King’s Research Portal DOI : 10 . 1016 / j . neubiorev . 2019 . 01 . 009 Document Version Publisher ' s PDF , also known as Version of record Link to publication record in King ' s Research Portal Citation for published version ( APA ) : Greven , C . U . , Lionetti , F . , Booth , C . , Aron , E . N . , Fox , E . , Schendan , H . E . , . . . Homberg , J . ( 2019 ) . Sensory Processing Sensitivity in the context of Environmental Sensitivity : A critical review and development of research agenda . Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews , 98 , 287 - 305 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neubiorev . 2019 . 01 . 009 Citing this paper Please note that where the full - text provided on King ' s Research Portal is the Author Accepted Manuscript or Post - Print version this may differ from the final Published version . If citing , it is advised that you check and use the publisher ' s definitive version for pagination , volume / issue , and date of publication details . And where the final published version is provided on the Research Portal , if citing you are again advised to check the publisher ' s website for any subsequent corrections . General rights Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the Research Portal are retained by the authors and / or other copyright owners and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognize and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights . •Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the Research Portal for the purpose of private study or research . •You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit - making activity or commercial gain •You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the Research Portal Take down policy If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact librarypure @ kcl . ac . uk providing details , and we will remove access to the work immediately and investigate your claim . Download date : 12 . Mar . 2020 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / neubiorev Review article Sensory Processing Sensitivity in the context of Environmental Sensitivity : A critical review and development of research agenda Corina U . Greven a , b , c , ⁎ , 1 , Francesca Lionetti d , 1 , Charlotte Booth e , 1 , Elaine N . Aron f , Elaine Fox e , Haline E . Schendan g , Michael Pluess d , Hilgo Bruining h , Bianca Acevedo i , 1 , Patricia Bijttebier j , 1 , Judith Homberg a , 1 a Radboud University Medical Center , Donders Institute for Brain , Cognition and Behaviour , Department of Cognitive Neuroscience , Nijmegen , the Netherlands b Karakter Child and Adolescent Psychiatry University Center , Nijmegen , the Netherlands c King ’ s College London , Social , Genetic & Developmental Psychiatry Centre , Institute of Psychiatry , Psychology & Neuroscience , London , UK d Queen Mary University of London , Department of Biological and Experimental Psychology , London , UK e University of Oxford , School of Psychology , Department of Experimental Psychology , Oxford , UK f Stony Brook University , Stony Brook , New York , USA g Cognition Institute , University of Plymouth , Plymouth , UK h University Medical Center Utrecht , Brain Center Rudolf Magnus , Department of Psychiatry , Utrecht , the Netherlands i University of California , Santa Barbara , Neuroscience Research Institute , Santa Barbara , CA , USA j KU Leuven , School Psychology and Development in Context , Leuven , Belgium A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords : Sensory processing sensitivity Highly sensitive person Highly sensitive child Di ﬀ erential susceptibility Environmental sensitivity Temperament Personality Aetiology Animal model Neuroscience Cognition Mental health A B S T R A C T Sensory Processing Sensitivity ( SPS ) is a common , heritable and evolutionarily conserved trait describing inter - individual di ﬀ erences in sensitivity to both negative and positive environments . Despite societal interest in SPS , scienti ﬁ c knowledge is lagging behind . Here , we critically discuss how SPS relates to other theories , how to measure SPS , whether SPS is a continuous vs categorical trait , its relation to other temperament and personality traits , the underlying aetiology and neurobiological mechanisms , and relations to both typical and atypical development , including mental and sensory disorders . Drawing on the diverse expertise of the authors , we set an agenda for future research to stimulate the ﬁ eld . We conclude that SPS increases risk for stress - related problems in response to negative environments , but also provides greater bene ﬁ t from positive and supportive experi - ences . The ﬁ eld requires more reliable and objective assessment of SPS , and deeper understanding of its me - chanisms to di ﬀ erentiate it from other traits . Future research needs to target prevention of adverse e ﬀ ects as - sociated with SPS , and exploitation of its positive potential to improve well - being and mental health . 1 . Introduction To survive and thrive on planet earth it is essential for all organisms to draw on environmental resources , such as food , protection from predators and social support . Animals and humans are programmed to perceive , process , react and adapt to speci ﬁ c social and physical ele - ments of the environment , both positive and negative ones . Of interest , there are substantial inter - individual di ﬀ erences in sensitivity and re - sponsivity to the environment in animals and humans ; some are much more sensitive and reactive compared to others ( Belsky and Pluess , 2009 ; Ellis et al . , 2011 ) . Across populations , a continuum from low to high sensitivity to the environment is observed . In recent years , Sensory Processing Sensitivity ( SPS ) , which describes inter - individual di ﬀ er - ences in trait sensitivity to experiences , and which began as a barely known topic 20 years ago ( Aron and Aron , 1997 ) , has become a much discussed facet of Environmental Sensitivity theory ( Pluess , 2015 ) . In this review , we discuss the knowns and unknowns in relation to the current conceptualisation of SPS , highlight the relevance and impact of the construct , and describe perspectives for future cross - disciplinary re - search . SPS is part of a family of theoretical frameworks on Environmental Sensitivity . Environmental Sensitivity is an umbrella term for theories https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neubiorev . 2019 . 01 . 009 Received 19 August 2018 ; Received in revised form 8 January 2019 ; Accepted 8 January 2019 ⁎ Corresponding author at : Radboud University Medical Center , Donders Institute for Brain , Cognition and Behaviour , Department of Cognitive Neuroscience , Kapittelweg 29 , 6525EN Nijmegen , the Netherlands . E - mail address : c . greven @ donders . ru . nl ( C . U . Greven ) . 1 Joint ﬁ rst / last authors . Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 98 ( 2019 ) 287 – 305 Available online 09 January 2019 0149 - 7634 / © 2019 The Authors . Published by Elsevier Ltd . This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / BY / 4 . 0 / ) . T explaining individual di ﬀ erences in the ability to register and process environmental stimuli ( Pluess , 2015 ) . These include the theories of Di ﬀ erential Susceptibility ( Belsky , 1997 ; Belsky and Pluess , 2009 ) , Bio - logical Sensitivity to Context ( Ellis and Boyce , 2011 ) , nd Sensory Proces - sing Sensitivity ( Aron and Aron , 1997 ) , the topic of the present review . All these theories state that individuals di ﬀ er in their sensitivity to both aversive as well as supportive environments . Unique to Sensory Pro - cessing Sensitivity is that it proposes an underlying phenotypic ( tem - perament ) trait characterised by greater depth of information proces - sing , increased emotional reactivity and empathy , greater awareness of environmental subtleties , and ease of overstimulation ( Aron et al . , 2012 ; Homberg et al . , 2016 ) . Early studies estimate that about 15 – 20 % of the population can be considered high on the SPS trait ( Aron and Aron , 1997 ) . The ﬁ rst measure to assess SPS , the Highly Sensitive Person ( HSP ) Scale , is a 27 - item self - report questionnaire of positive and negative cognitive and emotional responses to various environ - mental stimuli including ca ﬀ eine , art , loud noises , smells and fabrics . SPS is related to other temperament and personality traits re ﬂ ecting sensitivity to environments . For example , traits such as introversion ( or low extraversion ) , neuroticism ( or irritability / negative emotionality ) , and openness to experience have been associated with increased re - activity to environmental in ﬂ uences ( Asscher et al . , 2016 ; Hentges et al . , 2015 ; Pluess et al . , 2010 ) . Furthermore , the Behavioural Inhibi - tion System ( BIS ) and the Behavioural Activation System ( BAS ) ( Gray , 1982 ) , which describe the extent of pausing activity for the processing of con ﬂ icting information ( BIS ) and the urge to approach and satisfy needs ( BAS ) , have been related to heightened sensitivity to negative and positive environmental stimuli , respectively . Nonetheless , analyses show that SPS is distinctive from these traits ( Pluess et al . , 2017 ) . Recent ﬁ ndings suggest that SPS is moderately heritable ( Assary et al . , 2019 ) . Further , research has revealed associations between SPS and cognitive , sensory and emotional information processing in the brain ( Acevedo et al . , 2014 , 2018 ; Acevedo et al . , 2017 ; Jagiellowicz et al . , 2016 ) . This points towards a biological foundation for the SPS construct . SPS is conceptualised as a temperament trait , and not a disorder . However , in adverse childhood environments , individuals with high SPS scores may shift from typical to atypical development , with a ne - gative impact on well - being , and higher risk for behavioural problems and psychopathologies in childhood and adulthood ( Aron et al . , 2005 ; Booth et al . , 2015 ; Liss et al . , 2005 ) . Conversely , individuals high on SPS exposed to positive events in life may ﬂ ourish and perform ex - ceptionally well , for example showing more positive mood and inter - vention responsivity ( Pluess and Boniwell , 2015 ; Slagt et al . , 2017 ) , a result with important implications for policy makers and practitioners ( Assary and Pluess , 2017 ) . Despite the above described insights from SPS research , several shortcomings remain . SPS brings advantages in terms of capturing a global phenotype through questionnaire - based and behavioural / ob - servational assessment , its weaker point is that biological research on the aetiology and mechanisms underlying SPS is still in its infancy . How the so - far identi ﬁ ed neural processes interact and shape sensitivity to the environment is not well understood yet . What is more , the re - lationship of SPS to existing personality and temperament constructs re ﬂ ecting sensitivity to environments needs to be further clari ﬁ ed conceptually and empirically . Lastly , sensory sensitivities are also ob - served in mental disorders , but the relevance of SPS to seemingly re - lated disorders and well - being needs to be further studied . Finally , more work is needed on interventions to foster the potential of high SPS in - dividuals and prevent negative consequences . 1 . 1 . Importance of studying SPS From a theoretical point of view , studying SPS is important for deepening our understanding of a fundamental aspect of inter - in - dividual di ﬀ erences in sensitivity to the environment , observed in humans and animals ( Aron and Aron , 1997 ; Homberg et al . , 2016 ) . Interestingly , recently SPS has been discussed also in the context of anthropological studies ( Rappaport and Corbally , 2018 ) . SPS also has implications for health , education and work : SPS is thought to be a signi ﬁ cant factor impacting well - being , quality of life , and also func - tional di ﬃ culties ( Aron et al . , 2012 ) . Thus , it needs to be studied rig - orously and with respect to both basic and applied processes to improve well - being and life satisfaction , and preserve human capital , while preventing adverse e ﬀ ects and impairment among highly sensitive po - pulations . From a societal impact perspective , SPS has gained sub - stantial popularity in the public and media , with programmes being developed and professionals trained to coach and support highly sen - sitive employees , leaders , parents and children ( e . g . https : / / hsperson . com / resources / coaches / ) . However , basic , translational and applied scienti ﬁ c research on SPS is lagging behind , creating an imbalance between the need for information from society and the scienti ﬁ c knowledge collected so far . This easily leads to misinterpretations of what SPS is , and comes with risk for misinformation and potentially even harm to the public , and neglects the societal responsibility of science . 1 . 2 . Aim of review The aim of this paper is to address the above shortcomings by cri - tically discussing the state - of - the - art regarding scienti ﬁ c insights on SPS in a narrative review , and stimulating the ﬁ eld by proposing a future research agenda . We review the origins of the Sensory Processing Sensitivity framework and how it relates to other frameworks of Environmental Sensitivity ( Section 2 ) , how to measure SPS ( Section 3 ) , whether empirical evidence supports a dimensional or categorical conceptualisation of SPS ( Section 4 ) , the relationship of SPS to other temperament and personality traits ( Section 5 ) , what the underlying biological bases of SPS are ( Section 6 ) , and the relevance of SPS to mental health and intervention ( Section 7 ) . We have included all stu - dies focusing on SPS directly , published in indexed journals included in PubMed and Scopus until September 2018 , allowing a complete , ex - haustive summary of the current literature on SPS and related ﬁ eld . We advocate that some speculation is required to set a comprehensive fu - ture research framework in which transdisciplinary approaches will be central . This review borrows from team science principles ( Utzerath and Fernández , 2017 ) to bring together several authors with diverse areas of expertise to address the increasing complexity in science , re - quiring increased interdependency and specialisation in order to create more coherent research e ﬀ orts . This allows the current review to take a broader perspective as well as updated view compared to the previous review on SPS ( Aron et al . , 2012 ) , for instance through a greater focus on neuroscience and biobehavioural mechanisms , including animal work and the operationalisation of core components of SPS , as well as links to mental health and intervention . 2 . SPS and theories of Environmental Sensitivity 2 . 1 . Integrating di ﬀ erent theories of Environmental Sensitivity Since the late 1990s , several theoretical contributions , which have been developed independently from each other , have investigated such individual di ﬀ erences in sensitivity to environments . Initially , sensi - tivity was primarily seen as a vulnerability . The Diathesis - Stress model , also Dual - Risk model , proposes that individuals characterised by in - dividual risk factors ( e . g . speci ﬁ c gene allele variant , or higher emo - tional reactivity ) have a predisposition to su ﬀ er the negative con - sequences of environmental adversities more than others ( Ellis et al . , 2011 ; Monroe and Simons , 1991 ; Pluess and Belsky , 2009 ) . However , subsequent theories proposed that more sensitive individuals experi - ence stronger e ﬀ ects and responsivity to both negative and positive environmental conditions and stimuli . These theories include C . U . Greven et al . Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 98 ( 2019 ) 287 – 305 288 Di ﬀ erential Susceptibility ( Belsky , 1997 ; Belsky and Pluess , 2009 ) , Bio - logical Sensitivity to Context ( Boyce and Ellis , 2005 ) , and Sensory Pro - cessing Sensitivity ( Aron , 2002 ; Aron and Aron , 1997 ) . Di ﬀ erential Susceptibility , which has roots in developmental psy - chology , poses that highly sensitive individuals have a higher suscept - ibility to the environment , and assumes an evolutionary perspective by positing that individual di ﬀ erences in sensitivity ( low and high sensi - tivity ) represent two alternative developmental strategies ( low and high plasticity and adaptation ) maintained by natural selection to increase diversity and ﬁ tness of the species ( Belsky et al . , 1998 ; Belsky and Pluess , 2009 ) . More recently , the Vantage Sensitivity theory has been put forward , which concerns individual di ﬀ erences in response to positive stimuli , such as supportive psychological interventions without making claims about the potential response to adverse experiences ( de Villiers et al . , 2018 ; Pluess and Belsky , 2015 ) . In essence , Di ﬀ erential Suscept - ibility integrates the Diathesis - Stress and Vantage Sensitivity frameworks , by suggesting responsivity to both positive and negative environments . Di ﬀ erential Susceptibility puts emphasis on phenotypic temperament characteristics , endophenotypic attributes and genetic variants that may act as plasticity factors that make people more malleable to en - vironmental in ﬂ uences ( Belsky et al . , 1998 ; Belsky and Pluess , 2009 ) . In contrast , Biological Sensitivity to Context focuses speci ﬁ cally on physiological di ﬀ erences in reactivity ( e . g . arterial pressure , cortisol production , immune reactivity ) to environmental stimuli ( Boyce and Ellis , 2005 ) . It is de ﬁ ned as neurobiological susceptibility to cost - in - ﬂ icting as well as bene ﬁ t - conferring environments , and operationalised as an endophenotype re ﬂ ecting heightened reactivity in one or more stress response systems ( Boyce and Ellis , 2005 ) . In other words , stress response systems increase susceptibility to negative environments , but also to resources and support ( e . g . cooperative information , social op - portunities ) ( Ellis et al . , 2011 ; Pluess and Belsky , 2009 ) . Compared to Di ﬀ erential Susceptibility , which emphasises that di ﬀ erences in sensi - tivity are genetically determined and a result of bet - hedging against uncertain futures , Biological Sensitivity to Context emphasises the role of early environmental pressures in shaping sensitivity as it is based on the evolutionary notion of conditional adaptation , as high sensitivity is thought to develop in response to both extreme negative or positive environments ( Del Giudice et al . , 2011 ; Ellis and Boyce , 2011 ) . The Sensory Processing Sensitivity framework has been developed based on extensive review of the animal literature , and informed by temperament and personality theories on behavioural inhibition , shy - ness , and introversion in children and adults ( Aron , 2002 ; Aron and Aron , 1997 ) . Sensory Processing Sensitivity emphasises that sensitivity can be captured in a phenotypic temperament or personality trait , characterised by greater depth of information processing , increased emotional reactivity and empathy , greater awareness of environmental subtleties , and ease of overstimulation , thought to be driven by a more sensitive central nervous system ( Aron et al . , 2012 ; Homberg et al . , 2016 ) . Environments in the context of Sensory Processing Sensitivity are broadly de ﬁ ned and include any salient conditioned or unconditioned internal or external stimuli , including physical environments ( e . g . food , ca ﬀ eine intake ) , social environments ( e . g . childhood experiences , other people ’ s moods , crowds ) , sensory environments ( e . g . auditory , visual , tactile , olfactory ) , and internal events ( e . g . thoughts , feelings , bodily sensations such as hunger , pain ) . Recently SPS has been discussed also in the context of anthropological studies ( Rappaport and Corbally , 2018 ) . The described frameworks have recently been integrated within the broader Environmental Sensitivity meta - framework ( Pluess , 2015 ) , dis - played in Fig . 1 . Each of these frameworks on Environmental Sensitivity provides a unique contribution to the study of individual di ﬀ erences in response to the environment . The frameworks agree that individuals di ﬀ er in sensitivity to environments , and that only a minority of the population are highly sensitive , as if a minority is sensitive this holds an evolutionary advantage . Bene ﬁ ts of sensitivity are frequency - dependent in that sensitivity is advantageous when rare but disadvantageous when common ( Aron and Aron , 1997 ; Belsky and Pluess , 2009 ; Jagiellowicz et al . , 2012 ; Kagan , 2002 ; Suomi , 1997 ; Wolf et al . , 2008 ) . In essence , Di ﬀ erential Susceptibility proposes a mechanism ( that is sensitivity to positive and negative environments ) , which is also underlying the Biological Sensitivity to Context and Sensory Processing Sensitivity frame - works . Unique to Sensory Processing Sensitivity is that it is the ﬁ rst fra - mework to propose and develop a psychometric tool that captures sensitivity to environments directly as a phenotypic trait in adults and children ( see Section 3 ) , with important theoretical and applied im - plications for the study of individual di ﬀ erences in response to the environment . 2 . 2 . Evidence for SPS as a marker of Environmental Sensitivity Three observational studies were more in line with SPS acting as a vulnerability factor , in line with Diathesis Stress rather than Di ﬀ erential Susceptibility . An early study on SPS and the quality of the environment found an interaction between parenting environment and SPS , such that high SPS adults reporting having had an unhappy childhood scored higher on negative emotionality and social introversion , whereas high SPS adults reporting a happy childhood di ﬀ ered little from the larger population of non - highly sensitive adults on these traits ( Aron and Aron , 1997 ) . Furthermore , in adults SPS was shown to moderate the e ﬀ ect of parental care on depression symptoms ( Liss et al . , 2005 ) . In - dividuals scoring high on SPS reported the highest depression scores when parental care was low , while depression scores were unrelated to SPS when parental quality was high ( Liss et al . , 2005 ) . A study on life satisfaction in adults showed that while individuals high in SPS re - ported lower life satisfaction when childhood experiences were parti - cularly negative , no evidence was found for di ﬀ erential e ﬀ ects to po - sitive experiences ( Booth et al . , 2015 ) . The other studies were more in line with Di ﬀ erential Susceptibility . A paper by Aron et al ( 2005 ) for the ﬁ rst time reported a crossover interaction in three studies involving adults . Individuals high in SPS who reported a troubled childhood scored especially high on negative a ﬀ ect measures , but individuals high in SPS without such childhoods scored especially low on negative a ﬀ ect measures . This provided evi - dence that high SPS scores are linked to bene ﬁ tting more from positive experience , in line with Di ﬀ erential Susceptibility . Furthermore , a six - month longitudinal study assessing SPS in kindergarten children , re - ported that SPS interacted with changes in positive and negative par - enting in predicting externalising behavioural problems ( Slagt et al . , 2017 ) . Children scoring high on SPS were most responsive to changes in parenting behaviour in both directions , predicting increasing ex - ternalising problems when parenting became more negative , as well as predicting decreasing externalising problems when parenting im - proved , supporting Di ﬀ erential Susceptibility . Recently , laboratory studies have provided additional evidence that individuals high in SPS indeed show heightened responsivity to nega - tive and positive experiences . Adults high in SPS who were exposed to a positive mood induction video - clip , have been shown to have greater changes in positive a ﬀ ect compared to those reporting low sensitivity ( Lionetti et al . , 2018 ) . Furthermore , adults scoring high on SPS have been shown to be more willing to trade o ﬀ their privacy when viewing terrorism - related pictures compared to high SPS individuals viewing neutral pictures , whereas such a di ﬀ erence was not observed in in - dividuals with low SPS scores ( Rubaltelli et al . , 2018 ) . This suggests that individuals high in SPS may be more sensitive to terrorism - related media and community themes . Two intervention studies have provided evidence for greater inter - vention responsivity related to higher SPS , in line with Vantage Sensitivity . An intervention study in adolescent girls , found that girls high ( versus low ) in SPS responded more favourably to a school - based resiliency programme based in concepts of cognitive - behavioural therapy and positive psychology techniques ( Pluess and Boniwell , 2015 ) . Speci ﬁ cally , girls scoring high on SPS showed a signi ﬁ cant C . U . Greven et al . Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 98 ( 2019 ) 287 – 305 289 reduction in depression symptoms , which was evident at six and 12 - month follow ups , whereas girls low in sensitivity did not show any signi ﬁ cant change . These ﬁ ndings of heightened responsivity to positive experiences in individuals scoring high in SPS have recently been re - plicated in a large randomized control trial ( N = 2024 ) testing the ef - ﬁ cacy of a school - based anti - bullying intervention ( Nocentini et al . , 2018 ) . In line with expectations , the results of this study showed that the intervention signi ﬁ cantly decreased victimisation and bullying across the entire sample . However , a more in - depth analysis of inter - action e ﬀ ects showed that intervention e ﬀ ects were driven primarily by children scoring high in SPS . Conversely , for children scoring low on SPS , no signi ﬁ cant e ﬀ ect was reported . Furthermore , SPS has been shown to moderate the impact of early negative parenting styles on behavioural problems , and of positive parenting styles on social com - petence at age three and six ( Lionetti et al . , 2019 ) , suggesting that is able to capture behavioural traits relating to sensitivity toward both positive and negative environmental stimuli . Overall , these ﬁ ndings provide evidence that SPS , as assessed by questionnaire or behavioural observation , is related to heightened responsivity to negative as well as positive environments . 2 . 3 . Future directions Future studies should expand research on SPS as a sensitivity marker to both positive and negative environments . Going beyond a correlational approach , more research is needed that manipulates the positive or negative environmental variable in more controlled la - boratory contexts or within intervention studies . Furthermore , testing Di ﬀ erential Susceptibility in SPS in the context of daily life is important , to capture ecologically valid assessments of micro stressors ( e . g . daily hassles and daily uplifts ) and macro stressors ( e . g . major positive and negative life events such as life transitions ) . Ecological Momentary Assessments , which involve assessing the participant in real time in their natural environment , would be a particularly useful tool to ex - amine whether high SPS individuals are more responsive to positive and negative events throughout their daily life . Future studies which test the interaction between SPS and environmental events / quality ranging from low to high will bene ﬁ t from conducting more sophisti - cated analysis as the Regions of Signi ﬁ cance analyses ( Roisman et al . , 2012 ) , as a superior method for testing Di ﬀ erential Susceptibility than the simple slopes method , as it is able to distinguish where the signi ﬁ cance of crossover interactions lie . Another approach involves the repar - ametrized equation approach ( Belsky et al . , 2013 ; Widaman et al . , 2012 ) , which allows one to compare di ﬀ erent Environmental Sensi - tivity models based on crossover intersection points and associated con ﬁ dence intervals . Furthermore , studies have predominantly used cross - sectional study designs . Longitudinal study designs would allow a more in - depth analysis of causation and of di ﬀ erences at a within - person level , and the study of short - and long - term dynamic changes in response to environments . One pertinent question is whether SPS is a stable trait across development , or whether certain experiences lead to changes in levels of SPS . Lastly , biological underpinnings of Di ﬀ erential Susceptibility in SPS is only beginning to be unravelled ( Section 6 ) , and it remains unclear whether the same biological systems that support responsivity to negative environments also support responsivity to po - sitive environments in high SPS individuals . We also need better un - derstanding how the core hypothesised features in SPS relate to one another ( depth of processing , emotional reactivity and empathy , sen - sitivity to subtleties , overstimulation ) , and increase aetiological and neural understanding underlying the Sensory Processing Sensitivity framework . We make suggestions as to how this can be achieved in Section 6 , and in Fig . 1 . 3 . Assessment of SPS 3 . 1 . SPS scales : the Highly Sensitive Person ( HSP ) and Highly Sensitive Child ( HSC ) scales The ﬁ rst measure for assessing SPS , namely the Highly Sensitive Person ( HSP ) scale ( Aron and Aron , 1997 ) , developed alongside the theoretical framework of Sensory Processing Sensitivity , was the result of an exploratory and empirical study of what is meant when the term sensitive is used by clinicians and by the public . Elaine Aron and Arthur Aron conducted a series of in - depth qualitative interviews with 39 adults who self - identi ﬁ ed as “ highly sensitive ” , “ introverted ” , or “ easily overwhelmed by stimuli ” ( Aron and Aron , 1997 ) . The ﬁ rst 60 - item HSP Scale was based on these interviews and included statements regarding being highly conscientious , startling easily , having a rich inner life , and being more sensitive to pain , all considered markers of increased sen - sitivity . This contributed to de ﬁ ning the construct of SPS as referring to Fig . 1 . Models of Environmental Sensitivity . A ) Diathesis stress : Emphasises vulnerability or resilience in response to adverse environments . Vantage Sensitivity : emphasises vantage re - sistance or vantage sensitivity in response to positive environments , without making claims about response to negative environments . Di ﬀ erential Susceptibility : combines vantage sensitivity and diathesis stress models : Individuals are di ﬀ erentially susceptible not only to negative environments , but also to bene ﬁ cial e ﬀ ects of positive environments . Emphasises moderation of environmental in - ﬂ uences by genetics , temperament and en - dophenotypes . B ) Sensory Processing Sensitivity : Sensitivity captured in a behavioural ( temperament ) trait , hypothesised to re ﬂ ect increased depth of processing , awareness of subtleties , emotional reactivity and ease of overstimulation . We hy - pothesise that greater depth of processing , in interaction with emotional reactivity , is the core underlying component , leading to greater awareness of subtleties and ease of overstimulation . C ) Biological Sensitivity to Context : Emphasis on sensitivity as a biological property indexed by heightened reactivity in stress response system . Hypothesises biological reactivity to emerge from both highly stressful and highly protected early social environments . Models A ) , B ) and C ) all describe individual di ﬀ erences in sensitivity to both negative and positive environments , and all hypothesise heightened sensitivity or reactivity to be present in a minority of the population , for evolutionary reasons . C . U . Greven et al . Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 98 ( 2019 ) 287 – 305 290 a broader sensory processing of information captured by a variety of indicators , rather than simply sensitivity toward sensory stimuli . The questionnaire was tested on a broader sample including 604 under - graduate psychology students and 301 individuals from a community sample , resulting in the self - report 27 - item HSP scale , currently used for assessing SPS in adults ( Aron and Aron , 1997 ) . The psychometric properties and validity of the 27 - item HSP scale , as well as shorter version ( Acevedo et al . , 2014 ; Lionetti et al . , 2018 ; Pluess et al . , 2017 ; Rubaltelli et al . , 2018 ) , have subsequently been validated in multiple studies ( see below ) . Building on the HSP scale for adults , the recent Highly Sensitive Child ( HSC ) Scale , a 12 - item self - report measure of SPS in children as young as 8 years of age has been developed ( Pluess et al . , 2017 ) . The scale includes items such as “ I ﬁ nd it unpleasant to have a lot going on at once ” and “ Some music can make me really happy ” . The HSC scale has also been used in a parent - report format in order to assess sensitivity in kindergarten children ( Slagt et al . , 2017 ) , based on the same items from the HSC scale but rephrased so that it is the parent reporting on the child ’ s behaviour . The analysis of the factorial structure of the scale indicated that the HSC scale has adequate internal consistency and good psychometric properties across independent samples ( Pluess et al . , 2017 ; Weyn et al . , 2019 ) . Its criterion validity has been con ﬁ rmed by showing that children scoring high on this scale are more sensitive and responsive to the positive in ﬂ uence of psychological interventions ( Nocentini et al . , 2018 ; Pluess and Boniwell , 2015 ) , as well as to both positive and negative parenting quality ( Slagt et al . , 2017 ) . There is also another 23 - item parent - report questionnaire assessing SPS in children ( Aron , 2002 ) . This questionnaire includes items such as “ My child is bothered by noisy places ” or “ My child seems very intuitive ” , and has been used to examine its association with daily functioning in a Dutch - sample involving parents of children ages 3 – 16 ( Boterberg and Warreyn , 2016 ) . The items of this questionnaire partially overlap with the HSC questionnaire . However , this questionnaire scale has not yet been validated as to whether children scoring high on this measure are more sensitive to environmental in ﬂ uences and process information more deeply . The HSP / HSC scales have been translated into several languages . Dutch ( Weyn et al . , 2019 ) , Italian ( Nocentini et al . , 2017 ) , German ( Konrad and Herzberg , 2017 ; Tillmann et al . , 2018 ) , Turkish ( Ş engül - İ nal and Sümer , 2017 ) , Japanese ( Kibe et al . , 2018 ) and Icelandic ( Þórarinsdóttir , 2018 ) versions are available , and the HSC partial measurement invariance has been con ﬁ rmed across age , gender , and country based on Dutch and UK versions ( Weyn et al . , 2019 ) . Both HSC and HSP scores tend to be normally distributed in the population ( Booth et al . , 2015 ; Pluess et al . , 2017 ) , although some authors have pointed out a slight trend towards a bimodal distribution ( Aron et al . , 2012 ; Lionetti et al . , 2018 ) . Finally , the questionnaire - based assessment of SPS has been recently extended to the study of personality in animals . The Highly Sensitive Dog owner - report questionnaire has been developed for the assessment of a canine - SPS trait in domestic dogs ( Braem et al . , 2017 ) . Animal models of SPS have also been developed ( see Section 6 ) . 3 . 2 . SPS behaviour observation : the HSC rating - system The HSC Rating - System provides a behavioural observation assess - ment of SPS in pre - schoolers aged 3 – 5 years ( Lionetti et al . , 2017 ) . The development of the measure was guided by a theory - driven approach inspired by the theoretical de ﬁ nition of SPS in children ( Aron , 2002 ) and by the de ﬁ nition of the broader construct of Environmental Sensi - tivity ( Pluess , 2015 ) . The rating system , applied to a series of laboratory episodes derived from the Laboratory Temperament Assessment Battery procedure traditionally used for the coding of temperament ( Goldsmith et al . , 1999 ) , and coded by external observers trained on this method , has been found to capture children ’ s sensitivity to the rearing en - vironment , moderating the impact of both positive and negative parenting on positive and negative children ’ s outcomes ( Lionetti et al . , 2019 ) . The validation of the HSC Rating - System is currently limited to an American middle - class population and to a single study . However , given that it provides a multi - modal , and a more objective behavioural measure , it promises to be a useful tool for future research on SPS in children . Proper administration and coding of behaviour observation is key as external observers may misinterpret a child ’ s signals and cer - tainly may lack access to the child ’ s inner world . 3 . 3 . Components of HSP and HSC scales , and HSC rating - system Initial factor analyses on the HSP scale suggested a unitary sensi - tivity factor captured by a variety of items ( Aron and Aron , 1997 ) . However , subsequent factor analyses exploring alternative solutions found convergence for di ﬀ erent components ( Smolewska et al . , 2006 ) . In recent years , they have been often adopted in SPS studies as a way for describing features characterising the SPS trait . The most extensively psychometrically supported solution across children and adults ( Pluess et al . , 2017 ; Smolewska et al . , 2006 ) in - cludes the following components : 1 ) Low Sensory Threshold ( LST , i . e . sensitivity to subtle external stimuli ) , 2 ) Ease of Excitation ( EOE , i . e . being easily overwhelmed by internal and external stimuli ) , and 3 ) Aesthetic Sensitivity ( AES , i . e . openness for , and pleasure of , aesthetic experiences and positive stimuli ) . The three sensitivity components of LST , EOE and AES have been found to relate di ﬀ erentially to a ﬀ ect variables . More speci ﬁ cally , EOE and LST were both found to be asso - ciated with a moderate e ﬀ ect size with self - reported negative emo - tionality , anxiety and depression ( Liss et al . , 2005 ) , and LST , but not EOE , has been reported to correlate with self - rated sensory discomfort ( Weyn et al . , 2019 ) . Conversely , AES was reported to be associated with positive emotionality such as positive a ﬀ ect and self - esteem , but not with negative emotions , both in adulthood and childhood ( Pluess et al . , 2017 , add : Sobocko and Zelenski , 2015 ) . Importantly however , the LST , EOE and AES subscales were not designed , but emerged when analysing the scale , further their biological validity is unclear , and it is not clear what the components measure or mean when taken separately . Recently , reconciling the apparently contradictory views of the ex - istence of a unique , general , SPS factor or di ﬀ erent components of sensitivity , psychometric data across childhood , adolescence and adulthood , provided evidence in support of a bifactor solution . This solution includes a general SPS factor and allows recognition of the multidimensionality of the HSC and HSP scales , as represented by the three sensitivity components of LST , EOE and AES ( Lionetti et al . , 2018 ; Pluess et al . , 2017 ) . These results are consistent with ﬁ ndings identi - fying the summary score of the HSP and HSC scales capturing an in - creased sensitivity to positive and negative stimuli ( Slagt et al . , 2017 ) . The 23 - item parent - report HSP questionnaire for children ( Aron , 2002 ; Boterberg and Warreyn , 2016 ) showed two factors : Overreaction to Stimuli , which comprised items associated with overstimulation , emotional intensity and sensory sensitivity ( e . g . “ My child is bothered by loud noises ” ) and Depth of Processing ( e . g . “ My child asks deep , thought - provoking questions ” ) . Because this parent - report ques - tionnaire includes additional ( and partially distinct ) items compared to the more extensively studied HSC scale for children ( Nocentini et al . , 2018 ; Pluess et al . , 2017 ; Pluess and Boniwell , 2015 ; Slagt et al . , 2017 ) , this result may suggest that the inclusion of other items could allow one to capture speci ﬁ c SPS aspects not currently included in the HSC self - report questionnaire . Finally , a one - factor solution emerged for the newly developed observational HSC Rating - system for pre - schoolers ( Lionetti et al . , 2019 ) . This unique SPS factor correlated moderately and negatively with assertiveness ( which captures the degree to which the child makes requests or demands , o ﬀ ers suggestions , or draws attention to him / herself ) , and moderately and positively with constraint ( which pertains to regulatory aspects as inhibitory / e ﬀ ortful control ) , and all tempera - ment factors together explained only half of SPS variance . Overall , C . U . Greven et al . Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 98 ( 2019 ) 287 – 305 291 these results suggest that though SPS is associated with observed tem - perament to a moderate extent , it is not fully captured by other tem - perament factors ( Dyson et al . , 2012 ) . 3 . 4 . Future directions More objective assessment procedures for SPS would be a very va - luable alternative or addition to questionnaire - report . For infants and children , this could take the form of observational measures similar to the HSC Rating - system developed for pre - schoolers . From middle childhood and in adulthood , a semi - structured interview on SPS , which remains to be developed , would be valuable . Such an interview would provide a richer and more nuanced assessment of sensitivity as it in - cludes observer - rated observational data based on the trained inter - viewer ’ s judgments in interpreting responses ( Trull et al . , 1998 ) . The assessment of SPS could also be made more objective by the addition of cognitive - , genetic - or bio - markers ( see Section 6 ) . While the HSP and HSC scales have good psychometric properties and have been validated in multiple ways ( also see below ) , the scales need to be validated and optimised further . First , behaviours such as pausing to check in novel situations or taking time to make decisions , cardinal characteristics of individuals high in SPS and associated with depth of processing , are not su ﬃ ciently covered in the HSP and HSC scales ( Aron and Aron , 1997 ) . The items coming the closest to capturing depth of processing are those relating to the AES component . None - theless , the SPS scale has been associated with activation of brain areas involved in greater depth of processing , such as greater activation in secondary perceptual processing brain areas , in fMRI studies ( see Sec - tion 6 ) , suggesting that the existing scale does already capture depth of processing . More research is needed to test the ability of the scale to capture the SPS construct fully , or whether the additional items on depth of information processing are needed . Second , HSP / HSC scale items are mainly negatively phrased ( with the exception with those on the AES component ) , and may therefore not adequately capture the experience of highly sensitive individuals without psychological problems . Indeed , many of the items on the HSC / HSC scales appear to describe negative consequences of greater depth of information processing ( with the exception of the AES items ) . One of the authors of this manuscript ( E . Aron ) has developed a less negatively , and more neutrally worded version of the HSP scale , which is currently being validated ( E . Aron , personal communication , July 8 , 2018 ) . Lastly , regarding cultural di ﬀ erences , the analysis of the HSC scale invariance across cultures suggests that while the underlying structure of the scale is conceptualised similarly between Belgian and British people , and Belgian and British people attribute more or less the same meaning to the latent construct of the scale , the mean di ﬀ erences may not be comparable . That is , Belgians tend to score higher on some items ( mainly to those belonging to the AES scale ) , a trend that has been reported also for Italian children ( Nocentini et al . , 2017 ) . This suggests that some items may need to be adapted for cultural sensitivity , while retaining the pure assessment of SPS . 4 . SPS as a category or continuum ? The literature on SPS suggests that roughly 20 % of the population is assumed to be highly sensitive and 80 % less sensitive ( Aron et al . , 2012 ) . A popular metaphor is the Orchid - Dandelion metaphor , where Dandelions re ﬂ ect the majority of the population ( around 80 % ) who are less sensitive to the in ﬂ uence of either positive or negative environ - ments , whereas Orchids ( the remaining 20 % ) are more strongly a ﬀ ected by environmental adversity but also ﬂ ourish more in positive en - vironments ( Boyce and Ellis , 2005 ) . That 20 % of the population is highly sensitive was ﬁ rst proposed by the theory on SPS as an analogy to the work on infant reactivity ( or behavioural inhibition ) , as de ﬁ ned by Kagan ( 1994b ) . These researchers categorised infants into qualita - tive groups of infant reactivity , based on a theoretical framework concerning di ﬀ erences in the excitability of limbic structures , and ap - plied this model to observational judgments of motor and crying reac - tions in infants ( Kagan , 1994a ) . Taxometric analyses , which are ex - pressively designed to distinguish taxa from dimensions ( Ruscio and Ruscio , 2004 ) , supported their theoretical framework , by showing that a minority ( around 10 % ) of infants were highly reactive to visual , au - ditory and olfactory stimuli , with the remainder falling into a less re - active group ( Woodward et al . , 2000 ) . Moreover , Kagan ’ s work , em - pirical studies , and computer - based simulation on other temperamental traits related to sensitivity to environments in human and animals also provided support for the existence of individual traits associated with heightened sensitivity to the environment ( e . g . behavioural inhibition ) , as well as putative sensitivity gene variants ( see Section 6 ) with a re - latively low population frequency of about 10 – 35 % ( Aron and Aron , 1997 ; Belsky and Pluess , 2009 ; Jagiellowicz et al . , 2012 ; Kagan , 2002 ; Suomi , 1997 ; Wolf et al . , 2008 ) . This was also further supported in a Diploma thesis on SPS using taxometric analyses on the HSP scale in N = 898 individuals , which revealed a high sensitive taxonic group with a base rate of 15 – 20 % ( Borries , 2012 ) ; although this work was not replicated in a Master ’ s thesis ( Kroenung , 2015 ) . Overall , taxometric research across personality and psycho - pathology , has yielded dimensional results more often than taxonic ones , and there is a strong trend that newer studies reveal dimensional results ( Haslam et al . , 2012 ) . This has been suggested to be primarily due to improvements in taxometric practice , rendering early in ﬂ uential taxonic ﬁ ndings spurious ( Haslam et al . , 2012 ) . Hence , we expect si - milar ﬁ ndings to emerge for the HSP / HSC scales . More recently , two studies have applied latent class analysis ( a data - driven hypothesis - free method to test the structure of latent variables ) to the HSC and HSP scales . The ﬁ rst study identi ﬁ ed three SPS classes across four ethnically - diverse UK - based samples containing 8 – 19 year olds ( total N = 3581 ) , using the HSC scale : a low ( 25 – 35 % ) , medium ( 41 – 47 % ) and high ( 20 – 35 % ) sensitive group ( Pluess et al . , 2017 ) . These latent class ﬁ ndings were replicated in a study on multiple US adult samples ( N = 451 and N = 450 ) using the HSP scale , which also revealed a three ( rather than two ) - class solution : 31 % high sensitive , 40 % medium , and 29 % low sensitive ( Lionetti et al . , 2018 ) . The authors labelled this third class Tulips , who are intermediate between Orchids Fig . 2 . SPS in across the population . SPS is a continuous trait but people fall into three sensitivity groups along a sensitivity continuum . C . U . Greven et al . Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 98 ( 2019 ) 287 – 305 292 and Dandelions in terms of their sensitivity scores ( Fig . 2 ) . Together , the studies suggested preliminary cut - o ﬀ scores di ﬀ erentiating low , medium and high sensitive groups , which were relatively consistent across ages , but characterised by relatively low sensitivity and speci ﬁ - city ( Lionetti et al . , 2018 ; Pluess et al . , 2017 ) . In the adult study ( Lionetti et al . , 2018 ) , the three - group categorisation was subsequently applied to an independent sample of 230 UK - based adults . This re - vealed that di ﬀ erences between the three detected sensitivity groups in response to a positive mood - induction task were more of quantitative rather than qualitative nature : Orchid individuals scored signi ﬁ cantly higher in Neuroticism and emotional reactivity and lower in Extraver - sion than Dandelions and Tulips , with Tulips also signi ﬁ cantly di ﬀ ering from Dandelions and scoring intermediate to Dandelions and Orchids ( Lionetti et al . , 2018 ) . In both studies , the HSP / HSC scales were rela - tively normally distributed . Overall , these ﬁ ndings suggest that SPS is a continuously distributed trait but that people fall into three sensitivity groups along a sensitivity continuum . 4 . 1 . Future directions Whether SPS should be considered as a dimensional ( also con - tinuous , quantitative ) or categorical ( also taxonic , discrete , qualitative ) trait is an important question . Dimensionality would suggest that in - dividuals in the population di ﬀ er merely quantitatively in level of SPS traits with normal variation from low to high ( di ﬀ erences in degree ) . In contrast , categorisation would suggest that individuals in the popula - tion can be separated into non - arbitrary , qualitatively di ﬀ erent sensi - tivity groups ( di ﬀ erences in kind ) . Clarity about the categorical or di - mensional nature of SPS has consequences for how SPS should be assessed , and for the selection of suitable research designs ( Ruscio and Ruscio , 2004 ) . Overall , the more recent research on the HSP and HSC scales sug - gests that SPS is a continuous trait , along which individuals fall into di ﬀ erent sensitivity classes . In terms of future work , taxometric ana - lyses on the HSC / HSP scales would be a useful addition to the already conducted latent class analyses ( Lionetti et al . , 2018 ; Pluess et al . , 2017 ) , which would address the questions of distinguishing taxa from dimensions more directly ( Ruscio and Ruscio , 2004 ) . 5 . SPS and Temperament / Personality traits Aron and Aron ( 1997 ) introduced SPS as a trait related to , but distinct from other temperament and personality constructs . Being de - veloped based on extensive review of the animal literature , it has been suggested that SPS may relate to a general trait of sensitivity to the environment , or meta - personality trait of contextual sensitivity , which structures ( animal ) personality di ﬀ erences through determining the degree to which individual behaviour is guided by environmental in - ﬂ uence ( Aron et al . , 2012 ) . In light of this , we discuss here SPS within the context of temperament and personality constructs . 5 . 1 . Eysenck ’ s personality theory According to Eysenck ( 1967 ) , individual di ﬀ erences in personality can be described in terms of two dimensions : introversion ( vs extra - version ) and neuroticism ( vs emotional stability ) . Introversion relates to the optimal level of arousal at which an individual performs best : for those high in introversion , this level is way lower than for those high in extraversion . Neuroticism comprises proneness to distress and emo - tional instability . In a series of seven studies , Aron and Aron ( 1997 ) examined associations of SPS with introversion and neuroticism . They found low to moderate associations with introversion ( Pearson ’ s r median correlation around 0 . 29 ) and fairly high associations with neuroticism ( median . 54 ) . As to introversion , qualitative research by Aron and Aron ( 1997 ) shows that not all highly sensitive individuals display the pro ﬁ le of being socially introverted . 5 . 2 . Gray ’ s reinforcement sensitivity theory As an alternative to Eysenck ’ s theory , Gray ’ s Reinforcement Sensitivity Theory ( RST : Gray , 1982 ) proposed that individual di ﬀ er - ences in the sensitivity of basic brain systems underlie individual dif - ferences in personality : the Behavioural Inhibition System ( BIS ) , Be - havioural Approach System ( BAS ) , and Fight / Flight System ( FFS ) . In the original version of the theory , the BIS was thought to mediate re - activity to conditioned punishment and frustrating non - reward , and to underlie negative emotions , in particular anxiety . The BAS was thought to be reactive to conditioned stimuli signalling reward or relief from punishment and underlie positive emotions . The FFS was thought to modulate responses to unconditioned aversive stimuli and to underlie fear and defensive aggression . In 2000 , Gray and McNaughton ( Gray and McNaugthon , 2000 ) published a revision of the RST . In this revised RST , the BAS still functions as a reward system , and modulates re - sponses to all appetitive stimuli ( unconditioned as well as conditioned ) . Similarly , the FFS was assumed to modulate responses to all aversive stimuli and renamed to Flight , Fight and Freezing System ( FFFS ) . The BIS was now thought to be activated by stimuli that activate both the BAS and FFFS , and responsible for the inhibition of ongoing behaviour in the service of con ﬂ ict detection and resolution . According to Aron and Aron ( 1997 ) , SPS is especially related to BIS functioning , given the ‘ pause - to - check ’ function of this system . Consistent with this assump - tion , Smolewska et al . ( 2006 ) reported a positive association of BIS sensitivity with SPS as a global construct , as well as with its three components . In the same study , BAS sensitivity was found to be largely unrelated to SPS . If narrower facets of BAS are di ﬀ erentiated , i . e . po - sitive a ﬀ ect vs approach motivation in response to incentive cues , only the former showed a small signi ﬁ cant association with SPS as a global construct and with the components of EOE and EAS . More recently , Pluess et al . ( 2017 ) examined the association of SPS with BIS and BAS sensitivity in two samples of children . They found signi ﬁ cant positive correlations of both BIS and BAS sensitivity with SPS as a global con - struct , as well as with EOE and EAS components . Only BIS sensitivity was also positively correlated with the LST component . 5 . 3 . Rothbart ’ s temperament model According to Rothbart et al . ( Rothbart , 2011 ; Rothbart and Derryberry , 1981 ) temperament can be described as individual di ﬀ er - ences in emotional , motor , and attentional reactivity as measured by latency , intensity , recovery of response , and self - regulation processes that modulate reactivity ( Rothbart , 2007 ) . Temperamental reactivity refers to responses to change in the external and internal environment , measured in terms of the latency , duration and intensity of emotional , orienting and motor reactions . Self - regulation refers to processes that serve to modulate reactivity , especially processes of executive attention and e ﬀ ortful control . Depending on the developmental stage , three to ﬁ ve broad temperament domains are distinguished . Positive a ﬀ ectivity / extraversion re ﬂ ects one ’ s level of pleasurable engagement with the environment and the extent to which a person feels active , happy and enthusiastic ; negative a ﬀ ectivity re ﬂ ects subjective distress and an unpleasurable engagement with the environment ; e ﬀ ortful control comprises processes that modulate reactivity , such as attentional con - trol , inhibitory control and activation control . In some developmental stages , a ﬃ liative motivation ( i . e . the desire for closeness with others ) and / or orienting sensitivity / openness ( i . e . automatic attention to both external sensory events and spontaneously occurring thoughts and images ) are conceived as separate domains . Evans and Rothbart ( 2008 ) examined the association of SPS com - ponents with temperament domains and facets of Rothbart ’ s model in adults . For SPS , a two - factor conceptualization was used : one factor combined the EOE and LST components reported by Smolewska et al . ( 2006 ) ; the other was identical to the AES component . Similar ﬁ ndings have been reported in a sample of gifted young adults ( Rinn et al . , C . U . Greven et al . Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 98 ( 2019 ) 287 – 305 293 2018 ) . In Evans and Rothbart ’ s paper ( 2008 ) , the combined EOE / LST component ( called negative a ﬀ ect ) of SPS was found to be have a strong positive association with negative a ﬀ ectivity ( particularly the facet of sensory discomfort ) , a moderate negative association with e ﬀ ortful control and a relatively low negative association with positive a ﬀ ec - tivity / extraversion . The AES component of SPS ( called openness ) was found to have a strong positive association with all facets of orienting sensitivity from Rothbart ’ s model , and low to moderate positive asso - ciations with positive a ﬀ ectivity / extraversion and a ﬃ liative motiva - tion . Sobocko and Zelenski ( 2015 ) replicated the positive associations between the negative a ﬀ ect component of SPS ( EOE as well as LST ) and negative reactivity in Rothbart ’ s model . Bridges and Schendan ( 2019a ) replicated the association between negative a ﬀ ect of the SPS ( EOE , LST ) and negative reactivity based on both Rothbart and colleagues ’ model of SPS and their adult temperament scale . Further , EOE and LST com - ponents of the SPS are moderately negatively correlated with Rothbart ’ s extraversion / surgency ( validating the association of SPS and introver - sion ) but weakly positively correlated with Rothbart ’ s orienting sensi - tivity , and all components of SPS are weakly negatively related to Rothbart ’ s e ﬀ ortful control ( consistent with less attentional ﬁ ltering in SPS ) . Sobocko and Zelenski ( 2015 ) also replicated the positive asso - ciations between the AES component of SPS and positive a ﬀ ectivity / extraversion in Rothbart ’ s model . Bridges and Schendan ( 2019a ) also found the AES component of SPS to be positively associated with or - ienting sensitivity ( de ﬁ ned using both the model and questionnaire of Rothbart et al . ) . Pluess et al . ( 2017 ) reported , in samples of 9 – 18 year olds , positive correlations of negative a ﬀ ectivity , positive a ﬀ ectivity and e ﬀ ortful control with SPS as a global construct as well as with EOE , LST and EAS ( with the exception of the association of positive a ﬀ ec - tivity with LST , which was non - signi ﬁ cant ) . 5 . 4 . Mc Crae and Costa ’ s ﬁ ve - factor model of personality The ﬁ ve - factor model of personality ( McCrae and Costa , 1994 ) comprises ﬁ ve broad personality domains , derived from natural lan - guage using a lexicographic approach . The domains include Extraver - sion , Neuroticism , Openness to experience , Agreeableness and Con - scientiousness and each domain has a number of speci ﬁ c facets . As a global construct , SPS has been found to be positively associated with Neuroticism with a moderate e ﬀ ect size ( Lionetti et al . , 2018 ; Listou Grimen and Diseth , 2016 ; Pluess et al . , 2017 ; Smolewska et al . , 2006 ; Sobocko and Zelenski , 2015 ) and negatively associated with the domain of Extraversion ( Lionetti et al . , 2018 ; Listou Grimen and Diseth , 2016 ; Pluess et al . , 2017 ; Smolewska et al . , 2006 ; Sobocko and Zelenski , 2015 ) . Also , in most studies SPS was found to be positively associated with Openness to experience ( Bridges and Schendan , 2019a ; Lionetti et al . , 2018 ; Listou Grimen and Diseth , 2016 ; Pluess et al . , 2017 ; Smolewska et al . , 2006 ; Sobocko and Zelenski , 2015 ) . Five studies ex - amined associations of SPS as global construct with the domains of Agreeableness and Conscientiousness ; in none of the studies , these as - sociations were signi ﬁ cant ( Bridges and Schendan , 2019a ; Lionetti et al . , 2018 ; Pluess et al . , 2017 ; Smolewska et al . , 2006 ; Sobocko and Zelenski , 2015 ) . When the three dimensions of SPS are examined separately , a dif - ferentiated picture emerges . Across studies , both EOE and LST were found to have a positive association with Neuroticism ( Ahadi and Basharpoor , 2010 ; Bridges and Schendan , 2019a ; Listou Grimen and Diseth , 2016 ; Pluess et al . , 2017 ; Smolewska et al . , 2006 ; Sobocko and Zelenski , 2015 ) . Also , both EOE and LST were found to be inversely related to Extraversion ; these associations were , however , generally weaker and less consistent across studies than those with Neuroticism . In one study , in 15 – 19 year olds , EOE was inversely related to Con - scientiousness ( Pluess et al . , 2017 ) . In undergraduates , one study found both EOE and LST inversely relate to Openness ( Lionetti et al . , 2018 ) , while another study in a diverse adult sample found a weak positive relation for LST ( Bridges and Schendan , 2019a ) . In another study , in undergraduates , both EOE and LST were inversely related to Openness ( Lionetti et al . , 2018 ) . AES was consistently found to be positively as - sociated with Openness to experience ( Ahadi and Basharpoor , 2010 ; Bridges and Schendan , 2019a ; Lionetti et al . , 2018 ; Listou Grimen and Diseth , 2016 ; Smolewska et al . , 2006 ; Sobocko and Zelenski , 2015 ) . In three studies , AES was also positively related to Conscientiousness ( Ahadi and Basharpoor , 2010 ; Pluess et al . , 2017 ; Sobocko and Zelenski , 2015 ) and in two studies AES was positively related to Neu - roticism but much less so than to Openness in line with the greater relation between AES and positive than negative a ﬀ ect characteristics ( Ahadi and Basharpoor , 2010 ; Bridges and Schendan , 2019a ; Lionetti et al . , 2018 ) . In most studies , none of the SPS components were found to be signi ﬁ cantly associated with Agreeableness . As an exception , in Lionetti et al . ( 2018 ) and Bridges and Schendan ( 2019a ) ) , a positive association between AES and Agreeableness emerged , in relation to a shortened 12 - item version of the HSP scale , while a weak negative re - lation was found for LST and Agreeableness . Two unpublished pilot studies have moved beyond the predominant focus on the domain level of the ﬁ ve - factor model to a ﬁ ne - grained examination of which ﬁ ve - factor subdomains ( called facets ) are speci - ﬁ cally relevant for SPS . In the ﬁ rst pilot study , a community sample of 16 through 26 year olds ( N = 421 ) completed both the HSP and the NEO - PI - 3 scales ( P . Bijttebier , personal communication , April 5 , 2018 ) , and both domain - and facet - level associations were examined . At do - main level , SPS was found to be positively associated with higher Neuroticism and Openness , negatively associated with Extraversion , whereas no signi ﬁ cant association was shown with Agreeableness and Conscientiousness . At facet level , however , a more nuanced picture emerged showing that some of the associations at domain - level were driven by associations among some but not all facets . Also , it became clear that non - signi ﬁ cant associations at the domain level resulted from opposite patterns of associations for facets with the same domain . These preliminary ﬁ ndings suggest that in order to comprehensively grasp the set of personality facets that characterize high SPS individuals , a facet - level analysis is needed . A second pilot study ( P . Bijttebier , personal communication , April 5 , 2018 ) was conducted in a sample of 13 professionals who registered for a training programme “ HSP for Professionals ” . Prior to the training , they were asked to ﬁ ll in the NEO - PI - 3 , which assesses the ﬁ ve - factor model , taking the perspective of a prototypical highly SPS individual . Mean raw scores were converted to stanines in order to identify do - mains and facets that pop up as ‘ low ’ / ’ very low ’ or ‘ high ’ / ’ very high ’ compared to population norms . At domain level , Neuroticism popped up as ‘ very high ’ , Agreeableness and Openness as ‘ high ’ and Extraversion as ‘ low ’ . Interestingly , above or below average domain scores were found to be driven by above or below average scores on only part of the facets . Also , an average domain score was found to be driven by the fact that within that domain , some facets popped up as ‘ high ’ , whereas others popped up as ‘ low ’ or scored average . These preliminary ﬁ ndings suggest that high SPS might be considered as a blend of personality facets across domains . This opens opportunities to further extend and re ﬁ ne the set of tools available for the assessment of SPS , more speci ﬁ cally by constructing a ﬁ ve - factor model - based SPS compound consisting of all the facets that pop up as ‘ high ’ or ‘ low ’ in prototypical high SPS individuals . 5 . 5 . SPS simultaneously related to multiple personality constructs In some studies , constructs from di ﬀ erent personality theories are simultaneously related to SPS . For example , Smolewska et al . ( 2006 ) examined the relative contribution of Neuroticism and BIS sensitivity in predicting SPS ( subscales ) . They found that both Neuroticism and BIS sensitivity positively predicted SPS as a global construct , as well as the SPS components EOE and LST . The associations with Neuroticism were remarkably stronger than those with BIS sensitivity . In addition , Neu - roticism ( but not BIS sensitivity ) positively predicted AES , although C . U . Greven et al . Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 98 ( 2019 ) 287 – 305 294 that association was lower in magnitude than the associations with the other two subscales and with SPS as a global construct . In two recent studies in child samples , multiple regression analyses were used to examine associations of BIS and BAS sensitivity , positive and negative emotionality / a ﬀ ectivity and e ﬀ ortful control with SPS as a global construct as well as the EOE , LST and AES components ( Pluess et al . , 2017 ) . The multivariate models predicted 26 to 34 % of the variance of the SPS global score , and 15 to 35 % of the variance of the SPS com - ponents . In the ﬁ rst study , BIS sensitivity and Neuroticism emerged as signi ﬁ cant predictors of SPS as a global construct , as well as of EOE . BIS sensitivity ( but not Neuroticism ) also predicted LST . BAS sensitivity , positive emotionality / a ﬀ ectivity and – albeit to a lesser extent – BIS sensitivity predicted AES . In the second study , BIS sensitivity was un - related to SPS ( subscales ) , but Neuroticism was found to positively predict SPS as global construct , as well as EOE and LST . In addition , BAS sensitivity was inversely related to LST . And ﬁ nally , positive emotionality positively predicted both SPS as global construct and AES . Across the two studies , EOE and LST were most consistently predicted by BIS sensitivity and negative emotionality , whereas AES was pre - dominantly predicted by BAS sensitivity and positive emotionality . Nonetheless , these di ﬀ erent personality constructs at best explained a modest proportion of the variance of SPS , suggesting that SPS is not fully explained or captured by existing temperament and personality constructs ( Pluess et al . , 2017 ) . 5 . 6 . Future directions As reviewed above , SPS shows small to moderate associations with existing temperament and personality traits , even when these are taken together , and also di ﬀ ers conceptually from these temperament and personality traits . There is therefore reasonably good evidence that SPS can be considered a distinct construct . Whether SPS re ﬂ ects a more fundamental or meta - personality trait of sensitivity to environments remains a hypothesis . Future research should furthermore continue to examine associa - tions of SPS with traditional temperament and personality constructs , as this can aid the understanding of SPS based on what is already known regarding personality constructs . For example , normative data are available for the ﬁ ve - factor model , but are not ( yet ) available for SPS . One potential advice is to extend the above pilot research on as - sociations between SPS and the ﬁ ve - factor model facets . Di ﬀ erent ap - proaches are informative here : ( a ) a facet - level analysis of associations between HSP or HSC scores and ﬁ ve - factor model traits ; ( b ) a com - parison of the ﬁ ve - factor model domain and facet scores of high SPS individuals to population norms in order to identify domains and facets on which these individuals ’ children score either high or low . 6 . Biological basis of SPS 6 . 1 . Genetic and environmental aetiologies Understanding the aetiology of any complex trait requires a vast e ﬀ ort culminating research from large - scale genetic databases . This often starts with twin data research , whereby the heritability of a trait is estimated by comparing twin correlations between monozygotic twins ( who share 100 % of their genetic make - up ) and dizygotic twins ( who share approximately 50 % of their additive genes ) . This classical twin design can give an estimate of the proportion of variance in a trait that is explained by genetic , shared environmental and non - shared en - vironmental factors ( Boomsma et al . , 2002 ) . While this method is useful for elucidating whether genes play a role in a given trait , it cannot specify which genetic variants are implicated in its ontogeny . For this , molecular genetic studies are needed to ﬁ nd associations between traits and speci ﬁ c variants . Candidate gene studies test for associations with genetic variants such as single nucleotide polymorphisms ( SNPs ) that have some known biological function , therefore a priori assumptions are made about the relevance of the gene for the given trait . Genome wide association studies ( GWAS ) search for associations across the entire genome and thereby represent a data - driven approach to ﬁ nd signi ﬁ cant genetic variants . GWAS require data from huge samples of the population to account for statistical obstacles such as multiple comparisons . Only one twin study has been conducted assessing the heritability of SPS . This study estimated that 47 % of variance in SPS , assessed using the HSC scale in a UK population - representative sample of adolescents , could be explained by genetic factors , with the remaining variance explained by non - shared environmental factors ( Assary et al . , 2019 ) . Multivariate analyses revealed that genetic in ﬂ uences on the AES component were largely distinct from those underlying LST and EOE . This may re ﬂ ect an underlying multi - dimensional biological model of sensitivity , and it opens up the possibility that genetic factors may contribute to the development of subgroups of high SPS individuals who in particular score high on either AES or LST / EOE . SPS correlated signi ﬁ cantly with ﬁ ve - factor model Neuroticism ( r = 0 . 34 ) and Extra - version ( r = - 0 . 18 ) ( but not the other ﬁ ve - factor domains ) , and these correlations were largely explained by shared genetic in ﬂ uences . This suggests that the small to modest extent to which SPS shares phenotypic overlap with the other personality traits , is due to shared genes . Only two molecular genetic studies of SPS have been conducted . The ﬁ rst study included 169 individuals and reported an association between SPS and the serotonin transporter - linked polymorphic region ( 5 - HTTLPR ) ( Licht et al . , 2011 ) . 5 - HTTLPR has been shown to increase sensitivity to environmental stimuli , speci ﬁ cally negative but also po - sitive ones ( Beevers et al . , 2011 ; Homberg and Lesch , 2011 ; Pearson et al . , 2016 ) . High SPS was related to s / s homozygosity ( Licht et al . , 2011 ) . However , results from this study should be interpreted with caution given that the association between SPS and the s - allele was quite small , and the study had a small sample size . The second mole - cular genetic study assessed the association between SPS and multiple candidate genes in the dopaminergic system in a sample of 480 college students ( Chen et al . , 2011 ) . Ten polymorphisms were reported to show signi ﬁ cant associations with SPS and were included in subsequent re - gression analyses , which revealed that these polymorphisms together explained as much as 15 % of variance in SPS , with recent stressful life events explaining an additional 2 % . Such large e ﬀ ect sizes are rather unusual in molecular genetic studies and require replication . 6 . 2 . Neural mechanisms in humans To date , ﬁ ve functional MRI ( fMRI ) studies of SPS have been con - ducted in humans ( Acevedo et al . , 2014 , 2017 ; Aron et al . , 2010 ; Chen et al . , 2011 ; Jagiellowicz et al . , 2012 ) , providing evidence for its neural basis ( Fig . 3 ) . Utilizing the HSP scale as a measure of SPS , two studies examined brain responses to perceptual tasks , while the other two in - vestigated SPS responsivity to emotional stimuli . The ﬁ fth study ex - amined di ﬀ erences in resting - state brain activity in association with SPS . Additionally , several behavioural studies of SPS have been con - ducted in humans , providing evidence that awareness of environmental subtleties and emotional reactivity is enhanced in SPS . Furthermore , while studies have not yet directly addressed depth of processing , em - pathy , and overstimulation , ﬁ ndings point towards di ﬀ erences in these also . These behavioural studies will be discussed in the context of the associated neuroimaging ﬁ ndings . For one fMRI study examining perceptual responsivity as a function of SPS ( Jagiellowicz et al . , 2012 ) , the study participants were scanned while doing a task to notice subtle di ﬀ erences in photographs of land - scapes . Results showed that higher levels of SPS were associated with increased reaction times and increased activation of brain areas im - plicated in high - order visual processing and attention , such as the right claustrum , left occipito - temporal , bilateral temporal and medial and posterior parietal regions in response to detecting minor ( versus major ) changes in stimuli . C . U . Greven et al . Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 98 ( 2019 ) 287 – 305 295 A behavioural study in a diverse sample of 97 adults likewise found that the high SPS group ( top 30 % ) had higher reaction times to detect changes of an object in photographs only when the change is subtle ( colour or size ) , not when more obvious ( location , presence ) ( Bridges , 2018 , unpublished doctoral dissertation ; Bridges and Schendan , 2019b ) . In another fMRI study examining the perceptual aspects of SPS using the HSP scale cross - culturally ( Aron et al . , 2010 ) , Asians and Americans performed visuospatial tasks emphasising judgments that were already known to be either context - independent ( typically easier for Americans ) or context - dependent ( typically easier for Asians ) , so that brain activation is generally higher when performing the more di ﬃ cult task . It was found that individuals scoring high versus low on SPS showed lower culture - related di ﬀ erences in task performance . This suggests that SPS is associated with perceptual judgments that are based more directly on the actual incoming stimuli as they are , rather than on a cultural information ‘ ﬁ lter ’ . In line , while the Asians and Americans displayed increased activation of the frontal and parietal cortices when performing the more di ﬃ cult task , this was not found in the high SPS individuals among the Asians and Americans ( Aron et al . , 2010 ) . These results are consistent with a behavioural study involving German undergraduate students which showed that SPS was positively correlated with enhanced performance in a visual detection task ( Gerstenberg , 2012 ) . Interestingly , though no neurobiological corre - lates were investigated , SPS has been explored in association with other visual stimuliand preferences and , speci ﬁ cally , it has been investigated whether it is associatedwith blur tolerance andhigh - chroma colors preferences . No signi ﬁ cant association was identi ﬁ ed between SPS and the degree of blur tolerance ( Woods et al . , 2010 ) nor with preferences for high - chroma colors , even though at a descriptive level individuals who are highly sensitive reported to like high - chroma colors less than individuals who were low on sensitivity ( Woods et al . , 2010 ) . In another fMRI study examining the neural correlates of SPS in response to emotionally evocative face images of a partner or stranger ( Acevedo et al . , 2014 ) , recently married men and women were scanned twice ( about one year apart ) . The task was speci ﬁ cally designed to measure empathic processes as participants were ﬁ rst prompted with a sentence describing the context of the face image with corresponding statements such as , “ Your partner is feeling very happy because something wonderful has happened to them ” . The results revealed that across all conditions ( and replicating across one - year ) , SPS ( measured with the 11 - item HSP scale ) was signi ﬁ cantly associated with increased activation in brain regions that coordinate attention and action plan - ning ( in the cingulate and premotor area ) . For happy and sad photo conditions , SPS was associated with stronger activation in brain areas involved in sensory integration , awareness and empathy ( insula and inferior frontal gyrus ) , as well as preparation for action and cognitive self - control ( i . e . , premotor area , cingulate , medial and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex ) . The insula is particularly interesting with respect to SPS because it is responsible for perceiving and integrating inter - oceptive sensory stimuli , and has been thought to be the “ seat of awareness ” ( Craig , 2009 ) . Also , activation of the inferior frontal gyrus was found , which is part of a Mirror Neuron System , a network of re - gions that are involved in empathic processing and facilitate rapid in - tuition of others ’ goals ( Van Overwalle and Baetens , 2009 ) . Similarly , the cingulate cortex is involved in attention and the recognition of others ' actions ( Rizzolatti et al . , 1996 ) . The premotor area ﬁ nding is also of interest in the context of response to others ’ emotions as it is involved in unconscious behavioural control and action planning ( Cross et al . , 2006 ) . Finally , the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex is involved in higher order cognitive processing , decision making , self - regulation and task performance ( Dixon and Christo ﬀ , 2014 ) . Accordingly , these data suggest that high SPS individuals may readily intuit , “ feel ” and in - tegrate information , and respond to others ’ a ﬀ ective states , in particular to positive emotional states of a close partner ( relative to a strangers ’ , and to neutral a ﬀ ect ) . The results are consistent with cardinal traits of SPS as they highlight depth of processing , awareness and being more a ﬀ ected by others ’ moods and a ﬀ ective displays . In another fMRI study of SPS ( Acevedo et al . , 2017 ) , a group of females were scanned while viewing generally positive , negative , and neutral images from the standard International A ﬀ ective Picture System – IAPS ( Lang and Bradley , 2007 ) . Participants also completed the HSP scale and provided retrospective reports of childhood quality , measured with a battery of validated scales . Results showed that SPS ( and its interaction with a positive childhood environment ) was signi ﬁ cantly correlated with neural activity in areas involved in memory , emotion , hormonal balance , and re ﬂ ective thinking ( namely , the hippocampus , entorhinal area , hypothalamus , and temporal / parietal areas ) . Further - more , results showed that SPS was associated with a stronger reward response ( in the ventral tegmental area and nucleus accumbens ) to positive stimuli ; and this e ﬀ ect was especially ampli ﬁ ed for individuals reporting higher quality childhoods . For negative stimuli , the SPS x childhood interaction showed signi ﬁ cant activation in brain regions implicated in emotion - processing and self - regulation ( i . e . the amygdala and prefrontal cortex ) , without diminished reward activity ( which was seen for the simple correlation with SPS ) . These results provide a sug - gestion for how positive childhoods may have long - term impacts on individuals ’ susceptibility to stimuli , namely through mechanisms Fig . 3 . Neural signature of SPS . SPS is characterised by a ‘ hypersensitive ’ brain , re ﬂ ected by heightened reactivity of the areas indicated in response to social - emotional or other environmental stimuli . Together , the ac - tivity patterns in the brain of high SPS in - dividuals point towards deep information pro - cessing ( e . g . precuneus , prefrontal cortex , inferior frontal gyrus ) , and increased emo - tionality and empathy ( e . g . insula , claustrum , amygdala , cingulate cortex ) , the core facets that characterize SPS . Interestingly , these clusters of brain regions correspond to the de - fault mode and salience networks , respectively , which mediate internal mentation and atten - tion towards salient and emotional stimuli . C . U . Greven et al . Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 98 ( 2019 ) 287 – 305 296 related to self - regulation and by bu ﬀ ering individuals from dampened reward e ﬀ ects in response to negative stimuli . Finally , researchers investigated whether resting - state brain activity mediated the e ﬀ ects of dopamine - related genes on SPS ( Chen et al . , 2011 ) . It was found that temporal homogeneity of regional spontaneous activity in the precuneus suppressed the e ﬀ ect of dopamine - related genes on SPS . The precuneus is involved in the integration of higher - order information such as visuo - spatial imagery , episodic memory , and emotional stimuli , especially when self - related mental representations and self - processing are involved ( Cavanna and Trimble , 2006 ; Ye et al . , 2018 ) . This ﬁ nding indicates that the relation between SPS and dopa - mine genes is moderated by precuneus activity . 6 . 3 . Neurocognitive mechanisms in humans In two behavioural studies with English undergraduate students , high SPS groups were di ﬀ erent on controlled and automatic attention tasks ( Bridges , 2018 , unpublished doctoral dissertation ; Bridges and Schendan , 2019b ) . In one study using a standardized test , a high SPS or AES group made more errors only when the task involved incongruent ﬂ ankers , supporting the association of SPS with greater attention to irrelevant information , which may promote greater depth of processing but can result in errors . In another study , high SPS individuals showed both more interference and more facilitation e ﬀ ects for spatial con - gruency on an automatic exogenous attention orienting task . Consistent with the idea that greater automatic attention may support greater awareness of subtle information , another behavioural study suggested that high SPS groups have a greater ability to become more consciously aware of subtle higher - order , structured information during an implicit learning task ( Bridges , 2018 , unpublished doctoral dissertation ; Bridges and Schendan , 2019b ) . Neurosensitivity mechanisms , especially lower inhibition and automatic attention , may contribute to creative abilities in individuals high in SPS ( Bridges and Schendan , 2019a , b ) . Alto - gether , these ﬁ ndings suggest that SPS is associated with di ﬀ erences in controlled and automatic attention neural processes that have im - plications for other aspects of cognition ( e . g . memory , creativity ) , with some being bene ﬁ cial and some not . 6 . 4 . Animal models Basic research on the neural and physiological mechanisms under - lying SPS greatly advance our understanding of the construct . Since genetic evidence underlying personality traits , including SPS , is not yet conclusive , it is argued that basic research on the neural basis of be - haviour in experimental animals is needed to further advance me - chanistic understanding ( Robbins , 2018 ) . Indeed , animal models allow control over environmental factors as is not possible in humans , as well as invasive and causal manipulations . Thus , animal models may provide critical advances on the role of neuromodulators in behaviour and cognition in relation to biologically based traits . Sensitivity to en - vironments is seen across many animal species , with two di ﬀ erent be - havioural patterns consistently reported : one bold , proactive and more extraverted ; and another more cautious , reactive and inhibited ( Pennisi , 2016 ; Wolf et al . , 2008 ) . Hence , using animal models to un - derstand the biology underlying SPS is sensible . One potential animal model that can help to advance the under - standing of mechanisms is the serotonin transporter ( 5 - HTT ) knockout mouse / rat model . It is now widely accepted that these mouse and rat models modelling the 5 - HTTLPR s - allele ( Caspi et al . , 2010 ; Homberg and Lesch , 2011 ) show behavioural resemblances with people who are high on SPS ( Homberg et al . , 2016 ) . For instance , the knockout animals exhibit faster sensory processing ( Miceli et al . , 2017 ) , show reduced latent inhibition ( Nonkes et al . , 2012 ) which is indicative for increased openness to ( irrelevant ) environmental subtleties ( Carson et al . , 2003 ) , adapt better to changes in the environment ( Nonkes et al . , 2013 ) , ex - hibit increased anxiety - related behaviour in response to novel or emotionally con ﬂ icting situations ( Kalue ﬀ et al . , 2010 ) , show increased responsivity to rewarding agents ( Homberg et al . , 2008 ; Nonkes et al . , 2013 ) , have a better memory for emotionally arousing events ( Nonkes et al . , 2012 ) , and show depression - like phenotypes upon exposure to uncontrollable stress ( Carola and Gross , 2011 ; Homberg and van den Hove , 2012 ) . There is also evidence that 5 - HTT knockout mice behave according to the Di ﬀ erential Susceptibility theory ( Kaestner et al . , 2015 ) , as cohabitation of male mice with female mice reduced anxiety - like behaviour and increased exploratory locomotion in 5 - HTT knockout but not control mice . Although the association between SPS and the serotonin system needs further replication ( see Section 6 . 1 ) , the phe - notypic overlap encourages the use of 5 - HTT rodents as a model for Environmental Sensitivity approximating SPS , in order to increase the understanding of the neural mechanisms underlying SPS ( Homberg et al . , 2016 ) . 6 . 5 . Excitation - inhibition balance In line with the human fMRI studies , functional and structural imaging studies in 5 - HTT rodents point to altered activity of the pre - frontal cortex , amygdala , insula , nucleus accumbens , and hippocampus ( Bearer et al . , 2009 ; Pang et al . , 2011 ; van der Marel et al . , 2013 ) . Brain activity responses as measured by fMRI re ﬂ ect a summation of complex synaptic signalling events . Since information integration is dependent on balance between excitation and inhibition in the brain , mediated by the neurotransmitters glutamate and GABA , respectively ( Tatti et al . , 2017 ) , the excitation - inhibition balance in the brain may well be the basis of the neural mechanisms driving increased sensitivity to en - vironments . Using 5 - HTT knockout rats as an animal model for En - vironmental Sensitivity , approximating high SPS ( Homberg et al . , 2016 ) , it was found that faster sensory processing was associated with reduced inhibitory control over excitatory principal neurons in the somatosen - sory cortex , leading to increased excitability and sensory gating ( Miceli et al . , 2017 ) . It is possible that the increased excitability extends to other regions beyond the somatosensory cortex , given that GABA system components are reduced in the somatosensory cortex , prefrontal cortex and hippocampus ( Guidotti et al . , 2012 ; Luoni et al . , 2013 ; Miceli et al . , 2017 ) . Of interest , during brain maturation , GABA un - dergoes a switch from inducing depolarizing to hyperpolarizing re - sponses in postsynaptic cells . This switch is dependent , amongst others , on increased expression of the K ( + ) / Cl ( - ) co - transporter ( KCC2 ) . In 5 - HTT knockout rats , KCC2 expression is reduced in the cortex ( Miceli et al . , 2017 ) , which would increase the membrane depolarization of postsynaptic cells receiving GABAergic inputs . This raises the possibi - lity that the behavioural pro ﬁ le of 5 - HTT knockout rats , and thereby Environmental Sensitivity , may relate to neuronal immaturity . As sug - gested by a group of neuroscientists , neuronal immaturity may be as - sociated with increased plasticity and openness to the environment ( Castrén , 2013 ) . 6 . 6 . Hypothalamus - pituitary - adrenal axis Besides the brain , also related peripheral systems may contribute to sensitivity to environments . The hypothalamus - pituitary - adrenal ( HPA ) - axis is implicated in the bodily response to environmental in - sults , allowing the organism to respond in an adaptive manner . Studies using 5 - HTT knockout rats revealed that under baseline conditions , plasma corticosterone levels are increased compared to wild - type rats , but reduced after moderate early life stress ( Van der Doelen et al . , 2014 ) . This was related to increased adrenal mRNA levels of , e . g . the adrenocorticotropic hormone ( ATCH ) receptor . With the use of an in vitro adrenal assay , naïve 5 - HTT knockout rats were furthermore shown to display increased adrenal ACTH sensitivity . Interestingly , no changes in HPA - axis components were found in the hypothalamus and pituitary , suggesting that peripheral systems independent of the brain can con - tribute to sensitivity to environment . C . U . Greven et al . Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 98 ( 2019 ) 287 – 305 297 It has been well - established that environmental factors have the ability to modify gene expression through epigenetic mechanisms . Epigenetic mechanisms refer to the changes in gene expression that do not involve changes in the DNA sequence . One type of epigenetic me - chanism through which early life factors can alter gene expression later in life is DNA methylation , which involves the addition of methyl groups to the DNA , to convert cytosine to 5 - methylcytosine . Highly methylated areas tend to be less transcriptionally active . Using 5 - HTT knockout rats , it was found that DNA methylation of the corticotrophin releasing factor ( CRF ) was increased in the amygdala ( but not the bed nucleus stria terminalis ) of 5 - HTT knockout rats exposed to early life stress , compared to wild - type control rats and rats not exposed to early life stress . This correlated signi ﬁ cantly with reduced CRF mRNA levels . CRF mRNA levels were in turn found to correlate with improved stress coping behaviour , as a manifestation of sensitivity to environments ( Van der Doelen et al . , 2014 ) . Thus , while no evidence was found for changes in HPA - axis components in the brain to regulate HPA - axis re - activity to early life stress ( Van der Doelen et al . , 2014 ) , environmental factors may in ﬂ uence HPA - axis reactivity through epigenetic mechan - isms in the brain . 6 . 7 . Future directions Research on the genetic and environmental aetiologies of SPS is still in its infancy . As candidate gene studies have been criticised for their reliance on a priori assumptions about the biological function of spe - ci ﬁ c genes , which is limited at present ( Assary , Vincent , Keers , and Pluess , 2017 ) , a multi - pronged approach is needed to investigate the aetiology underlying SPS . Also , common and complex phenotypes , such as SPS , are expected to result from multiple genetic variants of small e ﬀ ect size ( Flint and Munafò , 2013 ) , as well as from synergistic inter - actions with the environment ( Keers and Pluess , 2017 ) . To advance the understanding of the aetiology of SPS , we re - commend di ﬀ erent levels of analysis for future research . First , ﬁ nding an association between SPS and 5 - HTTLPR supports recent theoretical assumptions that high SPS and the s - allele share phenotypes , in terms of heightened sensitivity to environments and emotional reactivity ( Homberg et al . , 2016 ) . Research with animals in the laboratory does suggest strong links between serotonergic gene variants and enhanced attention to emotional stimuli , a key feature of SPS ( Homberg et al . , 2016 ) . Thus , it will be very relevant to conduct large scale studies ex - amining serotonin gene variants in humans . Second , twin studies should be conducted in order to extend initial ﬁ ndings regarding the aetiologies of SPS beyond adolescents to children and adults , and to study stability and change over time of genetic and environmental ef - fects . Further , twin - based DeFries - Fulker extremes analyses would be useful ( Rende and Slomkowski , 2005 ) , in order to assess whether high levels of SPS are quantitatively similar ( aetiological continuity ) or qualitatively di ﬀ erent ( aetiological discontinuity ) from normal aetio - logical variation in SPS ( Shakeshaft et al . , 2015 ) , further addressing the continuum vs category question from an aetiological standpoint ( see also Section 4 ) . Third , the genetic structure of SPS needs to be assessed in a GWAS of su ﬃ cient size , in order to develop a basic model for the speci ﬁ c genetic variants associated with SPS . Lastly , we recommend more novel molecular genetic approaches such genome - wide complex trait analyses and the identi ﬁ cation of polygenic scores for SPS , which are created for individuals in a new target sample based on the number of trait - associated alleles weighted by their e ﬀ ect size from the dis - covery GWAS sample ( Assary et al . , 2017 ) . While the fMRI studies have brought substantial advances in un - derstanding the neural underpinnings of SPS , this work is still in its infancy . One direction for future research we recommend is to examine large - scale brain networks . A paradigm shift in the ﬁ eld of cognitive neuroscience emphasises the functioning of the brain as an activity balance between sets of large - scale networks that support unique , broad domains of cognitive functions ( Smith et al . , 2009 ) . These networks include the salience network ( Homberg et al . , 2017 ; Sridharan et al . , 2008 ) ( key areas : insula and anterior cingulate cortex ; bottom - up at - tention to salient stimuli and behavioural changes ) , and the default mode network ( Gusnard et al . , 2001 ) ( key areas : ventromedial pre - frontal cortex , rostral anterior cingulate cortex , precuneus ; active when we are o ﬀ task , mind - wandering , thoughts that are unrelated to the present sensory environment ) . Given the function of these networks , they may well underlie the SPS sensitivity facets . For instance , heigh - tened emotional reactivity as observed in SPS could be related to in - creased salience network activity . Likewise , deep cognitive processing could relate to increased activity of the default mode network . Under - standing the highly sensitive brain in terms of large - scale brain net - works would signi ﬁ cantly advance our insight in the neural basis of SPS . Speci ﬁ cally , it would help in understanding how deep information processing and heightened emotionality reactivity in SPS are associated with each other . An open question is whether deep cognitive processing is the central facet of SPS , and other phenotypes are secondary . It is also possible that reduced ‘ ﬁ ltering ’ of sensory information , leading to in - creased awareness of environmental subtleties , drives subsequent in - creased emotional and cognitive processing of the sensory information . Specialised large - scale brain network analyses ( e . g . dynamic causal modelling ) allow the identi ﬁ cation of a central node by investigation of directionality of functional connectivity between networks . Of interest to further understand the function of the high SPS brain is the Embo - died Predictive Interoception Coding ( EPIC ) model . This model postu - lates that the brain anticipates incoming sensory inputs by generating predictions through past experiences . Detection of a salient stimulus by comparing the predictions to actual sensory input can then be used as an alerting / reorienting signal , and relayed to the appropriate nodes that can implement a shift in attention or behaviour ( Barrett and Simmons , 2015 ) . This process involves the generation of predictions by agranular cortices ( e . g . insula , anterior cingulate cortex ) and prediction errors by granular cortices in the salience and default mode network . Since large - scale brain networks have also been identi ﬁ ed in rodents ( Becerra et al . , 2011 ; Huang et al . , 2016 ; Kleckner et al . , 2017 ; Lu et al . , 2012 ; Sierakowiak et al . , 2015 ) , it represents an excellent translational assay , to link data derived from animal studies to humans . While studies so far are compatible with the SPS characteristics of greater depth of processing and emotional reactivity , these character - istics have not been directly examined . In the brain perceptual in - formation processing proceeds hierarchically from low to deep levels , that is , neurons coding low level features , such as lines , which con - verges onto the same neuron at a more advanced stage of processing to construct higher level features ( Herzog and Clarke , 2014 ) . Association cortex contains convergence - divergence zones wherein higher level information feeds back to lower levels , producing richer semantic re - presentations embodied in lower level perceptual information ( Meyer & Damasio , 2009 ) . This raises the question of how depth of processing is related to perception . Evidence is accumulating that recurrent and top - down feedback processes in frontoparietal regions , which contribute to greater depth of processing , a ﬀ ect perception ( Schendan and Ganis , 2015 ; Herzog and Clarke , 2014 ) . Perception may be altered in SPS due to higher sensitivity of perceptual processing itself or to in ﬂ uences on perception from deeper information processing , including attention mechanisms , or top - down in ﬂ uences of high emotional reactivity . These possibilities may be distinguished using perceptual tasks ( e . g . illusions , psychophysics ) , testing bottom - up versus top - down in ﬂ uences of neutral ( e . g . using backward masking , or stimulus impoverishment ( Schendan and Ganis ( 2015 ) . The use of empirical tests to assess sen - sory perception by itself may also reveal how SPS relates to changes in the perception of sensory information and deeper information proces - sing . For instance , the ability to inhibit responses to incoming sensory information is an important feature of a healthy individual for which many conventional EEG tests are at hand such as sensory or sensor - imotor gating . Indeed , in work prior to the de ﬁ nition of SPS , more creative people were found to be more sensitive , de ﬁ ned as habituating C . U . Greven et al . Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 98 ( 2019 ) 287 – 305 298 more slowly to sensory noise ( i . e . less ability to learn to ﬁ lter out re - peated irrelevant sensory stimuli ) and higher skin potentials ( Martindale et al . , 1996 ) . In line , 5 - HTT knockout rats show reduced latent inhibition , also indicative for more attention for irrelevant sen - sory stimuli ( Nonkes et al . , 2012 ) . Furthermore , creative people who are sensitive , de ﬁ ned as having high resting arousal , physiological over - reactivity to stimulation , and poor biofeedback performance , show more variable alpha EEG responses and - on tasks requiring more creativity - less blocking of alpha EEG ( associated with perception and task anticipation and re ﬂ ecting modulation of activity in sensorimotor , dorsal attention and default mode networks , Hacker et al . , 2017 ; Capotosto et al . , 2011 ; Martindale , 1977 ) . Notably , a ﬁ eld of human studies is emerging on the involvement of neuronal coherence and computation in gating and perception but also in other relevant cognitive functions such as multisensory integration , working memory , and selective attention ( Wang , 2010 ) , which may bene ﬁ t SPS research . Depth of processing predicts di ﬀ erences in neu - robehavioral characteristics of SPS in memory and attention re ﬂ ecting greater semantic , elaborative , distinctive , and e ﬀ ortful information processing . For example , regarding memory , individuals high on SPS should perform better on episodic memory tests , which bene ﬁ t from greater depth of processing . Consistent with this , groups with s - relative to l - allele of 5 - HTTLPR and 5 - HTT knockout rodents show higher episodic memory and attention ( Roiser et al . , 2006 ; Homberg and Lesch , 2011 ) . Furthermore , high SPS individuals show higher episodic memory and more details , even following implicit learning , suggesting that automaticity of processes leads to better memory ( Bridges , un - published doctoral dissertation , 2018 ; Schendan , personal commu - nication , 13 August 2018 ) . Finally , further investigation of physiological responses , like HPA - axis reactivity , are of interest to expand our understanding of the biology of Environmental Sensitivity and its objective measurement . Plasma ACTH and cortisol levels , and DNA methylation levels of genes related to the HPA - axis in blood cells , can readily be measured in hu - mans , and these measurements can be extended to the brain in rodents . Of interest , 5 - HTT knockout rats and human 5 - HTTLPR s - allele carriers similarly display a decrease in heart rate in response to a threat pre - dicting cue , and similarly show moderation of the heart rate response by a neural circuitry involving the amygdala and the periaqueductal gray ( Schipper et al . , 2019 ) . Potential changes in autonomic regulation is supported by human imaging data whereby high SPS is associated with greater activation in the amygdala and PAG in response to emo - tionally evocative stimuli ( Acevedo et al . , 2017 ) . While 5 - HTT knockout rat data help to ﬁ ne tune the understanding of mechanisms underlying high SPS , a drawback is that these rats are genetically de ﬁ ned , and not phenotypically like high SPS . Therefore , a phenotypic rat model based on extremes in emotionality and increased information processing in a population of wild - type rats is currently being developed . The pheno - types of this new phenotypic model resemble those of 5 - HTT knockout rats , but the underlying aetiology is di ﬀ erent . By combing animal and human research we can make signi ﬁ cant advances in the mechanistic understanding of high SPS . 7 . SPS , ( mal ) adaptive outcomes , psychopathology and intervention 7 . 1 . Association of SPS with negative and positive outcomes SPS is conceptualised as a trait rather than a disorder , but in in - teraction with negative environments high SPS may increase risk for maladaptation and negative developmental outcomes , including mental and physical symptoms ( see also Section 8 ) . Indeed , research has re - lated SPS to a range of negative outcomes . These include higher levels of psychopathology - related traits , including internalising problems ( Boterberg and Warreyn , 2016 ) , anxiety ( Bakker and Moulding , 2012 ; Jonsson et al . , 2014 ; Liss et al . , 2008 ; Meredith et al . , 2016 ; Neal et al . , 2002 ) , depression ( Bakker and Moulding , 2012 ; Liss et al . , 2008 , 2005 ; Yano and Oishi , 2018 ) , and traits of autism spectrum disorders ( ASD ) and alexithymia ( Liss et al . , 2008 ) . SPS has also been associated with lower levels of subjective happiness ( Sobocko and Zelenski , 2015 ) , and lower levels of life satisfaction ( Booth et al . , 2015 ) . It is also related to factors associated with poor stress management including di ﬃ culties in emotion regulation ( Brindle et al . , 2015 ) , a greater but more accurate perception of home chaos ( Wachs , 2013 ) , increased levels of stress ( Bakker and Moulding , 2012 ; Benham , 2006 ) , physical symptoms of ill health ( Benham , 2006 ) , and greater work displeasure and need for re - covery ( Andresen et al . , 2017 ; Evers et al . , 2008 ) . Interestingly , a computational based model has been proposed to try to get a better understanding on the association of SPS with feeling of distress and overwhelming , pointing out to the importance of an external regulator agent ( a supportive person with normal sensitivity ) to promote the ability of the highly sensitive one to gradually learn on his / her own on how to cope with upsetting stimuli . Recently , SPS has also been pro - posed as a trait associated with frequent nightmares and vivid images in dreams ( Carr and Nielsen , 2017 ) , a hypothesis that has yet to be tested , and has been reported to be higher in individuals with type 1 diabetes ( Goldberg et al . , 2018 ) . Only part of these studies included interaction e ﬀ ects , but of those that did , most have supported the role of interac - tion with negative environments in predicting maladaptive outcomes , as reviewed in Section 2 . 2 . Central to the conceptualisation of SPS as re ﬂ ecting sensitivity to environmental factors , is that SPS is not only relevant to understanding maladaptation , but also optimal development or even ﬂ ourishing in positive environments . As such , higher levels of SPS have been related to positive outcomes , including increased positive a ﬀ ect following po - sitive mood induction ( Lionetti et al . , 2018 ) , increased social compe - tence in interaction with positive parenting styles ( Slagt et al . , 2017 ) , reduced depression scores and bullying and victimisation following intervention ( Pluess and Boniwell , 2015 ; Nocentini et al . , 2018 ) , as reviewed in Section 2 . 2 , and increased activation in the major reward centres of the brain in response to positive stimuli , such as smiling partner faces or generally positive emotional images ( Acevedo et al . , 2014 ) ( Section 6 . 2 ) , as well as higher creativity ( Bridges and Schendan , 2019a , b ) . Further , the HSP scale correlates signi ﬁ cantly ( r = 0 . 27 ) with feelings of awe , which add to the pleasure and meaning in life , assessed using a standard 6 - item Awe scale ( Aron et al . , 2018 ; Shiota et al . , 2007 ) . An association between SPS and higher creativity , de - termined by neurobiological factors , has been also proposed by other authors , at a theoretical level ( Rizzo - Sierra , 2012 ; Rizzo - Sierra et al . , 2012 ) . Regarding parenting , high SPS mothers are shown to score sig - ni ﬁ cantly higher on Parenting Di ﬃ culties ( e . g . “ Each day is full of hassles , ” “ I don ’ t get enough time to myself , ” “ I regret having become a parent ” ) and Attunement to Child ( e . g . “ I know what my child needs even before he lets me know ; ” “ I stay calm with my child no matter what , ” “ One of my strengths is the creativity I bring to parenting ” ) , whereas high SPS fathers scored signi ﬁ cantly higher only on Attunement to Child ( Aron et al . , 2019 ) . Results remained after con - trolling for external stressors , negative a ﬀ ectivity , education , marital status , age , and children ’ s age . Similar , a German study reported a negative association between transition to parenting and well - being in highly sensitive individuals ( Schmueckle et al . , 2017 ) . Furthermore , in a sample of Chinese parents with children with ASD symptoms , SPS has been reported to negatively impact on parental mental health through an indirect e ﬀ ect on parental intolerance of uncertainty ( Su et al . , 2018 ) . These ﬁ ndings suggest that for those high on SPS it is particu - larly important for their well - being to have ways to manage their per - ceived overstimulation of parenting , especially given that it could fa - cilitate the expression of their self - reported bene ﬁ t of the trait , their greater attunement to their children . C . U . Greven et al . Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 98 ( 2019 ) 287 – 305 299 7 . 2 . SPS in the context of psychiatry SPS is linked to increased risk for atypical development and sub - sequent mental disorder symptoms ( see also Section 7 . 1 ) . Most work thus far has focused on links of SPS to symptoms of anxiety and de - pression in non - clinical samples . Borrowing from psychological models of depression , a recent theory explains the association between SPS and psychological distress ( including depression and anxiety and somatic symptoms ) as a secondary phenomenon of cognitive reactivity ( i . e . maladaptive thought content and processes ) to sensory information and related negative emotions ( Bratholm Wyller et al . , 2018 ) . As such , it is not sensory stimuli per se or related negative emotions that are hy - pothesised to lead to psychological distress , but the secondary cognitive reactions of individuals to stimuli and emotions . This cognitive re - activity of individuals has been suggested to distinguish healthy and unhealthy individuals with high SPS ( Bratholm Wyller et al . , 2018 ) . Such a model is trans - diagnostic as it explains psychological distress associated with SPS , independent of speci ﬁ c diagnoses . In support of this , Brindle et al . ( 2015 ) found that di ﬃ culties in emotion regulation partially mediate the link between SPS and depression . Further , Meyer et al . ( 2005 ) found that higher SPS is related to more negative cognitive and a ﬀ ective reactions to ambiguous social scenarios , which is a cog - nitive risk factor associated with anxiety and depression ( Lau and Waters , 2017 ) . Next to anxiety and depression , sensitivity to environmental stimuli is also relevant to psychiatric disorders , such as ASD , attention - de ﬁ cit / hyperactivity disorder ( ADHD ) and schizophrenia ( Acevedo et al . , 2018 ; Ghanizadeh , 2011 ) . However , the relationships of SPS to these disorders remain to be clari ﬁ ed . Di ﬀ erent links are possible , such as that SPS may act as a risk or protective factor , modifying factor ( e . g . in - ﬂ uence the symptom expression and treatment ) , precursor or en - dophenotype for di ﬀ erent disorders , or as a cross - disorder ( also trans - diagnostic ) trait . Relevant to the question of similarities and di ﬀ erences to disorders involving sensory sensitives , a recent review of the brain regions involved in each of the conditions revealed that SPS di ﬀ ers from ASD and schizophrenia in that in response to social and emotional stimuli , SPS uniquely engages brain regions involved in reward pro - cessing , empathy , physiological homeostasis , self - other processing , and awareness ( Acevedo et al . , 2018 ) . However , no study has compared brain structure or function in high SPS individuals directly to those with disorders involving sensitivity to environments . Such studies are needed before more ﬁ rm conclusions can be drawn . A vibrant research area is the study of sensory symptoms in ASD , which have been added to the clinical symptoms of ASD in the DSM - 5 ( American Psychiatric Association , 2013 ) . ASD is a neurodevelop - mental disorder that is also associated with hypersensitivities ( e . g . to smell , sound , touch ) , but unlike SPS it has also been linked to hypo - sensitivity ( Marco et al . , 2011 ) , whereas hyposensitivity has neither been hypothesised nor examined for SPS . Yet , Jerome and Liss ( 2005 ) , reported that individuals high in SPS experienced low registration , and postulated that this could re ﬂ ect a compensatory mechanism put into place when an organism was so over - aroused that it shut down ( see also Section 6 ) . This mechanism has also been hypothesised to occur in in - dividuals with autism ( Gillingham , 2000 ) . Research is needed to de - lineate whether low registration in SPS and hyposensitivity in ASD are related . Furthermore , it is unclear whether sensory sensitivities in in - dividuals with ASD re ﬂ ect basic sensory di ﬀ erences ( e . g . sensitivity to discriminate between or detect sensory stimuli ) , or di ﬀ erences in af - fective response to these stimuli . No studies so far have quanti ﬁ ed SPS among individuals with ASD or other diagnoses in order to test the extent of overlapping architectures of sensory processing . At the neural level , sensory symptoms are thought to originate from di ﬀ erences in low - level processing in sensory - dedicated regions in the brain of in - dividuals with ASD ( Robertson and Baron - Cohen , 2017 ) , whereas SPS is associated with brain regions involved in reward processing , memory , physiological homeostasis , self - other processing , empathy and awareness ( Acevedo et al . , 2018 ) . This implies that sensory sensitivity has distinct qualities in ASD and SPS . More research is needed to un - derstand whether and how sensory processing in ASD relates to SPS . Lastly , there is a broad literature on sensory processing dysregula - tions including factors such as poor registration , sensitivity to stimuli , sensation seeking and sensation avoiding ( Dunn , 1997 ) . The relation of SPS to this literature needs further empirical testing . We reason that while individuals high in SPS may have any disorder , including Sensory Processing Disorder , the indications that nearly one third of the popu - lation may be high in SPS indicates that SPS is a not disorder ( im - pairment ) . That is , it is unlikely that a disorder would be so prevalent under evolutionary pressure . Furthermore , the perceptual advantages of SPS , such as decreased in ﬂ uence of culturally induced perceptual biases ( Section 6 ) , would seem to suggest that SPS bestows perceptual processing advantages . 7 . 3 . Intervention for high SPS individuals experiencing psychological distress Individuals with high levels of SPS are shown to bene ﬁ t more from psychological intervention ( Nocentini et al . , 2018 ; Pluess and Boniwell , 2015 ) . Intervention approaches may therefore not only be particularly vital for individuals high in SPS , given the association of SPS with psychopathology and stress - related problems , but also particularly ef - fective . Proposed interventions for individuals high in SPS experiencing psychological distress include those focusing on increasing an in - dividual ’ s self - ef ﬁ cacy regarding dealing with emotions ( Brindle et al . , 2015 ) . Given that acceptance of negative a ﬀ ective states has been shown to partially mediate the association between SPS and symptoms of depression ( Brindle et al . , 2015 ) , and given that associations between SPS and anxiety were only found when mindfulness and acceptance were low ( Bakker and Moulding , 2012 ) , mindfulness and acceptance - based programmes may also be valuable . Mindfulness - based interven - tions are increasingly shown to be e ﬀ ective in the reduction of stress , anxiety and depression relapse prevention ( Khoury et al . , 2013 ; Kuyken et al . , 2016 ) . Based on neuroimaging data showing greater responsivity to a ﬀ ective stimuli as a function of SPS in areas implicated in emotion ( i . e . the amygdala ) , mindfulness - based trainings , and in fact di ﬀ erent meditation types linked to deactivation of the amygdala ( Acevedo et al . , 2016 ) , may be useful for the enhancement of self - control and dimin - ished emotional reactivity in high SPS individuals ( Acevedo et al . , 2017 ) . A randomised - controlled study in 47 highly sensitive individuals , identi ﬁ ed using the Orienting Sensitivity scale of the Adult Temperament Questionnaire , which is related to SPS ( Evans and Rothbart , 2008 ) , found that mindfulness - based stress reduction had large e ﬀ ects on stress , social anxiety , personal growth and self - accep - tance , and moderate e ﬀ ects on emotional empathy and self - transcen - dence ( Soons et al . , 2010 ) . Recently , it has been proposed that mind - fulness - based cognitive therapy ( MBCT ) may ameliorate psychological distress in individuals with high levels of SPS through addressing cog - nitive reactivity , and that MBCT may have transdiagnostic intervention e ﬀ ects through mediation by cognitive reactivity of individuals high in SPS ( Bratholm Wyller et al . , 2018 ) . Recently , a computational based model has been proposed to try to get a better understanding on the association of SPS with feeling dis - tress or overwhelmed , pointing to the importance of an external reg - ulator agent ( a supportive person with normal sensitivity ) to promote the ability of the highly sensitive one to gradually learn on his / her own on how to cope with upsetting stimuli ( Tran et al . , 2018 ) . Finally , a recent study involving Japanese students reported that physical ex - ercise might moderate the association between SPS and depression tendencies in young adults , but the result has to be replicated in longitudinal studies to clarify the impact of physical activity on the association between sensitivity and depressive symptoms ( Yano and Oishi , 2018 ) . C . U . Greven et al . Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 98 ( 2019 ) 287 – 305 300 7 . 4 . Future directions Most studies so far are based on non - representative ( student ) sam - ples . Associations between SPS and mental disorder need to be quan - ti ﬁ ed further , also in relation to clinical samples , longitudinal designs , mental health registries , objective and biological markers of physical health and stress ( e . g . cortisol reactivity , in ﬂ ammation , allergies ) , and economic impact of SPS in terms of expected occurred health - care costs . An important line of future research is to examine the usefulness of SPS as a cross - disorder ( or transdiagnostic ) trait . Cross - disorder traits are not symptoms of disorder , but are , as neutral traits , uniquely suited to bridge psychiatric disorders with biological substrates of behaviour , clarify heterogeneity and comorbidity and inform cross - disorder inter - ventions , not achieved by the current diagnostic systems ( DSM : Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , ICD : International Classi ﬁ cation of Diseases ) ( Rodriguez - Seijas et al . , 2015 ; Walkup et al . , 2017 ) . SPS may be an ideal cross - disorder trait because it is : a ) observed in humans and animals , b ) heritable , and c ) associated with traits of mental disorders . Furthermore , there is evidence sup - porting that aetiological factors involved in SPS ( see Section 6 . 1 ) par - tially overlap with those in psychiatric disorders , for example ser - otonergic and dopaminergic genes are also involved in the aetiology of ADHD , anxiety and depression . SPS may be a suitable addition to the Research Domain Criteria ( RDoC ) ( Insel , 2014 ) , as the Sensory Proces - sing Sensitivity framework has been established based on observing sti - mulus responsivity in > 100 animal species ( Aron et al . , 2012 ) , in - dicating a strong biological foundation . A logical progression is to use human neurocognitive measures , such as electro - or magneto - en - cephalography and event - related potential studies , in particular to ex - pand this ﬁ eld to the human counterpart of cognitive neuroscience . A critical need is to characterize basic sensorimotor , perceptual , socio - emotional and neurocognitive function in relation to SPS , with learning and memory , attention , and emotional reactivity as the abilities that should vary most in SPS , but also other basic abilities ( e . g . language , object and spatial processing , inhibition ) . Further , more complex abil - ities ( e . g . meta - cognition , social perception and expression , deception , creativity ) should be characterised , as di ﬀ erences in basic abilities will a ﬀ ect more complex ones , and widespread neurobehavioral di ﬀ erences , which may a ﬀ ect large - scale brain networks , are predicted based on the neural and developmental mechanisms of SPS . Such neurobehavioral characteristics will be important for de ﬁ ning what SPS is , developing objective measures of SPS in addition to questionnaires , and tracking neurobehavioral characteristics in SPS across the lifespan and as a function of di ﬀ erent kinds of environments . An unresolved question is to what extent SPS taps into the same construct of sensory reactivity as ASD . High SPS and ASD are both characterised by sensory sensitivities , but there are also important di ﬀ erences : SPS is a temperament trait and not a disorder , di ﬀ ers from ASD in terms of heritability ( around 47 % for SPS and 83 % for ASD ; Assary et al . , 2019 ; Sandin et al . , 2017 ) , and higher empathy is ex - pected in high SPS individuals ( Aron et al . , 2012 ) , whereas certain aspects of empathy and social processing are often impaired in many individuals with ASD ( Bons et al . , 2013 ) . Nonetheless , it is conceivable that children with high SPS are misdiagnosed for ASD for instance when they are exposed to negative environmental factors that precipitate social withdrawal . A crucial caveat is the extreme heterogeneity in symptom constellations and severity across the autistic spectrum . Many studies have addressed the relationship between “ clinical ” sensory symptoms ( e . g . the Sensory Pro ﬁ le , an informant - rated scale used for ASD ) , often referred to as sensory modulation , and symptom severity and ASD subtype ( Bruining et al . , 2010 ; Bruining et al . , 2014 ; Jeste and Geschwind , 2014 ) . The construct of SPS opens up the interesting pos - sibility to test the contribution of normal sensitivity to ASD morbidity . It has been postulated that many di ﬀ erent aetiologies converge on ﬁ nal common pathways leading to ASD ( Bourgeron , 2015 ; Cellot and Cherubini , 2014 ; Delorme et al . , 2013 ) . Di ﬀ erential sensitivity to the environment might be an interesting factor to add to this list and ex - plore via SPS - driven research . SPS may be important for informing personalised intervention . Intervention e ﬀ ects may be greater and more long - term in those higher on SPS , as highly sensitive individuals process or internalise stimuli more deeply , which may allow them continuous application of the ac - quired intervention strategies . Research on the mechanisms ( e . g . psy - chological , cognitive , genetic , neurobiological ) underlying links be - tween SPS and psychopathology , and the responsiveness of high SPS individuals to intervention will be important to help understand how interventions work and for developing new interventions derived from such mechanisms , with implications for more as well as less sensitive individuals . As SPS is both genetically and environmentally de - termined , it may be possible to target sensitivity to environments in less sensitive individuals in order to facilitate treatment e ﬀ ectiveness , for example by therapy a ﬀ ecting neurobiological substrate of SPS ( e . g . through neurofeedback ) . As SPS appears to have consequences for predicting intervention success , measurement of SPS in clinical practice should be considered . In addition to developing and testing e ﬀ ectiveness of interventions for individuals with high levels of SPS and psychological distress , there is also a need for prevention programmes for high SPS individuals to prevent them from shifting to atypical development and help them ﬂ ourish , and to examine the conditions leading to psychological ﬂ ourishing and positive health in individuals high in SPS ( Huber et al . , 2011 ; Seligman , 2011 ) . A ﬁ rst step would be to educate individuals high on SPS about the trait , similar to psychoeducation programmes used in mental health settings ( Montoya et al . , 2011 ) . These individuals can then be followed longitudinally to study the expected bene ﬁ cial e ﬀ ects of being educated about the trait , either in relation to a control high SPS group not educated about their trait , or compared to the period before being informed . We expect that being aware of being high on SPS is key , as it allows to adopt appropriate self - care behaviours such as sometimes avoiding overstimulating situations and getting en - ough time to themselves to process their recent experiences . Another important step is to educate parents and teachers of children with high SPS about the trait , and to examine the e ﬀ ects of being raised and supported by parents and teachers who understand the child ’ s sensi - tivity on school performance , well - being and psychosocial adjustment . 8 . Conclusion With this review we have provided a comprehensive overview of the current status of research on SPS and knowledge gaps , and suggestions for future research . In Table 1 we have summarized the suggestions for future research in order to further understand SPS and to improve the management of mental health and well - being . While research on SPS is still in its infancy and there is need for greater methodological rigour of studies , there is now increasingly good evidence that SPS is distinct from other temperament and personality constructs . SPS allows mea - surement and mechanistic understanding of why some individuals are more sensitive to environmental in ﬂ uences than others . Since SPS is a basic individual characteristic also observed in animals it has far reaching implications . It provides the opportunity to explain individual di ﬀ erences in development in the context of environmental experi - ences , it may explain susceptibility to ( stress - related ) psychopatholo - gies , and may allow early detection of individuals at risk and early intervention to prevent aberrant behavioural developments , and help high SPS individuals to ﬂ ourish in modern society . We could envision a role for SPS in the Research Domain Criteria that describe behavioural domains across brain disorders ( Insel , 2014 ) . Speci ﬁ cally , its evolu - tionary roots provide the premise to obtain mechanistic understanding of SPS across species , and thereby to work towards its clinical im - plementation . C . U . Greven et al . Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 98 ( 2019 ) 287 – 305 301 Declarations of interest None . Acknowledgements The writing of this paper was partially supported with European Commission grants [ grant number 777394 AIMS - 2 - TRIALS to Corina Greven ; H2020 – MSCA – IF – 2015 - 704283 awarded to Francesca Lionetti , Eranid grant STANDUP awarded to Judith Homberg , and ERC Grant324176 awarded to Elaine Fox ] . The European Commission had no role in the writing and no in ﬂ uence on the contents of the manu - script . References Acevedo , B . P . , Aron , E . N . , Aron , A . , Sangster , M . D . , Collins , N . , Brown , L . , 2014 . The highly sensitive brain : an fMRI study of sensory processing sensitivity and response to others ’ emotions . Brain Behav . 4 ( 4 ) , 580 – 594 . Acevedo , B . P . , Pospos , S . , Lavretsky , H . , 2016 . The neural mechanisms of meditative practices : novel approaches for healthy aging . Curr . Behav . Neurosci . Rep . 3 ( 4 ) , 328 – 339 . Acevedo , B . P . , Jagiellowicz , J . , Aron , E . N . , Aron , A . , Marhenke , R . , 2017 . Sensory pro - cessing sensitivity and childhood quality ’ s e ﬀ ects on neural responses to emotional stimuli . Neuropsychiatry 14 ( 5 ) . Acevedo , B . P . , Aron , E . N . , Pospos , S . , Jessen , D . , 2018 . The functional highly sensitive brain : a review of the brain circuits underlying sensory processing sensitivity and seemingly related disorders . Philos . Trans . Biol . Sci . 373 ( 1744 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1098 / rstb . 2017 . 0161 . Ahadi , B . , Basharpoor , S . , 2010 . Relationship between sensory processing sensitivity , personality dimensions and mental health . J . Appl . Sci . 10 ( 7 ) , 570 – 574 . American Psychiatric Association , 2013 . Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders ( DSM - 5 ® ) . American Psychiatric Pub . Andresen , M . , Goldmann , P . , Volodina , A . , 2017 . Do overwhelmed expatriates intend to leave ? The e ﬀ ects of sensory processing sensitivity , stress , and social capital on ex - patriates ’ turnover intention . Eur . Manag . Rev . 5 ( 3 ) , 315 – 328 . Aron , E . N . , 2002 . The Highly Sensitive Child . Broadway Book - Thorsons . , USA . Aron , E . N . , Aron , A . , 1997 . Sensory - processing sensitivity and its relation to introversion and emotionality . J . Pers . Soc . Psychol . 73 ( 2 ) , 345 – 368 . Aron , E . N . , Aron , A . , Davies , K . M . , 2005 . Adult shyness : the interaction of temperamental sensitivity and an adverse childhood environment . Pers . Soc . Psychol . Bull . 31 ( 2 ) , 181 – 197 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0146167204271419 . Aron , A . , Ketay , S . , Hedden , T . , Aron , E . N . , Rose Markus , H . , Gabrieli , J . D . , 2010 . Temperament trait of sensory processing sensitivity moderates cultural di ﬀ erences in neural response . Soc . Cogn . A ﬀ ect . Neurosci . 5 ( 2 - 3 ) , 219 – 226 . Aron , E . N . , Aron , A . , Jagiellowicz , J . , 2012 . Sensory processing sensitivity : a review in the light of the evolution of biological responsivity . Personal . Soc . Psychol . Rev . 16 ( 3 ) , 262 – 282 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1088868311434213 . Aron , E . N . , Aron , A . , Tillmann , T . C . , 2018 . Future directions for sensory processing sensitivity research . In : Paper Presented at the 30th Convention of the Association for Psychological Science . San Francisco , California . Aron , E . N . , Aron , A . , Nardone , N . , Zhou , S . ( in press ) . Sensory Processing Sensitivity in the context of parenting : An exploratory study . Family Relations . Assary , E . , Pluess , M . , 2017 . Di ﬀ erential susceptibility in minority children : individual di ﬀ erences in environmental sensitivity . Handbook on Positive Development of Minority Children and Youth . Springer , Cham , pp . 139 – 152 . Assary , E . , Vincent , J . P . , Keers , R . , Pluess , M . , 2017 . Gene - environment interaction and psychiatric disorders : review and future directions . Paper Presented at the Seminars in Cell Developmental Biology . Assary , E . , Zavos , H . M . , Krapohl , E . , Keers , R . , Pluess , M . ( in preparation ) . Sensitivity to the Environment Has Two Distinct Heritable Components . Asscher , J . , Dekovic , M . , Den Akker , A . L . , Manders , W . A . , Prins , P . J . , Van Der Laan , P . H . , Prinzie , P . , 2016 . Do personality traits a ﬀ ect responsiveness of juvenile delinquents to treatment ? J . Res . Pers . 63 , 44 – 50 . Bakker , K . , Moulding , R . , 2012 . Sensory - processing sensitivity , dispositional mindfulness and negative psychological symptoms . Pers . Individ . Dif . 53 ( 3 ) , 341 – 346 . Barrett , L . F . , Simmons , W . K . , 2015 . Interoceptive predictors in the brain . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 16 , 419 – 429 . Bearer , E . L . , Zhang , X . , Janvelyan , D . , Boulat , B . , Jacobs , R . E . , 2009 . Reward circuitry is perturbed in the absence of the serotonin transporter . Neuroimage 46 ( 4 ) , 1091 – 1104 . Becerra , L . , Pendse , G . , Chang , P . - C . , Bishop , J . , Borsook , D . , 2011 . Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain . PLoS One 6 ( 10 ) , e25701 . Beevers , C . G . , Marti , C . N . , Lee , H . J . , Stote , D . L . , Ferrell , R . E . , Hariri , A . R . , Telch , M . J . , 2011 . Associations between serotonin transporter gene promoter region ( 5 - HTTLPR ) polymorphism and gaze bias for emotional information . J . Abnorm . Psychol . 120 ( 1 ) , 187 – 197 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a0022125 . Belsky , J . , 1997 . Variation in susceptibility to rearing in ﬂ uences : an evolutionary argu - ment . Psychol . Inq . 8 , 182 – 186 . Belsky , J . , Pluess , M . , 2009 . Beyond diathesis stress : di ﬀ erential susceptibility to en - vironmental in ﬂ uences . Psychol . Bull . 135 ( 6 ) , 885 – 908 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a0017376 . Belsky , J . , Hsieh , K . H . , Crnic , K . , 1998 . Mothering , fathering , and infant negativity as antecedents of boys ’ externalizing problems and inhibition at age 3 years : di ﬀ erential susceptibility to rearing experience ? Dev . Psychopathol . 10 ( 2 ) , 301 – 319 . Belsky , J . , Pluess , M . , Widaman , K . F . , 2013 . Con ﬁ rmatory and competitive evaluation of alternative gene ‐ environment interaction hypotheses . J . Child Psychol . Psychiatry 54 Table 1 Future research directions for SPS . Topic Future directions SPS and other theories of Environmental Sensitivity - Increase understanding about the core hypothesised features of SPS ( see Fig . 1 and Section 6 for suggestions ) . Assessment of SPS - Develop more objective assessment of SPS alongside existing HSP and HSC scales , especially behaviour observational measures , and semi - structured interviews . - Further validate and optimise the existing HSP and HSC scales in terms of the ability to capture depth of processing , and current negative phrasing of the items . - Adapt the HSP / HSC scales to be invariant across countries . SPS as a marker of Environmental Sensitivity - Investigate the relationship between SPS and reactivity to tightly controlled manipulations of positive and negative environments . - Investigate SPS developmentally – are there windows of heightened responsivity to the environment ? SPS and other temperament / personality traits - Expand research consolidating the existing evidence for validity of the HSP / HSC scales and independence from existing temperament and personality constructs . - Analyse SPS in terms of facets of Five Factor Model personality domains . SPS : Category or continuum ? - Examine the taxonic or dimensional nature of the SPS construct , especially by conducting state - of - the art taxometric analyses which have particular strength to answer this question Biological basis of SPS - Conduct longitudinal twin studies , across developmental ages . Conduct twin - based DeFries - Fulker extremes analysis of HSP / HSC scale to address the question of genetic ( dis ) continuity . - Conduct molecular genetic analyses of SPS , especially GWAS and polygenic risk scores . - Extend human and animal fMRI studies towards large - scale brain networks . - Elucidate whether SPS is related to changes in physiological responses , as assessed by galvanic skin responses , heart rate variability , and basal and stress - induced glucocorticoids levels . - Assess the epigenetic mechanisms underlying SPS x environment interactions . SPS , psychopathology and intervention - Conduct studies relating SPS to more rigorous assessments of mental health and well - being ( e . g . multi - informant , interview - based ) , and to objective and biological markers of physical health and stress ( e . g . cortisol reactivity , in ﬂ ammation , allergies etc . ) . - Obtain more mechanistic insight in how high SPS relates to and di ﬀ ers from mental disorders including sensitivity to environment . - Take into account SPS in explaining treatment heterogeneity . Study mechanisms underlying SPS as a predictor of treatment response , to help to design new intervention strategies for sensitive and less sensitive individuals . - Develop and study the e ﬀ ectiveness of prevention and positive intervention programmes for high SPS individuals . Note : HSP = Highly Sensitive Person ; HSC = Highly Sensitive Child . C . U . Greven et al . Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 98 ( 2019 ) 287 – 305 302 ( 10 ) , 1135 – 1143 . Benham , G . , 2006 . The highly sensitive person : stress and physical symptom reports . Pers . Individ . Dif . 40 ( 7 ) , 1433 – 1440 . Bons , D . , van den Broek , E . , Scheepers , F . , Herpers , P . , Rommelse , N . , Buitelaaar , J . K . , 2013 . Motor , emotional , and cognitive empathy in children and adolescents with autism spectrum disorder and conduct disorder . J . Abnorm . Child Psychol . 41 ( 3 ) , 425 – 443 . Boomsma , D . , Busjahn , A . , Peltonen , L . , 2002 . Classical twin studies and beyond . Nat . Rev . Genet . 3 ( 11 ) , 872 . Booth , C . , Standage , H . , Fox , E . , 2015 . Sensory - processing sensitivity moderates the as - sociation between childhood experiences and adult life satisfaction . Pers . Individ . Dif . 87 , 24 – 29 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . paid . 2015 . 07 . 020 . Borries , F . , 2012 . Do the " Highly Sensitive " Exist ? A Taxonometric Investigation of the Personality Construct Sensory Processing Sensivitity ( Unpublished Diplomarbeit ) . University of Bielefeld , Bielefeld , Germany . Boterberg , S . , Warreyn , P . , 2016 . Making sense of it all : the impact of sensory processing sensitivity on daily functioning of children . Pers . Individ . Dif . 92 , 80 – 86 . Bourgeron , T . , 2015 . From the genetic architeture to synaptic plasticity in autism spec - trum disorder . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 16 ( 9 ) , 551 – 563 . Boyce , W . T . , Ellis , B . J . , 2005 . Biological sensitivity to context : an evolutionary - develop - mental theory of the origins and functions of stress reactivity . Dev . Psychopathol . 17 ( 2 ) , 271 – 301 . Braem , M . , Asher , L . , Furrer , S . , Lechner , I . , Würbel , H . , Melotti , L . , 2017 . Development of the “ highly Sensitive Dog ” questionnaire to evaluate the personality dimension “ Sensory Processing Sensitivity ” in dogs . PLoS One 12 ( 5 ) , e0177616 . Bratholm Wyller , H . , BratholmWyller , V . B . , Crane , C . , Gjelsvik , B . , 2018 . The relationship between sensory processing sensitivity and psychological distress : a model of un - derpinning mechanisms and an analysis of therapeutic possibilities . Scand . Psychol . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 15714 / scandpsychol . 4 . e15 . Bridges , D . , 2018 . Neurosensitivity : Implications for Cognition and Creativity . Doctoral dissertation . School of Psychology . Plymouth University . Bridges , D . , Schendan , H . E . ( in press , a ) . The Sensitive , Open Creator . Personality and Individual Di ﬀ erences . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . paid . 2018 . 09 . 016 . Bridges , D . , Schendan , H . E . ( in press , b ) . Sensitive Individuals are More Creative . Personality and Individual Di ﬀ erences . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . paid . 2018 . 09 . 015 . Brindle , K . , Moulding , R . , Bakker , K . , Nedeljkovic , M . , 2015 . Is the relationship between sensory ‐ processing sensitivity and negative a ﬀ ect mediated by emotional regulation ? Aust . J . Psychol . 67 ( 4 ) , 214 – 221 . Bruining , H . , de Sonneville , L . , Swaab , H . , de Jonge , M . , Kas , M . , van Engeland , H . , Vorstman , J . , 2010 . Dissecting the clinical heterogeneity of autism spectrum dis - orders through de ﬁ ned genotypes . PLoS One 5 ( 5 ) . Bruining , H . , Eijkermans , M . J . , Kas , M . J . , Curran , S . R . , Vorstman , J . A . , Bolton , P . F . , 2014 . Behavioral signatures related to genetic disorders in autism . Molecular Austims 5 ( 1 ) . Capotosto , P . , Babiloni , C . , Romani , G . L . , Corbetta , M . , 2011 . Di ﬀ erential contribution of right and left parietal cortex to the control of spatial attention : a simultaneous EEG – rTMS study . Cereb . Cortex 22 ( 2 ) , 446 – 454 . Carola , V . , Gross , C . , 2011 . Mouse models of the 5 - HTTLPR× stress risk factor for de - pression . Behavioral Neurogenetics . Springer , pp . 59 – 72 . Carr , M . , Nielsen , T . , 2017 . A novel Di ﬀ erential Susceptibility framework for the study of nightmares : evidence for trait sensory processing sensitivity . Clin . Psychol . Rev . Carson , S . H . , Peterson , J . B . , Higgins , D . M . , 2003 . Decreased Latent Inhibition Is Associated With Increased Creative Achievement in High - functioning Individuals . American Psychological Association . Caspi , A . , Hariri , A . R . , Holmes , A . , Uher , R . , Mo ﬃ tt , T . E . , 2010 . Genetic sensitivity to the environment : the case of the serotonin transporter gene and its implications for studying complex diseases and traits . Am . J . Psychiatry 167 ( 5 ) , 509 – 527 . Castrén , E . , 2013 . Neuronal network plasticity and recovery from depression . JAMA Psychiatry 70 ( 9 ) , 983 – 989 . Cavanna , A . E . , Trimble , M . R . , 2006 . The precuneus : a review of its functional anatomy and behavioural correlates . Brain 129 ( Pt 3 ) , 564 . Cellot , G . , Cherubini , E . , 2014 . GABAergic signaling as therapeutic target for autism spectrum disorders . Front . Pediatr . 2 ( 70 ) . Chen , C . , Moyzis , R . , Stern , H . , He , Q . , Li , H . , Li , J . , et al . , 2011 . Contributions of do - pamine - related genes and environmental factors to highly sensitive personality : a multi - step neuronal system - level approach . PLoS One 6 ( 7 ) , e21636 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0021636 . Craig , A . D . , 2009 . Emotional moments across time : a possible neural basis for time per - ception in the anterior insula . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . Lond . B Biol . Sci . 364 ( 1525 ) , 1933 . Cross , E . S . , Hamilton , A . Fd . C . , Grafton , S . T . , 2006 . Building a motor simulation de novo : observation of dance by dancers . Neuroimage 31 ( 3 ) , 1257 – 1267 . de Villiers , B . , Lionetti , F . , Pluess , M . , 2018 . Vantage sensitivity : a framework for in - dividual di ﬀ erences in response to psychological intervention . Soc . Psychiatry Psychiatr . Epidemiol . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00127 - 017 - 1471 - 0 . Del Giudice , M . , Ellis , B . J . , Shirtcli ﬀ , E . A . , 2011 . The adaptive calibration model of stress responsivity . Neurosci . Biobehav . Rev . 35 ( 7 ) , 1562 – 1592 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neubiorev . 2010 . 11 . 007 . Delorme , R . , Ey , E . , Toro , R . , Leboyer , M . , Gillberg , C . , Bourgeron , T . , 2013 . Progress toward treatments for synaptic defects in autism . Nat . Med . 19 ( 6 ) , 685 – 694 . Dixon , M . L . , Christo ﬀ , K . , 2014 . The lateral prefrontal cortex and complex value - based learning and decision making . Neurosci . Biobehav . Rev . 45 , 9 – 18 . Dunn , W . , 1997 . The impact of sensory processing abilities on the daily lives of young children and families : a conceptual model . Infants Young Child . 9 ( 4 ) , 23 – 25 . Dyson , M . W . , Olino , T . M . , Dunn , W . , Goldsmith , H . H . , Klein , D . N . , 2012 . The structure of temperament in preschoolers : a two - stage factor analytic approach . Emotion 12 ( 1 ) . Ellis , B . J . , Boyce , W . T . , 2011 . Di ﬀ erential susceptibility to the environment : toward an understanding of sensitivity to developmental experiences and context . Dev . Psychopathol . 23 ( 1 ) , 1 – 5 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / s095457941000060x . Ellis , B . J . , Boyce , W . T . , Belsky , J . , Bakermans - Kranenburg , M . J . , van IJzendoorn , M . H . , 2011 . Di ﬀ erential susceptibility to the environment : an evolutionary – neurodeve - lopmental theory . Dev . Psychopathol . 23 ( 1 ) , 7 – 28 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / s0954579410000611 . Evans , D . E . , Rothbart , M . K . , 2008 . Temperamental sensitivity : Two constructs or one ? Pers . Individ . Dif . 44 ( 1 ) , 108 – 118 . Evers , A . , Rasche , J . , Schabracq , M . J . , 2008 . High sensory processing sensitivity at work . Int . J . Stress Manag . 15 ( 2 ) , 189 – 198 . Eysenck , H . , 1967 . Personality and extra - sensory perception . Journal of the Society for Psychical Research . Flint , J . , Munafò , M . R . , 2013 . Candidate and non - candidate genes in behavior genetics . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 23 ( 1 ) , 57 – 61 . Gerstenberg , F . X . R . , 2012 . Sensory - processing sensitivity predicts performance on a vi - sual search task followed by an increase in perceived stress . Pers . Individ . Dif . 53 ( 4 ) , 496 – 500 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . paid . 2012 . 04 . 019 . Ghanizadeh , A . , 2011 . Sensory processing problems in children with ADHD , a systematic review . Psychiatry Investig . 8 ( 2 ) , 89 – 94 . Gillingham , G . , 2000 . Autism : A New Understanding . Tacit . , Edmonton , Canada . Goldberg , A . , Ebraheem , Z . , Freiberg , C . , Ferarro , R . , Chai , S . , Gottfried , O . D . , 2018 . Sweet and sensitive : sensory processing sensitivity and type 1 diabetes . J . Pediatr . Nurs . 38 , e35 – e38 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . pedn . 2017 . 10 . 015 . Goldsmith , H . H . , Reilly , J . , Lemery , K . S . , Longley , S . , Prescott , A . , 1999 . The Laboratory Temperament Assessment Battery - Preschool version . Gray , J . A . , 1982 . The Neuropsychology of Anxiety : an Enquiry Into Thefunctions of the Septo - hippocampal System . Oxford University Press , New York . Gray , J . A . , McNaugthon , N . , 2000 . The Neuropsychology of Anxiety : an Enquiry Into the Functions of the Septo - hippocampal System , 2nd . Oxford University Press , Oxford . Guidotti , G . , Calabrese , F . , Auletta , F . , Olivier , J . , Racagni , G . , Homberg , J . , Riva , M . A . , 2012 . Developmental in ﬂ uence of the serotonin transporter on the expression of npas4 and GABAergic markers : modulation by antidepressant treatment . Neuropsychopharmacology 37 ( 3 ) , 746 – 758 . Gusnard , D . A . , Akbudak , E . , Shulman , G . L . , Raichle , M . E . , 2001 . Medial prefrontal cortex and self - referential mental activity : relation to a default mode of brain function . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 98 ( 7 ) , 4259 – 4264 . Hacker , C . D . , Snyder , A . Z . , Pahwa , M . , Corbetta , M . , Leuthardt , E . C . , 2017 . Frequency - speci ﬁ c electrophysiologic correlates of resting state fMRI networks . NeuroImage 149 , 446 – 457 . Haslam , N . , Holland , E . , Kuppens , P . , 2012 . Categories versus dimensions in personality and psychopathology : a quantitative review of taxometric research . Psychol . Med . 42 ( 5 ) , 903 – 920 . Hentges , R . F . , Davies , P . T . , Cicchetti , D . , 2015 . Temperament and interparental con ﬂ ict : the role of negative emotionality in predicting child behavioral problems . Child Dev . 86 ( 5 ) , 1333 – 1350 . Herzog , M . H . , Clarke , A . M . , 2014 . Why vision is not both hierarchical and feedforward . Front . Comput . Neurosci . 8 , 135 . Homberg , J . R . , Lesch , K . P . , 2011 . Looking on the bright side of serotonin transporter gene variation . Biol . Psychiatry 69 ( 6 ) , 513 – 519 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . biopsych . 2010 . 09 . 024 . Homberg , J . R . , van den Hove , D . L . A . , 2012 . The serotonin transporter gene and func - tional and pathological adaptation to environmental variation across the life span . Prog . Neurobiol . 99 ( 2 ) , 117 – 127 . Homberg , J . R . , De Boer , S . F . , Raasø , H . S . , Olivier , J . D . , Verheul , M . , Ronken , E . , et al . , 2008 . Adaptations in pre - and postsynaptic 5 - HT1A receptor function and cocaine supersensitivity in serotonin transporter knockout rats . Psychopharmacology 200 ( 3 ) , 367 – 380 . Homberg , J . R . , Schubert , D . , Asan , E . , Aron , E . N . , 2016 . Sensory processing sensitivity and serotonin gene variance : insights into mechanisms shaping environmental sen - sitivity . Neurosci . Biobehav . Rev . 71 , 472 – 483 . Homberg , J . R . , Kozicz , T . , Fernández , G . , 2017 . Large - scale network balances in the transition from adaptive to maladaptive stress responses . Curr . Opin . Behav . Sci . 14 , 27 – 32 . Huang , S . - M . , Wu , Y . - L . , Peng , S . - L . , Peng , H . - H . , Huang , T . - Y . , Ho , K . - C . , Wang , F . - N . , 2016 . Inter - strain di ﬀ erences in default mode network : a resting state fmri study on spontaneously hypertensive rat and Wistar Kyoto rat . Sci . Rep . 6 , 21697 . Huber , M . , Knottnerus , J . A . , Green , L . , van der Horst , H . , Jadad , A . R . , Kromhout , D . , et al . , 2011 . How should we de ﬁ ne health ? BMJ : Br . Med . J . ( Online ) 343 . Insel , T . R . , 2014 . The NIMH research domain criteria ( RDoC ) project : precision medicine for psychiatry . Am . J . Psychiatry 171 ( 4 ) , 395 – 397 . Jagiellowicz , J . , Xu , X . , Aron , A . , Aron , E . N . , Cao , G . , Feng , T . , Weng , X . , 2012 . The trait of sensory processing sensitivity and neural responses to changes in visual scenes . Soc . Cogn . A ﬀ ect . Neurosci . 6 ( 1 ) , 38 – 47 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / scan / nsq001 . Jagiellowicz , J . , Aron , A . , Aron , E . N . , 2016 . Relation between the temperament trait of sensory processing sensitivity and emotional reactivity . Soc . Behav . Pers . 44 ( 2 ) , 185 – 200 . Jerome , E . M . , Liss , M . , 2005 . Relationships between sensory processing style , adult at - tachment , and coping . Pers . Individ . Dif . 38 ( 6 ) , 1341 – 1352 . Jeste , S . S . , Geschwind , D . H . , 2014 . Disentangling the heterogeneity of autism spectrum disorder through genetic ﬁ ndings . Nat . Rev . Neurol . 10 ( 2 ) , 74 – 81 . Jonsson , K . , Grim , K . , Kjellgren , A . , 2014 . Do highly sensitive persons experience more nonordinary states of consciousness during sensory isolation ? Soc . Behav . Personal . Int . J . 42 ( 9 ) , 1495 – 1506 . Kaestner , N . , Richter , S . H . , Lesch , K . - P . , Schreiber , R . S . , Kaiser , S . , Sachser , N . , 2015 . Bene ﬁ ts of a “ vulnerability gene ” ? A study in serotonin transporter knockout mice . C . U . Greven et al . Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 98 ( 2019 ) 287 – 305 303 Behav . Brain Res . 283 , 116 – 120 . Kagan , J . , 1994a . Galen ’ s Prophecy . Basic Books , New York . Kagan , J . , 1994b . On the nature of emotion . Monogr . Soc . Res . Child Dev . 59 ( 2 - 3 ) , 7 – 24 . Kagan , J . , 2002 . Childhood predictors of state anxiety . Dialogues Clin . Neurosci . 4 ( 3 ) , 287 – 293 . Kalue ﬀ , A . , Olivier , J . , Nonkes , L . , Homberg , J . , 2010 . Conserved role for the serotonin transporter gene in rat and mouse neurobehavioral endophenotypes . Neurosci . Biobehav . Rev . 34 ( 3 ) , 373 – 386 . Keers , R . , Pluess , M . , 2017 . Childhood quality in ﬂ uences genetic sensitivity to environ - mental in ﬂ uences across adulthood : a life - course Gene× Environment interaction study . Dev . Psychopathol . 29 ( 5 ) , 1921 – 1933 . Khoury , B . , Lecomte , T . , Fortin , G . , Masse , M . , Therien , P . , Bouchard , V . , et al . , 2013 . Mindfulness - based therapy : a comprehensive meta - analysis . Clin . Psychol . Rev . 33 ( 6 ) , 763 – 771 . Kibe , C . , Suzuki , M . , Hirano , M . , 2018 . Individual sensitivity to the e ﬀ ects of resilience education : self - esteem enhancement in Japanese adolescents . Paper Presented at the European Conference on Positive Psychology . Kleckner , I . R . , Zhang , J . , Touroutoglou , A . , Chanes , L . , Xia , C . , Simmons , W . K . , et al . , 2017 . Evidence for a large - scale brain system supporting allostasis and interoception in humans . Nat . Hum . Behav . 1 ( 5 ) , 0069 . Konrad , S . , Herzberg , P . Y . , 2017 . Psychometric properties and validation of a german high sensitive person scale ( HSPS - G ) . Eur . J . Psychol . Assess . Kroenung , R . L . , 2015 . The Latent Structure of Sensitivity - a Taxometric Analysis of Sensory - processing Sensitivity . unpublished master ’ s thesis . University of Bielefeld , Bielefeld , Germany . Kuyken , W . , Warren , F . C . , Taylor , R . S . , Whalley , B . , Crane , C . , Bondol ﬁ , G . , et al . , 2016 . E ﬃ cacy of mindfulness - based cognitive therapy in prevention of depressive relapse : an individual patient data meta - analysis from randomized trials . JAMA Psychiatry 73 ( 6 ) , 565 – 574 . Lang , P . , Bradley , M . M . , 2007 . The International A ﬀ ective Picture System ( IAPS ) in the study of emotion and attention . Handbook of Emotion Elicitation and Assessment . pp . 29 . Lau , J . Y . , Waters , A . M . , 2017 . Annual Research Review : an expanded account of in - formation ‐ processing mechanisms in risk for child and adolescent anxiety and de - pression . J . Child Psychol . Psychiatry 58 ( 4 ) , 387 – 407 . Licht , C . L . , Mortensen , E . L . , Knudsen , G . M . , 2011 . Association between sensory proces - sing sensitivity and the 5 - HTTLPR Short / Short genotype . Biol . Psychiatry 69 , 152S – 153S ( Supplement for Society of Biological Psychiatry Convention and Annual Meeting , abstract , 510 ) . Lionetti , F . , Aron , E . N . , Aron , A . , Klein , D . N . , Pluess , M . , 2017 . Evaluating environmental sensitivity in preschoolers : the highly sensitive child rating system . Paper Presented at the 18th European Conference on Developmental Psychology Utrecht . Lionetti , F . , Aron , A . , Aron , E . N . , Burns , L . G . , Jagiellowicz , J . , Pluess , M . , 2018 . Dandelions , Tulips and Orchids : evidence for the existence of low - sensitive , medium - sensitive , and high - sensitive individuals . Transl . Psychiatry 8 ( 24 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41398 - 017 - 0090 - 6 . Lionetti , F . , Klein , D . N . , Aron , A . , Aron , E . , & Pluess , M . ( under review ) . Observer - Rated Environmental Sensitivity Moderates Children ’ s Response to Parenting Quality in Early Childhood . Liss , M . , Timmel , L . , Baxley , K . , Killingsworth , P . , 2005 . Sensory processing sensitivity and its relation to parental bonding , anxiety , and depression . Pers . Individ . Dif . 39 ( 8 ) , 1429 – 1439 . Liss , M . , Mailloux , J . , Erchull , M . J . , 2008 . The relationships between sensory processing sensitivity , alexithymia , autism , depression , and anxiety . Pers . Individ . Dif . 45 ( 3 ) , 255 – 259 . Listou Grimen , H . , Diseth , Å . , 2016 . Sensory processing sensitivity : factors of the highly sensitive person scale and their relationships to personality and subjective health complaints . Percept . Mot . Skills 123 ( 3 ) , 637 – 653 . Lu , H . , Zou , Q . , Gu , H . , Raichle , M . E . , Stein , E . A . , Yang , Y . , 2012 . Rat brains also have a default mode network . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 109 ( 10 ) , 3979 – 3984 . Luoni , A . , Hulsken , S . , Cazzaniga , G . , Racagni , G . , Homberg , J . R . , Riva , M . A . , 2013 . Behavioural and neuroplastic properties of chronic lurasidone treatment in serotonin transporter knockout rats . Int . J . Neuropsychopharmacol . 16 ( 6 ) , 1319 – 1330 . Marco , E . J . , Hinkley , L . B . , Hill , S . S . , Nagarajan , S . S . , 2011 . Sensory processing in autism : a review of neurophysiologic ﬁ ndings . Pediatr . Res . 69 ( 5 Pt 2 ) , 48R – 54R . Martindale , C . , 1977 . Creativity , consciousness , and cortical arousal . J . Altered States Conscious . Martindale , C . , Anderson , K . , Moore , K . , West , A . N . , 1996 . Creativity , oversensitivity , and rate of habituation . Pers . Individ . Dif . 20 ( 4 ) , 423 – 427 . McCrae , R . , Costa , P . , 1994 . The stability of personality : observation and evaluations . Curr . Dir . Psychol . Sci . 3 , 173 – 175 . Meredith , P . J . , Bailey , K . J . , Strong , J . , Rappel , G . , 2016 . Adult attachment , sensory pro - cessing , and distress in healthy adults . Am . J . Occup . Ther . 70 ( 1 ) 7001250010p7001250011 - 7001250010p7001250018 . Meyer , B . , Muriel , A . , David , P . B . , 2005 . Sensory sensitivity , attachment experiences , and rejection responses among adults with boderline and avoidant personality features . J . Pers . Disord . 19 ( 6 ) , 641 – 658 . Miceli , S . , Nadif Kasri , N . , Joosten , J . , Huang , C . , Kepser , L . , Proville , R . , et al . , 2017 . Reduced inhibition within layer IV of sert knockout rat barrel cortex is associated with faster sensory integration . Cereb . Cortex 27 ( 2 ) , 933 – 949 . Monroe , S . M . , Simons , A . D . , 1991 . Diathesis - stress theories in the context of life stress research : implications for the depressive disorders . Psychol . Bull . 110 ( 3 ) , 406 – 425 . Montoya , A . , Colom , F . , Ferrin , M . , 2011 . Is psychoeducation for parents and teachers of children and adolescents with ADHD e ﬃ cacious ? A systematic literature review . Eur . Psychiatry 26 ( 3 ) , 166 – 175 . Neal , J . A . , Edelmann , R . J . , Glachan , M . , 2002 . Behavioural inhibition and symptoms of anxiety and depression : Is there a speci ﬁ c relationship with social phobia ? Br . J . Clin . Psychol . 41 ( 4 ) , 361 – 374 . Nocentini , A . , Menesini , E . , Lionetti , F . , Pluess , M . , 2017 . Highly sensitive child scale : investigation of construct validity in a sample of Italian children . Paper Presented at the European Conference of Developmental Psychology . Nocentini , A . , Menesini , E . , Pluess , M . , 2018 . The personality trait of environmental sensitivity predicts children ’ s positive response to school - based anti - bullying inter - vention . Clin . Psychol . Sci . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 2167702618782194 . Nonkes , L . J . , van de Vondervoort , I . I . , de Leeuw , M . J . , Wijlaars , L . P . , Maes , J . H . , Homberg , J . R . , 2012 . Serotonin transporter knockout rats show improved strategy set - shifting and reduced latent inhibition . Learn . Mem . 19 ( 5 ) , 190 – 193 . Nonkes , L . J . , Maes , J . H . , Homberg , J . R . , 2013 . Improved cognitive ﬂ exibility in serotonin transporter knockout ratsis unchanged following chronic cocaineself ‐ administration . Addict . Biol . 18 ( 3 ) , 434 – 440 . Pang , R . D . , Wang , Z . , Klosinski , L . P . , Guo , Y . , Herman , D . H . , Celikel , T . , et al . , 2011 . Mapping functional brain activation using [ 14C ] - iodoantipyrine in male serotonin transporter knockout mice . PLoS One 6 ( 8 ) , e23869 . Pearson , R . , McGeary , J . E . , Maddox , W . T . , Beveers , C . G . , 2016 . Serotonin promoter polymorphism ( 5 - HTLPR ) predicts biased attention for emotion stimuli : Preliminary evidence of moderation by the social environment . Clin . Psychol . Sci . 4 ( 1 ) , 122 – 128 . Pennisi , E . , 2016 . The power of personality . Science 352 ( 6286 ) , 644 – 647 . Pluess , M . , 2015 . Individual di ﬀ erences in environmental sensitivity . Child Dev . Perspect . 9 ( 3 ) , 138 – 143 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / cdep . 12120 . Pluess , M . , Belsky , J . , 2009 . Di ﬀ erential susceptibility to rearing experience : the case of childcare . J . Child Psychol . Psychiatry 50 ( 4 ) , 396 – 404 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1469 - 7610 . 2008 . 01992 . x . Pluess , M . , Belsky , J . , 2015 . Vantage sensitivity : genetic susceptibility to e ﬀ ects of posi - tive experiences . In : Pluess , M . ( Ed . ) , Genetics of Psychological Well - Being . Oxford University Press , Oxford , pp . 193 – 210 . Pluess , M . , Boniwell , I . , 2015 . Sensory - Processing Sensitivity predicts treatment response to a school - based depression prevention program : evidence of Vantage Sensitivity . Pers . Individ . Dif . 82 ( 0 ) , 40 – 45 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . paid . 2015 . 03 . 011 . Pluess , M . , Belsky , J . , Way , B . M . , Taylor , S . E . , 2010 . 5 - HTTLPR moderates e ﬀ ects of current life events on neuroticism : di ﬀ erential susceptibility to environmental in - ﬂ uences . Prog . Neuropsychopharmacol . Biol . Psychiatry 34 ( 6 ) , 1070 – 1074 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . pnpbp . 2010 . 05 . 028 . Pluess , M . , Assary , E . , Lionetti , F . , Lester , K . J . , Krapohl , E . , Aron , E . N . , Aron , A . , 2017 . Environmental sensitivity in children : development of the highly sensitive child scale and identi ﬁ cation of sensitivity groups . Dev . Psychol . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / dev0000406 . Rappaport , M . B . , Corbally , C . , 2018 . Evolution of religious capacity in the genus homo : trait complexity in action through compassion . J . Religion Sci . 53 ( 1 ) , 198 – 239 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / zygo . 12387 . Rende , R . , Slomkowski , C . , 2005 . DeFries – Fulker analysis . Encycl . Stat . Behave . Sci . Rinn , A . N . , Mullet , D . R . , Jett , N . , Nyikos , T . , 2018 . Sensory processing sensitivity among high - ability individuals : a psychometric evaluation of the highly sensitive person scale . Roeper Rev . 40 ( 3 ) , 166 – 175 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 02783193 . 2018 . 1466840 . Rizzolatti , G . , Fadiga , L . , Gallese , V . , Fogassi , L . , 1996 . Premotor cortex and the re - cognition of motor actions . Cogn . Brain Res . 3 ( 2 ) , 131 – 141 . Rizzo - Sierra , C . V . , 2012 . The human sensory processing sensitivity : biological implica - tions for introversion , submission and creativity . Hypotheses in Clinical Medicine . Nova Science Publisher . Rizzo - Sierra , C . V . , Leon - S , M . E . , Leon - Sarmiento , F . E . , 2012 . Higher sensory processing sensitivity , introversion and ectomorphism : new biomarkers for human creativity in developing rural areas . J . Neurosci . Rural Pract . 3 ( 2 ) , 159 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4103 / 0976 - 3147 . 98314 . Robbins , T . , 2018 . Opinion on monoaminergic contributions to traits and temperament . Philos . Trans . Biol . Sci . 373 ( 1744 ) , 20170153 . Robertson , C . E . , Baron - Cohen , S . , 2017 . Sensory perception in autism . Nature Review Neuroscience 18 ( 11 ) , 671 – 684 . Rodriguez - Seijas , C . , Eaton , N . R . , Krueger , R . F . , 2015 . How transdiagnostic factors of personality and psychopathology can inform clinical assessment and intervention . J . Pers . Assess . 97 ( 5 ) , 425 – 435 . Roiser , J . P . , Rogers , R . D . , Cook , L . J . , Sahakian , B . J . , 2006 . The e ﬀ ect of polymorphism at the serotonin transporter gene on decision - making , memory and executive function in ecstasy users and controls . Psychopharmacology 188 ( 2 ) , 213 – 227 . Roisman , G . I . , Newman , D . A . , Fraley , R . C . , Haltigan , J . D . , Groh , A . M . , Haydon , K . C . , 2012 . Distinguishing di ﬀ erential susceptibility from diathesis – stress : recommenda - tions for evaluating interaction e ﬀ ects . Dev . Psychopathol . 24 ( 2 ) , 389 – 409 . Rothbart , M . K . , 2007 . Temperament , development , and personality . Curr . Dir . Psychol . Sci . 16 ( 4 ) , 207 – 212 . Rothbart , M . K . , 2011 . Becoming Who We Are : Temperament and Personality in Development . Guilford Press . Rothbart , M . K . , Derryberry , D . , 1981 . Development of individual di ﬀ erences in tem - perament . In : In : Lamb , M . E . , Brown , A . L . ( Eds . ) , Advances in Developmental Psychology Vol . 1 . Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ , pp . 37 – 86 . Rubaltelli , E . , Scrimin , S . , Moscardino , U . , Priolo , G . , Buodo , G . , 2018 . Media exposure to terrorism and people ’ s risk perception : the role of environmental sensitivity and psychophysiological response to stress . Br . J . Psychol . Ruscio , J . , Ruscio , A . M . , 2004 . Clarifying boundary issues in psychopathology : the role of taxometrics in a comprehensive program of structural research . J . Abnorm . Psychol . 113 ( 1 ) , 24 . Sandin , S . , Lichtenstein , P . , Kuja - Halkola , R . , Hultman , C . , Larsson , H . , Reichenberg , A . , 2017 . The heritability of autism spectrum disorder . Jama 318 ( 12 ) , 1182 – 1184 . Schendan , H . E . , Ganis , G . , 2015 . Top - down modulation of visual processing and C . U . Greven et al . Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 98 ( 2019 ) 287 – 305 304 knowledge after 250 ms supports object constancy of category decisions . Front . Psychol . 6 , 1289 . Schipper , P . , Bosch , K . , Hiemstra , M . , Glotzbach , S . , Klumpers , F . , Henckens , M . J . A . G . , Homberg , J . R . ( submitted ) . The Association between Serotonin Transporter Availability and Neural Correlates of Fear Bradycardia in Response to Threat . Schmueckle , M . , Lindert , J . , Schmolz , G . , 2017 . Psychological well - being of highly - sen - sitive persons in transition to parenthood - A cross - sectional study . Gesundheitswesen 79 ( 12 ) , e126 – e133 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1055 / s - 0035 - 1549984 . Seligman , M . E . , 2011 . Flourish : A Visionary New Understanding of Happiness and Well - Being . Free Press , New York , NY . Ş engül - İ nal , G . , Sümer , N . , 2017 . Exploring the multidimensional structure of sensory processing sensitivity in turkish samples . Curr . Psychol . 1 – 13 . Shakeshaft , N . G . , Trzaskowski , M . , McMillan , A . , Krapohl , E . , Simpson , M . A . , Reichenberg , A . , et al . , 2015 . Thinking positively : the genetics of high intelligence . Intelligence 48 , 123 – 132 . Shiota , M . N . , Keltner , D . , Mossman , A . , 2007 . The nature of awe : elicitors , appraisals , and e ﬀ ects on self - concept . Cogn . Emot . 21 ( 5 ) , 944 – 963 . Sierakowiak , A . , Monnot , C . , Aski , S . N . , Uppman , M . , Li , T . - Q . , Damberg , P . , Brené , S . , 2015 . Default mode network , motor network , dorsal and ventral basal ganglia net - works in the rat brain : comparison to human networks using resting state - fMRI . PLoS One 10 ( 3 ) , e0120345 . Slagt , M . , Dubas , J . S . , van Aken , M . A . , Ellis , B . J . , Dekovic , M . , 2017 . Sensory processing sensitivity as a marker of di ﬀ erential susceptibility to parenting . Dev . Psychol . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / dev00004 . Online ﬁ rst publication . Smith , S . M . , Fox , P . T . , Miller , K . L . , Glahn , D . C . , Fox , P . M . , Mackay , C . E . , et al . , 2009 . Correspondence of the brain ’ s functional architecture during activation and rest . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 106 ( 31 ) , 13040 – 13045 . Smolewska , K . A . , McCabe , S . B . , Woody , E . Z . , 2006 . A psychometric evaluation of the Highly Sensitive Person Scale : The components of sensory - processing sensitivity and their relation to the BIS / BAS and " Big Five " . Pers . Individ . Dif . 40 ( 6 ) , 1269 – 1279 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . paid . 2005 . 09 . 022 . Sobocko , K . , Zelenski , J . M . , 2015 . Trait Sensory - Processing Sensitivity and subjective well - being : distinctive associations for di ﬀ erent aspects of sensitivity . Pers . Individ . Dif . 83 , 44 – 49 . Soons , I . , Brouwers , A . , Tomic , W . , 2010 . An experimental study of the psychological impact of a Mindfulness - Based Stress Reduction Program on highly sensitive persons . Eur . J . Psychol . 6 ( 4 ) , 148 . Sridharan , D . , Levitin , D . J . , Menon , V . , 2008 . A critical role for the right fronto - insular cortex inswitching betweencentral - executive and default - mode networks . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 105 ( 34 ) , 12569 – 12574 . Su , X . , Cai , R . Y . , Uljarevi ć , M . , 2018 . Predictors of mental health in chinese parents of children with autism Spectrum disorder ( ASD ) . J . Autism Dev . Disord . 48 ( 4 ) , 1159 – 1168 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10803 - 017 - 3364 - 1 . Suomi , S . J . , 1997 . Early determinants of behaviour : evidence from primate studies . Br . Med . Bull . 53 ( 1 ) , 170 – 184 . Tatti , R . , Haley , M . S . , Swanson , O . K . , Tselha , T . , Ma ﬀ ei , A . , 2017 . Neurophysiology and regulation of the balance between excitation and inhibition in neocortical circuits . Biol . Psychiatry 81 ( 10 ) , 821 – 831 . Þórarinsdóttir , Þ . K . , 2018 . Psychometric Properties of the Highly Sensitive Person Scale and Its Relationship to the Big Five Personality Traits in a Sample of Icelandic University Students . Doctoral dissertation . University of Reykjavik . Tillmann , T . , El Matany , K . , Duttweiler , H . , 2018 . Measuring Environmental Sensitivity in educational contexts : a validation study with German - speaking students . J . Educ . Develop . Psychol . 8 ( 2 ) , 17 – 28 . Tran , L . , Treur , J . , Tuinhof , D . J . , 2018 . A network - oriented adaptive agent model for learning regulation of a highly sensitive person ’ s response . International Conference on Practical Applications of Agents and Multi - Agent Systems 248 – 261 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 94580 - 4 _ 20 . Trull , T . J . , Widiger , T . A . , Useda , J . D . , Holcomb , J . , Doan , B . - T . , Axelrod , S . R . , et al . , 1998 . A structured interview for the assessment of the Five - Factor Model of Personality . Psychol . Assess . 10 ( 3 ) , 229 . Utzerath , C . , Fernández , G . , 2017 . Shaping science for increasing interdependence and specialization . Trends Neurosci . 40 ( 3 ) , 121 – 124 . Van der Doelen , R . H . A . , Deschamps , W . , D ’ annibale , C . , Peeters , D . , Wevers , R . A . , Zelena , D . , et al . , 2014 . Early life adversity and serotonin transporter gene variation interact at the level of the adrenal gland to a ﬀ ect the adult hypothalamo - pituitary - adrenal axis . Transl . Psychiatry 4 ( 7 ) , e409 . van der Marel , K . , Homberg , J . R . , Otte , W . M . , Dijkhuizen , R . M . , 2013 . Functional and structural neural network characterization of serotonin transporter knockout rats . PLoS One 8 ( 2 ) , e57780 . Van Overwalle , F . , Baetens , K . , 2009 . Understanding others ’ actions and goals by mirror and mentalizing systems : a meta - analysis . Neuroimage 48 ( 3 ) , 564 – 584 . Wachs , T . D . , 2013 . Relation of maternal personality to perceptions of environmental chaos in the home . J . Environ . Psychol . 34 , 1 – 9 . Walkup , J . T . , Mathews , T . , Green , C . M . , 2017 . Transdiagnostic behavioral therapies in pediatric primary care : looking ahead . JAMA Psychiatry 74 ( 6 ) , 557 – 558 . Wang , X . J . , 2010 . Neurophsyiological and computational principles of cortical rhytms in cognition . Physiol . Rev . 90 ( 3 ) , 1195 – 1268 . Weyn , S . , Van Leuuwen , K . , Pluess , M . , Lionetti , F . , Greven , C . , Goosens , L . , et al . ( under review ) . Psychometric Properties of the Highly Sensitive Child Scale Across Developmental Stage , Gender , and Country . Widaman , K . F . , Helm , J . L . , Castro - Schilo , L . , Pluess , M . , Stallings , M . C . , Belsky , J . , 2012 . Distinguishing ordinal and disordinal interactions . Psychol . Methods 17 ( 4 ) , 615 – 622 . Wolf , M . , van Doorn , G . S . , Weissing , F . J . , 2008 . Evolutionary emergence of responsive and unresponsive personalities . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 105 ( 41 ) , 15825 – 15830 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0805473105 . Woods , R . L . , Colvin , C . R . , Vera - Diaz , F . A . , Peli , E . , 2010 . A relationship between toler - ance of blur and personality . Invest . Ophthalmol . Vis . Sci . 51 ( 11 ) , 6077 – 6082 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1167 / iovs . 09 - 5013 . Woodward , S . A . , Lenzenweger , M . F . , Kagan , J . , Snidman , N . , Arcus , D . , 2000 . Taxonic structure of infant reactivity : evidence from a taxometric perspective . Psychol . Sci . 11 ( 4 ) , 296 – 301 . Yano , K . , Oishi , K . , 2018 . The relationships among daily exercise , sensory - processing sensitivity , and depressive tendency in Japanese university students . Pers . Individ . Dif . 127 , 49 – 53 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . paid . 2018 . 01 . 047 . Ye , Q . , Zou , F . , Lau , H . , Hu , Y . , Kwok , S . C . , 2018 . Causal evidence for mnemonic meta - cognition in human precuneus . J . Neurosci . 38 ( 28 ) , 6379 . C . U . Greven et al . Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 98 ( 2019 ) 287 – 305 305