W e ll c o m e l i b r a r y , l o n d o n What is Chagas disease ? Chagas disease is a condition caused by the parasite Trypanosoma cruzi , which enters the body through broken skin and mucous membranes , and causes acute but often mild symptoms such as fever , swelling of lymph nodes and tissues , conjunctivitis and skin lesions . In poor rural areas of South and Central America , where the disease is endemic and health - care facilities are inadequate , these symptoms go largely unattended . Without treatment , the acute infection spontaneously subsides in the majority of patients ; however , the chronic infection can persist unnoticed for > 30 years before causing complications such as abnormal heart rhythm , heart failure , digestive problems and sudden cardiac death . About one in three carriers develop these chronic symptoms , which can be the first time they are diagnosed with T . cruzi infection . The Brazilian physician Carlos Chagas identified T . cruzi as the causative agent of the disease in 1909 , and later determined its clinical manifestations , epidemiology and entire life cycle in vectors , wild reservoirs and human hosts . Controversially , Chagas was never awarded a Nobel prize , despite being nominated twice . Where is Chagas disease found ? T . cruzi is endemic to Latin America , affect - ing ~ 10 – 12 million people and killing > 15 , 000 each year 1 , 2 . It is also carried by hundreds of thousands of people in Europe ( mostly Spain and Portugal ) , the United States , Canada , Japan and Australia . The carriers are typi - cally South American immigrants , who are often unaware of their infection , which has significant public - health implications for the management of blood banks and health - care provision , for example ( see Chagas disease : a new worldwide challenge on page S6 and Who , how , what and where ? on page S8 ) . How is Chagas disease transmitted ? The parasite T . cruzi moves among mammals , humans and triatomine or ‘kissing bug’ insects during its life cycle ( Fig . 1 ) . There are > 100 species of triatomine bugs with the potential to transmit T . cruzi , three of which are significant domestic species , including Triatoma infestans . Animal hosts in endemic areas include bats , palm tree - dwelling opossums , dogs , rats , guinea pigs and other small mammals , and , in the United States , opossums and raccoons are naturally infected with T . cruzi . Triatomine bugs live in palm trees , hollow trees , burrows , rock piles or other refuges , and feed on the blood of diverse mammals and other verte - brates , and on humans with whom they come into contact by flying into and colonizing their dwellings . Houses that are made of mud - brick — which are common in some poor areas — contain many cracks and crevices in which the bugs can hide . A triatomine picks up the parasitic infection by feeding on the blood of an infected animal or human . Once inside , the parasite divides rapidly in the insect gut before emerging in its faeces . When the triatomine takes another blood meal , it defecates on the skin of the victim , depositing T . cruzi in the process . The parasite is able to penetrate the new host if the skin is broken — by the bite of the bug or through other cuts and abrasions — or through the soft skin of the eyes and mouth . It can infect the cells of the soft tissues below , and then enter the blood stream and circulate to reach other body tissues . The parasite is not fussy — it can infect all mammalian cells . Alternatively , people and animals can become infected orally through ingesting food and drink that is contaminated with the faeces of a triatomine carrying the parasite . This happened recently at a school in Cara - cas , Venezuela , where there were 75 cases of acute Chagas disease and one death among 103 infected children following the consump - tion of contaminated Guava juice 3 . The fruit of the açaí palm is another common source of contamination , as it is harvested and pressed in the Amazon forest . Triatomine bugs do not exist in Europe and are less common in North America , but people can still pass on the infection to others through blood or organ donation . Mothers can also unwittingly pass the parasite onto their babies at birth , which is likely to affect infants world - wide ( see Chagas disease : a new worldwide challenge on page S6 ) . What is so special about T . cruzi ? T . cruzi poses an extra challenge for those trying to develop new drugs for Chagas disease because it is an intracellular parasite : it hijacks the cellular machinery to produce hundreds of new parasites until the cell bursts , releas - ing the progeny to infect surrounding tissue . This means that drugs against the parasite need to be able to cross the plasma mem - brane in order to kill it . By contrast , the other trypanosome parasites Leishmania ( which causes leishmaniasis ) and Trypanosoma brucei ( which causes African trypanosomiasis or sleeping sickness ) remain in the blood , and so are potentially more accessible to drugs . All of these are neglected tropical diseases for which there has been little investment in drug research and development ( R & D ) . Chagas disease 101 It is 101 years since Carlos Chagas discovered the parasite responsible for the disease that now bears his name . What progress has been made since this discovery ? Here Julie Clayton gives the low - down on Chagas disease . 7 , 000 BC to 1 , 500 AD Mummies from Chile and Peru found that show signs of chronic Chagas disease . 1500s Spanish and Portuguese colonization of South America helps promote spread of Triatoma infestans , which is the main domestic vector for Chagas disease . 1835 Charles Darwin visits Chile and reports being bitten by a triatomine bug . 1909 Brazilian physician Carlos Chagas identifies Trypanosoma cruzi as the cause of Chagas disease . 1910 Chagas discovers that the armadillo is a wild reservoir for T . cruzi , and that Triatoma geniculata ( now Panstrongylus geniculatus ) is a parasite vector , thus linking the animal and insect stages of the T . cruzi life cycle . 1934 Carlos Chagas dies . 1943 Creation of the Oswaldo Cruz Institute’s Prophylaxis and Study Centre for Chagas disease in Bambuí , Brazil . 1974 The World Health Organization Tropical Diseases Research Unit sets up a special programme for the study of trypanosomes and Chagas disease . 1991 Start of the Southern Cone Initiative for vector control and blood donor screening in Argentina , Bolivia , Brazil , Chile , Paraguay and Uruguay . The Drugs for Neglected Diseases Initiative ( DNDi ) is established to create a research and development pipeline against neglected tropical diseases including Chagas disease . 2004 Start of the BENznidazole Evaluation For Interrupting Trypanosomiasis ( BENEFIT ) clinical trial . 2005 Publication of the genome sequence for the T . cruzi strain CL – Brener . 2009 The International Symposium on the Centennial of the Discovery of Chagas Disease in Rio de Janeiro , Brazil , calls for better surveillance , diagnostic tools , prognostic indicators , and prevention and treatment options for Chagas disease . 2010 – 2011 Expected publication of the results from the BENEFIT trial to assess the efficacy of benznidazole in treating chronic Chagas disease . S4 24 June 2010 OUTLOOK cHa GaS diSeaSe www . nature . com / outlooks Carlos Chagas What treatments are available ? The only existing options for > 40 years have been the drugs benznidazole and nifurtimox . These are especially effective at curing infection in the early , acute phase , provided that patients complete a full 60 - day course at the correct dose , with cure rates of up to 80 % . The drugs are considered less effective in patients who have been chronically infected for > 10 years — although this is the subject of considerable debate . Benznidazole and nifurtimox are not ideal , given that their side effects can be severe , and they can lead to resistance . Consequently , many physicians prefer not to prescribe these drugs , and many harbour the belief that they might be useless anyway . What is the controversy around treating chronic Chagas disease ? In people who are chronically infected , the par - asite often seems to disappear . For decades , the traditional diagnostic methods were examina - tion of blood samples by microscopy , and ( for research purposes ) laboratory culture of blood samples and xenodiagnosis , in which blood is fed to triatomine bugs whose faeces are then analysed for the presence of T . cruzi . These methods frequently failed to detect T . cruzi in the blood of patients with chronic heart problems or other complications . Yet serum antibodies could still be detected . These obser - vations led people to conclude that chronic Chagas disease is an autoimmune condition , which is sparked initially by the parasite but then becomes self - sustaining , as the immune system goes on to attack the body tissues . The use of more sensitive immunohisto - chemical and PCR - based diagnostic tests has now overturned the autoimmune hypothesis showing that T . cruzi hides deep in the heart and other tissues ( as found at post - mortem 4 , 5 ) , and can circulate in the blood in relatively low numbers , which coincides with chronic compli - cations . Yet clinicians still lack clear guidelines on whether and when to treat chronic carriers , particularly those aged > 50 years . Why is Chagas disease so neglected ? As well as the controversies over its pathol - ogy , Chagas disease has suffered from an inadequate R & D pipeline . Many commen - tators attribute this to a lack of interest from pharmaceutical firms in producing drugs for diseases that mostly affect the world’s poorest . There also appears to be a lack of government commitment — even in many countries where Chagas disease is endemic — and therefore little investment in basic research and infra - structure for clinical trials . The Global Fund - ing of Innovation for Neglected Diseases ( G - FINDER ) survey of 2009 highlights that , of the US $ 132 million spent globally in 2008 on diseases caused by kinetoplastid parasites ( including T . cruzi ) , only US $ 15 . 6 million was invested in Chagas disease R & D . Most of that was for basic research , with less than US $ 5 million being used for new diagnostics , drugs and vaccines . A new chance for benznidazole ? Late 2010 or early 2011 will see the results of the largest clinical trial yet for Chagas disease : did darwin have chagas disease ? charles darwin wrote in his journal The Voyage of the Beagle a bout having been bitten by the Triatoma kissing bug when visiting chile in 1835 , and subsequently suffering poor health , including vomiting , gut pain , headaches and depression , for the rest of his life . The presence of gastric symptoms and his ultimate demise from cardiac problems have led some scholars to propose that darwin was suffering from chagas disease , although certain other fac - tors suggest otherwise — including the fact that the parasite is not transmitted directly in the bite of the insect . The many other explanations put forward include stress , allergies and lactose intolerance — an inability to digest milk and dairy products , made worse by darwin’s love of cream . The truth might be unattainable without exhuming darwin’s body from Westminster abbey in london , United Kingdom , to look for the presence of Trypanosoma cruzi dna . Fig . 1 | Life cycle of Trypanosoma cruzi , the causal agent of American trypanosomiasis . Image courtesy of Centers for Disease Control and Prevention , A . J . da Silva and M . Moser . the BENznidazole Evaluation For Inter - rupting Trypanosomiasis ( BENEFIT ) trial . The trial started in 2004 in Argentina , Bra - zil and Colombia with the goal of recruiting 3 , 000 patients with chronic Chagas disease , and aims to provide clearer guidance on the benefits of giving benznidazole to long - term chronic patients . BENEFIT uses real - time PCR and serologi - cal tests , and aims to provide precise figures on the cure rate with benznidazole in chronic disease . More importantly , it will test whether curing Chagas disease — or even just reducing the parasite load — can prevent or reduce the severity of cardiac complications , which are the major cause of death . However , technical obstacles remain that have hampered drug research in the past , particularly the difficulty of demonstrating treatment success ( cure or no cure ) . It is easier to show treatment failure — that is , the reacti - vation of T . cruzi and the appearance of drug - resistant parasite . Overcoming these obstacles will be an important goal in the coming years if significant progress is to be made against Chagas disease . n Julie Clayton is a freelance writer based in Bristol , United Kingdom . 1 . World expert committee . World Heath Organ . Tech . Rep . Ser . 905 , i – vi , 1 – 109 ( 2002 ) . 2 . Jannin , J . & Salvatella , r . Quantitative Estimates of Chagas Disease in the Americas [ OPS / HDM / CD / 425 - 06 ] 1 – 28 ( Pan american Health organization , 2006 ) . 3 . alarcón de noya , b . et al . J . Infect . Dis . 201 , 1308 – 1315 ( 2010 ) . 4 . Jones , e . m . et al . Am . J . Trop . Med . Hyg . 48 , 348 – 357 ( 1993 ) . 5 . Schijman , a . G . et al . Am . J . Trop . Med . Hyg . 70 , 210 – 220 ( 2004 ) . S5 24 June 2010 cHa GaS diSeaSe OUTLOOK www . nature . com / outlooks