1836 Research Paper Coordination of cell polarization and migration by the Rho family GTPases requires Src tyrosine kinase activity Paul Timpson * , Gareth E . Jones ‡ , Margaret C . Frame * † and Valerie G . Brunton * Background : The ability of a cell to polarize and move is governed by Addresses : * Beatson Institute for Cancer Research , CRC Beatson Laboratories , remodeling of the cellular adhesion / cytoskeletal network that is in turn Garscube Estate , Switchback Road , Bearsden , controlled by the Rho family of small GTPases . However , it is not known Glasgow , G61 1BD , United Kingdom . † Institute what signals lie downstream of Rac1 and Cdc42 during peripheral actin and of Biological and Life Sciences , Davidson adhesion remodeling that is required for directional migration . Building , University of Glasgow , Glasgow , G12 8QQ , United Kingdom . ‡ The Randall Institute , King’s College London , Guy’s Campus , London , Results : We show here that individual members of the Rho family , RhoA , SE1 1UL , United Kingdom . Rac1 , and Cdc42 , direct the specific intracellular targeting of c - Src tyrosine kinase to focal adhesions , lamellipodia , or filopodia , respectively , Correspondence : Valerie G . Brunton and that the adaptor function of c - Src ( the combined SH3 / SH2 domains E - mail : v . brunton @ beatson . gla . ac . uk coupled to green fluorescent protein ) is sufficient for targeting . Furthermore , Src’s catalytic activity is absolutely required at these peripheral cell - matrix Received : 13 June 2001 Revised : 10 October 2001 attachment sites for remodeling that converts RhoA - dependent focal Accepted : 11 October 2001 adhesions into smaller focal complexes along Rac1 - induced lamellipodia ( or Cdc42 - induced filopodia ) . Consequently , cells in which kinase - deficient Published : 27 November 2001 c - Src occupies peripheral adhesion sites exhibit impaired polarization toward migratory stimuli and reduced motility . Furthermore , phosphorylation of FAK , Current Biology 2001 , 11 : 1836 – 1846 an Src adhesion substrate , is suppressed under these conditions . 0960 - 9822 / 01 / $ – see front matter Conclusions : Our findings demonstrate that individual Rho GTPases  2001 Elsevier Science Ltd . All rights reserved . specify Src’s exact peripheral localization and that Rac1 - and Cdc42 - induced adhesion remodeling and directed cell migration require Src activity at peripheral adhesion sites . Background 8 ] . Thus , in order for v - Src to induce its biological effects , it must first be translocated from its site of synthesis to Adhesive interactions between cells and the extracellular environment , together with regulation of the intracellular its site of action at peripheral cell - matrix adhesions . cytoskeleton , control a number of key biological functions , The localization of v - Src to focal adhesions requires the including cell motility and invasion . Focal adhesions con - integrity of the actin cytoskeleton and is under the control sist of clustered integrins and proteins that link the extra - of RhoA GTPase [ 5 ] . In fibroblasts , activation of Rho cellular matrix ( ECM ) , through the integrins , to the actin GTPases , RhoA , Rac1 , and Cdc42 by different transmem - cytoskeleton and to proteins involved in adhesion - depen - brane receptors leads to distinct rearrangements of the dent signal transduction [ 1 ] . One such protein is the non - actin cytoskeleton . Activation of RhoA stimulates actomy - receptor tyrosine kinase c - Src that can also associate with osin - based contractility , which leads to the assembly of endosomal membranes in the perinuclear region of the actin stress fibers and focal adhesions found at the end cell [ 2 , 3 ] . Mutation of tyrosine - 527 to phenylalanine in of stress fibers [ 9 , 10 ] . Rac1 activation leads to localized c - Src , which results in catalytic activation , as well as re - actin polymerization at the cell periphery , resulting in lease of constraints on the SH3 and SH2 domains , leads the formation of lamellipodia , while activation of Cdc42 to c - Src being constitutively associated with focal adhe - results in the formation of fine actin - rich protrusions , sions [ 4 ] . Similarly , temperature - sensitive variants of the known as filopodia [ 11 – 13 ] . Rac1 and Cdc42 stimulate viral oncoprotein v - Src localize to focal adhesions when the assembly of focal complexes that are associated with activated by switch to permissive temperature [ 5 ] . The lamellipodia and filopodia , respectively . They contain a kinase activity of v - Src or c - Src is not required for focal number of the same proteins found in Rho - induced focal adhesion localization , but mutational analysis has revealed adhesions , including vinculin , paxillin , and focal adhesion a critical role for the SH3 domain of both proteins in their intracellular targeting [ 4 , 6 , 7 ] . Although the localization kinase ( FAK ) [ 13 ] . of Src to focal adhesions does not require Src’s catalytic activity , kinase activity is required for v - Src - induced focal Here , we addressed how RhoA - , Rac1 - , or Cdc42 - induced changes in the actin cytoskeleton influence the intracellu - adhesion turnover during transformation and motility [ 6 , Research Paper Requirement of Src for Rho family activity Timpson et al . 1837 lar localization of c - Src and Src’s biological effects at these cation of Src251 - GFP to focal adhesions was actin depen - dent . Thus , the regulation of Src251 - GFP in Swiss 3T3 peripheral sites . As the first 251 amino acids of c - Src , comprising the site of myristylation , unique region , and fibroblasts is indistinguishable from the actin - dependent SH3 and SH2 domains , are sufficient to localize c - Src to translocation of v - Src to focal adhesions that we have focal adhesions , we used green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) described previously [ 5 ] . These results imply that Src251 - fused to the first 251 amino acids of c - Src ( Src251 - GFP ) GFP is a useful tool to monitor the control of c - Src’s to monitor subcellular localization following stimulation intracellular targeting by direct fluorescence . of the Rho GTPases . Upon stimulation of RhoA , Rac1 , or Cdc42 , actin reorganization is accompanied by recruit - Localization of Src251 - GFP to specific peripheral sites is under the control of Rho family GTPases ment of c - Src to peripheral adhesion sites at stress fiber As treatment with LPA , which activates RhoA , resulted termini , lamellipodia , or filopodia , respectively . Further - in translocation of Src251 - GFP to focal adhesions ( Figure more , modulation of the actin cytoskeleton showed that 1d ) , we set out to determine whether this was a RhoA - RhoA activity and actin stress fibers are needed for Src’s dependent event . Expression of a constitutively active translocation from the cell interior to the membrane , with RhoA protein ( V14RhoA ) in the absence of serum resulted the precise peripheral localization being determined by in the formation of stress fibers ( Figure 2a , broken arrow ) . local actin organization that is in turn controlled by RhoA , Coexpression of V14RhoA with Src251 - GFP was suffi - Rac1 , and Cdc42 activities . In addition , Src’s catalytic cient to localize Src to the cell periphery at the ends of activity is required for the Rac1 - and Cdc42 - induced adhe - stress fibers ( Figure 2a , broken arrow ) , where it coloca - sion remodeling that is required for cell polarization and lized with the focal adhesion protein vinculin ( data not migration . We also show that impaired adhesion remodel - shown ) . ing in the presence of Src proteins that lack kinase activity is accompanied by reduced peripheral phosphorylation We then addressed how activation of Rac1 or Cdc42 influ - events , as shown by suppression of FAK phosphorylation enced the localization of c - Src within the cell . Activated at tyrosine 925 . Rac1 protein ( L61Rac1 ) was expressed in the cells by transient transfection and resulted in the formation of Results lamellipodia ( Figure 2b , broken arrows ) . Coexpression of The regulation of the actin cytoskeleton by the Rho family Src251 - GFP with L61Rac1 showed that Src251 - GFP was of GTPases is well documented and readily manipulated localized at an actin ring around the cell periphery ( Figure in Swiss 3T3 cells , making them an ideal model system 2b , solid arrow ) beyond which an actin ruffle had formed . in which to study the role of RhoA , Rac1 , and Cdc42 in the Src251 - GFP was also found at the tip of the ruffle that intracellular targeting of c - Src . We therefore determined appeared to have folded back on itself ( Figure 2b , broken whether Src251 - GFP ( Figure 1 ) was a suitable tool for arrows ) . Coexpression of a constitutively active Cdc42 studying the targeting of c - Src in these cells . We intro - protein ( V12Cdc42 ) with Src251 - GFP resulted in the for - duced Rho , Rac , and Cdc42 expression plasmids and mation of filopodia , and some of the expressed Src251 - Src251 - GFP by transient transfection or microinjection GFP moved from the perinuclear region to membrane ( further details on the conditions used are given in the regions at the base of filopodia ( Figure 2c , broken arrow ) , Supplementary methods section available with this article and at enhanced resolution ( Figure 2c , inset ) it can be online ) . seen in distinct complexes spaced along the actin filopodia ( broken arrows , inset ) . Translocation of Src251 - GFP to focal adhesions is dependent on the actin cytoskeleton When Src251 - GFP was microinjected into serum - starved The role of the individual Rho GTPases in the subcellular targeting of c - Src was further probed in experiments using cells , it was located in the perinuclear region ( Figure 1b , arrow ) . However , upon addition of serum , which resulted specific inhibitors of RhoA , Rac1 , and Cdc42 . Expression of a dominant - negative RhoA protein ( N19RhoA ) pre - in reformation of stress fibers , Src251 - GFP translocated to sites at the end of the actin cables ( Figure 1c , arrows ) , vented the reformation of stress fibers in response to serum ( compare Figure 3a with 3b ) . The broken arrow where it colocalized with the focal adhesion protein vin - culin ( data not shown ) . Similar results were seen following shows a cell expressing N19RhoA , which is consequently devoid of actin stress fibers and in which Src251 - GFP treatment with lysophosphatidic acid ( LPA ) ( Figure 1d ) , which initiates the reformation of actin stress fibers in remained perinuclear ( Figure 3b ) . This was in contrast to its location at peripheral focal adhesions in cells stimulated serum - starved Swiss 3T3 cells in a RhoA - dependent man - ner [ 9 ] . Treatment with the actin - disrupting drug cytocha - with serum ( Figure 3a ) . Y - 27632 is a chemical inhibitor of Rho kinase ( ROCK ) [ 14 ] , which is a downstream ef - lasin D prevented the reformation of the actin stress fibers in response to serum and the translocation of Src251 - fector of RhoA implicated in stress fiber formation [ 15 , 16 ] . Treatment of cells with Y - 27632 results in the loss GFP from the perinuclear region to the peripheral focal adhesions ( Figure 1e ) , further confirming that the translo - of stress fibers , and , when cells were treated with Y - 27632 1838 Current Biology Vol 11 No 23 Figure 1 Translocation of Src251 - GFP to focal adhesions is dependent on the actin cytoskeleton . ( a ) Schematic representation of the structural domains of Src251 - GFP , SrcY527F , and SrcMF constructs used . ( b ) Cells were serum starved for 48 hr prior to microinjection of Src251 - GFP . ( c , d ) Serum - starved cells were microinjected with Src251 - GFP and , following expression of the protein , were stimulated with serum ( c ) or LPA ( d ) . ( e ) Serum - starved cells were microinjected with Src251 - GFP and pretreated with cytochalasin D for 2 hr before stimulation with serum . Actin was visualized with rhodamine - phalloidin , and Src251 - GFP was localized by direct fluorescence . Scale bars (cid:1) 25 (cid:2) m . prior to expression of Src251 - GFP , the cells were devoid Platelet - derived growth factor ( PDGF ) stimulates the for - mation of lamellipodia at the cell periphery [ 17 ] via a of stress fibers even though serum was present and translo - cation of Src251 - GFP to peripheral focal adhesions in Rac1 - dependent mechanism [ 11 ] . To address the rela - tionship between RhoA and Rac1 signaling in the localiza - response to serum was blocked ( Figure 3c ) . Y - 27632 has also been reported to inhibit other kinases , and we cannot tion of c - Src within the cell , we stimulated cells with PDGF while inhibiting the formation of stress fibers by rule out the possibility that Y - 27632 is inhibiting kinases other than ROCK . However , in the context of these exper - treating the cells with Y - 27632 . As above , Y - 27632 was added to the cells prior to expression of Src251 - GFP , iments , treatment with Y - 27632 results in the loss of stress fibers and taken together with the ability of N19RhoA to resulting in loss of stress fibers . After stimulation with PDGF , Src251 - GFP remained perinuclear ( Figure 3d , block translocation of Src251 - GFP to focal adhesions we conclude that the actin - dependent localization of Src251 - broken arrow ) and did not translocate to the cell periphery , although the shape of the cell did change in response to GFP to these peripheral sites is controlled by RhoA . Research Paper Requirement of Src for Rho family activity Timpson et al . 1839 Figure 2 way [ 12 , 13 ] . Addition of bradykinin to Y - 27632 - treated cells resulted in the formation of filopodia seen as small actin - containing microspikes protruding from the cell body ( Figure 3g , solid arrows ) , although Src251 - GFP re - mained perinuclear in the presence of Y - 27632 ( Figure 3g , broken arrow ) . However , removal of Y - 27632 prior to addition of bradykinin resulted in the translocation of Src251 - GFP to the peripheral microspikes in response to bradykinin ( Figure 3h , solid arrows ) . The expression of a dominant - negative Cdc42 protein ( N17Cdc42 ) blocked bradykinin - induced filopodia formation ( Figure 3i , bro - ken arrow ) as compared to nonexpressing cells ( solid arrow ) that were able to induce filopodia . Coexpression of Src251 - GFP with N17Cdc42 , blocked bradykinin - induced translocation of Src to filopodia ; however , Src251 - GFP was not retained in the perinuclear region but was present in peripheral focal adhesions under these condi - tions ( Figure 3i , broken arrow ) . Thus , the RhoA pathway is also required to target c - Src from the perinuclear region to the cell periphery , prior to its localization to filopodia induced by Cdc42 . To eliminate the possibility that the localization of Src251 - Src localization is under the control of Rho family GTPases . ( a ) Cells GFP to these peripheral sites was a consequence of over - were serum starved for 48 hr to remove stress fibers prior to expression of available SH3 and SH2 domains , we were comicroinjection of V14RhoA and Src251 - GFP ( broken arrow ) . Solid also able to show that endogenous Src was able to localize arrow indicates noninjected cell . ( b ) Cells were cotransfected with L61Rac and Src251 - GFP . ( c ) Cells were cotransfected with to lamellipodia in response to PDGF ( Figure 3j ) . It was V12Cdc42 and Src251 - GFP . The broken arrow indicates Src251 - difficult to visualize endogenous Src in filopodia following GFP at the base of filopodia , and the broken arrows ( inset ) show an stimulation with bradykinin , which is most likely due to enhanced resolution of Src251 - GFP localizing along filopodia . Actin problems in detection of the low levels of endogenous was visualized with rhodamine - phalloidin and Src251 - GFP by direct fluorescence . Scale bars (cid:1) 25 (cid:2) m . proteins in small structures . However , this could be over - come by expressing full - length wild - type Src protein where treatment with bradykinin resulted in Src being readily seen in filopodia ( Figure 3k , inset ) . These data PDGF at the cell periphery ( Figure 3d , solid arrows ) . imply that the control of Src251 - GFP targeting within the However , if Y - 27632 was washed out prior to stimulation cell is the same as for endogenous Src or expressed wild - with PDGF , Src251 - GFP localized to lamellipodia ( Fig - type Src protein . ure 3e , solid arrows ) . Expression of dominant - negative N17Rac1 blocked the formation of lamellipodia in re - c - Src kinase activity is required for the efficient sponse to PDGF ( Figure 3f ) , confirming that PDGF was remodeling of cellular adhesions working through activation of Rac1 . No lamellipodia were It is the dynamic remodeling and interchange between formed in cells expressing N17Rac1 ( broken arrow ) as focal adhesions and focal complexes associated with la - compared to the nontransfected cells ( solid arrows ) . Al - mellipodia and filopodia that regulates cell motility , and though cells expressing N17Rac1 did not form lamelli - we therefore addressed whether the activity of c - Src at podia , these cells still contained actin stress fibers , and these cellular adhesions altered their remodeling . Cells Src251 - GFP was consequently located at the ends of these were grown in serum , where Src251 - GFP is localized at stress fibers in peripheral focal adhesions ( Figure 3f , bro - focal adhesions as a consequence of RhoA activity ( Fig - ken arrow ) . Thus , Rac1 drives the targeting of c - Src to ures 1 and 4c ) . Subsequent treatment of these cells with lamellipodia but is not involved in the initial movement PDGF resulted in PDGF - induced shape changes and of c - Src from the cell interior to the cell periphery , which is formation of lamellipodia . Although expression of Src251 - mediated by RhoA - dependent formation of stress fibers . GFP did not significantly alter the number of cells able to form lamellipodia ( around 80 % of cells expressing Src251 - GFP underwent shape changes associated with the forma - Similar experiments were carried out to define the rela - tionship between RhoA signaling and Cdc42 . Bradykinin tion of lamellipodia ) , we found that the Src was localized only to discrete patches around the forming ruffle ( broken stimulates the formation of actin microspikes , known as filopodia , at the cell periphery , by a Cdc42 - mediated path - arrow in Figure 4d ) where it colocalized with actin ( data 1840 Current Biology Vol 11 No 23 Figure 3 Coordinated regulation of the actin cytoskeleton by Rho family GTPases is required for Src targeting . ( a – c ) Cells were serum starved for 48 hr to remove stress fibers prior to microinjection of Src251 - GFP ( a , c ) or comicroinjection of Src251 - GFP with N19RhoA ( b ) . Following expression of the proteins , cells were stimulated with serum ( a , b ) or preincubated with Y - 27632 for 1 hr prior to stimulation with serum ( c ) . Broken arrows indicate microinjected cells , while solid arrows are nonexpressing cells . ( d , e , g , h ) Cells were transfected with Src251 - GFP and prior to expression of the protein were treated overnight with Y - 27632 to abolish stress fibers . The cells were then stimulated with PDGF ( d ) or bradykinin ( g ) or were stimulated with PDGF or bradykinin following wash out of the Y - 27632 ( e , h ) . ( f , i ) Cells were cotransfected with Src251 - GFP and N17Rac or N17Cdc42 and then placed in serum - free medium overnight to reduce the heterogeneity in the population prior to PDGF ( f ) or bradykinin ( i ) stimulation . Solid arrows show nontransfected cells , while broken arrows show cells expressing the constructs . Actin was visualized with rhodamine - phalloidin and Src251 - GFP by direct fluorescence . ( j ) Cells were placed in serum - free conditions overnight , stimulated with PDGF and endogenous Src visualized using the N2 - 17 Src antibody . ( k ) Cells expressing wild - type Src were placed in serum - free conditions overnight and stimulated with bradykinin . Inset shows enhanced resolution of wt - Src localizing along filopodia . Exogenously expressed Src was visualized using the chicken - specific Src EC10 antibody . Scale bars (cid:1) 25 (cid:2) m . not shown ) . This is in contrast to the uniform lamellipodia of PDGF that interferes with the actin rearrangements required for efficient formation of uniform lamellipodia . formed when Src251 - GFP is held in the perinuclear region of the cell prior to stimulation with PDGF ( Figure 3e ) , Since Src251 - GFP lacks a c - Src kinase domain ( Figure 1 ) , we examined whether the presence of an activated where Src251 - GFP is found in small structures continuous along the lamellipodia . This suggests that it is the pres - c - Src kinase at focal adhesions facilitated the Rac1 - depen - dent formation of uniform , continuous lamellipodia . For ence of Src251 - GFP at focal adhesions prior to addition Research Paper Requirement of Src for Rho family activity Timpson et al . 1841 Figure 4 Src kinase activity is required for efficient lamellipodia formation . ( a , b ) Cells were transfected with SrcY527F and maintained in 10 % serum to localize SrcY527F in peripheral focal adhesions ( a ) . Cells were then placed in serum - free medium overnight to reduce heterogeneity in the population and treated with emetine for 30 min prior to PDGF stimulation ( b ) . ( c , d ) Cells were transfected withSrc251 - GFPandmaintainedin10 % serum ( c ) or stimulated with PDGF as described above ( d ) . ( e , f ) Cells were transfected with SrcMF and maintained in 10 % serum ( e ) or stimulated with PDGF as described above ( f ) . ( g ) Enhanced magnification of kinase - defective ( SrcMF ) ( upperpanel ) orkinase - active Src ( SrcY527F ) ( lower panel ) localization in PDGF - induced lamellipodia . Src251 - GFP was visualized by direct fluorescence , SrcY527F and SrcMF using an anti - Src antibody . Scale bars (cid:1) 25 (cid:2) m . this , we expressed a c - Src protein , which has an activating the ability of these cells to form lamellipodia in response to PDGF . SrcMF has a point mutation in the kinase tyrosine to phenylalanine mutation at position 527 in the c - Src coding sequences ( SrcY527F ) ( reviewed in [ 18 ] ) domain ( K295M ) rendering it kinase inactive ( Figure 1 ) . SrcMF localizes to focal adhesions in cells grown in serum ( Figure 1 ) . SrcY527F localized to focal adhesions in the presence of serum ( Figure 4a ) . Following treatment with ( Figure 4e ) , and subsequent stimulation of these cells with PDGF resulted in the relocalization of SrcMF to PDGF , peripheral SrcY527F was located at lamellipodia that appeared continuous and relatively uniform ( Figure discrete patches around the edge of the forming lamelli - podia ( Figure 4f ) rather than to continuous lamellipodia 4b , broken arrows ) , in contrast to the discontinuous struc - tures formed in cells expressing Src251 - GFP ( Figure 4d , as seen in cells expressing the activated Src protein ( Fig - ure 4b ) . Magnification of the edge of the lamellipodia broken arrow ) . These data imply that the efficient reloca - tion of c - Src from RhoA - induced focal adhesions into in SrcMF and activated Src - expressing cells ( Figure 4g ) shows more clearly the influence of Src kinase activity Rac1 - induced structures along lamellipodia requires Src’s catalytic activity , although expression of kinase - deficient on the formation of the lamellipodia . Src colocalizes with actin both in the discrete patches in the SrcMF - expressing Src251 - GFP did not block the initial PDGF - induced shape changes that accompany lamellipodia formation cells and the continuous lamellipodia formed in cells ex - pressing activated Src ( data not shown ) . Treatment of ( Figure 4d ) . Furthermore , the protein synthesis inhibitor emetine was added prior to PDGF treatment in these cells with the Src kinase inhibitor PP2 also resulted in the formation of fragmented lamellipodia in response to experiments , implying that Rac1 activation led to relocal - ization of c - Src that preexisted in focal adhesions into PDGF ( results shown in Supplementary materials ) . Taken together , these data imply a role for Src kinase activity complexes that are continuous along lamellipodia . How - ever , we cannot rule out that some c - Src preexisted in in the efficient Rac1 - induced actin remodeling associated with lamellipodia formation . the perinuclear region after emetine treatment and moved out into the newly forming lamellipodia upon activation To demonstrate that the discontinuous lamellipodia of Rac1 . found in Src251 - GFP - expressing cells was associated with impaired focal adhesion remodeling into focal complexes , To further test whether the kinase activity of Src was required for efficient remodeling , we expressed a kinase - we compared Rac1 - induced peripheral adhesion remodel - ing in cells expressing Src251 - GFP with cells expressing defective Src mutant , SrcMF , in the cells and examined 1842 Current Biology Vol 11 No 23 Figure 5 Src kinase activity is required for the remodeling of peripheral adhesions during lamellipodia formation . ( a , d ) Cells were grown in serum - free conditions overnight to reduce heterogeneity in the population , then treated with emetine for 30 min prior to stimulation with PDGF , and stained with anti - vinculin ( a ) or anti - paxillin antibodies ( d ) . ( b , c ) Cells transfected with Src251 - GFP or ( e , f ) SrcY527F were placed in serum - free medium overnight prior to PDGF stimulation . SrcY527F and vinculin were visualized by anti - Src and anti - vinculin antibodies , respectively . Paxillin was visualized with rhodamine - conjugated anti - paxillin and Src251 - GFP by direct immunofluoresence . Scale bars (cid:1) 25 (cid:2) m . the activated c - Src mutant SrcY527F , monitoring adhe - eral adhesion remodeling that results in the breakdown sion complexes by staining with anti - vinculin or anti - pax - of larger focal adhesions and the generation of smaller illin . ( Anti - paxillin staining was used for colocalization focal complex adhesion structures at lamellipodia and filo - studies with anti - SrcY527F because anti - vinculin and podia , respectively . Further details given in Supplemen - anti - Src sera used were from the same species , restricting tary materials . colocalization studies . ) Anti - vinculin and anti - paxillin staining were indistinguishable , and , in growing cells c - Src kinase activity is required for cell motility treated with PDGF , we observed small vinculin - and pax - and polarization illin - containing complexes around the base of lamelli - As the formation of lamellipodia and filopodia have been podia ( Figure 5a , d , respectively ) . In PDGF - treated cells associated with the regulation of cell motility and chemo - expressing Src251 - GFP , vinculin colocalized with Src251 - taxis [ 19 , 20 ] , we examined whether the impaired focal GFP at the cell periphery but was located in larger discrete adhesion remodeling in the cells lacking kinase activity structures along the length of the lamellipodia ( Figure inhibited cell movement or the ability of cells to polarize 5b , c ) . In contrast , in activated SrcY527F - expressing cells , in response to a chemotactic agent . We found that the c - Src colocalized with paxillin along the base of uniform random migration of cells expressing Src251 - GFP or lamellipodia ( Figure 5e , f ) . Paxillin localizes to focal com - SrcMF was inhibited by around 70 % , while expression of plexes at the leading edge of lamellipodia as described GFP alone had no effect on cell motility ( Figure 6a ) . by Nobes and Hall [ 13 ] ; however , in cells expressing Expression of activated Src ( SrcY527F ) had no effect on activated Src , these were difficult to visualize as discrete the migration of the cells , suggesting that the level of structures , suggesting that Src’s overactivity may be fur - endogenous Src within the cells is not limiting for migra - ther breaking down the focal complexes . tion . This has also been reported for reintroduction of activated Src into Src (cid:3) / (cid:3) cells where activated Src restored migration to a similar level as reintroduction of the wild - Similar to these observations with PDGF , we found that type protein [ 21 ] . To examine the capacity of cells to bradykinin - induced focal adhesion remodeling to produce respond to a chemotactic gradient , we measured the abil - focal complexes at filopodia was impaired in Src251 - GFP - ity of cells to polarize toward PDGF using a Dunn cham - expressing cells ( results shown in Supplementary materi - ber [ 19 ] . Approximately 10 % of cells expressing Src251 - als ) . Thus , our data support a critical role for the catalytic activity of c - Src in the Rac1 - and Cdc42 - induced periph - GFP or SrcMF were able to polarize along the PDGF Research Paper Requirement of Src for Rho family activity Timpson et al . 1843 Figure 6 and our unpublished data ) , we found that PDGF stimu - lated the phosphorylation of tyrosine 925 , while in cells expressing SrcMF there was very little phosphorylation on this site ( Figure 7a ) . Expression of SrcMF ( Figure 7b , lower panel ) did not alter the level of FAK protein within the cells ( Figure 7b , upper panel ) . Therefore , using FAK tyrosine 925 phosphorylation as a marker of Src - depen - dent phosphorylation events at adhesions , we have shown that kinase - defective SrcMF expression suppresses both peripheral phosphorylation events and adhesion remod - eling . Discussion The ability of a cell to move depends on a cycle of adhe - sion , loss of attachment , and readhesion , which is gov - erned by and coordinated with changes in the actin cy - toskeleton arrangement and the microtubule system [ 1 , 24 ] . The actin structures , lamellipodia , and filopodia as - semble and disassemble at the leading edge of cells under the control of Rac1 and Cdc42 , providing a means of polarized cell movement . Small focal complexes form at lamellipodia and filopodia , which are rapidly turned over as the cell moves forward , while the RhoA - dependent assembly of stress fibers provide contractility and propul - sion required for forward cell movement . Since it is the Src kinase activity is required for random cell migration and the ability balance between contractility and adhesion that governs of cells to remodel in response to a chemoattractant gradient . ( a ) Random cell migration of cells in 10 % serum expressing Src251 - GFP , the rate of cell motility , relative activities of RhoA , Rac1 , GFP , SrcY527F ( (cid:4) GFP ) , or SrcMF ( (cid:4) GFP ) . Values are mean (cid:5) and Cdc42 are critical in determining whether and how SEM taken from at least five independent experiments and represent a cell moves . In this study , we examined the role of the data from between 30 and 60 cells in each case . ( b ) Polarity of Rho GTPases in directing the intracellular localization of cells expressing Src251 - GFP , GFP , SrcY527F ( (cid:4) GFP ) , or SrcMF ( (cid:4) GFP ) in response to a 10 ng / ml (cid:3) 1 PGDF gradient . Values are the tyrosine kinase c - Src , which is known to be required expressed as the percentage of cells in a population able to polarize , for cell motility , and the role of its kinase activity in using the criteria described in the Supplementary materials section , controling cell movement . generated from at least five independent experiments . The intracellular localization of c - Src is modulated by RhoA , Rac1 , and Cdc42 activity The localization of v - Src and c - Src to the cell periphery gradient , while around 80 % of the nontransfected cells in fibroblasts requires an intact actin cytoskeletal network exhibited polarity ( Figure 6b ) . Expression of GFP or [ 5 ] . Here , we show that the peripheral localization of SrcY527F had no effect on the polarity of the cells in Src251 - GFP , a fusion protein that contains Src’s SH3 and response to PDGF ( Figure 6b ) . Thus , both cell migration SH2 domains but lacks a kinase domain , is also dependent and cell polarization in response to a chemotactic stimuli , on RhoA - mediated assembly of actin stress fibers . Al - biological responses that require the coordinated activ - though Src251 - GFP was found in lamellipodia and filo - ities of Rho GTPases , are impaired in cells expressing podia following activation of Rac1 or Cdc42 , this was also either the Src251 - GFP or SrcMF kinase - deficient mutants dependent on the activity of RhoA , which mediates transit of c - Src . from the perinuclear region to the cell periphery . This implies that Src requires actin stress fibers to incorporate Src activity is required for phosphorylation of FAK into focal adhesions or into smaller focal complexes at FAK is a known Src substrate at adhesion sites , and there lamellipodia or filopodia , depending on the balance of is considerable evidence that FAK plays a central role specific Rho GTPase signals within the cell . As yet , little in the regulation of cell motility ( reviewed in [ 22 ] ) . We is known of the mechanism involved in the transport of therefore addressed whether phosphorylation of FAK was Src from the perinuclear region to the cell periphery . We suppressed in cells expressing Src kinase - defective mu - and others have demonstrated that it is not dependent tants that were unable to remodel focal adhesions in re - on the catalytic activity of c - Src but does require the Src sponse to PDGF and displayed impaired motility . Using SH3 domain [ 4 , 6 , 7 ] . In vitro experiments have demon - an antibody against phosphorylated tyrosine 925 in FAK , which is a site specifically phosphorylated by Src ( [ 23 ] strated that the Src SH3 domain binds to a number of 1844 Current Biology Vol 11 No 23 Figure 7 Phosphorylation of FAK is suppressed in cells expressing kinase - defective Src . ( a ) Cells were placed in serum - free conditions overnight and then stimulated with PDGF . Control cells were not stimulated with PDGF . FAK phosphorylated on tyrosine 925 was immunoprecipitated ( IP ) from extracts of cells infected with SrcMF or the empty vector using a phospho - FAK - Y925 - specific antibody . The proteins were resolved by SDS - PAGE , and the levels of phosphorylated FAK were detected following blotting with an anti - FAK antibody ( blot ) . ( b ) Expression of FAK and SrcMF in the SrcMF and vector - infected cells was determined in whole - cell extracts using an anti - FAK antibody ( top panel ) , and exogenously expressed SrcMF was visualized using the chicken - specific Src EC10 antibody ( bottom panel ) . cellular partners and that the regulatory subunit of phos - Src proteins suggests that , in addition to phosphorylating phatidylinositol 3 - kinase ( PI 3 - kinase ) is one binding part - key substrates , Src may be acting as an adaptor protein ner of the v - Src SH3 domain that is important for its allowing its recruitment into focal adhesion structures and / peripheral targeting [ 7 ] . Although the catalytic activity of or to recruit cellular partners to these sites . One such Src is not required for its targeting , a number of stimuli candidate is FAK , as there is considerable evidence link - that induce its peripheral targeting also activate Src kinase ing Src activity to FAK - regulated cell motility [ 8 , 29 ] . It activity ( e . g . , PDGF and bradykinin ) . These stimuli can is known that in fibroblasts lacking the FAK protein there therefore release constraints on both the kinase domain is an increased number of focal adhesions and an impaired and the SH3 domain of c - Src , ensuring that the activated ability to move , suggesting that FAK is required for the protein is not aberrantly localized within the cell . turnover of focal adhesions during cell motility [ 30 ] , while the ability of Src to induce adhesion turnover has been Regulation of cell motility requires coordinated activity linked to the phosphorylation and possibly subsequent of Rho GTPases and Src proteolysis of FAK [ 6 , 8 ] . In this study , we have shown Involvement of RhoA , Rac1 , and Cdc42 in cell motility that phosphorylation of FAK on tyrosine 925 , which is a is undoubtedly linked to their ability to rearrange the site known to be phosphorylated by Src [ 23 ] , is suppressed actin cytoskeleton . However , a secondary consequence of in cells which are unable to remodel their peripheral adhe - this actin remodeling is apparently to target other cellular sions after PDGF treatment , correlating with impaired proteins , such as c - Src , to these peripheral sites . We show cell motility and polarity . Thus , SrcMF expression sup - here that once located at the cell periphery c - Src acts in presses both Src - dependent phosphorylation events at the concert with the Rho GTPases to regulate cell polarity and cell periphery and stimulus - induced adhesion remod - motility . Several studies have suggested that Src family eling . kinases play a role during cell motility . For example , c - Src - deficient fibroblasts have a decreased random migration A key component of the coordinated movement of cells [ 21 ] , and cells deficient in all three ubiquitously expressed is their ability to polarize toward different migratory sig - family members , Src , Fyn , and Yes , are unable to migrate nals , and we addressed the role of c - Src in this process . into a wound [ 25 ] . Furthermore , c - Src kinase activity is The formation of Rac1 - dependent lamellipodia at the required for growth factor - induced migration and scatter - leading edge is required for cell motility [ 19 , 20 , 31 ] . In ing in a number of cell types [ 26 – 28 ] . The ability of Src addition , while Cdc42 is not essential for cell movement to influence cell motility in fibroblasts has been linked per se , it is required for directionality and the maintenance to the regulation of focal adhesion turnover . Cells lacking of cell polarity [ 19 , 20 , 32 ] . We have shown that c - Src Src family members are able to assemble focal adhesions kinase activity is required for cells to polarize and form [ 25 ] , indicating that Src is not required for their formation . a leading edge , and we propose that the ability of the However , cells in which kinase - defective mutants of Src Rho GTPases to direct the localization of Src to these are expressed have enlarged focal adhesions [ 4 , 6 ] , sugges - peripheral sites is required for the remodeling of the more tive of a role for Src kinase activity in the turnover of static focal adhesions into smaller more dynamic focal these structures that is needed for cells to move [ 6 ] . The presence of functional SH2 and SH3 domains in these complexes found at the leading edge of motile cells . Research Paper Requirement of Src for Rho family activity Timpson et al . 1845 ( both Sigma , Poole , UK ) . Y - 27632 ( 10 (cid:2) M , Welfide Corporation , Japan ) , The involvement of Src kinases in the regulation of integ - cytochalasinD ( 0 . 1 (cid:2) g / ml (cid:3) 1 ) , oremetine ( 55 (cid:2) g / ml (cid:3) 1 , bothSigma , Poole , rin - ECM interactions has been reported in a number of UK ) were added as indicated . Cells were fixed in 3 % paraformaldehyde , studies [ 25 , 33 , 34 ] . Specifically , Src can regulate the gen - washed PBS / 100 nM glycine , then permeabilized with PBS / 0 . 1 % sapo - eration of contractile force between the actin cytoskeleton nin / 20 mM glycine . After blocking with PBS / 0 . 1 % saponin / 10 % fetal calf serum , cells were incubated with anti - Src mAb EC10 to detect the and integrins , thus modulating cell motility [ 33 ] . In addi - exogenously expressed chicken Src proteins ( Upstate Biotechnology , tion , c - Src can transiently inhibit integrin - induced activa - Lake Placid , New York ) , anti - Src monoclonal antibody N2 - 17 to detect tion of Rho GTPase activity [ 34 ] , and oncogenic v - Src endogenous Src protein ( a kind gift from T . Hunter , Salk Institute , Califor - can antagonize RhoA activity via mechanisms involving nia ) , anti - vinculin mAb , rhodamine - conjugated phalloidin ( both Sigma , Poole , UK ) , or rhodamine - conjugated paxillin antibody ( Research Diag - activation of p190RhoGAP [ 35 , 36 ] . Thus , Src may act to nostics , Flanders , New Jersey ) . Nonconjugated antibody detection was regulate the turnover of Rho - mediated adhesions , which by reaction with species - specific TRITC - conjugated antibodies ( Sigma , is critical to the migratory process . In addition to adhesion Poole , UK ) . Cells were visualized using a confocal microscope ( MRC remodeling , Src facilitates the turnover of actin filaments 600 ; BioRad Labs , Hercules , California ) . which stabilize focal adhesion sites [ 7 , 36 ] , and this may FAK phosphorylation partially explain the reduction of random migration ob - Cells infected with pBABEpuro or pBABEpuro - SrcMF were trypsinized served in our study in cells expressing kinase - defective and plated at 2 . 5 (cid:6) 10 6 onto 100 mm culture plates in growth medium Src mutants ( Figure 6a ) and also cells lacking Src and the for 24 hr . The cells were then serum starved for 24 hr prior to stimulation other family members Fyn and Yes [ 25 ] . More recently , with 25 ng / ml (cid:3) 1 PDGF . Cell extracts were prepared in 50 mM Tris ( pH 7 . 4 ) , 150 mM NaCl , 1 % Triton X - 100 , 0 . 5 % deoxycholate , 0 . 1 % sodium the mDia family of Rho effectors , which cooperate with dodecyl sulfate , 1 mM EDTA , 1 mM EGTA , 10 mM sodium pyrophos - ROCK in the formation of bundled stress fibers , have phate , 0 . 5 mM sodium fluoride , 1 mM PMSF , 10 (cid:2) g / ml (cid:3) 1 aprotinin , and been shown to bind to Src , and Src kinase activity is 100 (cid:2) M sodium orthovanadate , and 1 mg of cell lysate incubated with required for the cooperative effect of mDia on stress fiber 2 (cid:2) g of phospho - FAK - Y925 rabbit polyclonal antibody . Generation of this antibody was as described in [ 38 ] using the peptide NDKVYENVT formation [ 37 ] . Thus , c - Src can have both positive and GLVKA ( C ) , which corresponds to residues 921 – 934 in FAK , in which negative effects on Rho - mediated stress fiber and adhe - tyrosine 925 has been chemically phosphorylated . The immune com - sion formation and may act at a pivotal point between plexeswerecollectedwithproteinAsepharoseandtheproteinsresolved their assembly and disassembly , placing it in a central by SDS - PAGE . FAK phosphorylated on tyrosine 925 was detected fol - lowing incubation with anti - FAK monoclonal antibody ( Transduction Lab - position from which to coordinate the multifaceted pro - oratories , BD Biosciences , Oxford , UK ) using ECL detection . cess of cell motility . Cell migration and polarization The major challenges are now to determine ( 1 ) how motile Cells were transfected with Src251 - GFP or GFP or cotransfected with cells integrate different signals that regulate the activity SrcY527F and GFP or SrcMF and GFP to allow detection of the trans - fected cells . To monitor polarization , cells were trypsinized 24 hr post - of RhoA , Rac1 , and Cdc42 , which in turn regulate the transfection and plated onto coverslips for 1 hr . Cells were then serum localization of c - Src and possibly other Src family kinases straved for 1 hr and mounted on Dunn chambers with PDGF 10 ng / ml (cid:3) 1 within the cell , and ( 2 ) how Src - dependent tyrosine phos - as chemoattractant [ 19 ] . For measurement of both random migration phorylation regulates adhesion remodeling in response to and polarization , microscopic images of the cells were acquired from a biological stimuli that induce directed cell migration . charged couple device camera ( Hamamatsu C4742 ) and captured by Open Lab ( Improvision Software , UK ) every 15 min over a 5 hr period . Details of how the mean cell speed was calculated and the criteria used Materials and methods to determine cell polarity are given in the Supplementary materials . Cells and plasmids CA10 - Src251 - GFP and CA10 - Src were kind gifts from P . Schwartzberg Supplementary material ( NIH , Bethesda , Maryland ) , and CA10 - SrcY527F and CA10 - SrcMF Further experimental details on the different methods used for the intro - ( K295M , Y527F ) wereakindgiftfromK . Kaplan ( MIT , Cambridge , Massa - duction of plasmids into the cells and the rationale for their use can be chusetts ) . pEGFP ( Clontech , Basingstoke , UK ) was used for expression found in the Supplementary material online at http : / / images . cellpress . of GFP . N19 - and V14RhoA , V12 - and N17Cdc42 , and L61 - and com / supmat / supmatin . htm . More detailed descriptions are also given N17Rac , all in the pRK5myc plasmid , were kindly provided by Alan Hall for the measurement of cell migration and polarity . ( UCL , London , UK ) . Swiss 3T3 cells were routinely grown in DMEM supplemented with 10 % fetal calf serum . Plasmids were introduced into Additional data are provided in which we have used the kinase inhibitor the cells by nuclear microinjection or transient transfection as indicated PP2 as further confirmation of the requirement of Src kinase activity for in the text , with further details given in the Supplementary materials . efficient remodeling of cellular adhesions in response to PDGF , and data are also presented which demonstrates that bradykinin - induced focal Immunofluorescence adhesion remodeling to produce focal complexes was also impaired in Cells were plated onto glass chamber slides 24 hr prior to transfection Src251 - GFP - expressing cells . We also provide further evidence that or onto glass coverslips 24 hr prior to microinjection . For experiments Src kinase activity is required for the turnover of focal adhesions in in which cells were serum starved to remove stress fibers prior to expres - experiments where treatment of cells expressing Src251 - GFP with the sion of the proteins , the cells were grown for 48 hr in serum - free condi - ROCK inhibitor results in the stabilization of focal adhesions which are tions prior to microinjection of the appropriate plasmids and analysis normally broken down in the absence of a Rho signal . carried out 3 – 5 hr later after expression of the proteins . For all other experiments , the proteins were expressed by transient transfection . Acknowledgements Growth factor treatment of the cells were as follows : 10 % serum for We thank John and Anne Wyke for critical reading of the manuscript . Thanks 30min , PDGF , 25ng / ml (cid:3) 1 for30min ( TCSBiologicals , BotolphClaydon , also to Gordon McLean for providing the phospho - FAK - Y925 antibody ; Pam Schwartzberg and Ken Kaplan for Src constructs ; and Alan Hall for the UK ) , bradykinin , 100 nM for 5 min or LPA 200 ng / ml (cid:3) 1 for 30 min 1846 Current Biology Vol 11 No 23 Rho family constructs . This work was supported by the Cancer Research of the Grb2 SH2 - domain binding site on focal adhesion kinase by Src - family protein - tyrosine kinases . Mol Cell Biol Campaign , and G . E . J . is a Leverhulme Trust Research Fellow . 1996 , 16 : 5623 - 5633 . 24 . Small JV , Rottner K , Kaverina I : Functional design in the actin References cytoskeleton . Curr Opin Cell Biol 1999 , 11 : 54 - 60 . 1 . Schoenwaelder SM , Burridge K : Bidirectional signaling between 25 . Klinghoffer RA , Sachsenmaier C , Cooper JA , Soriano P : Src family the cytoskeleton and integrins . Curr Opin Cell Biol 1999 , kinases are required for integrin but not PDGFR signal 11 : 274 - 286 . transduction . EMBO J 1999 , 18 : 2459 - 2471 . 2 . David - Pfeuty T , Nouvian - Dooghe Y : Immunolocalization of the 26 . Rodier JM , Valles AM , Denoyelle M , Thiery JP , Boyer B : pp60 c - src is cellular src protein in interphase and mitotic NIH c - src a positive regulator of growth factor - induced cell scattering overexpresser cells . J Cell Biol 1990 , 111 : 3097 - 3116 . in a rat bladder carcinoma cell line . J Cell Biol 1995 , 131 : 761 - 3 . Kaplan KB , Swedlow JR , Varmus HE , Morgan DO : Association of 773 . p60c - src with endosomal membranes in mammalian 27 . Rahim N , Hung W , Tremblay E , Saulnier R , Elliot B : c - Src kinase fibroblasts . J Cell Biol 1992 , 118 : 321 - 333 . activity is required for hepatocyte growth factor - induced 4 . Kaplan KB , Bibbins KB , Swedlow JR , Arnaud M , Morgan DO , Varmus motility and anchorage - independent growth of mammary HE : Association of the amino - terminal half of c - Src with carcinoma cells . J Biol Chem 1998 , 273 : 33714 - 33721 . focal adhesions alters their properties and is regulated by 28 . Liu J , Huang C , Zhan X : Src is required for cell migration and phosphorylation of tyrosine 527 . EMBO J 1994 , 13 : 4745 - shape changes induced by fibroblast growth factor 1 . 4756 . Oncogene 1999 , 18 : 6700 - 6706 . 5 . Fincham VJ , Unlu M , Brunton VG , Pitts JD , Wyke JA , Frame MC : 29 . Cary LA , Chang JF , Guan JL : Stimulation of cell migration by Translocation of Src kinase to the cell periphery is mediated overexpression of focal adhesion kinase and its association by the actin cytoskeleton under the control of the Rho family with Src and Fyn . J Cell Sci 1996 , 109 : 1787 - 1794 . of small G proteins . J Cell Biol 1996 , 135 : 1551 - 1564 . 30 . Ilic D , Furuta Y , Kanazawa S , Takeda N , Sobue K , Nakatsuji N , et 6 . Fincham VJ , Frame MC : The catalytic activity of Src is al . : Reduced cell motility and enhanced focal adhesion dispensable for translocation to focal adhesions but controls contact formation in cells from FAK - deficient mice . Nature the turnover of these structures during cell motility . EMBO J 1995 , 377 : 539 - 544 . 1998 , 17 : 81 - 92 . 31 . Ridley AJ , Comoglio PM , Hall A : Regulation of scatter factor / 7 . Fincham VJ , Brunton VG , Frame MC : The SH3 domain directs hepatocyte growth factor responses by Ras , Rac and Rho acto - myosin - dependent targeting of v - Src to focal adhesions in MDCK cells . Mol Cell Biol 1995 , 15 : 1110 - 1122 . via phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase . Mol Cell Biol 2000 , 20 : 6518 - 32 . Stowers L , Yelon D , Berg LJ , Chant J : Regulation of the 6536 . polarization of T cells toward antigen - presenting cells by 8 . Fincham VJ , Wyke JA , Frame MC : v - Src - induced degradation of Ras - related small GTPase Cdc42 . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1995 , focal adhesion kinase during morphological 92 : 5027 - 5031 . transformation of chicken embryo fibroblasts . Oncogene 33 . Felsenfeld DP , Schwartzberg PL , Venegas A , Tse R , Sheetz MP : 1995 , 10 : 2247 - 2252 . Selective regulation of integrin - cytoskeleton interactions 9 . Ridley AJ , Hall A : The small GTP - binding protein rho regulates by the tyrosine kinase Src . Nat Cell Biol 1999 , 1 : 200 - 206 . the assembly of focal adhesions and actin stress fibers in 34 . Arthur WT , Petch LA , Burridge K : Integrin engagement response to growth factors . Cell 1992 , 70 : 389 - 399 . suppresses RhoA activity via a c - Src - dependent mechanism . 10 . Chrzanowska - Wodnicka M , Burridge K : Rho - stimulated Curr Biol 2000 , 10 : 719 - 722 . contractility drives the formation of stress fibers and focal 35 . Ellis C , Moran M , McCormick F , Pawson T : Phosphorylation of adhesions . J Cell Biol 1996 , 133 : 1403 - 1415 . GAP and GAP - associated proteins by transforming and 11 . Ridley AJ , Paterson HF , Johnston CL , Diekmann D , Hall A : The small mitogenic tyrosine kinases . Nature 1990 , 343 : 377 - 381 . GTP - binding protein rac regulates growth factor - induced 36 . Fincham VJ , Chudleigh A , Frame MC : Regulation of p190 Rho - membrane ruffling . Cell 1992 , 70 : 401 - 410 . GAP by v - Src is linked to cytoskeletal disruption during 12 . Kozma R , Ahmed S , Best A , Lim L : The Ras - related protein transformation . J Cell Sci 1999 , 112 : 947 - 956 . Cdc42Hs and bradykinin promote formation of peripheral actin 37 . Tominaga T , Sahai E , Chardin P , McCormick F , Courtneidge SA , microspikes and filopodia . Mol Cell Biol 1995 , 15 : 1942 - 1952 . Alberts AS : Diaphanous - related formins bridge Rho GTPase 13 . Nobes CD , Hall A : Rho , rac , and cdc42 GTPases regulate the and Src tyrosine signaling . Mol Cell 2000 , 5 : 12 - 25 . assembly of multimolecular focal complexes associated 38 . McLean GW , Fincham VJ , Frame MC : v - Src induces tyrosine with actin stress fibers , lamellipodia , and filopodia . Cell 1995 , phosphorylation of focal adhesion kinase independently of 81 : 53 - 62 . tyrosine 397 and formation of a complex with Src . J Biol Chem 14 . Uehata M , Ishizaki T , Satoh H , Ono T , Kawahara T , Morishita T , et 2000 , 275 : 23333 - 23339 . al . : Calcium sensitization of smooth muscle mediated by a Rho - associated protein kinase in hypertension . Nature 1997 , 389 : 990 - 994 . 15 . Kimura K , Ito M , Amano M , Chihara K , Fukata Y , Nakafuku M , et al . : Regulation of myosin phosphatase by Rho and Rho - associated kinase ( Rho - kinase ) . Science 1996 , 273 : 245 - 248 . 16 . Leung T , Chen XQ , Manser E , Lim L : The p160 RhoA - binding kinaseROKalphaisamemberofakinasefamilyandisinvolvedinthereorganizationofthecytoskeleton . Mol Cell Biol 1996 , 16 : 5313 - 5327 . 17 . Mellstrom K , Heldin C , Westermark B : Induction of circular membrane ruffling on human fibroblasts by platelet - derived growth factor . Expt Cell Res 1988 , 177 : 347 - 359 . 18 . Thomas SM , Brugge JS : Cellular functions regulated by Src family kinases . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 1997 , 13 : 513 - 609 . 19 . Allen WE , Zicha D , Ridley AJ , Jones GE : A role for Cdc42 in macrophage chemotaxis . J Cell Biol 1998 , 141 : 1147 - 1157 . 20 . Nobes CD , Hall A : Rho GTPases control polarity , protrusion , and adhesion during cell movement . J Cell Biol 1999 , 144 : 1235 - 1244 . 21 . Hall CL , Lange LA , Prober DA , Zhang S , Turley EA : pp60 ( c - src ) is required for cell locomotion regulated by the hyaluronan receptor RHAMM . Oncogene 1996 , 13 : 2213 - 2224 . 22 . Parsons JT , Martin KH , Slack JK , Taylor JM , Weed SA : Focal adhesion kinase : a regulator of focal adhesion dynamics and cell movement . Oncogene 2000 , 19 : 5606 - 5613 . 23 . Schlaepfer DD , Hunter T : Evidence for in vivo phosphorylation