Real - time detection reveals that effectors couple dynamin’s GTP - dependent conformational changes to the membrane Rajesh Ramachandran and Sandra L Schmid * Department of Cell Biology , The Scripps Research Institute , La Jolla , CA , USA The GTPase dynamin is a mechanochemical enzyme in - volved in membrane ﬁssion , but the molecular nature of its membrane interactions and their regulation by guanine nucleotides and protein effectors remain poorly character - ized . Using site - directed ﬂuorescence labeling and several independent ﬂuorescence spectroscopic techniques , we have developed robust assays for the detection and real - time monitoring of dynamin – membrane and dynamin – dynamin interactions . We show that dynamin interacts preferentially with highly curved , PIP 2 - dense membranes and inserts partially into the lipid bilayer . Our kinetic measurements further reveal that cycles of GTP binding and hydrolysis elicit major conformational rearrange - ments in self - assembled dynamin that favor dynamin – membrane association and dissociation , respectively . Sorting nexin 9 , an abundant dynamin partner , transiently stabilizes dynamin on the membrane at the onset of stimulated GTP hydrolysis and may function to couple dynamin’s mechanochemical conformational changes to membrane destabilization . Amphiphysin I has the oppo - site effect . Thus , dynamin’s mechanochemical properties on a membrane surface are dynamically regulated by its GTPase cycle and major binding partners . The EMBO Journal ( 2008 ) 27 , 27 – 37 . doi : 10 . 1038 / sj . emboj . 7601961 ; Published online 13 December 2007 Subject Categories : membranes & transport ; proteins Keywords : conformational changes ; dynamin ; effectors ; ﬂuorescence spectroscopy ; membrane ﬁssion Introduction During the terminal stages of endocytic clathrin - coated vesi - cle formation , the large GTPase dynamin self - assembles into collar - like structures around the necks of deeply invaginated coated pits and catalyzes vesicle scission by mechanisms that remain poorly characterized ( for reviews , see Hinshaw , 2000 ; Conner and Schmid , 2003 ) . This modular GTPase ( Figure 1A ) is initially recruited to nascent coated pits via interactions between its C - terminal proline / arginine - rich domain ( PRD ) and Src homology 3 ( SH3 ) domain - containing binding part - ners ( Shpetner et al , 1996 ; Okamoto et al , 1997 ) . Subsequent interactions mediated by its pleckstrin homology ( PH ) do - main with phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PIP 2 ) at the membrane surface are , however , required for its in vivo function ( Achiriloaie et al , 1999 ; Lee et al , 1999 ; Vallis et al , 1999 ) . The middle domain and GTPase effector domain ( GED ) are both involved in self - assembly , and the latter is involved also in the stimulation of assembly - dependent GTPase activity ( Sever et al , 1999 ; Song et al , 2004 ; Ramachandran et al , 2007 ) . Dynamin self - assembles spontaneously into rings and helical spirals onto negatively charged phospholipid - contain - ing liposomes and lipid nanotubes to form protein - encircled lipid tubules that resemble the collared necks observed in vivo ( Sweitzer and Hinshaw , 1998 ; Stowell et al , 1999 ) . EM observations have revealed distinct conformational changes in self - assembled dynamin that result either in the constric - tion of dynamin spirals on liposomes upon GTP binding ( Zhang and Hinshaw , 2001 ; Chen et al , 2004 ; Danino et al , 2004 ) or an increase in pitch and corresponding elongation of the spirals on preformed lipid nanotubes upon GTP hydrolysis ( Stowell et al , 1999 ) . Whether the distinct con - formational changes detected in these static images reﬂect differences in experimental conditions ( membrane templates , dynamin concentration , etc . ) or distinct template - stabilized stages of the dynamin GTPase cycle remains to be deter - mined . More recent light microscopy studies have suggested that a GTPase - driven twisting rotation of assembled dynamin around the underlying membrane tubule mediates ﬁssion ( Roux et al , 2006 ) . Although these studies provide important clues into the global conformational changes in self - as - sembled dynamin during its GTP hydrolysis cycle , they offer very little insight into either the molecular nature or the dynamics of dynamin’s interactions with the membrane and also with itself . To further elucidate the nature of these interactions and their dynamics , and to gain new insight into the mechanisms underlying membrane ﬁssion , we have developed ﬂuores - cence spectroscopic assays to measure dynamin – membrane and dynamin – dynamin interactions in real time and used these to identify the role of nucleotide - dependent conforma - tional changes and effectors in regulating dynamin’s mechan - ochemical activities at the membrane . Results A real - time assay for dynamin – membrane interactions Fluorescence spectroscopy coupled to the site - speciﬁc ﬂuor - escence labeling of proteins is a powerful approach for determining protein interactions , conformations and mechan - isms that occur at a membrane surface ( Ramachandran et al , 2004 , 2005 ; Johnson , 2005 ) . Quantiﬁable data can be Received : 8 August 2007 ; accepted : 21 November 2007 ; published online : 13 December 2007 * Corresponding author . Department of Cell Biology , The Scripps Research Institute , 10550 N . Torrey Pines Road , La Jolla , CA 92037 , USA . Tel . : þ 1 858 784 2311 ; Fax : þ 1 858 784 2345 ; E - mail : slschmid @ scripps . edu The EMBO Journal ( 2008 ) 27 , 27 – 37 | & 2008 European Molecular Biology Organization | All Rights Reserved 0261 - 4189 / 08 www . embojournal . org & 2008 European Molecular Biology Organization The EMBO Journal VOL 27 | NO 1 | 2008 EMBO THE EMBO JOURNAL THE EMBO JOURNAL 27 obtained from very low concentrations of ﬂuorescently la - beled protein , as can information regarding probe environ - ment , intermolecular proximity , etc . Furthermore , changes in the ﬂuorescence signal can be monitored as a function of time to obtain kinetic information on conformational changes not possible with EM , X - ray crystallography or other related techniques . Therefore , to study the dynamics of dynamin – membrane and dynamin – dynamin interactions , we devel - oped ﬂuorescence - based assays and used low protein con - centrations ( typically p 0 . 1 m M ) that would permit the formation of only physiologically relevant short dynamin assemblies on model liposomal membranes . For the site - speciﬁc labeling , we engineered a functional derivative of human dynamin - 1 ( Figure 1A ) in which six of the seven native Cys residues ( at positions 86 , 424 , 427 , 442 , 607 and 708 ) were substituted with Ser , hereafter referred to as reactive - Cys - less dynamin or RCL - Dyn . This derivative , containing a critical , partially buried native Cys at residue 169 in the GTPase domain , was largely unreactive to thiol - modifying reagents under our labeling conditions ( data not shown ) . The PH domain of dynamin ( Figure 1A ) is responsible for PIP 2 headgroup recognition and membrane binding ( Salim et al , 1996 ; Vallis et al , 1999 ) . The key residues involved in this association reside in the variable loops ( VL1 – 3 ; Figure 1A ) ( Salim et al , 1996 ; Zheng et al , 1996 ) , and mutation of a critical Lys residue ( K535A ) in VL1 abrogates membrane binding ( Vallis et al , 1999 ) . Therefore , to detect Figure 1 A ﬂuorescence - based assay for dynamin – membrane interactions . ( A ) Schematic illustration of dynamin domain arrangement and ribbon representation of the human dynamin 1 PH domain crystal structure ( PDB ID : 1dyn ) . GED , GTPase effector domain ; PH , pleckstrin homology ; PRD , proline and arginine - rich domain . Positions of the Cys residues replaced with Ser are indicated and variable loops 1 – 3 ( VL1 – 3 ) in the PH domain are labeled . The location of I533 in VL1 that was replaced with a Cys ( I533C ) in this study is shown in stick representation . ( B ) Representative NBD emission spectra for 0 . 5 m M NBD - dynamin before and after incubation with either 15mol % PIP 2 - containing liposomes or 100mol % DOPC liposomes ( 150 m M total lipid ) . ( C ) Time - dependent emission intensity proﬁle for 0 . 1 m M NBD - dynamin before and after addition of 15mol % PIP 2 - containing liposomes ( 30 m M total lipid ) . For this and all subsequent ﬁgures , unless otherwise stated , F 0 is the initial intensity of NBD - dynamin before addition of lipid ( at time ¼ 0 ) and F is the intensity at time t . Representative data from at least three independent experiments are indicated as F / F 0 and plotted versus time . ( D ) Quenching of NBD ﬂuorescence by nitroxide moieties located at different depths in the membrane bilayer . Representative NBD emission spectra for 0 . 5 m M NBD - dynamin before and after incubation with either 15mol % PIP 2 - containing liposomes ( no quencher ) or with 15mol % PIP 2 - containing liposomes that also contain 10mol % of the indicated nitroxide - labeled phospholipid ( 150 m M total lipid ) . Dynamics of dynamin – membrane interactions R Ramachandran and SL Schmid The EMBO Journal VOL 27 | NO 1 | 2008 & 2008 European Molecular Biology Organization 28 dynamin – membrane interactions , we introduced a single reactive Cys residue in VL1 of the PH domain by replacing Ile at position 533 ( RCL - Dyn I533C ) . I533 is not conserved between dynamin - 1 and dynamin - 2 isoforms . This Cys was covalently modiﬁed with the environment - sensitive ﬂuoro - phore NBD , to yield RCL - Dyn I533C - NBD ( hereafter referred to as NBD - dynamin ) . It has previously been reported that the isoform speciﬁcity of I533 and the post - translational nitrosy - lation of C607 play important roles for dynamin 1 functions in vivo ( Artalejo et al , 1997 ; Wang et al , 2006 ) ; and , indeed , we ﬁnd that overexpression of RCL - Dyn I533C in tTA - HeLa cells inhibited transferrin uptake ( data not shown ) . However , we were unable to detect any defect in the in vitro activities of this mutant dynamin or its NBD - labeled derivative , includ - ing either lipid - binding ability or assembly - stimulated and basal GTPase activities , each of which were indistin - guishable from those of WT - dynamin ( Supplementary Figure 1A – C ) . As neither the multiple mutations nor the ﬂuorophore conjugation affected the enzymatic or assembly properties of dynamin , this modiﬁed dynamin serves as a valid tool for probing the mechanochemical coupling of these activities in vitro . Movement of NBD from an aqueous milieu to a nonpolar environment such as the hydrocarbon core of a membrane bilayer is accompanied by a pronounced increase in emission intensity ( Ramachandran et al , 2002 ) . Indeed , when NBD - dynamin was incubated with 15mol % PIP 2 - containing lipo - somes at concentrations that allowed near - complete binding of dynamin to membranes ( protein - to - lipid molar ratio of 1 : 300 ) , a dramatic six - to eightfold increase in NBD emission intensity was observed ( Figure 1B ) . The change in NBD emission intensity could be monitored in real time upon addition of target membranes , thereby providing a sensitive assay for determining the kinetics of these interactions ( Figure 1C ) that was not possible previously by sedi - mentation . Control experiments established the validity of this assay . First , in the presence of pure phosphatidylcholine ( PC ) lipo - somes that do not detectably bind dynamin , only a negligible increase in NBD emission intensity was observed ( Figure 1B ) . Second , no change in NBD emission intensity was detected when the NBD moiety was conjugated to a Cys residue introduced in the GTPase domain , RCL - Dyn S306C - NBD ( Supplementary Figure 2 ) , establishing that the assay de - tected direct PH domain – membrane interactions . Dynamin inserts partially into the lipid bilayer To determine the nature of dynamin – membrane interactions , we measured the accessibility of the NBD ﬂuorophore to membrane - restricted collisional quenching agents , here un - charged nitroxide moieties attached either to the acyl chain or the headgroup of phospholipid molecules ( Figure 1D ) . By comparing the extents of quenching from nitroxide moieties localized at different depths within the membrane bilayer , the relative membrane penetration depth of the dye can be determined ( Shatursky et al , 1999 ; Ramachandran et al , 2002 ) . Collisional quenching was observed from nitroxide moieties attached to the phospholipid headgroup ( TEMPO - PC ) , the 5th ( 5 - doxyl - PC ) and the 12th ( 12 - doxyl - PC ) carbon positions of the phospholipid acyl chain , conﬁrming that the increase in NBD emission intensity reﬂects dynamin – mem - brane association . The extent of quenching from these posi - tions varied signiﬁcantly with 5 - doxyl - PC 4 12 - doxyl - PC 4 TEMPO - PC ( Figure 1D , Table I ) , indicating a shallow disposition of the PH domain VL1 within the acyl chain region of the lipid bilayer . In the presence of the non - hydro - lyzable GTP analog , GMPPCP , no change in the pattern of quenching , and therefore the insertion depth of the PH domain , was observed ( Table I ) . However , the marginal increase in the extents of quenching from all quencher positions ( Table I ) suggests that GTP binding induces a conformational rearrangement in dynamin that increases the relative accessibility of the NBD dyes to the nitroxide moieties . Dynamin – membrane association is highly dependent on PIP 2 spatial density Using this quantitative assay , we next determined the afﬁnity of NBD - dynamin for PIP 2 - containing liposomes . The appar - ent binding afﬁnity was 4 10 - fold higher when PIP 2 was present at 15mol % ( K D ¼ 1 . 9 7 0 . 3 m M ) versus 2mol % ( K D ( app ) 4 15 m M ) of the total lipid present ( Figure 2A ) . When dynamin – membrane association was measured at a ﬁxed total lipid concentration while the mol % of PIP 2 per liposome was varied , we obtained a sigmoidal binding isotherm in - dicating that dynamin binding is cooperative with respect to local PIP 2 concentration ( Hill constant , n H ¼ 2 . 8 7 0 . 3 ; good - ness of ﬁt R 2 4 0 . 99 ) ( Figure 2B ) . The much reduced associa - tion of NBD - dynamin with 2 mol % PIP 2 - versus 15mol % PIP 2 - containing liposomes also occurred at a slower rate and exhibited biphasic kinetics ( Figure 2C ) , presumably corre - sponding to an initial fast association with a preexisting fraction of clustered PIP 2 followed by a slow rate of binding to diffuse PIP 2 molecules that are eventually clustered through dynamin polymerization . This slow second phase was not observed with 15mol % PIP 2 - containing liposomes ( Figure 2C , inset ) . Collectively , these data establish that dynamin tetramers preferentially bind to and self - assemble on membranes bearing a high spatial density of PIP 2 . Table I Quenching of NBD - dynamin emission by quenchers located at different depths in the membrane bilayer State F TEMPO - PC / F no quencher F 5 - doxyl - PC / F no quencher F 12 - doxyl - PC / F no quencher (cid:2) Nucleotide 0 . 91 7 0 . 02 0 . 70 7 0 . 01 0 . 83 7 0 . 01 + GMPPCP 0 . 84 7 0 . 04 0 . 65 7 0 . 01 0 . 79 7 0 . 04 Experiments were done as indicated in Figure 1D . NBD was excited at 470nm and emission measured at 530nm . F no quencher , F TEMPO - PC , F 5 - doxyl - PC and F 12 - doxyl - PC each represent F / F 0 values obtained for NBD - dynamin incubated with 15mol % PIP2 - containing liposomes that either lack ( no quencher ) or contain 10mol % of either TEMPO - PC , 5 - doxyl - PC , or 12 - doxyl - PC , respectively . F 0 and F are the emission - intensity values observed for NBD - dynamin before and after incubation with the corresponding liposomes , respectively . The values shown are the average of ratios 7 s . d . determined from at least three independent experiments . Dynamics of dynamin – membrane interactions R Ramachandran and SL Schmid & 2008 European Molecular Biology Organization The EMBO Journal VOL 27 | NO 1 | 2008 29 Dynamin – membrane association is sensitive to membrane curvature Large dynamic changes in membrane curvature at the coated pit precede clathrin - coated vesicle formation at the plasma membrane ( Conner and Schmid , 2003 ; McMahon and Gallop , 2005 ) . To determine the sensitivity of dynamin – membrane interactions to membrane curvature , we examined the bind - ing of NBD - dynamin to PIP 2 - containing liposomes ranging between 50nm and 1 m m in diameter , representing a gradual decrease in membrane curvature . Dynamin binding increased with decreasing liposome diameter , indicating a higher afﬁnity for more highly curved membranes ( Figure 2D ) . Guanine nucleotides regulate dynamin – membrane interactions The time resolution of our ﬂuorescence - based assay next allowed us to investigate the effect of guanine nucleotides on dynamin – membrane interactions . Addition of GMPPCP to NBD - dynamin ﬁrst bound saturably to PIP 2 - containing lipo - somes in the absence of nucleotides did not elicit any appreciable change in emission intensity , indicating that GTP binding does not increase or alter dynamin – membrane association ( Figure 3A ) . In contrast , addition of GDP elicited the rapid dissociation of dynamin , suggesting that , in its GDP - bound state , dynamin adopts a conformation that signiﬁcantly weakens its interaction with the membrane ( Figure 3A ) , resulting in an altered equilibrium distribu - tion between membrane - associated and free dynamin . Unexpectedly , addition of GTP also triggered rapid dynamin dissociation ( Figure 3A ) . This rapid decrease in membrane association was not a consequence of the total conversion of GTP to GDP , as o 5 % of the total GTP was consumed during this time course ( Supplementary Figure 1D ) . Moreover , simi - lar results were obtained in the presence of a GTP regenerat - ing system ( Supplementary Figures 3A and B ) . Together , these data suggest that rapid GTP hydrolysis by membrane - associated , self - assembled dynamin is accompanied by dynamin release from the membrane , reaching a new steady state that reﬂects cycles of membrane association and dis - sociation during GTP binding and hydrolysis , respectively . Stimulated GTP hydrolysis reproducibly triggered dynamin dissociation at a faster rate and to a slightly larger extent than GDP ( k GTP ¼ 2 . 2 7 0 . 1min (cid:2) 1 4 k GDP ¼ 1 . 6 7 0 . 1 min (cid:2) 1 ) ( Figure 3A ) . This difference likely reﬂects the reported 40 - fold - greater GTP binding afﬁnity of dynamin ( Binns et al , 1999 ) and the expected higher GDP occupancy in the active Figure 2 Dynamin – membrane interaction is highly sensitive to PIP 2 spatial density and membrane curvature . ( A ) Binding of 0 . 1 m M NBD - dynamin to increasing concentration of liposomes containing either 2mol % ( J ) or 15mol % PIP 2 ( K ) . The average membrane - dependent intensity increase is indicated as F / F 0 . ( B ) Binding of 0 . 1 m M NBD - dynamin to a ﬁxed concentration of liposomes ( 30 m M total lipid ) with increasing content of PIP 2 ( 0 – 15mol % ) . ( C ) Normalized time - dependent NBD emission intensity proﬁles for 0 . 1 m M NBD - dynamin upon addition of either 2mol % ( J ) or 15mol % ( K ) PIP 2 - containing liposomes ( 30 m M total lipid ) . To allow direct comparison of the rate of change of NBD ﬂuorescence , each intensity proﬁle was normalized to F f , the ﬁnal intensity at t ¼ 17min after liposome addition , and plotted as the total fractional intensity change as a function of time . Data were best ﬁt to either a one - phase ( for 15mol % PIP 2 ) or a two - phase ( for 2mol % PIP 2 ) association model as described in Supplementary data to obtain the indicated rate constants . ( Inset ) Binding of NBD - dynamin to 15mol % PIP2 - containing liposomes is plotted against the log of time in minutes . ( D ) Binding of 0 . 1 m M NBD - dynamin to 15mol % PIP 2 - containing liposomes ( 30 m M total lipid ) of varying diameter . The average membrane - dependent intensity increase of three independent experiments is indicated as F / F 0 . Dynamics of dynamin – membrane interactions R Ramachandran and SL Schmid The EMBO Journal VOL 27 | NO 1 | 2008 & 2008 European Molecular Biology Organization 30 sites after it is generated locally from high - afﬁnity GTP binding and hydrolysis rather than from low - afﬁnity binding of GDP directly from solution . Sedimentation analyses at steady state conﬁrmed that the NBD emission decrease observed upon addition of either GTP or GDP was due to dynamin – membrane dissociation and not to a nucleotide - dependent conformational change in membrane - bound dynamin that repositions NBD relative to the bilayer core ( Figure 3A , insets ; Supplementary Figure 3C ) . Similar results were obtained when liposomes were added to dynamin in the presence of various nucleotides ( Figure 3B ) . Dynamin bound rapidly to liposomes in the presence of GMPPCP and reached saturation at the same level as in the absence of nucleotides . The presence of GDP drastically reduced dynamin – membrane association ( 40 % of the steady - state intensity obtained with GMPPCP ) . In the presence of GTP , addition of PIP 2 - containing liposomes to NBD - dynamin resulted in a transient burst of NBD emission intensity increase followed by a relatively slow decrease at the onset of stimulated GTP hydrolysis to reach steady state comparable to that observed in the presence of GDP ( Figure 3B ) . Collectively , these data indicate that in its GMPPCP - or GTP - bound state , dynamin exhibits a higher afﬁnity for PIP 2 - containing membranes than in the GDP - bound state , but that GTP hydrolysis rapidly destabilizes dynamin – membrane interactions . GTP hydrolysis drives a major conformational rearrangement in dynamin How might dynamin trigger membrane ﬁssion if , under physiological conditions of GTP binding and hydrolysis , it rapidly dissociates from membranes ? To address this ques - tion , we sought evidence for nucleotide - dependent conforma - tional changes in self - assembled dynamin . To this end , we developed an assay that directly monitors dynamin – dynamin interactions in real time ( Ramachandran et al , 2007 ) using WT - dynamin surface labeled with the thiol - reactive deriva - tive of the ﬂuorophore BODIPY - Fl ( hereafter referred to as BODIPY - dynamin ) . Like NBD - dynamin , the basal and assem - bly - stimulated GTPase activities of BODIPY - dynamin , as well as its ability to bind liposomes , were indistinguishable from those of WT - dynamin ( Supplementary Figure 1A – C ) . The close proximity of BODIPY ﬂuorophores upon BODIPY - dynamin self - assembly leads to ﬂuorescence self - quenching ( see Methods ) and provides a direct measure of dynamin – dynamin interactions . Addition of PIP 2 - containing liposomes to BODIPY - dynamin elicited a rapid , saturable decrease in emission intensity , indicating dynamin self - assembly onto the membrane surface ( Figure 4A ) . Consistent with this interpretation , the kinetics of BODIPY - dynamin self - assembly were nearly super - imposable with that of NBD - dynamin – membrane association ( Supplementary Figure 4 ) . Moreover , in control experiments with the lipid binding - defective , BODIPY - labeled Dyn1 - K535A mutant ( Figure 4B ) , or with an assembly - defective Dyn1 mutant ( Ramachandran et al , 2007 ) , no signiﬁcant change in BODIPY emission intensity was observed . These data also provide further evidence that the lipid - binding and assembly properties of the differentially labeled dynamin derivatives ( BODIPY - dynamin versus NBD - dynamin ) are comparable and together demonstrate that dynamin mem - brane binding and self - assembly are tightly coupled . We next used this assay to determine the effects of guanine nucleotides on dynamin self - assembly . Addition of GMPPCP to self - assembled dynamin resulted in the further quenching of BODIPY emission until a new steady state was obtained ( Figure 4A ) . Because no corresponding change in NBD emis - sion intensity was observed under identical conditions ( Figure 3A ) , we interpret this BODIPY emission intensity change to reﬂect a GMPPCP - dependent conformational re - arrangement in self - assembled dynamin that brings adjacent BODIPY ﬂuorophores into closer proximity . Conversely , addition of GDP resulted in the dequenching of BODIPY emission , indicating a slow rate of dynamin disassembly ( Figure 4A ) . Upon addition of GTP , we detected a rapid , transient increase in BODIPY self - quenching that was immediately reversed by a relatively slow dequenching reac - tion . We interpret the initial decrease in emission intensity to reﬂect a transient conformational rearrangement triggered by GTP binding , similar to that seen and stabilized by GMPPCP . Subsequent GTP hydrolysis appears to elicit a major conformational change in membrane - bound , self - assembled dynamin that triggers its disassembly . Figure 3 Guanine nucleotides regulate dynamin – membrane inter - actions . ( A ) Representative time - dependent emission - intensity pro - ﬁles for 0 . 1 m M NBD - dynamin before and after sequential additions ( see arrows ) of 15mol % PIP 2 - containing liposomes ( 30 m M total lipid ) at 3min and the indicated nucleotides ( 1mM ﬁnal ) at 6min ; GMPPCP ( K ) , GDP ( } ) , GTP ( J ) . ( Insets ) Sedimentation analysis of 0 . 5 m M NBD - dynamin after incubation for 20min at 25 1 C with 15mol % PIP 2 - containing liposomes ( 150 m M total lipid ) and the indicated nucleotide ( 1mM ﬁnal ) was performed as described under Methods . The supernatant ( S ) and pellet ( P ) fractions were subjected to SDS – PAGE and visualized by Coomassie blue staining . See Supplementary Figure 3C for quantiﬁcation of data from three independent experiments . ( B ) Representative time - dependent emis - sion - intensity proﬁles for 0 . 1 m M NBD - dynamin were acquired as in ( A ) except that the indicated nucleotides ( 1mM ﬁnal ) now were added before ( at 3min ) the addition of PIP 2 - containing liposomes . Dynamics of dynamin – membrane interactions R Ramachandran and SL Schmid & 2008 European Molecular Biology Organization The EMBO Journal VOL 27 | NO 1 | 2008 31 We tested this interpretation using a mutant dynamin , BODIPY - labeled Dyn1 - S45N , that can bind GDP but not GTP ( Damke et al , 2001 ) . As expected , addition of GMPPCP to pre - assembled BODIPY - labeled Dyn1 - S45N ( BODIPY - Dyn1S45N ) did not elicit any further BODIPY self - quenching ( Figure 4B ) , whereas GDP addition triggered the rapid dis - assembly of BODIPY - Dyn1S45N from the membrane surface . In contrast to the effects on BODIPY - labeled WT - dynamin , addition of GTP failed to elicit a transient increase in BODIPY self - quenching . Instead , we observed a slow rate of BODIPY dequenching , attributable to the small fraction of GDP contaminating our GTP samples . A comparison of the rate of change of NBD and BODIPY emission intensity in pre - assembled dynamin upon addition of GTP revealed that dynamin disassembly was signiﬁcantly slower ( k ¼ 1 . 0 7 0 . 1min (cid:2) 1 ) than dynamin – membrane disso - ciation ( k ¼ 2 . 2 7 0 . 1min (cid:2) 1 ) . This temporal relationship in - dicates that dynamin dissociates from the membrane as partial assemblies rather than as individual subunits and suggests that dynamin – membrane dissociation is not a direct consequence of a loss of avidity but rather reﬂects a con - formational change that reduces dynamin’s afﬁnity for the membrane . Unexpectedly , there was no lag in membrane dissociation during the initial GTP hydrolysis - dependent con - formational rearrangement that precedes dynamin disassem - bly ( Figure 4B ) . This suggests that , as has been observed by others ( Danino et al , 2004 ) , after a concerted conformational rearrangement , dynamin dissociates from the ends of as - sembled spirals very rapidly , whereas the internal rungs of a spiral retain the GTP - dependent conformation and disassemble more slowly . SNX9 and AmphI differentially affect dynamin – membrane interactions How might this putative nucleotide - dependent , mechano - chemical conformational change be coupled to the under - lying membrane to accomplish ﬁssion ? During clathrin - mediated endocytosis , dynamin interacts and functions in concert with numerous SH3 domain - containing proteins , including major binding partners , sorting nexin 9 ( SNX9 ) and amphiphysin I ( AmphI ) ( David et al , 1996 ; Takei et al , 1999 ; Lundmark and Carlsson , 2004 ; Soulet et al , 2005 ) . SNX9 and AmphI both bind clathrin and AP - 2 and have been implicated in the targeted recruitment of dynamin to coated pits at the plasma membrane ( McMahon et al , 1997 ; Slepnev et al , 2000 ; Soulet et al , 2005 ) . Both possess a lipid - binding , triple - helical BAR ( Bin / amphiphysin / Rvs ) domain that may sense membrane curvature ( Peter et al , 2004 ) . In addition , SNX9 contains a phox homology ( PX ) domain that speciﬁcally binds to membrane phosphoinositides ( Pylypenko et al , 2007 ; Yarar et al , 2007 ) . In vitro studies have suggested that SNX9 enhances both dynamin’s basal and stimulated GTPase activities by promoting its self - assem - bly in solution and onto liposomes , respectively ( Soulet et al , 2005 ) . Results with AmphI have been more ambiguous . AmphI has been shown to either inhibit or stimulate dyna - min’s GTPase activity depending on bilayer curvature ( Yoshida et al , 2004 ; Soulet et al , 2005 ) . It has also been shown in EM studies to couple dynamin assembly to clathrin lattices and , in light scattering studies , to enhance dynamin - dependent ﬁssion of model liposomes ( Takei et al , 1999 ) . We ﬁrst explored the effects of SNX9 on dynamin – mem - brane interactions . Addition of an equimolar amount of SNX9 to NBD - dynamin pre - incubated with PIP 2 - containing lipo - somes under subsaturating conditions resulted in an increase in the recruitment of dynamin to the membrane reaching near - saturable levels ( Figure 5A , open circles ) . In the alter - nate order , addition of PIP 2 - containing liposomes to an equimolar mixture of SNX9 and NBD - dynamin again resulted Figure 4 GTP hydrolysis triggers a major conformational rearran - gement in membrane - associated dynamin . ( A ) Representative time - dependent emission - intensity proﬁles for 0 . 1 m M BODIPY - dynamin upon sequential additions of 15mol % PIP 2 - containing liposomes ( 30 m M total lipid ) at 3min and the indicated nucleotides ( 1mM ﬁnal ) at 6min . ( B ) Same as in ( A ) except using 0 . 1 m M of either the lipid binding - defective BODIPY - DynK535A ( only liposomes were added ) or BODIPY - Dyn1S45N , a dynamin mutant defective in GTP binding . ( C ) Direct comparison of the rate of dynamin – membrane dissociation and the rate of dynamin disassembly . Proﬁles for NBD emission - intensity decrease ( dynamin – membrane dissociation ; Figure 3A ) and BODIPY emission - intensity increase ( dynamin dis - assembly ; ( A ) ) upon addition of 1mM GTP were normalized and plotted as the total fractional intensity change as a function of time as in Figure 2C . Rate constants for dynamin – membrane dissociation and dynamin disassembly were determined as described in Supplementary data . Dynamics of dynamin – membrane interactions R Ramachandran and SL Schmid The EMBO Journal VOL 27 | NO 1 | 2008 & 2008 European Molecular Biology Organization 32 in the enhanced recruitment of NBD - dynamin to the membrane ( Figure 5A , closed circles ) . Neither the SNX9 - D SH3 truncation mutant nor the SNX9 - SH3 domain alone enhanced dynamin membrane recruit - ment ( Figure 5B ) . Indeed , SNX9 - D SH3 competed with NBD - dynamin for membrane binding even at vast membrane excess ( protein - to - lipid ratio of 1 : 150 ) . Thus , both SNX9 SH3 domain - dynamin PRD interactions and the SNX9 BAR / PX domains are required to enhance dynamin self - assembly and membrane binding . To further explore the contributions of the PX and BAR domains to this activity , we tested SNX9 PX - domain ( RYK mutant ) or BAR - domain ( mutBAR2 ) mu - tants defective in SNX9 – liposome interactions ( Yarar et al , 2007 ) . Whereas either mutant alone did not appreciably affect SNX9’s ability to stabilize dynamin – membrane inter - actions ( Figure 5C ) , the double mutant defective in both PX and BAR - domain functions ( RYK - mutBAR2 mutant ) exhibited signiﬁcant impairment in this activity ( Figure 5C ) . These data , taken together , indicated that SNX9 synergistically enhances dynamin recruitment onto a target membrane sur - face via cooperative PH / PX / BAR domain – membrane inter - actions and also by promoting dynamin self - assembly . We next examined whether SNX9 could stabilize dyna - min – membrane interactions during GTP hydrolysis . The pre - sence of equimolar SNX9 transiently stabilized pre - assembled NBD - dynamin on liposomes following addition of GTP , resulting in a detectable lag ( B 30s ) that preceded GTP hydrolysis - triggered dynamin – membrane dissociation ( Figure 5A and D ) . Moreover , in the presence of SNX9 , the rate of dynamin – membrane dissociation at the onset of stimulated GTP hydrolysis was slower ( k ¼ 0 . 4 7 0 . 1min (cid:2) 1 ) than that of dynamin by itself ( k ¼ 1 . 3 7 0 . 3min (cid:2) 1 ) ( Figure 5D ) . The lag preceding dynamin – membrane dissocia - tion in the presence of SNX9 was speciﬁc for GTP and not GDP ( Figure 5E ) , suggesting that SNX9 preferentially stabi - lizes dynamin on the membrane in the GTP - bound state , while also simultaneously stimulating dynamin’s assembly - dependent GTPase activity ( Soulet et al , 2005 ) . In this way , SNX9 could localize and couple dynamin’s putative GTP hydrolysis - dependent mechanochemical conformational changes to the underlying membrane . In stark contrast to SNX9 , addition of an equimolar amount of AmphI to pre - assembled NBD - dynamin on PIP 2 - containing liposomes resulted in the rapid dissociation of dynamin before a new steady state was obtained ( Figure 6 ) . A similar lower steady state was obtained when liposomes were added to an equimolar mixture of AmphI and NBD - dynamin pre - incubated in solution ( Figure 6 ) . Subsequent addition of GTP resulted in the further dissociation of dynamin from the membrane surface , reaching a new , very low steady state of dynamin – membrane binding ( Figure 6 ) . Thus , despite their structural similarity , SNX9 and AmphI either stabilize or destabilize dynamin – membrane interactions , respectively . Together , these data emphasize the speciﬁcity of SNX9 in Figure 5 SNX9 stabilizes dynamin – membrane interactions . ( A ) Representative time - dependent emission - intensity proﬁles for 0 . 05 m M NBD - dynamin before and after sequential additions ( arrows ) of 15mol % PIP 2 - containing liposomes ( 15 m M total lipid ) and 0 . 05 m M SNX9 ( J ) or vice versa ( K ) , and upon addition of GTP ( 1mM ﬁnal ; arrow ) . ( B ) SNX9 SH3 domain is necessary but not sufﬁcient for enhanced dynamin – membrane recruitment . Experiments were performed as in ( A ) , except using the SNX9 SH3 domain alone or the SNX9 D SH3 truncation mutant as indicated . ( C ) Both PX and BAR domains are required for SNX9 - mediated stabilization of dynamin – membrane interactions . Same as in ( A ) except that SNX9 mutants defective either in PX domain ( RYK ; & ) or BAR domain ( mutBAR2 ; } ) functions or both ( RYK - mutBAR2 ; J ) as described by Yarar et al ( 2007 ) were used and compared to WT SNX9 ( K ) . For these experiments , 0 . 4 m m diameter liposomes containing 62 . 5mol % DOPC , 15mol % DOPE , 15mol % DOPS and 7 . 5mol % PIP 2 were used . ( D , E ) . To directly compare the rates of dynamin – membrane dissociation upon addition of either GTP ( D ) or GDP ( E ) in the presence or absence of SNX9 , each intensity proﬁle was normalized and plotted as the total fractional intensity change as a function of time as in Figure 2C . Rate constants for dissociation in the presence of GTP ( D ) or GDP ( E ) in the presence or absence of SNX9 were determined as described under Supplementary data . Dynamics of dynamin – membrane interactions R Ramachandran and SL Schmid & 2008 European Molecular Biology Organization The EMBO Journal VOL 27 | NO 1 | 2008 33 coupling dynamin’s mechanochemical activities to the membrane . Discussion We have developed and employed new ﬂuorescence spectro - scopic assays that monitor dynamin – membrane and dynamin – dynamin interactions in real time , providing good temporal resolution and a sensitivity level amenable for simple quantitative measurements . Our results provide several new insights into dynamin function and into how cycles of GTP binding and hydrolysis might be coupled to membrane destabilization and ﬁssion . Speciﬁcally , we show that ( 1 ) dynamin interacts stably with PIP 2 - containing mem - branes by inserting partially into the lipid bilayer , ( 2 ) associa - tion of dynamin with these membranes is highly dependent on PIP 2 spatial density , ( 3 ) dynamin interacts preferentially with highly curved membranes consistent with its mechan - ochemical role at the necks of deeply invaginated coated pits in vivo , ( 4 ) dynamin exhibits a higher afﬁnity for the target membrane in the GTP - bound state than in the GDP - bound state ; the switch from a GTP - bound to a GDP - bound conformation upon GTP hydrolysis appears to determine dynamin – membrane association and dissociation , respec - tively , ( 5 ) dynamin – membrane dissociation occurs faster than dynamin disassembly , suggesting that dynamin dissoci - ates from the membrane as partial assemblies rather than as completely unassembled subunits , ( 6 ) GTP hydrolysis elicits a major conformational rearrangement in self - assembled dynamin that immediately precedes its disassembly , and ( 7 ) whereas SNX9 transiently stabilizes dynamin – membrane association , presumably localizing dynamin’s mechano - chemical conformational rearrangements to the underlying membrane , AmphI has the opposite effect . Multiple lines of evidence suggest that dynamin functions at both early and late stages of endocytosis ( Narayanan et al , 2005 ; Macia et al , 2006 ) . Indeed , most dominant - negative mutants of dynamin , including RCL - Dyn I533c , block early , rate - limiting stages of clathrin - mediated endocytosis before dynamin self - assembly and the formation of constricted coated pits ( Damke et al , 2001 ) . Herein , we focus ex - clusively on dynamin activities ( lipid binding , self - assembly , assembly - stimulated GTPase activity and dynamin – effector interactions ) required for late events in endocytosis . For each of these activities , NBD - dynamin ( RCL - Dyn I533C - NBD ) and BODIPY - dynamin are demonstrably equivalent to unlabeled WT - dynamin and to each other . Moreover , both NBD - and BODIPY - dynamins are similarly regulated by guanine nucleo - tides , and the differential effects of SNX9 and AmphI on NBD - dynamin – membrane interactions are consistent with their effects on WT - dynamin self - assembly and assembly - stimu - lated GTPase activities ( Owen et al , 1998 ; Soulet et al , 2005 ) . Therefore , although there are clearly other aspects of dynamin function required for clathrin - mediated endocytosis in vivo , these dynamin derivates appear to retain and faith - fully report the membrane - associated mechanochemical properties of dynamin studied here . Previous studies that examined dynamin association with lipid monolayers had suggested that dynamin is a membrane - active molecule capable of inserting a large surface area into the acyl chain region of a membrane monolayer ( Burger et al , 2000 ) . Using spin - labeled lipids and collisional quenching of ﬂuorescence , we have identiﬁed the relatively hydrophobic VL1 of the PH domain of dynamin , previously implicated in PIP 2 headgroup recognition , as one region of dynamin that inserts partially into the hydrophobic core of a membrane bilayer . Thus , similar to the N - terminal amphipathic helix of Arf family GTPases that insert partially into one leaﬂet of a bilayer ( Antonny , 2006 ) , the PH domains of a self - assembled dynamin polymer may act as ‘wedges’ or ‘footprints’ that asymmetrically expand one leaﬂet of a membrane bilayer against the other , ultimately bending the membrane . The sensitivity of dynamin – membrane interactions to PIP 2 concentration and the sigmoidal dependence of this inter - action on PIP 2 spatial density possibly reﬂects a ‘reduction of dimensionality effect’ ( Mosior and McLaughlin , 1992 ) in which the low - afﬁnity binding of a single PH domain in a dynamin tetramer to the ﬁrst PIP 2 molecule increases the proximity of the rest of the PH domains to nearby PIP 2 molecules , leading to cooperative , high - avidity membrane association . Similar mechanisms have been described for the N - WASP B - motif and the MARCKS peptide ( Wang et al , 2001 ; Papayannopoulos et al , 2005 ) . Signiﬁcant association of dynamin only with liposomes that contain X 5 mol % PIP 2 , under our in vitro conditions , also suggests that high local concentrations of PIP 2 generated during clathrin - mediated endocytosis may play a role in dynamin stabilization in vivo . Dynamin preferentially associated with more highly curved membranes in vitro , consistent with previous studies that have demonstrated a higher assembly - stimulated GTPase activity for dynamin on small versus large liposomes ( Yoshida et al , 2004 ) . Collectively , these data suggest that dynamin must overcome a larger thermodynamic barrier in bending and deforming the relatively ﬂatter membrane of a large liposome for efﬁcient self - assembly when compared to smaller liposomes with higher intrinsic curvature . In the physiological context , generation of highly curved coated pit necks by polymerizing clathrin lattices and accessory molecules ( Ford et al , 2002 ) may overcome this energy barrier required for efﬁcient dynamin self - assembly . Consistent with this notion , the burst of dynamin self - assem - bly observed at endocytic sites by TIRF microscopy ( Merriﬁeld et al , 2002 ) may reﬂect a preferential redistribu - tion of dynamin , initially recruited to the clathrin lattice Figure 6 Amphiphysin destabilizes dynamin – membrane interac - tions . Representative time - dependent emission - intensity proﬁles for 0 . 05 m M NBD - dynamin before and after sequential additions of 15mol % PIP 2 - containing liposomes ( 15 m M total lipid ) and 0 . 05 m M AmphI ( J ) or vice versa ( K ) , and upon addition of GTP ( 1mM ﬁnal ) . Dynamics of dynamin – membrane interactions R Ramachandran and SL Schmid The EMBO Journal VOL 27 | NO 1 | 2008 & 2008 European Molecular Biology Organization 34 through SH3 domain interactions , to sites of high lipid curvature , that is , coated pit necks , during the late stages of coated vesicle formation . The differential effects of GMPPCP , GTP and GDP on dynamin – membrane interactions indicate that , during GTP binding and hydrolysis , dynamin cycles through distinct conformations that progressively strengthen and weaken its interaction with the membrane . The weakened dynamin – membrane interactions of the GDP - bound versus the nucleo - tide - free state suggests that GDP - dependent conformational changes in the GTPase domain , however minor ( Niemann et al , 2001 ) , are ampliﬁed and relayed to the PH domain to effect dynamin – membrane dissociation . Thus , our data suggest that the dynamin GTPase and PH domains , although spatially separated , are conformationally coupled . Consistent with this , ﬂuorescence studies of dynamin in solution have detected nucleotide - dependent changes in PH domain con - formation using intrinsic Trp emission intensity ( Solomaha and Palfrey , 2005 ) . Atomic resolution structures of full - length dynamin under various nucleotide - bound states will be re - quired to elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying this long - range conformational relay . Our kinetic experiments with NBD - and BODIPY - labeled dynamins demonstrate that GTP hydrolysis elicits a major conformational rearrangement in self - assembled dynamin , before triggering disassembly . Here , we show that SNX9 , a major dynamin binding partner ( Lundmark and Carlsson , 2004 ; Soulet et al , 2005 ) , stabilizes membrane - associated dynamin during stimulated GTP hydrolysis ( Soulet et al , 2005 ) . Thus , SNX9 may function as a downstream effector that helps transduce the free energy of dynamin GTP hydro - lysis toward membrane destabilization events that are required for ﬁssion . Takei et al ( 1999 ) reported a progressive reduction in the light scattering of dynamin - coated liposomes upon sequential addition of AmphI and GTP and suggested that AmphI enhances GTP - dependent fragmentation of dynamin - coated liposomes . However , our ﬂuorescence - based data demon - strating dynamin – membrane dissociation upon sequential additions of AmphI and GTP suggest an alternate interpreta - tion : that the observed changes in light scattering , in part , reﬂect protein dissociation from the membrane . Taken together , our dynamic measurements of dynamin – membrane and dynamin – dynamin interactions suggest that the mechanism ( s ) of dynamin - mediated membrane ﬁssion involve a combination of partial membrane penetration , membrane tubule constriction and stabilization of GTP - de - pendent mechanochemical conformational changes on the membrane by effectors that regulate dynamin function . We propose that transient bilayer destabilization as a result of these conformational changes and the rapid dissociation of self - assembled dynamin from the membrane upon GTP hydrolysis may ultimately trigger membrane ﬁssion . Materials and methods Preparation of RCL - Dyn I533C cDNA encoding human WT - Dyn1 subcloned in pBluescript II KS þ ( Stratagene ) was used as the template for PCR - based mutagenesis using the Quikchange method ( Stratagene ) . All mutations were conﬁrmed by automated DNA sequencing . The Bam HI – Stu I fragment carrying the I533C mutation , along with Cys to Ser substitutions at residue positions 86 , 424 , 427 , 442 and 607 , was then used to replace the corresponding fragment of Cys - less - Dyn1 cDNA subcloned previously in pVL1393 ( AB Vector ) . Recombinant baculoviruses harboring this cDNA construct were generated , and RCL - Dyn I533C was expressed in infected Tn5 insect cells , puriﬁed and stored as described previously ( Leonard et al , 2005 ; Ramachan - dran et al , 2007 ) , except that no DTT and only 10 % ( v / v ) glycerol was used in the storage buffer . Protein concentration was determined by absorbance at 280nm using a molar absorptivity coefﬁcient ( e 280 ) of 58790M (cid:2) 1 cm (cid:2) 1 . Preparation of AmphI and SNX9 GST - tagged human amphiphysin I ( GST - AmphI ) ( gift of Pietro De Camilli , Yale University ) was expressed in Escherichia coli BL21 ( DE3 ) and puriﬁed using glutathione – sepharose according to standard procedures . SNX9 and SNX9 mutants were prepared as described previously ( Soulet et al , 2005 ; Yarar et al , 2007 ) . Preparation of NBD - and BODIPY - dynamins Cys at position 533 in RCL - Dyn I533C was selectively labeled in the absence of reducing agent with NBD using N , N 0 - dimethyl - N - ( iodoacetyl ) - N 0 - ( 7 - nitrobenz - 2 - oxa - 1 , 3 - diazol - 4 - yl ) ethylenediamine ( Invitrogen ) dissolved in DMSO , which was added at an equimolar ratio ( to avoid modiﬁcation of the partially buried native Cys at position 169 ) to about 15 m M of RCL - Dyn I533C in a ﬁnal reaction volume of 500 m l . After 1h at room temperature , DTTwas added to 5mM to stop the reaction . The mixture was then extensively dialyzed against buffer containing 20mM HEPES , pH 7 . 5 , 150mM KCl and 1mM DTT to separate NBD - dynamin from the dye - DTT adduct . After high - speed ultracentrifugation ( 100000 g ) to discard any precipitated protein , the efﬁciency of labeling was determined to be 30 – 60 % using a molar absorptivity coefﬁcient of 25000M (cid:2) 1 cm (cid:2) 1 at 478nm for NBD . NBD - dynamin was stored on ice and used within a week of production . NBD - labeling of Dyn - RCL S306C was performed and puriﬁed using similar procedures . For BODIPY - labeled dynamin derivatives , Dyn1 - WT , Dyn1 - S45N or Dyn1 - K535Awas labeled with a tenfold molar excess of the thiol - reactive iodoacetamide derivative of BODIPY - Fl ( Invitrogen ) and puriﬁed as described earlier ( Ramachandran et al , 2007 ) . The efﬁciency of labeling was determined using molar absorptivity coefﬁcients of 58790M (cid:2) 1 cm (cid:2) 1 at 280nm and 76000M (cid:2) 1 cm (cid:2) 1 at 502nm for dynamin and BODIPY , respectively The typical labeling efﬁciency was 1 : 1 ( one mole of BODIPYper mole of dynamin ) . Self - quenching of BODIPY dyes occurs by the formation of non - ﬂuorescent , ground - state dark dimers and homo - FRET from neighboring , unquenched BODIPY molecules ( Bergstrom et al , 2002 ) . Preparation of liposomes All phospholipids were purchased from Avanti Polar Lipids Inc . Liposomes were generated according to procedures described previously ( Ramachandran et al , 2007 ) . Unless otherwise stated , 0 . 1 m m diameter liposomes were used . Brieﬂy , liposomes containing either 100mol % 1 , 2 - dioleoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phosphocholine ( DOPC ; Avanti polar lipids ) or a mixture of DOPC and porcine PIP 2 at the different mole percentages ( mol % ) indicated were prepared by extrusion through polycarbonate membranes of varying pore diameters as mentioned . Liposomes used in lipophilic quenching experiments were prepared using DOPC and PIP 2 ( 15mol % ) in the same way , except that 10mol % of the DOPC was replaced by a nitroxide - labeled phospholipid , either 1 - palmitoyl - 2 - stearoyl - ( x - doxyl ) - sn - glycero - 3 - phospholipid ( x is equal to 5 or 12 and refers to the carbon position in the acyl chain to which the quencher moiety is attached ) or 1 , 2 - dioleoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phosphotempocho - line ( where the nitroxide is positioned on the phospholipid headgroup ) . Fluorescence spectroscopy Unless otherwise indicated , all intensity measurements shown were carried out with 0 . 1 m M NBD - or BODIPY - dynamin in buffer containing 20mM HEPES , pH 7 . 5 , 150mM KCl and 1mM MgCl 2 at 25 1 C using the instrumentation described earlier ( Ramachandran et al , 2007 ) . Increasing Mg 2 þ concentration in the buffer resulted in the reduced initial binding of dynamin to PIP 2 - containing liposomes ( Toner et al , 1988 ) . For the sub - saturable binding of dynamin to PIP 2 - containing liposomes in experiments that included SNX9 and AmphI , 0 . 05 m M dynamin and 2mM MgCl 2 ﬁnal concentrations were used . In experiments performed with the GTP regenerating Dynamics of dynamin – membrane interactions R Ramachandran and SL Schmid & 2008 European Molecular Biology Organization The EMBO Journal VOL 27 | NO 1 | 2008 35 system , the ﬁnal MgCl 2 concentration was 5mM ( Ingerman et al , 2005 ; Ramachandran et al , 2007 ) . The ﬁnal nucleotide concentra - tion in all relevant experiments was 1mM . For time - dependent emission intensity and spectral measure - ments ( 2 . 4ml ﬁnal volume ) 1cm (cid:3) 1cm quartz cuvettes were used , whereas for end - point measurements ( 260 m l ﬁnal volume ) 4mm (cid:3) 4mm quartz cuvettes were used . For the acquisition of NBD emission spectra , the dye was excited at 470nm ( 4 - nm bandpass ) and emission intensity was measured between 500 and 600nm ( 4 - nm bandpass ) . For end - point measurements , NBD - dynamin was excited at 470nm ( 4 - nm bandpass ) and emission intensity was measured at 530nm ( 4 - nm bandpass ) to establish F 0 . Liposomes were then added to these samples and incubated for 10min to allow saturable binding before the ﬁnal intensity value , F , was measured . For the acquisition of time - dependent emission - intensity proﬁles , samples containing either NBD - dynamin or BODIPY - dynamin were continuously stirred and temperature - equilibrated before and during data acquisition . Data collection was begun and recorded at 15s intervals ( 5s signal integration ) . NBD was excited at 470nm ( 4 - nm bandpass ) and emission was monitored at 530nm ( 4 - nm bandpass ) . BODIPY was excited at 490nm ( 2 - nm bandpass ) and emission was monitored at 510nm ( 2 - nm bandpass ) . After the initial intensity baseline was obtained , at the time points indicated , either nucleotide ( 1mM ﬁnal ) or PIP 2 - containing liposomes ( 1 : 300 molar ratio of protein to lipid ) were added to the sample . To obtain rate constants , data were ﬁt using either Kaleidagraph or Graphpad prism data analysis software as described in Supplementary data . GTPase and sedimentation assays All nucleotides were purchased from Sigma Inc . Basal and assembly - stimulated GTP hydrolysis rates of NBD - , BODIPY - and WT - dynamins were monitored as a function of time using a malachite green - based colorimetric assay as described previously ( Leonard et al , 2005 ) . Dynamin was separated into liposome - bound ( pellet , P ) and soluble ( supernatant , S ) fractions by high - speed centrifugation also as described earlier ( Ramachandran et al , 2007 ) . Supplementary data Supplementary data are available at The EMBO Journal Online ( http : / / www . embojournal . org ) . Acknowledgements We thank Quint Le Duc for early experiments , Drs Mark Surka and Defne Yarar for providing SNX9 , Sharmista Acharya , Vasyl Lukiyanchuk and Marilyn Leonard for excellent technical assistance and Schmid lab members for critical comments . This work was supported by NIH Grants R01 . GM42455 and R37 . MH61345 to SLS and an American Heart Association postdoctoral fellowship ( AHA 0625090Y ) to RR . This is TSRI manuscript no . 19086 . References Achiriloaie M , Barylko B , Albanesi JP ( 1999 ) Essential role of the dynamin pleckstrin homology domain in receptor - mediated endocytosis . Mol Cell Biol 19 : 1410 – 1415 Antonny B ( 2006 ) Membrane deformation by protein coats . Curr Opin Cell Biol 18 : 386 – 394 Artalejo CR , Lemmon MA , Schlessinger J , Palfrey HC ( 1997 ) Speciﬁc role for the PH domain of dynamin - 1 in the regulation of rapid endocytosis in adrenal chromafﬁn cells . EMBO J 16 : 1565 – 1574 Bergstrom F , Mikhalyov I , Hagglof P , Wortmann R , Ny T , Johansson LB ( 2002 ) Dimers of dipyrrometheneboron diﬂuoride ( BODIPY ) with light spectroscopic applications in chemistry and biology . J Am Chem Soc 124 : 196 – 204 Binns DD , Barylko B , Grichine N , Atkinson MA , Helms MK , Jameson DM , Eccleston JF , Albanesi JP ( 1999 ) Correlation be - tween self - association modes and GTPase activation of dynamin . J Protein Chem 18 : 277 – 290 Burger KN , Demel RA , Schmid SL , de Kruijff B ( 2000 ) Dynamin is membrane - active : lipid insertion is induced by phosphoinositides and phosphatidic acid . Biochemistry 39 : 12485 – 12493 Chen YJ , Zhang P , Egelman EH , Hinshaw JE ( 2004 ) The stalk region of dynamin drives the constriction of dynamin tubes . Nat Struct Mol Biol 11 : 574 – 575 Conner SD , Schmid SL ( 2003 ) Regulated portals of entry into the cell . Nature 422 : 37 – 44 Damke H , Binns DD , Ueda H , Schmid SL , Baba T ( 2001 ) Dynamin GTPase domain mutants block endocytic vesicle formation at morphologically distinct stages . Mol Biol Cell 12 : 2578 – 2589 Danino D , Moon KH , Hinshaw JE ( 2004 ) Rapid constriction of lipid bilayers by the mechanochemical enzyme dynamin . J Struct Biol 147 : 259 – 267 David C , McPherson PS , Mundigl O , de Camilli P ( 1996 ) A role of amphiphysin in synaptic vesicle endocytosis suggested by its binding to dynamin in nerve terminals . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93 : 331 – 335 Ford MG , Mills IG , Peter BJ , Vallis Y , Praefcke GJ , Evans PR , McMahon HT ( 2002 ) Curvature of clathrin - coated pits driven by epsin . Nature 419 : 361 – 366 Hinshaw JE ( 2000 ) Dynamin and its role in membrane ﬁssion . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 16 : 483 – 519 Ingerman E , Perkins EM , Marino M , Mears JA , McCaffery JM , Hinshaw JE , Nunnari J ( 2005 ) Dnm1 forms spirals that are structurally tailored to ﬁt mitochondria . J Cell Biol 170 : 1021 – 1027 Johnson AE ( 2005 ) Fluorescence approaches for determining pro - tein conformations , interactions and mechanisms at membranes . Trafﬁc 6 : 1078 – 1092 Lee A , Frank DW , Marks MS , Lemmon MA ( 1999 ) Dominant - negative inhibition of receptor - mediated endocytosis by a dyna - min - 1 mutant with a defective pleckstrin homology domain . Curr Biol 9 : 261 – 264 Leonard M , Song BD , Ramachandran R , Schmid SL ( 2005 ) Robust colorimetric assays for dynamin’s basal and stimulated GTPase activities . Methods Enzymol 404 : 490 – 503 Lundmark R , Carlsson SR ( 2004 ) Regulated membrane recruitment of dynamin - 2 mediated by sorting nexin 9 . J Biol Chem 279 : 42694 – 42702 Macia E , Ehrlich M , Massol T , Boucrot E , Brunner C , Kirchhausen T ( 2006 ) Dynasore , a cell permeable inhibitor of dynamin . Dev Cell 10 : 839 – 850 McMahon HT , Gallop JL ( 2005 ) Membrane curvature and mechan - isms of dynamic cell membrane remodelling . Nature 438 : 590 – 596 McMahon HT , Wigge P , Smith C ( 1997 ) Clathrin interacts speciﬁ - cally with amphiphysin and is displaced by dynamin . FEBS Lett 413 : 319 – 322 Merriﬁeld CJ , Feldman ME , Wan L , Almers W ( 2002 ) Imaging actin and dynamin recruitment during invagination of single clathrin - coated pits . Nat Cell Biol 4 : 691 – 698 Mosior M , McLaughlin S ( 1992 ) Electrostatics and reduction of dimensionality produce apparent cooperativity when basic pep - tides bind to acidic lipids in membranes . Biochim Biophys Acta 1105 : 185 – 187 Narayanan R , Leonard M , Song BD , Schmid SL , Ramaswami M ( 2005 ) An internal GAP domain negatively regulates presynaptic dynamin in vivo : a two - step model for dynamin function . J Cell Biol 169 : 117 – 126 Niemann HH , Knetsch ML , Scherer A , Manstein DJ , Kull FJ ( 2001 ) Crystal structure of a dynamin GTPase domain in both nucleo - tide - free and GDP - bound forms . EMBO J 20 : 5813 – 5821 Okamoto PM , Herskovits JS , Vallee RB ( 1997 ) Role of the basic , proline - rich region of dynamin in Src homology 3 domain binding and endocytosis . J Biol Chem 272 : 11629 – 11635 Owen DJ , Wigge P , Vallis Y , Moore JD , Evans PR , McMahon HT ( 1998 ) Crystal structure of the amphiphysin - 2 SH3 domain and its role in the prevention of dynamin ring formation . EMBO J 17 : 5273 – 5285 Papayannopoulos V , Co C , Prehoda KE , Snapper S , Taunton J , Lim WA ( 2005 ) A polybasic motif allows N - WASP to act as a sensor of PIP ( 2 ) density . Mol Cell 17 : 181 – 191 Peter BJ , Kent HM , Mills IG , Vallis Y , Butler PJ , Evans PR , McMahon HT ( 2004 ) BAR domains as sensors of membrane curvature : the amphiphysin BAR structure . Science 303 : 495 – 499 Dynamics of dynamin – membrane interactions R Ramachandran and SL Schmid The EMBO Journal VOL 27 | NO 1 | 2008 & 2008 European Molecular Biology Organization 36 Pylypenko O , Lundmark R , Rasmuson E , Carlsson SR , Rak A ( 2007 ) The PX - BAR membrane - remodeling unit of sorting nexin 9 . EMBO J 26 : 4788 – 4800 Ramachandran R , Heuck AP , Tweten RK , Johnson AE ( 2002 ) Structural insights into the membrane - anchoring mechanism of a cholesterol - dependent cytolysin . Nat Struct Biol 9 : 823 – 827 Ramachandran R , Surka M , Chappie JS , Fowler DM , Foss TR , Song BD , Schmid SL ( 2007 ) The dynamin middle domain is critical for tetramerization and higher - order self - assembly . EMBO J 26 : 559 – 566 Ramachandran R , Tweten RK , Johnson AE ( 2004 ) Membrane - de - pendent conformational changes initiate cholesterol - dependent cytolysin oligomerization and intersubunit beta - strand align - ment . Nat Struct Mol Biol 11 : 697 – 705 Ramachandran R , Tweten RK , Johnson AE ( 2005 ) The domains of a cholesterol - dependent cytolysin undergo a major FRET - detected rearrangement during pore formation . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102 : 7139 – 7144 Roux A , Uyhazi K , Frost A , De Camilli P ( 2006 ) GTP - dependent twisting of dynamin implicates constriction and tension in mem - brane ﬁssion . Nature 441 : 528 – 531 Salim K , Bottomley MJ , Querfurth E , Zvelebil MJ , Gout I , Scaife R , Margolis RL , Gigg R , Smith CI , Driscoll PC , Waterﬁeld MD , Panayotou G ( 1996 ) Distinct speciﬁcity in the recognition of phosphoinositides by the pleckstrin homology domains of dyna - min and Bruton’s tyrosine kinase . EMBO J 15 : 6241 – 6250 Sever S , Muhlberg AB , Schmid SL ( 1999 ) Impairment of dynamin’s GAP domain stimulates receptor - mediated endocytosis . Nature 398 : 481 – 486 Shatursky O , Heuck AP , Shepard LA , Rossjohn J , Parker MW , Johnson AE , Tweten RK ( 1999 ) The mechanism of membrane insertion for a cholesterol - dependent cytolysin : a novel paradigm for pore - forming toxins . Cell 99 : 293 – 299 Shpetner HS , Herskovits JS , Vallee RB ( 1996 ) A binding site for SH3 domains targets dynamin to coated pits . J Biol Chem 271 : 13 – 16 Slepnev VI , Ochoa GC , Butler MH , De Camilli P ( 2000 ) Tandem arrangement of the clathrin and AP - 2 binding domains in amphi - physin 1 and disruption of clathrin coat function by amphiphysin fragments comprising these sites . J Biol Chem 275 : 17583 – 17589 Solomaha E , Palfrey HC ( 2005 ) Conformational changes in dynamin on GTP binding and oligomerization reported by intrinsic and extrinsic ﬂuorescence . Biochem J 391 : 601 – 611 Song BD , Yarar D , Schmid SL ( 2004 ) An assembly - incompetent mutant establishes a requirement for dynamin self - assembly in clathrin - mediated endocytosis in vivo . Mol Biol Cell 15 : 2243 – 2252 Soulet F , Yarar D , Leonard M , Schmid SL ( 2005 ) SNX9 regulates dynamin assembly and is required for efﬁcient clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Mol Biol Cell 16 : 1058 – 2067 Stowell MH , Marks B , Wigge P , McMahon HT ( 1999 ) Nucleotide - dependent conformational changes in dynamin : evidence for a mechanochemical molecular spring . Nat Cell Biol 1 : 27 – 32 Sweitzer SM , Hinshaw JE ( 1998 ) Dynamin undergoes a GTP - dependent conformational change causing vesiculation . Cell 93 : 1021 – 1029 Takei K , Slepnev VI , Haucke V , De Camilli P ( 1999 ) Functional partnership between amphiphysin and dynamin in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat Cell Biol 1 : 33 – 39 Toner M , Vaio G , McLaughlin A , McLaughlin S ( 1988 ) Adsorption of cations to phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate . Biochemistry 27 : 7435 – 7443 Vallis Y , Wigge P , Marks B , Evans PR , McMahon HT ( 1999 ) Importance of the pleckstrin homology domain of dynamin in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Curr Biol 9 : 257 – 260 Wang G , Moniri NH , Ozawa K , Stamler JS , Daaka Y ( 2006 ) Nitric oxide regulates endocytosis by S - nitrosylation of dynamin . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103 : 1295 – 1300 Wang J , Arbuzova A , Hangyas - Mihalyne G , McLaughlin S ( 2001 ) The effector domain of myristoylated alanine - rich C kinase sub - strate binds strongly to phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate . J Biol Chem 276 : 5012 – 5019 Yarar D , Surka MC , Leonard MC , Schmid SL ( 2007 ) SNX9 activities are regulated by multiple phosphoinositides through the PX and BAR domains . Trafﬁc 8 ( e - pub ahead of print ; doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1600 - 0854 . 2007 . 00675 . x ) Yoshida Y , Kinuta M , Abe T , Liang S , Araki K , Cremona O , Di Paolo G , Moriyama Y , Yasuda T , De Camilli P , Takei K ( 2004 ) The stimulatory action of amphiphysin on dynamin function is de - pendent on lipid bilayer curvature . EMBO J 23 : 3483 – 3491 Zhang P , Hinshaw JE ( 2001 ) Three - dimensional reconstruction of dynamin in the constricted state . Nat Cell Biol 3 : 922 – 926 Zheng J , Cahill SM , Lemmon MA , Fushman D , Schlessinger J , Cowburn D ( 1996 ) Identiﬁcation of the binding site for acidic phospholipids on the pH domain of dynamin : implications for stimulation of GTPase activity . J Mol Biol 255 : 14 – 21 Dynamics of dynamin – membrane interactions R Ramachandran and SL Schmid & 2008 European Molecular Biology Organization The EMBO Journal VOL 27 | NO 1 | 2008 37