recognize them as such . Potentially , this confusion could result in the failure to pursue scientifically based perceptual / cognitive hypotheses . One example of such a ` perceptual change ' hypothesis is my suggestion ( Hollis 1982 ) that the mechanism underlying enhanced prey capture may be isomorphic with the associative mechanism underlying Pavlovian conditioning . That is , I have attempted to identify the perceptual change with a particular explanatory mechanism , to wit , with theories of how animals associate events . Interest - ingly , not only would this associative mechanism predict the absence of interference , but it could account for the observed decreases in detection accuracy that accompany changes in context , a finding that has been used as evidence of interfer - ence effects but which Guilford & Dawkins have revealed to be artefactual ( page 1841 ) . But the purpose of this reply is not to mount an argument for a particular perceptual mechanism ( see Hollis 1982 , for a complete description ) . Whether or not the process underlying Pavlovian conditioning is also responsible for enhanced prey capture , my hypothesis is a perceptual / cognitive explanation and , as such , it is an alternative only to other cognitive explanations . None of these , even a fully elaborated search image hypothesis , is an alternative to Guilford & Dawkins ' search rate explanation , as they imply . To be sure , the search rate hypothesis is a simpler explanation which is carefully stated and readily testable while ` search image ' is a vague concept , the predictions of which are anything but clear . But parsimony and clarity are irrelevant issues here . The search rate hypothe - sis is about animals ' motor output , not about the a priori perceptual mechanism that instructs the change in efferent activity . Because perceptual hypotheses attempt to explain what is happening inside an animal ' s head , they are difficult to formulate and to test . Certainly , they need not be a pursuit of all those who study this form of learning . However , both perceptual hypotheses and hypotheses about motor output are necessary to a full understanding of enhanced prey capture . And if we allow these two levels of proximate analysis to be confused with one another , we can be sure that more rigorous percep - tual hypotheses will continue to elude us . KAREN L . HOLLIS Department of Psychology , Mount Holyoke College , South Hadley , Massachusetts 01075 , U . S . A . References Guilford , T . & Dawkins , M . S . 1987 . Search images not Short Communications 163 proven : a reappraisal of recent evidence . Anim . Behar . . 35 , 1838 - 1845 . Hollis , K . L . 1982 . Pavlovian conditioning of signal - centered action patterns and autonomic behavior : a biological analysis of function . Ada . Study Behar . , 12 , 1 - 64 . ( Received 19 January 1988 ; revised 12 March 1988 , MS . number : sc - 421 ) Search Image Versus Search Rate : Two Different Ways to Enhance Prey Capture We disagree with Hollis ' ( 1988 ) criticisms of our search rate versus search image analysis ( Guilford & Dawkins 1987 ) . Hollis ' first claim is that all learning must , a priori , involve ' perceptual change ' , so it is wrong of us to refer to one hypothesis ( search image ) as based on a perceptual change and the other ( search rate ) on a motor change : both must involve perceptual change . We do not accept this unorthodox view of learning ( which conflates perceptual change and involve - ment of the central nervous system ) . Hollis then goes on to claim that the two hypotheses can never be considered alternatives , and that we confuse two levels of analysis . We think this claim is false . Hollis argues that some perceptual change must occur every time any animal learns anything , and that it is therefore invalid to distinguish learning that involves a perceptual change from learning that does not . We find this notion unacceptable because , like many psychologists today ( see e . g . Rescorla 1988 ) , we think that understanding exactly what an animal learns to do is important . Even though some sort of change in the central nervous system must underlie each case of what Hollis usefully calls ` enhanced prey capture ' , it is still valid to distinguish several different sorts of learning process , depending on what the increas - ingly successful predator is thought to be learning ( see Lawrence & Allen 1983 ) . For example , a predator that has simply learnt where to hunt has surely learnt something different from a predator that has not changed its hunting area at all but has instead learnt to master the technique of cracking open the shell covering its prey . Meanwhile , a predator that has neither changed its hunting area , nor improved its shell - opening skills , but has learnt to detect prey it previously overlooked , has learnt something else again . Each of these three predators has been learning ( and Hollis would presumably want to say that perceptual changes had occurred in each case ) , but what has been learnt differs in the three cases . To suggest that it is not useful to distinguish between learning different things