Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 376 . Publication date : November 2023 . Lessons from Homebrewed Hybridity : Designing Hybrid Digital Boardgames for Distanced Play LUCY A . SPARROW , School of Computing and Information Systems , The University of Melbourne , Australia MELISSA J . ROGERSON , School of Computing and Information Systems , The University of Melbourne , Australia In 2020 – 2021 , under the restrictions associated with the COVID - 19 pandemic , boardgame players around the world sought out ways to play physical boardgames with each other despite being physically apart . Their creative appropriations of digital technologies and physical tools to allow for hybrid distanced play demonstrate not only the resilience of boardgaming as a hobby , but also provide important insights into the design of novel distanced hybrid digital boardgames ( DHDBs ) . Through a survey of over 1300 respondents , this paper explores the ways distanced players engaged in homebrew practices to make physical boardgame play possible . Through reflexive thematic analysis , we identify three themes that reflect the practical issues players grappled with , including game choice , game mode or setup , and technical implementation . Reflecting on the challenges and opportunities associated with these issues , we consider their implications for DHDB design more generally . In doing so , we present the DHYE ( Distanced Hybrid plaY Experience ) framework , a practical set of design considerations that emphasises an understanding of distance not simply as an obstacle to enjoyable boardgame play but as an inspiration for novel and meaningful design . CCS Concepts : • Human - centered computing → Interaction design → Empirical studies in interaction design KEYWORDS : boardgames , hybrid play , pandemic , COVID - 19 , game design , distanced play , remote play ACM Reference format : Lucy A . Sparrow and Melissa J . Rogerson . 2023 . Lessons from Homebrewed Hybridity : Designing Hybrid Digital Boardgames for Distanced Play . In Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 7 , CHI PLAY , Article 376 ( November 2023 ) , 28 pages , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3611022 1 INTRODUCTION During the early COVID - 19 pandemic , boardgaming was described as a “perfect hobby for lockdown” [ 18 ] , offering those living together a way to spend time together and escape from the anxious realities of the pandemic [ 34 , 38 ] . However , many hobbyist players with gaming partners outside their limited ‘social bubble’ were unable to meet and play together in person . This led to Authors ’ addresses : L . Sparrow and M . Rogerson , School of Computing and Information Systems , The University of Melbourne . 700 Swanston Street , Carlton , Victoria , 3010 , Australia . { lucy . sparrow } { melissa . rogerson } @ unimelb . edu . au Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . 2573 - 0142 / 2023 / 11 - 376 $ 15 . 00 © Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . 2573 - 0142 / 2023 / 11 - 376 $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3611022 376 376 376 : 2 Lucy A . Sparrow and Melissa J . Rogerson Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 376 . Publication date : November 2023 . an explosion in players combining digital technologies and physical tools to allow them to play boardgames with their distant friends and families , often making use of communication software such as Zoom and Skype in combination with camera setups to continue engaging in material play with physical boards and pieces [ 48 , 75 ] . In this paper , we turn our attention to the technical questions—and the struggles and opportunities that came with these questions—that boardgame players faced in the creative appropriations of technologies to facilitate play among players who are not physically co - located . We refer to these endeavours as “homebrewed hybridity” , where ‘homebrewed’ refers to the unofficial , makeshift , or ‘at - home’ nature of these appropriations , and ‘hybridity’ refers to the combination of digital technologies and physical materials . Commercial hybrid digital boardgames ( HDBs ) , which are physical boardgames that necessarily integrate digital technologies ( such as apps , electronic components , and so on ) , have grown in popularity in recent years [ 57 ] . However , these games are often not designed with distanced play—the term used in this paper to refer to boardgame play between remote players— in mind . Homebrewed hybridity is therefore a unique form of hybridity : it is driven largely by players rather than designers , is not a mandatory part of the game , and is primarily performed to allow for physical boardgame play among distanced players . There are two key motivations to study these practices . Firstly , they shed light on an important form of leisure during the pandemic , demonstrating how players worked within unprecedented constraints to continue their preferred modes of play . Secondly , they allow us to better understand the challenges and opportunities facing the novel design space of distanced hybrid digital boardgames ( DHDBs ) , which has seen comparatively little academic and commercial attention . Distanced hybrid play is not limited to pandemic contexts but extends to numerous settings involving geographically distanced families and friends , shift workers , and those with health conditions that restrict movement . In the absence of commercial game designs for distanced play , hobbyists provide important insights into the challenges and opportunities involved in DHDB design , while the COVID - 19 pandemic provided a context for distanced hybrid play innovation . Examining homebrewed hybridity thus provides us with a wealth of ‘on - the - ground’ knowledge of DHDB design . Based on qualitative analysis of responses to a survey of over 1300 boardgame players worldwide , this paper describes the methods players used to enact tabletop play while being physically distanced . Hobbyist “consumer innovators” have shown potential to develop novel and useful boardgame designs , sometimes even more so than professional designers [ 44 ] . Acknowledging and reaffirming the creative potential of boardgame hobbyists , this study puts players’ creative appropriations of technology during the pandemic at the forefront of our analysis . Our research questions are as follows : • How did boardgame players make use of digital technologies and physical tools for distanced hybrid boardgame play during the COVID - 19 pandemic ? • What can we learn from players’ ‘homebrewed’ boardgame play for informing the design of distanced hybrid digital boardgames ? We find that boardgame players grappled with questions around game choice , game mode or setup , and implementation . In doing so , they devised creative and personalised hybrid arrangements to enable play , many requiring considerable effort , technical competence , and resources . We build upon these findings to provide an informed set of design considerations for DHDBs . By focusing on the structural processes involved in homebrewed hybridity , we contribute concrete , practical detail to existing higher - level design concepts in this area focused Lessons from Homebrewed Hybridity 376 : 3 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 376 . Publication date : November 2023 . on notions such as tangibility , shared time and shared space [ 37 , 39 , 75 ] . Namely , we pose and respond to three key design questions , “What kind of game should we design ? ” , “How should the game be set up” , and “How do we make the game work ? ” . We compare and contrast the challenges and opportunities respondents identified in their own homebrewed hybridity with those facing potential designers of DHDBs , presenting the DHYE framework of key considerations to guide the design process . Our contributions are thus four - fold : This paper deepens understanding of the practices of boardgaming during the pandemic , extends our understanding of the possibilities of hybrid digital boardgames for distanced play , provides practical foundations and design considerations for creating these games , and identifies key challenges and opportunities associated with these considerations . 2 RELATED WORK 2 . 1 Boardgaming in the Pandemic Several studies suggest that boardgaming became a notable form of leisure among co - located families [ 36 , 38 , 58 , 62 ] during the 2020 – 21 restrictions associated with the COVID - 19 pandemic . Just as many people turned to digital gaming as a way to connect with others and maintain their wellbeing [ 34 , 38 , 70 ] , boardgames were evoked as an ideal lockdown activity that people living together could engage in for social interaction , to pass the time [ 18 ] , or as a nostalgia - based coping mechanism [ 25 ] . At the same time , boardgamers who were not co - located had to find new ways to continue and adapt their play practices . Unable to meet face - to - face , many members of leisure communities continued their practices in new forms [ 1 , 12 , 71 ] . These adaptations were not always easy or possible , and depended on an individual’s living circumstances , socioeconomic status , relationships , mental health , and other personal factors [ 32 , 38 , 51 ] . Many casual boardgamers and boardgame hobbyists—that is , players who actively participate in the hobby and surrounding culture with a particular passion and knowledge [ 53 ] —showed notable resilience in their pursuit of boardgaming despite being physically distanced [ 18 , 50 ] . 2 . 2 Distanced and Hybrid Play In order to continue playing with faraway friends and family members , boardgamers frequently engaged in what we call distanced boardgame play ( or ‘distanced play’ for short ) . Given that traditional boardgaming practices involve players sitting around a board in the same physical space , distanced play requires the utilisation of technologies to make play possible . Just as the introduction of the penny post ( in which mail could be delivered for the cost of a penny ) in the United Kingdom fuelled the growth of play - by - mail games of Chess [ 27 , 41 ] , the pandemic saw a notable increase in fully digital online play [ 24 ] . While some turned to lighthearted party games such as Jackbox party games , 1 Heads Up ! [ G19 ] , Trivia games [ 21 , p . 306 ] , Pictionary [ G2 ] and Bingo [ 13 ] as a way to foster engagement and spend time together during shared video calls [ 28 ] , others played fully digital versions of boardgames available on platforms such as BoardGameArena , Tabletop Simulator and Tabletopia 2 via computers , smartphones , and other devices . However , this “digitization … neglects some of the core qualities of boardgame play” [ 37 ] : 1 Publisher Jackbox Games ( www . jackboxgames . com ) publishes a range of games across different digital platforms including PCs , gaming consoles and streaming devices . The games are designed for multiplayer play among co - located or distanced players . 2 www . boardgamearena . com , www . tabletopsimulator . com , www . tabletopia . com 376 : 4 Lucy A . Sparrow and Melissa J . Rogerson Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 376 . Publication date : November 2023 . in particular , online digital boardgames lack physical components such as boards , playing pieces , cards and dice , which are valued parts of the hobby itself [ 14 , 53 ] . Whereas players of asynchronous play - by - mail games like Chess [ 41 ] and Diplomacy [ G6 ] typically maintain a physical board on which they re - create players’ moves [ 5 ] , these fully digital versions lack physical components . Players of boardgames and tabletop roleplaying games ( TTRPGs ) [ 20 ] who shifted from in - person to online play during the pandemic expressed displeasure at the loss of tangible interaction , as well as the loss of face - to - face social interaction [ 61 , 75 ] . A hybrid form of synchronous distanced play that meaningfully combines physical pieces and digital technologies—also known as remote tangible play [ 37 ] , remote tabletop gaming [ 75 ] , or distributed board game play [ 39 ] —offers players a way to potentially make the best of both worlds . Hybrid digital boardgames ( HDBs ) have become more prominent in recent years , both in the boardgame industry and in academic work [ 30 , 43 , 56 , 57 ] . However , commercial HDBs— including popular titles such as Chronicles of Crime [ G9 ] , The Lord of the Rings : Journeys in Middle - Earth [ G18 ] , and the Unlock ! Series [ e . g . G11 ] , are not designed with distanced play in mind . Digital tools in HDBs can perform a variety of functions , including timing , randomising , housekeeping , informing , teaching , calculating , remembering and storytelling [ 57 ] —but do not necessarily explicitly enable remote connectivity between players . Even the Teburu system , 3 which combines a digital board with individual devices for players , focuses exclusively on co - located play . In comparison to the realm of commercial games , academic work has shown somewhat more interest in hybrid distanced play . Some studies have designed and evaluated specific technologies for remote boardgaming : the Tabletop Teleporter [ 42 ] combines two interactive tabletops into a “workspace” consisting of a digital board and videochat screen , while the PlayTogether system [ 68 ] uses a camera , infrared emitter and projector to display remote players’ hands and movements across a game board . More recently , Distributed Letter Jam [ 39 ] re - implemented a popular boardgame for distanced play using shared and personal displays , RFID readers , and microphones that switched between public and private chat channels . Although not explicitly intended for hybrid distanced play , scholars have also experimented with and prototyped innovations that have implications for hybrid distanced play , including bendable interactive playing cards [ 33 ] , wearable devices [ 11 ] , and interactive connective devices such as kettles , aprons and bottles [ 9 ] , lamps [ 74 ] , gloves [ 63 ] , and robots [ 15 , 72 ] . 2 . 3 Homebrewed Hybridity In the absence of commercial HDBs for distanced play , and without the bespoke technologies in the studies mentioned in the previous section , many boardgame players engaged in ‘homebrewed hybridity’ , a term employed in this paper to refer to the ways that boardgame players ‘retrofit’ their physical boardgames with digital technologies to homebrew their own DHDBs . During 2020 – 21 , a number of guides [ 4 , 19 ] , blog posts [ 6 ] and media articles [ 26 , 60 ] were created by and for players to help others continue boardgaming through the pandemic , often describing how to integrate cameras and communication software such as Zoom with physical boardgame components . A significant body of work on creativity and cognition has demonstrated the multitude of ways that everyday users creatively engage with designed objects , such as through reformulating and repurposing artefacts that have already been deployed in a reflection of the “design - after - design” 3 https : / / teburu . net / Lessons from Homebrewed Hybridity 376 : 5 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 376 . Publication date : November 2023 . approach [ 3 , 49 ] . The four - C model of creativity , which describes four kinds of creativity ( Big - C , Little - c , mini - c , and Pro - c Creativity ) , highlights how non - experts can engage in externally recognizable ( yet not groundbreaking ) creative endeavours ( Little - c ) and internal , personally meaningful creativity ( mini - c ) [ 31 ] . These “smaller” forms of creativity are exemplified in situations where non - experts make use of tools available to them for creative endeavours , such as through redesigning and adding to existing artifacts [ 29 ] , using conventional tools in unconventional ways [ 35 ] , drawing from “tools and materials at hand” through the practice of bricolage to make novel creations [ 67 ] , and in the construction of ‘creativity support tools’ ( CSTs ) from everyday objects to assist in creative endeavours [ 65 ] . Such creative practices are common among players of both digital and tabletop games . For example , many digital game players ‘mod’ ( or ‘modify’ ) existing games as a form of “cultural remixing” [ 45 ] , perceiving it to be a creative outlet that allows them to add personal meaning to their play [ 46 , 64 ] . Game masters ( GMs ) of tabletop roleplaying games have also been found to utilise everyday digital technologies ( such as word processors and custom scripts ) and physical materials ( such as notebooks , boxes and food ) as CSTs to facilitate improvisational and distributed creativity in preparing and playing their game sessions [ 65 ] . Homebrewed hybridity is a quintessential example of these kinds of at - home creative practices , though has received limited attention in academic work . In one recent study , Yuan et al . [ 75 ] drew from online commentary and in - depth interviews to examine how boardgame players appropriated technologies during the COVID - 19 pandemic to facilitate social connection in distanced play . They found that players worked to create a shared tabletop environment , shared information and awareness , and a shared sense of time . Another recent small - scale survey of remote digital and boardgame play practices during the pandemic [ 48 ] found that while some respondents benefitted from the flexibility and accessibility of remote play and appreciated the opportunity to connect with others socially , they also encountered a variety of challenges in adapting physical boardgames for distanced play . For instance , the difficulties of managing multiple devices and being unable to read body language and non - verbal cues could contribute to conflicts and miscommunications among players . 2 . 4 The Design of Hybrid Digital Boardgames for Distanced Play A small collection of academic work has explored the design of DHDBs [ 37 , 39 , 48 , 54 , 55 , 75 ] . Maurer and Fuchsberger [ 37 ] applied a theoretical framework to the analysis of material boardgames to imagine how they may be altered under remote conditions . They proposed three lenses for designing distanced play games : 1 ) Physicality , which emphasises the need for shared material space alongside digital tools ; 2 ) Agency , which stresses finding a balance between player agency and the potential automation of game elements offered by digital technology ; and 3 ) Time , which indicates the potential for exploring both synchronous and asynchronous play in distanced settings . They further reflected on some mechanisms and digital tools that could be useful in this design space , including awareness cues , annotation interfaces , and tracking / wearable technologies . In contrast to this theoretical approach , Yuan et al . [ 75 ] drew from empirical data to suggest that maintaining physicality is important for creating a shared sense of space , technology is important for fostering a shared awareness among players ( such as through monitoring eye gaze and even heart rate ) , and allowing for rules customisation can lead to a better social experience . Mills et al . [ 39 ] utilised a research through design approach to design a distributed version of Letter Jam [ G30 ] , again pointing to the importance of preserving tangibility . They recommended 376 : 6 Lucy A . Sparrow and Melissa J . Rogerson Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 376 . Publication date : November 2023 . enhancing a sense of presence by drawing attention to remote players and suggested leveraging spatiality by preserving the layout and gestures of physical boardgaming ( such as passing cards to the player on the right ) . Ramirez Gomez and Stawarz [ 48 ] drew from survey results to suggest the potential for integrating smart artefacts , wearables , edible elements , gaze tracking , haptic props , and even shape - changing interfaces into boardgames for remote play , arguing for the need to ensure equal access to audiovisual communication among players . Finally , Rogerson et al . [ 55 ] designed the “SMeFT decks” , an ideation tool to assist in the design of DHDBs . These four decks of cards , presenting prompts related to the Story , Mechanisms , Functions and Technology of a game’s design , were utilised in a series of participatory design workshops that produced a number of DHDBs . The authors suggested that distanced play does not need to be a “disadvantage that people must overcome when they are forced to be apart” but instead can be “fun , innovative , and a first choice for play” . Mirroring previous discussion of proxemics in play [ 40 ] , they note the importance of the distance holding meaning within the game context . In other work , Rogerson et al . adopted a research through design approach utilizing the SMeFT decks to design a DHDB titled Escaping the Laboratorium of Dr Moustache [ 54 ] . They discussed the importance of facilitating communication between distanced players , effective board design , implementing timed operations , and connecting the distanced context to the story of the game using technology . The high - level lenses and reflections highlighted in these works are important in guiding the design of DHDBs for synchronous play , particularly with social connection in mind . It is clear from these studies that tangibility , communication , and leveraging technology are pivotal to the distanced play experience . However , we are still faced with important , practical questions about how to approach the fundamentals of designing DHDBs from the ‘bottom - up’ . Where is the best place to start in designing a DHDB ? What challenges and opportunities need to be considered to produce a playable and enjoyable game for the average player ? Inspired by players’ homebrew practices during the COVID - 19 pandemic , this paper aims to address this gap , providing practical prompts and concrete design considerations for DHDBs . 3 METHOD Data were collected through an online survey of 1313 boardgame players worldwide , between 15 November and 12 December 2021 . The survey examined boardgame play habits and attitudes during the pandemic , exploring respondents’ in - person , online and hybrid play practices across the years 2020 - 2021 . The study was given ethics approval by the Office of Research Ethics and Integrity at The University of Melbourne ( Ethics ID : 22108 ) . 3 . 1 Survey The survey consisted of 25 questions plus an initial question asking for respondents’ informed consent . It was administered through Qualtrics and was estimated to take 10 – 15 minutes to complete . This survey was part of a wider study extending beyond the present paper and included a variety of queries pertaining to respondents’ demographic information ( including age , gender , country , employment status , and who they lived with ) , attitudes to COVID - 19 ( including any restrictions they had been experiencing ) , and general gaming habits and attitudes ( such as how much they enjoy playing boardgames ) . These data will be reported elsewhere , though we share some broad demographics in Section 3 . 1 . 2 . Lessons from Homebrewed Hybridity 376 : 7 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 376 . Publication date : November 2023 . The survey also asked about respondents’ in - person , online and distanced boardgame experiences during the COVID - 19 pandemic . These questions were posed through a mixture of multiple choice questions ( e . g . “With whom did you usually play boardgames online during 2020 - 2021 ? ” ) , scales ( e . g . “In 2020 and 2021 , how often did you do the following things ? ” , with prompts such as “Play boardgames in person with the people you live with” ) , and open - ended questions ( e . g . “Is there anything else you would like to tell us about playing boardgames in person since the start of the COVID - 19 pandemic ? ” ) . While future work will engage in a quantitative analysis of the survey data , the analysis of the present study focused entirely on the qualitative data generated by three open - ended questions : “Can you tell us how you used technology to play physical boardgames with people in other locations ? Who did you play with ? How did you set it up ? ” “Is there anything else that you would like to tell us about playing physical boardgames with people in other locations ? For example , are there particular games or types of games that you think work better than others ? ” “If you would have liked to play more boardgames during the COVID - 19 pandemic , what would have helped you to do so ? ” 3 . 2 Recruitment Advertisement text for the study asked , “Have you played boardgames during 2020 and 2021 ? ” , gave brief details about the study , and provided a URL to the survey . We were careful to appeal to both hobbyist and casual boardgamers to receive diverse responses . The survey was advertised through shareable posts on the authors’ personal social media accounts ( including Twitter and Facebook ) , on Facebook groups ( including dedicated boardgame community groups such as the BoardGameGeek Facebook group ) , the Opinionated Gamers mailing list , and on BoardGameGeek forums . All posts received permission from relevant moderators . Given that women and non - binary players are often underrepresented in research into boardgames [ 56 ] , particular efforts were made to advertise the survey on the BoardGameGeek ‘Women and Gaming’ forum as well as two Facebook groups focused on these genders . The survey was shared widely by other users , resulting in a strong response rate . 3 . 3 Respondents A total of 1313 respondents completed the survey . They ranged in age from 18 to 100 ( M = 41 ) ; 918 respondents identified as men ( 72 . 7 % ) , 307 as women ( 24 % ) , and 33 as non - binary ( 2 . 6 % ) . Thirteen ( 1 % ) respondents preferred not to disclose their gender , and 10 ( 0 . 8 % ) preferred to self - describe ( including transgender , agender , and genderfluid respondents ) . Respondents were from 49 different countries . The highest number of respondents—454—came from the USA ( 36 . 5 % ) , followed by 261 from Australia ( 21 % ) , 182 from the UK & Northern Ireland ( 14 . 6 % ) , 58 from Canada ( 4 . 7 % ) , and 43 from Germany ( 3 . 5 % ) . The majority of respondents ( 1023 , 85 . 9 % ) considered playing boardgames to be a hobby of theirs , while 82 respondents ( 6 . 9 % ) worked in the boardgame industry . 3 . 4 Analysis To address our research questions , we focused our analysis on the qualitative responses to the three open - ended questions outlined in Section 3 . 1 . Responses to these questions were collated and uploaded to NVivo . Using reflexive thematic analysis [ 17 , 66 ] and following the phases 376 : 8 Lucy A . Sparrow and Melissa J . Rogerson Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 376 . Publication date : November 2023 . described by Braun and Clarke [ 8 ] , the first author became familiarised with the data by reading through all the responses , then generated initial codes through inductively open coding each response . Coding was conducted at semantic and latent levels , extracting participants’ explicit responses while also inferring underlying meanings in the data . Initial themes were developed by organising these codes into categories reflecting similar concepts or “patterns of shared meaning” [ 17 ] . Regular meetings were held with the second author to discuss these categories throughout the analysis process , where the themes were sought , reviewed , defined and named reflexively . This collaborative refinement produced a set of three key themes and their respective subthemes , which are described in the present paper . 3 . 5 Reflexivity Statement In order to address the transparency and trustworthiness that is ideal for qualitative research involving reflexive thematic analysis [ 7 , 66 ] , we offer a short reflexivity statement describing our relevant backgrounds in relation to this paper’s topic . Like many around the world , the two authors were subject to significant pandemic restrictions and experienced long periods of lockdown . The first author is a casual boardgamer with a small boardgame collection who lived alone during this time . They connected primarily with local and overseas friends and family members online , and engaged in a number of tabletop roleplaying game ( TTRPG ) sessions with friends over Zoom . The second author is an avid hobbyist boardgamer with over 1500 boardgames in their collection . She lived with her immediate family and occasionally played games with them in person and with friends online via Zoom , though her boardgaming greatly reduced during lockdowns . To extend our personal understanding of the distanced play context , both authors , along with another colleague , played Exit : The Game – Theft on the Mississippi [ G4 ] as part of a distanced critical play session . Each player had a partial physical copy of the game ( two copies were distributed between the three players ) , communication took place over Zoom , and video of the players and game was facilitated through the use of laptops and an iPad . This was largely an uncomfortable and drawn - out process for everyone present ; although we enjoyed the social connection , we struggled to complete the game . While our goal in analysing the survey data is to capture respondents’ experiences with homebrewed hybridity , we acknowledge that our own struggles , frustrations and successes with hybrid distanced play at this time are likely to influence our framing of the results . Guided by our research question , our academic interest in hybrid digital games as artifacts to be designed has also influenced the framing of the themes . 4 FINDINGS We identified three themes that represent the interrelated issues that players grappled with in their engagement with homebrewed hybridity for distanced play . Our themes move beyond the scope of the survey questions to offer a “meaningful discussion” of the data [ 66 ] . We present them as a consecutive series of questions rather than distinct ‘facts’ about hybrid distanced play because respondents offered a wide variety of opinions , suggestions , and experiences . As such , the openness of the themes facilitates this diversity in responses and better captures the novelty and potential of this design space . Together , these questions tell a unique story of the at - home design process , encompassing the key struggles and opportunities players faced in playing boardgames at a distance . Lessons from Homebrewed Hybridity 376 : 9 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 376 . Publication date : November 2023 . The first theme is related to game choice , with players asking , “Which boardgame shall we play ? ” Here , players had to decide which genre of game would work best in distanced settings while considering the availability and affordances of the various components and mechanisms involved . The second theme is related to the game mode or setup , prompting the question , “How should we set up the game ? ” This theme demonstrates the ways that players organised and distributed both responsibility and game components in order to ensure everyone could meaningfully engage with the game . Finally , the third theme looks at implementation , asking , “How can we implement the digital and physical tools available us to make the game work ? ” Here , we look at how both digital technologies and physical objects were creatively appropriated and combined to facilitate the various setups detailed in the second theme . 4 . 1 Game Choice : Which Boardgame Shall We Play ? One of the first choices players had to make when engaging in distanced play was to decide what kind of boardgame could be adapted to a distanced context . Players considered what genre of game would be appropriate , what kinds of mechanisms and components would work best , and what games , tools and knowledge they had access to . This question came about not only because of the difficulties and complexities of translating existing physical boardgames to distanced play , but also because of the pandemic context—many players were confined to their homes , so they had to work with what was already available to them while considering the energy levels and mental capacity of the players involved given the stressful circumstances . 4 . 1 . 1 Players Purposefully Selected What Kind of Genre to Play . Many players opted for simpler social , party , dice , trivia or word games that were not too taxing to adapt or play over communication software . Several respondents mentioned the game Just One [ G26 ] , a cooperative party game in which players guess words based on clues , as being particularly “Zoomable” ( referring to the popular communication software Zoom ) . There were many reasons given for this , most of which pointed towards these kinds of games’ simplicity and “ease of play” , which was valued in the distressing and often overwhelming pandemic context . Noting a preference for “lighter” games with fewer , simpler rules , one respondent noted , I think that party games work well for remote play because they usually have a simplified ruleset and the components are often shared . These are also nice because video technology like Zoom gives support for a large number of participants , so these games adapt well to higher player counts . For similar reasons , push - your - luck games 4 [ 21 ] such as Can’t Stop [ G27 ] and roll and write games 5 such as Welcome To… [ G31 ] were also favoured . Roll and write games were considered an “obvious” choice , and “worked particularly well because you only need to send a copy of the paper to others , and have one person do the rolling for everyone” . This was especially helpful in a remote context , as “you only need one person to own a copy and everyone else just needs to print a page and have a pen” . On the other hand , some players opted for more complex games . These games were often cooperative [ 21 ] , including games like Pandemic Legacy [ G10 ] and Flash Point : Fire Rescue [ G21 ] , 4 In push - your - luck games , players must make decisions that could present them with further rewards at the risk of losing progress – in other words , they must “push their luck” to an appropriate level in order to maximise their chances of winning . This mechanic is common in many gambling games . 5 Roll and write games involve players rolling dice and writing down relevant scores or results while making decisions about , for instance , which dice to use or how to fill in the accompanying results sheet . 376 : 10 Lucy A . Sparrow and Melissa J . Rogerson Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 376 . Publication date : November 2023 . in which players work together to win the game as a group rather than compete with one another . One respondent noted , “We couldn’t imagine doing [ hybrid distanced play ] with anything other than a co - op game” . One reason that was repeatedly given for the preference for cooperative games was that “nothing is concealed in these games” , which makes facilitating distanced play over video chat easier . For example , one respondent observed that the remote setting makes it difficult to deal out unique sets of cards to each player while keeping them hidden from others , so having a cooperative game with full public information made the process easier . 4 . 1 . 2 Players Avoided Particular Mechanisms and Components . The choice of genre overlapped notably ( though not entirely ) with the kinds of mechanisms and components that the game possessed ( or , more often , did not possess ) . As mentioned in the previous section , cooperative games were particularly favoured because they did not contain any hidden information , which was the main element respondents avoided . As one respondent wrote , “Games that are complicated or have lots of moving parts can be a disaster to play remotely , especially when they involve hidden information like cards in a hand . ” Another respondent nominated Puerto Rico [ G29 ] as a suitable hybrid distanced game because all its gameplay information is public and available to all players . Games with any “secret information from a shared pool” such as cards , components that often play a particular role in facilitating hidden information , were thus often avoided due to being “very difficult to facilitate” . For one respondent the “major limiting factor was any game which needed each player to have a hand of concealed cards” . Another commented that although an individual player can manage and deal cards out , it becomes “fiddly” if an individual player needs to check their own cards . For example , if one player deals out hands of cards to distanced players , those players would need to either “find that exact same card in their own deck” or set up multiple secret communication channels to convey which cards each player had . Games with card drafting mechanisms like Sushi Go [ G32 ] , in which players repeatedly select a card from a dealt hand and pass the rest of the cards to the player on their left with the goal of building a valuable set , were also unpopular for the same reason . Conversely , a smaller number of respondents felt that games with hidden information could in fact work particularly well in a hybrid context given the availability of digital and online tools . For instance , one respondent mentioned that using a “separate message” system to conceal or convey information to individual players , or even writing code to help manage randomised decks or other components , would take care of the issues associated with concealed elements in a game . Some respondents suggested that games without a shared board worked better for distanced play , as they did not require one player to manage everyone’s moves , or multiple players to mirror each other’s movements on their own boards ( we describe these as director and symmetrical setups respectively—see Section 4 . 2 ) . Some participants suggested that information could be more easily shared via webcam in games like Sherlock Holmes Consulting Detective [ G16 ] , which has static maps and clues for players to explore rather than regularly updating boards and player pieces . Others mentioned that turn - based games—in which players take turns to carry out their moves , in contrast to real - time , reaction - based and some dexterity games—work better given the unreliability of technology , helping to pace the game and allowing for better synchrony between distanced players . One respondent noted that a game like RoboRally [ G15 ] , “where everybody plans their move , but e . g . reveal [ s ] their cards at the same time” , is ideal for this reason . 4 . 1 . 3 Players Chose Games to Play Based on How Accessible They Were . There were also practical limitations to the choice of game during the pandemic . Given that many players were confined to their homes at this time , they were largely restricted to the boardgames they already had available . Depending on the kind of setup they chose ( see Section 4 . 2 ) , they typically selected Lessons from Homebrewed Hybridity 376 : 11 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 376 . Publication date : November 2023 . games that at least one player had on hand , or that everyone already owned . Furthermore , there was a tendency to select games that all players already knew how to play—“Trying to teach everyone a new game remotely is hard” , so it was less burdensome if everyone knew the rules . Many players preferred games that “don’t take up a lot of table space” or that had a “compact playing area”—just as people struggled to reconfigure their space in order to work from home , players also had to adjust to playing at home in ways they previously had not , needing to find space to set up both the game and their devices while accommodating any other household members . Another restriction was presented by the technology players had available . This included both hardware and software : one respondent , for instance , commented that they could not find a “top - down camera on the market with enough range and definition to cover a board size” , while another mentioned that poor internet connection or lagging software could seriously hamper the playing experience . Furthermore , not all players had the knowledge or experience to use these devices . One respondent wrote , It is not always easy overcoming all the technical hurdles needed to get someone ' s device online … while at the same time juggling the already difficult notion of Zoom interactions . This was mostly , but not exclusively , an issue when dealing with my extended family ' s game days as we have attendees who are not technically adept . The technology itself is the hurdle and adding layers to it can just lead to frustration . Finally , one respondent mentioned that games with a lot of important visual detail , including card text and small icons , “suffer hugely when seen through screens as you lose the detail and the ability to engage with game pieces as you normally need to… I won’t even attempt to play anything but the simplest or clearest game ( e . g . Just One ) via Zoom for that main reason” . [ G26 ] 6 4 . 2 Game Mode : How Should We Set Up the Game ? Once a game was chosen , players had to figure out how to set up their physical games to facilitate distanced play . This theme describes the various ways that players organised themselves , their technology and the components of their chosen game ( s ) to enable a functioning play session . We identified three key setup structures that players employed : director setups , symmetrical setups , and distributed setups , along with a fourth category of mixed setups that reflects combinations of the other three . 4 . 2 . 1 Director Setups : One Player Oversees or Coordinates the Process of Gameplay . In this setup , one player takes the role of ‘director’ , host or moderator who oversees or coordinates the process of gameplay , similar to the role of a game master ( GM ) in tabletop roleplaying games such as Dungeons and Dragons [ G17 ] . Usually , this player is the only one who requires a physical copy of the game : they have control of the game board and the pieces , acting as a ‘go - between’ for players and the game state . This kind of setup was often achieved by the director sharing a video of the physical board then taking instructions from other players and carrying out their moves , as this respondent described : “My friends and I used Google Meet or FaceTime . I would set the game up , and the other players would tell me what they wanted to do in the game , and I would do their turns for them physically . ” See Figure 1 for a depiction of an example of this setup . 6 To avoid interrupting direct quotes , games mentioned by participants are cited after the quote . 376 : 12 Lucy A . Sparrow and Melissa J . Rogerson Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 376 . Publication date : November 2023 . Figure 1 : Visual depiction of the director setup for distanced play . One player acts as the director , sharing a video of the boardgame with other players in other locations . The physical orientation of players , the game and devices is depicted on the left , and the view players would have on a sample communication software is on the right . While this was the most common version of the director setup we identified , directors were often not simply passive recipients of instructions but would perform other important hosting tasks as well . This included narrating game text , sharing photographs of important shared game elements , and providing hidden information to individual players through texts and images . The following quotes from different respondents indicate a range of these tasks : I hosted a Sherlock Holmes Consulting Detective game using OBS to switch between views of the map , directory and our journal of notes . I read the case book entries for the visited locations . [ G16 ] I played Forgotten Waters over Discord with three close friends . I had the game and manipulated the components , sending photos of the map by phone to the others at times . [ G3 ] One home had the physical game set up with a camera permanently pointing at it … Text messages were used to give players information only they should have ( e . g . which cards were picked up , etc . ) . Sometimes , the director would play the game alongside the others ; at other times they would opt out of playing entirely and facilitate the game for everyone else . In some cases , this decision depended on the complexity of the director role : while some setups allowed the director to ( for example ) simply close their eyes and hold up clue cards when dealing out hidden information , other setups involved multiple screenshares and communication channels that required a more dedicated host . One respondent described a particularly multifaceted director role , demonstrating the many responsibilities a director can take on in distanced scenarios—as director , this player not only maintained the game board but also acted as a conduit for secret ( card ) and public ( board location ) information : I had the Clue board on Photoshop , used an online dice generator for everyone’s turns . I shared my screen on Zoom . I had physical cards that I scrambled and then “handed out” ( i . e . private chat message on Zoom ) to the players . I rolled the dice for them and they told me where to move to and then I moved the player tokens . When someone had to “show” a card , they messaged me privately and then I messaged the person that they had to show the card to . Theoretically speaking they could show it to each other but it was Lessons from Homebrewed Hybridity 376 : 13 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 376 . Publication date : November 2023 . a bunch of strangers and we didn’t want any cheating etc so I ( the host ) acted as a middle person . [ G24 ] Interestingly , the director setup did not just take place among groups where every player was distanced from each other : in some cases , most of the players were in the same physical location , and only one or two players were distanced . In such cases , one or all of the physically co - located players would act as a collective director for the distanced players , as described by this respondent : “I used FaceTime to play Scrabble with my family . They were all together at home around the table , and a computer with my call was placed on the table so I could see the board and my letters . When it was my turn I directed someone where to place my letters on my behalf . ” [ G5 ] 4 . 2 . 2 Symmetrical Setups : Players Each Have a Physical Copy of the Game and Mirror Each Other’s Moves . In this setup , all playing sites have a physical copy of the same game ( see Figure 2 ) . There is no centralised host conveying information between players and the game state—rather , players each set up their own version of the board , take their turns as normal and mirror the distanced players’ moves on their own boards . This setup perhaps most closely reflects traditional “play by mail” game setups associated with Chess [ 41 ] or Diplomacy [ G6 ] , where a player follows the progress of the game and plans their moves using their own copy of the game . One respondent described their own symmetrical setup as follows : Both ends owned the game and had it set up . We kept the camera pointed up from the table at our faces at all times to better simulate sitting at a table . We mostly used Facebook messenger video on a tablet , but also used Zoom and Skype and a laptop . When moves were taken we took time to update both boards to keep things synchronised . Figure 2 : Visual depiction of the symmetrical setup for distanced play . Each player has their own board set up in their respective locations , and each shares a video of their board with the others . The physical orientation of players , the game and devices is depicted on the left , and the view players would have on a sample communication software is on the right . Sometimes players kept cameras focused on the players’ faces and simply dictated their moves to each other , as described in the quote above . Other times players shared videos of their boards and / or components so that other players’ moves could be seen visually , and sometimes players shared a mix of faces , boards and components by utilising multiple cameras and accounts on communication software to “log in” as the different elements . Given these arrangements , games in which players’ moves or decisions could be conveyed verbally and / or visually were often chosen for this setup . For example , one respondent mentioned 376 : 14 Lucy A . Sparrow and Melissa J . Rogerson Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 376 . Publication date : November 2023 . playing Sagrada [ G1 ] in this way , with players taking turns to “pull out the dice and then tell the other person which colours they were and which numbers they’d rolled , so we could replicate the dice on both sides . Same with public objectives and tools . ” Games that already facilitated multiple boards in which players would keep track of their own progress also worked particularly well . The Quacks of Quedlinburg [ G34 ] was mentioned a couple of times in this regard : “Since both I and distant family members own a copy of Quacks of Quedlinburg , we have played that remotely as well , with people drawing physical tokens in their location , but while being on a call together . ” [ G34 ] On the other hand , games that involved shared resource pools , cards and “complex sources of randomness” were more difficult in this setup . In such cases , players had to find ways to keep track of the resources / cards played , and this could get particularly complicated when hidden information was involved ( e . g . when each player needed to be dealt an individual hand of cards ) . Games like this were often avoided in this setup as they “didn’t really work” , although one respondent tackled this issue by having all distanced players “arrange the decks to mirror each other” so that the cards could be drawn / dealt at each location . They then regularly checked in with all players to ensure symmetry : We would take breaks occasionally to confirm that both boards were the same and each person had the correct resources , etc . Occasionally there would be minor discrepancies but none were game changing and the system worked well . 4 . 2 . 3 Distributed Setups : The Game’s Physical Components Are Distributed Among Distanced Players . Like director setups , distributed setups only require one physical copy of the game—however , rather than one person managing the gameplay and physical components , the physical components of one boardgame are distributed among the various players . This setup was less common than both director and symmetrical setups , but was particularly notable for games that already had distributed elements , such as trading / collectable card games like Magic : The Gathering [ G14 ] and games where each player has a unique set of cards or pieces that stays with them throughout a game session such as Gloomhaven [ G7 ] . In these cases , each player would usually share a video of their individual playing fields and pieces via their chosen communication software ( see Figure 3 ) . Figure 3 : Visual depiction of the distributed setup for distanced play . Each player has a different part of a board game set up in their respective locations , and each shares a video of their partial board game with the others . The physical orientation of players , the game and devices is depicted on the left , and the view players would have on a sample communication software is on the right . Lessons from Homebrewed Hybridity 376 : 15 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 376 . Publication date : November 2023 . Players would also sometimes split up the various components of the game such that each player would have access to and control particular game elements . For example , one respondent reported dividing up the components of a solo game between two players : “ [ My gaming partner ] had a few cameras ( the webcam on her computer as well as a phone ) to show the board and to talk together over Zoom . I had the two decks . For one of the decks , I would just read the card to her as I flipped the card . ” Notably , respondents also reported distributing these physical components to their fellow players in person during socially distanced visits . One respondent gave their wife’s family “parts of [ Scattergories ] during an outdoor , distanced visit” [ G23 ] , while another “dropped a few components … to friends in a mailbox” , including scoresheets and tiles from the game NMBR 9 [ G35 ] . One respondent mentioned playing My City [ G20 ] with a friend and described it as particularly suitable for the pandemic in conjunction with these distributed visits , which gave them the opportunity to greet their friend in person : That game is a legacy game 7 , so between ‘chapters’ of three plays , we had to physically give various stickers and other new pieces to the friend we were playing with . So in that sense it [ was ] the perfect game [ and ] was unique to the pandemic – it was great for playing with a friend who lived nearby , who we could not game with in person but whose mailbox we could easily drive by and leave a small envelope in , maybe even saying hello briefly outside with masks on . 4 . 2 . 4 Mixed Setups : Combinations of Director , Symmetrical , and / or Distributed Setups . Although most descriptions of setups fell into one of the three categories listed in the previous sections , sometimes players would describe setups that involved a combination of director and symmetrical or distributed setups ( see Figures 4 and 5 ) . Figure 4 : Visual depiction of the director - distributed setup for distanced play . One player acts as the director , though each player has a different part of a board game set up in their respective locations , and each shares a video of their board game parts with the others . The physical orientation of players , the game and devices is depicted on the left , and the view players would have on a sample communication software is on the right . 7 Legacy games are games that are played over multiple sessions . Changes in the game state in earlier sessions will remain and impact future play sessions . 376 : 16 Lucy A . Sparrow and Melissa J . Rogerson Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 376 . Publication date : November 2023 . Figure 5 : Visual depiction of the director - symmetrical setup for distanced play . One player acts as the director and shares a video of their board with the others , though each player also has their own board set up in their respective locations . The physical orientation of players , the game and devices is depicted on the left , and the view players would have on a sample communication software is on the right . Director - distributed setups were the most common mixed setups reported . Here , players would distribute physical components among all players , but one player , the director , would manage or organise the gameplay overall . Often , the player who had the physical board and player pieces would take on a director - like role , taking instructions from other players regarding movement while the other players managed their own resources or cards . In other forms the director would help distribute the components and display game information to players . A number of games were played this way , including Second Chance [ G25 ] and Sherlock Holmes Consulting Detective [ G16 ] , but this setup was notably used to play Gloomhaven [ G7 ] : My friend with a 3D printer had been creating a more 3D version of his Gloomhaven . He used his phone on Zoom to display the map area and all of the important shared elements ( monsters , etc ) . We picked up our characters from his house and then played our characters over the zoom call . In director - symmetrical setups , players each had their own copy of the game and set it up physically in their respective locations . However , the director player took charge of particularly important components—for example , one respondent reported playing Ticket To Ride [ G22 ] in a symmetrical fashion , though one family still controlled the cards . Sometimes the director would also set up and share a video of a “master board” that the other players then used as a reference to update their own respective boards , saving the need for everyone to share a video of their play area . One respondent who used a master board to play Sagrada [ G1 ] noted that they accepted “playing this way would be very silly at times but that was half the fun ! ” Note that we did not identify any symmetrical - distributed setups , as in some ways these two setups are fundamentally at odds : a physical game cannot be entirely replicated among all participants while also being distributed among them . That said , it is possible for players to set up a game in symmetrical ways and then distribute tasks among the different players—for instance , one respondent reported playing Clank ! A Deck - Building Adventure [ G12 ] where each household set up a copy of the game , though one household was in charge of drawing and announcing cards from a shuffled deck while another was in charge of drawing and announcing Clank cubes . However , we categorise this as director - symmetrical , as the components were not distributed as much as the players’ ( directing ) responsibilities were . Lessons from Homebrewed Hybridity 376 : 17 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 376 . Publication date : November 2023 . 4 . 3 Implementation : How Can We Implement the Digital and Physical Tools Available to Us to Make the Game Work ? The third and final theme points to the creative ways that players appropriated both digital technologies and material objects to facilitate hybrid distanced play . 4 . 3 . 1 Players Used a Broad Range of Digital Technologies to Make Distanced Play Possible . Players made use of a variety of common digital technologies , including software that was accessed through devices they had on hand . Unsurprisingly , the most common forms of software mentioned were for communication , allowing for voice chat as well as sharing video of players’ faces , boards , components , and playing spaces . Communication software was pivotal for allowing communication between players and ensuring a shared awareness of the game state . It also acted as a central hub for play , much like the table itself when playing boardgames in - person , allowing players to gather and recognise each other as a playing group . Players mentioned using Zoom most frequently , sometimes using their work accounts to allow them to host and play for longer periods , and would often log in to multiple accounts to allow for multiple displays ( for instance , one to show their face , another to show their board ) . Other communication software mentioned included Discord , Google Meet , Google Hangouts , Skype , Microsoft Teams , FaceTime , Twitch , Jitsi , WeChat , WhatsApp , Facebook , TeamViewer , Signal , and YouTube Live . Private messaging on these platforms through text also facilitated direct communication between players , such as when a director would convey hidden information to an individual player . Hardware such as laptops , smartphones , tablets and cameras was indispensable for facilitating the use of such communication software , allowing players to verbally and visually convey game information to one another . Several players used the webcam built into their laptop to display their own face in real time , but also reported using their smartphone and tablet cameras to video themselves and their playing spaces . They also used these cameras to take photographs of specific components / cards for reference or sharing with others . At times this led to rather complex multi - camera setups . For example , one respondent reported playing Pandemic Legacy [ G10 ] with phones and iPads to show the board and separate sets of player cards all at once . Another respondent described their setup , which involved multiple devices and communication channels , in detail : I used an iPad logged into a secondary account and mounted on a tripod sat on the table to show the board and pieces and run audio ( through headphones unless playing with members of the household as well ) , while I used my phone logged into my primary Discord account to take closer up photos of cards and post these in a text channel for reference for the players ( typing their names as captions so the channel was searchable ) . I used my own Discord set up for this purpose with separate channels for each game . I also sometimes had my laptop logged into my primary account on the table , and used it for video and / or better audio through an external microphone instead of the iPad , which in those cases was only for vision of the board . Some players also made use of a variety of other supporting software and devices . Some software was specifically designed to help facilitate gaming : companion apps for games such as Gloomhaven [ G7 ] and Forgotten Waters [ G3 ] were used to help set up the game and provide game information , and automatic dice rolling applications assisted with randomisation . At other times , players made use of professional software , including Excel for spreadsheets and image editing tools such as Photoshop . One respondent used “Google Sheets to track character and game information” , while others used it to keep track of numbers and scores . Some used Google Documents to share game information among players and provide teams with dedicated spaces 376 : 18 Lucy A . Sparrow and Melissa J . Rogerson Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 376 . Publication date : November 2023 . for communication . Some even used Photoshop , PowerPoint or Excel to recreate the board digitally for players in director setups , as this respondent reported : “I made a version of Hive Mind in PowerPoint and shared screens with everyone so they could see me tracking their points and I would read out the cards from the physical game” [ G13 ] . Scanners and printers were particularly important for facilitating roll and write games like Welcome To… [ G31 ] , where directors would scan game sheets for other players to print and write on . 4 . 3 . 2 Players Creatively Made Use of Available Physical Objects to Facilitate Distanced Play . While digital technologies were essential for enabling distanced play , it is important to note the ways that players utilised physical tools in their physical space as well—after all , DHDBs are by nature amalgamations of both the digital and the physical . Many physical objects functioned to assist players in positioning their device cameras appropriately to capture multiple elements of the playing space . Some respondents used tripods , while a small number of respondents used boom arms to support their camera devices . For example , one respondent used such props to keep a steady visual on the playing space , using “a boom arm for a static top down view of the board which I shared to all participants” , while another used a tripod stand “that could easily be moved around the board” to show different areas in a more fluid manner . However , many respondents did not have these items available , so would use objects they had around the house as “impromptu camera stands” . One respondent “used some books to prop up the camera to see the board” , while another “propped my mobile phone on the dining room chandelier to show the table” . Some respondents even fashioned suspension devices to mount their cameras : I played Codenames via facetime / discord by suspending my phone above the dining room table and streaming with friends or family . I created a cardboard platform to hold my phone with a slot cut out for the camera and suspended it via twine from a light fixture above the table . We had an iPad also that would stream our video . [ G8 ] Finally , respondents also used physical objects to help manage the flow of hidden information . As already mentioned , many respondents struggled to find ways to convey specific information or components to individual players , particularly in director setups . Sometimes this was tackled by using physical ‘blockers’ to prevent the players from seeing certain elements of the game : for example , one respondent used “a shoebox to keep cards secret from the dealer but available to the remote player” when playing Brass [ G33 ] . 5 DISCUSSION These findings demonstrate the determination , resilience and creativity of players in continuing to play boardgames during pandemic restrictions . Many people adapted their leisure pursuits in response to these restrictions [ 1 , 12 , 16 , 50 , 69 , 71 ] and “technology was embraced” in the pursuit of leisure [ 73 ] —evidently , boardgaming was no exception . As one respondent noted , “If people are motivated to play , they will find a way to make it work” . Echoing the finding that “there is evidence of a creative and successful translation of physical games into the digital world” among homebrewers despite technical shortcomings [ 48 ] , the findings here detail players’ creative appropriation of digital technology and material tools driven by their own ingenuity . While some respondents mentioned a preference for playing fully online versions of boardgames , a great many still engaged in homebrewed hybridity in order to maintain the satisfaction and connection brought about by physical boards and pieces . Like Yuan et al . ’s study [ 75 ] , the present paper Lessons from Homebrewed Hybridity 376 : 19 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 376 . Publication date : November 2023 . further supports past work that emphasises the importance of materiality and physical components in boardgaming [ 14 , 53 ] . There is much to learn from players’ homebrewing efforts . Although the COVID - 19 pandemic represents a unique and unusual context , respondents offered much detail regarding their design choices that has implications for boardgame design for distanced play more generally . As we discussed in Section 2 . 4 , a handful of authors have put forward their own design considerations for boardgame design in distanced contexts , presenting useful concepts focused on facilitating a positive , shared social experience for players . Offering an alternative , bottom - up perspective , the present study focuses on the precise setups and technologies involved in hybrid distanced play . This affords us a deeper look into the ground - level design of these games . As such , our work extends and complements this prior work . In choosing what kind of game to play , what mode to play it in , and figuring out how to implement it , players faced a great deal of decision - making in actualizing boardgame play at a distance . While some saw success in their setups—one respondent even mentioned that they “discovered new ways to play that I ' ll probably be utilising well into the future”—others found them too cumbersome ; at the same time , many respondents agreed that certain kinds of games and setups worked more efficiently . In this section , we put forward a set of design considerations focused on practical processes , decision - making and facilitation . This allows us to fill out concepts like sociality and tangibility that have been highlighted in previous work while offering concrete directions for design . Drawing directly from our findings , we present these considerations to mirror the three main question prompts that faced the respondents in the present study , but with a focus on design instead of play : 1 ) What kind of game should we design ? ; 2 ) How should the game be set up ? ; and 3 ) How do we make the game work ? In responding to these questions , we also detail the novel DHYE ( Distanced Hybrid plaY Experience ) framework , which offers seven interrelated practical considerations and key related questions for designing DHDBs ( see Table 1 ) . Table 1 : The DHYE ( Distanced Hybrid plaY Experience ) Framework of design considerations for distanced hybrid digital boardgames . Design prompt Design consideration Key questions What kind of game should we design ? Context Why are your players distanced ? What kind of experience are they likely to desire given that context ? Complexity Which mechanisms and arrangements will lend the game an appropriate level of complexity given the context ? How should the game be set up ? Contribution What tasks is each player responsible for ? Communication How can distanced players communicate ( or not communicate ) with one another ? How do we make the game work ? Creativity How can novel technologies be used in creative ways to facilitate play in DHDBs ? Cohesion How can we ensure the story , mechanisms , and distanced context complement and reinforce one another ? Cost What is the monetary cost of the game for designers and players ? 376 : 20 Lucy A . Sparrow and Melissa J . Rogerson Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 376 . Publication date : November 2023 . 5 . 1 What Kind of Game Should We Design ? 5 . 1 . 1 Context . Respondents in this study were particularly keen to play simple and / or cooperative games that provided a more lighthearted and social experience ( see also Yuan et al . ’s work [ 75 ] ) . This was especially important to the respondents because of the pandemic , which had both prevented loved ones from socialising in person and had generated considerable stress that limited their mental and physical resources . Not all DHDBs will be played during a pandemic , but in reflecting on what kind of DHDB to design , it is important to note the first consideration of the DHYE framework : Context . Why are your players distanced , and what kind of experience are they likely to desire given that context ? Reasons for players being distanced might include families living across the globe , partners in long - distance relationships , quarantine periods , mobility constraints or hospital stays . In any case , the distance may already create a situation in which people have a stronger desire to connect and socialise with their fellow players . A cooperative design is not necessary to facilitate this , but it is one way to promote the kind of experience that directly addresses the distanced context . Taking context into account also means considering any limitations players might be facing in their physical environment , including how much table space they may have available and what technologies they have on hand . 5 . 1 . 2 Complexity . Respondents avoided games with hidden information and components like cards due to the difficulty of facilitating these kinds of mechanisms at a distance . Certainly , homebrewing games with these kinds of mechanisms can be complicated , and it is likely to be a challenge for designers as well . Here , we must consider the second consideration of the DHYE framework : Complexity . Which mechanisms and arrangements will lend themselves an appropriate level of complexity given the context ? At times , players reported a high cognitive load in the homebrew process , describing it as “difficult” , “awful” , “tiresome” , “cumbersome” , “too much work” , “prohibitive” , and “extra mental overhead” . Hybrid distanced play in any context can quickly become burdensome , and common mechanisms that are relatively straightforward in co - located play such as card drafting or set collection may become quite complex in DHDBs . The path of least resistance for both designers and players may involve an avoidance of mechanisms that rely heavily on shared physical components and / or hidden information . That said , although respondents frequently struggled to handle these kinds of mechanisms in existing boardgames , designing a DHDB from scratch means that there are a number of opportunities available to designers to employ workarounds through the use of novel technologies such as RFID tags and companion apps ( see Section 5 . 2 . 3 for further discussion ) . In this sense , the use of digital tools can help to maintain satisfying gameplay without sacrificing certain game mechanisms that would otherwise make the game too complicated in a distanced context . Regardless , in choosing an approach to complexity , designers must carefully consider what they expect players to already know how to do and what technology they are expected to understand how to operate . 5 . 2 How Should the Game Be Set Up ? In this study we identified three main setups used by players in homebrewed settings—director , symmetrical , and distributed—and two mixtures of these setups , director - symmetrical and director - distributed . These findings extend previous work in remote HDB play during the pandemic : Ramirez Gomez and Stawarz [ 48 ] suggest that remote board games rely on a “game master” , though the present study shows this is not always the case ; furthermore , while Yuan et Lessons from Homebrewed Hybridity 376 : 21 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 376 . Publication date : November 2023 . al . [ 75 ] identify director ( “Gamemaster [ GM ] does - it - all” ) and symmetrical ( “Mirror boards” ) setups in their work alongside “face - camera only” and “pen - and - paper” games , they do not discuss distributed setups or mixed setups . 5 . 2 . 1 Contribution . Outside of homebrewed contexts , then , one key decision a designer will need to make is to choose between these different setups . In doing so , it is important for designers to consider what Contribution they want each player to bring to the game . What tasks is each player responsible for ? In director setups , one player can be responsible for a range of activities , including moving pieces , dealing cards or resources , tracking players , providing and receiving instructions , and more . Like a game master in a tabletop roleplaying game , the director could also be responsible for guiding a game’s story and implementing music or sound effects . In this way , directors make significant contributions to the gameplay while other players contribute less . This kind of setup would thus work better with games that utilise a central board or mechanism , one that is heavily story - driven , or with games where players only need to provide simple directions , clues or prompts . However , while the director setup was the most popular among homebrewers in this study , it was also noted to be particularly “cumbersome” for the director player . Just as Yuan et al . [ 75 ] found that this setup can make the game feel like “work” to directors , respondents in this study described this setup as “tricky” and “asking a lot of effort from the person with the game” . Non - director players may also have limited access to the physical pieces , thus losing out on the benefits of tangible play . Players are not contributing equally to the gameplay’s functioning , and this can hinder a more social experience , burden the director player , and make other players feel reduced agency in the game’s operation . Any DHDB with a director setup must appropriately manage player contributions to avoid these pitfalls . On the other hand , symmetrical setups require everyone to have an identical copy of the game . Without a director or single shared playing space , players are likely to contribute more equally to the gameplay on a level playing field . Respondents often responded well to this setup , noting that it helped to take out the “alpha gamer” while also making boardgame play feel more “real” as everyone had access to a board . One way to design a symmetrical game is to—as many players in the present study did , and as is common in play - by - mail games [ 5 ] —require players to update their boards according to each other’s moves . However , this can be “clunky and slow” . It can also introduce a high risk of error , and this is a possibility even in director - symmetrical setups where one player is in charge of ensuring all boards are updated properly or controls a master board . Alternatively , symmetrical setups can also involve providing each player with the same game elements , but individualized for each player . This approach may work particularly well in games that involve individual resource management , as in worker placement games and deck , bag or pool building games . For example , in The Quacks of Quedlinburg [ G34 ] , each player has their own bag of chips and board to play with , demonstrating a “pacific” approach with limited direct conflict that is a common feature of many Eurogames [ 47 ] . Note however that in these kinds of setups players all contribute equally but also largely independently , which may reduce communication and cooperation between players . Although less common in homebrew contexts , distributed setups offer some real design opportunities that allow players to contribute in unique ways to the gameplay . In these setups , purposefully distributed components mean that each player can take control of one particular aspect of the game—every player has their own responsibilities , no single player is required to manage the overall gameplay , and every player has access to physical pieces . For example , 376 : 22 Lucy A . Sparrow and Melissa J . Rogerson Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 376 . Publication date : November 2023 . different players may manage and manipulate different resource types or control their own player pieces and cards . This setup can particularly lend itself to cooperative games , especially those with unique roles mechanisms , where players work together toward a shared goal ( see the design of Rogerson et al . ’s Escaping the Laboratorium of Dr Moustache [ 54 ] ) . Director - distributed setups are also promising here ; although one player might take on more responsibilities than the others ( such as by managing player movement ) , it is not uncommon in boardgame play for one player to be more dominant than the others , particularly when they are teaching or leading a game [ 52 ] . 5 . 2 . 2 Communication . Regardless of what setup is chosen , it is clear that players need to be able to engage in Communication regarding their decisions and moves effectively , especially if important social elements of boardgaming are to be retained [ 39 , 53 , 75 ] . So how should distanced players communicate with one another ? Respondents used a variety of communication software for this purpose , including combinations of voice , video and text chat . Designers of DHDBs may choose to facilitate communication primarily through either external software or communication tools built into the game . As communication software tools are widely available , it may be tempting to rely on players to find their own preferred tools . It is important to bear in mind , however , that communication software in its current state has been found to hinder DHDB play in a number of ways [ 48 , 75 ] ; such tools are not always reliable , may be liable to changes that could impact the way a game is played , and not all players will have equal access to and understanding of them . In light of this , there is an opportunity here for designers to consider how communication might be built into the game . A number of authors suggest there is promise in leveraging biometric indicators to promote shared awareness of bodily cues such as eye gaze , heart rate and touch [ 23 , 37 , 48 , 75 ] , though further evidence is needed to determine if these indicators reveal meaningful player information in a boardgame context . Elsewhere , researchers have explored how to communicate a sense of presence despite distance between participants [ 2 , 10 ] ; this ambient awareness may provide players with a sense of shared activity and focus . On the other hand , designers may consider moving in the opposite direction : that is , reducing the amount of communication required for the game to be played . As we will discuss in the next section , this can be done by integrating distance into the gameplay itself alongside particular digital technologies . 5 . 3 How Do We Make the Game Work ? 5 . 3 . 1 Creativity . A core goal in the design of DHDBs is to effectively combine both digital technologies and physical objects to facilitate a functioning game and an enjoyable player experience . In the present study , players often struggled with integrating digital technologies available to them to replicate the face - to - face experience for distanced play , making use of multiple cameras and widely available software with varied levels of success and satisfaction . However , designers have a lot more tools available to them than players did during the pandemic . We stress here that there are many opportunities for technologies to be utilised in novel ways to ameliorate the challenges brought about by hybrid distanced play , and even to disrupt consensus about what hybrid distanced play can or should look like . In discerning how to make the game work , then , we emphasise the fifth consideration of the DHYE framework : Creativity . How can novel technologies be used in creative ways to facilitate play in DHDBs ? In the previous section , we discussed how biometric technologies have been put forward as ways to facilitate communication during play . Using typical communication software in combination with cameras and microphones for boardgaming can be laborious , tiring , and do not Lessons from Homebrewed Hybridity 376 : 23 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 376 . Publication date : November 2023 . currently allow for users to adequately interpret eye gaze and body language . If the goal in designing a DHDB is to replicate or imitate in - person boardgaming experience , then improving and seeking out technology that offers a more ‘realistic’ experience is a must . This may involve integrating eye trackers and physiological sensors such as heart rate monitors or galvanic skin response sensors into the game’s design [ 23 ] —the game Ninja Catfoot and the Covert Action [ G28 ] , for example , uses the accelerometer present in players’ smartphones to monitor and respond to players’ hand movements . It may also mean enhancing the storytelling aspect of a game to build more of a shared game world through the use of immersive tools such as soundtracks [ 22 , 57 ] . However , rather than seeking out ways to imitate or leverage in - person interaction , designers may instead only allow for limited methods of interaction . Rogerson et al . [ 55 ] demonstrate a number of DHDB designs that make use of tools such as location and pressure sensors , microphones and smart lights that allow players to sense or infer other players’ moves without the need for external communication software . Synchronised sensors that pick up player movements , decisions and positions on symmetrical or distributed boards in combination with technological indicators such as lights and speakers opens up many opportunities for DHDB designers . Similarly , mobile apps that allow players to convey or gather information through RFID tags embedded into the physical components offer much creative potential . While this may reduce the social experience of the game in some ways , it also has the potential to provide a unique and satisfying standalone game experience that nevertheless offers an ‘ambient’ awareness of other players . 5 . 3 . 2 Cohesion . This brings us to our sixth consideration , Cohesion . In our creative use of technology , how can we ensure the story , mechanisms , and distanced context complement and reinforce one another ? For many respondents , the distance was an obstacle to overcome , requiring at times significant coordination and articulation [ 52 , 59 ] . Very few respondents managed to achieve a setup that was enjoyable in its own right and not a temporary substitute for in - person gaming ( or as one respondent wrote , a “second hand gaming experience” ) . However , distance can be an important feature of the game itself . Establishing cohesion in this sense , then , means considering how the distanced context—and the limited connections and communication this can bring—can be embedded into the game’s premise . Why are game characters unable to communicate easily , or why are they not located together on a shared board ? Rogerson et al . [ 54 , 55 ] suggest that distance is not merely a design challenge or obstacle but can be used as a springboard for the narrative and mechanisms of the game . For example , their DHDB concept Escaping the Laboratorium of Dr Moustache [ 54 ] puts players in the position of princesses who are lost and separated from each other in an abandoned laboratory , and who must find each other and work together in order to escape . In combination with sensors , sound effects and smart lights , this kind of game design does not simply try to replicate in - person boardgaming but seeks to leverage the affordances of the distance itself to present a novel gameplay experience that can be a “first choice for play” . 5 . 3 . 3 Cost . We conclude our framework with a practical consideration : Cost . What is the monetary cost of the game for designers and players ? Integrating digital technologies in the ways previously described can become costly : as Rogerson et al . [ 54 ] note , requiring multiple boards in a symmetrical setup can be “prohibitively expensive” for both players and designers alike . For example , a 10x10 board with 100 pressure sensors quadruples in cost if the game is designed to allow for up to four players . Moreover , there may be significant infrastructure expenses for publishers [ 56 ] . 376 : 24 Lucy A . Sparrow and Melissa J . Rogerson Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 376 . Publication date : November 2023 . This again raises a recurring dilemma in DHDB design : Should all the tools required to play the game be included in the box to provide a complete experience , as preferred by many hobbyist boardgamers [ 56 ] ? Or should players be relied upon to bring their own technologies to a play session or use external software and—potentially—custom hardware ? While the former may be preferable , it is expensive ; and while the latter may be more affordable , it can be excluding and unreliable . As in all production endeavours , balancing and weighing the costs of DHDBs is likely to require careful ongoing consideration . 5 . 4 Limitations and Future Work While our survey allowed us to explore a wide variety of homebrew practices , the survey format meant that we were unable to explore responses in greater detail , follow up on descriptions that we found difficult to interpret ( such as in responses with grammatical issues , typos or incomplete sentences ) , or observe the reported practices in person . Respondents may have been more likely to share their more notable successes or failures rather than their everyday practices , leaving out information that would have been valuable to furthering our understanding of homebrewed hybridity . Although we argue that the homebrew practices of players during the pandemic provides a useful starting point for understanding DHDB design , the target practices took place in a unique context that has valuable but imperfect applications to DHDB design in other contexts and among professional designers . In light of these limitations , there are many exciting opportunities for further work in this area . The present study could be extended to explore how players creatively appropriate digital technologies and physical tools in other distanced contexts such as long - distance relationships , making use of surveys , interviews , focus groups , direct observations or ethnographic work . Many of our respondents expressed frustration at the lack of guidance on how to play boardgames at a distance , presenting further opportunities to develop player - facing guides that answer our key questions concerning game choice , game mode , and implementation . There is also currently tremendous space for developing novel hybrid boardgames designed specifically for distanced play . Using and evaluating the DHYE framework in the design of DHDBs would further help to hone these considerations and assist designers in pursuing this novel design space . 6 CONCLUSION This paper explored how people appropriated digital technologies and physical tools to play boardgames with distanced friends and family during the COVID - 19 pandemic . Our analysis of over 1300 responses to a worldwide survey indicates that players grappled with deciding which game to choose to play ( including genre , mechanisms , and access considerations ) , how the game should be set up ( including director , symmetrical , distributed and mixed setups ) , and how the game should be implemented through the use of available digital technologies and physical tools . We have reflected and built on these findings to present a set of three fundamental questions for prospective designers of DHDBs alongside the DHYE framework of design considerations , which highlight context , complexity , contribution , communication , creativity , cohesion , and cost . Although restrictions associated with the pandemic have eased in many places around the world , the demand for hybrid distanced play remains . These games have an important role to play in contemporary leisure practices as ways of connecting families and friends who are physically separated from each other . This is an under - explored design space that requires specific attention—the design considerations for DHDBs are similar to but still different from co - located Lessons from Homebrewed Hybridity 376 : 25 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 376 . Publication date : November 2023 . boardgames , and there are multiple challenges involved in designing physical games with distanced players in mind . Nevertheless , we argue that distance can perform a valuable function in boardgames and is not just an obstacle to good design . We hope this paper provides a useful starting point for the further development of this unique and exciting design space for both boardgame designers and scholars alike . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We firstly thank the survey respondents , who so generously shared their experiences and thoughts with us at a particularly difficult time , as well as our colleague Sophie Freeman who joined us for a distanced play session and for subsequent design work . We also thank the presenters and attendees at the Australian and New Zealand Communication Association ( ANZCA ) conference 2022 , who shared their thoughts on an early presentation of a part of this paper . Finally , thanks goes to the University of Melbourne for providing funding for this project through the Early Career Research ( ECR ) Grant scheme . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Konstantinos Alexandris , T Karagiorgos , A Ntovoli and S Zourladani . 2022 . Using the theories of planned behaviour and leisure constraints to study fitness club members’ behaviour after Covid - 19 lockdown . Leisure Studies , 41 ( 2 ) . 247 - 262 . [ 2 ] Aloha Hufana Ambe , Alessandro Soro , Daniel Johnson and Margot Brereton . 2022 . From Collaborative Habituation to Everyday Togetherness : A Long - Term Study of Use of the Messaging Kettle . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) , 29 ( 1 ) . 1 - 47 . 10 . 1145 / 3470973 [ 3 ] Erling Bjögvinsson , Pelle Ehn and Per - Anders Hillgren . 2012 . Design things and design thinking : Contemporary participatory design challenges . Design issues , 28 ( 3 ) . 101 - 116 . [ 4 ] BoardGameGeek . n . d . Distance Gaming Guide | Wiki | BoardGameGeek , https : / / boardgamegeek . com / wiki / page / Distance _ Gaming _ Guide . [ 5 ] Ian Bogost . 2004 . Asynchronous multiplay : Futures for casual multiplayer experience . In Other Players , Center for Computer Games Research , IT University of Copenhagen , Denmark , 6 - 8 December 2004 . [ 6 ] mr boss . 2020 . mr boss’ design lair : 10 Board Games to Play Using Video Conferencing . , http : / / mrbossdesign . blogspot . com / 2020 / 03 / 10 - board - games - to - play - using - video . html [ 7 ] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke . 2020 . One size fits all ? What counts as quality practice in ( reflexive ) thematic analysis ? Qualitative Research in Psychology . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 14780887 . 2020 . 1769238 [ 8 ] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke . 2006 . Using thematic analysis in psychology . Qualitative Research in Psychology , 3 ( 2 ) . 77 - 101 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1191 / 1478088706qp063oa [ 9 ] Margot Brereton , Min Zhen Chai , Alessandro Soro , Aloha Hufana Ambe , Daniel Johnson , Peta Wyeth , Paul Roe and Yvonne Rogers . 2017 . Make and connect : enabling people to connect through their things . In Proceedings of the 29th Australian Conference on Computer - Human Interaction , 612 - 616 . [ 10 ] Margot Brereton , Alessandro Soro , Kate Vaisutis and Paul Roe . 2015 . The messaging kettle : Prototyping connection over a distance between adult children and older parents . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 713 - 716 . [ 11 ] Oğuz Turan Buruk and Oğuzhan Özcan . 2018 . Extracting Design Guidelines for Wearables and Movement in Tabletop Role - Playing Games via a Research Through Design Process . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 - 13 . [ 12 ] Carrie J Cai , Michelle Carney , Nida Zada and Michael Terry . 2021 . Breakdowns and Breakthroughs : Observing Musicians’ Responses to the COVID - 19 Pandemic . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 - 13 . [ 13 ] Rodney P . Carlisle . 2009 . Encyclopedia of play in today ' s society . SAGE , London , UK . [ 14 ] Marcus Carter , Mitchell Harrop and Martin Gibbs . 2014 . The Roll of the Dice in Warhammer 40 , 000 . ToDIGRA : Physical and Digital in Games and Play , 1 ( 3 ) . http : / / todigra . org / index . php / todigra / article / view / 20 / 75 [ 15 ] Wei - Chi Chien , Marc Hassenzahl and Julika Welge . 2016 . Sharing a robotic pet as a maintenance strategy for romantic couples in long - distance relationships . An autobiographical design exploration . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1375 - 1382 . [ 16 ] Wonock Chung , M Rebecca Genoe , Pattara Tavilsup , Samara Stearns and Toni Liechty . 2021 . The ups and downs of older adults’ leisure during the pandemic . World Leisure Journal , 63 ( 3 ) . 301 - 315 . [ 17 ] Victoria Clarke , Virginia Braun , Gareth Terry and Nikki Hayfield . 2019 . Thematic analysis . In Liamputtong , P . ed . Handbook of research methods in health and social sciences , Springer , Singapore , 843 - 860 . 376 : 26 Lucy A . Sparrow and Melissa J . Rogerson Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 376 . Publication date : November 2023 . [ 18 ] Matt Coward - Gibbs . 2020 . Why Don’t We Play Pandemic ? Analog Gaming Communities in Lockdown . Leisure Sciences . 1 - 7 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 01490400 . 2020 . 1773986 [ 19 ] crazyrich . 2020 . Remote Play Guide , https : / / www . reddit . com / r / Gloomhaven / comments / fvzj84 / remote _ play _ guide / . [ 20 ] Sebastian Deterding and José P Zagal . 2013 . Roleplaying Game Studies : A Handbook . [ 21 ] Geoffrey Engelstein and Isaac Shalev . 2022 . Building blocks of Tabletop Game Design : An Encyclopedia of Mechanisms . CRC Press ( Taylor & Francis ) , Boca Raton , FL . [ 22 ] Timea Farkas , Alena Denisova , Sarah Wiseman and Rebecca Fiebrink . 2022 . The Effects of a Soundtrack on Board Game Player Experience . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 - 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3502110 [ 23 ] Jérémy Frey . 2016 . Remote Heart Rate Sensing and Projection to Renew Traditional Board Games and Foster Social Interactions . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , San Jose , CA , ACM , 1865 - 1871 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2851581 . 2892391 [ 24 ] Alessandro Gabbiadini , Cristina Baldissarri , Federica Durante , Roberta Rosa Valtorta , Maria De Rosa and Marcello Gallucci . 2020 . Together apart : the mitigating role of digital communication technologies on negative affect during the COVID - 19 outbreak in Italy . Frontiers in psychology , 11 . 2763 . [ 25 ] Sean Gammon and Gregory Ramshaw . 2021 . Distancing from the present : Nostalgia and leisure in lockdown . Leisure Sciences , 43 ( 1 - 2 ) . 131 - 137 . [ 26 ] Jaina Grey . 2020 . 6 Best Boardgames You Can Play Over Zoom Wired , https : / / www . wired . com / gallery / board - games - for - remote - play / . [ 27 ] Tim Harding . 2010 . Correspondence Chess in Britain and Ireland 1824 – 1987 . McFarland & Company , London , UK . [ 28 ] Yasamin Heshmat and Carman Neustaedter . 2021 . Family and friend communication over distance in Canada during the COVID - 19 pandemic . In Designing Interactive Systems Conference 2021 , 1 - 14 . [ 29 ] Petros Ioannidis and Anders Sundnes Løvlie . 2022 . Exploring affordances through design - after - design : the re - purposing of an exhibition artefact by museum visitors . In Creativity and Cognition , 125 - 134 . [ 30 ] Ville Kankainen and Janne Paavilainen . 2019 . Hybrid Board Game Design Guidelines DiGRA 2019 , Kyoto , Japan . [ 31 ] James C Kaufman and Ronald A Beghetto . 2009 . Beyond big and little : The four c model of creativity . Review of general psychology , 13 ( 1 ) . 1 - 12 . [ 32 ] Young - Jae Kim , Jeong - Hyung Cho and Yeon - Ji Park . 2020 . Leisure sports participants’ engagement in preventive health behaviors and their experience of constraints on performing leisure activities during the COVID - 19 pandemic . Frontiers in Psychology , 11 . 589708 . [ 33 ] Nurit Kirshenbaum . 2021 . Research through Design of Bendable Interactive Playing Cards , University of Hawai ' i at Manoa . [ 34 ] Erica Kleinman , Sara Chojnacki and Magy Seif El - Nasr . 2021 . The gang’s all here : How people used games to cope with COVID19 quarantine . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 - 12 . [ 35 ] Tiffany Knearem , Xiying Wang , Jiaan Wan and John M Carroll . 2019 . Crafting in a community of practice : Resource sharing as key in supporting creativity . In Proceedings of the 2019 on Creativity and Cognition , 83 - 94 . [ 36 ] Brett Lashua , Corey W Johnson and Diana C Parry . 2021 . Leisure in the time of coronavirus : A rapid response special issue . Leisure Sciences , 43 ( 1 - 2 ) . 6 - 11 . [ 37 ] Bernhard Maurer and Verena Fuchsberger . 2019 . Dislocated Boardgames : Design Potentials for Remote Tangible Play . Multimodal Technologies and Interaction , 3 ( 4 ) . 72 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / mti3040072 [ 38 ] Mikko Meriläinen . 2022 . Pandemic rhythms : Adults’ gaming in Finland during the spring 2020 COVID - 19 restrictions . Convergence . 13548565221077582 . [ 39 ] Chelsea Mills , Carman Neustaedter and William Odom . 2021 . Distributed Letter Jam : Designing Distributed Board Game Play for Social Connection . In Companion Publication of the 2021 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing , 135 - 139 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3462204 . 3481753 [ 40 ] Florian Mueller , Sophie Stellmach , Saul Greenberg , Andreas Dippon , Susanne Boll , Jayden Garner , Rohit Khot , Amani Naseem and David Altimira . 2014 . Proxemics play : understanding proxemics for designing digital play experiences . In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on Designing interactive systems , 533 - 542 . [ 41 ] Harold James Ruthven Murray . 1913 . A History of Chess . Benjamin Press , Northampton , Mass . [ 42 ] Jasmin Odenwald , Sven Bertel and Florian Echtler . 2020 . Tabletop teleporter : evaluating the immersiveness of remote board gaming . In Proceedings of the 9TH ACM International Symposium on Pervasive Displays , 79 - 86 . [ 43 ] Ana Patrícia Oliveira , Micael Sousa , Mário Vairinhos and Nelson Zagalo . 2020 . Towards a new hybrid game model : designing tangible experiences . In 2020 IEEE 8th International Conference on Serious Games and Applications for Health ( SeGAH ) , IEEE , 1 - 6 . [ 44 ] Patrick Pollok , André Amft , Kathleen Diener , Dirk Lüttgens and Frank T . Piller . 2021 . Knowledge diversity and team creativity : How hobbyists beat professional designers in creating novel board games . Research Policy , 50 ( 8 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . respol . 2020 . 104174 [ 45 ] Nathaniel Poor . 2014 . Computer game modders’ motivations and sense of community : A mixed - methods approach . New Media & Dociety , 16 ( 8 ) . 1249 - 1267 . [ 46 ] Hector Postigo . 2007 . Of mods and modders : Chasing down the value of fan - based digital game modifications . Games and Culture , 2 ( 4 ) . 300 - 313 . Lessons from Homebrewed Hybridity 376 : 27 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 376 . Publication date : November 2023 . [ 47 ] Lewis Pulsipher . 2006 . The Essence of Euro - style Games . The Games Journal . http : / / thegamesjournal . com / articles / Essence . shtml [ 48 ] Argenis Ramirez Gomez and Katarzyna Stawarz . 2022 . Socially distanced games : Exploring the future opportunities of remote play . In Extended Abstracts of the 2022 Annual Symposium on Computer - Human Interaction in Play , 93 - 102 . [ 49 ] Johan Redström . 2008 . RE : Definitions of use . Design studies , 29 ( 4 ) . 410 - 423 . [ 50 ] Olivia K . Richards , Gabriela Marcu and Robin N . Brewer . 2021 . Hugs , Bible Study , and Speakeasies : Designing for Older Adults’ Multimodal Connectedness Designing Interactive Systems Conference 2021 , Association for Computing Machinery , Virtual Event , USA , 815 – 831 . [ 51 ] Tia Rogers - Jarrell , Deanna Vervaecke and Brad A Meisner . 2021 . Intergenerational family leisure in the COVID - 19 pandemic : Some potentials , pitfalls , and paradoxes . World Leisure Journal , 63 ( 3 ) . 316 - 329 . [ 52 ] Melissa J . Rogerson , Martin Gibbs and Wally Smith . 2018 . Cooperating to Compete : the Mutuality of Cooperation and Competition in Boardgame Play . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , Montreal QC , Canada , ACM , 1 - 13 . 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173767 [ 53 ] Melissa J . Rogerson , Martin Gibbs and Wally Smith . 2016 . “I Love All the Bits” : The Materiality of Boardgames . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , San Jose , California , USA , Association for Computing Machinery , 3956 – 3969 . 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858433 [ 54 ] Melissa J . Rogerson , Lucy A . Sparrow and Sophie O . Freeman . 2023 . Escaping the Laboratorium of Dr Moustache : Learning About Distanced Play Through Game Design . In DiGRA Australia 2023 , Sydney , Australia . [ 55 ] Melissa J . Rogerson , Lucy A . Sparrow and Sophie O . Freeman . 2022 . The SMeFT Decks : A Card - Based Ideation Tool for Designing Hybrid Digital Boardgames for Distanced Play . In Proceedings of the Australian Conference on Computer - Human Interaction ( OzCHI22 ) , Canberra , Australia , ACM . . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3572921 . 3572933 [ 56 ] Melissa J . Rogerson , Lucy A . Sparrow and Martin R . Gibbs . 2021 . More Than a Gimmick – Digital Tools for Boardgame Play . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , 5 ( CHI PLAY ) . Article 261 . 10 . 1145 / 3474688 [ 57 ] Melissa J . Rogerson , Lucy A . Sparrow and Martin R . Gibbs . 2021 . Unpacking “Boardgames with Apps” : The Hybrid Digital Boardgame Model . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 - 17 . 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445077 [ 58 ] Diane M Samdahl . 2021 . Advice for leisure studies : reflections on the pandemic from a retired professor . Leisure Sciences , 43 ( 1 - 2 ) . 247 - 251 . [ 59 ] Kjeld Schmidt and Liam Bannon . 1992 . Taking CSCW seriously : Supporting Articulation Work . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) , 1 ( 1 - 2 ) . 7 - 40 . [ 60 ] Heather Schwedel . 2020 . The Ingenious Ways People Are Playing Board Games on Zoom : Everyone has a Codenames method . Slate , https : / / slate . com / human - interest / 2020 / 03 / board - games - video - chat - codenames . html . [ 61 ] Paul Scriven . 2021 . From Tabletop to Screen : Playing Dungeons and Dragons during COVID - 19 . Societies , 11 ( 4 ) . 125 . [ 62 ] Xiangyou Shen , Megan MacDonald , Samuel W Logan , Colby Parkinson , Lydia Gorrell and Bridget E Hatfield . 2022 . Leisure engagement during COVID - 19 and its association with mental health and wellbeing in US adults . International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health , 19 ( 3 ) . 1081 . [ 63 ] Samarth Singhal , Carman Neustaedter , Yee Loong Ooi , Alissa N Antle and Brendan Matkin . 2017 . Flex - N - Feel : The design and evaluation of emotive gloves for couples to support touch over distance . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing , 98 - 110 . [ 64 ] Olli Sotamaa . 2010 . When the game is not enough : Motivations and practices among computer game modding culture . Games and Culture , 5 ( 3 ) . 239 - 255 . [ 65 ] Philip Tchernavskij , Andrew M Webb , Hayden Gemeinhardt and Wendy E Mackay . 2022 . Readymades & Repertoires : Artifact - Mediated Improvisation in Tabletop Role - Playing Games . In Creativity and Cognition , 298 - 311 . [ 66 ] Gareth Terry and Nikki Hayfield . 2021 . Essentials of Thematic Analysis . American Psychological Society , Washington , DC . [ 67 ] Anna Vallgårda and Ylva Fernaeus . 2015 . Interaction design as a bricolage practice . In Proceedings of the ninth international conference on tangible , embedded , and embodied interaction , 173 - 180 . [ 68 ] Elise van den Hoven and Ali Mazalek . 2007 . Tangible play : research and design for tangible and tabletop games . In International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces : Proceedings of the 12 th international conference on Intelligent user interfaces , Citeseer , 6 - 6 . [ 69 ] Marco van Leeuwen , Yvonne Klerks , Bertine Bargeman , Jasper Heslinga and Marcel Bastiaansen . 2020 . Leisure will not be locked down – insights on leisure and COVID - 19 from the Netherlands . World Leisure Journal , 62 ( 4 ) . 339 - 343 . [ 70 ] Dulakshi Wannigamage , Michael Barlow , Erandi Lakshika and Kathryn Kasmarik . 2020 . Analysis and prediction of player population changes in digital games during the COVID - 19 pandemic . In AI 2020 : Advances in Artificial Intelligence : 33rd Australasian Joint Conference , AI 2020 , Canberra , ACT , Australia , November 29 – 30 , 2020 , Proceedings 33 , Springer , 458 - 469 . [ 71 ] DJ Williams . 2021 . From gym rat to rock star ! Negotiating constraints to leisure experience via a strengths and substitutability approach . Leisure Sciences , 43 ( 1 - 2 ) . 31 - 35 . 376 : 28 Lucy A . Sparrow and Melissa J . Rogerson Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CHI PLAY , Article 376 . Publication date : November 2023 . [ 72 ] Lillian Yang and Carman Neustaedter . 2020 . An autobiographical design study of a long distance relationship : When telepresence robots meet smart home tools . In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference , 129 - 140 . [ 73 ] Marié EM Young . 2020 . Leisure pursuits in South Africa as observed during the COVID - 19 pandemic . World leisure journal , 62 ( 4 ) . 331 - 335 . [ 74 ] Xuqin Yu , Masa Inakage and Atsuro Ueki . 2021 . Aesthetic nostalgia mediated design for long distance relationship . In 10th International Conference on Digital and Interactive Arts , 1 - 5 . [ 75 ] Ye Yuan , Jan Cao , Ruotong Wang and Svetlana Yarosh . 2021 . Tabletop Games in the Age of Remote Collaboration : Design Opportunities for a Socially Connected Game Experience . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , Yokohama , Japan , Association for Computing Machinery , Article 436 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445512 LUDOGRAPHY [ G1 ] Adrian Adamescu and Daryl Andrews . 2017 . Sagrada , Floodgate Games , Minneapolis , MN , USA . [ G2 ] Rob Angel . 1985 . Pictionary , Hasbro , Pawtucket , RI , USA . [ G3 ] Mr . Bistro , J . Arthur Ellis , and Isaac Vega . 2020 . Forgotten Waters , Plaid Hat Games , Ashland , OH , USA . [ G4 ] Inka Brand , Markus Brand , and Ralph Querfurth . 2019 . Exit : The Game - Theft on the Mississippi , KOSMOS , Stuttgart , Germany . [ G5 ] Alfred Mosher Butts . 1948 . Scrabble , James Brunot , Newtown , CT . [ G6 ] Allan B . Calhamer . 1959 . Diplomacy , The Avalon Hill Game Co , Renton , WA , USA . [ G7 ] Isaac Childres . 2017 . Gloomhaven , Cephalofair Games , Lafayette , IN , USA . [ G8 ] Vlaada Chvátil . 2015 . Codenames , Czech Games Edition , Kladno , Czech Republic . [ G9 ] David Cicurel . 2018 . Chronicles of Crime , Lucky Duck Games , Kraków , Poland . [ G10 ] Rob Daviau and Matt Leacock . 2015 . Pandemic Legacy : Season 1 , Z - Man Games , Mahopac , NY . [ G11 ] Cyril Demaegd . 2017 . Unlock ! The Formula , Space Cowboys , Boulogne , France . [ G12 ] Paul Dennen . 2016 . Clank ! A Deck - Building Adventure , Renegade Game Studios , San Diego , CA , USA . [ G13 ] Richard Garfield . 2016 . Hive Mind , Calliope Games , Asheville , NC , USA . [ G14 ] Richard Garfield . 1993 . Magic : The Gathering , Wizards of the Coast , Seattle , WA , USA . [ G15 ] Richard Garfield . 1994 . RoboRally , Wizards of the Coast , Renton , WA , USA . [ G16 ] Raymond Edwards , Suzanne Goldberg and Gary Grady . 1982 . Sherlock Holmes : Consulting Detective , Sleuth Publications . [ G17 ] Gary Gygax and Dave Arneson . 1973 . Dungeons and Dragons , TSR , Inc , Lake Geneva , WI . [ G18 ] Nathan I . Hajek and Grace Holdinghaus . 2019 . The Lord of the Rings : Journeys in Middle - Earth , Fantasy Flight Games , Roseville , MN . [ G19 ] Nick Hayes . 2013 . Heads Up ! Party Game , Spin Master Ltd , Toronto , Canada . [ G20 ] Reiner Knizia . 2020 . My City , Kosmos , Stuttgart , Germany . [ G21 ] Kevin Lanzing . 2011 . Flash Point : Fire Rescue , Indie Boards & Cards , Oakland , CA , USA . [ G22 ] Alan R . Moon . 2004 . Ticket to Ride , Days of Wonder . [ G23 ] Parker Brothers . 1988 . Scattergories , Pawtucket , RI , USA . [ G24 ] Anthony Ernest Pratt and Elva Pratt . 1944 . Cluedo ( US title : Clue ) , Hasbro , Pawtucket , RI , USA . [ G25 ] Uwe Rosenberg . 2019 . Second Chance , Edition Spielwiese , Berlin , Germany . [ G26 ] Ludovic Roudy and Bruno Sautter . 2018 . Just One , Repos Production , Brussels , Belgium . [ G27 ] Sid Sackson . 1980 . Can ' t Stop , Parker Brothers , Pawtucket , RI , USA . [ G28 ] Jun Sasaki . 2020 . Ninja Catfoot and the Covert Action , Oink Games , Japan . [ G29 ] Andreas Seyfarth . 2002 . Puerto Rico , Alea , Bernau am Chiemsee , Germany . [ G30 ] Ondra Skoupý . 2019 . Letter Jam , Czech Games Edition . [ G31 ] Benoit Turpin . 2018 . Welcome To . . . Blue Cocker Games , Toulouse , France . [ G32 ] Phil Walker - Harding . 2013 . Sushi GO ! , Adventureland Games , Sydney , Australia . [ G33 ] Martin Wallace . 2007 . Brass ( Brass : Lancashire ) , Warfrog Games , Manchester , UK . [ G34 ] Wolfgang Warsch . 2018 . The Quacks of Quedlinburg ( Die Quacksalber von Quedlinburg ) , Schmidt Spiele , Berlin , Germany . [ G35 ] Peter Wichmann . 2017 . NMBR 9 , Abacusspiele , Dreieich , Germany . Received 2023 - 02 - 21 ; accepted 2023 - 07 - 07 .