Novel Isoform of Insulin Receptor Substrate p53 / p58 Is Generated by Alternative Splicing in the CRIB / SH3 - binding Region * Received for publication , March 14 , 2002 , and in revised form , April 14 , 2002 Published , JBC Papers in Press , May 2 , 2002 , DOI 10 . 1074 / jbc . M202512200 Carlos E . Alvarez , J . Gregor Sutcliffe‡ , and Elizabeth A . Thomas From the Department of Molecular Biology , The Scripps Research Institute , La Jolla , California 92037 Insulin receptor substrate p53 / p58 ( IRSp53 ) is in - volved in cytoskeletal dynamics and is a candidate dis - ease sensor in polyglutamine expansion neurodegenera - tion . It is widely expressed throughout the body , but its levels are dramatically elevated in forebrain regions . IRSp53 functions as a signal transducing adaptor be - tween activated Rho family GTPases and their effectors . There are four known alternatively spliced isoforms of IRSp53 that vary by the identity of the 3 (cid:1) - terminal exon . We report here that there is a fifth alternatively spliced isoform , IRSp53 - B , which lacks 40 amino acids abutting the CRIB / SH3 ( Cdc42 / Rac - interactive binding / Src ho - mology 3 ) - binding site . We speculate that the novel form has an altered function related to the mechanism of autoinactivation . IRSp53 - B has an odd history in the mammalian lineage , which may complicate the use of rodent models to study cytoskeletal reorganization . Insulin receptor substrate p53 / p58 ( IRSp53 ) 1 is a central player in cytoskeletal reorganization and a candidate disease sensor of neurodegenerative polyglutamine ( polyQ ) expan - sions . Biochemical studies have shown that IRSp53 interacts with many proteins that fall into two classes . The first class is transmembrane receptors , and the interacting proteins are the insulin receptor ( Tyr kinase ) ( 1 ) and brain - specific angiogene - sis inhibitor ( G protein - coupled receptor ) ( 2 ) . Cell culture stud - ies show that hamster IRSp53 is phosphorylated by activated forms of human insulin and insulin receptor - related receptors , as well as by the Drosophila insulin receptor ( 1 ) . Rat brain insulin receptors are highly enriched in postsynaptic fractions ( 3 ) . In cultured hippocampal neurons , IRSp53 and insulin re - ceptors are co - localized to postsynaptic densities . The func - tional effects of insulin / insulin - like growth factor 1 - induced phosphorylation of IRSp53 are not known . The second class of IRSp53 - binding proteins is involved in stimulus - mediated actin and microtubule cytoskeletal reorga - nization ( reviewed in Ref . 4 ) . Those proteins are three Rho family GTPases ( Rho , Rac , and cdc42 ) and three Rho family effectors ( mDia , WAVE2 , and Mena ) . Two regions of IRSp53 have been shown to interact with GTPases . Rac binds in the helical domain ( somewhere in the N - terminal 229 aa ) ( 5 ) and cdc42 binds in a partial CRIB domain that is 16 aa downstream of the helical domain ( 6 , 7 ) . Unbound IRSp53 has an inacces - sible SH3 domain . Activated forms of GTPases bind IRSp53 and allow its SH3 domain to bind effectors , resulting in various types of actin filament dynamics . Studies show that , through interactions with IRSp53 , Rho activates mDia , Rac activates WAVE2 , and cdc42 activates Mena ( 5 , 7 , 8 ) . Thus , IRSp53 is an adaptor that couples activators ( Rho GTPases ) and effectors ( Arp2 / 3 - activators ) . IRSp53 also interacts with atrophin - 1 , a protein of unknown function that causes dentatorubral - pallidoluysian atrophy when its polyQ sequence is expanded ( 9 ) . PolyQ expansions in atrophin - 1 result in a reduced affinity for IRSp53 . A key puzzle regarding polyQ disease is how widely expressed mutant pro - teins can lead to highly tissue - specific cell death . We showed that IRSp53 and atrophin - 1 are coexpressed in some cells , e . g . in medium spiny neurons of the striatum ( 10 ) . Furthermore , although IRSp53 mRNA is expressed widely throughout the body , it is very strongly enriched in the forebrain and , to a lesser extent , the cerebellum , tissues that are affected in var - ious types of polyQ neurodegeneration ( EST SE23B in Ref . 11 ) ( 10 ) . We and others have speculated that the role of IRSp53 in polyQ disease may not be restricted to dentatorubral - pallidol - uysian atrophy ( 9 , 10 ) . IRSp53 originally was identified as IRSp53 / p58 , a hamster insulin receptor substrate of 53 and 58 kDa ( 1 ) . There is a protein family with the same activity and name , IRS . IRSp53 is not a member of the IRS gene family . The N - terminal half of the protein is an IRSp53 - specific domain predicted to be almost purely helical . Although there are yeast homologs of Rho GTPases , of IRSp53 effectors , and of another IRSp53 - related adaptor ( WIP ) , there is no compelling yeast homolog of IRSp53 . There is one candidate yeast homolog , Hof1p , which has an SH3 domain and a weak match to a small portion of the helical domain , but the most divergent species from mammals that has a clear IRSp53 homolog is Drosophila ( this study ) . Flies have one IRSp53 gene , and humans have two ( the second is IRSp53 - L ) . Four isoforms of human and rat IRSp53 have been charac - terized by Western blotting analysis ( 12 ) . These forms are mediated by alternative splicing of the 3 (cid:1) - terminal exon ; they have identical sequences for the first 511 aa followed by unique sequences of 9 – 41 aa . It is not clear what the functional sig - nificance of these alternative forms is . We report here the discovery of a novel alternatively spliced isoform that lacks 40 aa in the CRIB / SH3 - binding region . This novel form has a curious history in the mammalian lineage , which may compli - cate the study of human cytoskeletal reorganization in rodent * This work was funded by National Institutes of Health Grant GM32355 ( to J . G . S . ) and a supplemental fellowship from the same source ( to C . E . A . ) . The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges . This article must therefore be hereby marked “ advertisement ” in accordance with 18 U . S . C . Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact . ‡ To whom correspondence should be addressed : Dept . of Molecular Biology , MB10 , The Scripps Research Institute , 10550 North Torrey Pines Rd . , La Jolla , CA 92037 . Tel . : 858 - 784 - 8064 ; Fax : 858 - 784 - 2212 ; E - mail : gregor @ scripps . edu . 1 The abbreviations used are : IRS , insulin receptor substrate ; SH3 , Src homology 3 ; polyQ , polyglutamine ; aa , amino acid ( s ) ; CRIB , Cdc42 / Rac - interactive binding ; RT , reverse transcription ; BisTris , 2 - [ bis ( 2 - hydroxyethyl ) amino ] - 2 - ( hydroxymethyl ) propane - 1 , 3 - diol ; Py , pyrimi - dine ; WASP , Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ; WIP , WASP - interacting protein ; VCA , verprolin homology , cofilin homology , and acidic region . T HE J OURNAL OF B IOLOGICAL C HEMISTRY Vol . 277 , No . 27 , Issue of July 5 , pp . 24728 – 24734 , 2002 © 2002 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , Inc . Printed in U . S . A . This paper is available on line at http : / / www . jbc . org 24728 b y on A p r il 16 , 2008 www . j b c . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m model systems . The location and biochemical profile of the alternative sequence suggest that it is involved in protein bind - ing . We speculate that the affected domain is involved in the autoinactivation mechanism of IRSp53 function . MATERIALS AND METHODS RNA and DNA Studies— Non - human RNA was isolated as poly ( A ) (cid:2) RNA ( FastTrack , Invitrogen ) and made into cDNA ( First - Strand , Am - ersham Biosciences ) . Human total and poly ( A ) (cid:2) RNAs were purchased ( CLONTECH ) . All but three of the human cDNAs were equilibrated by total RNA concentration . The others ( thalamus , striatum , and hypo - thalamus ) , which were made from poly ( A ) (cid:2) RNA , were roughly equili - brated to the former by (cid:1) - actin RT - PCR . The primers distinguish true (cid:1) - actin from pseudogenes HBAL ( 5 (cid:1) to 3 (cid:1) ; ctttgccgatccgccg ) and HBAR ( cgccctggtgcctgg ) . The IRSp53 RT - PCR assay was done with the follow - ing primers : MHI . L ( tccaagtccaacctggtcat ) and MHI . R ( gtcacgctcttgcg - cac ) . PCR was performed with Taq polymerase ( Amersham Biosciences ) as suggested by the manufacturer . The RT - PCR parameters were 94 °C for 1 min followed by 43 cycles of 94 °C for 5 s , 60 °C for 5 s , and 72 °C for 1 s . The genomic PCR parameters were almost the same except with 72 °C for 30 s . Genomic PCR was also done with a partial substitution of dGTP with 7 - Deaza - dGTP . This was done to exclude the possibility that the absence of dog and cow products was due to DNA secondary structure ( as opposed to being prohibitively long ) . For sequencing , PCR products were purified of primers ( Prep - A - Gene , Bio - Rad ) and se - quenced directly ( AmpliCycle , Applied Biosystems ) . The prosimian pri - mate used was Loris tardigradus , and the monkey was Macaca mu - latta . PCR experiments were analyzed by agarose electrophoresis ; negative images of ethidium bromide - stained gels are shown for im - proved contrast . Cloning— IRSp53 - A1 and B1 were cloned into pCRII - TOPO ( Invitro - gen ) oriented to allow transcription from the pCRII T7 promoter . Plas - mid ATG sequences between the T7 promoter and the insert were eliminated by removing the region between the Xba I site and the cloning site . The IRSp53 sequences correspond to GenBank TM se - quences AF390178 ( isoform A ) and AF390179 ( isoform B ) , except they begin 9 bp upstream of those sequences ( 5 (cid:1) terminus is gcagttgtcGCTT - TCCTCAC ; capital letters denote the termini of the GenBank TM se - quences ) . We refer to these clones as pCRII - T7 - IRSp53 - A1 and - B1 . Sequencing was done by a combination of manual isothermal sequenc - ing ( Sequenase , dI version , United States Biochemical ) and Applied Biosystems automated PCR sequencing ( The Scripps Research Insti - tute DNA Facility ) . In Vitro Transcription / Translation— We used T7 polymerase / rabbit reticulocyte lysate ( TnT T7 Quick , Promega ) to do coupled in vitro transcription / translation of our pCRII - T7 - IRSp53 - A1 / B1 clones . This system labels protein by [ 35 S ] methionine incorporation ( Redivue L - [ 35 S ] methionine , Amersham Biosciences ) . The translation products were run on SDS - PAGE under reducing conditions ( NuPAGE 4 – 12 % BisTris gels , Invitrogen ) . Protein molecular weight markers were run F IG . 1 . Alignment of mouse and human IRSp53 - A1 protein sequence . The positions that differ are shown as yellow residues on the human sequence ; the shared positions are simply colored . The CRIB domain is shown in black , and the SH3 - binding site is underlined . The alternative region that is present in IRSp53 - A but absent in the B form is shown in red . The overlying bracket marks the smallest sequence shown to bind cdc42 ( 6 ) . However , it is not known whether any of the second half of that sequence is necessary for that binding . The SH3 domain is in green . The helical domain is shown with the predicted helices marked in blue ( see “Materials and Methods” ) . The perfectly conserved sequences that link the three major helices are overlined . The WW domain and the alternative C - terminal sequence of isoform 1 are given in dark gray and pink , respectively . Alternative Splicing in CRIB / SH3 - binding Region of IRSp53 24729 b y on A p r il 16 , 2008 www . j b c . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m next to the labeled translation products ( Mark12 , Invitrogen ) . The markers were post - stained with Coomassie Blue , and the gels were dried on paper . Labeled protein was visualized by autoradiography . The log of the marker molecular weights was plotted against the distance migrated , and a best - fitting line was drawn through all the points ( R 2 (cid:3) 0 . 994 ) . The formula of that line was used to extrapolate the experimen - tal products as 53 and 58 kDa . Bioinformatics— The DNA and protein sequences were analyzed with the BLAST and PSI - BLAST versions currently available at NCBI ( www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov ) . DNA and protein data base analysis was done with Release 128 . 0 of GenBank TM . A protein structural prediction of the helical domain was done using 3D - PSSM , a method for protein fold recognition based on one - and three - dimensional sequence profiles cou - pled with two - dimensional structure and solvation potential ( www . bmm . icnet . uk / (cid:4) 3dpssm / ) ( 13 ) . The helices shown in Fig . 1 were derived from analysis of residues 1 – 259 of mouse IRSp53 ; use of full - length IRSp53 - A1 yields almost identical results . Most of the helical position predictions have a score of 9 , the highest confidence level possible for this program . RESULTS AND DISCUSSION In the process of isolating a reference cDNA sequence of mouse IRSp53 ( 10 ) , we found a novel isoform ( Fig . 1 ) . We performed RT - PCR with mouse whole brain cDNA using prim - ers near the translational start site and in the 3 (cid:1) - untranslated regions of IRSp53 – 1 . We cloned the PCR products and se - quenced one clone that is nearly identical to hamster and human IRSp53 but is 120 bp shorter in the middle . We then examined other clones and found that we had isolated two cDNA species of IRSp53 , one with and one without the 120 - bp segment . The full - length forms of mouse and human IRSp53 are 87 % identical ( over the entire coding sequence ) at the DNA level and 96 % identical ( over the entire 522 aa ) at the amino acid level . It is notable that these genes have evolved independ - ently for 160 million years ( they shared a common ancestor approximately 80 million years ago ) . Considering the fact that the third positions of codons are degenerate , 87 % conservation of 1569 bp is highly unusual . This suggests that the third position conservation throughout the length of the transcript is due to RNA secondary structure constraints ( presumably in - volved in RNA stability , localization , or regulation ) . We confirmed the existence of these two forms by designing primers that span the alternative 120 - bp region and repeating the RT - PCR of mouse whole brain cDNA ( Fig . 2 ) . We observed both cDNA species on agarose gels . Those two products were isolated individually from agarose gels , reamplified , and se - quenced directly . The two forms correspond to the two clones we had initially sequenced . As previous studies have referred to one of the 3 (cid:1) - terminal alternatively spliced mRNAs as the “short form , ” we have named the new one the “B form . ” We reasoned that it is the simplest way of referring to the novel alternative position in combination with the four alternative 3 (cid:1) - terminal exons ( the forms we cloned are IRSp53 - A1 and - B1 ) . We examined this novel alternative splice by RT - PCR of various mouse tissues ( Fig . 2 A ) . The levels of IRSp53 mRNA are highly elevated in specific regions of the brain ( 10 , 11 ) , so we focused our analysis on the brain . We find that the two forms are expressed in both the brain and periphery . In each tissue we examined , the levels of the B form are small to moderate fractions of total IRSp53 levels . However , the rela - tive amount of the two species cannot be discerned from these highly saturated PCR experiments . To test for tissue - specific regulation of this alternative splicing phenomenon , we selected cDNAs of apparent low and medium relative IRSp53 - B levels and performed a quantitative version of the same assay . Fig . 2 B shows that the levels of IRSp53 are highly variable between different tissues , roughly 3 % in liver and 30 % in whole brain . This finding suggests that we are not studying a stochastic process based on the relative strength of the two alternative splice sites but , rather , a regulated alternative splice . F IG . 2 . Mouse RT - PCR analysis . A PCR assay spanning the alternatively spliced region was used to amplify IRSp53 - A and - B in one reaction with one pair of primers . PCR products were analyzed by agarose electrophoresis ; negative images of ethidium bromide - stained gels are shown . A , cDNA from various mouse tissues was assayed for the presence of forms A ( 262 bp ) and B ( 142 bp ) . The identity of the larger products is not known , but panel B shows that those products only arise late in the PCR amplification process . B , semiquantitative analysis of two cDNAs from panel A . Liver and brain cDNA was serially diluted 2 - fold and amplified as described in A . In the liver , there is (cid:4) 32 - fold more A form cDNA than B form , and in brain there is (cid:4) 2 - fold more A form . DNA marker sizes are given in bp . m , marker ; (cid:5) , no template control ; br , whole brain ; ob , olfactory bulb ; cx , cortex ; ca , caudate putamen ; hy , hypothalamus ; cb , cerebellum ; li , liver . F IG . 3 . SDS - PAGE analysis of recombinant IRSp53 - A and - B . Mouse IRSp53 - A1 and - B1 were cloned downstream of the T7 promoter . Those constructs were used to perform coupled in vitro transcription / translation with [ 35 S ] Met . The recombinant products were analyzed by reducing SDS - PAGE along with a “no DNA” control ( Ctrl ) . The protein standards were detected by Coomassie Blue staining . The gel was dried and autoradiographed . Protein standards were used to size the recom - binant products . The two products have predicted masses of 58 ( IRSp53 - A ) and 53 ( IRSp53 - B ) kDa . Alternative Splicing in CRIB / SH3 - binding Region of IRSp53 24730 b y on A p r il 16 , 2008 www . j b c . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m There is confusion regarding the identity of IRSp53 protein species observed by SDS - PAGE analysis . There are two pre - dominant species seen in various rodent tissues ( 1 , 3 ) ; one has an apparent mass of 53 kDa and the other of 58 kDa . The molecular bases of the two protein species are not clear . We made protein expression constructs placing the T7 promoter in front of IRSp53 - A and - B and performed coupled in vitro tran - scription / translation . The translation products were analyzed by SDS - PAGE under reducing conditions ( Fig . 3 ) . We found that the two forms have mobilities corresponding to masses of 53 and 58 kDa . We were able to isolate the corresponding genomic region of the mouse IRSp53 by PCR because the intron flanking the alternative sequence is exceptionally short ( Figs . 4 and 5 D ) . Mapping of the alternatively spliced DNA sequence to the genomic sequence reveals that the alternative sequence is not an independent exon but rather is an extension of the down - stream exon . The gene structure of IRSp53 ( data not shown ) reveals that it is exon 9 that has two alternative 3 (cid:1) splice sites . We examined the two mouse splice sites for clues about regu - lation . There are two mechanisms that would explain the vary - ing ratios of A / B forms : activation of one splice site or blocking of the other . Comparison of the two sites weakly favors the later model . When the consensus matching of 3 (cid:1) splice sites is equal , as it is in this case , the strength of splice sites can be attributed to the pyrimidine density of the polypyrimidine ( polyPy ) tract . We observe that the A splice site has a very strong polyPy tract ( Py density of 14 / 15 or 18 / 20 bases ) , and the B splice site has a slightly weaker tract ( 13 / 14 or 16 / 20 ) . The splice site qualities alone would predict an approximately fixed ratio of the two forms , with the A form dominating . That is , the A splice site is very robust , it is stronger than the B site , and it is upstream of the B site . Our finding that the B form may be predominant in some tissues ( thalamus , Fig . 5 A ) hints that this alternative splicing may be regulated by blocking of the A site . We isolated the same region of human IRSp53 and looked for the presence of the alternative splice sites ( Fig . 3 A ) . The hu - man A and B consensus - matching splice sites ( not including polyPy tracts ) are perfectly conserved with those of the mouse , but the relative strengths of the two human polyPy tracts are F IG . 4 . Analysis of mouse and human IRSp53 alternative A and B splice sites . The A and B alternative splice sites of mouse and human IRSp53 were studied by isolating their intron 8 sequences . A , mouse ( top ) and human ( bottom ) genomic sequences are aligned to show sequence conservation and splicing features . Splice sites are bold and underlined . The A - specific exon 9 sequence is yellow , and the shared sequence is blue . The intron is shown by lowercase letters . The presumptive polyPy tract is given in black , and the extended Py tracts are gray . Below the alignment , the splice sites are scored for relative strengths based on the Py densities of the polyPy tracts . B , schematic of the alternative splicing phenomenon ( not drawn to scale ) . F IG . 5 . Comparative analysis of IRSp53 - A / B alternative splicing . The same PCR assay used to analyze alternative splicing of mouse IRSp53 - A / B ( Fig . 2 ) was used to assay cDNA and genomic DNA from closely and distantly related mammals . A , RT - PCR of rat tissue cDNAs shows that both the A and B forms are present and at relative levels similar to that seen in mouse . Thalamus appears to be the only tissue we have examined in mouse or rat that has more of the B form than the A form . The abbreviations are the same as in Fig . 2 , with the addition of the following : th , thalamus ; po , pons ; ki , kidney . B , RT - PCR of human tissue cDNAs reveals only the A form . New abbreviations are : fb , fetal brain ; sc , spinal cord ; he , heart ; fl , fetal liver ; lu , lung ; sp , spleen ; ty , thymus ; te , testes ; pl , placenta ; tr , trachea ; ag , adrenal gland ; pr , prostate ; bm , bone marrow ; sm , skeletal muscle . C , RT - PCR of whole brain cDNA from rhesus monkey and cow reveals only the A form . D , PCR of genomic DNA from mouse ( mo ) , rat ( ra ) , dog ( do ) , cow ( co ) , Loris ( lo ; prosimian primate ) , and human ( hu ) reveals that rodents and primates share a small intron size , but dogs and cows do not . Alternative Splicing in CRIB / SH3 - binding Region of IRSp53 24731 b y on A p r il 16 , 2008 www . j b c . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m more difficult to quantify . The A site polyPy tract appears to be very slightly stronger ( A splice site is 14 / 16 or 17 / 20 and B is 13 / 14 or 16 / 20 ) . However , it should be noted that , unlike the case for most exons , the B splice site and polyPy tract are located in the coding sequence . The mouse / human conservation of DNA sequence in this region could be because of alternative splicing and / or protein sequence conservation . Based on this analysis alone , we would predict the human gene to have the same alternatively spliced B form . Previous protein studies have shown abundant p53 and p58 forms of IRSp53 in hamsters , rats , and mice ( i . e . in rodents ) ( 1 , 3 ) . However , the levels of p53 in pig brain are barely detectable ( 3 ) . Although there are reports of p53 in humans , it is not precisely clear what the identity and / or SDS - PAGE mobility of this species is ( 5 , 9 , 12 ) . We looked for the novel alternative splice in near and distant mammalian relatives of the mouse , e . g . rats and humans ( with approximate divergence times of 10 and 80 million years , respectively ) . cDNAs from various rat and human tissues were tested with the same RT - PCR assay used with mouse ( the primer sequences are conserved in the rodent , bovine , and primate species examined here ) . The B form is present in rats but not in humans ( Fig . 5 , A and B ) . We increased the levels of human cDNA templates and the PCR cycle numbers to approximately single - molecule detection lev - els and did not detect IRSp53 - B in any human tissue . Cow and monkey whole brain cDNAs were tested and also showed no evidence of IRSp53 - B ( Fig . 5 C ) . It is possible that the eighth intron of rodents is so small that it reduces the splicing efficiency of the A splice site , which would lead to an increased use of the nearest downstream site . We examined this intron in IRSp53 from other mammals and found that primates and rodents share a small intron size , but that this is not a conserved mammalian feature ( Fig . 5 D ) . Thus , the rodent and primate introns are exceptionally short , and the cow and dog introns appear to be much larger . The size of the eighth intron does not appear to be related to the presence of the alternative B form ( i . e . humans have a small intron but no form B ) . These findings indicate that there may have been accelerated evolution in this IRSp53 gene region in the mam - malian lineage . We studied the IRSp53 protein sequence for clues about function ( Fig . 1 ) . The partial or variant CRIB domain has been characterized functionally ( 6 , 7 ) , and the SH3 - binding domain has been noted previously ( 14 ) , but we wish to note two obser - vations . First , the CRIB domain and the SH3 - binding site overlap and may represent two functional modes of the same site . Second , although the SH3 - binding site has been referred to as a P xx P sequence ( i . e . a common sequence ) , it is a perfect Class I SH3 - binding site ( N to C terminally , a basic aa followed by two iterations of any aa , a hydrophobic aa , and a Pro ( re - viewed in Ref . 15 ) ) . Another protein sequence feature that has been described only minimally is the helical domain . The dis - tinguishing characteristic of IRSp53 is its predicted helical domain , but it has never been described beyond that point . The mouse helical domain appears to be primarily composed of three large helices ( see “Materials and Methods” ) . Intriguingly , there is strong sequence conservation in the two short se - quences ( SQGSK is perfectly conserved ) that link the three helices . A search for divergent homologs of mammalian IRSp53 using F IG . 6 . CRIB / SH3 - binding site con - servation and model of IRSp53 acti - vation . A , comparison of the Drosophila IRSp53 CRIB / SH3 - binding site with those of mouse and human IRSp53 and with related sequences from other pro - teins ( taken from Ref . 6 ) . Identical posi - tions between all proteins are shown in blue and between IRSp53 proteins in red . The mouse / human variation is in yellow . On the alignment of all related sequences , fly positions that match non - consensus residues are in gray . The underlined se - quence corresponds to the alternatively spliced region that distinguishes form A from B . B , IRSp53 is released from auto - inactivation by cdc42 binding in the CRIB / SH3 - binding region ( black ) . GTPase cdc42 ( G , yellow ) binding frees the SH3 domain ( green ) for Rho family effector ( E , pink ) binding , which leads to Arp2 / 3 - mediated cytoskeletal reorganization . We propose that autoinactivation may be mediated by the interaction of the SH3 - binding site with the SH3 domain . The IRSp53 - A / B al - ternative region ( red ) may be part of the CRIB / SH3 - binding region . Such an ex - tended SH3 - binding region could interact directly with the SH3 domain . Alterna - tively , that region could be necessary for proper folding of the autoinhibited state of IRSp53 or for interaction with other regu - latory proteins . We speculate that in each of these scenarios , the most likely func - tional consequence is that IRSp53 is at least partially constitutively active . Alternative Splicing in CRIB / SH3 - binding Region of IRSp53 24732 b y on A p r il 16 , 2008 www . j b c . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m BLAST analysis yielded a single one , found in Drosophila ( CG7624 aa 41 – 846 , GenBank TM AAF50086 ) . We compared it and a protein commonly referred to as the yeast IRSp53 hom - olog , Hof1p , with the mouse protein . The fly helical domain is 26 % identical , 55 % similar over 141 aa ( with two gaps ) to the mammalian domain . The helical region of yeast Hof1p is 26 % identical , 48 % similar over 75 aa ( two gaps ) in the same region . However , when that core 75 - aa region of mouse IRSp53 ( which matches both the yeast and fly candidates ) is analyzed with PSI - BLAST against the full nonredundant GenBank TM data base , Drosophila IRSp53 is the only non - chordate match ( even after five iterations ) . The fly SH3 domain sequence is 44 % identical , 69 % similar to that of the mouse over 58 aa ( two gaps ) . The yeast SH3 domain is 20 % identical , 44 % similar over 62 aa ( two gaps ) . Finally , we found that Drosophila and mouse IRSp53 share a verprolin domain . 2 The verprolin domain is present only in mammalian isoform 2 , establishing it as the ancestor of the four C - terminal alternative forms ( it is also present in IRSp53 - L ) . The fact that verprolin domains activate Arp2 / 3 ( reviewed in Ref . 16 ) suggests that the ancestral form of IRSp53 directly activates Arp2 / 3 and that the three other mammalian forms require effectors . Based on protein se - quence , it is unclear whether Hof1p is a true homolog of mouse IRSp53 , but the fly protein does appear to be one . When we align IRSp53 from Drosophila and mice , the heli - cal , SH3 , and verprolin domains align robustly . The next best protein match between fly and mouse IRSp53 corresponds to the CRIB / SH3 - binding area ( Fig . 6 A ) . Curiously , the order of the CRIB / SH3 - binding site and the SH3 site are reversed in the two species , but the distance between them is the same . The fly site is 90 aa downstream of the SH3 domain , whereas the mammalian site is 90 aa upstream . Protein alignment of the fly site with that of mouse and human IRSp53 and with related sequences , described by Govind et al . ( 6 ) , suggest that it is a conserved element ( Fig . 6 A ) . Although the sequence homology extends from the CRIB / SH3 - binding site to the alternative exon sequence , three of the six matches in the alternative region are not conserved in humans and mice . This portion could be a spurious match or it could be related to the biology difference between rodents and primates ( i . e . as this region of IRSp53 in the two species has different biochemical roles ) . There are two features of the novel splice variant that have functional implications . First , the alternative sequence is only 4 aa from the CRIB / SH3 - binding site . The alternative form removes 40 aa abutting that functional domain ; it is difficult to imagine that this does not have an effect on the structural context and function of the CRIB / SH3 - binding site . Second , the alternative 40 aa is 15 % Pro and 20 % charged residues , hinting that it is a protein - binding region . It could either be part of the CRIB / SH3 - binding site or it could interact with other proteins . CONCLUSIONS It is widely believed that mammalian proteomes are almost identical and that species variations are mostly due to the regulation of gene expression . Here we report an exception in a highly conserved protein , i . e . protein variation results from regulation of alternative splicing . We observe a novel alterna - tively spliced form of IRSp53 in rodents but not in cows or primates . It remains to be demonstrated that this form is translated and stable . However , several genetic features sug - gest that this form is functional : it represents a significant proportion of IRSp53 transcripts , it is highly regulated , and it has evolved unchecked for at least 20 million years of diver - gence time ( in mice and rats ) . Biochemical considerations are consistent with this possibility and suggest a possible role for the alternative form . It is not yet clear whether the novel form is ancestral and was lost in the human and cow lineages or if it emerged in the rodent lineage . The novel form is the fifth alternatively spliced isoform of IRSp53 . The four other forms represent four different C ter - mini . We have proposed that isoform 2 directly activates Arp2 / 3 , whereas the other forms require intermediary effec - tors . 2 The new B form is generated by the in - frame elimination of 40 aa . This alternative region is 4 aa downstream of the partial CRIB / SH3 - binding site and 45 aa upstream of the SH3 domain . As the full - length protein is 96 % identical between humans and mice , the removal of such a large portion of the protein likely has major functional effects . The fact that the alternative 40 aa are 15 % Pro and 20 % charged residues sug - gests this region is involved in protein binding . The location of the alternative sequence , abutting the CRIB / SH3 - binding site , hints that it may be part of that functional domain . There is a recurring theme in the activation of various types of Ras superfamily effectors . Although GTPases bind to con - served motifs such as the CRIB domain of Rho - family effectors , it is the flanking sequence that undergoes the structural changes required for effector activation ( discussed in Ref . 17 ) . For example , it has been shown that the critical regulatory region of WASP does not include the N - terminal portion of the CRIB domain , but does include the sequence immediately downstream of this domain ( 17 ) . The GTPase - binding domain of WASP mediates autoinactivation by binding the C - terminal VCA region . Activation occurs when a GTPase binds to that site and liberates the VCA . ( Although one of the four IRSp53 iso - forms ( the ancestral isoform present in flies ) has a partially conserved VCA region , 2 it lacks the motif that interacts with the GTPase - binding domain . ) Both IRSp53 and WASP have a polyproline region immediately downstream of the GTPase - binding domain . It is possible that this CRIB - flanking region of IRSp53 has a function similar to that of WASP . These considerations lead us to propose the model in Fig . 6 B . The overlapping CRIB and SH3 - binding sites appear to com - prise one functionally integrated unit . It is known that this CRIB domain interacts with cdc42 and that this interaction results in the breaking of the reclusion of its SH3 domain . The cdc42 - bound form of IRSp53 is active because its SH3 domain is free to interact with Rho family effectors . One possibility is that autoinactivation is mediated by the SH3 - binding site bind - ing to the SH3 domain . ( Although this possibility seems obvi - ous , we have not found it stated in the literature . ) If this were true , we would expect that biochemistry to be affected by the removal of the large alternative sequence that lies between those two domains . We speculate that IRSp53 - B is either con - stitutively active or that it is regulated by another mechanism ( e . g . through the Rac - binding site in the helical domain ) ( 5 ) . Acknowledgments— We thank Derek Wildman and Morris Goodman for their gift of primate DNA and Fernanda Ceriani for providing Drosophila cDNA . We are grateful to Richard Roth for sharing his pCLDN - IRSp53myc clone with us so that we could confirm that it is in fact the IRSp53 - A form . We thank Lauren Sautkulis and Pam Foye for technical assistance . REFERENCES 1 . Yeh , T . C . , Ogawa , W . , Danielsen , A . G . , and Roth , R . A . ( 1996 ) J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 2921 – 2928 2 . Oda , K . , Shiratsuchi , T . , Nishimori , H . , Inazawa , J . , Yoshikawa , H . , Taketani , Y . , Nakamura , Y . , and Tokino , T . ( 1999 ) Cytogenet . Cell Genet . 84 , 75 – 82 3 . Abbott , M . A . , D . G . Wells , D . G . Wells , and Fallon , J . R . ( 1999 ) J . Neurosci . 19 , 7300 – 7308 4 . Bishop , A . L . , and Hall , A . ( 2000 ) Biochem . J . 2 , 241 – 255 5 . Miki , H . , Yamaguchi , H . , Suetsugu , S . , and Takenawa , T . ( 2000 ) Nature 408 , 732 – 735 6 . Govind , S . , Kozma , R . , Monfries , C . , Lim , L . , andAhmed , S . ( 2001 ) J . CellBiol . , 152 , 579 – 594 7 . Krugmann , S . , Jordens , I . , Gevaert , K . , Driessens , M . , Vandekerckhove , J . , and Hall , A . ( 2001 ) Curr . Biol . 11 , 1645 – 1655 2 C . E . Alvarez , manuscript submitted for publication . Alternative Splicing in CRIB / SH3 - binding Region of IRSp53 24733 b y on A p r il 16 , 2008 www . j b c . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m 8 . Fujiwara , T . , Mammoto , A . , Kim , Y . , and Takai , Y . ( 2000 ) Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 271 , 626 – 629 9 . Okamura - Oho , Y . , Miyashita , T . , Ohmi , K . , and Yamada , M . ( 1999 ) Hum . Mol . Genet . 8 , 947 – 957 10 . Thomas , E . A . , Foye , P . E . , Alvarez , C . E . , Usui , H . , and Sutcliffe , J . G . ( 2001 ) Neurosci . Lett . 309 , 145 – 148 11 . Usui , H . , Falk , J . D . , Dopazo , A . , de Lecea , L . , Erlander , M . G . , and Sutcliffe , J . G . ( 1994 ) J . Neurosci . 14 , 4915 – 4926 12 . Okamura - Oho , Y . , T . Miyashita , T . Miyashita , and Yamada , M . ( 2001 ) Bio - chem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 289 , 957 – 960 13 . Kelley , L . A . , R . M . MacCallum , R . M . MacCallum , and Sternberg , M . J . ( 2000 ) J . Mol . Biol . 299 , 499 – 520 14 . Yeh , T . C . , Li , W . , Keller , G . A . , and Roth , R . A . ( 1998 ) J . Cell . Biochem . 68 , 139 – 150 15 . Mayer , B . J . ( 2001 ) J . Cell Sci . 114 , 1253 – 1263 16 . Higgs , H . N . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2001 ) Annu . Rev . Biochem . 70 , 649 – 676 17 . Kim , A . S . , Kakalis , L . T . , Abdul - Manan , N . , Liu , G . A . , and Rosen , M . K . ( 2000 ) Nature 404 , 151 – 158 Alternative Splicing in CRIB / SH3 - binding Region of IRSp53 24734 b y on A p r il 16 , 2008 www . j b c . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m