Current Biology 17 , 395 – 406 , March 6 , 2007 ª 2007 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved DOI 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2007 . 02 . 012 Article Spatial and Temporal Relationships between Actin - Filament Nucleation , Capping , and Disassembly Janet H . Iwasa 1 and R . Dyche Mullins 1 , * 1 Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology University of California , San Francisco School of Medicine , 600 16 th Street San Francisco , California 94143 Summary Background : The leading actin network in motile cells is composed of two compartments , the lamellipod and the lamellum . Construction of the lamellipod requires a set of conserved proteins that form a biochemical cycle . The timing of this cycle and the roles of its components in determining actin network architecture in vivo , how - ever , are not well understood . Results : We performed ﬂuorescent speckle microscopy on spreading Drosophila S2 cells by using labeled deriv - atives of actin , the Arp2 / 3 complex , capping protein , and tropomyosin . We ﬁnd that capping protein and the Arp2 / 3 complex both incorporate at the cell edge but that capping protein dissociates after covering less than half the width of the lamellipod , whereas the Arp2 / 3 complex dissociates after crossing two thirds of the lamellipod . The lamellipodial actin network itself persists long after the loss of the Arp2 / 3 complex . De - pletion of capping protein by RNAi results in the dis - placement of the Arp2 / 3 complex and disappearance of the lamellipod . In contrast , depletion of coﬁlin , sling - shot , twinﬁlin , and tropomyosin , all factors that control the stability of actin ﬁlaments , dramatically expanded the lamellipod at the expense of the lamellum . Conclusions : The Arp2 / 3 complex is incorporated into the lamellipodial network at the cell edge but de - branches well before the lamellipodial network itself is disassembled . Capping protein is required for the for - mation of a lamellipodial network but dissociates from the network precisely when ﬁlament disassembly is ﬁrst detected . Coﬁlin , twinﬁlin , and tropomyosin appear to play no role in lamellipodial network assembly but func - tion to limit its size . Introduction Amoeboid cell motility requires construction of dynamic networks of actin ﬁlaments at the cell’s leading edge . These networks form characteristic compartments , deﬁned by ( i ) proximity to the membrane , ( ii ) rates of ﬁl - ament assembly and disassembly , and ( iii ) velocity of ﬁl - ament movement relative to the cell edge [ 1 – 3 ] . Salmon et al . identiﬁed four distinct compartments in the actin cytoskeleton of migrating newt lung epithelial cells [ 3 ] . At the very front of the cell , in a compartment called the lamellipod , actin ﬁlaments are nucleated and cross - linked and treadmill rapidly toward the cell body as they elongate from their membrane - proximal barbed ends . Filaments in this compartment are relatively short lived and depolymerize not far from the cell edge . Behind the lamellipod is a more slowly moving actin network called the lamellum . A third population of ﬁlaments , located in the cell body , undergoes anterograde ﬂow toward the cell edge . At the boundary between the la - mellum and the cell body , termed the convergence zone , myosin contraction causes actin ﬁlaments from the lamellum and cell body to meet . We previously proposed , based on dendritic nucle - ation by the Arp2 / 3 complex , a biochemical cycle for assembly and disassembly of actin ﬁlaments in motile networks [ 4 ] . In our model , the Arp2 / 3 complex is acti - vated at the membrane of the leading edge by interac - tion with nucleation - promoting factors and preexisting actin ﬁlaments . There , it nucleates new daughter ﬁla - ments that form an interconnected , branching network [ 5 ] . The new ﬁlaments elongate from their free barbed ends , and the free energy of this polymerization is con - verted into work , pushing the cell membrane forward . Each ﬁlament elongates until capping protein binds to its barbed end and terminates its growth [ 6 ] . Actin disas - sembly is catalyzed in part by coﬁlin , which together with proﬁlin promotes recycling of actin monomers [ 7 ] . This mechanism is thought to drive actin dynamics pri - marily in the lamellipod , in part because tropomyosin prevents binding of both coﬁlin and the Arp2 / 3 complex to actin ﬁlaments in the lamellum [ 8 , 9 ] . This view is con - sistent with the morphologies seen by electron micros - copy of actin networks of motile cells . Svitkina et al . found the lamellipodial network to be composed primar - ily of very short ( 100 nm ) , densely branched actin ﬁla - ments that contain signiﬁcant amounts of the Arp2 / 3 complex , whereas they found lamellar regions of the cell to contain long , unbranched ﬁlaments and much less Arp2 / 3 complex [ 10 ] . In this study , we used ﬂuorescent speckle microscopy of actin , Arp2 / 3 , capping protein , and tropomyosin to correlate the spatial and temporal dynamics of the actin network at the leading edge of Drosophila S2 cells with those of the proteins that construct it . These proteins are visible only when bound to ﬁlamentous actin , and so imaging their association with the network provides a dynamic map of when and where they exert their inﬂuence on cytoskeletal architecture . We coupled this dynamic mapping approach with dsRNA - induced knockdown of protein expression to determine the spe - ciﬁc effects of ﬁlament capping and disassembly on the structure of leading - edge networks . We found that the lamellipodial compartment is more complex than previ - ously appreciated and contains at least three subcom - partments : ( i ) a distal zone , near the cell edge , in which the Arp2 / 3 complex and capping protein associate with the network , ( ii ) a middle zone lacking capping pro - tein but containing the Arp2 / 3 complex , and ( iii ) a region that is near the boundary with the lamellum and lacks both proteins . We also found that assembly of the * Correspondence : dyche @ mullinslab . ucsf . edu lamellipod depends critically on the presence of both the Arp2 / 3 complex and capping protein . Loss of coﬁlin , the coﬁlin phosphatase slingshot , or tropomyosin leads to expansion of the lamellipod at the expense of the la - mellum . Together , our data reveal the precise timing of molecular events at the leading edge and indicate that coﬁlin and capping protein play profoundly different roles in determining the architecture of motile actin networks in vivo . Results Speckle Dynamics Reveal Multiple Actin Networks in Drosophila S2 Cells Rogers et al . previously used Drosophila S2 cells to study the function of actin regulatory proteins [ 11 ] . Here we used ﬂuorescent speckle microscopy to study S2 cytoskeletal dynamics in live cells . When plated on concanavilin A , S2 cells spread into a circular morphol - ogy with a 4 - to 5 - m m wide , actin - rich cortex surrounding a central cell body . The cortex is less than 200 nm thick , making it well suited for speckle microscopy . We ex - pressed Drosophila actin fused to EGFP under control of a copper - inducible promoter . In the absence of added copper , promoter leakiness produces low , stable levels of GFP - actin and produces ﬂuorescent speckles . Consistent with phalloidin staining of S2 cells , GFP - actin speckles appeared primarily in the peripheral cortex ( Movie S1 in the Supplemental Data available on - line ) . The highest speckle density occurs within one mi - cron of the cell edge , and the lowest density occurs in the cell body ( Figures 1A and 1B ) . We used kymographs to analyze speckle trajectories ( 11 cells , 42 kymographs , 600 speckles ; Figure 1B , top panel ) and plotted the initial distance of each speckle from the cell edge versus its average velocity ( Figure 2C ) . This analysis revealed three classes of actin speckles ( Figure 2B ; also Table S1 ) : ( i ) rapidly moving ( 2 . 46 6 0 . 04 m m / min ) speckles near the cell edge ( < 1 m m ) that travel an average distance of 1 . 40 6 0 . 03 m m ; ( ii ) more slowly moving ( 1 . 31 6 0 . 04 m m / min ) speckles between the cell edge and the cell body ( 1 – 6 m m from the edge ) that travel an average distance of 0 . 77 6 0 . 03 m m , and ( iii ) immobile ( 0 . 15 6 0 . 02 m m / min ) speckles in the cell body ( > 6 m m from the edge ) . Individual actin speckles did not un - dergo signiﬁcant changes in velocity . Three distinct populations also appeared in a histogram of actin - speckle velocities , even when location was not taken into account ( Figure 2D ) , and their mean values matched the velocities calculated from bins based on distance from the cell edge ( Figures 2C and 2D ) . Thus , based on location and velocity , we could distinguish three com - partments in the S2 cytoskeleton , similar to those previ - ously described by Ponti et al . [ 12 ] . These authors re - ferred to the membrane - proximal actin network as the lamellipod and the slower network immediately behind it as the lamellum . We follow the same convention here . Figure 1 . GFP - Tagged Actin and Actin - Regulatory Proteins Occupy Unique Compartments at the Leading Edge ( A ) S2 cells expressing GFP - actin , GFP - p16 ( Arp2 / 3 subunit ) , GFP - capping protein a ( CPA ) , and GFP - cytoskeletal tropomyosin ( cTm ) were im - aged by confocal microscopy . Images are a single frame from time - lapse movies of live S2 cells plated on concanavilin A for approximately 1 hr . The scale bar represents 10 m m . ( B ) KymographsofGFPspecklesrevealdynamiccompartmentalizationofactin andactin - bindingproteins . Left , maximum - intensityprojections oftime - lapsemoviesofS2cellsexpressingGFP - actin ( top ) , GFP - p16 , GFP - CPA , andGFP - cTm . Thescalebarrepresents10 m m . Thewhitelineat the 9o’clockposition indicatesthe cellarea from which kymographs ( right ) were constructed . Right panel : The x axis scale bar represents 1 m m ; the y axis scale bar represents 30 s . Current Biology 396 Figure 2 . Quantitative Analysis of GFP - actin , GFP - p16 , GFP - CPA , and GFP cTm Speckle Localization and Dynamics ( A ) Normalized average - ﬂuorescence - intensity line scan of GFP ﬂuorescence taken from a representative movie of an S2 cell expressing GFP - actin , GFP - p16 , GFP - CPA , orGFP - cTmanddisplayedasafunctionofdistancefromthecelledge , asdescribedintheExperimentalProcedures . ( B – D ) Individualspeckletrajectoriesfrom atleast tencellswere analyzed viakymographanalyses . ( B ) Linehistogram showingthe distancetrav - eledbyGFP - actin , GFP - p16 , andGFP - CPA speckles originating intheLP . Trajectoriesusedinthishistogramareshownasgreencirclesineach of the scatter plots in ( C ) . ( C ) Scatter plots of the distance from the cell edge versus velocity . From top to bottom : actin , cTm , p16 , and CPA . Speckle trajectories were labeled as originating in the lamellipod ( LP , green circles ) , lamellum ( LM , blue circles ) , or cell body ( CB , red circles ) based on their starting distance from the cell edge . Vertical lines indicate the mean velocity for each population , and shaded areas indicate the standard deviation . ( D ) Probability density function of the velocities of all GFP speckles of ( top to bottom ) actin , cTm , p16 , and CPA . The probabilitydensityfunction isoverlayedwiththebest - ﬁtline ( blackline ) derivedfrom cumulativedensity - function - curveﬁtting ( datanotshown ) . Vertical lines indicate means , and shaded areas indicate the standard deviation for each population . Dynamics of Leading - Edge Actin Networks 397 Actin - Regulatory Proteins Deﬁne Additional Subcompartments of the Peripheral Cytoskeleton We next used speckle microscopy to study the dynam - ics of key actin - regulatory factors . We expressed low levels of EGFP fused to subunits of the Arp2 / 3 complex , capping protein ( CPA ) , or cytoskeletal tropomyosin ( cTm ) in S2 cells . Previous studies suggest that Arp2 / 3 subunits and capping protein can be ﬂuorescently tagged without disrupting in vivo function [ 13 – 15 ] . We ﬁnd that GFP - cTm is incorporated into the actin network normally and can partially rescue the phenotype of cTm - depleted cells ( Figure S3 ) . The localization and dynamics of GFP - Arp3 and GFP - p16 speckles were identical , but GFP - p16 typically generated lower background ﬂuorescence and higher contrast , and so we used it for most experiments pre - sented here . The distribution of ﬂuorescently tagged Arp2 / 3 complex in S2 cells was similar to that of previ - ous immunolocalization studies [ 11 ] . Based on speckle location and velocity , we can conclude that the complex associates almost exclusively with the lamellipodial ac - tin network within 1 m m of the cell edge ( Figure 1 ; also Movie S2 ) . When we plotted distance from the cell edge versus velocity ( ten cells , 81 kymographs , more than 650 speckles ) we observed three populations of Arp2 / 3 speckles that corresponded to those observed with labeled actin . Arp2 / 3 speckles , however , were born predominantly in the lamellipod and underwent retrograde ﬂow at the same velocity as lamellipodial actin speckles ( 2 . 44 6 0 . 03 m m / min versus 2 . 46 6 0 . 04 m m / min ) . Arp2 / 3 speckles , however , had a signiﬁ - cantly shorter average lifetime than actin speckles ( 21 . 6 6 0 . 6 s versus 35 . 4 6 0 . 6 s ) and did not travel as far from the cell edge ( 0 . 83 6 0 . 01 m m versus 1 . 40 6 0 . 03 m m ; see also Table S1 ) . We conﬁrmed these differ - ences by simultaneously expressing GFP - actin and RFP - p16 in the same cells ( our unpublished observa - tions ) . Ponti et al . [ 12 ] used quantitative image analysis to map the kinetics of the appearance and disappearance of actin speckles and found that the lamellipod contains a narrow ( 1 m m ) band of rapid speckle appearance near the cell edge and then a band of rapid speckle disap - pearance . We used the same speckle - tracking software to create maps of both actin and Arp2 / 3 speckle dynam - ics ( Figures 3A and 3B ) . Both actin and Arp2 / 3 speckle maps revealed sharp , polarized bands of assembly and disassembly near the cell edge but , although the ap - pearance of Arp2 / 3 speckles coincided with the peak of actin ﬁlament assembly , Arp2 / 3 speckle disappearance preceded actin disassembly by 0 . 6 m m ( Figure 3C ) . Interaction of the Arp2 / 3 complex with the actin net - work , therefore , deﬁnes a distinct subcompartment comprising the membrane - proximal two - thirds of the lamellipod . Capping protein ( CPA ) speckles were restricted to a smaller portion of the lamellipod than Arp2 / 3 speckles and generally appeared as a thin ring at the very cell edge ( Figure 1A ; see also Movie S3 ) . CPA speckles were too short lived for automated analysis , but kymograph analysis ( 12 cells , 127 kymographs , > 500 speckles ) revealed that they were restricted to within 0 . 58 6 0 . 01 m m of the cell edge and had an average lifespan of 15 . 0 6 0 . 6 s . Their average velocity was 2 . 57 6 0 . 05 m m / min , similar to that of lamellipodial actin and Arp2 / 3 complex speckles ( Figures 2C and 2D ) . The distribution of CPA speckle velocities revealed two pop - ulations with means matching the average velocities of actin in the lamellipod and cell body ( Figure 2D ) . Cap - ping protein association thus deﬁnes an additional lamellipodial subcompartment that is smaller than , and nested within , that deﬁned by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Finally , we analyzed the localization and dynamics of cytoplasmic tropomyosin ( cTm ) speckles ( ten cells , 103 kymographs , > 550 speckles ) . GFP - cTm speckles were all born at least 1 m m from the cell edge ( Figure 2C ; also Movie S4 ) and had velocities matching those of GFP - actin speckles in the lamellum and cell body ( 0 . 91 6 0 . 03 m m / min , 0 . 29 6 0 . 03 m m / min ; Figure 2D ) . The zones in which tropomyosin and Arp2 / 3 complex speckles appeared were almost completely nonover - lapping . Depletion of Tropomyosin , Slingshot , or Twinﬁlin Causes Expansion of the Lamellipod at the Expense of the Lamellum To understand the molecular mechanisms underlying construction of the peripheral actin network , we incu - bated cells with double - stranded ( ds ) RNAs designed to deplete various actin - regulatory proteins . We ob - served the effects on cell morphology and on dynamics of actin , capping protein , tropomyosin , and the Arp2 / 3 complex by using speckle microscopy . In samples treated with cTm dsRNA , 50 % of cells ap - peared to be wild - type , 35 % had ragged leading edges , and 15 % were stellate or were otherwise not well spread . To determine whether the range of phenotypes observed represents cell - to - cell variation in efﬁcacy of cTm RNAi , we treated an S2 cell line stably expressing GFP - cTm with cTm dsRNA for 7 days . Cells retaining high GFP - cTm ﬂuorescence appeared to be wild - type , whereas cells expressing little or no GFP - cTm displayed irregular leading edges ( Figure S3B ) . We focused on cells exhibiting the ragged - edged phenotype produced by the partial knockdown of cTm ( Figure S1A ) . The leading edges of cTm - depleted cells were more dynamic than untreated cells and underwent rapid pro - trusion and retraction ( Figure S1B ) . We observed only two classes of actin speckles in these cells : ( i ) rapidly moving speckles distributed uniformly around the cell periphery and ( ii ) immobile speckles in the cell body . From kymograph analysis , we determined that the ve - locity of rapidly moving actin speckles ( 2 . 08 6 0 . 03 m m / min ) was intermediate between the lamellipodial andlamellarvelocities ofuntreated cellsandhadadistri - bution that is best described by two Gaussians rather than three ( Figure 4D ) . In addition , the lifetime of the rap - idly moving actin speckles was 64 % longer than that of lamellipodial actin speckles in untreated cells ( Table S1 ) and appeared to comprise a single broad network ( Figures 4C – 4E ) . To determine whether this network represents a rap - idly moving lamellum or a greatly expanded lamellipod , we examined the rates of actin - ﬁlament turnover and the dynamics of lamellipod - speciﬁc proteins . By automated image analysis , we observed broad , polarized bands of actin assembly and disassembly spanning the cortex ( Figure 3D ) . In addition , the spatial distributions of Current Biology 398 Figure 3 . Visualization of Network Assembly in S2 cells ( A and B ) Time - averaged turnover map of F - actin ( A ) and p16 ( B ) calculated from speckle - tracking analysis of an S2 cell expressing GFP - actin or GFP - p16 . Speckles were tracked and analyzed with fsmCenter , created by the Danuser group ( Scripps Research Institute ) , with algorithms previouslydescribed [ 14 ] . Intheleftpanels , redmarksthelocationsofrapidactin ( A ) andArp2 / 3 ( B ) speckleappearance . Greenmarksrapidactin ( A ) and Arp2 / 3 ( B ) speckle disappearance . In the middle and right panels , the rates of actin ( A ) and Arp2 / 3 ( B ) speckle birth ( middle ) and death ( right ) are plotted as grayscale values . The scale bar represents 10 m m . ( C ) Net actin and Arp2 / 3 speckle turnover rates are plotted versus distance from the cell edge . Data are from single S2 cells expressing either GFP - actin ( A ) orGFP - p16 ( B ) . Thethickgreenlineindicatesnetactinﬁlamentassembly / disassemblycalculatedfromthecellin ( A ) . Thethickblue line indicates net Arp2 / 3 association / dissociation to the actin network ; this was calculated from the cell in ( B ) . Mean ( vertical line ) and standard deviation ( shaded rectangle ) of the distance traveled by capping protein ( red ) , Arp2 / 3 ( blue ) and actin ( green ) were calculated from kymograph analyses . The ﬁgure was created with cytoProbe software from the Danuser group ( Scripps ) . ( D ) A turnover map of F - actin was calculated from speckle - tracking analysis of an S2 cell depleted of cTm and expressing GFP - actin . Actin assembly is shown in red ( center ) , and actin disassembly is shown in green ( right ) . The scale bar represents 10 m m . Dynamics of Leading - Edge Actin Networks 399 Arp2 / 3 and capping protein speckles were no longer re - stricted to subcompartments and extended throughout the cortex ( Figures 4C – 4E ) , and some p16 and CPA speckles now reached the boundary of the cell body . The peripheral actin network of cTm - treated cells , there - fore , appears to be an expanded lamellipodial network . Interestingly , depletion of the coﬁlin phosphatase slingshot or the actin - sequestering and - severing pro - tein twinﬁlin produced the same phenotype as depletion of tropomyosin ( Table S1 and Figures S4 and S5 ) . Nei - ther slingshot nor twinﬁlin knockdown affected the spreading or gross morphology of S2 cells . Speckle mi - croscopy of labeled actin , capping protein , and Arp2 / 3 , however , revealed that the peripheral actin cytoskeleton in slingshot - or twinﬁlin - depleted cells was a single , ho - mogeneous , lamellipodial network with retrograde ﬂow velocities slightly slower than the lamellipodial velocities of untreated cells ( Table S1 ) . Thus , loss of tropomyosin , slingshot , and twinﬁlin all produce similar expansions of the lamellipod . Coﬁlin Depletion Decreases Retrograde Velocities of Peripheral Actin Networks and Causes Lamellipod Expansion We depleted coﬁlin in S2 cells by using dsRNA against Drosophila coﬁlin / ADF ( twinstar ) . Consistent with a previous report [ 11 ] , most of the treated cells ( 76 % ) failed to spread on concanavilin A . Given sufﬁcient time Figure 4 . Tropomyosin RNAi Causes Expansion of the Lamellipod at the Expense of the Lamellum ( A ) Normalized average - ﬂuorescence - intensity line scan of GFP ﬂuorescence taken from a representative movie of a cTm - depleted S2 cell ex - pressing GFP - actin , GFP - p16 , or GFP - CPA and displayed as a function of distance from the cell edge . ( B ) Line histogram showing distance traveled by GFP - actin , GFP - p16 , and GFP - CPA speckles originating in the LP . Speckles used in this histo - gram are shown as green circles in each of the scatter plots in ( C ) . ( C ) Scatter plots were created as described in Figure 2C . Tropomyosin - depleted cells expressing ( from top to bottom ) GFP - actin , GFP - p16 , and GFP - CPA were analyzed . ( D ) ProbabilitydensityfunctionswerecreatedasdescribedinFigure2D . Tropomyosin - depletedcellsexpressing ( fromtoptobottom ) actin , p16 , or CPA were analyzed . Current Biology 400 ( 1 . 5 – 2 hr ) , 20 % – 30 % of cells eventually spread , and the gross morphology of these cells appeared to be normal . By staining with phalloidin , we observed elevated levels of ﬁlamentous actin ( data not shown ) . Confocal micros - copy of live cells expressing GFP actin showed that the leading - edge networks of the well - spread coﬁlin - depleted cells moved signiﬁcantly more slowly than controls ( Figure 5 ) . GFP - actin speckles averaged 0 . 88 6 0 . 05 m m / min in the lamellipodial region ( and 2 . 46 6 0 . 04 m m / min in untreated cells ) and 0 . 48 6 0 . 03 m m / min in the lamellar region ( and 1 . 31 6 0 . 04 m m / min in untreated cells ) . Similarly , GFP - p16 and GFP - CPA also traversed the lamellipod at slower rates ; velocities were 1 . 11 6 0 . 04 m m / min and 1 . 25 6 0 . 08 m m / min , re - spectively ( Table S1 ) . Tropomyosin decoration of actin ﬁlaments was greater in coﬁlin - depleted cells but was still most pronounced in the cell body and relatively sparse near the cell edge ( data not shown ) . Coﬁlin - depleted cells , like cells depleted of tropomy - osin , slingshot , and twinﬁlin , exhibited expanded zones of capping - protein and Arp2 / 3 - complex speckle move - ment as well as increased speckle lifespans ( Table S1 ; also Figures 5A – 5C ) . Because of the speckles’ slow speed relative to the length of the time - lapse se - quences , many trajectories were truncated in the kymographs ( Figure 5A ) , and this resulted in the Figure 5 . Coﬁlin RNAi Causes Decreased Velocities and Lamellipodial Expansion ( A ) Line histogram showing the distance traveled by GFP - actin , GFP - p16 , and GFP - CPA speckles originating in the LP in coﬁlin - depleted cells . Speckles used in this histogram are shown as green circles in each of the scatter plots in ( B ) . ( B ) ScatterplotswerecreatedasdescribedinFigure2C . Coﬁlin - depletedcellsexpressing ( fromtoptobottom ) GFP - actin , GFP - p16 , orGFP - CPA were analyzed . ( C ) ProbabilitydensityfunctionswerecreatedasdescribedinFigure2D . Coﬁlin - depletedcellsexpressing ( fromtoptobottom ) actin , p16 , orCPA were analyzed . Dynamics of Leading - Edge Actin Networks 401 underestimation of lifespan and distance traveled . Nonetheless , the coincident localization of lamellipodial actin , Arp2 / 3 complex , and capping protein are indica - tive of an expanded lamellipod . Depletion of Capping Protein Abolishes the Lamellipod but has Little Effect on the Lamellum We next observed the effect of depleting the a subunit of capping protein on peripheral actin networks . Depletion of the b subunit or both subunits of capping protein pro - duced identical phenotypes ( data not shown ) . After 7 day RNAi treatment , 95 % of cells showed intense mem - brane rufﬂing but spread well on concanavilin A . In most CPA - depleted cells , actin ﬁlaments were long and bun - dled , curved around the margins of the cell , and often formed clumps or tangles ( Figure 6B ) . Despite the pronounced rufﬂing at the edges of CPA - depleted cells , GFP - actin speckles at the cell edge moved 25 % more slowly and for a signiﬁcantly shorter distance ( 0 . 70 6 0 . 02 m m ) than lamellipodial actin speckles in untreated cells . Farther from the cell edge , actin speckles moved at velocities characteristic of lamellar actin in untreated cells ( 0 . 94 6 0 . 04 m m / min ) . The distribution of actin - speckle velocities ﬁt well to a three - population model , and means were similar to those in untreated cells . However , the population mov - ing at lamellar - like speeds was much larger than in un - treated cells and were often found close to the cell edge ( Figures 6C and 6D ) . The effect of CPA depletion on Arp2 / 3 speckles was dramatic . Almost all observed speckles were immobile and aggregated in bright puncta , often in areas distal from the cell edge . Kymograph analysis showed that the velocities of GFP - p16 speckles averaged less than 0 . 5 m m / min ( Figure 6C ) . The velocities of GFP - cTm speckles in the lamellum and cell body averaged 0 . 2 – 0 . 3 m m / min Figure 6 . Depletion of Capping Protein Abolishes the Lamellipod but has Little Effect on Lamellar Dynamics ( A ) LinehistogramshowingthedistancetraveledbyGFP - actinandGFP - p16specklesoriginatingintheLPinCPA - depletedcells . Specklesused in this histogram are shown as green circles in each of the scatter plots in ( C ) . ( B ) S2 cells were ﬁxed and F - actin and visualized with Alexa488 phalloidin . Left : untreated cell . Right : CPA - depleted cell . ( C ) Scatter plots were created as described in Figure 2C . Capping - protein - depleted cells expressing ( from top to bottom ) GFP - actin , GFP - p16 , and GFP - cTm were analyzed . ( D ) Probability density functions ( PDF ) were created as described in Figure 2D . Capping protein depleted cells expressing ( from top to bottom ) GFP - actin , GFP - p16 or GFP - cTm were analyzed . Current Biology 402 ( Table S1 ; also Figure 6C ) , but GFP - cTm speckles were still excluded from the very edge of the cell . Discussion Association of Capping Protein and the Arp2 / 3 Complex with the Lamellipodial Actin Network We detected two distinct actin networks at the leading edge of Drosophila S2 cells ; these networks were similar to those identiﬁed by Ponti et al . [ 12 ] in other cell types . Actin ﬁlaments in the most membrane - proximal network ( the lamellipod ) assemble and disassemble in a spatially polarized fashion and undergo rapid retrograde translo - cation toward the cell body at rates comparable to those observed in ﬁsh epidermal keratocytes [ 16 ] . The major - ity of these ﬁlaments are nucleated at the cell edge and disassembled 35 s later , approximately 1 . 5 m m from where they were born ( [ 12 ] and this study ) . We observed that most Arp2 / 3 complex speckles are conﬁned to the lamellipod , typically appear at the very edge of the cell , undergo retrograde ﬂow at the same rate as lamellipodial actin , and have an average lifetime of 22 s before they disappear in a narrow zone approxi - mately 0 . 8 m m from the cell edge . This zone is distinct from the region where lamellipodial actin speckles begin disappearing . Arp2 / 3 speckles always disappeared at the same place , regardless of speckle density , indi - cating that the observed spatial differences are not an artifact of relative differences in labeling . This result has several important implications . ( 1 ) The lamellipod network is not held together solely by the Arp2 / 3 com - plex . Further studies will be required to determine which crosslinkers maintain the integrity of the lamellipod in the absence of the Arp2 / 3 complex . One excellent candidate is ABP - 280 , which supports leading - edge protrusion and motility in several cell types [ 17 , 18 ] . ( 2 ) In vivo , ﬁlament debranching and ﬁlament depolymer - ization are separate processes . This ﬁnding differs from those of in vitro reconstitution studies in which the Arp2 / 3 complex dissociates from motile actin net - works only when the ﬁlaments to which it is attached are disassembled [ 19 ] . The mechanism of Arp2 / 3 disso - ciation in vivo requires further study . Capping protein also begins life at the cell edge but disappears even more quickly than Arp2 / 3 speckles . If the Arp2 / 3 complex nucleates actin ﬁlaments at the cell edge and capping protein binds their barbed ends , why do the two proteins dissociate from the network with different kinetics ? Formally , there are three possi - bilities : ( 1 ) Filaments are speciﬁcally uncapped by a factor within the lamellipod [ 20 ] ; ( 2 ) ﬁlaments bound to capping protein are preferentially targeted for early dis - assembly ; and ( 3 ) the mechanism of ﬁlament disassem - bly in the lamellipod releases capping protein from the network before the Arp2 / 3 complex . Because knock - down of the actin - disassembly factor coﬁlin results in expansion and complete overlap of both the Arp2 / 3 and capping - protein zones ( Figure 5 ) , we favor the third idea . When overlaid on the map of actin speckle dynam - ics , we ﬁnd that the disappearance of capping protein corresponds to the earliest point at which actin disas - sembly is observed . Because the pointed ends of ﬁla - ments in the lamellipod are anchored to the network by the Arp2 / 3 complex , coﬁlin - mediated ﬁlament sever - ing will increase the mobility of the barbed end more than that of the pointed end ( Figure 7 ) . Depletion of capping protein results in loss of Arp2 / 3 - complex activity , as judged from association with the Figure 7 . Schematic Model of Actin and Actin - Regulatory Proteins at the Leading Edge Arp2 / 3 ( green circles ) , capping protein ( red circles ) , coﬁlin ( yellow triangles ) , and actin ( white lines ) build lamellipodial actin networks ( green area ) , whereas tropomyosin ( blue ‘‘S’’ shapes ) is associated with lamellar actin networks ( blue area ) . A capping decrease due to depletion of cappingproteinleadstothecollapseofthelamellipodandexpansion ofthelamellum . Adisassemblydecreaseduetocoﬁlin , slingshot , twinﬁlin , or tropomyosin depletion leads to the expansion of the lamellipod at the expense of the lamellum . Dynamics of Leading - Edge Actin Networks 403 actin network , and almost complete loss of the lamelli - pod . Actin speckles still undergo slow retrograde move - ment from the leading edge , indicating that the under - lying lamellar actin network is intact . Mejillano et al . found that depletion of capping protein in mouse mela - noma cells caused explosive ﬁlopodium formation and mislocalization of the Arp2 / 3 complex [ 21 ] and specu - lated that , in the absence of capping protein , ﬁlopo - dium - forming factors such as Ena / VASP - family proteins might displace the Arp2 / 3 complex . The likely explana - tion for the difference in phenotypes is that S2 cells express lower amounts of the ﬁlopodial machinery than those used by Mejillano et al . Our results therefore argue that ﬁlopodium - forming factors cannot account for the effect of capping protein on Arp2 / 3 - complex activity . One possible explanation is that removal of capping protein perturbs the global balance between ﬁlamentous and monomeric actin . In the absence of capping protein , individual ﬁlaments polymerize longer and deplete soluble , monomeric actin , which in turn causes inhibition of Arp2 / 3 - complex activity . Regard - less of the mechanism , our results indicate that limiting ﬁlament growth at the cell edge plays a speciﬁc role in determining lamellipodial architecture and promoting efﬁcient Arp2 / 3 - complex activity . Both the Arp2 / 3 complex and capping protein are re - quired to reconstitute actin - dependent motility similar to that of the intracellular pathogen Listeria monocyto - genes [ 22 ] . In the absence of capping protein , the Arp2 / 3 complex generates disorganized clouds of ﬁla - mentous actin around Listeria [ 23 ] or polystyrene micro - spheres coated with the Arp2 / 3 - activating domains of ActA or N - WASP [ 24 ] . The addition of capping protein converts these clouds into organized , polarized , and motile networks ( [ 25 ] and our unpublished observa - tions ) . These results reveal an important kinetic synergy between the Arp2 / 3 complex and capping protein and suggest that self - sustaining lamellipod formation re - quires a precise balance between the rates of ﬁlament nucleation and capping . This is also consistent with the - oretical and experimental studies indicating that efﬁ - ciency of protrusion driven by growth of dendritically branched networks is highly sensitive to the average ﬁlament length [ 26 , 27 ] . Coﬁlin - Mediated Actin Disassembly Limits the Size of the Lamellipod In most cell types , coﬁlin localizes to a zone near the la - mellipod / lamellum junction [ 10 ] , but its precise role in determining dynamic network architecture has not been established . In vitro , coﬁlin severs and depolymer - izes actin ﬁlaments that have hydrolyzed their bound ATP and released the inorganic phosphate [ 28 – 30 ] . Con - sistent with this activity , several groups have reported that loss of coﬁlin function in vivo causes accumulation of ﬁlamentous actin [ 11 , 31 , 32 ] . Other studies report that ﬁlament severing by coﬁlin at the cell edge promotes actin assembly and is required for rapid membrane protrusion [ 33 , 34 ] . Based on speckle microscopy of actin , Arp2 / 3 com - plex , and capping protein , we found that coﬁlin deple - tion speciﬁcally expands the lamellipodial actin network at the expense of the lamellar network . We observed similar but even more obvious phenotypes when we depleted the coﬁlin - activating phosphatase , slingshot or twinﬁlin . Twinﬁlin was initially described as an actin - monomer - sequestering protein [ 35 ] , but budding - yeast twinﬁlin has recently been shown to sever actin ﬁla - ments in vitro [ 36 ] . Our results suggest that twinﬁlin and coﬁlin work synergistically to disassemble lamelli - podial actin networks and that loss of either enables the expansion of the lamellipod and loss of a two - network system . Tropomyosin , an actin side - binding protein , inhibits both Arp2 / 3 binding and actin severing by coﬁlin [ 8 , 37 ] . Several studies have conﬁrmed that tropomyosin and the Arp2 / 3 complex localize to distinct compart - ments in vivo [ 8 , 38 ] , and we found that knockdown of tropomyosin led to expansion of the lamellipod . The simplest explanation for this result is that , in the absence of tropomyosin , the Arp2 / 3 complex is no longer limited to the leading edge but is free to associate with ﬁlaments throughout the cell . The fact that knockdown of tropo - myosin produces the same phenotype as knockdown of slingshot or twinﬁlin suggests another possibility— namely , that the effect of tropomyosin knockdown may be mediated by actin - depolymerizing factors . In wild - type cells , coﬁlin activity may be directed toward the lamellipodbytheactivityoftropomyosin inthelamellum . In the absence of tropomyosin , all ADP actin ﬁlaments in the cell would become potential coﬁlin substrates , and this might act to disperse coﬁlin throughout the cell and reduce its concentration in the lamellipod . Conclusions Using ﬂuorescent speckle microscopy , we recon - structed the timing of critical events in the construction of actin - ﬁlament networks at the leading edge of motile cells . Capping protein and the Arp2 / 3 complex occupy unique , nested subcompartments within the lamellipod and are both absolutely required for lamellipod forma - tion . Coﬁlin , twinﬁlin , slingshot , and tropomyosin appear to play no role in the constructing the lamellipodial net - work but function to limit its size . Experimental Procedures Cell Culture and RNAi Treatment Drosophila SchneiderS2cellswereculturedandtreatedwithdsRNA as previously described [ 12 ] . CPA RNAi was done with dsRNA spe - ciﬁc to the a subunit . Cells were depleted of cTm by treatment with dsRNA speciﬁc to type II tropomyosin isoforms . Coﬁlin RNAi was performed with dsRNA against the entire coding sequence . Plasmid Construction and Transfection Gateway cloning technology ( Invitrogen ) was used for creating vec - tors for GFP expression in S2 cells . Drosophila genes for p16 ( ArpC5 ) , Arp3 , cTm , capping protein a and b , and coﬁlin ( twinstar ) were cloned from an S2 cDNA library , sequenced , and inserted intop - Entr - D - TOPOplasmids . Geneswerethenclonedintodestina - tion vectors that included GFP under the control of a copper promoter . Actin , Arp3 , p16 , coﬁlin , and CPA were tagged with an N - terminal ﬂuorescent tag , whereas cTm was labeled at its C termi - nus . S2 cells were transfected with Cellfectin ( Invitrogen ) , 1 – 2 m g of destination plasmid , and 0 . 5 m g of pCoHygro plasmid ( Invitrogen ) ( for construction of stable cell lines only ) . After 2 days , we observed ﬂuorescent protein in transient cell lines or added hygromycin to select for stably transfected cells . Current Biology 404 Speckle Microscopy S2cellstransientlyorstablyexpressinglowquantitiesofﬂuorescentproteinwereplatedonconcanavilin - A - coated glass - bottomed dishes ( MatTek ) and observed between 30 min and 1 . 5 hr after plat - ing . Images were taken with an Orca ER II camera ( Hamamatsu ) mounted to an Axiovert microscope ( Zeiss ) and Metamorph soft - ware ( Molecular Devices ) at 1 or 3 s intervals , and integration times were between 300 and 800 ms ; usually , 2x binning was used . Immunoﬂuorescence and ﬁxation Cells were ﬁxed as previously described [ 12 ] . Actin ﬁlaments were visualized with 200 nM Alexa - 488 or Alexa - 568 phalloidin ( Molecular Probes / Invitrogen ) . Images were acquired with an Orca II cooled CCD camera ( Hamamatsu ) equipped on a Nikon TE300 inverted mi - croscope and with Simple PCI software ( Compix ) . Kymograph Analysis Kymograph analyses were done with ImageJ ( http : / / rsb . info . nih . gov / ij ) with a plugin written by J . Rietdorf and A . Seitz ( http : / / www . embl . de / eamnet / html / body _ kymograph . html ) . For sparsely speck - led cells , 1 - m m - thick lines were used for kymograph creation . For densely speckled cells , such as GFP - actin , kymographs were constructed with a 4 - m m - thick line . Individual speckle trajectories and leading - edge outlines were drawn by hand in ImageJ and were analyzed with Matlab ( Mathworks ) . Background cytoplasmic ﬂuorescence , which is signiﬁcant in the green channel , was utilized for manually determining the cell edge in maximal - intensity projec - tions . Between 4 and 12 kymographs were created per cell , and be - tween6and12cellswereusedforeveryRNAiandcontrolcondition . Actin Speckle - Tracking and - Assembly Maps We used FsmCenter , a software package designed by the Danuser group ( Scripps , LaJolla , CA ) , totrackGFP - actinandp16specklesin S2 cells and to create actin - assembly maps . For assembly proﬁles , wereducedspatialaveragingtoa1pixelwidthinordertoaccuratelyvisualizethenarrowrangeinwhichGFP - p16 speckles appear . We used CytoProbe , written by Matthias Machacek , to create proﬁles showing activity or ﬂuorescence intensity from the cell edge . To compare the ﬂuorescence - intensity proﬁles of different proteins as shown in Figure 2A , we normalized the proﬁles such that the maxi - mum value was set to 1 and the minimum value was set to 0 . This allowed for a direct comparison of the localization of lamellipodial and lamellar proteins despite differences in cellular abundance . Supplemental Data Five ﬁgures , one table , andfourmoviesare available online athttp : / / www . current - biology . com / cgi / content / full / 17 / 5 / 395 / DC1 / . Acknowledgments We thank members of the Mullins laboratory , and especially Orkun Akin and Mark Dayel , for their insights , support , and helpful discus - sions . We are grateful to Ron Vale and his laboratory members for technical assistance and for the use of microscopes and reagents . SpecialthanksareduetoGaudenzDanuserandMatthiasMachacek for training and the use of fsmCenter and cytoProbe , as well as for helpful discussions . Finally , we thank Tapio Heino , Katherine Miller , and Tadashi Uemura for generously providing antibodies . This work was supported by grants to R . D . M . from the National Institutes of Health ( RO1 grant GM61010 ) and the Sandler Family Supporting Foundation and by funding from the University of California , San Francisco / UniversityofCalifornia , BerkeleyNanomedicineDevelop - ment Center and a National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship to J . H . I . Received : June 21 , 2006 Revised : February 5 , 2007 Accepted : February 6 , 2007 Published online : March 1 , 2007 References 1 . Watanabe , N . , and Mitchison , T . J . ( 2002 ) . Single - molecule speckle analysis of actin ﬁlament turnover in lamellipodia . Sci - ence 295 , 1083 – 1086 . 2 . Vallotton , P . , Gupton , S . L . , Waterman - Storer , C . M . , and Dan - user , G . ( 2004 ) . Simultaneous mapping of ﬁlamentous actin ﬂow and turnover in migrating cells by quantitative ﬂuorescent specklemicroscopy . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 9660 – 9665 . 3 . Salmon , W . C . , Adams , M . C . , and Waterman - Storer , C . M . ( 2002 ) . Dual - wavelength ﬂuorescent speckle microscopy reveals cou - pling of microtubule and actin movements in migrating cells . J . Cell Biol . 158 , 31 – 37 . 4 . Pollard , T . D . , Blanchoin , L . , and Mullins , R . D . ( 2000 ) . Molecular mechanisms controlling actin ﬁlament dynamics in nonmuscle cells . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 29 , 545 – 576 . 5 . Welch , M . D . , and Mullins , R . D . ( 2002 ) . Cellular control of actin nucleation . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 18 , 247 – 288 . 6 . Carlier , M . F . , and Pantaloni , D . ( 1997 ) . Control of actin dynamics in cell motility . J . Mol . Biol . 269 , 459 – 467 . 7 . Bamburg , J . R . ( 1999 ) . Proteins of the ADF / coﬁlin family : Essen - tial regulators of actin dynamics . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 15 , 185 – 230 . 8 . Blanchoin , L . , Pollard , T . D . , and Hitchcock - DeGregori , S . E . ( 2001 ) . Inhibition of the Arp2 / 3 complex - nucleated actin poly - merization and branch formation by tropomyosin . Curr . Biol . 11 , 1300 – 1304 . 9 . DesMarais , V . , Ichetovkin , I . , Condeelis , J . , and Hitchcock - DeGregori , S . E . ( 2002 ) . Spatial regulation of actin dynamics : A tropomyosin - free , actin - rich compartment at the leading edge . J . Cell Sci . 115 , 4649 – 4660 . 10 . Svitkina , T . M . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 1999 ) . Arp2 / 3 complex and ac - tin depolymerizing factor / coﬁlin in dendritic organization and treadmilling of actin ﬁlament array in lamellipodia . J . Cell Biol . 145 , 1009 – 1026 . 11 . Rogers , S . L . , Wiedemann , U . , Stuurman , N . , and Vale , R . D . ( 2003 ) . Molecular requirements for actin - based lamella forma - tion in Drosophila S2 cells . J . Cell Biol . 162 , 1079 – 1088 . 12 . Ponti , A . , Machacek , M . , Gupton , S . L . , Waterman - Storer , C . M . , and Danuser , G . ( 2004 ) . Two distinct actin networks drive the protrusion of migrating cells . Science 305 , 1782 – 1786 . 13 . Aizawa , H . , Fukui , Y . , andYahara , I . ( 1997 ) . LivedynamicsofDic - tyostelium coﬁlinsuggestsaroleinremodelingactinlatticework into bundles . J . Cell Sci . 110 , 2333 – 2344 . 14 . Schafer , D . A . , Welch , M . D . , Machesky , L . M . , Bridgman , P . C . , Meyer , S . M . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 1998 ) . Visualization and molecu - lar analysis of actin assembly in living cells . J . Cell Biol . 143 , 1919 – 1930 . 15 . Helfman , D . M . , Berthier , C . , Grossman , J . , Leu , M . , Ehler , E . , Perriard , E . , and Perriard , J . C . ( 1999 ) . Nonmuscle tropomyo - sin - 4 requires coexpression with other low molecular weight isoforms for binding to thin ﬁlaments in cardiomyocytes . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 371 – 380 . 16 . Jurado , C . , Haserick , J . R . , and Lee , J . ( 2005 ) . Slipping or grip - ping ? Fluorescent speckle microscopy in ﬁsh keratocytes re - veals two different mechanisms for generating a retrograde ﬂow of actin . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 507 – 518 . 17 . Flanagan , L . A . , Chou , J . , Falet , H . , Neujahr , R . , Hartwig , J . H . , and Stossel , T . P . ( 2001 ) . FilaminA , theArp2 / 3complex , andthemor - phology and function of cortical actin ﬁlaments in human mela - noma cells . J . Cell Biol . 155 , 511 – 517 . 18 . Sokol , N . S . , and Cooley , L . ( 2003 ) . Drosophila ﬁlamin is required forfolliclecellmotilityduringoogenesis . Dev . Biol . 260 , 260 – 272 . 19 . Samarin , S . , Romero , S . , Kocks , C . , Didry , D . , Pantaloni , D . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 2003 ) . How VASP enhances actin - based motility . J . Cell Biol . 163 , 131 – 142 . 20 . Allen , P . G . ( 2003 ) . Actin ﬁlament uncapping localizes to rufﬂing lamellae and rocketing vesicles . Nat . Cell Biol . 5 , 972 – 979 . 21 . Mejillano , M . R . , Kojima , S . , Applewhite , D . A . , Gertler , F . B . , Svit - kina , T . M . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 2004 ) . Lamellipodial versus ﬁlopo - dialmodeoftheactinnanomachinery : pivotalroleoftheﬁlament barbed end . Cell 118 , 363 – 373 . Dynamics of Leading - Edge Actin Networks 405 22 . Carlier , M . F . , Wiesner , S . , Le Clainche , C . , and Pantaloni , D . ( 2003 ) . Actin - based motility as a self - organized system : mecha - nism and reconstitution in vitro . C . R . Biol . 326 , 161 – 170 . 23 . Welch , M . D . , Rosenblatt , J . , Skoble , J . , Portnoy , D . A . , and Mitchison , T . J . ( 1998 ) . Interaction of human Arp2 / 3 complex and the Listeria monocytogenes ActA protein in actin ﬁlament nucleation . Science 281 , 105 – 108 . 24 . Noireaux , V . , Golsteyn , R . M . , Friederich , E . , Prost , J . , Antony , C . , Louvard , D . , and Sykes , C . ( 2000 ) . Growing an actin gel on spherical surfaces . Biophys . J . 78 , 1643 – 1654 . 25 . van der Gucht , J . , Paluch , E . , Plastino , J . , and Sykes , C . ( 2005 ) . Stress release drives symmetry breaking for actin - based move - ment . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 7847 – 7852 . 26 . Mogilner , A . , and Oster , G . ( 1996 ) . Cell motility driven by actin polymerization . Biophys . J . 71 , 3030 – 3045 . 27 . Bear , J . E . , Svitkina , T . M . , Krause , M . , Schafer , D . A . , Loureiro , J . J . , Strasser , G . A . , Maly , I . V . , Chaga , O . Y . , Cooper , J . A . , Borisy , G . G . , et al . ( 2002 ) . Antagonism between Ena / VASP proteins and actin ﬁlament capping regulates ﬁbroblast motility . Cell 109 , 509 – 521 . 28 . McGough , A . , Pope , B . , Chiu , W . , and Weeds , A . ( 1997 ) . Coﬁlin changes the twist of F - actin : Implications for actin ﬁlament dy - namics and cellular function . J . Cell Biol . 138 , 771 – 781 . 29 . McGough , A . , and Chiu , W . ( 1999 ) . ADF / coﬁlin weakens lateral contacts in the actin ﬁlament . J . Mol . Biol . 291 , 513 – 519 . 30 . Carlier , M . F . , Laurent , V . , Santolini , J . , Melki , R . , Didry , D . , Xia , G . X . , Hong , Y . , Chua , N . H . , and Pantaloni , D . ( 1997 ) . Actin depo - lymerizingfactor ( ADF / coﬁlin ) enhancestherateofﬁlamentturn - over : implication in actin - based motility . J . Cell Biol . 136 , 1307 – 1322 . 31 . Arber , S . , Barbayannis , F . A . , Hanser , H . , Schneider , C . , Stanyon , C . A . , Bernard , O . , and Caroni , P . ( 1998 ) . Regulation of actin dy - namicsthroughphosphorylationofcoﬁlinbyLIM - kinase . Nature 393 , 805 – 809 . 32 . Hotulainen , P . , Paunola , E . , Vartiainen , M . K . , and Lappalainen , P . ( 2005 ) . Actin - depolymerizingfactorandcoﬁlin - 1playoverlap - ping roles in promoting rapid F - actin depolymerization in mam - malian nonmuscle cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 649 – 664 . 33 . Chan , A . Y . , Bailly , M . , Zebda , N . , Segall , J . E . , andCondeelis , J . S . ( 2000 ) . Role of coﬁlin in epidermal growth factor - stimulated ac - tin polymerization and lamellipod protrusion . J . Cell Biol . 148 , 531 – 542 . 34 . Ghosh , M . , Song , X . , Mouneimne , G . , Sidani , M . , Lawrence , D . S . , and Condeelis , J . S . ( 2004 ) . Coﬁlin promotes actin polymeriza - tion and deﬁnes the direction of cell motility . Science 304 , 743 – 746 . 35 . Palmgren , S . , Vartiainen , M . , and Lappalainen , P . ( 2002 ) . Twinﬁ - lin , a molecular mailman for actin monomers . J . Cell Sci . 115 , 881 – 886 . 36 . Moseley , J . B . , Okada , K . , Balcer , H . I . , Kovar , D . R . , Pollard , T . D . , and Goode , B . L . ( 2006 ) . Twinﬁlin is an actin - ﬁlament - severing protein and promotes rapid turnover of actin structures in vivo . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 1547 – 1557 . 37 . Nishida , E . , Maekawa , S . , and Sakai , H . ( 1984 ) . Coﬁlin , a protein inporcine brainthat bindsto actin ﬁlaments andinhibitstheir in - teractions with myosin and tropomyosin . Biochemistry 23 , 5307 – 5313 . 38 . Gupton , S . L . , Anderson , K . L . , Kole , T . P . , Fischer , R . S . , Ponti , A . , Hitchcock - DeGregori , S . E . , Danuser , G . , Fowler , V . M . , Wirtz , D . , Hanein , D . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Cell migration without a lamellipodium : Translation of actin dynamics into cell movement mediated by tropomyosin . J . Cell Biol . 168 , 619 – 631 . Current Biology 406