a r X i v : 2008 . 05959v1 [ c s . C Y ] 13 A ug 2020 CREATIVITY IN THE ERA OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE Philippe Esling , Ninon Devis IRCAM - CNRS UMR 9912 STMS , Sorbonne Universite esling @ ircam . fr A BSTRACT Creativity is a deeply debated topic , as this concept is arguably quintessential to our humanity . Across different epochs , it has been infused with an extensive variety of meanings relevant to that era . Along these , the evolution of technology have provided a plurality of novel tools for creative purposes . Recently , the advent of Artiﬁcial In - telligence ( AI ) , through deep learning approaches , have seen proﬁcient successes across various applications . The use of such technologies for creativity appear in a natural continuity to the artistic trend of this century . However , the aura of a technological artefact labeled as intelligent has unleashed passionate and somewhat unhinged debates on its implication for creative endeavors . In this paper , we aim to provide a new perspective on the question of cre - ativity at the era of AI , by blurring the frontier between social and computational sciences . To do so , we rely on reﬂections from social science studies of creativity to view how current AI would be considered through this lens . As creativity is a highly context - prone concept , we underline the limits and deﬁciencies of current AI , requiring to move towards artiﬁcial creativity . We argue that the objective of trying to purely mimic human creative traits towards a self - contained ex - nihilo generative machine would be highly counterproductive , putting us at risk of not harness - ing the almost unlimited possibilities offered by the sheer computational power of artiﬁcial agents . 1 . INTRODUCTION Despite its substantial contributions to scientiﬁc research , Artiﬁcial Intelligence ( AI ) has focused on mathematico - logical approaches , aiming to solve formal problems with a set of well - deﬁned goals . Even with the constant thrilling leaps in this ﬁeld , recently crystallized around the ﬁeld of deep learning , the current state of our knowledge seems to remain far from understanding creative endeavors . The study of this more intricate human behavior proves to be crucial through two main aspects . On the one hand , it involves the understanding of creativity , this aspect that so fundamentally distinguishes human beings from other branches of the tree of life [ 49 ] . On the other hand , its principal object of study requires to model cognitive phe - nomena that are central to our social and intellectual evo - lution [ 26 ] . The growing interest for these issues is re - ﬂected in the widespread research efforts on generative models for a wide variety of tasks from diverse horizons , spanning industrial to fundamental sciences [ 35 ] . Amidst these questions , music provides an ideal frame - work for developing our comprehension of creative be - haviors , as it brings together stimulating theoretical ques - tions and cognitive processes that are strenuous to model . Indeed , music operates on unsupervised objectives , hardly deﬁned through task - oriented goals . Hence , revealing these musical creative mechanisms can also provide a remark - able projector on creativity in general , as music is one of the most highly organized , interactive and complex hu - man activity , while being an abstract , sensitive and phys - ical one , profoundly shaping a powerful metaphor of hu - man creative interactions . From an epistemological per - spective , approaches in computational creativity can be broadly divided into two major view . Historically , com - putational models developed for problem - solving aspects have been hijacked a posteriori by artists as a form of cre - ative recycling . However , within the AI revolution , an - other line of thought seems to have carved its own path , which we term the mathematical reiﬁcation of cognitive hypotheses . Indeed , AI is strewn by mimicry of intelligent behavior witnessed in biological systems , which appears foundational to this ﬁeld . We , as humans , are bound to address only ideas that our own perception can reach . As Blake wrote " Man’s desires are limited by his perceptions ; none can desire what he has not perceiv’d " [ 11 ] . Hence , we can only reason on conceptual objects that are acces - sible to our own thoughts . However , this reiﬁcation ap - proach appears inherently limited , as it is stranded by our current observations and limited cognitive knowledge . In this paper , we try to stroll down a novel path of thought , taking a different stance to that of reiﬁcation , aiming to scrutinize mathematical aspects of AI through the sociological aspects of creativity . Hence , we seek to blur the frontier between social and computational sci - ences by infusing mathematical properties of AI across a concomitant review of cognitive and psychological stud - ies of creativity . This approach can be seen as an intel - lectual experiment reﬂecting our current understanding of creativity in the era of AI . As we try to evaluate the inher - ent limitations , and what path could be contrived for future researches in AI , we argue that computers have a propen - sity to expand our limits , and are complementary to our own ﬂaws and limits . Hence , an approach purely based on mimicry of human cognitive behavior would be counter - productive , putting us at risk of not harnessing the almost unlimited possibilities offered by the sheer computational power of machines . Studying these questions could fos - ter and enrich the relationship between humans and AI by targeting situations of partnership converging towards more symbiotic co - creative interactions . Hence , address - ing these questions could give rise to a novel generic cat - egory of creatively intelligent systems . 2 . EPISTEMOLOGY OF CREATIVITY The notion of creativity , core to this paper reﬂection , is a topic that could hardly be more central and inseparable from our humanity . In all human crafts , arts and science alike , progress seems to be rhythmed by the pace of our capacity to divorce ourselves with the present , to reinvent and overtake existing thought patterns , and create novel ones . While appearing so quintessential and fundamen - tally distinguishing human beings from other branches of the tree of life , creativity might be the most prominent ex - ample of a mental phenomenon that is so central to our own existence , yet we understand so little about it [ 21 ] . 2 . 1 . Deﬁning creativity As we aim to reason on conceptual objects , understand - ing creativity requires ﬁrst the ability to precisely deﬁne it . However , the concept of creativity appears to be partic - ularly multi - faceted and complex to deﬁne . As is usually the case with such highly abstract concepts , decades of de - bates have ﬁrst focused on carving out its uniqueness by delineating it from closely - related concepts such as origi - nality , genius , imagination and talent [ 49 ] . In the collec - tive subconscious , the core aspect of creativity lies in nov - elty . In that sense , creativity involves moving across our preconceived knowledge and creating a schism between the present and the future [ 16 ] . Through this ﬁrst lens , creativity seems to put a strain on our relationship with the future , as it introduces uncertainty . Embracing cre - ativity implies a hazardous leap forward that might upset the balance of our pattern - seeking habits , as it is impos - sible to fully understand the consequences of an entirely novel concept or object [ 41 ] . However , we might take comfort in the fact that this uncertainty is not boundless , as creativity ( and art alike ) does not arise from a concep - tual void [ 37 ] . Even though creativity lives in the realms of the least predictable concepts , it remains ﬁrst and fore - most a contextually - embedded phenomenon [ 38 ] Indeed , creativity involves social aspects , as it impli - cates individuals in a context , working with a set of ex - isting patterns of meanings and symbols at a given time in history [ 28 ] . The signiﬁcance and relevance of creative ideas is not solely observed in their content , but within the social framework and historical period at which these ideas are produced . Ideas appear relevant only when a group of persons articulate their thoughts around the same set of questions [ 49 ] , and a critical mass of knowledge de - velops in one place . Hence , creativity offers variation and depends equally on the properties of the environment as on its own quality [ 17 ] . Conversely , what was deemed rev - olutionary and obtained widespread acclaim at one point will gradually be integrated as an impending norm of the era , slowly becoming mundane in the society and domain it operates [ 18 ] . An emblematic example in the musical realm is that of musical synthesizers [ 46 ] . When they appeared , audio synthesizers remained for long conﬁned to the fringe of contemporary and experimental music , producing unheard sounds that were too unsettling to be deemed musical yet . It is only through a gradual evolu - tion period that these sounds emerged across almost all musical genres , which now commonly integrate different levels of audio synthesis . In that sense , creativity is a transformative process , adapting and integrating elements to a domain with predeﬁned norms , steadily shifting and adapting these norms [ 45 ] . In summary , although creativity is complex and multi - faceted , it can be articulated around three major compo - nents of novelty ( creative ideas are innovative ) , quality ( appeal of the idea ) and relevance ( the idea is appropri - ate to the task and era ) [ 33 ] . Hence , studying creativity requires to consider a large number of nuances , which are themselves mostly subjective and renders the analysis of creativity as a set of empirically testable hypotheses rather tedious . This might explain why the empirical study of creativity is only at a very precocious stage . 2 . 2 . Historical aspects There is a strong historical component to the development and social perception of creativity , for long stranded be - tween notions of madness or genius . Different eras and societies have been more or less conducive to ﬂourish - ing creativity , with blossoming periods such as Ancient Greece , Italian Renaissance or French LumiÃ´lres . To un - derstand these disparities , we provide a scarce outline of the conceptual evolution of creativity along history , based the excellent work of Runco [ 49 ] . For a long time , West - ern societies only considered creative traits in the artis - tic domain , with a widespread predilection for the myth of the " lone genius " . Overlaying the strongly theistic vi - sions of societies at that time , creativity was viewed as a divine intervention , manifested as an outside " spirit " or " muse " for which the individual creator was merely a con - duit [ 49 ] . This vision started to shatter , when the scien - tiﬁc era blossomed around the 18 th century . This most inﬂuential event in the history of creativity , consecrated that all people exhibit different levels of talent in the wake of education , and that the " original genius " , which was a form of rule - defying exception [ 22 ] , was divorced from the supernatural . In response to the industrialization of Europe , Rousseau and the Romanticism movement ex - pressed a separation between the scientiﬁc rationalism and the need for humans to rely on their natural feelings as a source of wisdom . This vision created a schism in the so - cietal vision fracturing the rational scientist with the mis - understood deviant artist [ 49 ] . This might have created a paradoxical prejudice allowing to denigrate artists and creativity as being conﬁned to deviant personalities . This misconception unfortunatelysomehow survives in the col - lective unconscious to this day . Although creative persons and inventors are touted as a driving force to the improve - ment of society [ 41 ] , this image of deviance still allows for the denigration of artists when need be . 2 . 3 . Roles and construction A major question lies in the role that creativity plays in a given society , and why creativity might be so impor - tant . This outlines the perceived impact of creativity , but also what aspects are valued in creativity . As discussed by Gardner [ 27 ] , creativity can be seen as a temporary misalignment between an idea and the society in which it develops . Eventually , as some people are willing to take more risk and embrace new ideas , these gradually inte - grate the social fabric and ultimately become an accepted and standardized part of society . 2 . 3 . 1 . Creativity in society Moran [ 41 ] proposed to study the functional aspects of the role that creativity could play in society , proposing that it mostly endorses functions of improvement or expression . The improvement role is the effect that a creative object can have on society ( as technological artefacts ) , while the expression role is focused on the role that creativity exert on an individual . Although these two roles seem some - what dichotomous , they are proposed to interact in more of a complementary than competitive way . 2 . 3 . 1 . 1 . Creativity role as improvement The vision of creativity as improvement is that which is often gloriﬁed by political or industrial leaders , as a mandatory tool for the advance of society and humanity . In that sense , society is seen as a system , which is con - stantly moving upwards to an hypothetical blessed state ( notwithstandingour complete absence of a shred of knowl - edge to where that might be ) . Hence , creativity is the tool that transport society across the borders of the present to - wards an idealized future , by shifting norms to a higher position [ 49 ] . Whereas practitioners develop norms , cre - ativity pulls society forward , while inevitably giving way to standardization [ 41 ] . In that view of creativity as an enhancer of society , its importance is the goal and that it allows us to progress towards it . 2 . 3 . 1 . 2 . Creativity role as expression The other role of creativity proposed by Moran [ 41 ] is that of expression , which might be interpreted differ - ently depending on the society in which it unfolds . In that aspect , creativity can be regarded as a mean of self - expression and individuality , while the exact nature of this expression depends on the permissiveness of the surround - ing society . These forms of creativity in society are less focused on their results , and rather allow for solipsistic and individualistic approaches . Hence , creativity as ex - pression can be seen as a cathartic activity , which might be less valued by society . 2 . 3 . 1 . 3 . Creativity as transformation of expertise The two roles of creativity in society can interact and produce , for instance , improvement as a result of self - expression . In any case , it is important to note that cre - ativity is before all a transformational activity . There is a widely agreed - upon consensus that creativity is only per - mitted through an existing body of knowledge , strongly inﬂuencing the natue and quality of creative outcomes . As stated previously , the uncertainty of creativity is not boundless , as nothing arises from a conceptual void . When Newton stated " If I have seen further it is by standing on the shoulders of giants . " , he recognized that his own dis - coveries were only made possible by all the knowledge accumulated by previous researchers before him . Hence , creativity is the result of community - built expertise , later transformed in an incremental fashion 2 . 3 . 2 . Evolution and construction This transformational view is epitomized in the evolution - ary theory of creativity , which proposes an interesting par - allel between genetic evolution and the development of creative ideas . The original Darwinian model of Simon - ton [ 53 ] aimed to describe more developmental aspect of the creative process , but it naturally extends to larger ( so - cietal ) scales of how creativity developed across time and how social factors can come into play . Indeed , creative ideas are built on previous ones in an adaptive and open - ended manner [ 26 ] . This view of creative ideas evolving over time through culture can be depicted in Darwinian terms [ 6 ] , as pertaining to a form of inheritance of ideas , which are incrementally adapted to the timely constraints of their social environment as they pass from one person to the next . This concept is termed as the dual - inheritance theory [ 26 ] , which emphasizes the fact that we inherit both biological but also cultural information . This theory views culture as discrete elements , which are submitted to an adaptation process , both composed of random mutations and a fortuitous process where ideas are selected because of outside environmental effects [ 20 ] . In that sense , we explore an unknown space of ideas ( variation ) and choose to pursue some and not others ( se - lection ) , turning creativity in a variation - selection algo - rithm informed by expertise [ 21 ] . Here , the social con - text is of prime interest , as creative ideas are observed equally for their content and within the social framework within which these are produced . As ideas appear rele - vant only when a critical mass of knowledge is articulated around similar thoughts , this further underlines the ubiq - uitous need for knowledge , which is transformed through creative processes . However , this thickens the complexity of clearly separating intelligence and creativity . Indeed , intelligence can arguably be described as the process of associating and transforming existing knowledge . Yet , as social scientists debated for over a century to delineate these two behaviors , this warrants the existence of a sim - ilar need for moving our reasoning from artiﬁcial intelli - gence towards artiﬁcial creativity . 2 . 4 . Towards the existence of artiﬁcial creativity Being able to truly delineate intelligence and creativity would mean that they conceptually live as independent or - thogonal dimensions , which can each be evaluated sepa - rately from the other . Hence , this poses the question of the measure and evaluation of creativity as a dimension dissociated from intelligence . 2 . 4 . 1 . Evaluating creativity The question of assessing creativity might be one of the most controversial and complicated issue of the ﬁeld . This approach ( called psychometric ) is unique as it also radi - ates and impact all other types of creativity studies [ 36 ] . This entails the sensitive question of measurement , which appears at ﬁrst to be dauntingly complex in creative ﬁelds . Yet , this ﬁeld has a very extensive and ﬂourishing research history [ 44 ] , entailing the reliability ( agreement and con - sistency ) , validity ( accuracy of the measurements ) [ 36 ] , and discriminant validity ( not being contaminated by cor - related concepts of intelligence ) [ 57 ] . Most approaches to evaluating creativity have revolved around the idea of separating between convergent and di - vergent thinking processes . The convergent thinking pro - cess ( a term coined by Joy Paul Guilford [ 31 ] ) corresponds to the use of knowledge and reasoning to solve a prob - lem by eliciting a single solution . Hence , this delineates a corresponding set of questions that have a single cor - rect answer . Oppositely , the process of divergent thinking requires a framework where a wide variety of ideas can be generated in response to a given question or stimulus . These tests are usually derived from the seminal Torrance Test of Creative Thinking , which allows for the construc - tion of associative hierarchies , such as asking to propose different novel uses of a commonly known object [ 21 ] . In the musical realm , another stream of research rely on improvisation in jazz where a given melody should either be completed from memory ( control ) or freely ( creative ) , while keeping some parameters ( length , tempo ) ﬁxed [ 43 ] . Interestingly , this dichotomy would appear to provide a clear - cut and simple solution to our previous conundrum . By crudely exaggerating , we could conclude that intelli - gence is convergent , while creativity is divergent . How - ever , it should also be noted that some criticisms exist on the fact that creative processes also result from convergent thinking [ 21 ] , as creative ideas can be the fruit of labori - ous trial - and - error works . Still , the domain of divergent thinking seems to remain a privileged ground reserved to creative behaviors . 2 . 4 . 2 . AI for creativity in the light of social sciences Following our previous discussions , it would ﬁrst seem that AI approaches are only relevant to convergent think - ing . Indeed , it is usually secluded to the deﬁnition of problem - solving approaches , where the learning is formal - ized by having a given single correct solution , which al - lows to understand and evaluate the quality of the pro - posed model . However , these limitations are partly by - passed in the AI domain by using approaches based on probabilistic formulations [ 8 ] , where we try to understand the entire distribution of given types of data , rather than answering a question ( such as classifying objects ) . If we take a closer look at the criteria that are used for divergent thinking tests , these are usually evaluated on several indicators measuring the ideational ﬂuency ( amount of answers ) , originality ( unusualness of answers ) , ﬂexibil - ity ( variance in the concepts elaborated ) and elaboration ( precision and details of the answers ) [ 43 ] . A criticism of this evaluation method is that ﬂuency can act as a contam - inating factor in the originality scores , emphasizing the quantity over quality of ideas [ 43 ] . By construction , probabilistic modeling could easily overpower any human on these tests for ﬂuency and ﬂex - ibility . Indeed , an approach based on probability distri - bution estimation can produce an inﬁnite number of solu - tions and these can be as distant as we want . However , there is two caveats to this reasoning . First , this implies that we rely on a random sampling process to draw solu - tions , which already means that we perform some choice on the generative process . However , this generation being an ( hypothetically ) entirely random decision mechanism , it can already be seen as a form of human choice on the creative process . Second , the ﬂexibility aspect is related to the sampling of a pre - deﬁned distribution , which lim - its the model to produce examples that remain consistent with its original observations . Therefore , this greatly lim - its the output of the model to the set of knowledge that was selected and provided at the onset . As discussed earlier , expertise is a fundamental part of creativity , as it allows to obtain more efﬁcient reasoning , based on appropriate problem representations , and recall - ing domain - relevant patterns or invariant characteristics [ 36 ] . Following our ideas from the previous sections , it also seems that this social context component in the eval - uation of creativity can be limiting to human creativity . Oppositely , computational approaches can be freed from these societal biases , and generate an almost inﬁnite num - ber of solutions . However , this also introduces a novel caveat , that AI is trained to optimize a given distribution of pre - existing knowledge and it cannot evaluate the qual - ity of its own solution in any other way than the criterion , which is provided for training it . This lead to a paradox - ical situation , where there can be a boundless number of solutions , but in an inherently limited system bound by the model , knowledge and criterion choice . All of these observations warrants the question of what could be the place of AI in the creative process . Hence , we loop back to our previous question of ﬁnding a way to transition from artiﬁcial intelligence to artiﬁcial creativity . Indeed , if we have access to a seemingly inﬁnite genera - tion machine , but this machine is unable to evaluate its own correctness , and only produces variations of existing concepts , what creative use could we make of this system with peculiar characteristics . 3 . ON THE INTRINSIC LIMITS OF AI FOR SELF - CONTAINED CREATIVITY We now try to cast a light on the limits of relying on AI to produce its own self - contained creative behaviors , by dis - cussing the main body of our argument , through reviewing all studies surrounding the creative process . 3 . 1 . Studying the creative process The dominant paradigm to study the creative process scru - tinizes its structure as a set of stages , deﬁning componen - tial cognitive processes in a sequential or recursive fash - ion . The seminal model of Wallas [ 58 ] separates the cre - ative process between the preparation ( information gath - ering ) , deﬁnition ( problem ﬁnding ) , incubation ( reﬂecting on ideas ) , illumination ( appearance of a solution ) and ver - iﬁcation ( testing the quality of the solution ) stages . This very linear model has since been more widely replaced with a cyclical one , where stages are performed in various combinations and are highly inﬂuenced by ( extrinsic or intrinsic ) motivation [ 50 ] . Although it is now recognized that creativity is dynamic and interactive , looping between different stages , the original components of Wallas remain widely used even in modern reﬁnements . In the view of cognitive theory , any phenomenon can potentially be recreated if we understand all of its princi - ples . This should allow to address any complex and ar - duous problem by splitting it in smaller understandable phenomena . The underlying hypothesis is that ill - deﬁned problems can be broken into a set of smaller well - deﬁned objectives [ 51 ] . This cognitive approach , which focuses on the operators and strategies that come into play in the creative processes has been a privileged playground for deﬁning how AI should mimic creative behaviors . 3 . 2 . Mathematical reiﬁcation of ideas The abstraction of the creative process has been a core study for cognitive approaches and one of the most fertile ground for the mathematical reiﬁcation of ideas in AI re - search . In that view , AI should be bound to mimic human creative endeavors by reproducing the abstraction and tac - tics that come into play in our brains . In that sense , the cognitive approaches have been mostly concerned with fundamental processes that can be translated in compu - tational terms . This entails the extent to which knowledge and information are organized and accessed , through dif - ferent types of memory systems , and the corresponding processes for retrieval and analysis of various sources of information . Subsequently , the operations applied to this knowledge allow to circumscribe the creative process in a computational sense . Here , we broadly separate these views between these information and operation aspects , with some permeability across these categories . We study the major sub - processes as they have been analyzed in cognitive studies , while trying to tie links with how this reﬂects on corresponding approaches in AI research . 3 . 2 . 1 . Information There is a widely agreed consensus that creativity is only permitted through an existing body of knowledge , which strongly inﬂuences the quality of creative outcomes . This inﬂuence can be analyzed through the ways this knowl - edge is organized ( information structures ) , retrieved ( ac - cess strategies ) , analyzed ( similarity evaluation ) and even - tually transformed . 3 . 2 . 1 . 1 . Organization When receiving novel knowledge , humans create in - formation structures and hierarchies allowing to memo - rize and organize it . At the neural level , it appears that neighboring neurons encode similar micro - features , and distance between neurons can be interpreted as a proxy for their feature similarity [ 26 ] . Furthermore , these dis - tributed representations of micro - features induce a natural modularity that do not require any proactive mechanism for high - level organization . As the memory supposedly work in a content - addressable way , it appears reasonable that we gradually transitioned from coarse to ﬁner repre - sentations of memories [ 26 ] . Hence , we evolved towards increasingly complex overlapping distributions , allowing for more interconnections and recall , leading to relation - ships drawn from more integrative internal representation . These more complex associative hierarchies allow to handle intricate concepts with a variable organization of cognitive elements , objects and relationships [ 32 ] . The appearance of these systems is theorized to have produced emerging complex internal representation of abstract mean - ings through symbols and their relationships . As proposed by Deacon [ 19 ] , we shifted from an iconic representation ( simply storing physical or visual properties ) to an index - ical representation ( representing a set of properties ) and ﬁnally to a symbolic representation ( where the representa - tion itself bears no similarity to the object it represents ) . For Deacon , the birth of symbols allowed us to imagine the use of objects as elements with correlations separate from their simple physical properties , enabling more intu - itive and associative thinking processes . All of these ideas are crystallized in AI around the representation learning ﬁeld [ 7 ] , where the goal is to understand and learn proper - ties of a given set of objects in an unsupervised way ( only having access to the objects themselves ) . This is usually performed based on some more or less complex forms of compression in order to produce higher - level and smaller representation hierarchies . 3 . 2 . 1 . 2 . Retrieval Parallel to the development of these specialized neural circuits to structure knowledge , our brains also required to deﬁne mechanisms to access and retrieve this informa - tion . Indeed , when engaging in creative thinking , we need to rely on different granularities of representation levels , from very speciﬁc to highly abstract . The resulting re - trieval process obviously depends on the underlying orga - nization but also the accessibility of different knowledge items [ 61 ] . The internal ( physical ) constraints of retrieval can provide either highly similar ideas , or oppositely aim to process abstract and distant concepts . An encompassing model for understanding cognitive information retrieval is the path - of - least - resistance pro - posed by Ward [ 59 ] . This model posits that our predom - inant retrieval mechanism is to access basic and speciﬁc low - level examples from a given domain as starting points , while projecting their properties on the novel task at hand . This suggests that we can use the representativeness of in - formation items as a retrieval likelihood function . It also supports the idea that remote associations , less represen - tative and distant concepts can lead to higher novelty [ 61 ] . Supplementary constraints such as latent inhibition allow us to attend selectively to those information that appear the most relevant , while screening out irrelevant knowl - edge . However , it has been shown that the lack of such inhibitions might provide a greater ideational ﬂuency of creativity [ 25 ] . Indeed , using more distant concepts have been shown to increase originality , but this may come at the cost of practicality . This process of contextually se - lecting some parts in information is also highly reﬂected in modern AI through the idea of attention mechanisms [ 56 ] . These approaches compute additional vectors that allow to contextually mask part of the information at dif - ferent levels of processing , leading to the now well - known transformers models . 3 . 2 . 1 . 3 . Analysis Our ability for organized information retrieval allows to perform further analyses of this knowledge . This pro - cess has been scrutinized through the notion of contextual focus , where creative inspiration occurs when our atten - tion is defocused , allowing more associative thoughts and to activate simultaneously distant representations [ 40 ] . This form of defocused attention would allow to broadcast dif - fusely to broader region of our memory , allowing to con - sider a larger variety of elements rather than attentively select distinct elements as in convergent thinking . This type of broad activation with looser deﬁnition of similarity and selection could be primordial to associative thinking , while still being based on probabilistic relationships be - tween knowledge elements . This posits the existence of a separation between explicit cognition maps allowing con - vergent reasoning for problem - speciﬁc approaches , while implicit cognition would allow to reason on distant cre - ative associations between elements [ 47 ] . Interestingly , these hypotheses contrast with our previous parallel to the attention mechanisms in AI , pointing out to a potential paradoxical limit in this reiﬁcation process . 3 . 2 . 1 . 4 . Transformation and meta - representation Although transforming information could already seem to belong to the operations category , reorganization and transformation might already occur on our existing infor - mation structures . Indeed , as the phenomenon of neural plasticity is commonly accepted , there is also potentially some reorganizing mechanisms to allow existing knowl - edge categories to be formed based on task - speciﬁc objec - tives [ 61 ] . This could be facilitated by modules of meta - representation , serving to represent " concepts over con - cepts " [ 54 ] . This interesting notion would permit to fa - cilitate high - level reasoning across different domains , es - pecially in the case of analogies and metaphors . Hence , this type of second - order system could provide us with the ability to reﬂect on our own knowledge representa - tions and processes [ 20 ] . 3 . 2 . 2 . Operations Cognitive approaches emphasize the concept that individ - uals generate creative ideas by exploring their knowledge through different types of operations . Hence , we discuss in this section the ways in which we explore and develop relationships between different knowledge items . Several attempts to produce an encompassing model of such cre - ative operations have been proposed , such as the propul - sion model of Sternberg [ 55 ] . This model delineates a classiﬁcation of creative operations as replication ( trans - forming known ideas ) , redeﬁnition ( seeing known ideas in a new way ) , incrementation ( extending known ideas ) , advance incrementation ( similar but going further an ac - ceptable threshold ) , reconstruction ( reviving a previously abandoned idea ) and reinitiation ( starting an idea at a rad - ically different new point ) . Although this proposal is in - teresting , we rather follow here a categorization which is closer to the technical AI - based views and more prone to potential reiﬁcation . Hence , we split different ideas between the modiﬁcation ( transforming a single item of knowledge ) , association ( linking several items or ideas ) , analogy ( existing ideas are transferred to a new domain ) and abstraction ( ﬁnding a more general concept encom - passing several existing ideas ) . 3 . 2 . 2 . 1 . Modiﬁcation The large majority of advances in any domain are based on small incremental changes in various ideas pertaining to that ﬁeld . These operations imply to slowly modify existing ideas to include increasingly complex variations . This appears logical as creative objects must usually strike the right balance between familiarity and novelty . This be - havior can also clearly be seen in the publication patterns of any scientiﬁc ﬁeld . This operation can also sometimes be evidenced even within the production of a single object . For instance , in music , the notion of theme and variations is highly present , where the same material is exposed and varied along a given musical piece . With this modiﬁca - tion operation , it is usually necessary to understand the existing similarity with the target idea and features inside the given domain . This would imply a gradual access to the most readily similar instances given similar features , leading to a form of exemplar generation [ 60 ] . Although this can be seen in several approaches in AI , the variations remain in a conﬁned set as delineated by the choice of the model and dataset , following our previous argument pointing out to this inherent limitation ( Section 2 . 4 . 2 ) . 3 . 2 . 2 . 2 . Association The second type of well - studied creative operation is that of association or combination of existing knowledge and ideas . The conceptual combination implies to process complex forms of similarities between apparently hetero - geneous ideas , in order to generate a novel concept by merging these elementary ideas . This notion of allowing two contradictory ideas to be entertained simultaneously , called Janusian thinking is critical to creative ideation . Usually , this combination process allows the emergence of features that are beyond the simple summation of their components . Hence , combining distant concept and rec - onciling their discrepancies allows to postulate novel prop - erties that are absent from the original concepts , which is core to creativity [ 61 ] . Generally , the combination pro - cess requires to perform integration between ideas that are not usually grouped into a single coherent concept or even space , which requires to break traditional thinking patterns . Regarding AI approaches , this seems extremely complex , as it transgresses the notion of physical proper - ties distance , and even requires to go beyond conceptual distance aspects . To the best of our knowledge , this oper - ation appears to currently be out - of - reach for AI models . 3 . 2 . 2 . 3 . Analogy Another type of process that has been repeatedly exam - ined in creativity studies is the concept of analogy , where existing well - structured knowledge is projected onto a novel domain . On a simple basis , analogies can be used to apply given solutions from a domain to another , or communi - cating ideas in a more concise way . However , the real force of analogical reasoning appears when it connects the source and target domains at very profound levels of knowledge , rather than merely on their surface [ 29 ] . As an interesting but somewhat looser parallel , this notion is currently highly studied and successful in the AI ﬁeld , de - ﬁned as the task of domain transfer [ 9 ] . In this approach , part of the properties from an object ( deﬁned as source content ) are transferred to a given domain ( deﬁned as tar - get style ) . However , this process mostly aims to transform some low - level perceptual properties of objects rather than some profound conceptual aspects . 3 . 2 . 2 . 4 . Abstraction The abstraction category is the most intricate and com - plex to grasp , as it involves to work at higher - level spaces of logical reasoning . Here , we link this idea to our inher - ent predictive system that is thought to be one of the criti - cal function of the brain [ 21 ] . Evidence suggest that there are general appraisal and reward - based mechanisms in the brain that would provide incentives for learning . In that sense , the abstraction operation could allow us to perform more accurate predictions , by using these past rewards as global indicators for enhancing our own decision mecha - nisms . This relates to our previous discussion on the def - inition and learning of novel representation spaces ( Sec - tion 3 . 2 . 1 ) . Indeed , some approaches have tried to per - form prediction directly in these spaces [ 42 ] , as a proxy to reorganizing knowledge . However , these still do not provide forms of higher abstraction . 3 . 2 . 3 . Limitations As we reﬂect back on our presentation of different aspects of the creative process , we can see that our understanding of different stages is limited to that of preparation ( seen as information gathering ) and incubation ( seen as opera - tions on this knowledge ) . Following various components , there seems to be currently no equivalent to the steps of problem ﬁnding and illumination . However , these steps are critical to the creative process , and it appears that the most functional parts of any purely creative behaviors are still entirely human - based . This would point out to a form of partiality in artiﬁcial creativity , as the major aspects of its stages still seem to be out of reach . As we outlined throughout the deﬁnition of creativity ( Section 2 . 1 ) , the appreciation of its characteristics is usu - ally separated between the three factors of novelty , quality and social relevance . Hence , we try in the following to de - lineate the potential limitations of AI for creativity based on these three major criteria separately . 3 . 3 . Creativity and novelty The novelty aspect of creativity might be one of the most prominent in the collective subconscious . However , this might also be one of the most critical and complicated point to address in a computational approach . This re - lates to the way that systems are optimized by learning on a set of examples [ 30 ] . Indeed , training a given model usually relies on minimizing the expectation of a loss ( er - ror ) term . This implies that we are computing a mean er - ror across a set of known examples . This also means that the model is incentivized to perform correctly on the most common elements of knowledge , by trying to ﬁt the prin - cipal mode of the distribution ( where most examples are concentrated ) . Conversely , the unusual ( outliers ) exam - ples will have the lowest impact on the model training , and will mostly be ignored to avoid skewing the global error term . However , as we discussed earlier , creativity highly relates to dealing with these types of distant exam - ples . Hence , the major question is to know whether AI models could truly provoke novelty through some given operational mechanisms , or if this would be bound to re - quire a human intervention . Although AI is successful in the organization and retrieval of knowledge , the combi - nation of conceptual elements drawn from memory stem from largely more complex processes . The psychologist Margaret Boden has given much at - tention to the relations between creativity and machines [ 12 ] . In this view , the ability to ﬁnd new , surprising and socially valuable ideas can occur in three main ways : com - binatorial ( producing novel conﬁgurations of familiar ma - terials ) , exploratory ( discovering new paths in conceptual spaces ) or transformative ( when the space itself is dis - rupted giving way to ideas that were previously incon - ceivable ) . Hence , there might be some yet uncovered op - erations that might favor creativity in AI , by empowering their decision - making traits . This line of thought is princi - pally developed in the reinforcement learning approaches , where agents are deﬁned to explore spaces of possibili - ties . However , these require the deﬁnition of rewards and success functions that are still complex to deﬁne , as they relate to subtle perceptual and contextual aspects of the generated objects . 3 . 4 . Evaluating the creative quality Regarding the evaluation of the creative quality , there ap - pears to be a strong duality in this question . On one hand , learning approaches are trained by minimizing a criterion , which should serve as a proxy for quality . However , this loss usually pertains to some structural aspects of the gen - erated data , rather to more abstract aspects of its content . Hence , AI models are still unable to determine the real creative value of what they produce . To allow this com - plexity of understanding , we need to be able to evaluate both the creative product , but also the process itself . Hence , one of the major ﬂaws of AI applied to creativ - ity appears to lie within its inability to judge the creative structures that emerge from exploratory processes . In a more global sense , this amounts to say that AI approaches bear no artistic intent . Although this appears to be a pretty straightforward observation , this can be traced back to the question of measurement . Indeed , in order to provide a solution to this issue , we would need not only a computa - tional deﬁnition of creative ideas , but most importantly a criterion of evaluation on what are low - probability events that still appear relevant . This question of relevance re - lates strongly on the notion that creativity can only be evaluated within a given societal context . 3 . 5 . The notion of context As we emphasized in previous discussions , creativity is highly contextual and deeply related to cultural aspects . One of the most notable differences in the conception of creativity can be found in the separation between West - ern societies seeing creativity as a godly intervention con - veyed through an outside spirit , and Eastern societies that historically considered creation as a discovery or mimicry of something already pre - existing in the universe . This discrepancy in the evaluation of creativity can also be seen in what different cultures revere as a form of artistic ex - pression . For instance , Japanese civilization highly values the works of calligraphers , sword makers and ceramicists as art [ 52 ] , which is less prominent in Western societies . This inﬂuence of culture on our daily life is so pervasive and deeply intertwined with our reasoning that we are not even able to measure the true impact it may have . An emblematic example can be experienced in the excellent book Flatland by Edwin Abbott Abbott , showing that a person living in a two - dimensional world will most prob - ably never be able to reason about cubes . Throughoutthese aspects , cultures are inherently linked to languages , as they represent both the way we commu - nicate , but also the way we think about concepts . Hence , individuals with diverse backgrounds process information differently , and have vast varieties in conceptual function - ing [ 61 ] . These differences in language can be generalized to their largest separation between taxonomic or thematic ways of conceptualizing ideas [ 39 ] . The taxonomic func - tions of languages is highly dominant in Western cultures , where the objects and reasoning are " decontextualized " . Hence , the relationships between objects are less impor - tant than the category to which the object belongs to . Con - versely , the thematic language constructions which deﬁne Eastern languages put a larger emphasis on the context and logical or causal relationships between objects , rather than the individual object taken in isolation . Interestingly , this is also highly reminiscent and symmetrical to the the - ological ramiﬁcations between Western and Eastern con - structs , which seem largely impacted by our logos . Hence , it might appear that the evaluation and novelty of creativity remain entangled contextual - pronequestions . In order to provide an alternate path to the use of AI in cre - ativity , this requires to redeﬁne the relationships between human and machine in creative endeavors . 4 . REDEFINING THE RELATIONSHIP WITH AI THROUGH CO - CREATIVITY As we have seen across the previous sections , there are currently still some profound limitations to attain a true form of artiﬁcial creativity . Indeed , current systems do not show any substantial musical creativity , lacking machine musicianship ( the capacity to process music at a structural , symbolic level , a term coined by Robert Rowe [ 48 ] ) , high - level interaction strategies or generative autonomy . How - ever , there still exists interesting avenues to truly harness the peculiarities of AI models in creativity . 4 . 1 . Different views of AI in creativity One crucial distinction needs to be made in the use of AI for creativity depending on the role and place that it is granted in the creative process . On the one hand , a whole body of research appears to be devoted to use AI as self - sufﬁcient generators , which seek to generate entire pieces of art . The system receives little input from the user , which now acts as a passive admirer of the creation . On the other hand , AI systems can be seen as creation tools , which allows to enhance our own creativity . In that regard , despite its higher complexity and intellectual ram - iﬁcations , AI simply holds a position akin to that of an evolved brush to a painter . This second view provides en - hanced and facilitated ways to explore information spaces , but remain entirely subservient to our own creativity . As we discussed earlier , when using AI in generative processes , we still need to have a precise and well - deﬁned problem , along with a set of representative data . Hence , this already highly constrains the potential behavior of the algorithm , as we delineate the world of possibilities that are attainable and explored by the model . Furthermore , we also implicitly limit the capacity of the models to eval - uate their own realization , as we deﬁne a certain train - ing criterion and loss function , which acts as a learning signal . However , this will also constrain the view of the model to a single facet of the produced artefact . All of these observations relates to the question of creativity as a problem - ﬁnding rather than problem - solving activity . It is sometimes more crucial to ﬁnd an interesting question rather to ﬁnd solutions to existing ones . Current models of computational creativity focus on the ability to generate novel content . However , as dis - cussed previously , the highly context - proneaspects of cre - ativity seem to conﬁne this singularity - seeking approach to a pointless endeavor . Oppositely , it should be recog - nized that creativity traits should be shared between hu - man and machines . Indeed , most works do not consider the rich interplay and collaborations that emerge in the in - teraction and control of creative approaches themselves . Indeed , most models are proposal generators , where we can pick from a list of ideas . Instead , we should aim to establish co - creativity partnerships focusing on the inter - actions dynamics , by evaluating a variety of collaboration strategies . To do so , the ﬁrst step is to deﬁne the problem space itself , which can already be a daunting task . 4 . 2 . AI as a creativity - enhancing tool Whatever type of AI we might deﬁne , it still requires some form of human supervision . First , relying on AI as a creativity - enhancing tool requires to augment computa - tional creativity models with artiﬁcial perception , by learn - ing representation spaces for on - line music structure dis - covery and generative decisions based on cognitive dy - namics by infusing social sciences in computing models . Drawing an analogy to the previous section , ﬁrst ﬁnding disentangled representation spaces of information is a de - cisive and primordial aspect to any creative process . This process of unsupervised learning is still poorly un - derstood , even though it is one of the key towards new generations of learning algorithms . These questions are crystallized around the ﬁeld of disentangled representa - tion learning . The idea of representation learning is to ﬁnd compressed spaces ( termed latent spaces ) of infor - mation with a logical organization , while the disentangle - ment seeks to have the dimensions of these spaces to rep - resent each factor of variation in the data separately . This question is usually approached through the use of Varia - tional Auto - Encoders ( VAEs ) [ 34 ] . Although the use of VAEs for audio applications has only been scarcely inves - tigated , we recently proposed a perceptually - regularized VAE [ 23 ] that learns a space of audio signals aligned with perceptual ratings via a regularization loss . The resulting space exhibits an organization that is well aligned with perception . Hence , this model appears as a valid candi - date to learn an organized audio space . Following this research , we performed several follow - up studies to as - sess different generative aspects of these models , such as adding musical conditioning [ 10 ] , introducing other modal - ities of knowledge [ 15 ] or providing a continuous drum sounds synthesizer [ 1 ] . These types of spaces can pro - vide an invaluable step in the organization of information for the creative process , and can already serve as a gen - erative tool to quickly explore high - level properties . An exciting direction of research would be to model more ac - curately the geometric and topological features of these latent spaces across different learning settings . This ap - proach could provide insight on the learning process and new mechanisms to perform unsupervised learning . These recent researches on information organization link to our question of expanding the human knowledge . Indeed , the strength of AI lies in its ability to understand multivariate and highly non - linear interactions in spaces with large number of dimensions . Hence , this aspect of knowledge structuring can enhance our own power over information structures . As a clear pragmatic example of this idea , we recently introduced a radically novel formu - lation of audio synthesizer control [ 24 ] . We formalized this as the general question of ﬁnding an invertible map - ping between organized latent spaces , linking the audio space of a synthesizer’s capabilities to the space of its pa - rameters . This model allows to address extremely com - plex tasks such as parameter inference ( ﬁnding the pa - rameters of a synthesizer that reproduces any audio ﬁle ) , macro - control learning ( disentangling and simplifying its complex controls ) , and audio - basedpreset exploration ( nav - igating sets of examples in a perceptually - relevant and intuitive manner ) within a single model . This particu - lar instance shows that AI can be used as a mean to ef - ﬁciently re - organize intricate knowledge , even though it is already accessible in a more entangled and harder - to - harness sense . Hence , AI can be an extremely power - ful creativity facilitator in its ability to organize complex knowledge in a simpliﬁed way . In order to decisively move towards artiﬁcial creativ - ity , we critically need AI models that are able to listen and apprehend the musical structure correctly . These higher - level cognitive phenomena involve long - term memoriza - tion and structure discovery , usually performed on multi - ple time scales . In this direction , we worked on different aspects allowing to perform online semantic information extraction [ 13 ] and multi - scale musical structure predic - tion [ 14 ] . However , this also warrants the need to perform a machine evaluation of human creative behaviors in or - der to understand and match the complexity dynamics of musical interaction . This would allow artiﬁcial entities to infer new modes of a distribution in a self - supervised way as a proxy for creativity . In that sense , an interdisciplinary approach is mandatory , where social science and anthro - pological studies need to collide with machine capacities and algorithmic approaches . 4 . 3 . Towards models of co - creativity Overall , it seems that the limits of human creativity are reciprocally limiting to AI , as we are bound to deﬁne pro - cesses that only mimic our own preconceptions of cre - ativity . Furthermore , there is a limit in the quest of self - contained generative AI , as we require these approaches to generate novel content , but yet strongly conform to the existing norms of that domain . A solution to this conun - drum warrants the need to profoundly redeﬁne the creative relationship that may exist between human and machines . Indeed , instead of focusing on the either very subservient view of AI as proposal tools , or oppositely seeing it as a self - contained generator , we should acknowledge that the true power to be harnessed comes from the partnership between two separate systems ( human or machine ) with each its speciﬁc characteristics . This idea of co - creativity emphasizes the fact that creativity is an emerging phe - nomenon resulting from complex interactions and feed - backs between actors involved in a creative process . This allows to regard not only the production of each ( human or artiﬁcial ) part in isolation , but rather focus on the inter - action that emerges between different components . Recently at the IRCAM STMS lab , Assayag [ 2 ] has thoroughly investigated artiﬁcial creativity issues involved in musician - machine interaction , especially in the case of co - improvisation where agents of different nature ( artiﬁ - cial or human ) perform together in highly unpredictable live settings [ 5 ] . Assayag proposed the concept of hu - man machine co - creativity in music [ 3 ] , in order to over - come the aporia inherent to the essentialization of ma - chines when we try to assign them anthropocentric fea - tures such as creativity or intelligence , focusing then more on the relations than on the intrinsic qualities of agents . Co - creativity in that respect addresses emergent distributed behaviors inherent to complex cross - learning feed - backs between agents , and suggests reinforcement mechanisms pertaining to co - action . This shift in objective allows us to question different ways to build the best possible tech - nical tools that could foster and enhance co - creative in - teractions . According to Assayag [ 4 ] , co - creativity can only appear when two features linked to emergence and non - linear dynamics are identiﬁed : ( 1 ) emergence of co - hesive behaviors that are not reducible to , nor explainable by the mere individual processes of agents ; ( 2 ) appari - tion of non - linear regimes of structure formation , lead - ing to rich co - evolution of creative forms . The under - lying assumption is that such surging phenomena result from cross - learning processes between agents involving complex feed - backs loops and reinforcement . As a ma - jor consequence , the states and behavior of participating agents are in return modiﬁed continuously , making them evolve in terms of knowledge and skills . These ideas in - volve intriguing prospect of modeling the dynamics of different actors that cooperate to perform complex adap - tation . This requires anticipatory systems of interaction , with real - time adaptation that could account for the col - lective dynamics in creativity . 4 . 4 . Through the doors of perception As we discussed earlier , AI is inherently limited to opti - mize a mean accuracy on a given set of data , leading to the perilous situation of being an inﬁnite norm - generating machine , which would be detrimental to creativity . This underlines the risk of overusing AI models towards the dangerous path of standardisation . While we will not dwell into the questions of economic gain that could be inter - twined with this prospect , we still underline the dangers of indulging in these goals . The current supremacy of having highly conform thoughts and products , even in the artistic domain , can only lead to a dampening of creative endeavors . As an unconventional analogy from biology , this would resemble a form of genetic drift in creativity which should be avoided at all costs . This phenomenon is caused by continuously selecting a given subset of indi - viduals , which causes the reduction of genetic variance and an overall impoverishment of the available genetic material . To transpose this in optimization terms , we would constrain ourselves to convergeand remain stuck in a local minimum , by removing large parts of our search space . Although these thoughts might appear as a bleak obser - vation on the use of AI for creativity , there are glimmers of hope hiding underneath . The advent of computational ap - proaches have propelled creative endeavors into horizons that could never have been reached before , and this path seems far from being exhausted . These exciting avenues come from the fact that AI models and human behaviors can compensate for their respective limitations . In that sense , AI can easily process complex and multivariate in - formation without any prior bias . Hence , it can allow us to deal with objects and concepts that would easily exceed our perception potential . This also question the episte - mological reasoning of our quest to perform biologically - inspired mimicry , when we could harness the power of a truly novel and somewhat boundless generation tool . 5 . CONCLUSION Across this prospective paper , we tried to review the ﬁeld of creativity studies from a social and cognitive standpoint and tie parallel links to the current development of AI models . Doing so , we aimed to provide a novel look at creativity in the era of artiﬁcial intelligence . After under - lining the major limitations of current models from the lens of cognitive studies , we discussed how the highly contextual aspects of creativity and the question of qual - ity measurements prove to be crippling to the singularity - seeking approach . Hence , blindly following the aspiration of self - contained generative machines , based on purely mimicking human creative traits appear as a somewhat pointless endeavor . Instead , we discussed the possibility of redeﬁning the relationships between human and ma - chines through co - creativity approaches . This allows to scrutinize and empower the link between both agents in the creative process , rather than the agents taken in isola - tion , as a main object of study . 6 . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This work is supported by the ANR MAKIMOno ( 17 - CE38 - 0015 - 01 ) project , the SSHRC ACTOR ( 895 - 2018 - 1023 ) Partnership , Emergence ( s ) ACIDITEAM from Ville de Paris and ACIMO project from Sorbonne Université . References [ 1 ] C . Aouameur , P . Esling , and G . Hadjeres . Neu - ral drum machine : An interactive system for real - time synthesis of drum sounds . arXiv preprint arXiv : 1907 . 02637 , 2019 . [ 2 ] G . Assayag . Improvising in creative symbolic in - teraction . In Mathemusical conversations : Mathe - matics and Computation in Music Performance and Composition , pages 61 – 74 . World Scientiﬁc , 2016 . [ 3 ] G . Assayag . Human - machine co - creativity , a reﬂec - tion on symbolic indisciplines . In Artisticiel , Experi - ments in Cyber - Human Improvisations . RFI : Revue francophone dâ ˘A´Zinformatique et musique , 2020 . [ 4 ] G . Assayag . Reach project : Raising co - creativity in cyber - humanmusicianship . In Etincelle 20 , La revue de la crÃl’ation . 2020 . [ 5 ] G . Assayag , G . Bloch , A . Cont , and S . Dubnov . In - teraction with machine improvisation . In The Struc - ture of Style , pages 219 – 245 . Springer , 2010 . [ 6 ] R . Aunger . Darwinizing culture . The Status of Memetics as a , 2000 . [ 7 ] Y . Bengio , A . Courville , and P . Vincent . Representa - tion learning : A review and new perspectives . IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intel - ligence , 35 ( 8 ) : 1798 – 1828 , 2013 . [ 8 ] C . M . Bishop . Pattern recognition and machine learning . springer , 2006 . [ 9 ] A . Bitton , P . Esling , and A . Chemla - Romeu - Santos . Modulated variational auto - encoders for many - to - many musical timbre transfer . arXiv preprint arXiv : 1810 . 00222 , 2018 . [ 10 ] A . Bitton , P . Esling , A . Caillon , and M . Fouilleul . Assisted sound sample generation with musical conditioning in adversarial auto - encoders . arXiv preprint arXiv : 1904 . 06215 , 2019 . [ 11 ] W . Blake . The marriage of heaven and hell , volume 321 . American Chemical Society , 1790 . [ 12 ] M . A . Boden . Creativity and artiﬁcial intelligence . Artiﬁcial intelligence , 103 ( 1 - 2 ) : 347 – 356 , 1998 . [ 13 ] T . Carsault , J . Nika , and P . Esling . Using musical re - lationships between chord labels in automatic chord extraction tasks . In International Society for Music Information Retrieval Conference ( ISMIR ) , 2018 . [ 14 ] T . Carsault , A . McLeod , P . Esling , J . Nika , E . Naka - mura , and K . Yoshii . Multi - step chord sequence prediction based on aggregated multi - scale encoder - decoder networks . In IEEE 29th International Work - shop on Machine Learning for Signal Processing ( MLSP ) , pages 1 – 6 . IEEE , 2019 . [ 15 ] A . Chemla - Romeu - Santos , S . Ntalampiras , P . Es - ling , G . Haus , and G . Assayag . Cross - modal vari - ational inference for bijective signal - symbol transla - tion . In Proceedings of the 22 nd International Con - ference on Digital Audio Effects ( DAFx - 19 ) , 2019 . [ 16 ] A . Craft . The limits to creativity in education : Dilemmas for the educator . British journal of ed - ucational studies , 51 ( 2 ) : 113 – 127 , 2003 . [ 17 ] D . Cropley and A . Cropley . Functional creativity . The Cambridge Handbook of Creativity , page 301 , 2010 . [ 18 ] M . Csikszentmihalyi . Society , culture , and person : A systems view of creativity . In The systems model of creativity , pages 47 – 61 . Springer , 1988 . [ 19 ] T . W . Deacon . The symbolic species : The co - evolution of language and the brain . Number 202 . WW Norton & Company , 1998 . [ 20 ] D . Dennett . Conditions of personhood . In What Is a Person ? , pages 145 – 167 . Springer , 1988 . [ 21 ] A . Dietrich . Brain mechanisms of creativity : What we know , what we donâ ˘A´Zt . In Mobile Brain - Body Imaging and the Neuroscience of Art , Innovation and Creativity , pages 23 – 28 . Springer , 2019 . [ 22 ] J . Engell . The creative imagination : Enlightenment to romanticism . 1982 . [ 23 ] P . Esling , A . Bitton , and A . Chemla - Romeu - Santos . Generative timbre spaces with variational audio synthesis . 21st International DaFX Conference , arXiv : 1805 . 08501 , 2018 . [ 24 ] P . Esling , N . Masuda , A . Bardet , R . Despres , and A . Chemla - Romeu - Santos . Universal audio syn - thesizer control with normalizing ﬂows . In 22nd International Conference on Digital Audio Effects ( DaFX ) , 2019 . [ 25 ] G . J . Feist . The function of personality in creativity . The Cambridge handbook of creativity , pages 113 – 130 , 2010 . [ 26 ] L . Gabora and S . B . Kaufman . Evolutionary ap - proaches to creativity . The Cambridge handbook of creativity , pages 279 – 300 , 2010 . [ 27 ] H . Gardner . Creating minds : An anatomy of creativ - ity seen through the lives of freud . Einstein . Picasso . Stravinsky . Eliot . Graham , and Gandhi . New York : Basic Books , 1993 . [ 28 ] C . Geertz . The interpretation of cultures , volume 5019 . Basic books , 1973 . [ 29 ] D . Gentner , J . Holyoak , and N . Kokinov . The ana - logical mind : Perspectives from cognitive science . MIT press , 2001 . [ 30 ] I . Goodfellow , Y . Bengio , and A . Courville . Deep learning . MIT press , 2016 . [ 31 ] J . Guilford . Creativity . American psychologist , 5 ( 9 ) : 444 – 454 , 1950 . [ 32 ] A . B . Kaufman , S . A . Kornilov , A . S . Bristol , M . Tan , and E . L . Grigorenko . The neurobiologi - cal foundation of creative cognition . The Cambridge handbook of creativity , 216 , 2010 . [ 33 ] J . C . Kaufman and R . J . Sternberg . The Cambridge handbook of creativity . Cambridge University Press , 2010 . [ 34 ] D . P . Kingma and M . Welling . Auto - encoding varia - tional bayes . arXiv preprint arXiv : 1312 . 6114 , 2013 . [ 35 ] I . Kobyzev , S . Prince , and M . Brubaker . Normalizing ﬂows : An introduction and review of current meth - ods . IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Ma - chine Intelligence , 2020 . [ 36 ] A . Kozbelt , R . A . Beghetto , and M . A . Runco . The - ories of creativity . The Cambridge handbook of cre - ativity , 2 : 20 – 47 , 2010 . [ 37 ] P . Locher . How does a visual artist create an artwork . The Cambridge handbook of creativity , pages 131 – 144 , 2010 . [ 38 ] T . Lubart . Cross - cultural perspectives on creativity . The Cambridge handbook of creativity , pages 265 – 278 , 2010 . [ 39 ] E . M . Markman and J . E . Hutchinson . Children’s sensitivity to constraints on word meaning : Taxo - nomic versus thematic relations . Cognitive psychol - ogy , 16 ( 1 ) : 1 – 27 , 1984 . [ 40 ] C . Martindale . Biological bases of creativity . Hand - book of creativity , 2 : 137 – 152 , 1999 . [ 41 ] S . Moran . The roles of creativity in society . The Cambridge handbook of creativity , pages 74 – 90 , 2010 . [ 42 ] A . v . d . Oord , Y . Li , and O . Vinyals . Representation learning with contrastive predictive coding . arXiv preprint arXiv : 1807 . 03748 , 2018 . [ 43 ] J . A . Plucker and M . C . Makel . Assessment of creativity . The Cambridge handbook of creativity , pages 48 – 73 , 2010 . [ 44 ] J . A . Plucker and M . A . Runco . The death of creativ - ity measurement has been greatly exaggerated : Cur - rent issues , recent advances , and future directions in creativity assessment . Roeper Review , 21 ( 1 ) : 36 – 39 , 1998 . [ 45 ] G . J . Puccio and M . D . Chimento . Implicit theories of creativity : Laypersons’ perceptions of the creativ - ity of adaptors and innovators . Perceptual and Motor Skills , 92 ( 3 ) : 675 – 681 , 2001 . [ 46 ] M . Puckette . The Theory and Techniques of Elec - tronic Music . World Scientiﬁc Publishing Company , 2007 . [ 47 ] A . S . Reber . Implicit learning and tacit knowledge . Journal of experimental psychology : General , 118 ( 3 ) : 219 , 1989 . [ 48 ] R . Rowe . Machine musicianship . MIT press , 2004 . [ 49 ] M . A . Runco and R . S . Albert . Creativity research : A historical view . Cambridge University Press , 2010 . [ 50 ] M . A . Runco and I . Chand . Cognition and creativ - ity . Educational psychology review , 7 ( 3 ) : 243 – 267 , 1995 . [ 51 ] H . A . Simon et al . The sciences of the artiﬁcial . MIT Press Books , 1 , 1996 . [ 52 ] D . K . Simonton . Foreign inﬂuence and national achievement : The impact of open milieus on japanese civilization . Journal of Personality and So - cial Psychology , 72 ( 1 ) : 86 , 1997 . [ 53 ] D . K . Simonton . Origins of genius : Darwinian per - spectives on creativity . Oxford University Press , 1999 . [ 54 ] D . Sperber . The modularity of thought and the epi - demiology of representations . Mapping the mind : Domain speciﬁcity in cognition and culture , pages 39 – 67 , 1994 . [ 55 ] R . J . Sternberg , J . C . Kaufman , J . E . Pretz , et al . The creativity conundrum : A propulsion model of kinds of creative contributions . Psychology Press , 2002 . [ 56 ] A . Vaswani , N . Shazeer , N . Parmar , J . Uszkoreit , L . Jones , A . N . Gomez , Ł . Kaiser , and I . Polosukhin . Attention is all you need . In Advances in neural information processing systems , pages 5998 – 6008 , 2017 . [ 57 ] M . A . Wallach and N . Kogan . Modes of thinking in young children . 1965 . [ 58 ] G . Wallas . The art of thought . 1926 . [ 59 ] T . B . Ward . Structured imagination : The role of cat - egory structure in exemplar generation . Cognitive psychology , 27 ( 1 ) : 1 – 40 , 1994 . [ 60 ] T . B . Ward . Whatâ ˘A´Zs old about new ideas . The creative cognition approach , pages 157 – 178 , 1995 . [ 61 ] T . B . Ward and Y . Kolomyts . Cognition and creativ - ity . The Cambridge handbook of creativity , pages 93 – 112 , 2010 .