A Transcriptome Landscape of Mouse Embryogenesis Nicolas Fossat , 1 Sabine Pﬁster , 1 and Patrick P . L . Tam 1 , * 1 Embryology Unit , Children’s Medical Research Institute , University of Sydney , Locked Bag 23 , Wentworthville NSW 2145 , Australia * Correspondence : ptam @ cmri . usyd . edu . au DOI 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2007 . 11 . 011 Coordinated regulation of genetic activity underpins formation of the body plan and morphogenesis of embryonic structures . In this issue of Developmental Cell , Mitiku and Baker describe a chronological series of transcriptomes of postimplantation mouse embryos at gastrulation and early organogenesis , providing a valuable resource for studying the dynamics of both genome - wide and gene - speciﬁc transcriptional activities that accompany mouse embryogenesis . Elucidation of the developmental mechanisms controlling embryogene - sis requires an understanding of how genetic activity regulates morphogen - esis over time . Conceptually , an ap - proach to such an investigation of cel - lular and molecular mechanisms can be articulated as a multilevel paradigm ( Figure 1 ) . At the molecular level , anal - ysis of the transcriptome can reveal the proﬁle of gene activity . This activity reﬂects regulation by transcriptional complexes on regulatory elements of individualorsetsofgenesandmodula - tion by epigenetic effects via changes in chromatin conformation , histone and DNA modiﬁcations , nucleosome occupancy , andtheactivityofnoncod - ing regulatory RNAs ( # 1 , Figure 1 ) . The transcriptome of embryos of succes - sive developmental stages can , in turn , inform us about the dynamics of cellular biological activities : cell - intrin - sic housekeeping and differentiation activities ( # 2 , Figure 1 ) and cell - extrin - sic activities that mediate cell - cell and cell - environment interactions ( # 3 , Figure 1 ) . Together , the intrinsic and extrinsic cellular functions , directed by the progressive changes of the pro - teome , drive morphogenesis of the embryo over time ( # 4 and # 5 , Figure 1 ) . Thusfar , thetranscriptomeofmouse embryos has been studied by analyz - ing libraries of cDNAs and expressed sequence tags ( ESTs ) , serial analysis of gene expression ( SAGE ) , and , more commonly , microarray proﬁling . Re - cently , two sets of transcriptome data encompassing the whole preimplanta - tion period of development were pub - lished ( Hamatani et al . , 2004 ; Wang et al . , 2004 ) . The main ﬁndings of these studies are ( 1 ) that two transient waves of active transcription occur , ﬁrst at the two - to four - cell stage ( the zygotic genome activation ) and then at the eight - cell stage ( the mid - preimplanta - tion gene activation ) , which may reﬂect some synchronous changes in the developmental status of the blasto - meres ; and ( 2 ) that cell - cell signaling activity takes place prior to major mor - phogenetic events like compaction and blastocoel formation . In contrast , transcriptome analysis of the postim - plantation period has been more lim - ited in its coverage of developmental stages . In addition , variations in the methodologyandtechnologyplatform , the tools for data analysis and valida - tion , the choice of mouse strains , and the criteria for staging the embryos have confounded the construction of an integrated longitudinal proﬁle of the transcriptome . The study of Mitiku and Baker ( 2007 ) in this issue of Devel - opmentalCell hasnowprovidedacom - prehensivelookatthetranscriptome of postimplantation mouse embryos . Altogether , 13 stage - speciﬁc tran - scriptomes of embryos at gastrulation to early organogenesis are described . Thedevelopmentalstagesspanacross a period of active cell proliferation , lineage speciﬁcation , morphogenetic cell movement , and formation of organ primordia . This set of transcrip - tomes is unique for its ﬁne temporal resolution at successive 0 . 25 day intervals—transcriptomes were gener - ated from pooled embryos of the same nominalages , determinedbymatching their morphology to that of the Theiler system of developmental staging . The staging of embryos by morphology rather than actual ( gestational ) age may , however , result in a reduction in the ﬁdelity and consistency of the expression proﬁles , if the activity of certain cluster of genes is regulated chronologically ( age related ) rather than developmentally ( stage related ) . Analysis of the transcriptomes has revealed several discrete patterns of gene expression occurring between gastrulation and organogenesis . There are distinctive and coordinated switches in the expression pattern of groups of genes during the transition from rapid cell proliferation to en - hanced cell differentiation . Intuitively , genes that encode molecules for com - mon biological functions , or controlling parallel developmental processes , are expected to display a concerted expression pattern , consistent with the notion of the syn - expression grouping of genes ( Baldessari et al . , 2005 ) . In line with this concept , analy - sis of the mouse data sets revealed clustering of active genes during developmental transitions . Among the gene clusters , Mituku and Baker observed that those expressed during gastrulation are mostly related to ion metabolism and the maintenance of pluripotency , while those expressed after gastrulation are involved in line - age commitment , cell differentiation , organ formation , and morphogenesis . Coexpressing genes are known to be spatially clustered on the Developmental Cell 13 , December 2007 ª 2007 Elsevier Inc . 761 Developmental Cell Previews chromosomes ( Cohen et al . , 2000 ; Caron et al . , 2001 ) . As Mitiku and Baker discovered , not only are genes that are activated collectively during organogen - esislocalizedonthesamechromosome , the regulatory region of these genes is enriched for GLI binding sites . GLI tran - scriptionfactorsareinvolvedintheregu - lation of the downstream target genes of the Sonic hedgehog ( Shh ) signaling pathway . Coincidentally , expression of Gli2 , Gli3 , and Shh genes increases just beforetheactivationofthisgenecluster . Thisﬁndinglendssupporttothehypoth - esis that the GLI transcription factors may be instrumental in mediating the widespread activation of downstream gene cluster by SHH signaling . Whether a combined function of the entire gene cluster or only some individual genes is required for organogenesis has yet to be tested experimentally . Comparing the mouse transcrip - tome with that of other animals ( # 6 , Figure 1 ) reveals conservation in the activity of some genetic networks . The activity of one of the seven clus - ters of the mouse genes , encoding putative RNA processing and cell cy - cle regulators , provides one example for such conservation . These genes are downregulated at the onset of organogenesis of the mouse . In Dro - sophila , homologs of these genes are also downregulated shortly after gas - trulation , strongly suggesting a funda - mental role for RNA processing in the transition from cell proliferation to cell differentiation . There are also similari - ties between mouse and Xenopus : the mouse transcriptomes show little change between gastrulation and early neurulation , and the gene ex - pression proﬁles are relatively con - stant between gastrulae and neurulae in the frog ( Baldessari et al . , 2005 ) . However , it should be noted that while the conservation of certain aspect of the transcriptome highlights the com - monality in the molecular mechanisms of development , divergence is equally important for its contribution to the acquisition of species - speciﬁc embry - onic characteristics . The immediate beneﬁt of the avail - ability of this data resource on - line ( GSE9046 at http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / geo / index . cgi ) is that it enables us to ﬁnd out when genes of interest are expressed and how their expres - sion level changes within this window of postimplantation mouse develop - ment . In addition , these expression data could potentially be used as a reference for analyzing those of mutant embryos , keeping in mind the possible effect of strain background on the transcriptome . More value may be added to this resource if the whole - embryo transcriptomes were complemented by germ layer - and tis - sue lineage - speciﬁc transcriptomes of embryos at comparable developmen - tal stages ( Harrison et al . , 1995 ; Gu et al . , 2004 ; Sherwood et al . , 2007 ; Hou et al . , 2007 ) . It would then be fea - sible to mine the data for a develop - mental proﬁle of genetic activity in speciﬁc progenitor populations of known cell fates and also that of their derivatives . Finally , inferences about the impact of the transcriptome on embryo development are at present based principally on the knowledge of gene ontology . While such informa - tion may educate us about the putative function of speciﬁc genes , it is impor - tant to note that synergistic and nega - tive interactions among genes , over and above the activity of individual genes , may be more critical for the function of the transcriptome . REFERENCES Baldessari , D . , Shin , Y . , Krebs , O . , Ko¨nig , R . , Koide , T . , Vinayagam , A . , Fenger , U . , Mochii , M . , Terasaka , C . , Kitayama , A . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Mech . Dev . 122 , 441 – 475 . Caron , H . , van Schaik , B . , van der Mee , M . , Baas , F . , Riggins , G . , van Sluis , P . , Hermus , M . C . , van Asperen , R . , Boon , K . , Vouˆte , P . A . , et al . ( 2001 ) . Science 291 , 1289 – 1292 . Cohen , B . A . , Mitra , R . D . , Hughes , J . D . , and Church , G . M . ( 2000 ) . Nat . Genet . 26 , 183 – 186 . Gu , G . , Wells , J . M . , Dombkowski , D . , Preffer , F . , Aronow , B . , and Melton , D . A . ( 2004 ) . Devel - opment 131 , 165 – 179 . Hamatani , T . , Carter , M . G . , Sharov , A . A . , and Ko , M . S . ( 2004 ) . Dev . Cell 6 , 117 – 131 . Harrison , S . M . , Dunwoodie , S . L . , Arkell , R . M . , Lehrach , H . , and Beddington , R . S . ( 1995 ) . Development 121 , 2479 – 2489 . Hou , J . , Charters , A . M . , Lee , S . C . , Zhao , Y . , Wu , M . K . , Jones , S . J . , Marra , M . A . , and Hood - less , P . A . ( 2007 ) . BMC Dev . Biol . 7 , 92 . Mitiku , N . , and Baker , J . C . ( 2007 ) . Dev . Cell 13 , this issue , 897 – 907 . Sherwood , R . I . , Jitianu , C . , Cleaver , O . , Shaywitz , D . A . , Lamenzo , J . O . , Chen , A . E . , Golub , T . R . , and Melton , D . A . ( 2007 ) . Dev . Biol . 304 , 541 – 555 . Wang , Q . T . , Piotrowska , K . , Ciemerych , M . A . , Milenkovic , L . , Scott , M . P . , Davis , R . W . , andZer - nicka - Goetz , M . ( 2004 ) . Dev . Cell 6 , 133 – 144 . Figure 1 . A Multilevel Paradigm for Analyzing Cellular and Molecular Mechanisms of Embryogenesis ( 1 ) Activity of the transcriptome and epigenome generates the proteome , which regulates ( 2 ) intrinsic cellular functions and ( 3 ) extrinsic cell functions , including cell - cell and cell - environment interactions . ( 4 ) Cell differentiation and inductive tissue interaction drive morphogenesis , which is orchestrated spatially and ( 5 ) temporally during embryogenesis . ( 6 ) Comparative studies of embryological models other than the mouse may reveal the conservation and divergence of the developmental strategy . Components of this paradigm that are investigated by Mitiku and Baker ( this issue ) are highlighted . 762 Developmental Cell 13 , December 2007 ª 2007 Elsevier Inc . Developmental Cell Previews