nature medicine VOLUME 17 | NUMBER 10 | OCTOBER 2011 1315 t e c h n i c a l r e p o r t s The prognosis in advanced - stage ovarian cancer remains poor . Tumor - specific intraoperative fluorescence imaging may improve staging and debulking efforts in cytoreductive surgery and thereby improve prognosis . The overexpression of folate receptor - a ( FR - a ) in 90 – 95 % of epithelial ovarian cancers prompted the investigation of intraoperative tumor - specific fluorescence imaging in ovarian cancer surgery using an FR - a – targeted fluorescent agent . In patients with ovarian cancer , intraoperative tumor - specific fluorescence imaging with an FR - a – targeted fluorescent agent showcased the potential applications in patients with ovarian cancer for improved intraoperative staging and more radical cytoreductive surgery . Of all gynecologic malignancies , epithelial ovarian cancer ( EOC ) is the most frequent cause of death , both in the United States 1 and in Europe 2 . The relative absence of a clear , distinctive clinical presenta - tion in early stages , combined with the lack of a screening tool , often results in the disease being diagnosed only at more advanced stages . The overall 5 - year survival rate is 45 % 3 , and for stages III and IV it is only 20 – 25 % 4 , 5 . Currently , cytoreductive surgery followed by combi - nation chemotherapy is regarded as the most effective treatment . The degree of cytoreduction , in which minimal residual disease is defined as tumor deposits < 1 cm , is one of the few prognostic factors that can be actively influenced by the surgeon . Improved staging and possibly survival could be achieved by better cytoreduction aided by an intraop - erative , tumor - specific detection strategy that could assist the surgeon by providing real - time feedback on residual malignant tissue . Radiologic approaches such as X - ray , CT , MRI and ultrasound have been considered for use in assisting surgical procedures , but these are not tumor specific and generally are not useful for intra - operative applications . In contrast , fluorescence imaging , as an optical technique , relates naturally to surgical inspection and prac - tice , and it offers superior resolution and sensitivity compared to preoperative radiological imaging and to visual inspection and palpa - tion during surgery . The combination of accurate real - time imaging with tumor - specific fluorescent agents can shift the paradigm of sur - gical inspection by enabling localization of lesions that are difficult or impossible to detect by visual observation or palpation , possibly leading to up - staging of patients due to improved detection of tumor tissue and more radical excision of tumor tissue . In the last decade , several groups have contributed to progress in the development of optical imaging systems 6 and tumor - specific fluorophores for clinical applications 7 , 8 . Several preclinical 9 , 10 and clinical 11 – 13 studies have demonstrated the potential use of image - guided surgery . A promising target in EOC is FR - α . Recently , several studies on the expression of the FR - α in ovarian cancer have revealed that it is increased in 90 – 95 % of patients with EOC 14 , 15 . Moreover , the absence of FR - α on healthy cells leads to high tumor - to - normal ratios . As such , FR - α is potentially a good target for both therapeutic 8 – 10 and imaging purposes 16 – 18 . As a ligand of FR - α , folate has already been conjugated to DTPA for SPECT / CT imaging 16 and to several PET tracers 19 . It has also been linked to fluorescein for use in imaging metastatic disease in murine tumor models 18 , although this was never tested in humans . In this study , folate conjugated to fluorescein iso - thiocyanate ( folate - FITC ; Fig . 1 ) for targeting FR - α is used together with a real - time multispectral intraoperative fluorescence imaging system 20 . We report on the results of first - in - human use of intra - operative tumor - specific fluorescence imaging for real - time surgical visualization of tumor tissue in patients undergoing an exploratory laparotomy for suspected ovarian cancer . RESULTS Patient characteristics The mean age of all patients was 61 . 2 ± 11 . 4 ( mean ± s . d . ) . Four patients were diagnosed with a malignant epithelial ovarian tumor ( two serous carcinomas , one undifferentiated carcinoma and one mucinous Intraoperative tumor - specific fluorescence imaging in ovarian cancer by folate receptor - α targeting : first in - human results Gooitzen M van Dam 1 , George Themelis 2 , Lucia M A Crane 1 , Niels J Harlaar 1 , 2 , Rick G Pleijhuis 1 , Wendy Kelder 1 , Athanasios Sarantopoulos 2 , Johannes S de Jong 1 , Henriette J G Arts 3 , Ate G J van der Zee 3 , Joost Bart 4 , Philip S Low 5 & Vasilis Ntziachristos 2 1 Department of Surgery , Division of Surgical Oncology , BioOptical Imaging Center , University of Groningen , Groningen , The Netherlands . 2 Technische Universität München & Helmholtz Zentrum , München , Germany . 3 Department of Gynaecology , Division of Gynaecological Oncology , University of Groningen , Groningen , The Netherlands . 4 Department of Pathology and Molecular Biology , University Medical Center Groningen , University of Groningen , Groningen , The Netherlands . 5 Department of Chemistry , Purdue University , West Lafayette , Indiana , USA . Correspondence should be addressed to G . M . v . D . ( g . m . van . dam @ umcg . nl ) or V . N . ( v . ntziachristos @ tum . de ) . Received 15 October 2010 ; accepted 11 March 2011 ; published online 18 September 2011 ; doi : 10 . 1038 / nm . 2472 © 2011 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . t e c h n i c a l r e p o r t s 1316 VOLUME 17 | NUMBER 10 | OCTOBER 2011 nature medicine carcinoma ) and one patient with a serous borderline tumor . Five patients were diagnosed with a benign ovarian tumor , as confirmed by histopathology : two fibrothecomas , one cellular fibroma , one cystic teratoma and one benign multicystic ischemic ovary ( Table 1 ) . Intraoperative tumor - specific fluorescence imaging Use of the intraoperative imaging system did not interfere with the standard surgical procedure ( Supplementary Video 1 ) . The mean duration for capturing in vivo intraoperative fluorescence images and video was 10 min ( range : 4 – 36 min ) . Fluorescence was detectable intraopera - tively in all patients with a malignant tumor and FR - α expression but was absent in the patient with a malignant tumor but no FR - α expression and in those with benign tumors ( Table 1 ) . Healthy tissue did not show any fluorescence signal either in vivo , ex vivo or on histopathological validation . In two separate still images of patients with ovar - ian cancer , the mean tumor - to - background ratio ( as compared to healthy peritoneal sur - face ) for ten demarcated fluorescent tumor deposits in each still image was 3 . 1 ( ± 0 . 8 s . d . ) ( data not shown ) . In the patient with a high - grade serous carcinoma and extensive peri - toneal disseminated disease ( stage III , FR - α positive ) , widespread tumor - specific fluorescence ( white spots ) was present throughout the abdominal cavity ( Fig . 2 ) , as confirmed by ex vivo histopathology . Real - time image - guided excision of fluorescent tumor deposits of size < 1 mm was feasible ( Supplementary Fig . 1 ) , and all fluorescent tissue was confirmed to be malignant by histopa - thology . In the same patient , the tumor - specific fluorescent signal originating from disseminated tumor deposits could be detected up to 8 h after injection during a prolonged procedure . Detection of tumor deposits by fluorescence ex vivo Five surgeons independently identified tumor deposits on three sepa - rate color images ( shown on a representative image in Fig . 3a ) and on their corresponding fluorescence image of precisely the same area ( Fig . 3b ) . The number of tumor deposits detected by surgeons when guided by tumor - specific fluorescence ( median 34 , range 8 – 81 ) was significantly higher than with visual observation alone ( median 7 , range 4 – 22 , P < 0 . 001 ) ( Fig . 3c ) . Post - operative histopathological analyses All excised fluorescent tissue was again analyzed for tumor - specific fluorescence ex vivo , in which tumor deposits could be visualized with a resolution of approximately ≤ 1 . 0 mm ( Supplementary Fig . 1a – f ) . Representative examples of postoperative histopathological analyses are depicted in Figure 4 for three different ovarian tumors ( fibroth - ecoma , serous borderline tumor and high - grade serous carcinoma ) . Routine histopathological examination using hematoxylin and eosin ( H & E ) staining was performed to determine the nature of the excised tissue ( Fig . 4 , top row ) . All fluorescent tissue samples were confirmed to contain tumor , whereas nonfluorescent tissue was free of tumor . Additionally , immunohistochemical ( IHC ) staining for FR - α revealed strong expression in the malignant tumors , moderate expression in the borderline tumor and no expression in the benign lesions ( Fig . 4 , middle row ) . On one of the benign lesions there was considerable inflammation , with increased number of macrophages . This patient showed no fluorescence activity either in vivo or ex vivo by fluores - cence microscopy ( data not shown ) . Finally , fluorescence microscopy for folate - FITC showed a strong signal in all malignant tumors with FR - α expression and no signal in FR - α – negative malignant or benign lesions ( Fig . 4 , bottom row ) . These results show excellent correlation with the presence and intensity of the intraoperative fluorescence signal ( Table 1 ) . Folate receptor a b FITC Folate Tumor cell Figure 1 The tumor - specific fluorescent agent folate - FITC . ( a ) Folate is conjugated through an ethylenediamine spacer to fluorescein isothiocyanate ( FITC ) , resulting in folate - FITC , with a molecular weight of 917 kDa . ( b ) A schematic presentation of the targeting of ovarian cancer . Folate - FITC is targeted toward FR - α and internalized upon binding , shuttling folate - FITC into the cytoplasm . Table 1 Demographics and individual data for patients Study no . Age ( years ) Histopathology FIGO stage In vivo fluorescence IHC FR - α expression FM FITC Malignant tumor 1 72 Serous ovarian carcinoma III + + + + + + 7 76 Serous ovarian carcinoma III + + + 9 64 Undifferentiated carcinoma III – – – 10 61 Mucineus ovarian carcinoma III + + + Borderline tumor 5 48 Serous borderline tumor I 0 + 0 / + Benign tumor 2 59 Fibrothecoma n . a . – – – 3 74 Fibrothecoma n . a . – – – 4 53 Mature cystic teratoma n . a . – – – 6 64 Benign multicystic ischemic ovary n . a . – – – 8 41 Fibroma n . a . – – – n = 10 patients . + + , strong ; + , moderate ; 0 , weak ; − , absent ; FIGO , International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics ; IHC FR - α , immunohistochemistry folate - receptor alpha ; FM FITC , fluorescence microscopy for folate - FITC ; n . a . , not applicable . © 2011 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . t e c h n i c a l r e p o r t s nature medicine VOLUME 17 | NUMBER 10 | OCTOBER 2011 1317 DISCUSSION Ovarian cancer , known as the ‘silent lady killer’ , is the leading cause of death among gynecologic malignancies in the Western world . In this proof - of - concept study , we investigated the potential value of intra - operative tumor - specific fluorescence imaging in the detection of tumor tissue in ovarian cancer for improvement of optimal cytoreductive surgery . In this limited series , we showed that the use of intraoperative tumor - specific fluorescence imaging of the systemically adminis - tered FR - α – targeted agent folate - FITC offers specific and sensitive real - time identification of tumor tissue during surgery in patients with ovarian cancer and the presence of FR - α – positive tumors . Nevertheless , one patient presented with a malignant tumor that did not express FR - α , and consequently , no fluorescence was detected . To identify patients suitable for FR - α targeted image - guided surgery , FR - α may be detected on either tumor cells in ascites or on tumor tissue obtained during staging laparoscopy or primary surgery . A folate - targeted technetium scan ( EC20 , Endocyte Inc . ) may be also used to preoperatively identify FR - α – positive patients 21 . In a patient with extensive peritoneal carcinomatosis , a significantly higher number of fluorescent tumor deposits were detected using the fluorescence imaging approach than with conventional visual inspec - tion . Although the scoring was not accompanied by tactile infor - mation , we feel confident in comparing the two imaging methods ( visual observation versus fluorescence imaging ) alone , instead of adding tactile information , for which a gold standard is lacking . Although tactile information is considered by many surgeons as an important feature in staging , clear data is lacking in the literature on the exact sensitivity , specificity and diagnostic accuracy of palpation in cancer surgery . In the laparoscopic staging setting , enhanced tumor detection with tumor - targeted fluorescence may lead to up - staging . Furthermore , in interval debulking surgeries , vital tumor tissue can be difficult to distinguish owing to fibrosis and necrosis caused by chemotherapy . A tumor - targeted agent may help identify vital residual tumor tissue in the interval debulking setting . As a result of the increasing applica - tion of neo - adjuvant chemotherapy in patients with ovarian cancer and the possible effects of chemotherapy on the expression levels of FR - α in remaining vital tumor tissue present at interval debulking , it remains of paramount importance to investigate the presence of the target . In a tissue microarray study of more than 350 patients at the University Medical Center Groningen , we found that FR - α expres - sion in remaining vital tumor tissue is not significantly altered after chemotherapy 22 ( Crane et al . Cell . Oncol . 2011 , in press ) , which is in accordance with results reported previously 14 . In this pilot study , folate - FITC in an intravenously injected formu - lation appeared to be safe . Furthermore , it has a pharmacodynamic profile that facilitates fluorescence imaging over the time course from 2 to 8 h after injection . This systemic administration of a targeted fluorescent agent in humans provides a versatile platform for intra - operative tumor - specific fluorescence imaging . The use of targeted fluorescent agents could provide a paradigm shift in surgical imaging as it allows an engineered approach to improving tumor staging and the technique of cytoreductive sur - gery and thereby improving the outcome in ovarian cancer . A major advantage over current imaging modalities is that an intraoperative fluorescence imaging system offers a large field of view for inspection and staging . This , in turn , may permit future patient - tailored surgical interventions and may decrease the number of needless extensive surgical procedures and the associated morbidity . Besides improved staging , primarily expected for subjects initially classified in stages I and II , the second major advantage of intraoperative imaging as Relay lens Filter Filter b a c d f g e Dichroic mirrors Imagingchannel 3 Imaging channel 1 CCD 2 CCD 1 CCD 3 Laser Imagingoptics Filter Whitelightsource Beam diffuser Imaging channel 2 Figure 2 Intra - operative multispectral imaging system . ( a ) Multispectral fluorescence camera system . ( b ) Positioning before draping . ( c ) Intraoperative application including draping . ( d – g ) Intraoperative screenshots of simultaneously detected and depicted images in color ( d , f ) and corresponding fluorescence during surgery ( e , g ) in a patient with high - grade serous ovarian carcinoma and extensive peritoneal carcinomatosis ( stage III , FR - α positive ) . 80 a c b N u m be r o f t u m o r s po t s de t e c t ed 60 40 20 0 Color MedianMinimumMaximum P < 0 . 001 FLI Figure 3 Quantification of tumor deposits ex vivo . ( a , b ) Color image ( a ) with the corresponding tumor - specific fluorescence image ( b ) of a representative area in the abdominal cavity . ( c ) Scoring was based on three different color images ( median 7 , range 4 – 22 ) and their corresponding fluorescence images ( FLI ) ( median 34 , range 8 – 81 ) ; P < 0 . 001 by five independent surgeons . © 2011 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . t e c h n i c a l r e p o r t s 1318 VOLUME 17 | NUMBER 10 | OCTOBER 2011 nature medicine compared to current standard techniques is that it may guide the surgeon in debulking efforts , thus contributing to more efficient cytoreduction and ultimately improving the effect of adjuvant chemo - therapy in patients with reduced tumor load . Because cytoreduction is a key aspect in the prognosis of many solid tumors with a peritoneal dissemination pattern—including ovarian cancer 23 , 24 and colorec - tal cancer combined , in the so - called hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy ( HIPEC ) procedure 25 —a more complete debulking procedure may have a beneficial effect on outcome in different types of cancer . Improving the detection of cancer deposits to submillimeter size might ultimately improve survival rates , but whether this is the case needs to established by additional clinical studies . In ovarian cancer , the FR - α appears to constitute a good target because it is overexpressed in 90 – 95 % of malignant tumors , especially serous carcinomas . Furthermore , the targeting ligand , folate , is attrac - tive as it is nontoxic , inexpensive and relatively easily conjugated to a fluorescent dye to create a tumor - specific fluorescent contrast agent 26 . However , overexpression of FR - α varies strongly between different solid tumors originating from different organs 27 , a characteristic that reduces the general applicability of folate - FITC in cancer . Future developments in the identification of tumor - specific targets will undoubtedly bridge this gap and open new possibilities for tumor - specific fluorescence imaging in cancer surgery for other solid tumors . Subsequently , devel - opment of new fluorescent agents in the near - infrared spectrum will allow for identification of more deeply seated tumors , based on the stronger penetration properties of near - infrared dyes with an excitation wavelength > 700 nm compared to FITC 28 . In summary , our data outline the first in - human proof - of - principle and the potential benefit of intraoperative tumor - specific fluorescence imaging in staging and debulking surgery for ovarian cancer using the systemically administered targeted fluorescent agent folate - FITC . This technique did not create unwanted interference with standard surgical procedures . The combination of optical imaging tech - nologies with tumor - targeting strategies can shift the paradigm of surgical oncologic imaging , offering the unique opportunity to intra - operatively detect and quantify tumor growth and intra - abdominal spread . Larger international multicenter studies using standardized , uniformly calibrated multispectral fluorescence camera systems combined with folate - FITC are needed to confirm our data and further elucidate the diagnostic ( accuracy , sensitivity and specificity ) and therapeutic value of the reported approach in larger series of ovarian cancer patients . METhODS Methods and any associated references are available in the online version of the paper at http : / / www . nature . com / naturemedicine / . Note : Supplementary information is available on the Nature Medicine website . ACKNoWLeDGMeNtS The authors wish to thank W . Sluiter for help with statistical analyses , I . Wesselman for training the operating room personnel in using the camera system and B . Molmans ( Department of Hospital Pharmacy , University Medical Center Groningen ) for pharmaceutical expertise and support . Monoclonal antibody mAb343 was kindly provided by W . Franklin ( University of Colorado Health Science Center ) . AutHoR CoNtRiButioNS G . M . v . D . supervised the project , designed and performed the study , interpreted data and wrote the manuscript . G . T . designed the camera system , performed the study , interpreted data with technical and computer analyses support and wrote the manuscript . L . M . A . C . designed and performed the study , interpreted data and wrote the manuscript . N . J . H . performed the study and interpreted data . R . G . P . performed the study and interpreted data . W . K . performed the study and interpreted data . A . S . designed the camera system , performed the study and interpreted data with technical and computer analysis support . J . S . d . J . performed the study and interpreted data . H . J . G . A . designed and performed the study , interpreted data and wrote the manuscript . A . G . J . v . d . Z . designed and performed the study , interpreted data and wrote the manuscript . J . B . designed and performed the study , interpreted data , performed the pathology analyses and wrote the manuscript . P . S . L . designed and performed the study , and interpreted data . V . N . supervised the project , designed and performed the study , designed and provided the camera system and interpreted data , and wrote the manuscript . CoMPetiNG FiNANCiAL iNteReStS The authors declare no competing financial interests . Published online at http : / / www . nature . com / naturemedicine / . Reprints and permissions information is available online at http : / / www . nature . com / reprints / index . html . 1 . Jemal , A . et al . Cancer statistics , 2008 . CA Cancer J . Clin . 58 , 71 – 96 ( 2008 ) . 2 . Gondos , A . , Bray , F . , Hakulinen , T . & Brenner , H . Trends in cancer survival in 11 European populations from 1990 to 2009 : a model - based analysis . Ann . Oncol . 20 , 564 – 573 ( 2009 ) . 3 . Aletti , G . D . , Gallenberg , M . M . , Cliby , W . A . , Jatoi , A . & Hartmann , L . C . Current management strategies for ovarian cancer . Mayo Clin . Proc . 82 , 751 – 770 ( 2007 ) . 4 . Winter , W . E . III et al . Tumor residual after surgical cytoreduction in prediction of clinical outcome in stage IV epithelial ovarian cancer : a Gynecologic Oncology Group Study . J . Clin . Oncol . 26 , 83 – 89 ( 2008 ) . 5 . Ibeanu , O . A . & Bristow , R . E . Predicting the outcome of cytoreductive surgery for advanced ovarian cancer : a review . Int . J . Gynecol . Cancer 20 ( suppl . 1 ) , S1 – S11 ( 2010 ) . 6 . Troyan , S . L . et al . The FLARE intraoperative near - infrared fluorescence imaging system : a first - in - human clinical trial in breast cancer sentinel lymph node mapping . Ann . Surg . Oncol . 16 , 2943 – 2952 ( 2009 ) . 7 . Luker , G . D . & Luker , K . E . Optical imaging : current applications and future directions . J . Nucl . Med . 49 , 1 – 4 ( 2008 ) . H & E IHC FM a b c 5x 5x 5x 10x 10x 20x 20x 20x 20x Figure 4 Microphotographs of different ovarian tumors . ( a – c ) Three different tumor types are shown : fibrothecoma ( a ) , borderline serous tumor ( b ) and high - grade serous carcinoma ( c ) . Top row , routine staining with H & E ; middle row , immunohistochemical staining ( IHC ) for FR - α ; lower row , unstained slides observed with fluorescent microscopy ( FM ) to detect the intravenously administered folate - FITC . The fibrothecoma ( a ) shows no expression of FR - α nor binding of folate - FITC , which corresponds with the absence of lesions visualized intraoperatively using the fluorescence camera system . Both the borderline serous tumor ( b ) and the high - grade serous tumor ( c ) show epithelial expression of FR - α and binding of folate - FITC , which corresponds with the presence of visible lesions intraoperatively . © 2011 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . t e c h n i c a l r e p o r t s nature medicine VOLUME 17 | NUMBER 10 | OCTOBER 2011 1319 8 . Tromberg , B . J . et al . Assessing the future of diffuse optical imaging technologies for breast cancer management . Med . Phys . 35 , 2443 – 2451 ( 2008 ) . 9 . Kirsch , D . G . et al . A spatially and temporally restricted mouse model of soft tissue sarcoma . Nat . Med . 13 , 992 – 997 ( 2007 ) . 10 . von Burstin , J . et al . Highly sensitive detection of early - stage pancreatic cancer by multimodal near - infrared molecular imaging in living mice . Int . J . Cancer 123 , 2138 – 2147 ( 2008 ) . 11 . Sevick - Muraca , E . M . et al . Imaging of lymph flow in breast cancer patients after microdose administration of a near - infrared fluorophore : feasibility study . Radiology 246 , 734 – 741 ( 2008 ) . 12 . Tagaya , N . et al . Intraoperative identification of sentinel lymph nodes by near - infrared fluorescence imaging in patients with breast cancer . Am . J . Surg . 195 , 850 – 853 ( 2008 ) . 13 . Stummer , W . et al . Fluorescence - guided surgery with 5 - aminolevulinic acid for resection of malignant glioma : a randomised controlled multicentre phase III trial . Lancet Oncol . 7 , 392 – 401 ( 2006 ) . 14 . Kalli , K . R . et al . Folate receptor alpha as a tumor target in epithelial ovarian cancer . Gynecol . Oncol . 108 , 619 – 626 ( 2008 ) . 15 . Markert , S . et al . Alpha - folate receptor expression in epithelial ovarian carcinoma and non - neoplastic ovarian tissue . Anticancer Res . 28 , 3567 – 3572 ( 2008 ) . 16 . Mathias , C . J . et al . Indium - 111 - DTPA - folate as a potential folate - receptor - targeted radiopharmaceutical . J . Nucl . Med . 39 , 1579 – 1585 ( 1998 ) . 17 . Armstrong , D . K . et al . Exploratory phase II efficacy study of MORAb - 003 , a monoclonal antibody against folate receptor alpha , in platinum - sensitive ovarian cancer in first relapse . J . Clin . Oncol . 26 , 5500 ( 2008 ) . 18 . Kennedy , M . D . , Jallad , K . N . , Thompson , D . H . , Ben Amotz , D . & Low , P . S . Optical imaging of metastatic tumors using a folate - targeted fluorescent probe . J . Biomed . Opt . 8 , 636 – 641 ( 2003 ) . 19 . Leamon , C . P . et al . Synthesis and biological evaluation of EC20 : a new folate - derived , 99m Tc - based radiopharmaceutical . Bioconjug . Chem . 13 , 1200 – 1210 ( 2002 ) . 20 . Themelis , G . , Yoo , J . S . , Soh , K . S . , Schulz , R . & Ntziachristos , V . Real - time intraoperative fluorescence imaging system using light - absorption correction . J . Biomed . Opt . 14 , 064012 ( 2009 ) . 21 . Sega , E . I . & Low , P . S . Tumor detection using folate receptor - targeted imaging agents . Cancer Metastasis Rev . 27 , 655 – 664 ( 2008 ) . 22 . Crane , L . M . A . et al . The effect of chemotherapy on expression of folate receptor - α in ovarian cancer . Cell . Oncol . 34 . Published online , doi : 10 . 1007 / s13402 - 011 - 0052 - 6 . 23 . Vergote , I . et al . Timing of debulking surgery in advanced ovarian cancer . Int . J . Gynecol . Cancer 18 ( suppl . 1 ) , 11 – 19 ( 2008 ) . 24 . Aletti , G . D . et al . Aggressive surgical effort and improved survival in advanced - stage ovarian cancer . Obstet . Gynecol . 107 , 77 – 85 ( 2006 ) . 25 . Koppe , M . J . , Boerman , O . C . , Oyen , W . J . & Bleichrodt , R . P . Peritoneal carcinomatosis of colorectal origin : incidence and current treatment strategies . Ann . Surg . 243 , 212 – 222 ( 2006 ) . 26 . Low , P . S . & Antony , A . C . Folate receptor - targeted drugs for cancer and inflammatory diseases . Adv . Drug Deliv . Rev . 56 , 1055 – 1058 ( 2004 ) . 27 . Parker , N . et al . Folate receptor expression in carcinomas and normal tissues determined by a quantitative radioligand binding assay . Anal . Biochem . 338 , 284 – 293 ( 2005 ) . 28 . Troy , T . , Jekic - McMullen , D . , Sambucetti , L . & Rice , B . Quantitative comparison of the sensitivity of detection of fluorescent and bioluminescent reporters in animal models . Mol . Imaging 3 , 9 – 23 ( 2004 ) . © 2011 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . nature medicine doi : 10 . 1038 / nm . 2472 ONLINE METhODS Patients . The study was approved by the Investigational Review Board ( IRB ) of the University Medical Center Groningen and the Central Committee on Research Involving Human Subjects ( CCMO NL26980 . 042 . 09 ; http : / / www . ccmo - online . nl / main . asp ) and was registered at the Dutch Trial Register ( NTR1980 ; http : / / www . trialregister . nl / trialreg / index . asp ) and the European Clinical Trials Database ( EudraCT 2009 - 010559 - 29 ; http : / / eudract . emea . europa . eu / ) before inclusion . All patients gave their written informed consent and completed the study . Between September 2009 and May 2010 , patients scheduled to undergo a staging or debulking laparotomy for suspected ovarian cancer—based on an ovarian mass and / or the presence of ascites as diagnosed by ultrasound or CT scan , and / or elevated serum concentration of the CA - 125 tumor marker—were consented for the study . Exclusion criteria were pregnancy , significant renal failure ( creatinine > 400 µ mol per liter ) , severe cardiac or pulmonary disease ( ASA III - IV ) , a history of iodine allergy or anaphylactic reactions to insect bites or medication , and the presence or history of hyperthyroidism . After documented informed consent , the operative procedure was planned . Patients were not limited in their normal behavior or dietary or medication intake before the study . During surgery , patients were staged according to FIGO standard guidelines 29 via a midline laparotomy . Tumor - specific fluorescent agent . For targeting of the FR - α in ovarian cancer in patients , the imaging agent was produced at clinical grade according to GMP conditions by Endocyte Inc . Folate hapten ( vitamin B9 ) was conjugated with fluorescein isothiocyanate ( FITC ) , yielding folate - FITC ( Fig . 1a ) , as described previously by others 30 , 31 . Folate - FITC has an excitation wavelength of 495 nm and emits light at 520 nm . The agent specifically targets FR - α , after which it is internalized into the cytoplasm ( Fig . 1b ) . All vials of folate - FITC ( produced as EC17 ) were supplied by Endocyte Inc . after approval of the Investigational Medicinal Product Dossier documenta - tion according to US Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) and European Medicines Agency ( EMEA ) regulations by the local IRB and Hospital Pharmacy at the University Medical Center Groningen . All imaging agents were stored , recorded and monitored before release by the Hospital Pharmacy according to FDA / EMEA and Good Clinical Practice ( GCP ) guidelines . After intravenous injection of folate - FITC , all patients were monitored during in - hospital admission . Folate - FITC was dissolved in 10 ml sterile normal saline and injected at a dose of 0 . 3 mg per kg body weight over a period of 10 min . Four patients experienced mild discomfort in the upper abdominal region after injection of ~ 0 . 1 mg per kg folate - FITC , which disappeared within 10 – 15 min but which prompted cessation of the remaining dose according to protocol . All patients completed the entire study . No serious adverse events ( SAEs ) were reported during or after the study . Multispectral fluorescence camera system . The camera system was devel - oped by the Technical University Munich / Helmholtz Center Munich ( by G . T . , A . S . and V . N . ) 20 , 32 . In summary ( Fig . 2a ) , the camera system consists of a charge - coupled digital ( EM - CCD ) camera ( Andor Technology ) for sensitive fluorescence detection and two separate cameras for detection of intrinsic fluorescence and color ( PCO AG ) . The system is controlled by a synchro - nized multi - CPU computer system ( Dell Computer ) for simultaneous process - ing of raw data and image registration and rendering . During surgery , the camera was covered with sterile transparent drapes ( Carl Zeiss Vision BV , OPMI Sterile Drape , cat . no . 306071 ) ( Fig . 2b ) . The system attains a variable field of view ( FOV ) of 15 cm × 15 cm to 3 cm × 3 cm , with a corresponding resolution varying from 150 to 30 µ m . Data are acquired in parallel by all cameras so that color , light attenuation images and fluorescence images are simultaneously collected . Attention has been given to the development of an appropriate multispectral strategy that allows color imaging and simultaneous sensitive fluorescence detection in the visible light spectrum , as appropriate for FITC imaging . Besides training of the operating room personnel to cover the camera in sterile draping , no special training is necessary to use the camera intraoperatively . Surgical and imaging procedure . In all patients , a standardized imaging protocol was used before , during and after the surgical procedure . On opening the abdominal cavity through a midline incision , the surgeon localized the tumor and inspected and palpated the abdominal and pelvic regions according to FIGO guidelines 28 . At this point , fluorescence video inspection at maxi - mum FOV determined the presence of fluorescence activity , and multispectral images were captured ( Fig . 2c , d , f ) . Next , the surgeon proceeded with the standard surgical procedure . All tissue suspicious for tumor involvement was imaged both in vivo , and ex vivo immediately after tissue excision , for the presence of fluorescence . Thereafter , the surgical field was inspected with the fluorescence system for remaining fluorescence , and additional multispectral images were captured . Biopsies were taken of residual fluorescent tissue as part of the standard operative procedure . For ethical reasons ( i . e . , the risk of removing false - positive fluorescent ( healthy ) tissue situated in the vicinity of vital organs or structures ) , it was decided to remove fluorescent tissue only if it did not impose an additive negative effect on morbidity as judged by the operating surgeon . Additional methods . Detailed methodology is described in the Supplementary Methods . 29 . Benedet , J . L . , Bender , H . , Jones , H . III , Ngan , H . Y . & Pecorelli , S . FIGO staging classifications and clinical practice guidelines in the management of gynecologic cancers . FIGO Committee on Gynecologic Oncology . Int . J . Gynaecol . Obstet . 70 , 209 – 262 ( 2000 ) . 30 . Lu , Y . & Low , P . S . Folate targeting of haptens to cancer cell surfaces mediates immunotherapy of syngeneic murine tumors . Cancer Immunol . Immunother . 51 , 153 – 162 ( 2002 ) . 31 . Lu , Y . et al . Strategy to prevent drug - related hypersensitivity in folate - targeted hapten immunotherapy of cancer . AAPS J . 11 , 628 – 638 ( 2009 ) . 32 . Themelis , G . , Yoo , J . S . & Ntziachristos , V . Multispectral imaging using multiple - bandpass filters . Opt . Lett . 33 , 1023 – 1025 ( 2008 ) . © 2011 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d .