REVIEW : PART OF A SPECIAL ISSUE ON FLOWER DEVELOPMENT Flowers under pressure : ins and outs of turgor regulation in development Le´na Beauzamy 1 , 2 , Naomi Nakayama 1 , 2 , 3 , * and Arezki Boudaoud 1 , 2 , * 1 Reproduction et De´veloppement des Plantes , INRA , CNRS , ENS de Lyon , UCBL Lyon I , 46 Alle´e d’Italie , 69364 Lyon Cedex 07 , France , 2 Laboratoire Joliot - Curie , CNRS , ENS de Lyon , 46 Alle´e d’Italie , 69364 Lyon Cedex 07 , France and 3 Institute of Molecular Plant Sciences , University of Edinburgh , Mayﬁeld Rd , King’s Buildings , Edinburgh EH9 3JH , UK * For correspondence . E - mail naomi . nakayama @ ed . ac . uk or arezki . boudaoud @ ens - lyon . fr Received : 29 April 2014 Returned for revision : 30 June 2014 Accepted : 1 August 2014 Published electronically : 6 October 2014 † Background Turgor pressure is an essential feature of plants ; however , whereas its physiological importance is unequivocally recognized , its relevance to development is often reduced to a role in cell elongation . † Scope This review surveys the roles of turgor in development , the molecular mechanisms of turgor regulation and the methods used to measure turgor and related quantities , while also covering the basic concepts associated with water potential and water ﬂow in plants . Three key processes in ﬂower development are then considered more spe - ciﬁcally : ﬂower opening , anther dehiscence and pollen tube growth . † Conclusions Manymoleculardeterminantsofturgoranditsregulationhavebeencharacterized , whileanumberof methods are now available to quantify water potential , turgor and hydraulic conductivity . Data on ﬂower opening , anther dehiscence and lateral root emergence suggest that turgor needs to be ﬁnely tuned during development , both spatially and temporally . It is anticipated that a combination of biological experiments and physical measure - ments will reinforce the existing data and reveal unexpected roles of turgor in development . Key words : Flowerdevelopment , pollentube , antherdehiscence , ﬂoweropening , waterpotential , osmoticpressure , turgor pressure , hydraulic conductivity , aquaporins , plasmodesmata , osmoregulation . INTRODUCTION Plants are made of tiny ‘pressure bombs’ . Indeed , walled cells as in plants , fungi or bacteria contain a high hydrostatic pressure termedturgorpressure . Turgorpressurecanreach20atmospheres , i . e . 2 MPa , a value much higher than the air pressure inside auto - mobile tyres , and plays fundamental roles in structural integrity , morphogenesis and many otheraspects of physiological function . Although turgor pressure is often thought to be uniform within a developing organ , it can be variable from cell to cell . It also can change dynamically depending on many intrinsic and extrinsic factors , such as sugar metabolism , changes in the shapes of cells and tissues ( including growth ) and environmental conditions . Recent reviews addressed the role of turgor in plant growth ( Geitmann and Ortega , 2009 ; Hamant and Traas , 2010 ; Robinson et al . , 2013 ) , hydraulics of plant cells and tissues ( Maurel et al . 2008 ; Dumais and Forterre , 2012 ; Forterre , 2013 ; Prado and Maurel , 2013 ; Chaumont and Tyerman , 2014 ) or the quantiﬁcation ofturgor invivo ( Geitmann , 2006 ; Routier - KierzkowskaandSmith , 2012 ; Milani et al . , 2013 ) . Here we try to give a broader view of turgor and its regulation in development . We ﬁrst summarize thegeneralroleofturgorpressureinplantfunctionandthenover - view the ways by which cells can regulate it . We then review the methods that enable the measurement of water potential , turgor pressure or hydraulic conductivity . Such pieces of information are then placed into speciﬁc developmental contexts in three case studies from ﬂoral organ differentiation : anther dehiscence , ﬂower opening and pollen tube growth . We ﬁnally speculate on the role of the temporal and spatial regulation of turgor in development . ROLES OF TURGOR PRESSURE Turgor pressure provides structural integrity to each cell and to thetissue asawhole ( Fig . 1 ) . At thecellular level , turgor pressure pushes the plasma membrane against the cell wall and causes in - plane mechanical tension within the cell wall ( Fig . 1A ) . The rigid cell wall , which is made of a complex composite of carbohydrate polymers and structural proteins , stretches until it settles at a size and shape where the cell wall can stably withhold the internal pressure . Hence turgor pressure is thought to drive growth ( Geitmann and Ortega , 2009 ; Hamant and Traas , 2010 ; Robinson et al . , 2013 ) . The stiffness of a cell comes from both the material properties of the cell wall and the turgor pressure within the cell . In highly turgid cells , the surface stiffness is determined mostly by the turgor pressure and perhaps appropri - ately is referred to as ‘turgor’ ( see Appendix 1 ) . Similarly , at the tissue level , the structural strength of tissues depends on both the cell wall rigidity and turgor pressure in each cell . It can be easily observed that tissues harden when turgor pressure rises and soften and even wilt when turgor falls . Therefore , turgor is essential for the morphology , architecture and engineering soundness of plants . It is also believed that the outermost struc - ture of aerial organs is under tension and withstands the internal pressure ( Peters and Tomos , 1996 ; Hamant and Traas , 2010 ; Robinson et al . , 2013 ) ; the pressure exerted from the internal cells is borne by the epidermal cells – especially the outermost cell wall on the tissue surface ( Fig . 1B ) . Given the roleof turgor inthe structural strength of a plant , it is not surprising that dynamic variations in turgor have been impli - cated in plant movements ( Sibaoka , 1969 ; Dumais and Forterre , # The Author 2014 . Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Annals of Botany Company . This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / ) , which permits unrestricted reuse , distribution , and reproduction in any medium , provided the original work is properly cited . 1517 Annals of Botany 114 : 1517 – 1533 , 2014 doi : 10 . 1093 / aob / mcu187 , available online at www . aob . oxfordjournals . org 2012 ; Forterre , 2013 ) , for instance in the circadian movement of leaves . Themoststudiedexampleisstomata , whichareopenonly when turgor is high enough in guard cells . In addition to the structural contributions , turgor pressure also affects physical conditions within the cell and subsequently cel - lular function and biochemistry . It presses the plasma membrane against the cell wall , possibly thinning the membrane as a result ( Coster , 1976 ) . An increase in the cellular hydraulic pressure is often associated with an increase in cytoplasmic concentration so that cytoplasmic crowding modiﬁes the macromolecular con - formation and interactions ( van den Berg et al . , 2000 ; Ellis , 2001 ; Briegel et al . , 2014 ) . Intracellular membrane dynamics , as well as organellesizesandshapes , alsoseemtobesensitivetoturgorpres - sure ; forexample , thehighertheturgorpressure , thehighertheen - ergetic barrier for endocytosis to occur ( Fricke et al . , 2000 ) . Furthermore , changes in turgor pressure could be involved in signal transduction pathways . Environmental conditions impact turgor pressure ; high salinity or water stress reduce turgor , whereas hypo - osmotic conditions ( as in ﬂooding ) and compres - sion due to stomping by animals or bending by wind , for example , would increase the pressure . Biotic stress , for instance wounding caused by microbe infection , would release turgor pressure . Thus some of the signal transduction and molecular pathways activated in response to environmental stresses could be downstream of cues associated with changes in turgor pres - sure or other mechanical alterations ( Walley et al . , 2007 ) . In fact , osmotic conditions of the cell are so interlinked with turgor pressurethatitisoftenthoughtthatcellsmeasuretheirintracellularpressureviaosmosensing ( Urao et al . , 1999 ; Kumar et al . , 2013 ) . Alternatively , cells are thought to sense turgor pressure from their expansionorshrinkagefollowingchangesintheinternalpressure . Mechanosensitive proteins embedded in the plasma membrane which become activated when cells are deformed [ for example those reviewed in Monshausen and Haswell ( 2013 ) , e . g . stretch - activated channels ] can indirectly trigger responses to turgor changes . It is likely that there are many different ways by which cells sense physical parameters such as turgor pressure ; just about any of the diverse ways turgor pressure can affect cells , as described above , could be an input to induce cellular responses . In this framework , turgor would be at the same time an integrator of environmental and developmental cues and an entry point for various signalling pathways . In addition to the cellular physiological functions , turgor pres - sure and its gradient within a tissue can provide positional infor - mation , driving water and molecular movement directionally . In 1930 , ErnstMu¨nchproposedtheso - called‘pressureormassﬂow hypothesis’ to explain how sugars are transported from sink to source in plants ( Taiz and Zeiger , 2010 ) . The phloem cells at source have a high concentration of sugar that draws water into them , creating a gradient in turgor pressure , which is higher in the source and lower in the sink . Movement of the phloem sap occurs by bulk ( mass ) ﬂow down the turgor gradient to the sink . For nearly a century , it has been the most dominant theory for the mechanism driving long - distance transport . An even longer standing theory ( the cohesion – tension theory pro - posed by Joly and Dixon in 1894 ) dictates that the movement ofwaterandnutrientsthroughthexylemalsofollowsthegradientinwaterpotential . Unlike in the phloem , however , xylem trans - port occurs down the pressure gradient from the root to the leaf , where a negative pressure is generated by water evaporation into the air spaces in the mesophyll . REGULATION OF TURGOR PRESSURE Turgor pressure increases or decreases when the water content changes within the cell ( Fig . 1C ) . In an ideal equilibrium situ - ation with no active regulation of water content and no water ﬂow through the plant , turgor pressurewould only be determined by differences in osmotic potential between compartments ( Appendix 1 ) , e . g . between a cell and its extracellular space . Out of equilibrium , water inﬂux or efﬂux can be driven directly or indirectly . Random water movement across the membrane does happen at a low rate ; however , water molecules are trans - ferred into and out of a cell much more efﬁciently through open - ings in the cell boundary ( Haines , 1994 ) . The direct water movement occursthrough such ‘holes’ – waterchannels embed - ded in the plasma membrane , known as aquaporins , and the + – + + + + – – – – Cell wall tension A C B Causes of turgor changes Tissue tension Turgorpressure Turgorpressure Plasmodesmata Aquaporin [ Ions ] Sugar transporters Amino acid transporters Ion channels or transporters [ Amino acids ] [ Sugars ] F IG . 1 . Turgor pressure and its molecular determinants . ( A ) Turgor pressure puts cell walls in tension . ( B ) Turgor pressure can also induce tension at the tissue level , for instance in the epidermis . ( C ) Turgor pressure and water ﬂuxes depend on plasmodesmata , aquaporins , transporters and channels . Beauzamy et al . — Turgor regulation in ﬂower development 1518 intracellular cytoplasmic connections called plasmodesmata . Water passes through these openings following gradients in water potential ( see below ) . Hence water movement can be facili - tated indirectly by changing the differential osmotic potentials across the cell boundary . Alternatively , if water ﬂow is driven , for instance by evaporation , an increase in the difference in water potential between compartments occurs ( Appendix 1 ) , that dependsontheconductivityofopeningsbetweenthetwocompart - ments , such as plasmodesmata or aquaporins . Therefore , closure of plasmodesmata or gating of aquaporins can contribute to the regulation of turgor . Aquaporins Waterchannelsaremembraneintrinsicproteinsofalargefamily ( e . g . 35havebeenidentiﬁedinthegenomeof Arabidopsisthaliana ; see Johanson et al . , 2001 ) . Dubbed aquaporins , theyare diverseyet universal and found in all living kingdoms . Aquaporins are loca - lizedtovariousmembraneswithinacell – mostlytheplasmamem - braneorvacuolarmembrane ( alsoknownasthetonoplast ) , butalso in other compartments ( Chaumont and Tyerman , 2014 ) . Plasma membrane - localized aquaporins are called plasma membrane in - trinsic proteins ( PIPs ) , and they can be classiﬁed into two types , PIP1 and PIP2 , based on protein sequence similarities . PIPs are small ( 24 – 34 kDa ) proteins with six transmembrane domains , which are arranged in a ring - like conformation . Water molecules are transported inside the ring by osmosis , in both the inﬂuxandefﬂuxdirections , dependingonthedifferencebetween the cytosolic and apoplastic water potentials ( Murata et al . , 2000 ) . They usually form tetramers , but plant aquaporins seem to have diversiﬁed more extensively , and some of them make up heteromers ( Fetter et al . 2004 ) . This variety may be reﬂected in their functional speciﬁcities ; some of them are water - speciﬁc channels but some others are also permeable to other molecules , such as glycerol , CO 2 , boron and small organic solutes ( Henzler and Steudle , 2000 ; Chaumont et al . , 2005 ) . Aquaporins seem to mediate most of the water transfer across the plasma membrane . When the water permeability of the plasma membrane was measured in isolated protoplasts , it was found to be highly sensitive to mercury , a potent inhibitor of aquaporin function ( Ramahaleo et al . , 1999 ) . The measurement varied signiﬁcantly ( nearly a thousand - fold ) depending on the species , tissue types and developmental stages , suggesting that water movement is tightly regulated during development . In peach trees , the end of the dormancy correlates with higher ex - pression of tonoplast and plasma membrane aquaporins and an increase in the water content in the bud ( Yooyongwech et al . , 2008 ) . Overexpression of an aquaporin gene ( AtPIP1 ; 2 ) pro - duced an increasein thegrowth rate , transpiration rate and photo - synthetic efﬁciency in Nicotiana tabacum ( Aharon et al . , 2003 ) , though these effects might also be ascribed to the deregulation of stomata . Thewaterchannels are not constitutivelyopen , and their func - tion can be gated , for instance through post - translational modiﬁ - cations ( Chaumont et al . , 2005 ) . Their closure or opening are generally associated with environmental changes and stresses that plants experience . For instance , temperature affects aqua - porin function . Cold treatments reduced turgor , hydraulic con - ductivity and active nutrient transport in roots of Cucumis sativus ( Lee et al . , 2004 ) . Heavy metals ( e . g . mercury , gold and silver ) also close the water channels ( Zhang and Tyerman , 1999 ; Niemietz and Tyerman , 2002 ) . The dark - induced increase inleafhydraulicconductivityin A . thaliana dependsonthephos - phorylation of aquaporins ( Prado et al . , 2013 ) . Furthermore , cytosolic acidiﬁcation upon anoxia and other stresses inhibits water uptake via aquaporin ( Tournaire - Roux et al . , 2003 ) . Factors known to be involved in stress - induced signal trans - ductions , such as reactive oxygen species ( ROS ; e . g . hydrogen peroxide ) , also affect aquaporin activity ( Henzler and Steudle , 2000 ; Boursiac et al . , 2008 ) . Treatments with divalent cations ( especially Ca 2 + ) or H + inhibited water transport in suspension cultured cells , indicating that external acidity and Ca 2 + can also inﬂuence the gating mechanisms ( Gerbeau et al . , 2002 ) . In add - ition , aquaporin function is regulated via direct phosphorylation by membrane - associated calcium - dependent protein kinases ( Johnson and Chrispeels , 1992 ; Chaumont et al . , 2005 ) . Plasmodesmata Plasmodesmata are symplasmic connections between two ad - jacent cells . They are the tunnels across the cell wall through which water and solutes of all kinds ( e . g . nutrients , hormones , RNAs and proteins ) can travel , as long as they are smaller than the size exclusion limit ( Lucas and Lee , 2004 ; Burch - Smith and Zambryski , 2012 ) . Plasmodesmata are indispensable for cell – cell communication among neighbouring cells , as well as for long - distance transport and signalling . They are also import - ant for intercellular exchange of water and osmo - active solutes , and thus for the equilibration of turgor pressure . Based on the observations from ﬂuorescent recovery after photobleaching , the speed of movement of small molecules through plasmodes - matawascalculatedtobearound2 . 5 – 4 . 1 m ms – 1 forasingleepi - dermal cell wall in the root basal meristem ( Rutschow et al . , 2011 ) . In other words , molecules can move from one cell to another almost instantaneously . Plasmodesmata are complex structures that gather in cytoske - letons and endomembranes ( especially specialized endoplasmic reticulum membranes ) . Like aquaporins , they are not passive ‘holes’ and their permeability can be gated , although it is still unclear if the gating can be complete and thus can block water and small molecules . Plasmodesmataexhibitsophisticated select - ivity in macromolecule trafﬁcking that depends on the size and species of mRNAs and proteins . The size exclusion limit mea - sured using ﬂorescent - labelled dextran was found to be around 700 – 800 Da in the mesophyll cells of tobacco leaf ( Wolf et al . , 1989 ) . This limit was increased by . 10 - fold when the leaf was infected with Tobacco mosaic virus , probablyreﬂecting a strategy of the virus to spread through the plant body efﬁciently . Callose deposition to the apoplastic region surrounding plasmodesmata seems to be the key event leading to the closure of plasmodesmata and prevention of protein trafﬁc within ( Vaten et al . , 2011 ; Li et al . , 2012 ) . This callose depos - ition can be induced by ROS accumulation due to stress ( Benitez - Alfonso et al . , 2011 ) . Alternatively , a cytoskeleton - mediated mechanism could act in plasmodesmata gating . A surge of cytoplasmic free Ca 2 + induces a rapid closure ( within 5 s ) of plasmodesmata in Zea mays suspension cultured cells ( Holdaway - Clarke et al . , 2000 ) . Since this process is too fast to be due to callose deposition or reabsorption , it is more likely to be due to actin , myosin and / or centrin action , as those proteins Beauzamy et al . — Turgor regulation in ﬂower development 1519 are localized at the plasmodesmata in higher plants . Turgor pres - sure , especially a sharp difference in pressure between adjacent cells , has been shown to regulate protein trafﬁcking through plasmodesmata . The protein movement was blocked when the turgor pressure dropped suddenly in one cell by 200 kPa but not in the other cells of the multicellular trichomes in Nicotiana clevelandii ( Oparka and Prior , 1992 ) . Plasmodesmata , with their selective open / closed states , can create separate multicellular symplasmic domains within a tissue , where the cells may establish distinct molecular make - ups . For example , in the birch shoot apical meristem , tunica layers are separated from the corpus , and the central zone and peripheral zone consist of separate symplasmic domains ( Rinne and van der Schoot , 1998 ) . The tissues surrounding gametophytes also demar - catedistinctsymplasmicdomains ( Imlau etal . , 1999 ) . Floweringin arabidopsisseemstocorrelatewithsymplasticisolationoftheshootapexfromthephloem ( Gisel et al . , 1999 ) . A drastic reduction in ﬂuorescent tracer transport , which travels from vasculature tissue to the shoot apex , was observed when plants were submitted to ﬂowering - inducing long day conditions . Meanwhile , in short day conditions , water transport stayed high . The long day treatment not only promoted ﬂowering but also inhibited the movement of smallmolecules ( , 520 Da ) intotheshootapex ( Gisel etal . , 1999 ) . Speciﬁc closure of plasmodesmata is important for key devel - opmental events , because of the water movement and / or diffu - sion of other molecules . The beginning of the rapid elongation phase of Gossypium hirsutum ﬁbre is accompanied by the closure of plasmodesmata , which might enable a higher pressure tobemaintainedinthefastgrowingﬁbrecellsanddriverapidcellelongation ( Ruan et al . , 2001 ) . During ﬂower development , LEAFY and DEFICIENS , transcription factors that specify ﬂoral meristem identity in arabidopsis and ﬂoral organ identity in Antirrhinum majus , respectively , have been shown to move symplastically through plasmodesmata between the epidermal and internal cell layers ( Perbal et al . , 1996 ; Sessions et al . , 2000 ) . Whether concomitant water movement is important or not , to facilitate the protein translocation or for any other reasons , has not been directly tested yet . Osmoregulation Osmoregulationistheosmoticadjustmentofthecelltocontrol its water content by increasing or decreasing the cytosolic and vacuolar concentrations of osmotically active molecules . It should be noted that even though sub - cellular osmoregulation takes place , the osmotic pressure in the vacuole approximately equals that of the cytoplasm at equilibrium because the tonoplast ( unlike the cell wall ) cannot sustain signiﬁcant differences in pressure . Therefore , the function of vacuolar compartmentaliza - tion is not for generating differences in pressure , but probably for removing solutes that should not be present in the cytoplasm at high concentration . Plants’ remarkable capability to osmoregu - late has been well documented and researched for their response to water deﬁcits or high salinity ( Morgan , 1984 ) . However , osmoregulation also occurs almost constitutively in healthy plants . During a photoperiod , turgor adjusts to the periodic ﬂuc - tuations in sugar concentration and water conductance ( Haydon et al . , 2011 ) . In addition , in order to maintain turgor during growth , cells would need to osmoregulate . The three major classes of osmo - active molecules modulated in osmoregulation are ions , sugars and amino acids ( Fig . 1C ) . The molecular mechanisms to adjust the concentration of each type of the osmolytes are as follows . Ions . The ion concentrations in the cytosol and the organelles depend on the balance between the inﬂux and efﬂux across the plasma and intracellular membranes . The transport takes place down the electrochemical potential ( i . e . Nernst potential ) for channels . This is the case for some sym - / antiporters , which pump ions in or out using the concentration gradient of another ion ( often H + ) . Some other ion transporters ( e . g . H + - ATPase ) require ATP and energy input . Osmoregulation via ions predominantly occurs through K + and its counterions . Na + / H + antiporters NHX1 and NHX2 , which pump H + out of and Na + and / or K + into the vacuole , are necessary for the homeostasis of vacuolar pH and K + accu - mulation . These antiporters can act to sequester the osmo - active cations in the vacuole , thus being able to drive water movement into the vacuole ﬁrst and ultimately to the whole cell , increasing theturgorpressure . Whenthesegeneswereimpaired , thevacuole became more acidic and 70 % less enriched in K + , resulting in a dwarf phenotype with reduced cell expansion ( Bassil et al . , 2011 ) . On the other hand , NHX1 overexpression conferred salt tolerance ( Apse et al . , 1999 ) . Carbohydrates . Sugar production or breakdown can also elevate the osmotic potential of the cell . Carbohydrate metabolism , es - pecially photosynthetic production of sucrose , is important for celldivisionandexpansion . Itisalsoimportantforphotoperiodic turgor control and phloem transport of sugars . In sink tissues , storage polysaccharides break down to increase the osmotic po - tential ; for example , starch splits into glucose , fructose and / or malic acid , increasing the concentration of osmo - active solutes ( Taiz and Zeiger , 2010 ) . The sucrose concentration can increase in the cytosol because of sucrose transport . Sucrose transporters , such as sucrose trans - porter 1 ( SUT1 ) , are monosaccharide transporters that belong to asinglegenefamily . Theyarehigh - afﬁnitysucrose – protonsym - porters , which transport sucrose and protons in the same direc - tion across a membrane . SUT1 in Solanum lycopersicum and S . tuberosum localizes to the phloem sieve elements , where the phloem loading takes place ( Lalonde et al . , 1999 ) . SUT1 expres - sion changes in response to sugar availability , and it is upregu - lated in the sink tissues . Reduced SUT1 levels result in a 5 - to 10 - fold increase in carbohydrate concentration in the leaves ( Riesmeier et al . , 1994 ) . Amino acids . Amino acids are osmo - active , and their concentra - tions are modulated during osmoregulation . Proline in particular is targeted in osmoregulation . Proline is a proteinogenic amino acid with an exceptional conformational rigidity . It has been thought to be an inert , compatible osmolyte that protects sub - cellular structures and macromolecules under osmotic stress ( Szabados and Savoure´ , 2010 ) . The proline concentration is regulated at the levels of catabolism , inter - and intracellular transport , and biosynthesis . Proline is synthesized from glutamate through reduction by pyrroline - 5 - carboxylate synthase ( P5CS ) and P5C reductase , and the rate - limiting step is catalysed by P5CS . P5CS gene ex - pression is induced by environmental stress , and it is also Beauzamy et al . — Turgor regulation in ﬂower development 1520 under metabolic control , including negative feedback from proline itself . There are two P5CS enzymes in arabidopsis , which arehighlyexpressedinthereproductiveshootapical meri - stem and ﬂoral meristems ( Mattioli et al . , 2009 ) . Proline is enriched in speciﬁc tissue types , regardless of its proportionrelativetotheotheramino acids , withthe highestcon - centrationsintheﬂower , especially inthepollen grains and seeds ( Schwacke et al . , 1999 ; Verbruggen and Hermans , 2008 ) . Proline - dependent osmoregulation is especially important for drought and salinity responses , or environmental stress condi - tions in general , including acidic conditions , low temperature and heavy metals ( Delauney and Verma , 1993 ) . There are clear spatio - temporal speciﬁcities in osmoregulation . It is more active in young growing tissues than in more mature tissues . Under water stress , older leaves wilt ﬁrst , while younger leaves stay turgid and even continue to grow ( Molz and Boyer , 1978 ) . Sugarsandaminoacidsaremajorconstituentsofosmoregu - lationinmostexpandedleavesandgrowinghypocotyls . Ingrowing organs , osmoregulation is largely dependent on import of solutes , inparticulartheproductsofphotosynthesis . Changesintheconcen - trations of K + and its counterions ( e . g . malate and chloride ) also contribute greatly ( Morgan , 1984 ; Cazale´ et al . , 1998 ) . Each cell type has a unique composition of osmotica . Single - cellsamplingofcellular sap , combinedwithpressure probemeas - urement , revealedfour phases ofosmolyteaccumulation , depend - ing on the main osmotica type , in the developing root of Daucus carota ( Korolev et al . , 2000 ) . They were : an amino acid phase ( in germinating seedlings ) ; an ion phase ( inorganic and organic ions : K + , nitrate and malate ) ; a hexose phase ( glucose and fruc - tose ) ; and a sucrose phase . The amino acid phase was speciﬁc to the germinating seedlings , whereas the latter three phases were observed in more mature , sweetening carrot root . Different cell types had different osmolyte compositions , and thus the different types of osmolyte are interchangeable with regards to turgor pres - sure . For example , sugar content was the highest in the cells near the vascular cambium , and the concentrations of K + and sugar were usually reciprocal . Interestingly , the cambial cells contain exceptionally low K + and sugar concentrations . Furthermore , each cell type can utilize multiple mechanisms of osmoregulation . During the opening of stomatal guard cells , at least three alternative osmoregulation pathways are employed depending on the time of a day and the type of light ( Talbott and Zeiger , 1998 ) . The guard cells open when their turgor increases due to the surge in their osmotic potential and resulting water inﬂux . For the osmoregulation in these cells , carbohydrates , as wellasK + anditscounterions , arethemainosmoticatobemodu - lated . In red light conditions , photosynthetic sucrose production suppliesthe osmotica . In blue light conditions , there are two pos - sibilities . Intheearlierhalfoftheopeningperiod , starchisbroken down into malic acid , while a high H + concentration in the apo - plast drives Cl – and K + inﬂux into the cell . In the later half of the opening period , starch turns into sucrose to maintain the high osmotic potential and keep the guard cells open . QUANTIFYING TURGOR PRESSURE AND PLANT HYDRAULICS Inordertoassesstheroleofturgorpressureanditsregulation , itis fundamental to obtain quantitative data on water potential , hydrostatic ( turgor ) pressure , osmotic pressure and hydraulics , which we review in the following . All deﬁnitions of technical terms are given in Appendix 1 , together with the laws of physics that are needed to estimate them . Brieﬂy , water ﬂows from high to low water potential . Water potential is generally the sum of two contributions : the osmotic potential C P and the pressure potential C p , C w ¼ C P + C p . The pressure potential value is simply given by the hydrostatic pressure P ( relative to atmosphere ) , C p ¼ P . The osmotic potential value is given by the negative of osmotic pressure P , C P ¼ – P ¼ – MiRT , where M isthe molarityof the solution contained in the compart - ment in mol L – 1 , i the Van’t Hoff factor which represents the number of distinct particles produced when the substance is dis - solved ( e . g . i ¼ 2 for NaCl , 1 for mannitol ) , R the gas constant ( 8 . 314 L kPa – 1 K – 1 mol – 1 ) and T the absolute temperature ( in Kelvin ) . Therefore , if a cell is at equilibrium with a bath of pure water at atmospheric pressure ( C w ¼ 0 ) , then its turgor pres - sure is equal to its osmotic pressure , P ¼ MiRT . Many of the methodsbelowarebaseduponthegeneralizationofthisargument . Pressure measurements We ﬁrst survey the techniques that give access to the quantiﬁ - cation of turgor pressure , from the organ level down to the cell level . Psychrometer . A psychrometer can be used to measure average turgor in a tissue or an organ . Its modern form is due to Boyer and collaborators ( Boyer and Knipling , 1965 ; Boyer , 1966 ) . A tissue or an organ is put in a small closed chamber ( Fig . 2A ) . Water evaporates from the sample until saturation vapour pres - sure is reached ( note that the amount of water that has evaporated is small with respect to the amount of water in the sample , and so the change in water content of the sample is negligible ) . The system is then at equilibrium : water potentials are equal in the sample and in the gas phase ; evaporation and condensation of water compensate each other , ensuring a steady state . Athermocouple ( anelectriccircuitsuchthatatemperaturedif - ference yields a voltage ) is then used to measure the water poten - tial . A small drop of a solution of known osmolarity is put on the wet junction of the thermocouple , and the thermocouple is inserted into the chamber . If the drop has a lower water potential than the chamber , then some water condenses from the atmos - phere onto the drop , inducing a local temperature increase , which can be detected in comparison with the dry junction . If , conversely , the drop has a higher water potential , then some water evaporates from the drop . A drop of isopiestic solution , i . e . having the same vapour pressure as the chamber , does not induce a temperature change . The water potential of the sample is then equal to the water potential of the isopiestic drop which can be easily calculated from its osmolarcontent ( see ‘Water po - tential’ in Appendix 1 ) . To access turgor pressure in the organ , the osmotic pressure of the tissue cells is required , which can be obtained by extracting cell sap ( e . g . by freezing , thawing and putting the sample in a syringe ) and measuring its water po - tential with the same approach ( or with other approaches , see below ) . An estimation of the average turgor of the sample , P ( sample ) , is then the sum of the osmotic pressure P ( sample ) and the water potential C w ( sample ) . With this technique , turgor pressure was found to be 0 . 46 MPa in the soybean stem Beauzamy et al . — Turgor regulation in ﬂower development 1521 ( Nonami et al . , 1987 ) and 0 . 18 MPa in arabidopsis intermediate leaves ( Hayot et al . , 2012 ) . Pressurechamber . Apressurechamber ( alsoknownasthepressur - izedchamberorthepressurebomb ) isusedtomeasureturgorinthe excised part of a plant ( Scholander et al . , 1964 ; Boyer , 1995 ) . For instance , the leaf is cut and placed in a closed chamber with the petiole emerging from the chamber through a sealed joint so that the cut remains outside ( Fig . 2B ) . By increasing the pressure P ( chamber ) inside the chamber until the sap start to exude , it is possible to determine the water potential of the tissue cells . The protoplastic ( p ) and apoplastic ( a ) domains of the sample areinequilibrium . Theprotoplasticdomain , whichincludesallthe cell content , has an additional hydrostatic pressure P ( chamber ) , whereas the apoplastic domain , deﬁned by the rest of the plant , cell wall and xylem , is at the reference atmospheric pressure because the cut is in contact with the outside . Equilibrium yields C P ( p ) + C p ( p ) + P ( chamber ) ¼ C P ( a ) . C P ( a ) can be determined by collecting some sap and measur - ing its osmolarity . P ( chamber ) is known . The water potential of the cells in vivo is C P ( p ) + C p ( p ) and can then be calculated . If the osmolarity of the cells is measured ( see below ) , then their turgor pressure can be deduced . Scholander et al . ( 1964 ) found valuesintherange0 . 45 – 0 . 6 MPafortwigsfromvariousspecies . Wenextconsiderthemethodsdevelopedtoobtainturgoratthe celllevel . Theﬁrsttwoarebaseduponcellvolumechangesunder osmotic treatments ( Fig . 3B ) . Boyle – van’t Hoff plots . These plots were introduced by Ho¨ﬂer in 1920 ( and are also known as Ho¨ﬂer diagrams ) and their use was improved by Dainty ( 1972 ) , Tyree and Hammel ( 1972 ) and Zimmermann et al . ( 1976 ) ; see Zimmermann ( 1978 ) for a review . The method consists of bathing an isolated cell , or a tissue , successively in a set of solutions of graded molarity , M ( bath ) , and of measuring the volume of the protoplast ( or a of a given protoplast in a tissue ) , V ( cell ) , for each bath , as shown in Fig . 3A . The linear part of the plot , when there is no turgor pressure inside the cell [ P ( cell ) ¼ 0 ] , allows the determination of the total quantity of solutes in the cell , n ( cell ) . Indeed , in this region , equality of water potentials implies that M ( cell ) iRT ¼ M ( bath ) i’RT ( the same notations as above , for cell and bath , i and i’ representing the respective Van’t Hoff factors ) , and hence V ( cell ) = i / i ′ × n ( cell ) / M ( bath ) + b . In this equation , b represents the hypothetical volume inside the cell that is inaccessible to water , and thus does not participate in the water potential . The slope gives access to n ( cell ) which is assumed to be constant ( but see hereafter ) . When n ( cell ) is known , and since V ( cell ) canbe readon the plot foreach bathcon - dition , P ( cell ) can be calculated . The main weakness of this tech - nique is the assumption that n ( cell ) is constant ( semi - permeable membrane and no active osmoregulation ) . Therefore , it would be expected that the osmotic pressure , and hence turgor , are over - estimated . Also , a reliable optical measurement of volume is required for the method . The values found for turgor pressure are 0 . 5 – 0 . 8 MPa for the alga Chlorella emersonii ( Munns et al . , 1983 ) and 0 . 8 – 0 . 9 MPa in Allium cepa ( Gerdenitsch , 1984 ) . Incipient plasmolysis . Incipient plasmolysis is closely related to the previous approach , but is applicable only to walled cells because it relies on the plasmolysis point ( for comparison of behaviours of protoplast - like and walled cells when increasing their bath osmolarity , see Fig . 3B ) . In addition to the same ques - tionable assumption that n ( cell ) is constant , it is considered that the cell wall is so stiff that the cell volume change is negligible between the turgid state and the onset of plasmolysis . In order todeducetheirturgorpressure , cellsareputinbathsofincreasing osmolarity . The iso - osmotic concentration is determined by the onset of plasmolysis . Then the cell osmotic pressure can be cal - culated as P ( cell ) ¼ P ( bath ) ¼ M ( bath ) iRT , hence turgor inany bath as above . This technique is easier to implement because volume measurement is not required , but the assumptions that the cell wall is inﬁnitely stiff and that no osmoregulation occurs also lead to an overestimation of turgor . Moreover , any Vapour pressure Psychrometer A B Pressure chamber Equilibrium Measurement Y w ( chamber ) = Y w ( sample ) Y w ( chamber ) = Y w ( sample ) Continuousevaporation Waterretraction In vivo After excision In pressure chamber P Continuous water supply from soil Y w ( chamber ) < Y w ( sample ) Psychrometer Wet junction with a drop of known solution ? F IG . 2 . Measurements of water potential and hydraulic conductivity at the organ scale . ( A ) Psychrometer . ( B ) Pressure chamber . Beauzamy et al . — Turgor regulation in ﬂower development 1522 adhesion between the plasma membrane and the cell wall would delay the observation of plasmolysis . Indeed , the turgor pressure of 0 . 79 MPa found for the pollen tubes of Lilium longiﬂorum using incipient plasmolysis ( Benkert et al . , 1997 ) is signiﬁcantly higher than that found with the pressure probe ( see below ) . Pressureprobe . Apressureprobeenablesadirectmeasurementof turgor in a speciﬁc cell , isolated or within a tissue . An earlier set - up consisted of a capillary inserted in internodal cells of Nitella ﬂexilis that were emptied of their protoplasts ( Kamiya et al . , 1963 ) ; the cell walls were pressurized using a syringe con - nected to this capillary , the pressure being measured with a Bourdon - type manometer . In the ﬁrst version of the pressure probe ( Green , 1968 ) , a small capillary ﬁlled with water and con - taining a bubble of air was inserted into a living cell . By monitor - ingthevolumechangeofthebubble , itwaspossibletodeducethe pressure acting on it , i . e . turgor pressure . The method was then improved ( see , for example , Hu¨sken et al . , 1978 ; Tomos and Leigh , 1999 ) by ﬁlling the capillary with oil connected to an oilchamberwithapressuresensor . Whenthecapillaryisinserted into the cell , cell contents enter the capillary because of the higher hydrostatic pressure in the cell , and a visible cell sap – oil meniscus forms ( Fig . 4A ) . A piston is moved in the Cell behaviour under osmotic treatment Cell without wall Burst ( membrane cannot sustain P ) P + + P + P = 0 P = 0 P = 0 P = 0 P + P + + + Cell wall is able to resist to high P Walled cell D e c r ea s e o f t u r go r p r e ss u r e + s li gh t de c r ea s e o f c e ll v o l u m e I n c r ea s e o f ba t h c on c en t r a t i on D e c r e a s e o f t u r go r p r e ss u r e D e c r ea s e o f c e ll v o l u m e D e c r ea s e o f v o l u m e P u r e D il u t e d C o n c e n t r a t e d s o l u t i o n s I s o - o s m o t i c s o l u t i o n s s o l u t i o n s w a t e r V ( cell ) = i / i ´ × n ( cell ) × 1 / M ( bath ) + b P = 0 P + P + + P = 0 P = 0 P = 0 ’ ( c e ll ) = ’ ( ba t h ) + P ( c e ll ) Van’t Hoff plot A B b V ( cell ) ’ ( cell ) = ’  ( bath ) 1 / M ( bath ) Increase of bath concentration Plasmolysisstarting point F IG . 3 . Measurementofturgorwithosmotictreatments . ( A ) Van’tHoff ( Ho ¨ ﬂer ) plots that enable the determination of the cell solute concentration . ( B ) Schematics of cell deﬂation in hyperosmotic solutions . Oil - filled capillary Turgorpressure Turgorpressure Turgorpressure Extractionofinformationabout P Force Turgorpressure Turgor pressure Force Contactarea A Turgorpressure Cell sap Oil P Pressure probe A B C Ball tonometry Indentation techniques P = F / A Force ( N ) Indent depth ( nm ) Indentdepth F F IG . 4 . Measurement of turgor with mechanical methods . ( A ) Pressure probe , wherein the pressure is measured directly using a capillary . ( B ) Ball tonometry , wherein the surface of contact between the sphere and the cell is determined op - tically . ( C ) Indentation methods , wherein a force – depth curve is interpreted to yield the pressure . Beauzamy et al . — Turgor regulation in ﬂower development 1523 chamber to bring back the meniscus to the position of the cell wall ( the initial limit of the cell contents ) ; the pressure measured then is exactly turgor pressure . This method has been successfully applied to different cell types . Turgor was found to be equal to about 0 . 4 MPa in stems of Glycine max ( Nonami et al . , 1987 ) , 0 . 4 MPa in trichome cells of N . clevelandii ( Oparka and Prior , 1992 ) , 0 . 4 – 0 . 6 MPa in Z . mays and Triticum aestivum roots ( Rygol et al . , 1993 ) , 0 . 3 MPa in S . lycopersicum roots ( Grifﬁths et al . , 1996 ) , 0 . 3 – 0 . 6 MPa in the arabidopsis root epidermis ( Shabala and Lew , 2002 ; Javot et al . , 2003 ) , 0 . 2 MPa for lily pollen tubes ( Benkert , 1997 ) – much lower than with incipient plasmolysis – 0 . 4 MPa in arabidopsis suspension cells ( Gerbeau et al . , 2002 ) and 0 . 3 MPa for tomato single cells ( Wang , 2006 ) . This technique also revealed radial gradients in the root , with turgor increasing from the epidermis to the vascular strand ( Meshcheryakov et al . , 1992 ; Zimmerman et al . , 1992 ; Rygol et al . , 1993 ) , especially with enhanced transpiration . The pres - sure probe has two main drawbacks : it is intrusive and the size of the probe ( about 4 m m tip diameter ) does not allow its use on very small cells ( such as meristematic or guard cells in many plant species ) . Indentation methods . The principle of indentation methods stems from the observation that turgid plants appear stiffer than when ﬂaccid . This should also apply to the apparent stiffness when pushing on ( indenting ) a cell with a probe ( Fig . 4B , C ) . In ball tonometry ( Lintilhac et al . , 2000 ) , a small glass bead ( 0 . 05 – 0 . 5 mm in diameter ) is loaded with a controlled force onto an onion epidermal cell and the resulting contact area between the ball and the cell is optically measured . The pressure is then deduced using the relationship between pressure , force and area ( see Fig . 4B ) , yielding a value of about 0 . 6 MPa . The prin - cipleissimilartothemicromanipulationtechniqueusedinWang et al . ( 2006 ) , where a single cell is squeezed between a small cy - lindrical ﬂat - ended probe and a ﬂat surface , yielding a value of 0 . 3 MPa in tomato single cells . These approaches are efﬁcient but the interpretation of the results discarded the contribution of the cell wall to cell stiffness . The use of more reﬁned instruments such as the atomic force microscope ( AFM ) or microindenters ( such as the cellular force microscope ; Routier - Kwierzkowska et al . , 2012 ) provides the ability to control a very small tip ( radius typically , 1 m m ) and push it into a particular cell ( see Fig . 4C ) . As the indentation depth increases , the required force increases . Analysing the force – indentation curve with appropriate mechanical models makes it possible to take into account the contribution of the cell wall , but the deduction of the turgor pressure value is still an active research ﬁeld ( Deng et al . , 2011 ; Forouzesh et al . , 2013 ; Routier - Kwierzkowska et al . , 2012 ; Vella et al . , 2012 a , b ) . With such a method , Vogler et al . ( 2012 ) obtained values of 0 . 3 MPa for lily pollen tubes , much closer to pressure probe measurements than incipient plasmolysis ( Benkert et al . , 1997 ) . Osmolarity measurements Among the techniques described above for turgor pressure , some also enable determination of the osmolarity of the sample : e . g . Ho¨ﬂer diagrams and the incipient plasmolysis tech - nique , since knowing the osmolarity is a prerequisite for the determination of turgor ; or the psychrometer as the isopiestic drop in equilibrium with the solution inside the chamber has the same osmolarity as the solution . In freezing - point osmometry , the cell content needs to be extracted . The osmometer will cool it until it freezes . The pres - ence of solutes in a solvent reduces its freezing point . ( It is common practice during winter to put salt on roads because salt lowers the freezing point . ) This phenomenon depends mostly on the concentration of solutes and not on their nature , at least for small solutes [ for large solutes such as polyethylene glycol ( PEG ) , osmotic potential depends non - linearly on con - centration ] . By measuring the freezing point of the solution , the osmometer gives access to its osmolarity . Osmolality ( per kg , unlike osmolarity which is per L ) of barley leaf epidermal cells was measured from 430 to 550 mosmol kg – 1 with this tech - nique ( Fricke et al . , 1994 ) . Water and solute movement The ﬁrst methods at the organ level are based on imposing or measuring awater ﬂux and its proportionality with differences in pressure or in water potential . Pressure chamber . It is possible to deduce the hydraulic conduct - ivity L p ( seeAppendix1 ) withapressurechamber ( Boyer , 1995 ) , using the relationship L p ¼ J v / ( A × P ) where J v is the rate of sap ﬂow that is exuded from the excised tip because of the pressure , P , applied inside the chamber and A is the overall surface area of the sample . Values of L p found with thistechnique are about 2 × 10 – 8 m s – 1 MPa – 1 for the root of Lotus japonicus ( Henzler et al . , 1999 ) , 2 . 7 × 10 – 6 m s – 1 MPa – 1 for arabidopsis root and 1 . 5 × 10 – 7 m s – 1 MPa – 1 for arabidopsis rosette ( Postaire et al . , 2010 ) . Vacuum pump . In this method ( Kolb et al . , 1996 ) , a piece of plant is enclosed in achamber with negative pressure P , the stem or the petiole being outside the chamber and immersed in water . The negative pressure pulls water from the bath through the plant with a ﬂow rate ( F , units mmol s – 1 m – 2 or kg s – 1 m – 2 ) that depends on the hydraulic conductance of the sample , K . The valueof K isgivenbytheslopeoftheﬂowratevs . thevacuumpres - sure , P . Thistechniquegavevaluesin therange0 . 4 – 0 . 8 mmols – 1 MPa – 1 for the root of Artemisia tridentata ( Kolb et al . , 1996 ) . Highpressureﬂowmeter . Inthismethodintroduced by Tyree et al . ( 1995 ) , pressurized water is forced into the stem of an excised plant towards the roots or leaves . The pressure ( P , units MPa ) at the inlet is tuneable , and the corresponding inﬂow ( F , units mmol s – 1 m – 2 or kg s – 1 m – 2 ) can be measured . The slope of the F vs . P plot corresponds to the hydraulic conductance K . Typical values found for conductance range from 3 to 10 × 10 – 4 kg s – 1 m – 2 MPa – 1 for leaves of different crop species ( Tsuda and Tyree , 2000 ) , and from 1 to 2 × 10 – 4 kg s – 1 m – 2 MPa – 1 for mature leaves of different tropical species ( Tyree et al . , 2005 ) . We note that the three previous methods tend to induce stomatal opening and are therefore more sensitive to inner conductance when leaves are probed , unlike the next method . Evaporative ﬂux . This method ( Sack and Holbrook , 2006 ) is based on the proportionality between transpiration rate ( E , units mmol s – 1 m – 2 ) and the difference in water potential between plantandsoil , respectively C w ( leaf ) and C w ( soil ) . Thecoefﬁcient Beauzamy et al . — Turgor regulation in ﬂower development 1524 of proportionality is the conductance K ¼ E / [ C w ( soil ) – C w ( leaf ) ] . Values of K found with this technique are in the range 1 – 10 × 10 – 4 kg s – 1 m – 2 MPa – 1 for leaves of different crop species ( Tsuda and Tyree , 2000 ) , in agreement with the high pressure ﬂowmeter ( see paragraph above ) , and about 2 × 10 – 4 kg s – 1 m – 2 MPa – 1 for the arabidopsis leaf ( Martre et al . , 2002 ) . Values obtained with the three previous methods ( vacuum pump , high pressure and evaporative ﬂux ) are in good agreement with each other because they are based on the same principles ( Sack et al . , 2002 ) . The last method is less intrusive than the two previous ones , but measurements are more delicate . Pressure probe . The pressure probe can be used to modulate the position of the meniscus and follow the dynamics of the pressure until a steady state is reached , with a half - time t . The hydraulic conductivity of the cell membrane , L p , is determined by L p ¼ ln2 × V ( cell ) / [ A ( cell ) × t × ( e + P ) ] where V ( cell ) is the initial volume of the cell , A ( cell ) its membrane area , e ¼ V d P / d V ( derivative of pressurewith respect tovolume ) the volumetric elastic modulus , and P the internal osmotic pressure . e expresses how the volume of the cell changes with pressure due to cell wall elasticity , and this value is therefore accessible by applying a pressure difference and estimating the volume change by optical means ( see , for example , Zimmerman et al . , 1976 ) . The pressure probe can also be used to perform a ‘pressure clamp’ experiment ( Wendler and Zimmermann , 1982 ) : the pres - sure inside a cell is artiﬁcially maintained at a constant value higher than that at rest . The expression of L p becomes L p ¼ – S v / [ A ( cell ) × D P ] where S v is the initial slope of the volume relax - ation [ ¼ ( d D V / d t ) | t ¼ 0 ] , A is the membrane area , and D P is the dif - ference between the initial turgor pressure and the imposed pressure . This is an improvement on the previous method to deduce L p because there is no need to know P and V ( cell ) , which reduces errors . The volume change D V is imposed with the pressure probe , andthereforemorepreciselyknownthanifmeasuredoptic - ally . Typical values of L p found with the pressure probe are about 1 . 7 × 10 – 4 cm s – 1 MPa – 1 for Chara corallina internodes cells ( Zimmermann and Husken , 1979 ; Wendler and Zimmermann , 1982 ) , 6 × 10 – 7 m s – 1 MPa – 1 for corn and barley young roots ( Joshi et al . , 2009 ) , 9 × 10 – 7 m s – 1 MPa – 1 for maize young roots ( Knipfer et al . , 2007 ) , 1 . 2 × 10 – 8 m s – 1 MPa – 1 for tomato roots ( Grifﬁths et al . , 1996 ) , 5 × 10 – 7 m s – 1 MPa – 1 for root cor - tical cells of lotus ( Henzler et al . , 1999 ) , 4 . 6 × 10 – 7 m s – 1 MPa – 1 for arabidospsis suspension cells ( Gerbeau et al . , 2002 ) , and 0 . 5 – 8 × 10 – 6 m s – 1 MPa – 1 for parenchyma cells of Venus ﬂytrap leaf ( Colombani and Forterre , 2011 ) . Note that in techni - ques where the volume of displaced water is important , such as in the pressure clamp or the high pressure ﬂowmeter , solutes can accumulate in front of the osmotic barrier so that the com - partmentisnolongeratosmoticequilibrium . Thiscanleadtosig - niﬁcant errors in the calculated value of L p ( Knipfer et al . , 2007 ) . Finally , the pressure probe can also be used to monitor solute exchange indirectly ( Steudle et al . , 1987 ) . When the external bath of a maize root was changed to a bath containing a high con - centration of solute , the pressure measured was observed to follow a fast relaxation , probably corresponding to water move - ment from the root to the bath , and a slow secondary relaxation , that could be ascribed to ion exchanges between the root and the bath . Asosmoregulationcannotbeexcluded , thetimescaleofthe secondary relaxation could correspond to the half - time of ion ex - change or of osmoregulation ( or of a combination of both ) . Speciﬁc ion electrode technique / scanning ion - selective electrode technique / microelectrode ion ﬂux estimation / ion - speciﬁc vibrating probe . This technique can be used to quantify the concentration and ﬂux of speciﬁc ions . It involves the measurement of the voltage difference between a reference electrode and an elec - trode in contact with the solution of interest and ﬁlled with an ionophore , i . e . a lipid - soluble compound that is only permeable to a speciﬁc ion . The voltage difference is related to the concen - trationofthisionbytheNernstequation . Bydisplacingthemeas - urement electrode , it is possible to deduce the gradient of this ion close to the cell , and hence the diffusive ﬂux across the surface usingFick’slawandatabulatedvalueofthediffusion coefﬁcient ( Kochian et al . , 1992 ) or a calibration in known ion gradients ( Ku¨htreiber and Jaffe , 1990 ) . In practice , this electrode is oscil - lated sinusoidally , allowing the measurement to be quicker than the system drift ( Ku¨htreiber and Jaffe , 1990 ; Kochian et al . , 1992 ) . Using this technique , it was found that ﬂuxes had values of about 30 pmol cm – 2 s – 1 for Ca 2 + inﬂux at the cell apex of cotton ﬁbre ( Tang et al . , 2014 ) , whereas they ranged from 100 to 500 pmol cm – 2 s – 1 for Na + efﬂux in the root of cu - cumber and pumpkin ( Lei , et al . , 2014 ) . However , a main draw - back of this technique is the poor speciﬁcity of some ionophores , as shown for chloride ( Messerli et al . , 2004 ) . Fluorescent tracing . Indications on solute movement of larger molecules and therefore plasmodesmatal connectivity can be obtained by monitoring the movement of a ﬂuorescent dye in the tissue . Since membrane channels do not generally allow the passage of such dyes , ﬂuxes can be ascribed to plasmodes - mata . Dye passage can therefore be ascribed either to simple dif - fusion or to mean water ﬂowacross plasmodesmata . The dye can be microinjected in a speciﬁc domain ( Han et al . , 2014 ) , or loaded by iontophoresis ( application of a current of a few nanoAmps through the membrane to facilitate the entry of the dye ) as in Rinne and van der Schoot ( 1998 ) . Plants can be bom - barded with microparticles carrying plasmids with GFP ( green ﬂuorescent protein ) constructs ( Liarzi and Epel , 2005 ) . In other experiments , all the tissue is dyed but a restricted zone is photo - bleached , allowing the measurement of the recovery time ( Rutschow et al . , 2011 ) . These methods allow the deduction of the effective diffusion constants between cells inside the same symplastic domain and the plasmodesma permeability ; however it is not possible to distinguish between water ﬂow and solute dif - fusion . Typical values forarabidopsis root are D approx . 50 m m – 2 s – 1 and permeability approx . 10 m m s – 1 ( Rutschow et al . , 2011 ) . CASE STUDIES Basedontheinformationwehavedescribedabove , wenowillus - tratehowchangesinturgorpressureanddifferentmechanisms of turgor modulation drive developmental processes , drawing three major events in ﬂower development as examples ( Fig . 5 ) . Anther dehiscence When plants are ready for reproduction , the anthers open to expose and release mature pollen . This process is called anther dehiscence , and in many species it is the temporal determinant Beauzamy et al . — Turgor regulation in ﬂower development 1525 of pollination and subsequent fertilization . Anther dehiscence is thought to result from a reﬁned sequence of water allocation withinthestamen ( Fig . 5A ) ; theendothecium ( thesub - epidermal tissue ) and other speciﬁc cell types are actively hydrated ﬁrst and then dehydrated during the ﬁnal stages of stamen differentiation ( Scott et al . , 2004 ; Nelson et al . , 2012 ) . During the hydration phase , water ﬂuxes into the endothecium and polleninﬂate these structures . The enhancedhydration ofthe epidermal and sub - epidermal endothecium cells increasesup the turgorpressureinthesecellsandtheturgor - drivenforceborne by the epidermis , dramatically increasing the lateral tension in the epidermis . The heightened tension ruptures the weakest point – the stomium cells – and breaks open the entire anther locules ( Keijzer et al . , 1987 ) . Osmoregulation through K + accumulation seems to be the key in turgor control en route to anther dehiscence . The Na + / H + anti - portersNHX1andNHX2arenecessaryformaintenanceofpropervacuolarpHandK + concentration . In nhx1 ; nhx2 double mutants of arabidopsis , some ﬂowers ( approx . 7 % ) have problems with stamen ﬁlament elongation and anther dehiscence ( Bassil et al . , 2011 ) . In barley , K + is highly concentrated especially in the stomium ; this cell - speciﬁc K + accumulation may lead to targeted turgor enhancement and then breakage ( Rehman and Yun , 2006 ) . In Oryza sativa , on the other hand , it has been reported that swellingofpollenduetospeciﬁcK + accumulationthereisrespon - sible for stomium breakage ( Matsui et al . , 2000 ) . Once the stomium breaks , the anthers start to dehydrate . The endothecium has string - like secondary thickening of the cell wall that is mainly composed of lignin . When those cells dry , the endothecium undergoes enhanced shrinkage like a spring and creates an outward bending force , leading to full opening of the anthers and effective pollen release ( Keijzer et al . , 1987 ) . MYB26 transcription factor is necessary and sufﬁcient for the secondary thickening of the endothecium cell wall in ara - bidopsis . The mutant of the gene ( male sterile 35 ) can open the anther only partially , even though the stomium is broken ( Yang et al . , 2007 ) . PIP2 aquaporin proteins , which are speciﬁc - ally expressed in the anthers and styles , facilitate the withdrawal of water in tobacco ( Bots et al . , 2005 a , b ) . The anthers of RNAi ( RNA interference ) plants with reduced expression of PIP2 genes dehisced more slowly compared with the wild type ; nuclear magnetic resonance ( NMR ) - based tracking of water movement indicated slower water removal from the anthers . Anther dehydration is also driven by accumulation of os - molytes in the surrounding connective tissues and stamen ﬁla - ments . The sucrose transporter AtSUC1 is localized in the connective tissues , which could drive water out of the anthers ( Stadler et al . , 1999 ) . The DAD1 ( DEFECTIVE IN ANTHER DEHISCENCE1 ) gene of arabidopsis , which encodes the enzyme that catalyses the ﬁrst step of jasmonic acid ( JA ) biosyn - thesis , is expressed in the ﬁlaments immediately prior to ﬂower opening ( Ishiguro et al . , 2001 ) . The dad1 mutant has defects in Anther dehiscence A B C Petal expansion Pollen tube growth Solutes Aquaporin Hydrationphase P P Dehydrationphase F IG . 5 . Case studies in the ﬂower . ( A ) Anther dehiscence . ( B ) Petal expansion . ( C ) Pollen tube growth . Beauzamy et al . — Turgor regulation in ﬂower development 1526 anther dehydration and is delayed in anther dehiscence . The mutant is reduced in ﬁlament elongation and petal expansion , and thus a model was proposed for hydraulic synchronization of anther dehiscence and ﬂower opening . Translocation of water from the anther to the ﬁlament and petal would ensure that a suite of pollination - related events occurred simultaneously . The model is in accordance with the ﬁnding in Allium cepa that ﬁlament elongation occurs concomitantly with anther dehiscence ( Keijzer et al . , 1987 ) . Flower opening In addition to anther dehiscence , opening of the ﬂower gener - ally marks the onset of pollination . Flower opening is thought to facilitate pollen maturation and release , and it also makes the stigma on the carpels accessible to pollination ( van Doorn and van Meeteren , 2003 ) . There are several types of ﬂower opening ( e . g . single vs . repeated or nocturnal vs . diurnal ) depending on thespecies ; mostspecies , however , undergosingleandpermanent opening . Water movement is important for opening of the ﬂower , since the process is impaired in rose cut ﬂowers if there is a blockage in the basal stem ( van Doorn and van Meeteren , 2003 ) . In some other species ( e . g . cotton and chrysanthemum ) , the continuum of water in the ﬂower is separated from that in the stem , and the ﬂower can open even when leaves are wilting due to desiccation ( Trolinder etal . , 1993 ; vanDoornandvanMeeteren , 2003 ) . Such separation may be highlighting the importance of water relations in ﬂower opening and development in general . Floral buds open due to petal expansion and , to a lesser extent , stamen elongation ( Fig . 5B ) . Flower opening is typically rapid and is completed within 5 – 30 min . In most species it occurs due to uncovering of the petals ( i . e . removal of physical constraints , for example through the abscission of bracts and sepals ) or petal movements . Petal movements can be controlled by cell expansion or shrinkage via osmoregulation . For example , the petals of Gentiana kochiana and possibly Kalanchoe blossfeldiana move through reversible , turgor - driven expansion and contraction of cells on the adaxial surface ( van Doorn and van Meeteren , 2003 ) . A similar mechanism of cell expansion / shrinkage leading to reversible opening of a structure also underlies the opening / closure of the ice plant seed capsules ( Harrington et al . , 2011 ) . In most species studied to date , petal movements occur due to differential growth rate of the epidermis on the two sides ( i . e . abaxial or adaxial sides ) . A ﬂower opens when the adaxial sideofpetalsgrowsmorethantheabaxialside ( Fig . 5B ) . Thisdif - ferential growth is mostly mediated by differential osmoregula - tion ; carbohydrates accumulate , from either mobilization of storage carbohydrates or sucrose import ( van Doorn and van Meeteren , 2003 ) . Young ﬂowers typically contain high levels of starch . Solute levels increase prior to ﬂower opening through the uptake of sugars from the apoplast and the conver - sion ofpolysaccharides ( starch , fructan orboth ) to monosacchar - ides ( fructose and glucose ) . Supporting this notion , inhibition of starch degradation prevented petal growth in lily ( Bieleski et al . , 2000 ) . The petals of Morning Glory ( Ipomoea tricolor ) open early in one morning and senesce in the afternoon of the same day . The senescence starts by rolling of the corolla , curling the rib starting from the distal tip margins . This process is induced by ethylene , which enhances ion ( Rb + ) and sucrose efﬂux from the rib ; the rolling could be due to asymmetric turgor changes , since the petals could be unrolled when turgor pressure was eliminated in a strong hyperosmotic treatment that plasmolysed cells ( Hanson and Kende , 1975 ) . Aquaporins play central roles in petal cell expansion , and they mediateethylene - dependentinhibitionofﬂoweropening . Inroses , ethylene inhibits or promotes petal growth depending on the culti - vars ( Reid etal . , 1989 ) , andinthecultivar‘Samantha’itnegatively regulates petal expansion . Ethylene treatments resulted in irregu - lar , smaller petals due to less cell expansion and water content , and aquaporin genes PIP1 ; 1 and PIP2 ; 1 were found to be down - regulated ( Ma et al . , 2008 ; Chen et al . , 2013 ) . Ethylene seems to regulate aquaporin expression and ultimately petal cell expansion , via miRNA164 - mediated post - transcriptional regulation and the NAC - domain transcription factor RhNAC100 ( Pei et al . , 2013 ) . Inthecase oftulip , inwhichtheﬂoweropensdiurnallyaccord - ing to the daily temperature ﬂuctuations , petal expansion is regu - latedatthelevelofaquaporinproteinactivity . Thepetalsopenwhen the temperature rises in the morning , and they close in the evening when the temperature drops . It has been shown that warm tempera - ture activates water transport into the petal cells viathe phosphoryl - ationofPIP2 ; 2aquaporininaCa 2 + - dependentmanner ( Azad etal . , 2004 , 2008 ) . Pollen tube growth When pollen lands on the stigma at the tip of carpels , it bulges out at one position and begins to elongate as a tube . The pollen tube isthe tubularextrusion of the vegetative cell of the microga - metophyte . It carries two sperm cells inside and elongates inside the style of the carpels to bring the sperm to the megagameto - phyte for fertilization . The pollen tube is an autonomous single - cell system that undergoes localized growth at the very tip , atype ofcellgrowthcalled‘tipgrowth’ ( Fig . 5C ) , whichisalsofoundin fungal hyphae and root hairs . The pollen tube is one of the best - studied systems in plant cell biology , especially with regards to the investigation of cell growth regulation . Growth is thought to be driven by turgor pressure , and the pollen tube is one of the fastest growing cells ( Sanati Nezhad and Geitmann , 2013 ) . Thus a question arises : is turgor pressure particularly high in the pollen tube ? AtSUC1 is highlyexpressed in pollen and important for pollen tube germination and growth ( Stadler et al . , 1999 ; Sivitz et al . , 2008 ) , suggesting the import - ance of sucrose import in pollen tube growth . Pollen has high contentsofprolineandhydroproline ( 0 . 14 % ofthesolublemole - cules ) , which are enriched at the tip ( Dashek and Harwood , 1974 ) . Asplasmolysisstartsatthetipuponastronghyperosmotic treatment ( Hill et al . , 2012 ) , it might also be argued that water inﬂux / efﬂux is restricted to the growing tip ; it should be noted , however , that plasmolysis usually start at the corners of cells . Benkert et al . ( 1997 ) conducted pressure probe measurement of lily pollen tubes , being able to keep a micropipette inserted for 20 – 30 min without affecting the growth signiﬁcantly . The turgor was measured in the range 0 . 1 – 0 . 4 MPa , about 0 . 21 MPa on average . They also estimated the turgor pressure within the tube using incipient plasmolysis and found the mean to be 0 . 79 MPa . This discrepancy might be ascribed to the limita - tions of the incipient plasmolysis technique , e . g . cells could osmoregulate upon hyperosmotic treatments . Indeed the value Beauzamy et al . — Turgor regulation in ﬂower development 1527 0 . 3 MPa obtained by Vogler et al . ( 2012 ) using microindentation is consistent with the pressure probe measurement . Benkert et al . ( 1997 ) found no clearcorrelation between growth rates and turgor pressure ; faster growing tubes did not necessarily contain higher turgor . This observation questions the classic assumption that turgor pressure is the driving force for growth . Such a driving force could be provided by callose deposition at the rear of the proto - plast , pushing it forward ( see , for example , Parre and Geitmann , 2004 ) and eventually forming callose plugs preventing backward motion , though deposition would need to be fast enough to account for the speed at which tubes elongate . The assumption that turgor pressure is the driving force can be further explored in the context of oscillatory growth of pollen tube . A pollen tube starts out growing steadily , but frequently switches to oscillatory growthovertime , whenitgrowstooquicklyorexperiencesinstabil - ities ( Chebli and Geitmann , 2007 ) . The tube cycles between fast andslowphasesofgrowth , repeatingtheshiftsbetweengrowthpro - motion and inhibition every few minutes ; thus oscillatory growth allows ﬁne dissection of the temporal sequence of factors acting on the growth regulation . The concentrations of osmotically active solutes ( such as prolines ) do ﬂuctuate depending on the phases of the oscillatory growth ( Daseck and Harwood , 1974 ) . Ion inﬂux ( K + and Ca 2 + ) oscillates too , but its peak immediately precedes the slow growth phase , rather than the fast growth phase ( Chebli and Geitmann , 2007 ) . Furthermore , no consistent oscillation - dependent variation in turgor pressure was measured in lily pollen tube ( Benkert et al . , 1997 ) . Altogether , it is difﬁcult to determine whether , in the pollen tube , turgor pressure drives growth in a dose - dependent fashion . Since plasmolysed cells that lack turgor pressure cannot grow , it can be said that a threshold turgor pressure is necessary for growth ( Kroeger et al . , 2011 ) . On the other hand , excessive turgor pressure ( around twice as much as normal ) burst the tube at the tip ( Benkert et al . , 1997 ) . Therefore , the role of turgor in growth may be that its calibration to a particular range is important forgrowthmaintenance . Recentlyamodelwasproposedtoexplain such turgor calibration ( Hill et al . , 2012 ) . An osmosensor detects the difference in osmotic pressure between the cytoplasm and apo - plast . The osmosensor is localized to the plasma membrane at the growing tip of the tube to regulate the inﬂux of water . Since it was found to be sensitive to the treatment with mercury ( an inhibitorof aquaporins ) , an aquaporin was suggested to be the osmosensor ( Shachar - Hill et al . , 2013 ) . Alternatively , in such fast - growing cells as the pollen tube , cell wall extensibility could be large , so that turgor would remain close to the yield pressure required for growth ( Lockhart , 1965 ) , whichwouldexplainwhynooscillations of turgor have been observed . Changes in growth rates would be caused by any change in hydraulic conductivity or in osmotic po - tential , with no need to modulate turgor pressure . Nevertheless , turgor pressure would drive growth as in other scenarios . DISCUSSION Turgorpressuretendstobetakenforgranted . Itisperhapstoooften believed to be passive and unresponsive . However , in reality , it is active and dynamic , constantly changing depending on internal and external cues . Despite thewidely helddogmathat turgor pres - sure is uniform in all cells of an organ ( due to the numerous sym - plasmic connections , plasmodesmata ) , cells are equipped with machinery to create differential turgor pressure . In normal and stress - response processes of development and physiology , cells are constantly regulating their turgor pressure via molecular changes that modulate water inﬂux / efﬂux into and out of the cell . Anemergingpictureisthattheregulationofturgorpressureand water movement in and out of the cell is critical for many developmental processes , in ﬂowers and elsewhere . A series of recentreports on arabidopsislateralrootdevelopmentcollectively signify this point . At the stage of primordia bulging ( stage IV ) , both paths of water movement ( i . e . aquaporins and plasmodes - mata ) are restricted . Most PIP genes are downregulated , and altered levelsof PIP2 ; 1 transcriptsdelayed lateral root emergence ( Peret et al . , 2012 ) . Immature lateral roots are symplastically iso - latedinstagesIVandonward ; withoutthissymplasmicseparation , lateral root number and spacing were disturbed ( Oparka et al . , 1995 ; Benitez - Alfonso etal . , 2013 ) . Compressionbymechanical - lystiff neighbouring cells is critical for lateral root emergence and development ( Lucas et al . , 2013 ; Vermeer et al . 2014 ) , and inhib - ition of water movement into and out of the primordia would strengthen this compression effect . Whether such hydraulic isola - tionresultsindifferentialturgorornotremainstobeelucidated . At least , it appears that turgor decreases in the root cortex following auxin treatment ( Peret et al . , 2012 ) . Despite many indicationsthat it is possible and probably com - monplace , differential turgor pressure remains rather elusive , since it is difﬁcult to be measured directly . Technical advances in turgor measurement ( precise , accessible to the deep tissue and non - destructive ) are necessary for clear evidence of turgor variation . Fine - tip pressure probing or nano - indentation has the potential to deliver such a measurement strategy . In parallel to the mechanical measurement , an optical approach should also be employed ; pressure - sensitive proteins , including ﬂuorescent markers , can be engineered as biosensors of turgor pressure ( Barstow et al . , 2008 , 2009 ; Watanabe et al . , 2013 ) . Futuretechnologieswillfacilitateinvestigationofturgorregu - lation and its functional signiﬁcance . For example , the recently available lines of arabidopsis in which plasmodesmata can be closed in a cell type - speciﬁc manner ( Vaten et al . , 2011 ) are powerful genetic tools ; they can reveal the importance of sym - plasmic movements of small molecules , including water . As we understand more about gating mechanisms of plasmodes - mata , inducible plasmodesmata opening lines may become available , allowing us to dissect the importance of distinct sym - plasmic domains that pre - condition differential turgor pressure . Similarly , speciﬁc and controlled modulation of aquaporin func - tion through drug treatments or genetic modiﬁcation would greatly help the dissection of water movement among cells . Improved , cellular and sub - cellular resolution osmometer meas - urement and visualization of water content with magnetic reson - ance imaging ( MRI ) would also provide critical information underlying turgor differences and changes . Once we can experimentally monitor and control the turgor pressureofspeciﬁc cells , theimportance ofdynamicturgorregu - lation in plant development , growth and physiology will become more evident . Experimental data from physico - biological inves - tigations often require interpretation with computer modelling , via close collaborations across biology and physical sciences . Theoretical and empirical efforts will together uncover how turgor drives morphogenesis by pressuring the cells , one cell at a time . Beauzamy et al . — Turgor regulation in ﬂower development 1528 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Work by the authors was supported by the European Research Council [ StG 307387 to A . B . ] and Chancellor’s Fellowship from the University of Edinburgh [ to N . N . ] . LITTERATURE CITED Aharon R , Shahak Y , Wininger S , Bendov R , Kapulnik Y , Galili G . 2003 . Overexpression of a plasma membrane aquaporin in transgenic tobacco improves plant vigor under favorable growth conditions but not under drought or salt stress . The Plant cell 15 : 439 – 447 . ApseM , AharonG , SneddenW , BlumwaldE . 1999 . Salttoleranceconferredby overexpressionofavacuolarNa + / H + antiportinArabidopsis . Science 285 : 1256 – 1258 . Azad A , Sawa Y , Ishikawa T , Shibata H . 2004 . Phosphorylation of plasma membrane aquaporin regulates temperature - dependent opening of tulip petals . Plant and Cell Physiology 45 : 608 – 617 . AzadA , KatsuharaM , SawaY , IshikawaT , ShibataH . 2008 . Characterization of four plasma membrane aquaporins in tulip petals : a putative homolog is regulated by phosphorylation . Plant and Cell Physiology 49 : 1196 – 1208 . Barstow B , Ando N , Kim C , Gruner S . 2008 . Alteration of citrine structure by hydrostatic pressure explainsthe accompanying spectral shift . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , USA 105 : 13362 – 13366 . Barstow B , Ando N , Kim C , Gruner S . 2009 . Coupling of pressure - induced structural shifts to spectral changes in a yellow ﬂuorescent protein . Biophysical Journal 97 : 1719 – 1727 . BassilE , TajimaH , LiangY , etal . 2011 . TheArabidopsisNa + / H + antiporters NHX1 and NHX2 control vacuolar pH and K + homeostasis to regulate growth , ﬂower development , and reproduction . The Plant Cell 23 : 3482 – 3497 . Benitez - Alfonso Y , Jackson D , Maule A . 2011 . Redox regulation of intercellu - lar transport . Protoplasma 248 : 131 – 140 . Benitez - AlfonsoY , FaulknerC , PendleA , MiyashimaS , HelariuttaY , Maule A . 2013 . Symplasticintercellularconnectivityregulateslateralrootpattern - ing . Developmental Cell 26 : 136 – 147 . BenkertR , ObermeyerG , BentrupF . 1997 . Theturgorpressureofgrowinglily pollen tubes . Protoplasma 198 : 1 – 8 . van den Berg B , Wain R , Dobson C , Ellis R . 2000 . Macromolecular crowding perturbs protein refolding kinetics : implications for folding inside the cell . EMBO Journal 19 : 3870 – 3875 . Bieleski R , Elgar J , Heyes J . 2000 . Mechanical aspects of rapid ﬂoweropening in Asiatic lily . Annals of Botany 86 : 1175 – 1183 . Bots M , Feron R , Uehlein N , Weterings K , Kaldenhoff R , Mariani T . 2005 a . PIP1andPIP2aquaporinsaredifferentiallyexpressedduringtobaccoantherandstigmadevelopment . Journal of Experimental Botany 56 : 113 – 121 . Bots M , Vergeldt F , Wolters - Arts M , Weterings K , van As H , Mariani C . 2005 b . Aquaporins of the PIP2 class are required for efﬁcient anther dehis - cence in tobacco . Plant Physiology 137 : 1049 – 1056 . BoursiacY , BoudetJ , PostaireO , LuuD , Tournaire - RouxC , MaurelC . 2008 . Stimulus - induced downregulation of root water transport involves reactive oxygen species - activated cell signalling and plasma membrane intrinsic protein internalization . The Plant Journal 56 : 207 – 218 . Boyer J . 1966 . Isopiestic technique : measurement of accurate leaf water poten - tials . Science 154 : 1459 – 60 . Boyer J . 1995 . Measuring the water status of plants and soils . San Diego , Academic Press . BoyerJ , KniplingE . 1965 . Isopiestictechniqueformeasuringleafwaterpoten - tials with a thermocouple psychrometer . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , USA 54 : 1044 – 1051 . Briegel A , LadinskyM , OikonomouC , et al . 2014 . Structure of bacterial cyto - plasmic chemoreceptor arrays and implications for chemotactic signaling . eLife 3 : e02151 . Burch - SmithT , ZambryskiP . 2012 . Plasmodesmataparadigmshift : regulation from without versus within . Annual Review of Plant Biology 63 : 239 – 260 . Cazale´ AC , Rouet - Mayer MA , Barbier - Brygoo H , Mathieu Y , Laurie ` re C . 1998 . Oxidative burst and hypoosmotic stress in tobacco cell suspensions . Plant Physiology 116 : 659 – 669 . ChaumontF , TyermanS . 2014 . Aquaporins : highlyregulatedchannelscontrol - ling plant water relations . Plant Physiology 164 : 1600 – 1618 . ChaumontF , MoshelionM , DanielsM . 2005 . Regulationofplantaquaporinac - tivity . Biology of the Cell 97 : 749 – 764 . Chebli Y , Geitmann A . 2007 . Mechanical principles governing pollen tube growth . Functional Plant Science and Biotechnology 1 : 232 – 245 . ChenW , YinX , WangL , etal . 2013 . InvolvementofroseaquaporinRhPIP1 ; 1in ethylene - regulated petal expansion through interaction with RhPIP2 ; 1 . Plant Molecular Biology 83 : 219 – 233 . Colombani M , Forterre Y . 2011 . Biomechanics of rapid movements in plants : poroelastic measurements at the cell scale . Computer Methods in Biomechanics and Biomedical Engineering 14 : 115 – 117 . Coster H . 1976 . Turgor pressure sensing in plant cell membranes . Plant Physiology 58 : 636 – 643 . Dashek W , Harwood H . 1974 . Proline , hydroxyproline , and lily pollen tube elongation . Annals of Botany 38 : 947 – 959 . Dainty J . 1972 . Plant cell - water relations : the elasticity of the cell wall . Proceedings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh . Section A . Mathematical and Physical Sciences 70 : 89 – 93 . DelauneyA , VermaD . 1993 . Prolinebiosynthesisandosmoregulationinplants . The Plant Journal 4 : 215 – 223 . DengY , SunM , ShaevitzJ . 2011 . Directmeasurementofcellwallstressstiffen - ing and turgor pressure in live bacterial cells . Physical Review Letters 107 : 158101 . van Doorn W , Van Meeteren U . 2003 . Flower opening and closure : a review . Journal of Experimental Botany 54 : 1801 – 1812 . Dumais J , Forterre Y . 2012 . ‘Vegetable dynamicks’ : the role of water in plant movements . Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics 44 : 453 – 478 . Ellis R . 2001 . Macromolecular crowding : an important but neglected aspect of the intracellular environment . Current opinion in structural biology 11 : 114 – 9 . Fetter K , Van Wilder V , Moshelion M , Chaumont F . 2004 . Interactions between plasma membrane aquaporins modulate their waterchannel activ - ity . The Plant Cell 16 : 215 – 228 . Forouzesh E , Goel A , Mackenzie SA , Turner JA . 2013 . In vivo extraction of Arabidopsis cell turgor pressure using nanoindentation in conjunction with ﬁnite element modeling . The Plant Journal 73 : 509 – 520 . Forterre Y . 2013 . Slow , fast and furious : understanding the physics of plant movements . Journal of Experimental Botany 64 : 4745 – 4760 . Fricke W , Leigh R , Tomos A . 1994 . Concentrations of inorganic and organic solutesinextractsfromindividualepidermal , mesophyllandbundle - sheath cells of barley leaves . Planta 192 : 310 – 316 . Fricke W , JarvisM , Brett C . 2000 . Turgorpressure , membranetensionand the control of exocytosis in higher plants . Plant , Cell and Environment 23 : 999 – 1003 . Geitmann A . 2006 . Experimental approaches used to quantify physical para - meters at cellular and subcellular levels . American Journal of Botany 93 : 1380 – 1390 . Geitmann A , Ortega J . 2009 . Mechanics and modeling of plant cell growth . Trends in Plant Science 14 : 467 – 478 . GerbeauP , AmodeoG , HenzlerT , SantoniV , RipocheP , MaurelC . 2002 . The water permeability of Arabidopsis plasma membrane is regulated by diva - lent cations and pH . The Plant Journal 30 : 71 – 81 . Gerdenitsch W . 1984 . Microscopic contributions to the pressure – volume diagram of the cell - water relations as demonstrated with tissue cells . Protoplasma 119 : 35 – 47 . Gisel A , Barella S , Hempel F , Zambryski P . 1999 . Temporal and spatial regu - lation ofsymplastic trafﬁcking duringdevelopment in Arabidopsisthaliana apices . Development 126 : 1879 – 1889 . Green P . 1968 . Growth physics in Nitella : a method for continuous in vivo ana - lysisofextensibilitybasedonamicro - manometertechniqueforturgorpres - sure . Plant Physiology 43 : 1169 – 1184 . GrifﬁthsA , ParryA , JonesH , TomosA . 1996 . Abscisicacidandturgorpressure regulation in tomato roots . Journal of Plant Physiology 149 : 372 – 376 . HainesT . 1994 . Watertransportacrossbiologicalmembranes . FEBSLetters 346 : 115 – 122 . Hamant O , Traas J . 2010 . The mechanics behind plant development . New Phytologist 185 : 369 – 385 . HanX , HyunT , ZhangM , etal . 2014 . Auxin – callose - mediatedplasmodesmal gating is essential for tropic auxin gradient formation and signaling . Developmental Cell 28 : 132 – 146 . Hanson A , Kende H . 1975 . Ethylene - enhanced ion and sucrose efﬂux in morning glory ﬂower tissue . Plant Physiology 55 : 663 – 669 . Harrington M , Razghandi K , Ditsch F , et al . 2011 . Origami - like unfolding of hydro - actuated ice plant seed capsules . Nature Communications 2 : 337 . Haydon M , Bell L , Webb A . 2011 . Interactions between plant circadian clocks and solute transport . Journal of Experimental Botany 62 : 2333 – 2348 . Beauzamy et al . — Turgor regulation in ﬂower development 1529 Hayot C , Forouzesh E , Goel A , Avramova Z , Turner J . 2012 . Viscoelastic properties of cell walls of single living plant cells determined by dynamic nanoindentation . Journal of Experimental Botany 63 : 2525 – 2540 . Henzler T , Steudle E . 2000 . Transport and metabolic degradation of hydrogen peroxide in Chara corallina : model calculations and measurements with the pressure probe suggest transport of H 2 O 2 across water channels . Journal of Experimental Botany 51 : 2053 – 66 . HenzlerT , WaterhouseR , SmythA , etal . 1999 . Diurnalvariationsinhydraulic conductivity and root pressure can be correlated with the expression of pu - tative aquaporins in the roots of Lotus japonicus . Planta 210 : 50 – 60 . HillA , Shachar - HillB , SkepperJ , PowellJ , Shachar - HillY . 2012 . Anosmotic model of the growing pollen tube . PloS One 7 : e36585 . Holdaway - Clarke T , Walker N , HeplerP , Overall R . 2000 . Physiologicalele - vations in cytoplasmic free calcium by cold or ion injection result in transi - ent closure of higher plant plasmodesmata . Planta 210 : 329 – 335 . Hu¨sken D , Steudle E , Zimmermann U . 1978 . Pressure probe technique for measuring water relations of cells in higher - plants . Plant Physiology 61 : 158 – 163 . Imlau A , Truernit E , Sauer N . 1999 . Cell - to - cell and long - distance trafﬁcking of the green ﬂuorescent protein in the phloem and symplastic unloading of the protein into sink tissues . The Plant Cell 11 : 309 – 322 . Ishiguro S , Kawai - Oda A , Ueda J , Nishida I , Okada K . 2001 . The DEFECTIVE IN ANTHER DEHISCIENCE gene encodes a novel phospholipase A1 catalyzing the initial step of jasmonic acid biosynthesis , which synchronizes pollen maturation , anther dehiscence , and ﬂower opening in Arabidopsis . The Plant Cell 13 : 2191 – 2209 . Javot H , Lauvergeat V , Santoni V , et al . 2003 . Role of a single aquaporin isoform in root water uptake . The Plant Cell 15 : 509 – 522 . Johanson U , Karlsson M , Johansson I , et al . 2001 . The complete set of genes encoding major intrinsic proteins in Arabidopsis provides a framework for a new nomenclature for major intrinsic proteins in plants . Plant Physiology 126 : 1358 – 1369 . Johnson K , Chrispeels M . 1992 . Tonoplast - bound protein kinase phosphory - lates tonoplast intrinsic protein . Plant Physiology 100 : 1787 – 1795 . JoshiA , KnipferT , SteudleE . 2009 . Effectsofwaterstorageinthesteleonmea - surements of the hydraulics of young roots of corn and barley . New Phytologist 184 : 631 – 643 . Kamiya N , Tazawa M , Takata T . 1963 . The relation of turgor pressure to cell volume in nitella with special reference to mechanical properties of the cell wall . Protoplasma 57 : 501 – 521 . Keijzer C , Hoek I , Willemse M . 1987 . The processes of anther dehiscence and pollen dispersal III . The dehydration of the ﬁlament tip and the anther in three monocotyledonous species . New Phytologist 106 : 281 – 287 . Knipfer T , Das D , Steudle E . 2007 . During measurements of root hydraulics with pressure probes , the contribution of unstirred layers is minimized in the pressure relaxation mode : comparison with pressure clamp and high - pressure ﬂowmeter . Plant , Cell and Environment 30 : 845 – 860 . KochianLV , ShaffJE , Ku¨htreiberWM , JaffeLF , LucasWJ . 1992 . Useofan extracellular , ion - selective , vibrating microelectrode system for the quanti - ﬁcation of K + , H + , and Ca2 + ﬂuxes in maize roots and maize suspension cells . Planta 188 : 601 – 610 . Kolb K , Sperry J , Lamont B . 1996 . A method for measuring xylem hydraulic conductance and embolism in entire root and shoot systems . Journal of Experimental Botany 47 : 1805 – 1810 . KorolevA , TomosA , BowtellR , FarrarJ . 2000 . Spatialandtemporaldistribu - tion ofsolutesin the developingcarrot taprootmeasured at single - cell reso - lution . Journal of Experimental Botany 51 : 567 – 577 . KroegerJ , ZerzourR , GeitmannA . 2011 . Regulatorordrivingforce ? Therole of turgor pressure in oscillatory plant cell growth . PloS One 6 : e18549 . Ku¨htreiber WM , Jaffe LF . 1990 . Detection of extracellular calcium gradients with a calcium - speciﬁc vibrating electrode . Journal of Cell Biology 110 : 1565 – 1573 . Kumar MN , Jane WN , Verslues PE . 2013 . Role of the putative osmosensor Arabidopsis Histidine Kinase1 in dehydration avoidance and low - water - potential response . Plant Physiology 163 : 942 – 953 . LalondeS , BolesE , HellmannH , etal . 1999 . Thedualfunctionofsugarcarriers . Transport and sugar sensing . The Plant Cell 11 : 707 – 726 . LeeS , SinghA , ChungG , AhnS , NohE , SteudleE . 2004 . Exposureofrootsof cucumber ( Cucumissativus ) to low temperature severely reducesrootpres - sure , hydraulic conductivity and active transport of nutrients . Physiologia Plantarum 120 : 413 – 420 . Lei B , Huang Y , Sun J , et al . 2014 . Scanning ion - selective electrode technique and X - ray microanalysis provide direct evidence of contrasting Na + transport ability from root to shoot in salt - sensitive cucumber and salt - tolerant pumpkin under NaCl stress . Physiologia Plantarum ( in press ) . Li W , Zhao Y , Liu C , et al . 2012 . Callose depositionat plasmodesmata is acrit - icalfactorinrestrictingthecell - to - cellmovementofSoybeanmosaicvirus . Plant Cell Reports 31 : 905 – 916 . Liarzi O , Epel B . 2005 . Development of a quantitative tool for measuring changesinthecoefﬁcientofconductivityofplasmodesmatainducedbyde - velopmental , biotic , and abiotic signals . Protoplasma 225 : 67 – 76 . LintilhacP , WeiC , TanguayJ , OutwaterJ . 2000 . Balltonometry : arapid , non - destructive method for measuring cell turgor pressure in thin - walled plant cells . Journal of Plant Growth Regulation 19 : 90 – 97 . Lockhart JA . 1965 . An analysis of irreversible plant cell elongation . Journal of Thoeretical Biology 8 : 264 – 275 . LucasM , KenobiK , von Wangenheim D , etal . 2013 . Lateral rootmorphogen - esis is dependent on the mechanical properties of the overlaying tissues . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , USA 110 : 5229 – 5234 . Lucas W , Lee J . 2004 . Plasmodesmata as a supracellular control network in plants . Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology 5 : 712 – 726 . Ma N , Xue J , Li Y , et al . 2008 . Rh - PIP2 ; 1 , a rose aquaporingene , is involved in ethylene - regulated petal expansion . Plant Physiology 148 : 894 – 907 . Martre P , Morillon R , Barrieu F , North G , Nobel P , Chrispeels M . 2002 . Plasma membrane aquaporins play a signiﬁcant role during recovery from water deﬁcit . Plant Physiology 130 : 2101 – 2110 . Matsui T , Omasa K , Horie T . 2000 . Anther dehiscence in two - rowed barley ( Hordeum distichum ) triggered by mechanical stimulation . Journal of Experimental Botany 51 : 1319 – 1321 . Mattioli R , Falasca G , Sabatini S , Altamura M , Costantino P , Trovato M . 2009 . The proline biosynthetic genes P5CS1 and P5CS2 play overlapping roles in Arabidopsis ﬂower transition but not in embryo development . Physiologia Plantarum 137 : 72 – 85 . Maurel C , Verdoucq L , Luu D , Santoni V . 2008 . Plant aquaporins : membrane channels with multiple integrated functions . Annual Review of Plant Biology 59 : 595 – 624 . Meshcheryakov A , Steudle E , Komor E . 1992 . Gradients of turgor , osmotic pressure , and water potential in the cortex of the hypocotyl of growing ricinus seedlings : effects of the supply of water from the xylem and of solutes from the Phloem . Plant Physiology 98 : 840 – 852 . Messerli MA , Smith PJS , Lewis RC , Robinson KR . 2004 . Chloride ﬂuxes in lily pollen tubes : a critical reevaluation . The Plant Journal 40 : 799 – 812 . Milani P , Braybrook S , Boudaoud A . 2013 . Shrinking the hammer : microme - chanical approaches to morphogenesis . Journal of Experimental Botany 64 : 4651 – 4662 . Molz FJ , Boyer JS . 1978 . Growth - induced water potentials in plant cells and tissues . Plant Physiology 62 : 423 – 429 . Monshausen G , Haswell E . 2013 . A force of nature : molecular mechanisms of mechanoperception in plants . Journal of Experimental Botany 64 : 4663 – 4680 . Morgan J . 1984 . Osmoregulation and water stress in higher plants . Annual Review of Plant Physiology 35 : 299 – 319 . Munns R , Greenway H , Setter T , Kuo J . 1983 . Turgor pressure , volumetric elastic modulus , osmotic volume and ultrastructure of Chlorella emersonii grown at high and low external NaCl . Journal of Experimental Botany 34 : 144 – 155 . Murata K , Mitsuoka K , Hirai T , et al . 2000 . Structural determinants of water permeation through aquaporin - 1 . Nature 407 : 599 – 605 . Nelson M , Band L , Dyson R , et al . 2012 . A biomechanical model of anther opening reveals the roles of dehydration and secondary thickening . New Phytologist 196 : 1030 – 1037 . Niemietz C , Tyerman S . 2002 . New potent inhibitors of aquaporins : silver and goldcompoundsinhibitaquaporinsofplantandhumanorigin . FEBSLetters 531 : 443 – 447 . Nonami H , Boyer J , Steudle E . 1987 . Pressure probe and isopiestic psychrom - eter measure similar turgor . Plant Physiology 83 : 592 – 595 . Oparka K , Prior D . 1992 . Direct evidence for pressure - generated closure of plasmodesmata . The Plant Journal 2 : 741 – 750 . Oparka K , Prior D , Wright K . 1995 . Symplastic communication between primary and developing lateral roots of Arabidopsis thaliana . Journal of Experimental Botany 46 : 187 – 197 . ParreE , GeitmannA . 2004 . Morethanaleaksealant . Themechanicalproperties of callose in pollen tubes . Plant Physiology 137 : 274 – 286 . Pei H , Ma N , Tian J , et al . 2013 . An NAC transcription factor controls ethylene - regulated cell expansion in ﬂower petals . Plant Physiology 163 : 775 – 791 . Beauzamy et al . — Turgor regulation in ﬂower development 1530 Perbal M , Haughn G , Saedler H , Schwarz - Sommer Z . 1996 . Non - cell - autonomous functionof the Antirrhinumﬂoral homeotic proteins DEFICIENS and GLOBOSA is exerted by their polar cell - to - cell trafﬁck - ing . Development 122 : 3433 – 3441 . Pe´ret B , Li G , Zhao J , et al . 2012 . Auxin regulates aquaporin function to facili - tate lateral root emergence . Nature Cell Biology 14 : 991 – 998 . Peters W , Tomos A . 1996 . The history of tissue tension . Annals of Botany 77 : 657 – 665 . PostaireO , Tournaire - RouxC , GrondinA , etal . 2010 . APIP1aquaporincon - tributesto hydrostatic pressure - induced water transport in both the root and rosette of Arabidopsis . Plant Physiology 152 : 1418 – 1430 . Prado K , Maurel C . 2013 . Regulation of leaf hydraulics : from molecular to whole plant levels . Frontiers in Plant Science 4 : 255 . Prado K , Boursiac Y , Tournaire - Roux C , et al . 2013 . Regulation of Arabidopsis leaf hydraulics involves light - dependent phosphorylation of aquaporins in veins . The Plant Cell 25 : 1029 – 1039 . RamahaleoT , MorillonR , AlexandreJ , LassallesJ . 1999 . Osmoticwaterper - meability of isolated protoplasts . Modiﬁcations during development . Plant Physiology 119 : 885 – 896 . RehmanS , YunS . 2006 . DevelopmentalregulationofKaccumulationinpollen , anthers , and papillae : are anther dehiscence , papillae hydration , and pollen swellingleadingtopollinationandfertilizationinbarley ( Hordeumvulgare L . ) regulated by changes in K concentration ? Journal of Experimental Botany 57 : 1315 – 1321 . Reid M , Evans R , Dodge L , Mor Y . 1989 . Ethyleneand silver thiosulfate inﬂu - ence opening of cut rose ﬂowers . Journal of the American Society for Horticultural Science 114 : 436 – 440 . RiesmeierJ , WillmitzerL , FrommerW . 1994 . Evidenceforanessentialroleof the sucrose transporter in phloem loading and assimilate partitioning . EMBO Journal 13 : 1 – 7 . Rinne P , van der Schoot C . 1998 . Symplasmic ﬁelds in the tunica of the shoot apical meristem coordinate morphogenetic events . Development 125 : 1477 – 1485 . RobinsonS , BurianA , CouturierE , etal . 2013 . Mechanicalcontrolofmorpho - genesis at the shoot apex . Journal of Experimental Botany 64 : 4729 – 4744 . Routier - KierzkowskaA , SmithR . 2012 . Measuringthemechanicsofmorpho - genesis . Current Opinion in Plant Biology 16 : 25 – 32 . Routier - Kierzkowska A , Weber A , Kochova P , et al . 2012 . Cellular force microscopy for in vivo measurements of plant tissue mechanics . Plant Physiology 158 : 1514 – 1522 . RuanY , LlewellynD , FurbankR . 2001 . Thecontrolofsingle - celledcottonﬁber elongation by developmentally reversible gating of plasmodesmata and coordinated expression of sucrose and K + transporters and expansin . The Plant Cell 13 : 47 – 60 . Rutschow H , Baskin T , Kramer E . 2011 . Regulation of solute ﬂux through plasmodesmata in the root meristem . Plant Physiology 155 : 1817 – 1826 . Rygol J , Pritchard J , Zhu J , Tomos A , Zimmermann U . 1993 . Transpiration induces radial turgor pressure gradients in wheat and maize roots . Plant Physiology 103 : 493 – 500 . SackL , HolbrookN . 2006 . Leafhydraulics . AnnualReviewofPlantBiology 57 : 361 – 381 . SackL , MelcherPJ , ZwienieckiMA , HolbrookNM . 2002 . Thehydrauliccon - ductanceoftheangiospermleaflamina : acomparisonofthreemeasurement methods . Journal of Experimental Botany 53 : 2177 – 2184 . SanatiNezhadA , GeitmannA . 2013 . Thecellularmechanicsofaninvasivelife - style . Journal of Experimental Botany 64 : 4709 – 4728 . Scholander P , Hammel H , Hemmingsen E , Bradstreet E . 1964 . Hydrostatic pressure and osmotic potential in leaves of mangroves and some other plants . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , USA 52 : 119 – 125 . Schwacke R , Grallath S , Breitkreuz K , et al . 1999 . LeProT1 , a transporter for proline , glycine betaine , and gamma - amino butyric acid in tomato pollen . The Plant Cell 11 : 377 – 392 . Scott R , Spielman M , Dickinson H . 2004 . Stamen structure and function . The Plant Cell 16 Suppl : S46 – S60 . SessionsA , YanofskyM , WeigelD . 2000 . Cell – cellsignalingandmovementby the ﬂoral transcription factors LEAFY and APETALA1 . Science 289 : 779 – 782 . Shabala S , Lew R . 2002 . Turgor regulation in osmotically stressed Arabidopsis epidermal root cells . Direct support for the role of inorganic ion uptake as revealed by concurrent ﬂux and cell turgor measurements . Plant Physiology 129 : 290 – 299 . Shachar - Hill B , Hill A , Powell J , Skepper J , Shachar - Hill Y . 2013 . Mercury - sensitive water channels as possible sensors of water potentials in pollen . Journal of Experimental Botany 64 : 5195 – 5205 . Sibaoka T . 1969 . Physiology of rapid movements in higher plants . Annual Review of Plant Physiology 20 : 165 – 184 . SivitzA , ReindersA , WardJ . 2008 . ArabidopsissucrosetransporterAtSUC1is importantforpollengerminationandsucrose - inducedanthocyaninaccumu - lation . Plant Physiology 147 : 92 – 100 . StadlerR , TruernitE , GahrtzM , Sauer N . 1999 . The AtSUC1sucrosecarrier may represent the osmotic driving force for anther dehiscence and pollen tube growth in Arabidopsis . The Plant Journal 19 : 269 – 278 . SteudleE , OrenR , SchulzeED . 1987 . Measurementofhydraulicconductivity , solute permeability , and of reﬂection coefﬁcients of excised roots using the root pressure probe . Plant Physiology 84 : 1220 – 1232 . Szabados L , Savoure´ A . 2010 . Proline : a multifunctional amino acid . Trends in Plant Science 15 : 89 – 97 . Taiz L , Zeiger E . 2010 . Plant physiology , 5th edn . Sunderland , MA : Sinauer Associates . Talbott L , Zeiger E . 1998 . The role of sucrose in guard cell osmoregulation . Journal of Experimental Botany 49 : 329 – 337 . Tang W , He Y , Tu L , et al . 2014 . Down - regulating annexin gene GhAnn2 inhi - bitscottonﬁberelongationanddecreasesCa2 + inﬂuxatthecellapex . Plant Molecular Biology 85 : 613 – 625 TomosA , LeighR . 1999 . Thepressureprobe : aversatiletoolinplantcell physi - ology . AnnualReviewofPlantPhysiologyandPlantMolecularBiology 50 : 447 – 472 . Tournaire - Roux C , Sutka M , Javot H , et al . 2003 . Cytosolic pH regulates root water transport during anoxic stress through gating of aquaporins . Nature 425 : 393 – 397 . TrolinderN , McmichaelB , UpchurchD . 1993 . Waterrelationsofcottonﬂower petals and fruit . Plant , Cell and Environment 16 : 755 – 760 . Tsuda M , Tyree M . 2000 . Plant hydraulic conductance measured by the high pressure ﬂow meter in crop plants . Journal of Experimental Botany 51 : 823 – 828 . Tyree M , Hammel H . 1972 . The measurement of the turgor pressure and the water relations of plants by the pressure - bomb technique . Journal of Experimental Botany 23 : 267 – 282 . Tyree M , Patin˜o S , Bennink J , Alexander J . 1995 . Dynamic measurements of root hydraulic conductance using a high - pressure ﬂowmeter in the labora - tory and ﬁeld . Journal of Experimental Botany 46 : 83 – 94 . Tyree M , Nardini A , Salleo S , Sack L , El Omari B . 2005 . The dependence of leaf hydraulic conductance on irradianceduringHPFMmeasurements : any role for stomatal response ? Journal of Experimental Botany 56 : 737 – 744 . Urao T , Yakubov B , Satoh R , et al . 1999 . A transmembrane hybrid - type histi - dine kinase in Arabidopsis functions as an osmosensor . The Plant Cell 11 : 1743 – 1754 . Vate´nA , DettmerJ , WuS , etal . 2011 . Callosebiosynthesisregulatessymplastic trafﬁcking during root development . Developmental Cell 21 : 1144 – 1155 . VellaD , AjdariA , VaziriA , BoudaoudA . 2012 a . Indentationofellipsoidaland cylindrical elastic shells . Physical Review Letters 109 : 144302 . Vella D , Ajdari A , Vaziri A , Boudaoud A . 2012 b . The indentation of pressur - ized elastic shells : from polymeric capsules to yeast cells . Journal of the Royal Society , Interface / the Royal Society 9 : 448 – 455 . Verbruggen N , Hermans C . 2008 . Proline accumulation in plants : a review . Amino Acids 35 : 753 – 759 . VermeerJ , vonWangenheimD , BarberonM , etal . 2014 . Aspatialaccommo - dation by neighboring cells is required for organ initiation in Arabidopsis . Science 343 : 178 – 183 . Vogler H , Draeger C , Weber A , et al . 2012 . The pollen tube : a soft shell with a hard core . The Plant Journal 73 : 617 – 627 . Walley JW , Coughlan S , Hudson ME , et al . 2007 . Mechanical stress induces biotic and abiotic stress responses via a novel cis - element . PLoS Genetics 3 : 1800 – 1812 . Wang L , Hukin D , Pritchard J , Thomas C . 2006 . Comparison of plant cell turgor pressure measurement by pressure probe and micromanipulation . Biotechnology Letters 28 : 1147 – 1150 . Watanabe T , Imada K , Yoshizawa K , et al . 2013 . Glycine insertion makes yellow ﬂuorescent protein sensitive to hydrostatic pressure . PLoS One 8 : e73212 . Wendler S , Zimmermann U . 1982 . A new method for the determination of hy - draulicconductivityandcellvolumeofplantcellsbypressureclamp . Plant Physiology 69 : 998 – 1003 . Beauzamy et al . — Turgor regulation in ﬂower development 1531 Wolf S , Deom C , Beachy R , Lucas W . 1989 . Movement protein of tobacco mosaic virus modiﬁes plasmodesmatal size exclusion limit . Science 246 : 377 – 379 . Yang C , Xu Z , Song J , et al . 2007 . Arabidopsis MYB26 / MALE STERILE35 regulates secondary thickening in the endothecium and is essential for anther dehiscence . The Plant Cell 19 : 534 – 548 . Yooyongwech S , Horigane A , Yoshida M , et al . 2008 . Changes in aquaporin gene expression and magnetic resonance imaging of water status in peach tree ﬂower buds during dormancy . Physiologia Plantarum 134 : 522 – 533 . ZhangWH , TyermanSD . 1999 . InhibitionofwaterchannelsbyHgCl 2 inintact wheat root cells . Plant Physiolgy 120 : 849 – 858 . ZimmermannU . 1978 . Physicsofturgorandosmoregulation . AnnualReviewof Plant Physiology 29 : 121 – 148 . Zimmermann U , Hu¨sken D . 1979 . Theoretical and experimental exclusion of errors in the determination of the elasticity and water transport parameters ofplant cellsby the pressure probetechnique . Plant Physiology 64 : 18 – 24 . Zimmermann U , Steudle E , Lelkes P . 1976 . Turgor pressure regulation in Valonia utricularis : effect of cell wall elasticity and auxin . Plant Physiology 58 : 608 – 613 . Zimmermann U , Rygol J , Balling A , Klo¨ck G , Metzler A , Haase A . 1992 . Radial turgor and osmotic pressure proﬁles in intact and excised roots of Aster tripolium : pressure probe measurements and nuclear magnetic resonance - imaging analysis . Plant Physiology 99 : 186 – 196 . APPENDIX 1 Brief deﬁnitions of turgor - related terms and the corresponding mathematical deﬁnitions are given below . Water potential ( of a speciﬁc compartment ) ( notation C w , units MPa ) : this is the energy per unit volume of water in a spe - ciﬁc compartment . The lower the water potential of a compart - ment is , the more ‘favourable’ is this compartment for water molecules . If possible , water ﬂows towards compartments where the water potential is the lowest . This rule drives the osmosis phenomena . Water potential can be expressed as a sum of different factors involving gravity , interaction with the matrix , interaction with solutes and hydrostatic pressure ( Boyer , 1995 ) . In practice , this sum is often reduced to its two main components : the osmotic potential C P and the pressure po - tential C p . C w = C P + C p Thewater potential of acompartment containing only purewater at atmospheric pressure is zero ( because both C P and C p are equal to zero ) . If two different compartments ( e . g . a protoplast and its external bath ) are at equilibrium — in other words there is no water movement — their water potentials are equal . C w ( cell ) = C w ( bath ) This relationship is very useful to deduce the properties of the cell , since the water potential of a bath solution can be measured with an osmometer or imposed by the solute content . The refer - ence pressure potential of a solution under atmospheric pressure being zero , its water potential is equal to its osmotic potential . At equilibrium : C w ( cell ) = C P ( bath ) + C p ( bath ) = C P ( bath ) Osmotic potential ( of a speciﬁc compartment ) ( notation : C P or more rarely C s , units MPa ) : this energy per unit volume cor - responds to the stabilization of water molecules by interacting with solutes . Therefore , the osmotic potential is always negative ( stabilization ) , being equal to zero for pure water ( taken as a reference ) . The osmotic potential value is given by the negative of osmotic pressure P . C P = − P = − MiRT where M isthe molarity of the solution contained in the compart - ment in mol L – 1 , i is the Van’t Hoff factor ( the product M × i is in other words the osmolarity of the solution ) , R is the gas constant ( 8 . 314 L kPa – 1 K – 1 mol – 1 ) and T the absolute temperature . Equivalently , one can use the correspondence between P ¼ 0 . 1 MPa and M’i ¼ 42 mosmol kg – 1 ( which holds at 20 8 C ) . Osmotic pressure ( of a speciﬁc compartment ) ( notation P , units MPa ) : contrary to common belief , it is not a physical pres - sure , but rather an expression of the osmolarity of the solution contained in the compartment , since P ¼ MiRT ( see ‘Osmotic potential’ ) . This common confusion comes from ( in addition to the name ‘osmotic pressure’ , which is confusing by itself ) the statement that the osmotic pressure is the pressure that needs to be applied to a solution to prevent inward ﬂow of water across a semi - permeable membrane . This is true but con - fusing . Consider a cell bathed in pure water . The water potential of the cell is C w ( cell ) ¼ – P + P . Thewater potential of thepure water bath is zero . To prevent any water movement , the system should be at equilibrium , which means C w ( cell ) ¼ C w ( pure water ) ¼ 0 . This implies P ¼ P . So if , numerically , the value of the osmotic pressure of the cell is the same as the value of its hydrostatic pressure , then there is no water movement . However , this is only true for a pure water bath , and this does not mean that osmotic pressure is an actual pressure , nor that high osmotic value implies high hydrostatic value . Put in a bathwithhighosmolarity , atequilibriumthehydrostaticpressure of the same cell will be low if not zero . Pressure potential ( of a speciﬁc compartment ) ( notation C p , unitsMPa ) : thisenergyperunit volume correspondstothestabil - ization or destabilization of water molecules due to the pressure inside the compartment . Atmospheric pressure can be taken as a reference . For pressures higher than atmospheric , ‘pressurized’ water molecules are destabilized ( C p . 0 ) . For pressures lower than atmospheric , water molecules are stabilized ( C p , 0 ) . This last case can only be achieved under speciﬁc conditions , for example in the xylem where the sap is in tension ( negative pressure ) . Xylem therefore acts like a water pump system . The pressure potential value is simply given by the hydrostatic pres - sure P ( relative to atmosphere ) . C p = P Turgorpressure ¼ hydrostaticpressure ( notation P , unitsbars or MPa ) : this is the force per unit area ( Newton per square metre ¼ Pa ) water molecules apply on their environment . Vapour ( saturation ) pressure ( deﬁned for a given temp - erature ) : this is the pressure in a gas when this gas and its liquid phase are at equilibrium . For each solution ( with a speciﬁc water potential ) , there is a corresponding saturation vapour pressure . Permeability ( often expressed in m m s – 1 ) : a speed represent - ing how fast a molecule ( often a dye ) can move through a barrier Beauzamy et al . — Turgor regulation in ﬂower development 1532 ( e . g . a plasmodesma ) . It is sometimes used with the meaning of conductivity . Hydraulic conductivity ( notation L p , units m s – 1 MPa – 1 or m Ls – 1 m – 2 MPa – 1 ) : theratiobetweentheﬂowrateofwater , nor - malized by the area upon which this ﬂow occurs , between two compartments and the difference in water potential between these two compartments . The compartments can be individual cells [ the term cell hydraulic ( or water ) conductivity is then used , written L pcell ] for which the area is often that of the plasma membrane , or tissues [ e . g . for root , the term hydrostatic root hydraulic ( or water ) conductivity is used , written L pr - h ] . In the case of cells , it will depend , for instance , on the concentration and activity of aquaporins . Hydraulic conductance ( notation K , units d mmol s – 1 MPa – 1 or kg s – 1 MPa – 1 or m 3 s – 1 MPa – 1 ) : the same as hydraulic con - ductivity ( applied to water quantity , mass or volume ) , but with no normalization by area . This is a property of the organ or of the leafy shoot that is tested . Flux ( J , expressedinmolm – 2 s – 1 orinkgm – 2 s – 1 ) : represents how many molecules can cross a unit area ( of cell wall , per example ) per unit time . Drop in water potential related to water ﬂow : the ﬂux is proportional to the conductivity and to the water potential differ - ence between the two compartments , J ¼ L p DC w . In out of equi - libriumsituations , waterﬂows ( drivenforinstancebyevaporation ) , generatingdropsinwaterpotential , andsointurgor , thatdependon conductivity and on ﬂux . Therefore , the regulation of conductivity can lead to modulations in turgor pressure . Flowrate ( J v , unitsm 3 s – 1 or m Ls – 1 ) : representsthevolumeof liquid ( e . g . sap ) exuded from a cut per unit time . Half - time of waterexchange ( t 1 / 2 , units s ) : aftera rapid increase or decreaseof the pressure inside acell ( e . g . forcedwitha pressure probe ) , waterexchanges with the surrounding cells allow the pres - sure to stabilize again at its steady - state value . The pressure follows an exponential behaviour as a function of time , and t 1 / 2 is the time needed to recover half of the pressure difference . Beauzamy et al . — Turgor regulation in ﬂower development 1533