REVIEW The role of FoxO in the regulation of metabolism DN Gross , APJ van den Heuvel and MJ Birnbaum Institute for Diabetes , Obesity and Metabolism , Cox Institute , University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine and the Howard Hughes Medical Institute , Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , USA Forkhead proteins , and FoxO1 in particular , play a signiﬁcant role in regulating whole body energy meta - bolism . Glucose homeostasis is achieved by adjusting endogenous glucose production as well as glucose uptake by peripheral tissues in response to insulin . In the fasted state , the liver is primarily responsible for maintaining glucose levels , with FoxO1 playing a key role in promoting the expression of gluconeogenic enzymes . Following feed - ing , pancreatic beta cells secrete insulin , which promotes the uptake of glucose by peripheral tissues including skeletal muscle and adipose tissue , and can in part suppress gluconeogenic enzyme expression in the liver . In addition to directly regulating metabolism , FoxO1 also plays a role in the formation of both adipose tissue and skeletal muscle , two major organs that are critical for maintaining energy homeostasis . The importance of FoxO1 in energy home - ostasis is particularly striking under conditions of metabolic dysfunction or insulin resistance . In obese or diabetic states , FoxO1 - dependent gene expression promotes some of the deleterious characteristics associated with these conditions , including hyperglycemia and glucose intolerance . In addi - tion , the increase in pancreatic beta cell mass that normally occurs in response to a rise in insulin demand is blunted by nuclear FoxO1 expression . However , under these same pathophysiological conditions , FoxO1 expression may help drive the expression of genes involved in combating oxidative stress , thereby preserving cellular function . FoxO1 may also be involved in promoting the switch from carbohydrate to fatty acid as the major energy source during starvation . Oncogene ( 2008 ) 27 , 2320 – 2336 ; doi : 10 . 1038 / onc . 2008 . 25 Keywords : FoxO ; liver ; adipocyte ; beta cell ; skeletal muscle ; metabolism The distribution of FoxO1 in insulin - responsive tissues and its regulation by insulin - stimulated Akt phosphor - ylation allow FoxO1 to mediate a variety of important metabolic functions . Not only is FoxO1 inactivated by Akt phosphorylation , its activity and expression are tightly controlled by the acetylation / deacetylation state ( Accili and Arden , 2004 ) . In addition to its expression in insulin - sensitive tissues , FoxO1 also plays a vital role in the insulin - producing pancreatic beta cells ( Glauser and Schlegel , 2007 ; Kitamura and Ido Kitamura , 2007 ) . The ability of FoxO1 to regulate cell proliferation and mediate the expression of genes involved in gluconeo - genesis , energy metabolism and oxidative stress allows it to play a critical role in metabolism . Skeletal muscle is the major site of glucose disposal in humans , accounting for 80 – 90 % of insulin - stimulated glucose uptake ( de Lange et al . , 2007 ) . Therefore , sustaining its mass is critical for the maintenance of glucose homeostasis . Although the existing data are controversial , there is some evidence that FoxO1 plays a role in myocyte / myotube formation as well as myocyte cell size ( Bois and Grosveld , 2003 ; Hribal et al . , 2003 ) . FoxO1 also promotes loss of muscle mass by regulating the expression of genes involved in muscular atrophy ( Kamei et al . , 2004 ; Sandri et al . , 2004 ; Stitt et al . , 2004 ) . Like skeletal muscle , adipocytes take up glucose in response to insulin and store energy in the form of triglycerides , which can be broken down and released during times of energy deprivation . In addition , adipo - cytes secrete a number of hormones and cytokines , including leptin and adiponectin , which increase insulin sensitivity ( Ahima and Flier , 2000 ) . FoxO1 plays a key role in regulating adipocyte differentiation , and despite the decreased FoxO1 expression in mature adipocytes , studies have demonstrated a role for FoxO1 in the function of the mature adipocyte ( Nakae et al . , 2003 ; Subauste and Burant , 2007 ) . It has been suggested that FoxO1 can alter insulin sensitivity as well as promote protection from oxidative stress - induced adipocyte dysfunction . FoxO1 also plays a role in promoting adaptation to fasting . In addition to regulating muscle mass , FoxO1 is involved in altering its function . It promotes the expression of genes involved in energy metabolism resulting in the transition from carbohydrate oxidation to lipid oxidation under conditions such as fasting and exercise ( Bastie et al . , 2005 ) . In the liver , FoxO1 mediates the expression of genes involved in both glucose and lipid metabolism . Under fasting conditions , where FoxO1 is localized to the nucleus , it drives the expression of gluconeogenic enzymes ( Altomonte et al . , 2003 ; Puigserver et al . , 2003 ; Samuel et al . , 2006 ; Matsumoto et al . , 2007 ) . In addition , it regulates the expression of a speciﬁc apolipoprotein , which , when secreted from the liver in apolipoprotein particles , has the ability to alter lipase activity and thus lipid metabolism in peripheral tissues , including skeletal muscle and fat ( Altomonte et al . , 2004 ) . Correspondence : Dr MJ Birnbaum , University of Pennsylvania , 415 Curie Blvd , CRB Rm 322 , Philadelphia , PA 19104 , USA . E - mail : birnbaum @ mail . med . upenn . edu Oncogene ( 2008 ) 27 , 2320 – 2336 & 2008 Nature Publishing Group All rights reserved 0950 - 9232 / 08 $ 30 . 00 www . nature . com / onc During states of insulin resistance , an increase in pancreatic beta cell mass is required to compensate for the rise in insulin demand . FoxO1 inhibits the beta cell proliferation that is required to meet this increased insulin demand ( Kitamura et al . , 2002 ; Nakae et al . , 2002 ; Buteau et al . , 2006 ) . However , it also helps to preserve beta cell function under conditions of oxidative stress , such as in insulin - resistant states ( Kitamura et al . , 2005 ) . Therefore , FoxO1 mediates a protective effect by promoting the expression of genes involved in combat - ing oxidative stress while at the same time antagonizing increases in beta cell mass . Oxidative stress is also present in a number of other tissues during states of insulin resistance and FoxO1 - dependent transcription can promote the expression of genes that decrease reactive oxygen species , thereby improving normal cell function ( Greer and Brunet , 2005 ) . FoxO in skeletal muscle Skeletal muscle is the largest organ in the human body . In addition to its primary role in movement , skeletal muscle performs a number of critical functions including the regulation of energy metabolism . It contributes to more than 30 % of resting metabolic rate and 80 % of whole body glucose uptake ( de Lange et al . , 2007 ) . Therefore , maintaining its mass and composition is of critical importance for the well - being of the organism . The formation of skeletal muscle commences with the commitment of multipotent mesodermal precursor cells to the muscle cell fate . This process requires sequential activation of myogenic transcription factors followed by myoblast fusion . These committed cells proliferate as mononuclear myoblasts until they encounter a milieu permissive for differentiation , which involves exiting the cell cycle as well as changes in myogenic transcription factor expression . MyoD is the earliest marker of muscle differentiation and helps drive the expression of various muscle - speciﬁc transcription factors , including myogen - in and myocyte enhancer factor - 2 . As differentiation proceeds , fusion of mononucleated myoblasts to form multinucleated muscle ﬁbers occurs followed by in - creases in myosin heavy chain ( Figure 1 ; McKinsey et al . , 2002 ) . Skeletal muscle differentiation Unlike most peptide growth factors , which stimulate myoblast proliferation , insulin - like growth factor - 1 ( IGF - 1 ) promotes muscle differentiation . This occurs both in vitro and in vivo in a phosphoinositide 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) - Akt dependent fashion ( Jiang et al . , 1998 , 1999 ; Kaliman et al . , 1998 ; Tureckova et al . , 2001 ; Wilson and Rotwein , 2007 ) . A number of downstream substrates of Akt have been proposed to play a role in myogenesis , including p70S6 kinase , mammalian target of rapamy - cin , although with conﬂicting data , and FoxO1 ( Cool - ican et al . , 1997 ; Cuenda and Cohen , 1999 ; Erbay and Chen , 2001 ; Conejo et al . , 2002 ) . FoxO1 was cloned from a human rhabdomyosarcoma and in the past was referred to as FKHR ( forkhead found in human rhabdomyosarcoma ) ( Galili et al . , 1993 ) . Members of this family contain three highly conserved Akt phos - phorylation sites , which play a crucial role in their localization and subsequent activity ( Brunet et al . , 1999 ) . Since a FoxO1 fusion protein is associated with alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma , it was hypothesized that it may also play an important role in normal muscle growth and differentiation . In seminal experiments demonstrating the importance of FoxO1 in muscle ﬁber formation , Bois and Grosveld ( 2003 ) demonstrated that FoxO1 regulates the fusion of mononucleated myocytes into myotubes . In proliferating myoblasts , FoxO1 is localized to the cytoplasm , where it remains inactive . This is presumed to be through a non - Akt - dependent phosphorylation - mediated nuclear exclusion event . Almost immediately following serum withdrawal , a process that stimulates differentiation of muscle , FoxO1 translocates to the nucleus and binds to DNA , in a phosphorylation - independent manner . In addition , overexpression of a dominant - negative FoxO1 lacking the transactivation domain blocks myotube formation . Once FoxO1 is in the nucleus following the initiation of the differentiation program , its phosphorylation can downregulate the fusion activity of myocytes ( Bois and Grosveld , 2003 ) . Microarray expression analysis of cells overexpressing a non - phosphorylatable FoxO1 mutant revealed that the primary genes activated were those involved in cell fusion ( Furuyama et al . , 2003 ) . In fact , the promoters of many of these genes contain putative FoxO - binding sites . These data support a model where - by inactive FoxO1 resides outside the nucleus , allowing for the proliferation of myoblasts to occur . Following the initiation of differentiation , FoxO1 translocates to the nucleus , where it drives the expression of genes Lipid Oxidation LPLCD36 Glucose Oxidation PDK - 4 FastingExercise FoxO Myoblasts Myotubes Atrophy MuRF - 1 Atrogin / MAFbx FoxO1 StarvationDenervation ? Myotubes Figure 1 Effects of FoxO on skeletal muscle differentiation , atrophy and metabolism . FoxO promotes a switch in skeletal muscle energy metabolism from glucose oxidation to lipid oxidation by increasing the expression of genes such as PDK - 4 under various conditions , including fasting and exercise . FoxO also increases the expression of muscle atrophy genes , thereby promot - ing muscular atrophy in response to denervation or starvation . FoxO1 has been implicated in the inhibition as well as promotion of myoblast differentiation . PDK - 4 , pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase - 4 . Role of FoxO in the regulation of metabolism DN Gross et al 2321 Oncogene involved in myocyte fusion . Phosphorylation of FoxO1 once inside of the nucleus results in a decrease in its activity . Further support of the importance of FoxO1 in myotube formation came from studies evaluating the role of the small GTPase Rho and its downstream effector , Rho - associated kinase ( ROCK ) . Nishiyama et al . observed that Rho activity , as well as ROCK activity , is very high in proliferating myoblasts and this activity decreased during myogenesis , consistent with Rho’s negative impact on muscle differentiation ( Meriane et al . , 2000 ; Beqaj et al . , 2002 ; Nishiyama et al . , 2004 ) . Furthermore , constitutively active Rho or ROCK prevents myocyte fusion and pharmacological inhibition of ROCK enhances it . Early myogenic gene expression is not affected by these changes . With regard to FoxO1 , Rho / ROCK is required to maintain the transcription factor in the cytoplasm and ROCK inactivation is required for the nuclear accumulation of FoxO1 . ROCK directly phosphorylates FoxO1 in vitro , thus making it plausible that ROCK is the FoxO1 kinase involved in the nuclear exclusion of FoxO1 in proliferating myoblasts ( Nishiyama et al . , 2004 ) . As is generally true , insulin / IGF - 1 signaling through Akt leads to nuclear exclusion of FoxO1 in muscle ( Biggs et al . , 1999 ; Brunet et al . , 1999 ; Tang et al . , 1999 ; Hribal et al . , 2003 ) . Seemingly inconsistent with the studies discussed above , overexpression of a constitu - tively active FoxO1 results in complete inhibition of muscle differentiation ( Hribal et al . , 2003 ) . Decreased levels of myosin heavy chain and myogenin , markers of differentiating muscle , accompanied this suppression . Conversely , dominant - negative FoxO1 partially relieves the inhibitory effect of wortmannin on differentiation . Furthermore , C2C12 muscle cells with siRNA - mediated FoxO1 reduction still maintain their ability to differ - entiate ( Kitamura et al . , 2007 ) . This study also demon - strated that FoxO1 acts by increasing the activity of Notch , which inhibits muscle differentiation . In addi - tion , muscle - speciﬁc FoxO1 ablation in vivo by Cre - mediated excision increases fast - twitch muscle ﬁbers at the expense of slow - twitch muscle ﬁbers ( Kitamura et al . , 2007 ) . FoxO1 also inhibits mammalian target of rapamycin - mediated increases in protein synthesis both in vivo and in vitro . It accomplishes this by directly augmenting the expression of eukaryotic initiation factor 4E - binding protein - 1 , which prevents the initia - tion of translation ( Southgate et al . , 2007 ) . It is possible that studies reporting conﬂicting roles of FoxO1 in muscle differentiation are due to speciﬁc temporal patterns in the requirement for FoxO1 . Skeletal muscle loss Systemic muscle atrophy results from a variety of conditions including fasting , diseases such as cancer and diabetes , and disuse or denervation of speciﬁc muscle groups . Increased protein degradation occurs primarily by the ubiquitin – proteasome pathway ( Jagoe and Goldberg , 2001 ) . There are two muscle - speciﬁc ubiquitin ligases : atrogin - 1 ( MAFbx ) and MuRF - 1 ( muscle ring ﬁnger - 1 ) ( Glass , 2003 ) . Following starva - tion , induction of atrogin - 1 and MuRF - 1 occurs before the onset of muscle loss ( Gomes et al . , 2001 ) . Knockout of either atrogin - 1 or MuRF - 1 substantially decreases muscle atrophy induced by denervation ( Bodine et al . , 2001 ) . In addition to its role in muscle differentiation , FoxO has also been implicated in the breakdown of muscle ﬁbers . FoxO levels increase during starvation and glucocorticoid treatment , conditions that promote muscle atrophy ( Furuyama et al . , 2003 ; Imae et al . , 2003 ) . In cultured myotubes subjected to starvation or glucocorticoids , the activity of the IGF - 1 – PI3K – Akt pathway is decreased and that of FoxO increased . The increased expression of atrogin - 1 and MuRF - 1 , as well as the subsequent atrophy that ensues , is antagonized by IGF - 1 or overexpression of active PI3K or Akt ( Sandri et al . , 2004 ; Stitt et al . , 2004 ) . Stitt et al . ( 2004 ) observed that injections of IGF - 1 into the muscle of mice signiﬁcantly blunted the increases in atrogin - 1 and MuRF - 1 as well as muscular atrophy following dener - vation . In addition , expression of a dominant - inhibitory FoxO1 construct in myotubes or in rodent muscle decreases atrogin - 1 expression and muscle atrophy . Overexpression of FoxO3a also increases the activity of the atrogin - 1 promoter both in vitro and in vivo , and transgenic overexpression of FoxO1 in skeletal muscle results in severe muscular atrophy ( Kamei et al . , 2004 ; Sandri et al . , 2004 ; Southgate et al . , 2007 ) . In essence , conditions that promote muscle atrophy promote FoxO expression , whose activity may directly regulate the expression of these atrogenes . To obtain a more global view of the changes in gene expression that occur during muscle atrophy , expression proﬁling was performed on muscle from mice subjected to denervation treatment . Many of the transcripts whose expressions are altered in other models of atrophy such as diabetes , cancer and fasting are also altered following denervation ( Lecker et al . , 2004 ) . Three days after denervation , when the rate of muscle loss was the greatest , there was a dramatic upregulation of atrogin - 1 and MuRF - 1 . However , by 2 weeks post - denervation , the rate of atrophy decreased and the levels of these atrogenes returned to normal . One gene product that did not return to basal levels was FoxO1 . It remained elevated and is presumed to play a role not only in inducing the atrophy state but also in maintaining it ( Sacheck et al . , 2007 ) . This suggests caution when interpreting data involving muscular atrophy , since changes peak at various points in the program . Neither expression nor nuclear localization of FoxO1 or FoxO3a changes in isolated muscle from human amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients , despite elevated levels of atrogin - 1 , decreased Akt phosphorylation and chronic muscular atrophy ( Leger et al . , 2006b ) . How - ever , studies on healthy human subjects provided evidence that FoxO1 expression and nuclear localization could be affected by conditions that alter skeletal muscle mass . Exercise , which induces hypertrophy , leads to enhanced phosphorylation of Akt and diminished nuclear FoxO1 . Conversely , de - training , which induces Role of FoxO in the regulation of metabolism DN Gross et al 2322 Oncogene muscular atrophy , results in decreased phosphorylation of Akt as well as increased nuclear FoxO1 . Although the levels of atrogin - 1 and MuRF - 1 did not correlate with muscular atrophy in this study , the expression pattern of FoxO1 correlated ( Leger et al . , 2006a ) . In addition , Lee et al . ( 2004 ) demonstrated that FoxO3a nuclear localization was increased in a separate model of muscular atrophy and that FoxO3a bound to the atrogin - 1 promoter . An additional link between FoxO transcription factors and muscle loss is myostatin ( Allen and Unter - man , 2007 ) . Myostatin , originally identiﬁed using degenerative PCR , is expressed speciﬁcally in skeletal muscle . Myostatin - null mice display a large increase in muscle mass , whereas transgenic overexpression of this protein reduces skeletal muscle mass ( McPherron et al . , 1997 ; Reisz - Porszasz et al . , 2003 ) . Expression of constitutively active FoxO1 in C2C12 myotubes en - hances myostatin promoter activity and mutation of the FoxO - binding sites in the promoter reduces its activity ( Allen and Unterman , 2007 ) . In addition , during skeletal muscle catabolic states , FoxO1 induces the translational inhibitor 4E - binding protein - 1 by binding to its promo - ter , thereby diminishing protein synthesis ( Southgate et al . , 2007 ) . FoxO and skeletal muscle metabolism As mentioned above , starvation promotes the expres - sion of both FoxO1 and FoxO3a in rodents ( Furuyama et al . , 2003 ; Kamei et al . , 2003 ) . Glucocorticoids , whose levels also increase during starvation , boost expression of both FoxO1 and FoxO3a ( Furuyama et al . , 2003 ; Imae et al . , 2003 ) . A critical component of muscle metabolism during fasting is a switch from oxidation of carbohydrates as the major energy source to fatty acids . FoxO1 is involved in this adaptive response ( Bastie et al . , 2005 ) . Fasting , in addition to exercise , increases the expression of lipoprotein lipase , the enzyme that hydrolyses plasma triglycerides into fatty acids and glycerol for uptake by the muscle cell ( Rauramaa et al . , 1980 ; Ladu et al . , 1991 ; Goldberg , 1996 ; Greiwe et al . , 2000 ) . FoxO1 levels under numerous conditions parallel lipoprotein lipase expression , and overexpression of FoxO1 in C2C12 myocytes increases lipoprotein lipase ( Kamei et al . , 2003 ) . CD36 is a plasma membrane fatty acid translocase that facilitates fatty acid uptake into skeletal muscle ( Coburn et al . , 2000 ; Hajri and Abumrad , 2002 ; Hajri et al . , 2002 ) . Using an inducible FoxO1 construct , Bastie et al . ( 2005 ) demonstrated that FoxO1 could affect CD36 activity by altering its subcellular distribution . Shortly after FoxO1 induction , CD36 levels in the plasma membrane are enhanced 10 - fold despite no change in total expression . This is paralleled by an increase in intracellular triglycerides as well as uptake and oxidation of oleate . FoxO1 also regulates the expression of adiponectin receptors , which transmit a signal for increased fatty acid oxidation in muscle ( Tsuchida et al . , 2004 ; Huang et al . , 2007 ) . In essence , an upregulation of FoxO1 in differentiated myotubes prepares the muscle for an increased reliance on fatty acid oxidation , similar to fasting . However , the duration or intensity of FoxO activity may be critical in tipping the balances towards fatty acid oxidation versus muscular atrophy . The pyruvate dehydrogenase com - plex is a rate - limiting step in glucose oxidation , controlling the entry of glucose into the Kreb’s cycle by catalysing the conversion of pyruvate into acetyl - CoA . Phosphorylation of pyruvate dehydrogenase by pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase - 4 ( PDK - 4 ) inhibits the former’s activity . Interestingly , PDK - 4 expression in - creases with fasting ( Wu et al . , 1998 ; Pilegaard et al . , 2003 ; Spriet et al . , 2004 ; Tsintzas et al . , 2006 ) . Over - expression of an inducible FoxO1 in C2C12 myotubes increases PDK - 4 , leading to decreased pyruvate dehy - drogenase activity and glycolytic ﬂux ( Bastie et al . , 2005 ) . FoxO1 binds directly to the PDK - 4 promoter in C2C12 myotubes ( Furuyama et al . , 2003 ; Kwon et al . , 2004 ) . However , the time course of increased PDK - 4 is not identical to that of FoxO1 or FoxO3a , suggesting that FoxOs may coordinate with other factors to elicit these changes . When discussing the effects of starvation or exercise on skeletal muscle , one must consider the effect of members of the peroxisome proliferator - activated re - ceptor ( PPAR ) family . PPAR d , whose expression in skeletal muscle is greater than that of other family members , stimulates lipid metabolism and fatty acid oxidation , similar to the effects of FoxO1 described above ( Lefebvre et al . , 2006 ) . PPAR d agonists and transgenic expression in skeletal muscle increase fatty acid oxidation and glucose disposal in muscle and render mice resistant to diet - induced obesity ( Luquet et al . , 2003 ; Wang et al . , 2003 ; Lee et al . , 2006 ) . Similarly , PPAR d knockout mice are metabolically less active and are prone to obesity ( Wang et al . , 2003 ; Lee et al . , 2006 ) . Given that FoxO1 and PPAR d are increased under the same physiological conditions and that they mediate changes in the expression of many of the same genes , it is difﬁcult to determine whether some of the changes that occur are mediated by FoxO1 directly or by PPAR members . In addition , PPAR g co - activator - 1 a ( PGC1 a ) , which co - activates PPAR d in muscle , is also regulated by FoxO1 ( Wang et al . , 2003 ; Southgate et al . , 2005 ; de Lange et al . , 2007 ) . In rodents , FoxO acts as a switch for utilization of lipid from carbohydrate as the major fuel substrate in skeletal muscle during periods of starvation . However , the case in humans appears to be slightly different . Although PDK - 4 levels in both human and rodent skeletal muscle increase under very similar circumstances , such as insulin resistance , fasting and exercise , the effects of fasting or exercise on FoxO1 in skeletal muscle remain controversial ( Pilegaard et al . , 2000 ; Peters et al . , 2001 ; Tsintzas et al . , 2006 ) . FoxO in adipose tissue Adipose tissue plays a vital role in energy homeostasis . Adipocytes store energy in the form of triglycerides and Role of FoxO in the regulation of metabolism DN Gross et al 2323 Oncogene can mobilize these reserves to be used as substrates for oxidation during times of energy deprivation ( Large et al . , 2004 ) . In addition , adipocytes secrete various factors such as adiponectin , leptin , resistin and cyto - kines , which control organismal energy homeostasis through effects on fat cells as well as other tissues ( Ahima and Flier , 2000 ) . Dysregulation of adipose tissue is associated with a number of metabolic abnormalities ; therefore , maintaining its mass and function is critical in preserving normal whole body energy homeostasis ( Alberti et al . , 2006 ) . Adipocyte differentiation Adipocytes originate from a multipotent mesenchymal stem cell population that when subjected to appropriate stimuli become determined to the pre - adipocyte lineage ( Rosen and MacDougald , 2006 ) . Following this com - mitment step , terminal differentiation of these cells into mature adipocytes occurs in response to appropriate environmental cues . This process of differentiation involves the coordinated expression of a number of transcription factors as well as progression through the cell cycle ( Rosen and MacDougald , 2006 ) . Much of the work studying adipocyte differentiation has been done in immortalized pre - adipocyte cell lines . Upon reaching conﬂuence , these pre - adipocytes undergo growth arrest , but following treatment with a hormonal ‘cocktail’ they re - enter the cell cycle for several divisions , a process that has been termed mitotic clonal expansion . This is followed by growth arrest and subsequent terminal differentiation ( Rosen and MacDougald , 2006 ) . These changes in cell cycle occur in conjunction with the coordinated expression of several adipogenic tran - scription factors , including an early increase in the expression of CCAAT / enhancer - binding protein ( C / EBP ) b and C / EBP d followed by induction of PPAR g and C / EBP a ( Yeh et al . , 1995 ; Wu et al . , 1996 ; Mandrup and Lane , 1997 ; Morrison and Farmer , 2000 ; Rosen et al . , 2000 ) . PPAR g is a nuclear receptor that plays a crucial role in coordinating the expression of many genes involved in the formation of mature adipocytes and therefore has been referred to as the ‘master regulator of adipogenesis’ ( Farmer , 2005 ) . Its expression is required for the differentiation of adipocytes both in vivo and in vitro and thus regulation of PPAR g expression and activity is of great consequence in the formation and functioning of adipocytes ( Rosen et al . , 1999 ) . Synthetic ligands for this nuclear receptor are used as insulin - sensitizing agents in the treatment of diabetes ( Rosen and Spiegelman , 2000 ) . In addition to these adipogenic transcription factors , a number of cell cycle proteins are involved in adipocyte differentiation . Almost immediately upon hormonal induction , there is an increase in the expression of G1 cyclins as well as a decrease in cyclin - dependent kinase inhibitors , including p21 , events that trigger progression from G1 to S phase ( Morrison and Farmer , 1999 ; Tang et al . , 2003 ) . There is also a corresponding increase in E2F activity . E2F transcription factors regulate genes involved in cell cycle progression , but their activity is dependent on dissociation from members of the pocket protein family , which include retinoblastoma , p130 and p107 . This dissociation is in turn controlled by cyclin / cdk phosphorylation . Once released , E2Fs transactivate a number of genes including PPAR g ( Fajas et al . , 2002 ) . Retinoblastoma itself is also required for adipocyte differentiation through interaction with C / EBPs ( Chen et al . , 1996 ) . FoxO proteins increase p130 and both p27 and p21 ( cyclin - dependent kinase inhibitors ) , which prevents cell cycle progression ( Burgering and Kops , 2002 ) . In addition , FoxO reduces the expression of the G1 - phase cyclins D1 and D2 as well as the G2 – M - phase cyclin B ( Burgering and Kops , 2002 ; Furukawa - Hibi et al . , 2005 ) . FoxO1 and adipocyte differentiation A number of studies point toward a role for FoxO1 in adipocyte differentiation . Reduction in FoxO1 activity is dependent on intact insulin receptor signaling , as cells with decreased receptor expression or lacking insulin receptor substrate ( IRS ) proteins display impaired differentiation ( Accili and Taylor , 1991 ; Miki et al . , 2001 ; Tseng et al . , 2004 ) . In addition , loss of Akt1 expression in cultured pre - adipocytes results in de - creased phosphorylation and nuclear exclusion of FoxO1 and attenuated differentiation ( Xu and Liao , 2004 ; Baudry et al . , 2006 ; Bae et al . , submitted ) . Following treatment with differentiation - inducing agents that include insulin , FoxO1 is phosphorylated and translocates from the nucleus to the cytoplasm . As noted above , the cell cycle inhibitor p21 is a direct target of FoxO1 . Overexpression of a non - phosphorylatable , constitutively active FoxO1 increases expression of p21 and suppresses adipogenesis , whereas a dominant - inhibitory FoxO1 not only promotes adipocyte differ - entiation but also rescues the impaired differentiation in insulin receptor haploinsufﬁcient cells ( Nakae et al . , 2003 ) . These data were interpreted as indicating that FoxO1 regulates fat cell conversion by inﬂuencing progression through the cell cycle . FoxO1 also binds to and represses the activity of the PPAR g promoter as well as antagonizes PPAR g ’s ability to bind and transactivate target genes ( Dowell et al . , 2003 ; Armoni et al . , 2006 ) . FoxO1 phosphorylation can also be inﬂuenced by acetylation / deacetylation . Sirt2 , an NAD - dependent deacetylase and the most abundant sirtuin in adipocytes , decreases during the early stages of differentiation . It has been proposed that FoxO1 acetylation promotes further phosphorylation of FoxO1 , thereby enhancing its nuclear exclusion ( Jing et al . , 2007 ) . Suppression of Sirt2 , which promotes the acetylated state of FoxO1 and thus its phosphorylation and nuclear exclusion , en - hances adipocyte differentiation , while overexpression of Sirt2 , which deacetylates FoxO1 , prevents differentia - tion ( Jing et al . , 2007 ) . Sirt1 , another sirtuin family member expressed in adipocytes , can also prevent adipocyte differentiation ( Picard et al . , 2004 ; Bai et al . , 2007 ) . This reportedly occurs through its facilitation of bringing PPAR g together with its co - repressors , but may also involve FoxO ( Figure 2 ) . Role of FoxO in the regulation of metabolism DN Gross et al 2324 Oncogene FoxO1 and adipocyte function In non - diabetic obese humans and rodents , oxidative stress markers are elevated and the expression of anti - oxidant enzymes is decreased , particularly in adipose tissue ( Furukawa et al . , 2004 ) . A recent study demon - strated a dose - dependent decrease in FoxO1 expression by free fatty acid treatment in 3T3L1 adipocytes with a corresponding increase in reactive oxygen species and pro - inﬂammatory cytokine production and a decrease in adiponectin expression ( Subauste and Burant , 2007 ) . Interestingly , resveratrol , a Sirt agonist , increased FoxO1 expression and nuclear localization and de - creased reactive oxygen species levels in mature adipo - cytes exposed to free fatty acids . The adipokine pattern was also restored in the resveratrol - treated cells . These results suggest that a Sirt1 – FoxO1 pathway may play a role in protecting adipocytes from obesity - induced dysfunction . Since Sirt1 is an NAD - dependent deacety - lase , this would imply that the redox state in the adipocyte could inﬂuence FoxO1 - dependent gene tran - scription . In addition to oxidative stress , sirtuins are activated in response to caloric restriction ( Kaeberlein et al . , 1999 ; Tissenbaum and Guarente , 2001 ) . In fact , Sirt1 hetero - zygous mice have a decrease in fat mobilization in response to starvation , suggesting that Sirt1 can sense nutrient availability in adipose tissue ( Picard et al . , 2004 ) . Since Sirt1 can modulate the transcription of FoxO - dependent targets , the potential for FoxO1 to mediate the effects of Sirt1 in adipocytes in response to starvation or other environmental stress could be of interest . FoxO in the liver One of the primary functions of the liver is to regulate the supply of glucose and other metabolic fuels during times of energy deprivation . Plasma glucose levels are maintained by balancing glucose production with uptake by peripheral tissues . Glucose production occurs primarily by the liver and to a lesser extent by the kidney , and is tightly regulated by the insulin signaling pathway , among others ( Figure 3 ) . Gluconeogenesis Under fasting conditions , the liver provides energy by releasing glucose into the bloodstream . Initially , the glucose that is produced results from the breakdown of liver glycogen stores ( glycogenolysis ) , whereas with prolonged fasting gluconeogenesis is the primary source of glucose . The latter process involves the synthesis of glucose from non - carbohydrate precursors such as glycerol , lactate and the amino acid alanine . Gluconeo - genesis is regulated over the long term primarily through alterations in the expression of three major gluconeo - genic enzymes : glucose - 6 - phosphatase ( G6Pase ) , fruc - tose - 1 , 6 - biphosphatase and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase ( PEPCK ) ( reviewed by Postic et al . , 2004 ) . PEPCK is the rate - limiting enzyme that phos - phorylates oxaloacetate to form phosphoenolpyruvate , whereas G6Pase promotes the dephosphorylation of glucose - 6 - phosphate , allowing for the release of newly synthesized glucose into the bloodstream . Chronic expression of an active FoxO1 mutant in the liver leads to increased expression of genes involved in Confluent / Growth Arrested / Preadipocyte Clonal Expansion ( Cell Cycle Re - entry ) Terminally Differentiated Adipocytes ( Growth Arrested ) HormonalInduction C / EBP δ C / EBP β PPAR γ Cyclins / Cdks FoxO1 C / EBP α Rb s / E2F s pRb s + E2F s I . R . IRS PI3K Akt Cdk Inhibitors i . e . p21 Fatty acids LeptinResistin AdiponecdinCytokines Figure 2 Antagonistic effects of FoxO1 on adipocyte differentiation . Induction of adipocyte differentiation promotes the expression of C / EBPs , resulting in activation of the highly adipogenic transcription factor PPAR g . Mitotic clonal expansion is also initiated and includes activation of cyclin / cdk complexes and E2Fs , as well as a decrease in cdk inhibitor expression . Coincident with these changes , FoxO1 is phosphorylated and excluded from the nucleus . C / EBP , CCAAT / enhancer - binding protein ; PPAR g , peroxisome proliferator - activated receptor g . Role of FoxO in the regulation of metabolism DN Gross et al 2325 Oncogene gluconeogenesis , resulting in elevated plasma glucose and insulin levels , which are not able to maintain normal glycemia ( Zhang et al . , 2006 ) . Reduction of FoxO1 in both liver and white adipose tissue using an antisense oligonucleotide - mediated approach improves glucose tolerance and both hepatic and peripheral insulin action in mice with diet - induced obesity ( Samuel et al . , 2006 ) . Both G6Pase and PEPCK levels were diminished , accompanied by a decrease in fasting glucose levels , and in both the lean and obese mice , insulin levels were reduced and glucose tolerance was improved ( Samuel et al . , 2006 ) . Consistent with these studies , FoxO1 haploinsufﬁciency is able to rescue the loss of insulin sensitivity in InsR haploinsuffcient mice in part by reducing hepatic expression of gluconeogenic genes ( Nakae et al . , 2002 ) . Similar to the antisense - mediated approach and the haploinsufﬁcient FoxO1 mice , adeno - viral administration of dominant - inhibitory FoxO1 in mice also decreases fasting blood glucose levels by suppressing the expression of the gluconeogenic genes G6Pase and PEPCK ( Altomonte et al . , 2003 ) . Recently , a liver - speciﬁc inactivation of the FoxO1 gene was described ( Matsumoto et al . , 2007 ) . These mice have reduced glucose levels because of decreased hepatic glucose production . Overall , the data are consistent with the notion that insulin exerts effects on glucose metabolism in the liver by inhibiting FoxO1 . A major regulator of G6Pase and PEPCK , and consequently gluconeogenesis , is PGC1 a ( Yoon et al . , 2001 ) . Adenoviral administration of PGC1 a induces gluconeogenic gene expression , resulting in elevated plasma glucose levels in vivo as well as increased glucose output in isolated hepatocytes ( Yoon et al . , 2001 ) . PGC1 a is itself indirectly regulated by insulin . Insulin reduces the level of cyclic AMP generated in response to glucagon , resulting in an abrogation of cyclic AMP response element binding protein - dependent PGC1 a transcription ( Herzig et al . , 2001 ) . Insulin also inacti - vates FoxO1 , which positively regulates PGC1 a expres - sion at the transcriptional level by binding to three insulin response elements ( IREs ) in its promoter ( Daitoku et al . , 2003 ) . Mice lacking FoxO1 speciﬁcally in the liver are hypoglycemic and have decreased fasting - induced PGC1 a expression ( Matsumoto et al . , 2007 ) . Interestingly , PGC1 a is also a direct co - activator of FoxO1 ( Puigserver et al . , 2003 ) . In the fasted state , FoxO1 and PGC1 a cooperate to induce gluconeogenesis by stimulating the expression of G6Pase and PEPCK ( Puigserver et al . , 2003 ) . However , in the fed state , transcription of FoxO1 - dependent genes is antagonized by insulin - induced Akt phosphorylation directly of both PGC1 a and FoxO1 ( Puigserver et al . , 2003 ; Li et al . , 2007 ) . Thus , insulin regulates PGC1 a expression and activity through various mechanisms , one of which is FoxO1 inactivation . In addition to FoxO1 , other transcription factors such as the forkhead transcription factor hepatic nuclear factor - 4 ( HNF4 ) and PPAR a are co - activated by PGC1 a . Rhee et al . ( 2003 ) demonstrated that HNF4 is critical in maintaining PGC1 a - dependent gluconeogenic gene expression , since in its absence these gluconeogenic genes are not regulated by either fasting or over - expression of PGC1 a . In the case of G6Pase transcrip - tional regulation , there is evidence to support the notion that FoxO1 and PGC1 a act independently and that PGC1 a induces gene transcription through HNF4 . Mutation of the HNF - binding element within the G6Pase promoter region abolishes the effect of PGC1 a on promoter activity , although FoxO1 is still able to regulate promoter activity via the IRE and FoxO motifs ( Schilling et al . , 2006 ) . In addition , antisense targeting of FoxO1 in the liver decreases G6Pase expression . However , this effect does not occur in diet - induced obese mice , suggesting that other factors such as PGC1 a and HNF4 , or unknown components alter the regula - tion of gluconeogenesis in obese / insulin - resistant states ( Samuel et al . , 2006 ) . Conversely , in liver - speciﬁc FoxO1 knockout mice , PGC1 a was unable to induce PEPCK and G6Pase expression and consequently could not induce hepatic gluconeogenesis ( Matsumoto et al . , 2007 ) . More detailed studies will be needed to dissect the synergistic roles of PGC1 a and FoxO1 in gluconeo - genesis . There is also evidence to suggest that a ‘ﬁne - tuning’ mechanism exists , whereby overactive FoxO1 can decrease G6Pase expression through binding to the DNA - binding domain of HNF4 , thereby inhibiting HNF4 - mediated transcription ( Hirota et al . , 2003 ) . Together , these data show that FoxO1 promotes G6Pase expression , either directly or through PGC1 a . Direct regulation of PEPCK expression by FoxO is somewhat controversial . On the one hand , liver - speciﬁc transgenic overexpression of active FoxO1 results in increased PEPCK expression ( Zhang et al . , 2006 ) . However , this increase occurs in concert with PGC1 a , as both FoxO1 and PGC1 a bind to the PEPCK FoxO PGC1 α G6PasePEPCK gluconeogenesis PDK - 4 Aquaporin9 C / EBP α IRS - 2 IGFBP1 Trb3 insulinsensitivity Akt Fasting Feeding Figure 3 Effects of FoxO1 on hepatic insulin sensitivity and gluconeogenesis . FoxO1 enhances gluconeogenesis through trans - criptional activation of various genes , including PGC1 a , PEPCK and G6Pase . It also promotes the availability of substrates for gluconeogenesis in part by increasing the expression of PDK - 4 and aquaporin 9 for example . FoxO1 may also enhance hepatic insulin sensitivity through its actions on Trb3 , thereby increasing Akt activity . G6Pase , glucose - 6 - phosphatase ; PDK - 4 , pyruvate dehy - drogenase kinase - 4 ; PEPCK , phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase ; PGC1 a , PPAR g co - activator - 1 a . Role of FoxO in the regulation of metabolism DN Gross et al 2326 Oncogene promoter ; dominant - inhibitory FoxO1 blunts PGC1 a - induced PEPCK expression ( Puigserver et al . , 2003 ) . Similarly , primary hepatocytes derived from liver - speciﬁc FoxO1 - deﬁcient mice show an inhibition of PGC1 a - induced PEPCK transcription ( Matsumoto et al . , 2007 ) . In addition , introduction of dominant - negative FoxO1 into the hepatoma H4 cell line inhibits PEPCK and G6Pase expression . Adenoviral introduc - tion of the same construct into mice also lowers PEPCK expression , as well as G6Pase , and improves blood glucose in the diabetic db / db mouse model ( Altomonte et al . , 2003 ) . FoxO3a affects PEPCK expression , as it binds to the IRE within the PEPCK promoter , and drives gene transcription from this promoter in H4 cells ( Hall et al . , 2000 ) . On the other hand , some studies do not support a role for FoxO1 in PEPCK expression . Mice with a liver - speciﬁc transgenic gain - of - function FoxO1 mutant do not show signiﬁcant increases in PEPCK expression , despite increases in G6Pase , although there is a trend toward increased PEPCK in the fasted state ( Nakae et al . , 2002 ) . Similarly , adenoviral infection of FoxO1 in H4 cells increases G6Pase transcription without any effect on PEPCK in either the basal or dexamethasone / cyclic AMP - treated state ( Barthel et al . , 2001 ) . Finally , in primary hepato - cytes , PGC1 a is able to act through HNF4 to drive PEPCK transcription , although this does not exclude a role for FoxO1 ( Yoon et al . , 2001 ) . Therefore , similar to G6Pase , FoxO is capable of inducing PEPCK expres - sion directly or in concert with PGC1 a , but the precise physiological contribution of these pathways has yet to be determined with certainty . Another mechanism that promotes gluconeogenesis involves inhibition of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex . PDK - 4 phosphorylates the E2 subunit of this complex , thereby inhibiting the conversion of pyruvate to acetyl - CoA , resulting in a shift of pyruvate from the tricarboxylic acid cycle or fatty acid synthesis toward gluconeogenesis ( Randle , 1986 ) . Instead , pyruvate carboxylase converts the pyruvate to oxaloacetate , a substrate for PEPCK . In the hepatoma cell line HepG2 , both FoxO1 and FoxO3a bind to IREs within the PDK - 4 promoter and induce its transcription ( Kwon et al . , 2004 ) . In addition , mice lacking IRS - 1 speciﬁcally in the liver display increased PDK - 4 expression , most likely due to elevated FoxO1 activity ( Dong et al . , 2006 ) . Adenoviral overexpression of a constitutively active FoxO1 induces PDK - 4 expression in HepG2 cells ( Furuyama et al . , 2003 ) . However , in the absence of PPAR a , there is no increase in PDK - 4 in response to fasting , which normally increases FoxO activity and PDK - 4 expression ( Huang et al . , 2002 ) . This observation suggests that PPAR a is necessary for the induction of PDK - 4 . Glycerol , a gluconeogenic substrate derived primarily from triacylglycerol breakdown in adipose tissue , enters the liver through its transporter aquaporin 9 . Aquaporin 9 expression increases during fasting and is reduced by insulin through an IRE resembling a FoxO - binding element present in its promoter ( Kuriyama et al . , 2002 ) . This provides a plausible mechanism whereby insulin alters aquaporin 9 expression and subsequently glycerol uptake . In agreement with this notion , transcription of aquaporin 9 is increased in liver - speciﬁc FoxO1 trans - genic mice ( Zhang et al . , 2006 ) . FoxO1 also regulates gluconeogenesis in neonatal liver . Its expression sharply increases before birth , as does glycogen storage . Immediately following birth , glycogen breakdown in the liver provides energy to the newborn pups before suckling . Also at this time , expression of gluconeogenic enzymes must occur to maintain glucose levels . A critical regulator of perinatal gluconeogenesis as well as glycogen synthesis during late gestation is C / EBP a , as mice carrying a homozygous deletion of this gene die within hours after birth from severe hypoglycemia ( Wang et al . , 1995 ) . FoxO1 binds to C / EBP a via the forkhead domain , leading to an increase in C / EBP a - dependent transcription of PEPCK and thereby stimulating gluconeogenesis ( Sekine et al . , 2007 ) . Only in the presence of C / EBP a can FoxO1 bind to the PEPCK promoter , suggesting that FoxO1 can regulate the expression of both G6Pase and PEPCK while complexed with other transcription factors . Lipid metabolism Although the prevalent textbook view is that during periods of nutrient abundance liver utilizes glucose for the production of energy via glycolysis , substantial data support the hypothesis that glucose itself is virtually never used as a source for oxidation in the liver ( Katz and McGarry , 1984 ) . According to this view , hepatic glucokinase , which catalyses the phosphorylation of glucose to glucose - 6 - phosphate , is most important to the metabolism of stored glycogen by glycolysis and directing carbons into the hexose monophosphate shunt in support of lipogenesis . Expression of glucokinase and other glycolytic enzymes such as pyruvate kinase is downregulated by FoxO1 as ascertained by microarray and quantitative PCR studies in transgenic mice expressing a constitutively active FoxO1 ( Zhang et al . , 2006 ) . However , adenoviral infection of dominant - negative FoxO1 does not signiﬁcantly alter glucokinase expression in the liver ( Altomonte et al . , 2003 ) . There is substantial evidence that , in addition to FoxO , tran - scription factors such as sterol response element - binding protein - 1c ( SREBP - 1c ) , hypoxia - inducible factor 1 and HNF4 act downstream of insulin to regulate gluco - kinase transcription ( Foretz et al . , 1999 ; Roth et al . , 2004 ) . Until recently , most data favored a model in which increased expression of SREBP - 1c was required ( Foretz et al . , 1999 ; Kim et al . , 2004 ) . However , in primary hepatocytes , both insulin and liver X receptor activation result in increased SREBP - 1c expression but only with insulin does glucokinase expression increased as well ( Hansmannel et al . , 2006 ) . Interaction of SREBP - 1c with other insulin - regulated factors , possibly FoxO1 , may account for the observed regulation of glucokinase expression . Liver - speciﬁc transgenic expression of active FoxO1 induces expression of genes involved in lipid transport and decreases expression of genes important for Role of FoxO in the regulation of metabolism DN Gross et al 2327 Oncogene glycolysis and lipid / sterol synthesis , resulting in de - creased postprandial triglyceride concentrations com - pared to wild - type mice ( Zhang et al . , 2006 ) . However , using a similar mouse model , another group observed enhanced lipogenesis and liver steatosis ( Qu et al . , 2006 ) . Similarly , adenoviral delivery of an active FoxO1 variant to the liver results in lipogenesis , hepatic steatosis and reduced fatty acid oxidation ( Matsumoto et al . , 2006 ) . These increases in lipogenesis result from a feedback loop that enhances insulin signaling ( discussed later ) , thereby modulating lipid metabolism through SREBP - 1c in a FoxO1 - independent manner ( Matsumoto et al . , 2006 ) . The discrepancies observed with respect to insulin sensitivity and lipogenesis , or lack thereof , as depicted in Table 1 , could be caused by differences in experimental models or in the duration and level of overexpression , as well as time of assessment with respect to fasting versus feeding . In the prandial state , the liver is involved in de novo lipogenesis using glucose , or more likely its two - carbon glycolytic products as substrates . SREBP - 1c is a global regulator of lipogenic gene transcription ( Eberle et al . , 2004 ) . FoxO1 not only inhibits SREBP - 1c expression but also suppresses the expression of genes directly involved in fatty acid synthesis , including fatty acid synthase and ATP citrate lyase ( Zhang et al . , 2006 ) . Other factors , including liver X receptor , which also stimulates SREBP - 1c expression , directly induce the transcription of lipogenic genes as well ( Joseph et al . , 2002 ; Tobin et al . , 2002 ) . More detailed studies will reveal whether FoxO1 is involved in direct gene regulation of SREBP - 1c . Another component of liver metabolism involves the secretion of liver triglycerides into the plasma . Some of the triglycerides that are synthesized are stored in the liver but , under normal conditions , most are packaged , along with other proteins and lipids , into very low - density lipoprotein particles . Deﬁciency of the apolipo - protein ApoC - III greatly increases lipoprotein lipase activity and worsens diet - induced obesity and insulin resistance in mice ( Duivenvoorden et al . , 2005 ) . Con - versely , transgenic mice expressing human ApoC - III display hypertriglyceridemia ( Ito et al . , 1990 ) . Either wild - type or constitutively active FoxO1 induces ApoC - III and elevated plasma triglycerides by direct binding to an insulin / FoxO response element within the ApoC - III promoter ( Altomonte et al . , 2004 ) . However , it is not known whether this increase in plasma triglycerides is a direct consequence of ApoC - III upregulation or if other factors , such as increased insulin sensitivity , are also involved . PPAR a can also regulate ApoC - III expression by directly interacting with FoxO1 , thereby antagoniz - ing its action on ApoC - III gene transcription ( Qu et al . , 2007 ) . Thus , FoxO1 promotion of ApoC - III expression may explain in part the effects of FoxO on hepatic and plasma triglyceride levels . Insulin sensitivity Under certain circumstances , FoxO1 gain of function in the liver results in increased phosphorylation of insulin - regulated signaling molecules such as Akt and glycogen synthase kinase - 3 ( Matsumoto et al . , 2006 ; Naimi et al . , 2007 ) . FoxO1 promotes IRS - 2 gene expression provid - ing a possible mechanism for this feedback loop ( Matsumoto et al . , 2006 ; Zhang et al . , 2006 ) . However , overexpression of IRS - 2 alone does not reproduce the increased insulin sensitivity observed with FoxO1 gain of function . A potential explanation is that FoxO1 is mediating its effects through its ability to suppress the expression of Trb3 ( Matsumoto et al . , 2006 ) . Trb3 is a scaffolding protein that binds Akt and prevents insulin - induced Akt phosphorylation ( Du et al . , 2003 ) . In these studies , the suppression of Trb3 is not dependent on the DNA - binding domain of FoxO1 . FoxO1 may act through binding of PPAR a , a known regulator of Trb3 , and alter its activity . Alternatively , FoxO1 could interact with PGC1 a and trans - repress PPAR a ( Matsumoto et al . , 2006 ) . In contrast , Naimi and colleagues found that the ability of FoxO1 to promote increased Akt phosphorylation under both basal and insulin - stimulated conditions is independent of Trb3 expression , as overexpression of Trb3 in hepatocytes expressing a constitutively active FoxO1 cannot reverse the effects of FoxO1 on Akt phosphorylation ( Naimi et al . , 2007 ) . FoxO1 also leads to activation of other kinases such as extracellular signal - regulated kinase , c - Jun N - terminal kinase ( JNK ) and p38 mitogen - activated protein kinase ( p38 ) , and inhibition of p38 by either inhibitors or dominant - negative p38 expression Table 1 Effects of FoxO1 gain or loss of function on hepatic lipid metabolism Gain / loss of FoxO1 Method Plasma TG Hepatic TG Proposed mechanism Reference Gain Adenoviral Up ND ApoCIII up Altomonte et al . ( 2003 ) Gain Transgenic CA Up ND ApoCIII up Altomonte et al . ( 2003 ) Gain Adenoviral CA Down Up Trb3 up Matsumoto et al . ( 2006 ) Gain Adenoviral ND Up PGC1 b up Qu et al . ( 2006 ) Gain Transgenic CA ND Up SREBP1c / PGC12 b up Qu et al . ( 2006 ) Gain Transgenic CA Down Same SREBP1c down Zhang et al . ( 2006 ) Loss asRNA with DIO ND Down Samuel et al . ( 2006 ) Loss Liver KO Same Same Matsumoto et al . ( 2007 ) Loss Liver KO in the background of InsR (cid:1) / (cid:1) Down Down Matsumoto et al . ( 2007 ) Abbreviations : CA , constitutively active ; DIO , diet - induced obesity ; ND , not determined ; TG , triglycerides . Role of FoxO in the regulation of metabolism DN Gross et al 2328 Oncogene abrogates the FoxO1 - mediated increase in Akt phosphorylation ( Naimi et al . , 2007 ) . Although the exact role of Trb3 is not completely known , it is clear that FoxO1 activation under certain conditions can lead to increased insulin sensitivity . A well - characterized effect of FoxO1 in the liver is its ability to increase insulin - like growth factor - binding protein - 1 ( IGFBP1 ) expression by binding to IRE motifs within its promoter ( Hall et al . , 2000 ) . Loss of FoxO1 in the liver reduces IGFBP1 expression in fasted mice ( Matsumoto et al . , 2007 ) . Conversely , FoxO1 gain - of - function mutants increase the expression of IGFBP1 ( Matsumoto et al . , 2006 ; Zhang et al . , 2006 ) . These increases in IGFBP1 antagonize the growth - promoting actions of IGF - 1 . However , in these studies , the effects on IGFBP1 expression were observed in the context of overexpressed FoxO1 . Under more physiological conditions , insulin may not act through FoxO1 , but rather through mammalian target of rapamycin , to regulate IGFBP1 expression ( Mounier et al . , 2006 ) . FoxO and Sirt1 Recent work has focused attention on the putative role of FoxO1 in mediating the effects of Sirt1 on gluconeogenesis . Sirt1 binds directly to FoxO1 through a conserved LXXLL motif and catalyses its deacetyla - tion , which is associated with an increase in FoxO transcriptional activity ( Nakae et al . , 2006 ) . The rise in Sirt1 levels following an overnight fast has been implicated as contributing to gluconeogenesis ( Rodgers et al . , 2005 ) . Mutagenesis of the LXXLL motif within FoxO1 results in loss of Sirt1 binding . This is associated with decreased IGFBP1 and G6Pase expression as well as improved glucose tolerance ( Nakae et al . , 2006 ) . Treatment of hepatocytes with resveratrol , a known activator of sirtuins , increases gluconeogenic gene expression , although interpretation of this is compli - cated by the ability of Sirt1 to interact with and deacetylate PGC1 a ( Frescas et al . , 2005 ; Rodgers et al . , 2005 ) . This increase in gluconeogenic gene transcription can be blocked by dominant - negative FoxO1 , but since PGC1 a works through co - activation of FoxO1 , these data cannot identify the site of action of Sirt1 . In addition , Gan et al . ( 2005 ) found that the effects of Sirt1 on IGFBP1 expression are only in part dependent on FoxO1 , as mutating the FoxO1 - binding elements within the IGFBP1 promoter reduces but does not completely disrupt the positive actions of Sirt1 . Future studies will reveal to what extent the acetylation state of FoxO1 affects liver metabolism . FoxO in the beta cell The endocrine pancreas is critical for maintaining glucose homeostasis . It consists of four different cell types : beta cells , alpha cells , delta cells and the PP cells ( Murtaugh , 2007 ) . More recently , a ﬁfth cell type has been described in the islet ( the epsilon cells ) ( Prado et al . , 2004 ) . A critical function of the beta cell is to secrete insulin in response to glucose as well as other nutrients . Glucose is taken up by the cell and is quickly metabolized , resulting in an increase in the intracellular ATP / ADP ratio . This rise in ATP results in closing of potassium ATP channels , depolarization of the cell and subsequent opening of voltage - gated calcium channels . This increase in intracellular calcium leads to the secretion of insulin - containing granules ( Newgard and McGarry , 1995 ; Straub and Sharp , 2002 ) . A more delayed and extended period of insulin secretion also follows exposure to glucose but its cause is still not well understood . Beta cell development is the result of an orchestrated series of events . Pancreatic and duodenal homeobox factor - 1 ( Pdx - 1 ) is a transcription factor that plays an important role in the development of pancreas ( Kaneto et al . , 2007 ) . It is a key transcription factor that is present in all pancreatic endocrine cells during embryo - nic development ; however , its expression is largely restricted to beta cells in the adult pancreas ( Prado et al . , 2004 ; Lantz and Kaestner , 2005 ) . Pdx - 1 controls the expression of a number of beta cell genes including insulin , the beta cell glucose transporter Glut2 and glucokinase ( Lantz and Kaestner , 2005 ) . Pdx - 1 is in turn regulated in part by the forkhead transcription factor , FoxO1 , the most abundant forkhead transcription factor in pancreatic beta cells ( Kitamura et al . , 2002 ) . The maintenance of beta cell function and mass is critical for glucose homeostasis . Beta cell mass can be affected by changes in cell size , proliferation , neogenesis or apoptosis . Beta cell dysfunction occurs in response to a number of factors including chronic , excessive glucose or lipid exposure or cytokine signaling , all of which can lead to increased oxidative stress in the beta cell ( Poitout and Robertson , 2002 ; Robertson et al . , 2004 ) . To an extent , beta cells can cope with this stress and glucose homeostasis can be maintained . However , in the face of peripheral insulin resistance , the beta cell population must expand to compensate for the rise in insulin demand . This can be accomplished by an increase in beta cell size , proliferation and / or protection from pro - apoptotic signals ( Bouwens and Rooman , 2005 ) . The insulin / IGF - 1 receptor signaling pathway is an integral part of the beta cell’s ability to adapt to these changes ( Withers et al . , 1998 ; Kubota et al . , 2000 ; Okada et al . , 2007 ) . A number of hormones and growth factors such as insulin , incretin hormones including glucagon - like peptide - 1 ( GLP - 1 ) and glucose - dependent insulinotropic polypeptide , and even glucose itself increase beta cell mass ( Holz and Chepurny , 2005 ) . One feature that all of these factors have in common is the ability to enhance insulin / IGF - 1 receptor signaling . Activation of this pathway leads to a rise in Akt phosphorylation as well as a corresponding inactivation / nuclear exclusion of FoxO1 . Conversely , a decrease in Akt phosphorylation results in enhanced nuclear FoxO1 , which is inhibitory toward beta cell mass expansion ( Kitamura et al . , 2002 ; Nakae et al . , 2002 ) . In addition to the above - mentioned factors , components of the placental lactogen signaling cascade also have growth - promoting effects on beta cells ( Garcia - Ocana et al . , 2000 ; Freemark et al . , 2002 ; Role of FoxO in the regulation of metabolism DN Gross et al 2329 Oncogene Lindberg et al . , 2005 ; Jackerott et al . , 2006 ) . However , their convergence on the PI3K – Akt – FoxO1 pathway has not been established in beta cells ( Figure 4 ) . Insulin / IGF - 1 receptor pathway Transgenic manipulations of the insulin / IGF - 1 receptor pathway have resulted in mice with altered glucose metabolism and in some cases diabetes . For example , mice with whole body deletion of the insulin receptor die within a few days after birth from diabetic ketoacidosis ( Accili et al . , 1996 ; Joshi et al . , 1996 ) . However , only a subset of mice with heterozygous deletion of the receptor develop diabetes in the absence of other predisposing factors ( Bruning et al . , 1997 ; Kido et al . , 2000 ) . Interestingly , the diabetic phenotype and beta cell mass can be rescued by haploinsufﬁciency of FoxO1 ( Nakae et al . , 2002 ) . Since the insulin receptor signaling pathway in peripheral tissues plays an important role in glucose homeostasis , the direct effects of these deletions on beta cells can be difﬁcult to assess . For this reason , beta cell - speciﬁc deletions using Cre / loxP - mediated recombination were used to assess the FoxO require - ment in beta cells . Beta cell - speciﬁc deletion of either the insulin receptor ( b IRKO ) or IGF - 1 receptor ( b IGF1R - KO ) leads to a decrease in glucose - stimulated insulin secretion and some degree of glucose intolerance , although these changes are relatively modest . It is not until the animals are stressed that differences between the two genotypes become apparent . If the mice are rendered insulin resistant by either crossing them onto the liver - speciﬁc insulin receptor knockout mouse or by placing them on a high - fat diet , b IGF1RKO but not b IRKO mice are able to expand their beta cell mass ( Gleason et al . , 2007 ; Okada et al . , 2007 ) . This reduced beta cell mass in the b IRKO mice is accom - panied by an increase in nuclear FoxO1 expression and a corresponding decrease in Pdx - 1 expression . Further - more , only the b IRKO mice develop a progressive impairment of glucose intolerance accompanied by an age - dependent decline in beta cell mass ( Kulkarni et al . , 1999 , 2002 ) . Generation of mice deﬁcient in IRS proteins has yielded interesting metabolic phenotypes . Whole body IRS - 1 knockout mice are insulin resistant but they do not develop diabetes due to a compensatory increase in pancreatic beta cell mass ( Araki et al . , 1994 ; Tamemoto et al . , 1994 ; Yamauchi et al . , 1996 ) . However , whole body IRS - 2 knockout mice develop diabetes by 10 weeks of age due to the combination of peripheral insulin resistance and beta cell failure ( Withers et al . , 1998 ; Kubota et al . , 2000 ) . Again , haploinsufﬁciency of FoxO1 restores beta cell mass and proliferation in these mice ( Kitamura et al . , 2002 ) . Furthermore , haploinsuf - ﬁciency for PTEN partially reverses the diabetes and reduction in beta cell mass in the IRS - 2 knockout mice , which correlates with an increase in phosphorylated FoxO1 ( Kushner et al . , 2005 ) . Insulin / IGF - 1 IR / IGF - 1R IRS2 PI3K Akt GLP - 1 / GIP GLP - 1R / GIP - R cAMP PKA Glucose Glut2 Glucose G6P GK GlucoseMetabolism Ca2 + CREB P - Ser133 IRS - 2 InsulinSecretion Insulin Chronic / Elevated Glucose / Lipid Metabolism Oxidative Stress FoxO1 Pro - apoptotic DNA Repair / Stress Resistance Cdk inhibitors FoxO1 noitalytecA noitalytecA Sirt1 Foxa2 Pdx - 1 FoxO1 JNK R ep li c a t i on / B e t a C e ll M a ss P r e s e r v a t i ono ff un c t i on / S t r e ss R e s i s t an c e Nucleus Cytosol FoxO1 activity Figure 4 Effects of FoxO1 on pancreatic beta cell proliferation and function . Beta cell signaling pathways that converge on FoxO1 include insulin / IGF - 1 receptor - mediated signaling as well as incretin ( GLP - 1 / GIP ) signaling . Increased CREB phosphorylation in response to glucose or incretin - mediated signaling enhances IRS - 2 expression . Akt phosphorylation promotes FoxO1 nuclear exclusion , allowing beta cell replication to occur in response to various mitogenic factors . Oxidative stress activates JNK signaling , thereby promoting FoxO1 nuclear accumulation and preserving beta cell function . FoxO1 function is also dependent on its acetylation / deacetylation state , which can either enhance / preserve or diminish beta cell function . CREB , cyclic AMP response element binding protein ; GIP : glucose - dependent insulinotropic polypeptide ; GLP - 1 : glucagon - like peptide - 1 ; IGF - 1 , insulin - like growth factor - 1 ; IRS - 2 , insulin receptor substrate 2 ; JNK , c - Jun N - terminal kinase . Role of FoxO in the regulation of metabolism DN Gross et al 2330 Oncogene Incretins and FoxO1 GLP - 1 , an incretin hormone that promotes beta cell growth and insulin secretion , acts in part by increasing cyclic AMP and cyclic AMP response element binding protein phosphorylation , as well as activation of other signaling kinases ( Gonzalez and Montminy , 1989 ) . The GLP - 1 analog exendin - 4 requires expression of IRS - 2 to exert its growth - promoting effects on beta cells . Exendin - 4 treatment increases beta cell mass twofold in wild - type mice but it cannot reverse the loss in beta cell mass nor the progression to diabetes in IRS - 2 knockout mice ( Park et al . , 2006 ) . Since the insulin receptor signaling cascade and , in particular , IRS - 2 have been linked to diminished FoxO1 activity , it was of no surprise that GLP - 1 , which converges on this pathway , could also inhibit FoxO1 . Incretin treatment of cultured beta cells enhances nuclear exclusion of FoxO1 in a PI3K - dependent manner ( Kim et al . , 2005 ; Buteau et al . , 2006 ) . Expression of a constitutively nuclear FoxO1 antagonizes both the proliferative and anti - apoptotic effects of exendin - 4 . Pancreatic and duodenal homeobox factor - 1 and FoxO1 Although FoxO1 regulates many genes , an important downstream mediator of its effects on the beta cell is Pdx - 1 . Pdx - 1 is a beta cell transcription factor important for both the development of the endocrine pancreas and for maintenance of beta cell function in the adult ( Kaneto et al . , 2007 ) . Beta cell - speciﬁc loss of Pdx - 1 results in maturity - onset diabetes and loss of the beta cell phenotype . FoxO1 decreases Pdx - 1 expression and DNA - binding activity to its target genes at least in part by inhibiting FoxA2 ( Kitamura et al . , 2002 ) . FoxA2 is another member of the forkhead family of transcription factors and acts as a positive regulator of Pdx - 1 expression ( Wu et al . , 1997 ; Ben - Shushan et al . , 2001 ; Lee et al . , 2002 ) . In addition , Pdx - 1 and FoxO1 show mutual nuclear exclusion ( Kitamura et al . , 2002 ) . Mouse models with decreased insulin receptor signaling path - way or enhanced FoxO1 expression in the beta cell have reduced levels of Pdx - 1 ( Kitamura et al . , 2002 ; Kushner et al . , 2002 ; Buteau et al . , 2006 ; Okada et al . , 2007 ) . Conversely , the rescue of beta cell mass in the IRS - 2 knockout mice by FoxO1 haploinsufﬁciency results in enhanced Pdx - 1 levels ( Kitamura et al . , 2002 ) . GLP - 1 signaling , which can converge on the insulin receptor pathway , decreases nuclear FoxO1 and increases Pdx - 1 expression ( Buteau et al . , 1999 ; Wang et al . , 1999 ; Stoffers et al . , 2000 ) . Most notably , transgenic rescue of Pdx - 1 expression in the beta cell alone is able to restore beta cell mass and function in the diabetic IRS - 2 knockout mouse ( Kushner et al . , 2002 ) . Beta cell function Glucose homeostasis is not only dependent on pancrea - tic beta cell mass but also on proper beta cell function . Reactive oxygen species are a primary cause of beta cell dysfunction , partly as a result of the intrinsically low levels of antioxidant enzymes in these cells ( Grankvist et al . , 1981 ; Tiedge et al . , 1998 ) . Both glucotoxicity and lipotoxicity increase the level of reactive oxygen species in beta cells ( Poitout and Robertson , 2002 ; Robertson et al . , 2004 ) . An increase in oxidative stress leads to activation of JNK , resulting in decreased glucose - stimulated insulin secretion and expression of insulin , both of which can be prevented by inhibition of JNK ( Kaneto et al . , 2002 ; Essers et al . , 2004 ) . There is also a corresponding reduction in Pdx - 1 expression and DNA - binding activity in response to JNK activation ( Kaneto et al . , 2002 ; Kawamori et al . , 2003 , 2006 ) . Given the inhibitory effect of FoxO1 and JNK on the nuclear expression and DNA - binding activity of Pdx - 1 in beta cells , a connection between JNK and FoxO1 in beta cells was proposed . Kawamori et al . ( 2006 ) demonstrated that oxidative stress increased JNK activity , FoxO1 nuclear translocation and Pdx - 1 nuclear exclusion . Inhibition of JNK blocked the oxidative stress - induced translocation of FoxO1 into the nucleus . Despite the inhibitory effects of FoxO1 on beta cell mass , the transcription factor can still play a role in promoting beta cell function . For example , FoxO1 increases the expression of insulin and two insulin gene transcription factors , NeuroD and MafA , in response to oxidative stress ( Kitamura et al . , 2005 ) . The acetylation / deacetylation state of FoxO1 plays an important role in this process . The deacetylated form of FoxO1 is transcriptionally active toward these two proteins but is also sensitive to proteasomal degradation . Therefore , this mechanism only allows for an acute response to oxidative stress ( or a short burst of hyperglycemia following nutrient intake ) and is not sufﬁcient for maintaining beta cell function in the face of chronic hyperglycemia . Sirt1 , the deacetylase involved in pro - moting expression of these insulin gene transcription factors , tends to support expression of FoxO1 target genes involved in stress resistance in other cell types ( Greer and Brunet , 2005 ) . Thus , the effects of FoxO1 on beta cells appear to be contextual . FoxO1 may preserve beta cell function but its activity also prevents an increase in beta cell mass . Type 2 diabetes mellitus is a progressive disease that culminates with the loss of pancreatic beta cells . Although beta cell function is perturbed in the early stages of insulin resistance , the increase in beta cell mass and insulin secretion is able to compensate . In a subset of patients , this compensatory response eventually fails , beta cells are lost and type 2 diabetes ensues . Several strategies have been advocated for treatment of patients with insulin resistance . Some studies support a role for reducing the metabolic demand placed on beta cells so that their function may be preserved , while another approach is to enhance the performance of the beta cell ( Grill and Bjorklund , 2001 ; Ritzel et al . , 2004 ; Yoshi - kawa et al . , 2004 ) . FoxO1 appears to be central to the choice between these two options , as it promotes the expression of cell cycle - inhibitory genes , antioxidant genes and DNA repair genes to promote stress resistance but decreases the proliferative response of beta cells . Clearly , the balance between the forces that affect FoxO1 expression , activity and nuclear localiza - tion will play an important role in the fate of the pancreatic beta cell . Role of FoxO in the regulation of metabolism DN Gross et al 2331 Oncogene References Accili D , Arden KC . ( 2004 ) . FoxOs at the crossroads of cellular metabolism , differentiation , and transformation . Cell 117 : 421 – 426 . Accili D , Drago J , Lee EJ , Johnson MD , Cool MH , Salvatore P et al . ( 1996 ) . Early neonatal death in mice homozygous for a null allele of the insulin receptor gene . Nat Genet 12 : 106 – 109 . Accili D , Taylor SI . ( 1991 ) . Targeted inactivation of the insulin receptor gene in mouse 3T3 - L1 ﬁbroblasts via homologous recombination . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 88 : 4708 – 4712 . Ahima RS , Flier JS . ( 2000 ) . Adipose tissue as an endocrine organ . Trends Endocrinol Metab 11 : 327 – 332 . Alberti KG , Zimmet P , Shaw J . ( 2006 ) . Metabolic syndrome—a new world - wide deﬁnition . A Consensus Statement from the Interna - tional Diabetes Federation . Diabet Med 23 : 469 – 480 . Allen DL , Unterman TG . ( 2007 ) . Regulation of myostatin expression and myoblast differentiation by FoxO and SMAD transcription factors . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 292 : C188 – C199 . Altomonte J , Cong L , Harbaran S , Richter A , Xu J , Meseck M et al . ( 2004 ) . Foxo1 mediates insulin action on apoC - III and triglyceride metabolism . J Clin Invest 114 : 1493 – 1503 . Altomonte J , Richter A , Harbaran S , Suriawinata J , Nakae J , Thung SN et al . ( 2003 ) . Inhibition of Foxo1 function is associated with improved fasting glycemia in diabetic mice . Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 285 : E718 – E728 . Araki E , Lipes MA , Patti ME , Bruning JC , Haag III B , Johnson RS et al . ( 1994 ) . Alternative pathway of insulin signalling in mice with targeted disruption of the IRS - 1 gene . Nature 372 : 186 – 190 . Armoni M , Harel C , Karni S , Chen H , Bar - Yoseph F , Ver MR et al . ( 2006 ) . FOXO1 represses peroxisome proliferator - activated recep - tor - gamma1 and - gamma2 gene promoters in primary adipocytes . A novel paradigm to increase insulin sensitivity . J Biol Chem 281 : 19881 – 19891 . Bai L , Pang WJ , Yang YJ , Yang GS . ( 2007 ) . Modulation of Sirt1 by resveratrol and nicotinamide alters proliferation and differentiation of pig preadipocytes . Mol Cell Biochem 307 : 129 – 140 . Barthel A , Schmoll D , Kruger KD , Bahrenberg G , Walther R , Roth RA et al . ( 2001 ) . Differential regulation of endogenous glucose - 6 - phosphatase and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase gene expres - sion by the forkhead transcription factor FKHR in H4IIE - hepatoma cells . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 285 : 897 – 902 . Bastie CC , Nahle Z , McLoughlin T , Esser K , Zhang W , Unterman T et al . ( 2005 ) . FoxO1 stimulates fatty acid uptake and oxidation in muscle cells through CD36 - dependent and - independent mechan - isms . J Biol Chem 280 : 14222 – 14229 . Baudry A , Yang ZZ , Hemmings BA . ( 2006 ) . PKBalpha is required for adipose differentiation of mouse embryonic ﬁbroblasts . J Cell Sci 119 : 889 – 897 . Ben - Shushan E , Marshak S , Shoshkes M , Cerasi E , Melloul D . ( 2001 ) . A pancreatic beta - cell - speciﬁc enhancer in the human PDX - 1 gene is regulated by hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta ( HNF - 3beta ) , HNF - 1alpha , and SPs transcription factors . J Biol Chem 276 : 17533 – 17540 . Beqaj S , Jakkaraju S , Mattingly RR , Pan D , Schuger L . ( 2002 ) . High RhoA activity maintains the undifferentiated mesenchymal cell phenotype , whereas RhoA down - regulation by laminin - 2 induces smooth muscle myogenesis . J Cell Biol 156 : 893 – 903 . Biggs III WH , Meisenhelder J , Hunter T , Cavenee WK , Arden KC . ( 1999 ) . Protein kinase B / Akt - mediated phosphorylation promotes nuclear exclusion of the winged helix transcription factor FKHR1 . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96 : 7421 – 7426 . Bodine SC , Latres E , Baumhueter S , Lai VK , Nunez L , Clarke BA et al . ( 2001 ) . Identiﬁcation of ubiquitin ligases required for skeletal muscle atrophy . Science 294 : 1704 – 1708 . Bois PR , Grosveld GC . ( 2003 ) . FKHR ( FOXO1a ) is required for myotube fusion of primary mouse myoblasts . EMBO J 22 : 1147 – 1157 . Bouwens L , Rooman I . ( 2005 ) . Regulation of pancreatic beta - cell mass . Physiol Rev 85 : 1255 – 1270 . Brunet A , Bonni A , Zigmond MJ , Lin MZ , Juo P , Hu LS et al . ( 1999 ) . Akt promotes cell survival by phosphorylating and inhibiting a Forkhead transcription factor . Cell 96 : 857 – 868 . Bruning JC , Winnay J , Bonner - Weir S , Taylor SI , Accili D , Kahn CR . ( 1997 ) . Development of a novel polygenic model of NIDDM in mice heterozygous for IR and IRS - 1 null alleles . Cell 88 : 561 – 572 . Burgering BM , Kops GJ . ( 2002 ) . Cell cycle and death control : long live Forkheads . Trends Biochem Sci 27 : 352 – 360 . Buteau J , Roduit R , Susini S , Prentki M . ( 1999 ) . Glucagon - like peptide - 1 promotes DNA synthesis , activates phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase and increases transcription factor pancreatic and duodenal homeobox gene 1 ( PDX - 1 ) DNA binding activity in beta ( INS - 1 ) - cells . Diabetologia 42 : 856 – 864 . Buteau J , Spatz ML , Accili D . ( 2006 ) . Transcription factor FoxO1 mediates glucagon - like peptide - 1 effects on pancreatic beta - cell mass . Diabetes 55 : 1190 – 1196 . Chen PL , Riley DJ , Chen Y , Lee WH . ( 1996 ) . Retinoblastoma protein positively regulates terminal adipocyte differentiation through direct interaction with C / EBPs . Genes Dev 10 : 2794 – 2804 . Coburn CT , Knapp Jr FF , Febbraio M , Beets AL , Silverstein RL , Abumrad NA . ( 2000 ) . Defective uptake and utilization of long chain fatty acids in muscle and adipose tissues of CD36 knockout mice . J Biol Chem 275 : 32523 – 32529 . Conejo R , de Alvaro C , Benito M , Cuadrado A , Lorenzo M . ( 2002 ) . Insulin restores differentiation of Ras - transformed C2C12 myo - blasts by inducing NF - kappaB through an AKT / P70S6K / p38 - MAPK pathway . Oncogene 21 : 3739 – 3753 . Coolican SA , Samuel DS , Ewton DZ , McWade FJ , Florini JR . ( 1997 ) . The mitogenic and myogenic actions of insulin - like growth factors utilize distinct signaling pathways . J Biol Chem 272 : 6653 – 6662 . Cuenda A , Cohen P . ( 1999 ) . Stress - activated protein kinase - 2 / p38 and a rapamycin - sensitive pathway are required for C2C12 myogenesis . J Biol Chem 274 : 4341 – 4346 . Daitoku H , Yamagata K , Matsuzaki H , Hatta M , Fukamizu A . ( 2003 ) . Regulation of PGC - 1 promoter activity by protein kinase B and the forkhead transcription factor FKHR . Diabetes 52 : 642 – 649 . de Lange P , Moreno M , Silvestri E , Lombardi A , Goglia F , Lanni A . ( 2007 ) . Fuel economy in food - deprived skeletal muscle : signaling pathways and regulatory mechanisms . FASEB J 21 : 3431 – 3441 . Dong X , Park S , Lin X , Copps K , Yi X , White MF . ( 2006 ) . Irs1 and Irs2 signaling is essential for hepatic glucose homeostasis and systemic growth . J Clin Invest 116 : 101 – 114 . Dowell P , Otto TC , Adi S , Lane MD . ( 2003 ) . Convergence of peroxisome proliferator - activated receptor gamma and Foxo1 signaling pathways . J Biol Chem 278 : 45485 – 45491 . Du K , Herzig S , Kulkarni RN , Montminy M . ( 2003 ) . TRB3 : a tribbles homolog that inhibits Akt / PKB activation by insulin in liver . Science 300 : 1574 – 1577 . Duivenvoorden I , Teusink B , Rensen PC , Romijn JA , Havekes LM , Voshol PJ . ( 2005 ) . Apolipoprotein C3 deﬁciency results in diet - induced obesity and aggravated insulin resistance in mice . Diabetes 54 : 664 – 671 . Eberle D , Hegarty B , Bossard P , Ferre P , Foufelle F . ( 2004 ) . SREBP transcription factors : master regulators of lipid homeostasis . Biochimie 86 : 839 – 848 . Erbay E , Chen J . ( 2001 ) . The mammalian target of rapamycin regulates C2C12 myogenesis via a kinase - independent mechanism . J Biol Chem 276 : 36079 – 36082 . Essers MA , Weijzen S , de Vries - Smits AM , Saarloos I , de Ruiter ND , Bos JL et al . ( 2004 ) . FOXO transcription factor activation by oxidative stress mediated by the small GTPase Ral and JNK . EMBO J 23 : 4802 – 4812 . Fajas L , Landsberg RL , Huss - Garcia Y , Sardet C , Lees JA , Auwerx J . ( 2002 ) . E2Fs regulate adipocyte differentiation . Dev Cell 3 : 39 – 49 . Farmer SR . ( 2005 ) . Regulation of PPARgamma activity during adipogenesis . Int J Obes ( Lond ) 29 ( Suppl 1 ) : S13 – S16 . Foretz M , Guichard C , Ferre P , Foufelle F . ( 1999 ) . Sterol regulatory element binding protein - 1c is a major mediator of insulin action on Role of FoxO in the regulation of metabolism DN Gross et al 2332 Oncogene the hepatic expression of glucokinase and lipogenesis - related genes . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96 : 12737 – 12742 . Freemark M , Avril I , Fleenor D , Driscoll P , Petro A , Opara E et al . ( 2002 ) . Targeted deletion of the PRL receptor : effects on islet development , insulin production , and glucose tolerance . Endocrinol - ogy 143 : 1378 – 1385 . Frescas D , Valenti L , Accili D . ( 2005 ) . Nuclear trapping of the forkhead transcription factor FoxO1 via Sirt - dependent deacetyla - tion promotes expression of glucogenetic genes . J Biol Chem 280 : 20589 – 20595 . Furukawa S , Fujita T , Shimabukuro M , Iwaki M , Yamada Y , Nakajima Y et al . ( 2004 ) . Increased oxidative stress in obesity and its impact on metabolic syndrome . J Clin Invest 114 : 1752 – 1761 . Furukawa - Hibi Y , Kobayashi Y , Chen C , Motoyama N . ( 2005 ) . FOXO transcription factors in cell - cycle regulation and the response to oxidative stress . Antioxid Redox Signal 7 : 752 – 760 . Furuyama T , Kitayama K , Yamashita H , Mori N . ( 2003 ) . Forkhead transcription factor FOXO1 ( FKHR ) - dependent induction of PDK4 gene expression in skeletal muscle during energy deprivation . Biochem J 375 : 365 – 371 . Galili N , Davis RJ , Fredericks WJ , Mukhopadhyay S , Rauscher III FJ , Emanuel BS et al . ( 1993 ) . Fusion of a fork head domain gene to PAX3 in the solid tumour alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma . Nat Genet 5 : 230 – 235 . Gan L , Han Y , Bastianetto S , Dumont Y , Unterman TG , Quirion R . ( 2005 ) . FoxO - dependent and - independent mechanisms mediate SirT1 effects on IGFBP - 1 gene expression . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 337 : 1092 – 1096 . Garcia - Ocana A , Takane KK , Syed MA , Philbrick WM , Vasavada RC , Stewart AF . ( 2000 ) . Hepatocyte growth factor overexpression in the islet of transgenic mice increases beta cell proliferation , enhances islet mass , and induces mild hypoglycemia . J Biol Chem 275 : 1226 – 1232 . Glass DJ . ( 2003 ) . Signalling pathways that mediate skeletal muscle hypertrophy and atrophy . Nat Cell Biol 5 : 87 – 90 . Glauser DA , Schlegel W . ( 2007 ) . The emerging role of FOXO transcription factors in pancreatic beta cells . J Endocrinol 193 : 195 – 207 . Gleason CE , Gross DN , Birnbaum MJ . ( 2007 ) . When the usual insulin is just not enough . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104 : 8681 – 8682 . Goldberg IJ . ( 1996 ) . Lipoprotein lipase and lipolysis : central roles in lipoprotein metabolism and atherogenesis . J Lipid Res 37 : 693 – 707 . Gomes MD , Lecker SH , Jagoe RT , Navon A , Goldberg AL . ( 2001 ) . Atrogin - 1 , a muscle - speciﬁc F - box protein highly expressed during muscle atrophy . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98 : 14440 – 14445 . Gonzalez GA , Montminy MR . ( 1989 ) . Cyclic AMP stimulates somatostatin gene transcription by phosphorylation of CREB at serine 133 . Cell 59 : 675 – 680 . Grankvist K , Marklund SL , Taljedal IB . ( 1981 ) . CuZn - superoxide dismutase , Mn - superoxide dismutase , catalase and glutathione peroxidase in pancreatic islets and other tissues in the mouse . Biochem J 199 : 393 – 398 . Greer EL , Brunet A . ( 2005 ) . FOXO transcription factors at the interface between longevity and tumor suppression . Oncogene 24 : 7410 – 7425 . Greiwe JS , Holloszy JO , Semenkovich CF . ( 2000 ) . Exercise induces lipoprotein lipase and GLUT - 4 protein in muscle independent of adrenergic - receptor signaling . J Appl Physiol 89 : 176 – 181 . Grill V , Bjorklund A . ( 2001 ) . Overstimulation and beta - cell function . Diabetes 50 ( Suppl 1 ) : S122 – S124 . Hajri T , Abumrad NA . ( 2002 ) . Fatty acid transport across membranes : relevance to nutrition and metabolic pathology . Annu Rev Nutr 22 : 383 – 415 . Hajri T , Han XX , Bonen A , Abumrad NA . ( 2002 ) . Defective fatty acid uptake modulates insulin responsiveness and metabolic responses to diet in CD36 - null mice . J Clin Invest 109 : 1381 – 1389 . Hall RK , Yamasaki T , Kucera T , Waltner - Law M , O’Brien R , Granner DK . ( 2000 ) . Regulation of phosphoenolpyruvate carbox - ykinase and insulin - like growth factor - binding protein - 1 gene expression by insulin . The role of winged helix / forkhead proteins . J Biol Chem 275 : 30169 – 30175 . Hansmannel F , Mordier S , Iynedjian PB . ( 2006 ) . Insulin induction of glucokinase and fatty acid synthase in hepatocytes : analysis of the roles of sterol - regulatory - element - binding protein - 1c and liver X receptor . Biochem J 399 : 275 – 283 . Herzig S , Long F , Jhala US , Hedrick S , Quinn R , Bauer A et al . ( 2001 ) . CREB regulates hepatic gluconeogenesis through the coactivator PGC - 1 . Nature 413 : 179 – 183 . Hirota K , Daitoku H , Matsuzaki H , Araya N , Yamagata K , Asada S et al . ( 2003 ) . Hepatocyte nuclear factor - 4 is a novel downstream target of insulin via FKHR as a signal - regulated transcriptional inhibitor . J Biol Chem 278 : 13056 – 13060 . Holz GG , Chepurny OG . ( 2005 ) . Diabetes outfoxed by GLP - 1 ? Sci STKE 2005 : pe2 . Hribal ML , Nakae J , Kitamura T , Shutter JR , Accili D . ( 2003 ) . Regulation of insulin - like growth factor - dependent myoblast differentiation by Foxo forkhead transcription factors . J Cell Biol 162 : 535 – 541 . Huang B , Wu P , Bowker - Kinley MM , Harris RA . ( 2002 ) . Regulation of pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase expression by peroxisome proliferator - activated receptor - alpha ligands , glucocorticoids , and insulin . Diabetes 51 : 276 – 283 . Huang H , Iida KT , Sone H , Ajisaka R . ( 2007 ) . The regulation of adiponectin receptors expression by acute exercise in mice . Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes 115 : 417 – 422 . Imae M , Fu Z , Yoshida A , Noguchi T , Kato H . ( 2003 ) . Nutritional and hormonal factors control the gene expression of FoxOs , the mammalian homologues of DAF - 16 . J Mol Endocrinol 30 : 253 – 262 . Ito Y , Azrolan N , O’Connell A , Walsh A , Breslow JL . ( 1990 ) . Hypertriglyceridemia as a result of human apo CIII gene expression in transgenic mice . Science 249 : 790 – 793 . Jackerott M , Moldrup A , Thams P , Galsgaard ED , Knudsen J , Lee YC et al . ( 2006 ) . STAT5 activity in pancreatic beta - cells inﬂuences the severity of diabetes in animal models of type 1 and 2 diabetes . Diabetes 55 : 2705 – 2712 . Jagoe RT , Goldberg AL . ( 2001 ) . What do we really know about the ubiquitin – proteasome pathway in muscle atrophy ? Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care 4 : 183 – 190 . Jiang BH , Aoki M , Zheng JZ , Li J , Vogt PK . ( 1999 ) . Myogenic signaling of phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase requires the serine - threonine kinase Akt / protein kinase B . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96 : 2077 – 2081 . Jiang BH , Zheng JZ , Vogt PK . ( 1998 ) . An essential role of phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase in myogenic differentiation . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95 : 14179 – 14183 . Jing E , Gesta S , Kahn CR . ( 2007 ) . SIRT2 regulates adipocyte differentiation through FoxO1 acetylation / deacetylation . Cell Me - tab 6 : 105 – 114 . Joseph SB , Lafﬁtte BA , Patel PH , Watson MA , Matsukuma KE , Walczak R et al . ( 2002 ) . Direct and indirect mechanisms for regulation of fatty acid synthase gene expression by liver X receptors . J Biol Chem 277 : 11019 – 11025 . Joshi RL , Lamothe B , Cordonnier N , Mesbah K , Monthioux E , Jami J et al . ( 1996 ) . Targeted disruption of the insulin receptor gene in the mouse results in neonatal lethality . EMBO J 15 : 1542 – 1547 . Kaeberlein M , McVey M , Guarente L . ( 1999 ) . The SIR2 / 3 / 4 complex and SIR2 alone promote longevity in Saccharomyces cerevisiae by two different mechanisms . Genes Dev 13 : 2570 – 2580 . Kaliman P , Canicio J , Shepherd PR , Beeton CA , Testar X , Palacin M et al . ( 1998 ) . Insulin - like growth factors require phosphatidylinosi - tol 3 - kinase to signal myogenesis : dominant negative p85 expression blocks differentiation of L6E9 muscle cells . Mol Endocrinol 12 : 66 – 77 . Kamei Y , Miura S , Suzuki M , Kai Y , Mizukami J , Taniguchi T et al . ( 2004 ) . Skeletal muscle FOXO1 ( FKHR ) transgenic mice have less skeletal muscle mass , down - regulated Type I ( slow twitch / red muscle ) ﬁber genes , and impaired glycemic control . J Biol Chem 279 : 41114 – 41123 . Role of FoxO in the regulation of metabolism DN Gross et al 2333 Oncogene Kamei Y , Mizukami J , Miura S , Suzuki M , Takahashi N , Kawada T et al . ( 2003 ) . A forkhead transcription factor FKHR up - regulates lipoprotein lipase expression in skeletal muscle . FEBS Lett 536 : 232 – 236 . Kaneto H , Miyatsuka T , Shiraiwa T , Yamamoto K , Kato K , Fujitani Y et al . ( 2007 ) . Crucial role of PDX - 1 in pancreas development , beta - cell differentiation , and induction of surrogate beta - cells . Curr Med Chem 14 : 1745 – 1752 . Kaneto H , Xu G , Fujii N , Kim S , Bonner - Weir S , Weir GC . ( 2002 ) . Involvement of c - Jun N - terminal kinase in oxidative stress - mediated suppression of insulin gene expression . J Biol Chem 277 : 30010 – 30018 . Katz J , McGarry JD . ( 1984 ) . The glucose paradox . Is glucose a substrate for liver metabolism ? J Clin Invest 74 : 1901 – 1909 . Kawamori D , Kajimoto Y , Kaneto H , Umayahara Y , Fujitani Y , Miyatsuka T et al . ( 2003 ) . Oxidative stress induces nucleo - cytoplasmic translocation of pancreatic transcription factor PDX - 1 through activation of c - Jun NH ( 2 ) - terminal kinase . Diabetes 52 : 2896 – 2904 . Kawamori D , Kaneto H , Nakatani Y , Matsuoka TA , Matsuhisa M , Hori M et al . ( 2006 ) . The forkhead transcription factor Foxo1 bridges the JNK pathway and the transcription factor PDX - 1 through its intracellular translocation . J Biol Chem 281 : 1091 – 1098 . Kido Y , Burks DJ , Withers D , Bruning JC , Kahn CR , White MF et al . ( 2000 ) . Tissue - speciﬁc insulin resistance in mice with mutations in the insulin receptor , IRS - 1 , and IRS - 2 . J Clin Invest 105 : 199 – 205 . Kim SJ , Winter K , Nian C , Tsuneoka M , Koda Y , McIntosh CH . ( 2005 ) . Glucose - dependent insulinotropic polypeptide ( GIP ) stimu - lation of pancreatic beta - cell survival is dependent upon phospha - tidylinositol 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) / protein kinase B ( PKB ) signaling , inactivation of the forkhead transcription factor Foxo1 , and down - regulation of bax expression . J Biol Chem 280 : 22297 – 22307 . Kim SY , Kim HI , Kim TH , Im SS , Park SK , Lee IK et al . ( 2004 ) . SREBP - 1c mediates the insulin - dependent hepatic glucokinase expression . J Biol Chem 279 : 30823 – 30829 . Kitamura T , Ido Kitamura Y . ( 2007 ) . Role of FoxO proteins in pancreatic beta cells . Endocr J 54 : 507 – 515 . Kitamura T , Kitamura YI , Funahashi Y , Shawber CJ , Castrillon DH , Kollipara R et al . ( 2007 ) . A Foxo / Notch pathway controls myogenic differentiation and ﬁber type speciﬁcation . J Clin Invest 117 : 2477 – 2485 . Kitamura T , Nakae J , Kitamura Y , Kido Y , Biggs III WH , Wright CV et al . ( 2002 ) . The forkhead transcription factor Foxo1 links insulin signaling to Pdx1 regulation of pancreatic beta cell growth . J Clin Invest 110 : 1839 – 1847 . Kitamura YI , Kitamura T , Kruse JP , Raum JC , Stein R , Gu W et al . ( 2005 ) . FoxO1 protects against pancreatic beta cell failure through NeuroD and MafA induction . Cell Metab 2 : 153 – 163 . Kubota N , Tobe K , Terauchi Y , Eto K , Yamauchi T , Suzuki R et al . ( 2000 ) . Disruption of insulin receptor substrate 2 causes type 2 diabetes because of liver insulin resistance and lack of compensatory beta - cell hyperplasia . Diabetes 49 : 1880 – 1889 . Kulkarni RN , Bruning JC , Winnay JN , Postic C , Magnuson MA , Kahn CR . ( 1999 ) . Tissue - speciﬁc knockout of the insulin receptor in pancreatic beta cells creates an insulin secretory defect similar to that in type 2 diabetes . Cell 96 : 329 – 339 . Kulkarni RN , Holzenberger M , Shih DQ , Ozcan U , Stoffel M , Magnuson MA et al . ( 2002 ) . beta - cell - speciﬁc deletion of the Igf1 receptor leads to hyperinsulinemia and glucose intolerance but does not alter beta - cell mass . Nat Genet 31 : 111 – 115 . Kuriyama H , Shimomura I , Kishida K , Kondo H , Furuyama N , Nishizawa H et al . ( 2002 ) . Coordinated regulation of fat - speciﬁc and liver - speciﬁc glycerol channels , aquaporin adipose and aqua - porin 9 . Diabetes 51 : 2915 – 2921 . Kushner JA , Simpson L , Wartschow LM , Guo S , Rankin MM , Parsons R et al . ( 2005 ) . Phosphatase and tensin homolog regulation of islet growth and glucose homeostasis . J Biol Chem 280 : 39388 – 39393 . Kushner JA , Ye J , Schubert M , Burks DJ , Dow MA , Flint CL et al . ( 2002 ) . Pdx1 restores beta cell function in Irs2 knockout mice . J Clin Invest 109 : 1193 – 1201 . Kwon HS , Huang B , Unterman TG , Harris RA . ( 2004 ) . Protein kinase B - alpha inhibits human pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase - 4 gene induction by dexamethasone through inactivation of FOXO transcription factors . Diabetes 53 : 899 – 910 . Ladu MJ , Kapsas H , Palmer WK . ( 1991 ) . Regulation of lipoprotein lipase in adipose and muscle tissues during fasting . Am J Physiol 260 : R953 – R959 . Lantz KA , Kaestner KH . ( 2005 ) . Winged - helix transcription factors and pancreatic development . Clin Sci ( Lond ) 108 : 195 – 204 . Large V , Peroni O , Letexier D , Ray H , Beylot M . ( 2004 ) . Metabolism of lipids in human white adipocyte . Diabetes Metab 30 : 294 – 309 . Lecker SH , Jagoe RT , Gilbert A , Gomes M , Baracos V , Bailey J et al . ( 2004 ) . Multiple types of skeletal muscle atrophy involve a common program of changes in gene expression . FASEB J 18 : 39 – 51 . Lee CH , Olson P , Hevener A , Mehl I , Chong LW , Olefsky JM et al . ( 2006 ) . PPARdelta regulates glucose metabolism and insulin sensitivity . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103 : 3444 – 3449 . Lee CS , Sund NJ , Vatamaniuk MZ , Matschinsky FM , Stoffers DA , Kaestner KH . ( 2002 ) . Foxa2 controls Pdx1 gene expression in pancreatic beta - cells in vivo . Diabetes 51 : 2546 – 2551 . Lee SW , Dai G , Hu Z , Wang X , Du J , Mitch WE . ( 2004 ) . Regulation of muscle protein degradation : coordinated control of apoptotic and ubiquitin – proteasome systems by phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase . J Am Soc Nephrol 15 : 1537 – 1545 . Lefebvre P , Chinetti G , Fruchart JC , Staels B . ( 2006 ) . Sorting out the roles of PPAR alpha in energy metabolism and vascular home - ostasis . J Clin Invest 116 : 571 – 580 . Leger B , Cartoni R , Praz M , Lamon S , Deriaz O , Crettenand A et al . ( 2006a ) . Akt signalling through GSK - 3beta , mTOR and Foxo1 is involved in human skeletal muscle hypertrophy and atrophy . J Physiol 576 : 923 – 933 . Leger B , Vergani L , Soraru G , Hespel P , Derave W , Gobelet C et al . ( 2006b ) . Human skeletal muscle atrophy in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis reveals a reduction in Akt and an increase in atrogin - 1 . FASEB J 20 : 583 – 585 . Li X , Monks B , Ge Q , Birnbaum MJ . ( 2007 ) . Akt / PKB regulates hepatic metabolism by directly inhibiting PGC - 1alpha transcription coactivator . Nature 447 : 1012 – 1016 . Lindberg K , Ronn SG , Tornehave D , Richter H , Hansen JA , Romer J et al . ( 2005 ) . Regulation of pancreatic beta - cell mass and prolifera - tion by SOCS - 3 . J Mol Endocrinol 35 : 231 – 243 . Luquet S , Lopez - Soriano J , Holst D , Fredenrich A , Melki J , Rassoulzadegan M et al . ( 2003 ) . Peroxisome proliferator - activated receptor delta controls muscle development and oxidative cap - ability . FASEB J 17 : 2299 – 2301 . Mandrup S , Lane MD . ( 1997 ) . Regulating adipogenesis . J Biol Chem 272 : 5367 – 5370 . Matsumoto M , Han S , Kitamura T , Accili D . ( 2006 ) . Dual role of transcription factor FoxO1 in controlling hepatic insulin sensitivity and lipid metabolism . J Clin Invest 116 : 2464 – 2472 . Matsumoto M , Pocai A , Rossetti L , Depinho RA , Accili D . ( 2007 ) . Impaired regulation of hepatic glucose production in mice lacking the forkhead transcription factor foxo1 in liver . Cell Metab 6 : 208 – 216 . McKinsey TA , Zhang CL , Olson EN . ( 2002 ) . Signaling chromatin to make muscle . Curr Opin Cell Biol 14 : 763 – 772 . McPherron AC , Lawler AM , Lee SJ . ( 1997 ) . Regulation of skeletal muscle mass in mice by a new TGF - beta superfamily member . Nature 387 : 83 – 90 . Meriane M , Roux P , Primig M , Fort P , Gauthier - Rouviere C . ( 2000 ) . Critical activities of Rac1 and Cdc42Hs in skeletal myogenesis : antagonistic effects of JNK and p38 pathways . Mol Biol Cell 11 : 2513 – 2528 . Miki H , Yamauchi T , Suzuki R , Komeda K , Tsuchida A , Kubota N et al . ( 2001 ) . Essential role of insulin receptor substrate 1 ( IRS - 1 ) and IRS - 2 in adipocyte differentiation . Mol Cell Biol 21 : 2521 – 2532 . Role of FoxO in the regulation of metabolism DN Gross et al 2334 Oncogene Morrison RF , Farmer SR . ( 1999 ) . Role of PPARgamma in regulating a cascade expression of cyclin - dependent kinase inhibitors , p18 ( INK4c ) and p21 ( Waf1 / Cip1 ) , during adipogenesis . J Biol Chem 274 : 17088 – 17097 . Morrison RF , Farmer SR . ( 2000 ) . Hormonal signaling and transcriptional control of adipocyte differentiation . J Nutr 130 : 3116S – 3121S . Mounier C , Dumas V , Posner BI . ( 2006 ) . Regulation of hepatic insulin - like growth factor - binding protein - 1 gene expression by insulin : central role for mammalian target of rapamycin independent of forkhead box O proteins . Endocrinology 147 : 2383 – 2391 . Murtaugh LC . ( 2007 ) . Pancreas and beta - cell development : from the actual to the possible . Development 134 : 427 – 438 . Naimi M , Gautier N , Chaussade C , Valverde AM , Accili D , Van Obberghen E . ( 2007 ) . Nuclear forkhead box O1 controls and integrates key signaling pathways in hepatocytes . Endocrinology 148 : 2424 – 2434 . Nakae J , Biggs III WH , Kitamura T , Cavenee WK , Wright CV , Arden KC et al . ( 2002 ) . Regulation of insulin action and pancreatic beta - cell function by mutated alleles of the gene encoding forkhead transcription factor Foxo1 . Nat Genet 32 : 245 – 253 . Nakae J , Cao Y , Daitoku H , Fukamizu A , Ogawa W , Yano Y et al . ( 2006 ) . The LXXLL motif of murine forkhead transcription factor FoxO1 mediates Sirt1 - dependent transcriptional activity . J Clin Invest 116 : 2473 – 2483 . Nakae J , Kitamura T , Kitamura Y , Biggs III WH , Arden KC , Accili D . ( 2003 ) . The forkhead transcription factor Foxo1 regulates adipocyte differentiation . Dev Cell 4 : 119 – 129 . Newgard CB , McGarry JD . ( 1995 ) . Metabolic coupling factors in pancreatic beta - cell signal transduction . Annu Rev Biochem 64 : 689 – 719 . Nishiyama T , Kii I , Kudo A . ( 2004 ) . Inactivation of Rho / ROCK signaling is crucial for the nuclear accumulation of FKHR and myoblast fusion . J Biol Chem 279 : 47311 – 47319 . Okada T , Liew CW , Hu J , Hinault C , Michael MD , Krtzfeldt J et al . ( 2007 ) . Insulin receptors in beta - cells are critical for islet compensa - tory growth response to insulin resistance . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104 : 8977 – 8982 . Park S , Dong X , Fisher TL , Dunn S , Omer AK , Weir G et al . ( 2006 ) . Exendin - 4 uses Irs2 signaling to mediate pancreatic beta cell growth and function . J Biol Chem 281 : 1159 – 1168 . Peters SJ , Harris RA , Wu P , Pehleman TL , Heigenhauser GJ , Spriet LL . ( 2001 ) . Human skeletal muscle PDH kinase activity and isoform expression during a 3 - day high - fat / low - carbohydrate diet . Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 281 : E1151 – E1158 . Picard F , Kurtev M , Chung N , Topark - Ngarm A , Senawong T , Machado De Oliveira R et al . ( 2004 ) . Sirt1 promotes fat mobilization in white adipocytes by repressing PPAR - gamma . Nature 429 : 771 – 776 . Pilegaard H , Ordway GA , Saltin B , Neufer PD . ( 2000 ) . Transcrip - tional regulation of gene expression in human skeletal muscle during recovery from exercise . Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 279 : E806 – E814 . Pilegaard H , Saltin B , Neufer PD . ( 2003 ) . Effect of short - term fasting and refeeding on transcriptional regulation of metabolic genes in human skeletal muscle . Diabetes 52 : 657 – 662 . Poitout V , Robertson RP . ( 2002 ) . Minireview : secondary beta - cell failure in type 2 diabetes—a convergence of glucotoxicity and lipotoxicity . Endocrinology 143 : 339 – 342 . Postic C , Dentin R , Girard J . ( 2004 ) . Role of the liver in the control of carbohydrate and lipid homeostasis . Diabetes Metab 30 : 398 – 408 . Prado CL , Pugh - Bernard AE , Elghazi L , Sosa - Pineda B , Sussel L . ( 2004 ) . Ghrelin cells replace insulin - producing beta cells in two mouse models of pancreas development . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101 : 2924 – 2929 . Puigserver P , Rhee J , Donovan J , Walkey CJ , Yoon JC , Oriente F et al . ( 2003 ) . Insulin - regulated hepatic gluconeogenesis through FOXO1 – PGC - 1alpha interaction . Nature 423 : 550 – 555 . Qu S , Altomonte J , Perdomo G , He J , Fan Y , Kamagate A et al . ( 2006 ) . Aberrant Forkhead box O1 function is associated with impaired hepatic metabolism . Endocrinology 147 : 5641 – 5652 . Qu S , Su D , Altomonte J , Kamagate A , He J , Perdomo G et al . ( 2007 ) . PPAR { alpha } mediates the hypolipidemic action of ﬁbrates by antagonizing FoxO1 . Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 292 : E421 – E434 . Randle PJ . ( 1986 ) . Fuel selection in animals . Biochem Soc Trans 14 : 799 – 806 . Rauramaa R , Kuusela P , Hietanen E . ( 1980 ) . Adipose , muscle and lung tissue lipoprotein lipase activities in young streptozotocin treated rats . Horm Metab Res 12 : 591 – 595 . Reisz - Porszasz S , Bhasin S , Artaza JN , Shen R , Sinha - Hikim I , Hogue A et al . ( 2003 ) . Lower skeletal muscle mass in male transgenic mice with muscle - speciﬁc overexpression of myostatin . Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 285 : E876 – E888 . Rhee J , Inoue Y , Yoon JC , Puigserver P , Fan M , Gonzalez FJ et al . ( 2003 ) . Regulation of hepatic fasting response by PPARgamma coactivator - 1alpha ( PGC - 1 ) : requirement for hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha in gluconeogenesis . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100 : 4012 – 4017 . Ritzel RA , Hansen JB , Veldhuis JD , Butler PC . ( 2004 ) . Induction of beta - cell rest by a Kir6 . 2 / SUR1 - selective K ( ATP ) - channel opener preserves beta - cell insulin stores and insulin secretion in human islets cultured at high ( 11m M ) glucose . J Clin Endocrinol Metab 89 : 795 – 805 . Robertson RP , Harmon J , Tran PO , Poitout V . ( 2004 ) . Beta - cell glucose toxicity , lipotoxicity , and chronic oxidative stress in type 2 diabetes . Diabetes 53 ( Suppl 1 ) : S119 – S124 . Rodgers JT , Lerin C , Haas W , Gygi SP , Spiegelman BM , Puigserver P . ( 2005 ) . Nutrient control of glucose homeostasis through a complex of PGC - 1alpha and SIRT1 . Nature 434 : 113 – 118 . Rosen ED , MacDougald OA . ( 2006 ) . Adipocyte differentiation from the inside out . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 7 : 885 – 896 . Rosen ED , Sarraf P , Troy AE , Bradwin G , Moore K , Milstone DS et al . ( 1999 ) . PPAR gamma is required for the differentiation of adipose tissue in vivo and in vitro . Mol Cell 4 : 611 – 617 . Rosen ED , Spiegelman BM . ( 2000 ) . Molecular regulation of adipo - genesis . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 16 : 145 – 171 . Rosen ED , Walkey CJ , Puigserver P , Spiegelman BM . ( 2000 ) . Transcriptional regulation of adipogenesis . Genes Dev 14 : 1293 – 1307 . Roth U , Curth K , Unterman TG , Kietzmann T . ( 2004 ) . The transcription factors HIF - 1 and HNF - 4 and the coactivator p300 are involved in insulin - regulated glucokinase gene expression via the phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase / protein kinase B pathway . J Biol Chem 279 : 2623 – 2631 . Sacheck JM , Hyatt JP , Raffaello A , Jagoe RT , Roy RR , Edgerton VR et al . ( 2007 ) . Rapid disuse and denervation atrophy involve transcriptional changes similar to those of muscle wasting during systemic diseases . FASEB J 21 : 140 – 155 . Samuel VT , Choi CS , Phillips TG , Romanelli AJ , Geisler JG , Bhanot S et al . ( 2006 ) . Targeting foxo1 in mice using antisense oligonucleo - tide improves hepatic and peripheral insulin action . Diabetes 55 : 2042 – 2050 . Sandri M , Sandri C , Gilbert A , Skurk C , Calabria E , Picard A et al . ( 2004 ) . Foxo transcription factors induce the atrophy - related ubiquitin ligase atrogin - 1 and cause skeletal muscle atrophy . Cell 117 : 399 – 412 . Schilling MM , Oeser JK , Boustead JN , Flemming BP , O’Brien RM . ( 2006 ) . Gluconeogenesis : re - evaluating the FOXO1 – PGC - 1alpha connection . Nature 443 : E10 – E11 . Sekine K , Chen YR , Kojima N , Ogata K , Fukamizu A , Miyajima A . ( 2007 ) . Foxo1 links insulin signaling to C / EBPalpha and regulates gluconeogenesis during liver development . EMBO J 26 : 3607 – 3615 . Southgate RJ , Bruce CR , Carey AL , Steinberg GR , Walder K , Monks R et al . ( 2005 ) . PGC - 1alpha gene expression is down - regulated by Akt - mediated phosphorylation and nuclear exclusion of FoxO1 in insulin - stimulated skeletal muscle . FASEB J 19 : 2072 – 2074 . Role of FoxO in the regulation of metabolism DN Gross et al 2335 Oncogene Southgate RJ , Neill B , Prelovsek O , El - Osta A , Kamei Y , Miura S et al . ( 2007 ) . FOXO1 regulates the expression of 4E - BP1 and inhibits mTOR signaling in mammalian skeletal muscle . J Biol Chem 282 : 21176 – 21186 . Spriet LL , Tunstall RJ , Watt MJ , Mehan KA , Hargreaves M , Cameron - Smith D . ( 2004 ) . Pyruvate dehydrogenase activation and kinase expression in human skeletal muscle during fasting . J Appl Physiol 96 : 2082 – 2087 . Stitt TN , Drujan D , Clarke BA , Panaro F , Timofeyva Y , Kline WO et al . ( 2004 ) . The IGF - 1 / PI3K / Akt pathway prevents expression of muscle atrophy - induced ubiquitin ligases by inhibiting FOXO transcription factors . Mol Cell 14 : 395 – 403 . Stoffers DA , Kieffer TJ , Hussain MA , Drucker DJ , Bonner - Weir S , Habener JF et al . ( 2000 ) . Insulinotropic glucagon - like peptide 1 agonists stimulate expression of homeodomain protein IDX - 1 and increase islet size in mouse pancreas . Diabetes 49 : 741 – 748 . Straub SG , Sharp GW . ( 2002 ) . Glucose - stimulated signaling pathways in biphasic insulin secretion . Diabetes Metab Res Rev 18 : 451 – 463 . Subauste AR , Burant CF . ( 2007 ) . Role of FoxO1 in FFA - induced oxidative stress in adipocytes . Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 293 : E159 – E164 . Tamemoto H , Kadowaki T , Tobe K , Yagi T , Sakura H , Hayakawa T et al ( 1994 ) . Insulin resistance and growth retardation in mice lacking insulin receptor substrate - 1 . Nature 372 : 182 – 186 . Tang ED , Nunez G , Barr FG , Guan KL . ( 1999 ) . Negative regulation of the forkhead transcription factor FKHR by Akt . J Biol Chem 274 : 16741 – 16746 . Tang QQ , Otto TC , Lane MD . ( 2003 ) . Mitotic clonal expansion : a synchronous process required for adipogenesis . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100 : 44 – 49 . Tiedge M , Lortz S , Munday R , Lenzen S . ( 1998 ) . Complementary action of antioxidant enzymes in the protection of bioengineered insulin - producing RINm5F cells against the toxicity of reactive oxygen species . Diabetes 47 : 1578 – 1585 . Tissenbaum HA , Guarente L . ( 2001 ) . Increased dosage of a sir - 2 gene extends lifespan in Caenorhabditis elegans . Nature 410 : 227 – 230 . Tobin KA , Ulven SM , Schuster GU , Steineger HH , Andresen SM , Gustafsson JA et al . ( 2002 ) . Liver X receptors as insulin - mediating factors in fatty acid and cholesterol biosynthesis . J Biol Chem 277 : 10691 – 10697 . Tseng YH , Kriauciunas KM , Kokkotou E , Kahn CR . ( 2004 ) . Differential roles of insulin receptor substrates in brown adipocyte differentiation . Mol Cell Biol 24 : 1918 – 1929 . Tsintzas K , Jewell K , Kamran M , Laithwaite D , Boonsong T , Littlewood J et al . ( 2006 ) . Differential regulation of metabolic genes in skeletal muscle during starvation and refeeding in humans . J Physiol 575 : 291 – 303 . Tsuchida A , Yamauchi T , Ito Y , Hada Y , Maki T , Takekawa S et al . ( 2004 ) . Insulin / Foxo1 pathway regulates expression levels of adiponectin receptors and adiponectin sensitivity . J Biol Chem 279 : 30817 – 30822 . Tureckova J , Wilson EM , Cappalonga JL , Rotwein P . ( 2001 ) . Insulin - like growth factor - mediated muscle differentiation : collaboration between phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase – Akt - signaling pathways and myogenin . J Biol Chem 276 : 39264 – 39270 . Wang ND , Finegold MJ , Bradley A , Ou CN , Abdelsayed SV , Wilde MD et al . ( 1995 ) . Impaired energy homeostasis in C / EBP alpha knockout mice . Science 269 : 1108 – 1112 . Wang X , Cahill CM , Pineyro MA , Zhou J , Doyle ME , Egan JM . ( 1999 ) . Glucagon - like peptide - 1 regulates the beta cell transcription factor , PDX - 1 , in insulinoma cells . Endocrinology 140 : 4904 – 4907 . Wang YX , Lee CH , Tiep S , Yu RT , Ham J , Kang H et al . ( 2003 ) . Peroxisome - proliferator - activated receptor delta activates fat meta - bolism to prevent obesity . Cell 113 : 159 – 170 . Wilson EM , Rotwein P . ( 2007 ) . Selective control of skeletal muscle differentiation by Akt1 . J Biol Chem 282 : 5106 – 5110 . Withers DJ , Gutierrez JS , Towery H , Burks DJ , Ren JM , Previs S et al . ( 1998 ) . Disruption of IRS - 2 causes type 2 diabetes in mice . Nature 391 : 900 – 904 . Wu KL , Gannon M , Peshavaria M , Ofﬁeld MF , Henderson E , Ray M et al . ( 1997 ) . Hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta is involved in pancreatic beta - cell - speciﬁc transcription of the pdx - 1 gene . Mol Cell Biol 17 : 6002 – 6013 . Wu P , Sato J , Zhao Y , Jaskiewicz J , Popov KM , Harris RA . ( 1998 ) . Starvation and diabetes increase the amount of pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase isoenzyme 4 in rat heart . Biochem J 329 ( Part 1 ) : 197 – 201 . Wu Z , Bucher NL , Farmer SR . ( 1996 ) . Induction of peroxisome proliferator - activated receptor gamma during the conversion of 3T3 ﬁbroblasts into adipocytes is mediated by C / EBPbeta , C / EBPdelta , and glucocorticoids . Mol Cell Biol 16 : 4128 – 4136 . Xu J , Liao K . ( 2004 ) . Protein kinase B / AKT 1 plays a pivotal role in insulin - like growth factor - 1 receptor signaling induced 3T3 - L1 adipocyte differentiation . J Biol Chem 279 : 35914 – 35922 . Yamauchi T , Tobe K , Tamemoto H , Ueki K , Kaburagi Y , Yamamoto - Honda R et al . ( 1996 ) . Insulin signalling and insulin actions in the muscles and livers of insulin - resistant , insulin receptor substrate 1 - deﬁcient mice . Mol Cell Biol 16 : 3074 – 3084 . Yeh WC , Cao Z , Classon M , McKnight SL . ( 1995 ) . Cascade regulation of terminal adipocyte differentiation by three members of the C / EBP family of leucine zipper proteins . Genes Dev 9 : 168 – 181 . Yoon JC , Puigserver P , Chen G , Donovan J , Wu Z , Rhee J et al . ( 2001 ) . Control of hepatic gluconeogenesis through the transcrip - tional coactivator PGC - 1 . Nature 413 : 131 – 138 . Yoshikawa H , Ma Z , Bjorklund A , Grill V . ( 2004 ) . Short - term intermittent exposure to diazoxide improves functional performance of beta - cells in a high - glucose environment . Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 287 : E1202 – E1208 . Zhang W , Patil S , Chauhan B , Guo S , Powell DR , Le J et al . ( 2006 ) . FoxO1 regulates multiple metabolic pathways in the liver : effects on gluconeogenic , glycolytic , and lipogenic gene expression . J Biol Chem 281 : 10105 – 10117 . Role of FoxO in the regulation of metabolism DN Gross et al 2336 Oncogene