Findiing Science with Science Page 1 Finding Science with Science : Evaluating the Use of Scientific Knowledge and Semantics to Enhance Discovery of Scientific Resources * Kristin Stock a , Vera Karasova a , Anne Robertson b , Guillaume Roger b , Mark Small b , Mohamed Bishr c , Jens Ortmann c , Tim Stojanovic d , Femke Reitsma e , Lukasz Korczynski f and Boyan Brodaric g a Centre for Geospatial Science , University of Nottingham and Allworlds Geothinking , Nottingham , UK ; b EDINA , University of Edinburgh , Edinburgh , UK ; c Semantic Interoperability Lab , University of Muenster , Muenster , Germany ; d School of Earth and Ocean Sciences , Cardiff University , Cardiff , UK ; e Department of Geography , University of Canterbury , Christchurch , New Zealand ; f DERI , National University of Ireland , Galway , Galway , Ireland ; g Geological Survey of Canada , Ottawa , Canada Short Title : Finding Science with Science Keywords : ontology , semantics , knowledge infrastructure , marine science * Corresponding author . Email : kristin . stock @ nottingham . ac . uk Findiing Science with Science Page 2 Abstract Current approaches to the discovery of scientific resources ( publications , data sets and web services ) are dominated by keyword search . These approaches do not allow scientists to search on the deeper semantics of scientific resources , or to discover resources on the basis of the scientific approaches taken . This paper presents an approach to the discovery of scientific resources that uses structured knowledge in the form of ontologies describing the domain and the scientific knowledge inherent within the scientific resource . The work also supports the use of informal tags as a tool for resource discovery . These combined capabilities provide scientists with new and powerful options for resource discovery . A demonstration application was developed to illustrate this approach in the marine science domain . A qualitative user study was then undertaken to explore how scientists felt about the approach for resource discovery in the context of their scientific work . The study showed that marine scientists were enthusiastic about the capabilities of such an approach and appreciated the ability to browse the visual structure of the knowledge and query on scientific method . The exploratory nature of the user study was used to identify future directions for such improvements . Findiing Science with Science Page 3 1 . Introduction Tools for the discovery of information resources that assist scientists in the advancement of science ( for example , publications , data sets and web services ) are currently predominantly focussed around either keywords that are applied in an unstructured manner , or predefined taxonomies that can be inflexible . Such approaches do not capture the deeper semantics of a scientific resource , and are thus limited in their ability to allow scientists to discover resources on the basis of rich domain knowledge or scientific approaches taken . This paper presents and evaluates the discovery tools provided in the COastal and Marine Perception Application for Scientific Scholarship ( COMPASS ) ( Stock et al . 2009 ) . This application was developed with a view to demonstrating how scientists working in geoscientific domains ) might be given tools to search for scientific resources on the basis of their scientific content . The approach is underpinned by ontologies of scientific knowledge ( describing aspects like scientific models , analysis methods , processes , conclusions and theories ) and of domain knowledge ( in this case , the marine domain ) . The evaluation approach was qualitative in nature and involved observation and in ‐ depth interviews with a small number of scientists working in the marine domain . The outline of this paper is as follows : Section 2 presents a user scenario to illustrate the kind of problem this approach might address ; Section 3 provides a brief summary of current work in the area of tools for scientific resource discovery ( with particular reference to the geosciences ) ; Section 4 describes the COMPASS tools and explains how they differ and Findiing Science with Science Page 4 extend current work ; Section 5 explains the method that was taken for the user study ; Section 6 presents the results and recommendations from the user study and Section 7 is a discussion of the results and future directions . This paper does not provide details of the underlying architecture and information model for the geospatial knowledge infrastructure that underpins these discovery tools . Instead the reader is referred to Stock et al . ( 2009 ) for an overview of those aspects . 2 . User Scenario A scientist wishes to examine the environmental impact of a proposed port extension in the Severn Estuary in the United Kingdom , but would also like to consider environmental alternatives to the development and the ways in which the impacts of the development may be offset . In order to do this , she would first like to identify all information resources relating to the marine environment that are relevant in the wider area of the Severn Estuary and Bristol Channel . The scientist is particularly interested in data about the hydrography of the dredged channel that is proposed , and considers data captured by LIDAR to be the most appropriate for this purpose . After searching for only LIDAR data , she discovers that suitable data is not available , so she generalises her search by including both semantically related and semantically more general data capture methods that might provide useful information about the sea floor . Findiing Science with Science Page 5 In doing this search , the scientist finds a range of interesting publications describing an analysis method that she is not familiar with . She searches for other papers that have used the same analysis method in order to improve her understanding , but also discovers with interest that it has been applied in a number of different domains . She then discovers other papers from those domains that use a similar analysis method that she thinks may be particularly useful in the context of the study of the sea floor , even though this method has not been applied in the marine domain before . She decides to try to apply this new method from non ‐ marine domains to her sea floor analysis , and discovers that it is very useful in evaluating alternative dredging patterns for the proposed port development . Furthermore , the scientist discovers that the original analysis approach was based on a model of wave movement that she believes has not been used for many years and is superseded by other models . She would like to examine the temporal distribution of research that uses that model , and the geographical distribution of areas in which the model has been applied . In doing this , she discovers that while the model of wave movement in question is not currently applied in UK waters , it is still considered appropriate in oceans in the southern hemisphere , and realises that this difference in wave model is due to the effect of the El Nino ‐ Southern Oscillation ( ENSO ) . Figure 1 shows a hypothetical geographical and temporal distribution of resources that may be used for this purpose . After further thought , the scientist thinks that the analysis method that she adopted from the non ‐ marine domains that provided new insights into her particular environmental assessment has a number of characteristics that make it suitable for application in ENSO waters . She decides to contact the researchers working in ENSO waters to suggest collaboration to further explore this theory . Findiing Science with Science Page 6 This scenario has provided an example of the ways in which discovery by semantic relation and scientific approach , combined with geography and temporality may be useful in the conduct of science . 3 . Related Work The work described in this paper brings together a number of different strands of research and application in different fields , addressing the issue of displaying scientific resources ( for example , publications , data sets and web services ) in ways that enhance discovery to support the scientific process . This Section briefly reviews previous work in these strands and is followed by the presentation of the COMPASS discovery interface which illustrates how these strands are addressed by the current research . 3 . 1 Resource Discovery Tools Currently , the most dominant method for scientists to discover resources involves searching on keyword ‐ based Internet search engines like Google ( including Google Scholar ) , combined with keyword searches in library databases . Attempts have been made to extend these approaches with more advanced search and social networking capabilities , providing researchers with the ability to connect and communicate with each other . Examples include : • ResearchGate ( www . researchgate . net ) ( Herring 2011 ) is a social networking site for researchers that includes semantic search capabilities . It is focussed on making and managing contacts , discussions and connecting with people . Members can list their Findiing Science with Science Page 7 publications , and it provides access to publications from the major literature databases using semantic correlations and provides recommendations for similar publications . It also does text matching based on abstracts that have similar themes using semantic methods , and is thus more advanced than keyword searches . • Mendeley ( mendeley . com ) ( Henning and Reichelt 2008 ) is a desktop download for managing publications ( the researcher’s own and those of other researchers ) . It provides a number of functions for analysing research trends . Tools for identifying the most popular authors , papers , journals and tags and various other statistics about use of publications are available . • WikiProfessional ( www . wikiprofessional . com ) ( Giles 2007 ) is a tool for the medical research community that allows medical and biological concepts to be viewed , and links followed to related concepts and publications . Its visualisations are mainly in the form of lists and histograms that show how closely related different terms are . These resource discovery tools focus mainly on the discovery of publications . However , scientific datasets and web services for the provision of data and functions also play an important role in the scientific process . Such data sets and web services are particularly important in the context of geographical and environmental research , as they often describe and illustrate scientific models and research results that may be used by other researchers . Research communities working in these areas have expended some effort in recent years in trying to enhance discovery of these scientific resources to support scientists . The inclusion of such resources in a scientific infrastructure also has the added benefit of opening the way for future development of workflows that consist of multiple web services to achieve a particular scientific outcome ( Berkley et al . 2005 ) . Findiing Science with Science Page 8 The myGrid consortium has developed a suite of tools that are designed to support scientists in their use of web services , including tools for designing and executing workflows ( e . g . Taverna ) and for sharing workflows and data with scientists ( e . g . myExperiment ) . These tools have focussed on use in bioinformatics ( Wolstencroft et al . 2007 ) , but are also being applied to geographic information , for example in the soils area ( McLeod et al . 2009 ) . KEPLER is another system that supports scientists in defining workflows in a range of domains ( Ludäscher et al . 2006 ) . Bowers and Ludäscher ( 2004 ) have combined ontologies with workflows by using ontologies to perform data transformations in the biodiversity domain , removing some of the burden of detailed data transformations from scientists . Also , the PANGAEA data library links data sets to publications in the earth science and environmental domains ( Deis , 2010 ) . In particular , the geospatial standards community has spent some years developing standards to support the discovery and exchange of such scientific resources , including standards to describe : • metadata about all kinds of resources ( for example , ISO 19115 / 119 ( International Standards Organisation 2003 ) ) ; • web services that provide access to data ( for example , OGC Web Feature Service ( Vretanos 2005 ) ) ; • web services that execute scientific processes ( for example , OGC Web Processing Service ( Shut and Whiteside 2005 ) • data schemas ( for example , Geography Markup Language ( Portele 2007 ) ) ; Findiing Science with Science Page 9 • metadata repositories to support management of spatial data infrastructures , also known as registries or catalogues ( for example , OGC Catalogue Services Specification ( Nebert and Whiteside 2007 ) . The availability of these standards and widespread international support have meant that many clients have been developed to support simple keyword ‐ based discovery of such standards ‐ based resources using their metadata and / or the self ‐ describing nature of the OGC web services . However , infrastructures or clients that support more advanced semantic discovery of data sets and web services are rare . One such infrastructure is the Geosciences Network ( GEON ) , a cyberinfrastructure to support geoscience research . It has a services oriented architecture , and includes intelligent search , semantic data integration and visualisation of earth science data . This work integrates heterogeneous geological data sets using ontologies ( Lin and Sinha 2006 ; Lin and Ludäscher 2003 ) . Searching is by keyword , as well as other parameters , but ontology ‐ supported search is the goal of future research . Other work in the geosciences uses ontologies to support semantic discovery of remote ‐ sensing images ( Durbha and King 2005 ) as well as geospatial data connected to ontologies ( Lutz and Klien 2006 ; Klien et al . 2006 ; Wiegand and Zhou 2003 ) . Both the keywords approach and the semantics approaches described above focus search around static concepts or categories that exist in the domain of discourse . However , an approach has been proposed that organises and discovers scientific resources on the basis of the research process , rather than static thematic areas . This approach recognises that much of the meaning in scientific data , models and publications comes from the scientific process that was used to create those resources . This process may be described textually in Findiing Science with Science Page 10 publications , but is not usually searchable ( Pike and Gahegan 2007 ; Gahegan et al . 2009 ) . This proposed approach is explored further in this work . Table 1 summarises the features of these tools in relation to the contributions of the current work . 3 . 2 Ontology Visualisation Tools and Techniques A large number of tools for ontology visualisation that can be used both in desktop and web environments have been developed and are reviewed by Katifori et al . ( 2007 ) . Many have their origins in the biological sciences , as knowledge in this area is often organised in ways that are well suited to visualisation in a tree structure . Ontology visualisations are most commonly used to show how knowledge within a domain is structured , rather than as a tool to assist with discovery of information about that knowledge . However , ResearchGate allows users to find other researchers working in related areas , and provides a visualisation of researchers and publications , but the visualisation is not organised semantically . The Concept Web ( Giles 2007 ) provides a knowledge visualisation to assist with knowledge discovery , but this takes the form of a histogram rather than a semantic network or ontology . 3 . 3 Approaches to Description of the Scientific Knowledge COMPASS attempts to support the process of discovery of scientific resources using a model of scientific knowledge in terms of the components and processes from which it is Findiing Science with Science Page 11 constructed ( for example , analysis methods , hypotheses , scientific theories and models ) . Such discovery support allows users to discover scientific resources on the basis of the science , rather than the domain , supporting collaboration across different domains among people who are taking similar approaches , as well as more advanced examination of patterns in the process of the advancement of science . This approach depends on an adequate description of scientific knowledge and the process by which it is attained . Efforts to this end have included the creation of models of scientific knowledge ( Hars 2001 ) and discovery . Hars’ model has been implemented as a database and web server ( cybrarium 1 ) as a first step towards a knowledge infrastructure ( Hars 1998 ) . The model includes concepts such as Idea , Method , Theory , Framework , Construct , Variable and Concept , as well as the notion of Statement , which may be a Proposition , Hypothesis , Definition , Axiom or Law . Work by Brodaric et al . ( 2008 ) has then used this work together with the DOLCE upper ontology ( Gaurino 1998 ) to create an ontology of scientific knowledge , referred to as SKIo . 3 . 4 User Tagging The use of informal user tagging to aid in searching has become popular in web applications ( for example , Facebook , YouTube ) , and has also been applied in the context of discovery of scientific resources ( for example , CiteSeer ) . The tagging approach allows users to assign their own tags to resources to aid in searching , and supports the creation of folksonomies ( Pink 2005 ) . Folksonomies are used in many popular web applications and provide a convenient approach to searching , but have limited internal structure . Currently , most 1 http : / / cybrarium . usc . edu Findiing Science with Science Page 12 approaches use either ontologies or informal user tagging , but there have been some attempts to combine the two philosophically different ideas ( Ankolekar et al . 2008 ) . This Section has provided a brief summary of work in a number of different areas that relates to the research described in this paper . Although these different efforts have approached different aspects of the same goal , the combination of these different aspects still requires further attention . Thus the work described herein extends and advances previous work by providing a new approach to discovery of scientific resources to support the process of the advancement of science . 4 . The COMPASS Application The COMPASS application is intended to provide enhanced tools to scientists for discovery of scientific resources . More specifically , the objectives of the work were : ( 1 ) To allow users to search not just on keywords but on scientific approaches ( scientific models and theories , analysis methods ) , by displaying a scientific knowledge ontology . ( 2 ) To allow users to find resources based on semantically related terms ( parents , children , other types of connections ) , by displaying the domain and scientific knowledge ontologies . ( 3 ) To compare the preferences of users for formal ontologies and the more common approach of informal user tags in searching for data . The application was implemented using three different interfaces in a web browser . Each interface is described in the following subsections . This paper focuses on the user Findiing Science with Science Page 13 experience of the geospatial knowledge infrastructure , and the interested reader may refer to Stock et al . ( 2009 ) for an overview of the underlying design and implementation of the infrastructure . All ontologies used in the geospatial knowledge infrastructure were created using Web Ontology Language ( OWL ) ( McGuinness and van Harmelen 2004 ) . 4 . 1 The Discovery Interface Figure 2 shows the COMPASS discovery interface . It displays six boxes that can all be resized to allow the user to construct his or her query : ( 1 ) The top left box shows the domain knowledge . The prototype implementation uses resources from the marine domain , and an ontology of marine instruments was developed for the project . The ontology visualisation shows all of the classes in the ontology and also the properties that relate different classes ( referred to as relationships ) . The search may also be ‘semantically relaxed’ by including classes that are generalisations , specialisations or connected in any way , by a chosen number of levels of hops . Figure 3 illustrates this . ( 2 ) The middle left box shows the informal tags that have been attached to any resource by any user in the geospatial knowledge infrastructure . Users may add their own tags ( see Section 4 . 3 ) . The tags are unstructured . ( 3 ) The bottom left box shows the scientific knowledge ontology . This uses the Science Knowledge Infrastructure Ontology ( SKIo ) that was developed by Brodaric et al . ( 2008 ) . SKIo contains concepts for scientific knowledge life models and theories and the interface allowed users to search on this basis . SKIo was also slightly extended for the purposes of the project to cater for sampling and measurement research methods , and Findiing Science with Science Page 14 many of the classes that were imported from the DOLCE upper level ontology are not displayed in the ontology visualisation to improve clarity . Figure 4 illustrates this . ( 4 ) The bottom right box is a map , allowing users to select the geographical area of interest . ( 5 ) The middle right box allows the user to specify the dates of interest . ( 6 ) The top right box shows the query that is currently selected from all of the other boxes . The boxes may be used in any combination ( one , some or all ) . If nothing is selected , all resources in the infrastructure will be returned ( although this is very slow , and impractical as the infrastructure content expands ) . 4 . 2 The Results Interface Figure 5 shows an example of the Results interface . The top left box shows the resources that were returned by the query selected in the Discovery tab , and are grouped into Publications , Data Sets and Journal Articles . For each resource , new tags may be added ( see Section 4 . 3 ) , and users may choose to view recommendations . These recommendations make use of the ontology knowledge representation of the system , and three different types of recommendations are offered : • Geography , showing other resources addressing a similar geographical area , ordered by spatial nearness ; • Domain , showing other resources that are connected to the same or semantically similar classes in the domain ontology ; Findiing Science with Science Page 15 • Scientific Approach , showing other resources that use a similar scientific approach , using an algorithm based on matching classes and instances from the scientific knowledge ontology . Users may also view detailed information about the selected resource . This includes metadata and also the means to access the resource itself via a link : • In the case of publications , the link opens either the publication itself or the login / payment page ( if the publication is not openly accessible on the internet ) . The metadata itself comes from existing , standards ‐ compliant digital library repositories 2 that are queried dynamically by the infrastructure . • In the case of data sets , the link opens a page listing the data set , from which it can be downloaded . • In the case of web services , the link executes the web service . Figure 6 shows the input screen for an OGC Web Map Service , and once the user clicks ‘Execute’ , the map is displayed according to the user specification . In this implementation , users can execute web services separately , and the capacity to define and execute workflows that combine multiple web services is not provided , but the connection of the work to some workflow software would provide a useful additional function for scientists in the future . 4 . 3 The Tagging Interface The Tagging interface allows users to add new tags to a scientific resource , which are then displayed in the Discovery tab on subsequent loads . 2 Z39 . 50 ( National Information Standards Organisation 2003 ) and OAI - PMH ( Lagoze et al . 2002 ) standards are used . Findiing Science with Science Page 16 4 . 4 Implementation The COMPASS project implemented a geospatial knowledge infrastructure , and this paper focuses on a user interface to this infrastructure that support discovery of scientific resources . This Section briefly describes the infrastructure , and more detail is contained in Stock et al . ( 2009 ) . In the geospatial knowledge infrastructure , each resource is described using an application ontology , and these ontologies drive the display of the scientific resources . The application ontologies contain instances of classes from an information source ontology to describe some of the metadata aspects of the resources as well as additional information like bounding box ( which describes the geographic area covered by instances in the data set , whether they be lines , points or polygons ) , and also instances of classes from other ontologies to describe the semantics of the resource ( the domain ontology and the scientific knowledge ontology ) . For the purposes of this project , the application ontologies were created manually ( including their bounding boxes ) , but this was a cumbersome process . It is anticipated that for a fully operating infrastructure , tools for automatic creation of application ontologies from existing metadata respositories would be created . However , basic metadata from existing repositories must then be supplemented by the inclusion of detailed information about the scientific process , which requires understanding of the science itself . This would be best done by the scientists who conducted the work , and it is hoped that an incentive system together with user ‐ friendly tools would encourage scientists to tag their work in this way . Findiing Science with Science Page 17 In addition to the application ontologies for each resource , the knowledge infrastructure also includes a number of other types of ontologies : • Domain ontologies describing the marine domain ( in this case , but could cover any domain ) , displayed in the user interface to allow browsing the ontology ; • An information source ontology describing the structure of the resources ; • A scientific knowledge ontology describing the structure of scientific knowledge , displayed in the user interface to allow browsing the ontology and • OWL ‐ S Web service ontologies describing the web services . 5 . Method A qualitative research approach was adopted for the user study . In software design and development , it is common to conduct user evaluations using quantitative approaches , to examine aspects such as efficiency , effectiveness and satisfaction ( Frokjaer et al . 2000 ; Hoffer et al . 1999 ) . However , the proposed approach to scientific resource discovery is at the early stages of its development , and presents a new approach to resource discovery that is not commonly available to scientists ( in particular the use of scientific knowledge as a search tool is not familiar ) . For this reason , an exploratory research method was adopted , that would allow us to examine how marine scientists felt about these new approaches to querying . Specifically , we wanted to examine how well the application could support scientists as they conducted their research using their own , ‘native’ approaches and processes ; whether scientists thought this was a direction that would be useful to them in conducting their science and whether it should be pursued and if so , how we might direct Findiing Science with Science Page 18 future development of the approach . Qualitative research approaches are ideal for such bottom ‐ up exploratory analysis ( Hennink et al , 2011 ) . While qualitative approaches could have been used to provide information about efficiency , speed , usability and to perform numerical comparison with existing keyword search , we were interested in a deeper analysis of the way scientists thought about and used the tool , in terms of their own ways of conducting science and thinking about the scientific process . Again , quantitative methods are suitable for studying a topic from the perspective of the participants , rather than imposing an external set of measures ( Hennink et al , 2011 ) . We observed and interviewed 12 participants , all of whom were marine scientists conducting research in the marine science field . We recruited the participants by asking marine scientists who were involved in the project to recommend people who could be approached . Those people were approached and followed up once . About half of those approached agreed to take part . We visited them at their offices , recorded their actions and aimed to build up a rapport with them in order to get detailed information on their views about the application . This allowed us to gain a view of what they actually thought of the approach . Participants were not given payment or incentives . The use of a small number of non ‐ randomly selected participants is appropriate in qualitative research , because the goal is to understand the views of the participants in ‐ depth , and not to generalise to a wider population ( Hennink et al , 2011 ) . Similar themes and views ran through the interviews with the different respondents , suggesting that sufficient respondents had been included in the sample according to qualitative research Findiing Science with Science Page 19 methods ( Boyce and Neal , 2006 ) . Participants varied in their age and level of scientific experience , and views of the application were relatively consistent across the participants . The user study was undertaken with a particular focus on the aspects of the application that were highlighted in the original objectives and that represented the innovative contribution of this work . However , users were given the opportunity to test all aspects of the application . The user evaluation protocol was as follows : ( 1 ) The evaluator briefly explained the purpose of the evaluation to the participant . ( 2 ) The evaluator provided a brief ( 10 minute ) demonstration of the functionality of the application . This was the time required to demonstrate and explain all of the functionality of the application . ( 3 ) The participant was given the opportunity to use the application freely in any way he or she chose for 15 minutes and keystrokes were recorded . This length of time was chosen in order to allow users to have significant amount of time with the application , to provide some focus but to avoid the boredom that might result from a longer period . The participant was not given a specific task to complete , but was simply invited to explore , in line with the exploratory nature of the study . ( 4 ) The evaluator checked with the participant that she or he had tried all of the main functions in the application to ensure that subsequent evaluation could be completed . The participant was given the opportunity to try any functions not previously tested . ( 5 ) The user was asked to complete the modified ( word list ) version of the Microsoft Desirability toolkit ( Travis 2008 ) for three of the functions ( querying with the domain ontology ; querying with tags and querying with the scientific knowledge ontology ) . This Findiing Science with Science Page 20 involves being provided with a randomised list of 105 words , being asked to tick those that applied , then being asked to select the five of those that seemed most applicable . ( 6 ) The participant was asked three questions : a . Which aspects of the application did you like ? b . Which aspects of the application didn’t you like ? c . Would you like to make any suggestions for improvements ? 6 . Results 6 . 1 Views about Querying Options 6 . 1 . 1 Querying by Domain Ontology A detailed analysis and coding ( see Hennink et al 2011 ) of the transcripts of discussions following the use of the Microsoft Desirability Toolkit was conducted . The following themes emerged : • Linkages and connections were mentioned repeatedly and participants said that they liked seeing the overall structure , the connections and linkages between different concepts in the domain ontology . They liked having an overview ‘like a family tree’ , ‘a box of everything’ , being able to see the overall structure in its entirety . This emerged as one of the most important and beneficial aspects of the application . • The support for refinement made possible by the domain ontology was seen as useful by several participants , to start out in one place and focus down , to review a search and then become increasingly specific without having to start the search from the beginning were all different expressions of this same theme . Findiing Science with Science Page 21 • The concept of seeing a domain ontology as a circular tree was considered intuitive and clear , prompted ideas and allowed in ‐ depth and specific searching . • The word overlapping was used repeatedly , ‘there is so much’ . • Participants expressed the wish to get rid of the things they were not interested in . Figure 7 shows a tag cloud containing terms provided by users to describe querying by domain ontology , using the Microsoft Desirability Toolkit . The tag cloud shows the conflict between the things that participants liked about the domain ontology and the difficulties with visualisation . However , these difficulties were less prominent in the interviews than in the tag cloud . The problems with the visualisation were mainly due to the volume and display of information being experienced as cluttered , confusing and overwhelming ( see Section 7 ) . 6 . 1 . 2 Querying by Tags The response to the tagging approach to querying was positive from all participants . Analysis and coding of interview transcripts highlighted the following themes : • The design was clean , clear , attractive and ‘easy on the eye’ . • The function was simple and easy to use , much easier than the domain ontology . Several people said that they preferred it to the other approaches : ‘It’s the best one’ . • The difference in size in the keywords was important in making the display attractive and useable . Some respondents said that they liked the difference in size and the way that it indicated the importance of the concept , while others said that they didn’t know Findiing Science with Science Page 22 what the difference in text size indicated . In fact , the text size is determined by the number of resources that are tagged with that particular keyword . The mix of different types of tags ( subject areas , parameters , place names ) was seen as a good thing by most participants . • Efficiency was mentioned by most participants as an advantage of this approach . It was considered quicker than the domain ontology and than typing in a search term . • As with the domain ontology , several participants also thought that this function prompted new thoughts ( ‘picked up several tags that you hadn’t considered before’ ) , and promoted depth of search . • The approach was familiar to most , and one participant mentioned that she liked the application of an approach from social networking to the scientific context . The word cloud ( Figure 8 ) includes words like attractive , clean , easy to use , simple , fast and effective . Some users found all of the querying approaches ( including tags ) overwhelming and cluttered . Most users were much more accustomed to querying by tags than by ontologies , so were familiar with the concept and this may have affected the results . 6 . 1 . 3 Querying by Scientific Knowledge Ontology The coding and analysis of the interview transcripts for querying by scientific knowledge ontology showed less support for this approach . Most participants were strongly in support of the idea of finding resources based on methodology or technique , and thought this was Findiing Science with Science Page 23 an important and powerful idea . However , the scientific knowledge ontology interface was not well regarded . In addition to the criticisms directed at the domain ontology visualisation , the scientific knowledge ontology was found more difficult to use because participants were not able to find the terms they were looking for , and without knowing the ontology content , it was hard to navigate around to find the correct term . The word cloud ( Figure 9 ) reflects these views . Only about half of the users actually used this function ( due to lack of time and lack of understanding of its purupose ) , so some responses were based on the demonstration and their experiences with the domain ontology , which offers broadly the same functionality but with different subject matter and outcomes . 6 . 2 Open Questions The interview ended with three open questions . Participants were asked to identify aspects they liked , didn’t like and to suggest improvements to the application . Overall , the responses were very positive and supported the analysis of the interviews regarding the specific types of querying ( Section 6 . 1 above ) . Participants particularly liked the overall approach , commenting on its power , innovative nature and the potential improvement over existing approaches : • “Very related to academia , you only get scientific publications or services related to your actual needs – no silly things . ” • “Like the connection of the concepts – very intuitive . ” Findiing Science with Science Page 24 • “Prompted ideas , think broader than original search , open up whole range of other alternatives . ” • “Like the idea to be able to search for similar techniques elsewhere . ” • “Forces you to do a little more about your search – putting in a lot of effort but much more sophisticated results . ” The spatial and temporal querying were not specifically examined in the user study , as they were straightforward and the spatial querying in particular was considered to be a standard , familiar component of many geographic information querying tools . However , spatial querying was used by most participants , and temporal querying by about half of the participants . In the open questions , participants identified the geographic search as being something they particularly liked , and these functions were used by most participants , suggesting their relevance over and above the place ‐ name tag selection . Recommendations based on geography were also offered and were used by most participants . These three options for querying of the geographic location can be combined to support the scientific process , initially at the first stage of resource discovery , and later by refinement / extension of the search ( through Recommendations ) . In summary , the main findings from the user study that may be useful in directing future development were : • Querying by tagging was best . It was efficient , quick , clean , simple and easy to use . The differences in font size were an essential part of this . Findiing Science with Science Page 25 • The ability to view the entire structure and the linkages / connections between concepts when querying by domain ontology was considered very important and beneficial , but conversely , the visualisation was too cluttered and difficult to use . • The idea of querying by scientific knowledge ( specifically methodology or technique ) was considered useful , powerful and important , but this particular design and implementation ( using a scientific knowledge ontology ) was too complicated and difficult . 7 . Discussion In Section 5 , three broad goals for the user study were identified : 1 . to examine how well the application could support scientists as they conducted their research using their own , ‘native’ approaches and processes 2 . to identify whether scientists thought this was a direction that should be pursued and if so , 3 . to determine how future development of the approach should be directed . The user study suggested that the parts of the application that provided the ability to view the entire structure and linkages of the domain knowledge , and the ability to query by scientific methodology or technique were particularly useful in supporting the participating marine scientists in conducting research using their own particular approaches , and these were supported by the participants as directions that should be pursued , along with the tagging approach that was popular . The study also identified clear deficiencies in the Findiing Science with Science Page 26 proposed approach , and this Section goes on from these first two conclusions and addresses the issue of the future direction that might be taken . 7 . 1 Domain Knowledge Two alternative methods for querying based on domain knowledge were offered : ontologies and tags . Tags have been used on social networking and blogging sites for the last few years , and many studies have been made of their benefits and usability ( Halvey and Keane 2007 ; Hassan ‐ Montero and Herrero ‐ Solana 2006 ; Rivadeneira et al . 2007 ) . In our work , we wanted to explore how useful they might be for scientific resource discovery , and how they compared to ontologies . The tags used were not restricted to domain concepts , but also included place names ( e . g . Forth Estuary ) and parameters . Most participants considered this an advantage . The tagging approach was the most popular , and was widely supported , and thus is clearly a suitable candidate for future development . However , there are scalability problems , as the number of tags becomes greater . Some approaches have been proposed to resolve or reduce this problem , including the following : • The introduction of a simple structure to the tags ( folksonomies ) ( Al ‐ Khalifa et al . 2007 ) , in which users creating tags can specify relationships with other tags , creating a kind of hybrid between an ontology and informal tagging . In this case , some methods could be used to display subsets of tags and navigate among them , although this moves away from the benefits of the tag cloud querying identified by participants . • The development of automated approaches to reduction or consolidation of tags . Some social networking applications display only the most popular tags ( Knauf et al . 2010 ) , so this approach could be adopted , with automatic re ‐ tagging of more popular alternative Findiing Science with Science Page 27 tags using algorithms to identify semantically related tags . However , this would result in some loss of precision in expression of domain knowledge , considering the limited number of tags would be expected to apply across a range of disciplines . The method for determining font size is likely to have the result that more general tags would be used more often and therefore appear larger . There is some evidence for this among the 200 tags in the prototype . The larger tags are often general concepts ( ecology , bathymetry ) , while very specific tags like enterococci have a small font size . The use of an ontology for querying domain knowledge was less popular than tags , but two aspects were particularly attractive to the participants : the ability to see the entire ontology in a structured way ( ‘a box of everything’ ) , and the ability to see linkages . While many alternatives to ontology querying have been proposed , including using the ontology as a back end , and explaining how queries were decomposed and mapped to databases ( e . g . McGuinness et al . 2006 ) , participants still saw the direct use of ontologies as providing benefits . However , these benefits were clearly limited by the ontology visualisation problems . Most existing examples of web ‐ based visualisation of ontologies , semantic networks and trees use only small ontologies . This project developed an ontology for part of a small sub ‐ domain ( marine instruments , based around a subset of instruments ) , and as such is only a very small part of the ontology or ontologies that would be needed to more completely describe the domain of interest . In reality , domains cannot be neatly divided up , and many publications touch on a number of different domains ( for example , the publications explored often also Findiing Science with Science Page 28 related to generic concepts like ecology or topography ) . Thus potentially for this approach to work properly , very large ontologies would be required , and more effective tools for visualising them . Most work to date addresses the problem of clutter and complexity of ontology visualisation by either showing only a particular sub ‐ tree of the ontology ( Katifori et al . 2007 ) , or by using some algorithm to remove some of the less ‐ relevant nodes ( Xu et al . 2010 ) potentially using cognitive approaches to such filtering ( Falconer and Storey 2007 ) . There was some support in the current user study for this idea ( one participant said that he would ‘like to be able to get rid of the things you’re not interested in’ , and another mentioned filtering out ) , but there was more support for the benefits of seeing everything as a whole ( including by those who also wanted to filter some items out ) . We therefore propose to address this apparently contradictory wish to see everything , including all the connections without the clutter , using a two ‐ windowed visualisation ( as suggested by the participants ) , showing an overview window of the entire ontology , and a detail window that can zoom in progressively . This does not rule out some of the visually appealing approaches reviewed by Katifori et al . ( 2007 ) , but does support the display of an ontology in its entirety , rather than in parts or with some nodes removed . 7 . 2 Scientific Knowledge While the ability to query on some aspects of scientific knowledge ( methodology , technique ) was supported by participants , the ontology approach was rejected by participants . The scientific knowledge ontology itself assumes some understanding of the Findiing Science with Science Page 29 philosophy of science , which raises two problems . Firstly , users of the system may not have a good understanding of the philosophy of science , and secondly , the terminology used in the ontology may not reflect their terminology or way of thinking about the scientific process , which is often discipline ‐ specific . Many participants said that they did not know what to search for and couldn’t find the term they entered . The prototype included the ability to ask for recommendations ( once some results had been given ) on the basis of scientific knowledge . This allows users to find other resources that use similar scientific approaches and removes the complexity from them , but it does not allow the same level of refinement . For example , it is not possible to dictate a particular scientific methodology or technique . Given the popularity of the tagging approach and the benefits that users saw in combining all of the different aspects of a resource ( for example , domain concept , parameter , location ) , and notwithstanding the scalability issues , the inclusion of scientific knowledge in the tags may provide a useful approach . This has a number of benefits as follows : • It reduces the significant overhead required in annotating a resource with concepts from the scientific knowledge ontology . • It removes the constraint on the particular view of the scientific process reflected in the scientific knowledge ontology , as the creator chooses his or her own tags . • It avoids a problem that was encountered during creation of the ontologies in distinguishing between concepts that belonged in the domain ontology and concepts that belonged in the scientific knowledge ontology . In particular , the use of a marine Findiing Science with Science Page 30 instruments ontology resulted in some confusion about which ontology should contain some marine instruments , their methods , the parameters they measured . 8 . Conclusions The outcome of this work and the user study resulted in the following recommendations : 1 . Querying by informal tags is the preferred approach if there are few tags . 2 . Direct querying of a scientific knowledge ontology is not appropriate , but participants do want to search on scientific method . Inclusion of scientific knowledge as tags is proposed as an alternative to be explored . 3 . Display of the domain ontology using a two ‐ windowed approach is proposed a preferable approach to a single ontology window . This paper has presented an approach to the discovery of scientific resources to support scientists in more advanced ways than currently popular discovery tools . This approach allows discovery on the basis of semantic information in the form of ontologies , and also on the basis of scientific knowledge and the process by which science is developed ( including scientific theories , models and analysis methods ) , combined with tools for immediate access to scientific resources ( whether publications , data sets or web services ) that are of particular benefit in the context of the geosciences . The approach also has the potential , in future work , to allow patterns in time and space to be discovered using the ontologies that describe the resources . Findiing Science with Science Page 31 A qualitative user study showed that participants were enthusiastic about the idea of such searching and recognised its power . Querying by tag was the most popular approach , followed by querying by domain ontology , allowing users the ability to get an overview of the entire domain conceptual content . Querying of the scientific knowledge ontology was not popular , but participants did want to be able to specify searches based on scientific method and technique . Acknowledgements This work as funded under the COMPASS Project by the Joint Information Systems Committee of the UK , and their assistance is gratefully acknowledged . References Al ‐ Khalifa HS , Davis HC and Gilbert L 2007 Creating Structure from Disorder : Using Folksonomies to Create Semantic Metadata . 3rd International Conference on Web Information Systems and Technologies ( WEBIST ) , Barcelona , March 3 ‐ 6 2007 Ankolekar A , Krotzsch M , Tran T and Vrandecic D 2008 The two cultures : Mashing up web 2 . 0 and the semantic web . Web Semantics : Science , Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 6 : 70 – 75 Berkley C , Bowers S , Jones M , Ludäscher B , Schildhauer M and Tao J 2005 Incorporating Semantics in Scientific Workflow Authoring . Scientific and Statistical Database Management Conference , Santa Barbara , June 27 ‐ 29 2005 , 75 ‐ 78 Bowers S and Ludäscher B 2004 An Ontology ‐ Driven Framework for Data Transformation in Scientific Workflows . International Workshop on Data Integration in the Life Sciences ( DILS ' 04 ) 2004 , Leipzig , Germany , March 25 ‐ 26 2004 Boyce C and Neale P 2006 Conducting In ‐ Depth Interviews : A Guide for Designing and Conducting In ‐ Depth Interviews for Evaluation Input . Pathfinder International . Brodaric B , Reitsma F and Qiang Y 2008 SKIing with DOLCE : toward an e ‐ Science Knowledge Infrastructure . In : C . Eschenbach , M . Gruninger , eds . Formal Ontology in Information Systems , Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference ( FOIS08 ) , IOS Press , 208 ‐ 219 Findiing Science with Science Page 32 Deis L 2010 PANGAEA ( Geoscience & Environmental Data ) linked with Elsevier ' s Science Direct . SciTech News , 30 July 2010 . Available from http : / / blogs . princeton . edu / newscitechseries / 2010 / 07 / pangaea _ geoscience _ environ ment . html [ Accessed 8 August 2011 ] Durbha SS and King RL 2005 Semantics ‐ Enabled Framework for Knowledge Discovery From Earth Observation Data Archives . IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 43 : 2563 ‐ 2573 Falconer SM and Storey MA 2007 A cognitive support framework for ontology mapping . 6th International Semantic Web Conference ( ISWC 2007 ) , Busan , Korea , November 11 ‐ 15 , 2007 Frokjaer E , Hertzum M and Hornbeak K 2000 Measuring Usability : Are Effectiveness , Efficiency and Satisfaction Really Correlated ? , Proceedings of the ACM CHI 2000 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , The Hague , April 1 ‐ 6 2000 Gahegan M , Luo J , Weaver SD , Pike W and Banchuen T 2009 Connecting GEON : Making sense of the myriad resources , researchers and concepts that comprise a geoscience cyberinfrastructure . Computers and Geosciences 35 : 836 ‐ 854 Guarino N 1998 Formal Ontology in Information Systems . In : N . Guarino ( Ed . ) , Formal Ontology in Information Systems , Proceedings of FOIS ' 98 , Trento , Italy , June 6 ‐ 8 1998 . Amsterdam : IOS Press , 3 ‐ 15 Giles J 2007 Key biology databases go wiki . Nature 445 : 691 Halvey M and Keane M 2007 An Assessment of Tag Presentation Techniques . Proceedings of the 16th international conference on World Wide Web , Banff , Alberta , May 8 ‐ 12 2007 , 1313 – 1314 Hassan ‐ Montero Y and Herrero ‐ Solana V 2006 Improving Tag ‐ Clouds as Visual Information Retrieval Interfaces . International Conference on Multidisciplinary Information Sciences and Technologies , Merida , Spain , October 25 ‐ 28 2006 Rivadeneira A , Gruen D , Muller J and Millen D 2007 Getting our Heads in the Clouds : Toward Evaluation Studies of Tag Clouds . Conference on Human Factors in Computer Systems , San Jose , California , April 28 – May 3 2007 Hars A 2001 Designing scientific knowledge infrastructures : the contribution of epistemology . Information Systems Frontiers 3 : 63 ‐ 73 Hars A 1998 USC Cybrarium : An infrastructure for the creation and management of information systems knowledge , in : W . R . J . Baets ( Ed . ) , Proceedings 6th European conference on information systems , 4 ‐ 6 June 1998 , Aix ‐ en ‐ provence , pp . 75 ‐ 85 Findiing Science with Science Page 33 Henning V and Reichelt J 2008 Mendeley ‐ A Last . fm For Research ? IEEE Fourth International Conference on eScience . Indianapolis , USA , December 7 ‐ 12 2008 , 327 – 328 Hennink M , Hutter I and Bailey A 2011 Qualitative Research Methods . Los Angeles : Sage . Herring M 2011 Social media fortifies bond between scientists . TechnicianOnline . com . Published 1 June 2011 . http : / / www . technicianonline . com / features / social ‐ media ‐ fortifies ‐ bond ‐ between ‐ scientists ‐ 1 . 2597289 # . TmjuBGHJYg0 [ Accessed 6 August 2011 ] Hoffer J , George J and Valacich J 1999 Modern Systems Analysis and Design . Reading , Massachusetts , USA : Addison ‐ Wesley International Standards Organisation 2003 Geographic Information – Metadata , Reference number ISO 19115 : 2003 ( E ) , International Standards Organisation Katifori A , Halatsis C , Lepouras G , Vassilakis C and Giannopoulou E 2007 Ontology visualization methods – a survey . ACM Computing Surveys 39 Klien E , Lutz M and Kuhn W 2006 Ontology ‐ Based Discovery of Geographic Information Services ‐ An Application in Disaster Management . Computers , Environment and Urban Systems 30 : 102 ‐ 123 Knautz K , Soubusta S , and Stock WG 2010 Tag clusters as information retrieval interfaces . Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS ‐ 43 ) , January 5 – 8 , 2010 Lagoze C , Van de Sompel H , Nelson M and Warner S 2002 The Open Archives Initiative Protocol for Metadata Harvesting . Protocol Version 2 . 0 of 2002 ‐ 06 ‐ 14 Document Version 2008 ‐ 12 ‐ 07 . http : / / www . openarchives . org / OAI / openarchivesprotocol . html [ Accessed 6 August 2011 ] Lin K and Ludäscher B 2003 A System for Semantic Integration of Geologic Maps via Ontologies . Semantic Web Technologies for Searching and Retrieving Scientific Data ( SCISW ) , Sanibel Island , Florida , USA , October 20 2003 Lin K and Sinha AK 2006 Discovery and Semantic Integration of Geologic Data , Geoinformatics 2006 Annual Conference , Reston , VA Ludäscher B , Altintas I , Berkley B , Higgins D , Jaeger E , Jones M , Lee E , Tao J and Zhao Y 2006 Scientific workflow management and the Kepler system . Concurrency and Computation : Practice and Experience 18 : 1039 ‐ 1065 Lutz M and Klien E 2003 Ontology ‐ based retrieval of geographic information . International . Journal of Geographical Information Science 20 : 233 ‐ 260 Findiing Science with Science Page 34 McGuinness D and van Harmelen F 2004 OWL Web Ontology Language Overview . W3C Recommendation 10 February 2004 . http : / / www . w3 . org / TR / owl ‐ features / [ Accessed 6 August 2011 ] McGuinness DL , Ding L , Glass A , Chang C , Zeng H , Furtado V 2006 Explanation Interfaces for the Semantic Web : Issues and Models . Proceedings of the 3rd International Semantic Web User Interaction Workshop ( SWUI ' 06 ) , Athens , Georgia , November 6 2006 McLeod M , Bockheim J , Balks M and Aislabie J 2009 Soils of western Wright Valley , Antarctica . Antarctic Science 21 : 355 ‐ 365 National Information Standards Organization 2003 Information Retrieval ( Z39 . 50 ) : Application Service Definition and Protocol Specification . NISO Press , Bethesda , Maryland Nebert A , Whiteside A and Vretanos P 2007 OGC Catalogue Service Specification , Open Geospatial Consortium Specification 07 ‐ 006r1 . Pike W and Gahegan M 2007 Beyond Ontologies : Toward Situated Representations of Scientific Knowledge . International Journal of Human ‐ Computer Studies 65 : 674 ‐ 688 Pink DH 2005 " Folksonomy " . New York Times . http : / / www . nytimes . com / 2005 / 12 / 11 / magazine / 11ideas1 ‐ 21 . html , December 11 2005 Portele C 2007 OpenGIS Geography Markup Language ( GML ) Encoding Specification , Open Geospatial Consortium Specification 07 ‐ 036 Shut P and Whiteside A 2005 Web Processing Service Implementation Specification , Open Geospatial Consortium Specification 05 ‐ 007r4 Stock K , Robertson A , Bishr M , Stojanovic T , Ortmann J , Reitsma F and Medyckyj ‐ Scott D 2009 eScience for Sea Science : A Semantic Knowledge Infrastructure for Marine Scientists . 5th IEEE International Conference on e ‐ Science , Oxford , UK , December 9 ‐ 11 Travis D 2008 Measuring satisfaction : beyond the usability questionnaire . http : / / www . userfocus . co . uk / articles / satisfaction . html , 2008 Vretanos P 2005 Web Feature Service Implementation Specification , Open Geospatial Consortium Specification 04 ‐ 094 Wiegand N , Zhou N and Cruz IF 2003 A Web Query System for Heterogeneous Geospatial Data . 15th International Conference on Scientific and Statistical Database Management , Cambridge , MA , USA , July 9 ‐ 11 2003 Findiing Science with Science Page 35 Wolstencroft K , Alper P , Hull D , Wroe C , Lord P , Stevens R and Goble C 2007 The myGrid ontology : bioinformatics service discovery , International Journal of Bioinformatics Resesearch and Applications 3 : 303 ‐ 325 Xu K , Williams R , Hong , S ‐ H , Liu , Q and Zhang J 2010 Semi ‐ bipartite graph visualization for gene ontology networks . In : 17th International Symposium on Graph Drawing ( GD 2009 ) , 22 ‐ 25 Sep 2009 , Chicago , United States Findiing Science with Science Page 36 Function ResearchGate Mendeley Wiki ‐ Professional GEON MyGrid Provides rich semantic search . Yes No Yes No No Provides ontology browsing No No No Yes No Provides search by scientific process / method . No ( except if mentioned in abstract through semantic search ) No No No No Includes data sets , web services , etc . in addition to publications . No No No Yes Yes Table 1 : Comparison of Existing Research Infrastructures