Extensive Promoter - Centered Chromatin Interactions Provide a Topological Basis for Transcription Regulation Guoliang Li , 1 , 10 Xiaoan Ruan , 1 , 10 Raymond K . Auerbach , 2 , 10 Kuljeet Singh Sandhu , 1 , 10 Meizhen Zheng , 1 Ping Wang , 1 Huay Mei Poh , 1 Yufen Goh , 1 Joanne Lim , 1 Jingyao Zhang , 1 Hui Shan Sim , 1 Su Qin Peh , 1 Fabianus Hendriyan Mulawadi , 1 Chin Thing Ong , 1 Yuriy L . Orlov , 1 Shuzhen Hong , 1 Zhizhuo Zhang , 3 Steve Landt , 4 Debasish Raha , 4 Ghia Euskirchen , 4 Chia - Lin Wei , 1 Weihong Ge , 5 Huaien Wang , 6 Carrie Davis , 6 Katherine I . Fisher - Aylor , 7 Ali Mortazavi , 7 Mark Gerstein , 2 Thomas Gingeras , 6 Barbara Wold , 7 Yi Sun , 5 Melissa J . Fullwood , 1 Edwin Cheung , 1 , 8 Edison Liu , 1 Wing - Kin Sung , 1 , 3 Michael Snyder , 4 , * and Yijun Ruan 1 , 9 , * 1 Genome Institute of Singapore , Singapore 138672 , Republic of Singapore 2 Program in Computational Biology and Departments of Molecular , Cellular and Developmental Biology , Yale University , New Haven , CT 06520 , USA 3 Department of Computer Science , School of Computing , National University of Singapore , Singapore 117417 , Republic of Singapore 4 Center for Genomics and Personalized Medicine , Department of Genetics , Stanford University , Stanford , CA 94305 , USA 5 Department of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology , UCLA , Los Angeles , CA 90095 , USA 6 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory , Cold Spring Harbor , NY 11797 , USA 7 Division of Biology , California Institute of Technology , Pasadena , CA 91125 , USA 8 School of Biological Sciences , Nanyang Technological University , Singapore 637551 , Republic of Singapore 9 College of Life Sciences and Technology , Huazhong Agricultural University , Wuhan 430070 , P . R . China 10 These authors contributed equally to this work * Correspondence : mpsnyder @ stanford . edu ( M . S . ) , ruanyj @ gis . a - star . edu . sg ( Y . R . ) DOI 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2011 . 12 . 014 SUMMARY Higher - order chromosomal organization for tran - scription regulation is poorly understood in eukary - otes . Using genome - wide Chromatin Interaction Analysis with Paired - End - Tag sequencing ( ChIA - PET ) , we mapped long - range chromatin interactions associated with RNA polymerase II in human cells and uncovered widespread promoter - centered intra - genic , extragenic , and intergenic interactions . These interactions further aggregated into higher - order clusters , wherein proximal and distal genes were engaged through promoter - promoter interactions . Most genes with promoter - promoter interactions were active and transcribed cooperatively , and some interacting promoters could inﬂuence each other implying combinatorial complexity of tran - scriptional controls . Comparative analyses of different cell lines showed that cell - speciﬁc chro - matin interactions could provide structural frame - works for cell - speciﬁc transcription , and suggested signiﬁcant enrichment of enhancer - promoter inter - actions for cell - speciﬁc functions . Furthermore , genetically - identiﬁed disease - associated noncoding elements were found to be spatially engaged with corresponding genes through long - range interac - tions . Overall , our study provides insights into tran - scription regulation by three - dimensional chromatin interactions for both housekeeping and cell - speciﬁc genes in human cells . INTRODUCTION A fundamental question in biology is how genes and regulatory regions are organized and coordinated for transcription regula - tion . While operons , in which one promoter transcribes multiple genes in a single unit , are common in bacteria ( Jacob et al . , 1960 ) , and bicistronic transcript structures have been described in worms and ﬂies ( Pauli et al . , 1988 ; Zorio et al . , 1994 ) , eukary - otic genes are thought to be individually transcribed from their own promoters . However , evidence from in situ ﬂuorescence studies in the last decade suggests that transcription is not evenly distributed and is instead concentrated within large discrete foci in mammalian nuclei , raising the possibility that genes are organized into ‘‘transcription factories’’ ( Cook , 1999 ) containing RNA polymerase II ( RNAPII ) and other components for transcription . However , this theory lacks evidence with molecular and structural details . Thus , the question of how the regulation of genes is coordinated for transcription in mamma - lian cells remains largely open . Mammalian genomes are known to be organized intensively into higher - order conformation inside the micron - sized nu - clear space . Consequently , three - dimensional ( 3D ) organization must have a role in the mechanisms for transcription regulation and coordination ( Cremer and Cremer , 2001 ) . Chromosome Conformation Capture ( 3C ) and similar techniques ( van Steensel and Dekker , 2010 ) along with traditional in situ techniques have demonstrated that chromatin interactions can regulate 84 Cell 148 , 84 – 98 , January 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . transcriptional and epigenetic states ( Cope et al . , 2010 ) . However , such analyses are either limited to certain speciﬁc domains or of low resolution and lack functional details . There - fore , a global and high - resolution map of functional chromatin interactions is likely to uncover underlying principles of the higher - order genomic architectures regulating transcription . Recently , we developed Chromatin Interaction Analysis by Paired - End - Tag sequencing ( ChIA - PET ) for genome - wide inves - tigation of chromatin interactions bound by speciﬁc protein factors ( Fullwood etal . , 2009 ) . Byimmunoprecipitation ofafactor of interest along with associated DNA fragments and followed by diluted proximity ligation of distant DNA fragments tethered together within individual chromatin complexes , we elucidated the association of regulatory information through nonlinear arrangements . We demonstrated that long - range chromatin interactions occur between the transcription factor Estrogen Receptor a ( ER a ) bound regions and their target promoters . To globally investigate how all active promoters dynamically interact with their corresponding regulatory regions in vivo , we used ChIA - PET to analyze genome - wide chromatin interactions associated with RNAPII . Our results provide insights into the 3D interplay of active promoters as well as regulatory regions and suggest an architectural model in which related genes in mega - base range are organized for efﬁcient and potentially cooperative transcription . RESULTS Organizational Complexity of RNAPII - Associated Chromatin Interactions We analyzed ﬁve different human cell lines ( MCF7 , K562 , HeLa , HCT116 , and NB4 ) using ChIA - PET with a RNAPII antibody ( 8WG16 ) that recognizes the initiation form of the protein . The cell lines originated from a wide range of lineages , and provided a broad representation of human cells . In our pilot analysis , about 20 million uniquely mapped paired - end reads were gener - ated for each of the ChIA - PET experiments ( Table S1A available online ) , which resulted in two genome - wide datasets : the ChIP - enriched RNAPII binding sites and the RNAPII - bound long - range chromatin interactions . Both intrachromosomal and interchro - mosomal interaction data were obtained , and the vast majority of chromatin interactions identiﬁed by ChIA - PET were intrachro - mosomal ( Table S1B ) . Twenty - ﬁve intrachromosomal and seven interchromosomal interactions were validated either by 3C , DNA - FISH , or both ( Figure S1 and inset of Figure 1C ) . To present an inclusive view of the RNAPII - associated human chromatin interactome , we combined the ChIA - PET sequence reads from the six pilot experiments into one dataset for analysis ( Table S1 ) . Using embedded nucleotide barcode controls and statistical analyses , we assessed the data quality , ﬁltered out the technical noise , and identiﬁed high - conﬁdence binding sites and interacting PET clusters ( Experimental Procedures ) . From the combined pilot dataset , we identiﬁed 14 , 604 high - conﬁ - dence ( FDR < 0 . 05 ) RNAPII binding sites as well as 19 , 856 high - conﬁdence intrachromosomal interaction PET clusters ( Table S3 ) . The majority ( 83 % ) of RNAPII binding sites in the combined dataset were proximal to 5 0 Transcription Start Sites ( TSS ) of genes ( Figure 1A ) . There were also distinct but relatively weaker enrichments of peaks at the 3 0 Transcription End Sites ( TES ) of genes . Similar patterns were seen in all the individual experiments . Of the total RNAPII binding sites , 9 , 487 ( 65 % ) were involved in chromatin interactions and these sites showed higher RNAPII occupancy than those not involved in interactions ( Figure 1B ) , indicating that most highly - enriched RNAPII binding sites are involved in looped chromatin conformations . Three basic types of interactions were identiﬁed around gene promoters in the combined pilot dataset : intragenic ( promoter to gene internal regions , 938 , 5 % ) , extragenic ( promoter to distal regulatory elements such as enhancer , 6 , 530 , 33 % ) , and inter - genic ( promoter - promoter of different genes , 8 , 282 , 42 % ) . There was also a subcategory composed of intermediate enhancer - enhancer interactions ( 4 , 106 , 20 % ) . Some interactions ( 2 , 341 , 12 % ) were standalone duplex interactions between two interact - ing anchor regions , whereas most ( 17 , 515 , 88 % ) were further aggregated into 1 , 544 interaction complexes . We speculated that the isolated RNAPII binding at promoter sites , which are not involved in interactions , may reﬂect the basal promoter function for gene transcription , and thus were termed ‘‘basal promoters . ’’ By contrast , RNAPII - associated interactions might constitute a structural basis for complex regulatory mechanisms . These basic interactions further aggregated into complex architectures which we classiﬁed as ‘‘single - gene’’ or ‘‘multigene’’ complexes depending on the number of genes involved ( Figure 1C ) . The single - gene models consisted of single or multiple enhancer interactions with only one gene promoter , whereas the multigene models included intergenic promoter - promoter interactions and could also include intragenic and extragenic enhancer - promoter interactions . Moreover , several such complexes , distantly separated on a chromosome or on different chromosomes , further converged to form higher - order multigene interaction complexes ( Figures S1B , S1D , S1F , and S1G ) . Many chromatin complexes had genomic spans of 150 kb – 200 kb , and a few complexes spanned several mega - bases . Although there were only 1 , 328 multigene complexes in this combined pilot dataset , 11 , 723 genes were engaged in these complexes for an average of 8 . 8 genes per interaction complex ( Figure 1D ) , indicating that promoter - promoter inter - actions were widespread and may play a signiﬁcant role in tran - scription regulation . To understand how these looping structures inﬂuence tran - scription , we characterized these RNAPII - associated chromatin models ( basal promoters , single - gene and multigene com - plexes ) for structural features ( genomic property ) , functional output ( transcription activity ) , and epigenomic marks ( chromatin state ) . Distinct Genomic Properties of Single - and Multigene Interaction Models To determine the genomic characteristics of RNAPII - associated chromatin structures , we mapped several genomic descriptors that were known to associate with the expressivity of the human genome ( Versteeg et al . , 2003 ) , including GC content , gene density , SINE / LINE density , gene length , and the intron / exon ratio . In our analyses ( Figure 2 , Figure S2A ) , the multigene complexes were signiﬁcantly enriched with higher GC content , higher gene and SINE density , and lower LINE density as Cell 148 , 84 – 98 , January 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 85 compared to the single - gene interaction complexes and the regions of basal promoters , suggesting that multigene com - plexes were located in open chromatin and highly transcribed regions . In addition , genes in the multigene complex regions were relatively shorter than other gene categories , which is yet another property of highly expressed genes ( Eisenberg and Le - vanon , 2003 ) . Conversely , genomic loci associated with the single - gene complexes lay in the regions with lower gene and SINE density . Moreover , the genes engaged in the single - gene complexes were signiﬁcantly longer and had higher intron / exon ratiosthanthegenesofotherchromatin models ( Figure 2B ) . These observations suggest that genes with enhancer - promoter interactions in single - gene complexes were more likely to be tissue - speciﬁc or developmentally regulated , in line with the previous ﬁndings that genes in gene - poor regions associated with several distant regulatory elements , tended to be longer and had a higher noncoding to coding ratio than housekeeping genes ( Eisenberg and Levanon , 2003 ; Taylor , 2005 ) . Interacting Genes Show Correlated Expression To investigate the functional output of genes involved in the different chromatin models , as deﬁned by transcriptional activity , we focused our analyses on MCF7 cells , as it is a well - character - ized human cancer cell model with complementary datasets including RNA - Seq ( Experimental Procedures ) , time - course mi - croarray gene expression ( Fullwood et al . , 2009 ) , and GRO - Seq datasets ( Hah et al . , 2011 ) . Consistent with the combined pilot dataset , 90 % binding sites in MCF7 cells were found proximal to known gene promoters and 97 % genes with RNAPII present at their promoters had Figure 1 . Characterization of RNAPII Binding Peaks and Chromatin Interactions ( A ) RNAPII binding proﬁle around gene body . ( B ) Violin plots for intensities of RNAPII peaks involved ( red , mean intensity = 281 ) and not involved in interactions ( blue , mean intensity = 141 ) . ( C ) RNAPII - associated chromatin models : basal promoter ( BP ) with RNAPII binding but no chromatin interaction , single - gene ( SG ) complex with intra - and / or extragenic interactions and multigene ( MG ) complex with multiple genes in the interaction clusters . p , promoter ; g , gene ; and e , enhancer . The dotted curve for possible intragenic loop , and the solid curve for potential loop of enhancer - promoter and promoter - promoter interactions . Data tracks are : 1 and 2 , strand speciﬁc RNA - Seq data of MCF7 and K562 ; 3 , RNAPII binding peaks and ChIA - PET data . Inset ( bottom ) : DNA - FISH and 3C - qPCR validations of the extragenic interaction at the KLF4 locus , where the KLF4 promoter and enhancer are (cid:2) 1 Mb apart . Genomic locations used for 3C bait , test and control sites are indicated . The samelocationswere also used for DNA - FISH . The numbers ( n ) of nuclei counted and thefold change ( x ) inthe number of instances showing close proximity ( % 1 m m ) are indicated . 3C - qPCR mean values and standard error of means ( SEM ) from three independent experiments are shown . ( D ) Distribution of chromatin models ( BP , SG , MG ) and the numbers of genes engaged in the models . See also Figure S1 , Table S1 , Table S2 , and Table S3 . 86 Cell 148 , 84 – 98 , January 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . detectable transcriptional activity by RNA - Seq ( Figure 3A ) . The interactive RNAPII binding sites that were distal to gene promoters included intra - and extragenic regulatory elements such as enhancers . Approximately 45 % of the extragenic distal regulatory sites had detectable RNA signals that could represent possible noncoding RNA ( ncRNA ) transcripts . For genes associated with the three chromatin models , we analyzed the transcription levels measured by RNA - Seq reads . As shown in Figure 3B , in general , RNAPII binding at promoter sites correlated well with the expression level of the correspond - ing genes . Interestingly , the genes involved in the single - gene and the multigene models showed higher correlation between RNAPII binding and RNA - Seq signal ( Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcient : PCC : 0 . 46 and 0 . 45 respectively ) as compared to basal promoter genes ( PCC : 0 . 24 ) . Moreover , we observed that genes linked by complex chromatin interactions , especially those in multigene complexes , had signiﬁcantly higher expres - sion levels than basal promoter genes ( Figure 3C ) . This high expression appeared to be limited to genes interacting at the RNAPII anchor sites , as compared to genes located in the inter - vening chromatin loops . These data indicated that promoter - promoter interactions in multigene complexes were associated with higher transcriptional activity , which is consistent with our observations of their associated genomic features . Next , we characterized the expression patterns of genes present in the interacting regions using microarray data derived from 84 human tissues ( Su et al . , 2002 ) . We found distinct repre - sentation of tissue - speciﬁc and housekeeping genes in the three chromatin models ( Figure 3D , Figures S3A and S3B ) . Most genes in single - gene complexes with enhancer - promoter connectivity were tissue - speciﬁc , consistent with growing evidence that the expression levels of developmental and tissue - speciﬁc genes are largely modulated through cis - remote regulatory elements and trans - protein factors ( Hou et al . , 2010 ; Schoenfelder et al . , 2010 ) , and consistent with their genomic features ( less gene density , longer gene body and higher intron / exon ratio ) as previously described . Conversely , genes involved in multigene complexes as well as the basal promoter genes were character - ized as both tissue - speciﬁc and housekeeping categories . These observations were also supported by normalized CpG content and GC - skew at their promoter regions ( Figures S3C and S3D ) . As promoter - promoter interactions cluster multiple genes , they could provide an ideal topological framework for potential transcriptional coordination of both tissue - speciﬁc and house - keeping genes . This observation agrees with the evidence that ‘‘ridges , ’’ which are domains of highly transcribed genes , contain both housekeeping and tissue - speciﬁc genes ( Versteeg et al . , 2003 ) . Since large numbers of genes are found in multigene complexes , we propose that promoter - promoter interactions could serve as a dominant mechanism for transcription regu - lation of both housekeeping and tissue - speciﬁc genes in mammalian genomes . Next , we sought to determine whether genes with promoter - promoter interactions were more likely to be transcriptionally coordinated . RNA - Seq data showed that most of the paired genes with promoter - promoter interactions were expressed together at high levels ( Figure 3E ; Figure S3E ) . To further assess the coordinated transcription of paired genes across different conditions , we performed Pearson’s correlation analysis using estrogen - induced time course of GRO - Seq data ( Hah et al . , 2011 ) that measured transcription initiation rates of estrogen responsive genes , and observed signiﬁcant transcriptional correlation ( Figure 3F ; p value < 2 . 2E - 16 ) . Interestingly , the corre - lation was even greater for ER a - mediated gene pairs derived from our earlier data ( Fullwood et al . , 2009 ) , suggesting stronger correlation of transcription for genes involved in multigene complexes mediated by speciﬁc transcription factors . Similar correlation was also observed from other gene expression data - sets ( Figures S3F – S3I ) . As expected , housekeeping genes and genes belonging to the same GO classes showed even higher correlation than the rest ( Figures S3J and S3K ) . Altogether , our analyses indicated that a signiﬁcant proportion of gene pairs Figure 2 . Genomic Properties of Promoter - Centered Chromatin Models ( A ) Aggregation plots showing enrichment of genes , SINE and LINE elements around the TSS of genes in different chromatin models . Unique RefSeq TSSs were used for analyses . Red curve stands for multigene ( MG ) model , blue for single - gene ( SG ) model , gray for basal promoter ( BP ) model , and black dotted line for the rest of the genes ( R ) . ( B ) Box - plots showing distribution of percentage GC content of GC isochore around different models , gene length , and intron / exon ratio of RefSeq genes involved in the models . Triple asterisks ( * * * ) signiﬁes p value < 2 . 2E - 16 . Red box stands for MG , blue for SG , and gray for BP . Open box is for R ( rest of genic regions ) as background . See also Figure S2 . Cell 148 , 84 – 98 , January 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 87 involved in promoter - promoter interactions tended to be tran - scribed cooperatively . Multigene Complexes Provide Structural Framework for Cotranscription Correlated expression of interacting genes suggests that the multigene interaction complex might provide a molecular basis for the postulated ‘‘transcription factory’’ ( Cook , 1999 ) . To eluci - date the link between the multigene complexes revealed by ChIA - PET and transcription factories , we performed 3D DNA - FISH experiments using probes representing distinct multigene complexes in combination with RNAPII - IF staining in MCF7 nuclei ( Experimental Procedures ) . All experiments on four genomic loci randomly chosen from multigene complexes revealed a signiﬁcant association of the multigene complex loci with RNAPII foci ( Figure 4A - B ) , adding further evidence to support our view that multigene complexes could provide a structural framework for cotranscription . Furthermore , gene families were signiﬁcantly over - repre - sented ( p value < 0 . 006 ) in the multigene complexes ( Figure S3L ) , such as HIST , ZNF , KRT , HOXC , etc . ( Table S4 ) . Taking the HIST1H family as an example , the 58 genes of this family located on chromosome 6 formed three multigene complexes , and these three complexes converged into a higher - order super - complex , suggesting that all HIST1H genes were organized in a single chromatin architecture for coordinated transcription ( Figure 4C ) . All HIST1H genes were actively transcribed in both MCF7 and K562 cells , and were highly coregulated across different tissues and cellular conditions ( Figure 4D ) . Interestingly , HFE , a gene was not a part of the HIST1H family but was located in the middle of the ﬁrst HIST1H multigene complex , was not anchored at the interaction sites and was not expressed . Similarly , the genes located in the intervening loop regions between the three HIST1H interacting complexes were relatively less active and much less coordinated for coregulation across different tissues and cellular conditions . This case exempliﬁes the model where multigene complexes organize genes with similar functions across genomic space for coordinated expression . Multigene Complexes Support Synergistic Transcription Regulation To further investigate the likelihood that the multigene complex structure might provide a topological framework for tran - scriptional coregulation of interacting genes involved in such topology , we designed a set of perturbation experiments to Figure 3 . Transcriptional Activities in RNAPII - Associated Chromatin Models in MCF7 Cells ( A ) Pie charts of RNAPII binding peaks proximal ( blue ) or distal ( red ) to TSS of genes ( left ) , RNA - Seq data for genes with RNAPII peaks near TSS ( middle ) , and RNA - Seq enrichment around intergenic RNAPII peaks ( right ) . ( B ) Correlationof RNAPII binding in basal promoter ( BP ) , single - gene ( SG ) and multigene ( MG ) models with gene transcriptionlevels measured by RNA - Seq . The RNAPII enrichment heatmap shows binding intensity centered on TSS ( ± 5 kb ) along with corresponding gene transcription intensity . ( C ) Barplotsofexpressionlevelsofgenesinthethreemodels ( BP , SG , andMG ) . RNA - Seqmeanvalues ( RPKM ) andstandarderrorofmeans ( SEM ) fromgenesin thecorrespondingmodelsareshown . MGcomplexesalsocontain‘‘anchorgenes’’ ( TSSproximaltointeractinganchors ) and‘‘loopgenes’’ ( distantfromanchors , residing in loop regions ) . The remaining genes ( R ) not bound by RNAPII were included as a control . Double asterisks ( * * ) indicate signiﬁcant differences between the mean expressions of genes from SG and MG models ( p value < 4 . 02E - 08 ) . ( D ) Expression breadth ( number of tissues a gene is expressed in ) of genes present in three different chromatin models . P value is calculated using the nonparametric test of Kruskal - Wallis . ( E ) Contour plot of log - transformed RNA - Seq RPKM values for cotranscription of interacting genes involved in MG models in MCF7 cells . ( F ) Distribution of PCC values for RNAPII - and ER a - bound interacting gene pairs , randomly rewired gene pairs , and randomly picked gene pairs from control regions with the same genomic span and gene density distribution as the multigene complex regions . See also Figure S3 . 88 Cell 148 , 84 – 98 , January 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . test this . After comparing the RNAPII and ER a ChIA - PET data from MCF7 cells , we found that the RNAPII - bound multigene complex at the GREB1 locus partially overlaps with the ER a - bound chromatin loops , suggesting that this interaction com - plex , in part , is associated with ER a . Therefore , we performed siRNA experiments to knockdown the protein level of ER a in MCF7 cells , and monitored the alteration of chromatin interac - tions and gene transcription in the GREB1 multigene complex . Several chromatin interaction loops at this locus were disrupted by siER a transfection as tested by 3C experiments ( Figure 4E ) . In addition to GREB1 , which had a strong response to estrogen induction and reduction by siER a knockdown ( Figures S4A – S4D ) , we observed that the other genes in this complex such as E2F6 , KCNF1 and ATP6VC12 also had various levels of response to induction by estrogen and reduction by siER a knockdown ( Figure 4F ) . Interestingly , these genes did not directly interact with ER a at their promoter regions , but indirectly associated with ER a through RNAPII - bound chromatin loops . As a control , this effect was not seen in the nearby genes such as NOL10 and HPCAL1 that were in other RNAPII interaction complexes and also did not interact with ER a ( Figure 4G ) . Similar results were observed at another interaction locus centered on the GPR68 and CCDC88C genes ( Figure S4E ) . Thus , these results indicate that a speciﬁc stimulus ( estrogen ) could lead to coactivation of genes organized primarily through RNAPII - bound multigene complexes , and perturbation at one gene locus ( loss of ER a binding in this case ) in a multigene complex could alter the transcriptional states of other interacting genes within the same complex . Although genes in close genomic distances with each other had been reported to be correlated in expression levels ( Singer et al . , 2005 ) , our data suggests that the conjoint expression can be mediated through chromatin interactions . The functional signiﬁcance of such coregulation needs further investigation . Epigenomic Marks Associated with Chromatin Interaction Sites To study the association of transcription factors ( TFs ) with the RNAPII interactions , we examined the enrichment of 20 different TFs in K562 cells at the RNAPII interaction sites from the three chromatin models in our K562 ChIA - PET dataset ( Figures 5A and 5B , Figures S5A – S5D ) . General TFs such as E2F4 and E2F6 ( Figure 5A , Figure S5A ) directly bound at TSS sites ( Fig - ure 5B for a speciﬁc example ) . By contrast , speciﬁc TFs such as JunD and Max preferentially bound to distal regulatory sites and marked potential enhancers ( Figure S5B ) . Several chromatin remodeling factors and chromatin organization proteins such as INI1 , BRG1 , CTCF , and RAD21 associated primarily with non - TSS sites , suggesting that they may mediate long - range interactions with enhancer regions ( Figure 5A , Figure S5C ) . This hypothesis is consistent with other observations that INI1 and BRG1 , two subunits of the SWI / SNF complex , were involved in transcriptional looping ( Euskirchen et al . , 2011 ) . A common observation among all the factors was that interaction sites in the multigene complexes consistently showed elevated levels of factor enrichment , suggesting that the cooperative binding of factors in gene - rich domains leads to higher transcriptional activity , or these transcriptionally active open chromatin domains might converge to distinct specialized transcription factories , each enriched with general and speciﬁc TFs . We further explored the histone modiﬁcation data available from the ENCODE Consortium . Collectively , we found high enrichment of active histone modiﬁcation marks coupled with a lack of repressive marks in RNAPII interaction sites , conﬁrm - ing that the RNAPII interaction sites mapped by our ChIA - PET data were located in promoter and distal regulatory regions engaged and / or poised for high transcription levels ( Fig - ure S5D ) . Interestingly , the enrichment of active marks was highest in the multigene complexes , indicating that these might constitute transcriptional hubs . Our observations matched previous ﬁndings that the enrichment of active histone modiﬁ - cations positively correlated with RNAPII occupancy ( Barski et al . , 2007 ) . We observed similar histone modiﬁcation proﬁles in MCF7 cells ( Figure 5C ) using data that we generated previously ( Joseph et al . , 2010 ) . In particular , we applied the log ratio of H3K4me3 / H3K4me1 signal as a quantitative measurement of the likelihood that a genomic locus can act as a promoter or enhancer . Most noninteracting RNAPII sites proximal to TSS in basal promoter model showed high log ratios ( Figure 5D , plot 1 ; median = 2 . 4 ; > 90 % of the binding regions have log ratios > 0 ) , whereas most of the RNAPII interaction sites distal to TSS in the single - gene complex model and the multigene complex model ( conventional enhancer sites ) showed low H3K4me3 / me1 log ratios ( Figure 5D , plot 4 and 6 ; median < (cid:3) 0 . 72 ) , conﬁrming that this log ratio could reﬂect relative capac - ities of promoters and enhancers . Surprisingly , examination of RNAPII interaction sites proximal to known TSSs in the multigene complexes ( Figure 5D plot 5 ) revealed two peaks in the histo - gram of the log ratios , suggesting a mixture of enhancer and promoter elements in the promoter regions . Detailed proﬁles of H3K4me3 and H3K4me1 marks around the center ( ± 5 kb ) of those RNAPII interaction sites showed distinct characteristics of promoter - like , enhancer - like sub - groups ( Figure 5D , heat - map ) . Moreover , enhancer - like RNAPII interaction sites , on average , showed lower transcriptional activity than the promoter - like RNAPII sites ( Figure S5J ) . Thus , a large portion of interacting promoters may also have potential enhancer functions . We observed the same inverse correlation of H3K4me3 / me1 log ratio at the TSS proximal and TSS distal RNAPII sites for K562 ( Figure 5A ) , indicating that this observation is a general phenomenon applicable to all cell types . Interacting Promoters Possess Combinatorial Regulatory Functions To examine potential enhancer activity of promoters , we per - formed luciferase reporter gene assays , a commonly used method for promoter and enhancer characterization ( Pan et al . , 2008 ) . In these assays , approximately 500 bp fragments of the expected promoter regions were cloned upstream of a luciferase reporter gene construct either in a proximal position as the driving promoter or in a distal position as a presumed enhancer , and the constructs were transfected into MCF7 cells ( Experi - mental Procedures , Figures S5E – S5I ) . As shown in Figure 5E , the two interacting loci INTS1 and MAFK were 26 kb apart , and our RNA - Seq data suggested that both genes were active Cell 148 , 84 – 98 , January 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 89 Figure 4 . Transcriptional Coordination in Multigene Chromatin Complexes ( A ) Colocalization of multigene loci with RNAPII foci . Shown are the nuclear images of RNAPII IF - staining with four randomly - selected multigene loci ( MG1 - 4 ) and 2 control loci . Representative gene loci are MED20 , SYVN1 , HIST1 , and PLEC1 . ( B ) Quantitative analysisof nuclei ( n = 476 ) and alleles showing overlap of MGloci and RNAPII foci . Percentageoverlaps from MG loci and those from controlloci are signiﬁcantly different . ( C ) Super multigene complex of the histone gene family . Three distant clusters ( C1 , C2 , C3 ) of HIST1H genes converge together in a super - MG complex . Shown are RNA - Seq , RNAPII and ChIA - PET tracks in MCF7 and K562 cells . ( D ) Cotranscription of HIST1H genes in the super - MG complex in ( C ) . Correlation matrix derived from publicly available microarray data of 4 , 787 samples ( Supplemental Information ) . The rows and columns correspond to genes in each complex and the intervening regions . ( E ) RNAPII - bound multigene complex at the GREB1 locus . Shown are the ER a - and RNAPII - bound chromatin interactions . Highlighted promoters are anchored by RNAPII , but not by ER a . The bottom panel shows relative interaction frequency by 3C - qPCR data for the perturbation experiments using siER a knockdown and estrogen induction . 90 Cell 148 , 84 – 98 , January 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . in MCF7 cells . However , the normalized log ratio of H3K4me3 / me1 was 0 . 36 for the INTS1 promoter and 1 . 13 for the MAFK promoter , suggesting that the INTS1 promoter may have enhancer properties . To test this , we cloned the INTS1 promoter fragment in both orientations upstream of the MAFK promoter ﬂanking the luciferase gene . The luciferase reporter gene assay showed at least 7 - fold enhancement of luciferase expression from the MAFK promoter activity by the INTS1 promoter frag - ment , indicating that a bona ﬁde promoter can act as an enhancer to augment the activities of other promoters . In another example ( Figure 5F ) , the promoter of CALM1 interacts with an enhancer element 15 kb upstream and connects to the promoter of C14orf102 further upstream in 65 kb . Both RNA - Seq data and the H3K4me3 / me1 log ratio indi - cated that the CALM1 promoter was strong , whereas the C14orf102 promoter was weak and enhancer - like . The luciferase reporter gene assay showed marginal enhancement to the CALM1 promoter reporter gene activity by the native CALM1 enhancer and the C14orf102 promoter individually . However , the combined CALM1 enhancer and the C14orf102 promoter together led to a signiﬁcant (cid:2) 3 - fold enhancement of reporter expression from the CALM1 promoter . This result further vali - dates the enhancer function by interacting promoters and eluci - dates a possibility of combinatorial effect among interacting elements in multigene interaction complexes for transcription regulation . Next , we asked whether promoters with enhancer activity act speciﬁcally on their target genes . We swapped the pro - moter elements in the two examples of INTS1 - to - MAFK and C14orf102 - to - CALM1 for additional reporter genes assays ( Figure 5G ) . Intriguingly , when placed upstream to the CALM1 promoter , the INTS1 promoter showed remarkable enhance - ment of CALM1 promoter activity . Similarly , the combined construct of C14orf102 promoter and CALM1 enhancer also increased MAFK promoter activity signiﬁcantly . Meanwhile , a TATA box deleted promoter and other control promoters ( either active or inactive ) , taken from the nearby genes that are not involved in a promoter - promoter relationship , did not show cooperative enhancement to MAFK and CALM1 promoter activities ( Figures S5H and S5I ) . Thus , these results suggest a common property for promoters with enhancer capacity that could inﬂuence other promoters . In addition , we also tested the combination of inserting the enhancer - like promoter fragment in the position proximal to luciferase gene and the strong promoter in the distal position in the reporter gene construct . Of the 20 such luciferase experi - ments , we observed that the weaker promoters conveyed sig - niﬁcant enhancer function to their stronger interacting partners in luciferase activity rather than the reverse ( Figure S5K ) . In the case of interacting pair INTS1 ( enhancer - like promoter ) and MAFK ( strong promoter ) , the strong promoter MAFK did not demonstrate signiﬁcant enhancer activity ( Figure S5L ) . Thus , at promoter sites , there is an inverse relationship between enhancer and promoter functions . Cell - Line Speciﬁcity of Long - Range Chromatin Interactions To elucidate the cell - line speciﬁcity of chromatin interactions , we saturated the coverage of chromatin interactions through deep sequencing of more MCF7 and K562 ChIA - PET replicates ( Experimental Procedures ) . The saturated libraries are highly reproducible for interactions , and thus highly reliable for intercell line comparative analysis . These libraries exhibit the same pattern of genomic descriptors as the pilot libraries ( Figures S2B and S2C ) . With comprehensive ChIA - PET and RNA - Seq da - tasets , we performed comparative analysis between the two cell lines and identiﬁed cell - line speciﬁc genes and chromatin inter - actions ( Figure 6A ) . Most of the genes speciﬁcally expressed in their respective cells also showed cell - speciﬁc interactions ( Fig - ure 6B ) , implying that cell - speciﬁc chromatin interactions provide the structural basis for cell - speciﬁc transcription . Gene Ontology ( GO ) analysis revealed signiﬁcant enrichment of erythroid related GO terms such as response to stimulus and blood circulation for genes with speciﬁc expression and chro - matin interactions in K562 cells , whereas GO terms such as ectoderm development and related biological process were en - riched in MCF7 cells ( Figure 6C , Figure S6A ) . As expected , the genes common in both cell lines showed enrichment of house - keeping functions like metabolism , cell - cycle and signal trans - duction ( Figure S6B ) . Among the chromatin interactions speciﬁc to K562 cells , we captured many previously characterized interactions including the a - and b - globin loci ( Bau et al . , 2011 ; Hou et al . , 2010 ) . Fig - ure 6D shows extensive interactions identiﬁed by ChIA - PET data between the a - globin gene locus and the DNase hyper - sensitive ( DHS ) sites present in the gene body of the C16orf35 gene . Additionally , we found that the a - globin locus in K562 extended its interactions to the neighboring domains , which were constitutively active in both K562 and MCF7 cells , whereas the interactions to a - globin genes are K562 - speciﬁc , suggesting a complex chromatin architecture for spatiotemporal regulation of both constitutive and cell - speciﬁc transcription . Similarly , the b - globin gene locus also displayed previously known K562 - speciﬁc interactions with the nearby locus control region ( Figure S6C ) . GREB1 is a well characterized MCF7 - speciﬁc gene . As ex - pected , we found abundant chromatin interactions associated with RNAPII at this locus in MCF7 , but not in K562 cells ( Fig - ure 6E ) . In addition to recapitulating the previously identiﬁed ER a - associated interactions ( Fullwood et al . , 2009 ) , RNAPII interaction data showed an additional interaction site on the far most upstream ( left in Figure 6E ) side of this complex . A strong H3K4me1 mark on this site suggested that this is potentially an enhancer site for a transcription factor other than ER a . ( F and G ) Time course RT - qPCR following estrogen ( E2 ) induction after siControl ( solid ) and siER a ( dashed ) transfections of MCF7 cells . Colors of the curves correspond to genes shown in ( E ) . A secondary axis ( red , right side ) is used for GREB1 expression to accommodate its high expression level . Expression data of genes involved in the GREB1 multigene complex are in ( F ) , and the data for genes outside of the complex are in ( G ) . RT - qPCR mean values and standard deviations ( SD ) from two independent experiments are shown . See also Figure S4 and Table S2 . Cell 148 , 84 – 98 , January 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 91 92 Cell 148 , 84 – 98 , January 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . Intriguingly , a signiﬁcant RNA - Seq peak was also identiﬁed at this site , indicating a possible enhancer RNA transcript , a new class of noncoding RNA species ( Kim et al . , 2010 ) . Long - Range Enhancer - Promoter Interactions and Disease - Associated Noncoding Elements Our data showed that the enhancer - promoter interactions were signiﬁcantly enriched over other types of interactions for cell - speciﬁc genes ( Figure 7A ) when compared to genes commonly expressed in both cell lines . This ﬁnding supported the general view that distant - acting enhancers tend to be speciﬁcally involved in tissue - speciﬁc genes , and was consistent with our analysis in Figure 3D . Although potential enhancer sites can be identiﬁed using high throughput approaches ( Heintzman et al . , 2009 ) , it is still challenging to connect enhancers to their target genes that are hundreds of kilobases away . Moreover , many remote enhancers could be embedded in intronic regions of other distantly located genes ( Visel et al . , 2009 ) , making it noto - riously difﬁcult to relate enhancers to their speciﬁc target genes . In this study , we identiﬁed tens of thousands enhancer - promoter interactions ( Table S1C ) including approximately 1000 ultra - long - distance ( 500 kb to megabases ) events . We observed that R 40 % of enhancers do not interact with their nearest promoters and instead jump over to their target promoters , bypassing several intervening genes ( Figure 7B , Figure S7 ) . An interesting example is the SHH gene that was expressed in MCF7 but not in K562 cells ( Figure 7C ) . SHH is important in development and related to certain cancers ( Lettice et al . , 2002 ) . Transcription of SHH is controlled by its enhancer which is located 1 Mb away and embedded in the intronic region of LMBR1 ; point mutation in this enhancer site is known to cause preaxial polydactyly , a common congenital limb malformation in mammals ( Lettice et al . , 2002 ) . We found abundant interaction data between the SHH promoter and the previously character - ized SHH enhancer site in the LMBR1 intronic region in MCF7 cells , but no interaction data in K562 cells ( Figure 7C ) , which correlated well with their SHH transcription status . This is consis - tent with earlier observations ( Amano et al . , 2009 ) . In another interesting example , we identiﬁed two major inter - action sites located (cid:2) 600 kb and (cid:2) 1 Mb downstream from the IRS1 gene promoter . IRS1 is known to participate in type - 2 diabetes ( T2D ) mellitus , and is found speciﬁcally expressed in MCF7 cells ( Figure 7D ) . A recent GWAS study uncovered a cluster of SNPs that is genetically associated with high risk to insulin resistance , T2D , and coronary artery heart disease ( Kilpelainen et al . , 2011 ) . This high risk locus is found located in one of the IRS1 enhancer sites ( Figure 7D ) . Thus , our data provides experimental evidence to suggest that this disease - risk locus could be physically connected with the IRS1 promoter , potentially serving as a critical long - range enhancer to regulate the expression of IRS1 , in a similar manner as the SHH locus . Other examples of long - range and cell - speciﬁc enhancer - promoter interactions in MCF7 and K562 are shown in Figure S7 . Taken together , these results suggest that ChIA - PET interaction data may better inform the association of a SNP with a gene involved in a disease process by providing evidence for direct physical interactions . DISCUSSION Through genome - wide mapping , we comprehensively analyzed RNAPII - associated long - range chromatin interactions . Our most interesting ﬁnding was the extensive promoter - promoter interac - tions among proximal and distant genes from 5 human cell - lines , which indicated that this mechanism is common in cells . Our work with reporter gene and siRNA knockdown assays provided experimental evidence that many promoters in the multigene complexes can cooperatively regulate the activity of other promoters with which they interact . Our observations thus blurred the conventional deﬁnition of promoter and regulatory elements for transcription . With such promoter - promoter inter - actions , we speculate that genetic error at one particular promoter might also propagate to other promoters and hence could lead to pleiotropic consequences depending on the inter - action network within a cell type . Intriguingly , the multigene complexes illustrated in this study are , in principle , akin to the Figure 5 . Epigenomic Proﬁles of Chromatin Interactions and Combinatorial Regulation of Interacting Promoters ( A ) Enrichment proﬁles of TFs and histone modiﬁcations centered on RNAPII peaks ( ± 1250 bp ) of interacting loci of the three models in K562 cells . Solid lines represent ‘‘TSS’’ proximal regions and dotted lines depict ‘‘non - TSS’’ regions . y axis : sliding median for ChIP - Seq enrichment in the region . ( B ) Examples of TF enrichment at RNAPII interacting loci in K562 cells . ( C ) Histonemodiﬁcationmarksandopenchromatinmark ( FAIRE ) associatedwithchromatininteractionsitesinMCF7cells . Thewidthoftheopenboxesinthelog ratio track reﬂects the region where the H3K4me3 and H3K4me1 data were used for the log ratio calculation . ( D ) HistogramsofnormalizedH3K4me3 / me1logratioatRNAPIIsitesproximaltoTSS ( TSS ) anddistaltoTSS ( non - TSS ) ofgenesinthethreechromatinmodelsin MCF7 cells . Two peaks are seen in plot # 5 ( blue curve for enhancer - like , and the red for promoter - like ) . The heatmap shows detailed H3K4me3 and H3K4me1 enrichments around RNAPII interaction sites ( ± 5 kb ) proximal to TSS . Four distinct clusters of RNAPII sites are promoter - like ( red ) , enhancer - like ( green ) , heterogeneous ( yellow ) and weak signals ( gray ) . ( E – G ) Reporter gene assay of interacting promoters in MCF7 cells . RNA - Seq , H3K4me3 , H3K4me1 , H3K4me3 / me1 ratio , and RNAPII ChIA - PET data tracks are shown . Numbersontherightsideforeachtrackindicatethehighestpeakintensity . Themeanvaluesandstandarddeviations ( SD ) oftheluciferaseactivitiesfrom at least three independent experiments are shown . ( E ) Promoter - promoter interaction at the INTS1 - MAFK locus . The arrow boxes indicate the aligned promoter regions which were cloned in reporter gene constructs for luciferase assay . ( F ) Promoter - enhancer - promoter interactions at the C14orf102 - CALM1 locus . RNA - Seq data showed that CALM1 was highly expressed , whereas C14orf102 only marginally transcribed ( enlarged RNA - Seq track of the C14orf102 locus ) . ( G ) Swap assay of DNA fragments from different multigene complexes . The dotted arrow lines show the swap of elements cloned in the distal positions in the reporter gene constructs for luciferase assay . See also Figure S5 and Table S2 . Cell 148 , 84 – 98 , January 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 93 Figure 6 . Cell - Speciﬁc Chromatin Interactions ( A ) ContourplotsofRNA - Seqdata ( logRPKM , left ) andchromatininteractions ( logPETcounts , right ) inMCF7andK562cells , showingcommonandcell - speciﬁc gene expression and chromatin interactions . ( B ) Contour plots of interaction data ( log PET counts ) for genes speciﬁcally and commonly expressed in MCF7 and K562 cells . ( C ) Enrichment of cell - speciﬁc GO terms in genes and chromatin interactions speciﬁc in MCF7 and K562 cells . The p value of 0 . 01 is marked as dotted line . ( D ) AnexampleofK562 - speciﬁcchromatininteractions . a - globingenes ( indottedlinebox ) interactwithdistantlylocated ( (cid:2) 20kb ) DHSsites ( highlightedinyellow ) which are known to interact with a - globin genes . In sharp contrast , the a - globin genes in MCF7 cells are not expressed and have no interactions with the DHS sites . 94 Cell 148 , 84 – 98 , January 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . bacterial operon as a mechanism for coordinated transcriptional regulation of related genes , suggesting the possibility of a chro - matin - based operon mechanism ( chro - operon or chroperon ) for spatiotemporal regulation of gene transcription in eukaryotic nuclei . However , the ‘‘chroperon’’ expression is not dependent on the linear arrangement of the genes , but is highly dynamic and can adopt a multitude of cassette conﬁgurations because of the combinatorics permitted by the looping interactions . Alter - natively , these interactions could reﬂect stochastic movement of proximal and distant active genes to localized transcription factories . An important question is how these multigene complexes are organized . A likely model is that a suite of protein factors for modulating gene expression in a functional regulatory cassette may result in optimal stoichiometry when aggregated in 3D space . This clustering also draws the regulated genes into a common spatial domain , similar to how the nucleolus is orga - nized . The interacting regions can be established and / or maintained by potential chromatin bridging proteins such as cohesins ( Merkenschlager , 2010 ) and CTCF ( Handoko et al . , 2011 ) , and this process might be facilitated by chromatin remod - eling proteins ( Euskirchen et al . , 2011 ) , all of which are enriched at the interacting sites deﬁned by RNAPII ChIA - PET data . Long - range chromatin interactions including enhancer - promoter interactions are increasingly being recognized as an important mechanism to regulate many important genes . However , methods to identify such long - range relationships have been technically challenging . High - throughput approaches such as ChIP - Seq and DNase - Seq are efﬁcient in identifying potential regulatory sites , but lack the ability to interrogate the connectivity between the prospective enhancers and their target gene promoters . In this study using RNAPII as the protein target for ChIA - PET analysis , we identiﬁed a comprehensive repertoire of distant regulatory elements directly interacting with gene promoters . Many of them act through ultra - long - range chro - matin interactions . Such distal enhancer - promoter relationships are particularly difﬁcult to be identiﬁed by other approaches . As demonstrated in the cases of SHH and IRS1 , long range interac - tions derived from ChIA - PET data could provide the connectivity of GWAS - identiﬁed high - risk loci to their target genes , and thus offer possible mechanistic explanations to the function of disease - associated noncoding elements . Further investigation of spatial architectures revealed in this study will enhance our understanding of transcription regulation in normal and diseased conditions of human cells . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Cell Culture Five cell lines , namely MCF7 ( ATCC # HTB - 22 ) , K562 ( ATCC # CCL - 243 ) , HCT116 ( ATCC # CCL - 247 ) , HeLa ( ATCC # CCL - 2 . 2 ) , and NB4 , were grown under standard culture conditions and harvested at log phase . ChIA - PET Harvested cells were cross - linked using 1 % formaldehyde followed by neutralization with 0 . 2M glycine . Chromatin was isolated and subjected to the ChIA - PET procedure ( Fullwood et al . , 2009 ) . The ChIA - PET sequence reads were analyzed using ChIA - PET Tool ( Li et al . , 2010 ) . The data are available fromNCBI / GEO ( IDGSE33664 ) . Controland reproducibilityanalyses are described in Figure S8 . RNA - Seq Data MCF7 mRNA was isolated following the protocol described in Ruan et al . ( Ruan et al . , 2007 ) for strand - speciﬁc RNA - Seq analysisby SOLiD sequencing platform . The rest of the RNA - Seq datasets for other cell - lines were retrieved from the ENCODE data repository site ( http : / / genome . ucsc . edu / ENCODE / ) . ChIP - Seq Data TheChIP - Seqdatawereretrievedfrom ( Josephetal . , 2010 ) , ( Rahaetal . , 2010 ) and the ENCODE data repository site ( http : / / genome . ucsc . edu / ENCODE / ) . RNAPII IF Stain and DNA - FISH MCF7 cells were ﬁxed using 4 % formaldehyde followed by permeabilization with 0 . 04 % Triton - X . After blocking with donkey serum , cells were incubated with primary antibody ( 8WG16 ) overnight followed by Cy3 conjugated secondary antibody for 1 hr . IF - stained cells were post - ﬁxed and subjected to dehydration by 70 , 80 , 100 % ethanol series , rehydration with 2 3 SSC and denaturation in 2 3 SSC / 50 % formamide at 80 (cid:4) C for 40 min . Biotin - 16 - dUTP and digoxigenin - 11 - dUTP labeled DNA probes were hybridized to cells at37 (cid:4) Covernightinahumidchamber . Slideswerewashed , stainedwithDAPI , mounted and visualized by a Carl Zeiss LSM confocal microscope . Quantitative Chromosome Conformation Capture Analysis Targeted 3C products were analyzed by qPCR . The 3C - qPCR protocol was adapted and modiﬁed from the previous publication ( Fullwood et al . , 2009 ) . Luciferase Reporter Gene Assay Dual luciferase assayswereperformedasdescribed ( Panetal . , 2008 ) . Testing fragments were cloned into pGL4 . 10 - basic vector . Constructs were trans - fected into MCF7 cells , and luciferase activities were measured following standard protocols . Statistical Analysis All the statistical tests were executed using the R statistical package ( http : / / www . r - project . org / ) . More details are available in Extended Experimental Procedures . SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplemental Information includes Extended Experimental Procedures , ﬁve tables , and eight ﬁgures and can be found with this article online at doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2011 . 12 . 014 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We acknowledge the Genome Technology and Biology Group at the Genome Institute of Singapore for technical support . This work was supported by Singapore A * STAR and an NIH grant ( HG004456 ) to Y . R . Received : July 18 , 2011 Revised : October 21 , 2011 Accepted : December 12 , 2011 Published : January 19 , 2012 ( E ) AnexampleofMCF7 - speciﬁc chromatin interactionsaroundthe GREB1 locus . ThefarlefthighlightedyellowisaRNAPIIinteractionsitethatisnotoverlapped by ER a - bound interactions in this region . It is also the bait site for independent 3C validation of interactions in this region . Tracks included in ( D ) and ( E ) are RNA - Seq data , interaction loop view , RNAPII ChIA - PET peaks and interaction PETs , ChIP - Seq density proﬁle of H3K4me1 and H3K4me3 , and the ER a - ChIA - PET in ( E ) . The numbers on the right of each track are the highest density value . 3C - qPCR mean values and standard error of means ( SEM ) from three independent experiments are shown . See also Figure S6 and Figure S7 . Cell 148 , 84 – 98 , January 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 95 Figure 7 . Long - Range Enhancers and Disease - Associated Noncoding Elements ( A ) Percentage difference ofenhancer - promoter ( EP ) and promoter - promoter ( PP ) interactions incell - speciﬁc versuscommongenes fromMCF7 and K562cells . The representation of EP interactions is signiﬁcantly increased in cell - speciﬁc interactions , while the representation of PP interactions is decreased , when compared to interactions that are common to both cell lines . 96 Cell 148 , 84 – 98 , January 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . REFERENCES Amano , T . , Sagai , T . , Tanabe , H . , Mizushina , Y . , Nakazawa , H . , and Shiroishi , T . ( 2009 ) . ChromosomaldynamicsattheShhlocus : limbbud - speciﬁcdifferen - tial regulation of competence and active transcription . Dev . Cell 16 , 47 – 57 . Barski , A . , Cuddapah , S . , Cui , K . , Roh , T . Y . , Schones , D . E . , Wang , Z . , Wei , G . , Chepelev , I . , and Zhao , K . ( 2007 ) . High - resolution proﬁling of histone methyl - ations in the human genome . Cell 129 , 823 – 837 . Bau , D . , Sanyal , A . , Lajoie , B . R . , Capriotti , E . , Byron , M . , Lawrence , J . B . , Dekker , J . , and Marti - Renom , M . A . ( 2011 ) . The three - dimensional folding of the alpha - globin gene domain reveals formation of chromatin globules . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 18 , 107 – 114 . Cook , P . R . ( 1999 ) . The organization of replication and transcription . Science 284 , 1790 – 1795 . Cope , N . F . , Fraser , P . , and Eskiw , C . H . ( 2010 ) . The yin and yang of chromatin spatial organization . Genome Biol . 11 , 204 . Cremer , T . , and Cremer , C . ( 2001 ) . Chromosome territories , nuclear architec - ture and gene regulation in mammalian cells . Nat . Rev . Genet . 2 , 292 – 301 . Eisenberg , E . , and Levanon , E . Y . ( 2003 ) . Human housekeeping genes are compact . Trends Genet . 19 , 362 – 365 . Euskirchen , G . M . , Auerbach , R . K . , Davidov , E . , Gianoulis , T . A . , Zhong , G . , Rozowsky , J . , Bhardwaj , N . , Gerstein , M . B . , and Snyder , M . ( 2011 ) . Diverse rolesandinteractionsoftheSWI / SNFchromatinremodelingcomplexrevealed using global approaches . PLoS Genet . 7 , e1002008 . Fullwood , M . J . , Liu , M . H . , Pan , Y . F . , Liu , J . , Xu , H . , Mohamed , Y . B . , Orlov , Y . L . , Velkov , S . , Ho , A . , Mei , P . H . , etal . ( 2009 ) . Anoestrogen - receptor - alpha - bound human chromatin interactome . Nature 462 , 58 – 64 . Hah , N . , Danko , C . G . , Core , L . , Waterfall , J . J . , Siepel , A . , Lis , J . T . , and Kraus , W . L . ( 2011 ) . A rapid , extensive , and transient transcriptional response to estrogen signaling in breast cancer cells . Cell 145 , 622 – 634 . Handoko , L . , Xu , H . , Li , G . , Ngan , C . Y . , Chew , E . , Schnapp , M . , Lee , C . W . , Ye , C . , Ping , J . L . , Mulawadi , F . , etal . ( 2011 ) . CTCF - mediated functional chromatin interactome in pluripotent cells . Nat . Genet . 43 , 630 – 638 . Heintzman , N . D . , Hon , G . C . , Hawkins , R . D . , Kheradpour , P . , Stark , A . , Harp , L . F . , Ye , Z . , Lee , L . K . , Stuart , R . K . , Ching , C . W . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Histone modiﬁ - cations at human enhancers reﬂect global cell - type - speciﬁc gene expression . Nature 459 , 108 – 112 . Hou , C . , Dale , R . , and Dean , A . ( 2010 ) . Cell type speciﬁcity of chromatin orga - nization mediated by CTCF and cohesin . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 3651 – 3656 . Jacob , F . , Perrin , D . , Sanchez , C . , and Monod , J . ( 1960 ) . C . R . Hebd . Seances Acad . Sci . 250 , 1727 – 1729 . Joseph , R . , Orlov , Y . L . , Huss , M . , Sun , W . , Kong , S . L . , Ukil , L . , Pan , Y . F . , Li , G . , Lim , M . , Thomsen , J . S . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Integrative model of genomic factors for determining binding site selection by estrogen receptor a . Mol . Syst . Biol . 6 , 456 . Kilpelainen , T . O . , Zillikens , M . C . , Stancakova , A . , Finucane , F . M . , Ried , J . S . , Langenberg , C . , Zhang , W . , Beckmann , J . S . , Luan , J . , Vandenput , L . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Genetic variation near IRS1 associates with reduced adiposity and an impaired metabolic proﬁle . Nat . Genet . 43 , 753 – 760 . Kim , T . K . , Hemberg , M . , Gray , J . M . , Costa , A . M . , Bear , D . M . , Wu , J . , Harmin , D . A . , Laptewicz , M . , Barbara - Haley , K . , Kuersten , S . , etal . ( 2010 ) . Widespread transcription at neuronal activity - regulated enhancers . Nature 465 , 182 – 187 . Lettice , L . A . , Horikoshi , T . , Heaney , S . J . , van Baren , M . J . , van der Linde , H . C . , Breedveld , G . J . , Joosse , M . , Akarsu , N . , Oostra , B . A . , Endo , N . , et al . ( 2002 ) . Disruption of a long - range cis - acting regulator for Shh causes preaxial poly - dactyly . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 7548 – 7553 . Li , G . , Fullwood , M . J . , Xu , H . , Mulawadi , F . H . , Velkov , S . , Vega , V . , Ariyaratne , P . N . , Mohamed , Y . B . , Ooi , H . S . , Tennakoon , C . , et al . ( 2010 ) . ChIA - PET tool for comprehensive chromatin interaction analysis with paired - end tag sequencing . Genome Biol . 11 , R22 . Merkenschlager , M . ( 2010 ) . Cohesin : a global player in chromosome biology with local ties to gene regulation . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 20 , 555 – 561 . Pan , Y . F . , Wansa , K . D . , Liu , M . H . , Zhao , B . , Hong , S . Z . , Tan , P . Y . , Lim , K . S . , Bourque , G . , Liu , E . T . , and Cheung , E . ( 2008 ) . Regulation of estrogen receptor - mediated long range transcription via evolutionarily conserved distal response elements . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 32977 – 32988 . Pauli , D . , Tonka , C . H . , and Ayme - Southgate , A . ( 1988 ) . An unusual split Drosophila heat shock gene expressed during embryogenesis , pupation and in testis . J . Mol . Biol . 200 , 47 – 53 . Raha , D . , Hong , M . , and Snyder , M . ( 2010 ) . ChIP - Seq : a method for global identiﬁcation of regulatory elements in the genome . Curr . Protoc . Mol . Biol . Chapter 21 , Unit 21 19 21 - 14 . Roussel , M . J . , and Lanotte , M . ( 2001 ) . Maturation sensitive and resistant t ( 15 ; 17 ) NB4 cell lines as tools for APL physiopathology : nomenclature of cells and repertory of their known genetic alterations and phenotypes . Oncogene 20 , 7287 – 7291 . Ruan , Y . , Ooi , H . S . , Choo , S . W . , Chiu , K . P . , Zhao , X . D . , Srinivasan , K . G . , Yao , F . , Choo , C . Y . , Liu , J . , Ariyaratne , P . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Fusion transcripts and tran - scribed retrotransposed loci discovered through comprehensive transcrip - tome analysis using Paired - End diTags ( PETs ) . Genome Res . 17 , 828 – 838 . Schoenfelder , S . , Sexton , T . , Chakalova , L . , Cope , N . F . , Horton , A . , Andrews , S . , Kurukuti , S . , Mitchell , J . A . , Umlauf , D . , Dimitrova , D . S . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Prefer - ential associations between co - regulated genes reveal a transcriptional inter - actome in erythroid cells . Nat . Genet . 42 , 53 – 61 . Singer , G . A . , Lloyd , A . T . , Huminiecki , L . B . , and Wolfe , K . H . ( 2005 ) . Clusters of co - expressed genes in Mamm . Genomes are conserved by natural selection . Mol . Biol . Evol . 22 , 767 – 775 . Su , A . I . , Cooke , M . P . , Ching , K . A . , Hakak , Y . , Walker , J . R . , Wiltshire , T . , Orth , A . P . , Vega , R . G . , Sapinoso , L . M . , Moqrich , A . , et al . ( 2002 ) . Large - scale anal - ysis of the human and mouse transcriptomes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 4465 – 4470 . ( B ) Proportional distribution of 4 classes of enhancers observed in two cell lines based on locations in relation to gene coding regions . ‘‘Intragenic proximal’’ enhancers locate insideof gene - body ( mostly introns ) and interact withthenearby promoters . ‘‘Extragenic proximal’’enhancers locate outside of genebody and interactwiththenearbypromoters . ‘‘Intragenicdistal’’enhancerslocateinsideofgenebody ( mostlyintrons ) , bypassnearbygenesandinteractwithfarawaygene promoters in long - distance . ‘‘Extragenic distal’’ enhancers locate outside of gene body , bypass nearby genes and interact with faraway gene promoters in long - distance . ( C ) Long - range interactions between SHH ( highlighted in yellow , left ) and its enhancer located about 1 Mb away in an intron of LMBR1 ( highlighted yellow , right ) . The SHH expression is speciﬁcally seen in MCF7 cells . ( D ) Long - rangeinteractionsbetween IRS1 promoterandtwoenhancersaswellasstrong IRS1 expressionareseeninMCF7 , butnotinK562cells . Thedottedline box indicates the enhancer region that contains SNPs associated with insulin resistance , type - 2 diabetes ( T2D ) and coronary artery heart disease identiﬁed by a GWAS study . The interactions of enhancer located 1 . 1 Mb away to IRS1 promoter ( highlighted in yellow ) is validated by DNA - FISH ( right ) . The BAC clones and genomic segments used for DNA - FISH are indicated at the bottom . Tracksincludedin ( C ) and ( D ) areRNA - Seqdensityproﬁle , interactionloopview , RNAPIIpeaks , ChIA - PETinteractionPETs , ChIP - SeqdensityproﬁleofH3K4me1 and H3K4me3 marks . See also Figure S7 and Table S5 . Cell 148 , 84 – 98 , January 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 97 Taylor , J . ( 2005 ) . Clues to function in gene deserts . Trends Biotechnol . 23 , 269 – 271 . vanSteensel , B . , andDekker , J . ( 2010 ) . Genomicstoolsforunravelingchromo - some architecture . Nat . Biotechnol . 28 , 1089 – 1095 . Versteeg , R . , van Schaik , B . D . , van Batenburg , M . F . , Roos , M . , Monajemi , R . , Caron , H . , Bussemaker , H . J . , and van Kampen , A . H . ( 2003 ) . The human tran - scriptome map reveals extremes in gene density , intron length , GC content , and repeat pattern for domains of highly and weakly expressed genes . Genome Res . 13 , 1998 – 2004 . Visel , A . , Rubin , E . M . , and Pennacchio , L . A . ( 2009 ) . Genomic views of distant - acting enhancers . Nature 461 , 199 – 205 . Zorio , D . A . , Cheng , N . N . , Blumenthal , T . , and Spieth , J . ( 1994 ) . Operons as a common form of chromosomal organization in C . elegans . Nature 372 , 270 – 272 . 98 Cell 148 , 84 – 98 , January 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc .