Designing for Dynamic Diversity m Making accessible interfaces for older people Peter Gregor University of Dundee Department of Applied Computing Dundee DD1 4HN Scotland + 44 1382 344152 pgregor @ computing . dundee . ac . uk Alan F Newell , MBE , FRSE University of Dundee Department of Applied Computing Dundee DD1 4HN Scotland + 44 1382 344144 afn @ computing . dundee . ac . uk ABSTRACT In this paper , we describe why designers need to look beyond the twin aims of designing for the ' typical ' user and designing " prostheses . " Making accessible interfaces for older people is a unique but many faceted challenge . Effective applications and interface design needs to address the dynamic diversity of the human species . We introduce a new design paradigm , Design for Dynamic Diversity , and a methodology to assist its achievement , User Sensitive Inclusive Design . Keywords Universal accessibility , design for all , HCI , Usability Engineering , Design for Dynamic Diversity , User Sensitive Inclusive Design 1 . INTRODUCTION Most research and development in the field of communication and information technology to support older people and people with disabilities has , to date , concentrated on the development of special systems , and on accessibility features focused on younger disabled people . Similarly the human interfaces to most computer systems for general use have been designed , either deliberately or by default , for a " typical , " younger user 8 , 9 , 11 . The knowledge fi ' om these fields , therefore , does not necessarily easily transfer to the challenges encompassed in universal design 3 , 5 , 16 , 17 , 18 and in particular the changing functionality that accompanies the ageing process . This paper discusses the particular issues for the design process which accompany ageing and suggests a paradigm and methodology to support the process of designing software which is as near to the universal accessibility ideal as is possible , or least reasonable . These are , Design for Dynamic Diversity ( DDD or D3 ) ; and a necessary change in the focus of methodology to accommodate DDD , User Sensitive Inclusive Design ( USID ) D21 . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or eornmercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . WUA UC ' O1 , May 22 - 25 , 2001 , Alchcer do Sal , Portugal . Copyright 2001 ACM 1 - 58113 - 424 - X / 01 / 0005 . . . $ 5 . 00 . 2 . OLDER PEOPLE ARE DIFFERENT There are important characteristics that occur much more widely in groups of older people than in younger ones . Older people can , very crudely , be divided into three groups : • Fit older people , who do not appear - nor would consider themselves - disabled , but whose functionality , needs and wants are different to those they had when they were younger • Frail older people , who would be considered to have a " disability , " often a severe one , will , in addition , have a general reduction in their other functionalities • Disabled people who grow older , whose long - term disabilities have affected the ageing process , and whose ability to function can be critically dependent on their other faculties , which will also be declining . This taxonomy is important , because it serves to illustrate the fact that capability and disability are not opposites . The implications of this are often not apparent to software developers who have a tendency to develop things " for disability " or for " normal people , " failing to reeognise the whole range of capability levels which , while declining , do not yet represent a disability as such , and indeed the range of reduced capabilities which constitute a handicap only when taken together and interacting with a computer . Other major characteristics of older people , when compared with their younger counterparts , include : • The individual variability of physical , sensory , and cognitive functionality of people increases with increasing age • The rate of decline in that functionality ( that begins to occur at a surprising early age ) can increase significantly as people move into the " older " category • There are different , and more widely appearing problems with cognition , e . g . dementia , memory dysfunction , the ability to learn new techniques • Many older users of computer systems can be affected by multiple disabilities , and such multiple minor ( and sometimes major ) impairments can interact , at a human computer interface level to produce a handicap that is greater than the effects of the individual impairments . Thus research into accessibility focused on single 90 impairments may not always provide appropriate solutions . Older people may have significantly different needs and wants due to the stage of their lives they have reached The environments in which older people live and work can significantly change their usable functionality - e . g . the need to use a walking flame , to avoid long periods of standing , or the need to wear warm gloves . 3 . DESIGNING FOR DYNAMIC DIVERSITY - A NEW PARADIGM So , in general , as people grow older their abilities change . This process of change includes a decline over time in the cognitive , physical and sensory functions , and each of these will decline at different rates relative to one another for each individual . This pattern of capabilities varies widely between individuals , and as people grow older , this variability increases . In addition , any given individual ' s capabilities vary in the short term due , for example , to temporary decrease in , or loss of , function due to a variety of causes including illness , blood sugar levels and state of arousal . This collection of phenomena present a fundamental problem for the designers of computing systems , whether they be generic systems for use by all ages , or specific systems to compensate for loss of function . Systems tend to be designed for a " typical user " and either by design or by default , this user is young , fit , male , and crucially , has abilities which are static over time . These abilities are assumed to be broadly similar for everybody . Not only is this view wrong , in that is does not take account of the wide diversity of abilities among users , but it also ignores the fact that for individuals , these abilities are dynamic over time . Both the abilities and the rate at which they change also vary between individuals and between cultures . There is a need , therefore , to address the issues of Designing for this Dynamic Diversity . Current software design typically produces an artefact which is static and which has no , or very limited , means of adapting to the changing needs of users as their abilities change . Even the user - centred paradigm [ e . g . 6 , 13 , 14 , 15 ] looks typically at concerns such as representative user groups , without regard for the fact that the user is not a static entity . Metaphors and processes in use at present are ineffective in meeting the needs of this design paradigm or addressing the dynamic nature of diversity . New processes and practices are needed to address the design issues ; awareness raising among the design , economic and political communities has to start ; research is needed to find methods to pin down this moving target . 4 . USER SENSITIVE INCLUSIVE DESIGN - A SUPPORTING METHODOLOGY Particularly as older people can have very different characteristics to most designers , it is clear that User Centred Design principles need to be employed if appropriate technology is to be developed for this user group [ 4 ] . UCD methodologies , however , have been developed for user groups with relatively homogonous characteristics . " Older people " encompass an incredibly diverse group of users , and , even small subsets of this group , tend to have a greater diversity of functionality than is found in groups of younger people . An additional complication is that there can be serious ethical issues related to the use of such people as " subjects . " Some of these are medically related , but also include , for example , the ability to obtain informed consent . It is thus suggested that the standard methodology of User Centred Design is not appropriate for designing for t _ _ his user group . It is proposed that the techniques of UCD need to be modified to be appropriate to older people as the user group . A methodology , which could be called User Sensitive Inclusive Design , is required . This would need to address the issues of coping with : • Much greater variety of user characteristics and functionality • Finding and recruiting " representative users " [ 7 ] • Conflicts of interest between user groups ( including " temporarily able - bodied " ) • The need to specify exactly the characteristics and fimctionality of the user group • Tailored , personalisable and adaptive interfaces • Provision for accessibility using additional components ( hardware and software ) " Inclusive " is a more achievable objective than " for all " or " universal . " " ' Sensitive , " rather than " centred " reflects : • The lack of a truly representative user group , • Difficulties of communication with users , • Ethical issues [ 1 , 2 ] , • That different paradigms are needed to standard UCD paradigms [ e . g . 16 ] , • That there must be a different attitude of mind of the designer An appropriate experimental methodology is needed as well as for new forms of communication of results of such research and development . This should be a major strand in a research agenda within the field of attempting to provide universal accessibility for older people . 5 . DESIGNING FOR DYNAMIC DIVERSITY The development of an appropriate methodology for User Sensitive Inclusive Design will bring into focus not only the substantial variability which exists in user characteristics , but also the changing nature of the functionality they have , over both short and long time scales . This will lead naturally to the need for interface designs which are appropriate for a much wider range of functionality than is currently the case , and to the dynamic nature of users ' functionality . We thus believe that the concept of Design for Dynamic Diversity provides an important step not only towards the development of more effective interfaces for older people , but also for the more general problem of " universal " interface design . 91 6 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Our thanks to Rachelle Heller , Joaquim Jorge , Richard Guedj Mary Zajicek , Vicki Hanson , Muna Yousef & Kxista Coleman for their contributions to the workshop . 7 . REFERENCES 1 . Aim , N . 0994 ) . " Ethical Issues in AAC research " in " Methodological Issues in Research in Augmentative and Alternative Communication " eds Brodin , J & Ajessibm E . B . ( eds ) Proc . Third ISAAC Research Symposium . Jonkoping , Universty Press , Sweden pp 98 - 104 2 . Balandin , S . & Raghavendra , P ( 1999 ) . " Challenging Oppression : Augmented Communicators ' involvement in AAC Research " in Augmentative and Alternative Communication , new directions in research and practice " ed . Loncke , F . T . , Clibbens , J . , Arvidson , H . H . & Lloyd , L . L . Whurr , London . pp262 - 277 3 . Beirmann , A . W . ( 1997 ) . " More than Screen Deep - " Towards an Every - Citizen Interface to the National Information Infrastructure , " Computer Science and Telecommunications Board , National Research Council , National Academy Press , Washington D . C . 1997 4 . Gregor , P & Newell , A . F . ( 1999 ) The application of computing technology to interpersonal communication at the University of Dundee ' s Department of Applied Computing , Technology and Disability , 10 ( 1999 ) pp 107 - 113 5 . Hypponen , H . , ( 1999 ) . The Handbook on Inclusive Design for Telematics Applications , Siltasaarenkatu 18A , 00531 Helsinki , Finland . 6 . ISO 13407 : 1999 ( E ) . Human - centred design processes for interactive systems , International Organisation for Standards . 7 . McGregor , A . , ( 1995 ) . A voice for the future . Proceedings of the European Conference on the Advancement of Rehabilitation Technology ( ECART ' 95 ) . 10 - 13 October 1995 , Lisbon . Lisbon , Portugal : National Secretariat of Rehabilitation . pp 127 - 129 . 8 . Newell , A . F . , ( 1995 ) , Extra - ordinary Human Computer Operation , in " Extra - ordinary Human - Computer Interactions " by A . D . N . Edwards ( Ed . ) , Cambridge University Press 1995 9 . Newell , A . F . & GGregor , P . , ( 1997 ) . Human computer interfaces for people with disabilities , in Handbook of Human - Computer Interaction , Helander , M . , Landauer , T . K . and Prabhu , P . ( eds ) , Elsevier Science BV , ( ISBN 0 444 81862 6 ) pp 813 - 824 . 10 . Newell , A . F . , ( 1998 ) . Assistive Technology Research and Techological Development . In Improving the Quality of Life for the European Citizen , eds Placencia Porrero , I , & Ballabio E . Assistive Technology Research Series , Vol 4 , IOS Press , Amsterdam , pp xlvii - liii . 11 . Newell , A . F . & Cairns , A . Y . , ( 1993 ) . Designing for extra - ordinary users , Ergonomics in Design , Oct 1993 , 10 - 16 12 . Newell A . F . & Gregor P . , ( 2000 ) " User Sensitive Inclusive Design - in search of a new paradigm , Proc A . C . M . Conference on Universal Usability , Washington , DC Nov . 2000 , pp 39 - 44 13 . Nielsen , J . , Usability Engineering , ( 1993 ) . London Academic Press 14 . Preece , J . , ( 1994 ) . A guide to usability - human factors in computing , Addison Wesley & Open University . 15 . Shneiderman , B . , ( 1992 ) . Designing the user interface : strategies for effective human - computer interaction . Addison - Wesley Reading , Massachusetts 1992 . 16 . Sleeman , K . D . , ( 1998 ) . Disability ' s New Paradigm , Implications for Assistive Technology and Universal Design . In Improving the Quality of Life for the European Citizen , eds Placencia Porrero , I , & Ballabio E . Assistive Technology Research Series , Vol 4 , IOS Press , Amsterdam , pp xx - xxiv . 17 . Stephanidis , C . , ( 2001 ) User Interfaces for All . Lawrence Erlbanrn Assoc . London . 18 . Websites focussed on Universal Design include : http : / / www . design . ncsu . edu / cud / ud / ud . html , http : / / www . stakes , fi / include http : / / www . trace . wisc , edu , http : / / www . w3 . org / WAI . 92