Evolution : Development within Different Paradigms 2013 257 – 266 257 13 An Evolutionary and Anthropological Examination of Brain / Mind and Novelty Arthur Saniotis , Maciej Henneberg , and Jaliya Kumaratilake Abstract The human brain functions evolved to support the survival of our ancestors as omnivores in natural environments that were of complex and varied nature . This evolution , of necessity , had to support the development of extensive mem - ory systems and of an ability to imitate behaviors of others . Novelty as an ex - pression of creative thought probably evolved along with the increasingly com - plex social processes of earlier human ancestors . Novel thought was especially expedited by the evolution of complex societies , which allowed for increasing individual specialisation . This article provides an overview on how the brain / mind works in relation to novelty from evolutionary and anthropological perspectives . The paper locates brain / mind novelty in terms of evolution , pat - tern and evolutionary learning . The authors conclude that novelty is contingent on social systems , and that current human societies need to challenge ordinary ways of thinking in order to reduce social and ecological problems . Keywords : neuro - hormonal organization , metapattern , evolutionary learn - ing , liminality , symbolism . Introduction : The Evolutionary Considerations of Novelty This article examines how the brain / mind works in relation to novelty , and how this relationship is constituted . The first section will provide an overview of brain / mind and novelty from an evolutionary point of view . The second section will locate brain / mind and novelty in relation to patterns . These patterns pro - vide cognitive variations which in turn re - organize and re - invigorate older con - ceptual patterns . The third section will discuss Gregory Bateson ' s notion of ‘evolutionary learning’ and relate it to Victor Turner ' s concept of liminality as a generator of novelty in human societies . In this analysis , Novelty can be described as : 1 . A combination of units of mind that produces phenomena which were previously unknown . An Evolutionary and Anthropological Examination of Brain 258 2 . Something which is new and useful . Novelty in human beings consists of several levels : 1 . neuro - hormonal level ; 2 . language = symbolic communication ; 3 . embodiment into material or conceptual entities . The human brain functions evolved to support the survival of our ancestors as omnivores in natural environments that were of complex and varied nature . This evolution , of necessity , had to support the development of extensive mem - ory systems and of an ability to imitate behaviors of others , especially of the more experienced members of successful populations . In the short - term of the life of a generation or two , imitation and conformity ensured survival . On a larger scale of a number of generations , however , moving through a number of different environments that changed in response to global cycles and trends of climate , it was necessary that new ways of perceiving and manipulating the world would appear and be selectively supported if humanity were to survive . Since it did this , the appearance of novelties and their incorporation in human behavioral repertoire had to occur naturally . The human brain , with its multi - dimensional , uncertain processing of multiple neural signals in a tangle of criss - crossing neuronal networks bathed by hormonal secretions ( Henneberg 1988 ) is incapable of sustained logical thought without artificial extraneous support of drawing maps , writing and figurative art . Therefore novelty , an important ele - ment of hominin evolution , was not a result of conscious logical thought , but a product of natural phenomena of interactions of brain functions with external environmental stimuli . It follows that the occurrence of novelty , though impor - tant , is a rare evolutionary event in the situation of multitudes of human brains processing routine impulses in repetitive ways based primarily on imitation and repetition of memorized patterns . Novelty can result from the combination of units of mind that could pro - duce phenomena , which were previously unknown . Putting together the units of mind capable of generating a novel idea could be regulated by the neuro - hormonal functioning of the cerebral cortex and the idea could be expressed using a language ( orally or in writing ) or symbolic communication ( i . e . , draw - ings , body movements ) . Buddhist philosophy that originated over 2500 years ago , introduced to the world the novel concept of ‘self - enlightenment’ , which resulted from the crea - tive logical functioning / thinking of the human mind . Subsequently , both Plato and Aristotle incorporated novel thought into the appreciation of philosophy , aesthetics and morals . While novelty has been mainly the domain of philoso - phical inquiry , science has recently come on board to examine the roots , gen - eration , and implications of novelty in human beings . Novelty as an expression of creative thought probably evolved along with the increasingly complex social processes of earlier human ancestors . Novel Arthur Saniotis , Maciej Henneberg , and Jaliya Kumaratilake 259 thought was especially expedited by the evolution of complex societies , which allowed for increasing individual specialization ( Simonton 2000 ) . Rogers ( quoted in Ochse 1990 ) views novelty in terms of producing something , that is , as a produced creation . Alternately , according to Wertheiner ( 1945 ) , novel problem solving is based on reorganizing the existing knowledge into gestalt s ( wholes ) and perception is based on categorizing the world into good and bad gestalt s . In addition , human perception is organized ‘to perceive sets of stimuli as wholes’ , which express symmetrical and harmonious patterns ( Bowers et al . 1995 ) . Similarly , the brain tends to reorganize and transform knowledge during novel thoughts and problem solving ( Gruber 1974 ; Feldman 1988 ) . Novelty is dynamic , has the quality of underlying directionality , that is a ‘conceptual momentum’ ( Freyd and Pantzer 1995 ) . Furthermore , creativity consists of two stages , the generative and exploratory phases ( Finke et al . 1992 ) . Edelman ( 1992 ) argues that the evolution of the human brain was expe - dited due to neuronal group selection and the brain ' s higher order conscious - ness . The speed of the brain ' s development is also due , according to Edelman ( 1987 ) , to ‘somatic selection’ in which evolution occurs within the organism via competition between cells . Novelty probably evolved as an adaptive mechanism that increased indi - vidual and collective fitness . The Acheulian axes ascribed to Lower Pleisto - cence hominins ( H . erectus sensu lato ) depict novel symmetrical objects which served probably both for utilitarian and aesthetic purposes . Moreover , the ad - vent of religious / spiritual ideas in early Homo was truly novel and became in - tegrated in early shamanism . For Boyer ( 2000 : 93 ) , the characteristic of the human mind is that it has a capacity for culture – it is a ‘cultured mind’ , thereby enhancing the transmission of knowledge inter - generationally . This is an idea proposed by many social scientists and behaviourists . However , Boyer is cau - tious about whether hominization led to ‘liberated’ cognition , and therefore , making Homo more capable of novelty . However , since novelty is intrinsic to evolutionary processes , it should not be viewed as the special province of Homo sapiens . While evolutionary psychology posits brain / mind to be based on multiple modularity , as characterised by the ‘Swiss army knife’ analogy , this model has some shortcomings . Firstly , the brain has evolved for different kinds of transmission and learn - ing , such as cultural learning which seems to have been selected by natural se - lection to be most suited for Homo sapiens . In Darwinian terms , novelty can be thought of as an ideational mutation , which can inject otherwise stagnant idea - tional systems with new kinds of knowledge ( e . g . , Buddhist philosophy ) ( Sternberg 2000 ) . Sternberg ( 2000 ) points out that novelty is significant for the evolution of societies . Thus , novelty would have acted as a selection pressure on humans in the evolution of parts of culture . In other words , novelty may have played An Evolutionary and Anthropological Examination of Brain 260 an important role in ‘gene - culture co - evolution’ . Novel thought is often gener - ated by peripheral individuals in primate and human societies , thus , such indi - viduals often do not come from the dominant echelons of their society ( Laland et al . 2000 ) . However , the evolved capacities of human societies towards novel thought , albeit important , may not be as significant as humans have claimed . For exam - ple , while human cultures show a considerable variation , there are also consid - erable similarities in relation to technology and mytho - religious ideas . Follow - ing Boyer ( 2000 : 97 ) , what we observe is a recurrence of templates rather than limited variation . Moreover , human ability for accuracy in beliefs may also be overestimated ( Papineau 2000 : 170 ) , meaning that novelty may also be con - strained in most humans . There is no doubt that novelty yielded advantages to ancestral hominins which in turn increased human social complexity and hu - man morphology . For example , the novel use of fire for food processing ( pos - sibly beginning with H . habilis ) led to the reduction of human gut size and den - tal and mandibular structures ( Henneberg 1998 ) . Moreover , the early hominins would have created various types of novel parenting structures such as allopar - enting which meant that parental roles would have been shared within a com - munity of female / males thereby increasing a child ' s fitness . Alloparenting ex - tended human sociality , enabling a child to receive care and information from multiple inputs , as well as optimizing cooperative breeding ( Hrdy 1999 ) . The social organization of early hominins had to have been adapted to the fluctuations of multiple environments , thereby stimulating various adaptation strategies , which further triggered new ways of thinking about the world ( Ehrlich 2000 : 113 ) . This feedback system may have endowed hominin ancestors with cognitive capacities such as creating ‘internal representations or models of real - ity’ ( Bradshaw 1997 : 146 ) . These models of reality may have further led to more complex symbolic behaviours such as ritual genre which contoured hu - man development and neural synaptic wiring ( Laughlin et al . 1979 ) . According to Turner ( 1969 , 1974 ) , rituals provide novel ways for thinking and experienc - ing the lifeworld . Thus , rituals through their symbolic elements , redress exis - tential themes with a view of reclaiming psychic equilibrium . This is what Jackson ( 1998 ) refers to as the ‘existential imperative’ . Moreover , for Teske ( 2006 ) the narrative forms such as myth and ritual , construct virtual realities through which human actions commune with the sacred entities . Following this theme , Winkelman highlights the neurological elements of Upper Paleolithic cave art which may have represented internal models for meditating mytho - religious experience ( Winkelman 2004 : 204 ) . It could be suggested that ancestral cave art was an analogic device for eliciting and medi - tating altered states of consciousness ( ASC ) via sympathetic and parasympa - thetic arousal ( Saniotis and Henneberg 2011 ) . A feature of some Cro - Magnon cave art is their actual physical inaccessibility ; some art can only be reached by Arthur Saniotis , Maciej Henneberg , and Jaliya Kumaratilake 261 traversing long , narrow tunnels in total darkness , requiring a degree of effort and experiencing sensory deprivation . The remoteness of some cave art com - bined with physical effort and sensory deprivation may have been a novel de - vice for eliciting altered states of consciousness , thereby heightening the ex - traordinary quality of the individual ' s experience ( Leroi - Gourhan 1967 ; Sani - otis and Henneberg 2011 ) . According to Winkelman ( 2000 , 2002 , 2004 ) and Krippner ( 2000 ) , the ancestral shamanism was able to exploit the human pro - pensity towards ASC via the manipulation of symbols in order to generate af - fective states . Moreover , McClenon ( 1997 ) notes that the majority of human beings are genetically predisposed towards hypnotic states – an ancestral legacy that probably improved fitness in the ancestral environment ( by alleviating stress response , improving fertility , strengthening group ties ) . The shamanic manipulation of ASC for mytho - religious purposes was probably an exaptation ( a by - product of another selected trait ) . In any case , the ancestral shamanism was an ingeniously novel complex whose techniques informed religious prac - tices during the Holocene Era . Novelty as a Pattern Being an organic system , the brain consists of a dynamic flow of interactions at many levels and parts . The brain / mind is organized to create patterns . These patterns ‘both envelop and are enveloped by other patterns’ . The brain / mind is in a constant process of exchanging information and transformation . As a feed - back structure , the brain ' s mechanism is circular in which input and output in - teract . ‘This complex interaction between perception and action evident in ex - plaining and learning behaviors , is the means by which a system…’ has the capacity to adapt and increase its complexity ( Bale 1995 ) . The brain / mind cre - ates the dynamic patterns because that is the only way it meets the condition of transmissibility . Brain / mind is an open system . Brain is posited on an exchange of nerve signals between body and environment . Therefore , the patterns of sig - nals in this system are largely repetitive . The metapatterns in the brain / mind have been considered as a basis for the generation of novelty in humans . Bateson has described metapatterns as pat - terns which describe other patterns . Another definition of metapatterns is com - mon patterns which occur across biological and mental systems . Levi - Strauss ( 1962 ) believed that cultural binary systems reflected the dualistic structure of the human brain . The notion of cultural opposites was considered by structural anthropologists as being universal , a belief that was refuted by Turner ( 1967 ) , who claimed that Ndembu sociality was based on a tri - partite categorical system . Novelty is not a random act but is often deliberated and directed by cogni - tion using different states of consciousness . This means that non - ordinary states such as ASC may also participate in generating novelty . What is not known is An Evolutionary and Anthropological Examination of Brain 262 how different modes of awareness interact to produce novelty . That is , how and to what extent do the sub - liminal modes direct normal consciousness ? Jung ( 1964 ) pre - eminently discussed this interaction in relation to his archetypical theory , in which natural metapatterns are inscribed in the subconscious sub - strate , which in turn influence conscious awareness . In other words , the mind uses certain ideas which may be combined and recombined over a process of elimination , and controlled in order to generate new kinds of variations of these combinations . These new cognitive variations are more complex since they often demand a new kind of thinking from conventional thinking patterns . Con - sequently , these patterns may provide the emergence of new conceptual para - digms , leading to new kinds of relationship structures ( i . e . , eusociality ) . Nov - elty can reorganize conceptual patterns in individuals and groups , leading to a re - organization of old conceptual patterns . N → N’ = ∑ [ N1 + N2 + N3 ] , where N is novelty and N’ is various ideas generated by the brain / mind . Evolutionary Learning , Liminality and Novelty Evolutionary learning has been informed primarily by the noted cybernetician and anthropologist Gregory Bateson ( 1972 , 2002 ) . Bateson contends that many modern social systems are entrenched in negative cognitive maps that he refers to as ‘internal incoherence’ . This process is not only habitual but distorts hu - man capacity for correct relation with each other and between the human and non - human worlds . Bateson insists that ‘true’ learning should be dynamic and flexible in order to foster new and positive social systems . Additionally , the evolutionary learning privileges the inter - dependencies between individuals and embraces new levels of connectedness and syncretism . Several authors have shown that habituated cognitive maps throughout his - tory have been social and ecologically deleterious . For example , Diamond ( 2005 ) , argues that maladaptive cognitive maps of several previous cultures precipitated their extinction . These included Sumeria , Mohanjo Daro , Maya , Norse Greenland and Easter Island . In the case of Easter Island , its environment was totally devoid of trees . In each of the afore - mentioned societies , the ex - ploitative socio - economic practices led to the environmental collapse . Diamond also claims that in the cases of Easter Island and Norse Greenland , unfavorable religious interpretations reduced their inhabitants ' fitness . The current rate of ecological degradation characterizes the deficient nature of human cognitive maps . Human global practices are at the heart of this prob - lem and necessitate the new cognitive maps . Since a great deal has been written on this issue , we will mention here the heuristic provided by Bateson who ar - gues that the creative process may enable Homo sapiens to re - connect with the non - human world . Bateson ' s view on aesthetics is intrinsically related to current social and individual pathologies . For Bateson , aesthetic behavior is a form Arthur Saniotis , Maciej Henneberg , and Jaliya Kumaratilake 263 of evolutionary learning , in that it foregrounds the total human , and not simply cognition ( Charlton 2008 : 121 ) . The art continually acknowledges the complex - ity of the life - world ; as a pattern it may assist Homo sapiens to re - integrate with nature . One reason for this is that aesthetic processes are based on metaphor – they lead towards an ‘ecology of ideas’ , of the interwoven patterning of life processes ( Ibid . : 119 ) . In this way , religion , art , dreams and other forms of ASC transcend the limitations of ‘language - mediated consciousness’ , and privilege patterns of connectedness ( Ibid . : 112 ) . In this sense , art is corrective , enabling a way out of the current human malaise . As Bateson ( 1972 : 132 ) points out : ‘ [ the artistic pattern ] is both itself internally patterned and itself a part of a lar - ger patterned universe which provides an integral experience’ . Bateson ' s notion of aesthetics as a novel form of evolutionary learning is reflected in Victor Turner ' s analysis of religious based rituals throughout the world . According to Turner , liminality is a state during rituals in which partici - pants are segregated from society , and when their former social status is tempo - rarily annulled . In this ‘statusless’ condition Turner believed that : ‘Liminal fig - ures are neither here nor there ; they are between and betwixt and between the positions assigned and arrayed by law , custom , convention , and ceremonial’ ( Turner 1969 : 95 ) . Turner ' s concept of liminality is relevant here , since he ar - gues that it has the capacity for questioning and violating social reality ; in other words for challenging established cognitive maps and for fostering new ways of thinking . For Turnbull , ‘liminality is integrative of all experience , both on the conscious and subconscious levels of being’ ( Turnbull 1990 : 80 ) . Turner as well as other scholars provides multiple ethnographic accounts of liminality which are beyond the scope of the present paper . That being said , Turner ' s symbolic approach emphasizes the creative and ludic elements of liminality within indigenous and secular rituals ( Turner 1979 , 1982 , 1988 ) . Indeed , limi - nality offers a theatre of creative possibilities for participants which would oth - erwise be hidden from them in their ordinary lives . For example , Turner notes that during pilgrimages , the participants symbolically move from a structural to an anti - structural condition involving a partial elimination of former social status ( Eade and Sallnow 1991 : 4 ) . Turner also asserts that the relations be - tween pilgrims during pilgrimage are characterized by communitas type bonds – a relationship fostering equality , egalitarianism and brotherhood ( Turner 1974 : 307 ) . For Turner , the achievement of communitas is a significant reason to participate in rituals . In other words , liminality embodies the principles of evolutionary learning , that is , creativity , flexibility , and temporal suspension or inversion of social val - ues and behaviours . I contend that liminality in the human species is a novel be - havioural intervention for dissipating social entropy ( in this case , habitual cogni - tive maps that maintain structural forms of violence ; that is inequality , social in - An Evolutionary and Anthropological Examination of Brain 264 justice , discrimination , overt competitiveness ) , by challenging the participants ' worldviews . Participants then re - enter the secular world being revitalized . Conclusion This brief survey on brain / mind and novelty has argued for a heuristic towards understanding this relationship as being non - linear , non - reductionistic and dy - namic . While the brain ' s architecture is genetic , the brain ' s synaptic flexibility is influenced by the environment . In this way , there is a constant interaction between neural models and the environment which is referred to as the ‘cogni - tive imperative’ – the need for Homo sapiens to examine and comprehend their environments , from which the causative understanding emerges ( d ' Aquili 1972 ) . The implication here for brain novelty is that ideas should be accommo - dated in a social system in order to perpetuate . In other words , the environment influences the kinds of novelty which exist or not through a process of cultural selection , which in contrast to natural selection is not random but has a level of intentionality . The authors have contended that novelty has a phylogenetic his - tory which in Homo was expanded via the evolution of complex societies . Both Bateson and Turner offer ways of challenging old cognitive maps via evolutionary learning in which Homo aestheticus is introduced to our attention . The aesthetic modes of thinking and experiencing the world provide a way of ecological re - connection ( Charlton 2008 : 162 ) , and for dissipating social entropy . References Bale L . S . 1995 . Gregory Bateson , Cybernetics , and the Social / Behavioral Sciences . Cybernetics & Human Knowing 3 ( 1 ) : 27 – 45 . Bateson G . 1972 . Steps to an Ecology of Mind : Collected Essays in Anthropology , Psy - chiatry , Evolution , and Epistemology . New York : Ballantine . Bateson G . 2002 . Mind and Nature : A Necessary Unity . Cresskill , NJ : Hampton Press . Bowers K . S . , Favolden P . , and Mermigis L . 1995 . Intuitive Antecedents of Insight . The Creative Cognition Approach / Ed . by S . L . Smith , T . B . Wood , and R . A . Finke , pp . 27 – 51 . London : MIT Press . Boyer P . 2000 . Evolution of the Modern Mind and the Origins of Human Culture : Reli - gious Concepts as a Limiting Case . Evolution and the Human Mind : Modularity , Language and Meta - Cognition / Ed . by P . Carruthers , and A . Chamberlain , pp . 93 – 112 . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Bradshaw J . L . 1997 . Human Evolution : A Neuropsychological Perspective . East Sus - sex : Psychology Press . Charlton N . G . 2008 . Understanding Gregory Bateson : Mind , Beauty , and the Sacred Earth . Albany , NY : State University of New York Press . d ' Aquili E . G . 1972 . The Biopsychological Determinants of Culture . Reading , MA : Addison - Wesley . Arthur Saniotis , Maciej Henneberg , and Jaliya Kumaratilake 265 Diamond J . 2005 . Collapse : How Societies Choose to Fail or Survive . Camberwell , Victoria : Penguin . Eade J . , and Sallnow M . J . ( Eds . ) 1991 . Contesting the Sacred : The Anthropology of Christian Religion . London : Routledge . Edelman G . M . 1987 . Neural Darwinism : The Theory of Neuronal Group Selection . New York : Basic Books . Edelman G . M . 1992 . Bright Air , Brilliant Fire : On the Matter of the Mind . New York : Basic Books . Ehrlich P . R . 2000 . Human Natures : Genes , Cultures , and the Human Project . Wash - ington , D . C . : Island Press . Feldman D . H . 1988 . Creativity : Dreams , Insights , and Transformation . The Nature of Creativity : Contemporary Psychological Perspectives / Ed . by R . J . Sternberg , pp . 271 – 297 . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Finke R . A . , Ward T . B . , and Smith S . M . 1992 . Creative Cognition : Theory , Re - search , and Applications . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Freyd J . J . , and Pantzer T . M . 1995 . Static Patterns Moving in the Mind . The Creative Cognition Approach / Ed . by S . M . Smith , T . B . Ward , and R . A . Finke , pp . 184 – 204 . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Gruber H . E . 1974 . Darwin on Man : A Psychological Study of Creativity . London : Wildwood House . Henneberg M . 1988 . Evolution of Human Brain Size with Notes on the Paradigm of CNS Function . Basic Medical Sciences 8 : 48 – 58 . Henneberg M . 1998 . Evolution of the Human Brain : Is Bigger Better ? Clinical and Experimental Pharmacology and Physiology 25 : 745 – 749 . Hrdy S . B . 1999 . Mother Nature : Natural Selection and the Female of the Species . London : Chatto & Windus . Jackson M . 1998 . Minima Ethnographica : Intersubjectivity and the Anthropological Project . London : The University of Chicago Press . Jung C . G . 1964 . Man and Symbols . London : Aldous Books . Krippner S . 2000 . The Epistemology and Technologies of Shamanic Altered States of Consciousness . Journal of Consciousness Studies 7 ( 11 – 12 ) : 93 – 118 . Laland K . N . , Odling - Smee F . J . , and Feldman M . W . 2000 . Niche Construction Earns its Keep . Behavioral and Brain Sciences 23 ( 1 ) : 165 – 175 . Laughlin C . D . , McManus J . , and d ' Quilli E . 1979 . Introduction . The Spectrum of Ritual : A Biogenetic Structural Analysis / Ed . by E . D . d ' Aquili , C . D . Laughlin , and J . McManus , pp . 1 – 50 . New York : Columbia University Press . Leroi - Gourhan A . 1967 . Treasures of Prehistoric Art . Tr . Norbert Guteman . New York : Harry N . Abrams . Levi - Strauss C . 1962 . La Pensée Sauvage . Paris : Librairie Plon . McClenon J . 1997 . Shamanic Healing , Human Evolution , and the Origin of Religion . Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion 36 ( 3 ) : 345 – 354 . An Evolutionary and Anthropological Examination of Brain 266 Ochse R . 1990 . Before the Gates of Excellence : The Determinants of Creative Genius . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Papineau D . 2000 . The Evolution of Knowledge . Evolution and the Human Mind : Modularity , Language and Meta - Cognition / Ed . by P . Carruthers , and A . Chamberlain , pp . 170 – 206 . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Saniotis A . , and Henneberg M . 2011 . Manifestations of Mystical Experience and Evo - lution of the Human Brain . Human Evolution 26 ( 1 – 2 ) : 61 – 74 . Simonton D . K . 2000 . Human Creativity , Cultural Evolution , and Niche Construction . Behavioral and Brain Sciences 23 ( 1 ) : 159 – 160 . Sternberg R . J . 2000 . An Evolutionary Interpretation of Intelligence , Creativity , and Wisdom : A Link between the Evolution of Organisms and the Evolution of Ideas . Behavioral and Brain Sciences 23 ( 1 ) : 160 – 161 . Teske J . A . 2006 . Neuromythology : Brains and Stories . Zygon 41 ( 1 ) : 169 – 196 . Turnball C . 1990 . Liminality : A Synthesis of Subjective and Objective Experience . By Means of Performance : Intercultural Studies of Theatre and Ritual / Ed . by R . Schechner , and W . Appel , pp . 50 – 81 . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Turner V . W . 1967 . The Forest of Symbols : Aspects of Ndembu Ritual . Ithaca , NY : Cornell . Turner V . W . 1969 . The Ritual Process : Structure and Anti - structure . Chicago , IL : Aldine . Turner V . W . 1974 . Dramas , Fields , and Metaphors : Symbolic Action in Human Soci - ety . Ithaca , NY : Cornell University Press . Turner V . W . 1979 . Process , Performance , and Pilgrimage : A Study in Comparative Symbology . New Delhi : Concept Publishing Company . Turner V . W . 1982 . From Ritual to Theatre : The Human Seriousness of Play . New York : Performing Arts Journal Press . Turner V . W . 1988 . The Anthropology of Performance . New York : PAJ Publications . Wertheimer M . 1945 . Productive Thinking . New York : Harper & Row . Winkelman M . 2000 . The Neural Ecology of Consciousness and Healing . Westport , CN : Bergin & Garvey . Winkelman M . 2002 . Shamanism as Neurotheology and Evolutionary Psychology . American Behavioral Scientist 45 ( 12 ) : 1873 – 1885 . Winkelman M . 2004 . Shamanism as the Original Neurotheology . Zygon 39 ( 1 ) : 193 – 217 .