360 | JUNE 2012 | VOLUME 9 www . nature . com / nrcardio Department of Epidemiology and Public Health , University College London , 1 – 19 Torrington Place , London WC1E 6BT , UK ( A . Steptoe , M . Kivimäki ) Correspondence to : A . Steptoe a . steptoe @ ucl . ac . uk Stress and cardiovascular disease Andrew Steptoe and Mika Kivimäki Abstract | The physiological reaction to psychological stress , involving the hypothalamic – pituitary – adrenocortical and sympatho – adrenomedullary axes , is well characterized , but its link to cardiovascular disease risk is not well understood . Epidemiological data show that chronic stress predicts the occurrence of coronary heart disease ( CHD ) . Employees who experience work - related stress and individuals who are socially isolated or lonely have an increased risk of a first CHD event . In addition , short - term emotional stress can act as a trigger of cardiac events among individuals with advanced atherosclerosis . A stress - specific coronary syndrome , known as transient left ventricular apical ballooning cardiomyopathy or stress ( Takotsubo ) cardiomyopathy , also exists . Among patients with CHD , acute psychological stress has been shown to induce transient myocardial ischemia and long - term stress can increase the risk of recurrent CHD events and mortality . Applications of the ‘stress concept’ ( the understanding of stress as a risk factor and the use of stress management ) in the clinical settings have been relatively limited , although the importance of stress management is highlighted in European guidelines for cardiovascular disease prevention . Steptoe , A . & Kivimäki , M . Nat . Rev . Cardiol . 9 , 360 – 370 ( 2012 ) ; published online 3 April 2012 ; doi : 10 . 1038 / nrcardio . 2012 . 45 Introduction Psychological stress is increasingly recognized as an important issue in , and a potentially modifiable risk factor for , cardiovascular disease . 1 Stress is relevant to cardio­ vascular health at several stages of the disease process ; exposure to cardiovascular risk factors ( such as the stress­ related reduction in physical activity ) , the long­term development of atherosclerosis and subclinical coronary heart disease ( CHD ) , and the acute triggering of cardiac events in people with advanced CHD . In addition , among patients who have survived an acute coronary syndrome or stroke , stress can impair recovery and affect quality of life in the long term ( Figure 1 ) . Stress management is being incorporated into cardiac rehabilitation in many centers , and work­related stress is increasingly regarded as a public­health problem . 2 The concept of psychological stress has evolved from early studies of ‘fight­or­flight responses’ by the American physiologist Walter Cannon at the beginning of the 20 th century 3 to more­nuanced formulations . 4 , 5 Most inves­ tigators now argue that stress responses arise when demands on people exceed their psychosocial resources or adaptive capacity , and that individual differences exist in how well people cope with challenges or losses in their lives . Demands or stressors can take the form of acute life events such as the death of a loved one , long­term challenges such as chronic work­related stress or caring for someone with dementia , and daily minor harass­ ments such as traffic problems while commuting . The psychosocial resources relevant to these stressors include social support and personality traits , such as optimism and the ability to cope flexibly with challenges . Genetic factors can also affect an individual’s response to stress . 6 Both high levels of demand and poor social and psycho­ logical resources are relevant to the impact of stress on cardio vascular health . However , as will become evident , definitively establishing causal links between stress and cardiovascular disease in studies of humans is difficult . The purpose of this Review is to summarize the evi­ dence for an association between stress and cardio­ vascular disease focusing particularly on CHD and , to a lesser extent , stroke . The primary focus is on exposure to external stressors , rather than on psychological and biological factors affecting vulnerability to adversity . The contribution of depression and anxiety to the etiology and prognosis of CHD are separate issues that are not addressed in this Review . Physiological stress response Stress produces a range of physiological changes , only some of which are likely to be relevant to cardio vascular disease . The hypothalamic – pituitary – adrenocortical ( HPA ) and sympatho – adrenomedullary axes are the primary biological systems activated during the stress response ( Figure 2 ) . 7 , 8 Stress perception activates hypo­ physiotrophic neurons in the hypothalamus that secrete releasing hormones ( for example , corticotropin­releasing hormone and arginine vasopressin ) acting on the anterior pituitary to promote the secretion of adreno corticotropic hormone ( ACTH ) . In turn , ACTH acts on the adrenal cortex to initiate the synthesis and release of gluco­ corticoid hormones , such as cortisol , promoting the mobi­ lization of stored energy . Stress perception also results in activation of preganglionic sympathetic neurons in the spinal cord , which project to prevertebral or paravertebral ganglia that , in turn , project to end organs , including the Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests . R E V I E W S © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved NATURE REVIEWS | CARDIOLOGY VOLUME 9 | JUNE 2012 | 361 heart , and to the adrenal medulla . Related physiological changes include elevations in epinephrine and norepi­ nephrine levels , an increase in heart rate and peripheral vasoconstriction , vagal ( para sympathetic ) withdrawal , and increased energy mobilization . Components of the biological response to stress that plausibly contribute to CHD include raised blood pressure , reduced insulin sensi­ tivity , increased hemostasis , and endothelial dysfunction ; 7 however , the key pathological mechanisms of long­term stress and acute stress differ , as described below . Long - term stress and CHD Research on long­term stress has identified external stressors that are likely to elicit harmful reactions in a sub­ stantial proportion of people . These include work­related factors , such as excessive work demands , and factors in private life , such as marital problems , financial difficulties , caregiver strain , and social isolation . The INTERHEART study is probably the largest study to date in which the relationship between long­term stress ( over the previous 12­month period ) and CHD has been examined along with other potentially modifiable risk factors . In this study , 15 , 152 patients with acute myocardial infarction ( MI ) and 14 , 820 control individuals free from CHD were enrolled from 52 countries worldwide . 9 Long­term stress was included in a psychosocial composite score , which comprised stress at work and home , financial strain , lack of control , and depression . The INTERHEART investiga­ tors found that exposure to long­term stress added to the risk of acute MI even after taking into account combined exposure to conventional risk factors such as smoking , diabetes mellitus , hyper tension , apolipoprotein ( Apo ) B : ApoA1 ratio , and obesity . The odds ratio for MI was more than double ( increasing from 69 to 183 ) among individuals who were exposed to psychosocial adversity in addition to conventional risk factors compared with those free of stress ( Figure 3 ) . These findings were robust , as a similar pattern of associ ations was found in men and women , old and young indivi duals , and in all continents of the world . 9 Given that MI is often preceded by a long subclinical phase of atherosclerosis development , a case – control study such as the INTERHEART study , despite its large size , cannot rule out the possibility that stress perception can be , in fact , a consequence of disease process rather than a cause . More specifically , people with advanced ath­ erosclerosis might experience exhaustion more quickly and to a greater extent than others and , therefore , regard their environments as more stressful than those who are physically fit . Prospective cohort studies , in which the temporal order between long­term stress and CHD can be assessed , could provide a more­valid study design than a case – control approach . The largest amount of prospec­ tive evidence published to date relates to stressors in the work place , but a growing number of studies have focused on social isolation and loneliness . Stress related to work or social isolation The most­widely tested conceptual model of work­ related stress is the 2D ‘job strain model’ , 10 in which employees whose work is highly demanding , but over which they have a low level of control , are proposed to be in a ‘job strain’ situation . If prolonged , this state increases the risk of stress­related diseases , such as CHD . The highest risk of illness is assumed to relate to isolated strain ( iso­strain ) jobs , which are characterized by high demands , low control , and low social support at work . 10 Other common sources of stress in the work place include an imbalance between effort and reward ( in terms of income , respect , and status control ) , 11 and organizational injustice characterized by unfair treatment and management procedures . 12 Several reviews summarizing the evidence from pro­ spective studies on work­related stress and CHD are available , 13 – 17 but only one , published in 2006 , 14 pro­ vided quantitative estimates made on the basis of a meta­ analysis . This study showed that employees exposed to stress in the work place have an average 50 % excess risk of CHD compared with those who do not experience this type of stress . 14 The age­adjusted and sex­adjusted summary estimate of the relative risk of CHD across 10 individual studies 18 – 28 on job strain was 1 . 4 ( 95 % CI 1 . 2 – 1 . 8 ) . 14 The summary estimates for studies using other conceptualizations of work­related stress were of similar magnitude ; 1 . 6 ( 95 % CI 0 . 8 – 3 . 0 ) for imbalance between effort and reward at work , and 1 . 6 ( 95 % CI 1 . 2 – 2 . 1 ) for organizational injustice . 14 To take into account the latest evidence , we updated our 2006 meta­analysis 14 in rela­ tion to job strain , including prospective studies published up to December 2011 . With the same search strategy as used in the original meta­analysis , seven new studies were identified . 29 – 35 According to the pooled estimate , job strain was associated with a 1 . 4­fold ( 95 % CI 1 . 2 – 1 . 6 ) increased risk of CHD with no significant hetero­ geneity between studies ( I­squared < 8 % ) , suggesting Key points ■ Psychological stress contributes to cardiovascular disease at several stages , including the long - term development of coronary heart disease and acute triggering of cardiac events ■ Disturbances of inflammatory , hemostatic , and autonomic processes are likely to be the mechanisms by which short - term psychological stress triggers acute myocardial infarction ■ Chronic stress at work and in private life is associated with a 40 – 50 % increase in the occurrence of coronary heart disease in prospective observational studies ■ Indicators of elevated long - term stress , such as social isolation and work - related stress , are associated with poor prognosis among patients with established coronary heart disease ■ Stress - management interventions improve the quality of life of patients with advanced coronary heart disease , but effects on disease prognosis have been inconsistent Risk factors Vascular pathology Cardiac events Recurrent event / death Indirect effect Direct effect Trigger Prognostic factor Stress Figure 1 | Stress as a risk factor for cardiovascular disease and mortality . REVIEWS © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 362 | JUNE 2012 | VOLUME 9 www . nature . com / nrcardio that the effect size was not affected by the inclusion of new data ( A . Steptoe & M . Kivimäki , unpublished work ) . Notably , in these studies , job strain in relation to CHD was investi gated in both men and women . 29 – 35 Other than meta­analysis , another way of summariz­ ing evidence is to apply quality filters to the data . That is , instead of extracting summary estimates across all studies , only the best papers are selected to improve the estimation of effect size . In a systematic review pub­ lished in 2009 , Eller et al . assessed the quality of articles on work­related stress and ischemic heart disease pub­ lished up to 2008 . 17 Each study was rated in terms of the validity of exposure and outcome assessment , how well the working population was represented , coverage of full age range , sufficient follow­up period , sex­specific analysis , and adjustment for potential confounding factors . Of the 33 prospective and case – control studies identified , only four received the maximum , or almost maximum , quality scores and three of these high­quality studies reported an estimate for the association between job strain and CHD . 17 To facilitate interpretation , we conducted a meta­analysis of these three studies ; the age­adjusted and sex­adjusted summary estimate for relative risk between job strain and no job strain was 1 . 3 ( A . Steptoe & M . Kivimäki , unpublished work ) . Thus , the evidence from these high­quality studies is con­ sistent with the conclusions that we have drawn from the updated meta­analysis and suggests a moderate association between job strain and CHD . In addition to long­term work­related stressors , data from prospective studies have shown associations between sources of stress not related to work—such as marital problems , 36 widowhood , 37 death of a child , 38 and caring for a sick spouse at home 39 —and increased risk of CHD . Social isolation and loneliness have been highlighted as increasingly common sources of chronic stress . For example , over the past 2 decades , a threefold increase in the number of US citizens who report having no confidant has been reported . 40 In the UK , according to a 2010 survey by the Mental Health Foundation , one in ten people often feels lonely , one­third have a close friend or relative whom they think is very lonely , and half of those surveyed thought that people are getting lonelier in general . 41 We are not aware of any published meta­analyses on social isolation in relation to the incidence of CHD ; however , analyses of the association between social iso­ lation and disease prognosis among individuals with CHD or other chronic conditions have been published . 42 To quantify the excess risk of incident CHD associated with social isolation and loneliness , we performed a sys­ tematic literature review and meta­analysis of prospec­ tive cohort studies published up to December 2011 in CHD­free populations . 43 – 48 The pooled relative risk of CHD related to social isolation and loneliness across the nine studies identified was 1 . 51 , an excess risk of broadly similar magnitude as that for work­related stress ( A . Steptoe & M . Kivimäki , unpublished work ) . Although we did not find any clear evidence of publi­ cation bias , we cannot rule out the possibility that such bias existed because the studies were observational and publication bias is more common for observational data than for clinical trials . Our meta­analyses might , there­ fore , overestimate rather than underestimate the effects of work­related stress and social isolation on CHD risk . To evaluate this issue further , analyses pooling data from individual participants in published and unpublished studies are needed in the future . Evidence of a dose – response pattern In epidemiological studies , demonstrating a dose – response relationship strengthens the argument for cause and effect . In the British Whitehall II study , 49 repeated measurements have been performed to examine the importance of the duration of the exposure to stress for CHD risk . 50 – 52 A dose – response relationship was found between exposure to work­related stress over a 14­year period and risk of the metabolic syndrome at the end of the follow­up . The odds ratios for develop­ ing the metabolic syndrome were 1 . 1 ( 95 % CI 0 . 6 – 2 . 0 ) , 1 . 5 ( 95 % CI 0 . 7 – 2 . 9 ) , and 2 . 3 ( 95 % CI 1 . 3 – 3 . 8 ) times higher for employees who were exposed to work­related stress once , twice , and either three or four times , com­ pared with those who were not exposed to work­related stress . Among participants aged ≤50 years , long­term work­related stress was also associated with a 1 . 7­fold ( 95 % CI 1 . 2 – 2 . 4 ) increased risk of CHD compared with no exposure to stress . In the group of participants aged > 50 years , however , no such association was observed ( relative risk 1 . 1 , 95 % CI 0 . 7 – 1 . 8 with the highest level of work­related stress ) . 52 This finding could possibly be the result of exposure misclassification owing to retire­ ment and the fact that , in general , relative risks associ­ ated with cardiovascular risk factors tend to decrease in elderly populations . 9 Therefore , some evidence exists of a dose – response relationship between duration of work­ related stress and the incidence of CHD in younger ( aged ≤50 years ) employees . We are not aware of any studies in which CHD risk has been evaluated as a function of the length of the exposure to social isolation and loneliness . Underlying mechanisms Testing causality involves the investigation of plausible mechanisms through which long­term stress might Cerebral cortex Stress exposure Hypothalamus Pituitary Releasinghormones ACTH Adrenal medulla Peripheralsympatheticnerves Adrenal cortex Sympatheticoutput Figure 2 | The physiological stress response . Stress perception stimulates the hypothalamus to secrete releasing hormones , which act on the anterior pituitary to promote the secretion of ACTH . This hormone then acts on the adrenal cortex to initiate the synthesis and release of glucocorticoid hormones , promoting the mobilization of stored energy . In addition , stress perception activates preganglionic sympathetic neurons in the spinal cord , which project to prevertebral or paravertebral ganglia that , in turn , project to end organs , including the heart , and to the adrenal medulla . Abbreviation : ACTH , adrenocorticotropic hormone . REVIEWS © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved NATURE REVIEWS | CARDIOLOGY VOLUME 9 | JUNE 2012 | 363 impact CHD risk . In the Whitehall II study , 52 longer duration of work­related stress was associated with a greater morning rise in cortisol level and reduced heart­ rate variability , suggesting a direct effect of stress on the autonomic nervous system and neuroendocrine function . In the CARDIA study , 53 work­related stress was associ­ ated with an increase in the incidence of hyper tension , a finding not replicated in the Whitehall II study . 52 Social isolation has also been suggested to disrupt autonomic regulation of the heart , 54 and is associated with elevated levels of molecular stress markers , such as cortisol and epinephrine , 55 , 56 although the evidence is not entirely consistent . 57 Long­term stress has also been linked to increased risk of depressive disorders 58 – 62 ( a risk and prognostic factor for CHD ) , 63 the metabolic syndrome , 51 and reduced telomere length 64 ( a marker of cellular ageing and a risk factor for CHD ) . 65 The evidence linking stress and the development of atherosclerosis is mixed . 66 – 72 A link between problems in social relationships and reduced immune functioning and immune­mediated inflammatory processes has been indicated in a number of studies . 73 , 74 Both of these outcomes contribute to CHD risk . 75 A weak , bidirectional association might also exist between long­term stress and weight change , such that stress causes some individuals to gain and others to lose weight . 76 – 78 Weight gain is a risk factor for CHD , but whether the impact of stress is mediated through weight changes is not known . Stress can also influence CHD risk indirectly by increasing health­risk behaviors . For example , in the Finnish Public Sector study 79 of over 50 , 000 participants ( one of the largest cohort studies in the field ) , smokers who reported work­related stress were 50 % more likely to smoke over 20 cigarettes per day than those who did not experience work­related stress . In the Copenhagen City Heart Study , 80 individuals with high compared with low levels of stress were less likely to quit smoking , more likely to become physically inactive , and less likely to stop drinking alcohol above the sensible limits . Studies of long working hours show that continuously working ≥11 h per day is associated with shortened sleep duration and increased sleep disturbance , 81 both of which can increase the risk of CHD , especially if combined . 82 , 83 In addition , loneliness has been linked to increased likelihood of smoking and physical inactivity . 84 , 85 In combination , these findings suggest both direct and indirect mechanisms for the relationship between stress and CHD . Further insight might be gained from studies of biological responses to acute mental stress , in which greater cardiovascular and HPA axis responses have been associated prospectively with underlying CHD and disease progression 86 , 87 and with clinical cardiac events . 88 , 89 Noncausal explanations In observational studies , such as those reviewed above , confounding by imprecise measurement of factors in statistical models , or unmeasured additional factors , is an alternative explanation for observed associations between exposure and outcome . CHD can take decades to develop and is associated with a wide variety of risk factors in childhood and adulthood . The possibility of confounding arises when these risk factors additionally predict long­term stress . One potential confounder is socioeconomic disad­ vantage because , in many cohorts , experience of such adversity is more common among individuals with stress than in those who do not report stress . 49 The excess risk of CHD observed among people with stress could , there­ fore , in principle , be the result of factors associated with socioeconomic adversity , marking increased exposure to infectious agents and passive smoking , poor diet , and few opportunities for physical activity and high­quality health care , in addition to stress . Results from a Scottish study support this possibility . 90 Psychological stress was , by contrast to most other studies , associated with socio­ economic advantage rather than socioeconomic disad­ vantage . Surprisingly , psychological stress was associated with lower rather than higher cardiovascular mortality , leading the investigators to conclude that socioeconomic circumstances might confound the association between psychological stress and CHD . 90 However , an unusual measure of stress ( the Reeder stress inventory , which is a measure of stressful feelings rather than stress exposure and can be confounded by neuroticism ) was used in this study and the findings have not been replicated . Social isolation and loneliness also mark a range of coronary risk factors other than those directly related to stress , raising the possibility of residual confounding . A twin study , published in 2010 , found that loneliness is moderately heritable . 91 Confounding would occur if the genetic predisposition associated with loneliness is also associated with increased CHD risk . Evidence to support this possibility is currently not available . Only data from randomized controlled trials can rule out bias from confounding , but no trials of long­term stress or loneliness and CHD risk are currently in progress . In addition , such trials could be argued to be impractical , unfeasible , and unethical . 1 , 000 – 100 – _ 1 – Hypertension O dd s r a t i o f o r M I Plus obesity Plus smoking , diabetes mellitus , ApoB : ApoA1 ratio Plus psychosocialfactors Combined risk factors 1 . 9 ( 1 . 7 – 2 . 1 ) 42 . 3 ( 33 . 2 – 54 . 0 ) 68 . 5 ( 53 . 0 – 88 . 6 ) 182 . 9 ( 132 . 6 – 252 . 2 ) 10 Figure 3 | Risk of acute MI associated with exposure to multiple risk factors among 29 , 972 individuals across 52 countries in the INTERHEART study . 9 The 95 % CIs are shown in brackets . Abbreviations : Apo , apolipoprotein ; MI , myocardial infarction . REVIEWS © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 364 | JUNE 2012 | VOLUME 9 www . nature . com / nrcardio Clinical relevance The relevance of long­term stress in evaluating a patient’s absolute risk of developing CHD ( that is , in risk predic­ tion ) is unclear . In determining CHD risk , the focus must be on the ‘total risk’ because the presence of a single , high­level risk factor might be associated with lower overall risk than several slightly elevated risk factors in combination . To evaluate the overall risk , clinicians examine standard risk factors , such as age , sex , adverse lipid profiles , high blood pressure , diabetes , and smoking habits , and summarize these measurements by using mathematical equations , such as the Framingham risk score . 92 Data published in 2011 suggest that information on work­related stress , assessed by a questionnaire on long working hours , might slightly improve prediction of CHD made on the basis of the Framingham risk score . 93 Corresponding analyses of social isolation and loneliness are not available . Current European guidelines on cardiovascular disease prevention recommend assessment of long­ term stress , including work­related stressors and social isolation , by clinical interview or standard­ ized questionnaires . 94 The guidelines suggest that patients who experience stress or are at high risk owing to other factors , and those who have estab­ lished cardiovascular disease should receive indi­ vidual or group counseling for coping with stress and illness . In the case of clinically relevant emotional dis­ tress , referral to a specialist is needed . Corresponding recommendations are not included in prevention guidelines by the AHA or the ACC . 95 Acute stress triggers cardiac events Triggers are defined as activities or stimuli that exac­ erbate the acute physiological and pathophysiological processes that initiate cardiac events such as acute MI or sudden cardiac death . 96 – 98 Triggers include phys ical exertion , exposure to air pollution , and respir atory infection . 99 , 100 The notion that psychological stress could trigger acute MI was first studied systematically after a major earthquake in Athens in 1981 , when an excess of cardiac deaths was found over the following 3 days . 101 Over the past 30 years , an increase in rates of MI and sudden cardiac death has been reported after other earthquakes . Some inconsistencies in the data exist , which could be related to variations in the season of the year or the time of day at which the disasters occurred . Earthquakes that occur early in the day over the cold winter months are more likely to be associated with risk of cardiac events . 102 – 104 Other disasters have also been investigated , including major industrial accidents , 105 wars , and terrorist attacks 106 , 107 and have been related to an increase in rates of acute MI or sudden cardiac death . Related literature exists concerning the impact of major sports matches on cardiovascular events in specta­ tors . 108 , 109 Witte et al . showed that the risk of death from MI or stroke was increased ( relative risk 1 . 51 , 95 % CI 1 . 08 – 2 . 09 ) among Dutch men aged ≥45 years on the day on which the Dutch soccer team lost to the French under dramatic circumstances in the 1996 European Cup . 110 No equivalent increase was seen for women . A subsequent evaluation of cardiac emergencies in the Munich region of Germany during the 2006 soccer World Cup identi­ fied peaks on days on which the German team played ( 2 . 66­fold higher than during the control period ; 95 % CI 2 . 33 – 3 . 04 , P < 0 . 001 ) , particularly in the 2 h after the start of matches . 111 These studies show associations between acute cardio­ vascular events and emotionally important public events . However , we cannot be completely certain that psycho­ logical stress is the trigger , since the circumstances surrounding each case are difficult to reconstruct in the turmoil surrounding such occasions . Other factors such as physical exertion , heat , excessive alcohol con­ sumption , or exposure to pollutants might also contrib­ ute . 112 Additionally , most acute cardiovascular events do not take place in response to major events affect­ ing entire populations , but to individuals under more personal circumstances . To study emotional triggers in individual patients , a number of methodological difficulties must be over­ come ( Box 1 ) . Stress is often mentioned when survi­ vors of acute cardiac events are interviewed in hospital and asked about what they think caused their cardiac event , 113 but these reports might not be reliable . This field of research took a major step forward in the mid 1990s with the application of case – crossover methodology by Mittleman et al . in the MI Onset Study . 114 These investi­ gators compared the ‘hazard period’ ( for example , the 2 h before the onset of cardiac symptoms ) with compa­ rable control periods for the same individual . The case – crossover method eliminates many confounding factors , since the hazard and control period are both assessed in the same person , and also takes the base rate of stress exposure into account . Mittleman et al . established that patients were at increased risk of acute MI in the 2 h after an episode of intense anger , 114 a pattern that has been replicated by other researchers . 115 – 117 This methodology has also be used to demonstrate that short­term work­related stress , acute sadness , and the acute effects of bereavement act as triggers of cardiac events , 118 – 121 Interestingly , the impact of acute emotional stress has been shown to be more pronounced among people of lower socioeconomic status , 114 , 117 suggesting a socioeconomic gradient in vulnerability to acute , as well as chronic , stress . Box 1 | Difficulties in studying emotional triggers of cardiac events ■ Survival effects : information is typically collected retrospectively , and effects can be different for fatal and nonfatal cardiac events ■ Memory problems : patients might not accurately recall the circumstances surrounding the onset of symptoms ■ Timing difficulties : the exact moment of the onset of symptoms , such as severe chest pain , leading up to acute cardiac events might be difficult to define ■ Retrospective biases : patients try to make sense of what has happened to them , so might retrospectively magnify the stress that they were under before the event ■ Base rates : the fact that a patient experienced intense emotion immediately before a cardiac event needs to be assessed in the context of how frequent such emotions are for that individual REVIEWS © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved NATURE REVIEWS | CARDIOLOGY VOLUME 9 | JUNE 2012 | 365 Biological processes in acute triggering Progress has been made in understanding the biological processes underlying stress­related triggering of cardio­ vascular events . Triggering takes place against a back­ ground of advanced atherosclerosis , so is rare in people with little underlying CHD . In this respect , emotional triggering of MI and stroke is different from Takotsubo or stress cardiomyopathy , 7 , 122 , 123 a stress­specific syndrome identified some 20 years ago ( Box 2 and Figure 4 ) . No evi­ dence exists that psychological stress directly stimulates coronary or carotid artery plaque disruption through rupture or erosion . However , plaque disruption has adverse consequences when it is associated with acute inflammation , procoagulant responses such as platelet activation , and hemodynamic stress . 124 Cardiac imaging studies have revealed that a substantial proportion of patients with advanced CAD show transient myo cardial ischemia in response to acute mental stress . 125 , 126 Some patients manifest coronary artery vaso constriction during stress , particularly in regions of marked ste­ nosis . 127 Cardiac rhythm can also be disturbed ; 128 for example , a study of patients in the New York area of the USA with implanted cardioverter – defibrillators showed a marked increase in tachyarrhythmias in the month after the attacks on the World Trade Center on 11 September 2001 . 129 Whether patients who have actually experienced emo­ tional triggering of acute cardiac events have a particular susceptibility to psychological stress has not been widely studied . However , one comparison of survivors of acute coronary syndromes who did or did not report emotional triggers in the 2 h before symptom onset showed that the trigger group produced markedly greater increases in platelet activation and aggregation after experimental mental stress , as well as with slowed recovery of blood pressure responses after stress ( Figure 5 ) . 130 If these inflammatory , hemostatic , and autonomic responses coincide with plaque rupture , the result could be the development of severe coronary occlusion . Clinical relevance The clinical relevance of triggering processes for patient care has still to be established . Whether cardiac medi­ cations are protective against triggering is not clear , although some evidence exists that aspirin is associated with reduced risk of triggering by emotional stress . 98 Ensuring that patients with CHD avoid all intense emo­ tions is not feasible and natural disasters , by their very nature , are difficult to predict . Tofler and Muller have argued that programs to increase awareness of trig­ gers among clinicians and the public would be benefi­ cial , along with ensuring that emergency equipment is readily available . 131 Importantly , although the relative risk associated with acute emotional stress is substan­ tial , the absolute risk is not large . An attempt to quan­ tify the public­health impact of triggers of MI has been made by Nawrot and colleagues . 132 They concluded that the relative risk of MI associated with negative emotions is high , but that the population­attributable risk ( which takes account of the prevalence of the risk factor across the population ) is smaller , with emotional stress having a role in only 3 . 9 % of events . By comparison , 7 . 4 % of events were related to exposure to heavy traffic , 6 . 2 % to physical exertion , and 5 . 0 % to heavy alcohol consumption . 131 Stress and the prognosis of CHD Relatively little research has been carried out into the role of stress in the prognosis of people with established CHD . Studies of the psychological predictors of recur­ rent cardiac events and mortality after acute coronary syndromes have been dominated by research into depres­ sion 133 and , to a lesser extent , social support . 134 However , in the Beta­Blocker Heart Attack Trial carried out in the late 1970s a composite measure of stress from work , family difficulties , and negative life events was used . The investigators found that a high level of stress , particu­ larly when combined with social isolation , predicted a doubling of mortality risk over the 3­year period after an acute MI . 135 Another early study of men who had survived an MI before the age of 45 years found that mortality over the subsequent 5­year period was greater in those who had returned to working in jobs character­ ized by high demands and limited opportunities to learn new things . 136 The impact of work­related stress on recurrent cardiac events has been investigated in a population of predomi­ nantly male patients from Quebec , Canada who experi­ enced a first MI when aged < 60 years and returned to work . One analysis found that high job strain , defined by high demands and low control , reported at both 6 weeks and 2 years ( but not just once ) after returning to work was associated with recurrent CHD . 137 A later analysis indicated that a high level of imbalance between effort and reward measured 2 years after returning to work pre­ dicted recurrent cardiac events , particularly in the small subgroup of female patients . 138 The effect of job strain during the 5 years before an index cardiac event was evaluated over 8 . 5 years of follow­up in survivors of acute MI from the Stockholm Heart Epidemiology Program . 139 High job strain predicted the combined outcome of cardiac death and nonfatal MI , with a hazard ratio of 1 . 7 ( 95 % CI 1 . 1 – 2 . 8 ) relative to those with low job strain . Box 2 | Stress cardiomyopathy ■ Also known as Takotsubo cardiomyopathy or transient left ventricular apical ballooning cardiomyopathy 7 ■ Patients typically present with chest pain , electrocardiographic abnormalities , and elevated levels of cardiac enzymes ; the syndrome is , therefore , often confused with acute MI 122 ■ Patients with stress cardiomyopathy do not have obstructive coronary heart disease and , in many cases , the coronary arteries are normal ■ Unlike acute MI , myocardial dysfunction in stress cardiomyopathy is reversible ■ Stress cardiomyopathy is thought to account for some 2 % of suspected acute coronary syndrome admissions , and is much more common in women than men 122 ■ Acute triggering by emotional stress or by physical stimuli is observed in the majority of cases ■ Pathology can be related to increased catecholamine levels , although other physiological dysfunctions have also been reported Abbreviation : MI , myocardial infarction . REVIEWS © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 366 | JUNE 2012 | VOLUME 9 www . nature . com / nrcardio A study of 202 female survivors of acute cardiac events showed that financial strain ( difficulty in paying bills ) was associated with fatal or nonfatal recurrent events independent of age , education , income , marital status , initial diagnosis , and stress management . 140 Although these findings suggest that stress might have an impact on prognosis in a similar fashion to that described earlier for long­term etiology , insufficient evidence exists to draw firm conclusions . The literature suggesting that social support is related to favorable prognosis among patients with CHD , and that social isolation relates to poor prognosis , is exten­ sive . A 2010 review of prognostic studies of MI patients showed that low functional support ( lack of aid and encouragement provided to the individual by their social network ) increases cardiovascular and all­cause mortal­ ity , with pooled estimates of relative risk ranging between 1 . 6 and 1 . 7 . 141 Stress management and the heart The stress process can be modified at various stages that are potentially relevant to cardiovascular disease prevention and management . These include changes in exposure to stressful environments , for example through modifying working practices , changes in the emotional responses to stressful situations through altering cogni­ tive appraisals or strengthening psychological coping resources , or changes in physiological responses to stress through relaxation training or pharmacological intervention . Various types of coping strategy have been associated with modified risk of MI and with potential biological mediators such as cortisol production . 142 , 143 Coping by hiding negative feelings seems to predict increased risk , whereas strategies such as problem solving are related to reduced cortisol levels . 142 , 143 No studies of primary prevention of cardio vascular disease through stress reduction have been carried out , but extensive literature exists on the use of stress­ management techniques for secondary prevention in patients with CHD . Stress­management procedures pre­ viously investigated include relaxation­based methods and cognitive behavioral techniques designed to improve skills for coping with stress and to reduce negative emotional responses . 144 – 146 . Often , stress management has formed part of intervention packages that also include exercise training , dietary change , or education about medication regimens , such that identifying the distinct effects of stress reduction is difficult . 144 – 146 Extensive research has been conducted on the manage­ ment of depression in cardiac patients , although a discus­ sion of these data falls outside the scope of this article . Varied conclusions have been drawn about the impact of stress­management on cardiac outcomes in patients with CHD . 144 , 145 In a Cochrane review of random­ ized controlled trials of psychological interventions , in which studies with follow­up periods of < 6 months were excluded , Whalley et al . concluded that modest improve­ ments in depression and anxiety occurred , but that effects on cardiac outcomes were uncertain . 145 No significant reductions in total mortality or incidence of revascular­ ization were reported , but a small improvement in cardiac mortality was observed . 145 In these reviews , 144 , 145 a variety of psychological interventions , such as those focused on depression or Type A behavior ( impatience , aggressive­ ness , and competitiveness ) , were assessed rather than stress management in particular . In addition , a large­ scale study conducted in the 1990s demonstrated little benefit of psychological therapy , relaxation training , and stress­management training in terms of clinical sequelae or mortality . 147 Two studies published in the past 3 years indicate that extensive stress­management programs might have beneficial cardiac effects . Orth­Gomér et al . randomly assigned 237 women to stress management or usual care after acute MI , CABG surgery , or percutaneous coronary intervention ( PCI ) . 148 The stress­management program was carried out on a group basis over 20 ses­ sions , and centered on cardiovascular health education , self­monitoring , relaxation , and cognitive restructuring . During the follow­up period ( mean 7 . 1 years ) , 20 % and 7 % of the usual­care and stress­management groups died , respectively ( HR 0 . 3 , 95 % CI 0 . 1 – 0 . 7 ) . 148 The second study involved 362 patients hospitalized with acute MI , CABG surgery , or PCI . 149 Again , participants were randomly assigned to 20 group sessions of stress management or usual care . Stress management in this study focused on coping with stress , time urgency , reduc­ ing daily stress , and controlling hostility . No difference in total mortality between the two groups was observed over the 7 . 8 year follow­up , but slightly fewer patients in the intervention group ( 36 % ) than in the control group ( 47 % ) experienced fatal or nonfatal cardiovascular events , a difference that reached statistical significance in multivariate analysis . 149 Evidence also exists that stress management can attenuate stress­induced hemodynamic and myocardial ischemic responses in patients with cardiac conditions , 150 , 151 supporting the notion that the effectiveness of stress management is partly the result of direct modifications in physiological regulation . Stress­management programs of the type described here require considerable commitment both from staff and patients , and their feasibility as methods of sec­ ondary prevention in general clinical practice is uncer­ tain . However , the benefits of such programs in terms a b Figure 4 | Left ventriculography of a patient with stress cardiomyopathy . a | During diastole . b | During systole . Note the typical apical ballooning pattern during systole with apical and mid - ventricular akinesis and normal contractility at the base . Image courtesy of I . S . Wittstein , MD ; Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine , Baltimore , MD , USA . REVIEWS © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved NATURE REVIEWS | CARDIOLOGY VOLUME 9 | JUNE 2012 | 367 of improved psychological well­being should not be underestimated , and can be regarded as legitimate goals in themselves . Conclusions Evidence is accumulating from population and clinical studies that stress might contribute to risk of cardio­ vascular disease at a number of stages , including the long­term development of atherosclerosis and the acute triggering of cardiac events . Most evidence concern­ ing long­term stress comes from studies of the work place , and other sources of stress have not been studied extensively . Data come primarily from observational studies , so causality cannot be definitively established . Triggering of acute cardiac events by emotional stress has been repeatedly documented , but is likely to occur in a minority of patients . Stress management seems to have a favorable impact on cardiovascular health , but effects are difficult to disentangle from other lifestyle modifications that often occur at the same time . Among the priorities for future research on stress and cardiovascular disease , we would highlight the following . First , the pooling of published and unpublished studies to carry out individual participant meta­analysis will allow associations between CHD and exposure to stress to be investigated with greater power and precision than is possible in separate studies . Such collaborative programs are now in progress . 152 Second , more extensive study of the role of psychological stress in other cardiovascular outcomes , including stroke and stress cardiomyopathy , is needed . Third , a better integration of studies of biologi­ cal processes with population and clinical research would improve our understanding of the pathways responsible for the effects of stress , and help to identify new targets for prevention and management of cardiovascular events . Fourth , to complement observational studies and rigor­ ously test causal relationships , natural experiments 153 and studies with designs that involve exogenous factors will be needed . In addition , randomized controlled trials of stress modification in relation to surrogate cardiovas­ cular end points ( such as arterial stiffness and arterial­ wall thickness ) will be required . These studies are more feasible than large­scale trials powered for clinical out­ comes , and could also provide valuable information about mechanisms . Research into stress and cardiovascular disease is at an exciting stage of development and has the potential to deepen our understanding of causal processes and to improve patient care . M PA ( % ) Change from baseline 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 Stress 30 min post stress S y s t o li c B P ( mm H g ) Change from baseline 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 Stress 30 min post stress a b Figure 5 | The effects of stress on platelet activation and BP . Mean changes from baseline in a | platelet activation indexed by MPA % and b | systolic BP in survivors of acute coronary syndromes who experienced emotional triggers ( green bars ) or no emotional triggers ( yellow bars ) . 130 Results are adjusted for age , BMI , the use of aspirin and β - blockers , and baseline values of MPA % and systolic BP . Error bars are standard errors of the mean . Abbreviations : BP , blood pressure ; MPA , monocyte - platelet aggregates . Review criteria We searched Medline for prospective epidemiological studies on the association between stress and CHD published up to December 2011 using the terms “job strain” , “social isolation” , “loneliness” together with “cardiovascular” , “coronary heart disease” , and “prospective” . In addition , we scrutinized the reference sections of all systematic review articles . We included prospective cohort studies if quantitative estimates and confidence intervals ( or standard errors ) of the relative risk were reported . We excluded studies with no original data , those lacking relevant measurement of the exposure or outcomes , those that were not genuine prospective cohort studies , and overlapping papers reporting duplicate data . In cases of duplicate reports , we selected the paper with most cases of CHD . We did not include studies with stroke as the outcome . 1 . Hjemdahl , P . , Rosengren , A . & Steptoe , A . ( eds ) Stress and Cardiovascular Disease ( Springer - Verlag , New York , 2011 ) . 2 . Milczarek , M . , Schneider , E . & González , E . R . European Agency for Safety and Health at Work . European Risk Observatory Report . OSH in Figures : Stress at Work—Facts and Figures [ online ] , http : / / osha . europa . eu / en / publications / reports / TE - 81 - 08 - 478 - EN - C _ OSH _ in _ figures _ stress _ at _ work ( 2009 ) . 3 . Cannon , W . B . Bodily Changes in Pain , Hunger , Fear and Rage ( Routledge & Kegan Paul , London , 1915 ) . 4 . McEwen , B . S . Physiology and neurobiology of stress and adaptation : central role of the brain . Physiol . Rev . 87 , 873 – 904 ( 2007 ) . 5 . Lazarus , R . S . Stress and Emotion : A New Synthesis ( Springer Publishing Company , Inc . , New York , 1999 ) . 6 . Wu , T . , Snieder , H . & de Geus , E . Genetic influences on cardiovascular stress reactivity . Neurosci . Biobehav . Rev . 35 , 58 – 68 ( 2010 ) . 7 . Brotman , D . J . , Golden , S . H . & Wittstein , I . S . The cardiovascular toll of stress . Lancet 370 , 1089 – 1100 ( 2007 ) . 8 . Ulrich - Lai , Y . M . & Herman , J . P . Neural regulation of endocrine and autonomic stress responses . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 10 , 397 – 409 ( 2009 ) . 9 . Yusuf , S . et al . Effect of potentially modifiable risk factors associated with myocardial infarction in 52 countries ( the INTERHEART study ) : case – control study . Lancet 364 , 937 – 952 ( 2004 ) . 10 . Karasek , R . A . & Theorell , T . Healthy Work : Stress , Productivity , and the Reconstruction of Working Life ( Basic Books , New York , 1990 ) . 11 . Siegrist , J . Adverse health effects of high - effort / low - reward conditions . J . Occup . Health Psychol . 1 , 27 – 41 ( 1996 ) . 12 . Kivimäki , M . et al . Justice at work and reduced risk of coronary heart disease among employees : the Whitehall II Study . Arch . Intern . Med . 165 , 2245 – 2251 ( 2005 ) . 13 . Belkic , K . L . , Landsbergis , P . A . , Schnall , P . L . & Baker , D . Is job strain a major source of cardiovascular disease risk ? Scand . J . Work Environ . Health 30 , 85 – 128 ( 2004 ) . 14 . Kivimäki , M . et al . Work stress in the etiology of coronary heart disease—a meta - analysis . Scand . J . Work Environ . Health 32 , 431 – 442 ( 2006 ) . 15 . Hemingway , H . & Marmot , M . Evidence based cardiology : psychosocial factors in the etiology and prognosis of coronary heart disease . Systematic review of prospective cohort studies . BMJ 318 , 1460 – 1467 ( 1999 ) . 16 . Backe , E . M . , Seidler , A . , Latza , U . , Rossnagel , K . & Schumann , B . The role of psychosocial stress REVIEWS © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 368 | JUNE 2012 | VOLUME 9 www . nature . com / nrcardio at work for the development of cardiovascular diseases : a systematic review . Int . Arch . Occup . Environ . Health 85 , 67 – 79 ( 2012 ) . 17 . Eller , N . H . et al . Work - related psychosocial factors and the development of ischemic heart disease : a systematic review . Cardiol . Rev . 17 , 83 – 97 ( 2009 ) . 18 . Reed , D . M . , LaCroix , A . Z . , Karasek , R . A . , Miller , D . & MacLean , C . A . Occupational strain and the incidence of coronary heart disease . Am . J . Epidemiol . 129 , 495 – 502 ( 1989 ) . 19 . Johnson , J . V . & Hall , E . M . Job strain , work place social support , and cardiovascular disease : a cross - sectional study of a random sample of the Swedish working population . Am . J . Public Health 78 , 1336 – 1342 ( 1988 ) . 20 . Alterman , T . , Shekelle , R . B . , Vernon , S . W . & Burau , K . D . Decision latitude , psychologic demand , job strain , and coronary heart disease in the Western Electric Study . Am . J . Epidemiol . 139 , 620 – 627 ( 1994 ) . 21 . Kivimäki , M . et al . Work stress and risk of cardiovascular mortality : prospective cohort study of industrial employees . BMJ 325 , 857 ( 2002 ) . 22 . Lee , S . , Colditz , G . , Berkman , L . & Kawachi , I . A prospective study of job strain and coronary heart disease in US women . Int . J . Epidemiol . 31 , 1147 – 1153 ( 2002 ) . 23 . Kuper , H . & Marmot , M . Job strain , job demands , decision latitude , and risk of coronary heart disease within the Whitehall II study . J . Epidemiol . Community Health 57 , 147 – 153 ( 2003 ) . 24 . De Bacquer , D . et al . Perceived job stress and incidence of coronary events : 3 - year follow - up of the Belgian Job Stress Project cohort . Am . J . Epidemiol . 161 , 434 – 441 ( 2005 ) . 25 . Netterstrøm , B . , Kristensen , T . S . & Sjøl , A . Psychological job demands increase the risk of ischaemic heart disease : a 14 - year cohort study of employed Danish men . Eur . J . Cardiovasc . Prev . Rehabil . 13 , 414 – 420 ( 2006 ) . 26 . Uchiyama , S . , Kurasawa , T . , Sekizawa , T . & Nakatsuka , H . Job strain and risk of cardiovascular events in treated hypertensive Japanese workers : hypertension follow - up group study . J . Occup . Health 47 , 102 – 111 ( 2005 ) . 27 . Steenland , K . , Johnson , J . & Nowlin , S . A follow - up study of job strain and heart disease among males in the NHANES1 population . Am . J . Ind . Med . 31 , 256 – 260 ( 1997 ) . 28 . Eaker , E . D . , Sullivan , L . M . , Kelly - Hayes , M . , D’Agostino , R . B . Sr & Benjamin , E . J . Does job strain increase the risk for coronary heart disease or death in men and women ? The Framingham Offspring Study . Am . J . Epidemiol . 159 , 950 – 958 ( 2004 ) . 29 . Kornitzer , M . et al . Job stress and major coronary events : results from the Job Stress , Absenteeism and Coronary Heart Disease in Europe study . Eur . J . Cardiovasc . Prev . Rehabil . 13 , 695 – 704 ( 2006 ) . 30 . Kuper , H . , Adami , H . O . , Theorell , T . & Weiderpass , E . Psychosocial determinants of coronary heart disease in middle - aged women : a prospective study in Sweden . Am . J . Epidemiol . 164 , 349 – 357 ( 2006 ) . 31 . Tsutsumi , A . , Kayaba , K . , Hirokawa , K . & Ishikawa , S . Psychosocial job characteristics and risk of mortality in a Japanese community - based working population : the Jichi Medical School Cohort Study . Soc . Sci . Med . 63 , 1276 – 1288 ( 2006 ) . 32 . Andre - Petersson , L . , Engstrom , G . , Hedblad , B . , Janzon , L . & Rosvall , M . Social support at work and the risk of myocardial infarction and stroke in women and men . Soc . Sci . Med . 64 , 830 – 841 ( 2007 ) . 33 . Kivimaki , M . , Theorell , T . , Westerlund , H . , Vahtera , J . & Alfredsson , L . Job strain and ischaemic disease : does the inclusion of older employees in the cohort dilute the association ? The WOLF Stockholm Study . J . Epidemiol . Community Health 62 , 372 – 374 ( 2008 ) . 34 . Bonde , J . P . et al . Job strain and ischemic heart disease : a prospective study using a new approach for exposure assessment . J . Occup . Environ . Med . 51 , 732 – 738 ( 2009 ) . 35 . Netterstrøm , B . , Kristensen , T . S . , Jensen , G . & Schnor , P . Is the demand – control model still a usefull tool to assess work - related psychosocial risk for ischemic heart disease ? Results from 14 year follow up in the Copenhagen City Heart study . Int . J . Occup . Med . Environ . Health 23 , 217 – 224 ( 2010 ) . 36 . Orth - Gomér , K . et al . Marital stress worsens prognosis in women with coronary heart disease : The Stockholm Female Coronary Risk Study . JAMA 284 , 3008 – 3014 ( 2000 ) . 37 . Parkes , C . M . , Benjamin , B . & Fitzgerald , R . G . Broken heart : a statistical study of increased mortality among widowers . BMJ 1 , 740 – 743 ( 1969 ) . 38 . Li , J . , Hansen , D . , Mortensen , P . B . & Olsen , J . Myocardial infarction in parents who lost a child : a nationwide prospective cohort study in Denmark . Circulation 106 , 1634 – 1639 ( 2002 ) . 39 . Lee , S . , Colditz , G . A . , Berkman , L . F . & Kawachi , I . Caregiving and risk of coronary heart disease in U . S . women : a prospective study . Am . J . Prev . Med . 24 , 113 – 119 ( 2003 ) . 40 . McPherson , M . & Smith - Lovin , L . Social isolation in America : Changes in core discussion networks over two decades . Am . Sociol . Rev . 71 , 353 – 375 ( 2006 ) . 41 . Griffin , J . Mental Health Foundation . The lonely society ? [ online ] , http : / / www . mentalhealth . org . uk / content / assets / PDF / publications / the _ lonely _ society _ report . pdf ( 2010 ) . 42 . Holt - Lunstad , J . , Smith , T . B . & Layton , J . B . Social relationships and mortality risk : a meta - analytic review . PLoS Med . 7 , e1000316 ( 2010 ) . 43 . Patterson , A . C . & Veenstra , G . Loneliness and risk of mortality : a longitudinal investigation in Alameda County , California . Soc . Sci . Med . 71 , 181 – 186 ( 2010 ) . 44 . Thurston , R . C . & Kubzansky , L . D . Women , loneliness , and incident coronary heart disease . Psychosom . Med . 71 , 836 – 842 , ( 2009 ) . 45 . Olsen , R . B . , Olsen , J . , Gunner - Svensson , F . & Waldstrøm , B . Social networks and longevity . A 14 year follow - up study among elderly in Denmark . Soc . Sci . Med . 33 , 1189 – 1195 ( 1991 ) . 46 . Heffner , K . L . , Waring , M . E . , Roberts , M . B . , Eaton , C . B . & Gramling , R . Social isolation , C - reactive protein , and coronary heart disease mortality among community - dwelling adults . Soc . Sci . Med . 72 , 1482 – 1488 , ( 2011 ) . 47 . Orth - Gomér , K . , Rosengren , A . & Wilhelmsen , L . Lack of social support and incidence of coronary heart disease in middle - aged Swedish men . Psychosom . Med . 55 , 37 – 43 ( 1993 ) . 48 . Kaplan , G . A . et al . Social connections and mortality from all causes and from cardiovascular disease : prospective evidence from eastern Finland . Am . J . Epidemiol . 128 , 370 – 380 ( 1988 ) . 49 . Marmot , M . G . et al . Health inequalities among British civil servants : the Whitehall II study . Lancet 337 , 1387 – 1393 ( 1991 ) . 50 . Kivimäki , M . et al . Why is evidence on job strain and coronary heart disease mixed ? An illustration of measurement challenges in the Whitehall II study . Psychosom . Med . 68 , 398 – 401 ( 2006 ) . 51 . Chandola , T . , Brunner , E . & Marmot , M . Chronic stress at work and the metabolic syndrome : prospective study . BMJ 332 , 521 – 525 ( 2006 ) . 52 . Chandola , T . et al . Work stress and coronary heart disease : what are the mechanisms ? Eur . Heart J . 29 , 640 – 648 ( 2008 ) . 53 . Markovitz , J . H . , Matthews , K . A . , Whooley , M . , Lewis , C . E . & Greenlund , K . J . Increases in job strain are associated with incident hypertension in the CARDIA Study . Ann . Behav . Med . 28 , 4 – 9 ( 2004 ) . 54 . Grippo , A . J . , Lamb , D . G . , Carter , C . S . & Porges , S . W . Social isolation disrupts autonomic regulation of the heart and influences negative affective behaviors . Biol . Psychiatry 62 , 1162 – 1170 ( 2007 ) . 55 . Adam , E . K . , Hawkley , L . C . , Kudielka , B . M . & Cacioppo , J . T . Day - to - day dynamics of experience—cortisol associations in a population - based sample of older adults . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 17058 – 17063 ( 2006 ) . 56 . Grant , N . , Hamer , M . & Steptoe , A . Social isolation and stress - related cardiovascular , lipid , and cortisol responses . Ann . Behav . Med . 37 , 29 – 37 ( 2009 ) . 57 . Cacioppo , J . T . et al . Loneliness and health : potential mechanisms . Psychosom . Med . 64 , 407 – 417 ( 2002 ) . 58 . Netterstrøm , B . et al . The relation between work - related psychosocial factors and the development of depression . Epidemiol . Rev . 30 , 118 – 132 ( 2008 ) . 59 . Bonde , J . P . Psychosocial factors at work and risk of depression : a systematic review of the epidemiological evidence . Occup . Environ . Med . 65 , 438 – 445 ( 2008 ) . 60 . Virtanen , M . et al . Overcrowding in hospital wards as a predictor of antidepressant treatment among hospital staff . Am . J . Psychiatry 165 , 1482 – 1486 ( 2008 ) . 61 . Kivimäki , M . et al . Psychosocial work environment as a risk factor for absence with a psychiatric diagnosis : an instrumental - variables analysis . Am . J . Epidemiol . 172 , 167 – 172 ( 2010 ) . 62 . Nieuwenhuijsen , K . , Bruinvels , D . & Frings - Dresen , M . Psychosocial work environment and stress - related disorders , a systematic review . Occup . Med . ( Lond . ) 60 , 277 – 286 ( 2010 ) . 63 . Kuper , H . et al . Evaluating the causal relevance of diverse risk markers : horizontal systematic review . BMJ 339 , b4265 ( 2009 ) . 64 . Epel , E . S . et al . Accelerated telomere shortening in response to life stress . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 17312 – 17315 ( 2004 ) . 65 . Brouilette , S . W . et al . Telomere length , risk of coronary heart disease , and statin treatment in the West of Scotland Primary Prevention Study : a nested case – control study . Lancet 369 , 107 – 114 ( 2007 ) . 66 . Hintsanen , M . et al . Job strain and early atherosclerosis : the Cardiovascular Risk in Young Finns study . Psychosom . Med . 67 , 740 – 747 ( 2005 ) . 67 . Kivimäki , M . et al . Early risk factors , job strain , and atherosclerosis among men in their 30s : the Cardiovascular Risk in Young Finns Study . Am . J . Public Health 97 , 450 – 452 ( 2007 ) . 68 . Nordstrøm , C . K . et al . Work - related stress and early atherosclerosis . Epidemiology 12 , 180 – 185 ( 2001 ) . 69 . Rosvall , M . et al . Work - related psychosocial factors and carotid atherosclerosis . Int . J . Epidemiol . 31 , 1169 – 1178 ( 2002 ) . 70 . Muntaner , C . et al . Work organization and atherosclerosis : findings from the ARIC study . Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities . Am . J . Prev . Med . 14 , 9 – 18 ( 1998 ) . 71 . Lynch , J . , Krause , N . , Kaplan , G . A . , Salonen , R . & Salonen , J . T . Workplace demands , economic reward and progression of carotid atherosclerosis . Circulation 96 , 302 – 307 ( 1997 ) . REVIEWS © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved NATURE REVIEWS | CARDIOLOGY VOLUME 9 | JUNE 2012 | 369 72 . Xu , W . et al . Job stress and carotid intima – media thickness in Chinese workers . J . Occup . Health 52 , 257 – 262 ( 2010 ) . 73 . Cohen , S . , Doyle , W . J . , Skoner , D . P . , Rabin , B . S . & Gwaltney , J . M . Jr . Social ties and susceptibility to the common cold . JAMA 277 , 1940 – 1944 ( 1997 ) . 74 . Kiecolt - Glaser , J . K . et al . Hostile marital interactions , proinflammatory cytokine production , and wound healing . Arch . Gen . Psychiatry 62 , 1377 – 1384 ( 2005 ) . 75 . The Interleukin - 6 Receptor Mendelian Randomisation Analysis Consortium . The interleukin - 6 receptor as a target for prevention of coronary heart disease : a Mendelian randomisation analysis . Lancet , in press . 76 . Kivimäki , M . et al . Work stress , weight gain and weight loss : evidence for bidirectional effects of job strain on body mass index in the Whitehall II study . Int . J . Obes . ( Lond . ) 30 , 982 – 987 ( 2006 ) . 77 . Wardle , J . , Chida , Y . , Gibson , E . L . , Whitaker , K . L . & Steptoe , A . Stress and adiposity : a meta - analysis of longitudinal studies . Obesity ( Silver Spring ) 19 , 771 – 778 ( 2011 ) . 78 . Nyberg , S . T . et al . Job strain in relation to body mass index : pooled analysis of 160 , 000 adults from 13 cohort studies . J . Intern . Med . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1365 - 2796 . 2011 . 02482 . x . 79 . Kouvonen , A . , Kivimäki , M . , Virtanen , M . , Pentti , J . & Vahtera , J . Work stress , smoking status , and smoking intensity : an observational study of 46 , 190 employees . J . Epidemiol . Community Health 59 , 63 – 69 ( 2005 ) . 80 . Rod , N . H . , Grønbaek , M . , Schnohr , P . , Prescott , E . & Kristensen , T . S . Perceived stress as a risk factor for changes in health behavior and cardiac risk profile : a longitudinal study . J . Intern . Med . 266 , 467 – 475 ( 2009 ) . 81 . Virtanen , M . et al . Long working hours and sleep disturbances : the Whitehall II prospective cohort study . Sleep 32 , 737 – 745 ( 2009 ) . 82 . Cappuccio , F . P . , Cooper , D . , D’Elia , L . , Strazzullo , P . & Miller , M . A . Sleep duration predicts cardiovascular outcomes : a systematic review and meta - analysis of prospective studies . Eur . Heart J . 32 , 1484 – 1492 ( 2011 ) . 83 . Chandola , T . , Ferrie , J . E . , Perski , A . , Akbaraly , T . & Marmot , M . G . The effect of short sleep duration on coronary heart disease risk is greatest among those with sleep disturbance : a prospective study from the Whitehall II cohort . Sleep 33 , 739 – 744 ( 2010 ) . 84 . Hawkley , L . C . , Thisted , R . A . & Cacioppo , J . T . Loneliness predicts reduced physical activity : cross - sectional & longitudinal analyses . Health Psychol . 28 , 354 – 363 ( 2009 ) . 85 . Lauder , W . , Mummery , K . , Jones , M . & Caperchione , C . A comparison of health behaviors in lonely and non - lonely populations . Psychol . Health Med . 11 , 233 – 245 ( 2006 ) . 86 . Chida , Y . & Steptoe , A . Greater cardiovascular responses to laboratory mental stress are associated with poor subsequent cardiovascular risk status : A meta - analysis of prospective evidence . Hypertension 55 , 1026 – 1032 ( 2010 ) . 87 . Hamer , M . , O’Donnell , K . , Lahiri , A . & Steptoe , A . Salivary cortisol responses to mental stress are associated with coronary artery calcification in healthy men and women . Eur . Heart J . 31 , 424 – 429 ( 2010 ) . 88 . Sheps , D . S . et al . Mental stress - induced ischemia and all - cause mortality in patients with coronary artery disease : results from the Psychophysiological Investigations of Myocardial Ischemia study . Circulation 105 , 1780 – 1784 ( 2002 ) . 89 . Babyak , M . A . et al . Prognosis after change in left ventricular ejection fraction during mental stress testing in patients with stable coronary artery disease . Am . J . Cardiol . 105 , 25 – 28 ( 2010 ) . 90 . Macleod , J . et al . Psychological stress and cardiovascular disease : empirical demonstration of bias in a prospective observational study of Scottish men . BMJ 324 , 1247 – 1251 ( 2002 ) . 91 . Distel , M . A . et al . Familial resemblance for loneliness . Behav . Genet . 40 , 480 – 494 ( 2010 ) . 92 . Wilson , P . W . et al . Prediction of coronary heart disease using risk factor categories . Circulation 97 , 1837 – 1847 ( 1998 ) . 93 . Kivimäki , M . et al . Using additional information on working hours to predict coronary heart disease : a cohort study . Ann . Intern . Med . 154 , 457 – 463 ( 2011 ) . 94 . Graham , I . et al . European guidelines on cardiovascular disease prevention in clinical practice : executive summary . Fourth Joint Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and Other Societies on Cardiovascular Disease Prevention in Clinical Practice ( constituted by representatives of nine societies and by invited experts ) . Eur . Heart J . 28 , 2375 – 2414 ( 2007 ) . 95 . Pearson , T . A . et al . AHA guidelines for primary prevention of cardiovascular disease and stroke : 2002 update : consensus panel guide to comprehensive risk reduction for adult patients without coronary or other atherosclerotic vascular diseases . American Heart Association Science Advisory and Coordinating Committee . Circulation 106 , 388 – 391 ( 2002 ) . 96 . Kloner , R . A . Natural and unnatural triggers of myocardial infarction . Prog . Cardiovasc . Dis . 48 , 285 – 300 ( 2006 ) . 97 . Steptoe , A . & Brydon , L . Emotional triggering of cardiac events . Neurosci . Biobehav . Rev . 33 , 63 – 70 ( 2009 ) . 98 . Mittleman , M . A . & Mostofsky , E . Physical , psychological and chemical triggers of acute cardiovascular events : preventive strategies . Circulation 124 , 346 – 354 ( 2011 ) . 99 . Thompson , P . D . et al . Exercise and acute cardiovascular events placing the risks into perspective : a scientific statement from the American Heart Association Council on Nutrition , Physical Activity , and Metabolism and the Council on Clinical Cardiology . Circulation 115 , 2358 – 2368 ( 2007 ) . 100 . Warren - Gash , C . , Smeeth , L . & Hayward , A . C . Influenza as a trigger for acute myocardial infarction or death from cardiovascular disease : a systematic review . Lancet Infect . Dis . 9 , 601 – 610 ( 2009 ) . 101 . Trichopoulos , D . , Katsouyanni , K . , Zavitsanos , X . , Tzonou , A . & Dalla - Vorgia , P . Psychological stress and fatal heart attack : the Athens ( 1981 ) . earthquake natural experiment . Lancet 1 , 441 – 444 ( 1983 ) . 102 . Brown , D . L . Disparate effects of the 1989 Loma Prieta and 1994 Northridge earthquakes on hospital admissions for acute myocardial infarction : importance of superimposition of triggers . Am . Heart J . 137 , 830 – 836 ( 1999 ) . 103 . Leor , J . & Kloner , R . A . The Northridge earthquake as a trigger for acute myocardial infarction . Am . J . Cardiol . 77 , 1230 – 1232 ( 1996 ) . 104 . Bhaskaran , K . et al . Effects of ambient temperature on the incidence of myocardial infarction . Heart 95 , 1760 – 1769 ( 2009 ) . 105 . Ruidavets , J . B . et al . Triggering of acute coronary syndromes after a chemical plant explosion . Heart 92 , 257 – 258 ( 2006 ) . 106 . Feng , J . , Lenihan , D . J . , Johnson , M . M . , Karri , V . & Reddy , C . V . Cardiac sequelae in Brooklyn after the September 11 terrorist attacks . Clin . Cardiol . 29 , 13 – 17 ( 2006 ) . 107 . Kark , J . D . , Goldman , S . & Epstein , L . Iraqi missile attacks on Israel . The association of mortality with a life - threatening stressor . JAMA 273 , 1208 – 1210 ( 1995 ) . 108 . Kloner , R . A . , McDonald , S . , Leeka , J . & Poole , W . K . Comparison of total and cardiovascular death rates in the same city during a losing versus winning super bowl championship . Am . J . Cardiol . 103 , 1647 – 1650 ( 2009 ) . 109 . Carroll , D . , Ebrahim , S . , Tilling , K . , Macleod , J . & Smith , G . D . Admissions for myocardial infarction and World Cup football : database survey . BMJ 325 , 1439 – 1442 ( 2002 ) . 110 . Witte , D . R . , Bots , M . L . , Hoes , A . W . & Grobbee , D . E . Cardiovascular mortality in Dutch men during 1996 European football championship : longitudinal population study . BMJ 321 , 1552 – 1554 ( 2000 ) . 111 . Wilbert - Lampen , U . et al . Cardiovascular events during World Cup soccer . N . Engl . J . Med . 358 , 475 – 483 ( 2008 ) . 112 . Dahabreh , I . J . & Paulus , J . K . Association of episodic physical and sexual activity with triggering of acute cardiac events : systematic review and meta - analysis . JAMA 305 , 1225 – 1233 ( 2011 ) . 113 . Tofler , G . H . et al . Analysis of possible triggers of acute myocardial infarction ( the MILIS study ) . Am . J . Cardiol . 66 , 22 – 27 ( 1990 ) . 114 . Mittleman , M . A . et al . Triggering of acute myocardial infarction onset by episodes of anger . Circulation 92 , 1720 – 1725 ( 1995 ) . 115 . Lipovetzky , N . et al . Emotional events and anger at the workplace as triggers for a first event of the acute coronary syndrome : a case - crossover study . Isr . Med . Assoc . J . 9 , 310 – 315 ( 2007 ) . 116 . Möller , J . et al . Do episodes of anger trigger myocardial infarction ? A case – crossover analysis in the Stockholm Heart Epidemiology Program ( SHEEP ) . Psychosom . Med . 61 , 842 – 849 ( 1999 ) . 117 . Strike , P . C . , Perkins - Porras , L . , Whitehead , D . L . , McEwan , J . & Steptoe , A . Triggering of acute coronary syndromes by physical exertion and anger : clinical and sociodemographic characteristics . Heart 92 , 1035 – 1040 ( 2006 ) . 118 . Möller , J . , Theorell , T . , de Faire , U . , Ahlbom , A . & Hallqvist , J . Work related stressful life events and the risk of myocardial infarction . Case – control and case – crossover analyses within the Stockholm heart epidemiology program ( SHEEP ) . J . Epidemiol . Community Health 59 , 23 – 30 ( 2005 ) . 119 . Steptoe , A . , Strike , P . C . , Perkins - Porras , L . , McEwan , J . R . & Whitehead , D . L . Acute depressed mood as a trigger of acute coronary syndromes . Biol . Psychiatry 60 , 837 – 842 ( 2006 ) . 120 . Steptoe , A . et al . Emotional triggering and low socio - economic status as determinants of depression following acute coronary syndrome . Psychol . Med . 41 , 1857 – 1866 ( 2011 ) . 121 . Mostofsky , E . et al . Risk of acute myocardial infarction after the death of a significant person in one’s life : The Determinants of Myocardial Infarction Onset Study . Circulation 125 , 491 – 496 ( 2012 ) . 122 . Wittstein , I . S . et al . Neurohumoral features of myocardial stunning due to sudden emotional stress . N . Engl . J . Med . 352 , 539 – 548 ( 2005 ) . 123 . Sharkey , S . W . et al . Natural history and expansive clinical profile of stress ( tako - tsubo ) cardiomyopathy . J . Am . Coll . Cardiol . 55 , 333 – 341 ( 2010 ) . 124 . Naghavi , M . et al . From vulnerable plaque to vulnerable patient : a call for new definitions and risk assessment strategies : Part II . Circulation 108 , 1772 – 1778 ( 2003 ) . 125 . Goldberg , A . D . et al . Ischemic , hemodynamic , and neurohormonal responses to mental and REVIEWS © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 370 | JUNE 2012 | VOLUME 9 www . nature . com / nrcardio exercise stress . Experience from the Psychophysiological Investigations of Myocardial Ischemia Study ( PIMI ) . Circulation 94 , 2402 – 2409 ( 1996 ) . 126 . Strike , P . C . & Steptoe , A . Systematic review of mental stress - induced myocardial ischaemia . Eur . Heart J . 24 , 690 – 703 ( 2003 ) . 127 . Yeung , A . C . et al . The effect of atherosclerosis on the vasomotor response of coronary arteries to mental stress . N . Engl . J . Med . 325 , 1551 – 1556 ( 1991 ) . 128 . Kop , W . J . et al . Changes in heart rate and heart rate variability before ambulatory ischemic events ( 1 ) . J . Am . Coll . Cardiol . 38 , 742 – 749 ( 2001 ) . 129 . Steinberg , J . S . et al . Increased incidence of life - threatening ventricular arrhythmias in implantable defibrillator patients after the World Trade Center attack . J . Am . Coll . Cardiol . 44 , 1261 – 1264 ( 2004 ) . 130 . Strike , P . C . et al . Pathophysiological processes underlying emotional triggering of acute cardiac events . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 4322 – 4327 ( 2006 ) . 131 . Tofler , G . H . & Muller , J . E . Triggering of acute cardiovascular disease and potential preventive strategies . Circulation 114 , 1863 – 1872 ( 2006 ) . 132 . Nawrot , T . S . , Perez , L . , Kunzli , N . , Munters , E . & Nemery , B . Public health importance of triggers of myocardial infarction : a comparative risk assessment . Lancet 377 , 732 – 740 ( 2011 ) . 133 . Meijer , A . et al . Prognostic association of depression following myocardial infarction with mortality and cardiovascular events : a meta - analysis of 25 years of research . Gen . Hosp . Psychiatry 33 , 203 – 216 ( 2011 ) . 134 . Lett , H . S . et al . Social support and coronary heart disease : epidemiologic evidence and implications for treatment . Psychosom . Med . 67 , 869 – 878 ( 2005 ) . 135 . Ruberman , W . , Weinblatt , E . , Goldberg , J . D . & Chaudhary , B . S . Psychosocial influences on mortality after myocardial infarction . N . Engl . J . Med . 311 , 552 – 559 ( 1984 ) . 136 . Theorell , T . , Perski , A . , Orth - Gomér , K . , Hamsten , A . & de Faire , U . The effects of the strain of returning to work on the risk of cardiac death after a first myocardial infarction before the age of 45 . Int . J . Cardiol . 30 , 61 – 67 ( 1991 ) . 137 . Aboa - Eboule , C . et al . Job strain and risk of acute recurrent coronary heart disease events . JAMA 298 , 1652 – 1660 ( 2007 ) . 138 . Aboa - Eboulé , C . et al . Effort - reward imbalance at work and recurrent coronary heart disease events : a 4 - year prospective study of post - myocardial infarction patients . Psychosom . Med . 73 , 436 – 447 ( 2011 ) . 139 . László , K . D . , Ahnve , S . , Hallqvist , J . , Ahlbom , A . & Janszky , I . Job strain predicts recurrent events after a first acute myocardial infarction : the Stockholm Heart Epidemiology Program . J . Intern . Med . 267 , 599 – 611 ( 2010 ) . 140 . Georgiades , A . , Janszky , I . , Blom , M . , László , K . D . & Ahnve , S . Financial strain predicts recurrent events among women with coronary artery disease . Int . J . Cardiol . 135 , 175 – 183 ( 2009 ) . 141 . Barth , J . , Schneider , S . & von Kanel , R . Lack of social support in the etiology and the prognosis of coronary heart disease : a systematic review and meta - analysis . Psychosom . Med . 72 , 229 – 238 ( 2010 ) . 142 . Leineweber , C . et al . Covert coping with unfair treatment at work and risk of incident myocardial infarction and cardiac death among men : prospective cohort study . J . Epidemiol . Community Health 65 , 420 – 425 ( 2011 ) . 143 . O’Donnell , K . , Badrick , E . , Kumari , M . & Steptoe , A . Psychological coping styles and cortisol over the day in healthy older adults . Psychoneuroendocrinology 33 , 601 – 611 ( 2008 ) . 144 . Linden , W . , Phillips , M . J . & Leclerc , J . Psychological treatment of cardiac patients : a meta - analysis . Eur . Heart J . 28 , 2972 – 2984 ( 2007 ) . 145 . Whalley , B . et al . Psychological interventions for coronary heart disease . Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews , Issue 8 . Art . No . : CD002902 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / 14651858 . CD002902 . pub3 ( 2011 ) . 146 . van Dixhoorn , J . & White , A . Relaxation therapy for rehabilitation and prevention in ischaemic heart disease : a systematic review and meta - analysis . Eur . J . Cardiovasc . Prev . Rehabil . 12 , 193 – 202 ( 2005 ) . 147 . Jones , D . A . & West , R . R . Psychological rehabilitation after myocardial infarction : multicenter randomised controlled trial . BMJ 313 , 1517 – 1521 ( 1996 ) . 148 . Orth - Gomér , K . et al . Stress reduction prolongs life in women with coronary disease : the Stockholm Women’s Intervention Trial for Coronary Heart Disease ( SWITCHD ) . Circ . Cardiovasc . Qual . Outcomes 2 , 25 – 32 ( 2009 ) . 149 . Gulliksson , M . et al . Randomized controlled trial of cognitive behavioral therapy vs standard treatment to prevent recurrent cardiovascular events in patients with coronary heart disease : Secondary Prevention in Uppsala Primary Health Care project ( SUPRIM ) . Arch . Intern . Med . 171 , 134 – 140 ( 2011 ) . 150 . Blumenthal , J . A . et al . Effects of exercise and stress management training on markers of cardiovascular risk in patients with ischemic heart disease : a randomized controlled trial . JAMA 293 , 1626 – 1634 ( 2005 ) . 151 . Bishop , G . D . et al . Effects of a psychosocial skills training workshop on psychophysiological and psychosocial risk in patients undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting . Am . Heart J . 150 , 602 – 609 ( 2005 ) . 152 . Stewart , L . A . & Parmar , M . K . Meta - analysis of the literature or of individual patient data : is there a difference ? Lancet 341 , 418 – 422 ( 1993 ) . 153 . Medical Research Council . Using natural experiments to evaluate population health interventions : guidance for producers and users of evidence [ online ] , http : / / www . mrc . ac . uk / naturalexperimentsguidance ( 2011 ) . Acknowledgments M . Kivimäki is supported by the Medical Research Council , UK . Author contributions Both authors researched data for the article , contributed to the discussion of content , wrote the article , and reviewed / edited the manuscript before submission . REVIEWS © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved