Ci , mput & Graphtt . ~ Vol . 14 , No . 2 , pp , 203 - 274 . 1990 00 ' - ) 7 - 8493 / 90 $ 3 . 00 + . 00 Pnnted in Great Bnta = n . c ~ tg ~ 0 Pergamon Press plc Features and Geometric Reasoning THE IMPORTANCE OF DRAWING IN THE MECHANICAL DESIGN PROCESS DAVID G . ULLMAN , STEPHEN WOOD and DAVID CRAIG Department of Mechanical Engineering . Oregon State University . Corvallis , OR 97331 Abstract - - This paper is a study on the importance of drawing ( both formal drafting and informal sketching ) during the process of mechanical design . Five hypotheses , focused on the t ~ es of drawings , their necessity in mechanical problem solving , and their relation to the external representation medium , are presented and supported . Support is through referenced studies in other domains and the results of protocol studies performed on five mechanical designers . Videotapes of all the marks - on - paper made by designers in representative sections of the design process were studied in detail for their type and purpose . The resulting data is supportive of the hypotheses . These results also give requirements for future computer aided design tools and graphics education , and goals for further studies . I . INTRODUCTION The goal of this paper is to study the importance of drawing ( both formal drafting and informal sketching ) during the process of mechanical design . This goal can be extended to state that we intend to show the necessio " of drawing during all the developmental stages of a mechanical design . Through the information presented here , the requirements for future computer aided de - sign tools , graphics education , and further studies will be developed . All mechanical engineers are taught drafting . Thus , most engineers are skilled at making and interpreting these formal mechanical drawings . These drawings are representations of a final design ( the end product of the design process ) and they are intended to archive the completed design and communicate it to other de - signers and manufacturing personnel . Additionally , engineers are notorious for not being able to think without making " ' back - of - the - envelope " sketches of rough ideas . Sometimes these informal sketches serve to communicate a concept to a colleague , but more often they just help the idea take shape on paper . It is in considering how these sketches help an idea take form that gives a hint that drawing ' s role in engineering is more than just to archive a concept or to commu - nicate with others . Understanding the use of both drafting and sketching in design is important to help formulate the future development of Computer Aided Design or Drafting ( CAD ) systems . As CAD evolves and becomes more " ' intelligent , ' " the question of what attributes these sys - tems must have becomes more important . In the past , CAD system attributes have primarily been driven from developments in the computer industry , it is only through understanding drawing ' s importance in the design process that these systems can be based on design needs . Additionally , the pressures of CAD tool devel - opment , faculty time demands , and course expenses cause academic institutions to reevaluate the content of their " graphics ' " courses . Understanding drawing ' s importance in the design process helps establish what skills need to be taught to engineers during their training . This paper is organized by first , in Section 2 , clari - fying the types of drawings used in mechanical design . The hypotheses to be addressed in this paper are given in Section 3 . A discussion of research on the under - standing of visual imagery to be used as a basis for arguments in support of the hypotheses is in Section 4 . In Section 5 is a discussion of the results of data taken on how mechanical engineers use drawings dur - ing design . Lastly , in Section 6 , is a discussion of how well the hypotheses have been supported and the im - plications of our findings on CAD development , ed - ucational requirements , and future research directions . 2 . TYPES OF DRAWINGS USED IN DESIGN Engineers make many types of marks - on - paper . In research , to be described in Section 5 , we have broken down these marks into two main groupings : support notation and graphic representations . Support notation includes textual notes , lists , dimensions ( including leaders and arrows ) , and calculations . Graphic rep - resentations include drawings of objects and their functions , and plots and charts . Mechanical design graphic representations are often scale drawings made with mechanical instruments or CAD computer systems . These drawings , made in ac - cordance with a set of widely accepted rules , are defined as having been drafted . Sketches , on the other hand , are defined as " free - hand " drawings . They are usually not to scale and may use shorthand notations to rep - resent both objects and their function . A differentiation must be made between the act of graphic representation and the medium on which it occurs . The medium , whether it be paper and pencil , a computer stylus on a tablet , chalk on a blackboard , or other medium may put interface restrictions on the representation . The following discussions are con - cerned with what is being represented , not with how the representation is made . However , the discussions point to the medium ' s restriction on representation and the need for improved interfaces . Another aspect of drawings to be considered is the level of abstraction of the information to be repre - sented . During the design process , the design is refined CAG 14 : 2 - I 263 264 DAVID G . ULLMAN , STEPHEN % % " OOD , and DAVID CRAIG from an abstract concept to a final , detailed , drafted design . This can be clearly seen in an example taken from one of our studies described in Section 5 . In this study the designer was developing an assembly to hold three batteries for a clock / calendar in acom puter . Fig . I is a compilation of all the sketches and drawings one subject made during the development of a batteD ' con - tact in this design . The number beside each graphic image is the percentage of the way through the design when the representation was made . The component is refined from a sketch that contains primarily functional information , to a refined , scale drawing of the final form . The first sketch in Fig . 1 shows two contacts ( represented as circles ) and a connection between them for current flow ( represented as a line ) . The symbology here is clearly functional . Even though a good percentage of an engineer ' s graphic representation is informal sketching , drafting is the focus of most engineering training and the strength of CAD systems . On the other hand , most engineers receive no formal training in sketching . It is often assumed to be some natural ability . Three typical texts used in teaching undergraduate " mechanicar ' drawing were reviewed 1 - 3 . Each of these presented only a few pages of information on sketching . Addi - tionally . CAD systems do not support sketching in any meaningful way . For the purposes of this paper , the term CAD is de - fined as the use of interactive computer graphics to help solve a mechanical design problem . Current CAD tools aid the mechanical design process in four ways : as an advanced drafting tool : through assisting in the visualization of hardware and data : by improving data organization and communication : and through being used as a pre - and postprocessor for computer - based analytical techniques such as finite element analysis . weight and mass properties , kinematic analysis , etc . For all these uses , the " ' design " must be refined to the point that a scale drawing of it can be made . Thus , for current systems , the " ' D " in CAD means drafting . 3 . THE RELATION OF DRAWING TO PROBLEM SOLVING The initial reduction of videotaped data taken of design engineers led to the publication of six uses of the act of drawing4 , 5 : I . To archive the geometric form of the design . 2 . To communicate ideas between designers and be - tween the designers and manufacturing personnel . 3 . To act as an analysis tool . Often , missing dimensions $ ¢to a° : ; JT . 0 ZOD ~ - - - - - x - - - - - - - - : . ~ " I . olo ~ - ' ~ • 75 " ~ ~ ~ . ~ . . . . . . ? . . pc . _ ° - 2 . 3 % ( percentage of time through protocol ) 30 . 7 % 37 . 4 % 37 . 7 % 51 . 6 % Fig . 1 . The evolution of a batteD ' contact - - total protocol time of 8 hours and 34 minutes . The importance of drawing and tolerances are calculated on the drawing as it is developed . 4 . To simulate the design . 5 . To serve as a completeness checker . As sketches or other drawings are being made , the details left to be designed become apparent to the designer . This , in effect , helps establish an agenda of design tasks left to accomplish . 6 . To act as an extension of the designer ' s short - term memory . Designers often unconsciously make sketches to help them remember ideas that they might otherwise forget . it was realized that these observations were both over - lapping and incomplete . In particular , based on the data and readings in the cognitive psychology literature , we felt that the last item was potentially much richer than stated . Thus , these observations have fostered five hypotheses . Each hypothesis is presented below fol - lowed by support from the literature . The mechanical design data in support of these hypotheses is in Sec - tion 5 . tlypothesis 1 . Drawing is the preferred method of ex - ternal data representation by mechan - ical engineering designers . Designers represent data both internally , in their minds , and externally on paper , a computer screen , or other media . It is fairly obvious that designers like to draw in these mediums and prefer a picture to a written description of an object . It is important to understand why drawing representations are preferred over other forms such as text or propositions ( if - then rules ) . In Why a Diagram is ( Sometimes ) Worth Ten Thousand ~ r ~ rds . by Larkin and Simon6 , the au - thors explore the use of diagrams in problem solving . Here a diagram is a drafted , schematic drawing rep - resenting the objects in a physics problem . In this paper , sentential ( textual , indexed by position in a list - - a sentence ) and diagrammatic ( graphical ) representa - tions and their effect on problem solving are compared . In comparing these , the authors conclude that : 1 . Diagrams can group all information that is used together thus avoiding large amounts of search for needed elements . Text only indexes to the next ele - ment in the sentence list ( the adjacent piece of in - formation ) while diagrams have many adjacent elements . 2 . Diagrams explicitly preserve information about ge - ometry and topology , whereas text is only serial in nature . This feature of diagrams allows for easy in - dexing of information to support computation pro - cesses . However . text preserves the temporal or log - ical sequence of information . This is lost in dia - grams . 3 . Diagrams use location to group information about a single element , avoiding the need to match sym - bolic labels . Diagrams automatically support a large number of perceptual inferences : the information can be indexed in a variety of manners . 265 It seems reasonable that these conclusions about dia - grammatic representations can be extended to all graphical representations . Based on Larkin and Si - mon ' s conclusions , it is easy to see why , in the com - plexity of mechanical design , drawings are preferred over text . Hypothesis 2 . Sketching is an important Jbrm of graphical representation serving needs not supported by drafting . Later in this paper we will analyze all the marks - on - paper made by a small group of engineering de - signers . Their drawing marks will be classified as either free - hand ( sketching ) or drafting marks . The hypoth - esis above states that the sketches have a role that more formal drafting cannot fill . Dan Herbert , in Study Drawings in , 4 rchitectural Design : Applications for CA D Systems7 , considers the use of sketches ( study drawings ) in the solution of architectural design prob - lems . He defines " study drawings " as " informal , private drawings that architectural designers use as a medium for graphic thinking in the exploratory , stages of their work . " Architects often make these study drawings in the borders of or adjacent to their formal drawings . In his paper , Herbert conjectures about the properties of sketches that affect the design process . These properties form the basis for his theory , of the use of sketches in design . In Herbert ' s theory , sketches are used because they provide an extended memory for the visual images in the mind of the designer . Since sketches can be made more rapidly than formal drawings , they allow for more facile manipulation of ideas . Furthermore , sketches al - low the information to be represented in various forms , such as differing views or levels of abstraction . Thus , he calls sketches " graphic metaphors " for both the real object and the formally drafted object under devel - opment . In fact , Herbert claims that sketches are a principal medium of external thinking . Herbert ' s thoughts lead to the third hypothesis . Hypothesis 3 . Drawing is a necessary extension of vi - sual imagery used in mechanical de - sign . It is a necessao ' extension of a de - signer ' s cognitive capability for all but the most trivial data representation , constraint propagation , and mental simulation . This hypothesis states that without data represen - tation on media external to the designer , there can be no design of substantive problems . Anecdotal support for this hypothesis is evident in asking a designer to design something and observing him / her reach for a pencil or chalk . In the next section of this paper , we will discuss a model of information processing in hu - man problem solving that gives some scientific support to these anecdotal observations and to the hypothesis . In this model , drawings are an extension of humans " limited ability to visualize objects in their mind . 266 DAVID G . ULLMAN , STEPHEN WOOD , and DAVID CRAIG The limitation of cognitive ability leads to the fourth hypothesis . Hypothesis 4 . Drawings require transJormation from the designer ' s memorv to the extended memory medium . The nature of the transJormation is dependent on the characteristics of the medium . The manner in which humans represent information in their memoD is still a subject of much debate and research . Whatever the form of this internal represen - tation , it is potentially different from the representation made externally on paper , in a CAD system , or through some other media . The transformation between these two media is one of both correspondence and imple - mentation . Correspondence is the transformation be - tween the internal and the external vocabularies . If the designer has a visualized 3 - D object in his / her mind and wants to represent the object externally , it can be transformed into an isometric , orthographic , or other 2 - D representation and drawn on paper or with a 2 - D CAD tool , or it can be transformed to boolean prim - itives and represented on a solid modeling tool . Further , depending on the medium chosen , there is the additional necessity to transform the image to meet the requirements of the implementation . The cognitive process for drawing a line with a pencil is different from that for specifying the end points for a CAD rep - resentation ofthe line . Both the research of Larkin and Simon and of Herbert focus on correspondence . There is no literature known to the authors concerning the effect of implementation on the cognitive load of the designer . Even though the exact form of human memory is still unknown , it is generally discussed by psychologists in terms of cognitive units or chunks of data . The na - ture of these cognitive units , which will be discussed in the next section , leads to the fifth and final hypoth - esis . Hypothesis 5 . Drawings both utilize and determine the cognitive traits ( design features ) used in mental image formulation . Thus . the designer ' s cognitive information orga - ni - ation is interdependent with the drawing " s characteristics . This hypothesis is double edged . It seems obvious that the content and structure of drawings is dependent on the mental image and how it is formed ( its cognitive chunks ) . It is debatable whether or not the mental images are influenced by the drawings . This issue will be addressed again later . 4 . A COGNITIVE MODEL OF MECHANICAL DESIGN In an earlier description of designers as information processors 8 , we presented Fig . 2 as the environment in which the design takes place . This figure is based on the model developed by Newell and Simon9 and called the Information Pro - cessing System ( IPS ) . The figure can be viewed as a . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . " 6 i ii . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . STATE " ' - , proposa ' $ / ' ~ " T " " ' ~ ~ , Constrainls / " ( \ . / • , . , . . ' ~ \ C ~ venCons , , a : : ' ' . / \ . . . . . . . . . . . . . " ~ Long / EXTERNAL INTERNAL ENVIRONMENT ENVIRONMENT Fig . 2 . The design environment . " map " of the locations in which information about the design may be stored . It is divided into an internal work space ( inside the mind of the designer ) and an external workspace ( outside the mind of the designer ) . Within the designer , there are two locations corre - sponding to the two different kinds of memory . : short - term memory ( STM ) and long - term memory ( LTM ) . There is also a " processor " that is responsible for ap - plying operators and controlling the design process . In Ullman , Dietterich , and Stauffer8 , I0 operators were identified that characterize the problem solving in me - chanical design . External to the designer there are many " design state storage locations " including graphical representation media such as pieces of paper and CAD tools , as well as other sources such as textual notes , handbooks , and colleagues . Thus , the design or some feature of the design can only be represented in three locations : STM , LTM , and the so - called , external memory . Each " location " has certain properties that affect how it can be used in design . In order to support the hypotheses about the importance of drawing in the mechanical design pro - cess , this model needs to be discussed in more detail . To discuss drawing ' s role in the mechanical design process , the characteristics of the STM , the LTM , and the information flow between them and the external environment will be developed . This detail is based on Newell and Simon ' s model , the extensions of it to visual imagery by Kosslyn 10 - 12 , and the effort to codify it by AndersonI 3 . It must be realized that the con - tents of the model given here are not fully agreed to in the cognitive psychology community , but they are certainly secure enough to provide a basis for discussing the role of drawing in mechanical design . 4 . 1 . Short - term memom , Short - term memory , is very fast and powerful . The contents of the STM comprise the information we are aware of , our conscious mind . All design operations ( e . g . . visual perception and drawing creation ) are made on information that is brought into short - term mem - ory . Unfortunately , STM has limited capacity . Studies have shown that it is limited to approximately seven cognitive units or " chunks " of information9 . Al - The importance of drawing 267 though limited in capacity , the STM is a fast processor with processing times on the order of I00 msec17 . In the view of Kosslyn , one function of the short - term memory is as a visual buffer 12 . In this capacity , it is considered a hard - wired , special purpose , short - term buffer that evolved from the need to process in - formation from the eyes . Thus , this buffer is viewed as a coordinate space with limited spatial extent , more clarity toward the center , and the image fading without regeneration effort . The visual buffer supports images derived from the eyes during perception , and from both the eyes and the long - term memory during idea gen - eration and manipulation . 4 . 2 . Long - term memory The long - term memory , on the other hand , has es - sentially infinite capacity , but access is slow ( from 2 to 10 seconds per chunk ) . Access to long - term memory is also not direct . Instead , memories must be triggered by some cue or retrieval strategy based on information in short - term memory . During design , parts of the de - sign state are stored in long - term memory . These are relatively easy to cue because , at any time , currently important parts of the design state are in short - term memory and can act as pointers for the knowledge in the long - term memory . In terms of visual imagery , according to Kosslyn there are two different types of information stored in the long - term memory : facts about objects ( including size of objects , how they are put together , names of superordinate categories , their function , etc . ) and en - codings of the literal appearance of the object ( list of coordinates where points should be placed in the visual buffer ) . Shepard14 argues that there may not be a concrete or " first order " isomorphism between an ex - ternal object and the corresponding representation . He proposes a " second order " isomorphism in which functional relations among objects are modeled and stored . It is clear that the information about images contains more than the literal appearance and that a propositional memory must be included as part of the visual image . 4 . 3 . Cognitive units The contents of the cognitive units processed in the LTM and STM are not exactly clear . Anderson13 , in his effort to build a computer simulation of human information processing , utilizes three types of data representations for these units : spatial images , textual data , and propositions . It will be shown that the spatial representation view of memory is especially important in considering the form - oriented field of mechanical engineering design . There is virtually no evidence in the literature about the way in which designers encode information about mechanical objects in their memory . There has been much conjecture about this , however , as the chunks of data , more commonly referred to in engineering design as the design features , are the basic building blocks of human design organization . Thus , ira design is to be represented in a manner that is most easily communicated to / from a human designer , then the information should be encoded in features that are fa - miliar to him or her . Current CAD systems use features that are made of geometric primitives such as lines , arcs , solids , and icons . There are the features designers are taught to use , but it is not clear that these are the way the information is best organized in their memory , and most easily indexed . This gives rise to the following questions : Where do these features come from ? Is it that designers have a natural set of features in their heads , or is the patterning developed through their ed - ucation ? The only windows that exist to study the chunking of objects in a designer ' s head are through his / her rep - resentation of these features as written text , words , drawings , or gestures . Features used by humans to rep - resent geometry and topology are often not easily rep - resented textually or verbally , but can be graphically represented quite easily . For example , novice chess players , when asked to recall the position of chess men on a board , did so on a man - by - man basis . However , experts recalled patterns of men , larger , more complex features than the novice15 . These chunks had no formal " names " that could be represented as a simple written or spoken term , but they could be graphically represented by the positions On the board quite easily . Similar experiments in the domain of architecture 16 resulted in chunks that , although easily represented graphically , could only be awkwardly represented tex - tually as , for example , " A string of exterior walls " or " Two wall segments with windows forming an exterior corner of a square space . " The only experiment of this nature performed on mechanical engineers was performed by Waldron and Waldron18 . In this experiment , novices ( under . graduate students ) , intermediates ( graduate students ) , and experts ( practicing engineers ) were shown an as - sembly drawing for a short period of time . The drawing was then covered and the subjects asked to reproduce it . By observing the videotaped protocols of the subjects performing this task , it was evident that the novices remembered line segments , the intermediate subjects remembered objects such as gears , and the experts re - membered functional components embod . ~ ing a large number of physical objects . 4 . 4 . How the IPS model supports the hypotheses The above description is important to the under - standing of the use of graphical representations in me - chanical design , as it gives insight into the correctness of the hypotheses put forward in Section 3 . First , it must be noted that all the tasks performed on a design require either recall of information from the long - term memory or manipulation in the short - term memory . Since the number of chunks of infor - mation the STM can work with is limited and me - chanical designs get complicated very rapidly , the short - term memory forms a critical bottleneck for human designers . Additionally . as the STM transforms infor - mation so rapidly and the long - term memo ~ so slowly , only external representations made through trans - 268 DAVID G . ULLMAN , STEPHEN ~ " OOD , and D - x , . ID CR \ O forming the image to graphic or textual representation can serve as added memory . Since textual information is so limited in characterizing form . graphic represen - tation is the only reasonable memory extender for me - chanical designers . This supports the first hypothesis . The second hypothesis , that sketches serve purposes not supported by drafting , has much to do with the speed of the representation . One purpose in making a graphic image in the external environment is so that it can be viewed , encoded in the STM , and parsed in a new way . In other words , rapid external image gen - eration allows designers to " ' see " information differ - ently than the way it was generated . Thus , the method of generating the external image must be rapid and flexible or it will slow down the cognitive processing . Since the STM is so limited in capacity and me - chanical design is so complex , drawings are needed in design as an extension of the visual imagery capability . Thus , the IPS model supports hypothesis 3 . Consid - ering both hypotheses 2 and 3 , drawing both extends the capacity of the STM and gives the capability of reparsing the information for continued processing . The fourth hypothesis stated that graphical repre - sentation is a metaphor for visual imagery and it re - quires transformation dependent on the medium . It would be ideal if the rr / edium image representation requirements exactly matched the image representation in the short - term memory . In one sense , this match always occurs in that , to some degree , the medium used formulates the image chunks that are stored in the long - term memory and later form a basis for generating and inspecting the image in short - term memory . The fifth hypothesis states that graphical represen - tation both utilizes and determines design features . We have historically been constrained to two - dimensional media ( e . g . , pencil and paper ) and these have , to some degree , formed our representations . It is not clear how we encode and store three - dimensional objects . There is one argument that memory is object - centered and that the object can thus be manipulated as a solid model . This is countered by the argument that memory is viewer - centered and thus only the specific view stored in LTM can be used for generation or inspection 12 . Thus , the current state of cognitive research is not yet refined enough to support this hypothesis . cations tbr one of two lhirly simple , yet realistic , in - dustrial design problems . The engineers were requested to think aloud as they solved the problems . Their verbal reports , drawings , and gestures were video - and audio - taped for a period of 6 - 10 hours . The taped data were then transcribed to obtain a " protocol " of the design session . Each designer made numerous drawings during his / her solution of the problem . All of these were on paper , and the subjects were required to work in ink so that a complete history , of their marks - on - paper would be obtained . Some subjects found this restriction frustrating , and , in retrospect , erasing could have been allowed as the veodeotape clearly shows their efforts on the paper . It should be noted that CAD systems were not used in the study because none of the designers used CAD in their daily practice , and its use would have added another variable to an already complex experiment design . During the protocols , the subjects were asked to talk continually , not to explain what they were doing but just to talk along with their effort . Experiments have shown that verbalizing during problem solving does not alter the content of the solution19 . If the subject was silent for more than about I0 seconds , the ex - aminer would remind him / her to keep talking . The two problems used in the study were the " ' batteD ' contacts " problem and the " ' flipper - dipper " problem . The battery , contacts problem statement , in abbreviated form , is the following : Design a plastic envelope I dimensions provided ) and the electrical contacts to accept three batteries to power the time clock in a new computer . The batteries ( detailed dimensions provided ) must be connected in series and to an adjacent printed circuit board . The external dimensions of the envelope are provided as are needed contact pressures . The volume is 50 , 000 units / month for three years and the assembly will use a robot . Two subjects , S I and $ 2 , solved this problem . The flipper - dipper problem statement , in abbrevi - ated form , is the following : Design a mechanism that will accept a 10 " × 10 " × . 063 " aluminum plate from a worker , lower one side so that it just touches the surface of a chemical bath Ito receive a chemical coating ) , lift the plate offthe bath surface , flip it over . lov , ' er and coat the other side . and present it to the worker for re - moval . There were only to be 3 of these built . 5 . SUPPORTING EVIDENCE FROM STUDIES OF MECHANICAL DESIGNERS In previous research , we and our colleagues have taken videotaped protocols of mechanical design en - gineers solving realistic design problems . To support the hypotheses in this paper , sections of the videotaped data were reevaluated to identify data germane to the hypotheses , The following section briefly reviews the source of the data . This is followed by an evaluation of marks - on - paper made by the subjects in their so - lution of the problems . 5 . 1 . The protocol experiments Five mechanical design engineers of varying back - ground and experience were given the initial specifi - Three subjects , $ 4 , $ 5 . and $ 6 , solved this problem . More details of these problems and the solutions can be found in 5 , 8 . 20 . Approximately 46 hours of data were taken . All of the data was transcribed and analyzed to determine the general problem flow . In these early stages of work - ing with the data , it was realized that the act of drawing fulfilled needs beyond that of documenting the design . These observations prompted this investigation . Several detailed analysis techniques were tried on selected parts of this data in an attempt to develop an analysis method that provided insight into the goal structure of the design . It was found that an anal . vsis based on tasks , episodes , and operators was most re - vealing and was reasonabl . v repeatable b . ~ different re - The importance of drawln 8 26 ~ searchers . Results of this research arc reported in 8 . 20 . Additionally , this data has been used as a basis for developing representations 21 , 22 and a computer model of mechanical design 23 . There has also been an effort to automate the reduction of the data using a technique called pause analysis . Fifteen sections of the protocol data were analyzed for the content and purpose of the marks made on the paper . Three sections were taken from the protocol of each of the five subjects , S I , $ 2 , $ 4 , $ 5 , and $ 6 . For each subject , a section was chosen when : I ) the primary task was conceptualization , 2 ) the primary task was refining the design , and 3 ) the primary task was doc - umenting the design . These three areas were represen - tative of the significant phases of the design process ( conceptualization , layout , and detail design ) . The 15 sections of protocol data consisted of 174 minutes of data . Within this 3 + hours of data , all the marks made on the paper by the designers were investigated . It must be pointed out that the protocol data was not taken specifically for this study . Thus , the data analysis performed and the statistics given are consid - ered as preliminary pointers to studies specifically aimed at now identifiable issues . Protocol data is always subjective and time consuming in reduction , but usu - ally gives insight into where more detailed studies need to be performed . 5 . 2 . The types of marks - on - paper in the protocols The selected sections of protocol data were reviewed and each marking action was noted . A marking action was defined to be a series of marks made between sig - nificant marking pauses , where a significant pause was taken to be greater than one second . This value was chosen for three reasons . First , it appeared that for pauses longer than one second , the subject ' s focus of attention changed . In other words , the marks before a one - second pause served a different goal than those after . Second , pauses less than a second could be in - terpreted as just a change in gripping the pencil , moving the hand out of the line of sight , or other manifestation of the media . Third , Chase and Simon , in their study of chess players , used two seconds , with the caveats that this time was a bit arbitrary and that the results of the study would not change significantly if the value were changed by a small amount . In our study , less than 10 % of our data would be eliminated if the sig - nificant interval were changed from one second to two . It is assumed that each marking action is the external representation of a chunk of information . This as - sumption is commonly used15 , 16 and seems rea - sonable . During the pause , the subject either recalls information from long - term memory or processes in - formation in the STM to form a new chunk . Then , during the drawing action , the piece of information is represented externally . A total of 363 actions were identified . Each action and its preceding pause took an average of 29 seconds . In UIIman . Dietterich , and Stauffer8 it was shown that the average problem - solving episode was about 59 seconds : thus there are approximately two marking ac - tions per problem - solving episode . Within the 29 - second average length of pause plus action , the average length of time to make a mark on paper is 7 . 3 seconds with a standard deviation of 7 . 8 seconds . This value ean be further refined by consid - ering the marks made in the differing design phases where for conceptual design the average is 6 . 8 seconds , for layout design the average is 8 . 4 seconds , and for detail design the average is 7 seconds . The standard deviation on this data is 5 . 7 , 8 . 37 , and 8 . 7 respectively . The standard deviation on this data is high , as there are many different activities performed during these drawing actions . Many actions that were longer than one minute were used for recalling information used previously or in copying a previously designed part over for detailing . These sections may actually have more than one cognitive chunk being represented , but the action seemed focused on one goal and thus these were regarded as one chunk of data . To facilitate analysis , the 363 marks - on - paper are divided into " draw " marks and " support " marks . These are further refined into " sketch " and " draft " marks , and " text , " " ' dimension , " and " calculate ' " marks respectively . Thus there are five types of marks - on - paper . They are defined as : • Sketch : Drawings of features made free - hand . Typical sketches are shown in Fig . 1 . • Draft . " Drawings made with mechanical devices . An example of this is when subject $ 5 uses a straight edge and a ruler to lay out the " ' chair " mechanism , part of his device to hold the plate in the flipper - dipper problem . As shown in Fig . 3 , the subject used orthographic projections , • Text : Letters , words , or numbers that are not part of a dimension on a drawing and not part of a cal - culation . An example ofthis is when subject S 1 writes down some manufacturing notes next to the drawing of the spring contact in the battery contact problem as shown in Fig . 4 . • Dimension : Dimensions or dimension lines on a drawing ( either a sketch or a draft ) . An example of this is when subject $ 6 dimensions the location of some blocks and wire hoops that were part of his plate handling mechanism in the flipper - dipper problem solution . This is shown in Fig . 5 . • Calculate . Equations and answers to calculations . Combines constraints or design proposals to derive " 1 / - - ¢ ' ° " ~ " , . ~ " - t - - ' 1 ~ , t . : . : - ' \ 2 - - 1 " " r ' Yp . ~ . # t ¢ ~ . Fig . 3 . Drafting example from subject $ 5 . 270 DAVID Q . ULLMAN , STEPHEN WOOD , and DAVID CRAIG * , jr " TOw eJ ~ ' ¢ . - ~ 0 C ~ . , , . . e ' c . oDa . 6 ~ . o ' ~ Fig . 4 . Text example from subject S I . new information . An example of this is when subject $ 2 is trying to determine the stress and deflection in the spring due to the given contact force ; see Fig . 6 . There was some debate as to how to differentiate between sketch and draft . There are two measures to consider : ( a ) the use of instruments and ( b ) whether or not the drawing was to scale . Consistency with tra - ditional college graphics textsl , 2 , 3 suggests that the criteria should only be the use of instruments which is as defined above . All the subjects had instruments at hand . However , some subjects chose to make their scale drawing free - hand . It would seem that they felt that it was easiest not to use the instruments . The dif - ferentiation between sketch and draft is made even more clear by considering the point in the design when the drawing was made . When the subjects were trying to conceptualize the design , 100 % of the drawings were sketches . Later in the design , during the layout and detail phases , this drops to 52 % as some of the subjects used instruments to draw their refined design while others continued to sketch . Orthogonal to the types of marks - on - paper is the purpose of the marks . Each of the 363 marks was re - viewed to find the purpose for making it . The purposes for making marks - on - paper are " add , " " patch , " " re - fine , " and " recall information . " Each of these is defined below : • Add : The subject makes a specific mark for the first time that is not a given constraint ( an initial speci - fication ) . If the topic of the mark is a given con - straint , the subject is recalling information ( see be - low ) . An example of an Add is when subject $ 6 draws the grippers to hold the plate for the first time , thereby adding them to his design as shown in Fig . 7 . • Patch . " The subject detects a constraint violation and alters the design without changing the level of ab - straction . An example of this is when subject SI sketches the third sketch in Fig . I . Here she realizes that the contact , as originally drawn in the second sketch and being recalled here , will interfere with a wall ( dashed lines ) that has been added to the design since the second sketch was made . She scribbles out pan of what she has recalled from the second sketch and patches the design by angling the contact up - wards . • Refine : The subject makes a drawing or writes sup - porting information for the object at a less abstract level than previously• An example of Refine is when subject S I changes the design of the contact from a wire connecting two oval pieces of sheet material to one continuous piece as shown in Fig . 1 . • Recall Information : The subject recollects something that has been drawn or noted previously , or that is a given constraint . No new information is specified . An example of this is when subject $ 6 is drawing the water level , table area , and plate , which are given constraints in the problem . This is shown in Fig . 8 . Based on the types of marks - on - paper and the pur - pose of the marks , the 363 actions have been classified as shown in Table 1 . It is interesting to note the subject - to - subject vari - ation in our data . With such a small database , there is concern that the results are not generalizable . This concern is realistic and warranted , and thus we have only based our conclusions on the aggregated data . In reviewing all the drawings used by the five subjects ( including those not included in the data reduction in this paper ) , it was observed that subject SI only sketched and never used isometric drawings . Subject $ 2 , solving the same problem , also sketched and almost exclusively used isometrics . Subjects $ 4 , $ 5 , and $ 6 used a mix of isometrics , orthographies , and 2 - D drawings . However , $ 4 and $ 5 did nearly all of their work with instruments ( drafted ) , and $ 6 did no draft - ing . One area that was influenced by the problem is in the use of calculations . The two subjects who solved the battery contacts problem used calculations in the C . . . . _ i If " 2 _ i : " a " 7 _ R . ~ _ _ _ _ . - - - - - - - ~ / / Iz " Fig . 5 . Dimension example from subject $ 6 , . , ¢ - i1 " - The importance of drawing 271 , . 5 ~ . - - t ~ ~ : L C = . , - ) , - ) 2 ~ t ' Z . 1 " 7 - e Fig . 6 . Calculate example from subject $ 2 . sections of their protocols studied , whereas the other three subjects , solving the flipper - dipper problem , did not . To add some numbers to these observations , con - sider the drawing actions ( we lump sketch and draft together to account for S5 ' s use of drafting ) . For the 111 add actions the subject variation is SI = 10 , $ 2 = 7 , $ 4 - - 48 , $ 5 = 32 , and $ 6 = 14 . The mean and standard deviation are 4 . 9 actions and 4 . 7 actions re - spectively . For the 14 patching actions , the statistics are 10 . 3 actions and 8 . 4 actions . For the 53 refining actions they are 7 actions and 6 . 4 actions . Finally , for recalling information they are 7 . 2 actions and 9 . 5 ac - tions . 5 . 3 . Support of hypotheses Support for the first hypothesis , that drawing is the preferred method of external representation , comes as no surprise . Of the 363 marks - on - paper , only 9 % were for text and 5 % for calculations . The remainder were either sketching or drafting ( 72 % ) or dimensioning in support of the drawing ( 14 % ) . These percentages are fairly consistent across all the subjects , as shown in Table 2 . The second hypothesis states that sketching is an important form of representation in mechanical design . In our data , 67 % of the drawings were sketches . An argument could be made that many of these sketches could have been made using drafting equipment or on a CAD system . A counterargument is that with the average length of these sketching actions at eight sec - onds , the use of instruments could have slowed the drawing action to the point that the cognitive problem solving would be impaired . The third hypothesis , that drawing is a necessary extension of visual imagery , becomes most evident in the simulation sections of the protocols . It is certainly clear that many drawing actions were not to document the results of the design activity but were part of the design process itself . It is further logical that if the sub - jects could have performed these simulations in their heads , they would have done so without making the sketches . It was noted in 8 that the subjects never Fig . 7 . Add example from subject $ 6 . Fig . 8 . Recall information example from subject SI . compared their design proposals to more than two or three constraints . It was hypothesized that this was due to short = term memory limitations . Here it is clear that the drawings not only provide the subjects with a memory extension , but they also force the proposed design and constraints to the same level of abstraction and the same representation for comparison . Thus it can be concluded that these simulations on paper are necessary to the design effort . An attempt was made to develop statistics from the data in support of this hypothesis . However , the data is not consistent nor complete enough to support the premise . Future studies will need to be developed to specifically test for its validity . The fourth hypothesis , that drawings require trans - formations dependent on the medium , is difficult to support . First , this data only utilized a single external medium , pen and paper , thus eliminating any discus - sion of the effect of implementation . Secondly , un - derstanding how humans store and manipulate visual information is still not very well known . It seems clear that humans can perform visual image processing in either two or three dimensions I0 . However , studies are not yet conclusive in answering such questions as : Are all stored chunks of 3 - D information stored as 3 - D images , or are they stored as projections of images ; if the images are 3 = D , are they viewer - centered ( obJects described from the viewer ' s vantage point ) or object = centered ( description independent of viewpoint ) 24 ; and if images can be either 2 - D or 3 - D depending on the need , how is information transformed from one representation to the other ? One piece of evidence in determining the amount of transformation occurring is in the use of 2 - D draw = ings versus 3 - D drawings . In the protocol data it is clear that often the problem solving is satisfactory in two dimensions . At other times the subjects made 3 - D sketches or orthographic draftings ofthe objects they were designing . The data was reviewed to find the use of these different representation styles . The results of this review are shown in Table 3 with the percentage of each representation in each phase in parentheses . It is evident that in conceptual design most of the graphics are 2 - D ( 59 % ) , in the layout stage it is a mix of methods , and in the detail phase the representation has mostly been transformed to orthographic ( 78 % ) . It seems evident that designers can readily transform between these representation methods . This suggests that one of the representations in memory is 3 - D . The fifth hypothesis , that drawings both utilize and determine cognitive units , will be addressed one part at a time . First , there is strong evidence to support the 272 D : ~ ID O , ULLMAN . STEPFIE ~ WOOD . and D ~ , VID CR . - xtG Table 1 . Classification of actions . Dra ~ Support Sketch Draft Text Dimension Calculate Total Add 50 61 29 0 Patch l ~ t 0 0 0 Refine 43 10 0 3 Recall into 68 17 5 47 Total 175 ( 48 % ) 88 ( 24 % ) 34 ( 9 % ) 50 ( 14 % ) 6 146 ( 40 % ) I 15 ( 4 % ) 4 60 ( 17 % ) 5 142 ( 39 % ) 16 ( 5 % ) 363 ( 100 % ) notion that drawings utilize cognitive chunks . Chase and Simonl 5 assumed that the information between significant pauses was a representation of a single cog - nitive unit . Akin16 followed this assumption , and it seems reasonable here because the subjects clearly per - formed an action as one continuous effort . It could be that processing is occurring parallel to representation and thus the external marks - on - paper are a sequence of chunks with the pauses occurring when there is nothing to represent . However . the literature does not support this view , and neither does our data . In a typical example , subject $ 6 is trying to mount a wire . He is about one hour into his design when he spends a one - minute period making the sketch shown in Fig . 9 . This is a study drawing , where the circled numbers are our notation for the separate actions . As he has previously drawn the isometric bar labeled " 9 " along with the block on top of it , these are recalled / sketched rapidly ( 10 seconds ) ; there is then a short , one - second pause , and then the hole is added . The hole is a new feature and thus could not have been stored as part of the block . This sketch takes only one additional second and is labeled " 10 . " Then the wire that has been sketched before with various bends is recalled after a three - second pause . This wire has been patched so many times in the design effort that precedes this ex - ample section that it is unclear whether he recalls or patches the wire here . Now , with the wire in the hole , he has accomplished the goal of mounting the wire except that there is a constraint on how close the wire must be to the end of the block . After a 38 - second pause during which he simulates the position of the wire relative to the constraint , he adds line 12 , patching the design to meet the constraint . It is evident that each drawing action represents a separate feature of the design , and it is reasonable to assume that these are also at least some of the cognitive chunks the de - signer is dealing with . How the drawings determine these cognitive units is unknown . This issue is similar to the debate as to whether language patterns thought 25 . Do the tools with which the designer represents objects affect how they are stored ? Our data gives no answers to this ques - tion . 6 . CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS FOR CAD DEVELOPMENT , EDUCATION . AND FUTURE RESEARCH The evidence both from research in cognitive psy - chology and from the protocol studies of designers points to the importance of drawing in the design pro - cess beyond the documentation of final designs . Not only are drawings the preferred form of data represen - tations for the designer , but they are a necessary part of the design process . Sketching as a form of drawing has been shown to have properties that make its use important in design . Additionally , the medium for ex - ternal representation plays an active role in the amount of transformation needed to draw images from the STM and in the content of the cognitive chunks used . Finally , although with weak support , it has been shown that drawings are a window to the cognitive process used in problem solving by design engineers . This study has also raised many questions and leaves much room for further research in this area . The very methodology used to determine the effectiveness of drawings in support of the cognitive process is in need of additional work . At a minimum , the recording of the drawings , both sketches and draftings , should be automated . Obviously , the more facile the represen - tation medium the more it will be used and the more data recorded . Thus it is of interest to develop a method to allow rapid sketching and drawing to complement the cognitive process . The observations concerning the use of drawings in the design process indicate areas for CAD tool devel - Table 2 . Types of marks made by each subject . S 1 $ 2 $ 4 $ 5 $ 6 Total Sketch . draft , or dimension 57 ( 78 % ) 61 ( 78 % ) Text 13 18 % ) 5 ( 7 % ) Calculate 3 ( 4 ~ ) 12 ( 15 % ) 75 ( 90 % ) 52 ( 87 % ) 68 ( 97 % ) 313 ( 86 % ) 7 ( 9 % ) 7 ( 13 % ) 2 ( 3 % ) 34 ( 9 % ) t ( 1 % ) 0 0 16 ( 5 % ) Total 73 78 83 59 70 363 The importance of drawing Table 3 . Design phase ~ ersus graphic representation st qe . 273 2 - D Orthographic Isometric Total Conceptual ( All Sketch ) 47 ( 59 % ) Sketch 6 Layout ( 49 % ) Draft 28 Sketch 0 ( 3 % ) Detail Draft Total 85 29 ( 37 % ) 3 ( 4 % ) 79 18 17 ( 26 % ) ( 25 % ) 69 0 0 34 2 ~ 56 ( 78 % ) ( 19 % ) I I 5 137 41 263 opment . Since drawings play such an active role in the design process , CAD tools need to be more than tools to record well thought - out and structured concepts . Specifically : 1 . CAD systems must allow for sketching input . This is necessary for a number of reasons . First , it is a rapid representation method . Rubber banding and select methods traditional to CAD systems are sim - ply not fast enough . Second , the additional cognitive load to implement current systems is detrimental to the design process . Icon and menu selecting add an unneeded step to creating an image . Third , in conceptual design in particular , it is not necessary that all graphical representations be as refined as that demanded by current CAD systems . 2 . CAD systems must allow for a variety of interfaces for the designer . This does not mean more ways to define a circle , but an effort to match the interface to and the image on the CAD system to that needed by the designer . In other words , future CAD de - velopment needs to be driven from the " D " and not from the " C " in " ' CAD " where the " D " is for design . This will require focused cognitive studies of the use of new CAD systems . There are no studies in the literature known to the authors that indicate that CAD developers have studied the needs of the designers in any meaningful way . 3 . CAD systems must recognize domain - dependent features and treat them as entities . On one level this has been done through grouping and macros . How - ever , there is need for features at diverse levels of refinement and for the recognition of functional features . Only novice designers utilize simple prim - % - Fig . 9 . Subject $ 6 t ~ ing to mount a ~ qre . itives such as iine and arc : experts remember and index features functionally . If CAD systems are to be truly design tools usable by expert designers , then the ability to operate at varying levels of refinement and functionality are a must . In fact , some of the variational systems introduced on the market since 1987 have some of the needed capability . 4 . CAD tools need to be able to manage constraints ( even abstract and functional constraints ) and in - sure their satisfaction , as it is evident that human designers are cognitively limited in this ability . Constraints are both given at the beginning of a design ( design requirements ) and are derived as de - sign decisions are made . Both types need to be re - corded and used to insure that the design meets the given constraints and is complete in light of the design decisions . In engineering education , these results point to the importance of being able to represent design concepts graphically . It appears that the very design process itself is limited by the ability to use graphics as a cognitive extension . This implies the need for training not only in the standard drafting skills , but additionally in the ability to represent concepts that are more abstract and best represented as sketches . Thus , the training of good designers is somewhat dependent on training in graphic skills including both formal drawing and informal sketching . Acknowledgments - - Support for the original protocol study that served as a basis for this study is from the National Science Foundation grant number DMC 85 - 14949 . 1985 - 1987 . Sup - port for the pause analysis of the data is from a Schlumberger gift . The detail analysis of the data is supported by a Tektronix grant . REFERENCES 1 . T . E . French and C . J . Vierck , Graphic Science , McGraw - Hill , New York ( 1958 ) . 2 . W . J . Luzadder . Fundamentals of Engineering Drawing fi ~ r Design Product Development . and . Vumerical Control , 7th edition . Prentice Hall , Englewood Cliffs , NJ ( 1977 ) . 3 . G . G . S . Voland . Modern Engineering Graphics & Design , West Publishing Co . , St . Paul . MN ( 1987 ) . 4 . R . C . Fang . 2D Free Hand Recognition System . Master ' s Report . Oregon State University , Corvallis , OR ( April 1988 ) . 5 . D . G . UIIman and T . G . Dietterich . Toward expert CAD . Computers in Mechanical Engineering 6 ( 3 ) , 56 - 70 ( 1987 ) . 6 . J . Larkin and H . Simon , Why a diagram is ( sometimes ) worth a thousand words . Cognitive Science 11 , 65 - 99 ( 1987 ) . 274 DAVID G . ULLMAN , STEPHEN WOOD , and DAVID CRAIG 7 . D . Herbert , Study Drawings in Architectural Design : Ap - plications for CAD Systems . Proceedings of the 1987 Workshop of the Association for Computer . Aided Design in Architecture ( ACADIA ) ( 1987 ) . 8 . D . G . Ullman , T . G . Dietterich , and L . A . Stauffer , A model of the mechanical design process based on empir - ical data . In AIEDAM . Clive Dym ( Ed . ) , Academic Press , New York . 33 - 52 , ( 1989 ) . 9 . A . Newell and H . A . Simon , H , tman Problem Solving , Prentice Hall , Engtewood Cliffs , NJ ( 1972 ) . 10 . S . M . Kosslyn , Ghosts in the Minds Machine , W . W . Norton , New York ( 1983 ) . 11 . S . M . Kosslyn , J . Brunn , K . R . Cave , and R . W . Wallach , Individual differences in mental imagery ability : A com - putational analysis . In Visual Cognition , S . Pinker ( Ed . ) , Bradford Book , MIT Press , 195 - 243 ( 1985 ) . 12 . S . M . Kosslyn , Image and Mind . Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA ( 1980 ) . 13 . J . R . Anderson , TheArchitect , tre of Cognition , Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA ( 1983 ) . 14 . R . N . Shepard , The mental image . American Psychologist . 125 - 137 ( February 1978 ) . 15 . W . G . Chase and H . A . Simon , The mind ' s eye in chess . In Visual Information Processing , W . Chase ( Ed . ) , Pro - ceedings ofthe 8th Annual Carnegie Symposium on Cog - nition , Pittsburgh , 215 - 281 ( 1972 ) . 16 . O . Akin , Psychology of Architectural Design , Pion Ltd . , London ( 1986 ) . 17 . S . K . Card . T . P . Moran , and A . NewelL The Psychology of Human - Computer Interaction , Lawrence Erlhaum As - roe . , Hillsdale , NJ ( 1983 ) . 18 . M . B . Waldron and K . J . Waldron , Conceptual CAD tools for mechanical designers . Proceedings of Computers in Engineering Conference , Vol . I1 , V . A . Tipnis and E . M . Patton ( Eds . ) , San Francisco , 203 - 209 ( 1988 ) . 19 . K . A . Ericsson and H . A . Simon , ProtocolAnalvsis : Verbal Reports as Data , MIT Press , Cambridge , MA ( 1984 ) . 20 . L . A . Stauffer , An Empirical St , My on the Process of Me - chanical Design . Oregon State University Thesis , Cor - vallis , OR ( September 1987 ) . 21 . J . Tikerpuu and D . G . Ullman . Data representations for mechanical design based on empirical data . Proceedings of the 1988 International Computers in Engineering Con - ference . V . A . Tipnis and E . M . Patton ( Eds . ) , San Fran - cisco , 245 - 254 ( August 1988 ) . 22 . B . D . McGinnis and D . G . UIIman , The Evohaion of Commitments in the Design of a Component . Submitted to the 1989 Harrogate ICED Conference ( November 1988 ) . 23 . U . Warrier , A SOAR - based Computational Model of Me - chanicalDesign . Master ' s Thesis , Oregon State University . Corvallis , OR ( 1988 ) . 24 . P . Jolicoeur and S . M . Kosslyn , Coordinate Systems in the Long - Term Memory Representation of Three - Di - mensional Sha ~ s . Cognitive Psychology 15 , 301 - 345 ( 1983 ) . 25 . R . E . Mayer , Thinking , Problem Solving . Cognition . W . H . Freeman and Company , New York ( 1983 ) .