Novel Mode of Cooperative Binding between Myosin and Mg 2 + - actin Filaments in the Presence of Low Concentrations of ATP Kiyotaka Tokuraku 1 , 2 ⁎ , Rika Kurogi 1 , Ryo Toya 1 and Taro Q . P . Uyeda 2 1 Department of Chemical Science and Engineering , Miyakonojo National College of Technology , 473 - 1 Yoshio - cho , Miyakonojo - shi , Miyazaki 885 - 8567 , Japan 2 National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology , Tsukuba Central 4 , 1 - 1 - 1 Higashi , Tsukuba - shi , Ibaraki 305 - 8562 , Japan Received 17 June 2008 ; received in revised form 18 November 2008 ; accepted 3 December 2008 Available online 11 December 2008 Cooperative interaction between myosin and actin filaments has been detected by a number of different methods , and has been suggested to have some role in force generation by the actomyosin motor . In this study , we observed the binding of myosin to actin filaments directly using fluores - cence microscopy to analyze the mechanism of the cooperative interaction in more detail . For this purpose , we prepared fluorescently labeled heavy meromyosin ( HMM ) of rabbit skeletal muscle myosin and Dictyostelium myosin II . Both types of HMMs formed fluorescent clusters along actin filaments when added at substoichiometric amounts . Quantitative analysis of the fluorescence intensity of the HMM clusters revealed that there are two distinct types of cooperative binding . The stronger form was observed along Ca 2 + - actin filaments with substoichiometric amounts of bound phalloidin , in which the density of HMM molecules in the clusters was comparable to full decoration . The novel , weaker form was observed along Mg 2 + - actin filaments with and without stoichiometric amounts of phalloi - din . HMM density in the clusters of the weaker form was several - fold lower than full decoration . The weak cooperative binding required sub - micro - molar ATP , and did not occur in the absence of nucleotides or in the presence of ADP and ADP - Vi . The G680V mutant of Dictyostelium HMM , which over - occupies the ADP - Pi bound state in the presence of actin filaments and ATP , also formed clusters along Mg 2 + - actin filaments , suggesting that the weak cooperative binding of HMM to actin filaments occurs or initiates at an intermediate state of the actomyosin - ADP - Pi complex other than that attained by adding ADP - Vi . © 2008 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . Edited by M . Moody Keywords : actin ; myosin ; heavy meromyosin ; cooperative binding ; ATP Introduction Interaction of an actin filament with myosin in the presence of ATP results in activation of myosin ATPase and sliding of myosin along the actin - filament . A majority of recent studies to elucidate the mechanism of force generation have focused on conformational changes of the motor domain of myosin that are induced by binding and hydro - lysis of ATP and also by interaction with actin filaments . 1 However , there have been a large number of reports of cooperative changes within actin filaments induced by the binding of myosin . 2 , 3 For example , Oosawa et al . reported that near - maximal change of fluorescence intensity of a probe attached to actin occurs when only one heavy meromyosin ( HMM ) molecule was added * Corresponding author . E - mail address : tokuraku @ miyakonojo - nct . ac . jp . Abbreviations used : HMM , heavy meromyosin ; S1 , myosin subfragment 1 ; CA ( RP1 / 20 ) , Ca 2 + - actin bound with rhodamine phalloidin at a molar ratio of 1 : 20 ; CA ( RP1 / 1 ) , Ca 2 + - actin bound with rhodamine phalloidin at a molar ratio of 1 : 1 ; MA ( RP1 / 20 ) , Mg 2 + - actin bound with rhodamine phalloidin at a molar ratio of 1 : 20 ; MA ( RP1 / 1 ) , Mg 2 + - actin bound with rhodamine phalloidin at a molar ratio of 1 : 1 ; GFP , green - fluorescent protein ; YFP , yellow - fluorescent protein ; RHMM ( wt ) - F , rabbit skeletal muscle HMM with fluorescein ; DHMM ( wt ) - GFP , Dictyostelium wild type myosin II fused with GFP ; DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP , Dictyostelium G680V mutant myosin II fused with YFP ; Pi , phosphate ion . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jmb . 2008 . 12 . 008 J . Mol . Biol . ( 2009 ) 386 , 149 – 162 Available online at www . sciencedirect . com 0022 - 2836 / $ - see front matter © 2008 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . per ten actin subunits . 4 Tawada , 5 Fujime and Ishiwata , 6 Loscalzo et al . , 7 and Thomas et al . 8 observed a biphasic behavior of actin filaments as a function of myosin concentration changing at about one myosin molecule per six to ten actin subunits . Miki et al . also reported that the maximal fluorescence change in actin filaments occurred when only one HMM molecule was bound per 50 actin subunits or when one subfragment 1 ( S1 ) molecule was bound per 25 actin subunits . 9 These results indicate that binding of the myosin motor to the actin subunit evokes conformational changes of neighboring actin subunits in the same filament and , furthermore , suggest the possibility that cooperative conformational changes of actin fila - ments has some role in force generation with myosin . Several electron microscopic studies have visua - lized seemingly cooperative binding or unbinding of myosin motor to actin filaments . 10 – 13 Orlova and Egelman found that the binding of HMM to Ca 2 + - actin filaments was highly cooperative , in a sense that bound HMM molecules added at substoichio - metric amounts formed clusters along otherwise bare Ca 2 + - actin filaments . 14 In contrast , no coopera - tivity was observed with Mg 2 + - actin filaments . The cooperative binding of HMM to Ca 2 + - actin fila - ments was also abolished by a high concentration of bound phalloidin . They concluded that the binding of HMM induces structural changes in Ca 2 + - actin filaments , so that neighboring Ca 2 + - actin subunits gain higher affinity for HMM , resulting in clustering of HMM along Ca 2 + - actin filaments . 14 Similar cooperative binding between microtubule and kinesin ( or ncd ) has been reported , suggesting that the cooperative binding between motor proteins and corresponding filament tracks is a universal phenomenon . 15 , 16 Recently , the interaction of kinesin - coated latex beads with a single microtubule was observed directly by fluorescence microscopy . 17 The results showed that binding of a kinesin bead to the microtubule facilitated the subsequent binding of other kinesin beads to an adjacent region on the microtubule in the presence of ATP . This cooperative binding was not observed in the presence of ADP or 5 ′ - adenylylimidodiphosphate ( AMP - PNP ) , suggesting that the ATPase cycle is correlated to the cooperative binding . A correlation between the cooperative binding and the ATPase cycle has been suggested in the actin - myosin system . Siddique et al . detected a cooperative structural change of pyrene - labeled actin filaments that were copolymerized with acto - S1 chimera protein in the presence of ATP . 18 Kozuka et al . observed the dynamics of single actin subunits in actin filaments using single - molecule fluorescence resonance energy transfer , and found ATP - dependent dynamic poly - morphism of single actin molecules in actin filaments interacting with myosin - V or myosin - II . 19 It thus seems reasonable to hypothesize that the cooperative interaction between motor proteins and filament proteins depends on the ATPase cycle of the motor proteins . Fig . 1 . A schematic presentation of the myosin frag - ments ( a , c and d ) and expression plasmids ( b ) used in this study . a , RHMM ( wt ) - F was prepared from rabbit skeletal muscle HMM as described . 20 b , Expression plasmids of DHMM ( wt ) - GFP ( or DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP ) . ( c ) DHMM ( wt ) - GFP consists of two heavy chains of Dictyostelium myosin II ( residues 1 – 1096 ) fused with GFP , two essential light chain ( ELC ) , and two regulatory light chains ( RLC ) . ( d ) DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP consists of two G680V mutant of the heavy chain ( residue 1 – 1096 ) fused with YFP , two ELC , and two RLC . 150 Cooperative Binding of Myosin to F - actin In this study , we focused our analysis on conditions of actin filaments and the ATPase cycle of the myosin motor that favor cooperative bind - ing . For that purpose , we used fluorescence microscopy to observe directly the process of cooperative binding , using fluorescent analogs of HMM . The results revealed the presence of two distinct types of cooperative binding between HMM and actin filaments , a stronger form and a novel , weaker form . In addition , we suggest that the cooperative binding occurs in the actin - myosin - ADP - Pi state . Results Protein preparations To observe cooperative binding of the myosin to actin filaments by fluorescence microscopy , we labeled proteolytically prepared rabbit skeletal muscle HMM with fluorescein ( F ) near the C - terminus ( RHMM ( wt ) - F ) as described ( Fig . 1a ) . 20 Fig . 2a and b show time series of the fluorescent labeling reaction . The fluorescence intensity of Fig . 2 . Fluorescent labeling of rabbit skeletal muscle HMM and cooperative binding of the labeled - HMM to CA ( RP1 / 20 ) or MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments . ( a ) Rabbit skeletal muscle HMM was incubated with fluorescein - cadaverine and transglutaminase at 25 °C for 1 , 2 , 3 , and 5 h . The labeled HMM ( RHMM ( wt ) - F ) was electrophoresed in a 10 % polyacrylamide gel , and the gel was observed with a UV lamp ( top ) . The gel was then stained with Coomassie brilliant blue R - 250 ( bottom ) . The numbers at the top of the panel show incubation times . T , M , and HMM represent the electrophoretic positions of the top of separating gel , myosin that was not digested by chymotrypsin , and HMM , respectively . ( b ) Fluorescence intensities of the HMM bands shown in ( a ) . ( c and d ) 2 nM RHMM ( wt ) - F and 40 nM CA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments ( c ) or MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments ( d ) were incubated in Ca 2 + or Mg 2 + buffer containing approximately 0 . 1 μ M ATP at 25 °C for 5 min . They were then observed using fluorescence microscopy . Left and right micrographs of each pair show the fluorescence of rhodamine , showing F - actin , and that of fluorescein , showing rabbit HMM , in the same field , respectively . The two rhodamine and fluorescein fluorescence images were recorded under the same conditions . The bottom micrograph is a brightened version of fluorescein micrograph of d . The arrows in the micrograph indicate the RHMM ( wt ) - F cluster on an actin filament . The scale bar represents 10 μ m . 151 Cooperative Binding of Myosin to F - actin HMM increased with labeling time , and the reaction began to slow around the fifth hour ( Fig . 2b ) . In this study , we used RHMM ( wt ) - F labeled for 5 h . We also prepared wild type HMM and G680V mutant HMM of Dictyostelium myosin II , each fused with green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) and yellow fluor - escent protein ( YFP ) at the C - terminus , DHMM ( wt ) - GFP and DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP , respectively ( Fig . 1c and d ) . The recombinant proteins , coded on expres - sion shuttle vectors ( Fig . 1b ) , were expressed in Dictyostelium , and purified as described in Materials and Methods . Effects of Ca 2 + , Mg 2 + , and phalloidin on cooperative binding Orlova and Egelman reported that cooperative binding was observed by electron microscopy when skeletal HMM molecules were added at substoichio - metric amounts to Ca 2 + - actin filaments with no or a low concentration ( a stoichiometry of 1 : 20 with respect to actin subunits ) of phalloidin bound . 14 In contrast , no cooperative binding was observed with Mg 2 + - actin filaments , irrespective of the concentra - tion of phalloidin . In this study , we first re - examined the binding of RHMM ( wt ) - F to Ca 2 + - actin or Mg 2 + - actin filaments , which were bound with rhodamine phalloidin at a molar ratio of 1 : 20 ( CA ( RP1 / 20 ) or MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments ) , by fluorescence microscopy ( Fig . 2c and d ) . This series of experiments was performed in a buffer that resembled what is often used in in vitro motility assays : Ca 2 + buffer , 25 mM imidazole – HCl , 50 mM KCl , 1 mM DTT , 4 mM CaCl 2 , pH 7 . 4 ; andMg 2 + buffer , 25 mM imidazole – HCl , 50 mM KCl , 1 mM DTT , 4 mM MgCl 2 , pH 7 . 4 . Orlova and Egelman observed cooperative binding in the presence of sub - micromolar concentrations of ATP , which was carried over from the actin polymerizing solution . 14 We also observed coopera - tive binding in the presence of approximately 0 . 1 μ M ATP that was carried over from the polymerizing solution in which polymerization had been induced by the addition of Ca 2 + or Mg 2 + buffer . Fig . 2c shows 40 nM CA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments that had been incu - bated with 2 nM RHMM ( wt ) - F in Ca 2 + buffer containing approximately 0 . 1 μ M ATP . Fluorescence of rhodamine visualized actin filaments ( left - hand panel ) , and that of fluorescein showed localization of HMM ( right - hand panel ) . The set of micrographs revealed that bound RHMM ( wt ) - F formed clusters along CA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments . Although RHMM ( wt ) - F formed clusters along MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments as well , the fluorescence intensity of the clusters was significantly lower than that on CA ( RP1 / 20 ) fila - ments ( Fig . 2d ) . This suggests that RHMM ( wt ) - F molecules were clustered more sparsely on MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments than on CA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments , demonstrating that RHMM ( wt ) - F binds coopera - tively to both CA ( RP1 / 20 ) and MA ( RP1 / 20 ) fila - ments , although the manner of cooperative binding between the two types of filaments is different . Next , we tried to quantify the degree of coopera - tive binding . We considered that RHMM ( wt ) - F is unsuitable for quantitative analysis because it is difficult to label all RHMM ( wt ) molecules by the enzymatic reaction . In fact , the fluorescence inten - sity of RHMM ( wt ) - F had not saturated under our labeling conditions ( Fig . 2b , approximately 5 h ) , indicating that not all RHMM ( wt ) molecules were labeled with fluorescein . Moreover , our RHMM ( wt ) - F sample contained residual intact myosin ( Fig . 2a ) . Therefore , we used recombinant Dictyostelium HMM fused with GFP ( DHMM ( wt ) - GFP ) to quan - tify the cooperative binding because all recombi - nant HMM molecules were labeled by GFP molecules . Moreover , the use of recombinant HMM would allow us to analyze the behavior of mutant HMMs . The results of fluorescence microscopic observation revealed that DHMM ( wt ) - GFP also cooperatively bound to actin filaments in a manner similar to RHMM ( wt ) - F ( Fig . 3a , top pairs ) ; namely , DHMM ( wt ) - GFP formed clusters along CA ( RP1 / 20 ) and MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments , and the fluorescence intensity of the clusters on MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments was signifi - cantly lower than that on CA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments . The fluorescence intensity of clustered DHMM ( wt ) - GFP on CA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments ( Fig . 3a , top left ) and that of fully decorated - CA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments ( Fig . 3b ) , in which the DHMM ( wt ) - GFP molecules were present at a 1 : 1 molar ratio with respect to CA ( RP1 / 20 ) subunits , seemed comparable . Quantitative analysis ( Fig . 4 ) showed that fluorescence intensities of fully decorated - CA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments ( Fig . 3b ) and coop - eratively decorated - CA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments ( Fig . 3a , top left ) by DHMM ( wt ) - GFP were similar , indicating the density of DHMM ( wt ) - GFP in clusters on the CA ( RP1 / 20 ) filament was similar to full decoration . We confirmed also that the cooperative binding under the same condition was close to full decoration by electron microscopic observation ( data not shown ) , as reported by Orlova and Egelman . 14 On the other hand , the fluorescence intensity of GFP on MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments that were decorated cooperatively by DHMM ( wt ) - GFP was 14 . 2±5 . 3 % of fully decorated - CA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments ( Fig . 4b ) . This value shows that one DHMM ( wt ) - GFP molecule was bound per 5 ∼ 10 actin subunits under these conditions . Orlova and Egelman further reported that the cooperative binding of skeletal HMM to Ca 2 + - actin filaments was abolished by a high concentration of bound phalloidin . 14 Therefore , we also examined the effects of a high concentration of phalloidin on the cooperative binding of HMM by fluorescence micro - scopy . Contrary to the report by Orlova and Egelman , 14 we were able to observe cooperative binding in the presence of excess phalloidin ( Fig . 3a , bottom pairs ) . However , the fluorescence intensities of DHMM ( wt ) - GFP clusters on CA ( RP1 / 1 ) and MA ( RP1 / 1 ) filaments were low ( 18 . 0±7 . 3 % and 14 . 1± 6 . 8 % , respectively ) and similar to that of clusters on MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments ( Fig . 4b ) . These results demonstrated that the cooperative binding to CA ( RP1 / 1 ) , MA ( RP1 / 20 ) , and MA ( RP1 / 1 ) filaments was of a weak form , in which one HMM molecule was bound per 5 ∼ 10 actin subunits . The distribution 152 Cooperative Binding of Myosin to F - actin of fluorescence intensities at clusters apparently had a single peak in all cases , and the peak fluorescence intensities on CA ( RP1 / 1 ) , MA ( RP1 / 20 ) , and MA ( RP1 / 1 ) filaments were significantly weaker than on CA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments ( Fig . 4c ) . These results sug - gest that the stronger form of cooperative binding does not coexist with the weaker form . We observed cooperative binding between HMMs and actin filaments under all conditions , irrespective of whether Ca 2 + or Mg 2 + was bound , or of fully bound phalloidin . Physiological actin molecules are expected to carry Mg 2 + at the high - affinity metal binding site . 21 Therefore , we examined the weaker form of cooperativity in more detail using MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments . Myosin ATPase cycle and cooperative binding As mentioned above , Orlova and Egelman observed cooperative binding in the presence of a low concentration of ATP that was carried over from the actin polymerizing solution . 14 Therefore , to examine the importance of ATP in cooperative binding , we tried to eliminate ATP from the sample solution . In a preliminary experiment , we removed ATP from the actin solution by anion - exchange chromatography ( Dowex resin ) . Under this condi - tion , all MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments were decorated weakly along the entire length by DHMM ( wt ) - GFP , and cooperative binding was not observed . However , the filaments prepared in this way were Fig . 3 . Effects of Ca 2 + , Mg 2 + , and phalloidin on cooperative binding of DHMM ( wt ) - GFP to F - actin . Left and right micrographs of each pair are fluorescence images of rhodamine and GFP , respectively . ( a ) 1 . 5 nM DHMM ( wt ) - GFP and 34 nM Ca 2 + - actin filaments ( left pairs ) or Mg 2 + - actin filaments ( right pairs ) were incubated in a Ca 2 + or Mg 2 + buffer containing about 0 . 1 μ M ATP , and were observed by fluorescence microscopy . Top pairs , rhodamine phalloidin : actin molar ratio of 1 : 20 ( RP1 / 20 ) . Bottom pairs , rhodamine phalloidin : actin molar ratio of 1 : 1 ( RP1 / 1 ) . The arrows in the right - hand micrographs indicate clusters of DHMM ( wt ) - GFP along actin filaments ; ( b ) 50 nM DHMM ( wt ) - GFP and 50 nM CA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments were incubated in a Ca 2 + buffer containing about 0 . 1 μ M ATP at 25 °C for 5 min , and were observed by fluorescence microscopy . Thick bundles of actin filaments , which were induced by a high concentration of HMM , were observed in almost all fields . To compare the fluorescence intensity of GFP on single actin filaments , fields containing relatively larger numbers of single actin filaments are shown . The triangles in both panels indicate bundles of actin filaments , which were excluded from the quantitative analysis . The scale bar represents 10 μ m . 153 Cooperative Binding of Myosin to F - actin considerably shorter than those polymerized in the presence of trace amounts of ATP , and the filaments were gradually fragmented during observation by fluorescence microscopy . Therefore , in this study , we prepared nucleotide - free MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments by dialysis of a standard solution of MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments against ATP - free Mg 2 + buffer . The MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments prepared in this way appeared similar to standard actin filaments ; furthermore , those filaments were able to endure fluorescence microscopic observation . When DHMM ( wt ) - GFP was present at a low ratio ( 1 : 20 ) with respect to MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filament in the absence of ATP ( Fig . 5a , top ) , cooperative binding was not observed . Addi - tion of 0 . 1 μ M ATP induced cooperative binding of DHMM ( wt ) - GFP to MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments ( Fig . 5b , middle ) , so that a small number of filaments in a field were labeled weakly with DHMM ( wt ) - GFP , while other filaments had no detectable binding ( Fig . 5b ) . Although cooperative binding was observed in the presence of 0 . 5 μ M ATP , the fre - quency of the clusters of bound HMM was some - what lower than in the presence of 0 . 1 μ M ATP ( Fig . 5a , bottom ) . When there was 10 μ M ATP in the sample , fluorescence of DHMM ( wt ) - GFP was not observed on MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments within the current observation period ( data not shown ) . These results demonstrate that the cooperative binding between HMM and actin filaments requires submicromolar concentrations of ATP . There are several reports of cooperative binding of HMM to thin filaments ( containing tropomyosin Fig . 4 . Quantification of fluorescence intensity of DHMM ( wt ) - GFP on single actin filaments from Fig . 3 . ( a ) Fluorescence intensities were quantified by measuring the peak areas of fluorescence intensities above the background level across the actin filaments . ( b ) Average fluorescence intensities ( n = 30 ) of actin filaments under five different conditions are shown as the percentage of fully decorated actin filaments . Error bars denote SDs . ( c ) Distributions of the fluorescence intensities . 154 Cooperative Binding of Myosin to F - actin and the troponin complex ) . 11 , 22 Although tropo - myosin and the troponin complex had been removed from our actin preparations by a high - salt wash and gel - filtration chromatography ( Sup - plementary Data 1 ) , it was possible that small amounts of those proteins contaminated our actin filament solution , so that cooperative binding may have been induced as HMM preferentially bound to sections of actin filaments carrying tropomyosin and the troponin complex . In this scenario , a proportion of filaments with HMM clusters and bare filaments would not change as the concentration of HMM was varied . Thus , cooperative binding between various concentrations of DHMM ( wt ) - GFP and 40 nM MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments was examined in the presence or absence of ATP ( Fig . 6 ) . When 0 . 5 μ M ATP was present in the solution , the number of filaments with HMM clusters decreased with decreasing concen - tration of HMM ( Fig . 6a ) . In contrast , in the absence of ATP , a decreasing concentration of HMM resulted in only a decrease in fluorescence intensity while all the filaments remained labeled along the entire length ( Fig . 6b ) . These results , summarized quanti - tatively in Fig . 6c , suggested that the cooperative binding was unrelated to contamination of tropo - myosin and the troponin complex . That is to say , HMM can bind cooperatively to pure actin filaments in the presence of ATP . The fluorescence intensity of GFP when 20 nM DHMM ( wt ) - GFP was mixed with 40 nM MA ( RP1 / 20 ) was 33 . 6±7 . 9 % of fully decorated - MA ( RP1 / 20 ) in the absence of ATP ( Fig . 6a , top ) . The value indicates that one DHMM ( wt ) - GFP molecule was bound per approximately three actin subunits , which is denser than that observed in the presence of 1 . 5 nM DHMM ( wt ) - GFP and 34 nM MA ( RP1 / 20 ) ( Fig . 4b ) . Under these conditions , the majority of filaments ( N 85 % ) were decorated with DHMM ( wt ) - GFP ( Fig . 6b ) . This suggests that the binding ratio between HMM molecules and actin subunits in the weak cooperative binding is variable , depending on the mixing ratio . Although the fluorescence intensity increased with further increase of the DHMM ( wt ) - GFP concentration in the presence of 0 . 5 μ M ATP , the quantification was difficult due to bundling of filaments ( data not shown ) . It is known that there are at least three chemically distinct states of strongly bound actin - myosin complex within the myosin ATPase cycle ; namely , the transient , pre - stroke complex that presumably carries ADP and Pi ( A - M - ADP - Pi ) , actin - myosin - ADP ( A - M - ADP ) , and the actin - myosin ( A - M ) rigor complex . We have already demonstrated that cooperative binding is not observed in the nucleo - tide - free A - M state ( Figs . 5 and 6 ) . Therefore , we examined cooperative binding in the A - M - ADP state . When 1 , 10 , and 1000 μ M ADP were present in the sample solution , cooperative binding was not observed at all ( Fig . 7 ) , suggesting that cooperative binding does not occur in the A - M - ADP state . Next , we tried to examine cooperative binding in the A - M - ADP - Pi state . Previously , we found that the G680V mutant of Dictyostelium myosin is stabilized in the A - M - ADP - Pi state in the presence of actin filaments and ATP . 23 Therefore , we examined coop - erative binding between MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments and G680V mutant HMM of Dictyostelium myosin II fused with yellow fluorescent proteins ( YFP ) at the C - terminus ( DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP ) . In the absence of ATP , DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP formed clusters along MA Fig . 5 . Effect of ATP concentration on cooperative binding of DHMM ( wt ) - GFP to MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments . ( a ) The 2 nM DHMM ( wt ) - GFP and 40 nM MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments were incubated in Mg 2 + buffer containing 0 μ M ( top ) , 0 . 1 μ M ( middle ) , or 0 . 5 μ M ( bottom ) ATP , and were observed by fluorescence microscopy . Left and right micrographs are fluorescence images of rhodamine and GFP , respectively . The arrows in the left - hand micro - graphs indicate actin filaments that had no detectable binding of DHMM ( wt ) - GFP . The scale bar represents 10 μ m . ( b ) A schematic illustration of cooperative binding of DHMM ( wt ) - GFP to MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments . DHMM ( wt ) - GFP molecules were clustered loosely along actin filaments . 155 Cooperative Binding of Myosin to F - actin ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments , which was cooperative binding ( Fig . 8a , top ) . The release of Pi and ADP from the G680V mutant was slower than in the wild type , 23 and kinetic analysis of a related mutant ( G680A ) myosin indicated that this mutant has a very high affinity for ADP . 24 We thus speculated that the coope - rative binding was due to ADP and Pi that remained at the active site of the myosin head after the protein was purified . Therefore , we tried to remove ADP and Pi by an apyrase treatment , and asked if shifting the Fig . 6 . Quantification of cooperative binding of DHMM ( wt ) - GFP to MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments . Various concentrations of DHMM ( wt ) - GFP were mixed with 40 nM MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments in the presence of 0 . 5 μ M ATP ( a ) or in the absence of ATP ( b ) and were observed by fluorescence microscopy . Left and right micrographs are fluorescence images of rhodamine and GFP , respectively . The final concentrations of DHMM ( wt ) - GFP are shown on the left of each micrograph . Triangles in left - hand panels indicate bundles of actin filaments . The scale bar represents 10 μ m . ( c ) Average percentage ( randomly selected six fields of 1250 μ m 2 ) of MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments with bound DHMM ( wt ) - GFP , as counted from fluorescence micrographs of rhodamine . Bundles were excluded from the quantitative analysis . 156 Cooperative Binding of Myosin to F - actin equilibrium to the nucleotide - free , A - M state abolishes the cooperative binding . As expected , the cooperative binding , which would form HMM clusters , was abolished by the apyrase treatment of DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP for 4 h ( Fig . 8a , middle ) . In addition , DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP formed clusters on MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments in the presence of 0 . 5 μ M ATP ( Fig . 8a , bottom ) . These data suggested that the cooperative binding of DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP to MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments ( Fig . 8b ) occurred in the A - M - ADP - Pi state . However , it was conceivable that the clusters were aggregates of DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP that formed only when there was ATP in the sample solution . To test this possibility , we measured fluo - rescence intensity and length distributions of DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP clusters along MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments ( Fig . 9 ) . If the clusters were aggregates , the fluores - cence intensity may be the same or higher than that of fully decorated filaments . However , the fluorescence intensity of the clusters on MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments was lower than that of fully decorated - MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments ( Fig . 9b ) , in which the DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP molecules were present at a 1 : 1 molar ratio with respect to MA ( RP1 / 20 ) subunits ( 40 nM DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP ) . The peak fluorescence intensities of the clusters were less than 20 % of fully decorated - MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments when DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP con - centrations were 6 . 7 nM or less , suggesting the cooperative binding of DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP to MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments was a weaker form under these conditions . In the weaker form , where one HMM molecule was bound per 6 ∼ 7 actin subunits , the HMM molecule on the actin filaments were separated from neighboring HMM molecules . Therefore , this result suggested that the DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP clus - ters on MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments were not aggregates of Fig . 8 . Cooperative binding of DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP to MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments . ( a ) The 2 nM untreated ( top ) or apyrase treated - DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP ( middle ) and 40 nM MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments were incubated in Mg 2 + buffer in the absence of ATP , and were observed by fluorescence microscopy . The 2 nM untreated - DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP and 40 nM MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments were incubated in the presence of 0 . 5 μ M ATP , and were observed ( bottom ) . Left and right panels are fluorescence images of rhodamine and YFP , respectively . Fluorescence of YFP shows localization of DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP . The scale bar represents 10 μ m . ( b ) An illustration of cooperative binding of DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP to MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments . DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP mole - cules form short , loose clusters along actin filaments . Fig . 7 . Effect of ADP on binding of DHMM ( wt ) - GFP to MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments . The 2 . 5 nM DHMM ( wt ) - GFP and 40 nM MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments were incubated in Mg 2 + buffer containing 1 μ M ( top ) , 10 μ M ( middle ) , and 1000 μ M ( bottom ) ADP , and were observed using fluorescence microscopy . Left and right panels are fluorescence images of rhodamine and GFP , respectively . The scale bar represents 10 μ m . 157 Cooperative Binding of Myosin to F - actin DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP molecules . Moreover , if the clusters were aggregates , an increase of DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP concentration may result in an increase in the number of clusters but not in their length . Although an accurate count of the number of clusters was difficult , because they tended to fuse with each other with increasing concentration of DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP , it did not appear as if the number of clusters increased as the concentration increased ( Fig . 9a ) . Rather , the length of clusters along MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments increased accompanying the increase in DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP concentration ( Fig . 9c ) . These results do not suggest that the DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP clusters were aggregates of DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP molecules . However , there remains the possibility that the clusters were formed by fusion of very small aggregates that were too small to detect by the reso - lution ( ∼ 200 nm ) of our microscopy system . We found that clusters of DHMM ( wt ) - GFP and DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP along MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments appar - ently differed . That is , the range of DHMM ( wt ) - GFP clusters along actin filaments was longer than that of DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP . A hypothesis for the formation of longer and shorter clusters is proposed in the Discussion . Myosin - ADP - Pi state is mimicked by the phosphate analog , vanadate ( Vi ) . 25 Thus , we examined whether DHMM - ADP - Vi binds to MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments cooperatively ( Fig . 10 ) . When 2 nM DHMM ( wt ) - GFP that was incubated with 0 . 5 μ M ADP - Vi complex was Fig . 9 . Fluorescence intensity and length distributions of DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP clusters along MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments . ( a ) Various concentrations of untreated - DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP , in which ADP and Pi remained at the active site of the motor domain , and 40 nM MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments were incubated in the absence of ATP , and were observed by fluorescence microscopy . The final concentrations of DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP are shown on the left . The scale bar represents 10 μ m . ( b ) Fluorescence intensity distributions of DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP clusters on MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filament . ( c ) Length distributions of actin filaments ( F - actin ) and DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP clusters on MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments . Length distribution of actin filaments was measured from a fluorescence micrograph of rhodamine in the presence of 6 . 7 nM DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP . Fluorescence intensity and length distribution of DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP clusters ( n = 150 ) along F - actin were measured from fluorescence micrographs of YFP in the presence of various concentrations of DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP . 158 Cooperative Binding of Myosin to F - actin mixed with 40 nM MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments , coopera - tive binding was not observed . Although an increase of the concentration of ADP - Vi resulted in a decrease of the fluorescence intensity of GFP , cooperative binding was not observed . These results show that myosin - ADP - Pi that is mimicked by the addition of ADP - Vi does not bind to actin filaments cooperatively . Discussion In this study , we successfully observed coopera - tive binding between rabbit skeletal ( Fig . 2 ) or Dictyostelium ( Figs . 3 – 6 ) HMM and actin filaments using fluorescence microscopy . In addition , we have demonstrated that there are two clearly distinct modes of cooperative binding between HMM and actin filaments . The strong form of cooperative binding was observed only between HMM and Ca 2 + - actin filaments with low stoichio - metric amounts of bound phalloidin . In contrast to this , the weaker form of cooperative binding was observed under all other conditions tested , includ - ing Mg 2 + - actin filaments in the presence of excess phalloidin . Orlova and Egelman reported that cooperative binding was observed only between HMM and Ca 2 + - actin filaments without or with low stoichiometric amounts of bound phalloidin . 14 We speculate that this was due to the difficulty of dis - tinguishing weakly cooperative binding from no binding or sparse , random binding by electron microscopic observation . Unlike electron micro - scopy , fluorescence microscopy has an advantage that larger fields can be observed easily in a semi - quantitative manner . The density of HMM molecules in the clusters on Ca 2 + - actin filaments was close to full decoration ( Fig . 4 ; and see Ref . 14 ) and , therefore , the HMM molecules are in direct contact with neighboring HMM molecules along each protofilament of actin filaments . This type of clustering could be driven either by an affinity between HMM molecules , or by a conformational change of actin subunits that was induced by binding of HMM molecules and that results in enhanced affinity of adjacent actin subunits to other HMM molecules . Currently avail - able experimental data are unable to rule out one or the other of these two distinct mechanisms . In the case of the weaker form of cooperative binding , however , HMM molecules are on average separated by several unbound actin subunits and , therefore , this weaker form of cooperative binding cannot be due to direct affinity among HMM molecules . In skeletal muscle , actin filaments are bound with tropomyosin and the troponin complex , forming the so - called thin filaments . It is well established that binding of myosin motors to thin filaments , and the resultant activation of myosin ATPase and force generation , are regulated cooperatively by calcium ions . 1 In contrast , our actin is purified by gel - filtration chromatography , and is virtually free of tropomyosin and the troponin complex ( Supple - mentary Data 1 ) . Moreover , we obtained indirect functional evidence to suggest that tropomyosin and the troponin complex or any other minor contami - nants in our actin preparation did not contribute to the cooperative binding of HMM ( Fig . 6 ) . Thus , the weaker form of cooperative binding between myo - sin motors and actin filaments that we discovered here is a novel mode of cooperativity that is intrinsic to pure actin filaments , involving cooperative modulation of an affinity of actin subunits to myosin motor domains . HMM is able to move Mg 2 + - and Ca 2 + - actin fila - ments bound with high stoichiometric amounts of phalloidin . 26 Therefore , the strong cooperative binding with HMM or some property of actin fila - ments that causes strong cooperative binding with HMM is not essential for force generation by the actomyosin motor . However , we examined the effects of phalloidin on actin - HMM sliding velo - cities , 26 and found that high stoichiometric con - centrations of phalloidin reduced sliding velocities of Ca 2 + - actin filaments by 40 % . Sliding velocity of Mg 2 + - actin filaments was only slightly decreased with an increase in phalloidin concentration . There - fore , the strong cooperative binding with HMM or some property of actin filaments that causes the strong cooperative binding with HMM may have a modulating role to enhance the motility . In this study , we found that the weak cooperative binding with HMM correlates with the myosin ATPase cycle ( Scheme 1 ) . M - ATP states may be excluded from a candidate state that participates in the cooperative binding with actin filaments because these states do not posses a high affinity for actin filaments . 1 Our study revealed that cooperative binding of HMM does not occur in the A - M and Fig . 10 . Binding of DHMM ( wt ) - GFP containing ADP - Vi to MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments . The 2 nM DHMM ( wt ) - GFP , which was preincubated with ADP - Vi complex , and 40 nM MA ( RP1 / 20 ) filaments were incubated in Mg 2 + buffer and observed by fluorescence microscopy . Top , 0 . 5 μ M and bottom , 5 μ M are the final concentrations of ADP - Vi complex . Left and right panels are fluorescence images of rhodamine and GFP , respectively . The scale bar represents 10 μ m . 159 Cooperative Binding of Myosin to F - actin A - M - ADP states ( Figs . 5 – 7 ) . Besides , we found that the G680V mutant of Dictyostelium myosin , which is stabilized in the A - M - ADP - Pi state in the presence of ATP and actin , cooperatively bound to actin fila - ments ( Figs . 8 and 9 ) . However , cooperative binding was not observed using M - ADP - Vi ( Fig . 10 ) . These results suggest that the cooperative binding occurs at an intermediate state in the A - M - ADP - Pi state other than that attained by adding ADP - Vi . That the weak cooperative binding was not observed in the pre - sence of higher concentrations of ATP is presumably because bound HMM heads dissociate rapidly under those conditions , so that the growth of HMM clusters is hindered . Previous binding studies failed to detect the weak cooperative binding , but we speculate that this is because in those studies affinities were measured in the presence of excess ATP , or in the absence of ATP when myosin heads do not cycle through the A - M - ADP - Pi state . This is presumably why submicromolar ATP was appropriate to induce cooperative binding to form clusters . We observed two apparently different types of the weak form of cooperative binding between Dictyos - telium HMM and actin filaments . One is character - ized by shorter clusters or dots that were observed with DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP , and the other by longer clusters that were observed with DHMM ( wt ) - GFP . The longer clusters often extended along the entire length of the filaments , while the shorter clusters were scattered along the filaments . We propose the following model to explain how two apparently different types of clusters form . Binding of an HMM molecule to an actin subunit evokes conformational changes of several neighboring actin subunits . Since the affected actin subunits have a higher affinity for HMM , the motor domain of the next HMM molecule binds preferentially to one of those affected subunits , so that bound HMMs form loose clusters along the actin filament . The wild type HMM has a much higher ATPase activity than the G680V mutant . 23 Therefore , wild type HMM molecules redistribute themselves rapidly to a longer range along actin filaments while repeating association and dissocia - tion with the filament accompanying the ATPase cycle . Since the V max of actomyosin ATPase in Mg 2 + buffer was approximately 10 s - 1 , 26 submicromolar ATP may be almost completely depleted by a few nanomolar HMM when the sample was observed after incubation for 5 min . That is , it is likely that the crossbridges in the clusters that we observed were in a rigor - like state after the association and dissocia - tion cycles accompanying the ATPase cycle stopped . On the other hand , the G680V mutant HMM mole - cules , which posses a higher affinity for actin filaments in the presence of ATP , accumulate rapidly around initially affected regions of actin filaments , and redistribute themselves only very slowly to form longer clusters . In this study , we found a novel , weaker form of cooperative binding of HMM to Mg 2 + - actin filaments , which , unlike Ca 2 + - actin filaments that had been demonstrated to have stronger cooperative binding with HMM , are the physiological form of actin filaments . 21 Since this weak cooperative binding appears to occur in the A - M - ADP - Pi state , which is a critical intermediate in force generation by acto - myosin , it is tempting to speculate that the weaker form of cooperative binding to HMM is correlated with the force generation mechanism . In fact , regard - ing bound divalent metal ion and phalloidin , the weak cooperative binding was observed under all conditions under which movement of actomyosin motor had been observed , 26 supporting this specula - tion . Recent single - molecule experiments revealed that movements of individual myosin motors along actin filaments consist of multiple successive steps , including occasional backward steps . 27 , 28 If the cooperative binding of myosin is directional , it is possible that the cooperativity promotes directional movement of the myosin motor by decreasing the frequency of backward steps . Alternatively , the cooperative conformational changes of actin subunits that are induced by binding of myosin motors might affect the binding of other actin filament - binding proteins . This would lead to functional differentiation of actin filaments within a cell . Further studies are needed to understand these or any other physiolo - gical relevance of the weak cooperative binding between HMM and Mg 2 + - actin filaments . Materials and Methods Protein preparation Skeletal muscle actin and myosin were purified from rabbit skeletal muscle by standard techniques . 29 , 30 G - actin was further purified by gel - filtration chromatography using Superose 6 ( Amersham Pharmacia Biotech ) in G buffer ( 2 mM Tris – HCl , 0 . 5 mM 2 - mercaptethanol , 0 . 2 mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 005 % ( w / v ) azide , pH 8 . 0 ) containing 0 . 2 mM ATP . Rabbit skeletal muscle HMM was prepared as described . 31 The C - terminal region of rabbit skeletal muscle HMM was labeled with fluorescein by transglu - taminase - catalyzed incorporation of fluoresceincadaver - ine ( RHMM ( wt ) - F ; Fig . 1a ) . 20 To prepare fusion proteins of GFP and Dictyostelium HMM ( residues 1 – 1096 ) ( DHMM ( wt ) - GFP ; Fig . 1c ) or YFP and G680V mutant Dictyostelium HMM ( residues 1 – 1096 ) ( DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP , Fig . 1d ) , we constructed expression plasmids pTIKL - DHMM ( wt ) - GFP and pTIKL - DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP ( Fig . 1c ) , which drive the over - expression of the essential light chain , the regulatory light chain , and Scheme 1 . 160 Cooperative Binding of Myosin to F - actin the truncated heavy chain of Dictyostelium myosin II . 23 DHMM ( wt ) - GFP and DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP have a His - tag sequence after the carboxyl - terminus of GFP or YFP . The expression vectors were introduced into HS1 myosin null Dictyostelium cells 32 by electroporation . 33 The transfor - mants were cultured in HL5 medium containing penicil - lin , streptomycin , and 10 μ g / ml G418 at 21 °C , and were harvested . DHMM ( wt ) - GFP and DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP were purified from these cells by extraction of the cyto - skeleton fraction with ATP , followed by Ni - NTA affinity chromatography , as described . 23 To remove ADP ( and Pi ) in the myosin head of DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP that remained after the protein had been purified , 400 nM DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP was mixed with 0 . 02 U / ml of apyrase from potato ( grade VII , Sigma ) in Mg 2 + buffer , and was incubated at room temperature for 4 h . Complex of DHMM ( wt ) - GFP bound with ADP - Vi was prepared as described . 25 Protein concentrations were determined by the method of Lowry et al . using bovine albumin as the standard . 34 SDS - PAGE was done according to Laemmli , 35 using a 10 % ( w / v ) polyacrylamide gel . Preparation of rhodamine phalloidin - labeled Ca 2 + - and Mg 2 + - actin filaments Polymerization of Ca 2 + - or Mg 2 + - actin filaments was initiated by addition of Ca 2 + buffer ( 25 mM imidazole – HCl , 50 mM KCl , 1 mM DTT , 4 mM CaCl 2 , pH 7 . 4 ) or Mg 2 + buffer ( 25 mM imidazole – HCl , 50 mM KCl , 1 mM DTT , 4 mM MgCl 2 , pH 7 . 4 ) to G - actin ( 50 ∼ 100 μ M ) in G buffer , or dialysis of the G - actin solution against 1000 - fold excess of Ca 2 + or Mg 2 + buffers at 4 °C for 3 h . The resultant actin filaments ( 24 μ M ) were labeled by various concen - trations of rhodamine phalloidin in Ca 2 + or Mg 2 + buffers on ice overnight . Consequently , rhodamine phalloidin - labeled actin filaments ( final concentration 0 . 8 μ M ) that were polymerized by the addition of Ca 2 + or Mg 2 + buffers contained 1 . 6 ∼ 3 . 2 μ M ATP and 0 . 8 ∼ 1 . 6 % ( v / v ) G buffer . Rhodamine phalloidin - labeled actin filaments ( final con - centration 0 . 8 μ M ) that were polymerized by dialysis contained 0 . 004 μ M ATP and 0 . 002 % ( v / v ) G buffer assuming that dialysis was complete . Observations of the binding of HMM to actin filament by fluorescence microscopy Each fluorescent analog of myosin fragments , RHMM ( wt ) - F , DHMM ( wt ) - GFP , and DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP , was mixed with the rhodamine phalloidin - labeled actin fila - ments in Ca 2 + or Mg 2 + buffers in a micro tube . After incubation for 5 min at 25 °C , an aliquot was placed on a glass slide and overlaid with a coverslip . The sample was observed with a fluorescence microscope ( ECLIPS E600 , Nicon ) equipped with a CCD camera ( ARUGUS - HiSCA , Hamamatsu Photonics ) . Images were captured using a Plan - Fluor 100× , 1 . 30 N . A . oil - immersion objective lens . GFP and fluorescein , YFP , and rhodamine were visualized using band pass B - 2A ( EX450 - 490 , DM505 , BA520 combi - nation filter , Nikon ) , YFP - HQ ( EX490 - 500 , DM510 , BA520 - 560 combination filter , Nikon ) , and G - 2A ( EX510 - 560 , DM575 , BA590 combination filter , Nikon ) filters , respec - tively . Exposure time for GFP , fluorescein , and YFP was 2 s with a 6 . 25 % ( ND16 ) neutral density filters in place to reduce photobleaching . To further minimize the effect of photobleaching , images were captured within 5 s after the start of excitation of the field . Exposure time for rhodamine was 1s with a pair of 25 % ( ND4 ) and 6 . 25 % ( ND16 ) neutral density filters . Fluorescence micrographs were analyzed by NIH Image software ( NIH ) using unprocessed micro - graphs . Fluorescence intensities of DHMM ( wt ) - GFP or DHMM ( G680V ) - YFP on individual actin filaments were quantified by measuring the peak areas of fluorescence intensities above the background level across the actin filament . Acknowledgements We thank Dr E . Katayama for his help in the initial phase of this study , and for valuable suggestions . This work was supported , in part , by a Grant - in - Aid for Scientific Research from the Ministry of Educa - tion , Science , Sports and Culture of Japan to T . U . Supplementary Data Supplementary data associated with this article can be found , in the online version , at doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jmb . 2008 . 12 . 008 References 1 . Alberts , B . , Johnson , A . , Lewis , J . , Raff , M . , Roberts , K . & Walter , P . ( 2002 ) . Molecular biology of the Cell , 4th edit . Garland Science , New York . 2 . Oosawa , F . ( 1983 ) . Macromolecular assembly of actin . In Muscle and Nonuscle Motility ( Stracher , A . , ed . ) , pp . 151 – 216 , Academic Press , New York . 3 . Egelman , E . H . & Orlova , A . ( 1995 ) . New insights into actin filament dynamics . Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 5 , 172 – 180 . 4 . Oosawa , F . , Fujime , S . , Ishiwata , S . & Mihashi , K . ( 1972 ) . Dynamic property of F - actin and thin filament . Cold Spring Harbor Symp . Quant . Biol . 37 , 277 – 285 . 5 . Tawada , K . ( 1969 ) . Physicochemical studies of F - actin - heavy meromyosin solutions . Biochim . Biophys . Acta , 172 , 311 – 318 . 6 . Fujime , S . & Ishiwata , S . ( 1971 ) . Dynamic study of F - actin by quasielastic scattering of laser light . J . Mol . Biol . 62 , 251 – 265 . 7 . Loscalzo , J . , Reed , G . H . & Weber , A . ( 1975 ) . Conformational change and cooperativity in actin filaments free of tropomyosin . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA , 72 , 3412 – 3415 . 8 . Thomas , D . D . , Seidel , J . C . & Gergely , J . ( 1979 ) . Rotational dynamics of spin - labeled F - actin in the sub - millisecond time range . J . Mol . Biol . 132 , 257 – 273 . 9 . Miki , M . , Wahl , P . & Auchet , J . C . ( 1982 ) . Fluorescence anisotropy of labeled F - actin : influence of divalent cations on the interaction between F - actin and myosin heads . Biochemistry , 21 , 3661 – 3665 . 10 . Woodrum , D . T . , Rich , S . A . & Pollard , T . D . ( 1975 ) . Evidence for biased bidirectional polymerization of actin filaments using heavy meromyosin prepared by an improved method . J . Cell Biol . 67 , 231 – 237 . 11 . Craig , R . , Szent - Gyorgyi , A . G . , Beese , L . , Flicker , P . , Vibert , P . & Cohen , C . ( 1980 ) . Electron microscopy of thin filaments decorated with a Ca 2 + - regulated myosin . J . Mol . Biol . 140 , 35 – 55 . 161 Cooperative Binding of Myosin to F - actin 12 . Frado , L . L . & Craig , R . ( 1992 ) . Electron microscopy of the actin - myosin head complex in the presence of ATP . J . Mol . Biol . 223 , 391 – 397 . 13 . Walker , M . , White , H . , Belknap , B . & Trinick , J . ( 1994 ) . Electron cryomicroscopy of acto - myosin - S1 during steady - state ATP hydrolysis . Biophys . J . 66 , 1563 – 1572 . 14 . Orlova , A . & Egelman , E . H . ( 1997 ) . Cooperative rigor binding of myosin to actin is a function of F - actin structure . J . Mol . Biol . 265 , 469 – 474 . 15 . Vilfan , A . , Frey , E . , Schwabl , F . , Thormahlen , M . , Song , Y . H . & Mandelkow , E . ( 2001 ) . Dynamics and cooperativity of microtubule decoration by the motor protein kinesin . J . Mol . Biol . 312 , 1011 – 1026 . 16 . Wendt , T . G . , Volkmann , N . , Skiniotis , G . , Goldie , K . N . , Muller , J . , Mandelkow , E . & Hoenger , A . ( 2002 ) . Microscopic evidence for a minus - end - directed power stroke in the kinesin motor ncd . EMBO J . 21 , 5969 – 5978 . 17 . Muto , E . , Sakai , H . & Kaseda , K . ( 2005 ) . Long - range cooperative binding of kinesin to a microtubule in the presence of ATP . J . Cell Biol . 168 , 691 – 696 . 18 . Siddique , M . S . , Mogami , G . , Miyazaki , T . , Katayama , E . , Uyeda , T . Q . P . & Suzuki , M . ( 2005 ) . Cooperative structural change of actin filaments interacting with activated myosin motor domain , detected with copolymers of pyrene - labeled actin and acto - S1 chimera protein . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 337 , 1185 – 1191 . 19 . Kozuka , J . , Yokota , H . , Arai , Y . , Ishii , Y . & Yanagida , T . ( 2006 ) . Dynamic polymorphism of single actin molecules in the actin filament . Nature Chem . Biol . 2 , 83 – 86 . 20 . Kunioka , Y . & Ando , T . ( 1996 ) . Innocuous labeling of the subfragment - 2 region of skeletal muscle heavy meromyosin with a fluorescent polyacrylamide nano - bead and visualization of individual heavy meromyo - sin molecules . J . Biochem . ( Tokyo ) , 119 , 1024 – 1032 . 21 . Kitazawa , T . , Shuman , H . & Somlyo , A . P . ( 1982 ) . Calcium and magnesium binding to thin and thick filaments in skinned muscle fibres : electron probe analysis . J . Muscle Res . Cell Motil . 3 , 437 – 454 . 22 . Greene , L . E . ( 1982 ) . Comparison of the equilibrium binding of heavy meromyosin and myosin to F - actin in the presence and absence of the troponin - tropo - myosin complex . FEBS Lett . 139 , 233 – 236 . 23 . Uyeda , T . Q . P . , Tokuraku , K . , Kaseda , K . , Webb , M . R . & Patterson , B . ( 2002 ) . Evidence for a novel , strongly bound acto - S1 complex carrying ADP and phosphate stabilized in the G680V mutant of Dictyostelium myosin II . Biochemistry , 41 , 9525 – 9534 . 24 . Batra , R . , Geeves , M . A . & Manstein , D . J . ( 1999 ) . Kinetic analysis of Dictyostelium discoideum myosin motor domains with glycine - to - alanine mutations in the reactive thiol region . Biochemistry , 38 , 6126 – 6134 . 25 . Goodno , C . C . ( 1979 ) . Inhibition of myosin ATPase by vanadate ion . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA , 76 , 2620 – 2624 . 26 . Tokuraku , K . & Uyeda , T . Q . P . ( 2001 ) . Phalloidin affects the myosin - dependent sliding velocities of actin filaments in a bound - divalent cation dependent manner . J . Muscle Res . Cell Motil . 22 , 371 – 378 . 27 . Kitamura , K . , Tokunaga , M . , Iwane , A . H . & Yanagida , T . ( 1999 ) . A single myosin head moves along an actin filament with regular steps of 5 . 3 nanometres . Nature , 397 , 129 – 134 . 28 . Tanaka , H . , Homma , K . , Iwane , A . H . , Katayama , E . , Ikebe , R . , Saito , J . et al . ( 2002 ) . The motor domain determines the large step of myosin - V . Nature , 415 , 192 – 195 . 29 . Pardee , J . D . & Spudich , J . A . ( 1982 ) . Purification of muscle actin . Methods Enzymol . 85 , 164 – 181 . 30 . Hynes , T . R . , Block , S . M . , White , B . T . & Spudich , J . A . ( 1987 ) . Movement of myosin fragments in vitro : domains involved in force production . Cell , 48 , 953 – 963 . 31 . Okamoto , Y . & Sekine , T . ( 1985 ) . A streamlined method of subfragment one preparation from myosin . J . Biochem . ( Tokyo ) , 98 , 1143 – 1145 . 32 . Ruppel , K . M . , Uyeda , T . Q . P . & Spudich , J . A . ( 1994 ) . Role of highly conserved lysine 130 of myosin motor domain . In vivo and in vitro characterization of site specifically mutated myosin . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 18773 – 18780 . 33 . Egelhoff , T . T . , Titus , M . A . , Manstein , D . J . , Ruppel , K . M . & Spudich , J . A . ( 1991 ) . Molecular genetic tools for study of the cytoskeleton in Dictyostelium . Methods Enzymol . 196 , 319 – 334 . 34 . Lowry , O . H . , Rosebrough , N . J . , Farr , A . L . & Randall , R . J . ( 1951 ) . Protein measurement with the Folin phenol reagent . J . Biol . Chem . 193 , 265 – 275 . 35 . Laemmli , U . K . ( 1970 ) . Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the head of bacteriophage T4 . Nature , 227 , 680 – 685 . 162 Cooperative Binding of Myosin to F - actin