Live - Cell Chromosome Dynamics and Outcome of X Chromosome Pairing Events during ES Cell Differentiation Osamu Masui , 1 , 2 , 3 , 9 Isabelle Bonnet , 1 , 2 , 3 Patricia Le Baccon , 1 , 4 Isabel Brito , 1 , 5 , 6 Tim Pollex , 1 , 2 , 3 Niall Murphy , 1 , 2 , 3 Philippe Hupe´ , 1 , 5 , 6 , 7 Emmanuel Barillot , 1 , 5 , 6 Andrew S . Belmont , 8 and Edith Heard 1 , 2 , 3 , * 1 Institut Curie , 26 rue d’Ulm , Paris F - 75248 , France 2 CNRS UMR3215 , Paris F - 75248 , France 3 INSERM U934 , Paris F - 75248 , France 4 CNRS UMR218 , Paris F - 75248 , France 5 INSERM U900 , Paris F - 75248 , France 6 Mines ParisTech , Fontainebleau F - 77300 , France 7 CNRS UMR144 , Paris F - 75248 , France 8 Department of Cell and Developmental Biology , University of Illinois , 601 South Goodwin Avenue , Urbana , IL 61801 , USA 9 Present address : Research Centre for Allergy and Immunology , RIKEN Yokohama Institute , 1 - 7 - 22 , Suehiro - cho , Tsurumi , Yokohama , Kanagawa 230 - 0045 , Japan * Correspondence : edith . heard @ curie . fr DOI 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2011 . 03 . 032 SUMMARY Random X inactivation represents a paradigm for monoallelic gene regulation during early ES cell differentiation . In mice , the choice of X chromosome to inactivate in XX cells is ensured by monoallelic regulation of Xist RNA via its antisense transcription unit Tsix / Xite . Homologous pairing events have been proposed to underlie asymmetric Tsix expres - sion , but direct evidence has been lacking owing to their dynamic and transient nature . Here we investi - gate the live - cell dynamics and outcome of Tsix pair - ing in differentiating mouse ES cells . We ﬁnd an over - all increase in genome dynamics including the Xics during early differentiation . During pairing , however , Xic loci show markedly reduced movements . Upon separation , Tsix expression becomes transiently monoallelic , providing a window of opportunity for monoallelic Xist upregulation . Our ﬁndings reveal the spatiotemporal choreography of the X chromo - somes during early differentiation and indicate a direct role for pairing in facilitating symmetry - breaking and monoallelic regulation of Xist during random X inactivation . INTRODUCTION X chromosome inactivation ( XCI ) ensures equal levels of X - linked gene products in females ( XX ) and males ( XY ) ( Lyon , 1961 ) . XCI is initiated during early development via upregulation of the non - coding Xist transcript , which coats one X chromosome in cis and triggers its silencing . Once established , XCI is then main - tained through propagation of epigenetic marks during cell divi - sions . A remarkable feature of XCI is that two identical chromo - somes become differentially expressed in the same nucleoplasm . Germline imprinting provides one way of achieving asymmetric expression ( see Okamoto and Heard , 2009 for review ) . However , in most eutherians , and in postimplantation mouse embryos , XCI is random , with either the paternal or maternal X being silenced ( Lyon , 1961 ) . Random monoallelic gene expression has also been reported to occur at some auto - somal loci , with potentially important implications for develop - ment and disease ( Gimelbrant et al . , 2007 ) . In the case of random XCI , the X - inactivation center ( Xic ) , which includes the Xist gene and its antisense transcript Tsix , controls the initiation of this process ( see Navarro and Avner , 2010 for review ) . XCI takes place during the earliest stages of embryonic stem ( ES ) cell differentiation , at a time when other important developmental decisions are also being made . In undifferentiated female ES cells , Xist and Tsix are expressed at low levels , but upon differentiation , Xist becomes upregulated and Tsix downregulated on one of the two X chromosomes ( Lee et al . , 1999 ; Debrand et al . , 1999 ) . Consistent with this inverse expression pattern , Tsix and its enhancer Xite ( Lee et al . , 1999 ; Lee and Lu , 1999 , Sado et al . , 2001 ; Ogawa and Lee , 2003 ) are known to repress Xist in cis . Understanding how Xist becomes asymmetrically upregulated during early differentiation is thus central to our understanding of how the two X chromosomes become differentially expressed during random XCI . Activation of Xist during ES cell differentia - tion depends on downregulation of pluripotency factors such as Oct4 , Nanog , and Sox2 ( Navarro et al . , 2008 ) , as well as the presence of XX - dosage - sensitive competence of sensing factors , such as the X - linked Rnf12 protein ( Jonkers et al . , 2009 ) , and possibly other loci ( Xpr ) or noncoding transcripts ( Jpx , Ftx ) located 5 0 to Xist ( Augui et al . , 2007 ; Tian et al . , 2010 ; Chureau et al . , 2011 ) . However , these sensing mechanisms do not readily explain why only one of the two Xist alleles is Cell 145 , 447 – 458 , April 29 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . 447 upregulated , not both . Stochastic Xist expression models might partly explain this ( Monkhorst et al . , 2008 ) , but the surprisingly low frequency of biallelic Xist upregulation during the initiation of XCI in mice suggests that some other means of ensuring precise monoallelic regulation exists . Recently it was shown that the two Xic loci undergo transient homologous associations ( pairing ) during early differentiation , and it was proposed that this might play a role in the monoallelic regulation of Xist and Tsix during initiation of XCI ( Bacher et al . , Figure 1 . Generation of Xic TetO Homozy - gous Female ES Cells ( A ) A map of the Xic locus and the position of the TetO integration is indicated . Arrows indicate the transcription direction of each gene . Broken lines represent putative noncoding transcripts . ( B ) Schematic representation of the strategy used togenerate PGKT2 - TetRcells . TheTetO arraycan be bound by TetR - mCherry and used to visualize the locus in living cells . ( C ) DNA / RNAFISHforTetO ( DNAFISH , green ) and Xist ( RNA FISH , red ) on PGKT1 cells at day 5 of differentiation . Upper panels : Xist RNA accumu - lates on non - TetO - targeted X chromosome . Lower panels : Xist accumulates on TetO - targeted X chromosome ( n = 64 ) . ( D ) Kinetics of Xist RNA accumulation in parental PGK12 . 1 cells and in the TetO - targeted PGKT2 - TetR cells ( n > 100 per day of differentiation ) . Representative pictures for undifferentiated and day 3 differentiated PGKT2 - TetR cells are indi - cated ( green , Xist RNA ) . See also Figure S1 . 2006 ; Xu et al . , 2006 , 2007 ; Augui et al . , 2007 ) . Associations between homolo - gous chromosomal loci have been proposed to underlie the establishment of opposite states of transcriptional activity on homologous alleles in other situations , for example , during immuno - globulin recombination in B cell develop - ment ( Hewitt et al . , 2009 ) . In the case of X inactivation , pairing via the Xpr locus ( Fig - ure 1A ) has been proposed to help bring together and facilitate pairing at the Tsix loci ( Augui et al . , 2007 ) , which in turn is proposed to enable coordination of monoallelic Tsix expression and recip - rocal Xist expression ( Xu et al . , 2007 ; Scialdone and Nicodemi , 2008 ) . In support of this , deletion of both alleles of Tsix in females results in chaotic XCI , with biallelic or no Xist upregulation in a signiﬁcant proportion of cells ( Lee , 2005 ) . However , the coordinating role of Tsix pairing in monoallelic XCI has never been tested experimentally , and the actual relationship between Xic pairing and Xist / Tsix regulation has remained unclear , partly because of the asynchronous nature and hetero - geneity of early differentiating ES cells , which renders the precise ordering of events impossible in ﬁxed cells , where only snap - shots of dynamic events can be obtained . In this paper , we set out to examine the dynamics of X chromo - some pairing and its possible outcome , using the Tet operator / Tet repressor ( TetO / TetR ) tagging system in living ES cells . Both the Xic loci as well as other autosomal regions were visual - ized in real time in this way . We ﬁnd a general increase in the 448 Cell 145 , 447 – 458 , April 29 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . dynamics of loci during early ES cell differentiation . This could have important implications for the multiple developmental deci - sions being taken during this time . We show that Tsix pairing is a transient event , lasting approximately 45 min , and that during pairing , the Tsix loci show reduced mobility , suggesting some form of tethering to each other . We also demonstrate that the outcome of pairing is often monoallelic Tsix expression , which could in turn lead to monoallelic Xist upregulation . We thus present one of the ﬁrst live - cell investigations of the dynamics ofgenomic lociduringearlyXXEScelldifferentiation anddemon - strate that transient homologous associations can provide an efﬁcient means of generating asymmetric expression states . RESULTS Generation of TetO - Tagged Xic Loci in Female ES Cells To visualize the Xic loci and other genomic loci in living ES cells , we exploited the TetO / TetR system ( Michaelis et al . , 1997 ) . We ﬁrst targeted a single TetO array into a site located 65 kb down - stream of Xist ’s 3 0 end and 35 kb away from Xite ( Figure 1A and Figure S1A available online ) , in order to avoid any deleterious effects on Xist / Tsix / Xite regulation and initiation of XCI . The homologous recombination construct harboring the 224 - repeat TetO array ( 11 . 2 kb ) and a neomycin resistance gene was tar - geted into one of the two Xic loci in the PGK12 . 1 mouse female ES cell line ( Penny et al . , 1996 ) ( Figure 1B and Figure S1A ) . Two correctly targeted clones out of 310 screened were obtained and one of them was used for further analysis ( Figure S1B ) . Insertion of the TetO into the Xic did not affect the onset of XCI or the choice of X chromosome for XCI . The hemizygous clone ( PGKT1 ) was differentiated in vitro and analyzed for random XCI by Xist RNA FISH accompanied by TetO DNA FISH to distin - guish the TetO - tagged allele . Normal kinetics of Xist upregulation and similar frequencies of XCI were observed for both the Xic TetO and untagged Xic alleles ( Figure 1C and data not shown ) . This hemizygous PGKT1 clone was then used to generate ES cells in which both Xic loci were tagged for visualization . Initially , targetingofthesecondXiclocuswasattemptedusingatargeting construct containing a Lac operator ( LacO ) array . However , this failed despite repeated attempts . Instead , we generated Xic TetO homozygous cells by treating the hemizygous PGKT1 cells using increased G418 selection ( Figure 1B ) ( Mortensen et al . , 1992 ) . One of the clones obtained ( PGKT2 ) was found to have two X chromosomes , each of which carried a TetO - tagged Xic locus based on Southern blotting and DNA FISH on metaphase spreads ( Figures S1B – S1D ) . A TetR - mCherry fusion protein construct was introduced into the PGKT2 cell line as a stable transgene to enable visualization of the two Xic TetO loci ( Fig - ure 1B ) . In this clone ( PGKT2 - TetR ) , two TetR - mCherry foci could be readily detected by ﬂuorescence microscopy ( Fig - ure S1E and Movie S1 ) . The two TetR - mCherry foci corre - sponded to the TetO - tagged Xics as they systematically colocal - ized with punctate Xist / Tsix RNA FISH signals in undifferentiated ES cells ( Figure S1E ) . Upon differentiation of PGKT2 - TetR cells , monoallelic Xist RNA accumulation was observed with similar kinetics to the parental line ( Figure 1D ) . We conclude that the presence of the TetO tag within each of the Xic loci and the expression of the TetR - mCherry protein in PGKT2 - TetR cells did not interfere with normal XCI induction and kinetics . The PGKT2 - TetR cell line was therefore used for subsequent exper - iments . In the course of this work , we also generated a series of ES cell lines carrying randomly inserted , autosomal TetO arrays , which we were able to use to assess general chromosome mobility , as will be described later . Detection of Xic TetO Pairing in Living ES Cells We next established conditions for live - cell imaging of TetO - tagged Xic loci in PGKT2 - TetR ES cells ( Figure S2A ; see also Experimental Procedures ) . Following deconvolution of three - dimensional ( 3D ) image stacks , more than 80 % of nuclei showed two clear Xic TetO spots . In some cases , the TetR - bound locus appeared as a doublet , presumably due to sister chromatid separation ( Figure 2A and Movie S1 and Movie S2 ) . In order to determine the time window in which Xic pairing most often occurred , we assessed Xic pairing frequencies at different stages of differentiation , by measuring 3D distances between the centers of mass of the two Xic TetO spots in snapshots of living cells ( Figures 2A and 2B ) . Based on our previous criteria deﬁned in ﬁxed cells , pairing in living cells was deﬁned as Xic - Xic distances of % 2 m m ( Augui et al . , 2007 ) . A peak in Xic TetO pairing frequencies was found at day 1 of differentiation , as indicated by a marked shift to shorter TetO - TetO distances when compared to undifferentiated cells or late differentiated cells ( day 8 ) ( Figures 2B and 2C and Figure S2B ) . We reproducibly observed a peak of approximately 5 % to 10 % cells showing Xic TetO pairing at around day 1 of differentiation in three independent experiments ( Figures 2B and 2C and data not shown ) . These results agree with previous DNA FISH studies , where Tsix pairing was signiﬁ - cantly enriched at day 1 or 2 of differentiation ( Bacher et al . , 2006 ; Augui et al . , 2007 ) , and show that TetO - tagging of Xic loci does not interfere with normal pairing kinetics . Increased Mobility of the Xics and Other Genomic Loci during ES Cell Differentiation In order to determine the general context in which Xic pairing events occur , we wished to assess the dynamics of the Xics and of other genomic loci during ES cell differentiation . First , time - lapse 3D imaging was performed at various stages of differ - entiation of PGKT2 - TetR cells ( Figure 2A ) . Using imaging condi - tions that minimize phototoxicity in differentiating ES cells ( see Experimental Procedures ) , we ﬁrst carried out experiments using 1 min time intervals ( D t = 1 min ) , over a 30 min period , in undiffer - entiated and differentiated ES cells ( from days 1 to 4 ) ( illustrated in Movie S1 for undifferentiated cells and Movie S2 for day 1 differentiated cells ) . The distances ( d ) between two loci were used to assess mobility , as this avoids issues of nuclear rotation ( Marshall et al . , 1997 ) . Measuring 3D distances at each timepoint ( n > 50 cells imaged , at each day of differentiation ) , we noted that distances between the two Xic TetO loci appeared to be more variable during early differentiation as compared to undifferenti - ated ES cells , indicating a possible increase in mobility . This is illustrated when the change in TetO - TetO distances is plotted over time for multiple cells ( Figure S2C , compare cells differenti - ated for 1 or 2 days to undifferentiated cells ) . To quantify whether there was a difference in mobility and assess whether the movements observed were random Cell 145 , 447 – 458 , April 29 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . 449 ( diffusive ) or directional , we plotted the mean square displace - ment ( MSD , < D d 2 > ) of the loci over time ( Marshall et al . , 1997 ; Carmo - Fonseca et al . , 2002 ) . The slope of the MSD is proportional to the diffusion coefﬁcient ( D ) of the loci ( see Exper - imental Procedures ) . The more mobile two loci are , the faster the < D d 2 > value increases over time , and the steeper the MSD slope . We measured the MSD for R 40 cells at each stage of differentiation . For short time experiments , a linear increase of < D d 2 > with increasing time intervals ( D t ) was observed in all cases , suggesting that Xic TetO loci undergo diffusive rather than directional motion over a timescale of several to tens of minutes ( Figure 3A ) . However , the MSD < D d 2 > value increased more rapidly in differentiating cells ( days 1 , 2 , 3 , and 4 ) compared to undifferentiated cells ( Figure 3A ) . This increased mobility could be seen even in day 8 differentiated cells ( data not shown ) . At day 1 of differentiation , 47 % of cells ( n = 62 ) showed a change in TetO - TetO distances of > 2 m m over 1 hr , in contrast to only 14 % of undifferentiated cells ( n = 21 ) . MSD values calculated from data points near the beginning versus the ends of extended observation periods did not change in any signiﬁcant way indi - cating that the observed increase in mobility was not due to variable phototoxicity effects in differentiated versus undifferen - tiated cells ( Figure S3A ) . We could also exclude that this increase in mobility was due to increased nuclear volume during differen - tiation , as we found no signiﬁcant change in nuclear volume in day 1 differentiated cells compared to undifferentiated cells ( data not shown ) , similarly to a previous study ( Bacher et al . , 2006 ) , even though mobility changed substantially between these two time points . At sufﬁciently longer times , the plateau of an MSD curve reﬂects constraints on long - range chromatin mobility imposed by chromosome and / or nuclear structure ( see legend to Figure 3B ) . Measurements over longer time periods ( R 120 min ) revealed radii of ‘‘constrained diffusion’’ of (cid:2) 1 . 7 m m ( square root of 3 m m 2 plateau ) for both days 0 and 1 . This is in the range of chromosome territory size and well below nuclear size ( Figure 3B ) . We next evaluated whether the increase in mobility we observed during early differentiation was speciﬁc to the Xic locus Figure 2 . Analysis of Xic TetO Dynamics by Live - Cell Imaging ( A ) An example of a projected deconvolved image of day 1 differentiated living PGKT2 - TetR cells . Indicated values correspond to the 3D distance between two Xic TetO spots . Xic pairing cells are marked with white circles . ( B ) Detailed distribution of 3D distances between two Xic TetO spots for each differentiation stage shown in ( C ) . The black solid bars indicate the ‘‘Xic pairing’’ population ( d % 2 m m ) . ( C ) Summary of distribution of 3D distances between two Xic TetO spots for each differentiation stage shown in ( B ) . See also Figure S2 . 450 Cell 145 , 447 – 458 , April 29 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . or was a more general feature of the genome in early differenti - ating ES cells . To this end , different ES cell lines in which two independent autosomal loci had been tagged by random inte - gration of TetO arrays and also expressed a TetR - mCherry trans - gene to enable visualization , were examined ( Figure 3C and Movie S3 ) . The TetO - TetO distances in these lines ( PGK28 and PGK134 ) were measured in living cells ( in 3D , over time ) at different stages of differentiation ( n R 39 cells for each differen - tiation day ) and MSDs were calculated . We observed a general increase in locus mobility upon differentiation , similar to that observed for the Xics , in both cell lines ( Figure 3D ) . Although the kinetics of this increase differed in each case , the trend was the same , implying a general increase in genome mobility during early differentiation . In the case of the Xics , this greater mobility during early differentiation might facilitate the onset of homologous Xic pairing through an increase in the frequency of collisions between loci . On the other hand , it might also inhibit prolonged interactions during pairing . We therefore examined the dynamics of Xic loci during the pairing process in more detail . Live - Cell Imaging and Dynamics of Xic TetO Pairing Based on previous ﬁxed cell data , it has remained unclear whether Xicpairingisatransientbutfrequentevent , orelseapro - longed but rare event . To assess the frequency and duration of pairing , and the mobility of the Xic loci during this process , live - cell imaging experiments were performed on PGKT2 - TetR cells at day 1 of differentiation , which show the highest fre - quencies of Xic pairing ( Figures 2B and 2C ) . This also corre - sponds to the time when reciprocal Xist / Tsix expression patterns Figure 3 . Analysis of Xic TetO Mobility in Living ES Cells ( A ) Averaged mean square displacement curves ( MSD , < D d 2 > ) calculated from changes in distance between two Xic TetO spots for cells at different stages of differentiation . MSDs were derived from experiments at D t = 1 min time intervals , for a total of 30 min , and averaging was done over all the analyzed cells . For each time point , the statistical error after averaging over N cells ( seeExperimentalProceduresfordetails ) isplottedastheerrorbar ( day0 , N = 82 ; day 1 , N = 45 ; day 2 , N = 47 ; day 3 , N = 47 ; day 4 , N = 57 ; and day 1 pairing cells , N = 44 ) . MSD curves depend linearly on time , which demonstrate the relative diffusive motion of the two Xic TetO spots . The MSDs for undiffer - entiated cells ( green ) and day1 pairing cells ( gray ) are similar , whereas a signiﬁcant increase of the MSD slope is observed for differentiated cells . ( B ) Averaged MSD curvesfor long time - lapse experiments to see conﬁnement effect . Green squares : MSD for undifferentiated cells ( N = 44 ) derived from movies of 450 min duration with 15 min interval time . Blue circles : MSD for differentiatedcells ( N = 26 ) atday1ofdifferentiationcalculatedfrommoviesof 150 min with 5 min intervals . Error bars are the same as in ( A ) . Characteristic conﬁnement areaA isdetermined by ﬁtting ( black lines ) theexperimentalMSD points to the expression for a conﬁned motion : < D d 2 > = A 3 ð 1 (cid:3) e (cid:3) 6 Dt = A Þ . Typicalareaof conﬁnement is around3 m m 2 forbothundifferentiatedcells and day 1 differentiated cells , leading to a typical radius of conﬁnement of ﬃﬃﬃ 3 p z 1 : 7 m m . The ﬁt yields D values in excellent agreement with those previ - ously determined by MSD slopes for short - time experiment ( see Figure 3D ) . Because D undiff . cells is smaller than D day1 , the plateau is reached earlier for day 1 differentiated cells ( around 95 min ) than for undifferentiated cells ( around 250 min ) . ( C ) Schematic representation of Xic TetO homozygous line ( PGKT2 ) and two autosomal TetO clones , PGK # 28 and PGK # 134 . Relative positions of TetO integrationsitesweredeterminedbyTetODNAFISHonmetaphasespreadsof chromosomes . Photographs are snapshots of live - cell imaging . Scale bar = 10 m m . ( D ) Three - dimensionaldiffusionconstantDasafunctionofdifferentiationdays forthethreecelllinesshownin ( C ) . Dvalueswerededuced fromthelinearﬁtof the averaged MSD curves shown in ( A ) . Bars represent the standard deviation of the error provided by the polynomial ﬁtting software . See also Figure S3 and Movie S3 . Cell 145 , 447 – 458 , April 29 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . 451 are ﬁrst seen . Time - lapse imaging was performed on cells for 30 min periods , with 1 min intervals . We noted that in the majority of cells where Xic pairing ( distances % 2 m m ) was detected , both Xic TetO loci showed separated sister chromatids ( 84 . 1 % , n = 44 ) in at least one frame of the 30 min time - lapse movie . Repeated overlap and separation between sister chromatids could be seen on the minute timescale ( for example , Movie S1and Movie S4 ) . The detection of sister chromatids at both loci implies that DNA replication must have been completed prior to Xic pairing . Indeed , this is consistent with our previous DNA FISH studies on FACS - sorted cells ( Augui et al . , 2007 ) , where we found that pairing occurs in S phase after Xic DNA replication . To assess Xic mobility during pairing , we calculated the MSD of the loci in cells displaying Xic distances of less than 2 m m . As shown in Fig - ure 3A and Figure S3B , Xic TetO loci in cells where pairing is ongoing have a remarkably reduced range of movement compared to the total population at day 1 of differentiation . Thus , once the two Xics encounter each other and pairing initi - ates , the loci become restrained , even in the context of a general increase in mobility during early differentiation . The reduced mobility of the loci observed during pairing would suggest that they may be tethered either to each other or to a common nuclear compartment that provides an additional restraint to that of each polymer to its chromosome . We also assessed whether Xic TetO loci ever showed complete overlap ( i . e . , d = 0 m m ) during the course of pairing ( i . e . , d % 2 m m ) . In experiments where 1 min time intervals were used during imaging , the loci did show occasional complete overlap ( 6 . 8 % , n = 44 ) , although this lasted for only a few minutes at a time ( Figure 4A and Movie S4 ) and was not seen in all cells . Given the transient nature of the overlap , it may actually occur more frequently but would not be captured with the imaging intervals we used . In order to measure the actual duration of Xic pairing events ( d % 2 m m ) , we performed time - lapse experiments for R 150 min , with 5 min intervals to minimize phototoxicity and maintain total light exposure times the same as in 30 min movies . Under these imaging conditions , the cells appeared to grow and divide similarly to cells grown without imaging . Based on analysis of multiple nuclei ( n = 8 ) over 150 min , Xic TetO pairing was found to last an average of 42 min ( ± 31 min ) , consistent with previous estimates based on ﬁxed cell studies ( Xu et al . , 2007 ) . A representative cell , ﬁlmed for a 150 min period during which the Xic loci come together and remain within 2 m m of each other for 40 min , before separating again , is shown in Fig - ure 4B and Movie S5 . A few cells showed loci that appeared to be paired for R 150 min probably corresponding to arrested / dying cells due to the normal process of differentiation , and we did not include them in our analysis . Although longer time - lapse experiments ( 12 – 15 hr ) were attempted , these were difﬁcult to analyze owing to phototoxicity , as well as the fact that cells would often move out of the ﬁeld of imaging . Our previous work has shown that pairing is restricted to early S phase of the cell cycle ( Augui et al . , 2007 ) , but this does not account for its developmentally restricted onset . Recent studies have suggested that the pluripotency factor Oct4 may play a role in pairing ( Donohoe et al . , 2009 ) . To assess whether levels of Oct4 , or other pluripotency factors that decrease during early differentiation , were correlated with the onset of Xic pairing , we performed immunoﬂuorescence for Oct4 and Nanog following live - cell imaging . No clear - cut correlation could be seen of Oct4 or Nanog levels in Xic pairing versus nonpairing cells ( Fig - ure S4 ) , suggesting that overall levels of such factors do not dictate the onset of pairing during differentiation or in the cell cycle . In conclusion , we ﬁnd that Xic pairing occurs most frequently at day 1 of differentiation , shows noobvious correlation with pluripo - tency factor levels , and is a transient event , probably occurring in most of the population at least once per cell cycle during early differentiation . This latter conclusion is based on the fact that Xic pairing lasts for about 45 min on average , which represents approximately 5 % of the cell cycle ( estimated to be around 15 hr ) . This number is very close to the frequency observed for Xic pairing in the cell population ( approximately 6 % ) at this stage of differentiation ( Figures 2B and 2C ) . As pairing occurs almost exclusivelyinearlySphase , afterDNAreplicationoftheloci ( Augui etal . , 2007 ) , cell - cycleregulationislikelytoaccountforitstransient nature . Finally , the reduced Xic mobility observed during pairing , despite the generalized increase in mobility during early differenti - ation , indicates that the two loci are somehow tethered , either to each other or to a common nuclear structure during this time . Demonstration that Xic Pairing Frequently Results in Asymmetric Tsix Expression We next investigated how Xic pairing events might be linked to Xist / Tsix regulation and the onset of random XCI . In undifferenti - ated XX ES cells , previous studies have shown that Tsix is expressed from both alleles in almost 100 % of cells , and Xist expression is low ( Debrand et al . , 1999 ; Sun et al . , 2006 ) . Upon differentiation , Tsix is downregulated and Xist is upregulated on one of the two X chromosomes during early differentiation ( days 1 – 2 ) , but the exact order of events is unclear . Furthermore , although it has been proposed that Xic pairing may participate in monoallelic Xist / Tsix regulation ( Nicodemi and Prisco , 2007 ) , direct experimental evidence has never been provided in support of this model . To assess patterns of Xist / Tsix expression before and after pairing in PGKT2 - TetR cells , we ﬁrst performed RNA FISH anal - ysis on undifferentiated and day 1 differentiated cells . RNA FISH was performed using a combination of two double - stranded probes—one for Tsix ( DXPas34 ) , the other spanning 19 kb of Xist ( p510 ) ( Figure 5A ) . The p510 probe can detect both Xist and Tsix transcription , but we could distinguish Xist / Tsix RNA FISH proﬁles because the DXPas34 probe is speciﬁc for Tsix , and because only Xist shows distinctive RNA ‘‘cloud’’ signals ( Figure 5 ) . Different categories of Xist and Tsix expression proﬁles were deﬁned ( Figures 5B and 5C ) . In undifferentiated ES cells , the overwhelming majority of cells showed biallelic Xist and Tsix expression ( category 1 , mauve ) ( Figures 5A – 5D ) . At day 1 of differentiation , the proportion of cells showing different Xist / Tsix patterns increased as expected for the onset of XCI . In particular , a signiﬁcant proportion of cells showed monoallelic Tsix and / or Xist expression ( Figures 5B , 5C , and 5E ) . An increased proportion of cells ( 13 . 3 % ) also showed an accumulation of Xist RNA on one allele ( category 2 , pink ; Figures 5B , 5C , and 5E ) . At this early stage , the Xist RNA clouds are much 452 Cell 145 , 447 – 458 , April 29 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . Figure 4 . Time - Lapse Live - Cell Imaging of Xic Pairing Events in Early Differentiating ES Cells ( A ) Representative snapshots of a day 1 differentiated PGKT2 - TetR cell imaged over 30 min period at 1 min time intervals . Note that the two Xic TetO loci show complete overlap at the 21 min time point . Open circles : Xic pairing ( d % 2 m m ) . Scale bar = 10 m m . The whole movie is available as Movie S4 . ( B ) A representative image of a day 1 differentiated PGKT2 - TetR cell imaged over 150 min at 5 min intervals . Note that the two Xic TetO loci show pairing ( % 2 m m , open circle ) for 40 min ( from the 55 min to the 95 min time points ) , andtheyshowclosestproximityatthe75mintime point . Scale bar = 10 m m . See also Movie S5 . Cell 145 , 447 – 458 , April 29 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . 453 smaller and fainter than those observed in completely differenti - ated cells but nevertheless can clearly be distinguished from a punctate , nascent transcript signal . We also observed a small proportion of cells with biallelic Xist RNA clouds ( category 3 , blue ; Figures 5B , 5C , and 5E ) . Based on this ﬁxed cell analysis , we concluded that asym - metric Tsix and Xist expression patterns are established during the same differentiation time window as Xic pairing . However , it remained unclear whether Tsix downregulation precedes or follows Xist upregulation , whether Tsix downregulation causes Xist upregulation , or whether Xist upregulation triggers Tsix silencing in cis , and whether any of these events are linked to Xic pairing . We therefore combined our live - cell imaging analysis of Xic pairing events with RNA FISH to evaluate the transcrip - tional output of Xist and Tsix and to deﬁne the temporal order of these different proﬁles relative to Xic pairing . Live - cell imaging was performed as described above in undif - ferentiated and day 1 differentiated cells ( Figure S2A ) and imme - diately followed by ﬁxation and RNA FISH using Xist and Tsix probes . Live - cell ( TetR - mCherry ) and RNA FISH data ( 3D stacks ) were collected from the same cells . In differentiated cells , we examined Xist / Tsix expression status either at short ( 10 – 60 min ) or long ( 150 – 180 min ) intervals following the onset of live - cell imaging . Cells showing Xic pairing were considered to be those with Xic TetO distances of % 2 m m at the onset of time - lapse experiments . We observed that the proportion of Figure 5 . Xist / Tsix Expression Proﬁles and Their Link to Xic Pairing ( A ) Schematic representation of the two probes used for RNA FISH . The p510 DNA probe covers most of the Xist gene and can detect both Xist and Tsix transcripts . The Tsix probe ( DXPas34 ) covers the 5 0 end of Tsix and detects only Tsix transcripts . ( B ) Schematic representation of the ﬁve categories of RNA FISH signal patterns obtained for Xist and Tsix in undifferentiated and day 1 differentiated ES cells . ( C ) Examples of the ﬁve categories of Xist and Tsix expression status . RNA FISH for Xist / Tsix ( p510 , green ) and Tsix ( red ) are shown . Blue : DAPI . TetR - mCherry signal indicates the location of two Xic TetO loci imaged in living cells prior to ﬁxation and RNA FISH analysis . ( D ) Distribution of the ﬁve categories of Xist and Tsix RNA FISH patterns in undifferentiated PGKT2 - TetR cells . ( E ) Distribution of the ﬁve categories of Xist and Tsix RNA FISH patterns in day 1 differentiated PGKT2 - TetR cells . ( F ) Representative nucleus showing Tsix monoallelic expression ( category 5 ) , 60 min following Xic pairing . ( G ) Representative nucleus showing Xist RNA monoallelic accumulation ( category 2 ) , 180 min following Xic pairing . Xist RNA appears just upregulating . ( H ) Distribution of Xist / Tsix RNA FISH patterns for all Xic pairing cells at day 1differentiation ( top ) ; forXic pairing cells 10 to60 minafter pairing at thebeginning of themovie ( t = 0 ) ( left , bottom ) ; andforXicpairingcells150to180minafterpairingatthebeginningofthemovie ( t = 0 ) ( right , bottom ) . * Categoryisstatisticallymore signiﬁcantly enriched when compared to nonpairing population ( see also Tables S1A – S1C ) . ( I ) Distributionof Xist / Tsix RNAFISHpatternsforallXicincellsatday1ofdifferentiationthatdidnotshowpairingatthebeginningofthemovie ( t = 0 ) ( top ) ; forcells 10 to 60 min after the beginning of the movie ( left , bottom ) ; and for cells 150 to 180 min after the beginning of the movie ( right , bottom ) . 454 Cell 145 , 447 – 458 , April 29 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . cells showing monoallelic Tsix expression ( category 5 , yellow ) was higher in cells that had undergone pairing than in those that had not shown pairing ( Figures 5E , 5H , and 5I ; Table S1A ) . Moreover , monoallelic Tsix expression was found to be signiﬁ - cantly enriched in cells at short ( 10 – 60 min ) intervals after pairing , as compared to the cells that had not shown pairing ( p = 0 . 0083 ) ( Figures 5C , 5F , 5H , and 5I ; Table S1B ) . The proportion of category 2 ( pink ) cells with monoallelic Xist RNA accumulation also increased after Xic pairing , but only at later intervals ( 150 – 180 min ) after pairing ( Figures 5C , 5G , and 5H ; Table S1C ) . Tsix , on the other hand , had returned to a biallelic expression state ( category 2 ) at these later time intervals when increased Xist RNA upregulation is seen ( Figure 5G ) . Thus , Tsix expression on one of the two alleles is extinguished transiently after pairing ( 10 – 60 min ) , but the silent Tsix allele is re - expressed 1 – 2 hr later . In summary , our ﬁndings combine real - time visualization of Xic pairing with analysis of Xist / Tsix expression status to deﬁne the precise order and potential causality of events at this critical decision - making time during XCI . We reveal dynamic changes in Xist / Tsix expression patterns following transient Xic interac - tions , with one of the two Tsix alleles being frequently silenced immediately ( 0 – 60 min ) after pairing . The loss of Tsix - mediated repression on one allele may allow monoallelic Xist upregulation on that allele , as indicated by the increase in monoallelic Xist RNA accumulation observed subsequently ( 1 – 2 hr after pairing ) . By this time , however , the transiently silenced Tsix allele is re - ex - pressed on the allele that has started to accumulate Xist RNA . Nevertheless , in cells that upregulate Xist , Tsix will eventually become silenced in cis . It should be noted that the transient Tsix asymmetry induced by Xic pairing may sometimes be unproductive as some cells revert to biallelic expression of Tsix with no Xist upregulation 1 – 2 hr later . However , as Xic pairing can occur not only at day 1 of differentiation but also at later time points ( Augui et al . , 2007 ; Xu et al . , 2007 ) , there would be an opportunity at the next cell cycle to establish an asymmetric Tsix / Xist expression proﬁle . In conclusion , our ﬁndings demon - strate that Tsix pairing provides a potential window of opportu - nity for transient , asymmetric Tsix expression , which in turn could enable monoallelic Xist upregulation in cis and could thus be a key event in the choice step during XCI initiation . DISCUSSION Inter - and intrachromosomal interactions in the nucleus have been increasingly linked to gene regulation and / or the coordina - tion of gene expression ( for reviews see Williams et al . , 2010 and Schoenfelder et al . , 2010 ) . Knowledge of the exact outcome of such trans - associations , at the level of gene expression , has been lacking , however , as studies so far were performed only in ﬁxed cells , which can only provide snapshots and do not allow precise ordering of dynamic events . Here , we describe the in vivo dynamics and outcome of homologous trans - interactions that occur between the two Tsix loci on X chromosomes during the initiation of XCI in differentiating female ES cells . This study provides one of the ﬁrst in vivo spatiotemporal analyses of chro - mosomal dynamics and homologous chromosomal interactions in ES cells . Our data support the hypothesis that pairing at the Xic loci can facilitate the establishment of asymmetric expression patterns . We also demonstrate that such events occur in the context of increasing genome dynamics during early differentia - tion . Live - cell imaging of the Xics and of other , autosomal loci that we present here provides important insights into locus mobility in ES cells and their early differentiated derivatives . The mobility of loci that we found in undifferentiated ES cells ( (cid:2) 0 . 01 m m 2 / min ) is in fact similar to values previously observed for loci in transformed human cell lines ( (cid:2) 0 . 008 m m 2 / min ) ( Chubb et al . , 2002 ) . The motion we detected for the Xic loci in ES cells corresponded to constrained diffusion , with a radius of con - straint of (cid:2) 1 . 7 m m , which could correspond to the degree of constraint in a chromosome territory . Indeed , the Xic has been previously shown not to loop out of its territory to any signiﬁcant extent ( Augui et al . , 2007 ) . In the course of our analyses , we observed no signs of signiﬁcant directional long - range move - ments , such as those described following induction by transcrip - tional activators in somatic cells ( Chuang et al . , 2006 ) . However , we did ﬁnd an increase in locus mobility during early differentia - tion . The mobility reached after 1 – 3 days of differentiation approximates to the ‘‘rapid’’ motion observed following induc - tion of speciﬁc loci by transcriptional activators ( Chuang et al . , 2006 ) . This increase in locus mobility may be a general charac - teristic of the early differentiating ES cell genome , as we observed a similar increase for all loci examined . Intriguingly , chromatin dynamics ( histone exchange ) has been reported to decrease during differentiation of ES cells ( Meshorer et al . , 2006 ) . However , chromosome dynamics , which is a different ( though possibly related ) phenomenon than chromatin dynamics , had not so far been evaluated . Our results open up the possibility that increasing dynamics of genomic loci may accompany , or even participate in , the changes in gene activity underlying lineage - speciﬁc decisions in differentiating ES cells . This would be consistent with the recent proposal that chromo - some position and conﬁguration change during differentiation ( Rajapakse et al . , 2009 ) . The increased mobility of genomic loci that we have detected may reﬂect active chromatin - remodeling movements within the nucleus , as has been reported in yeast nuclei ( Gartenberg et al . , 2004 ) , and / or be symptomatic of increased cytoskeletal movements , which could impose move - ment and deformation on the nuclear envelope and its contents . Whatever the underlying cause of increased Xic mobility during early differentiation , we believe that this might facilitate the onset of pairing by increasing the frequency of collisions between loci and / or with different nuclear compartments ( Fig - ure 6 ) . However , once they have collided , the Xic loci remain tethered to each other ( or to a speciﬁc nuclear compartment ) as there is a marked decrease in mobility during pairing . Such tethering could occur via speciﬁc sequences in the Xic , or via association with a common nuclear compartment . So far , none of the nuclear compartments we have examined , such as nucleoli , the nuclear envelope , or replication foci , appear to be speciﬁc sites of Xic pairing ( Bacher et al . , 2006 ; Augui et al . , 2007 ; and O . M . , N . M . , and E . H . , unpublished data ) . Although DNA - binding factors , such as CTCF and Oct4 , have been impli - cated in pairing ( Xu et al . , 2007 ; Donohoe et al . , 2009 ) , the ubiquitous nature of their binding is unlikely to explain the spec - iﬁcity of Xic pairing . Xic elements such as the Xpr locus may facilitate such speciﬁcity . Unlike Tsix , Xpr can pair autonomously Cell 145 , 447 – 458 , April 29 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . 455 when present as a single - copy transgene ( Bacher et al . , 2006 ; Augui et al . , 2007 ) . Furthermore , Xpr is part of a large H3K9me2 / H3K27me3 hotspot ( Heard et al . , 2001 ) that may help to hold the Xic loci together via heterochromatic proteins , thus enabling the Tsix loci to interact , with the help of proteins such as CTCF and Oct4 . Keeping the loci together for a pro - longed period of approximately 45 min may be essential for the exchange of information that occurs during Xic pairing and for its subsequent outcome . Our ﬁndings shed new light on the outcome of pairing as we show that after the two Tsix loci have spent time in close prox - imity , they frequently show asymmetric expression upon separa - tion . The explanation we favor is that during pairing , one or more regulatory factors of Tsix becomes asymmetrically distributed , resulting in unequal transcription on the two alleles during the 10 – 60 min time window following their separation ( Figure 6 ) . Although CTCF and Oct4 , which are both reported to bind Tsix / Xite , are candidates for these regulatory factors , so far no evidence has shown that they become asymmetric ( Xu et al . , 2007 ; Donohoe et al . , 2009 ) . The fact that , after just 1 hr , Tsix bial - lelic expression is restored implies that asymmetry is transient . Nevertheless , by this time Xist upregulation has begun in an increased number of cells . We propose that the transient asym - metry in Tsix expression initiated during pairing creates a window of opportunity for upregulation of the Xist allele that is associated with the transiently downregulated Tsix allele . Once Xist RNA starts to accumulate , it will then presumably silence Tsix in cis . Thus a negative feedback loop is established , whereby transient , monoallelic downregulation of Tsix enables the upregulation of Xist , whichwillthenshutdown Tsix andlockinthetransientasym - metry created by pairing ( Figure 6 ) . Although Tsix reverts to bial - lelic expression without Xist RNA accumulation in some cases , Xicpairingduringsubsequentcellcyclescouldallowotheroppor - tunities for Tsix / Xist expression symmetry to be broken produc - tively . We believe that this mechanism of Xist symmetry breaking via the Tsix locus could be a mechanism that evolved to optimize monoallelic Xist regulation in the mouse , as an additional layer of regulation to stochastic events and feedback loops provided by X - linked activators such as Rnf12 ( Jonkers et al . , 2009 ) . Indeed , inothermammalssuchashumansandrabbits , whereafunctional Tsix homolog may not exist , substantial biallelic Xist upregulation can be found during initiation of XCI ( Okamoto et al . , 2011 ) . In thesemammals , Xist expression mayultimatelybecome monoal - lelic only as a result of stochastic events , Rnf12 - like feedback loops , and / or counterselection ( Monkhorst et al . , 2008 ) . In conclusion , our study reveals the in vivo dynamics of chro - mosomal trans - interactions during early differentiation and shows that pairing can result in transiently asymmetric gene expression between two alleles . Deﬁning the nature of the factors involved in Xic tethering and pairing , as well as those Figure 6 . Model for Monoallelic Tsix and Xist Regulation downstream of Pairing at Tsix / Xite From left , nucleus of an undifferentiated ES cell , where both the X chromosomes are actively transcribed and Tsix is biallelically expressed , Xist being more weaklyexpressed . Upondifferentiation , themobility ofchromosomesincreases ; thismayresult inincreased frequencyofrandom collisions between thetwoXic loci . Once the two loci come together , they stay in close proximity ( d % 2 m m ) for (cid:2) 45 min and display reduced mobility , indicative of possible tethering to each other , eitherdirectlyorviasomecommonnuclearcompartment . Immediatelyafterpairing , Tsix expressionbecomesmonoallelictransiently , throughasymmetric distribution of certain factor ( s ) at the locus ( schematically shown below ) . This transient downregulation of Tsix can provide an opportunity for upregulation of Xist transcription in cis and thus initiate XCI . Tsix monoallelic expression may return to a biallelic pattern at later time points , but this will no longer be able to prevent Xist RNA accumulation , and ultimately Tsix will be silenced by Xist in cis , ensuring that asymmetric Xist expression is locked in . 456 Cell 145 , 447 – 458 , April 29 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . that are exchanged and become transiently asymmetrically distributed after pairing has occurred , represents the next challenge . It will also be of interest to assess the degree to which trans - interactions participate in establishing asymmetric gene expression at loci other than the Xic , both in the context of random monoallelic gene expression ( for review , see Ohlsson , 2007 ) , as well as for nonhomologous loci when developmental decisions are being taken , and mutually exclusive expression patterns may sometimes be required . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Cell Culture Feeder - independent PGK12 . 1 mouse female ES cells were a gift from Neil Brockdorff ( Pennyetal . , 1996 ) , andtheirculturehaspreviouslybeendescribed in detail ( Bacher et al . , 2006 ; Augui et al . , 2007 ) . Brieﬂy , ES cells were cultured in DMEM with 15 % FCS , 1000 U / ml LIF , and Penicillin - Streptomycin ( GIBCO ) in 8 % CO 2 . ES cells were grown on gelatin - coated glass coverslips . Differentiation was induced in the presence of all - trans - retinoic acid , as described previously ( Rougeulle et al . , 2004 ) . Plasmids and Constructs To generate a targeting plasmid pSPO2 / FAB / TetO for homologous recombi - nation , two homology arms were PCR - ampliﬁed from mouse genomic DNA with the primers ( FA arm primers , 169 and 4756B ; FB arm primers , 4756A and 910B ) as previously described ( Clerc and Avner , 1998 ) and inserted into the pSPO2 plasmid . The primer sequences are as follows : 169 , 5 0 - CATGA GCTTTGCATCTAGGG - 3 0 ; 4756B , 5 0 - TGCCAGGACTTTGGAACA - 3 0 ; 4756A , 5 0 - C AAAGCCACACGGTTCAA - 3 0 ; 910B , 5 0 - ATTCAACTGCAAGTGAAT - 3 0 . Two hundred and twenty - four copies of a TetO DNA array and Neomycin - resistant cassetteﬂankedwith loxP sequenceswereinsertedbetweentwohomologous arms . Plasmids were ampliﬁed with MaxStbl2 - competent E . coli ( Invitrogen ) . N - terminal of mCherry open reading frame ( ORF ) was fused with the C - terminal of TetR ORF on pBluescript plasmid ( Stratagene ) , then the c - Myc NLS sequence was inserted between two ORFs to generate TetR - NLS - mCherry ORF . The TetR - NLS - mCherry ORF was inserted into the pBROAD3 expression plasmid ( Invivogen ) to generate pBROAD3 / TetR - mycNLS - mCherry . mCherry cDNA was a gift from Roger Tsien . Gene Targeting and Southern Blotting PGK12 . 1 cells were electroporated with NotI - linearized pSPO2 / FAB / TetO plasmid and selected with Neomycin ( 0 . 3 mg / ml ) . Colonies were picked and screened by Southern blotting , using standard protocols . Brieﬂy , extracted genomic DNA was digested with PstI , then resolved on a 0 . 6 % agarose gel . The resolved DNA was transfered to Positive TM Membrane ( Qbiogen ) and probed with 32 P - labeled FD - 1 / 2 DNA probe ( generated with PCR primers FD1 and FD2 ) to distinguish wild - type ( WT ) allele and targeted allele . The primer sequences are as follows : FD1 , 5 0 - GCCAGGGTTGGGTCTTGAAC - 3 0 ; FD2 , 5 0 - CCGACCCGACTGAGGAGTTT - 3 0 . In order to generate homozygous Xic TetO cells , one of the heterozygous Xic TetO clones identiﬁed was treated with increased dosage of G418 ( 30 mg / ml ) for 1 week . Colonies were picked and assessed by Southern blotting for the presence of the targeted allele but the absence of the WT allele . Clones were further analyzed by DNA FISH on metaphase spreads to conﬁrm karyo - type , Xic TetO Xic TetO status , and chromosome integrity . The pBROAD3 / TetR - mycNLS - mCherry - expressing construct was transfected into PGKT2 cells and selected with Hygromycin B , using standard transfection and selection procedures ( see Augui et al . , 2007 ) . Live - Cell Imaging PGKT2 cells expressing the TetR - mCherry transgene were seeded at 5 3 10 4 cells / cm 2 on gridded - glass - bottom dishes ( Matsunami Inc . ) or on 12 mm coverslips in a 6 - well plate for 1 or 2 days before differentiation was initiated . All images were acquired with 60 ms exposure time and 100 3 / 1 . 4 objective with 0 . 3 m m intervals between planes by the DeltaVision system ( API ) . Total exposure time was kept less than 100 s to avoid excess phototoxicity . All images were deconvolved and analyzed with softWoRx software ( API ) . Toxicity was assessed using various conditions of imaging and by assessing cell morphology and viability after several hours . Mean Square Displacement Analysis Three - dimensional manual tracking of distance between the two loci was per - formed using the ‘‘measure distance’’ tool in softWoRx software . MSD calculation was carried out using Matlab ( mathworks , http : / / www . mathworks . com / ) . Assuming that chromatin motion is modeled as a random walk ( Marshall et al . , 1997 ) , the relative mobility of the loci can be determined by plotting their mean square displacement ( MSD or < D d 2 > where D d = d ( t + D t ) - d ( t ) ) as a function of increasing time intervals D t ( d is the distance between the two loci at each time point ) . Free diffusion ( unconstrained motion ) gives a linear relationship between MSD and time intervals , whereas in the case of constrained diffusion , the MSD will reach a ‘‘plateau . ’’ According to Qian et al . ( 1991 ) , the statistical errors related to MSD computation quickly become largewhen D tbecomeslarge : asaresult , MSDcurvesshouldbebasedonlyon early time points ( the ﬁrst quarter of all time points ) . Error bars in individual MSD curves were calculated using the appropriate statistical approach ( Saxton , 1997 ) . Slopes k of individual MSD curves were obtained by a least - square linear ﬁtting of the ﬁrst quarter of points . Three - dimensional diffusion constant D were then determined k = 6 D , as our analyses were done in 3D . To make the analysis more robust ( i . e . , to circumvent the statistical variance inherent to individual cells ) , we averaged all individual MSDs over all the indi - vidual runs recorded for a given differentiation stage . After averaging over N individuals’ MSDs , the error bar is thus reduced by a factor of about 1 = ﬃﬃﬃﬃ N p . Immunoﬂuorescence and RNA and DNA FISH Immunoﬂuorescence , RNAFISH , andDNAFISHwereperformedasdescribed previously ( http : / / www . epigenome - noe . net / WWW / researchtools / protocol . php ? protid = 3 and Augui et al . , 2007 ) . The Xist probe was the p510 plasmid ( Rougeulleetal . , 1994 ) andthe Tsix probewasthe DXPas34 plasmid ( Debrand et al . , 1999 ) . The bacterial artiﬁcial chromosomes ( BACs ) used as probes for certain regions of Xic were as described previously ( Augui et al . , 2007 ) . SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplemental Information includes Extended Experimental Procedures , four ﬁgures , one table , and ﬁve movies and can be found with this article online at doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2011 . 03 . 032 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Wethankmembers of the Heard laboratory and John Sedat for helpful discus - sions ; Miche ` le Guggiari , Christel Picard , Matt Plutz , and Patricia Diaban - gouaya for technical assistance ; Yohanns Bellaiche , Franc¸ois Graner , and Jennifer Chow for helpful advice and for critical reading of the manuscript . We thank Olivier Renaud and Olivier Leroy ( PICT @ BDD imaging facility ) , as wellasSebastianHuartforassistancewithimageanalysis . Thisworkwassup - portedbytheHumanFrontierScienceProgramtoE . H . andA . S . B . ; theEUFP7 program HEROIC IP ; ANR and FRM funding , and an ERC Advanced Investi - gator Award to E . H . ; and the FRM to I . Bonnet ( postdoc grant n (cid:4) SPF20080512397 ) . Received : November 5 , 2010 Revised : February 23 , 2011 Accepted : March 18 , 2011 Published : April 28 , 2011 REFERENCES Augui , S . , Filion , G . J . , Huart , S . , Nora , E . , Guggiari , M . , Maresca , M . , Stewart , A . F . , and Heard , E . ( 2007 ) . Sensing X chromosome pairs before X inactivation via a novel X - pairing region of the Xic . Science 318 , 1632 – 1636 . Cell 145 , 447 – 458 , April 29 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . 457 Bacher , C . P . , Guggiari , M . , Brors , B . , Augui , S . , Clerc , P . , Avner , P . , Eils , R . , andHeard , E . ( 2006 ) . TransientcolocalizationofX - inactivationcentresaccom - panies the initiation of X inactivation . Nat . Cell Biol . 8 , 293 – 299 . Carmo - Fonseca , M . , Platani , M . , and Swedlow , J . R . ( 2002 ) . Macromolecular mobility inside the cell nucleus . Trends Cell Biol . 12 , 491 – 495 . Chuang , C . H . , Carpenter , A . E . , Fuchsova , B . , Johnson , T . , de Lanerolle , P . , and Belmont , A . S . ( 2006 ) . Long - range directional movement of an interphase chromosome site . Curr . Biol . 16 , 825 – 831 . Chubb , J . R . , Boyle , S . , Perry , P . , and Bickmore , W . A . ( 2002 ) . Chromatin motion is constrained by association with nuclear compartments in human cells . Curr . Biol . 12 , 439 – 445 . Chureau , C . , Chantalat , S . , Romito , A . , Galvani , A . , Duret , L . , Avner , P . , and Rougeulle , C . ( 2011 ) . Ftx is a non - coding RNA which affects Xist expression and chromatin structure within the X - inactivation center region . Hum . Mol . Genet . 20 , 705 – 718 . Clerc , P . , and Avner , P . ( 1998 ) . Role of the region 3 0 to Xist exon 6in the count - ing process of X - chromosome inactivation . Nat . Genet . 19 , 249 – 253 . Debrand , E . , Chureau , C . , Arnaud , D . , Avner , P . , and Heard , E . ( 1999 ) . Func - tional analysis of the DXPas34 locus , a 3 0 regulator of Xist expression . Mol . Cell . Biol . 19 , 8513 – 8525 . Donohoe , M . E . , Silva , S . S . , Pinter , S . F . , Xu , N . , and Lee , J . T . ( 2009 ) . The plu - ripotency factor Oct4 interacts with Ctcf and also controls X - chromosome pairing and counting . Nature 460 , 128 – 132 . Gartenberg , M . R . , Neumann , F . R . , Laroche , T . , Blaszczyk , M . , and Gasser , S . M . ( 2004 ) . Sir - mediated repression can occur independently of chromo - somal and subnuclear contexts . Cell 119 , 955 – 967 . Gimelbrant , A . , Hutchinson , J . N . , Thompson , B . R . , and Chess , A . ( 2007 ) . Widespread monoallelic expression on human autosomes . Science 318 , 1136 – 1140 . Heard , E . , Rougeulle , C . , Arnaud , D . , Avner , P . , Allis , C . D . , and Spector , D . L . ( 2001 ) . Methylation of histone H3 at Lys - 9 is an early mark on the X chromo - some during X inactivation . Cell 107 , 727 – 738 . Hewitt , S . L . , Yin , B . , Ji , Y . , Chaumeil , J . , Marszalek , K . , Tenthorey , J . , Salva - giotto , G . , Steinel , N . , Ramsey , L . B . , Ghysdael , J . , et al . ( 2009 ) . RAG - 1 and ATM coordinate monoallelic recombination and nuclear positioning of immu - noglobulin loci . Nat . Immunol . 10 , 655 – 664 . Jonkers , I . , Barakat , T . S . , Achame , E . M . , Monkhorst , K . , Kenter , A . , Rent - meester , E . , Grosveld , F . , Grootegoed , J . A . , and Gribnau , J . ( 2009 ) . RNF12 is an X - encoded dose - dependent activator of X chromosome inactivation . Cell 139 , 999 – 1011 . Lee , J . T . ( 2005 ) . Regulation of X - chromosome counting by Tsix and Xite sequences . Science 309 , 768 – 771 . Lee , J . T . , and Lu , N . ( 1999 ) . Targeted mutagenesisof Tsix leads to nonrandom X inactivation . Cell 99 , 47 – 57 . Lee , J . T . , Davidow , L . S . , and Warshawsky , D . ( 1999 ) . Tsix , a gene antisense to Xist at the X - inactivation centre . Nat . Genet . 21 , 400 – 404 . Lyon , M . F . ( 1961 ) . Gene action in the X - chromosome of the mouse ( Mus mus - culus L . ) . Nature 190 , 372 – 373 . Marshall , W . F . , Straight , A . , Marko , J . F . , Swedlow , J . , Dernburg , A . , Belmont , A . , Murray , A . W . , Agard , D . A . , and Sedat , J . W . ( 1997 ) . Interphase chromo - somes undergo constrained diffusional motion in living cells . Curr . Biol . 7 , 930 – 939 . Meshorer , E . , Yellajoshula , D . , George , E . , Scambler , P . J . , Brown , D . T . , and Misteli , T . ( 2006 ) . Hyperdynamic plasticity of chromatin proteins in pluripotent embryonic stem cells . Dev . Cell 10 , 105 – 116 . Michaelis , C . , Ciosk , R . , and Nasmyth , K . ( 1997 ) . Cohesins : chromosomal proteins that prevent premature separation of sister chromatids . Cell 91 , 35 – 45 . Monkhorst , K . , Jonkers , I . , Rentmeester , E . , Grosveld , F . , and Gribnau , J . ( 2008 ) . X inactivation counting and choice is a stochastic process : evidence for involvement of an X - linked activator . Cell 132 , 410 – 421 . Mortensen , R . M . , Conner , D . A . , Chao , S . , Geisterfer - Lowrance , A . A . , and Seidman , J . G . ( 1992 ) . ProductionofhomozygousmutantEScellswithasingle targeting construct . Mol . Cell . Biol . 12 , 2391 – 2395 . Navarro , P . , and Avner , P . ( 2010 ) . An embryonic story : analysis of the gene regulative network controlling Xist expression in mouse embryonic stem cells . Bioessays 32 , 581 – 588 . Navarro , P . , Chambers , I . , Karwacki - Neisius , V . , Chureau , C . , Morey , C . , Rou - geulle , C . , and Avner , P . ( 2008 ) . Molecular coupling of Xist regulation and plu - ripotency . Science 321 , 1693 – 1695 . Nicodemi , M . , and Prisco , A . ( 2007 ) . Symmetry - breaking model for X - chromo - some inactivation . Phys . Rev . Lett . 98 , 108104 – 108114 . Ogawa , Y . , and Lee , J . T . ( 2003 ) . Xite X - inactivation intergenic transcription elements that regulate the probability of choice . Mol . Cell 11 , 731 – 743 . Ohlsson , R . ( 2007 ) . Genetics . Widespread monoallelic expression . Science 318 , 1077 – 1078 . Okamoto , I . , and Heard , E . ( 2009 ) . Lessons from comparative analysis of X - chromosome inactivation in mammals . Chromosome Res . 17 , 659 – 669 . Okamoto , I . , Patrat , C . , Thepot , D . , Peynot , N . , Fauque , P . , Daniel , N . , Diaban - gouya , P . , Wolf , J . P . , Renard , J . P . , Duranthon , V . , andHeard , E . ( 2011 ) . Euthe - rian mammals use diverse strategies to initiate X - chromosome inactivation during development . Nature . Published online April 6 2011 . 10 . 1038 / nature09872 . Penny , G . D . , Kay , G . F . , Sheardown , S . A . , Rastan , S . , and Brockdorff , N . ( 1996 ) . Requirement for Xist in X chromosome inactivation . Nature 379 , 131 – 137 . Qian , H . , Sheetz , M . P . , andElson , E . L . ( 1991 ) . Singleparticletracking . Analysis of diffusion and ﬂow in two - dimensional systems . Biophys . J . 60 , 910 – 921 . Rajapakse , I . , Perlman , M . D . , Scalzo , D . , Kooperberg , C . , Groudine , M . , and Kosak , S . T . ( 2009 ) . The emergence of lineage - speciﬁc chromosomal topolo - gies from coordinate gene regulation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 6679 – 6684 . Rougeulle , C . , Colleaux , L . , Dujon , B . , and Avner , P . ( 1994 ) . Generation and characterization of an ordered lambda clone array for the 460 - kb region surrounding the murine Xist sequence . Mamm . Genome 5 , 416 – 423 . Rougeulle , C . , Chaumeil , J . , Sarma , K . , Allis , C . D . , Reinberg , D . , Avner , P . , and Heard , E . ( 2004 ) . Differential histone H3 Lys - 9 and Lys - 27 methylation proﬁles on the X chromosome . Mol . Cell . Biol . 24 , 5475 – 5484 . Sado , T . , Wang , Z . , Sasaki , H . , and Li , E . ( 2001 ) . Regulation of imprinted X - chromosome inactivation in mice by Tsix . Development 128 , 1275 – 1286 . Saxton , M . J . ( 1997 ) . Single - particle tracking : the distribution of diffusion coef - ﬁcients . Biophys . J . 72 , 1744 – 1753 . Schoenfelder , S . , Clay , I . , and Fraser , P . ( 2010 ) . The transcriptional interac - tome : gene expression in 3D . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 20 , 127 – 133 . Scialdone , A . , and Nicodemi , M . ( 2008 ) . Mechanics and dynamics of X - chro - mosome pairing at X inactivation . PLoS Comput . Biol . 4 , e1000244 . Sun , B . K . , Deaton , A . M . , and Lee , J . T . ( 2006 ) . A transient heterochromatic state in Xist preempts X inactivation choice without RNA stabilization . Mol . Cell 21 , 617 – 628 . Tian , D . , Sun , S . , and Lee , J . T . ( 2010 ) . The long noncoding RNA , Jpx is a molecular switch for X chromosome inactivation . Cell 143 , 390 – 403 . Williams , A . , Spilianakis , C . G . , and Flavell , R . A . ( 2010 ) . Interchromosomal association and gene regulation in trans . Trends Genet . 26 , 188 – 197 . Xu , N . , Tsai , C . L . , and Lee , J . T . ( 2006 ) . Transient homologous chromosome pairing marks the onset of X inactivation . Science 311 , 1149 – 1152 . Xu , N . , Donohoe , M . E . , Silva , S . S . , and Lee , J . T . ( 2007 ) . Evidence that homol - ogous X - chromosome pairing requires transcription and Ctcf protein . Nat . Genet . 39 , 1390 – 1396 . 458 Cell 145 , 447 – 458 , April 29 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc .