Review Regulation of iron transport and the role of transferrin ☆ , ☆☆ Konstantinos Gkouvatsos a , George Papanikolaou b , Kostas Pantopoulos a , ⁎ a Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research , Jewish General Hospital , and Department of Medicine , McGill University , Montreal , Quebec , Canada b Department of Dietetics and Nutritional Sciences , Harokopion University , Athens , Greece a b s t r a c t a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 18 September 2011 Received in revised form 27 October 2011 Accepted 30 October 2011 Available online 4 November 2011 Keywords : Transferrin Hepcidin Iron metabolism Background : Iron is utilized by several proteins as cofactor for major biological processes . However , iron may also harm cells by catalyzing the generation of free radicals and promoting oxidative stress . Acquisition , transport , utilization and storage of iron are tightly controlled to meet physiological needs and prevent excessive accumulation of the metal within cells . Plasma transferrin has been known for years as a central player in iron metabolism , assigned to circulate iron in a soluble , non - toxic form and deliver it to the erythron and othertissues . Recent data uncovered anadditionalroleoftransferrinasanupstream regulatorofhepcidin , a liver - derived peptide hormone that controls systemic iron traf ﬁ c . Scope of review : Here , we review basic features of iron metabolism , highlighting the function of transferrin in iron transport and cellular iron uptake . We further discuss the role of hepcidin as an orchestrator of systemic iron homeostasis , and the mechanisms underlying hepcidin regulation in response to various physiological cues . Emphasis is given on the role of transferrin on iron - dependent hepcidin regulation . Major conclusions : Transferrin exerts a crucial function in the maintenance of systemic iron homeostasis as component of a plasma iron sensing system that modulates hepcidin expression . General signi ﬁ cance : Proper expression of transferrin and hepcidin are essential for health , and disruption of their regulatory circuits is associated with iron - related disorders . This article is part of a Special Issue entitled Transferrins : Molecular mechanisms of iron transport and disorders . © 2011 Published by Elsevier B . V . 1 . Introduction The unique ability of iron to serve both as an electron donor and acceptor renders this metal irreplaceable for various physiological and metabolic pathways . Vital biochemical activities , including oxygen transport , energy production and cellular proliferation depend on iron - containing cofactors , such as heme , or iron sulfur clusters ( ISC ) . However , although bene ﬁ cial at normal levels , excess iron may become toxic due to its ability to catalyze the generation of free radicals and damage cellular macromolecules [ 1 ] . Mammals have evolved complex homeostatic circuits and specialized molecules to ensure safe and balanced iron acquisition , transfer and storage . Proteins involved in iron transport and in regulation of iron metabolism are summarized in Tables 1 and 2 , respectively . Plasma transferrin ( Tf ) is a powerful chelator , capable of binding iron tightly but reversibly [ 2 , 3 ] . A molecule of Tf can bind two atoms of ferric iron ( Fe 3 + ) with high af ﬁ nity ( K d = 10 − 23 M ) [ 2 ] , which is higher in the extracellular pH of 7 . 4 and decreases in the acidi ﬁ ed endosomes , allowing the dissociation of Fe + 3 . Tf belongs to a family of homologous iron - binding glycoproteins that encom - passes lactoferrin ( found both intracellular and in secretions , in - cluding milk ) , melanotrasferrin ( present on melanoma cells ) and ovotransferrin ( present in egg white ) [ 4 ] . They are all monomeric proteins of 76 – 81 kDa and consist of two structurally similar lobes ( termed N - and C - lobes ) , each containing a single iron - binding site . Iron chelation by transferrin serves three main purposes : i ) it maintains Fe 3 + in a soluble form under physiologic conditions , ii ) it facilitates regulated iron transport and cellular uptake , and iii ) it maintains Fe 3 + in a redox - inert state , preventing the generation of toxic free radicals . Tf has an indirect defensive role against systemic infections by depriving the potential pathogens of extracellular iron , which is essential for their growth [ 5 ] . Moreover , diferric holo - Tf exerts a key regulatory function in the expression of hepcidin ( encoded by the HAMP gene ) , a small hepatic peptide hormone that controls intestinal iron absorption and hepatic and macrophage iron release [ 6 – 8 ] . This review focuses on the functions of Tf and the Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1820 ( 2012 ) 188 – 202 ☆ This article is part of a Special Issue entitled Transferrins : Molecular mechanisms of iron transport and disorders . ☆☆ This work was supported by a grant from the Canadian Institutes for Health Research ( CIHR ; MOP - 86514 ) . ⁎ Corresponding author . Tel . : + 1 514 340 8260x5293 ; fax : + 1 514 340 7502 . E - mail address : kostas . pantopoulos @ mcgill . ca ( K . Pantopoulos ) . 0304 - 4165 / $ – see front matter © 2011 Published by Elsevier B . V . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bbagen . 2011 . 10 . 013 Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect Biochimica et Biophysica Acta journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / bbagen regulation of Tf expression in the context of cellular and systemic iron homeostasis . 2 . Tissue distribution and intestinal iron absorption 2 . 1 . Tissue and plasma iron pools The adult human body contains approximately 3 – 5 g of iron ( about 55 mg and 44 mg per kilogram of body weight for males and females respectively ) , with more than two thirds ( > 2 g ) incorporated in the hemoglobin of developing erythroid precursors and mature red blood cells [ 9 – 11 ] . Most of the remaining body iron is found in a transit pool in reticuloendothelial macrophages ( ~ 600 mg ) or stored in hepa - tocytes ( ~ 1000 mg ) within ferritin , an iron storage protein . A smaller fraction is present in muscles within myoglobin ( ~ 300 mg ) , while only a minuscule amount ( ~ 8 mg ) is constituent of other cellular iron - containing proteins and enzymes . Iron bound to plasma Tf corresponds to less than 0 . 1 % of total body iron ( ~ 3 mg ) , but represents in kinetic terms the most active pool ( Fig . 1 ) . More than 2 million new erythrocytes are produced every second by the bone marrow , requiring a daily supply of at least 20 – 30 mg of iron . To meet bone marrow needs , plasma Tf turns over > 10 times a day . It has been calculated that an iron atom enter - ing the plasma Tf pool will remain for only 90 min in systemic circu - lation before being taken up by the bone marrow [ 12 ] . Of the approximately 30 mg of Tf - bound iron circulating every day , more than 80 % is delivered to bone marrow erythroblasts [ 13 ] . Since the amount of dietary absorbed iron is limited to 1 – 2 mg daily , the basic source of plasma iron is the reticuloendothelial macrophage system . Senescent erythrocytes are phagocytized by macrophages in the spleen , liver and bone marrow . Macrophages degrade hemoglo - bin and catabolize heme in a reaction catalyzed by heme oxygenases ( HO - 1 or HO - 2 ) that liberates inorganic ferrous iron ( Fe 2 + ) and generates CO and biliverdin [ 14 ] . Macrophages export Fe 2 + through the transmembrane transporter ferroportin ( FPN1 ) , in a process coupled by re - oxidation of Fe 2 + to Fe 3 + by ceruloplasmin and fol - lowed by loading of Fe 3 + to Tf ( Fig . 2 ) [ 11 ] . Recycled iron can then be stored in ferritin or released back to plasma Tf at a rate that corre - lates with the iron needs for erythropoiesis [ 13 ] . Finally , approxi - mately 5 mg of the daily plasma iron turnover is allocated to non - erythroid cells such as hepatocytes , macrophages etc . Theoretically , under constant rates of Tf production and catabo - lism , the saturation of Tf with iron is in ﬂ uenced by : i ) the amount of iron absorbed from the diet , ii ) the amount of iron recycled and re - leased by reticuloendothelial macrophages , and iii ) the amount of iron utilized by the bone marrow and other tissues ( Fig . 1 ) . Tf satura - tion is an indicator of body iron stores , but also re ﬂ ects the balance between reticuloendothelial iron release and bone marrow uptake . Under normal conditions , approximately 30 % of the Tf iron - binding sites are saturated . The relatively low Tf saturation in conjunction with its high af ﬁ nity for iron , allow Tf to ef ﬁ ciently buffer alterations of plasma iron levels and capture unshielded iron , minimizing the risk of toxicity . In humans , values of Tf saturation b 15 % indicate iron de ﬁ ciency , whereas > 45 % are consistent with iron overload [ 15 ] . In disorders of severe iron overload ( hemochromatosis ) , Tf saturation exceeds 60 % . Under these conditions , the levels of redox - active non - transferrin bound iron ( NTBI ) increase dramatically ( up to 10 – 15 μ M or higher ) , and excess iron accumulates in tissue parenchymal cells and leads to organ damage [ 16 , 17 ] . Although the exact chemical nature of NTBI remains elusive , it is thoughtto circulate in theplasmain a form that is loosely bound to albumin or small organic acids , such as citrate [ 18 , 19 ] . The liver is the most prominent site of NTBI deposition , although considerable amounts of NTBI accumulate in further tissues , such as heart and pancreas . Table 1 Proteins involved in iron metabolism . Protein Abbreviation Function in iron metabolism Disruption phenotype Iron acquisition Transferrin Tf Plasma iron transfer Iron de ﬁ ciency anemia with tissue iron overload Transferrin receptor 1 TfR1 Internalization of holo - Tf Embryonic lethality in homozygotes . Iron de ﬁ ciency anemia in heterozygotes Sixtransmembraneepithelialantigenoftheprostate3 STEAP3 Ferric reductase in the endosomes of erythroid cells Iron de ﬁ ciency anemia Divalent metal transporter 1 DMT 1 Epithelial / endosomal transport of ferrous iron Iron de ﬁ ciency anemia Duodenal cytochrome b Dcytb Apical membrane ferric reductase of enterocytes Little or no impact on body iron stores Heme oxygenase 1 HO - 1 Degradation of hemoglobin for Fe 2 + release Anemia with low serum iron and hepatic and renal iron overload Cubilin CUBN Reabsorption of Tf from the glomerular ﬁ ltrate No signi ﬁ cant impact with regards to Tf reabsorption Haptoglobin HP Hemoglobin binding and endocytosis via CD163 Increased intestinal iron absorption with splenic and renal iron overload Hemopexin HPX Heme binding and endocytosis via CD91 Regional CNS iron overload HRG - 1 protein HRG - 1 Heme transport Zrt - Irt - like protein 14 Zip14 NTBI uptake by hepatocytes L - type voltage - depended calcium channels LVDCC NTBI uptake by cardiomyocytes Lipocalin 2 Lcn 2 Kidney iron uptake No apparent defects on iron metabolism Ferritin Ft Cellular iron storage and uptake Embryonic lethality ( H - ferritin ) T - cell immunoglobulin domain and mucin - domain TIM - 2 Endocytosis of ferritin Scavenger receptor class A , member 5 Scara5 Endocytosis of ferritin Intracellular iron transport Mitoferrin1 / 2 MFRN1 / 2 Import of ferrous iron to mitochondria Embryonic lethality with profound anemia Iron ef ﬂ ux Ferroportin FPN1 Export of ferrous iron Embryoniclethality in homozygotes . Iron overload withlow Tf saturation inheterozygotes ( HH type 4 ) Hephaestin HEPH Membrane - bound ferroxidase Severe hypochromic anemia & mucosal iron retention Ceruloplasmin CP Plasma ferroxidase Mild anemia with hepatic and regional CNS iron overload Feline leukemia virus , subgroup C , receptor FLVCR Heme export Macrocytic anemia with erythropoietic disorders 189 K . Gkouvatsos et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1820 ( 2012 ) 188 – 202 2 . 2 . Iron absorption Dietary iron absorption occurs in the duodenum and the upper por - tions of the jejunum . Absorbed iron normally equals to obligate iron losses , estimated to approximately 1 – 2 mg / day . Iron is lost through sweating , epidermal sloughing , urinary and intestinal epithelial exfolia - tion or bleeding . Since humans have no physiologic pathway for the excretion of redundant iron , maintenance of iron homeostasis is depen - dent on the regulation of intestinal iron absorption [ 20 , 21 ] . In order to reach systemic circulation , dietary iron has to cross the apical and basolateral membranes of absorptive enterocytes . Gastric acidity promotes the chelation of iron to soluble compounds , such as amines , amino acids and sugars , and is critical for iron bioavailability since prolonged achlorhydria leads to iron de ﬁ ciency [ 22 ] . Heme iron is more bioavailable than inorganic iron and is absorbed by a distinct , yet not well - de ﬁ ned mechanism , which most likely in - volves a specialized heme carrier . A recently proposed candidate ( heme carrier protein 1 ; HCP1 ) [ 23 ] was found to be predominantly a folate transporter and humans harboring mutations in HCP1 suffer from megaloblastic anemia associated with folate de ﬁ ciency [ 23 , 24 ] . Heme may be translocated across the apical membrane of enterocytes either via direct transport or by receptor - mediated endocytosis [ 25 , 26 ] . Subsequently heme is thought to undergo degradation inside enterocytes by heme oxygenases to release Fe 2 + , which follows the fate of absorbedinorganic iron ( seebelow ) . Hememay alsobe exported asanintactmoleculeacrossthebasolateralmembranetoplasmaviathe putative heme exporter FLVCR ( feline leukemia virus , subgroup C , recep - tor ) , and then scavenged by circulating hemopexin ( Hpx ) [ 27 , 28 ] . Inorganic ( non - heme ) iron , which roughly accounts for 90 % of di - etary iron , predominates within the intestinal lumen in the insoluble oxidized Fe 3 + form ( Fig . 2 ) . To cross the apical membrane , nutritional Fe 3 + undergoes reduction by brush border ferrireductases , of which duodenal cytochrome b ( Dcytb ) [ 29 ] is a candidate , and gets subse - quently transported as Fe 2 + by the proton - coupled divalent metal transporter 1 ( DMT1 ) [ 30 – 32 ] . The latter is a member of the solute carrier ( SLC ) family of membrane transport proteins and is also known as SLC11A2 . Experiments in mice showed that DMT1 is indis - pensable for dietary iron absorption [ 33 ] . On the other hand , the dis - ruption of Dcytb did not signi ﬁ cantly affect body iron stores [ 34 ] , suggesting the existence of alternative mechanisms for the reduction of iron in the intestinal lumen . The next step in the process involves the intracellular traf ﬁ c of newly acquired Fe 2 + . Although several models have been proposed , some of them involving chaperons and transcytosis or vesicular transfer of iron , the exact mechanisms are still poorly understood [ 35 ] . In the basolateral membrane , cytosolic iron is exported to the circulation by ferroportin ( FPN1 ) , which also belongs to the SLC transporter family ( SLC40A1 ) [ 36 – 38 ] . The export of iron and its sub - sequent loading to apo - Tf requires the re - oxidation of Fe 2 + to Fe 3 + , catalyzed by the membrane - bound ferroxidase hephaestin ( Fig . 2 ) . The severe hypochromic anemia , associated with mucosal iron reten - tion that characterizes hephaestin mutant ( sla ) mice [ 39 ] , illustrates the importance of this ferroportin - associated oxidase for the ef ﬂ ux of iron across the basolateral membrane of enterocytes . Studies on phlebotomized ceruloplasmin null mice have shown that under stress conditions that may exceed the oxidative capacity of hephaestin , the re - oxidation of Fe 2 + to Fe 3 + upon its release from intestinal entero - cytes is accomplished by its plasma homologue ceruloplasmin [ 40 ] . It has been proposed that circulating gastrins , peptide hormones that stimulate the secretion of gastric acid , may act as transient Fe 3 + chaperones that facilitate the loading of apo - Tf with iron [ 41 ] . 3 . Cellular iron uptake 3 . 1 . Transferrin - mediated mechanisms Erythroid progenitor cells and other rapidly dividing cell popula - tions acquire their metabolic iron from plasma Tf by receptor - mediated endocytosis , following interaction of iron - loaded Tf with the cell surface transferrin receptor 1 ( TfR1 ) . This transmembrane glycoprotein forms a disul ﬁ de - bonded homodimer , which can bind one Tf molecule at each of its subunits [ 42 , 43 ] . Interestingly the iron status of Tf impinges on its af ﬁ nity for TfR1 ; thus , diferric Tf binds with 30 - and 500 - fold higher af ﬁ nity to TfR1 , as compared to mono - ferric and apo - Tf , respectively [ 44 ] . TfR1 is expressed in many cell types . Cells with increased needs for iron such as developing erythroid and intestinal epithelial cells , placental syncytiotropho - blasts and neoplastic cells are among those demonstrating the highest TfR1 levels [ 13 , 43 ] . The events that follow the binding of holo - Tf to TfR1 are schemat - ically illustrated in Fig . 3 . The holo - Tf / TfR1 complex undergoes endo - cytosis via clathrin - coated pits . Acidi ﬁ cation of the endosome by a proton pump ATPase to pH 5 . 5 triggers a conformational change in Tf resulting in the release of Fe 3 + [ 45 ] . This is facilitated by the fact Table 2 Proteins involved in regulation of iron metabolism . Protein Abbreviation Iron regulatory function Disruption phenotype Systemic iron metabolism Hepcidin HEPC Inhibition of ferroportin - mediated iron ef ﬂ ux Early onset severe iron overload with suppressed hepcidin expression ( HHtype2A ) Bone morphogenetic protein 6 BMP 6 Regulation of hepcidin expression in response to hepatic iron Iron overload with decreased levels of hepcidin Hemojuvelin Hjv Enhancement of BMP signaling to hepcidin Early onset severe iron overload with suppressed hepcidin expression ( HHtype2A ) Transferrin Tf Plasma iron transfer Iron de ﬁ ciency anemia withtissueironoverload High Fe ( hemochromatosis ) protein HFE Regulation of hepcidin expression by plasma iron Iron overload with decreased levels of hepcidin ( HH type 1 ) Transferrin receptor 2 TfR2 Regulation of hepcidin expression by plasma iron Iron overload with decreased levels of hepcidin ( HH type 3 ) SMAD4 SMAD4 Signaling to hepcidin Decreased hepcidin levels and iron overload Matriptase - 2 TMPRSS6 Proteolytic cleavage of Hjv Macrocytic anemia with low iron stores and increased hepcidin Neogenin NEO Regulation of Hjv Hepatic iron overload with decreased hepcidin levels and BMP - signaling Cellular iron metabolism Iron regulatory protein 1 IRP1 Post - transcriptional regulation of IRE - containing mRNAs No apparent impact on iron metabolism Iron regulatory protein 2 IRP2 Post - transcriptional regulation of IRE - containing mRNAs Microcytic anemia with increased iron loading of the liver and the duodenum F - box and leucine - rich repeat protein 5 FBXL5 Iron - dependent ubiquitination and degradation of IRP2 Embryonic lethality . Liver - speci ﬁ c knock - out mice develop iron over - load and die with liver - failure when fed an iron - rich diet 190 K . Gkouvatsos et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1820 ( 2012 ) 188 – 202 that Tf remains bound to TfR1 , since a mildly acidic pH alone would not have been enough to remove iron ef ﬁ ciently from both Tf binding sites [ 46 ] . Liberated Fe 3 + needs to be reduced before transportation , via DMT1 [ 47 ] , across the endosomal membrane to the cytosol . The ferric reductase STEAP3 ( six - transmembrane epithelial antigen of the prostate 3 ) has been shown to perform this function in immature erythroid cells [ 48 ] . Finally , the apo - Tf / TfR1 complex returns to the cell membrane , through a process involving the traf ﬁ cking protein Sec15l1 [ 49 ] , where apo - Tf is recycled back to the bloodstream , avail - able to recapture iron . The half - life of Tf in humans is around 8 days , while iron delivery via the Tf / TfR1 cycle can be completed in approx - imately 5 – 20 min , depending on the cell type [ 50 ] . In other words , each Tf molecule may accomplish hundreds of cycles of iron binding and delivery to cells during its life span . Fig . 1 . Distribution and traf ﬁ cof iron in the body . Most of the body iron is utilized in hemoglobin of developing erythroid precursors and mature red blood cells . Reticuloendothelial macrophages recycle iron from ingested senescent erythrocytes and release it to plasma Tf for delivery to the bone marrow and other tissues . Likewise , dietary iron that is absorbed by duodenal enterocytes also reaches plasma Tf , which circulates 30 mg of iron per day . Excess of body iron is stored in liver hepatocytes . Fig . 2 . Regulation of systemic iron traf ﬁ c by hepcidin . Duodenal enterocytes assimilate dietary iron from the intestinal lumen via DMT1 , following reduction of Fe 3 + to Fe 2 + by Dcytb . Reticuloendothelial macrophages recycle iron from phagocytized senescent red blood cells . Both cell types release Fe 2 + to plasma via ferroportin , which is then re - oxidized to Fe 3 + by hephaestinorceruloplasmin , andcapturedbycirculatingapo - Tf . Liver - derivedhepcidininhibitsironef ﬂ uxfromthesecellsbybindingtoferroportin , whichpromotesitsinternalization and lysosomal degradation . The expression of hepcidin is induced by iron , in ﬂ ammatory signals or ER stress , and suppressed by iron de ﬁ ciency , erythropoietic signals or hypoxia . 191 K . Gkouvatsos et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1820 ( 2012 ) 188 – 202 Although this high - af ﬁ nity pathway accounts for most of the up - take of Tf - bound iron in cells , alternative low - af ﬁ nity mechanisms have also been described [ 51 ] . Studies in Huh7 hepatoma cells pro - vided evidence for internalization of Tf - bound iron in a low - af ﬁ nity and TfR1 - independent manner [ 52 ] . The contribution of such mecha - nisms to cellular iron acquisition depends on the concentration of Tf and the cell type . At low Tf concentrations ( b 0 . 3 μ mol / L ) TfR1 medi - ated uptake predominates , while at higher Tf concentrations low - af ﬁ nity mechanisms take over [ 53 ] . It should be noted that the physiological concentration of diferric holo - Tf in human plasma is ~ 5 μ mol / L , representing ~ 10 % of total circulating Tf [ 13 ] . This indi - cates that TfR1 - independent pathways may dominate the uptake of holo - Tf in many cells . Experiments showed that hepatocytes and intestinal crypt cells acquire Tf - bound iron by utilizing both high - and low - af ﬁ nity systems , whereas holo - Tf enters immature erythroid cells exclusively via the TfR1 route [ 53 , 54 ] . The exact mechanisms for TfR1 - independent uptake of Tf - bound iron have not been well characterized . One of them could potentially involve transferrin receptor 2 ( TfR2 ) that is mainly expressed in hepa - tocytes , and binds holo - Tf with a 25 - fold lower af ﬁ nity compared to its homolog TfR1 [ 55 , 56 ] . However , the limited tissue distribution of TfR2 does not support a broad role of this receptor in low - af ﬁ nity iron uptake . Along these lines , there are cell types demonstrating considerable TfR1 - independent uptake of Tf - bound iron , such as the intestinal crypt cells , which do not express TfR2 [ 53 ] . Moreover , mutations of TfR2 in both humans and mice have not been associated with defects in iron delivery to tissues [ 57 , 58 ] , whereas ablation of the TfR1 gene impairs erythropoiesis and neurologic development in mice and leads to embryonic lethality [ 59 ] . TfR2 mutations cause hereditary hemochromatosis [ 57 , 58 ] , indicating a critical role of this protein in the regulation of systemic iron homeostasis rather than cellular iron uptake , which will be discussed later in this review . In the kidney , renal proximal tubules acquire Tf - bound iron via the membrane receptor cubilin , which operates conjugated to its co - receptor megalin [ 60 ] . Cubilin is expressed on the apical ( urine facing ) membrane of the proximal tubule cells and mediates the re - absorption of ﬁ ltered Tf from the glomerular ﬁ ltrate [ 61 ] . Other potential candidates as receptors for low - af ﬁ nity uptake of Tf - bound iron are glyceraldehyde - 3 - phosphate - dehydrogenase ( GAPDH ) and proteoglycans , which have been reported to mediate endocytosis of holo - Tf in macrophages and hepatocytes , respectively [ 51 , 62 ] . How - ever , the overall contribution of these molecules to cellular iron - uptake in vivo is currently unclear and awaits validation . TfR1 - mediated endocytosis is the only route for iron delivery to erythroid precursors . Its importance is highlighted by the embryonic lethality of mice with targeted disruption of TfR1 , which is associated with hematopoietic and neuronal defects [ 59 ] . Moreover , heterozy - gous Tfr1 + / − mice manifest severe microcytic hypochromic anemia [ 59 ] . Likewise , hypotransferrinemic mice , which express pathologi - cally low levels of Tf ( b 1 % compared to healthy animals ) due to a splicing defect , develop severe iron de ﬁ ciency anemia , accompanied by massive iron overload in all non - hematopoietic tissues [ 63 ] . Thus , regardless of the existence of multiple pathways of Tf - bound iron uptake , the Tf / TfR1 cycle is indispensable for the delivery of Tf - bound iron to hemoglobin - synthesizing developing erythroid cells . The Tf / TfR1 route is also essential for iron transport to the central nervous system ( CNS ) , which is separated from the circulation by the blood brain barrier . This consists of capillary endothelial cells , a base - ment membrane and endfeet of astrocytes that form tight junctions and do not allow the free passage of nutrients and proteins , including Tf [ 64 ] . It appears that brain capillary endothelial cells acquire iron from plasma Tf via TfR1 and release it to the brain interstitium , possibly within vesicles [ 65 ] . Astrocytes play a crucial role in providing iron to neurons [ 66 ] and are capable of exporting the metal via ferroportin , with the aid of a membrane - bound ceruloplasmin isoform [ 67 ] . Exported iron can bind to brain Tf , which is locally produced by the choroid plexus . Brain Tf delivers iron to TfR1 - expressing cells , such as developing oligodendrocytes [ 68 ] and neurons [ 69 ] . However , because the concentration of Tf in the brain is considerably lower compared to that in plasma and , moreover , brain Tf is fully saturated with iron [ 70 ] , it is very likely that the delivery of iron to CNS cells also involves transferrin - independent mechanisms . The transport of iron to the developing fetus during pregnancy is mediated by the binding of maternal circulating Tf to TfR1 on the Fig . 3 . Cellular uptake of Tf - bound plasma iron . Circulating diferric Tf binds to TfR1 and the Tf / TfR1 complex undergoes endocytosis via clathrin - coated pits . A drop of pH to 5 . 5 , mediated by a proton pump , triggers the release of Fe 3 + from Tf . Following reduction by STEAP3 , Fe 2 + gets transported across the endosomal membrane to the cytosol via DMT1 . Apo - Tf is recycled back to the cell surface and released from TfR1 to plasma for another iron uptake cycle . 192 K . Gkouvatsos et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1820 ( 2012 ) 188 – 202 placental microvillar membrane [ 71 ] , which is followed by ef ﬂ ux of iron via ferroportin [ 72 ] , for binding to fetal Tf . 3 . 2 . Transferrin - independent mechanisms Tf is the principal source of iron for tissues . However , as discussed above , speci ﬁ c cell types may assimilate iron via alternative Tf - independent routes . For example , macrophages acquire high amounts of iron through phagocytosis of senescent erythrocytes . Following in - travascular hemolysis , hemoglobin or free heme are released and cir - culate in plasma . Haptoglobin ( Hp ) , a liver - derived plasma protein binds to free hemoglobin and promotes its endocytosis in macro - phages , upon recognition by the CD163 receptor [ 73 , 74 ] . Likewise , free heme is scavenged by hemopexin and the resulting complex is endocytosed via the CD91 receptor , present on the surface of macro - phages , hepatocytes and other cell types [ 28 , 75 ] . Specialized cells may possess the capacity to acquire heme iron via direct transport of heme across their plasma membrane [ 15 , 25 , 27 ] . Members of the conserved family of HRG - 1 ( SLC48A1 ) proteins , which were shown to mediate heme transport in Caenorhabditis elegans and to be essen - tial for erythropoiesis in zebra ﬁ sh [ 76 ] , are good candidates for this activity . Nevertheless , further studies are required to establish the functional signi ﬁ cance of HRG - 1 proteins in mammalian heme ho - meostasis . The putative heme chaperone HRG - 3 was recently reported to supply maternal heme to developing C . elegans embryos [ 77 ] , but it is currently unclear whether mammalian HRG - 3 homologs exist , which could potentially be involved in intercellular pathways for heme delivery . In iron overload states ( hereditary hemochromatosis , hypotrans - ferrinemia / atransferrinemia , transfusional siderosis etc . ) , NTBI that accumulates in the circulation is transported to tissue parenchymal cells by Tf - independent mechanisms [ 19 ] . DMT1 was initially pro - posed to operate as a major NTBI transporter in the liver , which is the principal site of NTBI clearance . However , liver - speci ﬁ c Dmt1 − / − mice are not protected against hepatic iron accumulation [ 33 ] . This is consistent with the lack of signi ﬁ cant iron transport activity by proton - dependent DMT1 at neutral pH , where NTBI uptake occurs . Moreover , it implies the existence of other pathways . The zinc trans - porter Zip14 ( Zrt - Irt - like protein 14 — also known as SLC39A14 ) exhibits a capacity for NTBI uptake in cultured cells [ 78 ] , but the role of this protein in liver iron loading remains to be established . Interest - ingly , apart from its NTBI transporting activity , Zip14 appears to also facilitate cellular assimilation of Tf - bound iron in cells [ 79 ] . Cardiomyocytes may take up considerable amounts of NTBI through L - type voltage - depended calcium channels ( LVDCC ) [ 80 ] . Indeed , treatment of iron overloaded mice with calcium channel blockers such as amlodipine or verapamil led to attenuation of myo - cardial iron accumulation and oxidative stress , and improved the cardiac function [ 80 ] . These results not only validated the involve - ment of LVDCC in myocardial iron uptake but also uncovered a new potential target for the treatment of heart disease , which develops secondary to iron overload disorders . A similar role of voltage - gated calcium channels has been proposed in the context of iron delivery to neuronal cells [ 81 ] . In the kidney , iron - loaded lipocalin 2 ( Lcn2 ) can be endocytosed by the receptors 24p3R ( also known as SLC22A17 ) [ 82 ] and megalin [ 83 ] . These de ﬁ ne further Tf - independent iron uptake mechanisms , which operate during organ development [ 84 ] , injury [ 85 ] or in ﬂ am - mation [ 82 ] . Lcn2 − / − mice develop normally and do not exhibit any iron metabolism defects [ 86 ] , excluding a major non - redundant function of the Lcn2 pathways in iron uptake . Finally , serum ferritin has been implicated in iron uptake , especially in pathological states where tissue damage results in release of iron - rich intracellular ferritin into plasma . Its endocytosis is mediated by the TIM - 2 ( T - cell immunoglobulin - domain and mucin - domain 2 ) [ 87 ] and the Scara5 ( scavenger receptor class A , member 5 ) [ 88 ] receptors , while H - ferritin can also be internalized upon speci ﬁ c binding to TfR1 [ 89 ] . Whether other ferritin uptake pathways exist , remains to be determined . 4 . Cellular iron metabolism 4 . 1 . Iron traf ﬁ cking , utilization and storage The traf ﬁ cking of iron inside the cells is perplexing and despite signi ﬁ cant recent advances several aspects remain poorly understood . It is believed that following its DMT1 - mediated transport across the endosomal membrane to the cytosol , newly acquired iron from the Tf / TfR1 cycle enters the labile iron pool ( LIP ) [ 90 ] . This is a transient pool of redox - active iron , presumably associated with several low molecular - weight chelates , such as citrate , ATP , AMP , pyrophosphate or various peptides . Although it represents only a minor fraction of total cellular iron ( estimated to be approximately 3 – 5 % ) , the cytosolic LIP re ﬂ ects the cellular iron status [ 91 ] . Thus , ﬂ uctuations of LIP levels are monitored by intracellular sensors , which trigger homeostatic adaptive responses . Cytosolic iron can enter the mitochondria via the SLC transporter mitoferrin ( Mfrn or SLC25A37 ) , localized to the inner mitochondrial membrane [ 92 ] . This is expressed in two isoforms , the erythroid - speci ﬁ c mitoferrin - 1 [ 93 ] and the ubiquitous mitoferrin - 2 [ 94 ] . Recent studies suggested an involvement of 2 , 5 - dihydroxybenzoic acid ( 2 , 5 - DHBA ) , a ligand of Lcn2 , in mitochondrial iron transport [ 95 ] . Cells unable to synthesize this mammalian siderophore accumulate exces - sive quantities of cytoplasmic iron and exhibit mitochondrial iron de ﬁ ciency , suggesting a requirement of 2 , 5 - DHBA for iron entry to mi - tochondria . Other experiments in hemoglobin - synthesizing erythroid cells have provided evidence that iron can be transported directly from the endosomes to the mitochondria via a “ kiss - and - run ” mecha - nism involving a direct contact between the two organelles [ 96 , 97 ] . Once inside the mitochondria , iron is utilized for the biosynthesis of heme or iron – sulfur clusters , which are pathways of paramount impor - tance for cellular metabolism [ 98 – 100 ] . Cellular iron that is not required immediately for metabolic pur - poses can be sequestered in the cytosol within ferritin , for storage and detoxi ﬁ cation . Each molecule of ferritin consists of 24 subunits of H - ( heavy ) and L - ( light ) chains , which are encoded by distinct genes and assemble into a shell - like structure [ 101 ] . A distinct ferritin isoform is expressed in mitochondria of speci ﬁ c cells [ 102 ] . The func - tion of mitochondrial ferritin ( FtMt ) is to detoxify excessive iron that accumulates in these organelles under pathological conditions , such as in sideroblastic anemia . Iron stored within ferritin is redox - inert and can be mobilized following ferritin degradation by lysosomes or the proteasome [ 103 , 104 ] . The essential role of ferritin in cellular iron metabolism is highlighted by the early embryonic lethality of H - ferritin null mice [ 105 ] . Excess of intracellular iron can also be exported via ferroportin [ 106 ] . In addition , heme iron may be released from cells expressing FLVCR [ 107 ] . 4 . 2 . Coordinate regulation of cellular iron homeostasis Cellular iron uptake , utilization , storage and transport are coordi - nately controlled by post - transcriptional mechanisms involving the iron responsive element ( IRE ) / iron regulatory protein ( IRP ) system . Several proteins of iron metabolism are encoded by mRNAs containing one or more IREs in their untranslated regions ( UTRs ) . These phyloge - netically conserved hairpin structures constitute binding sites for two homologous iron regulatory proteins , IRP1 and IRP2 , which are activated for IRE - binding in iron - starved cells [ 108 – 112 ] . IRE / IRP interactions inhibit translation of the mRNAs encoding H - and L - ferritin , ALAS2 ( erythroid - speci ﬁ c 5 - aminolevulenic acid synthetase 2 ; a key enzyme for heme biosynthesis ) , ferroportin , 193 K . Gkouvatsos et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1820 ( 2012 ) 188 – 202 HIF - 2 α ( hypoxia inducible factor 2 α ) and others , which contain a single IRE in their 5 ′ UTR . In addition , IRE / IRP interactions stabilize TfR1 and DMT1 mRNAs , containing IREs in their 3 ′ UTR . Under conditions of iron de ﬁ ciency , these homeostatic adaptations allow increased iron uptake and transport via DMT1 and prevent storage of scarce iron into ferritin and ef ﬂ ux via ferroportin . Moreover , under iron - limiting conditions , the IRP - mediated translational suppression of ALAS2 [ 113 ] and HIF - 2 α [ 114 ] is thought to block erythroid heme biosynthesis and expression of HIF - 2 α transcriptional target genes of iron metabolism and erythropoiesis , respectively . In specialized cell types , alternatively spliced non - IRE - containing isoforms of ferroportin [ 115 ] and DMT1 [ 116 ] mRNAs bypass post - transcriptional regulation by IRPs . An increase in iron supply prevents IRPs from binding to IREs and allows opposite homeostatic responses . In IRP1 , this involves the re - versible insertion of a cubane 4Fe - 4S cluster that converts the protein into a cytosolic aconitase [ 108 – 110 , 112 ] . By contrast , IRP2 undergoes iron - and oxygen - dependent degradation following ubiquitination by FBXL5 ( F - box and leucine - rich repeat protein 5 ) , an E3 ubiquitin ligase that senses iron levels via an Fe – O – Fe center within its hemerythrin domain [ 117 – 119 ] . Iron de ﬁ ciency promotes the removal of IRP1 ' s iron – sulfur cluster [ 120 ] and the stabilization of IRP2 [ 121 ] , resulting in increased IRE - binding activity . IRPs also respond to iron - independent signals . Thus , both IRP1 and IRP2 can be induced upon exposure of cells to H 2 O 2 [ 122 , 123 ] or NO [ 124 , 125 ] , stimulating TfR1 expression and iron uptake [ 126 , 127 ] . Sustained H 2 O 2 may also activate TfR1 expression and iron uptake in an IRP1 - independent manner [ 128 ] . Hypoxia results in IRP2 stabi - lization [ 129 ] , while it decreases the IRE - binding activity of IRP1 and modulates cellular iron homeostasis [ 130 ] . Taken together , these data provide links between iron metabolism , in ﬂ ammation and hypoxic responses . The IRE / IRP system is essential for life [ 131 ] . Targeted disruption of both IRPs causes embryonic lethality [ 132 , 133 ] , highlighting the importance of these proteins in early development . The viability of single Irp1 − / − or Irp2 − / − animals indicates a high degree of functional redundancy between IRP1 and IRP2 . Irp1 − / − mice are asymptomatic under standard laboratory conditions [ 134 ] , whereas Irp2 − / − mice develop hypochromic microcytic anemia and exhibit abnormal body iron distribution ( iron overloaded duodenum and liver , iron de ﬁ cient spleen ) [ 135 , 136 ] . Experiments with tissue speci ﬁ c disruption of both IRP1 and IRP2 revealed an important role of IRPs in regulation of intes - tinal iron transport [ 133 ] and iron suf ﬁ ciency in hepatocellular mito - chondria [ 137 ] . 5 . Regulation of Tf expression Tf is expressed predominantly in the fetal and adult liver , but lower amounts can be synthesized in other tissues such as the brain and the testis [ 138 ] . The expression of the Tf gene is controlled by transcriptional mechanisms . The levels of Tf mRNA increase steadily in liver during fetal development , reaching a plateau shortly after birth , and remain high in adult life [ 13 ] . By contrast , Tf expression declines rapidly after birth in other tissues such as the kidney , the spleen , the lung , the heart and the muscles [ 13 ] . Tissue speci ﬁ city of Tf expression is accomplished by the recruit - ment of different combinations of transcription factors in speci ﬁ c subsets of cells [ 138 ] . Two binding sites , PRI and PRII ( proximal regions I and II respectively ) , localized adjacent to the − 125 / + 1 promoter region , exhibit a key regulatory role in hepatic Tf transcrip - tion [ 139 , 140 ] . PRI interacts with HNF - 4 ( hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 ) [ 141 ] , while PRII contains a CCAAT sequence that binds to C / EBP ( CCAAT enhancer - binding protein ) [ 142 ] . Both these transcription factors positively regulate Tf expression in the liver . By contrast , Tf transcription in Sertoli cells and in the brain is regulated by different factors [ 140 ] . An enhancer region 3 . 6 kb upstream from the Tf mRNA transcriptional start site that interacts with HNF - 3 α and other ubiqui - tous factors , was found to be active in hepatocytes but not in Sertoli cells , explaining the 10 - fold lower amount of Tf mRNA found in the latter [ 140 , 141 ] . Studies in hepatoma cells revealed that the − 1000 / − 819 upstream region is able to repress the Tf promoter [ 141 ] . In neuronal cells and oligodendrocytes the expression of Tf is regulated by a different combination of transcriptional factors . These include C / EBP , CRI - BP ( central region I binding protein ) and COUP - TF ( chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription factor ) , with the two ﬁ rst having a positive regulator function and COUP - TF acting as a repressor [ 13 ] . In iron de ﬁ ciency , the rate of Tf synthesis in the liver increases sig - ni ﬁ cantly ( 2 - to 4 - fold ) but the underlying mechanism is unknown [ 143 ] . In contrast , Tf gene expression in the kidney , testis or brain is not affected by iron [ 143 ] . Furthermore , in ﬂ ammatory or immuno - logic stimuli may decrease the levels of circulating Tf , even though interleukin - 6 ( IL - 6 ) and other in ﬂ ammatory cytokines were shown to upregulate the expression of Tf gene in hepatoma cells [ 144 ] . Finally , in vitro studies identi ﬁ ed two adjacent hypoxia response elements ( HREs ) within the Tf gene enhancer , which are binding sites of HIF - 1 ( hypoxia - inducible factor - 1 ) [ 145 ] . This is consistent with the known increase in levels of circulating Tf under hypoxia [ 15 – 17 ] , a response that may facilitate iron supply for erythropoiesis . 6 . Regulation of systemic iron homeostasis 6 . 1 . Hepcidin , the iron - regulatory peptide hormone Tight and accurate regulation of iron absorption in humans is crit - ical to prevent systemic excess or de ﬁ ciency . This complex task is accomplished by hepcidin , a liver - derived peptide hormone that responds to multiple regulatory cues , including , iron availability , erythropoietic activity , anemia , in ﬂ ammatory signals and hypoxia ( Fig . 2 ) [ 15 , 146 ] . Hepcidin exerts its biological action by binding to ferroportin and promoting its phosphorylation , internalization and lysosomal degra - dation [ 147 ] . Since ferroportin is the unique cellular iron exporter in mammals [ 72 ] , its expression in enterocytes and macrophages deter - mines the degree of intestinal iron absorption and reticuloendothelial iron release . Therefore hepcidin ' s physiological role is to act as a neg - ative regulator of iron absorption and release . Humans with nonsense mutations in the hepcidin gene ( HAMP ) , suffer from juvenile hemochromatosis ( JH ) , a disease characterized byearlyonsetofsevereironoverload [ 148 ] . JHisasubtypeofhereditary hemochromatosis ( HH ) , a genetically heterogeneous disorder where hepcidin de ﬁ ciency or ferroportin resistance to hepcidin leads to increased iron absorption and progressive systemic iron accumula - tion [ 149 , 150 ] . Clinical complications of iron overload include ﬁ brosis and cirrhosis of the liver , hypogonadism , arthritis , cardiomyopathy , diabetes and skin hyperpigmentation . The majority of adult cases are attributed to mutations in HFE or , more rarely , to mutations in TfR2 and ferroportin ( SLC40A1 ) . On the opposite side in the spectrum , patients with mutations in matriptase - 2 ( encoded by the TMPRSS6 gene ) , a transmembrane serine protease , manifest pathologically increased hepcidin levels and develop a form of iron de ﬁ ciency anemia that is refractory to oral iron administration ( iron refractory iron de ﬁ - ciency anemia - IRIDA ) [ 151 ] . Similarly , Tmprss6 − / − and mask mice exhibit growth retardation , alopecia and severe anemia , as a result of hepcidin upregulation [ 152 ] . Under chronic in ﬂ ammatory conditions , increased hepcidin expression contributes to the anemia of chronic disease [ 153 ] . Biologically active hepcidin is a peptide of 25 amino acids [ 154 , 155 ] . It is generated primarily in hepatocytes , and at much lower levels in other cell types , upon cleavage of a larger 84 amino acid pro - peptide bythepro - hormoneconvertase furin [ 156 ] . Mature hepcidin is secreted to plasma and circulates bound to α 2 - macroglobulin [ 157 ] . Hepcidin 194 K . Gkouvatsos et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1820 ( 2012 ) 188 – 202 levels increase in response to iron [ 158 ] or in ﬂ ammation [ 159 ] , the latter considered as a mechanism of innate immunity to deprive iron from rapidly growing invading pathogens . Conversely , hepcidin levels drop with iron de ﬁ ciency , hypoxia and increased erythropoietic demand for iron [ 160 ] . Hepatocytes integrate diverse signals deriving from thesestimuli , whichresult intranscriptionalactivationofhepcidin by as yet partially characterized mechanisms . Basal hepcidin transcrip - tion requires C / EBP α ( CCAAT enhancer - binding protein α ) , which binds to a CCAAT promoter element [ 161 ] . Regulation of hepcidin expression in response to different stimuli is discussed below . 6 . 2 . Iron - dependent regulation of hepcidin expression Clinical studies in humans and experiments in mice have provided evidence that hepcidin expression can be modulated by both hepatic iron stores and circulating iron . Patients with HFE - or TfR2 - related he - mochromatosis show blunted hepcidin responses after oral iron chal - lenge , as compared to healthy controls [ 162 , 163 ] . Moreover , their hepcidinlevelsareinappropriatelylowrelativetoironload , asexpressed by the hepcidin / ferritin ratio [ 164 – 167 ] . Similar ﬁ ndings have been reported in mouse models of hemochromatosis [ 58 , 165 , 168 , 169 ] . 6 . 2 . 1 . Regulation by iron stores Hepatic iron is thought to induce hepcidin expression via bone morphogenetic protein ( BMP ) signaling ( Fig . 4 ) [ 170 , 171 ] . Activation of the BMP receptor upon BMP binding [ 172 ] eventually leads to phosphorylation of the intracellular SMAD1 , SMAD5 and SMAD8 proteins ( homologs of both the drosophila protein mothers against decapentaplegic and the C . elegans protein SMA ) . Subsequently , activat - ed p - SMAD1 / 5 / 8 interacts with SMAD4 and the complex translocates Fig . 4 . Modelsforiron - dependent regulationofhepcidin . ( A ) Whenthelevelsofserumironarelow , TfR1sequestersHFE , preventing itsinteractionwithTfR2 , whichisnecessaryfor signaling to hepcidin . Likewise , low hepatic iron content precludes expression and release of BMP6 for SMAD signaling . ( B ) When plasma iron levels increase , holo - Tf displaces HFE from TfR1 , allowing its interaction with TfR2 . The resulting , HFE / TfR2 complex activates the SMAD signaling cascade and / or the MAPK pathway , which activates hepcidin transcription . Hepatic iron overload triggers the expression and release of BMP6 , which activates the SMAD signaling cascade upon binding to BMP type I and II receptors and Hjv . 195 K . Gkouvatsos et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1820 ( 2012 ) 188 – 202 to the nucleus and binds to two BMP responsive elements ( BMP - RE1 and BMP - RE2 ) at proximal and distal sites of the hepcidin promoter , thereby activating its transcription [ 173 , 174 ] . In agreement with this model , liver - speci ﬁ c Smad4 − / − mice misregulate hepcidin expression and develop iron overload [ 175 ] . Biochemical experiments showed that inhibitory SMAD7 blocks the interaction of p - SMAD1 / 5 / 8 with SMAD4 and attenuates hepcidin expression [ 176 ] . Among the various BMPs , which induce hepcidin in vitro ( BMP2 , 5 , 6 , 7 and 9 ) [ 170 , 175 , 177 , 178 ] , BMP6 is the most physiologically relevant . Mice with targeted disruption of BMP6 in the liver exhibit iron overload and express nearly undetectable hepcidin levels , excluding a possible redundant compensatory role of other BMPs [ 179 , 180 ] . Injection of recombinant BMP6 into mice increased hepcidin expression and reduced serum iron levels [ 179 ] , whereas administration of a BMP6 neutralizing antibody [ 179 ] or the BMP6 antagonist dorsomorphin trig - gered opposite effects [ 181 ] . The expression of BMP6 mRNA is induced byironviaayetunknownmechanism , andBMP6mRNAlevelscorrelate with hepatic iron content , suggesting that BMP6 senses alterations in hepatocellular iron [ 7 , 171 ] . Hemojuvelin ( Hjv ) , encoded by the HFE2 gene , is a BMP co - receptor and forms complexes with type I and II BMP receptors , which enhance BMP / SMAD signal transduction and augment hepcidin expression [ 170 ] . It is expressed in hepatocytes and skeletal muscles and binds to membranesviaaC - terminal GPI ( glycosylphosphatidylinositol ) anchor . Humans with Hjv mutations exhibit profound hepcidin suppression and develop a JH phenotype [ 166 ] , clinically indistinguishable to that of patients with hepcidin disruption [ 182 ] . Mice with complete [ 183 , 184 ] or liver - speci ﬁ c [ 185 , 186 ] ablation of Hjv recapitulate iron overload . Biochemical experiments suggested that membrane - associated hepatocellular Hjv can be inactivated following cleavage by matriptase - 2 , which thereby attenuates BMP / SMAD signaling and acts as a negative regulator of hepcidin expression [ 187 ] . The importance of matriptase - 2 is also highlighted by genome wide association studies that show a correlation between matriptase - 2 variants , serum iron , transferrin saturation and hemoglobin levels [ 188 – 190 ] . Hypoxia increases matriptase - 2 expression , while mice treated with BMP6 or iron were found to up - regulate matriptase - 2 mRNA , very likely via induction of Id1 ( inhibitor of DNA binding 1 ) [ 191 ] . These ﬁ ndings suggest a role for matriptase - 2 in ﬁ ne - tuning hepcidin expression . By acting as a negative feedback regulator , it prevents elevated iron stores from leading to excessive hepcidin accumulation and thereby further deregulating iron homeostasis . Soluble forms of hemojuvelin ( sHjv ) , lacking the GPI - anchor , have been detected in human [ 192 , 193 ] rat [ 194 ] and mouse [ 195 ] plasma . One of them , generated by furin - mediated proteolytic cleavage at R332 [ 196 ] has been proposed to function as a decoy that inhibits signaling to hepcidin [ 197 ] . This concept derives from in vitro exper - iments with a puri ﬁ ed recombinant soluble form of Hjv [ 192 ] and in vivo data with a chimeric sHjv . Fc fusion construct [ 177 ] . Other forms of sHjv can be generated upon proteolytic cleavage at R288 by matriptase - 2 [ 187 ] or lipolytic cleavage of the GPI anchor by phospholipase A [ 198 ] . The former does not compete BMP signaling to hepcidin [ 199 ] . The origin of sHjv in plasma remains unknown , but given the abundance of Hjv in skeletal muscles [ 166 ] and the capacity of differentiating muscle cells to release sHjv [ 200 ] , it can be hypothesized that circulating sHjv may derive from muscles . Nevertheless , recent results have casted doubt on the physiological relevance of sHjv as a negative regulator of BMP signaling to hepcidin . Thus , mice with conditional disruption of muscular Hjv did not exhibit any obvious alterations in iron metabolism or hepcidin expression [ 185 , 186 ] . 6 . 2 . 2 . Regulation by circulating iron and holotransferrin Modulation of hepcidin by circulating iron levels is likely mediated by HFE and Tf receptors that sense alterations in plasma Tf saturation ( Fig . 4 ) . Injection of holo - Tf into mice caused a pronounced increase in hepcidin mRNA within hours , while control mice , injected with saline or apo - Tf , did not show any analogous effect [ 7 ] . Mice with liver - speci ﬁ c disruption of either HFE [ 201 ] or TfR2 [ 169 ] develop iron over - load due to hepcidin suppression , a proof of concept that hepatocellular expression of these proteins is indispensable for proper iron signaling . Iron - loaded patients with HFE - or TfR2 - related hemochromatosis have higher basal levels of hepcidin compared to controls ( although greatly suppressed for their iron load ) , indicating that signaling of iron storesis atleast partly preserved [ 163 , 202 , 203 ] . After oraladminis - tration of iron sulfate , normal subjects showed a parallel increase in Tf saturation and hepcidin , while in hemochromatotic patients , the hepci - din response was blunted , despite observed increases in serum iron [ 163 , 204 ] . Similar ﬁ ndings were recorded in mice after acute dietary iron challenge , with Hfe − / − mice showing milder impairment than mutant Tfr2 Y245X / Y245X counterparts [ 7 ] . Insights on the interplay between HFE , TfR1 , TfR2 and holo - Tf were provided by studies with genetically engineered mice bearing mutations either favoring or preventing HFE / TfR1 interactions . Mice with constitutive HFE / TfR1 interaction , displayed decreased hepcidin mRNA levels and systemic iron overload , similarly to Hfe − / − animals [ 205 ] . On the other hand , mice bearing a mutation that prevents bind - ing of HFE to TfR1 or mice with enhanced HFE expression developed iron de ﬁ ciency associated with inappropriately high hepcidin levels [ 205 ] . These results imply that TfR1 sequesters HFE and silences its signaling activity , whereas HFE acts to induce hepcidin expression when it is dissociated from TfR1 . Interestingly , the binding domains for Tf and HFE overlap in TfR1 , suggesting that holo - Tf competes HFE binding , while TfR2 may bind both holo - Tf and HFE simultaneously [ 206 – 208 ] . Finally , TfR2competesTfR1forbindingoftheHFEregardless of theholo - Tf levels [ 209 ] . These observationssupport amodelin which TfR1 sequesters HFE and prevents its interaction with TfR2 , which is necessary for the induction of hepcidin expression . When the iron satu - ration of Tf increases , holo - Tf displaces HFE from TfR1 , allowing its in - teraction with TfR2 [ 205 ] . According to this view , the HFE / TfR2 complex activates signaling to hepcidin . The stabilization of TfR2 by holo - but not apo - Tf [ 210 , 211 ] provides further support to this model . Nevertheless , in vivo experiments with double Hfe − / − Tfr 2 − / − mice revealed that these animals develop more severe iron overload than single Hfe − / − or Tfr2 − / − counterparts , raising the possibility that HFE and TfR2 exert some independent effects on hepcidin regulation [ 212 ] . Several questions arise on the signal transduction pathways that link the TfR2 / HFE complex to hepcidin . The treatment of primarily cultured murinehepatocytes withholo - Tfled toERK / MAP ( extracellular signal regulated kinase / mitogen activated protein ) kinase pathway acti - vation and subsequent treatment with an ERK - speci ﬁ c inhibitor blocked the induction of hepcidin expression by holo - Tf [ 213 ] . Consis - tently , Hfe − / − , Tfr2 − / − , or double Hfe − / − Tfr 2 − / − mice exhibited a signi ﬁ cant decrease in hepatic phospho - ERK1 / 2 levels , suggesting that both , HFE and TfR2 signal via the ERK1 / 2 pathway [ 212 ] . Nonetheless , multiple data also support the implication of BMP6 / SMAD signaling in HFE - and TfR2 - dependent regulation of hepcidin . Hepatocytes treated with holo - Tf demonstrated increased phosphorylation of SMAD1 / 5 / 8 , which was blocked after ERK inhibition [ 213 ] , while the levels of SMAD1 / 5 / 8 were found signi ﬁ cantly reduced in mice lacking HFE [ 214 ] or TfR2 [ 212 ] . These observations could be explained by the possible existence of a crosstalk between the BMP / SMAD and ERK / MAPK pathways . Recent studies , investigating the in vivo response of hepcidin to iso - lated increases of either Tf saturation or liver iron content , showed that hepcidin is independently regulated by both stimuli , implying the exis - tence of two distinct regulatory pathways [ 7 , 8 ] . Tf saturation did not have any effect on BMP6 expression , while acute iron administration , which increased Tf saturation without affecting hepatic iron content , resulted to activation of SMAD1 / 5 / 8 phosphorylation downstream of BMP6 . Interestingly , no involvement of the ERK1 / 2 pathway was ob - served in this in vivo setting [ 8 ] . Taken together , experimental evidence 196 K . Gkouvatsos et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1820 ( 2012 ) 188 – 202 supports a model in which hepcidin expression is regulated in response to hepatic iron stores via BMP6 / SMAD signaling and in response to circulating iron via the HFE / TfR2 complex ( Fig . 4 ) . The two pathways appear to crosstalk at the level of SMAD1 / 5 / 8 , downstream of BMP6 . 6 . 3 . Regulation of hepcidin expression by erythropoiesis and the role of transferrin It is well established that anemia - induced erythropoiesis requires an increase in iron absorption . In his seminal review article on “ regu - lators of iron balance in humans ” Clement Finch has proposed the existence of an “ erythroid regulator ” that stimulates absorption in response to anemia and ineffective erythropoiesis [ 215 ] . Unraveling the nature of these signals , which link bone marrow activity and hep - cidin expression , is currently a subject of intensive research . The role of erythropoietin ( EPO ) in hepcidin regulation in anemic states has been addressed by several studies . Injection of EPO in mice [ 216 ] as well as treatment of freshly isolated mouse hepatocytes [ 217 ] resulted in a dose - dependent decrease of hepcidin levels , while treat - mentof humanvolunteers withrecombinantEPO reducedconsiderably urinary hepcidin and increased slightly the expression of GDF15 ( growth differentiation factor 15 ) [ 218 ] . Ε PO can directly suppress hepci - din expression by attenuating the binding of C / EBP α to the hepcidin promoter [ 217 ] ; though the physiological signi ﬁ cance of this mecha - nism in vivo remains questionable . Patients with aplastic anemia do not increase iron absorption despite high serum EPO levels [ 219 ] and hepcidin ' s response to exogenous EPO is blocked in mice with prior experimental inhibition of erythropoiesis with carboplatin [ 220 ] . In another study , suppression of erythropoiesis with irradiation or post - transfusion polycythemia increased hepcidin mRNA levels , while exogenous post - irradiation EPO administration did not led to hepcidin decrease in mice [ 221 ] . These results indicate that hepcidin downregu - lation is rather triggered by erythropoietic activity and increased iron demand by erythroid precursor cells than directly caused by EPO . It should also be noted that EPO can modulate iron homeostasis by in - ducing TfR1 expression , cellular iron uptake and subsequently heme biosynthesis in erythroid progenitor cells [ 222 ] , and by inhibiting pro - in ﬂ ammatory immuneeffectorpathwaysknowntoaffecthepcidin and ferritin expression [ 223 ] . Insights on the link between Tf and erythropoietic control of hep - cidin were provided by studies in hypotransferrinemic mice ( hpx ) and humans suffering from hypotransferrinemia / atransferrinemia , a disorder of severe de ﬁ ciency in serum Tf . Patients and animals have severe anemia because of impaired iron delivery to erythroid tissue , which is associated with massive parenchymal iron overload , increased ironabsorptionandsuppressedhepcidinexpression [ 224 – 226 ] . Admin - istration of Tf to hpx mice corrected anemia , decreased iron overload and restored hepcidin expression . Moreover , transfusion of hpx mice with washed red blood cells ( RBCs ) was associated with hepcidin induction after restoration of anemia [ 226 ] . In a case study of a patient with hypotransferrinemia treated with plasma transfusions , time course measurements showed that Tf administration increased serum iron , hemoglobin and hepcidin [ 227 ] . These observations indicate that hepcidin suppression results from iron - restricted erythropoiesis due to Tf de ﬁ ciency and that exogenous Tf administration restores hepcidin levels by ameliorating bone marrow iron supply . Along the same line , Tf administration to a mouse model of β - thalassemia intermedia normalized labile plasma iron concentrations and increased hepcidin and hemoglobin production , leading to a marked improvement of the thalassemic phenotype [ 228 ] . Furthermore , α - globin precipitation was reduced in RBCs of treated mice , contributing to the observed increase in RBC lifespan . Theexact mechanismbywhichTfimproves erythropoi - esis remainsunknown but it is conceivable that anincrease inmonofer - ric Tf , may render iron accessible to more erythroid precursors , albeit at smaller amounts . This is also consistent with the observed further decrease in mean corpuscular hemoglobin ( MCH ) of RBCs [ 228 ] . Thalassemic patients have low hepcidin relatively to their iron load , demonstrating that increased erythropoietic demand for iron , dominates over iron stores in hepcidin regulation [ 229 , 230 ] . Thalasse - mias and other iron - loading anemias are characterized by ineffective erythropoiesis , where expanded proliferation of erythroid progenitor cells is associated with their limited maturation and premature death . The failure of these cells to maturate and their subsequent death is attributed to several factors , including imbalances of globin synthesis , heme and iron supply [ 231 ] . The proposed “ erythroid regulator ” is thought to comprise one or multiple molecules that signal for hepcidin suppression . GDF15 and TWSG1 ( twisted gastrulation - 1 ) are good can - didates asmediators of bonemarrow signaling . The former is a member of the TGF - β ( transforming growth factor β ) superfamily expressed by erythroid precursors . Serum levels of GDF15 are increased in the sera of patients with β - thalassemia , congenital dyserythropoietic anemias and sideroblastic anemia [ 232 – 235 ] . Serum from thalassemic patients or recombinant GDF15 incompletely suppressed hepcidin in human hepatocyte cultures [ 232 ] . Similarly , TWSG1 that also derives from erythroid precursors has been shown to increase in thalassemia and to suppress hepcidin expression in vitro [ 236 ] . Studies in both human cell cultures and thalassemic mouse models demonstrated that TWSG1 acts indirectly by inhibiting the BMP / SMAD signal transduction that leads to hepcidin transcriptional activation [ 236 ] . Interestingly , high expression of GDF15 and TWSG1 was also observed in hpx mice that decreased after treatment with Tf [ 226 ] . Nonetheless , GDF151 did not correlate with hepcidin levels in a cohort of patients recovering from hematopoietic stem cell transplantation [ 237 ] , suggesting that GDF15 is unlikely to function as a more general “ erythroid regulator ” of hepcidin . 6 . 4 . In ﬂ ammation and hepcidin expression In ﬂ ammatory cytokines and stress signals modulate hepcidin expression , and this response is associated to the pathogenesis of the anemia of chronic disease . IL - 6 promotes the phosphorylation of STAT3 ( signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 ) , which trans - locates to the nucleus and activates hepcidin transcription upon bind - ing to a proximal promoter element [ 238 – 240 ] . Likewise , mice injected with lipopolysaccharide ( LPS ) demonstrate increased hepci - din expression in the liver , attributed to activation of the STAT3 path - way [ 241 ] . Interestingly , experiments with mouse and rat models showed that erythropoietic drive [ 241 ] or iron de ﬁ ciency [ 242 ] can antagonize hepcidin induction during in ﬂ ammation , which is indica - tive of a hierarchy among signals . Myeloid cell types such as macro - phages and neutrophils may produce hepcidin in response to LPS or other bacterial pathogens , mediated by TLR4 ( toll - like receptor 4 ) sig - naling [ 243 ] . IL - 1 β is another potent inducer of hepcidin expression by employing both C / EBP α and BMP / SMAD signaling pathways [ 244 ] . Hepcidin transcription is also activated by endoplasmic reticu - lum ( ER ) stress . This involves the transcription factors CREBH ( cyclic AMP response element - binding protein H ) and / or the stress - inducible CHOP ( C / EBP homologous protein ) ; the latter operates by modulating the C / EBP α activity [ 245 , 246 ] . Finally , in vitro studies have suggested the existence of a putative p53 response element ( p53RE ) within the hepcidin gene promoter [ 247 ] . Thus , during malignancy the activa - tion of the p53 tumor suppressor protein would be expected to result in upregulation of hepcidin . This pathway uncovers an alternative link between malignancy and anemia of chronic disease and is possi - bly part of a defense mechanism against cancer , through iron depriva - tion of the malignant cells . 6 . 5 . Hypoxia and hepcidin expression Hypoxia and oxidative stress are further signals that decrease hepci - din expression . Studies in mice with liver - speci ﬁ c ablation of the expression of VHL ( von Hippel - Lindau ) factor , a tumor suppressor 197 K . Gkouvatsos et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1820 ( 2012 ) 188 – 202 protein regulating HIF α ( hypoxia inducible factor α ) subunit levels , proposed a key role for HIF1 / HIF2 in the hypoxic pathway of hepcidin expressionregulation [ 248 ] . However , biochemical datadid not support a possible direct transcriptional function of HIFs on the hepcidin promoter , since the deletion of the HIF candidate binding motifs in hepatoma cells did not alter the response of hepcidin to different hypoxic stimuli [ 249 – 251 ] . Thus , the binding of HIFs to the hepcidin promoter remains controversial . Hypoxia is also known to promote EPO synthesis , which consequently decreases the expression of hepci - din , as discussed earlier . Finally , oxidative stress promotes the hypoace - tylation of histones and decreases the binding of the two positive regulators C / EBP α and STAT3 to the promoter of hepcidin [ 249 , 252 ] . 7 . Perspectives Not too many years ago , the ﬁ eld of iron metabolism was synony - mous to the study of Tf and ferritin . The identi ﬁ cation of TfR1 and the Tf / TfR1 cycle , and the characterization of the IRE / IRP system in the 80s of the last century , paved the ground for understanding basic mecha - nisms of cellular iron acquisition and homeostasis . The molecular clon - ing of iron transporting molecules ( DMT1 and ferroportin ) and , moreover , the discovery of hepcidin as the principal orchestrator of body iron homeostasis at the dawn of the new millennium , provided a framework for a thorough comprehension of systemic iron traf ﬁ c and its regulation . It is now well - established that hepcidin expression is controlled by diverse stimuli including iron availability , erythropoietic demand for iron , in ﬂ ammation and hypoxia . Molecular mechanisms underlying these responses are now at least partially understood . The function of novel players in hepcidin regulation , such as BMPs , Hjv , HFE , TfR2 , matriptase - 2 and others , is a subject of rigorous investiga - tions . The elucidation of complex hepcidin regulatory pathways is al - ready providing new therapeutic concepts for the treatment of disorders of iron homeostasis , and is expected to lead to the develop - ment of new drugs . Recent studies revealed that the plasma iron carrier Tf plays a central role in hepcidin regulation by triggering its transcrip - tional activation via hemochromatosis - associated proteins ( HFE and TfR2 ) [ 226 ] . Studies involving Tf administration to hypotrasferrinemic patients and thalassemic mice , yielded novel and important clues for the treatment of anemias with ineffective erythropoiesis . Exogenous Tfmobilized iron from storesand altered itsdistribution from tissue pa - renchymal cells to hemoglobin synthesizingerythroid precursors [ 228 ] . An alternative approach , for protection of iron - overloaded tissues from iron ' s toxicity emerged , based on redistribution of the metal to utiliza - tion sites , rather than its simple chelation and excretion . The observed induction of hepcidin following Tf administration to thalassemic mice would favor this , by antagonizing typical uncontrolled iron egress from reticuloendothelial macrophages and intestinal enterocytes in these animals due to low hepcidin levels . Considering that hepcidin suppression contributes to systemic iron overload in iron - loading anemias , the development of Tf - based pharmacological strategies , pos - sibly in combination with classical iron chelation regimens , may offer therapeutic bene ﬁ ts to patients and ﬁ nd future applications in ordinary clinical practice . Acknowledgements This work was supported by a grant from the Canadian Institutes for Health Research ( MOP - 86514 ) . KG is supported by doctoral awards from the J . Latsis and A . Onassis Public Bene ﬁ t Foundations . KP holds a Chercheur National career award from the Fonds de la Recherche en Santé du Quebéc ( FRSQ ) . References [ 1 ] G . Papanikolaou , K . Pantopoulos , Iron metabolism and toxicity , Toxicol . Appl . Pharmacol . 202 ( 2005 ) 199 – 211 . [ 2 ] P . Aisen , A . Leibman , J . Zweier , Stoichiometric and site characteristics of the binding of iron to human transferrin , J . Biol . Chem . 253 ( 1978 ) 1930 – 1937 . [ 3 ] H . A . Huebers , C . A . Finch , The physiology of transferrin and transferrin receptors , Physiol . Rev . 67 ( 1987 ) 520 – 582 . [ 4 ] L . A . Lambert , Molecularevolution of the transferrin familyand associated recep - tors , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1820 ( 2012 ) 242 – 253 ( this issue ) . [ 5 ] J . H . Brock , T . Mainou - Fowler , S . J . McGregor , Transferrins and defence against in - fection , Ann . Ist . Super . Sanita 23 ( 1987 ) 935 – 941 . [ 6 ] L . Lin , E . V . Valore , E . Nemeth , J . B . Goodnough , V . Gabayan , T . Ganz , Iron - transferrin regulates hepcidin synthesis in primary hepatocyte culture through hemojuvelin and BMP2 / 4 , Blood 110 ( 2007 ) 2182 – 2189 . [ 7 ] E . Ramos , L . Kautz , R . Rodriguez , M . Hansen , V . Gabayan , Y . Ginzburg , M . P . Roth , E . Nemeth , T . Ganz , Evidence for distinct pathways of hepcidin regulation by acute and chronic iron loading in mice , Hepatology 53 ( 2011 ) 1333 – 1341 . [ 8 ] E . Corradini , D . Meynard , Q . Wu , S . Chen , P . Ventura , A . Pietrangelo , J . L . Babitt , Serum and liver iron differently regulate the bone morphogenetic protein 6 ( BMP6 ) - SMAD signaling pathway in mice , Hepatology 54 ( 2011 ) 273 – 284 . [ 9 ] N . C . Andrews , Disorders of iron metabolism , N . Engl . J . Med . 341 ( 1999 ) 1986 – 1995 . [ 10 ] K . S . Olsson , A . Norrby , Comment to : hepcidin : from discovery to differential diagnosis , Haematologica 93 ( 2008 ) 90 – 97 ; Haematologica 93 ( 2008 ) e51 discussion e52 . [ 11 ] J . Wang , K . Pantopoulos , Regulation of cellular iron metabolism , Biochem . J . 434 ( 2011 ) 365 – 381 . [ 12 ] I . Cavill , Erythropoiesis and iron , Best Pract . Res . Clin . Haematol . 15 ( 2002 ) 399 – 409 . [ 13 ] P . Ponka , C . Beaumont , D . R . Richardson , Function and regulation of transferrin and ferritin , Semin . Hematol . 35 ( 1998 ) 35 – 54 . [ 14 ] S . W . Ryter , J . Alam , A . M . Choi , Heme oxygenase - 1 / carbon monoxide : from basic science to therapeutic applications , Physiol . Rev . 86 ( 2006 ) 583 – 650 . [ 15 ] M . W . Hentze , M . U . Muckenthaler , B . Galy , C . Camaschella , Twototango : regulation of mammalian iron metabolism , Cell 142 ( 2010 ) 24 – 38 . [ 16 ] T . L . Wright , P . Brissot , W . L . Ma , R . A . Weisiger , Characterization of non - transferrin - bound iron clearance by rat liver , J . Biol . Chem . 261 ( 1986 ) 10909 – 10914 . [ 17 ] C . M . Craven , J . Alexander , M . Eldridge , J . P . Kushner , S . Bernstein , J . Kaplan , Tissue distribution and clearance kinetics of non - transferrin - bound iron in the hypo - transferrinemic mouse : a rodent model for hemochromatosis , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 84 ( 1987 ) 3457 – 3461 . [ 18 ] R . C . Hider , Nature of nontransferrin - bound iron , Eur . J . Clin . Invest . 32 ( Suppl 1 ) ( 2002 ) 50 – 54 . [ 19 ] P . Brissot , M . Ropert , C . Le Lan , O . Loreal , Non - transferrin bound iron : a key role in iron overload and iron toxicity , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1820 ( 2012 ) 401 – 408 ( this issue ) . [ 20 ] M . D . Knutson , Iron - sensing proteins that regulate hepcidin and enteric iron ab - sorption , Annu . Rev . Nutr . 30 ( 2010 ) 149 – 171 . [ 21 ] O . Han , Molecular mechanism of intestinal iron absorption , Metallomics 3 ( 2011 ) 103 – 109 . [ 22 ] C . Hershko , J . Patz , A . Ronson , The anemia of achylia gastrica revisited , Blood Cells Mol . Dis . 39 ( 2007 ) 178 – 183 . [ 23 ] M . Shayeghi , G . O . Latunde - Dada , J . S . Oakhill , A . H . Laftah , K . Takeuchi , N . Halliday , Y . Khan , A . Warley , F . E . McCann , R . C . Hider , D . M . Frazer , G . J . Anderson , C . D . Vulpe , R . J . Simpson , A . T . McKie , Identi ﬁ cation of an intestinal heme transporter , Cell 122 ( 2005 ) 789 – 801 . [ 24 ] A . Qiu , M . Jansen , A . Sakaris , S . H . Min , S . Chattopadhyay , E . Tsai , C . Sandoval , R . Zhao , M . H . Akabas , I . D . Goldman , Identi ﬁ cationofanintestinalfolatetransporterandthe molecular basis for hereditary folate malabsorption , Cell 127 ( 2006 ) 917 – 928 . [ 25 ] S . Severance , I . Hamza , Traf ﬁ cking of heme and porphyrins in metazoa , Chem . Rev . 109 ( 2009 ) 4596 – 4616 . [ 26 ] A . R . West , P . S . Oates , Mechanisms of heme iron absorption : current questions and controversies , World J . Gastroenterol . 14 ( 2008 ) 4101 – 4110 . [ 27 ] A . A . Khan , J . G . Quigley , Control of intracellular heme levels : heme transporters and heme oxygenases , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1813 ( 2011 ) 668 – 682 . [ 28 ] E . Tolosano , S . Fagoonee , N . Morello , F . Vinchi , V . Fiorito , Heme scavenging and the other facets of hemopexin , Antioxid . Redox Signal . 12 ( 2010 ) 305 – 320 . [ 29 ] A . T . McKie , D . Barrow , G . O . Latunde - Dada , A . Rolfs , G . Sager , E . Mudaly , M . Mudaly , C . Richardson , D . Barlow , A . Bomford , T . J . Peters , K . B . Raja , S . Shirali , M . A . Hediger , F . Farzaneh , R . J . Simpson , An iron - regulated ferric reductase asso - ciated with the absorption of dietary iron , Science 291 ( 2001 ) 1755 – 1759 . [ 30 ] F . Canonne - Hergaux , S . Gruenheid , P . Ponka , P . Gros , Cellular and subcellular lo - calization of the Nramp2 iron transporter inthe intestinal brush border and reg - ulation by dietary iron , Blood 93 ( 1999 ) 4406 – 4417 . [ 31 ] H . Gunshin , B . Mackenzie , U . V . Berger , Y . Gunshin , M . F . Romero , W . F . Boron , S . Nussberger , J . L . Gollan , M . A . Hediger , Cloning and characterization of a mamma - lian protein - coupled metal - ion transporter , Nature 388 ( 1997 ) 482 – 488 . [ 32 ] M . D . Fleming , C . C . I . Trenor , M . A . Su , D . Foernzler , D . R . Beier , W . F . Dietrich , N . C . Andrews , Microcytic anaemia mice have a mutation in Nramp2 , a candidate iron transporter gene , Nat . Genet . 16 ( 1997 ) 383 – 386 . [ 33 ] H . Gunshin , Y . Fujiwara , A . O . Custodio , C . Direnzo , S . Robine , N . C . Andrews , Slc11a2 is required for intestinal iron absorption and erythropoiesis but dis - pensable in placenta and liver , J . Clin . Invest . 115 ( 2005 ) 1258 – 1266 . [ 34 ] H . Gunshin , C . N . Starr , C . Direnzo , M . D . Fleming , J . Jin , E . L . Greer , V . M . Sellers , S . M . Galica , N . C . Andrews , Cybrd1 ( duodenal cytochrome b ) is not necessary for dietary iron absorption in mice , Blood 106 ( 2005 ) 2879 – 2883 . [ 35 ] Y . Ma , M . Yeh , K . Y . Yeh , J . Glass , Iron imports . V . Transport of iron through the intestinal epithelium , Am . J . Physiol . Gastrointest . Liver Physiol . 290 ( 2006 ) G417 – G422 . 198 K . Gkouvatsos et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1820 ( 2012 ) 188 – 202 [ 36 ] A . Donovan , A . Brownlie , Y . Zhou , J . Shepard , S . J . Pratt , J . Moynihan , B . H . Paw , A . Drejer , B . Barut , A . Zapata , T . C . Law , C . Brugnara , S . E . Lux , G . S . Pinkus , J . L . Pinkus , P . D . Kingsley , J . Palis , M . D . Fleming , N . C . Andrews , L . I . Zon , Positional cloning of zebra ﬁ sh ferroportin1 identi ﬁ es a conserved vertebrate iron exporter , Nature 403 ( 2000 ) 776 – 781 . [ 37 ] A . T . McKie , P . Marciani , A . Rolfs , K . Brennan , K . Wehr , D . Barrow , S . Miret , A . Bomford , T . J . Peters , F . Farzaneh , M . A . Hediger , M . W . Hentze , R . J . Simpson , A novel duodenal iron - regulated transporter IREG1 , implicated in the basolateral transfer of iron to the circulation , Mol . Cell 5 ( 2000 ) 299 – 309 . [ 38 ] S . Abboud , D . J . Haile , A novel mammalian iron - regulated protein involved in in - tracellular iron metabolism , J . Biol . Chem . 275 ( 2000 ) 19906 – 19912 . [ 39 ] C . D . Vulpe , Y . M . Kuo , T . L . Murphy , L . Cowley , C . Askwith , N . Libina , J . Gitschier , G . J . Anderson , Hephaestin , a ceruloplasmin homologue implicated in intestinal iron transport , is defective in the sla mouse , Nat . Genet . 21 ( 1999 ) 195 – 199 . [ 40 ] S . Cherukuri , R . Potla , J . Sarkar , S . Nurko , Z . L . Harris , P . L . Fox , Unexpected role of ceruloplasmin in intestinal iron absorption , Cell Metab . 2 ( 2005 ) 309 – 319 . [ 41 ] S . Kovac , G . J . Anderson , G . S . Baldwin , Gastrins , iron homeostasis and colorectal cancer , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1813 ( 2011 ) 889 – 895 . [ 42 ] P . Aisen , Transferrin receptor 1 , Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 36 ( 2004 ) 2137 – 2143 . [ 43 ] P . Ponka , C . N . Lok , The transferrin receptor : role in health and disease , Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 31 ( 1999 ) 1111 – 1137 . [ 44 ] S . P . Young , A . Bomford , R . Williams , The effect of the iron saturation of transferrin onitsbindinganduptakebyrabbitreticulocytes , Biochem . J . 219 ( 1984 ) 505 – 510 . [ 45 ] R . D . Klausner , G . Ashwell , J . van Renswoude , J . B . Harford , K . R . Bridges , Binding of apotransferrin to K562 cells : explanation of the transferrin cycle , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 80 ( 1983 ) 2263 – 2266 . [ 46 ] P . K . Bali , O . Zak , P . Aisen , A new role for the transferrin receptor in the release of iron from transferrin , Biochemistry 30 ( 1991 ) 324 – 328 . [ 47 ] M . D . Fleming , M . A . Romano , M . A . Su , L . M . Garrick , M . D . Garrick , N . C . Andrews , Nramp2 is mutated in the anemic Belgrade ( b ) rat : evidence of a role for Nramp2 in endosomal iron transport , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 95 ( 1998 ) 1148 – 1153 . [ 48 ] R . S . Ohgami , D . R . Campagna , E . L . Greer , B . Antiochos , A . McDonald , J . Chen , J . J . Sharp , Y . Fujiwara , J . E . Barker , M . D . Fleming , Identi ﬁ cation of a ferrireductase re - quired for ef ﬁ cient transferrin - dependent iron uptake in erythroid cells , Nat . Genet . 37 ( 2005 ) 1264 – 1269 . [ 49 ] J . E . Lim , O . Jin , C . Bennett , K . Morgan , F . Wang , C . C . Trenor , M . D . Fleming , N . C . Andrews , A mutation in Sec15l1 causes anemia in hemoglobin de ﬁ cit ( hbd ) mice , Nat . Genet . 37 ( 2005 ) 1270 – 1273 . [ 50 ] J . H . Katz , Iron and protein kinetics studied by means of doubly labeled human crystalline transferrin , J . Clin . Invest . 40 ( 1961 ) 2143 – 2152 . [ 51 ] G . J . Anderson , C . D . Vulpe , Mammalian iron transport , Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 66 ( 2009 ) 3241 – 3261 . [ 52 ] D . Trinder , O . Zak , P . Aisen , Transferrin receptor - independent uptake of differic transferrin by human hepatoma cells with antisense inhibition of receptor ex - pression , Hepatology 23 ( 1996 ) 1512 – 1520 . [ 53 ] G . J . Anderson , L . W . Powell , J . W . Halliday , The endocytosis of transferrin by rat intestinal epithelial cells , Gastroenterology 106 ( 1994 ) 414 – 422 . [ 54 ] A . C . Chua , R . M . Graham , D . Trinder , J . K . Olynyk , The regulation of cellular iron metabolism , Crit . Rev . Clin . Lab . Sci . 44 ( 2007 ) 413 – 459 . [ 55 ] H . Kawabata , R . Yang , T . Hirama , P . T . Vuong , S . Kawano , A . F . Gombart , H . P . Koef ﬂ er , Molecular cloning of transferrin receptor 2 . A new member of the transferrin receptor - like family , J . Biol . Chem . 274 ( 1999 ) 20826 – 20832 . [ 56 ] A . D . Robb , M . Ericsson , M . Wessling - Resnick , Transferrin receptor 2 mediates a biphasic pattern of transferrin uptake associated with ligand delivery to multi - vesicular bodies , Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 287 ( 2004 ) C1769 – C1775 . [ 57 ] C . Camaschella , A . Roetto , A . Cali , M . DeGobbi , G . Garozzo , M . Carella , N . Majorano , A . Totaro , P . Gasparini , The gene TFR2 is mutated in a new type of haemochroma - tosis mapping to 7q22 , Nat . Genet . 25 ( 2000 ) 14 – 15 . [ 58 ] R . E . Fleming , J . R . Ahmann , M . C . Migas , A . Waheed , H . P . Koef ﬂ er , H . Kawabata , R . S . Britton , B . R . Bacon , W . S . Sly , Targeted mutagenesis of the murine transferrin receptor - 2 gene produces hemochromatosis , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 99 ( 2002 ) 10653 – 10658 . [ 59 ] J . E . Levy , O . Jin , Y . Fujiwara , F . Kuo , N . C . Andrews , Transferrin receptor is neces - sary for development of erythrocytes and the nervous system , Nat . Genet . 21 ( 1999 ) 396 – 399 . [ 60 ] R . Kozyraki , J . Fyfe , P . J . Verroust , C . Jacobsen , A . Dautry - Varsat , J . Gburek , T . E . Willnow , E . I . Christensen , S . K . Moestrup , Megalin - dependent cubilin - mediated endocytosis is a major pathway for the apical uptake of transferrin in polarized epithelia , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 98 ( 2001 ) 12491 – 12496 . [ 61 ] C . P . Smith , F . Thevenod , Iron transport and the kidney , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1790 ( 2009 ) 724 – 730 . [ 62 ] C . I . Raje , S . Kumar , A . Harle , J . S . Nanda , M . Raje , The macrophage cell surface glyceraldehyde - 3 - phosphate dehydrogenase is a novel transferrin receptor , J . Biol . Chem . 282 ( 2007 ) 3252 – 3261 . [ 63 ] J . I . Huggenvik , C . M . Craven , R . L . Idzerda , S . Bernstein , J . Kaplan , G . S . McKnight , A splicing defect in the mouse transferrin gene leads to congenital atransferrine - mia , Blood 74 ( 1989 ) 482 – 486 . [ 64 ] N . J . Abbott , A . A . Patabendige , D . E . Dolman , S . R . Yusof , D . J . Begley , Structure and function of the blood – brain barrier , Neurobiol . Dis . 37 ( 2010 ) 13 – 25 . [ 65 ] T . Moos , T . Rosengren Nielsen , T . Skjorringe , E . H . Morgan , Iron traf ﬁ cking inside the brain , J . Neurochem . 103 ( 2007 ) 1730 – 1740 . [ 66 ] S . Y . Jeong , S . David , Age - related changes in iron homeostasis and cell death in the cerebellum of ceruloplasmin - de ﬁ cient mice , J . Neurosci . 26 ( 2006 ) 9810 – 9819 . [ 67 ] S . Y . Jeong , S . David , Glycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchored ceruloplasmin is re - quired for iron ef ﬂ ux from cells in the central nervous system , J . Biol . Chem . 278 ( 2003 ) 27144 – 27148 . [ 68 ] B . Todorich , J . M . Pasquini , C . I . Garcia , P . M . Paez , J . R . Connor , Oligodendrocytes and myelination : the role of iron , Glia 57 ( 2009 ) 467 – 478 . [ 69 ] T . Moos , Immunohistochemical localization of intraneuronal transferrin recep - tor immunoreactivity in the adult mouse central nervous system , J . Comp . Neurol . 375 ( 1996 ) 675 – 692 . [ 70 ] M . W . Bradbury , Transportofironintheblood – brain – cerebrospinal ﬂ uidsystem , J . Neurochem . 69 ( 1997 ) 443 – 454 . [ 71 ] L . Gambling , C . Lang , H . J . McArdle , Fetalregulationofiron transport during preg - nancy , Am . J . Clin . Nutr . ( in press ) , doi : 10 . 3945 / ajcn . 110 . 000885 . [ 72 ] A . Donovan , C . A . Lima , J . L . Pinkus , G . S . Pinkus , L . I . Zon , S . Robine , N . C . Andrews , The iron exporter ferroportin / Slc40a1 is essential for iron homeostasis , Cell Metab . 1 ( 2005 ) 191 – 200 . [ 73 ] M . Kristiansen , J . H . Graversen , C . Jacobsen , O . Sonne , H . J . Hoffman , S . K . Law , S . K . Moestrup , Identi ﬁ cation of the haemoglobin scavenger receptor , Nature 409 ( 2001 ) 198 – 201 . [ 74 ] H . Van Gorp , P . L . Delputte , H . J . Nauwynck , Scavenger receptor CD163 , a Jack - of - all - trades and potential target for cell - directed therapy , Mol . Immunol . 47 ( 2010 ) 1650 – 1660 . [ 75 ] V . Hvidberg , M . B . Maniecki , C . Jacobsen , P . Hojrup , H . J . Moller , S . K . Moestrup , Identi ﬁ cation of the receptor scavenging hemopexin - heme complexes , Blood 106 ( 2005 ) 2572 – 2579 . [ 76 ] A . Rajagopal , A . U . Rao , J . Amigo , M . Tian , S . K . Upadhyay , C . Hall , S . Uhm , M . K . Mathew , M . D . Fleming , B . H . Paw , M . Krause , I . Hamza , Haem homeostasis is reg - ulated by the conserved and concerted functions of HRG - 1 proteins , Nature 453 ( 2008 ) 1127 – 1131 . [ 77 ] C . Chen , T . K . Samuel , J . Sinclair , H . A . Dailey , I . Hamza , An intercellular heme - traf ﬁ cking protein delivers maternal heme to the embryo during development in C . elegans , Cell 145 ( 2011 ) 720 – 731 . [ 78 ] J . P . Liuzzi , F . Aydemir , H . Nam , M . D . Knutson , R . J . Cousins , Zip14 ( Slc39a14 ) me - diates non - transferrin - bound iron uptake into cells , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 103 ( 2006 ) 13612 – 13617 . [ 79 ] N . Zhao , J . Gao , C . A . Enns , M . D . Knutson , ZRT / IRT - like protein 14 ( ZIP14 ) pro - motes the cellular assimilation of iron from transferrin , J . Biol . Chem . 285 ( 2010 ) 32141 – 32150 . [ 80 ] G . Y . Oudit , H . Sun , M . G . Trivieri , S . E . Koch , F . Dawood , C . Ackerley , M . Yazdanpanah , G . J . Wilson , A . Schwartz , P . P . Liu , P . H . Backx , L - typeCa2 + channelsprovideamajor pathwayforironentryintocardiomyocytesiniron - overloadcardiomyopathy , Nat . Med . 9 ( 2003 ) 1187 – 1194 . [ 81 ] J . A . Gaasch , W . J . Geldenhuys , P . R . Lockman , D . D . Allen , C . J . Van der Schyf , Voltage - gated calcium channels provide an alternate route for iron uptake in neuronal cell cultures , Neurochem . Res . 32 ( 2007 ) 1686 – 1693 . [ 82 ] L . R . Devireddy , C . Gazin , X . Zhu , M . R . Green , A cell - surface receptor for lipocalin 24p3 selectively mediates apoptosis and iron uptake , Cell 123 ( 2005 ) 1293 – 1305 . [ 83 ] V . Hvidberg , C . Jacobsen , R . K . Strong , J . B . Cowland , S . K . Moestrup , N . Borregaard , The endocytic receptor megalin binds the iron transporting neutrophil - gelatinase - associated lipocalin with high af ﬁ nity and mediates its cellular up - take , FEBS Lett . 579 ( 2005 ) 773 – 777 . [ 84 ] J . Yang , D . Goetz , J . Y . Li , W . Wang , K . Mori , D . Setlik , T . Du , H . Erdjument - Bromage , P . Tempst , R . Strong , J . Barasch , An iron delivery pathway mediated by a lipocalin , Mol . Cell 10 ( 2002 ) 1045 – 1056 . [ 85 ] K . Mori , H . T . Lee , D . Rapoport , I . R . Drexler , K . Foster , J . Yang , K . M . Schmidt - Ott , X . Chen , J . Y . Li , S . Weiss , J . Mishra , F . H . Cheema , G . Markowitz , T . Suganami , K . Sawai , M . Mukoyama , C . Kunis , V . D ' Agati , P . Devarajan , J . Barasch , Endocytic de - livery of lipocalin - siderophore - iron complex rescues the kidney from ischemia – reperfusion injury , J . Clin . Invest . 115 ( 2005 ) 610 – 621 . [ 86 ] T . H . Flo , K . D . Smith , S . Sato , D . J . Rodriguez , M . A . Holmes , R . K . Strong , S . Akira , A . Aderem , Lipocalin 2 mediates an innate immune response to bacterial infection by sequestrating iron , Nature 432 ( 2004 ) 917 – 921 . [ 87 ] T . T . Chen , L . Li , D . H . Chung , C . D . Allen , S . V . Torti , F . M . Torti , J . G . Cyster , C . Y . Chen , F . M . Brodsky , E . C . Niemi , M . C . Nakamura , W . E . Seaman , M . R . Daws , TIM - 2 is expressed on B cells and in liver and kidney and is a receptor for H - ferritin en - docytosis , J . Exp . Med . 202 ( 2005 ) 955 – 965 . [ 88 ] J . Y . Li , N . Paragas , R . M . Ned , A . Qiu , M . Viltard , T . Leete , I . R . Drexler , X . Chen , S . Sanna - Cherchi , F . Mohammed , D . Williams , C . S . Lin , K . M . Schmidt - Ott , N . C . Andrews , J . Barasch , Scara5 is a ferritin receptor mediating non - transferrin iron delivery , Dev . Cell 16 ( 2009 ) 35 – 46 . [ 89 ] L . Li , C . J . Fang , J . C . Ryan , E . C . Niemi , J . A . Lebron , P . J . Bjorkman , H . Arase , F . M . Torti , S . V . Torti , M . C . Nakamura , W . E . Seaman , Binding and uptake of H - ferritin are mediated by human transferrin receptor - 1 , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 107 ( 2010 ) 3505 – 3510 . [ 90 ] O . Kakhlon , Z . I . Cabantchik , The labile iron pool : characterization , measurement , and participation in cellular processes , Free Radic . Biol . Med . 33 ( 2002 ) 1037 – 1046 . [ 91 ] M . Kruszewski , Labile iron pool : the main determinant of cellular response to oxidative stress , Mutat . Res . 531 ( 2003 ) 81 – 92 . [ 92 ] G . C . Shaw , J . J . Cope , L . Li , K . Corson , C . Hersey , G . E . Ackermann , B . Gwynn , A . J . Lambert , R . A . Wingert , D . Traver , N . S . Trede , B . A . Barut , Y . Zhou , E . Minet , A . Donovan , A . Brownlie , R . Balzan , M . J . Weiss , L . L . Peters , J . Kaplan , L . I . Zon , B . H . Paw , Mitoferrin is essential for erythroid iron assimilation , Nature 440 ( 2006 ) 96 – 100 . [ 93 ] W . Chen , P . N . Paradkar , L . Li , E . L . Pierce , N . B . Langer , N . Takahashi - Makise , B . B . Hyde , O . S . Shirihai , D . M . Ward , J . Kaplan , B . H . Paw , Abcb10 physically interacts with mitoferrin - 1 ( Slc25a37 ) to enhance its stability and function in the erythroid mitochondria , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 106 ( 2009 ) 16263 – 16268 . 199 K . Gkouvatsos et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1820 ( 2012 ) 188 – 202 [ 94 ] P . N . Paradkar , K . B . Zumbrennen , B . H . Paw , D . M . Ward , J . Kaplan , Regulation of mitochondrial iron import through differential turnover of mitoferrin 1 and mitoferrin 2 , Mol . Cell . Biol . 29 ( 2009 ) 1007 – 1016 . [ 95 ] L . R . Devireddy , D . O . Hart , D . H . Goetz , M . R . Green , A mammalian siderophore synthesized by an enzyme with a bacterial homolog involved in enterobactin production , Cell 141 ( 2010 ) 1006 – 1017 . [ 96 ] A . D . Sheftel , A . S . Zhang , C . Brown , O . S . Shirihai , P . Ponka , Direct interorganellar transfer of iron from endosome to mitochondrion , Blood 110 ( 2007 ) 125 – 132 . [ 97 ] D . R . Richardson , D . J . Lane , E . M . Becker , M . L . Huang , M . Whitnall , Y . S . Rahmanto , A . D . Sheftel , P . Ponka , Mitochondrial iron traf ﬁ cking and the integration of iron metabolism between the mitochondrion and cytosol , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 107 ( 2010 ) 10775 – 10782 . [ 98 ] S . W . Ryter , R . M . Tyrrell , The heme synthesis and degradation pathways : role in oxidant sensitivity . Heme oxygenase has both pro - and antioxidant properties , Free Radic . Biol . Med . 28 ( 2000 ) 289 – 309 . [ 99 ] P . Ponka , Tissue - speci ﬁ c regulation of iron metabolism and heme synthesis : dis - tinct control mechanisms in erythroid cells , Blood 89 ( 1997 ) 1 – 25 . [ 100 ] R . Lill , Function and biogenesis of iron – sulphur proteins , Nature 460 ( 2009 ) 831 – 838 . [ 101 ] P . Arosio , R . Ingrassia , P . Cavadini , Ferritins : a family of molecules for iron stor - age , antioxidation and more , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1790 ( 2009 ) 589 – 599 . [ 102 ] A . Campanella , E . Rovelli , P . Santambrogio , A . Cozzi , F . Taroni , S . Levi , Mitochon - drial ferritin limits oxidative damage regulating mitochondrial iron availability : hypothesis for a protective role in Friedreich ataxia , Hum . Mol . Genet . 18 ( 2009 ) 1 – 11 . [ 103 ] Y . Zhang , M . Mikhael , D . Xu , Y . Li , S . Soe - Lin , B . Ning , W . Li , G . Nie , Y . Zhao , P . Ponka , Lysosomal proteolysis is the primary degradation pathway for cytosolic ferritin and cytosolic ferritin degradation is necessary for iron exit , Antioxid . Redox Signal . 13 ( 2010 ) 999 – 1009 . [ 104 ] I . De Domenico , M . B . Vaughn , L . Li , D . Bagley , G . Musci , D . M . Ward , J . Kaplan , Ferroportin - mediated mobilization of ferritin iron precedes ferritin degradation by the proteasome , EMBO J . 25 ( 2006 ) 5396 – 5404 . [ 105 ] C . Ferreira , D . Bucchini , M . E . Martin , S . Levi , P . Arosio , B . Grandchamp , C . Beaumont , Early embryonic lethality of H ferritin gene deletion in mice , J . Biol . Chem . 275 ( 2000 ) 3021 – 3024 . [ 106 ] I . De Domenico , D . M . Ward , M . C . di Patti , S . Y . Jeong , S . David , G . Musci , J . Kaplan , Ferroxidase activity isrequired for the stability of cellsurface ferroportin in cells expressing GPI - ceruloplasmin , EMBO J . 26 ( 2007 ) 2823 – 2831 . [ 107 ] S . B . Keel , R . T . Doty , Z . Yang , J . G . Quigley , J . Chen , S . Knoblaugh , P . D . Kingsley , I . De Domenico , M . B . Vaughn , J . Kaplan , J . Palis , J . L . Abkowitz , A heme export protein is required for red blood cell differentiation and iron homeostasis , Science 319 ( 2008 ) 825 – 828 . [ 108 ] T . A . Rouault , The role of iron regulatory proteins in mammalian iron homeostasis and disease , Nat . Chem . Biol . 2 ( 2006 ) 406 – 414 . [ 109 ] S . Recalcati , G . Minotti , G . Cairo , Iron regulatory proteins : from molecular mech - anisms to drug development , Antioxid . Redox Signal . 13 ( 2010 ) 1593 – 1616 . [ 110 ] M . L . Wallander , E . A . Leibold , R . S . Eisenstein , Molecular control of vertebrate iron homeostasis by iron regulatory proteins , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1763 ( 2006 ) 668 – 689 . [ 111 ] P . Piccinelli , T . Samuelsson , Evolution of the iron - responsive element , RNA 13 ( 2007 ) 952 – 966 . [ 112 ] K . Pantopoulos , Iron metabolism and the IRE / IRP regulatory system : an update , Ann . N . Y . Acad . Sci . 1012 ( 2004 ) 1 – 13 . [ 113 ] M . Malicka - Blaszkiewicz , A . Kubicz , Partial puri ﬁ cation and some properties of a liver alkaline ribonuclease from the frog Rana esculenta , Acta Biochim . Pol . 26 ( 1979 ) 275 – 283 . [ 114 ] M . Sanchez , B . Galy , M . U . Muckenthaler , M . W . Hentze , Iron - regulatory proteins limit hypoxia - inducible factor - 2alpha expression in iron de ﬁ ciency , Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 14 ( 2007 ) 420 – 426 . [ 115 ] D . L . Zhang , R . M . Hughes , H . Ollivierre - Wilson , M . C . Ghosh , T . A . Rouault , A ferro - portin transcript that lacks an iron - responsive element enables duodenal and erythroid precursor cells to evade translational repression , Cell Metab . 9 ( 2009 ) 461 – 473 . [ 116 ] N . Hubert , M . W . Hentze , Previously uncharacterized isoforms of divalent metal transporter ( DMT ) - 1 : implications for regulation and cellular function , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 99 ( 2002 ) 12345 – 12350 . [ 117 ] A . A . Vashisht , K . B . Zumbrennen , X . Huang , D . N . Powers , A . Durazo , D . Sun , N . Bhaskaran , A . Persson , M . Uhlen , O . Sangfelt , C . Spruck , E . A . Leibold , J . A . Wohlschlegel , Control of iron homeostasis by an iron - regulated ubiquitin ligase , Science 326 ( 2009 ) 718 – 721 . [ 118 ] A . A . Salahudeen , J . W . Thompson , J . C . Ruiz , H . W . Ma , L . N . Kinch , Q . Li , N . V . Grishin , R . K . Bruick , An E3 ligase possessing an iron - responsive hemerythrin do - main is a regulator of iron homeostasis , Science 326 ( 2009 ) 722 – 726 . [ 119 ] T . Moroishi , M . Nishiyama , Y . Takeda , K . Iwai , K . I . Nakayama , TheFBXL5 - IRP2axisis integral to control of iron metabolism in vivo , Cell Metab . 14 ( 2011 ) 339 – 351 . [ 120 ] D . J . Haile , T . A . Rouault , J . B . Harford , M . C . Kennedy , G . A . Blondin , H . Beinert , R . D . Klausner , Cellular regulation of the iron - responsive element binding protein : disassembly of the cubane iron – sulfur cluster results in high - af ﬁ nity RNA bind - ing , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 89 ( 1992 ) 11735 – 11739 . [ 121 ] F . Samaniego , J . Chin , K . Iwai , T . A . Rouault , R . D . Klausner , Molecularcharacterization of a second iron - responsive element binding protein , iron regulatory protein 2 , J . Biol . Chem . 269 ( 1994 ) 30904 – 30910 . [ 122 ] K . Pantopoulos , M . W . Hentze , Rapid responses to oxidative stress mediated by iron regulatory protein , EMBO J . 14 ( 1995 ) 2917 – 2924 . [ 123 ] A . Hausmann , J . Lee , K . Pantopoulos , Redox control of iron regulatory protein 2 stability , FEBS Lett . 585 ( 2011 ) 687 – 692 . [ 124 ] G . Weiss , B . Goossen , W . Doppler , D . Fuchs , K . Pantopoulos , G . Werner - Felmayer , H . Wachter , M . W . Hentze , Translational regulation via iron - responsive elements by the nitric oxide / NO - synthase pathway , EMBO J . 12 ( 1993 ) 3651 – 3657 . [ 125 ] J . Wang , G . Chen , K . Pantopoulos , Nitric oxide inhibits the degradation of IRP2 , Mol . Cell . Biol . 25 ( 2005 ) 1347 – 1353 . [ 126 ] A . Caltagirone , G . Weiss , K . Pantopoulos , Modulation of cellular iron metabolism by hydrogen peroxide . Effects of H 2 O 2 on the expression and function of iron - responsive element - containing mRNAs in B6 ﬁ broblasts , J . Biol . Chem . 276 ( 2001 ) 19738 – 19745 . [ 127 ] K . Pantopoulos , G . Weiss , M . W . Hentze , Nitricoxideactivatesironregulatoryfactor and affects the post - transcriptional control of cellular iron metabolism , in : S . e . a . Moncada ( Ed . ) , The Biology of Nitric Oxide , vol . 4 , Portland Press , London , 1995 , pp . 24 – 31 . [ 128 ] B . Andriopoulos , S . Hegedusch , J . Mangin , H . D . Riedel , U . Hebling , J . Wang , K . Pantopoulos , S . Mueller , Sustained hydrogen peroxide induces iron uptake by transferrin receptor - 1 independent of the IRP / IRE network , J . Biol . Chem . 282 ( 2007 ) 20301 – 20308 . [ 129 ] E . S . Hanson , L . M . Foot , E . A . Leibold , Hypoxia post - translationally activates iron - regulatory protein 2 , J . Biol . Chem . 274 ( 1999 ) 5047 – 5052 . [ 130 ] E . G . Meyron - Holtz , M . C . Ghosh , T . A . Rouault , Mammalian tissue oxygen levels modulate iron - regulatory protein activities in vivo , Science 306 ( 2004 ) 2087 – 2090 . [ 131 ] M . U . Muckenthaler , B . Galy , M . W . Hentze , Systemic iron homeostasis and the iron - responsive element / iron - regulatory protein ( IRE / IRP ) regulatory network , Annu . Rev . Nutr . 28 ( 2008 ) 197 – 213 . [ 132 ] S . R . Smith , M . C . Ghosh , H . Ollivierre - Wilson , W . HangTong , T . A . Rouault , Complete lossofironregulatoryproteins1and2preventsviabilityofmurinezygotesbeyondtheblastocyststageofembryonicdevelopment , Blood Cells Mol . Dis . 36 ( 2006 ) 283 – 287 . [ 133 ] B . Galy , D . Ferring - Appel , S . Kaden , H . J . Grone , M . W . Hentze , Ironregulatory pro - teins are essential for intestinal function and control key iron absorption mole - cules in the duodenum , Cell Metab . 7 ( 2008 ) 79 – 85 . [ 134 ] E . G . Meyron - Holtz , M . C . Ghosh , K . Iwai , T . LaVaute , X . Brazzolotto , U . V . Berger , W . Land , H . Ollivierre - Wilson , A . Grinberg , P . Love , T . A . Rouault , Genetic ablations of iron regulatory proteins 1 and 2 reveal why iron regulatory protein 2 dominates iron homeostasis , EMBO J . 23 ( 2004 ) 386 – 395 . [ 135 ] S . S . Cooperman , E . G . Meyron - Holtz , H . Olivierre - Wilson , M . C . Ghosh , J . P . McConnell , T . A . Rouault , Microcytic anemia , erythropoietic protoporphyria and neurodegeneration in mice with targeted deletion of iron regulatory pro - tein 2 , Blood 106 ( 2005 ) 1084 – 1091 . [ 136 ] B . Galy , D . Ferring , B . Minana , O . Bell , H . G . Janser , M . Muckenthaler , K . Schumann , M . W . Hentze , Altered body iron distribution and microcytosis in mice de ﬁ cient for iron regulatory protein 2 ( IRP2 ) , Blood 106 ( 2005 ) 2580 – 2589 . [ 137 ] B . Galy , D . Ferring - Appel , S . W . Sauer , S . Kaden , S . Lyoumi , H . Puy , S . Kolker , H . J . Grone , M . W . Hentze , Iron regulatory proteins secure mitochondrial iron suf ﬁ - ciency and function , Cell Metab . 12 ( 2010 ) 194 – 201 . [ 138 ] M . M . Zakin , Regulation of transferrin gene expression , FASEB J . 6 ( 1992 ) 3253 – 3258 . [ 139 ] F . Brunel , A . Ochoa , E . Schaeffer , F . Boissier , Y . Guillou , S . Cereghini , G . N . Cohen , M . M . Zakin , Interactions of DNA - binding proteins with the 5 ′ region of the human transferrin gene , J . Biol . Chem . 263 ( 1988 ) 10180 – 10185 . [ 140 ] E . Schaeffer , F . Boissier , M . C . Py , G . N . Cohen , M . M . Zakin , Cell type - speci ﬁ c ex - pression of the humantransferrin gene . Role of promoter , negative , and enhanc - er elements , J . Biol . Chem . 264 ( 1989 ) 7153 – 7160 . [ 141 ] B . E . Sawaya , D . Aunis , E . Schaeffer , Distinct positive and negative regulatory ele - ments control neuronal and hepatic transcription of the human transferrin gene , J . Neurosci . Res . 43 ( 1996 ) 261 – 272 . [ 142 ] M . Theisen , R . R . Behringer , G . G . Cadd , R . L . Brinster , G . S . McKnight , AC / EBP - binding site in the transferrin promoter is essential for expression in the liver but not the brain of transgenic mice , Mol . Cell . Biol . 13 ( 1993 ) 7666 – 7676 . [ 143 ] R . L . Idzerda , H . Huebers , C . A . Finch , G . S . McKnight , Rat transferrin gene expres - sion : tissue - speci ﬁ c regulation by iron de ﬁ ciency , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 83 ( 1986 ) 3723 – 3727 . [ 144 ] A . Djeha , J . L . Perez - Arellano , S . L . Hayes , R . Oria , R . J . Simpson , K . B . Raja , J . H . Brock , Cytokine - mediated regulation of transferrin synthesis in mouse macrophages and human T lymphocytes , Blood 85 ( 1995 ) 1036 – 1042 . [ 145 ] A . Rolfs , I . Kvietikova , M . Gassmann , R . H . Wenger , Oxygen - regulated transferrin expression is mediated by hypoxia - inducible factor - 1 , J . Biol . Chem . 272 ( 1997 ) 20055 – 20062 . [ 146 ] T . Ganz , E . Nemeth , Hepcidin and disorders of iron metabolism , Annu . Rev . Med . 62 ( 2011 ) 347 – 360 . [ 147 ] E . Nemeth , M . S . Tuttle , J . Powelson , M . B . Vaughn , A . Donovan , D . M . Ward , T . Ganz , J . Kaplan , Hepcidin regulates cellular iron ef ﬂ ux by binding to ferroportin and inducing its internalization , Science 306 ( 2004 ) 2090 – 2093 . [ 148 ] M . De Gobbi , A . Roetto , A . Piperno , R . Mariani , F . Alberti , G . Papanikolaou , M . Politou , G . Lockitch , D . Girelli , S . Fargion , T . M . Cox , P . Gasparini , M . Cazzola , C . Camaschella , Natural history of juvenile haemochromatosis , Br . J . Haematol . 117 ( 2002 ) 973 – 979 . [ 149 ] A . Pietrangelo , Hereditaryhemochromatosis : pathogenesis , diagnosis , andtreat - ment , Gastroenterology 139 ( 2010 ) 393 – 408 ( 408 e391 - 392 ) . [ 150 ] G . Sebastiani , K . Pantopoulos , Disordersassociatedwithsystemicorlocalironover - load : from pathophysiology to clinical practice , Metallomics 3 ( 2011 ) 971 – 986 . [ 151 ] K . E . Finberg , M . M . Heeney , D . R . Campagna , Y . Aydinok , H . A . Pearson , K . R . Hartman , M . M . Mayo , S . M . Samuel , J . J . Strouse , K . Markianos , N . C . Andrews , M . D . Fleming , Mutations in TMPRSS6 cause iron - refractory iron de ﬁ ciency anemia ( IRIDA ) , Nat . Genet . 40 ( 2008 ) 569 – 571 . 200 K . Gkouvatsos et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1820 ( 2012 ) 188 – 202 [ 152 ] X . Du , E . She , T . Gelbart , J . Truksa , P . Lee , Y . Xia , K . Khovananth , S . Mudd , N . Mann , E . M . Moresco , E . Beutler , B . Beutler , The serine protease TMPRSS6 is required to sense iron de ﬁ ciency , Science 320 ( 2008 ) 1088 – 1092 . [ 153 ] G . Weiss , Iron metabolism in the anemia of chronic disease , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1790 ( 2009 ) 682 – 693 . [ 154 ] C . H . Park , E . V . Valore , A . J . Waring , T . Ganz , Hepcidin , aurinaryantimicrobialpep - tide synthesized in the liver , J . Biol . Chem . 276 ( 2001 ) 7806 – 7810 . [ 155 ] S . Rivera , E . Nemeth , V . Gabayan , M . A . Lopez , D . Farshidi , T . Ganz , Synthetic hep - cidin causes rapid dose - dependent hypoferremia and is concentrated in ferroportin - containing organs , Blood 106 ( 2005 ) 2196 – 2199 . [ 156 ] E . V . Valore , T . Ganz , Posttranslational processing of hepcidin in human hepato - cytes is mediated by the prohormone convertase furin , Blood Cells Mol . Dis . 40 ( 2008 ) 132 – 138 . [ 157 ] G . Peslova , J . Petrak , K . Kuzelova , I . Hrdy , P . Halada , P . W . Kuchel , S . Soe - Lin , P . Ponka , R . Sutak , E . Becker , M . L . Huang , Y . S . Rahmanto , D . R . Richardson , D . Vyoral , Hepcidin , the hormone of iron metabolism , is bound speci ﬁ cally to alpha - 2 - macroglobulin in blood , Blood 113 ( 2009 ) 6225 – 6236 . [ 158 ] C . Pigeon , G . Ilyin , B . Courselaud , P . Leroyer , B . Turlin , P . Brissot , O . Loreal , A new mouse liver - speci ﬁ c gene , encoding a protein homologous to human antimicro - bial peptide hepcidin , is overexpressed during iron overload , J . Biol . Chem . 276 ( 2001 ) 7811 – 7819 . [ 159 ] E . Nemeth , S . Rivera , V . Gabayan , C . Keller , S . Taudorf , B . K . Pedersen , T . Ganz , IL - 6 mediates hypoferremia of in ﬂ ammation by inducing the synthesis of the iron regulatory hormone hepcidin , J . Clin . Invest . 113 ( 2004 ) 1271 – 1276 . [ 160 ] G . Nicolas , C . Chauvet , L . Viatte , J . L . Danan , X . Bigard , I . Devaux , C . Beaumont , A . Kahn , S . Vaulont , The gene encoding the iron regulatory peptide hepcidin is regu - latedbyanemia , hypoxia , andin ﬂ ammation , J . Clin . Invest . 110 ( 2002 ) 1037 – 1044 . [ 161 ] B . Courselaud , C . Pigeon , Y . Inoue , J . Inoue , F . J . Gonzalez , P . Leroyer , D . Gilot , K . Boudjema , C . Guguen - Guillouzo , P . Brissot , O . Loreal , G . Ilyin , C / EBPalpha regu - lates hepatic transcription of hepcidin , an antimicrobial peptide and regulator of iron metabolism . Cross - talk between C / EBP pathway and iron metabolism , J . Biol . Chem . 277 ( 2002 ) 41163 – 41170 . [ 162 ] A . Piperno , D . Girelli , E . Nemeth , P . Trombini , C . Bozzini , E . Poggiali , Y . Phung , T . Ganz , C . Camaschella , Blunted hepcidin response to oral iron challenge in HFE - related hemochromatosis , Blood 110 ( 2007 ) 4096 – 4100 . [ 163 ] D . Girelli , P . Trombini , F . Busti , N . Campostrini , M . Sandri , S . Pelucchi , M . Westerman , T . Ganz , E . Nemeth , A . Piperno , C . Camaschella , A time course of hepcidin response to iron challenge in patients with HFE and TFR2 hemo - chromatosis , Haematologica 96 ( 2011 ) 500 – 506 . [ 164 ] S . G . Gehrke , H . Kulaksiz , T . Herrmann , H . D . Riedel , K . Bents , C . Veltkamp , W . Stremmel , Expression of hepcidin in hereditary hemochromatosis : evidence for a regulation in response to serum transferrin saturation and non - transferrin - bound iron , Blood 102 ( 2003 ) 371 – 376 . [ 165 ] K . R . Bridle , D . M . Frazer , S . J . Wilkins , J . L . Dixon , D . M . Purdie , D . H . Crawford , V . N . Subramaniam , L . W . Powell , G . J . Anderson , G . A . Ram , Disrupted hepcidin regula - tion in HFE - associated haemochromatosis and the liver as a regulator of body iron homoeostasis , Lancet 361 ( 2003 ) 669 – 673 . [ 166 ] G . Papanikolaou , M . E . Samuels , E . H . Ludwig , M . L . MacDonald , P . L . Franchini , M . P . Dube , L . Andres , J . MacFarlane , N . Sakellaropoulos , M . Politou , E . Nemeth , J . Thompson , J . K . Risler , C . Zaborowska , R . Babakaiff , C . C . Radomski , T . D . Pape , O . Davidas , J . Christakis , P . Brissot , G . Lockitch , T . Ganz , M . R . Hayden , Y . P . Goldberg , Mutations in HFE2 cause iron overload in chromosome 1q - linked juvenile he - mochromatosis , Nat . Genet . 36 ( 2004 ) 77 – 82 . [ 167 ] E . Nemeth , A . Roetto , G . Garozzo , T . Ganz , C . Camaschella , Hepcidin is decreased in TFR2 hemochromatosis , Blood 105 ( 2005 ) 1803 – 1806 . [ 168 ] K . A . Ahmad , J . R . Ahmann , M . C . Migas , A . Waheed , R . S . Britton , B . R . Bacon , W . S . Sly , R . E . Fleming , Decreased liver hepcidin expression in the hfe knockout mouse , Blood Cells Mol . Dis . 29 ( 2002 ) 361 – 366 . [ 169 ] D . F . Wallace , L . Summerville , V . N . Subramaniam , Targeteddisruptionofthehepatic transferrin receptor 2 gene in mice leads to iron overload , Gastroenterology 132 ( 2007 ) 301 – 310 . [ 170 ] J . L . Babitt , F . W . Huang , D . M . Wrighting , Y . Xia , Y . Sidis , T . A . Samad , J . A . Campagna , R . T . Chung , A . L . Schneyer , C . J . Woolf , N . C . Andrews , H . Y . Lin , Bone morphogenetic protein signaling by hemojuvelin regulates hepcidin expression , Nat . Genet . 38 ( 2006 ) 531 – 539 . [ 171 ] L . Kautz , D . Meynard , A . Monnier , V . Darnaud , R . Bouvet , R . H . Wang , C . Deng , S . Vaulont , J . Mosser , H . Coppin , M . P . Roth , Iron regulates phosphorylation of Smad1 / 5 / 8 and gene expression of Bmp6 , Smad7 , Id1 , and Atoh8 in the mouse liver , Blood 112 ( 2008 ) 1503 – 1509 . [ 172 ] A . U . Steinbicker , T . B . Bartnikas , L . K . Lohmeyer , P . Leyton , C . Mayeur , S . M . Kao , A . E . Pappas , R . T . Peterson , D . B . Bloch , P . B . Yu , M . D . Fleming , K . D . Bloch , Perturba - tion of hepcidin expression by BMP type I receptor deletion induces iron over - load in mice , Blood 118 ( 2011 ) 4224 – 4230 . [ 173 ] G . Casanovas , K . Mleczko - Sanecka , S . Altamura , M . W . Hentze , M . U . Muckenthaler , Bone morphogenetic protein ( BMP ) - responsive elements located in the proximal and distal hepcidin promoter are critical for its response to HJV / BMP / SMAD , J . Mol . Med . ( Berl . ) 87 ( 2009 ) 471 – 480 . [ 174 ] J . Truksa , P . Lee , E . Beutler , Two BMP responsive elements , STAT , and bZIP / HNF4 / COUP motifs of the hepcidin promoter are critical for BMP , SMAD1 , and HJV responsiveness , Blood 113 ( 2009 ) 688 – 695 . [ 175 ] R . H . Wang , C . Li , X . Xu , Y . Zheng , C . Xiao , P . Zerfas , S . Cooperman , M . Eckhaus , T . Rouault , L . Mishra , C . X . Deng , A role of SMAD4 in iron metabolism through the positive regulation of hepcidin expression , Cell Metab . 2 ( 2005 ) 399 – 409 . [ 176 ] K . Mleczko - Sanecka , G . Casanovas , A . Ragab , K . Breitkopf , A . Muller , M . Boutros , S . Dooley , M . W . Hentze , M . U . Muckenthaler , SMAD7 controls ironmetabolismas a potent inhibitor of hepcidin expression , Blood 115 ( 2010 ) 2657 – 2665 . [ 177 ] J . L . Babitt , F . W . Huang , Y . Xia , Y . Sidis , N . C . Andrews , H . Y . Lin , Modulationof bone morphogenetic protein signaling in vivo regulates systemic iron balance , J . Clin . Invest . 117 ( 2007 ) 1933 – 1939 . [ 178 ] J . Truksa , H . Peng , P . Lee , E . Beutler , Bone morphogenetic proteins 2 , 4 , and 9 stimulate murine hepcidin 1expression independently of Hfe , transferrin recep - tor 2 ( Tfr2 ) , and IL - 6 , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 103 ( 2006 ) 10289 – 10293 . [ 179 ] B . Andriopoulos Jr . , E . Corradini , Y . Xia , S . A . Faasse , S . Chen , L . Grgurevic , M . D . Knutson , A . Pietrangelo , S . Vukicevic , H . Y . Lin , J . L . Babitt , BMP6 is a key endoge - nous regulator of hepcidin expression and iron metabolism , Nat . Genet . ( 2009 ) 482 – 487 . [ 180 ] D . Meynard , L . Kautz , V . Darnaud , F . Canonne - Hergaux , H . Coppin , M . P . Roth , Lack of the bone morphogenetic protein BMP6 induces massive iron overload , Nat . Genet . ( 2009 ) 478 – 481 . [ 181 ] P . B . Yu , C . C . Hong , C . Sachidanandan , J . L . Babitt , D . Y . Deng , S . A . Hoyng , H . Y . Lin , K . D . Bloch , R . T . Peterson , Dorsomorphin inhibits BMP signals required for em - bryogenesis and iron metabolism , Nat . Chem . Biol . 4 ( 2008 ) 33 – 41 . [ 182 ] A . Roetto , G . Papanikolaou , M . Politou , F . Alberti , D . Girelli , J . Christakis , D . Loukopoulos , C . Camaschella , Mutant antimicrobial peptide hepcidin is asso - ciated with severe juvenile hemochromatosis , Nat . Genet . 33 ( 2003 ) 21 – 22 . [ 183 ] F . W . Huang , J . L . Pinkus , G . S . Pinkus , M . D . Fleming , N . C . Andrews , A mouse model of juvenile hemochromatosis , J . Clin . Invest . 115 ( 2005 ) 2187 – 2191 . [ 184 ] V . Niederko ﬂ er , R . Salie , S . Arber , Hemojuvelin is essential for dietary iron sens - ing , and its mutation leads to severe iron overload , J . Clin . Invest . 115 ( 2005 ) 2180 – 2186 . [ 185 ] K . Gkouvatsos , J . Wagner , G . Papanikolaou , G . Sebastiani , K . Pantopoulos , Conditional disruption of mouse Hfe2 gene : maintenance of systemic iron homeostasis requires hepatic but not skeletal muscle hemojuvelin , Hepatology 54 ( 2011 ) 1800 – 1807 . [ 186 ] W . Chen , F . W . Huang , T . B . de Renshaw , N . C . Andrews , Skeletal muscle hemoju - velin is dispensable for systemic iron homeostasis , Blood 117 ( 2011 ) 6319 – 6325 . [ 187 ] L . Silvestri , A . Pagani , A . Nai , I . DeDomenico , J . Kaplan , C . Camaschella , Theserine protease matriptase - 2 ( TMPRSS6 ) inhibits hepcidin activation by cleaving membrane hemojuvelin , Cell Metab . 8 ( 2008 ) 502 – 511 . [ 188 ] J . C . Chambers , W . Zhang , Y . Li , J . Sehmi , M . N . Wass , D . Zabaneh , C . Hoggart , H . Bayele , M . I . McCarthy , L . Peltonen , N . B . Freimer , S . K . Srai , P . H . Maxwell , M . J . Sternberg , A . Ruokonen , G . Abecasis , M . R . Jarvelin , J . Scott , P . Elliott , J . S . Kooner , Genome - wide association study identi ﬁ es variants in TMPRSS6 associated with hemoglobin levels , Nat . Genet . 41 ( 2009 ) 1170 – 1172 . [ 189 ] B . Benyamin , M . A . Ferreira , G . Willemsen , S . Gordon , R . P . Middelberg , B . P . McEvoy , J . J . Hottenga , A . K . Henders , M . J . Campbell , L . Wallace , I . H . Frazer , A . C . Heath , E . J . de Geus , D . R . Nyholt , P . M . Visscher , B . W . Penninx , D . I . Boomsma , N . G . Martin , G . W . Montgomery , J . B . Whit ﬁ eld , Common variants in TMPRSS6 are associated with iron status and erythrocyte volume , Nat . Genet . 41 ( 2009 ) 1173 – 1175 . [ 190 ] T . Tanaka , C . N . Roy , W . Yao , A . Matteini , R . D . Semba , D . Arking , J . D . Walston , L . P . Fried , A . Singleton , J . Guralnik , G . R . Abecasis , S . Bandinelli , D . L . Longo , L . Ferrucci , A genome - wide association analysis of serum iron concentrations , Blood 115 ( 2010 ) 94 – 96 . [ 191 ] D . Meynard , V . Vaja , C . C . Sun , E . Corradini , S . Chen , C . Lopez - Otin , L . Grgurevic , C . C . Hong , M . Stirnberg , M . Gutschow , S . Vukicevic , J . L . Babitt , H . Y . Lin , Regula - tion of TMPRSS6 by BMP6 and iron in human cells and mice , Blood 118 ( 2011 ) 747 – 756 . [ 192 ] L . Lin , Y . P . Goldberg , T . Ganz , Competitive regulation of hepcidin mRNA by solu - ble and cell - associated hemojuvelin , Blood 106 ( 2005 ) 2884 – 2889 . [ 193 ] C . Brasse - Lagnel , M . Poli , C . Lesueur , B . Grandchamp , A . Lavoinne , C . Beaumont , S . Bekri , Immunoassay for human serum hemojuvelin , Haematologica 95 ( 2010 ) 2031 – 2037 . [ 194 ] A . S . Zhang , S . A . Anderson , K . R . Meyers , C . Hernandez , R . S . Eisenstein , C . A . Enns , Evidence that inhibition of hemojuvelin shedding in response to iron is mediated through neogenin , J . Biol . Chem . 282 ( 2007 ) 12547 – 12556 . [ 195 ] D . Kuninger , R . Kuns - Hashimoto , M . Nili , P . Rotwein , Pro - protein convertases control the maturation and processing of the iron - regulatory protein , RGMc / he - mojuvelin , BMC Biochem . 9 ( 2008 ) 9 . [ 196 ] L . Silvestri , A . Pagani , C . Camaschella , Furin - mediated release of soluble hemoju - velin : a new link between hypoxia and iron homeostasis , Blood 111 ( 2008 ) 924 – 931 . [ 197 ] T . Ganz , Iron homeostasis : ﬁ tting the puzzle pieces together , Cell Metab . 7 ( 2008 ) 288 – 290 . [ 198 ] L . Lin , E . Nemeth , J . B . Goodnough , D . R . Thapa , V . Gabayan , T . Ganz , Soluble hemojuvelin is released by proprotein convertase - mediated cleavage at a con - served polybasic RNRR site , Blood Cells Mol . Dis . 40 ( 2008 ) 122 – 131 . [ 199 ] J . E . Maxson , J . Chen , C . A . Enns , A . S . Zhang , Matriptase - 2 - and proprotein convertase - cleaved forms of hemojuvelin have different roles in the down - regulation of hepcidin expression , J . Biol . Chem . 285 ( 2010 ) 39021 – 39028 . [ 200 ] D . Kuninger , R . Kuns - Hashimoto , R . Kuzmickas , P . Rotwein , Complex bio - synthesis of the muscle - enriched iron regulator RGMc , J . Cell Sci . 119 ( 2006 ) 3273 – 3283 . [ 201 ] M . Vujic Spasic , J . Kiss , T . Herrmann , B . Galy , S . Martinache , J . Stolte , H . J . Grone , W . Stremmel , M . W . Hentze , M . U . Muckenthaler , Hfe acts in hepatocytes to pre - vent hemochromatosis , Cell Metab . 7 ( 2008 ) 173 – 178 . [ 202 ] B . A . van Dijk , C . M . Laarakkers , S . M . Klaver , E . M . Jacobs , L . J . van Tits , M . C . Janssen , D . W . Swinkels , Serum hepcidin levels are innately low in HFE - related haemo - chromatosis but differ between C282Y - homozygotes with elevated and normal ferritin levels , Br . J . Haematol . 142 ( 2008 ) 979 – 985 . [ 203 ] C . Bozzini , N . Campostrini , P . Trombini , E . Nemeth , A . Castagna , I . Tenuti , R . Corrocher , C . Camaschella , T . Ganz , O . Olivieri , A . Piperno , D . Girelli , Measurement 201 K . Gkouvatsos et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1820 ( 2012 ) 188 – 202 of urinary hepcidin levels by SELDI - TOF - MS in HFE - hemochromatosis , Blood Cells Mol . Dis . 40 ( 2008 ) 347 – 352 . [ 204 ] M . B . Zimmermann , B . Troesch , R . Biebinger , I . Egli , C . Zeder , R . F . Hurrell , Plasma hepcidinisamodestpredictorofdietaryironbioavailability inhumans , whereas oral iron loading , measured by stable - isotope appearance curves , increasesplas - ma hepcidin , Am . J . Clin . Nutr . 90 ( 2009 ) 1280 – 1287 . [ 205 ] P . J . Schmidt , P . T . Toran , A . M . Giannetti , P . J . Bjorkman , N . C . Andrews , The trans - ferrin receptor modulates hfe - dependent regulation of hepcidin expression , Cell Metab . 7 ( 2008 ) 205 – 214 . [ 206 ] A . P . West Jr . , A . M . Giannetti , A . B . Herr , M . J . Bennett , J . S . Nangiana , J . R . Pierce , L . P . Weiner , P . M . Snow , P . J . Bjorkman , Mutationalanalysisofthetransferrinreceptor reveals overlapping HFE and transferrin binding sites , J . Mol . Biol . 313 ( 2001 ) 385 – 397 . [ 207 ] J . Chen , M . Chloupkova , J . Gao , T . L . Chapman - Arvedson , C . A . Enns , HFE modu - lates transferrin receptor 2 levels in hepatoma cells via interactions that differ from transferrin receptor 1 - HFE interactions , J . Biol . Chem . 282 ( 2007 ) 36862 – 36870 . [ 208 ] A . M . Giannetti , P . J . Bjorkman , HFE and transferrin directly compete for transfer - rin receptor in solution and at the cell surface , J . Biol . Chem . 279 ( 2004 ) 25866 – 25875 . [ 209 ] T . Goswami , N . C . Andrews , Hereditary hemochromatosis protein , HFE , interac - tion with transferrin receptor 2 suggests a molecular mechanism for mammali - an iron sensing , J . Biol . Chem . 281 ( 2006 ) 28494 – 28498 . [ 210 ] A . Robb , M . Wessling - Resnick , Regulation of transferrin receptor 2 protein levels by transferrin , Blood 104 ( 2004 ) 4294 – 4299 . [ 211 ] M . B . Johnson , C . A . Enns , Diferric transferrin regulates transferrin receptor 2 pro - tein stability , Blood 104 ( 2004 ) 4287 – 4293 . [ 212 ] D . F . Wallace , L . Summerville , E . M . Crampton , D . M . Frazer , G . J . Anderson , V . N . Subramaniam , Combined deletion of Hfe and transferrin receptor 2 in mice leads to marked dysregulation of hepcidin and iron overload , Hepatology 50 ( 2009 ) 1992 – 2000 . [ 213 ] G . Ramey , J . C . Deschemin , S . Vaulont , Cross - talk between the mitogen activated protein kinase and bone morphogenetic protein / hemojuvelin pathways is re - quired for the induction of hepcidin by holotransferrin in primary mouse hepa - tocytes , Haematologica 94 ( 2009 ) 765 – 772 . [ 214 ] E . Corradini , C . Garuti , G . Montosi , P . Ventura , B . Andriopoulos Jr . , H . Y . Lin , A . Pietrangelo , J . L . Babitt , Bone morphogenetic protein signaling is impaired in an HFE knockout mouse model of hemochromatosis , Gastroenterology 137 ( 2009 ) 1489 – 1497 . [ 215 ] C . Finch , Regulators of iron balance in humans , Blood 84 ( 1994 ) 1697 – 1702 . [ 216 ] G . Nicolas , L . Viatte , M . Bennoun , C . Beaumont , A . Kahn , S . Vaulont , Hepcidin , a new iron regulatory peptide , Blood Cells Mol . Dis . 29 ( 2002 ) 327 – 335 . [ 217 ] J . P . Pinto , S . Ribeiro , H . Pontes , S . Thowfeequ , D . Tosh , F . Carvalho , G . Porto , Erythropoietin mediates hepcidin expression in hepatocytes through EPOR sig - naling and regulation of C / EBPalpha , Blood 111 ( 2008 ) 5727 – 5733 . [ 218 ] P . Robach , S . Recalcati , D . Girelli , C . Gel ﬁ , N . J . Aachmann - Andersen , J . J . Thomsen , A . M . Norgaard , A . Alberghini , N . Campostrini , A . Castagna , A . Vigano , P . Santambrogio , T . Kempf , K . C . Wollert , S . Moutereau , C . Lundby , G . Cairo , Alterations of systemic and muscle iron metabolism in human subjects treated with low - dose recombinant erythropoietin , Blood 113 ( 2009 ) 6707 – 6715 . [ 219 ] L . M . Schiffer , I . Brann , E . P . Cronkite , P . Reizenstein , Ironabsorption andexcretion in aregenerative anaemia . A collaborative Swedish - American whole body coun - ter study , Acta Haematol . 35 ( 1966 ) 80 – 90 . [ 220 ] M . Pak , M . A . Lopez , V . Gabayan , T . Ganz , S . Rivera , Suppression of hepcidin dur - ing anemia requires erythropoietic activity , Blood 108 ( 2006 ) 3730 – 3735 . [ 221 ] M . Vokurka , J . Krijt , K . Sulc , E . Necas , Hepcidin mRNA levels in mouse liver re - spond to inhibition of erythropoiesis , Physiol . Res . 55 ( 2006 ) 667 – 674 . [ 222 ] G . Weiss , T . Houston , S . Kastner , K . Jöhrer , K . Grünewald , J . H . Brock , Regulationof cellular iron metabolismbyerythropoietin : activationofiron - regulatory protein and upregulation of transferrin receptor expression in erythroid cells , Blood 89 ( 1997 ) 680 – 687 . [ 223 ] M . Nairz , A . Schroll , A . R . Moschen , T . Sonnweber , M . Theurl , I . Theurl , N . Taub , C . Jamnig , D . Neurauter , L . A . Huber , H . Tilg , P . L . Moser , G . Weiss , Erythropoietincon - trastinglyaffects bacterialinfection andexperimentalcolitis byinhibitingnucle - ar factor - kappaB - inducible immune pathways , Immunity 34 ( 2011 ) 61 – 74 . [ 224 ] E . Beutler , T . Gelbart , P . Lee , R . Trevino , M . A . Fernandez , V . F . Fairbanks , Molecular characterization of a case of atransferrinemia , Blood 96 ( 2000 ) 4071 – 4074 . [ 225 ] S . S . Buys , C . B . Martin , M . Eldridge , J . P . Kushner , J . Kaplan , Iron absorption in hypotransferrinemic mice , Blood 78 ( 1991 ) 3288 – 3290 . [ 226 ] T . B . Bartnikas , N . C . Andrews , M . D . Fleming , Transferrinisa majordeterminantof hepcidin expression in hypotransferrinemic mice , Blood 117 ( 2011 ) 630 – 637 . [ 227 ] P . Trombini , T . Coliva , E . Nemeth , R . Mariani , T . Ganz , A . Biondi , A . Piperno , Ef - fects of plasma transfusion on hepcidin production in human congenital hypo - transferrinemia , Haematologica 92 ( 2007 ) 1407 – 1410 . [ 228 ] H . Li , A . C . Rybicki , S . M . Suzuka , L . von Bonsdorff , W . Breuer , C . B . Hall , Z . I . Cabantchik , E . E . Bouhassira , M . E . Fabry , Y . Z . Ginzburg , Transferrin therapy ame - liorates disease in beta - thalassemic mice , Nat . Med . 16 ( 2010 ) 177 – 182 . [ 229 ] G . Papanikolaou , M . Tzilianos , J . I . Christakis , D . Bogdanos , K . Tsimirika , J . MacFarlane , Y . P . Goldberg , N . Sakellaropoulos , T . Ganz , E . Nemeth , Hepcidin in iron overload disorders , Blood 105 ( 2005 ) 4103 – 4105 . [ 230 ] A . Kattamis , I . Papassotiriou , D . Palaiologou , F . Apostolakou , A . Galani , V . Ladis , N . Sakellaropoulos , G . Papanikolaou , The effects of erythropoetic activity and iron burden on hepcidin expression in patients with thalassemia major , Haematolo - gica 91 ( 2006 ) 809 – 812 . [ 231 ] S . Rivella , Ineffective erythropoiesis and thalassemias , Curr . Opin . Hematol . 16 ( 2009 ) 187 – 194 . [ 232 ] T . Tanno , N . V . Bhanu , P . A . Oneal , S . H . Goh , P . Staker , Y . T . Lee , J . W . Moroney , C . H . Reed , N . L . Luban , R . H . Wang , T . E . Eling , R . Childs , T . Ganz , S . F . Leitman , S . Fucharoen , J . L . Miller , HighlevelsofGDF15inthalassemiasuppressexpressionoftheironreg - ulatory protein hepcidin , Nat . Med . 13 ( 2007 ) 1096 – 1101 . [ 233 ] J . M . Ramirez , O . Schaad , S . Durual , D . Cossali , M . Docquier , P . Beris , P . Descombes , T . Matthes , Growth differentiation factor 15 production is necessary for normal erythroid differentiation and is increased in refractory anaemia with ring - sideroblasts , Br . J . Haematol . 144 ( 2009 ) 251 – 262 . [ 234 ] H . Tamary , H . Shalev , G . Perez - Avraham , M . Zoldan , I . Levi , D . W . Swinkels , T . Tanno , J . L . Miller , Elevated growth differentiation factor 15 expression in patients with congenital dyserythropoietic anemia type I , Blood 112 ( 2008 ) 5241 – 5244 . [ 235 ] G . Casanovas , D . W . Swinkels , S . Altamura , K . Schwarz , C . M . Laarakkers , H . J . Gross , M . Wiesneth , H . Heimpel , M . U . Muckenthaler , Growth differentiation fac - tor 15 in patients with congenital dyserythropoietic anaemia ( CDA ) type II , J . Mol . Med . ( Berl . ) 89 ( 2011 ) 811 – 816 . [ 236 ] T . Tanno , P . Porayette , O . Sripichai , S . J . Noh , C . Byrnes , A . Bhupatiraju , Y . T . Lee , J . B . Goodnough , O . Harandi , T . Ganz , R . F . Paulson , J . L . Miller , Identi ﬁ cation of TWSG1 as a second novel erythroid regulator of hepcidin expression in murine and human cells , Blood 114 ( 2009 ) 181 – 186 . [ 237 ] J . Kanda , C . Mizumoto , H . Kawabata , H . Tsuchida , N . Tomosugi , K . Matsuo , T . Uchiyama , Serum hepcidin level and erythropoietic activity after hematopoietic stem cell transplantation , Haematologica 93 ( 2008 ) 1550 – 1554 . [ 238 ] D . M . Wrighting , N . C . Andrews , Interleukin - 6 induces hepcidin expression through STAT3 , Blood 108 ( 2006 ) 3204 – 3209 . [ 239 ] M . V . Verga Falzacappa , M . Vujic Spasic , R . Kessler , J . Stolte , M . W . Hentze , M . U . Muckenthaler , STAT3 mediateshepatic hepcidinexpression and its in ﬂ ammatory stimulation , Blood 109 ( 2007 ) 353 – 358 . [ 240 ] A . Pietrangelo , U . Dierssen , L . Valli , C . Garuti , A . Rump , E . Corradini , M . Ernst , C . Klein , C . Trautwein , STAT3 is required for IL - 6 - gp130 - dependent activation of hepcidin in vivo , Gastroenterology 132 ( 2007 ) 294 – 300 . [ 241 ] H . Huang , M . Constante , A . Layoun , M . M . Santos , Contribution of STAT3 and SMAD4 pathways to the regulation of hepcidin by opposing stimuli , Blood 113 ( 2009 ) 3593 – 3599 . [ 242 ] I . Theurl , A . Schroll , M . Nairz , M . Seifert , M . Theurl , T . Sonnweber , H . Kulaksiz , G . Weiss , Pathways for the regulation of hepcidin expression in anemia of chronic disease and iron de ﬁ ciency anemia in vivo , Haematologica 96 ( 2011 ) 1761 – 1769 . [ 243 ] C . Peyssonnaux , A . S . Zinkernagel , V . Datta , X . Lauth , R . S . Johnson , V . Nizet , TLR4 - dependent hepcidin expression by myeloid cells in response to bacterial patho - gens , Blood 107 ( 2006 ) 3727 – 3732 . [ 244 ] P . Matak , T . B . Chaston , B . Chung , S . K . Srai , A . T . McKie , P . A . Sharp , Activated mac - rophages induce hepcidin expression in HuH7 hepatoma cells , Haematologica 94 ( 2009 ) 773 – 780 . [ 245 ] S . J . Oliveira , J . P . Pinto , G . Picarote , V . M . Costa , F . Carvalho , M . Rangel , M . deSousa , S . F . de Almeida , ER stress - inducible factor CHOP affects the expression of hepci - din by modulating C / EBPalpha activity , PLoS One 4 ( 2009 ) e6618 . [ 246 ] C . Vecchi , G . Montosi , K . Zhang , I . Lamberti , S . A . Duncan , R . J . Kaufman , A . Pietrangelo , ER stress controls iron metabolism through induction of hepcidin , Science 325 ( 2009 ) 877 – 880 . [ 247 ] O . Weizer - Stern , K . Adamsky , O . Margalit , O . Ashur - Fabian , D . Givol , N . Amariglio , G . Rechavi , Hepcidin , akeyregulatorofironmetabolism , istranscriptionallyactivated by p53 , Br . J . Haematol . 138 ( 2007 ) 253 – 262 . [ 248 ] C . Peyssonnaux , A . S . Zinkernagel , R . A . Schuepbach , E . Rankin , S . Vaulont , V . H . Haase , V . Nizet , R . S . Johnson , Regulation of iron homeostasis by the hypoxia - inducible transcription factors ( HIFs ) , J . Clin . Invest . 117 ( 2007 ) 1926 – 1932 . [ 249 ] S . O . Choi , Y . S . Cho , H . L . Kim , J . W . Park , ROSmediatethehypoxicrepressionofthe hepcidin gene by inhibiting C / EBPalpha and STAT - 3 , Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 356 ( 2007 ) 312 – 317 . [ 250 ] G . G . Braliou , M . V . VergaFalzacappa , G . Chachami , G . Casanovas , M . U . Muckenthaler , G . Simos , 2 - Oxoglutarate - dependentoxygenasescontrolhepcidingeneexpression , J . Hepatol . 48 ( 2008 ) 801 – 810 . [ 251 ] M . Volke , D . P . Gale , U . Maegdefrau , G . Schley , B . Klanke , A . K . Bosserhoff , P . H . Maxwell , K . U . Eckardt , C . Warnecke , Evidence for a lack of a direct transcriptional suppression of the iron regulatory peptide hepcidin by hypoxia - inducible factors , PLoS One 4 ( 2009 ) e7875 . [ 252 ] K . Miura , K . Taura , Y . Kodama , B . Schnabl , D . A . Brenner , Hepatitis C virus - induced oxidative stress suppresses hepcidin expression through increased his - tone deacetylase activity , Hepatology 48 ( 2008 ) 1420 – 1429 . 202 K . Gkouvatsos et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1820 ( 2012 ) 188 – 202