Information elaboration and team performance : Examining the psychological origins and environmental contingencies Christian J . Resick a , ⇑ , Toshio Murase b , Kenneth R . Randall c , Leslie A . DeChurch b a LeBow College of Business , Drexel University , Philadelphia , PA 19104 , United States b School of Psychology , Georgia Tech , Atlanta , GA 30332 , United States c Banner Health , Phoenix , AZ 85006 , United States a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 17 December 2012 Accepted 26 March 2014 Available online 21 April 2014 Accepted by Steven Farmer Keywords : Teams Information elaboration Information exchange Mental models Team composition Collective leadership Environmental turbulence a b s t r a c t Information elaboration enables functionally diverse teams to transform their breadth of knowledge resources into actionable solutions to complex problems . The current study advances information elab - oration theory and research in two ways . First , we identify how team ability and social motivation com - position characteristics provide the psychological origins of complex information processing efforts . Second , we identify environmental turbulence as an important boundary condition , clarifying when information elaboration beneﬁts team performance and when it does not . These ideas were tested in a sample of 4 - person self - managed teams ( N = 68 ) which were functionally diverse and performed a coop - erative strategic decision - making task . Results indicate that cognitive ability equips teams with the ‘‘can do’’ ability for complex elaboration efforts through emergent team mental models , whereas low prefer - ences for self - reliance provide the ‘‘will do’’ motivation for in - depth information exchange through col - lective leadership . In turn , teams beneﬁted from information elaboration in turbulent but not stable environments . (cid:2) 2014 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . Introduction From management consulting projects to R & D laboratories to hospital trauma centers , organizations of all types are increasingly deploying teams whose members have diverse functional back - grounds . The allure of these cross - functional teams is their capac - ity to engage in complex problem solving ; members bring with them a breadth of knowledge and expertise creating a pool of non - redundant informational resources for the team to draw upon ( Bantel & Jackson , 1989 ; Jehn , Northcraft , & Neale , 1999 ; Milliken & Martins , 1996 ; Williams & O’Reilly , 1998 ) . Yet , not all functionally diverse teams are able to leverage their informational resources ( van Dijk , van Engen , & van Knippenberg , 2012 ; Webber & Donahue , 2001 ) . Through openly exchanging task - relevant infor - mation and ideas , seeking clariﬁcation on the perspectives offered by others , and discussing and integrating this information—that is , by engaging in information elaboration processes—diverse teams are able to fully utilize their available knowledge resources ( van Knippenberg , De Dreu , & Homan , 2004 ) and outperform homogenous teams ( Homan , Van Knippenberg , Van Kleef , & De Dreu , 2007 ; van Ginkel & van Knippenberg , 2008 ) . However , func - tionally diverse teams are the least likely to share unique informa - tion or engage in complex information processing even though it is precisely those teams that are most likely to beneﬁt from in - depth information exchange ( Mesmer - Magnus & DeChurch , 2009 ; Stasser & Titus , 1985 , 1987 ) . An often overlooked consideration in stafﬁng functionally diverse teams , is ensuring that teams are composed of members who possess the ‘‘can do’’ abilities and the ‘‘will do’’ motivation to engage in complex information processing efforts ( van Knippenberg et al . , 2004 ) . The ability and motivation among team members provide a pool of general human capital resources that enable teams to leverage their more speciﬁc knowledge resources ( Ployhart & Moliterno , 2011 ) . To date , however , empirical studies of the compositional drivers of information elaboration have been sparse . Inparticular , the importanceof teammembercognitiveabil - ity in promoting information elaboration processes has not been tested . This is a critical oversight as the ‘‘can do’’ abilities of team members ( Ployhart & Moliterno , 2011 ) provide a basis for recogniz - ing the informational demands that are relevant to the task at hand and for determining how to use the team’s knowledge resources to accomplish its goals . Prior studies provide some evidence that members’ process accountability ( Scholten , Van Knippenberg , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . obhdp . 2014 . 03 . 005 0749 - 5978 / (cid:2) 2014 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . ⇑ Corresponding author . E - mail addresses : cresick @ drexel . edu ( C . J . Resick ) , toshio . murase @ gmail . com ( T . Murase ) , kenneth . randall @ bannerhealth . com ( K . R . Randall ) , lesliedechurch @ gmail . com ( L . A . DeChurch ) . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 124 ( 2014 ) 165 – 176 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / obhdp Nijstad , & De Dreu , 2007 ) and need for cognition ( Kearney , Gebert , & Voelpel , 2009 ) serve as motivational drivers of information elabora - tion . However , these studies have focused exclusively on members’ motivation to engage in deep - level information processing ( i . e . , members’ epistemic motivation ; De Dreu & Carnevale , 2003 ; Kruglanski & Webster , 1996 ) . The extent to which members’ prefer - ences for collective work arrangements ( i . e . , members’ social moti - vation ; De Dreu , Nijstad , & Van Knippenberg , 2008 ) serve as a motivational driver of information elaboration remains unclear . This is an important oversight as the ‘‘will do’’ preferences and ten - dencies among team members ( Ployhart & Moliterno , 2011 ) equip teams with the prosocial motivation to engage in cooperative infor - mation exchange and integration efforts ( De Dreu et al . , 2008 ) . Additionally , not all teams are equally likely to beneﬁt from extensive information processing . In developing their original the - ory , van Knippenberg and colleagues ( 2004 ) proposed task com - plexity as a boundary condition , with information elaboration processes being an important driver of success for teams working on complex as opposed to routine tasks . However , they failed to consider how the demands inherent in the team’s operating con - text impact the need for information elaboration among team members . This is an important area for exploration as events occurring outside of the team , but within the team’s operating con - text can create shifting goals or priorities , introduce new opportu - nities or threats , and alter how tasks and decisions affect desired outcomes . Further , the degree of task ambiguity and uncertainty inherent in the team’s performance setting have been shown to heighten the importance of knowledge integration for effective team decision - making ( De Dreu & Beersma , 2010 ) and creativity ( Sung & Choi , 2012 ) . However , the extent to which the importance of information elaboration for the success of functionally diverse teams differs across environmental contexts remains unclear . In the current study , we seek to build on van Knippenberg et al . ’s ( 2004 ) model of information elaboration by addressing two questions . First , we address the question , How do the composi - tional characteristics of functionally diverse teams provide the ‘‘can do’’ ability and ‘‘will do’’ motivation to engage in information elabora - tion processes ? Individuals who possess higher as opposed to lower levels of general cognitive ability are able to learn faster , acquire and assimilate larger amounts of information , and structure knowledge for more efﬁcient use ( Hunter , 1986 ; Jensen , 1998 ) . We propose that general cognitive ability composition provides an important , but incomplete understanding of ability as a driver of information elaboration processes . Team cognition in the form of shared task representations ( van Ginkel & van Knippenberg , 2008 , 2009 , 2012 ) and diversity mindsets ( van Knippenberg , van Ginkel , & Homan , 2013 ) provide a cognitive guide for information elaboration efforts . In line with this work , we propose and demon - strate the importance of general cognitive ability composition as a key driver of information elaboration through emergent team cog - nition in the form of similar strategy - focused mental models . Low self - reliant individuals enjoy working in situations where there is a distribution of tasks and resources , and are both willing to contribute to a collective effort and to rely on others to do their part ( Jackson , Colquitt , Wesson , & Zapata - Phelan , 2006 ; Ramamoorthy & Carroll , 1998 ) . We propose and demonstrate that low levels of self - reliance among members provides the prosocial motivation to engage in complex collective information exchange efforts through the sharing of the team’s leadership responsibili - ties . Our research , therefore , sheds light into the importance of ability , prosocial motivation , and emergent team properties for engendering information elaboration in functionally diverse teams . Second , we address the question , Do the demands of the team’s operating environment provide a boundary condition on the perfor - mance implications of information elaboration in functionally diverse teams ? Turbulent environments are characterized by continuous and unpredictable changes which disrupt routines and create a need to be vigilant of environmental demands ( Katz & Kahn , 1978 ; Lawrence & Lorsch , 1967 ) . We expect that complex informa - tion elaboration processes are most beneﬁcial for teams working in non - routine and unpredictable contexts . At the same time , infor - mation elaboration consumes time and energy ; for teams that face a more stable performance environment , extensive elaboration is likely to be unnecessary because it drains time and cognitive resources . We propose and demonstrate that information elabora - tion among team members is critical to success for functionally diverse teams operating in turbulent environments while of mini - mal value in more routine environments . Therefore , our research sheds light on the boundary conditions of the utility of information elaboration for cross - functional team success by highlighting the importance of the team’s environmental context , an often over - looked factor in team research ( Mathieu , Maynard , Rapp , & Gilson , 2008 ) . Information elaboration and environmental turbulence Information elaboration is a complex form of communication that involves ‘‘the exchange of information and perspectives , the process of feeding back the results of this individual - level process - ing into the group , and discussion and integration of its implica - tions’’ ( van Knippenberg et al . , 2004 , p . 1011 ) . Information elaboration processes extend beyond information sharing to cap - ture the extent to which team members contribute detailed expla - nations of their ideas , and spend time constructively discussing each other’s perspectives , integrating information , and determin - ing how to apply their knowledge resources to the problem at hand ( Hoever , van Knippenberg , van Ginkel , & Barkema , 2012 ) . In turn , teams are able to leverage their unique knowledge resources and outperform more homogenous teams ( Hoever et al . , 2012 ; Homan et al . , 2007 , 2008 ; Rico , Sanchez - Manzanares , Antino , & Lau , 2012 ; van Ginkel & van Knippenberg , 2008 , 2009 ) . At the same time , the organizational sciences have long recog - nized that neither organizations nor teams are impervious to external forces ( e . g . , Burns & Stalker , 1961 ; Katz & Kahn , 1978 ; Lawrence & Lorsch , 1967 ; Mathieu et al . , 2008 ) . When environ - ments are stable and predictable , operating procedures can be designed for routine efﬁciency . However , in turbulent environ - ments change occurs rapidly and unpredictably ; organizations must be cognizant of the environmental demands and continu - ously adjust their strategies , decisions , and routines to be effective ( Bergh & Lawless , 1998 ; Katz & Kahn , 1978 ) . For teams , turbulent environments create coordination challenges and heighten the importance of communication because previously relied - upon strategies and routines may no longer be appropriate ( Kozlowski , Gully , Nason , & Smith , 1999 ; Marks , Zaccaro , & Mathieu , 2000 ; Thomas - Hunt & Phillips , 2003 ) . In uncertain environments , knowl - edge integration is essential for teams to come up with creative solutions and perform at optimal levels ( Sung & Choi , 2012 ) . We expect that the beneﬁts of information elaboration differ substantially depending on the demands of the team’s operating environment , even when teams are working on similar types of complex and non - routine tasks . Take , for example , a cross - func - tional R & D team charged with designing a next generation elec - tronic medical device . A team that faces many disruptive events resulting from competitor practices , research and medical advances , and shifting consumer preferences will need to discuss their perspectives in greater detail to ensure that strategies and decisions are appropriate for the demands of the environment . Through information elaboration , these teams are able to draw on members’ unique capabilities , exchange perspectives , and develop novel and useful solutions ( Hoever et al . , 2012 ; van Ginkel & van Knippenberg , 2009 ) to address the evolving demands 166 C . J . Resick et al . / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 124 ( 2014 ) 165 – 176 of the environments . In contrast , extensive information elaboration is resource draining and less important when cross - functional teams face more stable operating environments with fewer disrup - tive events . Here , teams beneﬁt from the formation of routines , adoption of accepted practices , and processes that bring about decision - making efﬁciencies ( Nadkarni & Narayanan , 2007 ) . There - fore , we propose the following hypothesis . Hypothesis 1 . Information elaboration is positively related to team performance , and this relationship is stronger in turbulent as opposed to stable environments . Psychological origins of information elaboration Human capital provides a ‘‘unit - level resource that is created from the emergence of individuals’ knowledge , skills , abilities , and other characteristics ( KSAOs ) ’’ ( Ployhart & Moliterno , 2011 , p . 128 ) . Cross - functional teams need to be composed of members who provide the right mix of speciﬁc human capital to solve com - plex problems as well as the basic ability and motivation ( i . e . , gen - eral human capital ) to use their knowledge resources effectively . The functional diversity inherent in cross - functional teams pro - vides a basis for the emergence of speciﬁc human capital . In turn , the collective ability and motivation of team members are thought to be key compositional drivers of information elaboration ( van Knippenberg et al . , 2004 ) . In the next section , we examine the roles of cognitive ability and self - reliance beliefs composition in creating a capacity for information elaboration through emergent team cog - nition and the collective enactment of leadership functions . Team cognitive ability and self - reliance emerge from the char - acteristics of individual team members through a composition emergence process , which indicates that the team - level property is isomorphic to the individual - level property ( Kozlowski & Klein , 2000 ) . To form these team - level properties , the scores of individual members need to be aggregated using an appropriate composition model . Drawing on Steiner ( 1972 ) taxonomy of task types , van Knippenberg , Kooij - de Bode , and van Ginkel ( 2010 ) noted that information elaboration is an additive task because it requires all team members to contribute their unique knowledge and partici - pate in the discussion and integration of information . For additive tasks , the underlying traits of team members are most appropri - ately modeled using team - level means ( Beersma et al . , 2003 ; Homan et al . , 2008 ; van Knippenberg et al . , 2010 ) . Accordingly , we model team cognitive ability and team self - reliance using team - level means in the current study . ‘‘Can do’’ drivers of information elaboration General cognitive ability , which is a stable characteristic that captures the capacity to comprehend , process , and create new information ( Jensen , 1998 ; Kanfer & Ackerman , 1989 ) , provides teams with a general type of human capital that is useful across sit - uations ( Bell , 2007 ; Ployhart & Moliterno , 2011 ) . Individuals with high general cognitive ability are able to learn new and large amounts of information , retain information in memory , and struc - ture information for efﬁcient application in future situations ( Hunter , 1986 ; Schmidt , Hunter , & Outerbridge , 1986 ) . At the team level , cognitive ability reﬂects the extent to which team members possess ‘‘the capacity to understand complex ideas , learn from experience , reason , problem solve , and adapt’’ ( Devine & Philips , 2001 , p . 507 ) , and has been linked to team effectiveness across studies ( Bell , 2007 ) . Teams composed of high cognitive ability members should have the ability to recognize the team’s informa - tional needs , provide detailed and understandable explanations of their ideas , reﬂect upon information , and integrate and apply task - relevant knowledge resources . At the same time , organizational researchers are increasingly recognizing the cognitive underpinnings of effective information exchange in teams ( DeChurch & Mesmer - Magnus , 2010 ; Mohammed , Ferzandi , & Hamilton , 2010 ) . In particular , shared task representations have been found to be an important facilitator of information elaboration processes in diverse teams ( van Ginkel , Tindale , & van Knippenberg , 2009 ; van Ginkel & van Knippenberg , 2008 , 2009 , 2012 ) . Similarly , van Knippenberg et al . ( 2013 ) argued that members’ diversity mindsets are a speciﬁc form of team cognition that enables teams to conceptualize diversity as an informational resource and leverage their informational diver - sity to perform at optimal levels . Building on this work , for teams performing cooperative strategic decision - making tasks we pro - pose that the similarity among members’ strategy - focused team mental models ( TMM ) is an emergent team cognition that links team ability composition with information elaboration . Strategy TMM are a type of mental model that captures members’ collective understanding of the relationships among and implications of key decision alternatives ( Randall , Resick , & DeChurch , 2011 ) . We focus on strategy mental model similarity for three reasons . First , shared cognition within team has been found to be an important precur - sor to information elaboration ( van Ginkel & van Knippenberg , 2008 , 2009 ) . Second , a team’s strategic orientation has been found to guide information search efforts ( Woolley , Bear , Chang , & DeCostanza , 2013 ) . Third , strategy mental model similarity enables teams to execute strategies successfully because members have a common understanding of the implications of their decisions ( Ensley & Pearce , 2001 ; Knight et al . , 1999 ) . Cognitive ability is related to how individuals acquire , process , and use information in future settings ( Hunter , 1986 ; Kanfer & Ackerman , 1989 ) . Cognitive ability has been linked to the emer - gence of similar mental models among members by aiding team learning and creating the capacity for members to gain a shared understanding of their objectives and strategies to accomplish them ( Edwards , Day , Arthur , & Bell , 2006 ; Randall et al . , 2011 ; Resick , Dickson , Mitchelson , Allison , & Clark , 2010 ) . Teams com - posed of members with higher as opposed to lower cognitive abil - ity levels should be more likely to recognize the interdependencies that exist among members ( Resick et al . , 2010 ) and the need to work toward an agreed upon strategy ( Randall et al . , 2011 ) . In turn , strategy TMM similarity provides a key mechanism linking cogni - tive ability composition to information elaboration by guiding the understanding of informational relevance and the exchange of knowledge and information that is consistent with the shared understanding of the team’s strategies . Therefore , we offer the fol - lowing hypothesis . Hypothesis 2 . The positive relationship between team cognitive ability and information elaboration is mediated by strategy TMM similarity . ‘‘Will do’’ drivers of information elaboration The team’s motivation to spend time and effort cooperatively processing information is also an important determinant of infor - mation elaboration ( De Dreu et al . , 2008 ; Nijstad & De Dreu , 2012 ; van Knippenberg et al . , 2004 ) . Composition characteristics such as members’ openness to experience ( Homan et al . , 2008 ) , pro - diversity beliefs ( Homan et al . , 2007 ) , and need for cognition ( Kearney et al . , 2009 ) provide some insights into this motivational capacity . Similarly , process accountability has also been identiﬁed as a motivational driver of information elaboration ( Scholten et al . , 2007 ) . However , openness to experience and pro - diversity beliefs are broad characteristics that reﬂect one’s receptiveness to new ideas and different people , while process accountability and need C . J . Resick et al . / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 124 ( 2014 ) 165 – 176 167 for cognition are aspects of epistemic motivation that are reﬂective of one’s desire to develop a deep - level understanding of the world ( De Dreu & Carnevale , 2003 ) . Beyond these factors , an emerging stream of research argues that teams with a high level of prosocial motivation ( i . e . , the desire to cooperate and a preference for fair outcomes that have joint beneﬁts ) proactively search for , dissemi - nate , encode , and integrate information that is relevant for achiev - ing the team’s success ( De Dreu et al . , 2008 ) . In contrast , teams with a pro - self orientation are more likely to strategically withhold information or to deceive others for personal gain ( De Dreu , 2007 ; De Dreu et al . , 2008 ) . We propose that low preferences for self - reli - ance among members provide teams with a prosocial motivational capacity for in - depth information exchange efforts . Self - reliance is a facet of psychological collectivism that cap - tures a core belief that success cannot be accomplished working alone ( Jackson et al . , 2006 ; Ramamoorthy & Carroll , 1998 ) . Specif - ically , self - reliance addresses the extent to which individuals form a sense of responsibility to their groups , are comfortable with a dis - tribution of tasks , resources , and information , and are willing to rely on others ( Jackson et al . , 2006 ) . Teams composed of members with low self - reliance beliefs are naturally inclined to be trusting , believe that members are responsibility to their team , and com - fortable contributing information and effort toward collective endeavors ; in contrast , teams composed of high self - reliant mem - bers are naturally inclined to be skeptical of one another , believe that members are accountable for themselves and not to their group , and may withhold information and effort to protect their personal interests . Yet , functionally diverse teams need to manage their pool of unique knowledge resources effectively to solve problems and attain goals . Leadership is thought to play a particularly important role helping teams to effectively use their human capital and infor - mational resources by encouraging communication , information exchange and integration , idea vetting , and knowledge application ( Zaccaro , Rittman , & Marks , 2001 ) . We propose that low prefer - ences for self - reliance among members give rise to a particular role set , termed collective leadership , when teams are also self - man - aged . The collective view of leadership holds that direction setting , coordination , and social facilitation can be enacted by multiple team members ( Day , Gronn , & Salas , 2004 ; Erez , LePine , & Elms , 2002 ; Gronn , 2002 ; Klein , Ziegert , Knight , & Xiao , 2006 ) . Collective leadership is an informal , internal leadership mechanism ( Morgeson , DeRue , & Karam , 2010 ) that is particularly beneﬁcial for teams without formally designed leaders ( Yammarino , Salas , Serban , Shirreffs , & Shufﬂer , 2012 ) by promoting problem - solving activities that enable goal attainment ( Zaccaro et al . , 2001 ) . Build - ing on the notion that both task - and relationship - focused leader - ship functions contribute to team effectiveness ( Burke et al . , 2006 ) , particularly in teams with diverse membership ( Klein , Knight , Ziegert , Lim , & Saltz , 2011 ) , Hiller , Day , and Vance ( 2006 ) conceptualized collective leadership in terms of task - and relation - ship - oriented functions . Task - oriented functions involve direction setting , planning strategies for accomplishing goals , boundary spanning , and managing internal operations . Relationship - oriented functions aim to strengthen the social fabric of the team , enhanc - ing member’s capacity to work together effectively . For teams that are self - managed , we expect that low preferences for self - reliance among members create a prosocial orientation that motivates members to participate in the mutual enactment of the team’s leadership functions . In turn , members are motivated to seek out information , spend time and effort integrating and apply - ing unique knowledge , and persist through difﬁculties . When team members are highly self - reliant , members are less motivated to perform unassigned leadership functions , less interested in exchanging knowledge , less willing to engage in information inte - gration activities , and more likely to be protective of their knowledge . Therefore , we propose that self - reliance composition provides functionally diverse teams with the ‘‘will do’’ motivation to engage in information elaboration through the collective enact - ment of leadership functions among members , and present the fol - lowing hypothesis . A model of the hypothesized relationships is depicted in Fig . 1 . Hypothesis 3 . The negative relationship between team self - reli - ance beliefs and information elaboration is mediated by collective leadership . Method Participants and simulation Participants included 272 undergraduate students from a large public university in the Southeastern United States . Participants were predominantly female ( 65 % ) , with a mean age of 20 years ( SD = 4 . 64 ) , and represented a wide range of ethnic backgrounds ( 68 % Hispanic , 12 % Caucasian , 11 % African - American , 3 % Asian - American , and 6 % unspeciﬁed ) . Participants were randomly assigned to 68 four - person teams ; teams were randomly assigned to either a turbulent ( n = 33 ) or stable ( n = 35 ) environment condition . Teams performed a computerized strategic decision - making task created using the pc - game SimCity4 Deluxe Edition ( EA Games , 2004 ) , which is a city building simulation in which users design , build , and govern a city . We structured the task so that par - ticipants formed the city council of a simulated city . To create func - tional diversity , and ensure that knowledge and expertise were distributed across team members , we created four distinct roles . Through a task analysis that involved reviewing the Ofﬁcial Strat - egy Guide ( Kramer , 2003 ) , playing the game , and consulting with four subject matter experts ( SMEs ) , we created a list of tasks and actions that impacted the population of the simulated city . These tasks were clustered into four roles on the basis of content similar - ity to ensure a distribution of importance and minimize knowledge overlap . The four roles were then pilot - tested on two teams and reviewed with the SMEs . We incorporated adjustments and devel - oped four separate training modules ; the training modules and revised roles were piloted tested on six additional teams and again reviewed with the SMEs . Adjustments were incorporated , and the four roles and four training modules were ﬁnalized . Participants were randomly assigned to one of the four roles . Participants in the City Planner role were trained to determine the optimal uses for land , how to zone and develop land , and to manage transportation issues throughout the simulated city . Par - ticipants in the Financial Ofﬁcer role were trained on the city ﬁnan - cials and given responsibility for managing budgets , tax revenues , and expenditures . Participants in the Public Works Ofﬁcer role were trained to build and manage the simulated city’s power grid and plants , water and sanitation facilities , and public safety depart - ments , including ﬁre and police . Participants in the Social Welfare role were trained to address the simulated city’s health and wel - fare concerns , including environmental pollution , and building and funding hospitals and schools . The combination of these roles was needed to effectively manage the city , ensuring that informa - tion and expertise were distributed among members and that members were dependent upon each other to accomplish their objectives . As a result , there was no hierarchy among roles and teams were self - managed . Teams were given responsibility for the management of a par - tially developed city , and informed that , together , they were the city council of the simulated city . The city was developed near a coastal area and the landscape created both opportunities and challenges for growth and expansion . The northern portion of the 168 C . J . Resick et al . / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 124 ( 2014 ) 165 – 176 city contained medium - density industrial zones , while the south - ern portion of the city contained low - and medium - density resi - dential and commercial zones . An island off of the southeastern part of the city consisted of both high - density residential and com - mercial zones . Approximately one - ﬁfth of the simulated city’s land was unzoned . Each team began with a simulated population of 38 , 468 residents and a ﬁnancial reserve of $ 100 , 693 . Participants were tasked with the responsibility for making and implementing decisions regarding all aspects of city governance . Teams were given the goal of making their city as desirable a place to live and work as possible , a task that was measured through growth in the city’s population . The game was programmed so that deci - sions that increased the desirability of the city resulted in a corre - sponding increase in city population , while decisions that decreased the desirability of the city resulted in a decrease in pop - ulation . Teams were informed that they would be able to see the impact of their efforts by monitoring changes in the city’s population . Procedure Each experimental session lasted approximately 3 h . Partici - pants were provided a brief introduction to the purpose of the study and asked to provide informed consent . Next , participants completed measures of general cognitive ability , self - reliance beliefs , and demographics , and then progressed through 2 com - puter - based training ( CBT ) modules . The ﬁrst module outlined the basic goals of the simulation , how to operate various controls , and where to locate important information about the city’s status . Participants then completed a role - speciﬁc training module that outlined the responsibilities of the respective roles , and received instructions on : ( a ) how to use speciﬁc functions of the game , ( b ) how to retrieve and monitor information , and ( c ) the social and economic impact of various strategic decisions associated with their speciﬁc role . In addition , participants were provided a hand - out to use during the remainder of the session which contained role - speciﬁc information covered during training . After the CBTs , an experimenter asked each participant to demonstrate a series of critical , role - speciﬁc tasks . If a participant was unable to com - plete a given task , the experimenter demonstrated how to com - plete the task and then asked the participant to demonstrate it again . All participants correctly demonstrated all tasks by the sec - ond trial . This process ensured that all participants had acquired a basic level of knowledge necessary for the task . Training lasted approximately 45 min . Upon completion of the training modules , participants met in a conference room equipped with a 32 00 television connected to a desktop computer . Additionally , a 56 in . (cid:2) 36 in . color map of the city was posted on the wall and identiﬁed important buildings , such as power plants , hospitals , schools , police stations , and ﬁre houses . An experimenter provided an overview of the city and reiter - ated the team’s goal . Teams were then provided an initial period of 15 min to examine their city , identify any problems or areas where changes may be needed , and to make and implement deci - sions . During this time , the simulation was paused . After 15 min , the simulation was started and progressed for four simulated months , which lasted approximately 3 min . As time elapsed , teams were able to watch the evolution of their city ; however , they were unable to make any changes . Teams were instructed to use this time to plan their next decisions . After four simulated months the simulation was paused , and teams were then given 5 min to examine their city , identify changes , and implement decisions . The simulation was then started and ran for another four simulated months . In total , teams progressed through nine cycles of making and implementing decisions and then allowing the simulation to run for a total of 36 simulated months . Teams within the two conditions experienced the exact same circumstances during the ﬁrst ﬁve cycles ( 20 simulated months ) . For teams in the turbulent environmental condition , a series of four unforeseen disasters occurred during the ﬁnal four cycles ( 16 sim - ulated months ) . Teams in the stable conditions did not experience any changes in their environment . Environmental condition manipulation Each team was randomly assigned to either a stable or a turbu - lent environment condition . A turbulent environment : ( a ) is char - acterized by unexpected and inconsistent changes that are difﬁcult to predict , ( b ) is stressful , confusing , and intimidating , ( c ) requires different strategic approaches for goal accomplishment , and ( d ) places a signiﬁcant demand on communication and coordination among people ( Bergh & Lawless , 1998 ; Burns & Stalker , 1961 ; Katz & Kahn , 1978 ; Lawrence & Lorsch , 1967 ) . We operationalized environmental turbulence by creating a series of four unforeseen disasters ( e . g . , ﬁres , tornados , and attacks from hostile forces ) that occurred during consecutive intervals beginning after the ﬁfth decision cycle . To increase uncertainty , each disaster differed from the previous disaster and caused substantial damage to a different section of the city . These events disrupted normal operating condi - tions requiring the team to redirect their attention and decisions to repair damage and restore operations . To verify that participants perceived the two environmental conditions differently , we administered a 4 - item manipulation check after 36 simulated months . Responses were made on a 5 - point response scale ( 1 = Strongly Disagree to 5 = Strongly Agree ) , and then items were averaged into a composite variable ( a = . 82 ) . Participants in the turbulent condition ( m = 4 . 04 , sd = 0 . 65 ) agreed more strongly than participants in the stable condition ( m = 3 . 03 , sd = . 83 ; t = (cid:3) 12 . 16 , p < . 01 ) that events which occurred made the simulation unpredictable and chaotic . We also asked participants about the perceived level of difﬁculty of the task . Participants in the stable ( m = 3 . 28 , sd = 1 . 07 ) and turbulent ( m = 3 . 49 , sd = 1 . 21 ; t = (cid:3) 1 . 52 , ns ) conditions did not differ in their perceptions of task difﬁculty . Taken together , the manipulation checks indicated that participants in the two conditions differed in their perceptions of the stability and predictability of the environment , but not in the level of difﬁculty of the task . Measures Team composition We assessed cognitive ability using the Wonderlic Personnel Test Form IV ( Wonderlic , 1992 ) . Participants were given 12 min to complete the 50 - item measure . We measured self - reliance beliefs ( a = . 66 ) using Ramamoorthy and Carroll’s ( 1998 ) 4 - item scale . We focused on self - reliance beliefs as they reﬂect ones’ will - ingness to rely on others and share in collective responsibilities . Participants responded using a 5 - point Likert - type scale ( 1 = Strongly Disagree to 5 = Strongly Agree ) . As our intent was to model the inﬂuence of team compositional characteristics on infor - mation elaboration through emergent team properties , we aggre - gated ability and self - reliance using team - level means . TMM To elicit team members’ strategic understanding of the various decision options , we asked each participant to complete a matrix reporting his or her perception of the relationships among 12 stra - tegic decisions ( see Appendix A ) identiﬁed through our task analy - sis procedures . Participants read each pair of strategic decisions and rated the relationship on a 9 - point scale ranging from C . J . Resick et al . / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 124 ( 2014 ) 165 – 176 169 1 = totally unrelated to 9 = strongly related . The ratings capture members’ knowledge regarding how key city governing decisions are related to one another in achieving the team’s goal . Mental model structure was represented using Pathﬁnder Networks ( or PFNET ; Schvaneveldt , 1990 ) . The Pathﬁnder algorithm calculates a network of direct and indirect links between concepts with related concepts separated by fewer links ( and being closer in proximity ) while unrelated concepts are separated by greater distance . The degree of similarity among team members’ mental models was determined using Pathﬁnder’s metric of closeness ( C ) , which calculates the degree of similarity between two PFNETs . For each team , six strategy C scores were calculated by comparing the 4 members’ PFNETs to one another . Two networks without any com - mon links would have a C = 0 , and two networks that have identi - cal network structures would have a C = 1 . The six scores were then averaged together to create the TMM score for the team . Collective leadership Collective leadership was assessed by two raters who were trained on the simulation task and behaviors associated with col - lective leadership . The raters were blind to the study hypotheses and performance of the teams . All sessions were recorded . The rat - ers watched the teams’ decision making processes from the begin - ning of the simulation through the 8th decision - making trial ; raters were unable to see the performance of the team or the city . The raters assessed collective leadership using 15 items from Hiller et al . ’s ( 2006 ) scale with the item stem ‘‘How often do team mem - bers share in’’ . These items measured the Planning and Organizing , Problem Solving , & Support and Consideration dimensions from Hiller and colleagues ( 2006 ) measure . These dimensions are most relevant to understanding the collective leadership processes that link self - reliance beliefs with information elaboration . Each rater worked independently rating each item on a 5 - point scale ( 1 = rarely to 3 = sometimes to 5 = very often ) . An acceptable level of inter - rater agreement ( r wg ( moderatelyskewed ) = . 90 to r wg ( uniform ) = . 95 ) and reliability ( ICC 1 = . 56 , ICC 2 = . 72 , F = 3 . 53 , p < . 01 ) was found . All items were averaged together to create a composite rating ( a = . 93 ) . Information elaboration Information elaboration was assessed by two raters who were trained on the simulation task and information elaboration pro - cesses . The raters were blind to the hypotheses and performance of the teams . Different raters assessed collective leadership and information elaboration . We developed a behaviorally anchored rating scale ( BARS ) to assess the core behaviors associated with information elaboration ( i . e . , the exchange , processing , and integra - tion of information and perspectives ) based on van Knippenberg and colleagues ( 2004 ) work . Several pilot testing sessions were recorded and used for scale construction . Observers identiﬁed inci - dents of exceptionally good and exceptionally bad information elaboration . These incidents were then combined and scaled to cre - ate a 5 - point scale representing a continuum from 1 ( No Information Elaboration ) to 5 ( High Information Elaboration ) . The raters indepen - dently watched and rated the teams from the 4th through the 8th decision - making cycle ; raters were unable to see team perfor - mance . The raters then met to discuss and ﬁnalize their individual assessments , and ratings were averaged together to obtain an infor - mation elaboration score for each team . An acceptable level of inter - rater agreement ( r wg ( moderatelyskewed ) = . 87 to r wg ( uniform ) = . 94 ) and reliability ( ICC 1 = . 63 , ICC 2 = . 87 , F = 7 . 67 , p < . 01 ) was found . Team performance City population at the end of 36 simulated months was used as the indicator of team performance . Population scores ranged from 11 , 208 to 56 , 538 . Controls Three control variables were included in the analyses . Two con - trol variables were team inputs addressing prior experience play - ing SimCity ( 0 = Never , 1 = Less than once a month , 2 = A few times per month , 3 = A few times per week , and 4 = Daily ) , and working with their teammates ( 0 = Never to 6 = all three of my teammates at the same time prior to today’s study ) . Mean experience across members was used to create two team - level experience variables . To determine whether the relationships with team performance were due to team information elaboration and not simply to the amount of talking among members , we also controlled for team talking . Two raters independently watched the team’s decision making segments ( with the game paused ) in the 2nd through the 8th decision - making cycles ; raters were unaware of the city’s population and rated talking on a 5 - point scale ( 1 = Barely Talked to 5 = Talked Majority of the Session ) . This rating did not incorporate what teams talked about or whether it was constructive to the task . An acceptable level of inter - rater agreement ( r wg ( moderatelyskewed ) = . 82 to r wg ( uniform ) = . 92 ) and reliability ( ICC 1 = . 64 , ICC 2 = . 78 , F = 4 . 54 , p < . 01 ) was found . Analytical approach We conduct path - analyses , which allows researchers to model relationships using observed variables as single indicators of latent constructs ( Raykov & Marcoulides , 1999 ) , using AMOS 20 to test the hypothesized model of relationships . Model ﬁt was determined using the chi - square goodness of ﬁt , root mean square error of approximation ( RMSEA ) , and comparative ﬁt index ( CFI ) . For RMSEA , we used established rules of thumb ( see MacCallum , Browne , & Sugawara , 1996 ) and considered values below . 05 to indicate excellent ﬁt , values between . 05 and . 08 to indicate good ﬁt , and values between . 08 and . 10 to indicate mediocre ﬁt . For CFI , we used rules of thumb presented by Hu and Bentler ( 1999 ) and considered values above . 95 to indicate excellent ﬁt and values between . 90 and . 95 to indicate good ﬁt . Analyses controlled for time talking by estimating a direct path to team performance and covariances with TMM , collective leadership , and information elaboration . Analyses also controlled for : ( a ) prior SimCity experi - ence and ( b ) prior team experience by estimating direct paths from both experience variables to TMM , collective leadership , informa - tion elaboration , and performance . To test the moderating role of environmental turbulence , we ﬁrst centered the information elaboration and environmental tur - bulence latent variables and then created an interaction term from the center variables ( Cohen , Cohen , West , & Aiken , 2003 ) . Then , we tested the ﬁt of a main - effects - only path model . Next , we followed procedures previously identiﬁed ( see Cortina , Chen , & Dunlap , 2001 ; Mathieu , Tannenbaum , & Salas , 1992 ; Ping , 1995 ) and used ( e . g . , Netemeyer , Maxham , & Lichtenstein , 2010 ) to test for moder - ation . Speciﬁcally , we added environmental turbulence and the information elaboration by environmental turbulence interaction term to the model and included direct paths from turbulence and the interaction term to team performance . The ﬁt of the model and the statistical signiﬁcance of the interaction term were evalu - ated to determine if the moderation hypothesis ( Hypothesis 1 ) was supported . To test for mediation ( Hypotheses 2 and 3 ) , we followed proce - dures put forth by James , Mulaik , and Brett ( 2006 ) . Speciﬁcally , mediation is said to exist when ( a ) ﬁt indices indicate acceptable model ﬁt , ( b ) the path coefﬁcient from the predictor to the media - tor is statistically signiﬁcant , ( c ) the path coefﬁcient from the mediator to the outcome is statistically signiﬁcant , and ( d ) the indirect effect of the predictor on the outcome through the media - tor is statistically signiﬁcant . To test the indirect effects , we used the AMOS bootstrapping procedure , which is a nonparametric 170 C . J . Resick et al . / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 124 ( 2014 ) 165 – 176 procedure that does not assume any distribution shape , and pro - duces a sampling distribution to compute point estimates and con - ﬁdence intervals ( CIs ) for indirect effects under the assumption of full mediation . Indirect effects are said to be statistically signiﬁcant if the bias corrected 95 % conﬁdence intervals do not include zero . We conducted 5000 iterations for all bootstrapping analyses . Boot - strapping is a preferred approach to testing indirect effects in small sample size studies , as is often the case in teams research , because standard errors for indirect effects obtained with parametric approaches may be incorrect with small sample sizes , resulting in lower statistical power ( MacKinnon , Lockwood , & Williams , 2004 ) . Results Table 1 presents descriptive statistics and zero - order correla - tions among study variables . To test Hypothesis 1 , which proposed that environmental turbulence moderates the relationship between information elaboration and team performance , we ﬁrst ﬁt a main effects only model to the data . This model ﬁt the data well ( v 2 ( 19 ) = 8 . 27 , ns , CFI = 1 . 00 , RMSEA = . 00 ) , which is not surpris - ing given the small number of degrees of freedom . In addition , infor - mation elaboration had a statistically signiﬁcant main effect on performance ( b = . 41 , p < . 01 ) . Next , we ﬁt the hypothesized moder - ation model to the data which included environmental turbulence and the information elaboration by environmental turbulence inter - action term . This model also ﬁt the data well ( v 2 ( 36 ) = 30 . 74 , ns , CFI = 1 . 00 , RMSEA = . 00 ) . Focusing ﬁrst on the control variables , the path coefﬁcients for prior game experience ( b = (cid:3) . 01 , ns ) , prior team experience ( b = (cid:3) . 14 , ns ) , and talking ( b = (cid:3) . 15 , ns ) in relation to team perfor - mance were not statistically signiﬁcant . Additionally , team talking was correlated with information elaboration ( r = . 26 , p < . 01 ) , col - lective leadership ( r = . 67 , p < . 01 ) , and TMM ( r = . 18 , p < . 05 ) . The path coefﬁcient for prior game experience ( b = . 26 , p < . 05 ) was positively related to TMM , but the path coefﬁcient for prior team experience ( b = . 08 , ns ) was not . Neither prior game experience ( b = . 13 , ns ) nor prior team experience ( b = . 15 , ns ) were related to collective leadership . Finally , the coefﬁcient for team experience ( b = (cid:3) . 25 , p < . 05 ) but not prior game experience ( b = . 19 , ns ) was related to information elaboration . Regarding Hypothesis 1 , the path coefﬁcients for the informa - tion elaboration main effect ( b = . 35 , p < . 01 ) and the information elaboration by environmental turbulence interaction ( b = . 20 , p < . 05 ) in relation to performance were statistically signiﬁcant . Standardized path coefﬁcients and standard errors are depicted Fig . 1 . Hypothesized structural model of the ability and social motivational origins of team information elaboration and the moderating role of environmental turbulence . Table 1 Zero - order correlations among variables . Variable M SD 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 . Turbulence . 49 . 50 2 . Experience – SimCity . 36 . 29 (cid:3) . 13 3 . Experience – Team . 14 . 36 . 06 (cid:3) . 08 4 . Talking 3 . 85 . 86 . 19 (cid:3) . 05 . 07 5 . Cognitive Ability 20 . 40 2 . 32 . 12 . 11 (cid:3) . 08 . 08 6 . Self - Reliance 2 . 66 . 30 (cid:3) . 03 . 17 . 04 . 02 (cid:3) . 03 7 . Collective Leadership 3 . 69 . 57 . 06 . 04 . 18 . 64 * * . 06 (cid:3) . 23 8 . TMM . 25 . 05 . 18 . 27 * . 09 . 21 . 25 * (cid:3) . 08 . 13 9 . Info Elaboration 4 . 53 1 . 09 (cid:3) . 06 . 28 * (cid:3) . 16 . 49 * * . 20 (cid:3) . 08 . 38 * * . 35 * * 10 . Team Performance 42262 . 59 8671 . 12 (cid:3) . 51 * * . 19 (cid:3) . 25 * (cid:3) . 10 . 07 . 04 (cid:3) . 09 . 11 . 31 * Note . Turbulence = Environmental Turbulence Condition ( 0 = Stable , 1 = Turbulent ) . TMM = Team Strategy Mental Model Similarity . Info Elaboration = Information Elabora - tion . Self - Reliance and Cognitive Ability represent the team - level mean . * p < 05 ( two - tailed ) . * * p < . 01 ( two - tailed ) . N = 68 . C . J . Resick et al . / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 124 ( 2014 ) 165 – 176 171 in Fig . 2 . Next , we graphed the interaction and conducted simple slopes analyses following procedures outlined by Cohen et al . ( 2003 ) . As shown in Fig . 3 , information elaboration was positively related to team performance for teams operating in turbulent envi - ronments ( b = . 55 , t = 3 . 51 , p < . 01 ) but not for teams operating in stable environments ( b = . 16 , t = . 68 , ns ) . Therefore , we concluded that Hypothesis 1 was partially supported as information elabora - tion was unrelated to performance in stable environments . Addi - tionally , the set of team processes , emergent properties , composition characteristics and context factors explained 38 % of the variance in team performance . Hypothesis 2 proposed that team cognitive ability composition is positively related to information elaboration through strategy TMM . The path coefﬁcient from TMM to information elaboration was statistically signiﬁcant ( b = . 26 , p < . 05 ) ; however , the path coefﬁcient from cognitive ability to TMM ( b = . 20 , p = . 07 ) was not statistically signiﬁcant at the p < . 05 cut - off level . Given that our focus was the indirect effect of team cognitive ability on infor - mation elaboration and not the direct effect on TMM , we continued to conduct the bootstrapping analyses to test the indirect effects . The estimated 95 % conﬁdence interval around the indirect effect did not include zero ( b indirect = . 05 , 95 % CI [ . 001 , . 148 ] ) , indicating some support for Hypothesis 2 . The ﬁndings from the bootstrap - ping analyses are not entirely consistent with the tests of each stage of the mediation effect as the coefﬁcient for the team cogni - tive ability to TMM path exceeded the traditional p < . 05 cut - off level for statistical signiﬁcance . Bootstrapping provides a powerful and preferred approach to examining mediation effects in small sample size research where statistical power is reduced ( MacKinnon et al . , 2004 ) , which may provide some explanation for the inconsistent ﬁndings . Therefore , we concluded that team cognitive ability has a weak indirect effect on information elabora - tion through TMM similarly . Hypothesis 3 proposed that team self - reliance beliefs composi - tion is negatively related to information elaborate through the col - lective enactment of leadership functions among members . The path coefﬁcient for self - reliance beliefs was negatively related to collective leadership ( b = (cid:3) . 29 , p < . 01 ) , and collective leadership was positively related to information elaboration ( b = . 39 , p < . 01 ) . Further , the bootstrapping analyses indicated that the estimated 95 % conﬁdence interval around the indirect effect of self - reliance beliefs on information elaboration through collective leadership did not include zero ( b indirect = (cid:3) . 11 , 95 % CI [ (cid:3) . 211 , (cid:3) . 039 ] ) . There - fore , the results were supportive of Hypothesis 3 . Overall , the set of ‘‘can do’’ and ‘‘will do’’ drivers explained 33 % of the variance in information elaboration . We also conducted supplemental analyses using Preacher , Rucker , & Hayes , 2007 bootstrapping technique to determine whether information elaboration mediated the effects of collective leadership and TMM on team performance , and whether modera - tion of the information elaboration to performance path ( stage two moderation ) resulted in stronger indirect effects in turbulent as opposed to stable environments . For TMM , the bias corrected CI excluded zero for teams in the turbulent condition ( PE = 24642 . 56 ; 95 % CI [ 2528 . 96 , 67591 . 47 ] ) but not in the stable condition ( PE = 3556 . 30 ; 95 % CI [ (cid:3) 9584 . 02 , 16809 . 34 ] ) . Similarly , the bias corrected CI associated with collective leadership excluded zero for teams in the turbulent condition ( PE = 3023 . 10 ; 95 % CI [ 604 . 98 , 6796 . 07 ] ) but not in the stable condition ( PE = 436 . 28 ; 95 % CI [ (cid:3) 915 . 42 , 2428 . 37 ] ) . The results indicate that for function - ally diverse teams working in turbulent but not stable environ - ments , strategy - focused TMM and collective leadership are indirectly related to team performance through information elabo - ration processes . Discussion Organizations are increasingly operating in dynamic environ - ments ( Bergh & Lawless , 1998 ; Osterman , 2010 ) , and turning to functionally diverse teams to address complex , strategically Fig . 2 . Path analysis results . * p < . 05 . * * p < . 01 . v 2 ( 68 , df = 36 ) = 30 . 74 , n . s . , CFI = 1 . 00 , RMSEA = . 00 . Note . Standardized path coefﬁcients are listed . Two - tailed tests of statistical signiﬁcance were used for all path coefﬁcients . Analyses control for : ( a ) time talking with a direct path to team performance and covariances with TMM , collective leadership , and information elaboration , ( b ) prior SimCity experience and ( c ) prior team experience , both with direct paths to TMM , collective leadership , information elaboration , and team performance ; paths are not listed to reduce clutter . 30 , 000 35 , 000 40 , 000 45 , 000 50 , 000 55 , 000 60 , 000 Low Information Elaboration High Information Elaboration T ea m P e rf o r m a n ce Stable Turbulent Fig . 3 . The differential effects of information elaboration on team performance across stable and turbulent environments . 172 C . J . Resick et al . / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 124 ( 2014 ) 165 – 176 important problems and build a competitive advantage ( Grant & Parker , 2009 ; Jackson , Joshi , & Erhardt , 2003 ; van Knippenberg et al . , 2004 ) . Findings from the current study suggest that informa - tion elaboration is essential for these functionally diverse teams to perform effectively when they operate in highly turbulent con - texts , but may be of little value in more stable settings . Addition - ally , while equipping teams with functionally diverse members creates a broad pool of problem - speciﬁc human capital , our ﬁnd - ings shed light on the general human capital needed to create the ‘‘can do’’ ability and ‘‘will do’’ social motivation for information elaboration . We now examine the theoretical and practical impli - cations of these ﬁndings . Theoretical and practical implications The current study makes several contributions to team informa - tion elaboration theory and research . First , our study questions when functionally diverse teams beneﬁt from the elaborate discus - sion and integration of informational resources . Looking beyond team task complexity , our ﬁndings demonstrate empirically that the teams’ operating environment provides a boundary condition on the beneﬁts of information elaboration for the success of func - tionally diverse teams . Novel and uncertain environments impede the formation of routines , heightening the need for team commu - nication ( Marks et al . , 2000 ) and knowledge integration ( Gardner , Gino , & Staats , 2012 ; Sung & Choi , 2012 ) . Information elaboration processes enable cross - functional teams to leverage their knowl - edge resources to develop the innovative and useful solutions ( Hoever et al . , 2012 ) that are needed in turbulent environments . In contrast , stimuli are more clear and predictable in stable envi - ronments making it easier for team members to determine cause and effect associations ( Nadkarni & Barr , 2008 ) . Viable solutions can be arrived at without the extensive integration of knowledge ( Sung & Choi , 2012 ) . Teams can look to past precedents or follow tried - and - true strategies to achieve their objectives ( Nadkarni & Narayanan , 2007 ) without fully exploiting the team’s knowledge resources through extensive explanations of ideas or detailed dis - cussion of perspectives . In stable contexts , elaboration is less ben - eﬁcial and may even impede progress or decision - making efﬁciencies for some teams . Our study also departs from much of the empirical study of information elaboration by focusing exclusively on functionally diverse teams instead of contrasting the processes and perfor - mance of diverse and homogeneous teams . This approach enabled us to examine the ability and social motivation drivers of informa - tion elaboration speciﬁc to functionally diverse teams . As such , our second contribution is demonstrating empirically how team cogni - tive ability composition engenders information elaboration pro - cesses . The general cognitive ability among team members is a cognitive form of general human capital ( Ployhart & Moliterno , 2011 ) that creates the capacity to comprehend , process , and apply information ( Hunter , 1986 ; Jensen , 1998 ) . At the same time , team cognition such as members’ shared task representations ( van Ginkel & van Knippenberg , 2008 , 2009 , 2012 ) and diversity mind - sets provide a cognitive basis for information elaboration . Simi - larly , a team’s collective strategic orientation aids information search processes ( Woolley et al . , 2013 ) and decision adaptation ( Randall et al . , 2011 ) . Our ﬁndings illustrate that a team’s cognitive human capital creates the capacity for members to use speciﬁc knowledge resources through the exchange and integration of information by facilitating the emergence of strategy - focused TMM . Importantly , TMM did not lead to decision rigidity ( or a myopic view of their task ) . Instead , TMM provided a platform for understanding strategic options and exchanging information . Therefore , our study sheds light on the linkages between team ability composition and information elaboration in functionally diverse teams . Third , our ﬁndings provide insights into the importance of pro - social motivation by empirically demonstrating that low prefer - ences for self - reliance equip functionally diverse teams with the ‘‘will do’’ motivation ( Ployhart & Moliterno , 2011 ) for information elaboration . When the mean level of self - reliance preferences among members is low , members are comfortable with a distribu - tion of knowledge and responsibilities and relying on others to live up to their commitments ( Ramamoorthy & Carroll , 1998 ) . On tasks that focus on a ‘‘cooperative integration of perspectives’’ , a proso - cial orientation motivates members to contribute their insights and process information ( De Dreu et al . , 2008 , p . 36 ) ensuring that the team uses its knowledge resources . We further illustrate that the effects of self - reliance composition are transmitted through members’ mutual enactment of leadership functions such as prob - lem solving , planning , organizing , and support . As the environment rendered one member’s expertise more relevant , the team could shift towards taking direction from that person . Therefore , our ﬁndings also contribute toward an understanding of the composi - tional bases of collective leadership and the types of teams where collective leadership is important , which have been identiﬁed as key areas in need of future study ( Dust & Ziegert , 2012 ; Yammarino et al . , 2012 ) . In turn , through collectively enacting leadership functions , teams were aroused to the need to elaborate on task - relevant information and willing to put forth the effort needed to do so . TMM have been linked to epistemic motivation ( i . e . , the motiva - tion for deep level information processing ) in prior studies ( Nijstad & De Dreu , 2012 ; Randall et al . , 2011 ; van Ginkel et al . , 2009 ) . As epistemic motivation and prosocial motivation have been found to have an interactive effect on information exchange efforts ( see Nijstad & De Dreu , 2012 ) , we explored this possibility by testing the ﬁt of a model adding a collective leadership by TMM interac - tion term . This model ﬁt poorly ( v 2 ( 46 ) = 68 . 26 , ns , CFI = . 84 , RMSEA = . 09 ) and the interaction to information elaboration coefﬁ - cient was not signiﬁcant ( b = . 09 , ns ) . Our ﬁndings suggest that men - tal models are an emergent team property that may better reﬂect the ability as opposed to the epistemic motivation among team mem - bers to engage in information elaboration efforts . The current study also has several practical implications for organizations stafﬁng and developing functionally diverse , self - managed teams . First , information elaboration is particularly important for cross - functional teams working in intensely compet - itive business environments or under complex and unpredictable conditions . This same complex and detailed processing of informa - tion is likely to be unnecessary in stable and predictable business settings . Managers should prepare their staff for cross - functional team assignments by helping them to read cues from the business environment and determine when information elaboration efforts are most vital to assignment success , and to intervene when neces - sary to ensure the dissemination and integration of unique infor - mation . Training should also ensure that team members understand the diversity of knowledge and perspectives within the team and encourage members to reﬂect upon that knowledge ( Hoever et al . , 2012 ; van Ginkel & van Knippenberg , 2009 ; van Knippenberg et al . , 2013 ) . Another way to create the capacity for effective information elaboration is through the similarity of mem - bers’ strategy mental models . Providing training that helps mem - bers to identify critical functions and decision options , and understand the implications and opportunities among those deci - sions should facilitate the emergence of a strategic consensus that guides information elaboration efforts . Further , when teams are self - managed , the collective enactment of leadership may be a par - ticularly important driver of information elaboration . Organiza - tions should train members to understand the team’s functional C . J . Resick et al . / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 124 ( 2014 ) 165 – 176 173 leadership needs and how those functions can be mutually enacted by team members . The ﬁndings also illustrate the importance of carefully consider - ing the general - human capital needs when stafﬁng functionally diverse teams . The general cognitive ability among members cre - ates the capacity for teams to use their unique informational resources through the emergence of team cognition . Likewise , a low preference for self - reliance among members creates the proso - cial motivational capacity to work together and expend energy dis - cussing and integrating knowledge resources through the collective enactment of leadership functions . Limitations , future directions and conclusions Despite the beneﬁts of using a laboratory setting , there are a number of limitations that should be noted . For one , teams worked together for a relatively short amount of time on a task where the consequences of success or failure to the participating teams were minimal . As a result , the simulation did not fully capture the com - plexities that project and management teams experience when their decisions have a substantial strategic impact on both their teams’ and organizations’ success . Likewise , the level of functional diversity may be restricted as teams likely did not have the same depth and breadth of functional knowledge that many cross - func - tional project teams would possess . A related concern is that team members interacted with one another over a relatively short per - iod of time , thereby minimizing the complexity of their interac - tions . On the one hand , ﬁnding statistically signiﬁcant effects in the limited amount of time highlights the importance of the ability and motivational drivers of information elaboration , and the mod - erating role of environmental turbulence . On the other hand , it is possible that these internal processes and external forces will be less inﬂuential for teams operating in ﬁeld as opposed to labora - tory settings because of the complexity of the environment . At the same time , the SimCity scenario closely resembles many fea - tures of tasks performed by cross - functional knowledge teams sug - gesting that the task had a high level of psychological realism , which is an important consideration in conducting laboratory - based research ( Berkowitz & Donnerstein , 1982 ; Marks , 2000 ) . In addition , the structure of the simulation enabled us to distribute core knowledge across the four team members , and provided a practical method for testing our hypotheses . To more fully under - stand the nature of these relationships , future research should examine the relationships between team composition , emergent team properties , information elaboration and business context in ﬁeld settings using a longer timeframe . The timing of the measures also limits the conclusions that can be drawn from the current study . The time periods in which collec - tive leadership ( cycles 1 – 8 ) and TMM ( after cycle 6 ) were rated overlap with the time period in which information elaboration pro - cesses ( cycles 5 – 8 ) were rated . While a temporal ordering of rela - tionships is implied , the ﬁndings should not be interpreted as causal in nature . Given the duration of the study , we opted to assess team interactions as comprehensively as possible . We trained the raters to base their assessments on the behaviors they observed across the entire time period to provide comprehensive assessments instead of micro snap shots of behaviors . Changes from one episode to the next could be due to evolving interaction patterns or to changes in the demands of the task . In addition , we took care to ensure that different raters assessed collective leader - ship , information elaboration , and team talking , thereby reducing chances for common method bias to inﬂate the relationships ( e . g . , Doty & Glick , 1994 ) . A related limitation regarding measure - ment is the somewhat low observed internal consistency of the self - reliance beliefs scale which may have attenuated relationships with collective leadership and information elaboration . In addition , team processes and emergent states unfold in a dynamic manner ( Kozlowski & Ilgen , 2006 ; Mathieu et al . , 2008 ) as teams cycle through action and transition phases ( Marks , Mathieu , & Zaccaro , 2001 ) . Given the brief duration of the perfor - mance cycles , the simulation task did not provide an ideal platform to model the dynamic nature of these relationships . Future research should examine teams which work together over multiple days or even weeks to more fully understand how TMM , collective leadership and information elaboration co - evolve across time . In addition , the degree of ambiguity in the team’s performance con - text is likely to heighten task complexity in turbulent settings and weaken complexity in stable environments . Therefore , turbu - lence could affect the importance of information elaboration in iso - lation , through task complexity , or in conjunction with task complexity . While teams in the current study perceived a similar level of task difﬁcult across conditions , future research should examine how context and task characteristics jointly affect the importance of information elaboration processes more closely . Future research is also needed to understand the ability and moti - vational bases of information elaboration processes in more com - plex collectives such as multiteam systems , where goal accomplishment requires informational inputs from members across multiple teams embedded within or across organizational boundaries ( DeChurch & Mathieu , 2009 ) . In conclusion , our study advances information elaboration the - ory and research in two ways . First , we demonstrate how compo - sition characteristics equip teams with the ability and prosocial motivation to engage in information elaboration processes . Second , we ﬁnd that context provides insights into when information elab - oration beneﬁts team performance and when it does not . There - fore , our ﬁndings contribute actionable knowledge regarding how to appropriately staff and develop functionally diverse teams to achieve their performance potential . Appendix A Strategic decisions ( nodes ) represented in the strategic consensus measure 1 . Build schools / increase education funding 2 . Balance city budget 3 . Build roads / increase transportation funding 4 . Build parks / plant trees / increase city beautiﬁcation budget 5 . Increase taxes 6 . Build power plants / water treatment facilities / increase funding 7 . Build police stations / increase public safety funding 8 . Zone new areas / rezone existing areas 9 . Decrease taxes 10 . Reduce air and water pollution 11 . Build clinics / increase healthcare funding 12 . Revitalize existing buildings / neighborhoods References Bantel , K . A . , & Jackson , S . E . ( 1989 ) . Top management and innovations in banking : Does the composition of the top team make a difference ? Strategic Management Journal , 10 , 107 – 124 . Bell , S . T . ( 2007 ) . Deep - level composition variables as predictors of team performance : A meta - analysis . Journal of Applied Psychology , 92 , 595 – 615 . 174 C . J . Resick et al . / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 124 ( 2014 ) 165 – 176 Bergh , D . D . , & Lawless , M . W . ( 1998 ) . Portfolio restructuring and limits to hierarchical governance : The effects of environmental uncertainty and diversiﬁcation strategy . Organization Science , 87 – 102 . Berkowitz , L . , & Donnerstein , E . ( 1982 ) . External validity is more than skin deep : Some answers to criticisms of laboratory experiments . American Psychologist , 37 , 245 . Beersma , B . , Hollenbeck , J . R . , Humphrey , S . E . , Moon , H . , Conlon , D . E . , & Ilgen , D . R . ( 2003 ) . Cooperation , competition , and team performance : Toward a contingency approach . Academy of Management Journal , 46 , 572 – 590 . Burke , C . S . , Stagl , K . C . , Klein , K . J . , Goodwin , G . F . , Salas , E . , & Halpin , S . M . ( 2006 ) . What type of leadership behaviors are functional in teams ? A meta - analysis . Leadership Quarterly , 17 , 288 – 307 . Burns , T . , & Stalker , G . M . ( 1961 ) . The management of innovation . London : Tavistock Publications . Cohen , J . , Cohen , P . , West , S . G . , & Aiken , L . S . ( 2003 ) . Applied multiple regression / correlation analysis for the behavioral sciences ( 3rd ed . ) . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Cortina , J . M . , Chen , G . , & Dunlap , W . P . ( 2001 ) . Testing interaction effects in LISREL : Examination and illustration of available procedures . Organizational Research Methods , 4 , 324 – 360 . Day , D . V . , Gronn , P . , & Salas , E . ( 2004 ) . Leadership capacity in teams . The Leadership Quarterly , 15 , 857 – 880 . DeChurch , L . A . , & Mesmer - Magnus , J . R . ( 2010 ) . The cognitive underpinnings of effective teamwork : A meta - analysis . Journal of Applied Psychology , 95 , 32 – 53 . DeChurch , L . A . , & Mathieu , J . E . ( 2009 ) . Thinking in terms of multiteam systems . In E . Salas , G . F . Goodwin , & C . S . Burke ( Eds . ) , Team effectiveness in complex organizations : Cross - disciplinary perspectives and approaches . New York : Taylor & Francis . De Dreu , C . K . W . ( 2007 ) . Cooperative outcome interdependence , task reﬂexivity , and team effectiveness : A motivated information processing perspective . Journal of Applied Psychology , 92 , 628 – 638 . De Dreu , C . K . , & Beersma , B . ( 2010 ) . Team conﬁdence , motivated information processing , and dynamic group decision making . European Journal of Social Psychology , 40 , 1110 – 1119 . De Dreu , C . K . , & Carnevale , P . J . ( 2003 ) . Motivational bases of information processing and strategy in conﬂict and negotiation . Advances in Experimental Social Psychology , 35 , 235 – 291 . De Dreu , C . K . W . , Nijstad , B . A . , & Van Knippenberg , D . ( 2008 ) . Motivated information processing in group judgment and decision making . Personality and Social Psychology Review , 12 , 22 – 49 . Devine , D . J . , & Philips , J . L . ( 2001 ) . Do smarter teams do better : A meta - analysis of cognitive ability and team performance . Small Group Research , 32 , 507 – 532 . Doty , D . H . , & Glick , W . H . ( 1994 ) . Typologies as a unique form of theory building : Toward improved understanding and modeling . Academy of Management Review , 19 , 230 – 251 . Dust , S . B . , & Ziegert , J . C . ( 2012 ) . When and how are multiple leaders most effective ? It’s complex . Industrial and Organizational Psychology : Perspectives on Science and Practice , 5 , 421 – 424 . EA Games ( 2004 ) . SimCity4 Deluxe Edition . Edwards , B . D . , Day , E . A . , Arthur , W . , Jr . , & Bell , S . T . ( 2006 ) . Relationships among team ability composition , team mental models , and team performance . Journal of Applied Psychology , 91 , 727 – 736 . Ensley , M . D . , & Pearce , C . L . ( 2001 ) . Shared cognition in top management teams : Implications for new venture performance . Journal of Organizational Behavior , 22 , 145 – 160 . Erez , A . , LePine , J . A . , & Elms , H . ( 2002 ) . Effects of rotated leadership and peer evaluation on the functioning and effectiveness of self - managed teams : A quasi experiment . Personnel Psychology , 55 , 929 – 948 . Gardner , H . , Gino , F . , & Staats , B . ( 2012 ) . Dynamically integrating knowledge in teams : Transforming resources into performance . Academy of Management Journal , 55 , 998 – 1022 . Grant , A . M . , & Parker , S . K . ( 2009 ) . Redesigning work design theories : The rise of relational and proactive perspectives . The Academy of Management Annals , 3 , 317 – 375 . Gronn , P . ( 2002 ) . Distributed leadership as a unit of analysis . The Leadership Quarterly , 13 , 423 – 451 . Hiller , N . J . , Day , D . V . , & Vance , R . J . ( 2006 ) . Collective enactment of leadership roles and team effectiveness : A ﬁeld study . The Leadership Quarterly , 17 , 387 – 397 . Hoever , I . J . , van Knippenberg , D . , van Ginkel , W . P . , & Barkema , H . G . ( 2012 ) . Fostering team creativity : Perspective taking as key to unlocking diversity’s potential . Journal of Applied Psychology , 97 , 982 – 996 . Homan , A . C . , Hollenbeck , J . R . , Humphrey , S . E . , van Knippenberg , D . , Ilgen , D . R . , & van Kleef , G . A . ( 2008 ) . Facing differences with an open mind : Openness to experience , salience of intra - group differences , and performance of diverse work groups . Academy of Management Journal , 5 , 1204 – 1222 . Homan , A . C . , Van Knippenberg , D . , Van Kleef , G . A . , & De Dreu , C . K . W . ( 2007 ) . Bridging faultlines by valuing diversity : Diversity beliefs , information elaboration , and performance in diverse work groups . Journal of Applied Psychology , 92 , 1189 – 1199 . Hu , L . , & Bentler , P . M . ( 1999 ) . Cutoff criteria for ﬁt indexes in covariance structure analysis : Conventional criteria versus new alternatives . Structural Equation Modeling : A Multidisciplinary Journal , 6 , 1 – 55 . Hunter , J . E . ( 1986 ) . Cognitive ability , cognitive aptitudes , job knowledge , and job performance . Journal of Vocational Behavior , 29 , 340 – 362 . James , L . R . , Mulaik , S . A . , & Brett , J . M . ( 2006 ) . A tale of two methods . Organizational Research Methods , 9 , 233 – 244 . Jackson , C . , Colquitt , J . , Wesson , M . , & Zapata - Phelan , C . ( 2006 ) . Psychological collectivism : A measurement validation and linkage to group member performance . Journal of Applied Psychology , 91 , 884 – 899 . Jackson , S . E . , Joshi , A . , & Erhardt , N . L . ( 2003 ) . Recent research on team and organizational diversity : SWOT analysis and implications . Journal of Management , 29 , 801 – 830 . Jehn , K . A . , Northcraft , G . B . , & Neale , M . A . ( 1999 ) . Why differences make a difference : A ﬁeld study of diversity , conﬂict and performance in workgroups . Administrative Science Quarterly , 44 , 741 – 763 . Jensen , A . R . ( 1998 ) . The g factor . Westport , CT : Praeger . Kanfer , R . , & Ackerman , P . L . ( 1989 ) . Motivation and cognitive abilities : An integrative / aptitude - treatment interaction approach to skill acquisition . Journal of Applied Psychology , 74 , 657 . Katz , D . , & Kahn , R . L . ( 1978 ) . The social psychology of organizations . New York : John Wiley & Sons . Kearney , E . , Gebert , D . , & Voelpel , S . C . ( 2009 ) . When and how diversity beneﬁts teams : The importance of team members’ need for cognition . Academy of Management Journal , 52 , 581 – 598 . Klein , K . J . , Knight , A . P . , Ziegert , J . C . , Lim , B . C . , & Saltz , J . L . ( 2011 ) . When team members’ values differ : The moderating role of team leadership . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 114 , 25 – 36 . Klein , K . J . , Ziegert , J . C . , Knight , A . P . , & Xiao , Y . ( 2006 ) . Dynamic delegation : Shared , hierarchical , and deindividualized leadership in extreme action teams . Administrative Science Quarterly , 51 , 590 – 621 . Kruglanski , A . W . , & Webster , D . M . ( 1996 ) . Motivated closing of the mind : ‘‘Seizing’’ and ‘‘freezing’’ . Psychological Review , 103 , 263 . Knight , D . , Pearce , C . L . , Smith , K . G . , Olian , J . D . , Sims , H . P . , Smith , K . A . , et al . ( 1999 ) . Top management team diversity , group process , and strategic consensus . Strategic Management Journal , 20 , 445 – 465 . Kozlowski , S . W . J . , & Ilgen , D . R . ( 2006 ) . Enhancing the effectiveness of work groups and teams . Psychological Science in the Public Interest , 7 , 77 – 123 . Kozlowski , S . W . J . , & Klein , K . J . ( 2000 ) . A multilevel approach to theory and researchinorganizations : Contextual , temporal , and emergentprocesses . InK . J . Klein & S . W . J . Kozlowski ( Eds . ) , Multilevel theory , research , and methods in organizations ( pp . 3 – 90 ) . San Francisco , CA : Jossey - Bass . Kozlowski , S . W . J . , Gully , S . M . , Nason , E . R . , & Smith , E . M . ( 1999 ) . Developing adaptive teams : A theory of compilation and performance across levels and time . In E . Pulakos ( Ed . ) , The changing nature of performance : Implications for stafﬁng , motivation , and development ( pp . 240 – 292 ) . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass Publishers . Kramer , G . ( 2003 ) . Prima’s ofﬁcial strategy guide : SimCity4 Deluxe Edition . Roseville , CA : Random House . Lawrence , P . R . , & Lorsch , J . W . ( 1967 ) . Differentiation and integration in complex organizations . Administrative Science Quarterly , 12 , 1 – 47 . MacCallum , R . C . , Browne , M . W . , & Sugawara , H . M . ( 1996 ) . Power analysis and determination of sample size for covariance structure modeling . Psychological Methods , 1 , 130 – 149 . MacKinnon , D . P . , Lockwood , C . M . , & Williams , J . ( 2004 ) . Conﬁdence limits for the indirect effect : Distribution of the product and resampling methods . Multivariate Behavioral Research , 39 , 99 – 128 . Marks , M . A . ( 2000 ) . A critical analysis of computer simulations for conducting team research . Small Group Research , 31 , 653 – 674 . Marks , M . A . , Mathieu , J . E . , & Zaccaro , S . J . ( 2001 ) . A temporally based framework and taxonomy of team processes . Academy of Management Review , 26 ( 3 ) , 356 – 376 . Marks , M . A . , Zaccaro , S . J . , & Mathieu , J . E . ( 2000 ) . Performance implications of leader brieﬁngs and team - interaction training for team adaptation to novel environments . Journal of Applied Psychology , 85 , 971 – 986 . Mathieu , J . E . , Tannenbaum , S . I . , & Salas , E . ( 1992 ) . Inﬂuences of individual and situational characteristics on measures of training effectiveness . Academy of Management Journal , 35 , 828 – 847 . Mathieu , J . , Maynard , M . T . , Rapp , T . L . , & Gilson , L . ( 2008 ) . Team effectiveness 1997 – 2007 : A review of recent advancements and a glimpse into the future . Journal of Management , 34 , 410 – 476 . Mesmer - Magnus , J . R . , & DeChurch , L . A . ( 2009 ) . Information sharing and team performance : A meta - analysis . Journal of Applied Psychology , 94 , 535 – 546 . Milliken , F . J . , & Martins , L . L . ( 1996 ) . Searching for common threads : Understanding the multiple effects of diversity in organizational groups . Academy of Management Review , 21 , 402 – 433 . Mohammed , S . , Ferzandi , L . , & Hamilton , K . ( 2010 ) . Metaphor no more : A 15 - year review of the team mental model construct . Journal of Management , 36 , 876 – 910 . Morgeson , F . P . , DeRue , D . S . , & Karam , E . P . ( 2010 ) . Leadership in teams : A functional approach to understanding leadership structures and processes . Journal of Management , 36 , 5 – 39 . Nadkarni , S . , & Barr , P . S . ( 2008 ) . Environmental context , managerial cognition , and strategic action : An integrated view . Strategic Management Journal , 29 , 1395 – 1427 . Nadkarni , S . , & Narayanan , V . K . ( 2007 ) . The evolution of collective strategy frames in high and low velocity environments . Organization Science , 18 , 688 – 710 . Netemeyer , R . G . , Maxham , J . G . , III , & Lichtenstein , D . R . ( 2010 ) . Store manager performance and satisfaction : Effects on store employee performance and C . J . Resick et al . / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 124 ( 2014 ) 165 – 176 175 satisfaction , store customer satisfaction , and store customer spending growth . Journal of Applied Psychology , 95 , 530 – 545 . Nijstad , B . A . , & De Dreu , C . K . W . ( 2012 ) . Motivated information processing in organizational teams : Progress , puzzles , and prospects . Research in Organizational Behavior , 32 , 87 – 111 . Osterman , P . ( 2010 ) . Job design in the context of the job market . Journal of Organizational Behavior , 31 , 401 – 411 . Ping , R . A . ( 1995 ) . A parsimonious estimating technique for interaction and quadratic latent variables . Journal of Marketing Research , 32 , 336 – 347 . Ployhart , R . E . , & Moliterno , T . P . ( 2011 ) . Emergence of the human capital resource : A multilevel model . Academy of Management Review , 36 , 127 – 150 . Preacher , K . J . , Rucker , D . D . , & Hayes , A . F . ( 2007 ) . Assessing moderated mediation hypotheses : Theory , method , and prescriptions . Multivariate Behavioral Research , 42 , 185 – 227 . Ramamoorthy , N . , & Carroll , S . J . ( 1998 ) . Individualism / collectivism orientations and reactions toward alternative human resource management practices . Human Relations , 51 , 571 – 588 . Randall , K . R . , Resick , C . J . , & DeChurch , L . A . ( 2011 ) . Building team adaptive capacity : The roles of sensegiving and team composition . Journal of Applied Psychology , 96 , 525 – 540 . Raykov , T . , & Marcoulides , G . A . ( 1999 ) . On desirability of parsimony in structural equation model selection . Structural Equation Modeling : A Multidisciplinary Journal , 6 , 292 – 300 . Resick , C . J . , Dickson , M . W . , Mitchelson , J . K . , Allison , L . K . , & Clark , M . A . ( 2010 ) . Team composition , cognition , and effectiveness : Examining mental model similarity and accuracy . Group Dynamics : Theory , Research , and Practice , 14 , 174 – 191 . Rico , R . , Sanchez - Manzanares , M . , Antino , M . , & Lau , D . ( 2012 ) . Bridging team faultlines by combining task role assignment and goal structure strategies . Journal of Applied Psychology , 97 , 407 – 420 . Schmidt , F . L . , Hunter , J . E . , & Outerbridge , A . N . ( 1986 ) . Impact of job experience and ability on job knowledge , work sample performance , and supervisory ratings of job performance . Journal of Applied Psychology , 71 , 432 – 439 . Scholten , L . , Van Knippenberg , D . , Nijstad , B . A . , & De Dreu , C . K . ( 2007 ) . Motivated information processing and group decision - making : Effects of process accountability on information processing and decision quality . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 43 , 539 – 552 . Schvaneveldt , R . W . ( 1990 ) . Pathﬁnder associative networks : Studies in knowledge organization . Westport , CT : Ablex Publishing . Stasser , G . , & Titus , W . ( 1985 ) . Pooling of unshared information in group decision making : Biased information sampling during discussion . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 48 , 1467 – 1478 . Stasser , G . , & Titus , W . ( 1987 ) . Effects of information load and percentage of shared information on the dissemination of unshared information during group discussion . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 53 , 81 . Steiner , I . D . ( 1972 ) . Group process and productivity . New York : Academic Press . Sung , S . Y . , & Choi , J . N . ( 2012 ) . Effects of team knowledge management on the creativity and ﬁnancial performance of organizational teams . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 118 , 4 – 13 . Thomas - Hunt , M . C . , & Phillips , K . W . ( 2003 ) . Managing teams in the dynamic organization : The effects of revolving membership and changing task demands on expertise and status in groups . In R . S . Peterson & E . A . Mannix ( Eds . ) , Leading and managing people in the dynamic organization ( pp . 115 – 133 ) . Mahwah , New Jersey : Lawrence Erlbaum . van Dijk , H . , van Engen , M . L . , & van Knippenberg , D . ( 2012 ) . Defying conventional wisdom : A meta - analytical examination of the differences between demographic and job - related diversity relationships with performance . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 119 , 38 – 53 . van Ginkel , W . P . , & van Knippenberg , D . ( 2008 ) . Group information elaboration and group decision making : The role of shared task representations . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 105 , 82 – 97 . van Ginkel , W . P . , & van Knippenberg , D . ( 2009 ) . Knowledge about the distribution of information and group decision making : When and why does it work ? Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 108 , 218 – 229 . van Ginkel , W . P . , & van Knippenberg , D . ( 2012 ) . Group leadership and shared task representations in decision making groups . The Leadership Quarterly , 23 , 94 – 106 . van Ginkel , W . , Tindale , R . S . , & van Knippenberg , D . ( 2009 ) . Team reﬂexivity , development of shared task representations , and the use of distributed information in group decision making . Group Dynamics : Theory , Research , and Practice , 13 ( 4 ) , 265 – 280 . van Knippenberg , D . , Kooij - de Bode , H . J . , & van Ginkel , W . P . ( 2010 ) . The interactive effects of mood and trait negative affect in group decision making . Organization Science , 21 , 731 – 744 . van Knippenberg , D . , De Dreu , C . K . W . , & Homan , A . C . ( 2004 ) . Work group diversity and group performance : An integrative model and research agenda . Journal of Applied Psychology , 89 , 1008 – 1022 . van Knippenberg , D . , van Ginkel , W . P . , & Homan , A . C . ( 2013 ) . Diversity mindsets and the performance of diverse teams . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 121 , 183 – 193 . Webber , S . S . , & Donahue , L . M . ( 2001 ) . Impact of highly and less job - related diversity on work group cohesion and performance : A meta - analysis . Journal of Management , 27 , 141 – 162 . Williams , K . Y . , & O’Reilly , C . A . ( 1998 ) . Demography and diversity in organizations : A review of 40 years of research . Research in Organizational Behavior , 20 , 77 – 140 . Wonderlic & Associates . ( 1992 ) . Wonderlic personnel test and user’s manual . Libertyville , IL : Author . Woolley , A . W . , Bear , J . B . , Chang , J . W . , & DeCostanza , A . W . ( 2013 ) . The effects of team strategic orientation on team process and information search . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 122 , 114 – 126 . Yammarino , F . J . , Salas , E . , Serban , A . , Shirreffs , K . , & Shufﬂer , M . L . ( 2012 ) . Collectivistic leadership approaches : Putting the ‘‘we’’ in leadership science and practice . Industrial and Organizational Psychology : Perspectives on Science and Practice , 5 , 382 – 402 . Zaccaro , S . J . , Rittman , A . L . , & Marks , M . A . ( 2001 ) . Team leadership . Leadership Quarterly , 12 , 451 – 483 . 176 C . J . Resick et al . / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 124 ( 2014 ) 165 – 176