Defining Structural Similarity * Dedre Gentner , Arthur B . Markman Department of Psychology , Northwestern University Department of Psychology , University of Texas gentner @ northwestern . edu markman @ mail . utexas . edu There is general agreement that structural similarity — a match in relational structure—is crucial in analogical processing . However , theories differ in their definitions of structural similarity : in particular , in whether there must be conceptual similarity between the relations in the two domains or whether parallel graph structure is sufficient . In two studies , we demonstrate , first , that people draw analogical correspondences based on matches in conceptual relations , rather than on purely structural graph matches ; and , second , that people draw analogical inferences between passages that have matching conceptual relations , but not between passages with purely structural graph matches . Introduction The discovery of common structure is a central aspect of analogical processing ( Gentner , 1983 ; Gentner & Markman , 1997 ; Hofstadter , 2001 ; Holyoak & Thagard , 1995 ; Ramscar & Yarlett , 2003 ) . But what exactly enters into this process ? Most theories of analogy agree that analogical processing involves finding a correspondence between the conceptual structures of the Journal of Cognitive Science 6 : 1 - 20 , 2005 . ⓒ 2005 Institute for Cognitive Science , Seoul National University . * This work was supported by grant N00014 - 92 - J - 1098 from the ONR Cognitive Science Program to D . Gentner , by NSF - ROLE grant 21002 / REC - 0087516 to D . Gentner , and by NIDA Grant R21 - DA015211 and a Fellowship in the IC 2 Institute to Art Markman . We thank Kathleen Braun for help in conducting and analyzing the studies and Mark Keane and Miriam Bassok for helpful comments on an earlier version of this paper . two domains compared . As Kokinov and French ( 2003 ) put it , “Experimental work has demonstrated that finding this type of structural isomorphism between base and target domains is crucial for mapping . ” For example , when comparing ( a ) Mary hugged John because she loves him . ( b ) Rover nuzzled Sarah because he loves her . people seek a structurally consistent match between the two representations : that is , a match that preserves the constraints of one - to - one mapping and parallel connectivity ( Forbus , Gentner & Law , 1995 ; Gentner & Markman , 1997 ) . One to one mapping requires that each element in one domain match to at most one element in the other domain . 1 For example , if Mary in ( a ) is placed in correspondence with Rover , she cannot also be placed in correspondence with Sarah . Parallel connectivity states that if two predicates are placed in correspondence , then their arguments must also be placed in correspondence ; that is , there must be like bindings between the two analogs ( See Figure 1 ) . For example , if the two causal relations in ( a ) and ( b ) are matched , then their arguments must also be matched : Loves → Loves and Hug → Embrace . Likewise , if Loves → Loves , then Mary → Rover and John → Sarah . Almost all current theories of analogy agree on the importance of structural consistency , although models vary in whether it is implemented as a hard constraint ( Falkenhainer , Forbus , & Gentner , 1989 ; Gentner & Markman , 1997 ) or as a soft constraint ( Halford , 1992 ; Holyoak & Thagard , 1989 ; Hummel & Holyoak , 1997 ; Mitchell , 1993 ) . Although there is universal agreement that structural similarity is crucial in analogical processing , there is a dismaying lack of agreement on exactly what is meant by “structural similarity . ” In particular , theories disagree as to whether conceptual similarity in the relations is required , or whether a pure graph match is sufficient . To see this issue , contrast the initial sentence pair ( a ) and ( b ) with 2 Dedre Gentner , Arthur B . Markman 1 One principled exception occurs when two or more arguments are relationally equivalent , and can be collapsed into one : e . g . , in “The hydrogen atom is like the solar system” , the nine planets can be treated as one and placed in correspondence with the electron . the additional pair ( a ) Mary hugged John because she loves him . ( c ) Fred heated the sandwich before he ate it . Both pairs — ( a ) / ( b ) and ( a ) / ( c ) — have identical graph structure , as shown in Figure 1 . However , in pair ( a ) / ( b ) , the corresponding relations in the graph structure are conceptually similar , whereas in pair ( a ) / ( c ) , they are not . The crux of the disagreement is whether pure graph - structure matches like pair ( a ) and ( c ) are processed as analogies . According to Gentner ( 1983 ) , structural similarity involves conceptual similarity between corresponding relations . Thus pair ( a ) / ( b ) is analogous , but pair ( a ) / ( c ) is not . A contrasting view is that structural similarity need only entail graph matches ( Holyoak & Thagard , 1989 ; Hummel & Holyoak , 1997 ) . Theories in this camp concede that pure graph - matching analogies such as ( a ) / ( c ) are more difficult to process than relationally similar pairs , but hold that the processes are nonetheless fundamentally the same . This may sound like a simple matter of terminology , but there is more at stake . The problem of placing two structural representations in correspondence is one of matching two directed acyclic subgraphs . This kind of graph matching is known to be in the class of NP - hard problems ; the size of the computation required increases exponentially ( or worse ) with the size of the representations . Even if one settles for approximate rather than exact solutions , the computational burden still grows rapidly with the number of elements . Thus , any psychologically plausible process for finding analogical correspondences must control the computational burden of the match . This issue is particularly important because analogical comparison is often assumed to be a subcomponent of many other cognitive processes , such as problem solving and categorization . Computational models of analogy can reduce the complexity of the graph match in one of two ways : by using conceptual similarity to constrain the match , or by using selective projection to reduce the size of the search set . In the conceptual similarity method , an initial parallel matching process is carried out that finds all similar pairs ( both predicates and elements ) in the base and target , without regard to the structure of the match . Only these conceptually Defining Structural Similarity 3 matching pairs enter into further processing , thus reducing the effective size of the problem . This method is used in the Structure - mapping Engine ( SME ) ( Falkenhainer , Forbus , & Gentner , 1989 ; Forbus , Ferguson , & Gentner , 1994 ; Forbus , Gentner , & Law , 1995 ) . This initial set of local conceptual matches in SME includes both object matches and relational matches . It typically includes n - to - 1 matches and other 4 Dedre Gentner , Arthur B . Markman Figure 1 . Graph representations for sentences ( a ) , ( b ) and ( c ) . EAT Fred BEFORE HEAT Sandwich CAUSE LOVE EMBRACE Herb Sarah CAUSE LOVE EMBRACE Mary John a . b . c . matches that will later be rejected . In the next stage , structural consistency is imposed , with the effect of sorting the matches into structurally consistent kernels . Then these kernels are combined into one or more global mappings . The systematicity bias is implemented by a trickle - down computation , in which each matching predicate passes down a fraction of its evidence to its arguments . Finally , inferences are drawn by a kind of pattern completion from base to target ( For details , see Forbus , Gentner , & Law , 1995 ; Gentner & Markman , 1997 ) . Structural alignment and inference are computationally intensive . However , because the computation is restricted to the set of conceptually matching components ( rather than processing the entire graphs for the two domains ) , the process is rendered tractable . Thus , the initial parallel conceptual match stage is crucial to SME’s operation . The second method for simplifying the graph - matching problem is to first select a particular set of assertions or structures in one domain and project only that set to the other domain . The order of projection may be chosen on grounds of systematicity or centrality , or it may simply mirror input order . In either case , the set of potential matches is reduced , because only the selected assertions in the first domain need to be considered . Once a predicate is selected , the best match in the other domain can be determined on the basis of a purely structural match . In models that use this directional projection method — e . g . , Greiner’s ( 1988 ) NLAG , Keane’s ( 1997 ) IAM and Hummel and Holyoak’s ( 1997 ) LISA — conceptual similarity is not necessary , though it may be used to facilitate processing or to decide ambiguous cases . Rather , what most matters is the selection and ordering of predicates to be mapped . To summarize , while all extant theories of analogy consider structural similarity central , this key concept is defined differently in different theories . On the relational similarity view , as in structure - mapping theory , structural similarity requires conceptual similarity between corresponding relations . On the pure graph - isomorphism view , as in IAM and LISA , structural similarity requires only graph isomorphism ; although conceptual similarity between relations can be helpful , it is not central to the algorithm , nor is it considered fundamental to the nature of analogy . Returning to our example , both views would agree that the relationally similar pair [ ( a ) and ( b ) ] is processed as an analogy . However , the views diverge on the graph - isomorphic pair [ ( a ) and ( c ) ] . On the relational similarity view , such nonconceptual matches are not Defining Structural Similarity 5 processed as analogies , but are matched ( if at all ) as some kind of logical puzzle . Indeed , SME cannot process such matches in its normal mode of processing , because it requires conceptual similarity to find potential correspondences in its initial parallel matching stage . In contrast , on the graph - isomorphism view , pair [ ( a ) and ( c ) ] is simply a very difficult analogy . For example , LISA can process such non - conceptually - similar matches as analogies , although its processing is more efficient when given conceptually similar analogs ( Hummel & Holyoak , 1997 , p . 450 ; Kubose , Hummel & Holyoak , 2002 ) . Thus what’s at stake here is the kinds of algorithms that are viable in a computational simulation of analogy . Comparing graph isomorphism with relational similarity The question we ask is what constitutes structural similarity in analogy : that is , what kind of match is used in human analogical processing . To answer this we need an operationalization of how to detect analogical processing . We focus on two key phenomena : ( 1 ) how people align the representations , as discussed above ; and ( 2 ) whether and how people draw inferences from the match . The generation of candidate inferences is a core aspect of analogical reasoning ( Gentner & Markman , 1997 ; Kokinov & French , 2001 ; Holyoak & Thagard , 1995 ; Spellman & Holyoak , 1996 ) . The idea is that candidate inferences are generated during analogical processing by mapping information from the base to the target that is structurally consistent with the match ( Bowdle & Gentner , 1997 ; Clement & Gentner , 1991 ; Markman , 1997 ; Ramscar & Yarlett , 2002 ; Spellman & Holyoak , 1996 ) . Algorithmically , this can be done either by completing the pattern match achieved in the alignment process by mapping across further information connected to the matching relational structure ( Falkenhainer et al . , 1989 ) or by copying information from the base into a queried slot and substituting in corresponding elements of the target ( Holyoak , Novick , & Melz , 1994 ) . We present two studies aimed at clarifying the nature of structural similarity in analogy . The logic of our studies is to give people pairs of passages that permit different kinds of matches — e . g . , a pure graph isomorphism vs . a relational similarity match — and see ( 1 ) which correspondences people select ; ( 2 ) whether they consider the match a good analogy ; and ( 3 ) whether the 6 Dedre Gentner , Arthur B . Markman match leads to any inferences . We operationalized graph structure in two different ways across the two studies . In Experiment 1 , we took graph structure to be given by subject - verb - object sentence grammar . In Experiment 2 we used conceptual representations to determine the graphs . These two methods can be exemplified by a simplified example from Keane’s ( 1997 ) investigation . Keane asked people to find correspondences between sets of sentences with non - conceptually similar predicates : e . g . , Joel sees Marge . Ruby motivates Doris . Joel hugs Marge . Ruby knows Doris . Bert sees Marge . Lana motivates Doris . Although participants made some errors , most could decide that Joel corresponds to Ruby and Doris to Marge . 2 One way they could have done this is by using grammatical matches — e . g . , by noting that Joel and Ruby are each the subjects of two different verbs , and that Doris with Marge are the sentential objects in all three sentences . A second way people might arrive at a graph match ( which we take up in Experiment 2 ) is to set up conceptual graphs and match the parallel arguments of corresponding relations . For example , one might decide sees corresponds to motivates ( because there are two instances of each in their respective sets ) ; this correspondence then dictates that their arguments ( Joel → Ruby ; Marge → Doris ; Bert → Lana ) must match in the corresponding order . In Experiment 1 , we operationalized graph structure as subject - verb - object sentence grammar . This has the advantage of requiring few assumptions beyond ordinary syntactic rules . 3 In Experiment 2 , we used Defining Structural Similarity 7 2 The fact that people can derive correspondences between such sets , if told to find a match ( Keane , 1997 ) , has been used as evidence that these sets qualify as ( very difficult ) analogies ( Hummel & Holyoak , 1997 ; Keane , 1997 ) . But our evidence suggests that these nonconceptual matches are processed very differently from analogies . 3 The terms “structure” and “syntax” are often used interchangeably in discussions of representation . That is , the term “syntax of a match” is used to refer to the structure of the representation . However , this can lead to confusion with the sense of “syntax” as the grammatical syntax of the sentences that describe the domains . While graph conceptual graphs . In both cases , we pitted graph isomorphism against relational similarity . Experiment 1 In order to explore the distinction between pure graph isomorphism — here operationalized as grammar - matching — and relational similarity , we gave people the sentence sets shown in Table 1 . These sentences are constructed so that the correspondences dictated by the semantics of the relations are different from those dictated by the grammatical roles of the elements in the sentences . For example , if the sentence pair “Freddy chases after Fido” and “Rover runs from Bobby” is matched on the basis of grammar , the correspondences are Freddy → Rover ( the grammatical subjects ) and Fido → Bobby ( the grammatical objects ) . However , if people seek to find relational similarity between conceptual representations , they should represent the two sentences roughly as chases ( Freddy , Fido ) and chases ( Bobby , Rover ) . In this case , the correspondences will be Freddy → Bobby and Fido → Rover . The questions are , first , whether people base their correspondences on conceptual - relation matching or on grammatical graph matching , and , second , whether analogical inferences would follow the conceptual match or the purely grammatical graph match . To answer these , participants were asked , first , to state the best correspondences between the sentence sets ; and , second , to make an inference about the second set based on using the first set . Method Participants Participants in this study were 76 undergraduates at Northwestern University who were paid or received course credit for their time . Of these participants , 12 were dropped because they failed to follow instructions , leaving 64 participants whose data were analyzed . 8 Dedre Gentner , Arthur B . Markman structure and grammatical syntax may sometimes be in registration ( as in our Experiment 1 ) , they need not be [ e . g . , Jackendoff , 2002 , p . 2237 ] . In this paper we use the term “structure” as the general term and reserve “syntax” for linguistic grammatical structure . Materials and Procedure The materials for this study were the sentence sets shown in Table 1 . The two sets were constructed to have sentences that were conceptually similar but used complementary verbs , such that the grammatical subject of one was the grammatical object of the other . The sets were presented on a single page with corresponding sentences on the same line as in Table 1 . Sentence set A had four sentences , and sentence set B had three sentences . After reading the sentence sets , participants were asked to state which item in set B matched each of the two protagonists from set A : “Freddy” and “Fido . ” Then participants were asked to make a new inference about set B based on its match to set A . Results and Discussion Of the 64 participants in this study , 60 ( 94 % ) placed Freddy in Defining Structural Similarity 9 Table 1 . Materials used in Experiment 1 Analogy A B Freddy is searching . Rover is hiding . Freddy catches a glimpse of Fido . Rover attracts the notice of Bobby Freddy chases after Fido . Rover runs from Bobby . Freddy fails to catch Fido Matches Please state which items in B best match these items from A : Freddy _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Fido _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Inference Please make a new inference about B , based on A . correspondence with Bobby and Fido with Rover , χ 2 ( 1 ) = 49 . 00 , p < . 05 . Thus , people overwhelmingly placed the objects in correspondence based on the conceptual similarities between the sentence sets , even though making this match required going against the correspondences suggested by the syntax of the sentences . The inference results were also striking . Of the 60 participants who made conceptual matches , 86 % ( 52 / 60 ) made inferences consistent with their match . In contrast , not one of the four participants who made a graph match chose to draw any inference . This result suggests a deep difference between the process of deriving a purely graph - structural match and the process of deriving a relational similarity match . These results provide evidence that in analogical matching people align conceptual relational structures and generate inferences from them , even when there are readily apparent grammatical matches that oppose these relational similarity matches . However , striking as they are , the results leave some issues open . First , the finding that graph isomorphism failed to yield inferences , whereas relational similarity matches almost always did , is potentially extremely important , because inference projection is a signature phenomenon in analogical mapping . However , because only four participants chose the graph - isomorphic match , this finding is based on a very small pool . Second , although the results argue against a graph - matching process based on sentence grammar , they leave open the possibility of pure graph - matching processes based on conceptual event representations . For example , suppose people in Experiment 1 had encoded the sentences as chasing events , and had encoded the arguments as “chaser” and “chasee” rather than in terms of SOV grammar . In this case the correspondences arrived at by pure graph matching would mirror those arrived at via relational similarity matching . In Experiment 2 , we consider the other possible realization of pure graph isomorphism , namely , isomorphism in conceptual graphs . There are other reasons to replicate the results of Experiment 1 . The use of complementary verb pairs like chase / flee created a direct and obvious conflict between the conceptual matches and the grammatical isomorphism , and this may have led to some special processing strategy or in some other way have depressed the rate of isomorphic matching . Finally , the relational match may have been aided by the match between human names and dog names . 10 Dedre Gentner , Arthur B . Markman Although the use of object matches is consistent with a conceptual matching account , it is important to separate it from the use of relational similarity . Experiment 2 In Experiment 2 we again compared relational similarity matches with graph - isomorphic matches , with two major changes . First , we used a between - subjects design , so that the graph isomorphism could be processed on its own , without competing conceptual matches . In addition to clarifying the status of graph matches in generating correspondences , this will also permit a better assessment of whether graph matches lead to inferences . Second , we assumed conceptual representations ( rather than sentence - grammatical structure ) as the basis for the graph - matches . We also made other improvements such as avoiding complementary verbs and using neutral object names . We focused on the generation of inferences in this study , both because it is a central issue and because whether and which inferences people draw is diagnostic of their correspondences . To the extent that pure graph isomorphism can be shown to yield humanlike analogical inferences , it becomes a more viable prospect for a psychological mechanism of analogy . In order to asses whether participants’ inferences fit human patterns , we included in the base passage an extra piece of information not present in the target , that was causally connected to the rest of the base passage . This allowed us to investigate not only whether participants would draw inferences , but whether the inferences would be drawn from shared systems of matches . There is considerable evidence that people prefer interpretations based on connected systems of matches , and that their inferences are drawn from shared systems rather than from isolated matches ( Clement & Gentner , 1991 ; Keane , 1996 ; Markman , 1997 ) . Thus , to the extent that participants’ inferences show this preference for systematicity ( Gentner , 1983 ) , this will be evidence for the psychological plausibility of their processing method . In Experiment 2 we used the materials in Table 2 . Passage 1 describes a battle between the Fox corporation and the Time - Warner corporation . Participants compared this passage with either Passage 2a or Passage 2b . Comparing Passage 1 and Passage 2a affords a match based on relational similarity : e . g . , just as Time - Warner owns a cable system and a news network , Jason owns an insurance company and an office building . Just as the Fox Corporation wants space on Time - Warner’s cable system , Arthur wants an Defining Structural Similarity 11 office in Jason’s building . In contrast , the comparison between Passage 1 and Passage 2b affords a pure graph - isomorphism , with no relational similarity . In this case , Jason corresponds to Time - Warner and Arthur to Fox on the basis of the parallel syntactic structure between the relations in the two domains . For example , ‘Time - Warner owns a cable system and a news network’ in Passage 1 corresponds to ‘Jason goes to casinos and baseball games’ in Passage 2b . The key question was the degree to which these two kinds of matches would support inferences . To test this , we asked participants to make an analogical inference and assessed whether they did so : that is , did they propose any new information about second passage on the basis of the first . To increase the chances of such inferences , and also to permit a more specific question , we placed an extra , nonmatching piece of information in Passage 1 : namely , that Time - Warner does not want to allow Fox on its cable system . This is a shared system fact , because it is connected to the system of matches between the two passages . Thus this manipulation also allows us to test whether the two kinds of match are sensitive to systematicity . By design , the shared system fact can be unambiguously mapped to both of the second passages . When carried over 12 Dedre Gentner , Arthur B . Markman Table 2 . Materials for Experiment 2 Passage 1 Currently , the Fox corporation is feuding with the Time - Warner corporation . Time - Warner owns a cable system and a news network . Fox owns a news network , and wants space on the Time - Warner system to air its programs . Time - Warner does not want to allow the Fox news network on its cable system . To make matters worse , Time - Warner is trying to hire away Fox’s best employees . Time - Warner offers stock options to its employees making it an attractive place to work . Passage 2a Arthur and Jason are fighting . Jason has an insurance company and an office building . Arthur has an insurance company . Arthur wants to lease an office in Jason’s building so he can conduct business . Passage 2b Arthur has always admired Jason . Jason often goes to casinos and baseball games . Arthur goes to casinos and he likes to play baseball at games that Jason is watching to show off his skills . from Passage 1 to 2a , it leads to the inference that Jason does not want to lease space in his building to Arthur’s insurance company ; carried from Passage 1 to 2b ( by making substitutions for the corresponding ( but dissimilar ) relations in the domains ) , it leads to the inference that Jason does not want Arthur to watch his games . Each of these is a reasonable continuation of the target passage . Thus , the question is how the relational similarity group and the graph isomorphic group will fare with respect to ( 1 ) whether they generate inferences ; and ( 2 ) whether they generate shared - system inferences . Method Participants The participants were 54 undergraduates at the University of Texas at Austin who received course credit . Of these , 25 were randomly assigned to the relational similarity condition and 29 to the graph match condition . Procedure Participants were given a sheet containing either Passages 1 and 2a or Passages 1 and 2b ( Table 2 ) . They were told “Please read the following two passages . In the space below , please write out anything that you would predict about what might happen in Passage 2 based on what happened in Passage 1 . If you cannot think of any predictions , just write ‘None . ’” After writing their predictions , they rated their confidence in these predictions on a scale from 1 ( low ) to 7 ( high ) . Results and Discussion The responses were first categorized as analogical inferences ( inferences drawn from the base passage as instructed ) and extraneous inferences not drawn from the base . ( Typically , these last were plausible completions of the target based on general background knowledge . ) We next scored each analogical inference as to whether it was a shared system inference , a nonshared system inference or an inference unrelated to the base domain . ( Participants’ responses could fall into more than one category . ) As shown in Table 3 , relational similarity participants ( M = . 92 ) made five times as many Defining Structural Similarity 13 analogical inferences as did graph match participants ( M = . 17 ) . More specifically , relational similarity participants ( M = . 64 ) made four times as many shared - system inferences as did graph match participants ( M = . 14 ) , ☜ 2 = 14 . 51 , p < . 05 . The rate of shared system inferences in the relational similarity condition is comparable to what has been observed in other studies of analogical inference ( e . g . , Clement & Gentner , 1991 ; Markman , 1997 ) . Other analogical inferences ( nonshared system inferences ) were also far more prevalent in the relational - similarity condition ( M = . 28 ) than in the graph match condition ( M = . 03 ) , χ 2 = 6 . 41 , p < . 05 . If participants failed to see any connection between the two passages , we would expect them either to draw inferences based only on the target passage ( and unrelated to the base passage ) , or else no inferences at all . Among graph match participants , 45 % drew only extraneous ( nonanalogical ) inferences and 41 % drew no inferences . The corresponding figures are 28 % and 4 % for relational similarity participants . Thus , participants in the relational similarity condition made more shared - system inferences than either nonshared - system inferences or extraneous inferences , showing the typical sensitivity to systematicity observed in analogical mapping . In contrast , subjects in the graph 14 Dedre Gentner , Arthur B . Markman Table 3 . Results of Experiment 2 : Number ( and mean number ) of subjects making no inferences or only extraneous inferences , and number ( and mean per subject ) of analogical inferences by type . Percent Percent with Mean Number of Analogical Inferences Per Subject with no only Extraneous Shared Other Inferences Total Inferences Inferences System from Base Relational Similarity 4 % 28 % 0 . 64 0 . 28 0 . 92 Match ( N = 25 ) Graph Match 41 % 45 % 0 . 14 0 . 03 0 . 17 ( N = 29 ) match condition made more extraneous inferences than either shared or nonshared - system inferences . This pattern is further illuminated by participants’ confidence ratings . If participants are sensitive to systematicity ( as both the SME and IAM models predict ) , they should be most confident about shared - system inferences . This prediction was borne out for the relational similarity participants . For the shared system inferences made by relational similarity participants , the mean confidence rating was 5 . 13 ( out of 7 ) , as compared with a mean rating of 3 . 09 for their extraneous inferences . Graph match participants showed no such preference : the mean confidence rating for their shared - system inferences was 2 . 50 , as compared with 3 . 96 for their extraneous inferences . These results show a strikingly different pattern of inferencing between relational similarity matches and graph matches . Whereas 68 % of the relational similarity participants drew an analogical inference , 86 % of the graph match participants either drew no inferences or drew only extraneous inferences . Thus , even when explicitly encouraged to draw inferences from the analogy , most of the people in the graph match condition either declined entirely or simply invented facts about the target story . The confidence ratings were consistent with this pattern . Whereas relational similarity participants had high confidence in shared system analogical inferences , even those graph match participants who did make inferences showed no preference for analogical inferences over nonanalogical inferences ( extraneous inferences drawn purely from the target ) . General Discussion Our goal here is to clarify the nature of structural similarity in analogical comparison . In Experiment 1 , pure graph matches based on grammatical structure were pitted against relational similarity matches within - subjects . Participants overwhelmingly made correspondences based on relational similarity , not graph isomorphism . Further , nearly all the 60 participants who made relational similarity correspondences went on to draw an inference ; in contrast , none of the 5 participants who drew graph - isomorphic correspondences did so . In Experiment 2 , we compared conceptual graph matches with relational similarity matches in a between - subject design to allow Defining Structural Similarity 15 for the possibility that the poor showing for graph matches in Experiment 1 resulted from competition with the conceptual match . In this study , every effort was made to ‘level the playing field’ between relational similarity and graph matching . The graph - isomorphic passages contained no competing conceptual similarity alignment ; the only good alignment was the graph match . Further , the passages were designed such that the graph - isomorphic correspondences yielded a plausible inference , just as did the correspondences in the relational similarity match . Yet when given instructions to seek an analogical inference , the two groups showed a clear divergence . Among participants given relationally similar passages , 92 % drew analogical inferences — inferences from the base to the target . In contrast , among participants given the graph isomorphic passages , only 17 % made analogical matches . In fact , 41 % failed to draw any inference , despite instructions encouraging them to do so . Further , even when participants actually made an inference , most of the time this inference was simply a plausible completion of the target story rather than one based on an analogy between the base and target . Finally , another key difference between the two groups was that the similarity participants showed the systematicity bias that is typical of analogical mapping . They not only tended to draw the inference that belonged to the connected system of predicates shared by the two passages , but they were also highly confident of this shared - system inference when they did so . In contrast , only a small minority of the graph matching participants drew the shared system inference , and their confidence in that inference was low . In sum , people are remarkably unwilling to draw inferences from nonconceptual mappings , even when instructed to do so ; and when they do draw inferences , they do not show the normal systematicity bias . All of this suggests that when dealing with these nonmeaningful pairs , people are not engaging in normal analogical processing , but rather are solving a rather artificial puzzle . These findings support the theoretical claim that conceptual similarity is crucial in human analogical processing . One implication of these results is that it is unnecessary , and possibly counterproductive , to test computational simulations of analogy on graph - matching pairs that have no conceptual similarity . We suggest that a model’s ability to handle pure graph matches unsupported by conceptual similarities is irrelevant to its ability to capture human analogical mapping processes . Attempts to improve a model’s 16 Dedre Gentner , Arthur B . Markman performance on graph matches may result in distortions of its central process account . These findings invite further questions . For example , while relational similarity may be the chief contributor to structural alignment , other kinds of conceptual similarity also enter into analogical processing . However , the outcome of an analogical comparison can be influenced by object similarities as well as by relational similarity ( e . g . , Bassok , Wu & Olseth , 1995 ; Bassok & Medin , 1997 ; Keane , Hackett , & Davenport , 2001 ; Markman & Gentner , 1993 ; Rattermann & Gentner , 1998 ) . A natural question is whether conceptual similarity matters more for relations than for objects , as structure mapping - claims or whether all matches count equally . Recent research by Gentner and Kurtz ( in press ) bears out the claim that relational similarity matters more than object similarity . They asked participants to judge whether two events , each expressed in a single sentence , were or were not analogical . The degree to which participants considered two events analogical varied strongly with the similarity of their relations , as expressed in the verbs , but hardly at all with the similarity of the objects , as expressed by the object nouns . The Gentner and Kurtz research also addressed another question that follows from this research is what degree of synonymity is necessary to achieve a conceptual match ? They found that pairs with closely synonymous relations ( e . g . , Greg built the deck / Chad constructed the deck ) were almost always accepted as analogies , and pairs with very dissimilar relations ( e . g . , Greg built the deck / Chad swept the deck ) were almost never accepted . Intriguingly , pairs whose relations were of intermediate similarity — e . g . , Greg built the deck / Chad repaired the deck — were accepted about half the time ; and further , participants required much longer to decide for these pairs than for the very close or very far pairs — suggesting that participants may have re - represented the meanings to seek conceptual overlap . In sum , these findings support the view that analogical processing is driven by the presence of conceptual similarities — particularly relational similarities — between the base and target domain . As Polya ( 1954 , p . 13 ) put it , “… two systems are analogous , if they agree in clearly definable relations of their respective parts . ” Defining Structural Similarity 17 References Bassok , M . , & Medin , D . L . ( 1997 ) . Birds of a feather flock together : Similarity judgments with semantically rich stimuli . Journal of Memory and Language , 36 , 311 - 336 . Bassok , M . , Wu , L . , & Olseth , K . L . ( 1995 ) . Judging a book by its cover : Interpretative effects of content on problem solving transfer . Memory & Cognition , 23 ( 3 ) , 354 - 367 . Bowdle , B . , & Gentner , D . ( 1997 ) . Informativity and asymmetry in comparisons . Cognitive Psychology , 34 ( 3 ) , 244 - 286 . Clement , C . A . , & Gentner , D . ( 1991 ) . Systematicity as a selection constraint in analogical mapping . Cognitive Science , 15 , 89 - 132 . Falkenhainer , B . , Forbus , K . D . , & Gentner , D . ( 1989 ) . The structure mapping engine : Algorithm and examples . Artificial Intelligence , 41 ( 1 ) , 1 - 63 . Forbus , K . D . , Ferguson , R . W . , & Gentner , D . ( 1994 ) . Incremental structure mapping . Proceedings of the Sixteenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society , 313 - 318 . Forbus , K . D . , Gentner , D . , & Law , K . ( 1995 ) . MAC / FAC : A model of similarity - based retrieval . Cognitive Science , 19 ( 2 ) , 141 - 205 . Forbus , K . D . , & Oblinger , D . ( 1990 ) . Making SME greedy and pragmatic . Proceedings of the Twelfth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society , 61 - 68 . Gentner , D . ( 1983 ) . Structure mapping : A theoretical framework for analogy . Cognitive Science , 7 , 155 - 170 . Gentner , D . & & Kurtz , K . J . ( in press ) . Relations , objects and the composition of analogies . Cognitive Science . Gentner , D . , & Markman , A . B . ( 1997 ) . Structural alignment in analogy and similarity . American Psychologist , 52 ( 1 ) , 45 - 56 . Greiner , R . ( 1988 ) . Learning by understanding analogies . Artificial Intelligence , 35 , 81 - 125 . Halford , G . S . ( 1992 ) . Analogical reasoning and conceptual complexity in cognitive development . Human Development , 35 ( 4 ) , 193 - 217 . Hofstadter , D . R . ( 2001 ) . Epilogue : Analogy as the core of cognition . In Gentner , D . , Holyoak , K . J . , & Kokinov , B . N . ( Eds . ) , The analogical mind : Perspectives from cognitive science ( pp . 499 - 538 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Holyoak , K . J . , Novick , L . R . , & Melz , E . R . ( 1994 ) . Component processes in analogical transfer : Mapping , pattern completion , and adaptation . In K . J . Holyoak & J . A . Barnden ( Eds . ) , Advances in connectionist and neural 18 Dedre Gentner , Arthur B . Markman computation theory : Vol . 2 . Analogical connections ( pp . 113 - 180 ) . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . Holyoak , K . J . , & Thagard , P . ( 1989 ) . Analogical mapping by constraint satisfaction . Cognitive Science , 13 ( 3 ) 295 - 355 . Holyoak , K . J . , & Thagard , P . R . ( 1995 ) . Mental leaps : Analogy in creative thought . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Hummel , J . E . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1997 ) . Distributed representations of structure : A theory of analogical access and mapping . Psychological Review , 104 ( 3 ) , 427 - 466 . Jackendoff , R . ( 2002 ) . The foundations of language . New York : Oxford University Press . Keane , M . T . ( 1996 ) . On adaptation in analogy : Tests of pragmatic importance and adaptability in analogical problem solving . The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology , 49 / A ( 4 ) , 1062 - 1085 . Keane , M . T . ( 1997 ) . What makes an analogy difficult ? The effects of order and causal structure on analogical mapping . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 23 ( 4 ) , 946 - 967 . Keane , M . T . , Hackett , D . , & Davenport , J . ( 2001 ) . Similarity processing depends on the similarities present : Effects of relational prominence in similarity and analogical processing . In J . D . Moore & K . Stenning ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the 23rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 477 - 482 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Kokinov . B . & French , R . M . ( 2003 ) . Computational models of analogy - making . Encyclopedia of Cognitive Science . Kubose T . T . , Holyoak K . J . , Hummel J . E . ( 2002 ) . The role of textual coherence in incremental analogical mapping . Journal of Memory and Language , October 2002 , 47 ( 3 ) , 407 - 435 . Markman , A . B . ( 1997 ) . Constraints on analogical inference . Cognitive Science , 21 ( 4 ) , 373 - 418 . Markman , A . B . & Gentner , D . ( 1993 ) . Structural alignment during similarity comparisons . Cognitive Psychology , 25 , 431 - 467 . Mitchell , M . ( 1993 ) . Analogy making as perception . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Polya , G . ( 1954 ) . Induction and analogy in mathematics : Vol . 1 . Of mathematics and plausible reasoning . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Ramscar , M . & Yarlett , D . ( 2002 ) Semantic grounding in models of analogy : An environmental approach . Cognitive Science , 27 , 41 - 71 . Rattermann , M . J . & Gentner , D . ( 1998 ) . More evidence for a relational shift in the development of analogy : Children’s performance on a causal mapping task . Cognitive Development , 13 , 453 - 478 . Defining Structural Similarity 19 20 Dedre Gentner , Arthur B . Markman Spellman B . A . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1992 ) . If Saddam is Hitler then who is George Bush ? : Analogical mapping between systems of social roles . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 62 ( 6 ) , 913 - 933 . Spellman , B . A . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1996 ) . Pragmatics in analogical mapping . Cognitive Psychology , 31 , 307 - 346 . Yarlett , D . , & Ramscar , M . ( 2000 ) . Structure mapping theory and lexico semantic information . Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society , Philadelphia , PA .