Major Histocompatibility Complex Class II - Peptide Complexes Internalize Using a Clathrin - and Dynamin - independent Endocytosis Pathway * □ S Receivedforpublication , February8 , 2008 , andinrevisedform , March20 , 2008 Published , JBCPapersinPress , March31 , 2008 , DOI10 . 1074 / jbc . M801070200 Even Walseng ‡ § 1 , Oddmund Bakke § ¶ , and Paul A . Roche ‡2 From the ‡ Experimental Immunology Branch , NCI , National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , Maryland 20892 , the § Centre for Immune Regulation , Department of Molecular Biosciences , University of Oslo , Oslo 0316 , Norway , and ¶ The Gade Institute , University of Bergen , Bergen 5021 , Norway Major histocompatibility complex ( MHC ) class II molecules ( MHC - II ) function by binding antigenic peptides and displaying these peptides on the surface of antigen presenting cells ( APCs ) for recognition by peptide - MHC - II ( pMHC - II ) - specific CD4 T cells . It is known that cell surface MHC - II can internalize , exchange antigenic peptides in endosomes , and rapidly recycle back to the plasma membrane ; however , the molecular machin - ery and trafficking pathways utilized by internalizing / recycling MHC - II have not been identified . We now demonstrate that unlike newly synthesized invariant chain - associated MHC - II , mature cell surface pMHC - II complexes internalize following clathrin - , AP - 2 - , and dynamin - independent endocytosis path - ways . Immunofluorescence microscopy of MHC - II expressing HeLa - CIITA cells , human B cells , and human DCs revealed that pMHC enters Arf6 (cid:1) Rab35 (cid:1) EHD1 (cid:1) tubular endosomes follow - ing endocytosis . These data contrast the internalization path - waysfollowedbynewlysynthesizedandpeptide - loadedMHC - II moleculesanddemonstratesthatcellsurfacepMHC - IIinternal - ize and rapidly recycle from early endocytic compartments in tubular endosomes . Major histocompatibility complex 3 class II molecules ( MHC - II ) function by binding antigenic peptides and display - ing these peptides on the surface of antigen presenting cells ( APCs ) for recognition by MHC - II - restricted , peptide - specific CD4 T lymphocytes ( 1 ) . Antigenic peptides that bind to MHC - II are usually generated by proteolysis of foreign proteins in late endosomal / lysosomal antigen processing compartments in APCs . However , some antigenic peptides are generated in earlier endosomal compartments and are , in fact , destroyed in late , more acidic lysosomes ( 2 – 5 ) . Therefore MHC - II must fol - low a trafficking pathway that takes them to lysosome - like anti - gen processing compartments but still allows access to early endosomes . Newly synthesized MHC - II is targeted to antigen processing compartments as a consequence of its association with a chap - erone protein termed Invariant chain ( Ii ) . Ii association inhibits peptide binding to MHC - II ( 6 ) and enhances MHC - II folding and egress from the endoplasmic reticulum ( 7 – 9 ) . The cytoso - lic domain of Ii also contains intracellular sorting signals that direct Ii - associated MHC - II complexes ( MHC - II - Ii ) to lyso - some - like antigen processing compartments ( 10 , 11 ) . Once in these compartments Ii is degraded by proteolysis and antigenic peptides bind to Ii - free MHC - II molecules with the assistance of the “peptide editor” HLA - DM ( reviewed in Ref . 12 ) . Once loaded with peptides , MHC - II moves from the antigen process - ing compartments to the cell surface to display these pMHC - II to antigen - specific CD4 T cells . Although the pathway followed by newly synthesized MHC - II - Ii complexes to access these compartments has been the sub - ject of intense debate , there is now considerable data showing that most , if not all , Ii - associated MHC - II travels from the trans - Golgi network to the plasma membrane and then enters the endocytic pathway by clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Rapid internalization of MHC - II - Ii complexes from the cell surface is dependent on dileucine - based sorting signals in the cytosolic domain of Ii ( 10 , 11 , 13 ) . Mutation of these sorting signals pre - vent efficient sorting of MHC - II to antigen processing com - partments ( 14 , 15 ) and leads to the accumulation of MHC - II - Ii complexes on the plasma membrane ( 16 ) . Some of the dileucine sorting motifs , including those in Ii are responsible for the bind - ing of cargo proteins to the clathrin - associated adaptor protein AP - 2 ( 17 , 18 ) and are thus required for clathrin - mediated endo - cytosis of these proteins from the cell surface . The use of spe - cific small interfering RNA ( siRNA ) targeting clathrin and AP - 2 profoundly inhibited Ii internalization and resulted in the accu - mulation of Ii at the surface of clathrin / AP - 2 depleted cells ( 19 , 20 ) , highlighting the importance of AP - 2 - mediated clathrin - dependent endocytosis in MHC - II - Ii delivery to antigen proc - essing compartments . In addition , overexpression of a domi - nant - negative mutant of the GTPase dynamin prevented MHC - II - Ii internalization and Ii degradation ( 21 ) , indicating * Thisworkwasauthored , inwholeorinpart , byNationalInstitutesofHealth staff . This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health Intra - mural Program and the Norwegian Cancer Society ( to O . B . ) . The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges . This article must therefore be hereby marked “ advertisement ” in accordance with 18 U . S . C . Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact . □ S Theon - lineversionofthisarticle ( availableathttp : / / www . jbc . org ) contains supplemental Videos 1 – 3 . 1 Supported by the Norwegian Research Council during most of this work . 2 To whom correspondence should be addressed : Bldg . 10 , Rm . 4B36 , Bethesda , MD 20892 . Tel . : 301 - 594 - 2595 ; Fax : 301 - 435 - 7923 ; E - mail : paul . roche @ nih . gov . 3 The abbreviations used are : MHC , major histocompatibility complex ; APC , antigen presenting cell ; pMHC - II , peptide - loaded MHC - II ; mAb , mono - clonalantibody ; GFP , greenfluorescentprotein ; HA , hemagglutinin ; FACS , fluorescence - activated cell sorter ; HBSS , Hanks’ balanced salt solution ; siRNA , small interfering RNA ; Ii , invariant chain . THEJOURNALOFBIOLOGICALCHEMISTRY VOL . 283 , NO . 21 , pp . 14717 – 14727 , May23 , 2008 PrintedintheU . S . A . MAY 23 , 2008• VOLUME 283•NUMBER 21 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 14717 by gu e s t on N ov e m b e r 18 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m that dynamin is also required for efficient endocytosis of MHC - II - Ii complexes . In contrast to the behavior of Ii - associated MHC - II , almost nothing is known about the molecular mechanisms regulating the fate of Ii - free , peptide - loaded MHC - II ( pMHC - II ) once at the cell surface . Ii - free MHC - II is known to rapidly internalize from the cell surface , however , unlike Ii - associated MHC - II ( which traffics to antigen processing compartments ) , the majority of internalized Ii - free MHC - II rapidly recycles back to the plasma membrane ( 22 – 24 ) . Recycling MHC - II can in fact exchange antigenic peptides in early endosomes in HLA - DM - dependent ( 25 ) or HLA - DM - independent manners ( 26 ) and it has been suggested that recycling MHC - II could represent a significant fraction of the total pool of endosomal / lysosomal MHC - II molecules ( 23 ) . Because Ii - association prevents pep - tide binding to MHC - II ( 6 ) , antigenic peptides generated in early endosomes cannot bind to Ii - associated MHC - II com - plexes that are en route to lysosome - like antigen processing compartments . Thus it is likely that rapid MHC - II recycling ( and HLA - DM - catalyzed peptide - exchange ) could serve to increase the repertoire of peptides available to T cell recogni - tion by MHC - II molecules on the surface of APCs . In this study we have investigated the mechanisms regulating MHC - II - Ii and pMHC - II endocytosis and recycling and find that pMHC - II and MHC - II - Ii complexes enter cells by com - pletely different mechanisms . Unlike Ii - associated MHC - II , pMHC - II endocytosis is clathrin - , AP - 2 - , and dynamin - inde - pendent . Internalized pMHC - II enters elongated tubules that contain the small GTPases Arf6 and Rab35 , whereas Ii - associ - ated MHC - II does not . Because both Arf6 and Rab35 have been suggested to regulate clathrin - independent protein recycling ( 27 , 28 ) , our data highlights the different pathways of endocytosis and recycling of Ii - associated and Ii - free MHC - II molecules . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Cells and Reagents —HeLa cells ( ATCC , Manassas , VA ) , JY B cells , HeLa cells expressing CIITA , and the KG - 1 DC line ( both gifts from Dr . Peter Cresswell , Yale University School of Med - icine ) were maintained as described previously ( 60 , 61 ) . Human DCs were generated from elutriated human monocytes obtained from the NIH Blood bank . Briefly , the cells were grown for 6 days in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum , 50 ng / ml human granulocyte macro - phage - colony stimulating factor ( Peprotech , Rocky Hill , NJ ) , 35 ng / ml human interleukin - 4 ( Peprotech ) , 2 m M L - glutamine , 50 (cid:1) g / ml gentamicin , 1 m M sodium pyruvate , 55 (cid:1) M (cid:2) - mercapto - ethanol , and non - essential amino acids ( Sigma ) . On day 6 the cells were activated using 1 (cid:1) g / ml lipopolysaccharide for 24 h . Half of the media was changed every 2 days , adding fresh medium containing twice the concentration of the cytokines mentioned above . The following antibodies were used in this study : anti - pMHC - II mAb L243 ( BD Biosciences ) , anti - MHC - II - Ii mAb LL1 ( 33 ) , Alexa 488 - conjugated anti - HA ( Covance , Denver , PA ) , anti - Lamp - 1 mAb H4A3 and anti - Lamp - 2 mAb H4B4 ( Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank , Des Moines , IA ) , AP - 2 medium chain (cid:1) 2 ( AP50 ) , anti - clathrin heavy chain ( BD Biosciences ) , and anti - (cid:2) - tubulin ( Sigma ) . The anti - DR (cid:2) - chain mAb XD5 . All has been described previously ( 16 ) . Alexa Fluor - conjugated secondary antibodies were obtained from Molecular Probes ( Eugene , OR ) and horseradish per - oxidase - conjugated reagents were obtained from Southern Biotech ( Birmingham , AL ) . Plasmids encoding HA - tagged Arf6 and the Arf6 T27N GTPase mutant were provided by Julie Donaldson ( NHLBI , National Institutes of Health ) , GFP - tagged Rab35 and the Rab35 S22N GTPase mutant were provided by Steve Shaw ( NCI , National Institutes of Health ) , GFP - tagged EHD1 and GFP - CD63 were provided by Juan Bonifacino ( NICHD , National Institutes of Health ) , HA - tagged dynamin ( K44A ) mutant was provided by Katherine Roche ( NINDS , National Institutes of Health ) , and the dominant - negative fragment AP180C - EGFP was provided by Harvey T . McMahon ( Cam - bridge , UK ) . Immunoprecipitation and Immunoblotting —HeLa - CIITA cells were analyzed by immunoprecipitation and immunoblot analysis for expression of MHC - II , clathrin , and AP - 2 using protocols described previously ( 62 ) . Transfection and siRNA Treatment —HeLa cells were trans - fected using Lipofectamine and Plus reagent ( Invitrogen ) and were assayed 24 h after transfection . RNA interference was car - ried out using Lipofectamine 2000 ( Invitrogen ) . The siRNA constructs ( 20 (cid:1) M ) were added to HeLa cells in suspension and assayed 72 h after transfection . The sequences for the siRNA were as follows : clathrin heavy chain ( 5 (cid:1) 3 3 (cid:1) ) GGGAAGTTA - CATATTATTGtt ( Ambion , Foster City , CA ) , AP - 2 - (cid:1) 2 ( 5 (cid:1) 3 3 (cid:1) ) GTGGATGCCTTTCGGGUCAtt ( Qiagen , Valencia , CA ) , and negative control siRNA ( obtained from Qiagen ( catalog number 1022076 ) ) . The sequences for the clathrin heavy chain siRNA was determined by Ambion ( catalog number 16706 ) , whereas the AP - 2 medium chain siRNA sequences have been described previously ( 19 , 20 ) . Immunofluorescence Microscopy —HeLa - CIITA cells were fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde in phosphate - buffered saline for 12 min at room temperature as described ( 63 ) . For surface blocking , a mixture of goat anti - mouse IgG and Alexa 633 - conjugated goat anti - mouse was incubated on ice with cells that had been stained with primary mAb . The cells were then fixed , permeabilized with 0 . 1 % saponin in phosphate - buffered saline at room temperature , and incubated with Alexa 488 - or Alexa 546 - conjugated secondary antibodies to detect internalized mAb . Human DCs were incubated for 30 min at room temper - ature on polylysine - coated glass slides prior to fixation and immunostaining . All cells were imaged utilizing a Zeiss LSM 510 META confocal microscope using a (cid:2) 63 oil immersion objective lens ( NA 1 . 4 ) . Z - stack sections were collected at 0 . 4 - (cid:1) m intervals for three - dimensional reconstruction and 0 . 7 (cid:1) m for kinetic analyses . Live cell imaging was performed in HeLa - CIITA cells by incubating cells with a trace amount of Alexa 488 - conjugated mAb L243 ( Biolegend , San Diego , CA ) on a heated stage at 37 °C and immediately acquiring stacks of images at 2 - min intervals . Complete Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium with - out phenol red was used as imaging medium . All images were acquired in the mid - plane of the cells . Videos were generated by MHC Class II - Peptide Endocytosis 14718 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY VOLUME 283•NUMBER 21• MAY 23 , 2008 by gu e s t on N ov e m b e r 18 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m combining sequential images using LSM 510 WS ( release ver - sion 3 . 5 ) software ( Carl Zeiss MicroImaging , Inc . , Thornwood , NY ) . Computer animations of MHC - II distribution in cells were generated by combining individual z - stacks ( thickness 0 . 7 (cid:1) m ) using LSM 510 WS software and ImageJ software ( National Institutes of Health ) . Flow Cytometry - based Internalization and Recycling Assays — Cells were briefly trypsinized and washed twice in FACS staining buffer ( HBSS containing 2 % fetal bovine serum ) . Primary mAb were incubated with cells ( (cid:3) 5 (cid:2) 10 6 cells / ml ) for 20 min on ice and washed twice in ice - cold FACS staining buffer . Alexa - conjugated specific secondary antibodies were incubated with the labeled cells for 20 min on ice , washed twice , and cells were then fixed in 1 % paraformaldehyde in phosphate - buffered saline . For all internalization experi - ments the cells were first stained with the primary mAb on ice , washed twice in ice - cold FACS buffer , and re - cultured at 37 °C for various times . After two more washes in ice - cold buffer , the amount of primary antibody remaining on the cell surface was identified by staining cells with Alexa - conju - gated secondary antibodies on ice . The cells were washed in ice - cold FACS staining buffer and then fixed in 1 % paraform - aldehyde in phosphate - buffered saline at room temperature . Intracellular HA - dynamin was detected by staining of fixed - and saponin - permeabilized cells with Alexa 488 - conjugated anti - HA mAb . Expression of each antibody was determined by flow cytometry using a FACSCalibur ( BD Biosciences ) . The median fluorescence intensity was determined for each FACS profile and expressed as a percentage of the value present on cells kept on ice for the duration of the internalization assay . In other experiments the amount of each antigen present on the plasma membrane at steady - state after transfection was expressed as a - fold change relative to mock - transfected cells . MHC - II recycling assays were performed by incubating either KG - 1 DCs or HeLa - CIITA cells with anti - pMHC - II mAb L243 at 37 °C for 30 min , washing the cells extensively in ice - cold FACS staining buffer , and then blocking surface - exposed L243 using an excess of goat anti - mouse IgG and Alexa 633 - conjugated goat anti - mouse on ice . The cells were then washed again in ice - cold FACS buffer and then re - cultured in complete medium at 4 °C . At various times aliquots of each culture were removed and added to pre - warmed medium and incubated at 37 °C for various times . The cells were again washed in ice - cold FACS staining buffer and re - expressed pMHC - II present on the surface detected by staining cells with Alexa 488 - conjugated goat anti - mouse antibody on ice . Cells were analyzed by flow cytometry and the amount of MHC - II recycling was expressed as a fraction of the amount of pMHC - II reappearance detected after culture at 37 °C for 30 min . Cell Surface Biotinylation —HeLa - CIITA cells were seeded out in separate 6 - well plates 1 day prior to cell surface biotiny - lation . Briefly , the cells were washed with ice - cold HBSS , and surface proteins were biotinylated on ice using 0 . 5 mg / ml EZ - Link Sulfo - NHS - SS - Biotin ( Pierce ) for 30 min . Free biotin was quenched with two washes with 50 m M glycine in HBSS . The cells were then “chased” for various times in complete Dulbec - co’s modified Eagle’s medium at 37 °C or kept on ice in com - plete Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium . The cells were washed in cold HBSS and the surface biotin was reduced by incubating the cells with 150 m M reduced glutathione ( Calbio - chem ) in buffer containing 75 m M NaCl , 10 m M EDTA , and 75 m M NaOH for two treatments of 15 min each . Free glutathione was then quenched using 5 mg / ml iodoacetamide in HBSS . In some samples the biotinylated cells were not incubated with glutathione , thus representing the maximum amount of biotin - ylated pMHC - II present in the experiment . The cells were lysed , pMHC - II was isolated by immunoprecipitation using mAb L243 and the immunoprecipitates , and analyzed by blot - ting using streptavidin - horseradish peroxidase ( Southern Bio - tech , Birmingham , AL ) or using the DR (cid:2) - chain mAb XD5 . A11 . RESULTS pMHC - II and MHC - II - Ii Complexes Internalize and Recycle in HeLa - CIITA and Professional APCs —To identify the machinery regulating endocytosis of Ii - associated MHC - II and Ii - free pMHC - II complexes we have examined MHC - II trans - port in CIITA - expressing HeLa cells and a variety of primary and immortalized APCs . Stable expression of CIITA in HeLa cells induces expression of endogenous MHC - II and allows us to examine the distribution and trafficking of pMHC - II and MHC - II - Ii in a cell that possesses very well characterized endo - cytic and recycling pathways . Furthermore , these cells can function to stimulate antigen - specific CD4 T cells ( 29 ) , show - ing that they possess the cellular machinery required for anti - gen processing and presentation . The ability to differentiate between Ii - associated MHC - II and Ii - free pMHC - II is critical to examine the pathways of internalization followed by these two distinct forms of MHC - II . The specificity of the anti - pMHC - II mAb L243 used in this study for Ii - free MHC - II ( 30 ) was confirmed by immunopre - cipitation / immunoblot analysis . MHC - II was immunoprecipi - tated using either mAb L243 or the anti - HLA - DR (cid:3) - chain mAb DA6 . 147 and the amount of Ii and MHC - II present in each immunoprecipitate was determined by immunoblot analysis . Whereas an anti - (cid:3) - chain immunoprecipitate contained large amounts of Ii ( bound as MHC - II - Ii complexes ) , there was no Ii present in the mAb L243 immunoprecipitate ( Fig . 1 A ) , demon - strating that L243 does not react with immature , Ii - associated forms of MHC - II in HeLa - CIITA cells . Immunofluorescence microscopy using mAb L243 con - firmed that a significant amount of the intracellular pMHC - II localizes to LAMP - 1 - positive lysosome - like compartments in HeLa - CIITA cells in a manner that is similar to that of the distribution of pMHC - II in monocyte - derived DCs ( Fig . 1 B ) . In addition , immunoelectron microscopy demonstrated that as in human and mouse DCs ( 31 , 32 ) , pMHC - II is present on late endosomal / lysosomal structures with multivesicular morphol - ogy in HeLa - CIITA cells ( data not shown ) . These data strongly suggest that the machinery regulating pMHC - II trafficking is conserved in HeLa - CIITA cells and professional APCs . The kinetics of MHC - II internalization and recycling has been examined in both transfected human fibroblasts and human B cells ( 22 – 24 ) . To confirm that the rate of endocytosis of pMHC - II and MHC - II - Ii complexes are comparable in HeLa - CIITA cells and professional APCs we measured the kinetics of endocytosis of pMHC - II and MHC - II - Ii in various MHC Class II - Peptide Endocytosis MAY 23 , 2008• VOLUME 283•NUMBER 21 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 14719 by gu e s t on N ov e m b e r 18 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m cell types by FACS analysis . pMHC - II internalizes rapidly in HeLa - CIITA cells , the JY B cell line , and the KG - 1 DC line and reaches an equilibrium of 20 % internalization after (cid:3) 15 min ( Fig . 1 C ) . This equilibrium has been attributed to efficient recy - cling of MHC - II from early endosomes to the cell surface ( 22 ) . Immunofluorescence microscopy revealed the presence of internalized pMHC - II complexes in HeLa - CIITA cells ( Fig . 1 D ) and recycling experiments confirmed that the internalized pMHC - II could traffic from these intracellular compartments to the plasma membrane ( Fig . 1 C ) . Essentially identical results to these were obtained when examining the kinetics of internal - ization of pMHC - II in monocyte - derived human DCs ( results not shown ) . The internalization kinetics were similar when using whole antibody or the Fab fragment of the pMHC - II mAb L243 , confirming that internaliza - tion was not a consequence of pMHC - II cross - linking ( data not shown ) . Essentially all Ii molecules on the plasma membrane of human B cells ( 16 ) and HeLa - CIITA cells ( 29 ) are associated with MHC - II and we therefore used the Ii - specific mAb LL1 to tag surface MHC - II - Ii complexes ( 33 ) . In agreement with previous studies ( 16 , 34 ) , we found that MHC - II - Ii is rapidly internal - ized in HeLa - CIITA cells ( Fig . 1 , C and D ) . These data demonstrate that pMHC - II internalizes and recy - cles in HeLa - CIITA cells and pro - fessional APCs with similar kinetics . To confirm that the loss of pMHC - II mAb in the FACS - based endocytosis assay reflects internal - ization of pMHC - II protein we used an antibody - independent assay to examine pMHC - II endocytosis . Plasma membrane proteins on HeLa - CIITA cells were tagged with a reducible form of NHS - biotin and the resistance of protein reduction by extracellular glutathione used as an indication of protein endocyto - sis . When biotinylated HeLa - CIITA cells were kept on ice glutathione removed essentially all biotin moi - eties from surface pMHC - II . By contrast , culture of cells at 37 °C for various times before incubation of the cells with glutathione on ice revealed the presence of intracellu - lar ( reduction - resistant ) pMHC - II ( Fig . 2 ) . Quantitative analysis showed that the rate of pMHC - II endocytosis measured using this antibody - independent assay almost exactly mirrored that obtained using the FACS - based internalization assay . These data validate the FACS - based assay as a faithful indicator of pMHC - II endocytosis . pMHC - II and MHC - II - Ii Complexes Internalize Using Differ - ent Machinery —Although it is well established that the inter - nalization of MHC - II - Ii complexes proceeds via clathrin - de - pendent endocytosis ( 19 , 20 ) , the molecular mechanism regulating pMHC - II endocytosis has not been directly addressed . To directly examine the machinery required for internalization of pMHC - II and MHC - II complexes we have used siRNA to specifically deplete either clathrin or AP - 2 in HeLa - CIITA cells . Immunoblot analysis revealed 90 – 95 % knock down of the clathrin heavy chain and the AP - 2 (cid:1) - subunit FIGURE 1 . pMHC - II and MHC - II - Ii internalize with similar kinetics in both HeLa - CIITA and human B cells . A , HeLa - CIITA cells were lysed in Triton X - 100 and aliquots of the lysate were subjected to immunopre - cipitation using an isotype control IgG , anti - pMHC - II mAb L243 , or the anti - MHC - II (cid:3) - chain mAb DA6 . 147 . The immunoprecipitates were then analyzed by immunoblot analysis for the total content of MHC - II (cid:3) - chain ( top panel ) orIi ( bottompanel ) . B , HeLa - CIITAcellsandmonocyte - derivedhumanimmatureDCswerefixed , perme - abilized , and stained with mAb recognizing pMHC - II ( green ) and LAMP - 2 ( red ) . C , HeLa - CIITA cells ( circles ) , JY B cells ( squares ) , and KG - 1 DCs ( triangles ) were incubated on ice with mAb recognizing pMHC - II ( L243 ) or MHC - II - Ii ( LL1 ) . The cells were extensively washed and re - cultured at 37 °C . At different times the cells were washed on ice and the amount of tagged pMHC - II or MHC - II - Ii remaining on the cell surface was determined by incubating the cells with fluorescently labeled secondary antibodies on ice . The cells were analyzed by FACS analysisandrepresentativehistogramsofpMHC - IIandMHC - II - IiexpressiononHeLa - CIITAcellsareshown . The median fluorescence intensity of each time point was expressed as a fraction of the percentage of amount of taggedpMHC - IIorMHC - II - Iipresentonthecellsurfaceattime0 . Thedatashownarethemean (cid:4) S . D . obtained from more than three independent experiments . HeLa - CIITA cells ( circles ) or KG - 1 DCs ( triangles ) were incu - batedwithanti - pMHC - IImAbL243at37 °C , washed , andtherelativeamountofinternalpMHC - IIrecyclingback to the cell surface was determined as described under “Experimental Procedures . ” The data shown are the mean (cid:4) S . D . obtainedfrommorethanthreeindependentexperiments . D , upperpanels , HeLa - CIITAcellswere incubated with mAb recognizing pMHC - II for 30 min on ice . The cells were then fixed with paraformaldehye , pMHC - II molecules remaining on the surface were either “blocked” as described under “Experimental Proce - dures” or sham - blocked . Immunolabeled cell surface MHC - II was visualized using Alexa 546 - conjugated sec - ondary antibodies and confocal immunofluorescence microscopy . Lower panels , HeLa - CIITA cells were incu - bated with mAb recognizing pMHC - II ( L243 ) or MHC - II - Ii ( LL1 ) for 30 min on ice , extensively washed , and re - cultured at 37 °C for 15 min . The cells were then fixed with paraformaldehye , pMHC - II molecules remaining on the surface were blocked , and internalized pMHC - II or MHC - II - Ii visualized with Alexa 546 - conjugated secondary antibodies after permeabilization . MHC Class II - Peptide Endocytosis 14720 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY VOLUME 283•NUMBER 21• MAY 23 , 2008 by gu e s t on N ov e m b e r 18 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m as compared with cells treated with control siRNA ( Fig . 3 A ) . The cells were examined for expression of cell surface pMHC - II or MHC - II - Ii 72 h after siRNA treatment ( Fig . 3 B ) . In agree - ment with previous studies ( 19 , 20 ) , Ii expression at the cell surface was dramatically increased when either clathrin or AP - 2 were depleted from the cells , confirming the importance of clathrin and AP - 2 in regulating MHC - II - Ii endocytosis . By contrast , depletion of either AP - 2 or clathrin heavy chain for 3 days had no influence on the expression of pMHC - II on the cell surface , although , as reported previously depletion for 6 days did result in a slight decrease in the amount of pMHC - II pres - ent ( 19 , 20 ) . To examine whether the dramatic increase in MHC - II - Ii cell surface expression in AP - 2 - deficient cells was a consequence of diminished endocytosis we performed MHC - II internalization studies . These studies confirmed previous reports ( 19 , 20 ) that the rapid internalization of MHC - II - Ii from the cell surface is blocked in AP - 2 - deficient cells ( Fig . 3 C ) . By contrast , we found no difference in the kinetics or extent of pMHC - II internaliza - tion in these cells , clearly demonstrating that pMHC - II and MHC - II - Ii internalize using different molecular machines in HeLa - CIITA cells . The effect of AP - 2 depletion on pMHC - II endocytosis was also examined using our antibody - independent internalization assay . Plasma membrane proteins on HeLa - CIITA cells incu - bated with either control or AP - 2 siRNA were tagged with reducible NHS - biotin and the cells were incubated either on ice or at 37 °C for 10 min prior to the addition of ice - cold glutathi - one . Depletion of AP - 2 did not alter the amount of total biotin - ylated pMHC - II present at the plasma membrane and had no effect on the endocytosis of pMHC - II ( Fig . 4 ) . By contrast , AP - 2 depletion dramatically increased the amount of biotinylated MHC - II - Ii complexes present on the cells and reduced the rate of endocytosis of these complexes ( data not shown ) . These data demonstrate , using an antibody - independent internalization assay , that pMHC - II endocytosis is AP - 2 independent . pMHC - II Internalization Is Dynamin - and AP180 - independ - ent in HeLa - CIITA Cells , B Cells , and DCs —Besides AP - 2 , there are a number of molecules that are involved in this process of clathrin - mediated endocytosis , including dynamin and AP180 ( reviewed in Ref . 35 ) . In addition , there are distinct clathrin - independent trafficking pathways that are either dynamin - de - pendent and dynamin - independent ( reviewed in Ref . 36 ) . To examine the role of dynamin and AP180 in pMHC - II internal - ization we expressed dominant - negative forms of HA - tagged dynamin or GFP - AP180 in HeLa - CIITA , human B cells , and KG - 1 DCs . Each of these reagents has been shown to effectively block clathrin - mediated endocytosis and lead to an accumula - tion of cargo proteins at the cell surface ( 21 , 37 , 38 ) . Similar to the depletion of clathrin or AP - 2 , introduction of either domi - nant - negative dynamin or AP180 into HeLa - CIITA cells dra - matically enhanced expression of MHC - II - Ii at the cell surface ( Fig . 5 ) . By marked contrast , none of these treatments altered the expression of pMHC - II on the surface of HeLa - CIITA cells . To confirm that the results obtained in HeLa - CIITA cells were also valid for professional APCs , we introduced GFP - AP180 into JY B cells and KG - 1 DCs . Sorting on GFP - AP180 - positive or - negative cells ( as a control ) revealed that over - expression of AP180 resulted in an increase in MHC - II - Ii expression but had no effect on surface expression of pMHC - II ( Fig . 6 ) . As anticipated , overexpression of GFP alone had no effect on expression of MHC - II - Ii or pMHC - II ( data not shown ) . These data demonstrate that pMHC - II internalization from the cell surface follows a pathway that is clathrin - , AP - 2 - , AP180 - , and dynamin - independent . pMHC - II Internalizes into Tubular Endosomes —Surface tag - ging of pMHC - II or MHC - II - Ii with mAb on ice followed by a “chase” at 37 °C reveals the sites of accumulation of these mol - ecules after the chase , whether they are at the cell surface or in lysosome - like antigen processing compartments . We therefore illuminated the entire endocytic / recycling pathway followed by pMHC - II or MHC - II - Ii complexes by culturing cells in the presence of pMHC - II or MHC - II - Ii - specific mAb continuously for 30 min at 37 °C , blocked access of secondary antibodies to bind to cell surface pMHC - II or MHC - II - Ii mAb , and examined the distribution of internalized pMHC - II or MHC - II - Ii com - plexes by confocal immunofluorescence microscopy . The uptake of each antibody required the expression of the appro - priate antigen , as HeLa cells not expressing CIITA did not take up either anti - MHC - II mAb ( Fig . 7 A ) . Internalized MHC - II - Ii was present exclusively in vesicular structures in HeLa - CIITA cells , a finding that is consistent with our endocytosis data showing that MHC - II - Ii does not efficiently recycle . By con - trast , a significant amount of the internalized pMHC - II anti - body was present in long tubular structures that were adjacent to the plasma membrane as well as in small endocytic vesicles . Reconstruction of serial images from different planes of the cell clearly reveals the tubular morphology of the internalized pMHC - II structures ( supplemental Video 1 ) . These intracellu - lar pMHC - II (cid:5) tubules were also observed in monocyte - derived human DCs ( Fig . 7 B ) , confirming that the pMHC - II tubules observed in HeLa - CIITA cells reflect a normal pathway of FIGURE2 . KineticsofinternalizationofpMHC - IIinHeLa - CIITAcells . HeLa - CIITA cells were biotinylated on ice using sulfo - NHS - SS - biotin as described under “Experimental Procedures . ” The cells were kept on ice or incubated at 37°Cforvarioustimesandincubatedwithice - coldreducedglutathione ( ornot ) asindicated . ThecellswerelysedandpMHC - IIisolatedbyimmunoprecipitation usingmAbL243 . TheimmunoprecipitateswereanalyzedbySDS - PAGEandbio - tinylated pMHC - II detected using streptavidin - horseradish peroxidase and total pMHC - II present in the sample detected using the (cid:2) - chain - specific mAb XD5 . A11 . The amount of biotin - labeled pMHC - II present in each sample was expressedasafractionofthetotalamountofbiotin - labeledpMHC - IIpresenton cellsbeforeglutathionetreatment . MHC Class II - Peptide Endocytosis MAY 23 , 2008• VOLUME 283•NUMBER 21 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 14721 by gu e s t on N ov e m b e r 18 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m pMHC - II endocytosis / recycling that is also present in primary APCs . Internalized pMHC - II Is Present in Arf6 (cid:5) Rab35 (cid:5) Tubular Endosomes —Arf6 is a small GTPase that marks a clathrin - in - dependent cell surface recycling pathway that is used by CD59 and MHC class I molecules ( reviewed in Ref . 27 ) . Curiously , Arf6 compartments are also tubular , and we therefore intro - duced HA - tagged Arf6 into HeLa - CIITA cells to determine whether the pMHC - II tubules were Arf6 - positive ( endogenous levels of Arf6 are too low to be observed with the available antibodies and previous studies have shown that overexpres - sion of wild - type Arf6 does not alter membrane endocytosis / recycling ( 39 ) ) . The pMHC - II containing tubules were clearly Arf6 - positive ( Fig . 8 A ) . In addition , the small GTPase Rab35 and the Eps15 - homology domain containing protein EHD1 have been reported to be present on tubular endosomes that mediate rapid early endosomal recycling to the cell surface ( 28 , 40 ) . Introduction of GFP - Rab35 or GFP - EHD1 into HeLa - CIITA cells confirmed that the pMHC - II tubules were Rab35 - and EHD1 - positive . By contrast to the distribution of internalized pMHC - II , MHC - II - Ii was only seen in vesicular structures and was never observed in Arf6 - , Rab35 - , or EHD1 - FIGURE3 . DepletionofclathrinorAP - 2inhibitsMHC - II - IibutnotpMHC - II endocytosis . A , HeLa - CIITA cells were treated with control siRNA or siRNA targeted against clathrin or the (cid:1) 2 subunit of AP - 2 . After 3 days the expres - sion of clathrin or the (cid:1) 2 subunit of AP - 2 in the cell population was deter - minedbyimmunoblotanalysis . B , theexpressionofMHC - II - Ii ( LL1 ) orpMHC - II ( L243 ) on the plasma membrane of siRNA - treated cells was determined by FACSanalysis . Representativehistogramsshowingstainingofisotypecontrol antibody ( filledgray ) , controlsiRNA ( solidline ) , oreitherclathrin - orAP - 2siRNA ( dashed line ) are shown . The expression of pMHC - II or MHC - II - Ii on the cell surface under each condition is shown as a - fold increase in plasma mem - brane expression by normalizing the median fluorescence intensity of expression of the clathrin - or AP - 2 - siRNA - treated cells as compared with the expressionincontrolsiRNA - treatedcells . C , HeLa - CIITAcellstreatedwithcon - trol siRNA or AP - 2 siRNA were incubated on ice with mAb recognizing MHC - II - Ii or pMHC - II . The cells were extensively washed and either kept on ice or re - cultured for either 5 or 15 min at 37 °C . The cells were washed on ice and the amount of tagged pMHC - II or MHC - II - Ii remaining on the cell surface was determinedbyincubatingthecellswithfluorescentlylabeledsecondaryanti - bodies on ice . The percentage of tagged MHC - II - Ii or pMHC - II remaining on the cell surface of control siRNA - or AP - 2 siRNA - treated cells after 5 or 15 min ofcultureat37 °Cwasexpressedasapercentageofthetotalamountpresent on the surface on cells maintained on ice . FIGURE 4 . AP - 2 depletion does not alter surface pMHC - II endocytosis . HeLa - CIITAcellstreatedwithcontrolsiRNAorsiRNAtargetingthe (cid:1) 2subunit of AP - 2 . After 3 days the cells were biotinylated on ice using sulfo - NHS - SS - biotin , washed , and either incubated on ice or cultured at 37 °C for 10 min . The cells were then incubated with reduced glutathione on ice to remove surface biotin , washed , and pMHC - II isolated by immunoprecipitation analy - sis . The immunoprecipitates were analyzed by SDS - PAGE and biotinylated pMHC - II detected using streptavidin - horseradish peroxidase . A representa - tive gel indicating the amount of biotinylated pMHC - II on control or AP - 2 siRNA - treatedcellsisshown . ThepercentageofbiotinylatedpMHC - IIremain - ing on the plasma membrane after incubation of the cells at 37 °C was expressedasafractionofthetotalamountofbiotin - labeledpMHC - IIpresent on cells before glutathione treatment . The results shown are representative of two independent experiments . MHC Class II - Peptide Endocytosis 14722 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY VOLUME 283•NUMBER 21• MAY 23 , 2008 by gu e s t on N ov e m b e r 18 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m positive tubules ( data not shown ) . GFP - CD63 illuminated late endosomal / lysosomal vesicles and the pMHC - II - positive tubules did not contain CD63 . However , the vesicular pool of internalized pMHC - II was present in CD63 - positive structures , demonstrating that a small portion of internalized pMHC - II was sorted to late endosomes / lysosomes . In agreement with previous studies ( 28 , 39 ) , we found that expression of GTP binding mutants of either Arf6 ( Arf6 T27N ) or Rab35 ( Rab35 S22N ) disrupted the normal tubular endosome morphology . Most importantly , internalized pMHC - II was no longer found on tubular structures in these cells and instead co - localized with each of these markers on vesicular structures ( Fig . 8 B ) . Live cell imaging revealed the appearance of internalizing pMHC - II in tubules almost immediately and by 20 min the tubular pMHC - II structures were no longer observed , presum - ably due to fusion of the tubular recycling endosomes with the plasma membrane ( Fig . 8 C and supplementary Videos 2 and 3 ) . These data demonstrate that unlike Ii - associated MHC - II , pMHC - II complexes internalize using a clathrin - and dynamin - independent endocytosis pathway and strongly suggests that these complexes recycle back to the plasma membrane in Arf6 (cid:5) Rab35 (cid:5) EHD1 (cid:5) tubules . DISCUSSION APCs such as mature DCs , macrophages , and activated B cells express a majority of their pMHC - II complexes on the FIGURE 5 . Stable surface expression of pMHC - II is dynamin - and AP180 - independent in HeLa - CIITA cells . HeLa - CIITA cells were transfected with plasmids encoding HA - dynamin mutant or GFP - AP180 . After 2 days the cells were stained on ice with Alexa 548 - conjugated mAb recognizing MHC - II - Ii ( LL1 ) or pMHC - II ( L243 ) and fixed with paraformaldehyde . Dynamin - trans - fected cells were then permeabilized and stained with Alexa 488 - labeled anti - HA epitope antibody . The cell populations were analyzed by two - color FACSanalysisandcellsexpressingHA - taggeddynaminmutantorGFP - AP180 were analyzed for MHC - II - Ii or pMHC - II expression and were compared with cells from the same transfections that did not express HA - tagged dynamin mutant or GFP - AP180 . Representative histograms showing staining of isotype controlantibody ( filledgray ) , MHC - II - IiorpMHC - IIexpressionindynamin - orGFP - AP180 - negative cells ( solid line ) , and MHC - II - Ii or pMHC - II expression in dynamin - orGFP - AP180 - positivecells ( dashedline ) areshown . Theexpressionof MHC - II - IiorpMHC - IIonthecellsurfaceundereachconditionisshownasa - fold increase in plasma membrane expression by normalizing the median fluores - cenceintensityofexpressionofthedynaminmutant - orAP180 - expressingcells ascomparedwiththeexpressioninnon - expressingcells . FIGURE 6 . Stable surface expression of pMHC - II is dynamin - and AP180 - independentinprofessionalAPCs . JYBcellsandKG - 1DCsweretransfected withaplasmidencodingGFP - AP180 . After2daysthecellswerestainedonice withAlexa548 - conjugatedmAbrecognizingMHC - II - Ii ( LL1 ) orpMHC - II ( L243 ) and fixed with paraformaldehyde . The cellpopulationswereanalyzedbytwo - color FACS analysis and cells expressing GFP - AP180 were analyzed for MHC - II - Ii orpMHC - IIexpressionandwerecomparedwithcellsfromthesametransfections thatdidnotexpressGFP - AP180 . Representativehistogramsshowingstainingof isotype control antibody ( filled gray ) , MHC - II - Ii or pMHC - II expression in GFP - AP180 - negative cells ( solid line ) , MHC - II - Ii or pMHC - II expression in GFP - AP180 - positive cells ( dashed line ) are shown . The results shown are representative of thoseobtainedintwoindependentexperiments . MHC Class II - Peptide Endocytosis MAY 23 , 2008• VOLUME 283•NUMBER 21 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 14723 by gu e s t on N ov e m b e r 18 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m plasma membrane . However , like all plasma membrane pro - teins even pMHC - II can rapidly internalize from the plasma membrane into early endosomes and then recycle back out to the plasma membrane ( 22 – 24 , 41 ) . In fact , recycling MHC - II has been shown to exchange one antigenic peptide for another in both HLA - DM - dependent ( 25 ) and HLA - DM - independent manners ( 26 ) . Given the extremely large flux of MHC - II that can internalize in APCs , in 1990 Reid and Watts ( 24 ) made the prescient prediction that recycling MHC - II could represent a major pool of MHC - II capable of exchanging antigenic peptides to increase the diversity of ligands available to CD4 T cells ( 24 ) . In this study we have explored both molecular mechanisms leading to MHC - II internalization from the plasma membrane and the recycling pathway followed by internalized MHC - II . Ii - associated MHC - II molecules at the plasma membrane are rapidly internalized into late endosomal / lysosomal compart - ments in HeLa - CIITA cells ( shown here ) , heterologous cells ( 16 , 34 ) , and APCs ( 16 ) . Ii - dependent endocytosis of these com - plexes requires the recognition of dileucine motifs in the cyto - solic domain of Ii with the clathrin - associated AP - 2 adaptor ( 42 ) . Because the (cid:2) - chain in many alleles of mouse , rat , and human alleles of MHC - II contains a “dileucine - like” sequence in the cytosolic domain , it has been assumed that even Ii - free MHC - II internalizes by AP - 2 - dependent clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( 19 , 20 , 23 , 43 , 44 ) . Using a highly specific pMHC - II mAb that does not recognize Ii - associated MHC - II we show that plasma membrane pMHC - II endocytosis is clathrin - , AP - 2 - , and dynamin - independent . Whereas Ii is commonly referred to as an MHC - II chaperone that is required for MHC - II to access lysosome - like antigen processing compartments , it is clear that MHC - II ( and even pMHC - II complexes from the plasma membrane ) can reach these late endocytic compartments in the absence of Ii ( 45 , 46 ) . It is likely that Ii - associated MHC - II can more efficiently access these compartments than can Ii - free MHC - II , suggesting that Ii simply enhances the overall rate of MHC - II traffic to these compartments . In fact , we have found that the kinetics of cell surface pMHC - II arrival on CD63 (cid:5) antigen processing com - partments is significantly delayed relative to that of cell surface MHC - II - Ii complexes . 4 We have also found that internalized MHC - II from the cell surface can traffic back to multivesicular bodies and be secreted on exosomes from B cells ( 47 ) , demon - strated that the endocytosis pathway identified here leads to MHC - II delivery to multivesicular antigen processing compart - ments . Given the large number of pMHC - II on the cell surface at any given time , clathrin - and dynamin - independent endocy - tosis of Ii - free pMHC - II to both early endosomal and lysosome - like antigen processing compartments could be a major source of MHC - II for peptide loading ( as discussed below ) . It is inter - esting to note that the distribution of MHC - II in immature DC derived from Ii - deficient mice is indistinguishable from that in wild - type mice ( 46 ) , a fact that could be attributed to efficient MHC - II endocytosis and sorting into the relatively non - proteo - lytic antigen processing compartments in these cells ( 1 ) . Our internalization studies of surface - tagged pMHC - II in HeLa - CIITA and human DCs showed that pMHC - II internal - izes and reaches a steady - state distribution of 80 % plasma membrane , 20 % intracellular and reaches this equilibrium within 5 min . This is in excellent agreement with other studies performed in human B cells and fibroblasts ( 22 , 24 ) . To main - tain this distribution , cells must possess efficient machinery for recycling internalized molecules back to the plasma membrane . Following the entire pathway traversed by internalizing pMHC - II by continuous incubation with anti - pMHC - II mAb revealed pMHC - II in elongated tubular structures that appeared to emanate from the plasma membrane . These tubules also contained Arf6 , Rab35 , and EHD1 , known regula - tors of membrane recycling . Expression of GTPase mutants of Arf6 and Rab35 prevented the appearance of these tubules , and internalized pMHC - II now co - localized with these proteins on fragmented vesicles . The tubular structures observed in our study appear identical to the clathrin - and dynamin - independ - ent carriers that regulate cholera toxin endocytosis ( 48 ) . Arf6 is present in tubulovesicular structures that mediate recycling of membrane proteins internalized by clathrin - independent endocytosis ( 27 ) . Although not as well characterized as Arf6 , Rab35 is also present on tubulovesicular structures and has been reported to regulate a rapid early endosomal membrane recycling pathway ( 28 ) . It is important to note that whereas internalized pMHC - II can access CD63 - positive lysosomes , the tubules we describe here are not themselves CD63 - positive and do not represent the tubular lysosomes that have been described for the transport of pMHC - II from lysosomes to the plasma membrane of DCs ( 49 , 50 ) . Furthermore , pMHC - II (cid:5) tubular lysosomes are only observed after DC maturation ( 49 ) , and in this study we have restricted our analysis to HeLa - CIITA cells , B cells , and immature ( not activated ) DCs . 4 E . Walseng , O . Bakke , and P . A . Roche , unpublished observations . FIGURE 7 . Internalized pMHC - II is present on tubular endosomes . Untransfected HeLa cells ( panel A ) , HeLa - CIITA cells ( panel A ) , and monocyte - derived human DCs ( panel B ) were incubated with mAb recognizing pMHC - II ( L243 ) or MHC - II - Ii ( LL1 ) for 30 min at 37 °C . The cells were then fixed with paraformaldehye , pMHC - IImoleculesremainingonthesurfacewereblocked , and internalized MHC - II visualized using Alexa 546 - conjugated secondary antibodiesafterpermeabilization . Confocalmicroscopyrevealsthepresence of intracellular pMHC - II in tubular structures and MHC - II - Ii in perinuclear ves - icles only in HeLa - CIITA cells and human DCs . Insets show higher magnifica - tion images of the indicated regions of the cells . MHC Class II - Peptide Endocytosis 14724 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY VOLUME 283•NUMBER 21• MAY 23 , 2008 by gu e s t on N ov e m b e r 18 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m It has been suggested that MHC - II endocytosis is regulated by dileucine - like signals present in the cytosolic domain of the MHC - II (cid:2) - chain ( 22 , 51 ) . However , we have never obtained any evidence to support this conclusion . We have found that trun - cation of the entire cytosolic domains of the MHC - II (cid:3) - or (cid:2) - chains in either mouse or human MHC - II proteins does not alter the kinetics of pMHC - II endocytosis and that even these mutant MHC - II molecules enter into the tubular endosomes shown in this study ( data not shown ) . These observations are also consistent with previous reports that even tailless MHC - II can sort into lysosomal antigen processing compartments in the absence of Ii expression ( 14 ) . This is not to say that the cytosolic domain of MHC - II does not contain targeting infor - mation , as it has been shown that the conserved leucine - based sorting signal in the tail of the (cid:2) - chain was important for the intracellular distribution and polarized sorting of MHC - II ( 52 ) and for activation of certain antigen - specific T cells by antigen - pulsed APCs ( 51 , 53 ) . Although we have not directly addressed this issue in our current study , it is intriguing to speculate as to the nature of pMHC - II internalization signal . One likely possibility is that association with lipid raft membrane microdomains serves as a “signal” for entry into the clathrin - and - dynamin - independent endocytosis pathways ( as reviewed in Ref . 36 ) . A considerable amount of cell surface pMHC - II is lipid raft associated ( 54 ) and it is also curious that deletion of the cytosolic domains of MHC - II does not affect pMHC - II raft association ( 55 ) 5 or endocytosis from the plasma membrane . Furthermore , because lymphocytes do not express caveolin and do not possess struc - tures that resemble traditional caveolae ( 56 , 57 ) , dynamin - de - pendent or - independent endocytosis of pMHC - II by caveolae seems extremely unlikely . Although it has also been suggested that ubiquitination of the MHC - II (cid:2) - chain regulates MHC - II internalization in DCs ( 43 , 58 ) , the kinetics of MHC - II endocytosis in B cells is unaltered in mice lacking the major MHC - II ubiquitin ligase March - I ( 59 ) . In agreement with this , we find that mutation of the target lysine of MHC - II ubiquitination has no effect on the kinetics of pMHC - II endocytosis in HeLa - CIITA cells . 4 Such findings 5 P . A . Roche , unpublished observations . FIGURE 8 . Internalized pMHC - II is present in Arf6 (cid:1) Rab35 (cid:1) endosomal tubules . HeLa - CIITA cells were transfected with plasmids encoding wild - type HA - Arf6 , GFP - Rab35 , GFP - EHD1 , or GFP - CD63 ( panel A ) or the HA - Arf6 T27N mutant or GFP - Rab35 S22N mutant ( panel B ) . The distribution of each endosomal protein ( green ) and internalized pMHC - II ( red ) was analyzed by confocal microscopy as described above . Insets show higher magnification images of the indicated regions of the cells . The overlays reveal considerable colocalization of internalized pMHC - II with Arf6 - Rab35 , and EHD1 - containing tubules in cells expressing the wild - type proteins and colocalization with the disrupted , vesicular structures in cells expressing the mutant proteins . C , HeLa - CIITA cells were incubated with trace amounts of the Alexa 488 - conjugated pMHC - II mAb L243 at 37 °C and immediately analyzed by confocal microscopy . Individual images were acquired every 2 min and videos were generated by overlaying successive images . Shown is a representative series of images ( of a single focal plane ) showing the movement of a bolus of internalizing pMHC - II along tubular internal structures back to the plasma membrane . MHC Class II - Peptide Endocytosis MAY 23 , 2008• VOLUME 283•NUMBER 21 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 14725 by gu e s t on N ov e m b e r 18 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m could either highlight differences in MHC - II endocytosis path - ways in DCs and B cells or indicate a more complex role for MHC - II ubiquitination than previously appreciated . Our results demonstrate that cell surface MHC - II - Ii and pMHC - II complexes use completely different endocytic path - ways and have different fates after entering the cell interior . MHC - II - Ii complexes internalize very quickly in clathrin - , AP - 2 - , and dynamin - dependent manners and efficiently reach lysosome - like antigen loading compartments with no evidence of entry into tubular recycling endosomes . Although the initial rate of pMHC - II endocytosis is also relatively rapid , endocyto - sis is clathrin - , AP - 2 - , and dynamin - independent and a signifi - cant amount of internalized pMHC - II efficiently recycles from endosomes back to the plasma membrane and only inefficiently reaches lysosome - like antigen loading compartments . This dichotomy of trafficking routes used by cell surface MHC - II could provide a critical advantage to an APC , because in addi - tion to efficient targeting of Ii - associated MHC - II to lysosome - like antigen processing compartments pMHC - II will gain access to early endosomal antigens that are proteolytically sen - sitive and are unable to survive in the lysosomal antigen proc - essing compartments . By utilizing both an early endosomal recycling pathway for pMHC - II and a late endosomal / lysoso - mal targeting pathway for MHC - II - Ii complexes , APCs are able to present a wider repertoire of peptide antigens to the T cells . In situations in which immunodominant epitopes are proteo - lytic sensitive , it is critical that MHC - II gain access to these peptides in early endocytic compartments before they are com - pletely degraded in more proteolytic lysosome - like antigen processing compartments . Acknowledgments—We thank Nicolas Barois , Steve Shaw , and David Segal for critical reading of the manuscript and our many colleagues who have provided materials for this study . We also thank Mike Kru - hlak and the Experimental Immunology Branch microscopy facility for expert technical advice . REFERENCES 1 . Trombetta , E . S . , and Mellman , I . ( 2005 ) Annu . Rev . Immunol . 23 , 975 – 1028 2 . Barnes , K . A . , and Mitchell , R . N . ( 1995 ) J . Exp . Med . 181 , 1715 – 1727 3 . von Delwig , A . , Ramachandra , L . , Harding , C . V . , and Robinson , J . H . ( 2003 ) Eur . J . Immunol . 33 , 2353 – 2360 4 . von Delwig , A . , Musson , J . A . , Shim , H . K . , Lee , J . J . , Walker , N . , Harding , C . V . , Williamson , E . D . , and Robinson , J . H . ( 2005 ) Scand . J . Immunol . 62 , 243 – 250 5 . Delamarre , L . , Couture , R . , Mellman , I . , andTrombetta , E . S . ( 2006 ) J . Exp . Med . 203 , 2049 – 2055 6 . Roche , P . A . , and Cresswell , P . ( 1990 ) Nature 345 , 615 – 618 7 . Anderson , M . S . , and Miller , J . ( 1992 ) Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 89 , 2282 – 2286 8 . Bikoff , E . K . , Huang , L . Y . , Episkopou , V . , van Meerwijk , J . , Germain , R . N . , and Robertson , E . J . ( 1993 ) J . Exp . Med . 177 , 1699 – 1712 9 . Viville , S . , Neefjes , J . , Lotteau , V . , Dierich , A . , Lemeur , M . , Ploegh , H . , Benoist , C . , and Mathis , D . ( 1993 ) Cell 72 , 635 – 648 10 . Bakke , O . , and Dobberstein , B . ( 1990 ) Cell 63 , 707 – 716 11 . Lotteau , V . , Teyton , L . , Peleraux , A . , Nilsson , T . , Karlsson , L . , Schmid , S . L . , Quaranta , V . , and Peterson , P . A . ( 1990 ) Nature 348 , 600 – 605 12 . Busch , R . , Rinderknecht , C . H . , Roh , S . , Lee , A . W . , Harding , J . J . , Burster , T . , Hornell , T . M . , and Mellins , E . D . ( 2005 ) Immunol . Rev . 207 , 242 – 260 13 . Pieters , J . , Bakke , O . , and Dobberstein , B . ( 1993 ) J . Cell Sci . 106 , 831 – 846 14 . Simonsen , A . , Stang , E . , Bremnes , B . , Roe , M . , Prydz , K . , and Bakke , O . ( 1997 ) J . Cell Sci . 110 , 597 – 609 15 . Roche , P . A . , Teletski , C . L . , Karp , D . R . , Pinet , V . , Bakke , O . , and Long , E . O . ( 1992 ) EMBO J . 11 , 2841 – 2847 16 . Roche , P . A . , Teletski , C . L . , Stang , E . , Bakke , O . , and Long , E . O . ( 1993 ) Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 90 , 8581 – 8585 17 . Hofmann , M . W . , Honing , S . , Rodionov , D . , Dobberstein , B . , von Figura , K . , and Bakke , O . ( 1999 ) J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 36153 – 36158 18 . Bonifacino , J . S . , andTraub , L . M . ( 2003 ) Annu . Rev . Biochem . 72 , 395 – 447 19 . Dugast , M . , Toussaint , H . , Dousset , C . , and Benaroch , P . ( 2005 ) J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 19656 – 19664 20 . McCormick , P . J . , Martina , J . A . , and Bonifacino , J . S . ( 2005 ) Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 102 , 7910 – 7915 21 . Wang , K . , Peterson , P . A . , and Karlsson , L . ( 1997 ) J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 17055 – 17060 22 . Pinet , V . , Vergelli , M . , Martin , R . , Bakke , O . , andLong , E . O . ( 1995 ) Nature 375 , 603 – 606 23 . Reid , P . A . , and Watts , C . ( 1992 ) Immunology 77 , 539 – 542 24 . Reid , P . A . , and Watts , C . ( 1990 ) Nature 346 , 655 – 657 25 . Pathak , S . S . , Lich , J . D . , and Blum , J . S . ( 2001 ) J . Immunol . 167 , 632 – 635 26 . Sinnathamby , G . , and Eisenlohr , L . C . ( 2003 ) J . Immunol . 170 , 3504 – 3513 27 . Donaldson , J . G . ( 2003 ) J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 41573 – 41576 28 . Kouranti , I . , Sachse , M . , Arouche , N . , Goud , B . , and Echard , A . ( 2006 ) Curr . Biol . 16 , 1719 – 1725 29 . Stumptner - Cuvelette , P . , Morchoisne , S . , Dugast , M . , Le Gall , S . , Raposo , G . , Schwartz , O . , andBenaroch , P . ( 2001 ) Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 98 , 12144 – 12149 30 . Shackelford , D . A . , Lampson , L . A . , and Strominger , J . L . ( 1981 ) J . Immu - nol . 127 , 1403 – 1410 31 . Kleijmeer , M . J . , Oorschot , V . M . , and Geuze , H . J . ( 1994 ) J . Investig . Der - matol . 103 , 516 – 523 32 . Kleijmeer , M . J . , Ossevoort , M . A . , van Veen , C . J . , van Hellemond , J . J . , Neefjes , J . J . , Kast , W . M . , Melief , C . J . , and Geuze , H . J . ( 1995 ) J . Immunol . 154 , 5715 – 5724 33 . Hansen , H . J . , Ong , G . L . , Diril , H . , Valdez , A . , Roche , P . A . , Griffiths , G . L . , Goldenberg , D . M . , and Mattes , M . J . ( 1996 ) Biochem . J . 320 , 293 – 300 34 . Anderson , M . S . , Swier , K . , Arneson , L . , and Miller , J . ( 1993 ) J . Exp . Med . 178 , 1959 – 1969 35 . Maldonado - Baez , L . , and Wendland , B . ( 2006 ) Trends Cell Biol . 16 , 505 – 513 36 . Mayor , S . , and Pagano , R . E . ( 2007 ) Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell . Biol . 8 , 603 – 612 37 . Ford , M . G . , Pearse , B . M . , Higgins , M . K . , Vallis , Y . , Owen , D . J . , Gibson , A . , Hopkins , C . R . , Evans , P . R . , and McMahon , H . T . ( 2001 ) Science 291 , 1051 – 1055 38 . Gupta , S . N . , Kloster , M . M . , Rodionov , D . G . , and Bakke , O . ( 2006 ) Eur . J . Cell Biol . 85 , 457 – 467 39 . Naslavsky , N . , Weigert , R . , and Donaldson , J . G . ( 2004 ) Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 3542 – 3552 40 . Caplan , S . , Naslavsky , N . , Hartnell , L . M . , Lodge , R . , Polishchuk , R . S . , Donaldson , J . G . , and Bonifacino , J . S . ( 2002 ) EMBO J . 21 , 2557 – 2567 41 . Pinet , V . M . , and Long , E . O . ( 1998 ) Eur . J . Immunol . 28 , 799 – 804 42 . Rodionov , D . G . , and Bakke , O . ( 1998 ) J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 6005 – 6008 43 . van Niel , G . , Wubbolts , R . , Ten Broeke , T . , Buschow , S . I . , Ossendorp , F . A . , Melief , C . J . , Raposo , G . , van Balkom , B . W . , and Stoorvogel , W . ( 2006 ) Immunity 25 , 885 – 894 44 . Santambrogio , L . , and Strominger , J . L . ( 2006 ) Immunity 25 , 857 – 859 45 . Simonsen , A . , Momburg , F . , Drexler , J . , Hammerling , G . J . , and Bakke , O . ( 1993 ) Int . Immunol . 5 , 903 – 917 46 . Rovere , P . , Zimmermann , V . S . , Forquet , F . , Demandolx , D . , Trucy , J . , Ricciardi - Castagnoli , P . , and Davoust , J . ( 1998 ) Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 95 , 1067 – 1072 47 . Muntasell , A . , Berger , A . C . , and Roche , P . A . ( 2007 ) EMBO J . 26 , 4263 – 4272 48 . Kirkham , M . , Fujita , A . , Chadda , R . , Nixon , S . J . , Kurzchalia , T . V . , Sharma , D . K . , Pagano , R . E . , Hancock , J . F . , Mayor , S . , and Parton , R . G . ( 2005 ) J . Cell Biol . 168 , 465 – 476 49 . Boes , M . , Cerny , J . , Massol , R . , Op den Brouw , M . , Kirchhausen , T . , Chen , J . , and Ploegh , H . L . ( 2002 ) Nature 418 , 983 – 988 MHC Class II - Peptide Endocytosis 14726 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY VOLUME 283•NUMBER 21• MAY 23 , 2008 by gu e s t on N ov e m b e r 18 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m 50 . Chow , A . , Toomre , D . , Garrett , W . , and Mellman , I . ( 2002 ) Nature 418 , 988 – 994 51 . Zhong , G . , Romagnoli , P . , and Germain , R . N . ( 1997 ) J . Exp . Med . 185 , 429 – 438 52 . Simonsen , A . , Pedersen , K . W . , Nordeng , T . W . , von der Lippe , A . , Stang , E . , Long , E . O . , and Bakke , O . ( 1999 ) J . Immunol . 163 , 2540 – 2548 53 . Nabavi , N . , Ghogawala , Z . , Myer , A . , Griffith , I . J . , Wade , W . F . , Chen , Z . Z . , McKean , D . J . , and Glimcher , L . H . ( 1989 ) J . Immunol . 142 , 1444 – 1447 54 . Anderson , H . A . , Hiltbold , E . M . , andRoche , P . A . ( 2000 ) Nat . Immunol . 1 , 156 – 162 55 . Becart , S . , Setterblad , N . , Ostrand - Rosenberg , S . , Ono , S . J . , Charron , D . , and Mooney , N . ( 2003 ) J . Cell Sci . 116 , 2565 – 2575 56 . Fra , A . M . , Williamson , E . , Simons , K . , and Parton , R . G . ( 1995 ) Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 92 , 8655 – 8659 57 . Fra , A . M . , Williamson , E . , Simons , K . , and Parton , R . G . ( 1994 ) J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 30745 – 30748 58 . Shin , J . S . , Ebersold , M . , Pypaert , M . , Delamarre , L . , Hartley , A . , and Mell - man , I . ( 2006 ) Nature 444 , 115 – 118 59 . Matsuki , Y . , Ohmura - Hoshino , M . , Goto , E . , Aoki , M . , Mito - Yoshida , M . , Uematsu , M . , Hasegawa , T . , Koseki , H . , Ohara , O . , Nakayama , M . , Toyooka , K . , Matsuoka , K . , Hotta , H . , Yamamoto , A . , andIshido , S . ( 2007 ) EMBO J . 26 , 846 – 854 60 . Poloso , N . J . , Denzin , L . K . , and Roche , P . A . ( 2006 ) J . Immunol . 177 , 5451 – 5458 61 . Ackerman , A . L . , and Cresswell , P . ( 2003 ) J . Immunol . 170 , 4178 – 4188 62 . Poloso , N . J . , Muntasell , A . , and Roche , P . A . ( 2004 ) J . Immunol . 173 , 4539 – 4546 63 . Hiltbold , E . M . , Poloso , N . J . , and Roche , P . A . ( 2003 ) J . Immunol . 170 , 1329 – 1338 MHC Class II - Peptide Endocytosis MAY 23 , 2008• VOLUME 283•NUMBER 21 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 14727 by gu e s t on N ov e m b e r 18 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m Even Walseng , Oddmund Bakke and Paul A . Roche Clathrin - and Dynamin - independent Endocytosis Pathway Major Histocompatibility Complex Class II - Peptide Complexes Internalize Using a doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M801070200 originally published online March 31 , 2008 2008 , 283 : 14717 - 14727 . J . Biol . Chem . 10 . 1074 / jbc . M801070200 Access the most updated version of this article at doi : Alerts : When a correction for this article is posted • When this article is cited • to choose from all of JBC ' s e - mail alerts Click here Supplemental material : http : / / www . jbc . org / content / suppl / 2008 / 04 / 02 / M801070200 . DC1 http : / / www . jbc . org / content / 283 / 21 / 14717 . full . html # ref - list - 1 This article cites 63 references , 35 of which can be accessed free at by gu e s t on N ov e m b e r 18 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m