Article Dynamin - 2 Stabilizes the HIV - 1 Fusion Pore with a Low Oligomeric State Graphical Abstract Highlights d DNM2 is crucial for HIV - 1 fusion in T Cells and reporter cells d DNM2 is not necessarily linked with endocytosis d DNM2 tetramer stabilizes the HIV - 1 fusion pore Authors Daniel M . Jones , Luis A . Alvarez , Rory Nolan , . . . , Hila Novak - Kotzer , Michael L . Dustin , Sergi Padilla - Parra Correspondence spadilla @ well . ox . ac . uk In Brief Regulation of HIV - 1 fusion is one of the research areas of intense interest . Here , Jones et al . show that the large GTPase dynamin - 2 ( DNM2 ) forms a tetramer that acts to stabilize the HIV fusion pore . Jones et al . , 2017 , Cell Reports 18 , 443 – 453 January 10 , 2017 ª 2017 University of Oxford . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2016 . 12 . 032 Cell Reports Article Dynamin - 2 Stabilizes the HIV - 1 Fusion Pore with a Low Oligomeric State Daniel M . Jones , 1 Luis A . Alvarez , 2 Rory Nolan , 1 Margarita Ferriz , 1 Raquel Sainz Urruela , 2 Xe ` nia Massana - Mun˜oz , 1 Hila Novak - Kotzer , 3 Michael L . Dustin , 3 and Sergi Padilla - Parra 1 , 2 , 4 , * 1 Division of Structural Biology , University of Oxford , The Henry Wellcome Building for Genomic Medicine , Headington , Oxford OX3 7BN , UK 2 Wellcome Trust Human Genetics , Cellular Imaging Core , University of Oxford , Oxford OX3 7BN , UK 3 The Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology , University of Oxford , Headington , Oxford OX3 7BN , UK 4 Lead Contact * Correspondence : spadilla @ well . ox . ac . uk http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2016 . 12 . 032 SUMMARY One of the key research areas surrounding HIV - 1 concerns the regulation of the fusion event that occurs between the virus particle and the host cell during entry . Even if it is universally accepted that the large GTPase dynamin - 2 is important during HIV - 1 entry , its exact role during the ﬁrst steps of HIV - 1 infection is not well characterized . Here , we have utilized a multidisciplinary approach to study the DNM2 role during fusion of HIV - 1 in primary resting CD4 T and TZM - bl cells . We have combined advanced light microscopy and functional cell - based assays to experimentally assess the role of dyna - min - 2 during these processes . Overall , our data sug - gest that dynamin - 2 , as a tetramer , might help to establish hemi - fusion and stabilizes the pore during HIV - 1 fusion . INTRODUCTION One of the key research areas surrounding HIV - 1 concerns the regulation of the fusion event that occurs between the virus par - ticle and the host cell during entry . HIV - 1 fusion is initiated when conformational alterations to the viral gp120 - gp41 envelope pro - teins occur following binding of the virus to its receptor ( CD4 ) and co - receptor ( either CCR5 or CXCR4 ) ( Doms and Trono , 2000 ) , resulting in the release of the viral core into the cytoplasm . Several reports have presented evidence to indicate that HIV - 1 fuses directly at the cell membrane in SupT1 - R5 , CEM - ss and primary CD4 T Cells ( Herold et al . , 2014 ) . Plasma membrane fusion ( Wu and Yoder , 2009 ) presents a completely different set of challenges for incoming virus particles compared to those entering by post - endocytic fusion ( de la Vega et al . , 2011 ; Miyau - chi et al . , 2009a ) . For example , fusion events occurring at the plasma membrane mean that incoming particles inevitably encounter an intact cortical actin cytoskeleton , which consti - tutes a physical barrier that must be overcome for successful infection to occur . As an alternative to plasma membrane fusion , clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) allows viruses to cross the cell plasma membrane harbored within endocytic vesicles , fol - lowed by a fusion event between the membranes of the virus and the endosome . This process requires precise signaling events to not only initiate the process , but to ensure that fusion occurs prior to degradation of the virus particle within the increasingly toxic environment of the endolysosomal machinery ( Stein et al . , 1987 ) . Irrespective of the entry method utilized , it is clear that both the actin rearrangement and dynamin - 2 ( DNM2 ) activity are required for successful viral infection to occur ( Barrero - Villar et al . , 2009 ; Gordo´n - Alonso et al . , 2013 ) . Interestingly , while several reports clearly show the relevance of DNM2 in HIV - 1 fusion ( Miyauchi et al . , 2009a ; Pritschet et al . , 2012 ; Sloan et al . , 2013 ) , its exact role during virus entry is yet to be clariﬁed . One of the primary roles of DNM2 is to pinch forming endocytic vesicles from the plasma membrane to yield an endosome during CME ( Ferguson and De Camilli , 2012 ) . Thus , the involvement of DNM2 in HIV - 1 fusion is incompletely understood since recent evidence indi - cates that in primary CD4 T cells the virus fuses directly at the plasma membrane and not from within endosomes ( Herold et al . , 2014 ) , meaning the importance of DNM2 in HIV - 1 fusion may be distinct from its role in CME . Here , we have combined advanced light microscopy with cell - based functional assays to recover HIV - 1 fusion kinetics for reporter cell lines ( TZM - bl ) and primary resting CD4 T cells ( CXCR4 - tropic HXB2 ) isolated from healthy individuals . Interestingly , the addition of dynasore ( a DNM2 inhibitor ) at partially inhibitory concentrations ( Chou et al . , 2014 ) delayed HIV - 1 fusion kinetics in primary CD4 T cells . In addition , we performed ﬂuorescence lifetime imaging microscopy ( FLIM ) and number and brightness combined with total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence microscopy ( TIRFM ) exper - iments to ascertain the oligomeric state of DNM2 during HIV - 1 fusion . We found that DNM2 adopted a low oligomeric state ( a tetramer ) when reporter cells ( TZM - bl ) were exposed to virions with HIV - 1 JR - FL envelope proteins . By contrast , cells exposed to HIV - 1 virions displaying VSV - G envelope proteins ( Env ) exhibited higher oligomeric DNM2 states ( hexamers and octamers ) . These data supported insights gained from cell - cell fusion experiments where fusion was delayed by 3 – 4 min be - tween target cells expressing CD4 and co - receptor ( CCR5 ) , and effector cells expressing the HIV - 1 envelope were exposed to high concentrations of dynasore . Moreover , we observed Cell Reports 18 , 443 – 453 , January 10 , 2017 ª 2017 University of Oxford . 443 This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / ) . ﬂickering of the fusion pore in HIV - 1 - driven cell - cell fusion exper - iments when non - inhibitory concentrations of dynasore were used . Collectively , our results suggest that DNM2 might play a critical role inducing hemi - fusion and HIV pore stabilization ; probably with a low oligomeric state during fusion pore expan - sion and dilation within the plasma membrane . RESULTS Dynasore Inhibits HIV - 1 Fusion in Both Reporter TZM - bl Cells and CD4 T Cells We tested different concentrations of dynasore assessing HIV HXB2 fusion in resting CD4 T cells employing the real - time beta - lactamase assay ( BlaM ) ( Jones and Padilla - Parra , 2016 ) that measures viral fusion . Brieﬂy , a virion packaging Vpr - BlaM is liberated into the cytoplasm of a target cell and then a Fo¨rster resonance energy transfer ( FRET ) substrate ( CCF2 ) is cleaved and the ﬂuorescence proﬁle altered ( Figure 1A ) . The range of concentrations used in our titration experiments ( 5 , 20 , and 80 m M ) ( Figure 1B ) did not affect cell viability , as we detected no propidium iodide ( PI ) positive cells ( Figure S1 ) under these conditions . Previous reports have shown that the HIV envelope ( in this case HXB2 ) , but not the VSV - G protein is capable of medi - ating HIV infection of resting CD4 T cells ( Agosto et al . , 2009 ) . Here , we also show that the VSV - G Env was unable to mediate endosomal fusion ( Figure 1C ) in resting CD4 T cells . Willing to take a validated model for DNM2 - dependent virion endocytosis and fusion , we employed TZM - bl reporter cells pre - viously reported to allow endosomal fusion ( Jones and Padilla - Parra , 2016 ; Miyauchi et al . , 2009a , 2009b ) . HIV VSV - G was able to fuse in TZM - bl cells and is a well characterized virion that fuses within endosomes and is pH dependent ( Johannsdottir et al . , 2009 ) . Using an endpoint BlaM assay ( Zlokarnik et al . , 1998 ) , we monitored and compared the impact of different con - centrations of dynasore in fusion for both HIV VSV - G and HIV JRFL in TZM - bl cells . Higher concentrations of dynasore were required Figure 1 . HIV - 1 Fusion Kinetics Is Dyna - min - 2 Dependent in Both CD4 T Cells and TZM - bl Cells ( A ) Cartoon depicting the BlaM assay . Upon virion fusion and capsid release , the Vpr - BlaM chimera recognizes a FRET reporter ( CCF2 ) that changes color ( green to blue ) upon cleavage . ( B ) Real - timeBlaMwasappliedusingHIV - 1virions packaging the Vpr - b - Lactamase chimera and pseudotyped with HXB2 Env on primary CD4 T cells at different concentrations of dynasore : 0 m M ( green dots ) , 5 m M ( black dots ) , 20 m M ( gray dots ) , and 80 m M ( white dots ) . The proportion of fusion positive cells versus total number of cells is shown ( y axis ) versus time , in min ( x axis ) . ( C ) HIV - 1 / Vpr - b - Lactamase virions pseudotyped withVSVGturnedoutnottobefusogenic ( reddots ) showing the same behavior as HIV1 / Vpr - b - Lacta - mase bald particles ( without Env , black dots ) . ( D ) HIV - 1 virions packaging the Vpr - b - Lactamase chimera and pseudotyped with either VSV - G ( cyan dots ) or JR - FL ( orange dots ) were exposed to TZM - bl cells with different concentrations of dynasore ( 0 , 100 , 180 , 260 , 340 , and 400 m M ) and endpoint BlaM ( as deﬁned in Experimental Pro - cedures ) was applied . Higher concentrations of dynasore were required to fully inhibit HIV JRFL ( 240 m M ) as compared with HIV VSVG ( 180 m M ) . ( E ) Time - of - addition BlaM kinetics without spino - culation protocols on HIV VSV - G virions using three different blocks : 400 m M dynasore ( open red dots ) , temperature block ( pink crosses ) , and NH 4 Cl ( open green dots ) . All of the kinetics turned out to be very similar . The normalized proportion of fusion positive cells versus total number of cells is shown ( y axis ) versus time , in min ( x axis ) . ( F ) Time - of - addition BlaM kinetics without spino - culation protocols on HIV JRFL virions using four different blocks : TAK 779 ( open blue dots ) , dyna - sore ( open red dots ) , T20 ( open black dots ) , and temperature block ( pink crosses ) . The normalized proportion of fusion positive cells versus total numberofcellsisshown ( yaxis ) versustime , inmin ( xaxis ) . Inallcases , theerrorbarsrepresenttheSD calculated from three independent experiments . 444 Cell Reports 18 , 443 – 453 , January 10 , 2017 to fully inhibit fusion for HIV JRFL ( 250 m M ) as compared to HIV VSV - G ( 180 m M ) ( Figure 1D ) , suggesting that the role of DNM2 in HIV JRFL fusion may be unrelated to endocytosis also in TZM - bl reporter cells . Of note , we performed several experi - ments to validate the use of high concentrations of dynasore on live cells ( Figure S1 ) , as it was shown that dynamin inhibitors might have off target effects related to membrane rufﬂing ( Park et al . , 2013 ) . We therefore quantitatively studied the impact of dynasore on rufﬂing and the actin cytoskeleton through the use of FRET Raichu biosensors ( Figure S1 ) . We also avoided spino - culation , as we found that this technique might disrupt the regu - lation of the actin cytoskeleton , as evidenced by changes in small GTPase activity ( Figure S1 ) with a likely knockon effect on endocytosis ( Ferguson and De Camilli , 2012 ) . We found that higher dynasore concentrations ( 250 m M ) were needed to arrest full HIV - 1 fusion as compared to others ( Miyauchi et al . , 2009a ; de la Vega et al . , 2011 ) ( 80 m M and 160 m M , respectively ) . As stressed by de la Vega et al . ( 2011 ) , it is possible that the dyna - sore preparation might affect the rate of scape of HIV - 1 , although dynasore treatment reproducibility blocked HIV - 1 endocytosis and fusion in their experiments and ours . This is the reason why we have titrated dynasore ( and all drugs employed in our study ) while performing cell - viability experiments . To better understand the role of DNM2 in HIV - 1 entry , we per - formed time - of - addition BlaM ( Jones and Padilla - Parra , 2016 ) using either HIV VSV - G or HIV JRFL in reporter TZM - bl cells . We compared the effect of dynasore with known fusion inhibitors known to disrupt surface accessible viruses ( TAK 779 and T20 ) and universal inhibitors to block fusion for both virions HIV VSV - G or HIV JRFL , NH 4 Cl , and temperature block , respectively ( Miyau - chi et al . , 2009a ) . When treating TZM - bl cells with HIV VSV - G using fully inhibitory concentrations of dynasore ( i . e . , 400 m M ) , temper - ature block , and 80 mM NH 4 Cl , a lysosmotropic agent that raises the endosomal pH and therefore inhibits fusion , we found similar fusion kinetics with t 1 / 2 (cid:1) 30 min ( Figure 1E ) . This result sug - gests that , as expected , HIV VSV - G enters the cell via dynamin - dependent endocytosis and the universal inhibitors ( NH 4 Cl and temperature block ) behave similarly to the speciﬁc inhibitor dy - nasore . Therefore , HIV VSV - G fusion can be completely blocked by inhibiting endocytic pathways . Different fusion inhibitors ( point / speciﬁc and universal inhibitors ) were also utilized when assessing the role of DNM2 in HIV JRFL entry kinetics on TZM - bl cells ( Figure 1F ) . We titrated TAK 779 , a small - molecule CCR5 antagonist ( Figure S1 ) , and Enfuvirtide ( T20 ) , a known fusion in - hibitor that blocks the formation of the 6 - helix bundle formation ( Figure S1 ) , in order to use fully inhibitory concentrations for our time - of - addition BlaM . When plotting together the HIV JRFL fusion kinetics for dynasore , TAK 779 , T20 , as well as experi - ments where fusion was inhibited by temperature block ( reduc - tion from 37 (cid:3) C to 4 (cid:3) C ; Figure 1E ) , we saw that similar fusion kinetics were obtained for dynasore and TAK779 ( speciﬁc inhibitors ) with similar t 1 / 2 = 30 min . Fusion kinetics recovered for T20 and temperature block ( universal inhibitors ) were also very similar , but both delayed (cid:1) 20 min relative to dynasore and TAK77 with t 1 / 2 = 50 min . We reasoned that dynasore and TAK 779 must act just prior to fusion , while T20 and the temper - ature block ( universal inhibitor of both endocytosis and fusion ) occur right at the moment of fusion pore formation . This result suggests a different role for DNM2 for HIV JRFL as opposed to HIV VSV - G . as DNM2 seems to act right before full fusion , almost synchronously with HIV Env / CD4 - CCR5 interaction . Of note , we also tested NH 4 Cl inhibition on HIVJRFL , but as expected it was not able to arrest fusion ( Figure S1 ) . DNM2 Interactions Are Different for HIV VSV - G and HIV JRFL Recently , a report showed the importance of using FLIM to follow DNM2 activity in live cells in relation with its role regulating actin dynamics ( Gu et al . , 2014 ) . We therefore applied FLIM to follow DNM2 interactions in live cells in the context of virus entry and fusion ( Figures 2A and 2B ) . TZM - bl cells co - transfected with DNM2 labeled with either eGFP ( Dyn - GFP ) or mCherry ( Dyn - mCherry ) were exposed to HIV JRFL or HIV VSV - G at high MOIs ( 10 ) . As a negative control , viruses at the same MOI were also added to TZM - bl cells co - transfected with Dyn - GFP and mCherry alone . A shortening of the average lifetime due to FRET was observed for TZM - bl cells co - transfected with Dyn - GFP and Dyn - mCherry being treated with HIV JRFL or HIV VSV - G ( p = 0 . 02 and p < 0 . 001 , respectively ) , indicating DNM2 interact - ing ( Gu et al . , 2014 ) . Importantly , HIV VSV - G exposure resulted in a drastic lifetime diminution ( average < t > = 1 . 78 ± 0 . 07 ns , n = 10 as compared to the control < t > = 2 . 16 ± 0 . 09 ns , n = 18 ) , whereas HIV JRFL exposure produced only a slight , but signiﬁcant lifetime diminution ( average < t > = 2 . 02 ± 0 . 07 ns , n = 14 ) when compared to the negative controls . These data suggest that the VSV - G envelope protein—and to a lesser extent that of JRFL— provokedDNM2tointeract , albeittodifferent extents ( Figure2B ) . It is therefore possible that DNM2 plays distinct roles in the entry mechanisms of HIV VSV and HIV JRFL . Of note , the distribu - tion of endocytic markers ( early and mature endosomes , Rab5 - mCherry ) did not change upon addition of HIV virions ( Figure S2 ) . HIV - 1 Entry and Fusion Require a DNM2 Low Oligomeric State In a previous report ( Ross et al . , 2011 ) , the oligomeric state of DNM2 close to the plasma membrane was investigated by combining TIRFM with number and brightness analysis ( Unruh and Gratton , 2008 ) . When combining TIRF with number and brightness utilizing a very fast image acquisition ( i . e . , 50 ms / frame ) , it is possible to quantify the oligomeric state of Dy - namin if the dwell time ( image acquisition ) is less than that of the diffusion being investigated . Number and brightness analysis provides quantitative information regarding the oligomeric state on a pixel by pixel basis . Since we had seen changes in lifetime that relate with protein - protein interactions of DNM2 in the previ - ous FRET - FLIM experiment , we further investigated this ﬁnding by expressing Dyn - mCherry in TZM - bl cells before exposing them to either HIV JRFL or HIV VSV - G and performing TIRF / number and brightness microscopy ( Figure 3 ) . We also show that virions are able to get underneath the cells using labeled virions ( HIV JRFL Gag - GFP ) andTZM - blcellsexpressingDyn - mCherry ( FigureS3 ) . The addition of HIV VSV - G at a MOI of ten induced the formation of higher oligomeric states ( octamers , red pixels in the N and B ﬁg - ures , Figure 3 ) , suggesting that the scission of CCPs during CME may be conducted by dynamin octamers ( n = 14 ) . Conversely , the addition of HIV JRFL at the same MOI had no noticeable effect Cell Reports 18 , 443 – 453 , January 10 , 2017 445 on the oligomeric state of Dyn - mCherry ( tetramers , identiﬁed in Figure 3 , n = 14 ) . Thus , HIV entry appears not to require higher - order Dynamin structures in TZM - bl cells . Dynamin - 2 Stabilizes the Fusion Pore during HIV Fusion Fusion between individual HEK293T effector cells expressing the JRFL envelope and cytosolic eGFP and target TZM - bl re - porter cells expressing mCherry was studied using real - time ﬂuorescence microscopy ( Figure 4 ) . Effector HEK293T cells were allowed to sediment on target cells at 4 (cid:3) C for 30 min ( as described in Experimental Procedures ) , sufﬁcient time to allow receptor priming ( Padilla - Parra et al . , 2013 ) . Subsequently , the Figure 2 . FRET - FLIM Shows Different DNM2 Interactions for HIV VSV - G and HIV JRFL ( A ) Representative time correlated single photon counting intensity and FLIM micrographs for six different conditions are shown . FLIM images are pseudocolored andblue - coldpixelsrepresentlow lifetimes ( FRET + ) , while red - warm pixels repre - senthigh lifetimes ( FRET (cid:4) ) . The negativecontrols ( Dyn - GFP + mCherry with and without virions and Dyn - GFP + Dyn - mCherry ) present high average lifetime values ( FRET (cid:4) ) , while the TZM - bl ex - pressingDyn - GFP + Dyn - mCherryandexposedto either HIV JRFL or HIV VSVG present blue - colder colors designating FRET + detection and therefore DNM2 increased interactions upon virus addition . The scale bar represents 15 m m . ( B ) Boxchart representing the average mean life - time ( in nanoseconds , ns ) recovered from indi - vidualcellsfromatleastthreedifferentFRET - FLIM experiments ( n = 3 ) is shown for different condi - tions . The conditions are as follows : TZM - bl cells expressing Dyn - GFP + mCherry diffusing alone ( n = 16 ) , TZM - bl cells expressing Dyn - GFP + mCherry diffusingaloneinthepresence ofHIV JRFL ( n = 14 ) , TZM - bl cells expressing Dyn - GFP + mCherry diffusing alone in the presence of HIV VSVG ( n = 14 ) , TZM - bl cells expressing Dyn - GFP + Dyn - mCherry in the presence of HIV JRFL ( n = 14 ) , TZM - bl cells expressing Dyn - GFP + Dyn - mCherry in the presence of HIV VSVG ( n = 10 ) , and TZM - bl cells expressing Dyn - GFP + Dyn - mCherry ( n = 18 ) . sample was mounted on an inverted mi - croscope and the temperature shifted to 37 (cid:3) C in order to allow cell - cell fusion to occur ( Figure 4A ) . The formation of fusion pores and the kinetics of fusion were as - sessed by the transfer of eGFP from the effector cells toward the target cells that mirrored the mCherry transfer of target cells toward effector cells ( Figures 4B – 4D ) . Both effector and target cells became yellow when equilibrium in fusion pore dynamics was established ( Figures 4B – 4D ) . Changes in the mean ﬂuores - cence intensity of the target ( red signal ) and the effector cells ( green signal ) were plotted ( Figure 4E , left ) . When cells were treated with high con - centrations of Dynasore ( 400 m M ) ﬂickering of the pore was observed ( Figure 4E , middle ) , indicating that the fusion pore was not stable under these conditions ( Padilla - Parra et al . , 2012 ) . There is a slight possibility that the pore closure , measured as stabilization of the GFP and concomitant mCherry transfer from effector and target cells ( pink zone in Figure 4E , middle ) , comes from several pores simultaneously , but they should have to be totally synchronized , as opening and closure at different times would never be able to arrest fusion over 2 min ( horizontal lines for time - dependent intensities of GFP and mCherry in the pink zone for ﬂickering ) . 446 Cell Reports 18 , 443 – 453 , January 10 , 2017 In all cases , delayed pore formation and pore closing was observed for TZM - bl cells treated with dynasore , suggesting that DNM2 plays an important role in establishing and stabilizing the HIV - 1 fusion pore . When plotting the cumulative distribution of individual fusion events coming from three independent ex - periments , a delay in (cid:1) 3 min was observed for the TZM - bl cells treated with dynasore relative to the untreated ones ( Figure 4E , right ) . The average t 1 / 2 for cell - cell ( JR - FL ) fusion events without dynasore treatment was 2 . 83 ± 1 . 69 min ( n = 17 ) ; the average cell - cell fusion event for dynasore treated cells was delayed when taking into consideration the initial ( pore opening ) and ﬁnal points ( equilibrium ) 4 . 9 ± 1 . 8 min ( n = 20 ) . Inhibitory concentra - tions for single virus fusion in the presence of T20 or TAK 779 ( Ayouba et al . , 2008 ) , known HIV - 1 fusion inhibitors that block fusion and receptor engagement , respectively , were able to arrest fusion ( Figure S4 ) , providing a robust negative control for the cell - cell fusion approach . In contrast , when cell - cell fusion was studied using effector HEK293T cells expressing the VSV - G envelope and TZM - bl cells expressing mCherry , no change in pore formation or kinetics of individual events was observed when dynasore was present ( Figure 4F ) . Cell - cell fusion constitutes a unique approach to study fusion in the absence of endocytosis and showed that DNM2 is needed to establish and maintain the fusion pore ( Figure S4 ) only in HIV - 1 and not VSV , suggesting that there must be a regulation step in HIV - DNM2 dependent fusion ; as DNM2 is recruited toward the fusion pore perhaps through HIV - 1 / CD4 and co - receptor interactions . Dynamin - 2 Co - localizes with Double Labeled HIV - 1 Virions prior to Fusion In order to test whether DNM2 is recruited in the inner plasma membrane toward primed HIV JRFL virions prior fusion , we imaged TZM - bl cells expressing DNM2 - mCherry in the presence of double labeled virions HIV JRFL ( DiD / Gag - GFP ) . The virions were allowed to prime CD4 receptors in TZM - bl cells for 30 min at 4 (cid:3) C . Again , spinoculation protocols were not applied to avoid unwanted side effects in DNM2 regulation . The cells were imaged under the microscope and micrographs acquired both in X - Y and X - Z directions in a confocal microscope as explained in Experimental Procedures . Co - localization analysis in both planes revealed that 75 % of the double labeled parti - cles analyzed co - localized with DNM2 before fusion ( Figure 5 ) , as both the envelope ( DiD labeled ) and the core ( GFP - Gag ) co - localized with DNM - 2 - mCherry . We examined the spatial overlap between the intensity proﬁles for DNM2 - mCherry and DiD / Gag - GFP that was above 80 % in all cases positive for co - localization in both directions X - Y and X - Z , n = 24 from three independent experiments ( Figures 5C and 5D ) . These results suggest that DNM2 recruitment happens prior to fusion . We also tested the dominant - negative mutant DNM2 - K44A in the context of HIV - 1 fusion and found that it was not able to fully Figure 3 . Live Cell TIRF - Number and Brightness Analysis Shows Low Oligomeric States for Dynamin - 2 when Cells Are Exposed to Virions with HIV Env ( A ) TZM - bl cells expressing mCherry alone ( ﬁrst row ) , Dynamin - mCherry ( second row ) , Dynamin - mCherry treated with HIV VSVG ( third row ) , and Dyna - min - mCherry treated with HIV JRFL ( fourth row ) were imaged using TIRF ( as described in Experimental Procedures ) . The average intensity images ( ﬁrst columnfromtheleft , graymicrographs ) areshowntogetherwiththebrightness images ( second column from the left , rainbow pseudocolor ) , and the graph plottingbrightness ( countspersecondpermolecule ) versusintensity ( arbitrary units ) for all pixels is also shown ( third column from the left ) . The high oligo - meric states are seen in cells treated with HIV VSVG ( red pixels with high brightness , warm colors ) , and the lower oligomeric states comparable to Dy - namin - mCherry without treatment were seen in cells exposed to HIV JRFL . In bothcases , thecellsweretreatedwithMOI = 10 . Thesizeofthemicrographsis 25 . 6 3 25 . 6 m m . ( B ) Theaveragemaximumoligomericstatedetectedpercellisplottedforthree different conditions : TZM - bl cells expressing Dynamin - mCherry ( ﬁrst column ) , TZM - bl cells expressing Dynamin - mCherry treated with HIV JRFL ( second col - umn ) , and TZM - bl cells expressing Dynamin - mCherry treated with HIV VSVG . The higher oligomeric states where detected taking as a reference the brightness recovered from mCherry alone ( monomers ) expressed in TZM - bl cells and calibrating the S factor of the EM - CCD camera as explained in Experimental Procedures . Only cells treated with HIV VSVG systematically showed higher oligomeric states right after addition of the virions , indicating high CME endocytic activity . Cell Reports 18 , 443 – 453 , January 10 , 2017 447 block HIV JRFL fusion ( Figure S5 ) . These data coincide with Herold et al . ( 2014 ) and supports the idea of DNM2 having a low oligo - meric state as DNM2 GTPase activity relates with high oligo - meric states ( Ferguson and De Camilli , 2012 ) . DISCUSSION The mode of entry for HIV - 1 was thoroughly investigated in a recent report ( Herold et al . , 2014 ) , where the authors determined that HIV - 1 must fuse in the plasma membrane and that HIV - 1 does not require endocytosis to complete fusion . This view , however , is opposed to that of Miyauchi et al . ( 2009a ) , who postulated that HIV - 1 has to undergo exclusively endosomal fusion based on data from real - time single virus tracking com - bined with BlaM assays . We suspect that this controversy in the ﬁeld debating whether or not HIV - 1 gets inside the cell through endocytosis ( Marin and Melikyan , 2015 ) has deviated the attention from the actual role of DNM2 during HIV - 1 fusion . Nevertheless , there is growing interest in the ﬁeld to understand the role of actin dynamics in HIV infection : a recent report ( Me´nager and Littman , 2016 ) points at the importance of DNM2 in dendritic cells mediated trans - enhancement of CD4 T cell infection by HIV in vitro . In this scenario , insights about the true role of DNM2 during single virus fusion are needed to Figure 4 . Cell - Cell Fusion Experiments Show that Dynamin - 2 Stabilizes HIV - 1 Env Mediated Fusion ( A ) A cartoon depicting the strategy followed for our cell - cell fusion assays is shown . Brieﬂy , HEK293T cells expressing freely diffusing GFPs and JRFL Env ( effector cells ) were added onto TZM - bl reporter cells expressing freely diffusing mCherry ( target cells ) at 4 (cid:3) C for 30 min . Shifting the temperature under the microscope at 37 (cid:3) C permitted the visualization of JRFL Env mediated cell - cell fusion , measured by time - resolved two color confocal ﬂuorescence microscopy . ( B and C ) Micrographs showing TZM - bl cells transfected with mCherry exposed to HEK293T cells expressing JR - FL and eGFP untreated ( B ) or treated with 400 m M of dynasore ( C ) . The trans - missionchannel isalsoincluded ( ingray ) . Different time points show cells undergoing cell - cell fusion 2minafterchangingthetemperatureto37 (cid:3) C ( B ) or 4 min ( C ) . These events are shown with a white arrow . The error bar represents 20 m m . ( D ) Composite micrographs of a region of interest depicting cell - cell fusion showing transmission and green channel ( HEK293T cells expressing GFP and JRFL Env , left column ) , transmission and red channel ( TZM - bl cells expressing mCherry , middle ) , and merged channels ( right column ) at two different time lags : 0 min ( no fusion ) and 6 min ( cell - cell fusion completed shown by the concomitant transfer of red mCherry ﬂuorescent proteins from target cells toward effector cells and eGFP ﬂuorescent proteins from effector cells to - wardtargetcells ) . Thescalebarrepresents10 m m . ( E ) The ﬂuorescence intensities were recovered as a function of time integrating both signals ( red and green ) coming from two single events from target cells in the absence of dynasore ( left ) and in the presence of 400 m M dynasore ( middle ) . The ﬂick - ering of the fusion pore is only observed in cells treated with dynasore . The cumulative distribution of individual cell - cell fusion events comparing untreated cells ( green dots , n = 17 ) against dyna - sore treated cells ( small red dots , n = 20 ) is shown in the right image , evidencing a delay of around 3 min for cells treated with DNM2 inhibitor dyna - sore . ( F ) HEK293TcellsexpressingfreelydiffusingGFPsandVSVGEnv ( effectorcells ) wereaddedontoTZM - blreportercellsexpressingfreelydiffusingmCherry ( targetcells ) atroomtemperaturefor30min . ShiftingthepHusingacitratebufferatpH (cid:1) 5permittedustovisualizeVSVGEnvmediatedcell - cellfusion , measuredbytime - resolved twocolorconfocalﬂuorescencemicroscopy . Theleftimageshowsarepresentativeexamplewithoutdynasoretreatment , andthemiddleimagebeinganexampleof cell - cell fusion treated with 400 m M dynasore . Flickering of the pore was never observed in this case . The cumulative distribution of individual cell - cell fusion events comparinguntreatedcells ( greendots , n = 16 ) againstdynasoretreatedcells ( smallreddots , n = 15 ) isshownintherightimage , evidencingsynchronousfusionkinetics . 448 Cell Reports 18 , 443 – 453 , January 10 , 2017 fully understand the mechanisms taking place ( Padilla - Parra and Dustin , 2016 ) . Indeed , the process of HIV - 1 fusion pore formation and enlargement is an energy - intensive mechanism that neces - sitates the orchestrated role of several proteins ( Munro et al . , 2014 ) , among them DNM2 . Membrane fusion is vital for eukary - otic live , in this context it has recently been shown the transition to full membrane fusion can be determined by competition be - tween fusion and DNM2 - dependent ﬁssion mechanisms sup - porting the hemi - fusion and hemi - ﬁssion hypothesis in live cells ( Zhao et al . , 2016 ) . Our data suggest that DNM2 might play a multifaceted role during HIV - 1 entry : ﬁrst , a low DNM2 oligomeric state ( n = 4 ) might help to induce HIV - 1 hemi - fusion ( Montessuit et al . , 2010 ) and in turn prevent ﬁssion from happening as DNM2 ﬁssion depends on the formation of an octamer with a ring like structure and GTPase activity ( Mattila et al . , 2015 ) . These se - quences of events would favor HIV - 1 full fusion and second , DNM2 tetramers could concomitantly stabilize the fusion pore Figure 5 . HIV JRFL Virions Co - localize with Dynamin prior to Fusion ( A and B ) Confocal imaging of TZM - bl cells expressing DNM2 - mCherry ( in blue ) exposed to double labeled HIV JRFL virions ( DiD / Gag - GFP , yellow ) were imaged right after receptor priming in X - Y ( A ) and X - Z ( B ) directions . The scale bars represent 0 . 5 m m . ( C and D ) The line histograms for two represen - tative particles in X - Y ( C ) and X - Z ( D ) are shown . In bothcasestheintegralsundertheDNM2 - mCherry curves overlapped > 80 % as compared to the in - tegrals coming from Gag - GFP and DiD indicating positive co - localization . ( E ) Statistics from at least three independent experiments showing that 80 % of the particles analyzed ( 24 out of 30 ) showed positive co - local - ization between the virions and DNM2 - mCherry prior fusion . right after HIV - 1 hemi - fusion ( Figure 6 ) . Here , we show various lines of evidence to support this hypothesis : ﬁrst , we have shown substantial changes to HIV - 1 fusion kinetics when primary CD4 T cells are treated with a low dosage ( non - inhib - itory concentration ) of dynasore ( 5 m M and 20 m M ) ( Figure 1 ) . We have also shown that dynasore acts right before fusion synchronously with TAK 779 , a CCR5 antagonist ( Figure 1 ) in reporter TZM - bl cells . Second , our quantitative imaging experiments based on FRET - FLIM ( Figure 2 ) and number and bright - ness ( Figure 3 ) clearly show a difference in DNM2 activity and oligomeric state when treating the cells with high concen - tration of either HIV VSVG ( high oligomers , octamers ) or HIV JRFL ( low oligomers , tet - ramers ) . Third , cell - cell fusion assays re - vealed that dynasore could disrupt the formation of the fusion pore between effector cells expressing the HIV - 1 Env ( JRFL ) and target TZM - bl cells , causing ﬂickering of the fusion pore and delayed fusion kinetics ( Figure 4 ) . How - ever , we could not fully inhibit fusion with high concentra - tions of dynasore . Importantly , the dominant - negative mutant DNM2 - K44A was not able to fully block HIV JRFL fusion ( Fig - ure S5 ) . This mutant blocks DNM2 GTPase activity that in turn is related to its oligomeric state ( Ferguson and De Camilli , 2012 ) , reinforcing the idea that DNM2 acts with a low oligomeric state during HIV - 1 entry and fusion and also that its role during this process is not related to endocytosis . Moreover , we also show that DNM2 recruitment toward the fusion pore has to be speciﬁc ( Figure 5 ) and regulated , and this suggests that it might be responsible to induce HIV - 1 hemi - fusion as a tetramer . This behavior has previously been reported for a Dynamin related protein 1 ( Drp1 ) that promotes tethering and hemi - fusion of membranes in vivo ( Montessuit et al . , 2010 ) . This DNM2 Cell Reports 18 , 443 – 453 , January 10 , 2017 449 tetrameric state in turn would be very important since on one hand it is unable to complete ﬁssion ( Ferguson and De Camilli , 2012 ) and on the other it induces full fusion and pore stabilization ( Figure 5 ) . We hypothesize that DNM2 might be regulated by engagement of CD4 and co - receptor interactions either through a retroactive loop with actin as suggested in Taylor et al . ( 2012 ) and / or through a BAR domain protein able to sense curvature ( Gonza´lez - Jamett et al . , 2013 ) . Overall our data suggest that DNM2 , as a tetramer , might help to establish hemi - fusion , might inhibit ﬁssion , and does stabilize the pore during HIV - 1 fusion . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Plasmids pR8 D Env ( encoding the HIV - 1 genome harboring a deletion within Env ) , pcRev , Gag - GFP , H1N1 , and VSV - G were kindly provided by Greg Melikyan ( Emory University ) . The plasmid encoding the JR - FL envelope protein was a kind gift from James Binley ( Torrey Pines Institute for Molecular Studies ) . Dynamin - EGFP and Dynamin - mCherry where obtained from Addgene . Cell Culture HEK293T cells and TZM - bl cells were grown using DMEM ( Life Technologies ) supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum , 1 % penicillin - streptomycin , and 1 % L - Glutamine to give DMEM complete ( DMEM comp ) . All cells were main - tained in a 37 (cid:3) C incubator supplied with 5 % CO 2 . Cell Puriﬁcation Leukoreduction chambers from healthy individuals were obtained from the Na - tional Blood Service . CD4 + T cells were puriﬁed from the peripheral blood of healthy human donors . Blood was incubated ( 20 min , 25 (cid:3) C ) with RosetteSep humanCD4 + Tcellenrichmentcocktail ( StemCellTechnologies ) . Theremaining unsedimented cells were loaded onto Ficoll - Paque Plus ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , iso - lated by density centrifugation , and washed with PBS . The puriﬁed cells were culturedinRPMIcontainingantibioticsand10 % heat - inactivatedFBS . De - iden - tiﬁed leukoreduction chambers were obtained from the Oxford Radcliffe Bio - bank , whichoperatesunderUKHumanTissueAuthoritylicensenumber12217 . Flow Cytometry Puriﬁed CD4 + T cells were stained ( 30 min , 4 (cid:3) C ) with APC - labeled anti - CXCR4 ( eBioscience ) and FITC - labeled anti - CD4 ( eBioscience ) antibodies and washed with PBS ( containing 0 . 05 % BSA and 0 . 05 % sodium azide ) . We analyzed samples in a LSR II machine ( BD ) and FlowJo software . Figure 6 . Cartoon Depicting the Model Pro - posed for HIV - 1 Entry and Fusion and the Role of DNM2 in this Process ( A ) Cartoon summarizing the potential role of DNM2 during HIV - 1 entry and fusion . Right at the moment of HIV - Env priming with the co - receptor membrane HIV - 1 hemi - fusion might occur . Low oligomeric states of DNM2 potentially block ﬁssion and also help stabilize the fusion pore . The black line represents the outer lipid leaﬂet and the red line the inner leaﬂet . Virus Production Pseudotyped viral particles were produced by transfecting HEK293T cells plated at (cid:1) 60 % – 70 % conﬂuency in T75 or T175 ﬂasks . DNA components were transfected using GeneJuice ( Novagen ) in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions . To produce particles harboring the BlaM protease , cells were transfected with 2 m g pR8 D Env , 2 m g Vpr - BlaM , 1 m g pcREV , and 3 m g of the appropriate viral en - velope ( either VSV - G or the CCR5 - tropic HIV - 1 strain JR - FL or the CXCR4 - tropic HXB2 ) . For viruses harboring Gag - GFP , 3 m g of the Gag - GFP plasmid were used . Transfection mixtures were then added to cells in DMEM comp before returning ﬂasks to the 37 (cid:3) C CO 2 incubator . At 12 hr post - transfection , the transfection mixture - containing medium was removed and cells were washed with PBS . Fresh DMEM comp ( lacking phenol red ) was then added . Cells were subsequently incubated for a further 24 hr . At 48 hr post - transfec - tion , viral supernatants were removed from cells and pushed through a 0 . 45 m m syringe ﬁlter ( Sartorius Stedim Biotech ) before being aliquoted and stored at (cid:4) 80 (cid:3) C . For SVT - compatible virus production , cells were trans - fected in the same manner with 2 m g pR8 D Env , 3 m g Gag - GFP , 1 m g pcREV , and 3 m g of the appropriate viral envelope ( either VSV - G or JR - FL ) . At 12 hr post - transfection , the transfection complexes were removed and cells were washed with PBS before being incubated at 37 (cid:3) C with 10 mL Opti - MEM ( Life Technologies ) containing 10 m M DiD ( Life Technologies ) for 4 hr . Subse - quently , the staining mixture was removed , cells washed twice with PBS , and fresh DMEM comp ( lacking phenol red ) was then added . Cells were incu - bated for a further 24 hr prior to harvesting . BlaM Assay At 24 hr prior to the assay , TZM - bl cells were plated at 4 3 10 4 cells / well in black clear - bottomed 96 well plates . On the day of assay , cells were cooled on ice prior to the addition of the appropriate MOI of virus ( all infections were performed in 100 m L volumes ) . Immediately following addition of virus harboring Vpr - BlaM , cells were placed at 4 (cid:3) C for 1 hr . Virus was then removed and cells were washed with PBS and 100 m Lof DMEM comp was added toeach wellbefore shiftingtheplatetothe37 (cid:3) CCO 2 incubatortoinitiateviralentry . To gain kinetic data , virus fusion was blocked at the appropriate time point ( 0 , 15 , 30 , 45 , 60 , 75 , and 90 mins ) by removing the media and replacing with media containing Dynasore , TAK 779 , NH 4 Cl , or T20 ( Sigma - Aldrich ) . The inhibitor concentrations were found by testing different concentrations in titration ex - periments ( SupplementalInformation ) . Notethatforthe0mintimepoint , drugs were added immediately prior to the 37 (cid:3) C temperature shift . After 90 mins , cells were loaded with CCF2 - AM from the LiveBLAzer FRET B / G Loading Kit ( Life Technologies ) and incubated at room temperature in the dark for 2 hr . Finally , the CCF2 was removed ; cells were washed with PBS and ﬁxed with 2 % PFA prior to viewing . BlaM Assay Spectral Analysis and Real - Time BlaM TZM - bl cells loaded with CCF2 were excited using a 405 nm continuous laser ( Leica ) and the emission spectra between 430 – 560 nm was recorded pixel by pixel ( 512 3 512 ) using a Leica SP8 X - SMD microscope with a lambda resolu - tion of 12 nm . The ratio of blue emission ( 440 – 480 nm , cleaved CCF2 ) to green 450 Cell Reports 18 , 443 – 453 , January 10 , 2017 ( 500 – 540 nm , uncleaved CCF2 ) was then calculated pixel by pixel using ImageJ ( https : / / imagej . nih . gov / ij / ) for three different observation ﬁelds using a 20 3 objective and plotted as a function of time . Fusion kinetics were then recovered with automated software ( R ) detecting blue / green ratios coming from individual cells above the threshold given by our negative control ( No Env virions packaging Vpr - BlaM ) . Finally , a new protocol able to retrieve real - time HIV - 1 fusion data was applied . Brieﬂy , the real - time - BlaM assay represents a more streamlined approach for measuring virus fusion kinetics . Here , target cells are ﬁrst loaded with the CCF2 - AM in the presence of 12 . 5 mM probenecid and later exposed to virus particles . This means upon temperature shift to 37 (cid:3) C , cleavage of CCF2 - AM and the resultant color change from green to blue can be visualized in real time , all in a single sample of cells / virus and without the need for fusion inhibitor addition . This typically permits the recording of more data sets and produces a more reﬁned kinetic curve as compared to time - of - addition BlaM . Ofnote , thisprotocolwas alsoappliedonTZM - blcells , butwithoutsuc - cess . We found that the CCF2 - AM substrate was pumped out more efﬁciently in these cells even in the presence of probenecid and therefore decided to apply a time - of - addition approach with TZM - bl cells . Fo¨rster Energy Transfer by Fluorescence Lifetime Imaging Microscopy Living cells expressing Dynamin - EGFP alone or co - expressing Dynamin - EGFP and Dynamin - mCherry were imaged before and after virion addition using a SP8 – X - SMD Leica microscope from Leica Microsystems . Areas of in - terestwerechosenundereithera20 3 airimmersionobjectiveora63 3 / 1 . 4NA oil immersion objective . Cells were excited using a 488 nm pulsed laser tuned at80MHzcoupledwithsinglephotoncountingelectronics ( PicoHarp300 ) and subsequently detected by hybrid external detectors . To rule out artifacts due to photo - bleaching and insufﬁcient signal to noise , only cells with at least 250 – 1 , 000photonsperpixelandnegligibleamountofbleachingwereincluded in the analysis after a 2 3 2 image binning ( Leray et al . , 2013 ; Padilla - Parra et al . , 2009 ) . The acquired ﬂuorescence decay of each pixel in one whole cell was deconvoluted with the instrument response function ( IRF ) and ﬁtted by a Marquandt nonlinear least - square algorithm with one or two - exponential theoretical models using Symphotime software from Picoquant GmbH . The mean ﬂuorescence lifetime ( Tau ) and fraction of interacting donor ( f D ) were calculated as previously described ( Leray et al . , 2013 ; Zhao et al . , 2014 ) using SymPhoTime , Mapi software ( Leray et al . , 2013 ) and ImageJ ( https : / / imagej . nih . gov / ij / ) . Statistical analysis of the lifetime data was performed using a two - tailed t test or rank - sum test ( SigmaPlot ) . A mask to ﬁlter out the punctate structuresbasedonthresholdanalysiswasappliedusingImageJshowingthat the overall average lifetimes did not change . TCSPC acquisitions lasted (cid:1) 3 min to accumulateenough photons in order to perform double exponential ﬁts . Importantly , transient interactions orhigh intensity structures willbe exag - gerated after accumulating photons during the acquisition times . Total Internal Reﬂection Microscopy Combined with Number and Brightness Analysis TZM - bl cells were transfected with Dynamin - mCherry and observed in a Zeiss Elyra TIRF microscope equipped with a 100 3 oil objective ( 1 . 46 NA ) . Cells were exposed to a 561 nm line ( 100 mW ) and total internal reﬂection was achieved reaching the critical angle ( previously calibrated with lipid - bilayers treated red lipophilic dyes ) . There were 100 images that were recovered at 256 3 256 pixels setting the EM - CDD ( Andor ) exposure time at 50 ms per frame . ImageswereanalyzedtorecovernumberandbrightnessusingSimFCS software ( Laboratory for Fluorescence Dynamics , University of California at Irvine ) . In order to avoid for cell movement and moving objects , a running average of ten frames was used to detrend the ﬂuorescence ﬂuctuation and correct for cell movement during the acquisition . A sample with cells express - ingmCherryalonewasusedtocalibratethesettingsofthesystemandrecover a brightness above 1 for molecular diffusion above immobile structures and detector noise . Cell - Cell Fusion Assays HEK293T cells expressing freely diffusing GFPs and JRFL Env ( effector cells ) were added onto TZM - bl reporter cells expressing freely diffusing mCherry ( target cells ) at 4 (cid:3) C for 30 min . Shifting the temperature under the microscope at37 (cid:3) CpermittedtovisualizeJRFLEnvmediatedcell - cellfusion , measuredby time - resolved two color confocal ﬂuorescence microscopy using a Leica SP8 microscope . A white light laser ( WLL ) was set at 488 and 588 nm to simulta - neously excite GFP and mCherry using a 40 3 oil immersion objective and the emission light of both ﬂuorescent proteins was recovered with photon counting detectors ( HyD ) tuned at 500 – 550 ( green channel ) and 600 – 650 ( red channel ) . The pinhole was set at 1 . 5 Airy units , and we used an automatic adaptive autofocus to prevent z - drifting while imaging ( Leica ) . Leukoreduction chambers were used as a source of human peripheral blood mononuclear cells . The ﬂuorescence intensities were recovered as a function of time inte - gratingbothsignals ( redandgreen ) comingfromregionsofinterestcomprising targetcells ( TZM - bl ) intheabsence ofdynasoreandinthepresence of400 m M dynasoreusingImageJfreesoftware ( https : / / imagej . nih . gov / ij / ) . Ifcellsmoved during the movies , single cell tracks were recovered using manual tracking ( ImageJ ) . The cumulative distribution of individual cell - cell fusion events was calculated using Sigma Plot . The concentration of T20 ( Sigma ) used to inhibit cell - cell fusion was 40 m g / mL . Time - resolved single virus tracking with TIRFM was performed on TZM - bl cells expressing DNM2 - mCherry ( Addgene ) that were grown to near conﬂu - ency on glass - bottom 35 mm Petri dishes ( MatTek ) in phenol red - free growth medium . Cells were placed at 4 (cid:3) C and HIV JRFL viruses ( packaging Gag - GFP ) at 1 . 5 3 10 4 IU were added and allowed to sediment down for (cid:1) 30 min . After that , cells were placed under the TIRF microscope and imaged using a 100 3 objective using a 488 nm laser for GFP and 561 for mCherry . 3D Confocal Imaging TZM - bl cells expressing either DNM2 - mCherry ( Addgene ) or Rab5 - mCherry were grown to near conﬂuency on glass - bottom 35 mm Petri dishes ( MatTek ) in phenol red - free growth medium . Cells were placed at 4 (cid:3) C and viruses at 1 . 5 3 10 4 IU were added and allowed to sediment down for (cid:1) 30 min . After that , cells were placed under the SP8XSMD Leica confocal microscope ( Leica Microsystems ) and imaged . WLL was set for two different pathways to avoid bleed - through between Gag - GFP , Rab5 - mCherry , and DNM2 - mCherry : ( 1 ) WLL tuned at 488 and 633 nm to simultaneously excite GFP and DiD and ( 2 ) WLL tuned at 589 to excite DNM2 - mCherry . We used a 63 3 oil immer - sion ( 1 . 3 NA ) objective and the emission light of both ﬂuorescent proteins and DiD were recovered with photon counting detectors ( HyD ) tuned at 500 – 550 ( green channel ) , 600 – 650 ( mCherry channel channel ) , and 640 – 700 ( DiD channel ) . Thepinholewassetat1Airyunit , andweusedanautomaticadaptive autofocus to prevent z - and y - drifting while imaging ( Leica ) . Images were takeninX - YandX - Zplanes . Theﬂuorescenceintensityproﬁleswererecovered integratingbothpathways : ( 1 ) signals ( DiD , far - redandGag - GFP , green ) and ( 2 ) DNM2 - mCherry ( showninblue ) comingfromlinescrossingtheequatorialpartof double labeled virions using ImageJ free software ( https : / / imagej . nih . gov / ij / ) . Co - localization was considered to be positive when the overlap between the DNM - mCherry intensity proﬁle was at least 80 % with both channels DiD and Gag - GFP . SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplemental Information includes Supplemental Experimental Procedures and ﬁve ﬁgures and can be found with this article online at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2016 . 12 . 032 . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS S . P . - P . and M . L . D . conceived and designed research ; D . M . J . , L . A . A . , R . N . , M . F . , R . S . U . , X . M . - M . , H . N . - K . , and S . P . - P . performed research and analyzed the data . S . P . - P . wrote the manuscript with comments from all authors . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors thank all members of the Padilla - Parra lab that helped with imag - ing experiments , cell culture , and virus production . We also thank the Cellular Imaging Core from the Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics . We thank Cell Reports 18 , 443 – 453 , January 10 , 2017 451 Matsuda lab for providing GTPase Raichu constructs , Michael Moore for providing DNM2 - K44A mutant , Greg Melikyan for providing viral plasmids , and James Binley for providing the JR - FL and HXB2 constructs . S . P . - P . research group is funded by the Nufﬁeld Department of Medicine Leadership Fellowship from the University of Oxford . The Wellcome Trust Centre for Hu - man Genetics is supported by the Wellcome Trust ( grant 090532 / Z / 09 / Z ) . H . N . - K . and M . L . D . are supported by the Wellcome Trust ( grant 100262 / Z / 12 / Z ) . Received : August 31 , 2016 Revised : October 14 , 2016 Accepted : December 12 , 2016 Published : January 10 , 2017 REFERENCES Agosto , L . M . , Yu , J . J . , Liszewski , M . K . , Baytop , C . , Korokhov , N . , Humeau , L . M . , and O’Doherty , U . ( 2009 ) . The CXCR4 - tropic human immunodeﬁciency virus envelope promotes more - efﬁcient gene delivery to resting CD4 + T cells than the vesicular stomatitis virus glycoprotein G envelope . J . Virol . 83 , 8153 – 8162 . Ayouba , A . , Cannou , C . , Nugeyre , M . T . , Barre´ - Sinoussi , F . , and Menu , E . ( 2008 ) . Distinct efﬁcacy of HIV - 1 entry inhibitors to prevent cell - to - cell transfer of R5 and X4 viruses across a human placental trophoblast barrier in a recon - stitution model in vitro . Retrovirology 5 , 31 . Barrero - Villar , M . , Cabrero , J . R . , Gordo´n - Alonso , M . , Barroso - Gonza´lez , J . , Alvarez - Losada , S . , Mun˜oz - Ferna´ndez , M . A . , Sa´nchez - Madrid , F . , and Valen - zuela - Ferna´ndez , A . ( 2009 ) . MoesinisrequiredforHIV - 1 - inducedCD4 - CXCR4 interaction , F - actin redistribution , membrane fusion and viral infection in lym - phocytes . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 103 – 113 . Chou , A . M . , Sem , K . P . , Wright , G . D . , Sudhaharan , T . , and Ahmed , S . ( 2014 ) . Dynamin1 is a novel target for IRSp53 protein and works with mammalian enabled ( Mena ) protein and Eps8 to regulate ﬁlopodial dynamics . J . Biol . Chem . 289 , 24383 – 24396 . de la Vega , M . , Marin , M . , Kondo , N . , Miyauchi , K . , Kim , Y . , Epand , R . F . , Epand , R . M . , and Melikyan , G . B . ( 2011 ) . Inhibition of HIV - 1 endocytosis allows lipid mixing at the plasma membrane , but not complete fusion . Retro - virology 8 , 99 . Doms , R . W . , andTrono , D . ( 2000 ) . Theplasma membrane asacombatzonein the HIV battleﬁeld . Genes Dev . 14 , 2677 – 2688 . Ferguson , S . M . , and De Camilli , P . ( 2012 ) . Dynamin , a membrane - remodelling GTPase . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 13 , 75 – 88 . Gonza´lez - Jamett , A . M . , Momboisse , F . , Guerra , M . J . , Ory , S . , Ba´ez - Matus , X . , Barraza , N . , Calco , V . , Houy , S . , Couve , E . , Neely , A . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Dynamin - 2 regulates fusion pore expansion and quantal release through a mechanism that involves actin dynamics in neuroendocrine chromafﬁn cells . PLoS ONE 8 , e70638 . Gordo´n - Alonso , M . , Rocha - Perugini , V . , A´lvarez , S . , Ursa , A´ . , Izquierdo - Useros , N . , Martinez - Picado , J . , Mun˜oz - Ferna´ndez , M . A . , and Sa´nchez - Madrid , F . ( 2013 ) . Actin - bindingproteindrebrinregulatesHIV - 1 - triggeredactin polymerization and viral infection . J . Biol . Chem . 288 , 28382 – 28397 . Gu , C . , Chang , J . , Shchedrina , V . A . , Pham , V . A . , Hartwig , J . H . , Suphamung - mee , W . , Lehman , W . , Hyman , B . T . , Bacskai , B . J . , and Sever , S . ( 2014 ) . Regulation of dynamin oligomerization in cells : the role of dynamin - actin interactions and its GTPase activity . Trafﬁc 15 , 819 – 838 . Herold , N . , Anders - O¨ßwein , M . , Glass , B . , Eckhardt , M . , M € uller , B . , and Kra¨us - slich , H . G . ( 2014 ) . HIV - 1entryinSupT1 - R5 , CEM - ss , andprimaryCD4 + Tcells occursattheplasmamembraneanddoesnotrequireendocytosis . J . Virol . 88 , 13956 – 13970 . Johannsdottir , H . K . , Mancini , R . , Kartenbeck , J . , Amato , L . , and Helenius , A . ( 2009 ) . Host cell factors and functions involved in vesicular stomatitis virus entry . J . Virol . 83 , 440 – 453 . Jones , D . M . , andPadilla - Parra , S . ( 2016 ) . The b - LactamaseAssay : Harnessing aFRET Biosensor toAnalyse ViralFusionMechanisms ( Switzerland : Sensors ) , p . 16 . Leray , A . , Padilla - Parra , S . , Roul , J . , Heliot , L . , and Tramier , M . ( 2013 ) . Spatio - temporal quantiﬁcation of FRET in living cells by fast time - domain FLIM : a comparative study of non - ﬁtting methods . PLoS ONE 8 , e69335 . Marin , M . , and Melikyan , G . B . ( 2015 ) . Can HIV - 1 entry sites be deduced by comparing bulk endocytosis to functional readouts for viral fusion ? J . Virol . 89 , 2985 – 2985 . Mattila , J . P . , Shnyrova , A . V . , Sundborger , A . C . , Hortelano , E . R . , Fuhrmans , M . , Neumann , S . , M € uller , M . , Hinshaw , J . E . , Schmid , S . L . , and Frolov , V . A . ( 2015 ) . A hemi - ﬁssion intermediate links two mechanistically distinct stages of membrane ﬁssion . Nature 524 , 109 – 113 . Me´nager , M . M . , and Littman , D . R . ( 2016 ) . Actin Dynamics Regulates Dendritic Cell - Mediated Transfer of HIV - 1 to T Cells . Cell 164 , 695 – 709 . Miyauchi , K . , Kim , Y . , Latinovic , O . , Morozov , V . , and Melikyan , G . B . ( 2009a ) . HIV enters cells via endocytosis and dynamin - dependent fusion with endo - somes . Cell 137 , 433 – 444 . Miyauchi , K . , Kozlov , M . M . , and Melikyan , G . B . ( 2009b ) . Early steps of HIV - 1 fusion deﬁne the sensitivity to inhibitory peptides that block 6 - helix bundle formation . PLoS Pathog . 5 , e1000585 . Montessuit , S . , Somasekharan , S . P . , Terrones , O . , Lucken - Ardjomande , S . , Herzig , S . , Schwarzenbacher , R . , Manstein , D . J . , Bossy - Wetzel , E . , Basan˜ez , G . , Meda , P . , and Martinou , J . C . ( 2010 ) . Membrane remodeling induced by the dynamin - related protein Drp1 stimulates Bax oligomerization . Cell 142 , 889 – 901 . Munro , J . B . , Gorman , J . , Ma , X . , Zhou , Z . , Arthos , J . , Burton , D . R . , Koff , W . C . , Courter , J . R . , Smith , A . B . , 3rd , Kwong , P . D . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Conformational dynamics of single HIV - 1 envelope trimers on the surface of native virions . Science 346 , 759 – 763 . Padilla - Parra , S . , and Dustin , M . L . ( 2016 ) . Actin dynamics and HIV - 1 entry . Trends Mol . Med . 22 , 354 – 356 . Padilla - Parra , S . , Auduge´ , N . , Lalucque , H . , Mevel , J . C . , Coppey - Moisan , M . , and Tramier , M . ( 2009 ) . Quantitative comparison of different ﬂuo - rescent protein couples for fast FRET - FLIM acquisition . Biophys . J . 97 , 2368 – 2376 . Padilla - Parra , S . , Marin , M . , Kondo , N . , and Melikyan , G . B . ( 2012 ) . Synchro - nized retrovirus fusion in cells expressing alternative receptor isoforms releases the viral core into distinct sub - cellular compartments . PLoS Pathog . 8 , e1002694 . Padilla - Parra , S . , Marin , M . , Gahlaut , N . , Suter , R . , Kondo , N . , and Melikyan , G . B . ( 2013 ) . Fusion of mature HIV - 1 particles leads to complete release of a gag - GFP - based content marker and raises the intraviral pH . PLoS ONE 8 , e71002 . Park , R . J . , Shen , H . , Liu , L . , Liu , X . , Ferguson , S . M . , and De Camilli , P . ( 2013 ) . Dynamintripleknockoutcellsrevealofftargeteffectsofcommonlyuseddyna - min inhibitors . J . Cell Sci . 126 , 5305 – 5312 . Pritschet , K . , Donhauser , N . , Schuster , P . , Ries , M . , Haupt , S . , Kittan , N . A . , Korn , K . , Po¨hlmann , S . , Holland , G . , Bannert , N . , et al . ( 2012 ) . CD4 - and dyna - min - dependent endocytosis of HIV - 1 into plasmacytoid dendritic cells . Virology 423 , 152 – 164 . Ross , J . A . , Digman , M . A . , Wang , L . , Gratton , E . , Albanesi , J . P . , and Jameson , D . M . ( 2011 ) . Oligomerization state of dynamin 2 in cell membranes using TIRF and number and brightness analysis . Biophys . J . 100 , L15 – L17 . Sloan , R . D . , Kuhl , B . D . , Mesple ` de , T . , M € unch , J . , Donahue , D . A . , and Wain - berg , M . A . ( 2013 ) . Productive entry of HIV - 1 during cell - to - cell transmission via dynamin - dependent endocytosis . J . Virol . 87 , 8110 – 8123 . Stein , B . S . , Gowda , S . D . , Lifson , J . D . , Penhallow , R . C . , Bensch , K . G . , and Engleman , E . G . ( 1987 ) . pH - independent HIV entry into CD4 - posi - tive T cells via virus envelope fusion to the plasma membrane . Cell 49 , 659 – 668 . 452 Cell Reports 18 , 443 – 453 , January 10 , 2017 Taylor , M . J . , Lampe , M . , and Merriﬁeld , C . J . ( 2012 ) . A feedback loop between dynamin and actin recruitment during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . PLoS Biol . 10 , e1001302 . Unruh , J . R . , and Gratton , E . ( 2008 ) . Analysis of molecular concentration and brightness from ﬂuorescence ﬂuctuation data with an electron multiplied CCD camera . Biophys . J . 95 , 5385 – 5398 . Wu , Y . , and Yoder , A . ( 2009 ) . Chemokine coreceptor signaling in HIV - 1 infec - tion and pathogenesis . PLoS Pathog . 5 , e1000520 . Zhao , W . - D . , Hamid , E . , Shin , W . , Wen , P . J . , Krystoﬁak , E . S . , Villarreal , S . A . , Chiang , H . - C . , Kachar , B . , and Wu , L . - G . ( 2016 ) . Hemi - fused structure mediates and controls fusion and ﬁssion in live cells . Nature , Published online June 15 , 2016 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature18598 . Zhao , Y . , Ren , J . , Padilla - Parra , S . , Fry , E . E . , and Stuart , D . I . ( 2014 ) . Lysosome sorting of b - glucocerebrosidase by LIMP - 2 is targeted by the mannose 6 - phosphate receptor . Nat . Commun . 5 , 4321 . Zlokarnik , G . , Negulescu , P . A . , Knapp , T . E . , Mere , L . , Burres , N . , Feng , L . , Whitney , M . , Roemer , K . , and Tsien , R . Y . ( 1998 ) . Quantitation of transcription and clonal selection of single living cells with beta - lactamase as reporter . Science 279 , 84 – 88 . Cell Reports 18 , 443 – 453 , January 10 , 2017 453