Cell Host & Microbe Article Serine Phosphorylation of Cortactin Controls Focal Adhesion Kinase Activity and Cell Scattering Induced by Helicobacter pylori Nicole Tegtmeyer , 1 Ruth Wittelsberger , 1 Roland Hartig , 2 Silja Wessler , 3 Narcisa Martinez - Quiles , 4 and Steffen Backert 1 , 5 , * 1 Department of Microbiology 2 Department of Immunology Otto von Guericke University , Leipziger Strasse 44 , D - 39120 Magdeburg , Germany 3 Department of Molecular Biology , Section Microbiology , University Salzburg , Billrothstraße 11 , A - 5020 Salzburg , Austria 4 Microbiologı´a II , Facultad de Farmacia , Universidad Complutense de Madrid , Avda de la Complutense s / n , 28040 Madrid , Spain 5 Present address : School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Sciences Science Center West , Belﬁeld Campus , University College Dublin , Dublin 4 , Ireland * Correspondence : steffen . backert @ ucd . ie DOI 10 . 1016 / j . chom . 2011 . 05 . 007 SUMMARY Cell migration and invasion require the coordinated regulation of cytoskeletal architectural changes by signaling factors , including the actin - binding protein cortactin . Bacterial and viral pathogens subvert these signaling factors to promote their uptake , spread and dissemination . We show that the gastric pathogen Helicobacter pylori ( Hp ) targets cortactin by two independent processes leading to its tyrosine dephosphorylation and serine phosphorylation to regulate cell scattering and elongation . The phos - phorylation status of cortactin dictates its subcellular localization and signaling partners . Upon infection , cortactin was found to interact with and stimulate the kinase activity of focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) . This interaction required the SH3 domain and phos - phorylation of cortactin at serine 405 and a proline - rich sequence in FAK . Using Hp as a model , this study unravels a previously unrecognized FAK activation pathway . We propose that Hp targets cortactin to protect the gastric epithelium from excessive cell lift - ing and ensure sustained infection in the stomach . INTRODUCTION Eukaryotic cell motility and migration are crucial processes for a wide range of fundamental cellular activities and disease devel - opment , including wound healing , vascular disease , osteopo - rosis , mental retardation , chronic inﬂammatory disease , and tumor cell invasion and metastasis ( Yamaguchi and Condeelis , 2007 ; Weaver , 2008 ) . The complex processes of cell migration and invasion require dynamic regulation of the cortical actin cytoskeleton , utilizing a network of signaling factors that coordinate regulated changes in the cytoskeletal architecture . Consequently , many bacterial and viral pathogens have adapted speciﬁc mechanisms during evolution to subvert the host cytoskeletal machinery to promote their uptake , spread , and dissemination ( Frischknecht and Way , 2001 ; Selbach and Back - ert , 2005 ) . The important gastric pathogen and type I carcinogen Helicobacter pylori ( Hp ) targets multiple host cell signaling path - ways , which are implicated in inﬂammation , proliferation , cell scattering , migration , and elongation to both enhance bacterial colonization and promote disease development ( Polk and Peek , 2010 ) . Virulent Hp strains use a sophisticated type IV secretion system to inject the cytotoxin - associated gene A ( CagA ) effector protein into the cytoplasm of gastric epithelial cells followed by tyrosine phosphorylation by Src and Abl kinases to trigger global rearrangements in the host cell cyto - skeleton , leading to cell scattering and elongation ( Selbach and Backert , 2005 ; Bourzac et al . , 2007 ) . Injected CagA can profoundly induce the MEK kinase pathway , but the downstream targets of activated ERK kinases during infection are fully unknown ( Mimuro et al . , 2002 ; Brandt et al . , 2005 ) . In addition , CagA interacts with several cellular proteins in a phosphoryla - tion - dependent manner , including C - terminal Src kinase ( Csk ) , which inhibits the catalytic activity of Src by a negative feedback loop mechanism ( Tsutsumi et al . , 2003 ) . CagA - induced Src inac - tivation leads to tyrosine dephosphorylation of Src substrates , most notably cortactin ( Selbach et al . , 2003 ) . However , the role of tyrosine dephosphorylated cortactin in downstream signaling is unknown . Cortactin is now regarded as an integrator of signaling to the actin cytoskeleton which is consistent with its domain structure and identiﬁed binding partners . Cortactin is a multidomain protein that was ﬁrst identiﬁed as a substrate of Src kinase . Subsequently , cortactin has been described as key regulator of the actin cytoskeleton with roles in many actin - based cellular processes , including cell migration and invasion ( Yamaguchi and Condeelis , 2007 ) and tumor cell metastasis ( Li et al . , 2001 ) . Cortactin possesses an N - terminal acidic domain ( NTA ) that harbors a DDW motif activating the Arp2 / 3 actin polymeriza - tion machinery ( Uruno et al . , 2001 ; Weaver , 2008 ) . The NTA domain is followed by a series of repeat domains that bind ﬁlamentous actin ( F - actin ) . The C terminus contains a Src homology 3 ( SH3 ) domain that interacts with proline - rich binding sequences in several cortactin interaction partners . These include WIP , N - WASP , MLCK , dynamin - 2 , and others . Several excellent reviews have highlighted the latter interactions and 520 Cell Host & Microbe 9 , 520 – 531 , June 16 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . cortactin’s role in a variety of cellular processes , including cancer progression , invasive growth and metastasis , and endo - cytosis ( Daly , 2004 ; Cosen - Binker and Kapus , 2006 ; Orth and McNiven , 2006 ; Weaver , 2008 ; Ammer and Weed , 2008 ) . When analyzed by SDS - PAGE , cortactin migrates as an 80 / 85 kDa doublet , and the size shift from p80 to p85 can be induced by EGF treatment , but the exact mechanism is still not clear ( Campbell et al . , 1999 ) . Cortactin can be phosphorylated by tyrosine kinases ( Src , Fer , Syk , and Abl ) and serine / threonine kinases ( ERK and PAK1 ) ( Lua and Low , 2005 ) . Src kinase targets tyrosine residues Y - 421 , Y - 466 , and Y - 482 , while ERK phos - phorylates serines S - 405 and S - 418 ( Campbell et al . , 1999 ) , which lie in a proline - rich area . In addition , PAK1 phosphorylates S - 113 ( Webb et al . , 2006 ) . Interestingly , in vitro studies have shown that phosphorylation - mimetic cortactin ( S405 / 418D ) binds N - WASP at the SH3 domain , triggering Arp2 / 3 - dependent actin nucleation independent of the NTA domain ( Martinez - Quiles et al . , 2004 ) . The interaction of cortactin with N - WASP in vivo promotes the localization of N - WASP to sites of actin polymerization within invadopodia / podosomes ( Mizutani et al . , 2002 ) and enhances cell movement ( Kowalski et al . , 2005 ) . Collectively , these studies suggest cortactin and N - WASP are intimately intertwined in regulating Arp2 / 3 activity responsible for cortical actin assembly . Given the central position of cortactin in host signaling , it is not surprising that many microbial pathogens target cortactin functions for their own beneﬁt during infections , suggesting Figure 1 . Role of Cortactin in the Formation of the Hp - Induced Elongation Phenotype of AGS Cells AGScellsweretransfectedwithcortactinsiRNAor with a control siRNA and then infected with the Hp strain P1 for 6 hr . ( A ) Cortactinexpressionwasexaminedbywestern blotanalysis . The a - GAPDHblotservedasloading control . ( B ) Quantiﬁcation of cortactin expression and number of elongated AGS cells . Error bars represent ± standard deviation ( SD ) . ( C ) Phase - contrast microscopy shows that the Hp - induced phenotype is downregulated by cor - tactin siRNA . See also Figure S1 . that cortactin is an Achilles’ heel of the actin cytoskeleton ( Selbach and Back - ert , 2005 ) . Studies on the molecular basis of the infections afﬂicted by patho - gens like pathogenic Escherichia coli ( EPEC and EHEC ) , Shigella , Listeria , Staphylococcus , and Hp have yielded some further insights into the molecular mechanisms of cortactin functions . Intriguingly , invasion of host cells by several pathogens stimulates tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin while Hp induces tyrosine dephosphorylation ( Sel - bach and Backert , 2005 ) . Thus , the aim of the present study was to investigate in detail the role of cortactin serine phosphorylation during infection . RESULTS Importance of Cortactin and Activation Status of Kinases during Infection with Hp After having established that Hp targets cortactin , the present study was designed to investigate the molecular mechanism of cortactin signaling during infection . First , we aimed to conﬁrm the importance of cortactin for phenotypic outcome . For this purpose , AGS gastric epithelial cells were transfected with cortactin small interfering RNA ( siRNA ) or a scrambled siRNA control followed by infection with Hp wild - type ( WT ) for 6 hr ( Figure 1A ) . While nontransfected or siRNA control cells ex - hibited the characteristic Hp - induced scattering and elongation phenotype as reported earlier ( Bourzac et al . , 2007 ) , siRNA - based downregulation of cortactin expression by about 90 % signiﬁcantly inhibited the phenotype ( Figures 1B and 1C ) . These results suggest that cortactin is indeed involved in estab - lishing the cell scattering and elongation phenotype during infection . Human cortactin possesses several known phosphorylation sites and becomes phosphorylated on serine residues S - 113 , S - 405 , and S - 418 as well as on tyrosine residues Y - 421 , Y - 470 , and Y - 486 ( corresponding to Y - 421 , Y - 466 , and Y - 482 in mouse cortactin ) by PAK1 , ERK1 / 2 , and Src kinases ( Figure S1A Cell Host & Microbe Cortactin Targets FAK and Its Kinase Activity Cell Host & Microbe 9 , 520 – 531 , June 16 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . 521 available online ) . Toinvestigate theroleofcortactinphosphoryla - tion , we ﬁrst monitored the activities of each of these cortactin kinases using activation - speciﬁc phospho - antibodies during a time course of Hp infection between 0 . 5 and 8 hr . The results show that the activity of both serine / threonine kinases PAK1 and ERK1 / 2 increases continuously during infection , whereas c - Srcis onlytransiently activated ( 0 . 5 – 2hr ) and thenbecomes in - activated ( Figures S1B and S1C ) . The activation of PAK1 and ERK1 / 2 , as well as the inactivation of c - Src , strictly correlated with the Hp - induced elongation phenotype between 4 and 8 hr ( Figure S1D ) . These observations lead to the hypothesis that infection may induce phosphorylation of cortactin at serine but not tyrosine residues . Subcellular Localization of Phospho - Cortactin during Infection with Hp The serine phosphorylation status of cortactin in cellular processes including infection with microbes such as Hp is completely unknown ( Figure 2A ) . To examine this important question , we generated phospho - speciﬁc a - cortactin anti - bodies against the known serine residues S - 113 , S - 405 , and S - 418 . After demonstrating their speciﬁcity ( Figure S2A ) , we next aimed to investigate the serine phosphorylation of endog - enous cortactin p80 / p85 proteins and its subcellular localiza - tion during infection . For this purpose , AGS cells were infected with Hp WT and an isogenic D cagA mutant , followed by a biochemical fractionation into membrane and cytoplasmic frac - tions . As a loading control , staining with a a - cortactin antibody showed similar signals in all fractions , and a - integrin - b 1 blots revealed only signals in the membrane fraction but not in the cytosol as expected ( Figure 2B ) . Probing with the a - cortactin phospho - antibodies showed almost no signal in noninfected cells . After infection with WT Hp , strong bands for cortactin phosphorylated at S - 113 , S - 405 , and S - 418 appear and these cortactin species are exclusively present in the membrane fraction ( Figure 2C ) . Similar results were obtained with the D cagA mutant ( Figure 2C ) . Interestingly , while the a - cortactin - PS - 113 stained both p80 and p85 to similar extent during infection , the a - cortactin - PS - 405 antibody exclusively reacted with p85 , and the a - Cortactin - PS - 418 antibody with p80 . This result suggests that Hp induces cortactin phosphor - ylation at S - 113 , S - 405 , and S - 418 in a CagA - independent manner . In agreement with downregulation of Src activity as shown above and in our previous studies ( Selbach et al . , 2003 ; Tegtmeyer et al . , 2009 ) , cortactin underwent tyrosine - dephosphorylation upon infection with Hp WT in a fashion dependent on CagA ( Figure 2D ) . In addition , immunoprecipi - tated phosphoserine cortactin did not react with any of the phosphotyrosine - speciﬁc cortactin antibodies ( Figure S2C ) . Thus , infection with Hp speciﬁcally produces two cortactin populations in gastric epithelial cells : ( 1 ) p80 ( phosphorylated at S - 113 and S - 418 ) and ( 2 ) p85 ( phosphorylated at S - 113 and S - 405 ) ( Figure S2D ) . Figure 2 . Cortactin Becomes Phosphorylated on Serine Residues S - 113 , S - 405 , and S - 418 during Hp Infection ( A ) Schematic presentation of the 80 kDa cortactin molecule . The serine phosphorylation sites are highlighted on the left . ( B ) AGS cells were infected for 6 hr with Hp WT or D cagA mutant . Infected and control cells were separated into membrane and cytoplasmic fractions . The a - cortactin and a - integrin - b 1 blots served as loading controls . ( C ) Cortactin phosphorylation at the known serine residues S - 113 , S - 405 , and S - 418 was analyzed with the indicated phosphoserine - speciﬁc antibodies . Densitometric quantiﬁcation of band intensities is also shown . Error bars represent ± SD . ( D ) Cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation was analyzed using an a - pan - phosphotyrosine antibody . See also Figure S2 . Cell Host & Microbe Cortactin Targets FAK and Its Kinase Activity 522 Cell Host & Microbe 9 , 520 – 531 , June 16 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . Expression of GFP - Cortactin Mutants and Function during Hp Infection To investigate the functional importance of cortactin domains and individual phosphorylation sites during infection , we gener - ated a series of GFP - cortactin mutants , including N - and C - terminal deletions , W22A ( deﬁcient for Arp2 / 3 binding in the NTA domain ) as well as phosphorylation - deﬁcient point mutations ( S / A , Y / F ) and phosphorylation - mimetic mutants ( S / D , Y / D ) ( Figure S2E ) . Transfected AGS cells were infected with Hp for 6 hr , and similar expression of all constructs was conﬁrmed ( Figure S2A , Figure 4B , and data not shown ) . As shown in Figure S2E , the Hp - induced elongation phenotype is signiﬁcantly increased by overexpressing WT cortactin , suggesting a positive regulatory function in cell elongation . The expression of cortactin containing W22A , S113A , or S405 / 418A mutations resulted in an inhibitory effect , while expression of single phosphomimetic S113D , S405D , and Figure 3 . Cortactin Forms a Complex with FAK but Not with N - WASP or Actin during Hp Infection ( A ) AGS cells were infected for 6 hr with Hp WT or D cagA mutant , followed by an IP with an a - cortactin antibody . The blot was stripped and reprobed with the indicated antibodies for N - WASP and actin . ( C ) Immunoﬂuorescence analysis of noninfected or infected AGS cells ( 6 hr ) . Cells were ﬁxed and costained with a - cortactin ( red ) and a - FAK ( green ) antibodies . Innoninfectedcells , cortactinismainly located in the cytoplasm ( arrowheads ) , while FAK is located in focal adhesion contacts . In Hp - infected cells , cortactin also colocalizes with FAK at the tips of the elongated cells ( arrows ) . Quantiﬁcation of the signals show that about 5 % of total cortactin and 3 % of total FAK colocalize in infected cells . ( D ) AGS cells were transfected with indicated GFP - cortactin constructs ( 48 hr ) . Cells were then infected with Hp WT for 6 hr or left untreated , fol - lowedbyanIPwithan a - GFPantibody . The a - FAK blot shows that FAK is in complex with cortactin during Hp infection . This complex is not detect - able with the GFP - cortactin D SH3 mutant or in non - infected cells . ( B and E ) Quantitation of band intensities was performed with the Lumi - Imager F1 . Error bars represent ± SD . See also Figure S3 . S418D mutants signiﬁcantly increased the phenotype . These ﬁndings lead us to conclude that phosphorylation of cor - tactin at S - 113 , S - 405 , and S - 418 exhibit supportive effects on the phenotype . Interestingly , the S405 / 418D double or S113 / 405 / 418D triple mutants did not show this effect whereas the D SH3 , Y421 / 466 / 482D , or Y421D mutants largely inhibited the phenotype ( Fig - ure S2E ) . This suggests that cortactin’s serine phosphorylation sites and the SH3 domain are involved in signal transduction supporting the phenotypic outcome , while tyrosine phosphorylation had suppressive effects . Hp Terminates the Interaction of Cortactin with N - WASP and F - Actin Next , we wanted to identify interaction partners of cortactin and downstream signaling during Hp infection . We originally proposed that serine - phosphorylated cortactin may bind N - WASP , which then recruites and activates the Arp2 / 3 complex to induce actin polymerization . To test this hypothesis , AGS cells were infected for 6 hr with Hp WT or D cagA mutant , followed by immunoprecipitation ( IP ) with an a - cortactin antibody . Surpris - ingly , N - WASP and actin were found in IPs with cortactin of noninfected control cells , but this interaction was terminated during infection with both strains ( Figures 3A and 3B ) . These results suggest that infections with Hp induce the dissociation Cell Host & Microbe Cortactin Targets FAK and Its Kinase Activity Cell Host & Microbe 9 , 520 – 531 , June 16 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . 523 of the cortactin / N - WASP complex in a cagA - independent manner , and also release actin from the complex . Identiﬁcation of Focal Adhesion Kinase as an Interaction Partner of Cortactin The above results led us propose that cortactin might interact with as yet unidentiﬁed proteins during infection with Hp . To address this question , we investigated the cellular localization of cortactin before and after infection by immunoﬂuorecence microscopy . To this end , infected and noninfected AGS cells were ﬁxed and stained with the a - cortactin phosphoserine antibodies , but unfortunately they were not useful for this approach . Thus , we next stained cells with a speciﬁc monoclonal a - cortactin antibody . In noninfected cells , cortactin was predominantly detected in a spot - like pattern in the cytosol and in the membrane ( Figure 3C , arrowheads ) . In contrast , in cells infected with WT Hp , cortactin localized at the tip and at the base of the characteristic cellular elongations ( Figure 3C , left panel , arrows ) . Interestingly , at these spots cortactin is strongly colocalized with focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) , a well - known protein marker of cellular focal adhesion contacts ( Figure 3C , right panel , arrows ) . Based on the above ﬁndings , we proposed that a proportion of cortactin molecules may interact directly with FAK upon infection with Hp . To examine this hypothesis , we infected AGS cells transfected with different GFP - cortactin constructs with Hp or left them untreated , followed by IP using an a - GFP antibody . The IPs were probed with a - GFP and a - FAK anti - bodies , showing that FAK is in complex with cortactin and that this interaction requires the presence of both Hp and the SH3 domain in cortactin ( Figures 3D and 3E ) . Since such an interaction is yet not reported in the literature , our ﬁndings were veriﬁed by reverse transfection experiments . For this purpose , AGS cells were transfected with HA - tagged FAK Figure 4 . Cortactin Interacts with FAK In Vitro , and Phosphorylation of Cortactin atS - 405orS - 418 IsEssential for theBinding of FAK in Cells ( A ) In vitro phosphorylation of GST - cortactin with ERK , followed by incubation with FAK and GST pulldown . ( B ) AGS cells were cotransfected for 48 hr with indicated GFP - cortactin constructs and HA - FAK WT , followed by IP with an a - HA antibody . The IPs were probed with a - HA to ensure equal amounts ofHA - FAKinput . Westernblotanalysiswith a - GFP demonstrates that GFP - cortactin S405D and S418D bind to HA - FAK WT . ( C ) Band intensities were quantiﬁed with the Lumi - Imager F1 . Error bars represent ± SD . followed by IP with an a - HA antibody , showing that endogenous cortactin can bind FAK in the presence of Hp but not in uninfected cells expressing similar amounts of HA - FAK ( Figure S3A ) . Next , we aimed to investigate whether both puriﬁed proteins can interact in vitro . For this purpose , GST - cortactin was phosphorylated in vitro with ERK kinase followed by incubation with recombinant FAK and GST pulldown . The results showed that GST - cortactin phosphorylated by ERK at S - 405 or S - 418 can directly interact with FAK in the absence of other proteins in vitro ( Figure 4A ) . Role of Cortactin Phosphorylation for the Interaction with FAK Remarkably , the protein complex of FAK with cortactin in cells is only detectable after infection with Hp . This might be due to the deﬁned phosphorylation status of cortactin at S - 405 and S - 418 as stimulated during Hp infection . To examine whether this is the case , we transfected AGS cells with a series of phosphorylation - deﬁcient or phosphorylation - mimetic GFP - cortactin constructs in the presence of WT HA - FAK . In this experiment , the transfected cells were directly subjected to IP with a - HA antibodies without prior Hp infection in order to avoid further posttranslational modiﬁcation of cortactin as probably induced by the bacteria . The results show a very weak signal for bound WT ( unmodiﬁed ) GFP - cortactin , as ex - pected ( Figures 4B and 4C ) . The strongest signals for bound GFP - cortactin were detected for the phosphoserine - mimetic mutant S405D followed by S418D , whereas very weak signals were observed for the S405 / 418D double mutant or the phosphotyrosine - deﬁcient Y421 / 466 / 482F mutant ( Figures 4B and 4C ) . In contrast , no bound GFP - cortactin was detectable for the phosphoserine - deﬁcient mutant S405 / 418A and the phosphotyrosine - mimetic mutant Y421 / 466 / 482D ( Figures 4B and 4C ) . These ﬁndings indicate that phosphorylation of cor - tactin at individual S - 405 and S - 418 residues ( but not on both serines simultaneously ) positively regulates the interaction of cortactin with FAK , whereas phosphorylation of cortactin at the tyrosine residues Y - 421 , Y - 466 , and Y - 482 suppresses this interaction . Cell Host & Microbe Cortactin Targets FAK and Its Kinase Activity 524 Cell Host & Microbe 9 , 520 – 531 , June 16 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . Interaction of Cortactin with FAK Is Independent of Two Characterized PxxP Motifs In order to gain further evidence for the interaction of cortactin with FAK , we next investigated the molecular interaction site in FAK . Our favored hypothesis was that the SH3 domain of cortac - tin , which is essential for recruitment to FAK , may bind to one of two known SH3 - binding sites or so - called PxxP motifs ( Sieg et al . , 2000 ) . These two PxxP motifs are located in the proline - rich domains of FAK ( PR1 and PR2 , Figure S3B ) . To test whether PR1 and PR2 are involved in cortactin binding , we transfected AGS cells with HA - FAK WT , HA - FAK D PR1 , or HA - FAK D PR1 / D PR2 constructs . After 48 hr , transfected cells were infected with Hp for 6 hr , followed by an IP of FAK with a - HA - antibodies . The a - HA control blot shows that equal amounts of HA - FAK are present ( Figures S3C and S3D ) . The blot was then incubated with the a - cortactin antibody to detect bound endogenous cortactin . Surprisingly , we detected strong signals for each of the WT or mutant FAK constructs . To ensure the correctness of this result , we repeated the experiment in transfected FAK - deﬁcient ﬁbro - blasts ( FAK (cid:1) / (cid:1) cells ) and performed the IP with a - cortactin anti - bodies . The resulting western blots with a - cortactin and a - HA antibodies revealed signiﬁcant binding of the FAK D PR1 and FAK D PR1 / D PR2 mutants to endogenous cortactin in ﬁve inde - pendent experiments ( Figures S3E and S3F ) . In some of these experiments , we even detected slightly higher amounts of cortactin bound to FAK D PR1 and FAK D PR1 / D PR2 mutants as compared to WT FAK ( data not shown ) . These ﬁndings led us to conclude that neither PR1 nor PR2 of FAK is involved in direct binding to cortactin . FAK Binds to Cortactin by a PxxP Motif Since the SH3 domain of cortactin is essential for the binding to FAK and SH3 domain interactions are usually achieved via PxxP sequence motifs , we next analyzed the FAK amino acid sequence for other possible PxxP motifs . Interestingly , the sequence analysis resulted in the identiﬁcation of two PxxP motifs located closely to PR1 and PR2 that we called PR3 and PR4 , respectively ( Figure 5A ) . To investigate whether PR3 and / or PR4 are involved in binding of cortactin , both proline residues in each of these two motifs were replaced by alanines . The re - sulting constructs were designated as HA - FAK D PR1 / D PR3 and HA - FAK D PR1 / D PR4 mutants ( Figure 5A ) . AGS cells were then transfected with each of these constructs for 48 hr and subsequently infected with Hp for 6 hr , followed by an IP of FAK with a - HA antibodies . The a - HA blot shows that similar amounts of HA - FAK were precipitated from AGS cells ( Fig - ure 5B ) . Afterward , the blot was incubated with the a - cortactin antibody to quantify amounts of bound cortactin . The resulting densitometric analysis of the bands indicates again the strongest signals for bound cortactin with the FAK D PR1 mutant and with the FAK D PR1 / D PR4 double mutant but not with the FAK D PR1 / D PR3 double mutant ( Figures 5B and 5D ) . These observations demonstrate that the PR3 region of FAK , but not the PR4 region , is involved in binding of the SH3 domain of cortactin . Binding of Cortactin Is Associated with Increased FAK Kinase Activity The results described above suggest that Hp induces cortactin serine phosphorylation to mediate binding of FAK , possibly to Figure 5 . Binding of Cortactin Requires a Proline - rich Region in FAK and Is Associated with Increased FAK Kinase Activity ( A ) Schematic presentation of the domain structure of FAK and its proline - rich regions , PR1 and PR2 ( gray ) . Two other PxxP motifs were discovered and named PR3 and PR4 ( black ) . The indicated prolines were substituted by alanines . ( B ) AGS cells were transfected with the indicated HA - FAK constructs . After 48hr , cells wereinfectedwith Hp WT for6hrfollowed byan a - HAIP . Theinput amount of the HA - FAK constructs is shown . The a - cortactin blot shows that the D PR3 mutant barely binds cortactin , suggesting that PR3 region is important for the interaction with cortactin . ( C ) The activity of FAK kinase was analyzed using the a - phospho - FAK ( Y - 397 ) antibody . The results show that HA - FAK D PR1 and HA - FAK D PR2 are highly activated during infection , while weak kinase activity was detectable with the other FAK constructs . ( D ) Densitometricmeasurement ofband intensities revealed the percentage of FAK activity and the relative amount of bound cortactin per input amount of HA - FAK . Error bars represent ± SD . See also Figure S4 . Cell Host & Microbe Cortactin Targets FAK and Its Kinase Activity Cell Host & Microbe 9 , 520 – 531 , June 16 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . 525 either stimulate or inactivate FAK kinase activity . Thus , we next aimed to investigate the activation status of FAK in the complex with cortactin described above . For this purpose , the IPs produced in Figure 5B were probed with an antibody recognizing autophosphorylated FAK on tyrosine residue Y - 397 , which is indicative of FAK kinase activity ( Hauck et al . , 2002 ) . As shown in the respective phospho - blot ( Figure 5C ) and densitometric analysis of the bands ( Figure 5D ) , the strongest signals for activated FAK were obtained for the FAK D PR1 and FAK D PR2 mutants . In contrast , a moderate FAK activity was observed for the FAK D PR1 / D PR2 double mutant and FAK WT , whereas only a low kinase activity was observed for the FAK D PR1 / D PR3 and FAK D PR1 / D PR4 double mutants in the presence of Hp , similar to FAK WT in the noninfected control ( Figures 5C and 5D ) . Interestingly , the detected FAK activity for the constructs correlates with their capacity to bind cortactin , except for the FAK D PR1 / D PR4 double mutant showing strong binding to cortactin , but only a very low FAK kinase activity . These ﬁndings indicate that binding of cortactin to FAK may stimulate FAK kinase activity . To further support these observa - tions , we tested whether cortactin can stimulate FAK in the in vitro assay described above . Indeed , serine - phosphorylated but not nonphosphorylated GST - cortactin can induce FAK Figure 6 . Importance of FAK Activation and Complex Formation with Cortactin during Hp Infection ( A ) AGS cells were infected for 6 hr with Hp WT or D cagA mutant , followed by an a - cortactin IP . The IPs were probed with the indicated antibodies . ( B ) AGS cells were infected with Hp WT in the presence / absence of 10 m M FAK inhibitor PF - 573228 . The a - FAK blot conﬁrms equal amounts of protein in each lane . FAK activity was examined by using a - phospho - FAK ( Y - 397 ) antibody . ( C ) Quantitation of elongation phenotype and percentage of FAK activity as reavealed by densitometric measurement of band intensities . Error bars represent ± SD . ( D ) Microscopic analysis shows that treatment of cells with PF - 573228 blocked the elongation phenoytpe . See also Figure S5 . activity on a variety of tyrosine sites as monitored with phospho - speciﬁc anti - bodies for Y - 397 , Y - 407 , and Y - 576 ( Figure S4A ) . Role of Cortactin - FAK Interaction during Infection with Hp So far , we had demonstrated the binding of FAK to cortactin by transfection studies of tagged proteins . Thus , a further important question was whether endog - enous FAK and cortactin interact with each other during Hp infection and whether the bacterial protein CagA plays a role in this scenario . For this purpose , AGS cells were infected for 6 hr with WT Hp , or isogenic D cagA mutant , followed by an IP with a - cortactin antibodies . The precipitates were then analyzed by western blotting with several antibodies . The a - FAK blot re - vealed that endogenous cortactin binds strongly to endogenous FAK after Hp WT infection . Quantiﬁcation of IPs and superna - tants showed that about 5 % – 10 % of total cortactin and about 4 % – 9 % of total FAK are found in complex with each other , whereas this binding is signiﬁcantly blocked in infections with D cagA mutants ( Figure 6A ) . We then determined the activity of FAK bound to cortactin using the phospho - antibodies for Y - 397 , Y - 407 , and Y - 576 as described above . The results indicate that FAK activity is strongly elevated in the FAK - cortactin complex produced during infection with WT but not mutant Hp ( Figure 6A ) . These results clearly demonstrate that ( 1 ) the endogenous FAK and cortactin proteins interact with each other during Hp infection , ( 2 ) this interaction correlates with an increased FAK activity , and ( 3 ) this activity is lost upon infection with the D cagA mutant . Finally , to prove whether FAK kinase activity is equally important for phenotypic outcome as the presence of cortactin , we pharmacologically inhibited FAK kinase using PF - 573228 . This treatment signiﬁcantly blocked both FAK activity and Hp - induced elongation pheno - type ( Figure 6B – D ) . Cell Host & Microbe Cortactin Targets FAK and Its Kinase Activity 526 Cell Host & Microbe 9 , 520 – 531 , June 16 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . Expression of Cortactin Is Required for Hp - Stimulated FAK Activation The results described above suggest that cortactin binds FAK both in vitro and during infection and that it may stimulate its tyrosine kinase activity . Next , we investigated whether cortactin expression is required for Hp - induced FAK activation in AGS cells . For this purpose , cortactin expression was downregulated with cortactin siRNA and scrambled siRNA control followed by infection with Hp for 6 hr . siRNA - based downregulation of cortactin expression by about 85 % signiﬁcantly inhibited the activation of FAK by Hp as compared to the siRNA control ( Figures S4B and S4C ) . These results suggest that cortactin plays a signiﬁcant role in Hp - induced FAK activation , which is in agreement with previous studies reporting that Hp profoundly activates FAK during infection ( Kwok et al . , 2007 ; Tabassam et al . , 2008 ; Tegtmeyer et al . , 2010 ) , while transfected CagA in complex with Shp - 2 phosphatase alone has suppressive effects in the absence of Hp ( Tsutsumi et al . , 2006 ) , which can be ex - plained by 76 % less CagA - bound Shp - 2 during infection ( Figures S4D – S4F ) . Integrin - Mediated Cell Attachment Induces Serine Phosphorylation of Cortactin and FAK Activation The above observations suggest that Hp may highjack cortactin in a general host signaling pathway affecting cell adhesion . A well - studied host model system is integrin - mediated cell adhe - sion ( Hauck et al . , 2002 ) . To investigate whether serine - phos - phorylation of cortactin is also induced during cell attachment to a given substratum , we prepared AGS cells for cell spreading assays on immobilized ﬁbronectin and polylysine as control . The results show that most AGS cells adhere and spread on ﬁbro - nectin after 3 hr and this is associated with cortactin serine phos - phorylation at S - 405 and S - 418 ( but very little at S - 113 ) and FAK activation , while cells incubated on polylysine did not induce these phosphorylation events nor cell spreading ( Figure S5A ) . Thus , integrin - mediated cell adhesion to the extracellular matrix triggers increased serine phosphorylation of cortactin . Phosphorylation of Cortactin on S - 405 but Not S - 418 Triggers FAK Activation Finally , we aimed to investigate whether cortactin serine - phos - phorylation per se , besides playing a role in binding to FAK , may stimulate FAK’s tyrosine kinase activity in cells . To exclude side effects produced by endogeneous cortactin , we transfected cortactin - deﬁcient knockout ﬁbroblasts ( Lai et al . , 2009 ) with WT GFP - cortactin or the corresponding S405D , S418D , and D SH3 mutants , respectively , in the absence of Hp . Equal amounts of GFP - cortactin variants and lack of endogenous cortactin was veriﬁed in the a - cortactin blot ( Figures S5B and S5C ) . The same samples were probed with the a - FAK - PY - 397 antibody , which shows that cortactin S405D but not WT , S418D , or D SH3 cortac - tin mutants induced pronounced FAK phosphorylation . These results conﬁrm that S - 405 plays an important role not only in binding to FAK but also in activating its tyrosine kinase activity . DISCUSSION Cortactin is implicated in multiple actin - based cellular processes including the coordination of membrane dynamics and the reorganisation of the actin cytoskeleton . In these processes cortactin functions as an adaptor protein and interacts with components of diverse signal transduction pathways . It also possesses activity to promote binding of the Arp2 / 3 complex to produce actin ﬁlaments . Therefore , cortactin plays a key role in a wide array of cellular functions , ranging from cell motility and metastasis to endocytosis , and is also a common target exploited by microbes during infection ( Cosen - Binker and Kapus , 2006 ; Selbach and Backert , 2005 ) . However , the molec - ular regulation of cortactin is widely unknown . In particular , the role of cortactin serine phosphorylation for the function of its SH3 domain to bind signaling factors in vivo is completely unclear . Here , we report that the gastric pathogen Hp speciﬁcally induces the suppression of tyrosine - phosphorylated cortactin and the enrichment of serine - phosphorylated cortactin to trigger signaling involved in cell scattering and elongation . This pheno - type requires the activation of FAK through the speciﬁc interac - tion with cortactin phosphorylated at S - 405 as summarized in Figure 7 . This study therefore identiﬁes and characterizes a previously unrecognized binding partner of cortactin and a pathway for activating FAK . Downegulation of Cortactin’s Tyrosine Phosphorylation by Hp Cortactin is a target for phosphorylation by Src tyrosine kinase and by serine / threonine kinases , including ERK1 / 2 and PAK1 . Interestingly , while some pathogens induce tyrosine phosphory - lation of cortactin , Hp suppresses its tyrosine phosphorylation ( Selbach and Backert , 2005 ) . The latter is in agreement with the present data showing that Src is only transiently activated in infected AGS cells ( 0 . 5 – 2 hr ) and then becomes inactive . Src inactivation requires injected and phosphorylated CagA , which then binds to and activates Csk , a well - known inhibitor of Src ( Tsutsumi et al . , 2003 ) . Src therefore plays two separate roles in CagA - induced host cell signaling . First , c - Src is the kinase of CagA and activates this molecule by phosphorylation . Second , phospho - CagA induces deﬁned phosphorylation and dephosphorylation events within the c - Src molecule which lead to the inactivation of c - Src ( Selbach et al . , 2003 ) . Interest - ingly , expression of constitutive - active Src inhibited cortactin tyrosine dephosphorylation and cell elongation ( Selbach et al . , 2003 ) . In agreement with these ﬁndings , we found that expres - sion of tyrosine phosphorylation - mimicking cortactin constructs suppressed the phenotype similarly . Thus , Hp infection speciﬁ - cally accumulates the tyrosine - dephosphorylated form of cor - tactin necessary for phenotypic outcome . Induction of Cortactin’s Serine Phosphorylation by Hp In contrast to Src , Hp activates PAK1 and ERK1 / 2 constitutively over the entire course of infection . Since these are the kinases of cortactin’s serine phosphorylation , we then generated phos - pho - cortactin antibodies against all three known serine phos - phorylation sites ( S - 113 , S - 405 , and S - 418 ) . These antibodies were proven to be highly speciﬁc for the corresponding phos - pho - cortactin forms , which were indeed accumulated during infection . Interestingly , CagA is not required for this process , suggesting that the CagA - independent activation of the EGF receptor / Ras / Raf / MEK / ERK pathway by Hp ( Tegtmeyer et al . , 2009 ) is a second pathway upstream of cortactin as Cell Host & Microbe Cortactin Targets FAK and Its Kinase Activity Cell Host & Microbe 9 , 520 – 531 , June 16 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . 527 observedinothercellsystems ( Campbelletal . , 1999 ) . Inmanycell types , cortactin is present as 80 / 85 kDa bands , but their phos - phorylation status remained unclear . Interestingly , infection with Hp speciﬁcally generated these two cortactin populations in AGS cells with p80 being phosphorylated at S - 113 and S - 418 , and p85 phosphorylated at S - 113 and S - 405 . This suggests that phosphorylation of S - 405 may play a crucial role for generating p85 , but other modiﬁcations were also considered ( Kelley et al . , 2010 ) . Interestingly , cortactin p85 is predominantly expressed in colorectal cancer tissue samples but not in control cells ( Zhang et al . , 2006 ) . This let us propose that phosphorylation of cortactin at S - 405 and p85 induction may be important for changing cortactin’s conformation and downstream signaling by Hp . Interaction of Serine - Phosphorylated Cortactin with FAK Structural analysis of nonphosphorylated cortactin showed that it adopts a globular structure , which is mainly maintained by interactions of the SH3 domain either with the helical or F - actin binding domains ( Cowieson et al . , 2008 ) . Thus , the SH3 domain Figure 7 . Model for the Role of Cortactin Phosphorylation in Interaction with FAK during Hp Infection ( A ) Schematic presentation of the domain structure of cortactin with the known ERK1 / 2 , PAK1 , and Src phosphorylation sites . Phosphorylation may cause a switch in cortactin and makes the SH3 domain accessible for protein / protein interactions . ( B ) Phosphorylation - dependent binding of FAK is shown . ( C ) During the course of Hp infection two independent signaling pathways are activated leading to the ( 1 ) tyrosine dephosphorylation and ( 2 ) serine phosphorylation ofcortactinasindicated . CortactinphosphorylatedatS - 405 , butnotS - 113orS - 418 , playsacentralrolefortheinteractionwithFAKatPR3 . The interaction of cortactin with FAK induces the phosphorylation at Y - 397 and other sites resulting in signiﬁcantly increased kinase activity of FAK . Cell Host & Microbe Cortactin Targets FAK and Its Kinase Activity 528 Cell Host & Microbe 9 , 520 – 531 , June 16 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . could undergo intramolecular interactions by folding back . This raises the possibility that phosphorylation acts as a molecular switch that induces conformational changes in the cortactin molecule that liberate the SH3 domain ( Figure 7A ) . Having estab - lished that Hp induces profound serine phosphorylation of cor - tactin , we aimed to investigate downstream signaling . It was tempting to speculate that serine - phosphorylated cortactin would interact with already published interaction partners . To our surprise , none of the known interaction partners , including N - WASP , MLCK , Crk , actin , and others , were found in IPs with cortactin after infection . Instead , we discovered FAK asa binding factor of cortactin based on immunoﬂuerescence and IP exper - iments during transfection and infection and using in vitro GST pulldown studies . Using phosphorylation - deﬁcient or phosphor - ylation - mimetic cortactin constructs we could then demonstrate that phosphorylation of cortactin at S - 405 and to lesser extent by S - 418 ( but not both serine residues simultaneously ) triggered the interaction with FAK , while phosphorylation at Y - 421 , Y - 466 , and Y - 482 had suppressive effects ( Figure 7B ) . These ﬁndings are consistent with the positive and negative regulatory effects of respective cortactin mutants in the Hp - induced phenotype . We propose that the consequences over cortactin structure of each serine - phophorylation site ( S - 405 or S - 418 ) might be different . This is further supported by the observation that N - WASP can bind to cortactin S405 / 418D ( Martinez - Quiles et al . , 2004 ) but not in Hp infection ( this study ) . However , we focused here on FAK and identiﬁed a PxxP motif , named PR3 , which is involved in this binding . Thus , cortactin and FAK interact directly by a classical SH3 - PxxP interaction . Distinct Roles of Cortactin Molecules Phosphorylated at S - 113 , S - 405 , or S - 418 Our data also revealed that each of the investigated serine phos - phorylation sites in cortactin have distinct functions for pheno - typic outcome ( Figure 7C ) . First , expression of S405A and S418A mutants had signiﬁcant inhibitory effect on the scattering phenotype , while expression of single phosphomimetic S405D and S418D mutants ( but not the double S405 / 418D mutant ) enhanced it . Remarkably , we found that phosphorylation of S - 405 is only found in p85 and phosphorylation of S - 418 is only found in p80 . Thus , both sites are never phosphorylated at the same cortactin molecule . It appears that cortactin mainly phosphorylated at S - 405 facilitates binding to FAK and activa - tion of its kinase activity at various phospho - sites , including Y - 397 , Y - 407 , or Y - 576 , both in vitro and in vivo . Thus , this inter - action inﬂuences focal adhesion turnover and cell attachment important in cell motility and elongation . The outcome of infected AGS cells in vitro is that scattering cells simply elongate because the lagging ends cannot detach properly during migration due to enhanced FAK activity at these sites . However , cortactin phos - phorylated at S - 418 binds FAK to much less extent as compared to S - 405 and did not stimulate FAK kinase activity , thus obvi - ously having a different function . A recent study showed that expression of cortactin S405 / 418 phosphorylation null con - structs impaired carcinoma motility and adhesion and also in - hibited lamellipodia persistence as monitored by live - cell imaging ( Kelley et al . , 2010 ) . Cortactin phosphorylated at S - 418 localized to sites of dynamic actin assembly in lamelipodia of migrating cancer cells ( Kelley et al . , 2010 ) . An intriguing possi - bilty is that the latter cortactin form interacts with other mole - cule ( s ) to regulate actin dynamics in lamellipodia persistence . In the Hp model , this molecule seems not to be N - WASP , and therefore it should be identiﬁed in future studies . Finally , infection with Hp induced the phosphorylation of S - 113 in cortactin . Phos - phorylation of S - 113 by PAK is not required for the translocation of cortactin to podosomes , lamellipodia or membrane in smooth muscle cells ( Webb et al . , 2006 ) . However , phosphorylation by PAK signiﬁcantly reduced binding of cortactin to F - actin ( Webb et al . , 2006 ) which is in agreement with our IP experiments and the ﬁnding that mutation of S113A had inhibitory effects on phenotypical outcome . Role of Cortactin in Infections with Other Pathogens Several other bacterial pathogens have been also reported to modify cortactin phosphorylation and / or localization during infection . For example , invasion of gastric epithelial cells by Shigella ﬂexneri induces the tyrosine phosphorylation of cortac - tin by a c - Src - dependent pathway and Crk was shown to directly interact with tyrosine - phosphorylated cortactin to promote cor - tactin - dependent actin polymerization required for Shigella uptake ( Bougne ` res et al . , 2004 ; Nhieu et al . , 2005 ) . Similarly , invasion of host cells by Neisseria meningitidis and Staphylo - coccus aureus stimulates cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation ( Hoffmann et al . , 2001 ; Agerer et al . , 2005 ) . In addition , EPEC and EHEC recruit cortactin to the bacterial adhesion site in actin pedestals involving changes of its tyrosine phosphorylation ( Cantarelli et al . , 2007 ; Nieto - Pelegrin and Martinez - Quiles , 2009 ) . Consequently , tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin seems to play a role in bacterial invasion ( Shigella , Neisseria , and Staphylococcus ) and attachment / pedestal formation of extracellular bacteria ( EPEC and EHEC ) . Cortactin also appears to have a role in Listeria invasion , but the phosphorylation status is not clear ( Barroso et al . , 2006 ; Veiga and Cossart , 2005 ) . We show that Hp speciﬁcally induces the tyrosine dephosphoryla - tion and serine phosphorylation of cortactin . Similarly to Shigella and Neisseria , the activity of Src in infected cells determines the level of cortactin phosphorylation . In contrast to the latter path - ogens , however , cortactin does not appear to be involved in Hp invasion or attachment ( Selbach and Backert , 2005 ) . Since injected CagA highjacks Par1 kinase to disrupt cell polarity ( Saa - dat et al . , 2007 ) , Hp has an important impact on disturbing the integrity of the infected gastric epithelium , probably to loosen cell - to - cell junctions locally in order to gain access to certain nutrients which are absent in the gastric lumen . We propose that Hp therefore targets cortactin to enhance FAK activity as a straightforward mechanism to protect the gastric epithelium from excessive cell lifting from the substratum to ensure the life - long infection process at the epithelial surface . Since this signaling is associated with AGS cell scattering and elongation in vitro , this could also have important consequences for certain disease - associated events in vivo . Therefore , it will be interesting to determine in future studies whether serine phosphorylation of cortactin also plays a role in infections with other pathogens , and to characterize the associated signaling pathways . Conclusions Cortactin is a central regulator of the host actin cytoskeleton . Moreover , it was called an Achilles’ heel of the actin cytoskeleton Cell Host & Microbe Cortactin Targets FAK and Its Kinase Activity Cell Host & Microbe 9 , 520 – 531 , June 16 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . 529 because many pathogens highjack signals that converge on this scaffolding protein . Here , we gave insights on the role and regu - lation of cortactin phosphorylation events and downstream signaling , which contributes signiﬁcantly to our better under - standing of the molecular action of this protein . Using Hp as a model system , we characterized a molecular switch between tyrosine and serine phosphorylation in cortactin . We discovered an interaction partner of cortactin which was identiﬁed as FAK and we present a pathway leading to FAK activation ( Figure 7C ) . In this way Hp targets cortactin by two independent processes : ( 1 ) tyrosine dephosphorylation ( CagA - dependent ) and then ( 2 ) serine phosphorylation ( CagA independent ) . Both events are essential for cortactin - FAK interaction , and the stimulation of FAK activity is involved in deregulating normal cell adhesion processes . In summary , the characteristic changes in mor - phology of infected AGS cells resemble the process of onco - genic transformation and involve Src inactivation as well as FAK activation . Since CagA - positive Hp are associated with the onset of gastric cancer ( Polk and Peek , 2010 ) , it is tempting to speculate that CagA also contributes to oncogenic transfor - mation of infected cells by interfering with c - Src , ERK1 / 2 , and PAK1 signaling to cortactin . Interestingly , the gene encoding cortactin is ampliﬁed in some human cancers and cortactin is suspected to play a major role in tumor invasion ( Schuuring et al . , 1993 ) . Thus , it will be interesting to ﬁnd out in future studies how Hp - mediated disruption of signaling to cortactin could contribute to the onset of gastric cancer in vivo . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Cell Culture and Bacteria The human gastric adenocarcinoma cell line AGS was obtained from ATCC ( CRL 1739 ) . Mouse knockout ﬁbroblast cells for FAK (cid:1) / (cid:1) ( Sieg et al . , 2000 ) and cortactin (cid:1) / (cid:1) ( Lai et al . , 2009 ) were described previously . The Hp WT strains P1 , P12 , and NCTC11637 and their isogenic D cagA mutants were grown on agar plates under microaerophilic conditions . For infection , bacteria were added at a multiplicity of infection of 100 . The number of elongated AGS cells in each experiment was quantiﬁed in 10 different 0 . 25 mm 2 ﬁelds ( Tegt - meyer et al . , 2009 ) . All experiments were done in triplicate . Cell Fractionation , Inhibitors , IPs , Western Blotting , and Antibodies Biochemical separation of infected AGS cells into cytosolic and membrane fractions was previously described ( Kwok et al . , 2007 ) . The FAK inhibitor PF - 573228 was added 30 min prior to infection according to the manufacturer ( Tocris Bioscience ) . Treated / infected cells were harvested in ice - cold PBS containing 1 mmol / liter Na 3 VO 4 ( Sigma - Aldrich ) . IPs and western blotting were done as previously described ( Tegtmeyer et al . , 2009 ) . Band intensities were quantitated with the Lumi - Imager F1 ( Roche ) . Antibodies used in this work are described in the Supplemental Experimental Procedures . In Vitro Phosphorylation and GST Pulldown Full - length mouse cortactin was cloned as GST - fusion protein and puriﬁed as described ( Martinez - Quiles et al . , 2004 ) . Three micrograms GST - cortactin were incubated with 0 . 5 m g ERK2 kinase ( Cell Sciences ) in 1 3 kinase buffer ( NEB ) containing0 . 4mMATPfor30minat30 (cid:3) C . PhosphorylatedGST - cortac - tin waspuriﬁed withtheGST Pull - Down Kitaccording totheinstructions of the supplier ( Pierce ) . Recombinant full - length human FAK ( 0 . 3 m g , Biosource ) was added to puriﬁed cortactin followed by incubation for 1 hr at 30 (cid:3) C followed by GST pulldown . Cell Attachment Assays AGS cell attachment and spreading assays were performed according to procedures described previously ( Tegtmeyer etal . , 2010 ) . In brief , Petri dishes were coated with 200 m l of 50 m g / ml human ﬁbronectin ( Sigma ) or polylysine ( 0 . 01 % solution , Sigma ) at 4 (cid:3) C overnight . Nonspeciﬁc binding sites were blocked by incubation with 5 % BSA . Conﬂuent AGS cells were trypsinised and treated with soybean trypsin inhibitor according to the instructions of thesupplier ( Sigma ) . AfterwashingwithPBS , 4 3 10 6 cellsinRPMIwereadded to the precoated petri dishes ( or left untreated in the test tube ) and incubated for 3 hr where more than 80 % of the cells adhered properly . Immunoﬂuorescence Microscopy For immunoﬂuorescence staining , cells were ﬁxed with 3 . 4 % PFA , permeabi - lized with 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 in PBS , and blocked with 1 % BSA . Proteins were stainedwith a - FAKand a - cortactin4F11antibodies . Assecondaryantibodies , TRITC - conjugated a - mouse or FITC - conjugated a - rabbit immunoglobulins were used ( Sigma ) . F - actin was detected with Alexa Fluor 350 - conjugated phalloidin ( Invitrogen ) . Samples were analyzed with a Leica DMRE7 ﬂuores - cence microscope ( Kwok et al . , 2007 ) . Plasmids , Mutagenesis , and Transfection of DNA and siRNA Plasmids , DNA mutagenesis , siRNAs and transfection experiments used in this work are described in the Supplemental Experimental Procedures . Statistical Analysis All data were evaluated via Student’s t test with SigmaStat statistical software ( version 2 . 0 ) . Statistical signiﬁcance was deﬁned by p % 0 . 01 ( * ) and p % 0 . 001 ( * * ) . SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplemental Information includes Supplemental Experimental Procedures and ﬁve ﬁgures and can be found with this article online at doi : 10 . 1016 / j . chom . 2011 . 05 . 007 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We are very grateful to the David Schlaepfer lab ( University of California ) for providing FAK (cid:1) / (cid:1) knockout cells and FAK D PR1 / PR2 - HA constructs , to Klemens Rottner and Frank Lai ( HZI Braunschweig ) for providing cortactin (cid:1) / (cid:1) cell lines , and to the entire Backert lab in Magdeburg . The work of S . B . is sup - ported through a Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft grant ( Ba1671 / 8 - 1 ) , and N . M . Q . was funded by FIS - PS09 / 00080 . Received : March 10 , 2011 Revised : April 29 , 2011 Accepted : May 25 , 2011 Published : June 15 , 2011 REFERENCES Agerer , F . , Lux , S . , Michel , A . , Rohde , M . , Ohlsen , K . , and Hauck , C . R . ( 2005 ) . Cellular invasion by Staphylococcus aureus reveals a functional link between focal adhesion kinase and cortactin in integrin - mediated internalisation . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 2189 – 2200 . Ammer , A . G . , and Weed , S . A . ( 2008 ) . Cortactin branches out : roles in regu - lating protrusive actin dynamics . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 65 , 687 – 707 . Barroso , C . , Rodenbusch , S . E . , Welch , M . D . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 2006 ) . A role for cortactin in Listeria monocytogenes invasion of NIH 3T3 cells , but not in its intracellular motility . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 63 , 231 – 243 . Bougne ` res , L . , Girardin , S . E . , Weed , S . A . , Karginov , A . V . , Olivo - Marin , J . C . , Parsons , J . T . , Sansonetti , P . J . , and Van Nhieu , G . T . ( 2004 ) . Cortactin and Crk cooperate to trigger actin polymerization during Shigella invasion of epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 166 , 225 – 235 . Bourzac , K . M . , Botham , C . M . , and Guillemin , K . ( 2007 ) . Helicobacter pylori CagA induces AGS cell elongation through a cell retraction defect that is inde - pendent of Cdc42 , Rac1 , and Arp2 / 3 . Infect . Immun . 75 , 1203 – 1213 . Brandt , S . , Kwok , T . , Hartig , R . , Ko ¨ nig , W . , and Backert , S . ( 2005 ) . NF - kappaB activation and potentiation of proinﬂammatory responses by the Helicobacter pylori CagA protein . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 9300 – 9305 . Cell Host & Microbe Cortactin Targets FAK and Its Kinase Activity 530 Cell Host & Microbe 9 , 520 – 531 , June 16 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . Campbell , D . H . , Sutherland , R . L . , and Daly , R . J . ( 1999 ) . Signaling pathways and structural domains required for phosphorylation of EMS1 / cortactin . Cancer Res . 59 , 5376 – 5385 . Cantarelli , V . V . , Kodama , T . , Nijstad , N . , Abolghait , S . K . , Nada , S . , Okada , M . , Iida , T . , and Honda , T . ( 2007 ) . Tyrosine phosphorylation controls cortactin binding to two enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli effectors : Tir and EspFu / TccP . Cell . Microbiol . 9 , 1782 – 1795 . Cosen - Binker , L . I . , and Kapus , A . ( 2006 ) . Cortactin : the gray eminence of the cytoskeleton . Physiology ( Bethesda ) 21 , 352 – 361 . Cowieson , N . P . , King , G . , Cookson , D . , Ross , I . , Huber , T . , Hume , D . A . , Kobe , B . , and Martin , J . L . ( 2008 ) . Cortactin adopts a globular conformation and bundles actin into sheets . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 16187 – 16193 . Daly , R . J . ( 2004 ) . Cortactinsignallinganddynamicactinnetworks . Biochem . J . 382 , 13 – 25 . Frischknecht , F . , and Way , M . ( 2001 ) . Surﬁng pathogens and the lessons learned for actin polymerization . Trends Cell Biol . 11 , 30 – 38 . Hauck , C . R . , Hsia , D . A . , and Schlaepfer , D . D . ( 2002 ) . The focal adhesion kinase—a regulator of cell migration and invasion . IUBMB Life 53 , 115 – 119 . Hoffmann , I . , Euge ` ne , E . , Nassif , X . , Couraud , P . O . , and Bourdoulous , S . ( 2001 ) . ActivationofErbB2receptortyrosinekinasesupportsinvasionofendo - thelial cells by Neisseria meningitidis . J . Cell Biol . 155 , 133 – 143 . Kelley , L . C . , Hayes , K . E . , Ammer , A . G . , Martin , K . H . , and Weed , S . A . ( 2010 ) . Cortactin phosphorylated by ERK1 / 2 localizes to sites of dynamic actin regu - lation and is required for carcinoma lamellipodia persistence . PLoS ONE 5 , e13847 . Kowalski , J . R . , Egile , C . , Gil , S . , Snapper , S . B . , Li , R . , and Thomas , S . M . ( 2005 ) . Cortactin regulates cell migration through activation of N - WASP . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 79 – 87 . Kwok , T . , Zabler , D . , Urman , S . , Rohde , M . , Hartig , R . , Wessler , S . , Misselwitz , R . , Berger , J . , Sewald , N . , Ko¨nig , W . , and Backert , S . ( 2007 ) . Helicobacter exploits integrin for type IV secretion and kinase activation . Nature 449 , 862 – 866 . Lai , F . P . , Szczodrak , M . , Oelkers , J . M . , Ladwein , M . , Acconcia , F . , Benesch , S . , Auinger , S . , Faix , J . , Small , J . V . , Polo , S . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Cortactin promotes migration and platelet - derived growth factor - induced actin reorganization by signaling to Rho - GTPases . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 , 3209 – 3223 . Li , Y . , Tondravi , M . , Liu , J . , Smith , E . , Haudenschild , C . C . , Kaczmarek , M . , and Zhan , X . ( 2001 ) . Cortactin potentiates bone metastasis of breast cancer cells . Cancer Res . 61 , 6906 – 6911 . Lua , B . L . , andLow , B . C . ( 2005 ) . Cortactinphosphorylationasaswitchforactin cytoskeletal network and cell dynamics control . FEBS Lett . 579 , 577 – 585 . Martinez - Quiles , N . , Ho , H . Y . , Kirschner , M . W . , Ramesh , N . , and Geha , R . S . ( 2004 ) . Erk / Src phosphorylation of cortactin acts as a switch on - switch off mechanism that controls its ability to activate N - WASP . Mol . Cell . Biol . 24 , 5269 – 5280 . Mimuro , H . , Suzuki , T . , Tanaka , J . , Asahi , M . , Haas , R . , and Sasakawa , C . ( 2002 ) . Grb2 is a key mediator of helicobacter pylori CagA protein activities . Mol . Cell 10 , 745 – 755 . Mizutani , K . , Miki , H . , He , H . , Maruta , H . , and Takenawa , T . ( 2002 ) . Essential role of neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein in podosome formation and degradation of extracellular matrix in src - transformed ﬁbroblasts . Cancer Res . 62 , 669 – 674 . Nhieu , G . T . , Enninga , J . , Sansonetti , P . , and Grompone , G . ( 2005 ) . Tyrosine kinase signaling and type III effectors orchestrating Shigella invasion . Curr . Opin . Microbiol . 8 , 16 – 20 . Nieto - Pelegrin , E . , and Martinez - Quiles , N . ( 2009 ) . Distinct phosphorylation requirements regulate cortactin activation by TirEPEC and its binding to N - WASP . Cell Commun . Signal . 7 , 11 – 16 . Orth , J . D . , andMcNiven , M . A . ( 2006 ) . Getoffmyback ! Rapidreceptorinternal - ization through circular dorsal rufﬂes . Cancer Res . 66 , 11094 – 11096 . Polk , D . B . , and Peek , R . M . , Jr . ( 2010 ) . Helicobacter pylori : gastric cancer and beyond . Nat . Rev . Cancer 10 , 403 – 414 . Saadat , I . , Higashi , H . , Obuse , C . , Umeda , M . , Murata - Kamiya , N . , Saito , Y . , Lu , H . , Ohnishi , N . , Azuma , T . , Suzuki , A . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Helicobacter pylori CagA targets PAR1 / MARK kinase to disrupt epithelial cell polarity . Nature 447 , 330 – 333 . Schuuring , E . , Verhoeven , E . , Litvinov , S . , and Michalides , R . J . ( 1993 ) . The product of the EMS1 gene , ampliﬁed and overexpressed in human carci - nomas , is homologous to a v - src substrate and is located in cell - substratum contact sites . Mol . Cell . Biol . 13 , 2891 – 2898 . Selbach , M . , and Backert , S . ( 2005 ) . Cortactin : an Achilles’ heel of the actin cytoskeleton targeted by pathogens . Trends Microbiol . 13 , 181 – 189 . Selbach , M . , Moese , S . , Hurwitz , R . , Hauck , C . R . , Meyer , T . F . , and Backert , S . ( 2003 ) . The Helicobacter pylori CagA protein induces cortactin dephosphory - lation and actin rearrangement by c - Src inactivation . EMBO J . 22 , 515 – 528 . Sieg , D . J . , Hauck , C . R . , Ilic , D . , Klingbeil , C . K . , Schaefer , E . , Damsky , C . H . , and Schlaepfer , D . D . ( 2000 ) . FAK integrates growth - factor and integrin signals to promote cell migration . Nat . Cell Biol . 2 , 249 – 256 . Tabassam , F . H . , Graham , D . Y . , and Yamaoka , Y . ( 2008 ) . OipA plays a role in Helicobacter pylori - induced focal adhesion kinase activation and cytoskeletal re - organization . Cell . Microbiol . 10 , 1008 – 1020 . Tegtmeyer , N . , Zabler , D . , Schmidt , D . , Hartig , R . , Brandt , S . , and Backert , S . ( 2009 ) . Importance of EGF receptor , HER2 / Neu and Erk1 / 2 kinase signalling for host cell elongation and scattering induced by the Helicobacter pylori CagA protein : antagonistic effects of the vacuolating cytotoxin VacA . Cell . Microbiol . 11 , 488 – 505 . Tegtmeyer , N . , Hartig , R . , Delahay , R . M . , Rohde , M . , Brandt , S . , Conradi , J . , Takahashi , S . , Smolka , A . J . , Sewald , N . , and Backert , S . ( 2010 ) . A small ﬁbro - nectin - mimickingproteinfrombacteriainduces cellspreadingandfocaladhe - sion formation . J . Biol . Chem . 285 , 23515 – 23526 . Tsutsumi , R . , Higashi , H . , Higuchi , M . , Okada , M . , andHatakeyama , M . ( 2003 ) . Attenuation of Helicobacter pylori CagA x SHP - 2 signaling by interaction between CagA and C - terminal Src kinase . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 3664 – 3670 . Tsutsumi , R . , Takahashi , A . , Azuma , T . , Higashi , H . , and Hatakeyama , M . ( 2006 ) . Focal adhesion kinase is a substrate and downstream effector of SHP - 2 complexed with Helicobacter pylori CagA . Mol . Cell . Biol . 26 , 261 – 276 . Uruno , T . , Liu , J . , Zhang , P . , Fan , Yx , Egile , C . , Li , R . , Mueller , S . C . , and Zhan , X . ( 2001 ) . Activation of Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated actin polymerization by cortactin . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 259 – 266 . Veiga , E . , and Cossart , P . ( 2005 ) . Listeria hijacks theclathrin - dependent endo - cytic machinery to invade mammalian cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 7 , 894 – 900 . Weaver , A . M . ( 2008 ) . Cortactin in tumor invasiveness . Cancer Lett . 265 , 157 – 166 . Webb , B . A . , Zhou , S . T . , Eves , R . , Shen , L . , Jia , L . , and Mak , A . S . ( 2006 ) . Phosphorylation of cortactin by p21 - activated kinase . Arch . Biochem . Biophys . 456 , 183 – 193 . Yamaguchi , H . , and Condeelis , J . ( 2007 ) . Regulation of the actin cytoskeleton in cancer cell migration and invasion . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1773 , 642 – 652 . Zhang , L . H . , Tian , B . , Diao , L . R . , Xiong , Y . Y . , Tian , S . F . , Zhang , B . H . , Li , W . M . , Ren , H . , Li , Y . , and Ji , J . F . ( 2006 ) . Dominant expression of 85 - kDa form of cor - tactin in colorectal cancer . J . Cancer Res . Clin . Oncol . 132 , 113 – 120 . Cell Host & Microbe Cortactin Targets FAK and Its Kinase Activity Cell Host & Microbe 9 , 520 – 531 , June 16 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . 531