83 Participatory design through a cultural lens : insights from postcolonial theory Henry Mainsah Institute for Design The Oslo School of Architecture and Design E - mail : henry . mainsah @ aho . no Andrew Morrison Institute for Design The Oslo School of Architecture and Design E - mail : andrew . morrison @ aho . no ABSTRACT This paper examines challenges faced in participatory design’s confrontation with cultural complexity in contexts of intercultural encounter and transnational exchange . We argue that there is need for more elaborate approaches to culture , technology , and participation in relation to participatory design . By examining issues at the crossroads between knowledge and power , agency and representation we identify a variety of ways in which Postcolonial Theory might inform Participatory Design . Author Keywords Participatory , postcolonial , transnational , position , power . ACM Classification Keywords Participatory Design , Postcolonial Theory , cultural critique INTRODUCTION As our technologies increasingly travel across different contexts and our participatory design ( PD ) methods , principles and practices engage new constituencies the issue of culture has grown to be a central concern . In this article we argue that there is a need for more elaborated approaches to culture , technology , and participation particularly in relation to participatory design . We suggest postcolonial theory ( PoCo ) as one cultural approach that could be useful in framing central challenges facing participatory approaches to design in transnational and cross - cultural contexts . PARTICIPATORY DESIGN AND CULTURE As PD has grown in response to the increasing prevalence of technology in work and leisure , it has encompassed perspectives from post - structuralist inquiry , principally from Feminism and Science Technology Studies ( STS ) . PD has developed principles and practices for engaging in the constructing alternatives ( Bødker et al . 2011 ) and also changing relationships between work , institutional power and participation . Today PD acknowledges that technologies are taken up and increasingly taken apart by people ( Bäck et al . 2013 ) culturally and communicatively in the context of social media , cloud computing and an ‘Internet of Things’ ( IoT ) populated by networked products , services and interactions ( Bannon & Ehn 2013 ) . Balsamo ( 2011 ) argues that design involves not just the making of new artifacts but always involves the creation of new cultural possibilities ( Bagnara and Crampton - Smith 2006 , Morrison 2010 ) . Thus everyone who participates in the design of new technologies is also engaged in the process of designing culture . Through the practices of designing , cultural beliefs are materially reproduced , identities are negotiated , and social relations are codified ( Julier 2000 / 2014 ) . In this process , design replicates previous meanings but at the same time it makes possible the expression of new meanings ; the ability to understand culture in design research and practice becomes even more important . Yet in these important moves to expand the perspectives and positionality of technology , ‘representation’ and culture there remains little in the published PD research that could be said to be informed by areas such as Cultural Studies and other critical perspectives from the humanities . Primarily , culture is concerned with the production and exchange of meaning ( Hall , 1997 ) . Cultural theory provides frameworks for understanding the make - up of culture - the values , codes , narratives , ideologies , discourses , and common sense , among other things . Cultural theory offers models for understanding the ways in which culture exerts influence on social structure and social life . When relations between participation and design are central one might have imagined there would be more attention to the cultural and communicative , issues of mediated representation , of ‘participatory cultures’ ( Jenkins 2006 ) and in closer relation to the cultural sector and ‘industries’ prevalent in a wider design and design research domain . Cultural perspectives are increasingly being taken up in research on museums as institutions concerned with fostering participant interaction . This work addresses contemporary issues of emergent participatory techno - cultures ( e . g . Hayles 2012 ) . Co - design and participation are framed within a dialogical model of an engaged participatory design involving assemblies of actors and interested parties in the production of cultural expression ( Robertson et al . 2006 ) . Such work builds on technical expertise and knowledge of cultural histories and representations from in digital cultural heritage within ethnology and cultural historical analysis ( e . g . Stuedahl 2009 ) . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . PDC ' 14 Companion , October 06 - 10 2014 , Windhoek , Namibia Copyright 2014 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 3214 - 9 / 14 / 10… $ 15 . 00 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2662155 . 2662195 84 POSTCOLONIAL PERSPECTIVES Postcolonial perspectives on culture aim to deconstruct material and discursive legacies of colonialism ( Radcliffe , 1999 : 84 ) . As a discipline of theory and criticism PoCo an approach to thinking about how local practice operates in contemporary transnational contexts affected by histories , relations , and logics of colonialism . Theoretically its cultural - linguistic and political economy approaches draw on influences from poststructuralism and Marxism ( Blunt and Wills 2000 ) . It emphasises complex historicized encounters among actors with different locations , varied forms of power , and different paths to modernity and “development” ( McEwan 2001 ) . PoCo theory destabilizes the assumption of western knowledge as objective , authoritative and universally applicable ( Anderson 2002 ) . In this regard the ‘colonial’ thus might be placed besides class , gender and race as a major category of social and historical analysis . Thus postcolonialism attempts to rewrite the hegemonic narratives of time ( history ) and the spatial distribution of knowledge ( power ) that constructs such binaries as developed / developing , the west and the rest , first world / third world . As McEwan ( 2001 ) points out , these practices of naming are not innocent . PoCo challenges the experiences of speaking and writing by which dominant discourses come into being . They can be considered as part of processes of “worlding” ( Spivak 1990 ) or setting apart certain parts of the world from others . PoCo perspectives problematize the way in which the world is known , challenging the unacknowledged and unexamined assumptions at the heart of western disciplines through a radical reconstruction of history and knowledge production ( Guha 1982 in McEwan 2001 ) . It seeks to understand how location , social dimensions of identity , and the global political economy differentiate between groups and the opportunities they have for development . DESIGN AND THE POSTCOLONIAL Robertson and Wagner ( 2013 ) have called for more ethical approaches to PD that focus on a more reflexive engagement with participants , agency , and emancipatory participation . Bringing about more equal power relations and actually fostering emancipatory participation remains a central challenge for participatory design . We are encouraged to see that Postcolonial Studies have already appeared in recent PD conferences and literature , though this is still within information and computational systems design . Postcolonial critique is being taken up in a limited extent in science and technology studies , Human Computer Interaction , design and product history and in participatory design ( Moalosi et al . 2007 ; Meritt and Bardzell 2011 ; Irani and Dourish 2009 ; Irani et al . 2010 ; Meritt and Stolterman 2012 ) . All these studies use postcolonial perspectives to draw attention to concerns of power , authority , legitimacy , participation , and intelligibility in the contexts of cultural encounter within design practice . In the following we suggest four areas where a PoCo approach might be fruitful to PD . Our choice of these four areas reflects core areas of interest within PoCo about issues of knowledge and power , agency and representation . Drawing on these core interest areas , we explore how they might inform PD research and practice . Power relations There have been increased calls within participatory design literature to cast new critical light on power relationships in design practices ( Puri et al . 2004 ) . One aim of PoCo is to attempt to overcome inequalities by opening up spaces for the agency of marginalized peoples . Postcolonial theory offers a fluid and contextualized approach to understanding the distribution of power in PD practices . Meritt and Stolterman ( 2012 ) point out that having a position as a project initiator within a PD project with means and resources for generating a technological intervention implies occupying a position of dominance . However , power relations are never fixed or static . Although the position of the ‘Western’ rese archer / practitioner in a developing country context is often seen as powerful , there are some situations where power is displaced . Power relations are fluid and are often negotiated across a complex web of gender , class , race , and generation . While participatory design intentionally addresses power relationships , its focus does not extend beyond structural power and voice at the micro - level in the design process ( Meritt and Stolterman 2012 ) . Postcolonial theory offers opportunities to generate systemic understanding of political economies from local cultural worlds . Stories about the networked travels of technological objects , for example , reveal layers of information about the power relations that enabled those networks . Spatial metaphors and cultural essentialism In descriptions of PD practices in contexts that differ from our own , we encounter statements such as “In Africa , participative community meetings are held under the umbrella of…” or “the current African practice of participatory community meetin gs” ( Zorn et al . 2010 : 273 ) . Such descriptions often assume the existence of “cultures” or practices “out there in Africa” that is alien and completely unrelated to cultures “back here” . they reflect views on culture as something that is fixed rather than an active ongoing construction . In a world characterized as increasingly diasporic , transnational , and deterritorialized , , “back here” and the “local” depends on context , the relationship between a particular social space and the larger matrix of power and cultural relations in which it is embedded , whether in the form of a nation , a region , or another form of imagined community . The spatialization of ‘here’ and ‘there’ is itself a colonial legacy , where the colonial power observed from a distance , a vantage point above the colonized . Said’s ( 1993 ) notion of the contrapuntal emphasises “overlapping territories” and “intertwined histories” that are important to think of together as registrations of a vast social experience binding all its participants , even if antagonistically and unequally . Arjun Appadurai observes 85 that the expansion of global capitalism has allowed for culture and capital to flow from different centres , in different directions , with often no clear centre and periphery . Appadurai proposes to replace the centre - periphery model with a complex matrix of overlapping global cultural flows , which he categorises as “ethnoscapes , mediascapes , technoscapes , finanscapes , and ideoscapes” ( 1996 : 37 ) . Irani and colleagues ( 2010 ) coined the term ‘postcolon ial computing’ to challenge the idea of simple cultural binaries and taxonomic understandings of culture . Highlighting the importance of situating domestic technology in local culture , Bardzell et al . called for interaction designers to ‘find constructive ways to engage with users in such a way as to avoid oversimplified constructs . ’ While previous designations and dichotomies that signal both spatial and temporal distance – “developed” and “developing” world , “Africa and the “West” , “out there” and “back here” – the postcolonial perspective insists that the other world “out there” is related to the world “back here” ( Chambers 1996 : 209 ) . For PD , this calls for increased attention to the language of the texts of participatory design research - the metaphors , images , allusion , fantasy and rhetoric and what types they produce about peoples and places . Design as culture When technologists in PD , ICT4D , and HCI have faced design problems in intercultural settings they often tried to resolve these through models where culture is seen as something stable enough to be a fixed variant . These models often have origins in some forms of user - centred design that strive to fit technologies to a stabilized notion of the user ( Philip et al . 2012 ) . PoCo highlights the importance of viewing design as a cultural practice . Design objects are embedded in culture and are always reaching out to various cultural contexts incorporating different dimensions and resonances of meaning . Design , thus , is always a practice of representation where every structure of sensually appealing materiality has an immaterial dimension in a process of signifying meaning in a way that reflects and affects culture . PoCo recognizes categories such as female , African , or human do not exist independently of technology . Rather what it means to be African or ‘Western’ is often deeply entangled with power , institutions and technologies . Incorporating a PoCo perspective into PD requires a reconsideration of approaches that promise user - centred design to develop design artefacts appropriate to people located in some stable , coherent , and knowable cultural space . Rather , it would require recognizing ‘ indigenous ’ or ‘local’ spaces as sites of contestation and cultural innovation , where we should expect to find new forms of technical practices emerging and moving from these spaces ( Philip et al . 2012 ) . ‘De - centering’ PD knowledge PoCo theory is concerned with the epistemological and ontological status of the voices of subaltern peoples in Western knowledge systems . The question this brings in relation to PD is where in a global context the ‘centres’ and the ‘peripheries’ of knowledge production with PD are located today . PoCo helps problematize the dominance of ‘western eyes’ in PD research and it provides elaborate theoretical concepts and analyses of the creative arts from which design research may draw and engage with in dialogues concerning making and participation . A PoCo approach to PD will highlight the significance of knowledge from the margins . bell hooks ( 1990 ) argues that the margins are a site of ‘radical possibility’ . From the margins emerges hybridized indigenous knowledge that according to her offers a unique perspective undistorted by the power and prejudices of the centre . Although PD stresses the importance of participation of stakeholders in the process of design , these local participants do not often take part in the process of interpretation and analysis through which knowledge is produced . As bell hooks ( 1990 ) points out , the experience of the marginalized are used in the west without opening up the process to their knowledges , theories and explanations . When there is a meeting between the centre and the margins , it is always according to terms set down by the centre . bell hooks further argues that by retelling her experience her voice is included , but only as an example , or as data that the Western ‘expert’ alone can interpret . This is precisely why PoCo attempts to recover the voices of the oppressed marginalized and dominated . Theorists ( Spivak 1988 ; hooks 1990 ) have questioned the ability of researchers and experts in the West to engage with people elsewhere , in a manner that requires a de - centering of themselves as experts . Spivak ( 1988 ) asks whether ‘the subaltern’ can ever speak , so imbued must she ( the subaltern ) be with the words , phrases and cadences of Western thought in order for her to be heard . Robinson ( 1994 ) challenges the privileged fixed position of the researcher , to deconstruct the dualism between “self - researcher” and the “othe r - researched” . He instead opts for a “third space” where the subjectivities of both researcher and researched are mutually constructed , and meanings and interactions are also mediated , as is knowledge itself . CONCLUSION We have argued for the need for more elaborate approaches to culture , technology , and participation in relation to participatory design . Postcolonial approaches help explore how the production of knowledge on design and technology appropriation is inseparable from the exercise of power . With PoCo perspectives we can be better equipped to loosen the power of Western centred knowledge in PD and reassert the value of alternative experiences and ways of knowing ( Bhabha 1994 ; Fanon 1968 ; Spivak 1990 ) . It offers an expansive understanding of the potentialities of agency that can help inform and generate changes in PD practice . A PoCo approach offers new ways of conceiving the “participation” ethos of PD where work with participants at grassroots level in different cultural contexts contributes to breaking down hierarchies of knowledge / power that privilege the expert / outsider , undermine western imperialisms by 86 bringing new local knowledge to the fore in ways that dismantle a priori categories of PD knowledge . PD research in global contexts involves shifting the unit of analysis from local , regional , and national to relations and processes across cultures . Grounding analyses in articular , local sites of PD practice is necessary , but understanding the local in relation to larger , cross - national processes is also important . Postcolonial theory can contribute to the critical exploration of the relationships between cultural power and global economic power . Thus it points towards a radical reclaiming of the political and ideological dimension of PD . REFERENCES Anderson , W . Introduction : postcolonial technoscience , Social Studies of Science , 2002 , 32 ( 5 ) : 643 - 658 . Appadurai , A . Modernity at Large . Minneapolis : University of Minnesota Press . 1996 . Bäck , A . , Friedrich , P . , Ropponen , T . , Harju , A . and Hintikka , K . From design participation to civic participation - participatory design of a social media service . International Journal of Social and Humanistic Computing , 2013 , 2 ( 1 / 2 ) : 51 - 67 . Bagnara , S . and Crampton - Smith , G . ( eds ) . Theories and Practice of Interaction Design . Mahwah : Erlbaum . 2006 . Balsamo , A . Designing Culture . Durham : Duke University Press , 2011 . Bhabha , H . K . The Location of Culture . Routledge , UK . 1994 . Blunt , A . and Wills , J . Dissident geographies , London : Prentice Hall , 2000 . Bødker , K . , Kensing , F . and Simonsen , J . Participatory IT design : designing for business and workplace realities . MIT Press , Cambridge . 2004 . Chambers , I . Waiting on the end of the world ? In Morley , D . and Chen , K - H . ( Eds . ) Stuart Hall : critical dialogues in Cultural Studies . London : Routledge . 1996 . Ehn , P . Work - Oriented Design of Computer Artifacts . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . 1988 . Elovaara , P . , Igira , F . T . , and Mörtberg , C . Whose Participation ? Whose Knowledge ? Exploring PD in Tanzania - Zanzibar and Sweden . Proc . PDC 2006 , 105 - 114 . Fanon , F . The wretched of the earth . New York : Grove Press . 1968 . Guha , R . ( ed . ) Subaltern studies , New Delhi : Oxford University Press . 1982 . Hall , S . ( ed . ) Representation : Cultural Representation and signifying practices . London : Sage . 1997 . Hayles , C . How We Think . Chicago : Chicago University Press , 2012 . hooks , b . Yearning : race , gender and cultural politics . Boston , MA : South End Press . 1990 . Irani , L . and Dourish , P . Postcolonial interculturality . Proc . IWIC 2009 , 249 - 252 . Irani , L . , Vertesi , J . , Dourish , P . , Philip , K . , Grinter , R . E . Postcolonial Computing : A Lens on Design and Development . Proc . CHI 2010 , 1311 - 1320 . Jenkins , H . Convergence Culture : Where Old and New Media Collide . New York : NYU Press , 2006 . Julier , G . Cultures of Design . Sage , London . ( 3 rd edition ) . 2000 / 2014 . McEwan , C . Postcolonialism , feminism and development : intersections and dilemmas . Progress in Development Studies , 2001 , 1 ( 2 ) : 93 - 111 . Merritt , S . and Bardzell , S . Postcolonial Language and Culture Theory for HCI4D . Proc . CHI EA 2011 , 1675 - 1680 . Moalosi , R . , Popovic , V . and Hickling - Hudson , A . Product Analysis Based on Botswana ' s Postcolonial Socio - cultural Perspective . IJD . 2007 , 1 ( 2 ) , 35 - 43 . Morrison , A . Inside Multimodal Composition . Cressjkill : Hapmton Press , 2010 . Mörtberg , C . , Bratteig , T . , Wagner , I . , Stuedahl , D . & Morrison , A . Methods that matter in digital design research . In Wagner , I . , Bratteteig , T . and Stuedahl , D . ( eds ) . Exploring Digital Design . Vienna : Springer . 105 - 147 . 2010 . Philip , K . , Irani , L . and Dourish , P . Postcolonial computing : a tactical survey , Science Technology Human Values , 37 ( 1 ) : 3 - 29 . Puri , S . , Byrne , E . , Nhampossa , J . , and Quraishi , Z . Contextuality of Participation in IS Design : A Developing Country Perspective . Proc . PDC 2004 , 42 - 52 . Robertson , T . , Mansfield , T . and Loke , L . Designing an immersive environment for public use . Proc . PDC 2006 , 31 - 40 . Robinson , J . White women researching / representing ‘others’ : from anti - apartheid to postcolonialism ? In Blunt , A . and Rose , G . ( eds . ) Writing women and space . New York : Guilford , 1994 . Said , E . Culture and imperialism . New York : Vintage Books . 1993 . Simonsen J . and Robertson , T . Routledge International Handbook of Participatory Design . Routledge : London . 2013 . Spivak , G . The postcolonial critic : interviews , strategies , dialogue . London : Routledge . 1990 . Stuedahl , D . Digital Cultural Heritage Engagement . Ethnologia Scandinavica , 39 ( X ) : 67 - 81 . 2009 Zorn , B . Winschiers , N . and Theophilus , E . The baobab as a shared canvas , Proc . PDC 2010 , 273 - 74 .