University of Groningen Endocytosis by Random Initiation and Stabilization of Clathrin - Coated Pits Ehrlich , Marcelo ; Boll , Werner ; van Oijen , Antonius ; Hariharan , Ramesh ; Chandran , Kartik ; Nibert , Max L . ; Kirchhausen , Tomas Published in : Cell DOI : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2004 . 08 . 017 IMPORTANT NOTE : You are advised to consult the publisher ' s version ( publisher ' s PDF ) if you wish to cite from it . Please check the document version below . Document Version Publisher ' s PDF , also known as Version of record Publication date : 2004 Link to publication in University of Groningen / UMCG research database Citation for published version ( APA ) : Ehrlich , M . , Boll , W . , Oijen , A . V . , Hariharan , R . , Chandran , K . , Nibert , M . L . , & Kirchhausen , T . ( 2004 ) . Endocytosis by Random Initiation and Stabilization of Clathrin - Coated Pits . Cell , 118 ( 5 ) , 591 - 605 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2004 . 08 . 017 CopyrightOther than for strictly personal use , it is not permitted to download or to forward / distribute the text or part of it without the consent of the author ( s ) and / or copyright holder ( s ) , unless the work is under an open content license ( like Creative Commons ) . Take - down policy If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details , and we will remove access to the work immediately and investigate your claim . Downloaded from the University of Groningen / UMCG research database ( Pure ) : http : / / www . rug . nl / research / portal . For technical reasons the number of authors shown on this cover page is limited to 10 maximum . Download date : 01 - 02 - 2019 Cell , Vol . 118 , 591 – 605 , September 3 , 2004 , Copyright  2004 by Cell Press Endocytosis by Random Initiation and Stabilization of Clathrin - Coated Pits Kirchhausen , 1999 ) . The life cycle of a clathrin - coated vesicle , from coat assembly , cargo loading , and vesicle budding to coat disassembly and cargo delivery , in - Marcelo Ehrlich , 1 Werner Boll , 1 Antoine van Oijen , 2 Ramesh Hariharan , 3 Kartik Chandran , 4 Max L . Nibert , 4 and Tomas Kirchhausen 1 , * volves a sequence of regulated events on a time scale of seconds to minutes ( Kirchhausen , 2000 ) . Many of the 1 Department of Cell Biology Harvard Medical School and steps have been inferred from biochemical and cell - structural studies ( Conner and Schmid , 2003 ) , and some The CBR Institute for Biomedical Research 200 Longwood Avenue have recently been observed using live - cell imaging techniques ( Gaidarov et al . , 1999 ; Merrifield et al . , 2002 , Boston , Massachusetts 02115 2 Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology 2004 ; Rappoport and Simon , 2003 ) . Clathrin assemblies were first seen in living cells using Harvard University Cambridge , Massachusetts 02138 transient expression of EGFP - tagged clathrin light chains ( Gaidarov et al . , 1999 ) . Some of these assemblies were 3 Department of Computer Science Indian Institute of Science stationary and long - lived ; others appeared and disap - peared on a time scale of about a minute . A more de - Bangalore , 560012 India tailedanalysis ofthelater stagesinassembly ofselected coatedpits , usingsomewhatdifferentvisualizationtech - 4 Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics niques , showed that budding of a coated vesicle could be detected by an abrupt movement of the fluorescent Harvard Medical School 200 Longwood Avenue clathrin cluster , followed by loss of the clathrin signal after 15 – 30 s—an event interpreted as uncoating ( Merri - Boston , Massachusetts 02115 field et al . , 2002 ) . A sudden burst of dynamin associated with the coated pit , detected using dynamin1 - EGFP , preceded budding . A different group , using dynamin2 - Summary EGFP , reportedsimilar resultsbut found amore continu - ous increase in the dynamin signal ( Rappoport and Si - Clathrin - coated vesicles carry traffic from the plasma membrane to endosomes . We report here the real - mon , 2003 ) . Do these observations on selected coated pits repre - time visualization of cargo sorting and endocytosis by clathrin - coated pits in living cells . We have detected sent the full range of clathrin - associated events ? To answer this question , we have undertaken an unbiased the formation of coats by monitoring incorporation of fluorescently tagged clathrin or its adaptor AP - 2 ; we analysis of clathrin dynamics at plasma membranes of cells stably expressing EGFP - or YFP - tagged clathrin have also followed clathrin - mediated uptake of trans - ferrinandofsingleLDLorreovirusparticles . Theinten - light chain A to label clathrin , and EGFP - tagged (cid:1) 2 - adaptin to label the plasma - membrane clathrin adaptor sity of a cargo - loaded clathrin cluster grows steadily during its lifetime , and the time required to complete AP - 2 . In addition to coated pits that grow , bud , and uncoat as previously described , we detect a large num - assembly is proportional to the size of the cargo parti - cle . These results are consistent with a nucleation - ber of relatively short - lived clathrin clusters , which may be abortive coated pits . By conjoining this analysis with growth mechanism and an approximately constant growth rate . There are no strongly preferred nucle - studies of how single cargo molecules associate with individual clathrin - coated pits , we find that cargo is cap - ation sites . A proportion of the nucleation events are weak and short lived . Cargo incorporation occurs pri - turedonlybyrelatively“young”pits , whichthencontinue to grow with a mean total lifetime now determined by marily or exclusively in a newly formed coated pit . Our data lead to a model in which coated pits initiate the size of the cargo . These characteristics are consis - tent with the requirements of a system that must entrap randomly but collapse unless stabilized , perhaps by cargo capture . cargo of highly variable size and shape . Introduction Results Clathrin - coatedvesicles arethemost prominentcarriers Expression of Fluorescently Labeled Clathrin oftraffic betweentheplasmamembrane andearlyendo - and AP - 2 somes . A local , clathrin - associated invagination of the We established a monkey BSC1 epithelial cell line stably plasma membrane , a coated pit , pinches off to form a expressing rat brain clathrin LCa - EGFP ( Figure 1A ) , and membrane - derivedcoatedvesicle . Cargomolecules , such we showed that this fusion protein labeled coated pits as receptors that have specific targeting sequences in and vesicles and that it did not affect receptor - mediated theircytoplasmictails , arerecruitedtocoatedpitsthrough endocytic traffic of transferrin ( Figure 1B ) . In addition , interaction of their targeting signals with adaptor pro - we generated and characterized cell lines expressing teins ( Bonifacino and Traub , 2003 ; Brodsky et al . , 2001 ; LCa - YFP , which also colocalized with endogenous clathrin heavy chain and did not affect receptor - medi - ated endocytosis . At least 60 % of the endogenous * Correspondence : kirchhausen @ crystal . harvard . edu Cell592 Figure 1 . Labeling of Clathrin - Coated Struc - tures with LCa - EGFP ( A ) BSC1 cells stably expressing rat brain clathrin light chain LCa1fused to EGFP ( LCa - EGFP ) ( green ) werefixedwith3 . 75 % paraform - aldehyde and labeled with the monoclonal antibody X22 specific for the heavy chain of clathrin ( red ) . The epifluorescence views cor - respond to the bottom surface of the cell , in contact with the glass cover slip . The en - largedmergedviewofLCa - EGFPandendog - enous clathrin heavy chain ( upper right cor - ner ) corresponds to the section indicated by the square . The distribution of LCa - EGFP at the top and bottom cell surfaces displays the expectedpunctatepattern , andmostclusters ( 92 % (cid:2) 2 % , 545clustersinfourcells ) colocal - ize precisely with endogenous clathrin heavy chain . Scale bar , 10 (cid:3) m . ( B – D ) Expression of LCa - EGFP or (cid:1) 2 - EGFP had minimal effects on the uptake of trans - ferrin and its traffic to endosomes . After the continuous uptake of 50 (cid:3) g / ml transferrin la - beled with Alexa647 ( red ) for 20 min at 37 (cid:4) C by a mixture of BSC1 cells stably expressing ( or not ) LCa - EGFP ( green ) , the cells were fixed and imaged by epifluorescence microscopy . ( D ) BSC1 cells stably expressing (cid:1) 2 - EGFP ( green ) transientlyexpressing LCa - mRFP ( red ) . Theenlargedviewcorrespondstothebottomsurfaceofthecell . clathrin light chains LCa and LCb were replaced by LCa - nated at two wavelengths using a time - lapse series de - signed to acquire up to 300 consecutive images at inter - EGFP or LCa - YFP , as determinedby Western blot analy - sis of coated vesicles isolated from the expresser cells vals of 2 . 6 – 20 s and for periods of up to 20 min . No significant differences were observed in the analyses ( data not shown ) . We also established a BSC1 cell line stably expressing the AP - 2 rat brain (cid:1) 2 - adaptin fused described below when performed with images obtained by focusing on the top surface of the cell facing the at its C terminus to EGFP ( Figure 1C ) . As expected , this fusion protein associated only with the plasma mem - medium , or with images obtained from the bottom sur - face , in contact with the supporting glass cover slip . brane and colocalized perfectly with transiently ex - pressed clathrin LCa - mRFP ( Figure 1C ) and with endog - To track clathrin and AP - 2 clusters along the time series automatically , all images were spatially filtered enous AP - 2 ( data not shown ) . Its expression did not prevent uptake of transferrin ( Figure 1D ) . and segmented using SlideBook 4 ( Experimental Proce - dures ) . The procedure successfully identified all clus - ters , as verified by visual inspection in randomly chosen Dynamics of Clathrin and AP - 2 Assemblies We characterized the life cycle of the clathrin - coated images along the time series ( Figure 2A and Supplemen - tal Movies S3 and S4 on the Cell web site ) . The fluores - pits and vesicles tagged with fluorescent clathrin and AP - 2 using images acquired with a microscope config - centclusters appearedasobjects of200 – 400 nmdiame - ter , as expected for a coated pit or vesicle 100 – 200 nm ured with a confocal spinning disk ( see Supplemental Movies S1 – S4 at http : / / www . cell . com / cgi / content / full / in diameter , given the diffraction limit imposed by the transfer function of the microscope . 118 / 5 / 591 / DC1 ) . The samples were alternately illumi - Clathrin - Mediated Endocytosis in Living Cells 593 Figure 2 . Dynamics of Clathrin Coats ( A ) Validity check for automatic spot assignment in BSC1 cells expressing LCA - YFP . ( Left panel ) A representative raw image from a single time point acquired from the bottom surface of a BSC1 cell constitutively expressing clathrin LCa - YFP ( green ) . The bright spots correspond to LCa - YFP clusters . ( Right panel ) Positions and shapes of the masks corresponding to the objects identified automatically by the spot recognition algorithm . The correctness of the particle - tracking procedure that follows the identity of single clathrin clusters during the time series was confirmed by visual inspection ( see Supplemental Movie S3 ) . ( B ) Lifetime distribution for clathrin clusters in cells stably expressing LCA - EGFP . The distribution was determined from the elapsed time between the appearance and disappearance of every LCa - EGFP cluster present in the time series . Data were acquired from top and bottom surfaces of three different cells ; only events appearing after the second time frame and disappearing before the last frame and lasting at least 16 s ( four frames ) are included . The inset shows the maximum net fluorescence intensity of each clathrin cluster ( usually observed at the end of its life ) as a function of its lifetime . The series was acquired every 4 s for a period of 7 min . Approximately 90 by 90 pixels ( 130 nm / pixel ) were analyzed . ( C ) Fluorescence intensity calibration . The distribution of net fluorescence intensities ( fluorescence intensity for a given spot minus the fluorescence intensity of the background for an area of the same size ) was determined for the diffraction - limited clusters present in a sample of chemically crosslinked coated vesicles purified from BSC1 cells expressing LCa - EGFP . The average net fluorescence intensity ( 140 and 230 ) and the relative contribution ( 55 % and 17 % ) of the first two peaks were obtained from a multiple Gaussian fit . The inset shows the size distribution for an aliquot of the same sample , negatively stained with 1 . 2 % uranyl acetate and imaged by electron microscopy . The relative contribution of the barrel ( 65 – 70 nm ) and soccer ball ( 90 – 100 nm ) coats is 55 % and 22 % , also from a multiple Gaussian fit . ( D ) Lifetime distribution for the clathrin LCa - EGFP clusters shown in ( B ) separated according to their net fluorescence intensity into two groups of 482 and 165 spots with maximum net fluorescence intensity above and below 140 , respectively . ( E ) Distribution of lifetimes for AP - 2 clusters in cells stably expressing (cid:1) 2 - EGFP . The distribution was determined from the elapsed time between the appearance and disappearance of every (cid:1) 2 - EGFP cluster present in the time series . Only events appearing after the second time frame and disappearing before the last frame and lasting at least 12 s ( four frames ) are included . The number of AP complexes in a coated pit is less than the number of LCa light chains ( Kirchhausen , 1999 ) , so that the (cid:1) 2 - EGFP signal for a given sized coated pit is weaker . The earliest time at which the AP complex can be detected is therefore slightly later than the earliest clathrin detection time . At current data collection rates , the difference is relatively minor . The inset shows the maximum net fluorescence intensity of each AP - 2 cluster ( usually observed at the end of its life ) as a function of its lifetime . The series was acquired every 3 s for a period of 10 min . Approximately 90 by 90 pixels ( 130 nm / pixel ) were analyzed . The clathrin clusters appeared and disappeared with 60 triskelions ( soccer ball design ) ( Figure 2C ) . The fluo - rescence intensities from longer - lived clathrin clusters a mean lifetime of 46 s ( Figure 2B ) . The most frequent events had a duration of 28 – 32 s and a net fluorescence corresponded to the signal from larger isolated coated vesicles with diameters between 100 and 200 nm . Thus , intensity of 230 . We used coated vesicles isolated from this cell line to relate the net fluorescence intensity val - longer - lived clusters correspond to larger coated pits . The fluorescence intensity from a particular cluster in - ues to the size of the coated pits ( Experimental Proce - dures ) . The average intensity of these 28 – 32 s clusters creased as a function of time until the moment of its disappearance . We seldom found inactive fluorescent justpriortodisappearance ( Figure 2B , inset ) agreedvery well with the fluorescence emitted by isolated coated patches at the plasma membrane , and we did not ob - serve diffraction - limited small spots emanating from vesicles 90 – 100 nm in diameter and therefore containing Cell594 Figure 3 . Sites of Formation of Clathrin - Coated Pits ( A ) The 2D plot shows the locations in an imaged area at which new clathrin clusters appeared during the course of the 7 min time series analyzed in Figure 2B . ( B ) Clustering analysis of the nucleation sites used by newly formed coated pits using Ripley’s K function ( Ripley , 1976 ) . The solid lines are plots of the K function calculated from the experimental data of BSC1 cells expressing LCa - EGFP ( orange and red ) and (cid:1) 2 - EGFP ( green ) or from COS cells expressing LCa - EGFP ( blue ) and acquired every 2 , 4 , 3 , or 4 s , respectively . The stippled lines correspond to simulated K functions with ( gray ) or without ( orange and blue ) Poissonian contributions to rationalize the observed deviations from Poissonian behavior . The orange dotted line is obtained from a distribution of events in a field of active patches 400 nm in diameter surrounded by inactive rims of 200 nm wide . The blue line is obtained by combining this geometry with nonactive , empty regions ( inactivation of 50 % of the field by multiple empty regions , each having a diameter varying from 500 nm to 2 . 6 (cid:3) m ) . Both simulated curves are obtained with datasets that have a number of events and observation area similar to those in the experimental data sets . ( C ) Location of AP - 2 clusters in the first time frame ( left panel , black ; right panel , yellow ) compared to the location of all the AP - 2 clusters projected as a single frame ( right panel , red ) from the BSC1 stably expressing (cid:1) 2 - EGFP used for ( B ) and Supplemental Movie S2 . These images illustrate the absence of preferred sites for coat assembly . stable clusters , in contrast to some previous observa - A number of clusters ( (cid:1) 25 % of total ) had low intensity ( net fluorescence intensity of 140 or less ) and appeared tions ( Gaidarov et al . , 1999 ; Rappoport and Simon , 2003 ) . We did see stable clusters that persisted for at and disappeared with lifetimes of 16 – 28 s ( Figure 2D ) . These were identified and tracked by the software with least200sonthebottomsurfaceofCOScellstransientlyexpressingLCa - EGFP or LCa - YFP . We believe that a certainty of greater than 99 . 95 % ( Supplemental Data ) , and their assignments were verified manually . Their in - these stable clusters are the large , flat clathrin arrays seen by electron microscopy on the bottom surfaces of tensity corresponds to no more than 30 triskelions , in - dicting that , whatever these events represent , they can - cells ( Heuser , 1989 ) . The on - off dynamics of LCa - EGFP in BSC1 and COS cells were similar ( data not shown ) . not be complete coated vesicles . They may represent abortive coatedpits ( see below ) . Theremaining clusters , We saw no stable patches of (cid:1) 2 - EGFP in the BSC1 cells ; all the (cid:1) 2 - EGFP clusters showed the on - off behavior of greater intensity , displayed a broader distribution of lifetimes , peaking between 28 and 36 s . The lifetime just described for clathrin ( Figure 2E ) . Clathrin - Mediated Endocytosis in Living Cells 595 distribution for (cid:1) 2 - EGFP clusters resembled that for of the cell surface was inactive for coated pit formation and that these inactive regions varied in diameter from clathrin clusters but shifted toward shorter times by about 6 s ( Figure 2E ) . 0 . 5 to 2 . 6 (cid:3) m . The inactive regions might correspond to folds in the cell surface , constraints imposed by the The rate of appearance of new clathrin clusters lasting at least 20 s was about three events per 10 8 nm 2 s (cid:5) 1 . underlying cytoskeleton , or other special features of COS cells . We were unable to get a good fit by assuming Assuming that the majority of these events correspond to a 100 nm diameter coat , this rate can readily account restricted“hotspots”—thatis , byusingasmalldiameter for the active zone and a larger width for the inactive rim . for the observed capacity of cell in culture to internalize about 1 % – 2 % of cell membrane in 1 min through the clathrin pathway ( Hansen et al . , 1992 ) . As expected , the Correlated Dynamics of Clathrin , AP - 2 , dynamic on - off behavior of all of these clathrin clusters and Dynamin in Coated Pits was prevented by conditions known to interfere directly We monitored the behavior of transiently expressed or indirectly with clathrin coat assembly ( Supplemental clathrin LCa - mRFP in BSC1 cells stably expressing Movies S5 – S7 ) . It is therefore likely that most of the on - (cid:1) 2 - EGFP . Every fluorescent spot containing (cid:1) 2 - EGFP off events of lifetime equal to or greater than 24 – 28 s colocalized with LCa - mRFP ( Figure 1C ) in living cells , include all steps of clathrin coat assembly : nucleation and most ( 91 % ) colocalized with clathrin heavy chain in of a coated pit , completion of growth , transformation fixed cells ( data not shown ) . The clusters found in the into a coated vesicle by budding , and vesicle uncoating . coexpressing cells displayed the same on - off behavior as those in cells expressing only tagged LCa or (cid:1) 2 , indicating that coexpression did not affect the assembly Initiation Sites of coated pits and vesicles . For all spots , regardless of The majority of clathrin ( or (cid:1) 2 ) clusters in BSC1 cells their age , the fluorescent signals for LCa and (cid:1) 2 always appeared on the cell surface at sites that were not re - appeared and disappeared together and with similar used during the observation time ( Figures 3A and 3C ) . rates during the life of a cluster ( Figure 4A ) . We conclude Because the cells were stationary during the acquisition that clathrin and adaptor complexes coassociate in time , we can rule out the trivial explanation that global coated pits and that clathrin uncoating and adaptor dis - motion is responsible for the low frequency of spatial sociation also occur together . colocalization of nucleation sites . We performed a clus - Dynamin is required for budding of coated - vesicle tering analysis based on use of a scaled form of Ripley’s membranes . We transiently expressed clathrin LCa - K function ( Ripley , 1976 ) ( Supplemental Data ) . The re - mRFP and dynamin2 - EGFP in COS cells ( Figures 4B – sults , presented in Figure 3B , compare data sets ( solid 4E ) . The best time for imaging was 14 hr posttransfec - lines ) acquired from BSC1 cells , stably expressing LCa - tion , a time at which both proteins appear together in EGFP or (cid:1) 2 - EGFP , with simulations of distributions with small , transient clusters ( Supplemental Movie S8 ) . Ex - identical field and sample size as the experimental data pression ( particularly of dynamin ) for longer intervals ( ten simulations per dataset , dashed lines ) . The K func - resulted in the appearance of numerous stationary tion analyses for data from BSC1 cells show clearly clathrin and dynamin clusters , probably due to overex - detectable non - Poissonian components . To simulate pression . We used the same filtering and segmentation compartmentalization of the plasma membrane into do - procedure described above to identify clathrin and dy - mains of free diffusion bounded by diffusion barriers namin clusters in the transiently expressing COS cells . ( generally ascribed to cytoskeletal elements ) , we per - The clathrin clusters displayed the on - off behavior ob - formed the analysis using a model in which an active served in BSC1 cells stably expressing LCa - EGFP or field of random nucleation is surrounded by an inactive LCa - YFP and had similar mean lifetimes . Most of the rim . The dimensions that best fit the observed distribu - clathrinclusterswithlifetimesof30sorlongercontained tion are 400 nm for the diameter of the active patches dynamin ( Figures 4B and 4C ) . Many of the dynamin clus - and 200 nm for the width of the inactive rim . These ters did not contain clathrin , however ; these probably dimensions are roughly consistent with compartments represented caveolae or podosomes ( Orth and McNi - in the plasma membrane of 230 – 750 nm in diameter ven , 2003 ) . The colocalizing clathrin and dynamin sig - displaying free Brownian movement of single phospho - nals both increased steadily during the lifetime of the lipids or transferrin and (cid:6) 2 - macroglobulin receptor mol - cluster ( Figures 4C – 4E ) , and the strength of the dynamin ecules ( Fujiwara et al . , 2002 ; Sako and Kusumi , 1994 ) . signal often showed an acute increase , followed by a We conclude that the nonrandom contribution to the sharp decrease , prior to the disappearance of the asso - spatial distribution of nucleation sites can best be de - ciated clathrin signal ( Figure 4E ) . By contrast , the short - scribed by a restriction to active regions but not by lived clathrin clusters rarely exhibited this burst ( Figure localized , specialized structures . 4D ) , although the dynamin and clathrin signals still dis - We also analyzed data from COS cells transiently ex - appeared together ( Supplemental Movie S8 ) . pressing LCa - EGFP , for which coincidences of nucle - ation sites during the observation time were much more frequent . Indeed , from studies with COS cells , Gaidarov Real - Time Imaging of LDL Endocytosis Are the dynamics of clathrin analyzed in this way repre - et al . ( 1999 ) postulated that there are “hot spots”— privileged sites for coated - pit nucleation . We could sentative of coated pits that actually entrap and take up single cargo molecules ? We briefly ( 0 – 15 min ) incubated model our COS cell data by introducing large regions of inactive membrane into the model for active patches BSC1 cells expressing LCa - YFP with 0 . 72 (cid:3) g / ml LDL labeled by fluorescent DiI ( DiI - LDL ) or BSC1 cells ex - described above . The best fit to the data analyzed in Figure 3B was obtained by assuming that about 50 % pressing LCa - EGFP with LDL labeled by Alexa594 ( Reyn - Cell596 Figure 4 . Dynamics of Clathrin , AP - 2 , and Dynamin in Coated Pits ( A ) Plot of the fluorescence normalized to the highest value before uncoating of 28 coated pits containing (cid:1) 2 - EGFP and LCa - mRFP , each with a lifetime of 42 s . The data were obtained from three BSC1 cells stably expressing (cid:1) 2 - EGFP and transiently expressing LCa - mRFP . ( B ) Comparison of the distributions of clathrin lifetimes in clusters containing clathrin and dynamin and in those from which dynamin was absent ( or below detection limit ) . The data were obtained from COS cells transiently expressing clathrin LCa - mRFP and dynamin2 - EGFP , imaged with the spinning disk confocal 14 hr posttransfection every 6 s and for a period of 6 . 5 min and approximately 90 by 90 pixels ( 130 nm / pixel ) . ( C ) Fluorescence intensity for dynamin2 - EGFP and for LCa - mRFP determined for a subset of 22 clathrin clusters , each with a lifetime of 42 s . ( D and E ) Expanded views of a short - lived clathrin cluster ( abortive pit ) and a budding coated vesicle . The time series were obtained from a COS cell expressing LCa - mRFP ( red ) and dynamin2 - EGFP . Times are defined by the moment of appearance of the clathrin signal . The top ( D ) and bottom ( E ) panels represent examples of short - and long - lived clathrin clusters , respectively . While the fluorescence signals of clathrin and dynamin disappear synchronously in the short - lived abortive pit , the dynamin signal further increases in the budding coated vesicle just before both signals disappear . Clathrin - Mediated Endocytosis in Living Cells 597 Figure 5 . Dynamics of Capture and Internalization of Single DiI - LDL by Clathrin - Coated Pits and Vesicles ( A ) Expanded views from a time series of DiI - LDL and LCa - YFP , imaged by fluorescence microscopy using the spinning disk confocal microscope . Times are defined from the moment of association of single DiI - LDL particles with clathrin clusters , as illustrated in the schematic drawing ( B ) . T 1 – T 4 represent the intervals before association ( T 1 ) , during association ( T 2 ) , joint lateral motion of LDL and clathrin prior to uncoating ( T 3 ) , and motion of LDL after uncoating ( T 4 ) , respectively . Average and standard errors are shown . ( C ) The left and right panels contain plots for the average displacement of DiI - LDL before its association with clathrin ( T 1 ) and upon initiation of its lateral motion ( T 3 (cid:7) T 4 ) as a function of t 1 / 2 and t , respectively . The middle panel is a representative example showing the increase in the net fluorescence intensity for the LCa - YFP signal from a single clathrin pit during its association with one DiI - LDL particle . The red arrow indicates the time of encounter of DiI - LDL particle with a preformed and relatively dim clathrin pit . Note that t (cid:8) 0 corresponds to the appearance of the clathrin signal , not to the encounter as in ( A ) . ( D ) Distribution of lifetimes for the clathrin clusters that incorporate Alexa594 - LDL . The inset indicates the time of arrival of an LDL particle at a nascent coated pit . ( E ) Fluorescence intensity of a clathrin - coated pit at the time of arrival of an LDL particle ( black circles ) and before uncoating ( white circles ) . Cell598 olds and St . Clair , 1985 ) and then followed the dynamics about 390 at the time of uncoating , corresponding to of coated pit formation ( Figure 5 and Supplemental coats larger than 90 – 100 nm soccer balls ( Figure 5E , MovieS9 ) . Theuniformintensityofthediffraction - limited clear circles ) . LDLfluorescencesignalssuggeststhattheycorrespondtosingleLDLparticles . We confirmed that the uptake Real - Time Imaging of Transferrin Endocytosis of DiI - LDL was clathrin dependent ( Supplemental To study recruitment of a much smaller cargo , we moni - Movie S5 ) . tored the association of transferrin ( (cid:1) 5 nm in diameter ) We followed the trajectories of 63 single DiI - LDL parti - with LCa - EGFP clusters in COS cells ( Figure 6A ) . We cles identified on six cells labeled in four independent exposed cells briefly ( 1 min ) to transferrin labeled with experiments ( Figures 5A – 5C ) . We selected particles that Alexa568 ( approximately three to four dyes per mole - associated with clathrin clusters , which only happened cule ) and followed the dynamics of capture and endocy - on the top surface of the cell . Using SlideBook 4 , we tosisbymanualspottracking . Withinsecondsofincuba - determined manually the centers of selected particles tion , the plasma membrane became homogeneously in the DiI - fluorescence channel and then again in the labeled with Alexa568 transferrin and , soon thereafter , clathrin fluorescence channel . In this way , we found the weak spots appeared . All these spots colocalized with position of a Dil - LDL molecule and the corresponding growing clathrin clusters , suggesting that a transferrin clathrin LCa - YFP cluster at each point during the time receptor bound to its ligand can diffuse into a partially series . Prior to association with clathrin , most LDL parti - formed coat . Like LDL capture , incorporation occurred clesmoveddiffusivelyonthemembrane , asthedistance most frequently in newly formed coated pits ( 6 – 15 s post - traveled varied linearly with the square root of time ( Fig - appearance , Figure 6B , inset ) . Association of Alexa568 ure 5C ) . The calculated diffusion coefficient was about transferrin and LCa - EGFP lasted 24 – 50 s before uncoat - 6 (cid:9) 10 (cid:5) 10 cm 2 s (cid:5) 1 , well within the range of reported ing ( Figure 6B ) . values obtained by spectroscopic methods for the LDL receptor ( Goldstein et al . , 1981 ) . The characteristics of Real - Time Imaging of Reovirus Endocytosis this motion were similar to those exhibited by other LDL To examine coated pit dynamics during the uptake of particles that did not associate with clathrin during the a large cargo , we investigated the capture and endocy - course of the time series . In most cases ( n (cid:8) 41 ) , a DiI - tosis by clathrin - coated pits and vesicles of reovirus LDL particle diffusing on the cell surface encountered a nonenveloped , dsRNA virus that requires access to a rather dim , relatively stationary clathrin - coated cluster endosomes for successful infection ( Figure 7 and Sup - ( average age of 20 (cid:2) 2 s , with a typical fluctuation in plemental Movie S10 ) . Its receptor is an Ig superfamily lateral position of less than one to two pixels , or 100 – 200 member known as JAM1 ( Forrest et al . , 2003 ) ; it also nm ) . In a few cases ( n (cid:8) 5 ) , the DiI particle appeared to interacts with cell surface carbohydrates ( Paul et al . , land directly from the medium onto a young , preexisting 1989 ) . An active clathrin endocytic pathway is important clathrin cluster . In the remaining instances ( n (cid:8) 17 ) , for successful infection ( Supplemental Movies S11 a migrating DiI - LDL particle stopped moving just as a and S12 ) . clathrin cluster appeared beneath it . In all of these Upon landing on the upper surface of the cell ( no events , the fluorescence clearly continued to increase virus could be detected bound to the bottom surface ) , following association with the LDL particle ( see example Alexa647 reovirus particles were essentially stationary in Figure 5C ) . At the end of this period , the clathrin signal ( average displacement of 5 (cid:2) 1 nm s (cid:5) 1 [ n (cid:8) 17 ] over disappeared rapidly , presumably because of uncoating . periods of 280 – 1500 s ) . That is , the lateral mobility of Often , the clathrin - LDL objects executed an abrupt lat - the virus - receptor complex was substantially smaller eral displacement of 300 – 600 nm with an average speed than that of the LDL - LDL receptor . Eventually a clathrin of 57 nm s (cid:5) 1 for 11 (cid:2) 2 s just before disappearance of signal appeared as a cluster colocalizing with the viral the clathrin signal . From observations using a combina - particle , and the two then remained associated with tion of epifluorescence and TIRF , Merrifield et al . ( 2002 ) each other for 398 (cid:2) 49 s ( Figure 7B ) , significantly longer reported a similar lateral displacement ( average speed than the 40 – 60 s association of clathrin with LDL ( Figure of 44 nm s (cid:5) 1 ) of LCa - dsRED in clathrin clusters , just 5D ) . Presumably , the longer association was due to the before disappearance of the dsRED signal and immedi - time required to build a larger clathrin lattice ( the reovi - ately after appearance of a signal from dynamin1 fluo - rus particle is about 85 nm in diameter ; LDL is about 27 rescently tagged with EGFP . Thus , the sudden displace - nm ) . Consistent with this interpretation , the intensity of mentprobablyrepresentsbuddingofthecoatedvesicle , the clathrin signal also increased during the full period in for which dynamin is required , and release from the which clathrin and virus signals colocalized ( Figure 7C ) . plasma membrane . The DiI - LDL particle then continued At the end of the association period , we noticed ( as to move laterally after vesicle uncoating , and the dis - with LDL ) an abrupt disappearance of the clathrin signal tance traveledwas linearlydependent on time , a charac - and initiation of rapid lateral movement of the fluores - teristic of directed motion ( Figure 5C ) . The position of cent virus particle . The virus particle acquired an aver - the particles was hard to monitor beyond 30 s , because age speed of 26 (cid:2) 0 . 2 nm s (cid:5) 1 ( 301 determinations for the particle disappeared from the field of observation 34 viruses ) , and its path , which had the characteristics due to a combination of axial and lateral motion . of directed rather than diffusive motion , could be fol - Clathrin clusters active in LDL uptake , as identified lowed for at least 120 s . We suggest that , as with LDL , by the association of Alexa594 - LDL with LCa - EGFP , had therapid , directedmotionrepresentsintracellularmigra - mean lifetimes of 40 and 60 s ( Figure 5D ) . Their mean net tion of the virus encased in a newly uncoated vesicle fluorescence intensity was 180 at the time of association toward the appropriate endosomal compartment . Rapid with Alexa594 - LDL , consistent with the capture of LDL particles by young pits ( Figure 5E , black circles ) and and directed motion of reovirus was seen only after its Clathrin - Mediated Endocytosis in Living Cells 599 Figure 6 . Dynamics of Capture and Internalization of Transferrin by Clathrin - Coated Pits and Vesicles ( A ) Expanded views from a time series of Alexa568 transferrin and LCa - EGFP transiently expressed in COS cells , imaged by fluorescence microscopy using the spinning disk confocal microscope . ( B ) Distribution of lifetimes for the clathrin clusters that incorporate Alexa568 transferrin . The inset indicates the time of arrival of transferrin at nascent coated pits . association with clathrin ( Figure 7A and Supplemental expressing EGFP - or YFP - tagged LCa or (cid:1) 2 - EGFP . We thus avoid artifacts associated with transient overex - Movie S10 ) or , if this association was not detected , then only in areas that were clearly intracellular and after pression , and we can make consistent comparisons be - tween population - based analyses of endocytic events extensive exposure ( over 1 hr ) of the cells to the fluores - cent virus ( Supplemental Movie S12 ) . Because rapid and manual tracking of individual vesicles . In some cases , we briefly expressed fluorescently tagged LCa intracellular reovirus movement was seldom detected in cells not performing clathrin - mediated endocytosis or dynamin to study the capture of transferrin or the association of AP - 2 and dynamin with clathrin . We have ( Supplemental Movies S11 and S12 ) , we believe that the images showing colocalization of clathrin and reovirus recorded data from both top and bottom surfaces of the cells , and we have included in the statistics of coated - represent a prominent cellular entry route for the virus . pit lifetimes all clathrin - containing clusters of diffraction limit size . Exclusion of larger clathrin clusters ( and also Discussion weak and very mobile spots ) eliminates highly mobile endosomes and also a small number of stationary clus - Clathrin Dynamics at the Plasma Membrane The experimental analyses of clathrin coated pit formation ters on the bottom surface that are probably large , flat arrays . The data presented here thus provide an objec - presented here rely primarily on use of cell lines stably Cell600 Figure 7 . Dynamics of Capture and Internalization of Single Reovirus Particles by Clathrin - Coated Pits and Vesicles ( A ) Expanded views of a time series of reovirus tagged with Alexa647 ( red ) and LCa - YFP ( green ) imaged as in Figure 5 . Times are defined by the moment of association between reovirus and clathrin as illustrated in the schematic drawing ( B ) . Average and standard errors are shown . ( C ) The panel on the left shows a representative example of the increase in the net fluorescence intensity of a clathrin pit during its association with a single reovirus particle . Differences in imaging conditions preclude a direct comparison of absolute fluorescence intensities with the data in Figure 5 . The plot on the right shows the average displacement of the reovirus particles after onset of lateral motion ( T 3 (cid:7) T 4 ) as a function of t . This period includes the time elapsed immediately preceding clathrin uncoating . tive view of the dynamics of clathrin coat assembly and to ensure that the overall analysis applies to genuine endocytic vesicles and to identify the fate of vesicles disassembly at the surface of BSC1 and COS cells under the growth conditions described . We have also followed after loss of clathrin . We derive from our data the following description of specific cargo capture in a subset of the clathrin clusters Clathrin - Mediated Endocytosis in Living Cells 601 clathrin dynamics . A large fraction of coated pits nucle - Short - Lived Pits May Be Abortive ates at randomly distributed points within permissive The most unexpected result of our analysis is the detec - areasofthecellsurface . InBSC1cells ( stablyexpressing tion of a large number of relatively dim , very short - lived tagged LCa or (cid:1) 2 or transiently expressing tagged LCa ) , clathrin clusters . What is the significance of these there is little correlation between positions at which events ? It is possible that these short - lived clusters rep - coated pits assemble and the positions from which pre - resent a subset of more rapidly growing coats that ma - vious pits have budded . The situation is different in COS ture and pinch off quickly . Their weak fluorescence in - cells , which show a subset of coats assembling at pre - tensity argues against this interpretation , however . Their ferred regions , as previously described ( Gaidarov et al . , brightness corresponds to their age , calibrated as de - 1999 ) . We believe that the available evidence does not scribed , and we estimate that they contain not more support a model in which the plasma membrane con - than 30 triskelions . Moreover , their disappearance is tains specialized sites acting as factories to sustain the generally not accompanied by the burst of dynamin in - continuous assembly of many coated pits . We propose tensity seen just before budding of the larger structures , insteadthatrecruitmentofcoatcomponentsoccursran - norisitprecededbytherapidpositionalshiftthatsignals domlywithin alargenumberof activedomainsscattered pinching off . We thereforebelieve thata likelyinterpreta - throughout the plasma membrane and surrounded by tion of the short - lived clusters is that they are abortive regions of low activity , presumably constrained by the coated pits . Partially formed pits , in equilibrium between underlying cytoskeleton . additionandlossofclathrin , mightbeexpectedonocca - The duration of the nucleation step cannot be deter - sion to disassemble completely , especially if they con - mined from current data , because this step probably tained less than 20 – 30 triskelions . A specific event , per - involves toofew clathrin triskelions andAP - 2 complexes haps linked to capture of cargo , might stabilize the to detect . Once an assembly has become visible , how - nascent coated pit and thus commit it to finish assembly ever , it grows at a steady rate , and the extrapolation and to bud . Indeed , the average lifetime of the short - from the insets in Figure 2B and 2E suggests that , in our livedclustersislessthantheageatthetimeofuncoating experiments , a newly visible pit might be 10 – 20 seconds of a coated vesicle loaded with cargo . We suggest that old . Dynamin and AP - 2 appear in assembling pits along the coated pits that continue to completion of an endo - with clathrin , and the strengths of these fluorescent sig - cytic event are generally those loaded with cargo of nals grow in parallel . some kind , of which the transferrin in our experiments The rate of clathrin assembly can be estimated from will have labeled a larger proportion than the LDL and the likely size of a coated vesicle with a total visible reovirus . lifetime of 32 s , the peak of the distribution in Figure 2B . Our size - intensity calibration ( Figure 2C ) predicts Cargo Capture and Commitment to Completion that a 32 s vesicle corresponds to the abundant soccer The model just attained makes predictions that we can ballstructure ( 90 – 100nmouter diameter ) with60triskeli - test with our data . One of these is that , once cargo and ons ( Musacchio et al . , 1999 ) . Because the clathrin signal clathrin are together , clathrin assembly should proceed continues to increase throughout the measurable life - to coated vesicle budding and uncoating . Indeed , in the time of the cluster , we calculate from the data in Figure fields we analyzed , no transferrin - or LDL - associated 5 that the rate of growth is between one and two clathrin coated pits and very few reovirus - associated coated triskelions per second . The 6 - second - old pits that cap - pits failed to proceed to completion . ture transferrin will have 10 – 20 clathrins—just enough A second prediction of our model concerns the likeli - to form a slightly curved indentation in the plasma mem - hood of detecting clathrin associated with a reovirus brane but not enough to close in around even the small - particle when compared with the likelihood of detecting est cargo ; the 20 - second - old pits that capture LDL will clathrin at a random position on the cell membrane . We have (cid:1) 40 clathrins and will be more indented before scored fields in the reovirus time series for the number acquiring the remaining 40 – 120 clathrins needed to of clathrin clusters per unit area and for the fraction of make a larger coat . AP - 2 recruitment parallels clathrin virus particles associated with clathrin ( Supplemental assembly . Our experiments do not have sufficient reso - Table S1 ) . We assumed a random distribution of nucle - lution to determine whether the first clathrin precedes ation events ( see Figure 3 ) and calculate the likelihood or follows an AP complex , nor can we be certain at the of clathrin appearing within an area equal to the “foot - 1 s level whether clathrin uncoating precedes or follows print” of a virus particle ( between 0 . 03 and 0 . 1 (cid:3) 2 , de - AP dissociation . But the simplest interpretation of our pending on assumptions of the calculation , see Supple - data is that AP association and dissociation depend mental Table S1 ) and within a time equal to the mean simply on what is happening to the clathrin scaffold . lifetime of a coated pit ( 40 s ) . If association of cargo with This interpretation differs from one based on TIRF mi - a coated pit simply increasesits lifetime by committing it croscopyofcells transientlyexpressingLCa - dsREDand to finish the assembly of a clathrin lattice of suitable EGFP - (cid:6) - adaptin ( Rappoport et al . , 2003 ) . The authors size , then the likelihood of finding clathrin associated of that study reported that the (cid:6) chain signal appeared with a reovirus particle should be the likelihood above , in stable patches of LCa - dsRED but was absent in the multiplied by the proportional increase in lifetime of the “blinking” LCa - dsRED clusters . Our observations dem - coated pit ( 400 / 40 ) . The calculated likelihood is between onstrate clearly that authentic coated vesicles , active in 0 . 05 and 0 . 17 , in good agreement with the observed endocytosis of transferrin , LDL , or reovirus , have short value of 0 . 13 (cid:2) 0 . 02 ( Supplemental Table S1 ) . We con - ( 35 – 400 s ) lifetimes and contain adaptors . The associa - clude from this calculation that there is no evidence that tion of AP - 2 with coated pits and vesicles is also , of course , consistent with their biochemical copurification . the reovirus - receptor complex directly induces coated Cell602 Figure 8 . Model for the Life of an Endocytic Clathrin - Coated Pit ( A ) The principal molecular stages ( 1 – 8 ) in our proposed exploratory model for coated pit and vesicle formation . The gray line represents the plasma membrane ; gray circles , clathrin and adaptors and other coat proteins ; orange lines , membrane bound cargo . ( 1 ) Nucleation of coat assembly by recruitment of as yet unidentified components to randomly distributed positions on the inner surface of the plasma membrane . ( 2 ) During an initial exploratory phase , coated pits continue to grow but ( 3 ) collapse rapidly if conditions required for coat stabilization are notmet . ( 4 ) Alternatively , theformingcoatedpitstabilizes , perhapsbycargocapture . ( 5 ) Continuedgrowthaccompaniedbyfurtherinvagination of the membrane . ( 6 ) Membrane constriction and neck formation , followed by ( 7 ) a final burst of dynamin recruitment and fission of the connecting membranous neck . After budding , the coated vesicle moves away from the membrane . ( 8 ) Uncoating ensues within a few seconds of budding . This model is consistent with the on - off behavior and growth characteristics of the coat . ( B ) Alternative model for coated pit and vesicle formation . Cargo is captured by clathrin and other coat components that have first assembled as a large and relatively stable flat array . The deeply invaginated coated pits form either by complete reorganization of the flat array or by partial reorganization and release of a small patch of coat . pit formation , even though the apparent likelihood of in this earlier work was restricted to the interval just prior to clathrin uncoating , it clearly showed the presence of finding clathrin associated with virus is higher than for a similar but randomly selected area of membrane . dynamin1 in clathrin clusters before the final burst . More recent studies following a relatively small number of Rather , the presenceofvirusdetermines thatthelifetime of a pit that happens to form beneath it will be substan - pits and likewise restricted to the interval just prior to uncoating also show dynamin2 in assembling clathrin tiallylongerthanaverage ( SupplementalFigureS1 ) . Sim - ulation of the association of LDL and clathrin has led clusters , although they do not show a detectable final burst of intensity ( Rappoport and Simon , 2003 ) . These us to the same conclusion ( Supplemental Figure S1 ) . We asked what would be the mean time to capture for a data and ours help to resolve the long - standing puzzle presented by the presenceof dynamin embedded within particle diffusing toward a target in two dimensions , assuming a footprint of 15 nm for the interacting parts the clathrin lattice as detected by immunoelectron mi - croscopy ( Damke et al . , 1994 ) . The short duration of the of the LDL receptor and the clathrin coat . The simulated values range between 17 and 28 s , in excellent agree - dynamin burst and the rapidity with which uncoating mentwiththeobservedone ( 20s ) . Thus , aswithreovirus , ensues probably explain why rings of accumulated dy - LDL / LDL receptor complexes do not seem to induce namin have not been seen at the neck of budding vesi - coated pit formation ; instead , they are captured by an cles in thin - section electron micrographs . already partially assembled coated pit . There is no evidence that dynamin interacts directly with clathrin or its adaptors , but it does bind through its C - terminal , proline - richsegmenttoanumberofdifferent Dynamin SH3 - domain containing proteins , such as amphiphysin , We observed steady recruitment of dynamin followed which in turn can interact with clathrin and its adaptor in some cases by a burst of additional dynamin associa - AP - 2 ( David et al . , 1996 ) . Dynamin also appears to inter - tion , in agreement with previous real - time studies of the act with Hsc70 and auxilin , both of which associate with colocalization of dynamin1 - EGFP and clathrin on cell surfaces ( Merrifield et al . , 2002 ) . Although the analysis clathrin ( Newmyer et al . , 2003 ) . It is possible that , in Clathrin - Mediated Endocytosis in Living Cells 603 addition to having a role in fission , dynamin participates mitted” coated pit might be found in the dynamics of Hsc70 recruitment , the properties of GTPases involved in some other way in regulating assembly of a clathrin coat . It might , for example , act as a molecular antenna , in adaptor association , or in other activities not yet de - scribed . to recruit lipid - modifying enzymes such as endophilin ( Farsad et al . , 2001 ) , which could help to deform the The model just outlined separates the mechanism of initiation from the process of cargo recognition . It allows membrane lying under the clathrin lattice . a variety of different cargo adaptors to participate equally , rather than making one a privileged initiator , Model and it avoids the need to postulate differentiated bud - We summarize our conclusions with a tentative molecu - dingsitesonthemembrane . Criticaltestsofthisdescrip - lar description ofthe life of anendocytic , clathrin - coated tion of endocytosis as an exploratory process will be pit ( Figure 8 ) . Assembly nucleates by recruitment of as finding the mechanism by which abortive coated pits yetunidentifiedcomponentstorandomlydistributedpo - collapse and defining the signaling process that allows sitions on the inner surface of the plasma membrane . assembly to proceed . Addition of clathrin proceeds at a steady rate ( in these cells ) of about one triskelion every 2 s . Dynamin and Experimental Procedures AP - 2 are added to the coated pit along with clathrin ( and presumably other components that we have not Preparation of Plasmid , Virus , and Expresser Cells yet labeled ) . Assembly aborts unless a molecular event , LCa - YFP and LCa - mRFP were made by fusing DNA ( amplified by perhaps linked to cargo loading , commits the coated PCR ) encoding rat brain clathrin light chain , LCa1 ( Kirchhausen et al . , 1987 ) , to the 3 (cid:10) end of the coding sequence for EYFP ( Clontech ) pit to completion and budding . Cargo recruitment , at or mRFP . Reovirus type I Lang was purified from infected L929 least in the case of laterally mobile cargo such as trans - cells . Productive infection was determined by a single - cell - based ferrin or LDL receptor bound , occurs when the pit con - immunofluorescence assay ( DeTulleo and Kirchhausen , 1998 ) that tains about 10 – 40 triskelions , which is also the stage at detected the newly synthesized nonstructural protein (cid:3) NS . BSC1 which abortive assembly terminates . The dissolution of monkey kidney epithelial cells stably expressing LCa - YFP were ob - abortive assemblies is rapid , and whether it is an active tained by transfection and maintained by selection with G418 in DMEM supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum . Simultaneous process ( catalyzed , for example , by Hsc70 ) or results transient expression of LCa - mRFP and dynamin2 - EGFP was ob - simply from the failure of some molecular clamp to fix tained in monkey COS cells by DEAE Dextran - aided transfection of the nascent structure is an important open question . a mixture of plasmids at molar ratio of 2 : 1 . Under these conditions , The critical point appears to occur just when membrane expression of the constructs had no discernable effects on cell curvature might begin to resist further growth of the shape or growth . clathrin lattice . The size of the coated vesicle , and hence Preparation of Cells for Imaging the design of its clathrin lattice and the time it takes to BSC1 cells stably expressing LCa - YFP were imaged 18 – 40 hr after achieve its final form , is determined by the size of the plating on 25 mm diameter glass cover slips at a density of 20 , 000 – cargo . Pinching off , detected by sudden movement of 40 , 000 cells per well . When needed , transient expression of (cid:11) 95 – the clathrin cluster , is followed within about 10 s by 295Eps15 and dynamin K44A was achieved by transfection of the cells rapid loss of clathrin and AP - 2 . The newly uncoated 24 hr after plating and the cells imaged 48 – 72 hr later . COS cells vesicle then undergoes a directed motion away from the ( 20 , 000 – 40 , 000 ) were plated on 25 mm diameter glass cover slips and imaged 14 hr after transfection with LCa - mRFP and dynamin2 - budding point , presumably along a cytoskeletal track . EGFP . For imaging , the cells were transferred to (cid:6) - MEM supple - Extension of our experimental design to include other mentedwith20mMHEPES ( pH7 . 2 ) and0 . 5 % bovineserumalbumin components of an assembling coated pit will enable in the absence of phenol red . us to describe the sequence and rates of many of the molecular events about which , at present , we can Imaging only speculate . Images were acquired with a spinning disk confocal head ( Perkin Our observations suggest that the clathrin - based en - ElmerCo . , Boston , MA ) coupledtoafullymotorizedepifluorescence microscope ( Axiovert 200M ; Carl Zeiss , Inc . ; Thornwood , NY ) using docytic machinery has an exploratory character , rather 63 (cid:9) or 100 (cid:9) lenses ( Carl Zeiss , Inc ) under control of SlideBook 4 like the microtubule cytoskeleton . Microtubules nucle - ( Intelligent Imaging Innovations , Denver , CO ) . Digital images ( 12 bit ) ate at an organizing center , grow steadily , and collapse were obtained with a cool CCD camera ( Cool Snap HQ , Photomet - “catastrophically” unless their growing end is captured rics , Trenton , NJ ) with 2 (cid:9) 2 binning and spatial resolution of 130 by a suitable target ( Mitchison and Kirschner , 1984 ) . or 200 nm / pixel for the 100 (cid:9) and 63 (cid:9) lenses , respectively . Images Likewise , the coated pits we have followed appear to were acquired with exposure times between 800 and 1200 millisec - onds from cells maintained at 37 (cid:4) C using a heated stage ( 20 / 20 dissolve abruptly unless some intervening event deter - Technology , Inc . ; Wilmington , NC ) . A krypton - argon laser ( Mellets mines that they continue . One event that clearly corre - Griot , Carlsbad , CA ) emitting at 488 , 568 , and 647 nm was used to lates with such commitment is cargo loading , and we excite YFP , EGFP , mRFP , 1 , 1 (cid:10) - dioctadecyl - 3 , 3 , 3 (cid:10) , 3 (cid:10) - tetramethylin - suggest that the molecular mechanism by which a pit docarbocyanine perchlorate ( DiI ) . , Alexa568 , Alexa594 , and is stabilized and its growth allowed to proceed is linked Alexa647 . to the structures that carry out receptor sorting . For example , interaction of AP - 2 with peptides containing Image Processing The following sequential steps were used to identify and track tyrosine - based endocytic sorting signals increases sub - clathrin and dynamin clusters . ( 1 ) Creating a mask . We applied a stantially when AP - 2 becomes part of a clathrin coat 2D deconvolution to each raw image to increase signal - to - noise ( Rapoport et al . , 1997 ) . Conversely , cargo recognition ratio and to even out background . We smoothed the deconvolved must enhance AP - 2 affinity for clathrin . One or more images by applying a Gaussian 2D radial transformation ( radius , such interactions could create a commitment signal . A onepixel ) andidentifiedfastspatialchangesbyapplyingaLaplacian 2D derivative . Finally , a mask corresponding to each spot in the molecular basis for the rapid disassembly of an “uncom - Cell604 images was obtained by AND logical operation applied between the David , C . , McPherson , P . S . , Mundigl , O . , and De Camilli , P . ( 1996 ) . A role of amphiphysin in synaptic vesicle endocytosis suggested images resulting from the Laplacian transformation and the decon - volved images segmented by intensity . ( 2 ) Spot identification . We by its binding to dynamin in nerve terminals . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 93 , 331 – 335 . determined the spatial coordinates for the centroids of every masked spot in any given image . Spots larger than three pixels in DeTulleo , L . , and Kirchhausen , T . ( 1998 ) . The clathrin endocytic radius ( 100 (cid:9) lens ) were eliminated from further analysis , as they pathway in viral infection . EMBO J . 17 , 4585 – 4593 . would be larger than the diffraction - limited images of the 100 – 200 Farsad , K . , Ringstad , N . , Takei , K . , Floyd , S . R . , Rose , K . , and De nm diameter coated pits we wished to follow . ( 3 ) Spot tracking . We Camilli , P . ( 2001 ) . Generation of high curvature membranes medi - connected the masked spots in time by allowing the software to ated by direct endophilin bilayer interactions . J . Cell Biol . 155 , explore the position of every spot along the time series , removing 193 – 200 . objects moving two or more pixels in the x - y plane , e . g . , a radius Forrest , J . C . , Campbell , J . A . , Schelling , P . , Stehle , T . , and Dermody , of ( 2 ) 1 / 2 between time frames . Only spots that satisfied this spatial T . S . ( 2003 ) . Structure - function analysis of reovirus binding to junc - constraintforthreeormoreconsecutivetimeframeswereaccepted . tionaladhesionmolecule1 . Implicationsforthemechanismofreovi - We define the net fluorescence intensity of each spot masked in rus attachment . J . Biol . Chem . 28 , 48434 – 48444 . Published online the raw image as the difference in fluorescence intensity within the September 9 , 2003 . 10 . 1074 / jbc . M305649200 . mask minus the average background signal of the cytosol . Fujiwara , T . , Ritchie , K . , Murakoshi , H . , Jacobson , K . , and Kusumi , Fluorescence Intensity Calibration A . ( 2002 ) . Phospholipids undergo hop diffusion in compartmental - Weusedclathrin - coatedvesiclesisolatedfromtheBSC1cellsstably ized cell membrane . J . Cell Biol . 157 , 1071 – 1081 . expressing Lca - EGFP to relate the net fluorescence intensity mea - Gaidarov , I . , Santini , F . , Warren , R . A . , and Keen , J . H . ( 1999 ) . Spatial sured from coated pits in these cells to the number of clathrin control of coated - pit dynamics in living cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 1 – 7 . triskelions they contain . The size and type of clathrin - coated struc - Gallusser , A . , and Kirchhausen , T . ( 1993 ) . The (cid:12) 1 and (cid:12) 2 subunits turespresentinthepreparationwasdeterminedbyelectronmicros - of the AP complexes are the clathrin coat assembly components . copy of samples negatively stained with 1 . 2 % uranyl acetate ( Gal - EMBO J . 12 , 5237 – 5244 . lusser and Kirchhausen , 1993 ) . Clathrin - coated vesicles were Goldstein , B . , Wofsy , C . , and Bell , G . ( 1981 ) . Interactions of low purified by high - speed centrifugation in the presence of 100 mM density lipoprotein receptors with coatedpits on human fibroblasts : MES ( pH 6 . 5 ) ( Clairmont et al . , 1997 ) , transferred to a solution of pH estimateoftheforwardrateconstantandcomparisonwiththediffu - 7 . 0 ( to avoid the pH - dependent fluorescent quenching of EGFP ) , sion limit . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 78 , 5695 – 5698 . and imagedunder thesame acquisitionconditions used forimaging living cells . Brief ( 15 min ) chemical crosslinking ( 1 (cid:3) g protein / 0 . 01 Hansen , S . H . , Sandvig , K . , and van Deurs , B . ( 1992 ) . Internalization (cid:3) g DSP ) ( Kirchhausen and Harrison , 1981 ) was used to prevent efficiency of the transferrin receptor . Exp . Cell Res . 199 , 19 – 28 . spontaneous uncoating of the vesicles due to adsorption onto the Heuser , J . ( 1989 ) . Effects of cytoplasmic acidification on clathrin surface of the glass cover slip . lattice morphology . J . Cell Biol . 108 , 401 – 411 . Kirchhausen , T . ( 1999 ) . Adaptors for clathrin mediated traffic . Annu . Acknowledgments Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 15 , 705 – 732 . We thank Dr . M . Krieger , M . Penman , S . Xu , andY . Zhu for providing Kirchhausen , T . ( 2000 ) . Clathrin . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 69 , 699 – 727 . human DiI - LDL ; Dr . McNiven and Dr . R . Tsien for providing the Kirchhausen , T . , and Harrison , S . C . ( 1981 ) . Protein organization in constructs for human dynamin2 - EGFP and monomeric RFP ; Dr . J . clathrin trimers . Cell 23 , 755 – 761 . Parker for help and advice on the isolation of reovirus ; Drs . V . Chan - Kirchhausen , T . , Scarmato , P . , Harrison , S . C . , Monroe , J . J . , Chow , dru and J . Guanawardena for help in the early stages of image E . P . , Mattaliano , R . J . , Ramachandran , K . L . , Smart , J . E . , Ahn , A . H . , processing ; Dr . R . Massol for help and advice on many aspects of andBrosius , J . ( 1987 ) . Clathrinlight chainsLCAandLCB aresimilar , image acquisition ; and Dr . C . Monks and M . Roden for developing polymorphic and share repeated heptad motifs . Science 236 , keyfeaturesinSlideBook4 . WethankDr . S . C . Harrisonforextensive 320 – 324 . and fruitful discussions . M . E . is a Dorot Fellow and acknowledges Merrifield , C . J . , Feldman , M . E . , Wan , L . , and Almers , W . ( 2002 ) . Im - supportfromtheFulbrightFoundation . WethankthePerkinFounda - aging actin and dynamin recruitment during invagination of single tion for making available funds to help in purchasing the imaging clathrin - coated pits . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 691 – 698 . equipment . Supported by NIH GM36548 ( T . K ) . Merrifield , C . J . , Qualmann , B . , Kessels , M . M . , andAlmers , W . ( 2004 ) . Received : January 12 , 2004 Neural Wiskott Aldrich Syndrome Protein ( N - WASP ) and the Arp2 / 3 Revised : July 9 , 2004 complex are recruited to sites of clathrin - mediated endocytosis in Accepted : July 15 , 2004 cultured fibroblasts . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 83 , 13 – 18 . Published : September 2 , 2004 Mitchison , T . , andKirschner , M . ( 1984 ) . Dynamicinstabilityofmicro - tubule growth . Nature 312 , 237 – 242 . References Musacchio , A . , Smith , C . J . , Roseman , A . M . , Harrison , S . C . , Kirch - hausen , T . , and Pearse , B . M . F . ( 1999 ) . Functional organization of Bonifacino , J . S . , and Traub , L . M . ( 2003 ) . Signals for sorting of trans - clathrin in coats : combining electron cryomicroscopy and X - ray membrane proteins to endosomes and lysosomes . Annu . Rev . Bio - crystallography . Mol . Cell 3 , 761 – 770 . chem . 72 , 395 – 447 . Published online March 6 , 2003 . 10 . 1146 / Newmyer , S . L . , Christensen , A . , and Sever , S . ( 2003 ) . Auxilin - annurev . biochem . 72 . 121801 . 161800 . dynamin interactions link theuncoating ATPase chaperone machin - Brodsky , F . M . , Chen , C . Y . , Knuehl , C . , Towler , M . C . , and Wakeham , ery with vesicle formation . Dev . Cell 4 , 929 – 940 . D . E . ( 2001 ) . Biological basket weaving : formation and function of Orth , J . D . , and McNiven , M . A . ( 2003 ) . Dynamin at the actin - mem - clathrin - coated vesicles . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 17 , 517 – 568 . brane interface . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 15 , 31 – 39 . Clairmont , K . B . , Boll , W . , Ericsson , M . , and Kirchhausen , T . ( 1997 ) . Paul , R . W . , Choi , A . H . , and Lee , P . W . ( 1989 ) . The alpha - anomeric A role for the hinge / ear domain of the beta chains in the incorpora - form of sialic acid is the minimal receptor determinant recognized tion of AP complexes into clathrin - coated pits and coated vesicles . by reovirus . Virology 172 , 382 – 385 . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 53 , 611 – 619 . Rappoport , J . Z . , and Simon , S . M . ( 2003 ) . Real - time analysis of Conner , S . D . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 2003 ) . Regulated portals of entry clathrin - mediated endocytosis during cell migration . J . Cell Sci . into the cell . Nature 422 , 37 – 44 . 116 , 847 – 855 . Damke , H . , Baba , T . , Warnock , D . E . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 1994 ) . Induc - tion of mutant dynamin specifically blocks endocytic coated vesicle Rapoport , I . , Miyazaki , M . , Boll , W . , Duckworth , B . , Cantley , L . C . , Shoelson , S . , and Kirchhausen , T . ( 1997 ) . Regulatory interactions in formation . J . Cell Biol . 127 , 915 – 934 . Clathrin - Mediated Endocytosis in Living Cells 605 the recognition of endocytic sorting signals by AP - 2 complexes . EMBO J . 16 , 2240 – 2250 . Rappoport , J . Z . , Taha , B . W . , Lemeer , S . , Benmerah , A . , and Simon , S . M . ( 2003 ) . The AP - 2 complex is excluded from the dynamic popu - lation of plasma membrane - associated clathrin . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 47357 – 47360 . Reynolds , G . D . , and St . Clair , R . W . ( 1985 ) . A comparative micro - scopic andbiochemical studyof the uptakeof fluorescentand 125I - labeled lipoproteins by skin fibroblasts , smooth muscle cells , and peritoneal macrophages in culture . Am . J . Pathol . 121 , 200 – 211 . Ripley , B . D . ( 1976 ) . The second - order analysis of stationary point processes . J . Appl . Probab . 13 , 255 – 266 . Sako , Y . , and Kusumi , A . ( 1994 ) . Compartmentalized structure of the plasma membrane for receptor movements as revealed by a nanometer - level motion analysis . J . Cell Biol . 125 , 1251 – 1264 .