Molecular dissection of reactive astrogliosis and glial scar formation Michael V . Sofroniew Department of Neurobiology , University of California Los Angeles , Los Angeles , CA 90095 - 1763 , USA Reactive astrogliosis , whereby astrocytes undergo varying molecular and morphological changes , is a ubiquitous but poorly understood hallmark of all central nervous system pathologies . Genetic tools are now enabling the molecular dissection of the functions and mechanisms of reactive astrogliosis in vivo . Recent studies provide compelling evidence that reactive astro - gliosis can exert both beneﬁcial and detrimental effects in a context - dependent manner determined by speciﬁc molecular signaling cascades . Reactive astrocytes can have both loss of normal functions and gain of abnormal effects that could feature prominently in a variety of disease processes . This article reviews developments in the signaling mechanisms that regulate speciﬁc aspects of reactive astrogliosis and highlights the poten - tial to identify novel therapeutic molecular targets for diverse neurological disorders . Introduction Astrocytes ( Figure 1a ) are complex , highly differentiated cells that tile the entire central nervous system ( CNS ) in a contiguous fashion and make numerous essential contri - butions to normal function in the healthy CNS , including regulation of blood ﬂow , provision of energy metabolites to neurons , participation in synaptic function and plasticity , and maintenance of the extracellular balance of ions , ﬂuid balance and transmitters [ 1 – 4 ] . In addition , astrocytes respond to all forms of CNS insults such as infection , trauma , ischemia and neurodegenerative disease by a process commonly referred to as reactive astrogliosis , which involves changes in their molecular expression and morphology ( Figure 1b ) , and in severe cases , scar formation ( Figure 1c ) [ 5 – 9 ] . In spite of the long - standing recognition that astrocytes have the potential to undergo these changes after CNS insults , and in spite of the ubi - quitous presence of reactive astrocytes at all sites of CNS pathology , the functions and effects of reactive astrocytes are surprisingly poorly understood and their roles in speciﬁc disease processes are largely uncertain . Perhaps the most well known aspect of reactive astro - gliosis is that of scar formation . The ability of astrocytes to form scars that inhibit axon regeneration has been recog - nized for over 100 years and has led to an overall negative connotation that has long dominated concepts about the ramiﬁcations of reactive astrogliosis . Nevertheless , a grow - ing body of information indicates that reactive astrocytes exert numerous essential beneﬁcial functions and that astrocytes have a wide spectrum of potential , and often subtle , responses to CNS insults , of which scar formation is only one and lies at the extreme end in terms of its severity . This article summarizes recent advances in the molecular dissection of the functions and mechanisms of reactive astrogliosis , with the main focus on deletion experiments using transgenic mouse models that allow either cellular ablation or molecular deletion in combination with differ - ent types of injury or disease paradigms in vivo . This article begins with a deﬁnition and model of astrogliosis that includes surveys of molecules produced by reactive astrocytes and of triggering mechanisms and signaling pathways that regulate astrogliosis . It concludes with surveys of the functions of astrogliosis , the potential for dysfunction to contribute to disease mechanisms and the identiﬁcation of novel therapeutic targets . Space con - straints prevent exhaustive review of all topics and limit discussion to a cross - section of recent advances . Deﬁning reactive astrogliosis What is astrogliosis ? What features distinguish a reactive astrocyte from one that is non - reactive ? Is astrogliosis an all - or - none process or a gradated one ? Is it a good thing or bad ? What are its molecular triggers or its functional consequences ? Is astrogliosis synonymous with scar for - mation ? Perhaps a majority of well - informed neurobiolo - gists would be hard pressed to answer such questions . In spite of the increasing recognition that astrocytes play central roles in normal CNS function and that reactive astrocytes are primary responders to injury and disease , the concept of reactive astrogliosis seems generally elusive , with no commonly agreed upon deﬁnition or model . It is therefore useful to begin a review of recent studies into the functions and mechanisms of reactive astrogliosis by pre - senting a working model that deﬁnes various aspects of astrogliosis in a manner parsimonious with currently available information , while recognizing that any such model will require updating as new information accrues . This article proposes a deﬁnition and model of ‘reactive astrogliosis’ that integrates four interdependent key fea - tures : ( i ) reactive astrogliosis is a spectrum of changes in astrocytes that occur in response to all forms and severities of CNS injury and disease including subtle perturbations ; ( ii ) the changes undergone by reactive astrocytes vary with the nature and severity of the insult along a gradated continuum of progressive alterations in molecular expres - sion , progressive cellular hypertrophy and , in severe cases , proliferation and scar formation ( Figures 1 and 2 ) ; ( iii ) the changes of astrogliosis are regulated in a context - speciﬁc manner by speciﬁc signaling events that have the potential Review Corresponding author : Sofroniew , M . V . ( sofroniew @ mednet . ucla . edu ) 638 0166 - 2236 / $ – see front matter (cid:2) 2009 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tins . 2009 . 08 . 002 Available online 24 September 2009