University of Groningen Partitioning of Lipids at Domain Boundaries in Model Membranes Schafer , Lars V . ; Marrink , Siewert Published in : Biophysical Journal DOI : 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2010 . 08 . 072 IMPORTANT NOTE : You are advised to consult the publisher ' s version ( publisher ' s PDF ) if you wish to cite from it . Please check the document version below . Document Version Publisher ' s PDF , also known as Version of record Publication date : 2010 Link to publication in University of Groningen / UMCG research database Citation for published version ( APA ) : Schafer , L . V . , & Marrink , S . J . ( 2010 ) . Partitioning of Lipids at Domain Boundaries in Model Membranes . Biophysical Journal , 99 ( 12 ) , L91 - L93 . DOI : 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2010 . 08 . 072 CopyrightOther than for strictly personal use , it is not permitted to download or to forward / distribute the text or part of it without the consent of the author ( s ) and / or copyright holder ( s ) , unless the work is under an open content license ( like Creative Commons ) . Take - down policy If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details , and we will remove access to the work immediately and investigate your claim . Downloaded from the University of Groningen / UMCG research database ( Pure ) : http : / / www . rug . nl / research / portal . For technical reasons the number of authors shown on this cover page is limited to 10 maximum . Download date : 10 - 01 - 2019 Biophysical Journal , Volume 99 Supporting Material Title : Partitioning of Lipids at Domain Boundaries in Model Membranes Authors : Lars V Schafer and Siewert Jan Marrink Partitioning of Lipids at Domain Boundaries in Model Membranes : Supporting Information Lars V . Schäfer and Siewert J . Marrink Equilibration of lateral composition . It is crucial that the simulation time is long enough to allow the lipids to sample the entire bilayer patch , in particular also including the ( bulk of the ) L o domain , in which diffusion is slowed down as compared to the L d domain . To test the convergence of our simulations with respect to the lateral composition , we separately analyzed each 2 -  s interval from the last 8  s of the simulation . Figure S1 shows the POPC number density profiles obtained for one leaflet of the bilayer containing 40 POPC lipids ( 20 per monolayer ) ; similar results were obtained for the other leaflet and for PLiPC and LysoPC . Figure S1 . POPC number densities along dimension perpendicular to domain boundary interface , obtained from different time intervals of the simulation . Initially , the 2 mol - % of the 4 th component were inserted into the L d domain . Thus , an important test is to check whether these molecules actually visit the bulk of the L o domain during the simulation . The profiles in Figure S1 show that some POPC lipids are indeed temporarily located in the bulk of the L o domain . Already between 10 – 12  s simulation time , a few POPC lipids are located in L o , whereas no POPC is located in the bulk of the L d domain during that time interval ( black curve ) . From 12 – 14  s ( red curve ) , some POPC molecules re - enter the bulk of the L d domain , yet some POPC also remains in the bulk of L o . Towards the end of the simulation , all POPC lipids have left the bulk of the L o domain , and the density almost exclusively peaks at the domain boundary interfaces ( green and blue curves ) . The convergence of the composition profiles is understandable from the observed lateral diffusion coefficients of the PC lipids , which range from 12 · 10 - 8 cm 2 s - 1 in the bulk of the L d domain to 2 . 5 · 10 - 8 cm 2 s - 1 in the bulk of the L o domain . ( 1 ) For the interpretation of these diffusion coefficients , one has to keep in mind that they were obtained using a factor of 4 to convert simulation time to real time , as obtained by comparing to experimental diffusion coefficients ( 1 ) . In the present study , scaling of the simulation time was not required , because we did not calculate dynamic properties . All reported times are thus simulation times . To carefully estimate the root mean square distance sampled by the lipids in the membrane plane during the 18  s of simulation time , we also assume the same conversion factor 4 , and , furthermore , the slow diffusion coefficient of 2 . 5 · 10 - 8 cm 2 s - 1 ( observed in the bulk of the L o domain ) . This yields a distance of 27 nm , which is larger than the lateral dimensions of the simulated bilayer patch ( ca . 21 . 5 x 21 . 5 nm ) . Line tension . The line tension  was obtained from the bulk pressures measured during the simulations . For an interface along the X - dimension , it can be calculated according to  1 2 L Y L Z P YY  P XX   , where < > denotes an ensemble average , L Y and L Z are the box dimensions along the Y and Z dimensions , respectively , and P YY and P XX the respective pressure tensor components perpendicular and parallel to the interface . The factor ½ accounts for the fact that there are 2 interfaces in the simulation system . Statistical errors were obtained by analyzing the block averages of the pressure components as a function of block size , as implemented in the g _ analyze tool of Gromacs ( 2 ) . Note , the line tensions reported in this study are bilayer line tensions , whereas the fluctuation analysis carried out in Ref . ( 1 ) yielded the line tension per monolayer , i . e . ,  / 2 . 1 . Risselada , H . J . , and S . J . Marrink . 2008 . The molecular face of lipid rafts in model membranes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 105 : 17367‐17372 . 2 . Hess , B . 2002 . Determining the shear viscosity of model liquids from molecular dynamics simulations . J . Chem . Phys . 116 : 209‐217 .