Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID - 19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID - 19 . The COVID - 19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect , the company ' s public news and information website . Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID - 19 - related research that is available on the COVID - 19 resource centre - including this research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories , such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re - use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source . These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID - 19 resource centre remains active . Journal Pre - proof Environmental contamination of SARS - CoV - 2 on surfaces , air - conditioner and ventilation systems Varvara A . Mouchtouri , Michalis Koureas , Maria Kyritsi , Alexandros Vontas , Leonidas Kourentis , Spyros Sapounas , George Rigakos , Efthimia Petinaki , Sotirios Tsiodras , Christos Hadjichristodoulou PII : S1438 - 4639 ( 20 ) 30545 - 9 DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijheh . 2020 . 113599 Reference : IJHEH 113599 To appear in : International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health Received Date : 28 April 2020 Revised Date : 17 July 2020 Accepted Date : 19 July 2020 Please cite this article as : Mouchtouri , V . A . , Koureas , M . , Kyritsi , M . , Vontas , A . , Kourentis , L . , Sapounas , S . , Rigakos , G . , Petinaki , E . , Tsiodras , S . , Hadjichristodoulou , C . , Environmental contamination of SARS - CoV - 2 on surfaces , air - conditioner and ventilation systems , International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijheh . 2020 . 113599 . This is a PDF file of an article that has undergone enhancements after acceptance , such as the addition of a cover page and metadata , and formatting for readability , but it is not yet the definitive version of record . This version will undergo additional copyediting , typesetting and review before it is published in its final form , but we are providing this version to give early visibility of the article . Please note that , during the production process , errors may be discovered which could affect the content , and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain . © 2020 Published by Elsevier GmbH . Environmental contamination of SARS - CoV - 2 on surfaces , air - conditioner and ventilation systems Varvara A . Mouchtouri a , Michalis Koureas a , Maria Kyritsi a , Alexandros Vontas a , Leonidas Kourentis a , Spyros Sapounas b , George Rigakos b , Efthimia Petinaki c , Sotirios Tsiodras d , and Christos Hadjichristodoulou a * a Laboratory of Hygiene and Epidemiology , Faculty of Medicine , Larisa , Greece b Hellenic National Public Health Organization , Athens , Greece c Department of Microbiology , Faculty of Medicine , University of Thessaly , Larissa , Greece d National and Kapodistrian University of Athens , Medical School , Athens , Greece * Corresponding author : Christos Hadjichristodoulou , Laboratory of Hygiene and Epidemiology , Faculty of Medicine , University of Thessaly , 22 , Papakyriazi street , Larisa , Greece ; email : xhatzi @ uth . gr J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f Abstract Background : COVID - 19 can be transmitted directly through respiratory droplets or indirectly through fomites . SARS - CoV - 2 has been detected on various environmental surfaces , air samples and sewage in hospital and community settings . Methods : Environmental samples were collected from a ferryboat during a COVID - 19 ongoing outbreak investigation and a nursing home and from three COVID - 19 isolation hospital wards and a long - term care facility where asymptomatic COVID - 19 cases were isolated . Samples were tested by real - time reverse transcriptase – polymerase chain reaction . Results : SARS - CoV - 2 was detected on swab samples taken from surfaces of food preparation and service areas , hospital isolation wards , an air exhaust duct screen , air - conditioning filter , sewage treatment unit and air sample during investigations conducted in response to COVID - 19 outbreaks on a ferryboat , nursing home , isolation facility and COVID - 19 hospital wards . Discussion : Food preparation areas and utensils can be contaminated during COVID - 19 outbreaks . Respiratory droplets / nuclei from infected persons can be displaced by the air flow and deposited on surfaces . It can be assumed that in the same manner , air flow could transfer and deposit infected respiratory droplets / nuclei from infected persons to the mucous membranes of persons standing against the air flow direction . Keywords : SARS - CoV - 2 ; COVID - 19 ; surfaces ; air ; food safety ; ship ; outbreak ; disinfection ; waste ; ventilation system ; air - conditioning system ; nursing home ; sewage ; airborne J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 1 . Introduction Currently , it is accepted that COVID - 19 can be transmitted directly through respiratory droplets or indirectly through fomites ( Ong , Tan et al . 2020 , World Health Organization 2020 ) . Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 ( SARS - CoV - 2 ) has been detected on various environmental surfaces , air samples and sewage in hospital and community settings ( Moriarty , Plucinski et al . 2020 , Ong , Tan et al . 2020 , Wang , Feng et al . 2020 , Ye , Lin et al . 2020 ) . We collected environmental samples from a ferryboat during a COVID - 19 ongoing outbreak investigation with an attack rate of 31 . 3 % ( 119 / 380 travelers ) , a nursing home ( attack rate 9 . 8 % , 12 / 122 ) , three COVID - 19 isolation hospital wards and hallways and a long - term care facility where 30 asymptomatic COVID - 19 cases were isolated . 2 . Methods The World Health Organization guidelines were considered for sampling ( World Health Organization 2020 ) . Air samples were collected with a portable air sampler ( Sartorius Airport MD8 ) with air flow set to 50 L per minute and 10 minutes sampling time . Gelatin membrane filters of 80mm diameter ( Sartorius 17528 - 80 - ACD ) were used . After sampling , filters were removed with sterilized forcep and placed in a 50ml conical tube filled with ¼ strength Ringer’s solution . Surface samples were collected by wearing sterile gloves as follows : swab was removed from the package , wet to the viral transport medium and then an area of 5 cm by 5 cm was swabbed by applying pressure with the swab on the surface and rotating the swab stick , then the swab was added to the vial that was placed in a self - sealing bag . The self - sealing bag was cleaned with J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 70 % ethanol solution before placed to the transport container . Control samples were collected in the same way as the environmental samples from the potentially contaminated area , including opening the package and removing the swab from the tube , but without sampling any surfaces . All samples were tested by real - time reverse transcriptase – polymerase chain reaction ( RT - PCR ) . Genetic material extraction was performed with the iPrep™ Purification Instrument ( Invitrogen ) using the iPrep™ PureLink® Virus Kit ( Invitrogen ) . For the direct qualitative detection of SARS - CoV - 2 RNA , multiplex specific real - time RT - PCR was performed with the RIDA®GENE SARS - CoV - 2 RUO kit ( R - Biopharm , Germany ) in ABI STEP ONE real time system . For each sample a 10 - 1 dilution was also analyzed and both samples and their dilutions were analyzed in duplicate . 3 . Results and discussion Table 1 presents the positive laboratory test results and Table 2 the negative laboratory results . SARS - CoV - 2 RNA was detected on the air exhaust duct surface and screen of the ship hospital and cabins exhaust to open deck . Respiratory droplets / nuclei from infected persons were displaced and deposited on the air duct and screen of the ship air exhaust that was located in the open deck , three decks above the ship hospital examination area . Air from cabins and toilets of symptomatic and asymptomatic patients were directed towards the same air exhaust duct . SARS - CoV - 2 RNA was detected on the filter of the air - conditioner device in the nursing home patient room . Both results demonstrate that respiratory droplets / nuclei from infected persons can be displaced by the air flow and deposited on surfaces ( Lu , Gu et al . 2020 , Ong , Tan et al . 2020 ) . It can be assumed that in the same manner , air flow could transfer and deposit infected respiratory droplets / nuclei from infected persons to the mucous membranes of persons standing against the air flow direction ( Lu , Gu et al . 2020 ) . J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f The virus RNA was detected in one out of the 12 air samples collected . The positive air sample was collected at a height of approximately 0 . 8 meters and 2 . 5 meters away from a symptomatic patient not wearing a face mask . Symptomatic patients - if this is tolerated - could be advised to wear a face mask when a person is entering the isolation area . Equipment used for air sampling does not simulate human breathing patterns and therefore cannot ascertain the potential of airborne disease transmission . SARS - CoV - 2 RNA was detected on a food utensil during food preparation and on the bar counter where service of crew and passengers was taking place . It is possible that contamination of these surfaces occurred through the contaminated hands of food handlers either by respiratory excretions and / or faecal matter . The role of asymptomatic food handlers and the potential for transmission has not been studied yet . Food safety rules should be strictly applied including exclusion of symptomatic food handlers from working , strict personal hygiene , frequent cleaning and disinfection of food preparation areas ( World Health Organization 2020 ) . The use of face masks by food handlers handling ready - to - eat food ( especially cold food ) may be considered as a precautionary measure during the pandemic and until further evidence is available . Currently there is no evidence of such transmission events . SARS - CoV - 2 RNA was detected in the sewage holding tank of the ferryboat . Occupational exposure , through direct contact with sewage or through inhalation of sewage aerosolized particles could occur and therefore personal protective equipment should be worn by ship crew and workers at the port waste reception facilities . Our study is limited , by the testing of a limited number of samples . It was not possible to implement a consistent organized monitoring protocol to test hypotheses for the routes of transmission in the specific outbreaks context . Further studies could test samples by culture and J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f even sequencing of clinical and environmental strains could be conducted , both for the phylogenetic comparison of the strains and in order to find potential virus variants ( World Health Organization 2020 ) . 4 . Conclusions SARS - CoV - 2 RNA was detected on various surfaces in community settings where outbreaks have occurred and in the immediate environment of patients in hospital wards ( Table 1 ) . We were not able to quantify or check virus viability , however , other studies have demonstrated that SARS - CoV - 2 can persist on various types of surfaces ( Kampf , Todt et al . 2020 ) . Hand hygiene and environmental cleaning and disinfection can play a key role in interrupting the chain of infection . Currently , there are only a few studies testing virus resistance to chemical and physical cleaning and disinfection methods . Perhaps additional studies are needed to ensure evidence - based cleaning and disinfection protocols . Further studies can investigate the role of environmental contamination in the disease transmission via analytical epidemiological studies and the extent that indirect transmission can have . Acknowledgments Authors are grateful to the hospital staff and the ferryboat crew members for their help in sample collection . Conflict of interest Authors declared there are no conflicting interests . Authors contributions J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f CH and VM conceived of the study , VM , MKo , GR and SS collected samples , MKy , EP and AV conducted laboratory analysis , ST and CH coordinated outbreak investigations , MKo and LK participated in the air sampling design , all authors reviewed and approved the manuscript . References Kampf , G . , et al . ( 2020 ) . " Persistence of coronaviruses on inanimate surfaces and their inactivation with biocidal agents . " J Hosp Infect 104 ( 3 ) : 246 - 251 . Lu , J . , et al . ( 2020 ) . " COVID - 19 Outbreak Associated with Air Conditioning in Restaurant , Guangzhou , China , 2020 . " Emerg Infect Dis 26 ( 7 ) . Moriarty , L . F . , et al . ( 2020 ) . " Public Health Responses to COVID - 19 Outbreaks on Cruise Ships - Worldwide , February - March 2020 . " MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 69 ( 12 ) : 347 - 352 . Ong , S . W . X . , et al . ( 2020 ) . " Air , Surface Environmental , and Personal Protective Equipment Contamination by Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 ( SARS - CoV - 2 ) From a Symptomatic Patient . " JAMA . Wang , J . , et al . ( 2020 ) . " SARS - CoV - 2 RNA detection of hospital isolation wards hygiene monitoring during the Coronavirus Disease 2019 outbreak in a Chinese hospital . " Int J Infect Dis . World Health Organization ( 2020 ) . COVID - 19 and food safety : guidance for food businesses . Interim guidance , WHO . World Health Organization ( 2020 ) . Modes of transmission of virus causing COVID - 19 : implications for IPC precaution recommendations Scientific brief , WHO . World Health Organization ( 2020 , 18 February 2020 ) . " Surface sampling of coronavirus disease ( COVID - 19 ) : A practical “how to” protocol for health care and public health professionals . " Retrieved 20 April 2020 , 2020 , from https : / / apps . who . int / iris / bitstream / handle / 10665 / 331058 / WHO - 2019 - nCoV - Environment _ protocol - 2020 . 1 - eng . pdf . J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f Ye , G . , et al . ( 2020 ) . " Environmental contamination of the SARS - CoV - 2 in healthcare premises : An urgent call for protection for healthcare workers . " medRxiv : 2020 . 2003 . 2011 . 20034546 . J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f Table 1 . Environmental samples and positive real - time Reverse Transcription Polymerase Chain Reaction ( RT - PCR ) laboratory test results conducted in March and April 2020 in Greece Facility Type of sample Positive RT - PCR Sampling site ( cycle threshold value ) Number of samples International ferry boat * Surface swab Ship hospital and cabins air exhaust duct surface and screen to open deck ( 34 ) 1 Hand contact part of flour scoop in use , in galley ( 26 ) 1 Doorknob in toilets entrance near dining room ( 37 ) 1 Passengers’ bar counter ( 35 ) 1 Light switch in the ship hospital ( 34 ) 1 Sewage Sewage holding tank ( 27 ) 1 Nursing home * Surface swab Patient bed side rail ( 31 , 32 ) 2 Filter of wall mounted split air conditioner ( 34 ) 1 Outside doorknob of patient room ( 32 ) 1 Hospital COVID - 19 Surface swab Bed side surface patient 1 ( 32 ) 1 J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f negative pressure isolation ward and hallways Washbasin patient 1 ( 32 ) 1 Toilet bowl button patient 1 ( 36 ) 1 Air 2 . 5 m away from patient 1 with mask off - 0 . 8 height ( 36 ) 1 * : Samples were collected once a COVID - 19 outbreak was identified and before application of cleaning and disinfection measures J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f Table 2 . Environmental samples and negative real - time Reverse Transcription Polymerase Chain Reaction ( RT - PCR ) laboratory test results conducted in March and April 2020 in Greece Facility Type of sample Negative RT - PCR Sampling site Ν umber of samples International ferry boat * Surface swab Grilles at toilet air outlet in cabin of an asymptomatic COVID - 19 crew 1 Corridor handrail 1 Clean dish stored inside cupboard 1 Vegetable refrigerator door - handle 1 Nursing home * Surface swab Air - conditioner grill 2 Filter of wall mounted split unit air conditioner indoors 1 Floor outside patient room 2 Patient room outside doorknob 2 Patient room inside doorknob 1 J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f Toilet outside doorknob 2 Toilet inside doorknob 2 Toilet bowl 2 Patient food table 2 Isolation facility for asymptomatic COVID - 19 cases† Surface swab Living room table 1 Floor at exit 1 Exit door’s glass window 1 , 8m height 1 Wall against nurses’ bench 1 , 8m height 1 Nurses bench 1 Floor opposite living Room 3 . 5m 1 Wall against living room 3 . 5m distance , height 1 , 8m ) 1 Wall living room 1 . 80 height 1 TV , upper frame 1 TV remote control buttons 1 J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f Air Living room at 0 , 5 m height 1 3 . 5m distance from living room , height 0 , 8m 1 Nurses’ bench 1 , 2 m height 1 Exit at 0 , 5m height 1 Hospital COVID - 19 negative pressure isolation ward and hallways Surface swab Food table patient 1 ‡ , 2 ‡ , 3 ‡ 3 Central air outlet from negative pressure rooms in roof of hospital 1 Toilet bowl button at hallway 1 Toiled door knob at hallway 1 Light switch in hallway 1 Keyboard in hallway 1 Room for equipment storage in hallway 1 Bench at hallway 1 Doorknob in hallway 1 Anteroom bench in hallway 1 Bed side surface patient 2 1 J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f Washbasin patient 2 1 Toilet bowl button patient 1 , 2 2 Light switch patient 3 1 Air outlet 2m height patient 3 1 Air outlet 0 . 4m height patient 3 1 Toilet door knob patient 3 1 Wall 2 m from patient 3 1 Wall 3 m from patient 3 1 Air 1 - meter height and 2 . 5 m away from patients 1 , 2 with mask on 2 1 - meter height and 2 . 5 m away from patients 2 , 3 , 3 samples with mask off 3 Central air outlet from negative pressure rooms ( roof of hospital ) 1 - meter height 1 Bench in hallway 1 * : Samples were collected once a COVID - 19 outbreak was identified and before application of cleaning and disinfection measures † : Samples were collected after cleaning and disinfection application J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f ‡ : Patient 1 : symptomatic and 10th day of hospitalization . Patient 2 : symptomatic and unknown days of hospitalization . Patient 3 : asymptomatic and 13th day of hospitalization J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f