This article was downloaded by : [ T & F Internal Users ] , [ Kevin Swanson ] On : 15 November 2011 , At : 08 : 07 Publisher : Routledge Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number : 1072954 Registered office : Mortimer House , 37 - 41 Mortimer Street , London W1T 3JH , UK International Public Management Journal Publication details , including instructions for authors and subscription information : http : / / www . tandfonline . com / loi / upmj20 The Multiple Institutional Logics of Innovation David Lazer a , Ines Mergel b , Curtis Ziniel c , Kevin M . Esterling d & Michael A . Neblo e a NORTHEASTERN UNIVERSITY AND HARVARD UNIVERSITY b SYRACUSE UNIVERSITY c LIVERPOOL HOPE UNIVERSITY d UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA , RIVERSIDE e THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY Available online : 14 Oct 2011 To cite this article : David Lazer , Ines Mergel , Curtis Ziniel , Kevin M . Esterling & Michael A . Neblo ( 2011 ) : The Multiple Institutional Logics of Innovation , International Public Management Journal , 14 : 3 , 311 - 340 To link to this article : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10967494 . 2011 . 618308 PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE Full terms and conditions of use : http : / / www . tandfonline . com / page / terms - and - conditions This article may be used for research , teaching , and private study purposes . Any substantial or systematic reproduction , redistribution , reselling , loan , sub - licensing , systematic supply , or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden . The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation that the contents will be complete or accurate or up to date . The accuracy of any instructions , formulae , and drug doses should be independently verified with primary sources . The publisher shall not be liable for any loss , actions , claims , proceedings , demand , or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with or arising out of the use of this material . THE MULTIPLE INSTITUTIONAL LOGICS OF INNOVATION DAVID LAZER NORTHEASTERN UNIVERSITY AND HARVARD UNIVERSITY INES MERGEL SYRACUSE UNIVERSITY CURTIS ZINIEL LIVERPOOL HOPE UNIVERSITY KEVIN M . ESTERLING UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA , RIVERSIDE MICHAEL A . NEBLO THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY ABSTRACT : How do decentralized systems deal with innovation ? In particular , how do they aggregate the myriad experiences of their component parts , facilitate diffusion of information , and encourage investments in innovation ? This is a classic problem in the study of human institutions . It is also one of the biggest challenges that exists in the governance of decentralized systems : How do institutions shape individual behavior around solving problems and sharing information in a fashion that is reasonably com - patible with collective well - being ? We use a particular decentralized institution ( the U . S . House of Representatives ) , wrestling with a novel problem ( how to utilize the Internet ) , to explore the implications of three archetypical principles for organizing collective problem solving : market , network , and hierarchy . InternationalPublicManagementJournal International Public Management Journal , 14 ( 3 ) , pages 311 – 340 Copyright # 2011 Taylor & Francis Group , LLC DOI : 10 . 1080 / 10967494 . 2011 . 618308 ISSN : 1096 - 7494 print / 1559 - 3169 online D o w n l o a d e d by [ T & F I n t e r n a l U s e r s ] , [ K e v i n S w a n s on ] a t 08 : 07 15 N ov e m b e r 2 011 INTRODUCTION How do decentralized systems deal with innovation ? In particular , how do they aggregate the myriad experiences of their component parts ? This is a classic prob - lem in the study of human institutions—at all scales , from small groups of indivi - duals wrestling with common problems to policy learning across national boundaries . It is one of the biggest issues in collective action and thus governance : How do institutions shape individual behavior around solving problems and shar - ing information in a fashion that is reasonably compatible with collective well - being ? In fact , much of human history can be viewed through the lens of infor - mation production and sharing : how different ways of organizing humans provided reasons for individuals to solve other people’s problems ( Diamond 1997 ) . Innovation presents a particular governance challenge within the public sector because the market - based mechanisms ( e . g . , intellectual property rights ) that have evolved to encourage innovation seemingly do not apply to the public sector . There is no way for an innovative jurisdiction to profit from the successful adoption by another of its innovation . We use a particular decentralized institution ( the U . S . House of Representatives ) , wrestling with a novel problem ( how to utilize the Internet ) , to explore the implica - tions of three archetypical principles for organizing collective problem solving : market , network , and hierarchy ( Powell 1990 ) . We find that these three institutional logics intertwine in this particular case . The market turns out to be a powerful mechanism for fueling innovation , because an array of vendors has emerged that supplies Web services to House offices . These vendors provide the scale necessary for the development of cutting edge features for House Web sites . Information about vendors , in turn , flows through interpersonal networks , although there is relatively little consultation among House offices about how actual features on Web sites work . There are multiple hierarchical mechanisms that direct and limit what mem - bers do with their Web sites . There are House rules that limit the content of Web sites , and parties play a limited role in subsidizing innovative practices . We do find , however , evidence of underinvestment in innovative practice within offices , with little critical examination of what constituents want and need from member Web sites . That is , while there are powerful drivers of conformity ( DiMaggio and Powell 1983 ) with respect to Internet practices , the system fails at harnessing the collective capacity of these offices for problem solving . PROBLEM SOLVING IN DECENTRALIZED SYSTEMS Imagine a system where the agents in the system are each playing the same game against the environment . Because these games are similar to one another , the lessons learned in one game have implications for the best strategy in the other games . These potential informational externalities create a governance challenge : How do different principles for organizing collective human efforts affect the pooling of experiences and create incentives to innovate and share the lessons learned from a particular experiment ? 312 International Public Management Journal Vol . 14 , No . 3 , 2011 D o w n l o a d e d by [ T & F I n t e r n a l U s e r s ] , [ K e v i n S w a n s on ] a t 08 : 07 15 N ov e m b e r 2 011 Here we explore the role that three institutional mechanisms for organizing collec - tive human effort play in the aggregation of problem solving : market , hierarchy , and network ( cf . Powell 1990 ) . By market we mean that the problem is solved through an arms - length transaction between actors with a problem ( consumers ) and actors who can address that problem ( producers ) . By hierarchy we mean that the problem is solved through authoritative fiat or through concentration of power and resources in a system . And we define problem solving in networks to refer to the informal exchange and flow of favors and information within a given system , outside the existing hierarchical reporting structures . The governance challenges with respect to decentralized innovation revolve around the production , sharing , and aggregation of information : Challenge 1 — Information Production . The very possibility that the lessons learned by one actor would be useful to another means that there may be a mismatch between private incentives and public benefits to experimentation . Innovations that will diffuse and benefit others may be underproduced or not shared , because actors do not incorporate those benefits to others in their calculations . The incentive issue creates a subsidiary issue of scale—where there may be some innovations that only produce net benefits if there are multiple adopters . To take an extreme example , imagine an actor could invest c to yield benefits less than c , but where many other actors could then receive those benefits for free . In the absence of some type of return from the benefits others receive , it will not be in the interest of any single actor to produce them . Challenge 2 — Information Sharing . The fact that innovative practices can be public goods—where the innovative practices of one actor do not reduce the value those practices offer other actors , means that communicating those practices can greatly increase collective welfare . However , sharing sometimes comes with a cost—perhaps quite high , depending on the quality of information being con - veyed . A key question , then , is whether actors share private information when it would increase overall welfare . Challenge 3 — Information Aggregation . Even if information is being shared , it does not mean that there will be a convergence to an optimal array of practices . For any given domain , there are likely many alternative practices , and a key question will be whether the system of communication facilitates a convergence toward optimal practices . As the information cascade literature highlights ( Bikhchandani , Hirshleifer , and Welch 1992 ) , it is eminently possible that communication that does not convey all private information may result in the collective convergence on suboptimal practices . A key question , then , is , how do these various institutional mechanisms succeed or fail at addressing these governance issues ? We consider each institutional archetype in turn . The issue of market failure and information production has been well explored in economics . Economic models emphasize a few mechanisms to address the issue of informational externalities . The first is intellectual property protection . That is , if an actor produces an innovation that produces value for others , intellectual property THE MULTIPLE INSTITUTIONAL LOGICS OF INNOVATION 313 D o w n l o a d e d by [ T & F I n t e r n a l U s e r s ] , [ K e v i n S w a n s on ] a t 08 : 07 15 N ov e m b e r 2 011 rights provide a mechanism for the innovator to gain some rents from other benefici - aries . In principle , intellectual property protection addresses much of the issue of information production and sharing , because actors internalize some of the benefits other actors receive from an innovation . Apple invested in the iPhone because it gained substantial profits from its sales ; similarly , it has not been shy about telling the world about the benefits of the iPhone . Finally , one of the potentially compelling features of markets is that they aggregate information through price signals ( Hayek 1945 ) . These mechanisms of governance are seemingly inapplicable to the public sector , because there is limited capacity to gain rents from successful policies that are emu - lated elsewhere ( e . g . , Massachusetts cannot charge other states for lessons learned from its health coverage reforms ) and constitutional limits on consolidation ( e . g . , New York cannot launch a hostile takeover of New Jersey ) . However , as the case study below illustrates , for some policies , there is significant potential for market actors to ‘‘join’’ the informational ecosystem that includes the relevant government actors , developing and offering innovations that can then be transferred to other government actors through payment . Indeed , much production of various kinds in the public sector has been outsourced—sometimes called the hollowing out of the state ( Milward and Provan 2000 ) —where the same private firm serves multiple jurisdictions . The potential of this market mechanism depends on : 1 . The capacity of actors to contract out production . Certain types of policies can be contracted out and others not , e . g . , because of their complexity ( Brown , Potoski , and Van Slyke 2010 ) . For example , implementation of IT policy , to some extent , can be outsourced , which means that lessons learned from implementation in one location can be utilized by the contractor elsewhere , pro - viding the incentive to the contractor to innovate if they can capture some of the resulting rents . This example also highlights that nongovernment consumers on the demand side are also part of the broader information ecosystem , because the same contractors are providing services to both government and nongovernment entities . 2 . Formal or informal mechanisms of intellectual property rights . There will only be an incentive for contractors to innovate if those innovations are not easily emu - lated . If another actor could easily copy what was done in one location , then it is not possible for the original innovator to capture rents from successful innova - tions . Such emulation can be blocked through formal property protection ( e . g . , through the development of proprietary systems ) , or through informal mechanisms ( the development of systems that are difficult to copy because of their complexity ) . Market - based approaches create their own dysfunctions . The existence of intellec - tual property rights creates market power , and necessarily shifts surpluses from con - sumers to producers ( contractors ) . An exclusive market arrangement also means that innovation will be biased toward the development of systems that are protected by formal or informal intellectual property rights . Some of the support for the develop - ment of open source software for government use has derived from this dual critique 314 International Public Management Journal Vol . 14 , No . 3 , 2011 D o w n l o a d e d by [ T & F I n t e r n a l U s e r s ] , [ K e v i n S w a n s on ] a t 08 : 07 15 N ov e m b e r 2 011 ( Hamel and Schweik 2009 ) . That is , the open source software movement may be seen as support for outsourcing to the ‘‘commons’’ rather than to private sector entities . As the U . S . system of dual sovereignty ( and the case study below ) highlights , systems can have strands of both hierarchy and decentralization . That is , one can embed certain elements of hierarchy in an essentially decentralized system . Hierarchical governance resolves the scale issue by , essentially , removing ( at least partly ) ‘‘decentralized’’ from decentralized decision making . There are no informa - tional externalities for a centralized decision maker ( Strumpf 1999 ) . Thus , a hier - archy can consolidate systemic production , potentially eliminating the issues of externalities . A hierarchy can also subsidize innovation , providing resources to sub - sidiary actors for experimentation . Alternatively , a centralized decision maker can authoritatively constrain or mandate particular behaviors—e . g . , mandating that particular units attempt innovative policies that might not be in their self - interest to pursue . In the U . S . many policy domains have a blend of these relationships between the federal and state governments , where , for example , with Medicaid there is a mix of some flexibility with federal mandates and dollars . 1 Hierarchies , of course , have their own failings in the creation and dissemination of information . First , if production is consolidated , the hierarchy is creating an internal monopolist that may have the same issues around pricing ( or efficiency ) that a mon - opolist in the market would have ( Williamson 1971 ) . Second , even in a world where agents confront identical problems , they might have different information ( or per - spectives ) on what are promising solutions , thus potentially reducing the exploration of alternative policies . As Brandeis pointed out long ago , one of the presumed ben - efits of a decentralized system is that it promotes experimentation , and subsequent dissemination of successful policies . 2 Constraints on the behaviors of actors would , from this perspective , reduce innovation . 3 Third , the central actor may confront vast informational overload in terms of its capacity to aggregate different information , especially if peripheral actors have subtly different problems . In fact , this was the primary Hayekian critique of central planning . The premise of a network approach to innovation is that agents have differen - tiated connections and = or finite attention . That is , A can emulate B only if it sees what B is doing . Visibility depends on the nature of the innovation . Some ‘‘innova - tions , ’’ by their nature , are publicly visible . This is part of a larger pattern of systems where units can cheaply observe or refer to particular other units , where that link requires no reciprocal effort . The literature on networks and governance has emerged in the breach—where market or hierarchy are clearly missing and an informal system has emerged that apparently addresses the underlying governance problem . Notably , Ostrom ( 1990 , 2009 ) has focused on the role that networks regulate behavior in the provision of collective goods in the absence of a hierarchy . This research has focused on the pro - vision of common pool resources ( e . g . , Ostrom , Gardner , and Walker 1994 ) , but , as discussed below , much of the logic could apply to the creation and dissemination of innovative information . The emergence of enforced norms is likely one key compo - nent of information production and sharing—e . g . , recognition of helpful behavior THE MULTIPLE INSTITUTIONAL LOGICS OF INNOVATION 315 D o w n l o a d e d by [ T & F I n t e r n a l U s e r s ] , [ K e v i n S w a n s on ] a t 08 : 07 15 N ov e m b e r 2 011 and punishment of actors who do not share information ( Mergel , Lazer , and Binz - Sharf 2008 ) . The economic sociology literature , in contrast , has focused on the role of networks where markets fail . Much of the work on social capital ( in particular , the vein of work following from Bourdieu 2001 ; Coleman 1988 ) is really about how networks govern dimensions of exchange that would otherwise fail because of asymmetric information . A substantial literature has emerged around ‘‘network industries’’— e . g . , Broadway , construction , apparel— where economic actors are repeatedly recon - figured around existing projects ( Uzzi 1999 ; Jones 1996 ; Jones , Hesterly , and Borgatti 1997 ) . This literature has focused on the role that ( 1 ) relational embedded - ness ( repeat interactions with the focal actor ) and ( 2 ) structural embeddedness ( reputation vis - a ` - vis third parties ) play in regulating the behavior of individuals ( Uzzi 1996 ) . There is also a rapidly emerging literature on networks in public organizations , which has focused , for example , on the role that networks play in the success of pub - lic managers ( Meier and O’Toole 2001 ) ; as well as the role that network structure plays in the provision of public services ( Provan and Kenis 2008 ; Milward et al . 2010 ; Provan and Milward 2001 ) . Most of this literature , we would note , focuses on formal networks , rather than the emergent , informal networks ( Isett et al . 2011 ) on which we focus on in this article . How do informal networks address the three governance challenges outlined above ? Part of the answer may lie in reciprocity ( Axelrod and Hamilton 1981 ) , where dyads of actors with long - run relationships develop cooperative relationships . How - ever , reciprocity can be at most a small part of the answer , because the benefits of exchange within a dyad will not reflect the broader systemic benefits resulting from information sharing . It is not clear how dyadic reciprocity will encourage invest - ments in innovation that reflect the benefits to the whole system . It is unclear whether dyadic reciprocity will also reflect the benefits that third parties ( tied to one or both members of the dyad ) get when that information is subsequently shared with them . It is possible that information exchanged within a dyad offers currency for exchange in other dyads , but it is not at all obvious that this should lead to a healthy equilibrium of information sharing . Finally , as the information cascade literature highlights , it is not clear that dyadic informational exchange should yield effective information aggregation . In short , reciprocity in networks may be a weak mechanism to support effective governance . Informal networks may play other , more important roles in supporting governance , for example in fostering the emerg - ence of pro - social norms that encourages information sharing ( Mergel , Lazer , and Binz - Scharf 2008 ) . Norms that reward risk taking and innovation with status would certainly increase innovation . Communities where knowledge sharing is publicly recognized and seen as appropriate would likely have higher levels of information sharing . And settings where sharing otherwise private information regarding failure as well as success is encouraged would likely improve and information aggregation . As a general proposition , all of these organizational forms coexist , in differ - ent degrees . For example , if you look at one of the classic studies of diffusion— tetracycline ( Coleman , Katz , and Menzel 1957 ) —all three mechanisms were at work 316 International Public Management Journal Vol . 14 , No . 3 , 2011 D o w n l o a d e d by [ T & F I n t e r n a l U s e r s ] , [ K e v i n S w a n s on ] a t 08 : 07 15 N ov e m b e r 2 011 within the system . At its core , this was a study of the decentralized decision making of doctors , whose objective was to take care of their patients . Coleman and his col - laborators focused on how doctors learned through their network whether tetracy - cline was effective . However , not too far in the background was the fact that there was a market for drugs , with powerful intellectual property rights , which facilitated the creation of the drug in the first place , and which created an incentive to share information about the drug . In fact , a recent re - analysis—Van den Bulte and Lilien ( 2001 ) —of the Coleman data suggest that the network had little effect on behavior once one controlled for who was targeted for marketing . Further , in the background was a legal and regulatory regime ( i . e . , hierarchy ) that ( 1 ) protected those intellectual property rights and ( 2 ) approved of the drug for circulation . Our objective is to use the emergence of a particular ‘‘problem , ’’ the use of the Internet by members of Congress , to explore how these mechanisms for organizing collective problem solving coexist . We now turn to a discussion of our methodology . METHODOLOGY Case Selection and Context The empirical focus of this article is on use of the official Web sites by con - gressional offices . There are two primary reasons that we chose this as a setting in which to study innovation . First , is the novelty of the medium , and second is the decentralized management of congressional offices . We discuss each in turn . Novelty of the Medium Every member of the House currently has an official Web site . These Web sites present a virtual representation of the member to the world , and most notably to his = her constituents . The existing rules , such as the Franking rules , focus on the use of paper - based communication with constituents , so that the Internet is still a relatively novel medium for offices with a lot of uncertainty to what is acceptable practice . Given the wide reach of the Internet , these official Web sites offer a potentially powerful means to communicate with constituents and the public in general . How - ever , it is also a relatively novel medium for communication—as of the late 1990s , only about half of the members even had a Web site , and a few years before that the World Wide Web did not even exist . A casual perusal of Web sites suggests a substantial degree of convergence , but also nontrivial variation and experimentation . From our perspective , learning about the power of the medium is still fresh . This provides the opportunity for us to examine this learning process . The screenshots in Figure 1 show ( a ) an example of one of the first Web sites of a senator ( in this case Senator Edward Kennedy in 1993 ) and ( b ) an example of a highly developed Web site by Representative Mike Honda , who used a crowd - sourcing approach to include his constituents’ feedback into the Web - design process . THE MULTIPLE INSTITUTIONAL LOGICS OF INNOVATION 317 D o w n l o a d e d by [ T & F I n t e r n a l U s e r s ] , [ K e v i n S w a n s on ] a t 08 : 07 15 N ov e m b e r 2 011 Decentralized Nature of Congress Congressional offices can be considered as 440 small , functionally identical , and independent public organizations ( Salisbury and Shepsle 1981 ) . As one staffer we interviewed stated , ‘‘There’re 435 small businesses here , and each ‘CEO’ can do what Figure 1 . Sample Congressional Web Sites ( Color Figure Available Online ) . 318 International Public Management Journal Vol . 14 , No . 3 , 2011 D o w n l o a d e d by [ T & F I n t e r n a l U s e r s ] , [ K e v i n S w a n s on ] a t 08 : 07 15 N ov e m b e r 2 011 they want . ’’ 4 There are some House rules that limit how offices can use their Web sites , but within those constraints , congressional offices collectively come close to matching the assumption that decision making is truly decentralized . There is clearly some interdependence of payoffs in the success of members—e . g . , Democrats have a stake in the success of other Democrats and in the failure of Republicans , and vice versa . However , the payoff a particular member gets out of the effective use of the official Web site by a specific other member is surely fairly tiny . We would also note that members confront somewhat different challenges in com - municating with constituents . The communication needs of a member from a rural Colorado district differ from the needs of a member representing Manhattan . How - ever , all offices are operating under similar resource constraints , and similar desires to satisfy constituents and portray a positive image of the member . Further , much of this heterogeneity is visible both to the offices and to the researcher ; and one key subsidiary question we pursue is how this heterogeneity affects the search process . Data Collection We conducted interviews with the congressional staff person who had primary responsibility for the official member Web site of 99 members of Congress in the summer of 2006 . We were assisted in recruitment by the Congressional Management Foundation ( CMF ) , a small nonprofit organization dedicated to helping members of Congress better manage their offices . The sample was constructed purposively to be roughly reflective of the body as a whole , but , due to the vagaries of who was willing to cooperate , is biased toward affluent urban districts , Democrats , and offices with above average Web sites ( see Table 1 ) . In our analyses below we examine TABLE 1 Key Descriptive Comparing Survey Sample and House Comparison of Sample and House Sample House MC Democrat 62 % 47 % MC Republican 38 % 53 % MC Female 22 % 15 % MC Freshmen 11 % 9 % MC term ( average ) 5 . 65 4 . 5 Median district income $ 51 , 050 $ 43 , 318 District % urban households ( average ) 81 % 67 % District % bachelors degree ( average ) 25 % 24 % Region of country Northeast 15 % 19 % South 33 % 36 % Midwest 22 % 22 % West 29 % 22 % Note : MC ¼ member of Congress . THE MULTIPLE INSTITUTIONAL LOGICS OF INNOVATION 319 D o w n l o a d e d by [ T & F I n t e r n a l U s e r s ] , [ K e v i n S w a n s on ] a t 08 : 07 15 N ov e m b e r 2 011 whether our observations are robust across subsamples , focusing , in particular , on underrepresented strata . We note where we find significant deviations across subsamples . The semistructured interviews each lasted about 45 minutes . The interviews were transcribed and each statement in every interview coded in an iterative process using the qualitative data analysis program NVivo 2 ( QSR 2002 ) . At approximately the same time we conducted the interviews we also conducted a survey of the communications directors in House offices . This survey was more broadly about communication strategy but did include a few items regarding where offices got information about what to do with their Web sites . We received 100 responses from the 440 offices , for a response rate of 23 % . 5 Our core research question is to understand the ways in which Congress pools the experiences of congressional offices vis - a ` - vis the use of the Internet . We break this down into three subsidiary research questions , matching the three governance challenges laid out above : 1 . How do offices learn about which of their practices are successful and which are not successful ? 2 . How do offices learn from other offices ? In particular , how do they learn which of the practices of other offices are successful and which are not successful ? 3 . What institutions outside of offices have a major impact on the aggregation of information ? The first question focuses on feedback from the environment—e . g . , do offices gather data on constituent preferences ? Do they track what information Web - surfers look at , and what proportion of hits are from the district ? This infor - mation has possible positive externalities , because what is learned by one office potentially has relevance for others . For example , if an office finds that particular content is viewed more than others , this could be beneficial to other offices if this observation has relevance to what issues they might place on the Web site . This information might be transmitted through interpersonal communication , or through the simple observation of what that office is and is not doing with its Web site . Finally , what role in aggregating information do the institutional structures within Congress play ? The two obvious institutions with an interest in the successful aggre - gation of information are ( a ) the parties and ( b ) the administrative infrastructure of Congress . FINDINGS Our analytic interest is how the system pools together the experiences of various offices’ use of their official Web sites . Viewing the member’s office as the relevant locus of decisions about how to use the Web site , we split our analysis up into ( 1 ) environmental feedback , ( 2 ) market - driven influences on decisions regarding Web sites , ( 3 ) hierarchical drivers of practices , and ( 4 ) interoffice ( network ) flows of experiences . 320 International Public Management Journal Vol . 14 , No . 3 , 2011 D o w n l o a d e d by [ T & F I n t e r n a l U s e r s ] , [ K e v i n S w a n s on ] a t 08 : 07 15 N ov e m b e r 2 011 Innovation : The Role of Environmental Feedback The Internet is a communication medium . The primary function of an official Web site is to facilitate communication with constituents . A key part of viewing the innovations around the official Web sites is to understand how offices assess whether a particular intervention was effective . In this case , do offices find out what works and does not work through feedback from their constituents ? The Internet offers a particular promise for learning from the environment , because it is possible to track with some detail what visitors to the Web site are doing ( e . g . , number of hits , pages visited , referrers , etc . ) . We therefore evaluate two questions : To what extent do offices ( 1 ) proactively assess what their target audience ( generally , constituents ) wanted from the Web site and ( 2 ) ex post assess whether their Web site was hitting the target ? The data definitively show that there was remarkably little effort by offices to proactively assess what constituents wanted . In fact , only two out of 99 offices ( both representing districts with above average educations and incomes ) indicated any type of research into what their constituents wanted , as one of them describes : We . . . sent out a survey to about 40 , 000 constituents . . . asking whether podcasting was a feature they’d use , and whether tele - video conferences , online town halls , all [ that ] stuff , what did they want , what should our very limited resources be devoted to . The website was one of the top ones , without a doubt . Podcasting , in contrast , had a very limited response . . . The lack of proactive research on what constituents want is , perhaps , unsurprising given the expense of surveys , focus groups , etc . The monitoring of the use of the Web site , however , is much cheaper . Readily available data which are usually automatically collected include : number of unique visitors and page views , what parts of the Web site are viewed , the approximate geographic location of each visitor to the Web site , who is linking to the Web site , where traffic to the Web site is coming from . It should there - fore be easy to produce regular reports indicating how much traffic the Web site is get - ting , and from what part of the district , looking at which Web pages . It is therefore surprising that few offices reported looking regularly ( or even recently ) at these data ( although the offices , when asked about this , very often noted this lack with regret ) . Only four of the interviewees specifically stated that they used Web traffic reports on a regular basis to help determine how they should operate their Web sites , and two other interviewees indicated that they collected information about their Web traf - fic but did not state how they used this information . All other offices stated that they did not get the information , did not use the information , had not looked at it recently , or did not know the current specifics about their Web site’s traffic . Even those offices that reported tracking what parts of the Web site got hits did not examine the data carefully , as this one exchange highlights : [ Q : Do you look at what pages on your website get the most hits ? ] We do . THE MULTIPLE INSTITUTIONAL LOGICS OF INNOVATION 321 D o w n l o a d e d by [ T & F I n t e r n a l U s e r s ] , [ K e v i n S w a n s on ] a t 08 : 07 15 N ov e m b e r 2 011 [ Q : Do you do anything with that ? ] We used to do it more , I actually need to find out . ( Sigh ) From another office : We don’t monitor as closely as I think would be helpful in terms of the Web traffic . We do an email program that runs separately that I can tell what links people are clicking on , but we don’t often go back to the website to see , okay , this page was the most visited . In short , assessment of practices with respect to these Web sites was quite limited . There was certainly evidence over time of the emergence of novel practices—e . g . , new features to a Web site—but there was little assessment of whether those practices were effective , even in the minimal sense of a count of how many times they were used . Markets As noted above , markets resolve collective problem solving through the develop - ment of proprietary information , which is then monetized and sold ( oftentimes in the form of services ) . In this case , we did observe that a population of small com - panies that caters to the Web needs of congressional offices has emerged during the past decade . Congressional offices are provided with a fixed budget , with which they have a fair degree of discretion . For some services , they therefore confront a build - or - buy decision—do they use staff to build a Web site , or purchase expert - ise to do so ? Many offices have pursued the latter route , where a small cottage industry of firms has sprung up to offer Web services to members ; thus , those firms are divided along Democratic and Republican ( e . g . , one Republican oriented firm was called ‘‘Right click’’ ) lines . Fifty - eight percent of the offices in our survey reported hiring an outside consultant , where the following were typical comments from interviews : We had a great vendor that allowed us to change our whole front page . We could do a lot of things internally . [ O ] ur vendor came up with the ideas for how exactly to make the tour pages , a lot of pages , automated . Because when we did that , that was almost five years ago , so that was when nobody was doing it . Now it’s pretty standard to have some of those features . The essential market logic behind the outsourcing of the Web site is that there are economies of scale in the problem solving process , where the unit cost of production for many Web sites is lower than the cost of producing a single Web site . In principle , the resulting surplus can be divided among profit , quality of Web site , and the ability to offer lower prices to offices . 322 International Public Management Journal Vol . 14 , No . 3 , 2011 D o w n l o a d e d by [ T & F I n t e r n a l U s e r s ] , [ K e v i n S w a n s on ] a t 08 : 07 15 N ov e m b e r 2 011 The effectiveness of the market in part rests on how well information can be pro - tected . That is , if one vendor comes up with an innovative solution at some cost , and either offices or other vendors are able to copy that solution cheaply , there will be an underinvestment in innovation . In this particular domain , protection likely does not come in the form of intellectual property rights , but through the development of expertise that cannot be easily copied or built internally . However , that may still leave much relevant information unprotected , as highlighted by the statement of one clever staffer who made use of vendor services in another way : One of the things that I’ve seen several external consultants do to pursue our business is send us a review and a report on our website , sort of ana - lyzed by their staff and saying this really should be updated , this really should be changed to meet the standard government configuration or whatever . . . I then see that and I say , okay , I think I’m going to implement these things myself . In this case , the staffer is essentially free riding on the insights provided by a vendor . An additional issue with respect to vendors is that there will be a natural push from vendors to homogenize their products , because it is cheaper to offer a limited set of options , and in part because they are using off - the - shelf software designed for commercial purposes . Individual solutions for the different offices are then adapted from the standard set of solutions plus a personalized configuration . As one individ - ual noted , ‘‘Looking at some of the other companies , it sounded like they were trying to sell us more of a template of what a website would look like , instead of . . . just completely designed for us , and how we wanted it . ’’ In short , vendors play a critical role in aggregating experiences and standardizing practice through their provision of services to multiple offices . Hierarchies There are two layers of hierarchy within the House : one based on authority and one based on power and resources . With respect to the former , the Committee on House Administration ( CHA ) sets budgets and rules constraining off - budget behavior ( e . g . , postings to official Web sites were constrained in the last 30 days before the election ) . They also run the technical infrastructure of the House , House Information Resources ( HIR ) . 6 HIR provides essential IT support to the House . A part of that support is the hosting of member Web sites , as well as basic consulting on design , providing a number of templates for offices to choose from ( at no cost ) and checking the security of content that goes up on the Web site . It is clear , however , that those templates are seen as somewhat constraining for some offices . Part of the logic behind a hierarchical model of problem solving , like the market model , is that economies of scale in the provision of services can emerge . Production for offices may thus be consolidated at significantly lower cost . However , there is not THE MULTIPLE INSTITUTIONAL LOGICS OF INNOVATION 323 D o w n l o a d e d by [ T & F I n t e r n a l U s e r s ] , [ K e v i n S w a n s on ] a t 08 : 07 15 N ov e m b e r 2 011 a mandate that offices use HIR , creating a mixed model of production , through HIR , vendors , and self - production , where only 15 % of offices in our survey reported using an HIR template . As a point of comparison , interview responses suggest that while HIR is cheaper ( free ) private vendors generally provide more customized service and innovate faster than HIR is able to do : [ HIR ] are more involved than we’d like them to be . . . for instance , someone found a typo on her [ member’s ] biography this weekend and I have to email them and wait for them to change it on that site . Also they just updated our content editor , which we have yet to make work . . . also , any time you want to put streaming media up , or , we can’t actually put streaming media up , but floor speeches , it has to go through them . In short , the hierarchical model , in this setting , does not offer enough flexibility for many offices , and adds an additional layer of transaction costs . The second layer of hierarchy is based on the party organization of Congress . Parties have no direct authority over what members do with their Web sites . They do , however , have what we would label ‘‘problem - solving’’ resources . Earlier analysis of Web sites from 2003 suggested that Republicans had systematically better Web sites than Democrats ( Esterling , Lazer , and Neblo 2005 ) . This may have reflected a residual of the high priority that Speaker Newt Gingrich put on technology . Our interviews suggest that while the perception ( especially among Democrats ) persists that Republicans put a high priority on member Web sites , in fact the Democratic Party made Web sites a high priority after Nancy Pelosi became minority leader . Thus , for example , many Democratic interviewees said that under Pelosi Democrats put a lot of energy into developing the Web site www . HouseDemocrats . gov . Further , as an example of the resources of the parties , the Democratic Caucus provided a customized analysis of every Democrat’s Web site . One staff member described the consequences of this formal analysis as follows : ‘‘ [ A ] couple of months ago the Democratic caucus . . . audited everyone’s website . And told you what they thought was wrong with formatting , or telling you what rules you might have accidentally broken . . . . So that was a very . . . individualized report . ’’ One office that was just starting out used the report to help them get their Web site off the ground and followed all the rules laid out by the party : [ T ] hey also gave a document of the highest scoring Democratic websi - tes . . . the highest scoring was , [ specific member of Congress ] , and so I looked at his website and I thought it was very clear . And , as you can tell , ours is really similar . So I just worked with our HIR consultant , [ name ] , a very good guy , and we created this . The caucus thus plays a particular role in conveying to members how to utilize new Web - related innovations . The following interviewee works in the 324 International Public Management Journal Vol . 14 , No . 3 , 2011 D o w n l o a d e d by [ T & F I n t e r n a l U s e r s ] , [ K e v i n S w a n s on ] a t 08 : 07 15 N ov e m b e r 2 011 leadership , and talks about their role in conveying lessons about online video and e - newsletters . I was one of the first to get video up and running on my website . . . . I took the initiative . . . . We held a large meeting . . . , and I spoke and told them . . . it’s really easy and everyone needs to do it . . . . And . . . at six months I was helping offices left and right copy that function . . . . We did it more recently with . . . e - newsletters . . . saying . . . you’ve got to do them . Such an easy , great , cheap way to reach all your constituents . In 2006 , the Democrats also played a key role in pushing online town halls , in part by centralizing the capacity to provide online town halls , thus subsidizing online town halls , and in part by educating Democratic offices on how to do town halls : [ T ] he online town hall was done through the Democratic office . It’s cost prohibitive for every office to have their own online town hall run on their own . . . . So . . . that’s all centralized through the Democratic office . Yeah , the e - town hall was pretty neat . We worked with the House Democratic Caucus and they helped us set up the program that made it easy for us to post it . The Democratic Caucus also played an important role in conveying the party’s message via the Web . Thus , for example , predictably , the audit that the Democrats conducted in part had a party - oriented tilt : ‘‘ [ The ] survey was more focused on the party message than it was on the individual site . . . . So . . . if we had a link to the Appro - priations Committee website , but not the Democratic Appropriations website , then we had points taken off because we should have been linking to the Democratic site . . . . ’’ The Democrats also more directly pushed for certain content and messages on member Web sites . Unsurprisingly , the election was playing a big role during this period ; a large number of Democratic offices expressed similar experiences with party leadership encouraging a unified message for the fall election : [ T ] he Democrats in July and August rolled out their message platform . It’s called A New Direction for America . . . . The main thing was one sheet , a description of what the new direction for America was . And the leader’s office encouraged members to put it up on the website . . . . [ T ] he leadership office sent out a template on the New Direction for America , and they made an announcement at our press secretary’s meet - ing on Mondays , asking us to immediately put this up on our websites , because Leader Pelosi wanted all Democrats on message . I thought that her [ Pelosi’s ] office would just keep calling and telling me that I had to put it [ New Direction template ] up . ( Laugh ) But also , you THE MULTIPLE INSTITUTIONAL LOGICS OF INNOVATION 325 D o w n l o a d e d by [ T & F I n t e r n a l U s e r s ] , [ K e v i n S w a n s on ] a t 08 : 07 15 N ov e m b e r 2 011 know , it’s party unity and people should see what the Democrats are standing for . More generally , leadership plays a role in providing content to offices , as these comments make clear : I think it’s gotten better over the past year . The Democratic leadership will offer suggestions , templates , links . . . If you look at our website , there’s something about veterans on there right now which came basically straight from Pelosi’s office . There’s also something about cuts to college loan programs , which is another email that was sent to us . The Republican leadership also played a role in disseminating information regarding Internet - related practices to their caucus , as this example highlights : The House Republican Conference has a blog seminar , probably twice a year , and I attended that . And they have bloggers come in from all the - different popular websites and sit down and talk about what they like to see and what they can do . And then , there’s also a segment on how to create and start your own blog , which is very helpful . This example aside , it is clear that at this time the Republican leadership played a far less important role vis - a ` - vis their members than did the Democratic leadership . Not a single Republican staffer indicated that the support from their party was an important driver of any feature on their Web site . The following two individuals were among the most complimentary of the Republicans for the support provided by their leadership for office Web sites : I never once spoke with [ the Republican conference ] about developing our website . . . I’m trying to think . I’m sure at some point in time they . . . provided examples of different types . I can’t remember any specifics . . . but I’m sure if I did they would have given me great tips . But I didn’t . [ The ] conference does a really good job . . . putting out . . . best practices . . . . [ Q : To what extent have you gotten insights ? ] Not much . In short , even those Republican staff most positive about the support from party leadership did not report using any feedback from leadership . Other staffers were less positive regarding what the party had to offer : [ T ] he Republican Conference will send out stuff electronically to us . . . . I’ve had this conversation with [ them ] , like ninety - five percent of what you send me is useless . It’s too broad . It wouldn’t work in my district anyway . 326 International Public Management Journal Vol . 14 , No . 3 , 2011 D o w n l o a d e d by [ T & F I n t e r n a l U s e r s ] , [ K e v i n S w a n s on ] a t 08 : 07 15 N ov e m b e r 2 011 I think the Republican party’s a little bit behind the Democratic party as far as . . . their commitment to technology . . . I don’t know if they’ve been the leader that maybe [ other staffer ] and I feel that they should be . You know the Republican party being the leader and having its members really devote resources to internet communication . . . in my opinion , I think [ other staffer ] and I have really had to take it on ourselves , and it’s our prior commitment to it , and our commitment to it that has made us really work hard on this , and not really our party’s commitment to it . In short , during the period of our interviews , it is clear that the Democrats were more proactive in providing both form and content for member Web sites than Republicans , and that they had a real impact on Democratic Web sites . We would note that the relative importance of the party to Democrats as compared to Repub - licans in part reflects the relative popularity of Democrats as compared to Republi - cans during this period . In particular , while Democrats were trying to present a national focus in the election of 2006 , Republicans were trying to keep races local . That is , identification with the Democratic Party was clearly a plus and with the Republicans a minus in 2006 , and this almost certainly affected party strategy and member receptiveness during this period . INTERPERSONAL VERSUS ATTENTIONAL NETWORKS Do congressional offices learn Web site practices from each other ? The relative similarity of the situations of members creates substantial potential for informa - tional externalities . This potential of cheaply copying the practices of other members is not lost on harried staff , as one observed : ‘‘I was not in the business of trying to reinvent the wheel . I just wanted to . . . go out and steal the best ideas I could from other people . ’’ There are two pathways by which offices may directly affect each other : interper - sonal communication and passive observation . The particular practices we are study - ing are , by their very nature , in significant part public . Member Web sites are observable to all other offices , and viewing what other offices are doing is quite cheap and convenient . This is a contrast to many other practices , such as the use of particular types of databases to manage correspondence , which are essentially invisible to outsiders . We also note that the capacity to observe is finite—for example , in this case it is only ( generally ) possible to observe some subset of other member Web sites . What is interesting about member Web sites is that while one component is easily observable ( the actual Web site ) there is much information that is not visible , such as the experiences of the office ( e . g . , failed experiments that are no longer on the Web site ) and the management processes underlying what is on the Web site . These experiences are only accessible interpersonally—by talking to some - one in another office and engaging in a give and take about their management practices and experiments . The following interviewee illustrates searching both through observation and communication : ‘‘We looked at every single website . . . . We probably had [ a list of ] the top 30 sites . I individually contacted every single THE MULTIPLE INSTITUTIONAL LOGICS OF INNOVATION 327 D o w n l o a d e d by [ T & F I n t e r n a l U s e r s ] , [ K e v i n S w a n s on ] a t 08 : 07 15 N ov e m b e r 2 011 one of those offices , and found out , who do you use for your website , who does the upkeep of it , who designed it , got all of the specifics of it . . . . ’’ Unsurprisingly , the vast majority of offices reported looking at other Web sites for insight . However , most interviews suggested that interpersonal interactions with other offices were minimal ; the following represents the typical response : ‘‘I didn’t talk to other staff members . I definitely looked at other members’ sites very carefully and tried to see what they were doing that might work for us . ’’ Notably , in the interviews , only one office reported talking extensively to other offices about internal processes ( e . g . , Web site design ; how to get content on the Web site , etc . ) . Interpersonal communication was largely focused on identifying vendors , where the following two responses are typical : We’ve looked at basically every other member site there is . . . . [ W ] e picked out the ones we liked the best , and I contacted their staff , and we found out who their . . . vendor was . I mean , I just talked to a bunch of my friends that are press secretaries basically . I just called them and said hey , who do you guys use , or , you know , is there anything you’d recommend ? I really like your site , who did you use ? Yeah , you know , basically word of mouth . [ Name ] did the same , our chief of staff . And he talked to some other chiefs of staff , in terms of cost and benefits , and customer service . These last two quotes illustrate two different strategies for identifying who to talk to . The first relied on an extensive search of what was observable to guide personal contact . That is , the passive observation guided interpersonal information seeking . The second indicates a reliance on friends ; that is , a particular type of interpersonal network , friendship , guided interpersonal information seeking . In short , search largely takes place with respect to things that are publicly available—offices looking at each others’ Web practices , but not talking to each other frequently , and rarely delving into issues beyond vendor - related issues . We do not have a definitive explanation for this . This may be partly because offices do not look at each other as prime sources of best practices , as two individuals explain : [ Q : Have you talked to other people around the Hill who are running their websites ] I haven’t really , because , to be honest with you , there aren’t a lot of people who really know web design that well . I looked around at most of , of the congressional websites on the web and most of them I kind of found to be relatively unimpressive . You know , I’ve often heard the complaint from web savvy people that congressional websites all look the same . And basically they look very average . They might have some information on them about what the member is doing , 328 International Public Management Journal Vol . 14 , No . 3 , 2011 D o w n l o a d e d by [ T & F I n t e r n a l U s e r s ] , [ K e v i n S w a n s on ] a t 08 : 07 15 N ov e m b e r 2 011 but as far as being visually appealing they just can’t hack it with some of the big private sector sites . Further , there was also evidence of a ‘‘not built here’’ mentality within offices , that a particular office is so idiosyncratic that lessons regarding management practices are unlikely be successful ( Katz and Allen 1982 ) . As one individual states , ‘‘ [ E ] very congressional office just runs . . . their organization . . . in their own way . ’’ Unsurprisingly , only a tiny fraction of the individuals we spoke with reported looking at every other Web site in Congress . Where did offices focus their attention ? Some staff reported randomly browsing other members’ Web sites . Many were more purposeful , looking at Web sites that had received an award from the CMF ( see dis - cussion below ) . A smaller group reported looking at salient other members , e . g . , from nearby districts , or of prominent members : ‘‘We [ looked ] at all the neighboring congressional districts . . . as well as leaders in Congress . . . : Nancy Pelosi , the Hoyer site , Denny Hastert . . . . So we copied a lot of . . . the best ideas from other websites . ’’ Another subset explored non - Congressional or nongovernmental Web sites : I researched other sites , both commercial , Hill , other government entities , other things in life and you know jotted down ideas . . . what I liked about certain things . . . There are two [ that stand out ] . . . One was Senator Kennedy’s website . In fact his website was pretty solid at the time . . . the the other was Wine Inspector , wineinspector . com . They don’t have a lot of information on their homepage , it’s easily navigable . Figure 2 summarizes the distribution of network strategies we observed among the people we interviewed ( based on a coding of their responses to our structured interviews ) . The heavy reliance on passive observation—with 62 % of interviewees indicating that they looked at other Web sites but did not talk to other offices about Web practices—is particularly striking . The relative unimportance of interpersonal networks is striking , where only 26 % of interviewees indicated that they talked to other offices about their Web sites . This seemed like a particularly favorable environment for interpersonal networks to matter : the obvious potential for lessons that would cross offices , the physical prox - imity of offices , and the potential for perceptions of solidarity , at least for offices affiliated with the same party . However , there were other powerful factors that clearly undermined the importance of networks . First , the position of communi - cation director = press secretary had remarkable turnover—e . g . , the median tenure of our communications directors is about two years ( CMF 2004 ) . 7 Second , we saw little evidence that staff saw their responsibilities as transcending the office—i . e . , making the member look good was vastly more important than making the party look good . Third , as noted above , many staff felt there was little potential in learning from other offices . What were the drivers of the attentional networks ? The interviews suggest that proximity of district plays a role , as did the Web sites of particular members , either because of the prominence of the member , or because the Web site had been THE MULTIPLE INSTITUTIONAL LOGICS OF INNOVATION 329 D o w n l o a d e d by [ T & F I n t e r n a l U s e r s ] , [ K e v i n S w a n s on ] a t 08 : 07 15 N ov e m b e r 2 011 identified as particularly good . In the survey , we queried respondents about Web sites that they thought were ‘‘particularly good’’ ( see Table 2 ) . We would view this sociometric construct as capturing the views of respondents as to which Web sites were worth paying attention to for their design . That is , the selection of a Web site as ‘‘particularly good’’ suggests that the respondent is aware of that Web site , and views it as a good model . Below are the Web sites that were identified more than once . In Table 3 we present the results of a rare events logistic regression to assess the key determinants of a member’s Web site being mentioned by respondents as ‘‘parti - cularly good . ’’ As possible determinants , we included : whether the member in ques - tion was in leadership , the tenure of each member mentioned , whether the member was in the Democratic Party , and whether the target and the subject were from the same state and party . We also included a proxy for quality , the quantitative grade that each Web site received from the CMF ( see discussion below ) . We included whether members were part of party leadership and tenure in House , because senior members , and especially members in leadership , are generally more salient . We also include a dummy for ‘‘Democrat’’ in case there is a difference in how much Demo - cratic versus Republican Web sites are paid attention to . The above analysis suggests that while quality of the Web site was quite important in driving the structure of the attentional network , a number of institutional factors were extremely important as well . Unsurprisingly , the Web sites of members who were in leadership were also far more likely to be mentioned ( p < . 001 ) . State and partisan boundaries were extremely important ( p < . 001 ) in which Web sites were evaluated as ‘‘particularly good’’—i . e . , the bulk of Web sites identified were from the same state and party of the respondent . This is consistent with a related , Figure 2 . Search Strategies of Offices for Information About Web Practices . 330 International Public Management Journal Vol . 14 , No . 3 , 2011 D o w n l o a d e d by [ T & F I n t e r n a l U s e r s ] , [ K e v i n S w a n s on ] a t 08 : 07 15 N ov e m b e r 2 011 quasi - experimental paper , in which we found that the quality of Web sites was strongly correlated with the quality of other Web sites from the same state , and not proximate congressional districts ( Esterling , Lazer , and Neblo 2009 ) . TABLE 2 Congressional Members’ Web Sites Viewed by Others as Particularly Good ( Mentioned More than Once ) House Last Name First Name State Party Mentions Rep . Kingston Jack GA R 5 Rep . Pence Mike IN R 5 Rep . Capps Lois CA D 3 Rep . Honda Mike CA D 3 Rep . Sanders Bernie VT I 3 Sen . Clinton Hillary NY D 3 Sen . Kennedy Ted MA D 3 Rep . Barrow John GA D 2 Rep . Blumenauer Earl OR D 2 Rep . Boozman John AR R 2 Rep . Conaway Mike TX R 2 Rep . Fattah Chaka PA D 2 Rep . Mack Connie FL R 2 Rep . Musgrave Marilyn CO R 2 Rep . Pryce Deborah OH R 2 Sen . Hagel Chuck NE R 2 Sen . Snowe Olympia ME R 2 TABLE 3 Determinants of Respondents Mentioning a Particular Member’s Web Site as ‘‘Particularly Good’’ Web grade of Web site mentioned 0 . 032 (cid:1) ( 0 . 001 ) Member mentioned was in party leadership 1 . 160 (cid:1) ( 0 . 340 ) Tenure of member mentioned (cid:2) 0 . 060 ( 0 . 040 ) Member mentioned was a Democrat (cid:2) 0 . 408 ( 0 . 252 ) Respondent and member mentioned were of the same party 1 . 222 (cid:1) ( 0 . 288 ) Respondent and member mentioned were from the same state 1 . 459 (cid:1) ( 0 . 364 ) Constant (cid:2) 8 . 789 (cid:1) ( 0 . 510 ) Notes : Rare events logistic regression coefficients . Standard errors are included in parentheses . N ¼ 44 , 239 instead of the expected 54 , 400 ( all potential Web site mentions of the 100 survey respondents ) because not all respondents answered the question and a few members’ Web sites were not graded by the Congressional Management Foundation . (cid:1) significant at p < 0 . 001 . THE MULTIPLE INSTITUTIONAL LOGICS OF INNOVATION 331 D o w n l o a d e d by [ T & F I n t e r n a l U s e r s ] , [ K e v i n S w a n s on ] a t 08 : 07 15 N ov e m b e r 2 011 We also have some hints at what the structure of the interpersonal network might look like . We asked in the survey about what other offices they communicated with . 8 Only 52 offices were named , with some respondents naming multiple offices , so caution needs to be exercised in interpreting the data , but of those 52 , 86 % were within the same party , and ( when combined with 11 responses indicating the state delegation ) , 60 % were within the same state delegation . 9 That is , interpersonal networks were largely determined by party and state . The emulation process begs the question : How do you know when you are looking at a good Web site ? How do you know what is good practice on any Web site ? There are virtually no available objective data on ‘‘success’’ or ‘‘failure’’—e . g . , approval = disapproval numbers from constituents , traffic , etc . The general criteria used by staff were based on their own subjective experience of a particular Web site—as one indi - vidual stated : ‘‘ [ Y ] ou know a bad one when you see it , and you know a good one when you see it too . ’’ Further , the very presence of a feature on Web sites was an endorsement , as reflected in the reasoning of one staffer : ‘‘It was obvious everyone had a kids page , so we should definitely have a kids page . . . ’’ We would also note that sometimes practices were emulated simply because they solved a technical problem that an office was trying to solve , where presumably it was clear whether the solution in question worked or not . How this particular staffer , who was trying to figure out how to podcast , learned from another Web site is a case in point : [ T ] here was no . . . huge database of websites to explain how to do [ podcasting ] on the Internet . . . The Committee on Government Reform figured out how to do it . . . . I just looked at their source code and . . . deciphered how that’s done just by studying the code and understanding . . . the way it’s structured . Obviously , in the case of technical issues like this , it is easy to evaluate whether the solution of a particular Web site works ( e . g . , is it possible to play the file on an iPod ) . The CMF was also an important actor in the informational network , in particular as a norm setter . Beginning in 2002 , CMF began issuing the Gold Mouse Report , in which it identified best practices , as well as those Web sites best complying with those practices . 10 The Gold Mouse awards were based on a detailed set of criteria that the CMF developed , in part based on focus groups it conducted , in part in con - sultation with staff on the Hill . The influence came through the construction of a set of norms as to what members were supposed to do on their Web sites—the explicit identification of recommended practices . Thus , for example , many staff , given the responsibility for their member’s Web site , began by consulting the CMF report : I basically took the CMF book from a couple years ago [ to ] see what the Gold Mouse winners were doing , and used those techniques . [ A ] bsolutely . I’ve been to the CMF website and I’ve looked to see what their best practices are or what they say these members are doing 332 International Public Management Journal Vol . 14 , No . 3 , 2011 D o w n l o a d e d by [ T & F I n t e r n a l U s e r s ] , [ K e v i n S w a n s on ] a t 08 : 07 15 N ov e m b e r 2 011 correctly . . . to me , CMF , they’re experts in what they recommend , and they look at every single House . . . website and they critique them . And to have that information that’s available online for free , in my mind you’d be nuts not to look at it and use it and try to integrate that into your own website design . The second theme that came up repeatedly was that the Gold Mouse award created a competitive environment among the offices to win the award in 2006 , as the statements by the following three staff make clear : I think , if we don’t get at least a silver , it’s off with my head . [ laughter ] . . . Powerful people , they like to compete with other old powerful people , and then show their little awards . [ T ] he Congressman really wants to have a Gold Mouse . . . . That was part of the deal when he was going to hire me . [ K ] nowing that , the whole Gold Mouse thing was going be coming around again I wanted to make sure that anything that we did for the Congressman was going to be very , very content rich , very , very content driven , and as one or two click friendly for a visitor as possible . CMF thus has played a key role in influencing the direction of what is perceived as good practice of congressional Web sites . CMF set the normative environment , cre - ating an environment that rewarded or punished staff that performed well based on CMF’s standards . DISCUSSION How do institutions structure how people and organizations collectively solve problems ? We have examined the multiple types of institutional processes that gov - ern the production and dissemination of a particular innovation among Con - gressional offices . Market , network , and hierarchy have their distinctive logics in organizing human activity , and each plays an important role in this setting . Offices can be seen as consumers of a service , where a small industry has arisen to supply their needs . Information about the innovation flows through the network—and within the multiple networks that exist , more attentional than interpersonal . Multiple hierarchies govern office behavior , with both the administration of the House ( through CHA ) and the powers within the House ( through the parties ) playing key roles . Table 4 summarizes these findings . Notable as the key drivers of problem solving aggregation were : ( 1 ) the emergence of an array of small firms to serve the specialized market niche of Web services for members of Congress , ( 2 ) the parties—especially the Democratic Party—in pushing particular practices , ( 3 ) passive observation in spreading practices among the Web THE MULTIPLE INSTITUTIONAL LOGICS OF INNOVATION 333 D o w n l o a d e d by [ T & F I n t e r n a l U s e r s ] , [ K e v i n S w a n s on ] a t 08 : 07 15 N ov e m b e r 2 011 T A BLE 4 F a c t o rs I n f l u e n c i n g C on g r e ss i on a l O n li n e P r a c t i ce s E n v i r on m e n t a l F ee dba c k M a r k e t H i e r a r c hy N e t w o r k D e f i n i t i on P r i va t e i n f o r m a t i on ga r n e r e d f r o m d i r ec t e n gag e m e n t w i t h e n v i r on m e n t C on ce n t r a t i on o f p r ob l e m - s o l v i n g c a p a c i t y i n p r i va t e a c t o rs , f r o m w ho m s e r v i ce s a r e pu r c h a s e d A u t ho r i t y a nd po w e r R e l a t i on a l i n f l u e n ce s E xa m p l e s Su r v e y s a nd f o c u s g r oup s o f c on s t i t u e n t s T r a c k i n g u s ag e o f W e b s i t e E x t e r n a l v e ndo rs C H A d i r ec t i v e s a nd H I R t e m p l a t e s P a r t y a d v i ce = s ub s i d i e s A tt e n t i on a l n e t w o r k s I n t e r p e rs on a l n e t w o r k s N o r m s s e t b y C M F ; G o l d M ou s e A w a r d Su mm a r y o f f i nd i n g T h e r e w a s m i n i m a l e va l u a t i on o f t h e e ff ec t i v e n e ss o f W e b s i t e s . T h e r e w a s v e r y h e avy r e li a n ce on e x t e r n a l v e ndo rs . C H A w a s i m po r t a n t i n s e tt i n g g e n e r a l p a r a m e t e rs , a nd D e m o c r a t i c P a r t y w a s m o r e i m po r t a n t i n a ff ec t i n g p r a c t i ce t h a n R e pub li c a n P a r t y . A tt e n t i on a l n e t w o r k s w e r e v e r y i m po r t a n t a nd i n t e r p e rs on a l un i m po r t a n t i n s p r e a d i n g i n f o r m a t i on ; t h e C M F p l ay e d a c r i t i c a l r o l e i n s e tt i n g t h e no r m a t i v e e n v i r on m e n t . N o t e s : C H A ¼ C o mm i tt ee on H ou s e A d m i n i s t r a t i on ; H I R ¼ H ou s e I n f o r m a t i on R e s ou r ce s ; C M F ¼ C on g r e ss i on a l M a n ag e m e n t F ound a t i on . 334 D o w n l o a d e d by [ T & F I n t e r n a l U s e r s ] , [ K e v i n S w a n s on ] a t 08 : 07 15 N ov e m b e r 2 011 sites of other members , and ( 4 ) the informal norm - setting role of the CMF . These institutional logics interact , with the interpersonal networks , for example , playing a key role in creating market share ( through reputation ) for the relevant firms and the formal structure of the House clearly playing a key role in the emergent informal network . Particularly surprising to us was the dog that did not bark : the relative unimportance of direct interpersonal exchange networks . The relative importance of the attentional network —where ties are directed from the actor who pays attention to actors that receive attention—has fairly broad applicability . That is , in a world where everything is visible , individual capacity to process information may be quite limited relative to the amount of information available . The pattern of who is paying attention to whom may thus be viewed as a network structure . 11 The social science literature on networks has typically focused on ties where the information being transmitted is private . Examples of private informational networks include , for example , sharing of information about employment opportunities ( Granovetter 1974 = 1995 ) , or lobbyists sharing information with each other about political or policy information ( Carpenter , Esterling , and Lazer 1998 ) . As compared to private informational networks , the incentive issue discussed above may be exacerbated in attentional networks , because the innovator has no control over the information created by the innovation , and therefore reciprocity cannot sustain information development and exchange . However , there may be particular benefits to an actor providing a model which subsequently receives substantial attention . For example , in academia , citation patterns may be viewed as an attentional network , and receiv - ing many citations is considered a mark of success ; on the World Wide Web , simi - larly , incoming links drive traffic . Thus , the role of norms in providing a reward for receiving attention is especially important in the case of attentional networks . This particular case has a number of strengths and weaknesses . The distinctive strength of this study is that Congress is a well - understood institutional microcosm . There is significant homogeneity in the resources that offices have—eliminating many alternative explanations—and the sources of heterogeneity are generally well understood . It is therefore a useful petri dish in which to study innovation in a decen - tralized system . However , there are certainly ways in which the institution and the particular innovation that we study ( use of the Internet ) are unusual that limit the generalizability of our findings—particularly to a federal system of decentralized government . As a point of comparison we compare the results found here to two other studies that have similarly structured data . The first involves the diffusion of practices among state and local forensic DNA laboratories ( Mergel , Lazer , and Binz - Scharf 2008 ; Binz - Scharf , Lazer , and Mergel , forthcoming ) ; the second knowl - edge sharing among state health officials ( SHOs ) ( Lazer and Mergel 2011 ) . Both cases involved a similar combination of quantitative and qualitative data . A com - parison of the findings in this article highlights the contextual variables that interplay with the factors that we focused on for this article . The most striking difference among the cases is the role that interpersonal networks play . Our theoretical prior belief was that the apparent homogeneity and physical proximity of congressional offices would lead to networks being more important in this case than in the other two . The reality was the opposite : interpersonal THE MULTIPLE INSTITUTIONAL LOGICS OF INNOVATION 335 D o w n l o a d e d by [ T & F I n t e r n a l U s e r s ] , [ K e v i n S w a n s on ] a t 08 : 07 15 N ov e m b e r 2 011 communication was least important in this case , and most important for DNA laboratories . A comparison across cases suggests two factors as important . The first is longevity in position . As discussed above , most individuals in charge of their Web sites in congressional offices had those responsibilities quite briefly . Personnel in DNA laboratories are typically in a particular position , and in a specific laboratory for many years ( SHOs are in between ) . The second is longevity in career . The Hill is a starting point for many careers and end point for few . Except for a small group of individuals , the bulk of staff visit for a few years and move on to positions elsewhere . The resources embedded in relationships are highly perishable and , thus , less likely to be worth the investment . In contrast , personnel in DNA laboratories are self - consciously building task - related relationships across the country because of the long - run resources embedded in those relationships . Even if people shift organizations , they rarely shift careers . However , attentional networks were far more important in the case studied here than the other two . This clearly reflects the nature of the innovation , where merely observing what other congressional offices are doing with their Web sites is quite cheap . By comparison , much of what other DNA laboratories or SHOs are doing is impossible to observe without interpersonal contact . In all three systems , there are important hierarchical mechanisms that play the functions of constraining and subsidizing experimentation , as well as disseminating information . In the case of the DNA laboratories , the FBI has a key authority role , because it guards access to the national database system—if local agencies do not adhere to national standards , local profiles will not be uploaded to the national data - base . The FBI sets those standards and also pays for attendance at an annual con - ference on the DNA database system . For SHOs , because of the many policy domains in which they are involved , there is a multiplexity of mandates , in which the SHOs are less directly involved in ( likely because subordinates are directly overseeing more homogeneous areas ) . Markets play a key role in the DNA domain , because the tools ( e . g . , equipment and DNA kits ) used by DNA analysts are complex and expensive . As a result , mar - ket actors play an important role in the DNA informational ecosystem through sup - port of those tools . This closely parallels the role that market actors play in the congressional ecosystem ( although on a much larger scale ) . In contrast , the SHOs , as managers of large organizations , are somewhat insulated from information provided by market actors . While our main focus is on illuminating the presence of multiple institutional logics of innovation , a natural question is what the joint failings or success of the overall system is . The research highlights a number of troubling patterns with respect to this particular informational system . First , there is relatively little feedback into the system regarding success and failure . From what we observed , there is rather lit - tle evidence with respect to what actually works . This , we would argue , reflects a ser - ious failing of the system , where it is in no single actor’s interest to conduct costly experiments from which others might benefit . 12 Second , there is relatively little inter - personal knowledge sharing regarding experiences within the institution . Instead , there is a reflective mimicry process , with subjective evaluation of others’ visible 336 International Public Management Journal Vol . 14 , No . 3 , 2011 D o w n l o a d e d by [ T & F I n t e r n a l U s e r s ] , [ K e v i n S w a n s on ] a t 08 : 07 15 N ov e m b e r 2 011 practices . The net effect , perhaps , is a consolidation of practices , but without a strong foundation of information on what actually works . In fact , these are exactly the conditions under which one might expect information cascades , because the sharing of public information is high and private information low . These observations also point to places for follow up research . Our data collection here focused on the points of sovereignty in the system—the offices that make deci - sions as to how to create their Web sites . What was not included , generally , was research on other key actors in the system—the vendors , leadership , and HIR . It is clear that these actors played a key role in driving the homogenization of the system ; what role did they play in addressing the three governance challenges we outlined initially ? Did these actors , for example , aggregate information , by analyzing the rela - tive effectiveness of different Web sites ? Did they invest resources , more generally , to evaluate what features of congressional Web sites were and were not effective ? The indirect evidence that we gathered from offices suggests relatively meager invest - ments in this regard . Follow - up research can also focus on the second generation of Internet tools , such as the inclusion of social networking services as innovative parts of congressional Web sites and how these new technologies are integrated into the existing Internet strategy . ACKNOWLEDGEMENT We gratefully acknowledge the support of NSF grant No . 0429452 . Any opinions , findings , and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation ( NSF ) . NOTES 1 . Of course , federal – state relationships entail an array of interdependencies beyond policy information ( Esterling 2009 ) . 2 . New State Ice Company v . Liebmann ( 285 U . S . 262 , 311 ) . 3 . Analytically , this is a tricky question , since the central actor would presumably have greater capacity to extensively evaluate policy alternatives than peripheral actors . 4 . There are 435 voting members , and five non - voting delegates . 5 . There was an overlap of 53 offices between our two samples . 6 . For additional information on CHA see http : / / www . cha . house . gov . 7 . These data were gathered by the CMF’s 2004 House Staff Employment Study ( 2004 ) . The CMF sampled 211 offices in the House of Representatives . The survey gathered data on characteristics of the personal staffers of members of Congress , including the time they have spent in their current position . 8 . The specific item was : ‘‘For those Congressional staff that you talk with frequently from offices other than your own , what offices are they from ? ’’ ( emphasis in original question ) . 9 . We also asked about who the member was friends with , with similar results : of 90 ‘‘friends’’ named , 87 % were same party , and 44 % were the same state . 10 . All of the reports are available at www . cmfweb . org . THE MULTIPLE INSTITUTIONAL LOGICS OF INNOVATION 337 D o w n l o a d e d by [ T & F I n t e r n a l U s e r s ] , [ K e v i n S w a n s on ] a t 08 : 07 15 N ov e m b e r 2 011 11 . Attentional networks likely have distinctive topographies with , for example , constraints on the number of outgoing ties and no constraints on the number of incoming ties . Thus , for example , while some academic papers have many thousands of references to them by other academic papers ( and most have just a handful ) , no academic papers contain thousands of references . By contrast , there are likely significant upper limits in terms of the number of reciprocal friendships an individual can sustain . 12 . A potential exception might be if the parties or the firms invested significantly in eval - uating potential effective practices . However , no one suggested this was the case , and there certainly would have been an incentive for firms and parties to reveal such investments in order to persuade offices to purchase new services ( for the firms ) or adopt effective , new practices ( recommended by the parties ) . REFERENCES Axelrod , R . and W . D . Hamilton . 1981 . ‘‘The Evolution of Cooperation . ’’ Science 211 ( 4489 ) : 1390 – 1396 . Bikhchandani , S . , D . Hirshleifer , and I . Welch . 1992 . ‘‘A Theory of Fads , Fashion , Custom , and Cultural Change as Informational Cascades . ’’ The Journal of Political Economy 100 ( 5 ) : 992 – 1026 . Binz - Scharf , M . C . , D . M . Lazer , and I . Mergel . Forthcoming . ‘‘Searching for Answers : Networks of Practice Among Public Administrators . ’’ The American Review of Public Administration . Bourdieu , P . 2008 . ‘‘The Forms of Capital . ’’ Pp . 280 – 291 in N . W . Biggart , ed . , Reading in Economic Sociology . Oxford : Blackwell Publishers . Brown , T . L . , M . Potoski , and D . M . Van Slyke . 2010 . ‘‘Contracting for Complex Products . ’’ Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory 20 ( suppl 1 ) : i41 . Coleman , J . S . 1988 . ‘‘Social Capital in the Creation of Human Capital . ’’ American Journal of Sociology 94 : S95 – S120 . Diamond , J . 1997 . Guns , Germs , and Steel . New York : W . W . Norton . Esterling , K . M . , D . Lazer , and M . A . Neblo . 2009 . ‘‘Explaining the Diffusion of Web - Based Communication Technology Among Congressional Offices : A Natural Experiment Using State Delegations . ’’ Paper presented at CELS 2009 , the 4th Annual Conference on Empirical Legal Studies Paper , Los Angeles , November 20 – 21 . http : / / ssrn . com / abstrac = 1437660 . Esterling , K . , M . Neblo , and D . Lazer . 2005 . ‘‘Home ( Page ) Style : Determinates of the Quality of House Members ‘Websites . ’ ’’ International Journal of Electronic Government Research 1 ( 2 ) : 50 – 63 . Hayek , F . A . 1945 . ‘‘The Use of Knowledge in Society . ’’ The American Economic Review 35 ( 4 ) : 519 – 530 . Isett , K . , I . Mergel , K . LeRoux , P . Mischen , K . Rethemeyer . 2011 . ‘‘Networks in Public Administration Scholarship : Understanding Where We Are and Where We Need to Go . ’’ Special Issue : Minnowbrook III . Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory 21 ( Suppl . 1 ) : i157 – i173 . Jones , C . 1996 . ‘‘Careers in Project Networks : The Case of the Film Industry . ’’ Pp . 58 – 75 in The Boundaryless Career : A New Employment Principle for a New Organizational Era . Jones , C . , W . S . Hesterly , and S . P . Borgatti . 1997 . ‘‘A General Theory of Network Governance : Exchange Conditions and Social Mechanisms . ’’ Academy of Management Review 22 ( 4 ) : 911 – 945 . 338 International Public Management Journal Vol . 14 , No . 3 , 2011 D o w n l o a d e d by [ T & F I n t e r n a l U s e r s ] , [ K e v i n S w a n s on ] a t 08 : 07 15 N ov e m b e r 2 011 Lazer , D . and I . A . Mergel . 2011 . ‘‘Tying the Network Together : Evaluating the Impact of an Intervention into the Advice Network of Public Managers . ’’ SSRN eLibrary . http : / / ssrn . com / paper = 1881674 . Meier , K . J . and L . J . O’Toole . 2001 . ‘‘Managerial Strategies and Behavior in Networks : A Model with Evidence from US Public Education . ’’ Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory 11 ( 3 ) : 271 – 294 . Mergel , I . , D . Lazer , and M . C . Binz - Scharf . 2008 . ‘‘Lending a Helping Hand : Voluntary Engage - ment in Knowledge Sharing . ’’ International Journal of Learning and Change 3 ( 1 ) : 5 – 22 . Milward , H . B . and K . G . Provan . 2000 . ‘‘Governing the Hollow State . ’’ Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory 10 ( 2 ) : 359 – 380 . Milward , H . B . , K . G . Provan , A . Fish , K . R . Isett , and K . Huang . 2010 . ‘‘Governance and Collaboration : An Evolutionary Study of Two Mental Health Networks . ’’ Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory 20 ( Suppl . 1 ) : i125 – i141 . Ostrom , E . 1990 . Govering the Commons : The Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Ostrom , E . 2009 . ‘‘A General Framework for Analyzing Sustainability of Social - Ecological Systems . Science 325 ( 5939 ) : 419 – 422 . Ostrom , E . , R . Gardner , and J . Walker . 1994 . Rules , Games , and Common - Pool Resources . Ann Arbor : University of Michigan Press . Provan , K . G . and P . Kenis . 2008 . ‘‘Modes of Network Governance : Structure , Management , and Effectiveness . ’’ Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory 18 ( 2 ) : 229 – 252 . Provan , K . G . and H . B . Milward . 2001 . ‘‘Do Networks Really Work ? A Framework for Evaluating Public - Sector Organizational Networks . ’’ Public Administration Review 61 ( 4 ) : 414 – 423 . Uzzi , B . 1999 . ‘‘Embeddedness in the Making of Financial Capital : How Social Relations and Networks Benefit Firms Seeking Financing . ’’ American Sociological Review 64 ( 4 ) : 481 – 505 . Uzzi , B . 1996 . ‘‘The Sources and Consequences of Embeddedness for the Economic Performance of Organizations : The Network Effect . ’’ American Sociological Review 61 ( 4 ) : 674 – 698 . ABOUT THE AUTHORS David Lazer ( d . lazer @ neu . edu ) is an Associate Professor in Northeastern Univer - sity’s Department of Political Science and the College of Computer and Information Science and Director of the Program on Networked Governance at Harvard . His work focuses on the nexus of policy networks , computational social science , and collaborative intelligence . Ines Mergel ( iamergel @ maxwell . syr . edu ) is an Assistant Professor at the Department of Public Administration and International Affairs , Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs , Syracuse University . Her research focuses on the adoption of social media technologies and knowledge incubation in the public sector . Curtis Ziniel ( zinielc @ hope . ac . uk ) is a Lecturer in the Faculty of Education at Liverpool Hope University . He received his PhD in political science from the University of California , Riverside . His current research focuses on representation and communication in legislatures . THE MULTIPLE INSTITUTIONAL LOGICS OF INNOVATION 339 D o w n l o a d e d by [ T & F I n t e r n a l U s e r s ] , [ K e v i n S w a n s on ] a t 08 : 07 15 N ov e m b e r 2 011 Kevin M . Esterling ( kevin . esterling @ ucr . edu ) is Associate Professor of Political Science at the University of California , Riverside . He received his PhD in political science at the University of Chicago . His current research focuses on communication and deliberation in democratic politics . Michael A . Neblo ( neblo . 1 @ osu . edu ) is Assistant Professor of Political Science at Ohio State University . He received his PhD in political science from the University of Chicago . His current research focuses on the theory and practice of deliberative democracy . 340 International Public Management Journal Vol . 14 , No . 3 , 2011 D o w n l o a d e d by [ T & F I n t e r n a l U s e r s ] , [ K e v i n S w a n s on ] a t 08 : 07 15 N ov e m b e r 2 011