Disappearance of Macrophage Surface Folds after Antibody - dependent Phagocytosis HOWARD R . PETTY , DEAN G . HAFEMAN , and HARDEN M . McCONNELL Stauffer Laboratory for Physical Chemistry , Stanford University , Stanford , California 94305 ABSTRACT (cid:9) We have employed the method of Burwen and Satir ( / . Cell Biol . , 1977 , 74 : 690 ) to measure the disappearance of surface folds from resident guinea pig peritoneal macrophages after antibody - dependent phagocytosis . Unilamellar phospholipid vesicles containing dimyris - toylphosphatidylcholine and 1 mol % dinitrophenyl - e - aminocaproyl - phosphatidylethanola - mine , a lipid that possesses a hapten headgroup , were prepared by an ether injection technique . These vesicles were taken up by macrophages in a time - and temperature - dependent fashion . Vesicles that contained ferritin trapped in the internal aqueous volume were identified within macrophages by transmission electron microscopy . Scanning electron microscopy has shown that macrophage surface folds decrease dramatically after phagocytosis . The surface fold length ( pm ) per unit smooth sphere surface area ( pmt ) decreases from 1 . 3 ± 0 . 3 pm - ' to 0 . 53 ± 0 . 25 pm - ' when cells are incubated in the presence of specific anti - DNP antibody and vesicles at 37°C . No significant effect was observed in the presence of antibody only or vesicles only . Our studies show that phagocytosis is associated with a loss of cell surface folds and a loss of cell surface area , which is consonant with current views of the endocytic process . On the basis of our uptake data , we estimate that - 400 pmt of vesicle surface membrane is internalized . The guinea pig macrophage plasma membrane has a total area of - 400 pmt in control studies , whereas the cells have roughly 300 pmt after phagocytosis . These estimates of surface areas include membrane ruffles and changes directly related to changes in cell volume . We suggest that during antibody - dependent phagocytosis a membrane reservoir is made available to the cell surface . The macrophage plasma membrane possesses receptors for the Fc domain of the immunoglobulin molecule that can mediate immunologic recognition leading to phagocytosis or cytolysis of a target ( for reviews see references 21 - 23 ) . A variety of targets has been employed as models of antibody - dependent and antibody - independent phagocytosis ( e . g . , sheep erythro - cytes and latex beads , respectively ) . Recent research in this laboratory ( 12 , 16 ) and others ( 11 ) has examined the antibody - dependent phagocytosis of lipid - hapten - containing phospho - lipid vesicles . This system has several distinct advantages over the more conventional methods because : ( a ) it is chemically well characterized , ( b ) the physical characteristics ( " fluidity " ) of the membrane can be controlled , ( c ) membrane hapten density is known and can be varied , ( d ) surface charge density can be altered , ( e ) the cholesterol - phospholipid ratio can be changed , and ( f ) various materials can be delivered to the cells by entrapment m the internal aqueous volume of the vesicle . THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 89 MAY 1981 223 - 229 ©The Rockefeller University Press - 0021 - 9525 / 81 / 05 / 0223 / 07 $ 1 . 00 It is clear that such vesicles have many potential advantages for studies of molecular events involved in immunologic rec - ognition , triggering , and subsequent effector functions . To understand the role of cell surface components during antibody - dependent phagocytosis it is helpful to have an un - derstanding ofvariations in plasma membrane surface area as well as turnover . This description requires knowledge of four interrelated parameters : ( a ) cell surface area before phagocy - tosis , ( b ) cell surface area after phagocytosis , ( c ) area of cell surface membrane internalized , and ( d ) the area of membrane shuttled to the plasmalemma during this process . In the present study we have measured parameters a , b , and c to infer the magnitude of d . We have used resident guinea pig peritoneal macrophages in a study of the antibody - dependent phagocy - tosis of single - shell lipid vesicles containing lipid haptens , and radiolabeled lipid , or ferritin ( FT ) trapped in the internal aqueous volume . 223 MATERIALS AND METHODS Materials Cell buffer wascomposed of 2 . 0 mM CaC12 , l . 5 MM MgC12 , 5 . 4 mM KCI , 1 mM Na - 2HP0e , 5 . 6 mM glucose , 120 mM NaCl , 0 . 2 % bovine serum albumin ( Calbiochem - Behring Corp . , American Hoechst Corp . , San Diego , Calif . ; fatty acid poor ) , and 25 mM HEPES at pH 7 . 4 . Horse spleen FT was obtained from Sigma Chemical Co . ( St . Louis , Mo . ) . Glutaraldehyde , collidine buffer , andOS0 , were obtained from Polysciences , Inc . ( Warrington , Pa . ) . Scanning electron microscopy ( SEM ) specimen stubs were obtained from Pelco , Inc . ( Tustin , Calif . ) . Phospholipid Vesicles FT - containing , - - 1 - um unilamellar vesicles were prepared by a modification ofthe ether injection method ofDeamer andBangham ( 5 ) asdescribedpreviously ( 12 ) . Vesicle lipid composition was 99 mol % dimyristoylphosphatidylchotine ( DMPC ) and l mol % dinitrophenyl - e - aminocaproyl - phosphatidylethanolamine ( DNP - cap - PE ) . FT wastrapped within the vesicles by inclusion of 18 - 22 mg / ml FT in the phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ; 0 . 01 M sodium phosphate , 0 . 15 M NaCl , pH 7 . 4 ) injection buffer . To remove unentrappedFT the FT vesicles were washed three times by centrifugation on a 3 - ml cushion of 15 % Ficoll in PBS ( 12 , 000 gfor 30 min ) . For quantitative studies of vesicle - cell binding , 0 . 25 mol % radiolabeled phospholipid L - [ 1 - ' " C ] a - dipalmitoylphosphatidylethanolamine ( 55 uCi / mot , Ap - plied Science Labs , Inc . , State College , Pa . ) and 1 mol % of the fluorescent phospholipid N - 4 - nitrobenzo - 2 - oxa - 1 , 3 - diazole phosphatidylethanolamine ( NBD - PE ) , prepared from egglecithin ( Avanti Biochemicals , Inc . , Birmingham , Ala . ) were included in the lipid mixture with a concomitant decrease in the amount of DMPC . FT was omitted from the injection buffer to facilitate later separation of unbound vesicles andcells by density gradient centrifugation . Cell Preparation Resident peritoneal cells were collected from Hartley guinea pigs ( EZH Caviary , Williams , Calif ) . The anesthetized animals were sacrificed by cardiac puncture followed by cervical dislocation . Thecells were collected in 100 ml of cold Ca " , Mg + + - free Hanks ' balanced salt solution ( HBSS ) ( Grand Island Biological Co . , SantaClara , Calif . ) . Thecells were then washed with HBSS . The peritoneal cells were almost exclusively macrophages , eosinophils , and erythro - cytes as previously determined ( 6 ) . The macrophages were purified by step - density gradient centrifugation on lymphocyte separation medium ( Bionetics Laboratory Products , Litton Bionetics Inc . , Kensington , Md . ) as described by Boyum ( 1 ) . The cell preparation ( - v5 x 106 / animal ) was made up of 895 % phagocytes as indicated by latex bead uptake and confirmed by fluorescence microscopy and transmission electron microscopy ( TEM ) . Differential counts were made with Wright ' s stain and the viable percentage ( s95 % ) of cells was determined by trypan blue exclusion . Antihapten Antibody Rabbit anti - DNP antiserum wasa gift from Dr . Alfred Esser ( Scripps Clinic and Research Foundation , La Jolla , Calif ) . The anti - DNP IgG wasfractionated from serum by affinity chromatography using protein A coupled to cyanogen bromide - actived Sepharose ( 8 ) . In all experiments the anti - DNP wascentrifuged at 110 , 000 gfor 15 minin aBeckman airfuge ( Beckman Instruments , Inc . , Spinco Div . , Palo Alto , Calif . ) to remove aggregates . Phagocytosis of Vesicles To 1 . 2 x 5 . 0cm polypropylenevials ( E & KScientific Products , Inc . , Saratoga , Calif ) , 100pl ofvesicles ( 0 . 05 , amol total lipid , suspendedin PBS ) , andantibody diluted into 100 pl of PBS were added and thoroughly mixed . t x 106 macro - phages were added in 300pl ofcell buffer . Themixtures were incubated at 37 ' C in agyratory water - bath shaker ( model G76 , NewBrunswick Scientific Co . , Inc . , Edison , N . J . ) at 170 cycles / min . After various periods of time the vials were chilled in ice water . Measurement of Cell - associated Lipid Vesicles To measure vesicle uptake ( binding followed by phagocytosis ) by macro - phages , we employed " C - labeled lipids ( see above for preparation ) . In all determinations of vesicle uptake , control experiments were performed in the presence of radiolabeled vesicles and the absence of anti - DNP antibody . After incubation with vesicles , an aliquot of 0 . 5 ml was then layered with a polypro - pylene pipette tip onto 0 . 5 ml of a3 : 2 mixtureof 10 % Ficoll ( Pharmacia , Uppsala , 224 (cid:9) THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 89 , 1981 Sweden ) in cell buffer andFicoll - Hypaque ( density = 1 . 077 ) in a l . 0 - ml polysty - rene centrifuge tube ( Fisher Scientific Co . , Pittsburgh , Pa . ) . Thetube wascapped and spun at 500 g for 20 min , frozen , and the lower tip was removed with a hacksaw . The contents of the tip were digested overnight with 0 . 5 ml of NCS solubilizer ( Amersham Corp . , Arlington Heights , Ill . ) and the radioactivity was determined by adding 10 mlofatoluene - based scintillation fluor ( Preblend 2a70 ; RPICorp . , Elk Grove Village , Ill . ) andcounting in aliquid scintillation counter . The channel discriminators were set to exclude background light caused by chemiluminescence - phosphorescence , and the relative counting efficiency was determined later by adding an internal " C standard . Cell Volume The intracellular volume accessible to waterwas determined using methods similar to those previously described ( 4 ) . [ " C ] polyethylene glycol 4000 ( 21 . 7 mCi / g ) and ' H20 ( 5 Ci / ml ) were obtained from Amersham Corp . Incubation of macrophages with or without vesicles wascarried outas described under Phag - ocytosis of Vesicles , except that all volumes and reagents were increased by a factor of2 . 5 . After a 30 - min incubation with vesicles , 5 x 106 macrophages were pelleted by centrifuging at 800gfor 10 min and resuspended to 140 ttl in HBSS . 15 Id ofa mixture of [ " C ] polyethylene glycol ( 50 ACi / ml ) and3H20 ( 50pCi / ml ) wasadded andthe suspension wasincubated at 25 ' C for 30 min . Thesuspended cells were then layered over a 250 - pl cushion of dibutyl phthalate and paraffin oil in a 400 - p1 polypropylene centrifuge tube and centrifuged at 1 , 000 g for 2 min . Thelowerportion of the centrifuge tubes containing the cells wascut off . Thecell pellet was resuspended in 0 . 1 ml of H2Oand0 . 5 ml ofNCS solubilizer anddigested overnight . " C and ' ' H were determined as described under Phago - cytosis ofVesicles in adual - channel Beckman LS - 230 counter . Transmission Electron Microscopy Macrophages were fixed with 1 % glutaraldehyde in PBS for 1 h at room temperature . The macrophages were postfixed with 1 % OS0 , in 0 . 1 Mcollidine buffer ( pH7 . 0 ) at room temperature for l h . Thecellswere dehydrated in acetone andembedded in Spurr ' s resin ( 18 ) . The embedded cells were thin - sectioned on an AMRultramicrotome ( AMR Corp . , Bedford , Mass . ) equippedwith adiamond knife . Thethin sections were examined in aHitachi HU - l 1Eelectron microscope . Scanning Electron Microscopy Macrophages were fixed in suspension with 1 % glutaraldehyde in PBS for 1 h at room temperature . Thecells were then washed in 0 . l M collidine buffer and postfixed for 1 h in 1 % OsO , in collidine buffer at room temperature . Thecells were dehydrated in an increasing series of acetone inwaterwith three changesin 100 % acetone . The cells were placed in modified BEEM capsules ( Better Equip - ment for Electron Microscopy , Inc . , Bronx , N . Y . ) with a Millipore filter ( Milli - pore Corp . , Bedford , Mass . ; pore size 1 . 0 pm ) affixed to one end ( l5 ) . The macrophages were critical - point dried in C02 . Cells were dispersed on a stub coated with double - sticky tape before sputter coating with gold . Specimenswere examined in the ISI - 40 scanning electron microscope . Micrographswere taken with Polaroid type 55 P / N film . Measurement of Surface Fold Length We have employed the method developed by Burwen and Satir ( 2 , 3 ) to measure macrophage surface fold length perunit surface area before and after phagocytosis . Briefly , cells were randomly selected at low magnification . Micro - graphs taken at amagnification of 7 , 000 were enlarged to a nominal magnifi - cation of20 , 000 . The cell radius ( neglecting surface projections ) wasdetermined as described ( 3 ) by using aseries of concentric circles on plexiglass . Folds were traced with a mapreader to 80 % of the cell radius . Thefold length measured is compared to the surface area that a smooth sphere of the cell ' s radius would occupy in atwo - dimensional projection at 0 . 8 x radius ( see reference 3 ) . RESULTS Uptake of Vesicles Macrophages bearing Fc receptors bind specific antibody liganded phospholipid vesicles in a time - dependent fashion . The rate of binding is dependent on the surface density of bound antibody molecules and on the physical properties of the vesicle lipid bilayer ( 12 ) . The time - course of binding a large excess of DMPC vesicles containing 1 mol % DNP - cap - PE at 37°C to guinea pig macrophages is shown in Fig . 1 . After 30 0 16 z m 0 a J w V w 0 12 a 4 + ANTIBODY , , , - ANTIBODY 0 15 30 45 60 TIME ( minutes ) FIGURE 1 (cid:9) Rate of vesicle uptake by macrophages . DMPC vesicles contained 0 . 25 mol % radiolabeled phospholipid , 1 mol % fluores - cent NBD - PE , and 1 mol % DNP - cap - PE hapten ( O , with anti - DNP rabbit IgG ; 0 , without ) . Points show the mean of duplicate deter - minations ; standard deviations are ±10 % of the measured values . min , 16 % of the vesicle lipid was bound in the presence of anti - DNP antibody vs . 4 % in its absence . Incubation on ice for 15 min resulted in insignificant cell - associated radioactivity . The antibody - dependent binding and subsequent phagocytosis of the fluorescent vesicles was confirmed by direct observation using epifluorescence microscopy . TEM of FT Vesicles The uptake of FT vesicles was examined by thin - section TEM . A representative cell is shown in Fig . 2 . FT - containing vesicular structures may be seen throughout the cytoplasm . Such structures have not been observed in untreated macro - phages ( data not shown ) . It is also known that FT is not present in peritoneal macrophages under normal conditions ( 9 ) . We suggest that these structures are the internalized FT vesicles . The phagocytic vesicles may have fused with lysosomes . Scanning Electron Microscopy The surfaces of untreated resident guinea pig peritoneal macrophages possess many folds and ridges . A representative cell that was incubated at 37°C for 30 min is shown in Fig . 3 a . A few microvilli can be seen on occasional cells . Nearly all cells observed are spherical in shape . The folds were similar in width , although fold height appears to vary more in macro - phages than in mast cells ( 3 ) . Macrophages are heterogeneous with regard to both cell size ( Table I ) and fold length . To provide a significant amount ofquantitative data in convenient form , we have employed the method of Burwen and Satir ( 3 ) to assess the ratio ofsurface fold length to surface area . In Fig . 4A we show a histogram of this ratio for untreated cells . These data represent a composite ofthree separate experiments . The mean fold length : area ratio of 1 . 1 Am ' is similar to that of 1 . 3 Am ' reported for rat peritoneal mast cells ( 3 ) . In additional control experiments , we have shown that macrophages treated with antibody alone ( Fig . 3 b ) or FT vesicles alone ( Fig . 3 c ) are very similar to the untreated cells . Macrophages were exposed to either reagent for 30 min at 37°C . A substantial reduction in the number ofsurface folds occurs when macrophages are incubated with FT vesicles in the presence of specific antihapten antibodies . We show a typical cell in Fig . 3 d . These cells were treated with antibodies and FT vesicles for 30 min at 37°C as described above . Identical results were obtained on four separate occasions , each consist - ing ofpooled cells from several animals in each . In Fig . 4 B we show fold length : area ratio for this cell population , which is significantly less than that of control cells ( Fig . 4 A ) . A break in the histogram of Fig . 4 B can be observed . However , the reason for this discontinuity is uncertain . It may , for example , represent subpopulations ofmacrophages that differ in surface properties after phagocytosis . Additional experiments ( data not shown ) have indicated that the change in surface folds is time - dependent . In addition to data on surface folds , this technique also provides information with regard to cell size . The mean cell radii , neglecting surface projections , in control ( absence of both antibody and vesicles ) and phagocytosis experiments are 3 . 3 ± 0 . 06 and 3 . 8 ± 0 . 06 Am , respectively ( see also Table I ) . The cell radius , as measured by SEM , increased - 15 % . Cell Volume Because cell radius is an indirect measure ofcell volume , we considered it advisable to determine cell volume by a more direct means . We have employed 3 H20 as a probe for total pellet volume and [ ' 4 C ] polyethylene glycol as a probe of extra - cellular volume to measure total cell volume . Macrophage volume was found to be 160 ± 50 pm s / cell and 250 ± 70 pm 3 / cell before and after phagocytosis , respectively ( see Table I ) . Extracellular volume was somewhat greater after phagocytosis , suggesting a different packing behavior of the cells . These values are similar to those calculated from cell radii with the assumption that the cells are smooth spheres ( see Table I ) . Calculation of Macrophage and Vesicle Surface Areas From the data obtained , one may directly calculate the influence of membrane folds upon macrophage surface area . The fold length : surface area ratio is first adjusted by a small , but significant , geometrical factor ( 1 . 16 ) that corrects for image foreshortening ( up to 0 . 8 r ) in the SEM micrographs . The only assumption is that the cells are randomly placed on the SEM stub . The area of the fold is then calculated as described ( 3 ) with fold height estimated as 0 . 6 Am , fold width is 0 . 1 Am , and the area of a smooth sphere of the cell radius is 140 Am t . Fold width was estimated with TEM and SEM . Fold height was estimated from thin - section TEM micrographs by measuring the distance from cell body to end of the fold . This underesti - mates fold height and decreases slightly the magnitude of the differences we have observed . The surface area of a cell , including surface fold length and our estimates of height and width , is calculated to be - 400 Amt ( values are summarized in Table 1 ) . Surface area after phagocytosis ( fold height - 0 . 2 Am ) , including the increase in volume , is - 300 Am t . The surface area internalized may be calculated from the data given in Fig . 1 . With the assumption of random vesicle uptake , we calculate an internalized surface area of - 400 hm 2 / cell . We have employed the value of 50 A2 / lipid molecule and assumed 0 . 3 mol of exposed lipid / mole lipid in this calculation , as previously determined for similar vesicles ( 17 ) . In experi - ments utilizing the fluorescent phospholipid NBD - PE and fluorescence microscopy as described ( 12 ) , we estimate that at least one - half of the vesicles are internalized under the condi - tions employed for guinea pig macrophages . Previous workers have established that the surface area of internalized particles is very nearly equal to the surface area of plasmalemma PETTYET AL . (cid:9) Macrophage Surface Folds and Phagocytosis (cid:9) 225 FIGURE 2 TEM of an FT vesicle and specific antibody - treated resident guinea pig peritoneal macrophage . Macrophages were exposed to FT vesicles and antihapten antibody for 30 min at 37°C with agitation as described in Materials and Methods . A number of vesicular cytoplasmic structures that contain the FT label may be discerned . The vesicle membranes are not visualized because the saturated fatty acids employed in this study are not osmiophilic . This thin section has not been counterstained . x 17 , 000 . internalized . This has also been demonstrated ( by M . Mc - Closkey in this laboratory ) for the antibody - dependent uptake of lipid vesicles with freeze - fracture techniques . The above calculations show that the amount of surface area internalized is approximately equal to that originally present at the cell surface . Although the cell surface area decreases after phagocytosis ( while the volume increases ) , this does not account for the amount of plasmalemma internalized . 226 (cid:9) THE JOURNAL of CEEB BIOLOGY - VOLUME 89 , 1981 DISCUSSION Our studies have shown that there is a dramatic reduction of macrophage surface folds after antibody - dependent phagocy - tosis of lipid - hapten and ferritin - containing phospholipid ves - icles . The disappearance of surface folds requires the presence of both specific antibody and FT vesicles because antibody or FT vesicles alone have no effect . The reduction in fold length FIGURE 3 (cid:9) ( a ) SEM of a resident guinea pig peritoneal macrophage incubated at 37°C for 30 min . Thesecells possess many surface folds . ( b ) A typical SEMof a macrophage treated with anti - DNP antibody at 37°C for30 min . ( c ) SEM of a macrophage exposed to FT vesicles at 37°C for 30 min . This cell population and that of b are indistinguishable from the cells of a . ( d ) In this SEM , macrophages were treated with both specific antibody and FT vesicles under identical conditions at 37°C for30 min . A substantial reduction in the number of surface folds has taken place . All micrographs are x 7 , 200 . PETTY ET AE . (cid:9) Macrophage Surface Folds and Phagocytosis (cid:9) 227 internal vesicles ( um2 ) § * Based on SEMdata ( mean tSEM ) ; n = 41 for each entry . $ Basedon ' H20 tracer volumedata ( mean ±SDof duplicate determinations ) . § Based on binding data . See text for details . 15 10 JJWU 0 L ' l m Z 15 5 0 10 5 TABLE I Properties of Macrophages A B 00 0 . 4 0 . 8 1 . 2 1 . 6 SURFACE FOLD LENGTH / SURFACE AREA ( ~ , ~ , ~ m2 ) FIGURE 4 A histogram of the surface fold length ( ILm ) per unit smooth sphere surface area ( FLm2 ) of macrophages . ( A ) Control macrophages ( both antibody and vesicles are absent ) incubated at 37°C for 30 min . ( B ) Macrophages were treated with both antibody and FT vesicles . Both cell populations were examined during four separate experimentswith pooled cells from several animals in each . The data given in the histogram are from randomly selected cells in three experiments ( n = 41 for each panel ; see also Table I ) . was concomitant with the appearance of FT vesicles in the cytoplasm and the binding of " C - labeled phospholipid vesicles to macrophages . The data indicate that the internalization of plasma membrane during phagocytosis results in a decrease in surface folds . In previous studies ( 14 , 15 ) one of us has shown that the adsorptive pinocytosis of concanavalin A results in a global decrease in macrophage surface folds . Various workers ( for a review see reference 22 ) have suggested that localized decreases in surface folds occur near the location of phagocytosis . How - ever , the latter qualitative experiments are complicated by the facts that it is difficult to know a posteriori where the phago - cytic event took place and that the responses are generally not high ( for example , because of antibody - independent condi - G2H (cid:9) THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 59 , 1981 lions ) . We have , therefore , employed the method of Burwen and Satir to measure the decrease of surface folds in a highly responsive antibody - dependent system . Our data ( Table I ) show that a significant area of the cell surface membrane is removed . TEM studies of the uptake of FT vesicles have shownclearly the presence of FT - containing vesicular structures within mac - rophages . These structures probably represent the internalized FT vesicles . The presence of these structures indicates that vesicle morphology is not altered dramatically by phagocytosis . The vesicle membrane was not visualized in the thin sections because the saturated fatty acid employed in these preparations is not osmiophilic . This method of visualizing vesicle phago - cytosis might be useful in examining vesicle clearance in drug delivery systems . From our binding and SEM experiments , we suggest that a membrane reservoir is made available to the plasmalemma during phagocytosis . This is based upon the following data : ( a ) cell surface area before phagocytosis is = 400 Itm 2 , ( b ) this value after phagocytosis is = 300 Itm 2 , and ( c ) the binding data indicate that = 400 Itm 2 of vesicle surface area is internalized . ( This value is analogous to results in experiments utilizing RAW264 macrophages where these cells took up an area equivalent to 100 % ofthe cell surface area during phagocytosis [ 121 . ) Roughly 300 ftm 2 of surface area in addition to the = 100 pm t contributed by the decrease in membrane folds would need to be made available to the cell surface . We have not yet examined the possible sources ofthis area ; however , the Golgi apparatus and the plasmalemma - like membrane which is re - cycled during pinocytosis ( 20 ) are likely candidates . Previous studies of macrophage membrane flow have fo - cused upon ( a ) surface area internalized during bulk phase pinocytosis in resident ( 20 ) and activated ( 7 ) macrophages ; ( b ) the recyling of trypsin - a macroglobulin receptors after adsorp - tive pinocytosis ( 10 , 19 ) ; and ( c ) the recycling of membrane components after antibody - independent phagocytosis of latex beads ( 13 ) . Antibody - dependent lipid vesicle phagocytosis has been ex - amined in our laboratory ( 12 , 16 ) and in others ( 11 ) . In the presence of specific antibody , these vesicles activate the CN - - insensitive respiratory burst ofRAW264 macrophages ( 12 ) and guinea pig macrophages ( unpublished observations ) . The de - pendence of this respiratory burst on vesicle lipid composition ( " fluid " or " solid " ) is similar for both types of macrophages . The binding of vesicles to cells has been examined by fluores - cence microscopy ( 12 ) and a fluorescence - activated cell sorter ( 11 ) . A quantitative theory of Fc receptor motion and depletion after antibody - dependent phagocytosis of vesicles has been presented ( 12 ) andthis theory has been supported by rosetting experiments ( lti ) . The experiments described herein provide additional important ultrastructural data relevant to the mech - anism of Fc receptor depletion and membrane turnover . We thank Dr . R . Beuerman and Ms . S . Lauber of the Department of Opthamology , Stanford University Medical School for making the scanning electron microscope available . We are grateful to the De - partment of Biological Sciences , Stanford University for the use of their transmission electron microscope . We thank Ms . F . Thomas for her expert technical assistance . This work wassupported by grant 2ROl Al13587 from the National Institutes of Health . H . R . Petty is a fellow of the Damon Runyon - Walter Winchell Cancer Fund ( DRG - 396F ) . Received for publication 29 September 1980 , and in revisedform 30 December 1980 . Calculated Cell volume * ( Um3 / cell ) 150 230 Surface area of smooth sphere 140 180 ( Am2 ) * Surface area including folds 410 300 ( ILm2 ) Approximate surface area of - - - - 400 Quantities Control Phagocytosis ; Measured Cell radius ( ILm ) * 3 . 3 ± 0 . 06 3 . 8 t 0 . 06 Surface fold length / surface 1 . 1 ± 0 . 03 0 . 53 t 0 . 04 area ( ILm - ' ) * Cell volume ( ILm3 / cell ) $ 160 ± 50 250± 70 REFERENCES 1 . Boyum , A . 1976 . Isolation of lymphocytes , granulocytes and macrophages . Scand . J . Immunol . Suppl 5 : 9 - 15 . 2 . Burwen , S . J . 1977 . Measurement of microfold length per unit area in two - dimensional projection of mast cells . Scanning Electron Microscopy / 1977 , Vol . 11 . IIT Research Institute . Chicago , Ill . 21 - 28 . 3 . Burwen , S . J . , and B . H . Stair . 1977 . Plasma membrane folds on the mast cell surface and their relationship to secretory activity . J . Cell Biol . 74 : 690 - 697 . 4 . Castranova , V . , L . Bowman , and P . R . Miles . 1979 . Transmembrane potential and ionic content ofrat alveolar macrophages . J . Cell . Physiol . 101 : 4711380 . 5 . Deamer , D . , and A . D . Bangham . 1976 . Large volume liposomes by an ether vaporization method . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 443 : 629 - 634 . 6 . Daems , W . Th . , and P . Brederoo . 1973 . Electron microscopical studies on the structure , phagocytic properties , and peroxidatic activity of resident and exudate peritoneal macro - phages in the guinea pig . Z . Zellyorsch . Mikrosk . Arai . 144 : 247 - 297 . 7 . Edelson , P . J . , R . Zwiebel , and Z . A . Cohn . 1975 . The pinocytic rate of activated macrophages . J Exp . Med . 142 : 1150 - 1164 . 8 . Esser , A . F . , R . M . Bartholomew , J . W . Parce , and H . M . McConnell . 1979 . The physical state ofmembrane lipids modulates the activation ofthe first component of complement . J . Biol . Chem . 254 : 1768 - 1770 . 9 . Fedorko , M . E . , N . L . Cross , and J . G . Hirsch . 1973 . Appearance and distribution of ferritin in mouseperitonealmacrophagesin vitro after uptake ofheterologous erythrocytes . J . Cell Biol . 57 : 289 - 305 . 10 . Kaplan , J . 1980 . Evidence for revitalization of surface receptors for a - macroglobulin protease complexes in rabbit alveolar macrophages . Cell . 19 : 197 - 205 . 11 . Lesserman , L . D . , J . N . Weinstein , R . Blumenthal , and W . D . Terry . 1980 . Receptor - mediated endocytosis of antibody - opsonized liposomes by tumorcells . Proc . Nall . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 77 : 40891 ! 093 . 12 . Lewis , J . T . , D . G . Hafeman , and H . M . McConnell . 1980 . Kinetics ofantibody - dependent binding of haptenated phospholipid vesicles to a macrophage - related cell line . Biochem - istry . 19 : 5376 - 5386 . 13 . Muller , W . A . , R . M . Steinman , and Z . A . Cohn . 1980 . The membrane proteins of the vacuolar system . 11 . Bidirectional flow between secondary lysosomes and plasma mem - brane . J . Cell Biol . 86 : 304 - 314 . 14 . Petty , H . R . 1979 . The inflammatory macrophage - concanavalin A interaction . In Proceed - ings of the Electron Microscopy Society of America . G . W . Bailey , editor . Claitor Publishing , Baton Rouge , La . 154 - 155 . 15 . Petty , H . R . 1980 . Response ofthe resident macrophage to concanavalin A : Alterations of surface morphology and anionic site distribution . Exp . Cell Res . 128 : 439 - 454 . 16 . Petty , H . R . , D . G . Hafeman , and H . M . McConnell . 1980 . Specific antibody - dependent phagocytosis of lipid vesicles by RAW264 macrophages results in the loss of cell surface Fc but not Cab receptor activity . J . Immunol . 125 : 2391 - 2396 . 17 . Schwartz , M . A . , and H . M . McConnell . 1978 . Surface areas of liposomes and lipid vesicles . Biochemistry . 17 : 837 - 840 . 18 . Spurr , A . R . 1969 . A low - viscosity epoxy resinembeddingmedium ofelectron microscopy . J . Ultrastruct . Res . 26 : 31113 . 19 . Stahl , P . , P . H . Schlessinger , E . Sigardson , J . S . Rodman , and Y . C . Lee . 1980 . Receptor - mediated pinocytosis ofmannose glyconconjugates by macrophages : characterizationand evidence for receptor recycling . Cell . 19 : 207 - 215 . 20 . Steinman , R . M . , S . E . Brodie , and Z . A . Cohn . 1976 . Membrane flow during pinocytosis . A sterologic analysis . J . Cell Biol . 68 : 665 - 687 . 21 . Stossel , T . P . 1977 . Endocytosis . In Receptors and Recognition , Series A , Vol . 4 P . Cuatrecasas and M . F . Greaves , editors . Chapman and Hall , London . 103 - 141 . 22 . Walters , M . N . - L , and 1 . M . Papadimitriou . 1978 . Phagocytosis : A review . CRC Crit . Rev . Toxicol . 377 - 421 . 23 . Zuckerman , S . H . , and S . D . Douglas . 1979 . The characterization and functional signifi - cance of plasma membrane Fc receptors . CRC Cric Rev . Microbiol . Immunol 1 - 26 . PETTY ET AL . (cid:9) Macrophage Surface Folds and Phagocytosis (cid:9) 229