Endocytic Trafﬁcking of Rac Is Required for the Spatial Restriction of Signaling in Cell Migration Andrea Palamidessi , 1 Emanuela Frittoli , 1 Massimiliano Garre´ , 1 , 2 Mario Faretta , 1 , 2 Marina Mione , 1 Ilaria Testa , 3 Alberto Diaspro , 3 Letizia Lanzetti , 4 Giorgio Scita , 1 , 5 , * and Pier Paolo Di Fiore 1 , 2 , 5 , * 1 IFOM , Fondazione Istituto FIRC di Oncologia Molecolare , Via Adamello 16 , 20139 Milan , Italy 2 Dipartimento di Oncologia Sperimentale , Istituto Europeo di Oncologia , 20141 Milan , Italy 3 LAMBS - MicroScoBio , Department of Physics , University of Genoa , Via Dodecaneso 33 , 16146 Genoa , Italy 4 Dipartimento di ScienzeOncologiche , Universita ` degli Studidi Torino , Istitutoper laRicerca ela Curadel Cancro , Candiolo , 10060Turin , Italy 5 Dipartimento di Medicina , Chirurgia ed Odontoiatria , Universita´ degli Studi di Milano , 20122 Milan , Italy * Correspondence : giorgio . scita @ ifom - ieo - campus . it ( G . S . ) , pierpaolo . diﬁore @ ifom - ieo - campus . it ( P . P . D . F . ) DOI 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2008 . 05 . 034 SUMMARY The small GTPases , Rab5 and Rac , are essential for endocytosis and actin remodeling , respectively . Coordination of these processes is critical to achieve spatial restriction of intracellular signaling , which is essential for a variety of polarized functions . Here , we show that clathrin - and Rab5 - mediated endocy - tosis are required for the activation of Rac induced by motogenic stimuli . Rac activation occurs on early endosomes , where the RacGEF Tiam1 is also re - cruited . Subsequent recycling of Rac to the plasma membrane ensures localized signaling , leading to the formation of actin - based migratory protrusions . Thus , membrane trafﬁcking of Rac is required for the spatial resolution of Rac - dependent motogenic signals . We further demonstrate that a Rab5 - to - Rac circuitry controls the morphology of motile mamma - lian tumor cells and primordial germinal cells during zebraﬁsh development , suggesting that this circuitry is relevant for the regulation of migratory programs in various cells , in both in vitro settings and whole organisms . INTRODUCTION Spatial restriction of signaling is critical to ensure localized and polarized intracellular responses to extracellular cues . This is es - sential for a number of cellular processes , including directed cell migration , cell - fate decisions , epithelial cell polarization , growth cone movement , and tissue morphogenesis . Signal polarization is often obtained through the redistribution of signaling mole - cules in restricted areas of the plasma membrane in response to extracellular cues : a process that actively involves the endo - cytic machinery ( Jones et al . , 2006 ) . For example , guided cell mi - gration in Drosophila border cells is dependent on endocytosis / recycling of receptor tyrosine kinases ( RTK ) , such as the EGFR and PVR ( PDGF / VEGF Receptor ) ( Jekely et al . , 2005 ; McDonald et al . , 2003 ) . Moreover , the disruption in Drosophila of endocytic proteins caused hyperproliferation of wild - type imaginal epithe - lial tissues by altering the conﬁned apical distribution of the fate - decision receptor Notch and the polarity determinant Crumbs . In this case , failure to internalize / degrade Notch and Crumbs results in their accumulation , with concomitant expansion of the apical membrane domain and uncontrolled proliferation ( Lu and Bilder , 2005 ) . One process that critically relies on localized signaling is cell motility . Some of the most studied motogenic transducers are RTKs , which not only promote cell proliferation but also serve as guidance receptors through the regulation of actin remodel - ing , leading to the formation of migratory cellular protrusions , such as lamellipodia ( or peripheral rufﬂes ) and dorsal surface circular rufﬂes ( or ‘‘waves’’ ) ( Buccione et al . , 2004 ) . Whereas lamellipodia represent the ﬁrst obligatory step in two - dimen - sional cell motility , circular rufﬂes have been regarded as sites of internalization events , such as ﬂuid phase endocytosis . However , they have also been implicated in directed cell motil - ity in a 2D setting ( Buccione et al . , 2004 ) and in the acquired ability of cells to move in 3D matrices ( Suetsugu et al . , 2003 ) . Circular rufﬂes , therefore , represent unique sites at which spa - tially restricted actin remodeling may control cellular motility . One important question is whether endocytosis regulates this process . Indeed , Dynamin , a critical endocytic protein , is re - quired for the formation of circular rufﬂes ( Orth and McNiven , 2003 ) , and Rab5 , a master regulator of endocytosis ( Zerial and McBride , 2001 ) , is needed for actin dynamics leading to circular rufﬂing ( Lanzetti et al . , 2004 ) . In some settings , Rab5 can also induce the formation of lamellipodia ( Spaargaren and Bos , 1999 and this paper ) . Finally , studies on Rac , a pivotal regulator of actin remodeling and cell migration , suggested that the control of its intracellular trafﬁc is important for determining the sites ( s ) at which Rac signaling occurs ( del Pozo and Schwartz , 2007 ) . Many questions , however , are still unresolved . Dynamin and Rab5 , for instance , are GTPases , a class of proteins known to act as molecular switches in the regulation of biochemical Cell 134 , 135 – 147 , July 11 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 135 pathways . We do not know whether they control actin dynamics through their endocytic functions or through some direct effector role . Further , if endocytosis controls actin dynamics , what are the molecular mechanisms involved ? How is the machinery of actin dynamics routed to speciﬁc locations of the plasma mem - brane to allow the spatial restriction of signaling ? Here , we show that endocytosis , as a process , controls actin dynamics . Cla - thrin - and Rab5 - dependent endocytosis is required for the acti - vation of Rac , and recycling is responsible for delivery of active Rac to speciﬁc regions of the plasma membrane , where spatial restrictions are placed upon signaling . We further show that this circuitry has relevance for the regulation of migratory programs in various cells , in both in vitro settings and whole organisms . RESULTS Rab5 Activates Rac In mouse embryo ﬁbroblasts ( MEFs ) , the simultaneous activation of Rab5 , PI3 - K , and Rac by RTKs is needed for the formation of circular rufﬂes ( Lanzetti et al . , 2004 ) . Conversely , active Rac is sufﬁcient to generate lamellipodia and peripheral rufﬂes in re - sponse to RTK activation ( Lanzetti et al . , 2004 ) . In HeLa cells , Figure 1 . Rab5 Activates Rac and Actin Dynamics ( A and B ) HeLa cells , transfected and treated as shown ( Rab5 , Rab5 + RacN17 , Rab5 + wortmannin ) , were stained as indicated . Examples of lamellipo - dia ( [ A ] , arrowheads , upper panels ) and circular rufﬂes ( [ A ] , arrowheads , lower panels ) are shown . Scale bars , 10 m m . ( C ) Quantitation of peripheral and circular rufﬂes . Data are expressed as mean rufﬂing index ± SEM ( n = 5 ) ( 1 = rufﬂing index in Rab5 - transfected cells ) . ( D ) Lysates from HeLa cells , transfected and treated as shown on top ( Tiam1C1199 , positive control constituted by a dominant - active Tiam1 mutant ) , were subjected to GST - CRIB assay ( panel : GST - CRIB , a quantiﬁcation is also shown underneath . Bands were quantiﬁed , and normal - ized intensities were calculated relative to control . Values are means ± SAM [ n = 5 ] ) or used as such ( panel : Lysates ) . Detectionwasbyimmunoblotting ( IB ) as shown . ( E ) Lysates from MEF ( top ) or HeLa ( bottom ) cells , treated as shown on top , were IB as indicated . however , the ectopic expression of Rab5 alone was sufﬁcient to induce both peripheral and circular rufﬂes ( Fig - ure 1A ) . Since Rac is essential for actin re - modeling propelling these structures , we investigated its involvement in Rab5 - induced rufﬂes . Coexpression of a domi - nant - negative Rac mutant ( RacN17 ) in - hibited the effects of Rab5 on circular and peripheral rufﬂes ( Figures 1B and 1C ) . However , treatment with wortmannin inhibited the effects of Rab5 on circular rufﬂes but had scarce effect on peripheral rufﬂes ( Figures 1B and 1C ) . To reconcile these data with those obtained in MEFs , we pos - tulated that ( 1 ) Rab5 activates Rac ( thus leading to peripheral rufﬂe formation ) and ( 2 ) in HeLa cells , there are high endoge - nous levels of active PI3 - K that cooperate with Rab5 and Rac—putatively activated by Rab5—to induce circular rufﬂes . Both these predictions were conﬁrmed experimentally . The ex - pression of Rab5 ( Figure 1D ) , but not of an inactive Rab5 mutant ( data not shown ) , led to increased Rac - GTP levels in a wortman - nin - insensitive fashion ( Figure 1D ) . Similar results were also ob - tained in other cell lines , such as 293T and COS - 7 cells ( Figure S1A available online ) . In addition , in serum - starved HeLa cells at variance with MEFs , we detected constitutive ( ligand - independent ) levels of active PI3 - K , as witnessed by the presence of wortmannin - sensitive phosphorylated AKT ( Figure 1E ) . Rab5 , therefore , can induce the activation of Rac through a PI3 - K - independent mechanism . Is such a mechanism phy - siologically relevant ? To address this question , we employed hepatocyte growth factor ( HGF ) , a potent stimulator of actin dynamics and motility in epithelial cell lines . In HeLa cells , HGF induced both circular ( Figure 2A ) and peripheral rufﬂes 136 Cell 134 , 135 – 147 , July 11 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . ( data not shown ) . We used pharmacological inhibitors and dominant - negative mutants to dissect the signaling pathways implicated in HGF - induced rufﬂing . This revealed that PI3 - K , Rac , and Rab5 were all simultaneously needed ( Figures 2B – 2E ) . HGF treatment activated Rac with a time course compat - ible with its involvement in rufﬂe formation ( Figure 2F ) , and PI3 - K and Rab5 were required for this effect , as shown by decreased HGF - induced activation of Rac , in cells treated with wortmannin ( Figure 2G ) or transfected with a Rab5 domi - nant - negative mutant ( Rab5S34N ) ( Figure 2H ) . The simulta - Figure 2 . Activation of Rac and Actin Dy - namics by HGF Requires Rab5 ( A – D ) HeLa cells , transfected and treated as shown on top and bottom , were stained as indi - cated ( asterisks : transfected cells ; scale bars , 10 m m ) . ( E ) Quantitation of peripheral and circular rufﬂes . Data are expressed as mean rufﬂing index ± SEM ( n = 4 ) ( 1 = rufﬂing index in HGF - stimulated cells ) . ( F and G ) Lysates from HeLa cells , stimulated with HGFfortheindicatedtimes ( F ) ortreatedwithHGF and / orwortmanninasshownontop ( G ) , weresub - jectedtoGST - CRIB ( top ) or directIB withanti - Rac ( bottom ) . QuantitationsofRac - GTPareshownun - derneath . Bands were quantiﬁed , and normalized intensities were calculated relative to control . Values are means ± SEM ( n = 4 ) . ( H ) Lysates from HeLa cells , transfected as shown on bottom and stimulated with HGF as shown on top , weresubjectedtoGST - CRIBassay ( RacGTP , quantitation of Rac - GTP is shown underneath . Bands were quantiﬁed , and normalized intensities were calculated relative to control . Values are means ± SEM [ n = 3 ] ) or to IB as indicated . ( I – K ) HeLa cells were subjected to siRNA for Rab5A , B , and C . Cells were then analyzed for mRNA content ( [ I ] , by QRT - PCR , data are ex - pressed as fold change with respect to scrambled RNAi - transfected cells ) , GST - CRIB assay follow - ing HGF stimulation ( [ J ] , quantitation of Rac - GTP is shown on the right . Bands were quantiﬁed , andnormalizedintensitieswerecalculatedrelative to control . Values are means ± SEM [ n = 4 ] ) , or ac - tin dynamics ( [ K ] , cells were stained and treated as indicated ) . Scale bar , 10 m m . neous silencing of the three Rab5 iso - forms ( Rab5A , B , and C ; Figure 2I ) hampered both the activation of Rac ( Figure 2J ) and the formation of circular ( Figure 2K ) and peripheral ( data not shown ) rufﬂes by HGF . In Rab5A - , B - , and C - silenced cells , actin dynamics were restored by re - expression of a short interfering RNA ( siRNA ) - resistant Rab5A mutant ( Figure 2K ) . Interference with Rab5 function abrogated circular rufﬂes also in PDGF - treated MEFs ( Lanzetti et al . , 2004 ; Figure S1B ) . Collectively , these results indicate that Rab5 is required for the activation of Rac by RTKs . The Activation of Rac by Rab5 Requires Clathrin - Mediated Endocytosis Rab5 might induce the activation of Rac through several mechanisms , e . g . , through modulation of Rac - speciﬁc guanine nucleotide exchange factors ( GEFs ) or GTPase - activating protein ( GAPs ) . However , no signiﬁcant changes in total Rac GEF and GAP activities could be detected in lysates from Cell 134 , 135 – 147 , July 11 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 137 Rab5 - expressing cells ( data not shown ) . Rab5 is essential for endocytosis ; thus , we tested whether this process is required for the regulation of Rac by Rab5 . We inhibited endocytosis in HeLa cells by either a dominant - negative dynamin mutant ( DynK44A ) or by knocking down the clathrin heavy chain ( Fig - ure 3A ) . Under these conditions , Rab5 was severely hampered in its ability to induce Rac - GTP ( Figures 3B and 3C ) and circular and peripheral rufﬂes ( Figures 3D , S1C , and S1D ) . Similarly , when HeLa cells were stimulated with HGF , under endocytic blockade , both actin dynamics ( Figures 3E and S1E ) and Rac activation ( Figure 3F ) were severely impaired . Thus , the activa - tion of Rac by Rab5 requires the integrity of endocytic pathways and , in particular , of clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) . The Activation of Rac Takes Place on Early Endosomes The sum of the above results led us to postulate that Rab5 - con - trolled endocytic events are required for the activation of Rac . Toprovethis , weinitiallyinvestigatedthelocalizationofRacunder conditions of Rab5 - induced activation . In quiescent HeLa cells , Rac displayed a diffuse localization ( Figure 4A ) . However , in Figure 3 . Rab5 - and HGF - Induced Actin Dynamics and Rac Activation Require Functional Endocytosis ( A ) Lysates of HeLa cells transfected with scram - bled ( Ctr ) orClathrinsiRNAoligos ( twodifferentoli - gos , Ol . 1andOl . 2 ) orleftuntreated ( NT ) wereIBas shown . ( B and C ) Lysates from HeLa cells , transfected or subjected to siRNA as shown on top , were sub - jected to GST - CRIB assay ( RacGTP , quantitation of Rac - GTP is shown underneath . Bands were quantiﬁed , and normalized intensities were calcu - lated relative to control . Values are means ± SEM [ n = 4 ] ) or to IB as shown . Note , in reference to ( C ) , that similar results were obtained with Ol . 2 ( data not shown ) . ( D ) HeLa cells , transfected as shown on bottom , were analyzed for formation of peripheral and cir - cular rufﬂes ( see also Figures S1C and S1D ) . Data areexpressedasmeanrufﬂingindex ± SEM ( n = 3 ) ( 1 = rufﬂing index in Rab5 - transfected cells ) . ( E ) HeLa cells , treated with HGF and transfected as shown on bottom , were analyzed for formation of circular rufﬂes ( see also Figure S1E ) . Data are expressed as mean rufﬂing index ± SEM ( n = 4 ) ( 1 = rufﬂing index in HGF - stimulated cells ) . ( F ) Lysatesfrom HeLacells , subjected tosiRNAas shown on bottom and treated as shown on top , were subjected to GST - CRIB assay ( RacGTP , quantitation of Rac - GTP is shown underneath . Bands were quantiﬁed , and normalized intensities were calculated relative to control . Values are means ± SEM [ n = 4 ] ) or toIB asshown . Similar re - sults were obtained by KD of clathrin with Ol . 2 ( data not shown ) . Rab5 - transfectedcells , Racwaslocalized toRab5 - inducedenlargedvesicles , which were positive for the endocytic markers EEA1 and Transferrin ( Figures 4A , S2A , and S2B ) . Live - cell imaging also conﬁrmed that , upon Rab5 ex - pression , Rac was localized to Transferrin - positive vesicles ( Figure S2B and Movie S1 ) . Importantly , Rac could also be de - tected in EEA1 - positive endosomes under physiological condi - tions by stimulation with HGF ( Figure 4B ) . Next , we used a ﬂuorescently tagged Cdc42 and Rac interac - tive binding motif ( CRIB ) as a biosensor of Rac activation ( Itoh et al . , 2002 ) since it can only associate with GTP - loaded Rac / Cdc42 . Cells were transfected with Rab5 and either Rac WT or an inactive Rac mutant ( RacT17N ) . Both WT and mutant Rac were recruited to endosomes following Rab5 overexpression , indicating that Rac recruitment to these endomembranes occurs independently of its nucleotide - bound and active state . How - ever , the biosensor was recruited to endosomes only in Rac WT - expressing cells , thus showing that expression of Rab5 leads to the appearance of activated Rac on endosomal mem - branes ( Figure 4C ) . The above results show that Rac , either following activation by RTK or as a consequence of Rab5 overexpression , is localized to early endosomes , where it is present in an active state . While our 138 Cell 134 , 135 – 147 , July 11 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . data do not address whether this is due to internalization of Rac from the plasma membrane or recruitment of soluble Rac to en - dosomes , they argue that the endosomal membrane is a primary site for the activation of Rac . How is Rac activated on endosomes ? To gain insights into this issue , we investigated the localization of various Rac - GEFs . Among those we tested , Tiam - 1 was the only one that could be detected on endosomes in Rab5 - overexpressing cells ( Figure 5A ) , while it showed a preponderant cytoplasmic and plasma membrane localization in untransfected cells ( Figure 5B ) . OtherRac - GEFs , suchas Sos - 1 , Vav - 1 , orTrio , could not be detected on Rab5 - induced enlarged endosomes ( data not shown ) . We further showed that silencing of Tiam - 1 ( Figure 5C ) abrogated both the Rab5 - induced activation of Rac ( Figure 5D ) and actin dynamics ( Figures 5E and S3A ) . Interference with Tiam - 1 function by a dominant - negative approach elicited similar effects ( FigureS3B ) . Finally , inHGF - stimulatedcells , thesilencing of Tiam - 1 led to impairmentof both Rac activation ( Figure 5F ) and rufﬂe formation ( Figures 5G and S3C ) . Collectively , these data Figure 4 . Rab5 Controls Endosomal Re - cruitment of Rac ( A ) HeLa cells transfected as shown on bottom ( see also Figure S2 ) were stained with the indi - cated Abs . GFP - Rac was detected by epiﬂuores - cence . Scale bars , 10 m m . ( B ) HeLacells , treatedasshownontheleft ( SF , se - rum - free ) , were stained with anti - Rac and anti - EEA1 . Insets show magniﬁcation of the boxed area of the merged images . We determined , by manual counting , the fraction of Rac - and EEA1 - positive / EEA1 - positive vesicles : in SF , 3 . 5 % ± 1 . 2 % , n = 310 ; in HGF - stimulated cells , 45 % ± 4 % , n = 357 . Scale bars , 6 m m . ( C ) HeLa cells were transfected with Rab5 to - gether with YFP - CRIB - CFP and either wild - type Rac ( top ) orRacN17 ( bottom ) , followedbystaining with anti - Rac or processing for epiﬂuorescence to detect ﬂuorophore - conjugated proteins ( CRIB panels ) . Scale bars , 8 m m . ( Right panels ) Plots of the intensity proﬁle , at different emission wave - lengths corresponding to the signals of wild - type Rac ( top , red ) , RacN17 ( bottom , red ) , and CFP - CRIB - YFP ( green ) , of a set of pixels distributed on a line drawn across vesicles ( shown in the merged panels ) . Data are expressed as arbitrary unit versus length in microns . Confocal images in ( A ) – ( C ) are representative of more than 150 analyzed cells . supportthepossibilitythatRab5regulates the trafﬁcking of Rac and its GEF , Tiam1 , to an endosomal compartment , leading to Rac activation at that location . Recycling to the Cell Surface of Active Rac Is Required for Actin Dynamics A corollary of the previous ﬁndings is that endosome - associated active Rac should be rerouted to the plasma membrane to direct actin remodeling . We exploited the fact that the recycling of CME - internalized cargo , such as the Transferrin receptor ( TfR ) , can be speciﬁcally blocked at 16 (cid:2) C ( Punnonen et al . , 1998 ) . Therefore , we deter - mined the ability of HGF and Rab5 to induce circular rufﬂes at 16 (cid:2) C . Under these conditions , such actin remodeling was com - pletely abrogated ( Figure 6A ) . Importantly , actin dynamics in - duced by a constitutively activated Rac or TPA were unaffected ( Figure 6A ) . Furthermore , HGF - and Rab5 - induced GTP loading of Rac was similar at 37 (cid:2) C and 16 (cid:2) C ( Figures 6B and 6C ) . Thus , the lack of rufﬂing at 16 (cid:2) C cannot be ascribed to impairment of the biochemical machinery leading to Rac activation or control - ling actin dynamics . To obtain direct evidence of recycling of Rac - positive endoso - mal vesicles to the plasma membrane , we took advantage of a paGFP - Rac fusion protein containing a photo - activatable GFP moiety . Two - photonmicroscopyexcitationallowed thevisualiza - tion of single internalized vesicles . By monitoring the dynamics of Rac - positive vesicles under these conditions , we could readily Cell 134 , 135 – 147 , July 11 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 139 detect movement of Rac toward the cell periphery at plasma membrane sites where rufﬂes form ( Figure 6D and Movie S2 ) . This was also conﬁrmed by monitoring the motility of GFP - Rac - positive , Rab5 - induced vesicles that appeared to move centrifu - gally toward the sites of rufﬂe formation in motile cells ( Movie S3 ) . Basedontheaboveevidence , weconcludedthatrecyclingofRac to the plasma membrane is required for actin dynamics . To deﬁne the molecular mechanisms governing the recycling of Rac , we interfered with the activity of a series of small GTPases , known to control recycling from different endocytic compartments , such as Rab11 , Rab4 , and Arf6 ( Donaldson and Honda , 2005 ; Zerial and McBride , 2001 ) . No inhibition of Rab5 - or HGF - induced circular rufﬂes was detected when dominant - negative mutantsof Rab11 orRab4 were expressed inHeLa cells ( data not shown ) . Conversely , a dominant - negative Arf6 mutant , Arf6T44N , orArf6silencing , whicheffectivelypreventedrecycling of the internalized interleukin - 2 receptor ( Radhakrishna and Do - naldson , 1997 ; Figure S4A ) , completely abrogated the formation of circular rufﬂes by either HGF or Rab5 ( Figures S4B and S4C and data not shown ) . More importantly , silencing of Arf6 inhibited the motility of Rac from endosomes to the plasma membrane , as assessed by time - lapsed recording of two - photon - activated en - dosomal paGFP - Rac ( Figure S4D and Movie S4 ) . Rab5 Regulates the Morphology and Motility of HeLa Cells in 2D and 3D Our results support a model in which Rab5 - dependent endocytic trafﬁcking of Rac is necessary for its activation and the ensuing ability to control actin dynamics . Moreover , the need for Rac re - cycling to the plasma membrane suggests that endocytic traf - ﬁcking of Rac is required to obtain spatial restriction of actin re - modeling for any ensuing polarized functions ( Figure 6E ) . One such function might be cell motility , as membrane rufﬂing is connected to directed cell migration ( Buccione et al . , 2004 ) . To investigate this possibility , we initially performed experiments in HeLa cells ( which is the system in which most of the described biochemical characterizations were performed ) , both in 2D and 3D culture conditions . Figure 5 . Tiam1 Is Recruited to Endosomes in a Rab5 - Dependent Manner and Activates Rac ( A ) HeLa cells were transfected with Rab5 , Rac , and Tiam1 and stained as indicated . Scale bar , 5 m m . ( B ) HeLa cells were transfected with Tiam1 and stained as indicated . Scale bar , 8 m m . Confocal images in ( A ) and ( B ) are representative of more than 150 analyzed cells . ( C ) Lysates of HeLa cells transfected with scram - bled ( Ctr ) or Tiam1 siRNA oligos ( two different oli - gos , Ol . 1 and Ol . 2 ) were IB as shown . ( D ) Lysates from HeLa cells , transfected or sub - jected to siRNA as shown on top , were subjected toGST - CRIBassay ( RacGTP , quantitation ofRac - GTP is shown underneath . Bands were quantiﬁed , andnormalizedintensitieswerecalculatedrelative tocontrol . Valuesaremeans ± SEM [ n = 4 ] ) ortoIB as shown . Similar results were obtained with Tiam1 siRNA Ol . 2 ( data not shown ) . ( E ) HeLa cells , transfected as shown on bottom , were analyzed for formation of peripheral and cir - cular rufﬂes ( see also Figure S3 ) . Data are ex - pressed as mean rufﬂing index ± SEM ( n = 5 ) ( 1 = rufﬂing index in Rab5 + ctr siRNA - transfected cells ) . ( F ) Lysatesfrom HeLa cells , subjected tosiRNA as shown on bottom and treated as shown on top , were subjected to GST - CRIB assay ( RacGTP , quantitation of Rac - GTP is shown underneath . Bands were quantiﬁed , and normalized intensities were calculated relative to control . Values are means ± SEM [ n = 3 ] ) or toIBasshown . Similar re - sultswereobtainedbyKDofTiam1withOl . 2 ( data not shown ) . ( G ) HeLa cells , treated with HGF and transfected as shown on bottom , were analyzed for formation of circular rufﬂes ( see also Figure S3 ) . Data are expressed as mean rufﬂing index ± SEM ( n = 5 ) , as in ( E ) . 140 Cell 134 , 135 – 147 , July 11 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . Through a number of approaches , we demonstrated that Rab5 regulates the morphology and motility of these cells , both in 2D and 3D conditions ( see Figures S5 – S7 for a detailed description of the performed experiments ) . In particular , we found that , uponexpressionofRab5 , in2D , HeLacellsadoptedanelongated morphology with the extension of multiple , fast - protruding and - retracting lamellipodia ( Figure S5A and Movies S5 and S6 ) . A similarmorphologicalswitchwasinducedbyHGFtreatment ( Fig - ures S5B and S5C and Movie S7 ) in a Rab5 - dependent manner ( Figure S5B and Movie S7 ; also see Figures S5D – S5H and Movie S8forvariousquantitationsoftheseevents ) . Under3Dconditions and upon expression of Rab5 , HeLa cells underwent a dramatic morphological change from a round morphology to an elongated shape characterized by the extension of cell protrusions ( Figures S6A – S6C ) . This was accompanied by a redistribution of b 1 integ - rin , which , while distributed uniformly overthe cell surface in con - trol HeLa cells , appeared focalized with the underlying actin cytoskeleton following Rab5 expression ( Figure S6B ) . Finally , to monitor 3D motility , we employed a thick , pliable matrix com - posed of matrigel and collagen , which recapitulates key aspects of the type of matrix found in connective tissues ( Caswell et al . , 2007 ; Pinner and Sahai , 2008 ) . Under these conditions , Rab5 ex - pression promoted a switch from a blebbing to an elongated mode of motility ( Figure S6D and Movie S9 ) . This morphological transition was also associated with Rab5 - mediated enhanced cell invasion into matrigel ( Figure S7 and Movie S10 ) . The sum of these observations indicates that Rab5 modulates morphological and motility programs in HeLa cells . Rab5 Controls the Morphology of Motile Tumor Cells While the above observations point to a role for a Rab5 - mediated circuitry in controlling modes of cell migration , they left the Figure 6 . HGF - and Rab5 - Induced Actin Dynamics Require Functional Recycling ( A ) ( Left ) Serum - starved HeLa cells were incu - bated at 37 (cid:2) C or 16 (cid:2) C for 3 hr and then stimulated with HGF ( top panels ) or TPA ( 200 nM , 20 min , lower panels ) at the two temperatures . NT ( not treated ) represents control serum - starved HeLa cells at 37 (cid:2) C . Cells were stained with phalloidin . ( Right ) HeLa cells , transfected with Rab5 ( upper panels ) or RacQ79L ( lower panels ) , were incu - bated at 37 (cid:2) C or 16 (cid:2) C for 3 hr . Cells were stained with anti - Rab5 ( top , red ) or anti - Rac ( bottom , red ) and phalloidin ( top / bottom , green ) to detect trans - fected cells and F - actin , respectively . Scale bar , 15 m m . ( B ) Serum - starved HeLa cells were incubated at 37 (cid:2) C or 16 (cid:2) C for 3 hr prior to stimulation with HGF for the indicated times . Lysates were sub - jected to GST - CRIB assay ( RacGTP , quantitation of Rac - GTP is shown underneath . Bands were quantiﬁed , and normalized intensities were calcu - lated relative to control . Values are means ± SEM [ n = 3 ] ) or to IB with anti - Rac . ( C ) HeLa cells , transfected as shown on top , were incubated at 37 (cid:2) C or 16 (cid:2) C for 3 hr . Lysates were subjected to GST - CRIB assay ( RacGTP , quantita - tionofRac - GTPisshownunderneath . Bandswere quantiﬁed , and normalized intensities were calcu - lated relative to control . Values are means ± SEM [ n = 3 ] ) or to IB with anti - Rac or anti - Rab5 . ( D ) HeLa cells were cotransfected with Rab5 and paGFP - Rac . paGFP barely absorbs 488 nm light in its native form , thereby exhibiting weak ﬂuores - cence emission . Focal plane - restricted , multipho - ton - induced photoactivation of paGFP - Rac was achieved by exciting the area corresponding to avesicle ( ﬁrst panel , circle ) . Images were then col - lected every ﬁve pulses for approximately every 80 s , exciting ﬂuorescence at 488 nm . Scale bar , 2 m m . ( E ) A model for the endocytic , Rab5 - dependent control over Rac activation and spatially restricted actin dynamics . Cell 134 , 135 – 147 , July 11 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 141 question unanswered as to whether this circuitry has implica - tions for physiological or pathological processes . One such situ - ation might be represented by the switch between the so - called amoeboid and mesenchymal modes of cell migration . Two modes of single - cell 3D migration in extracellular matrices have been described ( Friedl and Wolf , 2003 ) . The elongated - lamellipodia movement ( mesenchymal mode ) begins with the formation of ﬂat , adherent protrusions driving directional motility ; this mode is Rac dependent ( Sahai and Marshall , 2002a , 2003 ) . Conversely , amoeboid migration depends on Rho - Rock - controlled actomyosin contractility , driving blebbing - like movements of loosely adherent cells ( Sahai and Marshall , 2002b , 2003 ) . This modality of migration is sensitive to inhibition of the Rock kinase by the pharmacological inhibitor Y27632 . Conversion between these migratory modes confers plasticity to metastatic tumor cell migration , allowing migratory ‘‘escape’’ strategies upon pharmacological intervention ( Friedl and Wolf , 2003 ) . To assess the role of Rab5 in these processes , we utilized the A375m2 melanoma and BE colon carcinoma cells , which have been characterized as model systems for amoeboid and mesen - chymal migration , respectively ( Sahai and Marshall , 2003 ) . A375m2 cells undergo a 3D amoeboid - to - mesenchymal transi - tion upon inhibition of the Rho - Rock pathway by Y27632 ( Sahai and Marshall , 2003 ) . This transition correlates , in 2D , with the for - mation of elongated , fast - retracting and - extending lamellipodia ( Sahai and Marshall , 2003 ; Figure 7A and Movie S11 ) . Similarly to what was observed in HeLa cells , the expression of Rab5 in A375m2 cells ( or the inhibition of the Rock kinase ) caused the ac - quisition of an elongated morphology in the 2D migratory envi - ronment , which was indistinguishable from that observed in the presence of the Rock inhibitor Y27632 ( Figure 7A and Movie S11 ) . This was accompanied by the activation of Rac ( Figure 7B ) and the formation of prominent circular rufﬂes ( Figure 7C ) . These latter results indicate that the Rab5 - to - Rac circuitry is fully oper - ational in this cell line as well . More importantly , Rab5 expres - sion , similarly to the inhibition of the Rock kinase , promoted a mesenchymal - like conversion when A375m2 were embedded into the 3D matrigel matrix ( Figure 7D ) or when they were plated , to monitor their motility , on a thick , pliable matrix ( Figures 7E and 7F and Movie S12 ) . Conversely , BE cells , which adopt an elon - gated morphology in 3D matrigel , were converted into ellipsoid cells upon silencing of Rab5A , Rab5B , and Rab5C , which also caused downregulation of RacGTP levels ( Figure 7G ) or expres - sion of Rab5S34N ( Figure 7H ) . Thus , Rab5 is required to regulate the motility modes of a variety of tumor cells . Rab5 Regulates PGCs’ Directional Migration in Zebraﬁsh The sum of our observations predicts that modulation of Rab5 activity should affect the migration ability of cells in model organ - isms . An in vivo system to study directional migration is that of primordial germ cells ( PGCs ) ( Raz , 2004 ) . In zebraﬁsh , PGCs di - rectionally migrate to the gonads , following chemotactic cues emanating from somatic tissues ( Raz , 2004 ) . To do so , they adopt an actomyosin - dependent , stereotyped amoeboid migra - tory strategy resembling that of mammalian tumor cells ( Blaser et al . , 2006 ) . We determined the effects of ectopic expression of human Rab5 on PGC migration during zebraﬁsh development . Strikingly , in more than 70 % ( 200 / 280 ) of Rab5 - transduced em - bryos , PGCs did not reach the gonadal area , while they did so in all control embryos ( 180 / 180 ) ( Figures 8A – 8C ) . Time - lapse re - cording of individual PGCs revealed that Rab5 induced in more than 60 % of cells ( 49 / 77 ) the extension of long - ( up to three to four times the cell diameter ) and fast - retracting protrusions , which were rarely observed in control PGCs ( 15 / 86 ) ( Figure 8D and Movie S13 ) . Thus , Rab5 appears to have a general and evo - lutionary conserved role in regulating the strategies adopted by cells to move in three - dimensional settings . DISCUSSION Endocytic Circuitry Leading to the Activation of Rac and the Spatial Restriction of Signaling In this study , we uncovered a molecular circuitry , illustrated in Figure 6E , which directs the activation of Rac and the spatial re - striction of its signaling , leading to actin dynamics . We showed that activation of Rac requires , at least under the conditions tested , clathrin - mediated endocytosis and that it occurs most likely in an early endosomal compartment . This is due to the simultaneous recruitment of Rac and Tiam - 1 onto endosomal membranes through mechanisms that remain to be elucidated . Thus , the early endosome scaffolds together a GEF and its target GTPase , allowing GTP / GDP exchange . Such a mechanism might be useful to prevent the indiscriminate activation of Rac at the plasma membrane and could serve to create a localized pool of Rac - GTP that can then be delivered to speciﬁc regions of the plasma membrane where space - restricted signaling is required . This circuitry has relevance for directed cell migration , as we showed that endocytic trafﬁcking of Rac is required for the trans - duction and spatial resolution of information emanating from mo - togenic stimuli . It is of note that genetic evidence in Drosophila also supports a role for endocytosis / recycling and , in particular , for Rab5 - mediated pathways in directed cell migration ( Jekely et al . , 2005 ; McDonald et al . , 2003 ) . Thus , endocytic pathways are required throughout evolution to ensure the spatial resolution of stimuli originating from motogenic receptors and to orches - trate localized actin dynamics , polarized protrusive activity , and directed cell motility . Endocytosis and the Control of Small GTPase Signaling Crosstalk among small GTPases is critical in the regulation of numerous cellular functions , and the cell has adopted several strategies to regulate it . In some cases , crosstalk is obtained through simple hierarchical cascades whereby two small GTPases are directly and orderly linked in a positive or negative ampliﬁcation loop . This is , for instance , the case with Ras - to - Rac signaling or signaling among Rho - like GTPases ( Schmidt and Hall , 2002 ) . In the case described here , Rab5 regulates Rac not via a direct biochemical link but , rather , by activating an entire process , en - docytosis , that provides the enabling conditions for the activa - tion of Rac and the execution of its function . Our data , therefore , add an extra layer to the complex strategies adopted by the cell to use endocytosis as a device to provide spatial and temporal 142 Cell 134 , 135 – 147 , July 11 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . dimensions to signaling . The regulation of Rac activity by endo - cytosis ( this paper ) is reminiscent of the endocytic - dependent regulation of Ras signaling . Ras and / or MAPK signaling has been observed on different endomembranes ( Mor and Philips , 2006 ) , and it depends on functional endocytosis ( Jiang and Sor - kin , 2002 ; Roy et al . , 2002 ) . Additionally , H - Ras is dynamically re - cruited , in both its active form and a Rab5 and Rab11 manner , to recycling endosomes ( Daniotti et al . , 2004 ) . There are important differences , however , in the ﬁnalities of endocytic regulation of Ras and Rac . In the former case , the or - ganelle location of Ras has invariably been proposed to serve as an intracellular platform , conferring signal speciﬁcity and diver - sity possibly by extending and segregating the repertoire of reg - ulatory molecules and / or effectors . In the case of Rac , endocy - tosis , localization to endosomes , and recycling to the plasma membrane should be viewed primarily as a means to resolve Figure 7 . Rab5 Controls the Morphology of Tumor Cells in 3D ( A ) A375m2 cells , transfected or treated as indi - cated , were plated sparsely , and their motility was monitored by time - lapse microscopy . Repre - sentative still images are shown . See also Movie S11 . Arrowheads indicate cells transfected with Rab5 . Scale bar , 20 m m . A quantitation of the ef - fects is in the lower panel , as determined by mea - suring the average ratio between the short and long axes of the cell ( circularity ) . More than 200 cells / conditions were analyzed . Data are ex - pressed as the mean ± SEM ( n = 3 ) . ( B ) Lysates of A375m2 , transfected as shown on top , were subjected toGST - CRIBassay ( RacGTP ) or to IB with the shown Abs . A quantitation is shown in the lower panel . Bands were quantiﬁed , andnormalizedintensitieswerecalculatedrelative to control . Values are means ± SEM ( n = 4 ) . Values are expressed as means ± SEM ( n = 4 ) . ( C ) Rab5 - transfected A375m2 cells were stained with phalloidin or anti - Rab5 . Shown are represen - tative cells forming circular rufﬂes . A quantitation is shown in the right panel . Data are expressed as the fraction of cells forming circular rufﬂes ± SEM ( n = 5 ) . Scale bar , 15 m m . ( D ) A375m2 cells , transfected with Rab5 , were analyzed by 3D matrigel assay . Untransfected A375m2cells ( redinthepicture ) displayedaround morphology ( length / width ratio (cid:3) 1 ) ; whereas 28 % ± 6 % ofRab5 - expressingcells ( green / yellow ) pos - sessed an elongated phenotype ( length / width ratio > 1 . 5 ) . ( E ) A375m2 cells , transfected or treated as indi - cated , were plated on a pliable matrix and their motility was monitored by confocal time - lapse . Still images from Movie S12 are shown . Under this condition , A375m2 cells were motile and moved with an average velocity of 2 . 4 ± 0 . 2 ( mean ± SEM ) mm / hr , as reported ( Pinner and Sahai , 2008 ) . ( F ) Quantitation of the experiments in ( E ) . ( Top ) ‘‘Circularity’’ ( see [ A ] ) . ( Bottom ) Morphology was evaluated as the ratio between the perimeter and the area ( cells’ shapes were manually drawn as described by Pinner and Sahai [ 2008 ] ) . More than 75 cells / conditions were analyzed . Data are expressed as the mean ± SEM ( n = 3 ) . ( G ) BE cells , transfected as indicated , were ana - lyzed by 3D matrigel assay ( left ) or CRIB assays ( right ) . Ninety - ﬁve percent ± 3 % ( SEM ) Rab5 - silenced cells displayed a round morphology ( length / width ratio (cid:3) 1 ) , while 91 % ± 8 % ( SEM ) control cells were elongated ( length / width ratio > 1 . 5 ) . Silencing of Rab5 was veriﬁed by quantitative PCR ( bottom ) . Scale bar , 25 m m . ( H ) BEcells , transfectedasshownontheright , wereanalyzedby3Dmatrigelassay . Morphologyanalysisindicatedthat67 % ± 7 % ofRab5S34N - expressingcells displayed a round morphology ( length / width ratio (cid:3) 1 ) , while 91 % ± 8 % control cells were elongated ( length / width ratio > 1 . 5 ) . Cell 134 , 135 – 147 , July 11 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 143 and direct signals in space , thus preventing them from becoming uniformly distributed and , as such , uninformative . The Impact of Recycling on Spatial Restriction of Signals and on the Execution of Polarized Functions One major ﬁnding of our study is that correct Rac - mediated actin dynamics requires recycling of activated Rac to the plasma membrane , at least under our tested conditions . This highlights recycling as a major mechanism to achieve spatial restriction of signals . Indeed , there is growing evidence for this in various experimental settings , including the process of yeast polariza - tion ( Marco et al . , 2007 ; Valdez - Taubas and Pelham , 2003 ) , the establishment of epithelial polarity and proliferation in Xenopus laevis ( Wedlich , 2002 ) and Drosophila melanogaster ( Jekely et al . , 2005 ; Lu and Bilder , 2005 ) , and the control of adhesion and migration through trafﬁcking of integrins and their regulators ( Caswell and Norman , 2006 ) . In this latter case , some of the reg - ulators , which mediate the redelivery of integrins to the leading edge of migrating cells , have been identiﬁed . These include Rab4 , Rab11 , Rab25 , and Arf6 ( Caswell et al . , 2007 ; Jones et al . , 2006 ) . In the case of Rac , we report here that Arf6 is required for spatial restriction of its activation . It remains to be established whether Arf6 does so by directly controlling Rac traf - ﬁcking or , as recently reported ( Balasubramanian et al . , 2007 ) , by promoting the recycling to the plasma membrane of lipid rafts to which Rac is targeted . This , in turn , leads to the question of the molecular cues that direct Rac to speciﬁc membrane locations . Although we did not investigate this issue directly , it is of note that integrin - medi - ated cell adhesion causes the appearance at the plasma mem - brane of high - afﬁnity binding sites for Rac , namely lipid rafts ( del Pozo et al . , 2004 , 2005 ) . Integrins act locally to prevent the lipid rafts internalization ( that occurs through clathrin - indepen - dent pathways ) , which serves as anchor points for Rac . It is tempting to speculate , therefore , that Rac , activated through a process that requires clathrin - dependent endocytosis ( this paper ) , is then delivered to speciﬁc regions of the plasma mem - brane , represented by lipid rafts ( del Pozo et al . , 2004 , 2005 ) whose nonclathrin internalization is prevented by integrin signal - ing . Such a circuitry would require that opposing effects on two endocytic pathways be coordinated , a concept that also emerged from recent genomic studies of the clathrin and noncla - thrin pathways of internalization ( Pelkmans et al . , 2005 ) . Endocytosis , Migration , and Metastatic Strategies Individual tumor cells adopt diverse modes of migration whose molecular determinants are starting to be elucidated . Amoeboid motility is characterized by the formation of uniformly distributed fast - extending and - retracting blebs and relies on efﬁcient acto - myosin contractility ( Fukui , 2002 ) . This latter feature enables cells to change their shape and volume , allowing them to squeeze forward through gaps present in the ﬁbrillar structure of the extracellular matrix in the absence of proteolitic activity ( Wolf and Friedl , 2006 ) . This type of motility is conserved throughout evolution and has been shown to have physiological relevance at the organismal level , such as during PGC migration in zebraﬁsh ( Blaser et al . , 2006 ) . Mesenchymal - type migration , conversely , relies on the formation of persistent and extended Rac - dependent lamellipodia protrusions and the activation of metalloproteases ( Wolf and Friedl , 2006 ) . By employing two well - established models of amoeboid - to - mesenchymal transition , the A375m2 melanoma and the BE colon carcinoma cells , we demonstrated that Rab5 controls the conversion between the two modalities of movement . Inter - estingly , morphologically ( and biochemically ) similar regulations seemed to be at play in HeLa cells , whose migratory modes have Figure 8 . Expression of Rab5 Prevents PGCs from Reaching Their Target during Zebraﬁsh Development and Alters the Migratory Shape of PGCs ( A ) PGCs , visualized through the expression of GFP : nos1 - 3 0 UTR and used as control , correctly migrated to the gonadal area ( boxed ) by 32 hpf ( hours post fertilization ) . In all control embryos ( 188 / 188 ) , PGCs reached the appropriate ﬁnal gonadal target . ( B and C ) In more than 70 % of embryos injected with Rab5a : nos1 - 3 0 UTR ( 200 / 280 ) , a signiﬁcant number of PGCs were found in ectopic positions throughout the body . Scale bars , 50 m m . ( D ) Still images from time - lapse movies showing PGCs coinjected with GFP : nos1 - 3 0 UTR and either empty vector ( left , GFP , see also Movie S13 ) or RAB5a : nos1 - 3 0 UTR ( middle / right , GFP + RAB5 , see also Movie S13 ) . Arrowheads indicate the ex - tension of elongated protrusions , which were de - tected in 49 / 77 of Rab5 - coinjected and 15 / 88 of control cells . Scale bars , 4 m m . 144 Cell 134 , 135 – 147 , July 11 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . not been well characterized so far . It should be cautioned , how - ever , that HeLa cells do not represent an ideal model to study amoeboid - to - mesenchymal transition because of their epitheli - oid nature . It is possible that , in the case of HeLa cells , what we detected is some form of epithelial - to - mesenchymal transi - tion on which other Rab5 - mediated events were superimposed , leading to the round - to - elongated conversion reminiscent of the amoeboid - to - mesenchymal transition ( see Figure S6 legend for a detailed discussion ) . Whatever the case , the ability of Rab5 - based circuitries to control the cellular modes of motility has important implications for the understanding of the molecular mechanisms of metasta - sis and for therapeutic intervention as well . As a case in point , pharmacological inhibition of metalloproteases ( which targets primarily mesenchymal motility ) has been proposed as a tool to inhibit tumor spreading and dissemination , with encouraging results in animal model systems ( Drummond et al . , 1999 ) . How - ever , clinical trials in human cancers have yielded disappointing results ( Arvelo and Cotte , 2006 ) . The ability of tumor cells to con - vert from metalloprotease - dependent ( mesenchymal ) to - inde - pendent ( amoeboid ) motility might account , at least in part , for these failures . In this framework , a detailed molecular under - standing of the ‘‘switch’’ might improve our ability to design ef - fective anti - invasive and antimetastatic therapies by preventing cancer cells from interconverting between migratory modes . Our ﬁndings suggest the possibility that Rab5 ( and Rab5 - acti - vated processes ) might sit at the heart of the switch . As a conse - quence , multiple components of endocytosis / recycling could potentially become the targets of anti - invasive strategies . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Reagents A detailed list of all plasmids , antibodies , and reagents is provided in the Supplemental Experimental Procedures . Transfections , Cell Lines , and Biochemical Assays Cell lines and culture conditions are described in the Supplemental Experi - mental Procedures . Transfections were performed using LipofectAMI - NET2000 ( Invitrogen ) , OligofectAMINET ( Invitrogen ) , or Fugene 6 ( Roche ) . The levels of Rac - GTP were measured by afﬁnity precipitation using the GST - CRIB of PAK1 , as described by Scita et al . ( 1999 ) ( see also the Supple - mental Experimental Procedures ) . Bands were quantiﬁed , and normalized intensities are expressed in arbitrary units ( a . u . ) relative to control ( assumed as 1 ) . Values are means ± SEM ( n = 4 ) . siRNA Experiments Two different siRNAs were used for Tiam1 KD ( Invitrogen ) and Clathrin KD ( Dharmacon , Inc . ) with comparable results . In the case of clathrin - KD , as an additional control , we showed that the procedure is very efﬁcient at reducing CME . In particular , the Ke ( internalization constant ) of the EGFR was reduced from 0 . 33 min (cid:4) 1 to background levels ( 0 . 05 min (cid:4) 1 ) ; the Ke of TfR was also re - duced from 0 . 63 min (cid:4) 1 to background levels ( 0 . 06 min (cid:4) 1 ) . Three isoform - speciﬁc siRNAs were used for the KD of Rab5A , B , and C ( Invitrogen ) in HeLa cells . For KD / reconstitution experiments of Rab5A , we used an additional Rab5A siRNA ( oligo2 ) ( Dharmacon ) , which targets the following Rab5A sequence : AGGAATCAGTGTTGTAGTA . Reconstitution of Rab5A expression in interfered cells was achieved by expression of YFP - Rab5A containing silent mismatches in the target sequence of oligo2 ( AGGAATCAATGCTGCAGTA ) . Three isoform - speciﬁc siRNAs were used for the KD of Rab5A , B , and C ( Invitrogen ) in MEF cells . A speciﬁc siRNA was used for Arf6 KD ( Dharmacon , Inc . ) . For all siRNA experiments , the appropriate scrambled oligos were used as control siRNAs ( ctr - siRNA ) . Sequences of all targeting oligonucleotides are in the Supplemental Exper - imental Procedures . Immunoﬂuorescence and Microscopy Cells ﬁxed in 4 % paraformaldehyde and permeabilized in 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 were incubated with the indicated primary antibody followed by the appropri - ate secondary antibody . F - actin was detected by staining with rhodamine - conjugated phalloidin . A BX61 ( Olympus ) microscope equipped with a 12 bit b / w CCD camera ( FViewII , Olympus ) was used for wide - ﬁeld ﬂuorescence imaging . To assess the formation of rufﬂes , duplicate slides were evaluated indepen - dentlybytwoobservers , andatleast200cellsperexperimentalconditionwere analyzed in at least three independent experiments . Further details are in the Supplemental Experimental Procedures . Confocal Microscopy was performed on a Leica TCS SP2 AOBS confocal microscope equipped with violet ( 405 nm laser diode ) , blue ( Argon , 488 nm ) , yellow ( 561 nm Solid State Laser ) , and red ( 633 nm HeNe Laser ) excitation la - ser lines . A 63 3 / 1 . 4 NA oil - immersion objective ( HCX PL APO 63X Lbd Bl , Le - ica Microsystems ) was employed for analysis . Image acquisition conditions were set to remove channel crosstalk , optimizing spectral detection bands and scanning modalities . Leica Confocal Software and ImageJ were used for data analysis . Time - lapse imaging of cell migration was performed on an IX70 inverted mi - croscope equipped with an incubation chamber ( Solent Scientiﬁc ) for temper - atureandCO 2 control . MovieswereacquiredbyaSensys ( Photometrics ) CCD camera controlled by Metamorph Software ( Universal Imaging ) using a 20 3 magniﬁcation objective . Tracking of cells was performed using the ‘‘Manual Tracking’’ plug - in distributed with ImageJ software . Living cell confocal imaging was performed on a Leica TCS SP5 confocal microscope equipped with a resonant scanner using a 63 3 oil - immersion ob - jective . For two - photon ﬂuorescence microscopy , a Chameleon - XR ( Coherent ) Ti : sapphire laser source was directly coupled to the scanning head of a Leica TCS SP5 AOBS confocal microscope using an infrared port . Two - photon ac - tivation was performed by irradiating a speciﬁc vesicle at l = 790 nm with a pixel dwell time of 4 . 9 m s and an activation average power < p > = 10 mW . The targeted region was subjected to pulses of high - energy - density infrared light ( l = 790 nm ) to induce photoactivation . Each pulse had a 1 s duration , and a time interval of 20 s between pulses was set to avoid photobleaching oftheactivatedmolecules . Imagingof theactivated proteins was obtained us - ing the 488 nm line of a 20 mW Argon ion laser using a 100 3 oil N . A . = 1 . 4 ob - jective HCX PL APO ( Leica Microsystems ) . The spectral window used for col - lecting ﬂuorescence was 500 – 600 nm . 3D Matrigel Assay HeLa cells were embedded into Matrigel ( Becton Dickinson ) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations . Brieﬂy , HeLa cells , suspended at a ﬁnal concentration of 2 3 10 5 cells / ml , were mixed with Matrigel solution ( 21 mg / ml ) in a 1 : 3 ratio at 4 (cid:2) C . Aliquots ( 250 – 300 m l ) of cell suspension were seeded in an 8 - well chamber slide ( Lab - Tek ) and allowed to solidify at 37 (cid:2) C for 4 hr . Cellswereﬁxedin4 % paraformaldehydeandstainedwithanti - Rab5andphal - loidin to detect F - actin . Sequential z sections ( at least 30 ) of embedded cells were obtained by indirect immunoﬂuorescence microscopy using a Leica TCS SP2 AOBS confocal microscope . 3D reconstructions of embedded cells into the Matrigel were done using the Volocity software . Primordial Germ Cell Migration in Zebraﬁsh To target Rab5 expression to PGCs in zebraﬁsh , we generated a construct composedofthecodingsequenceofhuman RAB5a fusedtothe3 0 UTRregion of the zebraﬁsh nanos1 gene , which ensures the translation of the mRNA ex - clusively in germ cells ( Raz , 2004 ) . Control GFP : nos1 3 0 UTR and RAB5a : nos1 3 0 UTR mRNAswere injectedinone - cell - stagezebraﬁsh embryos ataconcen - tration of 20 – 100 pg per embryo ( see Supplemental Data for details ) . Embryos developed to early somite stages were examined with a ﬂuorescent Cell 134 , 135 – 147 , July 11 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 145 stereomicroscope and a confocal ( Leica SP2 ) microscope . At least 75 moving cells per experimental condition were imaged at 3 – 5 somites stage and after 24 hpf ( hour postfertilization ) . The success of germ cells in reaching the go - nadal area was evaluated in about 500 embryos ( controls plus experimental embryos from ﬁve different experiments ) at 48 hpf . SUPPLEMENTAL DATA Supplemental Data include ﬁgures , movies , and Supplemental Experimental Procedures and can be found online at http : / / www . cell . com / cgi / content / full / 134 / 1 / 135 / DC1 / . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS WethankM . Zerial , M . Matsuda , S . Gutkind , Y . Nabeshima , J . G . Collard , P . De Camilli , L . Lim , G . Patterson , P . Chavrier , E . Raz , and T . Rudel for generously sharing their reagents with us . We also thank S . Sigismund , S . Polo , and S . Confalonieri for discussions and P . Romano for critically editing the manu - script . The Zebraﬁsh facility of IFOM provided excellent technical assistance . This work was supported by grants from AIRC ( Italian Association for Cancer Research ) to G . S . and P . P . D . F . ; the European Community ( VI Framework ) to G . S . and P . P . D . F . ; the Cariplo Foundation to G . S . and P . P . D . F . ; and the Italian Ministries of Health and of Education and University , the Monzino Foundation , and the Ferrari Foundation to P . P . D . F . Received : August 26 , 2007 Revised : March 31 , 2008 Accepted : May 9 , 2008 Published : July 10 , 2008 REFERENCES Arvelo , F . , and Cotte , C . ( 2006 ) . Metalloproteinases in tumor progression . In - vest . Clin . 47 , 185 – 205 . Balasubramanian , N . , Scott , D . W . , Castle , J . D . , Casanova , J . E . , andSchwartz , M . A . ( 2007 ) . Arf6 and microtubules in adhesion - dependent trafﬁcking of lipid rafts . Nat . Cell Biol . 9 , 1381 – 1391 . Blaser , H . , Reichman - Fried , M . , Castanon , I . , Dumstrei , K . , Marlow , F . L . , Kawakami , K . , Solnica - Krezel , L . , Heisenberg , C . P . , and Raz , E . ( 2006 ) . Migra - tion of zebraﬁsh primordial germ cells : a role for myosin contraction and cyto - plasmic ﬂow . Dev . Cell 11 , 613 – 627 . Buccione , R . , Orth , J . D . , and McNiven , M . A . ( 2004 ) . Foot and mouth : podo - somes , invadopodia and circular dorsal rufﬂes . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 5 , 647 – 657 . Caswell , P . T . , and Norman , J . C . ( 2006 ) . Integrin trafﬁcking and the control of cell migration . Trafﬁc 7 , 14 – 21 . Caswell , P . T . , Spence , H . J . , Parsons , M . , White , D . P . , Clark , K . , Cheng , K . W . , Mills , G . B . , Humphries , M . J . , Messent , A . J . , Anderson , K . I . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Rab25 associates with alpha5beta1 integrin to promote invasive migration in 3D microenvironments . Dev . Cell 13 , 496 – 510 . Daniotti , M . , Oggionni , M . , Ranzani , T . , Vallacchi , V . , Campi , V . , Di Stasi , D . , Torre , G . D . , Perrone , F . , Luoni , C . , Suardi , S . , et al . ( 2004 ) . BRAF alterations are associated with complex mutational proﬁles in malignant melanoma . Oncogene 23 , 5968 – 5977 . del Pozo , M . A . , and Schwartz , M . A . ( 2007 ) . Rac , membrane heterogeneity , caveolin and regulation of growth by integrins . Trends Cell Biol . 17 , 246 – 250 . del Pozo , M . A . , Alderson , N . B . , Kiosses , W . B . , Chiang , H . H . , Anderson , R . G . , and Schwartz , M . A . ( 2004 ) . Integrins regulate Rac targeting by internalization of membrane domains . Science 303 , 839 – 842 . del Pozo , M . A . , Balasubramanian , N . , Alderson , N . B . , Kiosses , W . B . , Grande - Garcia , A . , Anderson , R . G . , and Schwartz , M . A . ( 2005 ) . Phospho - caveolin - 1 mediates integrin - regulated membrane domain internalization . Nat . Cell Biol . 7 , 901 – 908 . Donaldson , J . G . , and Honda , A . ( 2005 ) . Localization and function of Arf family GTPases . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 33 , 639 – 642 . Drummond , A . H . , Beckett , P . , Brown , P . D . , Bone , E . A . , Davidson , A . H . , Gallo - way , W . A . , Gearing , A . J . , Huxley , P . , Laber , D . , McCourt , M . , et al . ( 1999 ) . Pre - clinical and clinical studies of MMP inhibitors in cancer . Ann . N Y Acad . Sci . 878 , 228 – 235 . Friedl , P . , and Wolf , K . ( 2003 ) . Tumour - cell invasion and migration : diversity and escape mechanisms . Nat . Rev . Cancer 3 , 362 – 374 . Fukui , Y . ( 2002 ) . Mechanistics of amoeboid locomotion : signal to forces . Cell Biol . Int . 26 , 933 – 944 . Itoh , R . E . , Kurokawa , K . , Ohba , Y . , Yoshizaki , H . , Mochizuki , N . , and Matsuda , M . ( 2002 ) . Activation of rac and cdc42 video imaged by ﬂuorescent resonance energy transfer - based single - molecule probes in the membrane of living cells . Mol . Cell . Biol . 22 , 6582 – 6591 . Jekely , G . , Sung , H . H . , Luque , C . M . , and Rorth , P . ( 2005 ) . Regulators of endo - cytosis maintain localized receptor tyrosine kinase signaling in guided migra - tion . Dev . Cell 9 , 197 – 207 . Jiang , X . , andSorkin , A . ( 2002 ) . CoordinatedtrafﬁcofGrb2andRasduringepi - dermal growth factor receptor endocytosis visualized in living cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 13 , 1522 – 1535 . Jones , M . C . , Caswell , P . T . , and Norman , J . C . ( 2006 ) . Endocytic recycling pathways : emerging regulators of cell migration . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 18 , 549 – 557 . Lanzetti , L . , Palamidessi , A . , Areces , L . , Scita , G . , and Di Fiore , P . P . ( 2004 ) . Rab5 is a signalling GTPase involved in actin remodelling by receptor tyrosine kinases . Nature 429 , 309 – 314 . Lu , H . , and Bilder , D . ( 2005 ) . Endocytic control of epithelial polarity and prolif - eration in Drosophila . Nat . Cell Biol . 7 , 1232 – 1239 . Marco , E . , Wedlich - Soldner , R . , Li , R . , Altschuler , S . J . , andWu , L . F . ( 2007 ) . En - docytosis optimizes the dynamic localization of membrane proteins that regu - late cortical polarity . Cell 129 , 411 – 422 . McDonald , J . A . , Pinheiro , E . M . , and Montell , D . J . ( 2003 ) . PVF1 , a PDGF / VEGF homolog , is sufﬁcient to guide border cells and interacts genetically with Taiman . Development 130 , 3469 – 3478 . Mor , A . , and Philips , M . R . ( 2006 ) . Compartmentalized Ras / MAPK signaling . Annu . Rev . Immunol . 24 , 771 – 800 . Orth , J . D . , and McNiven , M . A . ( 2003 ) . Dynamin at the actin - membrane inter - face . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 15 , 31 – 39 . Pelkmans , L . , Fava , E . , Grabner , H . , Hannus , M . , Habermann , B . , Krausz , E . , and Zerial , M . ( 2005 ) . Genome - wide analysis of human kinases in clathrin - and caveolae / raft - mediated endocytosis . Nature 436 , 78 – 86 . Pinner , S . , and Sahai , E . ( 2008 ) . PDK1 regulates cancer cell motility by antag - onising inhibition of ROCK1 by RhoE . Nat . Cell Biol . 10 , 127 – 137 . Punnonen , E . L . , Ryhanen , K . , and Marjomaki , V . S . ( 1998 ) . At reduced temper - ature , endocytic membrane trafﬁc is blocked in multivesicular carrier endo - somes in rat cardiac myocytes . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 75 , 344 – 352 . Radhakrishna , H . , and Donaldson , J . G . ( 1997 ) . ADP - ribosylation factor 6 reg - ulates a novel plasma membrane recycling pathway . J . Cell Biol . 139 , 49 – 61 . Raz , E . ( 2004 ) . Guidance of primordial germ cell migration . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 16 , 169 – 173 . Roy , S . , Wyse , B . , and Hancock , J . F . ( 2002 ) . H - Ras signaling and K - Ras sig - naling are differentially dependent on endocytosis . Mol . Cell . Biol . 22 , 5128 – 5140 . Sahai , E . , and Marshall , C . J . ( 2002a ) . RHO - GTPases and cancer . Nat . Rev . Cancer 2 , 133 – 142 . Sahai , E . , and Marshall , C . J . ( 2002b ) . ROCK and Dia have opposing effects on adherens junctions downstream of Rho . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 408 – 415 . Sahai , E . , and Marshall , C . J . ( 2003 ) . Differing modes of tumour cell invasion have distinct requirements for Rho / ROCK signalling and extracellular proteol - ysis . Nat . Cell Biol . 5 , 711 – 719 . Schmidt , A . , and Hall , A . ( 2002 ) . Guanine nucleotide exchange factors for Rho GTPases : turning on the switch . Genes Dev . 16 , 1587 – 1609 . 146 Cell 134 , 135 – 147 , July 11 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . Scita , G . , Nordstrom , J . , Carbone , R . , Tenca , P . , Giardina , G . , Gutkind , S . , Bjarnegard , M . , Betsholtz , C . , and Di Fiore , P . P . ( 1999 ) . EPS8 and E3B1 trans - duce signals from Ras to Rac . Nature 401 , 290 – 293 . Spaargaren , M . , and Bos , J . L . ( 1999 ) . Rab5 induces Rac - independent lamelli - podia formation and cell migration . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 3239 – 3250 . Suetsugu , S . , Yamazaki , D . , Kurisu , S . , and Takenawa , T . ( 2003 ) . Differential roles of WAVE1 and WAVE2 in dorsal and peripheral rufﬂe formation for ﬁbro - blast cell migration . Dev . Cell 5 , 595 – 609 . Valdez - Taubas , J . , and Pelham , H . R . ( 2003 ) . Slow diffusion of proteins in the yeastplasmamembraneallowspolaritytobemaintainedbyendocyticcycling . Curr . Biol . 13 , 1636 – 1640 . Wedlich , D . ( 2002 ) . The polarising role of cell adhesion molecules in early de - velopment . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 14 , 563 – 568 . Wolf , K . , and Friedl , P . ( 2006 ) . Molecular mechanisms of cancer cell invasion and plasticity . Br . J . Dermatol . 154 ( Suppl 1 ) , 11 – 15 . Zerial , M . , andMcBride , H . ( 2001 ) . Rabproteinsasmembraneorganizers . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2 , 107 – 117 . Cell 134 , 135 – 147 , July 11 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 147