A Qualitative Approach to Evidence - Based Entrepreneurship : TheoreticalConsiderations and an Example Involving Business Clusters Andreas Rauch Robert van Doorn Willem Hulsink Most research in evidence - based entrepreneurship builds on quantitative designs , which is unfortunate because qualitative studies provide a unique contribution to the domain of entrepreneurship . They look at distinctive phenomena in their speciﬁc time period and context in one way or another , and can help generate and test new theories . We , therefore , suggest using a systematic synthesis of case studies to aggregate the ﬁndings of qualitative research . Moreover , as a ﬁrst step , we developed an example to demonstrate how this approach can advance evidence - based entrepreneurship . Speciﬁcally , we synthesized 13 cases to examine how business clusters increase the performance of ﬁrms within clusters . Evidence is the essence of human knowledge ( Rousseau , Manning , & Denyer , 2008 ) Introduction Evidence - based decisions and practice models are increasingly important in entrepre - neurship research , a trend that is accompanied by an increasing number of meta - analyses in this domain ( Frese , Bausch , Schmidt , Rauch , & Kabst , 2012a ) . However , the synthesis of scientiﬁc evidence in entrepreneurship is clearly biased toward quantitative research , which is unfortunate because , in this way , scientiﬁc evidence in the ﬁeld of entrepreneur - ship is accumulated by focusing on studies that are based on speciﬁc methodologies and epistemological assumptions . However , the ﬁeld of entrepreneurship is diversiﬁed , which Please send correspondence to : Andreas Rauch , tel . : + 49 - 4131 - 677 - 2156 ; e - mail : Andreas . rauch @ inkubator . leuphana . de , to Robert van Doorn at robertvandoorn @ solcon . nl , and to Willem Hulsink at whulsink @ rsm . nl . P T E & 1042 - 2587 © 2014 Baylor University 333 March , 2014 DOI : 10 . 1111 / etap . 12093 is reﬂected by contributions from multiple disciplines , different theoretical perspec - tives , different and partially incompatible methodologies , and various units of analysis ( Davidsson , Low , & Wright , 2001 ) . As a consequence , the ﬁeld of entrepreneurship is highly fragmented , and there is a lack of agreement on core concepts and deﬁnitions of key constructs . Integrating the scientiﬁc evidence in entrepreneurship research requires balancing contributions from alternative research strategies ( Low , 2001 ) . To account for the diversity of approaches and methodologies used in entrepreneurship , we suggest broadening the area of evidence - based entrepreneurship by accumulating the knowledge that has become available from qualitative case study research . Speciﬁcally , this review introduces the systematic synthesis of qualitative case studies and describes techniques to synthesize qualitative research systematically . The goal of the systematic synthesis of qualitative case studies is to accumulate , organize , and interpret the studies , with the aim of achieving a level of understanding that tran - scends the results of the individual studies ( Campbell et al . , 2003 ; Rousseau et al . , 2008 ) . To our knowledge , there is not a single review in the domain of entrepreneurship that has tried to synthesize qualitative case studies systematically . A systematic synthesis of case studies provides multiple contributions to entrepreneurship research . First , the ﬁeld of entrepreneurship needs to establish scientiﬁc evidence about what has been done to identify areas of maturation and areas where more knowledge and strong practice recommendations need to be developed ( Chandler & Lyon , 2001 ; Rauch & Frese , 2006 ) . This is important , particularly as the ﬁeld of entrepreneurship needs to develop inte - grated theoretical frameworks . Second , the systematic synthesis of qualitative case studies generates evidence that cannot be generated through quantitative meta - analyses . Case studies provide unique contributions to the ﬁeld of entrepreneurship , and thereby contribute substantially to knowledge in entrepreneurship research ( Perren & Ram , 2004 ) . For example , case studies often provide unique information about speciﬁc time frames and contexts . Moreover , case studies often look at reasons behind speciﬁc behav - ior that may not be fully revealed in a quantitative study . Additionally , qualitative case studies can examine study settings that cannot be easily addressed via quantitative designs . Third , although the aim of case studies is often not to generate broad general - izations , the systematic synthesis of case studies can be used to test theories and hypoth - eses . Thus , when different case studies are collected across a wide variety of contexts , the cumulative results provide estimates about generalizability ( Yin , 2003 ) . By accumu - lating the unique contributions provided by case - oriented studies , our approach bridges the gap between qualitative research and the available case study research to a wider audience . Fourth , while meta - analyses usually attempt to trace results around the true value ( Hunter & Schmidt , 2004 ) , the systematic synthesis of qualitative case studies includes techniques that allow investigators to interpret research aiming to create tenta - tive theories of phenomena . The focus of such a synthesis could be on the accumulation across a set of qualitative case studies where the aim is to derive new theoretical insights . In this way , the synthesis itself becomes a study that contributes to the generation of evidence in the entrepreneurship domain . Thus , we argue that the entrepreneurship domain should develop robust research evidence across methods and different forms of data ( including qualitative and quantita - tive research ) to specify whether or not certain effects depend on speciﬁc contextual conditions ( Pittaway & Cope , 2007 ; Rousseau et al . , 2008 ) . In the following sections , we describe the potential contributions of a synthesis of case studies and the philosophical foundations of our approach , and we explain the most important steps involved in a systematic synthesis of qualitative research before discussing an example as an illustration of such an approach . 334 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE The Systematic Synthesis of Qualitative Research : Conceptual Concerns Evidence - based entrepreneurship is concerned with the systematic synthesis of know - ledge based on several sources of information and transcends the ﬁndings of individual studies ( Frese , Bausch , Schmidt , Rauch , & Kabst , 2012b ) . Evidence - based approaches have a major impact in medical science , where randomized controlled trials are generally accepted as the most valid source of evidence ( Davies & Nutley , 1999 ) . Other disciplines , such as management , have different research traditions and , accordingly , used different methods to establish scientiﬁc evidence ( Tranﬁeld , Denyer , & Smart , 2003 ) . The ﬁeld of entrepreneurship has increasingly accepted quantitative meta - analyses as a way of estab - lishing evidence in this domain . While the usefulness of meta - analyses in entrepreneur - ship has been discussed elsewhere ( Frese et al . , 2012a ; Rauch & Frese , 2006 ) , there are additional methods for establishing scientiﬁc evidence that have not been introduced to this area of research . This article focuses on the systematic synthesis of qualitative case studies . Case studies are a type of research that describes a single event or unit of analysis determined by the researcher ( Gephart , 2004 , p . 458 ) . Systematic syntheses of case study research have been conducted in areas such as healthcare , nursing research , and psycho - therapy ( Briner & Denyer , 2012 ) . Moreover , in the ﬁeld of management , some of the most recognized papers on strategic decision making were based on the synthesis of qualitative case studies ( Miller & Friesen , 1977 ; Mintzberg , Raisinghani , & Théorêt , 1976 ) . Thus , the systematic synthesis of qualitative case studies can offer a substantial contribution to the knowledge generated in a given discipline , although to our knowledge it is an approach that has not yet been tried in entrepreneurship research . We argue that it is important to take case study evidence into account in the domain of entrepreneurship because case studies are able to pursue research questions system - atically that are not easily answerable by ﬁndings generated by quantitative methods . Through case studies , it is possible to study samples that are extremely small and exclusive because the members of the population are very distinct and critical , for example , Nobel laureates or leaders of a business cluster . Such outliers need to be studied by relying also on qualitative techniques ( Zuckerman , 1972 ) . Additionally , case study research often explores underresearched contexts and new concepts that have been studied less frequently . This allows researchers to address and interpret complex and / or unique phenomena embedded in different contexts through an explorative orientation , by making observations , specifying constructs and measurements , and identifying patterns and regu - larities . Moreover , case study research is useful for examining entire processes , and ﬁnally can address the interconnectedness of processes , phenomena , and contexts ( Pettigrew , 1997 ) . To summarize , we argue that case studies provide a unique contribution to the area of entrepreneurship , and should therefore be included in evidence - based entrepreneurship . To include case studies in evidence - based entrepreneurship , we rely on speciﬁc assumptions about the nature of inquiries , about how case studies could be synthesized , and about the type of research that is suitable for such a synthesis . First , we discuss the assumptions inherent in our approach . The Nature of Inquiry That Is Suitable for a Systematic Synthesis of Qualitative Research Qualitative research in the domain of entrepreneurship is characterized by a host of different approaches that are based on different assumptions about reality , the nature of knowledge , and the extent to which they aim to apply scientiﬁc insights to a broader and more general context ( Crotty , 1998 ; Johnson , Buehring , Cassell , & Symon , 2006 ) . 335 March , 2014 The multifaceted methodologies used in entrepreneurship research to generate knowl - edge , such as grounded theory ( Lopez , Cunha , & Palma , 2009 ) , ethnographic studies ( Kodithuwakku & Rosa , 2002 ) , phenomenological studies ( Cope , 2011 ) , or narratives ( Gartner , 2007 ) , suggest that qualitative research is far away from a shared research paradigm . Moreover , not all these approaches strive for validity and generalization ( compare , e . g . , Creswell , 2009 ; Johnson et al . ; McKelvey , 2002 ) . Since we propose synthesizing case studies , we assume that the studies have some - thing in common that can be synthesized . Therefore , we assume that the cases reﬂect a certain existing reality . However , such a reality does not need to exist in an objective sense or as a part of a material world , but may also include unobservable entities ( Lawson , 2009 ) . As long as such entities can be operationalized , they can be studied and synthesized empirically . Moreover , we assume that scientiﬁc theories are the best approximations of this reality ( McKelvey , 1997 ) . Thus , theory has a relationship to a reality or a meaningful reference that can be studied scientiﬁcally . Knowledge derives from many different kinds of evidence that can be captured imperfectly and probabilistically . Thus , investigations do not provide a full explanation of phenomena . Scientiﬁc inquiry can make phenomena observable through scientiﬁc instruments , and research ﬁndings are always subjected to falsiﬁcation ( Dul & Hak , 2008 ) . Since this approach assumes that theory leads to predic - tion and that theory represents that proportion of reality that is within the scope of the theory , the results of different studies within this scope can be compared and synthesized in an evidence - based approach ( Pawson , 2002 ; Tourish , 2012 ) . Finally , our approach assumes that it is possible to generalize empirical observation to some broader category , other situations , or theory ( analytical generalization ; Yin , 2003 ) . While new and distinc - tive concepts and practices are difﬁcult to generalize immediately , qualitative researchers start their ﬁeld investigation by identifying central organizing ideas ( the so - called sensitizing concepts ) as points of departure from which to study the data and strive for analytical generalization ( from empirical observations to theory building ) ( Eisenhardt , 1989 ) . The theories become grounded and robust when the researchers verify their ﬁndings by looking at the same phenomenon from different angles using different data collection strategies and data sources ( Yin ) . This process of analytical generalization may produce the so - called theories of the middle range ( Merton , 1957 ) . With their modesty and inbuilt contingency , these middle range theories are open to generalization . Thus , gener - alizations are not based on sampling but on logical inferences based on the theoretical model ( Johnson et al . , 2006 ) . Eisenhardt and Yin have legitimized case studies in this tradition , and they described methods for using case studies for theory building as well as for providing practice evidence . In summary , our approach to synthesize qualitative case studies builds on certain assumptions of scientiﬁc realism ( Leplin , 1984 ; McKelvey , 1998 ) . It is important to note that these assumptions are not shared by all researchers ( Creswell , 2009 ) . The Nature of Synthesis Suitable in an Evidence - Based Approach Our assumptions about the nature of inquiry suitable for a synthesis of qualitative research affect our understanding of how knowledge should be synthesized ( Rousseau et al . , 2008 ) . Existing literature reports numerous different approaches to synthesize qualitative research ( Denyer & Tranﬁeld , 2006 ; Dixon - Woods , Agarwal , Young , Jones , & Sutton , 2004 ; Finfgeld , 2003 ) , which typically rely on core criteria for evaluating quali - tative literature : They have to be systematic and organized , transparent and explicit , replicable , and they have to synthesize the results ( Briner & Denyer , 2012 ) . At the same time , there are considerable differences between the various approaches . We think that it 336 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE is useful to categorize these approaches into three categories : aggregative , interpretative , and integrative approaches ( Table 1 ) . Although aggregative approaches have predomi - nantly been suggested to synthesize quantitative research ( Hoon , 2013 ; Rousseau et al . , 2008 ) , they can also be used to synthesize case studies and biographies . Aggregating case studies is useful in an evidence - based approach because it aims at integrating comparative phenomena across studies , and in doing so generalizing research evidence . Generaliza - tions are necessary in any evidence - based approach . Moreover , aggregative approaches are based on the scientiﬁc realism paradigm . The advantage of the aggregative synthesis is that it relies on a systematic and replicable process . Moreover , it is frequently based on well - formulated research questions . Furthermore , the aggregative synthesis of qualitative data often involves the quantiﬁcation of the information ( Christensen & Carlile , 2009 ) . In addition , this approach enables researchers to categorize circumstances and moderator variables . It is also important to note that aggregative studies are not only interested in increasing power through increasing the sample size . In fact , they can contribute to theory testing and theory development ( Eisenhardt , 1989 ; Hak & Dul , 2010 ) . For example , one meta - analysis compared broad and narrow task - related traits , and thereby shifted the focus of the personality approach to entrepreneurship ( Rauch & Frese , 2007 ) . The literature discusses different techniques to aggregate research ﬁndings . The traditional meta - analysis is the most prominent example of an aggregative approach ( Hunter & Schmidt , 2004 ) . However , aggregative approaches are not limited to meta - analyses ; there are several other methods that aim at integrating the results of qualitative studies ( Dixon - Woods et al . , 2004 ; Larsson , 1993 ) . For example , cross - case surveys , as proposed by Yin ( 2003 ) , systematically aggregate the ﬁndings of individual case studies , and similarly Eisenhardt ( 1989 ) has argued for replication of qualitative research . As a matter of fact , these scholars suggest three steps for building evidence from cases : within - case analysis , cross - case pattern search , and replication ( Hak & Dul ) . Finally , qualitative comparative analysis can be used to achieve causal inferences based on a number of cases ( Ragin , 1987 ) . Thus , aggregative approaches have been used to synthesize quantitative as well as qualitative research . Table 1 Methods for Integration of Qualitative Research Method for integration Aggregation Interpretation Integration Dominant philosophical foundation Realism Relativism Realism Data Quantitative , qualitative case studies , biographies Qualitative data , narratives , case studies , includes primary researcher interpretation Synthesizes different methodologies , qualitative and quantitative studies Techniques for synthesis Meta - analysis , systematic synthesis of case studies , content analysis , qualitative comparative analysis , cross - case analysis Meta - ethnography , meta - synthesis , narrative summary , grounded theory Systematic literature reviews , triangulation , Bayesian meta - analysis Generalization Generalizations possible , analytical generalization Only internal , little interest in generalizations , ideographic interpretation , conceptual generalization Generalizations possible 337 March , 2014 Interpretive synthesis aims at developing new interpretations of qualitative study ﬁndings that are different from the results reported in individual studies ( Noblit & Hare , 1988 ) , which requires the deconstruction and decontextualization of study ﬁndings and composing them into new , higher order constructs ( Finfgeld , 2003 ) . Studies in this tradition are predominantly nested in a relativistic paradigm and rely on an inductive approach , which means that , in most cases , they do not use a predeﬁned coding system . Interpretative approaches develop concepts and categories from which they develop a theory ( Glaser & Strauss , 1967 ) . This type of synthesis relies on qualitative studies , such as case studies and narratives . One of the most frequently used integrative approaches is meta - ethnography ( Noblit & Hare ) . The goal of meta - ethnography is to develop higher order constructs and develop new research questions . Meta - ethnography relies on a systematic process involving the creation of themes and metaphors , the comparison of themes and metaphors across studies , and the reciprocal translation into a higher order interpretation . Meta - synthesis is another example of an interpretative synthesis that relies on an inductive , explorative methodology to synthesize research ( Hoon , 2013 ) . These interpretative approaches are less useful for an evidence - based approach , since they do not aim for generalizations but for ideographic interpretations ( Creswell , 2009 ; Finfgeld ) . Integrative synthesis synthesizes evidence by combining different data collection methods , for instance qualitative and quantitative research , allowing researchers to overcome the weaknesses inherent in individual methods . An example of an integrative analysis is the Bayesian meta - analysis , where the evidence of different methods is pooled by statistically combining two data sets ( Dixon - Woods et al . , 2004 ) . In the domain of entrepreneurship research , Pittaway and Cope ( 2007 ) combined systematic literature reviews and bibliographic analysis to explore entrepreneurship education . Another study used bibliographic analysis to investigate strategic entrepreneurship ( Krauss , Marxt , Filser , & Guieu , 2011 ) . However , in these cases , the aim was not to synthesize qualitative research ; instead , the authors produced a qualitative review based on quantitative as well as qualitative data . Moreover , their primary goal was not to review qualitative studies , but rather to provide a thematic analysis of the ﬁeld . Finally , these kinds of reviews are difﬁcult to replicate because of lacking standardizations of the methodology of the review and contested deﬁnitions of quality ( Rousseau et al . , 2008 ) . For these reasons , we dis - regard systematic literature reviews ( Short , Ketchen , Shook , & Ireland , 2010 ) for an evidence - based approach . To summarize , existing literature suggests various methods of synthesizing qualitative case studies . As with any qualitative and quantitative research , the research question and available evidence determine which methodology should be used . In other words , the approach should ﬁt its purpose ( Briner & Denyer , 2012 , p . 124 ) . We advance the strategy of synthesizing research in an evidence - based approach with the aim of integrating the results of case studies , guiding practice recommendations , and opening new areas for research . Since this type of synthesis aims for generalization , the synthesis needs to build on a realistic scientiﬁc paradigm . Moreover , as is common in evidence - based approaches , we suggest that the decisions and steps accomplished through the synthesis should be shared , and thus should be replicable . This type of synthesis requires an aggregative methodology . The Type of Case Study Suitable for a Systematic Synthesis of Qualitative Case Studies Aggregative methods require the studies being synthesized to be relatively homoge - neous ( Rousseau et al . , 2008 ) . In particular , case studies have been suggested as being 338 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE useful for aggregative synthesis ( Jensen & Rodgers , 2001 ; Newig & Fritsch , 2009 ) . However , the case study methodology reﬂects relatively multifaceted research approaches in entrepreneurship research , which means that the entity of study suitable to a qualitative synthesis of case studies research needs to be deﬁned more closely . Generally speaking , it is important for the case studies to provide sufﬁcient information to analyze and aggregate the cases . The information must , to some extent , reﬂect an underlying reality inherent in the case ( compare above ) . This would ideally be accomplished in descriptive case studies ( Yin , 2003 ) , but also by case studies that provide an approximation of an underlying reality . Case studies that rely on the interpretations of the researcher and the interaction between the researcher and the case , and on interpretative and constructivistic paradigms , cannot be synthesized in an evidence - based approach . In addition , case studies that can be used for the synthesis can include a description of one unit of observation , they can be part of a publication ( e . g . , studies including several cases ) , and they may consist of data from multiple publications ( e . g . , when a case has been published in multiple outlets ) . Likewise , case studies may focus on individual entrepreneurs , ﬁrms , and organizations , or some broader deﬁned entrepreneurial context ( such as clusters , incubators , or regions ) . Moreover , it is also possible to distinguish different types of cases ( Jensen & Rodgers , 2001 ) , for example , snapshot case studies , longitudinal cases studies , pre – post case studies , patchwork case studies ( Hawthorne studies ) , and comparative cases studies . All of these different types of cases are useful entities for the systematic synthesis of qualitative research . In addition , it is necessary to develop evaluation criteria that ensure that the cases included in the analysis are methodologically sophisticated enough to be included in the systematic synthesis of case studies . However , different types of case studies have devel - oped different criteria for assessing the methodological quality of the cases ( Johnson et al . , 2006 ) . Some researchers simply apply criteria used in quantitative research to the evalua - tion of case studies ( Gibbert , Ruigrok , & Wicki , 2008 ) . Thus , case studies can be synthe - sized , provided that the requirements of construct validity ( e . g . , establish a clear chain of evidence ) , internal validity ( e . g . , work with a clear framework ) , external validity ( e . g . , strive for generalizability ) , and reliability ( e . g . , clarify the research procedures and establish a case study protocol ) ( Gibbert et al . ) are met . However , some scholars relying on scientiﬁc realism have developed criteria that are more consistent with the underlying philosophical assumptions , replacing internal validity with credibility ( authentic representation , triangu - lation ; Jick , 1979 ) , external validity with transferability ( extent of applicability ) , reliability with dependability ( minimization of researcher idiosyncrasies ) , and objectivity with conﬁrmability ( researcher self - criticism ) ( Johnson et al . , p . 138 ) . These evaluation criteria can be readily applied to the cases included in the synthesis . To summarize , there are different types of case studies that qualify for the systematic synthesis of case study research . In either case , the cases included should be based on a scientiﬁc realistic research paradigm ( Leplin , 1984 ) . It is useful if case studies included in the synthesis are comparable and homogeneous . The remaining heterogeneity should be accounted for in the cross - case analysis , for example , by coding moderator variables . Finally , it is necessary to develop a quality assessment of each case study to determine criteria for the inclusion in the synthesis . Description of the Process of Conducting a Systematic Synthesis of Qualitative Case Studies The systematic synthesis of case studies should involve a methodological approach that makes it possible to share the decisions made at each step of the process . Although 339 March , 2014 there is a fair amount of literature describing the steps involved when conducting such a review in the areas of management and healthcare ( Briner & Denyer , 2012 ; Finfgeld , 2003 ; Rousseau et al . , 2008 ) , this type of review is new to the domain of entrepreneurship . Moreover , because there are systematic differences between entrepreneurship and other areas , which may affect the review process , our aim is to describe the ﬁve steps of systematic synthesis ( Thorne , Jensen , Kearney , Noblit , & Sandelowski , 2004 ) : ( 1 ) deﬁn - ing a research question , ( 2 ) developing criteria for study location , ( 3 ) developing criteria for study inclusion , ( 4 ) conducting within - case analysis , and ( 5 ) conducting cross - case analysis . As with any meta - analysis , a systematic synthesis of qualitative research starts with a research question , which deﬁnes the universe of case study evidence in question ( Jensen & Rodgers , 2001 ) . Aggregative approaches typically answer a relatively speciﬁc theoreti - cally informed research question that addresses speciﬁc constructs , and as such supports operationalization and the selection of primary studies . Thereby , the research question speciﬁes the participants ( entrepreneur , owner , or manager ) in the study , the level of analysis ( ﬁrm level or individual level ) , and the time frame ( e . g . , before or after the economic crisis ) . The research question does not need to be in line with the questions addressed in the primary studies . For example , qualitative studies typically have a quali - tative research question such as “how do entrepreneurs mobilize resources ? ” A synthesis of qualitative studies may very well address a quantitative research question such as “are entrepreneurs aligning more resources more successfully ? ” Question formulation is a complex process requiring attention to issues related to the entrepreneurial effort itself , as well as to the complexities associated with entrepreneurial ﬁrms . Therefore , it is useful to ask practitioners as well as entrepreneurship researchers for an assessment and interpre - tation of the question to avoid developing a poorly speciﬁed question and obscuring content - related issues related to the question . Once the research question has been deﬁned , it guides the search for the type of studies that should be included in the synthesis . Unfortunately , the study location process may be more complicated for qualitative case studies than it is for quantitative studies ( Evans , 2002 ) . While major entrepreneurship journals , such as Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice and Journal of Business Venturing , occasionally publish case studies , quali - tative research is not the dominant study design presented in these journals . 1 However , qualitative research is not absent in entrepreneurship literature , but it tends to be published in other outlets , for example , in books and special issues ( Gartner & Birley , 2002 ; Neergaard & Ulhoi , 2007 ) . Moreover , the descriptive titles of many case studies make it less likely to identify them by key word search . Additionally , because the content of abstracts and the index terms being used make it more difﬁcult to identify relevant case studies as compared with quantitative studies ( Evans , 2002 ) , the study location process needs to include different databases and a range of different search terms to identify relevant studies ( Shaw et al . , 2004 ) . Another issue that is relevant to the study location process is the number of studies that should be located and included in the synthesis . Some scholars argue that the full body of evidence , published and unpublished , needs to be included in the synthesis ( Briner & Denyer , 2012 ; Rousseau et al . , 2008 ) . This approach has the advantage of , for instance , reducing the likelihood of publication bias . However , this strategy can be overly complex and impede deep analysis . If the synthesis aims to achieve saturated coding categories , theoretical sampling may be an economical way of dealing with complexity ( Finfgeld , 2003 ) . 1 . We identiﬁed 55 relevant articles using the term “case study” in the title , the abstract , or the key words in both journals . 340 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE As with traditional meta - analyses , the criteria for case study inclusion need to be speciﬁed ( Tranﬁeld et al . , 2003 ) . We suggested including criteria regarding quality and comparability of case studies , and moreover suggested to aggregate cases studies with the same epistemological foundation ( compare above ) . In addition to these formal criteria , the scope of the synthesis should be deﬁned in advance , determining which type of studies can be included in the systematic synthesis of the case studies . All criteria for the inclusion and exclusion of studies should be reported to ensure that the results can be replicated . After deciding which studies to include , they need to be ordered , coded , and catego - rized . The coding process should be systematic and involve multiple coders ( Rousseau et al . , 2008 ) . The process starts with the analysis of the individual studies . There are numerous strategies to code the individual studies . On the one hand , syntheses aiming to integrate research ﬁndings should rely on standardized coding rules and codes , which are often developed in a deductive way and rely on existing theories . For example , the information could be extracted from the individual cases through content analysis ( Krippendorff , 1980 ) . Moreover , content analysis can also be used to translate the quali - tative information into quantitative information ( Jensen & Rodgers , 2001 ) . In some variants of case analysis , it is possible to code concepts that emerge from the data ( Eisenhardt , 1989 ) . The information extracted from the within - case analysis should be described , aggregated , and presented in tables to inform the reader about the results of this process . The results of the analysis may also allocate phenomena to contexts and time points . Subsequently , the results of the analysis of each qualitative study need to be aggre - gated to compare and contrast the results at the cross - case level . Again , there are substan - tial differences in the cross - case synthesis , depending , for example , on whether the aim of the analysis is to integrate or interpret the qualitative studies . Aggregative synthesis would rely on a technique like cross - case analysis to accomplish the goal of study aggregation ( Yin , 2003 ) . An Example of a Qualitative Approach to Evidence - Based Entrepreneurship : Business Clusters in Developing Countries In this section , we develop an example of a study aggregating case study evidence in the entrepreneurship domain . The aim of this study is not to provide a comprehensive application of a systematic synthesis of case studies , but to investigate a small set of cases as an example and as a ﬁrst step in developing a synthesis in entrepreneurship research . This study addresses a speciﬁc research question . Moreover , it is an aggregative synthesis , integrating knowledge in one domain , and relies on analysis techniques like content analysis and cross - case analysis . At the same time , the study contributes to theory devel - opment by integrating two competing theories . Moreover , the study explicitly has the aim to extend the context of cluster research by focusing on six different developing econo - mies , and in doing so generalizing evidence that was initially contextualized . Finally , the synthesis provides a quantiﬁcation of the qualitative results . Introduction The geographical concentration of ﬁrms that are involved in related activities and that may work together to improve their performance ( Visser & Boschma , 2004 ) is a phenom - enon that goes back to the earliest urban developments . It is an interesting and almost 341 March , 2014 paradoxical phenomenon that local economies seem to be increasingly important in today’s globalized economy ( Audretsch , Grilo , & Thurik , 2011 ; Morosini , 2004 ) . Consequently , a growing number of regions , countries , and cities around the world are establishing initiatives to stimulate the development of business clusters , assuming that clusters have a positive effect on economic development , innovation , knowledge transfer , and ﬁrm performance . While this positive effect can be expected from a theoretical as well as empirical viewpoint , several factors , such as different conceptual and operational deﬁnitions of clusters , reliance on single case studies , and different levels of analysis , make it difﬁcult to verify valid generalizations ( Rocha , 2004 ) . In this study , we compare the characteristics of business clusters that affect the average performance of ﬁrms in a cluster within the speciﬁc context of developing economies . Most studies have thus far only analyzed business clusters in speciﬁc regions or countries . Our approach uses a single analytic framework to analyze clusters from seven economies , which makes it possible to test whether theoretical propositions about the effect of clusters can be applied to different contexts . While there are many publications studying the effectiveness of business clusters , our approach combines two theories to explain the ﬁrm - level effec - tiveness of clusters : the collective efﬁciency framework and the global value chain approach . The collective efﬁciency framework focuses on different levels of joint action , ranging from little cooperative linkages to extensive vertical , horizontal , and institutional linkages ( Schmitz , 1995a ) . While the collective efﬁciency framework is useful when it comes to describing linkages among ﬁrms within a given cluster ( internal linkages ) , it ignores the role of external linkages . External linkages of clusters can be analyzed via the insertion in global value chains , speciﬁcally the full range of activities required to bring a product from conception to different phases of production , delivery , and disposal after use ( Kaplinsky & Morris , 2001 ) . In this study , we compare the two theories and address the following research question : How does the level of joint action and insertions into global value chains affect the average performance of ﬁrms within business clusters in developing countries ? Thus , as we suggested above , we address a relatively speciﬁc research question that deﬁnes the constructs , entity , and context under investigation . Business Clusters and Performance The profound interest of the popular literature in business clusters was stimulated by the early work of Marshall ( 1920 ) , and more recently Porter ( 1990 ) . Marshall argued that concentrations of businesses in particular localities create local external economies that help ﬁrms share knowledge regarding products , markets , and technologies , which in turn leads to valuable innovations . Porter described three effects of business clusters : clusters stimulate the creation of new business ventures , drive innovation , and have a positive impact on productivity . The overall conclusion emerging from relevant literature is that business clusters could have signiﬁcant advantages for the constituent ﬁrms ( Audretsch et al . , 2011 ) . However , the argument that clusters always have a positive effect on ﬁrm performance is not uncontested . There are several examples of clusters of ﬁrms performing poorly ( e . g . , Sato , 2005 ; Scott , 2005 ) . Thus , it seems that the advan - tages of clusters depend on the speciﬁc characteristics of the business clusters . We argue that the performance of ﬁrms in business clusters depends on internal as well as external linkages . Collective Efﬁciency and Insertion in the Global Value Chain . The collective efﬁciency framework describes linkages among ﬁrms within a cluster ( internal linkages ) ( Schmitz , 1995a ) . Two dimensions of the collective efﬁciency framework explain how businesses 342 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE beneﬁt from clusters : external economies and collaboration among clustered ﬁrms . Exter - nal economies provide resources and product - related , market - related , and technological knowledge . To beneﬁt from external economies , clusters consciously need to pursue joint action ( Schmitz , 1999a ) . Thus , the active cultivation of joint action and collaboration affects ﬁrm performance positively . Entrepreneurship literature provides different classi - ﬁcations of internal linkages . In the context of this study , we distinguish three types of joint action . First , a local industry is characterized by no joint action . The ﬁrms in such a cluster are merely co - located , there are no cooperative linkages and ﬁrms may beneﬁt from passive external economies . Second , in local complex clusters , ﬁrms cooperate tactically , for example , by outsourcing noncore activities . Finally , in local alliances , ﬁrms cooperate strategically and have extensive vertical , horizontal , and institutional linkages . Internal linkages in clusters should be supported by external actors that connect clusters to global markets . Such external linkages can be described by referring to the concept of the global value chain . A value chain describes the full range of activities required to bring a product / service from its conceptualization , through processes of production to the customer and disposal after use . The insertion into the global value chain stimulates upgrading processes that help improve the performance of ﬁrms in a cluster because of enhanced production processes , better products , and extended functions carried out by the ﬁrm . Thus , local producers can , for example , learn from global buyers , and as a consequence improve company performance . While local joint action and insertion in the global value chain improve the perfor - mance of ﬁrms in clusters , we hypothesize that these are not linear effects , but that the two effects reinforce each other . Businesses achieve the best performance if internal connec - tions are supported by external connections , which provide access to global markets . Business Clusters in Developing Countries . When looking at entrepreneurship in devel - oping countries , it is important to consider speciﬁc issues related to what is a resource - constrained environment . Businesses in developing economies are usually constrained by limited resources , low productivity , small markets , low purchasing power among custom - ers , unfavorable physical and institutional infrastructures , and corruption . All these con - ditions do not support successful entrepreneurial activity . However , clusters provide an opportunity to overcome these constraints and facilitate business growth and success in developing economies . It is important to note that there are potential differences between business clusters in developing economies compared with more - developed economies . For example , there is evidence to suggest that ﬁrms cluster more often in developing economies , compared with more - developed economies . Moreover , there are structural differences between clusters in less - developed economies and clusters in developed economies . Clusters in less - developed economies usually consist of smaller ﬁrms that are geographically more concentrated and that are more homogeneous in terms of their economic activities . At the same time , clusters in less - developed economies are more heterogeneous in terms of skills and competencies . Despite these differences , we assume that the theoretical assumptions described above apply to both developed and less - developed economies because clusters provide competitive advantages to businesses within clusters , which in turn is related to business performance . Method Study Location . In our general recommendations , we discussed that the study location procedure may aim to locate all relevant studies , or alternatively may be restricted to some 343 March , 2014 theoretical sampling . Since our research question already restricts studies to a particular context , we decided to attempt to locate the broadest possible array of studies in this context . In order to locate case studies , we used key word searches in ABI / Inform and in Econlit , combining the term “cluster” with “lowly developed economies , ” “LDC , ” and “developing country . ” Furthermore , we examined the databases of institutions that support entrepreneurship in developing economies ( World Bank , ILO , UNU - Merit Maastricht , Institute of Development Studies , Institute for Industrial Development Policy , and SNV ) . In addition , we systematically searched key journals that address entrepreneurship in developing countries : World Development , Entrepreneurship & Regional Development , Journal of Developmental Entrepreneurship , and Journal of Development Studies . More - over , we checked the references of narrative reviews . Finally , we asked experts in the ﬁeld to name additional clusters we did not identify with the former strategies . Thus , as we suggested in our general recommendations , the study location process involved a range of different strategies to locate cases , exceeding the range of strategies usually used in quantitative meta - analyses ( cf . O’Boyle , Pollack , & Rutherford , 2012 ; Read , Song , & Smit , 2009 ; Rosenbusch , Rauch , & Bausch , 2013 ) . This procedure allowed us to identify case studies involving 80 business clusters . Selection Criteria . We used case studies conducted by independent research groups . As recommended in the third step of the description of the systematic synthesis of qualitative research , we developed selection criteria specifying the scope of the study ( criteria 1 – 3 ) as well as criteria ensuring the quality of studies included in the synthe - sis ( criteria 4 and 5 ) : ( 1 ) The cases had to deﬁne clusters as geographical concentra - tions of ﬁrms that are involved in the same or similar activities , and that may specialize , subcontract , or cooperate . ( 2 ) The cases describe clusters in low - income economies , as deﬁned by the World Bank . ( 3 ) The cases provide sufﬁcient information to code busi - ness performance , levels of joint action , and insertion in the global value chain . ( 4 ) The original publication did not use the case to analyze joint action and / or insertion into the global value chain . While this criterion is not necessary for a systematic synthesis of qualitative case studies , we introduced it because we aimed to avoid biases intro - duced in the original case description , which could occur , for example , when the case description focuses predominantly on joint action ( Schmitz , 1995b , 1999a ) . ( 5 ) We vali - dated our data through cross - veriﬁcation ; therefore , we included cases when we had information from at least two sources ( Yin , 2003 ) . First , in 12 clusters , we inte - grated information from different publications to create a more complete picture ( Appendix 1 ) . Second , in eight cases , we had access to one “expert” who knew the cluster well and who checked our coding of the cluster characteristics . As with criterion 4 , this is not a necessary criterion for a systematic synthesis of case studies , but it allowed us to create a more complete picture of the case ( Jensen & Rodgers , 2001 ) . These selection criteria reduced the initial 80 clusters to the 13 clusters coded for the purpose of our study ( Appendix 1 ) . Four of the 13 clusters were located in Africa , three in Latin America , and six in Southeast Asia . Measurement . To extract the relevant information from the individual case studies , we developed a detailed coding scheme in advance , including anchors for the coding . Thus , as we suggested in our general recommendation , we used a deductive approach to analyze the cases . The dependent variable was the average performance of ﬁrms within a cluster . We followed the recommendations by Venkatraman and Ramanujam ( 1986 ) and differ - entiated between ﬁnancial ( e . g . , proﬁts , overall performance , sales growth , proﬁt growth ) and operational performance ( including , e . g . , competitive advantage , innovation , 344 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE improvements in technology , quality , skills levels ) . Independent variables were the level of local joint action and insertion into the global value chain . The level of local joint action was coded in three categories : ( 1 ) local industries with no joint action , ( 2 ) local complex with specialization , and ( 3 ) local alliance with strategic cooperation . The coding of the insertion into the global value chain was carried out for suppliers as well as buyers . A low level of insertion was coded if external relationships focused only on import or export . A high level of insertion was coded if supplier and / or buyer directly assist in upgrading processes or products . Appendix 1 provides a detailed description of each cluster , the references of the sources used to analyze the cluster , and the data analysis results of our coding efforts . Data Analysis . The qualitative case study analysis consisted of two main activities . As we recommended , we ﬁrst performed a separate content analysis of each case . Subse - quently , we performed a cross - case analysis ( compare step 5 of the general recommen - dations ) . First , we developed a case data ﬁle for each case , listing the characteristics of the data sources , a case study description that covers general cluster characteristics as well as history , and the relevant information that was found in the literature regarding the concepts local joint action , insertion into global value chains , and the performance of the ﬁrms in the cluster . Second , for each case , we developed a data analysis table that systematically organized the information along the three concepts level of joint action , insertion into the global value chain , and performance ( compare Appendix 1 ) . Third , we coded the extent of local joint action , insertion into a global value chain , and performance within the cluster , which enabled us to translate the qualitative information included in the data analysis table into quantitative information . The cross - case analysis , ﬁnally , was performed by pattern matching and cross - case analysis , as suggested by Yin ( 2003 ) . To display our results , we created ﬁgures that organized the cases along the dimensions of our constructs . Moreover , the quantitative information that was extracted allowed us to perform additional correlation analyses to test the relationships between the independent and dependent variables . Results and Discussion Figure 1 presents the results with regard to the relationship between the level of joint action and ﬁrm performance . The general trend indicated that the clusters with the highest levels of joint action achieved the highest levels of performance ( Otigba and Pekalongan ) . However , this relationship was not supported for the Marikina cluster , which showed a moderate to high level of joint action , but a low - average level of ﬁrm performance . Thus , a high level of joint action is not always associated with high performance . With regard to the Marikina cluster , its low level of average performance may be due to a lack of external linkages with global value chains ( Figure 2 ) . Similarly , the majority of clusters with no insertion into the global value chain also showed low levels of performance—with the exception of the Suame cluster , which showed moderate levels of average performance . At the same time , only two of the ﬁve clusters with high levels of insertion into global value chains also showed high levels of average perfor - mance . It would appear that insertion into global value chains is a necessary but not sufﬁcient condition for high - average performance levels . Therefore , we analyzed the combined effect of local joint action and insertion in global value chains on performance ( Figure 3 ) , which revealed that the two clusters with 345 March , 2014 the highest levels of average performance ( Otigba and Pekalongan ) were characterized both by high levels of joint action and insertion into global value chains . Because all clusters with low - average performance showed low scores in at least one of the two dimensions ( joint action and / or insertion in the global value chain ) , we conclude that the interaction between local joint action and insertion into global value chains is the best predictor of performance of ﬁrm within business clusters . Our qualitative synthesis of cases allowed us to run some quantitative analyses as well , although the sample size is relatively small to expect robust results . The Spearman rank correlation between local joint action and performance was r = . 63 ( p < . 01 ) , the relationship between insertion in global value chains and performance was r = . 68 ( p < . 01 ) , and the relationship between a combined index ( level of joint action with insertion in the global value chain ) and performance was r = . 73 ( p < . 01 ) . Our synthesis of qualitative case studies of business clusters suggested three contributions to the literature . First , most existing studies look at the effects of either internal or external linkages of business clusters . Our analysis revealed that the combi - nation of local joint action and insertion into global value chains helps explain the performance of ﬁrms in clusters , which means that both internal and external linkages need to be taken into account . Second , our results contribute to the conceptual problems found in cluster literature , which make it difﬁcult to generalize the results ( Rocha , 2004 ) . Figure 1 Level of Joint Action and Performance 2 . Otigba 10 . Pekalongan 1 . Nnewi 3 . Suame 6 . Gamarra2 7 . Bucaramanga12 . Cebu 4 . Kamukunji 5 . Gamarra18 . Jepara 13 . Pampanga High Low L eve l o f p e r f o r m a n ce Moderate 9 . Ceper 11 . Marikina Local industry Local complex Local alliance Level of joint action 346 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE For example , relying on single case studies contextualized research ﬁndings . With our systematic synthesis of case studies , we showed that generalizations are indicated . Third , our study focused on clusters in developing economies . Most approaches to business clusters were developed in the Western world , as were the two frameworks we used to study the performance of business clusters . We showed that the results can be generalized beyond speciﬁc economic contexts . Thus , business clusters provide an opportunity to overcome the environmental constraints that businesses face in less - developed economies . Our study has some limitations that suggest avenues for future research . The ﬁrst issue is related to the question of causality . It is possible that the high performance of clusters leads to increased joint action in a cluster . Moreover , it may be easier for clusters that perform well to establish external linkages compared with clusters perform - ing less well . Due to our design , we were unable to test the causality of the reported relationships . However , our analysis of the Gamarra cluster indicated that joint action and insertion into global value chains improved subsequent performance . Such causality Figure 2 Insertion into Global Value Chains and Average Level of Performance No insertion in GVCs Some insertion in GVCs Insertion in GVCs Insertion in global value chains ( GVCs ) 2 . Otigba 10 . Pekalongan 3 . Suame 1 . Nnewi 6 . Gamarra2 7 . Bucaramanga12 . Cebu 4 . Kamukunji 5 . Gamarra1 9 . Ceper 11 . Marikina 13 . Pampanga 8 . Jepara High Low Moderate L eve l o f p e r f o r m a n ce 347 March , 2014 issues can be addressed very well in a synthesis of qualitative cases studies , for example , by synthesizing pre – post case studies ( Jensen & Rodgers , 2001 ) . Second , our analysis was based on secondary data , which may be biased by the intentions of the original authors . We tried to minimize such biases by relying on multiple sources for each case description , and moreover we veriﬁed our coding by involving experts familiar with the original clusters . Third , we did not test for moderator variables that could affect the results . For example , the stage of cluster development and the type of industry may affect internal and external linkages . While the limited number of cases included in our analysis made it difﬁcult to address such moderator variables , this type of analysis is very possible in a systematic synthesis of qualitative research , and thus opens avenues for future research . Figure 3 Cross - Case Analysis of Relationship Between Insertion into Global Value Chains and Level of Local Joint Action Within Cluster and Level of Performance Within Cluster No insertion Some insertion Insertion Insertion in global value chain ( GVC ) 11 . Marikina 3 . Suame 9 . Ceper 4 . Kamukunji 5 . Gam1 1 . Nnewi 2 . Otigba 10 . Pekalongan 8 . Jepara 7 . Buca 12 . Cebu L eve l o f j o i n t ac t i on High Low Specialization Strategic interfirm cooperation Coevolution Local industry Local complex Local alliance External economies 6 . Gam2 13 . Pampanga N . B . The third dimension in this graph , the average performance level within a business cluster , is indicated by the size of the circles . The three possible values ( low , moderate , high ) are equivalent to the three circle sizes ( small , medium , large ) . For three clusters , the longitudinal element is indicated by the dotted circle , that is , the former performance level . 348 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE Since the synthesis aimed for generalizations , our results can be used by institut - ions interested in enterprise development because we provide information about areas useful for intervention . Entrepreneurs may beneﬁt from the results because they provide guidelines for useful cooperation with other enterprises . Finally , we provide suggestions on how to promote entrepreneurship in less - developed economies . General Discussion While evidence - based entrepreneurship is becoming increasingly accepted in the ﬁeld of entrepreneurship , it is predominantly based on evidence drawn from quantitative studies . However , scientiﬁc knowledge in entrepreneurship is not restricted to quanti - tative research . Important concepts like network structure ( Elfring & Hulsink , 2007 ) , effectuation ( Sarasvathy , 2001 ) , and research into business clusters ( as demonstrated above ) have been developed and advanced through qualitative research . We argue that the cumulative evidence of a discipline includes knowledge from multiple sources of quantitative as well as qualitative evidence ( Rousseau et al . , 2008 ) . Thus , evidence - based best practices need to include qualitative research . In the present contribution , we devel - oped the systematic synthesis of qualitative research and provided an example of such an approach . Theoretical Implications The systematic synthesis of case study research provides several implications for entrepreneurship research . First of all , the ﬁeld of entrepreneurship needs to develop inventories about established knowledge in the ﬁeld . While the ﬁeld of entrepreneurship has advanced considerably in the last two decades , more and more studies have begun to focus on a vast number of different subjects and theoretical frameworks ( Davidsson et al . , 2001 ; Low , 2001 ) . This development leads to an increasing fragmentation of the ﬁeld . However , any discipline has to build evidence in areas of maturation and map scientiﬁc evidence in order to provide practical recommendation . For example , our syn - thesis of case studies revealed that clusters positively affect the performance of ﬁrms in a cluster . Such established evidence also suggests points of departure for future research . In general , the ﬁeld of entrepreneurship predominantly uses quantitative studies , and consequently meta - analysis to establish such scientiﬁc evidence . Thus , there is a domi - nance of quantitative studies in the ﬁeld , possibly because research designs and methods continually improved in quantitative entrepreneurship research , increasing the legiti - macy of this type of research ( Crook , Shook , Morris , & Madden , 2010 ) . However , 9 . 5 % of articles appearing in entrepreneurship journals can be classiﬁed as case studies ( Chandler & Lyon , 2001 ) . We argue that this type of research needs to be considered in evidence - based entrepreneurship . Case study research can be increasingly valuable to a discipline , if the cases involved motivate an interesting research question , if they inspire new ideas , and if they illustrate concrete examples of constructs ( Siggelkow , 2007 ) . At the same time , we assume that it is inevitable for case study research to increase meth - odological practices to increase its legitimacy in entrepreneurship research , including , for example , the use of secondary data and triangulation , the description of coding procedures and of the analysis , and detailed information about quality concerns . Guide - lines that are well understood by editors and reviewers have been described by Eisenhardt ( 1991 ) and Yin ( 2003 ) . 349 March , 2014 Second , a systematic synthesis of qualitative research can test theories and concepts that have been developed in the ﬁeld of entrepreneurship . New theories are introduced in conceptual papers or may have emerged from case study research . About 30 % of the papers published in the domain of entrepreneurship are conceptual in nature ( Chandler & Lyon , 2001 ) . However , rather than introducing more and more new concepts and theories , entrepreneurship research needs to test these theories rigorously to establish what we know and , based on that knowledge , to identify areas for future inquiry ( Low & MacMillan , 1988 ) . The synthesis of qualitative case studies provides the tools necessary to achieve such evidence . Third , the systematic synthesis of case study research contributes to theory develop - ment , and thus can go beyond just summarizing scientiﬁc evidence . For example , cases can be synthesized with the aim of developing or enhancing the conceptualization of constructs . Moreover , a synthesis can compare competing theoretical assumptions , for example , with regard to whether the relationship between human capital and performance is better explained by opportunity costs or by learning theory . In addition , a systematic synthesis of case studies could compare the relationship between constructs , such as the relationship between network characteristics and innovative activities . Our illustrative example attained this type of contribution by integrating two different frameworks used to explain the effects of business clusters . Finally , a systematic synthesis of case studies allows researchers to develop new theories or to adjust existing theories . While we suggested developing speciﬁc coding categories in a deductive way , and thus specifying speciﬁc categories in advance , the cod - ing system should be ﬂexible enough to allow new categories to emerge through the case analysis ( Eisenhardt , 1989 ) . Thus , the systematic synthesis of qualitative case studies can have different aims , from describing phenomena to developing and testing theories . Limitations We are aware that applying a systematic synthesis of case study research to entrepre - neurship requires additional considerations to exploit the full potential of such a synthesis . A ﬁrst issue is the question of whether or not it is legitimate to synthesize qualitative research . Epistemologically speaking , qualitative research is not always suitable for an evidence - based approach . We argued that case studies that build on scientiﬁc realism are suitable for a synthesis . However , case study research often involves interaction among the researcher , the data , the context , and the interpretation , and often focuses on a relativistic paradigm . While there are techniques available to aggregate this type of research ( Campbell et al . , 2003 ) , these approaches are not primarily designed to provide generalizations , and thus are not suitable for an evidence - based approach . Other qualita - tive research , however , aims at replicating results and making them accessible to practi - tioners . In this way , our approach contributes to this type of qualitative research by making the results of this research accessible to a wider audience . Second , the systematic synthesis of case studies aggregates the evidence from differ - ent case studies that look at phenomena from different angles and contexts , and that use different sources of information . As a consequence , the synthesis loses the ideographic information inherent in individual case studies . Thus , the generalizations are achieved at the expense of unique phenomena studied in individual case studies . Therefore , it is important to build in contingencies in the analysis that are theoretically indicated . Given that there are sufﬁcient cases available , this could be achieved by coding and analyzing subsets of cases . 350 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE Third , the systematic synthesis of qualitative research is not a homogeneous approach . We advanced a speciﬁc synthesis of qualitative case studies . However , there are a number of different techniques available to synthesize different types of qualitative research , and they all have different strengths and weaknesses ( Dixon - Woods et al . , 2004 ; Rousseau et al . , 2008 ) . For example , they are vulnerable in varying degrees to variations in the study design . Fourth , there are a number of methodological challenges that need to be addressed when developing this approach to entrepreneurship further . For example , entrepreneurship research needs to develop methodological standards for evaluating qualitative research and the systematic syntheses of qualitative research . As with quantitative meta - analyses , the process of the systematic synthesis of case - oriented research could be performed by a team , which could be used to evaluate the consistency of the study location process , the coding process , and the synthesis of the information ( Campbell et al . , 2003 ) . Moreover , there should be a clear set of quality criteria to assess each study before including it into the synthesis ( Jensen & Rodgers , 2001 ) . An additional quality assessment should address each of the steps of a systematic synthesis : an explicit purpose , a systematic approach to study location , explicit criteria for study inclusion , a comprehensive within and cross - study analysis , and a clear interpretation of the ﬁndings . Finally , aggregating the ﬁndings of qualitative research is a complex and challenging matter . For example , the judgments required for ﬁnding and extracting the relevant information from qualitative studies are relatively complex , and this process requires a deep understanding of the language and methodology used in a given ﬁeld . Additionally , all these decisions need to be documented and shared . Future Research We believe that there are a number of areas in entrepreneurship research that would beneﬁt from a systematic synthesis of case studies . For example , there is a continuing debate in the domain of entrepreneurship about the deﬁnition of the concept of opportu - nity . While some authors deﬁne opportunities as situations that are recognized by indi - viduals ( Eckhardt & Shane , 2003 , 2013 ; Shane & Venkataraman , 2000 ) , others claim that opportunities are created ( Alvarez & Barney , 2007 ) . Both approaches build on a realist epistemology ( Alvarez & Barney ) . Moreover , there are a number of case studies that evaluate opportunity recognition ( Duxbury , 2012 ) . A systematic synthesis of such case studies can provide an overview of the empirical evidence , and thereby contribute to the debate on the origins of business opportunities . Moreover , complex topics that cannot be easily addressed by quantitative inquiries can beneﬁt from a synthesis of qualitative case studies . For example , existing literature on business models is concerned with a complex phenomenon that explains how ﬁrms create value for their customers ( Magretta , 2002 ) . While there is agreement in the entrepreneur - ship literature that business models are an important construct , the literature is fragmented and characterized by different conceptualizations of the construct ( George & Bock , 2011 ) . A systematic synthesis of case studies on business models could help develop the con - ceptual boundaries of the concept across case studies . In addition , such a synthesis could investigate the consequences of business models . For example , a business model should affect how ﬁrms recognize and exploit existing opportunities . Moreover , providing value for customers should have positive effects on ﬁrm performance . Finally , the notion that entrepreneurial behavior is embedded in contexts can be systematically addressed in this type of review . Such contexts are usually described explicitly in qualitative studies , and therefore a systematic synthesis can account for such 351 March , 2014 contextual conditions . For example , some authors argue that opportunity exploitation is associated with uncertainty ( Knight , 1921 ) . A qualitative synthesis could examine whether uncertainty affects the proposed relationships . Another avenue could be the examination of a process - based view in entrepreneurship ( Baron & Markman , 2004 ) . In this case , to examine the antecedents and consequences of entrepreneurial behavior , the synthesis needs to achieve an interpretation of the evolution of phenomena over time . Similarly , a systematic synthesis of qualitative research could work with conditional validation and causality , and in doing so identify necessary and sufﬁcient conditions . Conclusions In this study , we have argued that evidence - based entrepreneurship needs to synthe - size case studies as well . This is important for two reasons . First , the systematic review of case - oriented research in entrepreneurship helps generate knowledge in the ﬁeld . This evidence is not restricted to what we know , but it can also uncover issues that we do not know yet and that need further examination . Second , a systematic review of qualitative research in entrepreneurship provides knowledge that is contextualized in the sense of what works for whom and under which circumstances ( Denyer & Tranﬁeld , 2006 ) . As such , evidence - based entrepreneurship makes knowledge accessible to practitioners and provides strong implications for actions and behavior . To summarize , our approach contributes to evidence - based entrepreneurship , which should synthesize knowledge and generalizations relying on multiple methods and designs ( Rousseau et al . , 2008 ) . 352 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE A pp e nd i x 1 : D a t a A n a l y s i s T a b l e 1 . N n e w i ( N i g e r i a ) 2 . O ti gb a ( N i g e r i a ) 3 . S u a m e ( G h a n a ) U s e d s t ud i e s : — S t udy 1 — S t udy 2 — . . . . a ) B r a u ti g a m ( 1997 ) b ) O y e l a r a n - O y e y i nk a ( 1997 , 2001 , 2004 ) c ) U z o r ( 2004 ) d ) A b i o l a ( 2006 a ) e ) P r o I nv e s t ( 2005 ) a ) O y e l a r a n - O y e y i nk a ( 2006 ) b ) A b i o l a ( 2006b ) a ) A d e y a ( 2006 ) b ) O b e ng ( 2002 ) c ) M c C o r m i c k ( 1998 ) d ) P r o I nv e s t ( 2005 ) C l u s t e r c h a r ac t e r i s ti c s : — A c ti v iti e s D i ff e r e n t b r a n c h e s o f m o t o r s p a r e p a r t s C o m pu t e r h a r d w a r e a nd s o f t w a r e t r a d e a nd p r odu c ti on M e t a l w o r k i ng , m ec h a n i ca l e ng i n ee r i ng , a nd v e h i c l e r e p a i r s e r v i ce s — R oo t s I n t h e 1960 s / ea r l y 1970 s , w it h a m a r k e t p l ac e s p ec i a li ze d i n m o t o r s p a r e p a r t s E a r l y 1990 s , s t a r ti ng w it h s a l e s o f c o m pon e n t s a nd e qu i p m e n t 1920 s / 1930 s — F u r t h e r c h a r ac t e r i s t i c s P l ace : N n e w i , N i g e r i a , u r b a n F i r m s a nd w o r k e r s : A bou t 510 ﬁ r m s , w it h e s ti m a t e d w o r k f o r ce o f 10 , 000 ; 10 – 15 l a r g e r c o m p a n i e s ( 2005 ) P l ace : L a go s , N i g e r i a , u r b a n F i r m s a nd w o r k e r s : M o r e t h a n 5 , 000 M S E s , m o r e t h a n 10 , 000 e m p l oy e d , a pp r ox . 8 e m p l oy ee s p e r ﬁ r m ( 2006 ) P l ace : K u m a s i , G h a n a , s ubu r b s , r u r a l F i r m s a nd w o r k e r s : B e t w ee n 10 a nd 15 , 000 m i c r o - ﬁ r m s ; t o t a l w o r k f o r ce m o r e t h a n 80 , 000 ( 2005 ) L o ca l j o i n t ac ti on : → M od e r a t e l e v e l , l o c a l c o m p l ex → H i gh l e v e l , l o c a l a lli an ce → M od e r a t e t o h i gh l e v e l , l o c a l c o m p l ex - a lli an ce — H o r i z on t a l li nk a g e s — C oop e r a ti v e c o m p e titi on ( a ) — J o i n t i m po r t o f r a w m a t e r i a l s ( c ) — S h a r i ng o f e qu i p m e n t , t ec hn i c i a n s , t r a n s po r t a ti on c o s t s , a nd i n f o r m a ti on ( c ) — J o i n t ﬁ n a n c i ng a nd a dv e r ti s i ng ( c ) — D u r i ng l a s t y ea r s t h e ho r i z on t a l li nk a g e s d i d no t i n c r ea s e v e r y m u c h ( a ) — U nu s u a ll y h i gh c oop e r a ti on — H i gh l e v e l o f s ub c on t r ac ti ng — C oop e r a ti v e c o m p e titi on — A ll ﬁ r m s c oop e r a t e w it h eac h o t h e r v i a a ss o c i a ti on s — J o i n t m a r k e ti ng , qu a lit y i m p r ov e m e n t , i n f o r m a ti on e x c h a ng e , a dv e r ti s i ng , a nd w a r e hou s i ng — F r ee ﬂ o w o f p r i ce i n f o r m a ti on , t ec hno l og i ca l s uppo r t , a nd m a r k e t i n f o r m a ti on — S o m e ho r i z on t a l s p ec i a li za ti on w it h i n t h e c l u s t e r ( a , d ) — E x t e n s i v e ho r i z on t a l s ub c on t r ac ti ng ( c ) — S o m e e x a m p l e s o f ( s t r a t e g i c ) ho r i z on t a l c oop e r a ti on , li k e a c oop e r a ti v e f o r m ec h a n i c s t o pu r c h a s e a nd s h a r e e qu i p m e n t ( d ) — L ittl e c on t ac t b e t w ee n l a r g e r a nd s m a ll e r ﬁ r m s ( c ) — V e r ti ca l li nk a g e s — R e l a ti on s h i p s d e v e l op i ng w it h s upp li e r s — E x t e n s i v e c oop e r a ti on w it h do m e s ti c bu y e r s on qu a lit y i m p r ov e m e n t — V e r ti ca l b ac k w a r d s ub c on t r ac ti ng i s y e t t o e m e r g e ( b ) — C on s i d e r a b l e v e r ti ca l li nk a g e s — E x t e n s i v e c oop e r a ti on w it h s upp li e r s — C oop e r a ti on w it h buy e r s — M a i n i npu t i s s c r a p m e t a l , s o l d by s e v e r a l t r a d e r s w it h i n t h e c l u s t e r a r ea ( d ) — P r e s e n ce o f s o m e v e r ti ca l li nk s w it h e ng i n ee r i ng ﬁ r m s ( a , c ) — S t r ong v e r ti ca l b il a t e r a l li nk a g e s b e t w ee n g a r a g e s a nd m e t a l w o r k s hop s : j o i n t p r odu c ti on ( c ) — I n s tit u ti on a l li nk a g e s — S e v e r a l i n s tit u ti on s e m p l oy i ng m u ltil a t e r a l ac ti v iti e s ( e . g . , t r a d e f a i r s a nd t r a i n i ng ) — C A P DAN v e r y i m po r t a n t a s a ss o c i a ti on f o r s ec u r it y ( w it h po li ce ) , f o r ﬁ gh t a g a i n s t p i r ac y ( w it h M i c r o s o f t ) , f o r t r a f ﬁ c p r ob l e m s ( w it h c it y c oun c il ) — O t h e r a ss o c i a ti on s f o r l obby i ng on n a ti on a l l e v e l — F i n a n c i a l i n s tit u ti on s e n t e r e d t h e c l u s t e r — S i gn i ﬁ ca n t nu m b e r o f i n s tit u ti on s i nvo l v e d i n t h e d e v e l op m e n t o f t h e c l u s t e r ( a , d ) — I T T U ( I n t e r m e d i a t e T ec hno l ogy T r a n s f e r U n it ) , a t ec hn i ca l s u ppo r t a nd c on s u lti ng un it , f o s t e r s t ec hno l ogy upg r a d i ng ( a , d ) — T r a i n i ng c ou r s e s f o r w o r k e r s g i v e n by i n s tit u t e ( a , d ) G l ob a l v a l u e c h a i n s : → U nb a l a n ce d , s o m e i n s e r ti on ( up s t r e a m ) → I n s e r ti on → N o i n s e r ti on — U p s t r ea m — M u c h r e li a n ce on a nd c oop e r a ti on w it h s upp li e r s fr o m a b r o a d ( e s p . T a i w a n ) — M o r e t h a n 50 % o f ﬁ r m s i s i m po r ti ng m o r e t h a n 80 % o f t h e i r m ac h i n e r y — M a ny i m po r t li nk a g e s w it h ﬁ r m s i n A s i a n c oun t r i e s — I m po r t o f f o r e i gn - b r a nd e d c o m pu t e r p r odu c t s fr o m c o m p a n i e s li k e I B M — J o i n t v e n t u r e a g r ee m e n t s w it h ﬁ r m s fr o m d e v e l op e d w o r l d — J u s t s o m e i m po r ti ng o f r a w m a t e r i a l s ( n e w s t ee l ) ( d ) — D o w n s t r ea m — 25 % o f ﬁ r m s a r e e ng a g e d i n li m it e d e xp o r t ac ti v iti e s t o o t h e r A fr i ca n c oun t r i e s — V e r y l o w l e v e l o f c oop e r a ti on — W ea k e xpo r t po s iti on — A pp r ox . 50 % o f ﬁ r m s e xpo r t t o f o r e i gn c oun t r i e s — S h a r e o f e xpo r t s i n c r ea s e d y ea r a f t e r y ea r ( m o s tl y t o W e s t e r n A fr i ca ) — E nh a n ce d c oop e r a ti on w it h g l ob a l buy e r s , e s p . on i n f o r m a ti on e x c h a ng e , qu a lit y i m p r ov e m e n t , a nd j o i n t m a r k e ti ng — M a i n l y f o c u s e d on do m e s ti c m a r k e t s ( d ) — S t ill e v i d e n ce o f ( i n f o r m a l ) s a l e s t o c u s t o m e r s fr o m n e i ghbo r i ng c oun t r i e s ( a , b , d ) 353 March , 2014 A pp e nd i x 1 : C on ti nu e d 1 . N n e w i ( N i g e r i a ) 2 . O ti gb a ( N i g e r i a ) 3 . S u a m e ( G h a n a ) P e rf o r m a n ce : → M od e r a t e p e r f o r m an ce : qu it e w e ll op e r a ti on a ll y , no t ou t s t a nd i ng ﬁ n a n c i a ll y → H i gh p e r f o r m an ce : s k e t c hy on ﬁ n a n c i a l p e rf o r m a n ce , c l ea r on op e r a ti on a l p e rf . → M od e r a t e p e r f o r m an ce : qu it e w e ll op e r a ti on a ll y , no t w e ll ﬁ n a n c i a ll y — F i n a n c i a l — F e w i nd i ca ti on s , no e v i d e n ce o f po s iti v e c h a ng e s i n r ea l i n c o m e s — I nd i r ec t : t h e a v e r a g e ca p ac it y u tili za ti on r a t e i s 20 % a bov e n a ti on a l a v e r a g e — D i r ec t : t u r nov e r a nd p r o ﬁ t a b ilit y i n c r ea s e d du r i ng p a s t y ea r s — I nd i r ec t : i n c r ea s i ng e xpo r t r a t e — F a ll i n d e m a nd f o r m o s t ﬁ r m s a nd a l s o m a ny w e n t ou t o f bu s i n e ss , d e s p it e g r o w i ng m a r k e t a nd good t ec hno l og i ca l c a p a b iliti e s ( c ) — O p e r a ti on a l — J ob c r ea ti on : bo t h b e f o r e a nd a f t e r 1996 t h e c l u s t e r p e rf o r m e d w e ll on t h i s i nd i ca t o r — H o w e v e r , m o s t g r o w t h ( a f t e r 96 ) i s ca u s e d by f o r e i gn t ec hn i ca l s t a ff — O u t s t a nd i ng r e s i s t a n ce o f t h e ﬁ r m s i n t h e N n e w i c l u s t e r t o t h e N i g e r i a n ec ono m i c c r i s i s i n t h e 1980 s a nd ea r l y 1990 s — I n c r ea s i ng e xpo r t r a t e po i n t s t o c on s t a n t qu a lit y i n p r odu c t s a nd p r o ce ss e s — H i gh j ob c r ea ti on r a t e , m o s tl y f o r un s k ill e d l o ca l p e op l e — O ngo i ng g r o w t h o f t h e c l u s t e r ( e n t r e p r e n e u r i a l c u lt u r e ) — U n i qu e kno w l e dg e p r e s e n ce — 19 84 : 40 , 000 w o r k e r s ; 2002 : 80 , 000 w o r k e r s ; p r o j ec ti on s : g r o w t h t o 100 , 000 w o r k e r s ( b ) — A v e r a g e g r o w t h r a t e o f nu m b e r o f w o r k e r s o f 8 % ( b ) — A d op ti on o f r e l a ti v e l y c o m p l e x t ec hno l og i e s a nd m ac h i n e s ( a ) — “ S u a m e M a g az i n e h a s g r o w n t o b ec o m e t h e l a r g e s t i n f o r m a l m a nu f ac t u r i ng a r ea i n G h a n a a nd on e o f t h e b i gg e s t i n t h e w ho l e o f W e s t A fr i ca” ( d : 39 ) 4 . K a m i kun ji ( K e ny a ) 5 . a nd 6 . G a m a rr a ( P e r u ) 7 . B u ca r a m a ng a ( C o l o m b i a ) U s e d s t ud i e s : — S t udy 1 — S t udy 2 — . . . . a ) M c C o r m i c k ( 1998 ) b ) P r o I nv e s t ( 2005 ) c ) K i ny a n j u i ( 2006 ) a ) V i ss e r ( 1999 , 2000 ) b ) A l o s ill a ( 2002 ) † c ) L a R e pub li ca , 26 / 01 / 05 a nd 26 / 11 / 06 † d ) B ez d i n ( 2005 ) † a ) P i e t r ob e lli a nd B a rr e r a ( 2002 ) b ) P i e t r ob e lli a nd R a b e ll o tti ( 2004 ) c ) G i u li a n i e t a l . ( 2005 ) C l u s t e r c h a r ac t e r i s ti c s : — A c ti v iti e s M e t a l w o r k i ng ( l a r g e v a r i e t y ) G a r m e n t s G a r m e n t s — R oo t s A r ound 1985 R oo t s i n 1945 M i d 1970 s — F u r t h e r c h a r ac t e r i s t i c s P l ace : N a i r ob i , K e ny a , s ubu r b s ( u r b a n ) F i r m s a nd w o r k e r s : ov e r 2 , 000 m i c r o - ﬁ r m s , t o t a l e m p l oy m e n t b e t w ee n 3 , 000 – 5 , 000 ( 2005 ) P l ace : L i m a , P e r u , u r b a n a r ea F i r m s a nd w o r k e r s : A r ound 14 , 000 s hop s ; 20 , 000 e n t r e p r e n e u r s ; 90 , 000 w o r k e r s ; t o t a l a nnu a l t u r nov e r o f 800 m illi on U . S . do ll a r s ( 2004 ) P l ace : B u ca r a m a ng a , C o l . , s e m i - u r b a n a r ea F i r m s a nd w o r k e r s : 1 , 600 ﬁ r m s , m a i n l y S M E s , no b i g ﬁ r m s , a v e r a g e e m p l oy m e n t : 37 , a v e r a g e 20 c u s t o m e r s p e r ﬁ r m ( 1995 ) L o ca l j o i n t ac ti on : L o w l e v e l , l o c a l i ndu s t r y : s o m e i nd i ca ti on s o f m ov i ng up w a r d s U n til 1995 : → L o w l e v e l , l o c a l i ndu s t r y B e t w ee n 1995 a nd 2006 : → M ov e s t o w a r d m od e r a t e l e v e l : l o c a l c o m p l ex M od e r a t e l e v e l , l o c a l c o m p l ex — I nd e x o f J A : m e d i u m ( b , c ) 354 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE — H o r i z on t a l li nk a g e s — H o r i z on t a l j o i n t ac ti on i s s o m e ho w p r e s e n t ( a ) — S o m e c oop e r a ti on a m ong w h ee l b a rr o w p r o du ce r s : j o i n t pu r c h a s i ng a nd w e l d i ng ( b ) — N o e v i d e n ce o f f u r t h e r e m e r g i ng c oop e r a t i v e li nk a g e s ( b ) — F e w v a r i a ti on s o f p r odu c t s ( c ) — P r e s e n ce o f i n f o r m a l g r oup i ng s o f ﬁ r m s m a k i ng s i m il a r p r odu c t s , d i f ﬁ c u lti e s b eca u s e o f a l ac k o f s t a nd a r d i za ti on ( a , c ) — S o m e b il a t e r a l e x c h a ng e o f t oo l s a nd e qu i p m e n t ( a ) B e f o r e 1995 ( a ) : — c oop e r a ti on l o w — l o w l e v e l o f s ub c on t r ac ti ng — no ca p ac it y c on t r ac ti ng — s o m e s p ec i a li za ti on i n ﬁ n i s h i ng — d i s p e r s e d ﬁ r m s m o r e ac ti v e i n s ub c on t r ac ti ng a nd c oop e r a ti on B e t w ee n 1995 a nd 2006 : — 2002 : vo i ce o f bu s i n e ss m e n i n G a m a rr a i s s till h a r d l y h ea r d du e t o o r g a n i za ti on a l w ea kn e ss e s ( b ) — 2005 : G a m a rr a C a r d i s i n t r odu ce d ( c r e d it ca r d d e v e l op e d by ﬁ r m s t h e m s e l v e s ) ( c ) — O u t s ou r c i ng o f p r odu c ti on w h e n ﬁ r m s ca nno t h a nd l e a l a r g e o r d e r ( a ) — O u t s ou r c i ng o f s e r v i ce s t h a t r e qu i r e s p ec i a l s k ill s ( a ) — H o r i z on t a l s p ec i a li za ti on : d i v e r s i ﬁ ca ti on ( a ) — G r oup o f ﬁ r m s w o r k t og e t h e r f o r on e c u s t o m e r , o ff e r i ng d i f f e r e n t qu a lit y / d e s i gn s ( a ) — M ac h i n e r y i s i nnov a t e d i n s t r ong c oop e r a ti on w it h s m a ll l o ca l w o r k s hop s ( a ) — I n t e r ac ti on w it h i n bu s i n e ss c o mm un it y i n c r ea s e s ( a ) — C oop e r a ti on b e t w ee n c o m p l e m e n t a r y ﬁ r m s m u c h h i gh e r t h a n b e t w ee n ﬁ r m s w it h s a m e p r odu c t s ( a ) — J o i n tl y o r g a n i ze d t r a d e f a i r s ( t og e t h e r w it h C h a m b e r o f C o mm e r ce ) ( a ) — S t r ong i n t e r - ﬁ r m a ss o c i a ti v e a ttit ud e no t y e t d e v e l op e d ( a ) — V e r ti ca l li nk a g e s — V e r ti ca l ( j ob ) s p ec i a li za ti on i s t o t a ll y a b s e n t , a ll ﬁ r m s p r odu ce e v e r y t h i ng a l on e ( b ) — L i nk a g e s w it h do m e s ti c s upp li e r s a nd buy e r s a r e pu r e l y m a r k e t - b a s e d , no c oop e r a ti on o r t ec hn i ca l a ss i s t a n ce ( b ) — V e r ti ca l j o i n t ac ti on i s e n ti r e l y m i ss i ng ( a ) — B e f o r e 1995 : l o w l e v e l o f v e r ti ca l s p ec i a li za ti on ( a ) — B e f o r e 1995 : no v e r ti ca l c oop e r a ti on w it h s upp li e r s o r o t h e r p a r ti e s ( a ) — N o v e r ti ca l s p ec i a li za ti on : + 80 % o f ﬁ r m s ca rr y ou t e n ti r e p r o ce ss i n t e r n a ll y ( a ) — N o s t r ong d i v i s i on o f l a bo r ( a ) — N o s t r ong b ac k w a r d li nk a g e s b eca u s e o f f ea r o f l o ss o f c on t r o l a nd a u t ho r it y ( a ) — S t r ong i n t e r - ﬁ r m a ss o c i a ti v e a ttit ud e no t y e t d e v e l op e d ( a ) — I n s tit u ti on a l li nk a g e s — L i m it e d bu s i n e ss a ss o c i a ti on ac ti v iti e s ( b ) — T h e K a m ukun ji i s m o r e a s e l f - h e l p o r g a n i za ti on t h a n a bu s i n e ss a ss o c i a ti on ( b ) — G ov e r n m e n t s uppo r t s t h e c l u s t e r s i n ce t h e e nd o f t h e 1980 s ( e . g . , bu il d i ng o f s h e d s ) ( c ) — G ov e r n m e n t a nd a ss o c i a ti on o r g a n i ze a nnu a ll y a n e xh i b iti on a nd s k ill d e v e l op m e n t p r og r a m s — H o w e v e r : “ m o s t o f t h e 20 ca s e s t ud i e s do no t p a y m e m b e r s h i p f ee s o r a tt e nd m ee ti ng s w h e n t h e y a r e s c h e du l e d , ” t h e e n t r e p r e n e u r s do no t t r u s t t h e gov e r n m e n t ( c : 12 ) — L ac k o f li nk s b e t w ee n t h e c l u s t e r a nd l ea r n i ng i n s tit u ti on s ( c ) B e f o r e 1995 : — no c oop e r a ti v e i n s tit u ti on a l li nk a g e s ( a ) B e t w ee n 1995 a nd 2006 : — 1995 : ﬁ v e i n iti a ti v e s t o f o r m a ss o c i a ti on s ( a ) — 2002 : vo i ce o f bu s i n e ss m e n i n G a m a rr a i s h a r d l y h ea r d du e t o o r g a n i za ti on a l w ea kn e ss e s ( b ) — 2005 / 2006 : i m po r t a n t r o l e f o r t h e C oo r d i n a ti ng C o mm itt ee ( C E G ) i n G a m a rr a ( c ) — 2005 : d e p a r t m e n t o f p r odu c ti on v e r y i n ti m a t e l y ti e d t o f o r m a ti on o f good p r ac ti ce s a nd t r a i n i ng i n G a m a rr a ( d ) — S u cce ss f u l a tt e m p t s t o s e t up bu s i n e ss a ss o c i a ti on : e . g . , C o t exc on , s e t up j o i n t p r o c u r e m e n t o f r a w m a t e r i a l s , w h i c h l e d t o p r i ce s t a b ili za ti on a nd i n c r ea s e d c o m p e titi v e n e ss ( a ) — S e v e r a l n a ti on a l a ss o c i a ti on s h a v e o f ﬁ ce s i n t h e c l u s t e r → l ea d s t o ﬂ o w o f i n f o r m a ti on ( a ) — S ec t o r a l a ss o c i a ti on f a il e d du e t o i nd i v i du a li s ti c b e h a v i o r ( a ) — A c ti v e C h a m b e r o f C o mm e r ce — S E NA o ff e r s l a bo r t r a i n i ng a nd o t h e r s e r v i ce s ( a ) — S hou l d b e f u r t h e r d e v e l op e d , s till s ho w i ng t h e “ you t h f u l n e ss o f t h e c l u s t e r ” ( a ) G l ob a l v a l u e c h a i n s : → N o i n s e r ti on U n til 1995 : → N o i n s e r ti on B e t w ee n 1995 a nd 2006 : → So m e i n s e r ti on → I n s e r ti on — P r e s e n ce o f m a i n l y g l ob a l c h a i n s ( b , c ) — U p s t r ea m — M a i n l y l o ca l s upp li e s ( b ) — F i r m s i n c l u s t e r m a i n l y u s e s up e r i o r P y m a o r T a ngu ï s c o tt on v a r i e ti e s ( on l y g r o w n i n P e r u ) ( a ) — M o r e t h a n 80 % o f f a b r i c s u s e d f o r p r odu c ti on i s i m po r t e d , m a i n l y fr o m U n it e d S t a t e s ( a ) — F o r m a ti on o f C o t exc on ( j o i n t i m po r ti ng ) d ec r ea s e d d e p e nd e n c y o n i n t e r m e d i a r i e s ( a ) — M o s t e n t e r p r i s e s ob t a i n t ec hno l og i e s fr o m l o ca l s ub s i d i a r i e s o f g l o b a l m ac h i n e r y p r ov i d e r s — D o w n s t r ea m — A l m o s t on l y l o ca l m a r k e t ( b ) — A f e w li nk a g e s w it h s o m e f o r e i gn ( i n f o r m a l ) c u s t o m e r s ( m a i n l y fr o m U g a nd a a nd R w a nd a ) , bu t on l y m a r k e t - b a s e d w it hou t c oop e r a ti on ( b , c ) — I n 1990 s : ﬁ r m s i n t h e G a m a rr a c l u s t e r a r e no t i n t e r n a ti on a ll y c o m p e titi v e ( s o m e o f t h e m t r i e d t o e xpo r t , non e o f t h e m w it h s u cce ss ) ( a ) — I n 2000 s : m o r e a nd m o r e i n t e r n a ti on a l m a r k e t s a r e g a i n e d ( U n it e d S t a t e s , V e n ez u e l a , E c u a do r , C h il e , B o li v i a ) ( c ) — I n 2006 : s e l f - i m po s e d r e du c ti on o f e xpo r t s t o E c u a do r a nd C h il e t o b e a b l e t o c ov e r do m e s ti c d e m a nd ( c ) — M a j o r it y o f ou t pu t i s e xpo r t e d ( 18 o f 25 s u r v e y e d ﬁ r m s , e xpo r t e d m o r e t h a n 60 % o f t h e i r ou t pu t ) ( a ) — M a i n e xpo r t m a r k e t s : U n it e d S t a t e s a nd L a ti n A m e r i ca ( a ) — N e w e xpo r t m a r k e t s : S a ud i A r a b i a , H ong K ong ( a ) — F o r e i gn buy e r s h e l p e d ﬁ r m s i n t h e c l u s t e r t o upg r a d e t h e i r t e c hno l og i e s ( a ) 355 March , 2014 A pp e nd i x 1 : C on ti nu e d 4 . K a m i kun ji ( K e n y a ) 5 . a nd 6 . G a m a rr a ( P e r u ) 7 . B u ca r a m a ng a ( C o l o m b i a ) P e rf o r m a n ce : → L o w p e r f o r m an ce : c ou l d i m p r ov e U n til b e g i nn i ng o f 1990 s : → H i gh p e r f o r m an ce ( b eca u s e o f e x t e r n a l ec ono m i e s ) A f t e r li b e r a li za ti on : → E r od i ng p e r f o r m an ce B e t w ee n 1995 a nd 2006 : → S i gn s o f i n c r e a s e d p e r f o r m an ce → M od e r a t e p e r f o r m an ce : b e tt e r t h a n o t h e r g a r m e n t s c l u s t e r s bu t no t i m p r e ss i v e — F i n a n c i a l — E s ti m a t e s s a y it i s un li k e l y t h a t t h e t o t a l t u r nov e r e x cee d s 10 m illi on U . S . $ ( a pp r ox . 5 , 000 U . S . $ p e r ﬁ r m p e r y ea r ) ( b ) — U no f ﬁ c i a l d a t a : 80 % o f w h ee l b a rr o w s a nd 75 % o f m e t a l box e s i n K e ny a a r e m a d e i n t h e a r ea ( c ) — U n til 1990 , a nnu a l g r o w t h i n do m e s ti c s a l e s ( a ) — A f t e r 1990 , m o r e i n t e r n a ti on a l c o m p e titi on ( a ) — I n 1993 , s i gn i ﬁ ca n t p e rf o r m a n ce g a p on a v e r a g e g r o ss s a l e s b e t w ee n c l u s t e r e d a nd d i s p e r s e d ﬁ r m s ( a ) — I n 1994 , p e rf o r m a n ce g a p on a v e r a g e g r o ss s a l e s b e t w ee n c l u s t e r e d a nd d i s p e r s e d ﬁ r m s h a s a l m o s t d i s a pp ea r e d ( s a l e s e r o s i on o f 27 % b e t w ee n 1993 a nd 1994 ) ( a ) — E xp ec t e d s a l e s g r o w t h b e t w ee n C h r i s t m a s p e r i od i n 2005 a nd 2006 i s 20 t o 25 % ( c ) — R ece n t i n c r ea s e i n d e m a nd du e t o h i gh e r p r i ce s ( c ) ( N o d a t a c ou l d b e f ound ) — O p e r a ti on a l — S l o w p r odu c ti on p r o ce ss e s ( b ) — L o w qu a lit y o f p r odu c t s ( b ) — L ittl e t ec hno l og i ca l d e v e l op m e n t ( e x ce p t w h ee l b a rr o w p r odu c ti on ) ( a , b ) — K a m ukun ji i s a l a r g e p e tt y c o mm od it y c l u s t e r w h i c h r ea li ze s on l y a f e w o f t h e po t e n ti a l b e n e ﬁ t s o f c l u s t e r i ng — I n 1993 , c l u s t e r e d ﬁ r m s e xp e r i e n ce d h i gh e r e m p l oy m e n t g r o w t h , a v e r a g e w a g e s , a nd l e ss unp a i d f a m il y l a bo r t h a n d i s p e r s e d ﬁ r m s ( a ) — R ece n t i n c r ea s e i n d e m a nd du e t o h i gh e r qu a lit y ( c ) — M o r e a nd m o r e ( i n t e r n a ti on a l ) m a r k e t s a r e p e n e t r a t e d ( c ) — T h e c l u s t e r s a pp ea r t o b e b e tt e r e qu i pp e d t o f ace i n t e r n a ti on a l c o m p e titi on t h a n o t h e r g a r m e n t c l u s t e r s i n C o l o m b i a ( a ) — T h e c u lt u r e w it h i n ﬁ r m s i n t h e c l u s t e r i s p r og r e ss i v e a nd dyn a m i c ( a ) — T h e r e a r e e x a m p l e s o f s t a r t - up s i n t h e c l u s t e r ( a ) — S o m e p r odu c t a nd p r o ce ss upg r a d i ng , bu t b e l o w a v e r a g e ( ov e r 40 ca s e s ) ( b , c ) 8 . J e p a r a ( I ndon e s i a ) 9 . C e p e r ( I ndon e s i a ) 10 . P e k a l ong a n ( I ndon e s i a ) U s e d s t ud i e s : — S t udy 1 — S t udy 2 a ) S a nd ee e t a l . ( 2002 ) b ) L o e b i s a nd S c h m it z ( 2005 ) c ) S a nd ee e t a l . ( 2000 ) d ) I ndon e s i a M a tt e r s , 09 - 01 - 06 a ) S a nd ee e t a l . ( 2002 ) b ) S a t o ( 2005 ) c ) P e rr y ( 2005 ) a ) S a nd ee e t a l . ( 2002 ) b ) T a m bun a n ( 2006 ) C l u s t e r c h a r ac t e r i s ti c s : — A c ti v iti e s F u r n it u r e M e t a l ca s ti ng ( bo t h ﬁ n a l a nd i n t e r m e d i a t e p r odu c ti on ) T e x til e s ( w i d e r a ng e ) — R oo t s L ong h i s t o r y , d a ti ng b ac k t o p r ec o l on i a l ti m e s . M od e r n c l u s t e r s i n ce t h e 1980 s T h e c o l on i a l ti m e s , b a s e d on s upp l y i ng e qu i p m e n t t o s ug a r ca n e f a r m e r s L o ng h i s t o r y 356 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE — F u r t h e r c h a r ac t e r i s t i c s P l ace : C e n t r a l J a v a , J e p a r a , r u r a l a r ea F i r m s a nd w o r k e r s : 3 , 500 ﬁ r m s ; 57 , 000 e m p l oy ee s ; m a i n l y s m a ll ﬁ r m s , bu t a l s o m o r e t h a n 100 ﬁ r m s w it h c l o s e t o 100 w o r k e r s ( 2000 ) P l ace : C e n t r a l J a v a , r u r a l a r ea F i r m s a nd w o r k e r s : c l o s e t o 332 ﬁ r m s ; 3 , 875 e m p l oy ee s ; m o s t ﬁ r m s l e ss t h a n 20 e m p l oy ee s ( l a t e 2001 ) P l ace : C e n t r a l J a v a , r u r a l a r ea F i r m s a nd w o r k e r s : 18 , 650 ﬁ r m s ; m o r e t h a n 131 , 000 w o r k e r s ; m o s tl y s m a ll ﬁ r m s ( 2000 ) L o ca l j o i n t ac ti on : → L o w l e v e l , l o c a l i ndu s t r y → L o w - m od e r a t e l e v e l , l o c a l i ndu s t r y - c o m p l ex → “ E x ce p t f o r p a ss i v e s ea r c h a nd r eac h e ff ec t s o f c l u s t e r i ng , bo t h p a ss i v e a nd ac ti v e e x t e r n a liti e s ( . . . ) s ee m t o b e li m it e d i n C e p e r ” ( b , p . 160 ) → H i gh l e v e l , l o c a l a lli an ce — H o r i z on t a l li nk a g e s — H o r i z on t a l c oop e r a ti on i nh i b it e d b eca u s e o f d i s t r u s t b e t w ee n ﬁ r m s ( u s e o f ill e g a l w ood ) ( a , b ) — L o w l e v e l o f ho r i z on t a l s p ec i a li za ti on ( b ) — L ittl e e v i d e n ce o f j o i n t p r o c u r e m e n t , m a r k e ti ng , r ec r u it m e n t , a nd s o on ( b ) — L a r g e p r odu ce r s o w n a ll e qu i p m e n t , s m a ll e r ﬁ r m s r e n t s p ec i ﬁ c s e r v i ce s fr o m t h e l a r g e r ﬁ r m s ( a ) — S m a ll e r ﬁ r m s m a k e u s e o f a c o mm on s e r v i ce f ac ilit y ( U n it P e l a y a n a n T e kn i s ) f o r r ece i v i ng o r d e r s a nd buy i ng i npu t s ( a , b ) — L i nk a g e s w it h ﬁ r m s ou t s i d e t h e c l u s t e r w e r e p r e f e rr e d a bov e ti e s t o n e i ghbo r s ( c ) — S t r ong ho r i z on t a l s p ec i a li za ti on ( a ) — G r oup o f s t r ong l o ca l e n t r e p r e n e u r s a r e ac ti v e i n bo t h p r odu c ti on a nd m a r k e ti ng ( a ) — C o ll a bo r a ti on a m ong p r odu ce r s t o s t a nd a r d i ze p r i ce s , qu a lit y , e m p l oy m e n t c ond iti on s , e t c . ( a ) — I n f o r m a l m ee ti ng s t o d i s c u ss i m po r t a n t i ss u e s ( a ) — M u lti - ti e r s ub c on t r ac ti ng n e t w o r k s ( a ) — L ea d i ng / p i on ee r i ng ﬁ r m s t a k e t h e l ea d a nd o t h e r ﬁ r m s f o ll o w ( b ) — V e r ti ca l li nk a g e s — E x i s t e n ce o f s ub c on t r ac ti ng n e t w o r k s w i t h s p ec i ﬁ c p a r t s o f f u r n it u r e p r odu c ti on b e i ng c on t r ac t e d t o s p ec i a li ze d s m a ll ﬁ r m s a nd c r a f t s m e n ( a ) — T op - l a y e r ﬁ r m s a r e e ng a g e d i n s ub c on t r ac ti ng ( a , b ) — D e v e l op m e n t o f l a bo r s p ec i a li za ti on i s li m it e d ( b ) — L a r g e r a nd s m a ll e r ﬁ r m s h a v e a c l ea r p r e f e r e n ce t o s e ll d i r ec tl y t o n ea r by m a r k e t s ou t s i d e t h e c l u s t e r ( a , b , c ) — T h e r e l a ti on s h i p s o f ﬁ r m s w it h t h e i r l a r g e s t o r d e r p r ov i d e r t e nd s t o b e l ong t e r m ( b ) — V e r ti ca l i n f o r m a ti on s h a r i ng , p r ov i s i on o f w o r k i ng ca p it a l , a nd s ti m u l a ti on o f t ec hno l ogy p r og r e ss , ca n b e f ound ( ho w e v e r t o li m it e d e x t e n t , a nd w it h w i d e v a r i a ti on s ) ( b ) — M a r k e ti ng i s r e s pon s i b ilit y o f w ho l e s a l e r s t h a t s e ll t h e t e x til e s t o s t o r e s t h r oughou t I ndon e s i a ( a ) — M u lti - ti e r s ub c on t r ac ti ng n e t w o r k s ( s ub c on t r ac ti ng p r odu c ti on t o ho m e w o r k e r s ) ( a ) — I n s tit u ti on a l li nk a g e s — D i r ec t gov e r n m e n t s uppo r t p l a y e d li m it e d r o l e ( a ) — N o c oop e r a ti v e , s o m e a ss o c i a ti on s ( a ) — R e gu l a r c o m p l a i n t s a bou t t h e n e g a ti v e r o l e o f t h e gov e r n m e n t ( t oo m u c h c on t r o l a nd b a d m a n a g e m e n t o f w ood s upp li e s : ill e g a l l ogg i ng ) ( a ) — D il e mm a f o r gov e r n m e n t : a ss i s ti ng s m a l l ﬁ r m s ca n r e s u lt i n s uppo r t o f ill e g a l l ogg i ng , bu t it l ea d s t o e m p l oy m e n t a nd i n c o m e ( b ) — A c ti v e gov e r n m e n t p r o m o ti on by p r ov i d i ng t ec hn i ca l s uppo r t a nd d e v e l op i ng c o mm on s e r v i ce f ac ilit y ( a ) — H o w e v e r , gov e r n m e n t s uppo r t i s l o w l y e v a l u a t e d ( b ) — S t a t e - s pon s o r e d c oop e r a ti v e f o r s m a ll ﬁ r m s ( a ) — M o r e a dv a n ce d ﬁ r m s w it h s ub c on t r ac ti ng li nk a g e s s ee m s t o b e a b l e t o a b s o r b kno w l e dg e fr o m i n s tit u ti on s ; o t h e r ﬁ r m s m o r e d i f ﬁ c u lti e s ( b ) — N o f o r m a l a ss o c i a ti on : t r u s t i s h i gh b e t w ee n p r odu ce r s a nd w o r k e r s ( a ) — W o m e n ’ s c oop e r a ti v e g i v e s f e m a l e ho m e w o r k e r s acce ss t o s m a ll a m oun t s o f w o r k i ng ca p it a l ( a ) — G ov e r n m e n t s uppo r t by p r ov i d i ng t ec hn i ca l s uppo r t ( a ) — G ov e r n m e n t e r ec t e d a l o ca l w ho l e s a l e m a r k e t t o b e u s e d by l o ca l s m a ll ﬁ r m s ( a ) — S t a t e e n t e r p r i s e s a r e ac ti v e i n c l u s t e r ( a ) G l ob a l v a l u e c h a i n s : → I n s e r ti on → N o i n s e r ti on → I n s e r ti on — U p s t r ea m — L o ca l s upp li e s c o m b i n e d w it h s o m e i m po r t s ( a ) — L i m it e d i m po r t s o f s p a r e p a r t s a nd c o m pon e n t s ( a ) — F o r l ong i nvo l v e m e n t w it h J a v a n e s e , A r a b , a nd C h i n e s e - I ndon e s i a n p r odu ce r s a nd t r a d e r s ( a ) — S o m e o f it s i npu t s a r e i m po r t e d ( a ) — D o w n s t r ea m — E x t e n s i v e e xpo r ti ng n e t w o r k s ( a ) — I n 2000 , J e p a r a f u r n it u r e w a s e xpo r t e d t o 68 c oun t r i e s ( a ) — M a ny g l ob a l buy e r s e s t a b li s h e d t h e i r o w n t h e i r o w n f ac t o r i e s i n J e p a r a ( m a i n l y j o i n t v e n t u r e s ) : t h e s e buy e r s li nk t h e d e m a nd i n t h e W e s t t o p r odu c ti on i n c l u s t e r ( a ) — F o r e i gn buy e r s d e t e r m i n e t ec hno l ogy upg r a d i ng , c r ea ti ng a nd ﬁ n a n c i ng n e w un it s ( a ) — R e l a ti on s h i p s b e t w ee n S M E s a nd f o r e i gn buy e r s a r e no t r ea ll y c o ll a bo r a ti v e ( b ) — N o d i r ec t p a r ti c i p a ti on i n e xpo r ti ng ( i nd i r ec tl y : C e p e r p r odu c t s a r e u s e d i n p r odu c t s t h a t a r e e xpo r t e d ) ( a ) — F o r e i gn a ss i s t a n ce i s l o w l y e v a l u a t e d c o m p a r e d w it h do m e s ti c a ss i s t a n ce ( b ) — F o r l ong i nvo l v e m e n t w it h J a v a n e s e , A r a b , a nd C h i n e s e - I ndon e s i a n p r odu ce r s a nd t r a d e r s ( a ) — 40 % ou t pu t i s e xpo r t e d ( a ) — F o r e i gn buy e r s a r e m o r e a nd m o r e i nvo l v e d i n d e v e l op m e n t o f e xpo r t t r a d e s i n ce t h e c r i s i s ( 1997 – 98 ) ( a ) — T h e e xpo r t n e t w o r k e n c o m p a ss e s m a ny c oun t r i e s , p r o m i n e n t A fr i ca n p r e s e n ce ( a ) — E x t e n s i v e ov e r s ea s t r a d e n e t w o r k s ( b ) 357 March , 2014 A pp e nd i x 1 : C on ti nu e d 8 . J e p a r a ( I ndon e s i a ) 9 . C e p e r ( I ndon e s i a ) 10 . P e k a l ong a n ( I ndon e s i a ) P e rf o r m a n ce : → F o r m e r l y h i gh p e rf o r m a n ce , c u rr e n tl y r a p i d l y d e c li n i ng p e r f o r m an ce → L o w p e r f o r m an ce → H i gh p e r f o r m an ce ( s o m e w h a t s k e t c hy ) — F i n a n c i a l — J e p a r a c l u s t e r w a s r e s pon s i b l e f o r g r o w t h o f f u r n i t u r e e xpo r t s fr o m U . S . $ 3 . 8 m illi on ( 1989 ) t o U . S . $ 97 m illi on ( 1996 ) a nd U . S . $ 147 m illi on ( 1998 ) ( c ) — I n 1998 , J e p a r a h a d a 40 % s h a r e i n t o t a l I ndon e s i a n f u r n it u r e e xpo r t s ( a ) — B e t w ee n 1996 a nd 2000 , t h e nu m b e r o f e xpo r t e d c on t a i n e r s i n c r ea s e d fr o m 200 t o 2 , 000 p e r m on t h ; ho w e v e r , a t t h e e nd o f 2002 t h i s h a s d ec r ea s e d w it h 40 % ( a ) — S i n ce 2004 , e xpo r t s a l e s d ec r ea s e d w it h 10 % p e r y ea r t o j u s t 112 m illi on U . S . $ i n 2006 ( d ) — E xpo r t m a r g i n s f o r t h e b i gg e r ﬁ r m s d ec r ea s e d by 20 % o r m o r e b e t w ee n 2000 a nd 2003 ( b ) — T h e d ec li n i ng e xpo r t s o f J e p a r a m i rr o r s t h e n a ti on w i d e a v e r a g e i n c r ea s i ng f u r n it u r e e xpo r t s ( d ) — C o m p a r a ti v e a dv a n t a g e o f C e p e r g r a du a ll y d ec r ea s e d ( d e m a nd d ec r ea s e d , l o s t m a r k e t s t o o t h e r m e t a l ca s ti ng c l u s t e r s ) ( a ) — N o t a b l e t o m a i n t a i n it s good p e rf o r m a n ce ( a ) — I n g e n e r a l , s a l e s i n c r ea s e d s i n ce 1998 ( a ) — I n p a r ti c u l a r , e xpo r t s a l e s i n c r ea s e d ( s i gn i ﬁ ca n tl y ) s i n ce 1998 ( a ) — O p e r a ti on a l — B e t w ee n 1997 a nd 2002 , t h e nu m b e r o f p r odu c ti o n un it s i n c r ea s e d fr o m 2 , 439 t o 3 , 700 ( b ) — B e t w ee n 1997 a nd 2002 , e m p l oy m e n t i n c r ea s e d fr o m 38 , 264 t o 58 , 210 w o r k e r s ( b ) — B e t w ee n 1997 a nd 2002 , w o r k e r s ea r n i ng s i n c r ea s e d s ub s t a n ti a ll y ( e s ti m a t e d , w it h 10 – 15 % p e r y ea r b e t w ee n 1997 a nd 2002 ) — W a g e s i n t h i s c l u s t e r a r e a bov e t h e m i n i m u m , bu t no t t h e h i gh e s t i n t h e a r ea — C o m p l a i n t s a bou t qu a lit y ( du e t o t oo r a p i d g r o w t h ) — S k ill s no t s u f ﬁ c i e n t t o f u l ﬁ ll i n t e r n a ti on a l d e m a n d — I n fr a s t r u c t u r a l p r ob l e m s ( du e t o t oo r a p i d g r o w t h ) P r ob l e m s : — u s e o f ill e g a l r a w m a t e r i a l s → ill e g a l l ogg i ng o f e x t r e m e l y young t r ee s ( c o s t - s a v e r ) — f o r e i gn buy e r s d e m a nd ce r ti ﬁ e d w ood , bu t t h e ce r ti ﬁ ca ti on i s s u s p e nd e d b eca u s e t h e s t a t e l o s t c on t r o l ov e r t h e ti m b e r t r a d e → B oo s t b a s e d on t h e d e v a l u a ti on a nd d e p r ec i a ti on o f c u rr e n c y → L ac k o f c oop e r a ti on , t h e r e f o r e , un a b l e t o d ea l w i t h p r ob l e m s — I n t h e l a t e 1990 s , C e p e r acc oun t e d f o r a l m o s t a t h i r d o f I ndon e s i a ’ s a nnu a l m e t a l ca s t p r odu c ti on ( c ) — B e t w ee n 1998 a nd 2001 , t h e nu m b e r o f w o r k e r s d ec r ea s e d fr o m 5 , 000 t o 3 , 875 ( a ) — I n 1997 , c l u s t e r c on t a i n e d 340 – 350 ﬁ r m s ( b ) a nd i n 2001 , t h e c l u s t e r c on t a i n e d 332 ﬁ r m s ( a ) — C e p e r d ec r ea s e d i n s i ze , w h il e o t h e r m e t a l ca s ti ng c l u s t e r e xp a nd e d ( a ) — R ece n t a tt e m p t s t o upg r a d e t ec hno l og i e s f a il e d ( a ) — N u m b e r o f ﬁ r m s i n c r ea s e d by 29 % s i n ce 1998 ( a ) — E m p l oy m e n t i n c r ea s e d by 20 % s i n ce 1998 ( ho m e w o r k e r s i n c r ea s e d ) ( a ) — I n c r ea s i ng s a l e s ca u s e d m o r e w o r k e r s t o s t a r t n e w e n t e r p r i s e s ( a ) 358 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE 11 . M a r i k i n a ( P h ili p p i n e s ) 12 . C e bu ( P h ili pp i n e s ) 13 . P a m p a ng a ( P h ili pp i n e s ) U s e d s t ud i e s : — S t udy 1 — S t udy 2 a ) S c o tt ( 2005 ) a ) B ee r e poo t ( 2004 ) b ) B ee r e poo t ( 2005 a ) c ) B ee r e poo t ( 2005b ) a ) B ee r e poo t ( 2004 ) b ) B e e r e poo t ( 2005 a ) c ) B ee r e poo t ( 2005b ) C l u s t e r c h a r ac t e r i s ti c s : — A c ti v iti e s S ho e i ndu s t r y ( c h ea p , l o w - qu a lit y s ho e s ) F u r n it u r e ( ou t doo r , a n ti qu e r e p r odu c ti on , a nd li f e s t y l e ) F u r n it u r e — R oo t s B e g i nn i ng o f t h e t w e n ti e t h ce n t u r y I n t h e 1950 s L a t e 1940 s , c l o s e l y r e l a t e d t o n ea r by U . S . m ilit a r y b a s e s — F u r t h e r c h a r ac t e r i s t i c s P l ace : P h ili pp i n e s , M a r i k i n a , u r b a n a r ea F i r m s a nd w o r k e r s : 248 ﬁ r m s , m o s tl y s m a ll - s i ze d , s o m e l a r g e r w it h hund r e d s o f e m p l oy ee s ( 2004 ) P l ace : P h ili pp i n e s , M e t r o C e bu , u r b a n a r ea F i r m s a nd w o r k e r s : a r ound 303 ﬁ r m s a nd 45 , 000 w o r k e r s ( 1999 ) ; m a ny s m a ll ﬁ r m s ; s o m e l a r g e r ; l a r g e s t a r ound 2 , 750 w o r k e r s P l ac e : P h ili pp i n e s , P a m p a ng a , p r ov i n ce ( r u r a l ) F i r m s a nd w o r k e r s : a r ound 376 ﬁ r m s , m o s t o f t h e m w it h l e ss t h a n 10 w o r k e r s ( 1999 ) ; 10 , 000 p e op l e e m p l oy e d ( 2002 ) L o ca l j o i n t ac ti on : → L o c a l c o m p l ex , s t a r ti ng t o m ov e t o l o c a l a lli an ce → L o c a l c o m p l ex → “ C l u s t e r b e n e ﬁ t s fr o m s o m e dyn a m i c c l u s t e r a dv a n t a g e s ” ( c , p . 173 ) → L o c a l i ndu s t r y → “ C l u s t e r d e p e nd s on s t a ti c c l u s t e r a dv a n t a g e s ” ( c , p . 173 ) — H o r i z on t a l li nk a g e s — P r e s e n ce o f “ ti gh tl y - w r ough t w e b s o f s o c i a l i n t e r ac ti on ” — F i r m s s ub c on t r ac t t h e d e m a nd t h a t e x cee d s t h e i r o w n ca p ac it y — S t r ong s e n s e o f o w n i d e n tit y a nd d i s ti n c t i v e n e ss ( e . g . , o w n s ho e m u s e u m i n t h e c it y ) — C o ll ec ti v e a tt e m p t s t o i m p r ov e t h e c oop e r a ti v e b a s e s o f p r odu c ti on — S e v e r a l c oop e r a ti v e s o w n e d by t h e ( s m a ll ) ﬁ r m s , p r ov i d i ng l o a n f ac iliti e s , r e du ce d c o s t s o f pu r c h a s i ng , o w n ( c o ll ec ti v e ) b r a nd s , e t c . — B e n e ﬁ ti ng fr o m ec ono m i e s o f s ca l e by f o r m i ng s m a ll s upp l y c on s o r ti a — H o w e v e r , s till s o m e d i s t r u s t a nd p r og r e ss s hou l d b e m a d e t o e s t a b li s h a c u lt u r e o f c o ll a bo r a ti on a nd j o i n t po liti ca l ac ti on — I ng r e d i e n t s p r e s e n t , bu t s till no r ea l c u lt u r e o f c o ll a bo r a ti on — H o r i z on t a l s p ec i a li za ti on o f ﬁ r m s o cc u r s — C oop e r a ti on i n iti a ti v e s w it h i n t h e c l u s t e r ( f o r m a ti on o f n e t w o r k r e l a ti on s ) — H o w e v e r , no i n t e n s i v e ( s t r a t e g i c ) c oop e r a ti on b e t w ee n ﬁ r m s ; i nd e p e nd e n c y i s h i gh e r v a l u e d — L ittl e l oy a lt y o f l a r g e r m a nu f ac t u r e r s t o s m a ll m a nu f ac t u r e r s ( upg r a d i ng o f s m a ll ﬁ r m s no t a go a l f o r t h e l a r g e r ﬁ r m s ) — D ec r ea s i ng t r u s t b e t w ee n e m p l oy e r s a nd w o r k e r s → r e s u lt s i n m o r e ou t s ou r c i ng — F i r m s a r e v e r y s p ec i a li ze d ho r i z on t a ll y : e n ti r e s t r ee t s a r e s p ec i a li ze d i n s p ec i ﬁ c p r odu c t s — N o n e t w o r k r e l a ti on s , on l y t r a n s ac ti on s — H ea vy c o m p e titi on b e t w ee n s ub c on t r ac t o r s b eca u s e t h e y h a v e t o b i d f o r o r d e r s fr o m e xpo r t e r s — S o m e s ub c on t r ac t o r s f o r m e d s m a ll g r oup s t o c oop e r a t e a nd h e l p e ac h o t h e r ( s h a r i ng e qu i p m e n t , t r a i n i ng , e t c . ) — C oop e r a ti on b e t w ee n e xpo r t e r s i s a l m o s t a b s e n t — V e r ti ca l li nk a g e s — P r odu c ti on v i a v e r ti ca ll y d i s i n t e g r a t e d ﬁ r m s — S p ec i a li ze d t a s k s a r e s ub c on t r ac t e d t o i nd e p e nd e n t w o r k s hop s — M a ny s t a nd a r d c o m pon e n t a r e b r ough t i n — E v e n t h e l a r g e r ﬁ r m s r e gu l a r l y s ub c on t r ac t b a t c h e s o f w o r k — T h r ea t e n e d p r e do m i n a n tl y by t h e i n c r ea s i ng i m po r t o f p a r t s fr o m C h i n a — M a ny r a w m a t e r i a l s a r e s ou r ce d fr o m o t h e r P h ili pp i n e i s l a nd s — D e g r ee o f ou t s ou r c i ng b e t w ee n d i r ec t e xpo r t e r s a nd s ub c on t r ac t o r s d i ff e r s p e r s ub s ec t o r — T h e p r odu c ti on p r o ce ss i s m o r e a nd m o r e s p lit up i n t o s e v e r a l s m a ll t a s k s t h a t a r e ou t s ou r ce d t o s ub c on t r ac t o r s a nd / o r ho m e w o r k e r s — L ittl e t r u s t b e t w ee n c on t r ac t o r s a nd s ub c on t r ac t o r s , bu t n e t w o r k r e l a ti on s e m e r g i ng — P r odu c ti on p r o ce ss i s s p lit up i n t o d i ff e r e n t s t a g e s f o r d i ff e r e n t ﬁ r m s : e x t e n s i v e u s e o f s ub c on t r ac t o r s — N o n e t w o r k r e l a ti on s , on l y t r a n s ac ti on s : s ub c on t r ac t o r s a r e no t r e w a r d e d f o r t h e i r l oy a lt y t o t h e i r e xpo r t e r s , a nd t h e r e i s h a r d l y a ny e x c h a ng e o f i n f o r m a ti on 359 March , 2014 A pp e nd i x 1 : C on ti nu e d 11 . M a r i k i n a ( P h ili pp i n e s ) 12 . C e bu ( P h ili pp i n e s ) 13 . P a m p a ng a ( P h ili pp i n e s ) — I n s tit u ti on a l li nk a g e s — P r e s e n ce o f “a ss o c i a ti on a l a nd i n s tit u ti on a l i n fr a s t r u c t u r e s ” — PFF I ( P h ili pp i n e F oo t w ea r F e d e r a ti on I n c . ) : b r o a d c r o ss - s ec ti on o f s ho e m a nu f ac t u r e r s i n M a r i k i n a , r e p r e s e n ti ng t h e c l u s t e r i n do m e s ti c a nd f o r e i gn f o r u m s , p r ov i d e c l u s t e r w it h c on s u lt a n c y s e r v i ce s a nd t r a i n i ng p r og r a m s — L ea gu e o f F ili p i no S ho e m a k e r a i m s t o e n s u r e t h a t i m po r t s do no t e v a d e t h e r e m a i n i ng t a r i ff r e gu l a ti on s — P h ili pp i n e F oo t w ea r A ca d e m y : p r ov i d e s t r a i n i ng c ou r s e s , t ec hn i ca l a dv i ce — L ea t h e r F oo t w ea r I ndu s t r y M a s t e r P l a n ( 1996 ) : gov e r n m e n t a l s t udy a bou t c u rr e n t w ea kn e ss e s , w it h t h e a i m t o p r o m o t e a nd f o s t e r t h e c l u s t e r — S p ec i ﬁ c l e g i s l a ti on by gov e r n m e n t t o p r o m o t e t h e d e v e l op m e n t o f t h e c l u s t e r — A c ti v e p a r ti c i p a ti on o f t h e l o ca l gov e r n m e n t — E a r l y 1970 s : gov e r n m e n t a nd i n t e r n a ti on a l dono r o r g a n i za ti on s s t a r t e d t o p a y a tt e n ti on t o t h e c l u s t e r — T r i p s t o f o r e i gn f u r n it u r e f a i r s w e r e o r g a n i ze d by gov e r n m e n t — 1974 : e s t a b li s h m e n t o f f u r n it u r e t r a d e a ss o c i a ti on i n C e bu a nd t r a d e s uppo r t o r g a n i za ti on s i n M a n il a — 1991 : ﬁ r s t o w n i n t e r n a ti on a l f u r n it u r e e xh i b it o r g a n i ze d i n c l u s t e r — M o s t e xpo r ti ng ﬁ r m s a r e r e g i s t e r e d w it h t h e B o a r d o f I nv e s t m e n t , w h i c h g i v e s t h e m v a r i ou s i n ce n ti v e s li k e 6 y ea r s o f t a x ho li d a y a nd l o w i m po r t du ti e s — S t r ong p r e s e n ce o f bu s i n e ss a ss o c i a ti on s , l o ca l gov e r n m e n t , a nd t r a i n i ng i n s tit u t e s → f ac ilit a t e s i n f o r m a ti on e x c h a ng e a nd upg r a d i ng p r o ce ss e s — A ss o c i a ti on C F I F v e r y ac ti v e , bu t s till w ea k on l obby i ng — N o s t r ong l o ca l bu s i n e ss a ss o c i a ti on t h a t s ti m u l a t e s j o i n t i n i ti a ti v e s — P r e s e n t a ss o c i a ti on s a r e i n e ff ec ti v e a nd l ac k c o mm on i n iti a ti v e s — T h e “ F u r n it u r e C it y ” ( w h e r e ﬁ r m s ca n r e n t p r odu c ti on s p ace ) f a il e d ( w r ong l o ca ti on ) — W e ll - e qu i pp e d t r a i n i ng ce n t e r i s no t i n u s e b eca u s e o f l ac k o f e x p e r ti s e a nd f und i ng — T h e r e i s a c r a f t s m e n s c hoo l ; ho w e v e r , it i s no t w e ll f un c ti on i ng G l ob a l v a l u e c h a i n s : → N o i n s e r ti on → I n s e r ti on — “ t h e f u r n it u r e e xpo r t e r s ( . . . ) a r e a l s o p a r t o f a n i n t e r n a ti on a l v a l u e c h a i n ” ( e , p . 54 ) → S o m e i n s e r ti on — U p s t r ea m — L a r g e r ﬁ r m s i m po r t e d t h e i r m ac h i n e r y fr o m c oun t r i e s li k e T a i w a n a nd I t a l y — S e v e r a l r a w m a t e r i a l s ( e . g . , w ood ) a r e i m po r t e d fr o m c oun t r i e s li k e N e w Z ea l a nd a nd M a l a y s i a — K no w l e dg e i s i m po r t e d v i a f o r e i gn li nk s ( e . g . , G e r m a n c on s u lt a n t s f o r t r a i n i ng ) — N o d a t a ( s uppo s e do m e s ti c s upp li e s ) — D o w n s t r ea m — O n l y f o r do m e s ti c m a r k e t s ( i n t e n s e c o m p e t iti on w it h o t h e r c oun t r i e s , m o s tl y C h i n a ) — F i r m s i n t h e c l u s t e r n e v e r b ee n i n c o r po r a t e d i n t o s i gn i ﬁ ca n t c oop e r a ti on w it h f o r e i gn buy e r s : “ca p ac it y f o r e xpo r t ac ti v it y i s no t a b l y und e r d e v e l op e d ” — L i nk s t o g l ob a l v a l u e c h a i n s a r e t o t a ll y a b s e n t — R ece n tl y s o m e m a nu f ac t u r e r s s t a r t e d t o r e a c h t o g l ob a l m a r k e t s by p a r ti c i p a ti ng i n i n t e r n a ti on a l t r a d e f a i r s — 1982 : B r iti s h f u r n it u r e c o m p a ny s t a r t e d a n e s t a b li s h m e n t i n t h e c l u s t e r ( a n ti qu e r e p r odu c ti on s ) , s till ac ti v e i n t h e c l u s t e r → f o s t e r e d upg r a d i ng ( t r a i n i ng , a tt r ac ti ng n e w f o r e i gn buy e r s ) — A f t e r 1982 : m o r e a nd m o r e f o r e i gn buy e r s b e g a n t o buy fr o m ﬁ r m s i n t h e c l u s t e r ( f o ll o w i ng B r iti s h p i on ee r ) — A r ound 175 ﬁ r m s e xpo r t d i r ec tl y t o f o r e i gn m a r k e t s — S e v e r a l f o r e i gn buy e r s h a v e a g e n c i e s i n s i d e t h e c l u s t e r — Ow n i n t e r n a ti on a l f u r n it u r e e xh i b it ( 3 , 097 f o r e i gn buy e r s v i s it e d it i n 2002 ) — M a i n e xpo r t m a r k e t s : U n it e d S t a t e s ( 62 % ) a nd J a p a n ( 9 % ) — V i a i n iti a l s a l e s t o U . S . m ilit a r y , d i r ec t e xpo r t s t o t h e U . S . m a r k e t b eca m e po ss i b l e — C u rr e n tl y , do m e s ti c m a r k e t m o s t i m po r t a n t a nd p r e f e rr e d — A r ound 110 e xpo r ti ng ﬁ r m s — N o f o r e i gn buy e r a g e n t s i n t h e c l u s t e r — A t t e m p t t o s e t up i n t e r n a ti on a l f u r n it u r e e xh i b it , w it h littl e s u cce ss : on l y 861 f o r e i gn buy e r s i n 2003 P e rf o r m a n ce : → L o w p e r f o r m an ce → M od e r a t e p e r f o r m an ce ( h i gh c o m p a r e d t o t o t a l P h ili pp i n e f u r n it u r e i ndu s t r y ) → L o w p e r f o r m an ce ( e s p ec i a ll y e xpo r ti ng , bu t g r o w i ng ) 360 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE — F i n a n c i a l — V e r y l o w p r o ﬁ t a b ilit y m a r g i n s — C l u s t e r m a n a g e d t o e n t e r t h e h i gh e r qu a lit y , b e tt e r p r i ce s f o r e i gn f u r n it u r e m a r k e t — C e bu c l u s t e r e xpo r t s i n c r ea s e d b e t w ee n 1998 a nd 2002 w it h 14 % : fr o m 210 m illi on U . S . $ t o 241 m illi on U . S . $ ( t o t a l P h ili pp i n e f u r n it u r e i ndu s t r y w it h 30 % b e t w ee n 1996 a nd 2000 ) — T h e w ood e n f u r n it u r e s ec t o r i n C e bu s ho w e d i m p r e ss i v e g r o w i ng e xpo r t s a l e s ( fr o m 24 . 7 m illi on U . S . $ i n 1998 t o 2001 . 3 m illi on U . S . $ 2002 : 270 % g r o w t h ) — A s a n e s ti m a ti on , a ﬁ r m i n C e bu e xpo r t s b e t w ee n 750 , 000 a nd 800 , 000 U . S . $ p e r y ea r ( 2002 ) — A s a n e s ti m a ti on , a ﬁ r m i n P a m p a ng a e xpo r t s a l m o s t 1 20 , 000 U . S . $ p e r y ea r ( 2002 ) — P a m p a ng a c l u s t e r e xpo r t s i n c r ea s e d b e t w ee n 1996 a nd 2000 w it h 1 63 % ( t o t a l P h ili pp i n e i ndu s t r y w it h 30 % ) , a nd b e t w ee n 1998 a nd 2002 w it h 15 % — O p e r a ti on a l — T h e i ndu s t r y i s i n g r ea t d i s a rr a y , un ce r t a i n f u t u r e — T h e c l u s t e r l o s t t h e w o r l d w i d e c o m p e titi on b a ttl e fr o m d i r ec t c o m p e tit o r s fr o m c l u s t e r s i n B r az il ( S i no s ) , C h i n a , o r M e x i c o ; m o s t no t a b l y w it h r e g a r d t o a tt r ac ti ng t h e a tt e n ti on o f ov e r s ea s t r a d e r s a nd buy e r s — N u m b e r o f ﬁ r m s d ec li n e d r a p i d l y : 513 i n 1994 t o 248 i n 2004 — M u c h d i ss a ti s f ac ti on w it h qu a lit y o f l o ca ll y m a d e i npu t s — O n a v e r a g e a pp r ox . 148 w o r k e r s p e r ﬁ r m — T h e c l u s t e r m a d e a s h i f t t o w a r d b e tt e r qu a lit y du r i ng l a s t d eca d e s ( e . g . , g r ea t e r r ec ogn iti on o f l o ca l d e s i gn s i n i n t e r n a ti on a l s ho w s a nd m a g az i n e s ) . — D yn a m i c e n t r e p r e n e u r i a l e nv i r on m e n t w h e r e m a ny ﬁ r m s s t a r t op e r a ti on s , bu t a l s o m a ny ﬁ r m s c l o s e — C l u s t e r m a n a g e d t o b ec o m e l e ss d e p e nd e n t on r a tt a n f u r n it u r e p r odu c ti on → r a tt a n i s s ub j ec t e d t o qu i c k c h a ng e s i n d e m a nd — C h i n e s e t h r ea t s ( C e bu ﬁ r m s h a v e a m u c h l o w e r p r odu c ti v it y r a t e ) — T h e c l u s t e r s till h a s a r e pu t a ti on f o r un r e li a b ilit y i n d e li v e r i e s — T h e C e bu c l u s t e r i s h ea d i ng f o r d i f ﬁ c u lt ti m e s , bu t it h a s s u r v i v e d o t h e r c r i s e s i n t h e p a s t 25 y ea r s ( e xp e r i e n c i ng s i m il a r p r ob l e m s a s 25 y ea r s a go ) — O n a v e r a g e , a pp r ox . 26 w o r k e r s p e r ﬁ r m — Q u a lit y t oo l o w t o s a ti s f y f o r e i gn d e m a nd s † T r a n s l a t e d by O li n e - T r a n s l a t e r . c o m . 361 March , 2014 REFERENCES Abiola , B . ( 2006a ) . Knowledge , technology , and growth : The case study of Nnewi Auto Parts Cluster in Nigeria . New York : World Bank . Abiola , B . ( 2006b ) . Knowledge , technology , and growth : The case study of Otigba Computer Village cluster in Nigeria . Unpublished manuscript , World Bank Technical Report , Washington , DC . Adeya , N . ( 2006 ) . Knowledge , technology and growth : The case study of Suame Manufacturing Enterprise Cluster in Ghana . New York : World Bank . Alosilla , J . I . ( 2002 ) . Gamarra : El Peru de los peruanos . Quehacer , 136 ( 3 ) , 66 – 71 . Alvarez , S . A . & Barney , J . B . ( 2007 ) . Discovery and creation : Alternative theories of entrepreneurial action . Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal , 1 ( 1 – 2 ) , 11 – 26 . Alvarez , S . A . & Barney , J . B . ( 2013 ) . Epistemology , opportunities , and entrepreneurship : Comments on Venkataraman et al . ( 2012 ) and Shane ( 2012 ) . Academy of Management Review , 38 ( 1 ) , 154 – 157 . Audretsch , D . B . , Grilo , I . , & Thurik , A . R . ( 2011 ) . Globalization , entrepreneurship , and the region . In M . Fritsch ( Ed . ) , Handbook of research on entrepreneurship and regional development ( pp . 11 – 32 ) . Northampton , MA : Edward Elgar . Baron , R . A . & Markman , G . D . ( 2004 ) . Toward a process view of entrepreneurship : The changing impact of individual - level variables across phases of new ﬁrm development . In M . A . Rahim , R . T . Golembiewski , & K . D . Mackenzie ( Eds . ) , Current topics in management ( pp . 44 – 64 ) . New Brunswick , NJ : Transaction Publishers . Beerepoot , N . ( 2004 ) . Learning in small enterprise clusters : The role of skilled workers in the diffusion of knowledge in the Philippines . International Journal of Technology and Globalization , 1 ( 1 ) , 78 – 91 . Beerepoot , N . ( 2005a ) . Collective learning by artisanal subcontractors in a Philippine furniture cluster . Tijdschrift vor Economische en Sociale Geograﬁe , 96 ( 5 ) , 573 – 584 . Beerepoot , N . ( 2005b ) . Collective learning in small enterprise clusters , skilled workers , labour market dynamics and knowledge accumulation in the Philippine furniture industry . Unpublished doctoral disserta - tion , University of Amsterdam , Amsterdam . Bezdin , D . L . ( 2005 ) . En la Suscripcion de la renovacion del convenio entre la coordinadora de empresarios de Gamarra e Indecopi [ Speech ] . Brautigam , D . ( 1997 ) . Substituting for the state : Institutions and industry development in Eastern Nigeria . World Development , 25 ( 7 ) , 1063 – 1080 . Briner , R . B . & Denyer , D . ( 2012 ) . Systematic review and evidence synthesis as a practice and scholarship tool . In D . M . Rousseau ( Ed . ) , The Oxford handbook of evidence based management ( pp . 112 – 129 ) . NewYork : Oxford University Press . Campbell , R . , Pound , P . , Pope , C . , Britten , N . , Pill , R . , Morgan , M . , et al . ( 2003 ) . Evaluating meta - ethnography : A synthesis of qualitative research on lay experiences of diabetes and diabetes care . Social Science & Medicine , 56 ( 4 ) , 671 – 684 . Chandler , G . N . & Lyon , D . W . ( 2001 ) . Issues of research design and construct measurement in entrepreneur - ship research . Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 25 ( 4 ) , 101 – 113 . Christensen , C . M . & Carlile , P . R . ( 2009 ) . Course research : Using the case method to build and teach management theory . Academy of Management Learning and Education , 8 ( 9 ) , 240 – 251 . 362 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE Cope , J . ( 2011 ) . Entrepreneurial learning from failure : An interpretative phenomenological analysis . Journal of Business Venturing , 26 ( 6 ) , 604 – 623 . Creswell , J . W . ( 2009 ) . Qualitative inquiry and research design : Choosing among ﬁve traditions . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Crook , T . R . , Shook , C . L . , Morris , M . L . , & Madden , T . M . ( 2010 ) . Are we there yet ? An assessment of research design and construct measurement practices in entrepreneurship research . Organizational Research Methods , 13 ( 1 ) , 192 – 206 . Crotty , M . ( 1998 ) . The foundations of social research : Meaning and perspective in the research process . London : Sage . Davidsson , P . , Low , M . , & Wright , M . ( 2001 ) . Editor’s introduction : Low and McMillan ten years on : Achievements and future directions for entrepreneurship research . Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice , 25 ( 4 ) , 5 – 15 . Davies , H . T . O . & Nutley , S . N . ( 1999 ) . The rise and rise of evidence in health care . Public Money & Management , 19 ( 1 ) , 9 – 16 . Denyer , D . & Tranﬁeld , D . ( 2006 ) . Using qualitative research synthesis to build an actionable knowledge base . Management Decision , 44 ( 2 ) , 213 – 227 . Dixon - Woods , M . , Agarwal , S . , Young , B . , Jones , D . , & Sutton , A . ( 2004 ) . Integrative approaches to qualitative and quantitative evidence . London : Health Development Agency . Dul , J . & Hak , T . ( 2008 ) . Case study methodology in business research . Oxford : Elsevier . Duxbury , T . ( 2012 ) . Towards more case study research in entrepreneurship . Technology Innovation Manage - ment Review , 2 ( 3 ) , 9 – 17 . Eckhardt , J . T . & Shane , S . A . ( 2003 ) . Opportunities and entrepreneurship . Journal of Management , 29 ( 3 ) , 333 – 349 . Eckhardt , J . T . & Shane , S . A . ( 2013 ) . Response to the commentaries : The individual - opportunity ( IO ) nexus integrates objective and subjective aspects of entrepreneurship . Academy of Management Review , 38 ( 1 ) , 160 – 163 . Eisenhardt , K . M . ( 1989 ) . Building theories from case study research . Academy of Management Review , 14 ( 4 ) , 532 – 550 . Eisenhardt , K . M . ( 1991 ) . Better stories and better constructs : The case for rigor and comparative logic . The Academy of Management Review , 16 ( 3 ) , 620 – 627 . Elfring , T . & Hulsink , W . ( 2007 ) . Networking by entrepreneurs : Patterns of tie formation for emerging organizations . Organization Studies , 28 ( 12 ) , 1849 – 1872 . Evans , D . ( 2002 ) . Database searches for qualitative research . Journal of the Medical Library Association , 90 ( 3 ) , 290 – 293 . Finfgeld , D . L . ( 2003 ) . Metasynthesis : The state of the art—So far . Qualitative Health Research , 13 ( 7 ) , 893 – 904 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 1049732303253462 Frese , M . , Bausch , A . , Schmidt , P . , Rauch , A . , & Kabst , R . ( 2012a ) . Evidence - based entrepreneurship ( EBE ) : A systematic approach to cumulative science . In D . Rousseau ( Ed . ) , The Oxford handbook of evidence based management ( pp . 92 – 111 ) . New York : Oxford University Press . 363 March , 2014 Frese , M . , Bausch , A . , Schmidt , P . , Rauch , A . , & Kabst , R . ( 2012b ) . Evidence - based entrepreneurship ( EBE ) : Cumulative science , action principles , and bridging the gap between science and practice . Foundations and Trends in Entrepreneurship , 8 ( 1 ) , 1 – 62 . Gartner , W . B . ( 2007 ) . Entrepreneurial narrative and a science of the imagination . Entrepreneurial Narrative Greif Symposium on Emerging Organizations , 22 ( 5 ) , 613 – 627 . Gartner , W . B . & Birley , S . ( 2002 ) . Qualitative methods in entrepreneurial research . Journal of Business Venturing , 17 ( 5 ) , 387 – 395 . George , G . & Bock , A . J . ( 2011 ) . The business model in practice and its implications for entrepreneurship research . Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 35 ( 1 ) , 83 – 111 . Gephart , R . P . ( 2004 ) . Qualitative research and the Academy of Management Journal . Academy of Manage - ment Journal , 47 ( 4 ) , 454 – 482 . Gibbert , M . , Ruigrok , W . , & Wicki , B . ( 2008 ) . What passes as a rigorous case study ? Strategic Management Journal , 29 , 1465 – 1474 . Giuliani , E . , Pietrobelli , C . , & Rabellotti , R . ( 2005 ) . Upgrading in global value chains : Lessons from Latin American clusters . World Development , 33 ( 4 ) , 549 – 573 . Glaser , B . G . & Strauss , A . L . ( 1967 ) . The discovery of grounded theory : Strategies for qualitative research . Chicago : Aldine Publishing Company . Hak , T . & Dul , J . ( 2010 ) . Theory - building with cases . In A . J . Mills , G . Durepos , & E . Wiebe ( Eds . ) , Encyclopedia of case study research ( pp . 932 – 937 ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Hoon , C . ( 2013 ) . Meta - synthesis of qualitative case studies : An approach to theory building . Organizational Research Methods , 16 ( 4 ) , 501 – 521 . Hunter , J . E . & Schmidt , F . L . ( 2004 ) . Methods for meta - analysis : Correcting error and bias in research ﬁndings . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . Jensen , J . L . & Rodgers , R . ( 2001 ) . Cumulating the intellectual gold of case study research . Public Adminis - tration Review , 61 ( 2 ) , 235 – 246 . Jick , T . D . ( 1979 ) . Mixing qualitative and quantitative methods : Triangulation in action . Administrative Science Quarterly , 24 ( 4 ) , 602 – 611 . Johnson , P . , Buehring , A . , Cassell , C . , & Symon , G . ( 2006 ) . Evaluating qualitative management research : Towards a contingent criteriology . International Journal of Management Reviews , 8 ( 3 ) , 131 – 156 . Kaplinsky , R . & Morris , M . ( 2001 ) . A handbook of value chain research ( Vol . 113 ) . Sussex , U . K . : IDRC . Kinyanjui , M . N . ( 2006 ) . Knowledge , technology and growth : The case study of Kamukunji Jua Kali Enter - prise Cluster in Kenya . New York : World Bank . Knight , F . H . ( 1921 ) . Risk , uncertainty , and proﬁt . New York : Kelly and Millman . Kodithuwakku , S . S . & Rosa , P . ( 2002 ) . The entrepreneurial process and economic success in a constrained environment . Journal of Business Venturing , 17 , 431 – 465 . Krauss , S . , Marxt , C . , Filser , M . , & Guieu , G . ( 2011 ) . Strategic entrepreneurship : Analyse der Strukturen und Entwicklung des Forschungsfeldes [ Strategic entrepreneurship : Analysis of the structure and development of the research ﬁeld ] . Zeitschrift für KMU und Entrepreneurship , 59 ( 3 ) , 203 – 228 . Krippendorff , K . ( 1980 ) . Content analysis : An introduction to its methodology . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . 364 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE Larsson , R . ( 1993 ) . Case survey methodology : Quantitative analysis of patterns across case studies . The Academy of Management Journal , 36 ( 6 ) , 1515 – 1546 . Lawson , T . ( 2009 ) . Ontology and economics : Tony Lawson and his critics . London : Routledge . Leplin , J . ( 1984 ) . Scientiﬁc realism . Berkeley : University of California Press . Loebis , L . & Schmitz , H . ( 2005 ) . Java furniture makers : Globalization winner of losers ? Development in Practice , 15 ( 3 / 4 ) , 514 – 521 . Lopez , M . P . , Cunha , M . P . , & Palma , P . ( 2009 ) . Cases studies on what entrepreneurs actually do to attract resources : A two - route framework . Journal of Enterprising Culture , 17 ( 3 ) , 323 – 349 . Low , M . B . ( 2001 ) . The adolescence of entrepreneurship research : Speciﬁcation of purpose . Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 25 ( 4 ) , 9 – 26 . Low , M . B . & MacMillan , B . ( 1988 ) . Entrepreneurship : Past research and future challenges . Journal of Management , 14 ( 2 ) , 139 – 162 . Magretta , J . ( 2002 ) . Why business models matter . Harvard Business Review , 80 ( 5 ) , 86 – 92 . Marshall , A . ( 1920 ) . Principles of economics . London : McMillan . McCormick , D . ( 1998 ) . Enterprise clusters in Africa : On the way to industrialization ? Brighton , Institute of Development Studies , University of Sussex . McKelvey , B . ( 1997 ) . Organization positivism : Separating myth from reality : Presented at the Macro Organizational Behavior Science Meeting . Los Angeles : The Anderson School at UCLA . McKelvey , B . ( 1998 ) . “Good” science from postmodernist ontology : Realism , complexity theory , and emergent dissipative structures . Non - linearity and the Organization Conference , Las Cruces , NM . McKelvey , B . ( 2002 ) . Postmodernism vs . truth in management theory . In E . A . Locke ( Ed . ) , Modernism and management : Pros , cons , and alternatives ( pp . 113 – 168 ) . Amsterdam : Elsevier . Merton , R . K . ( 1957 ) . Social theory and social structure . New York : Free Press . Miller , D . & Friesen , P . H . ( 1977 ) . Strategy - making in context : Ten empirical archetypes . Journal of Management Studies , 14 ( 3 ) , 253 – 280 . Mintzberg , H . , Raisinghani , D . , & Théorêt , A . ( 1976 ) . The structure of “unstructured” decision processes . Administrative Science Quarterly , 21 ( 2 ) , 246 – 275 . Morosini , P . ( 2004 ) . Industrial clusters , knowledge integration and performance . World Development , 32 ( 2 ) , 306 – 326 . Neergaard , H . & Ulhoi , J . P . ( 2007 ) . Handbook of qualitative research methods in entrepreneurship . Northampton , MA : Edward Elgar . Newig , J . & Fritsch , O . ( 2009 ) . The case survey method and applications in political science . APSA 2009 Toronto Meeting Paper . Noblit , G . W . & Hare , R . D . ( 1988 ) . Meta - ethnography : Synthesizing qualitative studies . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . O’Boyle , E . H . , Jr . , Pollack , J . M . , & Rutherford , M . W . ( 2012 ) . Exploring the relation between family involve - ment and ﬁrms’ ﬁnancial performance : A meta - analysis of main and moderator effects . Journal of Business Venturing , 27 ( 1 ) , 1 – 18 . 365 March , 2014 Obeng , G . Y . ( 2002 ) . Kumasi Suame Magazine . Kumasi ( Ghana ) : Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology . Oyelaran - Oyeyinka , B . ( 1997 ) . Newi : An emergent industry cluster in Nigeria . Ibadan : Technopol Publishers . Oyelaran - Oyeyinka , B . ( 2001 ) . Networks and linkages in African manufacturing ﬁrms : A Nigerian case study . Discussion paper , UNU / Intech . Oyelaran - Oyeyinka , B . ( 2004 ) . Networking technological change and industrialization : The case of small and medium ﬁrms in Nigeria . Special paper series , 20 , ATPS . Oyelaran - Oyeyinka , B . ( 2006 ) . Learning hightech and knowledge in local industries : The Otigba computer hardware cluster in Nigeria . Working paper series , UNU / Intech . Pawson , R . ( 2002 ) . Evidence - based policy : The promise of “realist synthesis . ” Evaluation , 8 ( 3 ) , 340 – 358 . Perren , L . & Ram , M . ( 2004 ) . Case - study method in small business and entrepreneurial research : Mapping boundaries and perspectives . International Small Business Journal , 22 ( 1 ) , 83 – 101 . Perry , M . ( 2005 ) . Business clusters in the south : A critical appraisal from Indonesian evidence . Singapore Journal of Tropical Geography , 26 ( 2 ) , 227 – 243 . Pettigrew , A . M . ( 1997 ) . What is a processual analysis ? Scandinavian Journal of Management , 13 ( 4 ) , 337 – 348 . Pietrobelli , C . & Barrera , T . O . ( 2002 ) . Enterprise clusters and industrial districts in Columbia’s fashion sector . European Planning Studies , 10 ( 5 ) , 541 – 562 . Pietrobelli , C . & Rabellotti , R . ( 2004 ) . Upgrading in clusters and value chains in Latin America : The role of policies . Washington , DC : Inter - American Development Bank . Pittaway , L . & Cope , J . ( 2007 ) . Entrepreneurship education : A systematic review of evidence . International Small Business Journal , 25 ( 5 ) , 479 – 510 . Porter , M . E . ( 1990 ) . The competitive advantage of nations . New York : Free Press . ProInvest . ( 2005 ) . The ProInvest program and cluster and enterprise networks . Economisti Associati , Bologna , Italy . Ragin , C . ( 1987 ) . The comparative method : Moving beyond qualitative and quantitative strategies . Berkeley , CA : University of California Press . Rauch , A . & Frese , M . ( 2006 ) . Meta - analysis as a tool for developing entrepreneurship research and theory . In J . Wiklund , D . P . Dimov , J . Katz , & D . Shepherd ( Eds . ) , Advances in entrepreneurship , Firm emergence , and growth ( pp . 29 – 52 ) . London : Elsevier . Rauch , A . & Frese , M . ( 2007 ) . Let’s put the person back into entrepreneurship research : A meta - analysis of the relationship between business owners’ personality traits , business creation and success . European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology , 16 ( 4 ) , 353 – 385 . Read , S . , Song , M . , & Smit , W . ( 2009 ) . A meta - analytic review of effectuation and venture performance . Journal of Business Venturing , 24 ( 6 ) , 573 – 587 . Rocha , H . O . ( 2004 ) . Entrepreneurship and development : The role of clusters . Small Business Economics , 23 , 363 – 400 . Rosenbusch , N . , Rauch , A . , & Bausch , A . ( 2013 ) . The mediating role of entrepreneurial orientation in the task environment – performance relationship : A meta - analysis . Journal of Management , 39 ( 3 ) , 633 – 659 . 366 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE Rousseau , D . M . , Manning , J . , & Denyer , D . ( 2008 ) . Evidence in management and organizational science : Assembling the ﬁeld’s full weight of scientiﬁc knowledge through syntheses . Academy of Management Annals , 2 ( 1 ) , 475 – 515 . Sandee , H . , Andadari , R . K . , & Sulandjari , S . ( 2000 ) . Small ﬁrm development during good times and bad . In C . Manning & P . v . Diermen ( Eds . ) , Indonesia transition : Social aspects of reformasi and crisis ( pp . 184 – 198 ) . Singapore : Institute of South - East Asian Studies . Sandee , H . , Isdijoso , B . , & Sulandjari , S . ( 2002 ) . SME clusters in Indonesia : An analysis of growth dynamics and employment conditions . Geneva : International Labour Organization . Sarasvathy , S . D . ( 2001 ) . Causation and effectuation : Toward a theoretical shift from economic inevitability to entrepreneurial contingency . Academy of Management Review , 26 ( 2 ) , 243 – 263 . Sato , Y . ( 2005 ) . Linkage formations by small ﬁrms : The case of a rural cluster in Indonesia . Bulletin of Indonesian Economic Studies , 36 ( 1 ) , 137 – 166 . Schmitz , H . ( 1995a ) . Collective efﬁciency : Growth path for small - scale industry . The Journal of Development Studies , 31 ( 4 ) , 529 – 566 . Schmitz , H . ( 1995b ) . Small shoemakers and fordist giants : Tale of a supercluster . Industrial Organization and Manufacturing Competitiveness in Developing Countries , 23 ( 1 ) , 9 – 28 . Schmitz , H . ( 1999a ) . Collective efﬁciency and increasing returns . Cambridge Journal of Economics , 23 , 465 – 483 . Scott , A . J . ( 2005 ) . The shoe industry of Marikina City , Philippines : A developing - country cluster in crisis . Philippine Journal of Third World Studies , 20 ( 2 ) , 76 – 99 . Shane , S . & Venkataraman , S . ( 2000 ) . The promise of entrepreneurship as a ﬁeld of research . Academy of Management Review , 25 ( 1 ) , 217 – 226 . Shaw , R . , Booth , A . , Sutton , A . , Miller , T . , Smith , J . , Young , B . , et al . ( 2004 ) . Finding qualitative research : An evaluation of search strategies . BMC Medical Research Methodology , 4 ( 1 ) , 1 – 5 . Short , J . C . , Ketchen , D . J . , Shook , C . L . , & Ireland , R . D . ( 2010 ) . The concept of “opportunity” in entrepre - neurship research : Past accomplishments and future challenges . Journal of Management , 36 ( 1 ) , 40 – 65 . Siggelkow , N . ( 2007 ) . Persuasion with case studies . Academy of Management Journal , 50 ( 1 ) , 20 – 24 . Tambunan , T . ( 2006 ) . Development of small and medium scale industry clusters in Indonesia . Kadin Indonesia Jetro . Thorne , S . , Jensen , L . , Kearney , M . H . , Noblit , G . , & Sandelowski , M . ( 2004 ) . Qualitative metasynthesis : Reﬂections on methodological orientation and ideological agenda . Qualitative Health Research , 14 ( 10 ) , 1342 – 1365 . Tourish , D . ( 2012 ) . “Evidence based management , ” or “evidence oriented organizing” ? A critical realist perspective . Organization , 20 ( 2 ) , 173 – 192 . Tranﬁeld , D . , Denyer , D . , & Smart , P . ( 2003 ) . Towards a methodology for developing evidence - informed management knowledge by means of systematic review . British Journal of Management , 14 ( 3 ) , 207 – 222 . Uzor , O . O . ( 2004 ) . Small - and medium - scale enterprise cluster development in the South - Eastern region of Nigeria . Paper presented at the 86 Weltwirtschaftliches Colloquium der Universitaet Bremen . Venkatraman , N . & Ramanujam , V . ( 1986 ) . Measurement of business performance in strategy research : A comparison of approaches . Academy of Management Review , 11 , 801 – 814 . 367 March , 2014 Visser , E . ( 1999 ) . A comparison of clustered and dispersed ﬁrms in the small - scale clothing industry of Lima . World Development , 27 ( 9 ) , 1553 – 1557 . Visser , E . ( 2000 ) . Structural adjustment and cluster advantages : A case from Peru . In A . Sverrisson & M . P . v . Dijk ( Eds . ) , Local economies in turmoil , the effects of deregulation and globalization ( pp . 77 – 94 ) . London : MacMillan . Visser , E . & Boschma , R . ( 2004 ) . Learning in districts : Novelty and lock - in in a regional context . European Planning Studies , 12 ( 6 ) , 793 – 808 . Yin , R . K . ( 2003 ) . Case study research , design and methods ( 3rd ed . ) . London : Sage . Zuckerman , H . ( 1972 ) . Interviewing an ultra - elite . Public Opinion Quarterly , 36 ( 2 ) , 159 – 175 . Andreas Rauch is a Professor for Entrepreneurship in Regional Enterprises , Leuphana University Lüneburg , Scharnhorststrasse 1 , 21335 Lueneburg , Germany . Robert van Doorn is MSc BA graduate from the Rotterdam School of Management , PO Box 1738 , 3000 DR Rotterdam , The Netherlands . Willem Hulsink is Associate Professor in the Rotterdam School of Management , PO Box 1738 , 3000 DR Rotterdam , The Netherlands . We would like to thank Meine - Pieter van Dijk for valuable comments on our paper . 368 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE