28 British Journal of Psychology ( 2012 ) , 103 , 28 – 43 C (cid:2) 2011 The British Psychological Society TheBritishPsychologicalSociety www . wileyonlinelibrary . com Resolving conﬂicting social categories : The role of age - related executive ability Russell R . C . Hutter 1 ∗ , Chantelle Wood 1 and Georgina F . Dodd 2 1 University of Leeds , UK 2 University of Reading , UK We investigated the effect of age - related decline in executive ability on the application of emergent features to incongruent social category conjunctions ( e . g . , male midwife ) . When forming an impression of an incongruent conjunction , older adults used more emergent attributes ( attributes associated exclusively with the category conjunction and not the constituents ) , relative to younger adults . Moreover , this relationship was mediated by a reduction in inhibitory ability ( measured using a Stroop task ) and processing speed ( measured using a Digit Symbol Substitution Test , DSST ) . These ﬁndings are consistent with the notion that executive ability is pivotal in understanding social functioning in older adults . We discuss the implications of these ﬁndings for the continuing development of models outlining the processes and stages involved in perceiving social category conjunctions . The ability to process social information about others quickly and efﬁciently is essential , but sometimes challenging . Interactions with unknown others are often ﬂeeting or su - perﬁcial , and consequently based upon activation of simpliﬁed cognitive representations of salient social categories ( e . g . , gender , race , age , occupation , etc . ) . Normally , this fast and efﬁcient process requires little effort on the behalf of perceivers . This is because it is often implemented without the requirement of the social perceiver’s attention , out of awareness – automatically ( Macrae , Milne , & Bodenhausen , 1994 ) . For the most part , this system of categorization works smoothly and efﬁciently , enabling social perceivers to navigate their social world , while attending to other seemingly more pressing tasks . We are interested in what happens when these categorical expectations are chal - lenged , through the simultaneous activation of conﬂicting social categories ( e . g . , a male midwife ) . How do perceivers interpret this and do the processes involved change across the lifespan ? Little is known about how natural aging processes affect categorization and impression formation later in life . This article focuses on the differential processing ∗ Correspondence should be addressed to Russell R . C . Hutter , Institute of Psychological Sciences , University of Leeds , LS2 9JT , UK ( e - mail : r . r . c . hutter @ leeds . ac . uk ) . DOI : 10 . 1111 / j . 2044 - 8295 . 2011 . 02037 . x Aging and conﬂicting social categories 29 consequences of forming impressions of targets that share membership of conﬂicting categories , for younger and older adults . The composition and dynamics of category conjunctions The construction and subsequent representation of a complex social category from two simple constituent categories is referred to as social category combination or conjunction ( Crisp & Hewstone , 2000 ; Deschamps & Doise , 1978 ; Ensari & Miller , 1998 ; Roccas & Brewer , 2002 ; Stangor , Lynch , Duan , & Glass , 1992 ) . Individuals sharing membership with more than one salient category are often perceived differently to members of each simple constituent category ( Hutter , Crisp , Humphreys , Waters , & Mofﬁtt , 2009 ) . Therefore , inconsistency resolution is often required to form a coherent impression , particularly when encountering targets that share membership of conﬂicting social categories ( known as incongruent or surprising category conjunctions ) . In forming impressions of incongruent conjunctions ( e . g . , a Harvard - educated carpenter ) , perceivers are likely to incorporate emergent traits or attributes ( e . g . , ‘non - materialistic’ ; Kunda , Miller , & Claire , 1990 ; see also Hastie , Schroeder , & Weber , 1990 ) , that are applied in the perception of the conjunction , but not either of the constituent categories ( Barsalou , 1987 , 1989 ; Estes & Ward , 2002 ; Hampton , 1997 ; Wilkenﬁeld & Ward , 2001 ) . Another focus of incongruent category conjunction is that of ‘constituent inheritance’ ( e . g . , Hampton , 1987 ; Hutter & Crisp , 2005 ) . This describes the extent to which attributes originating with the constituents are ‘inherited’ by the conjunction . Incongruent conjunctions tend to be comprised of more emergent and fewer constituent attributes relative to congruent conjunctions ( Hutter & Crisp , 2005 ; Hutter & Crisp , 2008 ) . Recent research has revealed that social perceivers do not immediately generate emergent attributes when encountering an incongruent conjunction . Instead , while constituent traits are applied early on in impression formation , emergent traits tend to appear later in the time course ( Hutter et al . , 2009 ; Siebler , 2008 ) . This suggests that it is only after attempts to ﬁt a given target to a simple category frame fail , that a second stage resulting in emergent trait application is invoked , a pattern of processing outlined in Hastie et al . ’s ( 1990 ) two - stage model of impression formation . Further research has indicated that this second stage of processing , responsible for emergent traits , involves complex deliberative reasoning ( Hastie et al . , 1990 ; Hutter et al . , 2009 ; Siebler , 2008 ) . However , recent research suggests there may also be important individual differences in the implementation of the second stage of processing , when forming impressions of incongruent conjunctions . Hutter et al . demonstrated that perceivers with a high Personal Need for Structure ( PNS ) , which is associated with a more ordered way of thinking ( Bartal & Guinote , 2002 ; Thompson , Naccarato , & Parker , 1989 ) , apply more emergent attributes and fewer constituent attributes to incongruent targets , relative to individuals with a lower PNS . This ﬁnding initially seems somewhat counterintuitive . Based on their greater need for structure and order , we may expect high PNS individuals to rely on categorical or stereotypical structures , and accordingly form more constituent - based impressions . However , incongruent conjunctions are a special case . High PNS perceivers experience greater difﬁculty when faced with conﬂicting or incongruent conjunctions that do not easily ﬁt their existing deﬁned categories . In seeking to ﬁnd a sense of order and certainty , they engage in inconsistency resolution processes to a greater degree ( part of the second stage involving complex reasoning in Hastie et al . ’s two - stage model ) , generating relatively more emergent to constituent 30 Russell R . C . Hutter et al . attributes to explain the conﬂict . This has the advantage of maintaining existing categorical structures without the need to update , change , or revise ( Hutter et al . , 2009 ) . These results are mirrored in the ﬁeld of stereotype maintenance . Sherman , Stroess - ner , Conrey , and Azam ( 2005 ) , for example , showed that greater attention to , and greater encoding of counter - stereotypic information is more likely for those motivated to maintain stereotypical representations ( in this case those higher in prejudice ) . Sherman et al . ( 2005 ) argue that this greater attention to counter - stereotypic information is a result of motivation to explain away these inconsistencies , thereby maintaining existing stereotypical structures . These ﬁndings are highly informative for the present work , in which we test the cognitive constructs involved for an aging versus younger group . Clearly , explaining away inconsistent information requires cognitive effort and we will argue in the next section that this is more likely to occur for an aging group . Executive functioning , aging , and forming impressions The inconsistency resolution process resulting in emergent attributes was conceptual - ized as reliant on executive functioning by Hutter and Crisp ( 2006 ) . Relative to a control condition , concurrently overloaded ( using digit production tasks : e . g . , Baddeley , 1986 , 1996 ; LaDoux , 1996 ) perceivers in Hutter and Crisp’s study showed impaired application of emergent attributes to incongruent conjunctions , while still generating a comparable number of constituent attributes . Emergent attribute production is therefore reliant upon the availability of adequate executive resources . Executive functioning , in particular inhibitory ability , is known to deteriorate with age ( e . g . , Hasher & Zacks , 1988 ; Lustig , Hasher , & Tonev , 2001 ) . Research has demonstrated links between age - related executive decline and a number of social processes including impression formation ( von Hippel , Silver , & Lynch , 2000 ; Payne , 2005 ) . In von Hippel et al . ’s ( 2000 ) work , for example , older adults were found to rely more on stereotypes , and were more prejudiced than their younger counterparts . Tellingly , this was mediated by poorer inhibitory ability . When processing category conjunctions therefore , older individuals with poorer inhibitory ability may be less likely to engage in the resource - consuming reasoning processes that result in the generation of emergent traits , instead relying on the simple category - based information that the constituent categories provide . Alternatively , age - related decline in cognitive ability , in the form reduced ability to inhibit conﬂicting information , presents a particular problem when encountering incongruent social category conjunctions that may require resolving . A wide range of studies suggest that inhibition plays an important role in categorizing people that belong to multiple social groups , but generally focuses on situations in which activation of a more salient category is accompanied by inhibition of the less salient category ( e . g . , Macrae , Bodehausen & Milne , 1995 ; Sinclair & Kunda , 1999 ) . Arguably however , inhibitory processes are just as important when studying conﬂicting category conjunctions . It seems likely , for example , that people with poor inhibitory ability would experience more difﬁculty with the conﬂict inherent in incongruent conjunctions , because they ﬁnd it harder to ignore the inconsistencies . Indeed , inhibition of irrelevant information is poorer in older adults ( Hasher & Zacks , 1988 ) . In much the same way as previously discussed with higher PNS therefore , older individuals with poorer inhibitory ability may be more motivated to engage in deliberative inconsistency resolution processes to explain away the conﬂict , and form a more coherent impression . Aging and conﬂicting social categories 31 This process should logically result in the generation of more explanatory ( emergent ) traits by older participants because inhibitory ability deteriorates with age . Comparable patterns of reduced age - related performance are found with processing speed . Slower processing speed is often indicative of reduced executive ability and has been shown to be associated with aging ( e . g . , Salthouse , 1996 ; Verhaeghen & Basak , 2005 ; Verhaeghen & Salthouse , 1997 ) . Reduced executive ability in the form of slower processing speed may be expected to attenuate the effortful generation of emergent traits in the same manner as increased cognitive load . However , there are also grounds for expecting the opposite . First , in keeping with the argument regarding inhibitory ability outlined above , perceivers with a slower processing style may be more likely to take the time and effort to resolve inconsistency . It is our contention that slower processors are more deliberative when encountering inconsistency . Based on the premise outlined above that older adults ﬁnd greater difﬁculty in ignoring irrelevant information , it therefore follows that failure to inhibit conﬂicting information might activate a deliberative inconsistency resolution processes ( Asch & Zukier , 1984 ) . Furthermore , Hutter et al . ( 2009 ) clearly showed that these processes not only result in more emergent attributes but also take more time for incongruent conjunctions . Therefore , this processing style in older adults should be more likely to result in emergent features when describing incongruent conjunctions because these features are the product of inconsistency resolution ( e . g . , Hastie et al . , 1990 ; Hutter & Crisp , 2005 ; Kunda et al . , 1990 ) . However , this process is at least partially distinct from the inhibitory route outlined previously and thus warrants independent investigation accordingly . Second , we argue that slower processors may think in terms of more rigid categories . Accordingly , they may be more likely to engage in effortful inconsistency resolution when forming impressions of incongruent conjunctions because incongruent targets violate their categorical boundaries to a greater degree . Indeed , the general cognitive slowing in processing speed associated with age ( e . g . , Salthouse , 1996 ; Verhaeghen & Basak , 2005 ; Verhaeghen & Salthouse , 1997 ) is also associated with a more ordered , structured , way of thinking , in the form of higher PNS ( Hess , 2001 ) . As discussed earlier , research has demonstrated that greater PNS is associated with greater emergent attribute application ( e . g . , Hutter et al . , 2009 ) . Accordingly , we may expect the same pattern of increased emergent trait application by individuals with slower processing speed . Ironically therefore , although perceivers with a slower processing style tend to show reduced executive abilities , they may require relatively more of these resources when encountering incongruent social category conjunctions , and generate more emergent traits to explain the conﬂict . While in the present research we are broadly interested in the effects of age - related executive decline and the application of emergent attributes , there exist a number of theoretical reasons to tease executive ability based on inhibitory ability and processing speed apart . As discussed earlier , von Hippel et al . ( 2000 ) showed that social perception in older adults is reliant on inhibitory ability . In addition , research demonstrates that inhibition also plays an important role in multiple social categorization ( e . g . , Macrae et al . , 1995 ; Sinclair & Kunda , 1999 ) . Therefore , there are solid grounds to suspect that inhibitory processes , as a partially independent mechanism , may be involved in incongruent category conjunction . In terms of processing speed , previously slower more deliberative processing has been shown to be associated with resolving incongruent conjunctions resulting in emergent attributes ( Hutter et al . , 2009 ) . Based on this , we believe that older adults with a slower more deliberative processing style may also be more likely to take the time and effort to apply more emergent features when 32 Russell R . C . Hutter et al . describing incongruent conjunctions . Indeed , failure to inhibit conﬂicting information , followed by a slow , deliberative processing of this information may represent discrete stages . Furthermore , as outlined above , slower processing speed has been shown to be associated with a more ordered , structured , way of thinking , in the form of higher PNS ( Hess , 2001 ) . In short , there are a number of reasons to expect age - related declines in executive functioning ( e . g . , inhibitory ability and processing speed ) to increase emergent trait use in social category conjunctions . However , no previous work has directly investigated the role of executive ability when perceiving incongruent social conjunctions in an aging sample . This therefore formed the basis for the current study . This research Broadly , the goal of the current study was to clearly show the role of reduced age - associated executive ability in emergent attribute application when processing incongruent social category conjunctions . Based on the logic presented above , a number of predictions were formulated : First , we expect that more emergent attributes will be applied by older adults versus younger adults because the former group is more likely to adopt a deliberative , slower processing style . Additionally , the aging group may have a greater need to explain away the conﬂict inherent in incongruent conjunctions due to poorer inhibitory ability and a greater need for structure . It is also predicted that no difference will be found in the number of constituent attributes generated across the two age groups because these are not produced through an effortful executive process . Second , it is anticipated that older perceivers will show the standard reduction in inhibitory ability and processing speed previously observed in the literature on aging ( Lustig et al . , 2001 ; Salthouse , 1996 ) . Finally , we predict that the relationship between age and emergent attribute generation will be mediated by this reduction in inhibitory ability and processing speed . As discussed above , poorer inhibitory ability and slower processing speed may lead older adults to adopt a deliberative , slower processing style . This leaves this group with a greater need to resolve the inconsistencies inherent in incongruent social category conjunctions through the generation of more emergent traits . Method Participants and design Seventeen young adults ( 12 women , mean age = 20 . 53 years , SD = 2 . 56 , range = 18 – 27 years ) and 17 older adults ( nine women , mean age = 68 . 82 years , SD = 5 . 46 , range = 63 – 79 years ) were allocated to a one factor ( age ) between subjects design with two levels ( younger adults vs . older adults ) . The younger group was recruited using the departmental research panel in exchange for an hour of course credit . Participants in the older group were recruited through the departmental aging panel . All participants were British nationals with English as their ﬁrst language . There were no reported differences in the number of years spent in formal education , t ( 32 ) = 0 . 15 , p > . 05 . There was a marginal difference found in a marker of ﬂuid intelligence ( block design ) , t ( 32 ) = 1 . 32 , p = . 09 , d = . 45 in the direction of superior ability in the younger group ( M = 42 . 00 , SD = 8 . 67 ) versus the older group ( M = 38 . 06 , SD = 8 . 73 ) , consistent with previous work ( e . g . , Horn , 1986 ) . Crystallized intelligence ( vocabulary ) was found to be higher in the older ( M = 59 . 65 , SD = 10 . 39 ) versus the younger group , ( M = 51 . 65 , SD = 5 . 60 ) , t ( 32 ) = − 2 . 80 , p = . 009 , d = 1 . 00 , in accordance with previous well - established ﬁndings Aging and conﬂicting social categories 33 ( e . g . , Cavanaugh & Blanchard - Fields , 2006 ) . Mediation analyses ( Baron & Kenny , 1986 ) were used to test the relationships between the predictor variable : age ( younger adults vs . older adults ) , and the dependent variables : number of emergent attributes and number of constituent attributes . Inhibitory ability ( Stroop ) and processing speed ( Digit Symbol Substitution Test , DSST ) were the mediator variables . Materials A pilot study was conducted to ensure that a person described as a ‘male midwife’ was rated as more surprising and less familiar than both a ‘male’ and a ‘midwife’ . Forty - four participants ( mean age = 22 . 20 , SD = 8 . 14 , range = 18 – 62 years ) rated each person for surprise and for familiarity ( 1 = not at all familiar ; 7 = very familiar ) . The male midwife ( M = 4 . 18 , SD = 2 . 16 ) was rated as more surprising than both the male ( M = 1 . 20 , SD = 0 . 76 ) , t ( 43 ) = 8 . 56 , p < . 0005 , d = 2 . 61 , and the midwife ( M = 1 . 89 , SD = 1 . 20 ) , t ( 43 ) = 6 . 81 , p < . 0005 , d = 2 . 08 . Likewise , the male midwife ( M = 2 . 27 , SD = 1 . 50 ) was rated as less familiar than both the male ( M = 6 . 39 , SD = 1 . 48 ) , t ( 43 ) = − 12 . 28 , p < . 0005 , d = − 3 . 75 , and the midwife ( M = 4 . 39 , SD = 2 . 22 ) , t ( 43 ) = − 6 . 84 , p < . 0005 , d = 2 . 09 . Correlational analyses revealed no signiﬁcant relationship between age and perceptions of familiarity or surprise ( all p’s > . 10 ) . Procedure Participants were given 2 min ( measured using a digital timer ) to describe each of three presented target labels , by generating up to 20 attributes in list form for each label . Following the procedure described by Hastie et al . ( 1990 ) , the ﬁrst label was an incongruent category conjunction ( male midwife ) , followed by each of the constituent categories that made up the conjunction ( male , midwife ) . The order of the constituent categories was alternated for each participant . Following the generation task , participants completed the DSST as a measure of processing speed . Participants were given a piece of paper depicting nine symbols , which corresponded with nine digits . Underneath this were seven rows of digits with empty spaces below them . Participants were given 90 s ( measured using a digital timer ) to ﬁll in the corresponding symbols as quickly and accurately as possible . The total number of correct substitutions was recorded and formed the dependent variable measuring processing speed . Participants then completed a Stroop ( 1935 ) task , which has been used previously to demonstrate age - related deﬁcits in inhibitory ability ( e . g . , Bugg , DeLosh , Davalos , & Davis , 2007 ) . Participants completed a baseline condition ﬁrst , followed by an interference condition . In the baseline condition , participants were given 60 s ( measured using a digital timer ) to name aloud the colours of 150 dots ( 10 rows of 15 dots ) on a board , as quickly as possible . The dots were coloured green , blue , red , yellow , and black , with each colour appearing three times per row , and 30 times in total . In the interference condition , participants were given 60 s ( measured using a digital timer ) to name aloud the colours of 150 colour name words ( 10 rows of 15 words ) on a board , as quickly as possible . Colour name words were coloured green , blue , red , yellow , and black with each word appearing three times per row . Crucially , the colour name word appeared in every colour except the colour congruent with the colour name word ( e . g . , the colour name word ‘BLACK’ appeared as green , blue , red , or yellow , but never black ) . Therefore , each colour name word appeared 30 times in total in various incongruent colours ( all trials were therefore incongruent ) . Participants were required to name the ink colour of each word aloud , as quickly as possible . The total number of correct responses in 34 Russell R . C . Hutter et al . the interference condition formed the dependent variable measuring inhibitory ability , while the baseline was used as a practice condition . Responses in both conditions were recorded by the experimenter on a Stroop board score sheet ( response time data were not collected due to the nature of the Stroop task administered ) . Participants then completed the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale ( WAIS - R : Wechsler , 1981 ) vocabulary test , as a measure of crystallized intelligence . This task simply requires participants to give a deﬁnition for a set of words . The number of correct deﬁnitions was recorded . Finally , ﬂuid intelligence was measured by the WAIS - R block design task , which required participants to recreate patterns presented to them in booklet form , using coloured blocks . Each block had two red sides , two white sides , and two sides which are half red and half white . Participants were required to construct nine patterns in total , the ﬁrst ﬁve using four blocks and the last four using nine blocks . For the ﬁrst ﬁve patterns , the participants were allowed a maximum of 60 s for each pattern ( measured using a digital timer ) , in which to recreate the pattern shown using the blocks . For the ﬁrst two of these , following a demonstration , the participants were permitted two attempts at each pattern . Participants scored 2 points if they successfully recreated the pattern on their ﬁrst attempt , and 1 point if they successfully recreated the pattern on their second attempt . For the following three patterns , only one attempt was allowed . For the remaining ( 4 ) patterns , participants were also given one attempt but a maximum time of 120 s ( measured using a digital timer ) was allowed . The time taken by the participant to recreate the pattern ( measured using a digital timer ) was recorded and determined the score they achieved for that trial . The faster participants completed the pattern , the more points they scored ( e . g . , if a participant recreated the pattern for trial 6 in 18 s , this is within the 1 – 20 s band and they were scored a maximum of 7 points . Alternatively , if they recreated the pattern in 50 s , this is in the 36 – 120 s time band and they were scored the minimum 4 points ) . If participants failed to recreate the pattern within the total seconds allowed , they were scored 0 . If the participant failed three consecutive trials , the test was discontinued . If the constructed blocks deviated by anything above 30 ◦ skewness from the booklet it was determined to be a fail . A total score from 51 was recorded . Dependent measures The two main dependent variables were the number of emergent attributes and the number of constituent attributes used to describe the incongruent category conjunction , a ‘male midwife’ . The secondary dependent variables were the number of correct responses on the Stroop interference condition ( e . g . , Markela - Lerenc et al . , 2009 ) and the total number of correct substitutions on the DSST . Vocabulary test scores , and total score for the block design were also recorded . The DSST , vocabulary test , and block design were obtained from the performance scale of the WAIS - R ( Wechsler , 1981 ) . All the tasks implemented were non - computerized ensuring parity between younger and older participants , as older adults are likely to be less familiar with computer - based technology ( Sharit & Czaja , 1994 ) . Results Coding The number of emergent and constituent attributes generated for the conjunctive category was calculated following a procedure derived from Hutter and Crisp ( 2005 ; see Aging and conﬂicting social categories 35 Table 1 . Emergent and constituent attributes generated , correct Stroop scores , and DSST substitu - tions , as a function of age Age Younger group Older group Emergent 1 . 08 ( 0 . 92 ) 2 . 06 ( 1 . 61 ) Constituent 3 . 97 ( 1 . 02 ) 3 . 91 ( 1 . 93 ) Stroop 62 . 35 ( 8 . 00 ) 51 . 06 ( 10 . 59 ) DSST 83 . 82 ( 13 . 27 ) 65 . 12 ( 13 . 90 ) Note . Standard deviations are shown in parentheses . also Hastie et al . , 1990 ) . Independent coders ﬁrst screened within - participants response sets for synonyms , which were counted once only . For example , ‘happy’ and ‘chirpy’ were both coded as ‘happy’ and only one counted . A between participants check was also undertaken to ensure that synonyms across participant were also re - coded – ensuring consistency with the within - participant check . A thesaurus was used for both stages . Next , the coders classiﬁed attributes generated by participants as either ‘emergent’ or ‘constituent’ . Attributes applied only when describing the category conjunction were coded as emergent , while attributes applied to the category combination and either one or both of its constituents were coded as constituent . For example , the attribute ‘misplaced’ was coded as emergent because it occurred only when describing the conjunction , while the attribute ‘caring’ was coded as constituent because it was observed for both the nurse constituent and the conjunction . Finally , the total number of emergent attributes and the total number of constituent attributes generated by each participant was calculated by each coder . Inter - rater reliability for the number of constituent and emergent attributes generated for each participant was calculated , using a Pearson’s correlation for each participant , revealing an acceptable level of rater agreement , r ( 68 ) = . 70 , p < . 0005 . Accordingly , the number of emergent and constituent attributes calculated by each coder across participants were averaged to form two single indices : one reﬂecting the number of emergent attributes generated and the other the number of constituent attributes generated . Attributes generated Consistent with predictions , a one factor ( age ) with two levels ( younger adults vs . older adults ) between - subjects Multi - variate Analysis of Variance ( MANOVA ) revealed that the older adults used signiﬁcantly more emergent attributes to describe the incongruent conjunction , relative to the younger adults ( M = 2 . 06 vs . M = 1 . 08 ) , Wilks’ Lambda = 0 . 114 , F ( 1 , 32 ) = 4 . 65 , p = . 039 , (cid:2) 2 p = . 13 . There was no signiﬁcant difference between the number of constituent attributes generated by the older relative to the younger adults , F ( 1 , 32 ) = 0 . 12 , p > . 05 ( see Table 1 ) . Stroop Following previous work ( e . g . , Markela - Lerenc et al . , 2009 ) , the number of correct in the baseline condition was not subjected to formal analyses , but instead formed a practice condition . 36 Russell R . C . Hutter et al . An independent samples t - test was conducted to compare inhibitory ability using the interference trials for Stroop across younger and older adults . This resulted in the predicted effect of age on inhibitory ability , with older adults scoring fewer correct relative to the younger adults ( M = 51 . 06 vs . M = 62 . 35 ) , t ( 32 ) = 3 . 51 , p = . 0005 , d = 1 . 24 ( see Table 1 ) . 1 DSST An independent samples t - test was also conducted on processing speed ( measured using the DSST ) to compare younger and older adults . The predicted effect of age on processing speed , with the older group making fewer substitutions on the DSST than the younger group ( M = 65 . 12 vs . M = 83 . 82 ) was observed , t ( 32 ) = 4 . 01 , p < . 0005 , d = 1 . 42 ( see Table 1 ) . Mediational analyses We used mediation analyses ( Baron & Kenny , 1986 ) to investigate the mediating role of inhibitory ability ( Stroop interference score ) in the predicted relationship between age and emergent attribute generation . In line with our ﬁrst prediction , age ( years as a continuous variable ) had a signiﬁcant positive effect on the number of emergent attributes generated , (cid:3) = . 36 , p = . 039 , such that emergent trait generation increased with age . To test our second prediction , that the relationship between age and emergent attribute generation is mediated by inhibitory ability , three further regressions were con - ducted . Age was found to have a signiﬁcant negative relationship with Stroop accuracy performance , (cid:3) = − . 57 , p = . 0005 , such that inhibitory ability decreased with age . A signiﬁcant negative relationship was found between Stroop performance and emergent attribute generation ( when controlling for age ) , indicating that poorer inhibitory ability was associated with greater emergence , (cid:3) = − . 46 , p = . 015 . When controlling for Stroop performance , the relationship between age and emergent attributes generated became non - signiﬁcant , (cid:3) = . 11 , p = . 53 . A Sobel test ( Sobel , 1982 ) revealed that this reduction in emergent attributes was signiﬁcant ( Z = 2 . 08 , p = . 02 ) . These results clearly implicate age - associated reductions in inhibitory ability in the increased application of emergent features observed , when a target that shares membership of conﬂicting social categories is encountered ( see Figure 1 ) . Our next prediction was that the relationship between age and emergent attribute generation would also be mediated by a reduction in processing speed . A signiﬁcant nega - tive relationship was found between age and the total number of correct substitutions on the DSST , (cid:3) = − . 60 , p < . 0005 , conﬁrming that advancing age is associated with reduced processing speed . The total number of correct substitutions on the DSST was signiﬁcantly negatively related to emergent attribute generation when controlling for the effects of age , (cid:3) = − . 44 , p = . 027 . That is , as processing speed decreased , so the likelihood 1 Alternative Stroop analysis : An alternative ratio analysis was undertaken on the Stroop data . We subtracted the interference ( number correct ) scores from the baseline ( number correct ) scores and divided by the baseline ( num - ber correct ) . We then repeated the main analysis conducted on the interference trials using instead the baseline - interference / baseline measure as the dependent measure . An independent samples t - test was conducted to compare inhibitory ability using the ratio measure for Stroop across younger and older adults . Again , this revealed the predicted effect of age on inhibitory ability using the ratio measure on the Stroop , with older adults performing less well relative to the younger adults ( M = 0 . 44 ; SD = 0 . 07 vs . M = 0 . 39 SD = 0 . 07 ) , at a signiﬁcant level t ( 32 ) = − 1 . 85 , p = . 037 . Aging and conﬂicting social categories 37 Age EmergentAttributes β = . 36 , p = . 039 β = - . 57 , p = . 0005 β = - . 46 , p = . 015 ( β = . 11 , p = . 53 ) Stroop Figure 1 . Mediational model of the relationships between age , Stroop , and emergent attribute generation . of generating emergent attributes increased . When controlling for DSST score , the relationship between age and emergence became non - signiﬁcant , (cid:3) = . 10 , p = . 60 . This reduction in the application of emergent features was furthermore found to be signiﬁcant using a Sobel test ( Sobel , 1982 ) , Z = 4 . 08 , p < . 0005 . This supports the argument that age - related reduced processing speed is associated with greater use of emergent attributes ( see Figure 2 ) . Notably , the direction of the observed effect was identical to that observed for inhibition . Indeed , the two measures were highly correlated in the present work , r = . 63 , p < . 0005 ( see Table 2 for all raw intercorrelations between variables ) . 2 Finally , as predicted , we did not ﬁnd an association between age and the number of constituent attributes used in the description of the incongruent conjunction , (cid:3) = − . 02 , p > . 05 . Taken together , these ﬁndings clearly illustrate the role of age - associated reductions in executive ability on elevated emergent attribute application in the percep - tion of individuals sharing membership of conﬂicting social category conjunctions . 3 2 Alternative dichotomized age , Stroop and DSST meditational analyses : In our mediation analyses , age was treated as a standardized continuous variable . However , arguably age could be treated as a dichotomous variable ( older vs . younger ) . We re - analysed our data in this manner for both the Stroop and DSST measures . Results were similar to those obtained with age a continuous variable . In line with our ﬁrst prediction , dichotomized age had a signiﬁcant positive effect on the number of emergent attributes generated , (cid:3) = . 37 , p = . 033 and a signiﬁcant negative relationship with Stroop accuracy performance , (cid:3) = − . 56 , p (cid:4) . 0005 . A signiﬁcant negative relationship was found between Stroop performance and emergent attribute generation ( when controlling for dichotomized age ) , (cid:3) = − . 46 , p = . 018 . When controlling for Stroop performance , the relationship between dichotomized age and emergent attributes generated became non - signiﬁcant , (cid:3) = . 11 , p = . 58 . A Sobel test ( Sobel , 1982 ) revealed that this reduction in emergent attributes was signiﬁcant ( Z = 2 . 08 , p = . 04 ) . A signiﬁcant negative relationship was found between dichotomized age and DSST performance , (cid:3) = − . 61 , p (cid:4) . 0005 . Accuracy on the DSST was signiﬁcantly negatively related to emergent attribute generation when controlling for the effects of dichotomized age , (cid:3) = − . 44 , p = . 032 . When controlling for DSST performance , the relationship between dichotomized age and emergence became non - signiﬁcant , (cid:3) = . 10 , p = . 62 . This reduction in the application of emergent features was furthermore found to be signiﬁcant using a Sobel test ( Sobel , 1982 ) , Z = 2 . 04 , p = . 04 . Finally , as predicted , we did not ﬁnd an association between dichotomized age and the number of constituent attributes used in the description of the incongruent conjunction , (cid:3) = − . 06 , p (cid:5) . 05 . 3 Fluid and Crystallized intelligence mediations : Fluid and Crystallized intelligence measures were included as baseline comparative measures ( but not potential mediators ) to ensure that our samples fell within normal parameters for age . However , we conducted two additional analyses to examine whether the age - related differences in emergent trait generation were actually mediated by ﬂuid and crystallized intelligence – a potential confound . The ﬁrst analysis was conducted with age as the predictor , number of emergent attributes as the DV , and ﬂuid intelligence as the mediator . Inconsistent with this potential confound , no relationship was found between ﬂuid intelligence and emergent attributes ( (cid:3) = − . 10 , p = . 58 ) . The same analysis was repeated with vocabulary as the mediator , and again no relationship was found between vocabulary and emergent attributes ( (cid:3) = − . 22 , p = . 25 ) . 38 Russell R . C . Hutter et al . Age EmergentAttributes β = . 36 , p = . 039 β = - . 44 , p = . 027 β = - . 60 , p = . 0005 ( β = . 10 , p = . 60 ) DSST Figure 2 . Mediational model of the relationships between age , DSST , and emergent attribute generation . Table 2 . Pearson - product momentum correlational coefﬁcients between different measures 1 2 3 4 5 1 . Age – − . 53 ∗∗ − . 58 ∗∗ . 36 ∗ − . 02 2 . Stroop − . 53 ∗∗ – . 63 ∗∗ − . 52 ∗∗ . 19 3 . DSST − . 58 ∗∗ . 63 ∗∗ – − . 50 ∗∗ . 34 4 . Emergent . 36 ∗ − . 52 ∗∗ − . 50 ∗∗ – − . 22 5 . Constituent − . 02 . 19 . 34 − . 22 – Note . ∗ p (cid:4) . 05 ; ∗∗ p (cid:4) . 01 . This was not the case for constituent attributes , where no age - related change was expected or observed . Discussion We have shown that older adults are more likely to apply emergent features when describing an incongruent conjunction , which was mediated by age - related decline in both inhibitory ability ( Stroop ) and processing speed ( DSST ) . Ordinarily , one might expect the diminished executive skill associated with age to prompt decreased produc - tion of emergent attributes . However , the current research has demonstrated that on encountering incongruent conjunctions a positive association exists , whereby aging results in greater emergent attribute application . Ironically , it is those perceivers with poorer executive ability who engage in more executive processing , in order to adequately perceive conﬂicting social category conjunctions . To our knowledge , this is the ﬁrst study to demonstrate this initially counterintuitive relationship between executive ability and impression formation . As discussed , reduced inhibitory ability associated with age is more likely to lead older perceivers to apply executive resources when forming an impression of incongruent conjunctions , generating a greater number of emergent traits . This is at odds with previous research suggesting that older perceivers with poorer inhibitory ability are Aging and conﬂicting social categories 39 more likely to employ less effortful strategies . Von Hippel et al . ( 2000 ) , for example , demonstrated that the use of stereotypes in impressions formed by older adults was mediated by poorer inhibitory ability . However , unlike von Hippel et al . , in the current research , poorer inhibitory ability resulted in seemingly less reliance on stereotypical ( constituent ) structures . The crucial factor responsible for this disparity between our work and von Hippel’s is likely to be our use of incongruent conjunctions , which create a particular problem for individuals with attenuated inhibitory ability . It is normally the case that older adults more readily adopt categorical processing , resulting in stereotypical thinking ( Henry , von Hippel , & Baynes , 2009 ; von Hippel et al . , 2000 ) . Furthermore , categorical ordering works well as a low cognitive effort , time - saving cognitive shortcut ( Fiske & Taylor , 1991 ) , which is particularly valuable to older adults . However , gaining coherent structure in this way is less adaptive when encountering a target that undermines categorical boundaries through dual membership of conﬂicting categories . In other words , forming impressions of an incongruent conjunction means that perceivers cannot simply tap in to the constituent stereotypes that make up a conjunction , because there are some attributes that are applicable to one constituent but not the other , or attributes may conﬂict . For instance , the association of the attribute ‘well paid’ with males conﬂicts with the ‘underpaid’ midwife , resulting in neither appearing in the conjunction . We suspect that it is these conﬂicts that lead to emergent attributes in the resolution process , for example , ‘non - conformist’ . This entire process is exacerbated for aging perceivers because their categorical boundaries are more rigidly structured ( Hess , 2001 ) , hence a greater need to resolve inconsistency . When encountering the incongruent social category conjunction , our aging sample was tasked with forming an impression that could not be accomplished solely with reference to their existing categorical structures without some form of modiﬁcation . As argued earlier , older adults with poor inhibitory ability experience greater difﬁculty with the constituent incompatibility in incongruent conjunctions ( resulting in mediation of inhibitory ability in the present work ) . This we believe is partially due to their inability to either ignore or overcome the inherent inconsistencies between such categories . Accordingly , as our research demonstrates , older perceivers employ a greater number of explanatory emergent traits , relative to their younger counterparts . In line with our predictions , slower processing speed also mediated the greater application of emergent traits in the older sample . This novel result is consistent with our argument that aging processors tend not only towards slower processing , but under some circumstances a more deliberative style of processing . It is our contention that a slower processing style leads to greater depth of thought when inconsistencies are encountered . The failure to inhibit inconsistency leaves older perceivers the task of resolving this . Incongruent conjunctions do not allow default , low cognitive effort , stereotypical processing , and alternatively require not only more cognitive effort but also more time ( Hutter et al . , 2009 ) . This results in a greater likelihood of instigating inconsistency resolution processes when forming impressions of incongruent conjunctions ( Asch & Zukier , 1984 ) . Another reason that thinking about and processing incongruent social category conjunctions may be particularly problematic for older adults is because aging is associated with greater need to maintain categorical boundaries . As discussed earlier , studies show that high PNS is linked with a decline in cognitive ability ( Hess , 2001 ) . In other words , cognitive aging is associated with a greater need to seek order and maintain categorical boundaries , simplifying perception and reducing uncertainty . Accordingly , older adults may engage online executive resources in order to maintain existing 40 Russell R . C . Hutter et al . categorical boundaries , generating emergent traits to explain inconsistencies , and to discount the incongruent target as unrepresentative . As a result , existing category representations remain stable and useful cognitive shortcuts . In short , a greater sacriﬁce in the short term , by applying executive resources on the rare occasions that incongruent conjunctions are encountered , results in the greater long - term gain of preserving easily processed simple categorical structures . In contrast , younger processors with more cognitive resources at their disposal are more adroit at absorbing incongruent conjunctions in to their existing , more ﬂexible categorical structures . It should be noted that there is a possible alternative interpretation for some of our ﬁndings , namely that older respondents show a bias towards accuracy over speed ( Salthouse , 1979 ) , which may have affected scores on our executive measures . However , there are a number of reasons to believe this was not the case . First , accuracy on the DSST is normally almost 100 % regardless of age . Therefore , the number of correct substitutions completed in the allocated time should be unaffected by a speed / accuracy trade off because accuracy is at ceiling . The Stroop measure , on the other hand , is more likely to be susceptible to an accuracy bias , as it may prompt a higher error rate . However , previous research has demonstrated that interference trials in the Stroop are relatively unaffected by speed or accuracy strategies ( Chen & Johnson , 1991 ) , and as outlined , these trials formed the dependent measure of inhibitory ability in the present study . It is therefore unlikely that age - related differences in speed / accuracy strategies can account for our ﬁndings . Our ﬁndings have important implications for the continued development of Hastie et al . ’s , ( 1990 ) two - stage model . In this model , perceivers ﬁrst attempt to ﬁt a given target to a simple category frame . If this fails ( which is likely to be the case for incongruent combinations ) , a second stage involving complex reasoning is activated . The results of the current research clearly demonstrate that individual differences in executive ability moderate the use of emergent features . Age - associated differences in inhibitory ability and processing speed leave older perceivers more likely to invoke complex reasoning . 4 We believe that these two individual difference factors may map directly on to the two stages discussed in Hastie’s two - stage model . That is , during the ﬁrst stage of processing , poor inhibition of conﬂicting information may result in aging adults experiencing particular difﬁculty in ﬁtting an incongruent target to a categorical frame . Accordingly , a second more deliberative stage is instigated , involving a slower style of processing to resolve the inconsistency . At this stage , older adults with a slower processing speed may be particularly likely to engage in deliberative processing and apply emergent attributes . We also further suggest that the increased application of emergent traits in individuals with reduced executive function can be both cognitive and motivational in nature . We believe that the observed results are at least partially due to older adults’ motivation to maintain their existing stereotypical structures , thus facilitating ease of processing in the future . However , more research is required to fully establish this potential motivated - cognition link . 4 It is worth noting that age - related differences in perceptions of how incongruent the conjunction is , could arguably have contributed to the differences in emergent trait generation observed in the present research . While pilot testing of the conjunctions for surprise and familiarity revealed no relationship between age and perception of familiarity of surprise , the proportion of older participants in the pilot was not equivalent to the sample we used in our experimental study . However , this factor cannot fully account for the results observed . If the increased emergent trait generation shown by older participants was due solely to how incongruent they found the conjunction used , then inhibitory ability ( measured by Stroop performance ) or processing speed ( measured by DSST performance ) would not have mediated the relationship . The value of our ﬁndings lies in the demonstrated role of age - related cognitive decline , not in the role of age per se . Aging and conﬂicting social categories 41 Conclusions When social perceivers’ categorical expectations are challenged , through the simultane - ous activation of conﬂicting social categories , the strategies used to form impressions are dependent on age . Speciﬁcally , as observed here , age - related decline in inhibitory ability and processing speed is associated with greater application of emergent features to incongruent social category conjunctions . The contrasting processing patterns between younger and older perceivers found in this work show distinct similarities with that of low versus high PNS perceivers found in previous work ( e . g . , Hutter et al . , 2009 ) . We suggest that this is due to older adults experiencing difﬁculty in ignoring the inherent inconsistencies in incongruent conjunctions , and processing conﬂicting information in a slower more deliberative style . It is possible that this is also linked to an increased rigidity of categories ( in common with high PNS perceivers ) leading to greater motivation to explain away the conﬂict . Accordingly , older adults are more likely to seek to form a more coherent impression , by engaging in slower and more deliberative inconsistency resolution processes resulting in more emergent features . In contrast , younger perceivers show a more ﬂexible cognitive proﬁle in which conﬂicting information is more readily accepted , without the need for further reasoning and generation of emergent traits . Future work should aim to establish the possible role of motivation to maintain categorical boundaries for elaborative processing in older adults in the application of emergent features , when forming impressions of persons sharing membership of conﬂicting categories . Broadly , this work contributes to the growing literature in which clearly deﬁned and testable social processing differences are observable across the life course . Acknowledgements We thank Dr . Andrew Prestwich and Professor Richard Crisp for comments on an earlier version of this manuscript . This research was supported by an Economic and Social Research Council grant to Russell R . C . Hutter [ PTA - 026 - 27 - 0626 ] . References Asch , S . E . , & Zukier , H . ( 1984 ) . Thinking about persons . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 46 , 1230 – 1240 . Baddeley , A . D . ( 1986 ) . Working memory . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Baddeley , A . D . ( 1996 ) . Exploring the central executive . Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology , 49A , 5 – 28 . Baron , R . M . , & Kenny , D . A . ( 1986 ) . The moderator - mediator variable distinction in social psycho - logical research : Conceptual , strategic and statistical considerations . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 51 , 1173 – 1182 . Barsalou , L . W . ( 1987 ) . The instability of graded structure : Implications for the nature of concepts . In U . Neisser ( Ed . ) , Concepts and conceptual development : Ecological and intellectual factors in categorisation ( pp . 101 – 140 ) . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Barsalou , L . W . ( 1989 ) . Intraconcept similarity and its implications for interconcept similarity . In S . Vosniadou & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning ( pp . 76 – 121 ) . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Bartal , Y . , & Guinote , A . ( 2002 ) . Who exhibits more stereotypical thinking ? The effect of need and ability to achieve cognitive structure on stereotyping . European Journal of Personality , 16 , 313 – 331 . doi : 10 . 1002 / per . 453 42 Russell R . C . Hutter et al . Bugg , J . M . , DeLosh , E . L . , Davalos , D . B . , & Davis , H . P . ( 2007 ) . Age differences in Stroop inter - ference : Contributions of general slowing and task - speciﬁc deﬁcits . Aging , Neuropsychology , and Cognition , 14 , 155 – 167 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 138255891007065 Cavanaugh , J . C . , & Blanchard - Fields , F . ( 2006 ) . Adult development and aging ( 5th ed . ) Belmont , CA : Wadsworth Publishing / Thomson Learning . Chen , J . Y . , & Johnson , M . K . ( 1991 ) . The Stroop congruency effect is more observable under a speed strategy than an accuracy strategy . Perceptual and Motor Skills , 73 , 67 – 76 . Crisp , R . J . , & Hewstone , M . ( 2000 ) . Crossed categorization and intergroup bias : The moderating roles of intergroup and affective context . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 36 , 357 – 383 . doi : 10 . 1006 / jesp . 1999 . 1408 Deschamps , J . C . , & Doise , W . ( 1978 ) . Crossed category memberships in intergroup relations . In H . Tajfel ( Ed . ) , Differentiation between social groups ( pp . 141 – 158 ) . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Ensari , N . , & Miller , N . ( 1998 ) . Effect of affective reactions by the out - group on preferences for crossed categorization discussion partners . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 75 , 1503 – 1527 . Estes , Z . , & Ward , T . B . ( 2002 ) . The emergence of novel attributes in concept modiﬁcation . Creativity Research Journal , 14 , 149 – 156 . Fiske , S . T . , & Taylor , S . E . ( 1991 ) . Social cognition ( 2nd ed . ) . New York : McGraw - Hill . Hampton , J . A . ( 1987 ) . Inheritance of attributes in natural concept conjunctions . Memory and Cognition , 15 , 55 – 71 . Hampton , J . A . ( 1997 ) . Emergent attributes in combined concepts . In T . B . Ward , S . M . Smith , & J . Vaid ( Eds . ) , Creative thought : An investigation of conceptual structures and processes ( pp . 83 – 111 ) . Washington , DC : APA books . Hasher , L . , & Zacks , R . T . ( 1988 ) . Working memory , comprehension , and aging : A review and a new view . In G . H . Bower ( Ed . ) , The psychology of learning and motivation ( Vol . 22 , pp . 193 – 225 ) . San Diego , CA : Academic Press . Hastie , R . , Schroeder , C . , & Weber , R . ( 1990 ) . Creating complex social conjunction categories from simple categories . Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society , 28 , 242 – 247 . Henry , J . D . , von Hippel , W . , & Baynes , K . ( 2009 ) . Social inappropriateness , executive control , and aging . Psychology and Aging , 24 , 239 – 244 . doi : 10 . 1037 / a0013423 Hess , T . M . ( 2001 ) . Aging - related inﬂuences on personal need for structure . International Journal of Behavioral Development , 25 , 482 – 490 . Horn , J . L . ( 1986 ) . Intellectual ability concepts . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Advances in the psychology of human intelligence . ( Vol . 3 , pp . 35 – 77 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Hutter , R . R . C . , & Crisp , R . J . ( 2005 ) . The composition of category conjunctions . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 31 , 647 – 657 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0146167204271575 Hutter , R . R . C . , & Crisp , R . J . ( 2006 ) . Implications of cognitive busyness for the perception of category conjunctions . Journal of Social Psychology , 146 , 253 – 256 . Hutter , R . R . C . , & Crisp , R . J . ( 2008 ) . Reduced Constituent Category Application in Surprising Combinations . The Journal of Social Psychology , 148 , 247 – 251 . Hutter , R . R . C . , Crisp , R . J . , Humphreys , G . W . , Waters , G . M . , & Mofﬁtt , G . ( 2009 ) . The dynamics of category conjunctions . Group Processes and Intergroup Relations , 12 , 673 – 686 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 1368430209337471 Kunda , Z . , Miller , D . T . , & Claire , T . ( 1990 ) . Combining social concepts : The role of causal reasoning . Cognitive Science , 14 , 551 – 577 . LaDoux , J . ( 1996 ) . The emotional brain . New York : Simon & Schuster . Lustig , C . , Hasher , L . , & Tonev , S . T . ( 2001 ) . Inhibitory control over the present and the past . European Journal of Cognitive Psychology , 13 , 107 – 122 . Macrae , C . N . , Bodenhausen , G . V . , & Milne , A . B . ( 1995 ) . The dissection of selection in person perception : Inhibitory processes in social stereotyping . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 69 , 397 – 407 . Aging and conﬂicting social categories 43 Macrae , C . N . , Milne , A . B . , & Bodenhausen , G . V . ( 1994 ) . Stereotypes as energy – saving devices : A peek inside the cognitive toolbox . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 67 , 808 – 817 . Markela - Lerenc J . , Schmidt - Kraepelin C . , Roesch - Ely D . , Mundt C . , Weisbrod M . , Kaiser , S . ( 2009 ) : Stroop interference effect in schizophrenic patients : An electrophysiological approach . International Journal of Psychophysiology , 71 , 248 – 257 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ijpsycho . 2008 . 10 . 005 Payne , B . K . ( 2005 ) . Conceptualizing control in social cognition : How executive functioning modulates the expression of automatic stereotyping . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 89 , 488 – 503 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 3514 . 89 . 4 . 488 Roccas , S . , & Brewer , M . B . ( 2002 ) . Social identity complexity . Personality and Social Psychology Review , 6 , 88 – 106 . Salthouse , T . A . ( 1979 ) . Adult age and the speed - accuracy trade - off . Ergonomics , 22 , 811 – 821 . Salthouse , T . A . ( 1996 ) . The processing - speed theory of adult age differences in cognition . Psychological Review , 103 , 403 – 428 . Sharit , J . , & Czaja , S . J . ( 1994 ) . Ageing , computer - based task performance , and stress : Issues and challenges . Ergonomics , 37 , 559 – 577 . Sherman , J . W . , Stroessner , S . J . , Conrey , F . R . , Azam , O . A . ( 2005 ) . Prejudice and stereotype maintenance processes : Attention , attribution , and individuation . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 89 , 607 – 622 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 3514 . 89 . 4 . 607 Siebler , F . ( 2008 ) . Emergent attributes in person perception : A comparative test of response time predictions . Social Psychology , 39 , 83 – 89 . doi : 10 . 1027 / 1864 - 9335 . 39 . 2 . 83 Sinclair , L . , & Kunda , Z . ( 1999 ) . Reactions to a Black professional : Motivated inhibition and activation of conﬂicting stereotypes . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 77 , 885 – 904 . Sobel , M . E . ( 1982 ) . Asymptotic conﬁdence intervals for indirect effects in structural equation models . Sociological Methodology , 13 , 290 – 312 . Stangor , C . , Lynch , L . , Duan , C . , & Glass , B . ( 1992 ) . Categorization of individuals on the basis of multiple social features . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 62 , 207 – 218 . Stroop , J . R . ( 1935 ) . Studies of interference in serial verbal reactions . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 12 , 643 – 662 . Thompson , M . M . , Naccarato , M . E . , Parker , K . C . H . , & Moskowitz , G . ( 2001 ) . The Personal Need for Structure ( PNS ) and Personal Fear of Invalidity ( PFI ) scales : Historical perspectives , present applications and future directions . In G . Moskowitz ( Ed . ) , Cognitive social psychology : The Princeton symposium on the legacy and future of social cognition ( pp . 19 – 39 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Verhaeghen , P . , & Basak , C . ( 2005 ) . Ageing and switching of the focus of attention in working memory : Results from a modiﬁed N - Back task . Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology , 58A , 134 – 154 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 02724980443000241 Verhaeghen , P . , & Salthouse , T . A . ( 1997 ) . Meta - analysis of age - cognition relations in adulthood : Estimates of linear and non - linear age effects and structural models . Psychological Bulletin , 122 , 231 – 249 . von Hippel , W . , Silver , L . A . , & Lynch , M . E . ( 2000 ) . Stereotyping against your will : The role of inhibitory ability in stereotyping and prejudice among the elderly . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 26 , 523 – 532 . Wechsler , D . ( 1981 ) . The psychometric tradition – developing the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale . Contemporary Educational Psychology , 6 , 82 – 85 . Wilkenﬁeld , M . J . , & Ward , T . B . ( 2001 ) . Similarity and emergence in conceptual combination . Journal of Memory and Language , 45 , 21 – 38 . Received 19 June 2010 ; revised version received 18 November 2010