1683 Commentary Introduction Cell migration is an essential function that is used for normal cell processes , such as wound healing ( Lambrechts et al . , 2004 ) , differentiation ( Weston , 1971 ) , and neuronal development ( Kanatani et al . , 2005 ) , as well as aberrant processes , such as tumor cell invasion and metastasis ( Titus et al . , 2005 ) . Migrating cells exhibit pronounced membrane extension at the leading edge , which is promoted largely by actin polymerization , concomitant with cycles of retraction mediated by the assembly and disassembly of adhesions ( Vicente - Manzanares et al . , 2005 ) . While the leading edge of a migrating cell is expanding and establishing new connections to the extracellular matrix , the rear disassembles its focal adhesions , allowing the cell to retract . In addition , migration involves the rearrangement of speciﬁc cellular structures , such as the Golgi complex ( Bershadsky and Futerman , 1994 ) , the centrosome ( Xie and Tsai , 2004 ) and focal adhesions ( Tamura et al . , 1998 ) . The discovery that the large GTPase dynamin resides at these diverse cellular locations suggests that , along with its well - documented role in endocytosis , dynamin plays a signiﬁcant role in cell migration . Here , we review recent ﬁndings indicating that this is indeed the case and provide some insights into how the dynamin family might contribute to the complex process of pushing and pulling a cell forward . Dynamins as polymeric contractile scaffolds : attributes helpful for cell motility Since the isolation of the ﬁrst dynamin protein in 1989 ( Shpetner and Vallee , 1989 ) , a larger superfamily of dynamins has been described , including three conventional dynamins ( Dyn1 , Dyn2 and Dyn3 ) , several related forms ( dynamin - like proteins , DLP / DRP ) that have been implicated in mitochondrial dynamics ( Labrousse et al . , 1999 ) , and the previously identiﬁed Mx proteins ( MxA and MxB ) , which have antiviral capacity ( Haller and Kochs , 2002 ) . Additional diversity is provided by considerable alternative splicing , leading to scores of different variants in mammalian cells ( Cao et al . , 1998 ) . Not all of these forms are expressed in a single cell type : Dyn1 is restricted to neuronal cells ; Dyn2 is ubiquitously expressed ; and Dyn3 may be limited to brain , lung and testis . Because dynamin has been implicated largely in the migration of epithelial cells , we focus here predominantly on Dyn2 . All of the conventional dynamins are large molecular weight GTPases ~ 96 kDa in size , which differentiates them from the class of small GTPases . In addition , the dynamins share signiﬁcant homology in several different domains that appear important for function ( Fig . 1 ) . These include a highly conserved N - terminal GTPase domain , a ‘middle domain’ that is also well conserved but has unknown function , a pleckstrin - homology ( PH ) domain that interacts with phosphoinositides such as phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PIP2 ) ( Barylko et al . , 1998 ) , and a GTPase effector domain ( GED ) that is thought to function as an internal GTPase - activating protein ( GAP ) domain and thus participates in self - regulation ( Muhlberg et al . , 1997 ) . At the C - terminus resides a proline - rich domain ( PRD ) whose sequence varies signiﬁcantly between the dynamin isoforms . This domain interacts with a wide variety of SH3 - domain - containing endocytic adaptor proteins , such as Grb2 ( Gout et al . , 1993 ) and intersectin ( Zamanian and Kelly , 2003 ) , BAR - domain - containing proteins such as amphiphysin and endophilin ( Ringstad et al . , 1997 ) , and actin - regulatory proteins ( see below ) such as cortactin ( McNiven et al . , 2000 ) and Abp1 ( Kessels et al . , 2001 ) ( see Table 1 ) . A remarkable property of the dynamins is their ability to self - assemble into complex polymers of deﬁned dimensions . This trait distinguishes dynamin from small GTPases that act as switches . Furthermore , unlike tubulin , a GTPase that also forms large polymers , dynamin polymers constrict when GTP is hydrolyzed ( Fig . 1 ) . Indeed , a variety of different structural approaches have demonstrated that upon nucleotide hydrolysis the internal diameter of the dynamin polymer is reduced ( Danino et al . , 2004 ) . This hydrolysis - constriction cycle can be The large GTPase dynamin , long known for its role in endocytosis , has most recently been implicated as a facilitator of cell migration and invasion . Recent observations link dynamin to the cycle of membrane expansion and retraction essential for cell motility . Its role in actin polymerization , membrane deformation and vesiculation , and focal adhesion dynamics are all important for this process , and the new ﬁndings provide exciting directions for studies of this ubiquitous and diverse protein family . Key words : Dynamin , Cell Motility , Migration , Invasion Summary Dynamin as a mover and pincher during cell migration and invasion Anne E . Kruchten and Mark A . McNiven * Center for Basic Research in Digestive Diseases and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , Mayo Clinic College of Medicine , 200 First Street SW , Rochester , MN 55905 , USA * Author for correspondence ( e - mail : mcniven . mark @ mayo . edu ) Accepted 28 February 2006 Journal of Cell Science 119 , 1683 - 1690 Published by The Company of Biologists 2006 doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 02963 J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e 1684 activated by interaction of the PH domain with membrane lipids such as PIP2 or by binding of the PRD to some of the effectors mentioned above ( Lin et al . , 1997 ) . Through this constriction process , dynamin can deform membranes and , in association with other proteins , such as BAR - domain - containing proteins and the actin cytoskeleton ( Itoh et al . , 2005 ) , serves as a pinchase , releasing vesicles from donor membrane compartments . This pinchase activity is essential for the role of dynamin in endocytosis . In fact , McMahon and colleagues have shown that such a constriction not only coincides with membrane scission but is also required for this event to proceed ( Marks et al . , 2001 ) . Perhaps the most dramatic demonstration to date of the combined actions of dynamin and actin in membrane tubulation and vesiculation comes from a recent study by Itoh et al . ( Itoh et al . , 2005 ) . They identiﬁed a novel subset of related proteins that contain F - BAR domains , which are similar to the previously identiﬁed BAR - domain proteins , some of Journal of Cell Science 119 ( 9 ) which regulate the actin cytoskeleton ( Peter et al . , 2004 ) . F - BAR proteins are cytosolic proteins that tubulate and deform membranes , probably by inducing membrane curvature . They interact with dynamin and work in synergy with it to tubulate and vesiculate cellular membranes . Interestingly , expression of F - BAR proteins leads to a dramatic tubulation of the plasma membrane ; however , when dynamin is co - expressed , the cells cannot form pronounced tubules ( Fig . 2 ) . Instead , these tubules are vesiculated , presumably because the pinchase activity of dynamin vesiculates the F - BAR - induced long tubules . Vesiculation of these tubules can be attenuated either by expression of a K44A mutant Dyn2 protein or , interestingly , treatment with the actin antagonist Latrunculin , which indicates that the pinchase function of Dyn2 on the F - BAR - formed tubules depends on an intact actin cytoskeleton . This capacity for rapid assembly and constriction while interacting with adaptor , signaling and cytoskeletal molecules that leads to the deformation and scission of cellular membranes makes dynamin unique . We can thus view it as a contractile polymeric scaffold ( Thompson and McNiven , 2001 ) that could also have a regulatory role ( Song and Schmid , 2003 ) at multiple cellular sites by engaging in spatial and temporal interactions with many binding partners . Interestingly , although dynamin localizes to the leading edge of migrating cells , little caveolae - or clathrin - based endocytic activity occurs at the lamellipodium of a cell . One might imagine that a dynamic dynamin polymer that can pinch , pull , push , or sever membranes in concert with an actin framework could make a substantial contribution to lamellipodium extension , cell adhesion , and uropodial retraction . Indeed , recent studies on the interaction of dynamin with lipids , actin and several new binding partners are providing some insight into its lamellipodial localization and support this notion . Dynamin and actin dynamics Several seminal studies provided the initial impetus for pursuing a relationship between dynamin and the actin cytoskeleton . Initially , De Camilli and colleagues ( Ochoa et al . , 2000 ) found Dyn2 to be situated at podosomes of transformed cells and osteoclasts . These matrix - degrading structures at the base of cells are formed from tubular invaginations of the plasma membrane and appear to require both actin and Dyn2 , because expression of Dyn2 mutants in these cells disrupts podosome formation . Although the precise mechanisms by which Dyn2 might participate in podosome formation or function are still unknown , this study provided the ﬁrst functional link between components of the actin cytoskeleton and the previously categorized endocytic protein Dyn2 . Three studies subsequently showed that actin - binding proteins interact with dynamin . We and others observed that at the plasma membrane Dyn2 strongly interacts with cortactin ( McNiven et al . , 2000 ) , an SH3 - domain - containing protein that demonstrates actin - binding and - remodeling activity in response to Erk phosphorylation ( Martinez - Quiles et al . , 2004 ) . Overexpression of a dominant - negative cortactin mutant that lacks the SH3 domain and cannot interact with Dyn2 signiﬁcantly reduces the recruitment of dynamin to membrane ruffles and increases the number of actin stress ﬁbers . This cortactin - Dyn2 interaction is essential for vesicle formation both at the plasma membrane ( Cao et al . , 2003 ) and at the Fig . 1 . Dynamin self - assembles and tubulates lipids . ( A ) Scheme of dynamin protein showing the GTPase domain , the middle domain ( MID ) , the pleckstrin - homology domain ( PH ) , the GED domain , and the proline - rich domain ( PRD ) . ( B ) Negative stain showing that dynamin protein self - assembles into rings in the presence of GTP (cid:2) S ; adapted from Hinshaw ( Hinshaw , 2000 ) , reprinted with permission . ( C ) The surface rendering depicts dynamin’s ability to constrict around tubules in an ordered manner . The dynamin head domain is shown in green , the stalk is blue , the leg is gold , and the inner lipid leaﬂet is grey ; adapted from Zhang and Hinshaw ( Zhang and Hinshaw , 2001 ) , reprinted with permission . Cryo - EM of (cid:3) PRD tubules before ( D ) and 5 seconds after ( E ) addition of GTP . The diagrams below each panel depict the constriction of the tubules in the presence of GTP . White arrows indicate undecorated lipid bulges and black arrowheads indicate transitions between constricted , decorated tubules and lipid bulges ; adapted from Danino et al . ( Danino et al . , 2004 ) , reprinted with permission . Bar , 100 nm . Negative stain of GDP - AlF ( F ) and GDP ( G ) dynamin on tubules depicting the change in pitch of dynamin rings after hydrolysis of GTP occurs ; adapted from Stowell et al . ( Stowell et al . , 1999 ) , reprinted with permission . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e 1685 Dynamin in cell migration trans - Golgi network ( Cao et al . , 2005 ) . At the same time , Qualmann and Kelly ( Qualmann and Kelly , 2000 ) observed that isoforms of the scaffolding protein syndapin bind to Dyn1 and appear to participate in a variety of dynamic cellular functions , such as extension of ﬁlopodia and endocytosis . Finally , Kessels and co - workers demonstrated a link between dynamin and the actin - binding protein Abp1 ( Kessels et al . , 2001 ) ; overexpression of dominant - negative Abp1 constructs that disrupt interaction of the wild - type protein with dynamin resulted in a signiﬁcant reduction in transferrin endocytosis . These three studies were among the ﬁrst to show a direct link between the endocytic machinery and the actin cytoskeleton , implicating a role for dynamin in the process . They also suggested that , in addition to pinching off membranes during endocytosis , dynamin also plays a wider role in regulation of actin dynamics . Speciﬁc forms of dynamin appear to preferentially interact with cortactin . For example , in the dendritic spines of hippocampal neurons , which contain actin , cortactin and Dyn3 ( Gray et al . , 2003 ) , one splice variant of Dyn3 ( Dyn3baa ) induces the formation of long , immature , ﬁlopodium - like spines that can extend several micrometers in length . By contrast , a splice variant ( Dyn3aaa ) that is also expressed in neurons but has an eight - residue insert just upstream of the PH domain does not induce this marked morphological change . In vitro binding experiments revealed that the Dyn3baa form exhibits a 200 % higher affinity for cortactin than does Dyn3aaa . Further evidence that Dyn2 regulates actin dynamics comes from studies ( Lee and De Camilli , 2002 ; Orth et al . , 2002 ) showing that it associates with actin - propelled vesicle comets formed as a consequence of overexpression of type I phosphatidylinositol phosphate 5 - kinase ( PIP5KI (cid:4) ) . Expression of the GTPase - deﬁcient DynK44A mutant or a Dyn (cid:3) PRD mutant inhibits the formation , growth and speed of these comets . Interestingly , Dyn2 is concentrated at the actin – vesicle - membrane interface but also extends along the length of the comet tails . This suggests a direct structure - function relationship with the actin ﬁlament network , implicating dynamin in the regulation of actin polymerization . At the same time , an in vitro study by Schafer and colleagues ( Schafer et al . , 2002 ) provides insights into the actin - nucleating and - organizing capacity of Dyn2 . In vitro actin polymerization assays demonstrate that Dyn2 has a biphasic effect on actin polymerization . In the presence of cortactin , low concentrations of dynamin enhance actin polymerization whereas higher concentrations inhibit this . Association of dynamin with lipid vesicles also increases rates of actin polymerization . The Dyn2K44A GTPase mutant inhibits the effect , which suggests that both its enzymatic activity and its binding to actin - binding proteins are important . Forming and extending lamellipodia Recent work indicates that dynamin might promote efficient cell migration by participating in lamellipodial extension . Recruitment of Dyn2 to lamellipodia depends upon a pre - established cortactin - rich cortical network , because expression of a cortactin protein lacking the SH3 domain greatly reduces localization of Dyn2 to the leading edge . Expression of a Dyn2 (cid:3) PRD protein prevents its recruitment to the lamellipodium but has no effect on cortactin distribution ( McNiven et al . , 2000 ) . Dynamin may thus link the cortical actin cytoskeleton with other processes , including lamellipodial extension . Krueger and colleagues ( Krueger et al . , 2003 ) have viewed GFP - tagged Dyn2 in living cells upon treatment with motogenic growth factors , such as PDGF or EGF . They observe a dramatic recruitment of both Dyn2 and cortactin to circular dorsal ruffles or ‘waves’ ( Fig . 3 ) . These dynamic and ephemeral structures form at the leading edge of cells and appear to function , in part , as sites of active actin remodeling that aid lamellipodial protrusion . When dorsal waves form , there is a dramatic reorganization of actin ; large , rigid stress ﬁbers disassemble and a ﬁner , more pliable actin meshwork is formed within the lamellipodium . This occurs almost exclusively at the site of lamellipodial extension , and preventing wave formation greatly attenuates extension of the leading edge of an activated cell along with subsequent motility ( Krueger et al . , 2003 ) . The recruitment of a Dyn2 - cortactin complex to dorsal waves is essential and concomitant with that Fig . 2 . Dynamin tubulates lipids cooperatively with the actin cytoskeleton . ( A , B ) Co - expression of RFP - FBP17 , an F - BAR - domain - containing protein , and GFP - Dyn2 results in antagonization of formation of lipid tubules , which is relieved by disruption of the actin cytoskeleton by Latrunculin B treatment ( B ) . ( A’ ) and ( B’ ) provide a higher magniﬁcation of the vesiculation ( A’ ) or tubulation ( B’ ) of lipids at the plasma membrane . These data demonstrate the importance of the cooperation of Dyn2 and actin in vesiculation of the membrane ; adapted from Itoh et al . ( Itoh et al . , 2005 ) , reprinted with permission . ( C ) Fluorescence image of a rat ﬁbroblast expressing a GFP - Dyn2abK44A mutant , which results in formation of dynamin - coated lipid tubules extending inwards from the plasma membrane ( Cao , H . and M . A . M . , unpublished data ) . ( D , E ) Two examples of PIP2 - containing membranes developing long actin cables in the presence of GTP . Long actin ﬁlament bundles form , demonstrating dynamin’s ability to alter the organization of actin ﬁlaments ; adapted from Schafer et al . ( Schafer et al . , 2002 ) , reprinted with permission . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e 1686 of multiple components of the Arp2 / 3 – N - WASp network , which is central to actin reorganization during cell migration . The small GTPase Rac , a protein known to mediate lamellipodium extension ( Nobes and Hall , 1995 ) , associates with wave complexes . Although there is no direct physical interaction between dynamin and Rac , several functional interdependencies between the two GTPases are observed ( Schlunck et al . , 2004 ) . Expression of mutant Dyn2 or knocking down Dyn2 by RNAi reduces lamellipodial extension while preventing recruitment of Rac ( Fig . 3 ) . Surprisingly , despite these disruptions , there is an increase in total Rac activity . In mutant - Dyn2 - expressing cells , Rac appears to be localized to long tubules emanating from the plasma membrane . Thus , there seems to be an intimate relationship between these two GTPases that plays an essential role in migration . It will be important to deﬁne this interaction further . Insights have been provided by Gomez and colleagues ( Gomez et al . , 2005 ) , who have shown that these proteins participate in the formation of the immunological synapse in activated T - cells . Synapse formation in these cells is regarded as a modiﬁed form of lamellipodial activity that is dependent upon dynamic actin reorganization . Interestingly , Dyn2 appears to regulate this process through direct interaction with the SH3 domain of the Rac guanine nucleotide exchange factor ( GEF ) Vav1 . Dyn2 does not appear to affect the GEF activity of Vav1 . Instead it is recruited to the synapse by this GEF and appears to recruit other cytoskeletal proteins and affect downstream signaling . Related observations in the amoeba proteus support ﬁndings in mammalian cells . Injection of anti - dynamin antibodies into this organism results in a loss of directional migration ( Dominik et al . , 2005 ) as well as a reduction in the rate of uroidal translocation . Amoeba Dyn2 appears to precipitate with actin pellets in an ATP - independent manner , which emphasizes its role in actin dynamics . Inactivation of amoeba orthologs of Dyn2 disrupts the polarity of the cell and results in the extension of pseudopodia in opposite directions . Although little is known about focal adhesions in amoeba , blocking Dyn2 might affect the formation of focal adhesion structures , leading to defective uroidal retraction and a loss of directed cell movement . Dynamics at the cell base The physical interaction between the cell and the substratum is tightly regulated and an essential factor in cell migration . Dyn2 plays an important role in several structures that mediate cell - matrix interactions , including focal adhesions , podosomes and invadopodia . Focal adhesions are complex structures composed of many proteins assembled around integrins , which provide a transmembrane link between the cytoplasm and the extracellular matrix . Regulated assembly and disassembly of these structures is essential for cells to move forward at the leading edge while retracting at the rear . The number of cytoskeletal and signaling components found at adhesion sites now exceeds 20 , and dynamin is a newly conﬁrmed addition to this complex , exhibiting several interactions with focal adhesion components . Recent ﬁndings now extend a seminal observation by Cypher and Letourneau ( Cypher and Letourneau , 1991 ) , who observed that dynamin is enriched at adhesion sites in growth cones from embryonic chick brain . Prominent components of focal adhesions are the syndecans , a family of membrane glycoproteins known to promote the formation of stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions . Using a yeast two - hybrid approach , Yoo et al . showed that the PH domain of Dyn2 interacts with syndecan - 4 ( Yoo et al . , 2005 ) . Importantly , Dyn2 redistributes from a diffuse cytoplasmic distribution to colocalize with syndecan - 4 and paxillin at focal adhesion sites after stimulation of cells with lysophosphatidic acid ( LPA ) ( Yoo et al . , 2005 ) . At the same time , Ezratty et al . ( Ezratty et al . , 2005 ) observed that Dyn2 interacts and colocalizes with focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) at focal adhesions . Dyn2 appears to play a functional role in cell adhesion , because a direct interaction between these two proteins is important for cell migration . Furthermore , a dominant - negative Dyn2 mutant inhibits the disassembly of focal adhesions in translocating cells . Indeed , cells expressing the Dyn2 mutant have reduced rates of migration into a wound and exhibit a characteristic drag of the uropod , which suggests an inappropriate Journal of Cell Science 119 ( 9 ) Fig . 3 . Dynamin participates in dorsal wave and lamellipodia formation . ( A ) Fluorescence image of a dorsal wave in a rat ﬁbroblast stimulated for 5 minutes with PDGF that accumulates both Dyn2 ( green ) and actin ( red ) at the progressing wave structure ( Orth , J . D . and M . A . M . , unpublished data ) . ( B ) Dyn2 and cortactin accumulate at the leading edge of a rat ﬁbroblast stimulated with EGF ( Orth , J . D . and M . A . M . , unpublished data ) . ( C ) Wild - type dynamin and Rac accumulate in the lamellipodium of an NIH3T3 ﬁbroblast co - expressing constitutively active Rac , whereas dominant - negative Dyn2K44A ( D ) disrupts lamellipodial extension as well as accumulation of Rac at the lamellipodium . Confocal imaging was used to create Z - series reconstructions , indicated by the lines in ( C ) and ( D ) and shown in ( C’ ) and ( D’ ) ; adapted from Schlunck et al . ( Schlunck et al . , 2004 ) , reprinted with permission . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e 1687 Dynamin in cell migration Fig . 4 . Dynamin localizes to focal adhesions , podosomes and invadopodia . Dynamin ( A ) colocalizes with constitutively active SrcY530F ( B ) in HeLa cells at the sites of focal adhesions ( C , merge ) ( Cao , H . and M . A . M . , unpublished data ) . Osteoclasts form a podosome ring , which accumulates both actin ( D ) and Dyn2 ( E ) . ( F ) Confocal imaging shows the overlap of Dyn2 ( green ) and actin ( red ) at high resolution . A375MM melanoma cells demonstrate an association of Dyn2 ( I ) with actin ( H ) at invadopodia where the degradation of extracellular matrix occurs ( G , arrows ) ; adapted from Baldassarre et al . ( Baldassarre et al . , 2003 ) , reprinted with permission . T a ble 1 . D y n a min bin d in g pa rtners ecnerefeR noitcn u F rentrap g nidnib nimanyD Scaffoldin g proteins Ar g B P 2 / nAr g B P 2 Adaptor protein colocalizin g with actin at stress fibers and adhesion sites Cestra et al . , 2005 S u bstrates of Abl / Ar g tyrosine kinases and Cbl u biq u itin li g ase 3002 , ylleK dna nainamaZ sisotycodne ni nietorp dloffacS L1 nitcesretnI G u anine n u cleotide exchan g e factor for CDC42 3002 , . la te razalaS snietorp yrotal ug er nitca sdnib taht nietorp dloffacS ab u T 5002 , . la te itinazz u rB esa g il niti u qib u 3E dna nietorp rotpadA lbC ot srotpecer detalyrohpsohp enisoyrt g niknil nietorp rotpadA 2 - brG downstream effector proteins Seedorf et al . , 1994 9991 , . la te hcilredn u W slan g is maertsnwod g nitaidem nietorp rotpadA kcN 1002 , . la te slesseK sisotycodne detaidem rotpecer ni devlovni nietorp g nidnib nitcA 1pbA snietorp lateleksotyC 5002 , . la te oaY nietorp g nidloffacs / lar u tc u ts a dna ealoevac fo tnenopmoc rojaM niloevaC 0002 , . la te neviNcM esanik crS fo etartsb u s tnenimorp dna nietorp g nidnib nitcA nitcatroC 8991 , . la te ektiW nitca ciremonom g nidnib yb ylbmessa nitca fo rotal ug eR nilifor P Focal Adhesion Kinase ( FAK ) Mediator of inte g rin si g nalin g and component of focal adhesions Ezratty et al . , 2005 dna noiterces ni devlovni esanik enisoryt rotpecer - noN crS u pre gu lated in several cancers Foster - Barber , 1998 Syndecan - 4 Membrane proteo g lycan that mediates focal adhesion and stress fiber formation Yoo et al . , 2005 P hospholipase C ( P LC - ) GEF for dynamin - 1 and s u bstrate for receptor tyrosine kinases Seedorf et al . , 1994 laci g olon u mmi eht fo noitamrof ni devlovni FEG ylimaf ohR 1 - vaV synapse Gomez et al . , 2005 Formin - bindin g protein 17 Involved in endocytosis and deformin g plasma membrane Kamioka et al . , 20044002 , . la te nospmohT noitaelc u n el u b u torcim ni devlovni nietorp lamosortneC nil u b u T - 9891 , eellaV dna rentephS noitomocol llec dna tropp u s lar u tc u rtS sel u b u torciM 7991 , . la te dats g niR sisotycodne elcisev citpanyS 1 - nilihpodnE srotal ug er citycodnE 6991 , . la te divaD sisotycodne elcisev citpanyS II - nisyhpihpmASyndapin / P ASCIN Co u plin g membrane traffic to the actin cytoskeleton Q u almann and Kelly , 2000 6991 , . la te g nehZ senarbmem fo stnenopmoc dipiL seditisonilyditahpsoh P J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e 1688 persistence of focal adhesion attachment . These ﬁndings highlight the idea that focal adhesion disassembly is not simply the reversal of assembly , because Dyn2 is not required for focal adhesion assembly . Rather , Dyn2 appears to regulate a speciﬁc process of focal adhesion disassembly through its interaction with FAK and other members of the cytoskeleton . Note that , along with the actin cytoskeleton , focal adhesions also associate with microtubules , which may have a role in focal adhesion turnover and retraction of the rear of the cell during cell migration . In addition to focal adhesions at the cell base , normal and neoplastic cells form membranous ventral invaginations such as podosomes and invadopodia that protrude into the extracellular matrix . Dyn2 appears to associate with actin - coated tubules at the site of podosome assembly in BHK and 3T3 cells , and a temperature - sensitive dominant - negative dynamin mutant results in a marked loss of podosomes . FRAP studies demonstrate that mutant Dyn2 signiﬁcantly reduces the turnover of actin at the podosome site , which suggests that it may participate in actin dynamics during podosome formation . The precise role of podosomes in cell migration is not well deﬁned , because it is unclear whether these structures are actually invadopodia , which are nearly identical in form and content . Like podosomes , invadopodia appear as actin - rich tubules of the ventral plasma membrane that both protrude into the extracellular matrix and invaginate into the cell interior . Providing a secretory and endocytic function , invadopodia are sites of protease release and subsequent endocytosis , facilitating matrix degradation and thereby promoting cell translocation and invasion . Dynamin is now known to have an essential role in focal matrix degradation by invadopodia / podosomes in a variety of neoplastic and primary cells . Reduction of Dyn2 levels in a human melanoma cell line by RNAi or expression of K44A Dyn2 reduces the cellular capacity to form invadopodia and degrade the extracellular matrix ( Baldassarre et al . , 2003 ) . Electron microscopy reveals the invadopodia to be reduced in number and in the size of the extension . Dyn2 might therefore be involved in both the structural aspects of invadopodia formation as well as the functional aspects of extracellular matrix degradation . Matrix degradation by osteoclasts is perhaps the best studied of several cell models of matrix degradation , and Dyn2 is a key player in this process . A prominent function of osteoclasts is the degradation and resorption of matrix during bone remodeling , allowing free movement through the osteo - lacunae . Dynamin and cortactin are signiﬁcantly enriched at sites of matrix degradation and resorption in osteoclasts and , furthermore , overexpression of dynamin in these cells leads to increased matrix resorption and migration . Accordingly , inhibition of dynamin function via the expression of the dominant - negative K44A mutant inhibits both migration and resorption ( Fig . 4 ) ( Bruzzaniti et al . , 2005 ) . How Dyn2 actually participates in osteoclast function is unclear , although it has been shown that it is part of a complex of Pyk2 , Src and Cbl . This interaction is negatively regulated by the tyrosine kinase Src . Thus , the Dyn2 - Cbl - Src connection may regulate the turnover of podosomes by Src signaling . Because podosome turnover is a key step in the attachment , matrix resorption and migratory processes of osteoclasts , the existence of a regulatory complex involving dynamin demonstrates that Dyn2 has a signiﬁcant role in regulating cell motility and other cellular events that can lead to metastases . Dynamin function : substantially more complicated than previously thought As is almost always the case , additional information and insights into dynamin function generates more questions than answers . Indeed , since 1989 when dynamin was ﬁrst identiﬁed , the scope of dynamin distribution and function has been shown to extend well beyond the focused localization of a budding clathrin - coated basket . Although the dynamins are a complex protein family that participates in many seemingly unrelated cell processes , this family does possess some general features that can help bring some order and clarity to this confusing functional diversity . Lipid - based membrane binding and vesiculation involve its PH and GTPase domains , allowing dynamin to support membrane dynamics during both endocytosis and membrane extension . The PRD mediates interactions with various binding partners , linking dynamin to sites of high actin turnover , such as endocytic vesicles , lamellipodial and ﬁlopodial protrusions , focal adhesions , podosomes and invadopodia . While illuminating its role in multiple membrane trafficking events in the endocytic and secretory pathways , which in retrospect might have been somewhat predictable , investigation of the dynamins has expanded into a new , exciting phase . This new direction includes less - conventional cellular structures and organelles where a role for a membrane pinchase or scaffold may , at ﬁrst , seem less obvious ( Fig . 5 ) . Yet , upon closer examination , a central role for the dynamins in dynamic processes such as lamellipodial extension and cell adhesion may become more apparent . Indeed , it should be no surprise that a protein that exhibits contractile and polymeric properties and contains a PH domain as well as a PRD might act as an actin regulator , membrane tubulator and constrictor , or a dynamic scaffold that supports the docking and integration of a host of other cytoskeletal and signaling components ( see Table 1 ) . Our understanding of dynamin’s role in cell motility is still in the most nascent of stages . What precisely is dynamin doing at Journal of Cell Science 119 ( 9 ) DOR S AL WAVE S Dyn2 a t s ite s of a ctin reorg a niz a tion a nd l a mellipod progre ss ion LAMELLIPODIALACCUMULATION Dyn2 a cc u m u l a te s a t the le a ding edge with cort a ctin a nd R a c INVADOPODIA & PODO S OME S Dyn2 inter a ct s with C b l a nd p a rticip a te s in m a trix degr a d a tion GOLGI Dyn2 ass oci a te s with cort a ctin a nd (cid:2) - t ubu lin a t the Golgi a nd centro s ome FOCALADHE S ION DI S A SS EMBLY Dyn2 inter a ct s with FAK a nd medi a te s t u rnover of a dhe s ion s Fig . 5 . Dynamin regulates multiple aspects of cell migration . Through its action as a polymeric scaffold protein and a GTPase , Dyn2 localizes to focal adhesions , invadopodia , podosomes , dorsal waves , and lamellipodia to promote cell migration . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e 1689 Dynamin in cell migration lamellipodia and invadopodia to support cell motility ? What are the mechanistic implications for dynamin in actin dynamics , membrane ruffling , and cytoskeletal interactions ? Even more enigmatic is the recently identiﬁed structure - function relationship with non - membrane - based cell structures , such as focal adhesions ( Ezratty et al . , 2005 ) and the centrosome ( Thompson et al . , 2004 ) . Because these organelles are generally thought to have limited interactions with membranes , a role for dynamins at these sites is difficult to model ; however , these structures do contribute to directed cell migration . Thus , the new studies bring dynamin into yet another cellular theater : one with implications for cell polarity and migration . As if the ﬁeld did not have enough to do deﬁning the role of dynamin in severing the neck of a clathrin - coated tubule . References Baldassarre , M . , Pompeo , A . , Beznoussenko , G . , Castaldi , C . , Cortellino , S . , McNiven , M . A . , Luini , A . and Buccione , R . ( 2003 ) . Dynamin participates in focal extracellular matrix degradation by invasive cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 1074 - 1084 . Barylko , B . , Binns , D . , Lin , K . , Atkinson , M . , Jameson , D . , Yin , H . and Albanesi , J . ( 1998 ) . Synergistic activation of dynamin GTPase by Grb2 and phosphoinositides . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 3791 - 3797 . Bershadsky , A . and Futerman , A . ( 1994 ) . Disruption of the Golgi apparatus by brefeldin A blocks cell polarization and inhibits directed cell migration . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 91 , 5686 - 5689 . Bruzzaniti , A . , Neff , L . , Sanjay , A . , Horne , W . C . , De Camilli , P . and Baron , R . ( 2005 ) . Dynamin forms a Src kinase - sensitive complex with Cbl and regulates podosomes and osteoclast activity . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 3301 - 3313 . Cao , H . , Garcia , F . and McNiven , M . A . ( 1998 ) . Differential distribution of dynamin isoforms in mammalian cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 9 , 2595 - 2609 . Cao , H . , Orth , J . D . , Chen , J . , Weller , S . G . , Heuser , J . E . and McNiven , M . A . ( 2003 ) . Cortactin is a component of clathrin - coated pits and participates in receptor - mediated endocytosis . Mol . Cell . Biol . 23 , 2162 - 2170 . Cao , H . , Weller , S . , Orth , J . D . , Chen , J . , Huang , B . , Chen , J . L . , Stamnes , M . and McNiven , M . A . ( 2005 ) . Actin and Arf1 - dependent recruitment of a cortactin - dynamin complex to the Golgi regulates post - Golgi transport . Nat . Cell Biol . 7 , 483 - 492 . Cestra , G . , Toomre , D . , Chang , S . and De Camilli , P . ( 2005 ) . The Abl / Arg substrate ArgBP2 / nArgBP2 coordinates the function of multiple regulatory mechanisms converging on the actin cytoskeleton . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 1731 - 1736 . Cypher , C . and Letourneau , P . ( 1991 ) . Identiﬁcation of cytoskeletal , focal adhesion , and cell adhesion proteins in growth cone particles isolated from developing chick brain . J . Neurosci . Res . 30 , 259 - 265 . Danino , D . , Moon , K . H . and Hinshaw , J . E . ( 2004 ) . Rapid constriction of lipid bilayers by the mechanochemical enzyme dynamin . J . Struct . Biol . 147 , 259 - 267 . David , C . , McPherson , P . S . , Mundigl , O . and de Camilli , P . ( 1996 ) . A role of amphiphysin in synaptic vesicle endocytosis suggested by its binding to dynamin in nerve terminals . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 93 , 331 - 335 . Dominik , M . , Klopocka , W . , Pomorski , P . , Kocik , E . and Redowicz , M . J . ( 2005 ) . Characterization of Amoeba proteus myosin VI immunoanalog . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 61 , 172 - 188 . Ezratty , E . J . , Partridge , M . A . and Gundersen , G . G . ( 2005 ) . Microtubule - induced focal adhesion disassembly is mediated by dynamin and focal adhesion kinase . Nat . Cell Biol . 7 , 581 - 590 . Foster - Barber , A . and Bishop , J . M . ( 1998 ) . Src interacts with dynamin and synapsin in neuronal cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 4673 - 4677 . Gomez , T . S . , Hamann , M . J . , McCarney , S . , Savoy , D . N . , Lubking , C . M . , Heldebrant , M . P . , Labno , C . M . , McKean , D . J . , McNiven , M . A . , Burkhardt , J . K . et al . ( 2005 ) . Dynamin 2 regulates T cell activation by controlling actin polymerization at the immunological synapse . Nat . Immunol . 6 , 261 - 270 . Gout , I . , Dhand , R . , Hiles , I . , Fry , M . , Panayotou , G . , Das , P . , Truong , O . , Totty , N . , Hsuan , J . and Booker , G . ( 1993 ) . The GTPase dynamin binds to and is activated by a subset of SH3 domains . Cell 75 , 25 - 36 . Gray , N . W . , Fourgeaud , L . , Huang , B . , Chen , J . , Cao , H . , Oswald , B . J . , Hemar , A . and McNiven , M . A . ( 2003 ) . Dynamin 3 is a component of the postsynapse , where it interacts with mGluR5 and Homer . Curr . Biol . 13 , 510 - 515 . Haller , O . and Kochs , G . ( 2002 ) . Interferon - induced mx proteins : dynamin - like GTPases with antiviral activity . Traffic 3 , 710 - 717 . Hinshaw , J . E . ( 2000 ) . Dynamin and its role in membrane ﬁssion . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 16 , 483 - 519 . Itoh , T . , Erdmann , K . S . , Roux , A . , Habermann , B . , Werner , H . and De Camilli , P . ( 2005 ) . Dynamin and the actin cytoskeleton cooperatively regulate plasma membrane invagination by BAR and F - BAR proteins . Dev . Cell 9 , 791 - 804 . Kamioka , Y . , Fukuhara , S . , Sawa , H . , Nagashima , K . , Masuda , M . , Matsuda , M . and Mochizuki , N . ( 2004 ) . A novel dynamin - associating molecule , formin - binding protein 17 , induces tubular membrane invaginations and participates in endocytosis . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 40091 - 40099 . Kanatani , S . , Tabata , H . and Nakajima , K . ( 2005 ) . Neuronal migration in cortical development . J . Child Neurol . 20 , 274 - 279 . Kessels , M . , Engqvist - Goldstein , A . , Drubin , D . and Qualmann , B . ( 2001 ) . Mammalian Abp1 , a signal - responsive F - actin - binding protein , links the actin cytoskeleton to endocytosis via the GTPase dynamin . J . Cell Biol . 153 , 351 - 366 . Krueger , E . W . , Orth , J . D . , Cao , H . and McNiven , M . A . ( 2003 ) . A dynamin - cortactin - Arp2 / 3 complex mediates actin reorganization in growth factor - stimulated cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 1085 - 1096 . Labrousse , A . , Zappaterra , M . , Rube , D . and van der Bliek , A . ( 1999 ) . C . elegans dynamin - related protein DRP - 1 controls severing of the mitochondrial outer membrane . Mol . Cell 4 , 815 - 826 . Lambrechts , A . , Troys , M . V . and Ampe , C . ( 2004 ) . The actin cytoskeleton in normal and pathological cell motility . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 36 , 1890 - 1909 . Lee , E . and De Camilli , P . ( 2002 ) . Dynamin at actin tails . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 161 - 166 . Lin , H . , Barylko , B . , Achiriloaie , M . and Albanesi , J . P . ( 1997 ) . Phosphatidylinositol ( 4 , 5 ) - bisphosphate - dependent activation of dynamins I and II lacking the proline / arginine - rich domains . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 25999 - 26004 . Marks , B . , Stowell , M . H . , Vallis , Y . , Mills , I . G . , Gibson , A . , Hopkins , C . R . and McMahon , H . T . ( 2001 ) . GTPase activity of dynamin and resulting conformation change are essential for endocytosis . Nature 410 , 231 - 235 . Martinez - Quiles , N . , Ho , H . , Kirschner , M . , Ramesh , N . and Geha , R . ( 2004 ) . Erk / Src phosphorylation of cortactin acts as a switch on - switch off mechanism that controls its ability to activate N - WASP . Mol . Cell . Biol . 24 , 5269 - 5280 . McNiven , M . A . , Kim , L . , Krueger , E . W . , Orth , J . D . , Cao , H . and Wong , T . W . ( 2000 ) . Regulated interactions between dynamin and the actin - binding protein cortactin modulate cell shape . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 187 - 198 . Muhlberg , A . , Warnock , D . and Schmid , S . ( 1997 ) . Free in PMC domain structure and intramolecular regulation of dynamin GTPase . EMBO J . 16 , 6676 - 6683 . Nobes , C . D . and Hall , A . ( 1995 ) . Rho , rac , and cdc42 GTPases regulate the assembly of multimolecular focal complexes associated with actin stress ﬁbers , lamellipodia , and ﬁlopodia . Cell 81 , 53 - 62 . Ochoa , G . C . , Slepnev , V . I . , Neff , L . , Ringstad , N . , Takei , K . , Daniell , L . , Kim , W . , Cao , H . , McNiven , M . , Baron , R . et al . ( 2000 ) . A functional link between dynamin and the actin cytoskeleton at podosomes . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 377 - 389 . Orth , J . D . , Krueger , E . W . , Cao , H . and McNiven , M . A . ( 2002 ) . The large GTPase dynamin regulates actin comet formation and movement in living cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 167 - 172 . Peter , B . J . , Kent , H . M . , Mills , I . G . , Vallis , Y . , Butler , P . J . , Evans , P . R . and McMahon , H . T . ( 2004 ) . BAR domains as sensors of membrane curvature : the amphiphysin BAR structure . Science 303 , 495 - 499 . Qualmann , B . and Kelly , R . ( 2000 ) . Syndapin isoforms participate in receptor - mediated endocytosis and actin organization . J . Cell Biol . 148 , 1047 - 1062 . Ringstad , N . , Nemoto , Y . and Camilli , P . D . ( 1997 ) . The SH3p4 / Sh3p8 / SH3p13 protein family : binding partners for synaptojanin and dynamin via a Grb2 - like Src homology 3 domain . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 8569 - 8574 . Salazar , M . A . , Kwiatkowski , A . V . , Pellegrini , L . , Cestra , G . , Butler , M . H . , Rossman , K . L . , Serna , D . M . , Sondek , J . , Gertler , F . B . and De Camilli , P . ( 2003 ) . Tuba , a novel protein containing bin / amphiphysin / Rvs and Dbl homology domains , links dynamin to regulation of the actin cytoskeleton . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 49031 - 49043 . Schafer , D . A . , Weed , S . A . , Binns , D . , Karginov , A . V . , Parsons , J . T . and Cooper , J . A . ( 2002 ) . Dynamin2 and cortactin regulate actin assembly and ﬁlament organization . Curr . Biol . 12 , 1852 - 1857 . Schlunck , G . , Damke , H . , Kiosses , W . B . , Rusk , N . , Symons , M . H . , Waterman - Storer , C . M . , Schmid , S . L . and Schwartz , M . A . ( 2004 ) . Modulation of Rac localization and function by dynamin . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 256 - 267 . Seedorf , K . , Kostka , G . , Lammers , R . , Bashkin , P . , Daly , R . , Burgess , W . H . , van der Bliek , A . M . , Schlessinger , J . and Ullrich , A . ( 1994 ) . Dynamin binds to SH3 domains of phospholipase C gamma and GRB - 2 . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 16009 - 16014 . Shpetner , H . and Vallee , R . ( 1989 ) . Identiﬁcation of dynamin , a novel mechanochemical enzyme that mediates interactions between microtubules . Cell 59 , 421 - 432 . Song , B . and Schmid , S . ( 2003 ) . A molecular motor or a regulator ? Dynamin’s in a class of its own . Biochemistry 42 , 1369 - 1376 . Stowell , M . H . , Marks , B . , Wigge , P . and McMahon , H . T . ( 1999 ) . Nucleotide - dependent conformational changes in dynamin : evidence for a mechanochemical molecular spring . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 27 - 32 . Tamura , M . , Gu , J . , Matsumoto , K . , Aota , S . , Parsons , R . and Yamada , K . ( 1998 ) . Inhibition of cell migration , spreading , and focal adhesions by tumor suppressor PTEN . Science 280 , 1614 - 1617 . Thompson , H . M . and McNiven , M . A . ( 2001 ) . Dynamin : switch or pinchase ? Curr . Biol . 11 , R850 . Thompson , H . M . , Cao , H . , Chen , J . , Euteneuer , U . and McNiven , M . A . ( 2004 ) . Dynamin 2 binds gamma - tubulin and participates in centrosome cohesion . Nat . Cell Biol . 6 , 335 - 342 . Titus , B . , Schwartz , M . and Theodorescu , D . ( 2005 ) . Rho proteins in cell migration and metastasis . Crit . Rev . Eukaryot . Gene Expr . 15 , 103 - 114 . Vicente - Manzanares , M . , Webb , D . J . and Horwitz , A . R . ( 2005 ) . Cell migration at a glance . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 4917 - 4919 . Weston , J . ( 1971 ) . Neural crest cell migration and differentiation . UCLA Forum Med . Sci . 14 , 1 - 22 . Witke , W . , Podtelejnikov , A . V . , Di Nardo , A . , Sutherland , J . D . , Gurniak , C . B . , Dotti , J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e 1690 C . and Mann , M . ( 1998 ) . In mouse brain proﬁlin I and proﬁlin II associate with regulators of the endocytic pathway and actin assembly . EMBO J . 17 , 967 - 976 . Wunderlich , L . , Farago , A . and Buday , L . ( 1999 ) . Characterization of interactions of Nck with Sos and dynamin . Cell . Signal 11 , 25 - 29 . Xie , Z . and Tsai , L . ( 2004 ) . Cdk5 phosphorylation of FAK regulates centrosome - associated miocrotubules and neuronal migration . Cell Cycle 3 , 108 - 110 . Yao , Q . , Chen , J . , Cao , H . , Orth , J . D . , McCaffery , J . M . , Stan , R . V . and McNiven , M . A . ( 2005 ) . Caveolin - 1 interacts directly with dynamin - 2 . J . Mol . Biol . 348 , 491 - 501 . Yoo , J . , Jeong , M . J . , Cho , H . J . , Oh , E . S . and Han , M . Y . ( 2005 ) . Dynamin II interacts with syndecan - 4 , a regulator of focal adhesion and stress - ﬁber formation . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 328 , 424 - 431 . Zamanian , J . L . and Kelly , R . B . ( 2003 ) . Intersectin 1L guanine nucleotide exchange activity is regulated by adjacent src homology 3 domains that are also involved in endocytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 1624 - 1637 . Zhang , P . and Hinshaw , J . E . ( 2001 ) . Three - dimensional reconstruction of dynamin in the constricted state . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 922 - 926 . Zheng , J . , Cahill , S . M . , Lemmon , M . A . , Fushman , D . , Schlessinger , J . and Cowburn , D . ( 1996 ) . Identiﬁcation of the binding site for acidic phospholipids on the pH domain of dynamin : implications for stimulation of GTPase activity . J . Mol . Biol . 255 , 14 - 21 . Journal of Cell Science 119 ( 9 ) J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e