3070 | M . Lampe et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell MBoC | ARTICLE Dual single - scission event analysis of constitutive transferrin receptor ( TfR ) endocytosis and ligand - triggered β 2 - adrenergic receptor ( β 2AR ) or Mu - opioid receptor ( MOR ) endocytosis Marko Lampe a , b , Fabienne Pierre c , Suleiman Al - Sabah d , Cornelius Krasel e , and Christien J . Merrifield c a European Molecular Biology Laboratory , 69117 Heidelberg , Germany ; b Translational Lung Research Center , Department of Translational Pulmonology , University of Heidelberg , 69120 Heidelberg , Germany ; c Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique UPR3082 , Laboratoire d’Enzymologie et de Biochimie Structurales , 91198 Gif - sur - Yvette Cedex , France ; d Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology , Faculty of Medicine , Kuwait University , 13110 Safat , Kuwait ; e Fachbereich Pharmazie , Institut für Pharmakologie und Klinische Pharmazie , Philipps - Universität Marburg , 35033 Marburg , Germany ABSTRACT The dynamic relationship between constitutive and ligand - triggered clathrin - mediated endocytosis is only poorly characterized , and it remains controversial whether clathrin - coated pits specialize to internalize particular receptor cargo . Here we analyzed the ligand - triggered endocytosis of the model G - protein – coupled receptors ( GPCRs ) β 2 - adrenergic receptor ( β 2AR ) and Mu - opioid receptor ( MOR ) at the level of individual endo - cytic events using a total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy ( TIRFM ) – based assay . Similar to the constitutive endocytosis of transferrin receptor ( TfR ) , ligand - triggered endocy - tosis of β 2AR occurs via quantized scission events hosted by clathrin spots and plaques of variable size and persistence . To address whether clathrin - coated structures ( CCSs ) specialize to internalize particular GPCRs , we adapted the TIRFM imaging assay to simultaneously quantify the internalization of TfR and the ligand - triggered endocytosis of the β 2AR or MOR . Agonist - triggered β 2AR or MOR endocytosis extended the maturation time of CCSs , as shown previously , but did not affect the rate of constitutive TfR endocytosis or loading of TfR into individual endocytic vesicles . Both the β 2AR and the MOR receptors entered cells in the same vesicles as TfR , and the overall evidence for CCS specialization was weak . These data support a simple model in which different cargoes internalize through common CCSs . INTRODUCTION Clathrin - mediated endocytosis is the main pathway for receptor internalization in eukaryotic cells . In this well - conserved pathway , receptors concentrate at clathrin - coated pits through association with adaptors and internalize as coated pits invaginate and bud into the cell . Total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy ( TIRFM ) has become an important tool to analyze the spatial and temporal organization of clathrin - mediated endocytosis in living cells ( Rappoport , 2008 ) . However , there remains some controversy over what constitutes a “canonical” clathrin - coated pit in live - cell imag - ing studies . Some studies suggest that receptor - mediated endocy - tosis is restricted to discrete , punctate clathrin - coated pits , whereas larger and more stable clathrin plaques are endocytically inactive ( Batchelder and Yarar , 2010 ) or constitute a unique pathway of endo - cytosis ( Saffarian et al . , 2009 ) . However , when individual constitutive endocytic events of transferrin receptor ( TfR ) , tagged with pH - sensi - tive super - ecliptic pHluorin ( sePhl ; Sankaranarayanan and Ryan , 2000 ) , were imaged directly using a TIRFM - based “pulsed pH” Monitoring Editor David G . Drubin University of California , Berkeley Received : Jun 17 , 2014 Revised : Jul 18 , 2014 Accepted : Jul 18 , 2014 This article was published online ahead of print in MBoC in Press ( http : / / www . molbiolcell . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E14 - 06 - 1112 ) on July 30 , 2014 . Address correspondence to : Christien J . Merrifield ( christien . merrifield @ lebs . cnrs - gif . fr ) . © 2014 Lampe et al . This article is distributed by The American Society for Cell Biology under license from the author ( s ) . Two months after publication it is avail - able to the public under an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Unported Creative Commons License ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 ) . “ASCB ® , ” “The American Society for Cell Biology ® , ” and “Molecular Biology of the Cell ® ” are registered trademarks of The American Society of Cell Biology . Abbreviations used : β 2AR , β 2 - adrenergic receptor ( s ) ; CCS , clathrin - coated structure ( s ) ; GPCR , G - protein – coupled receptor ( s ) ; MOR , mu - opioid receptor ( s ) ; TfR , transferrin receptor ( s ) ; TIRFM , total internal reflection fluorescence micros - copy . Volume 25 October 1 , 2014 Dual single - scission event analysis | 3071 could be detected while isoproterenol was washed on , and then off , the target cell . In an example HEK293 cell coexpressing green phl - β 2AR and Clc - mCherry , phl - β 2AR fluorescence was homogeneous across the plasma membrane and did not colocalize with punctate CCSs ( Figure 1Ai ) . The cell was imaged with pH cycling for 250 s , and in an example image acquired at pH 5 . 5 , no pH - resistant phl - β 2AR was detected close to the plasma membrane ( Figure 1Ai ) . At 250 s , the perfusion stream was switched to buffers containing 20 μM iso - proterenol , which triggered rapid recruitment of phl - β 2AR into CCSs ( Figure 1Ai ) . In an example image acquired at pH 5 . 5 , a population of brightly fluorescent punctae was revealed colocalized with Clc - mCherry labeled CCSs and with patches of phl - β 2AR at pH 7 . 4 ( Figure 1Aii , yellow circles ) . Not all clathrin patches colocalized with a correlated spot of phl - β 2AR at pH 7 . 4 ( Figure 1Aii , white arrow - head ) . These rare CCSs could represent coated pits that entirely lacked phl - β 2AR ( Cao et al . , 1998 ) , or they could be CCSs that pinched of at pH 5 . 5 or otherwise naturally acidified after scission ; in either of the latter cases , the phl - β 2AR cargo would be quenched and therefore invisible . The pH - resistant spots of phl - β 2AR fluores - cence in images acquired at pH 5 . 5 represented newly formed en - docytic vesicles containing phl - β 2AR that pinched off of the plasma membrane as the cell was perfused with a pulse of buffer at pH 7 . 4 in the preceding image ( Figure 1Aii , yellow circles ) . Phl - β 2AR ( + ) scission events manifested as the abrupt appear - ance of pH 5 . 5 – resistant phl - β 2AR spots colocalized with a cluster of phl - β 2AR at pH 7 . 4 ( Figure 1B ) . To quantify scission events , we used a semiautomated analysis similar to one described previously ( Taylor et al . , 2011 ) . Acid - resistant phl - β 2AR spots were tracked , their fluo - rescence quantified , and bona fide scission events classified primar - ily on the ratio of signal to noise ( S / N ) of the step increase in fluores - cence ( Figure 1B ) . The rapid clustering of phl - β 2AR at CCSs was coordinated with a burst of detected scission events in images acquired at pH 5 . 5 ( Figure 1C , gray histogram ) . Analysis of a cumulative frequency plot ( n = 1986 events , N = 3 cells ) revealed a remarkably steady flux of scission events for the duration of isoproterenol exposure ( Figure 1C , blue line ) . At t = 850 s , the perfusion stream was switched back to buffer lacking isoproterenol , after which the rate of scission events tailed off over ∼ 200 s ( Figure 1C ) . β 2AR ( + ) scission events occurred at clathrin spots and plaques The dynamic characteristics of endocytically active CCSs and the relationship between clathrin - coated bud maturation and CCS life - time remains only poorly appreciated ( for discussion see Mooren et al . , 2012 ) . In general , endocytically active CCSs at the adherent surface of cells were considered to be discrete , punctate CCSs that nucleated , grew in fluorescence , maintained a stable plateau of fluorescence for some variable time ( mean , ∼ 50 s ) , and abruptly disappeared upon internalization ( Merrifield et al . , 2002 ; Ehrlich et al . , 2004 ; Loerke et al . , 2009 ) . Larger , persistent clathrin plaques were considered either to be endocytically inactive ( Batchelder and Yarar , 2010 ) or to be involved in a different , “noncanonical” clathrin - mediated endocytic pathway ( Saffarian et al . , 2009 ) . How - ever , there is also evidence that the distinction of size classes of CCS is almost superfluous with regard to clathrin - coated bud for - mation because in NIH3T3 cells , quantized TfR ( + ) scission events were hosted by both discrete , punctate CCSs and larger and more persistent clathrin patches , and either type of structure could po - tentially host multiple scission events ( Merrifield et al . , 2005 ; Taylor et al . , 2011 ) . assay , it was found that both punctate coated pits and larger plaques could host multiple discrete , quantized scission events ( Merrifield et al . , 2005 ; Taylor et al . , 2011 ) . The pulsed pH assay identified indi - vidual scission events using the occlusion of fluorescently tagged , pH - sensitive receptor cargo from rhythmically imposed external pH changes ( Merrifield et al . , 2005 ; Taylor et al . , 2011 ) . Here we used the pulsed pH assay to determine the physical characteristics of clathrin - coated structures ( CCSs ) that endocytosed the two model G - protein – coupled receptors ( GPCRs ) β 2 - adrenergic receptor ( β 2AR ) and Mu - opioid receptor ( MOR ) . A second point of controversy is whether clathrin - coated pits can specialize to internalize specific cargo to the exclusion of other types of receptor . It has been suggested that CCPs can specialize to inter - nalize different types of GPCR ( Mundell et al . , 2006 ) or to internalize particular GPCRs while excluding TfR , which implies that receptor sorting can start at the plasma membrane ( Cao et al . , 1998 ; Tosoni et al . , 2005 ; Puthenveedu and von Zastrow , 2006 ) . In an alternative model , all CCPs are capable of internalizing a mixture of receptor cargo via a variety of receptor - specific adaptor proteins ( Keyel et al . , 2006 ) , and receptor sorting begins only after internalization ( Burd and Cullen , 2014 ) . To probe the dynamic relationship between constitutive and li - gand - triggered receptor - mediated endocytosis and to quantita - tively analyze the cointernalization of different types of receptor at individual scission events , we extended the pulsed pH assay to si - multaneously image two different receptors , with the TfR labeled green ( with sePhl ) and either β 2AR or MOR labeled red with the moderately pH - sensitive fluorescent protein mApple ( Shaner et al . , 2008 ) . RESULTS Single - event detection of β 2 - adrenergic receptor endocytosis To measure the dynamics of constitutive clathrin - mediated endocy - tosis in HEK293 cells , we used an optical assay to detect single - scission events of TfR ( Merrifield et al . , 2005 ; Taylor et al . , 2011 ) . Briefly , TfR was tagged at the extracellular domain with super - eclip - tic pHluorin , a pH - sensitive variant of green fluorescent protein ( Miesenbock et al . , 1998 ; Sankaranarayanan and Ryan , 2000 ) to produce TfR - phl ( Merrifield et al . , 2005 ) . A large - diameter perfusion tip was brought close to the target cell , and perfusate was cycled between buffer of pH 7 . 4 and 5 . 5 in synchrony with image acquisi - tion at 0 . 5 Hz using dual - color TIRFM ( Merrifield et al . , 2005 ; Taylor et al . , 2011 ; Supplemental Figure S1A ) . Scission events manifested as the abrupt appearance of pH - resistant TfR - phl punctae in im - ages acquired at pH 5 . 5 , colocalized with CCSs labeled with mCherry - tagged clathrin light chain ( Clc - mCherry ; Supplemental Figure S1A ) . To detect single ligand - triggered endocytic events , we tagged the model GPCR β 2AR at the extracellular N - terminus with super - ecliptic pHluorin to make phl - β 2AR . The hemaggluti - nin leader sequence was inserted N - terminal to pHluorin to ensure the correct membrane insertion of the receptor ( see Materials and Methods ) . As shown in an earlier study , attach - ment of pHluorin in front of the extracellular domain had negli - gible effects on the pharmacokinetics of ligand - triggered β 2AR endocytosis ( Puthenveedu et al . , 2010 ) . To detect single - scission events , we used a perfusion system ( Taylor et al . , 2012 ) to inte - grate rhythmic changes of extracellular pH with controlled perfu - sion of the β 2AR agonist isoproterenol , which rapidly triggers β 2AR signaling and endocytosis ( Staehelin and Simons , 1982 ; Supplemental Figure S1 , B – D ) . Hence potential scission events 3072 | M . Lampe et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell background features were quenched at pH 5 . 5 and so did not inter - fere with the detection of CCSs or scission events . Strikingly , when β 2AR ( + ) scission events were mapped to their host CCS , both clath - rin punctae and clathrin plaques could host spot - like scission events ( Figure 2 , Bi and Bii ) . To quantify the distribution of scission events among spot - like CCSs and clathrin plaques for five cells , we seg - mented images ( see Materials and Methods ) and quantified the pixel area of the phl - β 2AR ( + ) - marking scission and the correspond - ing “host” CCS , labeled with Mu2 - mCherry , and plotted the result as a density scatterplot ( Figure 2C ) . All scission events were the size of diffraction - limited spots , but a significant proportion ( ∼ 10 % ) of clathrin objects hosting scission events were significantly larger blobs and so classified as “plaques . ” Therefore ( and as shown previ - ously for TfR - phl ; Taylor et al . , 2011 ) , both clathrin spots and plaques could host discrete , quantized scission events of phl - β 2AR , and the To define the dynamic characteristics of CCSs that hosted β 2AR ( + ) scission events , we transfected HEK293 cells with phl - β 2AR and Mu2 - mCherry to label CCSs and detected and analyzed scis - sion events as described . Similar to NIH3T3 fibroblasts , both spot - like CCSs and larger and longer - lived clathrin plaques could exist at the adherent surface of HEK293 cells ( Figure 2A ) . Persistent clathrin plaques occurred in a significant proportion ( ∼ 10 % ) of cells growing on fibronectin - coated coverslips and were most likely triggered by tight adhesion to the substrate ( Batchelder and Yarar , 2010 ) . On challenge with isoproterenol , phl - β 2AR rapidly clustered at preexist - ing spot - like CCSs ( Puthenveedu and von Zastrow , 2006 ) and large clathrin plaques ( Figure 2 , A and Bi ) . As shown earlier , not all punc - tate CCSs showed clear colocalization with phl - β 2AR at pH 7 . 4 ( Figure 1Aii ) , and fine , finger - like projections at the lower surface of some HEK293 cells obscured things further ( Figure 2Ai ) . These FIGURE 1 : Single - event analysis of β 2AR internalization . ( Ai ) Example HEK293 cell expressing Clc - mCh ( left ) and phl - β 2AR at pH7 . 4 ( middle ) and 2 s later at pH 5 . 5 ( right ) ; first image taken ∼ 428 s before addition of isoproterenol . At pH 5 . 5 , cell - surface phl - β 2AR quenched and no pH - resistant , phl - β 2AR ( + ) endosomes were visible close to the plasma membrane . ( Aii ) Same cell 240 s after addition of isoproterenol . Phl - β 2AR became concentrated at coated pits at pH 7 . 4 ( middle ) . When cell - surface phl - β 2AR was quenched 2 s later at pH 5 . 5 , acid - resistant endosomes containing phl - β 2AR were clearly visible close to the plasma membrane . ( Aiii ) Expanded region indicated in Aii , showing Clc - mCh ( magenta , top left ) , phl - β 2AR at p H7 . 4 ( green , middle left ) , and overlay ( lower left ) . Three acid - resistant , phl - β 2AR ( + ) endosomes were visible in the field ( green , middle right ) colocalized with CCS ( yellow circles ) . ( B ) Time - resolved images of a single - scission event engulfing phl - β 2AR . The fluorescence was quantified and bona fide scission events defined primarily on the basis of S / N ( lower graph , scale : vertical 2 . 5 a . u . , horizontal 33 s ; see Materials and Methods for details ) . ( C ) Time course of detected scission events before , during , and after addition of isoproterenol . Summarized data from four cells showing the incidence of scission events over a 20 - s time window ( gray histogram ) and the cumulative number of scission events ( blue line ) . Volume 25 October 1 , 2014 Dual single - scission event analysis | 3073 relative sizes of clathrin spots and plaques are poor predictors of the endocytic poten - tial of any given CCS . In previous studies , it was likely that the endocytic activity at the edges of clathrin plaques was masked by the bright fluorescence of the plaque itself and so remained undetected . This was veri - fied when Mu2 - mCherry fluorescence traces were classified according to whether they occurred at spots or plaques : the average fluorescence traces in each case showed a discrete dip after scission , presumably as the clathrin bud separated from the host structure and was uncoated ( Figure 2D ) . Lifetimes analysis of spot - like CCS hosting β 2AR ( + ) scission events We next focused on a more detailed analy - sis of spot - like CCS lifetimes , since the dy - namics of these structures are most readily analyzed , and the lifetime of spot - like coated pits was used previously as a read - out of clathrin - coated pit maturation ( Ehrlich et al . , 2004 ; Puthenveedu and von Zastrow , 2006 ; Loerke et al . , 2009 ; Henry et al . , 2012 ) . To determine the maturation time of pro - ductive clathrin - coated buds , we tracked Mu2 - mCherry labeled CCSs and mapped them to bona fide scission events ( Merrifield et al . , 2005 ) . As shown previously for TfR in fibroblasts ( Merrifield et al . , 2005 ; Taylor et al . , 2011 , 2012 ) , spot - like CCSs most commonly hosted only one scission event but could potentially host multiple scission events ( Figure 3 , A and B ) . Strikingly , many scission events coincided with partial dim - ming but not complete disappearance of the host CCS , and repeated trains of partial dimming resulted in characteristic sawtooth - type profiles of Mu2 - mCherry fluorescence ( Figure 3A , right pair of traces ) . As described previously for NIH fibroblasts ( Merrifield et al . , 2005 ; Taylor et al . , 2011 ) , “nontermi - nal” events , for which the host CCS did not completely disappear after scission , com - prised a significant proportion of the total number of scission events ( ∼ 50 % ) . By defini - tion , terminal events coincided with the final disappearance of the host spot - like CCS ( Figure 3A ) . Clearly , the overall lifetime of a spot - like CCS is not an entirely accurate readout for the time course of clathrin - coated bud mat - uration . To estimate the time taken to form a productive clathrin bud , we measured the time between the first appearance ( i . e . , nu - cleation ) of spot - like CCSs and their corre - lated first detected β 2AR ( + ) scission event ( Figure 3C ) . The median time was ∼ 119 . 6s , which is ∼ 53 % longer than clathrin bud maturation in cells expressing only TfR - phl FIGURE 2 : Discrete , quantized scission events internalized β 2AR at clathrin spots and plaques . ( A ) An example HEK293 cell expressing the CCS marker Mu2 - mCherry ( magenta ) and phl - β 2AR ( green ) before ( top ) and after ( bottom ) challenge with isoproterenol . In this particular cell , CCSs appeared as discrete punctae and larger rosette - like plaques . ( Bi ) After challenge with isoproterenol , phl - β 2AR was concentrated at both types of CCS , and discrete scission events were detected at either type of structure . ( Bii ) A map of detected scission events ( red crosses ) overlaid on an inverted image of Mu2 - mCherry ( black ) . Scission events were detected at both punctate CCSs and larger clathrin plaques . ( C ) Density scatterplot of Mu2 - mCherry object area ( ordinate ) vs . newly scissioned phl - β 2AR object area ( abscissa ) . The fluorescence objects marking scission events are always spots but may colocalize to punctate or plaque - like CCSs . ( D ) Aligned and average fluorescence traces for Mu2 - mCherry fluorescence at terminal punctate ( black circles ) , nonterminal punctate ( red circles ) , or plaque - like CCSs ( open circles ) . All types of CCS show a drop in fluorescence after scission corresponding to CCV uncoating but differ in the persistence of fluorescence signal after scission . 3074 | M . Lampe et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell FIGURE 3 : Lifetimes analysis of clathrin spots . ( A ) Example fluorescence traces for Mu2 - mCherry ( magenta ) and phl - β 2AR ( green ) for CCSs that hosted one , two , and seven scission events , respectively ( arrows ) . ( B ) Histogram of the number of scission events detected per punctate CCS . A significant proportion ( ∼ 20 % ) of punctate CCSs hosted more than one scission event . ( C ) Histogram of the time between CCS nucleation and the first detected scission event for β 2AR ( median lifetime , 119 . 6 s ) . ( D ) The time between CCS nucleation and the first , second , or third detected scission event for TfR ( + ) scission events ( black circles ) , β 2AR ( + ) scission events ( open circles ) , or MOR ( gray circles ) revealed that CCSs matured more slowly when loaded with β 2AR or MOR . ( E ) Lifetimes histograms of punctate CCSs in cells expressing β 2AR before challenge ( Ei ) , during challenge ( Eii ) , and after washout ( Eiii ) of isoproterenol . Eiii insert shows increase in median lifetime of CCS lifetime on isoproteronol challenge for four cells . Volume 25 October 1 , 2014 Dual single - scission event analysis | 3075 so a slightly more acidic wash of pH ∼ 5 . 0 was used to quench both red and green fluorescence . In an example HEK293 cell bathed in buffer at pH 7 . 4 , TfR - phl was concentrated at CCSs and otherwise distributed evenly ( Figure 4Ai , green ) . By contrast , mApp - β 2AR fluo - rescence was uniform , with no concentration at CCSs ( Figure 4Ai , magenta ) . Images were acquired over a period of 400 s in conjunc - tion with alternating pH to detect single TfR - phl ( + ) scission events as described . Before the addition of isoproterenol , no mApp - β 2AR signal was detected at TfR - phl ( + ) scission events ( Figure 4Bi ) . At t = 402 s , isoproterenol was introduced into the rhythmically alternating perfusion streams to trigger mApp - β 2AR endocytosis ( Supplemen - tal Figure S1 and Materials and Methods ) . After a further ∼ 60 s , mApp - β 2AR coclustered with TfR - phl at CCS , and in an example TfR - phl ( + ) scission event , a robust step increase in mApp - β 2AR fluo - rescence was detected ( Figure 4Bii ) . This could occur only if TfR - phl and mApp - β 2AR pinched off in the same clathrin - coated vesicle . To visualize the flux of β 2AR through the constitutive clathrin - mediated endocytic pathway , we represented the fluorescence of bona fide TfR - phl ( + ) scission events as a density plot with “local time” ( relative to the scission event ) on the horizontal axis and “global time” ( i . e . , experimental time ) descending on the vertical axis ( Figure 4Ci ) and plotted the average fluorescence of TfR - phl and mApp - β 2AR before , during , and after isoproterenol challenge ( Figure 4Cii ) . There was no detectable mApp - β 2AR fluorescence at TfR ( + ) scission events before addition of isoproterenol , followed swiftly by a pulse of mApp - β 2AR fluorescence , indicating cointernal - ization of β 2AR with TfR into clathrin - coated vesicles ( Figure 4 , Ci and Cii ) . The fluorescence of TfR ( + ) scission events—which corre - sponds to the amount of receptor internalized by individual events— remained relatively constant for the duration of the experiment , with a moderate increase after addition of isoproterenol ( Figure 4Cii , green traces ) . The average fluorescence of mApp - β 2AR internalized per scission event rapidly decayed during exposure to isoproterenol as mApp - β 2AR was depleted from the plasma membrane ( Figure 4 , Ci and Cii ) . We established , in agreement with published results ( Puthen - veedu and von Zastrow , 2006 ) , that an influx of β 2AR into the clathrin - mediated endocytic machinery extended the lifetime of spot - like CCS . However , did this correspond to a general slowing of the con - stitutive endocytic rate ? To answer this question , we measured the incidence rate of TfR - phl ( + ) scission events before , during , and after challenge with isoproterenol ( Figure 5 ) . In an example cluster of three cells , TfR - phl fluorescence at pH 7 . 4 showed a moderate de - crease through the experiment , which was most likely due to bleach - ing ( Figure 5 , A and B ) . By contrast , mApp - β 2AR fluorescence at pH 7 . 4 dramatically decreased with first - order kinetics upon isoprotere - nol addition , followed by a recovery upon washout as the mApp - β 2AR was internalized and subsequently recycled ( Puthenveedu and von Zastrow , 2006 ; Figure 5 , A and C ) . For each cell , we defined a polygon of constant area that was contained within the footprint of the cell before , during , and after isoproterenol addition and mea - sured the number of TfR - phl ( + ) scission events that occurred within the polygon over time . On addition of isoproterenol , there was a very modest , although insignificant , increase in the incidence rate of TfR - phl scission events ( Figure 5D ) . We therefore conclude that li - gand - triggered endocytosis of β 2AR does not significantly change the overall incidence rate of constitutive endocytic scission events . To conclude , mApp - β 2AR internalization was detected in at least some vesicles that constitutively internalized TfR - phl , and isoprot - erenol - triggered mApp - β 2AR endocytosis slows CCS maturation . We then sought to determine the degree of cointernalization of TfR and β 2AR . ( t = 77 s ; Figure 3D ) but similar to the coated bud maturation time estimated for fibroblasts under similar conditions ( Taylor et al . , 2011 ) . Similar to earlier data from fibroblasts , the time between CCS nucleation and the n th detected scission event for TfR or β 2AR was roughly linear ( Figure 3D ) . To determine whether an alternative GPCR , MOR , had a similar effect on bud maturation time , we re - peated the experiment and analysis using phl - MOR and Mu2 - mCherry . The MOR agonist [ d - Ala 2 , NMe - Phl 4 , Gly - ol 5 ] - enkephalin ( DAMGO ) was used to trigger MOR endocytosis as described previ - ously ( Soohoo and Puthenveedu , 2013 ) . The median time from CCS nucleation to the first detected MOR ( + ) scission event was ∼ 150 s , which is approximately twice as long as the clathrin bud maturation time in cells expressing only TfR - phl . In previous studies it was shown that the lifetime of punctate CCSs increased upon stimulation of β 2AR internalization via a mech - anism involving the actin cytoskeleton ( Puthenveedu and von Zastrow , 2006 ) and receptor ubiquitination ( Henry et al . , 2012 ) . An analysis of overall ( unclassified ) spot - like CCS lifetimes revealed a similar , although moderate , increase in median spot - like CCS life - time upon isoproterenol challenge and ligand - triggered β 2AR en - docytosis ( Figure 3E ) . By inspection , the increase in median lifetime corresponded to a moderate decrease in the frequency of short - lived CCSs and consequent right shift of the lifetime distribution ( compare Figure 3 , Ei and Eii ) . To conclude , productive CCSs in HEK293 cells , competent for β 2AR internalization , comprise a markedly heterogeneous set of punctate structures and patches with a wide range of lifetimes . The great majority of productive punctate CCSs host only one scission event , but both punctate CCSs and larger patches may host multi - ple trains of scission events . Overall the simplest definition of a po - tentially productive CCS is any CCS that colocalizes with phl - β 2AR after isoproterenol challenge in which the phl - β 2AR is accessible to externally imposed acidification . Finally , the maturation time of pro - ductive spot - like CCSs was significantly increased by ligand - trig - gered β 2AR or MOR internalization . The acute effects of ligand - triggered endocytosis on constitutive endocytosis The dynamic relationship between constitutive clathrin - mediated endocytosis and ligand - triggered clathrin - mediated endocytosis re - mains only poorly characterized . It has been suggested that ∼ 25 % of CCSs preferentially internalize β 2AR or TfR and ∼ 50 % internalize both β 2AR and TfR ( Cao et al . , 1998 ; but see von Zastrow and Ko - bilka , 1992 ) and that a specialized subset of CCSs internalize β 2AR ( Puthenveedu and von Zastrow , 2006 ) . It has also been suggested that CCSs may specialize to internalize other , different types of GP - CRs ( Mundell et al . , 2006 ) . In addition , although it is clear that β 2AR clustering prolongs the lifetimes of the host coated pits ( Puthenv - eedu and von Zastrow , 2006 ) , it is not clear whether ligand - triggered β 2AR internalization acutely affects the rate of internalization of a constitutively endocytosed receptor such as TfR . Therefore experi - ments were designed to explore the dynamic relationship between constitutive endocytosis of TfR and the ligand - triggered endocyto - sis of β 2AR and to establish what proportion of TfR ( + ) scission events were also β 2AR ( + ) . First , the moderately pH - sensitive red fluorescent protein mAp - ple was inserted into the extracellular domain of β 2AR to make mApp - β 2AR , which , in turn , allowed simultaneous imaging of TfR - phl ( to detect single constitutive endocytic events ) and mApp - β 2AR ( to detect ligand - triggered β 2AR internalization ) using the pulsed pH assay . The p K a of mApple ( p K a 6 . 5 ; Shaner et al . , 2008 ) is lower than that of sePhl ( p K a 7 . 1 ; Sankaranarayanan and Ryan , 2000 ) , and 3076 | M . Lampe et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell Is there any evidence for coated - pit specialization ? In earlier work , it was shown , using immuno - fluorescence , that three populations of CCS exist at the plasma membrane of HEK293 cells after stimulation of β 2AR internalization by isoproterenol ( Cao et al . , 1998 ) . Approxi - mately ∼ 25 % of CCSs contained β 2AR alone , ∼ 50 % contained both β 2AR and TfR , and ∼ 25 % contained only TfR ( Cao et al . , 1998 ) . Here we revisited this measurement and determined the degree of coincidence of mApp - β 2AR with TfR - phl in newly scis - sioned endocytic vesicles . To do this , we measured mApp - β 2AR signal at TfR - phl ( + ) scission events before , during , and after iso - proterenol challenge , using a quantification algorithm developed to detect very weak fluorescence changes at fluorescent puncta ( see Materials and Methods ) . We used two different approaches to es - timate the proportion of TfR - phl ( + ) / mApp - β 2AR ( + ) scission events . In the first method , the fluorescence of mApple - β 2AR was mea - sured at TfR - phl ( + ) scission events in resting cells and the fluorescence distribution used to define an upper 95 % confidence limit on basal red fluorescence above which events were scored as mApp - β 2AR ( + ) after isoprot - erenol challenge . For the example cell in Figure 4 , 85 % of TfR - phl ( + ) vesicles were also scored as mApp - β 2AR ( + ) after isoprot - erenol challenge ( see Supplemental Figure S2 for details of quantification ) . To verify this analysis , we manually scored TfR - phl ( + ) scis - sion events for β 2AR fluorescence over a window from 60 s after isoproterenol addi - tion to the end of isoproterenol stimulation 200 s later . This analysis revealed that 89 % of TfR ( + ) scission events were also β 2AR ( + ) as judged by eye ( n = 234 events , N = 3 cells ) . These analysis depended on using the robust TfR - phl scission signal as a reference signal to measure constitutive scission events , and so it could not detect potential mApp - β 2AR ( + ) / TfR - phl ( – ) scission events . These could correspond to scission of vesi - cles from “specialized” CCSs that internal - ized β 2AR but excluded TfR . Moreover , using TfR - phl ( + ) scission events as a refer - ence most likely underestimated the pro - portion of TfR - phl ( + ) / mApp - β 2AR ( + ) scis - sion events , as the red mApple scission signal was dimmer than the green phl sig - nal and prone to contamination by internal - ized ( but incompletely quenched ) mApple - β 2AR fluorescence . The automated scission detection algorithm was adapted to detect the very faint candidate mApp - β 2AR scis - sion events ( see Materials and Methods ) . Briefly , spot fluorescence was measured FIGURE 4 : mApple - β 2AR clusters and internalizes with TfR - phl . ( A ) Example HEK293 cell expressing TfR - phl ( green , left ) and mApp - β 2AR ( magenta , right ) at pH 7 . 4 , 50 s before isoproterenol addition ( top ) and 550 s after isoproterenol challenge ( bottom ) . After isoproterenol challenge , mApp - β 2AR clustered with TfR - phl at CCSs . Images are averages of 50 frames , acquired at 0 . 5 Hz , centered on the relative time point . ( B ) Example TfR - phl scission events before ( Bi ) and after ( Bii ) isoproterenol addition . After isoproterenol addition , mApp - β 2AR signal coincided with TfR - phl ( + ) scission events , indicating that the two receptors cointernalized in the same vesicles . ( Ci ) Density plot of aligned fluorescence changes ( horizontal axis ) associated with bona fide TfR - phl ( + ) scission events plotted against global time ( vertical axis ) . The flux of mApp - β 2AR receptor through the constitutive CME pathway appeared as a transient pulse of fluorescence signal ( right ) . ( Cii ) Quantified average fluorescence traces of TfR - phl and mApp - β 2AR over the time windows indicated in Ci . Volume 25 October 1 , 2014 Dual single - scission event analysis | 3077 a stepwise fluorescence increase with S / N ≥ 10 ( see Materials and Methods ) . This eliminated false - positive events , which most likely represent endocytic vesicles briefly visiting the plasma membrane . The mApp - β 2AR ( + ) scission events identified were classified as TfR - phl ( + ) if there was a correlated stepwise increase in TfR - phl using a circle - minus - annulus measurement as before , but seg - mented spots were excluded from the annulus measurement , giv - ing a less noisy estimate of local background fluorescence . Candi - date mApp - β 2AR ( + ) scission events were classified as bona fide if they coincided with a cluster of mApp - β 2AR at pH 7 . 4 and showed FIGURE 5 : The flux of TfR - phl ( + ) scission events through the constitutive endocytic pathway is only mildly affected by ligand - triggered β 2AR internalization . ( A ) A group of 3 HEK293 cells before , during , and after challenge with isoproterenol , showing surface TfR - phl fluorescence ( left ) and mApple - β 2AR fluorescence ( right ) at pH 7 . 4 . ( B ) Quantification of fluorescence changes in cell indicated in A by asterisk . TfR - phl fluorescence ( green ) showed a moderate decrease during the course of the experiment . ( C ) By contrast , mApple - β 2AR ( magenta ) showed a robust decrease in fluorescence , followed by a moderate increase upon isoproterenol washout ( indicated by arrow ) . ( D ) The incidence rate of TfR - phl ( + ) scission events , expressed as events μm − 2 s − 1 , before , during , and after isoproterenol challenge . 3078 | M . Lampe et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell imaging data were generally less satisfactory . However , on chal - lenge with DAMGO , mApp - MOR ( + ) scission events were readily detected , and the proportion of mApp - MOR ( + ) / TfR - phl ( – ) scission events was estimated as for β 2AR . Of the events detected ( 132 events , three cells ) , 81 % were mApp - MOR ( + ) / TfR - phl ( + ) , as op - posed to the expected proportion of ∼ 50 % ( Figure 6 , D – F ) . DISCUSSION This is , to our knowledge , the first time that ligand - triggered endo - cytosis has been imaged at the level of single - scission events . The parallels with a similar analysis of constitutive TfR ( + ) scission events in NIH3T3 fibroblasts are striking ( Merrifield et al . , 2005 ; Taylor et al . , 2011 , 2012 ) . As for constitutive TfR endocytosis , the ligand - trig - gered endocytosis of β 2AR proceeds via quantized scission events hosted by an apparently diverse array of clathrin spots and plaques . A simple model to explain the observed diversity of CCS dynamics is that CCSs may occur as discrete clathrin - coated buds at the fluorescence with S / N ≥ 5 . Of the mApp - β 2AR scission events identified , 95 % coincided with a correlated TfR - phl ( + ) scission event ( Figure 6 , A – C ) . From this we conclude that , upon isoprot - erenol challenge , there is only one population of constitutive en - docytic vesicles in HEK293 cells that internalize both mApp - β 2AR and TfR - phl . The MOR is an alternative GPCR that is believed to internalize , at least in part , from specialized CCPs , and it has been suggested that ∼ 50 % of CCPs can specialize to internalize MOR in HEK293 cells ( Soohoo and Puthenveedu , 2013 ) . To better estimate the propor - tion of ( putative ) specialized MOR ( + ) scission events , we made a mApp - MOR construct , coexpressed it with TfR - phl in HEK - 293 cells , and performed a pulsed pH assay as for β 2AR . The MOR agonist DAMGO was used to trigger MOR endocytosis as described previ - ously ( Soohoo and Puthenveedu , 2013 ) . In general , the response of mApp - MOR to DAMGO challenge was less robust , rapid , and re - producible than the response mApp - β 2AR to isoproterenol , and the FIGURE 6 : Estimating the proportion of GPCR ( + ) / TfR ( – ) scission events using either mApp - β 2AR or mApp - MOR scission events as a reference . ( Ai , Aii ) Average time - resolved montage of mApp - β 2AR ( + ) / TfR - phl ( + ) scission events . ( Bi , Bii ) Quantification of fluorescence at pH 5 or 7 for ( Bi ) mApp - BAR or ( Bii ) TfR - phl . ( C ) Ninety - five percent of mApp - β 2AR ( + ) scission events were also TfR - phl ( + ) . ( Di , Dii ) Average time - resolved montage of mAppMOR ( + ) / TfR - phl ( + ) scission events . ( Ei , Eii ) Quantification of fluorescence at pH 5 or 7 for ( Ei ) mApp - MOR or ( Eii ) TfR - phl . ( F ) Eighty - one percent of mApp - MOR ( + ) scission events were also TfR - phl ( + ) . Volume 25 October 1 , 2014 Dual single - scission event analysis | 3079 scission events changed little—and if any - thing slightly increased—when mApp - β 2AR was driven through the clathrin - mediated endocytic pathway , suggesting that al - though the two receptors internalized in the same vesicles , they did not compete with one another . When the coincidence of Tfr - phl and mApp - MOR at endocytic events was ana - lyzed , it was found that ∼ 19 % of scission events were mApp - MOR ( + ) / TfR - phl ( – ) , which was a substantially lower proportion than the expected ∼ 50 % ( Soohoo and Puthenveedu , 2013 ) . These results therefore favor a model in which activated β 2 - AR and MOR hitchhike into the cell via constitutively internalizing clathrin - coated pits but can nonetheless modify the maturation times of the host CCSs ( Figure 7 ) . It remains possible that the ∼ 19 % of scis - sion events that apparently internalized MOR but not TfR represent specialized CCSs . However , as noted , detection limits and the pos - sibility of false - positive TfR - phl ( – ) / mApp - MOR ( + ) must be kept in mind when considering this possibility . In the future , a similar experi - mental strategy may be used to determine whether other types of receptor enter the cell via the same or specialized CCSs . MATERIALS AND METhODS TIRFM and perfusion system The dual - color TIRFM microscope has been described previously ( Taylor et al . , 2011 ) . The four - channel perfusion system was based on a previously published design ( Taylor et al . , 2011 ) with the addi - tion of three - way miniature valves to control addition / washout of drugs ( part LFRX0500050B ; Lee Company , Westbrook , CT ) . All con - trol and switching electronics were designed and built in - house . Pulsed pH assay The pulsed pH assay was described previously ( Merrifield et al . , 2005 ) and in more detail here in Supplemental Figure S1 . Briefly , the perfused buffer was switched between pH 7 . 4 ( HBS : 135 mM NaCl , 5 mM KCl , 1 . 8 mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 4 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM d ( + ) - glucose , 25 mM 4 - ( 2 - hydroxyethyl ) - 1 - piperazineethanesulfonic acid , 2 % fetal calf serum [ FCS ] ) and pH 5 . 0 ( MBS : 135 mM NaCl , 5 mM KCl , 1 . 8 mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 4 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM d ( + ) - glucose , 25 mM 2 - ( N - morpholino ) ethanesulfonic acid , 2 % FCS ) . To trigger β 2AR internal - ization , 20 mM isoproterenol was added to both HBS and MBS streams . All chemicals were bought from Sigma - Aldrich ( St . Louis , MO ) . Cell culture and transfection HEK293 cells were grown DMEM ( Life Technologies SAS , St . Aubin , France ) supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum in 10 % CO 2 and at 37°C . Adherent HEK293 cells , growing in six - well plates , were transfected with the relevant plasmid ( s ) using Lipofectamine 2000 at 24 – 48 h before imaging experiments and as per manufacturer’s in - struction ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) . Cells were replated onto clean coverslips ∼ 4 h after transfection and allowed to adhere overnight ready for imaging the following morning . Glass cleaning Coverslips were cleaned as described previously ( Merrifield et al . , 2005 ; Taylor et al . , 2011 ) . Briefly , coverslips were washed thrice in wash solution ( 0 . 01 % DECON 90 [ Decon Laboratories , Hove , United plasma membrane ( spot - like CCSs ) or in association with a large , flat or gently curved patch of clathrin at the plasma membrane ( plaque - like CCSs ; Figure 7 ) . As noted previously , the latter types of structure have been observed by electron microscopy ( Heuser , 1980 ; Maupin and Pollard , 1983 ) . To fully understand the CCS dynamics observed by microscopy , the dynamics of both the bud and , if present , the associated clathrin patch must be considered . If the patch of clathrin at the membrane is absent , the coated bud will disappear once scis - sion occurs in a terminal event ( Figure 7 ) . If a small patch of clathrin is left after scission , a nonterminal event will occur if a fresh bud re - grows at the same site ( Figure 7 ) . If the associated patch is suffi - ciently large and perhaps stabilized by adhesion ( Batchelder and Yarar , 2010 ) , it might sufficiently bright to obscure the loss of clathrin coat during budding events at or close to its edges , which would thus evade detection by conventional fluorescence microscopy , and it would appear as a plaque ( Figure 7 ) . Therefore CCSs are superfi - cially heterogeneous even though they represent a common path - way of receptor internalization . Similar to an earlier study ( Puthenveedu and von Zastrow , 2006 ) , it was found that ligand - triggered β 2AR internalization moderately extends the lifetime of spot - like CCS by ∼ 53 % . Here a prolongation of spot - like CCS lifetime was found using two different analyses : first , by tracking all spot - like CCSs before , during , and after ligand - triggered β 2AR endocytosis in the same set of cells , and second , by comparing the time between spot - like CCS nucleation and the first detected scission event for β 2AR ( + ) , MOR ( + ) , or TfR ( + ) scission events in different sets of cells . It has been proposed that the pro - longation of spot - like CCS lifetime by β 2AR loading may be of func - tional significance , perhaps reflecting the dynamics of a specialized subset of CCSs ( Puthenveedu and von Zastrow , 2006 ; Henry et al . , 2012 ) . Here , by simultaneously detecting the presence of TfR and β 2AR in newly scissioned vesicles , it was shown that β 2AR does in - crease the lifetime of CCSs but that TfR and β 2AR internalize in the same vesicles budding from CCSs . Moreover , despite the change in bud maturation time , the incidence rate of scission events remained remarkably constant before , during , and after ligand - triggered β 2AR endocytosis . One possible explanation for the steady flux is that the number of CCSs increases in response to ligand - triggered endocy - tosis and so compensates for increased bud maturation time . In - deed , in an example cell expressing Mu2 - mCherry and phl - MOR , the number of detected CCSs significantly increased after DAMGO stimulation ( Supplemental Figure S3 ) . Therefore the increase in CCS maturation time may be offset by simply nucleating more CCSs . It was also found that the amount of TfR - phl internalized by FIGURE 7 : A common pathway for constitutive TfR endocytosis and ligand - triggered GPCR endocytosis . Clathrin - coated pits can internalize both TfR ( green lollipops ) and GPCR ( β 2AR or MOR ; red lollipops ) . 3080 | M . Lampe et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell Guan XM , Kobilka TS , Kobilka BK ( 1992 ) . Enhancement of membrane inser - tion and function in a type IIIb membrane protein following introduction of a cleavable signal peptide . J Biol Chem 267 , 21995 – 21998 . Henry AG , Hislop JN , Grove J , Thorn K , Marsh M , von Zastrow M ( 2012 ) . Regulation of endocytic clathrin dynamics by cargo ubiquitination . Dev Cell 23 , 519 – 532 . Heuser J ( 1980 ) . Three - dimensional visualization of coated vesicle formation in fibroblasts . J Cell Biol 84 , 560 – 583 . Keyel PA , Mishra SK , Roth R , Heuser JE , Watkins SC , Traub LM ( 2006 ) . A single common portal for clathrin - mediated endocytosis of distinct cargo governed by cargo - selective adaptors . Mol Biol Cell 17 , 4300 – 4317 . Loerke D , Mettlen M , Yarar D , Jaqaman K , Jaqaman H , Danuser G , Schmid SL ( 2009 ) . Cargo and dynamin regulate clathrin - coated pit maturation . PLoS Biol 7 , e57 . Maupin P , Pollard TD ( 1983 ) . Improved preservation and staining of HeLa cell actin filaments , clathrin - coated membranes , and other cytoplasmic structures by tannic acid - glutaraldehyde - saponin fixation . J Cell Biol 96 , 51 – 62 . Merrifield CJ , Feldman ME , Wan L , Almers W ( 2002 ) . Imaging actin and dynamin recruitment during invagination of single clathrin - coated pits . Nat Cell Biol 4 , 691 – 698 . Merrifield CJ , Perrais D , Zenisek D ( 2005 ) . Coupling between clathrin - coated - pit invagination , cortactin recruitment , and membrane scission observed in live cells . Cell 121 , 593 – 606 . Miesenbock G , De Angelis DA , Rothman JE ( 1998 ) . Visualizing secretion and synaptic transmission with pH - sensitive green fluorescent proteins . Nature 394 , 192 – 195 . Mooren OL , Galletta BJ , Cooper JA ( 2012 ) . Roles for actin assembly in endocytosis . Annu Rev Biochem 81 , 661 – 686 . Mundell SJ , Luo J , Benovic JL , Conley PB , Poole AW ( 2006 ) . Distinct clathrin - coated pits sort different G protein - coupled receptor cargo . Traffic 7 , 1420 – 1431 . Olivo - Marin JC ( 2002 ) . Extraction of spots in biological images using multi - scale products . Pattern Recognition 35 , 1989 – 1996 . Puthenveedu MA , Lauffer B , Temkin P , Vistein R , Carlton P , Thorn K , Taunton J , Weiner OD , Parton RG , von Zastrow M ( 2010 ) . Sequence - dependent sorting of recycling proteins by actin - stabilized endosomal microdo - mains . Cell 143 , 761 – 773 . Puthenveedu MA , von Zastrow M ( 2006 ) . Cargo regulates clathrin - coated pit dynamics . Cell 127 , 113 – 124 . Rappoport JZ ( 2008 ) . Focusing on clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Biochem J 412 , 415 – 423 . Saffarian S , Cocucci E , Kirchhausen T ( 2009 ) . Distinct dynamics of endocytic clathrin - coated pits and coated plaques . PLoS Biol 7 , e1000191 . Sankaranarayanan S , Ryan TA ( 2000 ) . Real - time measurements of vesicle - SNARE recycling in synapses of the central nervous system . Nat Cell Biol 2 , 197 – 204 . Shaner NC , Lin MZ , McKeown MR , Steinbach PA , Hazelwood KL , Davidson MW , Tsien RY ( 2008 ) . Improving the photostability of bright monomeric orange and red fluorescent proteins . Nat Methods 5 , 545 – 551 . Soohoo AL , Puthenveedu MA ( 2013 ) . Divergent modes for cargo - mediated control of clathrin - coated pit dynamics . Mol Biol Cell 24 , 1725 – 1734 , S1721 – 1712 . Staehelin M , Simons P ( 1982 ) . Rapid and reversible disappearance of beta - adrenergic cell surface receptors . EMBO J 1 , 187 – 190 . Taylor MJ , Lampe M , Merrifield CJ ( 2012 ) . A feedback loop between dynamin and actin recruitment during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . PLoS Biol 10 , e1001302 . Taylor MJ , Perrais D , Merrifield CJ ( 2011 ) . A high precision survey of the molecular dynamics of mammalian clathrin - mediated endocytosis . PLoS Biol 9 , e1000604 . Tosoni D , Puri C , Confalonieri S , Salcini AE , De Camilli P , Tacchetti C , Di Fiore PP ( 2005 ) . TTP specifically regulates the internalization of the transferrin receptor . Cell 123 , 875 – 888 . von Zastrow M , Kobilka BK ( 1992 ) . Ligand - regulated internalization and recycling of human beta 2 - adrenergic receptors between the plasma membrane and endosomes containing transferrin receptors . J Biol Chem 267 , 3530 – 3538 . Kingdom ] ) and 100 mM KOH , thoroughly rinsed in double - distilled H 2 O , washed once in 100 % EtOH , and washed once in acetone before air drying in a sterile hood . All chemicals were supplied by Sigma - Aldrich unless otherwise stated . Plasmid design and construction The design of TfR - phl has been described previously ( Merrifield et al . , 2005 ) . The yellow fluorescent protein ( YFP ) of YFP - β 2AR ( Dorsch et al . , 2009 ) was replaced with super - ecliptic pHluorin using the Bam HI and Xba I restriction sites ( super - ecliptic pHluorin was ampli - fied with the primers AAAAAGGATCCATGAAGACGATCATCGC - CCTGAGCTACATCTTCTGCCTGGTATTCGCCAGTAAAGGAGAA - GAACTTTTCACTGGAGTTGTCCC [ also encoding a hemagglutinin signal sequence ; Guan et al . , 1992 ] and AAAAATCTAGATTTG - TATAGTTCATCCATGCC ) . Phluorin was replaced with mApple to make mApple - β 2AR using two sequential PCR reactions to reengi - neer the human growth hormone signal sequence into the N - termi - nus of mApple . To generate mApple - MOR , the entire open reading frame ( ORF ) of human MOR was synthesized ( Eurofins MWG , Ebers - berg , Germany ) with appropriate 5 ′ and 3 ′ restriction sites and used to replace the β 2AR ORF in phl - β 2AR and mApp - β 2AR . The Mu2 construct was described previously ( Taylor et al . , 2011 ) . Briefly , mCherry was inserted within the rat Mu2 ORF at residue 236 using the Bgl II and Nde I sites ( plasmid 27672 ; Addgene , Cambridge , MA ) . Image analysis All image analysis was performed in Matlab ( MathWorks , Cambridge , United Kingdom ) using custom - written software as described previ - ously ( Taylor et al . , 2011 ) , with the following modifications . Scripts were written in Matlab to segment spots using the wavelet - based multiscale products as described previously ( Olivo - Marin , 2002 ) . The coordinates of spots were extracted in Matlab and track histo - ries generated using a Matlab version of the IDL nearest - neighbor algorithm ( www . physics . emory . edu / ∼ weeks / idl / ) . To detect the very faint mApp - β 2AR ( + ) scission events , the fluorescence of candidate spots was quantified using a circle - minus - annulus measurement in which segmented spots were excluded from the annulus . This elimi - nated a major source of noise in the fluorescence measurement and allowed a more accurate estimate of fluorescence . REFERENCES Batchelder EM , Yarar D ( 2010 ) . Differential requirements for clathrin - depen - dent endocytosis at sites of cell - substrate adhesion . Mol Biol Cell 21 , 3070 – 3079 . Burd C , Cullen PJ ( 2014 ) . Retromer : a master conductor of endosome sort - ing . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 6 , a016774 . Cao TT , Mays RW , von Zastrow M ( 1998 ) . Regulated endocytosis of G - protein - coupled receptors by a biochemically and functionally distinct subpopulation of clathrin - coated pits . J Biol Chem 273 , 24592 – 24602 . Dorsch S , Klotz KN , Engelhardt S , Lohse MJ , Bunemann M ( 2009 ) . Analysis of receptor oligomerization by FRAP microscopy . Nat Methods 6 , 225 – 230 . Ehrlich M , Boll W , Van Oijen A , Hariharan R , Chandran K , Nibert ML , Kirchhausen T ( 2004 ) . Endocytosis by random initiation and stabilization of clathrin - coated pits . Cell 118 , 591 – 605 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We acknowledge funding from Medical Research Council ( MRC , London , UK ) grant MC _ U105178789 and Fondation pour la Re cherche Medicale ( FRM , Paris , France ) grant AJE201108 .