Nudging towards data equity : The role of stewardship and fiduciaries in the digital economy A Short White Paper and Research Agenda Astha Kapoor and Richard Whitt ( February 22 , 2021 DRAFT version ) I . Summary : Righting Power Balances in the Digital Economy In this short piece , we posit that data stewards and digital fiduciaries , by enabling greater participation in data - related decisions , can nudge society towards greater social and economic equity . First , we locate data stewards and digital fiduciaries within the broader debate on new data paradigms , and discuss their respective roles at the individual and community level . Drawing from literature on community stewardship of environmental resources , the paper relatedly touches upon possible duties and business models for data stewards and digital fiduciaries . Thereafter , we discuss conceptual and anecdotal links between “ladders” of participation and greater equity in the context of data . While strong links are posited between participation as facilitated by stewards and forms of data equity , there remains a need to establish , research , and evaluate the potential and limitations of data stewards and digital fiduciaries in the “wild . ” The paper concludes with specific questions designed to build a body of work that explores the role that stewards / fiduciaries can play in rebalancing power in the data economy . II . Background : Data Economies and Inequities A . Surveillance Capitalism and SEAM Cycles Today’s digital ecosystems largely are founded on data , algorithms , interfaces , and labor . These computational systems combine various overlays ( Web portals , social media offerings , mobile applications ) and underlays ( network infrastructure , cloud resources , personal devices , and environmental sensors ) . These components are fed by considerable amounts of data , derived from users’ fixed and mobile online ( and increasingly offline ) activities . ​ 1 While scholars generally agree that fixed capital and labor are critical inputs that drive market concentration in the digital economy , a growing consensus is that data itself has become its own source of control and power . ​ 2 The modern - day economic system that Shoshana Zuboff describes as “surveillance capitalism” runs on the collection and utilization of various forms of data to drive profits for a small group of businesses . ​ 3 The system relies on so - called “SEAMs” feedback cycles - - an entity’s “surveillance , extraction , analysis , and manipulation” modes - - which churn through data as a resource commodity . ​ 4 The end goal is to analyze human behaviours , and then manipulate subsequent choices and actions . Although each element of computational systems raises important questions about the nature and extent of corporate and governmental control over human autonomy and agency , ​ 5 ​ this paper focuses on the data flows that feed these systems . As we will explore below , the value of participation through forms of stewardship , and the ability of ordinary people to drive systemic change via “participation ladders , ” are of immense value when considering new paradigms to harness data for societal good . B . The Exploitative Yet Misused Role of Data As in traditional capitalism , treating data as a commodity resource magnifies the power and position of companies that hold the data surplus , 1 ​ See generally ​ Richard Whitt , ​ Hacking the SEAMs : Elevating Digital Autonomy and Agency for Humans ​ , U . Colorado Tech Law Journal , 19 : 1 , 135 ( 2021 ) , http : / / ctlj . colorado . edu / ? page _ id = 1283 ​ . 2 Nicholas Srnicek , ​ Data , Compute , Labour ​ , ( Jun , 2020 ) Ada Lovelace Institute https : / / www . adalovelaceinstitute . org / data - compute - labour / 3 Shoshana Zuboff , ​ The Age of Surveillance Capitalism : The Fight for a Human Future at the New Frontier of Power ​ ( 2019 ) . 4 ​ See ​ Whitt , ​ Hacking the SEAMs ​ . 5 ​ See ​ Whitt , ​ Hacking the SEAMs ​ . 2 while diminishing the agency of those whose lives are being harvested for profit . For the most part , people have no little visibility or control over how their data is collected and used . At best , governments to date have considered and in some cases implemented data protection regimes that require forms of transparency and accountability . While necessary , these actions are merely tokenism when considering the process of transforming the data economy into a more symmetrical forum for ordinary people . The equation is stark : while data generated via SEAMs cycles services the interests of a few , its value as an individual , societal , or public good is largely unrealized . Even in instances where large amounts of data is not unduly concentrated in corporate hands , governments and civil society organisations tend to manage it poorly , and fail to adequately harness its inherent value . This twin problem - of data being over - collected from individuals , and under - utilized for societal value - - is compounded by data’s peculiarity as a complex resource . Because data is a relational good , existing , individual - centric methods of governance do not adequately reflect its full community and societal value . This means , for example , that collective data can be used to discriminate against individuals , even as individual data can be used for societal value , as in the case of medical data . Further , as a non - rivalrous good , data’s uses by one entity need not impact others . In fact , sharing data among multiple entities can increase its value accordingly . Data value chains are complicated , however , and most stakeholders establish siloes that make value distribution difficult . ​ 6 A fundamental reimagination of data governance is necessary to address these unique characteristics . Such a new framework needs to be anchored not just in suppositions about convenience and ease of access for users ( often perceived as consumers seeking ease , not citizens with rights ) , but rather in ideas of equity . 6 See ​ Whitt , ​ Hacking the SEAMs ​ . 3 III . Data Equities in the Digital Economy The term “equity” has two well - defined connotations : ( 1 ) fair and just treatment of an individual or group , and ( 2 ) economic value of a financial instrument . Equity also has a third meaning , when referencing those Middle Ages laws originating in the English chancery designed to protect citizens’ rights and enforce duties . ​ 7 The equity courts offered a “gap - filling” forum , intended to redress injustices that otherwise were not adequately dealt with by existing laws . In the context of data as a market input , we can take “data equity” to mean the creation of equitable “gap - filling” mechanisms that address existing justice and market shortcomings , thereby allowing people to more fully exercise their freedom of action , or agency . In our modern data economy , the roles of the haves and the have - nots respectively are played by “surveillance” capitalists and everyone else in the data economy . As D’Ignazio and Klein see it , equity in the data economy is a concept that directly challenges power , because it acknowledges and works towards dismantling sizable structural differentials . ​ 8 As they explain , equity is “justice of a specific flavor , ” which takes into account the historic roots of differential power . ​ 9 Equity is also “both an outcome and a process , ” requiring those in positions of relative power “to listen deeper and listen differently” to those marginalized by the status quo . ​ 10 By contrast , concepts like greater transparency and accountability by themselves do not go far enough to dismantle structural power - - and can even have the unintended consequence of further entrenching dominant market players . ​ 11 In following concepts of data equity as laid out by D’Ignazio and Klein , then , we should build new governance systems containing the means of inclusive processes ( justice ) , that in turn lead to the ends of optimal 7 ​ https : / / www . merriam - webster . com / dictionary / equity ​ . 8 Catherine D’Ignazio and Lauren F . Klein , ​ Data Feminism ​ ( 2020 ) , at 60 . 9 Ignazio and Klein , ​ Data Feminism ​ , at 62 . 10 ​ Ignazio and Klein , ​ Data Feminism ​ , at 216 . 11 Ignazio and Klein , ​ Data Feminism ​ , at 61 - 65 . 4 economic outcomes ( value ) . This requires going beyond the too - easy reliance on transparency and accountability measures to discipline the behaviors of all - powerful actors . Instead , these systems should grant individuals and communities greater agency to participate in key decisions pertaining to uses of their data . These stakeholders also should be empowered to engage more closely with platforms where data is being utilized , and otherwise ensure that their multiple roles in data value chains are fully recognized . This paper posits that both flavors of data equity - - processes rooted in structural justice , and outcomes of optimal economic value - - can be actualized through the equitable forum of data stewards and digital fiduciaries , intermediaries that sit between data - sharers ( principals ) and data - requesters . These entities can utilize governance , technology , and structural measures to unlock the full potential value of user data , while still safeguarding and elevating individual and collective agency . In doing so , these stewards can correct the power imbalances between people ( as individuals and collectives ) and platform - based ecosystems . Data stewardship , founded on a “laddering” of rights and duties , is an essential starting point to considering a new data paradigm . IV . New Governance for a New Data Paradigm A . Climbing Ladders of Participation The very concept of participation is central to the thesis presented here - - namely , that providing people with opportunities to become actively involved in the ways their tech systems are governed can lead to greater personal and collective equities . Precisely how such participation is to be provided , particularly in the context of the structural realities of society’s inevitable constraints on such participation , is a gating question not to be overlooked . At the outset , human beings typically are not represented whole - cloth in the data that is recognized and collected about them . Instead , third parties - - 5 whether government agencies or corporations - - define and apply the parameters of data lifecycles . As D’Ignazio and Klein point out , those third parties usually are white men from the global North . ​ 12 Filters between data gatherers and subjects are inevitable . The resulting datasets can be biased , underrepresented - - or not collected at all . ​ 13 The counter challenge is that data systems of dominant groups can be built on excessive surveillance of minoritized groups . ​ 14 Either way , when it comes to the feedback loops of data extraction and analysis , individuals and their collective interests have little opportunity to participate directly at that granular level . This can be the case whether one is acting as a citizen of a nominally democratic government , or as a consumer of a company’s products and services . Nonetheless , acknowledging these realities at the outset can help us understand the deep roots of the problem , and shape the participation opportunities accordingly . With this important backdrop in mind , founding a new data paradigm on greater human agency in the digital world envisions a clear role for data stewards , personal and collective . These stewards would be equipped to represent the interests of their clients via - a - vis technology companies . Their role includes taking on a number of different sets of obligations , rooted in fiduciary law , which ensure that data is used to better society and empower people . They also offer an alternative to governance mechanisms premised on stand - alone individuals navigating their digital lives in an isolated manner . Over 50 years ago , Sherry Arnstein pioneered the concept of a “participation ladder , ” ​ 15 for citizens to climb as a means of gaining greater control over the decisions made on their behalf by government agencies . In its application to the data economy , the participation ladder offers both a critique of the current forms of data governance , and a description of 12 D’Ignazio and Klein , Data Feminism , at 26 - 29 . 13 ​ D’Ignazio and Klein , ​ Data Feminism ​ , at 33 - 39 . 14 ​ D’Ignazio and Klein , ​ Data Feminism ​ , at 39 - 47 . 15 Sherry R . Arnstein , ​ A Ladder of Citizen Participation ​ , Journal of the American Planning Association , Vol . 35 , No . 4 , July 1969 , pp . 216 - 224 . 6 structures and practices that can lead people , as data principals , to greater social and economic equity . In Arnstein’s analysis , most users occupy the bottom of the ladder - - “nonparticipation” - - where they are manipulated and unable to adequately engage with decision - making processes concerning their data uses . In the 7 data economy , this is the current status quo where users do not have any say in how their data is used , and are manipulated into parting with information without complete knowledge . Arnstein describes the next stage as tokenism , hinged on providing information and consultation , but not meaningful engagement . Per D’Ignazio and Klein , forms of government regulation that aim to move people to the next steps of the participation ladder - - such as transparency and accountability measures - - are wholly necessary but still inadequate mechanisms . One example is the notice - and consent regimes embedded in GDPR and other data protection laws . While a notable advance over the status quo , these mechanisms put the onus squarely on individuals to navigate on their own a thicket of website and app consent notifications . Finally , our proposed form of data stewardship can help steer people to the top of Arnstein’s participation ladder - - “citizen control” - - via forms of partnership , delegation of data - based power to the people . Data stewardship allows people to meaningfully engage with questions of data , and actively take control of its use , if they so desire . Data stewardship allows people to be in charge , and like in citizen - state relationships in the data economy that is the most worthwhile form of participation . ​ 16 B . Fiduciary Duties of the Data Steward Fiduciary law is essentially the common law of uneven human relationships . ​ 17 The doctrine is entwined with centuries of equity , torts , and other common law doctrine . ​ Tamar Frankel has observed that “throughout the centuries the problems that these laws were designed to solve are eternal , etched in human nature , derived from human needs , and built into 16 Elizabeth Rocha later developed a “Ladder of Empowerment” ( 1997 ) , where graduated progressions represent citizens moving from less to more empowerment in a community setting . With Rocha’s model , the availability of supportive services and systems feeds the empowerment rungs . ​ See ​ https : / / organizingengagement . org / models / ladder - of - empowerment / . 17 ​ For a deeper exploration of fiduciary law in the context of the digital world , ​ see generally Richard Whitt , ​ Old School Goes Online , Exploring Fiduciary Obligations of Loyalty and Care in the Digital Platforms Era , ​ 36 Santa Clara High Tech . L . J . 75 ( 2020 ) , https : / / digitalcommons . law . scu . edu / cgi / viewcontent . cgi ? article = 1648 & context = chtlj . 8 human activities . ” ​ 18 ​ For this reason , fiduciary - type principles are near - universal , having been applied across a vast array of human endeavors and most major global cultures . ​ 19 The basis for a fiduciary relationship is straightforward : assigning certain legal and moral obligations to people engaged in exchanges of value with each other . The linchpin is what Frankel calls “entrusted power . ” One person ( the entrustor ) grants access to something of value , to another person ( the fiduciary ) , so that the fiduciary can undertake tasks to benefit the entrustor . In these situations , the fiduciary normally has knowledge , expertise , or other desirable capabilities that the entrustor lacks . The fiduciary relationship is based on an entrustor’s confidence that the fiduciary will carry out its duties in ways that will further the entrustor’s interests . To that end , the role is rooted in asymmetric power relationships between the parties . ​ Prime modern - day examples of fiduciaries include doctors , lawyers , and certain financial advisors . The fiduciary typically abides by two basic types of duties : care and loyalty . In turn , these can be further subdivided into four specific duties : ● The general tort - like duty of care = do no harm to others . ● The fiduciary duty of care = act prudently towards the entrustor . ● The “thin” fiduciary duty of loyalty = have no conflicts of interest between duties and clients . ● The “thick” fiduciary duty of loyalty = promote the entrustor’s best interests . ​ 20 Importantly , because fiduciary duties are considered relational , they run not with property , but with the person and her entrusted confidence . 18 ​ T ​ AMAR ​ F ​ RANKEL ​ , F ​ IDUCIARY ​ L ​ AW ​ 79 ( 2010 ) . 19 ​ See generally ​ T ​ HE ​ O ​ XFORD ​ H ​ ANDBOOK ​ ​ OF ​ F ​ IDUCIARY ​ D ​ UTIES ​ ( Evan J . Criddle et al . eds . , 2019 ) . 20 ​ Other fiduciary duties include good faith and confidentiality . ​ Fiduciary Duties ​ , B ​ LACK ​ ’ ​ S ​ L ​ AW D ​ ICTIONARY ​ ( 11 ​ th ​ ed . 2019 ) ( defining other fiduciary duties as “ . . . good faith , trust , special confidence , and candor…” ) . 9 D . Functions and Forms of the Digital Steward Using “stewardship” as a conceptual umbrella to govern data can help inform and unify this proposed new data paradigm . Inspiration for data ecosystem stewardship is drawn in some measure from modern - day environmentalism . ​ 21 Respecting and caring for the integrity of the natural world is the cornerstone of being an environmental steward . This stance recognizes how humans have the power , and often the incentives , to harm or even destroy natural ecosystems . With the right incentives , they also have the power to coexist , and even encourage a flourishing of human beings with other beings in the natural environment . The main objective of the steward is to give voice , and enable participation from the data principals , currently disempowered in the data economy . Depending on the context , data stewards perform several roles to enable responsible data sharing , but fundamentally serve as negotiators on behalf of data principals . This includes to manage consent , distribute value , 21 ​ See , e . g . ​ , Ricardo Rozzi et al , ​ Earth Stewardship : Linking Ecology and Ethics in Theory and Practice ​ ( 2015 ) , at 10 - 13 ( integrating ecology and ethics forms the foundation for earth stewardship action ) ; F . Stuart Chapin , III , Gary P . Kofinas , and Carl Folke , ed . , ​ Principles of Ecosystem Stewardship : Resilience - Based Natural Resource Management in a Changing World ( 2009 ) ( goals of stewardship include encouraging the ecosystem’s resilience , sustainability , and diversity , and recognizing and managing the uncertainty from multiple feedback loops and tipping points ) . 10 Case study : Midata MiData is a non - profit data cooperative governed by its members which aims to help individuals democratically collaborate on how and where to share their health data . MiData allows members to share their aggregated data for research and innovation , and draw both monetary ( compensation for data ) , personal ( personalised medicine ) and societal ( innovation in health research ) value from it . MIDATA model based on the idea that we as a society must own , gain from , and govern our data and its sharing / processing . ensure transparency in data - related transactions , and magnify user leverage and power . In each instance , they act as a representative of individual or principal ( s ) , ​ 22 and assist them in moving up the participation ladder . The data steward also provides technological solutions through making data portable , interoperable , anonymised , and safeguarded . Given the multitude of functions data stewards perform , they come in different forms . Stewards are best understood through the framework of where decision - making lies . ​ 23 People possess the choice to be as engaged / involved in governing their data . As individuals , people can engage digital fiduciaries , which are structured to advise and guide individual empowerment across a range of computational functions , including access to data , utilization of AI , and interaction with device interfaces . Digital fiduciaries can also provide entrusted advanced technologies like personal data stores , account aggregators , and Personal AIs . As collectives , people can engage with data cooperatives , data trusts , and unions , where the steward enfranchises the data rights for a group . Here the data steward helps the group organize , and can bargain through representation , ​ 24 and recognize the need for community data rights , ​ 25 and delegate to third parties . This collective system is designed to unlock data for societal good . In short , the form of the steward is guided by its function , and the purpose it aims to pursue . However , data stewardship at the individual or collective levels cannot be seen as a silver bullet for the myriad of concerns in the data economy . It 22 Nanda , A , ​ Power Structures in the Data Economy ​ ( Oct , 2020 ) Available at https : / / thedataeconomylab . com / 2020 / 10 / 30 / power - structures - in - the - data - economy / . 23 Monhar , S , Kapoor , A & Ramesh , A . ​ Understanding data stewardship : taxonomy and use cases ​ ( 2019 ) Aapti Institute . 24 Sylvie Delacroix , Neil Lawrence and Jess Montgomery , ​ Selecting a data sharing structure : a value - based choice ​ ( March 2020 ) , ​ https : / / datatrusts . uk / blogs / selectingdatastructures ​ . 25 Parminder Jeet Singh & Jai Vipra . ​ Economic Rights Over Data : A Framework for Community Data Ownership ​ , Development , Palgrave Macmillan ; Society for International Development , vol . 62 ( 1 ) , at 53 - 57 ( December 2019 ) . 11 must be viewed as a starting point to reimagine the distribution of power and the value derived from data . Data stewardship allows people to play a bigger role in decisions pertaining to their data and while this has implications for accountability - data governance is a much wider issue which needs a combination of regulation and people - driven movements . Questions such as antitrust , content regulation , algorithmic bias cannot be dealt with stewardship along and need a more holistic response . 26 Ramesh , A , Kapoor , A , ​ Principles for Revenue Models of Data Stewardship ​ ( July 2020 ) , Aapti Institute . https : / / thedataeconomylab . com / 2020 / 07 / 31 / principles - for - revenue - models - of - data - stewardsh ip / . 27 Kimberly K . Smith , ​ Exploring Environmental Ethics : An Introduction ​ ( 2018 ) . 12 Complementary roles of stewards and fiduciaries While data stewardship is an overarching concept and digital fiduciaries and data stewards play complementary roles in ensuring participation in the digital economy , there are some notable differences in the focus of the two structures . ● Focus : Data steward is collective , focused on people and communities . The fiduciary is individualized - focused on the person as clientele ● Purpose : Data stewards are people - first , public and group interest driven whereas fiduciaries are focused on empowering individuals and not necessarily public - minded ● Business Models ​ 26 ​ : This means that data stewards must be designed as non - profits that do not draw benefit from the value of the data and are focused on safeguarding and promoting the interests of the group they represent , whereas fiduciaries can be commercial or non - profit entities ● Grounding : the obligations of the steward are extensive - - to some , stewardship is a vocation grounded in human ethics . ​ 27 Fiduciary’s duties to its clients are more limited , but also more precise , as they are founded in the traditional obligations from the common law V . Do Stewarded Participation Ladders Lead to Data Equities ? As envisioned here , data stewardship provides various ways for people to participate in the data economy , both as individuals and as collectives . The key question to ask at this juncture is : do these forms of participation in turn lead to greater data equity ? Is the beneficial friction generated between data requesters and stewards likely to result in greater equity as fairness , and lead to a more equitable data economy ? To date , the evidence is largely conceptual , and anecdotal , but not yet definitive empirically . A . Conceptual Frameworks : Climbing the PEP Ladder Fundamentally , stewards can help individuals and collectives alike to ascend Arnstein’s “participation ladder , ” as a means of achieving various data equities . In the process , they can ascend through the so - called “PEP” framework - - measures intended to “protect , enhance , and promote” agential rights in the digital world . ​ 29 28 Salome Viljoen , ​ Democratic Data : A Relational Theory for Data Governance ​ ( November 20 , 2020 draft ) , at 61 . 29 Richard Whitt , ​ HAACS in Action : Digital Fiduciaries , plus Personal AIs , https : / / whitt . medium . com / a - human - centered - paradigm - for - the - web - e7ceaee8fb0e ​ . 13 These models work closely together , allowing individuals by themselves , as well as , as part of a community to exercise their own agency as well as the agency of the community . Salome Viljoen for one agrees . While some may see an unbridgeable conceptual clash between data as individual medium ( DIM ) and data as democratic medium ( DDM ) , she observes that “dataficiation gives rise not only to personal claims regarding risk of personal violation that justify personal ordering , but also to population - level claims about the risk of social effects that justify political ordering . ” ​ 28 The PEP framework translates the tiers of duties from the common law of fiduciaries into obligations and services that stewards can provide to their clients and patrons . Aligned here to Arnstein’s participation ladder , these duties play out as : ● Protect ( guardian ) ​ : combines the general and fiduciary duties of care ( do no harm , and act prudently ) . This tier could roughly correspond to the transparency and accountability measures of “tokenism , ” such as securing the client’s data from external harms . ● Enhance ( mediator ) ​ : have no conflicts in duties and clients ; this can be seen as a form of consultation and partnership , such as improving the client’s online profile . ● Promote ( advocate ) ​ : advance the entrustor’s best interests ; this can amount to delegation and ultimate citizen control over her digital self . An example could be arming the citizen with a “Personal AI” to represent her interests vis - a - vis corporate or governmental “Institutional AIs” ( such as Google Assistant and Amazon’s Alexa , occupying her online and physical environments . As individuals engage with digital fiduciaries that are pairing higher degrees of duties with more service offerings , trust levels between the parties consequently should rise . Further , the PEP model aligns well with promoting community data rights , via laddered principles of transparency , accountability , fairness , and the social good . ​ 30 Collective bargaining as well leads to greater equity over time . ​ 31 The PEP framework envisions steps of greater participation by the steward / fiduciary in the entrustor’s data management , which is matched by 30 Richard Whitt , ​ Dr . John Snow : First Health Data Trust ​ , ​ A Human - Centered Paradigm for the Web ​ , Medium , September 21 , 2020 , https : / / whitt . medium . com / a - human - centered - paradigm - for - the - web - 27ae40159778 ? sk = 00552 857950f20678d5cdc1f103145e3 . 31 Kapoor , A , ​ Practising Data Stewardship in India ​ ( 2020 ) Ada Lovelace Institute . Available at https : / / www . adalovelaceinstitute . org / practising - data - stewardship - in - india / 14 the entrustor’s rights to greater representation . The conceptual model suggests that such enhanced equities - based participation options lead to greater forms of social and economic equity , for individuals and collectives alike . What other evidence supports such conclusions ? B . A Promising Series of Anecdotes With regard to data specifically , the anecdotal evidence on the value of participation is beginning to emerge in several ways . First ​ , participation allows individuals and communities to understand the value of their data to society , and in turn then , people are more willing to share their personal information for societal benefit . For instance , according to MiData’s research , 60 percent of people are willing to share 15 their data for scientific research . ​ 32 According to UK - based research , Understanding Patient Data ( UPD ) , when people understand the value their data has for public good , they are likely to support access / sharing . UPD’s research further illustrates that people ( patients ) are comfortable sharing anonymised sensitive personal data ( medical records ) for public health purposes , conditions a data steward can help fulfill . Second ​ , through stewardship models , groups and collectives are able to negotiate better on their rights with platforms pushing for better conditions . For instance , stewards like Driver’s Seat and Worker’s Info Exchange enable through different mechanisms the rights of drivers to have greater insight and more control over the data they generate on platforms such as Uber - these insights allow driver collectives to bargain with their employer for better working hours , wages etc . Third ​ , stewardship models make data more accessible to a wider range of stakeholders , and create opportunities for solving “wicked problems” . For instance , India’s Urban Data Exchange ( IUDX ) promotes data sharing for public good through its platform to improve city infrastructure . These efforts illustrate the potential of data stewardship and the value of meaningfully engaging data principals through new mechanisms of governance . That said , further research is required to fully comprehend the extent of impact stewardship can have on promoting equity more broadly . C . An Incomplete Empirical Record The relationship between participation and its impact on equity is well - documented in the environmental sector . Literature suggests that community participation , which begins with providing the community with relevant information can evolve to community ownership , where people work together to unlock power and capacities for environmental justice . ​ 33 32 Interview with Enrst Hafen ( Aapti Institute ) . 33 https : / / www . usdn . org / uploads / cms / documents / community _ engagement _ to _ ownership _ - _ t ools _ and _ case _ studies _ final . pdf 16 Research also points to the fact that adaptation and mitigation goals are more likely to be achieved if benefit - sharing mechanisms for reducing emissions are designed democratically through local participation . ​ 34 However , the evidence in the digital economy on the relationship between participation and equity remains incomplete and requires more inquiry . There is a need to design , and implement models of data stewardship for both collective and individual benefit . There is activity in the personal digital fiduciary space in India , in the form of account aggregators that serve as consent managers for financial services data , and aim to empower users to control information about their banking and financial transactions better . Other privacy - enhancing technical instruments also are catching on . For example , Sir Tim Berners - Lee has developed the SOLID project , which entails a privacy - protecting personal data pod that resides in the home . ​ 35 Digi . me allows users to aggregate and share their data directly with businesses , ​ 36 for both convenience and monetary return . The financial startup FortifID , utilizing the “open algorithm” model championed by the OPAL project at MIT , ​ 37 allows information to be shared between parties without direct access to the underlying data . ​ 38 In each case , however , the technologies do not inherently include agential governance in the vein of fiduciary obligations . As such technologies continue to promulgate , concomitant governance models need to be recognized and researched to understand their impact on society . ​ 39 34 ​ https : / / www . the ​ This commonsjournal . org / articles / 10 . 18352 / ijc . 301 / . 35 ​ https : / / inrupt . com / solid / ​ . 36 ​ https : / / digi . me / share / ​ . 37 ​ https : / / www . opalproject . org / about - opal ​ . 38 ​ https : / / www . fortifid . com / ​ . 39 One of the Authors has founded a new company , called Deeper Edge LLC , to serve as a digital fiduciary . See https : / / ​ www . deeperedge . net ​ . This may well be the first attempt to wed core governance principles derived from fiduciary law , with edge - based technologies harnessing the distributed Web . This “proof of concept” ( PoC ) company has its conceptual roots in the Author’s GLIAnet project ( https : / / www . glia . net ) . 17 Similar efforts are seen in the collective bargaining space on labour rights , ​ 40 medical research , and energy management . While nascent , these data cooperatives and unions are demonstrating the value of democratic decision - making and how it can lead to better outcomes for members of the participating community . However , the question on collectivising and mobilising people on questions of data is hard work , similar to building any bottom up movement . Another concern is the lack of clarity on business models for data stewards , as the complexity of potentially holding but not drawing financial benefit from data is significant . ​ 41 VI . Conclusion : A Proposed Data Governance Research Agenda Data stewardship has the potential to create immense value and impact for society , by creating new participation pathways that nudge individuals and communities alike towards greater data equity . Because data stewardship is a relatively new concept , however , open questions remain about its real - world viability . These questions extend to better understanding : possible use cases ; the optimal scale and scope of stewardship models ; business cases and financial sustainability ; the pertinent applicability of duties and opportunities ; and likely implications for public policy . As this paper has demonstrated , many of these open questions would best be addressed by developing a robust framework to define and raise up individual and community data rights . In short , additional tailored research can better cement the concept of data stewardship , as a vehicle for fundamentally reorganizing persistent power imbalances in the digital economy . 40 https : / / asia . fes . de / news / fow - collective - bargaining . 41 https : / / thedataeconomylab . com / 2020 / 07 / 31 / principles - for - revenue - models - of - data - stewardship / 18