COGNITIVE SCIENCE 17 , 285 - 309 ( 1993 ) How Experts Solve a Novel Problem in Experimental Design JANMAARTENSCHRAAGEN TN0 Institute for Human Factors IZF Research on expert - novice differences has mainly focused on how experts solve familiar problems . We know far less about the skills and knowledge used by experts when they are confronted with novel problems within their area of exper - tise . This article discusses a study in which verbal protocols were taken from sub - jects of various expertise designing an experiment in on area with which they were unfamiliar . The results showed that even when domain knowledge is lacking , experts solve a novel problem within their area of expertise by dividing the pro - blem into a number of subproblems that ore solved in a specified order . The lack of domain knowledge is compensated for by using abstract knowledge structures and domain - specific heuristic strategies . However , the quality of their solutions is considerably lower than the quality attained by experts who were familiar with the type of problem to be solved . The results suggest that when experts are con - fronted with novel problems as compared with familiar problems , their form of reasoning remoins intact , but the content of their reasoning suffers due to lack of domain knowledge . In the past 10 years , research on problem solving has focused mainly on dif - ferences in the way experts and novices structure their knowledge ( for reviews , see Glaser ; 1984 ; Green0 & Simon , 1988 ; VanLehn , 1989 ) . This research has clearly shown that the expert’s knowledge base is more abstract , more prin - cipled , and more organized for use than the novice’s knowledge base . However , several important questions have been neglected in the research just mentioned . In a review on problem solving and reasoning , Green0 and Simon ( 1988 ) mentioned , as one of the unanswered questions , the interactive development and utilization of general and specific skills . For instance , when confronted with novel problems within their domain of expertise , do experts resort to general strategies ( or “weak methods” ) and behave like I would like to thank Jan Elshout , Keith Holyoak , Irvin Katz , Jeroen Raaijmakers , Alma Schaafstal , Alan Schoenfeld , and two anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments and suggestions regarding earlier versions of this article . Correspondence and requests for reprints should be sent to Jan Maarten Schraagen , TN0 Institute for Human Factors IZF , P . O . Box 23 , 3769 ZG Soesterberg , The Netherlands . 286 J . M . SCHRAAGEN novices , or do they transfer more task - specific strategies to these novel pro - blems and perform better than novices ? The answer to this question partly depends on one’s definition of “novel problem . ” In this article , novel pro - blems are taken to be nonroutine but not necessarily difficult problems . A few studies have been carried out on the problem - solving skills experts use when confronted with novel problems ( e . g . , Adelson & Soloway , 1985 ; Larkin , 1983 ; Schoenfeld , 1985 , Chap . 9 ; Voss , Greene , Post , & Penner , 1983 ) . The results of those studies suggust that experts have learned moder - ately general strategies such as mental simulation that are used in domains such as software design ( Adelson & Soloway , 1985 ) . When they are con - fronted with novel problems , experts use those strategies to solve novel pro - blems . Schoenfeld ( 1985 ) argued that these strategies serve as control devices that rapidly curtail potential “wild goose chases” and ensure that experts make the most of the resources at their disposal . Besides using task - specific strategies , a second way in which experts could perform better than novices when confronted with novel problems , is by using their more abstract and more principled knowledge base . Novel pro - blems could remind experts of previously solved problems that are similar to the current problem in an abstract way . The study of Voss et al . ( 1983 ) showed that experts whose domain knowledge was lacking still generated more general subproblems than novices . Evidence for the importance of how knowledge is represented also comes from studies of analogical transfer ( Gick & Holyoak , 1980 , 1983 ; Holyoak & Koh , 1987 ; Novick , 1988 ) . In this research area , a distinction is made between structural and surface problem features . Structural features are abstract , whereas surface features are more literal . Novick showed that because the representations of experts include both surface and structural features , spontaneous positive transfer occurs in experts’ problem - solving attempts when the target problem and its analogue share structural features but are superficially dissimilar . Because novice rep - resentations are based largely on surface features ( e . g . , Adelson , 1981 ; Chi , Feltovich , 8c Glaser , 1981 ) , positive transfer does not occur in novices’ pro - blem solving when the target problem and its analogue share structural features but are superficially dissimilar . Because research in this area does not typically make use of verbal protocols , it remains unclear what strategies experts use to determine the appropriate structural features in a problem , and what strategies they use to adapt the analogue to the target problem . In conclusion , although there has been some research on how experts transfer their knowledge to novel problem situations , the interaction between representations and strategies is often left unclear . Mostly , the focus has been on either strategies or representations , but their joint contribution has not been studied in complex , real - world problems . The study here is an attempt to remedy this situation . The question of the transfer of expert knowledge to novel problems is an important one , both for theoretical and practical reasons . Theoretically , SOLVING NOVEL PROBLEMS 287 questions dealing with the transfer of knowledge and skills have important implications for theories of knowledge representation ( Singley & Anderson , 1989 ) . In particular , current theories of expertise continue to imply rather extreme domain specificity ( see Holyoak , 1991 , for a review ) . There have been relatively few studies of possible transfer to problems outside of , but close to , the domain of expertise . Finding evidence for abstract types of rea - soning skills that can be applied to novel problems would surely be at odds with current theories of expertise such as Anderson’s ( 1983 , 1987 ) . Practi - cally , finding evidence for positive transfer of expert knowledge to novel situations could have educational implications . The strategies and represen - tations used by experts could be made explicit and perhaps successfully taught to novices ( Bereiter & Scardamalia , 1987 ; Palincsar & Brown , 1984 ; Schoenfeld , 1985 ) . The rest of this article is structured as follows . The next section will outline a theoretical framework providing the vocabulary with which to describe the task to be studied , namely designing an experiment in the area of sensory psychology . This task is described in detail in the section following the theo - retical framework . After this task analysis , a model of expert problem solving will be derived in this particular task domain . The model is operationalized in terms of a coding scheme for the verbal protocols used in testing the model . In the results section , the model is compared with the experimental data . Finally , the general discussion will consider the implications of the results for the theoretical framework , as well as for educational issues . THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK Recent cognitive research ( e . g . , Collins , Brown , 8c Newman , 1989 ) has begun to differentiate the types of knowledge required for expertise . Broadly speak - ing , there is a consensus that aspects of knowing a domain include : l domain knowledge l heuristic strategies . control strategies l learning strategies Studies reviewed by Collins et al . ( 1989 ) and by Larkin ( 1989 ) suggest that the heuristic , control , and learning strategies are good candidates for trans - fer . In this study , which is more concerned with performance than with learning , I will ‘focus on the heuristic and control strategies . In the following , I will give some working definitions of what is commonly understood by the various types of knowledge required for expertise . Domain knowledge includes the conceptual and factual knowledge and procedures associated with a particular domain . Examples of domain knowl - edge in experimental design are concepts such as independent and dependent variables , general design principles ( e . g . , control for order effects ) , procedures 288 J . M . SCHRAAGEN for controlling nuisance variables ( e . g . , order effects can be controlled for by counterbalancing ) , and types of designs ( e . g . , factorial or random block designs ) . Because experts’ domain knowledge is highly organized , I will use the term “problem conception schema” in the rest of this article to empha - size the schematic organization of this knowledge ( cf . VanLenh , 1989 ) . Heuristic strategies are the “tricks of the trade , ” tacitly acquired by ex - perts through the practice of solving problems . Heuristic strategies specify how a task should be carried out , that is , by selecting domain knowledge or by positing a set of subtasks . Most of these strategies are domain - specific but some are general . For instance , the general strategies of decomposition and invariance identified by Larkin , Reif , Carbonell , and Gugliotta ( 1985 ) can be used in the related group of domains of fluid statics and direct - current circuits . General heuristic strategies , by definition , provide a basis for trans - fer from one domain to the other . In the domain of experimental design , a heuristic strategy that is often employed when a researcher is unfamiliar with a particular area of research , is to carry out a pilot study first . Very often , the pilot study is a much simplified version of the final set of experiments . Of course , precisely what pilot study should be run requires domain knowl - edge and limits the generality of this heuristic strategy . Control strategies are the knowledge that experts have about managing problem solving . These strategies determine what task or subtask should be carried out , whereas the heuristic strategies mentioned in the previous para - graph specify how a task or subtask should be carried out . In their analysis of novice and expert writing strategies , Bereiter and Scardamalia ( 1987 ) identified as a key component of expertise the control structure by which the writer organizes the numerous subactivities involved in writing . The control structure may be viewed as a direct outcome of the control strategies selected . For instance , using the control strategy of progressive deepening , a writer may decide first to sketch the major ideas and later fill in the details . Several of these control strategies constitute a control structure for the task as a whole . Without this control structure , writing becomes a confusing or random process , consisting mainly of writing ideas down until one has run out of ideas . In the domain of mathematics , Schoenfeld ( 1985 , chapt . 9 ) described the problem - solving performance of mathematician GP who solved a problem for which he had less domain knowledge immediately accessible than novice students , precisely because he was able to make very effective use of his knowledge ( good control ) , whereas the students were not . These studies provide clear evidence that effective executive control can make a big difference in problem solving , even compensating for inaccessible domain knowledge . Hence , heuristic and control strategies are likely to be observed when domain knowledge is insufficient , for instance in the case of nonroutine problem solving . One of the aims of this study was to identify the different SOLVING NOVEL PROBLEMS 289 contributions of each type of knowledge when solving a nonroutine problem in an area of problem solving that is a novel domain of research of this sort , namely , experimental design . The following section will use the concepts just defined to describe the task subjects had to carry out in this study . DESIGNING AN EXPERIMENT IN THE AREA OF SENSORY PSYCHOLOGY The problem - solving domain investigated in this study is that of designing an experiment in the area of sensory psychology , in particular the subarea of gustatory research , that is , research concerned with taste . The following paragraphs will describe the task of designing experiments by both using empirical sources , theoretical analyses , and handbooks . In handbooks on experimental design ( e . g . , Kerlinger , 1973 ) , one often finds the following two general goals that together constitute the task of designing an experiment : 1 . Answer the research question . 2 . Control all sources of variance . Based on previous research in the physics expertise literature ( e . g . , Larkin , 1980 ) , I will assume that the goal of answering the research question is accom - plished by understanding the problem , selecting a paradigm , and pursuing that paradigm . The notion of a paradigm as the knowledge structure that guides experts’ problem solving when designing experiments was derived by analogy with the medical domain . Feltovich and Barrows ( 1984 ) referred to these knowledge structures as “illness scripts . ” According to these authors , a clinician “attempts to represent and understand a patient problem by con - structing an integrated script or scenario for how the patient’s condition came to be , its major points of malfunction , and its subsequent associated consequences” ( p . 139 ) . In terms of our theoretical framework , the illness script may be viewed as an example of domain knowledge . When designing experiments , it is often useful to classify a particular research question as an instance of a more general question that may be solved by some general research plan ( Friedland & Iwasaki , 1985 ; Johnson , Nachtsheim , & Zualkerman , 1987 ) or paradigm . For instance , a research question on “how well people are able to remember faces of criminals they have only seen for a short moment” may be classified as an instance of the more general question , “how well are people able to recognize stimuli pre - sented for a short moment . ” This general question then evokes a “recogni - tion paradigm” from memory that specifies what steps have to be taken to answer this question in a scientific way . More specifically , a paradigm is a 290 J . M . SCHRAAGEN general research plan containing a specification of the subjects and the inde - pendent and dependent variables to be used in the experiment . A paradigm may also contain specifications of the instructions to subjects , the setting where the experiment is carried out , the outcome of the experiment , and control variables ( to be discussed in the next paragraph ) . Usually a subject is first selected , then receives a treatment in the form of an independent var - iable , and finally a particular aspect ( the dependent variable ) is measured . Hence , there is a temporal ordering in the elements containing the paradigm . The goal of controlling all sources of variance is accomplished by genera - ting design principles that minimize the error variance and maximize the systematic variance in an experiment . These general goals are accomplished in turn by more specific goals such as experimental control , reliable mea - surement , using homogeneous groups of subjects , increasing sample size , and using widely different experimental conditions . The goal of experimental control is still fairly general and is achieved by more specific goals such as “avoid carry - over effects . ” This particular goal may be accomplished by counterbalancing conditions . Control of variance is a goal familiar to all students of experimental psychology , and ways of achieving this goal may be found in any textbook on this subject ( e . g . , Neale & Liebert , 1980 ) . One of the aims of the protocol analyses was to identify the different strat - egies used by subjects whenever they encountered impasses due to a lack of knowledge . In principle , knowledge may be lacking for each of the goals mentioned before . However , I was not interested in problems beginners might have in understanding the problem statement , because in that case they would not even be able to start designing an experiment . I therefore chose a problem that all subjects would , in principle , be able to understand , namely , a problem that required knowledge of soft drinks and their taste . This choice of problem allowed me to focus on the knowledge and strategies subjects would bring to bear when actually designing an experiment . The primary interest in this study was in how experts solve novel problems within their domain of expertise . The domain of expertise in this case was designing psychological experiments . In order to identify what is specific for this particular group of experts , the study included subjects with less experience designing experiments ( i . e . , beginners and intermediates ) and subjects with more domain - specific knowledge ( i . e . , domain experts ) . Hence , the other three groups served as controls . For the domain experts , the pro - blem they had to solve was relatively easy , although not trivial . The use of more than two groups of subjects of varying expertise was inspired by the study of Voss et al , ( 1983 ) . It avoids a problem usually associated with expert - novice studies , namely , that experts may be very different from novices in other respects than their greater experience , for instance , in intelligence or motivation . By using more groups , the transition from novice to expert could be viewed in a more gradual way , and allowed us to make more comparisons SOLVING NOVEL PROBLEMS 291 among groups , thereby helping to “unconfound” some of the expert - novice differences . METHOD Overview of the Methodology Used in This Study The knowledge and strategies used by subjects were assessed by collecting verbal protocols of subjects while designing an experiment . The analysis of verbal protocols requires a coding scheme by means of which statements can be classified into particular categories . In developing a coding scheme , the researcher should follow particular rules ( see Ericsson & Simon , 1984 ) . For instance , a coding scheme should not be based on the protocols the researcher is interested in , but rather on a task analysis . Furthermore , the statements used for developing the coding scheme should be scored inde - pendently of each other . This study adopted the following procedure : 1 . Protocols of subjects solving a similar problem , as in this study , were segmented into units corresponding to sentences , or , in some cases , larger idea units . Each unit was typed on a card . The resultant deck of 58 cards was given to 6 other subjects who had not solved the problem , but who were familiar with the area of experimental design . Cards were presented to the subjects in a random order , thus ensuring independent scoring of each unit . These subjects were asked to sort the cards into as many cate - gories as they thought appropriate . 2 . Categories were reduced by cluster analysis . To this end , similarity matrices were developed based on the categories subjects came up with . Two units received a similarity score of 1 when they were placed in the same category and a score of 0 when they were placed in different cate - gories . These similarity matrices were averaged for all 6 subjects and analyzed by means of a hierarchical cluster analysis . The results of the cluster analysis showed four categories that were named as follows : a . understand problem b . operationalize variables ( subjects , ( in ) dependent variables ) c . plan ( sequence of events ) d . validity issues ( e . g . , carry - over effects ) . Further analysis showed that these categories could fairly objectively be established by looking for particular key words ( e . g . , words such as “identify , ” “recognize , ” and “taste” indicated problem understanding ; sequences of “then . . . and then” indicated the plan for data collection ; words such as “randomize” and “counterbalance” clearly indicated validity issues ) . Hence , the categories themselves and the attribution of statements to these categories were established by fairly objective pro - cedures , thus enduring sufficient reliability of coding . 292 J . M . SCHRAAGEN 3 . Based on a task analysis ( see the previous section ) , these four categories were slightly modified and abstracted . This modification resulted in the following four goals that are sequentially accomplished in the task of designing experiments : a . understand problem b . select paradigm c . pursue paradigm d . control variance . This control structure represents a model of domain - expert performance on simple , routine problems . On more complex problems , domain ex - perts would surely have to cycle through the four stages a number of times . 4 . Finally , in order to be able to classify actual protocol statements , a coding scheme was developed . The control structure mentioned before was extended with the following categories : a . evaluation statements , whenever there is insufficient knowledge to choose among two or more knowledge structures ; b . task - oriented statements , dealing with task requirements , questions to the experimenter , and the evaluation of the task as a whole ; c . monitoring statements or meta - comments , when subjects report about their own problem - solving processes . These verbalizations are often of limited value because they do not direct subsequent problem - solving behavior ( Ericsson & Simon , 1984 ) . The coding scheme specifies how the control structure is manifested in the verbal protocols . Note that the categories in the coding scheme were developed on the basis of a pilot study and not on the basis of the protocols to be discussed in this study . The full coding scheme , with examples from each category , is included in the Appendix . By using the examples and the key words underlined , the experimenter was able to assign statements to categories in a fairly objective way . In order to assess the coding scheme more objectively , a second coder assigned part of the statements from the protocols to categories using the same coding scheme . A Cohen’s kappa value of . 79 indicated good agreement between the two coders . According to Fleiss ( 1982 , p . 218 ) , “values greater than . 75 or so may be taken to represent excellent agreement beyond chance . ” Although , according to the task analysis , the goals are sequentially accom - plished , backing up to an immediately preceding goal is allowed , because it is reasonable to suppose that activation spreading from the current goal will maintain in working memory the most closely linked goals . One may , there - fore , expect to see these associative switches between neighboring goals in verbal protocols . SOLVING NOVEL PROBLEMS 293 Materials AlI subjects received the following problem : The manufacturer of Coca Cola wants to improve his product . Recently , he has received complaints that Coca Cola does not taste as good any more as it used to . Therefore , he wants to investigate what it is exactly that people taste when they drink Coca Cola . In order to be able to make a comparison with the competitors , Pepsi Cola and a house brand are included in the study as well . The manufacturer has indicated that “taste” may be defined very broadly in this study . The study will be conducted by a bureau for market research . The manufacturer has the entire Dutch population in mind as the target population . Please indicate as detailed as possible how , according to you , such a study would look like . You may be able to come up with more than one solution . In that case , do not hesitate and name all of them ! The problem description was deliberately kept vague in order to bring out differences between subjects in the way they structured the problem , using their knowledge of paradigms . In particular , the problem was vague as to the cause of the complaints the cola manufacturer received and on whether the type of study he proposes logically follows from the complaints he has received . The problem description also contained a number of details that subjects could change or abstract from . These details concerned the other cola brands , the broad definition of taste , the bureau for market research , and the target population . In actual practice , researchers are often confronted with questions that are ambiguous , unclear , implicit as far as the main pro - blem is concerned , and loaded with details . Subjects received standard think - aloud instructions on paper ( based on Ericsson & Simon , 1984 ) . Subjects did not have any trouble thinking aloud while solving the problem . Subjects Four categories of subjects were distinguished : Beginners ( Beg ) were undergraduates majoring in either experimental psychology ( n = 5 ) or in methodology ( n = 4 ) ; the beginners’ experience with designing experiments was limited to one or two experiments . Intermediates ( Int ) were graduate students in experimental psychology ( n = 2 ) or in methodology ( n = 1 ) ; the intermediates’ experience with designing experiments was limited to three or four experiments . The intermediates were intermediate design experts , not intermediate domain experts . Design experts ( DesExp ) were subjects with at least 10 years of experi - ence in designing experiments in psychology ; subjects had no experience with gustatory research ( n = 3 ) . 294 J . M . SCHRAAGEN 4 . Domain experts ( DomExp ) were subjects with at least 10 years of exper - ience in designing experiments in the area of sensory psychology ( n = 4 ) . Procedure Subjects were tested individually in a quiet room at their own or the experi - menter’s office . The experimenter told them that he was interested in how people of varying levels of expertise designed experiments . Next , subjects were given the problem statement together with the talk - aloud instructions . After subjects had read the problem statement , a cassette recorder was started which recorded the subjects’ verbalizations . Subjects were allowed to use paper and pencil if they wished to do so . Only two of the design experts made use of these materials . The subjects themselves indicated when they thought they had solved the problem . RESULTS AND DISCUSSION The results section is structured as follows . First , I will present data con - cerning the quality of the solutions . Next , I will present summary protocol statistics on the number of statements in each category of the coding system , the total problem - solving time , and the total number of solutions . These results give an overview of some gross differences among the groups . The theoretical framework will provide the categories for discussing the other results . More specifically , the following elements will be discussed : control structure ( operationalized as the number of switches among the different categories ) , control strategies , and heuristic strategies . Quality of Solutions The quality of the solutions that the subjects generated was established in the following way . First , solution elements for all subjects were categorized in four categories : subjects , independent variable ( s ) , dependent variable ( s ) , and control variable ( s ) . Next , each subject’s solution was printed on a sepa - rate page and randomly assembled in a scoring booklet . No reference as to the subject’s level of experience was made . These scoring booklets were sent to two domain experts , one of whom had participated as a subject in the experiment . The domain experts were asked to rate the solutions on a lo - point scale from solution quality very poor ( I ) , to solution quality excellent ( 10 ) . The Pearson correlation between the two ratings was . 73 , which was deemed sufficient for averaging the ratings of the two raters . The average solution quality for the beginners was 3 . 1 , for the intermediates 2 . 7 , for the design experts 4 . 2 , and for the domain experts 7 . 0 . A Kruskal - Wallis analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) with level of expertise as grouping variable and the solution quality as dependent variable showed a significant difference among the four groups ( t = 12 . 16 , p = , 007 ) . Planned comparisons between the SOLVING NOVEL PROBLEMS 295 TABLE 1 Average Total Number of Statements in Protocols , Average Total Problem - Solving Time ( in Min ) far the Four Groups of Subiects , and Average Number of Solutions - Statements Solution Time Solutions Beginners 27 5 1 . D intermediates 60 9 2 . 0 Design Experts 66 13 3 . 0 Domain Experts 68 14 4 . 2 beginners and the intermediates on the one hand ( the novice group ) and both expert groups on the other hand , showed a significant difference between the two pairs of groups ( U = 4 . 00 , p = . OOl ) , clearly reflecting an effect of experience with designing experiments . This effect was largely due to the domain experts’ scores , because no significant difference was found among the beginners , intermediates , and design experts ( t = 4 . 64 , p = . lo ) , although the design experts’ solution were rated slightly higher than those of the beginners and the intermediates . However , most interesting for the purposes here was a significant difference in solution quality between the two expert groups ( U = 0 . 00 , p = . 03 ) . These results show that the quality of the solutions generated by the design experts was considerably lower than that of the domain experts . Generally speaking , the design experts generated methodologically adequate experi - ments , based on paradigms they were familiar with , but these experiments did not answer the question they were supposed to answer . For instance , the domain experts often remarked that the use of similarity judgments when tasting colas , as used in multidimensional scaling paradigms , was inade - quate , because naive subjects are only able to indicate whether they like the colas or not , and not whether one cola is more or less like another cola . Because the design experts all generated one or more variants of multidimen - sional scaling paradigms , the quality of their solutions was rated considerably lower than that of the domain experts . Summary Statistics Table 1 shows the total number of statements in the protocols ( with the exclu - sion of monitoring statements ) , the total problem - solving time for the four groups of subjects , and the total number of solutions ( paradigms ) mentioned by subjects . Clearly , experts generated more solutions than both beginners and intermediates ; hence , they took much longer to solve the problem and generated more verbal statements than beginners and intermediates . This was confirmed statistically by planned comparisons between beginners and intermediates on the one hand , and both expert groups on the other hand . Mann - Whitney U tests showed significant differences for the number of J . M . SCHRAAGEN TABLE 2 Average Number of Statements and Proportion in Each Category of the Coding Scheme for the Four Groups Orient on task Understand problem Select paradigm / analogy Select design principles Pursue paradigm Evaluate task Monitoring Beg Int No . ( % ) No . ( % ) 1 ( 3 ) 1 ( 2 ) 5 ( 17 ) 9 ( 14 ) 3 ( 10 ) 7 01 ) 6 ( 20 ) 13 ( 20 ) 12 ( 40 ) 30 ( 47 ) 0 ( 0 ) O ( 0 ) 3 ( 10 ) 4 ( 6 ) DesExp No . ( % ) 3 ( 5 ) 10 ( 15 ) 12 ( 18 ) 15 ( 22 ) 25 ( 37 ) 1 ( 1 ) 1 ( 1 ) DomExp No . ( % ) 0 ( 0 ) 19 ( 28 ) 17 ( 25 ) 5 ( 7 ) 27 ( 40 ) 0 ( 0 ) 1 ( 0 . 5 ) statements ( U = 11 JO , p = . 009 ) , the solution time ( U = 5 . 00 , p = . 002 ) , and the number of solutions ( U = 9 . 00 , p = . 005 ) . Table 2 shows the number of statements and the proportion ( in brackets ) in each category of the coding scheme . Analyses were carried out on pro - portions rather than absolute numbers of statements because the beginners generated almost half the number of statements compared with the other groups . This must have been partly due to the smaller number of solutions beginners generated . Comparing absolute numbers of statements in this case would involve the assumption that the distribution of statements across cate - gories would remain constant for the beginners if they would have generated more solutions . However , because it is not clear a priori that the proportion of statements across categories remains constant with increasing numbers of solutions , analysis on absolute numbers is unjustified in this case . A Kruskal - Wallis ANOVA with level of expertise as grouping variable and the propor - tion of statements as dependent variable showed a marginally significant difference among the four groups for the category select design principles ( t = 6 . 40 , p = . 09 ) . The remaining categories were not significantly different for the four groups . Planned comparisons between design experts and domain experts showed a significant difference between the two groups for the cate - gory select design principles ( U = 12 . 00 , p = . 03 ) . Hence , the design experts used , across the whole protocol , more design principles than domain experts . A possible explanation for this finding is that design experts , because of their unfamiliarity with gustatory research , had to reason through most decisions on controlling variance , whereas domain experts could draw on worked - out decisions . Further planned comparisons between the beginners and the intermediates on the one hand ( the novice group ) and both expert groups on the other hand , showed significant differences between the two pairs of groups for the proportion of statements in the categories select paradigm / analogy ( U = 19 . 00 , p = . 05 ) and monitoring ( U = 72 . 50 , p = . 009 ) . Hence , the experts devoted relatively more of their attention to selection of a paradigm than the novices . The novices , however , generated more monitoring statements SOLVING NOVEL PROBLEMS 297 than the experts . The novices’ monitoring statements mostly indicated pro - blems they had with retrieving relevant domain knowledge ( e . g . , “I can’t think of anything else” or “I find this very difficult” ) . Control Structure In order to detect an ordering in the goals subjects successively pursued , the switches between the different categories in the protocols were counted . To determine the nature of the switches between the different categories , the three categories , orient on task , evaluate task , and monitoring , were excluded from further analysis . The reason for the exclusion was that these three categories are not part of the control structure of interest in this study . Hence , there were four categories left : understand problem ( U ) , select para - digm / analogy ( SP ) , pursue paradigm ( PP ) , and select design principles ( DP ) . The switches between the individual statements were classified and counted for each subject . Next , the number of switches was added for all subjects within one group . The switches between categories were tested both against a quasi - random model and against an expert model , in order to detect whether the data significantly differed from these models . A test against two models gives more confidence in the general pattern of results when , as predicted , one model is accepted and the other rejected . In this case , the random model , but not the expert model , may fit the data of the beginners well , whereas the reverse pattern was predicted for the expert groups . The diagonal was excluded from these analyses because the interest here was not in how long subjects would stay in one category , but which category they would pursue next . The quasi - random model takes into account the number of items in a particular category and determines the likelihood of going from a particular category to another category . Therefore , it controls for the different number of switches among the different groups of subjects . If there are more items in a particular category , then chances are higher that a transition will be made to that category , irrespective of the current category . The expert model is shown in Figure 1 . The expert model only allows switches between immediately preceding and immediately following cate - gories . This yields the pattern of legitimate ( L ) and illegitimate ( I ) switches shown in Table 3 . A constant error parameter was included for every illegiti - mate transition . Thus , every illegitimate switch was considered equally likely . The parameters in the model correspond to weights attached to the cate - gories . The chance of going from one category to the other is proportional with the ( relative ) weight of the category . There were three parameters in the model that had to be estimated : the error parameter and the parameters corresponding to switches from SP to U and from PP to SP . All other para - meters could be derived from these three parameters . Two variables are important when testing the data against the expert model : J . M . SCHRAAGEN r I UNDERSTAND PROBLEM ( Ul I SELECT DESIGN PRINCIPLES ( DP ) Figure 1 . Expert model . TABLE 3 Legitimate ( L ) and illegitimate ( I ) Switches According to the Expert Model To From U SP PP DP U L I I SP L L I PP I L L DP I I L 1 . The fit , expressed in a chi - square measure , and 2 . The magnitude of the error parameter , relative to the other parameters . Both variables are important because it is theoretically possible to have a good fit and a high value for the error parameter at the same time . This would be the case when the illegitimate transitions would all be equal in magnitude and relatively high at the same time . The predictions were that , for the expert groups , first , the data would not significantly deviate from the expert model , and second , the error parameter would be low compared with the other parameters . The value of the error parameter was therefore divided by the average value of the other parameters . The parameters in the models are estimated by minimizing a chi - square function . Hence , the predicted and observed frequencies of switches occur - ring in the protocols are compared and expressed in a chi - square measure . Table 4 shows the results of the parameter estimation . The pattern of switches SOLVING NOVEL PROBLEMS 299 TABLE 4 Chi - Squares0 far the Parameter Estimates of the Four Groups Random Model Expert Model Beginners lntermediotes Design Experts Domain Experts 6 . 14 20 . 42” 11 . 72’ 29 . 92 * * 9 . 20 21 . 60 * * 4 . 56 a ~ ‘ ( 5 , N = 19 ) . l p < . o5 . “p < . ool . between categories for the beginners did not significantly deviate from the quasi - random model . Both expert groups and the intermediates did deviate significantly from the quasi - random model . Because the beginners did not significantly differ from the quasi - random model , there was no need to test their data against the expert model . If one would do so , the error parameter would be too high relative to the other parameters . The intermediates significantly deviated from the expert model . The chi - square values for the experts were not significant . The legitimate parameters were , on average , five times as high as the illegitimate parameters . The estimated value for the error parameter was . 15 for the intermediates and . I3 for the expert groups . These values are very acceptable . Therefore , the conclusion is that the transition data for both groups of experts can be fitted with the expert model described previously . The intermediates’ data could not be fitted with both models . What is interesting about these data is not so much that the domain experts display the sequence of processes specified by the expert model - this has been known from the physics problem - solving literature for a long time ( e . g . , Larkin , 1980 ) - but rather that the design experts do so too . That is , even when solving nonroutine problems , experts exhibit strong control over their problem solving . Interestingly , strong control in this study was not associated with high solution quality because the design experts’ solutions were rated considerably lower than those of the domain experts , as shown before . Taken together , these results suggest that the design experts’ problem - solving activ - ity was structured by their choice of a paradigm . However , lacking the rele - vant domain knowledge , they often chose the wrong paradigm . The statistics discussed before have given an overall picture of some salient differences among groups in terms of the control structure . The next section will describe a control and a heuristic strategy used by the different groups of subjects . Strategies Two strategies were identified : progressive deepening ( control strategy ) and mental simulation ( heuristic strategy ) . The following sections will first 300 J . M . SCHRAAGEN describe the criteria used to determine the use of a particular strategy , then describe these strategies , illustrating them with protocol fragments where necessary , and finally describe the results in terms of these strategies . Progressive Deepening . Progressive deepening is a control strategy that goes over the same subproblem again and again , each pass acquiring some new item of information . In this study , progressive deepening was only observed when subjects were pursuing a paradigm . Progressive deepening is operationalized as follows : 1 . The problem solver changes the contents of a particular slot in a para - digm ( this change excludes mere repetition of the contents ) . 2 . The slot or its contents have been mentioned before , but not in the imme - diately preceding protocol statement ( this requirement excludes justify - ing statements ) . As defined in the task analysis , the slots in the problem conception schema include the independent and dependent variable , control variables , subjects , and the setting , the outcome , and the instructions to subjects . Progressive deepening was observed in the protocols of all design experts . The following paragraphs illustrate the strategy of progressive deepening in one of the design experts’ protocols . For example , Paradigm B ( tasting one cola after the other ) was men - tioned four times in all by Design Expert 2 . If we ignore the variants for the moment : 1 . The first time , Paradigm B was referred to simply by its generic name , “panel research . ” 2 . The second time , the panel research was described more fully by including : l the independent variable ( three colas ) , l the instructions ( “we would like to know what you like or dislike about Coca Cola” ) , l a control variable ( blind , i . e . , no brand names visible ) , and l the dependent variable ( description of taste , identification of Coca Cola ) . At this stage , the number of subjects and the statistical design are men - tioned by the subject , but are left open ( “I would not know that right now” ) . Five elements are mentioned in total the second time the panel research was described . 3 . The third time was an extension of what was stated before , and immedi - ately follows it , after the subject has briefly checked the problem state - ment again . The panel research is now referred to as “free , ” meaning “with open questions . ” Design Expert 2 explicitly focuses his attention on this less structured experiment first ( “Perhaps it would be good to SOLVING NOVEL PROBLEMS 301 4 . try to do it in two stages and first allow some open questions” ) . New categories are added and more items are mentioned with the old ones . The new categories added are : l number of subjects ( 25 - 50 ) , l treatment ( “have them taste a bit and allow them to go back and forth between colas” ) , and l statistical analysis ( “result is a number of dimensions that are not too clear because of a lot of noise ; probably one clear , but uninter - esting dimension” ) . Items added to old categories : l independent variable ( three glasses should be coded : a , b , c ) , l controls ( balance order ) , and l dependent variable ( describe differences in taste ) . Eighteen elements are mentioned in total the third time the panel research was described . Thus , comparing the second with the third time the panel research was mentioned , more than three times as many elements are mentioned the third time . The fourth time , paradigm B was referred to as the “more structured” approach . Because this approach uses a different dependent variable than the less structured approach , both approaches cannot be considered extensions of one another . In this protocol , five slots are successively refined , two of which ( the number of subjects and the statistical design ) are left open at first , but are explicitly mentioned . The other three slots ( independent , dependent , and control vari - ables ) are elaborated at several places in the protocol . The protocols of all subjects were analyzed in this way , and the results showed that the average number of successively refined slots for the begin - ners was 1 . 5 , for the intermediates 3 . 7 , for the design experts 3 . 3 , and for the domain experts 1 . 5 . A Mann - Whitney II test on the total number of slots for the beginners and the domain experts on the one hand , and the inter - mediates and the design experts on the other hand , showed a significant dif - ference between the two groups , ( I = 10 . 00 , p = . 009 . The results clearly show that both the intermediates and the design experts successively refined the slots in their problem conception schemata . In contrast , the beginners and the domain experts hardly returned to slots already filled in . A possible reason the beginners did not use the strategy of progressive deepening was the trouble they had in retrieving the appropriate knowledge from memory . This kept them from changing the contents of their paradigms . The domain experts did not need to change the contents of their paradigms as frequently as the design experts and the intermediates , because due to their greater familiarity with the domain of gustatory research , they more often retrieved the appropriate knowledge from memory immediately . 302 J . M . SCHRAAGEN Mental Simulation . The strategy of mental simulation makes use of the fact that design experts have represented paradigms as scenarios . When subjects tried to fill in the details of a particular paradigm , they would imagine what the experimental procedure would look like . Imagining the procedure often suggested extra information to be included in the paradigm , or difficulties that had to be resolved . The difficulties arose because particular design deci - sions violated certain validity issues , as specified by certain design principles . Evidence for the strategy of mental simulation comes from sequences such as “first . . . and then . . . and after that . ” For instance : “And then you make a list ( . . . ) with a number of dimensions , and then group those dimen - sions ( . . . ) and then let them fill them in ( . . . ) and then take those kinds of scores . ” Just using the words “and then . . . and then” is not evidence per se for the use of mental simulation . It might as well be evidence for just sum - ming up the steps in an already stored plan . Mental simulation , on the other hand , means trying out alternatives with the possibility of being corrected . I will restrict the definition of mental simulation , therefore , to those cases where pursuing a paradigm ( indicated by the words “and then . . . and then” ) is interrupted by selecting a design principle . An example where a problem is noted when mentally simulating the pro - cedure , is the following from Design Expert 3’s protocol : Now you have the problem of : you have three stimuli , you have a subject , you have all controls , and what are you going to do then ? . . . Well , I think three stimuli are not enough , so you could think about constructing a perceptual space in which you compare those colas with the larger group of soft drinks . The following example from Design Expert l’s protocol illustrates the use of general design principles : And then , secondly , the subject gets a drink , and then I do not know enough about details , whether you have to eat a little bit of bread after that , or wait a minute , or drink something neutral in between , I am not an expert in that area . Design Expert 1 interrupts the filling in of the details of the paradigm ( after “gets a drink” ) when he realizes that the subject gets another drink after the first one and that the taste of these two drinks may influence one another . One general design principle is to make sure that the measuring instrument does not change over the course of the experiment ( cf . Cook & Campbell , 1979 ) . In this case , the measuring instrument is the human taster . Design Expert 1 comes up with several ways of preventing this threat to the internal validity of the design , but does not choose among one of them on the grounds that he is not an expert when it comes to gustatory research . For each subject , a count was made of whether the subject used the strat - egy or not , irrespective of the number of times the subject used the strategy . This procedure was followed in order to ensure independence of observa - tions . The results showed that all intermediates and all design experts used SOLVING NOVEL PROBLEMS 303 mental simulation , whereas only 33 % of the beginners and 25 % of the do - main experts did so . The resulting differences in use of strategies between the groups were analyzed by means of a binomial test . The beginners and the domain experts made less frequent use of the strategy of mental simula - tion @ < . 005 ) than the intermediates and the design experts . Although the beginners frequently used the words “and then . . . and then , ” they did not use general design principles frequently , and when they tried to do so had trouble retrieving them from memory . The intermediates’ and the design experts’ knowledge of design principles was better structured for use , so they could actually note problems when mentally simulating the procedure . The domain experts did not have to use mental simulation extensively because they filled in the slots in their paradigms without hesitation , knowing exactly what the experimental procedure looks like in gustatory experiments . GENERAL DISCUSSION The main result of this study can simply be put as follows : When solving a novel problem for which their domain knowledge is lacking , experts can bring to bear general strategies that allow them to solve the problem in a highly structured way . This result implies that expertise cannot only be con - sidered the product of increasingly specialized domain knowledge , as current theories of expertise would claim ( e . g . , Anderson , 1987 ) . Instead , this study has shown that experts possess a number of strategies of varying generality that are more powerful than so - called weak methods . The power of these strategies lies in the effect they have on the form , not on the substance of the expert’s reasoning , given that the design experts in this study produced significantly poorer solutions than the domain experts , but otherwise main - tained the same structured approach to problem solving as the domain experts did . Exactly what these general strategies are , and how they may depend on a proper organization of the available domain knowledge will be discussed later . First , however , I will note some similarities and differences with other studies that have investigated transfer of knowledge across tasks within the same domain . The most relevant studies in this respect were those carried out by Adelson and Soloway ( 1985 ) and Adelson ( 1990 ) . The results of the study here on the use of mental simulation are very similar to Adelson and Soloway’s findings : Given sufficient expertise and a novel task , the designer will simulate the process to check that it does not violate the problem constraints . If the task is not novel , the expert skips the simulation because a successful solution can be retrieved from memory . Adelson ( 1990 ) reported on the use of pro - gressive deepening in software design . However , some differences between Adelson and Soloway’s ( 1985 ) work and the work here should be noted as well . Whereas the Adelson and Soloway study used a very qualitative approach , this study has shown that similar 304 J . M . SCHRAAGEN results can be obtained with much more quantitative methods and a larger number of subjects . Moreover , this study has distinguished between beginners and intermediates , which allows for more precise indications of the develop - ment of expertise . Finally , and this is in contrast to most other research of this sort , experimental design is a novel domain of research . The design experts were the most relevant group in this study , because they were included to provide the answer to the question of how experts solve novel problems . The data strongly suggest that the availability of a problem conception schema in the form of a paradigm greatly helps to structure pro - blem solving . When an experimental psychologist is confronted with a novel problem , this problem is first classified as belonging to a certain abstract category , for example , “a multidimensional scaling problem” This abstract category evokes a paradigm that subsequently guides problem solving , that is , it helps structure the problem statement and specifies the general categories ( independent variable , etc . ) for which information should be obtained . In this sense , experts still exhibit the schema - driven problem solving that char - acterizes their routine problem solving ( e . g . , VanLehn , 1989 ) , even when confronted with novel problems . Schema - driven problem solving should not be equated with “optimal” problem solving , however . The design experts in this study often chose a nonoptimal solution , as assessed by domain experts . What seems to occur when experts solve nonroutine , ill - structured problems is that they convert the problem into a category of problems they are familiar with , irrespective of whether they have chosen the optimal solution . However , the experimental psychologist may encounter impasses along the way when trying to design an experiment in a novel domain . These impasses are due to insufficient domain knowledge . For instance , when the area to which the paradigm is applied is new , it may not be clear how to fill in the details of that paradigm . In that case , the researcher uses the strategy of mental simulation , imagining what the experiment would look like when it was actually being carried out . When using the strategy of mental simula - tion , the researcher is frequently reminded of general design principles that apply in a particular case . The design experts in this study often chose not to go into too much detailed search . Instead , they preferred to keep a global picture of the com - plete paradigm active in working memory . That is , they went over the same paradigm again and again , leaving details open at first , but gradually adding them in . For instance , they started by referring to a paradigm by its name ; when they returned to it , they tried to find a general value for the independent and dependent variable ; these general values were subsequently more speci - fied and other elements were considered as well ( e . g . , control variables , number of subjects , statistical analysis ) . In short , the design experts used the strategy of progressive deepening . SOLVING NOVEL PROBLEMS 305 These results have important implications for those theories of cognitive skill acquisition ( e . g . , Anderson , 1987 ) that place a great deal of emphasis on highly domain - specific knowledge in experts’ cognitive skills . First , this study has shown that experts have a flexibility that goes beyond mere domain - specific knowledge . When this knowledge is lacking , experts can still main - tain a more structured approach than novices by making use of more abstract knowledge and strategies . Current theories of cognitive skill acquisition have mainly focused on the distinction between so - called “weak” and “strong” methods . The present study has shown that there may exist methods of intermediate generality , such as mental simulation . Exactly how general these methods are is a matter for further research . On the other hand , domain knowledge should not be undervalued . Use of general strategies is still bounded by the structure of the domain knowledge present , given that the design experts’ solutions were not significantly better than those of the begin - ners . Hence , although the form of the design experts’ reasoning was similar to that of the domain experts , the content or substance of their reasoning was dissimilar . Second , this study has indicated how these strategies make use of the abstract knowledge . For instance , experts have represented the abstract cate - gories in their paradigm in a temporal order . The strategy of mental sim - ulation makes use of this temporal ordering . The beginner’s knowledge is probably not structured in this way , so the beginners do not use the strategy of mental simulation as often as the experts . Practically , these results may have interesting educational implications . Strategic design knowledge , in the form of a control structure , is not taught explicitly in courses on experimental design . This strategic knowledge is now derived from practice in designing experiments . It may be interesting to try to convey this strategic knowledge for the task of designing experiments to students . Presenting students with high - level control structures could reduce their working - memory load . Studies such as those by Schoenfeld ( 1979 , 1985 , chap . 9 ) in the domain of mathematics have indicated that , under appropriate conditions , strategic knowledge can be taught success - fully , leading to “much more evaluation and curtailment of inappropriate solution paths after instruction than before it” ( Schoenfeld , 1985 , p . 309 ) . Besides strategic knowledge , one could try to convey to students the existence of broad classes of research questions and broad classes of answers in terms of paradigms . Schoenfeld ( 1985 , chap . 7 ) showed that after a one - semester problem - solving course in mathematics , students developed the appropriate deep structure perceptions of problem structure , and that such perceptions correlate well with enhanced problem - solving performance . A training study in which the acquisition of knowledge about paradigms and strategic knowl - edge would be separately manipulated , could perhaps answer the question 306 J . M . SCHRAAGEN why the beginners in this study did not use any of the strategies the design experts used . REFERENCES Adelson , B . ( 1981 ) . Problem solving and the development of abstract categories in programming languages . Memory & Cognition , 9 , 422 - 433 . Adelson , B . ( 1990 ) . Modeling software design within a problem - space architecture . In R . Freedle ( Ed . ) , Artuicial intelligence and the future of testing . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Adelson , B . , & Soloway , E . ( 1985 ) . The role of domain experience in software design . IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , 11 ( 11 ) , 1351 - 1360 . Anderson , J . R . ( 1983 ) . The architecture of cognition . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Anderson , J . R . ( 1987 ) . Skill acquisition : Compilation of weak - method problem solutions . Psychological Review , 94 ( 2 ) , 192 - 210 . Bereiter , C . , & Scardamalia , M . ( 1987 ) . The psychology of written composition . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Chi , M . T . H . , Feltovich , P . J . , & Glaser , R . ( 1981 ) . Categorization and representation of physics problems by experts and novices . Cognitive Science , 5 , 121 - 152 . Collins , A . , Brown , J . S . , & Newman , S . E . ( 1989 ) . Cognitive apprenticeship : Teaching the crafts of reading , writing , and mathematics . In L . B . Resnick ( Ed . ) , Knowing , learning , and instruction : & says in honor of Robert G / user . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Cook , T . D . , & Campbell , D . T . ( 1979 ) . Quasi - experimentation : Design and analysis issues for field settings . Boston : Houghton Mifflin . Ericsson , K . A . . Jr Simon , H . A . ( 1984 ) . Protocol analysis : Verbal reports as data . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Feltovich , P . J . , & Barrows , H . S . ( 1987 ) Issues of generality in medical problem solving . In H . G . Schmidt % M . L . de Volder ( Eds . ) , Tutorials in problem - based learning . Assen : Van Gorcum . Fleiss , J . L . ( 1982 ) Statistical methods for rates andproportions ( 2nd ed . ) . New York : Wiley . Friedland , P . E . , & Iwasaki , Y . ( 1985 ) . The concept and implementation of skeletal plans . Journal of Automated Reasoning , 1 , 161 - 208 . Gick , M . L . , Kc Holyoak , K . J . ( 1980 ) . Analogical problem solving . Cognilive Psychology , 12 , 306 - 355 . Gick , M . L . . & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1983 ) . Schema induction and analogical transfer . Cognifive Psychologv . 15 , l - 38 . Glaser , R . ( 1984 ) . Education and thinking : The role of knowledge . American Psychologist . 39 , 93 - m . \ Greeno , J . G . , & Simon , H . A . ( 1988 ) . Problem solving and reasoning . In R . C . Atkinson , R . J . Herrnstein , G . Lindzey , & R . Duncan Lute ( Eds . ) , Sfevens’handbook of experimenfal psychology . New York : Wiley . Holyoak , K . J . ( 1991 ) . Symbolic connectionism : Toward third - generation theories of expertise . In K . Ericsson & J . Smith ( Eds . ) , Toward a genera / theory of experrise : Prospects and limits . Cambridge , MA : Cambridge University Press . Holyoak , K . J . , & Koh , K . ( 1987 ) . Surface and structural similarity in analogical transfer . Memory % Cognition , 15 , 332 - 340 . Johnson , P . E . , Nachtsheim , C . J . , & Zualkerman , LA . ( 1987 ) . Consultant expertise . ExperI Sysfems , 4 ( 3 ) , 180 - 188 . Kerlinger , F . N . ( 1973 ) . Foundafions of behavioral research ( 2nd ed . ) . London : Holt , Rinehart & Winston . SOLVING NOVEL PROBLEMS 307 Larkin , J . H . ( 1980 ) . Skilled problem solving in physics : A hierarchical planning model . Journul of Structural Learning , 6 , 27 I - 297 . Larkin , J . H . ( 1983 ) . The role of problem representation in physics . In D . Gentner & A . L . Stevens ( Eds . ) , Mentul mode / s . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Larkin , J . H . ( 1989 ) . What kind of knowledge transfers ? In L . B . Resnick ( Ed . ) , Knowing , leurning , und instruction : Essays in honor of Roberf G / user . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Larkin , J . H . , Reif , F . , Carbonell , J . , & Gugliotta , A . ( 1985 ) . FERMI : A flexible expert rea - soner with multidomain inferencing . Cognitive Science , II , 65 - 100 . Neale , J . M . , & Liebert , R . M . ( 1980 ) . Science and behovioc An infroduction fo methods of research ( 2nd ed . ) . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall . Novick , L . R . ( 1988 ) . Analogical transfer , problem similarity , and expertise . JournatofExperi - mental Psychology , Learning , Memory , & Cognition , 14 , 510 - 520 . Palincsar , A . S . , & Brown , A . L . ( 1984 ) . Reciprocal teaching of comprehension - fostering and monitoring activities . Cognilive and fnslruction , 1 , 117 - 175 . Schoenfeld , A . H . ( 1979 ) . Can heuristics be taught ? In J . Lochhead & J . Clement ( Eds . ) , Cog - nifive process instruction : Raearch on teaching thinking skills . Philadelphia , PA : Franklin Instutite Press . Schoenfeld , A . H . ( 1985 ) . Mathematicalproblem solving . New York : Academic . Singley , M . K . , & Anderson , J . R . ( 1989 ) . The transfer of cognitive skill . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . VanLehn , K . ( 1989 ) . Problem solving and cognitive skill acquisition . In M . I . Posner ( Ed . ) , Foundations of cognitive science . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Voss , J . F . , Greene , T . R . , Post , T . A . , & Penner , B . C . ( 1983 ) . Problem - solving skill in the social sciences . In G . H . Bower ( Ed . ) , The psychology of / earning und motivufion : Advances in research theory ( vol . 17 ) . New York : Academic . APPENDIX CODING SCHEME Orient on Task ( 0 ) 01 . Task requirements : “So the task is to say what you have to do while thinking aloud” ; “and you want me to do thisunder time pressure ? ” 02 . Problem : “It’s a well - known problem at any rate : It has received quite some attention in the press” 03 . Question to experimenter : “I am allowed to write down things , just for myself ? ” Understand Problem ( U ) Ul . Generate problem constraint : “Manufacturer of Coca Cola wants to improve his product” ; “so what people taste exactly , thxhis question . ” U2 . Evaluate problem constraint : “But that does not mean that you have to take that seriously as investigator” ; “may well be that the Pepsi Cola is preferred at a certain moment . ” 308 J . M . SCHRAAGEN Select Paradigm or Analogy ( SP ) SPl . Generate paradigm or analogy : “Then I will go on to a more ‘diffi - cult’ experiment on what people exactly taste” ; “I understand that a panel experiment is a kind of constraint” ; “you could do the well - known Pepsi - challenge” ; “you could think of some kind of questionnaire . ” SP2 . Evaluate paradigm or analogy : “Maybe we should abandon that plan “ ; “and then pairwise comparisons may be useful” ; “if you want to investigate with young children , then questionnaires don’t get you very far . ” SP3 . Justify paradigm or analogy : “Because if they can’t do that , then there is not much use continuing” ; “a panel experiment is what comes to mind automatically , because if you were going to inter - view people on what they taste when they drink Coca Cola , then of course you will have nuisance factors such as image and so on” ; “I think I would do it with a card system , just because taste is so difficult to scale . ” Select Design Principles @ P ) DPl . Generate principle : “They have to be able to switch , I think” ; “and finally they also have to say which one is cola” ; “I think you need quite a few subjects” ; “and then I don’t know enough a & % details whether you have to eat a little piece of bread after that . ” DP2 . Evaluate principle : “Perhapswould be a good idea to try to do it in two stages” ; “and then it becomes lesaresting whether they have to identify cola or not . ” DP3 . Justify principle : “I want an overall judgment , because otherwise I cannot deduce which one you prefer . ” DP4 . Leave details of principle open : “Balance order and those kinds of technical details , I don’t know whether I have to go that far” ; “well , that requires some further consideration” ; “that panel , yes how large that would need to be , and the statistical design , I would not know that right now . ” Pursue Paradigm ( PP ) PPl . Generate solution : I think I would take a glass with a color which just doesn’t make you see any differences in color between the drinks” ; “and so you give a questionnaire and you let them score” ; “and then , secondly , ubject gets a drink . ” PP2 . Evaluate solution : “Just to make it kind of fun for the subjects” ; “well , with those data you would be ableto do something” ; “perhaps it is even better if you end up there . ” - . PP3 . Recall solution : “I have already said , nonrelevant factors are those image things , matters of order of presentation . ” SOLVING NOVEL PROBLEMS 309 Evaluate Task Q El . Evaluate task : “Is this enough , or do I have to go on , have I forgotten something important ? “ ; “what other questions are there ? ” Monitoring statements : “I just go on for a moment” ; “I am thinking about numerous things” ; “I presume I do not have to explain that fully” ; “let’s see , can I think of anything more about that target population . ” In the synthetic protocol , certain words are underlined . When coding the protocol , these words may be used as a guide for classifying statements . For example , evidence for a subject working on the problem formulation is appar - ent from words such as “question” and “goal” and from literal phrases from the problem formulation . Use of paradigm is indicated by words such as “experiment , ” “plan , ” “method , ” and “investigation . ” Verbs such as “have to , ” “can , ” and “want” very often indicate use of a design principle , for example , “You have to provide some open dimensions” ; “You have to give an instruction like . . . “ ; “The first time I want to mea - sure . . . . ” Verbs in the present tense , such as “let , ” “give , ” “get , ” “do , ” and “have” often give an indication of the current state of the paradigm , for example , “three of those glasses , let them taste , and then let them name” ; “You just have three beakers : a , b , c “ ; “One gets a drink , and you say . . . . ” Adjectives such as “important , ” “good , ” and “interesting” indicate evaluative statements , for example , “but that is probably an uninteresting dimension” ; “that’s probably not so bad . ”