The University of Manchester Research Designing Intergenerational Media Experiences Document Version Accepted author manuscript Link to publication record in Manchester Research Explorer Citation for published version ( APA ) : Pialorsi , V . , & Saeghe , P . ( Accepted / In press ) . Designing Intergenerational Media Experiences : A Participatory Design Approach . In Toys and the TV : Serious Play . Workshop at the ACM International Conference on Interactive Media Experiences . Published in : Toys and the TV : Serious Play . Workshop at the ACM International Conference on Interactive Media Experiences . Citing this paper Please note that where the full - text provided on Manchester Research Explorer is the Author Accepted Manuscript or Proof version this may differ from the final Published version . If citing , it is advised that you check and use the publisher ' s definitive version . General rights Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the Research Explorer are retained by the authors and / or other copyright owners and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights . Takedown policy If you believe that this document breaches copyright please refer to the University of Manchester’s Takedown Procedures [ http : / / man . ac . uk / 04Y6Bo ] or contact uml . scholarlycommunications @ manchester . ac . uk providing relevant details , so we can investigate your claim . Download date : 23 . Apr . 2020 1 Designing Intergenerational Media Experiences A Participatory Design Approach Veronica Pialorsi School of Arts and Media , University of Salford , Salford , UK , v . pialorsi @ edu . salford . ac . uk Pejman Saeghe Department of Computer Science , University of Manchester , Manchester , UK , pejman . saeghe @ manchester . ac . uk ABSTRACT The advent of new technologies and platforms ( e . g . hand - held displays , the Internet ) challenge the traditional ways in which we consume media content . The differences in the technological literacy of young children ( digital natives ) and elderly adults , can deny them opportunities to bond over shared media experiences . However , if designed thoughtfully , novel media experiences can bridge this intergenerational gap . We provide a scenario where connected toys encourage collaborative learning , and create a bonding experience between a grandchild and their grandparent . Furthermore , we propose a set of methods to be used in participatory design for the creation of such experiences . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - Centered Computing • Interaction Design Process and Methods • Participatory Design KEYWORDS Intergenerational , TV , Connected Toy , Augmented Reality , Participatory Design 1 Context The advent of new technologies , media , and platforms , is drastically changing the ways in which we consume video content . The physical TV set is only one of the many devices that enable access to video content . The ubiquity of new devices ( e . g . hand - held displays ) and the affordances they provide ( e . g . portability , interactivity ) are significantly changing the audiences’ experience and the habits associated with screen viewing . Their portability enables the viewers to watch content on the go ; thus transforming the traditional shared viewing experience into an exclusive and unaccompanied viewing experience . Similarly , the interactive features of new devices have the potential to transform the conventional passive viewing experience into interactive experiences where the viewers can interact with story elements . These novel technologies and media experiences are extremely popular , particularly among children . A recent study , carried out in the UK , suggests that 75 percent of infants , toddlers and preschool children use a touchscreen device , on a daily basis [ 4 ] , with between 50 to 70 percent of children aged 3 to 6 watching videos online through tablets , mobile phones and computers , on a regular basis [ 11 ] . This introduces the family system with new challenges [ 14 ] . For instance , as opposed to children , who are digital natives [ 18 ] , parents often struggle to keep up with the fast pace of digital innovation . This creates a digital divide , where parents feel challenged in their role , often due to a lack of competence in learning new technologies [ 1 , 15 ] . Furthermore , this effect is likely to be larger where the age gap is bigger ( e . g . between children and their grandparents ) . Nevertheless , digital divide can provide learning and sharing opportunities ( e . g . parents entering a dialogue with their children [ 1 ] ) . In this context , media experiences that engage different age groups can benefit both parties [ 16 , 21 , 23 ] , and be used to foster bonding between younger and older generations [ 11 ] . 2 2 Scenario Michael ( grandfather , 72 ) and Oscar ( grandson , 4 ) only see each other over the weekends . They both have a passion for motorcycles and get excited when a race is broadcast on TV . Although , this shared topic has brought them closer together , while watching the race , Oscar often gets frustrated once he loses track of his favourite racer . Oscar’s mom , Hanna is 43 and works for a digital advertising agency . She found out about a projection - based augmented reality system that generates 3 - D holographic virtual images from broadcast video . She set this up in their living room so that Michael and Oscar could watch a free - viewpoint version of the race , this weekend on a table top . Earlier in the week , she also found out about a new connected toy that has a generic appearance of a miniature motorcycle - racer on a bike , and can be assigned to a real racer during live broadcast of a motorcycle race . She bought two and brought them to their weekend reunion . Prior to the start of the broadcast , as Oscar picks up his toy , a pop - up window appears on the TV screen with instructions on how to connect it . Michael reads the instructions while Oscar investigates and learns how to connect his toy . The instructions are simple , and as the race starts , Michael and Oscar both hold their toy - racers in excitement and wait for their favourite racer to appear on TV . Each then presses their toy , once they see a close - up of their favourite racer on the screen . This assigns the racer to the toy and matches its appearance to that of the racer . Oscar and Michael emulate their own version of the race in the living room using their connected toys . Oscar can more easily follow the race by looking at the table - top projection of the entire racing track . Furthermore , the experience has become more engaging for them , since the toys are equipped with visual , tactile , and auditory feedback mechanisms . For instance , when Oscar’s racer overtakes another , his toy emits a sound and briefly vibrates . 3 Challenge There are many differences between younger and older audiences ( e . g . content choice , cognitive development , digital literacy ) . These differences introduce challenges in the design of media content aimed at intergenerational audiences . RQ : How can we design media experiences that are engaging for both groups , while encouraging interactivity and bonding between group members ? To address this challenge , we suggest adopting a Participatory Design ( PD ) approach to the design cycle for eliciting ideas , creating low - cost prototypes , and evaluating designs . In PD , one - on - one partnership with adults facilitates children’s engagement and ensures clear communication of their ideas [ 9 ] . Therefore , the children and the older adults are engaged in pairs as ‘equal design partners’ [ 20 ] in the generation of new concept ideas for media experiences aimed at intergenerational audiences . We propose PD for its inherent power to actively engage final users in collaborative partnerships with the stakeholders involved in the project [ 8 , 13 ] . This provides inclusion and ensures that anyone involved in the process has an independent position in the development of technological alternatives [ 7 ] . Furthermore , PD entails the use of interactive and hands - on techniques [ 3 ] that can be suitable for young children . We propose a range of tools strategically selected from the most common toolkits and techniques used in PD practices [ 19 ] . Each method is tailored according to cognitive skills , motor skills , and the developmental stage of the intergenerational cohort engaged in the design cycle ( preschool children and older adults , age 60 + ) . Since children at this young age make sense of their world through play and stories [ 2 , 17 , 22 ] , the research activities would mainly be structured around such activities . Moreover , to gather a deeper understanding of the psychological processes that channel the intergenerational audiences’ choices and behaviours in terms of media usage , we suggest to integrate design methods with techniques that are often used for psychological assessment , such as laddering [ 6 ] and self - characterisation [ 5 ] . 3 The selected methods are used in different forms , making , telling , doing [ 19 ] . These methods serve three main purposes : 1 . EXPLORE - Elicit past experiences to anticipate future possibilities . We have selected drawing and interview as methods to gather understanding on the intergenerational cohort’s relationship , their habits , and previous media experiences and preferences . Furthermore , we suggest to integrate those methods with observations trough video ethnography of the pairs playing in their own setting ( e . g . their living room ) . This is useful in gathering insights from their existing behaviour ( e . g . roles , relationship dynamics ) . 2 . CREATE - Foster the creative process to generate future possibilities of interaction and engagement with media in a connected environment . Creative toolkits will be provided and the pair and the designer ( s ) will be engaged in creative opportunities . Projective methods will be used to invite participants to express their desires and thoughts to elicit new ideas for example on new games . Projective methods are usually ambiguously instructed [ 10 ] to allow the elicitation of spontaneous insights that come from flexible and creative play . Children and older adults are firstly involved in the creation of a 2D collage ( used as a self - characterisation ) . They are asked to choose their characters among a set of cards providing ambiguous illustrations ( see examples in the Appendix ) and to imagine a story in which they are the protagonists . They are then engaged in generative research to create an artefact ( e . g . magic weapon ) to be used in the story previously invented . Lastly , participants are invited to role - play the story to gather understanding of the role that the artefact plays in their interaction . The artefact created , for example using dough , might trigger new concepts for future scenarios . EVALUATE - Test emerging design concepts against user expectations . The concepts emerged in the previous creative sessions are developed to create low - cost prototype ( s ) . The final prototype ( s ) is then tested and refined with the intergenerational pairs . A brief and simple scenario is presented to help participants imagine the prototype ( s ) in a practical context . Participants will then be invited to play freely with the prototype ( s ) and report their opinions and recommendations . Table 1 : Suggested PD methods with intergenerational cohorts . Purpose Methods MAKING TELLING DOING EXPLORE Drawing Interview Free play CREATE 2D Card collage Laddering Storytelling Role - playing Generative research EVALUATE Self - report measures Free play 4 Conclusion As the media - related technologies advance , our viewing experiences and habits are changing . Inclusion and engagement of final users through participatory design can provide insights into emerging viewer habits , needs and expectations . In particular , when designing for intergenerational audiences , this methodology can be used to create media experiences that foster learning and intergenerational bonding . 4 5 Acknowledgments V . Pialorsi acknowledges support from the AHRC award reference 2206729 P . Saeghe acknowledges support from the UK EPSRC grant number EP / R512394 / 1 REFERENCES [ 1 ] P . A . Aarsand ( 2007 ) . Computer and video games in family life : The digital divide as a resource in intergenerational interactions . Childhood , 14 ( 2 ) , 235 - 256 . [ 2 ] J . S . Bruner ( 1987 ) . Making Sense : The Child ' s Construction of the World . Routledge . [ 3 ] E . Carmel , R . D . , Whitaker , & J . F . , George ( 1993 ) . PD and joint application design : a transatlantic comparison . Communications of the ACM , 36 ( 6 ) , 40 - 48 . [ 4 ] R . Bedford , I . R . Saez de Urabain , C . H . Cheung , A . Karmiloff - Smith , & T . J . Smith ( 2016 ) . Toddlers’ Fine Motor Milestone Achievement Is Associated with Early Touchscreen Scrolling . Front Psychol 7 , 1108 . DOI : 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2016 . 01108 ( 2016 ) . [ 5 ] F . Fransella , R . Bell , & D . Bannister ( 2003 ) . A Manual for Repertory Grid Technique ( 2nd edition ) . Chichester : John Wiley & Sons . [ 6 ] F . Fransella ( 2003 ) . Some skills and tools for personal construct practitioners . In F . Fransella ( ed . ) International Handbook of Personal Construct Psychology . Chichester , UK : John Wiley & Sons . [ 7 ] J . Gregory ( 2003 ) . Scandinavian approaches to participatory design . International Journal of Engineering Education , 19 ( 1 ) , 62 - 74 . [ 8 ] M . L . Guha , A . Druin , and J . A . Fails ( 2013 ) . Cooperative Inquiry revisited : Reflections of the past and guidelines for the future of intergenerational co - design . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction , 1 ( 1 ) , 14 - 23 . [ 9 ] M . L . Guha , M . L . Druin , A . Chipman , G . Fails , J . A . Simms , & A . Farber . ( 2005 ) . Working with young children as technology design partners . Communications of the ACM , 48 ( 1 ) , 39 - 42 . [ 10 ] B . M . , Hanington ( 2007 ) . Generative research in design education . International Association of Societies of Design Research2007 : Emerging Trends in Design Research , 12 - 15 . [ 11 ] D . A . Harley , S . H . Kurniawan , G . Fitzpatrick , & F . Vetere ( 2009 ) . Age matters : bridging the generation gap through technology - mediated interaction . In CHI ' 09 extended abstracts on human factors in computing systems ( pp . 4799 - 4802 ) . [ 12 ] D . Holloway , L . Green , & S . Livingstone ( 2013 ) . Zero to eight : Young children and their internet use . [ 13 ] A . Large , V . Nesset , J . Beheshti , & L . Bowler ( 2006 ) . “Bonded design” : A novel approach to intergenerational information technology design . Library & Information Science Research , 28 ( 1 ) , 64 - 82 . [ 14 ] S . Livingstone , & J . Byrne ( 2018 ) . Parenting in the Digital Age . DIGITAL PARENTING , 19 . [ 15 ] C . Naranjo - Bock , & J . Ito ( 2017 ) . Playing together : The importance of joint engagement in the design of technology for children . In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( pp . 749 - 752 ) . [ 16 ] D . K . Orthner , & J . A . Mancini ( 1990 ) . Leisure impacts on family interaction and cohesion . Journal of leisure research , 22 ( 2 ) , 125 - 137 . [ 17 ] J . Piaget ( 1962 ) . Play , Dreams , and Imitation in Childhood . Norton , New York . [ 18 ] M . Prensky ( 2001 ) . Digital natives , digital immigrants . On the horizon , 9 ( 5 ) . [ 19 ] E . B . N . Sanders , E . Brandt , & T . Binder ( 2010 ) . A framework for organizing the tools and techniques of participatory design . In P roceedings of the 11th biennial participatory design conference ( pp . 195 - 198 ) . [ 20 ] J . C . Yip , K . Sobel , C . Pitt , K . J . Lee , S . Chen , K . Nasu , & L . R . Pina ( 2017 ) . Examining adult - child interactions in intergenerational participatory design . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( pp . 5742 - 5754 ) . [ 21 ] B . Teater ( 2016 ) . Intergenerational Programs to Promote Active Aging : The Experiences and Perspectives of Older . Adults , Activities , Adaptation & Aging , 40 ( 1 ) , 1 - 19 . 5 [ 22 ] L . Vygotsky ( 1978 ) . On the Zone of Proximal Development . In : Mind in Society . Harvard University . Press , Cambridge , 84 – 91 . [ 23 ] R . B . Zabriskie , & B . P . McCormick ( 2003 ) . Parent and child perspectives of family leisure involvement and satisfaction with family life . Journal of Leisure Research , 35 ( 2 ) , 163 - 189 . A APPENDIX Dixit Cards https : / / www . libellud . com / dixit / ? lang = en Veronica Pialorsi is a PhD researcher at the School of Arts and Media , at the University of Salford . She holds an MSc in Clinical Psychology and a further specialisation in Media Psychology . In her PhD , she researches the psychological processes behind intergenerational interactions with media and technology to inform the design of user - driven - experiences . Pejman Saeghe is a PhD researcher at the Department of Computer Science , at The University of Manchester . He holds an MSc in Computer Science and a BSc in Audio Engineering . His PhD interests are in the applications and the design space of augmented reality TV hybrid .