Developmental Cell Article The Arp2 / 3 Activator WASH Controls the Fission of Endosomes through a Large Multiprotein Complex Emmanuel Derivery , 1 , 2 , 3 Carla Sousa , 3 Je´re´mie J . Gautier , 3 Be´range ` re Lombard , 1 Damarys Loew , 1 and Alexis Gautreau 1 , 2 , 3 , * 1 Institut Curie , Centre de Recherche 2 CNRS UMR144 26 rue d’Ulm , 75248 Paris Cedex 05 , France 3 CNRS UPR3082 , Laboratoire d’Enzymologie et de Biochimie Structurales , Baˆt . 34 Avenue de la Terrasse , 91198 Gif - sur - Yvette Cedex , France * Correspondence : alexis . gautreau @ lebs . cnrs - gif . fr DOI 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2009 . 09 . 010 SUMMARY The Arp2 / 3 complex generates branched actin net - works when activated by Nucleation Promoting Factors ( NPFs ) . Recently , the WASH family of NPFs has been identiﬁed , but its cellular role is unclear . Here , we show that WASH generates an actin network on a restricted domain of sorting and recycling endo - somes . We found that WASH belongs to a multipro - tein complex containing seven subunits , including the heterodimer of capping protein ( CP ) . In vitro , the puriﬁed WASH complex activates Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin nucleation and binds directly to liposomes . WASH also interacts with dynamin . WASH depletion gives rise to long membrane tubules pulled out from endosomes along microtubules , as does dynamin inhibition . Accordingly , WASH is required for efﬁcient transferrin recycling . Together , these data suggest that the WASH molecular machine , integrating CP with a NPF , controls the ﬁssion of endosomes through an interplay between the forces generated by microtubule motors and actin polymerization . INTRODUCTION The actin cytoskeleton is a dynamic ensemble of microﬁlaments that contributes to cell morphogenesis . The polarized assembly of actin ﬁlaments often occurs at the surface of membranes , developing forces that cause their deformation or movement . Several classes of actin nucleators initiate these actin - based processes ( Pollard , 2007 ) . Among these , the Arp2 / 3 complex both nucleates and organizes actin ﬁlaments , as it associates with a preexisting ﬁlament to induce the assembly of a branching ﬁlament , thus generating dendritic arrays . The Arp2 / 3 complex needs to be activated by Nucleation Promoting Factors ( NPFs ) . The most potent NPFs contain a C - terminal VCA domain ( Ver - prolin homology or WH2 – Connector – Acidic ) that binds to both actin and the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Pollard , 2007 ) . VCA domain - con - taining proteins are divided into four families : WASP , WAVE , WHAMM / JMY , and WASH . Whereas the existence of WASP and WAVE families has been known for a decade , WHAMM / JMY and WASH families were only recently discovered ( Campel - lone et al . , 2008 ; Linardopoulou et al . , 2007 ; Zuchero et al . , 2009 ) . A unique amino - terminal domain characterizes each of these families . The cellular functions of NPFs have been extensively studied ( Takenawa and Suetsugu , 2007 ) . WAVE proteins are required for the formation of lamellipodia and membrane rufﬂes . WASP proteins are required for the formation of podosomes and for the internalization step of endocytosis . Importantly , WASP proteins were also found to propel endosomes in the cytoplasm under certain conditions ( Benesch et al . , 2002 and references therein ) . WHAMM is required to maintain Golgi morphology and to facilitate transport along the biosynthetic pathway ( Cam - pellone et al . , 2008 ) . JMY , despite signiﬁcant homologies to WHAMM , regulates transcription and cell migration ( Zuchero et al . , 2009 ) . WASH is an NPF in vitro , but its role in vivo is unclear . The WASH family comprises a single gene in Drosophila , Caenorhab - ditis elegans , and mouse genomes , but several paralogous genes in the human genome ( Linardopoulou et al . , 2007 ) . The WASH gene is essential in Drosophila , where it controls morpho - genesis of the egg chamber ( Linardopoulou et al . , 2007 ; Liu et al . , 2009 ) . Here , we characterized the role and the regulation of mammalian WASH with a focus on the single mouse protein . We uncovered that WASH nucleates actin on endosomes , and that this branched actin network plays an essential role in controlling ﬁssion of these organelles . Moreover , we report the existence of a multiprotein complex containing WASH , which is likely conserved in species possessing WASH proteins . RESULTS WASH Localizes to a Restricted Domain of Sorting and Recycling Endosomes We ﬁrst examined WASH expression and localization by using a polyclonal antibody we generated against the VCA domain . The afﬁnity - puriﬁed antibody recognized a major band in 3T3 cell lysate by western blot ( see Figure S1A available online ) . This band was markedly reduced upon siRNA - mediated deple - tion of WASH ( Figure 1A ) , whereas the amounts of the other NPFs—WHAMM , N - WASP , and WAVE2—were unaffected ( Fig - ure S1B ) . An analysis of several mouse tissues indicated that WASH expression is ubiquitous ( Figure 1B ; Figure S1C for full 712 Developmental Cell 17 , 712 – 723 , November 17 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . gel ) . In 3T3 cells , endogenous WASH was localized by immuno - ﬂuorescence in numerous cytoplasmic spots in the perinuclear region . These spots were reduced in intensity upon WASH depletion , conﬁrming staining speciﬁcity ( Figure S1D ) . Because the WASH antibody targets the VCA domain , which is relatively conserved among NPFs , we veriﬁed in addition that the WASH antibody does not immunoprecipitate WHAMM , N - WASP , and WAVE2 , in conditions under which WASH was fully depleted from the lysate ( Figure S1E ) . To conﬁrm this localization , we generated a stable 3T3 cell line expressing GFP - WASH . The overexpression of GFP - WASH in this line is moderate compared to endogenous WASH in the control line expressing GFP alone ( Figure S1F ) . GFP - WASH expression was accompanied by a downregulation of endogenous WASH , suggesting that GFP - WASH takes the place of endogenous WASH in this cell line . Indeed , the localization of GFP - WASH was the same as endog - enous WASH ( Figure S1G ) . A localization in lamellipodia upon transient overexpression of GFP - WASH was previously reported ( Linardopoulou et al . , 2007 ) , but we found no evidence of endog - enous WASH in lamellipodia of several cell lines ( data not shown ) . WASH was consistently present in cytoplasmic spots . To characterize these spots , we attempted to colocalize them with a series of well - characterized markers . There was no signif - icant colocalization with the cis - Golgi marker GM130 ( Figure 1C ) , nor with the trans - Golgi network marker TGN38 ( Figure 1D ) . To label sorting and recycling endosomes , cells were loaded until equilibrium with ﬂuorescent transferrin ( Tf ) ( Figure 1E ) . Colocali - zation was extensive in this case . Consistently , colocalization was also extensive with EEA1 , a marker of sorting endosomes ( also known as Early Endosomes ) ( Figure 1F ) . In 3T3 cells , sort - ing endosomes are relatively clustered in the perinuclear region . To examine endosomal compartments involved in the degrada - tive pathway , we labeled lysosomes with Lamp1 ( Figure 1G ) . Co - localization of Lamp1 with WASH was limited to occasional WASH spots on lysosomes . To conﬁrm these steady - state ﬁndings , we performed kinetic analyses of Tf uptake and recycling ( Figure S2 ) . The ﬁrst struc - tures seen , clathrin - coated pits , were devoid of WASH . How - ever , as early as 2 min later , Tf reached sorting endosomes , in which a high level of colocalization with WASH was observed . Importantly , this colocalization was maintained until the Tf signal decreased because of continued recycling . These results conﬁrm that WASH is associated with both sorting and recycling endosomes . We also followed the LDL cargo , which is sorted toward the degradative pathway ( Figure S3 ) . After a 10 min pulse incubation , LDL reached sorting endosomes , in which it clearly colocalized with WASH . When LDL was chased , it appeared in larger organelles , lysosomes , most of which were not labeled by WASH antibodies . These kinetic analyses conﬁrmed that WASH localizes to endosomes , with an enrichment in the recy - cling pathway compared to the degradative pathway . WASH localization was further characterized by using Rab GTPases , which coordinate trafﬁcking events and can be used as markers of different compartments ( Zerial and McBride , 2001 ) . Recycling pathways were followed by using Rab4 and Rab11 , markers of fast and slow recycling , respectively . Coloc - alization between WASH and Rab11 was evaluated by time - lapse imaging , because the GFP - Rab11 signal blurs upon ﬁxa - tion . Consistent with previous results , WASH colocalized with both Rab4 and Rab11 , although to a higher extent with Rab4 ( Figures 1H and 1I ; Movies S1 and S2 ) . Rab5 is enriched in newly internalized vesicles and sorting endosomes , where it regulates fusion events . Colocalization between WASH and Rab5 was signiﬁcant ( Figure 1J ; Movie S3 ) , conﬁrming the localization of WASH on sorting endosomes . Finally , we examined Rab7 , which is a marker of late endosomes in the degradative pathway . WASH was moderately associated with Rab7 compartments ( Figure 1K ) . Together , these results establish that WASH is local - ized on different populations of endosomes , with an enrichment in the recycling pathway compared to the degradative pathway . This distribution of WASH in the different endosomal compart - ments is summarized in Figure 1L . Interestingly , this colocalization analysis revealed that WASH never fully overlaps with any given marker . Even with Tf , WASH appeared juxtaposed rather than superimposed on Tf spots ( inset of Figure 1E ) , as one would expect if WASH was covering Tf - containing endosomes . To better visualize the two signals , we performed a three - dimensional ( 3D ) reconstruction after sectioning of the cell along the z axis ( Figure 2A ; Movie S4 ) . This conﬁrmed that WASH and Tf ﬂuorescence centroids were not superimposed . Because WASH spots are localized at different positions on endosomes in a single ﬁeld , it rules out any aberrant translational shift in the acquisition of the two chan - nels . Dual - color time - lapse imaging further conﬁrmed that the two spots were always associated and thus did not correspond to different organelles only transiently associated ( Figure 2B ; Movie S5 ) . To further prove this point , centroids of ﬂuorescence were tracked over time , and the distance between them was calculated ( Figure 2C ; Figure S4 for the analysis of multiple endosomes ) . This distance ﬂuctuates over time , between 0 and 0 . 3 m m , which is the apparent radius of the Tf - containing vesicle . Importantly , there was no inﬂuence of endosome movement on the ﬂuctuation of this distance . This is a strong argument that WASH has a restricted localization on endosomal membranes . Because the size of endosomes is about the resolution of optical microscopy , we enlarged endosomes by expressing the active form of Rab5 , which promotes endosomal fusion ( Zerial and McBride , 2001 ) . As expected , WASH staining did not cover the periphery of these enlarged endosomes , but displayed rather discrete spots ( Figure 2D ) . A 3D reconstruction unambiguously established that WASH is present on distinct domains at the surface of these large endosomes ( Figure 2E ; Movie S6 ) . These enlarged endosomes additionally revealed that the WASH domains were highly dynamic at their surface ( Movie S7 ) . WASH Activates Arp2 / 3 - Mediated Actin Polymerization on Endosomes F - actin , the Arp2 / 3 complex , and the marker of branched actin networks , cortactin , were previously detected on endosomes ( Kaksonen et al . , 2000 ) . However , the NPF responsible is not yet known ; thus , we examined whether WASH would polymerize actin on endosomes . The vast majority of WASH spots appeared to be associated with small F - actin structures ( Figure 3A ) . Impor - tantly , in dual - color time - lapse imaging , the association between WASH and F - actin was continuous over time ( Movie S8 ) . Consis - tent with the F - actin staining , most WASH spots also contained the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Figure 3B ) . However , there were more Arp2 / 3 spots than WASH spots in the perinuclear region , likely Developmental Cell The WASH Complex Controls Endosome Fission Developmental Cell 17 , 712 – 723 , November 17 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . 713 Figure 1 . WASH Localizes to Sorting and Recycling Endosomes ( A ) Speciﬁcity of WASH antibodies is validated by western blot lysates of siRNA - transfected 3T3 cells . ( B ) WASH is ubiquitously expressed in mouse tissues . ( C – K ) Colocalization of WASH with various endocytic markers . 3T3 cells were processed for immunoﬂuorescence with the indicated antibodies . Rab11 - expressing cells were imaged live , and a single image extracted from the movie is shown . A single plane of spinning disk confocal microscopy is shown , except for TGN38 ( epiﬂuorescence ) . A stable 3T3 line expressing GFP - WASH is used when indicated . Fluorescent fusion proteins of Rab 4 , 5 , 7 , and 11 Developmental Cell The WASH Complex Controls Endosome Fission 714 Developmental Cell 17 , 712 – 723 , November 17 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . because Arp2 / 3 can be recruited by other NPFs such as WHAMM or N - WASP . Interestingly , WASH was absent from the tip of actin comet tails induced by the overexpression of PIP5 - kinase ( Movie S9 ) , indicating that WASH is not involved in the so - called ‘‘endosomal rocketing , ’’ which requires N - WASP ( Benesch et al . , 2002 ) . Long - range movements of WASH - posi - tive endosomes depended on microtubules ( MTs ) , as revealed by treatment with the MT - depolymerizing drug , nocodazole ( Movie S10 , to be compared to Movie S5 ) . To prove that WASH was responsible for the actin polymerization on endo - somes , transfection of siRNAs was used to deplete WASH from 3T3 cells . Upon WASH depletion , most F - actin spots and a large fraction of Arp2 / 3 complex spots in the perinuclear region disappeared , indicating that WASH has a major role among the perinuclear NPFs ( Figure S5 ) . The staining of F - actin structures with phalloidin was too crowded to permit an accurate quantiﬁcation . To quantify Arp2 / 3 complex and cortactin recruitment on endosomes , we used a mild pre - extraction procedure that allowed us to elimi - nate speciﬁcally the contribution of the cytosolic pool of these proteins ( Figure S6A ) . When cells loaded with ﬂuorescent Tf were examined by immunoﬂuorescence for the localization of the Arp2 / 3 complex , endosomes were found to associate with the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Figure 3C ) . Upon WASH depletion , this association was drastically affected ( Figure S6 for a second siRNA ) , even though some perinuclear staining of the Arp2 / 3 complex was retained , in agreement with the fact that not all perinuclear Arp2 / 3 complex spots are associated with WASH . Quantiﬁcations conﬁrmed that WASH played a major role in recruiting the Arp2 / 3 complex onto endosomes ( Figure 3D ) . The same analysis conducted on cortactin recruitment gave similar results ( Figures 3E and 3F ) . To conﬁrm the speciﬁcity of this phenotype , we decided to perform rescue experiments in the stable 3T3 cell line expressing GFP - WASH , since transient overexpression of WASH has deleterious effects on Arp2 / 3 - dependent structures ( Figure S7B ) . GFP - or GFP - WASH - ex - pressing cell lines were transfected with a WASH siRNA that recognizes the 3 0 UTR of WASH , which is absent from the GFP - WASH mRNA . Indeed , endogenous WASH was depleted from GFP - expressing cells , but GFP - WASH was not depleted from GFP - WASH - expressing cells ( Figure S7C ) . Importantly , WASH siRNA transfection induces a loss of Arp2 / 3 complex ( Figure 3G ) and cortactin ( Figure 3H ) recruitment on endosomes in the GFP cell line , but not in the GFP - WASH cell line . This result not only establishes that the lack of Arp2 / 3 complex and cortactin recruit - ment on endosomes obtained upon siRNA - mediated depletion of WASH can be rescued , but it also validates that the GFP - WASH fusion protein used in this study is a functional WASH protein . This set of experiments demonstrates that WASH is an active NPF at the surface of endosomes , where it recruits and activates the Arp2 / 3 complex to induce actin polymerization . WASH Is Part of a Large Multiprotein Complex Containing CP An important level of regulation of NPFs is their inclusion in stable multiprotein complexes . N - WASP is associated with WASP - in - teracting protein ( WIP ) family proteins , and the WAVE proteins are incorporated into a large complex of ﬁve subunits ( Takenawa and Suetsugu , 2007 ) . To examine whether WASH is included in were transiently transfected . When indicated , 3T3 cells were loaded with ﬂuorescent Tf until equilibrium . The scale bars in ( C – K ) represent 10 m m ( 1 m m in inserts ) . ( L ) Scheme recapitulating the localization of WASH in the different compartments . CCP , clathrin - coated pit ; MVB , multivesicular bodies . Figure 2 . WASH Has a Restricted Localiza - tion at the Surface of Endosomes ( A ) 3T3 cells were loaded with ﬂuorescent Tf until equilibrium , then processed for immunoﬂuores - cence with WASH antibodies . Confocal z sections were acquired and processed for 3D reconstruc - tion . Front and side views are shown . Note the limited overlap between WASH and Tf signals . The scale bar represents 1 m m . ( B ) 3T3 cells stably expressing GFP - WASH were loaded with ﬂuorescent Tf until equilibrium , then processed for time - lapse imaging by using spin - ning disk confocal microscopy . The behavior of a single moving endosome is shown . Elapsed time is in seconds . The scale bar represents 1 m m . WASH and Tf are continuously associated , but do not fully overlap . ( C ) Tracking of ﬂuorescence centroids of GFP - WASH and Tf from the endosome displayed in ( B ) showsthatthedistancebetweenthetwospots is always below the apparent radius of the endo - some ( 0 . 3 m m ) , whether or not the endosome moves . The scale bar represents 1 m m . ( D ) 3T3 cells were transfected with GFP - Rab5 Q79L to enlarge endosomes and were processed for immunoﬂuorescence with WASH antibodies . Images corre - spond to a single confocal plane . The scale bar represents 10 m m ( 1 m m in inserts ) . WASH localizes to discrete spots at the periphery of the enlarged endosome . ( E ) Confocal z sections were acquired on a cell treated as in ( D ) and processed for 3D reconstruction as in ( A ) . The scale bar represents 1 m m . Developmental Cell The WASH Complex Controls Endosome Fission Developmental Cell 17 , 712 – 723 , November 17 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . 715 Developmental Cell The WASH Complex Controls Endosome Fission 716 Developmental Cell 17 , 712 – 723 , November 17 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . a multiprotein complex , we ﬁrst estimated its apparent molecular weight by using size - exclusion chromatography . A detergent extract was prepared from 3T3 cells and loaded on a super - dex - 200 column . A single peak of WASH was detected after the void volume and before the largest marker ( thyroglobulin , 669 kDa , 85 A˚ ; Figure 4A ) . The Stokes’ radius of native WASH was estimated at 88 A˚ . We complemented this analysis by ultra - centrifugation . The detergent extract was loaded on top of a linear sucrose gradient . A single peak of WASH was detected ( Figure 4B ) . WASH sedimented faster than the catalase marker ( 232 kDa , 11 . 3 S ) . The sedimentation coefﬁcient of WASH was estimated at 12 . 5 S . These values of Stokes’ radius and sedimentation coefﬁcient correspond to a molecular weight of (cid:2) 450 kDa ( see Supplemental Data ) . Because WASH is (cid:2) 50 kDa , these experiments indicate that WASH is included in a single complex of high molecular weight . To purify the WASH complex , we selected a stable 293 human cell line expressing WASH dually tagged with ( His ) 6 and Protein C Figure 3 . WASH Is Required for Arp2 / 3 - Mediated Actin Polymerization on Endosomes ( A and B ) WASH is associated with perinuclear structures containing F - actin and the Arp2 / 3 complex . 3T3 cells were processed for immunoﬂuorescence with WASH antibodies and either ( A ) ﬂuorescent phalloidin to stain F - actin structures or an ( B ) antibody recognizing the p16Arc subunit of the Arp2 / 3 complex . Each image corresponds to a single confocal plane . The scale bar represents 10 m m . ( C ) WASHis required for recruitment of theArp2 / 3 complex onendosomes . Transfectedcells wereloadedwithﬂuorescentTf . Cellswere thenpre - extractedand processedforimmunoﬂuorescencewithanantibodyrecognizingthep34ArcsubunitoftheArp2 / 3complex . RecruitmentoftheArp2 / 3complexonendosomesis greatly decreased in WASH - depleted cells . The scale bar represents 10 m m . ( D ) QuantiﬁcationofArp2 / 3complexenrichmentonperinuclearendosomesincellstreatedasin ( C ) . Aperinuclearregionofinterestisdeﬁnedbythresholdingthe Tf signal . This region of interest is then shifted to another region of the cytoplasm . In these two regions with the same area , p34Arc intensities are integrated . Perinuclear enrichment refers to the ratio of these two values . Mean ± standard error of the mean ( SEM ) of this ratio is plotted ( three independent experiments , n > 60 cells in each condition , * p < 0 . 001 compared with the control ) . ( E ) WASH is required for recruitment of cortactin on endosomes . Cells treated as in ( C ) were processed for immunoﬂuorescence with a cortactin antibody . ( F ) Quantiﬁcation of cortactin enrichment on perinuclear endosomes in cells treated as described in ( E ) . Quantiﬁcation as in ( D ) ( three independent experiments , n > 50 cells in each condition , * p < 0 . 001 compared with the control ) . ( GandH ) RescueoftherecruitmentofArp2 / 3andcortactinonendosomesbyGFP - WASHexpression . Stable3T3celllinesexpressingeitherGFPorGFP - WASH weretreatedandprocessedasin ( C ) and ( E ) . GFP - WASHisresistanttotheWASHsiRNAthattargetsaregionofthe3 0 UTR , whichisabsentfromtheGFP - WASH construct . Arp2 / 3 ( respectivelyCortactin ) recruitmentonTf - containingendosomeswasquantiﬁedasin ( D ) and ( F ) ( mean±SEM , threeindependentexperiments , n > 40 cells in each condition , * p < 0 . 001 compared with the control ) . Figure 4 . A Multiprotein Complex Contain - ing WASH and Capping Protein Binds to Liposomes and Activates Actin Polymeriza - tion In vitro ( A and B ) WASH belongs to a high - molecular weight complex . ( A ) Size - exclusion chromatog - raphy of a 3T3 cell lysate . Elution fractions were analyzedbyWASHwesternblot ( WB ) . TheStokes’ radius of standards is given in A˚ . ( B ) Ultracentrifu - gation of a 3T3 cell lysate in a sucrose gradient . Fractions were analyzed by WASH WB . The sedi - mentation coefﬁcient of standards is given in Svedberg ( S ) . ( C ) Identiﬁcation of the WASH complex . 293 cells stably expressing His - PC - WASH or the empty plasmid were lysed and submitted to two steps of afﬁnitychromatography . WASHanditsassociated proteins were stained by Coomassie blue and identiﬁedbymassspectrometry . Molecularweight markersinkDaareindicatedontheleftofeachgel . ( D ) CP is a bona ﬁde component of the WASH complex . Lysates from 3T3 cells were analyzed by immunoprecipitation with WASH antibodies or nonimmune IgG . Lysates and immunoprecipitates were analyzed by WB with the indicated anti - bodies . A pool of the CP belongs to the WASH complex . ( E ) Depletion of WASH complex subunits downre - gulatestheWASHprotein . 3T3cellsweredepleted of KIAA1033 , CP b , or WASH by using siRNAs . Amounts of these proteins in total cell lysates were analyzed by WB . ( F ) The WASH complex activates Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin nucleation . Conditions : 2 . 5 m M actin ( 10 % pyrene labeled ) , 20 nM Arp2 / 3 complex , and 35 nM WASH complex . ( G ) The WASH complex blocks elongation of barbed ends , indicating that the CP contained within the complex is not fully masked . Unlabeled F - actin seeds ( 1 m M ) and the WASH complex were preincubated before addition of G - actin ( 1 . 5 m M , 10 % pyrene labeled ) and initiation of actin polymerization . ( H ) TheWASHcomplexbindsdirectlytoliposomes . Whenliposomesmadeofpuriﬁedbrainlipids , mixedwithpuriﬁedWASHcomplex , wereﬂoatedonasucrose cushion , WASH was brought in the ﬂoating fraction , as revealed by WB . Developmental Cell The WASH Complex Controls Endosome Fission Developmental Cell 17 , 712 – 723 , November 17 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . 717 Figure 5 . WASH Inhibition Induces Tubulation of Endosomes ( A ) WASH was depleted from 3T3 cells by using siRNAs targeting either WASH itself or the KIAA1033 subunit . Cells were loaded with ﬂuorescent Tf until equi - librium , then ﬁxed and observed by epiﬂuorescencemicroscopy . Numerous long and narrow tubules containing Tf are observedupon WASH depletion ( arrows ) . The scale bar represents 10 m m . ( B ) RescueofthetubulationphenotypebyGFP - WASHexpression . Stable3T3celllinesexpressingeitherGFPorGFP - WASHweretreatedwiththesamesiRNAs as in ( A ) . GFP - WASH isresistanttothe WASHsiRNAthat targets the3 0 UTR . Cellswere imaged by time - lapsespinning disk confocal microscopyinthe presence of ﬂuorescent Tf . A single image from the movies is extracted . Arrows indicate tubulated endosomes . siRNA targeting WASH induces tubulation of the GFP cell line , but not of the GFP - WASH cell line , indicating that the tubulation phenotype is speciﬁcally due to WASH targeting , and not to an off target . Cells displaying tubuleswerecountedliveonthecriterionthattheyexhibitedatleastonetubule stableforatleast5s ( mean±SDoftwoindependent experiments , n > 82cellsfor each condition ) . The scale bar represents 10 m m . Developmental Cell The WASH Complex Controls Endosome Fission 718 Developmental Cell 17 , 712 – 723 , November 17 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . ( PC ) tags . We then used a Tandem Afﬁnity Puriﬁcation ( TAP ) protocol to purify WASH . Upon Coomassie staining , numerous proteins appeared to be associated with WASH , whereas the same experiment conducted with a control line gave no detect - able protein ( Figure 4C ) . These proteins were identiﬁed by LC - MS / MS ( Table S1 ) . Three uncharacterized proteins of high molecular weight , KIAA1033 , KIAA0196 , and KIAA0592 , were associated with WASH . Some Hsp70 proteins were identiﬁed , indicating that part of the puriﬁed WASH proteins were still in the process of folding . Tubulin was also found to associate with WASH . The two subunits of Capping Protein ( CP ) , a and b , together with the uncharacterized ‘‘coiled - coil domain con - taining 53’’ protein that comigrates with CP b are WASH partners of lower molecular weight . If the Hsp70 proteins and tubulin are excluded , which are abundant proteins and likely transient inter - actors , a potential multiprotein complex of seven subunits— KIAA1033 , KIAA0196 , KIAA0592 , WASH , CP a , CP b , and ‘‘coiled - coil domain containing 53’’—remains . Upon summing the mass of each of these subunits , we obtain a mass of 550 kDa , in relative agreement with the characterization of native WASH given the uncertainty of the Stokes’ radius measurement above the last marker . Because a stoichiometry of one subunit per complex already gives a larger complex than measured , it is likely that we have identiﬁed the entire WASH complex . The presence of CP in the WASH complex was particularly intriguing , because CP is known to exist as a free heterodimer ( Cooper and Sept , 2008 ) . To conﬁrm the association of CP with endogenous WASH , we immunoprecipitated WASH efﬁ - ciently so as to deplete the cell lysate ( Figure 4D ) . The immuno - precipitate contained a pool of both CP a and b . We also found that CP b colocalizes with WASH continuously over time in the perinuclear region ( Movie S11 ) . CP b was also found in lamellipo - dial / rufﬂing regions of the plasma membrane without WASH , as expected . The WASH immunoprecipitation and the imaging conﬁrmed that at least two distinct pools of CP exist in the cell . A general property of stable multiprotein complexes is that some subunits depend on others for their stability , a phenom - enon well described for the WAVE complex ( Takenawa and Su - etsugu , 2007 ) . We found that WASH was as deeply downregu - lated in 3T3 cells when KIAA1033 or CP b was targeted as when WASH itself was targeted ( Figure 4E ) . We extended this result in HeLa cells . Transfection of shRNA - encoding plasmids targeting any of the seven proposed subunits destabilized the WASH protein ( Figure S8 ) , conﬁrming that these seven proteins are part of the same stable multiprotein complex . CP inhibits actin dynamics at the barbed end of the ﬁlament . It is thus an activity that can oppose the generation of new barbed ends by the active Arp2 / 3 complex . We tested whether the puri - ﬁed WASH complex was able to promote actin polymerization in vitro . We ﬁrst veriﬁed that WASH constructs containing the VCA domain were able to activate Arp2 / 3 - dependent actin poly - merization in vitro by inducing branches ( Figure S9 ) . When the puriﬁed WASH complex was assayed in vitro , it was found to enhance the basal Arp2 / 3 complex activity ( Figure 4F ) , in line with the fact that most WASH spots were associated with F - actin in vivo . However , the WASH complex in absence of the Arp2 / 3 complex slowed down the kinetics of spontaneous actin poly - merization ( Figure 4F ) . This effect might be due to sequestration of G - actin by the WH2 domain present in the WASH VCA domain or to the capping activity of CP present in the complex . We ruled out the possibility that this effect might be due to the WH2 domain , because VCA at the same concentration does not display this inhibitory effect ( Figure S10B ) . To directly check whether CP within the WASH complex was active , we speciﬁ - cally monitored elongation at barbed ends by including F - actin seeds . The WASH complex exerted a dose - dependent inhibitory effect ( Figure 4G ) . However , this effect was observed at much higher concentrations than the inhibitory effect obtained with the free heterodimer of CP ( Figure S10 ) , indicating that the binding constants of CP to F - actin were signiﬁcantly affected by its inclusion into the WASH complex . Thus , the WASH complex promotes efﬁcient actin nucleation by the Arp2 / 3 complex , despite partial activity of its CP component . We then tested whether the puriﬁed WASH complex was able to directly interact with lipids . For this purpose , we generated liposomes from puriﬁed bovine brain lipids . When these lipo - somes were ﬂoated on a sucrose cushion by ultracentrifugation , they carried interacting proteins such as the protein IRSp53 , containing a RCB / IMD domain ( Takenawa and Suetsugu , 2007 ) , but not GST ( Figure S11 ) . When these liposomes were mixed with the WASH complex , WASH was detected in the top fraction ( Figure 4H ) . These results indicate that the restricted localization of WASH on endosomal membranes might be due , at least in part , to a direct interaction of the WASH complex with endosomal lipids . WASH Inactivation Induces Endosome Tubulation Actin polymerization by the Arp2 / 3 complex is known to generate a force that pushes or remodels membranes ( Taken - awa and Suetsugu , 2007 ) . We thus decided to investigate the morphology of endosomes upon WASH inactivation . Fluores - cent Tf was loaded until equilibrium in 3T3 cells previously trans - fected with siRNAs targeting WASH or KIAA1033 . Cells depleted of CP b were not analyzed further , because the free pool of CP was depleted together with WASH in this case . Strikingly , in WASH - depleted cells , long and narrow tubules containing Tf were observed ( Figure 5A ) . These tubules were up to 10 m m long and originated from larger round endosomes . Such long tubules were never observed in control cells . We thus sought to conﬁrm these ﬁndings by live cell imaging of ﬂuorescent Tf . Indeed , 3T3 cells treated with control siRNAs do not display Tf - positive tubules ( Movie S12 ) , whereas many of these were present in WASH - depleted cells ( Movie S13 ) . The compartments labeled with the Rab GTPases that colocalized with WASH , ( C ) The antibody targeting the VCA domain of WASH blocks the NPF activity of WASH in vitro . Conditions : 2 . 5 m M actin ( 10 % pyrene labeled ) , 25 nM Arp2 / 3 complex , and 62 . 5 nM GST - PVCA . ( D ) Microinjection of the WASH antibody induces the tubulation of endosomes . 3T3 cells were microinjected with WASH or control antibodies , loaded with ﬂuo - rescent Tf until equilibrium , and imaged by time - lapse spinning disk confocal microscopy . The scale bar represents 10 m m . ( E ) Quantiﬁcation as in ( B ) of the effect seen in ( D ) ( mean ± SD of three independent experiments , n > 12 cells for each condition in duplicate ) . The difference is statistically relevant ( p < 0 . 001 , Student’s t test ) . Developmental Cell The WASH Complex Controls Endosome Fission Developmental Cell 17 , 712 – 723 , November 17 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . 719 Rab4 , Rab5 , Rab7 , and Rab11 were all tubulated upon WASH depletion ( Figure S12 ) , indicating that this phenotype is not restricted to a subpopulation of endosomes . Time - lapse imaging revealed that Tf - containing tubules were highly dynamic . In many instances , a tubule elongates and the endosome follows on the same track ( Figure S13A ) , suggesting that both endosome tubulation and movement depend on MT and MT motors . Indeed , MT depolymerization with nocodazole prevented endo - some tubulation ( Figure S13B ) . To conﬁrm the speciﬁcity of this phenotype , we performed rescue experiments in the stable 3T3 cell lines expressing GFP or GFP - WASH as before . siRNA - transfected cells were then loaded with ﬂuorescent Tf and imaged live by using spinning disk confocal microscopy ( Movie S14 ) . Importantly , upon WASH siRNA transfection , many Tf - containing tubules were observed in the GFP cell line , but not in the GFP - WASH cell line ( Figure 5B ) . In addition , transfection of KIAA1033 siRNA induced tubulesinbothcelllines , indicatingthattheGFP - WASH - express - ing cell line was able to form endosome tubules if the WASH complex was targeted . Tubulation was quantiﬁed from real time observation of cells . The reported effects were highly repro - ducible in two independent experiments . Thus , tubulation of endosomes is speciﬁcally associated with the depletion of the WASH complex . However , this complex might have other impor - tant functions in addition to polymerizing actin at the surface of endosomes . In order to speciﬁcally affect actin polymerization at the surface of endosomes , we utilized the WASH antibody that targets its VCA domain . In pyrene - actin assays , this WASH antibody blocked the ability of WASH fusion proteins containing the VCA domain to activate Arp2 / 3 - mediated nucleation , but did not affect the VCA domains from WAVE2 or N - WASP ( Fig - ure 5C ; Figure S14A ) . It also efﬁciently blocked the activity of the WASH complex toward the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Figure S14B ) . When microinjected into cells , this antibody induced tubulation of Tf - containing endosomes ( Figure 5D ; Movie S15 , quantiﬁcation in Figure 5E ) . Thus , the WASH complex and speciﬁcally its ability to activate the Arp2 / 3 complex are required to maintain the morphology of endosomes and to prevent them from tubulating . To examine the physiological consequence on trafﬁcking , we turned to well - established assays of Tf recycling in HeLa cells . When Tf internalization was monitored by ﬂow cytometry , WASH - depleted cells contained a higher amount of Tf at all time points ( Figure 6A ) , suggesting that either internalization was increased or recycling was impaired . Given the extensive colocalization of WASH with internal endosomes , we tested speciﬁcally whether Tf recycling was affected . We loaded cells with ﬂuorescent Tf and examined the rate of its release . At all time points examined , WASH - depleted cells contained a higher amount of Tf ( Figure 6B ) , indicating that , indeed , Tf recycling is impaired in WASH - depleted cells . Endosomes are sorting platforms for cargoes taking different routes . This sorting is mediated by vesicular or small tubular transport intermediates ( Maxﬁeld and McGraw , 2004 ) . The long tubules and the defect in Tf recycling observed in WASH - depleted cells could be the consequence of a defective ﬁssion of transport intermediates . One of the best characterized machineries performing membrane ﬁssion is the GTPase dyna - min , which can be speciﬁcally inhibited by dynasore . We loaded cells with ﬂuorescent Tf and examined the Tf compartment upon dynasore treatment . Dynasore induced tubulation of endo - somes , like WASH depletion ( Figure 6C ) . As in WASH - depleted cells , the compartments labeled with Rab4 , Rab5 , Rab7 , and Rab11 were tubulated upon inhibition of dynamin ( Figure S12 ) . Dynasore - induced tubules aligned with MT tracks , as expected ( Figure S13C ) . Importantly , WASH was detected at the level of mother endosomes , but never along the dynasore - induced tubules emerging from them ( Figure 6D ; Movie S16 ) . This similar phenotype upon WASH inactivation and dynamin inhibition prompted us to examine whether WASH interacts with dynamin . Indeed , immunoprecipitation of endogenous WASH revealed associated endogenous dynamin ( Figure 6E ) . The reverse coim - munoprecipitation was attempted with wild - type ( WT ) and the inactive K44A mutant of dynamin . WT and mutant dynamin asso - ciated to the same extent with endogenous WASH , indicating that the interaction of WASH with dynamin is not regulated by the activity of the latter ( Figure 6F ) . Together , these results suggest that dynamin may play a role downstream of WASH in the ﬁssion of transport intermediates from endosomes , in line with a defective recruitment and / or activation of dynamin when WASH is inactivated , giving rise to endosome tubulation . DISCUSSION WASH belongs to a multiprotein complex , as has been demon - strated for other well - characterized NPFs . This complex that we have puriﬁed contains seven subunits , and it is likely to be a stable multiprotein complex , i . e . , a molecular machine , because we have obtained evidence that WASH depends on other sub - units for its stability . The WASH complex appears to be constitu - tively active in its ability to promote Arp2 / 3 - dependent nucle - ation , in contrast to the WAVE complex , which is intrinsically inactive ( Derivery et al . , 2009 ) . The identiﬁcation of CP in the WASH complex was a surprise . CP is already a complex , a heter - odimer , that is incorporated into a ‘‘supercomplex . ’’ It has previ - ously been shown that the heterodimer of CP is part of the Dynactin complex , which contains a miniﬁlament of actin - related proteins ( Schroer , 2004 ) . However , the WASH complex contains both an NPF and a CP , which is known to inhibit actin dynamics at the barbed end of ﬁlaments ( Cooper and Sept , 2008 ) , and thus represents a potential antagonist of the NPF . CP has long been recognized as an essential component of force generation by Arp2 / 3 - mediated branched actin networks in vitro ( Loisel et al . , 1999 ) and in vivo ( Mejillano et al . , 2004 ) . Without CP , all ﬁlaments in the network can be elongated , gener - ating a ‘‘ﬁshbone’’ appearance of comet tails obtained in biomi - metic assays ( Pantaloni et al . , 2000 ) . Recent evidence indicated that CP is more tightly associated with the generation of new actin ﬁlaments than suspected , because CP promotes Arp2 / 3 - mediated nucleation in vitro ( Akin and Mullins , 2008 ) . This role is in line with in vivo observation that CP is enriched at the tip of lamellipodia , where the WAVE NPF is active ( Lai et al . , 2008 ; Mejillano et al . , 2004 ) , rather than having a homogeneous distri - bution across the lamellipodia as initially thought . We were able to detect low but signiﬁcant CP activity within the puriﬁed WASH complex . This CP activity might also promote Arp2 / 3 acti - vation , as proposed for the free heterodimer of CP ( Akin and Mullins , 2008 ) . CP and WASH activities might also be sequen - tially revealed in a molecular cycle of activation . For example , Developmental Cell The WASH Complex Controls Endosome Fission 720 Developmental Cell 17 , 712 – 723 , November 17 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . the low CP activity might be sufﬁcient to target the WASH complex to pre - existing barbed ends , so that Arp2 / 3 activation takes place in close proximity to the barbed end of an actin ﬁla - ment , hence generating dense branched actin networks . The identiﬁcation of the WASH complex opens up exciting future investigations on the structural coordination between CP and the NPF , on the particular architecture of branched actin networks resulting from this coordination , and the generation of force at the level of endosomes . WASH and WHAMM are two NPFs that function at the surface of internal membranes and endosomes and Golgi , respectively . They also share the property of coordinating the actin and MT cytoskeletons in the formation of membrane tubules , because both WASH and WHAMM interact with tubulin . However , there is a signiﬁcant difference between these two NPFs . Notably , depletion of WASH induces tubulation , whereas overexpression of WHAMM induces tubulation ( Campellone et al . , 2008 ) . Consistently , the actin network polymerized by the VCA domain Figure 6 . WASH Controls the Fission of Transport Intermediates through an Inter - action with Dynamin ( A ) HeLa cells transfected with WASH targeting shRNAorcontrolshRNAwereincubatedwithﬂuo - rescent Tf at 4 (cid:3) C . After a shift to 37 (cid:3) C for the indi - cated times , cells were acid washed to remove membrane Tf . Intracellular Tf was then quantiﬁed by ﬂow cytometry . Intracellular Tf is expressed asapercentageofpreboundTf . Asinglerepresen - tative experiment with duplicate measurements is plotted ( mean ± SD ) . The histogram shows the mean ± SD of three independent experiments . WASH - depleted cells internalize a higher amount of Tf , suggesting that either uptake or recycling to the plasma membrane is affected . ( B ) Similarly transfected HeLa cells were loaded with ﬂuorescent Tf for 6 min at 37 (cid:3) C as in ( A ) and then acid washed at 4 (cid:3) C . After a shift to 37 (cid:3) C for the indicated times , intracellular Tf was quantiﬁed by ﬂow cytometry . Intracellular Tf is expressed as a percentage of the initial intracellular Tf . A single representative experiment with duplicate measurements is plotted ( mean ± SD ) . The histo - gram shows the mean ± SD of two independent experiments . WASH - depleted cells are slower to release internal Tf , indicating that its recycling to the plasma membrane is affected . ( C ) Pharmacological inhibition of dynamin mimics WASH depletion . 3T3 cells were loaded with ﬂuo - rescent Tf until equilibrium , then dynasore ( 80 m M ) was added in the presence of Tf for 30 min . Cells were processed as in Figure 5A . Numerous long and narrow tubules containing Tf are observed ( arrows ) . The scale bars represents 10 m m . ( D ) 3T3 cells expressing GFP - WASH treated with dynasore as in ( C ) were imaged by time - lapse spinningdiskconfocalmicroscopy . Asingleimage is extracted from the movie . GFP - WASH does not localize along the tubules , but to the mother endo - somes . The scale bars represents 10 m m . ( E ) WASH and dynamin II coprecipitate . WASH was immunoprecipitated from a lysate of B16F1 cells . The immunoprecipitates were analyzed with WASH or dynamin II antibodies . ( F ) TheinteractionofdynaminwithWASHdoesnot depend on its activity . 293T cells were transiently transfected with plasmids expressing GFP , GFP - dynamin II WT , or its inactive K44A derivative . GFP fusion proteins were precipitated with GFP - trap resin . The upper panel presents the WASH immunoblot , and the lower panel presents Ponceau staining . ( G ) A model for WASH function in endosome ﬁssion . A sorting or recycling endosome in the process of budding an intermediate of transport is represented . The WASH complex initiates Arp2 / 3 - dependent actin polymerization and generates a branched actin network on a restricted domain of the endosome . How micro - tubules are recruited to this domain is not known . The afﬁnity of the WASH complex for tubulin might play a role in this capture , and / or molecular motors at the surface of the endosomes might become clustered by the branched actin network . Eventually , molecular motors in this area bind MTs and begin to pull out a membrane tube . Dynamin interacts with the WASH complex and / or other components of the branched actin network like cortactin , and polymerizes in spirals around the nascent tube . The tension of the membrane is generated by the two opposing forces generated by MT motors pulling on the tube and the branched actin networks pushing on the endosome . This tension facilitates ﬁssion by dynamin . If WASH is absent , ﬁssion is defective and MT motors pull a long tube of membrane out of the endosome . Developmental Cell The WASH Complex Controls Endosome Fission Developmental Cell 17 , 712 – 723 , November 17 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . 721 of WHAMM and the direct interaction of its coiled - coil domain with MTs appear to facilitate the elongation of membrane tubules along MT tracks . In the case of WASH , the interaction we found with tubulin cannot play a role in the tubulation phenotype , because tubules are elongated along MT tracks when WASH is missing . This argues for a critical role of molecular motors in the generation of membrane tubules upon WASH inactivation . Among the genes encoding subunits of the WASH complex , the gene encoding KIAA0196 ( SPG8 ) has been recently reported to be mutated in Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia ( HSP ) ( Valdmanis et al . , 2007 ) . Many genes responsible for HSP are involved in membrane trafﬁc and the MT cytoskeleton ( Fink , 2006 ) . Spastin ( SPG4 ) , a MT - destabilizing protein that interacts with endosomal ESCRT complex components ; the kinesin motor KIF5A ( SPG10 ) , which moves intracellular organelles ; Spartin ( SPG20 ) , which regulates EGF receptor trafﬁcking ; ZFYVE27 ( SPG33 ) , which interacts with Rab11 ; and WASH might outline a trafﬁcking pathway essential to preserve motor neurons from degeneration . It will be interesting to examine the genes encoding the other subunits of the WASH complex in families affected by HSP , but in which the disease cannot be ascribed to already identiﬁed HSP genes . The role we propose for WASH in mediating the ﬁssion of trans - portintermediatesfromsortingandrecyclingendosomesgeneral - izes the role proposed for N - WASP in facilitating ﬁssion from the plasma membrane . N - WASP - mediated actin polymerization is required for the internalization of clathrin - coated pits , which occurs shortly after a burst of actin polymerization ( Takenawa and Suetsugu , 2007 ) . Actin polymerization mediated by N - WASP is required for dynamin - mediated ﬁssion of tubules induced by the overexpression of F - BAR / EFC proteins ( Itoh et al . , 2005 ; Tsu - jita et al . , 2006 ) . Importantly , the native complex of N - WASP with WIP is absolutely required for the physiological regulation of N - WASP by F - BAR / EFC proteins ( Takano et al . , 2008 ) . This is similar totherequirementoftheWASHcomplexinmediatingtheﬁssionof transport intermediates from sorting and recycling endosomes . An important difference with ﬁssion from the plasma mem - brane is that ﬁssion at endosomes is likely to involve molecular motors moving along MT tracks . MT motors generate a pulling force on the membrane . The WASH - Arp2 / 3 pathway controlling actinpolymerizationgeneratesapushingforceontheendosome . Thesetwoopposingforcesarelikelytoincreasethetensionofthe membrane that will undergo ﬁssion ( Figure 6G ) . Tension of the membrane facilitates dynamin - mediated ﬁssion ( Roux et al . , 2006 ) . Moreover , MT - dependent pulling forces , as well as actin - dependent pushing forces , have been shown to generate lipid sorting , which might have a contribution of its own in ﬁssion ( Liu and Fletcher , 2006 ; Liu et al . , 2006 ; Roux et al . , 2005 ) . Such a membrane of altered lipid composition and maintained under tension would be the perfect substrate for dynamin to mediate ﬁssion . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Information on cells , plasmids , siRNA sequences , antibodies , and additional procedures are included in the Supplemental Experimental Procedures . Immunocytochemistry and Time - Lapse Imaging 3T3 cells were plated for 2 hr onto glass coverslips coated with 50 m g / ml ﬁbro - nectin ( Sigma ) before each experiment . For immunocytochemistry , cells were ﬁxed in 3 % paraformaldehyde , permeabilized in PBS containing 0 . 05 % saponin , then processed for indirect immunoﬂuorescence by using standard techniques . Fixed cells were imaged by epiﬂuorescence microscopy on a Leica DM6000B microscope equipped with a 100 3 NA 1 . 4 oil immersion objective and a CoolSnap HQ camera ( Photometrics ) . Confocal optical sections were acquired with a custom spinning disc confocal microscope based on a Nikon TE2000 - U inverted microscope , a 100 3 NA 1 . 45 oil immer - sion objective , a Yokogawa CSU22 spinning disk head , and a CoolSnap HQ2 camera ( Photometrics ) with a binning set to 1 and operated with Metamorph 7 . 1 . 4 . This microscope was equipped with a temperature control chamber , The Cube ( Life Imaging Services ) . For Figures 3A and 3B , optical sections were acquired with a Leica TCS SP2 confocal microscope equiped with a 100 3 NA 1 . 4 oil immersion objective . For time - lapse microscopy , cells were plated onto ﬁbronectin - coated glass plates ( IWAKI ) , cultured for 2 hr at 37 (cid:3) C in DMEM medium without phenol red supplemented with 25 mM HEPES ( Invitrogen ) . Binning was set to 2 in this case , and channels were acquired sequentially . To compensate for the exit of vesicles from the confocal plane , several planes were acquired for each time point and a maximum intensity z projection was calculated . Image Analysis Analyses of images and movies were performed with Metamorph , ImageJ ( http : / / rsb . ingo . nih . gov / ij / ) and Adobe Premiere softwares . The background of images was homogenously substracted , and gamma settings were not adjusted . For 3D reconstructions , confocal z sections were performed with an increment of 0 . 2 m m , and images were processed with the VolumeJ plugin of ImageJ ( Abramoff and Viergever , 2002 ) . For visualization purposes , diffrac - tion , which artiﬁcially elongates round vesicles along the z axis , was corrected by modifying the aspect ratio parameter of VolumeJ from ( x , y , z ) = ( 1 , 1 , 1 ) to ( x , y , z ) = ( 1 , 1 , 0 . 5 ) . GFP - WASH and Tf were tracked over time by using ImageJ plugin MtrackJ created by Eric Meijering . The perinuclear enrichments of the Arp2 / 3 complex and cortactin were analyzed after a square root transforma - tion using a two - way ANOVA with treatments and independent experiments as parameters ( SigmaStat ) . The pairwise comparisons were performed with the Tukey Test using an a factor of 0 . 05 . Puriﬁcation of the WASH Complex The WASH complex was essentially puriﬁed like the WAVE complex ( Derivery etal . , 2009 ) , withthefollowingmodiﬁcations . Atotalof5 3 10 9 cellsexpressing ( His ) 6 - PC - TEV - WASH ( 3Lofculture , about10mlcellpellet ) werelysedin40ml of 50 mM HEPES , 200 mM NaCl , 1mM CaCl 2 , 1 % Triton X - 100 , 5 % glycerol , 5 mM MgCl 2 ( pH 7 . 4 ) . Lysate was incubated with 1 ml of PC beads ( Roche ) for 4 hr with recirculation at 4 (cid:3) C . PC beads were washed extensively with 50 ml lysisbuffer ; 50mlof50mMHEPES , 200mMNaCl , 1mMCaCl 2 , 0 . 4Msucrose ( pH7 . 4 ) ; 50mlof50mMHEPES , 200mMNaCl , 0 . 4Msucrose ( pH7 . 4 ) . Elution was then performed in 50 mM HEPES , 200 mM NaCl , 5 mM EGTA , 0 . 4 M sucrose ( pH 7 . 4 ) . Elution fractions were pooled and dialyzed against 50 mM HEPES , 200 mM NaCl , 10 mM imidazole , 0 . 4 M sucrose , 1 mM DTT ( pH 7 . 4 ) overnight . Eluate was then incubated with 50 m l Ni Sepharose High Perfor - mance ( GE Healthcare ) for 3 hr at 4 (cid:3) C . Beads were then washed extensively with 50 mM HEPES , 200 mM NaCl , 10 mM imidazole , 0 . 4 M sucrose , 1 mM DTT ( pH 7 . 4 ) and analyzed by SDS - PAGE . LC - MS / MS was performed as described ( Derivery et al . , 2009 ) . For activity assays , the WASH complex eluted after Protein C afﬁnity column was concentrated by using Amicon Ultra ( Millipore ) and was used within a day . SUPPLEMENTAL DATA Supplemental Data include Supplemental Experimental Procedures , four - teen ﬁgures , one table , and sixteen movies and can be found with this article online at http : / / www . cell . com / developmental - cell / supplemental / S1534 - 5807 ( 09 ) 00392 - X . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS WethankMoniqueArpin , ClaudiaAlmeida , LaurentBlanchoin , SusanneBolte , Beata ` Bugyi , Marie - FranceCarlier , Philippe Chavrier , Dafne Chirivino , Evelyne Coudrier , Edgar Gomes , Maud Hertzog , Cathy Jackson , Ludger Johannes , Developmental Cell The WASH Complex Controls Endosome Fission 722 Developmental Cell 17 , 712 – 723 , November 17 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . Marko Kaksonen , Christophe Lamaze , Pekka Lappalainen , Andres Leben - sohn , DanielLe´vy , DanielLouvard , Ste´phanieMiserey - Lenkei , GuillaumeMon - tagnac , Grac¸a Raposo , Erez Raz , Michal Reichman - Fried , Rajat Rohatgi , Win - fried Ro¨mer , Klemens Rottner , Aure´lien Roux , Dorothy Schafer , Giorgio Scita , Guillaume Van Niel , and Matt Welch for support , insights , and reagents . We greatly acknowledge the Plateforme d’Imagerie Cellulaire et Tissulaire - Infrastructures en Biologie Sante´ et Agronomie ( PICT - IBiSA ) and its staff . This work was supported by Fondation pour la Recherche Me´dicale ( INE20071110919 ) , Centre Nationale de la Recherche Scientiﬁque ( PEPS ) , and Agence Nationale pour la Recherche ( ANR - 08 - BLAN - 0012 - 03 and ANR - 08 - PCVI - 0010 - 03 ) . Received : January 15 , 2009 Revised : June 9 , 2009 Accepted : September 23 , 2009 Published : November 16 , 2009 REFERENCES Abramoff , M . D . , and Viergever , M . A . ( 2002 ) . Computation and visualization of three - dimensionalsofttissuemotionintheorbit . IEEETrans . Med . Imaging 21 , 296 – 304 . Akin , O . , and Mullins , R . D . ( 2008 ) . Capping protein increases the rate of actin - based motility by promoting ﬁlament nucleation by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Cell 133 , 841 – 851 . Benesch , S . , Lommel , S . , Steffen , A . , Stradal , T . E . , Scaplehorn , N . , Way , M . , Wehland , J . , and Rottner , K . ( 2002 ) . Phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - biphosphate ( PIP2 ) - induced vesicle movement depends on N - WASP and involves Nck , WIP , and Grb2 . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 37771 – 37776 . Campellone , K . G . , Webb , N . J . , Znameroski , E . A . , and Welch , M . D . ( 2008 ) . WHAMMisanArp2 / 3complexactivatorthatbindsmicrotubulesandfunctions in ER to Golgi transport . Cell 134 , 148 – 161 . Cooper , J . A . , andSept , D . ( 2008 ) . Newinsightsintomechanismandregulation of actin capping protein . Int . Rev . Cell Mol . Biol . 267 , 183 – 206 . Derivery , E . , Lombard , B . , Loew , D . , and Gautreau , A . ( 2009 ) . The Wave complex is intrinsically inactive . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 66 , 777 – 790 . Fink , J . K . ( 2006 ) . Hereditaryspasticparaplegia . Curr . Neurol . Neurosci . Rep . 6 , 65 – 76 . Itoh , T . , Erdmann , K . S . , Roux , A . , Habermann , B . , Werner , H . , and De Camilli , P . ( 2005 ) . Dynamin and the actin cytoskeleton cooperatively regulate plasma membrane invagination by BAR and F - BAR proteins . Dev . Cell 9 , 791 – 804 . Kaksonen , M . , Peng , H . B . , and Rauvala , H . ( 2000 ) . Association of cortactin with dynamic actin in lamellipodia and on endosomal vesicles . J . Cell Sci . 113 , 4421 – 4426 . Lai , F . P . , Szczodrak , M . , Block , J . , Faix , J . , Breitsprecher , D . , Mannherz , H . G . , Stradal , T . E . , Dunn , G . A . , Small , J . V . , and Rottner , K . ( 2008 ) . Arp2 / 3 complex interactions and actin network turnover in lamellipodia . EMBO J . 27 , 982 – 992 . Linardopoulou , E . V . , Parghi , S . S . , Friedman , C . , Osborn , G . E . , Parkhurst , S . M . , and Trask , B . J . ( 2007 ) . Human subtelomeric WASH genes encode a new subclass of the WASP family . PLoS Genet . 3 , e237 . Liu , A . P . , andFletcher , D . A . ( 2006 ) . Actinpolymerizationservesasamembrane domain switch in model lipid bilayers . Biophys . J . 91 , 4064 – 4070 . Liu , J . , Kaksonen , M . , Drubin , D . G . , and Oster , G . ( 2006 ) . Endocytic vesicle scission by lipid phase boundary forces . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 10277 – 10282 . Liu , R . , Abreu - Blanco , M . T . , Barry , K . C . , Linardopoulou , E . V . , Osborn , G . E . , and Parkhurst , S . M . ( 2009 ) . Wash functions downstream of Rho and links linear and branched actin nucleation factors . Development 136 , 2849 – 2860 . Loisel , T . P . , Boujemaa , R . , Pantaloni , D . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 1999 ) . Reconstitu - tion of actin - based motility of Listeria and Shigella using pure proteins . Nature 401 , 613 – 616 . Maxﬁeld , F . R . , and McGraw , T . E . ( 2004 ) . Endocytic recycling . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 5 , 121 – 132 . Mejillano , M . R . , Kojima , S . , Applewhite , D . A . , Gertler , F . B . , Svitkina , T . M . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 2004 ) . Lamellipodial versus ﬁlopodial mode of the actin nanoma - chinery : pivotal role of the ﬁlament barbed end . Cell 118 , 363 – 373 . Pantaloni , D . , Boujemaa , R . , Didry , D . , Gounon , P . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 2000 ) . The Arp2 / 3 complex branches ﬁlament barbed ends : functional antagonism with capping proteins . Nat . Cell Biol . 2 , 385 – 391 . Pollard , T . D . ( 2007 ) . Regulation of actin ﬁlament assembly by Arp2 / 3 complex and formins . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 36 , 451 – 477 . Roux , A . , Cuvelier , D . , Nassoy , P . , Prost , J . , Bassereau , P . , and Goud , B . ( 2005 ) . Role of curvature and phase transition in lipid sorting and ﬁssion of membrane tubules . EMBO J . 24 , 1537 – 1545 . Roux , A . , Uyhazi , K . , Frost , A . , and De Camilli , P . ( 2006 ) . GTP - dependent twisting of dynamin implicates constriction and tension in membrane ﬁssion . Nature 441 , 528 – 531 . Schroer , T . A . ( 2004 ) . Dynactin . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 20 , 759 – 779 . Takano , K . , Toyooka , K . , andSuetsugu , S . ( 2008 ) . EFC / F - BARproteinsandthe N - WASP - WIP complex induce membrane curvature - dependent actin poly - merization . EMBO J . 27 , 2817 – 2828 . Takenawa , T . , and Suetsugu , S . ( 2007 ) . The WASP - WAVE protein network : connecting the membrane to the cytoskeleton . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 8 , 37 – 48 . Tsujita , K . , Suetsugu , S . , Sasaki , N . , Furutani , M . , Oikawa , T . , and Takenawa , T . ( 2006 ) . Coordination between the actin cytoskeleton and membrane defor - mation by a novel membrane tubulation domain of PCH proteins is involved in endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 172 , 269 – 279 . Valdmanis , P . N . , Meijer , I . A . , Reynolds , A . , Lei , A . , MacLeod , P . , Schlesinger , D . , Zatz , M . , Reid , E . , Dion , P . A . , Drapeau , P . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Mutations in the KIAA0196 gene at the SPG8 locus cause hereditary spastic paraplegia . Am . J . Hum . Genet . 80 , 152 – 161 . Zerial , M . , andMcBride , H . ( 2001 ) . Rabproteinsasmembraneorganizers . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2 , 107 – 117 . Zuchero , J . B . , Coutts , A . S . , Quinlan , M . E . , Thangue , N . B . , and Mullins , R . D . ( 2009 ) . p53 - cofactor JMY is a multifunctional actin nucleation factor . Nat . Cell Biol . 11 , 451 – 459 . Developmental Cell The WASH Complex Controls Endosome Fission Developmental Cell 17 , 712 – 723 , November 17 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . 723