Kristine L . Nowak kristine . nowak @ uconn . edu University of Connecticut Frank Biocca Biocca @ msu . edu Media Interface & Network Design Lab Michigan State University Presence , Vol . 12 , No . 5 , October 2003 , 481 – 494 © 2004 by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology The Effect of the Agency and Anthropomorphism on Users’ Sense of Telepresence , Copresence , and Social Presence in Virtual Environments Abstract We report on an experiment that examined the inﬂuence of anthropomorphism and perceived agency on presence , copresence , and social presence in a virtual en - vironment . The experiment varied the level of anthropomorphism of the image of interactants : high anthropomorphism , low anthropomorphism , or no image . Per - ceived agency was manipulated by telling the participants that the image was either an avatar controlled by a human , or an agent controlled by a computer . The results support the prediction that people respond socially to both human and computer - controlled entities , and that the existence of a virtual image increases tele - presence . Participants interacting with the less - anthropomorphic image reported more copresence and social presence than those interacting with partners repre - sented by either no image at all or by a highly anthropomorphic image of the other , indicating that the more anthropomorphic images set up higher expectations that lead to reduced presence when these expectations were not met . 1 Introduction Technological advances have increasingly enabled computer - generated entities to mimic both the appearance and behaviors of humans ( Brent & Thompson , 1999 ; Dryer , 1999 ) . Questions have been raised about how these appearances and behaviors inﬂuence peoples’ levels of telepresence or immer - sion ( Draper , Kaber , & Usher , 1998 ; Minsky , 1980 ; Sheridan , 1992 ; Steuer , 1994 ) , copresence , or connection with another human ( Goffman , 1963 ; Nowak , 2001 ) , and social presence , or perception of a medium’s ability to connect people ( Rice , 1993 ; Short , Williams , & Christie , 1976 ) . People have reported feeling some level of presence in almost all mediated environments ( Rheingold , 1995 ; Schroeder , 2002 ) and have even responded socially to both human and nonhuman others as well as to the computer interfaces themselves ( Nass & Moon , 2000 ; Reeves & Nass , 1996 ; Slater & Steed , 2002 ) . Visual images representing both human and nonhuman entities increasingly inhabit games , online shopping environments , and educational software appli - cations ( Cassell , Sullivan , Prevost , & Churchill , 2000 ; Schroeder , 2002 ) . These visual images can and do vary on a number of levels and include every - thing from two - dimensional pictures to three - dimensional animated images Nowak and Biocca 481 ( Damer , 1997 ; Talamo & Ligorio , 2001 ) . Improve - ments in graphics and animation technology have made it increasingly possible for these visual images to appear human - like , or anthropomorphic . At the same time , ad - vances in the development of artiﬁcial intelligence have made it possible for a computer program to perform tasks that have traditionally been reserved for humans ( Goodwin , 1998 ; Magnenat - Thalmann & Kshirsagar , 2000 ) . Historically , people have spent much effort marking the boundary between human and nonhuman , distinguishing humans from both animals and machines ( Sheehan , 1991a , 1991b ) . However , these trends in computer animations and intelligence have made it in - creasingly difﬁcult to make the human / nonhuman dis - tinction , which we call agency , in virtual environments . These trends in the use of anthropomorphic images and entities acting with intelligence in mediated systems have a practical bearing on the usability and the percep - tion of the systems and people’s sense of presence . These trends have raised two kinds of concerns : psycho - logical concerns about the potential inﬂuence on peo - ple’s ability to successfully function in the information age ( Don , 1992 ; Laurel , 1990 ; Turkle , 1995 ) , and questions about the implications of these social re - sponses for the design of interfaces ( Brooks , 2002 ; Cas - sell et al . , 2000 ) . This paper examines the inﬂuence of the visual representation as well as agency on people’s sense of telepresence , copresence , and social presence . Implications of these ﬁndings for the design and use of social virtual environments are discussed . The next sec - tion deﬁnes and differentiates telepresence , copresence , and social presence . 2 The Sense of “Being There” with Another in a Social Virtual Environment : Telepresence , Copresence , and Social Presence The concept of presence is very broad and has a variety of deﬁnitions and meanings ( Barﬁeld , Zeltzer , Sheridan , & Slater , 1995 ; Lombard et al . , 2000 ) . Pres - ence has been recognized as a key performance goal for many systems and can provide insight into both the me - dium’s ability to provide the feeling that the user is “there” inside the media ( telepresence ) or in the “com - pany of others” ( copresence ) ( Schroeder , 2002 ) . At the same time , presence can measure the extent to which people feel that the interface is able to provide some sense of access to another mind ( social presence ) . Pres - ence includes several dimensions—including telepres - ence , social presence , and copresence—and each of these are deﬁned and measured distinctly as outlined in this section . The concept of mediated presence , or telepresence ( Draper et al . , 1998 ; Minsky , 1980 ; Sheridan , 1992 ; Steuer , 1994 ) , is most often deﬁned succinctly as the sensation of “being there” in the virtual or mediated environment ( Heeter , 1992 ; Steuer , 1994 ) . When tele - present , the user feels immersed ( Witmer & Singer , 1994 ) in the environment represented by the medium ( Steuer , 1994 ) . Biocca ( 1997 ) and others ( Gerrig , 1993 ; Minsky , 1980 ) have described telepresence as the user’s compelling sense of being in a mediated space and not where their physical body is located . The term copresence originated in the work of Goff - man ( 1963 ) , who explained that copresence existed when people reported that they were actively perceiving others and felt that others were actively perceiving them . Further , in its true meaning , “copresence renders persons uniquely accessible , available , and subject to one another” ( Goffman , 1963 , p . 22 ) . Copresence in this sense solely refers to a psychological connection to and with another person . It requires that interactants feel they were able to perceive their interaction partner and that their interaction partner actively perceived them ( Nowak , 2001 ) . Social presence has been frequently used to evaluate people’s ability to connect via telecommunication sys - tems ( Rice , 1993 ; Short et al . , 1976 ; Walther , 1996 ) . Short et al . , ( 1976 ) are credited with giving broad theo - retical currency to the concept of social presence . They deﬁned social presence as “the degree of salience of the other person in the interaction and the consequent sa - lience of the interpersonal relationships” ( p . 65 ) . How - ever , their measures of social presence have been shown to relate more to the user’s perception of a medium’s ability to provide salience of another as opposed to mea - 482 PRESENCE : VOLUME 12 , NUMBER 5 suring the actual perceived salience of another person ( Nowak , 2001 ) . This section deﬁned telepresence , copresence , and social presence . The next section deﬁnes agency and considers its potential inﬂuence on these constructs . 3 Considering Agency : Does the Agency of a Virtual Human Inﬂuence the Level of Presence ? The philosophical and psychological concept of agency has many subtle dimensions ( Bratman , 1999 ; McCann , 1998 ) . The concept of agency , deﬁned as the state of being in action or of exerting power , is central to the issue of the volitional or intentional force that drives the actions of an entity . The difference between an agent and avatar , as deﬁned here , turns on the issue of agency . The term agent is used to describe an entity whose actions are controlled by the computer itself ( a bot ) , whereas the term avatar is used to describe an entity whose actions are controlled by a human in real time . This project examines whether or not this distinc - tion inﬂuences telepresence , copresence , or social pres - ence . There are two basic positions on the inﬂuence of agency : ● Human primacy : This position holds that “human - ity matters” ( Sheehan , 1991a and b ) . If this were true , then agency would affect social experience . Therefore , even if agents look and behave the same , users will feel less connected to them than they will to those who are human , or avatars . ● Automatic social responsiveness : This position holds that people automatically respond socially to enti - ties that look or behave like humans . Therefore , if an agent looks or behaves like a human , people will respond to it socially , or like they would respond to another human ( Reeves & Nass , 1996 ) . These positions deﬁne the extremes ; one argues that humanity matters psychologically , the other that only the illusion of humanity matters . This experiment explores this boundary . Daniel Dennett suggested that people have adopted a successful evolutionary strategy in dealing with all enti - ties they encounter and treating all entities ( including people , animals , and artifacts ) as if it were a rational agent governed in its “choice” of “action” by a “consid - eration” of its “beliefs” and “desires” ( Dennett , 1996 , p . 27 ) . Consistent with the intentional stance , there is behav - ioral and neuropsychological evidence to suggest that humans are hardwired to respond to cues that suggest an entity has intentionality . In our encounter with in - tentional entities , ones that appear human may receive special attention . Agents in virtual environments may behave or appear in ways that could activate selective neuropsychological responses , which may lead to the perception that these entities are “living” as opposed to “nonliving” ( Gainotti , Silveri , Daniele , & Giustolisi , 1995 ; Warrington & Shallice , 1984 ) . In other words , computer - generated agents may activate people’s ten - dency to respond socially . This may mean that people are unable or unwilling to distinguish between humans and nonhumans in the face of similar morphology and behavior ( Keil , 1994 ) . When designing interfaces , it is important to under - stand the inﬂuence of agency on users’ sense of pres - ence . To understand what someone is saying , why they said it , and the social implications of the message , any interaction with another triggers people’s need to deter - mine who sent the message and why . The assumption might be , as the human primacy position argues , that agents are “mindless . ” If users focus on the mindless - ness of agents , it is reasonable to theorize that , although they may respond socially to any entity , they will feel less copresence and socially present with these “empty” nonhuman others . It is thus likely that agency will inﬂu - ence the user’s sense of access to another mind . This may mean varying levels of qualities that make people feel they have access to another mind will evolve , with the highest level being reserved for human minds . This leads to the following hypotheses : Hypothesis I : People will feel more copresent inter - acting with an avatar than with an agent . Hypothesis II : People will feel more social presence interacting with an avatar than with an agent . Nowak and Biocca 483 At the same time , people regularly interact with other physically present , or mediated , humans ( such as via telephone or television ) . Users have less experience in - teracting in the same physical space as artiﬁcially intelli - gent entities and may subconsciously maintain distance from them , thus reducing the sense of telepresence in the environment . The knowledge that the intelligence is not human may lead the user to feel less telepresent in the same environment as the agent . This leads to the following hypothesis : Hypothesis III : People will feel more telepresence interacting with an avatar than with an agent . 3 . 1 An Image Will Increase Presence People interact with others in virtual environments for a variety of purposes . During these interactions , peo - ple are forming mental models of one another . Research has suggested that users continue to categorize other people in virtual environments using the same catego - ries and similar processes to those used in unmediated environments ( Lipton , 1996 ; Reeves & Nass , 1996 ; Waskul & Douglass , 1997 ) . In the natural , unmediated world , the features of the natural body are used for cate - gorizing and forming mental models of one another ( Argyle , 1988 ; Ichheiser , 1970 ) . Further , a person’s physical characteristics are the basis for identiﬁcation during unmediated interactions ( Ichheiser , 1970 ) . Thus , it is likely that people will use the features of the virtual image for categorization in virtual environments and that the virtual image will inﬂuence how people respond to and feel about the medium and the environ - ment itself . Further , being represented by an image makes the people and environment seem more “real” ( Taylor , 2002 ) . It has been argued that one of the ma - jor reasons for providing visual images in virtual envi - ronments is to give users a sense of one another’s pres - ence and to enhance the feeling of colocation ( Benford , Greenhalgh , Rodden , & Pycock , 2001 ) . It seems that the visual images provide a means of identiﬁcation and recognition that may enhance engagement in the envi - ronment ( Benford et al . , 2001 ; Talamo & Ligorio , 2001 ; Taylor , 2002 ) . If this were correct , then any visible representation of another would cause people to feel more immersed in the environment than when no image is visible . This led to the following hypothesis : Hypothesis IV : People will feel more telepresence when their partner is represented by an image than when the partner is not represented by an image . Not only is the very existence of a virtual image likely to inﬂuence perception , but different images have been shown to have different inﬂuences ( Koda , 1996 ; Slater & Steed , 2002 ; Taylor , 2002 ; Turkle , 1995 ; Wexelblat , 1997 ) , although the direction and type of inﬂuence dif - ferent images have is still unclear . People may assume that virtual images with human morphological characteristics ( anthropomorphic ) necessarily represent humans ( Koda , 1996 ; Wexelblat , 1997 ) , and less - anthropomorphic images represent nonhumans ( Slater & Steed , 2002 ) . Although people have responded socially to all interfaces to some degree ( Reeves & Nass , 1996 ) , this “social” response has appeared to be stronger with the more “human” - looking ( anthropomorphic ) images ( Koda , 1996 ; Reeves & Nass , 1996 ; Turkle , 1995 ) . More - anthropomorphic images have been reported to be more engaging , interesting , and at - tractive ( Koda , 1996 ; Wexelblat , 1997 ) , which may ex - plain why much of the character design work is done with a goal towards re - creating lifelike or human - like forms ( Isla & Blumberg , 2002 ) . At the same time , more - anthropo - morphic images may set up higher expectations that could be disappointing when these expectations are not met ( Hindmarsh , Fraser , Heath , & Benford , 2001 ; Slater & Steed , 2002 ) . A computer - generated image may or may not have much relationship with who or what is actually being embodied . This means that the virtual embodiment of the intelligence is polymorphic , or it could take almost any shape ( Fisher , 1997 ) . Virtual images have been shown to represent a person and may be perceived to convey their abilities or limitations in the virtual world ( Benford et al . , 2001 ) . This may have advantages or disadvantages for human communication ( Lanier , 1992 ) . It would be advantageous if , for example , shape could be altered to dynamically express a range of per - sonalities and moods to facilitate people’s ability to communicate . On the other hand , it would be disadvan - tageous if the shape created an expectation ( such as a 484 PRESENCE : VOLUME 12 , NUMBER 5 level of intelligence or “humanness” ) that the entity behind it was unable to meet . This ambiguity raises the question about how anthropo - morphism inﬂuences the dimensions of presence . There is some evidence to support the notion that people are more comfortable with those that look most like them . First , in the person perception process , people create models of others based on what is most familiar , or based on a gener - alization from their own mind ( Gordon , 1986 ) . Secondly , users of low - bandwidth systems have been shown to be - lieve that others were more “like them” than users of high - bandwidth systems where there are more indicators ( such as voice and pictures ) ( Walter , 1996 ) . It is likely that the image a person creates in their mind when a mediated im - age is not visible , a “default image , ” will be anthropomor - phic because human morphology is most familiar . Therefore , responses to virtual entities not repre - sented by any image should be more similar to re - sponses to entities represented by highly anthropomor - phic rather than less - anthropomorphic images . In other words , when no visible image is provided to the user , they will imagine their interaction partner looks anthro - pomorphic but feel less connected to them when they’re represented by a low - anthropomorphic image that doesn’t look familiar . This leads to the following hypotheses : Hypothesis V : People will feel less copresence with partners represented by low - anthropomorphic images than with partners represented by high - anthropomor - phic images or by no images . Hypothesis VI : People will feel less social presence with partners represented by low - anthropomor - phic images than with partners represented by high - anthropomorphic images or no images . 4 Method A 2 (cid:1) 3 between - subjects experiment was conducted using two factors : ( 1 ) agency of virtual other with two lev - els— ( i ) participants were told they were interacting with a human ( avatar condition ) or ( ii ) a bot ( agent condition ) ; and ( 2 ) degree of anthropomorphism of virtual image with three levels— ( i ) highly anthropomorphic image , ( ii ) low - anthropomorphic image , and ( iii ) no image control . 4 . 1 Participants A total of 134 undergraduate participants ( 94 men , 40 women ) received extra credit in introductory telecommunication courses at a large midwestern uni - versity . Participants were stratiﬁed by sex and randomly assigned to one of the six experimental conditions . 4 . 2 Stimulus Materials 4 . 2 . 1 The Environment . This interaction took place in a three - dimensional environment that appeared on a computer screen and resembled a meeting room and either saw an image representing their interaction partner or did not . See Figure 1 . 4 . 2 . 2 Degree of Anthropomorphism . The degree of anthropomorphism was manipulated by in - serting one of three types of images in a virtual room : a high - anthropomorphic image ( Figure 1a ) , a low - anthropomorphic image ( Figure 1b ) , or no image at all ( Figure 1c ) . Both images included eyes and mouths . 4 . 2 . 3 Agency . Both written and verbal instructions contained the agency manipulation . Participants were told whether they were interacting with either a human - controlled avatar or a computer - controlled agent . 4 . 3 Measurement Instruments 1 4 . 3 . 1 Telepresence . Telepresence is a measure of the feeling a person has that they are “inside” a vir - tual environment , a sense of “being there . ” This mea - sure comes from a development of a measure for pres - ence as immersion ( Lombard & Ditton , 1999 ) . Eight 1 . Conﬁrmatory factor analysis and tests of internal consistency were applied to each scale . All items loaded highest on their primary factor . The ﬁnal number of items in each scale and standardized item alpha is presented in Table 1 . Nowak and Biocca 485 Likert - type items with a seven - point metric were used to form a scale . ( See Table 1 for retained items . ) 4 . 3 . 2 Copresence . Copresence is related to the feeling of connection between two people . Given its dual nature , this was measured by two separate scales , one asked about participants’ perception of their part - ner’s involvement in the interaction ( perceived other’s copresence ) and the other asked them to self - report about their involvement in the interaction ( self - reported copresence ) . The perceived other’s copresence scale included ﬁfteen indicators . This scale was derived from a combination of the indicators for intimacy , involvement , and immediacy ( Burgoon & Hale , 1987 ) . ( See Table 1 for retained items . ) The self - reported copresence scale included eleven of the items used in perceived other’s copresence , but re - vised to ask the participants to self - report their level of involvement in the interaction . ( See Table 1 for retained items . ) 4 . 3 . 3 Social Presence . Social presence , or the perceived ability of the medium to connect people , con - Figure 1 . Images of the different images used in experimental conditions of this study : ( a ) high - anthropomorphic image , ( b ) low - anthropomorphic image , and ( c ) no image . Figure 1 ( d ) In either the high - anthropomorphic or low - anthropomorphic conditions , participants were allowed to select one of these characters on the “Virtual Representation Selection Screen” to represent them . 486 PRESENCE : VOLUME 12 , NUMBER 5 Table 1 . Items Retained and Used as Measurement Instruments Dependent Variable Items retained after tests of internal consistency and reliability Self - reported copresence . ( Standard alpha . 78 ) . 1 – 5 strongly agree , strongly disagree . I did not want a deeper relationship with my interaction partner . I wanted to maintain a sense of distance between us . I was unwilling to share personal information with my interaction partner . I wanted to make the conversation more intimate . I tried to create a sense of closeness between us . I was interested in talking to my interaction partner . Perceived other’s copresence . ( Standard alpha . 9 ) . 1 – 5 strongly agree , strongly disagree . My interaction partner was intensely involved in our interaction . My interaction partner seemed to ﬁnd our interaction stimulating . My interaction partner communicated coldness rather than warmth . My interaction partner created a sense of distance between us . My interaction partner seemed detached during our interaction . My interaction partner was unwilling to share personal information with me . My interaction partner made our conversation seem intimate . My interaction partner created a sense of distance between us . My interaction partner created a sense of closeness between us . My interaction partner acted bored by our conversation . My interaction partner was interested in talking to me . My interaction partner showed enthusiasm while talking to me . Telepresence scale . ( Standard alpha . 88 ) 1 – 7 , Not at All , Very Much How involving was the experience ? How intense was the experience ? To what extent did you feel like you were inside the environment you saw / heard ? To what extent did you feel immersed in the environment you saw / heard ? To what extent did you feel surrounded by the environment you saw / heard ? Social presence : ( Standard alpha . 82 ) . To what extent did you feel able to assess your partner’s reactions to what you said ? —Able to assess reactions , not able to assess reactions . To what extent was this like a face - to - face meeting ? —A lot like face to face , not like face to face at all . Sliding scale To what extent was this like you were in the same room with your partner ? —A lot like being in the same room , not like being in the same room at all . To what extent did your partner seem “real” ? —Very real , not real at all . How likely is it that you would choose to use this system of interaction for a meeting in which you wanted to persuade others of something ? — Very likely , not likely at all . To what extent did you feel you could get to know someone that you met only through this system ? —Very well , not at all . Nowak and Biocca 487 sisted of nine items from Short et al . ( 1976 ) . Partici - pants used a sliding scale to indicate social presence . This sliding scale coded participants’ placement of the slider on the screen , using a mouse , to the nearest hun - dredth . ( See Table 1 for retained items . ) 4 . 4 Procedure Participants completed a consent form and pretest questionnaire measuring demographics and computer usage . Participants were given written instructions that told them that their goal was to get to know their part - ner who may work with them and compete as a team for a $ 100 prize in the future on a scavenger hunt for soft - ware technologies on the World Wide Web . The partici - pants were given additional instructions and then sat at a 19 in . computer screen equipped with headphones , a microphone , and a keyboard , which they used to enter the virtual environment . In the no - image condition , the participants entered their participant ID numbers and immediately entered the virtual room ( Figure 1c ) . In the other conditions , participants entered the ID numbers and went to the character selection screen ( Figure 1d ) where they se - lected an image to represent them . Then participants entered the virtual environment by pressing the enter key . The average interaction lasted about 15 min . The interaction began with the virtual confederate ( agent or avatar ) introducing himself or herself . When the virtual confederate was done , the participant saw a green light indicating it was their turn . The participant spoke into a microphone to give their name and other introductory information . Following their introduction , the partici - pant pressed a button marked “done” to indicate their turn was over , and the green light went off . Then , the virtual confederate indicated their skills relevant to a scavenger hunt on the World Wide Web . All partici - pants in all conditions heard the same prerecorded fe - male voice reading the same script . When the virtual confederate was ﬁnished , the participant again saw a green light indicating that it was their turn to summa - rize their skills and again press the “done” button when ﬁnished . The virtual confederate said goodbye and indi - cated a wish to continue working with the participant , and the green light came on again , allowing the participant to say goodbye . When the participant indicated they were done saying goodbye , the interaction was over . After the interaction , participants completed an on - line questionnaire that included measures of presence , copresence , and social presence . Then they were de - briefed . 5 Results A linear regression with effects coding ( 1 , agency ; 2 , avatar ) was conducted on Agency for Hypotheses I – III . Effects - coded regressions were also run to com - pare those who interacted with a partner represented by a virtual image ( either high - or low - anthropomorphic ) to those who interacted with a partner not represented by a virtual image on telepresence ( hypothesis IV ) , and to examine the inﬂuence of the different images on co - presence ( hypothesis V ) and social presence ( hypothesis VI ) . The agent variable was effect coded , and a regres - sion was run to look for multiplicative interaction , but none was found . ( See Table 2 . ) 5 . 1 Effect of Agency on Presence Hypothesis I : People will feel more copresent interacting with an avatar than with an agent . This hypothesis was not supported . The effect of agency on perceived other’s copresence is not signiﬁcant : R (cid:2) . 03 , F (cid:2) . 15 , p (cid:2) . 7 . Participants did not perceive more copresence with an avatar ( M (cid:2) 3 . 13 , SD (cid:2) . 78 ) than with an agent ( M (cid:2) 3 . 17 , SD (cid:2) . 77 ) . The effect of agency on self - reported copresence is not signiﬁcant : R (cid:2) . 05 , F (cid:2) . 33 , p (cid:2) . 57 . Participants did not feel more copresence with an avatar ( M (cid:2) 3 . 18 , SD (cid:2) . 80 ) than with an agent ( M (cid:2) 3 . 10 , SD (cid:2) . 69 ) . Hypothesis II : People will feel more social presence interacting with an avatar than with an agent . The effect of agency on social presence is not signiﬁ - cant : R (cid:2) . 09 , F (cid:2) . 96 , p (cid:2) . 33 . Participants did not feel more social presence with an avatar ( M (cid:2) 1 . 40 , SD (cid:2) . 33 ) , than with an agent ( M (cid:2) 1 . 45 , SD (cid:2) . 33 ) . 488 PRESENCE : VOLUME 12 , NUMBER 5 Hypothesis III : People will feel more telepresence interacting with an avatar than with an agent . This hypothesis was not supported . The effect of agency on telepresence was not signiﬁ - cant : R (cid:2) . 06 , F (cid:2) . 55 , p (cid:2) . 46 . Participants did not feel more telepresence when interacting with an avatar ( M (cid:2) 3 . 37 , SD (cid:2) 1 . 21 ) than with an agent ( M (cid:2) 3 . 52 , SD (cid:2) 1 . 15 ) . 5 . 2 Effect of Virtual Image on Presence Hypothesis IV : People will feel more telepresence when their partner is represented by an image than when the partner is not represented by an image . A linear regression with effects - coded values to com - pare the no - image condition to the image conditions combined ( 0 : no image ; 1 : anthropomorphic image or low - anthropomorphic image ) was used to test this hy - pothesis . Although those in the image conditions felt more presence than did those in the no - image condi - tion , the difference was not signiﬁcant : R (cid:2) . 14 , F (cid:2) 2 . 48 , p (cid:2) . 12 . However , as seen in Figure 2 , people did report higher levels of telepresence when they interacted with a partner represented by an image . However , contrary to predictions ( but consistent with other measures of pres - ence ) , participants reported more telepresence with the low - anthropomorphic image than with the anthropo - morphic image . This linear relationship was tested with a linear regression with effects - coded values ( (cid:3) 1 : no Figure 2 . Means for no - image , high - anthropomorphic image , and low - anthropomorphic image reported by dependent variables telepresence , self - reported copresence , perceived other’s copresence , and social presence . Table 2 . Summary of Linear Regression Analysis with Effects - Coded Values for Tests of all Hypotheses Variable Effects coding B SE B (cid:1) HIa : Agency on perceived other’s copresence 1 agent , 2 avatar (cid:3) . 00 . 13 (cid:3) . 034 HIb : Agency on self - reported copresence 1 agent , 2 avatar . 00 . 13 HII : Agency on social presence 1 agent , 2 avatar . 00 . 06 (cid:3) . 09 HIII : Agency on telepresence 1 agent , 2 avatar (cid:3) . 15 . 20 (cid:3) . 06 HIV : Virtual image on telepresence (cid:3) 1 : no image ; 0 : high - anthropomorphic image ; 1 : high - anthropomorphic image . 25 . 13 . 17 * HVa : Virtual image on perceived other’s copresence (cid:3) 1 : low - anthropomorphic image ; 1 : anthropomorphic image ; 0 : no image . 20 . 08 . 22 * HVb : Virtual image on self - reported copresence (cid:3) 1 : low - anthropomorphic image ; 1 : anthropomorphic image ; 0 : no image (cid:3) . 16 . 08 . 17 * HVI : Virtual image on social presence (cid:3) 1 : low - anthropomorphic image ; 1 : anthropomorphic image ; 0 : no image . 00 . 03 (cid:3) . 19 * p (cid:4) . 05 . Nowak and Biocca 489 image ; 0 : anthropomorphic image ; (cid:5) 1 : low - anthropo - morphic image ) . This relationship is signiﬁcant : R (cid:2) . 17 , F (cid:2) 3 . 87 , p (cid:2) . 05 . Those in the low - anthropomor - phic condition felt more telepresence than those in the anthropomorphic condition , who felt more telepresence than did those in the no - image condition . 5 . 3 Effect of Less - Anthropomorphic Image on Copresence and Social Presence A linear regression with effects coding to test the prediction that those in the less anthropomorphic con - dition would have less social and copresence than those in the no - image condition , who would have less social and copresence than those in the high anthropomorphic condition ( (cid:3) 1 : low - anthropomorphic image ; 0 : no im - age ; 1 : high - anthropomorphic image ) was used to test hypotheses V and VI . ( See Table 2 . See means by con - dition in Figure 2 . ) Hypothesis V : People will feel less copresence with partners represented by low - anthropomorphic images than with partners represented by high - anthro - pomorphic images or by no images . This hypothesis was not supported . The effect of the low - anthropomorphic image was signiﬁcant in the op - posite direction . The effect of an anthropomorphic virtual image on perceived other’s copresence is signiﬁcant : R (cid:2) . 22 , F (cid:2) 6 . 52 , p (cid:2) . 01 . Participants interacting with the less an - thropomorphic virtual image reported their partners to be more copresent than those who interacted with ei - ther a more anthropomorphic virtual image or with no image . The same trend in the results was found with regard to the participants’ self - reported copresence in the inter - action . The effect of a low - anthropomorphic image on participants’ self - reported copresence is signiﬁcant : R (cid:2) . 18 , F (cid:2) 4 . 23 , p (cid:2) . 04 . Participants interacting with a less - anthropomorphic virtual image felt more copres - ence with their partner than did those interacting with either no image or with a more anthropomorphic virtual image . Hypothesis VI : People will feel less social presence with partners represented by low - anthropomorphic images than with partners represented by high - anthropomorphic images or no images . This hypothesis was not supported . There was a sig - niﬁcant difference in the opposite direction . The effect of a low - anthropomorphic image on par - ticipants’ social presence is signiﬁcant : R (cid:2) . 19 , F (cid:2) 4 . 90 , p (cid:2) . 03 . Participants interacting with a less an - thropomorphic virtual image felt that the environment could provide more social presence than did those inter - acting with either no image or with a more anthropo - morphic virtual image . 6 Discussion The results have implications for various theoreti - cal issues regarding mediated interactions . We now con - sider the implications of the results just presented in terms of the inﬂuence of agency and the virtual image on pres - ence , copresence , and social presence . Then we discuss implications for virtual environment design and use . 6 . 1 Agency Does Not Inﬂuence Presence There was no difference in participants’ perception of the medium’s ability to provide a connection to an - other mind ( social presence ) , nor was there any differ - ence in the extent to which participants felt physically present in the virtual world ( telepresence ) . Given that the means in all conditions were well above the middle of the scale ( representing relatively high levels of pres - ence ) , it seems that users felt they had access to another mind and that the mind was attending to them and that they felt present in the virtual environment regardless of whether they interacted with an agent or avatar . Although no real conclusions can be made with non - signiﬁcant differences , these results are consistent with several other studies that suggest that participants re - spond to computers socially , or in ways that are similar to their responses to other humans ( Reeves & Nass , 1996 ) . It lends further support for the propositions as - sociated with the intentional stance ( Dennett , 1987 ) , 490 PRESENCE : VOLUME 12 , NUMBER 5 that people ascribe human intentionality to all entities , whether human or nonhuman . 6 . 2 Increasing Telepresence : Any Image is Better Than No Image The results show that when people interacted with a partner represented by any visible image , they felt more immersed in the virtual environment ( presence ) than when there was no visible image . This was true regardless of whether their partner was an agent or an avatar . At the same time , although those in the no - im - age condition felt less telepresence than those in either image condition , when it comes to a sense of connec - tion with another entity , the choice of image is inﬂuen - tial as well as explored in the next section . 6 . 3 Appearance Matters : Pick Your Image Carefully A pioneer of virtual reality technology , Jaron Lanier , suggested that users could easily “become a lob - ster” or to take on any image ( Lanier , 1992 ) . The re - sults reported previously indicate that taking advantage of this freedom to be anybody may have consequences . When the virtual human’s image was more unusual and iconic ( less anthropomorphic ) , people felt more copres - ence , social presence , and telepresence . In this case , us - ers may have felt more excited , engaged , and interested when the image deviated from what they have experienced in the physical world . These results conﬂict with previous research that indicated that anthropomorphism increased people’s level of engagement ( Koda , 1996 ; Wexelblat , 1997 ) . It appears that there are consequences to one’s choice of images , although which features or characteristics of the image increase engagement is still unknown . It is possible that the more anthropomorphic image in this experiment brought about higher expectations that were not met ( Hindmarsh et al . , 2001 ; Slater & Steed , 2002 ) . In open - ended questionnaires , some par - ticipants reported feeling strange about interacting with a head ﬂoating without a body . It is possible that this had more of an inﬂuence in the more anthropomorphic condi - tion in which some participants mentioned that the human - like choices were “not very attractive” and “funny looking . ” At the same time , the mouth and eyes were much larger in the low anthropomorphic condition , which may have increased engagement . Further research is needed to clarify what features or characteristics of the im - age cause increased engagement and presence . 6 . 4 A Case for an Anthropomorphic “Default Image” There was no signiﬁcant difference in the sense of copresence and social presence between users who interacted with a high anthropomorphic image and those who interacted with someone not represented by an image ( although there was a signiﬁcant differ - ence in telepresence ) . This indicates that the high - anthropomorphic image was more similar to the mental image participants created in their minds , or the default image when there was no visible image . This is consis - tent with the prediction that , in the absence of contra - dictory information , people assume that their interac - tion partner is anthropomorphic . It is important to note that the reaction to the anthropomorphic virtual image was not negative , but instead that reactions to the low - anthropomorphic image were more positive . 2 This is con - sistent with both the argument that people’s model of the other’s mind is based on a generalization from one’s own mind ( Gordon , 1986 ) as well as Walter’s 1996 ﬁnding that users were more likely to believe that others were “like them” in low bandwidth systems than in high bandwidth systems . Both of these theories argue that there may be a tendency for the “default other” to be some variation on the self in the absence of disconﬁrming experience . 7 Conclusion : Any “Other” Increases Presence , but All Bodies are Not Equal It has been argued that people may tend to re - spond socially to all intelligent others , whether the oth - ers are human or not ( Reeves & Nass , 1996 ) . The re - 2 . See Figure 2 . The means for all conditions were above the mid - dle of the scale . Nowak and Biocca 491 sults from this study are consistent with this theory , but they must be interpreted cautiously as they are based on acceptance of the null hypothesis . There were no differ - ences in users’ sense of presence whether or not they were interacting with a human , but all users felt a rela - tively high degree of presence . At the same time , the results showing signiﬁcant dif - ferences in how people responded to virtual bodies sug - gest a caveat . The presence of a virtual body caused peo - ple to feel more telepresence or immersion in the virtual environment . Also , certain types of images enhanced or increased both presence and social presence . Anthropo - morphic virtual bodies with human voices may consis - tently elicit social responses , but , at a certain level , in - creasing anthropomorphism may be less important to presence than exaggerating certain features of the image to enhance the experience . Also , increasing anthropo - morphism may raise expectations and should be done only when the interface and system can meet higher expectations . Participants were engaged with virtual humans whether they looked human or not . There is support in this experiment for the following conclusions : as artiﬁ - cial entities are represented by images or use language like humans , then they may elicit automatic social re - sponses from users . If they enhance facial expression and features or are unique and interesting , these responses may be increased . The visible representation had an ef - fect on presence , but the perception of whether the other was human or not had no effect . Future research should work to better deﬁne the boundaries of when , where , and how these responses are evoked . Acknowledgments This project was carried out at Michigan State University’s MIND Lab . This project was funded in part by the MSU Foundation and the SBC - Ameritech Foundation . The MIND Lab staff , especially Eric Maslowski , created the images used in this study . Thanks also to Carrie Heeter , Kelly Morrison , Sandi Smith , Chip Steinﬁeld , Duncan Rowland , and Mark Hamilton for their assistance . References Argyle , M . ( 1988 ) . Bodily communication ( 2nd ed . ) . New York : International Universities Press . Barﬁeld , W . , Zeltzer , B . , Sheridan , T . , & Slater , M . ( 1995 ) . Presence and performance within virtual environments . In W . Barﬁeld & T . A . Furness ( Eds . ) , Virtual environments and advanced interface design ( pp . 473 – 513 ) . New York : Oxford University Press . Benford , S . , Greenhalgh , C . , Rodden , T . , & Pycock , J . ( 2001 ) . To what extent is cyberspace really a space ? Collab - orative virtual environments . Communications of the ACM , 4 ( 7 ) , 79 – 85 . Biocca , F . ( 1997 ) . The cyborg’s dilemma : Progressive embod - iment in virtual environments . Journal of Computer Medi - ated Communication , 3 ( 2 ) , Retrieved from http : / / www . ascusc . org / jcmc / vol3 / issue2 / biocca2 . html . Bratman , M . ( 1999 ) . Faces of intention : Selected essays on in - tention and agency . Cambridge , U . K . : Cambridge Univer - sity Press . Brent , E . , & Thompson , G . A . ( 1999 ) . Sociology : Modeling social interaction with autonomous agents . Social Science Computer Review , 17 ( 3 ) , 313 – 322 . Brooks , R . ( 2002 ) . Flesh and machines . New York : Pantheon . Burgoon , J . , & Hale , J . ( 1987 ) . Validation and measurement of the fundamental themes of relational communication . Communication Monographs , 54 , 19 – 41 . Cassell , J . , Sullivan , J . , Prevost , S . , & Churchill , E . ( Eds . ) . ( 2000 ) . Embodied conversational agents . Cambridge : The MIT Press . Damer , B . ( 1997 ) . Avatars ! : Exploring and building virtual Worlds on the Internet . Berkley : Peachpit Press . Dennett , D . C . ( 1987 ) . The intentional stance . Cambridge : The MIT Press . ——— . ( 1996 ) . Kinds of minds : Toward an understanding of consciousness ( 1st ed . ) . New York : Basic Books . Don , A . ( 1992 ) . Anthropomorphism : From Eliza to Termina - tor 2 . Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human fac - tors in computing systems , 67 – 70 . Draper , J . V . , Kaber , D . B . , & Usher , J . M . ( 1998 ) . Telepres - ence . Human Factors , 40 ( 3 ) , 354 – 375 . Dryer , D . C . ( 1999 ) . Getting personal with computers : How to design personalities for agents . Applied Artiﬁcial Intelli - gence , 13 ( 2 ) , 273 – 295 . Fisher , J . ( 1997 ) . The postmodern paradiso : Dante , cyber - punk , and the technosophy of cyberspace . In D . Porter ( Ed . ) , Internet culture ( pp . 106 – 122 ) . London : Routledge . 492 PRESENCE : VOLUME 12 , NUMBER 5 Gainotti , G . , Silveri , M . C . , Daniele , A . , & Giustolisi , L . ( 1995 ) . Neuroanatomical correlates of category - speciﬁc se - mantic disorders : A critical survey . Memory , 3 , 247 – 264 . Gerrig , R . ( 1993 ) . Experiencing narrative worlds . Boston : Yale University Press . Goffman , E . ( 1963 ) . Behavior in public places : Notes on the social organization of gatherings . New York : The Free Press . Goodwin , J . ( 1998 ) . The meaning of life : Real and / or artiﬁ - cial . In T . Kunii & A . Luciani ( Eds . ) , Cyberworlds ( pp . 43 – 65 ) . Tokyo : Springer - Verlag . Gordon , R . M . ( 1986 ) . Folk psychology as simulation . Mind and Language , 1 , 158 – 171 . Heeter , C . ( 1992 ) . Being there : The subjective experience of presence . Presence : Teleoperators and Virtual Environments , 1 ( 2 ) , 262 – 271 . Hindmarsh , J . , Fraser , M . , Heath , C . , & Benford , S . ( 2001 ) . Virtually missing the point : Conﬁguring CVEs for object - focused interaction . In E . F . Churchill , D . N . Snowdon , & A . J . Munro ( Eds . ) . Collaborative virtual environments : Digital places and spaces for interaction ( pp . 115 – 142 ) . London Berlin Heidelberg : Springer - Verlag . Ichheiser , G . ( 1970 ) . Appearances and realities : Misunder - standing in human relations . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . Isla , D . , & Blumberg , B . ( 2002 , March ) . New challenges for character - based Al for games . Paper presented at the AAAI Spring Symposium on AI and Interactive Entertainment , Palo Alto , CA . Keil , F . ( 1994 ) . The birth and nurturance of concepts by domains : The origins of concepts of living things . In L . Hirschfeld & S . Gelman ( Eds . ) , Mapping the mind : Domain speciﬁcity in cognition and culture ( pp . 234 – 254 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Koda , T . ( 1996 ) . Agents with faces : A study on the effects of personiﬁcation of software agents . Unpublished master’s the - sis , Massachusetts Institute of Technology . Lanier , J . ( 1992 ) . Virtual reality : The promise of the future . Interactive Learning International , 8 , 275 – 279 . Laurel , B . ( 1990 ) . Interface agents : Metaphors with character . In B . Laurel ( Ed . ) , The art of human - computer interface design ( pp . 235 – 366 ) . Reading , MA : Addison - Wesley . Lipton , M . ( 1996 ) . Forgetting the body : Cybersex and iden - tity . In L . Strate , R . Jacobson , & S . Gibson ( Eds . ) , Commu - nication and cyberspace : Social interaction in an electronic environment . Cresskill , New Jersey : Hampton Press . Lombard , M . , & Ditton , T . ( 1999 ) . Presence measures . Un - published manuscript , Temple University . Lombard , M . , Ditton , T . B . , Crane , D . , Davis , B . , Gil - Egui , G . , Horvath , K . , Rossman , J . , & Park , S . ( 2000 ) . Measuring presence : A literature - based approach to the development of a standardized paper - and - pencil instrument . Paper presented at the Third International Workshop on Presence , Delft , The Netherlands . Magnenat - Thalmann , N . , & Kshirsagar , S . ( 2000 , October ) . Communicating with autonomous virtual humans . Paper presented at the seventeenth Twente Workshop on Lan - guage Technology , Enschede Universiteit Twente . McCann , H . ( 1998 ) . The works of agency : On human action , will , and freedom . Ithaca , NY : Cornell University Press . Minsky , M . ( 1980 ) . Telepresence . Omni , 2 , 44 – 52 . Nass , C . , & Moon , Y . ( 2000 ) . Machines and mindlessness : Social responses to computers . Journal of Social Issues , 56 ( 1 ) , 81 . Nowak , K . ( 2001 , May ) . Deﬁning and differentiating copres - ence , social presence and presence as transportation . Paper presented at the Presence 2001 Conference , Philadelphia , PA . Reeves , B . , & Nass , C . ( 1996 ) . The media equation : How peo - ple treat computers , television , and new media like real people and places . Stanford , CA : CSLI Publications . Rheingold , H . ( 1995 ) . The virtual community . New York : Harper Perennial . Rice , R . ( 1993 ) . Media appropriateness : Using social presence theory to compare traditional and new organizational me - dia . Human Communication Research , 19 ( 4 ) , 451 – 484 . Schroeder , R . ( 2002 ) . Social interaction in virtual environ - ments : Key issues , common themes , and a framework for research . In R . Schroeder ( Ed . ) , The social life of avatars : Presence and interaction in shared virtual environments . London : Springer - Verlag . Sheehan , J . ( 1991a ) . Introduction : Humans and animals . In J . Sheehan & M . Sosna ( Eds . ) , The boundaries of humanity : Humans , animals , machines ( pp . 27 – 35 ) . Oxford , England : University of California Press . ——— . ( 1991b ) . Introduction : Humans and machines . In J . Sheehan & M . Sosna ( Eds . ) , The Boundaries of humanity : Humans , animals , machines ( pp . 135 – 141 ) . Oxford , En - gland : University of California Press . Sheridan , T . ( 1992 ) . Musings on telepresence and virtual presence . Presence : Teleoperators and Virtual Environments , 1 ( 1 ) , 120 – 126 . Short , J . , Williams , E . , & Christie , B . ( 1976 ) . The social psy - chology of telecommunications . London : John Wiley & Sons . Slater , M . , & Steed , A . ( 2002 ) . Meeting people virtually : Ex - periments in shared virtual environments . In R . Schroeder Nowak and Biocca 493 ( Ed . ) , The social life of avatars : Presence and interaction in shared virtual environments ( pp . 146 – 171 ) . London : Springer - Verlag . Steuer , J . ( 1994 ) . Deﬁning virtual reality : Dimensions deter - mining telepresence . In F . Biocca & M . Levy ( Eds . ) , Com - munication in the age of virtual reality . Hillsdale , NJ : Law - rence Erlbaum . Talamo , A . , & Ligorio , B . ( 2001 ) . Strategic identities in cy - berspace . CyberPsychology & Behavior , 4 ( 1 ) , 109 – 122 . Taylor , T . L . ( 2002 ) . Living digitally : Embodiment in virtual worlds . In R . Schroeder ( Ed . ) , The social life of avatars : Presence and interaction in shared virtual environments ( pp . 40 – 62 ) . London : Springer - Verlag . Turkle , S . ( 1995 ) . Life on the screen : Identity in the age of the Internet . New York : Simon & Schuster . Walther , J . B . ( 1996 ) . Computer - mediated communication : Impersonal , interpersonal , and hyperpersonal interaction . Communication Research , 23 , 3 – 43 . Warrington , E . K . , & Shallice , T . ( 1984 ) . Category speciﬁc semantic impairments . Brain , 107 , 829 – 854 . Waskul , D . , & Douglass , M . ( 1997 ) . Cyberself : The emer - gence of self in on - line chat . The Information Society , 13 ( 4 ) , 375 – 397 . Wexelblat , A . ( 1997 ) . Don’t make that face : A report on anthro - pomorphizing an interface . Available : http : / / wex . www . media . mit . edu / people / wex / anthro - expt - paper / Anthro - r . htm . Witmer , B . G . , & Singer , M . J . ( 1994 ) . Measuring immersion in virtual environments ( 1014 ) . Alexandria , VA : U . S . Army Research Institute for the Behavioral and Social Sciences . 494 PRESENCE : VOLUME 12 , NUMBER 5