Chemistry of mycolactones , the causative toxins of Buruli ulcer Yoshito Kishi 1 Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology , Harvard University , 12 Oxford Street , Cambridge , MA 02138 Edited by Stuart L . Schreiber , Broad Institute , Cambridge , MA , and approved January 13 , 2011 ( received for review November 3 , 2010 ) Buruli ulcer is a severe and devastating skin disease caused by Mycobacterium ulcerans infection , yet it is one of the most neglected diseases . The causative toxin , referred to as mycolactone A / B , was isolated and characterized as a polyketide - derived macro - lide in 1999 . The current status of the mycolactone chemistry is described , highlighting the stereochemistry assignment of myco - lactone A / B ; total synthesis ; the structure determination of myco - lactone congeners from the human pathogen M . ulcerans , the frog pathogen Mycobacterium liflandii , and the fish pathogen Myco - bacterium marinum ; the structural diversity in the mycolactone class of natural products ; the highly sensitive detection / struc - ture - analysis of mycolactones ; and some biological activity . structure elucidation ∣ stucture diversity B uruli ulcer , also known as Bairnsdale or Searle ’ s ulcer , is a severe and devastating skin disease caused by Mycobacterium ulcerans infection , yet it is one of the most neglected diseases ( Fig . 1 ) . ( 1 – 4 ) Among the diseases caused by mycobacterial infection , Buruli ulcer occurs less frequently than tuberculosis ( Mycobacterium tuberculosis ) and leprosy ( Mycobacterium leprae ) . However , it is noted that the occurrence of Buruli ulcer is increas - ing and spreading in tropical countries , and that the incidence of the disease may exceed that of leprosy and tuberculosis in highly affected areas . Infection with M . ulcerans , probably car - ried by aquatic insects ( 5 ) and mosquitoes ( 6 ) , results in progres - sive necrotic lesions that , if untreated , can extend to 15 % of a patient ’ s skin surface . Surgical intervention has been the only practical curative therapy for Buruli ulcer . Encouragingly , com - bination treatments with rifampicin and either streptomycin or amikacin have recently been reported to prevent the growth of the bacteria in early lesions , pointing out the importance of diagnosing the disease at its preulcerative stage . Most pathogenic bacteria produce toxins that play an impor - tant role ( s ) in disease . However , there has been no evidence thus far to suggest toxin production by M . tuberculosis and M . leprae . Interestingly , the presence of a toxin in M . ulcerans had been noticed for many years , but the toxin was not isolated until 1999 when Small and coworkers succeeded in isolation and char - acterization of two polyketide - derived macrolides from this bac - teria ( 7 ) . These macrolides were designated mycolactones A and B . However , under standard laboratory conditions , mycolactones A and B exist as a 3 ∶ 2 equilibrating mixture and are referred to as mycolactone A / B in this paper . Intradermal inoculation of mycolactone A / B into guinea pigs produces lesions similar to that of Buruli ulcer in humans , demonstrating their direct correlation with Buruli ulcer ( 8 ) . Structure Gross Structure . The gross structure of mycolactone A / B was elu - cidated by Small and coworkers via a variety of spectroscopic methods ; coupled with MS , UV , and IR studies , extensive 2D NMR experiments ( GMQCOSY , TOCSY , HSQC , HMQC , and ROESY ) led them to suggest the gross structure of mycolactone A / B ( Fig . 2 ) . Mycolactone A / B exists as a 3 ∶ 2 equilibrating mix - ture , with the major and minor components corresponding to the Z - Δ 4 0 ; 5 0 - and E - Δ 4 0 ; 5 0 - isomers , respectively , in the unsaturated fatty acid side chain ( 9 ) . Stereochemistry . There are 1 , 024 stereoisomers possible for the proposed gross structure of mycolactone A / B . Considering the limited availability , as well as the noncrystallinity of mycolactone A / B , we were aware of the difficulties which might be encoun - tered in the assignment of its stereochemistry . Interestingly , we were then engaged in the development of the universal NMR da - tabase approach to assign the relative and absolute configuration of unknown compounds without degradation or derivatization ( 10 ) . We recognized that the universal NMR database approach was uniquely suited to address the stereochemistry of the myco - lactone A / B , and began the work . In order to assign the relative stereochemistry at C16 , C17 , and C19 , we wanted to learn the NMR profile for each diastereomer arising from these three stereogenic centers . For this purpose , we selected compound 1 corresponding to the C14 - C20 moiety of mycolactone A / B ( Fig . 3 ) . All of the four possible diastereomers of 1 were synthesized , and their NMR properties were analyzed . This study demonstrated that : ( i ) each diastereomer exhibits a distinct NMR profile that differs from that of the other diaster - eomers and ( ii ) only diastereomer 1a exhibits a profile matching the NMR profile of the C14 - C20 portion of mycolactone A / B . Based on this observation , we predicted the relative stereochem - istry at C16 , C17 , and C19 of mycolactone A / B corresponds to that of 1a . To address the relative stereochemistry at the macrolide moi - ety , i . e . , C5 , C6 , C11 , and C12 , we adopted a similar , but slightly modified approach , considering the overall efficiency of work . These efforts led us to conclude the relative stereochemistry of the core to be 2 ( Fig . 4 ) . Fig . 1 . Buruli ulcerlesion . Takenfrom “ Buruli ulcer : Mycobacterium ulcerans infection ” , ed . Kingsley Asiedu , Robert Scherpbier , and Mario Raviglione , World Health Organization , 2000 . Author contributions : Y . K . designed research ; Y . K . performed research ; Y . K . analyzed data ; and Y . K . wrote the paper . The authors declare no conflict of interest . This article is a PNAS Direct Submission . 1 To whom correspondence should be addressed . E - mail : kishi @ chemistry . harvard . edu . This article contains supporting information online at www . pnas . org / lookup / suppl / doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1015252108 / - / DCSupplemental . www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1015252108 PNAS ∣ April 26 , 2011 ∣ vol . 108 ∣ no . 17 ∣ 6703 – 6708 C H E M I S T RY S P E C I A L F E A T U R E The absolute stereochemistry of the core was concluded from the comparison of the 1 H NMR spectra of the ( S ) - and ( R ) - Mosher esters prepared from 2 with those prepared from the core derived from natural mycolactone . We should note that , with the use of chiral NMR solvents developed later , the absolute config - uration of the core could be determined only from NMR experi - ments ( 11 ) . To elucidatethe NMR profile for each diastereomerarising from the three stereogenic centers at C12 ′ , C13 ′ , and C15 ′ , we con - structed an NMR database for compound 3 , e . g . , synthesized all of the four possible diastereomersand analyzed theirNMR proper - ties . Asanticipated , thisexperimentdemonstratedthat : ( i ) eachdia - stereomer exhibits a distinct NMR profile that differs from that of the other diastereomers and ( ii ) the diastereomer 3 exhibits a pro - file matching the profile of this moiety of mycolactone A / B . From this observation , we predicted that the relative stereochemistry of mycolactone A / B at C12 ′ , C13 ′ , and C15 ′ corresponds to that of 3 . With the relative stereochemistry determined , we attempted to establish the absolute configuration of the unsaturated fatty acid chain . Derivatization and degradation approaches proved unsuc - cessful , largely due to the very limited availability of the natural mycolactone . Under this circumstance , we recognized the poten - tial of the NMR database approach in chiral solvents , which was concurrently developed in our laboratory ( 12 ) . Thus , we studied the 1 H NMR profiles of the four diastereomers of 3 in ( R ) - and ( S ) - N , and α - dimethylbenzylamines [ PhCH ( Me ) NHMe , DMBA ] , thereby revealing two important aspects . First , each diastereomer exhibited almost identical NMR profiles in both ( R ) - and ( S ) - DMBA , but very distinct and different NMR profiles from each other , thereby showing that the 1 H NMR database in ( R ) - and / or ( S ) - DMBA can be used for predicting the relative configuration of the structure motifs such as 3 . Second , each diastereomer exhib - ited a small but definitive difference between the chemical shifts recorded in ( R ) - DMBA and ( S ) - DMBA , demonstrating that the NMR database in ( R ) - and / or ( S ) - DMBA can be used for predict - ing the absolute configuration of the structure motifs such as 3 . The 1 H NMR spectra of mycolactone A / B were recorded in ( R ) - and ( S ) - DMBA , and the chemical shift assignment was made through COSY experiments . The 1 H chemical shift differences ( Δ δ ¼ δ R − δ S ) for the relevant protons in the natural mycolac - tone were found opposite in sign to those observed for 3 , allowing us to establish that the C12 ′ , C13 ′ , and C15 ′ - absolute configura - tion of the mycolactones corresponds to the antipode of 3 . Com - bined with the defined core structure , we concluded that the complete structure of the mycolactone A / B is 4 ( Fig . 5 ) ( 13 ) . It is worthwhile adding that we were able to make the chemical shift assignment and determine the chemical shift differences ( Δ δ ¼ δ R − δ S ) for the H17 and H19 protons . The experiment permitted us to predict that the absolute configuration of the core corresponds to that of 2 . This prediction was consistent with our earlier conclusion derived from the NMR analysis of the Mosher esters . Structure Determinations of Mycolactone Congeners . Following the isolation of mycolactone A / B , several mycolactone congeners were reported from clinical isolates of M . ulcerans from Africa , Malaysia , Asia , Australia , and Mexico . In addition , mycolactone - like metabolites were isolated from the frog pathogen Mycobac - terium liflandii and the fish pathogen Mycobacterium marinum . As these metabolites were available only in very minute quantities , their structure determination posed a major challenge . For many of these metabolites , the molecular formula estimated by mass spectroscopy was the only structure information available . With a complete structure and a flexible , modular synthesis ( vide infra ) of mycolactone A / B , we took a new approach to establish the complete structure of the mycolactone congeners . To illustrate this approach , we shall use the case of mycolactone F isolated from the fish pathogen M . marinum ( 14 ) . Based on the mass spectroscopic data , Leadlay suggested the gross structure of mycolactone F ( 15 ) . However , no data was available to assign its stereochemistry . Considering the similarity of mycolactone F to mycolactone A / B , we speculated 5 to be the likely structure and decided to synthesize this candidate ( Fig . 6 ) . Following the synthesis outlined later , we uneventfully obtained synthetic 5 . Under standard laboratory conditions , 5 ( λ max 323 nm , MeOH ) did not isomerize as rapidly as mycolac - tone A / B ( λ max 362 nm , MeOH ) . Under photochemical condi - Fig . 2 . Gross structure of mycolactone A / B . Mycolactone A / B exists as a 3 ∶ 2 equilibrating mixture , with the major and minor components being Z - Δ 4 0 ; 5 0 - and E - Δ 4 0 ; 5 0 - isomers , respectively , in the unsaturated fatty acid side chain . Fig . 3 . Four diastereomers possible for the NMR database compound 1 . Fig . 4 . Three structural motifs used for the stereochemistry assignment of mycolactone A / B . The structural motifs indicated in red and blue were used for theanalysis ofthecore , whereas that in greenwas used fortheanalysisof the unsaturated fatty acid side chain . Fig . 5 . Complete structure of mycolactone A / B . A wavy line indicates that this bond exists as a mixture of E - and Z - geometrical isomers . 6704 ∣ www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1015252108 Kishi tions ( 300 nm , acetone ) , however , a facile geometric isomeriza - tion was observed , furnishing a 5 ∶ 2 ∶ 2 mixture of three predomi - nant isomers - note the 1 , 3 , 5 - trimethyl groups present in the chromophore of mycolactone F vs . the 1 , 3 - dimethyl groups in the chromophore of mycolactone A / B . The 1 H NMR spectrum of synthetic , photochemically equilibrated material appeared to match the 1 H NMR spectrum reported for the natural mycolac - tone , which might suggest the structure of mycolactone F to be 5 . At the same time , we realized that this comparison alone could not exclude the possibility of 6 . In our terminology , 6 is a remote diastereomer of 5 , a diaster - eomer due to the stereocenter ( s ) present outside a self - contained box ( es ) ( 16 ) . As demonstrated in the universal NMR database work , remote diastereomers exhibit virtually identical , or at least very similar , NMR spectra in an achiral NMR solvent ( 17 ) . How - ever , in a chiral environment , they could show different physico - chemical properties . With both diastereomers 5 and 6 secured by synthesis , we began to search for an analytical method to distinguish them . Given the fact that only a very minute amount of natural myco - lactone F was available , we needed an analytical method with a high sensitivity and opted to use chiral analytical HPLC . For this search , we purposely used the photochemically equilibrated 5 and 6 with the hope that each of their geometric isomers might give a distinct retention time . Thus , HPLC comparison could be performed on the basis of six , instead of two , distinct retention times - note that both 5 and 6 exist as a mixture of three predomi - nant geometric isomers . After numerous attempts , we eventually found that a Chiralpak IA chiral column employing a mobile phase of toluene - isopropanol can distinguish all of the six remote diastereomers ( Fig . 7 ) . Finally , we subjected the natural product to this analysis , thereby demonstrating that mycolactone from the fish pathogen M . marinum is surprisingly 6 ( 18 ) . The 1 , 3 - diol present in the unsaturated fatty acid side chain of 6 occurs curiously in the mirror image of the 1 , 3 - diol present in other mycolactones . The mycolactone F used for this study was isolated from M . marinum DL240490 from cultured European sea bass . Intriguingly , we later found that the mycolactone iso - lated from M . marinum BB170200 from freshwater silver perch in Israel corresponds to 5 , referred to as mycolactone dia - F ( 19 ) . In this light , it is interesting to quote the Stinear claim that mycolactone - producing mycobacteria have all evolved from a common M . marinum progenitor ( 20 ) . This suggestion may imply that , at some stage of evolution , the absolute configura - tion in question was switched between the mycolactone F and mycolactone A / B series . Interestingly , prior to the isolation of mycolactone F from marine fish populations , all of the other mycolactones had been isolated from species located in or around freshwater habitats . The approach described for the structure elucidation of myco - lactone F was applied to establish the structure of mycolactones C ( 21 , 22 ) , D ( 23 ) , E ( 24 – 26 ) , and E ketone ( 27 ) ( Fig . 8 ) . Because this approach required an authentic sample for a given mycolac - tone , we needed to synthesize all of the mycolactones and their remote diastereomers . There was obviously an additional motiva - tion for us to undertake the synthetic work , namely to learn the biological profiles of these mycolactones and their remote diastereomers . Total Synthesis As the structure of mycolactone A / B was elucidated by applica - tion of the newly developed logic and method , we felt it was important to confirm the assigned structure . For this reason , we carried out a total synthesis of mycolactone A / B and were able to confirm that the assigned structure was indeed correct ( 28 ) . During the work , we realized that organic synthesis could play an additional , critical role to advance the mycolactone science . Because of the slow growth of M . ulcerans , it has been a difficult task to secure mycolactone A / B in quantities by fermentation . In addition , mycolactone A / B from the natural source is often contaminated with various unknown compounds , including myco - lactone congeners . We believed that organic synthesis could supply homogeneous material in sufficient quantities for further study . With this analysis , we continued synthetic work and devel - Fig . 6 . Structure of mycolactones F and dia - F isolated from M . marinum DL240490 ( cultured European sea bass ) and BB170200 ( freshwater silver perch ) , respectively . For the structure of core , see Fig . 5 . Under the photoche - mical condition ( 300 nm , acetone ) , both mycolactones smoothly isomerize , to furnish a 5 ∶ 2 ∶ 2 mixture of three predominant regioisomers . A wavy line indicates that this bond exists as a mixture of E - and Z - geometrical isomers . Fig . 7 . HPLC comparison of synthetic , photochemically isomerized mycolac - tone F and dia - F with the mycolactones isolated from M . marinum in fresh - water and saltwater fish . ( A ) 1 : synthetic mycolactone F , 2 : synthetic mycolactone dia - F , 3 : their 1 ∶ 1 mixture . ( B ) 1 : mycolactone isolated from freshwater fish pathogen ( M . marinum BB170200 ) , 2 : mixed with synthetic mycolactone F ; 3 : mixed with synthetic mycolactone dia - F . ( C ) 1 : mycolactone isolated from saltwater fish pathogen ( M . marinum DL240490 ) , 2 : mixed with synthetic mycolactone dia - F ; 3 : mixed with synthetic mycolactone F . Kishi PNAS ∣ April 26 , 2011 ∣ vol . 108 ∣ no . 17 ∣ 6705 C H E M I S T RY S P E C I A L F E A T U R E oped a scalable and efficient synthesis of the mycolactone class of natural products . In this section , we give a brief summary of the third generation synthesis ( 29 ) . This synthesis is modular in nature and can be adjusted for the preparation of various myco - lactone stereoisomers and / or analogs . Core Synthesis . Fig . 9 summarizes the current core synthesis with the key synthetic reactions indicated . The core is assembled from the three building blocks A , B , and C , each of which is synthesized using asymmetric reactions such as Brown crotylboration , Sharp - less asymmetric epoxidation , and Katsuki asymmetric epoxida - tion as the key steps . The building blocks A , B , and C are then assembled with Negishi cross - coupling reactions to furnish the mycolactone core 8 . With this route , we have prepared 6 g of the mycolactone core with relative ease and anticipate that it should be straightforward to prepare even larger quantities , if the need arose . It is worth - while noting : ( i ) this synthesis gives the core with > 99 % optical purity and ( ii ) this synthesis is flexible and permits access to var - ious stereoisomers and analogs of the mycolactones . Unsaturated Fatty Acid Synthesis . Fig . 10 summarizes the synthesis of the unsaturated fatty acid 9 from the building blocks D and E via Horner - Emmons reaction , followed by saponification ( 30 ) . Under standard laboratory conditions , the pentaenoate obtained from the Horner - Emmons reaction rapidly equilibrates into a 3 ∶ 2 mixture of the Z - Δ 4 0 ; 5 0 - and E - Δ 4 0 ; 5 0 - geometric isomers , which cor - responds to the ratio of mycolactone A / B . The phosphonate D was prepared from 2 - butene - 1 , 4 - diol in stereochemically homogeneous form , whereas the aldehyde E was synthesized from commercially available , optically pure ethyl ( S ) - 3 - hydroxybutyrate . Sharpless asymmetric dihydroxylation was used to install the remaining hydroxyl groups of mycolactone A / B , whereas catalytic asymmetric Cr - mediated allylation was used to install the hydroxyl groups of mycolactones C , E , and F . The coupling of the unsaturated fatty acid with the core was uneventfully accomplished using the Yamaguchi method , and subsequent tetrabutylammonium fluoride ( TBAF ) - promoted de - protection of the tert - butyldimethylsilyl ( TBS ) groups furnished mycolactone A / B . In the first generation synthesis , the C17 / C19 - diol of the core was protected as a cyclopentylidene ketal , but we noticed that the acid - promoted deprotection of the cyclopen - tylidene ketal was problematic . In contrast , mycolactone A / B is stable under the TBAF - promoted TBS - deprotection . The mycolactones have attracted considerable attention from the synthetic community not only for their biological activity , but also for being the first examples of polyketide macrolides isolated from a human pathogen . Indeed , several other groups have reported the syntheses of mycolactone core and / or unsaturated fatty acid side chain ( 31 – 34 ) . Structural Diversity in the Mycolactone Class of Natural Products All of the mycolactones reported to date are composed of a 12 - membered macrolactone and a highly unsaturated fatty acid side chain . The macrolactone core is conserved in all of the mem - bers in the mycolactone class of natural products . On the other hand , there is a remarkable structural diversity observed in the unsaturated fatty acid portion , including the length of fatty acid backbone , the degree of unsaturation , the degree of hydroxyla - tion , the stereochemistry of hydroxylation , the oxidation state of alcohols , and the number of methyl groups . Three mycolactones A / B , C , and D from clinical isolates of M . ulcerans are structurally well defined . All of them are com - posed of a hexadecanoic acid backbone with a pentaenoate chro - mophore , but differ in the number of hydroxyl and methyl groups . Two mycolactones from the frog pathogen M . liflandii are com - posed of a pentadecanoic acid backbone with the tetraenoate chromophore , but are different in the oxidation level , i . e . , 1 , 3 - diol vs . 1 , 3 - hydroxyketone at C11 ′ and C13 ′ . Mycolactones isolated Fig . 8 . Structurally well defined mycolactones . For the structure of core , see Fig . 5 . A wavy line indicates that this bond exists as a mixture of E - and Z - geometrical isomers . Fig . 9 . Convergent synthesis of the core 8 . ( A ) . The C5 and C6 stereogenic centers are incorporated by Brown crotylboration . ( B ) . The C11 and C12 stereogenic centers are incorporated by Sharpless asymmetric epoxidation , followed by a regiospecific epoxide - opening with LiCu ð Me Þ 2 . ( C ) . The C16 and C17 stereogenic centers are incorporated by Katsuki asymmetric epox - idation , followed by a regiospecific epoxide - opening with Al ð Me Þ 3 ∕ MeLi . ( D ) . Negishi cross coupling , followed by Yamaguchi lactonization . ( E ) . Negishi cross coupling . 6706 ∣ www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1015252108 Kishi from pathogens of frogs are different from those of human patho - gens in the length of the carbon backbone and the degree of unsaturation . Mycolactones F and dia - F from the fish pathogen M . marinum share the same pentadecanoic acid . However , because the fatty acid occurs as a mirror image , mycolactones F and dia - F are remote diastereomers . All of the mycolactones known to date have the same absolute configuration of the 1 , 3 - diol as that of mycolactone dia - F . The reason for the heterogeneity in the abso - lute configuration of the 1 , 3 - diol moiety is not clear at this time , but it gives an additional dimension to the structural diversity of mycolactones . Mycolactones isolated from fish and human patho - gens are different in the length of the carbon backbone and the degree of unsaturation . Detection and Structure Analysis As mentioned before , combination treatments with rifampicin and either streptomycin or amikacin have recently been reported to prevent the growth of the bacteria in early lesions , pointing out the importance of diagnosing the disease at its preulcera - tive stage . Currently , polymerase chain reaction of M . ulcerans DNA is commonly used to detect M . ulcerans infection ( 35 ) . Undoubtedly , there is an urgent need for development of a cost and time effective method , ideally simple enough for field - use in remote areas , to detect M . ulcerans infection . Interestingly , mycolactone A / B appears to be biosynthetically restricted to M . ulcerans and homogeneously distributed within the infected tissue ( 36 , 37 ) . Based on this knowledge , we recognized the pos - sibility of using mycolactones as a marker to detect M . ulcerans infection and / or diagnose Buruli ulcer . Mycolactone A / B is known to behave well to thin - layer chro - matography ( TLC ) , thereby suggesting that TLC could poten - tially meet the need , except for the sensitivity of detection . With this analysis , we studied and developed a naphthylboronate - assisted fluorogenic chemosensor that can detect as low as 2 ng of mycolactone A / B in a semiquantitative manner ( 38 ) . Relying on the excitation / emission of the pentaenoate chromophore , this method allows us to detect all of the mycolactones originating from the human pathogen M . ulcerans , but not mycolactones from the fish pathogen M . marinum or frog pathogen M . liflandii . For mycolactones derived from frogs and fish , the chiral HPLC profile should be a useful marker to detect their presence in fish tissue , for example . We recognize two possible areas to apply the boronate - assisted fluorogenic chemosensor . First , this method appears to be suited for the mycolactone - based chemotaxonomy of M . ulcerans . To illustrate the feasibility of this method , we analyzed the crude lipid extracts of African and Australian strains of M . ulcerans ( Fig . 11 ) . Obviously , this method can be used : ( i ) to test the homogeneity of mycolactones and ( ii ) to detect new myco - lactones . Second , as mentioned in the introduction , we began this study with the hope of developing a cost and time effective method , ideally simple enough for field - use in remote areas , to detect M . ulcerans infection . To this end , we have shown that this method can detect mycolactone A / B in pig and fish skin and muscle tissues doped with mycolactone A / B . There are a few issues still to address , but we are cautiously optimistic in achieving the ulti - mate goal . We should note that this method is “ invasive ” in nature . To the best of our knowledge , however , an effective bio - logical detection method , like tuberculin skin test for M . tubercu - losis infection , is not yet developed to detect M . ulcerans infection . In addition , a long - lasting vaccine is not yet available to protect against Buruli ulcer . Biological Activity Various in vitro and in vivo studies in mice and guinea pigs demonstrated that mycolactone plays a central role in the patho - genesis of M . ulcerans disease ; injection of 100 μ g of the toxin was sufficient to cause characteristic ulcers in guinea pig skin ( 8 ) . Mycolactone was shown to be associated with vacuolar nerve tis - sue damage in mice , which may account for the painlessness of Buruli ulcer lesions ( 39 ) . Significant progress has been made in the characterization of the biological activity of mycolactones , including cytotoxic and immunosuppresive effects ( 40 ) . However , as it is beyond the scope of this article to make a comprehensive summary , we make only a few comments on the biological activity of mycolactones . Mycolactone A / B causes a cytopathic effect on mouse fibroblast L929 cells characterized by cytoskeletal rearrangement with rounding up and subsequent detachment from tissue culture plates . Mycolactone A / B causes cell cycle arrest at the G0 / G1 phase , leading to cell death by apoptosis . It was noted that different cell lines vary in their sensitivity to the cytotoxicity of mycolactone A / B . ( 8 ) To the best of our knowledge , there is no cytotoxicity profile of mycolactones against a collection of human tumor cell lines . Yamori of The Cancer Chemotherapy Center of Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research conducted such an assay on synthetic mycolactone A / B ( see Fig . S1 ) , thereby show - ing a remarkable selectivity for LOX - IMVI cell - line . Fig . 10 . Convergent synthesis of unsaturated fatty acid side chain and com - pletion of total synthesis . Aldehyde E was synthesized from commercially available , optically pure ethyl ( S ) - 3 - hydroxybutyrate . Sharpless asymmetric dihydroxylation was employed for incorporation of the C11 ′ and C12 ′ stereo - genic centers of mycolactones A / B and D , whereas asymmetric Cr - mediated allylation was employed for incorporation of the 1 , 3 - diols of mycolactones C , E , F , and dia - F . ( A ) . Horner - Emmons reaction , followed by saponification . ( B ) . Yamaguchi esterification , followed by TBS deprotection with TBAF . A wavy line indicates that this bond exists as a mixture of E - and Z - geometrical isomers . Fig . 11 . TLC detection of mycolactones A / B and C . Photograph A : synthetic mycolactones A / B ( left ) , C ( right ) , and their mixture ( center ) . Photograph B : synthetic mycolactone A / B ( left ) , a lipid extract of an African strain of M . Ulcerans ( right ) , and their mixture ( center ) . Photograph C : synthetic mycolactone C ( left ) , a lipid extract of an Australian strain of M . Ulcerans ( right ) , and their mixture ( center ) . Kishi PNAS ∣ April 26 , 2011 ∣ vol . 108 ∣ no . 17 ∣ 6707 C H E M I S T RY S P E C I A L F E A T U R E Thus far , structure - activity studies have been limited to only mycolactone A / B and its immediate derivatives ( 8 , 41 ) . Consid - ering the structural diversity of natural mycolactones and the structural modifications now possible via organic synthesis , we can see an exciting opportunity to expand such structure - activity studies to shed further light on the molecular mechanisms of mycolactone action . A good departure point for this venture could be structure - activity studies on the natural mycolactones and their remote diastereomers ( Fig . 8 ) , that might uncover a re - lationship of a specific biological function with the minimum structural requirement . Once again , we should emphasize that these compounds are available as chemically well defined and homogeneous materials and also their structures can be tunable for the needs of investigations . Despite efforts from many research groups , the molecular target of mycolactones remains unknown . In this connection , we should note that Jackson of our laboratory has recently synthe - sized analog 10a ( Fig . 12 ) and demonstrated that : ( i ) 10a is useful to prepare a mycolactone conjugate and ( ii ) the amide 10b , de - rived from 10a , exhibits cytotoxicity ( 30 nm ) against L929 fibro - blasts in one third of the potency ( 10 nm ) of mycolactone A / B . Prospect The chemistry of mycolactones , including structure determina - tion / analysis , total synthesis , and highly sensitive detection meth - ods , has been well developed . Because of the slow growth of M . ulcerans , it has been a major task to secure mycolactone A / B in quantities by fermentation . In addition , mycolactones from the natural sources are often contaminated with various un - known compounds , including their congeners . The scalable and flexible synthesis developed can now provide not only chemically well defined and homogeneous materials , but also mycolactone analogs for study . In our view , it is an exciting time to witness a new phase in the mycolactone science . Cytotoxicity of synthetic mycolactone A / B against the 39 human tumor cell - lines is shown in the Fig . S1 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS . We thank the National Institutes of Health ( CA 22215 ) and Eisai USA Foundation for generous financial support . 1 . Asiedu K , Scherpbier R , Raviglione M ( 2000 ) Buruli ulcer : mycobacterium ulcerans infection , eds K Asiedu , R Scherpbier , and M Raviglione ( World Health Organization , Geneva ) . 2 . JohnsonPDR , etal . ( 2005 ) Buruliulcer ( M . ulceransinfection ) : newinsights , newhope for disease control . PLoS Med 2 : 282 – 286 . 3 . HongH , DemangelC , PidotSJ , LeadlayPF , StinearT ( 2008 ) Mycolactones : immunosup - pressive and cytotoxic polyketides produced by aquatic mycobacteria . Nat Prod Rep 25 : 447 – 454 . 4 . Demangel C , Stinear TP , Cole ST ( 2009 ) Buruli ulcer : reductive evolution enhances pathogenicity of Mycobacteriumulcerans . Nat Rev 7 : 50 – 60 . 5 . MarsollierL , etal . ( 2002 ) AquaticinsectsasavectorforMycobacteriumulcerans . Appl Environ Microb 68 : 4623 – 4628 . 6 . Johnson PDR , et al . ( 2007 ) Mycobacteriumulceransin mosquitoes captured during outbreak of Buruli ulcer , Southeastern Australia . Emerg Infect Dis 13 : 1653 – 1660 . 7 . George KM , et al . ( 1999 ) Mycolactone : a polyketide toxin from Mycobacterium ulceransrequired for virulence . Science 283 : 854 – 857 . 8 . GeorgeKM , PascopellaL , WeltyDM , SmallPLC ( 2000 ) AMycobacteriumulceranstoxin , mycolactone , causes apoptosis in guinea pig ulcers and tissue culture cells . Infect Immun 68 : 877 – 883 . 9 . Gunawardana G , et al . ( 1999 ) Characterization of novel macrolide toxins , mycolac - tones A and B , from a human pathogen , Mycobacteriumulcerans . J Am Chem Soc 121 : 6092 – 6093 . 10 . Kobayashi Y , Lee J , Tezuka K , Kishi Y ( 1999 ) Toward creation of a universal NMR database for the stereochemical assignment of acyclic compounds : the case of two contiguous propionate units . Org Lett 1 : 2177 – 2180 . 11 . Benewoitz AB , Fidanze S , Small PLC , Kishi Y ( 2001 ) Stereochemistry of the core struc - ture of the mycolactones . J Am Chem Soc 123 : 5128 – 5129 . 12 . KobayashiY , HayashiN , TanC - H , KishiY ( 2001 ) TowardthecreationofNMRdatabases in chiral solvents for assignments of relative and absolute stereochemistry : proof of concept . Org Lett 3 : 2245 – 2248 . 13 . Fidanze S , Song F , Szlosek - Pinaud M , Small PLC , Kishi Y ( 2001 ) Complete structure of the mycolactones . J Am Chem Soc 123 : 10117 – 10118 . 14 . Ranger BS , et al . ( 2006 ) Globally distributed mycobacterial fish pathogens produce a novel plasmid - encoded toxic macrolide , mycolactone F . Infect Immun 74 : 6037 – 6045 . 15 . Hong H , Stinear T , Porter J , Demangel C , Leadlay P ( 2007 ) A novel mycolactone toxin obtained by biosynthetic engineering . ChemBioChem 8 : 2043 – 2047 . 16 . Kobayashi Y , Tan C - H , Kishi Y ( 2000 ) Toward creation of a universal database for stereochemical assignment : the case of 1 , 3 , 5 - trisubstituted acyclic systems . Helv Chim Acta 83 : 2562 – 2571 . 17 . Boyle CD , Harmange J - C , Kishi Y ( 1994 ) Novel structure elucidation of AAL Toxin T A backbone . J Am Chem Soc 116 : 4995 – 4996 . 18 . Kim H - J , Kishi Y ( 2008 ) Total synthesis and stereochemistry of mycolactone F . J Am Chem Soc 130 : 1842 – 1844 . 19 . Kim H - J , et al . ( 2009 ) Heterogeneity in the stereochemistry of mycolactones isolated from M . marinum : toxins produced by fresh vs . saltwater fish pathogens . Chem Commun 7402 – 7404 . 20 . Yip MJ , et al . ( 2007 ) Evolution of Mycobacteriumulceransand other mycolactone - producing mycobacteria from a common Mycobacterium marinum progenitor . J Bacteriol 189 : 2021 – 2029 . 21 . Mve - Obiang A , Lee RE , Portaels F , Small PLC ( 2003 ) Heterogeneity of mycolactones produced by clinical isolates of Mycobacteriumulcerans : implications for virulence . Infect Immun 71 : 774 – 783 . 22 . Judd TC , Bischoff A , Kishi Y , Adusumilli S , Small PLC ( 2004 ) Structure determinationof mycolactone C via total synthesis . Org Lett 6 : 4901 – 4904 . 23 . Hon H , Spencer JB , Porter JL , Leadlay PF , Stinear T ( 2005 ) A novel mycolactone from a clinical isolate of Mycobacterium ulcerans provides evidence for additional toxin heterogeneity as a result of specific changes in the modular polyketide synthase . ChemBioChem 6 : 643 – 648 . 24 . Mve - Obiang A , et al . ( 2005 ) A newly discovered mycobacterial pathogen isolated from laboratory colonies ofXenopusspecies with lethal infections produces a novel form of mycolactone , theMycobacteriumulceransmacrolide toxin . InfectImmun 73 : 3307 – 3312 . 25 . Hong H , Stinear T , Skelton P , Spencer JB , Leadlay PF ( 2005 ) Structure elucidation of a novel family of mycolactone toxins from the frog pathogen Mycobacterium sp MU128FXT by mass spectrometry . Chem Commun 4306 – 4308 . 26 . Aubry S , et al . ( 2008 ) Synthesis and structure of mycolactone E isolated from frog mycobacterium . Org Lett 10 : 5385 – 5388 . 27 . Spangenberg T , Aubry S , Kishi Y ( 2010 ) Synthesis and structure assignment of the minor metabolite arising from the frog pathogen Mycobacteriumliflandii . Tetrahe - dron Lett 51 : 1782 – 1785 . 28 . SongF , FidanzeS , BenowitzAB , KishiY ( 2002 ) Totalsynthesisofthemycolactones . Org Lett 4 : 647 – 650 . 29 . Jackson KL , Li W , Chen C - L , Kishi Y ( 2010 ) Scalable and efficient synthesis of the mycolactone core . Tetrahedron 66 : 2263 – 2272 . 30 . SongF , FidanzeS , BenowitzAB , KishiY ( 2007 ) TotalsynthesisofmycolactonesAandB . Tetrahedron 63 : 5739 – 5753 . 31 . AlexanderMD , etal . ( 2006 ) Synthesisofthemycolactonecorebyring - closingmetath - esis . Chem Commun 4602 – 4604 . 32 . Feyen F , Jantsch A , Altmann K - H ( 2007 ) Synthetic studies on mycolactones : synthesis of the mycolactone core structure through ring - closing olefin metathesis . Synlett 415 – 418 . 33 . vanSummerenRP , FeringaBL , MinnaardAJ ( 2005 ) Newapproachestowardsthesynth - esis of the side - chain of mycolactones A and B . Org Biomol Chem 3 : 2524 – 2533 . 34 . YinN , WangG , QianM , NegishiE ( 2006 ) StereoselectiveSynthesisofthesidechainsof mycolactones A and B featuring stepwise double substitutions of 1 , 1 - Dibromo - 1 - alkenes . Angewandte Chemie International Edition 45 : 2916 – 2920 . 35 . Eddyani M , et al . ( 2009 ) Fine - needle aspiration , an efficient sampling technique for bacteriological diagnosis of nonulcerative Buruli ulcer . J Clin Microbiol 47 : 1700 – 1704 . 36 . Hong H , et al . ( 2008 ) Mycloactone diffuses from Mycobacteriumulcerans - infected tissues and targets mononuclear cells in peripheral blood and lymphoid organs . PLoS Neglect Trop D e325 : 1 – 8 . 37 . Sarfo FS , et al . ( 2010 ) Detection of mycolactone A / B in Mycobacterium ulcerans - infected human tissue . PLoS Neglect Trop D 4 : 1 – 9 . 38 . Spangenberg T , Kishi Y ( 2010 ) Highly sensitive , operationally simple , cost / time effective detection of the mycolactones from the human pathogen Mycobacterium ulcerans . Chem Commun 46 : 1410 – 1412 . 39 . En J , et al . ( 2008 ) Mycolactone is responsible for the painlessness of Mycobacterium ulceransinfection ( buruli Ulcer ) in a murine study . Infect Immun 76 : 2002 – 2007 . 40 . Pahlevan AA , et al . ( 1999 ) The inhibitory action of Mycobacteriumulceranssoluble factor on monocyte / T cell cytokine production and NF - κ B function . J Immunol 163 : 3928 – 3935 . 41 . Snyder DS , Small PLC ( 2003 ) Uptake and cellular actions of mycolactone , a virulence determinant for Mycobacteriumulcerans . Microb Pathogenesis 34 : 91 – 101 . Fig . 12 . A possibleprecursorforpreparationofmycolactone conjugates . For the structure of core , see Fig . 5 . Awavy line indicates that this bond exists asa mixture of E - and Z - geometrical isomers . 6708 ∣ www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1015252108 Kishi