Mosaic : Designing Online Creative Communities for Sharing Works - in - Progress Joy Kim , Maneesh Agrawala , Michael S . Bernstein Stanford University { jojo0808 , maneesh , msb } @ cs . stanford . edu Figure 1 . Mosaic allows artists to share not just completed artwork but also their creative process . Fun Under The Sea by masoto . ABSTRACT Online creative communities allow creators to share their work with a large audience , maximizing opportunities to showcase their work and connect with fans and peers . How - ever , sharing in - progress work can be technically and socially challenging in environments designed for sharing completed pieces . We propose an online creative community where shar - ing process , rather than showcasing outcomes , is the main method of sharing creative work . Based on this , we present Mosaic—an online community where illustrators share work - in - progress snapshots showing how an artwork was com - pleted from start to ﬁnish . In an online deployment and ob - servational study , artists used Mosaic as a vehicle for reﬂect - ing on how they can improve their own creative process , de - veloped a social norm of detailed feedback , and became less apprehensive of sharing early versions of artwork . Through Mosaic , we argue that communities oriented around sharing creative process can create a collaborative environment that is beneﬁcial for creative growth . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , topostonserversortoredistributetolists , requirespriorspeciﬁcpermission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . CSCW’17 , February 25 – March 01 , 2017 , Portland , OR , USA . Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 4335 - 0 / 17 / 03 . $ 15 . 00 DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2998181 . 2998195 Author Keywords Social computing ; creativity ; creative collaboration ; art ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords H . 5 . 3 . Information Interfaces and Presentation ( e . g . HCI ) : Group and Organization interfaces ; Collaborative computing INTRODUCTION Online creative communities today focus on showcasing completed work , creating a climate where creators aim to pro - duce work that is as impressive as possible to attract viewers and fans . In communities like those focused on art [ 4 ] , writ - ing [ 10 ] , and design [ 2 ] , a creator shares outcomes by up - loading ﬁnished pieces that are rewarded by views , favorites , or comments from others . The more views , favorites , and comments a submission gets , the more likely it is to appear in front of potential fans and other creators . Complementing these outcome - oriented communities , creators carve out pro - cess - oriented spaces aimed at learning new techniques and re - ceiving feedback from others , sharing in - progress work ( e . g . , [ 7 ] ) , creating and curating tutorials [ 47 ] , or organizing events speciﬁcally for tackling creative challenges [ 3 ] . But despite these efforts , creators encounter barriers to re - ceiving thoughtful feedback in these online spaces . These barriers include the inability to tell which users are open to unsolicited feedback [ 35 ] and a lack of mentors [ 22 ] . But most notably , simply posting work in the critique section of a creative community requires a creator to compete with ﬁn - ished work posted by others , discouraging the sharing of early work when feedback might be most useful . For example , on DeviantArt , users browse submissions by viewing single - image thumbnails ( so that creators must optimize for views by creating single images that result in attractive previews ) ; on / r / DestructiveReaders , a community centered around cri - tiquing writing on reddit [ 8 ] , writers often ask for help by posting a link to their story ( mirroring the way content is typ - ically shared on reddit as a whole ) , omitting useful informa - tion such as their goals or what they have tried already ; and on creative communities within Facebook and Tumblr , users feel they are spamming the community with unwanted con - tent if they make multiple posts about the same creative work over time . Instead , what if creative communities were designed to al - low creators to share creative process as ﬁrst - class content ? Rather than just sharing ﬁnished work , creators could share in - progress snapshots of work to illustrate what they did and why . Effective deliberate practice of a skill involves contin - ually assessing one’s creative process based on feedback and exploratory experiments [ 20 , 41 ] . Focusing on mastery [ 11 ] , rather than performance , can increase self - perceptions of task - oriented conﬁdence , especially for novices [ 17 ] . Focus - ing on improving one’s process can also have a signiﬁcant effect on the quality of creative output : without engaging in a broad exploration of ideas , creators can experience ﬁxa - tion [ 26 ] , but developing multiple ideas in parallel can pro - duce a wider range of ideas and higher quality results [ 17 ] . By designing an environment that rewards sharing early work and clear explanations , instead of just rewarding good out - comes , we may create opportunities for creators to not only learn speciﬁc techniques from each other but also enable them to reﬂect more effectively on their own work . In this paper , we focus on painting and illustration as an ex - ample of a domain especially dominated by outcome - oriented communities . To look at the types of interactions that arise when creators are instead able to focus on sharing process , we designed and launched Mosaic , an online social art plat - form where the primary method of sharing artwork is to up - load multiple images illustrating the steps taken to complete it . By encouraging creators to show how their work develops over time , we enable an environment that values the commu - nication of ideas and techniques . We launched Mosaic and conducted an observational study in which 49 users created 76 Mosaic projects . These users successfully used work - in - progress steps from others to reﬂect on their own creative processes and wrote speciﬁc feedback for others . In addi - tion , users expressed feeling less apprehensive about sharing early work on Mosaic compared to other creative communi - ties they frequent , in part because Mosaic served as a social environment where it felt normal to do so . This paper suggests that building social systems for collabo - rative learning and growth require different social affordances than those developed for communities centered around shar - ing outcomes . It contributes online community design pat - terns and a system that demonstrates examples of such affor - dances . Mosaic focuses speciﬁcally on illustration and art , but these design patterns may generalize to communities cen - tered around many creative domains including music , ﬁlm , writing , and design . More broadly , we argue that planning , mistakes , experiments , techniques , and inspiration are nor - mally hidden in social computing designs because they show - case ﬁnished work—but that these activities are valuable to communities where members may want to learn and support one another in their individual journeys of professional devel - opment . RELATED WORK Mosaic’s design draws from previous literature on the design of online creative communities as well as work studying cre - ativity support for both novices and experts . In particular , it is inspired by existing practices for sharing information about creative process and how those practices support ( and fall short of supporting ) creators’ goals . Online creative communities Creators who share a domain of interest often come together in communities of practice [ 48 ] ; with online technology , cre - ators from all over the world can build relationships with like - minded peers , learn new techniques , collaborate on projects , and work towards establishing their reputation in a commu - nity [ 38 , 30 ] . For example , a community might host contests or challenges where participating users create work based on the same theme , or provide social features such as messaging and forums that allow users to collaborate in co - producing work . In addition , an online creative community giving feed - back to each other can , in aggregate , provide positive men - toring experiences distinct from traditional ofﬂine mentor - ing [ 13 ] . The interactions that users engage in on these com - munities may differ depending on whether users consider themselves professionals or hobbyists [ 35 ] . Existing com - munities cover a wide range of interests , including songwrit - ing [ 42 ] , photography [ 38 ] , animation [ 32 ] , and more . In this paper , we focus speciﬁcally on communities centered around painting and illustration . On these websites , users typically submit an image representing ﬁnished work ( optionally ac - companied by a short description ) , which allows them to build up a proﬁle page that houses all of their submissions and acts as a portfolio of their activity . The way these communities are designed has signiﬁcant ef - fects on how users understand who their audience is [ 36 ] and how they interact and work with each other [ 19 ] . For ex - ample , in online design communities , novices use signals of attention ( e . g . , likes ) to determine which pieces of work to learn from and may tune their own sharing behavior to mimic strategies they see being used to share popular work [ 35 ] . As another example , interfaces that allow users to make judg - ments about the trustworthiness of others are essential for successful online collaborations [ 32 ] . Leaders of collabora - tions , too , often bear a large burden to maintain group aware - ness , but interfaces can mitigate this responsibility by making group activity , signals of trust , and tasks to be completed con - crete and transparent to the larger collaborating group [ 33 ] . Models of successful creative processes [ 42 ] —information that is normally invisible—could even be embedded in tools to encourage best practices , help creators ﬁnd suitable col - laborators , or help them ﬁgure out how to proceed in their work [ 37 ] . Other work explores how larger crowds can come together to collaborate directly through the use of competitive market - places [ 1 , 9 ] , combining previous work by others [ 51 ] , leader - generated constraints [ 27 ] , remixing [ 24 ] , training non - experts [ 16 ] , structuring the iterative feedback process [ 50 , 34 ] , and dynamically coordinating work by specialized ex - perts [ 40 ] . While we do not focus on direct collaboration in this paper , Mosaic builds on work that has shown how peer production can be improved through design and explores possible affordances for peer - supported learning and develop - ment . The design affordances Mosaic explores in the domain of sharing works - in - progress could be applied to crowd cre - ativity work to enable more effective collaboration . The effect of the creative process on outcomes The process taken to create something can have a signiﬁcant impact on creative outcomes ; for example , prototyping sev - eral different designs for an advertisement in parallel ( rather than iterating on a single design ) results in better - performing ads as well as increased personal conﬁdence for novices [ 17 ] . These immediate effects on self - perception can also improve a creator’s long - term ability to persevere [ 18 ] . Conversely , a process where the creator chooses a design concept too early can result in design ﬁxation [ 26 ] , which can limit idea gener - ation , even in experts [ 15 ] . Further complicating the creative process is the observation that a design problem can change as a creator explores solutions [ 41 ] , requiring the creator to be able to ﬂexibly change their goals as they work . Previous work has looked at speciﬁc interventions to the cre - ative process to try and improve creative outcomes . Looking at examples can help an ideator expand their design space by allowing existing ideas to be combined and reinterpreted [ 23 ] , but only when examples have certain properties [ 14 , 43 ] . The timing of when examples appear in the creative process is also important ; earlier tends to be better [ 29 ] , and ideators that are presented with ideas when they are stuck present more ideas than those who are presented with exam - ples at regular intevals . In fact , being presented with exam - ples at regular intervals is worse than being presented with no examples at all [ 44 ] . Other work has looked at using a shared idea map to help groups generate diverse ideas collab - oratively [ 43 ] , and even aiding in emulating speciﬁc expert strategies directly ( such as by automatically generating draw - ing guidelines [ 31 ] ) . This body of work shows how inﬂuenc - ing the creative process can change creative outcomes , but it is still unclear how to incorporate these ﬁndings into creators’ everyday practice . This can be especially difﬁcult due to the fact that the process behind shared online work is often hid - den . Mosaic , instead , attempts to complement this work by presenting a design for a social environment that helps cre - ators focus on improving not just what they produce but also how they produce it . Even without altering the creative process itself , simply re - ﬂecting on the creative process may help a creator think about new possible directions . Building a personal history using a timeline interface can provide a vehicle for identifying and reminiscing on key events [ 46 ] and drive people to generate new interpretations of the past [ 25 , 39 ] . We may see sim - ilar beneﬁts among artists asked to document their practice through Mosaic . In addition , Mosaic users can reﬂect on their processes with others through the form of feedback , which may help them identify gaps between their intent and how others perceive their work [ 21 ] . Those who help by partici - pating in this reﬂective process can also beneﬁt from newly generated insight [ 12 ] . FORMATIVE STUDY To better understand the challenges that creators face in the creative communities they use to share their work , we con - ducted semi - structured interviews with ten intermediate - level creators ( nine female , one male ) recruited through posts in anime , video game , and comic fandom art communities on Facebook , Tumblr , and DeviantArt . Creators’ ages ranged from 18 to 39 years old ( M = 27 . 4 ) , with occupations rang - ing from college student , full - time freelance illustrator , and QA developer . All participants had been or currently were ac - tive users of DeviantArt , and most additionally created posts about their art activity a few times a week on other social media platforms such as Facebook , Tumblr , Twitter , and In - stagram . Six of ten interview participants described their use of exist - ing social media platforms for sharing art as oriented around exposure ; they also described these platforms as not very use - ful for feedback , but use them anyway because they want to reach as many potential fans as possible . Eight interview par - ticipants stated that they occasionally post single snapshots of in - progress work on online communities , but these serve mostly as a social update to engage those who follow them . Three participants mentioned that they had never documented their process in a step - by - step format at all , being unsure as to whether it was something their audience wanted or because they were not conﬁdent that they could successfully teach oth - ers . One participant mentioned being explicitly told to stop posting in a Facebook community after having uploaded sev - eral images about a project in a row . Attempts at sharing the process behind their own artwork was met with various barriers , with four participants describing the interface design of these existing platforms as the main obstacle : You’re trying to keep it in one post , but it’s so much to keep track of . . . It was just , I guess , a lot of UIs and ev - erything not really designed for that kind of thing where it’s just . . . Then on DeviantArt , my god . Trying to get all the screen - caps into one gigantic document was just ugh . —P8 Despite only being able to see the ﬁnal outcome most of the time , the way interviewees viewed other artists’ ﬁnished work on existing creative communities was in terms of process . Six participants said seeing good artwork fueled inspiration for them , but nine participants also explained that this was paired with a struggle ( or even an inability ) to demystify how the outcome they were seeing was achieved . These interviews suggested that despite the popularity of cre - ative communities online , and despite a desire to share and get feedback on process , many creators do not ﬁnd the social and technical affordances of existing communities appropri - ate for process - oriented content . Exposing process was seen as helpful behavior that creators wanted to do but could not for technical or social reasons . We address these needs in Mo - saic , an online creative community where the main method of sharing work is to expose creative process . MOSAIC We know that orienting learning and creative support around the creative process can result in beneﬁts such as increased conﬁdence and higher quality creative outcomes , but the de - sign of online communities often presents barriers to creators who want to share information about their process . To explore potential designs for a community that enables social interactions oriented around creative process between artists , we created Mosaic : an online social platform where creators share artworks - in - progress . With the design of Mo - saic , we envisioned a community where members are encour - aged to share struggles in addition to successes , reﬂect on possible creative directions , and give and receive feedback in - formed by a creator’s intent and goals for a piece of artwork . In this section , we describe how Mosaic allows creators to improve their own creative processes and those of others . Projects and Works - in - Progress In Mosaic , the main unit of content is called a work - in - progress ( Figure 1 ) . The work - in - progress is an image ( ei - ther a photo or a screenshot ) of a creative work that is not yet complete . This image is accompanied by a title and a short caption describing the image . For example , an artist starting work on an oil painting may create a work - in - progress repre - senting their ﬁrst step ( e . g . , drawing a sketch ) . This work - in - progress would include a description of any reasoning behind their step ( e . g . , why they chose a certain type of subject mat - ter or how they chose a certain visual composition ) . Creators can group works - in - progress in a project ( Figure 2 ) , which represents a single creative work . That is , an artist working on a landscape painting may post a project repre - senting that painting , adding works - in - progress representing stages of the piece as they go ( e . g . , Sketch , Mid - tone Wash , Blocking Shapes , Rendering Details ) . Optionally , creators can ﬂag their project with a request for critique , which signals to other users that they are open to detailed feedback . Mosaic users can search works - in - progress using a search form that matches on text ; if a user searches for “sketch , ” they will be able to view all projects that contain a work - in - progress rep - resenting a sketch . Social features enable artists to view what others are do - ing . The homepage consists of a feed of recent activity from the Mosaic community as a whole , showing comments , new projects , and updates to projects ( that is , new works - in - progress that have been added to a project ) . Users are also able to follow other users and favorite projects so that they can be notiﬁed with an email when a user they follow creates new work or a project they have favorited is updated in any way . Lastly , users are able to comment on projects to share encouragement , feedback , or links to external resources . Scenario Making works - in - progress a ﬁrst - class unit of shareable work normalizes a number of social interactions that are difﬁcult on existing online creative communities . Below , we walk through a scenario illustrating some of the social advantages of using Mosaic to share creative work . Receiving helpful intermediate feedback Dawn is a novice artist who wants to be a professional illus - trator . Though she has taken art classes through school in the past , she recently started taking artwork more seriously . Dawn joins Mosaic and , after being welcomed to the web - site , is prompted to upload a photo or screenshot of whatever piece of artwork she’s currently working on . A few days ago , Dawn started work on small watercolor piece for a friend’s birthday , so she creates a new project titled “Watercolor Gift” and then adds a work - in - progress to this project by taking a photo of her sketch so far and typing a short caption about her thought process behind the sketch . Haruka is a freelance digital illustrator who is already a mem - ber of Mosaic . While browsing projects through the feed of recent activity seen on the Mosaic homepage ( Figure 3 ) , she sees a thumbnail of Dawn’s project so far . The piece seems to be of a sketch of a person ; Haruka has recently been studying anatomy and decides to takes a look to see if she can learn from this project . After clicking the project , she notices a mistake in the sketch , and leaves a comment . Dawn receives an email notiﬁcation about a new comment and logs into Mosaic . She realizes that Haruka is right about the mistake , and revises the sketch to address the issue . She takes a new photo and adds a new work - in - progress to the existing project , again accompanied by a caption summariz - ing the mistake and her solution . She leaves a comment re - sponding to Haruka to thank her for the feedback , and makes a mental note to look out for similar anatomy mistakes in the future . Later , after adding several more works - in - progress photos to her project , Dawn ﬁnishes her watercolor piece . She posts the link to her Mosaic project on her social media accounts , not - ing that she receives a few likes and followers from posting content about her creative process . Learning new techniques Dawn is looking to start a new project and starts to browse Mosaic ( along with other art community websites ) for inspi - ration . In Mosaic , Dawn clicks on a few watercolor projects that seem visually similar to her own style , but notices from looking at the work - in - progress photos and captions that some of them are created with similar techniques used in a slightly different order . Others show a work - in - progress that shows the use of an additional technique that results in an un - usual visual effect that Dawn has never tried before . Dawn feels motivated , and thinks about a project that would let her practice this new technique . Figure 2 . A Mosaic project . ( a ) The project consists of several snapshots of the artwork as it developed over time , including explanations by the artist describing what they did in each step and why . ( b ) Comments in Mosaic tend to be speciﬁc and considerate of the artist’s creative intent . ( c ) Other users can comment on projects . Dawn creates a sketch and uploads it as the ﬁrst work - in - progress for a new project . However , while trying this new technique on scratch paper , Dawn ﬁnds she’s having trou - ble getting it right . She takes a photo of these attempts and adds it as a new work - in - progress , noting in the accompany - ing caption that she’s stuck . Dawn edits her project to ﬂag it as requesting critique , which adds it to a special feed of projects that are occasionally emailed to users who choose to participate in giving feedback . Dawn later receives a clari - fying comment from one of these users about the photo she uploaded , which lets her get unstuck . Figure 3 . Users are shown a feed of recent activity when logged in . Activ - ity in Mosaic is centered around progress made on projects rather than on ﬁnished artwork . Figure 4 . Users can search for projects by content or by techniques used . Secondhand learning Haruka is similarly struggling with a new technique for a dig - ital painting she is working on . She normally creates illus - trations in a cartoony style that makes use of solid colors and clean lineart ; Haruka now wants to experiment with a more painterly look with her illustrations , but is having trouble ﬁg - uring out how to do this efﬁciently . She uses the search func - tion of Mosaic ( Figure 4 ) to ﬁlter for other projects that use that technique and look similar to her desired result . After ﬁnding a few suitable examples and examining their works - in - progresses , Haruka ﬁnds that she can use her old style of il - lustration until she is happy with the colors and lighting , then paint on top of this reﬁne her illustration and hide lineart . Haruka also knows that one of her favorite artists on Mosaic uses this technique in the same digital painting program as she does , so she leaves a comment on one of that artist’s projects asking for more details about how this technique is done in that particular program . The artist later responds , and even updates the work - in - progress captions in their own project to address Haruka’s question . A focus on process The above scenario highlights a key aspect of Mosaic’s de - sign : rather than focusing on showcasing ﬁnal outcomes , Mo - saic structures social interactions around units of content that show the process behind creative work . As a result , creators are able to directly ask for and receive help informed by the context of the creator’s current skill level and their creative intent . The content shared on Mosaic is directly related to creators’ goals to improve their process and learn new tech - niques . In addition , Mosaic unlocks a number of interactions we know to be useful to creativity , such as being able to ex - press intent [ 21 ] , receive feedback during the creative pro - cess [ 44 ] rather than afterwards , reﬂect on progress [ 41 ] , and determine when to reach out to others [ 19 ] . Mosaic can be visited at http : / / www . artsaic . com . EVALUATION We designed Mosaic based on the hypothesis that sharing cre - ative processes is difﬁcult for creators because existing cre - ative communities are designed to maximize the beneﬁts of sharing creative outcomes . Instead , we propose an alternate design for a community designed around works - in - progress and seek to understand the types of interactions between cre - ators that might result from such a design . In this section , we report on an evaluation where we explored how this process of generating and sharing works - in - process strengthens cre - ators’ abilities to reﬂect and allows a community to generate more meaningful feedback and support for its members . Method In order to understand the difﬁculties artists face when seek - ing or sharing works - in - progress online , we conducted a ﬁeld deployment of Mosaic to provide a meaningful example with which artists could compare and contrast against their past experiences . In contrast to a controlled study ( which would require growing a control community without the draw of an established user base ) , a ﬁeld deployment allowed us to prototype a design for a community for sharing process , to probe for existing practices surrounding works - in - progress and sharing knowledge , and to learn about ways in which Mosaic might disrupt or support these practices . This also allowed Mosaic users to compare their experiences on Mo - saic with their current activity in communities they already frequent . Over the course of four weeks , we launched Mosaic as an open beta and invited users from other hobbyist art commu - nities to use Mosaic as a way to give and receive critique and as a platform for hosting and sharing in - progress work . To ensure that artists would be able to provide meaningful feed - back to each other , we recruited from communities of artists with roughly similar backgrounds that had a wide range of skill levels ( in this case , beginner to advanced intermediate artists from anime / video game / comic fandom communities from Facebook , Tumblr , and Deviantart ) . During this time , we logged all community activity , including the creation of projects , works - in - progress snapshots , project favorites , user follows , and comments . Because we wanted artists to create artwork they were per - sonally invested in , we structured this study around the idea of creating a zine that would eventually be printed and adver - tised and sold to peers and fans in the community . Zines are typically small self - published anthologies of artwork created on a theme and , because of their self - published nature , are an accessible and popular way for creators of all skill levels to promote their work . In many online communities , they are often created as collections of fanart or fanﬁction . On a prac - tical level , zines provide opportunities for artists to meet each other and to cross - advertise their work . For this reason , we speciﬁcally recruited artists who worked in two - dimensional digital or traditional media . The zine will be compiled as a digital PDF and made available for download online . Artists who signed up on Mosaic were prompted to upload projects , which they could optionally submit to the zine . One submission per artist was allowed , though Mosaic users were able to create as many Mosaic projects as they liked . We allowed users to post both work they were currently working on as well as work - in - progress snapshots they may have had from previous work . Additionally , a peer voting round was used to select the artists that would be included in the zine , further incentivizing artists to do their best for the study task . The ﬁrst 30 artists who made submissions to the zine were given a $ 40 gift card . We also conducted semi - structured interviews with the same ten artists who were interviewed during our formative study , all of whom were participants in the deployment . Inter - view questions focused on their background and goals as an artist , the perceived beneﬁts of sharing and viewing works - in - progress , the dynamics between themselves and other users on Mosaic , perception towards feedback both received and given , and attitudes toward the artwork they created during the study period . In order to understand how creators explained their own work and what motivated them to communicate with each other , we analyzed Mosaic comments and projects as well as the responses from our semi - structured interviews . First , to an - alyze Mosaic comments and projects , the ﬁrst author gener - ated codes by looking for recurring patterns in the text written by users for comments and works - in - progress . Using these codes , two researchers independently coded the same ran - domly selected subset of comments and works - in - progress ( works - in - progress : κ = 0 . 64 ; comments : κ = 0 . 65 ) and dis - cussed disagreements in codes . Code deﬁnitions were revised to resolve disagreements . The remaining dataset was split in half and separately coded by each researcher using the new codes . Second , we used a similarly inductive approach to de - velop themes in interview responses . These themes allowed us to understand the relationship between creating works - in - progress and sharing these snapshots with peers , how Mo - saic’s design might deter or encourage sharing information about creative process , motivations for creating works - in - progress and commenting on others works , and how their experience with the Mosaic community compared with their experience on existing online creative social platforms . RESULTS The projects uploaded to Mosaic allowed artists to compare their creative processes with each other , leading to both tech - nical insights about how to improve as well as opportuni - ties to validate their approaches to creative problems . Figure 5 shows works - in - progress from a few of the most viewed projects on Mosaic . These projects show the variety of types of information creators chose to share with others , including the both the ideation and technical steps behind an artwork . Figure 5 . The ﬁrst few works - in - progresses from some of the most popular projects on Mosaic . ( a ) Sunﬂowers by marshmallowjelly . Many projects structured themselves around showing signiﬁcant steps in the progress of the artwork . ( b ) Kitsune Lune by starrydance . The creator shows an early sketch , as well as organizational tricks they use to remember what colors they use . ( c ) Like Satellites and Shooting Stars by waytooemily . The creator shows a few early sketches illustrating how they chose a composition for the piece . During the study period , a total of 46 users created 69 projects , with projects containing an average of 5 . 26 ( S D = 2 . 32 ) works - in - progress . Out of these , 38 projects were sub - mitted as entries for the zine . During this time , 468 unique users made 1144 unique visits ( 3489 pageviews ) to the Mo - saic website , with about 40 % of incoming users arriving through links on existing social media sites like Facebook , Twitter , and Deviantart . Sharing process served as vehicles for reﬂection Table 1 shows the various types of thoughts that creators documented while creating these works - in - progress , ranging from tutorial - like descriptions of steps taken during the cre - ative process , to questions asked in the middle of the process , to explanations of the higher - level goal pursued by the cre - ator . Creators typically did not wait until ﬁnishing their artwork to post their works - in - progress , nor did they stop to upload works - in - progress as they worked . Instead , after saving im - ages as they worked , artists would post one or more images representing substantial progress at the end of a working ses - sion ( taking a median of 4 . 36 hours in between updates to their project ) and reﬂect on their working session as a whole . This perhaps explains why only 53 % of WIPs were objective descriptions of what was done in the artwork ; these works - in - WIP Type Count % Example Describing action 177 53 % “I brush color onto . . . ” Justifying action 75 23 % “I did this because . . . ” Intent 37 11 % “I wanted a feeling . . . ” Struggle 23 7 % “I’m having trouble . . . ” Assessment 7 2 % “I think it looks . . . ” Idea 6 2 % “The idea came from . . . ” Ask for help 4 1 % “Which option is best ? ” Goals for growth 4 1 % “I wanted to improve . . . ” Table 1 . The types of descriptions written by creators to accompany work - in - progress snapshots . progress tended to focused more on loops of intent - attempt - assess and other internal thought processes than on the actual steps taken to acheive a visual effect : Initial sketch . The idea for this started as a quick doo - dle . It’s been unseasonably warm this spring , so I’ve been wanting to draw something summery and I’ve been researching sunﬂowers for the garden so I’ve had these happy ﬂowers on my mind recently . . . —Sketch , Sunﬂowers Seven participants described realizing aspects about their work they hadn’t realized before ( such as how long it takes them to complete part of a painting ) , or slowing down and making more deliberate creative decisions as a result of writ - ing down their reasoning for each phase of the art - making process . Some added that it would be useful to look back at their own processes in the future , saying that it was difﬁcult to remember how their own work began : Besides the usefulness of seeing other artists work and a different idea of how they work , [ Mosaic ] lets you look back at your own and kind of see that , oh , you started that bad . Sometimes you get caught up in that last im - age and be like , oh , I think it ﬁnally came together . It’s not too bad . Then you feel like , oh , can I do something like that again ? Or you start doing something and it looks horrible , but you don’t remember that something else you did looked horrible to begin with . —P2 In other words , Mosaic projects were distinctly unlike tradi - tional tutorials , acting instead more like diaries ; they became tools for reﬂection . Feedback helps validate process Four participants stated that feedback was difﬁcult to get in existing art communities , attributing this to the audience that was drawn by a platform oriented around gaining exposure . The relationship they had built up with others on these sites were more of a “celebrity - fan” relationship , rather than a re - lationship between artists who can help each other : Most of the comments on [ DeviantArt ] are “Oh , I love it , amazing . ” Which is great , I’m always grateful that people like my work , but if you’re looking for anything speciﬁc you’re not going to get it there . —P3 Comment Type Count % Example Speciﬁc like 64 35 % “I like the colors . . . ” Thanks ( creator ) 34 18 % “Thank you ! ” Answer ( creator ) 20 11 % “I did this by . . . ” Encouragement 18 10 % “Looks great ! ” Suggestion / critique 13 7 % “I would change . . . ” Intent ( creator ) 10 5 % “I hope it looks . . . ” Commiseration 6 3 % “Painting is hard . . . ” Technique 3 2 % “I’ll have to try that . . . ” Communication 4 2 % “Easy to understand . . . ” Response action 4 2 % “I’ll make sure to . . . ” Question 2 1 % “How did you . . . ” Other 7 4 % Table 2 . The type of comments written about projects . For this reason , six artists stated their current preferred method for receiving feedback was to ask artists they know in real life or friends they trusted , but this can quickly exhaust social capital . Mosaic , on the other hand , was described by seven partici - pants as a very artist - centric platform . Users made a total of 153 comments , with each project receiving an average of 2 . 22 ( S D = 2 . 19 ) comments and with users making an average of 3 . 85 comments ( S D = 6 . 08 ) each . The median time for com - ments to appear after a user made an update to a project was 16 . 52 hours , and projects received an average of 0 . 61 total comments ( S D = 1 . 32 ) prior to its last update . Only 10 % of comments were the simple encouragement typically seen in existing online art communities , with most other comments remarking on speciﬁc aspects of the process described by the creator , commiserating with the creator about the difﬁculty of the process , asking questions , or providing suggestions or critique ( Table 2 ) . By aiding artists in revealing the process behind an artwork , Mosaic reinforced a social norm of writ - ing speciﬁc , relevant feedback : [ Comments on Mosaic are ] . . . if they say they like some - thing , they seem to actually say what about it they liked . . . They seem a little bit more . . . informed as fellow artists . It’s not just “Oh , that’s cute , ” or “That’s pretty . ” —P2 Artists were very open to both negative and positive feed - back . When asked about the kind of comments they wished they could get more often , ﬁve participants said they wanted feedback not to neccessarily to improve their work , but to val - idate whether or not their creative intent was coming through in their output and to see if they were on the right track with their progress . More generally , participants described good feedback as speciﬁc , timely ( that is , received during the cre - ative process rather than afterwards ) , and relevant to current goals ( rather than suggesting other goals ) ; participants stated they would ignore feedback that was contrary to their creative intent . Mosaic seemed to allow other creators to pinpoint the intent of the creator posting artwork ( often because the cre - ator now had the opportunity to explain their goals and rea - soning through works - in - progress ) , leading to more informed feedback from the community as a whole and allowing cre - ators to use other users as a mirror to help them reﬂect on whether or not they were able to achieve their goals . Teaching through WIPs , teaching through feedback Creators approached uploading and composing works - in - progress on Mosaic as an informal teaching opportunity , with eight participants describing their imagined audience [ 36 ] as other artists at a skill level just below their own or even to “a me from the past” ( P5 ) . For the most part , artists docu - mented how they overcame some struggle or achieved some goal , and described their project in terms of teaching what was learned to others . Occasionally , if they found themselves stuck on solving a problem , they would break from this teach - ing role and ask for help . Overall , however , participants felt that each of their works - in - progress needed to represent sub - stantial progress on the project so that they would have some - thing to say to their audience . Participants were aware of the value of clearly communicating their process , with eight par - ticipants saying that posting works - in - progress was only use - ful when presented in chunks that made sense or when it was complete : I actually discarded a few [ works - in - progress ] that didn’t seem like they made much of a difference in be - tween . I just kind of chose some of the biggest ones you could see . I added this detail or changed colors or added more facial details here . Anything you could see an ac - tual progress to . —P2 This reﬂects votes from other Mosaic users during the peer voting round to decide which projects would be included in the zine . Voting was open to all Mosaic users ; out of 46 regis - tered users , 33 users participated in the peer voting round by selecting the three Mosaic projects they thought should be in - cluded in the zine . A Poisson regression showed that projects with the most votes were those which had more works - in - progress ( β = 0 . 114 , p < 0 . 01 ) , as well as more comments ( β = 0 . 135 , p < 0 . 01 ) . Paradoxically , Mosaic users seemed to approach writing feed - back as a teaching opportunity as well ; ﬁve participants mentioned that being able to view other people’s works - in - progress inﬂuenced their motivation to write feedback : If someone is posting as they work on their work , you actually feel like you’re right there encouraging them if you’re giving them feedback through steps and every - thing . . . If they post all their updates and they post when they’re ﬁnished , you actually feel a connection because you felt like you were cheering them on the entire time they were working on this thing . Now you see the ﬁn - ished the product and you’re like , “Dude , that’s awe - some . ” —P8 This may be explained by an underlying ideal of fairness ex - plicitly mentioned by two participants : I do think that part of what’s interesting about this site is that you do get to see all these middle steps . It seems a little unfair to not share that if I’m taking that in from other people . —P7 I think it’s the point of the community , in part , is to give and take critique and I think that’s really cool . —P6 That is , posting about creative process actually afforded re - ciprocal give and take in a creative community ; creators ended up framing their projects as gifts of knowledge to oth - ers , but this was also the same mechanism through which peo - ple received feedback and help . Showcasing failure is uncomfortable The fact that existing communities focus on sharing ﬁnal outcomes also means that ﬁrst impressions are important on these websites , further discouraging sharing in - progress work . It is often difﬁcult to bring viewers back to see updates to a creative piece in progress : I normally try to upload everything . . . when I’m done . . . that way , if people are viewing it , they’re not like , “Oh , this is cool but I don’t know where it’s going . I don’t want to come back and look at this , ” or they’ll forget about it . —P4 In addition , six participants mentioned they experience appre - hension when sharing their work online due to a lack of con - ﬁdence in their skills or negative experiences with aggressive commenters from the past . However , six artists also men - tioned documenting their process in a community allowed them to contrast their process against others , creating an envi - ronment where sharing process was normal and easing fears about posting content : [ Sharing process ] encourages people to share what they know . . . they don’t feel like they’re in direct competition because we’re all learning at the exact same time , just at different paces . —P8 In other words , posting content on Mosaic became less about trying to prove worth to an audience and more about the jour - ney of each individual creator . DISCUSSION Through our evaluation of user activity on Mosaic , we learned how a community of sharing works - in - progress can help cre - ators give and receive speciﬁc feedback and reﬂect on their creative practices . Interestingly , we also discovered how cre - ating an environment that encourages sharing process can also help creators feel comfortable sharing unﬁnished work or asking for help . In this section , we generalize our ﬁndings by discussing design implications for future social comput - ing systems and proposing a design space for creativity sup - port tools that encourage useful creative outcomes—such as mistakes , failures , prototypes , and experiments—beyond tra - ditional notions of success . A design space for sharing creative work Though Mosaic focused primarily on supporting painting and illustration , its interface for sharing snapshots of in - progress work over time could apply directly to several other domains , including music , writing , and design . This would likely work best for domains where there is a single artifact that repre - sents the whole creative work . Something like ﬁlm - making consists of writing a script , a casting process , days of actual Figure 6 . A design space of possible creative communities based on what creative outcomes are being shared and by who . ﬁlming , and more ; it is hard to say what a snapshot of work would look like in this case . In addition , Mosaic may best beneﬁt work with a smaller scope ; it’s easier to share and give feedback on snapshots of a short story , for example , than an entire novel . At a high level , however , Mosaic expands the space of pos - sible designs for creative communities by broadening the scope of useful artifacts that creators may want to share— namely , creative processes . Doing so increases social translu - cence [ 19 ] ; social interactions are no longer solely based on the ﬁnal result but also on an awareness of what a creator has done to the create the work and why certain creative choices were made . In Mosaic , we saw evidence that the design of a creative com - munity can affect users’ views on what type of content is valuable and useful for the rest of the community . Many ex - isting creative communities are creator - centric , meaning that they focus primarily on allowing creators to share their own content in publicly viewable portfolios . However , commu - nities can also be curator - centric , and focus more on allow - ing creators ( or fans ) to showcase or curate the work of oth - ers ; Pinterest [ 6 ] , where users can gather content in themed “boards , ” is one example of a community designed around social content curation . These design attitudes are not mutu - ally exclusive , as many communities ( including DeviantArt ) also support curation by allowing users to favorite work by others and organize and share these favorites . These two axes—whether users are sharing their own or cu - rating others’ content , and whether users are focusing on shar - ing outcomes or process—reveal a design space for online creative communities for sharing work ( Figure 6 ) . The upper - left quadrant contains communities for creators to showcase the outcomes of their own work ; the upper - right quadrant contains communities for creators to curate work of others which is commonly used to support creative activities such as collecting inspiration and examples . The lower - left quad - rant represents communities that focus on enabling creators to share their own creative processes with each other , and in - cludes communities like Mosaic . The lower - right quadrant represents an open design opportunity : communities that al - low creators to curate the creative processes of others . This could simply be the curation and collection of tutorials , or one could imagine a community where creators create customized libraries of socially vetted techniques . This design space is certainly not comprehensive , but acts as a starting point for thinking about the design of creative com - munities in a broader way . One could imagine , for exam - ple , inverting this design space to focus on negative outcomes rather than positive ones : communities that share portfolios of good work become spaces for creators to share their worst failures ; creators could collect examples of ﬁnished work they do not like to help them scope the range of possible ideas for their next art piece ; and creators could even document cre - ative processes that ended in failure ( i . e . , what not to do ) , which would be valuable from a learning perspective for both themselves and for others . Process as intellectual property Creators who share their work online often worry about art theft , where someone reposts their work somewhere else without credit ( or while claiming to be the creator ) . In our formative study , we asked interview participants whether art theft was a concern when posting works - in - progress . Surpris - ingly , participants stated the consequences of art theft were ( while annoying ) mostly harmless , and doubted that someone would take the effort to steal their work since they felt they were not particularly famous . This response is likely due to how we recruited participants , since we expressly sought cre - ators with similar backgrounds and skills to make it possible for creators to give feedback to each other . Potential theft may be a more pressing issue for those who consider process part of their intellectual property ( indeed , a process can be considered a type of patentable invention ) . While this might suggest that Mosaic’s focus on sharing process is not applica - ble to domains where sharing early ideas may result in loss of competitive advantage ( e . g . , startups ) , one could imagine us - ing a system like Mosaic internally to facilitate transparency and feedback within a team . Growing the Mosaic community How does a system like Mosaic grow ? Maintaining commu - nities like Mosaic can be difﬁcult , as shown by the closure of popular communities that have attempted to focus on pro - cess but have transitioned back into showcasing outcomes [ 5 ] . Mosaic was described by interview participants as making it much easier to upload series of works - in - progress compared to existing painting and illustration sites , and some partici - pants even reported sharing links to their Mosaic projects on their other social media proﬁles . However , while we were able to ﬁnd positive effects of Mosaic’s design among a com - munity of users who were already actively using Mosaic , ob - serving less active users or people external to Mosaic would give us a better sense of why people do ( or do not ) participate actively in the Mosaic community or the value they derive from visiting Mosaic as a lurker . For example , is it unreal - istic to expect that most creators will take the time to post detailed works - in - progress ? Or , do people ﬁnd they enjoy viewing Mosaic projects without community interaction ? In other words , what would the social landscape of something like Mosaic look like at larger scale ? For example , though Mosaic users were able to give speciﬁc feedback to one another , there was a large variance in the average number of comments written by users who had up - loaded at least one project . It may have been difﬁcult for some users to ﬁnd projects to give feedback on , as Mosaic’s main method to display projects was to display a feed of re - cent activity from the community as a whole . This problem would only become larger as the community grows . How - ever , an increase in community size may help projects receive more feedback in a timely manner ( that is , while the project is still in progress ) . It may be worth expanding on Mosaic’s feature of being able to ﬂag critiques and use this as a sig - nal to push projects wanting critique to other users , or even create a matchmaking service that connects project wanting feedback with users who upload similar projects . As another example , while 35 % of comments on Mosaic were speciﬁc feedback about what the commenter liked about a creator’s work , other types of useful comments such as critiques ( 7 % ) and comments on techniques used ( 2 % ) were less common . Approaches such as structuring feedback using guidelines or templates [ 49 ] may further support creators in writing speciﬁc and timely feedback for one another . In addition , how does Mosaic maintain its focus on process as it grows ? This paper focused encouraging community contribution by enabling creators to share their process , but healthy communities also require committed users , regula - tion of behavior , and procedures for attracting and socializing new members [ 28 ] . The creators that participated in our study were already familiar with existing art communities and had established art practices ; it would be interesting to see how users new to art communities are affected by Mosaic’s so - cial norms ( as well as how the community reacts when these norms are violated by new users ) . One possibility is that Mo - saic’s decision to structure content creation in terms of snap - shots of progress will help convey community values . For ex - ample , this may encourage new users to describe their work in detail and make it easier for others to identify and act on opportunities to help [ 45 ] . In addition , we found that Mosaic users approach posting works - in - progress as teaching oppor - tunities ; these works - in - progress may thus also act as proof that the artist put a nontrivial amount of effort towards their work . Other users may take this as a signal that the artist will spend a similar amount of effort incorporating any help they receive . In future work , it would be interesting to study a community composed of creators unfamiliar with online art communities and see if Mosaic’s design “autocorrects” the behavior of users who are unfamiliar with ( or ignore ) the so - cial ideals of exquivalent exchange expressed by some of our interview participants . CONCLUSION In this paper , we make two major contributions . First , we demonstrate the potential beneﬁts of an online creative com - munity based around sharing works - in - progress creations . We did this by building Mosaic , an online creative commu - nity , and conducting an observational study where we inter - viewed creators about their interactions with each other as well as their artmaking process . Artists described being able to give and receive more helpful feedback on their work and feeling more comfortable sharing unﬁnished work and mis - takes ( relative to other creative communities ) . Second , we generalize the approach we proposed through Mosaic and generate a design space demonstrating opportunities for new types of creative communities by expanding our idea of use - ful creative outcomes . While not comprehensive , the exam - ples discussed here illustrate the possible ways we can ﬁll the gaps in support for communities of creators left by current systems . By explicitly designing to create space for explo - ration , process , and failure in creative tools and communi - ties , we may better enable creators to not just achieve but also grow . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We would like to thank our colleagues that helped shape this research with their valuable feedback . We also thank all the artists who participated in this study for their time and ex - pertise . This material is based upon work supported by the NSF GRFP under Grant No . DGE - 114747 and by the Hasso Plattner Institute Design Thinking Research Program . REFERENCES 1 . 99designs . http : / / 99designs . com . 2 . Behance . https : / / behance . net . 3 . ConceptArt . org : Art Community Activities . http : / / www . conceptart . org / forums / forumdisplay . php / 74 - ART - COMMUNITY - ACTIVITIES . 4 . DeviantArt . http : / / deviantart . com . 5 . The Future Of Work In Progress ( WIPs ) - Behance Helpcenter . https : / / web . archive . org / web / 20160421001929 / https : / / help . behance . net / hc / en - us / articles / 218288227 - The - future - of - Work - in - Progress - WIPs - . Accessed : 2016 - 04 - 21 . 6 . Pinterest . http : / / pinterest . com . 7 . / r / artcrit . http : / / reddit . com / r / artcrit . 8 . / r / DestructiveReaders . http : / / reddit . com / r / destructivereaders . 9 . Threadless . http : / / threadless . com . 10 . Wattpad . https : / / www . wattpad . com / home . 11 . James H . Block , Peter W . Airasian , Benjamin S . Bloom , and John B . Carroll . 1971 . Mastery learning : Theory and practice . Holt , Rinehart and Winston New York . 12 . David Boud , Ruth Cohen , and Jane Sampson . 2014 . Peer learning in higher education : Learning from and with each other . Routledge . 13 . Julie Campbell , Cecilia Aragon , Katie Davis , Sarah Evans , Abigail Evans , and David Randall . 2016 . Thousands of Positive Reviews : Distributed Mentoring in Online Fan Communities . In Proc . CSCW ( CSCW ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 691 – 704 . 14 . Joel Chan , Katherine Fu , Christian Schunn , Jonathan Cagan , Kristin Wood , and Kenneth Kotovsky . 2011 . On the beneﬁts and pitfalls of analogies for innovative design : Ideation performance based on analogical distance , commonness , and modality of examples . J . Mech . Des 133 , 8 ( 2011 ) , 081004 . 15 . Nigel Cross . 2004 . Expertise in design : an overview . Design studies 25 , 5 ( 2004 ) , 427 – 441 . 16 . Mira Dontcheva , Robert R . Morris , Joel R . Brandt , and Elizabeth M . Gerber . 2014 . Combining Crowdsourcing and Learning to Improve Engagement and Performance . In Proc . CHI ( CHI ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 3379 – 3388 . 17 . Steven P . Dow , Alana Glassco , Jonathan Kass , Melissa Schwarz , Daniel L . Schwartz , and Scott R . Klemmer . 2010 . Parallel Prototyping Leads to Better Design Results , More Divergence , and Increased Self - efﬁcacy . ACM TOCHI 17 , 4 ( Dec . 2010 ) . 18 . Carol Dweck . 2006 . Mindset : The new psychology of success . Random House . 19 . Thomas Erickson and Wendy A . Kellogg . 2000 . Social Translucence : An Approach to Designing Systems That Support Social Processes . ACM TOCHI 7 , 1 ( March 2000 ) , 59 – 83 . 20 . K . A . Ericsson , Ralf T . Krampe , and Clemens Tesch - R¨omer . 1993 . The role of deliberate practice in the acquisition of expert performance . Psychological review 100 , 3 ( 1993 ) , 363 . 21 . Edmund B . Feldman . 1971 . Varieties of Visual Experience ; Art as Image and Idea . ( 1971 ) . 22 . Philip J . Guo . 2015 . Codeopticon : Real - Time , One - To - Many Human Tutoring for Computer Programming . In Proc . UIST ( UIST ’15 ) . 599 – 608 . 23 . Scarlett R . Herring , Chia - Chen Chang , Jesse Krantzler , and Brian Bailey . 2009 . Getting Inspired ! : Understanding How and Why Examples Are Used in Creative Design Practice . In Proc . CHI ( CHI ’09 ) . 87 – 96 . 24 . Benjamin Mako Hill and Andr´es Monroy - Hern´andez . 2013 . The Cost of Collaboration for Code and Art : Evidence from a Remixing Community . In Proc . CSCW ( CSCW ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1035 – 1046 . 25 . Steve Hodges , Lyndsay Williams , Emma Berry , Shahram Izadi , James Srinivasan , Alex Butler , Gavin Smyth , Narinder Kapur , and Ken Wood . 2006 . SenseCam : A Retrospective Memory Aid . In Proc . UbiComp ( UbiComp’06 ) . 177 – 193 . 26 . David G Jansson and Steven M Smith . 1991 . Design ﬁxation . Design studies 12 , 1 ( 1991 ) , 3 – 11 . 27 . Joy Kim , Justin Cheng , and Michael S . Bernstein . 2014 . Ensemble : Exploring Complementary Strengths of Leaders and Crowds in Creative Collaboration . In Proc . CSCW ( CSCW ’14 ) . 745 – 755 . 28 . Robert E Kraut , Paul Resnick , Sara Kiesler , Moira Burke , Yan Chen , Niki Kittur , Joseph Konstan , Yuqing Ren , and John Riedl . 2012 . Building successful online communities : Evidence - based social design . MIT Press . 29 . Chinmay Kulkarni , Steven P . Dow , and Scott R . Klemmer . 2014 . Early and repeated exposure to examples improves creative work . In Design Thinking Research . Springer , 49 – 62 . 30 . Stacey Kuznetsov and Eric Paulos . 2010 . Rise of the Expert Amateur : DIY Projects , Communities , and Cultures . In Proc . NordiCHI ( NordiCHI ’10 ) . 295 – 304 . 31 . Yong Jae Lee , C . Lawrence Zitnick , and Michael F . Cohen . 2011 . ShadowDraw : Real - time User Guidance for Freehand Drawing . In ACM SIGGRAPH 2011 Papers ( SIGGRAPH ’11 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , Article 27 , 10 pages . 32 . Kurt Luther , Kelly Caine , Kevin Ziegler , and Amy Bruckman . 2010 . Why It Works ( When It Works ) : Success Factors in Online Creative Collaboration . In Proc . GROUP ( GROUP ’10 ) . 1 – 10 . 33 . Kurt Luther , Casey Fiesler , and Amy Bruckman . 2013 . Redistributing Leadership in Online Creative Collaboration . In Proc . CSCW ( CSCW ’13 ) . 1007 – 1022 . 34 . Kurt Luther , Jari - Lee Tolentino , Wei Wu , Amy Pavel , Brian P . Bailey , Maneesh Agrawala , Bj¨orn Hartmann , and Steven P . Dow . 2015 . Structuring , Aggregating , and Evaluating Crowdsourced Design Critique . In Proc . CSCW ( CSCW ’15 ) . 473 – 485 . 35 . Jennifer Marlow and Laura Dabbish . 2014 . From Rookie to All - star : Professional Development in a Graphic Design Social Networking Site . In Proc . CSCW ( CSCW ’14 ) . 922 – 933 . 36 . Alice E Marwick and others . 2011 . I tweet honestly , I tweet passionately : Twitter users , context collapse , and the imagined audience . New media & society 13 , 1 ( 2011 ) , 114 – 133 . 37 . Justin Matejka , Wei Li , Tovi Grossman , and George Fitzmaurice . 2009 . CommunityCommands : Command Recommendations for Software Applications . In Proc . UIST ( UIST ’09 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 193 – 202 . 38 . Oded Nov , Mor Naaman , and Chen Ye . 2009 . Motivational , Structural and Tenure Factors that Impact Online Community Photo Sharing . . In Proc . ICWSM . 138 – 145 . 39 . Daniela Petrelli , Elise van den Hoven , and Steve Whittaker . 2009 . Making History : Intentional Capture of Future Memories . In Proc . CHI ( CHI ’09 ) . 1723 – 1732 . 40 . Daniela Retelny , S´ebastien Robaszkiewicz , Alexandra To , Walter S . Lasecki , Jay Patel , Negar Rahmati , Tulsee Doshi , Melissa Valentine , and Michael S . Bernstein . 2014 . Expert Crowdsourcing with Flash Teams . In Proc . UIST ( UIST ’14 ) . 75 – 85 . 41 . Donald A . Sch¨on . 1983 . The reﬂective practitioner : How professionals think in action . Vol . 5126 . Basic books . 42 . Burr Settles and Steven Dow . 2013 . Let’s Get Together : The Formation and Success of Online Creative Collaborations . In Proc . CHI ( CHI ’13 ) . 2009 – 2018 . 43 . Pao Siangliulue , Kenneth C . Arnold , Krzysztof Z . Gajos , and Steven P . Dow . 2015a . Toward Collaborative Ideation at Scale : Leveraging Ideas from Others to Generate More Creative and Diverse Ideas . In Proc . CSCW ( CSCW ’15 ) . 937 – 945 . 44 . Pao Siangliulue , Joel Chan , Krzysztof Z . Gajos , and Steven P . Dow . 2015b . Providing Timely Examples Improves the Quantity and Quality of Generated Ideas . In Proc . C & C ( C & C ’15 ) . 83 – 92 . 45 . Hon Jie Teo and Aditya Johri . 2014 . Fast , Functional , and Fitting : Expert Response Dynamics and Response Quality in an Online Newcomer Help Forum . In Proc . CSCW ( CSCW ’14 ) . 332 – 341 . 46 . Elizabeth Thiry , Siˆan Lindley , Richard Banks , and Tim Regan . 2013 . Authoring Personal Histories : Exploring the Timeline As a Framework for Meaning Making . In Proc . CHI ( CHI ’13 ) . 1619 – 1628 . 47 . Cristen Torrey , David W McDonald , Bill N Schilit , and Sara Bly . 2007 . How - To pages : Informal systems of expertise sharing . In ECSCW 2007 . Springer , 391 – 410 . 48 . Molly McLure Wasko and Samer Faraj . 2005 . Why Should I Share ? Examining Social Capital and Knowledge Contribution in Electronic Networks of Practice . MIS Q . 29 , 1 ( March 2005 ) , 35 – 57 . 49 . Anbang Xu , Shih - Wen Huang , and Brian Bailey . 2014 . Voyant : Generating Structured Feedback on Visual Designs Using a Crowd of Non - experts . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & # 38 ; Social Computing ( CSCW ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1433 – 1444 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2531602 . 2531604 50 . Anbang Xu , Huaming Rao , Steven P . Dow , and Brian P . Bailey . 2015 . A Classroom Study of Using Crowd Feedback in the Iterative Design Process . In Proc . CSCW ( CSCW ’15 ) . 1637 – 1648 . 51 . Lixiu Yu and Jeffrey V . Nickerson . 2011 . Cooks or Cobblers ? : Crowd Creativity Through Combination . In Proc . CHI ( CHI ’11 ) . 1393 – 1402 .