Braa , K . and Rolland , K . H . 2000 . Horizontal Information Systems : Emergent Trends and Perspectives . In : Baskerville , R . , Stage , J . and DeGross , J . I . ( eds . ) Organizational and Social Perspectives on Information Technology . Boston : Kluwer Academic Publishers , pp . 83 - 101 . Horizontal Information Systems : Emergent Trends and Perspectives Kristin Braa & Knut H . Rolland University of Oslo Norway Abstract The purpose of this paper is to point at some of the aspects that make today’s large - scale information systems and infrastructures in globally dispersed corporations exceedingly challenging to implement . At the brink of the new millennium , emerging trends like globalisation and the Internet – as well as the buzzword ‘knowledge management’ , have profound impacts on how business organisations design and deploy its IT solutions . Standardisation and integration seem to be the common strategy – whether it is ERP systems , middleware based IS , Intranets , or IT infrastructures . However , in practice these systems are often heterogeneous and fragmented , and constrained by various socio - technical aspects . In focusing on this phenomenon , we suggest the concept of a ‘horizontal information system’ . Drawing from examples from a maritime classification company we take a closer look at the phenomenon , and some implications for design and deployment of such systems are briefly described . 1 Introduction In this paper , we investigate the growing trend in knowledge - intensive and globally dispersed organisations in using IT for standardising and integrating knowledge , work , infrastructure , and information systems . We focus on the information systems and how these systems are integrated with work practices , paper documents , and an installed - base . The term ‘horizontal information system’ is purposed to underscore the distinct challenges facing the design , implementation and use of large - scale information systems that cut across different ' communities - of - practice ' ( Brown & Duguid , 1991 ) . Despite enabling technologies , including the success of Internet - based technologies , the deployment of a horizontal information system is likely to be constrained by installed - base issues , social and political aspects of knowledge sharing , social and material aspects of documents , and increasing socio - technical interdependencies created . We see a tendency moving from vertical information systems to horizontal and integrated systems that cut across the organisation . Trends emerging from internet - based technologies such as Intranets for internal organisational communication enhance this . Other similar trends such as globalisation and knowledge management are supporting this tendency in deploying large - scale infrastructure - like information system for the entire enterprise . The general term globalisation has been used to describe the increasing economical and political interdependence in the world society . These contemporary trends seem to some extent to lead organisations into focusing on integration of work and knowledge , and the on standardisation of both technology and work . However , we will not argue that they – in a deterministic way , shape how organisations utilise IT and design their information systems , but they rather seem to be used as rhetorical devices combined with state - of - the - art technologies in order to inscribe certain organisational behaviours . For instance , for increasing the control and the coordination in the organisation . The highlights from a case that put into focus the challenges in designing and implementing horizontal information systems is described . The company described is a maritime classification company ( MCC ) , operating world wide as an independent foundation working with the objective of ‘safeguarding life , property and the environment’ . The MCC is a global company that compromises 300 offices in 100 countries , and it has a total of 5500 employees . MCC is one of the world’s largest classification societies having classified approximately 15 % of the world’s commercial shipping fleet . The horizontal information system implemented is a classification support system designed for supporting surveyors in their inspection of ships throughout the world . We will use this case to emphasise characteristics and 2 possible pitfalls implementing such systems . The case is a rich case were we in this paper have mainly emphasised aspects we find relevant for discussing challenges implementing horizontal information systems . For more detailed reading of the case see ( Rolland , 1999 ) . This paper is structured in the following way . Firstly , we survey the emerging trends that ‘drives’ the use of IT in global and knowledge - intensive organisations , and the development of horizontal information systems in particular , namely the Internet , globalisation , the focus on utilising IT for the management of knowledge , and the focus on the transition from paper - based to digital documents . Next , some of the challenges that are related to these trends are identified from a study of the deployment of a horizontal information system in MCC . Then , from examples from this particular case , some general implications for the design and deployment of such systems are briefly outlined . 2 Emergent Trends and Perspectives 2 . 1 The Internet Factor The explosive adoption of Internet technologies during the 1990s has woven local networks into a global network , making up the infrastructure of information society . The telephone took 37 years to acquire 50 million listeners , the television needed 15 years to get the same amount of viewers , while the World Wide Web managed to reach 50 million surfers in around 3 years . 1 Nobody knows exactly how many people are connected to the Internet but it has been estimated to around 120 - 150 million people , and more importantly , the number continues to grow exponentially . We argue that our discipline is faced now with interesting challenges that must be met by both existing and new research paradigms . Internet was initially an experimental network between contractors and computer science researchers working for the US Department of Defence . From the Mid 1980 and until 1990 , it proved very successful as a world wide information infrastructure for faculty , staff and students at universities and research centres . In 1991 the restrictions against commercial use of the Internet were removed . The same year , the World Wide Web software was released . Then Web is one of the main driving forces of the Internet , where it is being used widely by large and small businesses , by private citizens , in schools and by consumers ( Guice , 1998 ) . Internet as a unifying concept for the development of open and simple standards has proven to be a strong force in setting the agenda for the development of commercial software . Public and private organisations recognise that they need to have an opinion about how the technology affects their business . The question is not if , but how Internet can be utilised as interaction and integration media internally in organisations and externally in interaction with the customers ( Braa & Sørensen , 1999 ) . The Internet as global infrastructure plays an increasingly important role in both information systems practice and research . The ability of Internet as a common platform to build services upon also creates expectations . Stand alone information systems are expected to integrate with the global network . Internet technology supports horizontal solutions involving a variety of actors both those behind the service , and those using the service . Thus , these systems become large heterogeneous networks that need to be aligned with an installed - base of existing systems as well as practices . In this way , Internet serves as an important integrating technology . 2 . 2 The Consequences of globalisation for the design of IS The general term globalisation has been used to describe the increasing economical and political interdependence in the world society . More specifically , Giddens ( 1991 ) describes the globalisation phenomenon as time - space distanciation . The conceptual framework of time - space distanciation in which the attention is directed to the complex relation between local involvement and interaction across distance . Now the level of time - space distansiation is much higher than in any other previous period , thus the relation between local and distant social forms and events become correspondingly stretched . This stretching process is what Giddens refers to as globalisation , in the sense that the modes of connection between different social contexts or regions become networked across the earth surface as a whole ( ibid . ) . Globalisation is thus defined as the intensification of worldwide social relations which link distant localities in such a way that local happenings are shaped by events occurring many miles away and visa versa . Globalization is to be understood as a dialectical phenomenon , in which events at one pole of a distanciated relation often produce divergent or even contrary occurrences at another . For Giddens modernization and globalization is closely connected . Globalization is the most 1 Observer ( 1999 ) : Guide to the Internet . The Observer , January 17th 1999 , pp . 32 3 visible form modernization is taking today and risk society is emerging ( Beck , 1992 ) . Everything is connected to everything , the interdependency increases and control decreases . Increasing risk means decreasing control . Traditionally , modernisation implied increased control in line with Beninger’s ( 1986 ) outline of the “control revolution . ” More knowledge and more and better technology implied both increased control . In the age of high modernity and globalisation , more knowledge may just as well lead to more unpredictability , more uncertainty and less controllability ( Hanseth & Braa , 2000 ) . This shift , which may appear contradictory , can be explained by the increasing role of side - effects ( Beck 1994 ) . Globalisation means integration . At the same time , all change - new technologies intro - duced , organisational structures and work procedures implemented , etc . - has unintended side - effects . Any change may affect those interacting with processes being involved in the change . Side - effects of local events often have global consequences . And the more integrated the world become , the longer and faster side - effects travel and the more significant their consequences . Globalisation also means globalisation of side effects . In the so - called ‘informational economy’ it has been argued that IT and globalization are reinforced by each other ( Bradley et al . , 1993 ; Castells , 1996 ) , and that these processes will shape markets and the way businesses compete . Interestingly , this will also change the way organisations use IT – how information systems are designed - and the motivations for developing these systems . In this context , IS - related literature seem to recommend global organisations to utilise IT for increasing the control and co - ordination ( e . g . Ives & Jarvenpaa , 1991 ) . Earl and Fenny ( 1996 ) , suggest that global and large - scale information systems have the potential to contribute to the global efficiency , local responsiveness , transfer of learning , and in making global alliances . The role of IT as a key factor to bring this changes about is often thought of as an opportunity to increase control and enhance co - ordination , while opening access to new global markets and businesses ( Ives and Jarvenpaa , 1991 ) . Barlett and Ghoshal ( 1998 ) claim that firms operating in this global markets will increasingly be at a serious strategic disadvantage it they are unable to firmly control their worldwide operations and manage them in a globally co - ordinated manner . Within this model corporations are focusing on more close coordination of increasingly more complex and global processes . At the same time , globalization is experienced as creating an increasingly more rapidly changing , dynamic , and unpredictable world . Thus , globalization and the growing unpredictability , uncertainty and less controllability make up profound consequenses for how organisations use IT and deploy large - scale information systems . IT and information systems are not unlimetedly enabling technologies that corporations can deploy to increase strategic advantages in terms of information integration and a standardised IT infrastructure . These technologies are inevidently connected to larger social systems , that in turn imposes a variety of socio - technical constrains on the use of IT . For instance , IT is playing key roles in implementation of ”flexible specialization” models by enabling more flexible production systems . On the other hand , as showed in the case of implementing SAP in a global organization ( Hanseth & Braa , 1998 ) , large and complex IT infrastructures may block for the changes in organisational structures and processes necessary for a global company to excel in the global market . Thus , in this perspective technology becomes an actor , which may decrease the number of possible re - designs , and hence , in this way , technology in general becomes both enabling and constraining ( Orlikowski , 1992a ) . This insight suggests IT will be both constraining and enabling for global organisations in increasing their control and coordination . In addition , since information technologies and systems become an integral part of almost any work process , this ultimately increases the interdependencies between different work processes and between those practices and the technologies involved . In a variety of businesses and organisations it seem to be a growing trend to build large - scale horizontal information systems . More specifically , this can be categories of systems such as Enterprise Resource Planning ( ERP ) systems , in - house developed client / server systems based on middleware architectures , or large Intranets based on Internet technologies and standards . Typically , these are systems that cut horizontally across the organisation aiming at integrating and standardising the organisations business processes . IS research on these topics that focus on the social - technical processes which take place when organisations are deploying large - scale information systems are almost non - existing . An exception , is Davenport ( 1998 ) who has surveyed the recent trends in Enterprise Systems , and denotes that information integration and standardisation may reduce the flexibility by imposing its own logic on the company’s strategy , culture , and organisation . On the other hand , some organisations may as well succeed in implementing such systems . Similarly , in the contemporary discussions around Information Infrastructures it has been shown how design and redesign of such large - scale systems are constrained by an installed - base of systems , standards and practices ( Hanseth et al . , 1996 ; Star & Ruhleder , 1996 ) . 4 2 . 3 Knowledge Management : social and political aspects One of the motivations for developing large - scale IS that transcend organisational departments and functions comes from the assumption that these systems will enable knowledge sharing , and thereby serve as an important tool for the establishment of an organisational memory . In our case of major a maritime classification company , one of the main objectives for developing a large - scale IS was to increase the sharing and creation of knowledge in the organisation . Thus , these motivations increase the relevance for drawing from research and insights on topics like ‘Knowledge Management’ and ‘Organisational Learning’ , that have long been focused in organisation theory and management science ( e . g . Argyris & . Schön , 1996 ; Wiig 1995 ) . In discussions within management science , economics , and recently within information systems , ‘knowledge’ has been put forward as the most valuable asset for the organisations in the ‘knowledge - based economy’ ( e . g . Neef et al . , 1998 ) . In these discussions different information systems and IT in general are often seen as an instrument for ‘transforming’ knowledge into valuable industrial commodities . However , knowledge as such – or knowledge management does not necessarily need to be linked to IT or IS . Nonaka & Takeuchi ( 1995 , 1998 ) describe a spiral process of organisational knowledge creation where knowledge is created through the interactions between tacit - tacit , tacit - explicit , explicit - explicit , and explicit - tacit knowledge through the phases of socialization , externalization , combination , and internalization . They differentiate the Japanese approach with the western approach focusing on conceptualising organisations as ‘information processing machines’ , and underline the importance of tacit knowledge within individuals and teams . Knowledge is defined as ‘justified true belief’ ( Nonaka & Takeuchi , 1998 : p . 218 ) , and is only created by individuals . Thus , in this theory of knowledge - creation it is not evident how this spiral process is going to be supported or enabled by IT or IS . Furthermore , the rather unpredictable outcome of using IT as an enabler of organisational change in general ( e . g . Orlikowski , 1992a ; Robey & Boudreau , 1999 ) , underscores the importance of not treating IT isolated from social and organisational issues . In this way IT will be both enabling and constraining for supporting knowledge sharing and creation in an organisational setting . In an attempt to establish a framework for knowledge management in terms of IT and information systems , Earl ( 1996 ) defines knowledge management as consisting of ‘knowledge systems’ , ( computer ) ‘networks’ , ‘knowledge workers’ , and the ‘learning organisation’ . Earl draws on case studies of Skandia and Shorko to illustrate how IT has enabled their knowledge - based strategies . However , in order to establish a knowledge - based strategy , Earl refers to the need for organisational collaboration ; training and personal development ; and organisational incentives to support knowledge sharing and collaboration . These three preconditions comes close to the challenges emphasised in the design and implementation of groupware , work flow systems and other large collaborative systems that has been the main focus in CSCW ( e . g . Grudin , 1994 ; Markus & Connolly , 1990 ; Orlikowski , 1992b ) . Viewing information systems as unconditionally enabling for the sharing of knowledge and collaboration , would be in line with ‘discrete - entity’ models of information systems ( Kling , 1987 ) . In this perspective both technology and knowledge will be a - political , and implicitly assume that the users will trust the technology and freely and unconditionally are willing to enter their knowledge into the system . Often relevant knowledge is something that each individual hold as their ‘competitive advantage’ for promotions and positions in the organisation . This is nicely illustrated by Orlikowski ( 1992b ) in a case study of a consulting firm there Lotus Notes is implemented to increase interchange of information between consultants . However , the consulting firm’s reward systems , policies and procedures , as well as culture and work norms did not support the sharing of knowledge between individuals . Likewise , Grudin ( 1994 ) and Markus & Connolly ( 1990 ) discuss issues around the interdependent nature of collaborative tools and point at asymmetries in workloads , prisoner’s dilemma , and establishing a critical mass of users , as the main problems . For instance , how do you motivate users to enter information into the systems they themselves do not get any benefit from ? These are more or less the same dilemmas that one faces when developing a horizontal information system . In more mainstream IS research similar issues have been investigated by Ciborra ( 1993 ) from a transaction cost perspective . Deploying information systems that will contradict the existing patterns of transactions established within the current organisation structure would fail . For instance , by providing a shared database system for information sharing in a hierarchical structure will most likely fail , because this form of sharing information will be to assume that there exists a ‘perfect’ market with no asymmetries and o opportunistic use of information . 5 The view that knowledge can be treated as a ‘commodity’ makes the state - of - the - art technologies unlimitedly enabling – downplaying the constraining factors illustrated by recent research in CSCW and IS . Even though the ‘Internet factor’ and other information technologies making it technically ‘easier’ to develop large - scale information systems it is less evident that these systems will be successful in terms of knowledge sharing and creation . 3 Horizontal Information Systems In the seventies Galbraith ( 1973 ) claimed that the uncertainty faced by organisations were due to insufficient information . Uncertainty was defined as the difference between the information needed for the successful execution of an organisational task and the information available in the organisation . Consequently , the information processing abilities of the organisation had to be increased as the organisation faced an increasing uncertainty . In Galbraith ' s information processing model of the organisation , one design strategy could be to deploy vertical information systems in order to increase the information processing abilities and avoid an overheated hierarchy . As illustrated in our case of a maritime classification company , information technologies and standards for interoperability and computer networking combined with visions of ( global ) knowledge sharing and information integration – represent a shift towards deploying horizontal in addition to vertical information systems . This shift from vertical and local ' information processing systems ' – to horizontal and global information systems comes with a range of new business opportunities as well as distinct challenges and pitfalls . These challenges can be summarised as more or less related to the following : • the growing socio - technical interdependencies that make it almost impossible to distinguish between the technical and the non - technical issues , which in turn , constrains the use of IT and the deployment of information systems in organisations ; • the installed - base of the existing information systems and standards , and related work practices ; • the social and political aspects of leveraging knowledge sharing and creation in an organisation ; • the linking of different communities - of - practice ; • the transition from paper documents to digital documents , given social and material aspects that gives meaning to a paper document in a specific community - of - practice ( Sandahl , 1999 ) . In order to focus on these problematic aspects the concept of a horizontal information system is suggested . Horizontal information systems are different from the traditional information systems in ways of typically being a support system for different communities in the organisation or between organisations . Typically , the traditional information systems focus on feeding the upper levels ( i . e . strategic management ) of the organisation with relevant information for taking decisions . Moreover , in this world , it was relatively easy to point at the typical users , making it possible to design the system for a special group of users ( i . e . managers and secretaries ) . In short , the focus was on automating the vertical information processing through a transaction processing system . The typical example will be a payroll system used by the administrative staff for information on employees , salaries , and the production of payslips 2 . In addition , management may use the system for planning the staff levels and promotions , and for reporting to the tax office . On the other hand , a typical horizontal information system will be focused on transparent access to information for many different categories of users and communities - of - practice – in other words it will focus more on ' informating ' in contrast to ' automating ' ( Zuboff , 1988 ) . Hence , here the focus is on interactions between users – not transactions , and the systems could support a formal flow of work as well as more informal information exchange and collaboration . However , the concept of a horizontal information system does neither denote a special technical architecture nor technical solution , or any special organisational structure . Consequently , the design , implementation and use of a horizontal information system requires , an explicit focus on the horizontal aspects which inherently comes as complex socio - technical interdependencies spiced with the lack of control , differences in practices and interests , and the inertia of the installed - base . 2 Examples of traditional information systems are given in Avison & Fitzgerald ( 1995 ) . Information Systems Development : Methodologies , Techniques and Tools . McGraw - Hill . 6 3 . 1 Related research Information Infrastructure The term Information Infrastructure has been used to describe large - scale networked structures that often cut across work - practices , departments , functions , and organisational borders ( e . g . Bud - Frierman , 1994 ; Hanseth et al . , 1996 ; Monteiro & Hanseth , 1995 ; Rolland , 1999 ; Star & Ruhleder , 1996 ) . Hence , any Horizontal Information System could also be defined as an Information Infrastructure . But , not necessarily the other way around , as a Horizontal Information System will focus more on supporting more or less specific activities for different communities - of - practice . Information Infrastructures , however , as the term is used in the literature , span from tailor - made large - scale collaborative systems ( Star & Ruhleder , 1996 ) , large EDI networks ( Monteiro & Hanseth , 1995 ) , National Information Infrastructures ( Branscomb & Kahin , 1995 ) , to the Internet ( Monteiro , 1998 ) . Bud - Frierman ( 1994 ) states that the concept of an Information Infrastructure is a potentially useful unit of discourse , being both a historical and cultural entity in addition to being used to describe both micro - and macro - level structures . In general , an information infrastructure can be understood as a term for describing the heterogeneous , dispersed , complex and interdependent components , which our “work” rely on to collaborate and co - ordinate activities through sharing and interchange of information in a given context . Along these lines an Information Infrastructure becomes a socio - technical phenomenon . Information Infrastructures are always more than cables , communication protocols , routers , and computers . More specifically , Hanseth ( 2000 ) emphasises that an Information Infrastructure is evidently an enabling , shared , open , socio - technical and heterogeneous installed - base . An Information Infrastructure is never built from scratch , and there will always be an installed - base in terms of a heterogeneous social system consisting of technical as well as non - technical components . An infrastructure are connected and interconnected components , which can be conceived as ‘ecologies of infrastructures’ ( Hanseth , forthcoming ) . One infrastructure consist of ecologies of sub - infrastructures by : • building one infrastructure as a layer on top of another ; • linking logical related networks ; • integrating independent components , making them interdependent In this way , a Horizontal Information System could be understood as a component in a larger Information Infrastructure . Similarly , according to Star & Ruhleder ( 1996 ) , an Information Infrastructure cannot be understood as pure technology , but that an Information Infrastructure is always embedded in a larger social structure . Moreover , Star & Ruhleder ( 1996 ) underlines that an infrastructure is something that develops in relation to practice , it is not to be conceived as a ‘thing’ or a static technical structure , and the question becomes ‘When is an infrastructure ? ’ – not ‘What is an infrastructure ? ’ Consequently , ‘an infrastructure occurs when the tension between local and global is resolved’ ( Star & Ruhleder , 1996 : p . 114 ) . Thus , this Information Infrastructure discussion focuses on some interesting aspects that increasingly are met when designing and deploying large - scale information systems . For instance , the focus on the installed - base , that is , the understanding that you can never develop a system from scratch – there is always something there in form of social practices , artifacts , and very often a heterogeneous collection of different information systems . In using the term Horizontal Information Systems we are interested in discovering the socio - technical processes surrounding the alignment between different practices , artifacts , the old information systems , and new systems and technologies . For instance , why is an information system successfully aligned within one context , whereas it can be totally misaligned in a different context ? And , how do we design and implement information systems that cut across different contexts ? Furthermore , how is this integration process shaped by the existing artifacts ( i . e . paper documents ) , work practices , and in what way are an installed - base enabling and constraining for a certain information system to be implemented ? Communities of Practice and artifacts One impeding aspect of designing large - scale information systems is that they cut across several ' communities - of - practice ' . The term ' Communities - of - practice ' has been used to denote a social group where a certain practice is common , coordinated and reproduced ( Brown & Duguid , 1991 ) . Thus , in any larger organisation there will typically exist numerous communities – an organisation can be 7 described as a community - of - communities . Artifacts , whether information systems or paper documents , play important roles in a community - of - practice were they mediate relations and coordinate activities , both within the community and between different communities . Usually , artifacts are not universally interpreted among different communities - of - practice . When deploying horizontal information systems , information provided by the system can be interpreted very differently within different communities - of - practice . Furthermore , when information which earlier existed on paper documents , as for instance standardised reports or checklists , becomes part of a horizontal information system , the information provided can be interpreted differently . Artifacts like paper documents have been recognised for having material and social aspects that are important for the meaning of the information inscribed on them ( Brown & Duguid , 1994 ; Braa & Sandahl , 1998 ) . For instance , Braa & Sandahl ( 1998 ) describe an attempt at a News Agency to implement paper - based TV schedules into a document information system . The design of the new document information system failed , because one of the resources that the users relied on in their work practice was not considered relevant for the design . At the News Agency the faxes and shelves indicated progress and states of the work process , and since this work process was visible to all workers at the office the artifacts played an important role in coordination of the work . In the document information system this coordination mechanism did not exist , and subsequently the system broke down . In more general terms , the concept of ‘borderline issues’ could be used to focus on documents’ additional or unnoticed resources , beyond what is usually recognised as the canonical meaning of the artifact ( Brown & Duguid , 1994 ) . In general , artifacts have both central and more peripheral properties , and there is a border between them . What is recognised as a central or peripheral property varies within different communities - of - practice . The boarder is distinguishable from the other peripheral properties if it plays a socially recognised role in the artifact’s use . For most of us , an invoice is a piece of paper that tells us how much we have to pay or how much others owe us . For us , the financial transaction itself is the central property of the invoice . As reported by Hughes and King ( 1993 ) , accountants may regard the comments , memos , queries and questions attached to the invoice as the central property , in order to be able to tell what has happened , what the status is , and what problems have to be solved . Some users see properties as a central and natural part of the documents , while other users of the same document regard the same properties as uninteresting and peripheral . There are no clear boundaries indicating what is seen as a central part of the artifact and what is peripheral . How the artifact , or more specifically the document , is regarded depends on the community - of - practice . The border is defined as the dividing line between the central and the peripheral properties . borderline issues are those resources that are shared and constitute a social meaning for a group of people . These unnoticed resources are developed over time as artifacts are integrated into ongoing practice and social conventions are developed . The border resources are maintained by communities - of - practices , and are resources that workers often rely on ( Brown & Duguid , 1994 ) . For instance , the lack of a mark in an invoice may be an unnoticed resource , indicating that a colleague is not at work , and that someone else is doing her job ( Hughes & King , 1993 ) . Borderline issues develop over time based on material continuity and communities of common practice . Material continuity is needed in order to recognise the properties , and community of common practice is necessary for members to share , recognise and reformulate conventions ( Brown & Duguid , 1994 ) . Because the border resources often lie beyond what is regarded as part of the artifact , designers often remove these when developing new system . As Horizontal Information Systems cut across different communities - of - practice , these systems potentially remove many of these borderline resources . Especially when the systems are deployed for ‘removing’ the existing paper - based documents within these communities and maybe more importantly , in - between different communities . A too strict standardisation through a Horizontal Information System may undermine the important local infrastructural resources that are the ‘foundation’ for continuos learning and innovation . 3 . 2 Everything is connected to everything In exploring and conceptualising the heterogeneous interdependencies , and thus provide explanations for the failure or success of design , implementation and use of a horizontal information system , we are inspired by actor - network theory ( ANT ) . The prominent idea behind ANT is the principle of symmetry between humans and non - humans , and that everything – from scientific ‘facts’ to information systems , are made up of heterogeneous networks of humans and non - humans ( e . g . Callon , 1991 ; Latour , 1987 ; 8 Latour , 1991 ; Law , 1992 ) . Lately , ANT has gained increasing popularity within IS research ( e . g . Hanseth & Braa , 1998 ; McMaster et al . , 1999 ; Monteiro & Hepsø , 1999 ; Walsham , 1997 ) . ANT has been recognised for its potential for grasping the various socio - technical relationships that make up today’s complex information systems and information infrastructures by taking the advantage of the concept of symmetry and that the ‘social’ can be discovered as inscriptions in artifacts . However , a strong symmetry , which implies both material agency and human agency , raise some important methodological and epistemological as well as practical concerns . For instance , Collins and Yearly ( 1992 ) argue that since artifacts do not have a social life that researchers can look into , they can not be treated like humans by social scientists , and hence there is no such thing as material agency . Furthermore , Walsham ( 1997 ) is concerned about the moral and ethical stance by assuming symmetry between humans and non - humans , but argues that ANT can be used without agreeing on strong symmetry . We will emphasise that at the practical level , this symmetry could be problematic when describing the work practices , artifacts and systems . Authors must be very careful when using ANT to not confuse between the socio - technical networks and the technical computer networks . 4 From Local and Vertical to Global and Horizontal 4 . 1 The Case of MCC In an ongoing case study of a Maritime Classification Company ( MCC ) one of the authors is studying the implementation and use of a large - scale information system . This case illustrates many of the profound challenges and pitfalls with designing and implementing a horizontal information system to be used by different communities in a global organisation . During the 1990s MCC has been challenged through increased global competition and swift changes that have effected their business environment . An important part of MCC’s strategy to meet these challenges has been to deploy IT with the intention of ‘re - engineering’ their way of working and become a ‘learning organisation’ . This alignment of the business strategy and the IT / IS - strategy , indicated a shift from a local and vertical IS , towards a more global and horizontal information system . In 1997 – as a part of this strategy , MCC invested approximately 52 million USD in common infrastructure and a large - scale information system . In this paper , use and implementation of this large - scale information system is illuminated , and will be referred to as the Horizontal Information System . The common IT infrastructure was launched in 1997 - 98 under the mantra ‘one world – one MCC’ , and comprised a WAN that links 300 offices , common NT servers , office applications , common e - mail system , and shared document databases . In addition to the global infrastructure campaign , MCC had since 1993 been working on the Horizontal Information System for supporting the work of the surveyors as well as the information requirements of managers and customers . The prominent idea was to integrate all relevant information for classification of vessels in a common product model . A product model is a standardised detailed description of all parts of a ship and the relationships between those parts . This common product model was developed using the UML modelling language and additional CASE tools , and serves as the common standard for the Horizontal Information System . In short , the Horizontal Information System is a state - of - the - art client / server system built on Microsoft’s COM architecture as middleware and a common SQL - based relational database as a server . The system was finished in December 1997 , however , the design had to be continuously adjusted , and was finally put in use at the first offices in early 1999 . The vision was that the Horizontal Information System would enable knowledge sharing and transparent access to all relevant information on vessels , certificates , surveys etc . , regardless of roles , departments , and positions in the organisation . Consequently , this use of IT was in stark contrast to the recent use of IT , which could be characterised as being local and vertical . Surveyors used PCs connected to different LANs mainly for word processing , e - mail , and for the use of different local databases . In addition , a specialised application for retrieval of up - to - date information on a vessel’s status and reporting of surveys had been used . A database running on a centralised mainframe system has been used to store all information on vessels , surveys , certificates and ship owners . 9 4 . 2 Enabling the management of knowledge Standardisation of work and knowledge sharing MCC has systematically worked for streamlining and standardising their work processes and several projects have been undertaken to define new work processes . In addition MCC has established a system with ‘work process owners’ who are responsible for a defined work process world - wide . As an overall strategy , MCC has emphasised standardisation on three different levels : 1 ) common work processes ; 2 ) common product model serving as a standard for the Horizontal Information System ; and 3 ) common IT infrastructure . However , in practice this strategy has not been unproblematic , due to the socio - technical nature of implementing such information systems and several unintended side - effects created . Pre - contract phase order delivery scrapping New building phase Common product model in an SQL database In - service phase ( Ships in operation ) Knowledge creation and sharing through the use of a horizontalinformation system in all three phases • planning and reporting • internal memos •certification • design and specification approval • approval • certification• survey A surveyor’s Work Horizontal IS Infrastructure Common operating system , file formats , data communication protocols , hardware platforms etc . The Horizontal Information System Application Application Application S t a nd a r d i s a t i o n o n a ll l e v e l s Figure 1 : Life - cycle information management in MCC Firstly , sharing knowledge through the Horizontal Information System implied to a certain extent that the terminology and the representation of knowledge used were agreed upon . To solve this problem MCC developed a large product model as a standardised information model for all applications compromising the Horizontal Information System . The idea was to represent product data , as well as work tasks , on a standardised form to make it possible to share knowledge through the system between the different communities and offices . However , system developers and others soon realised that the challenges with developing such models were not of a technical character , but rather organisational and political . A manager from the software development project pointed at the fact that historically , different departments and groups in the organisation had used different terminology and that a ‘stiffener’ was not a ‘stiffener’ throughout the organisation . Heterogeneity in terminology and meanings became more and more evident as the uniform design was implemented in the organisational environment . For the software developers the issue of different terminology and the meanings attached to the different terms was a more complex problem than first anticipated . Especially , because a product model required a standard breakdown structure for vessels . Secondly , the knowledge - intensive nature of the surveyors ' work make it considerably challenging to pre - define and standardise this work , and to design IT systems that do not pose to many constrains for their situated and context dependent work . The surveyors play an important role in the organisation by conducting various types of surveys on vessels . Their work involves both practical work ( e . g . investigating machinery and technical equipment on a vessel ) and office work ( e . g . writing technical reports , communicating with customers , using computer applications etc . ) , in this way the surveyors’ work can be characterised as knowledge - intensive . Surveyors have to keep up with changing rules and regulations concerning certification as well as technical knowledge within a variety of disciplines ( e . g . materials engineering , propulsion systems , hydrodynamics , and electronics ) . MCC is authorised for doing surveys and certification on behalf of more than 130 national administrations . In addition , surveyors do surveys based on MCC’s own classification rules and IMO ( International Maritime 10 Organisation ) regulations . Thus , in doing their daily work the surveyors draw upon experienced - based and tacit knowledge . For instance , the surveyors draw from their tacit knowledge to intuitively find those spots on a vessel’s hull that could have cracks or rust . Similarly , they do considerable work in front of the survey to gain as much explicit knowledge of the vessel as possible . For instance , they have to know the status of the ship , in terms of length , tonnage , flag , and information on the owner of the ship . Thus , the surveyors’ tacit and explicit knowledge as well as their communicative skills are all factors that determine MCC’ accumulated capability for safeguarding life and property . According to the surveyors interviewed the implementation of the new Horizontal Information System led to considerable changes for the surveyor role . Some of the surveyors interviewed meant that this new system would make the surveyors more or less ‘data collectors’ for MCC . They would spend considerable less of their time ‘out in the field’ doing practical engineering work as more of their time will be occupied doing office work . Communities - of - practice within MCC As a divisionalised and global organisation MCC consists of several different communities - of - practice . The differences between these communities were recognised during the design , implementation , and use of the new Horizontal Information System . In particular , the different interpretations and interests were visible when designing and implementing the Horizontal Information System with the intention of sharing knowledge throughout the global organisation and standardising the work done in different communities . This posed special challenges and problems for the design as well as the implementation of the system . Firstly , the surveyors are not one homogenous group , but more or less autonomous engineers that work in different offices around the world . Surveyors in the MCC organisation are working with different kinds of surveys according to where the focal ship is in its life cycle ( figure 1 ) . Already before a ship is designed and constructed , the ship owner decides to classify the new ship according to the MCC classification rules . A MCC surveyor must certify all components that are to be installed on the ship and their manufactures . In this process a MCC surveyor and the yard that is building the ship , would benefit on information on how a particular component or ship design have done in the past . It would be extremely helpful for a surveyor to know if other surveyors have recognised any typical failures or safety hazards concerning a specific design or component . Other surveyors specialise in doing surveys on ships that are in operation . As different communities of surveyors had different views on for instance how different components of a ship were related , this made it extremely difficult for the system developers to describe the ' correct ' requirements for the Horizontal Information System . Secondly , MCC is a global organisation where the different local stations are embedded in cultural and institutional environments that have different degrees of dissimilarity . For instance , at one MCC office in Germany the engineers insisted to write additional comments in German instead of using standardised English texts . At this office all their customers have similar requirements and their primary focus is on delivering results in form of technical reports as efficient as possible . At this office , the requirement was to have an integrated IS where they avoided entering the customer’s address and name more than once . In a small Norwegian office , however , the surveyors’ work is more varied , and to them this functionality is not required . On the contrary , they focus on flexibility in the IT support and that the different IT applications they use should have a consistent user interface . Thirdly , cultural differences in the division of labour make it difficult to design a system that standardises work processes . A superuser interviewed that is responsible for user training underlined that in eastern countries the surveyor role was different . For instance in Asia it was culturally determined that doing office - like work was the job of a secretary . Consequently , the users of the Horizontal Information System in eastern countries would most likely be secretaries and not surveyors . 4 . 3 The Meaning of Artifacts MCC as an organisation is dependent upon a variety of different paper - based documents . These artifacts serve as important infrastructural resources that support the surveyors , managers , secretaries , and others in carrying out their job . For instance , a surveyor in MCC typically uses paper - based checklists , memos , various reports , and drawings etc . as important artifacts for many different activities such as : 11 • supporting the everyday communication with other surveyors , managers , secretaries , ship owners , and officers on the ship . A preliminary report is used as basis for discussing a survey with the customer . • sharing of knowledge . Checklists represent context specific knowledge that has been accumulated by the surveyors’ experiences over decades . • coordination of intersecting work tasks . Checklists as knowledge - carriers The surveyors have established a system of different paper - based checklists for supporting the different types of surveys conducted by a surveyor in MCC . There are a total of 74 different checklists to be used in different kinds of surveys and types of vessels . The different checklists have been made of different people for different contexts and environments . Thus , there is no standard representation or common use of terminology , and these checklists have not been a part of the official documentation given to the customers . These checklists have been most helpful for inexperienced surveyors who use them down to every detail , and in this way they are learning what to focus on when conducting a survey of a vessel . On the other hand , more experienced users usually do not use the checklists – or they only use it in a very limited way . The initial plan for the Horizontal Information System was to include a standardised version of these paper - based checklists , in order to structure the input of information . This standardised way of reporting the survey information was required , because this information was used in the generation of various survey - reports . This created several dilemmas for the implementation and use of the new information system ( Rolland , 1999 ) . Firstly , the strategy was to include a very standardised set of checklists in order to be able to generate statistical information from the surveyors reporting through the standardised checklists . In the later stages of development and during implementation this strategy was abandoned , due to the organisational and technical complexity . Different groups of surveyors and system developers had to agree upon a common terminology and a general breakdown structure of a ship , which turned out to be a longitudinal and complex process . In addition , the systems developers had already programmed a version according to the product model philosophy that for various reasons did not meet some of the surveyors ' requirements . This meant that the complex product model had to be changed , which in turn required an effort of modelling and programming . This illustrates the rather ‘messy’ processes where ongoing negotiations and adjustments are made in order to transcend a diversity of socio - technical issues . Secondly , for the surveyors the use of the first version system led to a considerable amount of extra work . Before boarding the vessel for conducting the survey , the surveyors must print out the checklists from the Horizontal Information System because the first version of the system did not have mobile support . During the survey the surveyor takes notes on the printed checklists , and after arriving back at the office , the surveyor types in the same notes into the Horizontal Information System . Until recently , the checklists were only an optional resource used by the most inexperienced surveyors . The new system enforces the use of checklists , and hence , increasing the workload for the more experienced surveyors . Paper - based reports as a medium for communication and collaboration One of the main reasons for standardising the checklists was to create a standardised set of data to support the automatic production of reports . Some these reports are used in communication with officers and crew on a ship . For instance , when the surveyor has conducted a survey on a vessel , a “Report of periodical surveys” and a “Conditions – Memo for owners” are given to a member of the crew on the ship . These reports summarise the job that has been done , and what the surveyor found during this particular survey . The surveyor fills in the reports onboard the ship , and then their meaning is carefully explained to the ship officers or other members of the crew . It is of profound importance that any “Conditions of Class” ( CC ) are fully understood , so that the crew are able to do the required repairs and adjustments in order to maintain the safety for crew and cargo on the ship . In this context the reports are artifacts that act as mediators in the communication between the surveyor and different members of the crew . The implementation of the Horizontal Information System has slightly changed the tasks concerning reporting and communicating with the crew . Even though the reports generated by the system contain almost exactly the same information as the old paper - based reports , they are creating some problems for the surveyors and the crew . 12 Some of the surveyors stated that the information on the reports generated by the Horizontal Information System did not have a meaningful structure for the surveyors using the system . For instance , one of the reports was structured according the alphabetical order of the codes related to the different surveys , instead as on the paper - based reports , where the information was categorised according to the different components of the ship ( e . g . hull , machinery , propels , trusters ) . Thus , using differently structured reports made it harder for the crew on the ship to understand the reports . It was easier for the crew to understand concrete things like hull and propels , compared to MCC’s abstract four letter codes . The surveyors had different ways of compensating for avoiding this situation . For instance , the surveyors took their time in explaining every detail in the reports for the crew . In addition , attempts were made to change the standardised templates for the reports included in the Horizontal Information System . Since these templates were plain Microsoft Word files , it was possible for the surveyors to locally modify the templates , and in this way , re - structure the contents of the automatically generated reports . However , since it was not possible to save a new version of a template into the system , this work - around created some legal problems , and the users were strictly prohibited to not modify the templates . Because , by modifying the templates for the reports , there would exist two ( or more ) versions of the same report . One for the user that had modified the local template – and one for all others who is accessing that particular report through the Horizontal Information System . Thus , this created a serious dilemma – the reports should be “customer friendly” , but at the same time , legally speaking , there should only exist one version of the same report . 4 . 4 Installed - base issues Implementing the Horizontal Information System in the different offices could be characterised a time consuming and complex learning process , rather than sequential steps for deploying new information technologies in the organisation . Clearly , because of both technical and organisational reasons it was impossible to implement the system in all 300 offices simultaneously . Hence , for a period the old Mainframe System had to be used in parallel with the Horizontal Information System . Offices using the old Mainframe System and those using the Horizontal Information System are dependent upon having correct and updated information when planning and reporting surveys . Consequently , two problems had to be solved : 1 ) How should the Horizontal Information System and the Mainframe System be updated ? – and 2 ) When should the Horizontal Information System take over as the only information system being used ? In order to update the common database used by Horizontal Information System with data from the Mainframe System and vice versa , various scripts were made . In other words , the installed - base made it necessary to develop a gateway , because a discrete transition from the old system to the new system was impossible . Due to the complexity of the product model , the technically different databases used , as well as several adjustments in the design , it was difficult to ensure perfect updates between the Mainframe System and the Horizontal Information System . Thus , the Mainframe System represented an important part of the installed - base that had to be considered in the design and implementation processes . However , the installed - base issues were not considered until the new Horizontal Information System was tested with what was considered as relevant data . The data in the Mainframe System that had at first been considered as an enabling resource to be included in the new Horizontal Information System , became a constraint for the design and implementation . Furthermore , this had unintended side - effects that increased the surveyors ' distrust towards the new Horizontal Information System . In using with the Horizontal Information System some of the surveyors had experienced losing some of their information because of the imperfect gateway between the two systems ' databases . The surveyors had to enter the information into the system several times , and hence , this made their office work more time consuming and stressful . This increased the distrust toward the Horizontal Information System , and thereby created some work - arounds ( Gasser , 1981 ) . Firstly , some of the surveyors stated that they were more careful not to enter too much data into the system at a time . At the same time one of the intentions with the Horizontal Information System was to support more detailed , consistent , and a larger amount of information than before . In fact , the unintended side - effects of the Horizontal Information System may lead to the opposite , namely that the surveyors report less information than before . Secondly , this distrust towards the new system made the surveyors to double check the information provided . For instance , they constantly used a large book containing information on all vessels classified by MCC and compared the information in this book with the information on the screen . 13 In addition , the visions and strategies presented of the new Horizontal Information System before it was launched possibly also have decreased the trust towards the system . MCC has a separate division that focuses on software development and new products . This division is located at the headquarters , and is not directly concerned with the production ( e . g . classification and certification of vessels ) . In this way , the software developers working with the Horizontal Information System were seen as ’outsiders’ by the rest of the organisation . Despite of considerable user training and user participation , some of the users viewed the system as being designed by someone who did not understand their work – even when only a few aspects of the design were badly integrated with their work . Consequently , this increased the surveyors ' distrust towards the system , and especially when parts of the system did not match the surveyors ' ' cognitive images ' of the system established through presentations of the IT - visions presented by management and software developers . 5 Implications for Design From the case of MCC , numerous of implications for the design and deployment of horizontal information systems can be drawn . In this paper , however , only a few of these implications will be discussed . The primary rational behind the design of the Horizontal Information System in MCC was to standardise work processes and integrate , categorise , and purify the information related to these processes . As indicated by the case study – even if the development of the software was a fairly successful endeavour – different views and interests inscribed in the existing information and artifacts have put serious constrains on the design and implementation . For instance , the information on the survey reports is given meaning in a particular social practice where the artifact itself functions as a medium for communication and collaboration between the crew on a ship and the surveyor . Misalignment and distrust toward the first version of the system led to a range of different work - arounds and compensations , as well as adjustments of the design . This indicates that a too rough transition trigged by a horizontal information system might undermine the existing infrastructural resources ( Kling , 1987 ; Kling & Iacono , 1989 ) established through an institutionalised socio - technical network . Consequently , the deployment of a standardised IT architecture built for knowledge sharing between different communities may have side - effects that are quite opposite to supporting sharing and leveraging of knowledge in the organisation . In supporting knowledge - intensive work in different communities - of - practice with a horizontal information system , it becomes increasingly important to allow flexibility in use . The generation of the survey reports in the Horizontal Information System exemplifies this . Prior to the implementation of the system these reports were often tailored according to whom the surveyor was going to meet on the ship . In addition , numerous types of surveys are conducted during one visit on the ship , leading to complex survey reports that are structured in a specific way . Thus , how these reports are structured is extremely context dependent , and the need for flexibility for the surveyors to modify the generated reports becomes a prerequisite for well - structured reports . But , with the implementation of the Horizontal Information System this flexibility was gone , leading to several work - arounds and potentially different versions of the same report . Consequently , in order to deploy an information system for getting rid of the paper - based documents used , how paper artifacts are a part of a social practice needs to be analysed . The design and implementation of the Horizontal Information System was considerably constrained by an installed - base . Especially the Mainframe System that had to be used in parallel with the new system , not only affected the design and implementation processes , but also how the surveyors used the system . In this way , the Mainframe System becomes an actor , which has to be considered in all phases of development and in use . However , interestingly this Mainframe System was at first looked up on as a resource . Developing and deploying the Horizontal Information System at MCC illuminates how seemingly technical issues are inherently interconnected with non - technical issues as work practice of the different communities ; the various cultural and institutional environments ; use and meaning of paper - based documents ; distrust toward the system – and so forth . The involvement of different communities - of - practice , an installed - base ( e . g . the Mainframe System ) , and the somehow fluctuating requirements for the system , made the implementation process a dynamical and complex process of negotiating and adjusting current designs . Accordingly , an implementation of an information system that cut 14 horizontally across practices , departments and cultures , is considerably more time consuming than in the case of the more traditional systems . Drawing from actor - network theory ( e . g . Callon , 1991 Latour , 1991 ; Law , 1992 ) , it can be argued that in the deployment of such horizontal information systems , one is actually trying to change considerable larger networks , compared to the traditional information systems . For instance , the paper - based checklists are actants in a stabilised network of surveyors , managers , ship owners , information systems , rules and procedures , various documents etc . Thus , the paper - based checklists are a part of a more or less aligned actor - network , which again is part of a larger network of heterogeneous materials . This implies that implementing standardised checklists by including them in the Horizontal Information System will have impact on a wider socio - technical network , as this creates new interdependencies between users in different communities . 6 Conclusions The challenges concerning the design of large - scale information systems are neither local nor global , they are rather horizontal , and thus the question is not how to achieve a seamless integration between existing local practices – or a global and all embracing standard . But , to use IT in a flexible way to enable knowledge sharing in communities - of - practice , as well as linking the various communities in a way that do not undermine the local work practices and the established borderline resources in any community - of - practice . A horizontal information system does not exist in isolation , but interact with various other systems , artefacts and practises , relations that are continuously negotiated , and almost never reach a stable state as a typical ‘infrastructure’ . As shown in the case there is a need for flexibility , and the variety of communities - of - practice will be influenced and “fight” the standardisation attempt by means of their local practise . However , a certain degree of standardisation is needed in order to communicate across practises and borders . Emerging trends such as Internet technologies , globalisation and knowledge management are influencing the way information systems are designed . We have introduced the concept of Horizontal Information Systems in order to emphasise challenges to be met of large scale information systems that cut across communities - of - practices . 7 References Argyris , C . & Schön , D . A . 1996 . Organizational Learning II – Theory , Method , and Practice . Addison Wesley . Bartlett , C . A . and Ghoshal , S . Managing Across border The Transnational Solution , Harvard Business School Press , Boston , 1989 . Beck , Ulrich . 1992 . Risk Society . ( First published in German as Risikogesellscahft , 1988 ) . Beck , U . , Giddens , A . , and Lash , S . 1994 . Reflexive Modernizations - Politics , Tradition and Aesthetics in the Modern Social Order . Polity Press . Beniger , J . R . 1986 . The Control Revolution . Technological and Economic Origins of the Information Society . Harvard University Press , Cambridge , Mass . Bowker , G . & Star , S . L . 1994 . Knowledge and infrastructure in international information management : problems of classification and coding . In : Bud - Frierman , L ( ed ) . Information Acumen – The understanding and use of knowledge in modern business . Routledge . Braa , K . & Sørensen , C . 1998 . The Internet Factor , Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems , Vol 10 , No . 12 . Bradley , S . P , Hausman , J . A . & Nolan , R . L . ( eds . ) 199x . Globalization , Technology , and Competition . Harvard Business School Press . Branscomb , L . M . & Kahin , B . 1995 . Standards Processes and Objectives for the National Information Infrastructure . In Kahin & Abbate ( eds . ) . Standards Policy for information infrastructure . MIT Press . Brown , J . S . 1998 . Internet technology in support of “communities - of - practice” : the case of Xerox . Accounting , Management & Information Technology . Vol . 8 , pp . 227 - 236 . Brown , J . S . & Duguid , P . 1991 . Organizational Learning and Communities - of - practice : Toward a Unified View of Working , Learning , and Innovation . Organization Science , Vol . 2 , No . 1 , pp . 40 - 57 . Brown , J . S . & Duguid , P . 1994 . Borderline Issues : Social and Material Aspects of Design . Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 9 , pp . 3 - 36 . Braa , K . & Sandahl , T . I . 1998 . From Paperwork to Network – a field study . In Proceedings from the Third International Conference on the Design of Cooperative Systems , Cannes , France , May 26 - 29 1998 . Bud - Frierman , L . ( ed . ) . 1994 . Information Acumen – The understanding of knowledge in modern business . Routledge . Callon , M . 1991 . Techno - economic networks and irreversibility . In Law J . ( ed . ) . A Sociology of 15 Monsters – Essays on power , technology and domination . Routledge . Castells , M . 1996 . The Rise of the Network Society . Blackwell Publishers . Ciborra , C . U . 1999 . A Theory of Information Systems Based on Improvisation . In : Currie , W . & Galliers , B . ( eds . ) . Rethinking Management Information Systems – An Interdiciplinary Perspective . Oxford University Press . Collins , H . & Yearly , S . 1992 . Epistemological Chicken . In : Pickering ( ed . ) . Science as Practice and Culture . University of Chicago Press , pp . 301 - 326 . Davenport , T . H . 1998 . Putting the Enterprise into the Enterprise System . Harvard Business Review , July - August 1998 . Earl , M . J . 1996 . Knowledge Strategies : Propositions From Two Contrasting Industries . In : Earl , M . J . ( ed . ) . Information Management – The Organizational Dimension . Oxford University Press . Earl , M . J . & Fenny , D . F . 1996 . Information Systems in Global Business : Evidence from European Multinationals . In : Earl , M . J . ( ed . ) . Information Management – The Organizational Dimension . Oxford University Press . Galbraith , J . 1973 . Planlægning af Organisajoner . Inter European Editions , Amsterdam . Giddens , Anthony . Consequences of Modernity . Polity Press , Cambridge , UK , 1991 . Grudin , J . 1994 . Groupware and Social Dynamics : Eight Challenges for Developers . Communications of the ACM , Vol . 37 , No . 1 , pp . 92 - 105 . Guice , J . ( 1998 ) : Looking Backward and Forward at the Internet . The Information Society , vol . 14 , no . 3 . Hanseth , O . ( forthcoming ) . Infrastructures and the economy of standards . In : Ciborra , C . U . ( ed . ) Wiering the Corporation – IT infrastructure between control and drift ( forthcoming ) Hanseth , O . , Monteiro E , Hatling M . 1996 . Developing Information Infrastructure : The tension between standardisation and flexibility . Science , Technology , & Human Values , Vol . 21 , No 4 , pp . 407 - 426 . Hughes , J . & King , B . 1993 . Paperwork . In : Benford , S . & Mariani , J . ( eds . ) . Requirements and Metaphors of Shared Interaction . Part II : Shared Artifacts . COMIC Deliverable 4 . 1 , pp . 153 - 325 . Lancaster , England , 1993 . Ives , B . & Jarvenpaa , S . L . 1991 . Applications of Global Information Technology : Key Issues for Management . MIS Quarterly , March 1991 , pp . 32 - 49 . Jones , M . 1999 . Information Systems and the Double Mangle : Steering a Course Between the Scylla of Ebedded Structure and the Charybdis of Strong Symmetry . In : Larsen , T . Levine , L . , DeGross , J . I . ( eds . ) . Information Systems : Current Issues and Future Changes . IFIP . Kling , R . 1987 . Defining the boundaries of computing across complex organizations . In : Boland & Hirschheim ( eds . ) . Critical issues in Information Systems research . Wiley & Sons Kling , R . & Iacono , S . 1989 . The Institutional Character of Computerized Information Systems . Office : Technology and People , Vol . 5 , No . 1 , pp . 7 - 28 . Latour , B . 1987 . Science in Action . Harvard University Press . Latour , B . 1991 . Technology is society made durable . In Law J . ( ed . ) . A Sociology of Monsters – Essays on power , technology and domination . Routledge . Law , J . 1992 . Notes on the Theory of the Actor - Network : Ordering , Strategy , and Heterogeneity . Systems Practice , Vol . 5 , No . 4 , pp . 379 - 393 . Leiner , B . M , Cerf , V . G , Clark , D . D , Khan , R . E , Kleinrock , L , Lynch , D . C , Postel , J , Roberts , L . G , Wolff , S . S . 1997 . The past and future CSStory of the Internet . Communications of the ACM , Vol . 40 No . 2 , pp . 102 - 108 . Markus , M . L . & Connolly T . 1990 . Why CSCW Applications Fail : Problems in the Adoption of Interdependent Work Tools . Proceedings of the Conference on CSCW , ACM , pp . 371 - 380 . McMaster , T . , Vidgen , R . T . & Wastell , D . G . 1999 . Networks of Association and due Processes in IS Development . In : Larsen , T . Levine , L . , DeGross , J . I . ( eds . ) . Information Systems : Current Issues and Future Changes . IFIP . Monteiro , E . 1998 . Scaling Information Infrastructure : The Case of Next - Generation IP in the Internet . The Information Society , Vol . 14 , No . 3 , pp . 229 - 245 . Monteiro , E . & Hanseth , O . 1995 . Social shaping of information infrastructure : on being specific about the technology . In : Orlikowski , W . , Walsham , G . , Jones , M . R . , and DeGross , J . I . ( eds . ) . Information Technology and Changes in Organisational Work . Chapman & Hall . Monteiro , E . & Hepsø , V . 1999 . Diffusion of Infrastructure : Mobilization and Improvisation . In : Larsen , T . Levine , L . , DeGross , J . I . ( eds . ) . Information Systems : Current Issues and Future Changes . IFIP . Neef , D . , Siesfeld , G . A . & Cefola , J . ( eds . ) 1998 . The Economic Impact of Knowledge . Butterwurth - Heinemann . 16 Nonaka , I . & Takeuchi , H . 1995 . The Knowledge - Creating Company . Oxford University Press . Nonaka , I . & Takeuchi , H . 1998 . A Theory of the Firm’s Knowledge - Creation Dynamics . In : Chandler , A . D . , Hagström , P . & Sövell , Ö ( eds . ) . The Dynamic Firm – The role of technology , strategy , organization , and regions . Oxford University Press . Observer ( 1999 ) : Guide to the Internet . The Observer , January 17th 1999 , pp . 32 Orlikowski , W . J . 1992a . The Duality of Technology : Rethinking the Concept of Technology in Organizations . Organization Science , Vol . 3 , No . 3 , pp . 398 - 427 . Orlikowski , W . J . 1992b . Learning from Notes : Organizational Issues in Groupware Implementation . Proceedings of the Conference on CSCW , ACM , pp . 362 - 369 . Robey , D . & Boudreau , M . 1999 . Accounting for the Contradictory Organizational Consequences of Information Technology : Theoretical Directions and Methodological Implications . Information Systems Research , Vol . 10 , No . 2 , pp . 167 - 185 . Rolland , K . 1999 . Information Infrastructure Transition : Challenges with Implementing Standardised Checklists . In : Käkölä , T . K . ( ed . ) . Proceedings of the 22 nd Information Systems Research Seminar in Scandinavia , Keuruu , Finland , pp . 95 - 110 . Sandahl , T . I . 1999 . From Paper to Digital Documents . ( Dr . Scient thesis ) . University of Oslo , Department of Informatics . Schultze , U . 1999 . Investigating the Contradictions in Knowledge Management . In : Larsen , T . Levine , L . , DeGross , J . I . ( eds . ) . Information Systems : Current Issues and Future Changes . IFIP . Star , L . S . & Ruhleder , K . 1996 . Steps Toward an Ecology of Infrastructure : Design and Access for Large Information Spaces . Information Systems Research , Vol . 7 , No . 1 , pp . 111 - 134 . Walsham , G . 1997 . Actor - Network Theory and IS Research : Current Status and Future Prospects . In Lee , A . S , Liebenan , J . & Degnoss , J . I ( eds . ) . Information Systems and Qualitative Research . Chapman Hall . Wiig , K . M . 1995 . Knowledge Management Methods . Schema Press . Zuboff , S . 1988 . In the Age of the Smart Machine – The Future of Work and Power . Heinemann Professional Publishing .