Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1995 Evolution of Relational Factors Over Time : A Study of Distributed and Non - Distributed Meetings Kelly Burke Laku Chdambaram John Locke Idaho State University University of Hawaii University of H a w i The emerging collaborative organizational model provides a context $ or the use of new methods for facilitating interaction . At the same time , technology is evolving to support meetings among distributed participants . Few studies have examined the egect of these new Electronic Meeting Systems ( EMS ) on distributed workteams over time . ‘4daptive Structuration 7heory ( AST ) suggests that , when groups encounter environmental diJJiculties , they may creatively adapt some structures to mitigate the limitations . This study investigated the development of cohesiveness , conflict management , and process satisfaction over four sessions among face - to - face . distributed - synchronous and distributed - asynchronous groups supported bv an EMS . Results indicate that , despite structural impediments inherent in dtstributed interaction , groups can develop along these relational dimensions . These 9nding . s are consistent w‘th AST . However . research needs to examine further the nature qf’ structuration in technologically supported groups 1 . Introduction Technology is rapidly altenng communication in organizations . For instance , relatively simple technologies like e - mail increase the frequency and extent of communication opportunities . The availability of sophisticated EMSs , which facilitate various communication , meeting and task activities , promises to change the very nature of orgatuzahonal meehngs . Moreover , where flatter organkmonal structures are implemented , they are likely to emphasize horizontal information exchange among cwvorkers ( e . g . , quallty circles ) over traditional vertical interaction ( e . g . , chain of command reporting ) . The collaborative orgamzat ~ onal model provides a context for the use of new channels and methods for hcilimng communication and meetings [ 2 11 . This study examined group development in the context of structural constraints typlcal in dstributed meetings . Research with respect to distributed interaction - - especially asynchronous ( i . e . , Werent time . ddferent place ) - remains relatively scarce . There is mounting evidence , hower , that EMS mediated interaction is more relational than previously expected [ e . g . , 3 , 14 , 321 . This study observed distributed groups developing along several relational dmensions suggesting that , consistent with the concepts of structuration , hstributed groups can find ways to compensate for those structural impedtments predicted by some theorists [ e . g . , 41 to be inherent in mediated interaction . The next section of the paper examines relevant theory and research followed by an explanation of the research design . The paper concludes with a Qscussion of the results and their implications for future research and practice . 2 . Background 2 . 1 Adaptive Structuration Theory Media bandwidth theories [ e . g . , 2 , 261 lead to the conclusion that the communication effectiveness of a medium for relational interaction is drectly proportional to its capacity for carry @ a variety of cue types . For example , computer mediated communication ( CMC ) prohibits back - channel cueing like body language . Therefore , CMC is thought to possess limited utility for interaction requiring relational exchange . But evidence , from both ob ~ ective [ e . g . 241 and perceptual measures [ e . g . , 321 , indicates that CMC can accommodate relational interaction . The emergent use of emoticons provides an example of the adapmon of a “lean” m d u m for expressing emotions . Thus , it appears that media richness and social presence are not invariant characteristics of the m d a as some propose [ e . g . , 301 . The premise guiding this study is that , although media characteristics are structurally limiting , nonetheless , as evidenced by the invention of emoticons , people can exercise creativity in puslung those limits and redefining a medium’s communicative functionality . What is needed is a theory of computer mediated interaction h c h accounts for adapmon . Adaptive Structuration 7heory ( AST ) has been prescribed as an approach for understanding the role of technology in human interaction by examining the reciprocal impact people and systems have on each other [ 22 , 231 . Central to AST is the argument that technological and social structures - - in the form of rules and resources - - constrain and enable group activities . The features h c h an electronic meeting support system ( EMS ) provides to users of the system , e . g . , communication bandwdth , declsion tools , anonymity , etc . , are examples of technological structures . Structures limit 14 1060 - 3425 / 95 $ 4 . 00 0 1995 IEEE Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii Intemational Conference on System Sciences - 199s actions * le also providtng resouTces for undertalung those actions . For example , relative to ke - to - face interaction , e - mad is a more coflstraining medium . Nonetheless , e - mail is also a resouTce which al€ords opportunities to communicate when physically getting together is not possible . Similarly , social stmctures - - e . g , rules and norms , etc . - - are constraints and resou ~ ces which define group interaction . In his seminal development of “ t i o n theoq , Gddens describes rules as methodologies or techniques that people know about , often only implicitly , which provide formulm , for action [ SI . We argue that there is a set of rules and resources - - i . e . , a formula for action - - which , when employed , determines the extent to which a group will cohere . As it emerges , h s structural bundle results in a soclal system - - i . e . , a group’s cohesiveness - by which future actions are defined Thus , cohesion can be seen a manfmfuhon of the bundle of rules and resouTces that a€€ect a€€inity , innuence and other specific group characteristics related to cohesion . Seen as a bundle of st“d resources , cohesion enables groups to mrk together . On the other hand , cohesiveness is a constraining factor in that it is required for group action . Further , if either too much ( e . g . , grouptlunk ) or too little of it is present , groups can d e r . By reflecting on their level of cohesion , groups can monitor and manipulate their development and performance . For example , when a member perceives cohesiveness to be low , that person may attempt to increase it by playing a more diplomatic role . Similar arguments can be made for Connict management and process satisfaction , both of which are manifestations of underlying sbuctural processes . For instance , the effectiveness of the bundle of rules and resources d c h af€ects procechrxal aspects of the task - - e . g . , inhtbition , dominance , etc . - is represented by process satisfacton . This study takas the perspective that , through use , structural bundles underlying cohesiveness , conflict management and process satisfactton are intentionally manipulated so as to serve the specific requirements of the group in a patmlar context . Moreover , groups use and alter these structural sets in different ways , dependmg on relevant factors like task and group characteristics . 2 . 2 Structural Factors In Group Development Cohesiveness : Cohesion is defined as the aggregate of the interpersonal attractions of individual group members to each other and to the group as a whole [ 19 ] . Cohesiveness increases as the indviduals in a group perceive that individual and common goals can be achieved through group action . Interpersonal attraction is dependent on communication [ 19 ] ; as people communicate they increase the potential for attraction which , in turn , generates pressure toward agreement ( Le . , conformity ) . Perceived cohesion should , therefore , be affected by the extent to which a meeting environment facilitates interpersonal communication . Computer supported groups have reported less cohesiveness than manually supported groups ( i . e . , those having access to “manual” decision aids such as flip charts , etc . ) in early sessions but more in later sessions [ 2 ] . These results suggest that technical structures may be appropriated over time in ways which facilitate development of important social structures . Other variables which bear drectly on cohesion include influence , consensus , and relational factors such as affection , self disclosure , informality and impression formation . Influence is important to cohesion since the degree of cohesion is known to vary with influence [ 19 ] Influence is the process of bringing a group member into alignment with one’s own opinions or of altering another’s conduct . As members converge in opinions , they experience greater mutual attraction and greater cohesion . Synchronous computer conferencing and asynchronous e - mail groups exhibited greater choice shift , indicating greater influence , than face - to - face groups [ 131 . One reason may be that CMC & personalizes interaction , thus allowing people to abandon choices more readily than in a less anonymous environment ( e . g . , face - to - face ) . Conversely , face - to - fhce groups expressed more agreement than computer supported group [ 7 , IO ] . Assessment of others is important in establishing trust and consensus bulcltng . Faceto - face meetings have been shown to exhibit more socieemotional exchange ( eg , tension release , joking , etc . ) and CMC had more task related exchange [ 101 . These results suggest that CMC may be a less relational and less influential medium than fke - to - bce . Hence , cohesiveness may be expected to d e r in CMC . In contrast , other results suggest the potential for relational content in CMC [ e . g . 241 . Moreover , asynchronous groups have reported higher perceptions along several relational dunensions than hce - tdice groups [ 32 ] . Social presence theory and earlier research results notwithstanding , CMC groups generally perceived their interactions as more relational and , therefore , more personal than the face - to - face groups . The fact that Walther and Burgoon’s hdmgs M e r from earlier results is sigruficant due to methodologml considerations in some earlier studes . For instance , most early studies were one time observations , faling to account for longitudinal interaction h c h is critical in relational development . Although findings with respect to socio - emotional interaction in the context of EMSs are mixed , nonetheless , some evidence does suggest that electronically mediated interaction can permit relational development and Mitate cohesion over time . The relative paucity of studies investigating cohesion and related structural variables highlights the need for a better understanding of relational development in EMSs , especially in & stributed settings . 15 Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1995 Conflict : Though unavoidable in most group situations , conflict need not be detnmental to the group process [ 25 ] . When managed appropriately , conflict can lead to the surfacing and shared understan - of assumptions and opmions , pavmg the way for effective problem solving Thus , understanding how the meeting environment affects groups’ hang of conflict is essential to developing e M v e EMSs . Some have found that EMS groups experience greater conflict than non - supported groups indicating that development p”xs may destabilize in EMS conditions [ e . g . , 71 . Such destabtlization could negmvely affect members’ percept ~ ons and group performance . EMS groups exhibited less ability to manage d i c t than non - computer supported groups in the first two of four sessions , but greater ability in thejnul twa se ; rm’ons [ 2 ] . Computer supported groups have also reported less interpersonal conflict and less issue based conflict than non - supported groups [ 20 ] . Thus , EMSs may provide structured and focused procedural support as mll as some degree of anonymity , both of which may facilitate & ‘ve conflict management . Though mixed , these results provide support for the argument that , in time , groups may be able to adapt a technology to suit their needs . Process Satisfaction : Satisfaction with the group process include relational and procedural aspects of the activity , member contribution and participation [ 34 ] . The degree to wtuch these factors change over time determines how the process as a whole is perceived . EMS groups have reported being less satisfied than non - supported groups [ lo ] . Similarly , satisfaction was reported higher by face - to - fhce dyads when performing a value laden decision malung task but greater by distributed dyads when perfonnq an i n f o d o n gathering task [ 31 ] . These inconclusive results shed little light on the role of the EMS environment with respea to overall process satisfaction . Perceived contribution and participation are also considered important in determining member satisfaction [ 6 ] . Inhibition is related to participation because inhibited members are less likely to contribute to the proceedings than uninhibited members . Generally , greater inhibition occurs in face - to - face groups leading to the potential for less equality of participation than in distributed EMS groups [ e . g . , 13 , , 16 , 291 . More equal participation was found in anonymous EMS settings than when the EMS permitted identification [ 12 ] . These findings support the contention that EMSs are less personal and afford more anonymity than face - to - face environments , resulting in a greater tendency to “speak out” without fear of retribution . However , other studies found no difference between EMS supported and non - supported environments or between collocated and distributed groups in terms of participatory equality [ e . g . , 1 , 7 , 11 , 28 , 331 . These findings suggest that distributed groups may be no wise off than face - to - face groups in terms of participation equality . The issue of EMS differences with respect to the bundles of social structures discussed above has yet to be resolved since , overall , no systematic differences between face - to - face and distributed groups have been demonstrated , particularly over time . 3 . Research Framework Because group interaction is a dynamic process , group development can be seen from an inputs - process - outputs perspective , as presented graphically by the model in Figure 1 . According to this model , structural characteristics of the meeting environment ( inputs ) will impact the way participants behave and perceive such behavior ( processes ) . Perceptions of process states and their changes will determine members’ attitudes and the group’s performance ( outputs ) . Inputs : This study examines structural aspects of three meeting environments : face - to - face , dlspersed synchronous , and dispersed asynchronous . Face - to - face meetings are the most interactive . Alternatively , people may meet at the same time while in dlfferent places ( e . g . , conference calling ) . In terms of physical capacity , such Qstributed - synchronous settings are less interactive than face - to - face meetings because they transpire via meda which - - at least initially - - permit transmission of fewer types of cues . Distributed - asynchronous meetings , i . e . , dlfferent time / different place interaction ( e . g . , computer conferencing ) , are even less interactive because of the temporal delay inherent in such contexts . Processes : This study explores dlfferences in group processes among the three meeting environments shown in the model . We suggest that perceptions and actions are inextricably interdependent - - e . g . , how I perceive another group member’s credibility determines the extent to which I am likely to critique that person’s contributions . Thus , groups’ perceptions of various process states can be seen as indcators and determinants of group development . Thus , changes in perceptions represent and track changes in the underlying processes . Outputs : All of the above impact group outputs . From a structurational perspective , outputs include attitudes towards various aspects of the processes - - which feed back as inputs to future stages of the process - as well as performance . The current study focused on attitudinal output measures while performance was not explicitly examined . Time : Because development is a cumulative process , groups are likely to behave differently later in their existence than in earlier periods . Thus , accurate assessment of process effects requires using longitudlnal study designs . 16 Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1995 Figure 1 : Research Model Meeting Mode : ( combination of Technology Support Dispersion Synchronicity Channel Capacity ) 0 Face - to - Face 0 Dispersed Synchronous Dispersed Asynchronous Social : 0 Cohesiveness * b 0 Conflict Management * 4 0 Process Satisfaction * I t t b 4 0 Attitudes 0 Performance I I I Time ( Boundary Variable ) * These variables are not processes in themselves : rather they are manifestations of bundles of structural processes . 4 . Research Methodology 4 . 1 Study Design The study employed a repeated measures design , capturing data from each of four group meetings over a four week period . A single factor with three levels was manipulated : face - to - face with EMS , distributed - synchronous with EMS and distributed - asynchronous with EMS . The study used 127 subjects comprising 33 groups of junior and senior Business and Travel Industry Management students . Participants were randomly assigned to groups and groups were randomly assigned to meeting environments . The EMS used ( called GroupLink ) is a networked , distributed system designed by Ventana Corporation . Subjects were trained on and used only the Groupwriter co - authoring tool for all activities pertaining to the task . The task was a complex project development case which required all groups to create a policy manual for a multinational firm . Groups were required to write their document using the Groupwriter which functioned identically for all teams . However , all of the distributed groups’ interaction was EMS mediated while face - to - face groups could also talk . The instruments used had been validated earlier [ 2 ] . Cohesiveness was measured on a 5 point scale , the other two measures were 7 point scales . Results from follow - up reliability tests performed on each instrument in this study indicated acceptable reliability levels for all measures ( i . e . , Cronbach’s alphas of 0 . 82 , 0 . 56 and 0 . 82 for cohesion , conflict and satisfaction scales respectively ) . 4 . 2 Hypotheses Cohesiveness : As Qscussed earlier , cohesiveness depends on communication , interpersonal influence and conformity [ 5 , 191 . AccorQng to social - impact theory [ 17 ] , one of the three essential components of influence is immediacy - - i . e . , either temporal or spatial proximity - - and the degree of social - impact bears an inverse relation to proximity . For example , distributed - synchronous groups are more temporally immediate than asynchronous groups but less so than face - to - face groups As spatial and temporal & stance increase , opportunities to establish mutual trust and commitment to the relationship through self - disclosure [ 9 ] Qminish . Since cohesion varies with influence [ 19 ] and disclosure , cohesiveness can be expected to be greater initially in groups experiencing greater immediacy . Moreover , media richness theory and some research findings [ e . g . , 7 , 101 suggest that limited bandwidth can be expected to result in reduced relational communication effectiveness in distributed groups relative to face - to - face groups . Over time , all groups are expected to develop by engaging in structural adaptation . However , AST implies 17 Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii Infernational Conference on System Sciences - 1995 that , when faced with obstacles , groups will explore novel ways to compensate for environmental barriers to interaction . Thus , those in dstributed environments should start off slower in cohesion buildmg than face - to - face groups but should be able to develop cohesion as time passes and they overcome the impedments . We would expect to observe face - to - face groups plateauing in cohesion & er time because relational activities can be expected to plateau as relational needs are satisfied [ 151 . Thus , as Qstributed groups learn to adapt the technology and continue to develop cohesion linearly , they may begin to converge in perceived cohesiveness with collocated groups as time passes . Consequently , ths study predcts that profiles of cohesion will M e r among environments over time . H1 : Cohesiveness will differ across treatments over time . Hla : Cohesiveness will initially be greater in face - to - face groups than in distributed groups . Hlb : Over time , distributed groups Will increase at a greater rate than face - to - face groups in cohesiveness . Conflict Management : Strategies for managing conflict can be broadly categorized as passive , distributive or integrative [ 181 . Passive strateges include ignoring or avoiding conflict or submitting to others in the face of disagreement . Distributive strategies include requesting , persuadmg and demandmg techniques which emphasize outcomes favoring one party over another . Integrating includes disclosure and problem solving , both of which are aimed at generating mutually satisfactory solutions . Passive strategies preclude drect discussion or interaction while both dstributive and integrative strateges require explicit acknowledgment of the disagreement and dmussion towards either concession ( i . e . , distribution ) or neutral evaluation ( i . e . , integration ) . Passive strateges are thought to be ineffective in long term conflicl management . Nonetheless , an environment which impedes interaction may help prevent disruptive conflict I the short term . A less interactive and immedate environment , which restricts the exchange of such social information as status , appears to focus groups more on task issues resulting in less dysfunctional conflict [ e . g . , 21 . EMS supported groups also report less interpersonal conflict than in non - supported groups [ 7 , 201 . Thus , initially we expect distributed groups to experience higher perceived levels of conflict management than face - to - face groups . AST suggests that all groups should improve in conflict management as they experience handling it . In time , however , distributed groups may discover ways to circumvent structural impediments , perhaps leading to more conflict prone interaction and retarding conflict management . Given enough time , though , even distributed groups should be able to adapt the technology to facilitate integrative interaction . Thus , after a suf33cient number of sessions , distributed groups are expected to be as effective at managing conflict than face - to - face groups - - i . e . , in later sessions , they should increase at a greater rate in perceived level of conflict management . . H2 : Perceived level of conflict management will differ across treatments over time . H2a : Distributed groups will exhibit higher levels of perceived conflict management initially than face - to - face groups . H2b : Over time , distributed groups will increase at a greater rate than face - to - face groups in their perceived level of conflict management . Process Satisfaction : Meeting environments appear to influence several aspects of interaction . For example some systems increase participant anonymity leadmg to deindviduation [ 121 while others are helpful at equalizing participation [ 27 ] , Participation will be greater when assumptions , opinions and alternatives are explored more fully , which is more likely in groups where members are less inhibited . Hence , hstributed groups are expected to exhibit more deindividuation , and , therefore , more equal participation than distributed groups . Over time , however , AST suggests that indwiduals who are motivated to control the process may become creative in devising methods to assert their dominance , thus altering the power balance , despite the inherent neutrality of the EMS . For example , authority might be projected through the use of capital letters . In the face of persistent assertiveness , some members of distributed groups might withdraw from participation leading to a slower rate of satisfaction improvement than in face - t + face groups . H3 : Satisfaction with the group process will differ across treatments over time . H3a : Initially , face - to - face groups will report less satisfaction with the group process than distributed groups . H3b : Over time , satisfaction with group processes will increase at a slower rate in distributed groups than in face - to - face groups . 5 . Results and Discussion Profiles were compared using SPSSx ANOVAs for repeated measures . Follow - up one - way ANOVAs were performed to determine dfferences within sessions and Duncan’s range tests located differences between any two treatments . A significance level of a = . 05 was applied in all cases . Results are summarized in Table 1 . 18 Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii Intemational Conference on System Sciences - 1995 Table 1 : Summary of Hypotheses Tests I I Hla I F > S , A lstsession * 1 I H3b I NO convergence * supports research hypothesis , * * partial support F‘ - face - to - face , S = synchronous , A = asynchronous Cohesiveness : Results presented in Table 2 and Figure 2 suggest that profiles of cohesiveness did not differ across treatments . The profile is the shape of the pattern of observations over four sessions . A condition by time interaction would mean that profiles differed among the treatments over time . Interpreting longmcfinal data is a complex task . Thus , failure to observe profile differences may not tell the whole story . For instance , although profiles may not Mer , results from other tests may be helpful in understanding specific behavior patterns . Session - by - session ANOVAs ( signrficance levels reported in Table 2 ) indicate that face - teface groups reported greater cohesiveness than groups in both dstributed condtions after the first session , supporting hypothesis Hla . Moreover , dfferences between face - te face and synchronous groups in cohesiveness disappear after the first session . Thus , cohesion in synchronous groups - - though not in asynchronous groups - - increased more than in face - to - face groups , partially supporting hypothesis Hlb . Taken together , these results suggest that , while environments differed structurally in communication capacity , distributed groups were still able to achieve increasing cohesiveness . Furthermore , as time progressed they were able to reduce the differences between themselves and face - to - face groups in cohesiveness . Thus , even though a condition by time interaction did not pertain , patterns of change suggest the possibility that environments may differ and they need to be examined further . Adaptive structuration theory explains these results because it allows for emergent adaptation by groups to contextual structures . What were initially sigtuficant Merences , may have become less sigtllficant after the first session because synchronous groups learned to interact via the distributed technology in ways which counteracted environmental limitations . Despite their relatively less interactive environment , asynchronous groups also showed the potential for experiencing a similar pattern of development , but at a slower rate . Because adaptation occurs gradually , it may take longer than four one hour sessions to exhibit significant change in some structural bundles . In other words , meeting asynchronously may be so structurally problematic that more than four sessions is required to find ways to compensate for such impediments . ‘ T Figure 2 : Cohesiveness 19 ‘ t I I - F - t - F - - + - - S y n c h - r - A s y n c h I I ! I I I I I Session 1 Session 2 Session 3 S e s s i o n 4 Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1995 Table 2 : Differences Within Sessions - - Cohesiveness I Session I Effect 8 I F - value I P - value I 12 . 203 4 . 521 2 . 880 2 . 999 dDuncan’s range test - different pairs at a = . OS , ‘‘1’ . ‘‘ indicates ‘greater than , ” otherwise no difference . F = face - to - face , S = synchronous , A = asynchronous , dJ = 2 m . ) , 30 ( error ) . Conflict Management : Contrary to what was expected , profiles did not differ sigtuficantly among treatments . Also unexpectedly , face - to - face groups reported hgher perceived levels of conflict management than asynchronous groups - - though no better than synchronous groups - - in the first two sessions ( Table 3 ) . Thus , neither hypothesis H2 nor H2a was supported . However , in later sessions , ability to handle conflict among asynchronous groups increased at a greater rate than in face - to - face groups ( Figure 3 ) , partially supporting hypothesis H2b . Because the face - to - face environment has potential for more interpersonal interaction , whch can easily lead to non - task oriented conflict , the fact that those groups initially exhibited lower levels of perceived conflict management than distributed groups is somewhat puzzling . This is even more surprising gwen past findings with regard to overall conflict [ 2 ] and interpersonal conflict [ 20 ] . An explanation for the disparity of results may be that in the two earlier studes , the groups were either supported by an EMS or not , but all were face - to - fixe . Thus , the differences between treatments may have been specifically due to the supported groups having the EMS to focus them on task issues while the non - supported groups had no such mechanism available . In the present study , even the face - to - face groups had a system whch could be used to focus them on issues and away from personalities . Therefore , the face - to - face groups may have had the best of both worlds initially ; they had the EMS to focus them when interaction was not necessary and could also use face - to - face interaction to iron out issues as they arose . Conversely , distributed groups had less medla capacity to deal with any issues initially - - either task or interpersonal - - until such time as they had sufficient opportunity to explore new methods of interacting . As time passed , distributed groups improved in conflict management at a slightly greater rate than face - to - face groups . These results suggest that dwtributed groups were able to overcome environmental deficiencies - evidenced by differences in the first two sessions - - and manage conflict as effectively as face - to - face groups . An AST perspective would argue that these results are to be expected since groups can differentially appropriate constraining media structures in ways that work to their benefit . U ) E Q 2 ” t - F - t - F - - * - - S y n c h - 4 - Asynch ’ t Session 1 Session 2 Session 3 Session 4 Figure 3 : Conflict Management 20 Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1995 1 2 Table 3 : Differences Within Sessions - Conflict ManaPement F > A 3 . 422 . 046 F > A 3 . 035 . 063 - 3 4 None . 608 . 55 1 None . 904 , 416 + Duncan ' s range test - signzpcantly dzgerent pairs at a = . OS , df = 2 ( hyp . ) , 30 ( error ) . 1 None 2 None Process Safisfadiun : Profiles of satisfaction with group processes did not differ across treatments . Nor were there any Merences in the first session . Although they did increase in each session for all groups , perceptions of satisfaction were essentially no Werent across groups in any session , regardless of condition ( Figure 4 , Table 4 ) . Thus , none of the hypotheses concerning member satisfaction was supported . AST suggests that dstributed participants will learn to appropriate the system in ways which will eventually allow them to communicate cues which convey status , power or dominance . Thus , in this study , distributed groups were expected to experience increasing dissatisfaction with the process as anonymity and equality eroded . One possible explanation for the failure to observe differences relates to the presumption that a major determinant of satisfaction is participatory equality . On the contrary , inequality may be beneficial or even preferred in some cases . For example , when a person exhibits expertise essential to some aspect of the task , 1 . 115 , 341 . 13 1 , 877 others may welcome the leadership of that indvidual . Thus , while equality of participation may lead to a larger number of alternatives being explored [ e . g . , 21 or a greater procedure oriented focus rather than an issue - oriented one [ 33 ] , these factors may not correlate highly with process satisfaction . Moreover , though presumed to lead to more equal participation , anonymity also permits members to more critically evaluate others ' contributions without fear of reprisal ; this may result in increased dissatisfaction on the part of those whose contributions are being criticized . Table 4 : Differences Within Sessions - - Process Satisfaction I Session I Effect * I F - value I P - value 1 I 3 I None I . 437 I . 650 I I 4 I None I . 267 I , 768 I # Duncan ' s range test - signficantly diflerent pairs at a = . OS , df = 2 m . ) , 30 ( error ) . A variety of factors in addition to participatory equality are also considered important to satisfaction . Among them are critical examination of members ' contributions and validty checking of members ' assumptions [ 6 ] as well as goal - drectedness and issue amplification - - all of which were included in the construct used in the current study . Because satisfaction is such a complex construct , these other phenomena may need to be isolated and studied further to get a better idea of their specific roles in structurational development . 6 ' 3 I S e s s i o n I S e s s i o n 2 S e s s i o n 3 S e s s i o n 4 I Figure 4 : Process Satisfaction 21 Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1995 6 . Conclusions The results and lessons from this study raise several issues . With respect to perceptions of cohesiveness and conflict management , although this study found no Merences among environments in their overall patterns of development , nonetheless , differences * re exhibited during particular sessions . For example , faceto - face and dstributed groups differed in reported cohesiveness in every session . Moreover , asynchronous groups experienced lower levels of perceived conflict management than face - to - face groups in the first two sessions . These findings suggest that the environments do Mer . Results also showed that , over time , perceptions indicated improvement in all three sets of social variables . Such a pattern is consistent with the notion of adaptive structuration . Moreover , the fact that distributed groups improved faster than face - to - face groups in perceived contlict management provides soft support for the concept of differential appropriation implicit in AST . That is , perhaps different environmental characteristics require Merent appropriation techniques and cause different rates of group development . Implications For Future Research : While they are an important part of the development process , however , perceptions are only indcators of the underlying dynamics . The interaction process should be examined for concrete evidence of adaptive appropriation . For example , content analysis can determine whether structural adaptation leads to dfferences among treatments in communication behavior . Research would gain a clearer picture of how adaptive structuration actually occurs if different conversational structures were found to emerge in different environments . Furthermore , motivation may be a critical determinant of the structuring process ; future research ought to address this factor . For instance , groups meeting in organizational settings will probably be motivated dlfferently than the groups used in this study . Therefore , organizational case studes should be used to investigate the effects of real world motivational factors - among others - - on structuration . Implications For Managers : This paper argued that Qstributed interaction will become more prevalent as organizations continue to globalize . However , in order to truly facilitate distributed group activities , managers of technology need to have a better understanding of how groups develop in these new types of work environments . The premise driving this study was that , while spatial and temporal dstribution present opportunities , they also create problems for interaction . Further , groups may be able to adapt structures in ways that compensate for such problems . In this longtudnal study , dstributed groups developed along three important dimensions and , generally , fared no worse than face - to - face groups . This suggests that adaptation of various social rules and resources may occur - thus , enabling groups to develop effectively , even when they are distributed . However , the importance of this study is in showing that , regardless of the particulars of the processes and despite environmental impediments , distributed work group can develop along several critical social dmensions . References Beauclair , RA . ( 1987 ) An Expenmental Study of the Efects of Group Decision Support System Procm Support Applications on Small Group Decision Makzng , Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation , I n h University . Chidambaram , L . ( 1989 ) An Empirical Investigation of the impact of Computer Support on Group Development and Decision Mahng Pwfomance , Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation , Indtana University . Chidambaram , L . and Jones , B . ( 1993 ) ' ' Impact of Communication Medium and Computer Support on Group J ? efiormance : A Comparison of FacebFace and Dispersed Meetings . " MIS Quarterly , Vol . 17 , Daft , R . L . and Lengel , RH . ( 1986 ) " B o n a l Information Requrements , Media Richness , and Structural Design . " Management Science , Vol . 32 , No . 5 , pp . 554 - 571 . Festinger , L . ( 1954 ) " A Theory of Social Comparison Processes " Human Relations , Vol . 7 , 117 - 140 . Fisher , B . A and Ellis , D . G . ( 1990 ) Small Group Decision Making : Communication and the Group Procm 3rd ed . , New York , NY : McGraw Hill Publishing Company . Gallupe , RB . ( 1985 ) The Jmpact of Task Diflculty on the Use of a Group Decision Support System , Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation , University of Minnesota . Giddens , A . ( 1984 ) The Constitution of Society : Outline of the Theory of Structuration , Berkeley , CA : University of California Pres . Gilbert , S . J . ( 1976 ) " Empirical and Theoretical Extensions of Self Disclosure , " in G . R . Miller ( Ed . ) , Explorations in Inteprsonal Communication , Beverly Hills , CA : Sage Publications , 197 - 215 . Kltz , S . R , Johnson K . , and TurofE , M . ( 1986 ) " Experiments in Group Decision Maktng . Communication Process and Outcome in Face - to - Face Versus ComputeIlzed Conferences . " Human Communication Research , Vol . 13 , No . 2 , 225 - 252 . NO . 4 , 465 - 488 . Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - I995 Jatvenw S . L . , Rao , V . S . , andHuber , G . P . ( 1988 ) " Computer Support for Meetings of Groups Workmg on Unstructured Problems : A Field Experiment . " MIS Quarterly , 645 - 665 . Jessup , L . M . , Connolly , T . and Tansik , D . k ( 1990 ) " Toward a Theory of Automated Grouprk : The Deindividmtmg effects of Anonyrmty . " SmalZ Group Research , Vol . 21 , No . 3 , 333 - 348 . Kiesler , S . , Siegel , J . and McGuire , T . W . ( 1984 ) " Soctal Psychologml Aspects of Computer - Mdated Communication . " American Psychologist , Vol . 39 , Kinney , S . and Dennis , A . ( 1994 ) ' Reevaluating Media R ~ chness : Cues , Feedback , and Task " Proceedings of the Twenty - Seventh Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , IEEE Computer Society Press , Vol . IV . , 21 - 30 . Knapp , M . , Ellis , D . and Williams , B . ( 1980 ) " Perceptions of Communication Behawor Associated With Relationship Terms . " Communication Monographs , Vol . 47 , 262 - 278 . Kutsko , J . and Smith , J . Y . ( 1991 ) " Effectiveness Measures for Distributed Teams Using Electronic Meeting Technology : The Larson / Lafasto Instrument . " Proceedings of the Twenty - Fourth Hawaii lntemational Conference on System Sciences , IEEE Computer Society Press , Vol . III . , Latane , B . ( 1981 ) " Psycholopy of Social Impact . " American Psychologist , Vol . 36 , 343 - 356 . Littlejohn , S . W . ( 1989 ) ' Theories of Human Communication , Belmont , CA Wadsworth Publislung Company . McGrath , J . E . ( 1984 ) Group : Interaction and Perfirmance , Englewood Cl & . , NJ : Rentice Hall . Miranda , S . M . and Bostrom , RP . ( 1993 ) " The Impact of Group Support Systems on Group Conflict and Conflict Management : An Empirical Investi - on . I ' Proceedings of the Twenty - Sixth Hawaii lntemational Conference on System Sciences , IEEE Computer Society Press . Vol . I \ ' , , Nunamaker , J . F . , Jr . , B r i e , RO . , and Romano , N . C . , Jr . , ( 1993 ) " Meeting Environments of the Future . " Groupware ' 93 Proceedings , San Mateo , CA : Morgan KauJinan Publishers , 125 - 144 . Poole , M . S . and DeSanctis , G . ( 1989 ) " Use of Group Decision Support Systems as an Appropnation Process . " Proceedings of the Twnty - Second Hawaii Intemational Conference on System Sciences , IEEE Computer Society Press , Vol . 111 , 149 - 157 . Poole , M . S . and DeSanctis , G . ( 1992 ) " Microlevel Structuration in Computer - Supported Group NO . lo . , 1123 - 1134 . 458 - 470 . 83 - 94 . Decision Making " Human Communication Research , Vol . 19 , No . 1 . 5 - 49 . Rice , RE . and Love , G . ( 1987 ) " Electronic Emotion : Socieemotional Content in a Computer - Medated Communication Nebark . ' I Communication Research , Vol . 14 , No . 1 , 85 - 108 . Ross , R . S . ( 1989 ) Small Groups in Organizational Settings , E n g l e d Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . Short , J . , Williams , E . , and Christie , B . ( 1976 ) 7 ' he Social Psychology of Telecommunications , London : John Wiley and Sons . Siegel , J . , Dubrovsky , V . . Kiesler , S . , and McGuire , T . W . ( 1986 ) " Group Processes in Computer - Mediated Communication . " Organizational Behavior andHuman Decision fiocesses , Vol . 37 , 157 - 187 . Smith , J . , and Vanecek , M . T . ( 1989 ) " A Nonsimultaneous Computer Conference as a Component of Group Decision support Systems . " Proceedings of the 7 ' wnty - Second Hawaii Intemational Confmence on System Sciences , IEEE Computer Society Press , Vol . III . , 370 - 377 . Sproull , L . and Kiesler , S . ( 1986 ) ' Reducing S d Context Cues : Electronic Mail in Orgamzat ~ onal Communication . " Management Science , Vol . 32 , No . Trevino , L . K . , Daft , R . , and Lengel , R . H . ( 1990 ) " Undersmdtng Managers ' Media Choices : A Symbolic Interactionist Perspective . " J . Fulk and C . Steinfield ( E & . ) , Organizations and Communication Technology , Newbury park , CA : Sage Publications , Valacich , J . S . , Mennecke , B . E . , Wachter , R . , and Wheeler , B . C . ( 1994 ) ' Extensions to Medta Richness Theory : A Test of the Task - Mda Fit Hypothesis . " Proceedings of the Twenty - Seventh Hawaii Intemational Confience on System Sciences , EEE Computer Society Press , Vol . IV . , 11 - 20 . Walther , J . B . and Burgoon , J . K . ( 1992 ) ' Relational Communication in Computer - Mediated Interaction . " Human Communication Research , Vol . 19 , No . 1 , 50 - 88 , Watson , R . T . , DeSanctis , G . and Poole , M . S . ( 1988 ) " Using a GDSS to Facilitate Group Consensus : Some Intended and Unintended Consequences . " hflS Quarterly , Vol . 12 , No . 3 , 463 - 480 . Witteman , H . ( 199 1 ) ' ' Group Member Satisfaction : A Conflict - Related Account . " Small Group Research , Vol . 22 , No . 1 , 24 - 58 . 11 , 1492 - 1512 . 7 1 - 94 . 23