Uptake of Rabies Virus into Epithelial Cells by Clathrin - Mediated Endocytosis Depends upon Actin Silvia Piccinotti , a , b Tomas Kirchhausen , b , c , d Sean P . J . Whelan a , b Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology , a Program in Virology , b and Department of Cell Biology , c Harvard Medical School , Boston , Massachusetts , USA ; Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine , Boston Children’s Hospital , Boston , Massachusetts , USA d Rabies virus ( RABV ) causes a fatal zoonotic encephalitis . Disease symptoms require replication and spread of the virus within neuronal cells ; however , in infected animals as well as in cell culture the virus replicates in a broad range of cell types . Here we use a single - cycle RABV and a recombinant vesicular stomatitis virus ( rVSV ) in which the glycoprotein ( G ) was replaced with that of RABV ( rVSV RABV G ) to examine RABV uptake into the African green monkey kidney cell line BS - C - 1 . Combining bio - chemical studies and real - time spinning - disk confocal ﬂuorescence microscopy , we show that the predominant entry pathway of RABV particles into BS - C - 1 cells is clathrin dependent . Viral particles enter cells in pits with elongated structures and incom - plete clathrin coats which depend upon actin to complete the internalization process . By measuring the time of internalization and the abundance of the clathrin adaptor protein AP2 , we further show that the pits that internalize RABV particles are similar to those that internalize VSV particles . Pharmacological perturbations of dynamin or of actin polymerization inhibit productive infection , linking our observations on particle uptake with viral infectivity . This work extends to RABV particles the ﬁnding that clathrin - mediated endocytosis of rhabdoviruses proceeds through incompletely coated pits which depend upon actin . R abies virus ( RABV ) is the prototypical member of the zoo - notic lyssavirus genus responsible for fatal encephalitis in an - imals and humans . A single - stranded negative - sense RNA virus , RABV encases its RNA genome in a bullet - shaped , enveloped par - ticle that incorporates a single surface glycoprotein ( G ) . RABV G mediates all internalization steps from cell binding to membrane fusion . In addition , G is a major determinant of RABV neurotro - pism ( 1 ) . Conjugation or pseudotyping with the ectodomain of pathogenic RABV G or peptides derived from receptor - binding regions allows retargeting of biologically active molecules to the central nervous system ( CNS ) for drug delivery or as neurotracers ( 2 , 3 ) . Since a large part of RABV pathogenesis is reliant on the virus garnering access to neurons and the CNS , G is also a deter - mining factor in RABV virulence . The pathogenicity of attenuated strains can be effectively increased by replacing the glycoprotein with one from a neurotropic , virulent strain ( 4 ) . Like other rhabdoviruses , RABV gains access to the cellular interior by endocytosis and subsequent low pH - dependent fusion ( 5 – 7 ) . Electron micrographs of viral particles in vesicles with elec - tron - dense coats suggest that clathrin - coated pits mediate the up - take of RABV in both neuronal and nonneuronal cells ( 8 , 9 ) . However , static images cannot inform on the fate of such particles or the relevance of these interactions for subsequent infection . High - resolution live - imaging techniques permit tracking of viral uptake into coated pits ( 10 – 15 ) . Fluorescence tagging of coated - pit components and quantitative analysis methods have revealed differencesforthepitsengagingﬂuorescentlytaggedviralparticles ( 11 , 12 ) . In particular , vesicular stomatitis virus ( VSV ) particles are internalized through partially coated clathrin pits that require actin for the completion of envelopment ( 11 ) . The morphology of the particle is a key determinant of actin dependence , since a trun - cated , defective interfering particle of VSV , DI - T , does not require actin polymerization ( 12 ) . This observation also extends to other viruses with dimensions compatible with canonical coated pits , as clathrin - dependent uptake of the 60 - nm - diameter parvovirus is also actin independent ( 10 , 12 ) . In the present study , we employed biochemical and high - res - olution imaging approaches to study RABV internalization . For this purpose , we used a recombinant VSV ( rVSV ) expressing RABV G ( rVSV RABV G ) that mimics the morphology of authen - tic RABV and allows experimentation at biosafety level 2 . To es - tablish rVSV RABV G as a surrogate virus , we compared its entry behavior with that of a “single - cycle” version of RABV which lacks a copy of the G gene and is ampliﬁed in cells that express RABV G ( rRABV (cid:1) G ) . We show that , like that of VSV , the predominant internalization route of RABV into BS - C - 1 cells is through pits that are partially coated with clathrin and depend upon actin for internalization . The kinetics of internalization of RABV particles are also indistinguishable from those of VSV in the time between particle attachment to cells and association of the particles with the clathrin machinery and in the time of clathrin - dependent up - take . MATERIALS AND METHODS Cells and viruses . African green monkey kidney BS - C - 1 cells ( ATCC CCL - 26 ; American Type Culture Collection , Manassas , VA ) , either the wild type or a line stably expressing the (cid:2) 2 subunit of AP2 fused to en - hanced green ﬂuorescent protein ( eGFP ) ( AP2 - eGFP ) ( 16 ) , were main - tained at 37°C and 5 % CO 2 in Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle medium ( DMEM ; Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ; Tissue Culture Biologicals , Tulare , CA ) . Recombinant G de - letionRABVstrainSADL16expressingeGFP ( rRABV (cid:1) G ) wasakindgift Received 17 June 2013 Accepted 15 August 2013 Published ahead of print 21 August 2013 Address correspondence to Sean P . J . Whelan , swhelan @ hms . harvard . edu , or Tomas Kirchhausen , kirchhausen @ crystal . harvard . edu . Supplemental material for this article may be found at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / JVI . 01648 - 13 . Copyright © 2013 , American Society for Microbiology . All Rights Reserved . doi : 10 . 1128 / JVI . 01648 - 13 November 2013 Volume 87 Number 21 Journal of Virology p . 11637 – 11647 jvi . asm . org 11637 of E . M . Callaway ( 17 ) . rRABV (cid:1) G stocks were produced by propagation of the virus in 293T cells stably expressing SAD B19 RABV G ( also a gift of E . M . Callaway ) . Once ampliﬁed , rRABV (cid:1) G was puriﬁed using the same protocol as for recombinant VSV . Titer was estimated by infecting non - complementing293TcellswithserialdilutionsofpuriﬁedrRABV (cid:1) Gand countingeGFP - expressinginfectedcellsat30hourspostinfection ( hpi ) by ﬂow cytometry . rVSV eGFP , rVSV RABV G eGFP ( rVSV RABV G ) ( 18 ) , and a recombinant VSV expressing the Ebola virus glycoprotein , rVSV EboV GP eGFP ( rVSV EboV GP ) ( 19 ) , were ampliﬁed , puriﬁed , and maintained as previously described ( 11 ) . rVSV eGFP was generated by ampliﬁcation of the eGFP open reading frame ( ORF ) and insertion into the Xho and MscI sites of pVSV1 ( (cid:3) ) 41 ( 20 ) . The resulting virus was recovered as described previously ( 21 ) . Protein composition of puriﬁed virions . To separate the viral pro - teins , we subjected puriﬁed virions to SDS - PAGE using 10 % polyacryl - amide ( wt / vol ) and0 . 13 % ( wt / vol ) bis - acrylamideandvisualizedthemby staining with Coomassie blue . Relative amounts of N or G protein were established using ImageJ ( U . S . National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , Maryland ; http : / / rsb . info . nih . gov / ij / ) . Inhibitors . The following chemicals were administered at the listed concentrations : 0 . 1 (cid:4) M baﬁlomycin A1 ( BAF A1 ; Calbiochem , Milli - pore ) ; 100 (cid:4) M dynasore ; and 25 (cid:4) M 5 - ( N - ethyl - N - isopropyl ) amiloride ( EIPA ; Sigma - Aldrich ) . Latrunculin B ( LatB ; Sigma - Aldrich ) concentra - tions ranged from 0 . 5 to 6 (cid:4) M , as illustrated ( see Fig . 7 ) . One micromolar LatB was administered for internalization assays . Nucleic acid transfection . To visualize clathrin and actin dynamics simultaneously , we cotransfected rat mCherry - LCa ( constructed as de - scribedfortomato - LCa [ 22 ] ) withmouseactin - eGFPinto90 % - conﬂuent BS - C - 1 cells in 6 - well plates . Plasmid DNA was introduced into the cells using FuGene HD ( Roche Diagnostics , Indianapolis , IN ) according to the manufacturer’s instructions , using a ratio of 3 (cid:4) g DNA to 5 (cid:4) l FuGENE HD in 100 (cid:4) l Opti - MEM . Following overnight incubation at 37°C , cells were reseeded onto 25 - mm coverslips at 25 % conﬂuence . Cells were im - aged approximately 5 h later , after complete adherence to the coverslips was veriﬁed by visual inspection . Electron microscopy ( EM ) . To visualize viral morphology , we depos - ited puriﬁed rVSV eGFP or rVSV RABV G particles onto carbon - coated copper grids and stained them with 2 % phosphotungstic acid ( wt / vol ) in H 2 O ( pH 7 . 5 ) . To visualize viral particles in clathrin - coated pits , we inoc - ulatedBS - C - 1cellsatamultiplicityofinfection ( MOI ) of1 , 000for15min at 37°C . Samples were then processed for ultrathin sectioning as previ - ouslydescribed ( 11 , 23 ) . Virusparticlesandultrathinsectionsofcellswere viewed using a Tecnai G 2 Spirit BioTWIN transmission electron micro - scope ( FEI , Hillsboro , OR ) . Dye conjugation to virus particles . Viral particles were labeled with 40 (cid:4) g ml (cid:5) 1 Alexa Fluor ( AF647 ) succinyl esters ( Molecular Probes , Invit - rogen , Eugene , OR ) as previously described ( 11 ) . Titration of virus prep - arations before and after labeling showed that dye conjugation had a neg - ligible effect on infectivity . Infectivity studies . Cytoﬂuorimetry experiments were carried out in 24 - well plates and epiﬂuorescence microscopy experiments in black , clear - bottomed 96 - well microplates ( Corning , Tewksbury , MA ) . BS - C - 1 cells were treated either 15 min prior to infection or at 2 hpi with DMEM plus inhibitors as indicated on the ﬁgures and in the ﬁgure legends . rRABV (cid:1) G inoculations were incubated for 2 h at 37°C with an estimated MOI of 0 . 5 , whereas rVSV RABV G inoculations were incubated with an MOI of 0 . 5 for 1 h at 37°C . Following inoculation , cells were washed and mediawerereplacedasindicated . Cellswereprocessedforepiﬂuorescence microscopy or cytoﬂuorimetry at 4 to 6 hpi for VSV - RABV or 25 hpi for rRABV (cid:1) G . LatBwasremovedat12hpitopreventcytotoxicity . Cellswere washed three times with DMEM and media was replaced with DMEM supplemented with 10 % FBS . For epiﬂuorescence microscopy , cells were washed twice with phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) and ﬁxed for 15 min with 4 % paraformaldehyde ( PFA ) . The ﬁxed cells were washed with PBS and stained with DAPI ( 4 = , 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole ) in the presence of 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 for 30 min at 37°C . rVSV eGFP - infected cells were imaged using a CellWorX automated microscope ( Applied Precision , Is - saquah , WA ) ; rRABV SAD B19 (cid:1) G - infected samples were imaged using an ImageXpress Micro automated microscope ( Molecular Devices , Sunnyvale , CA ) . For cytoﬂuorimetry , cells were washed with PBS and harvested using 0 . 5 mM EDTA in PBS . Mean ﬂuorescence measurements were obtained using a modiﬁed FACSCalibur ( Cytek Development , Fre - mont , CA ) instrument and analyzed using FlowJo ( Tree Star Industries , Ashland , OR ) . Uncoating assay . Conﬂuent BS - C - 1 cells seeded onto 12 - mm cover - slips were exposed for 15 min to DMEM containing 5 (cid:4) g ml (cid:5) 1 cyclohex - imide ( CHX ) alone or with an entry inhibitor as indicated ( see Fig . 3 ) . Cells were then inoculated with rVSV RABV G at an MOI of 1 , 000 . Fol - lowing1hofincubationat37°C , unabsorbedviruswasremovedbywash - ing with fresh media . The treatment media were replaced , and cells were incubated for 2 h at 37°C . Note that CHX and the indicated entry inhib - itors were maintained on cells throughout the inoculation as well as dur - ing the subsequent 2 h of incubation . Cells were washed with PBS and ﬁxed with 4 % PFA for 15 min . Following permeabilization with 0 . 1 % TritonX - 100 , cellswereexposedtomouse23H12anti - Mantibody ( giftof D . Lyles ) ( 24 , 25 ) and 1 : 3 , 000 propidium iodide ( PI ; Sigma - Aldrich , St . Louis , MO ) and an AF488 - labeled goat anti - mouse secondary antibody . Coverslips were mounted onto slides using ProLong Gold antifade mounting media ( Molecular Probes ) . z stacks were collected at 0 . 3 - (cid:4) m intervals . Images were analyzed and processed using ImageJ , maintaining contrast adjustments constant across samples for the AF488 - conjugated secondary - antibody signal . Internalization assay . Twenty - ﬁve to ﬁfty percent - conﬂuent BS - C - 1 cells seeded onto 12 - mm coverslips were treated with chemicals as indi - cated ( see Fig . 4 ) . AF647 - labeled rVSV RABV G was added at an MOI of 100 and incubated for 30 min at 37°C . Cells were washed with PBS , ﬁxed with 4 % PFA , and exposed to anti - RABV G antibody ( 1 : 500 ; Millipore , Billerica , MA ) , whichwasdetectedbyasecondarygoatanti - mouseAF488 ( 1 : 500 ; Molecular Probes ) . To stain the cell membrane , we also exposed cells to 10 (cid:4) g ml (cid:5) 1 AF594 - labeled wheat germ agglutinin ( WGA ; Molec - ular Probes ) . Coverslips were mounted onto slides using ProLong Gold antifade mounting media ( Molecular Probes ) . Samples were imaged by spinning - disk confocal microscopy with z stacks collected at 0 . 3 - (cid:4) m in - tervals . StackswereprocessedusingImageJ ( NationalInstitutesofHealth , Bethesda , MD ; http : / / imagej . nih . gov / ij / ) . For increased clarity , z - stack maximal projections were processed to exclude coverslip - bound viruses . The WGA signal was used to generate a mask matching the outline of the cell ( s ) . The area outside the border of the cell was replaced with a black background . Exposure and contrast adjustments were kept constant across samples throughout image acquisition and processing ; WGA con - trast and brightness were optimized to aid visualization of the cell bound - aries . Transferrin uptake . For cytoﬂuorimetry experiments , BS - C - 1 cells were seeded onto 24 - well plates to be conﬂuent the next day . For ﬁxed confocal microscopy , BS - C - 1 cells were seeded onto 12 - mm coverslips to be 50 % conﬂuent the next day for ease of imaging . BS - C - 1 cells were pretreatedwithDMEMplusLatBorDMEMalonefor5to10min . AF488 - labeled transferrin ( Tfn ; Molecular Probes ) was added to the media at a ﬁnal concentration of 20 (cid:4) g ml (cid:5) 1 , and the cultures were incubated for 7 minat37°C . Onice , cellswererapidlywashedwithacidsolution ( PBS , 0 . 5 M NaCl , 0 . 2 M acetic acid ) and 3 times with PBS . Tfn uptake was assessed by spinning - disk confocal cytoﬂuorimetry . Cells intended for analysis by ﬂow cytometry were harvested and analyzed as described above . Fixed - cell imaging . Slides were imaged using a Marianas system ( In - telligent Imaging Innovations ) based on a Zeiss observer microscope ( Carl Zeiss MicroImaging , Thornwood , NY ) outﬁtted with a CSU - 22 spinning - disk confocal unit ( Yokogawa Electric Corporation , Tokyo , Ja - pan ) and a 40 (cid:6) ( Plan - Neoﬂuar , NA 1 . 3 ; Carl Zeiss MicroImaging ) or 63 (cid:6) ( Plan - Apochromat , NA1 . 4 ; CarlZeissMicroimaging ) objectivelens . Excitation wavelengths were 491 nm for AF488 , 561 nm for AF594 , and Piccinotti et al . 11638 jvi . asm . org Journal of Virology 660 nm for AF647 . For three - dimensional acquisitions , the vertical posi - tion was manipulated in 0 . 3 - (cid:4) m increments using a PZ - 2000 automated stage ( Applied Scientiﬁc Instrumentation , Eugene , OR ) . Images were col - lected using a Photometrics Cascade II electron multiplication camera ( Photometrics , Tucson , AZ ) . SlideBook versions 4 and 5 ( Intelligent Im - aging Innovations , Denver , CO ) were used to command the hardware devices and visualize the acquired data . Live - cell imaging . Live single - particle tracking on AP2 - eGFP - ex - pressing BS - C - 1 cells was conducted as described previously , collecting images at 3 - s intervals over a period of 10 min per cell ( 11 ) . Slidebook 4 . 2 . 13 and 5 . 0 . 0 . 2 ( Intelligent Imaging Innovations ) were used to com - mand the hardware devices and visualize the acquired data . Prior to im - aging , Alexa - labeled virus was centrifuged brieﬂy on a tabletop microcen - trifuge to remove aggregates . Cells were inoculated with a volume of virus calibrated to result in attachment and internalization of approximately 100 particles per cell within 20 min ( (cid:7) 1 (cid:6) 10 9 PFU of rVSV RABV G ) . Movies were generated by exporting time - lapse TIFF ﬁles from Slidebook and compiling the images into a single AVI ﬁle using ImageJ . All contrast editing , cropping , and scaling were performed using ImageJ . Analysis of time series . Image analysis was performed as previously described ( 11 , 12 ) withthefollowingmodiﬁcations . Imageswereexported from Slidebook 4 . 2 . 13 and 5 . 0 . 0 . 2 , cropped using ImageJ , and analyzed using a previously described automated image analysis application ( IMAB ) within MATLAB ( MathWorks , Natick , MA ) ( 22 ) . As previously described ( 11 , 12 , 22 ) , only events where single particles docked onto cells and were seen to undergo internalization were included in our analysis . Virusaggregatesandpredockedparticleswereexcludedfromtheanalysis . Internalization events were conﬁrmed by observation of rapid directional movement of viral particles toward the perinuclear region . For compari - son , 50 pits lacking virus particles within the time frame of virus uptake were also analyzed to provide baseline measurements of coat lifetime and intensity . RESULTS Recombinant VSV expressing RABV G . Recombinant VSVs in which the glycoproteins from Ebola , Marburg , and Lassa fever viruses replace the endogenous glycoprotein ( G ) serve as useful surrogates to study the uptake pathways of these viruses ( 18 , 19 , 26 ) under biosafety level 2 conditions . We adapted such a strategy to permit the study of RABV infection by replacing VSV G with that of RABV SAD B19 ( rVSV RABV G ) ( Fig . 1A ) ( 18 ) . As ex - pected , rVSV RABV G retains the morphological features of au - thentic RABV : rVSV RABV G virions are bullet shaped and mea - sure on average 180 nm in length and 80 nm in width ( Fig . 1B and C ) . These dimensions are typical for RABV and also match those of the parental VSV strain rVSV eGFP ( Fig . 1B and C ) ( 27 , 28 ) . Puriﬁed rVSV RABV G virions incorporate RABV G to an extent comparable to VSV G incorporation into particles ( Fig . 1D ) . Col - lectively , these data show that the rVSV RABV G particles are structurally indistinct from those of VSV except that they now contain RABV G on their surfaces and thus appear externally as RABV . Productive infection of rVSV RABV G occurs through a clathrin - dependentendocyticpathwayandrequiresendosomal acidiﬁcation . To determine whether rVSV RABV G serves as a useful surrogate to study RABV entry and deﬁne the route of in - fection , we compared its sensitivity to inhibitors of different en - docytic mechanisms with that of a recombinant single - cycle RABV virus , rRABV (cid:1) G . We tested baﬁlomycin A1 ( BAF A1 ) , an inhibitor of the H (cid:3) ATPase pump which by blocking endosomal acidiﬁcation eliminates the trigger of conformational rearrange - ments in G necessary for membrane fusion ; amiloride ( EIPA ) , an inhibitor of macropinocytosis ( 29 ) ; and dynasore , an inhibitor of dynamin required for the scission step of clathrin - mediated endo - cytosis ( 30 ) . To discriminate between the effect of inhibitors on entryversuspostentrystepsofviralreplication , wecomparedtheir effects when added prior to or 2 h following inoculation with virus ( Fig . 2A ) . For controls , we monitored the impact of these inhibi - tors on infection with rVSV eGFP , a virus that depends upon clathrin - dependent endocytosis and endosome acidiﬁcation , and a recombinant VSV expressing the Ebola virus glycoprotein ( rVSV EboV GP ) , which requires macropinocytic uptake ( Fig . 2D ) . For each virus , infection was measured by the expression of FIG 1 Characterization of recombinant VSV expressing RABV G . ( A ) Genomic structures of rRABV (cid:1) G eGFP , rVSV eGFP , and rVSV RABV G eGFP . The single - stranded , negative - sense RNA genomes are shown in a 3 = to 5 = orientation . N , nucleocapsidgene ; P , phosphoproteingene ; M , matrixgene ; G , glycoprotein gene ; L , large polymerase gene . Noncoding genomic leader ( Le ) and trailer ( Tr ) regions serve as promoters for RNA synthesis and genomic RNA encapsidation , respectively . All viruses express the eGFP gene ( green ) as a marker for infection . The glycoprotein open reading frame of rRABV (cid:1) G eGFP was replaced with that of eGFP . To produce infectious virus , rRABV (cid:1) GwasgrownincomplementingcellsexpressingSADB19G . InrVSV RABV G eGFP , the wild - type VSV G ( 1 , 535 nt ) was replaced with RABV G ( 1 , 574 nt ) from the SAD B19 strain . ( B ) Electron micrographs of rVSV eGFP and rVSV RABV G eGFP viral particles demonstrate morphological homoge - neity . Particles were negatively stained with 1 % PTA . ( C ) Dimensions of indi - vidual viral particles measured from micrographs like those shown in panel B . Eachopencirclerepresentsthemeasurementforasinglevirion . Alinedenotes the mean ( (cid:8) the standard deviation [ SD ] ; n (cid:9) 50 ) for each population , the value of which is provided . ( D ) SDS - PAGE analysis of puriﬁed virions . Viral proteins were stained with Coomassie blue . The ratio of N to G was quantiﬁed using ImageJ to estimate the average glycoprotein density in each particle population . Clathrin - and Actin - Dependent Rabies Virus Entry November 2013 Volume 87 Number 21 jvi . asm . org 11639 FIG 2 Dynamin and endosomal acidiﬁcation are required for productive RABV G - dependent infection . ( A ) Schematic of the methods employed for panels B andC . Agraphicalrepresentationofacellateachtimepointindicatesthestageofinfection . Circlesrepresentviralparticles , surfacebound ( ﬁlled ) orinternalized ( hollow ) . Expression of the reporter gene , eGFP , is shown as a diffuse green in the cytoplasm . BS - C - 1 cells were inoculated with virus ( MOI (cid:9) 0 . 5 ) and assayed for infection by detection of the eGFP reporter gene either by autoscope microscopy or cytoﬂuorimetry at the collection point ( 25 hpi for rRABV (cid:1) G ; 4 to 6 hpi for rVSV RABV G ) . The effect of inhibitor on viral infection was assayed by treating cells with drug prior ( pre ) or following ( post ) inoculation with virus . Comparison of pretreated and posttreated samples enables determination of the effect of each inhibitor on viral entry . ( B ) Fluorescence microscopy of single - cycle rRABV (cid:1) G infection following treatment with inhibitor . The H (cid:3) pump inhibitor baﬁlomycin A1 ( BAF A1 ; 0 . 1 (cid:4) M ) , macropinocytosis inhibitor amiloride ( EIPA ; 25 (cid:4) M ) , anddynamininhibitordynasore ( 100 (cid:4) M ) weretestedfortheirabilitiestoimpactRABVinfection . rRABV (cid:1) Ginfectionwasdetected via expression of the eGFP reporter gene ( green ) . Cell nuclei were labeled with DAPI ( blue ) . ( C ) Fluorescence microscopy of rVSV RABV G infection following treatment with inhibitors . rVSV RABV G infection is also detected as expression of the eGFP reporter gene ( green ) . Cell nuclei were labeled with DAPI ( blue ) . Imageswerecollectedusingthesameexposureandprocessedtothesamebrightnessandcontrastsettings . Dynasorehasamoderateeffectontherateofviral - gene expression ; asaresult , thebrightnessandcontrastwerereadjustedinthedynasoreinsetstohighlightlower - intensityinfectedcells . ( D ) Cytoﬂuorimetricanalysis of infection . Total eGFP expression following pretreatment with drug was calculated from mean ﬂuorescence intensites using FlowJo software and expressed as percentages relative to that of controls treated following inoculation ( % post ) . rVSV eGFP ( VSV ) and rVSV EboV GP ( EboV ) served as prototypical clathrin - dependent and macropinosome - dependent pathogens , respectively . Statistically signiﬁcant differences are demarcated by asterisks ( Student’s t test ; P (cid:10) 0 . 01 ) . Piccinotti et al . 11640 jvi . asm . org Journal of Virology eGFP detected by ﬂuorescence microscopy ( Fig . 2B and C ) or cytoﬂuorimetry ( Fig . 2D ) . The addition of BAF A1 or dynasore prior to inoculation blocked rRABV (cid:1) G infection , whereas EIPA had no effect . None of the inhibitors had a signiﬁcant effect following postentry addi - tion . This result indicates that rRABV (cid:1) G entry is dependent on dynamin and is likely clathrin mediated . As expected , productive infection also requires endosome acidiﬁcation . rVSV RABV G ( Fig . 2C ) shared the same sensitivity proﬁle as rRABV (cid:1) G ( Fig . 2B ) , supporting that this recombinant virus serves as a useful sur - rogate to study rabies virus entry . To quantitate the reduction in infection , we used cytoﬂuorimetry ( Fig . 2D ) . Pretreatment of cells with BAF A1 reduced rVSV RABV G infection to 1 % of that of postinoculation - treated controls . Pretreatment with dynasore re - duced rVSV RABV G infection , like VSV infection , to 20 % of that of postinoculation - treated controls , and pretreatment with EIPA had a negligible effect on eGFP expression ( Fig . 2C and D ) . By contrast , infection of rVSV EboV GP was strongly inhibited by EIPA but not by dynasore ( Fig . 2D ) . These results support the hypothesis that infection with rVSV RABV G requires dynamin and that macropinocytosis does not play a role in infection . Fur - thermore , the similarity in sensitivity proﬁles for rVSV RABV G and VSV is suggestive of a clathrin - dependent route of entry . BAFA1anddynasoreblockRABVinfectionatseparatesteps in internalization . To identify the steps at which BAF A1 and dynasore block infection , we employed separate assays that di - rectly monitor uncoating ( Fig . 3 ) and internalization ( Fig . 4 ) of the virus ( 31 ) . For uncoating , we detected the release of internal virion matrix ( M ) protein following successful membrane fusion . Brieﬂy , cells were infected in the presence of the protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide so that only the incoming virion proteins were detected . Successful membrane fusion releases the virion contents into the cytoplasm , a step that is visualized by monitor - ing the diffuse distribution of the input M protein by immunoﬂu - orescence ( Fig . 3A and B ) , and in the absence of CHX , infection was established in almost every cell ( Fig . 3C ) . By contrast , intact particles result in high - intensity perinuclear punctate staining , as shown by treatment of cells with BAF A1 in the presence ( Fig . 3B ) or absence ( Fig . 3C ) of CHX . This is consistent with the fact that inhibition of the vacuolar ATPase prevents the drop in endo - somal pH required for RABV G fusion , leading to the accumu - lation of intracellular particles . In the presence of dynasore , FIG3 AbsenceofMproteinreleaseandexpressionincellstreatedwithBAFA1ordynasore . ( A ) Schematicoftheuncoatingassayprotocol . ReleaseofMprotein is monitored as an indication of viral fusion . Fifteen minutes prior to infection , cells were treated with 5 uM cycloheximide ( CHX ) to prevent de novo synthesis ofviralproteins . CHXwasadministeredaloneorinconjuctionwithentryinhibitor , 0 . 1uMBAFA1 , or100uMdynasore , asindicated . Cellswereinoculatedwith rVSV RABV G virus ( MOI (cid:9) 500 ) for 1 h . At 3 hpi , cells were ﬁxed , permeabilized ( indicated by dashed cell outline ) , and stained with antibody against VSV M ( (cid:11) M ; green ) and propidium iodide ( PI ; red ) . External , surface - bound virus is shown as ﬁlled circles , internalized virus as open circles . Anti - M antibody stained bothdiffuseMinthecellandtightlypackedMinindividualparticles . ( B ) ConfocalmicroscopyofMreleaseincellstreatedwithentryinhibitorsandCHX . Above the merged images are single - plane z - stack cross sections . PI ( red ) and (cid:11) M ( green ) signals are shown separately below the merged images . ( C ) Confocal microscopy of M localization in the absence of CHX treatment . Cells were stained with PI ( red ) and (cid:11) M ( green ) . Large panels were imaged with a 40 (cid:6) lens objective ; insets for BAF A1 - and dynasore - treated conditions were imaged with a 60 (cid:6) lens objective , allowing visualization of aggregates of unfused viral particles . Clathrin - and Actin - Dependent Rabies Virus Entry November 2013 Volume 87 Number 21 jvi . asm . org 11641 there was no diffuse cytoplasmic M or perinuclear accumula - tion of intact particles . Intact particles appeared uniformly dis - persed over the presumed cell surface and absent from the cell interior ( Fig . 3B and C ) . To conﬁrm that dynasore prevents particle internalization at the plasma membrane , we inoculated cells with Alexa Fluor - la - beled virions for 30 min and , following ﬁxation , exposed cells to an antibody directed against RABV G in the absence of membrane permeabilization ( Fig . 4A ) . This approach results in dually labeled surface - bound particles and permits their discrimination from singly labeled internalized particles . Following 30 min of inocula - tion , approximately half of cell - associated particles were internal and singly labeled , resulting in 42 % colocalization of the Alexa Fluor signal with the anti - RABV G stain ( Fig . 4B ) . Internal parti - cles were distributed between the perinuclear region and the cell periphery . In the presence of BAF A1 , rVSV RABV G particles wereinternalizedintoendocyticcompartments , resultinginaper - centage of colocalization ( 44 % ) similar to that of untreated con - FIG4 Dynasoreblocksinternalizationattheplasmamembrane . ( A ) Schematicofinternalizationassay . Fifteenminutespriortoinfection , cellsweretreatedwith DMEM only ( B ) , 0 . 1 uM BAF A1 ( C ) , or 100 uM dynasore ( D ) . AF647 - labeled rVSV RABV G virus ( MOI (cid:9) 50 ) was administered to cells for 30 min . During incubation , surface - bound virus ( ﬁlled blue circles ) internalizes and travels to the perinuclear region ( open blue circles ) . Cells were ﬁxed and stained with antibody against RABV G ( (cid:11) G ) in the absence of permeabilization , which exclusively dually labels external particles ( blue - green ﬁlled circles ) . Internal particles are protected from (cid:11) G staining and remain singly labeled ( open blue circles ) . WGA staining was used to detect cell surfaces . ( B , C , and D ) Confocal microscopy of internalization assay in cells treated as listed above . AF647 - labeled rVSV RABV G ( RABV ) and (cid:11) G signals are shown individually . In the merged panels , the RABVsignalisshowninblue , (cid:11) Gingreen , andWGAinred . Singlylabeledinternalparticlesappearblueandduallylabeledexternalparticlesappearcyan . Above the merged images are single - plane z - stack cross sections . Smaller panels ( right ) show magniﬁed portions of the cells corresponding to the white squares in the merged panels . 11642 jvi . asm . org Journal of Virology trols ( Fig . 4C ) . By contrast , treatment of cells with dynasore re - sulted in the accumulation of dually labeled particles distributed evenly on the cell surface ( Fig . 4D , 78 % colocalization ) . Those particles remained at the plasma membrane , as detected by WGA staining ( Fig . 4D , z cross - section ) . We conclude that inhibition of dynamin - dependent processes prevents rVSV RABV G uptake at the cell surface . Kinetics of rVSV RABV G uptake in clathrin - coated pits . To further understand the steps of clathrin - mediated uptake of rVSV RABV G particles , we visualized single viral particles undergoing internalization by electron microscopy . Clathrin - coated pits are readily identiﬁable in electron micrographs as invaginations of the plasma membrane surrounded by an electron - dense coat ( Fig . 5 , ﬁrst row ) . Vesicles arising from clathrin - mediated endocytosis are largely spherical and have an average interior diameter of 60 nm . As expected for VSV ( 11 ) and as shown here for rVSV RABV G , viral particles are found within elongated vesicles with electron - dense material visible on the spherical end ( Fig . 5 ) . Previously we demonstrated that the clathrin - coated struc - tures that internalize VSV take longer to form than pits lacking virus ; they also lack the expected content of clathrin and its adap - tor molecule , AP2 ( 11 ) . To investigate whether pits internalizing rVSV RABV G share similar properties , we monitored the inter - nalization of single viral particles into BS - C - 1 cells stably express - ing ﬂuorescently tagged AP2 ( 11 , 12 ) . We analyzed particles that displayed the following properties : ( i ) docking of the particle on the cell surface ; ( ii ) a period of surface association with the cell membrane characterized by limited motility and potential associ - ation with AP2 ; and ﬁnally , ( iii ) sustained , rapid , directed move - ment toward the perinuclear region . A representative internaliza - tion event shows docking and a period of short - range , low - speed movement at the cell surface followed by a steady increase in AP2 ( Fig . 6A and C ) . After reaching peak intensity , the AP2 signal abruptly disappears , and the virus moves rapidly toward the peri - nuclear region ( Fig . 6A and C ; see Movie S1 in the supplemental material ) . This loss of the AP2 signal is indicative of the uncoating of clathrin following scission of the coated pit from the plasma membrane ( 32 ) . We found that the majority ( 76 % ) of rVSV RABV G particles were seen within AP2 - containing structures during entry ( Fig . 6A ) . The remaining particles internalized in the absence of a detectable AP2 signal ( Fig . 6B and D ; Movie S2 ) . To compare internalization of rVSV RABV G to that of the related rhabdovirus , VSV , we measured the following parameters : maximum AP2 intensity and duration relative to those of empty pits ( Fig . 6E ) and the time from docking to a cell to association with AP2 relative to the time for WT VSV ( Fig . 6F ) . rVSV RABV G - internalizing pits recruit on average 1 . 7 times more AP2 than their empty counterparts ( median value ; n (cid:9) 66 ) ( Fig . 6E ) . In addition , the duration of AP2 recruitment was approximately 1 . 8 times that of a pit lacking virus . These changes mirror those pre - viously measured for the internalization of WT VSV into pits ( 11 , 12 ) . We also found that the time to capture of rVSV RABV G particles by coated pits was indistinguishable from that of VSV ( Fig . 6F ) . Collectively , the ﬁxed and live - cell - imaging data sup - port that RABV particles internalize into incompletely clath - rin - coated pits with structures and a lifetime similar to those that internalize VSV . Actin dependence of RABV entry . We found previously that VSV also internalizes through partially coated clathrin pits which depend on actin to complete uptake ( 11 ) . We therefore examined whether RABV entry is also actin dependent . Using the actin - depolymerizing drug latrunculin B ( LatB ) , we disrupted forma - tion of actin structures and monitored the effect on rVSV RABV G infection by cytoﬂuorimetry ( Fig . 7A ) . Inhibition of actin polym - erization prior to the addition of virus resulted in a 62 % reduction in rVSV RABV G infection , similar to that observed for VSV ( Fig . 7A ) . Treatment of cells with LatB at 2 h postinoculation had a marginal effect on infection of both viruses , conﬁrming that the requirement for actin is speciﬁc to entry ( Fig . 7A ) . Inhibition of uptake was also observed for the single - cycle rabies virus , rRABV (cid:1) G ( Fig . 7B and C ) . Consistent with an entry block , viral particles fail to internalize and remain surface bound on cells pretreated with LatB ( Fig . 7D ) . Previous work demonstrated that disruption of actin polymerization does not block coated - pit formation or alter the kinetics of internalization in BS - C - 1 cells ( 11 , 33 ) . Ac - cordingly , depolymerization of actin had a negligible effect on transferrin accumulation as detected by cytoﬂuorimetry ( Fig . 7A ) and confocal microscopy ( data not shown ) . Live - cell imaging of clathrin pits also conﬁrmed that the formation and kinetics of coated pits are largely unchanged in the presence of LatB ( see Movie S3 in the supplemental material ) . These data demon - strate a requirement for actin polymerization during the inter - nalization of VSV and RABV that is not shared by pits that lack virus particles . Wenextvisualizedtheassociationofactinwithclathrin - coated pits during rVSV RABV G entry by live confocal microscopy in BS - C - 1 cells transiently expressing ﬂuorescently labeled clathrin light chain and actin ( see Movie S4 in the supplemental material ) . No detectable recruitment of actin was observed for pits lacking viral particles . In contrast , when the clathrin machinery was engaged in uptake of rVSV RABV G particles , we observed an accumulation of actin shortly following assembly of the clath - rin coat . These results demonstrate that actin recruitment is FIG 5 Visualization of clathrin - dependent uptake of rVSV RABV G by trans - mission electron microscopy . Electron micrographs show the presumed order of internalization for empty , rVSV eGFP , or rVSV RABV G clathrin - coated pits . BS - C - 1 cells were exposed to virus at an MOI of 1 , 000 for 15 min prior to ﬁxation and processing as outlined in Materials and Methods . Arrowheads highlight sections of the endocytic vesicle lacking electron - dense clathrin . Clathrin - and Actin - Dependent Rabies Virus Entry November 2013 Volume 87 Number 21 jvi . asm . org 11643 integral to clathrin - mediated internalization of RABV parti - cles . These data extend our ﬁndings on the clathrin - dependent uptake of VSV to another member of the family Rhabdoviridae , RABV , providing further support for the model that the parti - cles are internalized through partially coated pits that require actin for internalization . DISCUSSION In this study , we used a combination of infectivity - based and sin - gle - particle - tracking approaches to examine how RABV produc - tively enters epithelial cells . We employed a single - cycle rabies virus , rRABV (cid:1) G , and a recombinant VSV in which the endoge - nous glycoprotein was replaced with that of RABV . We showed that uptake of rVSV RABV G mimics uptake of rRABV (cid:1) G , dem - onstrating its usefulness as a surrogate for studying RABV entry . WepresentevidencethatRABVinternalizationintoBS - C - 1ﬁbro - blasts is primarily clathrin mediated . Furthermore , RABV uptake proceeds through partially coated clathrin pits which require actin for completion of envelopment , a mechanism shared for internal - ization of the related rhabdovirus VSV . Live - microscopy ap - proaches revealed that the kinetics of internalization of RABV and VSV are indistinguishable . The presence of RABV G on the sur - FIG 6 Live - cell imaging and kinetics analysis of rVSV RABV G internalization . ( A ) Tile view of images taken from a 10 - min time - lapse movie ( see Movie S1 in the supplemental material ) of rVSV RABV G labeled with AF647 ( top , blue ) entering a BS - C - 1 cell stably expressing AP2 - eGFP ( middle , green ) via clathrin - mediatedendocytosis . Particleswereimagedatarateof20imagesmin (cid:5) 1 . CircleshighlightthepresenceofdetectablevirusandAP2 , respectively . Thepercentage ( atleft ) referstothefractionofrecordedeventsthatwereclathrindependent ( 76 % ; n (cid:9) 66 ) . ( B ) Tileviewofimagestakenfroma10 - mintime - lapsemovie ( Movie S2 ) of AF647 - labeled rVSV RABV G ( top , blue ) entering a BS - C - 1 cell stably expressing AP2 - eGFP ( middle , green ) in an AP2 - independent manner . The percentage ( at left ) refers to the fraction of recorded events that were clathrin independent ( 24 % ; n (cid:9) 66 ) . ( C and D ) Graphical representations of the particle behaviors illustrated in panels A and B . AF647 - labeled rVSV RABV G ﬂuorescence ( RABV G ) was plotted as a percentage of its maximum . AP2 was plotted as a percentage of the average maximal ﬂuorescence of empty pits . Particle speed is also plotted on the right y axes . ( E ) Plots of maximal AP2 intensity and duration duringAP2 - dependentinternalizationofrVSVRABVeGFPplottedasapercentageoftheaverageforallmeasuredemptypits . Emptyandviralpitsarecompared . Empty circles refer to individual measurements ; bars indicate the median value , which is shown on the plot . For both parameters , the difference between empty andviralpitsisstatisticallysigniﬁcantasdeterminedbyStudent’s t test ( P (cid:10) 10 (cid:5) 12 ) . ( F ) PlotcomparingthetimebetweendockingandAP2captureforWTVSV and rVSV RABV G . Empty circles refer to individual measurements ; bars indicate the median value , which is shown on the plot . The difference between time to capture of WT VSV and rVSV RABV G is not statistically signiﬁcant as determined by Student’s t test ( P (cid:12) 0 . 1 ) . Piccinotti et al . 11644 jvi . asm . org Journal of Virology facesoftheparticlesdoesnotimpactthekineticsofinternalizationofparticlesbyclathrin - coatedpitsortheirtimetoassociationwith clathrin . Thisworkthereforecharacterizestheclathrin - dependent process of RABV uptake at the plasma membrane and reveals commonalities with the internalization of VSV into epithelial cells . These results also further support our prior ﬁnding that the length of a rhabdovirus particle correlates with the lifetime of the coated pit and the involvement of the actin machinery for coated - pit internalization . rVSV RABV G as a surrogate to study RABV entry . Particle morphology as well as the identity , number , and abundance of viral surface proteins that bind cell surface attachment factors at the plasma membrane inﬂuences viral entry . The rVSV RABV G particle faithfully replicates the surface characteristics of authentic RABV . It incorporates the single glycoprotein efﬁciently and re - tains the characteristic bullet shape . Furthermore , its biological behavior during the entry stages of infection is identical to that of a “single - cycle” RABV . Therefore , rVSV RABV G is functionally indistinguishable from an authentic RABV particle and can be used as a surrogate to study viral uptake . Viral factors that impact the mechanism and actin depen - dence of envelopment in a clathrin - coated pit . We show that clathrin - coated pits internalizing rVSV RABV G particles have an altered morphology compared to those lacking virus . The amounts of clathrin and adaptors recruited and the duration of thecoatingprocessobservedbyliveconfocalimagingaswellastheappearanceofthenascentcoatedpitbyEMsupportrVSVRABVGuptakethroughpartiallycoatedpits . In addition , uptake of , and FIG 7 Impact of actin depolymerization on rVSV RABV G internalization . ( A ) Impact of chemical depolymerization of actin on rVSV RABV G ( RABV ) and rVSV eGFP ( VSV ) infections . BS - C - 1 cells were treated with various concentrations of latrunculin B ( LatB ) to inhibit polymerization of actin . As shown in the schematic , drug was added either 10 min prior to a 1 - h inoculation with virus or at 2 hpi and maintained until analysis . eGFP expression was assayed by cytoﬂuorimetry at 4 hpi . rVSV eGFP is shown in red and rVSV RABV G in blue . Uptake of ﬂuorescent transferrin ( Tfn , gray ) is included as a control for general disruption of clathrin - dependent endocytosis . Cells were pretreated with LatB 10 min prior to Tfn addition . Cells were incubated with Tfn for 7 min . Following a wash with acid buffer to remove surface - bound Tfn , intracellular Tfn levels were measured by ﬂow cytometry . ( B ) Effect of actin depolymerization on rRABV (cid:1) Ginfection . BS - C - 1cellsweretreatedwith6 (cid:4) MLatBpriortoinoculation ( pre ) orat2hpi ( post ) . ExpressionofeGFP ( green ) fromviralgenomeswasdetected byconfocalmicroscopyat25hpi . Cellswerestainedwithpropidiumiodide ( red ) . ( C ) QuantiﬁcationofLatBeffectonrRABV (cid:1) Ginfection . BS - C - 1cellstreated as for panel B were collected and analyzed for eGFP expression by ﬂow cytometry . ( D ) Confocal microscopy of internalization assay in cells . Above the merged images are single - plane z - stack cross sections . Cells pretreated as indicated were inoculated with AF647 - labeled rVSV RABV G ( RABV ) , ﬁxed , and stained with antibody against RABV G in the absence of permeabilization . The LatB concentration used was 1 (cid:4) M . RABV ( blue ) and (cid:11) G ( green ) signals are shown separately in inlays below the merged images . WGA is shown in red . Singly labeled , internalized particles appear blue ; dually labeled , surface - bound particles appear cyan . Clathrin - and Actin - Dependent Rabies Virus Entry November 2013 Volume 87 Number 21 jvi . asm . org 11645 infection with , rVSV RABV G or rRABV (cid:1) G are inhibited by chemicals that block actin polymerization . The related rhabdovi - rus VSV also internalizes via partially coated clathrin pits and requires actin polymerization ( 11 , 12 ) . The pits are indistinct in their appearance by EM and live - cell imaging , and the uptakes of the viruses follow similar kinetics . These studies also showed that the partially coated pit and the requirement for actin during viral internalization depend upon the size of the particle , as truncated VSV particles enter through fully coated pits and do not require actin polymerization ( 12 ) . While we did not examine whether truncated RABV particles are taken up through fully clathrin - coated pits and bypass the need for actin polymerization , we pre - dict this to be the case . The fact that both VSV and RABV particles ofsimilardimensionsinternalizethroughsimilarcoatedpitslendsfurthersupporttothisprediction . Recent studies show that the structural adaptability of clathrin - coated pits is an intrinsic property of the host machinery . Sup - porting this view , the actin dependence of clathrin - mediated en - docytosis is induced by artiﬁcially tensing the plasma membrane either by exposing cells to hypoosmotic media or by mechanical stretching of the plasma membrane ( 34 ) . Under conditions of elevated membrane tension , actin is required to provide sufﬁcient force to counteract membrane resistance and constrict the neck of nascent coated pits prior to the ﬁnal recruitment of dynamin . The incoming viral particle , which represents a physical obstacle to pit constriction , may lead to the recruitment of actin by inducing membrane tension ( 11 , 12 , 34 ) . Therefore , the presence of VSV or RABV G on the surface of the viral particle does not impact the formation of the clathrin - coated pit . Commonalities in the uptake of two distinct rhabdoviruses . Despite employing the same endocytic pathway , viruses internal - ized by clathrin - mediated endocytosis display different behaviors when associating with coated pits . Lateral diffusion into pre - formed pits has been reported for parvovirus and dengue virus entry ( 10 , 15 ) . In contrast , VSV and inﬂuenza A virus do not exhibit such properties and are internalized by pits that form at or in close proximity to viral particles ( 11 , 14 ) . The kinetics of uptake also vary , as parvovirus capture is very rapid ( (cid:10) 20 s ) ( 10 ) whereas dengue virus remains surface bound for several minutes prior to capture ( 15 ) . For VSV and inﬂuenza A virus , the interval between binding and detection of a virus - associated clathrin signal is in the range of minutes ( 11 , 14 ) . Like those of VSV , RABV particles rarely associate with preex - isting pits and show no detectable lateral movement prior to the appearance of the AP2 signal . The interval between rVSV RABV G particle docking and clathrin appearance was indistinguishable from that observed with VSV . These similarities suggest that the clathrin uptake mechanisms for VSV and rVSV RABV G converge upon a common pathway . The rVSV RABV G glycoprotein is derived from the SAD B19 vaccine strain of RABV . Vaccine strains whichhavebeenextensivelypassagedincellculturearebelievedtouseubiquitousmoleculesforcellattachmentandentry . Although a recent report suggests that the low density lipoprotein receptor ( LDLR ) family serves as a VSV receptor , direct interaction of VSV G and LDLR has not been demonstrated and cells lacking LDLR are susceptible to VSV infection ( 35 ) . Additional evidence sup - ports a relatively nonspeciﬁc electrostatic interaction of VSV with the host cell surface ( 36 ) . Although RABV and VSV engage the clathrin machinery with similar kinetics , we do not think it likely that this reﬂects the use of a shared cell surface attachment mole - cule . Whether the engagement of distinct receptor molecules can impact the kinetics with which a given particle associates with the clathrin machinery remains to be determined . Implications for RABV internalization into different cell types . RABV infects epithelial cells in the ﬁnal stages of disease , whenvirusspreadsfromtheCNStoavarietyofextraneuraltissuesthroughinnervationroutes . Epithelial - cell infection is also a pri - mary and necessary step in intranasal or oral infections in animals and in accidental exposures of laboratory workers to RABV ( 37 – 40 ) . The BS - C - 1 cells used in this study do not express the putative RABV receptors p75 neurotrophin receptor ( p75 NTR ) and neural cell adhesion molecule ( NCAM ) , as both were undetectable by reverse transcription ( RT ) - PCR ( data not shown ) . Cells were not tested for the presence of the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor ( nAChR ) because it is known to be expressed only on the postsyn - aptic membrane of neuromuscular junctions and in the CNS ( 41 ) . Infection was also unaffected by ganglioside depletion by neur - aminidase treatment ( data not shown ) . Consequently , the means by which RABV attaches to these cells is uncertain . Nevertheless , our observation of a primarily clathrin - mediated entry mecha - nism for RABV is consistent with previous EM studies with non - neuronal ﬁbroblasts ( 9 ) . We also observed , however , the AP2 - independent uptake of a minor proportion ( 24 % ) of RABV particles . We do not know the entry route for these internalization event ( s ) , but our pharmacological studies show that such events are unlikely to reﬂect a macropinocytic uptake . Pathogenic strains of RABV which have not been passaged in culture show a narrow and speciﬁc neurotropism . Although our studies were conducted with epithelial cells , RABV infection of neurons and RABV receptor biology support internalization by clathrin - mediated processes . For example , RABV particles are vis - ible in clathrin - coated pits by electron microscopy of cultured hippocampal neurons ( 8 ) . Furthermore , p75 NTR and NCAM both internalize via clathrin - mediated endocytosis when bound to their endogenous ligands or when cross - linked with antibody ( 42 – 44 ) . These observations suggest that clathrin - coated pits likelyplayacentralroleinRABVuptakeinneuronalcellsaswellasinepithelialcells . Our ongoing studies are aimed at elucidating the internalization mechanism of RABV into primary neuronal cells and evaluating how engagement of speciﬁc receptors by RABV G can inﬂuence the mechanism and kinetics of particle internalization . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank D . Cureton and S . Boulant for discussions and R . Massol for support using the IMAB analysis software . This work was funded by NIH grant AI081842 and NERCE grant U54AI057159 . S . P . J . W . is a recipient of the Burroughs Wellcome Investi - gators in the Pathogenesis of Infectious Disease Award , and S . P . is a re - cipient of the Giovanni Armenise - Harvard Ph . D . Award . REFERENCES 1 . Dietzschold B , Schnell M , Koprowski H . 2005 . Pathogenesis of rabies . Curr . Top . Microbiol . Immunol . 292 : 45 – 56 . 2 . Kato S , Kobayashi K , Inoue K , Kuramochi M , Okada T , Yaginuma H , Morimoto K , Shimada T , Takada M , Kobayashi K . 2011 . A lentiviral strategy for highly efﬁcient retrograde gene transfer by pseudotyping with fusion envelope glycoprotein . Hum . Gene Ther . 22 : 197 – 206 . 3 . Kato S , Kuramochi M , Takasumi K , Kobayashi K , Inoue K , Takahara D , Hitoshi S , Ikenaka K , Shimada T , Takada M , Kobayashi K . 2011 . Neuron - speciﬁc gene transfer through retrograde transport of lentiviral vector pseudotyped with a novel type of fusion envelope glycoprotein . Hum . Gene Ther . 22 : 1511 – 1523 . Piccinotti et al . 11646 jvi . asm . org Journal of Virology 4 . Morimoto K , Foley HD , McGettigan JP , Schnell MJ , Dietzschold B . 2000 . Reinvestigation of the role of the rabies virus glycoprotein in viral pathogenesis using a reverse genetics approach . J . Neurovirol . 6 : 373 – 381 . 5 . Gaudin Y . 2000 . Rabies virus - induced membrane fusion pathway . J . Cell Biol . 150 : 601 – 612 . 6 . Gaudin Y , Tuffereau C , Durrer P , Brunner J , Flamand A , Ruigrok R . 1999 . Rabies virus - induced membrane fusion . Mol . Membr . Biol . 16 : 21 – 31 . 7 . Roche S , Gaudin Y . 2004 . Evidence that rabies virus forms different kinds of fusion machines with different pH thresholds for fusion . J . Virol . 78 : 8746 – 8752 . 8 . LewisP , LentzTL . 1998 . Rabiesvirusentryintoculturedrathippocampal neurons . J . Neurocytol . 27 : 559 – 573 . 9 . Superti F , Derer M , Tsiang H . 1984 . Mechanism of rabies virus entry into CER cells . J . Gen . Virol . 65 : 781 – 789 . 10 . Cureton DK , Harbison CE , Cocucci E , Parrish CR , Kirchhausen T . 2012 . Limited transferrin receptor clustering allows rapid diffusion of ca - nineparvovirusintoclathrinendocyticstructures . J . Virol . 86 : 5330 – 5340 . 11 . Cureton DK , Massol RH , Saffarian S , Kirchhausen TL , Whelan SP . 2009 . Vesicular stomatitis virus enters cells through vesicles incompletely coated with clathrin that depend upon actin for internalization . PLoS Pathog . 5 : e1000394 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1000394 . 12 . Cureton DK , Massol RH , Whelan SP , Kirchhausen T . 2010 . The length of vesicular stomatitis virus particles dictates a need for actin assembly during clathrin - dependent endocytosis . PLoS Pathog . 6 : e1001127 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1001127 . 13 . Johannsdottir HK , Mancini R , Kartenbeck J , Amato L , Helenius A . 2009 . Host cell factors and functions involved in vesicular stomatitis virus entry . J . Virol . 83 : 440 – 453 . 14 . Rust MJ , Lakadamyali M , Zhang F , Zhuang X . 2004 . Assembly of endocytic machinery around individual inﬂuenza viruses during viral en - try . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 11 : 567 – 573 . 15 . van der Schaar HM , Rust MJ , Chen C , van der Ende - Metselaar H , Wilschut J , Zhuang X , Smit JM . 2008 . Dissecting the cell entry pathway of dengue virus by single - particle tracking in living cells . PLoS Pathog . 4 : e1000244 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1000244 . 16 . Ehrlich M , Boll W , Van Oijen A , Hariharan R , Chandran K , Nibert ML , Kirchhausen T . 2004 . Endocytosis by random initiation and stabilization of clathrin - coated pits . Cell 118 : 591 – 605 . 17 . Wickersham IR , Finke S , Conzelmann KK , Callaway EM . 2007 . Retro - grade neuronal tracing with a deletion - mutant rabies virus . Nat . Methods 4 : 47 – 49 . 18 . Carette JE , Raaben M , Wong AC , Herbert AS , Obernosterer G , Mul - herkar N , Kuehne AI , Kranzusch PJ , Grifﬁn AM , Ruthel G , Dal Cin P , Dye JM , Whelan SP , Chandran K , Brummelkamp TR . 2011 . Ebola virus entry requires the cholesterol transporter Niemann - Pick C1 . Nature 477 : 340 – 343 . 19 . Wong AC , Sandesara RG , Mulherkar N , Whelan SP , Chandran K . 2010 . A forward genetic strategy reveals destabilizing mutations in the Ebolavi - rus glycoprotein that alter its protease dependence during cell entry . J . Virol . 84 : 163 – 175 . 20 . Whelan SP , Barr JN , Wertz GW . 2000 . Identiﬁcation of a minimal size requirement for termination of vesicular stomatitis virus mRNA : impli - cations for the mechanism of transcription . J . Virol . 74 : 8268 – 8276 . 21 . Whelan SP , Ball LA , Barr JN , Wertz GT . 1995 . Efﬁcient recovery of infectious vesicular stomatitis virus entirely from cDNA clones . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 92 : 8388 – 8392 . 22 . Massol RH , Boll W , Grifﬁn AM , Kirchhausen T . 2006 . A burst of auxilin recruitment determines the onset of clathrin - coated vesicle uncoating . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 103 : 10265 – 10270 . 23 . Maupin P , Pollard TD . 1983 . Improved preservation and staining of HeLacellactinﬁlaments , clathrin - coatedmembranes , andothercytoplas - micstructuresbytannicacid - glutaraldehyde - saponinﬁxation . J . CellBiol . 96 : 51 – 62 . 24 . Lefrancios L , Lyles DS . 1982 . The interaction of antibody with the major surface glycoprotein of vesicular stomatitis virus . I . Analysis of neutraliz - ing epitopes with monoclonal antibodies . Virology 121 : 157 – 167 . 25 . Lefrancois L , Lyles DS . 1982 . The interaction of antibody with the major surfaceglycoproteinofvesicularstomatitisvirus . II . Monoclonalantibod - ies of nonneutralizing and cross - reactive epitopes of Indiana and New Jersey serotypes . Virology 121 : 168 – 174 . 26 . Garbutt M , Liebscher R , Wahl - Jensen V , Jones S , Moller P , Wagner R , Volchkov V , Klenk HD , Feldmann H , Stroher U . 2004 . Properties of replication - competent vesicular stomatitis virus vectors expressing glyco - proteins of ﬁloviruses and arenaviruses . J . Virol . 78 : 5458 – 5465 . 27 . Guichard P , Krell T , Chevalier M , Vaysse C , Adam O , Ronzon F , Marco S . 2011 . Three dimensional morphology of rabies virus studied by cryo - electron tomography . J . Struct . Biol . 176 : 32 – 40 . 28 . Mebatsion T , Konig M , Conzelmann KK . 1996 . Budding of rabies virus particles in the absence of the spike glycoprotein . Cell 84 : 941 – 951 . 29 . Koivusalo M , Welch C , Hayashi H , Scott CC , Kim M , Alexander T , Touret N , Hahn KM , Grinstein S . 2010 . Amiloride inhibits macropi - nocytosis by lowering submembranous pH and preventing Rac1 and Cdc42 signaling . J . Cell Biol . 188 : 547 – 563 . 30 . Macia E , Ehrlich M , Massol R , Boucrot E , Brunner C , Kirchhausen T . 2006 . Dynasore , acell - permeableinhibitorofdynamin . Dev . Cell 10 : 839 – 850 . 31 . Cureton DK , Burdeinick - Kerr R , Whelan SP . 2012 . Genetic inactivation of COPI coatomer separately inhibits vesicular stomatitis virus entry and gene expression . J . Virol . 86 : 655 – 666 . 32 . Kirchhausen T , Boll W , van Oijen A , Ehrlich M . 2005 . Single - molecule live - cell imaging of clathrin - based endocytosis . Biochem . Soc . Symp . 71 – 76 . 33 . Boucrot E , Saffarian S , Massol R , Kirchhausen T , Ehrlich M . 2006 . Role of lipids and actin in the formation of clathrin - coated pits . Exp . Cell Res . 312 : 4036 – 4048 . 34 . Boulant S , Kural C , Zeeh JC , Ubelmann F , Kirchhausen T . 2011 . Actin dynamics counteract membrane tension during clathrin - mediated endo - cytosis . Nat . Cell Biol . 13 : 1124 – 1131 . 35 . Finkelshtein D , Werman A , Novick D , Barak S , Rubinstein M . 2013 . LDL receptor and its family members serve as the cellular receptors for vesicular stomatitis virus . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 110 : 7306 – 7311 . 36 . Coil DA , Miller AD . 2004 . Phosphatidylserine is not the cell surface receptor for vesicular stomatitis virus . J . Virol . 78 : 10920 – 10926 . 37 . Winkler WG , Baker EF , Jr , Hopkins CC . 1972 . An outbreak of non - bite transmitted rabies in a laboratory animal colony . Am . J . Epidemiol . 95 : 267 – 277 . 38 . Winkler WG , Fashinell TR , Lefﬁngwell L , Howard P , Conomy P . 1973 . Airborne rabies transmission in a laboratory worker . JAMA 226 : 1219 – 1221 . 39 . Conomy JP , Leibovitz A , McCombs W , Stinson J . 1977 . Airborne rabies encephalitis : demonstration of rabies virus in the human central nervous system . Neurology 27 : 67 – 69 . 40 . Johnson N , Phillpotts R , Fooks AR . 2006 . Airborne transmission of lyssaviruses . J . Med . Microbiol . 55 : 785 – 790 . 41 . Gotti C , Fornasari D , Clementi F . 1997 . Human neuronal nicotinic receptors . Prog . Neurobiol . 53 : 199 – 237 . 42 . Deinhardt K , Reversi A , Berninghausen O , Hopkins CR , Schiavo G . 2007 . Neurotrophins redirect p75NTR from a clathrin - independent to a clathrin - dependent endocytic pathway coupled to axonal transport . Traf - ﬁc 8 : 1736 – 1749 . 43 . Diestel S , Schaefer D , Cremer H , Schmitz B . 2007 . NCAM is ubiq - uitylated , endocytosed and recycled in neurons . J . Cell Sci . 120 : 4035 – 4049 . 44 . Minana R , Duran JM , Tomas M , Renau - Piqueras J , Guerri C . 2001 . Neural cell adhesion molecule is endocytosed via a clathrin - dependent pathway . Eur . J . Neurosci . 13 : 749 – 756 . Clathrin - and Actin - Dependent Rabies Virus Entry November 2013 Volume 87 Number 21 jvi . asm . org 11647