ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 R E V I E W S I N A D V A N C E Mechanisms of Endocytosis Gary J . Doherty and Harvey T . McMahon MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology , Hills Road , Cambridge , CB2 0QH , United Kingdom ; email : doherty @ mrc - lmb . cam . ac . uk , hmm @ mrc - lmb . cam . ac . uk Annu . Rev . Biochem . 2009 . 78 : 31 . 1 – 31 . 46 The Annual Review of Biochemistry is online at biochem . annualreviews . org This article’s doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . biochem . 78 . 081307 . 110540 Copyright c (cid:2) 2009 by Annual Reviews . All rights reserved 0066 - 4154 / 09 / 0707 - 0001 $ 20 . 00 Key Words caveolae , clathrin - mediated endocytosis , clathrin - independent endocytosis , dynamin , small G proteins Abstract Endocytic mechanisms control the lipid and protein composition of the plasma membrane , thereby regulating how cells interact with their environments . Here , we review what is known about mammalian en - docytic mechanisms , with focus on the cellular proteins that control these events . We discuss the well - studied clathrin - mediated endocytic mechanisms and dissect endocytic pathways that proceed indepen - dently of clathrin . These clathrin - independent pathways include the CLIC / GEEC endocytic pathway , arf6 - dependent endocytosis , ﬂotillin - dependent endocytosis , macropinocytosis , circular doral rufﬂes , phago - cytosis , and trans - endocytosis . We also critically review the role of caveolae and caveolin1 in endocytosis . We highlight the roles of lipids , membrane curvature - modulating proteins , small G proteins , actin , and dynamin in endocytic pathways . We discuss the functional relevance of distinct endocytic pathways and emphasize the importance of studying these pathways to understand human disease processes . 31 . 1 Review in Advance first posted online on March 24 , 200 9 . ( Minor changes may still occur before final publication online and in print . ) A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 Contents INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31 . 2 MORPHOLOGY OF PUTATIVE ENDOCYTIC PORTALS . . . . . . . . . 31 . 6 CLATHRIN - MEDIATED ENDOCYTOSIS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31 . 8 CLATHRIN - INDEPENDENT ENDOCYTOSIS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31 . 11 CAVEOLIN1 - AND FLOTILLIN - ASSOCIATED ENDOCYTIC MECHANISMS . . . 31 . 11 CLATHRIN - AND CAVEOLAE / CAVEOLIN1 - INDEPENDENT ENDOCYTOSIS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31 . 15 MECHANISMS OF INTERNALIZATION INVOLVING LARGER VOLUMES OF MEMBRANE . . . . . 31 . 17 ENDOCYTOSIS OF BACTERIAL TOXINS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31 . 19 ENDOCYTOSIS OF PATHOGENS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31 . 21 LIPID REQUIREMENTS FOR ENDOCYTOSIS . . . . . . . . . . . . 31 . 23 PROTEINS THAT DRIVE AND STABILIZE MEMBRANE CURVATURE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31 . 24 SMALL G PROTEINS AND CYTOSKELETAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ENDOCYTOSIS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31 . 25 DYNAMIN AND FISSION OF ENDOCYTIC MEMBRANES . . . . 31 . 29 THE CONTROL OF ENDOCYTOSIS AND ITS PHYSIOLOGICAL IMPORTANCE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31 . 31 ENDOCYTOSIS AND DISEASE . . . . 31 . 33 INTRODUCTION With the advent of electron microscopy ( EM ) came a general appreciation of the enormous complexity of cellular membrane anatomy . Membranes allow the compartmentalization of cellular chemistry , either by the speciﬁc accu - mulation of proteins on their surfaces ( increas - ing the avidity of protein - protein interactions ) or by creating diffusion barriers between their lumina and the cytoplasm . Changes in the dis - tribution , protein and lipid composition , and luminal content of these membranes , through the highly dynamic ﬁssion and fusion reac - tions that occur from and between such com - partments , are primary regulators of many , if not most , extranuclear cell biological processes . To determine how these changes are effected , a large membrane trafﬁcking community has emerged and has contributed invaluably to the understanding of many fundamental aspects of cell biology and physiology , in addition to many disease processes . This review focuses on the molecular characterization of endocytic path - ways and the interrelationships between these pathways . The outer leaﬂet of the plasma membrane is the surface through which each cell com - municates with its environment , and in order to appropriately respond to , or affect , its envi - ronment , its composition must be tightly regu - lated by the cell . Endocytosis describes the de novo production of internal membranes from the plasma membrane lipid bilayer . In so doing , plasma membrane lipids and integral proteins andextracellularﬂuidbecomefullyinternalized into the cell . It can be considered the morpho - logical opposite of exocytosis , which describes the fusion of entirely internal membranes with the plasma membrane . In so doing , this pro - cess expels speciﬁc chemicals to the extracel - lular space and delivers lipids and proteins to the plasma membrane . It is the control ( by cel - lular proteins ) of endocytosis from , and exo - cytosis to , the plasma membrane that allows the interactions between the cell and its en - vironment to be precisely regulated . For ex - ample , endocytosis of transmembrane recep - tors ( which removes them from the surface wheretheyareabletointeractwithextracellular cues ) regulates the long - term sensitivity of cells to their speciﬁc ligands . However , endocytosis does not simply negatively regulate interactions with the external world . The processes , which 31 . 2 Doherty · McMahon A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 endocytosis plays a key role in regulating , con - tinue to expand and include processes as seem - ingly disparate as mitosis , antigen presentation , and cell migration . Furthermore , it is becom - ing apparent that endocytosis plays key roles in the positive regulation of many intracellular signaling cascades ( 1 ) . In addition , pathogens often exploit endocytic routes to mediate their internalization into cells ( 2 ) . Although much is known about the cargoes for endocytic struc - tures , the speciﬁc mechanisms by which these cargoes are recruited and internalized are less clear . There exists many routes of endocytic up - take into cells . Much work has focused on clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) . The mecha - nisms by which the proteins involved in this process recruit cargo into developing clathrin - coated pits ( CCPs ) , and subsequently form clathrin - coated vesicles ( CCVs ) , are becoming increasingly understood ( 3 , 4 ) . Many proteins that are involved in the formation of CME in - termediates have been identiﬁed and character - ized , and researchers in the ﬁeld can therefore make use of speciﬁc markers along the pathway and speciﬁc molecular tools to interfere with the process in a deﬁned manner . These tools include RNAi techniques , although it should be noted that clathrin and the adaptor AP2 are very stable , and multiple rounds of treatment are required to completely deplete cells of these proteins . Inadequate depletion , coupled with the fact that transferrin uptake ( used widely to assess CME efﬁciency ) is incredibly sensitive to perturbation of such proteins , has led to confu - sion in the endocytic community about the role of CME in certain processes , and therefore , caution is advised when interpreting data using these approaches . Even the most profound reductions in transferrin uptake are not directly indicative of a total loss of CME events . In our hands , a useful tool to inhibit CME is overexpression of the C terminus of AP180 ( 5 ) . AP180 is a neuronal clathrin adaptor that links clathrin to PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 in the membrane . The region being overexpressed is the clathrin - binding domain without the membrane anchor . CME : clathrin - mediated endocytosis CCP : clathrin - coated pit CCV : clathrin - coated vesicle Alongside a frequent misconception that CME is the only major mechanism by which endocytosis occurs , for many years , the term receptor - mediatedendocytosis ( RME ) hasbeen used , often synonymously with CME . Owing to the clarity beginning to emerge from stud - ies of endocytic events , we urge abandonment of the term RME because methods are read - ily available to easily dissect the method ( s ) of endocytosis used for the cargo of interest ; a schemeforendocyticclassiﬁcationcanbefound in Reference 6 ( see also Figure 1 and Table 1 ) . Although CME is certainly an extremely im - portant endocytic mechanism , accounting for a large proportion of endocytic events , an ever expanding array of cargoes has been shown to undergo endocytosis in a clathrin - independent manner ( 7 ) . EM techniques have suggested that much of the budding that occurs from the plasma membrane does not appear to require the formation of the clathrin coat , which is readily observable around CCPs and CCVs . Indeed , cells devoid of CME events are capable of endocytosis . Clathrin - independent endocy - tosis itself has been further dissected into seem - ingly distinct pathways , based on the reliance of these pathways on certain proteins and lipids , their differential drug sensitivities and their abilities to internalize particular cargoes ( 6 , 8 ) . Clathrin - dependent and - independent endocy - tosis are expected to be roughly equiprevalent modes of internalization in ﬁbroblastic cells , and the relative proportions of each will pre - sumably differ in other cell types owing to their adaptions for speciﬁc functions . Although we describe the molecular players of these path - ways below ( see also Table 1 ) , it is impor - tant to ask : What are the functions of differ - ent pathways ? And how are the different path - ways adapted / specialized for function ? These distinct pathways create endosomal compart - ments with distinct lumina and surfaces to al - low the differential modulation of intracellular events , including the possibility of delivering cargoes to distinct intracellular destinations . Here , we review what is known about en - docytic pathways in mammalian cells . This review does not attempt to be exhaustive ; www . annualreviews . org • Mechanisms of Endocytosis 31 . 3 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 Flotillin - dependentendocytosis Clathrin - mediatedendocytosis IL2R β endocytic pathway Arf6 - dependent endocytosis Dynamin Clathrin CLIC / GEEC - type endocytosis Circular dorsal ruffles Caveolar - type endocytosis Macropinocytosis Phagocytosis Entosis Figure 1 Putative endocytic portals . Transmission and scanning electron micrographs of structures known or thought to be involved in endocytic events . Note the morphological variability of these endocytic structures . Figures are reproduced or modiﬁed from the following sources : Clathrin - mediated endocytosis [ provided by John Heuser ( 9 ) ] , caveolar - type endocytosis ( 11 ) , CLIC / GEEC - type endocytosis ( 6 , 7 ) , the putative ﬂotillin - associated endocytic structures ( 65 ) , phagocytosis [ provided by Robert North ] , macropinocytosis ( 104 ) , circular dorsal rufﬂes ( 99 ) , and entosis ( 120 ) . The arrowheads in the ﬂotillin - dependent endocytosis image point to immunoreactivity for green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) in cells expressing both ﬂotillin1 and - 2 GFP . Note that there is controversy surrounding the morphology of ﬂotillin - positive regions of the plasma membrane and that the morphologies of the IL2R β pathway and arf6 - dependent pathway are also unclear . The arrows in the circular dorsal rufﬂe image show rufﬂed structures that appear to evolve into circular structures such as that shown within the box . The arrowheads in macropinocytic picture indicate cytoskeletal elements . 31 . 4 Doherty · McMahon A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 Table 1 The molecular characteristics of endocytic events and the known morphological and molecular features of each of the endocytic pathways described in this review a Endocyticmechanisms Clathrinmediated Caveolae - / caveolin1 - dependent CLIC / GEEC IL2Rβ pathway Arf6 dependent Flotillindependent Phagocytosis Macropinocytosis Circular dorsal ruffles Entosis Morphology Vesicular Vesicular / tubulovesicular Tubular / ring like Vesicular ? Vesicular / tubular Vesicular Cargo shaped Highly ruffled Highly ruffled Cell shaped Implicated cargoes b RTKs , GPCRs , transferrin receptor , anthrax toxin CTxB , SV40 , GPI - linked proteins Fluid phase markers , CTxB , GPI - linked proteins IL2Rβ , FCεRI , Kir3 . 4 , γc - cytokine receptor MHC class I proteins , CD59 , carboxypeptidaseE CTxB , CD59 , proteoglycans Pathogens , apoptotic remnants Fluid phase markers , RTKs Fluid phase markers , RTKs Matrix - deligated cells Small G - protein dependence Rab5 , Arf6 implicated Unclear ( may regulate cdc42 activity ) Cdc42 , Arf1 RhoA , Rac1 Arf6 Unclear Unclear Arf6 / cdc42 / rac1 / rhoA ( depending on type ) Rac1 RhoA Not as yet Not as yet Not as yet Well established Dynamin implicated ? Some evidence Implicated Implicated Implicated Implicated but unclear Not as yet ( CtBP1 / BARS impli - cated in scission ) Adherens junctions Cortactin , actin Actin , PAK1 , PI3K , Ras , Src , HDAC6 Actin , IQGAP1 , amphiphysin1 , Rho kinase , adhesion proteins Flotillin 1 and 2 Unclear as yet PAK1 , PAK2 ARHGAP10 , actin , GRAF1 Other proteins implicated Clathrin , AP2 , epsin , SNX9 , synaptojanin , actin amphiphysin , plus many others Caveolins , PTRF , src , PKC , actin ( many signaling proteins localize to these sites ) a See the text for references . b Abbreviations : CLIC , clathrin - independent carriers ; GEEC , GPI - AP enriched early endosomal compartment ; GPCRs , G protein - - coupled receptors ; GPI , glycosylphosphatidylinositol ; MHC , major histocompatibility complex ; RTK , receptor tyrosine kinase . instead , we refer the reader to the ∼ 64 , 000 pa - pers identiﬁed by a PubMed search for endo - cytosis ( as of January 2009 ) ! Space limitations preclude a full discussion of all issues here , and we refer the reader to our Supplementary In - formation ( followthe Supplemental Material link from the Annual Reviews home page at http : / / www . annualreviews . org ) where these discussions are continued , with a more exten - sive discussion of the importance to endocyto - sis of membrane lipids , membrane curvature - modulating proteins , cell adhesion , and cell migration . We begin with a discussion of en - docytic membrane morphology before focus - ing on the molecular cell biology of distinct endocytic mechanisms . Much has been deci - phered from studies following the uptake of bacterial toxins and pathogens , and these ﬁnd - ings are also reviewed . We then discuss require - ments for endocytic pathways and highlight the critical roles for lipids , membrane curvature - modulating proteins , small and large G www . annualreviews . org • Mechanisms of Endocytosis 31 . 5 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 proteins , and the cytoskeleton in endocytic events . Finally , we discuss the function of en - docytosis , the cell biological and physiological relevance of distinct endocytic pathways , and the relevance of endocytic mechanisms to the understanding and treatment of human disease . We must point out that great care should be taken when attempting to correlate observa - tions that have been made in distinct cell types . Because distinct endocytic pathways will have their own functions , different types of special - ized cells will therefore have varying propor - tions of plasma membrane turnover occurring by each of these mechanisms . MORPHOLOGY OF PUTATIVE ENDOCYTIC PORTALS A budding structure from the plasma mem - brane is a necessary prerequisite for any en - docytic pathway , and major known structures of this type are shown in Figure 1 . Because clathrin coats are visible around spherical mem - brane buds and endocytosed vesicles by EM ( Figure 1 ) ( 9 ) , it is possible to distinguish clathrin - independentbuddingeventsbytheab - sence of such a coat . CME proceeds through a series of well - deﬁned morphological interme - diates , whereby a CCP undergoes progressive invagination before scission from the plasma membrane to form a CCV ( Figure 2 ) ( 4 , 9 ) . EM , however , requires ﬁxed samples , so it is difﬁcult to ascertain whether all invaginated CCPs , and other membrane invaginations ob - served by this technique , subsequently undergo scission from the plasma membrane . Only with the development of total internal reﬂection ﬂu - orescence microscopy ( TIR - FM ) , which allows the visualization in real time of the behavior of ﬂuorescent proteins ( including ﬂuorescently labeled clathrin ) at , or very close to , the basal −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→ Figure 2 Membrane curvature modulation during endocytosis . Schematic diagram ( left panels ) demonstrating the stages of , and some of the key protein players in , the budding and scission of clathrin - coated pits ( CCPs ) . After budding to form a clathrin - coated vesicle ( CCV ) , the clathrin basket is removed by uncoating proteins to form a naked vesicle . On the right are illustrations of different mechanisms of membrane curvature generation and stabilization . plasma membrane of cells , have some of these issues been addressed . The most commonly reported nonclathrin - coated plasma membrane buds are known as caveolae ( for “little caves” ) ( Figure 1 ) . These ﬂask - shaped invaginations exist on the surface of many mammalian cell types , are around 60 – 80 nm in diameter , and can constitute ap - proximately a third of the plasma membrane area of the cells of some tissues , being es - pecially abundant in smooth muscle , type I pneumocytes , ﬁbroblasts , adipocytes , and en - dothelial cells ( 10 ) . Under certain conditions a ﬁlamentous , spike - like coat can be observed around caveolae ( Figure 1 ) ( 11 ) . Unsurpris - ingly perhaps given their morphology , these structures have been extensively implicated in endocyticevents ( 10 ) andcanbefollowed , using ﬂuorescent caveolin1 expression , in real time . Multicaveolar assemblies , where many caveo - lae are connected together and to the plasma membrane in structures resembling bunches of grapes , can be commonly observed . Internalization can also take place by macropinocytosis , which usually occurs from highly rufﬂed regions of the plasma mem - brane . Rufﬂed extensions of the plasma mem - branes form around a region of extracellular ﬂuid , with apparent subsequent internalization of this complete region ( Figure 1 ) . The mem - brane may not always be as extensively ruf - ﬂed as we depict . The other textbook method of internalization , which occurs in specialized cells , is phagocytosis , whereby opsonized and particulate material can be taken up into cells by the progressive formation of invaginations around the cargo destined to be internalized , with or without the growth of enveloping membrane extensions ( Figure 1 ) . These pro - cesses involve the uptake of larger membrane areas than CME and caveolar mechanisms , 31 . 6 Doherty · McMahon A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 Insertion of wedge Membrane curvature scaffolding Membrane curvature / tension modulation by cytoskeleton Epsin Dynamin Nucleated actin polymerization BAR domains : ( e . g . , amphiphysin SNX9 ) GTP Membrane deformation by insertions CCP assemblyand bud formation Sculpting the membrane Fully formed and invaginated CCP CCV formation by dynamin - mediated scission GDP Uncoating to produce naked CCV AuxilinHsc70 ATP ADP Clathrin Epsin , amphiphysin , SNX9 , and other adaptor proteins promote clathrin recruitment and assembly f Insertiowedg Epsin ti BAR proteins promote dynamin recruitment and together they form the vesicle neck www . annualreviews . org • Mechanisms of Endocytosis 31 . 7 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 allowing them to be followed by phase contrast microscopy . It is becoming increasingly clear that en - docytosis into tubular , in addition to vesic - ular , compartments is a common event in mammalian cells ( 8 , 12 ) , and views of cellular anatomy should be adjusted accordingly . Cer - tain lipid compartments , and the distribution of their components , can be highly sensitive to ﬁx - ationconditions ( G . J . Doherty & R . Lundmark , unpublished results , and see References 13 and 14 ) , and this may have hampered their dis - covery . The sections taken for EM visualiza - tion bias observations toward seemingly spher - ical / ovoid structures because tubular structures will usually appear thus in a cross section . Ele - gant EM studies have preserved and identiﬁed prevalent tubular endocytic intermediates re - sponsible for the internalization of a variety of ligands ( Figure 1 ) ( 8 ) . As with macropinocytic structures , these structures appear to have no electron - densecoatwhenviewedbyEM . These pathways can be followed in real time using ﬂu - orescently labeled cargo proteins . Morphological analysis of other endocytic pathways has also revealed endocytosis asso - ciated with dorsal rufﬂes , putative ﬂotillin - associated invaginations , and cell - in - cell inva - sion that happens after cell - matrix deligation known as entosis ( Figure 1 ) . CLATHRIN - MEDIATED ENDOCYTOSIS In CME , a wide variety of transmembrane re - ceptors and their ligands are packaged with the use of cargo adaptors into CCVs ( see Figure 2 ) . In addition to those used in endocytosis , CCVs can also bud from various intracellular com - partments with the use of different adaptor pro - teins . Thus , in the cell , there are various forms of CCVs . Even at the plasma membrane we viewCCVproductionasaacollectionofclosely related endocytic pathways , linked by the use of thecoatproteinclathrin ( 4 ) . ForCCPandCCV formationfromtheplasmamembrane , thereisa widerangeofpossiblecargoadaptorsandacces - sory proteins that can be used , and the process is not hardwired , either in requiring the same complement of accessory proteins in every cell or in being limited to a small subset of mem - brane cargoes . The diversity of cargoes and the diversity of adaptor and accessory proteins used toimplementvesicleformationreﬂectthepath - ways’ adaptations to tools suited to the mate - rials being packaged . In some cells , the cargo complement may be rather limited , whereas at synapses , at least 20 different cargoes of diverse functions are packaged in the same vesicle with high ﬁdelity . The ﬂexibility and ﬂuidity in the system is inherent in the design , where there are overlapping and shared functions of vari - ous adaptors and accessory proteins . A likely corollary of this is that there will be a range of dependence of cargo internalization upon indi - vidual adaptors and accessory proteins ( 4 ) . Al - though in some situations , the importance of AP2 adaptors in plasma membrane CCV for - mationmaybefundamental ; however , giventhe design , this dependence is unlikely to be uni - versal . The design also allows us to consider some accessory adaptors and protein networks modulating actin polymerization as “add on” modules , wheretheirinvolvementmayhelpdif - ferentiate the closely related pathways . Adaptor and accessory proteins coordinate clathrin nucleation at sites of the plasma mem - brane , which are destined to be internalized ( 15 ) . This nucleation promotes the polymer - ization of clathrin into curved lattices , and this consequently stabilizes the deformation of the attached membrane . Clathrin polymerization ( coupled with the action of other proteins ) aids in the formation and constriction of the vesi - cle neck , helping to bring the membranes sur - rounding the neck into close apposition . The membrane scission protein dynamin is a large GTPase , which forms a helical polymer around this constricted neck and , upon GTP hydrol - ysis , mediates the ﬁssion of the vesicle from the plasma membrane ( 16 ) , irreversibly releas - ing the CCV into the interior of the cell . The clathrin basket is subsequently released from the vesicle by auxilin and hsc70 . This naked vesicle then undergoes further trafﬁck - ing within the cell before appropriate delivery 31 . 8 Doherty · McMahon A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 of its cargo through fusion with a destination intracellular compartment . Dileucine - and tyrosine - based motifs on the cytoplasmic face of cargo molecules are both directly sensed by separate sites on the Adaptor Protein - 2 ( AP2 ) ( previously Assem - bly Polypeptide - 2 ) complex ( 3 , 17 ) , which links cargo to nucleating clathrin , such as is the case for the YTRF motif of the transferrin recep - tor ( 18 ) , the internalization of which is a widely used speciﬁc marker for CME events . Different receptors can use many of the wide array of al - ternative adaptor and accessory proteins for the clustering and stimulation of their endocytosis ( see below ) . Theoretical considerations suggest that clathrin polymerization alone is insufﬁcient for membrane curvature generation ( 19 ) . Epsin family proteins , which can link cargo [ for ex - ample , ubiquitinated cargo ( 20 ) ] to clathrin , also bind directly to inositol lipids and can help drive membrane deformation in the assembling CCP through the insertion of a amphipathic helix ( 21 ) . Where epsins are present , this will provide an initial membrane deformation in concert with clathrin polymerization to form a membrane bud ( 22 ) . Other accessory pro - teins can also help deform the membrane ( see below ) . Apart from epsins , G protein – coupled receptors ( GPCRs ) can be linked to clathrin similarly through the binding of β - arrestins , which interact with the phosphorylated recep - tors , PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , clathrin , and AP2 ( 23 , 24 ) . Likewise , dab2 and ARH have been shown to function as cargo - speciﬁc adaptor proteins dur - ing low - density lipoprotein ( LDL ) receptor in - ternalization ( 25 ) , and numb appears to have a similar role during notch endocytosis ( 26 ) . If multiple receptors are endocytosed by CME in the same cell , they may be sorted in endo - somes . However , it is possible that the differ - ential afﬁnities of receptors ( determined , for example , by phosphorylation or ubiquitination of the receptor ) for speciﬁc adaptor proteins are responsible for their clustering into dis - tinct CCPs / CCVs such that each vesicle can be formed in a kinetically distinct manner and then trafﬁcked to its appropriate intracellular destination in a manner dependent on its cargo and their ligands . Accessory proteins can participate in CME through aiding membrane deformation in the membrane bud ( see below ) by recruiting other participating proteins or by performing scaffolding / coordination functions within the endocytic process . N - BAR and BAR domain - containing proteins , such as SNX9 and amphiphysin , can generate and stabilize membrane curvature ( and may thus aid in membrane deformation within the CCP ) , bind both clathrin and AP2 , and recruit dynamin to the neck of the budding vesicle ( 27 – 31 ) . Eps15 appears to act as a scaffolding protein and clusters AP2 appendages through a long , ﬂexible C - terminal tail ( 15 ) . Many more accessory proteins have been identiﬁed , including NECAP , intersectin , and stonin , as have several kinases that may play important roles during the endocytic process ( 15 ) . On the basis of biochemical interrogations , our lab has proposed a model of how sequential interac - tions of increasing avidity of accessory proteins and clathrin for AP2 can drive CCP formation ( 15 ) . Recent ﬁndings have shown that proteins originally shown to be important regulators of more diverse cellular phenomena , e . g . , apopto - sis ( p53 ) ( 32 ) , asymmetric cell division ( numb ) ( 26 ) , or cell polarity ( par proteins ) ( 33 ) , are also intimately involved in CME . Studies have also identiﬁed an increasingly large number of BAR superfamily domain - containing proteins involved in CME . These data suggest that the repertoire of proteins that are ( or can become ) involved in CME will be signiﬁcantly larger than we currently appreciate , but whether such proteins are involved globally in CME , within particular subsets of CCPs , or even at all ( because overexpressed proteins may localize artifactually to CCPs ) , remains to be deﬁnitively established . It is becoming increasingly likely that dis - tinct adaptor and accessory proteins control the internalizationofdistinctcargoes , thatdifferent subtypesofCCVsmaysubsequentlybeformed , and that different specialist proteins will be re - quired to assemble each pit subtype . This may www . annualreviews . org • Mechanisms of Endocytosis 31 . 9 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 seem like an obvious remark , given knowledge of the nature of the dynamic network of in - teractions that exists in this process , but con - clusive proof that cargo - speciﬁc ( or at least relatively cargo - speciﬁc ) CCPs / CCVs exist is lacking ( 34 ) , and clathrin - independent path - ways do not appear to produce homogeneous endosomes ( although these are not neces - sarily analogous structures ) . Because , in the main , morphologically indistinguishable struc - tures appear to be responsible for the internal - ization of cargoes that enter via CME , and be - cause single CCPs / CCVs have been shown ( at least sometimes ) to contain more than one type of cargo moiety , it is likely that each CCP / CCV contains a competitively produced population of cargoes and adaptors / accessory proteins . The exact composition of these CCPs / CCVs will depend on many factors , including ( a ) the concentration of each cargo type at the plasma membrane , ( b ) the speciﬁc activa - tion state of each cargo , ( c ) the dependence on speciﬁc activation states for the recruitment of each cargo to CCPs , ( d ) the mobility of that cargo in the plasma membrane , ( e ) the overall afﬁnity of adaptor / accessory protein binding to that cargo , ( f ) the concentration of adaptor / accessory proteins that can be used to recruit each cargo , and ( g ) the ability of that adap - tor / cargo to interact with the clathrin polymer - izationmachinery . ThisviewofCME , however , poses a problem in cargo sorting for the cell . Whether sorting happens only in sorting endo - somesoralsoinCCPsisunclear . Theformation of cargo - speciﬁc CCVs , with cargo type - driven signals for further trafﬁcking , would allow an additionallayerofregulation . Cargolikelyplays an important role in driving CCP / CCV forma - tion because empty CCVs are unlikely to have useful functions . If cargo drives CCP forma - tion , then it is also possible that each CCV will have a minimum number of molecules of each particular cargo . This would provide a quan - tum of cargo that may allow digital processing of cargo - associated information by the cell , es - pecially if downstream consequences of endo - cytosishappeninarobustandstereotypedman - ner . It is important to address if cargo clustering drives CCP formation de novo or if clustered cargoes are recruited to sites where clathrin has already been partially assembled and completes this process of assembly . The surface residence time of CCPs ( and therefore membrane ﬁssion ) is regulated by interaction with GPCR cargo ( and this CCP formation is reversible ) through interaction with the actin cytoskeleton ( 35 ) . Further - more , Transferrin Receptor Trafﬁcking Protein ( TTP ) interacts with both dynamin and the transferrin receptor . The demonstration that , in the absence of transferrin receptor bind - ing , TTP can negatively regulate the rate of GTP hydrolysis by dynamin provides a po - tential mechanism by which cargo can signal speciﬁcally and directly to the scission machin - ery ( 36 ) . This might inform the scission ma - chinery as to the state of cargo recruitment , and only when sufﬁcient transferrin receptor has accumulated , will scission be permitted to proceed . This would automatically exclude the majority of other cargo proteins because car - goes will compete for similar binding partners and the avidity of these interactions will fa - vor transferrin receptor incorporation once it has accumulated beyond a critical concentra - tion . Space restrictions within the CCV will likely also select against hitchhiking by other cargoes . It remains possible that , just as many cargoes have speciﬁc adaptors , there might also existcargo - speciﬁcinteractingproteinsthatcan interact with , and regulate , the scission ma - chinery . Such an arrangement would certainly produce an elegant mechanism for the pro - duction of cargo - speciﬁc CCVs but remains unexplored . Another poorly understood issue is how CCP and CCV sizes are controlled . Furthermore , CCPs have been observed to form at the edges of ﬂat clathrin sheets , sug - gesting that they may arise from the locally high concentration of coat proteins , or cargo in these regions , or perhaps even partially preassembled intermediates , but this remains uncertain . The ligands internalized by CME are myr - iad , and it is likely that many more cargo - speciﬁc adaptor / accessory proteins will be dis - covered , each with core key features including 31 . 10 Doherty · McMahon A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 particular cargo afﬁnities . Redundancy in the system allows for robustness ; for example , close to 100 % of receptor A may ordinarily be in - ternalized through binding to a single type of adaptor protein , yet , in the absence of this adap - tor , receptor A may use lower - afﬁnity inter - actions to recruit the CME machinery . The view of CME as a dynamic network of protein - protein and protein - lipid interactions will help interpret overexpression and siRNA studies and provide novel insights into the regulation and spatiotemporal dynamics of this ubiquitous process ( 4 ) . CLATHRIN - INDEPENDENT ENDOCYTOSIS Perturbation of CME affects the endocytosis of all the cargoes that have been mentioned in Table 1 row 1 , at least in cell types in which this has been studied . However , the endocytosis of many other types of endogenous and exoge - nous cargoes is relatively unaffected by inhibi - tion of this pathway . Furthermore , these types ofcargomoleculesareinternalized , inthemain , in a cholesterol - dependent manner , in contrast to CME cargo molecules . This strongly implies the existence of additional endocytic pathways that exist endogenously and that are indepen - dent of clathrin . However , it should be noted at this stage that using methods that inhibit CME as tools to discover new constitutive up - take pathways ( that ordinarily exist and that are prevalent ) is far from ideal because such treat - ment may functionally upregulate a pathway that is usually much more silent or even nonex - istent . As well as the extent , the properties of this pathway may also change because interfer - ence with CME would have cell - wide conse - quences in terms of signaling levels , lipid and protein distributions , membrane tension , and stress responses . The discovery of novel path - ways of endocytosis should therefore , where possible , rely on the use of unperturbed cells before using such techniques to probe their properties further . Relatively few endogenous , noncargo pro - teins associated with clathrin - independent endocytic pathways have been discovered to date , and of those that have , little is known about how these might contribute to the mech - anism of endocytosis . Perhaps this is owing to the absence of conserved core recruitment hubs for the concentration of cargoes , which would allow straightforward biochemical experiments to be performed . What is currently under - stood about these pathways has been derived mainly from study ( in a variety of cell types ) of the morphology of these endocytic structures by EM , from following the internalization of ( often artiﬁcially clustered ) endogenous mark - ers or bacterial exotoxins predominantly by ﬂu - orescence microscopy , from determining the lipid requirements for these pathways , from ex - amining their sensitivity to certain drugs , and from ascertaining their dependence on cellular proteins such as small G proteins , kinases , and dynamin . These pathways are discussed in the following sections . CAVEOLIN1 - AND FLOTILLIN - ASSOCIATED ENDOCYTIC MECHANISMS There are three mammalian caveolin proteins . Although caveolin3 is muscle speciﬁc , cave - olin1 and 2 are found widely in nonmuscle cells with only neurons and leukocytes appar - ently lacking caveolae . Caveolin1 is enriched in caveolae ( 11 ) , with ∼ 100 – 200 molecules per caveola ( 37 ) , and cells that do not ex - press this protein ( and muscle cells not express - ing caveolin3 ) are devoid of morphologically evident caveolae . Overexpression of caveolin1 in caveolae - deﬁcient cells is sufﬁcient to pro - duce ﬂask - shaped plasmalemmal invaginations morphologically indistinguishable from cave - olae in normal cells ( 38 ) . These data imply that caveolin1 is necessary ( and perhaps suf - ﬁcient ) for caveolar biogenesis . Caveolin2 ap - pears not to be necessary for caveolar forma - tion but likely plays important roles in at least some such structures . Caveolin1 is capable of forming higher - order oligomers , is palmitoy - lated , and binds cholesterol and fatty acids , which stabilize oligomer formation ( 39 , 40 ) . www . annualreviews . org • Mechanisms of Endocytosis 31 . 11 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 GSL : glycosphingolipid CLIC : clathrin - independent carrier GEEC : GPI - AP - enriched early endosomalcompartment This may be important both in ordering lo - cal lipids into invagination - competent compo - sitions , as well as in the export of these lipids to the plasma membrane . Caveolin1 forms com - plexes composed of 14 – 16 monomers ( 41 ) , and a model has been proposed by which caveolin1 could effect changes in membrane curvature ( 42 ) ( see below ) . Caveolin1 binds the fatty acid tails of the glycosphingolipid ( GSL ) GM1 and can colocalize with GM1 and another “raft - associated” GSL , Gb3 , in cellular membranes ( 43 ) . However , GM1andGb3 , andtheirligands cholera toxin ( CTx ) and Shiga toxin ( STx ) , re - spectively , are found on the extracellular leaﬂet of the plasma membrane , and caveolin1 is on the cytoplasmic side . Caveolin1 forms a hairpin structure that is embedded into the membrane , perhaps reaching through into the outer mono - layer ( and perhaps thereby contributing to the necessary cross talk across the bilayer ) . Both its N and C termini are exposed to the cytoplasm . It is thought that caveolins may contribute to the spike - like coat found on caveolae . In addi - tion to this coat , high - resolution EM analysis of caveolar ultrastructure has revealed a ring - like density found circumferentially around the caveolar neck ( 44 ) . Caveolae ( or rather precaveolae because they are not yet on the plasma membrane ) appear to undergo formation in the Golgi complex , where they acquire their charac - teristic detergent insolubility and cholesterol association in concert with ( at least partial ) caveolin1 oligomerization ( 37 ) . Cholesterol depletion ﬂattens caveolae ( 11 ) and increases the mobility of caveolin1 in the plasma mem - brane . Despite these observations , the precise role of caveolin1 , the speciﬁc lipid composi - tion of caveolae , and the speciﬁc functional relevance of other caveolae - associated proteins remain to be ﬁrmly established . The abundance of caveolae in many cell types is certainly consistent with a major role in trafﬁcking , and certain markers have been rather convincingly shown to be capable of undergoing endocytosis into caveolin1 - positive structures ( which include large neutral pH in - tracellular structures , termed caveosomes , and smaller vesicles and tubules ) , such as SV40 virions , cholera toxin B subunit ( CTxB ) , and glycosylphosphatidylinositol ( GPI ) - linked pro - teins ( 7 , 10 , 45 ) . Such caveolin1 - positive struc - tures have been shown to have great variance in their life cycles and their abilities to fuse with each other and other organelles . How - ever , a role for caveolae in the constitutive en - docytosis of these markers is questioned by the artifactual clustering of glycolipid or pro - tein receptors into caveolae that occurs when they are exposed to multivalent ligands , in - cluding antibodies and toxins . Moreover , al - though caveolar - type structures are certainly observed in regions of the cell distant from the obvious plasma membrane , it has been shown that many of these structures can still be con - nected directly to the plasma membrane and have thus not undergone scission from this site ( 46 ) , making it difﬁcult to assess the endocytic nature of caveolin1 - positive membranes . Fur - thermore , Sandvig et al . ( 47 ) have convincingly argued that most caveolae appear surface con - nected when sections for EM are taken perpen - dicular to the plasma membrane , but not when sectioned otherwise . In addition , using ruthe - nium red treatment , they have also shown that large caveosomal / multicaveolar structures that appear distant from the plasma membrane are still surface connected ( 47 ) . Although caveo - lae may or may not pinch off from the mem - brane , it still remains useful to discuss data derived from experiments examining caveo - lae because it is clear that the predominantly caveolae - associated protein caveolin1 is associ - ated with endocytosis , and because experiments previously thought to be examining caveolar endocytosis may shed light on other endocytic pathways . As caveolin1 - associated cargoes overlap with those of the clathrin - independent carrier ( CLIC ) / GPI - AP enriched early endo - somal compartment ( GEEC ) pathway , per - haps manipulations previously thought to affect caveolar endocytosis are acting on this pathway . Consistent with this , a recent study has in - triguingly found that a region of caveolin1 shows homology to a GDI sequence , and cave - olin1 speciﬁcally binds GDP - bound cdc42 ( 48 ) . 31 . 12 Doherty · McMahon A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 Caveolin1 depletion resulted in an increase in activated cdc42 levels at the plasma membrane . These intriguing data suggest that caveolin1 regulates the activity of cdc42 , which is heavily implicated in CLIC / GEEC endocytosis . How - ever , caveolin1 manipulations may also affect other pathways . The internalization of very few markers has been shown to be caveolin1 dependent ( 7 , 10 ) , and perhaps , transcytosis across endothe - lial barriers , which appears to occur through caveolae , is currently the most convincing traf - ﬁcking process associated with caveolae ( 49 ) . Caveolin1 - null mice are surprisingly normal macroscopically , despite being devoid of cave - olae , but do have a reduced life span ( 50 ) . They have defects in the regulation of vascu - lar tone , which appears to be linked to en - dothelial cell hyperproliferation and microvas - cular hyperpermeability ( 51 ) , which is eNOS dependent ( 52 ) . They also have transcytotic de - fects and defects in lipid droplet formation and in liver regeneration after partial hepatectomy ( 10 , 53 ) . Although overexpression of caveolin1 in - creases the number of caveolae , it can also pro - foundly inhibit the endocytosis of ordered lipid microdomains . Caveolin1 overexpression also inhibits the endocytosis of autocrine motility factor ( AMF ) to the ER and CTxB to the Golgi apparatus ( 54 ) . Such a CTxB trafﬁcking de - fect was also observed in caveolin1 - null mouse embryonic ﬁbroblasts ( MEFs ) , which were also shown to bind the same levels of CTxB as wild - type controls ( 8 ) . The internalization of both AMF and CTxB is sensitive to cholesterol de - pletion and tyrosine kinase inhibition . These two ligands do not colocalize intracellularly when cells are exposed to both , despite these ac - cumulating together in caveolae on the surface ( 54 ) . Furthermore , although caveolin1 actually facilitates dysferlin delivery to the plasma mem - brane ( an opposing role to that in endocytosis ) , dysferlin enters cells by a clathrin - independent pathway more rapidly in caveolin1 - null cells ( 55 ) . These results , and others , suggest that either caveolae may be involved in anterograde trafﬁcking , the protection of surface proteins from internalization , and / or competition with other pathways for particular essential lipids . Caveolae might induce the titration of endoge - nous binding partners or lipids necessary for endocytosis . Conversely , caveolin1 overexpres - sion may reduce overall membrane ﬂuidity and therefore even inhibit caveolin1 - mediated in - ternalization events . A very tight regulation of the levels of caveolin1 on the plasma mem - branewouldconsequentlyberequired , andper - haps , this contributes to differences reported for caveolar dynamics using ﬂuorescence approaches . The presence of caveolin1 on apparently in - tracellular compartments that colocalize with recently internalized markers is consistent with the hypothesis that these represent caveolae that have been internalized whole . It also re - mains possible that caveolin1 may also mark ( perhaps nonspeciﬁcally because there is an abundance of caveolin1 on the plasma mem - brane ) other uptake pathways that are formed from noncaveolar regions of the plasma mem - brane . Consistent with this is the ﬁnding that caveolin1 can be found in the tubular CLIC / GEEC membranes but is unnecessary for this pathway to proceed ( see below ) . We have also observed that under certain circum - stances caveolin1 can be found in extensive tubular networks , and caveolin1 may prefer to locate to areas of such high membrane curva - ture ( G . J . Doherty , unpublished observations ) . Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching experiments have shown that caveolae can be very stable in unstimulated cells ( 56 ) . How - ever , using TIR - FM it has also been shown thatmanyplasmamembranecaveolin1 - positive spots appear and disappear toward the cell in - terior ( almost half were shown to be dynamic over 5 min ) and seem to undergo kiss - and - run fusion and ﬁssion with the plasma membrane , although some were observed to travel longer distances intracellularly ( 37 ) . Caveolin1 on in - tracellular vesicles retains its ability to provide stability to membrane microdomains , and this may inﬂuence subsequent sorting ( 57 ) . Using EM techniques that can distinguish between surface - connected and nonsurface - connected www . annualreviews . org • Mechanisms of Endocytosis 31 . 13 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 SL : sphingolipid caveolar / caveosome - like structures , about 2 % of the caveolar population ( at least small - / single - caveolin1 - positive vesicular structures ) in MEFs were shown to have undergone ap - parent scission from the plasma membrane af - ter warming for 1 min in the presence of CTxB ( 8 ) . After a longer period of incuba - tion , larger , tubulovesicular caveolin1 - positive structures were shown to accumulate the toxin and appeared to be unconnected to the plasma membrane ( 8 ) . This internalized population could be doubled in extent by treatment with the phosphatase inhibitor okadaic acid as well as bytheadditionofexogenouslactosideceramide ( LacCer ) . The mobility of caveolin1 - positive structures is also increased by stimulation with SV40virions , GSLs , orcholesterol ( 37 , 58 ) . Ap - parent internalized caveolae have been shown to be capable of fusing with both the classi - cal early endosome as well as with caveoso - mal structures ; both of these steps are rab5 dependent ( 57 ) . LacCer ( at least in its BODIPY ﬂuorescent form ) trafﬁcs through caveolin1 - positive com - partments and subsequently reaches the Golgi apparatus ( 59 ) . Total sphingolipid ( SL ) or spe - ciﬁc GSL depletion results in the reduction of the amount of LacCer endocytosis , a reduction ofcaveolin1levelsattheplasmamembrane , and accumulation of caveolin1 at the Golgi appara - tus ( 60 ) . C8 - sphingomyelin and the ganglioside GM3 are each sufﬁcient to restore caveolin1 export in SL - depleted cells . Phosphorylation of caveolin1 appears to trigger the ﬂattening and fusion of caveolae in cells expressing viral - sarcoma ( v - src ) . Cave - olin1 S80E ( a phosphomimetic mutant ) does not associate with detergent - resistant mem - brane fractions and is not found on the plasma membrane ( 61 ) . The corresponding phospho - mutant ( S80A ) has an afﬁnity for cholesterol that is similar to that of wild - type protein and isfoundoncaveolarmembranes . Thus , dephos - phorylation at this site , perhaps at the level of the ER / Golgi , might regulate the formation of caveolin1 - dependent microdomains . Likewise , phosphorylation at the plasma membrane may then be responsible for their disassembly , which could be either a positive or negative regula - tor of endocytosis . A number of kinases have been shown to regulate caveolar / microdomain - dependent endocytosis , but how this might be temporally coordinated , and exactly which type of clathrin - independent endocytosis is affected in these assays , is unclear ( 37 ) . There have also been a number of novel roles suggested for caveolae ( see Reference 10 and below ) . A large number of signaling proteins have been found associated with , and regulated by , caveolae , and these structures may act as sig - naling platforms ( 62 ) . However , aside from the caveolins , little is known about proteins in - volved in caveolar genesis . Recently , PTRF ( or cavin ) was shown to associate with surface cave - olae , to be necessary in both zebra ﬁsh and mammalian cells , and to be necessary for cave - olar formation , with caveolin1 located instead on ﬂat regions of the plasma membrane and un - dergoing quicker degradation ( 63 ) , suggesting that caveolin1 is not sufﬁcient for membrane deformation . Flotillin proteins ( also called reggie pro - teins ) are not enriched in caveolae but are found oligomerized in distinct membrane mi - crodomains ( 64 ) . Their homology to caveolin1 suggests that they may play a role in the or - dering of lipids in an analogous manner to caveolae ( ﬂotillins are also proposed to form a similar hairpin structure in the membrane and are palmitoylated ) . Indeed , it has recently been shown that ﬂotillin1 and - 2 are found in plasma membrane domains distinct from cave - olae ( 65 ) and that ﬂotillin1 is necessary for a portionofCTxBuptake ( 64 ) . ByTIR - FM , bud - ding of ﬂotillin1 - positive structures into the cell was found to be rare in comparison with that of CCPs , similar to ﬁndings with caveolar - type endocytosis . Flotillin2 appears to undergo trafﬁcking from the Golgi , and by TIR - FM , ﬂotillin2 - positive puncta were shown to un - dergo cycling to and from the plasma mem - brane in a manner similar to ﬂotillin1 - positive puncta ( 66 ) . Flotillin2 cycling can be inhib - ited by cell - cell contact formation and stim - ulated by serum and epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) , but was shown not to be associated 31 . 14 Doherty · McMahon A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 withepidermalgrowthfactorreceptor ( EGFR ) , cellular prion - related protein ( PrP c ) , or GFP - GPI uptake . However , the GPI - linked protein CD59 is found in ﬂotillin1 + 2 - positive domains at 12 ◦ C and in internalized ﬂotillin1 - positive vesicles , andﬂotillin1isnecessaryforCD59up - take ( 65 ) . Interestingly , ﬂotillin1 is also neces - sary for the dynamin - dependent but clathrin - and caveolin1 - independent uptake of cell surface proteoglycans , which it appears to de - liver to late endosomes in ﬂotillin1 - positive compartments ( 67 ) . Although one study showed that co - overexpression of ﬂotillin1 and - 2 generated new plasma membrane microdomains in which they colocalize , another study showed that ﬂotillin1 and - 2 colocalize less impressively , perhaps reﬂecting different expression levels in thesestudies ( 65 , 66 ) . Flotillin1 - and - 2 - positive domains contain about 95 molecules of each ﬂotillin and have been suggested by correla - tiveﬂuorescenceandEMtobemorphologically similar to caveolae ( 65 ) . However , although ex - pression of caveolin1 / 3 , or even honeybee cave - olin , resultsintherescueofcaveolaeproduction in ( caveolae - negative ) caveolin1 - null cells , co - overexpression of ﬂotillin1 and - 2 did not in - duce caveolae - like invaginations ( 68 ) . Flotillin may mark a pathway separate from those dis - cussed below , or may act upstream in domain organization for other clathrin - and caveolin1 - independent pathways . Indeed , ﬂotillin can be found concentrated in the membranes of early CLIC / GEEC intermediates ( 14 ) . CLATHRIN - AND CAVEOLAE / CAVEOLIN1 - INDEPENDENT ENDOCYTOSIS Endocytosis occurs in cells depleted of both CME events and caveolin1 in a manner dependent on cholesterol , implying distinct endocytic pathways that require speciﬁc lipid compositions . Such microdomain - dependent , butclathrin - andcaveolin1 - independent , endo - cytosishasbeenshowntointernalizeextracellu - lar ﬂuid , SV40 virions ( 69 ) , CTxB , GM1 , other SLs , GPI - linked proteins , as well as receptors for IL2 , growth hormone , AMF , endothelin , and many other molecules ( 7 ) . The dependence of these pathways on speciﬁc cell substituents , and their morphologies , is summarized in Figure 1 and Table 1 . Proteins that attach to membranes by way of a glycosylphosphatidylinositol an - chor ( GPI - linked proteins ) are enriched in detergent - resistant membrane fractions and are not normally concentrated into CCPs or caveolae . They undergo endocytosis via a cholesterol - dependent , clathrin - independent endocytic pathway ( 13 ) . The internalization of these proteins is kinetically distinct from the uptake of transmembrane proteins and can bypass conventional rab5 - positive endo - cytic compartments . One such pathway , which delivers cargoes to endosomes termed GPI - AP - enriched early endosomal compartments ( GEECs ) , is seemingly regulated by the small G protein cdc42 and is not inhibited by the overexpression of dominant - negative dynamin proteins that inhibit CME ( 13 , 70 ) . Such an acidic , tubulovesicular compartment appears to account for a large proportion of internalized ﬂuid phase markers ( 71 ) . The recruitment of GPI - linked proteins into these endocytic struc - tures is dependent on the GPI moiety , but it is currently unknown how this is regulated de - spite the active maintenance of nanoscale clus - ters of such proteins on the cellular surface that are dependent upon membrane cholesterol ( 58 ) . A recent hypothesis incorporating the chirality and intrinsic tilt of molecules within such a cluster suggests that the membrane con - stituentsalonearesufﬁcientformembranebud - ding ( 72 ) . The production of high membrane curvature in this way may allow cellular pro - teins that sense and generate membrane cur - vature , such as BAR domain - containing pro - teins , dynamin ( although dynamin has not been found on GEEC endocytic intermedi - ates ) , and their functional homologs , to induce further curvature generation to produce tubu - lar / vesicular structures that are then delivered to GEECs , as well as to induce the ultimate scission of such invaginations from the plasma membrane . www . annualreviews . org • Mechanisms of Endocytosis 31 . 15 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 The folate receptor FR α , which likely in - creases local folate concentrations at the plasma membrane to allow its efﬁcient uptake via fo - late transporters , is a GPI - linked protein and is only concentrated in caveolae after cross - linking ( 73 ) . Binding of folate does not change the normal diffuse distribution of FR α at the plasma membrane , and further studies have ruled out a role for caveolae in FR α endocyto - sis ( 74 , 75 ) . KB cells endogenously express this receptor where it is found in noncoated mem - brane invaginations as well as in clathrin - coated structures ( 76 ) . In CHO cells , the major endo - cytic pathway for stably transfected FR α de - livers it to GEECs ( 13 ) . The GEEC pathway is downstream of the highly prevalent CLICs that have been observed by EM to be predominantly tubular or ring like in morphology ( 8 ) and are discussed in detail below . Without ruling out the possibility that there are several distinct subtypes of this endocytic route , the pathway is referred to here as the CLIC / GEEC path - way . No cell physiological function has yet been reported for this prevalent endocytic route , despitethelargeamountofinternalmembranes that this pathway contributes . We have recently shown how the BAR domain - containing pro - tein GRAF1 ( a tumor suppressor in leukocytes ) sculpts the ∼ 40 - nm diameter tubular mem - branes of this prevelant endocytic route ( 14 ) . When the CLIC / GEEC pathway is dis - rupted , there appears to be compensatory en - docytosis of GPI - linked proteins via CME ( 13 ) , but whether this allows internalized proteins to be trafﬁcked to their appropriate destinations is unclear . The intracellular destination for ma - terial endocytosed through the CLIC / GEEC pathway appears to differ between cell types , including lysosomal and pericentriolar recy - cling compartments ( 13 , 77 ) . If this reﬂects the presence of speciﬁc CLIC / GEEC subtypes or is due to other cell type - dependent factors is unknown . Whether and how all GPI - linked proteins are endogenously regulated through endocytic mechanisms remains a mystery . The core struc - ture of the GPI moiety is conserved among all GPI anchors , but the precise structures of their lipids and side chains are variable . These vari - abilities may modulate their abilities to become concentrated in , or escape from , speciﬁc types of membrane microdomains . If distinct types of microdomains are turned over by distinct en - docytic mechanisms , then this would provide each subtype of GPI - linked protein with dis - tinct turnover kinetics . Both GPI - linked proteins and the IL2R β receptor are enriched in detergent - resistant membrane fractions ( implying clustering into membrane microdomains ) , and cholesterol de - pletion abrogates the endocytosis of both types of protein ( 78 ) . However , it has been demonstrated that a clathrin - and caveolin1 - independent endocytic pathway , which is seem - ingly distinct from that of the CLIC / GEEC pathway , is responsible for the internalization of the IL2R β receptor after ligation and that this pathway is dependent upon the activity of the small G proteins rhoA and rac1 , and the kinases PAK1 and PAK2 ( 79 ) . At least some of the membranes internalized by this pathway communicate with clathrin - dependent endo - cytic compartments , and the pathway appears to be dynamin - dependent . A similar dynamin - dependent , clathrin - independent pathway ap - pears to be responsible for the internalization of the γ c cytokine receptor and the IgE receptor Fc ε RI ( 80 , 81 ) , but both the prevalence and the wider role of such a pathway outside of leuko - cytes are unclear . It has been shown that the GPI - linked pro - tein CD59 and major histocompatibility com - plex ( MHC ) class I proteins can be cointernal - ized into clathrin - independent , arf6 - positive endosomes that appear to be distinct from CLIC / GEEC endocytic structures ( 14 , 82 ) . Arf6 is also heavily implicated in a recy - cling pathway to the plasma membrane ( 83 ) . This arf6 - associated endocytosis appears to be dynamin independent , and these endo - somes can communicate with both transferrin - positive compartments and the arf6 - dependent recycling pathway ( 82 ) . This latter observa - tion makes phenotypes downstream of arf6 activity modulation difﬁcult to reliably inter - pret . The K + channel Kir3 . 4 also takes this 31 . 16 Doherty · McMahon A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 arf6 - associated endocytic pathway , and a se - ries of acidic motifs in these proteins enhance the association of the channel with members of the EFA6 family of arf6 GTP exchange factors ( GEFs ) ( 84 ) . Whether these function analogously to sorting motifs in CME is un - clear . Postendocytic clathrin - independent traf - ﬁcking pathways are beginning to be resolved , and some degree of communication with the classical rab5 - positive endosome is a feature of many , if not all , endocytic pathways ( 6 ) . Although GPI - linked proteins have been shown to be internalized by the pathways de - scribed above , it has also been suggested that GPI - linked proteins are transported directly to the Golgi apparatus , and there is evidence for a constitutive clathrin - independent endocytic mechanism responsible for direct transport of luminal contents and GPI - linked proteins to this site ( 85 , 86 ) . The endocytic apparatus re - sponsible for this is currently unclear , but may include CLIC / GEEC subtypes . MECHANISMS OF INTERNALIZATIONINVOLVINGLARGERVOLUMESOFMEMBRANE Although the mechanisms described in the preceding two sections can be described as pinocytic , macropinocytosis describes a form of larger - scale internalization that frequently involves protrusions from the plasma mem - brane that subsequently fuse with themselves ( or back with the plasma membrane ) , result - ing in the uptake of extracellular components trapped between these sites ( Figure 1 ) . This morphologicallydescribedprocessisbothrac1 - and actin - dependent , and many studies have linked it to the ability to form membrane rufﬂes . Although this is a well - known pro - cess , the molecules involved in the mechanism and regulation of macropinocytosis are elusive , as is any relationship between this process and clathrin - independent pinocytic processes . The kinase PAK1 has been heavily impli - cated in macropinocytosis and is necessary for , and sufﬁcient to induce , the process ( 87 ) . PAK1 binds rac1 , which also activates it ( 88 ) . Phosphatidylinositol - 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) , ras , and src activities also promote macropinocytosis , presumably downstream of receptor ligation , and recent studies also implicate HDAC6 and its substrate hsp90 in this process ( 89 – 91 ) , al - though how these contribute remains unclear . Macropinocytosis is cholesterol dependent , and cholesterol is required for the recruitment of activated rac1 to these sites ( 92 ) . Perhaps , because this process can be stimulated by the profound activation of receptors , it lies at one end of the same spectrum as other membrane microdomain - dependent endocytic pathways . Indeed , microdomain markers are enriched in membrane rufﬂes ( 93 ) . The substantial local ac - cumulation of speciﬁc lipids at heavily activated regions of the plasma membrane likely leads to dramatic intracellular changes at these sites ( given the profound interplay that exists be - tween plasma membrane organization and the cytoskeleton ) and may account for the morpho - logical features of this process . It was shown as early as 1979 that receptor tyrosine kinases can be internalized by clathrin - independent mechanisms ( 94 ) . The EGF and platelet - derived growth factor ( PDGF ) recep - tors have been shown to be present in cave - olae , but overexpression of caveolin1 inhibits their activation , suggesting that residence in caveolae is inhibitory to their signaling ( 95 – 97 ) , and perhaps this also inhibits their endo - cytosis . In the presence of high EGF concen - trations and in concert with a population of receptorsundergoingCME , thereappearstobe another endocytic mechanism that occurs in re - sponse to receptor ubiquitination . Upon treat - ment with EGF ( or PDGF / hepatocyte growth factor ( HGF ) rufﬂed structures appear on the dorsal surface of receptive cells and appear to move or evolve along the dorsal surface ( dor - sal waves ; cf . classical macropinocytosis , which occurs predominantly at cellular peripheries ) ( 98 , 99 ) . The formation of such structures , known as circular dorsal rufﬂes ( CDRs ) , ap - pears to be cortactin and dynamin dependent . Several kinases and adhesion molecules are also found in these regions ( 100 ) . Upon formation www . annualreviews . org • Mechanisms of Endocytosis 31 . 17 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 ofthesestructuresbyhighEGFconcentrations , EGFRsbecomepredominantlyconcentratedin CDRs and appear to be rapidly internalized from these sites by tubular endocytic structures , which are independent of clathrin and cave - olin1 . Treatments that inhibit rufﬂe formation , however , have no effect on EGF - stimulated macropinocytosis , suggesting that rufﬂes them - selves are not necessary for this process ( 101 , 102 ) . Rab5 ( usually implicated in CME ) , and its effector rabankyrin5 , have been shown to be involved in CDRs / macropinocytosis ( 103 ) , but how these operate here is not known , and such observations may even reﬂect modulation of exocytosis to these sites . Treatment of PC12 cells and neurons with nerve growth factor in - duces the endocytosis of its receptor TrkA in a manner stimulated by , and dependent upon , the large GTPases Pincher ( EHD4 ) and dy - namin ( 104 ) . This mode of internalization re - sembles that mediating EGF receptor uptake in macropinocytic rufﬂes . Although the func - tions of these endocytic modes are not estab - lished , these results intriguingly suggest that they may act to densensitize cells to large con - centrations of growth factors through internal - ization of a large proportion of their speciﬁc receptors . Thismayallowprocessessuchasgra - dient sensing to proceed . In cell culture , CDRs can be differenti - ated spatially from the ventral location of simi - larly distorted plasma membrane regions asso - ciated with invadopodia and podosomes ( 105 ) . Invading tumor cells extend long protrusions into the surrounding matrix , which results in the speciﬁc degradation of matrix at these sites through the speciﬁc enrichment of sol - uble and transmembrane matrix metallopro - teinases . These structures , termed invadopo - dia , are capable of endocytosing matrix com - ponents , which are subsequently delivered to lysosomal compartments ( 105 ) . The nature of these endocytic structures is unknown but they seem to contribute strongly to cell invasion . In - vadopodia are actin - rich structures and possess many of the actin - regulating proteins present in podosomes as well as dynamin ( 106 ) . The inhibition of dynamin function reduces local matrix degradation by invadopodia . Dynamin directly binds cortactin , which cross - links actin ﬁlaments , forming actin sheets ( 107 ) . Macrophages and osteoclasts endogenously produce podosomes ( 108 ) , which are actin - rich and actin - dependent membrane extensions in - volved in the early steps of cell - matrix adhe - sionandpossessfocaladhesioncomponentsand the src tyrosine kinase ( src family members are enriched in membrane microdomains ) in ad - dition to Arp2 / 3 and actin - regulating proteins that are absent from focal adhesions . They also contain dynamin and cortactin as well as the BAR domain - containing protein endophilin2 ( 109 ) . Because all of these latter proteins have been implicated in endocytic events , and be - cause these structures form tubular membrane structures , it is tempting to speculate that po - dosomes may , as well as likely playing an im - portant role in cellular adhesion and migration , be sites of active endocytosis . However , there is currently no direct evidence to support this . The shared presence of dynamin , cortactin , and actin - regulating proteins suggests that CDRs , invadopodia , and podosomes may share some common underlying principles of function . Professional phagocytic cells , such as macrophages , monocytes , and neutrophils , are dependent upon small G proteins for their clathrin - independent internalization of op - sonized particles . Upon ligation of Fc recep - tors by the constant regions of antibodies , the phagocyte produces ﬁlopodial extensions around the particle in a cdc42 - dependent man - ner with subsequent internalization being de - pendent upon rac1 ( 110 – 113 ) . These proteins recruit N - WASP and the actin nucleating and polymerizingArp2 / 3complextothephagocytic membranes , and actin polymerization is neces - sary for phagocytosis to occur ( 114 ) . IQGAP1 , and its interaction with the formin Dia1 , is also required for phagocytosis ( as well as cell mi - gration ) ( 115 ) . By contrast , the internalization of particles opsonized with the complement ef - fector fragment C3b occurs in response to the ligation of CR3 ( a modiﬁed integrin , which undergoes internalization in a microdomain - dependent manner ) in a rhoA - ( and its effector 31 . 18 Doherty · McMahon A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 rho kinase - ) dependent manner ( 116 , 117 ) . The phagocytosed particle is internalized into actin - lined membranes ( 116 , 117 ) . In this method of phagocytosis , membrane protrusions are not usually observed despite Arp2 / 3 recruitment ( 114 ) . Amphiphysin1 , usually associated with CME , is also required for phagocytosis in Ser - toli cells ( 118 ) . Vinculin and paxillin ( markers of cell - matrix adhesion sites ) are present at the regions where the particle is in contact with the plasma membrane ( 119 ) . This link with adhesion proteins , coupled with the rhoA dependence of this process , suggests that the formation of local adhesive structures is instru - mental in this mechanism of internalization , and phagocytosis may therefore bear mechanis - tic similarities to other internalization mecha - nisms described in this section . Recently it was shown that upon detach - ment of cells from matrix , which usually triggers cell death , a still - living cell can be in - ternalized whole into another in a rhoA - and actin - dependentmannerbeforedegradationby , or release from , the host cell ( 120 ) . Imaging of the adherens junctions ( which are necessary for this process ) is reminiscent of the zipper - ing mechanism of bacterial entry and CR3 - associated phagocytosis , although more work needs to be done to determine if these have commonlinks . Moreworkalsoneedstobedone to investigate the mechanisms of membrane re - arrangements and ﬁssion in this system , as well those that occur during the rac1 - dependent process of trans - endocytosis , where a small re - gion of receptor - containing membrane is inter - nalized by a neighboring cell . Clathrin , dab2 , and dynamin have already been implicated in this latter process , at least in gap junction trans - endocytosis ( 121 , 122 ) . ENDOCYTOSIS OF BACTERIAL TOXINS Although many bacterial and plant toxins are capable of traversing the plasma [ e . g . , Borde - tella pertussis adenylate cyclase ( 123 ) ] or endo - somal [ e . g . , Clostridium botulinum toxins ( 124 ) ] membranes directly , others enter and trafﬁc through cells without disrupting membranes and are thus useful probes for the dissection of endocytic routes . Anthrax toxin binds to transmembrane proteins TEM8 and CMG2 on the plasma membrane and is followed by cholesterol - dependent and clathrin - mediated internalization of the toxin ( 125 – 127 ) . Tox - ins of the A - B 5 ( such as CTx and STx , re - spectively ) and A - B ( such as the castor bean toxin ricin ) types have been used to probe retrograde ( plasma membrane to perinuclear compartment ) trafﬁcking pathways . The pen - tameric B subunits of A - B 5 - type toxins have binding sites for speciﬁc glycolipids , which are resident on the cell surface . The glycolipid re - ceptor for one such toxin , CTxB , is the gan - glioside GM1 ( 128 ) , which , as a GSL , has a high tendency to self - assemble into membrane microdomains , and the toxin may aid the parti - tioning of these lipids into such domains . The transport of CTx is cholesterol de - pendent , and indeed , caveolin1 - and clathrin - independent endocytosis has also been shown to be responsible for CTxB internalization . Some studies have shown that endogenous GM1 ( thereceptorforCTxB ) , andexogenously added CTxB , are found enriched in caveolae . However , CTxBcanentercellsdevoidofcaveo - lae , anduptakeofCTxBbycaveolar - typemech - anisms appears to be a minor mechanism for its internalization in certain cell types ( 7 ) . In some cell types at least , CTxB can be internal - ized by CME ( 85 ) . EM studies to determine the earlycarriersforCTxBhaveshownthat ( incon - ﬂict with other studies that have claimed that CTxB is a lipid microdomain / caveolar marker ) the protein is only slightly enriched in these structures and is also found in CCPs , consis - tent with the demonstration that some CTxB enters via this pathway ( 8 ) . Analysis of the early clathrin - independent , CTxB - enriched , endocytic carriers in MEFs by EM demonstrated that these are tubular - and ring - shaped structures , belonging to the same pathway as GEECs ( 13 ) . Consistent with this , GPI - linked proteins and ﬂuid phase markers were also found in these structures ( 7 , 8 ) . These CLICs were shown to bud from the plasma www . annualreviews . org • Mechanisms of Endocytosis 31 . 19 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 membrane and were the most prevalent early carriers of CTxB observed . These structures were also found to be cholesterol dependent . Some of these membranes contained caveolin1 . However , this prevalent endocytic route is also found in caveolin1 - null MEFs , and the mor - phology of structures involved in CTxB uptake and trafﬁcking was found to be ultrastructurally identical in these cells , suggesting that the pres - ence of caveolin1 on these compartments is not essential for their function . Overexpression of a dominant - negative eps15 protein in these cells , which blocked CME events , reduced the trans - port of CTxB to the Golgi apparatus by about 40 % ( 8 ) , consistent with the observation that CTxB can enter cells via CME ( 129 ) . Methyl - β - cyclodextrin ( MBCD ) treatment , which had no effect on CME , reduced the Golgi deliv - ery of CTxB in untransfected caveolin1 - null cells by ∼ 40 % to 45 % . Many studies of CTxB uptake by different endocytic pathways appear conﬂicting at ﬁrst glance , but the heterogene - ity of cell types used in these studies , with their intrinsic abilities to internalize by each type of pathway , may account for many of these differences . Furthermore , although com - bined inhibition of clathrin - , caveolin1 - , and arf6 - dependent endocytic events completely abolishes CTxB uptake , inhibition of any one of these pathways in isolation only slightly affects CTxB internalization , suggesting com - pensatoryendocytosisthroughtheothers ( 130 ) . Whether only a speciﬁc type of endocytosis is responsiblefortheappropriatesubsequenttraf - ﬁcking of the toxin is unknown , and it appears that CTxB can take a direct route from the plasma membrane to the Golgi and that this can be unaffected by inhibition of its uptake through CME ( 85 , 131 , 132 ) . STx interacts with globotriaosylceramide ( Gb3 / CD77 ) through interactions with the trisaccharide domain of this GSL . The B 5 sub - unit of STx ( STxB ) can enter cells through both CME and clathrin - independent routes , undergoing retrograde transport in detergent - resistant membranes ( 133 ) and , from early en - dosomal structures , seems to trafﬁc directly to the Golgi network . The binding of STxB to Gb3 results in cytoskeletal remodeling ( 134 ) , and it has been suggested that STxB can pro - mote its own ( Syk - dependent ) entry ( 135 ) . The elicitation of cellular signaling downstream of simple binding would not be surprising . A sin - gle STxB protein could cluster up to 15 Gb3 molecules at a time ( 136 ) , thereby presum - ably changing the face of the inner leaﬂet of the plasma membrane at this site . A variety of downstream events might ensue from the cre - ation of such a domain . This may well be re - ﬂective of endogenous events , for example , at clustered sites of cellular adhesion or at sites whereligatedreceptorsarerecruitedintomem - brane microdomains . A recent study has shown that STxB can be sufﬁcient to induce its own internalization into model giant vesicles ( 137 ) , but whether this can also happen in the ab - sence of cellular proteins is unclear . This study showed that ATP is not necessary for the uptake of STxB in vivo ( interpreted as being a similar process to internalization in their naked model membranes , although these have a specialized lipid mixture that is likely highly permissive for tubular invaginations , and perhaps similarly for scission , which was promoted in these assays by tension changes ) . However , cellular proteins can store a large amount of potential energy in their structures , and it would be surprising indeed if some of these were not required for internalization of the toxin . The use of bacterial toxins , which bind to plasma membrane glycolipids , has certainly aided the study of clathrin - independent endo - cytic pathways . However , care must be taken when interpreting the pathways taken via these toxins as they may be sufﬁcient to induce their own uptake via nonendogenous pathways . For example , ricin has two sites that bind to , and potentially cluster , β 1 – 4 - linked galactosides , which are displayed by a wide variety of cellular glycoproteins and glycolipids . This has , as yet , precluded the identiﬁcation of any ( if any ex - ist ) speciﬁc cellular glycoprotein / glycolipid re - ceptors . Ricin , as well as entering via CME , was shown early to be internalized via a tubular clathrin - and dynamin - independent mechanism that appeared to converge with 31 . 20 Doherty · McMahon A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 clathrin - dependent endocytic markers soon af - ter its internalization ( 138 , 139 ) , but it is un - clear if this particular pathway is also used for endogenous cargoes . ENDOCYTOSIS OF PATHOGENS Although many pathogens can be taken up into immune cells by phagocytic processes , it is be - coming clear that viruses and intracellular bac - teria can hijack other endocytic pathways to gain access to different cells . Many viruses hi - jack the CME machinery in order to be inter - nalized into host cells and , in the main , appear to induce their own CCPs rather than using preexisting ones . There appear to be at least eightpathwaysbywhichvirusescanbeinternal - ized , butmanyofthesemaybemanifestationsof the same pathway , either being modiﬁed by the viruses themselves or dependent upon the spe - ciﬁc cell type used ( 2 ) . Markers used for these studies might also be nonexclusive for each pu - tative pathway . It is clear however , that clathrin - independent mechanisms are important in the entry of many viruses . For example , although ∼ 65 % of inﬂuenza viruses enter through CME , the remainder enter via another clathrin - and caveolin1 - independent route , which is involved in swift trafﬁcking of the virus to perinuclear regions of the cell ( 140 ) . Treatment of cells with eps15 dominant - negative overexpression ( which profoundly abrogates uptake of trans - ferrin but does not stop all CME ) , choles - terol sequestration with nystatin [ although this was in contrast with another study in a dif - ferent cell type ( 140 ) ] , or both simultaneously , had little effect on inﬂuenza infectivity ( 141 ) . Epsin1 depletion did impede CME of the virus , which was still equally infective in depleted cells ( 142 ) . These results suggest both that there is a cholesterol - and clathrin - independent viral uptake mechanism and that there is compen - sation for the loss of one uptake pathway by another [ and this latter phenomenon can cer - tainly occur in cells ( 143 ) ] . Downstream re - dundancy in this system is certainly plausible because fusion of inﬂuenza virions with endo - somal membranes to allow cytoplasmic release occurs similarly for both clathrin - dependent and - independent pathways ( 140 ) . Inﬂuenza virons bind sialic acid residues on glycol - ipids / glycoproteins and appear to induce the formation of new CCPs at the site of binding ( 140 ) . How the virions signal to induce this is unknown . SV40 virions have regions on their capsid surfaces that bind to plasma membrane GSLs , including GM1 ( the receptor for CTxB ) to which it binds with high avidity in a simi - lar manner to CTxB ( 144 ) , enabling them to enter cells though clathrin - independent path - ways . This may be due to the induction of lipid microdomain formation with the subsequent recruitment of clathrin - independent budding machinery . Incubation of receptive cells with the virus induced a doubling of the number of active caveolin1 - positive structures at the cell surface , and these structures appeared to be capable of trafﬁcking the virus into the cell ( 69 ) . SV40 does not associate with CCPs . Us - ing caveolin1 - null cells , the virus appeared to undergo internalization through the progres - sive invagination of tightly associated clathrin - independent membranes ( eventually ∼ 60 nm in diameter ) around the virus in a clathrin - and caveolae - independent , but cholesterol - dependent , manner . Uptake of virus was faster in caveolin1 - negative cells than in caveolin1 - positive cells and was not altered by the over - expression of dynamin2 K44A ( in contrast to internalization in caveolin1 - expressing cells ) or dominant - negative / - positive arf6 ( 69 ) . This uptake was sensitive to genistein , implying the necessity of cellular proteins dependent uponphosphorylationtoallowfunctionalinter - nalization through this pathway . Internalized viruses continued to associate with detergent - resistant membranes , suggesting that they re - tained the plasma membrane lipids with which they originally associated . This tight binding may allow for the bypass of endogenous sort - ing mechanisms and perhaps also allows dis - sociation from coendocytosed proteins . Over - expression of caveolin1 into caveolin1 - negative cells did not inhibit SV40 entry , and inter - nalization could be seen to occur both in www . annualreviews . org • Mechanisms of Endocytosis 31 . 21 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 caveolin1 - positive as well as caveolin1 - negative compartments ( 69 ) . The intrinsic curvature of viruses , and their abilities to act with membrane components di - rectly and with high avidity , may immediately promote the production of membrane curva - ture at this site , with an invagination appear - ing at the site of contact . This may promote the accumulation of speciﬁc lipids , proteins that interact with these lipids , including sig - naling proteins ( which may also be activated through receptor clustering ) , and membrane curvature - sensing molecules , all of which may synergizetostimulateaspeciﬁcendocyticappa - ratus . Viruses are also capable of entering cells via a virus - induced , membrane bleb - associated , and PAK1 - dependent macropinocytic pathway thatiscoupledwith , anddependentupon , phos - phatidylserine accumulation on the viral enve - lope , suggestingthatthisinternalizationmaybe similar to that involved in the uptake of apop - totic bodies ( 145 ) . Clathrin - independent endocytosis of lipid microdomains appears to bypass the canon - ical endosome - to - lysosome pathway , offering pathogens a potential route to avoid lysosomal enzymes . The ﬁrst bacterium shown to invade cells using a lipid microdomain - based mech - anism was Escherichia coli . The FimH adhesin on the tips of E . coli ﬁmbriae is a mannose - binding lectin that binds the GPI - linked pro - tein CD48 and allows the bacteria to be internalized with cholesterol - dependent lipid microdomains in macrophages and mast cells , thereby bypassing lysosomes ( 146 ) . The entry of Brucella abortus , Campylobacter jejuni , and My - cobacterium spp . intocellshasalsobeenshownto be cholesterol dependent ( 147 ) . Interestingly , clathrin accumulates at the sites where other bacteria , including Listeria monocytogenes , un - dergo internalization and is necessary for the entry of this bacterium into cells ( 148 ) . This bacterium later trafﬁcs through cells by the induction of propulsive actin comets , allow - ing lysosomal bypass . The surface proteins of L . monocytogenes , InlA and InlB , bind to E - cadherin ( triggering its phosphorylation and ubiquitination ) and the HGF receptor Met , respectively , and , following their ubiquitina - tion by Hakai and Cbl , the bacterium is inter - nalized in a clathrin - and dynamin - dependent manner ( 148 , 149 ) . How this larger scale in - ternalization corresponds sterically to what oc - curs during CME of nano - / pico - scale parti - cles in noninfected cells may be difﬁcult to imagine , but early studies on yolk protein up - take in mosquito oocytes showed larger CCVs than those routinely found in mammalian cells ( 9 ) , and there may be poorly understood ﬂex - ibility and robustness of the associated endo - cytic apparatus . It is also possible that these bacteria can induce nonendocytic clathrin lat - tices after binding to the plasma membrane ; these have been observed endogenously and are of unknown function but may cluster pro - teins at particular sites . Indeed , it is unknown if clathrin plays any direct role in the mem - brane shape changes accompanying bacterial internalization or is simply permissive for en - try by other means . Both clathrin and caveolin1 are recruited to E - cadherin - coated beads and are required for their internalization , as well as L . monocytogenes internalization ( 149 ) , but whether and how these proteins communicate is uncertain . Clathrin even appears to be im - portant in the formation of actin - rich pedestals by ( noninvasive ) enteropathogenic E . coli ( 150 ) , which are induced by delivering ( injecting ) pro - teins into cells through type III secretion sys - tems ( 151 ) . The binding of such an apparatus to membranes ( and thus delivery of effector proteins ) is dependent on membrane choles - terol ( 152 ) . Although some of the proteins de - livered through this route can directly nucle - ate actin ( 153 ) , others modulate the activity of rho family GTPases and thereby indirectly sub - vert the normal control of cellular actin dy - namics ( 154 , 155 ) . Such proteins in Salmonella typhimurium [ entry of which is cholesterol de - pendent ( 156 ) ] include G protein – activating protein ( GAP ) and guanine nucleotide ex - change factor ( GEF ) proteins that can be recruited to the plasma membrane by interac - tions with cdc42 ( 157 , 158 ) . Delivered proteins can result in the inhibition , or promotion , of bacterial uptake into cells ( 155 , 159 ) . Whether 31 . 22 Doherty · McMahon A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 such proteins promote bacterial internalization through nonendogenous pathways or mod - ify endogenous endocytic routes is currently unclear . LIPID REQUIREMENTS FOR ENDOCYTOSIS It has become apparent that the plasma mem - brane itself is not simply a passive com - ponent in endocytic processes . Indeed , the plasma membrane - enriched phosphoinositide PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 is necessary for the invagination of CCPs , and many of the adaptor and acces - sory proteins involved in CME bind to this phospholipid . The regulation of and the func - tional roles of this phospholipid in CME are becoming increasingly understood and have been extensively reviewed elsewhere ( 160 ) . An enzymatic translocation technique has re - cently shown how hyperacute plasma mem - brane PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 depletion results in near complete AP2 depletion from the plasma mem - brane but had only minor effects on the as - sembly of clathrin , although this treatment blocked CME ( 161 ) . This promising approach may allow further regulatory mechanisms of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 in CME and other pathways to be addressed . In Supplementary Information ( see also Supplementary Figure 1 ) , wedescribetherole of other lipids in endocytosis , the nature of pu - tative membrane microdomains / nanodomains , and how lipids may sense , or be involved in , the generation of membrane curvature . Much work on the determination of lipid requirements for particular endocytic path - ways has relied upon the use of agents that extract or sequester membrane cholesterol . Exogenously added MBCD results in the re - moval of cholesterol from the plasma mem - brane of cells and abrogates the isolation of or - dinarily microdomain - associated proteins from detergent - resistant fractions ( 162 ) . The hy - drophobic core of this compound dissolves lipids by reducing the activation energy of their efﬂux from membranes . Agents that se - quester cholesterol , such as ﬁlipin and nystatin , are also routinely used to functionally deplete cholesterol in the plasma membrane . Both ex - tractionandsequesteringagentshavebeenused to disrupt endocytic events , but some ﬁndings are conﬂicting , and there remains some uncer - tainty about lipid requirements for endocytic pathways . For example , extraction of choles - terol with MBCD treatment has been shown to decrease the number of caveolae on the plasma membrane as well as having effects on CME , where treatment resulted in the ﬂattening of CCPs together with a reduction in transfer - rin uptake ( a speciﬁc marker for CME events ) . Such treatment had no effect on the endo - cytosis of the plant toxin ricin , and indeed , under certain conditions , cholesterol extrac - tion can even increase ricin endocytosis ( 163 ) . Cholesterol extraction produces a reduction in the amount of plasma membrane rufﬂing , coincident with reorganization of the actin cy - toskeleton ( 92 ) . In other studies , using con - centrations of MBCD that did not have any effect on CME , clathrin - independent endo - cytic events were observed to be speciﬁcally disrupted ( 8 ) . The use of nystatin / ﬁlipin has likewise been shown to speciﬁcally affect clathrin - independent endocytosis ( 69 , 164 , 165 ) . Different ﬁndings with respect to the cholesterol dependence of endocytic pathways may simply reﬂect the type and concentrations of agents used , the cell types used , and the lig - ands used to assess clathrin - independent en - docytic capabilities , and may also reﬂect the differential inhibition of truly unique clathrin - independent endocytic mechanisms . Neverthe - less , the general consensus in the ﬁeld remains that , although moderate depletion of plasma membrane cholesterol has little effect on CME , it profoundly affects the endocytosis of partic - ular cellular proteins , as well as that of exoge - nous toxins and pathogens , and this distinc - tion in lipid requirements has signiﬁcantly con - tributed to the study of clathrin - independent endocytic pathways ( 7 ) . However , as we have recently discussed , great care should be taken when using lipid - modifying agents because these can have knock - on effects on other lipids ( 166 ) . www . annualreviews . org • Mechanisms of Endocytosis 31 . 23 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 To determine the precise SL requirements for endocytosis of an array of markers , Cheng et al . ( 60 ) used a temperature - sensitive sys - tem whereby they could deplete total cellu - lar SLs by incubation of mutant cells at a nonpermissive temperature , resulting in defec - tive serine palmitoyltransferase activity . Such treatment resulted in a selective blockade of clathrin - independent endocytic events ( as de - termined by LacCer , albumin , dextran , and IL2 receptor uptake assays ) with no effect being observed on CME ( as determined by transfer - rin and LDL uptake assays ) . Probing this fur - ther , by using cell - permeable inhibitors of sph - ingomyelin ( SM ) and GSL biosynthesis , they found that depletion of both SMs and GSLs inhibited the uptake of all of the studied mark - ers of clathrin - independent endocytosis . Con - versely , treatment with inhibitors that increase SM , but decrease GSL levels , speciﬁcally in - hibited LacCer internalization , with the inter - nalization of the other markers being relatively unaffected . Exogenous SLs were then added to SL - depleted cells to determine speciﬁc SL re - quirements for each cargo . Addition of GM3 or C8 - LacCer was sufﬁcient to restore the ma - jority of LacCer endocytic potential , whereas C6 - sphingomyelin had no effect on LacCer en - docytosis but partially restored that of albumin , the IL2 receptor , and dextran . Although total SL depletion affects the endocytosis of these markers , this treatment increased the toxic ef - fect of ricin through enhanced Golgi delivery in depleted cells ( 167 ) . The total amount of ricin endocytosis in SL - depleted cells was shown to be normal . Incubation of cells with polyunsat - urated fatty acids ( which would be expected to interfere with lipid microdomain formation ) dramatically reduces STx , but not CTx , up - take or ricin toxicity ( 168 ) . Taken together , the data reviewed in this section highlight a key role for distinct lipids in the regulation of spe - ciﬁc endocytic pathways , although for clathrin - independent endocytic pathways at least , this work remains in its infancy , and correlative uptake and ultrastructural studies after lipid modulation will help to address this in greater depth . PROTEINS THAT DRIVE AND STABILIZE MEMBRANE CURVATURE The common underlying feature of endocytic membranes , as opposed to other regions of the plasma membrane , is their necessary high cur - vature . Biophysical considerations tell us that membranes generally like to be rather ﬂat . In - deed in recent years , a large variety of cellu - lar proteins , including even proteins such as arf family small G proteins , were found to func - tion at sites of speciﬁc membrane curvature , and many of these are also capable of , and nec - essary for , membrane curvature generation . We havealreadyhighlightedaroleforepsininCCP formation , where it inserts an amphipathic he - lix into the proximal lipid monolayer to in - ducemembranecurvaturethatisconcomitantly stabilized by clathrin . Such helices insert into the protein - proximal leaﬂet of the lipid bilayer , with the center of the helix at the glycerol back - bone of the lipids . This results in the phospho - lipid moieties becoming splayed because the glycerol backbone is the most rigid point of the lipid ( and acts as a fulcrum for lipid rotation ) . This splay , coupled with an increase in outer monolayer area relative to the inside , effectively induces membrane curvature generation . The cytoskeleton is also likely to be impor - tantinmembranecurvatureregulation ( 166 ) . In addition to pushing forces that might be con - tributed by actin polymerization ( helping , e . g . , to push neck membranes closer together ) , the cytoskeleton may also provide pulling forces to keep the neck under tension , which promotes dynamin’s ﬁssion ability ( 169 ) . Indeed , motor proteins such as myosin VI [ which binds to the CME adaptor dab2 and PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ( 170 ) ] and myosin 1E [ which binds to dynamin ( 171 ) ] have been implicated in CME . The insertion of caveolin1 into the mem - brane likely plays a role in membrane curvature generation in caveolae , presumably through a poorly understood role for its membrane - insertedhairpinandoligomerization . However , ﬂotillins , which are also proposed to have sim - ilar hairpins , do not appear to be sufﬁcient to 31 . 24 Doherty · McMahon A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 induce membrane curvature in vivo ( 68 ) . By re - placing cholesterol with its precursor desmos - terol , the number of caveolin1 molecules per caveola was decreased , and this resulted in a greater heterogeneity of caveolar sizes ( 172 ) , consistent with caveolin1 being necessary for caveolar formation and its role in effecting membrane curvature changes ( or stabilizing such changes ) at these sites . Alternatively , cave - olin1 may recruit other proteins responsible for the induction and stabilization of membrane curvature at these sites . Dynamin appears to play a role in caveolae membrane dynamics ( see below ) , but given caveolar stability , these ﬁnd - ings are at odds with the transient recruitment to , and function of , dynamin at other sites , and itisunclearhowitsscissionactivitywouldbein - hibited at caveolae . Furthermore , although dy - namin forms spiral oligomers , it appears that thedensitiesatcaveolarnecksaremoreringlike ( 44 ) , and it is unclear if dynamin contributes to these densities . Other ways in which membranes can be deformed are schematized in Figure 2 . In Sup - plementary Information ( see also Supple - mentary Figure 2 ) , we review the BAR super - family of proteins , many of which are intimately linked with membrane trafﬁcking events , in - cluding endocytic events , where they may help generate / stabilize the high membrane curva - ture of these sites and / or function in effec - tor recruitment to sites of speciﬁc membrane curvature . SMALL G PROTEINS AND CYTOSKELETAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ENDOCYTOSIS Members of the arf , rab , and rho families of small G proteins appear to be very impor - tant in endocytic events . These proteins pro - ceed through membrane - bound and cytosolic cycles in manners regulated by their intrin - sic GDP / GTP - loading status and other cel - lular proteins . A typical life cycle for a rab family member is shown in Figure 3 a . Dis - tinct endocytic pathways appear to require spe - ciﬁc types of small G proteins , and the mech - anisms by which these might promote endo - cytosis through effecting membrane curvature changes are shown in Figure 3 b . However , the observed small G protein dependence on the same underlying endocytic pathway may differ between cell types and may not be a very speciﬁc method ( predominantly due to pleiotropic effects of interference with small G protein function ) by which to initially catego - rize these pathways . However , in the absence of better markers and more mechanistic informa - tion as to how small G proteins contribute to endocytosis , such studies have proved very use - ful . The roles of some speciﬁc small G proteins known to be of relevance to endocytic pathways are now reviewed . Of the six arf small GTPases , only arf6 is ro - bustly found at the plasma membrane ( 173 ) and is enriched in membrane rufﬂes , where it is nec - essary for their rac1 - dependent formation , per - haps by recruiting rac1 ( 174 ) . Arf6 regulates at least one clathrin - independent endocytic path - way responsible for the internalization of car - goes , including CD59 , MHC class I , IL2R β , mGluR7 , carboxypeptidase E , and GPI - linked proteins ( 71 , 82 , 175 ) . The turnover of GTP by arf6 also plays a key role in the cycling of synaptic vesicles ( 176 ) . The arf6 effectors phos - pholipase D ( which catalyzes the formation of phosphatidic acid ) and phosphatidylinosi - tol ( 4P ) 5 - kinase [ which catalyzes PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 formation ] favor PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 formation , which itself is an arf activator ( 177 ) . Arf6 ac - tivation can thereby result in a rapid rise in PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 levels at the plasma membrane . Arf6 also has a direct role in the regulation of the cytoskeleton , and local production of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 also regulates actin polymeriza - tion ( for example , WASP and proﬁlin are regulated by binding to this phospholipid ) ( 178 , 179 ) . PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 is enriched in the plasma membrane and is required for the in - vagination of CCPs ( 160 ) . Overexpression of dominant - active arf6 produces rufﬂe forma - tion and induces macropinocytosis ( 173 ) . Many CME adaptor and accessory proteins bind to PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 through PH , ANTH , or ENTH www . annualreviews . org • Mechanisms of Endocytosis 31 . 25 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 Small G proteins Effector proteins turned on GDP GDP GTP GDP Appropriate lipid / curvature environment GTP GDP GDP Inactive , GDI bound Inactive , GDI free , lipid bound Active , GDI free , lipid bound GDP dissociation inhibitor GTPase - activating protein GDI displacement factor Guanine nucleotide exchange factor Lipid modification to protein Protein - modifying enzymes Lipid - modifying enzymes Cytoskeletal regulation Direct effects on membrane curvature Activation and recruitment of membrane curvature - sensing and - generating proteins GTP b a Figure 3 The small G protein life cycle and ways in which these proteins can modulate endocytic events . ( a ) Schematic diagram showing a typical life cycle for a small G protein . In the case of arf family G proteins , activation will take place preferentially on a highly curved membrane . ( b ) Effects of small protein activation , with a focus on how these proteins can have effects on membrane curvature . domains and positively charged patches ( in the caseofAP2 ) ( 160 ) . Adirectroleforarf6inCME is elusive , as there seems to be little biochem - ical evidence to support a link speciﬁcally to this process , although activated arf6 can recruit AP2 to membranes in vitro ( 180 ) . However , in some cell types at least , arf6 regulates CME of receptors , such as angiotensin type I , and 31 . 26 Doherty · McMahon A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 vasopressin type 2 receptors ( 181 ) , and the arf6 GAP , SMAP , which interacts with clathrin , ap - pears to have effects speciﬁcally on CME ( 182 ) . Recently , wehaveshownhowarfandarf - like proteinsmaycontributetoendocyticregulation in a novel manner ( 183 ) . GTP - loaded arf1 and arf6 ( their active forms ) are capable of generat - ing positive membrane curvature through the insertion of an N - terminal amphipathic helix into the proximal lipid monolayer ( 183 ) . The hydrophobic surface of this helix is unavail - able for membrane binding in GDP - bound arf but becomes released upon GTP loading ( 184 ) . Furthermore , these proteins load GTP in a curvature - sensitive manner ( loading is stimu - lated by high positive curvature ) . These charac - teristics are positively reinforcing : Exchange of GTP results in helix insertion , which , in addi - tion to decreasing the off rates of these proteins from the membrane , results in greater mem - brane curvature and more GTP loading . Ac - tive arfs thus become clustered on membrane buds where they activate their effectors . It is unclear how this process is spatiotemporally regulated by arf GTPase - activating protein ( arfGAPs ) and arf guanine nucleotide exchange factors ( arfGEFs ) , but several of these proteins are curvature sensitive ( through BAR domains ) . It may be therefore that curvature is the pri - mary regulator of the GDP - GTP cycle of arf proteins . Arf1 , which is usually resident at the Golgi , and the PDZ domain - containing rhoGAP ARHGAP10 that it recruits have been shown to be necessary for the CLIC / GEEC en - docytic pathway ( 185 ) . ARHGAP10 deple - tion also reduces α - catenin recruitment to adherens junctions and L . monocytogenes inva - sion ( 186 ) . Given that arf6 - associated clathrin - independent endocytic membranes share many properties with CLIC / GEEC membranes , it is possiblethatarf1andarf6differentiallyregulate CLIC / GEEC subtypes , or such membranes in different cell types . How arf1 contributes to CLIC / GEEC endocytosis is uncertain , but its activity is necessary for the regulation of the plasmamembraneresidencetimeofcdc42 [ per - haps through ARHGAP10 , which has GAP activity for cdc42 ( 186 ) ] , which is known to be important for CLIC / GEEC function . Furthermore , dominant - active arf6 suppresses lipopolysaccharide - induced macropinocytosis , and arf6 hyperactivity or inactivity both cause dramatic inhibition of podosome formation in , and migration of , primary dendritic cells ( 187 ) , perhaps through lipid or cytoskeletal effects , but is unclear precisely how this is mediated . Each rab GTPase ( including speciﬁc iso - forms ) appears to highlight and regulate a distinct intracellular trafﬁcking compart - ment . Although rab5 plays important roles in the pathway of CME , rab8 associates with macropinosomes and the seemingly endocytic , arf6 - associated , tubular structures that emerge from these ( 188 ) . Rab8 is also necessary for CTxB transport to the Golgi , and β 1 inte - grins have been found in rab8 - positive tubules . This is consistent both with observations that β 1 integrin trafﬁcking is arf6 dependent and that rab8 overexpression / depletion has effects on cellular morphology ( 188 , 189 ) . Niemann - Pick C ( NPC ) cells have abnormal storage of intracellular cholesterol and exhibit defects in CTxB uptake and trafﬁcking to the Golgi appa - ratus . Remarkably the abilities of these cells to trafﬁc CTxB and remove accumulated choles - terol are restored by rab8 overexpression , de - spite the fact that this is not the genetic deﬁcit in these cells ( 190 ) . Rab8 depletion also results in intracellular cholesterol storage . These re - sults might imply that a membrane trafﬁcking pathway regulated by rab8 allows bidirectional transport ( either directly or through appropri - ate lipid homeostasis ) . We have recently shown that rab8 also localizes to CLIC / GEEC endo - cytic membranes ( 14 ) . Members of the rho family of small G proteins—rhoA , cdc42 , and rac1—have been extensively implicated in endocytic regulation as well as in controlling cytoskeletal changes and signaling events within the cell ( 191 ) . The pathway responsible for IL2R β endocytosis is dependent on rhoA and rac1 ( 78 , 79 ) , whereas rac1 is heavily implicated in macropinocyto - sis ( 102 ) . Heterologously expressed nicotinic acetylcholine receptor ( AChR ) is internalized www . annualreviews . org • Mechanisms of Endocytosis 31 . 27 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 by tubular intermediates in a Rac - and actin - dependent endocytic manner ( 192 ) . Although overexpression of a constitutively GDP - bound mutant of rhoA speciﬁcally inhibits albumin and IL2R endocytosis , inactive cdc42 specif - ically inhibits ﬂuid phase internalization ( 60 ) . TheCLIC / GEECpathwayrequirescdc42 , and perhaps its functions there include the promo - tion of actin polymerization , which appears to be required for endocytosis through this path - way ( 70 , 71 ) . RhoA and cdc42 bind to lipids and preferentially to SM - and cholesterol - enriched membranes . Cells depleted of SLs have less rhoA and cdc42 present at the plasma mem - brane , and this effect is also observed upon SM depletion ( which may account for some of the observed lipid dependence of endocytic pathways described above ) . The localization of dominant - active rhoA / cdc42 to the plasma membrane can be restored in these cells by C6 - SM , which also partially restores the en - docytosis of albumin , dextran , and the IL2R . Therefore , membrane recruitment of small G proteins to speciﬁc membrane regions from which endocytosis appears to occur seems to be important for their functions in endocytic reg - ulation . Cholesterol depletion , however , stabi - lizes cdc42 at the plasma membrane and re - duces its activation ( 70 ) , perhaps accounting for someoftheeffectsofthistreatmentonclathrin - independent endocytic events . How small G protein – regulatory events in endocytosis are spatiotemporallycoordinated , andtherolesand nature of their important effectors in each en - docytic process , remains incompletely charac - terized . The schematic in Figure 3 b may pro - vide a framework for the study of the roles of these proteins in endocytic regulation . Rho family small G proteins are extensively implicated in cytoskeletal regulation . We have previously discussed the role of both small G proteins and lipids in modulating cytoskeletal polymerization and the important way in which membrane - cytoskeleton interactions are pro - duced and controlled ( 166 ) . These issues are not discussed here . It should , however , be noted here that , although endocytic pathways may be differentially modulated by agents that dis - rupt the actin cytoskeleton , whether such re - quirements for actin are due to the need to coordinate its polymerization at the site of an internalizing membrane is not understood be - cause these agents have profound effects on other parameters , e . g . , plasma membrane ten - sion , which would have knock - on effects on en - docytosis . Constitutively active rhoA can even inhibit CME , although it is not likely that rhoA plays a direct mechanistic role in this path - way ( 78 ) . Such requirements may be depen - dent on cell type ; as well as on the substrate on which the cells are grown ; and whether one is imaging / recording endocytosis at the coverslip face of the cell , the dorsal surface , or more globally ( 166 ) . Although most stud - ies on macropinocytosis have found it to be actin dependent , the NKG2A inhibitory re - ceptor was found to be internalized by a rac1 - dependent , actin - independent macropinocytic process ( 193 ) , suggesting that there may be sev - eral variants of this type of process . We and oth - ers have discussed the various roles actin may play at the site of endocytosis , and we refer the reader to these reviews ( 166 , 194 , 195 ) . Despite the importance of small G proteins and actin , focused study of these molecules may ultimately not allow the deﬁnitive dissection of endocytic pathways . The identiﬁcation of speciﬁcmarkersthatsurround , andthatarenec - essary for the formation of , the newly forming endosomal membranes will allow such ques - tions to be addressed more directly . The identi - ﬁcation of GRAF1 as a protein directly involved in , and necessary for CLIC / GEEC endocytosis goes someway toward this goal ( 14 ) . Because researchers are predominantly de - pendent on cultured cells for the study of en - docytic pathways , as well as the caveats already discussed , the route to senescence that these cells usually undergo through repeated passage may likewise determine the relative propor - tion of endocytic events at any given passage number . Studies must therefore depend on the isolation and characterization of distinct path - ways and their speciﬁc endogenous markers in 31 . 28 Doherty · McMahon A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 homogeneous cells before the true relevance , overlap , and function of these pathways in vivo can be addressed by tools such as mutant small G proteins . DYNAMIN AND FISSION OF ENDOCYTIC MEMBRANES Dynamin is a large molecular weight GTPase , which can bind and tubulate liposomes , and , upon GTP hydrolysis , is capable of stretching these tubulated liposomes through changes in the conformation of its spiral oligomer ( 196 ) . Dynamin1 preferentially binds PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , which promotes dynamin oligomerization , a process regulated by other curvature - sensing proteins , such as the BAR domain - containing proteins SNX9 and amphiphysin1 ( 197 ) . Dy - namin1 is found around the neck connecting invaginated CCPs and the rest of the plasma membraneandisnecessaryforCME ( 198 , 199 ) . It has also been proposed that , as well as this pulling force which brings the membranes of the neck into close apposition , a twisting force exerted by dynamin1 on tubular membranes is responsible for their vesiculation / ﬁssion ( 169 ) and that this may contribute to overcoming the high activation barrier presented to membrane ﬁssion ( Supplementary Figure 3 ) . It might alsoprovideareasonwhyactinisinvolvedinen - docytic events—here it may provide tension to the neck of the vesicle . Membrane ﬁssion must occur during the last stage of any endocytic event . Fission could occur from the “ripping” and subsequent resealing of membranes . This is unlikely because not only does ripping mem - branes require a great deal of energy , it would also have to occur circumferentially around the membrane at once . Furthermore , it allows tran - sient electrochemical communication between the extracellular and intracellular ﬂuids . The most likely mechanism by which membrane ﬁs - sion occurs is via the transient fusion of mem - branes , with proximal monolayer mixing and point - wise formation of a hemifusion interme - diate , and subsequent expansion of this point to form a hemifusion diaphragm before full ﬁssion . It is extremely unlikely that this will occur spontaneously ( within normal thermal ﬂuctuations ) without the input of energy in one form or another from cellular proteins . The published dynamin dependencies of endocytic pathways are summarized in Table 1 . Speciﬁc ﬁndings that have led to some of these conclu - sions are now reviewed . At ﬁrst glance the CLIC / GEEC pathway appears to be dynamin independent because dominant - negative dynamin still allows appar - ent internalization and because dynamin does not localize to these early endocytic structures by immuno - EM . Dynamin1 K44A overexpres - sion in MEFs resulted in the abrogation of Golgi delivery of CTxB . Instead , CTxB was found to accumulate in tubular compartments ( 8 ) . These were not labeled with CTxB at 4 ◦ C , suggesting that these structures were not still connected to the plasma membrane , but these may be partially inaccessible to wash - ing steps attributable to diffusion limitations within such a structure . Microinjection of an - tidynamin2 antibodies or dynamin2 depletion in cells inhibits basal levels of ﬂuid phase up - take , but not stimulated levels ( suggesting that this effect of dynamin is not through inhibition of macropinocytosis ) , and only expression of speciﬁc dynamin2 splice variants in dynamin2 - depleted cells rescues this phenotype ( 200 ) . Be - cause CLIC / GEEC endocytosis is associated with so much ﬂuid phase internalization ( 14 , 71 ) these data suggest that this pathway is dy - namn dependent . Furthermore , acute dynamin inhibition abrogates CLIC / GEEC endocyto - sis , and dynamin is strongly linked biochemi - cally to this process through binding the SH3 domain of GRAF1 ( 14 ) . The clathrin - independent pathway respon - sible for IL2R β internalization appears to be dynamin dependent ( 78 ) , as does caveolar - type endocytosis . Caveolin1 and dynamin form a complex in vivo . An in vitro system using the plasma membranes of lung endothelial cells showed that cytosolic factors and GTP hydrolysis were sufﬁcient to induce the ﬁssion of caveolar structures rich in caveolin - 1 and www . annualreviews . org • Mechanisms of Endocytosis 31 . 29 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 trafﬁcking markers in a dynamin - dependent manner ( 201 ) . Dynamin has also been found at the neck of caveolae , and GTP hydrolysis by dynamin appears necessary for the pinching off of such structures ( 202 , 203 ) . Dynamin2 may also control the production of single mobile caveolae from the larger , much more static , multicaveolar assemblies . Dynamin2 K44A overexpression results in the accumulation of large multi - invaginated caveolar - type struc - tures and reduces SV40 internalization and infectivity ( 204 ) , although these observations may be due to pleiotropic effects of mutant dynamin overexpression . CDR internalization appears to be dynamin dependent . Although dynamin K44A can inhibit PDGF - induced macropinocytosis , this may be through mod - ulation of rac localization ( 205 ) . Dynamin does not appear generally necessary for macropinocytic mechanisms , where the PAK1 substrate CtBP1 / BARS has been shown to be important for ﬁssion ( 206 ) . However , whether this protein has direct or indirect effects on the ﬁssion process is unclear . Flotillin - associated endocytosishasbeenshowntobebothdynamin dependent and independent ( 64 , 67 ) , whereas arf6 - associated endocytosis appears to be dynamin independent , although the Vp22 pro - tein from herpes simplex virus is internalized by an arf6 - dependent , dynamin - dependent , clathrin - independent pathway ( 207 ) . The use of dominant - negative dynamin constructs to inhibit CME has been well docu - mented . K44A ( without any bound nucleotides ) and S45N ( the putative GDP - locked state ) mutants are used and presumably inhibit the function of endogenous dynamin competi - tively ( 199 ) . Using an inducible cell line ex - pressing dynamin K44A , it was shown that the long - term internalization of ricin was not blocked by overexpressed levels of this mu - tant known to signiﬁcantly abrogate CME , de - spite a reduction up to at least 15 min after induction ( 208 ) . The extent of toxin degra - dation was not signiﬁcantly different in over - expressing and noninduced cells . However , although the ricin - containing endolysosomal compartments looked similar at the ultrastruc - tural level in both mutant - expressing and con - trol cells , the amount of the toxin reaching the Golgi apparatus , and its toxic effect , was profoundly reduced in mutant - expressing cells . Ricin is ordinarily internalized by tubular car - riers , which merge with clathrin - dependent markers soon after internalization , and it may be that transport of ricin from this compart - ment to the Golgi is dynamin dependent ( 138 , 208 ) . Conversely , an effect similar to that ob - served for CTxB uptake in the CLIC / GEEC pathway may be responsible or an alterna - tive pathway may be upregulated . Interestingly , increased expression of inducible dynamin K44A by butyric acid treatment potentiated the reduction in toxicity observed in mutant - overexpressing cells ( 208 ) . This may suggest thatdifferentdynamin - dependentpathwaysare differentially sensitive to the amount of mutant available . Dynamin1 knockout mice die shortly af - ter birth . It appears that the large increase in clathrin - coated proﬁles ( including those connected to tubular plasma membrane in - vaginations ) at resting state in neurons from these mice occurs predominantly at inhibitory synapses , similar to effects reported for synap - tojanin knockout mice ( 209 , 210 ) . In other synapses perhaps , although dynamin1 usu - ally performs vesicle endocytosis , other dy - namins may compensate in CME , or clathrin - independent mechanisms that may normally be more silent are upregulated in extent , and only when synapses are strongly stimulated , does the lack of dynamin1 become apparent . Before the precise function of each dynamin splice variant is known , it is difﬁcult to pre - dict in which particular splice variant back - ground mutants should be produced in order to study speciﬁc effects of their overexpres - sion . Dynamin inhibitors show great promise for acute dynamin inhibition ( 211 ) , and the use of these will allow more simple interrogation of the roles of dynamin and provide novel in - sight into whether and how dynamin regulates particular endocytic pathways . 31 . 30 Doherty · McMahon A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 THE CONTROL OF ENDOCYTOSIS AND ITS PHYSIOLOGICAL IMPORTANCE Although much is known about the role of CME , it is unclear why distinct endocytic path - ways are required in vivo . This may be due to differential requirements for many param - eters , including speed , cell signaling , cargo de - livery to speciﬁc compartments , and membrane area / lipidturnover . Endocytosisintimatelyreg - ulates many processes , including nutrient up - take , cell adhesion and migration , signaling , pathogen entry , synaptic transmission , receptor downregulation , antigen presentation , cell po - larity , mitosis , growth and differentiation , and drug delivery . We discuss only some intriguing examples here . The recycling / degradation fate of a receptor isdependentonendocyticmechanisms . Indeed , although clathrin - independent EGFR endocy - tosis appears to target the receptor to be de - graded , EGFR internalized by CME appears to be recycled to the plasma membrane where it can continue to participate in signaling ( 212 ) . Such observations have dramatic implications for drug discovery , opening up new avenues to modulate cell signaling pathways . For exam - ple , EGFR is hyperactive in many cancers , and routing this receptor to clathrin - independent mechanisms , e . g . , by CME adaptor function inhibition , should enhance degradation of the receptor and abrogate signaling . The study of endocytic mechanisms also provides a ba - sis for the understanding of drug delivery and will hopefully inspire new techniques to deliver drugs to speciﬁc intracellular locations . The abilities of cargo molecules to asso - ciate with adaptor proteins of the CME ma - chinery and their relative afﬁnities for dis - tinct types of membrane lipids ( which could , in clathrin - independent endocytic events , as - sume the role of protein adaptors in CME ) will likely ultimately determine whether these proteins are internalized by clathrin - dependent or - independent mechanisms . Likewise , dif - ferent subtypes of both clathrin - dependent and clathrin - independent endocytosis will be coordinately regulated such that appropriate further trafﬁcking may occur in response to ligation of protein or lipid receptors . The com - mon dependence of clathrin - independent en - docytic pathways on cholesterol and tyrosine kinaseactivityissuggestiveofacommontypeof mechanism underlying these pathways and may provide the basis through which this control can be studied . There is a distinction between what are known as constitutive ( where endocy - tosis continuously occurs in the absence of ac - tivation by ligands ) and induced forms ( where endocytosis is stimulated by ligand binding and downstreamevents ) ofendocytosis ( 34 ) . Clearly these require differential signaling modulation , and receptor clustering , ubiquitination and kinases appear to be important in this ; these are well reviewed elsewhere [ see e . g . , ( 213 ) ] . Be - cause many ligands undergo both types of inter - nalization , because distinct endocytic pathways can be speciﬁcally upregulated in extent , and because there are often many difﬁculties in dis - tinguishing between these two modes , this issue has not been considered further here , nor has the issue of apicobasal polarity , where distinct endocytic mechanisms operate at distinct poles , because this is also discussed elsewhere ( 47 ) . Data from work in insulin - stimulated cells may provide a mechanism ( albeit perhaps oversimplistic ) to explain how and why inter - nalization by distinct endocytic pathways may be endogenously controlled in a physiological process . In unstimulated adipocytes , the GLUT4 glucose transporter is usually inter - nalized by a cholesterol - dependent pathway , with a minority going in via a slow AP2 - dependent pathway ( owing to the presence of a FQQI intracellular motif ) . Upon treatment with insulin , uptake through the cholesterol - dependent pathway is inhibited through a broad effect on cholesterol - dependent endo - cytic mechanisms ( 214 ) . Consequently , more of the transporter may be presented upon the cell surface to participate in glucose transport ( presumably because FQQI motifs cannot be as efﬁciently recruited into CCPs as can canonical recruitment motifs ) , despite an increase in transferrin receptor endocytosis occurring in www . annualreviews . org • Mechanisms of Endocytosis 31 . 31 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 insulin - treated cells . This may be reversed in vivo by a classical negative feedback mechanism whereby the induced fall in plasma glucose concentrations , through glucose uptake into cells , will result in reduced insulin secretion , whereupon a shift back to a predominantly cholesterol - dependent , AP2 - independent type of internalization occurs . This mechanism may act in concert with insulin - stimulated exocytosis of GLUT4 - containing vesicles . It is well - known that receptor tyrosine kinases ( such as the EGF , PDGF , and HGF receptors ) are capable of undergoing CME , and in the presence of low EGF concentrations , the majority of EGF receptors undergo CME and are not ubiquitinated . At higher levels of EGF , where the receptor is endocytosed via CDR - associated mechanisms , the receptor becomes ubiquitinated and degraded ( 215 ) , presumably to allow growth factor gradient - sensing capabilities to be restored as well as to avoid a massive response to sustained signaling . EGFR signaling appears to differ depending on microdomain / nonmicrodomain association , as well as on endosomal location , perhaps owing to the relative partitioning of downstream effector molecules [ e . g . , H - Ras is enriched in lipid microdomains , whereas K - Ras is excluded from these regions ( 216 ) ] . Thus , the switching of endocytic mechanism might not only inﬂuence the fate of the receptor , but also the extent and type of signaling that can ensue after ligation . Surprisingly , clathrin - independent endocytosis of the EGFR appears to be dependent on epsin , eps15 , and eps15R , proteins heavily implicated in CME mech - anisms ( 215 ) , and such studies suggest that caution be advised when interpreting results relying on the modulation of these proteins . As with EGFRs , TGF β Rs are endocytosed by both clathrin - dependent and cholesterol / caveolin1 - dependent pathways . CME of the receptor seems to occur upon association with Smad anchor for receptor activation ( SARA ) and permits signaling ( 217 ) , presumably by allowing interaction with downstream sig - naling components such as Smad proteins . By contrast , endocytosis of this receptor via clathrin - independent pathways appears to enhance receptor degradation ( 217 ) . Such rerouting appears to be dependent on the inter - action of the receptor with the Smad7 - Smurf2 E3 ubiquitin ligase ( 218 ) . Although the PDGFR induces CDRs at high concentrations of PDGF , it undergoes CME at low concentrations of PDGF . Low concentrations of PDGF induce cell migration , whereas higher doses induce cell proliferation ( 219 ) . It is likely therefore distinct endosomal membranes are controlling very different sig - nalingpathwaysdownstreamofPDGFligation . The cross talk between signaling and endocy - tosis has been reviewed elsewhere ( 220 ) and is a hot area of research . Endosomal control of cell signaling has been conserved even in ﬂies where physiological Notch signaling requires entry of the receptor into endosomes ( 221 ) . Caveolin1 increases the export of , and the total amount of , free cholesterol in cells ( 222 ) . A role for caveolin1 in the regulation of in - tracellular lipid homeostasis has been proposed owing to these results and to the ﬁnding that it regulatescellularfattyaciduptake ( 223 ) . Parton & Simons ( 10 ) have recently argued how cave - olae may function as stores for microdomain - associated lipids and have suggested that com - munication between lipid droplets ( fat - storing organelles ) and caveolae might allow the reg - ulation of lipid storage and release within the cell . Another putative , but elegant , role for the function of caveolin1 , and associated caveolae , is in the storage of apparent membrane surface area ( i . e . , the area of the membrane that would be able to interact with ﬂat surfaces parallel to the major plane of the plasma membrane ; this includes the apparent spaces in the main mem - brane plane formed by , for example , caveolar invaginations ) because ﬂattening of infoldings would be expected to increase this area . Some evidence exists that caveolin1 and caveolae may respond to shear stress and cellular stretch ( 10 ) . Stretch results in the redistribution of caveolin1 ( presumably from caveolae ) to sites of adhe - sion ( 224 ) . Becausecaveolin1atadhesionsitesis not associated with caveolae , presumably then , 31 . 32 Doherty · McMahon A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 this redistribution is concomitant with caveo - lar collapse and an increase in apparent surface area . As caveolae can undergo kiss - and - run fu - sion and ﬁssion with and from the plasma mem - brane ( 37 ) , this may contribute to the ﬂexibil - ity of such regulation . Such mechanisms may allow for cellular elasticity and counter forces that might otherwise result in the ripping of the plasma membrane . Consistent with this , the shape changes that follow ICAM1 - dependent adhesion of neutrophils to lung endothelial cells and accompany hyperpermeability of this sitearecaveolin1dependent ( 225 ) . Intriguingly , caveolae are enriched in cell types that are most exposed to physiological stretch and shear . Caveolae are extensively implicated in the modulation of signaling events , but whether and how this is coupled to endocytosis is not known . The N - terminal domain of caveolin1 interacts with a variety of signaling molecules , including src family kinases ( 226 ) , H - Ras ( 227 ) , and eNOS ( 228 ) . Caveolin1 also interacts with the kinase domain of the EGFR and negatively regulates its kinase activity ( 229 ) . G α subunits of heterotrimeric G proteins are enriched in caveolae and interact with caveolin1 , an inter - action which also appears to negatively regu - late their signaling ( 143 ) . Certainly caveolin1 appears to have many effects on important cel - lular processes , including the regulation of cell growth and division , mitogen - activated protein kinase signaling , and contact inhibition ( 10 ) . It also appears to act as a tumor suppressor pro - tein in cultured cells ( 230 ) , yet caveolin1 - null mice have no increased cancer incidence , sug - gesting that loss of the protein alone is not sufﬁcient to produce malignancies [ despite an increase in cell proliferation observed in the mammary glands of these mice ( 231 ) ] . How - ever , mutations have been found in caveolin1 in breast cancer tissue , and loss of this protein may therefore promote progression to cancer ( 232 , 233 ) . Consistent with this , dysplastic lesions are found more often in caveolin1 - null mice than in heterozygotic mice on a breast tumor - prone genetic background ( 234 ) , and caveolin1 - null mice are more prone to developing malignan - cies from epithelially applied carcinogens ( 235 ) . CME and clathrin - independent endocytosis are both stimulated by an increase in cytoso - lic Ca 2 + concentrations in pancreatic β - cells , likely as a result of increased exocytosis . In - deed , exocytosis and endocytosis are intimately coupled ( 166 ) . The clathrin - independent path - way identiﬁed here is actin - and dynamin - dependent and is stimulated by higher Ca 2 + concentrations than the CME pathway . The roles of these distinct pathways remain to be established but are reminiscent of fast clathrin - independent endocytosis at synapses , where CME appears to have a role in slower vesi - cle retrieval to maintain synaptic area ( 236 ) . The precise contribution and roles of presynap - tic CME and clathrin - independent endocytic pathways are currently under hot debate . The most controversial debate of all is whether kiss - and - run exo - endocytic cycling occurs ( 237 ) . In this process exocytosed vesicles do not fully col - lapse into the plasma membrane but transiently fuse , allowing content release before rapid en - docytosis , and this process presumably requires less energy than endocytosis after full collapse and has been shown to occur in other cell types ( 238 ) . Endocytosis , and membrane trafﬁcking in general , hasbeenintimatelylinkedtotheability of cells to move . In Supplementary Informa - tion , we discuss links between endocytic mech - anisms , cell - matrix adhesion turnover , and cell migration ( see also Supplementary Figure 4 ) . ENDOCYTOSIS AND DISEASE Given the obvious importance of the exo - endocytic cycle , it is not surprising that this and other membrane trafﬁcking pathways are often disrupted in human disease ( 239 , 240 ) , and this link could be much more far reach - ing than previously anticipated given the vari - ety of processes endocytosis regulates [ which now include even sex steroid internalization ( 241 ) previously thought to occur via diffu - sion through the plasma membrane ] and the plethora of proteins being identiﬁed as endo - cytic proteins . With the probable vital impor - tance of many core endocytic components and www . annualreviews . org • Mechanisms of Endocytosis 31 . 33 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 key adaptors , these proteins are unlikely to be found commonly mutated in human disease or ( given the robustness of the network of core components ) result in mild phenotypes if mu - tated ( 4 ) . Mostofthemutationsmaybefoundin more specialized accessory proteins or in cargo proteins themselves . For example , the LDL re - ceptor adaptor protein ARH , which links the receptor to clathrin and AP2 and allows it to be recruited to CCPs ( 242 ) , is mutated in autoso - mal recessive hypercholesterolemia . Caveolin3 is found mutated in a variety of dominant my - opathies and muscular dystrophies . However , alongside mutations in canonical endocyticproteins , itisalsopossiblethatseveral neurodegenerative conditions either produce or are caused by defects in endocytic processes . Much thought on endocytic abnormalities ac - companying neurodegeneration has focused on these as downstream consequences of protein aggregation , which could be caused by titration ofcellularproteinsinto , orcytotoxicityof , these aggregations . It is possible , however , that such endocytic defects are more primary in these dis - easesandthataggregatesandotherpathological and clinical ﬁndings form downstream of endo - cytic defects , for example , through aggregation and loss of function of the aggregation - prone protein . For example , polyglutamine expan - sions in ataxin2 can cause spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 . Although the normal function of ataxin2 is not clear , it seems to inhibit EGFR inter - nalization and intriguingly binds to endophilin A1 and A3 , suggesting an important role for ataxin2 in endocytic regulation ( 243 ) . Endo - cytic / retrograde trafﬁcking phenotypes are also earlyfeaturesofAlzheimer’sdiseaseandDown’s syndrome ( 244 , 245 ) . Furthermore , huntingtin and HAP40 interact and appear to act as an effector complex for rab5 in control of endo - some dynamics , reducing their overall motility by favoring the association of such organelles with actin over microtubules ( 246 ) . Huntingtin interacts with membranes , and this membrane interaction is critical for huntingtin aggrega - tion ( 247 ) . The toxic A β protein associated with plaques in Alzheimer’s disease is released from amyloid precursor protein ( APP ) in an endocytosis - dependent manner , and ﬂotillin2 , whichpromotescholesterol - dependentcluster - ing of APP on cell surfaces , is necessary for a portion of APP uptake by neurons by CME and A β generation ( 248 ) . The desmosomal cadherin Dsg3 is a tar - get for autoantibodies in pemphigus vulgaris , and these antibodies induce Dsg3 endocytosis through a clathrin - and dynamin - independent pathway , seemingly resulting in loss of desmo - somal adhesion ( 249 ) . Ordinarily cadherins un - dergo endocytosis by both CME and clathrin - independent mechanisms , and the endocytic regulation of sites of cell - cell adhesion has been reviewed elsewhere ( 250 ) . It is important that we study in detail the endogenous mechanisms of endocytosis to ever fully understand how these contribute to health and thereby how their dysregulation contributes to in human disease . SUMMARY POINTS 1 . Endocytosishasmanyfunctions . Itcontrolsthecompositionoftheplasmamembraneand thus controls how cells respond to , and interact with , their environments . For example , endocytosis plays key roles in nutrient uptake , cell signaling , and cell shape changes . 2 . There are many distinct endocytic pathways that coexist in mammalian cells . In this re - view , we outlined ten different pathways . Currently pathways are best deﬁned through their differential dependencies on certain lipids and proteins , including clathrin , cave - olin1 , ﬂotillin1 , GRAF1 , kinases , small G proteins , actin , and dynamin . Although some cargoes enter exclusively by one pathway , most cargoes can enter by several pathways . 31 . 34 Doherty · McMahon A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 3 . Any endocytic mechanism requires the coordinated action of proteins that are capable of deforming the plasma membrane to produce highly curved endocytic intermediates and proteins that can induce scission of these intermediates from the plasma membrane . Such proteins include ENTH domain - containing proteins , BAR superfamily proteins , arf family small G proteins , proteins that nucleate actin polymerization , and dynamin superfamily proteins . The best understood mechanism is clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) . 4 . Although caveolae have been extensively reported as endocytic intermediates , the con - tributions of caveolae to endocytosis are uncertain . 5 . The molecular and functional dissection of endocytic mechanisms is vital for the under - standing of many physiological phenomena and disease processes . Such understanding will allow the rational discovery of novel therapeutic agents . FUTURE ISSUES 1 . How is clathrin - coated pit ( CCP ) formation coupled to cargo incorporation ? What con - trols CCP size , and how is CCP ﬁssion regulated by dynamin ? How are the membrane curvature - modulating proteins acting in CME spatiotemporally coordinated ? 2 . What are the cell biological functions of clathrin - independent endocytic pathways , and how are they controlled ? How is cargo recruited to these membranes ? Is cargo con - centrated by adaptor proteins ? What are their coat proteins ? How is membrane curva - ture generated in these pathways ? How is the scission of these endocytic membranes mediated ? 3 . What are the distinct features of CME and clathrin - independent endocytosis in cell signaling and cargo delivery ? How is entry of cargoes that can enter by multiple pathways controlled ? DISCLOSURE STATEMENT The authors are not aware of any afﬁliations , memberships , funding , or ﬁnancial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors would like to apologize to the many people whose work we have not been able to include owing to space restrictions and thank Richard Lundmark for years of interesting and challenging conversations about the nature of clathrin - independent endocytic pathways . LITERATURE CITED 1 . Hoeller D , Volarevic S , Dikic I . 2005 . Compartmentalization of growth factor receptor signalling . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 17 : 107 – 11 2 . Marsh M , Helenius A . 2006 . Virus entry : open sesame . Cell 124 : 729 – 40 www . annualreviews . org • Mechanisms of Endocytosis 31 . 35 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 3 . Sorkin A . 2004 . Cargo recognition during clathrin - mediated endocytosis : a team effort . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 16 : 392 – 99 4 . Schmid EM , McMahon HT . 2007 . Integrating molecular and network biology to decode endocytosis . Nature 448 : 883 – 88 5 . Ford MG , Pearse BM , Higgins MK , Vallis Y , Owen DJ , et al . 2001 . Simultaneous binding of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 and clathrin by AP180 in the nucleation of clathrin lattices on membranes . Science 291 : 1051 – 55 6 . Mayor S , Pagano RE . 2007 . Pathways of clathrin - independent endocytosis . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 8 : 603 – 12 7 . Kirkham M , Parton RG . 2005 . Clathrin - independent endocytosis : new insights into caveolae and non - caveolar lipid raft carriers . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1746 : 349 – 63 8 . Kirkham M , Fujita A , Chadda R , Nixon SJ , Kurzchalia TV , et al . 2005 . Ultrastructural identiﬁcation of uncoated caveolin - independent early endocytic vehicles . J . Cell Biol . 168 : 465 – 76 9 . Roth TF , Porter KR . 1964 . Yolk protein uptake in the oocyte of the mosquito Aedes aegypti L . J . Cell Biol . 20 : 313 – 32 10 . Parton RG , Simons K . 2007 . The multiple faces of caveolae . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 8 : 185 – 94 11 . Rothberg KG , Heuser JE , Donzell WC , Ying YS , Glenney JR , Anderson RG . 1992 . Caveolin , a protein component of caveolae membrane coats . Cell 68 : 673 – 82 12 . Marbet P , Rahner C , Stieger B , Landmann L . 2006 . Quantitative microscopy reveals 3D organization and kinetics of endocytosis in rat hepatocytes . Microsc . Res . Tech . 69 : 693 – 707 13 . Sabharanjak S , Sharma P , Parton RG , Mayor S . 2002 . GPI - anchored proteins are delivered to recycling endosomes via a distinct cdc42 - regulated , clathrin - independent pinocytic pathway . Dev . Cell 2 : 411 – 23 14 . Lundmark R , Doherty GJ , Howes MT , Cortese K , Vallis Y , et al . 2008 . The GTPase - activating protein GRAF1 regulates the CLIC / GEEC endocytic pathway . Curr . Biol . 18 : 1802 – 8 15 . Schmid EM , Ford MG , Burtey A , Praefcke GJ , Peak - Chew SY , et al . 2006 . Role of the AP2 beta - appendage hub in recruiting partners for clathrin - coated vesicle assembly . PLoS Biol . 4 : e262 16 . PraefckeGJ , McMahonHT . 2004 . Thedynaminsuperfamily : universalmembranetubulationandﬁssion molecules ? Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 5 : 133 – 47 17 . Marks MS , Woodruff L , Ohno H , Bonifacino JS . 1996 . Protein targeting by tyrosine - and di - leucine - based signals : evidence for distinct saturable components . J . Cell Biol . 135 : 341 – 54 18 . Collawn JF , Stangel M , Kuhn LA , Esekogwu V , Jing SQ , et al . 1990 . Transferrin receptor internalization sequence YXRF implicates a tight turn as the structural recognition motif for endocytosis . Cell 63 : 1061 – 72 19 . Nossal R . 2001 . Energetics of clathrin basket assembly . Trafﬁc 2 : 138 – 47 20 . PoloS , SigismundS , FarettaM , GuidiM , CapuaMR , etal . 2002 . Asinglemotifresponsibleforubiquitin recognition and monoubiquitination in endocytic proteins . Nature 416 : 451 – 55 21 . Ford MG , Mills IG , Peter BJ , Vallis Y , Praefcke GJ , et al . 2002 . Curvature of clathrin - coated pits driven by epsin . Nature 419 : 361 – 66 22 . Hinrichsen L , Meyerholz A , Groos S , Ungewickell EJ . 2006 . Bending a membrane : how clathrin affects budding . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 : 8715 – 20 23 . Wolfe BL , Trejo J . 2007 . Clathrin - dependent mechanisms of G protein – coupled receptor endocytosis . Trafﬁc 8 : 462 – 70 24 . Laporte SA , Oakley RH , Holt JA , Barak LS , Caron MG . 2000 . The interaction of beta - arrestin with the AP - 2 adaptor is required for the clustering of beta 2 - adrenergic receptor into clathrin - coated pits . J . Biol . Chem . 275 : 23120 – 26 25 . Maurer ME , Cooper JA . 2006 . The adaptor protein Dab2 sorts LDL receptors into coated pits inde - pendently of AP - 2 and ARH . J . Cell Sci . 119 : 4235 – 46 26 . Santolini E , Puri C , Salcini AE , Gagliani MC , Pelicci PG , et al . 2000 . Numb is an endocytic protein . J . Cell Biol . 151 : 1345 – 52 27 . Lundmark R , Carlsson SR . 2003 . Sorting nexin 9 participates in clathrin - mediated endocytosis through interactions with the core components . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 46772 – 81 28 . Lundmark R , Carlsson SR . 2004 . Regulated membrane recruitment of dynamin - 2 mediated by sorting nexin 9 . J . Biol . Chem . 279 : 42694 – 702 31 . 36 Doherty · McMahon A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 29 . Yoshida Y , Kinuta M , Abe T , Liang S , Araki K , et al . 2004 . The stimulatory action of amphiphysin on dynamin function is dependent on lipid bilayer curvature . EMBO J . 23 : 3483 – 91 30 . Peter BJ , Kent HM , Mills IG , Vallis Y , Butler PJ , et al . 2004 . BAR domains as sensors of membrane curvature : the amphiphysin BAR structure . Science 303 : 495 – 99 31 . David C , McPherson PS , Mundigl O , de Camilli P . 1996 . A role of amphiphysin in synaptic vesicle endocytosis suggested by its binding to dynamin in nerve terminals . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 93 : 331 – 35 32 . EndoY , SugiyamaA , LiSA , OhmoriK , OhataH , etal . 2008 . Regulationofclathrin - mediatedendocytosis by p53 . Genes Cells 13 : 375 – 86 33 . Balklava Z , Pant S , Fares H , Grant BD . 2007 . Genome - wide analysis identiﬁes a general requirement for polarity proteins in endocytic trafﬁc . Nat . Cell Biol . 9 : 1066 – 73 34 . Benmerah A , Lamaze C . 2007 . Clathrin - coated pits : Vive la difference ? Trafﬁc 8 : 970 – 82 35 . Puthenveedu MA , von Zastrow M . 2006 . Cargo regulates clathrin - coated pit dynamics . Cell 127 : 113 – 24 36 . Tosoni D , Puri C , Confalonieri S , Salcini AE , De Camilli P , et al . 2005 . TTP speciﬁcally regulates the internalization of the transferrin receptor . Cell 123 : 875 – 88 37 . PelkmansL , ZerialM . 2005 . Kinase - regulatedquantalassembliesandkiss - and - runrecyclingofcaveolae . Nature 436 : 128 – 33 38 . LipardiC , MoraR , ColomerV , PaladinoS , NitschL , etal . 1998 . Caveolintransfectionresultsincaveolae formation but not apical sorting of glycosylphosphatidylinositol ( GPI ) - anchored proteins in epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 140 : 617 – 26 39 . Dietzen DJ , Hastings WR , Lublin DM . 1995 . Caveolin is palmitoylated on multiple cysteine residues . Palmitoylation is not necessary for localization of caveolin to caveolae . J . Biol . Chem . 270 : 6838 – 42 40 . Monier S , Dietzen DJ , Hastings WR , Lublin DM , Kurzchalia TV . 1996 . Oligomerization of VIP21 - caveolin in vitro is stabilized by long chain fatty acylation or cholesterol . FEBS Lett . 388 : 143 – 49 41 . Sargiacomo M , Scherer PE , Tang Z , Kubler E , Song KS , et al . 1995 . Oligomeric structure of caveolin : implications for caveolae membrane organization . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 92 : 9407 – 11 42 . Parton RG , Hanzal - Bayer M , Hancock JF . 2006 . Biogenesis of caveolae : a structural model for caveolin - induced domain formation . J . Cell Sci . 119 : 787 – 96 43 . FraAM , MasseriniM , PalestiniP , SonninoS , SimonsK . 1995 . Aphoto - reactivederivativeofganglioside GM1 speciﬁcally cross - links VIP21 - caveolin on the cell surface . FEBS Lett . 375 : 11 – 14 44 . Richter T , Floetenmeyer M , Ferguson C , Galea J , Goh J , et al . 2008 . High - resolution 3D quantitative analysis of caveolar ultrastructure and caveola - cytoskeleton interactions . Trafﬁc 9 : 893 – 909 45 . Cheng ZJ , Singh RD , Marks DL , Pagano RE . 2006 . Membrane microdomains , caveolae , and caveolar endocytosis of sphingolipids . Mol . Membr . Biol . 23 : 101 – 10 46 . Parton RG , Molero JC , Floetenmeyer M , Green KM , James DE . 2002 . Characterization of a distinct plasma membrane macrodomain in differentiated adipocytes . J . Biol . Chem . 277 : 46769 – 78 47 . Sandvig K , Torgersen ML , Raa HA , van Deurs B . 2008 . Clathrin - independent endocytosis : from nonex - isting to an extreme degree of complexity . Histochem . Cell Biol . 129 : 267 – 76 48 . NevinsAK , ThurmondDC . 2006 . Caveolin - 1functionsasanovelCdc42guaninenucleotidedissociation inhibitor in pancreatic beta - cells . J . Biol . Chem . 281 : 18961 – 72 49 . Heltianu C , Dobrila L , Antohe F , Simionescu M . 1989 . Evidence for thyroxine transport by the lung and heart capillary endothelium . Microvasc . Res . 37 : 188 – 203 50 . ParkDS , CohenAW , FrankPG , RazaniB , LeeH , etal . 2003 . Caveolin - 1null ( − / − ) miceshowdramatic reductions in life span . Biochemistry 42 : 15124 – 31 51 . Drab M , Verkade P , Elger M , Kasper M , Lohn M , et al . 2001 . Loss of caveolae , vascular dysfunction , and pulmonary defects in caveolin - 1 gene - disrupted mice . Science 293 : 2449 – 52 52 . Schubert W , Frank PG , Woodman SE , Hyogo H , Cohen DE , et al . 2002 . Microvascular hyperperme - ability in caveolin - 1 ( − / − ) knock - out mice . Treatment with a speciﬁc nitric - oxide synthase inhibitor , L - NAME , restores normal microvascular permeability in Cav - 1 null mice . J . Biol . Chem . 277 : 40091 – 98 53 . Fernandez MA , Albor C , Ingelmo - Torres M , Nixon SJ , Ferguson C , et al . 2006 . Caveolin - 1 is essential for liver regeneration . Science 313 : 1628 – 32 54 . Nabi IR , Le PU . 2003 . Caveolae / raft - dependent endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 161 : 673 – 77 55 . Hernandez - Deviez DJ , Howes MT , Laval SH , Bushby K , Hancock JF , Parton RG . 2008 . Caveolin regulates endocytosis of the muscle repair protein , dysferlin . J . Biol . Chem . 283 : 6476 – 88 www . annualreviews . org • Mechanisms of Endocytosis 31 . 37 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 56 . Thomsen P , Roepstorff K , Stahlhut M , van Deurs B . 2002 . Caveolae are highly immobile plasma mem - brane microdomains , which are not involved in constitutive endocytic trafﬁcking . Mol . Biol . Cell 13 : 238 – 50 57 . Pelkmans L , Burli T , Zerial M , Helenius A . 2004 . Caveolin - stabilized membrane domains as multifunc - tional transport and sorting devices in endocytic membrane trafﬁc . Cell 118 : 767 – 80 58 . Sharma DK , Brown JC , Choudhury A , Peterson TE , Holicky E , et al . 2004 . Selective stimulation of caveolar endocytosis by glycosphingolipids and cholesterol . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 : 3114 – 22 59 . Sharma DK , Choudhury A , Singh RD , Wheatley CL , Marks DL , Pagano RE . 2003 . Glycosphingolipids internalized via caveolar - related endocytosis rapidly merge with the clathrin pathway in early endosomes and form microdomains for recycling . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 7564 – 72 60 . Cheng ZJ , Singh RD , Sharma DK , Holicky EL , Hanada K , et al . 2006 . Distinct mechanisms of clathrin - independent endocytosis have unique sphingolipid requirements . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 : 3197 – 210 61 . Schlegel A , Arvan P , Lisanti MP . 2001 . Caveolin - 1 binding to endoplasmic reticulum membranes and entry into the regulated secretory pathway are regulated by serine phosphorylation . Protein sorting at the level of the endoplasmic reticulum . J . Biol . Chem . 276 : 4398 – 408 62 . Krajewska WM , Maslowska I . 2004 . Caveolins : structure and function in signal transduction . Cell Mol . Biol . Lett . 9 : 195 – 220 63 . Hill MM , Bastiani M , Luetterforst R , Kirkham M , Kirkham A , et al . 2008 . PTRF - Cavin , a conserved cytoplasmic protein required for caveola formation and function . Cell 132 : 113 – 24 64 . Glebov OO , Bright NA , Nichols BJ . 2006 . Flotillin - 1 deﬁnes a clathrin - independent endocytic pathway in mammalian cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 8 : 46 – 54 65 . Frick M , Bright NA , Riento K , Bray A , Merriﬁed C , Nichols BJ . 2007 . Coassembly of ﬂotillins induces formationofmembranemicrodomains , membranecurvature , andvesiclebudding . Curr . Biol . 17 : 1151 – 56 66 . Langhorst MF , Reuter A , Jaeger FA , Wippich FM , Luxenhofer G , et al . 2008 . Trafﬁcking of the mi - crodomain scaffolding protein reggie - 1 / ﬂotillin - 2 . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 87 : 211 – 26 67 . Payne CK , Jones SA , Chen C , Zhuang X . 2007 . Internalization and trafﬁcking of cell surface proteogly - cans and proteoglycan - binding ligands . Trafﬁc 8 : 389 – 401 68 . Kirkham M , Nixon SJ , Howes MT , Abi - Rached L , Wakeham DE , et al . 2008 . Evolutionary analysis and molecular dissection of caveola biogenesis . J . Cell Sci . 121 : 2075 – 86 69 . Damm EM , Pelkmans L , Kartenbeck J , Mezzacasa A , Kurzchalia T , Helenius A . 2005 . Clathrin - and caveolin - 1 - independent endocytosis : entry of simian virus 40 into cells devoid of caveolae . J . Cell Biol . 168 : 477 – 88 70 . Chadda R , Howes MT , Plowman SJ , Hancock JF , Parton RG , Mayor S . 2007 . Cholesterol - sensitive cdc42 activation regulates actin polymerization for endocytosis via the GEEC pathway . Trafﬁc 8 : 702 – 17 71 . Kalia M , Kumari S , Chadda R , Hill MM , Parton RG , Mayor S . 2006 . Arf6 - independent GPI - anchored protein - enriched early endosomal compartments fuse with sorting endosomes via a Rab5 / phosphatidylinositol - 3 (cid:5) - kinase - dependent machinery . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 : 3689 – 704 72 . Sarasij RC , Mayor S , Rao M . 2007 . Chirality induced budding : a raft - mediated mechanism for endocy - tosis and morphology of caveolae ? Biophys . J . 92 : 3140 – 58 73 . Mayor S , Rothberg KG , Maxﬁeld FR . 1994 . Sequestration of GPI - anchored proteins in caveolae trig - gered by cross - linking . Science 264 : 1948 – 51 74 . Fujimoto T . 1996 . GPI - anchored proteins , glycosphingolipids , and sphingomyelin are sequestered to caveolae only after crosslinking . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 44 : 929 – 41 75 . Parton RG , Joggerst B , Simons K . 1994 . Regulated internalization of caveolae . J . Cell Biol . 127 : 1199 – 215 76 . Rijnboutt S , Jansen G , Posthuma G , Hynes JB , Schornagel JH , Strous GJ . 1996 . Endocytosis of GPI - linked membrane folate receptor - alpha . J . Cell Biol . 132 : 35 – 47 77 . Fivaz M , Vilbois F , Thurnheer S , Pasquali C , Abrami L , et al . 2002 . Differential sorting and fate of endocytosed GPI - anchored proteins . EMBO J . 21 : 3989 – 4000 78 . Lamaze C , Dujeancourt A , Baba T , Lo CG , Benmerah A , Dautry - Varsat A . 2001 . Interleukin 2 receptors and detergent - resistant membrane domains deﬁne a clathrin - independent endocytic pathway . Mol . Cell 7 : 661 – 71 79 . Grassart A , Dujeancourt A , Lazarow PB , Dautry - Varsat A , Sauvonnet N . 2008 . Clathrin - independent endocytosis used by the IL - 2 receptor is regulated by Rac1 , Pak1 and Pak2 . EMBO Rep . 9 : 356 – 62 31 . 38 Doherty · McMahon A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 80 . Sauvonnet N , Dujeancourt A , Dautry - Varsat A . 2005 . Cortactin and dynamin are required for the clathrin - independent endocytosis of γ c cytokine receptor . J . Cell Biol . 168 : 155 – 63 81 . Fattakhova G , Masilamani M , Borrego F , Gilﬁllan AM , Metcalfe DD , Coligan JE . 2006 . The high - afﬁnity immunoglobulin - E receptor ( FcepsilonRI ) is endocytosed by an AP - 2 / clathrin - independent , dynamin - dependent mechanism . Trafﬁc 7 : 673 – 85 82 . Naslavsky N , Weigert R , Donaldson JG . 2004 . Characterization of a nonclathrin endocytic pathway : membrane cargo and lipid requirements . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 : 3542 – 52 83 . DonaldsonJG , Porat - ShliomN , CohenLA . 2009 . Clathrin - independentendocytosis : Auniqueplatform for cell signaling and PM remodeling . Cell Signal . 21 ; 1 – 6 84 . Gong Q , Weide M , Huntsman C , Xu Z , Jan LY , Ma D . 2007 . Identiﬁcation and characterization of a new class of trafﬁcking motifs for controlling clathrin - independent internalization and recycling . J . Biol . Chem . 282 : 13087 – 97 85 . Nichols BJ , Kenworthy AK , Polishchuk RS , Lodge R , Roberts TH , et al . 2001 . Rapid cycling of lipid raft markers between the cell surface and Golgi complex . J . Cell Biol . 153 : 529 – 41 86 . Martin OC , Pagano RE . 1994 . Internalization and sorting of a ﬂuorescent analogue of glucosylceramide to the Golgi apparatus of human skin ﬁbroblasts : utilization of endocytic and nonendocytic transport mechanisms . J . Cell Biol . 125 : 769 – 81 87 . Dharmawardhane S , Schurmann A , Sells MA , Chernoff J , Schmid SL , Bokoch GM . 2000 . Regulation of macropinocytosis by p21 - activated kinase - 1 . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 : 3341 – 52 88 . Knaus UG , Wang Y , Reilly AM , Warnock D , Jackson JH . 1998 . Structural requirements for PAK activation by Rac GTPases . J . Biol Chem . 273 : 21512 – 18 89 . Amyere M , Payrastre B , Krause U , Van Der Smissen P , Veithen A , Courtoy PJ . 2000 . Constitutive macropinocytosis in oncogene - transformed ﬁbroblasts depends on sequential permanent activation of phosphoinositide 3 - kinase and phospholipase C . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 : 3453 – 67 90 . Veithen A , Cupers P , Baudhuin P , Courtoy PJ . 1996 . v - Src induces constitutive macropinocytosis in rat ﬁbroblasts . J . Cell Sci . 109 ( Part 8 ) : 2005 – 12 91 . Gao YS , Hubbert CC , Lu J , Lee YS , Lee JY , Yao TP . 2007 . Histone deacetylase 6 regulates growth factor - induced actin remodeling and endocytosis . Mol . Cell . Biol . 27 : 8637 – 47 92 . Grimmer S , van Deurs B , Sandvig K . 2002 . Membrane rufﬂing and macropinocytosis in A431 cells require cholesterol . J . Cell Sci . 115 : 2953 – 62 93 . Ma˜nesS , LacalleRA , G´omez - Mout´onC , Mart´ınezAC . 2003 . Fromraftstocrafts : membraneasymmetry in moving cells . Trends Immunol . 24 : 320 – 26 94 . Haigler HT , McKanna JA , Cohen S . 1979 . Rapid stimulation of pinocytosis in human carcinoma cells A - 431 by epidermal growth factor . J . Cell Biol . 83 : 82 – 90 95 . Yamamoto M , Toya Y , Jensen RA , Ishikawa Y . 1999 . Caveolin is an inhibitor of platelet - derived growth factor receptor signaling . Exp . Cell Res . 247 : 380 – 88 96 . Park WY , Park JS , Cho KA , Kim DI , Ko YG , et al . 2000 . Up - regulation of caveolin attenuates epidermal growth factor signaling in senescent cells . J . Biol . Chem . 275 : 20847 – 52 97 . Fujita Y , Maruyama S , Kogo H , Matsuo S , Fujimoto T . 2004 . Caveolin - 1 in mesangial cells suppresses MAP kinase activation and cell proliferation induced by bFGF and PDGF . Kidney Int . 66 : 1794 – 804 98 . Orth JD , Krueger EW , Weller SG , McNiven MA . 2006 . A novel endocytic mechanism of epidermal growth factor receptor sequestration and internalization . Cancer Res . 66 : 3603 – 10 99 . Orth JD , McNiven MA . 2006 . Get off my back ! Rapid receptor internalization through circular dorsal rufﬂes . Cancer Res . 66 : 11094 – 96 100 . Krueger EW , Orth JD , Cao H , McNiven MA . 2003 . A dynamin - cortactin - Arp2 / 3 complex mediates actin reorganization in growth factor - stimulated cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 : 1085 – 96 101 . Li G , D’Souza - Schorey C , Barbieri MA , Cooper JA , Stahl PD . 1997 . Uncoupling of membrane rufﬂing and pinocytosis during Ras signal transduction . J . Biol . Chem . 272 : 10337 – 40 102 . West MA , Prescott AR , Eskelinen EL , Ridley AJ , Watts C . 2000 . Rac is required for constitutive macropinocytosis by dendritic cells but does not control its downregulation . Curr . Biol . 10 : 839 – 48 103 . Schnatwinkel C , Christoforidis S , Lindsay MR , Uttenweiler - Joseph S , Wilm M , et al . 2004 . The Rab5 effector Rabankyrin - 5 regulates and coordinates different endocytic mechanisms . PLoS Biol . 2 : E261 www . annualreviews . org • Mechanisms of Endocytosis 31 . 39 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 104 . ShaoY , AkmentinW , Toledo - AralJJ , RosenbaumJ , ValdezG , etal . 2002 . Pincher , apinocyticchaperone for nerve growth factor / TrkA signaling endosomes . J . Cell Biol . 157 : 679 – 91 105 . Buccione R , Orth JD , McNiven MA . 2004 . Foot and mouth : podosomes , invadopodia and circular dorsal rufﬂes . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 5 : 647 – 57 106 . McNiven MA , Baldassarre M , Buccione R . 2004 . The role of dynamin in the assembly and function of podosomes and invadopodia . Front . Biosci . 9 : 1944 – 53 107 . Cowieson NP , King G , Cookson D , Ross I , Huber T , et al . 2008 . Cortactin adopts a globular confor - mation and bundles actin into sheets . J . Biol . Chem . 283 : 16187 – 93 108 . MarchisioPC , CirilloD , NaldiniL , PrimaveraMV , TetiA , Zambonin - ZalloneA . 1984 . Cell - substratum interaction of cultured avian osteoclasts is mediated by speciﬁc adhesion structures . J . Cell Biol . 99 : 1696 – 705 109 . Ochoa GC , Slepnev VI , Neff L , Ringstad N , Takei K , et al . 2000 . A functional link between dynamin and the actin cytoskeleton at podosomes . J . Cell Biol . 150 : 377 – 89 110 . Massol P , Montcourrier P , Guillemot JC , Chavrier P . 1998 . Fc receptor - mediated phagocytosis requires CDC42 and Rac1 . EMBO J . 17 : 6219 – 29 111 . Castellano F , Montcourrier P , Chavrier P . 2000 . Membrane recruitment of Rac1 triggers phagocytosis . J . Cell Sci . 113 ( Part 17 ) : 2955 – 61 112 . Hoppe AD , Swanson JA . 2004 . Cdc42 , Rac1 , and Rac2 display distinct patterns of activation during phagocytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 : 3509 – 19 113 . Chimini G , Chavrier P . 2000 . Function of Rho family proteins in actin dynamics during phagocytosis and engulfment . Nat . Cell Biol . 2 : E191 – 96 114 . May RC , Caron E , Hall A , Machesky LM . 2000 . Involvement of the Arp2 / 3 complex in phagocytosis mediated by FcgammaR or CR3 . Nat . Cell Biol . 2 : 246 – 48 115 . BrandtDT , MarionS , GrifﬁthsG , WatanabeT , KaibuchiK , GrosseR . 2007 . Dia1andIQGAP1interact in cell migration and phagocytic cup formation . J . Cell Biol . 178 : 193 – 200 116 . Caron E , Hall A . 1998 . Identiﬁcation of two distinct mechanisms of phagocytosis controlled by different Rho GTPases . Science 282 : 1717 – 21 117 . OlazabalIM , CaronE , MayRC , SchillingK , KnechtDA , MacheskyLM . 2002 . Rho - kinaseandmyosin - II control phagocytic cup formation during CR , but not FcgammaR , phagocytosis . Curr . Biol . 12 : 1413 – 18 118 . Yamada H , Ohashi E , Abe T , Kusumi N , Li SA , et al . 2007 . Amphiphysin 1 is important for actin polymerization during phagocytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 18 : 4669 – 80 119 . Allen LA , Aderem A . 1996 . Molecular deﬁnition of distinct cytoskeletal structures involved in complement - and Fc receptor - mediated phagocytosis in macrophages . J . Exp . Med . 184 : 627 – 37 120 . Overholtzer M , Mailleux AA , Mouneimne G , Normand G , Schnitt SJ , et al . 2007 . A nonapoptotic cell death process , entosis , that occurs by cell - in - cell invasion . Cell 131 : 966 – 79 121 . Marston DJ , Dickinson S , Nobes CD . 2003 . Rac - dependent trans - endocytosis of ephrinBs regulates Eph - ephrin contact repulsion . Nat . Cell Biol . 5 : 879 – 88 122 . Piehl M , Lehmann C , Gumpert A , Denizot JP , Segretain D , Falk MM . 2007 . Internalization of large double - membraneintercellularvesiclesbyaclathrin - dependentendocyticprocess . Mol . Biol . Cell 18 : 337 – 47 123 . Ladant D , Ullmann A . 1999 . Bordatella pertussis adenylate cyclase : a toxin with multiple talents . Trends Microbiol . 7 : 172 – 76 124 . Minton NP . 1995 . Molecular genetics of clostridial neurotoxins . Curr . Top . Microbiol . Immunol . 195 : 161 – 94 125 . Abrami L , Liu S , Cosson P , Leppla SH , van der Goot FG . 2003 . Anthrax toxin triggers endocytosis of its receptor via a lipid raft - mediated clathrin - dependent process . J . Cell Biol . 160 : 321 – 28 126 . Bradley KA , Mogridge J , Mourez M , Collier RJ , Young JA . 2001 . Identiﬁcation of the cellular receptor for anthrax toxin . Nature 414 : 225 – 29 127 . ScobieHM , RaineyGJ , BradleyKA , YoungJA . 2003 . Humancapillarymorphogenesisprotein2functions as an anthrax toxin receptor . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 100 : 5170 – 74 128 . Holmgren J , Lonnroth I , Mansson J , Svennerholm L . 1975 . Interaction of cholera toxin and membrane GM1 ganglioside of small intestine . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 72 : 2520 – 24 31 . 40 Doherty · McMahon A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 129 . Torgersen ML , Skretting G , van Deurs B , Sandvig K . 2001 . Internalization of cholera toxin by different endocytic mechanisms . J . Cell Sci . 114 : 3737 – 47 130 . Massol RH , Larsen JE , Fujinaga Y , Lencer WI , Kirchhausen T . 2004 . Cholera toxin toxicity does not require functional Arf6 - and dynamin - dependent endocytic pathways . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 : 3631 – 41 131 . Pang H , Le PU , Nabi IR . 2004 . Ganglioside GM1 levels are a determinant of the extent of caveolae / raft - dependent endocytosis of cholera toxin to the Golgi apparatus . J . Cell Sci . 117 : 1421 – 30 132 . Nichols BJ . 2002 . A distinct class of endosome mediates clathrin - independent endocytosis to the Golgi complex . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 : 374 – 78 133 . Falguieres T , Romer W , Amessou M , Afonso C , Wolf C , et al . 2006 . Functionally different pools of Shiga toxin receptor , globotriaosyl ceramide , in HeLa cells . FEBS J . 273 : 5205 – 18 134 . Takenouchi H , Kiyokawa N , Taguchi T , Matsui J , Katagiri YU , et al . 2004 . Shiga toxin binding to globotriaosyl ceramide induces intracellular signals that mediate cytoskeleton remodeling in human renal carcinoma - derived cells . J . Cell Sci . 117 : 3911 – 22 135 . Lauvrak SU , Walchli S , Iversen TG , Slagsvold HH , Torgersen ML , et al . 2006 . Shiga toxin regulates its entry in a Syk - dependent manner . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 : 1096 – 109 136 . Ling H , Boodhoo A , Hazes B , Cummings MD , Armstrong GD , et al . 1998 . Structure of the Shiga - like toxin I B - pentamer complexed with an analogue of its receptor Gb3 . Biochemistry 37 : 1777 – 88 137 . Romer W , Berland L , Chambon V , Gaus K , Windschiegl B , et al . 2007 . Shiga toxin induces tubular membrane invaginations for its uptake into cells . Nature 450 : 670 – 75 138 . Hansen SH , Sandvig K , van Deurs B . 1993 . Molecules internalized by clathrin - independent endocytosis are delivered to endosomes containing transferrin receptors . J . Cell Biol . 123 : 89 – 97 139 . Sandvig K , van Deurs B . 2002 . Transport of protein toxins into cells : pathways used by ricin , cholera toxin and Shiga toxin . FEBS Lett . 529 : 49 – 53 140 . RustMJ , LakadamyaliM , ZhangF , ZhuangX . 2004 . Assemblyofendocyticmachineryaroundindividual inﬂuenza viruses during viral entry . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 11 : 567 – 73 141 . Sieczkarski SB , Whittaker GR . 2002 . Inﬂuenza virus can enter and infect cells in the absence of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . J . Virol . 76 : 10455 – 64 142 . Chen C , Zhuang X . 2008 . Epsin 1 is a cargo - speciﬁc adaptor for the clathrin - mediated endocytosis of the inﬂuenza virus . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 105 : 11790 – 95 143 . Damke H , Baba T , van der Bliek AM , Schmid SL . 1995 . Clathrin - independent pinocytosis is induced in cells overexpressing a temperature - sensitive mutant of dynamin . J . Cell Biol . 131 : 69 – 80 144 . Neu U , Woellner K , Gauglitz G , Stehle T . 2008 . Structural basis of GM1 ganglioside recognition by simian virus 40 . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 105 : 5219 – 24 145 . Mercer J , Helenius A . 2008 . Vaccinia virus uses macropinocytosis and apoptotic mimicry to enter host cells . Science 320 : 531 – 35 146 . Malaviya R , Gao Z , Thankavel K , van der Merwe PA , Abraham SN . 1999 . The mast cell tumor necrosis factoralpharesponsetoFimH - expressing Escherichiacoli ismediatedbytheglycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchored molecule CD48 . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 96 : 8110 – 15 147 . Lafont F , Abrami L , van der Goot FG . 2004 . Bacterial subversion of lipid rafts . Curr . Opin . Microbiol . 7 : 4 – 10 148 . Veiga E , Cossart P . 2005 . Listeria hijacks the clathrin - dependent endocytic machinery to invade mam - malian cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 7 : 894 – 900 149 . Bonazzi M , Veiga E , Pizarro - Cerd´a J , Cossart P . 2008 . Successive post - translational modiﬁcations of E - cadherin are required for InlA - mediated internalisation of Listeria monocytogenes . Cell Microbiol . 10 : 2208 – 22 150 . VeigaE , GuttmanJA , BonazziM , BoucrotE , Toledo - AranaA , etal . 2007 . Invasiveandadherentbacterial pathogens co - opt host clathrin for infection . Cell Host Microbe 2 : 340 – 51 151 . Galan JE , Wolf - Watz H . 2006 . Protein delivery into eukaryotic cells by type III secretion machines . Nature 444 : 567 – 73 152 . Hayward RD , Cain RJ , McGhie EJ , Phillips N , Garner MJ , Koronakis V . 2005 . Cholesterol binding by the bacterial type III translocon is essential for virulence effector delivery into mammalian cells . Mol . Microbiol . 56 : 590 – 603 www . annualreviews . org • Mechanisms of Endocytosis 31 . 41 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 153 . Hayward RD , Koronakis V . 2002 . Direct modulation of the host cell cytoskeleton by Salmonella actin - binding proteins . Trends Cell Biol . 12 : 15 – 20 154 . Ly KT , Casanova JE . 2007 . Mechanisms of Salmonella entry into host cells . Cell Microbiol . 9 : 2103 – 11 155 . Hayward RD , Koronakis V . 2006 . Pathogens reWritE Rho’s rules . Cell 124 : 15 – 17 156 . Garner MJ , Hayward RD , Koronakis V . 2002 . The Salmonella pathogenicity island 1 secretion system directs cellular cholesterol redistribution during mammalian cell entry and intracellular trafﬁcking . Cell Microbiol . 4 : 153 – 65 157 . Stebbins CE , Galan JE . 2001 . Structural mimicry in bacterial virulence . Nature 412 : 701 – 5 158 . Cain RJ , Hayward RD , Koronakis V . 2004 . The target cell plasma membrane is a critical interface for Salmonella cell entry effector - host interplay . Mol . Microbiol . 54 : 887 – 904 159 . ShaoF , MerrittPM , BaoZ , InnesRW , DixonJE . 2002 . AYersiniaeffectorandaPseudomonasavirulence protein deﬁne a family of cysteine proteases functioning in bacterial pathogenesis . Cell 109 : 575 – 88 160 . Haucke V . 2005 . Phosphoinositide regulation of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 33 : 1285 – 89 161 . Abe N , Inoue T , Galvez T , Klein L , Meyer T . 2008 . Dissecting the role of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 in endocytosis and recycling of the transferrin receptor . J . Cell Sci . 121 : 1488 – 94 162 . Simons K , Toomre D . 2000 . Lipid rafts and signal transduction . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 1 : 31 – 39 163 . Rodal SK , Skretting G , Garred O , Vilhardt F , van Deurs B , Sandvig K . 1999 . Extraction of cholesterol with methyl - beta - cyclodextrin perturbs formation of clathrin - coated endocytic vesicles . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 : 961 – 74 164 . Anderson HA , Chen Y , Norkin LC . 1996 . Bound simian virus 40 translocates to caveolin - enriched membrane domains , and its entry is inhibited by drugs that selectively disrupt caveolae . Mol . Biol . Cell 7 : 1825 – 34 165 . Minshall RD , Tiruppathi C , Vogel SM , Niles WD , Gilchrist A , et al . 2000 . Endothelial cell - surface gp60 activates vesicle formation and trafﬁcking via G ( i ) - coupled Src kinase signaling pathway . J . Cell Biol . 150 : 1057 – 70 166 . DohertyGJ , McMahonHT . 2008 . Mediation , modulation , andconsequencesofmembrane - cytoskeleton interactions . Annu . Rev . Biophys . 37 : 65 – 95 167 . Grimmer S , Spilsberg B , Hanada K , Sandvig K . 2006 . Depletion of sphingolipids facilitates endosome to Golgi transport of ricin . Trafﬁc 7 : 1243 – 53 168 . Spilsberg B , Llorente A , Sandvig K . 2007 . Polyunsaturated fatty acids regulate Shiga toxin transport . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 364 : 283 – 88 169 . Roux A , Uyhazi K , Frost A , De Camilli P . 2006 . GTP - dependent twisting of dynamin implicates con - striction and tension in membrane ﬁssion . Nature 441 : 528 – 31 170 . Spudich G , Chibalina MV , Au JS , Arden SD , Buss F , Kendrick - Jones J . 2007 . Myosin VI targeting to clathrin - coated structures and dimerization is mediated by binding to Disabled - 2 and PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 . Nat . Cell Biol . 9 : 176 – 83 171 . Krendel M , Osterweil EK , Mooseker MS . 2007 . Myosin 1E interacts with synaptojanin - 1 and dynamin and is involved in endocytosis . FEBS Lett . 581 : 644 – 50 172 . Jansen M , Pietiainen VM , Polonen H , Rasilainen L , Koivusalo M , et al . 2008 . Cholesterol substitution increases the structural heterogeneity of caveolae . J . Biol . Chem . 283 : 14610 – 18 173 . DonaldsonJG . 2003 . MultiplerolesforArf6 : sorting , structuring , andsignalingattheplasmamembrane . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 41573 – 76 174 . Cotton M , Boulay PL , Houndolo T , Vitale N , Pitcher JA , Claing A . 2007 . Endogenous ARF6 interacts with Rac1 upon angiotensin II stimulation to regulate membrane rufﬂing and cell migration . Mol . Biol . Cell 18 : 501 – 11 175 . Lavezzari G , Roche KW . 2007 . Constitutive endocytosis of the metabotropic glutamate receptor mGluR7 is clathrin - independent . Neuropharmacology 52 : 100 – 7 176 . D’Souza - Schorey C , Chavrier P . 2006 . ARF proteins : roles in membrane trafﬁc and beyond . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 : 347 – 58 177 . Aikawa Y , Martin TF . 2005 . ADP - ribosylation factor 6 regulation of phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate synthesis , endocytosis , and exocytosis . Methods Enzymol . 404 : 422 – 31 31 . 42 Doherty · McMahon A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 178 . Miki H , Miura K , Takenawa T . 1996 . N - WASP , a novel actin - depolymerizing protein , regulates the corticalcytoskeletalrearrangementinaPIP2 - dependentmannerdownstreamoftyrosinekinases . EMBO J . 15 : 5326 – 35 179 . Lassing I , Lindberg U . 1985 . Speciﬁc interaction between phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate and proﬁlactin . Nature 314 : 472 – 74 180 . Paleotti O , Macia E , Luton F , Klein S , Partisani M , et al . 2005 . The small G - protein Arf6GTP recruits the AP - 2 adaptor complex to membranes . J . Biol . Chem . 280 : 21661 – 66 181 . Houndolo T , Boulay PL , Claing A . 2005 . G protein – coupled receptor endocytosis in ADP - ribosylation factor 6 - depleted cells . J . Biol . Chem . 280 : 5598 – 604 182 . Tanabe K , Torii T , Natsume W , Braesch - Andersen S , Watanabe T , Satake M . 2005 . A novel GTPase - activatingproteinforARF6directlyinteractswithclathrinandregulatesclathrin - dependentendocytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 : 1617 – 28 183 . Lundmark R , Doherty GJ , Vallis Y , Peter BJ , McMahon HT . 2008 . Arf family GTP loading is activated by , and generates , positive membrane curvature . Biochem . J . 414 : 189 – 94 184 . Pasqualato S , Menetrey J , Franco M , Cherﬁls J . 2001 . The structural GDP / GTP cycle of human Arf6 . EMBO Rep . 2 : 234 – 38 185 . Kumari S , Mayor S . 2008 . ARF1 is directly involved in dynamin - independent endocytosis . Nat . Cell Biol . 10 : 30 – 41 186 . Sousa S , Cabanes D , Archambaud C , Colland F , Lemichez E , et al . 2005 . ARHGAP10 is necessary for α - catenin recruitment at adherens junctions and for Listeria invasion . Nat . Cell Biol . 7 : 954 – 60 187 . Svensson HG , West MA , Mollahan P , Prescott AR , Zaru R , Watts C . 2008 . A role for ARF6 in dendritic cell podosome formation and migration . Eur . J . Immunol . 38 : 818 – 28 188 . Hattula K , Furuhjelm J , Tikkanen J , Tanhuanpaa K , Laakkonen P , Peranen J . 2006 . Characterization of the Rab8 - speciﬁc membrane trafﬁc route linked to protrusion formation . J . Cell Sci . 119 : 4866 – 77 189 . Powelka AM , Sun J , Li J , Gao M , Shaw LM , et al . 2004 . Stimulation - dependent recycling of integrin beta1 regulated by ARF6 and Rab11 . Trafﬁc 5 : 20 – 36 190 . Linder MD , Uronen RL , H¨oltt¨a - Vuori M , van der Sluijs P , Peranen J , Ikonen E . 2007 . Rab8 - dependent recycling promotes endosomal cholesterol removal in normal and sphingolipidosis cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 18 : 47 – 56 191 . Ridley AJ . 2006 . Rho GTPases and actin dynamics in membrane protrusions and vesicle trafﬁcking . Trends Cell Biol . 16 : 522 – 29 192 . Kumari S , Borroni V , Chaudhry A , Chanda B , Massol R , et al . 2008 . Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor is internalized via a Rac - dependent , dynamin - independent endocytic pathway . J . Cell Biol . 181 : 1179 – 93 193 . Masilamani M , Narayanan S , Prieto M , Borrego F , Coligan JE . 2008 . Uncommon endocytic and traf - ﬁcking pathway of the natural killer cell CD94 / NKG2A inhibitory receptor . Trafﬁc 9 : 1019 – 34 194 . Girao H , Geli MI , Idrissi FZ . 2008 . Actin in the endocytic pathway : from yeast to mammals . FEBS Lett . 582 : 2112 – 19 195 . Lanzetti L . 2007 . Actin in membrane trafﬁcking . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 19 : 453 – 58 196 . Stowell MH , Marks B , Wigge P , McMahon HT . 1999 . Nucleotide - dependent conformational changes in dynamin : evidence for a mechanochemical molecular spring . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 : 27 – 32 197 . Ramachandran R , Schmid SL . 2008 . Real - time detection reveals that effectors couple dynamin’s GTP - dependent conformational changes to the membrane . EMBO J . 27 : 27 – 37 198 . Takei K , McPherson PS , Schmid SL , De Camilli P . 1995 . Tubular membrane invaginations coated by dynamin rings are induced by GTP - gamma S in nerve terminals . Nature 374 : 186 – 90 199 . MarksB , StowellMH , VallisY , MillsIG , GibsonA , etal . 2001 . GTPaseactivityofdynaminandresulting conformation change are essential for endocytosis . Nature 410 : 231 – 35 200 . Cao H , Chen J , Awoniyi M , Henley JR , McNiven MA . 2007 . Dynamin 2 mediates ﬂuid - phase mi - cropinocytosis in epithelial cells . J . Cell Sci . 120 : 4167 – 77 201 . Schnitzer JE , Oh P , McIntosh DP . 1996 . Role of GTP hydrolysis in ﬁssion of caveolae directly from plasma membranes . Science 274 : 239 – 42 202 . Henley JR , Krueger EW , Oswald BJ , McNiven MA . 1998 . Dynamin - mediated internalization of cave - olae . J . Cell Biol . 141 : 85 – 99 www . annualreviews . org • Mechanisms of Endocytosis 31 . 43 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 203 . Oh P , McIntosh DP , Schnitzer JE . 1998 . Dynamin at the neck of caveolae mediates their budding to form transport vesicles by GTP - driven ﬁssion from the plasma membrane of endothelium . J . Cell Biol . 141 : 101 – 14 204 . Pelkmans L , Puntener D , Helenius A . 2002 . Local actin polymerization and dynamin recruitment in SV40 - induced internalization of caveolae . Science 296 : 535 – 39 205 . Schlunck G , Damke H , Kiosses WB , Rusk N , Symons MH , et al . 2004 . Modulation of Rac localization and function by dynamin . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 : 256 – 67 206 . Liberali P , Kakkonen E , Turacchio G , Valente C , Spaar A , et al . 2008 . The closure of Pak1 - dependent macropinosomes requires the phosphorylation of CtBP1 / BARS . EMBO J . 27 : 970 – 81 207 . Nishi K , Saigo K . 2007 . Cellular internalization of green ﬂuorescent protein fused with herpes simplex virus protein VP22 via a lipid raft - mediated endocytic pathway independent of caveolae and Rho family GTPases but dependent on dynamin and Arf6 . J . Biol . Chem . 282 : 27503 – 17 208 . Llorente A , Rapak A , Schmid SL , van Deurs B , Sandvig K . 1998 . Expression of mutant dynamin inhibits toxicity and transport of endocytosed ricin to the Golgi apparatus . J . Cell Biol . 140 : 553 – 63 209 . Hayashi M , Raimondi A , O’Toole E , Paradise S , Collesi C , et al . 2008 . Cell - and stimulus - dependent heterogeneity of synaptic vesicle endocytic recycling mechanisms revealed by studies of dynamin 1 - null neurons . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 105 : 2175 – 80 210 . Cremona O , Di Paolo G , Wenk MR , Luthi A , Kim WT , et al . 1999 . Essential role of phosphoinositide metabolism in synaptic vesicle recycling . Cell 99 : 179 – 88 211 . Kirchhausen T , Macia E , Pelish HE . 2008 . Use of dynasore , the small molecule inhibitor of dynamin , in the regulation of endocytosis . Methods Enzymol . 438 : 77 – 93 212 . Sigismund S , Argenzio E , Tosoni D , Cavallaro E , Polo S , Di Fiore PP . 2008 . Clathrin - mediated inter - nalization is essential for sustained EGFR signaling but dispensable for degradation . Dev . Cell 15 : 209 – 19 213 . LiberaliP , RamoP , PelkmansL . 2008 . Proteinkinases : startingamolecular - systemsviewofendocytosis . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 24 : 501 – 23 214 . Blot V , McGraw TE . 2006 . GLUT4 is internalized by a cholesterol - dependent nystatin - sensitive mech - anism inhibited by insulin . EMBO J . 25 : 5648 – 58 215 . Sigismund S , Woelk T , Puri C , Maspero E , Tacchetti C , et al . 2005 . Clathrin - independent endocytosis of ubiquitinated cargos . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 : 2760 – 65 216 . Prior IA , Harding A , Yan J , Sluimer J , Parton RG , Hancock JF . 2001 . GTP - dependent segregation of H - ras from lipid rafts is required for biological activity . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 : 368 – 75 217 . Runyan CE , Schnaper HW , Poncelet AC . 2005 . The role of internalization in transforming growth factor beta1 - induced Smad2 association with Smad anchor for receptor activation ( SARA ) and Smad2 - dependent signaling in human mesangial cells . J . Biol . Chem . 280 : 8300 – 8 218 . Kavsak P , Rasmussen RK , Causing CG , Bonni S , Zhu H , et al . 2000 . Smad7 binds to Smurf2 to form an E3 ubiquitin ligase that targets the TGF beta receptor for degradation . Mol . Cell 6 : 1365 – 75 219 . De Donatis A , Comito G , Buricchi F , Vinci MC , Parenti A , et al . 2008 . Proliferation versus migration in platelet - derived growth factor signaling : the key role of endocytosis . J . Biol . Chem . 283 : 19948 – 56 220 . Mills IG . 2007 . The interplay between clathrin - coated vesicles and cell signalling . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 18 : 459 – 70 221 . Vaccari T , Lu H , Kanwar R , Fortini ME , Bilder D . 2008 . Endosomal entry regulates Notch receptor activation in Drosophila melanogaster . J . Cell Biol . 180 : 755 – 62 222 . FuY , HoangA , EscherG , PartonRG , KrozowskiZ , SviridovD . 2004 . Expressionofcaveolin - 1enhances cholesterol efﬂux in hepatic cells . J . Biol . Chem . 279 : 14140 – 46 223 . Meshulam T , Simard JR , Wharton J , Hamilton JA , Pilch PF . 2006 . Role of caveolin - 1 and cholesterol in transmembrane fatty acid movement . Biochemistry 45 : 2882 – 93 224 . Sedding DG , Hermsen J , Seay U , Eickelberg O , Kummer W , et al . 2005 . Caveolin - 1 facilitates mechanosensitive protein kinase B ( Akt ) signaling in vitro and in vivo . Circ . Res . 96 : 635 – 42 225 . Hu G , Vogel SM , Schwartz DE , Malik AB , Minshall RD . 2008 . Intercellular adhesion molecule - 1 - dependent neutrophil adhesion to endothelial cells induces caveolae - mediated pulmonary vascular hyperpermeability . Circ . Res . 102 : e120 – 31 31 . 44 Doherty · McMahon A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 226 . Parker EM , Zaman MM , Freedman SD . 2000 . GP2 , a GPI - anchored protein in the apical plasma membrane of the pancreatic acinar cell , co - immunoprecipitates with src kinases and caveolin . Pancreas 21 : 219 – 25 227 . Song KS , Li S , Okamoto T , Quilliam LA , Sargiacomo M , Lisanti MP . 1996 . Co - puriﬁcation and direct interactionofRaswithcaveolin , anintegralmembraneproteinofcaveolaemicrodomains . Detergent - free puriﬁcation of caveolae microdomains . J . Biol . Chem . 271 : 9690 – 97 228 . Bernatchez PN , Bauer PM , Yu J , Prendergast JS , He P , Sessa WC . 2005 . Dissecting the molecular control of endothelial NO synthase by caveolin - 1 using cell - permeable peptides . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 : 761 – 66 229 . Couet J , Sargiacomo M , Lisanti MP . 1997 . Interaction of a receptor tyrosine kinase , EGF - R , with caveolins . Caveolin binding negatively regulates tyrosine and serine / threonine kinase activities . J . Biol . Chem . 272 : 30429 – 38 230 . Lee SW , Reimer CL , Oh P , Campbell DB , Schnitzer JE . 1998 . Tumor cell growth inhibition by caveolin re - expression in human breast cancer cells . Oncogene 16 : 1391 – 97 231 . Sotgia F , Williams TM , Schubert W , Medina F , Minetti C , et al . 2006 . Caveolin - 1 deﬁciency ( − / − ) conveys premalignant alterations in mammary epithelia , with abnormal lumen formation , growth factor independence , and cell invasiveness . Am . J . Pathol . 168 : 292 – 309 232 . Hayashi K , Matsuda S , Machida K , Yamamoto T , Fukuda Y , et al . 2001 . Invasion activating caveolin - 1 mutation in human scirrhous breast cancers . Cancer Res . 61 : 2361 – 64 233 . Li T , Sotgia F , Vuolo MA , Li M , Yang WC , et al . 2006 . Caveolin - 1 mutations in human breast cancer : functional association with estrogen receptor alpha - positive status . Am . J . Pathol . 168 : 1998 – 2013 234 . Williams TM , Cheung MW , Park DS , Razani B , Cohen AW , et al . 2003 . Loss of caveolin - 1 gene expression accelerates the development of dysplastic mammary lesions in tumor - prone transgenic mice . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 : 1027 – 42 235 . Capozza F , Williams TM , Schubert W , McClain S , Bouzahzah B , et al . 2003 . Absence of caveolin - 1 sensitizes mouse skin to carcinogen - induced epidermal hyperplasia and tumor formation . Am . J . Pathol . 162 : 2029 – 39 236 . Jockusch WJ , Praefcke GJ , McMahon HT , Lagnado L . 2005 . Clathrin - dependent and clathrin - independent retrieval of synaptic vesicles in retinal bipolar cells . Neuron 46 : 869 – 78 237 . He L , Wu LG . 2007 . The debate on the kiss - and - run fusion at synapses . Trends Neurosci . 30 : 447 – 55 238 . Harata NC , Aravanis AM , Tsien RW . 2006 . Kiss - and - run and full - collapse fusion as modes of exo - endocytosis in neurosecretion . J . Neurochem . 97 : 1546 – 70 239 . Aridor M , Hannan LA . 2000 . Trafﬁc jam : a compendium of human diseases that affect intracellular transport processes . Trafﬁc 1 : 836 – 51 240 . Aridor M , Hannan LA . 2002 . Trafﬁc jams II : an update of diseases of intracellular transport . Trafﬁc 3 : 781 – 90 241 . Hammes A , Andreassen TK , Spoelgen R , Raila J , Hubner N , et al . 2005 . Role of endocytosis in cellular uptake of sex steroids . Cell 122 : 751 – 62 242 . Garuti R , Jones C , Li WP , Michaely P , Herz J , et al . 2005 . The modular adaptor protein autoso - mal recessive hypercholesterolemia ( ARH ) promotes low density lipoprotein receptor clustering into clathrin - coated pits . J . Biol . Chem . 280 : 40996 – 1004 243 . NonisD , SchmidtMH , vandeLooS , EichF , DikicI , etal . 2008 . Ataxin - 2associateswiththeendocytosis complex and affects EGF receptor trafﬁcking . Cell Signal . 20 : 1725 – 39 244 . Cataldo AM , Mathews PM , Boiteau AB , Hassinger LC , Peterhoff CM , et al . 2008 . Down syndrome ﬁbroblast model of Alzheimer - related endosome pathology : accelerated endocytosis promotes late en - docytic defects . Am . J . Pathol . 173 : 370 – 84 245 . Cataldo AM , Peterhoff CM , Troncoso JC , Gomez - Isla T , Hyman BT , Nixon RA . 2000 . Endocytic path - way abnormalities precede amyloid β deposition in sporadic Alzheimer’s disease and Down syndrome : differential effects of APOE genotype and presenilin mutations . Am . J . Pathol . 157 : 277 – 86 246 . PalA , SeverinF , HopfnerS , ZerialM . 2008 . RegulationofendosomedynamicsbyRab5andHuntingtin - HAP40 effector complex in physiological versus pathological conditions . Methods Enzymol . 438 : 239 – 57 247 . AtwalRS , XiaJ , PinchevD , TaylorJ , EpandRM , TruantR . 2007 . Huntingtinhasamembraneassociation signalthatcanmodulatehuntingtinaggregation , nuclearentryandtoxicity . Hum . Mol . Genet . 16 : 2600 – 15 www . annualreviews . org • Mechanisms of Endocytosis 31 . 45 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV378 - BI78 - 31 ARI 14 March 2009 13 : 23 248 . Schneider A , Rajendran L , Honsho M , Gralle M , Donnert G , et al . 2008 . Flotillin - dependent clustering of the amyloid precursor protein regulates its endocytosis and amyloidogenic processing in neurons . J . Neurosci . 28 : 2874 – 82 249 . Delva E , Jennings JM , Calkins CC , Kottke MD , Faundez V , Kowalczyk AP . 2008 . Pemphigus vulgaris IgG - induced desmoglein - 3 endocytosis and desmosomal disassembly are mediated by a clathrin - and dynamin - independent mechanism . J . Biol . Chem . 283 : 18303 – 13 250 . Yap AS , Crampton MS , Hardin J . 2007 . Making and breaking contacts : the cellular biology of cadherin regulation . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 19 : 508 – 14 Related Resource H . McMahon . 2009 . Researching endocytic mechanisms . http : / / www . endocytosis . org / 31 . 46 Doherty · McMahon A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2009 . 78 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A M BR I DG E UN I V E R S I T Y on 04 / 27 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION AND SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURES FOR MECHANISMS OF ENDOCYTOSIS Gary J . Doherty and Harvey T . McMahon LIPIDS AND ENDOCYTOSIS As well as providing an appropriate hydrophobic environment for membrane - inserted proteins ( via transmembrane domains ) or membrane - associated proteins ( via GPI anchoring / acylation / myristoylation / prenylation , etc . ) , membrane lipids play vital recruitment and scaffolding functions for membrane - associated signaling events ( via binding of a variety of protein domains , including PH , PX , ENTH , ANTH , BAR , N - BAR , F - BAR , I - BAR , FYVE , and FERM domains ) . These functions for lipids and another in the modulation of endocytic events ( as is reviewed below ) may be intricately interconnected because both signaling and other membrane - resident proteins would be expected to modulate endocytic events and vice versa . This has made it difficult to decipher whether certain lipids that are necessary for certain types of endocytic events are simply permissive bystanders ( e . g . , in terms of being appropriate shapes to sterically permit the architectural changes that occur in budding regions of the plasma membrane ) or are indeed active controllers of endocytic events . Certainly , in the case of clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) , there is clear evidence for the coexistence of both types of modulatory capacity . In vitro saturated chains of hydrocarbons pack together better than do unsaturated lipids , and this certainly creates some degree of membrane heterogeneity within the plane of a membrane monolayer . The shapes of the volumes occupied by membrane lipids allow them to coordinately pack with other lipid types with “cognate” volume shapes , and this likely permits membrane curvature generation , a prerequisite for any endocytic pathway . However , whether particular lipid components of cellular membranes , at physiological temperatures and diffusion rates , form clusters in which lipid - interacting proteins are enriched remains surprisingly controversial ( 1 ) . A great deal of evidence supports their existence , but there is extensive debate surrounding the size and nature of such “lipid rafts , ” or “membrane microdomains , ” and theoretical and recent experimental approaches studying model membranes have shown the existence of liquid - ordered and - disordered , large and nanoscopic , lipid domains ( 2 - - 5 ) . Providing that cellular membranes exist with relative lipid concentrations approximating these studied ranges , and it appears that they do , then it is likely that similar membrane heterogeneities will exist in vivo , and indeed , these have been convincingly detected through several approaches ( 5 , 6 ) . Low - density ( floating ) membrane fractions after detergent extraction are thought to represent purified liquid - ordered phases of the plasma membrane ( membrane microdomains ) . These detergent - resistant membrane isolates are enriched in many cellular components including GPI - anchored proteins , cholesterol , lactoceramide , glycosphingolipids ( GSLs ) such as Gb3 and Gb5 , flotillins , caveolin1 , small and heterotrimeric G proteins , and doubly acylated members of the src family of tyrosine kinases ( 7 , 8 ) . However , the method of isolation of these lipids by Triton extraction involves such extreme perturbations that these methods appear not to be sufficient to reliably identify bona fide proteins and lipids that are endogenously associated with membrane microdomains . Addition of Triton has been shown to artifactually produce microdomains and induce the redistribution of proteins into such structures ( 9 ) . Despite these limitations , it has been elucidated that clathrin - independent endocytic structures are critically dependent on cholesterol and specific sphingolipids ( SLs ) , which are proposed to be enriched in microdomains of the plasma membrane . However , a recent study that has isolated lipid rafts at 37 ° C , and neutral pH suggests that cholesterol may not even be enriched in these domains ( 10 ) , potentially necessitating reinterpretation of many findings using cholesterol modulation . SLs and cholesterol in the outer leaflet appear to be necessary for the formation of membrane microdomains . SLs consist of a sphingosine backbone linked to a fatty acid chain . The different types of headgroups present in such molecules divide SLs into three main structural classes : ceramides ( the simplest subfamily , which contains only the CH 2 OH headgroup of sphingosine ) ; sphingomyelins ( SMs , which have phosphorylcholine or phosphorylethanolamine headgroups ) ; and GSLs ( which have sugar moieties as their headgroups and can be further subclassified as cerebrosidal or gangliosidal depending on the type of such glycosylation ) . Large headgroups of SLs ( relative to their heavily saturated chains of hydrocarbons ) result in spaces that are likely filled by cholesterol moieties , which interact intimately with SLs . Whether saturated / unsaturated lipid tail packing , in addition to GSL - cholesterol interactions in liquid - ordered regions of the outer membrane monolayer , affects the packing of lipids in the inner leaflet is unknown , but some evidence suggests that this may well occur ( 11 ) . SLs , found on the extracellular leaflet of the lipid bilayer , may be able to interdigitate with components of the inner leaflet . Here , cholesterol may fill the spaces created by such interdigitation , thereby allowing transbilayer communication through cholesterol clustering . Transmembrane domains have been shown to interact closely with membrane lipids ( 12 ) , and because the plasma membrane in vivo has a high concentration of such domains , these likely play prominent roles in the creation and stabilization of membrane microdomains . Patching of membrane lipids and proteins by addition of multivalent ligands , such as antibodies and bacterial exotoxins , likely also creates and stabilizes membrane microdomains . Once created , the affinity of endogenous proteins for microdomain - associated lipids and proteins ( over other lipids and proteins ) will determine their abilities to cluster in microdomains . If this hypothesis is true , then many subtypes of microdomain will likely form . CURVATURE AND ENDOCYTOSIS Changes in membrane shape are required for membrane trafficking events , and known ways in which membranes can be deformed are schematized in Figure 2 and Supplementary Figure 2 . The crystallization of the membrane curvature sensing / stabilizing / generating BAR domain ( 13 ) has led to a greater understanding of how proteins with such domains may be mechanistically involved in such membrane shape changes . This BAR module consists of two all α - helical coiled - coil monomers that dimerize in a roughly antiparallel manner . The angle at which these domains dimerize , coupled with kinks in some helices , creates the characteristic banana shape of the dimeric BAR module ( Figure 2 and Supplementary Figure 2 ) . This BAR module binds membranes via electrostatic interactions between positively charged residues concentrated on its concave face and negatively charged lipid headgroups ( 13 ) . In addition to this cognate charge recognition , BAR domains can distinguish cellular membranes on the basis of their curvatures . The nature of the concave face of the BAR module , which preferentially binds membranes with curvatures that most precisely fit its intrinsic molecular curvature , allows this to be achieved . The membrane - binding interface is highly curved in each of the BAR modules whose structures have been crystallized to date , and these proteins bind with highest affinity to highly curved lipid membranes . The structures of other coiled - coil domains with lower homology to BAR domains have since been solved ( 14 - - 16 ) . The F - BAR ( a BAR domain with an FCH homology region or FCH - BAR ) module has a much larger dimerization interface , and this , coupled with distinct kink angles in the helices of each monomer , creates a concave lipid - binding face with a much lower intrinsic curvature than that observed in BAR modules ( 14 , 15 ) . This finding is consistent with observations that it binds flatter membranes with greater affinity than do BAR domains . Another weakly homologous module is created by IRSp53 - MIM homology domain ( IMD ) dimerization ( 16 ) . Here , dimerization creates a lenticular ( or zeppelin - shaped ) dimeric module , which binds lipids on a modestly convex surface . This module appears to bind to membranes curved in the opposite direction to those bound by BAR domains , and thus , we call this the inverse BAR ( I - BAR ) domain ( 17 ) . It is possible that a complete spectrum of coiled - coil domains exist that dimerize into functional modules for the detection of the whole gamut of membrane curvatures that exists in vivo . Curvature sensing by proteins would be predicted to be important for the delivery of effector domains to distinct subcellular locations . Consistent with this , many BAR , F - BAR , and IMD domain - containing proteins are multidomain proteins and comprise a wide variety of effector functions . Many of these proteins have domains involved in the regulation of small G proteins of the arf and rho families . Many also contain protein - protein interaction components , such as SH3 or PDZ domains and ankyrin repeats . The ability to interact with other proteins might recruit these interactors to specifically curved membrane regions . Conversely , such domains may allow for greater specificity in the differential recruitment of coiled - coil domain - containing proteins to cellular subcompartments . Because there are many similarly curved regions of the cell , such recruitment signals likely allow discrimination through “coincidence detection . ” For example , some BAR domain - containing proteins contain other lipid - binding domains , such as PX or PH domains , and this would be expected to enhance membrane - binding specificity . Furthermore , although the ultimate functions of membrane curvature sensing by these proteins is not in question , such coiled - coil domains likely also function as general dimerization interfaces , increasing the avidity with which effector and protein - protein interaction domains found in such proteins can function . BAR , F - BAR , and IMD domains have all been shown to be capable of deforming lipid membranes in vitro and thus also function as membrane curvature generators ( 13 , 14 , 17 ) . BAR modules are capable of deforming large , roughly spherical liposomes into very highly curved tubular membranes with a narrow range of diameters similar to that predicted by superimposition of circular arcs onto the concave structure of each module ( Supplementary Figure 2 ) . This suggests that BAR modules are found on these tubular structures with their long axes roughly perpendicular to the long axis of the tubule . F - BAR domains are also capable of producing tubular membranes , and these are of highly variable diameter up to approximately 130 nm , suggesting that the orientation of these modules on membranes is more flexible ( 14 ) , and these form helical coats on membrane tubules ( 18 ) . IMD domains are capable of deforming membranes into short tubules with a more rigid diameter of around 80 nm , and these tubules were shown to be invaginations of larger membrane structures ( 17 ) , in contrast to the long evaginated tubules induced by BAR and F - BAR modules ( 13 , 14 ) . A subfamily of BAR domain - containing proteins contains an N - terminal amphipathic helix , which folds upon membrane binding ( Supplementary Figure 2 ) ( 19 ) . Such “N - BAR modules” likely function as a unit , with efficient membrane deformation provided by the N - terminal amphipathic helix with the subsequent membrane curvature produced , being further promoted , and stabilized by the canonical BAR module . In addition , an additional amphipathic helix , found at the apex of the concave face of the Nadrin / Endophilin subfamilies of N - BAR modules , is likely to contribute to membrane curvature generation ( 19 ) . Proteins that bind membranes with specific curvatures ( which have been induced either through spontaneous fluctuation , the specific accumulation of particular lipids , or through membrane curvature generation by other cellular proteins ) , and especially those that do so with high affinity , will promote the maintenance of that membrane curvature . In so doing , these proteins can passively allow the stabilization and growth of specific membrane curvatures . This is distinct from active curvature generation whereby these modules , upon binding membranes that are not optimally curved to fit the domain , change the shape of membranes such that the highest affinity interaction between membrane and protein occurs . The capacities to actively generate and passively maintain membrane curvature likely coexist and should be considered as part of a spectrum of domain activity . These properties cannot be effectively distinguished using conventional analytical membrane deformation techniques . However , it is likely that modules with additional mechanisms to produce membrane curvature changes , and those that efficiently and robustly generate curvature , lie at one end of this spectrum , whereas others , which are less potent in producing membrane deformation in vitro and lack additional modular ( curvature - inducing ) components , lie at the other end . Distinguishing between passive and active membrane deformation is important to identify primary and secondary effectors of membrane deformation and precise mechanisms of membrane deformation in vivo . Because BAR domains are capable of sensing and driving membrane curvature changes in vitro , this might provide mechanistic insight into how such changes are actively managed in vivo . Overexpressed BAR domains in vivo were shown to bind to tubular networks , and the introduction of mutations that abolished membrane - binding and - tubulating abilities in vitro led to cytoplasmic protein localization ( 13 ) . Overexpression of BAR domains from different proteins led to distinct patterns of localization , suggesting differential recruitment of the effector functions of such domains . This work supported the idea that BAR domains are functional in effecting membrane curvature changes in vivo and opened up the possibility that distinct BAR domain - containing proteins regulate specific membrane trafficking steps . A wealth of studies has since demonstrated specific roles for BAR domain - containing proteins in vivo ( 20 ) . The largest bodies of literature exist for amphiphysins , endophilins , sorting nexins , and F - BAR proteins . Because these are reviewed elsewhere ( 20 - - 24 ) , specific examples are dealt with only briefly here . Amphiphysin1 is an N - BAR domain - containing , brain - enriched , but rather ubiquitously expressed , protein , which interacts with dynamin1 ( 25 ) , the endocytic lipid phosphatase synaptojanin1 ( 26 ) , as well as clathrin and AP2 ( 27 ) . It localizes to clathrin - coated pits ( CCPs ) and is essential for CME to proceed under various conditions ( 28 , 29 ) , and it appears that it functions by membrane deformation , dynamin recruitment , and the creation of membrane - cytoskeleton linkages . By contrast , the amphiphysin homolog in Drosophila melanogaster ( D - Amph ) does not appear to be involved in CME because there is no biochemical or cell biological link to this process . Instead , D - Amph is found on T - tubular membranes in striated muscle , and mutants have a severely disorganized T - tubular / sarcoplasmic reticulum system ( 30 ) . An isoform of amphiphysin2 was also shown to have a similar role in stabilizing the T - tubular network in mammalian muscle cells ( 31 ) . Amphiphysin1 appears to have additional roles in phagocytosis and the stabilization of tubulobulbar complexes in Sertoli cells and , along with dynamin2 , is necessary for efficient spermatid release ( 32 ) . Endophilin proteins have a domain structure similar to amphiphysins ( in that they have an N - terminal N - BAR domain followed by a C - terminal SH3 domain ) . EndophilinA proteins also bind to dynamin ( 33 ) and synaptojanin ( 34 ) and have been implicated in synaptic vesicle endocytosis ( 35 ) . Current data are strongly suggestive of a role for endophilinA1 in CME , but there is no biochemical link that specifically ties the protein to this process . However , endophilinA1 has been found at CCPs and has been proposed to function in late stages of CME by recruiting a synaptojanin1 isoform and dynamin ( 36 ) . Recently , F - BAR domain - containing proteins , including FBP17 , have also been localized to CCPs , where they appear to have important roles during CME ( 15 ) and where they may coordinate actin polymerization . Clathrin - dependent and - independent endocytic functions have also been ascribed to the F - BAR domain - containing proteins syndapins , and syndapin stimulates bulk endocytosis after strong stimulation in lamprey synapses ( 37 , 38 ) . Furthermore , the BAR domain - containing protein SNX9 localizes to CCPs and is necessary for CME , but a recent study has shown that this protein can also localize to glycosylphosphatidylinositol ( GPI ) - linked protein - positive tubular membranes and to CDRs , where it appears necessary for their function ( 39 ) . In addition to binding dynamin , SNX9 can also bind to and stimulate N - WASP and Arp2 / 3 - associated actin polymerization . Indeed , actin regulation appears to be a feature of many BAR superfamily proteins , as is linkage to dynamins . Indeed , large G proteins of the dynamin superfamily , including the classical dynamins , and EHDs are also capable of membrane deformation ( see Supplementary Figure 3 ) . Dynamins use this to promote scission of budding vesicles ( as discussed in the printed text ) . Perhaps EHDs ( 40 ) , which are already heavily implicated in membrane trafficking events , have roles similar to dynamins in other budding events . CELL ADHESION , MIGRATION AND ENDOCYTOSIS A recent study has intriguingly suggested that a large proportion of plasma membrane lipid microdomains are regulated by the formation of sites of cellular adhesion to the surrounding matrix . At these sites , integrin clustering by matrix ligation triggers the formation of a large protein complex , which mechanically couples the matrix to the actin cytoskeleton ( so - called focal complexes / adhesions ) . When these sites are disassembled , a large portion of ordered plasma membrane is lost ( 41 ) . Furthermore , upon deligation from matrix , cells are induced to undergo endocytosis in a partially caveolin1 - dependent manner . The determination that Tyr14 phosphorylation of caveolin1 is necessary for at least some of this membrane order is consistent with results that have shown its ability to bind specific lipids and that this phosphorylation appears to be required for deligation - induced microdomain endocytosis ( 41 , 42 ) . C - src phosphorylates caveolin1 on Tyr14 ( 43 ) , and this phosphorylation has been indirectly linked to the ability of caveolae to undergo internalization . Interestingly , if SLs are added exogenously to cells , c - src becomes activated , and this is concomitant with caveolin1 and dynamin phosphorylation ( 44 ) . Caveolin1 pY14 appears to localize to focal adhesions , although there are some doubts as to the specificity of the antibody recognizing this form of the protein because it appears to recognize paxillin in immunofluorescent analysis ( 45 ) . Great care should therefore be taken in interpreting results from experiments that use this antibody . Other studies suggest a link between clathrin - independent endocytosis and adhesion . Caveolin1 binds integrins and appears to be necessary for integrin signaling ( 46 ) . Furthermore , GSL receptors for several bacterial exotoxins ( such as GM1 and Gb3 ) are enriched in focal adhesions ( 41 ) . A nonnatural GSL stereoisomer , which is not plasma membrane microdomain resident , inhibits caveolar - type endocytosis as well as β 1 - integrin signaling ( 47 ) . Moreover , the depletion of β 1 - integrin results in a decrease in albumin and LacCer endocytosis ( 47 ) . Turnover of extracellular matrix occurs by endocytic mechanisms , and endocytosis of both β 1 - integrin and fibronectin is caveolin1 dependent ( 48 ) . The exposure of cells to SV40 , as well as increasing the mobility of caveolin1 - positive structures ( both going toward and away from the cell surface ) , results in the loss of focal adhesions and actin stress fibers ( 49 ) . Focal complexes and adhesions are continually remodeled and turned over . Adhesion mechanisms may direct the formation of clustered lipid domains and may subsequently , through the mechanisms already described , direct the endocytosis of specific ligands from specific regions of the plasma membrane . Interestingly , a screen for kinases involved in clathrin - independent endocytosis demonstrated many positives that are specifically involved in the regulation of cell adhesion ( 50 ) . An arf GTPase - activating protein ( arfGAP ) domain - containing protein specific for arf6 , GIT1 , has been shown to promote focal adhesion downregulation in a complex together with PAK2 and β PIX , a guanine nucleotide exchange factor ( GEF ) for rac1 ( 51 ) . GIT1 has been implicated in trafficking between the plasma membrane and endosomes and appears to act as a scaffold for ERK activation at focal adhesions ( 52 , 53 ) . ERK has also been suggested to regulate the formation of tubular trafficking membranes ( 54 ) . Another arfGAP protein , PKL , binds the focal adhesion component paxillin as well as PIX and the kinase PAK ( 55 ) , which is necessary for macropinocytosis ( 56 ) . Arf6 - and EHD1 - associated recycling to the plasma membrane has been observed for cargoes taken up by arf6 - dependent endocytosis ( 57 ) . Interestingly , if cells are deligated and replated , an arf6 - dependent recycling compartment recycles CTxB ( a marker for liquid - ordered lipids ) back to the plasma membrane , where it appears to allow rac1 activation and cell spreading to ensue ( 58 ) . This provides exciting support for a role of the exo - endocytic cycle in adhesion regulation . The discovery that microtubule - associated focal adhesion disassembly was dependent upon dynamin opened the exciting possibility that focal adhesion disassembly may occur via a membrane trafficking pathway . Dynamin2 siRNA treatment resulted in a large increase in the size and number of focal adhesions ( 59 ) . Many of these were found at the centrobasal surface , usually a region of the cell relatively deficient in focal adhesions . Inhibition of disassembly was also observed by dominant - negative dynamin2 K44E overexpression , and this protein localized in part to focal adhesions . This inhibition was dependent upon the integrity of the proline - rich domain of dynamin2 . Endogenous dynamin was also found at focal adhesions . By TIR - FM , corrals of dynamin2 encircling focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) - positive regions of focal adhesions were observed as well as punctate colocalization of these proteins at such sites . During the washout phase after nocodazole treatment , an increase in colocalization was observed . Dynamin localization to focal adhesions was shown to be dependent on FAK , which ( along with pTyr397 FAK ) coimmunoprecipitated with dynamin . Dynamin was also found necessary for normal cell migration , as determined by a wound - healing assay . Because dynamin is found at adhesion sites , which are closely coupled to the plasma membrane , it may control endocytic traffic from these sites , although this putative mechanism has not been explored . It is possible that this occurs through integrin endocytosis , which would abolish signals for adhesion site assembly , concomitant with dissolution of the site . This would also explain the piecemeal disassembly of these sites , which has been observed ( 59 ) . Integrin puncta have been found in migrating cells , and integrin endocytosis and recycling is known to occur in these cells ( 60 ) . Endocytosis of integrins , or other adhesion receptors , would allow irreversible disassembly of adhesion sites . There is , however , no such direct link suggested as yet . Focal adhesion disassembly by these means would also explain the phenomenon of deligation - induced microdomain endocytosis discussed previously and suggests that endocytosis is concomitant with adhesion site disassembly rather than something that occurs through permissive means after disassembly . Cell migration requires the intricate coordination of membrane trafficking , focal adhesion turnover , and cytoskeletal changes . However , the role of membrane trafficking in migrating cells , and how this coordination occurs , has been hotly debated ( 61 - - 66 ) . Focal adhesions at the rear of migrating cells must be disassembled in order to allow the cell to continue migrating . The potential links between endocytosis and adhesion site regulation offer a novel means by which this can be achieved , and endocytosis at disassembling adhesion sites would also be capable of providing membranes from the rear that might then be delivered to the leading edge of the cell . In mammalian cells , the greatest body of evidence is consistent with a role for adhesion receptor endocytosis from the rear of a migrating cell and its eventual recycling to the leading edge to take part in further adhesion events . Membrane trafficking is absolutely required for cell migration in Dictyostelium discoideum although net exocytosis to the leading edge does not appear to occur in these cells ( 67 ) . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis in migrating MDCK cells has been shown by TIR - FM to be enriched toward the leading edges of cells and so is unlikely to provide either endocytic regulation of adhesion sites at the rear or the required directionality of membrane traffic to the leading edge ( 68 ) . However , in T lymphocytes , clathrin and AP2 are enriched at the uropod , and CME is necessary for chemotaxis in these cells ( 69 ) . Rac1 ( which is critical for cell migration ) appears to become activated on early endosomes , and CME allows its activation here ( 70 ) . Active rac1 is then recycled to the plasma membrane , and activation of actin - based cell migratory mechanisms ensues . Although integrins are capable of undergoing clathrin - mediated endocytosis at the leading edge ( 71 ) , they have also been shown to be internalized via clathrin - independent routes ( 72 ) , and GPI - linked proteins , many of which are involved in cell adhesion , enter via the CLIC / GEEC pathway ( 73 - - 75 ) . Such endocytic processes may thereby allow adhesion site disassembly to be coupled to cell migration . Rho family small G proteins are known to be necessary for the formation of clathrin - independent endocytic structures as well as master regulators of cytoskeletal changes . This strongly suggests that these proteins play central ( integrating ) roles in the coordination of cell migration . How the cytoskeleton is regulated by small G proteins is well understood ( 76 ) , but how this can be integrated with membrane trafficking is unknown . LITERATURE CITED 1 . Hancock JF . 2006 . Lipid rafts : contentious only from simplistic standpoints . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 : 456 - - 62 2 . Mayor S , Viola A , Stan RV , del Pozo MA . 2006 . Flying kites on slippery slopes at Keystone . Symposium on lipid rafts and cell function . EMBO Rep . 7 : 1089 - - 93 3 . Silvius J . 2005 . Lipid microdomains in model and biological membranes : How strong are the connections ? Q . Rev . Biophys . 38 : 373 - - 83 4 . Simons K , Vaz WL . 2004 . Model systems , lipid rafts , and cell membranes . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 33 : 269 - - 95 5 . Sharma P , Varma R , Sarasij RC , Ira , Gousset K , et al . 2004 . Nanoscale organization of multiple GPI - anchored proteins in living cell membranes . Cell 116 : 577 - - 89 6 . Silvius JR , Nabi IR . 2006 . Fluorescence - quenching and resonance energy transfer studies of lipid microdomains in model and biological membranes . Mol . Membr . Biol . 23 : 5 - - 16 7 . Sargiacomo M , Sudol M , Tang Z , Lisanti MP . 1993 . Signal transducing molecules and glycosyl - phosphatidylinositol - linked proteins form a caveolin - rich insoluble complex in MDCK cells . J . Cell Biol . 122 : 789 - - 807 8 . Casey PJ . 1995 . Protein lipidation in cell signaling . Science 268 : 221 - - 25 9 . Madore N , Smith KL , Graham CH , Jen A , Brady K , et al . 1999 . Functionally different GPI proteins are organized in different domains on the neuronal surface . EMBO J . 18 : 6917 - - 26 10 . Ayuyan AG , Cohen FS . 2008 . Raft composition at physiological temperature and pH in the absence of detergents . Biophys . J . 94 : 2654 - - 66 11 . Gri G , Molon B , Manes S , Pozzan T , Viola A . 2004 . The inner side of T cell lipid rafts . Immunol . Lett . 94 : 247 - - 52 12 . Nyholm TK , Ozdirekcan S , Killian JA . 2007 . How protein transmembrane segments sense the lipid environment . Biochemistry 46 : 1457 - - 65 13 . Peter BJ , Kent HM , Mills IG , Vallis Y , Butler PJ , et al . 2004 . BAR domains as sensors of membrane curvature : the amphiphysin BAR structure . Science 303 : 495 - - 99 14 . Henne WM , Kent HM , Ford MG , Hegde BG , Daumke O , et al . 2007 . Structure and analysis of FCHo2 F - BAR domain : A dimerizing and membrane recruitment module that effects membrane curvature . Structure 15 : 839 - - 52 15 . Shimada A , Niwa H , Tsujita K , Suetsugu S , Nitta K , et al . 2007 . Curved EFC / F - BAR - domain dimers are joined end to end into a filament for membrane invagination in endocytosis . Cell 129 : 761 - - 72 16 . Millard TH , Bompard G , Heung MY , Dafforn TR , Scott DJ , et al . 2005 . Structural basis of filopodia formation induced by the IRSp53 / MIM homology domain of human IRSp53 . EMBO J . 24 : 240 - - 50 17 . Mattila PK , Pykalainen A , Saarikangas J , Paavilainen VO , Vihinen H , et al . 2007 . Missing - in - metastasis and IRSp53 deform PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 - rich membranes by an inverse BAR domain - like mechanism . J . Cell Biol . 176 : 953 - - 64 18 . Frost A , Perera R , Roux A , Spasov K , Destaing O , et al . 2008 . Structural basis of membrane invagination by F - BAR domains . Cell 132 : 807 - - 17 19 . Gallop JL , Jao CC , Kent HM , Butler PJ , Evans PR , et al . 2006 . Mechanism of endophilin N - BAR domain - mediated membrane curvature . EMBO J . 25 : 2898 - - 910 20 . Itoh T , De Camilli P . 2006 . BAR , F - BAR ( EFC ) and ENTH / ANTH domains in the regulation of membrane - cytosol interfaces and membrane curvature . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1761 : 897 - - 912 21 . Zhang B , Zelhof AC . 2002 . Amphiphysins : raising the BAR for synaptic vesicle recycling and membrane dynamics . Bin - Amphiphysin - Rvsp . Traffic 3 : 452 - - 60 22 . Song W , Zinsmaier KE . 2003 . Endophilin and synaptojanin hook up to promote synaptic vesicle endocytosis . Neuron 40 : 665 - - 67 23 . Reutens AT , Begley CG . 2002 . Endophilin - 1 : a multifunctional protein . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 34 : 1173 - - 77 24 . Carlton J , Bujny M , Rutherford A , Cullen P . 2005 . Sorting nexins - - - unifying trends and new perspectives . Traffic 6 : 75 - - 82 25 . Wigge P , Vallis Y , McMahon HT . 1997 . Inhibition of receptor - mediated endocytosis by the amphiphysin SH3 domain . Curr . Biol . 7 : 554 - - 60 26 . Cestra G , Castagnoli L , Dente L , Minenkova O , Petrelli A , et al . 1999 . The SH3 domains of endophilin and amphiphysin bind to the proline - rich region of synaptojanin 1 at distinct sites that display an unconventional binding specificity . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 32001 - - 7 27 . Slepnev VI , Ochoa GC , Butler MH , De Camilli P . 2000 . Tandem arrangement of the clathrin and AP - 2 binding domains in amphiphysin 1 and disruption of clathrin coat function by amphiphysin fragments comprising these sites . J . Biol . Chem . 275 : 17583 - - 89 28 . Ryan TA , Li L , Chin LS , Greengard P , Smith SJ . 1996 . Synaptic vesicle recycling in synapsin I knock - out mice . J . Cell Biol . 134 : 1219 - - 27 29 . Wigge P , Kohler K , Vallis Y , Doyle CA , Owen D , et al . 1997 . Amphiphysin heterodimers : potential role in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 8 : 2003 - - 15 30 . Razzaq A , Robinson IM , McMahon HT , Skepper JN , Su Y , et al . 2001 . Amphiphysin is necessary for organization of the excitation - contraction coupling machinery of muscles , but not for synaptic vesicle endocytosis in Drosophila . Genes Dev . 15 : 2967 - - 79 31 . Lee E , Marcucci M , Daniell L , Pypaert M , Weisz OA , et al . 2002 . Amphiphysin 2 ( Bin1 ) and T - tubule biogenesis in muscle . Science 297 : 1193 - - 96 32 . Yamada H , Ohashi E , Abe T , Kusumi N , Li SA , et al . 2007 . Amphiphysin 1 is important for actin polymerization during phagocytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 18 : 4669 - - 80 33 . Ringstad N , Nemoto Y , De Camilli P . 1997 . The SH3p4 / Sh3p8 / SH3p13 protein family : binding partners for synaptojanin and dynamin via a Grb2 - like Src homology 3 domain . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 94 : 8569 - - 74 34 . Micheva KD , Kay BK , McPherson PS . 1997 . Synaptojanin forms two separate complexes in the nerve terminal . Interactions with endophilin and amphiphysin . J . Biol . Chem . 272 : 27239 - - 45 35 . Dickman DK , Horne JA , Meinertzhagen IA , Schwarz TL . 2005 . A slowed classical pathway rather than kiss - and - run mediates endocytosis at synapses lacking synaptojanin and endophilin . Cell 123 : 521 - - 33 36 . Perera RM , Zoncu R , Lucast L , De Camilli P , Toomre D . 2006 . Two synaptojanin 1 isoforms are recruited to clathrin - coated pits at different stages . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 : 19332 - - 37 37 . Andersson F , Jakobsson J , Low P , Shupliakov O , Brodin L . 2008 . Perturbation of syndapin / PACSIN impairs synaptic vesicle recycling evoked by intense stimulation . J . Neurosci . 28 : 3925 - - 33 38 . Modregger J , Ritter B , Witter B , Paulsson M , Plomann M . 2000 . All three PACSIN isoforms bind to endocytic proteins and inhibit endocytosis . J . Cell Sci . 113 : 4511 - - 21 39 . Yarar D , Waterman - Storer CM , Schmid SL . 2007 . SNX9 couples actin assembly to phosphoinositide signals and is required for membrane remodeling during endocytosis . Dev . Cell 13 : 43 - - 56 40 . Daumke O , Lundmark R , Vallis Y , Martens S , Butler PJ , McMahon HT . 2007 . Architectural and mechanistic insights into an EHD ATPase involved in membrane remodelling . Nature 449 : 923 - - 27 41 . Gaus K , Le Lay S , Balasubramanian N , Schwartz MA . 2006 . Integrin - mediated adhesion regulates membrane order . J . Cell Biol . 174 : 725 - - 34 42 . del Pozo MA , Balasubramanian N , Alderson NB , Kiosses WB , Grande - Garcia A , et al . 2005 . Phospho - caveolin - 1 mediates integrin - regulated membrane domain internalization . Nat . Cell Biol . 7 : 901 - - 8 43 . Li S , Seitz R , Lisanti MP . 1996 . Phosphorylation of caveolin by src tyrosine kinases . The alpha - isoform of caveolin is selectively phosphorylated by v - Src in vivo . J . Biol . Chem . 271 : 3863 - - 68 44 . Sharma DK , Brown JC , Choudhury A , Peterson TE , Holicky E , et al . 2004 . Selective stimulation of caveolar endocytosis by glycosphingolipids and cholesterol . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 : 3114 - - 22 45 . Hill MM , Scherbakov N , Schiefermeier N , Baran J , Hancock JF , et al . 2007 . Reassessing the role of phosphocaveolin - 1 in cell adhesion and migration . Traffic 8 : 1695 - - 705 46 . Wary KK , Mariotti A , Zurzolo C , Giancotti FG . 1998 . A requirement for caveolin - 1 and associated kinase Fyn in integrin signaling and anchorage - dependent cell growth . Cell 94 : 625 - - 34 47 . Singh RD , Holicky EL , Cheng ZJ , Kim SY , Wheatley CL , et al . 2007 . Inhibition of caveolar uptake , SV40 infection , and beta1 - integrin signaling by a nonnatural glycosphingolipid stereoisomer . J . Cell Biol . 176 : 895 - - 901 48 . Shi F , Sottile J . 2008 . Caveolin - 1 - dependent beta1 integrin endocytosis is a critical regulator of fibronectin turnover . J . Cell Sci . 121 : 2360 - - 71 49 . Pelkmans L , Zerial M . 2005 . Kinase - regulated quantal assemblies and kiss - and - run recycling of caveolae . Nature 436 : 128 - - 33 50 . Pelkmans L , Fava E , Grabner H , Hannus M , Habermann B , et al . 2005 . Genome - wide analysis of human kinases in clathrin - and caveolae / raft - mediated endocytosis . Nature 436 : 78 - - 86 51 . Zhao ZS , Manser E , Loo TH , Lim L . 2000 . Coupling of PAK - interacting exchange factor PIX to GIT1 promotes focal complex disassembly . Mol . Cell . Biol . 20 : 6354 - - 63 52 . Lahuna O , Quellari M , Achard C , Nola S , Meduri G , et al . 2005 . Thyrotropin receptor trafficking relies on the hScrib - betaPIX - GIT1 - ARF6 pathway . EMBO J . 24 : 1364 - - 74 53 . Hoefen RJ , Berk BC . 2006 . The multifunctional GIT family of proteins . J . Cell Sci . 119 : 1469 - - 75 54 . Robertson SE , Setty SR , Sitaram A , Marks MS , Lewis RE , Chou MM . 2006 . Extracellular signal - regulated kinase regulates clathrin - independent endosomal trafficking . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 : 645 - - 57 55 . Turner CE , Brown MC , Perrotta JA , Riedy MC , Nikolopoulos SN , et al . 1999 . Paxillin LD4 motif binds PAK and PIX through a novel 95 - kD ankyrin repeat , ARF - GAP protein : a role in cytoskeletal remodeling . J . Cell Biol . 145 : 851 - - 63 56 . Dharmawardhane S , Schurmann A , Sells MA , Chernoff J , Schmid SL , Bokoch GM . 2000 . Regulation of macropinocytosis by p21 - activated kinase - 1 . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 : 3341 - - 52 57 . Caplan S , Naslavsky N , Hartnell LM , Lodge R , Polishchuk RS , et al . 2002 . A tubular EHD1 - containing compartment involved in the recycling of major histocompatibility complex class I molecules to the plasma membrane . EMBO J . 21 : 2557 - - 67 58 . Balasubramanian N , Scott DW , Castle JD , Casanova JE , Schwartz MA . 2007 . Arf6 and microtubules in adhesion - dependent trafficking of lipid rafts . Nat . Cell Biol . 9 : 1381 - - 91 59 . Ezratty EJ , Partridge MA , Gundersen GG . 2005 . Microtubule - induced focal adhesion disassembly is mediated by dynamin and focal adhesion kinase . Nat . Cell Biol . 7 : 581 - - 90 60 . Caswell PT , Norman JC . 2006 . Integrin trafficking and the control of cell migration . Traffic 7 : 14 - - 21 61 . Bretscher MS . 1996 . Getting membrane flow and the cytoskeleton to cooperate in moving cells . Cell 87 : 601 - - 6 62 . Bretscher MS . 1996 . Moving membrane up to the front of migrating cells . Cell 85 : 465 - - 67 63 . Kamiguchi H , Lemmon V . 2000 . Recycling of the cell adhesion molecule L1 in axonal growth cones . J . Neurosci . 20 : 3676 - - 86 64 . Palecek SP , Schmidt CE , Lauffenburger DA , Horwitz AF . 1996 . Integrin dynamics on the tail region of migrating fibroblasts . J . Cell Sci . 109 ( Part 5 ) : 941 - - 52 65 . Schmoranzer J , Kreitzer G , Simon SM . 2003 . Migrating fibroblasts perform polarized , microtubule - dependent exocytosis towards the leading edge . J . Cell Sci . 116 : 4513 - - 19 66 . Sheetz MP , Felsenfeld D , Galbraith CG , Choquet D . 1999 . Cell migration as a five - step cycle . Biochem . Soc . Symp . 65 : 233 - - 43 67 . Thompson CR , Bretscher MS . 2002 . Cell polarity and locomotion , as well as endocytosis , depend on NSF . Development 129 : 4185 - - 92 68 . Rappoport JZ , Simon SM . 2003 . Real - time analysis of clathrin - mediated endocytosis during cell migration . J . Cell Sci . 116 : 847 - - 55 69 . Samaniego R , Sánchez - Martín L , Estecha A , Sánchez - Mateos P . 2007 . Rho / ROCK and myosin II control the polarized distribution of endocytic clathrin structures at the uropod of moving T lymphocytes . J . Cell Sci . 120 : 3534 - - 43 70 . Palamidessi A , Frittoli E , Garre M , Faretta M , Mione M , et al . 2008 . Endocytic trafficking of Rac is required for the spatial restriction of signaling in cell migration . Cell 134 : 135 - - 47 71 . Nishimura T , Kaibuchi K . 2007 . Numb controls integrin endocytosis for directional cell migration with aPKC and PAR - 3 . Dev . Cell 13 : 15 - - 28 72 . Fabbri M , Di Meglio S , Gagliani MC , Consonni E , Molteni R , et al . 2005 . Dynamic partitioning into lipid rafts controls the endo - exocytic cycle of the alphaL / beta2 integrin , LFA - 1 , during leukocyte chemotaxis . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 : 5793 - - 803 73 . Funaro A , Ortolan E , Ferranti B , Gargiulo L , Notaro R , et al . 2004 . CD157 is an important mediator of neutrophil adhesion and migration . Blood 104 : 4269 - - 78 74 . Elortza F , Nuhse TS , Foster LJ , Stensballe A , Peck SC , Jensen ON . 2003 . Proteomic analysis of glycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchored membrane proteins . Mol . Cell Proteomics 2 : 1261 - - 70 75 . Rege TA , Hagood JS . 2006 . Thy - 1 , a versatile modulator of signaling affecting cellular adhesion , proliferation , survival , and cytokine / growth factor responses . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1763 : 991 - - 99 76 . Raftopoulou M , Hall A . 2004 . Cell migration : Rho GTPases lead the way . Dev . Biol . 265 : 23 - - 32 Legends for Supplemental Figures Supplementary Figure 1 The possible nature of plasma membrane lipids and microdomains . ( a ) Schematic diagram depicting the shape volumes that may be occupied by certain plasma membrane lipid types . ( b ) Schematic diagram depicting how the packing of cone - shaped ( above ) and cylinder - shaped ( below ) lipids may determine the curvature of a membrane monolayer or how lipids with certain shapes may cluster at sites of particular membrane curvature . ( c ) Schematic diagrams depicting putative liquid - disordered and liquid - ordered phases of the plasma membrane . ( d ) Schematic diagrams depicting how liquid - ordered phases of the plasma membrane might be stabilized by multivalent ligands and endogenous lipid - associated or - inserting proteins . Abbreviations : SL , sphingolipid ; GSL , glycosphingolipid ; GPL , glycerophospholipid ; SM , sphingomyelin . Supplementary Figure 2 Ways to deform cell membranes and how BAR and N - BAR domains achieve this . ( a ) Diagram illustrating several methods by which membranes may be deformed into more highly curved structures . ( b ) Schematic diagrams depicting how dimeric BAR and N - BAR modules interact with membranes . The D - Amphiphysin BAR domain structure ( 38 ) in ribbon representation is used as a backbone . Note the intrinsic curvature of this module and the interaction of its concave face with lipid membranes . ( left ) A BAR module is shown binding weakly to relatively flat membranes and strongly to highly curved membranes . In so doing , it can sense and stabilize membrane curvature . ( right ) An N - BAR module is depicted binding more strongly to flatter membranes than the BAR module ( owing to lower off rates from the membrane ) . It folds an N - terminal amphipathic helix , which then inserts into the membrane , allowing anchorage . This insertion also actively generates membrane curvature , and this curvature is then promoted and stabilized by the canonical BAR module . Supplementary Figure 3 Dynamin and membrane fission . ( a ) Schematic diagram depicting the mechanism of action of dynamin in the scission of a budding membrane . The numbers shown refer to the steps in the membrane fission diagram shown in panel ( b ) First , in 1 , dynamin is recruited to the neck of the budding vesicle , where it oligomerizes and is GTP bound . Upon GTP hydrolysis by dynamin , in 2 , the membranes of the neck are brought closer together , which reduces the energy barrier to their fusion . The inset shows a tubulated liposome with loosely bound spirals of dynamin visible . This change in the pitch of the dynamin spiral is thought to exert pulling and twisting forces on the membranes at the neck and brings these membranes into close apposition . Then membrane fusion occurs , in 3 + 4 , and an internalized vesicle is produced . ( b ) Schematic diagram depicting the putative intermediates in membrane fission . A cross section of the neck of a budding vesicle is depicted . The membranes of the neck , in 1 , are brought into close apposition , in 2 , by the action of dynamin or a related protein . This reduces the activation energy required for formation of the hemifusion intermediate where the proximal bilayers mix in 3 . The outer monolayers then mix , and a fusion pore is produced , in 4 , which then widens in three dimensions to produce full membrane fission in 5 . Supplementary Figure 4 Adhesion and endocytosis . ( a ) Schematic diagram depicting the basal location of cell - matrix adhesions ( focal adhesions ) ( green ) and their connections to actin stress fibers ( orange ) and the extracellular matrix ( blue ) in cells in culture . ( b ) Schematic diagram depicting putative steps in deligation - induced microdomain endocytosis . Panel 1 shows a close up of a mature focal adhesion shown in panel a . Upon deligation from matrix ( panel 2 ) , the focal adhesion disassembles , releasing the adhesion - associated microdomain lipids ( and possibly caveolin1 pTyr14 ; panel 3 ) . The release of these lipids may allow caveolar - type endocytosis , or other endocytic mechanisms to proceed ( panel 4 ) . These mechanisms might also allow the endocytosis of intergrins or other adhesion proteins , which would allow dominant focal adhesion disassembly in the absence of global deligation , such as may occur physiologically during focal adhesion remodeling and cell migration . C - O O - O O C O NH CH 2 O O H S a t u r a t e d f a tt y a c i d U n s a t u r a t e d f a tt y a c i d R = H - ceramide R = phosphorylcholine - SM R = sugar ( s ) - GSL OH F a tt y a c i d S p h i n g o s i n e C O O O C O O P O - O O H 2 C N + CH 3 CH 3 CH 3 Membrane microdomain Liquid - ordered phase Liquid - disordered phase Stabilization by membrane - inserting proteins and lipid - modified proteins Stabilization by cross - linking SLs ( some GPLs adopt this shape too ) Cholesterol Phosphatidyl - choline ( other GPLs ) GPLs GPLs Cholesterol and GSLs Antibodies Multivalent bacterial exotoxins with GPLs in inner leaflet cholesterol - low a b c d R Cone Cone Cylinder Curved Flat Supplementary Figure 1 Membrane bending Cytoskeletal motors Clathrin - like indirect scaffolding BAR / BAR - like domain scaffolding Amphipathic helix / bulky residue insertion Cone - shaped lipid clustering Membrane protein intramembrane shape a b F - BAR domain I - BAR domain Amphipathichelix insertion Membrane curvature sensing / stabilization / generation BAR module N - BAR module Membrane Weak binding to flat membranes Strong net binding to flat membranes Strong binding to curved membranes Membrane Active membrane curvature generation Supplementary Figure 2 Dynamin recruited to neck of budding membrane , where it oligomerizes Concerted GTP hydrolysis by dynamin produces a pulling + / - twisting force on neck membranes , bringing them into close apposition Hemifusion occurs ( between opposing monolayers ) Point of hemifusion Hemifusion occurs ( between opposing monolayers ) 1 2 3 + 4 5 1 2 5 4 3 Proximal monolayer headgroups Distal monolayer headgroups Hemifusion stalk with outer monolayer mixing Fusion pore * * * * a b Supplementary Figure 3 Deligation from matrix Adhesiondisassembly Lipid microdomain and pTyr14 caveolin1 release Released pTyr14 caveolin1 allows caveolar - type endocytosis Released microdomain lipids from adhesion allows caveolin1 - and clathrin - independent endocytosis Focal adhesion components Focal adhesion Extracellular matrix Integrins Membrane microdomain Extracellular matrix pTyr14 caveolin1 Actin stress fibers a b 1 2 3 4 Supplementary Figure 4 ? ?