Actin Disassembly by Cofilin , Coronin , and Aip1 Occurs in Bursts and Is Inhibited by Barbed - end Cappers The Harvard community has made this article openly available . Please share how this access benefits you . Your story matters Citation Kueh , Hao Yuan , Guillaume T . Charras , Timothy J . Mitchison , and William M . Brieher . 2008 . Actin disassembly by cofilin , coronin , and Aip1 occurs in bursts and is inhibited by barbed - end cappers . The Journal of Cell Biology 182 ( 2 ) : 341 - 353 . Published Version doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200801027 Citable link http : / / nrs . harvard . edu / urn - 3 : HUL . InstRepos : 8347348 Terms of Use This article was downloaded from Harvard University’s DASH repository , and is made available under the terms and conditions applicable to Other Posted Material , as set forth at http : / / nrs . harvard . edu / urn - 3 : HUL . InstRepos : dash . current . terms - of - use # LAA T H E J O U R N A L O F C E L L B I O L O G Y JCB : ARTICLE The Rockefeller University Press $ 30 . 00 J . Cell Biol . Vol . 182 No . 2 341 – 353 www . jcb . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200801027 JCB 341 Correspondence to William M . Brieher : wbrieher @ uiuc . edu Abbreviations used in this paper : Aip1 , actin - interacting protein 1 ; CCD , charge - coupled device ; CytoD , cytochalasin D ; df , degrees of freedom ; KabC , kabiramide C ; LatB , latrunculin B ; PAGFP , photoactivatable GFP ; mRFP , mono - meric red ﬂ uorescence protein . The online version of this paper contains supplemental material . Introduction Actin fi laments turn over rapidly in cells , and their assembly through barbed end growth is thought to generate protrusive force . Rapid assembly must be balanced by equally rapid dis - assembly to replenish the monomer pool and allow remodeling of cell shape . Disassembly is arguably the least understood step in the actin dynamics cycle ( Pollard and Borisy , 2003 ) . We need to elucidate its mechanism to understand the morphogenesis of dynamic actin assemblies and answer the fundamental question of how polymerization dynamics transduce the energy of ATP hydrolysis into mechanical work . Physiological disassembly mechanisms must fulfi ll two requirements : ( 1 ) fast kinetics and ( 2 ) disassembly in a cytoplasm that contains high concentra - tions of polymerizable monomer ( (cid:2) 5 – 20 μ M , estimated from Dabiri et al . , 1990 ; Pollard , 1986 ) . This monomer will tend to make exposed fi lament ends grow rather than shrink . Hydro - lysis and phosphate release of polymer - bound nucleotide is thought to provide the thermodynamic drive for actin fi lament disassembly ( Mitchison , 1992 ; Pollard and Borisy , 2003 ) , but the mechanism by which this chemical energy is transduced into protein dynamics is not known . One widely discussed dis - assembly mechanism involves subunit dissociation from slow - growing pointed ends of fi laments . This mechanism gives rise to treadmilling of individual fi laments ( Wegner , 1976 ) . Another widely discussed mechanism involves severing ( Pollard and Borisy , 2003 ) , which increases the number of fi lament ends where subunit dissociation can potentially occur . A third plausible mechanism , subunit dissociation from fast - growing barbed ends , has been seldom discussed because barbed ends are thought to either grow or be capped ( Marchand et al . , 1995 ; Pantaloni et al . , 2001 ) . T urnover of actin ﬁ laments in cells requires rapid ac - tin disassembly in a cytoplasmic environment that thermodynamically favors assembly because of high concentrations of polymerizable monomers . We here im - age the disassembly of single actin ﬁ laments by coﬁ lin , coronin , and actin - interacting protein 1 , a puriﬁ ed pro - tein system that reconstitutes rapid , monomer - insensitive disassembly ( Brieher , W . M . , H . Y . Kueh , B . A . Ballif , and T . J . Mitchison . 2006 . J . Cell Biol . 175 : 315 – 324 ) . In this three - component system , ﬁ laments disassemble in abrupt bursts that initiate preferentially , but not exclusively , from both ﬁ lament ends . Bursting disassembly generates un - stable reaction intermediates with lowered afﬁ nity for CapZ at barbed ends . CapZ and cytochalasin D ( CytoD ) , a barbed - end capping drug , strongly inhibit bursting disassembly . CytoD also inhibits actin disassembly in mammalian cells , whereas latrunculin B , a monomer sequestering drug , does not . We propose that bursts of disassembly arise from cooperative separation of the two ﬁ lament strands near an end . The differential effects of drugs in cells argue for physiological relevance of this new disassembly pathway and potentially explain discor - dant results previously found with these drugs . Actin disassembly by coﬁ lin , coronin , and Aip1 occurs in bursts and is inhibited by barbed - end cappers Hao Yuan Kueh , 1 , 2 Guillaume T . Charras , 3 , 4 Timothy J . Mitchison , 1 and William M . Brieher 1 , 5 1 Department of Systems Biology , Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA 02115 2 Graduate Program in Biophysics , Harvard University , Cambridge , MA 02138 3 London Centre for Nanotechnology and 4 Department of Cell and Developmental Biology , Faculty of Life Sciences , University College London , London , England , UK 5 Department of Cell and Developmental Biology , University of Illinois , Urbana , IL 61801 © 2008 Kueh et al . This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike – No Mirror Sites license for the ﬁ rst six months after the publica - tion date ( see http : / / www . jcb . org / misc / terms . shtml ) . After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License ( Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Unported license , as described at http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 / ) . JCB • VOLUME 182 • NUMBER 2 • 2008 342 ( Brieher et al . , 2006 ) . Although our previous work began to de - fi ne roles for each factor in the purifi ed protein system ( Brieher et al . , 2006 ) , it did not determine how the full purifi ed system promotes disassembly on a single - fi lament level . We address this question here . Results Actin ﬁ laments disassemble in bursts We imaged the disassembly of single , fl uorescently labeled ac - tin fi laments catalyzed by the three - component purifi ed protein system consisting of cofi lin , coronin , and Aip1 . Concentrations of individual components were chosen to be those suffi cient for full rate enhancement in L . monocytogenes comet tail disassem - bly ( Brieher et al . , 2006 ) . All reactions also contained 5 μ M of unlabeled actin monomer and 2 mM ATP , which refl ects the physiological requirement that disassembly must occur in sub - stantial concentrations of polymerizable monomer . We poly - merized fl uorescent - labeled actin fi laments in a perfusion chamber using the actin cross - linker fi lamin to immobilize fi laments to the coverslip surface . In all assays , fi laments were polymerized for < 1 min before initiation of disassembly . Filament aging leads to kinetic changes we will detail elsewhere ( unpublished data ) . Newly assembled fi laments were then disassembled by perfusion of the three - component system . Immediately after perfusion , a streaming video of actin fi laments ( acquisition time per image = 400 ms ) was acquired by wide - fi eld fl uorescence We recently reconstituted a purifi ed protein system con - sisting of cofi lin , coronin , and actin - interacting protein 1 ( Aip1 ) that catalyzes the disassembly of Listeria monocytogenes comet tails ( Brieher et al . , 2006 ) , dense actin assemblies that structur - ally and biochemically resemble the leading edge of motile cells ( Cameron et al . , 2001 ) . These three purifi ed components together reconstitute disassembly that is both fast ( (cid:2) < 100 s ) and insensitive to polymerizable monomer ( (cid:2) 10 μ M ATP - actin monomer ) . Cofi lin belongs to a family of widely conserved , es - sential proteins that promote actin disassembly in many , per - haps all , cell types and structures ( Maciver and Hussey , 2002 ) . It preferentially binds ADP - actin fi laments and presumably helps to couple the energy of ATP hydrolysis to actin turnover ( Carlier et al . , 1997 ; Blanchoin and Pollard , 1999 ) . Paradoxi - cally , cofi lin can also promote actin assembly , presumably by providing new barbed ends to seed polymerization ( Ichetovkin et al . , 2002 ; Ghosh et al . , 2004 ) . Coronin binds actin fi laments and also plays a role in physiological actin turnover ( de Hostos et al . , 1991 ; Foger et al . , 2006 ; Cai et al . , 2007b ) . Its mechanism of action is still controversial and may be isoform dependent ( Cai et al . , 2007a ) . We used coronin 1a , which was purifi ed to homogeneity from calf thymus ( Brieher et al . , 2006 ) . Aip1 works with cofi lin to promote actin disassembly in a variety of organisms ( Ono , 2001 ; Rogers et al . , 2003 ; Ketelaar et al . , 2004 ; Okada et al . , 2006 ) . It appears to interact with fi lament barbed ends ( Okada et al . , 2002 ; Balcer et al . , 2003 ) and confer mono - mer sensitivity to the three - component disassembly reaction Figure 1 . Actin ﬁ laments disassemble in bursts in coﬁ lin , coronin , and Aip1 . ( A ) Time - lapse wide - ﬁ eld epiﬂ uorescence images of ﬂ uorescently labeled actin ﬁ laments in the presence of 2 μ M coﬁ lin , 1 μ M coronin , 200 nM Aip1 , 5 μ M of actin monomer , and 2 mM ATP . Filaments shorten and disappear from the ﬁ eld of view . Bar , 3 μ m . ( B ) Successive time - lapse images showing a single actin ﬁ lament ( f1 ) over time , along with kymographs drawn along the contours of representative ﬁ laments ( f1 – f4 ) . The red lines on the image of f1 at t = 0 denote the contour on which the kymograph was drawn . Time is given on the x axis of the kymograph , whereas the position along the ﬁ lament contour is given on the y axis . Mean integration time for a single image was 400 ms for f1 – f3 and 16 ms for f4 . Triangles denote endwise bursting ( f1 – f3 ) ; yellow triangles denote initial burst ( f1 – f3 ) , red triangles denote successive proximal bursts ( f1 and f2 ) , and green triangle denotes a successive distal burst ( f3 ) . Same - side bursts occurred more frequently ( 78 % ) than opposite - side bursts ( 22 % ; P < 0 . 001 , one - tailed z test ) . The square denotes internal disassembly event counted as a severing event ( f3 ) . Bar , 1 μ m . ( C ) Histogram of ﬁ lament burst size . The mean burst size was 260 subunits . ( D ) Histogram of waiting times between successive bursts ( red ) , ﬁ t to a single exponential ( black ) . Single exponential ﬁ t gave characteristic decay time of (cid:2) = 14 s . 343 PHYSIOLOGICAL MECHANISM OF ACTIN DISASSEMBLY • Kueh et al . tion ( Maciver et al . , 1991 ) . We found that a cofi lin - alone sev - ering reaction showed no preference for filament ends and generated two detectable daughter fi laments after each event ( Fig . 2 A ) . To quantitatively compare the disassembly reaction catalyzed by a three - component system to the cofi lin - alone re - action , we scored disassembly events under both conditions and counted them as either bursting or severing events . For scoring purposes , a severing event was one in which both daughter fi la - ments remained attached to the surface of the coverslip for at least two frames after breakage . Such an analysis revealed that , although fi laments in the three - component system underwent occasional internal disassembly events that were scored as sev - ering events ( Fig . 1 B , f3 , square ) , bursting from ends was the predominant mode of disassembly ( Fig . 2 B ) . In contrast , sever - ing was the predominant mode of disassembly catalyzed by co - fi lin alone ( Fig . 2 B ) , which is consistent with previous studies ( Maciver et al . , 1991 ; Andrianantoandro and Pollard , 2006 ) . Our cofi lin - alone data reinforce our conclusion that bursting disassembly catalyzed by cofi lin , coronin , and Aip1 is a novel mechanism of fi lament disassembly . Actin fi laments are structurally polarized , so we next tested whether the bursts of disassembly occur preferentially from a particular end of the fi lament . To separately probe dis - assembly near barbed ends and pointed ends , we imaged dis - assembly of fi laments elongated from fragments of Limulus polyphemus , acrosomal processes , which are highly bundled ar - rays of fi laments all oriented in the same direction ( Bonder and Mooseker , 1983 ) . Filaments grown off the barbed end of acro - somal bundles have free barbed ends but pointed ends that are connected to the acrosome . The reverse applies at the pointed end . We polymerized bundles of fi laments off the barbed ends and pointed ends of L . polyphemus acrosomes using 5 μ M of fl uorescently labeled actin monomer and 2 mM ATP and then perfused them with cofi lin , coronin , and Aip1 , as well as un - labeled actin monomer and ATP . To minimize fi lament aging effects , fi laments were perfused within 2 min after initiation of polymerization . Interestingly , fi lament bundles grown from either barbed ends ( Fig . 3 A , b ) or pointed ends ( Fig . 3 A , p ) of acrosomal processes disassembled at comparable rates ( Fig . 3 A ) . Most of the polymer mass in the fi lament bundles disappeared within the fi rst 2 min ; the remainder , which manifest as a short microscopy ( Fig . 1 A and Video 1 , available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200801027 / DC1 ) . In the presence of cofi lin , coronin , and Aip1 , fi laments shortened and disappeared from the fi eld of view within the fi rst 100 s ( Fig . 1 , A and B ; and Video 1 ) . We tracked the locations of fi lament ends using kymographs drawn along the contours of individual actin fi laments ( Fig . 1 , B and C , fi laments f1 – f4 ) . Kymographs showed that fi laments did not shrink smoothly from an end ; instead , they disassembled in infrequent bursts , with fi laments abruptly losing mass from an end ( Fig . 1 B , triangles ) . Most disassembly events occurred at fi lament ends , but events were occasionally initiated in the middle of the fi lament ; these were scored as severing events ( Fig . 1 B , blue square ; see Fig . 2 for a detailed comparison of this reaction to a cofi lin - mediated severing reaction ) . In an attempt to resolve molecular events within an endwise burst , the acquisition time per image was reduced to 16 ms using a high - speed camera ( Fig . 1 B , fi lament f4 ) . At this frame rate , kymographs were noisy , but disassembly still appeared primarily as bursts at ends . The abruptness of the burst argues against mechanisms involving successive dissociation of individual subunits from an end ; the instantaneous off rate for such a mechanism would have to be (cid:2) 10 4 subunits / s . Many fi laments underwent multiple bursts of disassembly . Successive endwise bursts primarily occurred from the same end where the initial burst occurred ( Fig . 1 B , fi laments f1 and f2 , red triangles ) , with a small fraction of bursts occurring from the op - posite end as well ( Fig . 1 B , fi lament f3 , green triangle ) . The sig - nifi cantly higher frequency of same - side bursts ( 78 % ) versus opposite - side bursts ( 22 % ; n = 158 , P < 0 . 001 , 1 - tailed z test ) suggests either a favored end for disassembly or vectorial propa - gation of an instability inward from either end . Endwise bursts had a mean size of 260 subunits , and the time between succes - sive bursts from the same end was exponentially distributed with a characteristic decay time of 14 s ( Fig . 1 , C and D ) . The abrupt bursts of fi lament disassembly catalyzed by co - fi lin , coronin , and Aip1 appeared quite different from a classical cofi lin - mediated severing reaction . To directly compare these mechanisms , we repeated the imaging experiments using cofi lin alone at 10 μ M , 10 - fold higher than the concentration of cofi lin used in the three - component system . Previous studies have also found that cofi lin effi ciently severed fi laments at this concentra - Figure 2 . Filament bursting is distinct from coﬁ lin - mediated severing . ( A ) Time - lapse images of two actin ﬁ laments dis - assembling in 10 μ M coﬁ lin , 5 μ M of actin monomer , and 2 mM ATP . Long ﬁ laments were chosen to illustrate the oc - currence of multiple severing events within a single ﬁ lament . Bar , 1 μ m . ( B ) Bar graph showing the fraction of disassembly events scored as bursting ( red ) or severing ( green ) , either in the full depolymerizing system ( left ) or in coﬁ lin alone ( right ) . In the full system , bursting occurred with signiﬁ cantly higher frequency than severing ( (cid:3) 2 = 190 , df = 1 , P < 0 . 01 ) . How - ever , in the presence of high concentrations of coﬁ lin , sever - ing occurred with signiﬁ cantly higher frequency than bursting ( (cid:3) 2 = 55 , df = 1 , P < 0 . 01 ) and was the predominant dis - assembly mechanism observed under these conditions . We note that mean initial ﬁ lament length did not differ signiﬁ cantly between different experiments and was not the cause of the differences observed . JCB • VOLUME 182 • NUMBER 2 • 2008 344 not only at their tips but also along their lengths ( Fig . 4 B , middle ) , which is consistent with binding of CapZ to barbed ends of severed fi laments . To quantify the fraction of capped fi laments before and after cofi lin treatment , we measured for individual fi lament bundles the CapZ / fi lament ratio , which reports on the proportion of capped fi laments ( see Materials and methods ) . This analysis showed that cofi lin - treated fi lament bundles showed no signifi cant decrease in the fraction of capped fi laments com - pared with untreated bundles ( Fig . 4 , A and B , right ; 1 - tailed t test , t = 1 . 6 , degrees of freedom [ df ] = 14 , P > 0 . 01 ) . We con - clude that fi laments severed by cofi lin retain the ability to bind CapZ at their barbed ends , as expected . When fi lament bundles were partially disassembled with cofi lin , coronin , and Aip1 before CapZ incubation , their fl uo - rescence also tapered due to disassembly ( Fig . 4 C , left ) . However , unlike cofi lin - treated fi lament bundles , these bundles recruited almost no CapZ ( Fig . 4 C , middle ) . The CapZ / fi lament ratio for bundles treated with cofi lin , coronin , and Aip1 was much lower than that for untreated bundles ( Fig . 4 , A and C , right ; 1 - tailed t test , t = 11 . 1 , df = 22 , P < 0 . 01 ) and not signifi cantly different from zero ( Fig . 4 C , right ; t test , t = 2 . 3 , df = 15 , P > 0 . 01 ) . A simi - lar decrease in CapZ recruitment was also seen when CapZ was incubated concurrently with cofi lin , coronin , and Aip1 ( unpub - lished data ) . These results suggest that , unlike a pure severing reaction , bursting disassembly by the three - component system generates as reaction intermediates barbed ends that are not rec - ognized by CapZ . To determine whether these barbed ends were stable in buffer , we partially disassembled fi lament bundles with cofi lin , coronin , and Aip1 , then incubated them in buffer for 10 s before incubation with CapZ . These fi lament bundles recruited signifi cantly more CapZ than bundles treated directly with CapZ ( Fig . 4 , C and D ; 1 - tailed t test , t = 4 . 8 , df = 22 , P < 10 (cid:4) 4 ) , which suggests that , in the absence of disassembly factors , nonstandard barbed ends rapidly revert to a standard CapZ - recognizable form . Consistent with this interpretation , others have observed that co - fi lin and Aip1 do not inhibit fi lament elongation from barbed ends when washed out ( Ono et al . , 2004 ) . These data suggest that bursting disassembly generates unstable fi lament intermediates with nonstandard barbed ends not recognized by CapZ . stub of fi laments at the acrosomal barbed end , disassembled with considerably slower kinetics ( Fig . S1 and Video 2 , available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200801027 / DC1 ) . To quantify the fast component of disassembly , we fi rst sub - tracted out the slowly varying component of the decay curve ( see Materials and methods ) . Bundles with either exposed barbed ends or exposed pointed ends exhibited similar polymer mass decay curves and inferred decay rate constants ( Fig . 3 , B and C ) . These results suggest that bursting does not occur preferentially from a particular end of the fi lament but can proceed vectorially from either end . We also note that in our single - fi lament assay , internal fi lament disassembly events catalyzed by cofi lin , coro - nin , and Aip1 frequently gave rise to two new fi lament ends that both underwent bursting disassembly ( unpublished data ) , which is consistent with both ends undergoing bursting disassembly at similar rates . Bursting disassembly generates barbed ends not recognized by CapZ The disassembly pathway catalyzed by cofi lin , coronin , and Aip1 may involve reaction intermediates with structurally al - tered fi lament ends . To test this hypothesis , we probed the barbed ends of fi laments using fl uorescently labeled CapZ , a protein that caps standard fi lament barbed ends with fast kinetics and high affi nity ( Caldwell et al . , 1989 ; Schafer et al . , 1996 ) . We polymerized fi lament bundles from L . polyphemus acro - somal fragments , treated them under different depolymerizing conditions , and then perfused them with 3 μ M Alexa 488 CapZ for 10 s . This CapZ incubation was suffi cient to completely cap all standard barbed ends ( unpublished data ) , which is consistent with previous kinetic studies ( k on (cid:2) 3 μ M (cid:4) 1 s (cid:4) 1 from Schafer et al . , 1996 ) . When fi lament bundles were incubated with CapZ in the absence of disassembly , they recruited CapZ at their tips , which is consistent with all fi laments recruiting CapZ to their barbed ends ( Fig . 4 A , middle ) . When fi lament bundles were partially disassembled with cofi lin alone before CapZ incuba - tion , their fl uorescence intensity tapered toward the end of the bundle , which refl ects shortening of fi laments due to severing ( Fig . 4 B , left ) . Cofi lin - treated fi lament bundles recruited CapZ Figure 3 . Actin ﬁ laments disassemble with similar kinetics from both ends . ( A ) Time - lapse images of actin ﬁ lament bundles grown off fragments of L . polyphemus acrosomal pro - cesses . Filaments in the long bundle have ex - posed barbed ends ( b ) , whereas ﬁ laments in the short bundle have exposed pointed ends ( p ) . The two bundles shown were elongated from opposite ends of the same L . polyphe - mus acrosomal fragment . The brightness of the shorter bundle was increased relative to the longer one for ease of visualization . At 0 s , ﬁ lament bundles were perfused with 2 μ M coﬁ lin , 1 μ M coronin , 300 nM Aip1 , 5 μ M of actin monomer , and 2 mM ATP . Bar , 1 μ m . ( B ) Total actin polymer mass in the ﬁ lament bundles as a function of time measured for all bundles ( red ) , bundles with exposed barbed ends ( green ) , and bundles with exposed pointed ends ( blue ) . To compare the rates of rapid disassembly , the slowly varying component of each decay curve was removed ( Fig . S1 , available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200801027 / DC1 ; see Materials and methods ) . ( C ) Bar graph comparing decay rates for bundles with exposed barbed ends ( b ) with those with exposed pointed ends ( p ) . Data represent mean and standard deviation of three independent experiments . 345 PHYSIOLOGICAL MECHANISM OF ACTIN DISASSEMBLY • Kueh et al . acrosomal fragments ( 30 nM ; Fig . 5 D ) . In contrast , although CapZ also inhibited polymerization off acrosomal fragments with a low IC 50 ( 30 nM ; Fig . 5 E ) , its inhibitory effects on dis - assembly did not saturate at 10 μ M ( Fig . 5 E ) . The difference in IC 50 s between CytoD - and CapZ - mediated inhibition of dis - assembly suggests differences in the detailed mechanism be - tween these two barbed end – capping agents . For example , barbed ends generated during disassembly may have a conformation that is recognized by CytoD but not by CapZ . Regardless of the detailed mechanism , their common inhibitory effects suggest an important role for barbed end – capping agents in controlling fi lament stability in the three - component system , even when disassembly occurs by bursting from the pointed end . In con - trast , CytoD did not inhibit fi lament severing in high concentra - tions of cofi lin alone ( Fig . 5 F ) , which is consistent with others ’ results ( Ono et al . , 2004 ) . Barbed end – capping agents inhibit actin disassembly in cells To determine whether physiological actin disassembly also oc - curs by a mechanism that is inhibited by barbed end – capping agents , we treated mammalian tissue culture cells with CytoD and measured disassembly by several different assays . As a con - trol , we used latrunculin B ( LatB ) , a drug that also inhibits poly - merization but does so by sequestering a free monomer . We fi rst used a simple bulk assay for total cellular F - actin . Human HeLa S3 cells grown in suspension were treated with either 10 μ M CytoD or LatB , fi xed at various time points after treatment , and then stained with TRITC - phalloidin to quantify bulk F - actin levels . Before drug treatment , F - actin was present throughout the entire cell and was enriched at the cell cortex ( Fig . 6 A , top ) . Treatment of the cells with CytoD did not reduce the amount of F - actin per cell ( Fig . 6 A , middle ; and Fig . 6 B , blue ) . The TRITC - phalloidin signal remained high for > 30 min after CytoD treatment . The drug was active in these cells as it induced extensive blebs after a few minutes ( unpublished data ) . In con - trast , treatment of cells with LatB led to a rapid drop in the amount of F - actin per cell ( Fig . 6 A , bottom ; and Fig . 6 B , red ) . Barbed end – capping agents inhibit actin disassembly in vitro Our experiments with fl uorescent CapZ argue against a dis - assembly mechanism where depolymerization factors form a stable cap with fi lament barbed ends to prevent monomer addi - tion and fi lament annealing . They instead suggest that bursting disassembly may involve active disruption of fi lament internal structure , leading to ragged barbed ends that cannot recruit CapZ . To test these ideas further , we imaged single fi laments after perfusion with cofi lin , coronin , and actin monomer with or without Aip1 , and in the presence of CapZ or cytochalasin D ( CytoD ) , a well - characterized barbed end – capping drug . Omission of Aip1 from the three - component system stopped disassembly ( Fig . 5 A , green ) and greatly reduced the frequency of both bursts and scored severing events ( Fig . 5 B , green ) . Omission of either cofi lin or coronin had the same ef - fect ( Fig . S2 , available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200801027 / DC1 ) , which is consistent with a requirement for all three factors for rapid monomer - insensitive disassembly in L . monocytogenes comet tails ( Brieher et al . , 2006 ) . CapZ could not substitute for Aip1 in the three - component reaction ( Fig . 5 , A and B , yellow ) , which suggests a role for Aip1 in dis - assembly that is distinct from barbed - end capping . When added to the full three - component system , both CytoD and CapZ strongly inhibited fi lament disassembly ( Fig . 5 A , black and blue ) , block - ing both endwise bursting and internal severing modes of fi la - ment disassembly ( Fig . 5 B , black and blue ) . To separately test the effect of CytoD and CapZ on disassembly from fi lament barbed ends and pointed ends , we imaged acrosomal fi lament bundles in the presence of the full three - component system and either CytoD or CapZ ( Fig . 5 C ) . Remarkably , disassembly of fi laments grown off barbed ends and pointed ends were inhib - ited with equal effi cacy , which suggests that fi lament segments near both ends disassemble through the same CytoD / CapZ - sensitive mechanism ( Fig . 5 C ) . CytoD inhibited fi lament bun - dle disassembly with an IC 50 of 90 nM ( measured using total polymer mass from all fi lament bundles in a fi eld of view ) , which is similar to its IC 50 for inhibition of polymerization off Figure 4 . Bursting disassembly generates barbed ends not recognized by CapZ . Fluorescence images show Alexa 647 actin ( left ) and Alexa 488 CapZ ( right ) in ﬁ lament bundles . Barbed ends are oriented toward to the right . The bar graph shows the CapZ / actin ﬁ lament ratio , a measure of the fraction of capped barbed ends in the bundle . Data represent mean and standard deviation of eight ﬁ lament bundles . ( A ) Filament bundles polymerized from L . polyphemus acrosomal fragments were incubated directly with Alexa 488 CapZ . ( B ) Filament bundles were partially disassembled with 8 μ M coﬁ lin for 90 s then incubated with CapZ . ( C ) Filament bundles were partially disassembled with 2 . 5 μ M coﬁ lin , 1 . 5 μ M coronin , and 50 nM Aip1 for 25 s , then incubated with CapZ . ( D ) Filament bundles were partially disassembled with coﬁ lin , coronin , and Aip1 as in C , incubated in buffer for 10 s , then incubated with CapZ . Bar , 1 μ m . JCB • VOLUME 182 • NUMBER 2 • 2008 346 kabiramide C ( KabC ) , a barbed end – capping drug structurally unrelated to CytoD ( Tanaka et al . , 2003 ) . We recorded time - lapse fl uorescence videos of L . monocytogenes actin comet tails inside mammalian tissue culture cells expressing GFP - actin . Before drug addition , actin comet tail assembly propelled L . monocyto - genes forward in the cytoplasm . Comet tail actin disassembled within a minute after assembly ( Fig . 6 C , control ; and Fig . 6 D , green ; Theriot et al . , 1992 ) , causing a decrease in fi lament den - sity away from the bacterium . Both CytoD and KabC stopped comet tail assembly and L . monocytogenes motility within a few seconds after addition ( Fig . 6 C ) , which is consistent with the drugs capping barbed ends to inhibit actin polymerization . Both CytoD and KabC also inhibited disassembly of comet The TRITC - phalloidin signal dropped by nearly threefold over the fi rst 100 s , which implies a timescale of disassembly consistent with fl uorescence recovery after photobleaching studies of corti - cal actin turnover ( Murthy and Wadsworth , 2005 ) and our data with the purifi ed protein system . The differential responses of cellular F - actin levels to CytoD and LatB treatment provides evi - dence that CytoD also actively inhibits actin fi lament disassembly in vivo , as it also does in our purifi ed protein system in vitro . To probe disassembly on a well - characterized actin array in vivo , we imaged actin comet tails formed by the intracellular pathogen L . monocytogenes ( Sanger et al . , 1992 ; Theriot et al . , 1992 ) while perturbing cells with CytoD or LatB . To control for secondary effects of CytoD , we also used in this assay Figure 5 . Barbed end – capping factors inhibit actin disassembly by coﬁ lin , coronin , and Aip1 . ( A ) Mean ﬁ lament length over time under the following conditions : 2 μ M coﬁ lin , 1 μ M coronin , 5 μ M of actin monomer , and 2 mM ATP , as well as 200 nM Aip1 ( red ) , no Aip1 ( green ) , 5 μ M CapZ ( yellow ) , 200 nM Aip1 + 1 μ M CytoD ( black ) , or 200 nM Aip1 + 5 μ M CapZ ( blue ) . Fast monomer - insensitive disassembly required Aip1 ( red vs . green , yellow ) . CytoD and CapZ inhibited disassembly in the full system ( black , blue vs . red ) . ( B ) Bar graph showing the percentage of ﬁ laments that underwent endwise bursting or severing . The number of ﬁ laments analyzed is given below the bars . The percentages of ﬁ laments that either underwent endwise bursting or severing increased signiﬁ cantly in the presence of Aip1 ( red vs . green , yellow ) and decreased signiﬁ cantly when the barbed - end cappers CytoD and CapZ were added to the full system ( black , blue vs . red ; severing frequency of (cid:4) CapZ vs . + CapZ , (cid:3) 2 = 4 . 9 , df = 1 , P < 0 . 05 ; all other pairwise comparisons , (cid:3) 2 > 40 , df = 1 , P < 0 . 001 ) . ( C ) Polymer mass decay for bundles with either exposed barbed ends or pointed ends in 3 μ M CytoD ( brown and purple ) or 10 μ M CapZ ( blue and green ) , as well as polymer mass decay for all ﬁ lament bundles in the absence of barbed - end cappers ( red ) . Disassembly of bundles with either exposed barbed ends or pointed ends were inhibited by CytoD / CapZ with equal efﬁ cacy . ( D ) Fraction of polymer mass disassembled as a function of CytoD concentration ( red circles ) . Best ﬁ t of the data to a hyperbola ( red curve ) shows an IC 50 of 90 nM for inhibition of disassembly . Length of ﬁ lament bundles polymerized for a ﬁ xed period of time in the presence of varying concentrations of CytoD is also shown ( blue squares ) . Hyperbolic best ﬁ t ( blue curve ) shows an IC 50 of 30 nM for inhibition of polymerization . ( E ) Fraction of polymer disassembled as a function of CapZ concentration ( red squares ) . The titration curve did not reach saturation ; the red curve denotes best ﬁ t of the data to a straight line . The length of ﬁ lament actin bundle polymerized in the presence of varying concentrations of CapZ is also shown ( blue circles ) . Polymerization conditions were identical to those in D . Hyperbolic best ﬁ t ( blue curve ) gave an IC 50 of 30 nM for inhibition of polymerization . Error bars indicate SD . ( F ) CytoD does not inhibit coﬁ lin - mediated severing . The bar graph shows the percentage of ﬁ laments that severed during a 400 s video either in the absence of CytoD ( left ) or in the presence of 1 μ M CytoD ( right ) . Conditions : 8 μ M coﬁ lin and 5 μ M of actin monomer in assay buffer . 347 PHYSIOLOGICAL MECHANISM OF ACTIN DISASSEMBLY • Kueh et al . Lamellipodia and other dynamic cellular actin assem - blies contain dense dendritic arrays resembling those seen in L . monocytogenes comet tails ( Sechi et al . , 1997 ; Cameron et al . , 2001 ) . To test if these arrays show similar sensitivities to CytoD versus LatB with respect to disassembly , we imaged the ruffl ing edge of BSC - 1 cells stably expressing a fusion of actin to monomeric RFP and photoactivatable GFP ( mRFP - PAGFP - actin ; Fig . S4 , available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200801027 / DC1 ) . PAGFP allows localized illumination of specifi c actin subpopulations , and the in - tandem mRFP permits simultaneous viewing of the bulk actin population . Like GFP - actin , this probe localized to actin - rich cellular struc - tures like the ruffl ing cell edge and stress fi bers ( Fig . 7 A ) . During the experiments , we imaged both red and green fl uorescence and tails , which showed no visible decrease in fluorescence for up to a minute after drug addition ( Fig . 6 , C and D , blue ; and Videos 3 and 4 , available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200801027 / DC1 ) . Cell rounding induced by both drugs hindered longer observation ; however , tails were still visible in rounded - up cells up to 10 min after CytoD addition , which implies a reduction in the disassembly rate by at least 20 - fold . Although LatB also rapidly stopped tail assembly and L . mono - cytogenes movement , it did not inhibit disassembly . Comet tails disappeared after drug addition at a rate similar to that in un - treated cells ( Fig . 6 , C and D , red ; and Video 5 ) . Others have previously noted that comet tails are stable in CytoD - treated cells ( Sanger et al . , 1992 ) but did not attribute this observation to inhibition of disassembly . Figure 6 . Barbed end – capping drugs inhibit actin disassembly in mammalian tissue - culture cells . ( A ) Images of suspension HeLa S3 cells showing F - actin stained with TRITC - phalloidin ( top ) and DNA stained with Hoechst ( bottom ) . Images show untreated cells ( left ) , cells treated with 10 μ M CytoD for 480 s ( middle ) , and cells treated with 10 μ M LatB for 480 s ( right ) . All images used identical acquisition settings and contrast levels . Bar , 10 μ m . ( B ) The level of F - actin per cell at different times after treatment with either CytoD ( blue ) or LatB ( red ) . F - actin levels remained high after CytoD treatment . In contrast , F - actin levels fell rapidly upon LatB treatment . Each point represents the mean and SD of at least 10 ﬁ elds of cells . ( C ) Images of actin comet tails in L . monocytogenes – infected BSC - 1 cells taken at successive times after drug treatment . In the absence of any drugs ( control ) , comet tails disassembled within 50 s . Upon LatB treatment , comet tails also disassembled within 50 s , which suggests that there is no effect of LatB on comet tail disassembly kinetics . In contrast , comet tails did not disassemble in CytoD - and KabC - treated cells for at least 50 s after drug addition , which implies that CytoD and KabC inhibited comet tail dis - assembly . All drugs were added at time 0 . Bar , 5 μ m . ( D ) Curves showing decay of actin polymer mass from L . monocytogenes comet tails . In the absence of drugs , actin disassembled at an initial rate of k control = ( 2 . 3 ± 0 . 2 ) × 10 (cid:4) 2 s (cid:4) 1 . LatB did not change the disassembly rate , with k LatB = ( 2 . 6 ± 0 . 2 ) × 10 (cid:4) 2 . In contrast , CytoD reduced the L . monocytogenes comet tail decay rate to k CytoD = ( 1 . 9 ± 6 ) × 10 (cid:4) 4 s (cid:4) 1 . Data represent the mean of polymer mass in multiple tails ( control , 27 tails ; CytoD treatment , 40 tails ; LatB treatment , 27 tails ) . Disassembly rates were obtained by ﬁ tting the initial slope of the decay curve to a straight line . JCB • VOLUME 182 • NUMBER 2 • 2008 348 Discussion This study aimed to elucidate the mechanism of rapid monomer - insensitive actin disassembly by the three - component system consisting of cofi lin , coronin , and Aip1 . By directly imaging fi la - ment disassembly , we found that this three - component system disassembled fi laments in abrupt bursts , where 100 - subunit - long segments near both fi lament ends were lost very rapidly . Bursting disassembly generated fi lament barbed ends not recognized by CapZ , a protein that binds tightly to standard barbed ends . When added to the three - component system , CapZ and CytoD inhibited bursting disassembly , and did so from both ends with equal effi - cacy . CytoD and KabC , a structurally unrelated barbed - end cap - per , also inhibited actin disassembly in mammalian cells , which suggests that the three - component system reconstitutes a preva - lent physiological disassembly pathway . Mechanism of actin ﬁ lament bursting disassembly What is the mechanism underlying bursting fi lament dis - assembly ? We propose the following model ( Fig . 8 A ) : during a burst of disassembly , cooperative weakening of lateral inter - actions between the two strands of the actin fi lament causes the strands to transiently separate near an end ( Fig . 8 A , left ) . Cofi lin has been shown to disrupt lateral contacts between sub - units in adjacent strands ( Bobkov et al . , 2004 ) as well as induce splaying or unwinding of strands observed by electron microscopy ( Bremer et al . , 1991 ; McGough et al . , 1997 ) . Aip1 , which is compared actin dynamics before and after drug treatment both in bulk and in photoactivated subpopulations . Before drug treatment , a dense actin assembly was present at the ruffl ing cell edge ( Fig . 7 , A and D , red ) . Consistent with existing turnover data ( Wang , 1985 ; Watanabe and Mitchison , 2002 ; Ponti et al . , 2004 ) , this assembly was highly dynamic ; photoactivated subpopula - tions disappeared within 50 s after photoactivation ( Fig . 7 , A and D , green ; and Video 6 ) . After LatB treatment , the bulk actin assembly disappeared within 50 s ( Figs . 7 B and 6 E , red ) . A subpopulation of the assembly photoactivated immediately after drug addition decayed with kinetics similar to those in bulk ( Fig . 7 , B and E , green ) . These results are consistent with LatB ’ s function as a monomer - sequestering agent that stops polymerization without affecting depolymerization . In contrast , CytoD stabilized the bulk actin assembly at the cell edge , stop - ping ruffl ing and rendering the assembly much less dynamic ( Fig . 7 C and F , red ; and Video 6 ) . The bulk assemblies remained static for > 100 s , which refl ects simultaneous inhibition of poly - merization and depolymerization . Subpopulations of the assem - blies photoactivated after CytoD treatment persisted for > 100 s ( Fig . 7 , C and F , green ) , which suggests that CytoD actively in - hibits disassembly and does not simply promote local nucle - ation or accumulation of actin . The similar inhibitory effect of barbed end – capping factors on observed cellular actin assem - blies and on single fi laments in vitro suggests that the three - component system reconstitutes the physiological mechanism of actin disassembly in L . monocytogenes comet tails , the lead - ing edge , and the bulk cortex of round cells . Figure 7 . Barbed - end cappers inhibit disassembly of dynamic actin at the rufﬂ ing cell edge . ( A – C ) Time - lapse images of rufﬂ ing edges in BSC - 1 cells expressing mRFP - PAGFP - actin taken before CytoD addition ( A ) , after LatB addition ( B ) , or after CytoD addition ( C ) . The red channel shows bulk actin and the green channel shows photoactivated ﬂ uorescence . Images were taken before activation ( left ) , immediately after activation ( middle ) , and 100 s after activation ( right ) . ( D – F ) Kymographs taken along the lines shown in A , B , and C , respectively . The color kymograph shows bulk actin in red and photoactivated actin in green . The black and white kymograph shows photoactivated actin alone . Arrows show the time of CytoD addition ( D and F ) or LatB addition ( E ) . ( A and D ) Before drug treatment , photoactivated subpopulations of actin decayed within 100 s . ( B and E ) LatB did not inhibit actin disassembly . Both bulk and photoactivated subpopulations of actin disappeared within 100 s . ( C and F ) CytoD inhibited disassembly of dynamic actin assemblies at the rufﬂ ing edge . Photoactivated actin subpopulations remained visible for > 100 s , and bulk actin ﬂ uorescence persisted at the rufﬂ ing cell edge . Bar , 5 μ m . 349 PHYSIOLOGICAL MECHANISM OF ACTIN DISASSEMBLY • Kueh et al . whereas severing does not ( Fig . 5 F ) . In our view , severing better describes the behavior of fi laments treated with high con - centrations of cofi lin alone ( Fig . 2 ) . Future efforts to distinguish between these alternative models will require electron micros - copy of intermediates or development of spectroscopic methods that report on fi lament internal structure . The mechanism of inhibition of disassembly by barbed end – capping agents presents a paradox we have yet to fully re - solve . Mutual antagonism between barbed end capping and burst - ing disassembly suggests a possible means of inhibition . Bursting disassembly may inhibit binding of CytoD / CapZ by separating fi lament strands ; conversely , CytoD / CapZ may inhibit bursting disassembly by keeping strands together near barbed ends . How - ever , fi laments do not disassemble preferentially from barbed ends but instead disassemble near both ends with similar kinetics by a similar capping - sensitive mechanism . We considered several possible explanations . One possibility is that barbed end factors control the stability of the whole fi lament by binding only to the free barbed end . However , the effect of barbed - end binding would have to propagate through the L . polyphemus acrosomal bundle , which itself is highly stabilized . Alternatively , barbed end factors may act in solution as opposed to on the polymer to inhibit dis - assembly . For instance , CytoD may interact with an actin mono - mer to perturb the activity of the purifi ed system ( Goddette and Frieden , 1986 ) . However , we failed to detect any possible indirect effects of CytoD in solution ( Fig . S3 , available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200801027 / DC1 ) . A third possibility is that barbed end factors may bind along the fi lament length to in - hibit strand separation . Consistent with this idea , in vitro studies point to low - affi nity cytochalasin B binding sites along the fi la - ment length ( Hartwig and Stossel , 1979 ) . Implications for actin dynamics in cells What are the implications of this new disassembly reaction for dynamic organization and morphogenesis of actin assemblies in cells , assuming that it is physiologically relevant ? Actin cyto - skeletal networks in cells must disassemble through a mecha - nism that is both fast and insensitive to monomers . Monomer insensitivity is a basic thermodynamic requirement for non - equilibrium polymer turnover in the cell , and speed is important to allow fast remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton . The three - component reaction may achieve speed by disassembling entire fi laments in cells in a single burst , as many actin fi laments do not exceed hundreds of subunits in length in cells ( Sechi et al . , 1997 ; Cameron et al . , 2001 ) . Moreover , the three - component reaction may achieve monomer insensitivity by generating non - standard fi lament ends ( Fig . 4 C ) that cannot readily add sub - units , which is akin to the low affi nity of shrinking microtubule ( + ) ends for tubulin . We have not visualized these nonstandard ends and speculate that the two fi lament strands may be unequal in length or partially separated ( Fig . 8 A ) . In contrast to bursting disassembly by the three - component system , pure severing by cofi lin alone nucleates assembly by generating fi lament ends that can grow ( Ichetovkin et al . , 2002 ; Andrianantoandro and Pollard , 2006 ) . The opposite effects of these two reactions may help resolve the paradoxical role of cofi lin in cells , where it promotes disassembly in some cases believed to bind fi laments at barbed ends and along their lengths ( Okada et al . , 2002 ) , may also catalyze cofi lin - induced strand separation . Consistent with this idea , Aip1 interacts with the F - actin subunit near surfaces that form lateral interactions with adjacent fi lament strands in the Holmes model ( Holmes et al . , 1990 ; Amberg et al . , 1995 ; Rodal et al . , 1999 ; Clark and Amberg , 2007 ) . As separated strands lack stabilizing lateral interactions , they are highly unstable and rapidly disassemble into constituent subunits . Rapid disassembly of separated fi lament strands is plau - sible , as single - stranded polymers are not limited by dissociation of individual subunits from ends ( Oosawa and Asakura , 1975 ) . This burst leaves behind a nonstandard fi lament end ( Fig . 4 ) , which can then initiate another burst at a signifi cantly faster rate , giving rise to a successive series of bursts from the same fi la - ment end ( Fig . 1 B , f1 and f2 ) . Occasionally , strand separation also occurs in the middle of the fi lament , giving rise to internal bursts of disassembly scored as severing events in our assay ( Fig . 1 B , f3 ; and Fig . 8 A , right ) . However , most disassembly occurs as bursts from either fi lament end ( Fig . 2 B ) , as strands separate more easily near ends . An alternative interpretation of our observations is that bursting disassembly simply involves fi lament severing , where a spatially localized disruption of the fi lament causes it to break at the site of disruption ( Fig . 8 B ) . Both severed daughter fi la - ments are completely intact but one daughter fi lament immedi - ately diffuses away and cannot be detected . However , we favor cooperative strand separation over severing for several reasons : ( 1 ) strand separation accounts for preferential bursting from an end that has already undergone a burst ( Fig . 1 ) , whereas sever - ing does not ; ( 2 ) strand separation accounts for preferential initiation of disassembly near fi lament ends ( Fig . 1 ) , whereas severing does not ( moreover , the classical severing we observed using cofi lin alone was not biased toward ends [ Fig . 2 ] , which argues that nothing in our experimental setup , such as fi lament immobilization , is causing an artifi cial bias toward ends ) ; ( 3 ) we were able to score severing by single fi lament imaging ( Fig . 2 ) , which argues that we would have seen severing if it contributed to bursting ; ( 4 ) strand separation accounts for disassembly inter - mediates with lowered affi nity for CapZ ( Fig . 4 ; it is also possible that barbed ends are structurally intact but capped by Aip1 after a burst and thus unable to bind CapZ ; however , this putative Aip1 – barbed end interaction would be quite unstable [ (cid:2) < 10 s ; Fig . 4 D ] ) ; and ( 5 ) strand separation plausibly accounts for inhibition of disassembly by capping factors ( Figs . 5 – 7 ) , Figure 8 . Candidate mechanisms for actin ﬁ lament disassembly by co - ﬁ lin , coronin , and Aip1 . ( A ) Cooperative strand separation . ( B ) Filament severing . Black lines denote ﬁ lament strands . The blue box denotes CapZ . The red bar denotes inhibition of CapZ binding . Successive illustrations depict reaction intermediates in each disassembly pathway . JCB • VOLUME 182 • NUMBER 2 • 2008 350 Imaging of single actin ﬁ laments Alexa 488 – or Alexa 647 – labeled actin was treated with 1 mM EGTA and 0 . 2 mM MgCl 2 on ice for 5 min to convert calcium - ATP - actin to magnesium - ATP - actin . To remove residual ﬁ laments , the actin was then diluted in G buf - fer ( 0 . 2 mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 2 mM ATP , and 2 mM Tris - Cl , pH 8 ) , left on ice for 20 min , and centrifuged at 436 , 000 g with a k - factor of 7 for 20 min . The supernatant , which contained actin monomer , was retained and kept on ice . Filamin , an actin cross - linking protein , was diluted into assay buffer ( 50 mM KCl , 2 mM MgCl 2 , 2 mM ATP , and 100 mM K + - Hepes , pH 7 . 8 ) to a ﬁ nal concentration of 10 – 50 μ g / ml and adsorbed onto coverslips of perfusion chambers using a 10 - min incubation . Chambers were then washed with blocking solution ( 5 mg / ml casein , 0 . 2 % Tween 20 , and 0 . 1 % Pluronic F - 127 in assay buffer ) for 5 min . Immediately before poly - merization , Alexa 488 and Alexa 647 actin monomer were mixed to a ﬁ nal concentration of 10 μ M , 30 % Alexa 647 – labeled and 5 % Alexa 488 – labeled . 10 × polymerization buffer ( 500 mM KCl , 20 mM MgCl 2 , 20 mM ATP , and 1 M K + - Hepes , pH7 . 8 ) was then added , and the mix - ture was allowed to polymerize in the perfusion chamber for 30 – 60 s . The chamber was then perfused with 6 – 7 chamber volumes of assay buffer supplemented with an oxygen scavenging system ( 4 . 5 mg / ml glucose , 0 . 2 mg / ml glucose oxidase , and 35 μ g / ml catalase ) and 10 % blocking solution for imaging . Actin ﬁ laments in the perfusion chamber were im - aged immediately at room temperature using an upright wide - ﬁ eld epiﬂ uo - rescence microscope ( E90i ) with a 60 × 1 . 4 NA oil objective ( both from Nikon ) . To distinguish newly polymerized ﬁ laments from ﬁ laments already present before salt addition , an image of ﬁ laments in the ﬁ eld of view was ﬁ rst taken in both the far - red channel ( Alexa 647 ) and the green channel ( Alexa 488 ) . The disassembly factors were diluted into imaging buffer and then perfused into the chamber , and a streaming video of ﬁ lament dis - assembly was taken in the far - red channel using either an intensifying charge - coupled device ( CCD ) camera ( ORCA ; Hamamatsu ) or an electron microscopy CCD camera ( iXon ; Andor Technology PLC ) with image acqui - sition software ( Metamorph 6 . 0 ; Invitrogen ) . Segmentation of single ﬁ laments by automated image analysis Single actin ﬁ laments in the time - lapse images were segmented using a custom image analysis algorithm written in MATLAB ( Mathworks ) . For each image in a time - lapse sequence , background correction was performed by subtracting a grayscale morphological opening of the image from its parent . The contrast of the image was then adjusted . The low contrast value was set to : C low = I mode + n I width , where I mode is the grayscale value at the peak of the image intensity histogram , I width is the width of the peak of the intensity histogram , and n is an adjustable parameter . The high contrast value was set to : C high = I mode + f ( I max – I mode ) , where I max is the highest grayscale value in the image and 0 < f < 1 is the degree of satura - tion . The image was then segmented and the segmentation was iteratively reﬁ ned using the following procedure : the contrast - adjusted image was passed through a Canny edge detector , which generated a binary image with closed contours around the actin ﬁ laments . Single - pixel gaps in the contours in the binary images were bridged , and the regions enclosed in the contours were ﬁ lled . Unﬁ lled open contours were removed by morpho - logical opening , and the ﬁ lled objects were thinned to lines . The shape of each object was automatically inspected , and only objects without branch points ( corresponding to linear segments ) were retained . The grayscale values from pixels corresponding to objects in the segmentation were than averaged to obtain mean ﬁ lament intensity I ﬁ l from this estimate , and the new high contrast value of the image was then set to : ( 2 ) C high = I mode + f ( I ﬁ l – I mode ) . The procedure was then repeated until I ﬁ l converged to a constant value . A typical image would require approximately three or four iterations before convergence . This iterative procedure achieves automated segmen - tation robust to ﬂ uctuations in ﬂ uorescence intensity , variations in ﬁ lament density , and the presence of bright outliers . It also does not require input parameters that explicitly depend on microscope acquisition settings . Once segmentation was achieved , lengths of individual linear con - tours were estimated by the number of pixels occupied by the contours in the binary image . The lengths from all linear objects were then averaged to give the mean ﬁ lament length . Imaging of actin ﬁ lament bundles grown off L . polyphemus acrosomal processes L . polyphemus acrosomal actin bundles ( a gift from G . Waller and P . Matsudaira , Massachusetts Institute of Technology , Cambridge , MA ) were absorbed to coverslips of perfusion chambers for 5 min . Perfusion chambers were then incubated with blocking solution ( 5 mg / ml casein , 0 . 2 % Tween 20 , ( Kiuchi et al . , 2007 ; Okreglak and Drubin , 2007 ) and assembly in others ( Ichetovkin et al . , 2002 ; Ghosh et al . , 2004 ) . Local activity of Aip1 and / or coronin may be important in determining whether cofi lin catalyzes assembly or disassembly in cells . The inhibitory effects of barbed - end cappers in our exper - iments suggest a role for barbed end – associated factors such as CapZ , formin , or gelsolin in modulating not only fi lament assem - bly but also disassembly . Conversely , bursting disassembly may antagonize barbed end – capping agents in cells , possibly account - ing for the cofi lin - dependent fast dissociation of CapZ from dynamic actin assemblies in cells ( Miyoshi et al . , 2006 ) . Simi - larly , the side - binding factors ( Siripala and Welch , 2007 ) may also modulate fi lament stability in cells . We note that the rate of bursting disassembly in our in vitro assays decreased when fi la - ments were immobilized with N - ethylmaleimide – inactivated myosin instead of fi lamin ( unpublished data ) . It will be a chal - lenge to examine how fi laments disassemble in the full reper - toire of factors that interact with actin fi laments in cells . Differential drug effects We fi nally note that CytoD and LatB are widely used research tools and are often used interchangeably . Previous studies demon - strated , but did not explain , differences between these drugs with respect to actin polymerization ( Higashida et al . , 2004 ) , gross morphology ( Spector et al . , 1989 ) , cell mechanical prop - erties ( Wakatsuki et al . , 2001 ) , and other cellular processes ( Forer and Pickett - Heaps , 1998 ; Morales et al . , 2000 ; Omata et al . , 2000 ) . The dramatic difference in their effects on disassembly ( Figs . 6 and 7 ) has not been recognized before and may explain these different effects on cell physiology . In the future , differen - tial effects of these two drugs can be used to test the importance of disassembly in different actin - dependent cellular processes , a question that has largely been overlooked . Materials and methods Protein puriﬁ cation Actin was prepared from rabbit skeletal muscle according to the method of Pardee and Spudich ( 1982 ) . The F - actin was then depolymerized by dialy - sis into G buffer ( 2 mM Tris - Cl , 0 . 2 mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 2 mM ATP , 0 . 1 % (cid:5) - mer - captoethanol , and 0 . 005 % NaN 3 , pH 8 . 0 ) and further puriﬁ ed by an additional cycle of polymerization / depolymerization as described by Pardee and Spudich ( 1982 ) . Actin was then repolymerized and labeled on lysines using approximately stoichiometric amounts of Alexa 488 and Alexa 647 N - hydroxysuccinimide – ester ( Invitrogen ) according to the pro - cedure of Kellogg et al . ( 1988 ) . The labeled actin was subject to two addi - tional cycles of polymerization and depolymerization and then frozen in aliquots at (cid:4) 80 ° C . Coﬁ lin , coronin , and Aip1 were puriﬁ ed as described by Brieher et al . ( 2006 ) . Construction of perfusion chambers Perfusion chambers were assembled using glass coverslips ( 48366 – 227 ; VWR International ) , glass slides ( 3050 ; Gold Seal ) , and thin paraﬁ lm strips . Glass coverslips were cleaned for imaging by sonication for 30 min in 1 % Micro - 90 detergent ( 99999 – 01 ; Cole - Parmer ) , 60 min in 2 M KOH , 30 min in acetone , and 30 min in ethanol . During each solution change , coverslips were rinsed extensively using 10 or more changes of distilled water . Cleaned coverslips were then stored in ethanol until the day of the experiment . To assemble the perfusion chamber , two paraﬁ lm strips were placed on surface of the glass slide . The coverslips were then removed from etha - nol , dried using ﬁ ltered air , and pressed onto the paraﬁ lm strips to create a ﬂ uid channel . The chamber was then baked at 85 ° C for 20 s to create a seal between the paraﬁ lm and the glass . Assembled chambers were stored in a box and used within 2 d . 351 PHYSIOLOGICAL MECHANISM OF ACTIN DISASSEMBLY • Kueh et al . fected with L . monocytogenes for 3 h , washed with DME containing 50 μ g / ml gentamicin , and incubated at 37 ° C for up to 24 h before live imaging . Live imaging of L . monocytogenes comet tails in tissue culture cells Imaging was performed using a 100 × 1 . 4 NA oil objective on an epiﬂ uo - rescence microscope ( TE300 ; Nikon ) . BSC - 1 cells expressing GFP - actin were imaged in DME containing 50 μ g / ml gentamicin and 20 mM Hepes at pH 7 . 4 and were maintained at 37 ° C by a heated metal stage . Infected cells containing visible GFP - actin comet tails were located for time - lapse image acquisition . Time - lapse movies of GFP - actin ﬂ uorescence in comet tails were then acquired with a cooled - CCD camera ( ORCA - ER ; Ham - mamatsu ) using image acquisition software ( MetaMorph ; MDS Analytical Technologies ) . For experiments involving drug treatment , the imaging me - dia was exchanged for media containing the drug of interest during the course of image acquisition . Drug concentrations used : 6 μ M LatB , 5 μ M CytoD , and 0 . 5 μ M KabC ( provided by G . Marriot , University of Wiscon - sin , Madison , WI ) . In all cases , the concentration of DMSO was < 0 . 5 % . Measurement of polymer mass decay in L . monocytogenes comet tails in cells Polymer mass in L . monocytogenes actin comet tails were obtained using the same image processing routine detailed for analysis of L . polyphemus acrosomal ﬁ lament bundles . Polymer mass decay curves were obtained in regions of interest around the part of the comet tail that had polymerized immediately before drug addition . Decay curves from multiple cells were then normalized and averaged together . Preparation of mRFP - PAGFP - actin in a retroviral vector The mRFP - PAGFP - actin plasmid was based on an EGFP - tagged human (cid:5) - actin from Clontech Laboratories , Inc . First , EGFP was excised using an NheI – BglII digest and replaced by mRFP ( a gift of R . Tsien , University of California , San Diego , La Jolla , CA ) . Second , PAGFP ( a gift from R . Wedlich - Soldner , Max Planck Institute , Martinsried , Germany ) was PCR ampliﬁ ed and ligated in the mRFP - actin between XhoI and BglII . In addi - tion , to enhance ﬂ exibility of the linking regions , glycine residues were in - serted between mRFP and PAGFP ( one added ) and between PAGFP and actin ( three added ; Fig . S4 ) . The plasmid sequence was veriﬁ ed by se - quencing . For reliable expression inside cells , a retrovirus encoding mRFP - PAGFP - actin was generated . mRFP - PAGFP - actin was PCRed and ligated into pLNCX2 ( Clontech Laboratories , Inc . ) between HindIII and NotI , and this construct was transfected into a GPG - 293 packaging cell line for pro - duction of retrovirus ( Ory et al . , 1996 ) . Preparation of a cell line stably expressing mRFP - PAGFP actin BSC - 1 cells were infected with DME media containing retrovirus with the mRFP - PAGFP construct and a G418 selectable marker . 3 d later , cells were split into media containing 500 μ g / ml G418 ( Invitrogen ) . Upon conﬂ u - ence , cells were then resplit in selective media at very low density ( 1 : 1 , 000 , 1 : 5 , 000 , and 1 : 10 , 000 ) . 3 wk later , individual colonies were picked and regrown to conﬂ uence . Individual clones were then selected based on cell vitality and morphology , as well as actin morphology and mRFP - PAGFP - actin ﬂ uorescence intensity , and cultured on glass coverslips for imaging . Imaging of photoactivated ﬂ uorescent actin in tissue culture cells Imaging was performed using a 100 × 1 . 4 NA oil objective on an inverted microscope ( TE2000U ; Nikon ) with an Ultraview spinning disk confocal unit ( PerkinElmer ) . BSC - 1 cells expressing PAGFP - mRFP - actin were imaged in CO 2 - independent medium ( 18045 – 088 ; Invitrogen ) supplemented with L - glutamine and were maintained at 37 ° C by a heated metal stage . Cells were excited with 488 - or 568 - nm light from an argon - krypton laser ( Melles Griot ) , and images were taken with a cooled - CCD camera ( ORCA - ER ) us - ing image acquisition software ( MetaMorph ) . During the time lapse , media containing the drug was applied to the cells , and the PAGFP - mRFP - actin was photoactivated using a nitrogen pulse laser tuned to 405 nm ( Photonic Instruments , Inc . ) . Both LatB and CytoD were diluted in CO 2 - independent media to a ﬁ nal concentration of 5 μ M in 0 . 5 % DMSO . Online supplemental materials Fig . S1 shows decay rates of L . polyphemus actin bundles with exposed barbed versus pointed ends . Fig . S2 shows that monomer - insensitive dis - assembly of single ﬁ laments requires coﬁ lin , coronin , and Aip1 . Fig . S3 tests the effects of CytoD acting in solution on actin disassembly . Fig . S4 is a diagram of the mRFP - PAGFP - actin construct used for the photo - activation experiments in cells . Video 1 shows disassembly of single actin ﬁ laments in the presence of coﬁ lin , coronin , Aip1 , and G - actin . Video 2 and 0 . 1 % Pluronic F - 127 in assay buffer ) for 5 min . Filaments were elon - gated off acrosomal bundles by incubation with 3 μ M Alexa 647 – labeled actin monomer in assay buffer for 2 min and then washed . For time - lapse imaging experiments , ﬁ lament bundles were perfused with disassembly factors and 100 μ g / ml ﬁ lamin , which held bundles together for imaging . For experiments with Alexa 488 CapZ , ﬁ lament bundles were treated un - der different depolymerizing conditions , incubated with 3 μ M Alexa 488 CapZ for 10 s , washed again , bundled with 200 μ g / ml ﬁ lamin , and then imaged . Unless otherwise stated , all perfusion steps were performed using assay buffer supplemented with oxygen scavenging system and 10 % blocking solution . Imaging was performed using the ﬂ uorescence micro - scope described for single ﬁ laments . Measurement of polymer mass decay in acrosome ﬁ lament bundles To quantify polymer mass in ﬂ uorescent ﬁ lament bundles , we wrote an automated image analysis routine in MATLAB ( Mathworks ) . The routine measures integrated intensity of a bright object over a dark background . The grayscale value for the background in each image was estimated by ﬁ nding the mode of the image histogram , assuming that the objects of interest were small in the ﬁ eld of view . The pixel intensities were back - ground - subtracted using the obtained value and then summed to obtain the integrated ﬂ uorescence intensity . This procedure was repeated for all images in the time - lapse sequence . The polymer mass decay curves of all ﬁ lament bundles were obtained by running this routine for the entire ﬁ eld of view ( Fig . S1 A , left ) . Polymer mass decays for long bundles and short bundles were obtained by running the routine on the appropriate regions of interest ( Fig . S1 A , middle and right ) . The polymer mass exhibited a rapidly decaying component followed by a decay with signiﬁ cantly slower kinetics . We then subtracted from the polymer mass decay curve the slow - varying component , which was obtained by ﬁ tting the last seg - ment of the curve to a straight line and extrapolating to time 0 ( Fig . S1 B , red and orange lines ) . The resultant decay curve was then normalized to unity at time 0 , and the characteristic rate of polymer mass decay was then obtained by ﬁ tting the ﬁ rst few points of the normalized decay curve to a straight line ( Fig . S1 C ) . For experiments involving Alexa 488 CapZ ( capping protein was a generous gift of A . Lebensohn , Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA ) , the integrated CapZ ﬂ uorescence in a single ﬁ lament bundle was mea - sured in a region of interest surrounding the ﬁ lament bundle . Background was measured in a neighbouring region of interest where no ﬁ lament bundles were present . The number of actin ﬁ laments in the bundle was estimated by taking the maximal ﬂ uorescence intensity along the ﬁ lament bundle length . The integrated CapZ ﬂ uorescence was divided by esti - mated actin ﬁ lament number to obtain the CapZ / actin ﬁ lament ratio ( Fig . 3 B ) , which measures the proportion of CapZ - bound ﬁ laments in the ﬁ lament bundle . Drug treatment of suspension cells HeLa S3 cells were cultured in suspension in shaking Fernbach ﬂ asks in CO 2 independent medium ( Invitrogen ) plus 10 % fetal calf serum . 10 ml of log phase culture ( (cid:2) 10 5 cells / ml ) were removed , disaggregated by pass - ing twice through a 27 - gauge needle , and kept in a water bath at 37 ° with occasional agitation . At time 0 , CytoD or LatB was added from a 2 , 000 × stock in DMSO to a ﬁ nal concentration of 10 μ M . 0 . 5 ml aliquots of cells were removed at each time point and ﬁ xed by dilution into 1 ml of PBS ( 155 mM NaCl , 1 mM potassium phosphate , 3 mM sodium phos - phate , 1 mM MgCl 2 , and 1 mM CaCl 2 , pH 7 . 4 ) + 2 % formaldehyde . After 10 – 20 min at 25 ° C , the ﬁ xed cells were collected by centrifugation ( 1 , 000 g for 5 min ) and resuspended in 100 μ l of PBS + 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 + 0 . 5 μ M TRITC - phalloidin + 1 μ M Hoechst dye . This was a saturat - ing amount of TRITC - phalloidin , as judged by the presence of excess unbound reagent in solution after the incubation . After 30 min at 25 ° C with occasional agitation , the cells were diluted with 1 ml of PBS + 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 , collected by centrifugation , resuspended in 50 μ l of PBS + 60 % glycerol , and mounted between a slide and coverslip . Random ﬁ elds were imaged with a 10 × objective . Integrated intensity of the TRITC - phal - loidin signal in each ﬁ eld of view was measured using the image analysis routine described for acrosome ﬁ lament bundles . The total intensity in the ﬁ eld of view was then divided by the number of cells present to obtain the integrated intensity per cell . Infection of tissue culture cells with L . monocytogenes Before infection , BSC - 1 cells were cultured in DME media on polylysine - coated glass coverslips . Cells were then infected with an adenovirus expressing GFP - actin and incubated overnight . These GFP - actin – expressing cells were then in - JCB • VOLUME 182 • NUMBER 2 • 2008 352 Foger , N . , L . Rangell , D . M . Danilenko , and A . C . Chan . 2006 . Requirement for coronin 1 in T lymphocyte traffi cking and cellular homeostasis . Science . 313 : 839 – 842 . Forer , A . , and J . D . Pickett - Heaps . 1998 . Cytochalasin D and latrunculin af - fect chromosome behaviour during meiosis in crane - fl y spermatocytes . Chromosome Res . 6 : 533 – 549 . Ghosh , M . , X . Song , G . Mouneimne , M . Sidani , D . S . Lawrence , and J . S . Condeelis . 2004 . Cofi lin promotes actin polymerization and defi nes the direction of cell motility . Science . 304 : 743 – 746 . Goddette , D . W . , and C . Frieden . 1986 . The kinetics of cytochalasin D binding to monomeric actin . J . Biol . Chem . 261 : 15970 – 15973 . Hartwig , J . H . , and T . P . Stossel . 1979 . Cytochalasin B and the structure of actin gels . J . Mol . Biol . 134 : 539 – 553 . Higashida , C . , T . Miyoshi , A . Fujita , F . Oceguera - Yanez , J . Monypenny , Y . Andou , S . Narumiya , and N . Watanabe . 2004 . Actin polymerization - driven molecular movement of mDia1 in living cells . Science . 303 : 2007 – 2010 . Holmes , K . C . , D . Popp , W . Gebhard , and W . Kabsch . 1990 . Atomic model of the actin fi lament . Nature . 347 : 44 – 49 . Ichetovkin , I . , W . Grant , and J . Condeelis . 2002 . Cofi lin produces newly poly - merized actin fi laments that are preferred for dendritic nucleation by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Biol . 12 : 79 – 84 . Kellogg , D . R . , T . J . Mitchison , and B . M . Alberts . 1988 . Behaviour of micro - tubules and actin fi laments in living Drosophila embryos . Development . 103 : 675 – 686 . Ketelaar , T . , E . G . Allwood , R . Anthony , B . Voigt , D . Menzel , and P . J . Hussey . 2004 . The actin - interacting protein AIP1 is essential for actin organiza - tion and plant development . Curr . Biol . 14 : 145 – 149 . Kiuchi , T . , K . Ohashi , S . Kurita , and K . Mizuno . 2007 . Cofi lin promotes stimulus - induced lamellipodium formation by generating an abundant supply of actin monomers . J . Cell Biol . 177 : 465 – 476 . Maciver , S . K . , and P . J . Hussey . 2002 . The ADF / cofi lin family : actin - remodeling proteins . Genome Biol . 3 : reviews3007 . 1 – 3007 . 12 Maciver , S . K . , H . G . Zot , and T . D . Pollard . 1991 . Characterization of actin fi la - ment severing by actophorin from Acanthamoeba castellanii . J . Cell Biol . 115 : 1611 – 1620 . Marchand , J . B . , P . Moreau , A . Paoletti , P . Cossart , M . F . Carlier , and D . Pantaloni . 1995 . Actin - based movement of Listeria monocytogenes : actin assembly results from the local maintenance of uncapped fi lament barbed ends at the bacterium surface . J . Cell Biol . 130 : 331 – 343 . McGough , A . , B . Pope , W . Chiu , and A . Weeds . 1997 . Cofi lin changes the twist of F - actin : implications for actin fi lament dynamics and cellular function . J . Cell Biol . 138 : 771 – 781 . Mitchison , T . J . 1992 . Compare and contrast actin fi laments and microtubules . Mol . Biol . Cell . 3 : 1309 – 1315 . Miyoshi , T . , T . Tsuji , C . Higashida , M . Hertzog , A . Fujita , S . Narumiya , G . Scita , and N . Watanabe . 2006 . Actin turnover - dependent fast dissociation of capping protein in the dendritic nucleation actin network : evidence of frequent fi lament severing . J . Cell Biol . 175 : 947 – 955 . Morales , M . , M . A . Colicos , and Y . Goda . 2000 . Actin - dependent regulation of neurotransmitter release at central synapses . Neuron . 27 : 539 – 550 . Murthy , K . , and P . Wadsworth . 2005 . Myosin - II - dependent localization and dynamics of F - actin during cytokinesis . Curr . Biol . 15 : 724 – 731 . Okada , K . , L . Blanchoin , H . Abe , H . Chen , T . D . Pollard , and J . R . Bamburg . 2002 . Xenopus actin - interacting protein 1 ( XAip1 ) enhances cofi lin fragmentation of fi laments by capping fi lament ends . J . Biol . Chem . 277 : 43011 – 43016 . Okada , K . , H . Ravi , E . M . Smith , and B . L . Goode . 2006 . Aip1 and cofi lin promote rapid turnover of yeast actin patches and cables : a coordinated mechanism for severing and capping fi laments . Mol . Biol . Cell . 17 : 2855 – 2868 . Okreglak , V . , and D . G . Drubin . 2007 . Cofi lin recruitment and function during actin - mediated endocytosis dictated by actin nucleotide state . J . Cell Biol . 178 : 1251 – 1264 . Omata , W . , H . Shibata , L . Li , K . Takata , and I . Kojima . 2000 . Actin fi laments play a critical role in insulin - induced exocytotic recruitment but not in endocytosis of GLUT4 in isolated rat adipocytes . Biochem . J . 346 ( Pt 2 ) : 321 – 328 . Ono , S . 2001 . The Caenorhabditis elegans unc - 78 gene encodes a homologue of actin - interacting protein 1 required for organized assembly of muscle actin fi laments . J . Cell Biol . 152 : 1313 – 1319 . Ono , S . , K . Mohri , and K . Ono . 2004 . Microscopic evidence that actin - interacting protein 1 actively disassembles actin - depolymerizing factor / cofi lin - bound actin fi laments . J . Biol . Chem . 279 : 14207 – 14212 . Oosawa , F . , and S . Asakura . 1975 . Thermodynamics of the Polymerization of Proteins . Academic Press , New York . 204 pp . Ory , D . S . , B . A . Neugeboren , and R . C . Mulligan . 1996 . A stable human - derived packaging cell line for production of high titer retrovirus / vesicular stoma - titis virus G pseudotypes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 93 : 11400 – 11406 . shows disassembly of actin grown off L . polyphemus bundles under the same conditions . Videos 3 , 4 , and 5 show decay of L . monocytogenes actin comet tails in the presence of CytoD , KabC , or LatB , respectively . Video 6 shows actin turnover in rufﬂ ing BSC - 1 cells as a function of CytoD . Online supplemental material is available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200801027 / DC1 . We thank Gerard Marriot for his generous gift of KabC , the Randy King Laboratory for GFP - actin adenovirus , Andres Lebensohn for capping protein , and Guichy Waller and Paul Matsudaira for L . polyphemus acrosomal sperm processes . We also thank Roger Tsien and Roland Wedlich - Soldner for plasmids . The photoactivation experiments were performed using the spin - ning disk confocal microscope in the Nikon Imaging Center at the Harvard Medical School . In addition , we also thank members of the Mitchison Labo - ratory for feedback , support , and encouragement ; and Jue Shi for help with statistics . This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grant GM 23928 . H . Y . Kueh is a Howard Hughes Medical Institute predoctoral fellow . G . T . Charras is a Royal Society University Research Fellow . Submitted : 11 January 2008 Accepted : 2 July 2008 References Amberg , D . C . , E . Basart , and D . Botstein . 1995 . Defi ning protein interactions with yeast actin in vivo . Nat . Struct . Biol . 2 : 28 – 35 . Andrianantoandro , E . , and T . D . Pollard . 2006 . Mechanism of actin fi lament turnover by severing and nucleation at different concentrations of ADF / cofi lin . Mol . Cell . 24 : 13 – 23 . Balcer , H . I . , A . L . Goodman , A . A . Rodal , E . Smith , J . Kugler , J . E . Heuser , and B . L . Goode . 2003 . Coordinated regulation of actin fi lament turnover by a high - molecular - weight Srv2 / CAP complex , cofi lin , profi lin , and Aip1 . Curr . Biol . 13 : 2159 – 2169 . Blanchoin , L . , and T . D . Pollard . 1999 . Mechanism of interaction of Acanthamoeba actophorin ( ADF / Cofi lin ) with actin fi laments . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 15538 – 15546 . Bobkov , A . A . , A . Muhlrad , A . Shvetsov , S . Benchaar , D . Scoville , S . C . Almo , and E . Reisler . 2004 . Cofi lin ( ADF ) affects lateral contacts in F - actin . J . Mol . Biol . 337 : 93 – 104 . Bonder , E . M . , and M . S . Mooseker . 1983 . Direct electron microscopic visualiza - tion of barbed end capping and fi lament cutting by intestinal microvillar 95 - kdalton protein ( villin ) : a new actin assembly assay using the Limulus acrosomal process . J . Cell Biol . 96 : 1097 – 1107 . Bremer , A . , R . C . Millonig , R . Sutterlin , A . Engel , T . D . Pollard , and U . Aebi . 1991 . The structural basis for the intrinsic disorder of the actin fi lament : the “ lateral slipping ” model . J . Cell Biol . 115 : 689 – 703 . Brieher , W . M . , H . Y . Kueh , B . A . Ballif , and T . J . Mitchison . 2006 . Rapid actin monomer - insensitive depolymerization of Listeria actin comet tails by cofi lin , coronin , and Aip1 . J . Cell Biol . 175 : 315 – 324 . Cai , L . , A . M . Makhov , and J . E . Bear . 2007a . F - actin binding is essential for coro - nin 1B function in vivo . J . Cell Sci . 120 : 1779 – 1790 . Cai , L . , T . W . Marshall , A . C . Uetrecht , D . A . Schafer , and J . E . Bear . 2007b . Coronin 1B coordinates Arp2 / 3 complex and cofi lin activities at the lead - ing edge . Cell . 128 : 915 – 929 . Caldwell , J . E . , S . G . Heiss , V . Mermall , and J . A . Cooper . 1989 . Effects of CapZ , an actin capping protein of muscle , on the polymerization of actin . Biochemistry . 28 : 8506 – 8514 . Cameron , L . A . , T . M . Svitkina , D . Vignjevic , J . A . Theriot , and G . G . Borisy . 2001 . Dendritic organization of actin comet tails . Curr . Biol . 11 : 130 – 135 . Carlier , M . F . , V . Laurent , J . Santolini , R . Melki , D . Didry , G . X . Xia , Y . Hong , N . H . Chua , and D . Pantaloni . 1997 . Actin depolymerizing factor ( ADF / cofi lin ) enhances the rate of fi lament turnover : implication in actin - based motility . J . Cell Biol . 136 : 1307 – 1322 . Clark , M . G . , and D . C . Amberg . 2007 . Biochemical and genetic analyses provide insight into the structural and mechanistic properties of actin fi lament disassembly by the Aip1p cofi lin complex in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Genetics . 176 : 1527 – 1539 . Dabiri , G . A . , J . M . Sanger , D . A . Portnoy , and F . S . Southwick . 1990 . Listeria monocytogenes moves rapidly through the host - cell cytoplasm by inducing directional actin assembly . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 87 : 6068 – 6072 . de Hostos , E . L . , B . Bradtke , F . Lottspeich , R . Guggenheim , and G . Gerisch . 1991 . Coronin , an actin binding protein of Dictyostelium discoideum lo - calized to cell surface projections , has sequence similarities to G protein beta subunits . EMBO J . 10 : 4097 – 4104 . 353 PHYSIOLOGICAL MECHANISM OF ACTIN DISASSEMBLY • Kueh et al . Pantaloni , D . , C . Le Clainche , and M . F . Carlier . 2001 . Mechanism of actin - based motility . Science . 292 : 1502 – 1506 . Pardee , J . D . , and J . A . Spudich . 1982 . Purifi cation of muscle actin . Methods Enzymol . 85 Pt B : 164 – 181 . Pollard , T . D . 1986 . Rate constants for the reactions of ATP - and ADP - actin with the ends of actin fi laments . J . Cell Biol . 103 : 2747 – 2754 . Pollard , T . D . , and G . G . Borisy . 2003 . Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin fi laments . Cell . 112 : 453 – 465 . Ponti , A . , M . Machacek , S . L . Gupton , C . M . Waterman - Storer , and G . Danuser . 2004 . Two distinct actin networks drive the protrusion of migrating cells . Science . 305 : 1782 – 1786 . Rodal , A . A . , J . W . Tetreault , P . Lappalainen , D . G . Drubin , and D . C . Amberg . 1999 . Aip1p interacts with cofi lin to disassemble actin fi laments . J . Cell Biol . 145 : 1251 – 1264 . Rogers , S . L . , U . Wiedemann , N . Stuurman , and R . D . Vale . 2003 . Molecular requirements for actin - based lamella formation in Drosophila S2 cells . J . Cell Biol . 162 : 1079 – 1088 . Sanger , J . M . , J . W . Sanger , and F . S . Southwick . 1992 . Host cell actin assembly is necessary and likely to provide the propulsive force for intracellular movement of Listeria monocytogenes . Infect . Immun . 60 : 3609 – 3619 . Schafer , D . A . , P . B . Jennings , and J . A . Cooper . 1996 . Dynamics of capping pro - tein and actin assembly in vitro : uncapping barbed ends by polyphos - phoinositides . J . Cell Biol . 135 : 169 – 179 . Sechi , A . S . , J . Wehland , and J . V . Small . 1997 . The isolated comet tail pseudo - podium of Listeria monocytogenes : a tail of two actin fi lament populations , long and axial and short and random . J . Cell Biol . 137 : 155 – 167 . Siripala , A . D . , and M . D . Welch . 2007 . SnapShot : actin regulators I . Cell . 128 : 626 . Spector , I . , N . R . Shochet , D . Blasberger , and Y . Kashman . 1989 . Latrunculins – novel marine macrolides that disrupt microfi lament organization and affect cell growth : I . Comparison with cytochalasin D . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton . 13 : 127 – 144 . Tanaka , J . , Y . Yan , J . Choi , J . Bai , V . A . Klenchin , I . Rayment , and G . Marriott . 2003 . Biomolecular mimicry in the actin cytoskeleton : mechanisms underlying the cytotoxicity of kabiramide C and related macrolides . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 100 : 13851 – 13856 . Theriot , J . A . , T . J . Mitchison , L . G . Tilney , and D . A . Portnoy . 1992 . The rate of actin - based motility of intracellular Listeria monocytogenes equals the rate of actin polymerization . Nature . 357 : 257 – 260 . Wakatsuki , T . , B . Schwab , N . C . Thompson , and E . L . Elson . 2001 . Effects of cytochalasin D and latrunculin B on mechanical properties of cells . J . Cell Sci . 114 : 1025 – 1036 . Wang , Y . L . 1985 . Exchange of actin subunits at the leading edge of living fi bro - blasts : possible role of treadmilling . J . Cell Biol . 101 : 597 – 602 . Watanabe , N . , and T . J . Mitchison . 2002 . Single - molecule speckle analysis of ac - tin fi lament turnover in lamellipodia . Science . 295 : 1083 – 1086 . Wegner , A . 1976 . Head to tail polymerization of actin . J . Mol . Biol . 108 : 139 – 150 .