Major Article Use of personal protective equipment among health care personnel : Results of clinical observations and simulations JaHyun Kang PhD , MPH a , * , 1 , John M . O’Donnell DrPH , MSN b , Bonnie Colaianne MSN c , Nicholas Bircher MD d , Dianxu Ren MD , PhD a , Kenneth J . Smith MD , MS e , f a Department of Health and Community Systems , School of Nursing , University of Pittsburgh , Pittsburgh , PA b Department of Nurse Anesthesia , School of Nursing , University of Pittsburgh , Pittsburgh , PA c Clinical Improvement Department , Wolff Center , University of Pittsburgh Medical Center , Pittsburgh , PA d Department of Anesthesiology , School of Medicine , University of Pittsburgh , Pittsburgh , PA e Division of General Internal Medicine , Department of Medicine , School of Medicine , University of Pittsburgh , Pittsburgh , PA f Section of Decision Sciences , School of Medicine , University of Pittsburgh , Pittsburgh , PA Key Words : Health care personnel Personal protective equipment Contamination Simulation Videotape analysis Fluorescent powder Background : Very little is known about how health care personnel ( HCP ) actually use personal protec - tive equipment ( PPE ) . Methods : The clinical PPE practices of 50 HCP from selected units at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center ( UPMC ) Presbyterian Hospital were videotaped with HCP consent . For 2 PPE simulation sessions ( simple and full - body sets ) , 82 HCP were recruited throughout the UPMC system . Simulation practices were videotaped and examined using ﬂuorescent powder with ultraviolet lighting . All participants com - pleted an electronic survey . For a follow - up evaluation simulation , 12 HCP were recruited among simulation participants . Results : Among 130 total sessions from 65 participants , contamination occurred in 79 . 2 % of simula - tions during the doﬃng process with various PPE items : simple set ( 92 . 3 % ) and full - body set ( 66 . 2 % ) . Among 11 follow - up evaluation participants , contaminations still occurred in 82 % after receiving individual feed - back , but the overall contamination level was reduced . Using the contamination information gained during the simulation analysis , 66 % of potential contamination was estimated for the clinical observation . Con - cernsandbarriersinPPEusefromHCPsurveyresponseswereasfollows : time - consuming , cumbersomeness , and PPE effectiveness . Conclusions : Although HCP knew they were being videotaped , contamination occurred in 79 . 2 % of the PPE simulations . Devising better standardized PPE protocols and implementing innovative PPE educa - tion are necessary to ensure HCP safety . © 2017 Association for Professionals in Infection Control and Epidemiology , Inc . Published by Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . BACKGROUND The 2014 U . S . Ebola cases in nurses that resulted from occupa - tional exposure underscored that health care personnel ( HCP ) are at risk for contracting infectious diseases during patient care . Despite the Ebola transmission route ( ie , contact with body ﬂuids ) being relatively clear , 2 U . S . nurses were infected with Ebola during patient care despite their wearing of full - body personal protective equip - ment ( PPE ) . Cable News Network reported inconsistencies in the type of PPE worn and the procedures of donning and doﬃng PPE during patient care as possible causes of the ﬁrst nurse’s Ebola infection . 1 This emphasizes that very little is known about how HCP actually use PPE in their daily practice . Although updated PPE guidelines were released during the Ebola outbreak , some discrepancies still exist among them . For example , regarding the donning of PPE for Ebola preparedness , the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) training modules state that “if your gown does not have thumb hooks , some facilities may con - sider taping the sleeve of the gown over the inner glove to prevent potential skin exposure from separation between the sleeve and inner * Address correspondence to JaHyun Kang , PhD , MPH , College of Nursing , Seoul National University , 103 Daehak - ro , Jongno - gu , Seoul 03080 , Republic of Korea . E - mail address : jahyunkang @ gmail . com ( J . Kang ) . Funding / support : SupportedbytheAPICHeroesImplementationResearchScholar Award 2015 - 16 program and the Peter M . Winter Institution for Simulation , Edu - cation , and Research Center . Conﬂicts of interest : None to report . 1 Current aﬃliations : College of Nursing , Seoul National University , Seoul , Re - public of Korea and Research Institute of Nursing Science , Seoul National University , Seoul , Republic of Korea . 0196 - 6553 / © 2017 Association for Professionals in Infection Control and Epidemiology , Inc . Published by Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ajic . 2016 . 08 . 011 American Journal of Infection Control 45 ( 2017 ) 17 - 23 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect American Journal of Infection Control journal homepage : www . ajicjournal . org American Journal of Infection Control glove during activity . ” 2 However , World Health Organization guide - lines prohibit the use of tape to seal any exposure between gloves and gowns because of the potential for contamination during the removal process . 3 During Ebola outbreak readiness preparation in 2014 , most U . S . tertiary hospitals developed tailored protocols and trained HCP in using PPE . However , such protocols were imperfect because of a lack of suﬃcient quantities of PPE ( eg , hazmat suits , impermeable gown , face shields ) , and many HCP were directed to video , paper , or online sources to learn proper PPE use . 4 The exist - ing discrepancies between CDC guidelines and actual hospital protocols ( eg , those of Emory Healthcare ) have led infection preventionists to call for clear PPE use protocols and procedures for Ebola . 5 Until the Ebola outbreak received widespread attention with calls for development of a resource - intensive preparedness response ( eg , full PPE and a trained observer system ) , problems regarding general PPE use had not been examined in depth . Although PPE is an es - sential part of isolation precautions to protect both HCP and patients from exposures to infectious agents , PPE compliance in hospitals may not have received the same emphasis as hand hygiene com - pliance , which is known to be the most effective intervention in preventing disease transmission . Because PPE is only effective when used correctly , both PPE noncompliance and poor donning and doﬃng processes can result in transmission of infectious disease . However , PPE monitoring in hospital settings is usually limited to yes or no compliance 6 that is not extended to veriﬁcation of actual competency in PPE donning and doﬃng procedures . In fact , effec - tive PPE use in clinical settings involves a complex matrix of variables , such as PPE availability at a patient’s room ; PPE type , size , and quality ; intended procedure ; HCP task burden ( eg , number of as - signed patients ) ; level of potential exposure ; and work environment . For optimal PPE use , HCP competency in donning and doﬃng PPE alone is insuﬃcient . Rather , it must be complemented by the nec - essary system - level support , such as leadership , policies , teamwork , training efforts , and safety culture . Given the lack of a clear and highly standardized protocol for PPE use , the goal of this study was to enhance safety for both HCP and patients by providing evidence ( 1 ) to establish a standardized pro - tocol for optimal PPE use and ( 2 ) to optimize an educational intervention across health care facilities and in professional health schools . To achieve this goal , this study aimed ( 1 ) to describe the knowledge , attitudes , and practices of HCP on PPE use ; ( 2 ) to assess the performance of HCP regarding PPE procedures with different types of PPE ; and ( 3 ) to identify potential breaches in and barriers to PPE compliance . METHODS This study was designed as an observational , descriptive study in 4 parts : a clinical observation , a simulation observation , a survey ( for both clinical and simulation participants ) , and a follow - up eval - uation simulation . Simulations required HCP to don and doff diverse PPE types for each item ( eg , N95 respirator—pouch vs ﬂat - fold vs cup style ) in 2 levels of sets ( ie , simple set [ basic PPE items , such as daily use PPE in clinical setting ] , full - body set [ enhanced pro - tection PPE items , such as in Ebola preparedness ] ) . With the University of Pittsburgh Institutional Review Board approval , both survey and videotaping observation methods were used for data collection . Survey Survey questions were developed using the Qualtrics survey system ( Qualtrics , Provo , UT ) for collecting the necessary informa - tion from HCP , such as profession , sex , age , PPE experience year , PPE use frequency , PPE education experience , beliefs on PPE effective - ness , perceptions of cumbersomeness in PPE use , and conﬁdence in using PPE ( in general , simple set , and full - body set ) . In addi - tion , open - ended survey questions were included to reﬂect HCP opinions about barriers , concerns , and suggestions for PPE use in their practices . The survey questions developed were reviewed by 2 study task force team members ( B . C . and K . J . S . ) and were pilot - tested by 3 infection preventionists from Three Rivers / Pittsburgh APIC Chapter ( TRAPIC ) for content clarity and appropriate wording . Clinical observations The clinical observation portion of this study was conducted at the UPMC Presbyterian Hospital , a 762 - bed tertiary care facility , from August 31 - September 11 , 2015 . Clinical observation subjects ( ie , HCP who visited patients on isolation ) were recruited at selected units that had every tenth isolation patient location on a daily report , which listed all isolation patient rooms in the hospital . The report was generated during the study period by a UPMC system infec - tion control coordinator ( B . C . ) during the study period . A trained research assistant visited the selected units , recruited HCP , ob - tained consent for research participation , videotaped the PPE performance ( both donning and doﬃng ) of HCP , and asked HCP to complete an online survey using a tablet computer . Through the ad - ditional survey questions , study participants for clinical observation were able to choose ( 1 ) to receive feedback on their observed PPE practices and ( 2 ) to participate in the simulation portion of this study . Because ﬂuorescent powder could not be used on patients in an actual hospital setting , clinical observation videos were analyzed based on simulation analysis results to ﬁnd potential contamina - tion opportunities . Simulations The simulation portion of this study was conducted at the Uni - versity of Pittsburgh , Peter M . Winter Institution for Simulation , Education , and Research from September 22 - November 10 , 2015 . Subjects were recruited through the UPMC system and the Univer - sity of Pittsburgh School of Nursing , through an introduction at the UPMC Presbyterian Hospital Nursing Grand Rounds , through e - mail advertisements , and by posting ﬂyers on the UPMC intranet and bul - letin boards located at the hospital coffee shop and nearby elevators . All HCP , across all disciplines ( eg , doctor , nurse , nurse aid , techni - cian ) , who participated in patient care at UPMC , were eligible to participate in the study . To encourage research participation in the simulation portion , an incentive ( ie , $ 45 ) was provided . During each simulation , participants completed ( 1 ) a written consent form , ( 2 ) a ﬁrst simulation session with a randomly as - signed simple PPE set , ( 3 ) a second simulation session with a randomly assigned full - body PPE set , and ( 4 ) an online survey . Various styles of each PPE item were randomly combined by taking 1 sample among each different PPE available from each category in order : disposable gown ( yellow gown vs blue surgical gown vs im - permeable gown ) , surgical mask ( antifog vs chamber style ) , N95 respirator ( pouch style vs ﬂat - fold style vs cup style ) , gloves ( long sleeve vs short sleeve ) , cap ( bouffant vs surgical ) , full - body gown ( hazmat suit vs 2 disposable gowns for dual covering front and back ) , hood ( pullover vs long vs short ) , face shield ( mask with shield vs face shield ) , eye protection ( goggle vs glasses style ) , and shoe cover ( boot cover vs shoe cover ) . In addition , a powered air purifying res - pirator ( PAPR ) was used as in Ebola preparedness as part of some randomly assigned full - body PPE sets . Simulation participants’ PPE donning and doﬃng procedures were videotaped simultaneously using both a tablet computer and sim - ulation room cameras to avoid missing any parts of the PPE 18 J . Kang et al . / American Journal of Infection Control 45 ( 2017 ) 17 - 23 procedure because of any angle limitations or operational mis - takes . To aid HCP with the donning and doﬃng procedure on unfamiliar PPE items for full - body sets , including hand hygiene steps between the doﬃng procedures , UPMC Ebola preparedness donning and doﬃng posters were posted as reference aids on the walls of a donning room and a simulation room , without providing any in - terventions or education prior to their simulations . For the full - body set donning , a research assistant aided each participant by taping the sleeve of the gown over the inner glove as the CDC recommended . PPE performance of the simulation participants was measured using ﬂuorescent powder ( Glo Germ Powder , Glo Germ Company , Moab , UT ) and an ultraviolet light . After donning an assigned PPE set , each participant was asked to demonstrate their usual patient care ( eg , physical assessment which was intensive enough to contami - nate the surface of PPE ; touching - involved practices varied by occupation and were chosen by participants ) at bedside to a SimMan ( Laerdal , Stavanger , Norway ) that was fully covered with ﬂuores - cent powder . After doﬃng the PPE set , contamination with ﬂuorescent powder was examined using an ultraviolet light in the darkened sim - ulation room . Any contaminated areas were photographed using a tablet computer and ( or ) a high - resolution camera . All contamina - tion with ﬂuorescent powder was thoroughly cleaned using soap and water before the HCP left the simulation room . To evaluate the videotaped donning and doﬃng procedure with different sets and styles of PPE , an electronic checklist program with a time recording function for each donning and doﬃng item was developed . Using this PPE performance checklist program , all vid - eotaped data ( from both clinical and simulation ) were coded with comments for observed potential contamination procedure and be - haviors by 2 coders ( ie , a research assistant and the principal investigator ) . Follow - up evaluation simulation After checking contamination photographs and observed contam - ination behaviors in videotaped simulation data , a small proportion of the simulation participants ( n = 12 ) were invited back for the second 1 - hour simulation with the same PPE sets for a follow - up evaluation ( December 7 - 8 , 2015 ) . A recruiting e - mail was sent to HCP who ex - pressedinterestinparticipatinginafollow - upsimulationbasedontheir additional survey response . Recruitment was completed in the order that participants signed up for available time slots . Evaluation simu - lation sessions were held to observe any changes in PPE performance afterprovidingindividualfeedbackonparticipants’contaminationerrors by showing their contaminated photographs and potential contami - nation behaviors during donning and doﬃng through captured screens or by playing video of their performance . Data analysis For data analysis of various level of contaminations observed , the principal investigator grouped the different contamination levels displayed in photographs with ﬂuorescent powder into 4 contam - ination categories : negligible ( very few particles , hard to ﬁnd ) , noticeable ( more contaminated than negligible ) , apparent ( easily found with enough amounts of powder or several parts of evident contamination ) , and severe ( massively contaminated with signif - icant amounts ) . Then the 4 categories of contamination were combined into minor ( negligible and noticeable ) and obvious ( ap - parent and severe ) for meaningful statistical analysis because of the small number of simulation observations in some categories . Descriptive statistical analysis was conducted using SAS version 9 . 4 ( SAS Institute , Cary , NC ) . A Fisher exact test ( for categorical vari - ables ) and a Wilcoxon rank - sum test ( for continuous variables ) were conducted to compare any affecting variables between contamina - tion and no contamination . Among contamination cases , further comparison was performed between minor and obvious contam - ination levels for each simple set and full - body set category . RESULTS Simulation Among 82 HCP who made a participation appointment , 65 HCP ( 72 . 9 % ; including 3 HCP who participated in the clinical observa - tion ) completed their 1 - hour simulations . Participants’ characteristics are summarized in Table 1 . Their average PPE use experience was 5 . 16 years ( Table 2 ) . Among the 65 simulation participants , 63 HCP ( 97 % ) had at least 1 instance of contamination during the PPE doﬃng process in 2 simulation sessions with both a simple set and a full - body set ( Table 3 ) . Only 2 participants had no contaminations from either simulation . For the 130 total simulations observed from the 65 participants , the overall contamination rate was 79 % ( n = 103 ) . For the 60 simple set PPE contaminations , 40 % were rated as minor , whereas 60 % were rated as obvious according to the combined 2 levels of contamination described . For the 43 full - body set con - taminations , 65 . 1 % were minor and 34 . 9 % were obvious ( Table 4 ) . Contamination locations with ﬂuorescent powder were ob - served where participants can contact during the doﬃng process . The most contaminated areas for both simple and full - body sets were hands and ﬁngers followed by arm - wrist and face ( Table 3 ) . Even among the 8 participants who used randomly assigned full - body PPE set with a hazmat suit ( Tychem ; DuPont , Wilmington , DE ) and Table 1 Summary of participants’ characteristics from the survey responses Category Clinical participants ( N = 50 ) Simulation participants ( N = 65 ) * Profession Registered nurse 40 ( 80 ) 36 ( 55 ) Nurse assistant 5 ( 10 ) 10 ( 15 ) Physician 2 ( 4 ) 3 ( 5 ) Physical therapist 2 ( 4 ) — Respiratory therapist 1 ( 2 ) — Laboratory technician — 1 ( 2 ) Other † — 15 ( 23 ) Sex Female 34 ( 68 ) 53 ( 82 ) Male 16 ( 32 ) 12 ( 18 ) Age range ( y ) 20s 26 ( 52 ) 48 ( 74 ) 30s 10 ( 20 ) 10 ( 15 ) 40s 6 ( 12 ) 3 ( 5 ) 50s 6 ( 12 ) 3 ( 5 ) 60s 2 ( 4 ) 1 ( 2 ) Frequency of PPE use Many times a day 41 ( 82 ) 29 ( 45 ) Several times a day 9 ( 18 ) 10 ( 15 ) 1 - 2 times a day — — Several times a week — 7 ( 11 ) 1 - 2 times a week — 3 ( 5 ) Several times a month — 4 ( 6 ) 1 - 2 times a month — 12 ( 18 ) Educational exposure for PPE ‡ Continuing education 44 ( 88 ) 39 ( 60 ) UPMC Ebola preparedness Infonet 33 ( 66 ) 30 ( 46 ) On the job training 48 ( 96 ) 58 ( 89 ) NOTE . Values are N ( % ) . PPE , personal - protective equipment ; UPMC , University of Pittsburgh Medical Center . * Some participants did not answer some questions . † Among the 15 other professions , 6 were nursing anesthetist students , 3 were ad - vanced patient care technicians , and 2 were clinical research coordinators . ‡ Study participants could choose all that apply . 19 J . Kang et al . / American Journal of Infection Control 45 ( 2017 ) 17 - 23 a PAPR ( Versaﬂo TR600 ; 3M , St . Paul , MN ) , 50 % of HCP contami - nated their shirt neckline , forearm , chin , cheek , and palm at the minor level during the doﬃng process . The average times for donning and doﬃng by type of PPE set are summarized in Table 3 . With a hazmat suit and a PAPR , the donning process took an average of 7 . 55 minutes ( range , 5 . 2 - 13 . 47 ) and the doﬃng process took 4 . 06 minutes ( range , 3 . 08 - 5 . 63 ) . A signiﬁcant difference ( P = . 0488 ) was noted when comparing contamination versus speed of doﬃng with simple PPE sets : obvious levels ( 45 . 39 seconds average doﬃng time ) versus minor levels of contamination ( 55 . 46 seconds average doﬃng time ) . The main reasons for doﬃng contamination observed were ( 1 ) removing several PPE items at once , ( 2 ) doﬃng gloves ﬁrst and then touching other PPE with bare hands , ( 3 ) pushing PPE into a trash can , and ( 4 ) unconscious cross touch ( eg , touching the outer sur - faces of a gown when rolling it up to reduce its volume for discard ) . Minor contamination in the full - body PPE set with a hazmat suit and a PAPR occurred during the doﬃng process when pushing trash down into the container , unzipping the gown , and cross contami - nation ( eg , pumping hand sanitizer ) . No signiﬁcant difference was found between contamination levels ( contamination vs no con - tamination and minor vs obvious ) comparing participant background information , such as profession , sex , age , years of experience , ed - ucation exposure , beliefs in PPE effectiveness , perceptions of cumbersomeness , and conﬁdence in using PPE . There was no con - tamination observed related to removing tape from sleeves and gloves . Donning process issues observed in the PPE simulations were unfamiliarity with some PPE items ( eg , overall hood ) , confusion about the wearing order of multilayered PPE items ( eg , double gowning , double gloving , hood and goggles ) , and human errors ( eg , not tying the back strap of the gown ) . Survey Simulation participants’ survey responses are summarized in Tables 2 and 5 . Although participants believed in the effectiveness of PPE use in minimizing exposure to infectious pathogens ( mean of 8 in the 10 - point Likert scale from 1 [ not very much ] to 10 [ very much ] ) , they also reported that PPE use during their practice was cumbersome ( mean , 5 . 45 ) . Participants showed relatively high con - ﬁdence in their PPE use in general ( mean , 8 . 02 ) and with a simple PPE set ( mean , 8 . 17 ) . However , they were less conﬁdent ( mean , 4 . 6 ) in the use of full - body protection PPE sets , as in Ebola prepared - ness . Barriers or concerns in PPE use expressed by the simulation participants were time consumption ( eg , slowed down team round - ing ) , cumbersomeness ( eg , tough to move with a PAPR ) , lack of training ( eg , not sure in what order to don or doff PPE ) , worry about PPE effectiveness ( eg , thin yellow disposable gown ) , PPE issues ( eg , throwing PPE away ) , and others , such as listed in Table 5 . Sugges - tions from participating HCP for better PPE use were more training ( eg , yearly continuing education , orientation training ) , the need to develop better PPE ( eg , something more eﬃcient ) , and the hope to resolve unexamined issues ( eg , trash container , stethoscope ) . Evaluation simulation Among the 65 simulation participants , 11 participants com - pleted follow - up simulations . After receiving individual feedback on their previous performance , including pictures and video parts of procedural errors , 10 participants ( 91 % ) still made contamina - tion errors . The rate of contamination of the total evaluation simulations was 82 % ( 18 / 22 ) . Importantly , the overall contamina - tion level was reduced in 82 % . For example , of the 11 participants in evaluation simulation for simple sets , 9 had obvious contami - nation in their initial simulation , and of these , 8 improved their contamination level to minor . Clinical observation For clinical PPE practice observation , 50 HCP were recruited during the clinical study period . The participants’ characteristics are summarized in Table 1 , and their survey responses are shown in Table 2 . Using the information gained about contamination path - ways during the simulation analysis , we calculated a potential contamination exposure rate of 66 % ( 33 / 50 ) for the clinical obser - vation videos . The most common contamination prone behaviors were touching the exterior of the gown while rolling it up ( n = 15 ) and cross touching while doﬃng PPE ( n = 11 ) . Other potential Table 2 Study participants’ years of PPE use and their beliefs and conﬁdence levels from the survey responses Category Clinical participants ( N = 50 ) Simulation participants ( N = 65 ) * Mean ± SD Range Mean ± SD Range Years of PPE use experience 8 . 69 ± 9 . 23 1 - 40 5 . 16 ± 5 . 20 0 . 15 - 25 Belief in effectiveness of PPE in minimizing exposure to infectious pathogen ( s ) † 7 . 56 ± 2 . 19 3 - 10 8 . 00 ± 2 . 06 1 - 10 Feel cumbersomeness in using PPE † 4 . 90 ± 2 . 60 1 - 10 5 . 45 ± 2 . 74 1 - 10 Conﬁdence in using PPE in general † 8 . 43 ± 1 . 94 1 - 10 8 . 02 ± 1 . 96 2 - 10 Conﬁdence in using a simple PPE set † NA 8 . 17 ± 1 . 60 4 - 10 Conﬁdence in using a full - body PPE set † NA 4 . 60 ± 2 . 50 1 - 10 NA , not applicable because the survey for clinical observation did not include the questions for conﬁdence in using different level of PPE sets ; PPE , personal protec - tive equipment . * Some participants did not answer some questions . † Forthesequestions , a10 - pointLikertscalewasusedrangingfrom1 ( notverymuch ) to 10 ( very much ) . Table 3 Summary of contamination results during the doﬃng process by PPE set ( N = 65 , 130 total simulations ) Category Simple set ( N = 65 ) Full - body set ( N = 65 ) Contamination rate From both sets 40 * ( 61 . 5 ) From both sets 40 * ( 61 . 5 ) Simple set only 20 ( 30 . 8 ) Full - body set only 3 ( 4 . 6 ) Total 60 ( 92 . 3 ) Total 43 ( 66 . 2 ) Contamination area † in order Hands - ﬁngers 40 ( 66 . 7 ) Hands - ﬁngers 16 ( 37 . 2 ) Arm - wrist 23 ( 38 . 3 ) Arm - wrist 12 ( 27 . 9 ) Face ‡ 20 ( 33 . 3 ) Face ‡ 11 ( 25 . 6 ) Shirt 13 ( 21 . 7 ) Foot § - shoes 9 ( 20 . 9 ) Neck - collar 8 ( 13 . 3 ) Shirt 8 ( 18 . 6 ) Foot § - shoes 6 ( 10 . 0 ) Neck - collar 6 ( 14 . 0 ) Pants 5 ( 8 . 3 ) Pants 4 ( 9 . 3 ) Scalp - hair - ear 4 ( 6 . 7 ) Scalp - hair - ear 1 ( 2 . 3 ) Average donning time ¶ 169 . 88 seconds ( range , 35 - 364 ) 6 . 63 minutes ( range , 4 . 02 - 13 . 47 ) Average doﬃng time ¶ 51 . 31 seconds ( range , 19 - 112 ) 2 . 42 minutes ( range , 1 . 12 - 5 . 67 ) NOTE . Values are N ( % ) or as otherwise indicated . PPE , personal protective equipment . * That is , 40 participants contaminated themselves while doﬃng both sets . † This area’s information is counted per participant , regardless of multiple counts on the same area . ‡ Face area includes forehead , nose , cheek , chin , and jaw across the face area . § Some participants wore shoes that exposed their foot skin ( eg , ﬂip ﬂops ) , and con - tamination of lower pant leg nearby feet was included in this foot - shoes category . ¶ IncludingalltimespentcheckingUniversityofPittsburghMedicalCenterPPEdonning and doﬃng posters and communication with a research assistant . 20 J . Kang et al . / American Journal of Infection Control 45 ( 2017 ) 17 - 23 Table 4 Summary of contamination level results from PPE simulations ( n = 65 , 130 total simulations ) PPE , personal - protective equipment . Table 5 Selected quoted narrative survey responses from simulation participants on barriers and concerns , and suggestions for PPE use 1 . Barriers and concerns in PPE use Time - consuming • “Physician teams round in large groups and most often in the patient’s room , this can be very cumbersome and time - consuming for multiple people to don PPE . ” • “Emergency without time to put on PPE . ” • “It is very time consuming to put on PPE for entering every isolation [ precaution ] patient’s room , even if just to take a peek in and ask a simple question . . . ” • “I feel that the time used to don the PPE is a big factor towards why healthcare workers don’t always use it when necessary because we have the mindset that we are just going to complete a basic task quickly and that in the time it takes to don the PPE , the task could already be completed . ” Cumbersomeness • “The PPE sometimes does make it harder to handle certain equipment that require precise and ﬁne motor skills . ” • “The PPE with PAPR was . . . tough to move around as the suit was too big . ” • “During winter , when everyone has a respiratory illness , it signiﬁcantly slows down my morning pre - rounds and rounds for everyone to gown and glove , and [ I’m ] really not convinced that this prevents much spread of disease . Super annoying . ” • “When [ patients ] have MRSA precaution [ s ] , so many [ patients ] have [ these ] precautions that [ the ] number of times needing to get in PPE is [ cumbersome ] . Especially [ since ] MRSA is everywhere . ” Lack of training • “I didn’t know [ in ] what order to put the equipment on . ” • “Lack of experience / training on some of the equipment . ” • “Diﬃcult when more layers are added ( head covers , shoe covers ) because as nurses we [ don’t ] use that often . ” Worry about PPE effectiveness • “There are some concerns about whether that thin yellow gown is actually an infectious barrier . ” • “I use the simple set most often but when doﬃng I feel there is not a clean way to do it . I feel contaminated every time . ” PPE issues • “Our ﬂoor frequently runs out of gowns , so using them every time . . . isn’t completely realistic—we tend to save them for activities that require more physical contact with the patient . ” • “You deﬁnitely need to wear the protective pants in any event that [ an ] infectious [ disease ] such as Ebola is concerned . I feel that without them , your personal pants can and will be exposed to such contaminants” • “PAPRs often come with dead batteries and there isn’t always someone to help you . ” • “PPE varies from site to site and it is diﬃcult to adjust to the differences . ” • “Way too big of a size , too bulky ; made me feel a little claustrophobic in the full face mask . ” Other • “Hot . ” • “Laziness . ” 2 . Suggestions Training - education • “I did not receive any speciﬁc training regarding PPE when hired as an RN . This should be included in orientation . ” • “I believe that individuals in practice should have a yearly continuing education module or simulation to practice and support the correct use of PPE in the clinical setting . ” • “ . . . I did not have much guidance when putting or taking off the PPE but I know I could’ve done better if I had watched a video or something ﬁrst to show me how to put the PPE on . ” • “Training on each speciﬁc item and the order in which they go on . ” Need for better PPE • “Something more eﬃcient to put on faster and that is easy to take off . ” • “Standardize PPE in the US . ” • “The gown should have a back cover built in because I have noticed at other facilities where the gowns have ties at the neck , a lot of the healthcare workers don’t bother tying the neck and only tie the lower back , leaving their upper back exposed . ” Unexamined points • “We need to be forthcoming about whether it truly works and what the costs are behind all the yellow gowns and masks . PPE often gets tossed in the Biohazard red bin because it is a large container and the patient’s small bedside trash can is full and does not accommodate PPE . ” • “Use of feet covers always during isolation . ” • “One area is a PPE for personal stethoscope [ s ] . The cheap plastic ones are full of germs themselves and are pretty worthless in exams . ” MRSA , methicillin - resistant Staphylococcus aureus ; PAPR , powered air purifying respirator ; PPE , personal protective equipment ; RN , registered nurse . 21 J . Kang et al . / American Journal of Infection Control 45 ( 2017 ) 17 - 23 contamination behaviors were grabbing gown to take it off , removal of gloves ﬁrst , simultaneously doﬃng gown and gloves , and pushing the trash down . The average time used for donning simple PPE ( gown , gloves , and / or mask ) was 47 . 56 seconds ( range , 27 - 104 ) , and it was 18 . 82 seconds ( range , 7 - 52 ) for doﬃng . Among the 50 clin - ical participants , 26 HCP ( 52 % ) reported on their survey responses that they wanted feedback on their PPE performance ; no further questions were asked based on our feedback provided to participants . DISCUSSION Our study demonstrated substantial contamination rates mea - sured after the doﬃng process regardless of differences in PPE sets and styles . This aligns with other recent small - scale pilot study results that have reported PPE doﬃng contamination rates ranging from 25 % - 100 % . 7 - 9 To our knowledge , this study is the ﬁrst to examine HCP PPE donning and doﬃng practices through a comprehensive approach using videotaped observations , ﬂuorescent powder on full - body simulation mannequins , both simple and full - body PPE sets , combinations of different PPE styles , and a realistic simulation center environment . The recent Cochrane review on PPE use among HCP ( which included publications up to January 2016 ) mentioned a sample size of 62 for detecting a 0 . 5 risk ratio ( from a power cal - culation when a contamination of control group = 0 . 7 , α = 0 . 05 , and β = 0 . 80 ) to compare 2 different types of PPE ( eg , gowns vs coveralls ) . 7 Although we did not satisfy their recommendation of using a non - pathogenic virus for outcome measurements , our simulation study with 65 HCP provided comprehensive , videotaped evidence of how HCP actually don and doff various PPE from both clinical observa - tions and simulations . Furthermore , even immediately after participants received in - dividual feedback about the type , amount , and cause of their contaminations and tried to avoid the same mistakes , 91 % of HCP still had contamination ( s ) during follow - up evaluation simula - tions . Importantly , these evaluation simulation contaminations occurred as the HCPs were using the same PPE sets as the previ - ous assigned sets . Although contamination levels during the follow - up simulations were reduced from obvious to minor in most cases , HCP contaminated themselves in other ways as they were trying to avoid the previous mistakes . Similarly , Casalino et al 10 found that contaminations still occurred alongside other errors with 2 differ - ent PPE sets ( ie , basic PPE vs enhanced PPE ) after 2 types of training programs ( ie , conventional vs reinforced ) consisting of 1 theoret - ical and 3 follow - up practical training sessions at 72 - hour intervals . Therefore , HCP contamination during PPE doﬃng seems to be caused by natural ﬂaws ( in other words , a “moment of lack of vigilance , ” personal communication with Dr Richard Garﬁeld , Columbia Uni - versity , June 21 , 2016 ) in human behaviors ; however , better training does produce less contamination . 7 Moreover , we could delve into the HCP behavior ﬂaws that caused contaminations during the doﬃng process . Just a 10 - second dif - ference ( 55 vs 45 ) in average simple set doﬃng time resulted in a signiﬁcant difference in contamination level ( minor vs obvious ) . We observed that as HCP doffed PPE in a rushed manner , they con - taminated themselves by unconsciously touching the outside of the PPE . Unfamiliar PPE items ( eg , back and forth double gowning , leg boots , goggles , or a long hood ) also caused HCP to contaminate them - selves while they were trying to doff PPE : the more PPE layers , the more cross - contamination is possible during the doﬃng process . Rolling the doffed PPE up to reduce its volume to facilitate discard - ing it caused cross touching outside of the contaminated gowns , which were sometimes unknowingly reversed during the rolling process . Earrings and hair buns hindered mask doﬃng by inter - twining with strings . Regarding World Health Organization recommendations against using tape because of the potential contamination risk of interference with safe gown and gloves doﬃng , no contaminations associated with tape removal were observed in this study . This ﬁnding that taping may not present signiﬁcant con - tamination risk is supported by Bell et al’s recent report . 11 Other mistakes in the doﬃng process , such as forcefully tearing PPE to doff , untied gown strings , and unexpected donning mistakes ( wrong se - quence of donning PPE items ) , caused some contamination cases . Only a few HCP who paid meticulous attention to the donning and doﬃng process were free of any contaminations . Unique to this study’s ﬁndings , many episodes of contamina - tion actually occurred when HCP discarded PPE into a trash can . Because of the many bulky PPE items , even a large trash can was rapidly ﬁlled . Although the trash can lid could be opened using a foot pedal , some HCP touched the lid or even held the trash can with one hand so that the other hand could push the trash down more deeply to reduce the trash volume . This ﬁnding highlights the im - portance of frequent emptying of trash cans to ensure enough space is free to discard bulky PPE items . Contamination of shoes and pants was observed in this study , which aligns with the report by Guo et al indicating that working shoes are unhygienic . 12 For the shoe covers or boot covers , using a chair to assist in donning and doﬃng them may need to reevalu - ated because some HCP did not use the chair and because the chair could also be a potential contamination source . Even during use of simple PPE sets , substantial contamination of the pants and feet - shoes were noted . This suggests that HCP are likely to contaminate their working shoes during use of simple PPE sets ( ie , those not including shoes covers ) . If this occurs during work in clinical set - tings , the working shoes may serve as a potential source of pathogen transmission to the greater hospital environment . Therefore , our study supports the Occupational Safety and Health Administra - tion recommendation for boot or shoe cover use when large quantities or splashes of infective material are anticipated or present . 13 This study has several limitations . The study results have a high likelihood of a Hawthorne effect ( ie , effect on the performance of a subject because they know they are being observed ) . However , this Hawthorne effect limitation is most likely to have impacted per - formance in a positive direction , and it is likely that HCP contamination rates or amounts could have been worse than our ﬁndings . Similarly , as likelihood of performance in the positive di - rection , there was an absence of clinical care time pressures at the simulation center , which may have resulted in more time and care being taken on doﬃng and donning . Also , despite the various PPE styles and sets that were examined , the effectiveness of each PPE itself by style , materials , prolonged wearing time , or whether it sat - isﬁed the Occupational Safety and Health Administration’s requirements , such as ﬁt testing , 14 were not evaluated in this study . Because convenience samples of study participants and PPE items from one health care system were adopted , these ﬁndings may not be generalizable to other clinical settings . Although we tried to measure the sequence of donning and doﬃng PPE and the time con - sumed by PPE donning and doﬃng , any meaningful sequences of PPE use were systematically unmeasurable because of the ran - domly prepared PPE sets with various type of PPE items , and many HCP tried to doff several PPE at once . Despite the use of both the simulation center’s cameras on the ceilings and a tablet computer , some minor elements of PPE performance were not captured in a few cases because of blind spots and limited angles . Because of lack of enough light for a high - resolution camera , ﬂuorescent powder particles were not captured consistently in the darkened room ; there - fore , some contamination parts may have been missed . In some minor contamination levels including only a few particles , there could be the possibility of ﬂuorescent particles falling down from somewhere else without any behavior mistakes 15 because of heavy 22 J . Kang et al . / American Journal of Infection Control 45 ( 2017 ) 17 - 23 contaminations of the PPE surfaces . In addition , because ﬂuores - cent powder is not removed by hand hygiene using alcohol hand sanitizer , more contaminations results could be reported despite HCP hand hygiene performance in the simulation . The various extent of contamination with ﬂuorescent powder could not be measured quantitatively by centimeters squared as Guo et al measured their ﬂuorescent lotion contamination ; therefore , we measured contami - nations in an ordinal categorical fashion for data analysis . However , ﬂuorescent powder was the best choice for our contamination mea - surement methods instead of a nonpathogenic virus because instant photographic ﬁndings were very helpful to track the contamina - tion errors when monitoring videotaped HCP performance . Finally , we could not evaluate the PPE performance of 3 HCP who partici - pated in both clinical observation and simulation because we could not track their identity by using study identiﬁcation for each study part ( eg , C01 , S01 , E01 ) for anonymous participation . Our simulation participants largely believed PPE could mini - mize exposure to infectious pathogens , and most of our study participants showed a willingness to use PPE correctly ; therefore , they suggested more training , evidence , and support to ﬁll the gap between desired performance and actual practice . Contamination errors caused by unfamiliarity , complexity with more PPE layers , rushed movements , and unconscious habits ( eg , pushing PPE trash down ) could be prevented through training . Better training can allow HCP to improve their PPE performance , and our observed doﬃng contamination could be more of a systemic ﬂaw in our traditional education for HCP in PPE use rather than a reckless individual’s mistake . Evidence shows that traditional learning methods ( eg , watching educational videos , learning PPE guidelines ) are inferior to immersive learning methods , including active learner involve - ment using simulations that include feedback on performance . 16 , 17 CONCLUSIONS Regardless of the different levels of PPE sets or various style com - binations , this study demonstrated frequent contaminations after PPE use and doﬃng . These contamination breaches appear to be as - sociated with poor HCP PPE techniques , knowledge deﬁcits , and behavioral ﬂaws . Although it may be impossible to achieve zero breaches in HCP PPE doﬃng , this study emphasizes the need for reﬁning PPE protocols based on further scientiﬁc evidence , rein - forcing PPE training using innovative methods , improving and standardizing PPE equipment for targeting HCP optimal use . Further research with multidisciplinary collaborations is necessary to resolve each piece of the complex PPE problem to reduce the potential for contamination and exposure to infectious diseases and therefore ensure HCP safety . Acknowledgments We thank the 114 health care personnel for their participation in either clinical videotaped observations , simulations , or both study parts ; the Peter M . Winter Institution for Simulation , Education , and Research ( WISER ) center for their professional support and their in kind donations of approximately a total of $ 22 , 000 for study simu - lations ; Debra A . Novak , Senior Service Fellow of National Personal Protective Technology Laboratory / National Institute for Occupa - tional Safety , for her expert consultation for this study as a task force team member ; John Lutz , Director of Information Technology , WISER , for developing the monitoring checklist program for videotaped data ; Tami Minnier , University of Pittsburgh Medical Center ( UPMC ) Chief Quality Oﬃcer , for supporting this study throughout the UPMC system ; Jacqueline Dunbar - Jacob , Dean of the University of Pitts - burgh School of Nursing , for supporting this study ; Laurie L . Rack , Clinical Director of Medical Services , UPMC Presbyterian Hospital , for her support in recruiting health care personnel ; Sara Goga , Cat - egory Lead UPMC Supply Chain Management , for her support to purchase personal protective equipment items at UPMC dis - counted prices ; Knox T . Walk , Director of Business Continuity and Preparedness Operations , UPMC , for his support through 2 powered air purifying respirator ( PAPR ) units ( 3M TR600 PAPR unit with belt , high - eﬃciency particulate air ﬁlter for training , ﬁlter cover , adjust - able hose , rechargeable battery , and single battery charger ) for the full - body protection set ; Sheila McCool , Marion Pokrywka , and Chris - tine Bingman , Infection Preventionists from APIC Chapter 051 , Three Rivers / Pittsburgh ( TRAPIC ) , for pilot testing the survey questions ; and Marcy Lindley , Heather Shura , Erica Yawnlis , and Conor O’Donnell for their diligent research assistant work . References 1 . Weiss J CDC changes Ebola care guidelines for U . S . hospitals after Dallas case . The Dallas Morning News . October 13 , 2014 . Available from : http : / / www . dallasnews . com / news / news / 2014 / 10 / 13 / cdc - changes - ebola - care - guidelines - for - u . s . - hospitals - after - dallas - case . Accessed October 14 , 2014 . 2 . CentersforDiseaseControlandPrevention . Ebola : personalprotectiveequipment ( PPE ) donning and doﬃng procedures . 2014 . Available from : http : / / www . cdc . gov / vhf / ebola / hcp / ppe - training / n95Respirator _ Gown / donning _ 08 . html . Accessed November 3 , 2014 . 3 . World Health Organization . Personal protective equipment in the context of ﬁlovirusdiseaseoutbreakresponse : rapidadviceguideline . 2014 . Availablefrom : http : / / apps . who . int / iris / bitstream / 10665 / 137410 / 1 / WHO _ EVD _ Guidance _ PPE _ 14 . 1 _ eng . pdf ? ua = 1 . Accessed November 4 , 2014 . 4 . Park A . Nurses “infuriated” by suggestion of Dallas Ebola protocol breach . 2014 . Available from : http : / / time . com / 3506907 / nurses - protocol - breach - ebola / . Accessed October 29 , 2014 . 5 . APIC . APIC Ebola readiness poll : results of an online poll of infection preventionists . 2014 . Available from : http : / / www . apic . org / Resource _ / TinyMceFileManager / Topic - speciﬁc / Ebola _ Readiness _ Poll _ Results _ FINAL . pdf . Accessed November 2 , 2014 . 6 . ClockSA , CohenB , BehtaM , RossB , LarsonEL . Contactprecautionsformultidrug - resistant organisms : current recommendations and actual practice . Am J Infect Control 2010 ; 38 : 105 - 11 . 7 . Verbeek JH , Ijaz S , Mischke C , Ruotsalainen JH , Mäkelä E , Neuvonen K , et al . Personal protective equipment for preventing highly infectious diseases due to exposuretocontaminatedbodyﬂuidsinhealthcarestaff . CochraneDatabaseSyst Rev 2016 ; ( 4 ) : CD011621 . 8 . BeamEL , GibbsSG , BoulterKC , BeckerditeME , SmithPW . Amethodforevaluating healthcareworkers’personalprotectiveequipmenttechnique . AmJInfectControl 2011 ; 39 : 415 - 20 . 9 . Casanova LM , Rutala WA , Weber DJ , Sobsey MD . Effect of single - versus double - glovingonvirustransfertohealthcareworkers’skinandclothingduringremovalofpersonalprotectiveequipment . Am J Infect Control 2012 ; 40 : 369 - 74 . 10 . Casalino E , Astocondor E , Sanchez JC , Diaz - Santana DE , Del Aguila C , Carrillo JP . Personal protective equipment for the Ebola virus disease : a comparison of 2 training programs . Am J Infect Control 2015 ; 43 : 1281 - 7 . 11 . Bell T , Smoot J , Patterson J , Smalligan R , Jordan R . Ebola virus disease : the use of ﬂuorescents as markers of contamination for personal protective equipment . IDCases 2015 ; 2 : 27 - 30 . 12 . Guo YP , Li Y , Wong PL . Environment and body contamination : a comparison of two different removal methods in three types of personal protective clothing . Am J Infect Control 2014 ; 42 : e39 - 45 . 13 . Acello B . The OSHA handbook : guidelines for compliance in health care facilities andinterpretiveguidelinesforthebloodbornepathogensstandard . 3rded . Clifton Park ( NY ) : Thomson Delmar Learning ; 2002 . 14 . Peterson K , Novak D , Stradtman L , Wilson D , Couzens L . Hospital respiratory protection practices in 6U . S . states : a public health evaluation study . Am J Infect Control 2015 ; 43 : 63 - 71 . 15 . Tomas ME , Kundrapu S , Thota P , Sunkesula VC , Cadnum JL , Mana TS , et al . Contamination of health care personnel during removal of personal protective equipment . JAMA Intern Med 2015 ; 175 : 1904 - 10 . 16 . Cook DA , Hamstra SJ , Brydges R , Zendejas B , Szostek JH , Wang AT , et al . Comparative effectiveness of instructional design features in simulation - based education : systematic review and meta - analysis . Med Teach 2013 ; 35 : e867 - 98 . 17 . Cook DA . How much evidence does it take ? A cumulative meta - analysis of outcomes of simulation - based education . Med Educ 2014 ; 48 : 750 - 60 . 23 J . Kang et al . / American Journal of Infection Control 45 ( 2017 ) 17 - 23