T ECHNICAL R EPORT nature biotechnology • VOLUME 21 • JANUARY 2003 • www . nature . com / naturebiotechnology 86 A general method for the covalent labeling of fusion proteins with small molecules in vivo Antje Keppler 1 , 2† , Susanne Gendreizig 1 , 2† , Thomas Gronemeyer 1 , 2 , Horst Pick 2 , Horst Vogel 2 , and Kai Johnsson 1 , 2 * Published online 9 December 2002 ; doi : 10 . 1038 / nbt765 Characterizing the movement , interactions , and chemical microenvironment of a protein inside the living cell is crucial to a detailed understanding of its function . Most strategies aimed at realizing this objective are based on genetically fusing the protein of interest to a reporter protein that monitors changes in the environment of the coupled protein . Examples include fusions with fluorescent proteins , the yeast two - hybrid system , and split ubiquitin 1 – 3 . However , these techniques have various limitations , and considerable effort is being devoted to specific labeling of proteins in vivo with small synthetic molecules capa - ble of probing and modulating their function . These approaches are currently based on the noncovalent binding of a small mole - cule to a protein , the formation of stable complexes between biarsenical compounds and peptides containing cysteines , or the use of biotin acceptor domains 4 – 10 . Here we describe a gen - eral method for the covalent labeling of fusion proteins in vivo that complements existing methods for noncovalent labeling of proteins and that may open up new ways of studying proteins in living cells . In our strategy , covalent labeling with a small molecule is achieved through the human DNA repair protein O 6 - alkylguanine - DNA alkyltransferase ( hAGT ) , which irreversibly transfers the alkyl group from its substrate , O 6 - alkylguanine - DNA , to one of its cys - teine residues ( Fig . 1A ) 11 . The substrate specificity of hAGT is rela - tively low , as it also reacts readily with the nucleobase O 6 - benzylgua - nine ( BG ) . Furthermore , oligonucleotides containing derivatives of O 6 - benzylguanosine with substituted benzyl rings are also accepted as substrates of hAGT 12 . We therefore reasoned that O 6 - benzylguanine ( BG ) derivatives of type 1 could be used for the in vivo labeling of hAGT fusion proteins ( Fig . 1B ) . We investigated the feasibility of this approach by labeling hAGT fusion proteins in vivo with biotin and fluorescein using the BG derivatives BGBT and BGAF ( Fig . 1C ) . BGAF was synthesized as the diacetate of fluorescein to increase its membrane permeabil - ity . Within the cell , the diacetate of fluorescein is readily hydrolyzed to fluorescein by esterases , yielding BGFL ( Fig . 1C ) 5 . We chose these two BG derivatives because their covalent attach - ment to proteins in vivo can be easily detected , thereby allowing for the evaluation of the approach . BGBT , BGAF , and BGFL can be synthesized in four steps from 6 - chloroguanine ( Fig . 1D ) . In addi - tion , we carried out all experiments with the hAGT mutant G160W ( W160 hAGT ) , which has been reported to possess an increased activity against BG 13 . To investigate the reactivity of substrates such as BGBT or BGFL with W160 hAGT , we measured the kinetics of the reaction of BGBT with purified W160 hAGT in vitro ( Fig . 2A , B ) . In these experiments , the second - order rate constant of the reaction of W160 hAGT with BGBT was determined to be 600 s - 1 M - 1 , as compared with 3 , 000 s - 1 M - 1 for the reaction of W160 hAGT with BG . This demon - strated that BG derivatives substituted at the 4 - position of the benzyl ring are substrates of W160 hAGT and can be used to label W160 hAGT in vitro . We next tested whether BGBT can selectively label W160 hAGT in vivo when it is expressed in Escherichia coli as a fusion protein with an N - terminal His 6 tag . In these experiments , BGBT was directly added to the medium of E . coli expressing W160 hAGT , and proteins labeled with biotin were detected by probing the western blots of total cell extracts with streptavidin - peroxidase conjugates ( Fig . 2C ) . The results demonstrate specific labeling of W160 hAGT in E . coli by BGBT within 60 min ; the only other major band in the western blot corre - sponds to a protein that is also biotinylated in the absence of BGBT . Overexpression of a different globular protein of similar size , either cytochrome c peroxidase ( CCP , 30 kDa , Fig . 2C ) or glu - tathione S - transferase ( GST , 25 kDa , data not shown ) , resulted in no observable labeling of the overexpressed protein by BGBT . 1 Institute of Molecular and Biological Chemistry and 2 Institute of Biomolecular Sciences , Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Lausanne ( EPFL ) , CH - 1015 , Lausanne , Switzerland . * Corresponding author ( kai . johnsson @ epfl . ch ) . † These authors contributed equally to this work . Figure 1 . ( A ) Mechanism of DNA repair by hAGT . ( B ) Covalent labeling of an X - hAGT fusion protein using O 6 - benzylguanine ( BG ) derivatives of type 1 . ( C ) Structure of the BG derivatives BGBT , BGAF , and BGFL used in this work . ( D ) Scheme of synthesis of BGBT , BGAF , and BGFL : ( a ) 1 - methylpyrrolidin , N , N - dimethylformamide ( DMF ) , 66 % ; ( b ) 2 , 2 , 2 - trifluoro - N - ( 4 - hydroxymethyl - benzyl ) - acetamide , potassium tert - butoxide , DMF , 88 % ; ( c ) K 2 CO 3 , methanol , 85 % ; ( d ) N - ( + ) - biotinyl - 6 - aminocaproic acid N - succinimidyl ester , triethylamine , DMF , 69 % ; ( e ) 5 ( 6 ) - carboxyfluorescein diacetate N - succinimidyl ester ( mixture of isomers ) , triethylamine , DMF , 8 % ( BGFL ) , 2 % ( BGAF ) . See Supplementary Experimental Protocol online for details of the synthesis of BGBT , BGAF , and BGFL . N N N H N O NH 2 NH O HN O S HN NH O H H N N NH N O NH 2 N N N N O NH 2 DNA NH N N N NH 2 DNA O H S S CH 3 Label CH 3 S X Label hAGT S X NH N NH N O NH 2 H 1 O O O COO N N N H N O NH 2 NH O BGBT BGFL O O O O O N N N H N O NH 2 NH O O O BGAF hAGT hAGT hAGT N N NH N N NH 2 N N NH N Cl NH 2 N N NH N O NH 2 BGBT a b , c d e NH 2 Cl BGAF , BGFL 6 - Chloroguanine A B C D © 2003 N a t u r e P ub li s h i ng G r oup h tt p : / / www . n a t u r e . c o m / n a t u r e b i o t ec hno l og y T ECHNICAL R EPORT www . nature . com / naturebiotechnology • JANUARY 2003 • VOLUME 21 • nature biotechnology 87 To evaluate the efficiency of the in vivo labeling with BGBT in E . coli , we quantified the reaction of a fusion protein of W160 hAGT and GST ( GST - W160 hAGT ) with biotin in vivo . We incubated E . coli expressing GST - W160 hAGT with BGBT for 2 . 5 h . Lysates were either first incubated with a synthetic oligonucleotide containing the nucleobase BGBT and then analyzed by western blotting , or directly analyzed by western blotting . Oligonucleotides containing BGBT can be used to quantify the concentration of active hAGT because they stoichiometrically label active hAGT with a near dif - fusion - controlled rate constant 12 . Assuming that the remaining active GST - W160 hAGT in the lysate is completely labeled , it is possi - ble to quantify the efficiency of cellular labeling by comparing the intensities of the band in the western blot of W160 hAGT that was labeled solely in vivo with that of W160 hAGT additionally labeled in the cell extracts . The average efficiency of the in vivo labeling of GST - W160 hAGT with BGBT was 24 % . To investigate whether the covalent labeling of hAGT fusion pro - teins in vivo can be applied in different hosts , we fused W160 hAGT to the N - terminus of dihydrofolate reductase ( DHFR ) from mouse to yield W160 hAGT - DHFR and expressed this fusion protein in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae . In this con - struct , DHFR also carried a C - terminal hemagglutinin ( HA ) epi - tope tag . Analysis of the biotinylation of W160 hAGT - DHFR in yeast using western blots proved impossible because the streptavidin - peroxidase conjugate strongly cross - reacted with several yeast proteins , one of which is about the same size as the W160 hAGT - DHFR fusion protein . We therefore analyzed biotinylation of W160 hAGT - DHFR fusion in yeast by an enzyme - linked immunosorbent assay ( ELISA ) using an anti - HA antibody as the pri - mary antibody ( Fig . 2D ) . The signals in the ELISA obtained from such samples were substantially above background , which was defined as the signal obtained from yeast not incubated with BGBT . To quantify the efficiency of the labeling in yeast , the signal from lysates treated with oligonucleotides contain - ing BGBT after labeling in vivo was compared to that of lysates labeled solely in vivo ( Fig . 2D ) . We estimate that 10 % of W160 hAGT - DHFR was biotinylated in vivo under these condi - tions . No signal above background was observed in this assay when a different DHFR fusion protein , a fusion protein with the S . cerevisiae Ste14p ( Ste14p - DHFR ) , was expressed using the same vector and incubated in vivo and in cell extracts with BGBT ( Fig . 2D ) . The rela - tive low efficiency of the in vivo labeling with BGBT in E . coli and yeast is most likely due to low intracellular concen - tration of the substrate . Biotin deriva - tives possessing linker structures simi - lar to that of BGBT have been shown to possess relatively low cell permeability 5 . To study the feasibility of our approach in standard mammalian cell cultures , we investigated the labeling of a W160 hAGT fusion protein with fluorescein in Chinese hamster ovarian ( CHO ) cells using BGAF . In contrast to AGTs from yeast and E . coli , all mammalian AGTs characterized so far accept BG as a substrate 11 . We therefore used a previously described AGT - deficient CHO cell line 11 , 14 to achieve a specific labeling of the W160 hAGT fusion protein . To facilitate evaluation of the fluores - cence labeling , we targeted the label to the nucleus of the CHO cells by fusing W160 hAGT to three consecutive simian virus 40 ( SV40 ) large T antigen nuclear localization sequences ( NLS ) , yielding W160 hAGT - NLS 3 ( ref . 15 ) . We transfected CHO cells with a vector expressing W160 hAGT fused to enhanced cyan fluorescent protein and NLS 3 ( W160 hAGT - ECFP - NLS 3 ) and verified the nuclear localization of W160 hAGT - ECFP - NLS 3 by confocal fluorescence microscopy ( Fig . 3F ) . CHO cells transiently transfected with a vector expressing W160 hAGT - NLS 3 were incubated with BGAF for 5 min , washed , and moni - tored with confocal fluorescence microscopy ( Fig . 3A – C ) . During and after the washing step , excess fluorophores leaked out of the Figure 2 . Labeling of W160 hAGT fusion proteins in vitro and in vivo . ( A ) Analysis of the in vitro reaction of W160 hAGT ( 0 . 4 µ M ) with BGBT ( 15 µ M ) . From the reaction mixture , aliquots were taken at indicated time points and quenched with oligonucleotide containing BGBT . Biotinylated W160 hAGT was detected by western blotting using a streptavidin – peroxidase conjugate . The band Y corresponds to a co - purified proteolytic degradation product of W160 hAGT . ( B ) Fitting of the intensities obtained from the western blot in ( A ) to a first - order reaction model , resulting in a second - order rate constant of 600 s - 1 M - 1 for the reaction of W160 hAGT with BGBT . ( C ) Analysis of total cell extract of E . coli BL21 ( DE3 ) expressing W160 hAGT with and without BGBT in the medium . Lane 1 , SDS - PAGE of BL21 ( DE3 ) expressing W160 hAGT and subsequent staining with Coomassie Blue ; lanes 2 – 4 , western blot of total cell extracts of BL21 ( DE3 ) expressing or not expressing W160 hAGT in the presence or absence of BGBT after 120 min . In lane 2 , CCP was expressed instead of W160 hAGT . A streptavidin - peroxidase conjugate was used to detect biotin - labeled proteins . The band at 20 kDa corresponds to a protein that is biotinylated in E . coli in the absence of BGBT . ( D ) Analysis of cell lysates of yeast S . cerevisiae expressing or not expressing a W160 hAGT - DHFR fusion protein in the presence or absence of BGBT ( 10 µ M , 2 . 5 h ) using an ELISA . Samples in columns B – D were also incubated with an oligonucleotide containing the nucleobase BGBT after lysis . In column D a Ste14p - DHFR fusion protein was overexpressed instead of W160 hAGT - DHFR . An anti - HA antibody was used as the primary antibody and an anti - mouse - HRP conjugate as a secondary antibody . The data shown are the average of three independent experiments . The expression level of W160 hAGT - DHFR under these conditions was estimated to be < 1 % of total protein . A B C D © 2003 N a t u r e P ub li s h i ng G r oup h tt p : / / www . n a t u r e . c o m / n a t u r e b i o t ec hno l og y T ECHNICAL R EPORT nature biotechnology • VOLUME 21 • JANUARY 2003 • www . nature . com / naturebiotechnology 88 cell , and after 25 min , only the nucleus of the cell displayed a strong fluorescence signal ( Fig . 3A – C ) . The background fluores - cence in the cytosol under these conditions was measured at < 10 % ( Fig . 3C ) . In agreement with previous localization studies on AGT , cells transiently expressing W160 hAGT without the NLS displayed fluorescence staining in both the nucleus and , to a lesser extent , the cytosol ( data not shown ) 16 . Two control experiments indicated that the observed fluorescence labeling of the nucleus was due to a covalent labeling of W160 hAGT - NLS 3 . First , in AGT - deficient CHO cells not transfected with the gene encoding W160 hAGT - NLS 3 , no fluorescence labeling of the nucleus was observed ( Fig . 3D ) . Second , incubating CHO cells transiently expressing W160 hAGT - NLS 3 with BG before incubation with BGAF to inactivate the hAGT fusion protein prevented the fluorescence labeling of the nucleus ( Fig . 3E ) . These data thus show that hAGT can be cova - lently and specifically labeled in mammalian cell cultures . Using a calibration curve obtained with BGFL at pH 7 . 6 , we estimated the concentration of fluorescence - labeled W160 hAGT - NLS 3 in the nucleus to be 2 µ M . By comparison , the concentration of the W160 hAGT - ECFP - NLS 3 fusion protein in the nucleus after 24 h of transient expression was estimated to be 3 µ M , demonstrating that the in vivo concentration of the labeled hAGT fusion protein approaches that of the corresponding ECFP fusion protein . hAGT has several properties that make it suitable for the specific and covalent labeling of fusion proteins in vivo . Most importantly , it has high activity on a substrate that is otherwise chemically inert and that can be derivatized with a wide variety of labels such as dyes , cross - linkers , or affinity tags without substan - tially affecting the rate of the reaction of hAGT with the substrate . None of the substrates tested so far showed chemical toxicity dur - ing the in vivo labeling , and because the labeling is irreversible , excess substrate can be easily washed away . Furthermore , as hAGT is a monomer of 207 residues , fusion of hAGT to other pro - teins is unlikely to affect their oligomeric state , and fusion at either its N or C terminus should not diminish its activity 11 . Experiments in mammalian cells should be done in AGT - deficient cell lines to avoid labeling of the endogenous AGT . For example , incubating HEK293 cells with BGAF led to detectable fluorescence labeling of the endogenous AGT in the nucleus of the cell ( data not shown ) . The efficiency of in vivo labeling for a given substrate will primarily depend on its cell permeability . However , for most applications a quantitative labeling of the protein of interest is not mandatory . In conclusion , we have described a general method for the cova - lent and specific labeling of fusion proteins in vivo . The method can be applied in different organisms and can be used to incorporate a variety of labels , making it a useful tool for functional studies of pro - teins in living cells . Experimental protocol Kinetics of the reaction of W160 hAGT with BGBT in vitro . In a typical experiment , W160 hAGT ( 0 . 4 µ M ) was incubated with the nucleobase BGBT ( 15 µ M ) in buffer A ( 50 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 2 , 1 mM dithiothreitol ) at 25 °C , and aliquots taken at defined times were quenched with an oligonu - cleotide containing O 6 - benzylguanosine ( 1 µ M ) . The aliquots were analyzed by western blotting using a neutravidin – peroxidase conjugate ( Pierce , Rockford , IL ) and a chemiluminescent peroxidase substrate ( Renaissance reagent plus ; NEN Life Science Products , Boston , MA ) . The intensities of the bands on the western blot were analyzed using an image station ( Kodak 440 ) , and the data were fitted to a reaction model assuming first - order kinetics . Covalent labeling of hAGT in E . coli . For the labeling of W160 hAGT with BGBT , liquid cultures of BL21 ( DE3 ) ( Novagen , Madison , WI ) containing a pET - 15b ( Novagen ) – based expression vector encoding W160 hAGT with an N - terminal fusion peptide ( MHHHHHHSSA ) were grown to an optical density at 600 nm ( OD 600 ) of 0 . 6 in Luria – Bertani ( LB ) medium at 37 °C . Expression of W160 hAGT was induced by adding isopropyl - β - D - thiogalactoside ( IPTG ; final concentration 1 mM ) , and BGBT was added to a final concentration of 10 µ M . For the labeling of GST - W160 hAGT with BGBT ( 10 µ M ) , GST - W160 hAGT was expressed in E . coli JM83 using the vector pGEX2T ( Pharmacia , Uppsala , Sweden ) . At different time points , cells were harvested by centrifugation , and were twice resuspended in LB medium and then centrifuged to remove excess BGBT . For the analysis of the specificity of the in vivo labeling , aliquots of cells were directly resuspended in SDS sample buffer . To analyze the efficiency of the labeling , cells were resuspended in buffer A containing 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride ( PMSF ) and lysed by adding first lysozyme ( 0 . 2 mg / ml ) and then deoxycholic acid ( 1 mg / ml ) . Samples were either analyzed directly by western blotting as described earlier or incubated with a synthetic oligonucleotide containing BGBT ( final con - centration 1 µ M ) and then analyzed by western blotting . The efficiencies measured in four independent experiments were 11 % , 18 % , 20 % , and 50 % , corresponding to an average efficiency of 24 % . Incubating lysates of E . coli expressing GST - W160 hAGT that were not labeled in vivo with oligonucleotides containing BGBT yielded a band in the western blot with an intensity within 15 % of the intensity of the band obtained for the lysates of cells labeled both in vivo and in vitro . Covalent labeling of hAGT in yeast . A culture of L40 yeast cells , containing an expression vector in which the W160 hAGT - DHFR protein is under the con - trol of the p cup1 promoter , was grown to an OD 600 of 0 . 6 . Expression of W160 hAGT - DHFR was induced by adding CuSO 4 to a concentration of 100 µ M , and BGBT was added to a concentration of 10 µ M . At defined times , aliquots were taken , and cells were harvested by centrifugation . To remove excess BGBT , the pellet was twice resuspended in yeast medium , incubated for 5 min at room temperature , and subsequently centrifuged . Washed cells were resus - pended in buffer A and lysed by repeated freeze – thaw cycling . For the ELISA , biotinylated W160 hAGT - DHFR was immobilized in streptavidin - coated Figure 3 . Covalent labeling of nuclear - targeted W160 hAGT - NLS 3 in AGT - deficient CHO cells . ( A – F ) Confocal micrographs showing overlays of transmission and fluorescence channels : ( A – E ) excitation , 488 nm ; ( F ) excitation , 458 nm . Size bar in ( A – F ) corresponds to 10 µ m . Confocal micrographs ( A – C ) illustrate the time course of the labeling of transiently expressed W160 hAGT - NLS 3 with BGAF in AGT - deficient CHO cells . ( A ) AGT - deficient CHO cell transiently expressing W160 hAGT - NLS 3 during incubation with BGAF ( 5 µ M ) . ( B ) Same cell as in ( A ) after 5 min of incubation with BGAF ( 5 µ M ) and three washes with PBS . ( C ) Same cell as in ( B ) after an additional 25 min of incubation in PBS , illustrating the specific labeling of hAGT - NLS 3 in the nucleus of a transiently transfected CHO cell . ( D ) Nontransfected , AGT - deficient CHO cells after 5 min of incubation with BGAF ( 5 µ M ) followed by three washes with PBS . ( E ) AGT - deficient CHO cells transiently transfected with nuclear - targeted hAGT and blocked with nonfluorescent BG ( 10 µ M ) for 2 h . After blocking , cells were incubated with BGAF ( 5 µ M ) followed by three washes with PBS . Confocal micrographs ( D ) and ( E ) were taken 30 min after the last wash with PBS . ( F ) Confocal micrograph illustrating the transient expression of nuclear - targeted W160 hAGT - ECFP - NLS 3 . A B C D E F © 2003 N a t u r e P ub li s h i ng G r oup h tt p : / / www . n a t u r e . c o m / n a t u r e b i o t ec hno l og y T ECHNICAL R EPORT www . nature . com / naturebiotechnology • JANUARY 2003 • VOLUME 21 • nature biotechnology 89 An efficient protein complex purification method for functional proteomics in higher eukaryotes Daniel Forler * , Thomas Köcher * , Michaela Rode * , Mark Gentzel , Elisa Izaurralde , and Matthias Wilm † Published online 16 December 2002 ; doi : 10 . 1038 / nbt773 The ensemble of expressed proteins in a given cell is organized in multiprotein complexes 1 , 2 . The identification of the individual com - ponents of these complexes is essential for their functional char - acterization . The introduction of the ‘tandem affinity purification’ ( TAP ) methodology substantially improved the purification and systematic genome - wide characterization of protein complexes in yeast 1 , 3 , 4 . The use of this approach in higher eukaryotic cells has lagged behind its use in yeast because the tagged proteins are normally expressed in the presence of the untagged endogenous version , which may compete for incorporation into multiprotein complexes . Here we describe a strategy in which the TAP approach is combined with double - stranded RNA interference ( RNAi ) 5 , 6 to avoid competition from corresponding endogenous proteins while isolating and characterizing protein complexes from higher eukaryotic cells . This strategy allows the determina - tion of the functionality of the tagged protein and increases the specificity and the efficiency of the purification . The TAP method is a protein tag – based affinity purification tech - nique originally developed in yeast 3 , 4 . The application of this methodology on a genome - wide scale has led to the systematic study of the functional organization of the yeast proteome with the purification of > 589 multiprotein assemblies 1 . Although much of the information obtained from yeast can be extrapolated to higher eukaryotes , the greater complexity of higher eukaryotic genomes , together with differences in post - translational modifications between yeast and metazoa , necessitates the use of homologous systems for the functional characterization of higher eukaryotic proteomes . In yeast , the endogenous protein is replaced by the tagged version by means of homologous recombination in haploid cells . To reproduce this feature in higher eukaryotic cells , we have developed the so - called iTAP strategy , in which the TAP approach 3 , 4 is combined with suppression of the corresponding endogenous protein by RNAi 5 , 6 . The TAP tag consists of two immunoglobulin - binding domains of protein A from Staphylococcus aureus ( zz - tag ) , a cleavage site for the tobacco etch virus ( TEV ) protease , and the calmodulin - binding peptide ( CBP ) 3 , 4 . Plasmids expressing TAP - tagged proteins are sta - bly transfected into Drosophila melanogaster ( Dm ) Schneider cells ( S2 cells ) . We chose these cells because of the ease with which poly - clonal lines expressing the tagged proteins can be established as well as the efficiency with which endogenous genes can be silenced by RNAi 5 , 6 . European Molecular Biology Laboratory ( EMBL ) , Meyerhofstrasse 1 , D - 69012 Heidelberg , Germany . * These three authors contributed equally to this work . † Corresponding author ( wilm @ embl - heidelberg . de ) . microtiter wells and detected by using an anti - HA antibody ( Babco , Richmond , CA ) as a primary and an anti - mouse - HRP conjugate ( Sigma , St . Louis , MO ) as a secondary antibody . The ELISA was developed using the per - oxidase substrate 2 , 2 ′ - azino - bis ( 3 - ethylbenzthiazoline - 6 - sulfonic acid ) diammonium salt ( ABTS ) , and the signal ( absorbance ) was measured at 405 nm ( OD 405 ) . The background signal was defined as the OD 405 of cell lysates obtained from cells treated exactly as just described but omitting the BGBT . To determine the efficiency of the labeling with BGBT , lysates of cells were either directly analyzed by ELISA as just described or incubated with an oligonucleotide containing 0 . 04 µ M BGBT and then analyzed by ELISA as described . Covalent labeling of hAGT in CHO cells . CHO cells deficient in AGT were transfected with a vector encoding either W160 hAGT - NLS 3 or W160 hAGT - ECFP - NLS 3 . After 24 h of transient expression , cells grown on 0 . 18 - mm - thick glass slides were transferred to a perfusion chamber and incubated with BGFL ( 5 µ M ) for 5 min . Cells were washed three times with PBS buffer to remove excess substrate . A Zeiss LSM510 laser scanning confocal microscope was used for fluorescence measurements . Detection of fluorescein or ECFP sig - nals was achieved by appropriate filters . Scanning speed and laser intensity were adjusted to avoid photobleaching of the fluorescent probes and damage or morphological changes to the cells . Note : Supplementary information is available on the Nature Biotechnology website . AcknowledgmentsFunding of this work was provided by the Swiss Science Foundation , the European Community , and the EPFL . S . G . was supported by a fellowship from the Boehringer Ingelheim Foundation . Nils Johnsson is acknowledged for help - ful discussions and advice , Maik Kindermann for help with the synthesis of BGBT , Stefan Pitsch for the gift of 6 - chloroguanine , Robert Damoiseaux for the synthesis of oligonucleotide containing BGBT , and Bernd Kaina for the CHO cell line . Conflicting interests statement The authors declare that they have no competing financial interests . Received 3 June 2002 ; accepted 2 October 2002 1 . Tsien , R . Y . The green fluorescent protein . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 67 , 509 – 544 ( 1998 ) . 2 . Fields , S . & Song , O . A novel genetic system to detect protein – protein interactions . Nature 340 , 245 – 246 ( 1989 ) . 3 . Johnsson , N . & Varshavsky , A . Split ubiquitin as a sensor of protein interactions in vivo . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 91 , 10340 – 10344 ( 1994 ) . 4 . Farinas , J . & Verkman , A . S . Receptor - mediated targeting of fluorescent probes in living cells . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 7603 – 7606 ( 1999 ) . 5 . Wu , M . M . et al . Organelle pH studies using targeted avidin and fluorescein – biotin . Chem . Biol . 7 , 197 – 209 ( 2000 ) . 6 . Griffin , B . A . , Adams , S . R . & Tsien , R . Y . Specific covalent labeling of recombinant protein molecules inside live cells . Science 281 , 269 – 272 ( 1998 ) . 7 . Adams , S . R . et al . New biarsenical ligands and tetracysteine motifs for protein labeling in vitro and in vivo : synthesis and biological applications . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 124 , 6063 – 6076 ( 2002 ) . 8 . Gaietta , G . et al . Multicolor and electron microscopic imaging of connexin traffick - ing . Science 296 , 503 – 507 ( 2002 ) . 9 . Cronan , J . E . , Jr . Biotination of proteins in vivo . A post - translational modification to label , purify and study proteins . J . Biol . Chem . 265 , 10327 – 10333 ( 1990 ) . 10 . Smith , P . A . et al . A plasmid expression system for quantitative in vivo biotinylation of thioredoxin fusion proteins in Escherichia coli . Nucleic Acids Res . 26 , 1414 – 1420 ( 1998 ) . 11 . Pegg , A . E . Repair of O 6 - alkylguanine by alkyltransferases . Mutat . Res . 462 , 83 – 100 ( 2000 ) . 12 . Damoiseaux , R . , Keppler , A . & Johnsson , K . Synthesis and applications of chemi - cal probes for human O 6 - alkylguanine - DNA alkyltransferase . ChemBioChem 2 , 285 – 287 ( 2001 ) . 13 . Xu - Welliver , M . , Leitao , J . , Kanugula , S . , Meehan , W . J . & Pegg , A . E . Role of codon 160 in the sensitivity of human O 6 - alkylguanine - DNA alkyltransferase to O 6 - ben - zylguanine . Biochemical Pharmacol . 58 , 1279 – 1285 ( 1999 ) . 14 . Kaina , B . , Fritz , G . , Mitra , S . & Coquerelle , T . Transfection and expression of human O 6 - methylguanine - DNA methyltransferase ( MGMT ) cDNA in Chinese hamster cells : the role of MGMT in protection against the genotoxic effects of alky - lating agents . Carcinogenesis 12 , 1857 – 1867 ( 1991 ) . 15 . Kalderon , D . , Roberts , B . L . , Richardson , W . D . & Smith , A . E . A short amino acid sequence able to specify nuclear location . Cell 39 , 499 – 509 ( 1984 ) . 16 . Belanich , M . et al . Intracellular localization and intercellular heterogeneity of the human DNA repair protein O 6 - methylguanine - DNA methyltransferase . Cancer Chemother . Pharmacol . 37 , 547 – 555 ( 1996 ) . © 2003 N a t u r e P ub li s h i ng G r oup h tt p : / / www . n a t u r e . c o m / n a t u r e b i o t ec hno l og y