Fibroblast growth factors ( FGFs ) that signal through FGF receptors ( FGFRs ) regulate fundamental developmental pathways , controlling events such as mesoderm pattern­ ing in the early embryo 1 through to the development of multiple organ systems 2 . FGF signalling extends to many physiological roles in the adult organism , including the regulation of angiogenesis and wound repair . FGFRs are expressed on many different cell types and regulate key cell behaviours , such as proliferation , differentiation and survival , which makes FGF signalling susceptible to sub­ version by cancer cells . There is compelling evidence for deregulated FGF signalling in the pathogenesis of many cancers that origi­ nate from different tissue types . Aberrant FGF signalling can promote tumour development by directly driving cancer cell proliferation and survival , and by support­ ing tumour angiogenesis . Mouse models have confirmed that FGF signalling has oncogenic potential , but have also importantly demonstrated that FGF signalling can have tumour suppressive functions in certain contexts . Coupled with the importance of FGF signalling in tis­ sue development and homeostasis , this underlines the importance of appropriate targeting of any potential therapeutic interventions . FGF signalling FGF signalling has evolved to become a highly complex growth factor signalling pathway , reflecting the multi­ tude of physiological functions that are controlled by FGF signalling . The mammalian FGF family comprises 18 ligands ( BOX 1 ) , which exert their actions through 4 highly conserved transmembrane tyrosine kinase receptors ( FGFR 1 , FGFR2 , FGFR3 and FGFR4 ) ( FIG . 1 ) . A fifth related receptor , FGFR5 ( also known as FGFRL1 ) , can bind FGFs , but has no tyrosine kinase domain , and might negatively regulate signalling 3 ( FIG . 2 ) . FGFs are secreted glycoproteins that are generally readily sequestered to the extracellular matrix , as well as the cell surface , by heparan sulphate proteoglycans ( HPSGs ) . To signal , FGFs are released from the extra­ cellular matrix by heparinases , proteases or specific FGF­ binding proteins , and the liberated FGFs subsequently bind to cell surface HPSGs ( reviewed in ReF . 4 ) . Cell surface HPSGs also stabilize the FGF ligand – receptor interaction , forming a ternary complex with FGFR 5 , 6 ( FIG . 1 ) . The specificity of the FGF – FGFR interaction is established partly by the differing ligand­binding capaci­ ties of the receptor paralogues 7 , 8 , but also by alternative splicing of FGFR , which substantially alters ligand spe­ cificity ( FIG . 1 ) . Further control of FGF – FGFR specificity is mediated by the tissue­specific expression of particular ligands and receptors , coupled with several cell surface or secreted proteins that facilitate the FGF – FGFR inter­ action 9 , such as the Klotho family 10 for hormonal FGFs ( BOX 1 ) , which further increases ligand specificity . Downstream signalling . FGF receptors signal as dim­ ers , and ligand­dependent dimerization leads to a conformational shift in receptor structure that acti­ vates the intracellular kinase domain , resulting in intermolecular transphosphorylation of the tyrosine kinase domains and intracellular tail . Phosphorylated tyrosine residues on the receptor function as docking sites for adaptor proteins , which themselves may also * Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research Centre , The Institute of Cancer Research , London SW3 6JB , UK , and Royal Marsden Hospital , London SW3 6JJ , UK . ‡ Queen Mary University of London , Barts & The London School of Medicine and Dentistry , Institute of Cancer , London EC1M 6BQ , UK . e‑mails : Nicholas . turner @ icr . ac . uk ; r . p . grose @ qmul . ac . uk doi : 10 . 1038 / nrc2780 Fibroblast growth factor signalling : from development to cancer Nicholas Turner * and Richard Grose ‡ Abstract | Fibroblast growth factors ( FGFs ) and their receptors control a wide range of biological functions , regulating cellular proliferation , survival , migration and differentiation . Although targeting FGF signalling as a cancer therapeutic target has lagged behind that of other receptor tyrosine kinases , there is now substantial evidence for the importance of FGF signalling in the pathogenesis of diverse tumour types , and clinical reagents that specifically target the FGFs or FGF receptors are being developed . Although FGF signalling can drive tumorigenesis , in different contexts FGF signalling can mediate tumour protective functions ; the identification of the mechanisms that underlie these differential effects will be important to understand how FGF signalling can be most appropriately therapeutically targeted . R E V I E W S 116 | FebRuARy 2010 | VoLuMe 10 www . nature . com / reviews / cancer © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 Craniosynostosis syndromes Characterized by premature fusion of the skull sutures , which often results in cranial deformities and associated pathologies . Chondrodysplasia syndromes Characterized by abnormal shortening of long bones owing to premature growth arrest of chondrocytes in the epiphyseal plates . be directly phosphorylated by FGFR 11 , leading to the activation of multiple signal transduction pathways ( FIG . 2 ) . FGFR substrate 2 ( FRS2 ) is a key adaptor pro­ tein that is largely specific to FGFRs , although it can also bind other tyrosine kinase receptors , such as neu­ rotrophic tyrosine kinase receptor type 1 ( NTRK1 ) , ReT and anaplastic lymphoma kinase ( ALK ) 12 . FRS2 binds to the juxtamembrane region of FGFRs through its phosphotyrosine­binding ( PTb ) domains . The activated FGFR phosphorylates FRS2 on several sites , allowing the recruitment of the adaptor proteins son of sevenless ( SoS ) and growth factor receptor­bound 2 ( GRb2 ) to activate RAS and the downstream RAF and MAPK pathways 11 . A separate complex involving GRb2­associated binding protein 1 ( GAb1 ) recruits a complex , which includes PI3K , and this activates an AKT­dependent anti­apoptotic pathway 13 . elsewhere on the intracellular portion of the acti­ vated receptor , and independently of FRS2 binding , the Src homology 2 ( SH2 ) domain of phospholipase Cγ ( PLCγ ) binds to a phosphotyrosine residue towards the carboxyl terminus 14 ( FIG . 2 ) . After PLCγ is activated , it hydrolyses phosphatidylinositol­4 , 5­biphosphate ( PIP 2 ) to phosphatidylinositol­3 , 4 , 5­triphosphate ( PIP 3 ) and diacylglycerol ( DAG ) 15 , activating protein kinase C ( PKC ) , which partly reinforces the activation of the MAPK pathway by phosphorylating RAF . Several other pathways are also activated by FGFRs , depending on the cellular context , including the p38 MAPK and Jun N­terminal kinase pathways , signal transducer and acti­ vator of transcription ( STAT ) signalling 16 and ribosomal protein S6 kinase 2 ( RSK2 ) 17 . Negative regulation of signalling . The mechanisms of attenuation and negative feedback control of FGFR signalling are only partly understood . Following activation receptors are internalized , resulting in receptor degradation or recycling , in a process that is partly controlled by CbL­mediated monoubiquitylation 18 ( FIG . 2 ) . MAPK signalling , particularly eRK1 and eRK2 signal­ ling , has been shown to phosphorylate FRS2 on many serine and / or threonine residues , inhibiting the recruit­ ment of GRb2 ( ReF . 12 ) . Downstream signalling can be attenuated through the induction of MAPK phosphatases such as MAPK phosphatase 3 ( MKP3 ) 19 , Sprouty ( SPRy ) proteins 20 , 21 and SeF 22 , 23 family members that modulate receptor signalling at several points in the signal trans­ duction cascade 24 ( FIG . 2 ) . MKP3 dephosphorylates eRK1 and eRK2 to attenuate MAPK signalling 19 , and SPRy proteins are thought to function in either a dominant­ negative fashion , by competing for GRb2 binding and so preventing SoS­mediated RAS activation , or by directly binding to RAF and blocking subsequent MAPK signal­ ling 20 , 21 . Similarly , SeF may function at multiple levels and has a transmembrane form that can directly interact with FGFRs ; both the transmembrane form and a splice vari­ ant that is confined to the cytoplasm seem to be capable of inhibiting eRK phosphorylation 25 . Context - dependent signalling . Studies of FGF signalling during development reinforce the crucial importance of cellular context in determining the functional outcome of FGFR activation ( BOX 2 ) . Although in most cellular con­ texts FGFs induce proliferation and migration 2 , in certain cell types physiological FGF signalling induces differen­ tiation and / or cell cycle arrest . This has been most clearly demonstrated in the development of endochondral and membranous bone , in which mouse models have shown that FGFR3 and FGFR2 can negatively regulate prolifera­ tion and positively drive differentiation 26 , 27 . In humans , several gain­of­function germline mutations in the FGFR genes result in skeletal dysplasias , with FGFR2 mutations a common cause of craniosynostosis syndromes and FGFR3 mutations common in chondrodysplasia syndromes 28 . Similarly , activating germline mutations in FGFR1 are a cause of Pfeiffer syndrome , a rare craniosynostosis syn­ drome 29 . Through several different mechanisms , these germline mutations result in ligand­independent activa­ tion of the receptor , which induces the premature fusion of cranial sutures 28 and the differentiation of chondro­ cytes in the endplates of long bones 28 . There is a lack of evidence regarding whether germline FGFR mutations predispose to cancer . The predominant signalling pathway activated down­ stream of FGFRs in development seems to be MAPK signalling 30 , and although it is incompletely understood current evidence points to the importance of differen­ tial effects of MAPK signalling in determining the cel­ lular response of FGFR activation . The downstream effect of MAPK signalling is mostly cell proliferation ; for example , through the induction of cyclin D1 expres­ sion , thereby promoting entry into the S phase of the cell cycle 31 , 32 . However , MAPK signalling induces cell cycle arrest and differentiation in other contexts , such as the p21­dependent cell cycle arrest in chondrocytes 33 and the differentiation of neuronal PC­12 cells 34 . Similarly , divergent responses can occur in cancer development ( discussed below ) . At a glance • Fibroblast growth factors ( FGFs ) and their receptors ( FGFRs ) drive crucial developmental signalling pathways , which are responsible for many functions , including cell proliferation , survival and migration . As such , they are susceptible to hijack by cancer cells and have been shown to have oncogenic roles in many cancers . • Conversely , FGFR signalling can also have tumour suppressive roles , through driving differentiation , regulating other oncogenic pathways , protecting cells from damage or perhaps by mediating immune surveillance . • The specific cellular context in which FGF signalling occurs is clearly important for determining whether oncogenic or tumour protective outcomes are evoked , and understanding more about context - specific FGF signalling is a key area of research . • There are several types of genetic evidence that support an oncogenic function for FGFRs : identification of gene amplifications , activating mutations , chromosomal translocations , single nucleotide polymorphisms and aberrant splicing at the post - transcriptional level . Expression of FGFs can also be affected by gene amplification . • There is now evidence from multiple cancer types to implicate FGF signalling in several oncogenic behaviours , including proliferation , survival , migration , invasion and angiogenesis . • Therapeutic targeting of FGFs and their receptors is a major area of drug development research . Most agents are small - molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitors , but blocking antibodies and ligand - trap approaches are also being developed . R E V I E W S NATuRe ReVIewS | CanCer VoLuMe 10 | FebRuARy 2010 | 117 © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 Seborrhoeic keratosis A benign wart - like growth of skin keratinocytes . There are many factors that underlie context­dependent signalling , including the cell type­specific expression of different adaptor molecules , signal transduction enhancers , transcription factors and co­activators 32 . other factors that are important in context specifi­ city include crosstalk with other signalling networks , such as wnt signalling 35 , and importantly the kinetics of signalling , with sustained strong signalling induc­ ing differentiation , senescence and apoptosis , and less pronounced signalling inducing proliferation and survival 36 . A further factor that affects the context specificity of FGF signalling might be differences in signalling between the FGFRs . Although all four FGFRs signal through a similar network of pathways in general , the kinase domain of FGFR1 drives stronger downstream pathway activation than FGFR4 ( ReF . 37 ) . There is also some evidence that differential responses to signal­ ling are initiated by the FGFR1 and FGFR2 kinase domains , with more rapid attenuation of FGFR2 signalling mediated by receptor internalization and degradation 38 – 40 . Although splicing of the extra­ cellular domain controls ligand specificity , there is no evidence to suggest that this affects intracellular signalling per se . Deregulation of FGF signalling in cancer In this section we discuss the substantial evidence that supports the existence of aberrant FGF signalling in the pathogenesis of multiple types of cancer . The under lying mechanism driving FGF signalling is largely tumour specific , and can be split into genomic FGFR alterations that drive ligand­independent receptor signalling com­ pared with alterations that support ligand­dependent activation ( FIG . 3 ; TABLe 1 ) . Activating mutations . The importance of FGF signalling in tumour pathogenesis was highlighted by a screen of more than 1 , 000 somatic mutations found in the cod­ ing exons of 518 protein kinase genes from 210 different human cancers 41 . of the non­synonymous mutations , components of the FGF signalling pathways were the most commonly mutated 41 . bladder cancer has the most established link to FGFR mutations . overall ~ 50 % of bladder cancers have somatic mutations in the FGFR3 ­coding sequence 42 , and most of the mutations precisely match the activating germline mutations of thanatophoric dysplasia , a lethal form of dwarfism 43 . Mutations in bladder cancer are strongly associated with non­muscle invasive disease , with 50 – 60 % of non­muscle invasive cancers possessing FGFR3 mutations , and mutations occurring less commonly in muscle­invasive bladder cancers ( 10 – 15 % of these cancers only ) . In contrast to the epidermal growth factor recep­ tor ( EGFR ) gene , in which activating mutations occur almost exclusively in the kinase domain , more than half of the mutations in FGFR3 occur at a single position in the extracellular domain ( S249C ) . This mutation leads to the formation of an aberrant intermolecular cysteine disulphide bridge , which results in constitutive dimeriza­ tion and activation of the receptor 44 , 45 . Mutations are also commonly found in the transmembrane domain ( such as y373C ) , as well as less common kinase domain muta­ tions ( such as K652e ) 46 , with y373C and to a lesser extent K652e constitutively activating the receptor 44 , 45 . FGFR3 mutations have also been identified in many other cancer types , including cervical cancers 47 , multiple myeloma , prostate cancer 48 and spermatocytic semino­ mas 49 ( TABLe 1 ) . A single report identified FGFR3 muta­ tions in oral squamous carcinomas 50 , but this was not confirmed by a follow­up study 51 . FGFR3 ­activating mutations are also found at a high frequency in the benign skin conditions epidermal nevi 52 and seborrhoeic keratosis 53 , which do not progress to malignancy 54 . Mutations of FGFR2 , which are also frequently extra­ cellular and identical to the activating germline muta­ tions found in craniosynostosis syndromes 28 , have been described in 12 % of endometrial carcinomas 55 . FGFR2 ­ mutant endometrial cancer cell lines are highly sensi­ tive to FGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors 28 , which reflects oncogenic addiction to the mutant­activated FGFR . Interestingly , FGFR3 and HRAS mutations are mutu­ ally exclusive in bladder cancer 56 , but PIK3CA muta­ tions are more commonly found in bladder cancers with FGFR3 mutations 57 , 58 . Similarly , FGFR2 and KRAS mutations are mutually exclusive in endometrial can­ cer 59 . This suggests that in these cancers only a single mechanism of activation is required to fully activate MAPK signalling , although oncogenic PI3K signalling can be enhanced by multiple ‘hits’ . FGFR gene amplifications . In contrast to the activation of FGFR3 by mutation , amplifications of FGFR3 have been described only rarely in cancers 60 . Conversely , amplifications of both FGFR1 and FGFR2 have more commonly been described . Approximately 10 % of gas­ tric cancers show FGFR2 amplification , which is asso­ ciated with poor prognosis diffuse­type cancers 61 , 62 . Gastric cancer cell lines with FGFR2 amplifications show evidence of ligand­independent signalling and are highly sensitive to FGFR inhibitors 61 , 62 , although Box 1 | The FGF family The fibroblast growth factor ( FGF ) family nomenclature describes 23 members , although there are only 18 FGF receptor ( FGFR ) ligands . Four family members do not function as FGF ligands ( FGF11 , FGF12 , FGF13 and FGF14 ) and are more correctly referred to as FGF homologous factors , and there is no human FGF15 gene ; the gene orthologous to mouse Fgf15 is FGF19 . Most FGF ligands function in a classic autocrine or paracrine fashion . A surprising recent development is the identification of a family of FGFs ( FGF19 , FGF21 and FGF23 ) that function as hormones ( reviewed in ReF . 158 ) . The hormonal FGFs bind poorly to heparan sulphate proteoglycans and can diffuse from the source of production into the circulation . FGFs are subject to multiple splicing events that affect function , and although FGFs are normally thought of as secreted glycoproteins some have also been shown to have nuclear functions ( reviewed in ReF . 158 ) . Furthermore , there is strong evidence emerging that FGFRs also traffic to the nucleus ( reviewed in ReF . 159 ) , where they may evoke an entirely different downstream effect to that of the classic receptor tyrosine kinase signalling pathways . Several germline FGF mutations have been identified in human disease , including loss - of - function mutations of FGF3 in deafness 160 , FGF8 in Kallmann syndrome 161 and FGF10 in Lacrimo - auditory - dento - digital syndrome 162 . Gain - of - function mutations in FGF23 have been identified in hypophosphataemic rickets 163 . R E V I E W S 118 | FebRuARy 2010 | VoLuMe 10 www . nature . com / reviews / cancer © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 Nature Reviews | Cancer FGFR2 IIIb IIIc FGF1FGF2FGF4FGF8FGF21FGF23 FGF10FGF22FGF7FGF21FGF1FGF3 IIIc isoform IIIb isoform TKdomain FGFligand FGFR Acid box Ig I Ig II Ig III FGF – FGFR structure FGFR splicing a b c IIIa IIIb IIIc TM FGFR specificity HPSG paracrine secretion of FGF7 by fibroblasts may also contribute to cellular proliferation in vivo 63 . Interestingly , in some gastric cancer cell lines amplifica­ tion of FGFR2 is accompanied by deletion of the most C­terminal coding exon 64 . This results in the expres­ sion of a C­terminally truncated receptor , which can also be generated by aberrant splicing in cell lines that lack the C­terminal deletion . This C­terminal FGFR2 truncation interferes with receptor internalization 65 , therefore preventing a potential mechanism of signalling attenuation and contributing to constitutive activation of the receptor . Amplification of the chromosomal region 8p11 – 12 , the genomic location of FGFR1 , is one of the most common focal amplifications in breast cancer 66 – 68 , and occurs in approximately 10 % of breast cancers , predominantly in oestrogen receptor ( eR ) ­positive cancers 66 . FGFR1 amplifications have also been reported in oral squamous carcinoma 69 and are found at a low incidence in ovarian cancer 70 , bladder cancer 71 and rhabodomyosarcoma 72 ( TABLe 1 ) . In contrast to FGFR2 amplifications , overexpres­ sion of wild­type FGFR1 occurs in cancer ; it is unclear whether the higher levels of FGFR1 lead to tumours that aberrantly respond to paracrine FGF ligands , such as FGF2 , or whether at higher levels of FGFR1 expression ligand­independent signalling occurs . It is also important to note that the 8p11 – 12 region is gene dense and it is not universally accepted that FGFR1 is the causative oncogene in this amplified region in breast cancer 73 , 74 . FGFR1 might also be important in breast cancers that lack FGFR1 ampli­ fications , and one study suggested that an FGFR inhibi­ tor blocked the proliferation of non­amplified cancer cell lines by downregulating D­type cyclins 75 . Chromosomal translocations in haematological malig - nancies . Some of the strongest evidence linking FGF signalling to oncogenesis has come from the study of haematological malignancies , in which translocations involving the FGFRs have been identified . Several FGFR intragenic translocations have been identified , which typically result in a fusion protein comprising the N terminus of a transcription factor fused to an FGFR kinase domain . This leads to constitutive FGFR dimeri­ zation and activation 76 – 78 ( TABLe 1 ) . A different translo­ cation is found in multiple myeloma : 15 % of multiple myelomas harbour a t ( 4 ; 14 ) translocation that links FGFR3 at 4p16 . 3 to the immunoglobulin heavy chain IGH locus at 14q32 ( ReFs 79 , 80 ) . These translocations are intergenic , with the breakpoints occurring ~ 70 kb upstream of FGFR3 , and bring FGFR3 under the con­ trol of the highly active IGH promoter . It is important to note that the translocations involving FGFR3 in multi­ ple myeloma also involve the adjacent multiple myeloma SeT domain­containing ( MMSET ) gene , and the relative contributions of FGFR3 and MMSET to oncogenesis are subject to ongoing debate 81 . However , the importance of FGFR3 overexpression and mutation in haemato­ logical malignancy has been modelled using transgenic mice 82 ( BOX 3 ) , and t ( 4 ; 14 ) myeloma cell lines are highly sensitive to FGFR3 targeting 83 , 84 . FGFR3 translocation in multiple myeloma is asso­ ciated with a poor prognosis and is rarely found in monoclonal gammopathy of uncertain significance , a precur­ sor condition of multiple myeloma , which suggests that FGFR3 translocations promote a rapid conversion to full multiple myeloma 85 . The ultimate effect of the translo­ cation is to overexpress FGFR3 out of context , which might result in aberrant ligand­dependent signalling 86 ( with hypersensitivity to ligands by swamping negative feedback and receptor internalization and degradation pathways ) or ligand­independent signalling . In a small proportion of t ( 4 ; 14 ) multiple myeloma , FGFR3 is also mutated ( ~ 5 % translocated cases ) 87 , presumably further Figure 1 | FGFr structure and control of ligand specificity . a | The basic structure of the fibroblast growth factor ( FGF ) – FGF receptor ( FGFR ) complex comprises two receptor molecules , two FGFs and one heparan sulphate proteoglycan ( HSPG ) chain . The FGF signalling pathway comprises 4 highly conserved transmembrane receptors and 18 FGF ligands ( BOX 1 ) . FGFs bind with low affinity to cell surface HSPGs ( purple ) and with high affinity to specific FGFRs . The FGFRs , which are phylogenetically closely related to the vascular endothelial growth factor receptors ( VEGFRs ) and platelet - derived growth factor receptors ( PDGFRs ) , consist of three extracellular immunoglobulin ( Ig ) domains , a single transmembrane helix and an intracellular split tyrosine kinase ( TK ) domain . The second and third Ig domains form the ligand - binding pocket and have distinct domains that bind both FGFs and HSPGs . b | Ligand - binding specificity is generated by alternative splicing of the Ig III domain . The first half of Ig III is encoded by an invariant exon ( IIIa ) , which is spliced to either exon IIIb or IIIc , both of which splice to the exon that encodes the transmembrane ( TM ) region . Epithelial tissues predominantly express the IIIb isoform and mesenchymal tissues express IIIc . FGFR4 is expressed as a single isoform that is paralogous to FGFR - IIIc . c | Examples of the extent to which ligand specificity can differ between FGFR - IIIb and FGFR - IIIc isoforms , illustrated with the differing ligand specificty of FGFR2 isoforms . The FGFR2 - IIIb ligands are shown in blue and the FGFR2 - IIIc ligands are shown in brown . For example , FGF7 and FGF10 bind specifically to FGFR2 - IIIb and have essentially no binding to FGFR2 - IIIc 7 . The mechanisms controlling splice isoform choice are becoming clearer and defined control elements have been identified in the introns surrounding alternatively spliced exons 177 – 179 . R E V I E W S NATuRe ReVIewS | CanCer VoLuMe 10 | FebRuARy 2010 | 119 © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 Nature Reviews | Cancer FRS2 α GRB2 Sos Ras Raf MEK MAPK PLC γ FGF FGF FGFR FGFR GAB1 PI3K Target genes PKC IP 3 DAG PIP 2 Ca 2 + FGF signalling pathways SEFB MKP3 AKT STATs P P P P P P P P • Negative feedback . For example , through SPRY , SEF , MAPKP3 and MKP1 • Downstream transcription factors . For example , FOS , JUN and PEA3 Nucleus S E F F G F R L 1 CBL SPRY SPRY MKP1 Monoclonal gammopathy of uncertain significance A clonal proliferation of plasma cells that manifests as excess monoclonal immunoglobulin in the blood . A common condition of old age that progresses to multiple myeloma at a rate of ~ 2 % per year . reinforcing FGFR3 signalling 82 . Interestingly , FGFR3 translocations also occur mutually exclusively of NRAS and KRAS mutations 88 . Autocrine and paracrine signalling . Most of the genomic aberrations discussed above lead to constitutive receptor activation and ligand­independent signalling . Ligand­ dependent signalling is likely to have a similarly impor­ tant role in the pathogenesis of cancer , through either autocrine production of ligand in cancer cells or para­ crine production of ligand from stromal cells that may be expressed physiologically or in response to cancer cells in a ‘paracrine loop’ . Several mouse models have shown that ectopic expression of FGF can promote cancer . This has been achieved by expressing FGF in either epithelial cells or stromal fibroblasts , which results in the autocrine and paracrine stimulation of cancer cells , respectively ( BOX 3 ) . The first strong evidence for autocrine FGF signalling driving human tumorigenesis comes from studies of melanoma , which expresses high levels of FGFR1 and FGF2 . The growth of human melanoma xenografts regressed after antisense­mediated inhibition of FGFR1 or FGF2 ( ReF . 89 ) , suggesting that an FGF2 – FGFR1 autocrine loop promotes the development of some melanomas . Frequent amplification of FGF1 , resulting in increased FGF1 expression , has also been reported in ovarian cancer and is associated with poor survival 90 . The FGF1 expres­ sion levels correlated with microvessel density , suggesting that aberrantly expressed FGF1 functions in a paracrine fashion to promote angiogenesis 90 . whether FGF1 also functions in an autocrine manner in ovarian cancer to promote tumour cell proliferation or survival is unclear . An autocrine FGF2 – FGFR1­IIIc feedback loop has also been reported in non­small­cell lung cancer cell lines that show resistance to the eGFR antagonist gefitinib 91 . unequivocal evidence that paracrine FGF released from the stroma functions on human cancer cells to pro­ mote tumorigenesis is lacking , principally because it is difficult to model such an interaction in vitro . Increased plasma levels of FGF2 and other FGFs are found in multi­ ple cancer types 92 . This partly reflects the increased release of FGFs : as tumours invade and degrade the extracellular matrix FGF is liberated 4 , freeing it to function as a para­ crine growth factor . Tumour cells may also induce FGF2 release from stromal inflammatory infiltrate ( reviewed in ReF . 93 ) , which may promote tumour survival in a classic paracrine loop or promote angiogenesis . The angiogenic response can be further augmented by the establishment of an autocrine FGF2 signal in endothelial cells 93 . In prostate cancer , several FGFs , including FGF2 ( ReF . 94 ) and FGF6 ( ReF . 95 ) , are upregulated . Similarly , FGFR1­IIIc is upregulated in poorly differentiated pros­ tate cancers 94 , which suggests the potential existence of a paracrine loop , and FGFR2­IIIb is downregulated . In astrocytomas , a similar increase in FGFR1 expression has been reported in high­grade tumours 96 . However , it is unclear to what extent the expression of FGFR1­IIIc in prostate cancer drives tumour progression , and to what extent the expression of this splice form is a conse­ quence of tumour progression , particularly the epithe­ lial – mesenchymal transition ( eMT ) , which could lead to secondary changes in FGFR splicing and expression 97 . Loss of the expression of negative regulators , including SPRy1 and SPRy2 ( ReF . 98 ) and SeF 99 , can also increase FGF signalling in prostate cancer . It has been proposed that these changes in prostate cancer may result in androgen independence 100 . As in prostate cancer , the expression of FGF1 , FGF2 and FGF7 is higher in breast cancer stroma than in normal breast stroma 101 , 102 . As mentioned above , increased levels of several FGFs are detected in the serum of cancer patients , but some hormonal FGFs , such as FGF19 , signal physio­ logically through the bloodstream . Transgenic mice expressing FGF19 in skeletal muscle developed hepato­ cellular carcinomas 103 , which presumably reflects an endocrine action of the increased levels of circulating FGF19 ( BOX 3 ) . FGF19 was overexpressed in a subgroup of liver , colonic and lung squamous carcinomas 103 . Figure 2 | FGFr signalling network . The signal transduction network downstream of fibroblast growth factor ( FGF ) receptors ( FGFRs ) , along with negative regulators . Following ligand binding and receptor dimerization , the kinase domains transphosphorylate each other , leading to the docking of adaptor proteins and the activation of four key downstream pathways : RAS – RAF – MAPK , PI3K – AKT , signal transducer and activator of transcription ( STAT ) and phospholipase C γ ( PLC γ ) ( green ) . FGFRs have also been shown to bind and directly phosphorylate ribosomal S6 kinase 17 ( not shown ) . Signalling can be negatively regulated at several levels by receptor internalization or the induction of negative regulators , including FGFR - like 1 ( FGFRL1 ) , SEF , Sprouty ( SPRY ) , CBL , MAPK phosphatase 1 ( MKP1 ) and MKP3 ( brown ) . These regulators may modulate ligand binding ( FGFRL1 and SEF ) or interfere with intracellular signalling , principally through modulation of the MAPK pathway . DAG , diacylglycerol ; FRS2 α , FGFR substrate 2 α ; GRB2 , growth factor receptor - bound 2 ; IP 3 , inositol triphosphate ; P , phosphorylation ; PIP 2 , phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - biphosphate ; PKC , protein kinase C ; Sos , son of sevenless . R E V I E W S 120 | FebRuARy 2010 | VoLuMe 10 www . nature . com / reviews / cancer © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 A monoclonal antibody that sequesters FGF19 blocked the growth of colonic cancer cell lines and xenografts that overexpress FGF19 ( ReF . 104 ) , suggesting that the growth of these cells may be driven by an autocrine loop functioning through FGFR4 ( ReF . 105 ) . FGF19 requires β­klotho expression to interact with FGFR4 , at least in physiological signalling , however , the expres­ sion of β­klotho is still to be established in these tumour types . Germline single nucleotide polymorphisms . A further link between FGFR signalling and breast cancer has been provided by recent genome­wide association stud­ ies that identified FGFR2 as a breast cancer susceptibil­ ity gene 106 , 107 . In pioneering studies , single nucleotide polymorphisms ( SNPs ) located in the second intron of FGFR2 were found to correlate with an increased risk of developing breast cancer . The ‘at risk’ minor allele is prevalent , with 40 % of the population carry­ ing at least one copy , but the increase in risk is relatively small , increasing risk by 1 . 26­fold in a heterozygote and 1 . 63­fold in a homozygote 106 . Interestingly , the SNP seems to appreciably increase the risk of developing eR­positive breast cancer 108 only , with little or no effect on eR­negative breast cancer . There remains substantial uncertainty regard­ ing how the minor FGFR2 allele increases breast cancer risk and exactly which of the multiple SNPs in the second intron — which are in strong linkage disequilibrium — are mechanistically important . one study suggested that the SNPs result in modest increases in FGFR2 mRNA expression through the modification of a binding site for the transcription factors oCT1 and runt­related transcription factor 2 ( RuNX2 ) 109 . binding sites for eR and oCT1 often cluster together 110 , suggesting a model in which eR and oCT1 cooperate in regulating FGFR2 expression and potentially also cooperate with C / ebPβ to drive tran­ scription 109 . The potential role of eR in determining the functional effects of this SNP may explain the apparent restriction of the risk attributed for this SNP to eR­positive breast cancer 108 . A second SNP , FGFR4 G388R , does not seem to increase the incidence of cancer , but has been reported to associate with poor prognosis in multiple cancer types , including breast cancer 111 , colon cancer 111 and lung adenocarcinoma 112 . The FGFR4 G388R allele is common , with at least one copy present in approxi­ mately half the population . How this SNP influences cancer prognosis is less clear , and it potentially pro­ motes cancer cell motility and invasion 111 or resistance to chemotherapy 113 . Oncogenic mechanisms of FGF signalling FGF signalling can promote cancer development by affecting a range of major downstream biological processes . The following sections highlight exam­ ples for which particular aspects of FGF signalling affect various cancer cell behaviours in different tumour types . FGF and proliferation . excessive cell proliferation is one of the hallmarks of cancer , and many cell­based studies and mouse models have demonstrated that FGF signalling promotes tumour cell proliferation ( BOX 3 ) . Studies of the FGFR translocations of human haematological malignancies ( TABLe 1 ) have shown that the mechanism driving a proliferative response to FGF signalling differs depending on context . The zinc fin­ ger 198 ( ZNF198 ; also known as ZMyM2 ) – FGFR1 fusion proteins identified in 8p11 myeloproliferative syndrome delete the FRS2­binding site of FGFR1 , and require PLCγ binding at y766 along with STAT5 activation for proliferation 76 , 77 . by contrast , the break­ point cluster region ( bCR ) – FGFR1 fusion proteins of chronic myelogenous leukaemia ( CML ) activate GRb2 through FGFR1­mediated phosphorylation of a bCR tyrosine residue 76 , 77 , and the eTV6 – FGFR3 fusion proteins found in peripheral T cell lymphoma are oncogenic , at least partly though PI3K signalling 114 . These data demonstrate an important principle , in which the signal transduction pathways initiating FGFR­dependent oncogenesis differ depending on cellular context . Mouse studies have further added to our under­ standing of how FGFs can influence proliferation ( BOX 3 ) . FGF10 overexpression in the stromal com­ partment of the murine prostate resulted in epithe­ lial hyperproliferation , which was concomitant with the upregulation of the androgen receptor 115 . FGF10 signalling was potentially dependent on FGFR1 as a dominant­negative FGFR1­IIIc construct attenu­ ated cancer development 116 , although this construct might also inhibit FGFR2 signalling through recep­ tor heterodimerization . expression of activated AKT in prostate epithelium combined with the high FGF10 expression in the stroma to further promote tumori­ genesis 116 . Similarly , in an independent study , Pten deficiency in prostate epithelium ( which results in increased phospho­AKT levels ) synergized with auto­ crine overexpression of FGF8 , leading to prostate adenocarcinoma 117 . Finally , ablation of Frs2 inhibited prostate cancer development in the mouse 118 . These data emphasize the potential importance of FGF signal­ ling for prostate cancer development , but also suggest Box 2 | FGF signalling in development A substantial body of knowledge has been compiled on the importance of fibroblast growth factor ( FGF ) signalling in development , and some of the principles are relevant to our understanding of how FGF signalling may affect tumorigenesis . Gene targeting studies in mice have identified crucial functions for many FGF ligands and receptor isoforms in development , with knockout phenotypes often resulting in death in utero or at birth from a failure to execute fundamental developmental programmes , including gastrulation 164 , 165 and organogenesis 2 , 166 – 168 . For example , FGF10 plays a key part in lung development signalling through FGFR2 - IIIb , as well as being required for the normal branching ductal development in the mammary gland 169 , 170 and prostate 171 , 172 . In development , FGFs have been shown to operate through reinforcing paracrine loops , in which active FGF signalling drives cell proliferation , migration and survival . For example , in the developing limb , paracrine networks involving FGF4 , FGF8 , FGF10 , FGFR2 - IIIb and FGFR2 - IIIc initiate and maintain limb development and underpin epi - thelial – mesenchymal interactions 173 . R E V I E W S NATuRe ReVIewS | CanCer VoLuMe 10 | FebRuARy 2010 | 121 © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 Nature Reviews | Cancer FGF FGF FGF FGF FGF FGF FGF FGF FGF FGF Activatingmutation Translocation Geneamplification Alteredsplicing Ligand - independent signalling Ligand - dependent signalling AberrantFGF a b c Stroma Vasculature FGFR Paracrine ligand d Angiogenesis Autocrineligand that a second hit in the PI3K – AKT pathway might be required to enhance the oncogenic potential of FGF signalling . FGF and survival . The mitogenic effects of FGF signal­ ling may also be enhanced by pro­survival signalling . FGF signalling has the potential , depending on the cell type , to activate anti­apoptotic pathways through either the activation of PI3K – AKT or STAT signalling . This prosurvival effect has also been linked to resistance to chemotherapy . FGF2 has been suggested to play an important part in small­cell lung cancer , in which high levels of serum FGF2 are associated with a poor prog­ nosis 119 . Studies have suggested that FGF2 mediates a cytoprotective effect by upregulating the expression of the anti­apoptotic proteins bCL­2 , bCL­X L , X­linked inhibitor of apoptosis ( XIAP ) and inhibitor of apoptosis 1 ( IAP1 ; also known as bIRC3 ) through an S6 kinase ( S6K2 and RSK2 ) ­mediated pathway , therefore promoting resistance to chemotherapy 120 – 122 . Additional evidence supporting the importance of the S6K2 pathway in FGFR­driven cancer came from a breast carcinoma model , in which non­transformed MCF­10A breast cancer cells expressing conditionally activated FGFR1 became transformed in an S6K2­dependent manner . Inhibition of S6K2 by small interfering RNA or small molecule inhibitors caused the death of FGFR1­ transformed cells , whereas non­transformed parental cells were unaffected 123 . The RSK2 and PI3K pathways are not the only ones to mediate FGF­dependent survival signalling . evidence from studies of FGFR1 , which is expressed in addition to FGFR3 in bladder cancer , suggested that the increased expression of FGFR1 in normal and cancerous urothe­ lial cell lines promotes FGF2­induced proliferation and decreased apoptosis 124 . These effects were transduced by MAPK signalling through FRS2 and PLCγ , and mediated by cyclin D1 ( which promotes proliferation ) , MCL1 and phospho­bAD ( which promotes survival ) . Some urothelial cancer cell lines also showed FGFR1­ dependent growth in soft agar 124 . Together , these data confirm that cell survival is a major readout of FGF signalling , and multiple pathways can result in similar outcomes . FGF and migration and invasion . In addition to effects on proliferation and survival , FGF signalling can promote cell migration in several ways . Simple in vitro models , Figure 3 | Mechanisms of pathogenic cancer cell FGF signalling . The ways in which fibroblast growth factors ( FGFs ) and FGF receptors ( FGFRs ) can be altered in cancer fall into four main groups . a | Genomic alteration of FGFR can occur through three mechanisms , leading to ligand - independent signalling . First , activating mutations can result in ligand - independent dimerization or constitutive activation of the kinase ( shown by yellow lightning ) . Second , chromosomal translocations can also lead to ligand - independent signalling . Intragenic translocations generate fusion proteins , usually with the amino terminus of a transcription factor fused to the carboxy - terminal FGFR kinase domain , resulting in dimerization of the fusion protein and constitutive signalling ; for example , FGFR3 is brought under the control of an unrelated promoter , resulting in FGFR3 overexpression . Third , receptor gene amplification , which results in supraphysiological receptor overexpression . FGFR2 overexpression can also be accompanied by altered C - terminal splicing that might contribute to receptor accumulation . b | Establishment of a paracrine loop . Altered FGFR expression on a cancer cell can potentially occur by splicing , which alters FGFR specificity , or by amplification of an FGFR gene to express FGFR out of context , which is activated by FGF ( green ) expressed by a stromal component . Tumour cells can stimulate stromal cells to release FGF ligands and increase the release of ligands from the extracellular matrix . c | Establishment of an autocrine loop . FGF ligands are produced in an autocrine fashion by a cancer cell ( brown ) . The autocrine loop can be established by FGFR expression out of context or by the increased expression of FGF ligands . d | FGF stromal effects , including angiogenesis . FGF released from stromal cells or cancer cells can act on endothelial cells to promote angiogenesis . R E V I E W S 122 | FebRuARy 2010 | VoLuMe 10 www . nature . com / reviews / cancer © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 such as the invasion of pancreatic cancer cells through Matrigel­coated Transwell filters , have shown FGF10­ and FGFR2­IIIb­dependent invasion 125 . In a breast cancer model with a membrane­tethered chemically inducible FGFR1 kinase domain 126 , activation of FGFR1 in the mammary epithelium in adult mice induced MAPK­ and AKT­dependent proliferation and ultimately led to invasive mammary lesions 126 . In vitro studies of the same inducible construct in three­dimensional cultures of HC11 mouse mammary epithelial cells demonstrated that , as well as increasing cell proliferation and survival , constitutive FGFR1 signalling led to the loss of polarity and the gain of a matrix metalloproteinase 3 ( MMP3 ) ­ dependent invasive phenotype 127 . Interestingly , this effect was specific to the FGFR1 kinase domain , and an identi­ cal FGFR2 construct showed no effect on cell survival and invasion 38 . The same inducible FGFR1 construct induced prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia when expressed and chemically activated in the mouse prostate 40 . Interestingly , in this model prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia progressed over the course of 1 year to a tran­ sitional sarcomatoid­type carcinoma , suggesting that eMT had occurred . This eMT phenotype was accom­ panied by upregulation of both Sox9 , an FGF target gene associated with eMT 128 , and the pro­angiogenic factor angiopoietin 2 ( ANG2 ) 129 . eMT is important in cancer cell metastasis , disrupting cell – cell contacts and promoting tumour cell invasion 130 , and these data therefore suggest that activation of FGFR1 signalling can both initiate cancer development and promote invasion and metastasis . SoX9 was also upregulated in a study of androgen­ induced prostate carcinogenesis , in which the FGF and wnt signalling pathways were significantly upregulated . This study potentially uncovered a reactivation of signal­ ling pathways used in the embryo for both proliferation and invasion in prostate cancer progression 131 . In devel­ opment , wnt – β­catenin and FGF signalling function in concert to coordinate collective cell migration during morphogenesis through differential regulation of the chemokine receptors CXCR4b and CXCR7b , and a simi­ lar molecular mechanism could theoretically regulate the collective cell migration that underpins metastasis 132 . FGF in angiogenesis . Alongside embryogenesis , one of the first areas in which FGF signalling was shown to be important in terms of cell proliferation and migration was during wound healing 133 . Initial studies showed a key role for FGF signalling in epithelial repair but some FGF members , in particular FGF2 , are known to be important for new blood vessel growth at the wound site ( reviewed in ReF . 134 ) . Angiogenesis is key to the repair process , delivering nutrients and oxygen to support the energy­consuming process of tissue remodelling 134 . If a tumour is to grow more than 1 mm 3 and metastasize , it must establish its own blood supply to provide oxygen and nutrients 135 , and FGFs have also been implicated in tumour angiogenesis 93 , 136 . endothelial cells express high levels of FGFR1­IIIc , as well as FGFR2­IIIc in some circumstances , and both FGF1 and FGF2 ( and to a lesser extent FGF4 and FGF8b ) are potent pro­angiogenic growth factors 93 . FGFs stimulate new vessel formation and Table 1 | Genetic alterations in FGF receptors and FGFs related to cancer Gene Cancer type ( incidence ) refs FGFR1 Amplification Breast cancer ( 10 % ) , ovarian cancer ( ~ 5 % ) , bladder cancer ( 3 % ) and rhabdomyosarcoma ( 3 % ) 66 , 67 , 70 – 72 Mutation Melanoma ( rare ) 180 Translocation Stem cell leukaemia and lymphoma syndrome ( 8p11 myeloproliferative syndrome characterized by FGFR1 translocations ) and chronic myeloid leukaemia ( rare ) 76 , 77 FGFR2 Amplification Gastric cancer ( 10 % ) and breast cancer ( ~ 1 % ) 61 , 62 Mutation Endometrial cancer ( 12 % ) and gastric cancer ( rare ) 55 , 181 Germline SNP Second intron SNP : increased incidence of breast cancer 106 , 107 FGFR3 Amplification Bladder ( NR ) , salivary adenoid cystic cancers ( NR ) 60 , 182 Mutation Bladder cancer ( 50 – 60 % non - muscle invasive type , 10 – 15 % invasive type ) , cervical cancer ( 5 % ) , myeloma ( 5 % translocated cases ) , prostate ( 3 % ) and spermatocytic seminoma ( 7 % ) 42 , 46 – 50 , 87 , 183 Translocation Myeloma ( 15 % ) and peripheral T cell lymphoma ( rare ) 78 – 80 FGFR4 Germline SNP Coding SNP : poor prognosis breast , colon and lung adenocarcinoma 111 , 112 FGF1 Amplification Ovarian ( NR ) 181 FGF , fibroblast growth factor ; NR , not reported ; SNP , single nucleotide polymorphism . R E V I E W S NATuRe ReVIewS | CanCer VoLuMe 10 | FebRuARy 2010 | 123 © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 vessel maturation by driving endothelial cell proliferation , promoting extracellular matrix degradation , altering intercellular adhesion and communication by affecting cadherins and gap junctions , respectively , and modulat­ ing integrin expression ( reviewed in ReF . 93 ) . Although most of these effects are transduced through MAPK activation , PKC activation is also required for FGF­ induced endothelial cell proliferation 137 and migration 138 . Furthermore , a model of FGFR1­mediated chemotaxis was dependent on PI3K signalling to drive endothelial cell motility , with wortmannin ( a PI3K inhibitor ) treat­ ment blocking migration independently of receptor tyrosine kinase activity 139 . evidence for a role of FGFs in tumour angiogenesis includes the increased mobilization of FGF ligands from the extracellular matrix , as has been shown for FGF­binding protein 140 , the paracrine release of FGF2 from tumour cells acting on endothelial cells to initiate angiogenesis 89 , FGF1 expression in ovarian cancer 90 and the autocrine release of FGF2 from capillary endothelial cells 141 . Autocrine FGF2 signalling might also be impor­ tant in the growth of endothelial tumours such as Kaposi’s sarcoma 142 . Finally there is substantial crosstalk between FGFR and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor ( VeGFR ) signalling in angiogenesis , and the FGFR system may mediate resistance to VeGFR targeting in some situations 143 , 144 . FGF tumour suppressive effects in cancer As well as the wealth of evidence that links activation of FGF signalling with oncogenesis , there is unequiv­ ocal evidence from mouse models for a tumour sup­ pressive role of FGFR2 in some contexts . Mice that specifically lack FGFR2­IIIb in keratinocytes are sensitive to carcinogenic insults to their skin 145 . In mouse models of medulloblastoma , FGF signalling inhibits Sonic Hedgehog signalling , which blocks the proliferation of cancer cells 146 . In addition , studies in a rat model of prostate cancer showed that when non­ malignant epithelial cells expressing FGFR2­IIIb were mixed with stromal cells they formed non­malignant tumours . However , when the stromal cells were absent , epithelial cells underwent a splicing switch from the FGFR2­IIIb to the FGFR2­IIIc isoform , and expression of FGF2 was upregulated , potentially initi­ ating an autocrine loop . These studies established the importance of epithelial – stromal interactions in the paracrine regulation of prostate epithelial cell proliferation 147 . Several studies of human tumours and cancer cell lines potentially support a tumour protective effect of FGFR2 signalling . In bladder cell lines , expression of FGFR2­IIIb expression blocks proliferation 148 . FGFR2­IIIb , which is physiologically expressed in many epithelial structures , is downregulated on pro­ gression in bladder cancers 148 , prostate cancer 94 and salivary adenocarcinomas 149 . In prostate cancer cell lines , the expression of a conditionally active FGFR1 kinase domain promotes proliferation , but a con­ ditionally active form of FGFR2 does not 39 . Finally , inactivating mutations of FGFR2 have been described in melanoma 150 . In some circumstances FGFR2 signalling is clearly oncogenic , so what explains the potential tumour sup­ pressive effects ? In general , it is important to draw a distinction between genuine tumour suppressive effects and oncogene­induced senescence . It is well recognized that context­dependent differences in signalling can lead to either tumour promotion or senescence in response to activated FGF signalling . Similarly , the genuine tumour suppressive effects of FGFR2­IIIb are also likely to reflect context­ dependent differences in signalling . Although there has been much focus on FGFR2­IIIb , as opposed to FGFR2­IIIc , being tumour protective , there is no evi­ dence that splicing of the extracellular domain affects intracellular signalling . Therefore , it seems likely that differences in extracellular splicing reflect changes in cellular phenotype . other mechanisms have been proposed for the tumour suppressive function of FGFR2 . FGF signal­ ling may induce cytoprotective pathways in epithelial cells , helping to maintain genomic stability following challenge with carcinogens , reactive oxygen species or other cytotoxic stresses , as shown in mice that lack the NRF2 transcription factor — which is known to be reg­ ulated by FGF7 ( ReF . 151 ) . Another speculative mech­ anism is a potential role for FGFR2­IIIb in immune surveillance . γδ­T cells release both FGF7 ( ReF . 152 ) Box 3 | Mouse models of FGF - driven carcinogenesis autocrine FGF signalling The earliest evidence linking activation of fibroblast growth factor ( FGF ) signalling to mammary oncogenesis came from studies of the mouse mammary tumour virus ( MMTV ) , which as a result of vertical transmission was shown to be responsible for a high rate of cancer in certain mice lineages in the 1970s . MMTV exerts oncogenic effects by insertional mutagenesis , and along with members of the Wnt pathway the commonest integration sites included three members of the FGF family ( Fgf3 , Fgf4 and Fgf8 ) 174 . Multiple studies have demonstrated that overexpression of FGFs in the epithelium induces carcinogenesis through an autocrine signal loop . Examples include the expression of FGF8 from the MMTV - LTR promoter , which causes lobular - type mammary adenocarcinoma at 1 year of age 175 ; FGF8 in the prostate epithelium , which initiates prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia ( PIN ) ; and prostate cancer when expressed in a Pten haploinsufficient background 117 . The conditional expression of FGF10 in lung epithelium induced pulmonary tumours 176 . Paracrine FGF signalling One important study has demonstrated that FGF10 expressed in the stromal compartment can induce prostate carcinoma 116 . Increased levels of FGF10 led to PIN and the subsequent development of cancer with increased androgen receptor expression ; FGF10 expression also synergized with activated AKT signalling 116 . Hormonal FGF signalling One study demonstrated that FGF19 expressed in skeletal muscle induced hepatocellular carcinoma , presumably owing to increased circulating FGF19 levels 103 . FGFr activation Two studies using the same chemically inducible FGFR1 construct expressed from a tissue - specific promoter have demonstrated that constitutive activation of FGFR1 can induce mammary invasive lesions 126 , and in the prostate can induce PIN that subsequently progressed to a sarcomatoid prostate cancer 40 , 128 . By contrast , ablation of Frs2 in the prostate epithelium offered partial protection against SV40 T antigen - induced prostate cancer , potentially owing to impaired epithelial proliferation 118 . Retroviral expression of FGFR3 in the murine bone marrow induced lymphoma or leukaemia development , with a latency that was markedly reduced on the expression of FGFR3 with an activating mutation 82 . R E V I E W S 124 | FebRuARy 2010 | VoLuMe 10 www . nature . com / reviews / cancer © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 and FGF10 , which may signal through FGFR2­IIIb in epithelia to promote immune surveillance , and loss of epithelial FGFR2 could therefore interfere with tumour surveillance . Therapeutic approaches Several pharmaceutical companies have developed FGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors ( TKIs ) ( TABLe 2 ) that are in the early phases of clinical trials . So far , all of the TKIs are ATP­competitive VeGFR2 inhibitors . The VeGFR and FGFR kinase domains have high structural similar­ ity , and several VeGFR TKIs also inhibit the FGFRs . Dual inhibition with VeGFRs has the obvious poten­ tial benefit of targeting two pro­angiogenic growth fac­ tors , or of simultaneously targeting angiogenesis and tumour cell proliferation . However , many of these TKIs with multiple targets are less potent against the FGFRs and it is uncertain if this will be a disadvantage in clini­ cal development . Targeting multiple kinases may also increase the side effects of these compounds , limiting the ability to deliver drugs at doses required for FGFR inhibition . Consequently , several pharmaceutical com­ panies are developing highly potent FGFR TKIs , which are selective over VeGFRs . Preclinical development of potent FGFR TKIs has been complicated by tissue calci­ fication . FGF23 is involved in phosphate homeostasis 153 , and in preclinical models highly potent ( but not less potent ) FGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors have caused hyperphosphataemia­mediated tissue calcification owing to blockade of FGF23 signalling . It is unknown whether this will be an issue in humans . To minimise the side effects of targeting FGFRs , therapeutic antibodies may have substantial ben­ efits , as they can be used to treat cancer cells that are reliant on a particular FGFR and therefore reduce the potential toxicity of pan­FGFR inhibition . Antibodies targeting FGFR3 have been shown to have an anti­ proliferative effect on bladder cancer cells 154 , 155 and t ( 4 ; 14 ) myeloma 155 . A single chain Fv antibody that tar­ geted FGFR1­IIIc could not be pursued further after it was found to potentially block FGF signalling in the hypothalamus , resulting in severe anorexia in rodents and monkey models 156 . It remains to be ascertained whether this would be a class effect for all FGFR1­IIIc antibodies . A third approach is to develop FGF ligand traps ; for example , FP­1039 ( Five Prime Therapeutics ) , a soluble fusion protein that consists of extracellular FGFR1­IIIc fused to the Fc domain of IgG1 . These traps could potentially block the activity of multiple FGF ligands and receptors , and exert both anti­angiogenic and anti­proliferative effects 157 . Finally , a different approach is the use of FGF ligands to stimulate FGFRs . A recombinant FGF7 ligand , also known as keratinocyte growth factor , has been licensed for the treatment of mucositis induced by myelotoxic therapy requiring haematopoietic stem cell support ( TABLe 2 ) . This compound should not be used outside the licensed indications , as safety has not been established in any tumour types known to express FGFR2­IIIb , the receptor for FGF7 . Future prospects The past decade has seen a dramatic increase in our under­ standing of the relevance of FGFs and their receptors to cancer biology . Depending on the tumour type , aber­ rant FGF signalling can function in a cell­autonomous fashion , or through modulating tumour – stroma Table 2 | Current status of FGF and FGFR - targeting therapies * Drug name Company range of activity or target Clinical development refs Small molecular tyrosine kinase inhibitors SU5402 In vitro reagent Selective FGFR inhibitor ( now superseded by availability of PD173074 ) NA 75 PD173074 In vitro reagent Selective FGFR inhibitor NA 184 TKI258 Novartis FGFR , PDGFR and VEGFR inhibitor Phase II 185 BIBF 1120 Boehringer Ingelheim FGFR , PDGFR and VEGFR inhibitor Phase III 186 BMS - 582 , 664 ( Brivanib ) Bristol - Myers Squibb FGFR and VEGFR inhibitor Phase II 187 E7080 Eisai FGFR , PDGFR and VEGFR inhibitor Phase I 188 TSU - 68 Taiho Pharmaceutical FGFR , PDGFR and VEGFR inhibitor Phase I / II 189 FGFR antibodies and FGF ligand traps IMC - A1 ImClone FGFR1 - IIIc - specific antibody NA 156 PRO - 001 ProChon Biotech FGFR3 - specific blocking antibody NA 84 R3Mab Genentech FGFR3 - specific antibody NA 155 1A6 Genentech FGF19 - specific antibody NA 104 FP - 1039 Five Prime Therapeutics FGF ligand trap ( multiple FGFs ) Phase I 157 FGF ligand for mucosal chemoprotection Palifermin ( Kepivance ) Biovitrum AB Recombinant FGF7 ( activates FGFR2 - IIIb ) Licensed 190 FGF , fibroblast growth factor ; FGFR , FGF receptor ; NA , not applicable ; PDGFR , platelet - derived growth factor receptor ; VEGFR vascular endothelial growth factor receptor . * Several pharmaceutical companies have highly potent and selective FGFR inhibitors in preclinical development . R E V I E W S NATuRe ReVIewS | CanCer VoLuMe 10 | FebRuARy 2010 | 125 © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 interactions , and activate different downstream pathways depending on cellular context . The emerging data on FGF signalling has sparked several pharmaceutical com­ panies to develop drugs that target FGFRs . These are now entering the clinic , and many more are in preclinical development . It is currently not well understood how FGFR2 sig­ nalling can be tumour promoting in some contexts , but tumour suppressive in others . until the underlying mechanisms of the context specificty of FGF signalling are better understood , the non­selective targeting of FGFRs should be used cautiously in an adjuvant or cur­ ative setting . An assessment of the safety of long­term FGFR inhibition in preclinical models would be reas­ suring . The mechanisms underlying tumour suppres­ sive effects could , however , also present an opportunity in cancer treatment . The potentiation or reinstatement of these FGF­mediated tumour suppressive signals may represent a new avenue in tumour therapy . The presence of many different genomic aberra­ tions , each one largely specific to the tumour type and often occurring at a low frequency , presents practical problems for clinical development . Successful strategies will depend on the selection of tumours in which FGF signalling is driving proliferation and survival , and it is likely that a set of tumour­specific companion diag­ nostics will be required to select patients . This becomes a more difficult problem when identifying tumours in which paracrine and autocrine signalling is driv­ ing tumour cell proliferation . Although the activation of signalling loops will be highly prevalent in some tumour types , for other types it will be a challenge to differentiate tumours in which changes in FGFR receptor expression and splicing are driving prolifera­ tion from those in which these changes occur merely as consequence of tumour progression . The identifica­ tion of tumours in which FGF2 is driving angiogen­ esis presents a similar problem . Much translational research is required to help address these questions . It is also likely that additional tumour types that are driven by FGF signalling , with different mechanisms of FGF pathway activation , will emerge in the next few years to further strengthen the role of FGF signalling in cancer biology . 1 . Kimelman , D . & Kirschner , M . Synergistic induction of mesoderm by FGF and TGF - β and the identification of an mRNA coding for FGF in the early Xenopus embryo . Cell 51 , 869 – 877 ( 1987 ) . 2 . De Moerlooze , L . et al . An important role for the IIIb isoform of fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 ( FGFR2 ) in mesenchymal - epithelial signalling during mouse organogenesis . Development 127 , 483 – 492 ( 2000 ) . 3 . Wiedemann , M . & Trueb , B . Characterization of a novel protein ( FGFRL1 ) from human cartilage related to FGF receptors . Genomics 69 , 275 – 279 ( 2000 ) . 4 . Ori , A . , Wilkinson , M . C . & Fernig , D . G . The heparanome and regulation of cell function : structures , functions and challenges . Front . Biosci . 13 , 4309 – 4338 ( 2008 ) . 5 . Harmer , N . J . et al . Towards a resolution of the stoichiometry of the fibroblast growth factor ( FGF ) - FGF receptor - heparin complex . J . Mol . Biol . 339 , 821 – 834 ( 2004 ) . 6 . Mohammadi , M . , Olsen , S . K . & Ibrahimi , O . A . Structural basis for fibroblast growth factor receptor activation . Cytokine Growth Factor Rev . 16 , 107 – 137 ( 2005 ) . 7 . Zhang , X . et al . Receptor specificity of the fibroblast growth factor family . The complete mammalian FGF family . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 15694 – 15700 ( 2006 ) . 8 . Ornitz , D . M . et al . Receptor specificity of the fibroblast growth - factor family . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 15292 – 15297 ( 1996 ) . 9 . Wu , D . Q . , Kan , M . K . , Sato , G . H . , Okamoto , T . & Sato , J . D . Characterization and molecular cloning of a putative binding protein for heparin - binding growth factors . J . Biol . Chem . 266 , 16778 – 16785 ( 1991 ) . 10 . Kurosu , H . et al . Regulation of fibroblast growth factor - 23 signaling by klotho . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 6120 – 6123 ( 2006 ) . 11 . Eswarakumar , V . P . , Lax , I . & Schlessinger , J . Cellular signaling by fibroblast growth factor receptors . Cytokine Growth Factor Rev . 16 , 139 – 149 ( 2005 ) . 12 . Gotoh , N . Regulation of growth factor signaling by FRS2 family docking / scaffold adaptor proteins . Cancer Sci . 99 , 1319 – 1325 ( 2008 ) . 13 . Altomare , D . A . & Testa , J . R . Perturbations of the AKT signaling pathway in human cancer . Oncogene 24 , 7455 – 7464 ( 2005 ) . 14 . Peters , K . G . et al . Point mutation of an FGF receptor abolishes phosphatidylinositol turnover and Ca 2 + flux but not mitogenesis . Nature 358 , 678 – 681 ( 1992 ) . 15 . Klint , P . & Claesson - Welsh , L . Signal transduction by fibroblast growth factor receptors . Frontiers in Bioscience 4 , 165 – 177 ( 1999 ) . 16 . Hart , K . C . et al . Transformation and Stat activation by derivatives of FGFR1 , FGFR3 , and FGFR4 . Oncogene 19 , 3309 – 3320 ( 2000 ) . 17 . Kang , S . et al . Fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 associates with and tyrosine phosphorylates p90 RSK2 , leading to RSK2 activation that mediates hematopoietic transformation . Mol . Cell . Biol . 29 , 2105 – 2117 ( 2009 ) . 18 . Thien , C . B . & Langdon , W . Y . Cbl : many adaptations to regulate protein tyrosine kinases . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2 , 294 – 307 ( 2001 ) . 19 . Zhao , Y . & Zhang , Z . Y . The mechanism of dephosphorylation of extracellular signal - regulated kinase 2 by mitogen - activated protein kinase phosphatase 3 . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 32382 – 32391 ( 2001 ) . 20 . Casci , T . , Vinos , J . & Freeman , M . Sprouty , an intracellular inhibitor of Ras signaling . Cell 96 , 655 – 665 ( 1999 ) . 21 . Hacohen , N . , Kramer , S . , Sutherland , D . , Hiromi , Y . & Krasnow , M . A . Sprouty encodes a novel antagonist of FGF signaling that patterns apical branching of the Drosophila airways . Cell 92 , 253 – 263 ( 1998 ) . 22 . Furthauer , M . , Lin , W . , Ang , S . L . , Thisse , B . & Thisse , C . Sef is a feedback - induced antagonist of Ras / MAPK - mediated FGF signalling . Nature Cell Biol . 4 , 170 – 174 ( 2002 ) . 23 . Tsang , M . , Friesel , R . , Kudoh , T . & Dawid , I . B . Identification of Sef , a novel modulator of FGF signalling . Nature Cell Biol . 4 , 165 – 169 ( 2002 ) . 24 . Thisse , B . & Thisse , C . Functions and regulations of fibroblast growth factor signaling during embryonic development . Dev . Biol . 287 , 390 – 402 ( 2005 ) . 25 . Tsang , M . & Dawid , I . B . Promotion and attenuation of FGF signaling through the Ras - MAPK pathway . Sci . STKE 228 , 7 ( 2004 ) . 26 . Yu , K . et al . Conditional inactivation of FGF receptor 2 reveals an essential role for FGF signaling in the regulation of osteoblast function and bone growth . Development 130 , 3063 – 3074 ( 2003 ) . 27 . Colvin , J . S . , Bohne , B . A . , Harding , G . W . , McEwen , D . G . & Ornitz , D . M . Skeletal overgrowth and deafness in mice lacking fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 . Nature Genet . 12 , 390 – 397 ( 1996 ) . 28 . Ornitz , D . M . & Marie , P . J . FGF signaling pathways in endochondral and intramembranous bone development and human genetic disease . Genes Dev . 16 , 1446 – 1465 ( 2002 ) . 29 . Muenke , M . et al . A common mutation in the fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 gene in Pfeiffer syndrome . Nature Genet . 8 , 269 – 274 ( 1994 ) . 30 . Corson , L . B . , Yamanaka , Y . , Lai , K . M . & Rossant , J . Spatial and temporal patterns of ERK signaling during mouse embryogenesis . Development 130 , 4527 – 4537 ( 2003 ) . 31 . Ho , A . & Dowdy , S . F . Regulation of G 1 cell - cycle progression by oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 12 , 47 – 52 ( 2002 ) . 32 . Dailey , L . , Ambrosetti , D . , Mansukhani , A . & Basilico , C . Mechanisms underlying differential responses to FGF signaling . Cytokine Growth Factor Rev . 16 , 233 – 247 ( 2005 ) . 33 . Raucci , A . , Laplantine , E . , Mansukhani , A . & Basilico , C . Activation of the ERK1 / 2 and p38 mitogen - activated protein kinase pathways mediates fibroblast growth factor - induced growth arrest of chondrocytes . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 1747 – 1756 ( 2004 ) . 34 . Maher , P . p38 mitogen - activated protein kinase activation is required for fibroblast growth factor - 2 - stimulated cell proliferation but not differentiation . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 17491 – 17498 ( 1999 ) . 35 . Peters , G . , Lee , A . E . & Dickson , C . Concerted activation of two potential proto - oncogenes in carcinomas induced by mouse mammary tumour virus . Nature 320 , 628 – 631 ( 1986 ) . For the first time , this study shows a co - operative oncogenic effect of FGF and WNT signalling in mammary tumorigenesis . 36 . Marshall , C . J . Specificity of receptor tyrosine kinase signaling : transient versus sustained extracellular signal - regulated kinase activation . Cell 80 , 179 – 185 ( 1995 ) . 37 . Vainikka , S . et al . Signal transduction by fibroblast growth factor receptor - 4 ( FGFR - 4 ) . Comparison with FGFR - 1 . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 18320 – 18326 ( 1994 ) . 38 . Xian , W . , Schwertfeger , K . L . & Rosen , J . M . Distinct roles of fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 and 2 in regulating cell survival and epithelial - mesenchymal transition . Mol . Endocrinol . 21 , 987 – 1000 ( 2007 ) . 39 . Freeman , K . W . et al . Conditional activation of fibroblast growth factor receptor ( FGFR ) 1 , but not FGFR2 , in prostate cancer cells leads to increased osteopontin induction , extracellular signal - regulated kinase activation , and in vivo proliferation . Cancer Res . 63 , 6237 – 6243 ( 2003 ) . 40 . Freeman , K . W . et al . Inducible prostate intraepithelial neoplasia with reversible hyperplasia in conditional FGFR1 - expressing mice . Cancer Res . 63 , 8256 – 8263 ( 2003 ) . 41 . Greenman , C . et al . Patterns of somatic mutation in human cancer genomes . Nature 446 , 153 – 158 ( 2007 ) . This screen for somatic mutations in the human kinome identified components of FGF signalling pathways as the most frequently mutated coding regions . R E V I E W S 126 | FebRuARy 2010 | VoLuMe 10 www . nature . com / reviews / cancer © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 42 . Cappellen , D . et al . Frequent activating mutations of FGFR3 in human bladder and cervix carcinomas . Nature Genet . 23 , 18 – 20 ( 1999 ) . This report describes the detection of somatic FGFR3 mutations in solid tumours that are identical to those underpinning FGFR3 - dependent developmental defects . 43 . van Rhijn , B . W . et al . Novel fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 ( FGFR3 ) mutations in bladder cancer previously identified in non - lethal skeletal disorders . Eur . J . Hum . Genet . 10 , 819 – 824 ( 2002 ) . 44 . Naski , M . C . , Wang , Q . , Xu , J . & Ornitz , D . M . Graded activation of fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 by mutations causing achondroplasia and thanatophoric dysplasia . Nature Genet . 13 , 233 – 237 ( 1996 ) . 45 . di Martino , E . , L’Hote , C . , G . , Kennedy , W . , Tomlinson , D . C . & Knowles , M . A . Mutant fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 induces intracellular signaling and cellular transformation in a cell type - and mutation - specific manner . Oncogene 28 , 4306 – 4316 ( 2009 ) . 46 . Munro , N . P . & Knowles , M . A . Fibroblast growth factors and their receptors in transitional cell carcinoma . J . Urol . 169 , 675 – 682 ( 2003 ) . 47 . Rosty , C . et al . Clinical and biological characteristics of cervical neoplasias with FGFR3 mutation . Mol . Cancer 4 , 15 ( 2005 ) . 48 . Hernandez , S . et al . FGFR3 mutations in prostate cancer : association with low - grade tumors . Mod . Pathol . 22 , 848 – 856 ( 2009 ) . 49 . Goriely , A . et al . Activating mutations in FGFR3 and HRAS reveal a shared genetic origin for congenital disorders and testicular tumors . Nature Genet . 41 , 1247 – 1252 ( 2009 ) . 50 . Zhang , Y . et al . Constitutive activating mutation of the FGFR3b in oral squamous cell carcinomas . Int . J . Cancer 117 , 166 – 168 ( 2005 ) . 51 . Aubertin , J . , Tourpin , S . , Janot , F . , Ahomadegbe , J . C . & Radvanyi , F . Analysis of fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 G697C mutation in oral squamous cell carcinomas . Int . J . Cancer 120 , 2058 – 2059 ( 2007 ) . 52 . Hafner , C . et al . Mosaicism of activating FGFR3 mutations in human skin causes epidermal nevi . J . Clin . Invest . 116 , 2201 – 2207 ( 2006 ) . 53 . Logie , A . et al . Activating mutations of the tyrosine kinase receptor FGFR3 are associated with benign skin tumors in mice and humans . Hum . Mol . Genet . 14 , 1153 – 1160 ( 2005 ) . 54 . Mandinova , A . et al . A positive FGFR3 / FOXN1 feedback loop underlies benign skin keratosis versus squamous cell carcinoma formation in humans . J . Clin . Invest . 119 , 3127 – 3137 ( 2009 ) . 55 . Dutt , A . et al . Drug - sensitive FGFR2 mutations in endometrial carcinoma . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 8713 – 8717 ( 2008 ) . 56 . Jebar , A . H . et al . FGFR3 and Ras gene mutations are mutually exclusive genetic events in urothelial cell carcinoma . Oncogene 24 , 5218 – 5225 ( 2005 ) . 57 . Lopez - Knowles , E . et al . PIK3CA mutations are an early genetic alteration associated with FGFR3 mutations in superficial papillary bladder tumors . Cancer Res . 66 , 7401 – 7404 ( 2006 ) . 58 . Platt , F . M . et al . Spectrum of phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase pathway gene alterations in bladder cancer . Clin . Cancer Res . 15 , 6008 – 6017 ( 2009 ) . 59 . Byron , S . A . et al . Inhibition of activated fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 in endometrial cancer cells induces cell death despite PTEN abrogation . Cancer Res . 68 , 6902 – 6907 ( 2008 ) . 60 . Nord , H . et al . Focal amplifications are associated with high - grade and recurrences in stage Ta bladder carcinoma . Int . J . Cancer 9 Oct 2009 ( doi : 10 . 1002 / ijc . 24954 ) . 61 . Kunii , K . et al . FGFR2 - amplified gastric cancer cell lines require FGFR2 and Erbb3 signaling for growth and survival . Cancer Res . 68 , 2340 – 2348 ( 2008 ) . 62 . Takeda , M . et al . AZD2171 shows potent antitumor activity against gastric cancer over - expressing fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 / keratinocyte growth factor receptor . Clin . Cancer Res . 13 , 3051 – 3057 ( 2007 ) . 63 . Nakazawa , K . , Yashiro , M . & Hirakawa , K . Keratinocyte growth factor produced by gastric fibroblasts specifically stimulates proliferation of cancer cells from scirrhous gastric carcinoma . Cancer Res . 63 , 8848 – 8852 ( 2003 ) . 64 . Ueda , T . et al . Deletion of the carboxyl - terminal exons of K - sam / FGFR2 by short homology - mediated recombination , generating preferential expression of specific messenger RNAs . Cancer Res . 59 , 6080 – 6086 ( 1999 ) . The amplification of FGFR2 in gastric cancer cell lines is accompanied by the expression of a C - terminal truncated FGFR2 variant that has subsequently been shown to be important for transformation . 65 . Cha , J . Y . , Maddileti , S . , Mitin , N . , Harden , T . K . & Der , C . J . Aberrant receptor internalization and enhanced FRS2 - dependent signaling contribute to the transforming activity of the fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 IIIb C3 isoform . J . Biol . Chem . 284 , 6227 – 6240 ( 2009 ) . 66 . Courjal , F . et al . Mapping of DNA amplifications at 15 chromosomal localizations in 1875 breast tumors : definition of phenotypic groups . Cancer Res . 57 , 4360 – 4367 ( 1997 ) . 67 . Jacquemier , J . et al . Expression of the FGFR1 gene in human breast - carcinoma cells . Int . J . Cancer 59 , 373 – 378 ( 1994 ) . 68 . Reis - Filho , J . S . et al . FGFR1 emerges as a potential therapeutic target for lobular breast carcinomas . Clin . Cancer Res . 12 , 6652 – 6662 ( 2006 ) . 69 . Freier , K . et al . Recurrent FGFR1 amplification and high FGFR1 protein expression in oral squamous cell carcinoma ( OSCC ) . Oral Oncol . 43 , 60 – 66 ( 2007 ) . 70 . Gorringe , K . L . et al . High - resolution single nucleotide polymorphism array analysis of epithelial ovarian cancer reveals numerous microdeletions and amplifications . Clin . Cancer Res . 13 , 4731 – 4739 ( 2007 ) . 71 . Simon , R . et al . High - throughput tissue microarray analysis of 3p25 ( RAF1 ) and 8p12 ( FGFR1 ) copy number alterations in urinary bladder cancer . Cancer Res . 61 , 4514 – 4519 ( 2001 ) . 72 . Missiaglia , E . et al . Genomic imbalances in rhabdomyosarcoma cell lines affect expression of genes frequently altered in primary tumors : an approach to identify candidate genes involved in tumor development . Genes Chromosom . Cancer 48 , 455 – 467 ( 2009 ) . 73 . Garcia , M . J . et al . A 1 Mb minimal amplicon at 8p11 – 12 in breast cancer identifies new candidate oncogenes . Oncogene 24 , 5235 – 5245 ( 2005 ) . 74 . Bernard - Pierrot , I . et al . Characterization of the recurrent 8p11 – 12 amplicon identifies PPAPDC1B , a phosphatase protein , as a new therapeutic target in breast cancer . Cancer Res . 68 , 7165 – 7175 ( 2008 ) . 75 . Koziczak , M . , Holbro , T . & Hynes , N . E . Blocking of FGFR signaling inhibits breast cancer cell proliferation through downregulation of D - type cyclins . Oncogene 23 , 3501 – 3508 ( 2004 ) . 76 . Xiao , S . et al . FGFR1 is fused with a novel zinc - finger gene , ZNF198 , in the t ( 8 ; 13 ) leukaemia / lymphoma syndrome . Nature Genet . 18 , 84 – 87 ( 1998 ) . 77 . Roumiantsev , S . et al . Distinct stem cell myeloproliferative / T lymphoma syndromes induced by ZNF198 – FGFR1 and BCR – FGFR1 fusion genes from 8p11 translocations . Cancer Cell 5 , 287 – 298 ( 2004 ) . 78 . Yagasaki , F . et al . Fusion of ETV6 to fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 in peripheral T - cell lymphoma with a t ( 4 ; 12 ) ( p16 ; p13 ) chromosomal translocation . Cancer Res . 61 , 8371 – 8374 ( 2001 ) . 79 . Avet - Loiseau , H . et al . High incidence of translocations t ( 11 ; 14 ) ( q13 ; q32 ) and t ( 4 ; 14 ) ( p16 ; q32 ) in patients with plasma cell malignancies . Cancer Res . 58 , 5640 – 5645 ( 1998 ) . 80 . Chesi , M . et al . Frequent translocation t ( 4 ; 14 ) ( p16 . 3 ; q32 . 3 ) in multiple myeloma is associated with increased expression and activating mutations of fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 . Nature Genet . 16 , 260 – 264 ( 1997 ) . The identification of t ( 4 : 14 ) translocations in multiple myeloma , which bring FGFR3 under the control of the IgH promoter . 81 . Lauring , J . et al . The multiple myeloma associated MMSET gene contributes to cellular adhesion , clonogenic growth , and tumorigenicity . Blood 111 , 856 – 864 ( 2008 ) . 82 . Li , Z . et al . The myeloma - associated oncogene fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 is transforming in hematopoietic cells . Blood 97 , 2413 – 2419 ( 2001 ) . 83 . Qing , J . et al . Antibody - based targeting of FGFR3 in bladder carcinoma and t ( 4 ; 14 ) - positive multiple myeloma in mice . J . Clin . Invest . 119 , 1216 – 1229 ( 2009 ) . 84 . Trudel , S . et al . The inhibitory anti - FGFR3 antibody , PRO - 001 , is cytotoxic to t ( 4 ; 14 ) multiple myeloma cells . Blood 107 , 4039 – 4046 ( 2006 ) . 85 . Avet - Loiseau , H . et al . 14q32 translocations and monosomy 13 observed in monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance delineate a multistep process for the oncogenesis of multiple myeloma . Intergroupe Francophone du Myelome . Cancer Res . 59 , 4546 – 4550 ( 1999 ) . 86 . Otsuki , T . et al . Expression of fibroblast growth factor and FGF - receptor family genes in human myeloma cells , including lines possessing t ( 4 ; 14 ) ( q16 . 3 ; q32 . 3 ) and FGFR3 translocation . Int . J . Oncol . 15 , 1205 – 1212 ( 1999 ) . 87 . Onwuazor , O . N . et al . Mutation , SNP , and isoform analysis of fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 ( FGFR3 ) in 150 newly diagnosed multiple myeloma patients . Blood 102 , 772 – 773 ( 2003 ) . 88 . Chesi , M . et al . Activated fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 is an oncogene that contributes to tumor progression in multiple myeloma . Blood 97 , 729 – 736 ( 2001 ) . 89 . Wang , Y . & Becker , D . Antisense targeting of basic fibroblast growth factor and fibroblast growth factor receptor - 1 in human melanomas blocks intratumoral angiogenesis and tumor growth . Nature Med . 3 , 887 – 893 ( 1997 ) . The demonstration that human tumour cell lines can induce angiogenesis by releasing FGF2 . 90 . Birrer , M . J . et al . Whole genome oligonucleotide - based array comparative genomic hybridization analysis identified fibroblast growth factor 1 as a prognostic marker for advanced - stage serous ovarian adenocarcinomas . J . Clin . Oncol . 25 , 2281 – 2287 ( 2007 ) . 91 . Marek , L . et al . Fibroblast growth factor ( FGF ) and FGF receptor - mediated autocrine signaling in non - small - cell lung cancer cells . Mol . Pharmacol . 75 , 196 – 207 ( 2009 ) . 92 . Poon , R . T . , Fan , S . T . & Wong , J . Clinical implications of circulating angiogenic factors in cancer patients . J . Clin . Oncol . 19 , 1207 – 1225 ( 2001 ) . 93 . Presta , M . et al . Fibroblast growth factor / fibroblast growth factor receptor system in angiogenesis . Cytokine Growth Factor Rev . 16 , 159 – 178 ( 2005 ) . 94 . Giri , D . , Ropiquet , F . & Ittmann , M . Alterations in expression of basic fibroblast growth factor ( FGF ) 2 and its receptor FGFR - 1 in human prostate cancer . Clin . Cancer Res . 5 , 1063 – 1071 ( 1999 ) . 95 . Ropiquet , F . , Giri , D . , Kwabi - Addo , B . , Mansukhani , A . & Ittmann , M . Increased expression of fibroblast growth factor 6 in human prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia and prostate cancer . Cancer Res . 60 , 4245 – 4250 ( 2000 ) . 96 . Yamaguchi , F . , Saya , H . , Bruner , J . M . & Morrison , R . S . Differential expression of 2 fibroblast growth factor - receptor genes is associated with malignant progression in human astrocytomas . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 91 , 484 – 488 ( 1994 ) . 97 . Savagner , P . , Valles , A . M . , Jouanneau , J . , Yamada , K . M . & Thiery , J . P . Alternative splicing in fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 is associated with induced epithelial - mesenchymal transition in rat bladder carcinoma cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 5 , 851 – 862 ( 1994 ) . 98 . Fritzsche , S . et al . Concomitant down - regulation of SPRY1 and SPRY2 in prostate carcinoma . Endocr . Relat Cancer 13 , 839 – 849 ( 2006 ) . 99 . Darby , S . et al . Loss of Sef ( similar expression to FGF ) expression is associated with high grade and metastatic prostate cancer . Oncogene 25 , 4122 – 4127 ( 2006 ) . 100 . Kwabi - Addo , B . , Ozen , M . & Ittmann , M . The role of fibroblast growth factors and their receptors in prostate cancer . Endocr . Relat . Cancer 11 , 709 – 724 ( 2004 ) . 101 . Finak , G . et al . Stromal gene expression predicts clinical outcome in breast cancer . Nature Med . 14 , 518 – 527 ( 2008 ) . 102 . Relf , M . et al . Expression of the angiogenic factors vascular endothelial cell growth factor , acidic and basic fibroblast growth factor , tumor growth factor β - 1 , platelet - derived endothelial cell growth factor , placenta growth factor , and pleiotrophin in human primary breast cancer and its relation to angiogenesis . Cancer Res . 57 , 963 – 969 ( 1997 ) . 103 . Nicholes , K . et al . A mouse model of hepatocellular carcinoma : ectopic expression of fibroblast growth factor 19 in skeletal muscle of transgenic mice . Am . J . Pathol . 160 , 2295 – 2307 ( 2002 ) . 104 . Desnoyers , L . R . et al . Targeting FGF19 inhibits tumor growth in colon cancer xenograft and FGF19 transgenic hepatocellular carcinoma models . Oncogene 27 , 85 – 97 ( 2008 ) . R E V I E W S NATuRe ReVIewS | CanCer VoLuMe 10 | FebRuARy 2010 | 127 © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 105 . Pai , R . et al . Inhibition of fibroblast growth factor 19 reduces tumor growth by modulating beta - catenin signaling . Cancer Res . 68 , 5086 – 5095 ( 2008 ) . 106 . Easton , D . F . et al . Genome - wide association study identifies novel breast cancer susceptibility loci . Nature 447 , 1087 – 1093 ( 2007 ) . These genome - wide association studies identified an SNP in the second intron of FGFR2 that was associated with an increased incidence of breast cancer . 107 . Hunter , D . J . et al . A genome - wide association study identifies alleles in FGFR2 associated with risk of sporadic postmenopausal breast cancer . Nature Genet . 39 , 870 – 874 ( 2007 ) . 108 . Garcia - Closas , M . et al . Heterogeneity of breast cancer associations with five susceptibility Loci by clinical and pathological characteristics . PLoS Genet . 4 , e1000054 ( 2008 ) . 109 . Meyer , K . B . et al . Allele - specific up - regulation of FGFR2 increases susceptibility to breast cancer . PLoS Biol . 6 , 108 ( 2008 ) . 110 . Carroll , J . S . et al . Genome - wide analysis of estrogen receptor binding sites . Nature Genet . 38 , 1289 – 1297 ( 2006 ) . 111 . Bange , J . et al . Cancer progression and tumor cell motility are associated with the FGFR4 Arg ( 388 ) allele . Cancer Res . 62 , 840 – 847 ( 2002 ) . 112 . Spinola , M . et al . FGFR4 Gly388Arg polymorphism and prognosis of breast and colorectal cancer . Oncol . Rep . 14 , 415 – 419 ( 2005 ) . 113 . Thussbas , C . et al . FGFR4 Arg388 allele is associated with resistance to adjuvant therapy in primary breast cancer . J . Clin . Oncol . 24 , 3747 – 3755 ( 2006 ) . 114 . Maeda , T . , Yagasaki , F . , Ishikawa , M . , Takahashi , N . & Bessho , M . Transforming property of TEL - FGFR3 mediated through PI3 - K in a T - cell lymphoma that subsequently progressed to AML . Blood 105 , 2115 – 2123 ( 2005 ) . 115 . Abate - Shen , C . & Shen , M . M . FGF signaling in prostate tumorigenesis - - new insights into epithelial - stromal interactions . Cancer Cell 12 , 495 – 497 ( 2007 ) . 116 . Memarzadeh , S . et al . Enhanced paracrine FGF10 expression promotes formation of multifocal prostate adenocarcinoma and an increase in epithelial androgen receptor . Cancer Cell 12 , 572 – 585 ( 2007 ) . Although previous studies had shown that autocrine release of FGFs from epithelial cells could initiate tumorigenesis , this study provided evidence that paracrine release of FGF10 from stroma could also act on the epithelium to induce prostate adenocarcinoma . 117 . Zhong , C . , Saribekyan , G . , Liao , C . P . , Cohen , M . B . & Roy ‑ Burman , P . Cooperation between FGF8b overexpression and PTEN deficiency in prostate tumorigenesis . Cancer Res . 66 , 2188 – 2194 ( 2006 ) . 118 . Zhang , Y . et al . Role of epithelial cell fibroblast growth factor receptor substrate 2 α in prostate development , regeneration and tumorigenesis . Development 135 , 775 – 784 ( 2008 ) . 119 . Ruotsalainen , T . , Joensuu , H . , Mattson , K . & Salven , P . High pretreatment serum concentration of basic fibroblast growth factor is a predictor of poor prognosis in small cell lung cancer . Cancer Epidemiol . Biomarkers Prev . 11 , 1492 – 1495 ( 2002 ) . 120 . Pardo , O . E . et al . Fibroblast growth factor - 2 induces translational regulation of Bcl - XL and Bcl - 2 via a MEK - dependent pathway : correlation with resistance to etoposide - induced apoptosis . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 12040 – 12046 ( 2002 ) . 121 . Pardo , O . E . et al . Fibroblast growth factor 2 - mediated translational control of IAPs blocks mitochondrial release of Smac / DIABLO and apoptosis in small cell lung cancer cells . Mol . Cell . Biol . 23 , 7600 – 7610 ( 2003 ) . 122 . Pardo , O . E . et al . FGF - 2 protects small cell lung cancer cells from apoptosis through a complex involving PKCepsilon , B - Raf and S6K2 . EMBO J . 25 , 3078 – 3088 ( 2006 ) . 123 . Xian , W . et al . Fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 - transformed mammary epithelial cells are dependent on RSK activity for growth and survival . Cancer Res . 69 , 2244 – 2251 ( 2009 ) . 124 . Tomlinson , D . C . , Lamont , F . R . , Shnyder , S . D . & Knowles , M . A . Fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 promotes proliferation and survival via activation of the mitogen - activated protein kinase pathway in bladder cancer . Cancer Res . 69 , 4613 – 4620 ( 2009 ) . 125 . Nomura , S . et al . FGF10 / FGFR2 signal induces cell migration and invasion in pancreatic cancer . Br . J . Cancer 99 , 305 – 313 ( 2008 ) . 126 . Welm , B . E . et al . Inducible dimerization of FGFR1 : development of a mouse model to analyze progressive transformation of the mammary gland . J . Cell Biol . 157 , 703 – 714 ( 2002 ) . 127 . Xian , W . , Schwertfeger , K . L . , Vargo - Gogola , T . & Rosen , J . M . Pleiotropic effects of FGFR1 on cell proliferation , survival , and migration in a 3D mammary epithelial cell model . J . Cell Biol . 171 , 663 – 673 ( 2005 ) . 128 . Acevedo , V . D . et al . Inducible FGFR - 1 activation leads to irreversible prostate adenocarcinoma and an epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition . Cancer Cell 12 , 559 – 571 ( 2007 ) . This study demonstrates that prolonged FGFR signalling is sufficient for the development of prostate cancer . 129 . Winter , S . F . et al . Conditional activation of FGFR1 in the prostate epithelium induces angiogenesis with concomitant differential regulation of Ang - 1 and Ang - 2 . Oncogene 26 , 4897 – 4907 ( 2007 ) . 130 . Kang , Y . & Massague , J . Epithelial - mesenchymal transitions : twist in development and metastasis . Cell 118 , 277 – 279 ( 2004 ) . 131 . Schaeffer , E . M . et al . Androgen - induced programs for prostate epithelial growth and invasion arise in embryogenesis and are reactivated in cancer . Oncogene 27 , 7180 – 7191 ( 2008 ) . 132 . Aman , A . & Piotrowski , T . Wnt / beta - catenin and Fgf signaling control collective cell migration by restricting chemokine receptor expression . Dev . Cell 15 , 749 – 761 ( 2008 ) . 133 . Werner , S . et al . The function of KGF in morphogenesis of epithelium and reepithelialization of wounds . Science 266 , 819 – 822 ( 1994 ) . 134 . Werner , S . & Grose , R . Regulation of wound healing by growth factors and cytokines . Physiol . Rev . 83 , 835 – 870 ( 2003 ) . 135 . Hanahan , D . & Folkman , J . Patterns and emerging mechanisms of the angiogenic switch during tumorigenesis . Cell 86 , 353 – 364 ( 1996 ) . 136 . Kandel , J . et al . Neovascularization is associated with a switch to the export of bFGF in the multistep development of fibrosarcoma . Cell 66 , 1095 – 1104 ( 1991 ) . 137 . Presta , M . , Tiberio , L . , Rusnati , M . , Dell’Era , P . & Ragnotti , G . Basic fibroblast growth factor requires a long - lasting activation of protein kinase C to induce cell proliferation in transformed fetal bovine aortic endothelial cells . Cell Regul . 2 , 719 – 726 ( 1991 ) . 138 . Daviet , I . , Herbert , J . M . & Maffrand , J . P . Involvement of protein kinase C in the mitogenic and chemotaxis effects of basic fibroblast growth factor on bovine cerebral cortex capillary endothelial cells . FEBS Lett . 259 , 315 – 317 ( 1990 ) . 139 . Landgren , E . , Klint , P . , Yokote , K . & Claesson - Welsh , L . Fibroblast growth factor receptor - 1 mediates chemotaxis independently of direct SH2 - domain protein binding . Oncogene 17 , 283 – 291 ( 1998 ) . 140 . Czubayko , F . et al . A secreted FGF - binding protein can serve as the angiogenic switch in human cancer . Nature Med . 3 , 1137 – 1140 ( 1997 ) . 141 . Schweigerer , L . et al . Capillary endothelial cells express basic fibroblast growth factor , a mitogen that promotes their own growth . Nature 325 , 257 – 259 ( 1987 ) . 142 . Ensoli , B . et al . Synergy between basic fibroblast growth factor and HIV - 1 Tat protein in induction of Kaposi’s sarcoma . Nature 371 , 674 – 680 ( 1994 ) . 143 . Casanovas , O . , Hicklin , D . J . , Bergers , G . & Hanahan , D . Drug resistance by evasion of antiangiogenic targeting of VEGF signaling in late - stage pancreatic islet tumors . Cancer Cell 8 , 299 – 309 ( 2005 ) . This study showed that FGFs mediate resistance to VEFGR2 targeting by reactivating tumour angiogenesis , and that dual inhibition of FGF and VEGF impaired tumour progression . 144 . Kerbel , R . S . Therapeutic implications of intrinsic or induced angiogenic growth factor redundancy in tumors revealed . Cancer Cell 8 , 269 – 271 ( 2005 ) . 145 . Grose , R . et al . The role of fibroblast growth factor receptor 2b in skin homeostasis and cancer development . EMBO J . 26 , 1268 – 1278 ( 2007 ) . A mouse model with a FGFR2 - IIIb deletion demonstrates a tumour - protective role for FGFR2 - IIIb in the skin . 146 . Fogarty , M . P . , Emmenegger , B . A . , Grasfeder , L . L . , Oliver , T . G . & Wechsler - Reya , R . J . Fibroblast growth factor blocks Sonic hedgehog signaling in neuronal precursors and tumor cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 2973 – 2978 ( 2007 ) . 147 . Yan , G . , Fukabori , Y . , McBride , G . , Nikolaropolous , S . & McKeehan , W . L . Exon switching and activation of stromal and embryonic fibroblast growth factor ( FGF ) - FGF receptor genes in prostate epithelial cells accompany stromal independence and malignancy . Mol . Cell . Biol . 13 , 4513 – 4522 ( 1993 ) . 148 . Ricol , D . et al . Tumour suppressive properties of fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 - IIIb in human bladder cancer . Oncogene 18 , 7234 – 7243 ( 1999 ) . 149 . Zhang , Y . et al . Growth inhibition by keratinocyte growth factor receptor of human salivary adenocarcinoma cells through induction of differentiation and apoptosis . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 98 , 11336 – 11340 ( 2001 ) . 150 . Gartside , M . G . et al . Loss - of - function fibroblast growth factor receptor - 2 mutations in melanoma . Mol . Cancer Res . 7 , 41 – 54 ( 2009 ) . 151 . auf dem Keller , U . et al . Nrf transcription factors in keratinocytes are essential for skin tumor prevention but not for wound healing . Mol . Cell . Biol . 26 , 3773 – 3784 ( 2006 ) . 152 . Boismenu , R . & Havran , W . L . Modulation of epithelial cell growth by intraepithelial gamma delta T cells . Science 266 , 1253 – 1255 ( 1994 ) . 153 . Shimada , T . et al . FGF - 23 transgenic mice demonstrate hypophosphatemic rickets with reduced expression of sodium phosphate cotransporter type IIa . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 314 , 409 – 414 ( 2004 ) . 154 . Martinez - Torrecuadrada , J . et al . Targeting the extracellular domain of fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 with human single - chain Fv antibodies inhibits bladder carcinoma cell line proliferation . Clin . Cancer Res . 11 , 6280 – 6290 ( 2005 ) . 155 . Qing , J . et al . Antibody - based targeting of FGFR3 in bladder carcinoma and t ( 4 ; 14 ) - positive multiple myeloma in mice . J . Clin . Invest . 119 , 1216 – 1229 ( 2009 ) . 156 . Sun , H . D . et al . Monoclonal antibody antagonists of hypothalamic FGFR1 cause potent but reversible hypophagia and weight loss in rodents and monkeys . Am . J . Physiol . Endocrinol . Metab . 292 , 964 – 976 ( 2007 ) . 157 . Zhang , H . et al . FP - 1039 ( FGFR1 : Fc ) , a soluble FGFR1 receptor antagonist , inhibits tumor growth and angiogenesis ( AACR – NCI – EORTC International Conference , San Francisco , 2007 ) . 158 . Beenken , A . & Mohammadi , M . The FGF family : biology , pathophysiology and therapy . Nature Rev . Drug Discov . 8 , 235 – 253 ( 2009 ) . 159 . Bryant , D . M . & Stow , J . L . Nuclear translocation of cell - surface receptors : lessons from fibroblast growth factor . Traffic 6 , 947 – 954 ( 2005 ) . 160 . Tekin , M . et al . Homozygous mutations in fibroblast growth factor 3 are associated with a new form of syndromic deafness characterized by inner ear agenesis , microtia , and microdontia . Am . J . Hum . Genet . 80 , 338 – 344 ( 2007 ) . 161 . Falardeau , J . et al . Decreased FGF8 signaling causes deficiency of gonadotropin - releasing hormone in humans and mice . J . Clin . Invest . 118 , 2822 – 2831 ( 2008 ) . 162 . Milunsky , J . M . , Zhao , G . , Maher , T . A . , Colby , R . & Everman , D . B . LADD syndrome is caused by FGF10 mutations . Clin . Genet . 69 , 349 – 354 ( 2006 ) . 163 . Consortium , A . Autosomal dominant hypophosphataemic rickets is associated with mutations in FGF23 . Nature Genet . 26 , 345 – 348 ( 2000 ) . 164 . Arman , E . , Haffnerkrausz , R . , Chen , Y . , Heath , J . K . & Lonai , P . Targeted disruption of fibroblast growth - factor ( FGF ) receptor - 2 suggests a role for FGF signaling in pregastrulation mammalian development . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 5082 – 5087 ( 1998 ) . 165 . Meyers , E . N . , Lewandoski , M . & Martin , G . R . An Fgf8 mutant allelic series generated by Cre - and Flp - mediated recombination . Nature Genet . 18 , 136 – 141 ( 1998 ) . 166 . Colvin , J . S . , Green , R . P . , Schmahl , J . , Capel , B . & Ornitz , D . M . Male - to - female sex reversal in mice lacking fibroblast growth factor 9 . Cell 104 , 875 – 889 ( 2001 ) . 167 . Sekine , K . et al . Fgf10 is essential for limb and lung formation . Nature Genet . 21 , 138 – 141 ( 1999 ) . 168 . Min . , H . et al . Fgf - 10 is required for both limb and lung development and exhibits striking functional similarity to Drosophila branchless . Genes Dev . 12 , 3156 – 3161 ( 1998 ) . 169 . Dillon , C . , Spencer - Dene , B . & Dickson , C . A crucial role for fibroblast growth factor signaling in embryonic mammary gland development . J . Mammary Gland Biol . Neoplasia 9 , 207 – 215 ( 2004 ) . R E V I E W S 128 | FebRuARy 2010 | VoLuMe 10 www . nature . com / reviews / cancer © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 170 . Jackson , D . et al . Fibroblast growth - factor receptor signaling has a role in lobuloalveolar development of the mammary - gland . J . Cell . Sci . 110 , 1261 – 1268 ( 1997 ) . 171 . Kuslak , S . L . & Marker , P . C . Fibroblast growth factor receptor signaling through MEK – ERK is required for prostate bud induction . Differentiation 75 , 638 – 651 ( 2007 ) . 172 . Thomson , A . A . & Cunha , G . R . Prostatic growth and development are regulated by FGF10 . Development 126 , 3693 – 3701 ( 1999 ) . 173 . Ornitz , D . M . & Itoh , N . Fibroblast growth factors . Genome Biol . 2 , 3005 – 3005 . 12 ( 2001 ) . 174 . Callahan , R . & Smith , G . H . MMTV - induced mammary tumorigenesis : gene discovery , progression to malignancy and cellular pathways . Oncogene 19 , 992 – 1001 ( 2000 ) . 175 . Daphna - Iken , D . et al . MMTV - Fgf8 transgenic mice develop mammary and salivary gland neoplasia and ovarian stromal hyperplasia . Oncogene 17 , 2711 – 2717 ( 1998 ) . 176 . Clark , J . C . et al . FGF - 10 disrupts lung morphogenesis and causes pulmonary adenomas in vivo . Am . J . Physiol . Lung Cell . Mol . Physiol . 280 , L705 – 715 ( 2001 ) . 177 . Wagner , E . J . et al . Characterization of the intronic splicing silencers flanking FGFR2 exon IIIb . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 14017 – 14027 ( 2005 ) . 178 . Seth , P . , Miller , H . B . , Lasda , E . L . , Pearson , J . L . & Garcia - Blanco , M . A . Identification of an intronic splicing enhancer essential for the inclusion of FGFR2 exon IIIc . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 10058 – 10067 ( 2008 ) . 179 . Baraniak , A . P . , Chen , J . R . & Garcia - Blanco , M . A . Fox - 2 mediates epithelial cell - specific fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 exon choice . Mol . Cell Biol . 26 , 1209 – 1222 ( 2006 ) . 180 . Lin , W . M . et al . Modeling genomic diversity and tumor dependency in malignant melanoma . Cancer Res . 68 , 664 – 673 ( 2008 ) . 181 . Jang , J . H . , Shin , K . H . & Park , J . G . Mutations in fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 and fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 genes associated with human gastric and colorectal cancers . Cancer Res . 61 , 3541 – 3543 ( 2001 ) . 182 . Vekony , H . et al . DNA copy number gains at loci of growth factors and their receptors in salivary gland adenoid cystic carcinoma . Clin . Cancer Res . 13 , 3133 – 3139 ( 2007 ) . 183 . Cross , N . C . & Reiter , A . Tyrosine kinase fusion genes in chronic myeloproliferative diseases . Leukemia 16 , 1207 – 1212 ( 2002 ) . 184 . Mohammadi , M . et al . Crystal structure of an angiogenesis inhibitor bound to the FGF receptor tyrosine kinase domain . EMBO J . 17 , 5896 – 5904 ( 1998 ) . 185 . Sarker , D . et al . A phase I pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic study of TKI258 , an oral , multitargeted receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor in patients with advanced solid tumors . Clin . Cancer Res . 14 , 2075 – 2081 ( 2008 ) . 186 . Hilberg , F . et al . BIBF 1120 : triple angiokinase inhibitor with sustained receptor blockade and good antitumor efficacy . Cancer Res . 68 , 4774 – 4782 ( 2008 ) . 187 . Chen , J . et al . FGFR3 as a therapeutic target of the small molecule inhibitor PKC412 in hematopoietic malignancies . Oncogene 24 , 8259 – 8267 ( 2005 ) . 188 . Matsui , J . et al . E7080 , a novel inhibitor that targets multiple kinases , has potent antitumor activities against stem cell factor producing human small cell lung cancer H146 , based on angiogenesis inhibition . Int . J . Cancer 122 , 664 – 671 ( 2008 ) . 189 . Machida , S . et al . Inhibition of peritoneal dissemination of ovarian cancer by tyrosine kinase receptor inhibitor SU6668 ( TSU - 68 ) . Int . J . Cancer 114 , 224 – 229 ( 2005 ) . 190 . Spielberger , R . et al . Palifermin for oral mucositis after intensive therapy for hematologic cancers . N . Engl . J . Med . 351 , 2590 – 2598 ( 2004 ) . Acknowledgements R . G . would like to acknowledge financial support from The Wellcome Trust , Medical Research Council and Barts and The London Charitable Foundation . N . T . would like to acknowl - edge financial support from Cancer Research UK and Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research , UK . We thank S . Werner and A . Reynolds for critical reading of the manuscript . Competing interests statement The authors declare no competing financial interests . DATABASES Entrez Gene : http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / gene EGFR | FGF1 | HRAS | IGH | KRAS | MMSET | NRAS | PIK3CA | Pten | Sox9 National Cancer Institute Drug Dictionary : http : / / www . cancer . gov / drugdictionary gefitinib OMIM : http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / omim CML | Kaposi’s sarcoma | multiple myeloma | Pfeiffer syndrome UniProtKB : http : / / www . uniprot . org ALK | ANG2 | β - catenin | β - klotho | BAD | BCL - 2 | BCL - X L | BCR | CBL | cyclin D1 | ERK1 | ERK2 | ETV6 | FGF2 | FGF6 | FGF7 | FGF8 | FGF10 | FGF19 | FGF23 | FGFR1 | FGFR2 | FGFR3 | FGFR4 | FRS2 | GAB1 | GRB2 | IAP1 | MCL1 | MKP3 | MMP3 | NRF2 | NTRK1 | OCT1 | p21 | RSK2 | RUNX2 | S6K2 | SPRY1 | SPRY2 | VEGFR2 | XIAP | ZNF198 FURTHER INFORMATION Richard Grose’s homepage : http : / / www . cancer . qmul . ac . uk / staff / grose . html all links are aCtive in tHe online PDF R E V I E W S NATuRe ReVIewS | CanCer VoLuMe 10 | FebRuARy 2010 | 129 © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10