CHAPTER SEVEN Emerging Mechanisms and Roles for Asymmetric Cytokinesis C . Thieleke - Matos * , † , 1 , D . S . Osório * , { , 1 , A . X . Carvalho * , { , E . Morais - de - Sá * , † , 2 * i3S—Instituto de Investigac ¸ a˜o e Inovac ¸ a˜o em Sau´de , Universidade do Porto , Porto , Portugal † Cell Division and Genomic stability , IBMC , Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular , and i3S , Instituto de Investigac ¸ a˜o e Inovac ¸ a˜o em Sau´de , Universidade do Porto , Porto , Portugal { Cytoskeletal Dynamics , IBMC , Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular , and i3S , Instituto de Investigac ¸ a˜o e Inovac ¸ a˜o em Sau´de , Universidade do Porto , Porto , Portugal 2 Corresponding author : e - mail address : eurico . sa @ ibmc . up . pt Contents 1 . Introduction 298 2 . Primer on Animal Cell Cytokinesis 300 2 . 1 Organization of Cytokinesis Contractile Ring 300 2 . 2 Regulation of Cytokinesis by Small GTPases Rho and Rac 304 2 . 3 Midbody Formation and Abscission 306 2 . 4 Overview of Epithelial Organization and Cytokinesis 307 3 . Molecular and Cellular Mechanisms Controlling Asymmetric Cytokinesis 310 3 . 1 Intrinsic Regulation of Asymmetric Ring Constriction 311 3 . 2 Extrinsic Regulation of Epithelial Cytokinesis 313 3 . 3 Asymmetric Midbody Inheritance 319 4 . Polarized Cytokinesis : Defining Cellular Identity and Shape 322 4 . 1 Importance of Midbody in Cell - Fate Determination 322 4 . 2 Axis Specification 324 4 . 3 Midbody as Spatial Determinant of Epithelial Architecture 326 5 . Concluding Remarks 330 Acknowledgments 331 References 331 Abstract Cytokinesis completes cell division by physically separating the contents of the mother cell between the two daughter cells . This event requires the highly coordinated reor - ganization of the cytoskeleton within a precise window of time to ensure faithful geno - mic segregation . In addition , recent progress in the field highlighted the importance of cytokinesis in providing particularly important cues in the context of multicellular tis - sues . The organization of the cytokinetic machinery and the asymmetric localization 1 Authors contributed equally . International Review of Cell and Molecular Biology , Volume 332 # 2017 Elsevier Inc . ISSN 1937 - 6448 All rights reserved . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / bs . ircmb . 2017 . 01 . 004 297 or inheritance of the midbody remnants is critical to define the spatial distribution of mechanical and biochemical signals . After a brief overview of the conserved steps of animal cytokinesis , we review the mechanisms controlling polarized cytokinesis focus - ing on the challenges of epithelial cytokinesis . Finally , we discuss the significance of these asymmetries in defining embryonic body axes , determining cell fate , and ensuring the correct propagation of epithelial organization during proliferation . 1 . INTRODUCTION Cell division ensures the proliferation of unicellular organisms as well as the development and renewal of tissues in multicellular organisms . Cyto - kinesis , the last step of cell division segregates the cytoplasm of the mother cell between the two daughter cells . The timing of daughter cell separation must be tightly coordinated with chromosome segregation to ensure proper partitioning of the genetic material . For many decades , research on the field has largely focused on the molecular characterization of the cytokinesis machinery and on the mechanisms that contribute to timely assemble and position the contractile ring , the transient structure that allows cytokinesis to occur . Studies using unicellular organisms , mammalian cell cultures , and one - cell zygotes remarkably advanced the current understanding of these processes ( D’Avino et al . , 2015 ; Fededa and Gerlich , 2012 ; Green et al . , 2012 ) . However , the complex biomechanical interactions within a multicellular environment and the need to synchronize cell division with the spatial organization of tissue architecture and cell fate determination raise a number of new challenges , which are just beginning to be addressed . The event of cytokinesis is also specifically tailored to support very dis - tinct developmental functions , mostly via the generation of asymmetries . In many cases , the contractile ring is asymmetrically positioned along the divid - ing cell axis , producing daughter cells with different sizes . These events , gen - erally termed asymmetric cell division , are critical to generate cellular diversity in multicellular organisms and occur for instance in Drosophila and Caenorhabditis elegans neuroblasts , C . elegans zygotes , and mouse oocytes . Asymmetric cell division has been extensively discussed elsewhere , for com - prehensive reviews of the subject the reader is referred to other publications ( Gonczy , 2008 ; Lu and Johnston , 2013 ; Roubinet and Cabernard , 2014 ) . A second type of asymmetry can occur within the division plane when the constriction of the contractile ring occurs preferentially from one of the sides . The C . elegans one - cell stage embryo provides a good example to 298 C . Thieleke - Matos et al . distinguish these two types of asymmetries : ( 1 ) the embryo is divided into two daughter cells of different sizes and ( 2 ) the contractile ring normally constricts asymmetrically along the division plane ( Fig . 1 ; Audhya et al . , 2005 ; Maddox et al . , 2007 ) . Although the exact role of asymmetric cytoki - nesis in the C . elegans zygote is still a matter of debate , more recent studies in Drosophila and Xenopus highlight its particular importance in the context of an epithelium . It is now clear that the multicellular context of the epithelial tissue demands an elaborated coordination of adhesion between dividing and neighboring cells , which promotes cytokinesis asymmetries , and ensures the correct spatial organization of new cellular interfaces ( Firmino et al . , 2016 ; Founounou et al . , 2013 ; Guillot and Lecuit , 2013 ; Herszterg et al . , 2013 , 2014 ; Higashi et al . , 2016 ; Morais - de - Sa and Sunkel , 2013 ) . In this review , we will first briefly describe the cytokinesis machinery and then focus on the physiological relevance and molecular mechanisms that control asymmetric cytokinesis and polarized midbody localization or inheritance in a variety of biological settings , with a particular emphasis on epithelial cytokinesis . Fig . 1 Asymmetries during the first embryonic division in C . elegans . ( A ) Scheme of a one - cell C . elegans embryo depicting two types of asymmetry : ( 1 ) embryonic asymmetry on the anterior ( A ) – posterior ( P ) axis ( anterior cell is larger than posterior cell , blue arrows ) and ( 2 ) the asymmetry of ring constriction as the furrow progresses unilaterally from one of the sides and only later from the opposite ( green arrows ) . ( B ) Snapshots of a dividing one - cell embryo - expressing GFP - tagged myosin II ( NMY - 2 ; green ) and an mCherry - tagged pleckstrin homology ( PH ) domain to label the plasma membrane ( red ) at 50 % ingression and after cytokinesis completion showing the generation of a larger anterior AB cell and a smaller posterior P1 cell ( blue arrows ) . Size bar , 10 μ m . ( C ) Kymograph of the equatorial region ( dashed lines in B ) of a dividing one - cell embryo showing the asymmetry of constriction as furrow progresses unilaterally . Fluorescent markers as in ( B ) . Time interval between each frame is 10 s . Size bar , 10 μ m . 299 Asymmetric Cytokinesis in Animal Cells 2 . PRIMER ON ANIMAL CELL CYTOKINESIS In animal cells , cytokinesis depends on a contractile actomyosin ring that assembles after the onset of anaphase at the cell equator and then con - stricts toward the center of the cell while folding the plasma membrane behind it . Contractile ring constriction progresses until only a narrow bridge of cytoplasm and compacted central spindle connects the two daughter cells . The process of cytokinetic abscission then finalizes daughter cell separation by microtubule and membrane scission . In this section , we will first intro - duce the key players and general regulation of cytokinesis and abscission and then briefly overview epithelial cell organization and cytokinesis . 2 . 1 Organization of Cytokinesis Contractile Ring Pioneering electron microscopy studies by Schroeder in the 1970s showed that the cytokinetic contractile ring is a thin ( 0 . 1 – 0 . 2 μ m ) , filamentous struc - ture that assembles beneath the plasma membrane at the cell equator ( Schroeder , 1968 , 1972 ) . Its molecular composition has been characteri - zed through a combination of genetic perturbations , small molecule inhib - itors , and proteomics approaches ( Eggert et al . , 2006 ; Glotzer , 2005 ; Skop et al . , 2004 ) . The contractile ring is mainly composed of filamentous actin ( F - actin ) and nonmuscle myosin II ( hereafter myosin II ) together with sev - eral cross - linking and regulatory proteins that modulate their behavior ( Green et al . , 2012 ) . The scaffold of the contractile ring is composed of nonbranched actin filaments . Actin filaments treadmill naturally , monomers incorporate prefer - entially at the plus - end of the filament ( barbed - end ) and disassemble at the minus - end ( pointed - end ) . Actin dynamics plays an important role during cytokinesis and results from the interplay of different actin - binding proteins ( Blanchoin et al . , 2014 ; Guha et al . , 2005 ; Murthy and Wadsworth , 2005 ) . Nucleation and elongation of nonbranched filaments are promoted by formins of the diaphanous family ( CYK - 1 in C . elegans , Diaphanous in Drosophila , and Dia2 in mammalians ) that localize to the cytokinetic fur - row and are required for cytokinesis in several species ( Castrillon and Wasserman , 1994 ; Severson et al . , 2002 ; Swan et al . , 1998 ; Watanabe et al . , 2008 ) . The severing and disassembly of filaments is promoted by Cofilin whose activity is modulated by Aip1 ( actin interacting protein 1 ) and coronin ( Chen et al . , 2015 ; Ishikawa - Ankerhold et al . , 2010 ; Lin et al . , 2010 ; Ono , 2003 ) . The Arp - 2 / 3 complex promotes the formation 300 C . Thieleke - Matos et al . of branched actin filament networks and is thought to be inhibited in the cleavage furrow region ( Canman et al . , 2008 ; Rotty et al . , 2013 , see more in Section 2 . 2 ) . Profilin binds to monomeric actin controlling actin mono - mer distribution between F - actin nucleated by the formin and the Arp - 2 / 3 complex ( Suarez et al . , 2015 ) and also modulating F - actin dynamics by directly binding to barbed ends ( Pernier et al . , 2016 ) . Myosin II is a motor protein that forms bipolar filaments capable of slid - ing actin filaments past one another by moving toward their barbed ends at the expense of ATP . It is also able to cross - link actin filaments and allows force transmission throughout an actin filament network . Myosin II is a con - ventional myosin composed of two heavy chains ( NMHC : NMY - 1 / 2 in C . elegans , Zip in Drosophila , MYH9 / 10 / 14 in mammalians ) , two essential light chains ( ELC : MLC - 5 in C . elegans , Mlc - c in Drosophila , MYL6 in mammalian ) , and two regulatory light chains ( RLC : MLC - 4 in C . elegans , Sqh in Drosophila , MRLCs in mammalians ) . The activation of myosin II requires the phosphorylation of two conserved serines in the N - terminus of the RLC by Rho kinase ( ROCK : LET - 502 in C . elegans , Rok in Drosophila ) and other kinases ( see Section 2 . 2 ) . Phosphorylation of the RLC promotes a conformational shift of the myosin II molecule from a closed ( inactive ) state to an opened ( active ) state that is able to form bipolar tail - to - tail filaments ( see Vicente - Manzanares et al . , 2009 for a review ) . These filaments are approximately 300 nm long and include a few dozen myosin heads and are believed to be the main functional form of the protein ( Niederman and Pollard , 1975 ; Pollard , 1982 ) . Myosin II was one of the ear - liest molecules to be implicated in cytokinesis as its depletion or inhibition cause cytokinesis failure and multinucleation ( De Lozanne and Spudich , 1987 ; Mabuchi and Okuno , 1977 ; Straight et al . , 2003 ) . In addition to actomyosin , anillin and septins are the most intensively studied components of the contractile ring . Anillin is a conserved multi - domain protein that was first identified in Drosophila embryos through its ability to bind to F - actin ( Miller et al . , 1989 ) . In mammalian cells and Drosophila , anillin localizes to the nucleus in interphase and then in the cortex from nuclear envelope breakdown onward . After anaphase , anillin localizes to the contractile ring and then to the midbody after full constriction ( Field and Alberts , 1995 ; Oegema et al . , 2000 ) . Anillin has been shown to interact with a myriad of contractile ring components thus placing it as a potential hub for cytokinesis organization . In addition to being responsible for recruiting the septins to the contractile ring in some systems ( D’Avino et al . , 2008 ; Goldbach et al . , 2010 ; Hickson and 301 Asymmetric Cytokinesis in Animal Cells O’Farrell , 2008 ; Maddox et al . , 2005 ) , anillin also binds F - actin , myosin II ( independently of F - actin ) , mammalian Dia2 , RhoA , and its regulators Ect2 and RacGAP50C among others ( Piekny and Maddox , 2010 ) . The myosin II and actin - binding sites were mapped to the N - terminal part of the protein whereas the C - terminal half contains the anillin homology domain ( AHD ) that is important for RhoA binding ( Piekny and Glotzer , 2008 ) . The C - terminal end contains a pleckstrin homology ( PH ) domain that can associate with membranes and is important for the interaction with septins . The PH domain of anillin interacts with phosphatidylinositol phos - phate lipids ( PIPs ) , including phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 or PIP2 ) , which is enriched in the furrow in mammalian cells ( Liu et al . , 2012 ; Logan and Mandato , 2006 ) . Additionally , two cryptic motifs for membrane association have recently been identified in the structure of human anillin ( Sun et al . , 2015 ) : ( 1 ) the C2 domain that precedes the PH domain and ( 2 ) the Rho binding domain . Due to their membrane inter - acting abilities anillin and septins have been proposed to constitute the link between the contractile ring and the plasma membrane . Accordingly , Dro - sophila and mammalian cells depleted of anillin can fail cytokinesis pre - senting an ingressing furrow that displaces back and forth along the plasma membrane . These oscillatory movements suggest improper anchor - age to the plasma membrane ( Hickson and O’Farrell , 2008 ; Kechad et al . , 2012 ; Piekny and Glotzer , 2008 ; Straight et al . , 2005 ) . Similar oscillations were not observed during the first embryonic division in C . elegans where anillin ( ANI - 1 ) depletion caused the loss of ring constriction asymmetry ( see more in Section 3 . 1 ) but did not affect constriction rate or completion of cytokinesis ( Maddox et al . , 2007 ) . Nonetheless , anillin was shown to promote the topological transition from an actomyosin disc to a stack of rings that occurs during meiotic cytokinesis ( Dorn et al . , 2010 ; Maddox et al . , 2005 ) . In the postembryonic context , ANI - 1 depletion causes several developmental defects including cuticle , gonad , and vulva malformations ( Maddox et al . , 2005 ) . Analysis of cytokinesis in vulval precursor cells ( epi - thelial cells that form the vulva ) upon ANI - 1 depletion showed that although constriction was still asymmetric toward the apical side ( typical in epithelial tissues , see more in Sections 2 . 4 , 3 . 1 , and 3 . 2 ) , the constriction rate was lower indicating that ANI - 1 is required for cytokinesis in epithelial cells ( Bourdages et al . , 2014 ) . Septins were first identified as the main components of the filamentous rings ( septin collars ) that encircle the bud neck of dividing S . cerevisiae ( Byers and Goetsch , 1976 ) . Septins are conserved in animals with several 302 C . Thieleke - Matos et al . orthologues described : two septins in C . elegans ( UNC - 59 and UNC - 61 ) ( John et al . , 2007 ) , five in Drosophila ( Pnut , Sep1 , Sep2 , Sep4 , and Sep5 ) , and 13 in mammalian systems ( divided in four groups : SEPT2 ( SEPT1 , 2 , 4 , 5 ) , SEPT6 ( SEPT6 , 8 , 10 , 11 , 14 ) , SEPT7 , and SEPT9 ( SEPT3 , 9 , 12 ) ( Weirich et al . , 2008 ) . Septins are GTP - binding proteins that form het - erooligomers that can further assemble into apolar filaments . The N - terminal part contains a proline rich polybasic domain that is important for lipid interaction preceding a central GTPase domain that is followed by a C - terminal coiled - coil - rich septin unique element ( Mostowy and Cossart , 2012 ) . Septin filaments are considered to be the fourth element of the cyto - skeleton . In contrast to other cytoskeletal components , septins self - assemble into rings in vitro and in the absence of actin form rings in the cytosol of mammalian cells ( Kinoshita et al . , 2002 ) . Septins have been proposed to per - form diverse functions by serving as scaffolds or diffusion barriers between different membrane compartments ( Caudron and Barral , 2009 ) . They often accumulate at curved membrane structures like the cytokinetic furrow and have been shown to sense micron - scale membrane curvature ( Bridges et al . , 2016 ) . Additionally , septins can also promote the formation of F - actin rings by cross - linking filaments into curved bundles ( Mavrakis et al . , 2014 ) . Finally , septins can induce membrane tubule formation from liposomes , in particular when these are enriched with PIP2 ( Tanaka - Takiguchi et al . , 2009 ) . The roles of septins during cytokinesis in metazoans are tissue and developmental stage - dependent . In C . elegans , septins localize to the contractile ring and midbody but are mostly not required for embryonic divisions . Instead , septin mutants display anomalies in postembryonic devel - opment of the vulva , sensory neurons , and gonads ( Finger et al . , 2003 ; Nguyen et al . , 2000 ) . Additionally , septins together with anilins play a role in asymmetric furrow closure in the first embryonic division ( Dorn et al . , 2016 ; Maddox et al . , 2007 , see more in Section 3 . 1 ) . In the Drosophila early embryo , Pnut localizes to the cellularization membranes , cleavage furrows of dividing cells , and epithelial leading edges during dorsal closure . Pnut is not required for embryonic divisions but mutants exhibited defects later during cellularization ( Adam et al . , 2000 ; Fares et al . , 1995 ; Neufeld and Rubin , 1994 ) . Septins are also specifically required for cytokinesis during planar division in the Drosophila pupal neuroepithelium , being dispensable in the orthogonal divisions where the contractile ring does not face the constraints of intercellular adhesion ( Founounou et al . , 2013 ) . In mammalian tissue cul - ture cells inhibition or depletion of different septin isoforms causes failure in cytokinesis ( Estey et al . , 2010 ; Kinoshita et al . , 1997 ; Nagata et al . , 2003 ; 303 Asymmetric Cytokinesis in Animal Cells Spiliotis et al . , 2005 ; Surka et al . , 2002 ) . Sept7 knockout mice displayed embryonic lethality , however , Sept7 (cid:1) / (cid:1) bone marrow - derived stem cells were able to proliferate independently of septins ( Ageta - Ishihara et al . , 2013 ; Menon et al . , 2014 ) . Overall , it is possible that a pattern of septin require - ment exists : embryonic divisions , nonadherent cells , and cells in simpler tis - sues are mostly able to perform cytokinesis in the absence of septins , whereas strongly adherent cells and cells in complex tissues and constrained epithelia require septins for cytokinesis ( reviewed in Menon and Gaestel , 2015 , see more in Section 3 ) . 2 . 2 Regulation of Cytokinesis by Small GTPases Rho and Rac Like most actomyosin processes , cytokinesis is regulated by members of the Rho family of small GTPases . These molecular binary switches cycle between an active GTP - bound and an inactive GDP - bound form . This switch is controlled by guanine nucleotide exchange factors ( GEFs ) that pro - mote activation via GDP to GTP exchange and GTPase - activating proteins ( GAPs ) that promote the hydrolysis of GTP leading to inactivation . Addi - tionally , posttranslational lipid modifications allow them to associate with the plasma membrane where they can initiate signaling cascades activating their downstream effectors . RhoA ( RHO - I in C . elegans , Rho1 in Drosophila ) is the most upstream factor of cytokinesis and localizes to the nascent cytokinetic furrow early in cytokinesis ( Nishimura et al . , 1998 ; Takaishi et al . , 1995 ) . At this stage , a zone of active , plasma membrane - associated RhoA forms at the division plane in a spindle - dependent manner ( Bement et al . , 2005 ; Murthy and Wadsworth , 2008 ; Rappaport , 1985 ) . RhoA promotes cytokinesis via sev - eral downstream effectors of which the best characterized are : ( 1 ) Rho kinase and citron kinase ( Sticky in Drosophila ) , two kinases that can activate myosin II via myosin phosphorylation ( Amano et al . , 1996 ; Riento and Ridley , 2003 ; Yamashiro et al . , 2003 ) ; ( 2 ) anilin that directly binds activated RhoA ( Hickson and O’Farrell , 2008 ; Piekny and Glotzer , 2008 ) ; and ( 3 ) diaphanous formins that are released from their autoinhibited state to pro - mote actin filament elongation via direct interaction with RhoA ( Otomo et al . , 2005 ; Rose et al . , 2005 ; Watanabe et al . , 1997 , 1997 , 2010 ) . The cycling of RhoA between the active and inactive forms ( RhoA flux ) is important for the maintenance of the active RhoA zone and is thought to be promoted by the sequential action of its GEFs and GAPs ( Miller and Bement , 2009 ; Zhang and Glotzer , 2015 ) . 304 C . Thieleke - Matos et al . ECT - 2 ( epithelial cell - transforming sequence 2 , LET - 21 / ECT - 2 in C . elegans , Pebble in Drosophila ) is the main GEF for RhoA during cyto - kinesis ( Tatsumoto et al . , 1999 ) with its depletion in C . elegans ( Schonegg and Hyman , 2006 ; Sonnichsen et al . , 2005 ) , Drosophila ( Prokopenko et al . , 1999 ) , or mammalian cells ( Kim et al . , 2005 ; Yuce et al . , 2005 ) leading to complete inhibition of ring constriction and cytokinesis failure , similar to what is observed in RhoA depletions . Upon chromosome segregation at anaphase , an antiparallel microtubule array termed spindle midzone forms between the two chromosomal masses . The spindle midzone concentrates cytokinesis reg - ulators including the centralspindlin complex comprising kinesin - 6 MKLP - 1 ( ZEN - 4 in C . elegans and Pavarotti in Drosophila ) and MgcRacGAP ( CYK - 4 in C . elegans and Tumbleweed / RacGAP50C in Drosophila ) ( Jantsch - Plunger et al . , 2000 ; Mishima et al . , 2002 ; Pavicic - Kaltenbrunner et al . , 2007 ) . ECT - 2 also concentrates in this region by interacting with the centralspindlin compo - nent MgcRacGap / CYK - 4 in a Plk - 1 phosphorylation - dependent manner ( Kim et al . , 2014 ; Wolfe et al . , 2009 ; Zou et al . , 2014 ) . The interaction between the centralspindlin complex and ECT - 2 is essential for RhoA acti - vation ( Basant et al . , 2015 ; Burkard et al . , 2007 , 2009 ; Lekomtsev et al . , 2012 ; Niiya et al . , 2006 ; Wolfe et al . , 2009 ; Zhang and Glotzer , 2015 ) . In C . elegans , where Rho activation has been characterized in more detail , full RhoA acti - vation also involves the activity of the GAP CYK - 4 that functions non - canonically contributing to the activation of ECT - 2 ( Zhang and Glotzer , 2015 ) . In addition , it involves NOP - 1 , a serine - rich protein with no recog - nizable domains and no identified orthologs in other systems ( Tse et al . , 2012 ) . Astral microtubules touching the cortex were proposed to restrict the accumu - lation of active RhoA and contractile ring proteins at the poles contributing to their concentration in the equatorial region ( Dassow et al . , 2009 ; Lewellyn et al . , 2010 ) . Rac1 has mostly been reported as a negative regulator of cytokinesis by controlling the interplay between cell adhesion and division . This interplay is most critical in adherent cells and tissues since cytokinesis involves shape changes that are counteracted by substrate and cell – cell adhesions ( see more in Section 3 ) . Rac1 inactivation at the equatorial region is important to locally reduce cell adhesions and allow for contractile ring constriction ( Bastos et al . , 2012 ) . Additionally , Rac1 activation of Arp - 2 / 3 complex via WASP in the remainder cortex is thought to counteract contractile ring ingression . Consistent with this , depletion of Rac1 or the Arp - 2 subunit of the Arp - 2 / 3 complex enables cytokinesis completion in ECT - 2 impaired C . elegans embryos ( Loria et al . , 2012 ) . 305 Asymmetric Cytokinesis in Animal Cells 2 . 3 Midbody Formation and Abscission The physical isolation of the two daughter cells occurs during abscission , the last step of cytokinesis . The process of abscission is better characterized in human tissue culture cells ( for a review , see Mierzwa and Gerlich , 2014 ) . By late telophase , the contractile ring has reached the spindle midzone and encircles the compacted midzone microtubules . At this point , the con - tractile ring is denominated midbody ring . The midbody ring together with the central microtubule region is designated midbody and the flanking microtubule regions are called midbody arms . The abscission machinery assembles at the midbody and requires the evolutionarily conserved family of ESCRT ( endosomal sorting complex required for transport ) proteins . ESCRTs form modular complexes involved in membrane remodeling in different cellular processes . Early ESCRTs ( ESCRT - 0 , - I , - II ) exist between cytoplasmic and membrane - associated states , whereas ESCRT - III are cyto - plasmic monomers shown to polymerize into different types of filaments in vitro ( Guizetti et al . , 2011 ) . Finally , the AAA - ATPase Vps4 catalyzes membrane scission and the disassembly of ESCRT - III filaments ( reviewed in Olmos and Carlton , 2016 ) . The centrosomal - associated protein CEP - 55 is recruited from centro - somes to the spindle midzone after phosphorylation by mitotic kinases and is an important regulator of abscission in mammalian cells ( Fabbro et al . , 2005 ; Martinez - Garay et al . , 2006 ; Zhao et al . , 2006 ) . CEP - 55 inter - acts with the centralspindlin component MKLP - 1 and is responsible for recruiting two components of the ESCRT machinery , ALIX and the ESCRT - I complex ( Lee et al . , 2008 ; Morita et al . , 2007 ) that can indepen - dently promote the assembly of spiral ESCRT - III filaments on one of the midbody arms ( Christ et al . , 2016 ; Elia et al . , 2011 ; Guizetti et al . , 2011 ; Lafaurie - Janvore et al . , 2013 ) . Microtubules are then progressively severed by the action of spastin and katanin ( Agromayor et al . , 2009 ; Matsuo et al . , 2013 ; Reid et al . , 2005 ; Yang et al . , 2008 ) and membrane scission is accom - plished by Vps4 , leading to the cleavage of the intracellular bridge ( Mierzwa and Gerlich , 2014 , see further in Section 3 ) . In HeLa cells , cytoplasmic isolation of the two daughter cells occurs around 50 – 60 min after the end of constriction , coincidently with microtubule bundle severing and ESCRT - III - mediated scission ( Guizetti et al . , 2011 ) . Our knowledge on abscission at the embryonic and developmental level and how it compares to cells in culture is still limited . Unlike tissue culture cells , recent work in C . elegans early embryos ( Green et al . , 2013 ) 306 C . Thieleke - Matos et al . demonstrated that abscission involves two steps : ( 1 ) cytoplasm isolation ( early abscission ) that takes place immediately when contractile ingression stops and is septin , but not ESCRT , dependent and ( 2 ) midbody remnant release ( late abscission ) that only occurs at the subsequent cell division involving membrane shedding in an ESCRT - III - dependent manner . Addi - tionally , midbody microtubules are not required for abscission as both abscission stages occurred normally in embryos depleted of SPD - 1 / Prc - 1 that do not have a spindle midzone . This work suggested a stronger role for the midbody ring instead of midbody microtubules in coordinating abscission of the first C . elegans division ( Green et al . , 2013 ) . In Drosophila oogenesis , the female germline stem cell ( fGSC ) divides asymmetrically to give rise to another fGSC and a daughter cell cystoblast . Recent studies showed that cytokinesis completion in fGSC depends on a complex formed between ALIX and the ESCRT - III component shrub that localizes to the midbody / midbody rings . Depletion of either component delayed fGSC abscission leading to the formation of chains of daughter cells that remained connected to the fGSC via midbody rings ( Eikenes et al . , 2015 ; Matias et al . , 2015 ) . This study indicates some degree of conservation of the pathways previously described in human cells . Nonetheless , no CEP - 55 orthologues are known in C . elegans or Drosophila , indicating that the ESCRT complex is either directly recruited or that there are alternative recruitment pathways . 2 . 4 Overview of Epithelial Organization and Cytokinesis Complexlifeemergedfrom thedevelopment ofdynamicphysiologicalbarriers that protect the internal from the external environment and allow organ com - partmentalization . These barriers are efficiently established by the epithelial tis - sue and formed by polarized sheets of cells that display a biochemical and functional asymmetry along their apicobasal axis ( Rodriguez - Boulan and Macara , 2014 ; Fig . 2A ) . The cortex of epithelial cells is organized into distinct subcellular domains : an apical domain ( normally facing the exterior of the epi - thelia or the lumen of an organ ) ; a basal domain on the opposite side , in close contact with the underlying extracellular matrix ; a lateral domain contacting neighboring cells ; and a junctional domain formed at the apicolateral border that contains a number of specialized intercellular junctions , and whose orga - nization presents some differences across evolution ( Rodriguez - Boulan and Macara , 2014 ) . The typical Drosophila epithelial cellpresents adherensjunctions ( AJs ) connecting the cortex of neighboring cells just below the apical domain . These structures are assembled by the intercellular interactions of the 307 Asymmetric Cytokinesis in Animal Cells extracellular domain of the transmembrane protein E - Cadherin , which is linked to the intracellular actin cytoskeleton by catenins . AJs control adhesion and shape , not only byresistingdetachment but alsovia modulation ofthe acto - myosin cytoskeleton in response to forces transmitted along the epithelial tissue Fig . 2 Overview of epithelial organization and cytokinesis asymmetry . ( A ) Basic subcel - lular organization of Drosophila and vertebrate epithelia . Cortical domains polarized along the apicobasal axis are defined by the activity of evolutionarily conserved polarity complexes . Antagonistic ( red ) and positive interactions ( blue ) between the main polarity complexes are represented , as well as the position of the set of junctions that control adhesion ( adherens junctions ) and paracellular diffusion ( septate junctions and tight junctions ) . ( B ) Epithelial cell cytokinesis is asymmetric along the apicobasal axis ( end - on views of the contractile ring are shown ) . The scheme shows how asymmetric fur - rowing ( black arrows ) and ring constriction position the midbody close to the apical domain . A time - lapse series of Drosophila follicular epithelial cells expressing GFP - tagged anillin ( green in the top panel ; gray in the bottom panel ) to mark the contrac - tile / midbody ring and a plasma membrane marker ( red , top panel ) is shown on the right . Note that asymmetric ring constriction positions the midbody close to the apical domain ( arrow ) . 308 C . Thieleke - Matos et al . ( Lecuit and Yap , 2015 ) . Most types of vertebrate epithelia contain a set of junc - tions close to the apical side ( AJs and tight junctions ( TJs ) ) , which are globally termedtheapicaljunctionalcomplex ( Fig . 2A ) . TJsarepositionedabovetheAJ , and function as sealing junctions to segregate the internal from the external environment ( Fig . 2A ) . In Drosophila , the order of sealing junctions ( septate junction ) and AJs is inverted , whereas in C . elegans , AJs and sealing junctions are combined into a single electron - dense apical junction ( McMahon et al . , 2001 ) . Setting apicobasal polarity and junction positioning requires the integra - tion of a network of biochemical interactions , based on mutual antagonism and positive - feedback loops between evolutionarily conserved protein com - plexes with discrete subcellular localizations ( Flores - Benitez and Knust , 2016 ; Rodriguez - Boulan and Macara , 2014 ; Fig . 2A ) . The aPKC ( con - sisting of Par - 3 or Bazooka in Drosophila , aPKC , Par - 6 , and CDC42 ) and Crumbs ( consisting of Crumbs , PALS1 , or Stardust in Drosophila , and PATJ ) complexes define the apical domain , whereas the basolateral domain is determined by members of the Lgl module ( Lgl , Scrib , and Dlg ) , the protein kinase Par - 1 and the Yurt module ( Yurt / Coracle / Neurexin - IV / Na + , K + - ATPase ) . The presence of Par - 3 / Baz within the apical complex is tightly controlled as it also interacts with components of the cell adhesion com - plexes , regulating the stability and localization of AJs and TJs ( Ebnet et al . , 2001 ; Takekuni et al . , 2003 ; Wei et al . , 2005 ) . Both the apical kinase aPKC and the basolateral kinase Par - 1 phosphorylate Par - 3 / Baz to limit its extension on the apical and basolateral side , refining the position of the junc - tional domain at the apicolateral border ( Benton and St Johnston , 2003 ; Krahn et al . , 2010a ; Morais - de - Sa et al . , 2010 ; Suzuki et al . , 2004 ; Walther and Pichaud , 2010 ) . In addition to determining the size of each spa - tial domain and the positioning of specific junctional complexes , epithelial polarity also ultimately orients vesicle trafficking and cytoskeleton organiza - tion , which in turn play critical roles controlling epithelial organization ( Apodaca et al . , 2012 ; Eaton and Martin - Belmonte , 2014 ; Rodriguez - Boulan and Macara , 2014 ) . For instance , regulated trafficking of the trans - membrane proteins E - Cadherin and Crumbs regulates AJ stability and apicobasal polarity , respectively ( Langevin et al . , 2005 ; Lu and Bilder , 2005 ; Roeth et al . , 2009 ; Woichansky et al . , 2016 ) . During cell division , epithelial cells orient the mitotic spindle , either planar to the epithelial layer to maintain a monolayer organization or orthogonally to form stratified epithelia and control cell fate . Mitotic 309 Asymmetric Cytokinesis in Animal Cells spindle orientation and cell rounding require extensive morphological and cytoskeleton changes , which are often coupled with the reorganiza - tion of core components of planar and apicobasal polarity ( Bell et al . , 2015 ; Bergstralh et al . , 2013 ; Carvalho et al . , 2015 ; Devenport et al . , 2011 ; Morais - de - Sa and Sunkel , 2013 ; Rosa et al . , 2015 ) . In contrast , epithelia maintain the localization of apical adhesion complexes during mitosis to preserve tissue cohesiveness ( Baker and Garrod , 1993 ; Founounou et al . , 2013 ; Guillot and Lecuit , 2013 ; Herszterg et al . , 2013 ; Jinguji and Ishikawa , 1992 ; Morais - de - Sa and Sunkel , 2013 ; Reinsch and Karsenti , 1994 ) . Cytokinesis recently assumed particular rel - evance in the epithelial environment due to in vivo studies in Drosophila and C . elegans , which described a multicellular coordination of forces between neighboring and dividing cells and common features that include asymmetric ring constriction and apical midbody positioning ( Fig . 2B ; see more inSection 3 ; Bourdages et al . , 2014 ; Founounou et al . , 2013 ; Guillot and Lecuit , 2013 ; Herszterg et al . , 2013 , 2014 ; Morais - de - Sa and Sunkel , 2013 ) . Asymmetric furrowing has also been reported in very distinct types of vertebrate epithelia , including the mouse small intestine ( Fleming et al . , 2007 ; Jinguji and Ishikawa , 1992 ) , mouse and Zebrafish neuroepithelia ( Das et al . , 2003 ; Kosodo et al . , 2004 , 2008 ) , Xenopus embryos ( Hatte et al . , 2014 ; Higashi et al . , 2016 ) , cultured hepatocytes , Madin - Darby canine kidney ( MDCK ) , and Caco - 2 cells ( Jaffe et al . , 2008 ; Reinsch and Karsenti , 1994 ; Taneja et al . , 2016 ; Wang et al . , 2014 ) . 3 . MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR MECHANISMS CONTROLLING ASYMMETRIC CYTOKINESIS Unilateral , asymmetric , polarized , or nonconcentric are common ter - minologies to describe an asymmetry within the contractile ring plane . This kind of asymmetry is observed throughout animal evolution , having also been documented in unicellular eukaryotes , such as Trypanosome brucei , where the cleavage furrow follows unidirectional ingression during division ( Wheeler et al . , 2013 ) . Asymmetric cytokinesis may also refer to situations where the midbody is asymmetrically inherited by one of the daughter cells ( Kuo et al . , 2011 ; Paolini et al . , 2015 ; Salzmann et al . , 2014 ) . In this chapter , we will cover the molecular mechanisms that control these asymmetries . Polarized furrowing and ring constriction entail different physical and 310 C . Thieleke - Matos et al . biochemical properties between the opposite sides of the equatorial region of the dividing cells . Both asymmetries in protein distribution around the ring circumference and mechanisms extrinsic to the ring contribute to polar - ized cytokinesis . 3 . 1 Intrinsic Regulation of Asymmetric Ring Constriction Asymmetric contractile ring constriction can result from the heteroge - neous distribution of structural components around the ring circumfer - ence . An example of this phenomenon occurs during the first zygotic division in C . elegans ( Maddox et al . , 2007 ; Fig . 1 ) . Early in cytokinesis , embryos display a shallow deformation around the division plane but then ingression happens only from one side . Furrowing proceeds unilaterally and only later does the opposite side undertake ingression , resulting in nonconcentric cytokinesis ( Fig . 1B and C ) . Components of the contractile ring , such as myosin II , anillin , and septins , display higher concentration on the side of the furrow that ingresses first . Depletion of anillin or septins leads to uniform myosin II distribution and symmetric furrowing , suggesting that these proteins are regulators of asymmetric ring contraction ( Maddox et al . , 2007 ) . Nonetheless , anillin - independent mechanisms for generating asymmetric constriction must exist as NOP - 1 impaired embryos ( see Section 2 . 2 ) still constrict asymmetrically in the absence of anillin ( Tse et al . , 2012 ) . The C . elegans zygote is thought to lack polarized distribution of spatial cues at the cell equator . The symmetry breaking event is therefore random and possibly arises from the amplification of small stochastic differences in the recruitment of contractile ring compo - nents to the cell equator . This may lead to localized membrane deforma - tion and result in the formation of a back - to - back plasma membrane configuration at only one side of the cell equator . A recent theoretical model proposed that the localized high curvature of this membrane con - figuration leads to the stochastic asymmetry of furrowing . The local align - ment of membrane - associated actin filaments parallel to the division plane would facilitate local actomyosin contractility and further promote fur - rowing . Filament alignment and increased contractility would gradually propagate around the ring circumference , potentiating furrowing asym - metry ( Dorn et al . , 2016 ) . According to this model , symmetric furrowing would be less advantageous to the cell because uniform F - actin alignment would significantly increase the rigidity of the contractile ring and delay 311 Asymmetric Cytokinesis in Animal Cells constriction . Therefore , asymmetric constriction could serve as an energy - efficient way to perform fast cytokinesis . Asymmetric furrowing with basal to apical directional asymmetry posi - tions the midbody apically and seems to be the prevalent mode of cytokinesis in epithelial tissue ( for a review , see Herszterg et al . , 2014 ) . Although the underlying causes of asymmetric furrowing seem to be related to extrinsic factors ( see Section 3 . 2 ) , intrinsic anisotropy of ring contractility can also play a role in epithelia ( Fig . 3A ) . Live cell imaging in the Drosophila pupal notum revealed that the ring constricts preferentially from the basal side ( Founounou et al . , 2013 ; Herszterg et al . , 2013 ) . Accordingly , myosin II and septins accumulate on the basolateral cortex during the asymmetric phase of ring constriction . However , the distribution of ring components is variable in other epithelial tissues where it does not correlate with the basal to apical directionality of ring constriction . Moreover , in contrast to what happens in one - cell C . elegans embryos , loss of septin , or anillin function Fig . 3 Multiple modes controlling asymmetric ring constriction to promote apical mid - body positioning in Drosophila epithelia . Basal to apical constriction results from asym - metric distribution of contractile ring components ( red ) ( A ) or is promoted by apical anchoring of a homogeneous ring to intercellular adherens junctions ( green ) ( B ) . 312 C . Thieleke - Matos et al . does not interfere with apical - directed constriction in several Drosophila epi - thelial types ( Founounou et al . , 2013 ; Guillot and Lecuit , 2013 ; Herszterg et al . , 2013 ; Morais - de - Sa and Sunkel , 2013 ) . Similarly , the simple epi - thelium formed by the vulval precursor cells in C . elegans also displays anillin - independent asymmetric cleavage ( Bourdages et al . , 2014 ) . Thus , an intrinsic asymmetry of septins and anillin distribution in the contractile ring is dispensable to generate asymmetric constriction in an epithelial tissue . Asymmetric ring constriction could alternatively be determined by the uneven distribution of an upstream factor , such as RhoA , along the apicobasal axis of epithelial cells . Curiously , unilateral cleavage furrow ingression is induced in human cells upon Chlamydia infection due to local disruption of RhoA on one side of the cell ( Sun et al . , 2011 ) . Nevertheless , RhoA distribution is fairly symmetric in the Drosophila follicular epithelium ( Morais - de - Sa and Sunkel , 2013 ) , and enrichment of active RhoA on one of the sides of the division plane has yet to be documented in contexts where cytokinesis is normally asymmetric . 3 . 2 Extrinsic Regulation of Epithelial Cytokinesis The distribution of septins , anillin , and myosin II along the contractile ring circumference in the Drosophila follicular epithelium and embryonic ecto - derm does not follow a basal to apical gradient that could explain preferential contractility of the ring on the basal side ( Guillot and Lecuit , 2013 ; Morais - de - Sa and Sunkel , 2013 ) . Moreover , using laser nanodissection to cut the contractile ring in embryonic epithelia , Guillot and Lecuit have shown that the intrinsic ring tension is identical in the apical and basal sides in a context of asymmetric furrowing ( Guillot and Lecuit , 2013 ) . Thus , other factors external to the ring must dictate the directionality of constriction . In agree - ment , recent studies show the involvement of forces exerted on the contrac - tile ring linked to the polarized adhesion to neighboring cells or substrate . For example , despite the generalized idea that isolated single cells display near concentric constriction , polarized ring constriction toward the sub - strate was observed in cultured HeLa and Drosophila S2 cells ( Bourdages et al . , 2014 ; Fishkind and Wang , 1993 ; Taneja et al . , 2016 ) . In these cases , the extent of adhesion to the substrate modulates furrow geometry as higher densities of adhesive substrates induce the formation of larger focal adhesions that resist constriction and cause a reduction of ingression from the con - tacting side . This resistive force depends on a population of mitotic focal adhesions that bind to the extracellular matrix and are regulated by paxilin , 313 Asymmetric Cytokinesis in Animal Cells focal adhesion kinase , and vinculin ( Taneja et al . , 2016 ) . Polarization of cleavage furrow progression during epithelial cytokinesis relies instead on localized intercellular adhesion between epithelial cells . Maintenance of the mechanical coupling of the dividing cell to its neighbors via cell – cell adhesion represents a major challenge to epithelial cells , having critical impact on the specific features of epithelial cytokinesis . In particular , the contractile ring needs to counter forces generated by adhesion to neighbor - ing cells . Recent studies using laser microsurgery and genetic manipulation in Drosophila as well as contributions from C . elegans and vertebrate models have begun to elucidate how epithelial cell division is synchronized with tis - sue architecture and the importance of cell - cell junctions , in particular AJs , for asymmetric cytokinesis . 3 . 2 . 1 Role of AJs in Asymmetric Ring Constriction AJs connect neighboring epithelial cells as they are linked through α - Catenin to an intracellular actomyosin belt that encircles the apicolateral border ( Lecuit and Yap , 2015 ) . Laser ablation of a region of the contractile ring in the Drosophila embryonic ectoderm led to the formation of a gap that widened with time . Widening was larger when laser ablation was performed apically , suggesting that the contractile ring is subject to higher extrinsic forces on the side where the AJs are located ( Guillot and Lecuit , 2013 ) . Since the apical side of the ring contacts AJs throughout constriction in both Dro - sophila embryonic ectoderm and follicular epithelium ( Guillot and Lecuit , 2013 ; Morais - de - Sa and Sunkel , 2013 ) , ring anchoring to AJs could result in additional forces resisting constriction ( Fig . 3B ) . In line with this idea , genetic inactivation of AJ core components disrupts the asymmetry of ring constriction ( Guillot and Lecuit , 2013 ; Morais - de - Sa and Sunkel , 2013 ) and gap widening is reduced when laser ablation is performed on the apical side of the ring in cells depleted of α - Catenin ( Guillot and Lecuit , 2013 ) . Fur - thermore , ectopic polarization of AJ complexes in Drosophila S2 cells directs furrow constriction toward the surface with accumulation of AJ compo - nents , showing that AJs determine the orientation of ring constriction in a context lacking other polarized cues ( Morais - de - Sa and Sunkel , 2013 ) . Intercellular adhesion also seems to oppose ring constriction leading to nonconcentric closure in the C . elegans epithelial tissue , even though it is unclear whether this asymmetry requires AJs ( Bourdages et al . , 2014 ) . Fur - thermore , attachment of the contractile ring apparatus to the apicolateral junctions may also underlie asymmetric cytokinesis in vertebrates as studies 314 C . Thieleke - Matos et al . in Xenopus , mouse , and human epithelial tissue have shown that AJs and TJs continuously contact the contractile ring during cytokinesis ( Baker and Garrod , 1993 ; Higashi et al . , 2016 ; Jinguji and Ishikawa , 1992 ) . Importantly , AJs may provide an alternative link between the contractile ring and the plasma membrane in both invertebrate and vertebrate cells as over - expression of the Cadherin – Catenin complex rescues the cytokinesis defects produced by loss of anillin and septin function in Drosophila spermatocytes and mouse fibroblasts ( Goldbach et al . , 2010 ) . We do not yet understand the exact molecular nature of the connection between AJs and the cytokinetic ring , but a number of components of the actomyosin belt associated with AJs during interphase are shared with the protein machinery of the cytokinetic ring ( Padmanabhan et al . , 2015 ) . The mechanical load produced by a con - tractile ring and sensed by AJs may stabilize the association of these with the actin filaments in the ring , as application of force increases the lifetime of the interactions between actin and the Cadherin – Catenin complex ( Buckley et al . , 2014 ) . Furthermore , both E - Cadherin and α - Catenin undergo force - dependent conformational changes that stabilize AJs under tension ( Borghi et al . , 2012 ; Buckley et al . , 2014 ; Kim et al . , 2015 ; Rakshit et al . , 2012 ; Yao et al . , 2014 ; Yonemura et al . , 2010 ) and may reinforce the connection with the actomyosin contractile ring . Interestingly , FRAP studies of E - Cadherin and β - Catenin in Xenopus embryos have shown that these proteins are stabilized at the cleavage furrow ( Higashi et al . , 2016 ) . Moreover , the actin - binding protein vinculin is recruited to AJs at the fur - row , as anticipated when AJs are under high tension ( Higashi et al . , 2016 ; Yonemura et al . , 2010 ) . However , a similar AJ stabilization does not seem to occur in Drosophila as we describe later ( Section 3 . 2 . 2 ) . 3 . 2 . 2 Remodeling of Cell Contacts at Daughter - Neighboring Cell Interface In most epithelia , daughter cells remain neighbors after division , leading to the formation of compact clones after continuous proliferation ( Aigouy et al . , 2010 ; Baena - Lopez et al . , 2005 ; Farhadifar et al . , 2007 ; Gibson et al . , 2006 ; Knox and Brown , 2002 ; Olivier et al . , 2010 ) . In Drosophila , effi - cient abscission and formation of new adhesive contacts between daughter cells involves a transient reduction of adhesion with the neighboring cells ( Fig . 4A and B ; Founounou et al . , 2013 ; Guillot and Lecuit , 2013 ; Herszterg et al . , 2013 ; Morais - de - Sa and Sunkel , 2013 ) . Decrease of the E - Cadherin levels at the interface between the cleavage furrow and the 315 Asymmetric Cytokinesis in Animal Cells neighboring cells seems to be induced mechanically by a combination of opposing forces , one generated by constriction of the contractile ring and the other resulting from transmission of cortical tension from neighboring cells ( Fig . 4A ; Founounou et al . , 2013 ; Guillot and Lecuit , 2013 ) . Anillin and septins seem to be necessary to ensure that ring constriction produces sufficient force to overcome adhesion to neighboring cells , as dividing cells depleted of or mutant for either protein constrict slower ( Founounou et al . , 2013 ; Guillot and Lecuit , 2013 ) . Septin mutant cells fail cytokinesis but suc - ceed when neighboring cells are laser ablated , further supporting the idea that constricting rings have to overcome resisting forces from neighboring cells ( Founounou et al . , 2013 ) . As septins are able to cross - link actin fila - ments into curved bundles in vitro ( Mavrakis et al . , 2014 ) , they could Fig . 4 AJ remodeling and regulation of cohesion between dividing and neighboring cell membranes during epithelial cytokinesis . Schematic representation of an apical cross section of dividing Drosophila ( A and B ) or Xenopus ( C ) epithelial cells is shown . A balance of forces produced by ring constriction and neighboring cells control tissue cohesion and AJ remodeling . ( A ) In Drosophila embryonic epithelia , opposing forces of ring constriction ( black arrows ) and tension transmitted from neighboring cells ( blue arrows ) induces AJ disengagement and detachment of the dividing from the neighbor - ing cell membrane . Septins are required in the contractile ring to induce AJ detachment and physical separation from neighboring cells . ( B ) In the Drosophila pupal notum , neighboring cells respond to ring constriction by locally accumulating myosin II in a Rok - dependent manner . This pool of myosin II exerts tension to maintain the mem - branes of the dividing cells tightly juxtaposed ( blue arrows ) , ensuring maintenance of cohesion between dividing and neighboring cells ( C ) . In the Xenopus gastrula epithe - lium , the connection to the AJs is maintained during constriction and reinforced by the recruitment of vinculin to the cleavage furrow . 316 C . Thieleke - Matos et al . contribute to the production of force during ring constriction to counteract adhesion to neighboring cells . Alternatively , anillin and septins may ensure that the contractile ring is able to loosen its anchoring to AJs as their deple - tion or mutation lead to the stable attachment of AJs to the contractile ring ( Founounou et al . , 2013 ; Guillot and Lecuit , 2013 ) . Extrinsic tension trans - mitted by neighboring cells may also challenge the stability of the last stages of ring constriction as septins have been shown to have an important role in anchoring the midbody ring to the plasma membrane ( El Amine et al . , 2013 ; Kechad et al . , 2012 ) . Accordingly , mutants for the septin pnut tend to fail cytokinesis after the ring has already constricted significantly and only a thin intercellular bridge exists between the two separating cells ( Founounou et al . , 2013 ) . Although transient loss of adhesion is likely to be induced mechanically , biochemical pathways may also cooperate . Phosphorylation - dependent reg - ulation of the interactions established within the Cadherin – Catenin com - plex may provide the means for rapid control of E - Cadherin levels at AJs ( for a recent review , see Coopman and Djiane , 2016 ) , but has yet to be examined during cytokinesis . Alternatively , localized regulation of vesicle trafficking triggering E - Cadherin endocytosis could also play a role . The E3 ubiquitin ligase Hakai triggers E - Cadherin internalization and lysosomal targeting in mammalian cells ( Fujita et al . , 2002 ; Palacios et al . , 2005 ) , but does not directly control E - Cadherin degradation in Drosophila ( Kaido et al . , 2009 ) . Interestingly , proteins that concentrate on the contractile ring , such as Rok and the formin Diaphanous are involved in the activation of E - Cadherin endocytosis during Drosophila epithelial morphogenesis ( Levayer et al . , 2011 ) . However , their involvement in contractile ring func - tion makes it hard to uncouple the mechanical from the biochemical roles that they may play on the localized loss of E - Cadherin . Equatorial reduction of adhesion at the dividing cell - neighboring cell interface affects the cohesiveness of Drosophila epithelial tissues differently ( Fig . 4 ) . Electron microscopy analyses revealed the existence of an extracel - lular empty space between the ingressing furrow of a dividing cell and neigh - boring cells in embryonic epithelia ( Fig . 4A ; Guillot and Lecuit , 2013 ) . In contrast , cohesion of the two plasma membranes is maintained in the pupal notum where the neighboring cell is pulled toward the ingressing furrow of the dividing cell ( Fig . 4B ; Founounou et al . , 2013 ; Herszterg et al . , 2013 ) . In this case , cytokinetic ring constriction induces localized accumulation of active myosin in neighboring cells ( Fig . 4B ; Founounou et al . , 2013 ; Herszterg et al . , 2013 ) . This Rho kinase - dependent myosin II accumulation 317 Asymmetric Cytokinesis in Animal Cells is thought to generate tension to maintain the juxtaposition of daughter cell membranes during invagination . Thus , localized myosin II accumula - tion in the neighboring cell facilitates the contact between daughters to define the length of the newly formed AJ interface ( Herszterg et al . , 2013 ) . What triggers myosin II accumulation in the neighboring cell is unknown . Local changes in tension could trigger it intrinsically but given the mechanotransduction properties of both E - Cadherin and α - Catenin , it is possible that the tension directly exerted by the constricting ring on the AJs formed with the neighboring cell plays an important role . Increased cortical stiffness and accumulation of F - actin is seen on E - Cadherin adhesion sites subjected to force ( Barry et al . , 2014 ; le Duc et al . , 2010 ) , highlighting the mechanical impact that AJs have on the remodeling of the actomyosin cytoskeleton . However , the simultaneous local decrease of AJ component levels is hard to reconcile with the idea that E - Cadherin - dependent adhe - sion mediates myosin II accumulation in neighboring cells . Therefore , fur - ther research will be necessary to identify how the mechanical signal of ring constriction leads to myosin accumulation . Cell cohesiveness is also maintained during cytokinesis in mammals , as electron microscopy in the mouse small intestine showed the complete jux - taposition between neighboring cells and the furrow of dividing cells ( Jinguji and Ishikawa , 1992 ) . Furthermore , maintenance of the occluding TJs throughout cytokinesis in the Xenopus embryonic gastrula ensures that the epithelial tissue functions as an efficient barrier to paracellular diffusion dur - ing division ( Higashi et al . , 2016 ) . Although the aforementioned studies in the Drosophila pupal notum provided an elegant explanation as to how epi - thelial cohesion is maintained in a context with localized reduction in cell adhesion , recent work in the Xenopus gastrula suggests that vertebrates may display differences regarding AJ remodeling during cytokinesis . In this context , AJs remain continuously connected to the contractile ring during cytokinesis and recruit vinculin to the cleavage furrow ( Fig . 4C ; Higashi et al . , 2016 ) . Inhibition of vinculin is sufficient to induce a transient reduc - tion of AJs at the region that contacts the contractile ring , which results on the acceleration of cleavage furrow ingression . Thus , a specific function for vinculin in reinforcing AJs during vertebrate epithelial cytokinesis provides one possible explanation for the differences observed between AJ behavior in Drosophila , where vinculin is dispensable for viability ( Alatortsev et al . , 1997 ) . The formation of a new daughter – daughter cell interface is dispensable in some epithelial contexts during mouse , Xenopus , and chicken embryonic 318 C . Thieleke - Matos et al . development , where tissue rearrangements results from the intercalation of neighboring cells between daughter cells during cell division ( Firmino et al . , 2016 ; Hatte et al . , 2014 ; Higashi et al . , 2016 ; Lau et al . , 2015 ; Packard et al . , 2013 ) . In chick embryos , the degree of neighboring cell intercalation increases during gastrulation and requires low levels of actomyosin accumu - lation in neighboring cells to allow junction remodeling ( Firmino et al . , 2016 ) . Thus , molecular responses in neighboring epithelial cells can also facilitate tissue rearrangement , instead of promoting maintenance of cohe - sive clonal populations . Epithelial cytokinesis therefore also seems to be tightly coordinated with the control of the geometry of epithelial cell pack - ing , which has particular relevance during developmental stages with exten - sive tissue remodeling , such as gastrulation ( Firmino et al . , 2016 ; Higashi et al . , 2016 ) . In conclusion , advances in the field underline the importance of coordi - nating intrinsic mechanisms controlling asymmetric ring constriction with the extrinsic forces imposed by adhesion to neighboring cells . Recent efforts elucidated important aspects of this multicellular synchronization , highlight - ing the intricate mechanical interplay between ring constriction and the remodeling of AJs and the connected actomyosin cytoskeleton . Understand - ing how adhesion is remodeled and how neighboring cells sense ring con - striction will now benefit from the large number of in vivo models where epithelial cytokinesis can be studied . Future analysis can also be extended to tubular epithelia , as recent studies in Drosophila tracheal branches and Zebrafish blood vessels have revealed complex AJ remodeling mechanisms coupling morphogenesis with different modes of asymmetric cytokinesis ( Aydogan et al . , 2015 ; Denes et al . , 2015 ) . 3 . 3 Asymmetric Midbody Inheritance Although the final destination of the midbody is unclear in most epithelial cell divisions , its biased inheritance has emerged as a critical factor in cell fate decisions and embryonic development ( see Section 4 for details ) . Unilateral severing of intercellular bridge during abscission can lead to the asymmetric inheritance of the midbody by one of the daughter cells . This was first described in vitro in HeLa cell culture , where it may result from the pref - erential accumulation of abscission - related secretory vesicles in one of the daughter cells ( Byers and Abramson , 1968 ; Gromley et al . , 2005 ; Mishima et al . , 2002 ) . Furthermore , asymmetric inheritance may also occur as consequence of release of tension at the intercellular bridge , which 319 Asymmetric Cytokinesis in Animal Cells controls the assembly of the abscission promoting ESCRT - III complex ( Lafaurie - Janvore et al . , 2013 ) . The molecular mechanisms underlying asymmetric inheritance of the midbody in vivo are now coming into view , mostly arising from studies using invertebrate models . The mechanical properties of the actomyosin cell cortex also seem to underlie the stereotypical inheritance of the midbody in C . elegans embryos , as they tend to be inherited by the daughter cell that is under lower tension during early embryogenesis ( Singh and Pohl , 2014 ) . Anterior – posterior axis establishment in the C . elegans zygote and its asymmetric division result in a two - cell embryo comprising a larger AB cell with high levels of cortical myosin II and higher cortical tension and a smaller P1 cell with low levels of myosin II and lower cortical tension . The midbody remnant of the first cytokinesis localizes at the interface between the AB and P1 cells and is invariably internalized by the EMS cell ( Ou et al . , 2014 ; Singh and Pohl , 2014 ) . Before internalization , the midbody is displaced into the future ven - tral side of the embryo . Midbody displacement along the AB - P1 interface is due to rotational cortical flows of myosin II perpendicular to the antero - posterior axis of the embryo , which occur primarily in the AB cell as it starts to divide . Midbody internalization seems to be due to the interaction between a coat of actin that forms on the midbody site on the P1 side of the cell – cell interface and the P1 mitotic spindle ( Singh and Pohl , 2014 ) . Singh and Pohl proposed a model ( Fig . 5 ) where this interaction would mediate : ( 1 ) the tethering of the P1 spindle to the midbody and lead to Fig . 5 Model for the asymmetric midbody localization and inheritance in C . elegans early embryo . ( A ) During the transition from the two - cell to the four - cell stage of the C . elegans embryo , the midbody of the first embryonic division moves ventrally concom - itantly with rotational flows of cortical myosin in the AB cell , which are polarized orthog - onally to the anterior - posterior axis . ( B ) Actin filaments transiently coat the membrane overlaying the midbody remnant and tethers astral microtubules of the mitotic spindle of the P1 cell contributing to its orientation . ( C ) The midbody remnant is released and inherited by the EMS cell . 320 C . Thieleke - Matos et al . spindle skewing during cortical flow - mediated midbody displacement ( spin - dle skewing is essential for dorsoventral patterning of the embryo , see more in Section 4 . 2 ) and ( 2 ) the release of the midbody into the P1 cell . Anterior – posterior polarity limits the formation of the actin coat to the P1 cell as dis - ruption of anterior polarity in par - 6 mutants induces actin coat formation in both sides of the midbody remnant , rotation of both AB and P1 spindles and splitting of the midbody between the two cells . Conversely , the disruption of posterior polarity using par - 2 mutants blocks actin coat formation alto - gether and prevents midbody internalization . The nature of the actin accu - mulation at the midbody requires further characterization as it is unclear how it is promoted and whether the timing of cap formation and disassembly match that of the establishment of the P1 spindle and its orientation . Mid - body release also requires the ESCRT - III component VPS - 32 . 1 and the apoptotic cell corpse engulfment genes CED - 1 and CED - 2 ( Fig . 5C ; Ou et al . , 2014 ; Singh and Pohl , 2014 ) . Asymmetric midbody inheritance has also been directly connected with the centrosome of the dividing cell . A functional centrosome is necessary for the stereotypical midbody inheritance in Drosophila male and fGSC ( Salzmann et al . , 2014 ; Yamashita et al . , 2007 ) . Accordingly , if the function of the centrosome is disrupted using dsas - 4 mutants that lack centrioles , mid - body inheritance is randomized ( Salzmann et al . , 2014 ) . The centrosomes present at the opposite poles of the mitotic spindle are intrinsically different as each contains a pair of centrioles of different age and molecular compo - sition ( Reina and Gonzalez , 2014 ) . Importantly , midbody inheritance is coupled with the daughter ( younger ) centrosome , regardless of its segrega - tion to the differentiated gonioblast in the male GSC division or to the stem cell in the female GSC division ( Salzmann et al . , 2014 ) . In contrast , the asymmetric inheritance of the midbody is biased toward cells that retain the mother centrosome in mammalian cells , including pluripotent stem cells and cancer stem cells ( Kuo et al . , 2011 ) . Although the molecular mechanism that links centrosome age to midbody inheritance is unknown , it is tempting to speculate that the asymmetries in microtubule stability observed between mother and daughter centrosomes ( Gasic et al . , 2015 ) may account for the distinct association with the midbody and ultimately to its asymmetric inher - itance . However , other mechanisms must also govern this process as the cor - relation between centrosome age and midbody inheritance seems to be dependent on the cellular context . There is evidence for other mechanisms determining midbody inheri - tance beside asymmetric organization of the actomyosin cytoskeleton and 321 Asymmetric Cytokinesis in Animal Cells the connection to centrosomes or astral microtubules . For instance , anillin was shown to be critical for the asymmetric inheritance of the midbody by the retinal ganglion cell during neurogenic divisions in Zebrafish neuro - epithelium ( Paolini et al . , 2015 ) . Current knowledge on asymmetric mid - body inheritance is however still very limited and requires further efforts to understand how differences between the two daughter cells signal into the biochemical and mechanical pathways controlling abscission . 4 . POLARIZED CYTOKINESIS : DEFINING CELLULAR IDENTITY AND SHAPE Initially viewed as cell division junk , the midbody has emerged as a critical signaling hub . In this sense , polarized or unilateral cytokinesis can ultimately be considered as a mechanism to position the midbody at a spe - cific place or to induce its asymmetric inheritance . The position of the mid - body either apically in epithelial cells or ventrally during C . elegans axis formation or its asymmetric retention or release have been proposed to coordinate the architecture of the dividing cells , axis specification , and cell fate determination , respectively . These recent findings will be outlined later . 4 . 1 Importance of Midbody in Cell - Fate Determination It is well established that the midbody can persist for long periods after cell division . Midbody persistence in cells may relate to its importance as a sig - naling platform . Moreover , the asymmetric inheritance of the midbody to one of the daughter cells , its release into the extracellular space , degradation , or active retention contribute to determine whether cells maintain their undifferentiated state or initiate a differentiation program after division . Accordingly , the accumulation of midbody remnants seems to correlate with stem cell identity in multiple mouse and human tissues ( Kuo et al . , 2011 ) . In vitro , the number of midbody remnants decreases as human embryonic stem cells ( hESCs ) differentiate into fibroblast - like cells , whereas it increases when these cells are reprogrammed into pluripotent stem cells ( dH1f - iPS ) ( Kuo et al . , 2011 ) . As mentioned above , the midbody is also asymmetrically inherited by the stem cell during fGSC division in Drosophila ( Salzmann et al . , 2014 ) . These results could indicate that midbody inheri - tance at the end of cell division is part of a pathway controlling stemness but this idea is challenged by other findings . For instance , randomization of midbody inheritance via centrosome disruption did not elicit cell fate 322 C . Thieleke - Matos et al . defects in the Drosophila germline ( Stevens et al . , 2007 ; Yamashita et al . , 2003 ) . Furthermore , the midbody is inherited by the gonialbasts , the differ - entiating cells in the Drosophila male germline ( Salzmann et al . , 2014 ) . Although midbody inheritance does not necessarily determine stem cell fate , midbody remnant removal could be a requisite for differentiation . Midbody remnants are released from the differentiating gonialblasts into the neighbor - ing somatic cells ( Salzmann et al . , 2014 ) , whereas mammalian stem cells accumulate midbody remnants throughout subsequent divisions by block - ing their degradation by autophagy ( Kuo et al . , 2011 ) . Other examples that couple midbody removal to cell differentiation have been observed in stem cell types ( NS - 5 and HSCs ) and tumor - derived cell lines where increased midbody release occurs in response to differentiating agents ( Ettinger et al . , 2011 ) . Whether released midbodies simply contribute to the elimina - tion of stem cell fate determinants or if they also serve as mediators of long - distance communication between cells remains unknown . The ability of released midbodies to move along the cell surface and their engulfment by nonsister cells via an actin - dependent phagocytosis - like mechanism may provide an efficient mechanism for long range signaling ( Crowell et al . , 2014 ) . In addition to studies suggesting that differentiation can be promoted by midbody removal , the midbody can also directly act as a platform to con - trol the distribution of differentiation factors . For instance , asymmetric inheritance of midbody remnants favors differentiation during neurogenic asymmetric cell division in the Zebrafish retina ( Paolini et al . , 2015 ) . Fur - thermore , during the early differentiation of Drosophila neurons , the polar - ization of the first neurite occurs at the site of the midbody during cytokinesis of the precursor cell , through the accumulation of two midbody components , Rho1 and Aurora - A . These initiate a molecular cascade that induces membrane deformation and neurite outgrowth ( Pollarolo et al . , 2011 ) . Studies using Drosophila sensory organ precursor cells also highlighted that the asymmetric distribution of factors controlling Notch signaling into the two daughter cells ( pIIa and pIIb ) is only generated at the later stages of cytokinesis , further revealing the importance of synchronizing cytokinesis with cell differentiation ( Couturier et al . , 2012 ; Derivery et al . , 2015 ) . Proteomic and lipidomic analysis of isolated midbodies revealed a com - plex mixture of lipids and hundreds of proteins , some of which are involved in multiple signaling pathways and may be important to control the cellular program ( Atilla - Gokcumen et al . , 2014 ; Skop et al . , 2004 ) . Proteins iden - tified at the midbody whose asymmetric inheritance would be relevant 323 Asymmetric Cytokinesis in Animal Cells for cell fate determination , include the core binding protein β ( CBF β ) , which belongs to a family of transcription factors ( Lopez - Camacho et al . , 2014 ) , components of the Wnt signaling pathway , such as the Frizzled 2 , β - Catenin , and Dishevelled ( Fumoto et al . , 2012 ; Habib et al . , 2013 ; Kaplan et al . , 2004 ) ; proteins involved in chemokine receptor signaling as phospholipase C and heterotrimeric Gi α ( Cho and Kehrl , 2007 ; Naito et al . , 2006 ) ; and the components of the MAP kinase signaling pathway , MEK1 / 2 and ERK1 / 2 ( Kasahara et al . , 2007 ; Willard and Crouch , 2001 ) . Furthermore , the prominin - 1 ( CD133 , prom1 ) stem cell marker is another promising candidate to link midbody inheritance with cell fate . It is enriched in midbodies that are released into the extracellular neural tube to trigger differentiation of neuroepithelial cells during development of the vertebrate nervous system ( Dubreuil et al . , 2007 ; Marzesco et al . , 2005 ) . Midbody release involves budding of the apical membrane of neur - oepithelial cells leading to loss of prom1 coupled with the reduction in the size of the apical domain . Midbody release therefore can also influence the switch from symmetric self - renewing to asymmetric neurogenic divi - sions by reducing components of the apical domain of each daughter cell asymmetrically ( Dubreuil et al . , 2007 ; Kosodo et al . , 2004 ; Marzesco et al . , 2005 ) . Altogether , these studies highlight the importance of the midbody as a source of signaling factors controlling cell fate . However , they also challenge the idea that the midbody generally harbors determinants toward stem cell maintenance or differentiation , as receiving and retaining midbody rem - nants produce distinct effects depending on cell type , tissue , and species . How the midbody is selectively retained and targeted to autophagy or released in specific cell types remains elusive . Moreover , identifying the molecules regulating proliferation and differentiation that are inherited together with the midbody is an exciting avenue to understand the role of asymmetric midbody inheritance . 4 . 2 Axis Specification Internal or external asymmetric cues induce the establishment of embryonic axes , setting the development of the overall organism body plan . It has long been documented that asymmetric cytokinesis during the first division of both Cnetophore and Cnidaria embryos plays a critical role in axis specification ( Freeman , 1977 , 1981 ) . In these organisms , the unilateral furrow ingression 324 C . Thieleke - Matos et al . is initiated in the vicinity of the polar body and establishes the oral pole of the embryo . The molecular factors linking the cytokinesis machinery and axis determination remain unknown , but classic embryo centrifugation experi - ments that induced unilateral cleavage away from the polar body directly demonstrated that the site of the first cleavage sets the oral - aboral axis ( Freeman , 1977 ) . As mentioned previously , the midbody of the first embryonic division in C . elegans gets displaced along the AB - P1 cell interface due to myosin cor - tical flows . Concomitantly , a transient increase of actin at the site of the mid - body in the P1 cell is thought to tether astral microtubules and skew the P1 mitotic spindle as the midbody is displaced ( see Section 3 . 3 ) . Midbody dis - placement and consequent P1 spindle skewing define the dorsoventral axis of the embryo ( Singh and Pohl , 2014 ) . Indeed , genetic interference with the stereotyped midbody localization or laser ablation of the midbody prevents spindle skewing and perturbs dorsoventral axis formation ( Singh and Pohl , 2014 ) . The asymmetrically localized midbody remnant is eventually inter - nalized by the EMS cell at the four - cell stage . This internalization is however dispensable for dorsoventral axis formation as animals mutant for the apopto - tic cell corpse engulfment genes ced - 1 and ced - 2 fail to internalize the mid - body and do not present any developmental defects ( Ou et al . , 2014 ) . These results suggest that in this case , the midbody does not work as an essential signaling platform that controls cell fate but it contributes to dorsoventral axis specification prior to its internalization , by directing the correct orien - tation of the P1 spindle ( Singh and Pohl , 2014 ; Fig . 5 ) . Interestingly , in the entomopathogenic nematode Romanomermis cul - icivorax , the midbody from the first embryonic division also maintains its association with the cortex during subsequent divisions and is distributed in a stereotypical manner ( Schulze and Schierenberg , 2008 ) . Despite dis - playing a pattern of early embryonic divisions that is dramatically different from that of C . elegans , R . culicivorax embryos also mobilize the midbody remnants of the first division onto a ventral position . Similar to what has been described in C . elegans , irradiation of the midbody also affects spindle orientation and positioning during the transition from the two - cell to four - cell stage . Thus , mediating the anchoring of astral microtubules could be a conserved feature controlling the development of these two phylogeneti - cally distant nematodes . Whether the localization of midbody remnants from embryonic division’s influences pattern formation during development in more complex organisms remains to be addressed . 325 Asymmetric Cytokinesis in Animal Cells 4 . 3 Midbody as Spatial Determinant of Epithelial Architecture Epithelial cells must maintain tissue cohesiveness and organize a new polar - ized interface at the end of cytokinesis . Recent studies in the Drosophila notum and follicular epithelium provided key insights into the role of the midbody as a platform that defines how and where new cell junctions are formed ( Herszterg et al . , 2013 ; Morais - de - Sa and Sunkel , 2013 ) . These studies describe a wave of actin polymerization that occurs around the mid - body and is dependent on Rac and the Arp - 2 / 3 complex ( Fig . 6A ) . The apical position of the midbody acts as a spatial cue for actin polymerization as midbody mispositioning , via mitotic spindle misorientation ( Herszterg et al . , 2013 ) or disruption / mislocalization of AJ components ( Morais - de - Sa and Sunkel , 2013 ) , leads to the corresponding displacement of actin polymerization . Actin accumulation around the midbody may serve multiple purposes in the regulation of epithelial architecture . In the Drosophila notum , it ensures the formation of the interface between the two daughter cells , pro - moting the withdrawal of the membranes of neighboring cells that are inter - posed between the new daughter cells ( Herszterg et al . , 2013 ) . Consistently , the wave of actin polymerization occurs simultaneously with the removal of the neighboring cell membrane . Loss of rac or arp3 activities leads to smaller interfaces and can fully block the formation of new AJs between daughter cells , resulting in a distinct topological arrangement of the tissue ( Herszterg et al . , 2013 ) . The formation of a new AJ interface also requires the assembly of new Cadherin – Catenin complexes . Cadherin - based adhe - sion is promoted by the formation of oligomeric cadherin clusters , whose turnover and supra - molecular organization are dependent on the association with actin filaments ( Engl et al . , 2014 ; Hong et al . , 2013 ; Truong Quang et al . , 2013 ; Wu et al . , 2015 ) . Thus , actin polymerization around the mid - body may also promote the assembly of AJs at the interface between new daughter cells . Arp - 2 / 3 is indeed required to induce cell surface extension , fostering the efficient assembly of new adhesions between contacting cells in culture ( Verma et al . , 2004 ; Wu et al . , 2015 ) . Nevertheless , how nucleation of branched actin filaments is coordinated with the assembly of new E - Cadherin complexes at the daughter cell interface remains unknown . Basal mispositioning of the midbody and its associated branched actin polymerization results in epithelial invaginations in the follicular epithelium , which likely develop by positioning components that normally localize to the apical region and adhesion complexes at the site of the mispositioned 326 C . Thieleke - Matos et al . Fig . 6 The midbody as a spatial determinant for the formation of new cell – cell contacts and apical polarization . ( A ) The scheme shows an apical cross section of Drosophila epi - thelia ( enlarged from the region on the right ) . The apically localized midbody ( blue circle ) orients a wave of Rac and Arp - 2 / 3 - dependent actin polymerization ( blue arrows ) , which promotes the withdrawal of the membranes of neighboring cells ( red ) and allows the assembly of an adherens junction interface ( yellow rectangles ) between daughter cells . ( B ) Midbody - oriented formation of the apical lumen in mammalian 3D cultures . During the first cell division , the midbody serves as a spatial cue for the formation of the apical initiation site ( AMIS , blue rectangles ) . Stable midbody - associated microtubules guide the transport of Rab11 - positive endosomes ( green circles ) , powered by the interaction between the molecular motor kinesin - 2 and FIP5 . These endosomes carry specific cargo , such as the apical proteins Podocalyxin ( PODXL ) and Crumbs3a , and are then docked at the cleavage site in a mechanism dependent on PODXL binding to GTP - bound Rab35 . The delivery of these proteins also relies on Rab8 / Rab11 - dependent exocytosis , which mediates the initial recruitment of Par3 to the AMIS , where it participates on an ampli - fication loop with aPKC , Par - 6 and the Cdc42 GTPase to form the apical domain . Similar mechanisms may couple the apical - directed furrow ingression and midbody position - ing with the expansion of the apical lumen during subsequent divisions . 327 Asymmetric Cytokinesis in Animal Cells midbody ( Morais - de - Sa and Sunkel , 2013 ) . However , how the formation of the new apical interface is directed by the midbody and whether there is a connection to actin polymerization remains unknown . The multi - PDZ domain protein Par - 3 ( Baz in Drosophila ) , which is required to establish the apical domain and define the position of the apicolateral junction in both vertebrate and invertebrate cells ( Section 2 . 4 ) may be the central piece of this enigma . During Drosophila embryonic cellularization , an apical actin net - work is the primary cue for Baz localization at the apical - lateral border , where it mediates the recruitment of Cadherin – Catenin complexes thereby eliciting AJ formation ( Harris and Peifer , 2004 , 2005 ; McGill et al . , 2009 ) . Likewise , Par - 3 specifically localizes to F - actin rich domains , which are essential for cell polarization in the context of endothelial cell adhesion ( Galvagni et al . , 2012 ) . These studies establish a link between F - actin - and Par - 3 - mediated polarizations and add to multiple studies that identify Par - 3 / Baz as the connection between cytokinesis and polarization . Firstly , Par - 3 accumulation at the cleavage furrow promotes apical lumen formation during neural tube formation in Zebrafish ( Buckley et al . , 2013 ; Tawk et al . , 2007 ) . Second , clustering of Baz / Par - 3 and Cadherin – Catenin complexes immediately after the division of Drosophila sensory neuron precursors marks the place where the first membrane deformation will initiate neuronal polar - ization ( Pollarolo et al . , 2011 ) . Finally , in rat hepatocytes , Par - 3 relocates from midbody - associated microtubules to the plasma membrane prior to abscission and accumulation of the TJ protein ZO - 1 , preceding de novo formation of the apical lumen ( Wang et al . , 2014 ) . Although polarization during mitotic exit seems to rely on recruitment of Par - 3 / Baz to the plasma membrane in several contexts , how Par - 3 / Baz is delivered is not fully understood . Interestingly , phosphatidylinositol ( 4 , 5 ) - bisphosphate ( PIP2 ) strongly accumulates at the midbody ( Ben El Kadhi et al . , 2011 ; Emoto et al . , 2005 ; Field et al . , 2005 ) and is also a key determinant of the apical domain , recruiting Par - 3 and other polarity proteins to the plasma membrane ( Bailey and Prehoda , 2015 ; Claret et al . , 2014 ; Field et al . , 2005 ; Horikoshi et al . , 2011 ; Krahn et al . , 2010b ; Martin - Belmonte et al . , 2007 ) . Studies in mammalian epithelial cultured cells have shown that the mid - body can also serve as a platform to guide apical determinants and junction components to the plasma membrane by orchestrating the recruitment of specialized trafficking machinery ( Fig . 6B ) . 3D cultured cysts of MDCK and human colorectal cells ( Caco - 2 ) form an apical lumen surrounded by a layer of polarized cells . The apical lumen is positioned during cytokinesis 328 C . Thieleke - Matos et al . of a single epithelial cell when the midbody guides the formation of the api - cal membrane initiation site ( AMIS ) , by mediating selective transport in Rab11 - positive endosomes of apical proteins , such as Podocalyxin ( PODXL , also known as glycoprotein 35 ) and Crumbs3a ( Crb3a ) from the outer surface to the AMIS ( Hobdy - Henderson et al . , 2003 ; Schluter et al . , 2009 ) . Stable microtubules associated with the midbody have critical relevance for the directed transport of intracellular vesicles , which is depen - dent on the interaction between the microtubule - binding motor kinesin - 2 and FIP5 , a Rab11 interacting protein ( Li et al . , 2014a ) . Formation of these apical endocytic carriers is controlled via a phospho - regulated interaction between FIP5 and Sorting Nexin 18 , which temporally restricts the trans - port of FIP5 - endosomes along the midbody microtubules to telophase ( Li et al . , 2014a , b ; Willenborg et al . , 2011 ) . Fusion of apical proteins with the plasma membrane at the midbody site is then promoted by a combina - tion of mechanisms that tether vesicles transporting apical determinants , recently shown to require binding of GTP - Rab35 to the cytoplasmic tail of PODXL ( Klinkert et al . , 2016 ) . Furthermore , establishment of the apical domain is dependent on Rab8 / Rab11a - directed exocytosis to target Par - 3 to the AMIS , where Par - 3 directs further apical trafficking , participating on an amplification loop with Cdc42 GTPase and aPKC ( Bryant et al . , 2010 ; Fig . 6B ) . During subsequent epithelial divisions , cleavage furrow ingression always occurs toward the apical surface , positioning the midbody apically , where it may contribute to lumen expansion and apical polarization ( Jaffe et al . , 2008 ; Reinsch and Karsenti , 1994 ; Wang et al . , 2014 ) . The precise contribution of the midbody to apical polarization in vivo remains to be shown , but a recent study that addressed TJ biogenesis revealed that two new tricellular TJs are formed in either side of the midbody immediately after cytokinesis in Xenopus embryos ( Higashi et al . , 2016 ) . In addition , another recent study has shown the importance of the midbody to form a specialized apical structure—the primary cilium ( Bernabe - Rubio et al . , 2016 ) —a critical signaling center that projects outward at the surface of the apical membrane . In MDCK cells , the midbody remnant carries com - ponents involved in ciliogenesis ( intraflagellar transport proteins , Rab8 , and exocyst subunits ) from a peripheral to a central position along the apical sur - face until it contacts the centrosome , where primary cilium formation begins ( Bernabe - Rubio et al . , 2016 ) . Thus , the coordination between the polarity and cytokinesis machinery is relevant to set polarity de novo , and is also important to propagate epithelial organization during proliferation via the spatial localization of the midbody on the apical side of epithelia . 329 Asymmetric Cytokinesis in Animal Cells 5 . CONCLUDING REMARKS Asymmetric cleavage furrow ingression and the regulation of the posi - tion of the midbody remnants are emerging as widespread events to couple cell division with specific developmental purposes . We are just starting to unravel the molecular mechanisms underlying these events , which depend both on intrinsic mechanisms that polarize the cytokinetic machinery and on the spatial distribution of extrinsic cues , as documented in multicellular tis - sues . In epithelia , intercellular junctions assume particular importance in cytokinesis both during initial generation of asymmetric ring constriction and also as part of the coordination with neighboring cells to ensure the con - tinued integrity of the tissue . The exact mechanical impact of ring constric - tion on the molecular organization of cell – cell junctions , and how it is transduced to neighboring cells is not fully understood and seems to be dependent on the developmental context . Although it is now evident that much of what has been reported in specific in vivo models should not be generalized , understanding how differences in the specialized organization of each tissue impacts cytokinesis will enable the identification of key basic principles . To further decipher the interplay between cytokinesis and the organization of tissue architecture and polarity , researchers will benefit from the continuous revolution on microscopy techniques and the power of new optogenetic tools ( Sydor et al . , 2015 ; Tischer and Weiner , 2014 ) to revers - ibly interfere with protein activity with the necessary temporal and spatial control . Moreover , the development of multiple Foster resonance energy transfer ( FRET ) - based sensors of force - dependent conformational changes of junctional proteins will help to understand how the force generated by ring constriction could be sensed by cell - cell junctions and transduced to neighboring cells . The complexity of mechanisms underlying the localization , inheritance , and function of the midbody is just starting to be described and appears to be highly dependent on the cell type , microenvironment , and developmental context . Distinct midbody fates have been linked to the control of cell fate and tissue organization in different cell types , but the signaling effectors that associate with the midbody in a cell type - specific manner are mostly unknown . The concentration of several lipid species is dramatically altered during cytokinesis and may impact on the mechanical and signaling prop - erties of the plasma membrane ( Arai et al . , 2015 ; Atilla - Gokcumen et al . , 2014 ; Makino et al . , 2015 ) . Thus , understanding how particular lipids locally 330 C . Thieleke - Matos et al . accumulate at the midbody and work at the interface between cytokinesis , polarity , and cell fate machineries will be important future goals . Finally , it is increasingly clear that the midbody acts as an essential cue to spatially couple cell division with apicobasal organization . Recent studies have started to elu - cidate the molecular basis underlying the interactions between midbody - associated microtubules , Rab - GTPases , motor proteins , and the exocyst to coordinate the localization of polarity proteins with cytokinesis comple - tion . Although the importance of cell adhesion and polarity protein traffick - ing during interphase is well established ( Apodaca et al . , 2012 ; Eaton and Martin - Belmonte , 2014 ) , direct evidence for the role of midbody - directed vesicle trafficking in epithelial polarization is still lacking in vivo . In conclu - sion , the midbody can no longer be viewed as a simple by - product of cell division since its role in controlling the organization and fate of daughter cells has now been described in a wide range of organisms and biological settings . Over the next years , it will be important to further understand the mechanisms underlying the asymmetries generated during cytokinesis , and the critical importance of these events in development and disease . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by grants from FCT ( Fundac ¸ a˜o para a Ci ^ encia e a Tecnologia ) under projects ( PTDC / BIA - BCM / 120132 / 2010 ) and ( PTDC / BEX - BCM / 0432 / 2014 ) to E . M . and from the European Research Council ( ERC ) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme to A . X . C . ( grant agreement 640553 - ACTOMYO ) . A . X . C . and E . M . have FCT Investigator positions funded by FCT and cofunded by ESF through POPH Type 4 . 2—Promotion of Scientific Employment . REFERENCES Adam , J . C . , Pringle , J . R . , Peifer , M . , 2000 . Evidence for functional differentiation among Drosophila septins in cytokinesis and cellularization . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 3123 – 3135 . Ageta - Ishihara , N . , Miyata , T . , Ohshima , C . , Watanabe , M . , Sato , Y . , Hamamura , Y . , Higashiyama , T . , Mazitschek , R . , Bito , H . , Kinoshita , M . , 2013 . Septins promote den - drite and axon development by negatively regulating microtubule stability via HDAC6 - mediated deacetylation . Nat . Commun . 4 , 2532 . Agromayor , M . , Carlton , J . G . , Phelan , J . P . , Matthews , D . R . , Carlin , L . M . , Ameer - Beg , S . , Bowers , K . , Martin - Serrano , J . , 2009 . Essential role of hIST1 in cytokinesis . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 , 1374 – 1387 . Aigouy , B . , Farhadifar , R . , Staple , D . B . , Sagner , A . , Roper , J . C . , Julicher , F . , Eaton , S . , 2010 . Cell flow reorients the axis of planar polarity in the wing epithelium of Drosophila . Cell 142 , 773 – 786 . Alatortsev , V . E . , Kramerova , I . A . , Frolov , M . V . , Lavrov , S . A . , Westphal , E . D . , 1997 . Vin - culin gene is non - essential in Drosophila melanogaster . FEBS Lett . 413 , 197 – 201 . Amano , M . , Ito , M . , Kimura , K . , Fukata , Y . , Chihara , K . , Nakano , T . , Matsuura , Y . , Kaibuchi , K . , 1996 . Phosphorylation and activation of myosin by Rho - associated kinase ( Rho - kinase ) . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 20246 – 20249 . 331 Asymmetric Cytokinesis in Animal Cells Apodaca , G . , Gallo , L . I . , Bryant , D . M . , 2012 . Role of membrane traffic in the generation of epithelial cell asymmetry . Nat . Cell Biol . 14 , 1235 – 1243 . Arai , Y . , Sampaio , J . L . , Wilsch - Brauninger , M . , Ettinger , A . W . , Haffner , C . , Huttner , W . B . , 2015 . Lipidome of midbody released from neural stem and progenitor cells during mam - malian cortical neurogenesis . Front . Cell . Neurosci . 9 , 325 . Atilla - Gokcumen , G . E . , Muro , E . , Relat - Goberna , J . , Sasse , S . , Bedigian , A . , Coughlin , M . L . , Garcia - Manyes , S . , Eggert , U . S . , 2014 . Dividing cells regulate their lipid composition and localization . Cell 156 , 428 – 439 . Audhya , A . , Hyndman , F . , McLeod , I . X . , Maddox , A . S . , Yates 3rd , J . R . , Desai , A . , Oegema , K . , 2005 . A complex containing the Sm protein CAR - 1 and the RNA helicase CGH - 1 is required for embryonic cytokinesis in Caenorhabditis elegans . J . Cell Biol . 171 , 267 – 279 . Aydogan , V . , Lenard , A . , Denes , A . S . , Sauteur , L . , Belting , H . G . , Affolter , M . , 2015 . Endo - thelial cell division in angiogenic sprouts of differing cellular architecture . Biol . Open 4 , 1259 – 1269 . Baena - Lopez , L . A . , Baonza , A . , Garcia - Bellido , A . , 2005 . The orientation of cell divisions determines the shape of Drosophila organs . Curr . Biol . 15 , 1640 – 1644 . Bailey , M . J . , Prehoda , K . E . , 2015 . Establishment of Par - polarized cortical domains via pho - sphoregulated membrane motifs . Dev . Cell 35 , 199 – 210 . Baker , J . , Garrod , D . , 1993 . Epithelial cells retain junctions during mitosis . J . Cell Sci . 104 ( Pt . 2 ) , 415 – 425 . Barry , A . K . , Tabdili , H . , Muhamed , I . , Wu , J . , Shashikanth , N . , Gomez , G . A . , Yap , A . S . , Gottardi , C . J . , de Rooij , J . , Wang , N . , Leckband , D . E . , 2014 . alpha - catenin cytomechanics—role in cadherin - dependent adhesion and mechanotransduction . J . Cell Sci . 127 , 1779 – 1791 . Basant , A . , Lekomtsev , S . , Tse , Y . C . , Zhang , D . , Longhini , K . M . , Petronczki , M . , Glotzer , M . , 2015 . Aurora B kinase promotes cytokinesis by inducing centralspindlin oligomers that associate with the plasma membrane . Dev . Cell 33 , 204 – 215 . Bastos , R . N . , Penate , X . , Bates , M . , Hammond , D . , Barr , F . A . , 2012 . CYK4 inhibits Rac1 - dependent PAK1 and ARHGEF7 effector pathways during cytokinesis . J . Cell Biol . 198 , 865 – 880 . Bell , G . P . , Fletcher , G . C . , Brain , R . , Thompson , B . J . , 2015 . Aurora kinases phosphorylate Lgl to induce mitotic spindle orientation in Drosophila epithelia . Curr . Biol . 25 , 61 – 68 . Bement , W . M . , Benink , H . A . , von Dassow , G . , 2005 . A microtubule - dependent zone of active RhoA during cleavage plane specification . J . Cell Biol . 170 , 91 – 101 . Ben El Kadhi , K . , Roubinet , C . , Solinet , S . , Emery , G . , Carreno , S . , 2011 . The inositol 5 - phosphatase dOCRL controls PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 homeostasis and is necessary for cytokinesis . Curr . Biol . 21 , 1074 – 1079 . Benton , R . , St Johnston , D . , 2003 . Drosophila PAR - 1 and 14 - 3 - 3 inhibit Bazooka / PAR - 3 to establish complementary cortical domains in polarized cells . Cell 115 , 691 – 704 . Bergstralh , D . T . , Lovegrove , H . E . , St Johnston , D . , 2013 . Discs large links spindle orienta - tion to apical - basal polarity in Drosophila epithelia . Curr . Biol . 23 , 1707 – 1712 . Bernabe - Rubio , M . , Andres , G . , Casares - Arias , J . , Fernandez - Barrera , J . , Rangel , L . , Reglero - Real , N . , Gershlick , D . C . , Fernandez , J . J . , Millan , J . , Correas , I . , Miguez , D . G . , Alonso , M . A . , 2016 . Novel role for the midbody in primary ciliogenesis by polarized epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 214 , 259 – 273 . Blanchoin , L . , Boujemaa - Paterski , R . , Sykes , C . C . , Plastino , J . , 2014 . Actin dynamics , archi - tecture , and mechanics in cell motility . Physiol . Rev . 94 , 235 – 263 . Borghi , N . , Sorokina , M . , Shcherbakova , O . G . , Weis , W . I . , Pruitt , B . L . , Nelson , W . J . , Dunn , A . R . , 2012 . E - cadherin is under constitutive actomyosin - generated tension that is increased at cell - cell contacts upon externally applied stretch . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 109 , 12568 – 12573 . 332 C . Thieleke - Matos et al . Bourdages , K . G . , Lacroix , B . , Dorn , J . F . , Descovich , C . P . , Maddox , A . S . , 2014 . Quantita - tive analysis of cytokinesis In Situ during C . elegans postembryonic development . PLoS One 9 , e110689 . Bridges , A . A . , Jentzsch , M . S . , Oakes , P . W . , Occhipinti , P . , Gladfelter , A . S . , 2016 . Micron - scale plasma membrane curvature is recognized by the septin cytoskeleton . J . Cell Biol . 213 , 23 – 32 . Bryant , D . M . , Datta , A . , Rodriguez - Fraticelli , A . E . , Peranen , J . , Martin - Belmonte , F . , Mostov , K . E . , 2010 . A molecular network for de novo generation of the apical surface and lumen . Nat . Cell Biol . 12 , 1035 – 1045 . Buckley , C . E . , Ren , X . , Ward , L . C . , Girdler , G . C . , Araya , C . , Green , M . J . , Clark , B . S . , Link , B . A . , Clarke , J . D . , 2013 . Mirror - symmetric microtubule assembly and cell inter - actions drive lumen formation in the zebrafish neural rod . Embo J . 32 , 30 – 44 . Buckley , C . D . , Tan , J . , Anderson , K . L . , Hanein , D . , Volkmann , N . , Weis , W . I . , Nelson , W . J . , Dunn , A . R . , 2014 . Cell adhesion . The minimal cadherin - catenin com - plex binds to actin filaments under force . Science 346 , 1254211 . Burkard , M . E . , Randall , C . L . , Larochelle , S . P . , Zhang , C . , Shokat , K . M . , Fisher , R . P . , Jallepalli , P . V . , 2007 . Chemical genetics reveals the requirement for Polo - like kinase 1 activity in positioning RhoA and triggering cytokinesis in human cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 104 , 4383 – 4388 . Burkard , M . E . , Maciejowski , J . , Rodriguez - Bravo , V . N . , Repka , M . , Lowery , D . M . , Clauser , K . R . , Zhang , C . , Shokat , K . M . , Carr , S . A . , Yaffe , M . B . , Jallepalli , P . V . , 2009 . Plk1 self - organization and priming phosphorylation of HsCYK - 4 at the spindle midzone regulate the onset of division in human cells . PLoS Biol . 7 , e1000111 . Byers , B . , Abramson , D . H . , 1968 . Cytokinesis in HeLa : post - telophase delay and microtubule - associated motility . Protoplasma 66 , 413 – 435 . Byers , B . , Goetsch , L . , 1976 . A highly ordered ring of membrane - associated filaments in bud - ding yeast . J . Cell Biol . 69 , 717 – 721 . Canman , J . C . , Lewellyn , L . , Laband , K . , Smerdon , S . J . , Desai , A . , Bowerman , B . , Oegema , K . , 2008 . Inhibition of Rac by the GAP activity of centralspindlin is essential for cytokinesis . Science 322 , 1543 – 1546 . Carvalho , C . A . , Moreira , S . , Ventura , G . , Sunkel , C . E . , Morais - de - Sa , E . , 2015 . Aurora a triggers Lgl cortical release during symmetric division to control planar spindle orienta - tion . Curr . Biol . 25 , 53 – 60 . Castrillon , D . H . , Wasserman , S . A . , 1994 . Diaphanous is required for cytokinesis in Drosoph - ila and shares domains of similarity with the products of the limb deformity gene . Development 120 , 3367 – 3377 . Caudron , F . , Barral , Y . , 2009 . Septins and the lateral compartmentalization of eukaryotic membranes . Dev . Cell 16 , 493 – 506 . Chen , Q . , Courtemanche , N . , Pollard , T . D . , 2015 . Aip1 promotes actin filament severing by cofilin and regulates constriction of the cytokinetic contractile ring . J . Biol . Chem . 290 , 2289 – 2300 . Cho , H . , Kehrl , J . H . , 2007 . Localization of Gi alpha proteins in the centrosomes and at the midbody : implication for their role in cell division . J . Cell Biol . 178 , 245 – 255 . Christ , L . , Wenzel , E . M . , Liestol , K . , Raiborg , C . , Campsteijn , C . , Stenmark , H . , 2016 . ALIX and ESCRT - I / II function as parallel ESCRT - III recruiters in cytokinetic abscis - sion . J . Cell Biol . 212 , 499 – 513 . Claret , S . , Jouette , J . , Benoit , B . , Legent , K . , Guichet , A . , 2014 . PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 produced by the PI4P5K SKTL controls apical size by tethering PAR - 3 in Drosophila epithelial cells . Curr . Biol . 24 , 1071 – 1079 . Coopman , P . , Djiane , A . , 2016 . Adherens junction and E - Cadherin complex regulation by epithelial polarity . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 73 , 3535 – 3553 . 333 Asymmetric Cytokinesis in Animal Cells Couturier , L . , Vodovar , N . , Schweisguth , F . , 2012 . Endocytosis by Numb breaks Notch symmetry at cytokinesis . Nat . Cell Biol . 14 , 131 – 139 . Crowell , E . F . , Gaffuri , A . L . , Gayraud - Morel , B . , Tajbakhsh , S . , Echard , A . , 2014 . Engulf - ment of the midbody remnant after cytokinesis in mammalian cells . J . Cell Sci . 127 , 3840 – 3851 . Das , T . , Payer , B . , Cayouette , M . , Harris , W . A . , 2003 . In vivo time - lapse imaging of cell divisions during neurogenesis in the developing zebrafish retina . Neuron 37 , 597 – 609 . Dassow , G . v . , Verbrugghe , K . J . C . , Miller , A . L . , Sider , J . R . , Bement , W . M . , 2009 . Action at a distance during cytokinesis . J . Cell Biol . 187 , 831 – 845 . D’Avino , P . P . , Takeda , T . , Capalbo , L . , Zhang , W . , Lilley , K . S . , Laue , E . D . , Glover , D . M . , 2008 . Interaction between anillin and RacGAP50C connects the actomyosin contractile ring with spindle microtubules at the cell division site . J . Cell Sci . 121 , 1151 – 1158 . D’Avino , P . P . , Giansanti , M . G . , Petronczki , M . , 2015 . Cytokinesis in animal cells . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 7 , a015834 . De Lozanne , A . , Spudich , J . A . , 1987 . Disruption of the Dictyostelium myosin heavy chain gene by homologous recombination . Science ( New York , N . Y . ) 236 , 1086 – 1091 . Denes , A . S . , Kanca , O . , Affolter , M . , 2015 . A cellular process that includes asymmetric cyto - kinesis remodels the dorsal tracheal branches in Drosophila larvae . Development 142 , 1794 – 1805 . Derivery , E . , Seum , C . , Daeden , A . , Loubery , S . , Holtzer , L . , Julicher , F . , Gonzalez - Gaitan , M . , 2015 . Polarized endosome dynamics by spindle asymmetry during asymmetric cell division . Nature 528 , 280 – 285 . Devenport , D . , Oristian , D . , Heller , E . , Fuchs , E . , 2011 . Mitotic internalization of planar cell polarity proteins preserves tissue polarity . Nat . Cell Biol . 13 , 893 – 902 . Dorn , J . F . , Zhang , L . , Paradis , V . r . , Edoh - Bedi , D . , Jusu , S . , Maddox , P . S . , Maddox , A . S . , 2010 . Actomyosin tube formation in polar body cytokinesis requires anillin in C . elegans . Curr . Biol . 20 , 2046 – 2051 . Dorn , J . F . , Zhang , L . , Phi , T . T . , Lacroix , B . , Maddox , P . S . , Liu , J . , Maddox , A . S . , 2016 . A theoretical model of cytokinesis implicates feedback between membrane curvature and cytoskeletal organization in asymmetric cytokinetic furrowing . Mol . Biol . Cell 27 , 1286 – 1299 . Dubreuil , V . , Marzesco , A . M . , Corbeil , D . , Huttner , W . B . , Wilsch - Brauninger , M . , 2007 . Midbody and primary cilium of neural progenitors release extracellular membrane par - ticles enriched in the stem cell marker prominin - 1 . J . Cell Biol . 176 , 483 – 495 . Eaton , S . , Martin - Belmonte , F . , 2014 . Cargo sorting in the endocytic pathway : a key reg - ulator of cell polarity and tissue dynamics . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 6 , a016899 . Ebnet , K . , Suzuki , A . , Horikoshi , Y . , Hirose , T . , Meyer Zu Brickwedde , M . K . , Ohno , S . , Vestweber , D . , 2001 . The cell polarity protein ASIP / PAR - 3 directly associates with junctional adhesion molecule ( JAM ) . Embo J . 20 , 3738 – 3748 . Eggert , U . S . , Mitchison , T . J . , Field , C . M . , 2006 . Animal cytokinesis : from parts list to mech - anisms . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 75 , 543 – 566 . Eikenes , A . H . , Malerod , L . , Lie - Jensen , A . , Sem Wegner , C . , Brech , A . , Liestol , K . , Stenmark , H . , Haglund , K . , 2015 . Src64 controls a novel actin network required for proper ring canal formation in the Drosophila male germline . Development 142 , 4107 – 4118 . El Amine , N . , Kechad , A . , Jananji , S . , Hickson , G . R . , 2013 . Opposing actions of septins and Sticky on Anillin promote the transition from contractile to midbody ring . J . Cell Biol . 203 , 487 – 504 . Elia , N . , Sougrat , R . , Spurlin , T . A . , Hurley , J . H . , Lippincott - Schwartz , J . , 2011 . Dynamics of endosomal sorting complex required for transport ( ESCRT ) machinery during cyto - kinesis and its role in abscission . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 108 , 4846 – 4851 . 334 C . Thieleke - Matos et al . Emoto , K . , Inadome , H . , Kanaho , Y . , Narumiya , S . , Umeda , M . , 2005 . Local change in phospholipid composition at the cleavage furrow is essential for completion of cytoki - nesis . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 37901 – 37907 . Engl , W . , Arasi , B . , Yap , L . L . , Thiery , J . P . , Viasnoff , V . , 2014 . Actin dynamics modulate mechanosensitive immobilization of E - cadherin at adherens junctions . Nat . Cell Biol . 16 , 587 – 594 . Estey , M . P . , Ciano - Oliveira , C . D . , Froese , C . D . , Bejide , M . T . , Trimble , W . S . , 2010 . Dis - tinct roles of septins in cytokinesis : SEPT9 mediates midbody abscission . J . Cell Biol . 191 , 741 – 749 . Ettinger , A . W . , Wilsch - Brauninger , M . , Marzesco , A . M . , Bickle , M . , Lohmann , A . , Maliga , Z . , Karbanova , J . , Corbeil , D . , Hyman , A . A . , Huttner , W . B . , 2011 . Proliferat - ing versus differentiating stem and cancer cells exhibit distinct midbody - release behav - iour . Nat . Commun . 2 , 503 . Fabbro , M . , Zhou , B . - B . , Takahashi , M . , Sarcevic , B . , Lal , P . , Graham , M . E . , Gabrielli , B . G . , Robinson , P . J . , Nigg , E . A . , Ono , Y . , Khanna , K . K . , 2005 . Cdk1 / Erk2 - and Plk1 - dependent phosphorylation of a centrosome protein , Cep55 , is required for its recruitment to midbody and cytokinesis . Dev . Cell 9 , 477 – 488 . Fares , H . , Peifer , M . , Pringle , J . R . , 1995 . Localization and possible functions of Drosophila septins . Mol . Biol . Cell 6 , 1843 – 1859 . Farhadifar , R . , Roper , J . C . , Aigouy , B . , Eaton , S . , Julicher , F . , 2007 . The influence of cell mechanics , cell - cell interactions , and proliferation on epithelial packing . Curr . Biol . 17 , 2095 – 2104 . Fededa , J . P . , Gerlich , D . W . , 2012 . Molecular control of animal cell cytokinesis . Nat . Cell Biol . 14 , 440 – 447 . Field , C . M . , Alberts , B . M . , 1995 . Anillin , a contractile ring protein that cycles from the nucleus to the cell cortex . J . Cell Biol . 131 , 165 – 178 . Field , S . J . , Madson , N . , Kerr , M . L . , Galbraith , K . A . , Kennedy , C . E . , Tahiliani , M . , Wilkins , A . , Cantley , L . C . , 2005 . PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 functions at the cleavage furrow during cytokinesis . Curr . Biol . 15 , 1407 – 1412 . Finger , F . P . , Kopish , K . R . , White , J . G . , 2003 . A role for septins in cellular and axonal migra - tion in C . elegans . Dev . Biol . 261 , 220 – 234 . Firmino , J . , Rocancourt , D . , Saadaoui , M . , Moreau , C . , Gros , J . , 2016 . Cell division drives epithelial cell rearrangements during gastrulation in chick . Dev . Cell 36 , 249 – 261 . Fishkind , D . J . , Wang , Y . L . , 1993 . Orientation and three - dimensional organization of actin filaments in dividing cultured cells . J . Cell Biol . 123 , 837 – 848 . Fleming , E . S . , Zajac , M . , Moschenross , D . M . , Montrose , D . C . , Rosenberg , D . W . , Cowan , A . E . , Tirnauer , J . S . , 2007 . Planar spindle orientation and asymmetric cytokinesis in the mouse small intestine . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 55 , 1173 – 1180 . Flores - Benitez , D . , Knust , E . , 2016 . Dynamics of epithelial cell polarity in Drosophila : how to regulate the regulators ? Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 42 , 13 – 21 . Founounou , N . , Loyer , N . , Le Borgne , R . , 2013 . Septins regulate the contractility of the actomyosin ring to enable adherens junction remodeling during cytokinesis of epithelial cells . Dev . Cell 24 , 242 – 255 . Freeman , G . , 1977 . The establishment of the oral - aboral axis in the ctenophore embryo . J . Embryol . Exp . Morph . 42 , 237 – 260 . Freeman , G . , 1981 . The role of polarity in the development of the hydrozoan planula larva . Rouxs Arch . Dev . Biol . 190 , 168 – 184 . Fujita , Y . , Krause , G . , Scheffner , M . , Zechner , D . , Leddy , H . E . , Behrens , J . , Sommer , T . , Birchmeier , W . , 2002 . Hakai , a c - Cbl - like protein , ubiquitinates and induces endocy - tosis of the E - cadherin complex . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 222 – 231 . Fumoto , K . , Kikuchi , K . , Gon , H . , Kikuchi , A . , 2012 . Wnt5a signaling controls cytokinesis by correctly positioning ESCRT - III at the midbody . J . Cell Sci . 125 , 4822 – 4832 . 335 Asymmetric Cytokinesis in Animal Cells Galvagni , F . , Baldari , C . T . , Oliviero , S . , Orlandini , M . , 2012 . An apical actin - rich domain drives the establishment of cell polarity during cell adhesion . Histochem . Cell Biol . 138 , 419 – 433 . Gasic , I . , Nerurkar , P . , Meraldi , P . , 2015 . Centrosome age regulates kinetochore - microtubule stability and biases chromosome mis - segregation . Elife 4 , e07909 . Gibson , M . C . , Patel , A . B . , Nagpal , R . , Perrimon , N . , 2006 . The emergence of geometric order in proliferating metazoan epithelia . Nature 442 , 1038 – 1041 . Glotzer , M . , 2005 . The molecular requirements for cytokinesis . Science 307 , 1735 – 1739 . Goldbach , P . , Wong , R . , Beise , N . , Sarpal , R . , Trimble , W . S . , Brill , J . A . , 2010 . Stabilization of the actomyosin ring enables spermatocyte cytokinesis in Drosophila . Mol . Biol . Cell 21 , 1482 – 1493 . Gonczy , P . , 2008 . Mechanisms of asymmetric cell division : flies and worms pave the way . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 9 , 355 – 366 . Green , R . A . , Paluch , E . , Oegema , K . , 2012 . Cytokinesis in animal cells . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 28 , 29 – 58 . Green , R . A . , Mayers , J . R . , Wang , S . , Lewellyn , L . , Desai , A . , Audhya , A . , Oegema , K . , 2013 . The midbody ring scaffolds the abscission machinery in the absence of midbody microtubules . J . Cell Biol . 203 , 505 – 520 . Gromley , A . , Yeaman , C . , Rosa , J . , Redick , S . , Chen , C . T . , Mirabelle , S . , Guha , M . , Sillibourne , J . , Doxsey , S . J . , 2005 . Centriolin anchoring of exocyst and SNARE com - plexes at the midbody is required for secretory - vesicle - mediated abscission . Cell 123 , 75 – 87 . Guha , M . , Zhou , M . , Wang , Y . - l . , 2005 . Cortical actin turnover during cytokinesis requires myosin II . Curr . Biol . 15 , 732 – 736 . Guillot , C . , Lecuit , T . , 2013 . Adhesion disengagement uncouples intrinsic and extrinsic forces to drive cytokinesis in epithelial tissues . Dev . Cell 24 , 227 – 241 . Guizetti , J . , Schermelleh , L . , Mantler , J . , Maar , S . , Poser , I . , Leonhardt , H . , Muller - Reichert , T . , Gerlich , D . W . , 2011 . Cortical constriction during abscission involves helices of ESCRT - III - dependent filaments . Science 331 , 1616 – 1620 . Habib , S . J . , Chen , B . C . , Tsai , F . C . , Anastassiadis , K . , Meyer , T . , Betzig , E . , Nusse , R . , 2013 . A localized Wnt signal orients asymmetric stem cell division in vitro . Science 339 , 1445 – 1448 . Harris , T . J . , Peifer , M . , 2004 . Adherens junction - dependent and - independent steps in the establishment of epithelial cell polarity in Drosophila . J . Cell Biol . 167 , 135 – 147 . Harris , T . J . , Peifer , M . , 2005 . The positioning and segregation of apical cues during epithelial polarity establishment in Drosophila . J . Cell Biol . 170 , 813 – 823 . Hatte , G . , Tramier , M . , Prigent , C . , Tassan , J . P . , 2014 . Epithelial cell division in the Xenopus laevis embryo during gastrulation . Int . J . Dev . Biol . 58 , 775 – 781 . Herszterg , S . , Leibfried , A . , Bosveld , F . , Martin , C . , Bellaiche , Y . , 2013 . Interplay between the dividing cell and its neighbors regulates adherens junction formation during cytoki - nesis in epithelial tissue . Dev . Cell 24 , 256 – 270 . Herszterg , S . , Pinheiro , D . , Bellaiche , Y . , 2014 . A multicellular view of cytokinesis in epi - thelial tissue . Trends Cell Biol . 24 , 285 – 293 . Hickson , G . R . X . , O’Farrell , P . H . , 2008 . Anillin : a pivotal organizer of the cytokinetic machinery . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 36 , 439 – 441 . Higashi , T . , Arnold , T . R . , Stephenson , R . E . , Dinshaw , K . M . , Miller , A . L . , 2016 . Mainte - nance of the epithelial barrier and remodeling of cell - cell junctions during cytokinesis . Curr . Biol . 26 , 1829 – 1842 . Hobdy - Henderson , K . C . , Hales , C . M . , Lapierre , L . A . , Cheney , R . E . , Goldenring , J . R . , 2003 . Dynamics of the apical plasma membrane recycling system during cell division . Traffic 4 , 681 – 693 . 336 C . Thieleke - Matos et al . Hong , S . , Troyanovsky , R . B . , Troyanovsky , S . M . , 2013 . Binding to F - actin guides cadherin cluster assembly , stability , and movement . J . Cell Biol . 201 , 131 – 143 . Horikoshi , Y . , Hamada , S . , Ohno , S . , Suetsugu , S . , 2011 . Phosphoinositide binding by par - 3 involved in par - 3 localization . Cell Struct . Funct . 36 , 97 – 102 . Ishikawa - Ankerhold , H . C . , Gerisch , G . N . , Mueller - Taubenberger , A . , 2010 . Genetic evi - dence for concerted control of actin dynamics in cytokinesis , endocytic traffic , and cell motility by coronin and Aip1 . Cytoskeleton ( Hoboken ) 67 , 442 – 455 . Jaffe , A . B . , Kaji , N . , Durgan , J . , Hall , A . , 2008 . Cdc42 controls spindle orientation to posi - tion the apical surface during epithelial morphogenesis . J . Cell Biol . 183 , 625 – 633 . Jantsch - Plunger , V . , Gonczy , P . , Romano , A . , Schnabel , H . , Hamill , D . , Schnabel , R . , Hyman , A . A . , Glotzer , M . , 2000 . CYK - 4 : A Rho family gtpase activating protein ( GAP ) required for central spindle formation and cytokinesis . J . Cell Biol . 149 , 1391 – 1404 . Jinguji , Y . , Ishikawa , H . , 1992 . Electron microscopic observations on the maintenance of the tight junction during cell division in the epithelium of the mouse small intestine . Cell Struct . Funct . 17 , 27 – 37 . John , C . M . , Hite , R . K . , Weirich , C . S . , Fitzgerald , D . J . , Jawhari , H . , Faty , M . , Schlapfer , D . , Kroschewski , R . , Winkler , F . K . , Walz , T . , Barral , Y . , Steinmetz , M . O . , 2007 . The Caenorhabditis elegans septin complex is nonpolar . Embo J . 26 , 3296 – 3307 . Kaido , M . , Wada , H . , Shindo , M . , Hayashi , S . , 2009 . Essential requirement for RING finger E3 ubiquitin ligase Hakai in early embryonic development of Drosophila . Genes Cells 14 , 1067 – 1077 . Kaplan , D . D . , Meigs , T . E . , Kelly , P . , Casey , P . J . , 2004 . Identification of a role for beta - catenin in the establishment of a bipolar mitotic spindle . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 10829 – 10832 . Kasahara , K . , Nakayama , Y . , Nakazato , Y . , Ikeda , K . , Kuga , T . , Yamaguchi , N . , 2007 . Src signaling regulates completion of abscission in cytokinesis through ERK / MAPK activa - tion at the midbody . J . Biol . Chem . 282 , 5327 – 5339 . Kechad , A . , Jananji , S . , Ruella , Y . , Hickson , G . R . , 2012 . Anillin acts as a bifunctional linker coordinating midbody ring biogenesis during cytokinesis . Curr . Biol . 22 , 197 – 203 . Kim , J . - E . , Billadeau , D . D . , Chen , J . , 2005 . ThetandemBRCTdomainsofEct2arerequiredfor bothnegativeandpositiveregulationofEct2incytokinesis . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 5733 – 5739 . Kim , H . , Guo , F . , Brahma , S . , Xing , Y . , Burkard , M . E . , 2014 . Centralspindlin assembly and 2 phosphorylations on MgcRacGAP by Polo - like kinase 1 initiate Ect2 binding in early cytokinesis . Cell Cycle 13 , 2952 – 2961 . Kim , T . J . , Zheng , S . , Sun , J . , Muhamed , I . , Wu , J . , Lei , L . , Kong , X . , Leckband , D . E . , Wang , Y . , 2015 . Dynamic visualization of alpha - catenin reveals rapid , reversible confor - mation switching between tension states . Curr . Biol . 25 , 218 – 224 . Kinoshita , M . , Kumar , S . , Mizoguchi , A . , Ide , C . , Kinoshita , A . , Haraguchi , T . , Hiraoka , Y . , Noda , M . , 1997 . Nedd5 , a mammalian septin , is a novel cytoskeletal component inter - acting with actin - based structures . Genes Dev . 11 , 1535 – 1547 . Kinoshita , M . , Field , C . M . , Coughlin , M . L . , Straight , A . F . , Mitchison , T . J . , 2002 . Self - and actin - templated assembly of Mammalian septins . Dev . Cell 3 , 791 – 802 . Klinkert , K . , Rocancourt , M . , Houdusse , A . , Echard , A . , 2016 . Rab35 GTPase couples cell division with initiation of epithelial apico - basal polarity and lumen opening . Nat . Commun . 7 , 11166 . Knox , A . L . , Brown , N . H . , 2002 . Rap1 GTPase regulation of adherens junction positioning and cell adhesion . Science 295 , 1285 – 1288 . Kosodo , Y . , Roper , K . , Haubensak , W . , Marzesco , A . M . , Corbeil , D . , Huttner , W . B . , 2004 . Asymmetric distribution of the apical plasma membrane during neurogenic divisions of mammalian neuroepithelial cells . Embo J . 23 , 2314 – 2324 . 337 Asymmetric Cytokinesis in Animal Cells Kosodo , Y . , Toida , K . , Dubreuil , V . , Alexandre , P . , Schenk , J . , Kiyokage , E . , Attardo , A . , Mora - Bermudez , F . , Arii , T . , Clarke , J . D . , Huttner , W . B . , 2008 . Cytokinesis of neur - oepithelial cells can divide their basal process before anaphase . Embo J . 27 , 3151 – 3163 . Krahn , M . P . , Buckers , J . , Kastrup , L . , Wodarz , A . , 2010a . Formation of a Bazooka - Stardust complex is essential for plasma membrane polarity in epithelia . J . Cell Biol . 190 , 751 – 760 . Krahn , M . P . , Klopfenstein , D . R . , Fischer , N . , Wodarz , A . , 2010b . Membrane targeting of Bazooka / PAR - 3 is mediated by direct binding to phosphoinositide lipids . Curr . Biol . 20 , 636 – 642 . Kuo , T . C . , Chen , C . T . , Baron , D . , Onder , T . T . , Loewer , S . , Almeida , S . , Weismann , C . M . , Xu , P . , Houghton , J . M . , Gao , F . B . , Daley , G . Q . , Doxsey , S . , 2011 . Midbody accumu - lation through evasion of autophagy contributes to cellular reprogramming and tumor - igenicity . Nat . Cell Biol . 13 , 1214 – 1223 . Lafaurie - Janvore , J . , Maiuri , P . , Wang , I . , Pinot , M . , Manneville , J . B . , Betz , T . , Balland , M . , Piel , M . , 2013 . ESCRT - III assembly and cytokinetic abscission are induced by tension release in the intercellular bridge . Science 339 , 1625 – 1629 . Langevin , J . , Morgan , M . J . , Sibarita , J . B . , Aresta , S . , Murthy , M . , Schwarz , T . , Camonis , J . , Bellaiche , Y . , 2005 . Drosophila exocyst components Sec5 , Sec6 , and Sec15 regulate DE - Cadherin trafficking from recycling endosomes to the plasma membrane . Dev . Cell 9 , 365 – 376 . Lau , K . , Tao , H . , Liu , H . , Wen , J . , Sturgeon , K . , Sorfazlian , N . , Lazic , S . , Burrows , J . T . , Wong , M . D . , Li , D . , Deimling , S . , Ciruna , B . , Scott , I . , Simmons , C . , Henkelman , R . M . , Williams , T . , Hadjantonakis , A . K . , Fernandez - Gonzalez , R . , Sun , Y . , Hopyan , S . , 2015 . Anisotropic stress orients remodelling of mammalian limb bud ectoderm . Nat . Cell Biol . 17 , 569 – 579 . le Duc , Q . , Shi , Q . , Blonk , I . , Sonnenberg , A . , Wang , N . , Leckband , D . , de Rooij , J . , 2010 . Vinculin potentiates E - cadherin mechanosensing and is recruited to actin - anchored sites within adherens junctions in a myosin II - dependent manner . J . Cell Biol . 189 , 1107 – 1115 . Lecuit , T . , Yap , A . S . , 2015 . E - cadherin junctions as active mechanical integrators in tissue dynamics . Nat . Cell Biol . 17 , 533 – 539 . Lee , H . H . , Elia , N . , Ghirlando , R . , Lippincott - Schwartz , J . , Hurley , J . H . , 2008 . Midbody targeting of the ESCRT machinery by a noncanonical coiled coil in CEP55 . Science ( New York , N . Y . ) 322 , 576 – 580 . Lekomtsev , S . , Su , K . - C . , Pye , V . E . , Blight , K . , Sundaramoorthy , S . , Takaki , T . , Collinson , L . M . , Cherepanov , P . , Divecha , N . , Petronczki , M . , 2012 . Centralspindlin links the mitotic spindle to the plasma membrane during cytokinesis . Nature 492 , 276 – 279 . Levayer , R . , Pelissier - Monier , A . , Lecuit , T . , 2011 . Spatial regulation of Dia and Myosin - II by RhoGEF2 controls initiation of E - cadherin endocytosis during epithelial morpho - genesis . Nat . Cell Biol . 13 , 529 – 540 . Lewellyn , L . , Dumont , J . , Desai , A . , Oegema , K . , 2010 . Analyzing the effects of delaying aster separation on furrow formation during cytokinesis in the Caenorhabditis elegans embryo . Mol . Biol . Cell 21 , 50 – 62 . Li , D . , Kuehn , E . W . , Prekeris , R . , 2014a . Kinesin - 2 mediates apical endosome transport dur - ing epithelial lumen formation . Cell Logist . 4 , e28928 . Li , D . , Mangan , A . , Cicchini , L . , Margolis , B . , Prekeris , R . , 2014b . FIP5 phosphorylation during mitosis regulates apical trafficking and lumenogenesis . EMBO Rep . 15 , 428 – 437 . Lin , M . C . , Galletta , B . J . , Sept , D . , Cooper , J . A . , 2010 . Overlapping and distinct functions for cofilin , coronin and Aip1 in actin dynamics in vivo . J . Cell Sci . 123 , 1329 – 1342 . Liu , J . , Fairn , G . D . , Ceccarelli , D . F . , Sicheri , F . , Wilde , A . , 2012 . Cleavage furrow organi - zation requires PIP2 - mediated recruitment of anillin . Curr . Biol . 22 , 64 – 69 . 338 C . Thieleke - Matos et al . Logan , M . R . , Mandato , C . A . , 2006 . Regulation of the actin cytoskeleton by PIP2 in cyto - kinesis . Biol . Cell 98 , 377 – 388 . Lopez - Camacho , C . , van Wijnen , A . J . , Lian , J . B . , Stein , J . L . , Stein , G . S . , 2014 . Core binding factor beta ( CBFbeta ) is retained in the midbody during cytokinesis . J . Cell . Physiol . 229 , 1466 – 1474 . Loria , A . , Longhini , K . M . , Glotzer , M . , 2012 . The RhoGAP domain of CYK - 4 has an essen - tial role in RhoA activation . Curr . Biol . 22 , 213 – 219 . Lu , H . , Bilder , D . , 2005 . Endocytic control of epithelial polarity and proliferation in Dro - sophila . Nat . Cell Biol . 7 , 1232 – 1239 . Lu , M . S . , Johnston , C . A . , 2013 . Molecular pathways regulating mitotic spindle orientation in animal cells . Development 140 , 1843 – 1856 . Mabuchi , I . , Okuno , M . , 1977 . The effect of myosin antibody on the division of starfish blas - tomeres . J . Cell Biol . 74 , 251 – 263 . Maddox , A . S . , Habermann , B . , Desai , A . , Oegema , K . , 2005 . Distinct roles for two C . elegans anillins in the gonad and early embryo . Development 132 , 2837 – 2848 . Maddox , A . S . , Lewellyn , L . , Desai , A . , Oegema , K . , 2007 . Anillin and the septins promote asymmetric ingression of the cytokinetic furrow . Dev . Cell 12 , 827 – 835 . Makino , A . , Abe , M . , Murate , M . , Inaba , T . , Yilmaz , N . , Hullin - Matsuda , F . , Kishimoto , T . , Schieber , N . L . , Taguchi , T . , Arai , H . , Anderluh , G . , Parton , R . G . , Kobayashi , T . , 2015 . Visualization of the heterogeneous membrane distribution of sphingomyelin associated with cytokinesis , cell polarity , and sphingolipidosis . Faseb J . 29 , 477 – 493 . Martin - Belmonte , F . , Gassama , A . , Datta , A . , Yu , W . , Rescher , U . , Gerke , V . , Mostov , K . , 2007 . PTEN - mediated apical segregation of phosphoinositides controls epithelial mor - phogenesis through Cdc42 . Cell 128 , 383 – 397 . Martinez - Garay , I . , Rustom , A . , Gerdes , H . - H . , Kutsche , K . , 2006 . The novel centrosomal associated protein CEP55 is present in the spindle midzone and the midbody . Genomics 87 , 243 – 253 . Marzesco , A . M . , Janich , P . , Wilsch - Brauninger , M . , Dubreuil , V . , Langenfeld , K . , Corbeil , D . , Huttner , W . B . , 2005 . Release of extracellular membrane particles carrying the stem cell marker prominin - 1 ( CD133 ) from neural progenitors and other epithelial cells . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 2849 – 2858 . Matias , N . R . , Mathieu , J . , Huynh , J . - R . , 2015 . Abscission is regulated by the ESCRT - III protein shrub in Drosophila germline stem cells . PLoS Genet . 11 , e1004653 . Matsuo , M . , Shimodaira , T . , Kasama , T . , Hata , Y . , Echigo , A . , Okabe , M . , Arai , K . , Makino , Y . , Niwa , S . - I . , Saya , H . , Kishimoto , T . , 2013 . Katanin p60 contributes to microtubule instability around the midbody and facilitates cytokinesis in rat cells . PLoS One 8 , e80392 . Mavrakis , M . , Azou - Gros , Y . , Tsai , F . C . , Alvarado , J . , Bertin , A . , Iv , F . , Kress , A . , Brasselet , S . , Koenderink , G . H . , Lecuit , T . , 2014 . Septins promote F - actin ring forma - tion by crosslinking actin filaments into curved bundles . Nat . Cell Biol . 16 , 322 – 334 . McGill , M . A . , McKinley , R . F . , Harris , T . J . , 2009 . Independent cadherin - catenin and Bazooka clusters interact to assemble adherens junctions . J . Cell Biol . 185 , 787 – 796 . McMahon , L . , Legouis , R . , Vonesch , J . L . , Labouesse , M . , 2001 . Assembly of C . elegans api - cal junctions involves positioning and compaction by LET - 413 and protein aggregation by the MAGUK protein DLG - 1 . J . Cell Sci . 114 , 2265 – 2277 . Menon , M . B . , Gaestel , M . , 2015 . Sep ( t ) arate or not—how some cells take septin - independent routes through cytokinesis . J . Cell Sci . 128 , 1877 – 1886 . Menon , M . B . , Sawada , A . , Chaturvedi , A . , Mishra , P . , Schuster - Gossler , K . , Galla , M . , Schambach , A . , Gossler , A . , Forster , R . , Heuser , M . , Kotlyarov , A . , Kinoshita , M . , Gaestel , M . , 2014 . Genetic deletion of SEPT7 reveals a cell type - specific role of septins in microtubule destabilization for the completion of cytokinesis . PLoS Genet . 10 , e1004558 . 339 Asymmetric Cytokinesis in Animal Cells Mierzwa , B . , Gerlich , D . W . , 2014 . Cytokinetic abscission : molecular mechanisms and tem - poral control . Dev . Cell 31 , 525 – 538 . Miller , A . L . , Bement , W . M . , 2009 . Regulation of cytokinesis by Rho GTPase flux . Nat . Cell Biol . 11 , 71 – 77 . Miller , K . G . , Field , C . M . , Alberts , B . M . , 1989 . Actin - binding proteins from Drosophila embryos : a complex network of interacting proteins detected by F - actin affinity chro - matography . J . Cell Biol . 109 , 2963 – 2975 . Mishima , M . , Kaitna , S . , Glotzer , M . , 2002 . Central spindle assembly and cytokinesis require a kinesin - like protein / RhoGAP complex with microtubule bundling activity . Dev . Cell 2 , 41 – 54 . Morais - de - Sa , E . , Sunkel , C . , 2013 . Adherens junctions determine the apical position of the midbody during follicular epithelial cell division . EMBO Rep . 14 , 696 – 703 . Morais - de - Sa , E . , Mirouse , V . , St Johnston , D . , 2010 . aPKC phosphorylation of Bazooka defines the apical / lateral border in Drosophila epithelial cells . Cell 141 , 509 – 523 . Morita , E . , Sandrin , V . , Chung , H . - Y . , Morham , S . G . , Gygi , S . P . , Rodesch , C . K . , Sundquist , W . I . , 2007 . Human ESCRT and ALIX proteins interact with proteins of the midbody and function in cytokinesis . EMBO J . 26 , 4215 – 4227 . Mostowy , S . , Cossart , P . , 2012 . Septins : the fourth component of the cytoskeleton . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 13 , 183 – 194 . Murthy , K . , Wadsworth , P . , 2005 . Myosin - II - dependent localization and dynamics of F - actin during cytokinesis . Curr . Biol . 15 , 724 – 731 . Murthy , K . , Wadsworth , P . , 2008 . Dual role for microtubules in regulating cortical contrac - tility during cytokinesis . J . Cell Sci . 121 , 2350 – 2359 . Nagata , K . , Kawajiri , A . , Matsui , S . , Takagishi , M . , Shiromizu , T . , Saitoh , N . , Izawa , I . , Kiyono , T . , Itoh , T . J . , Hotani , H . , Inagaki , M . , 2003 . Filament formation of MSF - A , a mammalian septin , in human mammary epithelial cells depends on interactions with microtubules . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 18538 – 18543 . Naito , Y . , Okada , M . , Yagisawa , H . , 2006 . Phospholipase C isoforms are localized at the cleavage furrow during cytokinesis . J . Biochem . 140 , 785 – 791 . Neufeld , T . P . , Rubin , G . M . , 1994 . The Drosophila peanut gene is required for cytokinesis and encodes a protein similar to yeast putative bud neck filament proteins . Cell 77 , 371 – 379 . Niederman , R . , Pollard , T . D . , 1975 . Human platelet myosin . II . In vitro assembly and struc - ture of myosin filaments . J . Cell Biol . 67 , 72 – 92 . Nguyen , T . Q . , Sawa , H . , Okano , H . , White , J . G . , 2000 . The C . elegans septin genes , unc - 59 and unc - 61 , are required for normal postembryonic cytokineses and morphogenesis but have no essential function in embryogenesis . J . Cell Sci . 113 , 3825 – 3837 . Niiya , F . , Tatsumoto , T . , Lee , K . S . , Miki , T . , 2006 . Phosphorylation of the cytokinesis reg - ulator ECT2 at G2 / M phase stimulates association of the mitotic kinase Plk1 and accu - mulation of GTP - bound RhoA . Oncogene 25 , 827 – 837 . Nishimura , Y . , Nakano , K . , Mabuchi , I . , 1998 . Localization of Rho GTPase in sea urchin eggs . FEBS Lett . 441 , 121 – 126 . Oegema , K . , Savoian , M . S . , Mitchison , T . J . , Field , C . M . , 2000 . Functional analysis of a human homologue of the Drosophila actin binding protein anillin suggests a role in cyto - kinesis . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 539 – 552 . Olivier , N . , Luengo - Oroz , M . A . , Duloquin , L . , Faure , E . , Savy , T . , Veilleux , I . , Solinas , X . , Debarre , D . , Bourgine , P . , Santos , A . , Peyrieras , N . , Beaurepaire , E . , 2010 . Cell lineage reconstruction of early zebrafish embryos using label - free nonlinear microscopy . Science 329 , 967 – 971 . Olmos , Y . , Carlton , J . G . , 2016 . The ESCRT machinery : new roles at new holes . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 38 , 1 – 11 . 340 C . Thieleke - Matos et al . Ono , S . , 2003 . Regulation of actin filament dynamics by actin depolymerizing factor / cofilin and actin - interacting protein 1 : new blades for twisted filaments . Biochemistry 42 , 13363 – 13370 . Otomo , T . , Otomo , C . , Tomchick , D . R . , Machius , M . , Rosen , M . K . , 2005 . Structural basis of Rho GTPase - mediated activation of the formin mDia1 . Mol . Cell 18 , 273 – 281 . Ou , G . , Gentili , C . , Gonczy , P . , 2014 . Stereotyped distribution of midbody remnants in early C . elegans embryos requires cell death genes and is dispensable for development . Cell Res . 24 , 251 – 253 . Packard , A . , Georgas , K . , Michos , O . , Riccio , P . , Cebrian , C . , Combes , A . N . , Ju , A . , Ferrer - Vaquer , A . , Hadjantonakis , A . K . , Zong , H . , Little , M . H . , Costantini , F . , 2013 . Luminal mitosis drives epithelial cell dispersal within the branching ureteric bud . Dev . Cell 27 , 319 – 330 . Padmanabhan , A . , Rao , M . V . , Wu , Y . , Zaidel - Bar , R . , 2015 . Jack of all trades : functional modularity in the adherens junction . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 36 , 32 – 40 . Palacios , F . , Tushir , J . S . , Fujita , Y . , D’Souza - Schorey , C . , 2005 . Lysosomal targeting of E - cadherin : a unique mechanism for the down - regulation of cell - cell adhesion during epithelial to mesenchymal transitions . Mol . Cell . Biol . 25 , 389 – 402 . Paolini , A . , Duchemin , A . L . , Albadri , S . , Patzel , E . , Bornhorst , D . , Gonzalez Avalos , P . , Lemke , S . , Machate , A . , Brand , M . , Sel , S . , Di Donato , V . , Del Bene , F . , Zolessi , F . R . , Ramialison , M . , Poggi , L . , 2015 . Asymmetric inheritance of the apical domain and self - renewal of retinal ganglion cell progenitors depend on anillin function . Development 142 , 832 – 839 . Pavicic - Kaltenbrunner , V . , Mishima , M . , Glotzer , M . , 2007 . Cooperative assembly of CYK - 4 / MgcRacGAP and ZEN - 4 / MKLP1 to form the centralspindlin complex . Mol . Biol . Cell 18 , 4992 – 5003 . Pernier , J . , Shekhar , S . , Jegou , A . , Guichard , B . , Carlier , M . - F . , 2016 . Profilin interaction with actin filament barbed end controls dynamic instability , capping , branching , and motility . Dev . Cell 36 , 201 – 214 . Piekny , A . J . , Glotzer , M . , 2008 . Anillin is a scaffold protein that links RhoA , actin , and myo - sin during cytokinesis . Curr . Biol . 18 , 30 – 36 . Piekny , A . J . , Maddox , A . S . , 2010 . The myriad roles of anillin during cytokinesis . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 21 , 881 – 891 . Pollard , T . D . , 1982 . Structure and polymerization of Acanthamoeba myosin - II filaments . J . Cell Biol . 95 , 816 – 825 . Pollarolo , G . , Schulz , J . G . , Munck , S . , Dotti , C . G . , 2011 . Cytokinesis remnants define first neuronal asymmetry in vivo . Nat . Neurosci . 14 , 1525 – 1533 . Prokopenko , S . N . , Brumby , A . , O’Keefe , L . , Prior , L . , He , Y . , Saint , R . , Bellen , H . J . , 1999 . A putative exchange factor for Rho1 GTPase is required for initiation of cytokinesis in Drosophila . Genes Dev . 13 ( 17 ) , 2301 – 2314 . Rakshit , S . , Zhang , Y . , Manibog , K . , Shafraz , O . , Sivasankar , S . , 2012 . Ideal , catch , and slip bonds in cadherin adhesion . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 109 , 18815 – 18820 . Rappaport , R . , 1985 . Repeated furrow formation from a single mitotic apparatus in cylin - drical sand dollar eggs . J . Exp . Zool . 234 , 167 – 171 . Reid , E . , Connell , J . , Edwards , T . L . , Duley , S . , Brown , S . E . , Sanderson , C . M . , 2005 . The hereditary spastic paraplegia protein spastin interacts with the ESCRT - III complex - associated endosomal protein CHMP1B . Hum . Mol . Genet . 14 , 19 – 38 . Reina , J . , Gonzalez , C . , 2014 . When fate follows age : unequal centrosomes in asymmetric cell division . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . Lond . B Biol . Sci . 369 , 20130466 . Reinsch , S . , Karsenti , E . , 1994 . Orientation of spindle axis and distribution of plasma mem - brane proteins during cell division in polarized MDCKII cells . J . Cell Biol . 126 , 1509 – 1526 . 341 Asymmetric Cytokinesis in Animal Cells Riento , K . , Ridley , A . J . , 2003 . ROCKs : multifunctional kinases in cell behaviour . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 4 , 446 – 456 . Rodriguez - Boulan , E . , Macara , I . G . , 2014 . Organization and execution of the epithelial polarity programme . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 15 , 225 – 242 . Roeth , J . F . , Sawyer , J . K . , Wilner , D . A . , Peifer , M . , 2009 . Rab11 helps maintain apical crumbs and adherens junctions in the Drosophila embryonic ectoderm . PLoS One 4 , e7634 . Rosa , A . , Vlassaks , E . , Pichaud , F . , Baum , B . , 2015 . Ect2 / Pbl acts via Rho and polarity pro - teins to direct the assembly of an isotropic actomyosin cortex upon mitotic entry . Dev . Cell 32 , 604 – 616 . Rose , R . , Weyand , M . , Lammers , M . , Ishizaki , T . , Ahmadian , M . R . , Wittinghofer , A . , 2005 . Structural and mechanistic insights into the interaction between Rho and mam - malian Dia . Nature 435 , 513 – 518 . Rotty , J . D . , Wu , C . , Bear , J . E . , 2013 . New insights into the regulation and cellular functions of the ARP2 / 3 complex . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 14 , 7 – 12 . Roubinet , C . , Cabernard , C . , 2014 . Control of asymmetric cell division . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 31 , 84 – 91 . Salzmann , V . , Chen , C . , Chiang , C . Y . , Tiyaboonchai , A . , Mayer , M . , Yamashita , Y . M . , 2014 . Centrosome - dependent asymmetric inheritance of the midbody ring in Drosoph - ila germline stem cell division . Mol . Biol . Cell 25 , 267 – 275 . Schluter , M . A . , Pfarr , C . S . , Pieczynski , J . , Whiteman , E . L . , Hurd , T . W . , Fan , S . , Liu , C . J . , Margolis , B . , 2009 . Trafficking of Crumbs3 during cytokinesis is crucial for lumen for - mation . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 , 4652 – 4663 . Schonegg , S . , Hyman , A . A . , 2006 . CDC - 42 and RHO - 1 coordinate acto - myosin contrac - tility and PAR protein localization during polarity establishment in C . elegans embryos . Development 133 , 3507 – 3516 . Schroeder , T . E . , 1968 . Cytokinesis : filaments in the cleavage furrow . Exp . Cell Res . 53 , 272 – 276 . Schroeder , T . E . , 1972 . The contractile ring . II . Determining its brief existence , volumetric changes , and vital role in cleaving Arbacia eggs . J . Cell Biol . 53 , 419 – 434 . Schulze , J . , Schierenberg , E . , 2008 . Cellular pattern formation , establishment of polarity and segregation of colored cytoplasm in embryos of the nematode Romanomermis cul - icivorax . Dev . Biol . 315 , 426 – 436 . Severson , A . F . , Baillie , D . L . , Bowerman , B . , 2002 . A Formin Homology protein and a profilin are required for cytokinesis and Arp2 / 3 - independent assembly of cortical micro - filaments in C . elegans . Curr . Biol . 12 , 2066 – 2075 . Singh , D . , Pohl , C . , 2014 . Coupling of rotational cortical flow , asymmetric midbody posi - tioning , and spindle rotation mediates dorsoventral axis formation in C . elegans . Dev . Cell 28 , 253 – 267 . Skop , A . R . , Liu , H . , Yates , J . , Meyer , B . J . , Heald , R . , 2004 . Dissection of the mammalian midbody proteome reveals conserved cytokinesis mechanisms . Science ( New York , N . Y . ) 305 , 61 – 66 . Sonnichsen , B . , Koski , L . B . , Walsh , A . , Marschall , P . , Neumann , B . , Brehm , M . , Alleaume , A . M . , Artelt , J . , Bettencourt , P . , Cassin , E . , Hewitson , M . , Holz , C . , Khan , M . , Lazik , S . , Martin , C . , Nitzsche , B . , Ruer , M . , Stamford , J . , Winzi , M . , Heinkel , R . , Roder , M . , Finell , J . , Hantsch , H . , Jones , S . J . , Jones , M . , Piano , F . , Gunsalus , K . C . , Oegema , K . , Gonczy , P . , Coulson , A . , Hyman , A . A . , Echeverri , C . J . , 2005 . Full - genome RNAi profiling of early embryogenesis in Caenorhabditis elegans . Nature 434 , 462 – 469 . Spiliotis , E . T . , Kinoshita , M . , Nelson , W . J . , 2005 . A mitotic septin scaffold required for Mammalian chromosome congression and segregation . Science 307 , 1781 – 1785 . Stevens , N . R . , Raposo , A . A . , Basto , R . , St Johnston , D . , Raff , J . W . , 2007 . From stem cell to embryo without centrioles . Curr . Biol . 17 , 1498 – 1503 . 342 C . Thieleke - Matos et al . Straight , A . F . , Cheung , A . , Limouze , J . , Chen , I . , Westwood , N . J . , Sellers , J . R . , Mitchison , T . J . , 2003 . Dissecting temporal and spatial control of cytokinesis with a myo - sin II inhibitor . Science 299 , 1743 – 1747 . Straight , A . F . , Field , C . M . , Mitchison , T . J . , 2005 . Anillin binds nonmuscle myosin II and regulates the contractile ring . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 193 – 201 . Suarez , C . , Carroll , R . T . , Burke , T . A . , Christensen , J . R . , Bestul , A . J . , Sees , J . A . , James , M . L . , Sirotkin , V . , Kovar , D . R . , 2015 . Profilin regulates F - actin network homeostasis by favoring formin over Arp2 / 3 complex . Dev . Cell 32 , 43 – 53 . Sun , H . S . , Wilde , A . , Harrison , R . E . , 2011 . Chlamydia trachomatis inclusions induce asym - metric cleavage furrow formation and ingression failure in host cells . Mol . Cell . Biol . 31 , 5011 – 5022 . Sun , L . , Guan , R . , Lee , I . J . , Liu , Y . , Chen , M . , Wang , J . , Wu , J . - Q . , Chen , Z . , 2015 . Mech - anistic insights into the anchorage of the contractile ring by anillin and Mid1 . Dev . Cell 33 , 413 – 426 . Surka , M . C . , Tsang , C . W . , Trimble , W . S . , 2002 . The mammalian septin MSF localizes with microtubules and is required for completion of cytokinesis . Mol . Biol . Cell 13 , 3532 – 3545 . Suzuki , A . , Hirata , M . , Kamimura , K . , Maniwa , R . , Yamanaka , T . , Mizuno , K . , Kishikawa , M . , Hirose , H . , Amano , Y . , Izumi , N . , Miwa , Y . , Ohno , S . , 2004 . aPKC acts upstream of PAR - 1b in both the establishment and maintenance of mammalian epi - thelial polarity . Curr . Biol . 14 , 1425 – 1435 . Swan , K . A . , Severson , A . F . , Carter , J . C . , Martin , P . R . , Schnabel , H . , Schnabel , R . , Bowerman , B . , 1998 . cyk - 1 : a C . elegans FH gene required for a late step in embryonic cytokinesis . J . Cell Sci . 111 , 2017 – 2027 . Sydor , A . M . , Czymmek , K . J . , Puchner , E . M . , Mennella , V . , 2015 . Super - resolution micros - copy : from single molecules to supramolecular assemblies . Trends Cell Biol . 25 , 730 – 748 . Takaishi , K . , Sasaki , T . , Kameyama , T . , Tsukita , S . , Tsukita , S . , Takai , Y . , 1995 . Translo - cation of activated Rho from the cytoplasm to membrane ruffling area , cell - cell adhesion sites and cleavage furrows . Oncogene 11 , 39 – 48 . Takekuni , K . , Ikeda , W . , Fujito , T . , Morimoto , K . , Takeuchi , M . , Monden , M . , Takai , Y . , 2003 . Direct binding of cell polarity protein PAR - 3 to cell - cell adhesion molecule nectin at neuroepithelial cells of developing mouse . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 5497 – 5500 . Tanaka - Takiguchi , Y . , Kinoshita , M . , Takiguchi , K . , 2009 . Septin - mediated uniform brac - ing of phospholipid membranes . Curr . Biol . 19 , 140 – 145 . Taneja , N . , Fenix , A . M . , Rathbun , L . , Millis , B . A . , Tyska , M . J . , Hehnly , H . , Burnette , D . T . , 2016 . Focal adhesions control cleavage furrow shape and spindle tilt dur - ing mitosis . Sci . Rep . 6 , 29846 . Tatsumoto , T . , Xie , X . , Blumenthal , R . , Okamoto , I . , Miki , T . , 1999 . Human ECT2 is an exchange factor for Rho GTPases , phosphorylated in G2 / M phases , and involved in cytokinesis . J . Cell Biol . 147 , 921 – 928 . Tawk , M . , Araya , C . , Lyons , D . A . , Reugels , A . M . , Girdler , G . C . , Bayley , P . R . , Hyde , D . R . , Tada , M . , Clarke , J . D . , 2007 . A mirror - symmetric cell division that orches - trates neuroepithelial morphogenesis . Nature 446 , 797 – 800 . Tischer , D . , Weiner , O . D . , 2014 . Illuminating cell signalling with optogenetic tools . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 15 , 551 – 558 . Truong Quang , B . A . , Mani , M . , Markova , O . , Lecuit , T . , Lenne , P . F . , 2013 . Principles of E - cadherin supramolecular organization in vivo . Curr . Biol . 23 , 2197 – 2207 . Tse , Y . C . , Werner , M . , Longhini , K . M . , Labbe , J . C . , Goldstein , B . , Glotzer , M . , 2012 . RhoA activation during polarization and cytokinesis of the early Caenorhabditis elegansembryo is differentially dependent on NOP - 1 and CYK - 4 . Mol . Biol . Cell 23 , 4020 – 4031 . Verma , S . , Shewan , A . M . , Scott , J . A . , Helwani , F . M . , den Elzen , N . R . , Miki , H . , Takenawa , T . , Yap , A . S . , 2004 . Arp2 / 3 activity is necessary for efficient formation of E - cadherin adhesive contacts . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 34062 – 34070 . 343 Asymmetric Cytokinesis in Animal Cells Vicente - Manzanares , M . , Ma , X . , Adelstein , R . S . , Horwitz , A . R . , 2009 . Non - muscle myo - sin II takes centre stage in cell adhesion and migration . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 , 778 – 790 . Walther , R . F . , Pichaud , F . , 2010 . Crumbs / DaPKC - dependent apical exclusion of Bazooka promotes photoreceptor polarity remodeling . Curr . Biol . 20 , 1065 – 1074 . Wang , T . , Yanger , K . , Stanger , B . Z . , Cassio , D . , Bi , E . , 2014 . Cytokinesis defines a spatial landmark for hepatocyte polarization and apical lumen formation . J . Cell Sci . 127 , 2483 – 2492 . Watanabe , N . , Madaule , P . , Reid , T . , Ishizaki , T . , Watanabe , G . , Kakizuka , A . , Saito , Y . , Nakao , K . , Jockusch , B . M . , Narumiya , S . , 1997 . p140mDia , a mammalian homolog of Drosophila diaphanous , is a target protein for Rho small GTPase and is a ligand for profilin . Embo J . 16 , 3044 – 3056 . Watanabe , S . , Ando , Y . , Yasuda , S . , Hosoya , H . , Watanabe , N . , Ishizaki , T . , Narumiya , S . , 2008 . mDia2 induces the actin scaffold for the contractile ring and stabilizes its position during cytokinesis in NIH 3T3 cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 19 , 2328 – 2338 . Watanabe , S . , Okawa , K . , Miki , T . , Sakamoto , S . , Morinaga , T . , Segawa , K . , Arakawa , T . , Kinoshita , M . , Ishizaki , T . , Narumiya , S . , 2010 . Rho and anillin - dependent control of mDia2 localization and function in cytokinesis . Mol . Biol . Cell 21 , 3193 – 3204 . Wei , S . Y . , Escudero , L . M . , Yu , F . , Chang , L . H . , Chen , L . Y . , Ho , Y . H . , Lin , C . M . , Chou , C . S . , Chia , W . , Modolell , J . , Hsu , J . C . , 2005 . Echinoid is a component of adhe - rens junctions that cooperates with DE - Cadherin to mediate cell adhesion . Dev . Cell 8 , 493 – 504 . Weirich , C . S . , Erzberger , J . P . , Barral , Y . , 2008 . The septin family of GTPases : architecture and dynamics . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 9 , 478 – 489 . Wheeler , R . J . , Scheumann , N . , Wickstead , B . , Gull , K . , Vaughan , S . , 2013 . Cytokinesis in Trypanosoma brucei differs between bloodstream and tsetse trypomastigote forms : implications for microtubule - based morphogenesis and mutant analysis . Mol . Microbiol . 90 , 1339 – 1355 . Willard , F . S . , Crouch , M . F . , 2001 . MEK , ERK , and p90RSK are present on mitotic tubulin in Swiss 3T3 cells : a role for the MAP kinase pathway in regulating mitotic exit . Cell . Signal . 13 , 653 – 664 . Willenborg , C . , Jing , J . , Wu , C . , Matern , H . , Schaack , J . , Burden , J . , Prekeris , R . , 2011 . Interaction between FIP5 and SNX18 regulates epithelial lumen formation . J . Cell Biol . 195 , 71 – 86 . Woichansky , I . , Beretta , C . A . , Berns , N . , Riechmann , V . , 2016 . Three mechanisms control E - cadherin localization to the zonula adherens . Nat . Commun . 7 , 10834 . Wolfe , B . A . , Takaki , T . , Petronczki , M . , Glotzer , M . , 2009 . Polo - like kinase 1 directs assem - bly of the HsCyk - 4 RhoGAP / Ect2 RhoGEF complex to initiate cleavage furrow for - mation . PLoS Biol . 7 , e1000110 . Wu , Y . , Kanchanawong , P . , Zaidel - Bar , R . , 2015 . Actin - delimited adhesion - independent clustering of E - cadherin forms the nanoscale building blocks of adherens junctions . Dev . Cell 32 , 139 – 154 . Yamashiro , S . , Totsukawa , G . , Yamakita , Y . , Sasaki , Y . , Madaule , P . , Ishizaki , T . , Narumiya , S . , Matsumura , F . , 2003 . Citron kinase , a Rho - dependent kinase , induces di - phosphorylation of regulatory light chain of myosin II . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 1745 – 1756 . Yamashita , Y . M . , Jones , D . L . , Fuller , M . T . , 2003 . Orientation of asymmetric stem cell divi - sion by the APC tumor suppressor and centrosome . Science 301 , 1547 – 1550 . Yamashita , Y . M . , Mahowald , A . P . , Perlin , J . R . , Fuller , M . T . , 2007 . Asymmetric inheritance of mother versus daughter centrosome in stem cell division . Science 315 , 518 – 521 . Yang , D . , Rismanchi , N . , Renvoise , B . , Lippincott - Schwartz , J . , Blackstone , C . , Hurley , J . H . , 2008 . Structural basis for midbody targeting of spastin by the ESCRT - III protein CHMP1B . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 15 , 1278 – 1286 . 344 C . Thieleke - Matos et al . Yao , M . , Qiu , W . , Liu , R . , Efremov , A . K . , Cong , P . , Seddiki , R . , Payre , M . , Lim , C . T . , Ladoux , B . , Mege , R . M . , Yan , J . , 2014 . Force - dependent conformational switch of alpha - catenin controls vinculin binding . Nat . Commun . 5 , 4525 . Yonemura , S . , Wada , Y . , Watanabe , T . , Nagafuchi , A . , Shibata , M . , 2010 . alpha - Catenin as a tension transducer that induces adherens junction development . Nat . Cell Biol . 12 , 533 – 542 . Yuce , O . , Piekny , A . , Glotzer , M . , 2005 . An ECT2 - centralspindlin complex regulates the localization and function of RhoA . J . Cell Biol . 170 , 571 – 582 . Zhang , D . , Glotzer , M . , 2015 . The RhoGAP activity of CYK - 4 / MgcRacGAP functions non - canonically by promoting RhoA activation during cytokinesis . Elife 4 , e08898 . Zhao , W . - M . , Seki , A . , Fang , G . , 2006 . Cep55 , a microtubule - bundling protein , associates with centralspindlin to control the midbody integrity and cell abscission during cytoki - nesis . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 3881 – 3896 . Zou , Y . , Shao , Z . , Peng , J . , Li , F . , Gong , D . , Wang , C . , Zuo , X . , Zhang , Z . , Wu , J . , Shi , Y . , Gong , Q . , 2014 . Crystal structure of triple - BRCT - domain of ECT2 and insights into the binding characteristics to CYK - 4 . FEBS Lett . 588 , 2911 – 2920 . 345 Asymmetric Cytokinesis in Animal Cells