Computer Supported Cooperative Work 8 : 353 – 371 , 1999 . © 1999 Kluwer Academic Publishers . Printed in the Netherlands . 353 Voice Loops as Coordination Aids in Space Shuttle Mission Control EMILY S . PATTERSON , JENNIFER WATTS - PEROTTI (cid:3) and DAVID D . WOODS Cognitive Systems Engineering Laboratory , Institute for Ergonomics , The Ohio State University ( (cid:3) Now at Eastman Kodak Company , Rochester , NY ) ( Received December 2 1998 ) Abstract . Voice loops , an auditory groupware technology , are essential coordination support tools for experienced practitioners in domains such as air trafﬁc management , aircraft carrier operations and space shuttle mission control . They support synchronous communication on multiple channels among groups of people who are spatially distributed . In this paper , we suggest reasons for why the voice loop system is a successful medium for supporting coordination in space shuttle mission control based on over 130 hours of direct observation . Voice loops allow practitioners to listen in on relevant communications without disrupting their own activities or the activities of others . In addition , the voice loop system is structured around the mission control organization , and therefore directly supports the demands of the domain . By understanding how voice loops meet the particular demands of the mission control environment , insight can be gained for the design of groupware tools to support cooperative activity in other event - driven domains . Key words : attention , broadcasting , common ground , coordination , ethnographic study , mission control , mutual awareness , overhearing , voice loops 1 . Introduction In supervisory control , cognitive activities such as monitoring and anomaly response are often distributed across interdependent sets of practitioners . As Hughes , Randall , and Shapiro ( 1992 ) and others have noted , practitioners in these domains must be able to coordinate their efforts on a “moment to moment basis , in response to constantly changing circumstances . ” Voice loops , a groupware tech - nology which allows synchronous communication among groups of people who are spatially distributed , are used to aid coordination in domains such as air trafﬁc management , aircraft carrier operations ( Rochlin , LaPorte and Roberts , 1987 ) and space shuttle mission control . Voice loops are essential coordination support tools for experienced practi - tioners in space shuttle mission control . Controllers use the voice loops to directly communicate with other personnel in mission control . More importantly , however , controllers use the voice loops to remain aware of the activities of other controllers and mission events in related shuttle subsystems . Controllers continuously monitor 354 EMILY S . PATTERSON ET AL . approximately four voice loops while directly communicating on a primary loop . By being aware of events when they occur , they can synchronize their activities with other controllers and with the actions of the astronauts . If something that is reported on the loops does not match their expectations , they can direct their attention to that thread of conversation and investigate what the deviations are and how their own activities might be impacted . This paper analyzes how voice loops facilitate the coordination of physically distributed practitioners in space shuttle mission control based on direct observa - tions of voice loops in use . We describe how mission control is structured and how the different types of voice loops reﬂect the organizational structure . Then we outline the coordination functions that voice loops support and illustrate these func - tions in an example . We conclude with a discussion of how this analysis provides insight into the important functions that should be considered in the development of systems intended to support cooperative work in other event - driven domains . 2 . Methods Our ﬁndings are based on direct observations of ﬂight controllers using voice loops to support their activities during space shuttle operations ( see Figure 3 for an excerpt of observed voice loop communications ) . The observations were conducted at the Maintenance Mechanical Arm and Crew Systems ( MMACS ) , Mechanical ( Mech ) , Payloads Ofﬁcer ( Payloads ) and Remote Manipulator System ( RMS ) ﬂight control consoles . Over 130 hours of observation were conducted during portions of four actual missions and 27 ﬂight control simulations . Flight control simulations include a full complement of astronauts and ﬂight controllers supporting each ﬂight control console . The high - ﬁdelity simulations are used to train the controllers to respond to unexpected problems . In addition to these observations , we interviewed controllers during low - tempo periods in the simulations and missions about how they use voice loops to support their activities . Controllers described formal and informal protocols that govern the usage of voice loops in mission control , which loops they monitor , why they monitor them , and how and when they are expected to speak on the loops . In addition , we interviewed the personnel who manage the voice loop system to learn how the speciﬁc voice loop assignments are made for each mission , how the loops are managed during ﬂight operations , and which loops are permanently archived . 3 . Cooperative structure of space shuttle mission control 3 . 1 . H IERARCHICAL SUPERVISORY CONTROL STRUCTURE The voice loop system maps onto the supervisory control structure of mission control . NASA’s Mission Control Center ( MCC ) at the Johnson Space Center in Houston , Texas is responsible for managing space shuttle missions from take - off to touchdown . During missions , teams of ﬂight controllers monitor spacecraft