Determining the Mechanical Properties of Yeast Cell Walls John D . Stenson School of Chemical Engineering , University of Birmingham , Edgbaston , Birmingham B15 2TT , U . K . Peter Hartley School of Mechanical Engineering , University of Birmingham , Edgbaston , Birmingham B15 2TT , U . K . Changxiang Wang and Colin R . Thomas School of Chemical Engineering , University of Birmingham , Edgbaston , Birmingham B15 2TT , U . K . DOI 10 . 1002 / btpr . 554 Published online February 28 , 2011 in Wiley Online Library ( wileyonlinelibrary . com ) . The intrinsic cell wall mechanical properties of Baker’s yeast ( Saccharomyces cerevisiae ) cells were determined . Force – deformation data from compression of individual cells up to failure were recorded , and these data were ﬁtted by an analytical model to extract the elas - tic modulus of the cell wall and the initial stretch ratio of the cell . The cell wall was assumed to be homogeneous , isotropic , and incompressible . A linear elastic constitutive equation was assumed based on Hencky strains to accommodate the large stretches of the cell wall . Because of the high compression speed , water loss during compression could be assumed to be negligible . It was then possible to treat the initial stretch ratio and elastic modulus as adjustable parameters within the analytical model . As the experimental data ﬁt - ted numerical simulations well up to the point of cell rupture , it was also possible to extract cell wall failure criteria . The mean cell wall properties for resuspended dried Baker’s yeast were as follows : elastic modulus 185 (cid:1) 15 MPa , initial stretch ratio 1 . 039 (cid:1) 0 . 006 , circum - ferential stress at failure 115 (cid:1) 5 MPa , circumferential strain at failure 0 . 46 (cid:1) 0 . 03 , and strain energy per unit volume at failure 30 (cid:1) 3 MPa . Data on yeast cells obtained by this method and model should be useful in the design and optimization of cell disruption equip - ment for yeast cell processing . V V C 2011 American Institute of Chemical Engineers Biotechnol . Prog . , 27 : 505 – 512 , 2011 Keywords : yeast , biomechanics , micromanipulation , elastic modulus , initial stretch ratio Introduction The disruption of microbial cells is important in biopro - cessing as a means of releasing products that cannot be secreted . For example , Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells must be disrupted during the production of proteins such as Hepa - titis B vaccine 1 and hydrocortisone . 2 Cell disruption involves breaking cell walls to release the internal contents into the suspending solution by methods such as high - pressure ho - mogenization or cavitation . 3 To understand and predict cell disruption , knowledge of the effects of ﬂuid stress on the cell and of the material properties of the cell wall is required . 4 – 6 There may be different types of stress generation in different types of disruption equipment , but in all cases the response of the cell will be determined by the mechani - cal properties of the cell wall . Improvement in disruption has been the motivation of recent studies into the mechanical properties of yeast cells . 7 – 13 In addition to protection against external physical stresses , the cell wall contains the hydrostatic or turgor pressure within the cell , which is caused by osmotic pressure differ - ences between the cytoplasm and the suspending medium . The osmotic pressure in the medium is usually lower than that inside the cell , causing the cell to swell ( inﬂate ) . Under - standing the maintenance of cell shape is another motivation for studies into the mechanical properties of yeast cells . Many techniques have been used to measure the mechani - cal properties of cells and tissues . 14 All of these methods can determine the mechanical properties of cells , but only compression testing by micromanipulation is able to extract parameters up to cell failure and therefore is the technique of choice for this work . Compression testing by micromani - pulation can be used to determine the mechanical properties of small particles or cells with sizes down to about 1 l m . 14 – 16 It has been used to study many experimental systems includ - ing sea - urchin eggs , 17 , 18 single tomato cells , 19 – 21 animal cells , 16 , 22 , 23 yeast cells , 7 – 13 bacteria , 24 microspheres and microcapsules , 15 , 25 , 26 and pollen grains . 27 In this technique , an individual cell is compressed between two ﬂat parallel surfaces , usually until it bursts . By measuring the force being Current address of John D . Stenson : Centre for Bioprocess Engineering Research , Department of Chemical Engineering , University of Cape Town , Rondebosch 7701 , South Africa . Current address of Changxiang Wang : School of Dentistry , University of Birmingham , St Chad’s Queensway , Birmingham B4 6NN , U . K . Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to C . R . Thomas at c . r . thomas @ bham . ac . uk . V V C 2011 American Institute of Chemical Engineers 505 applied to the cell and the displacement of the surfaces , force – deformation data can be found . However , to under - stand fully the mechanical behavior of cell walls , it is essen - tial to obtain intrinsic mechanical properties that allow cells of different size and composition , and with different histor - ies , to be compared . By linking the compression technique to a cell mechanical model , it is possible to obtain such properties , e . g . , the cell wall elastic modulus , and then to determine the stresses and strains in the cell wall during compression , which may also be used to develop failure criteria . Feng and Yang 28 presented a theoretical model for com - pression of an inﬂated gas - ﬁlled spherical membrane between two frictionless and parallel platens . The membrane was assumed to behave as a Mooney – Rivlin nonlinear elastic material . This model was extended by Lardner and Pujara 29 whose formulation used identical equations except that it assumed that the enclosed volume was constant during com - pression , which is the case of a liquid - ﬁlled sphere with impermeable walls . This assumption of a liquid core is more realistic when considering a biological system . Furthermore , biological cells are usually under internal ( turgor ) pressure and , therefore , are inﬂated before compression begins . This means that the osmotic pressure of the suspending medium or solution inﬂuences the cell diameter and can produce an initial stretching of the wall before compression begins . The model must allow for this . The constitutive equation of the yeast cell wall ( i . e . , the relationship between stresses and strains ) is unknown a pri - ori . However , previous studies by Smith et al . 11 have shown that it is possible to ﬁt a linear elastic material model to the compression data . Because of the high deformations required to cause yeast cell wall failure , a model allowing for large strains has been developed recently using a more appropriate deﬁnition of strain , i . e . , Hencky strain . 13 It was shown that this model ﬁtted the compression data well . This model was used here to characterize the intrinsic material properties of the Baker’s yeast cell wall , in particular , the elastic modulus . The reliability of the method of ﬁtting model simulations to compression testing data to obtain cell wall elastic moduli has been studied . 8 A number of parameters were identiﬁed that needed to be determined to prevent nonunique solutions being obtained . This is when a number of different combina - tions of parameter values can produce matching simulation results ( at least within the precision of the experiments ) . These parameters included • the initial stretch ratio ( i . e . , the radius of the uninﬂated cell to its radius under turgor at the beginning of compression ) ; • the initial cell wall thickness ratio ( i . e . , the ratio of the cell wall thickness to cell radius for an uninﬂated or turgor - less cell ) ; and • the cell wall permeability or hydraulic conductivity . It was shown that even if the constitutive equation of the cell wall can be assumed to be linear elastic , at least two of these parameters must be predetermined accurately and pre - cisely to prevent nonunique solutions being obtained . The other parameter can be treated as an adjustable parameter that can be determined by model ﬁtting . The initial cell wall thickness ratio was difﬁcult to measure during compression testing so a population mean value was used . In work so far on yeast cells , a population mean value of the initial stretch ratio was used , leaving permeability as the adjustable parameter . 9 , 11 , 12 An objective of this work was to use micromanipulation compression rates that allowed water loss from the cells dur - ing compression to be considered negligible , rendering it unnecessary to know the cell wall permeability . This allowed the initial stretch ratio to be treated as an adjustable parame - ter for each cell , and it and the corresponding elastic modu - lus giving the best ﬁt could be determined . This improved on the previous methods in not requiring the use of a popu - lation mean initial stretch ratio , although a population mean cell wall thickness ratio was still needed . The model was ﬁt - ted to cell failure to ﬁnd useful failure criteria such as the stresses and strains at this point . Materials and Methods Yeast cell suspensions Dried Baker’s yeast ( S . cerevisiae ) ( Fermipan Red , DSM Bakery Ingredients , Dordrecht , Holland ) was suspended in Isoton II solution ( Coulter Electronics , Hertfordshire , UK ) at 2 g L (cid:2) 1 for 24 h at 4 (cid:3) C to give a reproducible suspension of late stationary - phase cells . 30 Before use , the suspension of cells was warmed to room temperature , and a 1 : 100 dilution made using Isoton II solution to allow individual cells to be selected for compression experiments . All micromanipulation experiments were performed at room temperature , and temperature variations between 25 and 35 (cid:3) C have been shown to have no signiﬁcant effect on the results . 31 Isoton II solution was found to have an osmotic pressure of 0 . 8 MPa . Visualization chamber A visualization chamber has been developed to analyze the effects of osmotic step increases on yeast cells and the resultant changes in cell volume . 32 This method involves changing a surrounding hypotonic solution for a hypertonic solution , in steps of increasing osmotic pressure , resulting in water loss and cell shrinkage . Cells were ﬁxed to the Petri dish via electrostatic interac - tions using a solution of chitosan ( Sigma - Aldrich , ref : 448869 ) at 1 g of chitosan per 1 L of water . 33 Although chito - san can be toxic to yeast cells , it has been shown that at this low concentration it does not have a detrimental effect . 32 The chitosan solution was left in the dish for 1 h before being removed , and the dish was allowed to dry . Sixty microliters of cell suspension at a concentration of 2 g L (cid:2) 1 was then placed in the center of the chitosan - covered Petri dish and left for 45 min . Following this , a PVC disk was placed in the Petri dish to form a chamber using silicone grease in the contact regions to hold the disk tightly in place . It was possible to focus on (cid:4) 40 cells at any one time using a magniﬁcation of 400 (cid:5) . Only this number of cells could be observed at any one time because of the high level of magniﬁcation that was required for an accu - rate measurement of the cell size . Nine solutions of sodium chloride ( Sigma - Aldrich , ref : S5629 ) with osmotic pressures between 0 . 24 and 9 . 6 MPa were produced . The osmotic pressures of these solutions were calculated using osmotic tables 34 and checked directly using a vapor pressure osmometer ( Wescor 5500 vapor pres - sure osmometer , Chemlab Scientiﬁc Products , Hornchurch , UK ) . 506 Biotechnol . Prog . , 2011 , Vol . 27 , No . 2 This technique allowed the initial stretch ratio of individ - ual cells to be determined using the methods described by Smith et al . 10 However , this could not be done during com - pression experiments because of the relatively poor resolu - tion of the optics in the micromanipulation equipment , which prevented accurate measurement of the cell volume . Compression testing by micromanipulation In compression testing by micromanipulation , an individ - ual yeast cell is fully compressed between two parallel and rigid platens until it ruptures . 7 This work involved the use of two different types of compression equipment , a low strain rate microcompression tester ( LSRT ) 7 , 10 , 19 and a more recently developed high strain rate microcompression tester ( HSRT ) . The HSRT is described in detail elsewhere . 25 This compression equipment is capable of much greater compres - sion speeds ( up to at least 308 l m s (cid:2) 1 ) than the LRST ( up to 68 l m s (cid:2) 1 ) , though it is considerably more difﬁcult to use with yeast cells because of an optical design intended for larger objects such as microspheres . In either case , the force applied on a cell was measured by a force transducer ( model 403A , Aurora Scientiﬁc , ON , Canada ) , which has a full scale of 5000 l N and a resolution of 100 nN . The compression experiment produced voltage data that were ampliﬁed 10 - fold before being recorded by a data acquisition board ( Amplicon Liveline , Brighton , UK ) . Voltage – time data were then converted into force – displace - ment data using the method outlined by Mashmoushy et al . 7 In initial experiments , (cid:4) 100 cells were compressed over a 3 - h period at a wide range of speeds , up to 308 l m s (cid:2) 1 , using both the LRST and HRST for their appropriate ranges of speed . During this time , the temperature of the suspending so - lution and viability of the cells remained constant . Once a suit - able speed had been established for compressions with negligible water loss , this was used for subsequent experiments . As described below , this was 68 l m s (cid:2) 1 using the LSRT . Individual cell sizes were measured directly from force – displacement data . 10 Having determined the size of the cell being compressed , it was possible to use this data to estimate the initial cell wall thickness . Although it was impractical to determine the cell wall thickness for individual cells being compressed , the mean cell wall thickness to cell radius ratio for a population of cells could be determined using transmis - sion electron microscopy . The use of a mean ratio leads to some error as individual cells of the same size will undoubt - edly have slightly different cell wall thicknesses . However , an analysis of the transmission electron microscopy data sug - gested that such errors were not more than (cid:1) 3 % , and in practice , there appears to be no alternative to this approach . Repeated compressions To ensure the elastic cell wall model 13 was appropriate for use with yeast cells to high deformations , it was impor - tant to determine whether the elastic yield point of the wall was exceeded during compression ( leading to irreversible plastic deformation ) . Ideally , a hysteresis trial would have been done , i . e . , a compression – release experiment tracking the force in both directions . However , there was a signiﬁcant time delay of approximately half a second whilst the LSRT reversed direction . Using a hydraulic conductivity of 0 . 31 (cid:5) 10 (cid:2) 12 ms (cid:2) 1 Pa (cid:2) 1 ( Ref . 11 ) found on similar yeast cells to those used in this work , it was calculated that such a delay would have allowed sufﬁcient water loss to occur to render the hysteresis experiment invalid . It was , therefore , decided to compress and release a cell repeatedly ( to a high deforma - tion not causing failure , i . e . , 60 % ) . Signs of hysteresis and / or permanent deformation were sought . Modeling compression testing data The model and the method of ﬁtting simulations to experi - mental data have been described in full elsewhere . 13 The initial stretch ratio and its corresponding elastic modulus were treated as adjustable parameters . Their values were determined through model ﬁtting , using the correlation coefﬁcient between simu - lated and experimental data to choose the best values . A typical example of model ﬁtting is shown in Figure 1 . Effect of compression speed on the estimated elastic modulus It was expected that at lower speeds of compression , force – deformation data would be inﬂuenced by water loss from the cell . 10 Similar yeast cells to those used in this work have been shown to have a very high hydraulic conductivity ( 0 . 31 (cid:5) 10 (cid:2) 12 ms (cid:2) 1 Pa (cid:2) 1 ) . 11 The model could be ﬁtted to experimental data regardless of the speed of compression , but unless water loss was negligible , the resulting estimate of the elastic modulus would be incorrect . To examine this effect , (cid:4) 100 cells were compressed at speeds ranging from 8 to 308 l m s (cid:2) 1 . For speeds above 68 l m s (cid:2) 1 , it was necessary to use the HSRT . In each case , it was assumed that the elastic modulus could be determined as if there was negligible water loss , giving a ‘‘pseudo - elastic modulus’’ ( so - called because it is similar to but not actually the elastic modulus ) . Within the numerical simulations , the cell wall permeability was therefore set at zero , regardless of the experimental speed . Furthermore , the initial stretch ratio was ﬁxed at 1 . 04 because ﬁtting for this parameter when water loss was occurring would be meaningless . The ﬁtting procedure was otherwise as described above . Results Repeated compressions In this test , a cell was partially compressed and the load removed . The load was then reapplied to a slightly higher Figure 1 . Typical example of results produced by the ﬁtting process . Parameter values : E ¼ 163 MPa , k s ¼ 1 . 01 , r o ¼ 2 . 49 l m , and h o ¼ 92 nm . Biotechnol . Prog . , 2011 , Vol . 27 , No . 2 507 amount of deformation and the load removed once again . The load was applied for a ﬁnal time until the cell ruptured . Figure 2 shows experimental data for the repeated compres - sion and release of a cell . The force – deformation data are very close , at least up to 60 % ( second compression ) . As can be seen in Figure 2 , the force – deformation curves essentially overlapped . If the cell wall behavior was elastic - plastic , then the high level of de - formation should have permanently deformed the cell lead - ing to a different force – deformation curve being generated by subsequent compressions . It is , therefore , reasonable to presume that deformation is elastic throughout the process . It remains possible that there was a yield point above 60 % de - formation , although 60 % was , in general , a large fraction of the overall deformation to cell bursting . Furthermore , the quality of model ﬁtting suggests no signiﬁcant plastic behav - ior ( Figure 1 ) . Effect of compression speed on elastic modulus Figure 3 shows the effect of compression speed on the ‘‘pseudo - elastic modulus’’ estimated assuming negligible water loss during compression . It can be seen that the modu - lus was essentially constant for compression speeds of 68 l m s (cid:2) 1 and above . This indicates that when the cells were compressed at or above this speed the effects of water loss from the cell during compression could be considered negli - gible . Presumably , other time - dependent effects , such as wall or cell viscoelasticity , were also negligible . To ensure that no time - dependent behavior such as water loss was affecting the results , it seemed reasonable to use a compression speed of 68 l m s (cid:2) 1 ( the maximum available using the LSRT , which was the more experimentally conven - ient tester ) . This result was conﬁrmed by simulations in which the cell wall was taken to be permeable , as previously reported . 13 For a compression speed of 68 l m s (cid:2) 1 , the simulated force – deformation curves for no water loss and for a hydraulic conductivity of 0 . 31 (cid:5) 10 (cid:2) 12 ms (cid:2) 1 Pa (cid:2) 1 were close , 11 whereas both were signiﬁcantly different to the curve at 8 l m s (cid:2) 1 also for a hydraulic conductivity of 0 . 31 (cid:5) 10 (cid:2) 12 ms (cid:2) 1 Pa (cid:2) 1 . This conﬁrms that it was reasonable to assume negligible water loss during compression for speeds of 68 l m s (cid:2) 1 and above . These simulations also showed that ignoring water loss at 8 l m s (cid:2) 1 gave a pseudo - elastic modu - lus 27 MPa lower than the simulation allowing for water loss . This compares well to the data shown in Figure 3 , where the mean ( pseudo - ) elastic modulus at 8 l m s (cid:2) 1 was found to be 18 MPa lower than that produced at 68 l m s (cid:2) 1 . Figure 3 shows that if the compression speed is sufﬁ - ciently high , then any cell volume changes during compres - sion can be considered negligible . This result has important implications because setting the cell volume changes during deformation to zero ( which is equivalent to a cell wall per - meability of zero ) allows the initial stretch ratio to be treated as an adjustable parameter while still allowing unique results from the modeling . This is the ﬁrst time that it has been pos - sible to obtain information about the initial stretch ratio of individual cells from compression testing . Population data and means for the initial stretch ratio and elastic modulus By ﬁtting numerical simulations to experimental data for many cells at the chosen speed of 68 l m s (cid:2) 1 , a mean elastic modulus of 185 (cid:1) 15 MPa was determined . ( The error is expressed as conﬁdence limits ; 103 cells were characterized to obtain the population data . ) This result may be compared with that of Smith et al . , 11 i . e . , 150 (cid:1) 15 MPa , also for Fer - mipan yeast cells . The elastic modulus was not dependent on the inﬂated cell diameter , i . e . , the diameter at the start of compression ( Fig - ure 4 ) . In this work , the mean initial stretch ratio was determined to be 1 . 039 (cid:1) 0 . 006 ( 103 cells ) . This compares well to the value presented by Smith et al . 11 of 1 . 04 (cid:1) 0 . 01 for similar cells , found by measurement of volume changes caused by osmotic pressure changes . It was found that the initial stretch ratio was not dependent on the cell size , as shown in Figure 5 . Figure 6 shows a comparison of initial stretch ratio data from a visualization chamber and from compression testing . The visualization chamber gave a mean initial stretch ratio Figure 3 . Effect of compression speed on the mean ‘‘pseudo - elastic modulus’’ from ﬁtting numerical simulations . In each case , the initial stretch ratio was ﬁxed at 1 . 04 , and the elastic modulus was an adjustable parameter within the model . Approximately 100 cells were tested at each compression speed . LSRT , low strain rate tester ; HSRT , high strain rate tes - ter for speeds higher than 68 l m s (cid:2) 1 . Errors are standard errors . Figure 2 . Force – deformation data for the repeated compres - sion of a cell . Cell size ¼ 4 . 1 l m , deformation at failure ¼ 68 % , and force at failure ¼ 123 l N . 508 Biotechnol . Prog . , 2011 , Vol . 27 , No . 2 of 1 . 033 (cid:1) 0 . 008 , which compares well with that obtained by compression testing of 1 . 039 (cid:1) 0 . 006 . Chi - squared tests were performed on the data in Figure 6 , which showed that the distributions were statistically similar at the 5 % level . This demonstrates that the wide range of initial stretch ratios obtained by compression testing is rea - sonable . The size independence of the initial stretch ratio has been observed previously using a similar visualization cham - ber method . 35 The initial stretch ratio was not found to depend on the elastic modulus , which was surprising because a simple force balance on a spherical shell would suggest that the initial stretch ratio would depend on the elastic modulus ( for a given osmotic pressure difference and cell wall thickness ) . Possibly , the dependence was masked by biological variability . Force and deformation at failure The experimental data showed that the mean force at fail - ure was 138 (cid:1) 11 l N . This is comparable to previous ﬁnd - ings for Fermipan - dried Baker’s yeast of 113 , 6 101 , 7 and 97 l N . 10 These differences might be due to the signiﬁcantly higher speed of compression used here , which meant that water loss was negligible . Figure 7 shows the relationship between the force at failure and the cell diameter , which is such a weak correlation that one might conclude that the force at failure is nearly size independent , as shown previously . 7 , 10 The mean deformation at failure was 67 % (cid:1) 2 % . This compares to a previous value of 67 % for similar cells and conditions , 10 even though the latter used a signiﬁcantly lower compression speed . It is perhaps reasonable that a cell would have to be deformed to a similar extent at failure , regardless of the conditions , to obtain similar stretches and hence strains in the walls at failure . This could also explain why the percentage deformation at failure and the force at failure were nearly independent of the initial stretch ratio ( data not shown ) . Failure criteria and cell wall thickness assumptions Because the models ﬁt the experimental data well up to failure ( e . g . , Figure 1 ) , it was possible to estimate the Figure 5 . Relationship between the initial stretch ratio and the cell diameter . Dashed lines represent 95 % conﬁdence limits . . Figure 6 . Comparison of the initial stretch ratio determined by compression testing and using the visualization chamber . Number of cells shown as the percentage of the total popula - tion of the cells tested . Figure 7 . Relationship between the force at failure and the cell diameter for cells compressed at 68 l m s 2 1 . Approximately 100 measurements . Dashed lines represent 95 % conﬁdence limits . Figure 4 . Relationship between the elastic modulus and the cell diameter . Dashed lines represent 95 % conﬁdence limits . Biotechnol . Prog . , 2011 , Vol . 27 , No . 2 509 stresses and strains at failure . To determine appropriate fail - ure criteria , it would be necessary to have independent infor - mation on the mechanism of failure . However , to date , it has not been possible to determine the precise mechanism that leads to cell wall failure from compression testing by micromanipulation . From the numerical model , it was found that at a typical failure deformation the stress and strain were up to ﬁve times greater in the circumferential ( hoop ) direction of the cell than along a meridian . 13 Therefore , it was assumed that cell wall failure propagated along a meridian . Also , above a deformation of 40 % , the strain and stress in the wall were found to be always highest at the equator of the cell , so this is where failure was assumed to occur . This mode of failure has been observed for melamine - formaldehyde microcapsules compressed within an environmental scanning electron microscope . 36 The principal ( Hencky ) strain in the circum - ferential direction was calculated , along with the true or Cauchy stress , which is the work conjugate stress for Hencky strain , assuming wall incompressibility . 13 It was found that the mean circumferential stress at failure was 115 (cid:1) 5 MPa , and the mean circumferential strain at failure was found to be 0 . 46 (cid:1) 0 . 03 ( 103 cells ) . Other possible failure criteria that could be used are the von Mises stress and strain as used by Smith et al . 11 von Mises stress is often used to determine the yielding point at which a ductile material , such as metal , begins to deform plastically . If a von Mises failure criterion was assumed in this work , the corresponding stress and strain at failure were 102 (cid:1) 5 MPa and 0 . 55 (cid:1) 0 . 04 ( 103 cells ) , respectively . It is not clear why these values are different to those given by Smith et al . 11 who found the mean von Mises stress at fail - ure to be 70 (cid:1) 4 MPa and mean von Mises strain at failure to be 0 . 75 (cid:1) 0 . 08 ( 96 cells ) . Possibly , it is because Smith et al . 11 assumed a constant stretch ratio of 1 . 04 . Another important possibility for a failure criterion is the strain energy per unit volume at failure , on the assumption that any cell breakage in processing would require the energy stored in the cell wall to exceed some critical level . This failure measure might be useful when considering the breakage of yeast cells in disruption processes such as ho - mogenization . The value for this criterion was found to be 30 (cid:1) 3 MPa or MJ m (cid:2) 3 ( 103 cells ) . The negative correlation of the strain energy per unit volume at failure with the cell size is shown in Figure 8 . It is speculated that this negative correlation arises because larger cells are likely to have more bud scars or other ﬂaws in the wall , although it will require further work to demonstrate this , or otherwise . All of the other failure criteria showed a similar negative correlation with cell diameter . As mentioned earlier , it was impractical to determine the cell wall thickness of individual cells during compression testing , so a constant cell wall thickness to cell radius ratio was used . It has been suggested 11 , 31 that it is therefore more appropriate to use the ‘‘surface modulus’’ to describe the me - chanical properties of the cell wall . The surface modulus is the product of the elastic modulus E and the cell wall thick - ness h o when the cell is uninﬂated ( has zero turgor ) . The combined parameter Eh o is found in the dimensionless group used to describe the force data in compression testing . 13 Its use obviates the need to use a predetermined mean cell wall thickness ratio in calculating E . However , it is unclear if this parameter has any bearing on the breakage of cells in disrup - tion equipment . A surface modulus of 15 . 3 (cid:1) 1 . 2 N m (cid:2) 1 ( 103 cells ) was calculated here . The surface modulus calcu - lated in this work was shown to be only weakly correlated with the cell diameter ( not shown ) . Furthermore , it has been claimed that only the inner b - 1 , 3 - glucan layer provides me - chanical support to the cell wall , 37 so it may actually be inappropriate to use the whole cell wall thickness in model - ing . For example , if the outer layers of the cell wall were stripped away by enzymic treatment , 38 then the cell wall thickness assumption used in this work would no longer be valid . The thickness of the b - 1 , 3 - glucan layer was not deter - mined in this work . As well as this , although the mean cell wall thickness to cell radius ratio used in this work was a good approximation , there were still variations in cell wall thickness from cell to cell that were not incorporated in the analysis . By using the surface modulus and the surface strain energy , the uncer - tainty in cell wall thickness is of no importance , as these pa - rameters are thickness independent . The latter is preferred . Discussion There are few available studies on the mechanical proper - ties of fungal cell walls . Using atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) , the elastic modulus of Aspergillus nidulans has been determined to range between 110 and 200 MPa depending on the distance from the hyphal tip and on the growth media . 39 This is an important conﬁrmation of the present results as S . cerevisiae and A . nidulans have similar chemi - cal and structural properties , so a similar elastic modulus is to be expected . 40 Smith et al . 10 obtained an elastic modulus of 150 (cid:1) 15 MPa for Baker’s yeast in comparison to the present value of 185 (cid:1) 15 MPa . One of the major reasons for this difference is that the earlier work assigned a value of 1 . 04 to the initial stretch ratio of every cell ( equal to the mean value for the cell population ) . 8 Following that protocol , an elastic modulus of 166 (cid:1) 15 MPa was obtained from the present data . This shows that ﬁxing the initial stretch ratio causes an underesti - mation of the elastic modulus . To understand the relationships between the parameters , it is important to consider the structure of the Baker’s yeast cell wall . The inner b - 1 , 3 - glucan layer is claimed to be the Figure 8 . Relationship between the strain energy per unit vol - ume at failure and the cell diameter . Dashed lines represent 95 % conﬁdence limits . 510 Biotechnol . Prog . , 2011 , Vol . 27 , No . 2 cell wall component that provides the majority of the me - chanical strength to the cell . 37 b - 1 , 3 - Glucan chains are highly elastic because of their hollow helix structure . If the thickness of the wall was taken to be the thickness of a puta - tive load - bearing b - 1 , 3 - glucan layer , rather than the entire wall thickness , the elastic modulus and consequently the strain energy per unit volume at failure would be signiﬁ - cantly higher than those presented here . However , the sur - face modulus and surface strain energy will be unaffected whatever choice is made for the wall thickness . Although chitin is deposited in the lateral cell walls and crosslinked with b - 1 , 3 - glucan and b - 1 , 6 - glucan following cytokinesis , 41 it is generally not present in the walls of buds , suggesting that chitin is not essential for the stability and mechanical strength of the cell walls . The majority of chitin is found in the bud scars of mother cells and to a lesser extent in the birth scars of daughter cells . It has been shown by AFM that the chitin within the bud scar has an elastic modulus up to 10 times greater than the mannoprotein sur - face . 42 When the highly elastic b - 1 , 3 - glucan layer is cross - linked with signiﬁcantly stiffer chitin , the ability of the cell wall to stretch during compression might be expected to be reduced . 43 The Baker’s yeast ( S . cerevisiae ) cells used in this work have been shown to be late stationary phase , 30 although this does not mean that most of the cells are old and highly scarred . Indeed , most cells will be daughter cells . 44 How - ever , when cells enter the stationary phase their cell walls change becoming thicker and more impermeable to macro - molecules . 37 , 45 Also , the number of disulﬁde bridges in the cell wall increases by six to seven times that of cells during the exponential phase . 46 The thickness of the yeast cell wall is also cell size dependent with mother cells ( largest cells ) being thicker than those of the daughter cells ( smallest cells ) . In this work , this relationship was simulated by the size in - dependence of the initial thickness ratio , although there is no evidence that this ratio is even approximately constant across the cell cycle or a fermentation . The scatter observed in Figures 4 , 5 , 7 , and 8 is assumed to be due to the biological variability of the cells . There are an estimated 1 , 200 genes of S . cerevisiae , which affect the composition and organization of the cell wall , 47 and (cid:4) 50 % of cell wall proteins are regulated by the cell cycle . 48 Besides the average composition of the wall , growth proc - esses change during the cell cycle between isotropic ( growth over whole of cell surface ) and apical ( growth at the tip dur - ing bud formation ) . Bud formation leads to the deposition of chitin bud scars in the cell wall . Older cells may be expected to have more bud scars and , therefore , may be expected to have different mechanical properties to younger cells . It is also known that changes in the growth medium , growth tem - perature , external pH , and oxygen levels will signiﬁcantly affect the thickness , composition , and structure of the cell wall . 49 At present , this heterogeneity is ignored in compres - sion testing , and it is assumed that the means and standard deviations of the cell wall material properties should provide enough information for further studies , for example , of the mechanisms of yeast cell disruption . Conclusion Compression testing by micromanipulation at high strain rates ( compression speeds ) has been used to produce force – deformation data for yeast cells . It was conﬁrmed that a thin - walled sphere with a linear elastic constitutive equation for the cell wall material can represent the mechanics of a yeast cell . The high strain rates allowed the cell wall perme - ability to be neglected , thereby allowing the initial stretch ra - tio of individual cells to be found from compression data with the corresponding elastic modulus . This study has given mean cell wall properties for late sta - tionary phase Baker’s yeast of 185 (cid:1) 15 MPa for the elastic modulus and 1 . 039 (cid:1) 0 . 006 for an initial stretch ratio , as well as giving other parameter values that might be relevant to cell behavior in disruption processes . It is of interest that ﬁxing the initial stretch ratio , as done in earlier work , causes an underestimation of the elastic modulus . Using this method , it will now be possible to study how changes in yeast cell wall composition and structure , for example , dur - ing fermentation , affect wall material properties . It will also be possible to investigate further the mechanisms of cell dis - ruption in processing . Acknowledgments The authors acknowledge the ﬁnancial support of the Bio - technology and Biological Sciences Research Council , UK . Notation h ¼ cell wall thickness during compression ( nm ) h o ¼ cell wall thickness of uninﬂated cell ( nm ) r 0 ¼ radius of uninﬂated cell ( l m ) E ¼ elastic modulus ( MPa ) F ¼ force compressing cell ( l N ) k s ¼ initial stretch ratio Abbreviations HSRT ¼ high strain rate tester LSRT ¼ low strain rate tester Literature Cited 1 . McAleer WJ , Buynak EB , Maigetter RZ , Wampler DE , Miller WJ , Hilleman MR . Human Hepatitis - B vaccine from recombi - nant yeast . Nature . 1984 ; 307 : 178 – 180 . 2 . Kelly D , Kelly S . Rewiring yeast for drug synthesis . Nat Bio - technol . 2003 ; 21 : 133 – 134 . 3 . Balasundaram B , Pandit AB . Selective release of invertase by hydrodynamic cavitation . Biochem Eng J . 2001 ; 8 : 251 – 256 . 4 . Thomas CR , Zhang Z . The effect of hydrodynamics on biologi - cal materials . In : Galindo E , Ramirez OT , editors . Advances in Bioprocess Engineering II . Dordrecht , The Netherlands : Springer ; 1998 : 137 – 170 . 5 . Kleinig AR , Middelberg APJ . The correlation of cell disrup - tion with homogeniser valve pressure gradient determined by computational ﬂuid dynamics . Chem Eng Sci . 1996 ; 51 : 5103 – 5110 . 6 . Kleinig AR , Middelberg APJ . On the mechanism of microbial cell disruption in high - pressure homogenisation . Chem Eng Sci . 1998 ; 53 : 891 – 898 . 7 . Mashmoushy H , Zhang Z , Thomas CR . Micromanipulation measurement of the mechanical properties of baker’s yeast cells . Biotechnol Tech . 1998 ; 12 : 925 – 929 . 8 . Smith AE , Moxham KE , Middelberg APJ . On uniquely deter - mining cell - wall material properties with the compression experiment . Chem Eng Sci . 1998 ; 53 : 3913 – 3922 . 9 . Smith AE . Cell wall mechanical properties of Saccharomyces cerevisiae . PhD Thesis , University of Adelaide , Australia , 1999 . 10 . Smith AE , Zhang Z , Thomas CR . Wall material properties of yeast cells . I . Cell measurements and compression experiments . Chem Eng Sci . 2000 ; 55 : 2031 – 2041 . Biotechnol . Prog . , 2011 , Vol . 27 , No . 2 511 11 . Smith AE , Moxham KE , Middelberg APJ . Wall material proper - ties of yeast cells . II . Analysis . Chem Eng Sci . 2000 ; 55 : 2043 – 2053 . 12 . Smith AE , Zhang Z , Thomas CR , Moxham KE , Middelberg APJ . The mechanical properties of Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA . 2000 ; 97 : 871 – 9874 . 13 . Stenson JD , Thomas CR , Hartley P . Modelling the mechanical properties of yeast cells . Chem Eng Sci . 2009 ; 64 : 1892 – 1903 . 14 . Zhang Z , Stenson JD , Thomas CR . Micromanipulation in me - chanical characterisation of single particles . Adv Chem Eng . 2009 ; 37 : 29 – 85 . 15 . Liu KK , Williams DR , Briscoe BJ . Compressive deformation of a single microcapsule . J Phys Rev E . 1996 ; 54 : 6673 – 6680 . 16 . Peeters EAG , Bouten CVC , Oomens CWJ , Baaijens FPT . Moni - toring the biomechanical response of individual cells under compression : a new compression device . Med Biol Eng Comput . 2003 ; 41 : 498 – 503 . 17 . Yoneda M . Tension at the surface of sea - urchin egg : a critical examination of Cole’s experiment . J Exp Biol . 1964 ; 41 : 893 – 906 . 18 . Yoneda M . Tension at the surface of sea - urchin eggs on the ba - sis of ‘liquid drop’ concept . Adv Biophys . 1973 ; 4 : 153 – 190 . 19 . Blewett JM , Burrows K , Thomas CR . A micromanipulation method to measure the mechanical properties of single tomato suspension cells . Biotechnol Lett . 2000 ; 22 : 1877 – 1883 . 20 . Wang CX , Wang L , Thomas CR . Modelling the mechanical properties of single suspension - cultured tomato cells . Ann Bot . 2004 ; 93 : 443 – 453 . 21 . Wang CX , Pritchard J , Thomas CR . Investigation of the mechanics of single tomato fruit cells . J Texture Stud . 2006 ; 37 : 597 – 606 . 22 . Zhang Z , Ferenczi MA , Thomas CR . A micromanipulation tech - nique with a theoretical cell model for determining mechanical properties of single mammalian cells . Chem Eng Sci . 1992 ; 47 : 1347 – 1354 . 23 . Nguyen B , Wang QG , Kuiper NJ , El Haj AJ , Thomas CR , Zhang Z . Strain - dependent viscoelastic behaviour and rupture force of single chondrocytes and chondrons under compression . Biotechnol Lett . 2009 ; 31 : 803 – 809 . 24 . Shiu C , Zhang Z , Thomas CR . A novel technique for the study of bacterial cell mechanical properties . Biotechnol Lett . 1999 ; 13 : 707 – 713 . 25 . Wang CX , Cowen C , Zhang Z , Thomas CR . High - speed com - pression of single alginate microspheres . Chem Eng Sci . 2005 ; 60 : 6649 – 6657 . 26 . Nguyen VB , Wang CX , Thomas CR , Zhang Z . Mechanical properties of single alginate microspheres determined by micro - compression and ﬁnite element modelling . Chem Eng Sci . 2009 ; 64 : 821 – 829 . 27 . Liu T , Zhang Z . Mechanical properties of desiccated ragweed pollen grains determined by micromanipulation and theoretical modelling . Biotechnol Bioeng . 2004 ; 85 : 770 – 775 . 28 . Feng WW , Yang WH . On the contact problem of an inﬂated spherical nonlinear membrane . Trans Am Soc Mech Eng : J Appl Mech . 1973 ; 40 : 209 – 214 . 29 . Lardner TJ , Pujara P . Compression of spherical cells . In : Nemat - Nasser S , editor . Mechanics Today , Vol . 5 . New York : Pergamon ; 1980 : 161 – 176 . 30 . Kleinig AR . Cell disruption mechanics . PhD thesis , University of Adelaide , Australia , 1997 . 31 . Stenson JD . Investigating the mechanical properties of yeast cells . PhD thesis , The University of Birmingham , UK , 2008 . 32 . Berner JL , Gervais P . A new visualization chamber to study the transient volumetric response of yeast cells submitted to osmotic shifts . Biotechnol Bioeng . 1994 ; 43 : 165 – 170 . 33 . Champluvier B , Kamp B , Rouxhet PG . Immobilization of b - ga - lactosidase retained in yeast : adhesion of the cells on a support . Appl Microbiol Biotechnol . 1989 ; 27 : 464 – 469 . 34 . Wolf AV , Brown MG , Prentiss PG . Concentration properties of aqueous solutions : conversion tables . In : Weast RC , Astle MJ , editors . CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics , 61st ed . Boca Raton , FL : CRC Press ; 1980 . 35 . Martinez de Maranon I , Gervais P , Molin P . Determination of cells’ water membrane permeability : unexpected high osmotic permeability of Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Biotechnol Bioeng . 1997 ; 56 : 62 – 70 . 36 . Ren YL , Donald AM , Zhang ZB . Investigation of radiation damage to microcapsules in environmental SEM . Mater Sci Technol Ser . 2007 ; 23 : 857 – 864 . 37 . Klis FM , Boorsma A , de Groot PWJ . Cell wall construction in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Yeast . 2006 ; 23 : 185 – 202 . 38 . Zlotnik H , Fernandez MP , Bowers B , Cabib E . Saccharomyces cerevisiae mannoproteins form an external cell layer that deter - mines wall porosity . J Bacteriol . 1984 ; 159 : 1018 – 1026 . 39 . Zhao L , Schaefer D , Xu HJ , Modi SJ , Lacourse WR , Marten MR . Elastic properties of the cell wall of Aspergillus nidulans studied with atomic force microscopy . Biotechnol Prog . 2005 ; 21 : 292 – 299 . 40 . de Groot PWJ , Brandt BW , Horiuchi H , Ramd AFJ , de Koster CG , Klis FM . Comprehensive genomic analysis of cell wall genes in Aspergillus nidulans . Fungal Genet Biol . 2009 ; 46 : 72 – 81 . 41 . Shaw JA , Mol PC , Bowers B , Silverman SJ , Valiviesco MH , Durdn A , Cabib E . The function of chitin synthases 2 and 3 in the Saccharomyces cerevisiae cell cycle . J Cell Biol . 1991 ; 114 : 111 – 123 . 42 . Touhami A , Nysten B , Dufrene YF . Nanoscale mapping of the elasticity of microbial cells by atomic force microscopy . Lang - muir . 2003 ; 19 : 4539 – 4543 . 43 . Lesage G , Bussey H . Cell wall assembly in Saccharomyces cer - evisiae . Microbiol Mol Biol Rev . 2006 ; 70 : 317 – 343 . 44 . Porro D , Vai M , Vanoni M , Alberghina L , Hatzis C . Analysis and modelling of growing budding yeast populations at the sin - gle cell level . Cytometry A . 2009 ; 75 : 114 – 120 . 45 . Klis FM , Mol P , Hellingwerf K , Brul S . Dynamics of cell wall structure in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . FEMS Microbiol Rev . 2002 ; 26 : 239 – 256 . 46 . De Nobel JG , Klis FM , Priem J , Munnik T , Van Den Ende H . The glucanase – soluble mannoproteins limit cell wall porosity in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Yeast . 1990 ; 6 : 491 – 499 . 47 . Klis FM , de Jong M , Brul S , de Groot PWJ . Extraction of cell surface associated proteins from living yeast cells . Yeast . 2007 ; 24 : 253 – 258 . 48 . Spellman PT , Sherlock M , Zhang MQ , Lyer VR , Anders K , Eisen MB , Brown PO , Botstein D , Futcher B . Comprehensive identiﬁcation of cell - cycle regulated genes of the yeast cell Sac - charomyces cerevisiae microarray hybridisation . Mol Biol Cell . 1998 ; 9 : 3273 – 3297 . 49 . Aguilar - Uscanga B , Francois JM . A study of the yeast cell wall composition and structure in response to growth conditions and mode of cultivation . Lett Appl Microbiol . 2003 ; 37 : 268 – 274 . Manuscript received Jun . 11 , 2010 , and revision received Nov . 2 , 2010 . 512 Biotechnol . Prog . , 2011 , Vol . 27 , No . 2