Easing Cross - Border Communication : MOBILE - mediated Communication and Its Framework Kyungsub Stephen Choi School of Management Rhode Island College Providence , RI , USA 02908 kchoi @ ric . edu Youngsoo Kim School of Information Systems Singapore Management University Singapore 178902 yskim @ smu . edu . sg Abstract Communication is probably the most critical component of an organization engaged in a cross - border collaboration . Today’s smart devices substantially contribute to such communication . Combined with social media , mobile communication technologies are becoming the main platform for many core functions within organizations . In this paper , we identified seven media identifiable attributes : synchronicity ( SYN ) , de - individuation and co - presence ( DCP ) , accessibility readiness ( ARD ) , cognizance of environment change ( CEC ) , wearability - portability ( WRB ) modality - select ( MDS ) and visibility ( VSB ) . These seven attributes significantly impact the course of mobile - mediated communication . We believe that development of a theoretical perspective that embraces the complexity of mobile - mediated communication is due in order to fully comprehend the mobile ecosystem that is upon us . 1 . Introduction Beginning with iPhone and Android phones about a decade ago , mobile technologies have brought significant change to both the business and personal lifestyle landscape . In order to keep up with this rapidly evolving environment , many business organizations are hastily mobilizing their customer - focused operations [ 25 ] , [ 33 ] . In the case of the consumer market , industry numbers and figures report that the consumption rate of mobile technologies is rapidly increasing . One industry report states that worldwide smartphone sales reached 1 . 2 billion units in 2014 , up 28 . 4 percent from 2013 , representing two - thirds of global mobile phone sales [ 16 ] . Similarly , the mobile operating system ( OS ) market is also exhibiting fast growth , with the Android OS topping all other mobile operating systems . Even the leading desktop OS , the Windows OS , has become much more mobile friendly [ 22 ] . In contrast , personal computer software sales and demand are experiencing a significant decline [ 21 ] , [ 27 ] . Mobile technology has had a similar impact on the social media sector . The two leading social media platforms , Facebook and Twitter , both reported that the overwhelming majority of their users are mobile users ; 80 % of Twitter active users are on mobile [ 31 ] and 85 % of Facebook daily active users are on mobile [ 12 ] . An industry report predicts that “Facebook is now so thoroughly a mobile service that its original website may soon become a footnote in the company’s financial statements” [ 17 ] . Accessing social media such as Facebook or Twitter through smartphones or mobile devices is becoming the preferred choice of many people today . This is yet another example of the way mobile technology is significantly influencing consumer behavior and lifestyles , as well as the overall business environment . The significance of this phenomenon is that communication through this combination ( mobile device and social media ) is drastically different from the communication that occurs when either one is used alone or in combination with only a non - mobile or less - mobile setup like a PC [ 7 ] . Further magnifying this effect is wearable technology ( e . g . Google Glass and the Apple Watch ) . This technology possesses physical characteristics that influence how a user initiates and conducts communication and information sharing . One such characteristic is ‘wearability . ’ This refers to how well and naturally a device can be worn and used . Moreover , if a device is too visible or too easily discerned by others during communication , then it may negatively influence a conversation or even cause non - users to completely shun the user , as was the case with Google Glass [ 3 ] . This characteristic has emerged as a major technical challenge and a factor that impacts whether the wearable device becomes popular . Under these circumstances , from the academic perspective , it is worth initiating more IT - enabled 353 Proceedings of the 50th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences | 2017 URI : http : / / hdl . handle . net / 10125 / 41191 ISBN : 978 - 0 - 9981331 - 0 - 2 CC - BY - NC - ND communication studies whose aim should be to explore a number of issues stemming from the ever - increasing prevalence and significance of the mobile platform . To ensure the efficacy and rigorousness of these studies , a sound media theory is imperative . Of course , the information systems community has a number of such theories ( e . g . Media Synchronicity Theory [ 10 ] that have sustained computer - mediated communication ( CMC ) studies . However , the issue now is that media synchronicity theory ( MST ) and other established theories are not adequate for addressing and explaining the peculiarities ( e . g . wearability ) of mobile technologies and the myriad issues that arise from them . Given the expectation that there will be increasingly more mobile communication devices in various forms in coming years , it is important that we as an academic community develop an appropriate theoretical framework . This is an on - going report on a study that seeks to develop a theoretical framework that can eventually yield a sound media theory for IS studies . In this report , the following sections are provided : 1 ) relevant CMC theories , 2 ) media characteristics and capabilities , 3 ) research issues , and 4 ) expected contribution . 2 . Relevant computer - mediated communication theories Among CMC theories , the two most well - known ones are Media Richness Theory ( MRT ) and Media Synchronicity Theory ( MST ) . For this preliminary paper , the theories’ brief descriptions are provided here . MRT is based on two criteria : uncertainty and equivocality under an organizational setting [ 8 ] . Uncertainty is defined as the gap between what information is needed and what information is already available . Equivocality occurs when c multiple , conflicting interpretations are present or when no one particular interpretation stands out . A medium is evaluated according to how well it integrates these two criteria following a scale of high and low . Thus , a medium with high media richness is one that exhibits both low uncertainty and low equivocality . For example , face - to - face communication is a medium that shows high media richness according to MRT , while an unaddressed document is a medium that shows low media richness . Media Synchronicity Theory ( MST ) [ 10 ] divides media capabilities into the following categories : transmission velocity , parallelism , symbol sets , rehearsability and reprocessability . Transmission velocity refers to the speed by which the medium conveys its messages . Parallelism concerns the medium’s capability to simultaneously send multiple messages to different recipients . Symbol sets are the number of physical expressions that one can add to a message , such as a handshake , the nodding of the head or the closing of the eyes . Rehearsability is a measure of the degree to which the medium allows a message to be edited and rehearsed before sending . Similarly , reprocessability describes the degree to which a medium allows a message to be re - evaluated again during decoding . 3 . Media characteristics and capabilities of mobile - mediated communication The two theories described above have provided the theoretical framework for CMC studies for decades . But as wearable mobile ICT devices increasingly become more common , these frameworks fall short in addressing the new behaviors and perceptions that are caused by the devices’ physical attributes . On the other hand , in Mobile - mediated Communication ( MMC ) theory , the focus is centered on mobility , mobile - related functions and behaviors , and device wearability . Earlier , during the cellular phone era , Castells et al [ 6 ] studied many of the social dimensions of mobile communications use in our society . In their work , they describe the significant attributes of mobile platform communication . However , their research was primarily focused on voice communication which does not include the multimedia and data sharing that is so prevalent now . Thus , when we see that the breadth of today’s media is wider and more complex , the limitations of previous frameworks becomes more evident . Simply put , there are now many more kinds of multimedia and mobile applications . Today , through the Apple store or Android market , one can browse hundreds of different types of mobile applications across a variety of genres . Similarly , there exist a number of different social platforms tailored to suit different individuals and lifestyles . Similarly , the mobile device market continues to surprise the world with creative products such as Google Glass and the Apple Watch . Given the increasingly ready availability of Nano technology [ 24 ] and the increasing invention of smaller personal gadgetry , it would not be a surprise to see such items as a necklace , ring , wrist band or contact lenses become mobile devices in the near future . The attributes and features of these various multimedia and mobile applications , as well as their integration with each other , culminates in the creation 354 of new levels and paradigms of communication . Furthermore , these paradigms have opened new areas of and opportunities for value creation . One such new attribute is visibility ( or more specifically , the lack thereof ) . In order for wearable mobile devices to be successful , one industry report highlights the importance of a device’s ability to be hidden [ 3 ] . In other words , can the device be worn by a person , yet hide itself from other people by its design or size in order to minimize the attention it draws ? This attribute is one of several that helps predict how people will behave when using these wearable devices . Along with visual prominence , attributes such as design , size and wearability will become significant factors in one’s decision whether to use these devices for communication purposes . MMC is a theory which will address the attributes , needs and limitations described above , which is why we believe it is better situated to accommodate the ever - changing nature of mobile communication platforms , and will provide a theoretical framework for scholarly work on these mobile devices . The first step in this endeavor is to define the prominent media capabilities that differentiate one media from another . The information filtering capability has been excluded as it is one of the common features in almost all ICT and does not differentiate one media from another media . Additionally , due diligence was exercised in excluding any no - value - added capabilities . For example , any capability that differentiate only between face - to - face to a media was excluded since face - to - face is not in the scope of MMC . Therefore , the major capabilities to be studied are : synchronicity ( SYN ) , de - individuation and co - presence ( DCP ) , accessibility readiness ( ARD ) , cognizance of environment change ( CEC ) , wearability - portability ( WRB ) modality - select ( MDS ) and visibility ( VSB ) . Synchronicity ( SYN ) is a core communication process of mobile technology . The media synchronicity theory [ 10 ] used this to sub - categorize the processing and transmission capabilities . Given the robust wireless connectivity available to many mobile users , flawless and simultaneous communication can surely expected between two or more parties in various communication modes ( voice , texting , or video ) . De - individuation and co - presence ( DCP ) occurs when a person simply observes an on - going group communication without taking a part in that communication ( de - individuation ) , which in turn may allow the person to be involved in more than one online rendezvous ( co - presence ) . In other words , a person may be in and out of a few different online meetings simultaneously . Previous studies [ 20 ] , [ 13 ] hint that these behaviors are common in group contexts and more so in a technology - driven setting . If an online meeting is text - driven then these behaviors are more profound . By the expectancy - value theory [ 32 ] , a person is perceived to gain more goods by engaging in multiple conversations and acquiring more information . Additionally , this is highly correlated to the synchronicity capability of a mobile technology . Without a robust synchronous maneuver , these behaviors are not possible . Cognizance of environment change ( CEC ) is one of the prime functions of mobile technology—the ability to react to changing locations [ 18 ] . Location - based data and information is a major function of mobile technology and it has sparked many academic research studies [ 5 ] and commercial applications . For example , the “Foursquare” mobile application gathers information about businesses and places around a person’s location [ 26 ] . Based on the ratings and comments of the previous visitors , a person may evaluate a certain nearby business establishment before patronizing it . Another example is that of “Zalando” [ 19 ] , an image recognition mobile application that enables a user to take image shots of people passing by in order to get information ( such as brand names ) on what they are wearing and where to purchase similar clothes . Modality - select ( MDS ) describes a person’s freedom to choose or switch back and forth from one communication mode to another . For example , a person sending a message may choose to make a voice call , send a text message either by phone or through a social networking medium , or begin video conferencing . In return , the receiver may respond back through the same communication mode or choose to use other channels . For example , many parents like to call their children in order to hear their children’s voices , but the children like to text instead of voice call [ 9 ] , [ 23 ] . Accessibility readiness ( ARD ) measures the level of readiness of a mobile technology for communication . Readiness is determined by the specific maneuvers that a person needs to take in order to use the mobile technology for communication , beginning with the location where the technology initially resides in normal use and ending at the point where a person successfully forwards a message to another person . The level of readiness varies with technology : in the case of a personal computer , there are many maneuvers required until a person can respond to an email message , but a “thumb drive” smartphone takes less number of maneuvers . An example of technology with particularly high readiness is the “pull” technology utilized in such devices as Google Glass . It is a technology where a person or object is identified via image 355 reading / recognition software , which then “pulls up” any associated data and information automatically , without a person’s conscious intervention or physical steps . This pull technology is based on image - reading technology which is actively applied in mobile applications [ 15 ] , [ 19 ] . Wearability - portability ( WRB ) refers to a how well an item of mobile technology conforms to a person’s physical needs ( e . g . “how well does a device fit or how wearable it is for a person engaged in on - demand communication” ) . It has to fit to a person where he can function his or her daily routines without causing them to be conscious of the fitness of the mobile technology to their body . Early in the development of mobile technology , the paradigm was portability : a device had to be portable for a person to carry it . Today , this paradigm is rapidly shifting to wearability . While the mobile communications field is still dominated by portable smartphones and tablet PCs ( e . g . the iPad ) , we are witnessing a major shift to wearable smart devices . The underlying idea that drives this paradigm has much in common with embedded computing [ 4 ] , [ 28 ] . Here , communication is initiated as naturally and effortlessly as possible if a device is not only portable , but also wearable . Finally , Visibility ( VSB ) refers to the degree to which a piece of mobile technology’s outside appearance draws the attention of other people . In other words , the question becomes how visible ( or how small ) the device is and how it is perceived by others . The common consensus is that the smaller , more hidden and more intuitive a device is , the more likely it is to be accepted by other people . Ignoring this fact has led to noticeable failures [ 3 ] . Therefore , the growing expectation of people who are consuming these technologies is that the smaller the device , the more naturalness it possesses . This paradigm explains the ever - decreasing size of emerging wearable mobile devices . 4 . Media capabilities classification The media capabilities described in the previous section can be placed into two groups . One group is oriented toward the communication process , while the other group is more closely associated with outside physical appearance . The capabilities associated with the communication process are synchronicity ( SYN ) , de - individuation and co - presence ( DCP ) , cognizance of environment change ( CEC ) , while the ones associated with the physical appearance are modality - selection ( MDS ) , accessibility readiness ( ARD ) , wearability - portability ( WRB ) and visibility ( VSB ) . The communication process group encompasses those capabilities that are integrated with social media and smartphones , categorized by their outstanding communication features . Among these capabilities , the most significant is that of cognizance of environment change ( CEC ) . This capability yields new data and information based on changes in location and time . Such information can also be acquired automatically via “pull” technology . Given these available technologies—image - reading and the automatic “pulling” of data and information—a person can load himself with endless streams of data , information and communication . It is important to note that these capabilities—CEC , SYN , and DCP—interact dynamically and reciprocally with each other in a group setting . For instance , synchronicity ( SYN ) closely sustains de - individuation and co - presence ( DCP ) . While a person is exercising DCP , he must be synchronously connected and informed on the on - going activities . This ensures that the person is able to continue his or her participation in the group action and process . The synchronicity ( SYN ) capability also allows cognizance of environment change ( CEC ) to be effective . A device’s continuous ability to track location - change and provide data or information on a particular location is only possible if there is robust synchronicity ( SYN ) . Furthermore , modality - selection ( MDS ) can amplify the degree of de - individuation and co - presence ( DCP ) . Whether it is a phone call , texting , video conferencing or some other mode of communication , synchronicity ( SYN ) can certainly heighten and lessen the impact of de - individuation and co - presence ( DCP ) . These communication processes and capabilities are closely intertwined , resulting in dynamic interactions and reciprocal influences . Collectively , they cause an increase in mobile communication fluidity and promptness ( figure 1 ) . Specifically , they allow a person to frequently engage in multiple conversations or data sharing , and also enjoy immediacy , spontaneity , and gratification . These in turn lead to more frequent and more productive communicative activities . 5 . Research issues The first and foremost part of our agenda ought to be the validation of the presented media capabilities and characteristics . Each of these capabilities must be validated under various different contexts and using different variables . 356 Figure 1 Media capabilities illustration Table 1 Construct Summary Constructs Abbrev . Definitions Communication processes Synchronicity SYN Flawless and simultaneous communication between two or more parties . De - individuation and Co - presence DCP When a person simply observes an on - going group communication without taking a part in that communication ( de - individuation ) , which in turn may allow the person to be involved in more than one online rendezvous ( co - presence ) Cognizance of environment change CEC Changing locations and its influence on communication Communication capabilities Modality - select MDS A person’s freedom to choose or switch back and forth from one communication mode to another . Accessibility readiness ARD The level of readiness of a mobile technology for communication . Wearability WRB How well an item of mobile technology conforms to a person’s physical needs Visibility VSB The degree to which a piece of mobile technology’s outside appearance draws the attention of other people . Table 2 Comparison between technologies Social media integrated with ( device below ) SYN DCP CEC MDS ARD WRB VSB Personal computer high high N / A low low N / A N / A Smartphone high high high high med med high Google Glass low - med low - med high low - med high high med Apple Watch low - med low - med high low - med high high low 357 In computer - mediated communication ( CMC ) , there have been a slew of various contexts and different variables by which such capabilities were tested—task type , group size , member dispersion , member familiarity , member attributes , member interaction , meeting or communication duration , anonymous identity , gender , meeting frequency , social influence , relevant background , member conflicts and more [ 1 ] , [ 11 ] , [ 14 ] , [ 30 ] . In a similar manner , mobile - mediated communication ( MMC ) needs to be tested for each capabilities’ legitimacy and efficacy . It is reasonable to expect that the capabilities will generate different processes and results than those found in CMC . Therefore , the focus should be on defining the user perceptions and attitudes that may trigger certain MMC - related behaviors . Secondly , researchers must keep in mind that MMC fosters an environment that invites value creation . For example , Sørensen [ 29 ] discusses the value creation - enabling capabilities of technology , such as computers as medium [ 2 ] . Specifically focusing on work environment , his study introduced the notion of enterprise mobility services . Given the capabilities our theory examines , there can now be a number of progressive services and products at the enterprise level . For instance , a few decades ago , the notion of virtual company based on e - commerce was simply a dream . But currently , we are looking at enterprise mobility that is primed and able . Thirdly , it is important that future research considers human factors and behaviors . First , the modality - selection attribute ( MDS ) introduces a new area that has not been investigated by any previous IS studies . Furthermore , certain places or situations recommend one mode over the others , such as our preference for texting rather than making a voice call when in a classroom , church or on public transit . From these considerations , the following questions arise : What factors influence a person’s decision to choose and use a certain media mode ? What are user’s the motivations or rationales ? How does this decision - making differ between a new call and returning call ? How significant are the other relevant factors , such as task type and urgency , in affecting this modal selection ? Are there any other major influencing factors such as societal , age , occupational , or cultural ? How is “efficiency” defined in this realm ? These and other similar questions must be worked on . Fourth , the wearability - portability ( WRB ) and visibility ( VSB ) capabilities require more serious exploration . The concept of ubiquity or “anywhere and anytime” communication has been present in and has been used in many previous technological studies . But WRB and VSB take this concept to a new level . Being able to wear technology on one’s face ( Google Glass ) or on the wrist ( Apple Watch ) is a different ubiquitous experience than being able to use an Internet - connected personal computer at any location . The cognitive interplay between a person , device , and communication process is different in these two CMC scenarios . Lastly , but certainly not the least , a set of measuring instruments are needed for each of these constructs . There must be a set of validated and empirically - tested measuring instruments if we are to to examine a mobile technology according to this theoretical framework . Each instrument must be objective and testable in order to support this framework . 6 . References [ 1 ] M . Alavi , “Computer - mediated collaborative learning : An empirical evaluation , ” MIS Quarterly , 18 ( 2 ) , June 1994 , pp . 159 - 174 . [ 2 ] Andersen , P . B . , B . Holmqvist and J . F . Jensen , ( eds ) The computer as medium . Cambridge University Press . 1993 . [ 3 ] A . Barr , “Google Glass Loses Focus of Some Developers , ” The Wall Street Journal , Printed on November 14 , 2014 . [ 4 ] M . Beigl , H . W . Gellersen and A . Schmidt , “Mediacups : experience with design and use of computer - augmented everyday artefacts , ” Computer Networks , 35 ( 4 ) , 2001 , pp . 401 - 409 . [ 5 ] C . Bettini , S . Jajodia , P . Samarati , and S . X . Wang . “Privacy in location - based applications : research issues and emerging trends” , Springer Science & Business Media , Vol . 5599 , 2009 . [ 6 ] Castells , M . , M . Fernández - Ardèvol , and J . L . Qiu , Mobile Communication and Society : A Global Perspective . Cambridge , MA , U . S . A . : MIT Press , 2009 . [ 7 ] K . Choi and I . Im , “A Comparative Group Collaborative Communication Analysis of Mobile Microblogging and Non - mobile Online Message Board , ” International Journal of Electronic Commerce , 19 ( 4 ) , Summer 2015 , pp . 1 - 24 . [ 8 ] R . L . Daft and R . H . Lengel , “Organizational information requirements , media richness and structural design , ” Management science , 32 ( 5 ) , 1986 , pp . 554 - 571 . [ 9 ] L . Davidson , “Want a response from your teen ? Text , don ' t call , ” Printed on Jul . 29 , 2013 , http : / / www . today . com / parents / want - response - your - teen - text - dont - call - 6C10761156 [ 10 ] A . R . Dennis , R . M . Fuller , and J . S . Valacich , “Media , tasks , and communication processes : A theory of media synchronicity , ” MIS quarterly , 32 ( 3 ) , 2008 , pp . 575 - 600 . 358 [ 11 ] G . DeSanctis and R . B . Gallupe , “A foundation for the study of group decision support systems , ” Management Science , 33 ( 5 ) , 1987 , pp . 589 - 609 [ 12 ] Facebook . com , Data retrieved May 22 , 2015 , http : / / newsroom . fb . com / company - info / [ 13 ] L . Festinger , A . Pepitone , & T . Newcomb , “Some consequences of de - individuation in a group , ” the Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology , 47 ( 2S ) , 382 . 1952 . [ 14 ] J . Fjermestad and S . R . Hiltz , “An assessment of group support systems experimental research : methodology and results , ” Journal of Management Information Systems , 15 ( 3 ) , 1998 , pp . 7 - 149 . [ 15 ] G . A . Fowler , “One - Minute Review : Amazon’s ‘Flow’ Image Recognition Beats Barcode Scans , ” The Wall Street Journal , Printed on February 5 , 2014 [ 16 ] Gardner research , " Market Share : Devices , All Countries , 4Q14 Update . " Date retrieved May 12th 2015 , URL http : / / www . gartner . com / document / 2985017 . [ 17 ] V . Goel , “Facebook ' s Growth Slows Slightly , but Mobile Shift Intensifies , ” The New York Times , Printed on April 22 , 2015 . [ 18 ] A . Goldfarb , “The Internet Killed Distance . Mobile Computing Brought It Back , ” MIT Technology Review , Data retrieved May 31 , 2015 , http : / / www . technologyreview . com / news / 520796 / the - internet - killed - distance - mobile - computing - brought - it - back / [ 19 ] C . Gummer , “Zalando Testing Mobile Clothing Recognition App , ” The Wall Street Journal , Printed on August 29 , 2014 . [ 20 ] R . Haines and C . Mann , “A new perspective on de - individuation via computer - mediated communication , ” European Journal of Information Systems , March 2011 , 20 ( 2 ) , pp 156 – 167 , 2011 . [ 21 ] A . Hesseldahl , Printed on Apr 11 , 2016 , " After Worst Year Ever , PC Sales Off to Another Bad Start in 2016 , " Retrieved from http : / / www . recode . net / 2016 / 4 / 11 / 11586044 / after - worst - year - ever - pc - sales - off - to - another - bad - start - in - 2016 [ 22 ] IDC , International Data Corporation ( IDC ) Worldwide Quarterly Mobile Phone Tracker , Date retrieved May 11 , 2015 . URL http : / / www . idc . com / prodserv / smartphone - market - share . jsp [ 23 ] A . Lenhart , R . Ling , S . Campbell and K . Purcell , “Teens and Mobile Phones , ” Pew Research Center , Printed on April 20 , 2010 , http : / / www . pewinternet . org / 2010 / 04 / 20 / teens - and - mobile - phones / [ 24 ] J . Macoubrie , “Public perceptions about nanotechnology : Risks , benefits and trust , ” Journal of Nanoparticle Research , 6 ( 4 ) , 2014 , pp . 395 - 405 . [ 25 ] F . Manjoo , “For Verizon and AOL , Mobile Is a Magic Word , ” New York Times , printed on May 13 , 2015 . [ 26 ] J . Marshall , “Foursquare Launches New Location - Based Ad Offering , ” The Wall Street Journal , Printed on April 14 , 2015 [ 27 ] R . McMillan , Printed on Jan . 12 , 2016 , " PC Sales Drop to Historic Lows " Retrieved from ttp : / / www . wsj . com / articles / pc - sales - drop - to - historic - lows - 1452634605 [ 28 ] T . P . Moran and P . Dourish , “Introduction to this special issue on context - aware computing , ” Human – Computer Interaction , 16 ( 2 - 4 ) , 2001 , pp . 87 - 95 . [ 29 ] Sørensen , C . , Enterprise Mobility : Tiny Technology with Global Impact on Work , Palgrave Macmillan , first edition , November 15 , 2011 . [ 30 ] S . Strauss and J . E . McGrath , “Does the medium matter ? The interaction of task type and technology on group performance and member reactions . ” Journal of Applied Psychology , 79 ( 1 ) , 1994 , pp . 87 - 97 . [ 31 ] Twitter . com , Date retrieved May 22 , 2015 https : / / about . twitter . com / company [ 32 ] A . Wigfield and J . S . Eccles , “Expectancy – value theory of achievement motivation , ” Contemporary educational psychology , 25 ( 1 ) , 68 - 81 . 2000 . [ 33 ] R . Winkler , “Google’s Spero on Mobile Commerce : ‘The Consumer Has All the Power , ” The Wall Street Journal , Printed on November 14 , 2014 . 359