A quarter of a century of intense research has revealed several hallmarks of cancer , including self - sufficiency in growth signals , insensitivity to inhibitory signals , evasion of apoptosis , tissue invasion and unlimited replicative potential 1 . The burgeoning body of experi - mental evidence we review attributes some of these hallmarks to a mechanism shared by tumour - initiating and metastasizing cells ( FIG . 1 ; see Supplementary information S1 ( figure ) ) , namely an aberrant propen - sity to disassemble signalling and adhesion complexes and sort them for either degradation or re - assembly , following vesicular trafficking . This dynamic remod - elling places the spotlight on internalization and recycling routes ( that is , endocytosis ) as crucial tar - gets of the processes driving cancer initiation and progression . Endocytic portals : variations on a common theme Evolution transformed primordial endocytic routes that were dedicated to nutrient uptake into sophisticated sig - nalling and adhesion platforms , the multiplicity of which is concisely introduced below ( FIG . 2 ) . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) . From semi - nal work into the uptake of low - density lipoprotein , Brown and Goldstein outlined the basic tenets of CME : receptor clustering in clathrin - coated pits ( CCPs ) is followed by membrane invagination and vesicle scis - sion 2 . Released vesicles shed their coats before fusing with tubulo - vesicular compartments , denoted ‘early’ endosomes . Thereafter , cargos undergo sorting in the multi - vesicular body ( MVB ) , either for degradation in lysosomes or for recycling . At the cell surface , lattices made up of clathrin triskelia recruit adaptor proteins , such as AP2 , and nucleate coat assembly at mem - brane microdomains enriched in phosphatidylinositol ( 4 , 5 ) - bisphosphate ( PIP 2 ) . Cardinal roles are attributed to two groups of GTPases : dynamins , which promote constriction and fission of vesicle stalks , and Rab fam - ily members . As GTP - regulated switches , Rab proteins locally activate particular complements of effectors to execute vesicle budding , motility or fusion 3 . Additional prominent players include epsins and epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) pathway substrate 15 ( EPS15 ) , which associate with ubiquitin - conjugated cargos . Along with phosphorylation , ubiquitylation of both cargos and the endocytic machinery ( such as HGS and EPS15 ) underlies rapid trafficking of membrane receptors . Cavoelae - mediated endocytosis ( CavME ) . Caveolae are specialized forms of lipid rafts , generated by oligomeriza - tion of their primary protein constituent , caveolin 4 . After inward budding , caveolin - positive vesicles are directed to larger caveolin - enriched organelles , denoted caveo - somes . Interestingly , caveolar vesicles may be further targeted to early endosomes , thereby allowing conver - gence with the classical CME pathway 5 . Vesicle release , as with CME , is driven by dynamins . Other activators include protein kinase C ( PKC ) and Src family kinases . Notably , differential engagement of CME and CavME by the same receptor cargo ( such as EGFR and trans - forming growth factor β ( TGF β ) receptor ) may regulate signalling capacity and endocytic fate 6 , 7 . * Department of Biological Regulation , The Weizmann Institute of Science , Rehovot 76100 , Israel , and ‡ Department of Systems Biology , MD Anderson Cancer Center , Houston , Texas 77030 , USA . Correspondence to Y . Y . e‑mail : yosef . yarden @ weizmann . ac . il doi : 10 . 1038 / nrc2521 Clathrin triskelion A basic building block of clathrin coats , comprising three heavy chains that assemble into a three - pronged radial structure ( ‘triskelion’ ) , and three light chains that regulate formation of higher - order structures . Dynamins Large GTPases that form a helix around the neck of nascent vesicles and separate them from parent membranes . Derailed endocytosis : an emerging feature of cancer Yaron Mosesson * , Gordon B . Mills ‡ and Yosef Yarden * Abstract | Once engaged by soluble or matrix - anchored ligands , cell surface proteins are commonly sorted to lysosomal degradation through several endocytic pathways . Defective vesicular trafficking of growth factor receptors , as well as unbalanced recycling of integrin - and cadherin - based adhesion complexes , has emerged in the past 5 years as a multifaceted hallmark of malignant cells . In line with the cooperative nature of endocytic machineries , multiple oncogenic alterations underlie defective endocytosis , such as altered ubiquitylation ( Cbl and Nedd4 ubiquitin ligases , for example ) , altered cytoskeletal interactions and alterations to Rab family members . Pharmaceutical interception of the propensity of tumour cells to derail their signalling and their adhesion receptors may constitute a novel target for cancer therapy . NATuRE REVIEwS | cancer VOluME 8 | NOVEMBER 2008 | 835 REVIEWS Epsins Three genes encoding epsin 1 , 2 and 3 have been identified in mammals . Epsin 3 shows restricted expression compared with epsins 1 and 2 . Caveolae Cholesterol - rich membrane microdomains that are stabilized by caveolin . Lipid raft A dynamic membrane microdomain formed through lipid - based interactions , that is rich in sphingolipids and sterols . Lipid rafts provide a platform to compartmentalize signalling events , including facilitating endocytosis of protein and lipid constituents . Caveolin Proteins that are associated with clathrin - independent endocytosis and are encoded by CAV1 , CAV2 , and CAV3 . Caveolin 1 and 2 have similar expression patterns , but calveolin 3 is restricted to striated and smooth muscle . Anoikis A form of apoptotic cell death induced by loss of adhesion to the ECM . Clathrin - and caveolin - independent endocytosis . Studies of the uptake of a plant toxin 8 , as well as studies that used a temperature - sensitive dynamin mutant 9 , indicated the occurrence of clathrin - and dynamin - independent endocytosis . A similar , dynamin - and RHOA - dependent route was uncovered by studying internalization of the interleukin 2 receptor 10 . Collectively , intracellular car - riers identified in these pathways are denoted ClICs ( clathrin - and caveolin - independent carriers ) . Insights into dynamin - independent pathways have come from studies of glycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchored pro - teins . localized actin polymerization , as well as cell division cycle 42 ( CDC42 ) and ARF1 , were shown to regulate internalization of glycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchored proteins through tubular plasma membrane invaginations 11 . Macropinocytosis and circular dorsal ruffles ( CDRs ) . Membrane protrusions that fuse back with the plasma membrane generate large ( > 1 µ m ) carriers , termed macro pinosomes , in a mechanism regulated by Rac , ARF6 and the wAVE complex 12 . One interesting route of fluid - phase uptake , CDR , is initiated by growth factors . CDRs are transient , ring - like protrusions that support internalization of receptor tyrosine kinases ( RTKs ) 13 . RAB5 is crucial for RTK - induced circular ruffling , act - ing in collaboration with uSP6 N - terminal - like protein ( uSP6Nl ) and Rac GTPases 14 . On - ground , pre - flight preparations The majority of cancer mortality derives from metas - tases . Metastasis is a highly ordered process , the first step of which entails dissolution of cell – cell junctions , and it necessitates evasion of cell death by anoikis dur - ing dissemination in the circulation . The tissue of origin is often a well - packed tubular epithelium characterized by growth arrest and polar distribution of proteins and organelles . Despite their appearance , epithelial junc - tions are remarkably dynamic : their architecture and constituents are maintained by constant endocytic and exo cytic cycles , which are aberrant in tumours ( FIG . 3 ) . Morphological polarity not only restricts motil - ity and invasion , but is crucially required to regulate cell proliferation and survival . For instance , the need to dis - rupt polarity and cell – cell communication during cell proliferation has long been realized and , indeed , forms the basis of ‘mitotic shake off’ as a method to enrich cells in mitosis . Apical – basolateral polarity is established by cadherins ( and nectin ) , which form calcium - dependent homophil - lic adhesions . Epithelial cadherins ( E - cadherins ) connect to the cytoskeleton through β - catenin and an actin - recruiting component , α - catenin , to form the primor - dial adherens junction ( AJ ) . Tight junctions ( TJs ) then form apically by recruiting a set of transmembrane proteins ( that is , claudins , occludins and junctional adhesion molecule 1 ( JAM1 ) ) , which are linked through tight junction proteins ( also known as zonal occludens ( ZO ) proteins ) and additional protein components to the actin cytoskeleton . The crucial role of AJs and TJs in cancer is underscored by the frequent occurrence of E - cadherin mutations in lobular breast cancer and in diffuse - type gastric cancer 15 , as well as by the disruption of cell – cell junctions by several tumour viruses . For example , the causal agent of adult T - cell leukaemia , HTlV1 , encodes a PDZ ( PSD95 , DlG , ZO1 ) - containing protein called TAX1 that disrupts TJs 16 . Maintenance of TJs by endocytic – exocytic cycles . Epithelial polarity is dynamically maintained by sev - eral trafficking pathways , including recycling and trans - cytosis 17 . The pivotal polarizing function of endocytosis has recently been exemplified by clathrin - knockdown experiments performed in epithelial cells : most baso - lateral proteins mislocalized to the apical surface , but the apical compartment remained unaffected 18 . Emerging lines of evidence indicate that polarity - maintaining trafficking is manipulated in tumours by oncogenic signals acting on an evolutionary conserved group of polarity genes called Par ( partitioning - defective ) . The Par genes were identified in Caenorhabditis elegans 20 years ago , but their connection to endocytosis emerged only recently 19 : a genome - wide RNA - interference search for defects in secretion of a yolk protein identified two PDZ - containing proteins of TJs , PAR3 and PAR6 , as well as CDC42 . A previous genetic screen , searching for metastasis modifiers of oncogenic Ras ( Ras V12 ) - induced tumours in Drosophila melanogaster , identified another cohort , namely CDC42 , PARD3 ( PAR3 ) and PAlS1 , a PDZ domain guanylate kinase 20 . Mechanistic glimpses of CDC42 emerged from a recent study from A . Pawson’s laboratory : using a proteomic approach , they identified RICH1 as a At a glance • Along with material uptake , endocytosis regulates signal transduction , as well as morphogenetic aspects of normal physiology ( such as cell adhesion and migration ) . The multiple routes of endocytosis share a canonical , convergent structure : they begin at coated invaginations of the plasma membrane , progress through several endosomal compartments and culminate in lysosomes . An escape pathway enables internalized proteins to return to the plasma membrane through a recycling compartment . • Endocytic pathways present multiple abnormalities in human tumours . For example , dissolution of cell – cell junctions ( adherens and tight junctions ) and loss of morphological polarity precedes full malignant transformation ; the underlying process encompasses enhanced internalization and unbalanced partitioning of junctional proteins ( such as epithelial cadherin ) between the lysosomal pathway and the recycling route . • A burgeoning body of evidence indicates that tumours gain self - sufficiency in growth signals by delaying endocytosis - mediated inactivation of growth factor receptors . Multiple oncogenic mechanisms intercept receptor endocytosis : defects in key endosomal proteins , evasion of ubiquitylation - mediated sorting to degradation , and malfunctioning of collaborative processes such as actin remodelling . • To conquer tissue barriers and colonize distant organs , tumour cells dynamically disintegrate cell - to - matrix adhesion sites and re - assemble them at the front of invading protrusions . This polar re - distribution is propelled by enhanced recycling of adhesion molecules of the integrin family , a process enabled by aberrant microtubules and small GTP - binding proteins of the Rab family . • Future studies are likely to uncover additional links between cancer and endocytosis , as well as unravel common biochemical interfaces ( such as phosphoinositol homeostasis and cytoskeletal perturbations ) amenable for therapeutic interventions . R E V I E W S 836 | NOVEMBER 2008 | VOluME 8 www . nature . com / reviews / cancer Tightjunction Polarized growth - arrested tissue Polarity disruption Adherensjunction RAB13 LGL aPKC CDC42 PAR6 • Intact cell – cell and cell – matrix junctions • Polarization of proteins , lipids and organelles • Contact inhibition of growth and migration • Aberrant receptor ubiquitylation • Defects in endocytic adaptors • Increased receptor recycling and cell proliferation • Increased long - loop recycling of integrins • Increased expression of Rab proteins • Stabilized microtubules enhance integrin endocytosis • Par - and aPKC - mediated loss of tight junctions • E - cadherin endocytosis and degradation • p120 - Catenin aberrations destabilize adherens junctions SRC E - cadherin Lysosome Hakai Tyr p120 Ub Enhanced proliferation Cell migration Caveolae RTK P P P Ub MVB CCP Lysosome Lysosome PNRC Integrin Longloop Shortloop RAB4 RAB25 Nature Reviews | Cancer 1 3 4 2 P Apical – basolateral polarity A characteristic feature of epithelial cells in which the plasma membrane is divided into an apical surface facing the lumen and a basolateral surface contacting the underlying extracellular matrix . Cadherin Cadherins are the major adhesive units of AJs . Cadherin cytoplasmic domains interact with a catenin - based complex , which couples to the actin cytoskeleton and regulates adhesion - dependent signalling . CDC42 - specific GTPase - activating protein ( GAP ) that is capable of regulating endocytosis of several PDZ - domain proteins of TJs 21 . Apparently , CDC42 – GTP targets junctional proteins to lysosomes , whereas CDC42 – GDP sorts them to RAB13 - containing recy - cling endosomes , thereby maintaining polarity 22 . Overexpression of CDC42 , along with RHOA and RAC1 , is associated with progression of testicular tumours 23 . likewise , together with an atypical PKC ( aPKC ) , the Par group is richly involved in cancer . In D . melanogaster , the protein encoded by the tumour suppressor gene lethal giant larvae ( lgl ) interacts with the aPKC – PAR6 complex . likewise , activation of lKB1 , which is the cause of the Peutz – Jeghers germline cancer predisposition syndrome , is sufficient to induce polarity of single intestinal cells 24 . Along with the tumour suppres - sors DlG and SCRIB , lGl regulates polarity through polarized exocytosis 25 , 26 . In humans , aPKC overexpression in ovarian and colon cancer contributes to poor patient prognosis 27 , and decreased expression of lGl , DlG1 and SCRIB is widely associated with tumour progression 28 . In line with the possibility that the Par – PKC complex regulates endocytic assembly and disassembly of TJs in response to oncogenic signals , EGF was shown to regulate TJ assembly by phosphorylating PAR3 ( REF . 29 ) , whereas the oncogenic receptor ERBB2 ( also known as HER2 ) disrupts polarity by binding to PAR6 and subsequently recruiting aPKC 30 . Potentially , the tumour suppressor von Hippel – lindau protein , an E3 ubiquitin ligase , inhibits these polarity - disrupting effects of ERBB2 by targeting aPKC for degra - dation 31 . In summary , several lines of evidence attribute loss of epithelial polarity to the effects of oncoproteins and tumour suppressors on the balance between endo - cytic and exocytic cycles that are essential for dynamic maintenance of TJs and cancer pathophysiology . Figure 1 | aberrant endocytosis of transmembrane proteins contributes to malignant transformation . The figure highlights normal and derailed endocytosis of junctional proteins , such as cadherins , and residents of tight junctions , growth factor receptors and integrins , which are depicted in more detail in subsequent figures . For simplicity , the figure presents a hypothetical sequence of individual steps , which probably take place simultaneously in tumours . Note that the prototype endocytic pathway initiates at coated invaginations of the plasma membrane , sequentially progresses through several endosomal compartments and culminates in lysosomes . Frequent manipulations in tumours include unbalanced partitioning of cargos between the lysosomal pathway and an alternative recycling route that evades intracellular degradation . aPKC , atypical protein kinase C ; CCp , clathrin - coated pit ; CDC , cell division cycle ; MVB , multi - vesicular body ; PAR , partitioning defective ; RTK , receptor tyrosine kinase ; Tyr , tyrosine ; Ub , ubiquitin . R E V I E W S NATuRE REVIEwS | cancer VOluME 8 | NOVEMBER 2008 | 837 L y s o s o m e L y s o s o m e L y s o s o m e E n d o s o m e L y s o s o m e G o l g i E R T G N Nature Reviews | Cancer Macropinosome Sortingendosome Caveosome Caveolin Dynamin RE EE CCP LE or MVB Endosome C L I C - D C L I C - D I C l a t h r i n C a v e o l a e M a c r o p i n o c y t o s i s Clathrins , dynamins , Rac , RHOA , SRC , TKs , epsins , EPS15 , mono - Ub , CDC42 , TKs , PKC , rafts Caveolin , dynamin , SRC , PKC , intersectin RAC1 , CDC42 , ruffles , nexins , ARF6 , Rab5 , rafts Dynamins , RHOA , cortactin , EPS15 , epsins , rafts Adherens junction ( AJ ) . A macromolecular structure below TJs that is pivotal in cell – cell adhesion and polarization of epithelial cells . Primary constituents are adhesive units ( cadherins and nectins ) and cytoplasmic regulators ( catenins ) , which link membranes to cytoskeletal components at discrete contact sites . Tight junction ( TJ ) . Also termed zona occludens , a TJ mediates cell – cell adhesion and serves as a semi - permeable barrier between apical and basolateral surfaces of epithelial sheets . They comprise transmembrane units , including claudins , occludins and JAMs , which associate with cytoplasmic PDZ domain scaffold proteins . Regulation of AJs by mitogen - induced cadherin endo - cytosis . The best - studied components of AJs are E - cadherin and β - catenin ; E - cadherin traps β - catenin at the cytoplasm , but loss of this interaction enables nuclear translocation of β - catenin and activation of the wnt pathway , which controls polarity and influ - ences cell migration 32 . Changes in cadherin – catenin interactions are common in cancer and they are due to mutations as well as epigenetic and transcriptional regulation . Accordingly , the E - cadherin promoter binds several transcriptional repressors ( such as SNAIl ( also known as SNAI1 ) , SluG ( also known as SNAI2 ) and ZEB2 ) , resulting in the acquisition by cultured epithe - lial cells of a mesenchymal - cell - like motile phenotype . However , transcription repression is insufficient to account for the extensive and rapid mitogen - induced clearance of E - cadherin from cell junctions ; in fact this implies that other pathways are involved . An illustra - tive example relates to EGF - stimulated epidermoid cells : following stimulation , SNAIl is slowly induced and represses E - cadherin expression , but existing junc - tional E - cadherin rapidly undergoes endocytosis 33 . Although the majority of studies reported a clathrin - dependent route of E - cadherin internalization ( see REF . 34 and references therein ) , non - clathrin - dependent pathways have been implicated , including CavME ( see REF . 33 and references therein ) and an EGF - induced macropinocytosis pathway 35 . An important mechanism of E - cadherin endocytosis relates to the ability of RTKs and Src family kinases to physically bind to and enhance tyrosine phosphoryl - ation of E - cadherin . Similarly to Cbl – RTK interac - tions ( see below ) , this leads to the recruitment of an E3 ubiquitin ligase , called Hakai , that ubiquitylates and enhances internalization of the E - cadherin com - plex 36 . Endocytosis of a key endothelial cell adhesion molecule , VE - cadherin , is regulated by vascular endo - thelial growth factor A ( VEGFA ) through a different mechanism : p21 - activated kinase ( PAK ) phosphoryl - ates a highly conserved motif within the intracellular tail of VE - cadherin , which results in the recruitment of β - arrestin , thereby promoting internalization of VE - cadherin and disassembly of AJs 37 . Regulation of cadherin trafficking at recycling endo - somes . The intracellular fate of internalized E - cadherin , sorting for either degradation or recycling , is crucial as it eliminates existing AJs or re - deploys E - cadherin Figure 2 | routes of endocytosis . The diagram illustrates final destinations , as well as morphological and functional attributes , of the major pathways of endocytosis of transmembrane proteins . Boxes list cardinal molecular players of the respective pathways . Note the convergence of several pathways on key molecular players . CCP , clathrin - coated pit ; CDC42 , cell division cycle 42 ; CLIC - D , dynamin - dependent clathrin - independent carriers ; CLIC - DI , dynamin - and clathrin - independent carriers ; EPS15 , epidermal growth factor receptor substrate 15 ; ER , endoplasmic reticulum ; LE , late endosome ; mono - Ub , mono - ubiquitylation ; MVB , multi - vesicular body ; PKC , protein kinase C ; RE , recycling endosomes ; TGN , trans - Golgi network ; TK , tyrosine kinase . R E V I E W S 838 | NOVEMBER 2008 | VOluME 8 www . nature . com / reviews / cancer Actin cytoskeleton Tightjunction Adherensjunction RAB13 RE RE RAB11 RAB5 RAB7 EE EE LE LE PAR6 / 3 – – – E - cadherin Lysosome Lysosome Tyr p120 Ub Nature Reviews | Cancer aPKC PAR4 LGL CDC42 SRC β - Catenin α - Catenin p120 - Catenin Hakai P Transcytosis Vesicular trafficking of protein and lipid components between apical and basolateral membranes , bypassing the degradative lysosomal pathway . This is essential for maintenance of cell polarity . in new junctions . For example , depletion of HGS ( an adaptor expressed in endosomes that sorts cargos for degradation ) upregulates E - cadherin and inhibits tumorigenesis 38 . Along with constitutive , clathrin - mediated endocytosis , cadherin internalization is selec - tively induced by growth factors , such as hepatocyte growth factor ( HGF ) , and by rivalry between VEGF and angiopoietin , which determines the endocytosis of VE - cadherin 39 . The recycling endosome serves as a major point of cadherin diversion . ARF6 , an endo - somal GTP - binding protein co - expressed with EGFR in aggressive breast tumours , regulates endocytosis of cadherins in response to EGF only when GEP100 ( also known as IQSEC1 ) , a GTP exchange protein , loads it with GTP 40 . The other GTP - binders of recy - cling endosomes , namely RAB4 and RAB11 , have similarly been implicated in E - cadherin endocytosis . GTP - bound RAB4A interacts within the trans - Golgi network with NMYC downregulated gene 1 ( NDRG1 ) , a prostate and breast metastasis suppressor protein 41 , whereas RAB11 seems to regulate not only deliv ery of nascent E - cadherin from the Golgi to the baso - lateral surface , but also the ability of internalized E - cadherin to activate RAP1 while residing in recycling endosomes 42 . Sabotaging the gatekeeper : regulation of cadherin endo - cytosis by p120 - catenin . Several lines of evidence , includ - ing gene ablation , indicate that E - cadherin is remarkably destabilized in the absence of its armadillo repeat binding partner , p120 - catenin 43 . How exactly p120 - catenin regu - lates endocytosis of E - cadherin remains unclear . According to one model , interactions with Rho family GTPases enable p120 - catenin to regulate cadherin internalization . Alternatively , p120 - catenin may obliterate binding of the endocytic machinery ( such as Hakai ) to the cytoplasmic tail of E - cadherin . Although endocytosis is a plausible tar - get , p120 - catenin regulates microtubule - driven trafficking of N - cadherin by binding to kinesin 44 , which implicates recycling machineries in cadherin regulation . Consistent with the tumour - suppressive functions of p120 - catenin , Src family kinases multiply phosphorylate and inhibit the ability of p120 - catenin to stabilize E - cadherin . An especially important issue relates to the fate of the cat - enin binding partners of E - cadherin . According to several analyses , the p120 - catenin – cadherin – β - catenin complex dissociates upon internalization 35 and , whereas cadherin is sorted to lysosomal degradation 45 , β - catenin is released to translocate to the nucleus and regulate expression of MYC , CCND1 ( cyclin D1 ) and other pivotal genes ( BOX 1 ) . In accordance with the gatekeeper function of p120 - catenin , Figure 3 | endocytic mechanisms underlying dissolution of cell – cell contacts and loss of tumour cell polarity . The figure depicts molecular switches that disperse well - packed epithelia . The tight junctions and adherens junctions holding together adjacent cells are schematically shown , along with a polarity - maintaining module comprising partitioning - defective 6 ( PAR6 ) , atypical protein kinase C ( aPKC ) and the tumour suppressor gene product LGL . Through PAR3 and PAR1 , this module engages another tumour suppressor , the protein kinase LKB1 . The module recruits cell division cycle 42 ( CDC42 ) , the activated form of which targets internalized components of tight junctions to the late endosomes ( LE ) and lysosomes , thereby dissolving junctions . A competing process , probably involving RICH1 , an inhibitor of CDC42 , targets internalized junctional proteins to RAB13 - containing recycling endosomes , which enables re - assembly of tight junctions . One mechanism of disruption of adherens junctions is presented : growth factor - induced activation of Src family kinases inactivates 120 - catenin , an inhibitor of epithelial ( E ) - cadherin endocytosis . In parallel , SRC tags E - cadherin with phosphotyrosine ( TyrP ) . This is followed by ubiquitylation of E - cadherin by an E3 ligase called Hakai , thereby biasing degradation of E - cadherin and diminishing recycling through RAB11 - containing recycling endosomes ( RE ) . Proteins whose function is associated with oncogenesis , along with displaying aberrant expression in human tumours , are shown in red , whereas those involved in tumour suppression are shown in green . EE , early endosomes ; RE , recycling endosomes ; Tyr , tyrosine ; Ub , ubiquitin . R E V I E W S NATuRE REVIEwS | cancer VOluME 8 | NOVEMBER 2008 | 839 Nature Reviews | Cancer RE LE or MVB CCP ERBB4 EE YAP Importin - β Nucleus NCOR Lysosome MAPKsignal Transcription Repression Cyclin D expression MP1 – p14 S80 – ERBB4 APPL TSG101 EGFR S80 complete loss , reduced expression or mislocalization to the cytoplasm or nucleus correlate with progression of various types of tumours . For example , analysis of 118 prostate tumours detected decreased expression in 45 % of the specimens 46 , whereas a study of 557 colorectal tumours found p120 - catenin in the cytoplasm of 53 % of the samples and this was associated with reduced patient survival 47 . In summary , despite gaps in our understand - ing , it is already clear that cadherin endocytosis is richly regulated by mitogens and oncogenic signals at several levels , including ubiquitylation , recycling and interactions with p120 - catenin . Starting the engine To ensure faithful application in physiological set - tings , signalling by growth factor receptors is counter - balanced by several strategies of restraint , including post - transcriptional feedback inhibition 48 . RTK endo - cytosis constitutes an earlier means to sculpt delimited signalling profiles . Brisk sequestration of the activated receptor into invaginating pits , and its endosomal sorting for degradation , precludes prolonged firing 49 . Many tumours adopt this concept in reverse , that is , harnessing of proto - oncogenic signals by under - mining receptor downregulation . Mechanistically , Box 1 | Signalling en route and moonlighting in the nucleus The occurrence of receptor tyrosine kinases ( RTKs ) and endocytic adaptors in the nucleus , along with detection of disparate signalling complexes in endosomes , has challenged the dogma that endocytosis is a mere desensitization process . The origin of the ‘signalling endosome’ concept tracks back to the work of Bergeron and colleagues 155 , who detected in endosomes both activated epidermal growth factor receptors ( EGFRs ) and components of the Ras pathway . In this vein , a dominant - negative dynamin mutant enhanced EGF - induced mitogenesis , but decreased mitogen - activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) activation 156 , and a late endosome ( LE ) scaffold of MAPK , the MP1 – p14 complex , is needed for signalling 157 . Likewise , selective activation of EGFR in early endosomes ( EE ) showed that signals emanating at endosomes are sufficient for S - phase entry 158 ( see figure ) . Nuclear translocation of intact or fragmented forms of several RTKs have been reported . Endosome - localized cleavage of ERBB4 enables nuclear translocation of an intracellular fragment 159 , which binds transcription factors such as the NCOR repressor complex 160 and STAT5A 161 . Similarly , the canonical endocytic pathway enables importin - β - mediated nuclear entry of EGFR and ERBB2 ( REF . 162 ) . Cyclin D1 may be one of the genes directly regulated by nuclear EGFR , whereas nuclear ERBB2 seems to transactivate the cyclooxygenase 2 ( COX2 ) promoter 163 . Because co - expression of COX2 and ERBB2 associates with tumour aggressiveness 164 , nuclear entry of ERBB2 may bear prognostic significance . However , extension to other RTKs , as well as more direct and mechanistic evidence , is still necessary . Even more intriguing are reports documenting many endocytic machinery proteins in the nucleus . Nucleocytoplasmic shuttling affects clathrin , which enhances p53 - dependent transactivation 165 , along with endocytic adaptors ( such as TSG101 ) that were previously characterized as tumour suppressors . A prominent example is APPL1 , a Rab5 - binding endosomal protein that translocates to the nucleus and interacts with a histone deacetylating complex 166 . Whether APPL1 and other endocytic proteins perform nuclear functions distinct from their roles in endocytosis remains unknown . CCP , clathrin - coated pit ; RE , recycling endosome . R E V I E W S 840 | NOVEMBER 2008 | VOluME 8 www . nature . com / reviews / cancer EE or MVB CblTSG101HGS and STAM VPS25VPS37 CCP ClathrinAP2DynaminsEPS15 HIP1NUMBCortactin Caveolae Caveolin 1 DynaminsEpsins RTK P P P Ub P Ub RF PTB E2 ~ GF GF CCP Cbl Ub MVB EE RE Lysosome Nature Reviews | Cancer COOL1SRCAIP4AlixTula GRB2CIN85LRIG1 multiple opportunities to intercept endocytosis emerge in cancer ( FIG . 4 ; TABLE 1 ) . Autocrine loops favouring receptor recycling . Research into the Erbb family of RTKs has proved instrumental in forging a relationship between receptor downregu - lation and proliferative signalling . Four receptors exist in vertebrates ( EGFR ( or ERBB1 ) , ERBB2 ( or HER2 ) , ERBB3 and ERBB4 ) , which variably bind to multiple ligands sharing an EGF motif ( TGF α , EGF and heparin - binding EGF ( HBEGF ) , for example ) . Selective ligand association can induce various receptor homodimers and heterodimers , thereby generating signalling units with distinct properties 50 . The endocytic behaviour of EGF - assembled EGFR homodimers is the best - characterized : activated dimers cluster over CCPs and rapidly internalize . In endosomes , sustained kinase activity encourages extensive EGFR multiubiquitylation , which instigates degradative sorting of ligand and recep - tor at MVBs 51 . In contrast to EGF , association of TGF α with EGFR is increasingly unstable in progressively acidic endosomal compartments 52 . As a result , hypoubiquit - ylated EGFRs divert into tubulo - vesicular elements that recycle signalling - competent receptors to the cell sur - face 53 . Accordingly , ligands such as TGF α and HBEGF that commit only to a partial endocytic itinerary have long been recognized as more potent mitogens than EGF . This concept extends to other RTKs : growth induction by distinct keratinocyte growth factors inversely corre - lates with degradative sorting of their cognate receptor 54 . limited receptor downregulation by mitogenic ligands is highly relevant to human malignancies ; continuous autocrine signalling in TGF α - expressing tumours is commonly observed in carcinomas of the lung , ovary , colon and prostate , often indicating poor prognosis 55 . Receptor overexpression : yet another means to evade a degradative fate . RTK overexpression provides an alternative way to sustain growth - promoting signals in tumours . First , high receptor levels may saturate the finite capacities of the CCPs and endosomal adaptors 56 . Second , certain RTKs , such as ERBB2 , may lack sort - ing determinants that allow efficient engagement by the endocytic machinery . Moreover , within heterodimers ERBB2 can transmit to its co - receptors both recycling propensity and resistance to downregulation 57 , 58 . ERBB2 might also be fundamentally averse to internalization at the plasma membrane through infrequent recruitment to CCPs 59 . likewise , association with HSP90 may basally retain ERBB2 at the cell surface . Accordingly , treatment of cells with HSP90 antagonists triggers ERBB2 ubi - quitylation by chaperone - associated ligases , and accel - erates its intracellular degradation 60 – 62 . Collectively , these evasion mechanisms allow ERBB2 - expressing cells to capitalize on oncogenic signalling fluxes , which explains the aggressiveness of certain subtypes of carcinomas . Overexpression of ERBB2 , due to gene amplification , has been reported in subtypes of breast , lung , pancre - atic , colon , endometrial and ovarian cancer and predicts poor prognosis for cancer patients 63 . The Cbl platform : collapsing under oncogenic pressure . Prominent E3 ubiquitin ligases controlling receptor endocytosis include the Nedd4 family proteins , which target cargos such as cytokine receptors and ion chan - nels , and Cbl . Mammalian Cbl proteins have a common structure ( FIG . 4 ) that includes a phosphotyrosine bind - ing ( PTB ) module that interacts with disparate phospho - tyrosine motifs in RTKs and a RING finger that engages E2 proteins to mediate substrate ubiquitylation and nedd ylation 51 , 64 – 66 . Early evidence of roles for Cbl in can - cer emerged in retroviruses : viral Cbl , which encodes the PTB in isolation , was identified as the transforming gene of the Cas NS - 1 virus in B - cell lymphoma and myeloid Figure 4 | endocytic mechanisms controlling growth factor signalling . Growth factor ( GF ) - activated receptors are internalized through clathrin - coated pits ( CCP ) or through caveolae , membrane sub - domains enriched in caveolin . Key players of each route are listed in boxes . Within early endosomes ( EE ) , tyrosine phosphorylated ( P ) receptors recruit Cbl family ligases through a phosphotyrosine binding domain ( PTB ; inset ) , and the ring finger ( RF ) of Cbl recruits ubiquitin - loaded E2 molecules . This step is highly regulated , either negatively ( by Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor 7 ( ARHGEF7 or COOL1 ) and SRC , for example ) or positively ( by CIN85 and LRIG1 , for example ) . Receptor sorting for degradation or for recycling endosomes ( RE ) takes place both in EEs and in multi - vesicular bodies ( MVBs ) . This process is regulated by several sorting complexes ( ESCRTs ) , as well as by ubiquitin - binding proteins ( such as HGS and STAM ) . Escape from Cbl - mediated receptor degradation is common in tumours expressing mutant forms of receptor tyrosine kinases or Cbl . Proteins whose function is associated with oncogenesis , along with displaying aberrant expression in human tumours , are shown in red , whereas those involved in tumour suppression are shown in green . EPS15 , epidermal growth factor receptor substrate 15 ; Ub , ubiquitin . R E V I E W S NATuRE REVIEwS | cancer VOluME 8 | NOVEMBER 2008 | 841 Table 1 | Regulators of endocytosis aberrantly expressed in human tumours Protein Function in endocytosis aberrations in human cancer Oncogenic properties refs CBL Mediates multiubiquitylation of RTKs Point mutations ( e . g . R420Q in RING ) , insertions and deletions in AML Inhibits ubiquitylation and downregulation of RTK FLT3 69 , 167 , 168 HIP1 & HIP1R Coordinates actin remodelling during formation of clathrin - coated vesicles HIP1 – PDGFBR fusion in CMML Induces cytokine - independent growth . 169 Overexpression in primary epithelial tumours & gliomas Transforms mouse fibroblasts to induce colonies in soft agar and tumours in nude mice 96 VPS37A ESCRTI protein ; promotes down - regulation of ubiquitylated receptors Downregulation in HCC Knockdown strongly stabilizes EGFR 112 ARHGEF7 or COOL1 CDC42 GEF ; mediates CDC42 - dependent sequestration of Cbl Overexpression in breast cancers Necessary for v - Src - induced transformation including tumour formation in nude mice 170 Cortactin Coordinates actin polymerization at endocytic sites ; ARP2 – ARP3 activator ; binds F - actin and dynamin Amplification at gene locus ( 11q13 ) and protein overexpression in primary breast carcinomas and HNSCCs Overexpression inhibits ligand - induced EGFR endocytosis ; knockdown accelerates receptor downregulation in HNSCC cell lines 171 Clathrin heavy chain Principal coat protein ; instigates membrane invagination CHC – ALK fusion in IMT and large B - cell lymphoma Constitutive activation of ALK 172 CHC – TFE3 fusion in paediatric renal carcinoma Aberrant transcription factor activity ? 173 SNAP91 Clathrin - binding adaptor ; involved in assembly of clathrin coats SNAP91 – AF10 fusion in ALL and AML Fusion comprising clathrin - binding domain of SNAP91and putative transcription factor AF10 174 EPS15 Endocytic scaffold for clathrin ; promotes clathrin - mediated endocytosis EPS15 – MLL fusion in AML EPS15 coiled - coil domain mediates oligomerization of MLL , a DNA - binding histone methyltransferase 175 Endophilin II Induces membrane curvature during vesicle formation . EEN – MLL fusion in AML EEN coiled coil - dependent dimerization and oncogenic activation of MLL 176 SPRY ( Sprouty ) Competes with RTKs for Cbl binding Downregulation of SPRY1 and SPRY2 in breast and prostate cancers . Antagonist of Ras – Erk pathway . SPRY1 and SPRY2 overexpression in osteosarcoma and prostate cancer cells , respectively , inhibits cell proliferation and invasion . 177 HAX1 Regulates clathrin - mediated integrin endocytosis Overexpression in advanced oral carcinoma Knockdown inhibits endocytosis of integrin α v β 6 and migration of oral carcinoma cells 133 Disabled 2 Cargo - selective clathrin adaptor ; recruits myosin VI to clathrin - coated structures Downregulation in ovarian , prostate , bladder , breast , oesophageal and colorectal carcinomas Increased expression suppresses growth of choriocarcinoma and prostate cancer cells 178 NUMB Mediates internalization of β integrins during directional cell migration . Associates with E - cadherin in recycling endosomes Downregulation in breast cancer Notch antagonist . Tumour suppressor activity attributed to stabilization of p53 179 GEP100 ARF6 GEF ; interacts with activated EGFR Overexpression in invasive ductal carcinomas of the breast Knockdown inhibits metastasis formation by breast cancer cells in nude mice 40 RAB25 Regulates receptor recycling . Promotes invasion by delivery of integrin α 5 β 1 to the leading edge Amplification of genomic locus ( 1q22 ) in advanced ovarian and breast cancers Overexpression promotes increased anchorage - independent growth and tumour cell invasion . 134 NDRG1 RAB4A effector protein involved in E - cadherin recycling Downregulation in prostate , breast and pancreatic carcinomas Suppresses metastasis of prostate and colon cancer cells in nude mice . 180 ACK1 Binds clathrin and activated EGFR ; promotes receptor degradation Gene amplification in advanced - stage primary tumours and metastases derived from prostate and breast Enhances tumorigenesis in nude mice . Promotes degradation of tumour suppressor protein WWOX 181 PAR3 Controls endocytosis and recycling in clathrin - dependent and independent pathways Downregulation in HCC Associations with tumour suppressors ( VHL and PTEN ) and oncogenes ( e . g . ERBB2 ) impinge on regulation of cell polarity 182 Caveolin 1 Essential for caveolar biogenesis and endocytosis Downregulation and sporadic mutation in breast cancer , correlating with oestrogen receptor expression . Upregulation in multiple cancer types ; positively correlates with high tumour grade and poor clinical outcome . Amplification in aggressive breast carcinomas Expression inversely correlates with cell cycle progression and transformation . However , ectopic expression suppresses oncogene - induced apoptosis and confers resistance to anoikis 183 ALK , anaplastic lymphoma kinase ; ALL , acute lymphocytic leukaemia ; AML , acute myeloid leukaemia ; ARP , actin - related protein ; CDC , cell division cycle ; CMML , chronic myelomonocytic leukaemia ; E - cadherin , epithelial cadherin ; EGFR , epidermal growth factor receptor ; ENN , endophilin II ; EPS15 , EGFR pathway substrate 15 ; Erk , extracellular - signal - regulated kinase ; ESCRT , endosomal sorting complex required for transport ; GEF , guanine nucleotide exchange factor ; HCC , hepatocellular carcinoma ; HIP , Huntingtin - interacting protein 1 ; HIP1R , HIP1 - related ; HNSCC , head and neck squamous cell carcinoma ; IMT , inflammatory myofibroblastic tumour ; MML , myeloid / lymphoid or mixed - lineage leukemia ; NDRG1 , NMYC downregulated gene 1 ; PAR3 , partitioning - defective 3 ; RTK , receptor tyrosine kinase ; TFE3 , transcription factor E3 ; VHL , von Hippel – Lindau ; VPS , vacuolar protein sorting . R E V I E W S 842 | NOVEMBER 2008 | VOluME 8 www . nature . com / reviews / cancer Total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy Light is directed at an angle sufficient to cause total reflection at regions proximal to the interface between the sample and coverslip . This technique offers resolution of dynamic processes at the plasma membrane , such as localized actin polymerization and recruitment of effector proteins . leukaemia in mice 67 , and 70Z - Cbl , which incorporates a deletion within the linker that separates the PTB from the RING finger , was shown to be the causative mutation in 70Z / 3 pre - B - cell lymphoma 68 . Moreover , analysis of bone marrow from patients with acute myeloid leukae - mia revealed a rare amino acid substitution within the CBl RING finger ( arginine 420 to glutamine ) , rendering the protein ligase - defective 69 . Ectopic expression of the point mutant caused impaired downregulation of FlT3 , an RTK that has been frequently implicated in leukaemic transformation . It will be important to determine whether other Cbl aberrations exist in human malignancies . Perturbations that cheat receptor ubiquitylation . Active sorting in endosomes is attributed to various ubiquitin - binding domains ( uBDs ) borne by multiple adaptors . These include uIMs , which are present in both HGS and STAM and recruit incoming receptors to MVBs , the MIu and ZnF motifs that were identified in the RAB5 - specific guanine nucleotide exchange factor RABGEF1 ( also known as RABEX5 ) , and the uEV and NZF domains , which are carried by the MVB - localized proteins TSG101 and VPS36 , respectively . Further , many endosomal regula - tors are also commonly modified with ubiquitin . E3 ligase – adaptor pairings include TAl with TSG101 , NEDD4 or parkin with EPS15 , and MDM2 with β - arrestin . Alternatively , certain adaptors can undergo autono - mous E3 - independent ubiquitylation by virtue of their ubiquitin - binding capability 70 . Somatically acquired mutations in RTKs , which evade ubiquitin - mediated sorting to degradation , are widespread in cancer . EGFR aberrations in this context include EGFRvIII , an oncogenic deletion mutant prevalent in glioblastomas . Importantly , EGFRvIII escapes efficient downregulation : hypophosphorylation of its Cbl docking site ( tyrosine 1045 ) in cancer cells is in accord with retarded receptor internalization and increased recycling 71 , 72 . Further , non - small - cell lung tumours in patients of East Asian origin ( and others ) frequently present kinase domain mutations that increase EGFR catalytic activity and receptor half - life . Although constitutively tyrosine phosphorylated , these receptors undergo weak ubiquitylation and down - regulation , which is correlated with heterodimerization with ERBB2 , constitutive association with HSP90 and poor Cbl binding 73 , 74 . Escape from degradation can be induced by exposure of the wild - type receptor to reactive oxidants present in cigarette smoke ; once again , EGFR is activated upon oxi - dation but Cbl - mediated degradation is defective 75 . HGFR ( encoded by MET ) , the receptor for HGF , is another prominent example . HGFR couples to Cbl through a jux - tamembrane tyrosine residue ; a point mutation at this site is highly tumorigenic in animal models , and is associated with an inability to activate an endosomal adaptor , HGS 76 . Interestingly , certain primary tumours derived from the lung exhibit an internal deletion in HGFR encompassing the Cbl docking site 76 . Finally , transforming mutations that sabotage Cbl - dependent ubiquitylation have been described for other RTKs , including KIT 77 . In summary , oncogenic RTKs present multiple strategies to evade endocytosis - mediated desensitization . Paralysing the highway police : regulation of Cbl . Several reports implicate Src family kinases in control of the half - life of Cbl 78 – 80 . Interaction with active Src redirects the ubiquitin ligase activity of Cbl towards itself , which results in proteasomal destruction . Hence , uncoupling of the Cbl node may account for one facet of the well - established collaboration between RTKs and Src dur - ing oncogenesis 81 . Other trans - acting E3 ligases may also impinge on Cbl stability . HECT domain ligases of the Nedd4 family interact with Cbl through their ww domains and inhibit the degradative effects on substrates such as EGFR and Src 82 , 83 . Another strat - egy to regulate the regulator involves non - destructive sequestration of Cbl : according to Cerione and col - leagues , activated CDC42 engages an adaptor protein , ARHGEF7 ( also known as COOl1 ) that associates with Cbl proteins 84 . Stabilization of this tripartite complex by a constitutively active CDC42 titrates Cbl away from EGFR , leading to receptor accumulation and cellular transformation . Blocking Cbl release by overexpression of CDC42 or ARHGEF7 may have relevance in certain human cancers 23 , 85 . Similarly to ARHGEF7 , Sprouty proteins displace RTKs from Cbl , yet they impart both positive and negative pressures on mitogenic signal - ling . Multiple growth factors , including EGF and sev - eral FGFs , induce transcription of Sprouty proteins and increase their tyrosine phosphorylation , thereby sequestering Cbl away from activated EGFRs 86 , 87 , and Sprouty downregulation has been commonly observed in several types of cancer , including lesions of lung , liver , breast 88 and prostate 89 . However , Sprouty proteins are also extensively implicated as conserved negative regu - lators of the mitogen - activated protein kinase – extra - cellular - signal - regulated kinase cascade downstream of several RTKs . Bursting at the coated pit : aberrations in actin - associated endocytic adaptors . It is increasingly clear that actin polymerization is intimately involved in virtually all modes of internalization . By using total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy and fluorescently tagged actin , Merrifield and colleagues first observed in endocytic loci ‘actin bursts’ that preceded intern - alization of the endocytic coat and coincided with transient recruitment of dynamins 90 . Subsequent analyses have revealed ordered recruitment of actin filament - nucleating factors , primarily the actin - related protein 2 ( ARP2 ) – ARP3 complex and two of its acti - vators , wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( wASP ) and cortactin 91 . Equally incriminating are the adaptor proteins that bridge actin and endocytic machineries , which include intersectin , endophilin and cortactin . Huntingtin - interacting protein 1 ( HIP1 ) and its close relative HIP1R are classical actin adaptors harbour - ing binding sites for phosphoinositides , cortactin and clathrin , which enable stimulation of clathrin assem - bly in vitro 92 . Depletion of HIP1R resulted in stable association between CCPs and the actin assembly machinery 93 , implying that HIP1R coordinates actin remodelling with vesicle dynamics . Given this crucial function , it is perhaps not surprising that HIP1 proteins R E V I E W S NATuRE REVIEwS | cancer VOluME 8 | NOVEMBER 2008 | 843 Focal adhesions Large cellular sites of adhesion ( several micrometres long ) to the ECM . Adhesion is mediated by integrins , mainly α 5 β 1 and α v β 3 , which bind ECM constituents , and coordinate anchoring proteins that couple to actin stress fibres . Focal complexes Small precursors of FAs ( less than a micrometre long ) continuously formed and disassembled under extending lamellipodia during cell migration . Retraction or arrest of lamelllipodia transforms a minority of focal contacts into larger , more stable FAs . have been extensively implicated in oncogenesis . HIP1 overexpression has been observed in various human cancers , including prostate tumours , in which it cor - related with relapse after prostatectomy 94 . Notably , a recent study described frequent HIP1 overexpression in glial tumours , which often coincided with increased RTK expression 95 . Consistently , when overexpressed , HIP1 transforms fibroblasts , induces tumours in nude mice and upregulates several RTKs 96 . Other potentially oncogenic actin - associated adaptors include cortactin and CIN85 . Overexpression of cortactin was found to impair downregulation of EGFR and , conversely , cort - actin depletion accelerated receptor degradation 97 . In conclusion , aberrant expression of adaptors linking the actin cytoskeleton to the endocytic machinery impairs endocytosis of RTKs in tumours . Sneaking away at the MVB : mechanisms that defy RTK regulation by ESCRTs . ESCRT ( endosomal sort - ing complex required for transport ) proteins were identified in pioneering screens of yeast mutants , which analysed mis - sorting of endocytic cargos 98 , 99 . Certain ‘vacuolar protein sorting’ ( vps ) mutants were characterized by the presence of aberrantly large pre - vacuolar compartments ( ‘Class E’ ) 100 . Subsequent ana - lyses revealed that Class E proteins of both yeast and mammals cluster into three MVB complexes , ESCRTI , ESCRTII and ESCRTIII , which transfer ubiquitin - con - jugated cargos to lysosomes 101 . Correlation of ESCRTs with carcinogenesis emerged as a complex undertak - ing , probably because these complexes sort diverse cargos ranging from immune receptors to neurotrans - mitters . Hence , unlike the Cbl node , causative involve - ment of ESCRTs in oncogenesis is subtle . Knockdown of individual components of ESCRTs ( such as TSG101 and VPS24 ) strongly inhibits EGFR degradation and sustains signalling 102 , 103 . Congruently , crucial links between ESCRT proteins and cancer emerged from studies of imaginal disc epithelia in D . melanogaster , as three independent screens retrieved the ESCRT com - ponents TSG101 ( REF . 104 ) and VPS25 ( REFS 105 , 106 ) . Remarkably , loss of either ESCRT protein recapitulated disruption of polarity and acquisition of mesenchymal morphology by mutant cells . In contrast with insects , in mammals tumour - suppressive roles for ESCRT proteins remain open . Notably , an antisense screen in murine fibroblasts originally described TSG101 as a tumour susceptibility gene 107 . Although several groups subsequently reported aberrant TSG101 tran - scripts in several tumour types , studies using condi - tional deletion of TSG101 noted no oncogenic effect 108 . Rather , TSG101 expression was found to be essential for survival and migration of highly transformed cells 109 , 110 . Accordingly , upregulation of TSG101 has been described in selected human malignancies , including papillary thyroid carcinoma and certain breast cancers 111 . Conversely , a single report suggests a growth - inhibitory role for VPS37 in hepatocellular carcinomas 112 . Nevertheless , reconciliation of the roles of ESCRT proteins in oncogenesis awaits further analyses . From runway to destination To depart their birthplace , cross tissue barriers and colonize distant organs ( that is , metastasize ) , tumour cells must develop motile and invasive phenotypes . Cell - to - matrix adhesion sites of motile cells serve these functions by constantly dissolving and re - appearing at the front of lamellipodial protrusions . This polar distri - bution of dynamic adhesions is propelled by vesicular transport , primarily recycling of adhesion molecules of the integrin family 113 ( FIG . 5 ) . The 20 or so distinct heterodimers of α and β integrins are major constitu - ents of the cell’s ‘feet’ , namely focal adhesions , as well as their smaller precursors , focal complexes . Similarly to other transmembrane receptors , integrins such as α v β 5 target their extracellular matrix ligands ( vitronectin in the case of α v β 5 ) to degradation in lysosomes 114 . Nevertheless , we now realize that the propensity of integrins to evade degradation and form new adhe - sions is pivotal for cell migration . The first evidence of integrin recycling was provided by Mark Bretscher in 1989 ( REF . 115 ) , and this led him to propose that rear - to - front recycling of the fibronectin receptor enables cellular treadmilling of integrins on ligands . Although analyses of migrating cells using total internal reflec - tion fluorescence microscopy indicates increased rates of endocytosis and exocytosis towards the advancing lamellipodium , rather than the trailing edge 116 , the evidence we review below indicates that transcrip - tional and mutational alterations enhance recycling of integrin and thereby confer invasive properties to tumour cells ( FIG . 5 ) . Integrin internalization : same players , new masks . Persistent migration necessitates rapid turnover of adhesion sites , and indeed the plasma membrane pool of integrins is recycled through the endosomal sys - tem once every 30 minutes 117 . The dynamic nature of integrin endocytosis is exemplified by recurrent exploi - tation of this process , using specific small GTPases , by invading pathogens such as Yersinia pseudotuberculosis , which harnesses β 1 integrin and RAC1 ( REF . 118 ) , and the adeno - associated virus 2 ( AAV2 ) , which uses α v β 5 and similarly mobilizes RAC1 ( REF . 119 ) . Another Rho family member , RHOA , establishes new focal adhesions by activating actomyosin contractility and aggregat - ing integrins , but the disassembly mechanism of focal adhesions remained unknown until recently . Because earlier studies noted that growing microtubules con - tact focal adhesions transiently , thereby inducing their disassembly , Ellen Ezratty and her colleagues exposed resting cells to nocodazole , a microtubule - severing agent , and studied the wave of microtubule regrowth that follows nocodazole removal 120 . Remarkably , the extensive disassembly of focal adhesions they observed required dynamins , along with focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) . It appears that FAK recruits dynamins to the disassembling focal contacts , and microtubules acti - vate the GTPase activity of dynamins 118 . Conceivably , and in analogy to RTK endocytosis , dynamins gener - ate the collars of forming integrin - loaded vesicles , and later pinch them off the plasma membrane . Another R E V I E W S 844 | NOVEMBER 2008 | VOluME 8 www . nature . com / reviews / cancer Lysosome Trailingedge Advancing lamellipodium PNRC EE Integrin Nature Reviews | Cancer Dynamin MT Actin FAK Integrin Short loop RAB4PKD1 Internalization DynaminsPKC α CAV1FAKMT Long loop RAB25PKBGSK3 β ARF6 Perinuclear recycling compartment A collection of tubular organelles associated with microtubules , engaged in recycling of endocytosed cargos to the cell - surface by a Rab11 - dependent process . important function of FAK involves SRC and inhibition of endocytosis of matrix metalloproteinases , which enhances extracellular matrix ( ECM ) degradation and tissue invasion 121 . Routes of integrin internalization . Early analyses of entry mechanisms of certain integrin - binding viruses ( such as adenovirus group C ) clearly implicated clathrin in integrin internalization . In accordance , the cytoplasmic domains of several integrins , such as β 1 , β 3 and β 5 , comprise adaptin - binding motifs . A recent study by Nishimura and Kaibuchi underscores the association between integrin endocytosis and clathrin - coated struc - tures 122 . Focusing on NuMB , which binds both EPS15 and AP2 , they showed that this adaptor also binds to integrin β 1 and localizes to clathrin - coated structures around focal adhesions . within focal adhesions , NuMB recruits the aPKC – PAR3 complex to adopt a polarized distribution toward the leading edge . In addition to the clathrin - dependent route , two clathrin - independent pathways enable integrin internalization : the dynamin - dependent caveolar pathway and the less - studied , dynamin - independent macropinocytosis process . For instance , clustering of α 2 β 1 translocates this integrin complex from rafts to caveolae , and their subsequent internalization depends on PKC 123 . Recycling of integrin after internalization : a tale of GTPases and kinases . Following their internalization , integrins undertake considerably different intracellular itineraries : a short recycling loop controlled by RAB4 , a long loop that traverses a perinuclear recycling compart - ment , or eventual sorting to degradation in lysosomes ( reviewed in REF . 124 ) . As in the case of RTKs , integrin recycling is tuned primarily by small GTPases of the Rab ( and Arf ) family , as well as by protein kinases . Integrin molecules selected for short - loop recycling are sorted to particular subdomains of early endosomes and then recycle back to the cell surface under the control of RAB4A and specific kinases ( such as PKD1 ) . For example , treatment of fibroblasts with platelet - derived growth factor ( PDGF ) shunts α v β 3 to the short - loop recycling pathway 117 , perhaps in order to enhance turnover of adhesion sites during rapid cell migration . By contrast with the short loop , long - loop recycling of integrins involves Rab11 - dependent exit from the peri - nuclear recycling compartment . This selective process is marshalled by kinases of the PKB and PKC families . For example , PKC ε phosphorylates an intermediate filament protein , vimentin , thereby possibly releas - ing integrins from a mechanical tether 125 . likewise , PKB ( also known as Akt ) regulates recycling of α 5 β 1 through several downstream targets , including ACAP1 , an ARF6 - specific GTPase involved in clathrin coat assembly 126 . The crucial functions of ARF6 and RAB11 are exemplified by the ability of the respective nucleo - tide exchange - defective mutants to arrest integrins in the perinuclear compartment 127 . Yet other small G pro - teins , RAB21 and RAB5 , directly bind α - integrin chains and influence both recycling and internalization of β 1 integrins 128 . Although many details are still obscure , it is conceivable that GTP - bound forms of RAB11 , ARF6 and RAB21 regulate integrin recycling by remodelling actin fibres and by activating phospho inositide - specific kinases , as well as other kinases . Human malignancies linked to integrin recycling The frequently observed association between recycling of integrins and the ability of cells to escape anoikis and enter the cell cycle 129 has been paralleled in the past Figure 5 | endocytic mechanisms underlying tumour cell migration and invasion through tissue barriers . The diagram presents a motile cell , the advancing lamellipodium of which moves directionally ( arrow ) . Focal adhesions ( FAs ) are schematically shown , and integrin heterodimers are present at these . Cell migration necessitates polarized endocytosis and trafficking of FA complexes . Integrin internalization ( see inset ) is controlled by dynamin , which is activated by microtubules ( MTs ) , and protein kinases , such as FAK and protein kinase C α ( PKC α ) . Both clathrin - and caveolin 1 ( CAV1 ) - coated domains of the plasma membrane are involved in internalization of integrin . Once in early endosomes ( EEs ) , integrins may be sorted for degradation in lysosomes , recycled to the plasma membrane through a RAB4 - dependent route , or transported to the perinuclear recycling compartment . Recycling from the perinuclear recycling compartment requires Rab11 family members , such as RAB25 , and for some integrin heterodimers , also the protein kinase B ( PKB ) – GSK3 β ( glycogen synthase kinase - β ) axis , ARF6 or certain isoforms of PKC . Human tumours often aberrantly express RAB25 , display a specific repertoire of growth factor - induced integrin heterodimers or present abnormally stabilized microtubules , which promote trafficking of integrins . Proteins whose function is associated with oncogenesis , along with displaying aberrant expression in human tumours , are shown in red . R E V I E W S NATuRE REVIEwS | cancer VOluME 8 | NOVEMBER 2008 | 845 Detyrosinated microtubules Microtubules in which the carboxy - terminal tyrosine of the α - tubulin subunits is removed , revealing a charged glutamate residue . Regulates microtubule stability and differential interactions of effectors , and positively correlates with proliferating cancer cells . 5 years by a myriad of clinical observations . In fact , as reviewed below , all crucial components of the Rab11 - mediated , long - loop recycling trajectory have persuasive relevance to malignancy . Integrin α v β 6 . Several integrin heterodimers and their ECM partners ( such as fibronectin ) have been implicated in cancer progression , and the case for α v β 6 has lately been strengthened . This weakly expressed pan - epithelial receptor for fibronectin and tenascin increases during wound healing , localizes to the leading edge of migrat - ing cells and , when ectopically expressed , increases cell migration in model systems 130 . According to a study per - formed with colon cancer cells , TGF β transcriptionally increases β 6 expression by activating the transcription factor ETS1 ( REF . 131 ) . Accordingly , an extensive survey of colorectal cancer revealed that tumours with increased β 6 expression are associated with a significantly reduced patient survival time in comparison with tumours with weak or no β 6 expression 131 . Similar observations were made with oral , ovarian and , most recently , cervical cancer 132 . Further , HAX1 , an interaction partner of β 6 and an anti - apoptotic protein , enables clathrin - mediated endocytosis of integrin α v β 6 and increases invasion in organotypic invasion assays 133 . These observations explain an association between HAX1 expression and advanced - state oral carcinoma 133 . Rab11 family and binding proteins . The Rab11 sub - family of small GTPases includes RAB11A , RAB11B and RAB11C ( also known as RAB25 ) . Expression of RAB25 is restricted to epithelia and earlier work identified it as a component of an invasive signature of primary mam - mary tumours 133 . Comparative genomic hybridization analyses identified amplification of RAB25 in approxi - mately half of ovarian and breast cancers 134 . Importantly , increased expression of RAB25 is associated with shorter survival of ovarian , breast and hepatocellular carcinoma patients . The mechanism by which RAB25 increases the aggressiveness of tumours is unclear . RAB25 is coordi - nately expressed with E - cadherin , potentially as a conse - quence of coregulation by SNAIl 135 . In addition , RAB25 increases cell survival under multiple stresses , including chemotherapy , owing to its activation of the PI3K – Akt signalling pathway and alteration of the expression of pro - and anti - apoptotic molecules 134 . A recent study reported that RAB25 directly associates with integrin α 5 β 1 , which enables retention of a pool of the recycling integrin at the cell front and promotes invasion into fibroblast - derived extracellular matrix 136 . Another line of evidence supporting contributions of RAB25 to tumour aggressiveness emerged from studies of a RAB11 binding protein , RCP , which is included in an oncogenic ampli - con on chromosome 8 ( REF . 137 ) . Thus , amplification of components of the RAB25 functional complex occurs in multiple tumour lineages , suggesting an important role in tumour initiation or progression . The PKB – GSK3 β axis and microtubule stabiliza - tion . The low O 2 tension that characterizes many solid tumours ( hypoxia 138 ) potentially links microtubules and integrin recycling with metastasis . According to a report by the Mercurio laboratory , hypoxia stabilizes microtubules and promotes Rab11 - mediated traffick - ing of integrin α 6 β 4 through a mechanism that involves PKB activation , inhibition of glycogen synthase kinase 3 β ( GSK3 β ) and diminished phosphorylation of micro - tubule - associated proteins , such as tau 139 . Conceivably , a subset of hypoxia - induced detyrosinated microtubules , which are unusually stable , mobilizes RAB11 and forms tracks for delivery of α 6 β 4 - containing vesicles to the leading edge of invasive cancer cells . The mechanism underlying α 6 β 4 endocytosis is probably the microtu - bule - induced enhancement of the GTPase activity of dynamins discussed above 120 . In conclusion , altered integrin recycling , which is instigated by hypoxia , deregulated Rab gene expression or microtubule stabilization , emerges as a shared fea - ture of human tumours . In accordance with this notion , tubulin stabilization by detyrosination correlates with poor prognosis of breast cancer 140 and approximately 50 % of Rab genes display increased mRNA expression in the majority of ovarian cancer 141 . Further , enhanced expression of RAB25 has been noted not only in ovarian and breast tumours 134 but also in prostate and bladder cancer 142 . Future directions By regulating crucial features of signal transduction , including amplitude , spatial distribution and signalling kinetics , derailed endocytosis of surface receptors prob - ably underlies more than one hallmark of cancer 1 . This Review highlights yet another important feature of sig - nalling in tumours , namely the integration and harmoni - zation of cell - to - cell and cell - to - matrix cues . By altering a common platform comprising dynamins and Rab fam - ily GTPases as well as cytoskeletal elements , oncogenic insults achieve a multifaceted phenotype that simulta - neously affects cell polarity , proliferation and migration ( FIG . 1 ) . An exemplification of the breadth of the endo - cytic platform is provided by a recent study demon - strating activation of Rac within endosomes and actin remodelling by both RAB5 and clathrin 143 . Two future implications of this newly emerging feature of cancer are discussed below : do cancer cells deploy a universal mechanism to alter endocytosis of both signalling and adhesion receptors , and how might these lessons translate to clinical applications ? The examples described in the body of this Review lead us to hypothesize that cancer cells manipulate a universal platform to derail endocytosis in multiple ways . At the plasma membrane , a major initiating event involves transformation of the planar membrane into a curved surface , overcoming cytoskeleton – membrane adhesion . It has become increasingly apparent that PIP 2 critically regulates this process 144 by anchoring to the plasma membrane , and thereby inhibiting , several actin - binding proteins ( such as cofilin ) . Congruently , mammary cell migration is preceded by phospho - lipase C - induced PIP 2 hydrolysis , which locally acti - vates cofilin and severs actin filaments 145 . Similarly , dephosphorylation of PIP 2 by a lipid phosphatase , R E V I E W S 846 | NOVEMBER 2008 | VOluME 8 www . nature . com / reviews / cancer synaptojanin , modifies both EGFR endocytosis and cell migration 146 . whether derailed tumour endocytosis depends on metabolism of phosphatidylinositol lipids by enzymes frequently mutated in tumours ( PI3K and PTEN , for example ) remains an open issue . likewise , because dynamin regulates several endocytic routes , this large GTPase is another candidate hub of derailed endocytosis . The sorting machinery , which lies further down the endocytic pathway , displays many genetic and post - trans - lational alterations in tumours ( TABLE 1 ) . One remark - able example is the Rab11 family , which regulates cargo recycling . RAB25 is overexpressed in ovarian and breast cancer 141 , and RAB11 responds to hypoxia by increasing recycling of integrins 139 . Because low O 2 pressure stabi - lizes microtubules and enhances tumour cell invasion 147 , whereas Rab11 recycles both integrins and many RTKs , a module consisting of tubulin , dynamin and RAB11 may constitute an important part of the cargo - derailing machinery of aggressive , probably hypoxic , tumour cells . Future studies may establish this concept and uncover new implications for cancer . Transforming into an Achilles heel the propensity of tumours to shunt their receptors is a promising challenge in translational research . Advanced intravital imaging methods are expected to use altered trafficking to dif - ferentiate between normal and tumour - initiating cells early in the natural history of malignant lesions . Another interface with oncology is underscored by the ability of certain genotoxic stresses to induce internalization of RTKs : both ultraviolet irradiation and chemotherapeutic drugs trigger sequestration of EGFRs in early endosomes , in a mechanism involving clathrin and p38 - dependent receptor phosphorylation 148 , 149 . Along with phosphoryl - ating EGFR , p38 also modifies two RAB5 effectors , EEA1 and rabenosyn 5 ( REF . 150 ) , as well as RAB5 – GTP 151 , to regulate endocytosis of a wide range of cargos . Aberrations within this emergent machinery may not only impart resistance to certain chemotherapies and radiotherapies , but may also allow selection of aggres - sive tumours capable of RTK - driven evasion of apoptosis under genotoxic stress . Similarly to drug - induced engagement of a tumour’s endocytic routes , the differences in routing of endo - cytosed cargo may be harnessed for the delivery of toxic loads , such as bacterial toxins , into tumour cells . Monoclonal antibodies ( mAbs ) targeted to RTKs and integrins provide an example that extends beyond delivery of toxic loads 152 . Humanized anti - ERBB2 and anti - EGFR mAbs are already used to treat patients with breast , colorectal or head - and - neck cancer , but their mechanism of action is currently unclear . One potential mechanism involves the ability of mAbs , especially in combinations of two or more , to target their cognate receptors to degradation in lysosomes 153 . Remarkably , early - phase clinical trials suggest that a specific combination of mAbs elicit clinical response in ERBB2 - overexpressing breast cancer patients 154 . Hence , answering questions such as how antibodies force RTKs to change their itinerary from recycling endosomes to inner vesicles of MVBs , and whether similar lessons can be applied to integrins and cadherins , may yield novel cancer therapies , as well as diminish acquired resistance to existing immunotherapeutics . 1 . Hanahan , D . & Weinberg , R . A . The hallmarks of cancer . Cell 100 , 57 – 70 ( 2000 ) . 2 . Goldstein , J . L . , Anderson , R . G . & Brown , M . S . Coated pits , coated vesicles , and receptor - mediated endocytosis . Nature 279 , 679 – 685 ( 1979 ) . 3 . Zerial , M . & McBride , H . Rab proteins as membrane organizers . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2 , 107 – 117 ( 2001 ) . 4 . Parton , R . G . & Simons , K . The multiple faces of caveolae . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 8 , 185 – 194 ( 2007 ) . 5 . Pelkmans , L . , Burli , T . , Zerial , M . & Helenius , A . Caveolin - stabilized membrane domains as multifunctional transport and sorting devices in endocytic membrane traffic . Cell 118 , 767 – 780 ( 2004 ) . 6 . Di Guglielmo , G . M . , Le Roy , C . , Goodfellow , A . F . & Wrana , J . L . Distinct endocytic pathways regulate TGF - β receptor signalling and turnover . Nature Cell Biol . 5 , 410 – 421 ( 2003 ) . 7 . Sigismund , S . et al . Clathrin - independent endocytosis of ubiquitinated cargos . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 2760 – 2765 ( 2005 ) . 8 . Llorente , A . , Rapak , A . , Schmid , S . L . , van Deurs , B . & Sandvig , K . Expression of mutant dynamin inhibits toxicity and transport of endocytosed ricin to the Golgi apparatus . J . Cell Biol . 140 , 553 – 563 ( 1998 ) . 9 . Damke , H . , Baba , T . , van der Bliek , A . M . & Schmid , S . L . Clathrin - independent pinocytosis is induced in cells overexpressing a temperature - sensitive mutant of dynamin . J . Cell Biol . 131 , 69 – 80 ( 1995 ) . 10 . Lamaze , C . et al . Interleukin 2 receptors and detergent - resistant membrane domains define a clathrin - independent endocytic pathway . Mol . Cell 7 , 661 – 671 ( 2001 ) . 11 . Kumari , S . & Mayor , S . ARF1 is directly involved in dynamin - independent endocytosis . Nature Cell Biol . 10 , 30 – 41 ( 2008 ) . 12 . Innocenti , M . et al . Abi1 regulates the activity of N . - WASP and WAVE in distinct actin - based processes . Nature Cell Biol . 7 , 969 – 976 ( 2005 ) . 13 . Orth , J . D . , Krueger , E . W . , Weller , S . G . & McNiven , M . A . A novel endocytic mechanism of epidermal growth factor receptor sequestration and internalization . Cancer Res . 66 , 3603 – 3610 ( 2006 ) . 14 . Lanzetti , L . , Palamidessi , A . , Areces , L . , Scita , G . & Di Fiore , P . P . Rab5 is a signalling GTPase involved in actin remodelling by receptor tyrosine kinases . Nature 429 , 309 – 314 ( 2004 ) . 15 . Becker , K . F . et al . E - cadherin gene mutations provide clues to diffuse type gastric carcinomas . Cancer Res . 54 , 3845 – 3852 ( 1994 ) . 16 . Ohashi , M . et al . Human T - cell leukemia virus type 1 Tax oncoprotein induces and interacts with a multi - PDZ domain protein , MAGI - 3 . Virology 320 , 52 – 62 ( 2004 ) . 17 . Mostov , K . , Su , T . & ter Beest , M . Polarized epithelial membrane traffic : conservation and plasticity . Nature Cell Biol . 5 , 287 – 293 ( 2003 ) . 18 . Deborde , S . et al . Clathrin is a key regulator of basolateral polarity . Nature 452 , 719 – 723 ( 2008 ) . This important paper describes for the first time a requirement for clathrin in polarized sorting of proteins to the basolateral membrane . 19 . Balklava , Z . , Pant , S . , Fares , H . & Grant , B . D . Genome - wide analysis identifies a general requirement for polarity proteins in endocytic traffic . Nature Cell Biol . 9 , 1066 – 1073 ( 2007 ) . 20 . Pagliarini , R . A . & Xu , T . A genetic screen in Drosophila for metastatic behavior . Science 302 , 1227 – 1231 ( 2003 ) . 21 . Wells , C . D . et al . A Rich1 / Amot complex regulates the Cdc42 GTPase and apical - polarity proteins in epithelial cells . Cell 125 , 535 – 548 ( 2006 ) . This interesting study identifies CDC42 - associated proteins involved in the maintenance of TJs and trafficking of junctional proteins . 22 . Terai , T . , Nishimura , N . , Kanda , I . , Yasui , N . & Sasaki , T . JRAB / MICAL - L2 is a junctional Rab13 - binding protein mediating the endocytic recycling of occludin . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 2465 – 2475 ( 2006 ) . 23 . Kamai , T . et al . Overexpression of RhoA , Rac1 , and Cdc42 GTPases is associated with progression in testicular cancer . Clin . Cancer Res . 10 , 4799 – 4805 ( 2004 ) . 24 . Baas , A . F . et al . Complete polarization of single intestinal epithelial cells upon activation of LKB1 by STRAD . Cell 116 , 457 – 466 ( 2004 ) . 25 . Gangar , A . , Rossi , G . , Andreeva , A . , Hales , R . & Brennwald , P . Structurally conserved interaction of Lgl family with SNAREs is critical to their cellular function . Curr . Biol . 15 , 1136 – 1142 ( 2005 ) . 26 . Zhang , X . et al . Lethal giant larvae proteins interact with the exocyst complex and are involved in polarized exocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 170 , 273 – 283 ( 2005 ) . 27 . Eder , A . M . et al . Atypical PKC ι contributes to poor prognosis through loss of apical - basal polarity and cyclin E overexpression in ovarian cancer . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 12519 – 12524 ( 2005 ) . 28 . Kuphal , S . et al . Expression of Hugl - 1 is strongly reduced in malignant melanoma . Oncogene 25 , 103 – 110 ( 2006 ) . 29 . Wang , Y . et al . Tyrosine phosphorylated Par3 regulates epithelial tight junction assembly promoted by EGFR signaling . EMBO J . 25 , 5058 – 5070 ( 2006 ) . 30 . Aranda , V . et al . Par6 – aPKC uncouples ErbB2 induced disruption of polarized epithelial organization from proliferation control . Nature Cell Biol . 8 , 1235 – 1245 ( 2006 ) . This manuscript provides insights into the disruption of cell polarity by growth factor receptors , involving recruitment of the PAR6 – aPKC complex to activated ERBB2 . 31 . Okuda , H . et al . The von Hippel – Lindau tumor suppressor protein mediates ubiquitination of activated atypical protein kinase C . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 43611 – 43617 ( 2001 ) . 32 . Nelson , W . J . & Nusse , R . Convergence of Wnt , β - catenin , and cadherin pathways . Science 303 , 1483 – 1487 ( 2004 ) . R E V I E W S NATuRE REVIEwS | cancer VOluME 8 | NOVEMBER 2008 | 847 33 . Lu , Z . , Ghosh , S . , Wang , Z . & Hunter , T . Downregulation of caveolin - 1 function by EGF leads to the loss of E - cadherin , increased transcriptional activity of β - catenin , and enhanced tumor cell invasion . Cancer Cell 4 , 499 – 515 ( 2003 ) . 34 . Kimura , T . , Sakisaka , T . , Baba , T . , Yamada , T . & Takai , Y . Involvement of the Ras – Ras - activated Rab5 guanine nucleotide exchange factor RIN2 – Rab5 pathway in the hepatocyte growth factor - induced endocytosis of E - cadherin . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 10598 – 10609 ( 2006 ) . 35 . Bryant , D . M . et al . EGF induces macropinocytosis and SNX1 - modulated recycling of E - cadherin . J . Cell Sci . 120 , 1818 – 1828 ( 2007 ) . 36 . Fujita , Y . et al . Hakai , a c - Cbl - like protein , ubiquitinates and induces endocytosis of the E - cadherin complex . Nature Cell Biol . 4 , 222 – 231 ( 2002 ) . An interesting paper that identified the E3 ligase of E - cadherin and described a role for ubiquitin - dependent downregulation of E - cadherin in the breakdown of cell – cell junctions . 37 . Gavard , J . & Gutkind , J . S . VEGF controls endothelial - cell permeability by promoting the β - arrestin - dependent endocytosis of VE - cadherin . Nature Cell Biol . 8 , 1223 – 1234 ( 2006 ) . 38 . Toyoshima , M . et al . Inhibition of tumor growth and metastasis by depletion of vesicular sorting protein Hrs : its regulatory role on E - cadherin and β - catenin . Cancer Res . 67 , 5162 – 5171 ( 2007 ) . 39 . Gavard , J . , Patel , V . & Gutkind , J . S . Angiopoietin - 1 prevents VEGF - induced endothelial permeability by sequestering Src through mDia . Dev . Cell 14 , 25 – 36 ( 2008 ) . 40 . Morishige , M . et al . GEP100 links epidermal growth factor receptor signalling to Arf6 activation to induce breast cancer invasion . Nature Cell Biol . 10 , 85 – 92 ( 2008 ) . This key paper describes a direct interaction between the ARF6 GEF , GEP100 , and activated EGFR , which is necessary for invasiveness of breast cancer cells . 41 . Kachhap , S . K . et al . The N - Myc down regulated gene1 ( NDRG1 ) is a Rab4a effector involved in vesicular recycling of E - cadherin . PLoS ONE 2 , e844 ( 2007 ) . 42 . Balzac , F . et al . E - cadherin endocytosis regulates the activity of Rap1 : a traffic light GTPase at the crossroads between cadherin and integrin function . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 4765 – 4783 ( 2005 ) . 43 . Davis , M . A . & Reynolds , A . B . Blocked acinar development , E - cadherin reduction , and intraepithelial neoplasia upon ablation of p120 - catenin in the mouse salivary gland . Dev . Cell 10 , 21 – 31 ( 2006 ) . 44 . Chen , X . , Kojima , S . , Borisy , G . G . & Green , K . J . p120 catenin associates with kinesin and facilitates the transport of cadherin – catenin complexes to intercellular junctions . J . Cell Biol . 163 , 547 – 557 ( 2003 ) . 45 . Xiao , K . , Oas , R . G . , Chiasson , C . M . & Kowalczyk , A . P . Role of p120 - catenin in cadherin trafficking . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1773 , 8 – 16 ( 2007 ) . 46 . Kallakury , B . V . et al . Decreased expression of catenins ( α and β ) , p120 CTN , and E - cadherin cell adhesion proteins and E - cadherin gene promoter methylation in prostatic adenocarcinomas . Cancer 92 , 2786 – 2795 ( 2001 ) . 47 . Bellovin , D . I . , Bates , R . C . , Muzikansky , A . , Rimm , D . L . & Mercurio , A . M . Altered localization of p120 catenin during epithelial to mesenchymal transition of colon carcinoma is prognostic for aggressive disease . Cancer Res . 65 , 10938 – 10945 ( 2005 ) . 48 . Amit , I . et al . A module of negative feedback regulators defines growth factor signaling . Nature Genet . 39 , 503 – 512 ( 2007 ) . 49 . Wiley , H . S . , Shvartsman , S . Y . & Lauffenburger , D . A . Computational modeling of the EGF - receptor system : a paradigm for systems biology . Trends Cell Biol . 13 , 43 – 50 ( 2003 ) . 50 . Yarden , Y . & Sliwkowski , M . X . Untangling the ErbB signalling network . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2 , 127 – 137 ( 2001 ) . 51 . Levkowitz , G . et al . Ubiquitin ligase activity and tyrosine phosphorylation underlie suppression of growth factor signaling by c - Cbl / Sli - 1 . Mol . Cell 4 , 1029 – 1040 ( 1999 ) . 52 . Ebner , R . & Derynck , R . Epidermal growth factor and transforming growth factor - α : differential intracellular routing and processing of ligand - receptor complexes . Cell Reg . 2 , 599 – 612 ( 1991 ) . 53 . Longva , K . E . et al . Ubiquitination and proteasomal activity is required for transport of the EGF receptor to inner membranes of multivesicular bodies . J . Cell Biol . 156 , 843 – 854 ( 2002 ) . 54 . Belleudi , F . et al . Keratinocyte growth factor receptor ligands target the receptor to different intracellular pathways . Traffic 8 , 1854 – 1872 ( 2007 ) . 55 . Nicholson , R . I . , Gee , J . M . & Harper , M . E . EGFR and cancer prognosis . Eur . J . Cancer 37 ( Suppl . 4 ) , S9 – S15 ( 2001 ) . 56 . French , A . R . , Sudlow , G . P . , Wiley , H . S . & Lauffenburger , D . A . Postendocytic trafficking of epidermal growth factor - receptor complexes is mediated through saturable and specific endosomal interactions . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 15749 – 15755 ( 1994 ) . 57 . Lenferink , A . E . et al . Differential endocytic routing of homo - and hetero - dimeric ErbB tyrosine kinases confers signaling superiority to receptor heterodimers . EMBO J . 17 , 3385 – 3397 ( 1998 ) . 58 . Worthylake , R . , Opresko , L . K . & Wiley , H . S . ErbB - 2 amplification inhibits down - regulation and induces constitutive activation of both ErbB - 2 and epidermal growth factor receptors . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 8865 – 8874 ( 1999 ) . 59 . Hommelgaard , A . M . , Lerdrup , M . & van Deurs , B . Association with membrane protrusions makes ErbB2 an internalization - resistant receptor . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 1557 – 1567 ( 2004 ) . 60 . Citri , A . et al . Hsp90 restrains ErbB - 2 / HER2 signalling by limiting heterodimer formation . EMBO Rep . 5 , 1165 – 1170 ( 2004 ) . 61 . Lerdrup , M . , Hommelgaard , A . M . , Grandal , M . & van Deurs , B . Geldanamycin stimulates internalization of ErbB2 in a proteasome - dependent way . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 85 – 95 ( 2006 ) . 62 . Tikhomirov , O . & Carpenter , G . Geldanamycin induces ErbB - 2 degradation by proteolytic fragmentation . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 26625 – 26631 ( 2000 ) . 63 . Ross , J . S . et al . The Her - 2 / neu gene and protein in breast cancer 2003 : biomarker and target of therapy . Oncologist 8 , 307 – 325 ( 2003 ) . 64 . Joazeiro , C . A . et al . The tyrosine kinase negative regulator c - Cbl as a RING - type , E2 - dependent ubiquitin - protein ligase . Science 286 , 309 – 312 ( 1999 ) . 65 . Oved , S . et al . Conjugation to Nedd8 instigates ubiquitylation and down - regulation of activated receptor tyrosine kinases . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 21640 – 21651 ( 2006 ) . 66 . Yokouchi , M . et al . Ligand - induced ubiquitination of the epidermal growth factor receptor involves the interaction of the c - Cbl RING finger and UbcH7 . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 31707 – 31712 ( 1999 ) . 67 . Langdon , W . Y . , Hartley , J . W . , Klinken , S . P . , Ruscetti , S . K . & Morse , H . C . 3rd . v - cbl , an oncogene from a dual - recombinant murine retrovirus that induces early B - lineage lymphomas . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 86 , 1168 – 1172 ( 1989 ) . 68 . Andoniou , C . E . , Thien , C . B . & Langdon , W . Y . Tumour induction by activated abl involves tyrosine phosphorylation of the product of the cbl oncogene . EMBO J . 13 , 4515 – 4523 ( 1994 ) . 69 . Sargin , B . et al . Flt3 - dependent transformation by inactivating c - Cbl mutations in AML . Blood 110 , 1004 – 1012 ( 2007 ) . First description of a Cbl mutation in human cancer , correlating with impaired downregulation of the RTK FLT3 . 70 . Hoeller , D . et al . E3 - independent monoubiquitination of ubiquitin - binding proteins . Mol . Cell 26 , 891 – 898 ( 2007 ) . 71 . Grandal , M . V . et al . EGFRvIII escapes down - regulation due to impaired internalization and sorting to lysosomes . Carcinogenesis 28 , 1408 – 1417 ( 2007 ) . 72 . Han , W . , Zhang , T . , Yu , H . , Foulke , J . G . & Tang , C . K . Hypophosphorylation of residue Y1045 leads to defective downregulation of EGFRvIII . Cancer Biol . Ther . 5 , 1361 – 1368 ( 2006 ) . 73 . Shtiegman , K . et al . Defective ubiquitinylation of EGFR mutants of lung cancer confers prolonged signaling . Oncogene 26 , 6968 – 6978 ( 2007 ) . 74 . Yang , S . et al . Association with HSP90 inhibits Cbl - mediated down - regulation of mutant epidermal growth factor receptors . Cancer Res . 66 , 6990 – 6997 ( 2006 ) . 75 . Khan , E . M . , Lanir , R . , Danielson , A . R . & Goldkorn , T . Epidermal growth factor receptor exposed to cigarette smoke is aberrantly activated and undergoes perinuclear trafficking . FASEB J . 22 , 910 – 917 ( 2008 ) . 76 . Abella , J . V . et al . Met / Hepatocyte growth factor receptor ubiquitination suppresses transformation and is required for Hrs phosphorylation . Mol . Cell . Biol . 25 , 9632 – 9645 ( 2005 ) . 77 . Zeng , S . , Xu , Z . , Lipkowitz , S . & Longley , J . B . Regulation of stem cell factor receptor signaling by Cbl family proteins ( Cbl - b / c - Cbl ) . Blood 105 , 226 – 232 ( 2005 ) . 78 . Bao , J . , Gur , G . & Yarden , Y . Src promotes destruction of c - Cbl : implications for oncogenic synergy between Src and growth factor receptors . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 2438 – 2443 ( 2003 ) . 79 . Howlett , C . J . & Robbins , S . M . Membrane - anchored Cbl suppresses Hck protein - tyrosine kinase mediated cellular transformation . Oncogene 21 , 1707 – 1716 ( 2002 ) . 80 . Yokouchi , M . et al . Src - catalyzed phosphorylation of c - Cbl leads to the interdependent ubiquitination of both proteins . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 35185 – 35193 ( 2001 ) . 81 . Tice , D . A . , Biscardi , J . S . , Nickles , A . L . & Parsons , S . J . Mechanism of biological synergy between cellular Src and epidermal growth factor receptor . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 1415 – 1420 ( 1999 ) . 82 . Courbard , J . R . et al . Interaction between two ubiquitin - protein isopeptide ligases of different classes , CBLC and AIP4 / ITCH . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 45267 – 45275 ( 2002 ) . 83 . Magnifico , A . et al . WW domain HECT E3s target Cbl RING finger E3s for proteasomal degradation . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 43169 – 43177 ( 2003 ) . 84 . Wu , W . J . , Tu , S . & Cerione , R . A . Activated Cdc42 sequesters c - Cbl and prevents EGF receptor degradation . Cell 114 , 715 – 725 ( 2003 ) . 85 . Fritz , G . , Brachetti , C . , Bahlmann , F . , Schmidt , M . & Kaina , B . Rho GTPases in human breast tumours : expression and mutation analyses and correlation with clinical parameters . Br . J . Cancer 87 , 635 – 644 ( 2002 ) . 86 . Hall , A . B . et al . hSpry2 is targeted to the ubiquitin - dependent proteasome pathway by c - Cbl . Curr . Biol . 13 , 308 – 314 ( 2003 ) . 87 . Rubin , C . et al . Sprouty fine - tunes EGF signaling through interlinked positive and negative feedback loops . Curr . Biol . 13 , 297 – 307 ( 2003 ) . 88 . Lo , T . L . et al . The ras / mitogen - activated protein kinase pathway inhibitor and likely tumor suppressor proteins , sprouty 1 and sprouty 2 are deregulated in breast cancer . Cancer Res . 64 , 6127 – 6136 ( 2004 ) . 89 . Kwabi - Addo , B . et al . The expression of Sprouty1 , an inhibitor of fibroblast growth factor signal transduction , is decreased in human prostate cancer . Cancer Res . 64 , 4728 – 4735 ( 2004 ) . 90 . Merrifield , C . J . , Feldman , M . E . , Wan , L . & Almers , W . Imaging actin and dynamin recruitment during invagination of single clathrin - coated pits . Nature Cell Biol . 4 , 691 – 698 ( 2002 ) . 91 . Kaksonen , M . , Sun , Y . & Drubin , D . G . A pathway for association of receptors , adaptors , and actin during endocytic internalization . Cell 115 , 475 – 487 ( 2003 ) . 92 . Legendre - Guillemin , V . et al . HIP1 and HIP12 display differential binding to F - actin , AP2 , and clathrin . Identification of a novel interaction with clathrin light chain . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 19897 – 19904 ( 2002 ) . 93 . Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . et al . RNAi - mediated Hip1R silencing results in stable association between the endocytic machinery and the actin assembly machinery . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 1666 – 1679 ( 2004 ) . 94 . Rao , D . S . et al . Huntingtin - interacting protein 1 is overexpressed in prostate and colon cancer and is critical for cellular survival . J . Clin . Invest . 110 , 351 – 360 ( 2002 ) . 95 . Bradley , S . V . et al . Huntingtin interacting protein 1 is a novel brain tumor marker that associates with epidermal growth factor receptor . Cancer Res . 67 , 3609 – 3615 ( 2007 ) . 96 . Rao , D . S . et al . Altered receptor trafficking in Huntingtin Interacting Protein 1 - transformed cells . Cancer Cell 3 , 471 – 482 ( 2003 ) . 97 . Timpson , P . , Lynch , D . K . , Schramek , D . , Walker , F . & Daly , R . J . Cortactin overexpression inhibits ligand - induced down - regulation of the epidermal growth factor receptor . Cancer Res . 65 , 3273 – 3280 ( 2005 ) . 98 . Bankaitis , V . A . , Johnson , L . M . & Emr , S . D . Isolation of yeast mutants defective in protein targeting to the vacuole . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 83 , 9075 – 9079 ( 1986 ) . 99 . Rothman , J . H . , Hunter , C . P . , Valls , L . A . & Stevens , T . H . Overproduction - induced mislocalization of a yeast vacuolar protein allows isolation of its structural gene . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 83 , 3248 – 3252 ( 1986 ) . 100 . Raymond , C . K . , Howald - Stevenson , I . , Vater , C . A . & Stevens , T . H . Morphological classification of the yeast vacuolar protein sorting mutants : evidence for a prevacuolar compartment in class E vps mutants . Mol . Biol . Cell 3 , 1389 – 1402 ( 1992 ) . R E V I E W S 848 | NOVEMBER 2008 | VOluME 8 www . nature . com / reviews / cancer 101 . Katzmann , D . J . , Odorizzi , G . & Emr , S . D . Receptor downregulation and multivesicular - body sorting . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 3 , 893 – 905 ( 2002 ) . 102 . Bache , K . G . et al . The ESCRT - III subunit hVps24 is required for degradation but not silencing of the epidermal growth factor receptor . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 2513 – 2523 ( 2006 ) . 103 . Doyotte , A . , Russell , M . R . , Hopkins , C . R . & Woodman , P . G . Depletion of TSG101 forms a mammalian ‘Class E’ compartment : a multicisternal early endosome with multiple sorting defects . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 3003 – 3017 ( 2005 ) . 104 . Moberg , K . H . , Schelble , S . , Burdick , S . K . & Hariharan , I . K . Mutations in erupted , the Drosophila ortholog of mammalian tumor susceptibility gene 101 , elicit non - cell - autonomous overgrowth . Dev . Cell 9 , 699 – 710 ( 2005 ) . 105 . Thompson , B . J . et al . Tumor suppressor properties of the ESCRT - II complex component Vps25 in Drosophila . Dev . Cell 9 , 711 – 720 ( 2005 ) . 106 . Vaccari , T . & Bilder , D . The Drosophila tumor suppressor vps25 prevents nonautonomous overproliferation by regulating notch trafficking . Dev . Cell 9 , 687 – 698 ( 2005 ) . 107 . Li , L . & Cohen , S . N . Tsg101 : a novel tumor susceptibility gene isolated by controlled homozygous functional knockout of allelic loci in mammalian cells . Cell 85 , 319 – 329 ( 1996 ) . 108 . Wagner , K . U . et al . Tsg101 is essential for cell growth , proliferation , and cell survival of embryonic and adult tissues . Mol . Cell Biol . 23 , 150 – 162 ( 2003 ) . 109 . Carstens , M . J . , Krempler , A . , Triplett , A . A . , Van Lohuizen , M . & Wagner , K . U . Cell cycle arrest and cell death are controlled by p53 - dependent and p53 - independent mechanisms in Tsg101 - deficient cells . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 35984 – 35994 ( 2004 ) . 110 . Zhu , G . et al . Reduction of TSG101 protein has a negative impact on tumor cell growth . Int . J . Cancer 109 , 541 – 547 ( 2004 ) . 111 . Oh , K . B . , Stanton , M . J . , West , W . W . , Todd , G . L . & Wagner , K . U . Tsg101 is upregulated in a subset of invasive human breast cancers and its targeted overexpression in transgenic mice reveals weak oncogenic properties for mammary cancer initiation . Oncogene 26 , 5950 – 5959 ( 2007 ) . 112 . Xu , Z . , Liang , L . , Wang , H . , Li , T . & Zhao , M . HCRP1 , a novel gene that is downregulated in hepatocellular carcinoma , encodes a growth - inhibitory protein . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 311 , 1057 – 1066 ( 2003 ) . 113 . Jones , M . C . , Caswell , P . T . & Norman , J . C . Endocytic recycling pathways : emerging regulators of cell migration . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 18 , 549 – 557 ( 2006 ) . 114 . Panetti , T . S . & McKeown - Longo , P . J . The α v β 5 integrin receptor regulates receptor - mediated endocytosis of vitronectin . J . Biol . Chem . 268 , 11492 – 11495 ( 1993 ) . 115 . Bretscher , M . S . Endocytosis and recycling of the fibronectin receptor in CHO cells . EMBO J . 8 , 1341 – 1348 ( 1989 ) . 116 . Rappoport , J . Z . & Simon , S . M . Real - time analysis of clathrin - mediated endocytosis during cell migration . J . Cell Sci . 116 , 847 – 855 ( 2003 ) . 117 . Roberts , M . , Barry , S . , Woods , A . , van der Sluijs , P . & Norman , J . PDGF - regulated rab4 - dependent recycling of α v β 3 integrin from early endosomes is necessary for cell adhesion and spreading . Curr . Biol . 11 , 1392 – 1402 ( 2001 ) . 118 . Gustavsson , A . et al . Role of the β 1 - integrin cytoplasmic tail in mediating invasin - promoted internalization of Yersinia . J . Cell Sci . 115 , 669 – 2678 ( 2002 ) . 119 . Sanlioglu , S . et al . Endocytosis and nuclear trafficking of adeno - associated virus type 2 are controlled by rac1 and phosphatidylinositol - 3 kinase activation . J . Virol . 74 , 9184 – 9196 ( 2000 ) . 120 . Ezratty , E . J . , Partridge , M . A . & Gundersen , G . G . Microtubule - induced focal adhesion disassembly is mediated by dynamin and focal adhesion kinase . Nature Cell Biol . 7 , 581 – 590 ( 2005 ) . An important study that provides novel insights into the regulation of cell migration by microtubule - dependent dissolution of focal adhesions . 121 . Wu , X . , Gan , B . , Yoo , Y . & Guan , J . L . FAK - mediated src phosphorylation of endophilin A2 inhibits endocytosis of MT1 – MMP and promotes ECM degradation . Dev . Cell 9 , 185 – 196 ( 2005 ) . 122 . Nishimura , T . & Kaibuchi , K . Numb controls integrin endocytosis for directional cell migration with aPKC and PAR - 3 . Dev . Cell 13 , 15 – 28 ( 2007 ) . This paper shows that an endocytic adaptor , NUMB , has an important role in polarized cell migration through direct binding to β 1 and β 3 integrins and regulating integrin trafficking . 123 . Upla , P . et al . Clustering induces a lateral redistribution of α 2 β 1 integrin from membrane rafts to caveolae and subsequent protein kinase C - dependent internalization . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 625 – 636 ( 2004 ) . 124 . Caswell , P . & Norman , J . Endocytic transport of integrins during cell migration and invasion . Trends Cell Biol . 18 , 257 – 263 ( 2008 ) . 125 . Ivaska , J . et al . PKC ε - mediated phosphorylation of vimentin controls integrin recycling and motility . EMBO J . 24 , 3834 – 3845 ( 2005 ) . 126 . Li , J . et al . An ACAP1 - containing clathrin coat complex for endocytic recycling . J . Cell Biol . 178 , 453 – 464 ( 2007 ) . 127 . Powelka , A . M . et al . Stimulation - dependent recycling of integrin β 1 regulated by ARF6 and Rab11 . Traffic 5 , 20 – 36 ( 2004 ) . 128 . Pellinen , T . et al . Small GTPase Rab21 regulates cell adhesion and controls endosomal traffic of β 1 - integrins . J . Cell Biol . 173 , 767 – 780 ( 2006 ) . 129 . Hynes , R . O . Integrins : bidirectional , allosteric signaling machines . Cell 110 , 673 – 687 ( 2002 ) . 130 . Eliceiri , B . P . & Cheresh , D . A . Adhesion events in angiogenesis . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 13 , 563 – 568 ( 2001 ) . 131 . Bates , R . C . et al . Transcriptional activation of integrin β 6 during the epithelial - mesenchymal transition defines a novel prognostic indicator of aggressive colon carcinoma . J . Clin . Invest . 115 , 339 – 347 ( 2005 ) . 132 . Hazelbag , S . et al . Overexpression of the α v β 6 integrin in cervical squamous cell carcinoma is a prognostic factor for decreased survival . J . Pathol . 212 , 316 – 324 ( 2007 ) . 133 . Ramsay , A . G . et al . HS1 - associated protein X - 1 regulates carcinoma cell migration and invasion via clathrin - mediated endocytosis of integrin α v β 6 . Cancer Res . 67 , 5275 – 5284 ( 2007 ) . 134 . Cheng , K . W . et al . The RAB25 small GTPase determines aggressiveness of ovarian and breast cancers . Nature Med . 10 , 1251 – 1256 ( 2004 ) . This manuscript demonstrates frequent amplification of RAB25 in advanced ovarian and breast cancers , as well as a crucial role for RAB25 in tumorigenesis . 135 . De Craene , B . et al . The transcription factor snail induces tumor cell invasion through modulation of the epithelial cell differentiation program . Cancer Res . 65 , 6237 – 6244 ( 2005 ) . 136 . Caswell , P . T . et al . Rab25 associates with α 5 β 1 integrin to promote invasive migration in 3D microenvironments . Dev . Cell 13 , 496 – 510 ( 2007 ) . 137 . Garcia , M . J . et al . A 1 Mb minimal amplicon at 8p11 – 12 in breast cancer identifies new candidate oncogenes . Oncogene 24 , 5235 – 5245 ( 2005 ) . 138 . Brown , J . M . The hypoxic cell : a target for selective cancer therapy — eighteenth Bruce F . Cain Memorial Award lecture . Cancer Res . 59 , 5863 – 5870 ( 1999 ) . 139 . Yoon , S . O . , Shin , S . & Mercurio , A . M . Hypoxia stimulates carcinoma invasion by stabilizing microtubules and promoting the Rab11 trafficking of the α 6 β 4 integrin . Cancer Res . 65 , 2761 – 2769 ( 2005 ) . A report that links hypoxia to cell invasiveness through integrin trafficking , involving stabilized , detyrosinated microtubules and Rab11 . 140 . Mialhe , A . et al . Tubulin detyrosination is a frequent occurrence in breast cancers of poor prognosis . Cancer Res . 61 , 5024 – 5027 ( 2001 ) . 141 . Cheng , K . W . , Lahad , J . P . , Gray , J . W . & Mills , G . B . Emerging role of RAB GTPases in cancer and human disease . Cancer Res . 65 , 2516 – 2519 ( 2005 ) . 142 . Mor , O . et al . Molecular analysis of transitional cell carcinoma using cDNA microarray . Oncogene 22 , 7702 – 7710 ( 2003 ) . 143 . Palamidessi , A . et al . Endocytic trafficking of Rac is required for the spatial restriction of signaling in cell migration . Cell 134 , 135 – 147 ( 2008 ) . This study describes an interesting interplay between endocytosis and cell motility involving RAB5A - dependent activation of Rac in endosomes , and Rac recycling to regulate localized actin remodeling . 144 . Raucher , D . et al . Phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate functions as a second messenger that regulates cytoskeleton - plasma membrane adhesion . Cell 100 , 221 – 228 ( 2000 ) . 145 . van Rheenen , J . et al . EGF - induced PIP2 hydrolysis releases and activates cofilin locally in carcinoma cells . J . Cell Biol . 179 , 1247 – 1259 ( 2007 ) . 146 . Malecz , N . et al . Synaptojanin 2 , a novel Rac1 effector that regulates clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Curr . Biol . 10 , 1383 – 1386 ( 2000 ) . 147 . Le , Q . T . , Denko , N . C . & Giaccia , A . J . Hypoxic gene expression and metastasis . Cancer Metastasis Rev . 23 , 293 – 310 ( 2004 ) . 148 . Winograd - Katz , S . E . & Levitzki , A . Cisplatin induces PKB / Akt activation and p38 MAPK phosphorylation of the EGF receptor . Oncogene 25 , 7381 – 7390 ( 2006 ) . 149 . Zwang , Y . & Yarden , Y . p38 MAP kinase mediates stress - induced internalization of EGFR : implications for cancer chemotherapy . EMBO J . 25 , 4195 – 4206 ( 2006 ) . 150 . Mace , G . , Miaczynska , M . , Zerial , M . & Nebreda , A . R . Phosphorylation of EEA1 by p38 MAP kinase regulates mu opioid receptor endocytosis . EMBO J . 24 , 3235 – 3246 ( 2005 ) . 151 . Cavalli , V . et al . The stress - induced MAP kinase p38 regulates endocytic trafficking via the GDI : Rab5 complex . Mol . Cell 7 , 421 – 432 ( 2001 ) . 152 . Ben - Kasus , T . , Schechter , B . , Sela , M . & Yarden , Y . Cancer therapeutic antibodies come of age : targeting minimal residual disease . Mol . Oncol . 1 , 42 – 54 ( 2007 ) . 153 . Friedman , L . M . et al . Synergistic down - regulation of receptor tyrosine kinases by combinations of mAbs : implications for cancer immunotherapy . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 1915 – 1920 ( 2005 ) . 154 . Baselga , J . et al . Objective response rate in a phase II multicenter trial of pertuzumab ( P ) , a HER2 dimerization inhibiting monoclonal antibody , in combination with trastuzumab ( T ) in patients ( pts ) with HER2 - positive metastatic breast cancer ( MBC ) which has progressed during treatment with , T . J . Clin . Oncol . 2007 ASCO Annu . Meet . Proc . Pt I 25 , 1004 ( 2007 ) . 155 . Di Guglielmo , G . M . , Baass , P . C . , Ou , W . J . , Posner , B . I . & Bergeron , J . J . Compartmentalization of SHC , GRB2 and mSOS , and hyperphosphorylation of Raf - 1 by EGF but not insulin in liver parenchyma . EMBO J . 13 , 4269 – 4277 ( 1994 ) . 156 . Vieira , A . V . , Lamaze , C . & Schmid , S . L . Control of EGF receptor signaling by clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Science 274 , 2086 – 2088 ( 1996 ) . 157 . Teis , D . , Wunderlich , W . & Huber , L . A . Localization of the MP1 – MAPK scaffold complex to endosomes is mediated by p14 and required for signal transduction . Dev . Cell 3 , 803 – 814 ( 2002 ) . 158 . Pennock , S . & Wang , Z . Stimulation of cell proliferation by endosomal epidermal growth factor receptor as revealed through two distinct phases of signaling . Mol . Cell Biol . 23 , 5803 – 5815 ( 2003 ) . 159 . Ni , C . Y . , Murphy , M . P . , Golde , T . E . & Carpenter , G . γ - Secretase cleavage and nuclear localization of ErbB - 4 receptor tyrosine kinase . Science 294 , 2179 – 2181 ( 2001 ) . 160 . Sardi , S . P . , Murtie , J . , Koirala , S . , Patten , B . A . & Corfas , G . Presenilin - dependent ErbB4 nuclear signaling regulates the timing of astrogenesis in the developing brain . Cell 127 , 185 – 197 ( 2006 ) . 161 . Williams , C . C . et al . The ERBB4 / HER4 receptor tyrosine kinase regulates gene expression by functioning as a STAT5A nuclear chaperone . J . Cell Biol . 167 , 469 – 478 ( 2004 ) . 162 . Lo , H . W . et al . Nuclear - cytoplasmic transport of EGFR involves receptor endocytosis , importin β 1 and CRM1 . J . Cell Biochem . 98 , 1570 – 1583 ( 2006 ) . 163 . Wang , S . C . et al . Binding at and transactivation of the COX - 2 promoter by nuclear tyrosine kinase receptor ErbB - 2 . Cancer Cell 6 , 251 – 261 ( 2004 ) . 164 . Ristimaki , A . et al . Prognostic significance of elevated cyclooxygenase - 2 expression in breast cancer . Cancer Res . 62 , 632 – 635 ( 2002 ) . 165 . Enari , M . , Ohmori , K . , Kitabayashi , I . & Taya , Y . Requirement of clathrin heavy chain for p53 - mediated transcription . Genes Dev . 20 , 1087 – 1099 ( 2006 ) . 166 . Miaczynska , M . et al . APPL proteins link Rab5 to nuclear signal transduction via an endosomal compartment . Cell 116 , 445 – 456 ( 2004 ) . This paper uncovers a novel mitogenic signalling pathway in which RAB5 - activated APPL proteins translocate from endosomes to the nucleus and interact with proteins involved in nucleosome remodeling . R E V I E W S NATuRE REVIEwS | cancer VOluME 8 | NOVEMBER 2008 | 849 167 . Abbas , S . , Rotmans , G . , Lowenberg , B . & Valk , P . J . Exon 8 splice site mutations in the gene encoding the E3 - ligase CBL are associated with core binding factor acute myeloid leukemias . Haematologica 12 Aug 2008 ( doi : 10 . 3324 / haematol . 13187 ) . 168 . Caligiuri , M . A . et al . Novel c - CBL and CBL - b ubiquitin ligase mutations in human acute myeloid leukemia . Blood 110 , 1022 – 1024 ( 2007 ) . 169 . Ross , T . S . , Bernard , O . A . , Berger , R . & Gilliland , D . G . Fusion of Huntingtin interacting protein 1 to platelet - derived growth factor β receptor ( PDGF β R ) in chronic myelomonocytic leukemia with t ( 5 ; 7 ) ( q33 ; q11 . 2 ) . Blood 91 , 4419 – 4426 ( 1998 ) . 170 . Ahn , S . J . et al . Overexpression of β Pix - a in human breast cancer tissues . Cancer Lett . 193 , 99 – 107 ( 2003 ) . 171 . Buday , L . & Downward , J . Roles of cortactin in tumor pathogenesis . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1775 , 263 – 273 ( 2007 ) . 172 . Bridge , J . A . et al . Fusion of the ALK gene to the clathrin heavy chain gene , CLTC , in inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor . Am . J . Pathol . 159 , 411 – 415 ( 2001 ) . 173 . Argani , P . et al . A novel CLTC – TFE3 gene fusion in pediatric renal adenocarcinoma with t ( X ; 17 ) ( p11 . 2 ; q23 ) . Oncogene 22 , 5374 – 5378 ( 2003 ) . 174 . Dreyling , M . H . et al . The t ( 10 ; 11 ) ( p13 ; q14 ) in the U937 cell line results in the fusion of the AF10 gene and CALM , encoding a new member of the AP - 3 clathrin assembly protein family . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 93 , 4804 – 4809 ( 1996 ) . 175 . So , C . W . , Lin , M . , Ayton , P . M . , Chen , E . H . & Cleary , M . L . Dimerization contributes to oncogenic activation of MLL chimeras in acute leukemias . Cancer Cell 4 , 99 – 110 ( 2003 ) . 176 . Liu , H . et al . Functional contribution of EEN to leukemogenic transformation by MLL – EEN fusion protein . Oncogene 23 , 3385 – 3394 ( 2004 ) . 177 . Lo , T . L . et al . Sprouty and cancer : the first terms report . Cancer Lett . 242 , 141 – 150 ( 2006 ) . 178 . Karam , J . A . et al . Decreased DOC - 2 / DAB2 expression in urothelial carcinoma of the bladder . Clin . Cancer Res . 13 , 4400 – 4406 ( 2007 ) . 179 . Colaluca , I . et al . NUMB controls p53 tumour suppressor activity . Nature 451 , 76 – 80 ( 2008 ) . 180 . Bandyopadhyay , S . et al . The Drg - 1 gene suppresses tumor metastasis in prostate cancer . Cancer Res . 63 , 1731 – 1736 ( 2003 ) . 181 . van der Horst , E . H . et al . Metastatic properties and genomic amplification of the tyrosine kinase gene ACK1 . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 15901 – 15906 ( 2005 ) . 182 . Fang , C . M . & Xu , Y . H . Down - regulated expression of atypical PKC - binding domain deleted asip isoforms in human hepatocellular carcinomas . Cell Res . 11 , 223 – 229 ( 2001 ) . 183 . Shatz , M . & Liscovitch , M . Caveolin - 1 : a tumor - promoting role in human cancer . Int . J . Radiat . Biol . 84 , 177 – 189 ( 2008 ) . Acknowledgements We thank Y . Zwang and T . Goldkorn for insightful comments . Y . Y . is the incumbent of the Harold and Zelda Goldenberg Professorial Chair . His laboratory is supported by research grants from the U . S . National Cancer Institute ( NCI ; CA072981 ) , the Israel Science Foundation , Dr . Miriam and Sheldon G . Adelson Medical Research Foundation and the German – Israeli Foundation . G . B . M . is supported by the Komen Foundation and the NCI ( PO1CA099031 ) . DATABASES Entrez Gene : http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / entrez / query . fcgi ? db = gene CCND1 | MYC National Cancer Institute : http : / / www . cancer . gov / bladder cancer | breast cancer | cervical cancer | colon cancer | endometrial cancer | gastric cancer | head and neck cancer lung cancer | oral cancer | ovarian cancer | pancreatic cancer | prostate tumours UniProtKB : http : / / www . uniprot . org β - catenin | p120 - catenin | ARF1 | ARF6 | ARHGEF7 | ARP2 | ARP3 | CDC42 | cortactin | E - cadherin | EGF | EGFR | EPS15 | ERBB2 | ERBB3 | ERBB4 | ETS1 | FAK | fibronectin | FLT3 | Hakai | HAX1 | HBEGF | HGF | HGFR | HGS | HIP1 | HIP1R | IQSEC1 | KIT | JAM1 | LKB1 | MDM2 | NDRG1 | NEDD4 | NUMB | PAR3 | PKC ε | PKD1 | RAB11A | RAB11B | RAB13 | RAB21 | RAB25 | RAB4A | RABGEF1 | RAC1 | RAP1 | RCP | RHOA | RICH1 | SCRIB | SNAI1 | SNAI2 | SRC | STAM | tenascin | TGF α | TSG101 | USP6NL | VE - cadherin | VEGFA | vimentin | vitronectin | von Hippel – Lindau | VPS24 | VPS25 | VPS36 | ZEB2 FURTHER INFORMATION Y . Yarden’s homepage : www . weizmann . ac . il / Biological _ Regulation / Yossi _ Yarden / Alliance for Cell Signalling : http : / / www . signalling - gateway . org Cell Migration Gateway : http : / / www . cellmigration . org RTK Consortium : http : / / www . rtkconsort . org Signal Transduction Knowledge Environment ( STKE ) : http : / / stke . sciencemag . org SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION See online article : S1 ( figure ) all links are active in the Online PdF R E V I E W S 850 | NOVEMBER 2008 | VOluME 8 www . nature . com / reviews / cancer