Development of Decision Rationale in Complex Group Decision Making Helena M . Mentis , Paula M . Bach , Blaine Hoffman , Mary Beth Rosson & John M . Carroll College of Information Sciences and Technology University Park , PA , USA [ hmentis , pbach , bhoffman , mrosson , jcarroll ] @ ist . psu . edu ABSTRACT This study explores the characteristics of rationale devel - opment in a complex group decision making task and con - siders design implications for better supporting rationale development in group decision making . Twelve three - person , multi - role teams performed three instances of a collaborative decision making task with physical maps . We used rhetorical structure theory to analyze the structure of their decision making discourse . We found that groups be - gin their reasoning processing by stating and relating in - formation and finish their reasoning through a point - counterpoint discussion . We also found that established groups reduced their need to analyze information during the last moments of a decision . Implications for the design of group decision support systems to encourage rationale de - velopment are presented . Author Keywords CSCW , decision making , rationale , RST . ACM Classification Keywords H5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous . INTRODUCTION Complex issues and tasks can become too challenging for any one individual to successfully complete ; this is at least partly due to the abundance of information individuals must sort through and process . In addition , some complex prob - lems require knowledge and expertise from varying do - mains . For complex problems of this sort , groups are often superior because they encompass different types of exper - tise , and can help to ensure optimal decision making through information coverage and processing [ 17 ] . Usually , group decision - making is a process that involves not only information sharing but also argumentation and negotiation among group members . Group Decision Sup - port Systems ( GDSS ) have been developed to facilitate the formulation and solution of unstructured problems by a group of individuals through effective information sharing among group members mediated by computers . The pre - vailing thought behind GDSS is that as group members share more information ( specifically new , unrepeated in - formation ) they generate a better decision . However , this is not always the case in practice . In fact , GDSS may increase the total amount of information exchanged , but this increase does not ensure that more information is processed or that decision - making is improved [ 4 ] . Some posited reasons for failure include lack of ability to integrate newly received information , difficulty in assessing information credibility , or the ignorance of information saliency . Decision makers with different expertise and opinions may have different reasons in support of or against alternative solutions , and conflicts are inevitable in this process . In such cases , group members need to explicitly exchange their individual decision rationales , make tradeoffs , and achieve consensus on final group decisions . Thus , to sup - port group decision - making , one is really supporting the development of group rationale – the group’s explanation of the reason – for a choice . Looking at group decision making from the perspective of common ground , group work requires the development of mutual knowledge , beliefs , and protocols that partners share , which leads to a shared mental model . Both group rationale and shared mental models have been shown to be necessary for effective and efficient information sharing and collaboration [ 14 ] [ 16 ] . Making reasoning explicit and readily available among team members allows the group to build common ground and reach a shared mental model more quickly as well as maintain it throughout the task . This rationale development can better enable critical evalu - ation in group decision making processes ; therefore it is of benefit to support rationale and awareness of rationale across group members . In our study we sought to systematically understand the development of group rationale in a complex group deci - sion task . The outcomes of this research can be used to inform the design of group decision support systems so that they can better capture , represent , and share task informa - tion . We dismiss the idealized notion that groups consist of rational actors who freely share relevant information . In - Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . CHI 2009 , April 4 – 9 , 2009 , Boston , MA , USA . Copyright 2009 ACM 978 - 1 - 60558 - 246 - 7 / 09 / 04… $ 5 . 00 . CHI 2009 ~ Cognitive Modeling and Assessment April 8th , 2009 ~ Boston , MA , USA 1341 stead our research explores patterns of argumentation that reveal when and how actors are likely to share certain types of information and points of view . Note that we are not asserting that GDDS should incorporate formal models of argumentation . Rather , we see the present study as a step towards understanding how argumentation is used in com - plex decision making , so that tools can be built to support collaborators , not define their work processes . By following argumentation streams that develop into a decision we can recreate the reasoning that led to the rationale statements , and devise implications for the design of a group decision support system to support groups in recording , reviewing , and developing sound rationale towards their final decision . In exploring rationale , we hope to call attention to charac - teristics of collaboration involved in decision making and critical analysis of data tied to the decisions . In other words , supporting decision rationale aids the establishment of common ground toward more efficient and agreed upon decision - making and issue evaluation . In the next section , we introduce the concept of rationale as a foundational element of group decision making . We fol - low this with a description of our study approach and re - search questions . In the fourth and fifth sections we summa - rize our empirical methods and analysis techniques . The sixth section presents our results and is followed by a dis - cussion of design implications and general conclusions . RATIONALE AND GROUP DECISION MAKING Since the late 1980s , many system tools have been pro - posed and implemented to support group decision - making processes by explicitly representing rationale . The gIBIS hypertext groupware [ 3 ] is one of the earliest tools to repre - sent discourse structures with the purpose of making it easy for people to see the discourse’s rationale . SIBYL [ 11 ] , which has been viewed as an extension of gI - BIS , was designed to support decision - making by directly recording group decision rationale . SIBYL consists of three parts : Decision Representation Language ( DRL ) , a set of services which uses the DRL to provide decision support , and the user interface . The DRL represents a decision prob - lem that can be represented through goals , alternatives , and relation between them . Thus , DRL allows for arguing for a position in DRL by producing a claim and then supporting , denying , or presupposing another claim . SIBYL’s services use the DRL to provide four types of services : the manage - ment of dependencies , plausibility , viewpoints , and prece - dents . The author suggested that this language explicitly describes the knowledge gathered in decision - making and the service provides beneficial feedback to users . However , SIBYL only allows users to make decisions within simple decision matrices and pick up alternatives according to pre - defined goals , which usually may not be clearly articulated in practice . Contrary to these systems , HERMES [ 9 ] focuses on aiding decision makers in reaching a decision . This system not only captures and represents users’ rationale but also pro - vides reasoning mechanisms to support argumentation . The primary goal of HERMES was to facilitate communication and recommend solutions . However , neither of these systems inform their system’s reasoning mechanisms on any situated understanding of rationale development in group decision - making . Thus our work aims at articulating the development of group decision rationale in a complex group decision mak - ing task . By understanding reasoning through patterns of argumentation used by different groups in a concrete task environment , we expect to find useful system tool design implications which can not only lead to better representa - tion of decision rationale but also imply effective reasoning mechanisms to support argumentation . Group Decision Rationale In our study , rationale is defined as the explanation of the reason for a decision – the why behind the what . In [ 20 ] , Shafir , Simonson , & Tversky provide a reason - based model of decision - making . They argued that considering reasons as guiding decision - making provided a method for under - standing how choice conflicts are resolved . Conflicts arise when people are trying to determine how to trade off one attribute relative to another or when deciding which attrib - ute is more important . Thus , decision makers seek and de - velop reasons for choosing one option over another . Three general principles that govern the role of reasons in deci - sion - making arose from their analysis : a ) people rely on the more important dimension during comparisons ; b ) compati - bility and salience account for weighting ; and c ) relation - ships between choices can yield decisions that are easier or more difficult to justify . Through these findings they con - clude that decisions are reached by focusing on justifica - tions for the selection through the use of frames , contexts , and elicitation procedures . There is evidence that rationale plays an important role in decision - making . However , Nis - bett & Wilson [ 18 ] showed that people are not always con - scious of their reasons for a decision and , when prompted to provide a rationalization , will oftentimes devise spurious explanations . Before a group can make a final decision , there are usually two processes to carry out : the selection process , which refers to obtaining the solution set of alternatives from the group members , and the consensus process , which refers to how to obtain the maximum degree of agreement between alternative choices [ 8 ] . In the former process , individual rationales are developed by individual members to propose different decision choices ; while in the consensus process , which can be considered as a dynamic and iterative group discussion process , the individual rationales are exchanged and negotiated to form group rationale . In this sense , to support group decision - making is actually to support the rationale development in these two processes . A good sup - port system should not only be able to efficiently structure and represent the individual rationales from the selection CHI 2009 ~ Cognitive Modeling and Assessment April 8th , 2009 ~ Boston , MA , USA 1342 process but also provide mechanisms to support argumenta - tion , which can lead to the consensus of group rationale . STUDYING GROUP DECISION RATIONALE In studying group decision rationale , we have made three study design choices . First , we are taking a systems per - spective in that the group as a whole is more than the sum of the parts . We are therefore analyzing the argumentation streams between entities within a group as opposed to each individual member . Just as with distributed cognition , we are analyzing information processing beyond an individual level of analysis – adapting the framework of individual rationale development for group problem solving . Thus , the group rationale for a decision is the product of group information processing including inputting , comparing , weighing , and discarding information just as an individual argues through a problem in his / her own head . In order to reconstruct the group’s argument , one must follow the indi - vidual contributions to the discussion and how they build on one another as diagrammed in Figure 1 . Member # 1 Member # 2 Member # 3 Time Figure 1 : Group Argumentation Structure from Individual Contributions Second , we are focusing on one particular context of com - plex decision making - Geo - collaborative planning . Geo - collaborative decision - making refers to group decision - making aimed at solving decision problems in a geographic space , such as emergency management , site selection , and regional planning . Many of these problems require the par - ticipation and collaboration of people from diverse public areas or representing different social interests . As a conse - quence , diverse groups often generate solutions to these problems . Our motivation focuses on a specific real - world and real - time form of collaboration which requires a sub - stantial amount of discussion and disagreement and could benefit from discussion and decision support . This focus allows us to develop design implications for a geo - collaborative system we are currently developing . Third , we are first studying face - to - face groups in order to make suggestions for the design of tools in a software pro - totype . Our future work will focus on the design rationale of such a software prototype and we will enhance it based on successful group decision rationale . RESEARCH QUESTIONS To understand better rationale development and group deci - sion - making we have devised the following research ques - tions . Our first research question is concerned with the develop - ment of rationale as a task - focused discussion progresses . Generally , groups first have to share individual information , then examine the information , and finally compare informa - tion . Each one of these stages requires a different type or argumentation – argumentation that information added is relevant , argumentation on what that information means , argumentation that information is more important – to result in a final decision . Through our analysis we aim to system - atically describe what types of arguments and discussions people use at these different stages . Thus our first research question is : How does group rationale develop over a complex group decision - making task ? Our second research question aims to address the differ - ences in discussion motivations and processes between newly formed groups and established groups . Groups who have worked together longer have already built a shared mental model and have developed more common ground than a new group . Thus , this will affect how an established group discusses and argues . Specifically , we are predicting that established group members will rely less on explicit references to information that was established and under - stood among group members in previous work . Our second research question addresses this group disparity : How does group rationale development differ between new groups and established groups in a complex group deci - sion - making task ? METHODS The following study was first conducted in order to study common ground development in groups [ 2 ] . In the present paper , we reanalyze the data to examine the development of group decision rationale . Thus the data reported here rely on a different method of coding and analysis , one that is specific to questions of rationale development . Study Design To investigate our rationale - related research questions , we studied three - person groups collaborating on an emergency planning task face - to - face with paper maps . Each member played distinct and stable roles and contributed distinct ex - pertise and information – all of which was required to per - form the collective task successfully . We ensured that no roles had more important information than the others . The study was run with twelve teams . We created same - gender groups as much as possible , resulting in six male teams , five female , and one mixed - gender with one female and two males . Group tasks were performed in English , and all par - ticipants were fluent English speakers with 17 of the par - ticipants being non - native speakers . Twenty of the partici - pants had undergraduate degrees , and the remaining 16 had graduate degrees . For the structure of the experimental task , we adapted the “hidden profile” paradigm . A hidden profile task asks for group members to share their unique knowledge – other - wise the hidden optimal choice may not be revealed [ 21 ] . These kinds of tasks have been used as a typical lab ex - CHI 2009 ~ Cognitive Modeling and Assessment April 8th , 2009 ~ Boston , MA , USA 1343 periment task to test information sharing between group members in making decisions [ 4 ] [ 15 ] . Figure 2 : Collaborating around the Map In each of our emergency management scenarios , four pos - sible solutions are available as evacuation plans , corre - sponding to four shelters to which the family could be evacuated . One is optimal ( i . e . , it has the least number of problems ) , but the information provided to each member is biased toward different choices selected from the three suboptimal solutions . The critical pieces of information items are risks or constraints pertaining to each of the four possible solutions . Each member of the team is given a unique set of information ; each individual’s set of informa - tion is biased toward a different shelter . But if the team pools its information across roles , the fourth shelter is clearly the best alternative : it has only four total constraints versus seven each for the other three shelters . The experimental task was modeled after real - world emer - gency management tasks [ 19 ] involving expert collabora - tion in situation - room environment , collaborating together both with documents and materials specific to the individ - ual experts and those shared with the whole group . In our sessions , the teams sat or stood around a tabletop working area to start the task . They were instructed to not show their role - specific information sheet or map to the other participants , and they were asked to share information with the team on the shared map using their individually colored pens and post - its . When they reached a decision , they wrote down the final plan along with three alternatives in order of preference on a final plan sheet . Teams were given 20 min - utes to complete this task . This process was repeated three times in total , with new scenarios and information pre - sented each time . Participants maintained the same expert role throughout . The order of the scenarios was counterbal - anced between the runs . DATA ANALYSIS Rhetorical Structure Theory ( RST ) In order to analyze the transcripts of the discussions we sought to identify a coding schema which analyzed the ar - guments used in discourse . By adopting a method for fol - lowing linked claims and evidence , and framing the conver - sation threads as one text , we can follow the development of the decision making process which leads to the final de - cision rationale . Rhetorical Structure Theory ( RST ) was first developed to analyze written text [ 12 ] and is a method for describing the structure of text through relationships between clauses of text . The structural pattern can be seen as writers expressing their intentions or arguments . Relationships in the structures normally consist of a claim and evidence . This descriptive process provides an account of textual coherence that is independent of the lexical and grammatical forms of the text . We have adopted this method for the analysis of oral conversation . Though oral conversation may not be as logi - cal and coherent as written text , we expected that the same relationships would be found . Even though [ 13 ] originally commented that RST is not suitable for dynamic , dialogic interaction , there have been a number of successful applications of the original or modi - fied versions of RST to dialogue . ( See the review presented in [ 24 ] for a complete list . ) For instance , [ 5 ] proposed RST analyses of conversations that cover intra - turn relations whereas [ 22 ] annotated a task - oriented spoken dialogue corpus with RST relations within turns . Finally , [ 23 ] car - ried out two different levels of analysis , one where analysis was performed inside the turn , and another one where the emphasis was on the conversation as a jointly constructed text . In both cases , the relations were the standard RST set , and no modifications were made . Thus , we are following the use of the RST codes as outlined by [ 23 ] – viewing the conversation as a jointly constructed text while using the standard RST set . Coding Scheme Because the language we are analyzing is oral conversation rather than written text , we are unable to apply all of the RST codes . In addition , many of the codes were not – and may never be used – in our study context . Thus , we re - viewed the argument types and coded a sample transcript as a group to identify the appropriate codes and modify the descriptions as necessary for our uses ( see Table 1 for the full list of codes and descriptions ) . After this process , twelve argument types remained which we felt were natu - rally groups into three different argument categories . The first category consists of those arguments which state known information without any interpretation ( State ) . The second category consists of an interpretation or analysis of the information or summary of information ( Analyze ) . The third category consists of those arguments that argue for or against a previously stated phrase or idea ( Argue ) . This categorization is outlined in Table 1 . CHI 2009 ~ Cognitive Modeling and Assessment April 8th , 2009 ~ Boston , MA , USA 1344 When coding the transcripts , we first decomposed the ra - tionale in a top - down and thematic manner . To do this , we began by identifying in the transcripts the point when the team members reached a final decision . We then identified all decision points throughout the group discussion . Deci - sion points are any temporary or final consensus by the group ; they may also be stated preferences that trigger more discussion about a topic . Table 1 : RST Codes , Descriptions , and Examples Category Codes Description Conjunction Adds more information to previous segment Restatement Restates information Elaboration Makes previous segment clearer Summary Lists or summarizes 2 or more segments Justify States role or knowledge as reason for statement State Background Pulls from previously info Interpretation States outcome without value Analyze Evaluation States outcome with value Evidence Provides support Antithesis Disagrees Argue Concession Acknowledges point For example , “I think we should choose Hoffman Cove” or “okay , Bramble was first , and then Vihar was second” are both examples of decision points . Both of these comments articulate a preference that then elicits agreement or dissent . As a result , the comments act as turning points in the dis - cussion , and influence how argumentation proceeds . Deci - sion points of this sort occur frequently and regularly enough throughout the discussion , and thus serve as useful segmentation points for discussion analysis . In applying the RST codes to the rest of the transcript , we first cleaned up the transcripts . In other words , we removed utterances that had nothing to do with the decision making process such as “Ums” and “Sighs” . In addition , off topic conversation such as comments on the difficulty in reading the maps were removed from the transcript . Once we had a working transcript , we coded all turns with the RST codes . Occasionally , a longer turn would have multiple RST codes . Figure 3 is an example of the use of the RST codes across speakers . Colored boxes indicate the three collaborators mapping purple , green , and orange to public works , envi - ronmental , and mass care respectively . First the Public Works expert states an evaluation on a previous statement regarding Garbrick Street . The ensuing conversation re - volves around Garbrick Street and the problems it presents by both the Public Works expert and the Environmental Expert . Finally , the Mass Care expert presents another per - spective to the conversation – that they could take a differ - ent route . Figure 3 : Segment of Dialogue and Use of RST Codes Before continuing the RST coding , we coded a test case in order to determine and improve our intercoder reliability . [ 25 ] reviewed a number of studies that have investigated the coding reliability and determined that RST has a high coding reliability as long as agreement is reached through training and discussion of disagreements on a test set before actual analysis is performed . In addition , they commented that Cohen’s kappa was used by many of the reviewed stud - ies and thus could be used for future intercoder reliability . Cohen’s kappa is appropriate when a variable has a high number of values such as the RST codes – it is harder to get coders to agree when there are twelve choices in compari - son to only three choices . However , Cohen’s kappa is best when there are only two coders . Since we had three coders , we utilized Fleiss’ kappa which is a modification of Scott’s Pi and related to Cohen’s kappa . The three coders studied the RST coding scheme , coded a sample transcript , discussed the usage of every code , and modified their coding results to achieve a higher consensus . After completing this process three times , the kappa coeffi - cient is 0 . 62 . According to [ 10 ] this indicates ‘substantial agreement’ . RESULTS For our first research question – How does group rationale develop in a complex group decision - making task – we be - gan by summarizing the frequency of types of arguments CHI 2009 ~ Cognitive Modeling and Assessment April 8th , 2009 ~ Boston , MA , USA 1345 used across all groups and runs . Table 2 lists these results in addition to a breakdown of all arguments occurring before a first decision point ( i . e . from the beginning of discussion to first decision point ) as well as those occurring after a last decision point ( i . e . the last round of discussion before a final decision was reached ) . Each column should total 100 % . Bold rows had a significant change between the first and last decision point . Table 2 : Argument Types Overall and by Decision Points Category Codes Overall Prior to First DPs After Last DPs Conjunction 16 . 9 % 21 . 8 % 9 . 6 % Restatement 25 . 6 % 26 . 3 % 16 . 0 % Elaboration 12 . 9 % 17 . 7 % 9 . 3 % Summary 3 . 5 % 2 . 9 % 2 . 7 % Justify 0 . 1 % 0 . 0 % 0 . 3 % State Background 0 . 3 % 0 . 3 % 0 . 6 % Interpretation 7 . 2 % 6 . 2 % 9 . 3 % Analyze Evaluation 10 . 2 % 8 . 6 % 12 . 3 % Evidence 10 . 7 % 8 . 5 % 19 . 7 % Antithesis 10 . 0 % 5 . 7 % 16 . 4 % Argue Concession 2 . 5 % 1 . 8 % 3 . 8 % Total 100 % 100 % 100 % Overall , with an average of 216 arguments per run , the groups primarily used Restatement , Conjunction , and Ela - boration throughout their discussions . Viewed by argument category , the groups primarily used those arguments in State ( 59 . 3 % of all arguments ) followed by those in Argue ( 23 . 2 % ) and then Analyze ( 17 . 5 % ) . Thus , much of the rationale development consisted of presenting information and then weighing pieces of information against one an - other , as opposed to separately analyzing the value or im - plications of each piece of information . When we consider the progression of the conversation , we can see that the groups began their discussions primarily with Restatement , Conjunction , and Elaboration with an average of 54 arguments . However , by the end of the deci - sion - making process , the groups came to rely on Evidence , Antithesis , and Restatement ( average of 42 arguments ) ( χ 2 ( 10 , N = 1546 ) = 1 . 68 , p < . 001 ) . A set of paired t - tests con - firmed this observation : the proportion of Elaboration , Re - statement and Conjunction arguments significantly de - creased ( t ( df = 23 ) = 3 . 49 , 2 . 22 , 3 . 38 , p < . 05 ) from the begin - ning of the discussion to the end , while proportions for Evi - dence and Antithesis significantly increased ( t ( df = 23 ) = - 4 . 35 , - 3 . 55 , p < . 001 ) . Again combining these patterns into the more abstract cate - gory level , we can see that the beginning of the discussions centered on State arguments ( 69 . 1 % ) , but by the end of the discussions the role of State arguments was reduced to 38 . 5 % ( t ( df = 23 ) = 5 . 71 , p < . 001 ) while Argue had a signifi - cant increase from 17 . 78 % to 39 . 9 % ( t ( df = 23 ) = - 4 . 88 , p < . 001 ) ( χ 2 ( 2 , N = 1546 ) = 1 . 55 , p < . 001 ) . Thus , the ends of the discussions were dominated by a close to even mix of arguments in State ( 38 . 5 % ) and Argue ( 39 . 9 % ) . We found the tendency to rely on information arguments at the start of a decision process interesting . Recall that in our coding scheme , the ‘beginning’ of the run is bounded by the first decision point . This means that early in a decision process , team members are already starting to propose pos - sible decisions , even though they have been primarily fo - cused on presenting information and not subjecting it to much comparison or analysis . This may be due to an inher - ent desire to simplify the decision space , by removing choices through some heuristic or initial bias . For instance , many early decision points consisted of a team member stating that a shelter was such a bad choice that the team should not consider it further . Given this tendency , we ex - pect that the Analyze arguments that do occur may be cen - tered on a single option offered for rejection . This would be a point of analysis in the future . The relative increase in Argue statements at the end of the discussion is not surprising , considering that the task is to find an optimal solution . However , note that a third of the comments at the end of the discussion are in the State cate - gory . Thus , even at the end , team members continue to share information , even though by this point the majority of this information are Restatements . The concurrent increase in Evaluation comments may reflect a pairing of Restate - ments with corresponding Evaluation arguments . Table 3 : Argument Types in 1 st vs . 3 rd Run Category Codes First Run Third Run Conjunction 15 . 3 % 19 . 0 % Restatement 23 . 6 % 28 . 3 % Elaboration 12 . 6 % 13 . 5 % Summary 3 . 9 % 3 . 0 % Justify 0 % 0 . 3 % State Background 0 . 5 % 0 . 0 % Interpretation 7 . 4 % 7 . 0 % Analyze Evaluation 11 . 7 % 8 . 4 % Evidence 12 . 2 % 8 . 8 % Antithesis 9 . 8 % 10 . 3 % Argue Concession 3 . 3 % 1 . 5 % CHI 2009 ~ Cognitive Modeling and Assessment April 8th , 2009 ~ Boston , MA , USA 1346 For our second research question – Does group rationale development differ between new groups and established groups in a complex group decision - making task ? – we compared the frequency of argument types in the first run versus the third run of all groups ( Table 3 ) . Bold rows indicate a significant increase or decrease from the first run to the third run . Overall , during the first run , the groups averaged 246 arguments and primarily used Restatement , Conjunction , Elaboration , and Evidence . By the third run the average number of arguments was significantly less at 187 , and the arguments were primarily Restatement , Conjunction , Elaboration , and Antithesis ( χ 2 ( 10 , N = 2596 ) = 43 . 60 , p < . 001 ) . Justify also showed a significant increase with a one - tailed paired t - test ( t ( df = 11 ) = - 1 . 74 , p < . 05 ) ; this might signify a move towards the use of team members’ role specific knowledge to lend weight to their arguments and thus might indicate a difference we might see with groups of experts . The significant reduction in Evaluation , Evidence , and Concession suggest a shift from spending time analyzing information and arguing about choices to spending time direction sharing and restating information ( t ( df = 11 ) = 1 . 72 , 3 . 28 , 2 . 69 , p < . 05 ) . A similar pattern can be seen in the summaries for argument categories . From first to third run , the groups show a trend toward an increase in their usage of State arguments ( 55 . 7 % to 64 . 0 % ) and decreased their usage of Analyze arguments ( 19 . 1 % to 15 . 4 % ) ( Figure 4 ) ( t ( df = 11 ) = - 1 . 32 , p = . 213 ; t ( df = 11 ) = . 844 , p = . 416 ) ( χ 2 ( 2 , N = 2596 ) = 18 . 15 , p < . 001 ) . Although neither of these differences was significant , the general pattern is consistent with the changes in specific argument types . Together , these findings suggest a move toward cognitive efficiency by the group members . The implications that would usually be stated for a piece of information are later encapsulated in the information being presented . This indicates a growing level of expertise by the individual members and development of common ground in the group . Again , this may indicate a difference we might see with groups comprised of real domain experts . Figure 4 : Overall Argument Usage for New ( 1st run ) vs . Es - tablished ( 3rd run ) Groups ( n = 12 ) We also examined the characteristics of first and final deci - sion points for the new and established groups , because we expected that the groups might evolve their rationale devel - opment “style” as they became more familiar with one an - other . With an average of 72 arguments , newly - formed groups began their discussions with a fairly even mix of Restatement , Conjunction , and Elaboration . By the third run , with an average of 73 arguments , established groups continued to use Restatement , Conjunction , and Elaboration in the early phases of their rationale development ( χ 2 ( 9 , N = 880 ) = 24 . 97 , p < . 001 ) . Compiling the tallies into the higher level categories , we see that both new and estab - lished groups start their decision processes similarly ( χ 2 ( 2 , N = 870 ) = 2 . 46 , p = . 293 ) with a high number of State argu - ments ( 66 . 7 % to 71 . 4 % respectively ) , and approximately the same level of Analyze ( 15 . 5 % to 14 . 2 % ) . The estab - lished groups , though , trend to be less likely to present Ar - gue statements at the start of a discussion ( 17 . 8 % to 14 . 4 % ) . However , as newly - formed groups reached their final deci - sions , they used mostly Evidence and Antithesis ( overall average of 60 arguments ) . In contrast , established groups ended with Restatement , Evaluation , Evidence and Antithe - sis ( overall average of 53 arguments ) ( χ 2 ( 10 , N = 676 ) = 41 . 70 , p < . 001 ) . Thus , whereas new groups pri - marily complete their rationale development with more Argue ( 48 . 2 % ) than State ( 31 . 8 % ) , the established groups end with more State ( 46 . 1 % ) than Argue ( 30 . 1 % ) ( Figure 5 ) ( χ 2 ( 2 , N = 676 ) = 22 . 84 , p < . 001 ) . In addition , both the in - crease in State and decrease in Argue were significant ( t ( df = 11 ) = - 1 . 83 , 2 . 96 , p < . 05 ) . Figure 5 : End of Decision Making Argument Usage for New ( 1 st run ) and Established ( 3 rd run ) Groups ( n = 12 ) In summary , in the beginning of a discussion , both new groups and established groups tend to favor State arguments over those of Analyze or Argue . However , towards the end of a decision making task , newly - formed groups are more likely to rely on Argue comments , whereas established groups use State comments as they move towards a final decision . Again , this shows the tendency for established groups to reduce their use of Analyze and Argue and in - CHI 2009 ~ Cognitive Modeling and Assessment April 8th , 2009 ~ Boston , MA , USA 1347 stead focus on simply stating the information towards the end of the discussion cycle . Overall , these results point to a developing sophistication in the groups’ decision making and rationale skills . New groups who are unfamiliar with the task and with each other use Argue strategies to push for a decision ; but established groups continue to state information with less need for Ar - gue exchanges at the end of the discussion . That they do not require as many Analyze or Argue statements may also be another indication of the growth of common ground among the group members , as the values relevant to indi - vidual analysis and opinion become implicit in the group’s understanding of one another’s opinions and knowledge . If a member can predict how a piece of information will be evaluated by the group , then simply Stating may be enough . DISCUSSION As we have shown , our data reveal a trend of increasing elicitations of information and details surrounding the task relative to the number of conflicts and disagreements about the task . Working together and communicating across the runs allows the members to develop their shared under - standing of the task , each other , and their co - developed norms for accomplishing the task . In other words , as com - mon ground was established , the group members transi - tioned into a more efficient form of communication by cut - ting down on arguments and conflicts in favor of informa - tion dispersal and confirmation . This finding confirms the benefits of shared experiences known as the common knowledge effect and the group his - tory effect . The common knowledge effect states that an item of information will have more influence on the judg - ment of a group when it is shared than when unshared [ 7 ] . As such , group members were trying to determine which pieces of information were more important and had to do that less often when the groups were more established . The group history effect states that as a group develops , it cre - ates a shared frame of reference [ 1 ] . This frame of reference over time leads to an understanding of events , a shared vo - cabulary , and shared knowledge and thus less of a need for explicit communication [ 1 ] . The established groups showed evidence of developing a common frame of reference by decreasing their average number of statements , presumably by beginning to establish an understanding of events , a shared vocabulary , and shared knowledge . However , the increase in Restatement , Elaboration , and Conjunction might also show an inefficient use of time as group mem - bers repeatedly remind each other about information previ - ously shared . These findings can also be related to the small group com - munication theory , Decision Emergence Theory ( DET ) [ 6 ] . DET describes the phases of group decision making ( orien - tation , conflict , emergence , and reinforcement ) along with a classification system for verbal interactions . This classifi - cation system included many similar categories of verbal statements as in RST . As is apparent in Table 4 , the major - ity of the verbal interaction codes from DET are from the Analysis and Argue categories of RST ; only Elaboration is from State . Thus , in DET , decision development is not concerned with the sharing of information in forming a de - cision – only the evaluation of that information . When [ 6 ] applied the verbal interaction coding scheme to the phases of decision making , they found that the first phase ( Orienta - tion phase ) was predominately Clarification and Agreement acts and the final phase ( Reinforcement ) favorable Interpre - tation and Substantiation are more predominant . Future analysis using RST would benefit from segmenting the transcripts into the four phases and analyzing the types of arguments used within each phase . Table 4 : DET Codes vs . RST codes DET Verbal Interaction Comparable RST Arguments Interpretation Interpretation & Evaluation Substantiation Evidence Clarification Elaboration Modification Antithesis Agreement Concession Disagreement Antithesis Finally , it is important to keep in mind that not all cultures , and thus not all languages and rhetorical styles , will present their thoughts and conduct group discussions in the same manner as is evident in English . RST was initially designed and tested on English text and thus reflects a western view of composition and persuasion . For instance , we might ex - pect to find rather different rhetorical characteristics for members of national cultures that are more collectivist in their value systems than a typical western society . Design Implications We chose to study rationale processes in a geo - collaborative task domain in order to generate design sug - gestions for a software prototype being developed to sup - port distributed geo - collaborative decision making . Our high level assumption is that we should capture a group’s rationale as it develops , keeping it cognitively accessible and shared among members . Although we are focused on this particular task setting , the design of software applica - tions for use in similar situations and for similar tasks could also benefit from support for rationale development . Although we are not encouraging the incorporation of for - mal models of argumentation which may define the work of groups , a few tool design implications are particularly evi - dent from our results . The first concerns support for Re - statement . It is likely that group members repeat informa - tion not only for recall , but also for thought organization . A system capable of keeping this information viewable and at - hand could reduce the need for these actions , giving group CHI 2009 ~ Cognitive Modeling and Assessment April 8th , 2009 ~ Boston , MA , USA 1348 members more time and focus for decision - critical argu - mentation and discussion , for critical evaluation instead of redundant information collecting and thought gathering . Allowing them to reorganize information by grouping it and creating connections also supports restatement . In addition , to support the restatement of Analyze acts such as evalua - tion and interpretation , a mechanism can be provided for recording and maintaining a persistent list of evaluations along with the information shared . Finally , in order to support established groups in reducing Argue statements such as Antithesis a system could docu - ment how various Argue processes have “worked out” - that is presumably what leads to common ground , thus al - lowing Argue to be less evident in later runs . In addition to these general design implications , we have developed a more concrete set of ideas for supporting ra - tionale in group decision making . We are currently explor - ing these features as part of our larger project on distributed software for emergency management planning teams [ 2 ] , but they could be adapted to many geo - collaborative deci - sion making tasks . Proposed Tool Designs We propose a Thought Space that catalogs information dis - cussed by groups and catalogs relationships and groupings between information . As group members move into the argument phase they can connect pieces or groups of in - formation and indicate whether it is a positive or negative relationship ( See Figure 6 ) . The Thought Space concept would support the development of rationale by making discussions more explicit , leverag - ing the common ground constraints of Reviewability & Revisability [ 16 ] . Both constraints are unique to computer - mediated communication , enabling participants to go be - yond what is possible in spoken communication . The Thought Space would also support activity awareness by explicitly stating beliefs and attitudes towards information on the maps , the team members can build up a shared set of beliefs or rationale by supporting or negating implications . This can lead to a more rapidly evolving group consensus . Figure 6 : Thought Space to Support Group Decision Rationale Because our empirical analysis revealed a preponderance of State comments in group discussions , we also expect that support for managing the associated information would be useful within the Thought Space . For example , a list of all annotations to this point would pool all of the information shared , keeping it readily available for the members’ pe - rusal . We expect that this should aid in recall and awareness of data and might reduce the need to restate or elicit infor - mation from others . It is particularly interesting to note that the more established groups are even more likely to rely on Restatements in their discussion . This suggests that they have learned the importance of attending to the details and interdependencies of the information available ( e . g . , in con - trast to arguing about some specific piece ) . An annotation tool that displays previously entered information might help established groups become even more efficient in their communication style , by reducing the need for redundant information sharing . Note that in addition to simply recording information shar - ing , another impact of the annotation tool would be to rein - force the activity of sharing among members that has been taking place during a discussion . Each member would be able to see not only what information has been shared but also know which member pushed which certain information to the group . This could help to raise awareness of which issues are important to which role ( s ) . As a result , members might be better able to anticipate potential conflict stem - ming from differences among role perspectives . The inclu - sion of such an annotation tool in the design should help to surface some of the implicit characteristics of established groups , so as to more quickly enable consensus and com - mon ground . CONCLUSION Complex tasks benefit from group collaboration more so than individual efforts to solve the associated problems and address difficulties . The ability to draw from experts with domain knowledge in various spaces and to gain additional perspectives for a situation may better reach optimal solu - tions . We have furthered our understanding of group ra - tionale in a complex group decision making task in order to support collaboration . We have shown that there is a trend for groups to state and share information more than analyze or argue points as their common ground grows and be - comes established . Although we do not claim that findings from geo - collaboration are easily generalized to other con - texts , our RST analysis of this complex task is an important first step in understanding and supporting the development of group decision rationale through strategically developed information sharing and discussion tools . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was partially supported by the U . S . Office of Naval research under award N000140510549 . We thank Noldus IT ( www . noldus . com ) for use of their software tools . We also thank IST graduate students Anna Wu and Bo Yu for their help in preliminary analyses of these data . CHI 2009 ~ Cognitive Modeling and Assessment April 8th , 2009 ~ Boston , MA , USA 1349 REFERENCES 1 . Carley , K . ( 1986 ) . Knowledge acquisition as a social phenomenon . Instructional Science , 14 ( 3 - 4 ) , pp . 381 - 438 . 2 . Convertino , G . , Mentis , H . M . , Rosson , M . B . , Carroll , J . M . , Slavkovic , A . , & Ganoe , C . ( 2008 ) . Articulating Common Ground in Cooperative Work : Content and Process . Proceedings of the Conference on Human Fac - tors in Computing Systems , pp . 1637 - 1646 . 3 . Conklin , J . and Begeman , M . L . ( 1987 ) . gIBIS : a hyper - text tool for team design deliberation . Conference on Hypertext and Hypermedia , pp . 247 - 251 . 4 . Dennis , A . R . ( 1996 ) . Information exchange and use in group decision making : You can lead a group to infor - mation , but you can ' t make it think . MIS Quarterly , 20 ( 4 ) , pp . 433 - 457 . 5 . Fawcett , R . P . & Davies , B . L . ( 1992 ) . Monologue as a turn in dialogue : Towards an integration of exchange structure and rhetorical structure theory . In R . Dale , E . Hovy , D . Rösner and O . Stock ( Eds . ) , Aspects of Auto - mated Language Generation ( pp . 151 - 166 ) . Berlin : Springer . 6 . Fisher , B . A . & Ellis , D . ( 1990 ) . Anatomy of communi - cation in decision - making groups : Improving effective - ness . In D . Ellis & B . A . Fisher ( Eds . ) , Small Group De - cision Making , 3d ed . , ( pp . 170 - 200 ) . New York : McGraw - Hill . 7 . Gigone , D . & Hastie , R . ( 1993 ) . The common knowl - edge effect : Information sharing and group judgment . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 65 ( 5 ) , pp . 959 - 974 . 8 . Herrera - Viedma , E . , Herrera , F . and Chiclana , F . ( 2002 ) . A consensus model for multiperson decision making with different preference structures . IEEE Transactions on Systems , Man and Cybernetics—Part A : Systems and Humans , 32 ( 3 ) , pp . 394 - 402 . 9 . Karacapilidis , N . and Papadias , D . ( 2001 ) . Computer supported argumentation and collaborative decision making : the HERMES system . Information Systems , 26 ( 4 ) , pp . 259 - 277 . 10 . Landis , J . R . & Koch , G . G . ( 1977 ) . The measurement of observer agreement for categorical data . Biometrics 33 , pp . 159 – 174 . 11 . Lee , J . ( 1990 ) . SIBYL : a tool for managing group de - sign rationale . Proceedings of the Conference on Com - puter - supported Cooperative Work , pp . 79 - 92 . 12 . Mann , W . C . & Thompson , S . A . ( 1988 ) . Rhetorical Structure Theory : Toward a functional theory of text or - ganization . Text 8 ( 3 ) , pp . 243 - 281 . 13 . Mann , W . C . , Matthiessen , C . , & Thompson , S . A . ( 1992 ) . Rhetorical Structure Theory and text analysis . In W . C . Mann and S . A . Thompson ( Eds . ) , Discourse De - scription : Diverse Linguistic Analyses of a Fund - Raising Text ( pp . 39 - 78 ) . Amsterdam and Philadelphia : John Benjamins . 14 . Mathieu , J . E . , Heffner , T . S . , Goodwin , G . F . , Salas , E . , & Cannon - Bowers , J . A . ( 2000 ) . The influence of shared mental models on team process and performance . Journal of Applied Psychology , 85 ( 2 ) , pp . 273 - 283 . 15 . Mennecke , B . E . ( 1997 ) . Using group support systems to discover hidden profiles : an examination of the influ - ence of group size and meeting structures on informa - tion sharing and decision quality . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies , 47 , pp . 387 - 405 . 16 . Monk , A . ( 2003 ) . Common ground in electronically mediated communication : Clark’s theory of language use , in J . M . Carroll ( Ed . ) , Toward a multidisciplinary science of HCI . MIT Press . 17 . Nahavandi , A . , & Aranda , E . ( 1994 ) . Restructuring teams for the re - engineered organization . Academy of Management Executive , 8 ( 4 ) , pp . 58 – 68 . 18 . Nisbett , R . E . & Wilson , T . D . ( 1977 ) . Telling more than we can know : Verbal reports on mental processes . Psy - chological Review , 84 , pp . 231 - 259 . 19 . Schafer W . , Ganoe C . , Carroll J . M . ( 2007 ) . Supporting Community Emergency Management Planning through a Geocollaboration Software Architecture . CSCW , 16 ( 4 - 5 ) , pp . 501 - 537 . 20 . Shafir , E . , Simonson , I . , & Tversky , A . ( 1993 ) . Reason - based choice . Cognition , 49 ( 1 - 2 ) , pp . 11 - 36 . 21 . Stasser , G . ( 1992 ) . Information salience and the discov - ery of hidden profiles by decision - making groups : a ‘Thought Experiment’ . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 52 , pp . 156 - 181 . 22 . Stent , A . ( 2000 ) . Rhetorical structure in dialog , Pro - ceedings of First International Conference on Natural Language Generation ( INLG ' 2000 ) ( pp . 247 - 252 ) . 23 . Taboada , M . ( 2004 ) . Rhetorical relations in dialogue : A contrastive study . In C . L . Moder and A . Martinovic - Zic ( Eds . ) , Discourse across Languages and Cultures ( pp . 75 - 97 ) . Amsterdam : John Benjamins . 24 . Taboada , M & Mann , W . C . ( 2006a ) . Applications of Rhetorical Structure Theory . Discourse Studies , 8 ( 4 ) , pp . 567 - 588 . 25 . Taboada , M . & Mann , W . C . ( 2006b ) . Rhetorical Struc - ture Theory : Looking back and moving ahead . Dis - course Studies , 8 ( 3 ) , pp . 423 - 459 . CHI 2009 ~ Cognitive Modeling and Assessment April 8th , 2009 ~ Boston , MA , USA 1350