873 873 31 A Case Study of Qualitative Methods Colleen M . Lewis 1 Introduction In research – and many parts of life – we only see the finished product , a snapshot of calm and certainty even when the reality is chaotic . When people meet me , they might learn that I am a computer science ( CS ) professor . I assume they would never guess that I nearly failed data structures in college and still struggled in my second attempt . They would never imagine how many interviews I bombed and graduate schools I did not get into . They don’t see the inevitable paper and grant rejections or poor teaching evaluations . Those things aren’t on my CV , but reflecting back , I see these as some of the most influential elements for my learning . This chapter is a narrative of the actual doing of a research study , what Roth ( 2006 ) calls a praxis narrative . I hope to give you a “feel for the game” ( Bourdieu , 1992 ) of doing one type of qualitative research . Ideally , you will gain some insights into qualitative methods , or at least recognition that if it feels chaotic , it is not necessarily wrong . Textbooks about qualitative methods have a burden of providing clarity to the methods . This chapter instead seeks to show all of the mess and ambiguity . In our current context , where computing knowledge is often perceived as only available to the intellectual elite or people with a “geek gene , ” it is our responsibility to challenge these notions and help others see our humanness . I will attempt to do that while telling the backstory of this paper . In this chapter , I will share some of what I learned through writing , revising , and now reflecting on a paper that traversed a particularly rocky path . My qualitative analysis was eventually published in a paper at the Association for Computing Machinery ( ACM ) Special Interest Group on Computer Science Education ( SIGCSE ) International Computing Education Research ( ICER ) conference ( Lewis , 2012a ) , but the path there was a bit bumpy . The analysis came from my master’s thesis ( submitted December 2009 ) , abbreviated to submit to ICER in April of 2010 . It was rejected from ICER in 2010 and again in 2011 . Despite the suspicion that the manuscript was doomed , I decided to revise and resubmit it again in 2012 . Only in this third submission to ICER was it accepted . I received incredibly thoughtful – and harsh – reviews of my first submission to ICER in 2010 . At that time , my work was described as preliminary and that the contribution was fairly minimal . 9781108496735ch21 - 31 _ p635 - 892 . indd 873 03 - Nov - 18 5 : 37 : 20 PM 874 874 LEWIS When it was finally accepted in 2012 , it was awarded the inaugural Chair’s Award at the 2012 ICER conference , “given to the paper that , in the judgment of the organizing committee , best illustrates the highest standards of empirical computing education research , taking into account the quality of its questions asked , methodology , analysis , writing , and contribution to the field . ” As an eternal imposter , I am distrustful of this characterization , but I can confidently claim that my work got much better and that the story of this growth captures important parts of my learning about qualitative methods . The feedback I received at each point , even when it seemed unnecessarily harsh , was thoughtful and ultimately helpful . In terms of the volume of new and edited text , each new ICER submission was a significant revision . However , the changes themselves were never burdensome . The ideas were there , I just did not know how to put them into words , or even that I should put them into words . The key learning was subtle and led to reframing , restructuring , and ultimately much better analysis . The following sections will chronicle my insights within the process distilled into tips . The tips are sequenced to roughly align with the broad categories of data collection , analysis , and writing . Each tip tells part of the story of the work of qualitative research . In recounting a part of the story , I attempt to capture something I think I learned about these broad , often interwoven categories of doing qualitative research . I have written each tip as a declarative statement , but these statements serve only as labels for the messiness that the real work of qualitative methods involves . Given that messiness , these declarative tips might be improved by adding “when possible” to the end of each . Now that I have written these tips , they seem obvious ; they might even appear in qualitative methods textbooks . Perhaps I had even read them with them in one of the two qualitative methods courses I took en route to my PhD in science and mathem - atics education . However , qualitative methods require juggling multiple goals , and I simply had not developed fluency and consistency in applying these ideas and strategies . Data Collection • Check and organize your data as you go ( Section 2 . 1 ) . • Don’t plan to collect data when you are developing a new curriculum ( Section 2 . 2 ) . • Adapt your data collection as you go ( Section 2 . 3 ) . Data Analysis • Keep detailed notes as your analysis evolves ( Section 3 . 1 ) . • Follow your instincts ( Section 3 . 2 ) . • Try to cherry - pick some interesting data ( Section 3 . 3 ) . • Invent terms ( i . e . , constructs ) so that you can work toward more precise ana - lysis ( Section 3 . 4 ) . • It would be easier if it were systematic ( Section 3 . 5 ) . • When your analysis is good , it will seem obvious ( Section 3 . 6 ) . 9781108496735ch21 - 31 _ p635 - 892 . indd 874 03 - Nov - 18 5 : 37 : 20 PM A Case Study of Qualitative Methods 875 875 • Acknowledge that your epistemological assumptions will shape the analysis ( Section 3 . 7 ) . Writing • Provide structure to help your reader understand your data ( Section 4 . 1 ) . • Distinguish description and interpretation ( Section 4 . 2 ) . • Present enough data so that someone could disagree with your interpretation ( Section 4 . 3 ) . • Explain why you chose qualitative methods ( Section 4 . 4 ) . • Explain the limitations of the work ( Section 4 . 5 ) . • Explain how your analysis fits into the ongoing conversation ( Section 4 . 6 ) . • Tie the motivation to the analysis ( Section 4 . 7 ) . • Make the implications for teaching explicit ( Section 4 . 8 ) . I encourage you to read the paper . It reveals how much of the real work is invis - ible in the final product . However , I will assume you haven’t read it and will pro - vide the relevant context as necessary . The paper describes a student that I gave the pseudonym Kevin as he debugs a Scratch program over the course of less than five minutes . Kevin was one of fifty 11 – 12 - year - old students enrolled in a summer enrichment program for academically advanced students . I taught the enrichment course with the help of two other adults . The students were divided between a morning and afternoon section , each with 36 hours of instruction . One class used Scratch and the other used Logo . Each day , students in each class did isomorphic tasks using their given programming language . In this design , I was also generating quantitative data from surveys and daily quizzes to see how students’ attitudes and performance differed between the two sections . This quantitative data was described in another paper ( Lewis , 2010 ) . Kevin was technically pair programming at the time , but his partner , Rachel , did not say anything during the episodes I analyzed , and from the whole class video she appears to not be looking at their computer screen or Kevin . With that context , you are ready for the tips ! 2 Data Collection In preparation for my data collection , I frequently received advice that I was collecting too much data . With student assent and parental consent , I recorded students’ screens during each of the 36 hours of instruction in the summer enrichment program . My students , 11 – 12 - year - olds , worked in a total of 25 pairs , with 12 pairs in the first offering and 13 pairs in the second offering . Every hour of instruction was also recorded on three video cameras . Therefore , I had over 900 hours or over 38 days of video recordings . “Too much data” seems like a reasonable critique and an understatement . I am nearly certain that I will deserve this critique again on future projects . However , the following three tips attempt to capture what I have learned and hope to apply in data collection for future projects . 9781108496735ch21 - 31 _ p635 - 892 . indd 875 03 - Nov - 18 5 : 37 : 20 PM 876 876 LEWIS 2 . 1 Tip – Check and Organize Your Data As You Go I am dismissive of the “too much data” critique , but it is not wrong . As my mentors and peers predicted , I was totally overwhelmed during data collection , and as a result I did not sufficiently check and organize the data during the course . That is a mistake I hope to avoid repeating . I had done plenty in advance of the summer course , but it was still insufficient . For a class project , I had collected and analyzed data from a one - hour pilot study with four students . This short intervention did not pilot the whole curric - ulum , but I began the summer having written a paper using the same type . That summer , I had prepared by installing the screen recording software on all of the computers in my classroom and confirmed that it recorded using each of the external microphones that were required . I determined that the battery in the external microphones would need to be replaced daily to ensure audio recordings were made . I had developed a labeling system for the physical tapes recorded by each of the three video cameras in the room . I made elaborate checklists that we used to ensure we collected and stored the data . I owe a huge debt of gratitude to my co - teachers Brittany Murlas and Christa Henderson because they did not know what they had signed up for ! We had very little data lost during the summer ; given the complexity of the data collection , I think this was impressive . There was just one catch . When the screen recordings expanded , the audio and the video file got out of sync . When I opened the file with video editing software , the audio component was about two - thirds of the length of the video . Only when the audio component was stretched to match the length of the video did the audio appear to sync up with the video . This easily could have been detected before the end of the summer if I had been checking the data throughout . Instead , it required that I use a computer in my research lab to stretch the audio , which took more time to process than the length of the ori - ginal video . It seems likely that if I had caught this earlier I could have avoided this additional step . Will this same problem repeat itself ? No , but surely some - thing else will go wrong , and I might as well set aside the time during data collection to figure that out . 2 . 2 Tip – Don’t Plan to Collect Data When You Are Developing a New Curriculum The course in which I collected data was a course I had never taught before . I had prepared all of the curriculum in advance , but students completed the content I had planned for the three - week course within the first week . I spent the remaining two weeks sleep - deprived as I tried to keep up with the students and generate more activities for them . How were my results changed because the cur - riculum was far from perfect ? Recall that I taught computing using Scratch and Logo to address quantitative questions related to the strengths and weaknesses of each . The curriculum was likely equally bad between the Scratch and Logo 9781108496735ch21 - 31 _ p635 - 892 . indd 876 03 - Nov - 18 5 : 37 : 20 PM A Case Study of Qualitative Methods 877 877 offerings of the course , and I hope did not affect my results comparing Scratch and Logo ( Lewis , 2010 ) . From that experience , I now strongly believe that you should not collect data in the first offering of a course . This seems like another tip that I will ignore sooner than is wise , but the flaws in a first offering of a course most likely will reduce the interpretability of results . Perhaps only collecting data with polished curricula is unrealistic , but describing the weaknesses of the curriculum is necessary . If I could go back and revise that publication ( Lewis , 2010 ) , I would include more information about the ways in which the class was rocky . I think I owe that to my readers and the research community generally . 2 . 3 Tip – Adapt Your Data Collection As You Go One of my reviewers in 2010 argued that I should standardize my data collection and appeared to imply that qualitative work requires that all participants be given the same set of problems . While I reject the larger argument that the participants need a consistent experience , there are definitely practical consider - ations that would justify this . First , qualitative research requires a lot of space to explain the methods and analysis . If participants are each answering different questions , a lot of real estate could be lost to the description of the relevant problems that appear in the analyses . Second , asking the same question mul - tiple times may provide the opportunity to follow up on hypotheses that are developed from an earlier participant’s answer . This was helpful in my disserta - tion ( Lewis , 2012b ) , which involved one - on - one interviews with students solving programming problems during a clinical interview . Often a student’s answers puzzled me , and their responses to my follow - up questions provided no illu - mination . If another student expressed a similar idea , follow - up questions with that second student might be more fruitful . This opportunity was only available because I asked all students a common set of questions . However , these follow - up questions are examples where each student may be asked different questions . These unplanned follow - up questions allowed me to explore topics I did not know to plan interview questions for . 3 Data Analysis I have frequently received the advice to be more systematic in my analysis . I think an assumption in the word “systematic” is that there are pre - scriptive steps that should be followed to ensure that qualitative methods are done correctly . That has not been my experience . I will concede in the first tip below that I should be more systematic in keeping detailed notes of my ana - lysis decisions . However , the remaining tips embrace the openness of qualitative methods . Qualitative methods do not guarantee that another researcher would find the same result . My paper focused on less than five minutes of Kevin’s inter - action with Scratch . With over 900 hours of video recordings , there is seemingly 9781108496735ch21 - 31 _ p635 - 892 . indd 877 03 - Nov - 18 5 : 37 : 20 PM 878 878 LEWIS no chance that another researcher would have identified this same five - minute excerpt ! The first analysis task I had was to narrow the focus of the research and data analysis . This task feels anything but systematic , and I have gotten more and more comfortable with that . Section 4 describes the ways I try to build trust with my reader because I am not relying on following a predetermined set of steps . 3 . 1 Tip – Keep Detailed Notes As Your Analysis Evolves One way to be systematic is to document the analysis process as you go . In qualitative methods , this documentation is typically referred to as “memos . ” I think about it as a lab notebook or journal describing the analysis . I have good systems for implementing this on my collaborative projects , but not my individual ones . In all of my collaborative projects , we coedit a shared Google doc during each meeting , and those notes nearly form a transcript of the meeting . In one project that spanned multiple years ( Lewis , Anderson , & Yasuhara , 2016 ; Lewis , Yasuhara , & Anderson , 2011 ) , we made it easier to refer back to these meeting notes by labeling each document with a title and including a one - sentence sum - mary of the discussion at the top of the document . This was invaluable when we later wrote up our methods , and it helped us during the analysis to avoid inadvertently backtracking . A weakness of the methods in my individual analysis efforts is that I do not have comprehensive notes about the path of my analysis . When I watch video data , I take notes in what is often called a “content log . ” This helps me docu - ment my observations and initial hypotheses , but it does not capture the con - tinual snapshots of my analysis process like I have done in my collaborative projects . In my future individual analyses , I need to learn to incorporate the generation of this type of artifact . For this aspect of being systematic , I see only advantages . 3 . 2 Tip – Follow Your Instincts To sift through 900 hours of video , I began my analysis focused on a par - ticular piece of the curriculum : where students draw a brick wall , as shown in Figure 31 . 1 . For those not familiar with Scratch , characters , like the cat shown in Figure 31 . 1 , can draw lines as they move around the screen . The task of drawing the brick wall , which was designed by Guy Haas ( n . d . ) , involves a relatively complex set of movements of the character that involve alternating whether the character is drawing a line ( i . e . , to draw a brick ) or is not drawing a line ( i . e . , to create a space ) . It is pretty tricky to pick lengths for the bricks , partial bricks , and spaces that allow each row of bricks to line up . Additionally , it is tricky to navigate the character between these lines . If you are dying to see the code , you might try it directly in Scratch or read the published paper ( Lewis , 2012a ) . 9781108496735ch21 - 31 _ p635 - 892 . indd 878 03 - Nov - 18 5 : 37 : 20 PM A Case Study of Qualitative Methods 879 879 I started with the brick wall activity based upon my experience of students completing the activity in class . Students often appeared to productively engage with the activity for between one and two hours . 1 Students hit predictable bugs , which appeared to be conceptually rich . Best of all , these bugs were immediately recognizable to me from what was drawn on the screen . For example , students often hit a point where the rows were skewed like a staircase . From having taught the class in which data were collected , my gut instinct was to focus on this problem in order to observe debugging behavior . Perhaps my description of why I picked the brick wall sounds systematic . I certainly had reasons to pick the brick wall task . However , these reasons evolved as I started the analysis , and I could have picked another task and generated compelling reasons for focusing on that task instead . Narrowing the focus of the analysis is fundamentally open , and I have begun to come to grips with the fact that my plan is to trust my instincts . Luckily , as a CS instructor , I am constantly able to refine and test my instincts about how people learn CS , which increases my confidence in my instincts . However , focusing on one thing means there is less time to focus on other things , and there is nothing other than my fallible instincts on which to rely . 3 . 3 Tip – Try to Cherry - Pick Some Interesting Data Once I had picked the task and I had started watching videos , one might describe my process of picking specific video excerpts as cherry - picking . While cherry - picking is used as a critique , I now think about this work as choosing the right cherries to pick ! In other projects , I have cherry - picked quotes to illustrate a point in the completed analysis ( e . g . , Lewis , Yasuhara , & Anderson , 2011 ) , but in this project , cherry - picking was an early step in the analysis . Figure 31 . 1 Completed drawing of a brick wall in Scratch . 1 This difficult a task might have been risky in a classroom with only a single teacher , but we had three adult instructors with class sizes of 24 and 26 . 9781108496735ch21 - 31 _ p635 - 892 . indd 879 03 - Nov - 18 5 : 37 : 20 PM 880 880 LEWIS As I recall , I had watched hours of video before finding Kevin’s excerpt . I was looking for times where I could reasonably claim that the students were debug - ging . There were plenty of things that might be debugging . The video showed the students’ screens , which meant in watching the videos I could observe a bug in their code and then could observe them making changes to their code . However , it was not clear that the students and I were seeing the same thing . Had they noticed the bug ? Did they think that the changes they made to the code would fix the bug ? This was a pretty deep rabbit hole . I eventually stumbled upon the video of Kevin and Rachel . Kevin and Rachel’s statements were unique in that they made their debugging explicit . Sometimes this was from Kevin and Rachel’s dialogue and sometimes this was when Kevin seemed to be talking to himself or perhaps to the computer . The episode in the ICER paper began with Kevin stating , “What ? Wait . ” It seemed clear that Kevin had recognized a bug . Stumbling upon these data was like finding a gold mine ! The ambiguity in every other video I had watched was disambiguated here by their statements . In the explicitness of their debugging , they were unlike other pairs . However , they did not seem to be outliers in other ways . In focusing on a single pair , I was not going to be sure of the exact extent to which the patterns I observed would generalize . Finding examples where I could observe the things I was interested in for my research ( i . e . , finding some cherries to pick ) was the most important thing at this stage . 3 . 4 Tip – Invent Terms ( i . e . , Constructs ) So That You Can Work toward More Precise Analysis My analysis revolves around Kevin’s understanding of program state . This idea of “state” is my primary construct . Methods books may provide a more com - prehensive definition of construct , but I think of it is as a term that I use in my research for which I provide a specific definition . Across my projects , I have developed constructs that help me think about the analysis . Often I will develop constructs that do not appear in the final paper , but the process of iteratively refining my definition for the construct helps me refine my ideas and analysis . Unfortunately , my construct of state is imperfect . The following definition of state from my paper has at least two big problems : State represents the idea , present in all programming environments , of a set of temporary or permanent variables that completely describe the current environment on which a program can act . This includes programmer - defined variables as well as other aspects of the runtime environment such as the current stack frame . Program commands change aspects of the computer program’s state and the process of writing programs involves developing sequences of state change operations to achieve a particular goal . ( Lewis , 2012a , p . 127 ) First , my definition is inconsistent with a way that computer scientists talk about state . Specifically , computer scientists talk about functional programming 9781108496735ch21 - 31 _ p635 - 892 . indd 880 03 - Nov - 18 5 : 37 : 20 PM A Case Study of Qualitative Methods 881 881 languages as being stateless . This relies on the idea that a function , from the mathematical definition , has a single output for each input . That is , if you pass a function the same input multiple times , you are guaranteed to get the same output . They describe functions as “stateless” because the output only depends on the input . This contrasts with imperative programming where a function that adds two to the variable x will each time result in a different value of x ; that is , it is stateful . Second , based on my definition , absolutely everything in programming is state – everything . What is not state ? Nothing . This is not good . Hopefully , in the future , I will be able to narrow in on something well - defined and more spe - cific . With a construct too broadly defined , it seems less likely to be helpful . The first big problem with my construct tends to make some computer scientists mad , but I think the “everything is state” problem is much worse . A similar critique could likely be made of the notional machine construct ( see Chapter 1 ) , which encompasses all of how programs are executed by computers . This is not a new revelation that my construct of state has big problems . I have spent a lot of time thinking about it , and I have decided that the construct is still useful . In particular , I knew that my use of state was inconsistent with another usage , but – for people without that context – “state” seemed intuitive to them , and for people with that context , it was never difficult to clarify my meaning . 3 . 5 Tip – It Would Be Easier if It Were Systematic I think a jigsaw puzzle analogy is helpful for qualitative research . There appear to be endless puzzle pieces to choose from and I am trying to pick out and connect enough pieces to provide a clear , even if small , picture . Unfortunately , there is no box lid to guide the process and no edges of the puzzle to help me pick a place to start . There are just puzzle pieces , and I have to continually con - vince myself that I will be able to put some of them together if I spend time considering the possible connections . In my experience , qualitative analysis takes a long time before it seems like the pieces fit together . Along the way , I will often figure out that the pieces do not fit in the way I had believed or that a piece I had barely noticed is probably more important than some of the other connections I had made . Sometimes hours , weeks , and months can go by with seemingly no measurable progress . Qualitative analysis takes time , and it does not follow a recipe of steps where it is possible to make continual forward progress . Each of my qualitative projects has involved multiple and sometimes prolonged periods of doubt about the direction and content of the analysis . Without a set of steps to follow , this openness can be overwhelming . Two things have been helpful for me in managing this doubt and uncertainty . First , I track my time and I give myself a sticker for every 45 minutes of work . 2 There might 2 I am not kidding : see https : / / medium . com / @ colleenlewis / intrinsic - motivation - is - overrated - dc1cbd4a7b7c 9781108496735ch21 - 31 _ p635 - 892 . indd 881 03 - Nov - 18 5 : 37 : 21 PM 882 882 LEWIS not be measurable progress , but there are no shortcuts for this work , and I need to get myself to put in the time . Second , I frequently share my analysis with colleagues . In graduate school , we had faculty - run research groups where one or two students would sign up to present their work and lean on the group to help them chart their next steps . As a faculty member , I no longer had access to these groups , and in 2014 , I started hosting the Work in Progress workshop at ICER in order to provide a similar venue of support . Many times , new perspectives can help us to find a path forward . 3 . 6 Tip – When Your Analysis Is Good , It Will Seem Obvious My greatest frustration in doing qualitative research is that when I think I’m done , it all seems obvious . Why had that taken me so long ? I have put some puzzle pieces together and now there is a clear picture . I think that this feeling of obviousness is a feature of well - done qualitative work , but I think this leads to me ( and others ) underestimating it . Consider the key finding in my paper : I hypothesize that a key competence in debugging is learning to identify what elements of program state are important to pay attention to and that this attention , and not only domain knowledge , mediates the debugging process . ( Lewis , 2012a , p . 127 ) Of course it is important for students to pay attention to the right elements of program state . However , even if the finding seems obvious , I think there is some - thing important here . In the paper , I argue that once students pay attention to the right element of state , the bug feels like a simple mistake . By eventually dismissing many – or potentially most – bugs as simple mistakes , students may miss that part of learning to program is learning what elements of state they should pay attention to . The connection between qualitative results being obvious and students discounting bugs as obvious is just a coincidence , but one I appreciate . I might not convince readers of this chapter that my key finding in my paper is meaningful , but I hope to share my experience of frustration when the final result seems obvious because the pieces have come together so well . While I find this deeply frustrating , I now see obviousness as the goal for my analysis and perhaps as something I can help my readers value . 3 . 7 Tip – Acknowledge That Your Epistemological Assumptions Will Shape the Analysis In the end , my analysis connected directly to the theoretical work of my advisor , Andrea ( Andy ) diSessa . Is that a coincidence ? No . My advisor works in the general area of epistemology . He focuses on physics , but his theories have been applied to other domains . By the time I started working on this analysis , I had – consistent with my advisor’s work – started to think of learning as a process of developing the ability to solve problems across contexts . In Andy’s work , he talks about how students learn to pay attention to the right things in order 9781108496735ch21 - 31 _ p635 - 892 . indd 882 03 - Nov - 18 5 : 37 : 21 PM A Case Study of Qualitative Methods 883 883 to solve problems in physics ( e . g . , diSessa & Sherin , 1998 ) . In my dissertation , I argued that students’ thinking and learning about state are consistent with his model , which was developed around students’ thinking and learning about force in physics . Building upon his work , in my dissertation , I proposed changes to his theory and argued why CS content motivated these changes , but these changes were also applicable to physics . Connections to existing theories can be important for moving the field for - ward . These epistemological connections were helpful in connecting my work to the broader body of literature about education or , more specifically , “conceptual change . ” While these connections to my advisor’s work can be seen as biases , I think they are , to some extent , unavoidable . In educational research , our epistemo - logical assumptions are necessarily going to shape how we make sense of students’ thinking and learning . Like our instincts , these shape how we navi - gate the openness of qualitative research . Again , qualitative methods don’t guarantee us that different readers would find the same thing . The point is to focus on phenomena where prescriptive steps would be insufficient , and we can attempt to make these assumptions that guide our work explicit . 4 Writing I have frequently received the advice to “write clearly . ” Probably nothing could be less helpful . I certainly have had mixed results in my writing . Even from my accepted 2012 submission , I received a disparaging comment about my writing and a suggestion to do a “careful revision . ” I had certainly engaged in “careful revision , ” but that does not mean that my careful revision is sufficient to produce clear writing . Instead , I have settled on the following tips , which I hope steer me toward writing clearly . 4 . 1 Tip – Provide Structure to Help Your Reader Understand Your Data After years of working with this data set , I found the lines of transcript , and Kevin’s accompanying actions , crystal clear . This was not the case for my formal and informal readers . In early drafts , I was surprised by the things that my readers found opaque , and their feedback forced me to be explicit and structured in my writing . I believe that the most consequential change that I made across the revisions to improve clarity was breaking the analysis up into short , sequential excerpts that each included subsections titled “Summary , ” “Data , ” and “Analysis . ” However , this structure was present in my 2011 submission , which notably was still rejected . Even if this structure did not unlock the elusive acceptance , it was foundational in how I now think about describing my analyses . Each excerpt began with a “Summary , ” which provided a brief overview of what happened in the excerpt to follow . I tried to write this in a way that no one 9781108496735ch21 - 31 _ p635 - 892 . indd 883 03 - Nov - 18 5 : 37 : 21 PM 884 884 LEWIS would dispute and that would prepare my readers to read the transcript that followed . For example , beginning in 2011 and present in the published version , I wrote , “In excerpt three , Kevin executes the program to draw the first two rows and retraces the first and second row before accidentally tracing over the first row with a copy of the second row . ” I think it would be reasonable to quibble with my use of “accidentally , ” which I think implies an interpretation of Kevin’s actions . However , the rest seems a cut - and - dried description . The next subsection , “Data , ” provided the transcript for that portion and would likely be nearly impossible for a reader to read without having first read the summary . Parentheticals within the transcript described Kevin’s actions of executing or modifying code . I used sequential line numbers between excerpts to show that the content progressed sequentially . I think that helping the reader to understand the overall chronology is important , and therefore I never use ellipses to indicate pauses because they can be misinterpreted as removed text . Instead , I note pauses as a parenthetical note , as in “ ( pause ) . ” Realistically , using ellipses is probably fine provided that the convention is stated . The third section , “Analysis , ” walked through the episode chronologically , alternating description and interpretation . The structure of these subsections is likely less important for the reader than in drawing my attention , as I am writing and revising , to the fact that I am engaged in interpretation . This might seem rather simplistic , but analysis tasks are difficult enough that this metacognition is still difficult and relevant for me . The next tip is dedicated to this difficulty . 4 . 2 Tip – Distinguish Description and Interpretation In this work , I want to understand Kevin’s thinking . Unfortunately , I can only make inferences or assumptions about his thinking based upon his statements and actions . Therefore , whenever I make a statement about Kevin’s thinking , I need to include a hedging term such as “appears” or “I hypothesize . ” For example , the first subsection of analysis began : “Kevin retraced the top row three times and appeared unsure why a third line was not drawn . ” The first half of the sentence constitutes my description of the events and the second half constitutes an interpretation . Another example appears in the second episode’s analysis : “From Kevin’s statement ‘why isn’t this working ? ’ ( line 10 ) I assume that he identified a problem , but had not identified the cause” ( Lewis , 2012a , p . 131 ) . The content of my interpretation and its source are explicit . As an author , I might describe my task as “describing what I think happened . ” However , this includes relatively distinct elements such as : ( 1 ) the events that are part of the overall sequence of events and context ; ( 2 ) the specific events that shape my opinion ; ( 3 ) my interpretation based upon those events ; and ( 4 ) any technical content knowledge a reader might not have . Again , I find this challen - ging . Exploring the following two sentences in the final paper can capture some of this challenge : By experimenting with the rotation of the character , he appeared to be appro - priately attending to the direction of the character . However , for a complete 9781108496735ch21 - 31 _ p635 - 892 . indd 884 03 - Nov - 18 5 : 37 : 21 PM A Case Study of Qualitative Methods 885 885 understanding of the bug he also needed to attend to the position of the character . ( Lewis , 2012a , p . 131 ) The first phrase presents my description : “By experimenting with the rotation of the character . ” Unfortunately , even in this simple phrase , the line between descrip - tion and interpretation is blurry . Specifically , my use of “experimenting with” is not purely descriptive . Instead , “experimenting with” likely evokes a goal - driven action , and I do not provide support for this interpretation . This description could likely be improved by removing “experimenting with” and replacing it with “modifying , ” which better fits the goal of description rather than interpretation . Moving on from this imperfection , the second phrase presents my inter - pretation : “he appeared to be appropriately attending to the direction of the character . ” With the hedging phrase “appeared to , ” I signal the claim as inter - pretive . The third phrase presents technical content : “However , for a com - plete understanding of the bug he also needed to attend to the position of the character . ” Here , I attempt to treat the technical details of the bug objectively , without hedging , to clearly communicate an aspect of the episode that relies on content knowledge that a reader might not have . Again , there is a lot to think about in writing and analysis . 4 . 3 Tip – Present Enough Data That Someone Could Disagree with Your Interpretation In each submission , my reviewers have provided alternative interpretations of the data . Their sometimes forceful presentation of alternative interpretations made me question my work and my interpretations . While initially frustrating , these were sometimes some of the most helpful comments that I received because they helped me identify specific strengths and weaknesses of my analysis . First and foremost , providing enough data that someone could form an alternative hypothesis is helpful for ensuring that you can get feedback that will help improve the work . This can be challenging because of page limits , but earlier stages of formative feedback can provide the opportunity to expose more of the data to alternative hypotheses . Additionally , I could expose to them how I had chosen to select particular data ( see Section 3 . 2 ) . Before my first ICER submission , I had received multiple rounds of feedback , most not - ably from peers and advisors at the University of California , Berkeley . Second , transparency in the analysis is important because other researchers might not have focused on the same thing if they analyzed your data . I figure it cannot be stated too many times : qualitative methods do not provide a set of pre - scriptive steps that will produce a particular analysis . As discussed above , the knowledge and perspectives of the researcher are naturally embedded within qualitative analysis . By providing enough data that someone could disagree with you , your reader has the opportunity to critique your interpretations . Developing alternative interpretations ( or “rival hypotheses” ; Yin , 2013 ) has become an essential part of my process of analysis , and I believe it is helpful if 9781108496735ch21 - 31 _ p635 - 892 . indd 885 03 - Nov - 18 5 : 37 : 21 PM 886 886 LEWIS this can be made visible to my readers . In a more recent ICER paper ( Lewis & Shah , 2015 ) , my collaborator and I compiled a list of alternative hypotheses and discussed the strengths and weaknesses of each in the paper . 4 . 4 Tip – Explain Why You Chose Qualitative Methods In the process of writing this chapter , I can now see how comments that I had dismissed from my 2010 reviewers may have actually been a symptom of not explaining why I chose qualitative methods . Across my reviews , I think that reviewers’ comments requesting more standard data collection and more data analysis suggest that I had not done the work of explaining why qualitative data collection and analysis were appropriate . My 2010 submission did little more than describe the work as “a fine grain analysis . ” The “Data Collection” section in my 2011 submission said : The data collection was designed to capture students engaged in programming and debugging … Rather than gathering information such as performance on quizzes , we attempted to capture students’ process of solving problems . This specified that qualitative data were collected , but not why . The text removed between the two sentences above further described the content of that data . However , my study design had reasons for both qualitative data collection and qualitative analysis . Only in the final draft , after the 2012 submission , did I explain the reason for my use of qualitative data and analysis within the methods section : There are a number of challenges in studying students’ debugging behavior . Observing students debugging their own buggy code does not provide any con - sistency across research participants because the bugs they identify and fix will be unique . However , observing students debugging uniform bugs in code they did not write may be an unfamiliar experience for students and not representa - tive of their behavior debugging their own code . The methods used in this study prioritized observing natural debugging behavior rather than documenting behavior that could easily be compared across research participants . ( Lewis , 2012a , p . 128 ) Here , I situate my goal of “observing natural debugging behavior” as central to the research question of understanding students’ debugging behavior . I try to make the point that no other methods would be sensible , and I remind the reader of these points in the conclusion . 4 . 5 Tip – Explain the Limitations of the Work In the CS education community , much of the research is quantitative . At times , it seems that reviewers are critiquing my work for not being quantitative or are implicitly critiquing the fact that I am not making quantitative claims . I am sympathetic to slipping into the dominant , quantitative frame . In the CS educa - tion research course that I teach , some students initially propose a quantitative research question for their qualitative research project . Quantitative studies are 9781108496735ch21 - 31 _ p635 - 892 . indd 886 03 - Nov - 18 5 : 37 : 21 PM A Case Study of Qualitative Methods 887 887 so common that warning students about this pitfall does not seem to particu - larly help . Instead , I have found that the prompt , “Would this question be better answered with thousands of research participants ? ” can help students evaluate their research question once it is written . A quantitative research question might motivate the study , but the selection of qualitative methods implies that we are not yet able to conduct a quantitative study about the topic . I believe that in addition to motivating the use of qualitative methods , it is necessary to specify what the analysis does not claim . It is not sufficient merely not to include unsupported quantitative claims . It is necessary to draw the reader’s attention to this . For example , in the final version , I included an explanation of these bounds : “The case study is intended to illustrate details of this model , but is not intended to establish the prevalence of this pattern” ( Lewis , 2012a , p . 127 ) . Additionally , before presenting the body of the analysis , I reminded the reader about what the analysis does not show : “Case studies like this one are not intended to prove that a particular pattern of behavior exists within a population . Instead , the data serve to inform and exemplify hypotheses regarding features of learning within a domain” ( Lewis , 2012a , p . 129 ) . I think these reminders are helpful even if , in principle , they should not be required . 4 . 6 Tip – Explain How Your Analysis Fits into the Ongoing Conversation I have had a difficult time situating the work within the existing literature . Reviewer 2 in 2010 critiqued my submission for not referencing relevant papers and particularly pressed me to reference relevant papers that had appeared at ICER . My initial response to this comment was righteous indignation ; perhaps the reviewer was upset that I had not referenced one of their publications . After years , I have a better understanding of this comment , and I feel a bit of sheepish - ness for my initial response . In submitting my paper to ICER , I was attempting to join an ongoing conversation . However , by omitting relevant work published at ICER , I appeared ill informed about the current state of the conversation . This was not a self - centered reviewer – this was a reviewer helping me to under - stand the norms of academic research , and I now appreciate it if reviewers point me to relevant work even if I had made the conscious decision to exclude it . Beyond including relevant references , the paper’s “Previous Research” section should highlight the gap in the extant literature that I am attempting to address and should summarize the extant literature in order to contextualize that gap and bring my reader into the conversation . I have had trouble applying this idea when I think I have a novel insight about the literature or when the lit - erature that inspired me to conduct the study does not actually relate to the contribution I am trying to make in the paper . For example , in my 2010 submis - sion , I thought I was particularly clever for sharing how state was central across different bodies of research : This section reviews a diverse set of work that helps emphasize the importance of state . The first category focuses on a reframing of prior misconceptions research with an emphasis on state . The second category focuses on researchers who either explicitly or implicitly argue for the 9781108496735ch21 - 31 _ p635 - 892 . indd 887 03 - Nov - 18 5 : 37 : 21 PM 888 888 LEWIS importance of state . The third category focuses on programming environ - ments that make state visible for novice programmers . ( Lewis , 2010 ) However , it probably is not that difficult to convince a reader that state is interesting . And these connections did not relate to my analysis beyond the fact that they were about state . In later versions , I cut these connections entirely . If I had kept them , they would probably be best placed in a discussion section . They could possibly fit into a previous research section if I did not repeat the mistake of omitting how the previous research actually motivates the current analysis . Similarly , in my master’s thesis , I foolishly included literature that motivated me in pursuing this line of work . Unrelated to the analysis or results , the abstract of my master’s thesis began , “The paper presents a critique of a line of computer science education research that focuses on identifying predictors of programming aptitude and assumes a static view of intelligence . ” My master’s thesis included basically all of the content from the paper I have been describing , but also included a diatribe about arguments claiming that some students could never learn CS . This frame from my master’s thesis still provides the underlying motivation for my work , but is utterly disconnected from the analytic work and research questions that I address . It seems silly now , but this previous research was connected for me , and it seemed intuitive that it should be included . I assume that I will continue to make this mistake and hope that I can remember to remove it in later drafts . 4 . 7 Tip – Tie the Motivation to the Analysis Similar to my instinct to include irrelevant previous literature , I have had diffi - culty describing the gap in the literature that I am attempting to address . Since qualitative methods do not progress along a prescriptive path , it is not possible to target a narrow gap in the research . Instead , the contribution of the work is emergent . The work forms a picture with many possible connections to the existing literature . Now I see the need to more narrowly motivate the work . Excerpts from the abstracts of each of my ICER submissions show how I was attempting to motivate or otherwise frame the work . I began with an absurdly huge framing , and in each submission refined the focus . The abstract for my first submission to ICER started to narrow in on the construct of state : “State is a technical computer science term for the current environment of a computer program . I argue that the concept of state is as diffi - cult to learn and central to programming as the concept of force within physics education . ” This is unrelated to the analysis , and the second sentence ends with a bold and unsupported claim . What support do I have for it ? None . It is a manifestation of the connections I was starting to make between the coordin - ation class of force and my developing ideas of state as a coordination class . However , that theoretical connection did not come close to providing support for the bold claim I made . The absurdity of this unsupported claim did not 9781108496735ch21 - 31 _ p635 - 892 . indd 888 03 - Nov - 18 5 : 37 : 21 PM A Case Study of Qualitative Methods 889 889 appear to be lost on my reviewers . I only mentioned the argument about force in the abstract , which I do not recommend , but because of the absurdity of this claim , I probably mitigated some of the damage . The abstract for my second submission to ICER continued to narrow my focus , and I wisely opted to not lead with an unsupported claim : “To better understand the challenges in learning to program , we conducted a qualitative analysis of young students engaged in debugging computer programs they had written in Scratch . ” This goal of “understand [ ing ] the challenges in learning to program” is certainly central to the work . However , this is still far removed from the analytic work of the paper . This likely motivates the majority of CS educa - tion research , but is not specific to my project or work . The abstract for my third submission to ICER further narrowed in on debug - ging : “To develop a model of students’ debugging processes , we conducted a qualitative analysis of young students engaged in debugging computer programs they had written in Scratch . ” This is almost identical to the previous submis - sion , except that my goal “To better understand the challenges in learning to program” became “To develop a model of students’ debugging processes . ” My analysis is about understanding Kevin’s debugging behavior . That is certainly a component of his learning to program , but the narrower focus seems to connect directly to the analysis , and yet is still broad enough to be perceived as generally important . In the future , I will probably only refine my understanding of my primary contribution at the end , but hope to remember to move it to the begin - ning of the paper . 4 . 8 Tip – Make the Implications for Teaching Explicit I think that a strength and a weakness of the CS education research community is that many of us are also computing educators . This is a strength because com - puting educators can readily evaluate claims based upon their own experience , and my reviewers frequently noted that the importance of state was clear to them from their teaching . This is a weakness because , as computing educators , we need to make decisions about what and how to teach , and we might devalue the incremental work of education research . Education research is frequently incremental and may sometimes require years or decades to mature to the point of having clear educational implications . For those of us who are also CS educators , this may be exceptionally frustrating , but it is likely important to accept this in order to make progress in the field . While I value the incremental work of computing education , in response to the audience of computing educators , of which I am a member , I try to expli - citly connect to educators’ intuitions and provide concrete recommendations . Without providing recommendations , readers might believe that the research simply documents a deficiency of students . I believe that documenting students’ difficulties is productive for improving pedagogy . However , I believe that the responsibility for change rests with the educators and educational institutions . It is far too tempting to write students off as “bad students” without finding 9781108496735ch21 - 31 _ p635 - 892 . indd 889 03 - Nov - 18 5 : 37 : 21 PM 890 890 LEWIS ways that we can change the structures in small and large ways to support their success . The recommendations from my research are essentially always tentative , but by making my tentative recommendations explicit , I can hopefully prevent some misunderstandings that we can let ourselves off the hook by blaming our students . As an educator , I am frequently making small tweaks to my teaching , and if they are really just small tweaks , the risk of doing so before there is research support is probably low . 5 Conclusion Your mileage with these tips may vary . Some of them are likely very gen - eral and would be applicable for qualitative , quantitative , and mixed - methods studies . It seems like “check and organize your data as you go” might be uni - versally necessary . However , these tips came from particular challenges that I have faced in using and writing about qualitative methods . I hope that this will motivate me to return to these tips as a checklist throughout my later projects . I imagine that I might be the person who benefits most from the existence of this chapter , but I hope that it provides some benefit for others . Beyond the content of the tips , I hope that this chapter helps you see how much is hidden in the unpublished backstories of research papers . Because these stories are unpublished , many people – particularly while pursuing a PhD – come to falsely believe that they are alone in wrestling with the messiness of research and the disappointment of rejection . Acknowledgments This chapter was originally a joint venture between myself and Josh Tenenberg . Josh provided the encouragement and coaching to help me recognize and articulate these tips . I honestly couldn’t have done it without that support ! Thanks , Josh ! In addition to the helpful comments of the editors , I appreciate that Michael Clancy , Michael Loui , Mark Guzdial , Sebastian Dziallas , Shriram Krishnamurthi , Kathi Fisler , and Andy Ko provided helpful comments and feedback ! References Bourdieu , P . ( 1992 ) . The practice of reflexive sociology ( The Paris Workshop ) . In P . Bourdieu & L . J . D . Wacquant ( Eds . ) , An Invitation to Reflexive Sociology ( pp . 216 – 260 ) . Chicago , IL : Chicago University Press . diSessa , A . A . , & Sherin , B . L . ( 1998 ) . What changes in conceptual change ? International Journal of Science Education , 20 ( 10 ) , 1155 – 1191 . 9781108496735ch21 - 31 _ p635 - 892 . indd 890 03 - Nov - 18 5 : 37 : 21 PM A Case Study of Qualitative Methods 891 891 Haas , G . ( n . d . ) BFOIT Introduction to Computer Programming . Retrieved from http : / / guyhaas . com / bfoit / itp / Iteration . html # more _ projects Lewis , C . M . ( 2010 ) . How programming environment shapes perception , learning and goals : Logo vs . Scratch . In Proceedings of the 41st ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education ( pp . 346 – 350 ) . New York : ACM Press . Lewis , C . M . ( 2012a ) . The importance of students’ attention to program state : A case study of debugging behavior . In Proceedings of the International Computing Education Research Conference ( ICER 2012 ) ( pp . 127 – 134 ) . New York : ACM Press . Lewis , C . M . ( 2012b ) . Applications of Out - of - Domain Knowledge in Students’ Reasoning about Computer Program State ( PhD dissertation ) . University of California , Berkeley . Lewis , C . M . , Anderson , R . E . , & Yasuhara , K . ( 2016 ) . I don’t code all day : Fitting in computer science when the stereotypes don’t fit . In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on International Computing Education Research ( ICER ‘16 ) ( pp . 23 – 32 ) . New York : ACM Press . Lewis , C . M . , & Shah , N . ( 2015 ) . How equity and inequity can emerge in pair pro - gramming . In Proceedings of the International Computing Education Research Conference ( ICER 2015 ) ( pp . 41 – 50 ) . New York : ACM Press . Lewis , C . M . , Yasuhara , K . , & Anderson , R . E . ( 2011 ) . Deciding to major in com - puter science : A grounded theory of students ' self - assessment of ability . In Proceedings of the Seventh International Workshop on Computing Education Research ( pp . 3 – 10 ) . New York : ACM Press . Roth , W . - M . ( 2006 ) . Textbooks on qualitative research and method / methodology : Toward a praxis of method . Forum : Qualitative Social Research , 7 ( 1 ) , 11 . Yin , R . K . ( 2013 ) . Case Study Research : Design and Methods , 5th edn . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage Publications . 9781108496735ch21 - 31 _ p635 - 892 . indd 891 03 - Nov - 18 5 : 37 : 21 PM 892 9781108496735ch21 - 31 _ p635 - 892 . indd 892 03 - Nov - 18 5 : 37 : 21 PM