Tardigrades exhibit robust inter - limb coordination across walking speeds Jasmine A Nirody 1 , 2 , Lisset A . Duran 3 , Deborah Johnston , and Daniel J . Cohen 4 1 Center for Studies in Physics and Biology , Rockefeller University , New York , NY 10065 USA 2 All Souls College , University of Oxford , Oxford OX1 4AL United Kingdom 3 Department of Molecular Biology , Princeton University , Princeton , NJ 08540 USA 4 Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering , Princeton University , Princeton , NJ 08540 USA March 20 , 2021 Abstract Tardigrades must negotiate heterogeneous , ﬂuctuating environments , and accordingly utilize locomotive strategies capable of dealing with variable terrain . We analyze the kinematics and inter - leg coordination of freely walking tardigrades ( species : Hypsibius dujardini ) . We ﬁnd that tardigrade walking replicates several key features of walking in insects despite disparities in size , skeleton , and habitat . To test the eﬀect of environmental changes on tardigrade locomotor con - trol circuits , we measure kinematics and inter - leg coordination during walking on two substrates of diﬀerent stiﬀnesses . We ﬁnd that the phase oﬀset between contralateral leg pairs is ﬂexible , while ipsilateral coordination is preserved across environmental conditions . This mirrors similar results in insects and crustaceans . We propose that these functional similarities in walking co - ordination between tardigrades and arthropods is either due to a generalized locomotor control circuit common to panarthropods , or to independent convergence onto an optimal strategy for robust multi - legged control in small animals with simple circuitry . Our results highlight the value of tardigrades as a comparative system towards understanding the mechanisms – neural and / or mechanical – underlying coordination in panarthropod locomotion . The vast majority of animals need to move to survive . Tardigrades , though famed for their slow and unwieldy gait , are no exception . One of the smallest legged animals , tardigrades rely on their locomotive abilities to escape from predators , and to ﬁnd food and mates [ 22 , 26 ] . The ﬁrst observations of tardigrades in the 18th century centered around their distinctive gait : they were described , in quick succession , as ‘water bears’ [ 11 ] and ‘Il tardigrado’ [ 29 ] due to their slow , lum - bering style of walking . Beyond these initial characterizations , however , not much is known about how tardigrades move about in their environment . In more recent years , their ability to with - stand environmental extremes by entering a dormant state called a ‘tun’ has garnered signiﬁcant attention [ 3 , 16 , 14 ] . But even this famed resilience relies on locomotion : tun formation requires slow and controlled dehydration , making moving in dramatically ﬂuctuating micro - environments an important behavioral factor in successful dehydration and rehydration [ 4 ] . Unlike other fundamental rhythmic motor programs ( e . g . , heartbeat or respiration ) , locomotion needs to be ﬂexible and responsive to environmental stimuli . Terrestrial tardigrades in particular must traverse a complicated three - dimensional environment comprising a wide range of terrain types . Furthermore , diﬀerent behavioral goals call for diﬀerent walking speeds , ranging from slow exploratory walking to swift running for escape maneuvers [ 9 ] . As such , locomotor output must be 1 tuned to both speed and substrate . Such tuning can be achieved via adjusting the kinematics of single legs ( e . g . , stepping frequency or step length ) , but often also results in changes in temporal coordination between legs . These changes can occur in the form of transitions between discrete gaits : for instance , a horse switches from walking to trotting to galloping as it goes from slow to intermediate to high speeds [ 1 , 2 ] . Alternatively , stepping patterns can lie along a continuum of inter - leg coordination patterns ( ICPs ) . This may indicate that a single control circuit may suﬃce to generate all observed ICPs – that is , there need not be separate dedicated controllers for each ‘gait’ . Excitingly , recent analyses have suggested the existence of such a continuum in walking insects [ 20 , 35 , 30 , 8 ] . Are there fundamental principles behind the generation of such a continuum that can be gen - eralized beyond insects to describe walking in other legged panarthropods ? Morphological simi - larities in the underlying neural structure have been noted across Panarthropoda ( Arthropoda + Tardigrada ) , supporting a sister - group relationship between these taxa [ 36 ] . However , given the large disparities in size , skeletal morphology , and environment between arthropods and tardigrades , it is unclear if these morphological parallels translate to similarities in whole - organism performance between tardigrades and arthropods . For instance , tardigrades , with body lengths down to just several hundred microns , exist at a scale where most other organisms have opted for locomotive modes other than walking . To what extent does their scale and aquatic environment aﬀect their inter - leg coordination and biomechanical strategy in comparison to larger legged organisms ? Furthermore , little is known about how the control of locomotion in soft - bodied animals diﬀers from those with rigid skeletons . Most soft animals are legless ( e . g . , nematodes or the larval stages of insects like Drosophila ) , and the lack of discrete contact points with the substrate makes it diﬃcult to identify changes in the timing of ground interactions [ 32 ] . Deeper evaluation in Onychophorans ( velvet worms ) [ 23 ] , and in the larval stages of holometabolous insect orders which have developed leg - like appendages called ‘prolegs’ on their abdomens ( e . g . , beetles [ 38 ] ; sawﬂies , moths and butterﬂies [ 15 , 31 , 21 ] ) , has indicated that soft - bodied locomotion is less regular than that observed in jointed arthropods . It is unclear if this increased variability is due to diﬀerences in underlying neural connectivity , or is simply a consequence of increased degrees of freedom associated with controlling lobopodal locomotion . Here , we utilize the framework developed from studies of insect walking to compare the biome - chanical strategies used by the eutardigrade Hypsibius dujardini with those described in arthropods . Is walking in tardigrades described by a single continuum of ICPs ? What is the relationship be - tween the structure of the tardigrade neural system and organismal function during locomotion ? We characterize the kinematics of how tardigrades generate a range of forward walking speeds , as well as how their strategies adjust given variation in environmental properties like substrate stiﬀ - ness . Surprisingly , we ﬁnd marked similarities in coordination between tardigrades and arthropods during spontaneous planar walking [ 6 , 10 , 20 , 35 , 30 , 8 ] , suggesting that either ( 1 ) there exists a common circuit for the control of forward walking in panarthropods ; or ( 2 ) that tardigrades and arthropods independently converged upon a similar set of coordination strategies for locomotion despite striking diﬀerences in size , skeletal morphology , and ecology . Our ﬁndings emphasize the value of the tardigrade as a compelling comparative system to study the evolution and mechanisms of legged locomotion . Additionally , characterizing the similarities and diﬀerences between tardi - grade locomotion and that of other legged organisms may also inform the development of both soft robotics and micro - scale technologies . 2 b Representative gait cycle d Canonical hexapod gaits stance 0 . 00 s 0 . 28 s 0 . 64 s 0 . 96 s 100 μ m R3 L3 R2 L2 L1 R1 c Averaged footfall diagram a Body plan L1 AEP L3 PEP R1 AEP R2 AEP swing stance start swing start L4 R4 L e g tripod swing tetrapod ( r ) wave gait tripod : 3 % tetrapod : 31 % wave gait : 10 % unclassified : 56 % template matching body length : 350 . 40 ± 46 . 04 μ m Figure 1 : Overview of tardigrade kinematics . ( a ) Tardigrade body plan . Colored arrows denote inter - leg relationships as in the podogram shown in ( c ) . Note that kinematic data for the reduced back legs ( L4 , R4 ) are not shown here ( see Supplementary Information ) . Mean ± s . d . body length ( measured from the tip of the nose to the attachment of the back leg pair ) is provided for animals pooled between 50 kPa ( N = 23 ) and 10 kPa ( N = 20 ) conditions . ( b ) An exemplary stepping cycle comprising one swing and stance phase for all legs . ( c ) Podogram shows the average temporal sequence of ground contacts for legs L1 - L3 ( left , anterior to posterior ) and R1 - R3 ( right , anterior to posterior ) . Values are normalized to cycle period of the left front leg L1 , shown within the gray shaded region , [ 0 . 0 - 1 . 0 ] . Extrapolated sequences for previous [ - 0 . 5 , 0 ) and subsequent ( 1 , 1 . 5 ] periods are shown outside the shaded area . A total of n = 122 cycles ( here , we deﬁne ‘cycle’ as a sequence containing one full stride from each leg ) from N = 23 animals are shown . Mean ± s . d . is depicted ; s . d . indicated by red lines . Colored arrows highlight posterior - to - anterior propagation of ipsilateral swing events ; color scheme for legs is as shown in tardigrade schematic drawing in ( a ) . ( d ) Schematic of canonical hexapod stepping patterns : tripod , tetrapod , and wave gait . In tripod , three limbs swing simultaneously ; in tetrapod , two limbs swing simultaneously ; and in ( pentapodal ) wave gait each limb swings individually . The transitions between conﬁgurations are shown to reﬂect the posterior - to - anterior propagation of ipsilateral swing events ( as in ( c ) ) . Gait template matching , a technique which classiﬁes each stride to a ‘canonical’ pattern of phase oﬀsets for swing initiations ( see Table S1 ) , fails to classify 56 % of strides . This is largely because while the majority of strides are ‘tetrapodal’ , limbs that are expected to swing simultaneously instead swing with a slight temporal oﬀset so that anti - phase contralateral coordination is maintained . 3 Kinematic parameters and forward speed b Cycle period vs forward speed a Step amplitude vs forward speed Walking speed ( μ m / s ) Walking speed ( μ m / s ) c Swing / stance vs forward speed Walking speed ( μ m / s ) Figure 2 : Leg stepping parameters relative to forward speed . Each point represents a stride ( stance + swing ) for an individual leg , n = 989 strides are shown . Data for the ﬁrst three leg pairs are pooled , individual ﬁts for each leg pair are provided in Figure S1 . Stride length ( a ) smoothly increases and period ( b ) smoothly decreases with walking speed , suggesting that tardigrades modulate both stride length and stepping frequency to increase forward speed . ( c ) Each step is composed of a swing ( leg lifted ) and stance ( leg on the ground ) period ; swing duration stays roughly constant with speed , while stance duration is modulated , decreasing with increasing speed . Results Overview of tardigrade leg and claw morphology . We quantify spontaneous planar walking in the eutardigrade Hypsibius dujardini ( see Materials and Methods ) . All known tardigrade species have four pairs of legs , with the fourth leg pair oriented posteriorly ( Fig . 1a ) . Structural studies have demonstrated that while all four legs are similar in structure and show serial homologies , the number of leg muscles decreases moving anterior to posterior , with the fourth leg pair having the fewest and most divergent musculature [ 13 ] . Several kinematic parameters of the fourth leg pair show larger variation and lower dependence on walking speed relative to that in the ﬁrst three pairs ( Fig . S1 - S3 ) . This is in accordance with the hypothesis that the posterior legs of tardigrades are used primarily for grasping rather than propulsion in forward locomotion [ 25 ] . Despite observations of a monotonic decrease in number and monotonic increase in branching of musculature from the anterior to posterior segments in tardigrades [ 13 ] , we ﬁnd no signiﬁcant diﬀerences in kinematic parameters or stepping precision among the ﬁrst three leg pairs , suggesting that the ﬁrst three leg pairs function equivalently for forward planar walking . We observe that tardigrades had considerable diﬃculty achieving persistent locomotion on stan - dard , polished glass slides ( Video S1 ) . Without claw engagement , animals appear unable to suc - cessfully move forward ; we ﬁnd a higher probability of productive directed movement on roughened glass substrates . Hence , to more eﬀectively capture their native environment and support claw - ground engagement , we perform all core characterizations on soft , polyacrylimide gels engineered to have a stiﬀness of 50 kPa where we could clearly observe claw engagement causing gel deformation ( Video S2 - S3 ; Fig . S4 ) . Tardigrade kinematics across walking speeds . In our experiments , tardigrades walk with an average speed of 163 . 0 ± 49 . 9 µ m / s ( 0 . 48 ± 0 . 11 body lengths / s ; range : 79 . 1 - 263 . 5 µ m / s ) . To initially describe the walking behavior , we examine the relationship between several kinematic 4 1 2 3 4 5 1 Drosophila melanogaster 2 Manduca sexta ( larvae ) Courtesy of B . Trimmer 3 4 5 Cataglyphis fortis Pfeffer et al . , 2016 Mendes et al . , 2013 DeAngelis et al . , 2019 Carausius morosus Dallman et al . , 2019 Cupiennius salei Weihmann , 2013 D u t y F a c t o r Speed ( mm / s ) Figure 3 : Comparison of duty factor vs forward speed across Panarthropoda . Tardigrades maintain a relatively constant duty factor across all observed forward walking speeds ; we ﬁnd a weak negative correlation between duty factor and walking speed ( ρ = − 0 . 33 , p < 0 . 001 ) . As in Fig . 2 , each point represents a stride for a single leg ; a total of n = 989 strides are shown . Inset ﬁgure shows the duty factor vs walking speed relationship for several arthropod species during slow walking . All species except the stick insect ( inset gray points , data from [ 7 ] ) show signiﬁcant inverse relationships between forward speed and duty factor . Linear regression ﬁts are shown as solid lines alongside 95 % conﬁdence intervals ; ﬁts for which p > 0 . 05 are shown as dotted lines . parameters and speed ( Fig . 2 and Fig . S1 ) . A stride for each leg comprises a ‘swing’ phase , in which the leg is lifted and takes a step , and a ‘stance’ phase , in which the leg is in contact with the ground . Step amplitude , deﬁned as the distance between the posterior extreme position ( PEP ) measured at lift - oﬀ of a leg at the start of a swing and the anterior extreme position ( AEP ) measured at touch - down of the same leg at the end of swing , increases with forward walking speed ( Fig . 2a ) . Stride period decreases with walking speed , plateauing at walking speeds of approximately v > 100 µ m / s ( Fig . 2b ) . As speed increases , stance duration is modulated strongly while swing duration remains relatively constant ( Fig . 2c ) . Both stance duration and stride period show a hyperbolic relationship with speed , as observed in insects ( Drosophila [ 35 ] ; stick insect Carausius morosus [ 7 ] ; desert ant Cataglyphyis fortis [ 33 ] ) . In line with studies in arthropods , we ﬁnd that swing duration is coordinated with stride period ( ρ = 0 . 54 , p < 0 . 001 ) . This relative modulation is cleanly characterized by changes in the duty factor , the proportion of a gait cycle spent in stance phase . Duty factor changes smoothly with walking speed across the majority of arthropods , which is consistent with observations that arthropod stepping patterns lie along a continuum . Tardigrades , like all arthropod species surveyed , show a smooth relationship between duty factor and forward walking speed ( Fig . 3 ) , suggesting that they similarly do not display discrete gaits but continuously transition between ICPs . Faster walking speeds generally result in stepping patterns with lower duty factors – i . e . , legs spend proportionally less time on the ground the faster the animal is moving . Species that do not utilize a wide range of stepping 5 patterns therefore do not show signiﬁcant changes in duty factor over observed speeds . For instance , the adult stick insect C . morosus is a slow , careful walker and overwhelmingly favors the stable tetrapodal coordination ( in which four legs are kept on the ground at any given time ) , maintaining a near - constant duty factor across its small range of natural walking speeds ( Fig . 3 inset , purple ) . The tardigrade H . dujardini , which has to navigate similarly complex terrain ( albeit at a very diﬀerent length scale ) , displays a relatively weak correlation between duty factor and speed in ( ρ = − 0 . 33 , p < 0 . 001 ) . This may suggest that living in and moving through variable environments results in a preference for a consistent , stable stepping pattern over the ability to walk at a wide range of speeds . Smooth transitions between stepping patterns . As previously noted , stepping patterns in hexapods are often grouped into three canonical ‘gaits’ ( Fig . 1d ) . In tripod gait , two sets of three limbs swing together ; in tetrapod gait , three groups of two limbs swing together ; in wave gait , each limb swings alone [ 35 ] . Our experiments show that H . dujardini primarily prefer a tetrapodal stepping pattern across speeds ; an exemplary gait cycle is shown in ( Fig . 1b ) . This is consistent with our ﬁnding that tardigrade duty factor maintains the expected value for tetrapodal coordination ( df = 0 . 67 ) at all observed speeds ( Fig . 3 ) . As previously mentioned , there is mounting evidence that stepping patterns in insects ( and perhaps , more generally ) do not correspond to distinct gaits , but instead form a speed - dependent continuum of inter - leg coordination patterns ( ICPs ) [ 8 , 30 , 35 ] . Tardigrades , similarly , do not ad - here cleanly prescribed canonical gaits . Classiﬁcation using gait template matching results in 56 % of tardigrade strides remaining ‘unclassiﬁed’ and non - canonical , even after allowing for behavioral variance and tracking discrepancies ( Fig . 1d ) . In accordance with our initial observations , ap - proximately 70 % of classiﬁed strides are suﬃciently aligned with ‘idealized’ tetrapod coordination ( Fig . 1d ; see Materials and Methods ) ; this alignment increases with walking speed ( Fig . S5 ) . To determine how this spectrum of gaits arises , we considered that studies in Drosophila have indicated that tuning a single parameter , stance duration , can generate the spectrum of observed walking patterns [ 8 ] . Here , we ﬁnd that tardigrades show a smooth , continuous relationship in both stance duration ( Fig . 2c ) and duty factor ( Fig . 3 ) with speed , supporting our hypothesized lack of distinct gaits , and lack of discrete transitions between them . Simple , local coordination rules explain tardigrade ICPs . To better understand what kind of controller is responsible for tardigrade locomotion patterns , we turn to studies demonstrating that a small set of simple ‘coordination rules’ is suﬃcient to generate the continuum of observed insect ICPs during planar walking [ 24 ] . These locally - distributed rules describe how a leg aﬀects the likelihood of the initiation of a swing event in an anterior or contralateral neighboring leg [ 6 , 10 ] . Rule 1 states that a leg’s stance - to - swing transition is suppressed while its neighbor is in swing , while Rule 2 states that the likelihood of lift - oﬀ increases once the neighboring leg touches down . Both rules have been shown to be stronger between ipsilateral rather than between contralateral leg pairs [ 10 , 24 ] . A unifying hypothesis for the observed continuum of stepping patterns [ 8 ] and decentralized control of insect walking [ 10 , 24 ] is rooted in the structure of the arthropod nervous system . As anatomical studies have highlighted the similarities between the tardigrade and arthropod nervous systems [ 19 , 36 ] , we hypothesize that stepping patterns in tardigrades should exemplify several key attributes of arthropod ICPs . Each pair of legs – front , middle , and hind leg pairs in arthropods – is controlled by its own ganglion of the ventral nerve cord ( VNC ) , each of which consists of two 6 L1 L2 L3 R1 R2 R3 + + + + - L1 L2 L3 R1 R2 R3 - - - a Suppression of simulateous ipsilateral swings Proportion of phase after swing start ( before anterior ipsilateral leg swing ) P r o b a b i l i t y P r o b a b i l i t y b Initiation of anterior swing at touch - down avg duration of swing Inter - leg ‘rules’ : temporal coordination P r o b a b i l i t y Proportion of phase after stance start ( before anterior ipsilateral leg swing ) c Observed back - to - front wave of swing initiation d Contralateral vs ipsilateral phases tetrapod p d f Figure 4 : Temporal coordination between ipsilateral leg pairs . Plots represent data pooled from all leg pairs ; a total of n = 654 strides are shown . Insets show pairwise inter - leg relationships , with color scheme as demarcated by the arrows on tardigrade schematics . Cumulative distribution functions ( CDFs ) show that leg swings are ( a ) suppressed immediately following the swing initiation of the posterior ipsilateral neighbor and ( b ) initiated after the posterior ipsilateral leg has touched down into stance . ( c ) Histogram and probability density of observed phase shift between ipsilateral legs show that tardigrades maintain a posterior - to - anterior wave with a phase diﬀerence φ I = 13 between swing onsets . Similar observations have been made in several arthropods [ 6 , 35 , 30 ] . Pairwise comparison using the Kolmogorov - Smirnov test found no signiﬁcant diﬀerences between any leg pairs , after controlling for multiple testing . ( d ) Joint distribution of the phase diﬀerence between contralateral ( φ C ) and ipsilateral ( φ I ) leg pairs . Preferred coordination shows characteristic phase diﬀerences diﬀerent from those observed in ‘idealized’ tetrapod . Notably , while tardigrades prefer the expected φ I = 13 , contralateral leg pairs display anti - phase coordination φ C = 12 . right and left hemi - ganglia , which control the corresponding legs . The three segmental ganglia are linked by longitudinal connectives [ 19 ] . A simple hypothesis consists of mutual inhibitory coupling between each right and left hemi - ganglion and a posterior - to - anterior inhibitory coupling between the longitudinal commissures connecting ipsilateral ganglia [ 8 ] . This is analogous to Rule 1 ( Fig . 4a and Fig . S6c ) . Indeed , our analysis of inter - leg coordination compellingly suggests that both Rule 7 1 and Rule 2 are active between ipsilateral leg pairs in tardigrades . In accordance with Rule 1 , our data show that the likelihood of a swing initiation is nearly zero after its posterior ipsilateral neighbor lifts oﬀ ( Fig . 4a and Fig . S6c ) . This likelihood sharply rises after the time since its posterior ipsilateral neighbor’s swing initiation surpasses the sample average swing duration (cid:104) t swing (cid:105) = 0 . 18 ( normalized to one cycle length ) . To check compliance with Rule 2 , we examine the likelihood of a leg lifting oﬀ into swing phase after its posterior ipsilateral neighbor completes its swing and touches down ( Fig . 4b ) . As predicted , we ﬁnd that this probability rises sharply immediately after touch down of the ipsilaterally posterior leg . Compliance with these rules in tardigrades results in a back - to - front wave of swing initiations across walking speeds ( Fig . 1c ) , a pattern observed in a broad range of arthropod taxa [ 6 , 10 , 20 , 35 , 30 , 8 ] . The average ipsilateral oﬀset in our data , φ I = 0 . 36 ± 0 . 17 , is approximately as predicted for tetrapod leg coordination patterns ( ipsilateral phase oﬀset for ‘ideal’ tetrapod : φ I = 13 ) . Phase oﬀsets are equivalent between all ipsilateral leg pairs ( Fig . 4c ) , suggesting a similar role for all three sets of legs in forward planar walking . Leg pairs maintain this oﬀset across walking speeds ; coordination is more variable at very low speeds , as was found in previous studies [ 35 , 8 ] . Inter - leg coupling in the context of these rules is signiﬁcantly weaker ( if active at all ) between contralateral leg pairs ( Fig . S6c ) . Our data ﬁnds that all contralateral leg pairs show an average anti - phase preference . Such a value may arise from a bimodal distribution with twin peaks at φ C = 13 and φ C = 23 , as might be expected from the two idealized tetrapod patterns ( Fig . 1d ) . However , we ﬁnd contralateral phase diﬀerences to be normally distributed about 0 . 5 ( Fig . 4d and Fig . S6b ) . This relationship arises from a slight cross - body oﬀset in swing initiations , such that limbs that would be expected to swing simultaneously are slightly oﬀset in their liftoﬀ time . Interestingly , previous work in Drosophila has also reported anti - phase contralateral coordination across forward walking speeds [ 35 , 30 , 8 ] ; though it has not yet been explicitly tested , this pattern may be common to tetrapod - like stepping patterns across arthropods . Changes in limb kinematics and ICPs with substrate stiﬀness . Natural terrain is rarely homogeneous , and legged animals often need to cope with environmental inconsistencies such as changes in substrate roughness [ 5 , 34 ] or stiﬀness [ 21 ] . These irregularities often constrain organismal performance , and can result in constraints on walking speed as well as changes in limb kinematics . Limnoterrestrial tardigrades , like H . dujardini , walk along soft , uneven plant matter . Having established earlier that claw engagement is essential for H . dujardini and that hard , ﬂat surfaces posed a particular challenge , we next explore the importance of substrate stiﬀness , hypothesizing that particularly soft substrates may pose problems to proper claw engagement [ 18 ] . To assess the role of stiﬀness , we compare tardigrade locomotion on our standard , 50 kPa gels to that on 10 kPa gels ( see Materials and Methods ) . Tardigrade walking speed on the soft gels decreases nearly two fold relative to performance on the stiﬀ gels ( 160 . 5 ± 57 . 8 µ m / s on the 50 kPa substrate vs 91 . 0 ± 32 . 0 µ m / s on the 10 kPa substrate ; see Fig . S4 ) . Because tardigrades do not always walk at steady speeds , we compare walking speed distributions on 50 kPa and 10 kPa substrates to rule out the apparent slower speed coming from an increase in stop - start motion . However , speeds on both substrates are distributed unimodally , suggesting that the change in walking speed with substrate stiﬀness is due to a shift towards lower preferred walking speeds rather than more frequent acceleration and deceleration . More speciﬁcally , the observed reduction in speed is achieved largely through changes in stride period rather than step length ; within each stride , the stance duration varies signiﬁcantly between conditions , while swing duration does not 8 Phase shift between ipsilateral leg pairs a n t i p h a s e i n - p h a s e a n t i p h a s e i n - p h a s e D e n s i t y Phase shift between posterior contralateral leg pair 10 kPa 50 kPa b Contra - vs ipsilateral phases at 10 kPa tetrapod c Inter - limb coupling vs substrate stiffness a Kinematic parameters with substrate stiffness 10 kPa 10 kPa 50 kPa 50 kPa Figure 5 : Eﬀects of substrate stiﬀness on walking kinematics and inter - leg coordination . ( a ) Tardigrades adjust period ( top right panel ) and stance duration ( bottom right panel ) with changes in substrate stiﬀness . Distributions for step amplitude ( top left panel ) and swing duration ( bottom left panel ) are largely unchanged between stiﬀness conditions . ( b ) Joint distribution of the phase diﬀerence between contralateral ( φ C ) and ipsilateral ( φ I ) leg pairs on the 10 kPa substrate . As on the 50 kPa substrate , tardigrades prefer the expected tetrapodal ipsilateral phase diﬀerence φ I ≈ 13 but display anti - phase contralateral coordination φ C ≈ 12 . Larger variance in ipsilateral phase is apparent than on the 50 kPa substrate . ( c ) Comparison of the marginal ipsilateral phase diﬀerence distributions on 50 kPa and 10 kPa substrate shows an additional peak at φ I = 23 on the 10 kPa substrate ( red ) . This arises because of transient in - phase stepping by the neighboring posterior leg pair ( bottom inset ) , deviating from the preferred anti - phase ( top inset ) . ( Fig . 5a ) . As such , higher duty factors are associated with stepping patterns on the 10 kPa substrate ( Table S2 ) , perhaps indicating greater locomotive eﬀort necessitating longer ground contact times . 9 We also explore how substrate stiﬀness modulated speciﬁc inter - leg control rules , and ﬁnd that inter - leg phase relationships are mostly robust to changes in substrate stiﬀness ( Fig . 5b ) . The preferred stepping patterns on the 10 kPa substrate maintain several key features to that observed on the 50 kPa substrate : ( 1 ) ipsilateral swing events proceed in a posterior - to - anterior fashion ; ( 2 ) adjacent ipsilateral legs show a preferred phase diﬀerence φ I ≈ 13 ; and ( 3 ) contralateral leg pairs show a preference for anti - phase coordination φ C ≈ 12 . However , we ﬁnd a smaller second peak in the distribution of ipsilateral phase diﬀerences at φ I ≈ 23 of strides taken on the 10 kPa substrate ( Fig . 5b , c ) . Closer analysis reveals that this second peak arises due to the posterior - most leg pair showing in - phase rather than anti - phase coordination ( Fig . 5c ) . These alternate stepping patterns arise when a leg pair steps in phase ( φ C = 0 ) , and consequently , the leg pair in front of it may either adopt an ( 1 ) in - phase contralateral coordination to maintain a constant ipsilateral phase diﬀerence φ I = 13 , or an ( 2 ) anti - phase contralateral coordination to ‘reset’ to the preferred tetrapod - like pattern , which leads to one side showing an ipsilateral diﬀerence of φ I = 13 and the other side showing a phase diﬀerence φ I = 23 . The latter strategy is preferred , with in - phase contralateral stepping patterns being largely transient ; however , we did observe rare instances of a sustained ‘galloping’ gait as would result from the former strategy ( Video S4 ) . Discussion In addition to their famed resilience under conditions of extreme stress , tardigrades also display a remarkable robustness in their day - to - day activities . Tardigrade morphology is strongly conserved across species that live in and move through a large range of habitats , including marine , freshwater , and limnoterrestrial environments . Here , we characterize how kinematics and inter - leg coordination in the limnoterrestrial tardigrade H . dujardini adapt to changes in walking speed and substrate properties . We ﬁnd that tardigrade stepping patterns change smoothly with walking speed , rather than displaying sharp transitions between discrete ‘gaits’ . Further , the observed patterns reproduce key features in the spectrum of ICPs characterized in various insect species , namely : ( 1 ) a posterior - to - anterior wave of ipsilateral swing initiations across all walking speeds ; and ( 2 ) a general preference for anti - phase coordination between contralateral legs . More generally , we ﬁnd that the observed spectrum of tardigrade inter - leg coordination patterns emerges naturally from surprisingly small set of local coordination rules derived from behavioral observations in insect species [ 10 ] . These functional parallels are particularly striking given the large disparities in size , skeletal morphology , and environmental between tardigrades and insects . Tardigrades are approximately 500 , 000 times smaller than stick insects , and yet ‘rules’ derived from behavioral studies in C . morusus suﬃciently and accurately describe walking patterns in H . dujardini [ 6 , 10 ] . Whether these commonalities arise from shared ancestral structures remains an exciting open question [ 36 , 19 , 27 ] . One hypothesis points to anatomic similarities in underlying neural circuitry . A simple model for locomotor control in insects was proposed based on studies in walking Drosophila , and is built upon the anatomy of the ventral nerve cord ( VNC ) . This model supposes a posterior - to - anterior inhibitory coupling between ipsilateral neuropil , as well as mutual inhibitory coupling between contralateral neuropil of the VNC [ 8 ] . There are various striking similarities in tardigrade and arthropod VNC structure : ( 1 ) the VNC comprises three segmented ganglia , each associated with a walking leg pair ; and ( 2 ) each ganglion is divided into left and right hemiganglia linked by contralateral projections . In contrast , the closely - related velvet worms – which , like tardigrades , are among the only extant 10 soft - bodied walkers – have two laterally - located non - segmented ganglia [ 36 , 19 ] . This disparity in underlying neuroanatomy may account for the diﬀerences between onychophoran gaits and those observed in tardigrades and arthropods [ 23 ] . As such , comparative analyses making use of VNC structure indicate a sister - grouping between tardigrades and arthropods [ 19 , 36 ] . It is an intriguing hypothesis that there may exist a common simple locomotor circuit underlying walking in panarthropod species , which has been modiﬁed along certain clades due to speciﬁc pres - sures on organismal performance ( e . g . , in - phase contralateral coordination in crayﬁsh swimmerets [ 37 ] ) . An example of one such modiﬁcation is the modulation of inter - or intra - segmental connec - tions in response to changes in the environment , e . g . , varying surface stiﬀness . The behavioral ﬂexibility observed in arthropod walking is partially ascribed to the modular nature of segmented body plans . Varying of substrate stiﬀness is likely salient for tardigrades because they lack a rigid skeleton , and accordingly may utilize a biomechanical strategy distinct from most adult insects that relies crucially on environmental stiﬀness [ 18 ] . Analyses in the soft - bodied hawk moth larvae found that Manduca sexta caterpillars did indeed sense changes in substrate stiﬀness and adjusted their stepping patterns to accommodate these changes [ 21 ] . Studies in several insect species suggest that ipsilateral ( inter - segmental ) synchronization dominates inter - leg coupling patterns , while con - tralateral ( intra - segmental ) coupling is adjustable [ 34 , 28 , 24 ] . Consistent with these observations , tardigrades show changes in their contralateral phase oﬀset but largely preserve ipsilateral coordi - nation on soft substrates . We observe both transient strides in which contralateral limbs step in phase , as well as occasional sustained in - phase contralateral coordination resulting in a ‘bounding’ or ‘galloping’ gait . Interestingly , several species of dung beetle in the genus Pachysoma have also been observed to maintain a galloping gait across shifting sands [ 28 ] . However , alternative analyses – including molecular analyses [ 17 ] and comparative studies of brain structure [ 27 ] – group onychophorans together with arthropods , an interpretation which suggests that functional analogues between tardigrade and arthropod walking have independently evolved . In this case , the similarities in underlying circuitry controlling tardigrade and insect walking may not be ancestral . It may be that the observed set of coordination patterns , which only require a single simple controller , might be preferable in small animals with small circuits for limb control [ 8 ] . Previous studies have also proposed that the magnitude and robustness of static stability during walking may aﬀect preference for certain ICPs [ 30 ] . It is unclear , however , whether stability or the need to stay upright would be a concern for tardigrades , which are far smaller than stick insects or even fruit ﬂies , and walk underwater with the assistance of buoyancy . Parallel convergence onto similar inter - leg coordination strategies by tardigrades and arthropods is intriguing given their varied ecology , disparities in size , and diﬀerence in skeletal structure between the two groups , and can provide signiﬁcant insight into general design principles for eﬃcient and robust control of multi - legged locomotion . A more deﬁnitive distinction between these scenarios will require deeper functional studies com - bined with molecular , phylogenetic , and anatomical analyses . We note that this work focuses on analyzing spontaneous walking in H . dujardini , and that our data is accordingly constrained both in number of species considered and in the range of walking speeds observed . Future work should expand upon both of these parameters , both by surveying walking dynamics across Tardigrada ( keeping in mind the wide ecological range of the phylum ) and by perturbation or manipulation experiments that may expand the observed range of walking speeds . Tardigrade walking also poses several fundamental mechanistic questions . Tardigrades are 11 among the smallest legged animals , and , given their ecological success , investigations into their biomechanical strategy provide valuable insight into the scaling of eﬃcient polypedal walking in various ecological conditions . For instance , the common preference for tetrapod - like coordination in both tardigrades and far larger species like the stick insect points to the selective importance of static stability in species that regularly navigate variable , three - dimensional terrain [ 12 , 10 ] . Simi - larly , the shift towards in - phase contralateral stepping on soft substrates in tardigrades is mirrored in the evolved ‘galloping’ gait of desert - dwelling beetles orders of magnitude larger in size [ 28 ] . This common strategy may reﬂect an energetic beneﬁt to in - phase contralateral coordination on unstable or shifting terrain that holds across a remarkably large range of length scales . Further - more , tardigrades are one of the only soft - bodied animals that walk using ‘true’ legs , which allows for cleaner characterization of coordination and kinematic strategy than is possible in soft animals that crawl without discrete ground contacts . To this end , our ﬁndings here highlight the value of tardigrades both as a comparative system towards understanding the mechanisms underlying coordination in panarthropod locomotion and as an organismal system uniquely positioned to in - form our understanding of the design and control of small , soft - bodied locomotive systems , from organisms to robots . Acknowledgments We thank Barry Trimmer for data on Manduca sexta larva kinematics and many helpful discussions . J . A . N . was supported by a James S . McDonnell Foundation Fellowship for Studying Complex Systems , and Fellowships from All Souls College at the University of Oxford and the Center for Studies in Physics and Biology at the Rockefeller University . D . J . T . thanks Princeton for a SEAS Innovation Grant from the Helen Shipley Hunt Fund . L . A . D . was supported by the Jonas Salk Award . References [ 1 ] RM Alexander . Optimization and gaits in the locomotion of vertebrates . Physiological Reviews , 69 ( 4 ) : 1199 – 1227 , 1989 . [ 2 ] RM Alexander and AS Jayes . A dynamic similarity hypothesis for the gaits of quadrupedal mammals . Journal of Zoology , 201 ( 1 ) : 135 – 152 , 1983 . [ 3 ] H Baumann . Die anabiose der tardigraden . Zool Jahrb , 45 : 501 – 556 , 1922 . [ 4 ] Thomas C Boothby , Hugo Tapia , Alexandra H Brozena , Samantha Piszkiewicz , Austin E Smith , Ilaria Giovannini , Lorena Rebecchi , Gary J Pielak , Doug Koshland , and Bob Gold - stein . Tardigrades use intrinsically disordered proteins to survive desiccation . Molecular Cell , 65 ( 6 ) : 975 – 984 , 2017 . [ 5 ] GT Clifton , D Holway , and N Gravish . Uneven substrates constrain walking speed in ants through modulation of stride frequency more than stride length . Royal Society Open Science , 7 ( 3 ) : 192068 , 2020 . 12 [ 6 ] Holk Cruse . What mechanisms coordinate leg movement in walking arthropods ? Trends in Neurosciences , 13 ( 1 ) : 15 – 21 , 1990 . [ 7 ] Chris J Dallmann , Volker D¨urr , and Josef Schmitz . Motor control of an insect leg during level and incline walking . Journal of Experimental Biology , 222 ( 7 ) , 2019 . [ 8 ] Brian D DeAngelis , Jacob A Zavatone - Veth , and Damon A Clark . The manifold structure of limb coordination in walking Drosophila . eLife , 8 : e46409 , 2019 . [ 9 ] Michael H Dickinson , Claire T Farley , Robert J Full , MAR Koehl , Rodger Kram , and Steven Lehman . How animals move : an integrative view . Science , 288 ( 5463 ) : 100 – 106 , 2000 . [ 10 ] Volker D¨urr , Josef Schmitz , and Holk Cruse . Behaviour - based modelling of hexapod locomo - tion : linking biology and technical application . Arthropod Structure & Development , 33 ( 3 ) : 237 – 250 , 2004 . [ 11 ] JAE Goeze . 2 . beobachtung : ¨Uber den kleinen wasserb¨aren . In Herrn Karl Bonnets Ab - handlungen aus der Insektologie , aus dem Franz¨osischen ¨ubersetzt und mit einigen Zus¨atzen herausgegeben von Joh . August Ephraim Goeze , Pastor bei der St . Blasii Kirche in Quedlin - burg , JJ Gebauers Wittwe and Joh Jacob Gebauer Halle , pages 367 – 355 . 1773 . [ 12 ] Martyna Grabowska , Elzbieta Godlewska , Joachim Schmidt , and Silvia Daun - Gruhn . Quadrupedal gaits in hexapod animals – inter - leg coordination in free - walking adult stick in - sects . Journal of Experimental Biology , 215 ( 24 ) : 4255 – 4266 , 2012 . [ 13 ] Vladimir Gross and Georg Mayer . Cellular morphology of leg musculature in the water bear Hypsibius exemplaris ( Tardigrada ) unravels serial homologies . Royal Society Open Science , 6 ( 10 ) : 191159 , 2019 . [ 14 ] Takuma Hashimoto , Daiki D Horikawa , Yuki Saito , Hirokazu Kuwahara , Hiroko Kozuka - Hata , Tadasu Shin , Yohei Minakuchi , Kazuko Ohishi , Ayuko Motoyama , Tomoyuki Aizu , et al . Extremotolerant tardigrade genome and improved radiotolerance of human cultured cells by tardigrade - unique protein . Nature Communications , 7 ( 1 ) : 1 – 14 , 2016 . [ 15 ] Howard Everest Hinton . On the structure , function , and distribution of the prolegs of the Panorpoidea , with a criticism of the Berlese - Imms theory . Transactions of the Royal Entomo - logical Society of London , 106 ( 13 ) : 455 – 540 , 1955 . [ 16 ] K Ingemar J¨onsson , Elke Rabbow , Ralph O Schill , Mats Harms - Ringdahl , and Petra Rettberg . Tardigrades survive exposure to space in low earth orbit . Current Biology , 18 ( 17 ) : R729 – R731 , 2008 . [ 17 ] Christopher E Laumer , Nicolas Bekkouche , Alexandra Kerbl , Freya Goetz , Ricardo C Neves , Martin V Sørensen , Reinhardt M Kristensen , Andreas Hejnol , Casey W Dunn , Gonzalo Giri - bet , et al . Spiralian phylogeny informs the evolution of microscopic lineages . Current Biology , 25 ( 15 ) : 2000 – 2006 , 2015 . [ 18 ] Huai Ti Lin and Barry A Trimmer . The substrate as a skeleton : ground reaction forces from a soft - bodied legged animal . Journal of Experimental Biology , 213 ( 7 ) : 1133 – 1142 , 2010 . 13 [ 19 ] Georg Mayer , Christine Martin , Jan R¨udiger , Susann Kauschke , Paul A Stevenson , Izabela Poprawa , Karin Hohberg , Ralph O Schill , Hans - Joachim Pﬂ¨uger , and Martin Schlegel . Selective neuronal staining in tardigrades and onychophorans provides insights into the evolution of segmental ganglia in panarthropods . BMC Evolutionary Biology , 13 ( 1 ) : 230 , 2013 . [ 20 ] C´esar S Mendes , Imre Bartos , Turgay Akay , Szabolcs M´arka , and Richard S Mann . Quan - tiﬁcation of gait parameters in freely walking wild type and sensory deprived Drosophila melanogaster . eLife , 2 : e00231 , 2013 . [ 21 ] Cinzia Metallo , Ritwika Mukherjee , and Barry A Trimmer . Stepping pattern changes in the caterpillar Manduca sexta : the eﬀects of orientation and substrate . Journal of Experimental Biology , 2020 . [ 22 ] Diane R Nelson . Current status of the Tardigrada : evolution and ecology . Integrative and Comparative Biology , 42 ( 3 ) : 652 – 659 , 2002 . [ 23 ] Ivo de Sena Oliveira , Andreas Kumerics , Henry Jahn , Mark M¨uller , Franz Pfeiﬀer , and Georg Mayer . Functional morphology of a lobopod : case study of an onychophoran leg . Royal Society Open Science , 6 ( 10 ) : 191200 , 2019 . [ 24 ] Malte Schilling and Holk Cruse . Decentralized control of insect walking : A simple neural net - work explains a wide range of behavioral and neurophysiological results . PLoS Computational Biology , 16 ( 4 ) : e1007804 , 2020 . [ 25 ] L Sch¨uttler and H Greven . Beobachtungen zur lokomotion von tardigraden . Acta Biologica Benrodis , 11 : 33 – 52 , 2000 . [ 26 ] Denis Shcherbakov , Ralph O Schill , Franz Br¨ummer , and Martin Blum . Movement behaviour and video tracking of Milnesium tardigradum Doy ` ere , 1840 ( Eutardigrada , Apochela ) . Con - tributions to Zoology , 79 ( 1 ) : 33 – 38 , 2010 . [ 27 ] Frank W Smith , Paul J Bartels , and Bob Goldstein . A hypothesis for the composition of the tardigrade brain and its implications for panarthropod brain evolution . Integrative and Comparative Biology , 57 ( 3 ) : 546 – 559 , 2017 . [ 28 ] Jochen Smolka , Marcus J Byrne , Clarke H Scholtz , and Marie Dacke . A new galloping gait in an insect . Current Biology , 23 ( 20 ) : R913 – R915 , 2013 . [ 29 ] L Spallanzani . Opuscoli di ﬁsica animale e vegetabile dell’abate spallanzani . Spallanzani L . Edizione nazionale delle opere di Lazzaro Spallanzani . Parte quarta , volume terzo . Modena : Mucchi , pages 15 – 109 , 1776 . [ 30 ] Nicholas S Szczecinski , Till Bockem¨uhl , Alexander S Chockley , and Ansgar B¨uschges . Static stability predicts the continuum of interleg coordination patterns in Drosophila . Journal of Experimental Biology , 221 ( 22 ) , 2018 . [ 31 ] Barry Trimmer and Jonathan Issberner . Kinematics of soft - bodied , legged locomotion in Manduca sexta larvae . The Biological Bulletin , 212 ( 2 ) : 130 – 142 , 2007 . [ 32 ] ER Trueman . The locomotion of soft - bodied animals . London : Edward Arnold , 200 , 1975 . 14 [ 33 ] Verena Wahl , Sarah E Pfeﬀer , and Matthias Wittlinger . Walking and running in the desert ant Cataglyphis fortis . Journal of Comparative Physiology A , 201 ( 6 ) : 645 – 656 , 2015 . [ 34 ] Tom Weihmann , Pierre - Guillaume Brun , and Emily Pycroft . Speed dependent phase shifts and gait changes in cockroaches running on substrates of diﬀerent slipperiness . Frontiers in Zoology , 14 ( 1 ) : 1 – 15 , 2017 . [ 35 ] Anne Wosnitza , Till Bockem¨uhl , Michael D¨ubbert , Henrike Scholz , and Ansgar B¨uschges . Inter - leg coordination in the control of walking speed in Drosophila . Journal of Experimental Biology , 216 ( 3 ) : 480 – 491 , 2013 . [ 36 ] Jie Yang , Javier Ortega - Hern´andez , Nicholas J Butterﬁeld , Yu Liu , George S Boyan , Jin - bo Hou , Tian Lan , and Xi - guang Zhang . Fuxianhuiid ventral nerve cord and early nervous system evolution in Panarthropoda . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 113 ( 11 ) : 2988 – 2993 , 2016 . [ 37 ] Calvin Zhang , Robert D Guy , Brian Mulloney , Qinghai Zhang , and Timothy J Lewis . Neural mechanism of optimal limb coordination in crustacean swimming . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 111 ( 38 ) : 13840 – 13845 , 2014 . [ 38 ] Daniel B Zurek , Stanislav N Gorb , and Dagmar Voigt . Locomotion and attachment of leaf bee - tle larvae Gastrophysa viridula ( Coleoptera , Chrysomelidae ) . Interface Focus , 5 ( 1 ) : 20140055 , 2015 . 15