R . P . Feynman , Phys . Rev . 76 , 769 1949 Space - Time Approach to Quantum Electrodynamics R . P . Feynman Department of Physics , Cornell University , Ithaca , New York ( Received May 9 , 1949 ) — — (cid:5) ♦ (cid:5) — — Reprinted in “Quantum Electrodynamics” , edited by Julian Schwinger — — (cid:5) ♦ (cid:5) — — Abstract In this paper two things are done . ( 1 ) It is shown that a consid - erable simpliﬁcation can be attained in writing down matrix elements for complex processes in electrodynamics . Further , a physical point of view is available which permits them to be written down directly for any speciﬁc problem . Being simply a restatement of conventional electrodynamics , however , the matrix elements diverge for complex processes . ( 2 ) Electrodynamics is modiﬁed by altering the interaction of electrons at short distances . All matrix elements are now ﬁnite , with the exception of those relating to problems of vacuum polariza - tion . The latter are evaluated in a manner suggested by Pauli and Bethe , which gives ﬁnite results for these matrices also . The only ef - fects sensitive to the modiﬁcation are changes in mass and charge of the electrons . Such changes could not be directly observed . Phenomena directly observable , are insensitive to the details of the modiﬁcation used ( except at extreme energies ) . For such phenomena , a limit can be taken as the range of the modiﬁcation goes to zero . The results then agree with those of Schwinger . A complete , unambiguous , and presumably consistent , method is therefore available for the calculation of all processes involving electrons and photons . 1 The simpliﬁcation in writing the expressions results from an em - phasis on the over - all space - time view resulting from a study of the solution of the equations of electrodynamics . The relation of this to the more conventional Hamiltonian point of view is discussed . It would be very diﬃcult Co make the modiﬁcation which is proposed if one in - sisted on having the equations in Hamiltonian form . The methods apply as well to charges obeying the Klein - Gordon equation , and to the various meson theories of nuclear forces . Illus - trative examples are given . Although a modiﬁcation like that used in electrodynamics can make all matrices ﬁnite for all of the meson theories , for some of the theories it is no longer true that all directly observable phenomena are insensitive to the details of the modiﬁcation used . The actual evaluation of integrals appearing in the matrix elements may be facilitated , in the simpler cases , by methods described in the appendix . This paper should be considered as a direct continuation of a preceding one 1 ( I ) in which the motion of electrons , neglecting interaction , was ana - lyzed , by dealing directly with the solution of the Hamiltonian diﬀerential equations . Here the same technique is applied to include interactions and in that way to express in simple terms the solution of problems in quantum electrodynamics . For most practical calculations in quantum electrodynamics the solution is ordinarily expressed in terms of a matrix element . The matrix is worked out as an expansion in powers of e 2 / ~ c , the successive terms corresponding to the inclusion of an increasing number of virtual quanta . It appears that a considerable simpliﬁcation can be achieved in writing down these matrix elements for complex processes . Furthermore , each term in the expansion can be written down and understood directly from a physical point of view , similar to the space - time view in I . It is the purpose of this paper to de - scribe how this may be done . We shall also discuss methods of handling the divergent integrals which appear in these matrix elements . The simpliﬁcation in the formulae results mainly from the fact that pre - vious methods unnecessarily separated into individual terms processes that were closely related physically . For example , in the exchange of a quantum between two electrons there were two terms depending on which electron emitted and which absorbed the quantum . Yet , in the virtual states consid - ered , timing relations are not signiﬁcant . Only the order of operators in the matrix must be maintained . We have seen ( I ) , that in addition , processes in 1 R . P . Feynman , Phys . Rev . 76 , 749 ( 1949 ) , hereafter called I . 2 which virtual pairs are produced can be combined with others in which only positive energy electrons are involved . Further , the eﬀects of longitudinal and transverse waves can be combined together . The separations previously made were on an unrelativistic basis ( reﬂected in the circumstance that ap - parently momentum but not energy is conserved in intermediate states ) . When the terms are combined and simpliﬁed , the relativistic invariance of the result is self - evident . We begin by discussing the solution in space and time of the Schr¨odinger equation for particles interacting instantaneously . The results are immedi - ately generalizable to delayed interactions of relativistic electrons and we represent in that way the laws of quantum electrodynamics . We can then see how the matrix element for any process can be written down directly . In particular , the self - energy expression is written down . So far , nothing has been done other than a restatement of conventional electrodynamics in other terms . Therefore , the self - energy diverges . A mod - iﬁcation 2 in interaction between charges is next made , and it is shown that the self - energy is made convergent and corresponds to a correction to the electron mass . After the mass correction is made , other real processes are ﬁnite and - insensitive to the “width” of the cut - oﬀ in the interaction . 3 Unfortunately , the modiﬁcation proposed is not completely satisfactory theoretically ( it leads to some diﬃculties of conservation of energy ) . It does , however , seem consistent and satisfactory to deﬁne the matrix element for all real processes as the limit of that computed here as the cut - oﬀ width goes to zero . A similar technique suggested by Pauli and by Bethe can be applied to problems of vacuum polarization ( resulting in a renormalization of charge ) but again a strict physical basis for the rules of convergence is not known . After mass and charge renormalization , the limit of zero cut - oﬀ width can be taken for all real processes . The results are then equivalent to those of Schwinger 4 who does not make explicit use of the convergence factors . The method of Schwinger is to identify the terms corresponding to correc - tions in mass and charge and , previous to their evaluation , to remove them from the expressions for real processes . This has the advantage of showing that the results can be strictly independent of particular cut - oﬀ methods . 2 For a discussion of this modiﬁcation in classical physics see R . P . Feynman , Phys . Rev . 74 939 ( 1948 ) , hereafter referred to as A . 3 A brief summary of the methods and results will be found in R . P . Feynman , Phys . Rev . 74 , 1430 ( 1948 ) , hereafter referred to as B . 4 J . Schwinger , Phys . Rev . 74 , 1439 ( 1948 ) , Phys . Rev . 75 , 651 ( 1949 ) . A proof of this equivalence is given by F . J . Dyson , Phys . Rev . 75 , 486 ( 1949 ) . 3 On the other hand , many of the properties of the integrals are analyzed using formal properties of invariant propagation functions . But one of the properties is that the integrals are inﬁnite and it is not clear to what extent this invalidates the demonstrations . A practical advantage of the present method is that ambiguities can be more easily resolved ; simply by direct calculation of the otherwise divergent integrals . Nevertheless , it is not at all clear that the convergence factors do not upset the physical consistency of the theory . Although in the limit the two methods agree , neither method appears to be thoroughly satisfactory theoretically . Nevertheless , it does appear that we now have available a complete and deﬁnite method for the calculation of physical processes to any order in quantum electrodynamics . Since we can write down the solution to any physical problem , we have a complete theory which could stand by itself . It will be theoretically in - complete , however , in two respects . First , although each term of increasing order in e 2 / ~ c can be written down it would be desirable to see some way of expressing things in ﬁnite form to all orders in e 2 / ~ c at once . Second , although it will be physically evident that the results obtained are equiv - alent to those obtained by conventional electrodynamics the mathematical proof of this is not included . Both of these limitations will be removed in a subsequent paper ( see also Dyson 5 ) . Brieﬂy the genesis of this theory was this . The conventional electrody - namics was expressed in the Lagrangian form of quantum mechanics de - scribed in the Reviews of Modern Physics . 5 The motion of the ﬁeld oscilla - tors could be integrated out ( as described in Section 13 of that paper ) , the result being an expression of the delayed interaction of the particles . Next the modiﬁcation of the delta - function interaction could be made directly from the analogy to the classical case . 6 This was still not complete because the Lagrangian method had been worked out in detail only for particles obeying the non - relativistic Schr¨dinger equation . It was then modiﬁed in accordance with the requirements of the Dirac equation and the phenomenon of pair creation . This was made easier by the reinterpretation of the theory of holes ( I ) . Finally for practical calculations the expressions were developed in a power series in e 2 / ~ c . It was apparent that each term in the series had a simple physical interpretation . Since the result was easier to understand than the derivation , it was thought best to publish the results ﬁrst in this 5 R . P . Feynman , Rev . Mod . Phys . 20 , 367 ( 1948 ) . The application to electrodynamics is described in detail by H . J . Groenewold , Koninklijke Nederlandsche Akademia van Weteschappen . Proceedings Vol . LII , 3 ( 226 ) 1949 . 6 For a discussion of this modiﬁcation in classical physics see R . P . Feynman , Phys . Rev . 74 939 ( 1948 ) , hereafter referred to as A . 4 paper . Considerable time has been spent to make these ﬁrst two papers as complete and as physically plausible as possible without relying on the La - grangian method , because it is not generally familiar . It is realized that such a description cannot carry the conviction of truth which would accompany the derivation . On the other hand , in the interest of keeping simple things simple the derivation will appear in a separate paper . The possible application of these methods to the various meson theories is discussed brieﬂy . The formulas corresponding to a charge particle of zero spin moving in accordance with the Klein Gordon equation are also given . In an Appendix a method is given for calculating the integrals appearing in the matrix elements for the simpler processes . The point of view which is taken here of the interaction of charges diﬀers from the more usual point of view of ﬁeld theory . Furthermore , the familiar Hamiltonian form of quantum mechanics must be compared to the over - all space - time view used here . The ﬁrst section is , therefore , devoted to a discussion of the relations of these viewpoints . 1 COMPARISON WITH THE HAMILTONIAN METHOD Electrodynamics can be looked upon in two equivalent and complemen - tary ways . One is as the description of the behavior of a ﬁeld ( Maxwell’s equations ) . The other is as a description of a direct interaction at a dis - tance ( albeit delayed in time ) between charges ( the solutions of Lienard and Wiechert ) . From the latter point of view light is considered as an interaction of the charges in the source with those in the absorber . This is an imprac - tical point of view because many kinds of sources produce the same kind of eﬀects . The ﬁeld point of view separates these aspects into two simpler problems , production of light , and absorption of light . On the other hand , the ﬁeld point of view is less practical when dealing with close collisions of particles ( or their action on themselves ) . For here the source and absorber are not readily distinguishable , there is an intimate exchange of quanta . The ﬁelds are so closely determined by the motions of the particles that it is just as well not to separate the question into two problems but to consider the process as a direct interaction . Roughly , the ﬁeld point of view is most practical for problems involving real quanta , while the interaction view is best for the discussion of the virtual quanta involved . We shall emphasize the interaction viewpoint in this paper , ﬁrst because it is less familiar and therefore requires more discussion , and second because the important aspect 5 in the problems with which we shall deal is the eﬀect of virtual quanta . The Hamiltonian method is not well adapted to represent the direct action at a distance between charges because that action is delayed . The Hamiltonian method represents the future as developing out of the present . If the values of a complete set of quantities are known now , their values can be computed at the next instant in time . If particles interact through a de - layed interaction , however , one cannot predict the future by simply knowing the present motion of the particles . One would also have to know what the motions of the particles were in the past in view of the interaction this may have on the future motions . This is done in the Hamiltonian electrodynam - ics , of course , by requiring that one specify besides the present motion of the particles , the values of a host of new variables ( the coordinates of the ﬁeld oscillators ) to keep track of that aspect of the past motions of the particles which determines their future behavior . The use of the Hamiltonian forces one to choose the ﬁeld viewpoint rather than the interaction viewpoint . In many problems , for example , the close collisions of particles , we are not interested in the precise temporal sequence of events . It is not of interest to be able to say how the situation would look at each instant of time during a collision and how it progresses from instant to instant . Such ideas are only useful for events taking a long time and for which we can readily obtain information during the intervening period . For collisions it is much easier to treat the process as a whole . 7 The M ∅ ller interaction matrix for the the collision of two electrons is not essentially more complicated than the nonrelativistic Rutherford formula , yet the mathematical machinery used to obtain the former from quantum electrodynamics is vastly more complicated than Schr¨odinger’s equation with the e 2 / r 12 interaction needed to obtain the latter . The diﬀerence is only that in the latter the action is instantaneous so that the Hamiltonian method requires no extra variables , while in the former relativistic case it is delayed and the Hamiltonian method is very cumbersome . We shall be discussing the solutions of equations rather than the time diﬀerential equations from which they come . We shall discover that the so - lutions , because of the over - all space - time view that they permit , are as easy to understand when interactions are delayed as when they are instantaneous . As a further point , relativistic invariance will be self - evident . The Hamil - tonian form of the equations develops the future from the instantaneous present . But for diﬀerent observers in relative motion the instantaneous present is diﬀerent , and corresponds to a diﬀerent 3 - dimensional cut of space - 7 This is the viewpoint of the theory of the S matrix of Heisenberg . 6 time . Thus the temporal analyses of diﬀerent observers is diﬀerent and their Hamiltonian equations are developing the process in diﬀerent ways . These diﬀerences are irrelevant , however , for the solution is the same in any space time frame . By forsaking the Hamiltonian method , the wedding of relativity and quantum mechanics can be accomplished most naturally . We illustrate these points in . the next section by studying the solution of Schr¨odinger’s equation for non - relativistic particles interacting by an in - stantaneous Coulomb potential ( Eq . 2 ) . When the solution is modiﬁed to include the eﬀects of delay in the interaction and the relativistic properties of the electrons we obtain an expression of the laws of quantum electrody - namics ( Eq . 4 ) . 2 THE INTERACTION BETWEEN CHARGES We study by the same methods as in I , the interaction of two particles using the same notation as I . We start by considering the non - relativistic case described by the Schr¨dinger equation ( I , Eq . 1 ) . The wave function at a given time is a function ψ ( x a , x b , t ) of the coordinates x a and x b of each particle . Thus call K ( x a , x b , t ; x 0 a , x 0 b , t 0 ) the amplitude that particle a at x 0 a at time t 0 will get to x a at t while particle b at x 0 b at t 0 gets to x b at t . If the particles are free and do not interact this is K ( x a , x b , t ; x 0 a , x 0 b , t 0 ) = K 0 a ( x a , t ; x 0 a , t 0 ) K 0 b ( x b , t ; x 0 b , t 0 ) where K 0 a is the K 0 function for particle a considered as free . In this case we can obviously deﬁne a quantity like K , but for which the time t need not be the same for particles a and b ( likewise for t 0 ) ; e . g . , K 0 ( 3 , 4 ; 1 , 2 ) = K 0 a ( 3 , 1 ) K 0 b ( 4 , 2 ) ( 1 ) can be thought of as the amplitude that particle a goes from x 1 at t 1 to x 3 at t 3 and that particle b goes from x 2 at t 2 to x 4 at t 4 . When the particles do interact , one can only deﬁne the quantity K ( 3 , 4 ; 1 , 2 ) precisely if the interaction vanishes between t 1 and t 2 and also between t 3 and t 4 . In a real physical system such is not the case . There is such an enormous advantage , however , to the concept that we shall continue to use it , imagining that we can neglect the eﬀect of interactions between t 1 and t 2 and between t 3 and t 4 . For practical problems this means choosing such long time intervals t 3 − t 1 and t 4 − t 2 that the extra interactions near the end points have small relative eﬀects . As an example , in a scattering 7 problem it may well be that the particles are so well separated initially and ﬁnally that the interaction at these times is negligible . Again energy values can be deﬁned by the average rate of change of phase over such long time intervals that errors initially and ﬁnally can be neglected . Inasmuch as any physical problem can be deﬁned in terms of scattering processes we do not lose much in a general theoretical sense by this approximation . If it is not Figure 1 : The fundamental interaction Eq . ( 4 ) . Exchange of one quantum between two electrons . made it is not easy to study interacting particles relativistically , for there is nothing signiﬁcant in choosing t 1 = t 3 if x 1 6 = x 3 as absolute simultaneity of events at a distance cannot be deﬁned invariantly . It is essentially to avoid this approximation that the complicated structure of the older quantum electrodynamics has been built up . We wish to describe electrodynamics as a delayed interaction between particles . If we can make the approximation of assuming a meaning to K ( 3 , 4 ; 1 , 2 ) the results of this interaction can be expressed very simply . To see how this may be done , imagine ﬁrst that the interaction is simply that given by a Coulomb potential e 2 / r where r is the distance between the particles . If this be turned on only for a very short time ∆ t 0 at time t 0 the ﬁrst order correction to K ( 3 , 4 ; 1 , 2 ) can be worked out exactly as was Eq . ( 9 ) of I by an obvious generalization to two particles : K ( 1 ) ( 3 , 4 ; 1 , 2 ) = − ie 2 R R K 0 a ( 3 , 5 ) K 0 b ( 4 , 6 ) r − 1 56 × K 0 a ( 5 , 1 ) K 0 b ( 6 , 2 ) d 3 x 5 d 3 x 6 ∆ t 0 , 8 where t 5 = t 6 = t 0 . If now the potential were on at all times ( so that strictly K is not deﬁned unless t 4 = t 3 and t 1 = t 2 ) , the ﬁrst - order eﬀect is obtained by integrating on t 0 , which we can write as an integral over both t 5 and t 6 if we include a delta - function δ ( t 5 − t 6 ) to insure contribution only when t 5 = t 6 Hence , the ﬁrst - order eﬀect of interaction is ( calling t 5 − t 6 = t 56 ) : K ( 1 ) ( 3 , 4 ; 1 , 2 ) = − ie 2 R R K 0 a ( 3 , 5 ) K 0 b ( 4 , 6 ) r − 1 56 × δ ( t 56 ) K 0 a ( 5 , 1 ) K 0 b ( 6 , 2 ) dτ 5 dτ 6 , ( 2 ) where dτ = d 3 x dt . We know , however , in classical electrodynamics , that the Coulomb po - tential does not act instantaneously , but is delayed by a time r 56 , taking the speed of light as unity . This suggests simply replacing r − 1 56 δ ( t 56 ) in ( 2 ) by something like r − 1 56 δ ( t 56 − r 56 ) to represent the delay in the eﬀect of b on a . This turns out to be not quite right , 8 for when this interaction is repre - sented by photons they must be of only positive energy , while the Fourier transform of δ ( t 56 − r 56 ) contains frequencies of both signs . It should instead be replaced by δ + ( t 56 − r 56 ) where δ + ( x ) = ∞ Z 0 e − iωx dω / π = lim (cid:15) → 0 ( πi ) − 1 x − i(cid:15) = δ ( x ) + ( πix ) − 1 . ( 3 ) This is to be averaged with r − 1 56 δ + ( − t 56 − r 56 ) which arises when t 5 < t 6 and corresponds to a emitting the quantum which b receives . Since ( 2 r ) − 1 ( δ + ( t − r ) + δ + ( − t − r ) ) = δ + ( t 2 − r 2 ) , this means r − 1 56 δ ( t 56 ) is replaced by δ + ( s 256 ) where s 256 = t 256 − r 256 is the square of the relativistically invariant interval between points 5 and 6 . Since in clas - sical electrodynamics there is also an interaction through the vector poten - tial , the complete interaction ( see A , Eq . ( I ) ) should be ( 1 − ( v 5 · v 6 ) δ + ( s 256 ) , or in the relativistic case , ( 1 − α a · α b ) δ + ( s 2 56 ) = β a β b γ aµ γ bµ δ + ( s 2 56 ) . 8 It and a like term for the eﬀect of a on b , leads to a theory which , in the classical limit , exhibits interaction through half - advanced and half - retarded potentials . Classically , this is equivalent to purely retarded eﬀects within a closed box from which no light escapes ( e . g . , see A , or J . A . Wheeler and R . P . Feynman , Rev . Mod . Phys . 17 , 157 ( 1945 ) ) . Analogous theorems exist in quantum mechanics but it would lead us too far astray to discuss them now . 9 Hence we have for electrons obeying the Dirac equation , K ( 1 ) ( 3 , 4 ; 1 , 2 ) = ie 2 R R K + a ( 3 , 5 ) K + b ( 4 , 6 ) γ aµ γ bµ × δ + ( s 256 ) K + a ( 5 , 1 ) K + b ( 6 , 2 ) dτ 5 dτ 6 , ( 4 ) where γ aµ and γ bµ , are the Dirac matrices applying to the spinor correspond - ing to particles a and b , respectively ( the factor β a β b being absorbed in the deﬁnition , I Eq . ( 17 ) , of K + ) . This is our fundamental equation for electrodynamics . It describes the eﬀect of exchange of one quantum ( therefore ﬁrst order in e 2 ) between two electrons . It will serve as a prototype enabling us to write down the corre - sponding quantities involving the exchange of two or more quanta between two electrons or the interaction of an electron with itself . It is a consequence of conventional electrodynamics . Relativistic invariance is clear . Since one sums over µ it contains the eﬀects of both longitudinal and transverse waves in a relativistically symmetrical way . We shall now interpret Eq . ( 4 ) in a manner which will permit us to write down the higher order terms . It can be understood ( see Fig . 1 ) as saying that the amplitude for “ a ” to go from 1 to 3 and “ b ” to go from 2 to 4 is altered to ﬁrst order because they can exchange a quantum . Thus , “ a ” can go to 5 ( amplitude ( K + ( 5 , 1 ) ) emit a quantum ( longitudinal , transverse , or scalar γ aµ ) and then proceed to 3 ( K + ( 3 , 5 ) ) . Meantime “ b ” goes to 6 ( K + ( 6 , 2 ) ) , absorbs the quantum ( γ bµ ) and proceeds to 4 ( K + ( 4 , 6 ) ) . The quantum meanwhile proceeds from 5 to 6 , which it does with amplitude δ + ( s 256 ) . We must sum over all the possible quantum polarizations it and positions and times of emission 5 , and of absorption 6 . Actually if t 5 > t 6 it would be better to say that “ a ” absorbs and “ b ” emits but no attention need be paid to these matters , as all such alternatives are automatically contained in ( 4 ) . The correct terms of higher order in e 2 or involving larger numbers of electrons ( interacting with themselves or in pairs ) can be written down by the same kind of reasoning . They will be illustrated by examples as we proceed . In a succeeding paper they will all be deduced from conventional quantum electrodynamics . Calculation , from ( 4 ) , of the transition element between positive energy free electron states gives the M ∅ ller scattering of two electrons , when ac - count is taken of the Pauli principle . The exclusion principle for interacting charges is handled in exactly the same way as for noninteracting charges ( I ) . For example , for two charges it requires only that one calculate K ( 3 , 4 ; 1 , 2 ) − K ( 4 , 3 ; 1 , 2 ) to get the net 10 amplitude for arrival of charges at 3 and 4 . It is disregarded in intermedi - ate states . The interference eﬀects for scattering of electrons by positrons discussed by Bhabha will be seen to result directly in this formulation . The formulas are interpreted to apply to positrons in the manner discussed in I . As our primary concern will be for processes in which the quanta are virtual we shall not include here the detailed analysis of processes involving real quanta in initial or ﬁnal state , and shall content ourselves by only stating the rules applying to them . 9 The result of the analysis is , as expected , that they can be included by the same line of reasoning as is used in discussing the virtual processes , provided the quantities are normalized in the usual manner to represent single quanta . For example , the amplitude that an electron in going from 1 to 2 absorbs a quantum whose vector potential , suitably normalized , is c µ exp ( − ik · x ) = C µ ( x ) is just the expression ( I , Eq . ( 13 ) ) for scattering in a potential with A ( 3 ) replaced by C ( 3 ) . Each quantum interacts only once ( either in emission or in absorption ) , terms like ( I , Eq . ( 14 ) ) occur only when there is more than one quantum involved . The Bose statistics of the quanta can , in all cases , be disregarded in intermediate states . The only eﬀect of the statistics is to change the weight of initial or ﬁnal states . If there are among quanta , in the initial state , some a which are identical then the weight of the state is ( 1 / n ! ) of what it would be if these quanta were considered as diﬀerent ( similarly for the ﬁnal state ) . 3 THE SELF – ENERGY PROBLEM Having a term representing the mutual interaction of a pair of charges , we must include similar terms to represent the interaction of a charge with itself . For under some circumstances what appears to be two distinct electrons 9 Although in the expressions stemming from ( 4 ) the quanta are virtual , this is not actually a theoretical limitation . One way to deduce the correct rules for real quanta from ( 4 ) is to note that in a closed system all quanta can be considered as virtual ( i . e . , they have a known source and are eventually absorbed ) so that in such a system the present description is complete and equivalent to the conventional one . In particular , the relation of the Einstein A and B coeﬃcients can be deduced . A more practical direct deduction of the expressions for real quanta will be given in the subsequent paper . It might be noted that ( 4 ) can be rewritten as describing the action on a , K ( 1 ) ( 3 , 1 ) = i R K + ( 3 , 5 ) × A ( 5 ) K + ( 5 , 1 ) dτ 5 of the potential A µ ( 5 ) = e 2 R K + ( 4 , 6 ) δ + ( s 256 ) γ µ × K + ( 6 , 2 ) dτ 6 arising from Maxwell’s equations − (cid:3) 2 A µ = 4 πj µ from a “current” j µ ( 6 ) = e 2 K + ( 4 , 6 ) γ µ K + ( 6 , 2 ) produced by particle b in going from 2 to 4 . This is virtue of the fact that δ + satisﬁes − (cid:3) 22 δ + ( s 221 ) = 4 πδ ( 2 , 1 ) . ( 5 ) 11 may , according to I , be viewed also as a single electron ( namely in case one electron was created in a pair with a positron destined to annihilate the other electron ) . Thus to the interaction between such electrons must correspond the possibility of the action of an electron on itself . 10 This interaction is the heart of the self energy problem . Consider to ﬁrst order in e 2 the action of an electron on itself in an otherwise force free region . The amplitude K ( 2 , 1 ) for a single particle to get from 1 to 2 diﬀers from K + ( 2 , 1 ) to ﬁrst order in e 2 by a term K ( 1 ) ( 2 , 1 ) = − ie 2 R R K + ( 2 , 4 ) γ µ K + ( 4 , 3 ) γ µ × K + ( 3 , 1 ) dτ 3 dτ 4 δ + ( s 243 ) . ( 6 ) It arises because the electron instead of going from 1 directly to 2 , may go ( Fig . 2 ) ﬁrst to 3 , ( K + ( 3 , 1 ) ) , emit a quantum ( γ µ ) , proceed to 4 , ( K + ( 4 , 3 ) ) , absorb it ( γ µ ) , and ﬁnally arrive at 2 ( K + ( 2 , 4 ) ) . The quantum must go from 3 to 4 ( δ + ( s 243 ) ) . This is related to the self - energy of a free electron in the following man - ner . Suppose initially , time t 1 , we have an electron in state f ( 1 ) which we imagine to be a positive energy solution of Dirac’s equation for a free parti - cle . After a long time t 2 − t 1 the perturbation will alter the wave function , which can then be looked upon as a superposition of free particle solutions ( actually it only contains f ) . The amplitude that g ( 2 ) is contained is calcu - lated as in ( I , Eq . ( 21 ) ) . The diagonal element ( g = f ) is therefore Z Z ˜ f ( 2 ) βK ( 1 ) ( 2 , 1 ) βf ( 1 ) d 3 x 1 d 3 x 2 . ( 7 ) The time interval T = t 2 − t 1 ( and the spatial volume V over which one integrates ) must be taken very large , for the expressions are only ap - proximate ( analogous to the situation for two interacting charges ) . 11 This is because , for example , we are dealing incorrectly with quanta emitted just before t 2 which would normally be reabsorbed at times after t 2 . If K ( 1 ) ( 2 , 1 ) from ( 6 ) is actually substituted into ( 7 ) the surface integrals can be performed as was done in obtaining I , Eq . ( 22 ) resulting in − ie 2 Z Z ˜ f ( 4 ) γ µ K + ( 4 , 3 ) γ µ f ( 3 ) δ + ( s 243 ) dτ 3 dτ 4 . ( 8 ) 10 These considerations make it appear unlikely that the contention of J . A . Wheeler and R . P . Feynman , Rev . Mod . Phys . 17 , 157 ( 1945 ) , that electrons do not act on themselves , will be a successful concept in quantum electrodynamics . 11 This is discussed in reference 5 in which it is pointed out that the concept of a wave function loses accuracy if there are delayed self - actions . 12 Figure 2 : Interaction of an electron with itself , Eq . ( 6 ) . Putting for f ( 1 ) the plane wave u exp ( − ip · x 1 ) where p µ is the energy ( p 4 ) and momentum of the electron ( p 2 = m 2 ) , and u is a constant 4 - index symbol , ( 8 ) becomes − ie 2 R R ( ˜ uγ µ K + ( 4 , 3 ) γ µ u ) × exp ( ip · ( x 4 − x 2 ) ) δ + ( s 243 ) dτ 3 dτ 4 , the integrals extending over the volume V and time interval T . Since K + ( 4 , 3 ) depends only on the diﬀerence of the coordinates of 4 and 3 , x 43 µ , the integral on 4 gives a result ( except near the surfaces of the region ) in - dependent of 3 . When integrated on 3 , therefore , the result is of order V T . The eﬀect is proportional to V , for the wave functions have been normal - ized to unit volume . If normalized to volume V , the result would simply be proportional to T . This is expected , for if the eﬀect were equivalent to a change in energy ∆ E , the amplitude for arrival in f at t 2 is altered by a factor exp ( − i ∆ E ( t 2 − t 1 ) ) , or to ﬁrst order by the diﬀerence − i ( ∆ E ) T . 13 Figure 3 : Interaction of an electron with itself . Momentum space , Eq . ( 11 ) . Hence , we have ∆ E = e 2 Z ( ˜ uγ µ K + ( 4 , 3 ) γ µ u ) exp ( ip · x 43 ) δ + ( s 243 ) dτ 4 , ( 9 ) integrated over all space - time dτ 4 . This expression will be simpliﬁed presently . In interpreting ( 9 ) we have tacitly assumed that the wave func - tions are normalized so that ( u ∗ u = ( ˜ uγ 4 u ) = 1 . The equation may there - fore be made independent of the normalization by writing the left side as ( ∆ E ) ( ˜ uγ 4 ) u ) , or since ( ˜ uγ 4 u ) = ( E / m ) ( ˜ uu ) and m ∆ m = E ∆ E , as ∆ m ( ˜ uu ) where ∆ m is an equivalent change in mass of the electron . In this form invariance is obvious . One can likewise obtain an expression for the energy shift for an electron in a hydrogen atom . Simply replace K + in ( 8 ) , by K ( V ) + , the exact kernel for an electron in the potential , V = βe 2 / r , of the atom , and f by a wave function ( of space and time ) for an atomic state . In general the ∆ E which results is not real . The imaginary part is negative and in exp ( − i ∆ ET ) produces an exponentially decreasing amplitude with time . This is because we are asking for the amplitude that an atom initially with no photon in the ﬁeld , will still appear after time T with no photon . If the atom is in a state which can radiate , this amplitude must decay with time . The imaginary part of ∆ E when calculated does indeed give the correct rate of radiation from atomic states . It is zero for the ground state and for a free electron . In the non - relativistic region the expression for ∆ E can be worked out as has been done by Bethe . 12 In the relativistic region ( points 4 and 3 as 12 H . A . Bethe , Phys . Rev . 72 , 339 ( 1947 ) . 14 close together as a Compton wave - length ) the K ( V ) + which should appear in ( 8 ) can be replaced to ﬁrst order in V by K + plus K ( 1 ) + ( 2 , 1 ) given in I , Eq . ( 13 ) . The problem is then very similar to the radiationless scattering problem discussed below . 4 EXPRESSION IN MOMENTUM AND ENERGY SPACE The evaluation of ( 9 ) , as well as all the other more complicated expres - sions arising in these problems , is very much simpliﬁed by working in the momentum and energy variables , rather than space and time . For this we shall need the Fourier Transform of δ + ( s 221 ) which is − δ + ( s 221 ) = π − 1 Z exp ( − ik · x 21 ) k − 2 d 4 k , ( 10 ) which can be obtained from ( 3 ) and ( 5 ) or from I , Eq . ( 32 ) noting that I + ( 2 , 1 ) for m 2 = 0 is δ + ( s 221 ) from I , Eq . ( 34 ) . The k − 2 means ( k · k ) − 1 Figure 4 : Radiative correction to scattering , momentum space . or more precisely the limit as δ → 0 of ( k · k + iδ ) − 1 . Further d 4 k means ( 2 π ) − 2 dk 1 dk 2 dk 3 dk 4 . If we imagine that quanta are particles of zero mass , then we can make the general rule that all poles are to be resolved by considering the masses of the particles and quanta to have inﬁnitesimal negative imaginary parts . Using these results we see that the self - energy ( 9 ) is the matrix element between u and u of the matrix ( e 2 / πi ) Z γ µ ( p − k − m ) − 1 γ µ k − 2 d 4 k , ( 11 ) 15 where we have used the expression ( I , Eq . ( 31 ) ) for the Fourier transform of K + . This form for the self - energy is easier to work with than is ( 9 ) . The equation can be understood by imagining ( Fig . 3 ) that the electron of momentum p emits ( γ µ ) a quantum of momentum k , and makes its way now with momentum p − k to the next event ( factor ( p − k − m ) − 1 ) which is to absorb the quantum ( another γ µ ) . The amplitude of propagation of quanta is k − 2 . ( There is a factor e 2 / πi for each virtual quantum ) . One inte - grates over all quanta . The reason an electron of momentum p propagates as 1 / ( p − m ) is that this operator is the reciprocal of the Dirac equation operator , and we are simply solving this equation . Likewise light goes as 1 / k 2 , for this is the reciprocal D’Alembertian operator of the wave equation of light . The ﬁrst γ µ , represents the current which generates the vector po - tential , while the second is the velocity operator by which this potential is multiplied in the Dirac equation when an external ﬁeld acts on an electron . Using the same line of reasoning , other problems may be set up directly in momentum space . For example , consider the scattering in a potential A = A µ γ µ varying in space and time as a exp ( − iq · x ) . An electron initially in state of momentum p 1 = p 1 µ γ µ will be deﬂected to state p 2 where p 2 = p 1 + q . The zero - order answer is simply the matrix element of a between states 1 and 2 . We next ask for the ﬁrst order ( in e 2 ) radiative correction due to virtual radiation of one quantum . There are several ways this can happen . First for the case illustrated in Fig . 4 ( a ) , ﬁnd the matrix : Figure 5 : Compton scattering , Eq . ( 15 ) . ( e 2 / πi ) Z γ µ ( p 2 − k − m ) − 1 a ( p 1 − k − m ) − 1 γ µ k − 2 d 4 k . ( 12 ) 16 For in this case , ﬁrst 13 a quantum of momentum k is emitted ( γ µ ) , the electron then having momentum p 1 − k and hence propagating with factor ( p 1 − k − m ) − 1 . Next it is scattered by the potential ( matrix a ) receiv - ing additional momentum q , propagating on then ( factor ( p 2 − k − m ) − 1 ) with the new momentum until the quantum is reabsorbed ( γ µ ) . The quan - tum propagates from emission to absorption ( k − 2 ) and we integrate over all quanta ( d 4 k ) , and sum on polarization µ . When this is integrated on k 4 , the result can be shown to be exactly equal to the expressions ( 16 ) and ( 17 ) given in B for the same process , the various terms coming from residues of the poles of the integrand ( 12 ) . Or again if the quantum is both emitted and reabsorbed before the scattering takes place one ﬁnds ( Fig . 4 ( b ) ) ( e 2 / πi ) Z a ( p 1 − m ) − 1 γ µ ( p 1 − k − m ) − 1 γ µ k − 2 d 4 k , ( 13 ) or if both emission and absorption occur after the scattering , ( Fig . 4 ( c ) ) ( e 2 / πi ) Z γ µ ( p 2 − k − m ) − 1 γ µ ( p 2 − m ) − 1 ak − 2 d 4 k . ( 14 ) These terms are discussed in detail below . We have now achieved our simpliﬁcation of the form of writing matrix elements arising from virtual processes . Processes in which a number of real quanta is given initially and ﬁnally oﬀer no problem ( assuming correct nor - malization ) . For example , consider the Compton eﬀect ( Fig . 5 ( a ) ) in which an electron in state p 1 absorbs a quantum of momentum q 1 , polarization vector e 1 µ so that its interaction is e 1 µ γ µ = e 1 , and emits a second quantum of momentum − q 2 polarization e 2 to arrive in ﬁnal state of momentum p 2 . The matrix for this process is e 2 ( p 1 + q 1 − m ) − 1 e 1 . The total matrix for the Compton eﬀect is , then , e 2 ( p 1 + q 1 − m ) − 1 e 1 + e 1 ( p 1 + q 2 − m ) − 1 e 3 , ( 15 ) the second term arising because the emission of e 2 , may also precede the ab - sorption of e 1 ( Fig . 5 ( b ) ) . One takes matrix elements of this between initial and ﬁnal electron states ( p 1 + q 1 = p 2 − q 2 ) , to obtain the Klein Nishina formula . Pair annihilation with emission of two quanta , etc . , are given by the same matrix , positron states being those with negative time component of p . Whether quanta are absorbed or emitted depends on whether the time component of q is positive or negative . 13 First , next , etc . , here refer not to the order in true time but to the succession of events along the trajectory of the electron . That is , more precisely , to the order of appearance of the matrices in the expressions . 17 5 THE CONVERGENCE OF PROCESSES WITH VIRTUAL QUANTA These expressions are , as has been indicated , no more than a re - expression of conventional quantum electrodynamics . As a consequence , many of them are meaningless . For example , the self - energy expression ( 9 ) or ( 11 ) gives an inﬁnite result when evaluated . The inﬁnity arises , apparently , from the coincidence of the δ – function singularities in K + ( 4 , 3 ) and δ + ( s 243 ) . Only at this point is it necessary to make a real departure from conventional electrodynamics , a departure other than simply rewriting expressions in a simpler form . We desire to make a modiﬁcation of quantum electrodynamics analogous to the modiﬁcation of classical electrodynamics described in a previous arti - cle , A . There the δ ( s 212 ) appearing in the action of interaction was replaced by f ( s 212 ) where f ( x ) is a function of small width and great height . The obvious corresponding modiﬁcation in the quantum theory is to replace the δ + ( s 2 ) appearing the quantum mechanical interaction by a new function f = ( s 2 ) . We can postulate that if the Fourier transform of the classical f ( s 212 ) is the integral over ail k of F ( k 2 ) exp ( − ik · x 12 ) d 4 k , then the Fourier transform of f + ( s 2 ) is the same integral taken over only positive frequencies k 4 for t 2 > t 1 and over only negative ones for t 2 < t 1 in analogy to the relation of δ + ( s 2 ) to δ ( s 2 ) . The function f ( s 2 ) = f ( x · x ) can be written 14 as f ( x · x ) = ( 2 π ) − 2 ∞ R k 4 = 0 R sin ( k 4 | x 4 | ) × cos ( K · x ) dk 4 d 3 K g ( k · k ) , where g ( k · k ) is k − 1 4 times the density of oscillators and may be expressed for positive k 4 as ( A , Eq . ( 16 ) ) g ( k 2 ) = ∞ Z 0 ( δ ( k 2 ) − δ ( k 2 − λ 2 ) ) G ( λ ) dλ , where ∞ R 0 G ( λ ) dλ = 1 and G involves values of λ large compared to m . This simply means that the amplitude for propagation of quanta of momentum 14 This relation is given incorrectly in A , equation just preceding 16 . 18 k is − F + ( k 3 ) = π − 1 Z ∞ 0 ( k − 2 − ( k 2 − λ 2 ) − 1 ) G ( λ ) dλ , rather than k − 2 . That is , writing F + ( k 2 ) = − π − 1 k − 2 C ( k 2 ) , − f + ( s 212 ) = π − 1 Z exp ( − ik · x 12 ) k − 2 C ( k 2 ) d 4 k . ( 16 ) Every integral over an intermediate quantum which previously involved a factor d 4 k / k 2 is now supplied with a convergence factor C ( k 2 ) where C ( k 2 ) = Z ∞ 0 − λ 2 ( k 2 − λ 2 ) − 1 G ( λ ) dλ . ( 17 ) The poles are deﬁned by replacing k 2 by k 2 + iδ in the limit δ → 0 . That is λ 2 may be assumed to have an inﬁnitesimal negative imaginary part . The function f + ( s 212 ) may still have a discontinuity in value on the light cone . This is of no inﬂuence for the Dirac electron . For a particle satisfying the Klein Gordon equation , however , the interaction involves gradients of the potential which reinstates the δ function if f has discontinuities . The condition that f is to have no discontinuity in value on the light cone implies k 2 C ( k 2 ) approaches zero as k 2 approaches inﬁnity . In terms of G ( λ ) the condition is ∞ Z 0 λ 2 G ( λ ) dλ = 0 . ( 18 ) This condition will also be used in discussing the convergence of vacuum polarization integrals . The expression for the self - energy matrix is now ( e 2 / πi ) Z γ µ ( p − k − m ) − 1 γ µ k − 2 d 4 kC ( k 2 ) , ( 19 ) which , since C ( k 2 ) falls oﬀ at least as rapidly as 1 / k 2 , converges . For prac - tical purposes we shall suppose hereafter that C ( k 2 ) is simply − λ 2 / ( k 2 − λ 2 ) implying that some average ( with weight G ( λ ) dλ ) over values of λ may be taken afterwards . Since in all processes the quantum momentum will be contained in at least one extra factor of the form ( p − k − m ) − 1 represent - ing propagation of an electron while that quantum is in the ﬁeld , we can expect all such integrals with their convergence factors to converge and that the result of ail such processes will now be ﬁnite and deﬁnite ( excepting the 19 processes with closed loops , discussed below , in which the diverging integrals are over the momenta of the electrons rather than the quanta ) . The integral of ( 19 ) with C ( k 2 ) = − λ 2 ( k 2 − λ 2 ) − 1 noting that p 2 = m 2 , λ (cid:29) m and dropping terms of order m / λ is ( see Appendix A ) ( e 2 / 2 π ) [ 4 m ( ln ( λ / m ) + 1 2 ) − p ( ln ( λ / m ) + 5 / 4 ) ] . ( 20 ) When applied to a state of an electron of momentum p satisfying p u = mu , it gives for the change in mass ( as in B , Eq . ( 9 ) ) ∆ m = m ( e 2 / 2 π ) ( 3 ln ( λ / m ) + 3 4 ) . ( 21 ) 6 RADIATIVE CORRECTIONS TO SCATTERING We can now complete the discussion of the radiative corrections to scattering . In the integrals we include the convergence factor C ( k 2 ) , so that they converge for large k . Integral ( 12 ) is also not convergent because of the well - known infrared catastrophy . For this reason we calculate ( as discussed in B ) the value of the integral assuming the photons to have a small mass λ min (cid:28) m (cid:28) λ . The integral ( 12 ) becomes ( e 2 / πi ) R γ µ ( p 2 − k − m ) − 1 a ( p 1 − k − m ) − 1 × γ µ ( k 2 − γ 2 min ) − 1 d 4 kC ( k 2 − λ 2 min ) , which when integrated ( see Appendix B ) gives ( e 2 / 2 π ) times (cid:20) 2 (cid:18) ln mλ min − 1 (cid:19) (cid:16) 1 − 2 θ tan2 θ (cid:17) + θ tan θ + 4 tan2 θ θ R 0 α tan αdα # a + 14 m ( qa − aq ) 2 θ sin 2 θ + r a , ( 22 ) where ( q 2 ) 1 / 2 = 2 m and we have assumed the matrix to operate between states of momentum p 1 and p 2 = p 1 + q and have neglected terms of order λ min / m , m / λ , and q 2 / λ 2 . Here the only dependence on the convergence factor is in the term ra , where r = ln ( λ / m ) + 9 / 4 − 2 ln ( m / λ min ) . ( 23 ) 20 As we shall see in a moment , the other terms ( 13 ) , ( 14 ) give contributions which just cancel the ra term . The remaining terms give for small q , ( e 2 / 4 π ) (cid:18) 1 2 m ( qa − aq ) + 4 q 2 3 m 2 a (cid:18) ln m λ min − 3 8 (cid:19)(cid:19) , ( 24 ) which shows the change in magnetic moment and the Lamb shift as inter - preted in more detail in B . 15 We must now study the remaining terms ( 13 ) and ( 14 ) . The integral on k in ( 13 ) can be performed ( after multiplication by C ( k 2 ) ) since it involves nothing but the integral ( 19 ) for the self - energy and the result is allowed to operate on the initial state u 1 , ( so that p 1 u 1 = mu 1 ) . Hence the factor following a ( p 1 − m ) − 1 will be just ∆ m . But , if one now tries to expand 1 / ( p 1 − m ) = ( p 1 + m ) / ( p 21 − m 2 ) one obtains an inﬁnite result , since p 21 = m 2 . This is , however , just what is expected physically . For the quantum can be emitted and absorbed at any time previous to the scattering . Such a process has the eﬀect of a change in mass of the electron in the state 1 . It therefore changes the energy by ∆ E and the amplitude to ﬁrst order in ∆ E by − i ∆ E · t where t is the time it is acting , which is inﬁnite . That is , the major eﬀect of this term would be canceled by the eﬀect of change of mass ∆ m . The situation can be analyzed in the following manner . We suppose that the electron approaching the scattering potential a has not been free for an inﬁnite time , but at some time far past suﬀered a scattering by a potential b . If we limit our discussion to the eﬀects of ∆ m and of the virtual radiation of one quantum between two such scatterings each of the eﬀects will be ﬁnite , though large , and their diﬀerence is determinate . The propagation from b to a is represented by a matrix a ( p 0 − m ) − 1 b , ( 25 ) 15 That the result given in B in Eq . ( 19 ) was in error was repeatedly pointed out to the author , in private communication , by V . F . Weisskopf and J . B . French , as their calcu - lation , completed simultaneously with the author’s early in 1948 , gave a diﬀerent result . French has ﬁnally shown that although the expression for the radiationless scattering B , Eq . ( 18 ) or ( 24 ) above is correct , it was incorrectly joined into Bethe’s non - relativistic result . He shows that the relation ln 2 k max − 1 = ln λ min used by the author should have been ln 2 k max − 5 / 6 = ln λ min . This results in adding a term − ( 1 / 6 ) to the logarithm in B , Eq . ( 19 ) so that the result now agrees with that of J . B . French and V . F . Weisskopf , Phys . Rev . 75 , 1240 ( 1949 ) and N . H . Kroll and W . E . Lamb , Phys . Rev . 75 , 388 ( 1949 ) . The author feels unhappily responsible for the very considerable delay in the publication of French’s result occasioned by this error . This footnote is appropriately numbered . 21 in which one is to integrate possibly over p 0 ( depending on details of the situation ) . ( If the time is long between b and a , the energy is very nearly determined so that p 0 2 is very nearly m 2 . ) We shall compare the eﬀect on the matrix ( 25 ) of the virtual quanta and of the change of mass ∆ m . The eﬀect of a virtual quantum is ( e 2 / πi ) Z a ( p 0 − m ) − 1 γ µ ( p 0 − k − m ) − 1 × γ µ ( p 0 − m ) − 1 bk − 2 d 4 kC ( k 2 ) , ( 26 ) while that of a change of mass can be written a ( p 0 − m ) − 1 ∆ m ( p 0 − m ) − 1 b , ( 27 ) and we are interested in the diﬀerence ( 26 ) - ( 27 ) . A simple and direct method of making this comparison is just to evaluate the integral on k in ( 26 ) and subtract from the result the expression ( 27 ) where ∆ m is given in ( 21 ) . The remainder can be expressed as a multiple − r ( p 0 2 ) of the unperturbed amplitude ( 25 ) ; − r ( p 0 2 ) a ( p 0 − m ) − 1 b . ( 28 ) This has the same result ( to this order ) as replacing the potentials a and b in ( 25 ) by ( 1 − 12 r ( p 0 2 ) ) a and ( 1 − 12 r ( p 0 2 ) ) b . In the limit , then , as p 0 2 → m 2 the net eﬀect on the scattering is − 12 ra where r , the limit of r ( p 0 2 ) as p 0 2 → m 2 ( assuming the integrals have an infrared cut - oﬀ ) , turns out to be just equal to that given in ( 23 ) . An equal term − 12 ra arises from virtual transitions after the scattering ( 14 ) so that the entire ra term in ( 22 ) is canceled . The reason that r is just the value of ( 12 ) when q 2 = 0 can also be seen without a direct calculation as follows : Let us call p the vector of length m in the direction of p 0 so that if p 0 2 = m ( 1 + (cid:15) ) 2 we have p 0 = ( 1 + (cid:15) 0 p and we take (cid:15) as very small , being of order T − 1 where T is the time between the scatterings b and a . Since ( p 0 − m ) − 1 = ( p 0 + m ) / ( p 0 2 − m 2 ) ≈ ( p + m ) / 2 m 2 (cid:15) , the quantity ( 25 ) is of order (cid:15) − 1 or T . We shall compute corrections to it only to its own order ( (cid:15) − 1 ) in the limit (cid:15) → 0 . The term ( 27 ) can be written approximately 16 as ( e 2 / πi ) Z a ( p 0 − m ) − 1 γ µ ( p − k − m ) − 1 × γ µ ( p 0 − m ) − 1 bk − 2 d 4 kC ( k 2 ) , 16 The expression is not exact because the substitution of ∆ m by the integral in ( 19 ) is valid only if p operates on a state such that p can be replaced by m . The error , however , is of order a ( p 0 − m ) − 1 ( p − m ) ( p 0 − m ) − 1 b which is a ( ( 1 + (cid:15) ) p + m ) ( p − m ) × ( ( 1 + (cid:15) ) p + m ) p ( 2 (cid:15) + (cid:15) 2 ) − 2 m − 4 . But since 2 = m 2 we have p ( p − m ) = − m ( p − m ) = ( p − m ) p so the net result is approximately a ( p − m ) b / 4 m 2 and is not of order 1 / (cid:15) but smaller , so that its eﬀect drops out in the limit . 22 using the expression ( 19 ) for ∆ m . The net of the two eﬀects is therefore approximately 17 − ( e 2 / πi ) R a ( p 0 − m ) − 1 γ µ ( p − k − m ) − 1 (cid:15) p ( p − k − m ) − 1 × γ µ ( p 0 − m ) − 1 bk − 2 d 4 kC ( k 2 ) , a term now of order 1 / (cid:15) ( since ( p 0 − m ) − 1 ≈ ( p + m ) × ( 2 m 2 (cid:15) ) − 1 ) and therefore the one desired in the limit . Comparison to ( 28 ) gives for r the expression ( p 1 + m / 2 m ) R γ µ ( p 1 − k − m ) − 1 ( p 1 m − 1 ) ( p 1 − k − m ) − 1 × γ µ k − 2 d 4 kC ( k 2 ) . ( 29 ) The integral can be immediately evaluated , since it is the same as the integral ( 12 ) , but with q = 0 , for a replaced by p 1 / m . The result is therefore r · ( p 1 / m ) which when acting on the state u 1 is just r , as p 1 u 1 = mu 1 . For the same reason the term ( p 1 + m ) / 2 m in ( 29 ) is eﬀectively 1 and we are left with − r of ( 23 ) . 18 In more complex problems starting with a free electron the same type of term arises from the eﬀects of a virtual emission and absorption both previ - ous to the other processes . They , therefore , simply lead to the same factor r so that the expression ( 23 ) may be used directly and these renormalization integrals need not be computed afresh for each problem . In this problem of the radiative corrections to scattering the net result is insensitive to the cut - oﬀ . This means , of course , that by a simple rear - rangement of terms previous to the integration we could have avoided the use of the convergence factors completely ( see for example Lewis 19 ) . The problem was solved in the manner here in order to illustrate how the use of 17 We have used , to ﬁrst order , the general expansion ( valid for any operators A , B ) ( A + B 0 − 1 = A − 1 − A − 1 BA − 1 + A − 1 BA − 1 BA − 1 − . . . with A = p − k − m and B = p 0 − p = (cid:15) p to expand the diﬀerence of ( p 0 − k − m ) − 1 and ( p − k − m ) − 1 . 18 The renormalization terms appearing B , Eqs . ( 14 ) , ( 15 ) when translated directly into the present notation do not give twice ( 29 ) but give this expression with the central p 1 m − 1 factor replaced by mγ 4 / E 1 where E 1 = p 1 µ , for µ = 4 . When integrated it therefore gives ra ( ( p 1 + m ) / 2 m ) ( mγ 4 / E 1 ) or ra − ra ( mγ 4 / E 1 ) ( p 1 − m ) / 2 m . ( Since p 1 γ 4 + γ 4 p 1 = 2 E 1 ) which gives just ra , since p 1 u 1 = mu 1 . 19 H . W . Lewis , Phys . Rev . 73 , 173 ( 1948 ) . 23 such convergence factors , even when they are actually unnecessary , may fa - cilitate analysis somewhat by removing the eﬀort and ambiguities that may be involved in trying to rearrange the otherwise divergent terms . The replacement of δ + by f + given in ( 16 ) , ( 17 ) is not determined by the analogy with the classical problem . In the classical limit only the real part of δ + ( i . e . , just δ ) is easy to interpret . But by what should the imaginary part , 1 / ( πs 2 ) , of δ + be replaced ? The choice we have made here ( in den - ning , as we have , the location of the poles of ( 17 ) ) is arbitrary and almost certainly incorrect . If the radiation resistance is calculated for an atom , as the imaginary part of ( 8 ) , the result depends slightly on the function f + . On the other hand the light radiated at very large distances from a source is independent of f + . The total energy absorbed by distant absorbers will not check with the energy loss of the source . We are in a situation analogous to that in the classical theory if the entire f function is made to contain only retarded contributions ( see A , Appendix ) . One desires instead the analogue of h F i ret of A . This problem is being studied . One can say therefore , that this attempt to ﬁnd a consistent modiﬁcation of quantum electrodynamics is incomplete ( see also the question of closed loops , below ) . For it could turn out that any correct form of f + which will guarantee energy conservation may at the same time not be able to make the self - energy integral ﬁnite . The desire to make the methods of simplifying the calculation of quantum electrodynamic processes more widely available has prompted this publication before an analysis of the correct form for f + is complete . One might try to take the position that , since the energy dis - crepancies discussed vanish in the limit λ → ∞ , the correct physics might be considered to be that obtained by letting λ → ∞ after mass renormal - ization . I have no proof of the mathematical consistency of this procedure , but the presumption is very strong that it is satisfactory . ( It is also strong that a satisfactory form for f + can be found . ) 7 THE PROBLEM OF VACUUM POLARIZATION In the analysis of the radiative corrections to scattering one type of term was not considered . The potential which we can assume to vary as a µ exp ( − iq · x ) creates a pair of electrons ( see Fig . 6 ) , momenta p a , − p b . This pair then reannihilates , emitting a quantum q = q b − q a , which quantum scatters the original electron from state 1 to state 2 . The matrix element for this process ( and the others which can be obtained by rearranging the 24 order in time of the various events ) is − ( e 2 / πi ) ( ˜ u 2 γ µ u 1 ) R Sp [ ( p a + q − m ) − 1 × γ µ ( p a − m ) − 1 γ µ ] d 4 p a q − 2 C ( q 2 ) a ν . ( 30 ) This is because the potential produces the pair with amplitude proportional to a ν γ ν the electrons of momenta p a , and − ( p a + q ) proceed from there to annihilate , producing a quantum ( factor γ µ ) which propagates ( factor q − 2 C ( q 2 ) ) over to the other electron , by which it is absorbed ( matrix ele - ment of γ µ , between states 1 and 2 of the original electron ( ˜ u 2 γ µ u 1 ) ) . All momenta p a and spin states of the virtual electron are admitted , which means the spur and the integral on d 4 p a are calculated . One can imagine that the closed loop path of the positron - electron pro - duces a current 4 πJ µ a ν , ( 31 ) which is the source of the quanta which act on the second electron . The quantity J µν = − ( e 2 / πi ) R Sp [ ( p + q − m ) − 1 × γ µ ( p − m ) − 1 γ µ ] d 4 p , ( 32 ) is then characteristic for this problem of polarization of the vacuum . One sees at once that J µν diverges badly . The modiﬁcation of δ to f alters the amplitude with which the current j µ , will aﬀect the scattered electron , but it can do nothing to prevent the divergence of the integral ( 32 ) and of its eﬀects . One way to avoid such diﬃculties is apparent . From one point of view we are considering all routes by which a given electron can get from one region of space - time to another , i . e . , from the source of electrons to the apparatus which measures them . From this point of view the closed loop path leading to ( 32 ) is unnatural . It might be assumed that the only paths of meaning are those which start from the source and work their way in a continuous path ( possibly containing many time reversals ) to the detector . Closed loops would be excluded . We have already found that this may be done for electrons moving in a ﬁxed potential . Such a suggestion must meet several questions , however . The closed loops are a consequence of the usual hole theory in electrodynamics . Among other things , they are required to keep probability conserved . The proba - bility that no pair is produced by a potential is not unity and its deviation from unity arises from the imaginary part of J µν . Again , with closed loops 25 Figure 6 : Vacuum polarization eﬀect on scattering , Eq . ( 30 ) . excluded , a pair of electrons once created cannot annihilate one another again , the scattering of light by light would be zero , etc . Although we are not experimentally sure of these phenomena , this does seem to indicate that the closed loops are necessary . To be sure , it is always possible that these matters of probability conservation , etc . , will work themselves out as simply in the case of interacting particles as for those in a ﬁxed potential . Lack - ing such a demonstration the presumption is that the diﬃculties of vacuum polarization are not so easily circumvented . 20 An alternative procedure discussed in B is to assume that the function K + ( 2 , 1 ) used above is incorrect and is to be replaced by a modiﬁed function K 0 + having no singularity on the light cone . The eﬀect of this is to provide a convergence factor C ( p 2 − m 2 ) for every integral over electron momenta . 21 This will multiply the integrand of ( 32 ) by C ( p 2 − m 2 ) C ( ( p + q ) 2 − m 2 ) , since the integral was originally δ ( p a − p b + q ) d 4 p a d 4 p b and both p a and p b get convergence factors . The integral now converges but the result is unsatisfactory . 22 One expects the current ( 31 ) to be conserved , that is q µ j µ = 0 or 20 It would be very interesting to calculate the Lamb shift accurately enough to be sure that the 20 megacycles expected from vacuum polarization are actually present . 21 This technique also makes self - energy and radiationless scattering integrals ﬁnite even without the modiﬁcation of δ + to f + for the radiation ( and the consequent convergence factor C ( k 2 ) for the quanta ) . See B . 22 Added to the terms given below ( 33 ) there is a term 14 ( λ 3 − 2 µ 2 + 13 q 2 ) δ µν for C ( k 2 ) = − λ 2 ( k 2 − λ 2 ) − 1 , which is not gauge invariant . ( In addition the charge renormalization has − 7 / 6 added to the logarithm . ) 26 q µ J µν = 0 . Also one expects no current if a is a gradient , or a ν = q ν , times a constant . This leads to the condition J µν q ν = 0 which is equivalent to q µ J µν = 0 since J µν is symmetrical . But when the expression ( 32 ) is in - tegrated with such convergence factors it does not satisfy this condition . By altering the kernel from K to another , K 0 , which does not satisfy the Dirac equation we have lost the gauge invariance , its consequent current conservation and the general consistency of the theory . One can see this best by calculating J µν q ν directly from ( 32 ) . The ex - pression within the spur becomes ( p + q − m ) − 1 q ( p − m ) − 1 γ µ which can be written as the diﬀerence of two terms : ( p − m ) − 1 γ µ − ( p + q − m ) − 1 γ µ Each of these terms would give the same result if the integration d 4 p were without a convergence factor , for the ﬁrst can be converted into the second by a shift of the origin of p , namely p 0 = p + q . This does not result in cancelation in ( 32 ) however , for the convergence factor is altered by the substitution . A method of making ( 32 ) convergent without spoiling the gauge in - variance has been found by Bethe and by Pauli . The convergence fac - tor for light can be looked upon as the result of superposition of the ef - fects of quanta of various masses ( some contributing negatively ) . Like - wise if we take the factor C ( p 2 − m 2 ) = − λ 2 ( p 2 − m 2 − λ 2 ) − 1 so that ( p 2 − m 2 ) − 1 C ( p 2 − m 2 ) = ( p 2 − m 2 ) − 1 − ( p 2 − m 2 − λ 2 ) − 1 we are taking the diﬀerence of the result for electrons of mass m and mass ( λ 2 + m 2 ) 1 / 2 . But we have taken this diﬀerence for each propagation between interactions with photons . They suggest instead that once created with a certain mass the electron should continue to propagate with this mass through all the potential interactions until it closes its loop . That is if the quantity ( 32 ) , integrated over some ﬁnite range of p , is called J µν ( m 2 ) and the correspond - ing quantity over the same range of p , but with m replaced by ( m 2 + λ 2 ) 1 / 2 is J µν ( m 2 + λ 2 ) we should calculate J Pµν = ∞ Z 0 [ J µν ( m 2 ) − J µν ( m 2 + λ 2 ) ] G ( λ ) dλ , ( 32 0 ) the function G ( λ ) satisfying R ∞ 0 G ( λ ) dλ = 1 and R ∞ 0 G ( λ ) λ 2 dλ = 0 . Then in the expression for J P µν the range of p integration can be extended to inﬁnity as the integral now converges . The result of the integration using 27 this method is the integral on dλ over G ( λ ) of ( see Appendix C ) J Pµν = − e 2 π ( q µ q ν − δ µν q 2 ) (cid:18) − 13 ln λ 2 m 2 − (cid:20) 4 m 2 + 2 q 2 3 q 2 (cid:16) 1 − θ tan θ (cid:17) − 19 (cid:21)(cid:19) , ( 33 ) with q 2 = 4 m 2 sin 2 θ . The gauge invariance is clear , since q µ ( q µ q ν − q 2 δ µν ) = 0 . Operating ( as it always will ) on a potential of zero divergence the ( q µ q ν − δ µν q 2 ) a ν , is simply − q 2 a µ , the D’Alembertian of the potential , that is , the current producing the potential . The term − 13 ( ln ( λ 2 / m 2 ) ) ( q µ q ν − q 2 δ µν ) therefore gives a current proportional to the current producing the potential . This would have the same eﬀect as a change in charge , so that we would have a diﬀerence ∆ ( e 2 ) between e 2 and the experimentally observed charge , e 2 + ∆ ( e 2 ) , analogous to the diﬀerence between m and the observed mass . This charge depends logarithmically on the cut - oﬀ , ∆ ( e 2 ) / e 2 = − ( 2 e 2 / 3 π ) ln ( λ / m ) . After this renormalization of charge is made , no eﬀects will be sensitive to the cut - oﬀ . After this is done the ﬁnal term remaining in ( 33 ) , contains the usual eﬀects 23 of polarization of the vacuum . It is zero for a free light quan - tum ( q 2 = 0 ) . For small q 2 it behaves as ( 2 / 15 ) q 2 ( adding − 15 to the logarithm in the Lamb eﬀect ) . For q 2 > ( 2 m ) 2 it is complex , the imagi - nary part representing the loss in amplitude required by the fact that the probability that no quanta are produced by a potential able to produce pairs ( ( q 2 ) 1 / 2 > 2 m ) decreases with time . ( To make the necessary analytic continuation , imagine m to have a small negative imaginary part , so that ( 1 − q 2 / 4 m 2 − 1 ) 1 / 2 becomes − i ( q 2 / 4 m 2 − 1 ) 1 / 2 as q 2 goes from below to above 4 m 2 . Then θ = π / 2 + iu where sin h u = + ( q 2 / 4 m 2 − 1 ) 1 / 2 , and − 1 / tan θ = i tan hu = + i ( q 2 − 4 m 2 ) 1 / 2 ( q 2 ) − 1 / 2 ) . Closed loops containing a number of quanta or potential interactions larger than two produce no trouble . Any loop with an odd number of inter - actions gives zero ( I , reference 9 ) . Four or more potential interactions give integrals which are convergent even without a convergence factor as is well known . The situation is analogous to that for self - energy . Once the sim - ple problem of a single closed loop is solved there are no further divergence diﬃculties for more complex processes . 24 23 E . A . Uehling , Phys . Rev . 48 , 55 ( 1935 ) , R . Serber , Phys . Rev . 48 , 49 ( 1935 ) . 24 There are loops completely without external interactions . For example , a pair is created virtually along with a photon . Next they annihilate , absorbing this photon . Such 28 8 LONGITUDINAL WAVES In the usual form of quantum electrodynamics the longitudinal and transverse waves are given separate treatment . Alternately the condition ( ∂A µ / ∂x µ ) Ψ = 0 is carried along as a supplementary condition . In the present form no such special considerations are necessary for we are dealing with the solutions of the equation − (cid:3) 2 A µ = 4 πj µ , with a current j µ , which is conserved ∂j µ / ∂x µ = 0 . That means at least (cid:3) 2 ( ∂A µ / ∂x µ ) = 0 and in fact our solution also satisﬁes ∂A µ / ∂x µ = 0 . To show that this is the case we consider the amplitude for emission ( real or virtual ) of a photon and show that the divergence of this amplitude vanishes . The amplitude for emission for photons polarized in the µ direction involves matrix elements of γ µ . Therefore what we have to show is that the corresponding matrix elements of q µ γ µ = q vanish . For example , for a ﬁrst order eﬀect we would require the matrix element of q between two states p 1 and p 2 = p 1 + q . But since q = p 2 − p 1 and ( ˜ u 2 p 1 u 1 ) = m ( ˜ u 2 u 1 ) = ( ˜ u 2 p 2 u 1 ) the matrix element vanishes , which proves the contention in this case . It also vanishes in more complex situations ( essentially because of relation ( 34 ) , below ) ( for example , try putting e 2 = q 2 in the matrix ( 15 ) for the Compton Eﬀect ) . To prove this in general , suppose a i , i = 1 to N are a set of plane wave disturbing potentials carrying momenta q i , ( e . g . , some may be emissions or absorptions of the same or diﬀerent quanta ) and consider a matrix for the transition from a state of momentum p 0 to p N such as a N Π N − 1 t = 1 ( p i − m ) − 1 a i , where p i = p i − 1 + q i ( and in the product , terms with larger i are written to the left ) . The most general matrix element is simply a linear combination of these . Next consider the matrix between states p 0 and p N + q in a situation in which not only are the a i , acting but also another potential a exp ( − iq · x ) where a = q . This may act previous to all a i in which case it gives a N Π ( p i + q − m ) − 1 a i ( p 0 + q − m ) − 1 q which is equivalent to + a N Π ( p i + q − m ) − 1 a i since + ( p 0 + q − m ) − 1 q is equivalent to ( p 0 + q − m ) − 1 × ( p 0 + q − m ) as p 0 is equivalent to m acting on the initial state . Likewise if it acts after all the potentials it gives q ( p N − m ) − 1 a N Π ( p i − m ) − 1 a i which is equivalent to − a N Π ( p i − m ) − 1 a i since p N + q − m gives zero on the ﬁnal state . Or again loops are disregarded on the grounds that they do not interact with anything and are thereby completely unobservable . Any indirect eﬀects they may have via the exclusion principle have already been included . 29 it may act between the potential a k and a k + 1 for each k . This gives N − 1 P k = 1 a N Π N − 1 i = k + 1 ( p i + q − m ) − 1 a i ( p k + q − m ) − 1 × q ( p k − m ) − 1 a k Π k − 1 j = 1 ( p j − m ) − 1 a j . However , ( p k + q − m ) − 1 q ( p k − m ) − 1 = ( p k − m ) − 1 − ( p k + q − m ) − 1 , ( 34 ) so that the sum breaks into the diﬀerence of two sums , the ﬁrst of which may be converted to the other by the replacement of k by k − 1 . There remain only the terms from the ends of the range of summation , + a N N − 1 Π i = 1 ( p i − m ) − 1 a i − a N N − 1 Π i = 1 ( p i + q − m ) − 1 a i . These cancel the two terms originally discussed so that the entire eﬀect is zero . Hence any wave emitted will satisfy ∂A µ / ∂x µ = 0 . Likewise lon - gitudinal waves ( that is , waves for which A µ = ∂φ / ∂x µ or a = q cannot be absorbed and will have no eﬀect , for the matrix elements for emission and absorption are similar . ( We have said little more than that a poten - tial A µ = ∂ϕ / ∂x µ has no eﬀect on a Dirac electron since a transformation ψ 0 = exp ( − iφ ) ψ removes it . It is also easy to see in coordinate representa - tion using integrations by parts . ) This has a useful practical consequence in that in computing probabil - ities for transition for unpolarized light one can sum the squared matrix over all four directions rather than just the two special polarization vectors . Thus suppose the matrix element for some process for light polarized in direction e µ , is e µ M µ . If the light has wave vector q µ , we know from the argument above that q µ M µ = 0 . For unpolarized light progressing in the z direction we would ordinarily calculate M 2 x + M 2 y . But we can as well sum M 2 x + M 2 y + M 2 z − M 2 t for q µ M µ implies M t = M z since q t = q z for free quanta . This shows that unpolarized light is a relativistically invariant con - cept , and permits some simpliﬁcation in computing cross sections for such light . Incidentally , the virtual quanta interact through terms like γ µ . . . γ µ k − 2 d 4 k . Real processes correspond to poles in the formulae for virtual processes . The pole occurs when k 2 = 0 , but it looks at ﬁrst as though in the sum on all four values of µ , of γ µ . . . γ µ we would have four kinds of polarization instead of two . Now it is clear that only two perpendicular to k are eﬀective . 30 The usual elimination of longitudinal and scalar virtual photons ( leading to an instantaneous Coulomb potential ) can of course be performed here too ( although it is not particularly useful ) . A typical term in a virtual transition is γ µ . . . γ µ k − 2 d 4 k where the . . . represent some intervening matrices . Let us choose for the values of µ , the time t , the direction of vector part K , of k , and two perpendicular directions 1 , 2 . We shall not change the expression for these two 1 , 2 for these are represented by transverse quanta . But we must ﬁnd ( γ t . . . γ t ) − ( γ K . . . γ K ) . Now k = k 4 γ t − Kγ K , where K = ( K · K ) 1 / 2 , and we have shown above that k replacing the γ µ . gives zero . 25 Hence Kγ K is equivalent to k 4 γ t and ( γ t . . . γ t ) − ( γ K . . . γ K ) = ( ( K 2 − k 24 ) / K 2 ) ( γ t . . . γ y ) , so that on multiplying by k − 2 d 4 k = d 4 k ( k 24 − K 2 ) − 1 the net eﬀect is − ( γ t . . . γ t ) d 4 k / K 2 . The γ t means just scalar waves , that is , potentials pro - duced by charge density . The fact that 1 / K 2 does not contain k 4 means that k 4 can be integrated ﬁrst , resulting in an instantaneous interaction , and the d 3 K / K 2 is just the momentum representation of the Coulomb potential , 1 / r . 25 A little more care is required when both γ µ ’s act on the same particle . Deﬁne x = k 4 γ t + Kγ K , and consider ( k . . . x ) + x . . . k ) . Exactly this term would arise if a system , acted on by potential x carrying momentum − k , is disturbed by an added potential k of momentum + k ( the reversed sign of the momenta in the intermediate factors in the second term x . . . k has no eﬀect since we will later integrate over all k ) . Hence as shown above the result is zero , hut since ( k . . . x ) + ( x . . . k ) = k 24 ( γ t . . . γ t ) − K 2 ( γ K . . . γ K ) we can still conclude ( γ K . . . γ K ) = k 24 K − 2 ( γ t . . . γ t ) . 31 9 KLEIN GORDON EQUATION The methods may be readily extended to particles of spin zero satisfying the Klein Gordon equation , 26 (cid:3) 2 ψ − m 2 ψ = i∂ ( A µ ψ ) / ∂x µ + iA µ ∂ψ / ∂x µ − A µ A µ ψ . ( 35 ) The important kernel is now I + ( 2 , 1 ) denned in ( I , Eq . ( 32 ) ) . For a free particle , the wave function ψ ( 20 satisﬁes + (cid:3) 2 ψ − m 2 ψ = 0 . At a point , 2 , inside a space time region it is given by ψ ( 2 ) = Z [ ψ ( 1 ) ∂I + ( 2 , 1 ) / ∂x 1 µ − ( ∂ψ / ∂x 1 µ ) I + ( 2 , 1 ) ] N µ ( 1 ) d 3 V 1 , ( as is readily shown by the usual method of demonstrating Green’s the - orem ) the integral being over an entire 3 - surface boundary of the region ( with normal vector N µ ) . Only the positive frequency components of ψ con - tribute from the surface preceding the time corresponding to 2 , and only negative frequencies from the surface future to 2 . These can be interpreted as electrons and positrons in direct analogy to the Dirac case . The right - hand side of ( 35 ) can be considered as a source of new waves and a series of terms written down to represent matrix elements for processes of increasing order . There is only one new point here , the term in A µ A µ by which two quanta can act at the same time . As an example , suppose three quanta or potentials , a µ exp ( − iq a · x ) , b µ exp ( − iq b · x ) , and c µ exp ( iq e · x ) are to act in that order on a particle of original momentum p 0 µ , so that p a = p 0 + q a , and p b = p a + q b ; the ﬁnal momentum being p c = p b + q c . 26 The equations discussed in this section were deduced from the formulation of the Klein Gordon equation given in reference 5 , Section 14 . The function ψ in this section has only one component and is not a spinor . An alternative formal method of making the equations valid for spin zero and also for spin 1 is ( presumably ) by use of the Kemmer - Duﬃn matrices β µ satisfying the commutation relation β µ β ν β σ + β σ β ν β µ = δ µν β σ + δ σν β µ . If we interpret a to mean a µ β µ , rather than a µ γ µ , for any a µ , all of the equations in mo - mentum space will remain formally identical to those for the spin 1 / 2 ; with the exception of those in which a denominator ( p − m ) − 1 has been rationalized to ( p + m ) ( p 2 − m 2 ) − 1 since p 2 is no longer equal to a number , p · p . But p 3 does equal ( p · p ) p that ( p − m ) − 1 may now be interpreted as ( m p + m 2 + p 2 − p · p ) ( p · p − m 2 ) − 1 . This im - plies that equations in coordinate space will be valid of the function K + ( 2 , 1 ) is given as K + ( 2 , 1 ) = [ ( i O 2 + m ) − m − 1 ( O 2 + (cid:3) 22 ) ] iI + ( 2 , 1 ) with O 2 = β µ ∂ / ∂x 2 µ . This is all in virtue of the fact that the many component wave function ψ ( 5 components for spin 0 , 10 for spin 1 ) satisﬁes ( i O − m ) ψ = a ψ which is formally identical to the Dirac Equation . See W . Pauli , Rev . Mod . Phys . 13 , 203 ( 1940 ) . 32 The matrix element is the sum of three terms ( p 2 = p µ p µ ) ( illustrated in Fig . 7 ) ( p c · c + p b · c ) ( p 2 b − m 2 ) − 1 ( p b · b + p a · b ) × ( p 2 a − m 2 ) − 1 ( p a · a + p 0 · a ) − ( p c · c + p b · c ) ( p 2 b − m 2 ) − 1 ( b · a ) − ( c · b ) ( p 2 a − m 2 ) − 1 ( p a · a + p 0 · a ) . ( 36 ) The ﬁrst comes when each potential acts through the perturbation i∂ ( A µ ψ ) / ∂x µ + iA µ ∂ψ / ∂x µ . These gradient operators in momentum space mean respectively the momentum after and before the potential A µ oper - ates . The second term comes from b µ and a µ acting at the same instant and arises from the A µ A µ term in ( a ) . Together b µ and a µ carry momentum q bµ + q aµ so that after b · a operates the momentum is p 0 + q a + q b or p b . The ﬁnal term comes from c µ and b µ operating together in a similar manner . The term A µ A µ thus permits a new type of process in which two quanta can be emitted ( or absorbed , or one absorbed , one emitted ) at the same time . There is no a · c term for the order a , b , c we have assumed . In an actual problem there would be other terms like ( 36 ) but with alterations in the order in which the quanta a , b , c act . In these terms a · c would appear . As a further example the self - energy of a particle of momentum p µ is ( e 2 / 2 πim ) Z [ ( 2 p − k ) µ ( ( p − k ) 2 − m 2 ) − 1 × ( 2 p − k ) µ − δ µµ ] d 4 k k − 2 C ( k 2 ) , where the δ µµ comes from the A µ A µ term and represents the possibility of the simultaneous emission and absorption of the same virtual quantum . This integral without the C ( k 2 ) diverges quadratically and would not converge if C ( k 2 ) = − λ 2 / ( k 2 − λ 2 ) . Since the interaction occurs through the gradients of the potential , we must use a stronger convergence factor , for example C ( k 2 ) = λ 4 ( k 2 − λ 2 ) − 2 , or in general ( 17 ) with R ∞ 0 λ 2 G ( λ ) dλ = 0 . In this case the self - energy converges but depends quadratically on the cut - oﬀ λ and is not necessarily small compared to m . The radiative corrections to scattering after mass renormalization are insensitive to the cut - oﬀ just as for the Dirac equation . When there are several particles one can obtain Bose statistics by the rule that if two processes lead to the same state but with two electrons ex - changed , their amplitudes are to be added ( rather than subtracted as for Fermi statistics ) . In this case equivalence to the second quantization treat - ment of Pauli and Weisskopf should be demonstrable in a way very much like that given in I ( appendix ) for Dirac electrons . The Bose statistics mean that the sign of contribution of a closed loop to the vacuum polarization is 33 the opposite of what it is for the Fermi case ( see I ) . It is ( p b = p a + q ) J µν = e 2 2 πim R [ ( p bµ + p aµ ) ( p bν + p aν ) ( p 2 a − m 2 ) − 1 × ( p 2 b − m 2 ) − 1 − δ µν ( p 2 a − m 2 ) − 1 − δ µν ( p 2 b − m 2 ) − 1 ] d 4 p a giving , J Pµν = e 2 π ( q µ q ν − δ µν q 2 ) (cid:20) 1 6 ln λ 2 m 2 + 1 9 − 4 m 2 − q 2 3 q 2 (cid:18) 1 − θ tan θ (cid:19)(cid:21) , the notation as in ( 33 ) . The imaginary part for ( q 2 ) 1 / 2 > 2 m is again positive representing the loss in the probability of ﬁnding the ﬁnal state to be a vacuum , associated with the possibilities of pair production . Fermi statistics would give a gain in probability ( and also a charge renormalization of opposite sign to that expected ) . Figure 7 : Klein - Gordon particle in three potentials , Eq , ( 36 ) . The coupling to the electromagnetic ﬁeld is now , for example , p 0 · a + p a · a , and a new possibility arises , ( b ) , of simultaneous interaction with two quanta a · b . The propagation factor is now ( p · p − m 2 ) − 1 for a particle of momentum p µ . 10 APPLICATION TO MESON THEORIES The theories which have been developed to describe mesons and the in - teraction of nucleons can be easily expressed in the language used here . Cal - culations , to lowest order in the interactions can be made very easily for the 34 various theories , but agreement with experimental results is not obtained . Most likely all of our present formulations are quantitatively unsatisfactory . We shall content ourselves therefore with a brief summary of the methods which can be used . The nucleons are usually assumed to satisfy Dirac’s equation so that the factor for propagation of a nucleon of momentum p is ( p − M ) − 1 where M is the mass of the nucleon ( which implies that nucleons can be created in pairs ) . The nucleon is then assumed to interact with mesons , the various theories diﬀering in the form assumed for this interaction . First , we consider the case of neutral mesons . The theory closest to electrodynamics is the theory of vector mesons with vector coupling . Here the factor for emission or absorption of a meson is gγ µ , when this meson is “polarized” in the µ direction . The factor g the “mesonic charge , ” replaces the electric charge e . The amplitude for propagation of a meson of momen - tum q in intermediate states is ( q 2 − µ 2 ) − 1 ( rather than q − 2 as it is for light ) where µ is the mass of the meson . The necessary integrals are made ﬁnite by convergence factors C ( q 2 − µ 2 ) as in electrodynamics . For scalar mesons with scalar coupling the only change is that one replaces the γ µ by 1 in emission and absorption . There is no longer a direction of polarization , µ , to sum upon . For pseudo - scalar mesons , pseudoscalar coupling replace γ µ by γ 5 = iγ x γ y γ z γ t . For example , the self - energy matrix of a nucleon of momentum p in this theory is ( g 2 / πi ) Z γ 5 ( p − k − M ) − 1 γ 5 d 4 k ( k 2 − µ 2 ) − 1 C ( k 2 − µ 2 ) . Other types of meson theory result from the replacement of γ µ , by other expressions ( for example by 12 ( γ µ γ ν − γ ν γ µ ) with a subsequent sum over all µ and ν for virtual mesons ) . Scalar mesons with vector coupling result from the replacement of γ µ by µ − 1 q where q is the ﬁnal momentum of the nucleon minus its initial momentum , that is , it is the momentum of the meson if absorbed , or the negative of the momentum of a meson emitted . As is well known , this theory with neutral mesons gives zero for all processes , as is proved by our discussion on longitudinal waves in electrodynamics . Pseudoscalar mesons with pseudo - vector coupling corresponds to γ µ being replaced by µ − 1 γ 5 q white vector mesons with tensor coupling correspond to using ( 2 µ ) − 1 ( γ µ q − q γ µ ) . These extra gradients involve the danger of producing higher divergencies for real processes . For example , γ 5 q gives a logarithmically divergent interaction of neutron and electron . 27 Although 27 M . Slotnick and W . Heitler , Phys . Rev . 75 , 1645 ( 1949 ) . 35 these divergencies can be held by strong enough convergence factors , the results then are sensitive to the method used for convergence and the size of the cut - oﬀ values of λ . For low order processes µ − 1 γ 5 q is equivalent to the pseudoscalar interaction 2 Mµ − 1 γ 5 because if taken between free particle wave functions of the nucleon of momenta p 1 and p 2 = p 1 + q , we have ( ˜ u 2 γ 5 q u 1 ) = ( ˜ u 2 γ 5 ( p 2 − p 1 ) u 1 ) = − ( ˜ u 2 p 2 γ 5 u 1 ) − ( ˜ u 2 γ 5 p 1 u 1 ) = − 2 M ( ˜ u 2 γ 5 u 1 ) since γ 5 anticommutes with p 2 and p 2 operating on the state 2 equivalent to M as is 1 on the state 1 . This shows that the γ 5 interaction is unusually weak in the non - relativistic limit ( for example the expected value of γ 5 for a free nucleon is zero ) , but since γ 25 = 1 is not small , pseudoscalar theory gives a more important interaction in second order than it does in ﬁrst . Thus the pseudoscalar coupling constant should be chosen to ﬁt nuclear forces including these important second order processes . 28 The equivalence of pseudoscalar and pseudo - vector coupling which holds for low order pro - cesses therefore does not hold when the pseudoscalar theory is giving its most important eﬀects . These theories will therefore give quite diﬀerent results in the majority of practical problems . In calculating the corrections to scattering of a nucleon by a neutral vector meson ﬁeld ( γ µ ) due to the eﬀects of virtual mesons , the situation is just as in electrodynamics , in that the result converges without need for a cut - oﬀ and depends only on gradients of the meson potential . With scalar ( 1 ) or pseudoscalar ( γ µ ) neutral mesons the result diverges logarithmically and so must be cut oﬀ . The part sensitive to the cut - oﬀ , however , is di - rectly proportional to the meson potential . It may thereby be removed by a renormalization of mesonic charge g . After this renormalization the results depend only on gradients of the meson potential and are essentially inde - pendent of cut - oﬀ . This is in addition to the mesonic charge renormalization coming from the production of virtual nucleon pairs by a meson , analogous to the vacuum polarization in electrodynamics . But here there is a further diﬀerence from electrodynamics for scalar or pseudoscalar mesons in that the polarization also gives a term in the induced current proportional to the meson potential representing therefore an additional renormalization of the mass of the meson which usually depends quadratically on the cut - oﬀ . Next consider charged mesons in the absence of an electromagnetic ﬁeld . One can introduce isotopic spin operators in an obvious way . ( Speciﬁcally 28 H . A . Bethe , Bull . Am . Phys . Soc . 24 , 3 , Z3 ( Washington , 1949 ) . 36 replace the neutral γ 5 , say , by τ i γ − 5 and sum over i = 1 , 2 , where τ 1 = τ + + τ − , τ 2 = i ( τ + − τ − ) and τ + changes neutron to proton ( τ + on proton = 0 ) and τ − changes proton to neutron . ) It is just as easy for practical problems simply to keep track of whether the particle is a proton or a neutron on a diagram drawn to help write down the matrix element . This excludes certain processes . For example in the scattering of a negative meson from q 1 to q 2 by a neutron , the meson q 2 must be emitted ﬁrst ( in order of operators , not time ) for the neutron cannot absorb the negative meson q 1 until it becomes a proton . That is , in comparison to the Klein Nishina formula ( 15 ) , only the analogue of second term ( see Fig . 5 ( b ) ) would appear in the scattering of negative mesons by neutrons , and only the ﬁrst term ( Fig . 5 ( a ) ) in the neutron scattering of positive mesons . The source of mesons of a given charge is not conserved , for a neutron capable of emitting negative mesons may ( on emitting one , say ) become a proton no longer able to do so . The proof that a perturbation q gives zero , discussed for longitudinal electromagnetic waves , fails . This has the consequence that vector mesons , if represented by the interaction γ µ , would not satisfy the condition that the divergence of the potential is zero . The interaction is to be taken 29 as γ µ − µ − 2 q µ q in emission and as γ µ in absorp - tion if the real emission of mesons with a non - zero divergence of potential is to be avoided . ( The correction term µ − 2 q µ q gives zero in the neutral case . ) The asymmetry in emission and absorption is only apparent , as this is clearly the same thing as subtracting from the original γ µ . . . γ µ , a term µ − 2 q . . . q . That is , if the term − µ − 2 q µ q is omitted the resulting theory 29 The vector meson ﬁeld potentials ϕ µ satisfy − ∂ / ∂x ν ( ∂ϕ µ / ∂x ν − ∂ϕ ν / ∂x µ ) − µ 2 ϕ µ = − 4 πs µ , where s µ , the source for such mesons , is the matrix element of γ µ between states of neutron and proton . By taking the divergence ∂ / ∂x µ of both sides , conclude that ∂ϕ ν / ∂x ν = 4 πµ − 2 ∂s ν / ∂x ν , so that the original equation can lie rewritten as (cid:3) 2 ϕ µ − µ 2 ϕ µ = − 4 π ( s µ + µ − 2 ∂ / ∂x µ ( ∂s ν / ∂x ν ) ) . The right hand side gives in momentum representation γ µ − µ − 2 q µ q ν γ ν the left yields the ( q 2 − µ 2 ) − 1 and ﬁnally the interaction s µ ϕ µ in the Lagrangian gives the γ µ on absorption . Proceeding in this way ﬁnd generally that particles of spin one can be represented by a four - vector u µ ( which , for a free particle of momentum q satisﬁes q · u = 0 ) . The propaga - tion of virtual particles of momentum q from state ν to µ is represented by multiplication by the 4 - 4 matrix ( or tensor ) P µν = ( δ µν − µ 2 q µ q ν ) × ( q 2 − µ 2 ) − 1 . The ﬁrst - order interac - tion ( from the Proca equation ) with an electromagnetic potential a exp ( ik · x ) corresponds to multiplication by the matrix E µν = ( q 2 · a + q 1 · a ) δ µν − q 2 ν a µ − q 1 ν a ν , where q 1 and q 2 = q 1 + k are the momenta before and after the interaction . Finally , two potentials a , b may act simultaneously , with matrix E 0 µν = − ( a · b ) δ µν + b µ a ν 37 describes a combination of mesons of spin one and spin zero . The spin zero mesons , coupled by vector coupling q , are removed by subtracting the term µ − 2 q . . . q . The two extra gradients q . . . q make the problem of diverging integrals still more serious ( for example the interaction between two protons corre - sponding to the exchange of two charged vector mesons depends quadrati - cally on the cut - oﬀ if calculated in a straightforward way ) . One is tempted in this formulation to choose simply γ µ . . . γ µ and accept the admixture of spin zero mesons . But it appears that this leads in the conventional formalism to negative energies for the spin zero component . This shows one of the advan - tages of the method of second quantization of meson ﬁelds over the present formulation . There such errors of sign are obvious while here we seem to be able to write seemingly innocent expressions which can give absurd re - sults . Pseudovector mesons with pseudovector coupling correspond to using γ 5 ( γ µ − µ − 2 q µ q ) for absorption and γ 5 γ µ for emission for both charged and neutral mesons . In the presence of an electromagnetic ﬁeld , whenever the nucleon is a proton it interacts with the ﬁeld in the way described for electrons . The meson interacts in the scalar or pseudoscalar case as a particle obeying the Klein - Gordon equation . It is important here to use the method of calculation of Bethe and Pauli , that is , a virtual meson is assumed to have the same “mass” during all its interactions with the electromagnetic ﬁeld . The result for mass µ and for ( µ 2 + λ 2 ) 1 / 2 are subtracted and the diﬀerence integrated over the function G ( λ ) dλ . A separate convergence factor is not provided for each meson propagation between electromagnetic interactions , otherwise gauge invariance is not insured . When the coupling involves a gradient , such as γ − 5 q where q is the ﬁnal minus the initial momentum of the nucleon , the vector potential A must be subtracted from the momentum of the proton . That is , there is an additional coupling ± γ 5 A ( plus when going from proton to neutron , minus for the reverse ) representing the new possibility of a simultaneous emission ( or absorption ) of meson and photon . Emission of positive or absorption of negative virtual mesons are repre - sented in the same term , the sign of the charge being determined by temporal relations as for electrons and positrons . Calculations are very easily carried out in this way to lowest order in g 2 for the various theories for nucleon interaction , scattering of mesons by nucleons , meson production by nuclear collisions and by gamma - rays , nu - clear magnetic moments , neutron electron scattering , etc . , However , no good agreement with experiment results , when these are available , is obtained . Probably all of the formulations are incorrect . An uncertainty arises since 38 the calculations are only to ﬁrst order in g 2 , and are not valid if g 2 / ~ c is large . The author is particularly indebted to Professor H . A . Bethe for his explanation of a method of obtaining ﬁnite and gauge invariant results for the problem of vacuum polarization . He is also grateful for Professor Bethe’s criticisms of the manuscript , and for innumerable discussions during the development of this work . He wishes to thank Professor J . Ashkin for his careful reading of the manuscript . APPENDIX In this appendix a method will be illustrated by which the simpler integrals appearing in problems in electrodynamics can be directly evaluated . The integrals arising in more complex processes lead to rather complicated functions , but the study of the relations of one integral to another and their expression in terms of simpler integrals may be facilitated by the methods given here . As a typical problem consider the integral ( 12 ) appearing in the ﬁrst order radiationless scattering problem : Z γ µ ( p 2 − k − m ) − 1 a ( p 1 − k − m ) − 1 γ µ k − 2 d 4 kC ( k 2 ) , ( 1 a ) where we shall take C ( k 2 ) to be typically − λ 2 ( k 2 − λ 2 ) − 1 and d 4 k means ( 2 π ) − 2 dk 1 dk 2 dk 3 dk 4 . We ﬁrst rationalize the factors ( p − k − m ) − 1 = ( p − k + m ) ( ( p − k ) 2 − m 2 ) − 1 obtaining , Z γ µ ( p 2 − k + m ) a ( p 1 − k + m ) γ µ k − 2 d 4 kC ( k 2 ) × ( ( p 1 − k ) 2 − m 2 ) − 1 ( ( p 2 − k ) 2 − m 2 ) − 1 . ( 2 a ) The matrix expression may be simpliﬁed . It appears to be best to do so after the integrations are performed . Since AB = 2 A · B − BA where A · B = A µ B µ is a number commuting with all matrices , ﬁnd , if R is any expression , and A a vector , since γ µ A = − A γ µ + 2 A µ , γ µ A Rγ µ = − A γ µ Rγ µ + 2 R A . ( 3 a ) Expressions between two γ µ ’s can be thereby reduced by induction . Particularly useful are γ µ γ µ = 4 γ µ A γ µ = − 2 A γ µ AB γ µ = 2 ( AB + BA ) = 4 A · B γ µ ABC γ µ = − 2 CBA ( 4 a ) 39 where A , B , C are any three vector - matrices ( i . e . , linear combinations of the four γ µ s ) , In order to calculate the integral in ( 2a ) the integral may be written as the sum of three terms ( since k = k σ γ σ ) , γ µ ( p 2 + m ) a ( p 1 + m ) γ µ J 1 − [ γ µ γ σ a ( p 1 + m ) γ µ + γ µ ( p 2 + m ) a γ σ γ µ ] J 2 + γ µ γ σ a γ τ γ µ J 3 , ( 5 a ) where J ( 1 ; 2 ; 3 ) = Z ( 1 ; k σ ; k σ k τ ) k − 2 d 4 kC ( k 2 ) × ( ( p 2 − k ) 2 − m 2 ) − 1 ( ( p 1 − k ) 2 − m 2 ) − 1 . ( 6 a ) That is for J 1 the ( 1 ; k σ ; k σ k τ ) is replaced by 1 , for J 2 by k σ and for J 3 by k σ k τ . More complex processes of the ﬁrst order involve more factors like ( ( p 3 − k ) 2 − m 2 ) − 1 and a corresponding increase in the number of k ’s which may appear in the numerator , as k σ k τ k ν . . . . Higher order processes involving two or more virtual quanta involve similar integrals but with factors possibly involving k + k 0 instead of just k , and the integral extending on k − 2 d 4 kC ( k 2 ) k 0 − 2 d 4 kC ( 0 2 ) . They can be simpliﬁed by methods analogous to those used on the ﬁrst order integrals . The factors ( p − k ) 2 − m 2 may be written ( p − k ) 2 − m 2 = k 2 − 2 p · k − ∆ , ( 7 a ) where ∆ = m 2 − p 2 , ∆ 1 = m 21 − p 21 , etc . , and we can consider dealing with cases of greater generality in that the diﬀerent denominators need not have the same value of the mass m . In our speciﬁc problem ( 6a ) p 21 = m 2 that ∆ 1 = 0 , but we desire to work with greater generality . Now for the factor C ( k 2 ) / k 2 we shall use − λ 2 ( k 2 − λ 2 ) − 1 k − 2 . This can be written as − λ 2 / ( k 2 − λ 2 ) k 2 = k − 2 C ( k 2 ) = − λ 2 Z 0 dL ( k 2 − L ) − 2 . ( 8 a ) Thus we can replace k − 2 C ( k 2 ) by ( k 2 − L ) − 2 and at the end integrate the result with respect to L from zero to λ 2 . We can for many practical purposes consider λ 2 very large relative to m 2 or p 2 . When the original integrai converges even without the convergence factor , it will be obvious since the L integration will then be convergent to inﬁnity . If an infra - red catastrophe exists in the integral one can simply assume quanta have a small mass λ min and extend the integral on L from λ 2 min to λ 2 , rather than from zero to λ 2 . We then have to do integrals of the form Z ( 1 ; k σ ; k σ k τ d 4 k ( k 2 − L ) − 2 ( k 2 − 2 p 1 · k − ∆ 1 ) − 1 × ( k 2 − 2 p 2 · k − ∆ 2 ) − 1 , ( 9 a ) where by ( 1 ; k σ ; k σ k τ ) we mean that in the place of this symbol either 1 , or k σ or k σ k τ may stand in diﬀerent cases . In more complicated problems there may be 40 more factors ( k 2 − 2 p i · k − ∆ i ) − 1 or other powers of these factors ( the ( k 2 − L ) − 2 may be considered as a special case of such a factor with p i = 0 , ∆ i = L ) and further factors like k σ k τ k ρ . . . in the numerator . The poles in all the factors are made deﬁnite by the assumption that L , and the ∆’s have inﬁnitesimal negative imaginary parts . We shall do the integrals of successive complexity by induction . We start with the simplest convergent one , and show Z d 4 k ( k 2 − L ) − 3 = ( 8 iL ) − 1 . ( 10 a ) For this integral is R ( 2 π ) − 2 dk 4 d 3 K ( k 24 − K · K − L ) − 3 where the vector K , of magnitude K = ( K · K ) 1 / 2 is k 1 , k 2 , k 3 . The integral on k 4 shows third order poles at k 4 = + ( K 2 + L ) 1 / 2 and k 4 = − ( K 2 + L ) 1 / 2 . Imagining , in accordance with our deﬁnitions , that L has a small negative imaginary part only the ﬁrst is below the real axis . The contour can be closed by an inﬁnite semi - circle below this axis , without change of the value of the integral since the contribution from the semi - circle vanishes in the limit . Thus the contour can be shrunk about the pole k 4 = + ( K 2 + L ) 1 / 2 and the resulting k 4 , integral is − 2 πi times the residue at this pole . Writing k 4 = ( k 2 + L ) 1 / 2 + (cid:15) and expanding ( k 24 − K 2 − L ) − 3 = (cid:15) − 3 ( (cid:15) + 2 ( K 2 + L ) 1 / 2 ) − 3 in powers of (cid:15) , the residue , being the coeﬃcient of the term (cid:15) − 1 , is seen to be 6 ( 2 ( K 2 + L ) 1 / 2 ) − 5 so our integral is − ( 3 i / 32 π ) ∞ Z 0 4 πK 2 dK ( K 2 + L ) − 5 / 2 = ( 3 / 8 i ) ( 1 / 3 L ) establishing ( 10a ) . We also have R k σ d 4 k ( k 2 − L ) − 3 = 0 from the symmetry in the k space . We write these results as ( 8 i ) Z ( 1 ; k σ ) d 4 k ( k 2 − L ) − 3 = ( 1 ; 0 ) L − 1 , ( 11 a ) where in the brackets ( 1 ; k σ ) and ( 1 ; 0 ) corresponding entries are to he used . Substituting k = k 0 − p in ( 11a ) and calling L − p 2 = ∆ shows that ( 8 i ) Z ( 1 ; k σ ) d 4 k ( k 2 − 2 p · k − ∆ ) − 3 = ( 1 ; p σ ) ( p 2 + ∆ ) − 1 . ( 12 a ) By diﬀerentiating both sides of ( 12a ) with respect to ∆ or with respect to p τ there follows directly ( 24 i ) Z ( 1 ; k σ ; k σ k τ ) d 4 k ( k 2 − 2 p · k − ∆ ) − 4 = − ( 1 ; p σ ; p σ p τ − 1 2 δ στ ( p 2 + ∆ ) ) ( p 2 + ∆ ) − 2 . ( 13 a ) Further diﬀerentiations give directly successive integrals including more k factors in the numerator and higher powers of ( k 2 − 2 p · k − ∆ ) in the denominator . 41 The integrals so far only contain one factor in the denominator . To obtain results for two factors we make use of the identity a − 1 b − 1 = Z 1 0 dx ( ax + b ( 1 − x ) ) − 2 , ( 14 a ) ( suggested by some work of Schwinger’s involving Gaussian integrals ) . This rep - resents the product of two reciprocals as a parametric integral over one and will therefore permit integrals with two factors to be expressed in terms of one . For other powers of a , b we make use of all of the identities , such as a − 2 b − 1 = Z 1 0 2 xdx ( ax + b ( 1 − x ) ) − 3 , ( 15 a ) deducible from ( 14a ) by successive diﬀerentiations with respect to a or b . To perform an integral , such as ( 8 i ) Z ( 1 ; k σ ) d 4 k ( k 2 − 2 p 1 · k − ∆ 1 ) − 2 ( k 2 − 2 p 2 · k − ∆ 2 ) − 1 , ( 16 a ) write , using ( 15a ) , ( k 2 − 2 p 1 · k − ∆ 1 ) − 2 ( k 2 − 2 p 2 · k − ∆ 2 ) − 1 = Z 1 0 2 xdx ( k 2 − 2 p x · k − ∆ x ) − 3 , where p x = x p 1 + ( 1 − x ) p 2 and ∆ x = x ∆ 1 + ( 1 − x ) ∆ 2 , ( 17 a ) ( note that ∆ x is not equal to m 2 − p 2 x ) so that the expression ( l6a ) is ( 8 i ) R 1 0 2 xdx ( 1 ; k σ ) d 4 k ( k 2 − 2 p x · k ∆ x ) − 3 which may now be evaluated by ( 12a ) and is ( 16 a ) = Z 1 0 ( 1 ; p xσ ) 2 xdx ( p 2 x + ∆ x ) − 1 , ( 18 a ) where , p x , ∆ x are given in ( 17a ) . The integral in ( 18a ) is elementary , being the integral of ratio of polynomials , the denominator of second degree in x . The general expression although readily obtained is a rather complicated combination of roots and logarithms . Other integrals can be obtained again by parametric diﬀerentiation . For exam - ple diﬀerentiation of ( 16a ) , ( 18a ) with respect to ∆ 2 or p 2 τ gives ( 8 i ) Z ( 1 ; k σ ; k σ k τ ) d 4 k ( k 2 − 2 p 1 · k − ∆ 1 ) − 2 ( k 2 − 2 p 2 · k − ∆ 2 ) − 2 = − Z 1 0 ( 1 ; p xσ ; p xσ p xτ − 1 2 δ στ ( x 2 p 2 + ∆ x ) ) × 2 x ( 1 − x ) dx ( p 2 x + ∆ x ) − 2 , ( 19 a ) again leading to elementary integrals . 42 As an example , consider the case that the second factor is just ( k 2 − L ) − 2 and in the ﬁrst put p 1 = p , ∆ 1 = ∆ . Then p x = x p , ∆ x − x ∆ + ( 1 − x ) L . There results ( 8 i ) Z ( 1 ; k σ ; k σ k τ ) d 4 k ( k 2 − L ) − 2 ( k 2 − 2 p · k − ∆ ) − 2 = − Z 1 0 ( 1 ; xp σ ; x 2 p σ p τ − 1 2 δ στ ( x 2 p 2 + ∆ x ) ) × 2 x ( 1 − x ) dx ( x 2 p 2 + ∆ x ) − 2 . ( 20 a ) Integrals with three factors can be reduced to those involving two by using ( 14a ) again . They , therefore , lead to integrals with two parameters ( e . g . , see application to radiative correction to scattering below ) . The methods of calculation given in this paper are deceptively simple when applied to the lower order processes . For processes of increasingly higher orders the complexity and diﬃculty increases rapidly , and these methods soon become impractical in their present form . A . Self - Energy The self - energy integral ( 19 ) is ( e 2 / πi ) Z γ µ ( p − k − m ) − 1 γ µ k − 2 d 4 kC ( k 2 ) , ( 19 ) so that it requires that we ﬁnd ( using the principle of ( 8a ) ) the integral on L from 0 to λ 2 of Z γ µ ( p − k + m ) γ µ d 4 k ( k 2 − L ) − 2 ( k 2 − 2 p · k ) − 1 , since ( p − k ) 2 − m 2 = k 2 − 2 p · k , as p 2 = m 2 . This is of the form ( 16a ) with ∆ 1 = L , p 1 = 0 , ∆ 2 = 0 , p 2 = p so that ( 18a ) gives , since p x = ( 1 − x ) p , ∆ x = xL , ( 8 i ) Z ( 1 ; k σ ) d 4 k ( k 2 − L ) − 2 ( k 2 − 2 p · k ) − 1 = Z 1 0 ( 1 ; ( 1 − x ) p σ 02 xdx ( ( 1 − x ) 2 m 2 x L ) − 1 , or performing the integral on L , as in ( 8 ) , ( 8 i ) Z ( 1 ; k σ ) d 4 k k − 2 C ( k 2 ) ( k 2 − 2 p · k ) − 1 = Z 1 0 ( 1 ; ( 1 − x ) p σ ) 2 dx ln xλ 2 + ( 1 − x ) 2 m 2 ( 1 − x ) 2 m 2 . Assuming now that λ 2 (cid:29) m 2 we neglect ( 1 − x ) 2 m 2 relative to xλ 2 in the ar - gument of the logarithm , which then becomes ( λ 2 / m 2 ) ( x / ( 1 − x ) 2 ) . Then since R 1 0 dx ln ( x ( 1 − x ) − 2 ) = 1 and R 1 0 ( 1 − x ) dx ln ( x ( 1 − x ) − 2 ) = − ( 1 / 4 ) ﬁnd ( 8 i ) Z ( 1 ; k σ ) k − 2 C ( k 2 ) d 4 k ( k 2 − 2 p · k ) − 1 = (cid:18) 2 ln λ 2 m 2 + 2 ; p σ (cid:18) ln λ 2 m 2 − 1 2 (cid:19)(cid:19) , 43 so that substitution into ( 19 ) ( after the ( p − k − m ) − 1 in ( 19 ) is replaced by ( p − k + m ) ( k 2 − 2 p · k ) − 1 ) gives ( 19 ) = ( e 2 / 8 π ) γ µ [ ( p + m ) ( 2 ln ( λ 2 / m 2 ) + 2 ) − p ( ln ( λ 2 / m 2 ) − 1 2 ) ] γ µ = ( e 2 / 8 π ) [ 8 m ( ln ( λ 2 / m 2 ) + 1 ) − p ( 2 ln ( λ 2 m 2 ) + 5 ) ] , ( 20 ) using ( 4a ) to remove the γ µ ’s . This agrees with Eq . ( 20 ) of the text , and gives the self - energy ( 21 ) when p is replaced by m . B . Corrections to Scattering The term ( 12 ) in the radiationless scattering , after rationalizing the matrix denominators and using p 21 = p 22 = m 2 requires the integrals ( 9a ) , as we have discussed . This is an integral with three denominators which we do in two stages . First the factors ( k 2 − 2 p 1 · k ) and ( k 2 − 2 p 2 · k ) are combined by a parameter y ; ( k 2 − 2 p 1 · k ) − 1 ( k 2 − 2 p 2 · k ) − 1 = Z 1 0 dy ( k 2 − 2 p y · k ) − 2 , from ( 14a ) where p y = yp 1 + ( 1 − y ) p 2 . ( 21 a ) We therefore need the integrals ( 8 i ) Z ( 1 ; k σ ; k σ k τ ) d 4 k ( k 2 − L ) − 2 ( k 2 − 2 p y · k ) − 2 , ( 22 a ) which we will then integrate with respect to y from 0 to 1 . Next we do the integrals ( 22a ) immediately from ( 20a ) with p = p y , ∆ = 0 : ( 22 a ) = − R 1 0 R 1 0 ( 1 ; xp yσ ; x 2 p yσ p yτ − 1 2 δ στ ( x 2 p 2 y + ( 1 − x ) L ) ) 2 x ( 1 − x ) dx ( x 2 p 2 y + L ( 1 − x ) ) − 2 dy . We now turn to the integrals on L as required in ( 8a ) . The ﬁrst term , ( 1 ) , in ( 1 ; k σ ; k σ k τ ) gives no trouble for large L , but if L is put equal to zero there results x − 2 p − 2 y which leads to a diverging integral on x as x → 0 . This infra - red catastrophe is analyzed by using λ 2 min for the lower limit of the L integral . For the last term the upper limit of L must be kept as λ 2 . Assuming λ 2 min (cid:28) p 2 y (cid:28) λ 2 the x integrals which remain are trivial , as in the self - energy case . One ﬁnds − ( 8 i ) Z ( k 2 − λ 2 min ) − 1 d 4 kC ( k 2 − λ 2 min ) ( k 2 − 2 p 1 · k ) − 1 ( k 2 − 2 p 2 · k ) − 1 = Z 1 0 p − 2 y dy ln ( p 2 y / λ 2 min ) ( 23 a ) 44 − ( 8 i ) Z k σ k − 2 d 4 kC ( k 2 ) ( k 2 − 2 p 1 · k ) − 1 ( k 2 − 2 p 2 · k ) − 1 = 2 Z 1 0 p yσ p − 2 y dy , ( 24 a ) − ( 8 i ) Z k σ k τ k − 2 d 4 kC ( k 2 ) ( k 2 − 2 p 1 · k ) − 1 ( k 2 − 2 p 2 · k ) − 1 = Z 1 0 p yσ p yτ p − 2 y dy − 1 2 δ στ Z 1 0 dy ln ( λ 2 p − 2 y ) + 1 4 δ στ . ( 25 a ) The integrals on y give , Z 1 0 p − 2 y dy ln ( p 2 y λ − 2 min ) = 4 ( m 2 sin 2 θ ) − 1 " θ ln ( mλ − 1 min ) − Z θ 0 α tan αdα # , ( 26 a ) Z 1 0 p yσ p − 2 y dy = θ ( m 2 sin 2 θ ) − 1 ( p 1 σ + P 2 σ ) , ( 27 a ) Z 1 0 p yσ p yτ p − 2 y dy = θ ( 2 m 2 sin 2 θ ) − 1 ( p 1 σ + p 1 τ ( p 2 σ + p 2 τ ) + q − 2 q σ q τ ( 1 − θ ctn θ ) , ( 28 a ) Z 1 0 dy ln ( λ 2 p − 2 y ) = ln ( λ 2 / m 2 ) + 2 ( 1 − θ ctn θ ) . ( 29 a ) These integrals on y were performed as follows . Since p 2 = p 1 + q where q is the momentum carried by the potential , it follows from p 22 = p 21 = m 2 that 2 p 1 · q = − q 2 so that since p y = p 1 + q ( 1 − y ) , p 2 y = m 2 − q 2 y ( 1 − y ) . The substitution 2 y − 1 = tan θ where θ is deﬁned by 4 m 2 sin 2 θ = q 2 is useful for it means p 2 y = m 2 sec 2 α / sec 2 θ and p − 2 y dy = ( m 2 sin 2 θ ) ) − 1 dα where α goes from − θ to + θ . These results are substituted into the original scattering formula ( 2a ) , giving ( 22 ) . It has been simpliﬁed by frequent use of the fact that p 1 operating on the initial state is m and likewise p 2 when it appears at the left is replacable by m . ( Thus , to simplify : γ µ p 2 ap 1 γ µ = − 2 p 1 ap 2 by ( 4 a ) , = − 2 ( p 2 − q ) a ( p 1 + q ) = − 2 ( m − q ) a ( m + q ) . A term like qaq = − q 2 a + 2 ( a · q ) q is equivalent to just − q 2 a since q = p 2 − p 1 = m − m has zero matrix element . ) The renormalization term requires the corresponding integrals for the special case q = 0 . 45 C . Vacuum Polarization The expressions ( 32 ) and ( 32 0 ) for J µν in the vacuum polarization problem require the calculation of the integral J µν ( m 2 ) = e 2 πi Z Sp [ γ µ ( p − 1 2 q + m ) γ ν p + 1 2 q + m ) ] d 4 p × ( ( p − 1 2 q ) 2 − m 2 ) − 1 ( ( p + 1 2 q ) 2 − m 2 ) − 1 , ( 32 ) where we have replaced p by p − 12 q to simplify the calculation somewhat . We shall indicate the method of calculation by studying the integral , I ( m 2 ) = Z p σ p τ d 4 p ( ( p − 1 2 q ) 2 − m 2 ) − 1 ( ( p + 1 2 q ) 2 − m 2 ) − 1 . The factors in the denominator , p 2 − p · q − m 2 + 14 q 2 and p 2 + p · q − m 2 + 14 q 2 are combined as usual by ( 8a ) but for symmetry we substitute x = 12 ( 1 + η ) , ( 1 − x ) = 12 ( 1 − η ) and integrate η from − 1 to + 1 : I ( m 2 ) = + 1 Z − 1 p σ p τ d 4 p ( p 2 − ηp · q − m 2 + 1 4 q 2 ) − 2 dη / 2 . ( 30 a ) But the integral on p will not be found in our list for it is badly divergent . However , as discussed in Section 7 , Eq . ( 34 0 ) we do not wish I ( m 2 ) but rather ∞ R 0 [ I ( m 2 ) − I ( m 2 + λ 2 ) ] G ( λ ) dλ . We can calculate the diﬀerence I ( m 2 ) − I ( m 2 + λ 2 ) by ﬁrst calculating the derivative I 0 ( m 2 + L ) of I with respect to m 2 at m 2 + L and later integrating L from zero to λ 2 . By diﬀerentiating ( 30a ) , with respect to m 2 ﬁnd , I 0 ( m 2 + L ) = + 1 Z − 1 p σ p τ d 4 p ( p 2 − ηp · q − m 2 − L + 1 4 q 2 ) − 3 dη . This still diverges , but we can diﬀerentiate again to get I 00 ( m 2 + L ) = 3 + 1 Z − 1 p σ p τ d 4 p ( p 2 − ηp · q − m 2 − L + 1 4 q 2 ) − 4 dη = − ( 8 i ) − 1 + 1 Z − 1 ( 1 4 η 2 q σ q τ D − 2 − 1 2 δ στ D − 1 ) dη ( 31 a ) ( where D = 14 ( η 2 − 1 ) q 2 + m 2 + L ) , which now converges and has been evaluated by ( 13a ) with p = 12 η q and ∆ = m 2 + L − 14 q 2 . Now to get I 0 we may integrate 46 I 00 with respect to L as an indeﬁnite integral and we may choose any convenient arbitrary constant . This is because a constant C in I 0 will mean a term − Cλ 2 in I ( m 2 ) − I ( m 2 + λ 2 ) which vanishes since we will integrate the results times G ( λ ) dλ and ∞ R 0 λ 2 G ( λ ) dλ = 0 . This means that the logarithm appearing on integrating L in ( 31a ) presents no problem . We may take I 0 ( m 2 + L ) = ( 8 i ) − 1 + 1 Z − 1 [ 1 4 η 2 q σ q τ D − 1 + 1 2 δ στ ln D ] dη + Cδ στ , a subsequent integral on L and ﬁnally on η presents no new problems . There results − ( 8 i ) Z p σ p τ d 4 p ( ( p − 1 2 q ) 2 − m 2 ) − 1 ( ( p + 1 2 q ) 2 − m 2 ) − 1 = ( q σ q τ − δ στ q 2 ) (cid:20) 1 9 − 4 m 2 − q 2 3 q 2 (cid:18) 1 − θ tan θ (cid:19) + 1 6 ln λ 2 m 2 (cid:21) + δ στ [ ( λ 2 + m 2 ) ln ( λ 2 m − 2 + 1 ) − C 0 λ 2 ] ( 32 a ) where we assume λ 2 (cid:29) m 2 and have put some terms into the arbitrary constant C 0 which is independent of λ 2 ( but in principle could depend on q 2 and which drops out in the integral on G ( λ ) dλ . We have set q 2 = 4 m 2 sin 2 θ . In a very similar way the integral with m 2 in the numerator can be worked out . It is , of course , necessary to diﬀerentiate this m 2 also when calculating I 0 and I 00 . There results − ( 8 i ) Z m 2 d 4 p ( ( p − 1 2 q ) 2 − m 2 ) − 1 ( ( p + 1 2 q ) 2 − m 2 ) − 1 = 4 m 2 ( 1 − θ ctn θ ) − q 2 / 3 + 2 ( λ 2 + m 2 ) ln ( λ 2 m − 2 + 1 ) − C 00 λ 2 ) , ( 33 a ) with another unimportant constant C 00 . The complete problem requires the further integral , − ( 8 i ) Z ( 1 ; p σ ) d 4 p ( ( p − 1 2 q ) 2 − m 2 ) − 1 ( ( p + 1 2 q ) 2 − m 2 ) − 1 = ( 1 , 0 ) ( 4 ( 1 − θ ctn θ ) + 2 ln ( λ 2 m − 2 ) ) . ( 34 a ) The value of the integral ( 34a ) times m 2 diﬀers from ( 33a ) , of course , because the results on the right are not actually the integrals on the left , hut rather equal their actual value minus their value for m 2 = m 2 + λ 2 . Combining these quantities , as required by ( 32 ) , dropping the constants C 0 , C 00 and evaluating the spur gives ( 33 ) . The spurs are evaluated in the usual way , noting that the spur of any odd number of γ matrices vanishes and S p ( AB ) = S p ( BA ) for arbitrary A , B . The S p ( 1 ) = 4 and we also have 1 2 S p [ ( p 1 + m 1 ) ( p 2 − m 2 ) ] = p 1 · p 2 − m 1 m 2 , ( 35 a ) 47 1 2 S p [ ( p 1 + m 1 ) ( p 2 − m 2 ) ( p 4 − m 4 ) ] = ( p 1 · p 2 − m 1 m 2 ) ( p 3 · p 4 − m 3 m 4 ) − ( p 1 · p 3 − m 1 m 3 ) ( p 2 · p 4 − m 2 m 4 ) + ( P − 1 · p 4 − m 1 m 4 ) ( p 2 · p 3 − m 2 m 3 ) , ( 36 a ) where p i , m i are arbitrary four - vectors and constants . It is interesting that the terms of order λ 2 ln λ 2 go out , so that the charge renormalization depends only logarithmically on λ 2 . This is not true for some of the meson theories . Electrodynamics is suspiciously unique in the mildness of its divergence . D . More Complex Problems Matrix elements for complex problems can be set up in a manner analogous to that used for the simpler cases . We give three illustrations ; higher order corrections to the M ∅ ller scattering , to the Compton scattering , and the interaction of a neutron Figure 8 : The interaction between two electrons to order ( e 2 / ~ c ) 2 . One adds the contribution of every ﬁgure involving two virtual quanta , Appendix D . with an electromagnetic ﬁeld . For the M ∅ ller scattering , consider two electrons , one in state u 1 of momentum p 1 and the other in state u 2 of momentum p 2 . Later they are found in states u 3 , p 3 and u 4 , p 4 . This may happen ( ﬁrst order in e 2 / ~ c ) because they exchange a quantum of momentum q = p 1 − p 3 = p 4 − p 2 in the manner of Eq . ( 4 ) and 48 Fig . 1 . The matrix element for this process is proportional to ( translating ( 4 ) to momentum space ) ( ˜ u 4 γ µ u 2 ) ( ˜ u 3 γ µ u 1 ) q − 2 . ( 37 a ) We shall discuss corrections to ( 37a ) to the next order in e 2 / ~ c . ( There is also the possibility that it is the electron at 2 which ﬁnally arrives at 3 , the electron at 1 going to 4 through the exchange of quantum of momentum p 3 − p 2 . The amplitude for this process , ( ˜ u 4 γ µ u 1 ) ( ˜ u 3 γ µ u 2 ) ( p 3 − p 2 ) − 2 must be subtracted from ( 37a ) in accordance with the exclusion principle . A similar situation exists to each order so that we need consider in detail only the corrections to ( 37a ) , reserving to the last the subtraction of the same terms with 3 , 4 exchanged . ) One reason that ( 37a ) is modiﬁed is that two quanta may be exchanged , in the manner of Fig . 8a . The total matrix element for all exchanges of this type is ( e 2 / πi ) Z ( ˜ u 3 γ ν ( p 1 − k − m ) − 1 γ µ u 1 ) ( ˜ u 4 γ ν ( p 2 + k − m ) − 1 γ µ u 2 ) · k − 2 ( q − k ) − 2 d 4 k , ( 38 a ) as is clear from the ﬁgure and the general rule that electrons of momentum p contribute in amplitude ( p − m ) − 1 between interactions γ µ and that quanta of momentum k contribute k − 2 . In integrating on d 4 k and summing over µ and ν , we add all alternatives of the type of Fig . 8a . If the time of absorption , γ µ , of the quantum k by electron 2 is later than the absorption , γ µ , of q − k , this corresponds to the virtual state p 2 + k being a positron ( so that ( 38a ) contains over thirty terms of the conventional method of analysis ) . In integrating over all these alternatives we have considered all possible distor - tions of Fig . 8a which preserve the order of events along the trajectories . We have not included the possibilities corresponding to Fig . 8b , however . Their contribution is ( e 2 / πi ) Z ( ˜ u 3 γ ν ( p 1 − k − m ) − 1 γ ν u 1 ) × ( ˜ u 4 γ µ ( p 2 + q − k − m ) − 1 γ ν u 2 ) k − 2 ( q − k ) − 2 d 4 k , ( 39 a ) as is readily veriﬁed by labeling the diagram . The contributions of all possible ways that an event can occur are to be added . This means that one adds with equal weight the integrals corresponding to each topologically distinct ﬁgure . To this same order there are also the possibilities of Fig . 8d which give ( e 2 / πi ) Z ( ˜ u 3 γ ν ( p 2 − k − m ) − 1 γ µ ( p 1 − k − m ) − 1 γ ν u 1 ) × ( ˜ u 4 γ µ u 2 ) k − 2 q − 2 d 4 k . This integral on k will be seen to be precisely the integral ( 12 ) for the radiative corrections to scattering , which we have worked out . The term may be combined with the renormalization terms resulting from the diﬀerence of the eﬀects of mass change and the terms , Figs . 8f and 8g . Figures 8e , 8h , and 8i are similarly analyzed . Finally the term Fig . 8c is clearly related to our vacuum polarization problem , and when integrated gives a term proportional to ( ˜ u 4 γ µ u 2 ) ( ˜ u 3 γ ν u 1 ) J µν q − 4 . If the 49 Figure 9 : Radiative correction to the Compton scattering term ( a ) of Fig . 5 . Appendix D . charge is renormalized the term ln ( λ / m ) in J µν in ( 33 ) is omitted so there is no remaining dependence on the cut - oﬀ . The only new integrals we require are the convergent integrals ( 38a ) and ( 39a ) . They can be simpliﬁed by rationalizing the denominators and combining them by ( 14a ) . For example ( 38a ) involves the factors ( k 2 − 2 p 1 · k ) − 1 ( k 2 + 2 p 2 · k ) − 1 k − 2 ( q 2 + k 2 − 2 q · k ) − 2 . The ﬁrst two may be com - bined by ( 14a ) with a parameter x , and the second pair by an expression obtained by diﬀerentation ( l5a ) with respect to b and calling the parameter y . There results a factor ( k 2 − 2 p x · k ) − 2 ( k 2 + y q 2 − 2 yq · k ) − 4 so that the integrals on d 4 k now involve two factors and can be performed by the methods given earlier in the appendix . The subsequent integrals on the parameters x and y are complicated and have not been worked out in detail . Working with charged mesons there is often a considerable reduction of the number of terms . For example , for the interaction between protons resulting from the exchange of two mesons only the term corresponding to Fig . 8h remains . Term 8a , for example , is impossible , for if the ﬁrst proton emits a positive meson the second cannot absorb it directly for only neutrons can absorb positive mesons . As a second example , consider the radiative correction to the Compton scat - tering . As seen from Eq . ( 15 ) and Fig . 5 this scattering is represented by two terms , so that we can consider the corrections to each one separately . Figure 9 shows the types of terms arising from corrections to the term of Fig . 5a . Calling k 50 the momentum of the virtual quantum , Fig . 9a gives an integral Z γ µ ( p 2 − k − m ) − 1 e 2 ( p 1 + q 1 − k − m ) − 1 e 1 ( p 1 − k − m ) − 1 γ µ k − 2 d 4 k , convergent without cut - oﬀ and reducible by the methods outlined in this appendix . The other terms are relatively easy to evaluate . Terms b and c of Fig . 9 are closely related to radiative corrections ( although somewhat more diﬃcult to evaluate , for one of the states is not that of a free electron , ( p 1 + q ) 2 6 = m 2 ) . Terms e , f , are renormalization terms . From term d must be subtracted explicitly the eﬀect of mass ∆ m , as analyzed in Eqs . ( 26 ) and ( 27 ) leading to ( 28 ) with p 0 = p 1 + q , a = e 2 , b = e 1 . Terms g , h give zero since the vacuum polarization has zero eﬀect on free light quanta , q 21 = 0 , q 22 = 0 . The total is insensitive to the cut - oﬀ λ . The result shows an infra - red catastrophe , the largest part of the eﬀect . When cut - oﬀ at λ min , the eﬀect proportional to ln ( m / λ min ) goes as ( e 2 / π ) ln ( m / λ min ) ( 1 − 2 θ ctn2 θ ) , ( 40 a ) times the uncorrected amplitude , where ( p 2 − p 1 ) 2 = 4 m 2 sin 2 θ . This is the same as for the radiative correction to scattering for a deﬂection p 2 − p 1 . This is physically clear since the long wave quanta are not eﬀected by short - lived intermediate states . The infra - red eﬀects arise 30 from a ﬁnal adjustment of the ﬁeld from the asymptotic coulomb ﬁeld characteristic of the electron of momentum p 1 before the collision to that characteristic of an electron moving in a new direction p 2 after the collision . The complete expression for the correction is a very complicated expression involving transcendental integrals . As a ﬁnal example we consider the interaction of a neutron with an electromag - netic ﬁeld in virtue of the fact that the neutron may emit a virtual negative meson . We choose the example of pseudoscalar mesons with pseudovector coupling . The change in amplitude due to an electromagnetic ﬁeld A = a exp ( − iq · x ) determines the scattering of a neutron by such a ﬁeld . In the limit of small q it wilt vary as qa − aq which represents the interaction of a particle possessing a magnetic mo - ment . The ﬁrst - order interaction between an electron and a neutron is given by the same calculation by considering the exchange of a quantum between the electron and the nucleon . In this case a µ is q − 2 times the matrix element of γ µ between the initial and ﬁnal states of the electron , the states diﬀering in momentum by q . The interaction may occur because the neutron of momentum p 1 emits a neg - ative meson becoming a proton which proton interacts with the ﬁeld and then reabsorbs the meson ( Fig . 10a ) . The matrix for this process is ( p 2 = p 1 + q ) , Z ( γ 5 k ( p 2 − k − M ) − 1 a ( p 1 − k − M ) − 1 ( γ 5 k ) ( k 2 − µ 2 ) − 1 d 4 k . ( 41 a ) Alternatively it may be the meson which interacts with the ﬁeld . We assume that it does this in the manner of a scalar potential satisfying the Klein Gordon Eq . 30 F . Bloch and A . Nordsieck , Phys . Rev . 52 , 54 ( 1937 ) . 51 ( 35 ) , ( Fig . l0b ) − Z ( γ 5 k 2 ) ( p 1 − k 1 − M ) − 1 ( γ 5 k 1 ) ( k 22 − µ 2 ) − 1 × ( k 2 · a + k 1 · a ) ( k 21 − µ 2 ) − 1 d 4 k 1 , ( 42 a ) where we have put k 2 = k 1 + q . The change in sign arises because the virtual meson is negative . Finally there are two terms arising from the γ 5 a part of the pseudovector coupling ( Figs . 10c , 10d ) Z ( γ 5 k ) ( p 2 − k − M ) − 1 ( γ 5 a ) ( k 2 − µ 2 ) − 1 d 4 k , ( 43 a ) and Z ( γ 5 a ) ( p 1 − k − M ) − 1 ( γ 5 k ) ( k 2 − µ 2 ) − 1 d 4 k , ( 44 a ) Using convergence factors in the manner discussed in the section on meson theories each integral can be evaluated and the results combined . Expanded in powers of q the ﬁrst term gives the magnetic moment of the neutron and is insensitive to the cut - oﬀ , the next gives the scattering amplitude of stow electrons on neutrons , and depends logarithmically on the cut - oﬀ . The expressions may be simpliﬁed and combined somewhat before integration . This makes the integrals a little easier and also shows the relation to the case of pseudoscalar coupling . For example in ( 41a ) the ﬁnal γ 5 k can be written as γ 5 ( k − p 1 + M ) since p 1 = M when operating on the initial neutron state . This is ( p 1 − k − M ) γ 5 + 2 mγ 5 since γ 5 anticommutes with p 1 and k . The ﬁrst term cancels the ( p 1 − k − M ) − 1 and gives a term which just cancels ( 43a ) . In a like manner the leading factor γ 5 k in ( 41a ) is written as − 2 Mγ − 5 − γ 5 ( p 2 − k − M ) , the second term leading to a simpler term containing no ( p 2 − k − M ) − 1 factor and combining with a similar one from ( 44a ) . One simpliﬁes the γ 5 k 1 and γ 5 k 2 in ( 42a ) in an analogous way . There ﬁnally results terms like ( 41a ) , ( 42a ) but with pseudoscalar coupling 2 Mγ 5 instead of γ 5 k , no terms like ( 43a ) or ( 44a ) and a remainder , representing the diﬀerence in eﬀects of pseudovector and pseudoscalar coupling . The pseudoscalar terms do not depend sensitively on the cut - oﬀ , but the diﬀerence term depends on it logarithmically . The diﬀerence term aﬀects the electron - neutron interaction but not the magnetic moment of the neutron . Interaction of a proton with an electromagnetic potential can be similarly an - alyzed . There is an eﬀect of virtual mesons on the electromagnetic properties of the proton even in the case that the mesons are neutral . It is analogous to the radiative corrections to the scattering of electrons due to virtual photons . The sum of the magnetic moments of neutron and proton for charged mesons is the same as the proton moment calculated for the corresponding neutral mesons . In fact it is readily seen by comparing diagrams . that for arbitrary q , the scattering matrix to ﬁrst order in the electromagnetic potential for a proton according to neutral meson theory is equal , if the mesons were charged , to the sum of the matrix for a neutron 52 Figure 10 : According to the meson theory a neutron interacts with an elec - tromagnetic potential a by ﬁrst emitting a virtual charged meson . The ﬁgure illustrates the case for a pseudoscalar meson with pseudovector cou - pling . Appendix D . and the matrix for a proton . This is true , for any type or mixtures of meson cou - pling , to all orders in the coupling ( neglecting the mass diﬀerence of neutron and proton ) . 53