Developmental Cell Perspective Expanding the Morphogenetic Repertoire : Perspectives from the Drosophila Egg David Bilder 1 , * and Saori L . Haigo 1 , 2 1 Department of Molecular & Cell Biology , 379 Life Sciences Addition # 3200 , University of California , Berkeley , Berkeley , CA 94720 - 3200 , USA 2 Present address : Dept . of Biochemistry , University of California , San Francisco , San Francisco , CA 94158 - 2517 USA * Correspondence : bilder @ berkeley . edu DOI 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2011 . 12 . 003 Tissue and organ architectures are incredibly diverse , yet our knowledge of the morphogenetic behaviors that generate them is relatively limited . Recent studies have revealed unexpected mechanisms that drive axis elongation in the Drosophila egg , including an unconventional planar polarity signaling pathway , a distinctive type of morphogenetic movement termed ‘‘global tissue rotation , ’’ a molecular corset - like role of extracellular matrix , and oscillating basal cellular contractions . We review here what is known about Drosophila egg elongation , compare it to other instances of morphogenesis , and highlight several issues of general developmental relevance . The Problem of Tissue Morphogenesis The most captivating aspect of biology to the youngest budding scientist may be the diversity of animal forms . Darwin memorably expressed this sentiment as ‘‘endless forms most beautiful’’ ( Darwin , 1859 ) ; both external bodies and their internal organ counterparts display wonderful , and wonderfully diverse , forms . These forms do not of course exist for our aesthetic appreciation ; instead they adhere to the maxim ‘‘form follows function . ’’ To give just one example , the function of many of our own organs , including vasculature , kidneys , and lungs , depends on the construction of a highly branched network of elongated tubules . In order to understand how organs and indeed organisms func - tion , we need to understand the processes that generate such forms during development . The mechanisms that drive tissue and organ morphogenesis are subjects of long - standing interest . Embryonic events such as gastrulation and axis extension have been extensively studied , particularly in externally fertilizing animals such as sea urchins , sea squirts , frogs , ﬁsh , worms , and ﬂies . Despite this diversity , research to date has uncovered a fairly limited but highly conserved repertoire of cell behaviors that mediate morphogenesis ( Quintin et al . , 2008 ) . For instance , apical constriction of epithelial sheets drives tissue invagination during gastrulation across many species , as well as subsequent devel - opmental events ( Sawyer et al . , 2010 ) . Similarly , many species utilize convergent extension , in which a group of cells converge along a common midline and intercalate , to elongate the body axis ( Keller , 2002 ) . Yet while these are several examples of well - understood processes , our study of animal morphogenesis is really in its infancy . We need to know all the dynamic cellular behaviors that shape tissues , uncover the mechanisms by which these are individually and collectively regulated , and understand how these molecular mechanisms interface with cell and tissue mechanical properties to actually sculpt organs . Follicle Elongation during Drosophila Oogenesis This Perspective will discuss mechanisms that confer the simple oval shape of the Drosophila egg , a relatively unexamined process that is shedding new light on the above issues . Drosophila oogenesis has a long history of study , dating back to the pioneering descriptions of King ( King , 1970 ; King et al . , 1956 ) , and has numerous features that render it attractive to developmental biologists ( Spradling , 1993 ) . One advantage is the simplicity of the organ . Drosophila eggs arise from individual units called follicles ( or egg chambers ) , which consist of just two cell types , the germline and a surrounding somatic epithelium ( Figure 1C ) . A germline cyst , which contains 15 supporting nurse cells and a single oocyte , forms the core of each follicle . The cyst is encased within a simple monolayered epithelium of ‘‘follicle cells’’ ( FCs ) ; FCs contact the germline at their apical surfaces while their basal surfaces lie along a basement membrane . A second advantage is the anatomical organization of the ovary ( Figure 1A ) . The stem cell populations that generate the germline and somatic follicle components reside in the anterior of an ovariole ; each follicle moves posteriorly as it develops and is separated from neighboring follicles by intervening stalk cells ( Figure 1B ) . An ovariole contains six to eight follicles of increas - ing maturity , vividly illustrating why it can be called an ‘‘egg assembly line , ’’ and providing snapshots of the (cid:1) 7 . 5 days of development between the initial stem cell division and the mature egg . A third advantage is that the rich biology of oogen - esis can be investigated with the full power of Drosophila genetics , via both classical female sterile approaches and more contemporary genetic mosaic analyses . These features have made Drosophila oogenesis an important system for the study of diverse biological processes , from DNA replication to pattern formation to stem cell and miRNA biology . By compar - ison , one of the most visually conspicuous events – how follicles take on their shape—has received little attention . As a model for morphogenesis , the follicle again offers many attractive features ( Horne - Badovinac and Bilder , 2005 ) . First , after leaving the germarium , each follicle is encased in its own basement membrane , and its development can be considered as largely isolated . Second , it has well - deﬁned and restricted periods of cell division . After the 16 cell cyst is formed , the germline grows only through endoreplication of nurse cells , which drive a > 5000 - fold expansion of follicle volume . Mean - while , the follicle epithelium proliferates to (cid:1) 650 – 1000 cells 12 Developmental Cell 22 , January 17 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . ( measurements vary ) by the end of stage 6 , when cell divisions cease ; afterward , endoreplication allows continued FC growth ( Figure 2C ) . Therefore , changes in follicle shape after stage 6 are ‘‘pure’’ morphogenesis , with limited complicating involve - ment of cell proliferation or death . Third , the follicle is geometri - cally simple ; it is radially symmetric around its anterior - posterior ( A - P ) axis ( Figure 1D ) until dorsal - ventral symmetry is broken at stage 7 ( Roth and Lynch , 2009 ) . Indeed , the A - P axis is the early follicle’s only apparent axis , evident in the presence of special - ized FCs at each pole of the epithelium , with the oocyte localized to the posterior pole ( Figures 1A and 1C ) . Fourth and most critically , the follicle undergoes a sequence of fascinating morphogenetic changes during its development . Some of these ( e . g . , border cell migration [ Montell , 2003 ; Rørth , 2009 ] , dorsal appendage morphogenesis [ Berg , 2008 ] ) have met with substantial previous study ; others ( e . g . , the squamous / columnar transition of cuboidal epithelial cells and their accompanying repositioning with respect to the germline [ Grammont , 2007 ; Kolahi et al . , 2009 ] ) less so . In this review we focus on the most obvious morphogenetic change , which is also the simplest : how eggs develop their oval shape . Newly formed follicles are nearly perfect spheres , which appear round in cross - section . As the follicle grows , growth is initially isotropic ; stage 4 follicles are nearly as round as their precursors ( Figures 1A and 2A ) . However , during stage 5 , I nd y - G F P DN A F a s III F - a c t i n C o ll agen I V - G F P D D’ D” laitnerefmucric P - A oocyte nurse cells follicle cells C B stalk cells A stage 10B st . 9 germarium st . 7 st . 5 st . 4 stage 13 A P circumferential Figure 1 . Drosophila Oogenesis ( A ) Ovariole expressing Collagen - IV - GFP ( green ) , stained for ﬁlamentous actin ( red ) , DNA ( blue ) , and FasIII ( orange ) . Stages are marked . Anterior of ovariole is to left and posterior is to right ; all subsequent panels share this orientation unless otherwise speciﬁed . ( B ) Close - up of stalk cells ( sc ) separating two follicles . ( C ) Anterior - posterioraxisofthefollicle , establishedduring initial stages of oogenesis , is reﬂected by polar cells ( FasIII - GFP , orange ) in the epithelium . The oocyte is lo - calized at the posterior . Stage 7 follicle is stained as in ( A ) . ( D ) Radialsymmetryofthefollicle atstage 8demonstrated by slices through the A - P ( D 0 ) and circumferential ( D 00 ) axes . Indy - GFP ( green ) marks follicle epithelial plasma membranes . the follicle begins a pronounced elongation , as growth along the A - P axis exceeds that along the axes perpendicular , hereafter referred to as the ‘‘circumferential axis’’ ( Bateman et al . , 2001 ; Frydman and Spradling , 2001 ; Haigo and Bilder , 2011 ) . At stage 7 , the follicle is a prolate ellipsoid ( in cross - section a fairly regular oval ) ( Figures 1A and 2A ) , a geometry that is also seen in the stage 14 ( nearly mature ) egg . The follicle elongates (cid:1) 2 fold ( (cid:1) 75 % of total ) in 20 hr between stages 5 and 9 , which we refer to as the ‘‘major phase’’ of follicle elon - gation ( Figure 2A ) , and by stage 10 , it has reached (cid:1) 2 . 5 fold . At the end of stage 10 , the contents of the nurse cells are transferred rapidly into the oocyte in a process called ‘‘dumping’’ ( Mahajan - Miklos and Cooley , 1994 ) ; live imaging suggests that the oocyte expands to ﬁll existing follicle dimensions , so dumping primarily determines egg volume rather than follicle shape per se ( Lee and Cooley , 2007 ) . Ellipsoid shape represents a solution to maximize volume while passing through a narrow cross - sectional area such as an oviduct ( Smart , 1991 ) ; indeed , elongation of the Drosophila egg is required for it to travel readily down the oviduct to be fertilized and laid . Moreover , as egg shape preﬁgures that of the fertilized zygote , it inﬂuences the diffusion of embryonic patterning gradients . Overall , the elemental geometric transitions during Drosophila egg elonga - tion provide a simple case of organ morphogenesis . The Follicle Epithelium Sculpts the Growing Egg Through what mechanisms do insect eggs assume an elongated shape ? Pioneering investigations were made on the Dipteran gall midge Heteropeza , whose eggs also elongate from spherical to ellipsoid during development . Removal of the follicle epithe - lium through irradiation , chemical , or mechanical manipulation caused spherical eggs to develop , suggesting a critical role for the epithelium in elongation ( Went , 1978 ; Went and Junquera , 1981 ) . Strikingly , nearly spherical eggs are also produced by Drosophila homozygous for a female sterile mutation isolated by Nusslein - Volhard called kugelei ( kug ) ( Figure 3E ) ( Gutzeit et al . , 1991 ) ( now known as fat2 , see below ) . The eggs of kug females are both shorter and broader than WT eggs , distinguish - ing them from small egg mutants that fail to undergo nurse cell Developmental Cell 22 , January 17 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 13 Developmental Cell Perspective dumping and emphasizing that kug induces a speciﬁc defect in organ shape . A similar , albeit weaker , phenotype is seen in short egg ( seg ) mutants , and activity of the seg gene product , like kug , appears to be required in the FCs and not the germline ( Wie - schaus et al . , 1981 ) . These data reinforce the notion that egg elongation is determined by activities in the follicle epithelium . Elongation Requires Links between the ECM and the Actin Cytoskeleton The existence of the kug mutation indicated that egg elongation is under simple genetic control . Subsequent , often serendipitous descriptions of additional mutations that disrupt elongation of eggs or follicles—hereafter called ‘‘round egg mutants’’— conﬁrmed this ﬁnding . Some of these mutants , like kug , are homozygous viable but mutant females produce a portion of round eggs , suggesting that egg shape control is a principal role of the gene product . Other mutants show essential require - ments in embryonic or larval development , and their role in egg shape is revealed through genetic mosaic analysis ( Figures 3F , 3H , and 3I ) . To date , all tested round egg mutants act in FCs rather than the germline . Interestingly , the molecular identity of genes known to control egg elongation indicates that most act in a single process : linking the extracellular matrix to intracellular actin ﬁlaments ( Figure 5D ) . Extracellular matrix components that are found in the follicle basement membrane include Collagen IV and Laminin ; both are required for egg elongation ( Frydman and Spradling , 2001 ; A B C 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 2 . 5 3 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 A s p ec t R a t i o ( AU ) Time ( hours ) Stage Duration ( hrs ) 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 - 13 14 2 1 8 6 5 3 6 6 6 6 3 . 5 > 2 8 4 01 follicle elongation polarized global tissue rotation oscillating contractions polarized fibrillar ECM polarized basal actin filaments A - P polarity determined D - V polarity determined nurse cell dumping dorsal appendageformation border cell migration follicle cell proliferation follicle cell endoreplication m a j o r ev e n t s du r i ng oog e n es i s m o l e c u l es a nd b e h a v i o r s c on t r o lli ng e gg s h a p e eggshell secretion & maturation Figure 2 . Dynamics of Egg Elongation ( A ) Elongation of follicles , depicted as follicle aspect ratio with respect to developmental time . Stages of oogenesis are marked on top of graph . Insets show stage 4 ( isotropic ) and stage 8 ( elon - gated ) follicles . ( B and C ) Timing of events involved in egg elon - gation ( B ) , in comparison to major events of oogenesis ( C ) . Dotted lines indicate process initi - ated but not mature . See also Horne - Badovinac and Bilder ( 2005 ) . Haigo and Bilder , 2011 ) . Mutations in receptors for these molecules that are expressed on the FC basal surface , including Integrin a and b subunits ( Fig - ure 3F ) , Dystroglycan , and the receptor tyrosine phosphatase Dlar , also cause the production of round eggs ( Bateman et al . , 2001 ; Deng et al . , 2003 ; Duffy et al . , 1998 ; Frydman and Spradling , 2001 ) . Finally , proteins that link these extracellular matrix receptors to the actin cytoskeleton , including the integrin binding protein Talin and the Dystrogly - can - binding protein Dystrophin , are required , as is the Pak kinase , which may control actin organization down - stream of Dlar and integrins ( Be´cam et al . , 2005 ; Conder et al . , 2007 ; Mirouse et al . , 2009 ) . Not all round egg mutants induce identical phenotypes ; they vary in the frequency and degree of round eggs produced , and some display round follicles that die prior to egg production . Neverthe - less , they collectively indicate that interactions between the actin cytoskeleton within FCs and the basement membrane underlying them are crucial for proper egg shape . Planar Polarized Cytoskeletal Organization in the Follicle Epithelium Follicle epithelia mutant for the above genes ultimately produce round eggs , but how do these arise ? Developmental analyses have generally traced defects back to the major phase of follicle elongation . For follicles lacking Dlar or integrin function , aspect ratios diverge from WT around stage 5 ; collagen IV mutants diverge slightly later ( Bateman et al . , 2001 ; Frydman and Spra - dling , 2001 ; Haigo and Bilder , 2011 ) . Analysis of mutant follicles at these stages has revealed that they all share a common phenotype . The follicles that fail to elongate display defects in a striking planar polarized organization of actin ﬁlaments on the basal surface of the follicle epithelium ( Figures 3A and 3B ) . Planar polarity refers to the organization of morphological and / or molecular structures within and / or across a tissue in a plane orthogonal to its apicobasal axis ( note that this term is meant to be more general than the commonly used ‘‘planar cell polarity’’ [ Goodrich and Strutt , 2011 ] ) . The ﬁrst description of this organization in Drosophila ovaries came when Gutzeit , following earlier studies on microtubules in Heteropeza , docu - mented basally localized arrays of parallel actin ﬁlaments in 14 Developmental Cell 22 , January 17 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . Developmental Cell Perspective FCs ( Gutzeit , 1990 ; Tucker and Meats , 1976 ) that show three aspects of planar polarity . First , all ﬁlaments within an individual cell show a common orientation . Second , in all cells this orienta - tion is coordinated ; they are aligned around the circumferential axis of the follicle , perpendicular to the elongating A - P axis . Third , on one face along the circumferential axis , ﬁlaments in one cell terminate in ﬁlopodia - like protrusions that cross over to neighboring cells ( Figures 3A and 3J ) . These features , partic - ularly the monopolar protrusions , prompted Gutzeit ( Gutzeit , 1991 ) to term this organization ‘‘planar circular polarity’’ ; we prefer the term ‘‘chiral planar polarity’’ to distinguish the oriented but continuous planar polarity of the follicle from the more familiar planar polarity seen in bounded tissues . Planar polarized organization is not apparent when the follicle exits the germarium ; consistently oriented basal actin ﬁlaments are not visible at stage 4 . However , during stage 5 long and thin posterior basal apical anterior basementmembrane integrin β PS fat2 stage 8 stage 12 stage 8 fafafafafafafafafafafaaaafaaaaatttt2t2t2t2t2t2t2t2t2t2t2t2t2t2t2t2 D actin - rich protrusions J H stages 4 - 5 stages 5 - 8 I wt β PS β PS tw tw wt fat2 A B C G E F stage 8 stage 8 stage 12 fat2 wt wt F - actin F - actin Collagen IV - GFP F - actin F - actin F - actin Fat2 Lar β PS integrin actin filaments Collagen IV Figure 3 . Planar Cell Polarity Phenomena in Follicles ( A ) Planarpolarizedorganizationofbasalﬁlamentousactin ( red ) at stage 8 . Monopolar protrusions ( arrows ) reveal coordinated chirality within the tissue . ( B ) Appearance of planar polarized stress ﬁbers at stage 12 . ( C ) Planar polarized organization of Collagen IV ( green ) at stage 8 . ( D ) WT elongated egg . ( E ) Round egg produced by a fat2 homozygous mutant female . ( F ) Round egg produced by a female with mosaic b PS Integrin mutant clones in the follicle epithelium . ( G ) Mispolarization of basal actin in fat2 follicle at stage 8 . Note signs of local alignment . ( H ) Aberrant organization of planar polarized actin in b PS Integrin mosaic epithelium at stage 8 . Clone boundaries are marked with dotted line ; clone is to top . ( I ) displays same genotype at stage 12 . Note nonautonomous polarity defects in neighboring WT cells . ( J ) Diagram of planar polarized actin and Collagen IV localization before ( left ) and during ( right ) follicle elonga - tion . In stage 4 follicles , Collagen IV ﬁbrils are nascent and basal actin polarization is poorly coordinated . After stage 5 , Collagen IV ﬁbrils elongate in concert with polarized basal actin and monopolar protrusions in FCs . An illus - tration of the basal surface of a stage 8 FC highlights planar polarized features including monopolar actin - rich protrusions and localized Fat2 , as compared to Dlar and b PS Integrin . actin ﬁlaments appear along FC basal surfaces , oriented circumferentially , and become increas - ingly robustuntil late stage 8 ( Figures 3A and3J ) , after which they become disorganized as the FCs undergo further morphogenetic events ( Figures 2B and 2C ) ( Bateman et al . , 2001 ; Delon and Brown , 2009 ; Frydman and Spradling , 2001 ; Gutzeit , 1990 ; He et al . , 2010 ) . Planar polarized actin organization reappears tran - siently at stage 10A and then more stably at stage 12 , when ﬁlaments in oocyte - contacting FCs form dense polarized bundles that occupy most of basal surface . The latter show striking morphological and molecular resemblances to focal adhesions seen in cell culture ( Figure 3B ) ( Delon and Brown , 2009 ) . Does planar polarized actin organization play a role in Drosophila egg elongation ? Tucker and Meats initially suggested that mechanical properties of a planar polarized cytoskeleton in insect follicles might constrain growth along the circumferential axis , by providing ‘‘greater resistance to circumferential expan - sion than to elongation of the follicle parallel to its polar axis’’ ( Tucker and Meats , 1976 ) . This model found some favor with subsequent investigators , who termed it a ‘‘molecular corset . ’’ Experimental support for an actin - based molecular corset came from analyzing ‘‘round egg’’ mutant follicles ( Bateman et al . , 2001 ; Conder et al . , 2007 ; Frydman and Spradling , 2001 ; Gutzeit et al . , 1991 ; Viktorinova´ et al . , 2009 ) . In these , actin ﬁlaments retained a common orientation within a given FC , but the orientation in each cell was mispolarized with respect to the follicle axis ( Figure 3G ) . This loss of polarity is reminiscent of that seen in mutations that disrupt planar polarity in widely Developmental Cell 22 , January 17 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 15 Developmental Cell Perspective studied systems such as the ﬂy wing and vertebrate inner ear ( Axelrod , 2009 ; Goodrich and Strutt , 2011 ) where polarity is controlled by genes such as frizzled , dishevelled , fat , and dachs - ous ( which we call here the ‘‘conventional PCP signaling path - ways , ’’ Figures 5A and 5B ) . Other resemblances suggested a link between the two phenomena . For instance , planar polarity in ‘‘round egg’’ mutant follicles is not random but appears inﬂu - enced by neighboring cells , with signs of swirls and regional organization . Moreover , mosaic analysis shows that a patch of such mutant FCs can non - cell - autonomously alter the polarity of WT neighbors ( Figures 3H and 3I ) ( Bateman et al . , 2001 ; Fryd - man and Spradling , 2001 ; Viktorinova´ et al . , 2009 ) . Despite the several similarities between planar polarity in the follicle and in more familiar planar polarized systems , there are also notable differences . Though both can regulate the polariza - tion of actin - based structures within the plane of an epithelium , conventional PCP signaling often controls actin at the apical surface while in the follicle polarity is manifested at the basal surface . Mutations that disrupt conventional PCP signaling show cell - autonomous phenotypes in clones of cells ; there is little nonautonomous rescue . By contrast , small clones of round egg mutant cells can show no disruption of polarity , while large clones do . Finally , mutations that disrupt conventional PCP regulators such as Dishevelled , Van Gogh , Fat , and Dachsous have no apparent effect on follicle actin organization or elonga - tion ( Viktorinova´ et al . , 2009 ) , suggesting that a different molecular pathway is involved in controlling planar polarity in the follicle . Fat2 Points to an Alternate Pathway for Follicle Planar Polarity Potential insight into an alternative follicle planar polarity pathway has come from the recent identiﬁcation of a new egg elongation regulator ( Viktorinova´ et al . , 2009 ) . Fat2 encodes a large atypical cadherin that is related to Fat , an important regulator of conventional PCP signaling in ﬂy wings , eyes , and abdomen . Reverse genetic analysis of using small chromosomal deletions revealed that ﬂies lacking Fat2 are viable but female sterile and only produce round eggs , similar to kug mutants ( Figure 3E ) . In fact , kug mutants are allelic to fat2 mutants and contain premature stop codons in the fat2 coding sequence . Fat2 has a complex expression pattern and can be found at apical and lateral surfaces of the FCs , but at the basal sur - face a monopolar , chiral localization can be observed during stages 6 and 7 : Fat2 is enriched at a single , circumferential side of each FC , where it colocalizes with Dlar ( Figure 3J ) . In Dlar mutant follicles with misoriented actin ﬁlaments , monopolar localization of Fat2 is lost and it is found throughout the plasma membrane . The identiﬁcation of a Fat - like cadherin that controls planar organization in the follicle is a fascinating ﬁnding , given the precedent in the wing , where heterophilic binding between Fat and its partner Dachsous promotes the polarization of the intercellular contact that leads to planar polarity ( Axelrod , 2009 ; Goodrich and Strutt , 2011 ; Matakatsu and Blair , 2004 ) . In view of the structure , localization , and mutant phenotype of fat2 , along with the independence of follicle planar polarity from conventional PCP signaling , it is tempting to speculate that Fat2 reveals a distinct but partially molecularly analogous pathway for this alternative polarity system . Little is known about vertebrate homologs of Drosophila Fat2 , though one , called Fat1 , has been implicated in organizing polarized actin struc - tures in migrating cells as well as in podocytes of the kidney ( Ciani et al . , 2003 ; Hou et al . , 2006 ; Moeller et al . , 2004 ; Tanoue and Takeichi , 2004 ) . Unlike the other egg elongation regulators , Fat2 does not yet have molecular associations with ECM ; it may point to a role for intercellular communication in planar polarity within the follicle ( Viktorinova´ et al . , 2011 ) . Elongation Requires Rotation of the Follicle While the above round egg mutants identify genes required for follicle elongation , the mechanism through which they do so was unknown . We recently used live imaging of follicles to determine this mechanism and discovered an unanticipated morphogenetic behavior ( Haigo and Bilder , 2011 ) . During the major phase of elongation , the entire follicle executes several complete rotations around its circumferential axis ( Figure 4A ) . Both the orientation and the timing of rotation coincide with the basal actin planar polarity observed in ﬁxed tissue ; rotation is evident at stage 5 but ceases early in stage 9 ( Figure 2B ) . Both epithelium and germline rotate in concert ; they do so within the relatively static basement membrane that encases each follicle ( Figure 4C ) . Rotation is an active process autonomous to each follicle , as isolated follicles rotate with characteristics similar to those in intact ovarioles . Despite the fact that follicle rotation is robust , with rates averaging (cid:1) 0 . 5 m m / minute , and occurs for more than 20 hr , previous analyses of ﬁxed samples raised no suspicion that any such movement was happening . Because of the topologically closed geometry of the follicle , each interme - diate ‘‘snapshot’’ during rotation looks identical ; discovery of rotation awaited the advent of conditions for live imaging . Indeed , early ﬁlms of easily cultured Heteropeza follicles sug - gested that a similar rotation occurs ( Fux et al . , 1978 ) . What are the forces that generate rotation , and why does the follicle undergo this remarkable migration that nonetheless results in no net translocation of the tissue ? The coincident timing of follicle rotation , the initial stage of planar polarized actin organization , and the major phase of elongation prompted an investigation of round egg mutants . Follicle epithelia lacking either Integrin or Collagen IV not only fail to elongate but also fail in rotation , indicating that the epithelium is the force - generating tissue and crawls across the follicular basement membrane . This analysis also demonstrated that one function of rotation is to build a planar polarized organization of this base - ment membrane . Polarized organization of the ECM parallels that of basal actin , becoming clear at stage 5 , but is maintained at later stages when basal actin is dynamically reorganized ( Figures 2B and 3C ) . Moreover , planar ECM polarity is lost in nonrotating mutants . Thus , secretion of components from the circumferentially rotating FCs creates a circumferentially polar - ized ECM ( Figure 4D ) . This structure is not only required to permit polarized rotation but also to maintain the elongated shape of the follicle after rotation has ceased ( Figure 4F ) . The rapid return toward roundness following acute treatment of elongated follicles with collagenase but not actin depolymerizing agents indicates that the planar polarized basement membrane , rather than the basal actin ﬁlaments , serves as the molecular corset that imposes the egg’s oval shape and provides a mechanism 16 Developmental Cell 22 , January 17 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . Developmental Cell Perspective linking this unexpected morphogenetic movement to the pro - cess of egg elongation . The involvement of planar polarity and tissue rotation in egg elongation raises a host of interesting questions ; we consider below four that have general implications for developmental biology . Does Rotation Drive Elongation of Other Organs ? Follicle rotation displays hallmarks common to known morpho - genetic movements but additionally includes a number of distinguishing features . For instance , it has some resemblance to the most familiar cell behavior driving tissue elongation , con - vergent extension ( Keller , 2002 ) . In both cases , movement of cells transverse to the A - P axis drives elongation . The duration and degree of elongation during follicle rotation ( (cid:1) 2 - fold over 20 hr ) resemble classic convergent extension cases such as Xenopus gastrulation and neurulation ( (cid:1) 2 - fold over 13 . 5 hr ) . As in Drosophila follicles , Xenopus neural plate cells extend planar polarized monopolar protrusions and move along ECM 0 min 40 min A stage 5 stage 7 B C Collagen IV fibrils follicle cell movement EARLY ELONGATION PHASE : Polarized tissue rotation builds planar polarized ECM fibrils that act as a molecular corset to initiate anisotropic growth D MID ELONGATION PHASE : Actomyosin - driven polarized basal contractions , through interactions with polarized ECM fibrlls , coordinate follicle cell morphogenesis with tissue elongation LATE ELONGATION PHASE : Polarzed ECM fibrils maintain molecular corset function during continued anisotropic growth of egg chambers until the maturation of the eggshell at stage 12 E F nim 03 ~ nim 0 Figure 4 . Polarized Rotation during Follicle Elongation ( A ) Live imaging of rotating stage 7 follicle at different time points . Volocity - rendered 3D image ; marked cells are pseudocolored . ( B ) Still image stained as in 1A emphasizing that neighboring follicles can rotate with opposite chiralities . ( C ) Drawing of basal surface of a rotating follicle , illustrating movement of FCs over stationary ECM ﬁbrils . ( D – F ) Models for behaviors associated with elon - gating follicles : tissue rotation organizing a planar polarized collagen corset that channels growth along the A - P axis ( D ) , oscillating contractions providing further force resistance in the follicle center ( E ) , and collagen corset maintaining anisotropic forces that have driven egg elongation ( F ) . Figure 4D was modiﬁed from Haigo and Bilder ( 2011 ) . substrates that themselves can show polarized organization ( Davidson et al . , 2004 ; Elul and Keller , 2000 ; Rozario and DeSimone , 2010 ) . However , tissues undergoing convergent extension narrow along one axis while lengthening the perpendicular axis via intercalation of cells . In the follicle , growth increases the length of both axes but is channeled anisotropically ; it is not yet clear the extent to which cell intercalation is involved in elongation . Moreover , conver - gent extension involves cells converging along deﬁned boundaries , while the follicle epithelium is radially symmetric until dorsoventral ( D - V ) symmetry is broken at stage 7 and lacks an evident boundary for convergence . Many cases of vertebrate convergent extension require conventional PCP signaling , while others such as the rapid fast - phase of Drosophila germband extension ( (cid:1) 2 - fold elongation over 30 min ) use actomyosin - based remodeling of adherens junctions to drive intercalation ( Cavey and Lecuit , 2009 ; Vichas and Zallen , 2011 ) ; neither of these appears to be the primary mechanism driving follicle elongation . Finally , as an unbounded tissue , rotating follicles lack the intrinsic front - rear polarizing cue inherent to cell groups that migrate with a free or leading edge . Although FCs acquire clear front - rear polarity that is chirally organized within the follicle , they must select and coordinate this direction of motility through alternative , currently mysterious means ( see below ) . Thus , follicle rotation is a distinct form of collective cell migration , in which global rotation of a continuous tissue induces morphogenetic change . Could tissue rotation drive elongation of other developing organs , including those of vertebrates ? It is worth noting that in terms of cell biology , follicle rotation appears to be a fairly traditional migration of an epithelial sheet , maintaining apical cell - cell junctions and using basal cell - matrix interactions to generate a motile force ( Friedl and Gilmour , 2009 ; Rørth , 2009 ) . Developmental Cell 22 , January 17 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 17 Developmental Cell Perspective What is unconventional is the geometry of the migration , in that it is a rotary movement of a topologically closed tissue . While such isolated structures are not common in most animal organs , tubes and cysts with a continuous circumferential axis are widespread , and in glandular organs these are often connected to a spherical cyst - like acinus . An appealing place to look for tissue rotation may therefore be in the development of tubular and acinar organs such as breast , lung , and kidney ; perhaps in addition to the translational component obvious from ﬁxed samples there is a rotational component during elongation . Additional hints might come from careful analysis of mice mutant for Fat1 , an apparent homolog of ﬂy Fat2 ; these mice have a documented defect in podocyte formation , but other additional phenotypes may be present ( Ciani et al . , 2003 ) . A third hint is to look for tissues where planar polarized organization of the base - ment membrane / ECM is known . As live imaging is brought to bear on vertebrate organogenesis , additional instances may come to light . Although in vivo documentation is yet to come , a recent paper provides intriguing evidence that a tissue rotation - like phenomenon may also occur in human organs . When cultured ex vivo in a basement membrane analog , single primary human mammary epithelial cells or their nonmalignant , immortalized counterparts will undergo 3D morphogenesis , recapitulating many stages of normal mammary development to form an acinar - like structure , the apical surface of which faces a hollow lumen and whose basal surface contacts the basement membrane ( Petersen et al . , 1992 ) . Tanner et al . ( 2012 ) now reveal that both the single - cell progenitor , as well as its cohesive multicellular descendant clusters , show coordinated rotational movement . The mammary cell units undergo multiple revolutions during the process of acinar development , moving at a velocity of (cid:1) 0 . 2 m m / min with no net translocation . Individual cells show planarly asymmetric enrichment of actin at their basal surfaces in the direction of rotation , and pharmacological treatments demonstrate that actomyosin is required . The chirality of rota - tion , as well as its plane , appear unconstrained in this isolated system , but rotation occurs constantly over the more than 6 days examined . Interestingly , malignant mammary cells that cannot organize acini , due to inappropriate interactions with the basement membrane ( Weaver et al . , 1997 ) , are defective in rotation . The malignant progenitor cell actually spins more quickly as com - pared to a nonmalignant progenitor , but as a multicellular structure develops , coordinated motility between the cells is lost , cells move primarily with random and lateral vectors , and the net structure fails to rotate . This aspect of the malignant phenotype is traced to a loss of cell - cell adhesion : silencing of E - cadherin and Par - 3 in nonmalignant cells disrupts both coordinated rotation and acquisition of acinar architecture , while reacquisition of polarity ( through ‘‘phenotypic reversion’’ of malignant cells [ Weaver et al . , 1997 ] ) restores both features . The cause - and - effect relationship between coordinated multi - cellular rotation , cell and tissue polarity , and acinar architecture remains to be determined , as does how the ex vivo rotation of isolated epithelial acini manifests itself in vivo in the context of connecting ducts and other cells . Nonetheless , this work , along with earlier hints of rotation in kidney - derived cysts in cell culture ( Guo et al . , 2008 ; Zeng et al . , 2006 ) , supports the hypothesis that tissue rotation is a widespread morphogenetic movement reutilized in different developmental contexts . How Is Chiral Symmetry Broken ? The Drosophila follicle has been an important system for under - standing both cell and organismal polarity . A rich mechanistic and conceptual framework for symmetry - breaking events that dictate the A - P and later D - V axes exists ( Roth and Lynch , 2009 ) ; the discovery of chiral planar polarity poses the challenge of understanding the source of this additional break of symmetry . In orienting basal actin ﬁlaments and undergoing rotation , the follicle has to deﬁne a polarity around its circumfer - ence that was previously not appreciated . An individual follicle rotates in a single direction , either clockwise or counterclock - wise if viewed along the A - P axis with anterior pole nearest ( Figure 4B ) . The former can be said to possess dextral chiral polarity and the latter to possess sinistral chiral polarity , as opposed to the proximodistal , mediolateral , or radial polarity evident in bounded epithelial sheets . The polarity of each follicle appears autonomous , with no obvious relationship between its polarity and that of its neighbors . While required for elongation , rotation in either chirality will serve to produce oval eggs , and unlike other symmetry - breaking events , the choice has no apparent ramiﬁcations for development of the resultant embryo . Examples of chiral polarity in biology include snail embryos , where the pattern of cell divisions initiates a conserved L - R signaling pathway that establishes an animal with a given hand - edness ( Kuroda et al . , 2009 ) and the C . elegans embryo , where chiral rearrangements of cells result from and elaborate L - R asymmetry ( Pohl and Bao , 2010 ) . Drosophila itself exhibits several instances of chiral rotation : the chiral rotation of the male genitalia , whose directionality is controlled by a myosin that also controls embryonic L - R asymmetry ( Spe´der et al . , 2006 ) , and the chiral rotation of ommatidia in the developing eye , which is coordinated by conventional PCP signaling ( Jenny , 2010 ) ; additionally , chiral biases in the shape of embryonic hindgut cells contributes to the leftward rotation and subsequent rightward looping of this organ ( Taniguchi et al . , 2011 ) . While chirality in the above cases is invariant , one of many distinguish - ing features of the follicle is that its chirality is not ﬁxed . The roughly equal proportions of dextrally and sinistrally polarized follicles raise the possibility that the underlying mechanism may involve a stochastic process , which is unusual but not unprecedented ( Johnston and Desplan , 2010 ) . How does the entire FC epithelium appreciate the chiral choice ; does a planar polarizing signal originate in a particular subset of cells and then propagate , or does the epithelium make some type of collective decision ? This is one of many questions whose answers await further study . What Alternative Mechanisms Can Generate Planar Polarity ? Although less morphologically obvious than apicobasal polarity , planar polarity is being documented in an increasing number of epithelial tissues . Planar polarity information is critical to orient a tissue along a body axis and to coordinate morphological structures in static tissue as well as collective cell behaviors in dynamic tissue ( Zallen , 2007 ) . The importance of planar polar - ized organization has become clear from studies of animals 18 Developmental Cell 22 , January 17 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . Developmental Cell Perspective mutant for conventional PCP pathway regulators . Conventional PCP signaling involves pathways mediated by two groups of proteins , the Fat / Dachsous protocadherins and the Frizzled / Van Gogh module , which is sometimes referred to as the ‘‘core PCP pathway’’ or ‘‘noncanonical Wnt signaling . ’’ These path - ways have numerous tissue - and organism - speciﬁc variations and can also interact with each other ( for reviews see Axelrod , 2009 ; Goodrich and Strutt , 2011 ) . Current models indicate that Fat and Dachsous bind heterophilically and that graded spatial expression of Dachsous and the interaction - modifying kinase Four - jointed within a ﬁeld of cells leads to different levels of Fat - Dachsous heterodimers on an individual cell’s proximal and distal surfaces ( Figure 5A ) . In Frizzled / Van Gogh signaling , an inter - and intracellular feedback mechanism leads to asym - metric localization of these two transmembrane proteins , thus polarizing an intracellular contact by accumulating Dsh on the distal side and Prickle on the proximal side ( Figure 5B ) . Defects in either pathway can lead to failures of not only orientation of external sensory structures such as hairs and bristles , but also defects in convergent extension , oriented cell divisions , and ciliary organization among others ( Wallingford and Mitchell , 2011 ; Zallen , 2007 ) . Despite these impressive phenotypes , some tissues with planar polarity exist in which phenotypes are not seen in conven - tional PCP mutant animals . The best - characterized example is the Drosophila embryonic germband , another tissue that undergoes extensive elongation through convergent extension ( Cavey and Lecuit , 2009 ; Vichas and Zallen , 2011 ) . In response to embryonic A - P patterning cues , ectodermal epithelial cells polarize Myosin II and Rho kinase to A - P cell interfaces and Bazooka to D - V interfaces ( Bertet et al . , 2004 ; Zallen and Wie - schaus , 2004 ) . The resultant localized myosin contractility remodels adherens junctions and their associated actin cyto - skeleton , leading to cell shape changes and ultimately polarized cell intercalation ( Figure 5C ) . No role for conventional PCP signaling in reading or executing this polarity has been uncov - ered . Moreover , evidence for the conventional PCP pathway in planar polarized collective cell migration movements such as wound healing ( Caddy et al . , 2010 ) and the zebraﬁsh lateral line is limited . Given the apparent prevalence of planar polarized organization , and the existence of planar polarized processes that are not disrupted by mutations in conventional PCP regula - tors , it seems clear that alternative mechanisms can mediate cell communication . Follicle planar polarity , which is independent of the con - ventional PCP pathway , provides another system in which to explore these . One model for follicle planar polarity invokes mechanotransduction in the plane of the epithelium as a pri - mary mechanism ( Figure 5D ) . In this model , FCs migrating during rotation generate contractile forces on the basement cell - matrix interactions basal apical anterior posterior core PCP pathway proximal distal apical basal Ft - Ds pathway proximal distal apical basal cell - junction remodeling apical basal anterior posterior 2 2 2 1 1 collagen IV α 2 laminin A perlecan integrin β PS fat2 lar talin actin Genes fat dachsous dachs four - jointed frizzled dishevelled van gogh flamingo prickle diego actin myosin II rho kinase E - cadherin par - 3 Drosophila abdominal epithelium Drosophila pupal wing epithelium Drosophila germband epithelium Drosophila follicle epithelium Molecular Mechanisms Regulating Planar Polarity ? ? ? ? D C B A 1 1 1 1 1 Figure 5 . Models of Planar Polarity Propagation in Drosophila In the abdomen ( A ) , subtle asymmetries in the number of Ft - Ds heterodimers on each side of a cell result in asymmetric localization of Dachs ; whether polarity propagationoccurssimultaneouslyorsequentiallyisunclear . Inthewing ( B ) , molecularinteractionsbetweenPCPsignalingcomponents , bothreinforcing ( Fzand Vangcomplexesacrosscellboundaries ) andexclusionary ( FzandVangcomplexeswithinacell ) createafeedbackloopthatampliﬁesandcoordinatespolarity . In thegermband ( C ) , planar polarizationof actin ﬁlaments and MyosinII , along withcomplementary asymmetries ofcell - junction proteins , drive polarized junctional remodeling and cell intercalation . In contrast to these stationary epithelia , in motile FCs ( D ) mechanotransduction between chirally polarized integrin - mediated adhesion complexes and the extracellular matrix ampliﬁes polarity , while rotation of the epithelium coordinates it . Numbers denote a temporal sequence of events ; question marks denote ambiguity in temporal sequence . See text for details . Developmental Cell 22 , January 17 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 19 Developmental Cell Perspective membrane , stimulating and aligning nascent ECM ﬁbrilogene - sis . The subsequent increased ECM rigidity is then reciprocally sensed by integrin - mediated adhesions in FCs to reinforce actin ﬁlament polarity . In a thematic parallel to conventional PCP signaling ( Axelrod , 2009 ) ( Figure 5B ) , this positive biomechan - ical feedback loop ( Parsons et al . , 2010 ) serves to amplify the planar polarized axis . Meanwhile , the concerted migration of the epithelium in the topologically closed follicle results in indi - vidual cells moving over ECM ﬁbrils that were previously oriented by its neighbors , thus ensuring global coordination of polarity . When rotation does not occur , basal actin ﬁlaments within wild - type cells align locally but cannot achieve a uniform global orientation . This model provides one explanation for the role of actin / ECM regulators in follicle planar polarity , but more conventional intercellular signaling roles of proteins such as Fat2 cannot be ruled out . Intriguingly , several groups have recently shown that mechanical force can inﬂuence and reorient conventional PCP features ( Aigouy et al . , 2010 ; Olguı´n et al . , 2011 ) . Deciphering interactions between the systems control - ling global and local cues in follicle planar polarity will shed light on alternative mechanisms that can endow structural and functional planar polarization on both static and dynamic animal epithelia . How Can Polarized ECM Shape Tissues ? The planar polarized ECM that is established by follicle rotation is required to maintain elongation of the egg even after rotation has ceased . The simplest model suggests that the coordinated orientation of ECM ﬁbrils imparts a tensile strength along the circumferential axis that offers a greater resistance to the ex - pansionary forces of the growing follicle during its (cid:1) 250 - fold increase in volume following stage 4 , thereby channeling growth along the AP axis ( Figure 4D ) . Interesting precedents for a mechanical role for polarized ECM in determining tissue shape exist . In plant cells , cellulose is deposited by biosynthetic com - plexes that are propelled circumferentially through the plasma membrane ; the resultant hoop - like cellulose microﬁbrils in the cell wall constrain elongation of the growing cells within , thus directing growth to the longitudinal axis ( Baskin , 2005 ; Paredez et al . , 2006 ) . Recent papers document analogous ﬁndings in rod - shaped bacteria : MreB - containing complexes rotate cir - cumferentially around the long cell axis while synthesizing peptidoglycan in the cell wall ; this process is required to resist intracellular turgor pressure and maintain cell shape ( Domı´ - nguez - Escobar et al . , 2011 ; Garner et al . , 2011 ; van Teeffelen et al . , 2011 ) . In Xenopus , the orientation of ﬁbronectin ﬁbrils in the ECM surrounding the growing notochord has been sug - gested to limit the shape changes permitted , determining whether either elongation or widening results ( Adams et al . , 1990 ; Koehl et al . , 2000 ) . Such data point to a critical role for not just composition but speciﬁc planar polarized organization of the ECM in directing cell and organ growth . How a tissue achieves a speciﬁc organization of ECM is not well understood . Several interesting facets have been uncov - ered . Conventional PCP genes have been implicated in dictating the appropriate tissue plane at which an ECM is formed ( Goto et al . , 2005 ) . Mechanical forces , either isotropic in static cells or tractile in migratory cells , can orient and remodel existing ECM molecules and assemble ECM polymers and ﬁbrils ( Parsons et al . , 2010 ; Rozario and DeSimone , 2010 ) . Indeed , collective cell migration often alters the ECM substrate that is being traversed ( Friedl and Gilmour , 2009 ) ; the treadmill - like nature of follicle rotation may form a closed - circuit feedback loop that coordinates and reinforces such alterations ( see above ) . Close studies of the ECM - organizing mechanisms in the follicle may reveal principles that will inform not only organ shape but also events such as invasive trajectories of tumor cells . Oscillating Contractions of the FCs Contribute to Elongation Follicle rotation ceases before the egg fully elongates , and mutants that block rotation do not entirely block elongation , indicating that several mechanisms combine to regulate the shape of the follicle and resultant egg . Live imaging has re - vealed another surprising behavior in developing follicles that inﬂuences follicle dimensions ( He et al . , 2010 ) . At stage 9 following the end of rotation ( Figure 2B ) , the basal but not apical surfaces of certain , primarily centrally located FCs initiate rhythmic though asynchronous contractions . These contractions show planar polarized behavior : Myosin II accu - mulation on the planar polarized basal actin ﬁlaments that were established during rotation leads the cells to shorten along the circumferential but not the AP axis ( Figure 4E ) . This cell shape change is temporary and is lost between contraction cycles . Nevertheless , acute disruption of actin in follicles under - going oscillating contractions causes a decrease in follicle width , while increasing contractions via addition of the calcium ionophore ionomycin caused an increase . Depletion of ROCK and Talin produced round eggs ( cf . Be´cam et al . , 2005 ) and decreased Myosin II recruitment , while overexpression of Pax - illin caused egg hyperelongation and increased Myosin II recruitment , suggesting that cell - matrix adhesion and the resul - tant intracellular tension induces the recruitment of Myosin II to the planar polarized basal actin . The contractions are sug - gested to serve as a feature of the molecular corset , perhaps dynamically resisting forces in the center of the egg chamber and directing them toward the poles . This fascinating behavior raises a host of questions concerning the source of the contractions , determinants of their periodicity and spatial distri - bution , and their exact mechanism in inﬂuencing tissue shape . Moreover , it emphasizes that much rich biology remains to be discovered in the visually straightforward morphogenesis of the Drosophila egg . Oscillating contractions of actomyosin , ﬁrst described in C . elegans embryos ( Munro et al . , 2004 ) , have been documented not only in Drosophila follicles but also at numerous phases of epithelial morphogenesis in Drosophila embryos . Oscillating contractions in the apical surface of the developing mesoderm are mechanically coupled to adherens junctions via a ratchet - like mechanism ; this leads to a permanent cell shape change , inducing apical constriction to drive gastrulation ( Martin et al . , 2009 ) . Later in development , similar adherens junction - coupled oscillations in the amnioserosa lead to apical constriction that promotes dorsal closure ( David et al . , 2010 ; Gorﬁnkiel et al . , 2009 ; Solon et al . , 2009 ) . Oscillations are not , however , limited to cells undergoing apical constriction . Oscillations also occur in ectodermal cells during germband elongation 20 Developmental Cell 22 , January 17 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . Developmental Cell Perspective ( Fernandez - Gonzalez and Zallen , 2011 ; Rauzi et al . , 2010 ; Sawyer et al . , 2011 ) where oscillating Myosin II resolves prefer - entially in a planar polarized fashion , toward the shrinking adherens junctions that drive cell intercalation . The observation of related phenomena in Xenopus tissues undergoing conver - gent extension ( Kim and Davidson , 2011 ) , where contractions become polarized in elongating cells , suggests that this is a surprisingly widespread and conserved mechanism associated with cell shape change and tissue morphogenesis . As with tissue rotation and convergent extension , the oscilla - tions in the follicle share similarities and differences with the above processes . The periodic nature , prominence in epithelial cells , and association with tissue morphogenesis are shared . However , in the follicle , it is a basal actomyosin network rather than an apical one that undergoes contractions . In ﬂy embryonic epithelia , this apical network is meshlike and is often mechani - cally coupled to adherens junctions , while in the follicle it is associated with the lengthy planar polarized actin ﬁlaments that are coupled to the extracellular matrix . The apical contrac - tions can be sensitive to planar polarized cues : in the ectoderm , oscillations become biased along the A - P axis , while in Xenopus tissues they can be inﬂuenced by Fz - mediated PCP signaling . In these cases , as with the anisotropic apical constrictions of the mesoderm and amnioserosa , contractions lead to a perma - nent cell shape change , while in the follicle , although an aniso - tropic shape change occurs , it is transient . By illustrating distinct variations on a widespread theme , the follicle here again will extend our understanding of dynamic morphogenetic outcomes that shape tissues . Concluding Remarks The research reviewed here demonstrates how unappreciated morphogenetic mechanisms can contribute to the tremendous diversity of animal forms . Identiﬁcation of phenomena such as tissue rotation , oscillating cellular contractions , and alternative planar - polarity - generating pathways allows us to expand the morphogenetic toolkit ; with further expansion , iterations and variations on these mechanisms , and their combinatorial usage with more familiar cell behaviors , we will eventually be able to account for the overall processes that shape tissues . The pursuit of this goal will push research toward the most exciting frontiers of development , such as the interfaces between familiar molec - ular signaling and mechanobiology . The Drosophila follicle , where traditional strengths of genetic manipulation can now be combined with live imaging and direct measurements of force , and whose relatively simple geometry lends itself well to mathe - matical modeling , is well poised to be a major contributor . Finally , if well - studied systems can yield such surprises when examined with new tools and perspectives , we can only imagine what the study of currently unexamined tissues and organisms will bring . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS WethankNipamPatel , MikeSimon , LiHe , andAlexParedezforhelpfulconver - sations and Lin Yuan for comments on the manuscript . We apologize to those authors whose work could only be cited in review . Morphogenesis work in the Bilder lab is supported by grants from the NIH and the Burroughs - Wellcome Trust ; S . L . H . has been supported by an American Heart Association Predoc - toral Fellowship and a Berkeley Graduate Fellowship . REFERENCES Adams , D . S . , Keller , R . , andKoehl , M . A . R . ( 1990 ) . Themechanicsofnotochord elongation , straightening and stiffening in the embryo of Xenopus laevis . Development 110 , 115 – 130 . Aigouy , B . , Farhadifar , R . , Staple , D . B . , Sagner , A . , Ro¨per , J . C . , Ju¨licher , F . , and Eaton , S . ( 2010 ) . Cell ﬂow reorients the axis of planar polarity in the wing epithelium of Drosophila . Cell 142 , 773 – 786 . Axelrod , J . D . ( 2009 ) . Progress and challenges in understanding planar cell polarity signaling . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 20 , 964 – 971 . Baskin , T . I . ( 2005 ) . Anisotropic expansion of theplant cellwall . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 21 , 203 – 222 . Bateman , J . , Reddy , R . S . , Saito , H . , and Van Vactor , D . ( 2001 ) . The receptor tyrosine phosphatase Dlar and integrins organize actin ﬁlaments in the Drosophila follicular epithelium . Curr . Biol . 11 , 1317 – 1327 . Be´cam , I . E . , Tanentzapf , G . , Lepesant , J . A . , Brown , N . H . , and Huynh , J . R . ( 2005 ) . Integrin - independent repression of cadherin transcription by talin during axis formation in Drosophila . Nat . Cell Biol . 7 , 510 – 516 . Berg , C . A . ( 2008 ) . Tube formation in Drosophila egg chambers . Tissue Eng . Part A 14 , 1479 – 1488 . Bertet , C . , Sulak , L . , and Lecuit , T . ( 2004 ) . Myosin - dependent junction re - modelling controls planar cell intercalation and axis elongation . Nature 429 , 667 – 671 . Caddy , J . , Wilanowski , T . , Darido , C . , Dworkin , S . , Ting , S . B . , Zhao , Q . , Rank , G . , Auden , A . , Srivastava , S . , Papenfuss , T . A . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Epidermal wound repair is regulated by the planar cell polarity signaling pathway . Dev . Cell 19 , 138 – 147 . Cavey , M . , and Lecuit , T . ( 2009 ) . Molecularbases of cell - celljunctions stability and dynamics . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 1 , a002998 . Ciani , L . , Patel , A . , Allen , N . D . , and ffrench - Constant , C . ( 2003 ) . Mice lacking the giant protocadherin mFAT1 exhibit renal slit junction abnormalities and a partially penetrant cyclopia and anophthalmia phenotype . Mol . Cell . Biol . 23 , 3575 – 3582 . Conder , R . , Yu , H . , Zahedi , B . , and Harden , N . ( 2007 ) . The serine / threonine kinase dPak is required for polarized assembly of F - actin bundles and apical - basal polarity in the Drosophila follicular epithelium . Dev . Biol . 305 , 470 – 482 . Darwin , C . ( 1859 ) . On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection ( London : Murray ) . David , D . J . , Tishkina , A . , and Harris , T . J . ( 2010 ) . The PAR complex regulates pulsed actomyosin contractions during amnioserosa apical constriction in Drosophila . Development 137 , 1645 – 1655 . Davidson , L . A . , Keller , R . , and DeSimone , D . W . ( 2004 ) . Assembly and remod - eling of the ﬁbrillar ﬁbronectin extracellular matrix during gastrulation and neurulation in Xenopus laevis . Dev . Dyn . 231 , 888 – 895 . Delon , I . , and Brown , N . H . ( 2009 ) . The integrin adhesion complex changes its composition and function during morphogenesis of an epithelium . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 4363 – 4374 . Deng , W . M . , Schneider , M . , Frock , R . , Castillejo - Lopez , C . , Gaman , E . A . , Baumgartner , S . , and Ruohola - Baker , H . ( 2003 ) . Dystroglycan is required for polarizing the epithelial cells and the oocyte in Drosophila . Development 130 , 173 – 184 . Domı´nguez - Escobar , J . , Chastanet , A . , Crevenna , A . H . , Fromion , V . , Wedlich - So¨ldner , R . , and Carballido - Lo´pez , R . ( 2011 ) . Processive movement of MreB - associated cell wall biosynthetic complexes in bacteria . Science 333 , 225 – 228 . Duffy , J . B . , Harrison , D . A . , andPerrimon , N . ( 1998 ) . Identifyinglocirequiredfor follicular patterning using directed mosaics . Development 125 , 2263 – 2271 . Elul , T . , and Keller , R . ( 2000 ) . Monopolar protrusive activity : a new morpho - genic cell behavior in the neural plate dependent on vertical interactions with the mesoderm in Xenopus . Dev . Biol . 224 , 3 – 19 . Developmental Cell 22 , January 17 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 21 Developmental Cell Perspective Fernandez - Gonzalez , R . , and Zallen , J . A . ( 2011 ) . Oscillatory behaviors and hierarchical assembly of contractile structures in intercalating cells . Phys . Biol . 8 , 045005 . Friedl , P . , and Gilmour , D . ( 2009 ) . Collective cell migration in morphogenesis , regeneration and cancer . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 , 445 – 457 . Frydman , H . M . , and Spradling , A . C . ( 2001 ) . The receptor - like tyrosine phos - phatase lar is required for epithelial planar polarity and for axis determination within drosophila ovarian follicles . Development 128 , 3209 – 3220 . Fux , T . , Went , D . F . , and Camenzind , R . ( 1978 ) . Movement Pattern and Ultrastructure of Rotating Follicles of the Pedogenetic Gall Midge , Hetero - peza - Pygmaea Winnertz ( Diptera - Cecidomyiidae ) . Int . J . Insect Morphol . Embryol . 7 , 415 – 426 . Garner , E . C . , Bernard , R . , Wang , W . , Zhuang , X . , Rudner , D . Z . , and Mitchison , T . ( 2011 ) . Coupled , circumferential motions of the cell wall synthesis machinery and MreB ﬁlaments in B . subtilis . Science 333 , 222 – 225 . Goodrich , L . V . , and Strutt , D . ( 2011 ) . Principles of planar polarity in animal development . Development 138 , 1877 – 1892 . Gorﬁnkiel , N . , Blanchard , G . B . , Adams , R . J . , and Martinez Arias , A . ( 2009 ) . Mechanical control of global cell behaviour during dorsal closure in Drosophila . Development 136 , 1889 – 1898 . Goto , T . , Davidson , L . , Asashima , M . , and Keller , R . ( 2005 ) . Planar cell polarity genes regulate polarized extracellular matrix deposition during frog gastrulation . Curr . Biol . 15 , 787 – 793 . Grammont , M . ( 2007 ) . Adherens junction remodeling by the Notch pathway in Drosophila melanogaster oogenesis . J . Cell Biol . 177 , 139 – 150 . Guo , Q . , Xia , B . , Moshiach , S . , Xu , C . , Jiang , Y . , Chen , Y . , Sun , Y . , Lahti , J . M . , and Zhang , X . A . ( 2008 ) . The microenvironmental determinants for kidney epithelial cyst morphogenesis . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 87 , 251 – 266 . Gutzeit , H . O . ( 1990 ) . The microﬁlament pattern in the somatic follicle cells of mid - vitellogenic ovarian follicles of Drosophila . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 53 , 349 – 356 . Gutzeit , H . O . ( 1991 ) . Organization and in vitro activity of microﬁlament bundles associated with the basement membrane of Drosophila follicles . Acta Histochem . Suppl . 41 , 201 – 210 . Gutzeit , H . O . , Eberhardt , W . , and Gratwohl , E . ( 1991 ) . Laminin and basement membrane - associated microﬁlaments in wild - type and mutant Drosophila ovarian follicles . J . Cell Sci . 100 , 781 – 788 . Haigo , S . L . , andBilder , D . ( 2011 ) . Globaltissuerevolutionsinamorphogenetic movement controlling elongation . Science 331 , 1071 – 1074 . He , L . , Wang , X . B . , Tang , H . L . , and Montell , D . J . ( 2010 ) . Tissue elongation requires oscillating contractions of a basal actomyosin network . Nat . Cell Biol . 12 , 1133 – 1142 . Horne - Badovinac , S . , and Bilder , D . ( 2005 ) . Mass transit : epithelial morpho - genesis in the Drosophila egg chamber . Dev . Dyn . 232 , 559 – 574 . Hou , R . , Liu , L . , Anees , S . , Hiroyasu , S . , and Sibinga , N . E . ( 2006 ) . The Fat1 cadherinintegratesvascularsmoothmusclecellgrowthandmigrationsignals . J . Cell Biol . 173 , 417 – 429 . Jenny , A . ( 2010 ) . Planar cell polarity signaling in the Drosophila eye . Curr . Top . Dev . Biol . 93 , 189 – 227 . Johnston , R . J . , Jr . , and Desplan , C . ( 2010 ) . Stochastic mechanisms of cell fate speciﬁcation that yield random or robust outcomes . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 26 , 689 – 719 . Keller , R . ( 2002 ) . Shaping the vertebrate body plan by polarized embryonic cell movements . Science 298 , 1950 – 1954 . Kim , H . Y . , and Davidson , L . A . ( 2011 ) . Punctuated actin contractions during convergent extension and their permissive regulation by the non - canonical Wnt - signaling pathway . J . Cell Sci . 124 , 635 – 646 . King , R . ( 1970 ) . Ovarian Development in Drosophila melanogaster ( New York : Academic Press ) . King , R . C . , Rubinson , A . C . , and Smith , R . F . ( 1956 ) . Oogenesis in adult Drosophila melanogaster . Growth 20 , 121 – 157 . Koehl , M . A . R . , Quillin , K . J . , and Pell , C . A . ( 2000 ) . Mechanical design of ﬁber - wound hydraulic skeletons : The stiffening and straightening of embryonic notochords . Am . Zool . 40 , 28 – 41 . Kolahi , K . S . , White , P . F . , Shreter , D . M . , Classen , A . K . , Bilder , D . , and Mofrad , M . R . ( 2009 ) . Quantitative analysis of epithelial morphogenesis in Drosophila oogenesis : New insights based on morphometric analysis and mechanical modeling . Dev . Biol . 331 , 129 – 139 . Kuroda , R . , Endo , B . , Abe , M . , and Shimizu , M . ( 2009 ) . Chiral blastomere arrangement dictates zygotic left - right asymmetry pathway in snails . Nature 462 , 790 – 794 . Lee , S . , and Cooley , L . ( 2007 ) . Jagunal is required for reorganizing the endo - plasmic reticulum during Drosophila oogenesis . J . Cell Biol . 176 , 941 – 952 . Mahajan - Miklos , S . , and Cooley , L . ( 1994 ) . Intercellular cytoplasm transport during Drosophila oogenesis . Dev . Biol . 165 , 336 – 351 . Martin , A . C . , Kaschube , M . , and Wieschaus , E . F . ( 2009 ) . Pulsed contractions of an actin - myosin network drive apical constriction . Nature 457 , 495 – 499 . Matakatsu , H . , and Blair , S . S . ( 2004 ) . Interactions between Fat and Dachsous and the regulation of planar cell polarity in the Drosophila wing . Development 131 , 3785 – 3794 . Mirouse , V . , Christoforou , C . P . , Fritsch , C . , St Johnston , D . , and Ray , R . P . ( 2009 ) . Dystroglycan and perlecan provide a basal cue required for epithelial polarity during energetic stress . Dev . Cell 16 , 83 – 92 . Moeller , M . J . , Sooﬁ , A . , Braun , G . S . , Li , X . , Watzl , C . , Kriz , W . , and Holzman , L . B . ( 2004 ) . Protocadherin FAT1 binds Ena / VASP proteins and is necessary for actin dynamics and cell polarization . EMBO J . 23 , 3769 – 3779 . Montell , D . J . ( 2003 ) . Border - cell migration : the race is on . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 4 , 13 – 24 . Munro , E . , Nance , J . , and Priess , J . R . ( 2004 ) . Corticalﬂows powered by asym - metricalcontractiontransportPARproteins toestablishandmaintainanterior - posterior polarity in the early C . elegans embryo . Dev . Cell 7 , 413 – 424 . Olguı´n , P . , Glavic , A . , and Mlodzik , M . ( 2011 ) . Intertissue mechanical stress affects Frizzled - mediated planar cell polarity in the Drosophila notum epidermis . Curr . Biol . 21 , 236 – 242 . Paredez , A . R . , Somerville , C . R . , and Ehrhardt , D . W . ( 2006 ) . Visualization of cellulose synthase demonstrates functional association with microtubules . Science 312 , 1491 – 1495 . Parsons , J . T . , Horwitz , A . R . , and Schwartz , M . A . ( 2010 ) . Cell adhesion : inte - grating cytoskeletal dynamics and cellular tension . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 11 , 633 – 643 . Petersen , O . W . , Rønnov - Jessen , L . , Howlett , A . R . , and Bissell , M . J . ( 1992 ) . Interaction with basement membrane serves to rapidly distinguish growth and differentiation pattern of normal and malignant human breast epithelial cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 89 , 9064 – 9068 . Pohl , C . , and Bao , Z . ( 2010 ) . Chiral forces organize left - right patterning in C . elegans by uncoupling midline and anteroposterior axis . Dev . Cell 19 , 402 – 412 . Quintin , S . , Gally , C . , and Labouesse , M . ( 2008 ) . Epithelial morphogenesis in embryos : asymmetries , motors and brakes . Trends Genet . 24 , 221 – 230 . Rauzi , M . , Lenne , P . F . , and Lecuit , T . ( 2010 ) . Planar polarized actomyosin contractile ﬂows control epithelial junction remodelling . Nature 468 , 1110 – 1114 . Rørth , P . ( 2009 ) . Collective cell migration . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 25 , 407 – 429 . Roth , S . , and Lynch , J . A . ( 2009 ) . Symmetry breaking during Drosophila oogenesis . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 1 , a001891 . Rozario , T . , and DeSimone , D . W . ( 2010 ) . The extracellular matrix in develop - ment and morphogenesis : a dynamic view . Dev . Biol . 341 , 126 – 140 . Sawyer , J . M . , Harrell , J . R . , Shemer , G . , Sullivan - Brown , J . , Roh - Johnson , M . , and Goldstein , B . ( 2010 ) . Apical constriction : a cell shape change that can drive morphogenesis . Dev . Biol . 341 , 5 – 19 . 22 Developmental Cell 22 , January 17 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . Developmental Cell Perspective Sawyer , J . K . , Choi , W . , Jung , K . C . , He , L . , Harris , N . J . , and Peifer , M . ( 2011 ) . A contractile actomyosin network linked to adherens junctions by Canoe / afadin helps drive convergent extension . Mol . Biol . Cell 22 , 2491 – 2508 . Smart , I . H . ( 1991 ) . Egg shape in birds . In Egg Incubation : Its Effects on Embry - onic Development in Birds and Reptiles , D . C . Deeming and M . W . J . Ferguson , eds . ( Cambridge : Cambridge University Press ) , pp . 101 – 116 . Solon , J . , Kaya - Copur , A . , Colombelli , J . , and Brunner , D . ( 2009 ) . Pulsed forces timed by a ratchet - like mechanism drive directed tissue movement during dorsal closure . Cell 137 , 1331 – 1342 . Spe´der , P . , Ada´m , G . , and Noselli , S . ( 2006 ) . Type ID unconventional myosin controls left - right asymmetry in Drosophila . Nature 440 , 803 – 807 . Spradling , A . ( 1993 ) . Developmental genetics of oogenesis . In The Develop - ment of Drosophila Melanogaster , M . Bate and A . Martinez - Arias , eds . ( New York : CSHL Press ) , pp . 1 – 70 . Taniguchi , K . , Maeda , R . , Ando , T . , Okumura , T . , Nakazawa , N . , Hatori , R . , Nakamura , M . , Hozumi , S . , Fujiwara , H . , and Matsuno , K . ( 2011 ) . Chirality in planar cell shape contributes to left - right asymmetric epithelial morphogen - esis . Science 333 , 339 – 341 . Tanner , K . , Mori , H . , Mroue , R . , Bruni - Cardoso , A . , and Bissell , M . J . ( 2012 ) . Angular morphomechanics in the establishment of multicellular architecture of glandular tissues . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , in press . 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1119578109 . Tanoue , T . , and Takeichi , M . ( 2004 ) . Mammalian Fat1 cadherin regulates actin dynamics and cell - cell contact . J . Cell Biol . 165 , 517 – 528 . Tucker , J . B . , and Meats , M . ( 1976 ) . Microtubules and control of insect egg shape . J . Cell Biol . 71 , 207 – 217 . vanTeeffelen , S . , Wang , S . , Furchtgott , L . , Huang , K . C . , Wingreen , N . S . , Shae - vitz , J . W . , and Gitai , Z . ( 2011 ) . The bacterial actin MreB rotates , and rotation dependsoncell - wallassembly . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 15822 – 15827 . Vichas , A . , and Zallen , J . A . ( 2011 ) . Translating cell polarity into tissue elonga - tion . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 22 , 858 – 864 . Viktorinova´ , I . , Ko¨nig , T . , Schlichting , K . , and Dahmann , C . ( 2009 ) . The cad - herin Fat2 is required for planar cell polarity in the Drosophila ovary . Develop - ment 136 , 4123 – 4132 . Viktorinova´ , I . , Pismen , L . M . , Aigouy , B . , and Dahmann , C . ( 2011 ) . Modelling planar polarity of epithelia : the role of signal relay in collective cell polarization . J . R . Soc . Interface 8 , 1059 – 1063 . Wallingford , J . B . , and Mitchell , B . ( 2011 ) . Strange as it may seem : the many links between Wnt signaling , planar cell polarity , and cilia . Genes Dev . 25 , 201 – 213 . Weaver , V . M . , Petersen , O . W . , Wang , F . , Larabell , C . A . , Briand , P . , Damsky , C . , and Bissell , M . J . ( 1997 ) . Reversion of the malignant phenotype of human breast cells in three - dimensional culture and in vivo by integrin blocking anti - bodies . J . Cell Biol . 137 , 231 – 245 . Went , D . ( 1978 ) . Oocyte maturation without follicular epithelium alters egg shape in a Dipteran insect . J . Exp . Zool . 205 , 149 – 155 . Went , D . F . , and Junquera , P . ( 1981 ) . Embryonic development of insect eggs formed without follicular epithelium . Dev . Biol . 86 , 100 – 110 . Wieschaus , E . , Audit , C . , and Masson , M . ( 1981 ) . A clonal analysis of the roles of somatic cells and germ line during oogenesis in Drosophila . Dev . Biol . 88 , 92 – 103 . Zallen , J . A . ( 2007 ) . Planar polarity and tissue morphogenesis . Cell 129 , 1051 – 1063 . Zallen , J . A . , and Wieschaus , E . ( 2004 ) . Patterned gene expression directs bipolar planar polarity in Drosophila . Dev . Cell 6 , 343 – 355 . Zeng , D . , Ferrari , A . , Ulmer , J . , Veligodskiy , A . , Fischer , P . , Spatz , J . , Ventikos , Y . , Poulikakos , D . , andKroschewski , R . ( 2006 ) . Three - dimensionalmodelingof mechanicalforces inthe extracellular matrix during epithelial lumen formation . Biophys . J . 90 , 4380 – 4391 . Developmental Cell 22 , January 17 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 23 Developmental Cell Perspective