University of Pennsylvania ScholarlyCommons Publicly Accessible Penn Dissertations 1 - 1 - 2014 Opposing Actin Networks Modulate the Mechano - Activation of the Integrin LFA - 1 During Immunological Synapse formation William Andrew Comrie University of Pennsylvania , drew . comrie @ gmail . com Follow this and additional works at : http : / / repository . upenn . edu / edissertations Part of the Allergy and Immunology Commons , Cell Biology Commons , Immunology and Infectious Disease Commons , and the Medical Immunology Commons This paper is posted at ScholarlyCommons . http : / / repository . upenn . edu / edissertations / 1242 For more information , please contact libraryrepository @ pobox . upenn . edu . Recommended Citation Comrie , William Andrew , " Opposing Actin Networks Modulate the Mechano - Activation of the Integrin LFA - 1 During Immunological Synapse formation " ( 2014 ) . Publicly Accessible Penn Dissertations . 1242 . http : / / repository . upenn . edu / edissertations / 1242 Opposing Actin Networks Modulate the Mechano - Activation of the Integrin LFA - 1 During Immunological Synapse formation Abstract Formation of a functional immune response requires the regulated transfer of information between T cells , and APCs , which leads to a variety of functional outcomes . In many cases this information transfer occurs at a regulated area of cell - cell contact termed the immunological synapse ( IS ) . In T cells responding to APCs there is a robust accumulation of F - actin on the T cell side of the synapse . This F - actin response is characterized by robust polymerization at the periphery of the contact site followed by centripetal flow of the network towards the center of the IS . While it is well known that this F - actin flow is required for the maintenance of signaling at the IS , the mechanism behind this observation has remained elusive . Recent evidence has suggested that the TCR and the integrin LFA - 1 are regulated through the application of force on the receptor - ligand bond . This raises the distinct possibility that the robust F - actin flow provides the mechanical force to activate these receptors , thereby enhancing and maintaining signaling at the IS . I demonstrate that the robust F - actin flow at the T cell side of the IS is required for LFA - 1 accumulation to and maintenance of conformational changes associated with affinity maturation at the IS . Furthermore I find that full induction of LFA - 1 conformational change requires binding to immobilized ligand , and is enhanced through the induced fit of ligand binding , alongside the enhanced tension provided by pulling on immobilized ICAM - 1 . Furthermore , I find that Dendritic Cells ( DCs ) are capable of modulating the lateral mobility of ICAM - 1 on their plasma membrane during TLR induced maturation . Mature DCs greatly restrict the lateral mobility of ICAM through the increased expression and activity of the actin binding proteins moesin and α - actinin - 1 . The limitation of ICAM - 1 mobility is critical for ICAM - 1 mediated adhesion of T cells to DCs , through the regulation of LFA - 1 affinity maturation , and is essential for full T cell proliferation . Our results therefore indicate that the actin cytoskeletons on both sides of the T cell - DC IS coordinately function to maximize conformational change of LFA - 1 and promote synapse stability at the IS . Additionally , these data demonstrate that one role of the T cell F - actin centripetal flow may be to provide the force required for the activation of mechano - sensitive molecules , thus propagating signal transduction at the IS . Degree Type Dissertation Degree Name Doctor of Philosophy ( PhD ) Graduate Group Immunology First Advisor Janis K . Burkhardt Second Advisor Terri M . Laufer This dissertation is available at ScholarlyCommons : http : / / repository . upenn . edu / edissertations / 1242 Keywords Actin , Adhesion , Immunological Synapse , Integrin , Mechanotransduction , Signaling Subject Categories Allergy and Immunology | Cell Biology | Immunology and Infectious Disease | Medical Immunology This dissertation is available at ScholarlyCommons : http : / / repository . upenn . edu / edissertations / 1242 OPPOSING ACTIN NETWORKS MODULATE THE MECHANO - ACTIVATION OF THE INTEGRIN LFA - 1 DURING IMMUNOLOGICAL SYNAPSE FORMATION William A . Comrie A DISSERTATION in Immunology Presented to the Faculties of the University of Pennsylvania in Partial fulfillment of the requirements for the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy 2014 Supervisor of Dissertation _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Janis K . Burkhardt , Ph . D . , Associate Professor of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine Graduate Group Chairperson _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ David M . Allman , Ph . D . , Associate Professor of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine Dissertation Committee Terri Marilyn Laufer , M . D . , Associate Professor of Medicine Michael S . Marks , Ph . D . , Professor of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine Yair Argon , Ph . D . , Professor of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine Tobias Baumgart , Ph . D . , Associate Professor of Physical and Biological Chemistry ii DEDICATION I dedicate this thesis to Mia . Your unwavering resolve and constant support have gotten me through so much in my life , and grad school is no exception to this . Thank you for listening to hours of complaining that my cells aren’t cooperating , and for always making me think that any setback was only temporary . You are my love and my life , thank you for being there with me through it all . iii ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS I would like to thank my thesis mentor Janis Burkhardt . For allowing me to follow my own path under your guidance I am supremely grateful . The guidance and support you have provided have been invaluable to my growth as a student and a scientist . Thank you for always being excited to look at a new piece of data , even when they were sometimes confounding , and for always encouraging me to do the right experiment , rather than the easy one . Working in your lab has been an excellent experience , and I will always appreciate it . To the members of the Burkhardt lab , I would also like to express my extreme gratitude . You have all made this a truly enjoyable experience , and have certainly helped in different ways both to the development of my projects and to my personal development as a scientist . I would like to thank Shuixing Li for his expertise in cloning , Yanping Huang for countless scientific conversations and her thoughtful advise on the many problems that arose throughout my time in lab , Fiona Clark and Ed Williamson for making everything run so smoothly , Sarah Boyle for help with FRAP experiments and analysis , and Alex Babich for great scientific discussions and his many contributions to the work presented here . I would also thank my mom and dad who always encouraged me to bring my learning to the next level , and insisting that I should always push further in my studies and not just rely on my current knowledge to get me by . I would especially like to thank them for my first microscope , through which I first gleamed the wonders of the unseen world . There is no doubt I would not be here today without their guidance . iv ABSTRACT OPPOSING ACTIN NETWORKS MODULATE THE MECHANO - ACTIVATION OF THE INTEGRIN LFA - 1 DURING IMMUNOLOGICAL SYNAPSE FORMATION William A . Comrie Janis K . Burkhardt Formation of a functional immune response requires the regulated transfer of information between T cells , and APCs , which leads to a variety of functional outcomes . In many cases this information transfer occurs at a regulated area of cell - cell contact termed the immunological synapse ( IS ) . In T cells responding to APCs there is a robust accumulation of F - actin on the T cell side of the synapse . This F - actin response is characterized by robust polymerization at the periphery of the contact site followed by centripetal flow of the network towards the center of the IS . While it is well known that this F - actin flow is required for the maintenance of signaling at the IS , the mechanism behind this observation has remained elusive . Recent evidence has suggested that the TCR and the integrin LFA - 1 are regulated through the application of force on the receptor – ligand bond . This raises the distinct possibility that the robust F - actin flow provides the mechanical force to activate these receptors , thereby enhancing and maintaining signaling at the IS . I demonstrate that the robust F - actin flow at the T cell side of the IS is required for LFA - 1 accumulation to and maintenance of conformational changes associated with affinity maturation at the IS . Furthermore I find that full induction of LFA - 1 conformational change requires binding to immobilized ligand , and is enhanced through the induced fit of ligand binding , alongside the enhanced tension provided by pulling on immobilized ICAM - 1 . Furthermore , I find that Dendritic Cells ( DCs ) are capable of modulating the lateral mobility of ICAM - 1 on their plasma membrane during TLR induced maturation . Mature DCs greatly restrict the lateral mobility of ICAM through the increased expression and activity of the actin binding proteins moesin and α - actinin - 1 . The limitation of ICAM - 1 mobility is critical for ICAM - 1 mediated adhesion of T cells to DCs , through the regulation of LFA - 1 affinity maturation , and is essential for full T cell proliferation . Our results therefore indicate that the actin cytoskeletons on both sides of the T cell – DC IS coordinately function to maximize conformational change of LFA - 1 and promote synapse stability at the IS . Additionally , these data demonstrate that one role of the T cell F - actin centripetal flow may be to provide the force required for the activation of mechano - sensitive molecules , thus propagating signal transduction at the IS . v TABLE OF CONTENTS ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ……………………………… . ……………………… . … . . III ABSTRACT ………………………………………………………………………… . . . . . IV LIST OF FIGURES ……………………… . . ………………………………………… . VII LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS …………… . … . . ……… . . …………………………… . VIII LIST OF ELECTRONIC FILES . …………………………………………………… . . . X CHAPTER 1 : INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………… . …… . 01 I . Summary II . Signal Initiation and the Formation of the Immunological Synapse a . Formation of the Immunological Synapse b . Sustained TCR signaling is maintained in receptor microclusters III . Regulation of the T cell actin cytoskeleton at the IS a . The T cell IS F - actin network is highly dynamic b . TCR triggering leads to robust F - actin polymerization c . Outside – in LFA - 1 mediated signaling and integrin mediated organization of the F - actin network d . Costimulatory molecule mediated organization of the F - actin network IV . The F - actin cytoskeletal and the control of molecular activation at the IS a . Maintaining quiescence in resting cells b . T cell migration , initial antigen scanning , and the conversion to the stable IS c . Nucleation and translocation of signaling microclusters d . Termination of microcluster - mediated signaling e . Force generation and T cell activation f . Cytoskeletal forces and the initiation and maintenance of TCR mediated signaling i . Kinetic segregation ii . Kinetic proofreading model iii . The serial triggering / serial engagement model iv . Conformational change and the mechanical induction of TCR triggering g . Regulation of integrin function by cytoskeletal forces h . Regulation of CD28 signaling by rearrangement of the F - actin network i . Force based activation of other mechanosensitive molecules at the IS j . Cytoskeletal forces create signaling rich and signaling poor zones at the IS V . The Dendritic Cell cytoskeleton and the generation of molecular tension during T cell priming vi a . DCs form barriers to lateral diffusion and control synaptic patterns b . The DC cytoskeleton plays a critical role in T cell priming c . The DC actin network undergoes specific changes during maturation d . Control of MHC lateral mobility e . Control of integrin ligand lateral mobility f . Control of CD80 / 86 lateral mobility VI . T cells and DCs coordinately regulate the mechanical activation of LFA - 1 at the IS CHAPTER 2 : …………………………………………… . . . ……………………………51 T CELL F - ACTIN FLOW REGULATES LFA - 1 AVIDITY AND SPATIAL ORGANIZATION AT THE IS I . Summary II . Introduction III . Results IV . Discussion CHAPTER 3 : . . ………………………………………………………………………… . . 86 THE DC F - ACTIN NETWORK CONSTRAINS ICAM - 1 MOBILITY TO ENHANCE LFA - 1 AFFINITY MATURATION , CONJUGATE FORMATION , AND T CELL ACTIVATION I . Summary II . Introduction III . Results IV . Discussion CHAPTER 4 : DISCUSSION ………………… . ………………… . …………………119 I . Summary II . T cells as a unique model for studying mechanical transduction III . The cytoskeletal regulation of molecular patterns and global organization of the IS IV . Alternative actin flow - dependent pathways leading to LFA - 1 activation V . Cross - regulation of leukocyte integrins VI . The virological synapse and viral control of integrin activation VII . Modulating mechanotransduction to enhance in - vitro T cell activation VIII . New tools to study mechanotransduction at the IS IX . Concluding remarks CHAPTER 5 : MATERIALS AND METHODS ……………………………………148 APPENDIX A : MOVIE LEGENDS ……………………………………………… . . . 165 REFERENCES : ……………………………………………………………………… . 168 vii LIST OF FIGURES Figure 1 . 1 ) Regulation of the F - actin network at the IS . Figure 1 . 2 ) Models of Force Dependent TCR signaling Figure 1 . 3 ) Integrin regulation by applied forces Figure 1 . 4 ) Regulation of CD28 Signaling by applied forces Figure 2 . 1 ) LFA - 1 activation intermediates are organized into a concentric array by a T cell intrinsic mechanism Figure 2 . 2 ) Analysis of LFA - 1 activation intermediates , talin localization and ICAM - 1 binding Figure 2 . 3 ) LFA - 1 conformational change and synaptic patterns vary with ICAM - 1 concentration Figure 2 . 4 ) Analysis of LFA - 1 distribution with respect to the actomyosin network . Figure 2 . 5 ) ICAM - 1 engagement retains the pool of activated LFA - 1 in the IS periphery . Figure 2 . 6 ) Centripetal flow of the actomyosin network regulates valency and affinity of LFA - 1 Figure 2 . 7 ) Centripetal flow of the actomyosin network regulates valency and affinity of LFA - 1 : data from a single donor Figure 2 . 8 ) F - actin dynamics regulate the organization of activated LFA - 1 Figure 2 . 9 ) F - actin flow maintains the high - affinity conformation of LFA - 1 and its localization at the IS Figure 2 . 10 ) Co - engagement of VLA - 4 slows F - actin flow and attenuates LFA - 1 activation Figure 2 . 11 ) Modulation of centripetal F - actin flow by co - engagement of integrin ligands Figure 2 . 12 ) LFA - 1 / ICAM - 1 interactions are maintained by ongoing F - actin dynamics Figure 2 . 13 ) LFA - 1 activation requires a polarized TCR stimulus and immobilized ICAM - 1 Figure 2 . 14 ) Model of LFA - 1 activation at the IS Figure 3 . 1 ) Dendritic cells regulate the lateral mobility of ICAM - 1 upon maturation Figure 3 . 2 ) The DC actin cytoskeleton clusters ICAM - 1 and constrains its mobility Figure 3 . 3 ) Actin regulatory proteins moesin and α - actinin - 1 regulate the lateral mobility of ICAM - 1 Figure 3 . 4 ) High baseline moesin phosphorylation and low ICAM - 1 mobility in IL - 4 treated BMDCs Figure 3 . 5 ) The cytoplasmic tail of ICAM - 1 mediates clustering and lateral mobility in the plasma membrane of BMDCs Figure 3 . 6 ) Altering ICAM - 1 mobility perturbs T cell adhesion and priming Figure 3 . 7 ) ICAM - 1 mobility does not impact IL - 2 production at early time points , and T cell proliferation defects are not rescued by the addition of exogenous IL - 2 Figure 3 . 8 ) DCs expressing chimeric ICAM - 1 yield inconsistent conjugation results , and do not prime T cells efficiently Figure 3 . 9 ) Restriction of ICAM - 1 lateral mobility promotes LFA - 1 affinity maturation Figure 3 . 10 ) Model showing how DCs regulate ICAM - 1 mobility to enhance LFA - 1 activation on T cells viii LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS Abbreviation Full name ADAP Signal transducing adaptor protein ARP2 / 3 Actin related protein 2 / 3 APC Antigen Presenting Cell Bleb blebbistatin BCR B cell receptor BMDC Bone Marrow Derived Dendritic Cell CDC42 Cell division control protein 42 homolog CrkL Crk - like protein Csk C - Src kinase cSMAC central supramolecular activating cluster CytoD Cytochalasin D DC Dendritic Cell DMEM Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium dSMAC distal supramolecular activating cluster EGF Epidermal Growth Factor ELISA enzyme - linked immunosorbent assay ERK1 / 2 Extracellular signal - regulated Kinase 1 / 2 ERM Ezrin / Radixin / Moesin F - actin Filamentous Actin FAK Focal Adhesion Kinase FLNa Filamin A FRET Fluorescence Recovery After Photobleaching GAPDH glyceraldehyde 3 - phosphate dehydrogenase GEF Guanine Nucleotide Exchange Factor GM - CSF Granulocyte / Monocyte Colony Stimulating Factor gp120 Envelope glycoprotein GP120 Grb - 2 Growth factor receptor - bound protein 2 GTP Guanosine - 5 ' - triphosphate HS1 Haematopoietic lineage cell - specific protein 1 ICAM - 1 Intercellular adhesion molecule - 1 IL - 2 Interleukin 2 IS Immunological synapse ITAM Immunoreceptor Signaling Motifs Itk interleukin - 2 - inducible T - cell kinase Jas Jasplakinolide JNK c - Jun N - terminal kinases KS Kinetic Segregation LAT Linker of Activated T cells LATB Latrunculin B Lck lymphocyte - specific protein tyrosine kinase LtxA Leukotoxin A LFA - 1 Lymphocyte function - associated antigen 1 LPS Lipopolysaccharide ix mAb monoclonal antibody Mac1 Macrophage - 1 antigen Nck Non - catalytic region of tyrosine kinase adaptor protein 1 NIK NF - kB inducing Kinace PKC Protein Kinase C PLC γ Phospholipase C Gamma pN Pico newton PMA Phorbol myristate acetate pMHC peptide Major Histocompatibility Complex pSMAC peripheral supramolecular activating cluster Rac1 Ras - related C3 botulinum toxin substrate 1 Rap1 Ras - related protein 1 RIAM Rap1 - interacting molecule ROCK Rho Kinase RPMI Roswell Park Memorial Institute SLAT SWAP - 70 - like adaptor protein of T cells SLP76 SH2 domain containing leukocyte protein of 76kDa SWAP - 70 Switch - associated protein 70 TCR T cell receptor TLR Toll - like Receptor TSG101 Tumor susceptibility gene 101 VCAM - 1 vascular cell adhesion molecule - 1 VLA - 4 Very Late Antigen - 4 VS Virilogical Synapse WAVE2 Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein family member 2 WASp Wiskott aldrich syndrome protein Y - 27 Y - 27632 ZAP70 Zeta - chain - associated protein kinase 70 x LIST OF ELECTRONIC FILES Movie S1 . LFA - 1 activation intermediates are organized into a concentric array in T cell - B cell conjugates . Movie S2 . Molecular dynamics in T lymphoblasts spreading on stimulatory bilayers . Movie S3 . Molecular dynamics in T lymphoblasts with no apparent cSMAC . spreading on stimulatory bilayers . Movie S4 . Tracking of F - actin dynamics in T cells spreading on stimulatory coverglasses . Movie S5 . F - actin dynamics in T lymphoblasts spreading on coverglasses coated with anti - CD3 + / - ICAM - 1 . Movie S6 . F - actin dynamics persist in human T cells treated with myosin II inhibitors , but cease completely after subsequent addition of jasplakinolide . Movie S7 . F - actin flow is slowed by the addition of immobilized VCAM - 1 . 1 CHAPTER 1 : INTRODUCTION I . Summary T cells are an essential aspect of the adaptive immune system . Importantly , during their circulation through blood , lymph nodes , and peripheral sites of inflammation , T cells must encounter and respond appropriately to a variety of environmental stimuli . Several of these responses are dependent on the application of external forces on T cells . A good example of this is the activation of cell adhesion molecules during the slow rolling and firm adhesion steps of diapedesis , the process that brings cells from the bloodstream into tissues . Following diapedesis , T cells generate internal forces that drive migration in search of cells bearing their cognate peptide bound to proteins of the major histocompatibility complex ( pMHC ) . Following encounter of T cells with antigen presenting cells ( APCs ) bearing cognate pMHC , a regulated contact site with the APC known as the Immunological Synapse ( IS ) is formed . The IS is a specialized membrane domain where information exchange takes place , and formation of the IS is indispensible for antigen recognition and proper immune responses . Recent advances in our knowledge of the IS and associated signaling events have suggested that information transfer depends on generation of internal forces on receptor - ligand pairs through regulated changes in the T cell acto - myosin network that produce a robust centrosymmetric F - actin flow . While the signaling events that lead to F - actin polymerization and drive the dynamic flow of the F - actin network at the IS are well understood , the mechanism by which actin flow enhances T cell activation has remained elusive . One important aspect of the acto - myosin flow is that it can produce force on receptors and signaling molecules that are known to drive the formation and 2 centralization of signaling microclusters at the IS ( 1 - 4 ) . Recent thought has focused on the role this force may have in mechano - sensitive receptor triggering , allowing for the transmission of chemical signaling following force induced receptor activation ( 5 ) . The existence of force sensitive signaling events at the IS suggests a new role for the acto - myosin centripetal flow as the source of the molecular forces driving these mechanosensitive signaling events . According to this new paradigm , early signaling events drive the robust polymerization of F - actin at the IS , which in turn functions to enhance signal transduction at the IS , and ultimately T cell activation . II . Signal Initiation and the Formation of the Immunological Synapse Formation of the Immunological Synapse Circulating T cells must enter the tissues through a regulated process known as diapedesis , in which cells first make contact with the endothelium and undergo slow rolling , followed by firm adhesion , and ultimately move through the endothelial layer . The extracellular and intracellular forces that govern these steps have been reviewed before , and will not be covered here in depth ( 5 , 6 ) . In brief , both selectin - ligand bonds , which mediate slow rolling , and integrin – ligand bonds , which mediate firm adhesion , can be strengthened through extracellular sheer forces provided by blood flow . In this way , both of these molecular interactions engage in catch bonds , a type of molecular interaction that is characterized by an increase in affinity or bond lifetime with the application of either normal ( parallel ) or tangential ( perpendicular ) force to the receptor ligand bond . This can be compared with the more conventional slip bond in which force application results in decreased affinity and bond rupture . In this way these adhesion 3 molecules not only resist the shear force in the blood vessels , but actually use it to strengthen cell attachment to the endothelium ( 7 , 8 ) . Once in tissues , T cells migrate in the search of cells bearing their cognate pMHC complex . Though many cell types can express cognate pMHC , including B cells and macrophages for MHC class II and most nucleated cells for MHC class I , DCs are especially adept at initiating the activation of naïve T cells in the lymphnodes . Migrating , naïve , T cells that encounter cognate pMHC expressing dendritic cells ( DCs ) in lymphnodes first form short , intermittent contacts followed by periods of prolonged conjugation ( 9 ) . Prolonged contacts depend on both the antigenic dose and the overall stimulatory properties of the peptide used ( 10 , 11 ) . The generation of stable contacts additionally requires the presence of ICAM - 1 , the main ligand for the leucocyte specific integrin LFA - 1 , on APCs ( 12 ) . Interference with the generation of stable interactions leads to poor T cell memory , and the induction of tolerance ( 12 - 14 ) . Initial recognition of antigen presented on an APC by a quiescent or migrating T cell results in the formation of a small initial contact area , followed by the rapid spreading of the T cell towards the APC . This initial cell spreading is followed by a period of brief retraction and the formation of the mature synapse ( 15 , 16 ) . Sustained TCR signaling is maintained in receptor microclusters Concomitant with cell spreading is the formation of small clusters of TCR / pMHC complexes , and the recruitment of canonical signaling molecules involved in TCR signal transduction ( 17 , 18 ) . Separate aggregates of LFA - 1 / ICAM and the costimulatory signaling pair CD28 / CD80 also form within the same time frame as TCR microcluster generation ( 19 , 20 ) . Upon reaching maximal spreading , microclusters 4 begin to undergo actin dependent transport towards the center of the IS . The continued signaling at the IS is dependent on the continuous formation of these microclusters in the periphery of the spreading T cell and the recruitment of key signaling molecules including Zap70 and SLP76 ( 1 , 21 ) . The signals that initiate and sustain microclusters and other signaling events at the IS are highly actin dependent ( 1 , 2 ) . However , signals downstream of microcluster formation also drive F - actin nucleation making the relationship between microcluster signaling and actin extremely complicated . In the following sections , I will first describe the complex control of actin nucleation at the IS and follow this up with an in - depth analysis of how F - actin nucleation and the forces generated by this process initiate and guide signaling at the IS . III . Regulation of the T cell actin cytoskeleton at the IS The T cell IS F - actin network is highly dynamic Polymerization of F - actin on the T cell side of the IS is a key hallmark of a productive synapse . The F - actin network at the IS is characterized by robust polymerization in the periphery of the contact area with centrosymmetric retrograde flow , and eventual disassembly of F - actin filaments towards the center ( 2 , 3 ) . Consistent with this , actin filaments are generally shorter ( more branched ) and less stable in the periphery of the IS where active nucleation is occurring , and more stable towards the center of the IS ( 22 ) . F - actin retrograde flow is primarily driven through the polymerization of F - actin , which continuously pushes on the plasma membrane , thereby driving the acto - myosin network inward . Flow of the F - actin network is stabilized through the contractile activity of non - muscle Myosin IIA , which in the absence of F - actin depolymerization 5 Figure 1 . 1 Regulation of the F - actin network at the IS . Ligation of multiple receptors including the TCR , the costimulatory molecule CD28 , and the adhesion molecule LFA - 1 results in the induction of robust polymerization of the F - actin network at the immunological synapse . The pathways that mediate F - actin polymerization are highly interdependent , as the TCR dependent activation of Lck is involved in the initiation of CD28 mediated signaling , and both the TCR induced activation and CD28 induced recruitment of PKC θ are required , in part , for LFA - 1 activation and downstream signaling . Additionally , Vav1 , the GEF for the critical actin regulators Rac1 and CDC42 , is triggered in a cooperative fashion downstream of each of these key surface receptors . Following initiation of the ARP2 / 3 dependent actin polymerization , cell spreading occurs followed by the initiation of robust retrograde actin flow and formation of the mature immunological synapse . In addition to triggering actin nucleation the TCR , CD28 , and LFA - 1 all associate with the F - actin network through multiple interactions denoted by a yellow star . In many cases , as discussed in the text , these interactions with the F - actin network serve to drive additional signaling in an actin dependent feedback loop . 6 results in constriction of the F - actin network ( 2 ) . Simultaneous inhibition of F - actin polymerization , F - actin de - polymerization , and Myosin contractility results in complete inhibition of all F - actin dynamics at the IS . As discussed below , multiple signaling pathways , including those downstream of the TCR , CD28 , and the integrin LFA - 1 , lead to the activation of actin regulatory proteins and the initiation of F - actin polymerization . TCR triggering leads to robust F - actin polymerization Following TCR triggering , multiple signals downstream of the TCR converge on the actin cytoskeleton thereby inducing robust F - actin polymerization ( Figure 1 . 1 ) . The exact signaling pathways downstream of the TCR that result in actin polymerization have been reviewed extensively , [ ( 23 - 25 ) and references therein ] , and will only be briefly discussed here . Following TCR engagement , several protein tyrosine kinases are activated leading to the phosphorylation of multiple effectors . One such effector molecule is the scaffold protein linker for activation of T cells ( LAT ) . LAT phosphorylation recruits SLP - 76 to the IS , and with it the Rho - Family GTPase exchange factor ( GEF ) Vav1 , the adapter Nck , and the IL - 2 - inducible T cell kinase ( Itk ) . The recruitment and activation of these molecules leads GTP loading and activation of the small GTPases Rac1 and CDC42 . These small GTPases increase the activity of the ARP2 / 3 complex activators WASp , WAVE2 , and HS1 , which are critical for proper initiation of actin nucleation ( 26 - 28 ) . In addition , the GEF SWAP - 70 - like adaptor of T cells ( SLAT ) is activated downstream of Lck and increases the activity of CDC42 and Rac1 ( 29 ) . In model T cell systems , the end result of these signaling cascades is a robust actin response characterized by polymerization at the periphery and centripetal flow , with 7 concomitant de - polymerization of the F - actin network towards the IS center ( 2 , 3 ) . Outside – in LFA - 1 mediated signaling and integrin mediated organization of the F - actin network LFA - 1 is the main integrin on the surface of naïve lymphocytes and mediates synapse formation and firm adhesion ( 30 ) . While its main role is decisively as an adhesion molecule , LFA - 1 is well known to initiate signaling following receptor ligation ( “outside - in” signaling ) . Molecules activated through outside - in signaling include FAK , ERK1 / 2 , JNK , and PLC γ ( 31 - 33 ) . Importantly , LFA - 1 can mediate the polymerization of F - actin through the ADAP mediated activation of SLP - 76 ( 34 - 36 ) . This results in F - actin polymerization , likely through the Vav mediated activation of Rac1 , CDC42 and WASp and WAVE ( Figure 1 . 1 ) ( 37 - 39 ) . Recruitment of the actin nucleating module of the ARP2 / 3 complex to the site of integrin engagement is enhanced through interactions of the complex with the talin binding protein vinculin ( 39 - 41 ) . As discussed later , integrin activation and vinculin binding to talin is dependent on talin interactions with the F - actin network following TCR initiation of F - actin flow ( Figure 1 . 3 ) . This suggests a robust feed - forward loop whereby integrin activation is dependent on F - actin generated forces , and results in increased activation of F - actin nucleating factors and F - actin polymerization at the IS . While integrin engagement can induce actin polymerization , it can also lead to modulation of F - actin flow rates . Engagement of VLA - 4 , an integrin upregulated following initial priming , by immobilized VCAM - 1 greatly decreases the centripetal flow of the F - actin at the IS ( 42 ) . This may occur through the interaction of multiple actin binding proteins with the β chain of VLA - 4 . A strong connection of ligand - immobilized integrin to the viscoelastic F - actin network is likely to slow the 8 flow of the network at the site of integrin engagement , while the engagement of multiple integrins across the IS area would cause an overall rate decrease in the F - actin flow ( 42 , 43 ) . So while integrins are capable of nucleating F - actin polymerization , the overall effect on the F - actin network flow at the IS will depend on the strength of the outside - in signal , the strength of the interaction between the integrin cytoplasmic domain and the actin network , and the mobility of the integrin ligand ( since only immobilized ligand could oppose forces on the integrin tail ) . Costimulatory molecule mediated organization of the F - actin network CD28 is well recognized as an essential costimulatory molecule leading to robust IL - 2 production and naïve T cell activation / expansion following colligation with the TCR ( 44 ) . The classical pathways involved with CD28 costimulation have been extensively discussed and reviewed ( 15 , 45 - 47 ) . Importantly , CD28 signaling is critically involved in the regulation of the F - actin network , and can interact with F - actin through the F - actin binding protein Filamin A ( Figure 1 . 1 ) . CD28 interacts with and activates Vav and SLP - 76 through the Grb - 2 binding site on CD28 . This promotes the formation of Vav / SLP - 76 complexes and initiates downstream signaling ( 48 - 50 ) . In cells in which the Lck negative regulator Csk has been inhibited , CD28 binding to CD80 / 86 can mediate robust F - actin polymerization ( 51 ) . CD28 - dependent F - actin polymerization occurs through Vav - mediated activation of CDC42 , and is enough to initiate cell spreading , though the appearance of the F - actin network is not as symmetrical as with TCR stimulation ( 52 ) . CD28 costimulation has also been shown to induce the dephosphorylation and activation of the actin severing protein cofilin ( 53 ) . Increases in actin severing can lead to increased rates of actin polymerization through the freeing of 9 barbed ends ( 54 ) . Increased rates of severing and F - actin polymerization could help create a highly branched F - actin network , thereby contributing to F - actin flow . Additionally , it has recently been discovered that a lymphoid cell specific actin un - capping protein , Rltpr , is critical for CD28 mediated signaling ( 55 ) . Though it remains to be determined if Rltpr functions to remove capping protein from barbed ends of actin filaments at the IS , it raises the distinct possibility that CD28 signaling could enhance F - actin polymerization through freeing barbed ends for G - actin addition . IV . The F - actin cytoskeleton and the control of molecular activation at the IS As detailed in the previous sections , TCR and costimulatory molecule mediated signaling converge to initiate and control the F - actin network at the IS . In a complex pathway , the F - actin network is critical for proper signal transduction , suggesting a positive feedback loop whereby initial signaling induces F - actin restructuring , which in turn reinforces early signals . In the following sections , I will describe mechanisms by which the F - actin network can control or mediate signaling at the IS . Maintaining quiescence in resting cells The maintenance of T cells in a quiescent state in the absence of cognate antigen is critical for the prevention of autoimmunity and the proper regulation of the immune response as a whole . To maintain quiescence , T cells make use of several mechanisms . One such mechanism may involve segregation of signaling clusters into various compartments on the surface , and the prevention of receptor clustering . As has been 10 shown for the B cell receptor ( BCR ) ( 56 ) , the actin cytoskeleton may act in T cells to limit baseline signaling by preventing clustering of the TCR or downstream signaling intermediates . In fact , one - way antigen experienced cells maintain increased sensitivity to antigen is through the oligomerization and clustering of the TCR , suggesting that this process is , in fact , regulated ( 57 ) . Additionally , it has been reported that large clusters of TCR and LAT are maintained separately in resting cells , and only overlap upon activation ( 58 ) . While LAT clusters are maintained by the underlying actin cytoskeleton , it remains possible that the separation of LAT and TCR clusters depends on the actin cytoskeleton in resting T cells ( 59 ) . Reorganization of the actin network following stimulation could then drive cluster growth and interactions between TCR and LAT clusters . In B cells , proteins of the Ezrin , Radixin , Moesin ( ERM ) family of actin binding proteins limit BCR cluster formation , preventing aberrant signaling through the maintenance of diffusional barriers to the BCR ( 56 ) . Interestingly , the BCR is capable of transiently deactivating ERM proteins , which allows for increased BCR diffusion and cluster formation . This cycle is required for antigen capture , as both constitutively active and dominant negative ERM proteins interfere with this process ( 60 ) . This shows that while ERM mediated barriers to diffusion may aid in maintaining a quiescent state , they also undergo a dynamic cycle of activation and deactivation that regulate these barriers . Transient ERM deactivation allows for initial clustering , while prompt reactivation maintains these larger clusters . A similar process may be occurring in T cells , as TCR stimulation can cause ERM dephosphorylation and cytoskeletal relaxation ( 61 ) . T cell migration , initial antigen scanning , and the conversion to the stable IS 11 For most studies of the IS and initial antigen encounter , T cells are allowed to spread on a stimulatory surface from a single cell suspension . This means that the initial contact must inherently result in cell spreading and the formation of a firm adhesive contact . In this system , F - actin generated forces are required for de novo cell spreading , and the initial TCR mediated F - actin polymerization is absolutely required to initiate synapse formation . However , in - vivo , initial contact between a T - cell and an antigen bearing APC occurs within the context of T cell migration . T cell migration requires actin - mediated protrusion of the leading edge and Myosin - mediated contraction of the trailing edge known as the uropod . Upon initial T cell scanning during the short interaction periods of T cell / APC interactions , T cells form mobile synapses known as kinapses . These kinapses show many of the same markers as mature synapses but are not radially symmetrical ( 62 , 63 ) . In this manner , migrating cells , cells that are undergoing initial kinapse mediated scanning , and cells that have formed a stable synapse are all likely to be using similar regulation of the F - actin network . For instance , the distribution of the acto - myosin network in T cells forming a symmetric synapse is very analogous to that of migrating cells , with robust F - actin polymerization at the leading edge and Myosin concentrated closer to the cell body , at areas of F - actin depolymerization ( 64 ) . The conversion between synapses , kinapses , and full migration likely depends on a symmetric acto - myosin network at the IS , and may be determined by the strength of TCR signaling . In support of this , the balance between PKC θ and the actin nucleation promoter WASp determines if cells are likely to break or maintain symmetry ( 65 ) . Nucleation and translocation of signaling microclusters 12 Following the formation of a stable , symmetric synapse , microclusters of TCR and downstream signaling components such as Zap70 and SLP76 form in the periphery of the IS ( peripheral supramolecular activation cluster or pSMAC ) and undergo retrograde transport to the center of the contact zone ( central supramolecular activation cluster or cSMAC ) . De - polymerization of the F - actin network results in cessation of TCR microcluster formation , suggesting an intact network is required for microcluster nucleation ( 1 , 18 ) . Additionally , depolymerization of the F - actin network abolishes TCR microcluster dynamics , suggesting that F - actin retrograde flow drives the central accumulation of microclusters following their formation . Since microtubules and cytoplasmic dynein have been implicated in microcluster movement toward the IS center ( 66 ) , it is possible that the actin network simply functions as a scaffold for microcluster nucleation , and that subsequent microtubule dependent microcluster transport depends upon maintenance of this actin scaffold . However , it is more likely that the actual inward flow of the acto - myosin network is required for both microcluster nucleation and translocation , since inhibiting F - actin dynamics , but leaving the network otherwise intact , completely abrogates the formation of new SLP76 microclusters and prevents microcluster translocation to the cSMAC ( 2 ) . This is supported by the fact that actin flow rates are locally perturbed at TCR microclusters that encounter a barrier to inward transport ( 67 ) , suggesting direct interactions between the TCR and the actin network . While the exact role of the F - actin flow in continued signaling from individual microclusters is not currently known , inhibition of the F - actin flow interrupts phosphorylation of PLC γ and ongoing calcium flux at the IS ( 2 ) . Termination of microcluster - mediated signaling 13 While F - actin flow at the IS is critical for the formation of microclusters and sustained signaling , it may also set a molecular countdown for signal termination . The cSMAC is an area of reduced protein phosphorylation , and prolonging the time microclusters spend in the cell periphery actually prolongs signaling lifetime ( 18 , 68 ) . Moreover , recruitment of TCR into the cSMAC is dependent on the ubiquitin binding protein TSG101 , and knockdown of TSG101 inhibits cSMAC formation and increases microcluster lifetime and total phosphotyrosine levels at the IS ( 69 ) . In this regard , as the actin retrograde flow continues at the IS it may first initiate the formation of microclusters , but then it would lead to their deactivation by driving their accumulation at the signaling deficient cSMAC . This method of turning off TCR signaling may be critical to gauge the quantity of antigen on a cell surface , and perhaps for the prevention of hyper - stimulation by the activation of too many TCRs at a given time . Force generation and T cell activation It is interesting to note that during the initial contact between a migrating T cell and an APC , and in the radially symmetric mature synapse , multiple forces are applied to the molecular contacts . During the initial contact , actin driven migration of the T cell along the APC provides this force , while at the mature IS the retrograde F - actin flow provides a similar force . With this in mind , molecular contacts between TCR and pMHC , integrins and integrin ligands , and costimulatory molecules and their ligands must persist and signal under constant strain . Interestingly , the generation of molecular forces at the IS downstream of pMHC – TCR interactions is directly correlated with the antigenicity of a given pMHC ( 70 ) , and T cells respond differently depending on the mechanical properties of the stimulatory surfaces they encounter ( 71 , 72 ) . Human T 14 cells respond better to substrates of increasing stiffness , and this corresponds to an increased ability to generate force at the IS along with increasing substrate stiffness ( 72 , 73 ) . Additionally , migrating T cells , which are characterized by a highly dynamic leading edge with forward protrusion driven by actin polymerization , are far more sensitive to antigen when encountered at the leading edge , rather than the less dynamic uropod ( 74 , 75 ) . This evidence suggests that T cells must not only be activated in the presence of forces at the IS , but that these forces may be a critical component of signal initiation and T cell activation . If this is the case , then the study of the mechanical forces on the TCR and other receptors at the IS , and the relevant mechanosensitive signaling pathways , becomes critically important in gaining a complete understanding of T cell activation . Cytoskeletal forces and the initiation and maintenance TCR mediated signaling The TCR complex consists of the TCR αβ heterodimer non - covalently linked to the immunoreceptor tyrosine - based activation motif ( ITAM ) containing CD3 signaling complex consisting of CD3 γ , CD3 δ , CD3 ε , and CD3 ζ subunits . While the molecular interactions between the TCR and pMHC have been extensively characterized , the mechanism by which receptor ligation is transmitted across the plasma membrane and transformed into the biochemical signals associated with TCR triggering is unknown and hotly debated . Several challenges unique to the TCR / pMHC interaction must be overcome in order to initiate signaling , and any model proposed to describe TCR triggering must take these into account ( 76 ) . First , TCR triggering must be extraordinarily sensitive , as only a few molecules of cognate pMHC exist on the surface 15 Figure 1 . 2 Models of force dependent TCR signaling . 16 A ) The kinetic segregation model of TCR signaling is dependent on the separation of molecules with small extracellular regions such as the TCR and those with large extracellular regions such as the phosphatase CD45 . Actin dependent juxtaposition of the T cell and APC plasma membranes may drive the separation of molecules with large extracellular domains from those with small extracellular domains . This should occur even in the presence of low numbers of cognate pMHC on the APC surface . B ) The kinetic proofreading model proposes TCR triggering is based upon longer bond lifetimes for strong agonists than weak agonists . The force dependent catch bond behavior of the TCR with strong , but not weak , agonists can enhance bond lifetime following the application of actin dependent force , which would also be enough to rupture the slip bond type molecular interactions associated with weak or non agonist pMHC . C ) The serial triggering / serial engagement molecule could benefit from the presence of multiple F - actin interactions with the TCR . Though it may not be force dependent , the association of the TCR with the F - actin network could lead to actin dependent clustering of the TCR on the plasma membrane , allowing for rapid successive unbinding and rebinding , and thereby serial triggering of multiple TCRs , by a single pMHC . D ) Several conformational changes that have been described for the TCR may be induced or enhanced by the application of force by the T cell actin cytoskeleton . The first posits a mechanical lever type action of the TCR under the application of a tangential force . The TCR acts as a lever inducing a bending of the stiff CD3 chains that then propagates to the intracellular domain and results in signal initiation . The second suggests that actin associations with the CD3 chains may help to pull the CD3 chains away from the inner leaflet of the plasma membrane , thus exposing the ITAMs for phosphorylation and binding of essential regulators such as the kinase ZAP70 . The third possibility demonstrates a type of catch bond molecular interaction whereby force would cause a conformational change that would allow a stronger association of the TCR with cognate pMHC . of a given APC . Indeed it has been shown that TCR triggering and T cell activation can occur with a single molecule of cognate pMHC on the surface of an APC ( 77 ) . Secondly , the TCR must have a high level of discrimination between cognate pMHC and pMHC containing non - agonist peptides . Since the TCR must necessarily have a small amount of affinity for self pMHC as a product of positive selection , the TCR must be able to distinguish low numbers of agonist peptides from high numbers of non - agonist pMHC . In essence , TCR triggering models must account for an ability to trigger despite a low signal to noise ratio . Finally , TCR triggering must occur despite a near limitless diversity in the binding of pMHC and TCR . Several models have been proposed to account for these necessities in TCR triggering ( including the kinetic segregation model , the kinetic proofreading model , the serial triggering / serial engagement model , and the conformational change model ) . I will briefly discuss these models with particular focus on the potential role of the F - actin cytoskeleton and the force generated by F - actin at the 17 IS in each . It is important to note that many observations that support a role in cytoskeletal force can be explained within the context of multiple models , and it is likely that several mechanisms are working together to initiate TCR triggering . Kinetic segregation The kinetic segregation ( KS ) model was proposed to account for data showing that a large proportion of Lck is phosphorylated on the activating tyrosine , Y394 , in T cells , even in the absence of TCR stimulation ( 78 ) . It is likely that this active Lck is continuously opposed by the action of CD45 and other phosphatases , since pharmacological phosphatase inhibition induces T cell activation in the absence of TCR stimulation ( 79 - 81 ) . Additionally , removal of the Lck negative regulator C - src tyrosine kinase ( Csk ) results in the phosphorylation of proximal TCR triggering events ( 51 ) . It is therefore unsurprising that the balance between tonic signaling and activation of TCR signaling depends on the expression of Csk , inhibitory phosphatases like CD45 , and kinases like Lck ( 82 ) . The KS model proposes that close membrane approximation enforced by TCR / pMHC bond length ( approximately 15nm ) is too small to allow co - localization of proteins with large extracellular domains , such as CD45 . In the model , the TCR is a passive player in this process , and close membrane approximation is driven entirely by the affinity of TCR for pMHC and the formation of multiple bonds leading to stochastic size based sorting and exclusion of large molecules from pMHC / TCR rich areas . Exclusion of this key phosphatase then allows the system to be dominated by the constantly active Lck , and TCR triggering ensues ( 83 ) . Indeed , in - vitro modeling of the TCR signaling network on reconstituted liposomes has shown that clustering of CD3 ζ and Lck is enough to overcome even high concentrations of CD45 and induce signaling 18 ( 84 ) , and large ectodomain proteins have been shown to enhance clustering of smaller proteins and their ligand in live cells ( 85 ) . Following initial triggering , phosphorylated ITAMs can be protected by interaction with their specific binding partners ( 84 ) . The strongest evidence for the kinetic segregation model is based on observations that truncation of the CD45 ectodomain impairs TCR mediated signaling , and that full function can be restored by simply adding any large ectodomain to truncated CD45 ( 86 , 87 ) . Additionally , the size of the ectodomain influences CD45 and TCR exclusion into separate protein islands , with larger ectodomains resulting in greater separation . Moreover , elongation of the pMHC by the addition of various length tethers linking the pMHC to the APC membrane results in poor T cell activation corresponding to greater distances between the APC and T cell and poor exclusion of CD45 from the interface and from CD3 clusters ( 88 , 89 ) . Though elongated pMHC did not affect TCR or coreceptor binding and TCR clustering , elongation of the pMHC may also affect the force transduced to the TCR , a fact that I consider in the section on force - based models of TCR triggering . Despite the evidence presented above for the KS model , several key problems have arisen in the literature . First , some authors have found that small ectodomains can result in CD45 exclusion from TCR and CD2 microclusters , as well as the total IS interface , suggesting that ectodomain size may not be the only contributing factor in this process ( 82 , 90 ) . Additionally , truncation of the intracellular domain of CD43 results in poor exclusion from the IS ( 91 ) . This suggests that for certain large molecules , segregation based on size is not enough to determine molecular sorting at the IS , and molecular crowding and active transport of molecules may also be involved . Secondly , 19 evidence from NK cells suggests that similar molecular sorting events between inhibitory and activating receptors based on the size of their ectodomains are at work , and ligands with large ectodomains are excluded from synapses containing other , shorter , ligands ( 92 ) . Interestingly , it has been found that in NK cells , molecular segregation of large molecules from small molecules depends largely on the surface expression level of the small ectodomain protein and its receptor ; more expression ( and more receptor - ligand engagement ) lead to greater segregation ( 93 ) . This instinctively makes sense in that , in order to exclude CD45 and other large ectodomain proteins , the combined bond strength between all local TCR / pMHC molecules must be strong enough to deform the local plasma membrane and bring cells into close proximity , overcoming resistance posed by the presence of not only molecules like CD45 , but the entire glycocalyx . Given the generally low affinity of the TCR , multiple interactions would be needed to provide this force . This idea is troublesome given recent evidence that only one pMHC can induce the formation of a microcluster containing hundreds of TCRs , presumably excluding CD45 , on a responding T cell ( 77 ) . Additionally , TCR microclusters can form in the absence of agonist pMHC , and even in the complete absence of MHC on artificial surfaces coated with ICAM - 1 . Furthermore , in the absence of MHC on the stimulatory surface , CD45 is excluded from these TCR microclusters ( 94 ) . This observation necessitates a different mechanism besides stochastic exclusion of large molecules following TCR / pMHC bond formation to explain any size - based exclusion of CD45 from TCR microclusters . The polymerization of the F - actin network and forces generated by the network may be enough to overcome these limitations . During kinapse formation , the T cell actin 20 network is undergoing dynamic regulation through a combination of chemokine receptor , co - stimulatory molecule , and integrin mediated signaling . This reorganization of the F - actin network may be enough to overcome the charge repulsion presented by the glycocalyx and push the T cell and APC membranes close together ( 17 ) . This force may be enough to initiate CD45 exclusion from the TCR based on size alone . In this way , CD45 could be excluded from the TCR in areas of close membrane approximation , even in the absence of TCR / pMHC interactions . Following TCR engagement and induction of robust F - actin polymerization and formation of a symmetric IS , forces generated downstream of the TCR in combination with the close membrane approximation enforced by TCR bound to pMHC could enhance this process , further separating inhibitory phosphatases and other large ectodomain proteins from TCR microclusters and leading to their exclusion from the IS . In line with this idea , it has recently been found that T cells can produce invadosome - like protrusions into the membrane of an APC . These protrusions can form in the absence of antigen ( though both frequency and longevity are increased in the presence of antigen ) , and induce extremely close membrane approximation , overcoming charge repulsions mediated by the glycocalyx ( 95 ) . Critically , these protrusions are completely dependent on the F - actin network , occur in multiple T cell / APC models , and precede the onset of early TCR triggering . Additionally , it is known that disruption of the F - actin network prevents the formation of new TCR microclusters , even in the continued contact between the T cell and an artificial APC ( 1 ) . This suggests that receptor clustering and exclusion of CD45 is dependent on the continued presence of F - actin , and perhaps F - actin generated membrane proximity . Based on this evidence , the KS model should be modified to account for the contribution 21 of F - actin generated force in initiating close membrane approximation , particularly in the presence of low pMHC concentration , thus contributing to CD45 exclusion form sites of TCR – pMHC binding ( Figure 1 . 2 ) . Kinetic proofreading model The kinetic proofreading model of TCR triggering initially proposed by McKeithan posits that TCR triggering requires individual bond lifetimes above a certain threshold duration , and longer than the dissociation time . Furthermore , if unbinding occurs prior to this threshold being reached then no signaling occurs and the TCR resets itself ( 96 ) . This model was later refined to allow for retention of signaling intermediates in TCR activation so that rebinding of pMHC to the same TCR would continue from where the previous interaction left off ( 97 ) . This fits well with the observations that fast pMHC on rates can overcome low dwell times / high off rates and lead to high apparent affinities and TCR triggering . That is , if a pMHC rebinds prior to diffusing away from the TCR , it could induce TCR triggering by reaching the threshold even when any given interaction was particularly short ( 98 , 99 ) . In fact , in the 2D setting of the IS , k on has been shown to be one of the best predictors of pMHC agonist strength ( 100 , 101 ) . Force produced by the F - actin network may play an interesting role in the kinetic proofreading model of TCR triggering . It has recently been shown that the TCR can engage in catch bond molecular interactions with cognate pMHC ( 102 ) . The authors show that in the absence of force on the TCR / pMHC bond there is an inverse relationship between the average lifetime of the bond and pMHC potency . Following the application of 10pN of exogenous force to the bond , agonist pMHC bond lifetimes increase behaving like catch bond molecular interactions , while antagonist bond 22 lifetimes decrease behaving like more traditional slip - bond type molecular interactions . This leads to a 57 - fold increase in the ratio of bond lifetimes between strong agonist and strong antagonist peptides following the application of force . Additionally , catch bond behavior correlated strongly with the strength of the agonist ( as measured by T cell stimulatory capacity ) such that the strongest agonist pMHC had the largest increase in bond lifetime following the application of force , and required the greatest force to induce the catch bond behavior . Interestingly , it has been shown that at the IS , the actin cytoskeleton acts to decrease the half - life of some TCR / pMHC bonds ( 100 ) . Internally generated force provided by the F - actin network therefore may be able to serve a similar purpose to the external force applied in the study by Liu et al . In terms of the kinetic proofreading model , force would thus allow for increased specificity and greater bond lifetimes for agonist vs . antagonist pMHC , enhancing sensitivity and diminishing noise during TCR signal acquisition ( Figure 1 . 2 ) . The serial triggering / serial engagement model The serial engagement model was proposed as a way of accounting for the high specificity of the TCR given low 3D affinities and high off rates of agonist pMHC , along with low numbers of agonist pMHC on the surface of the APC . In this model , pMHC would serially engage with multiple TCRs , triggering each one individually before moving onto another . In this way , the system takes advantage of the high off rate to trigger multiple receptors ( 103 ) . Later studies have confirmed that a single pMHC is capable of recruiting hundreds of TCRs into a complex , initiating T cell activation and cytokine production ( 77 ) . In a manner similar to that proposed here for the KS model , it has previously been proposed that actin force can cause close membrane approximation 23 between the T cell and the APC , thus bringing the TCR into close proximity to the APC membrane ( 104 ) . This close proximity would accommodate the fast on - rates characteristic of agonist pMHC and would ensure that multiple TCRs would be in the vicinity to promote subsequent rebinding of the pMHC to the same or an adjacent TCR . The rate of T cell activation as described by the serial triggering model would be highly influenced by the localized concentrations of TCR on the surface of T cells . Therefore , a mechanism whereby triggering of the first TCR helps bring other TCRs into the immediate vicinity would increase activation efficiency by eliminating a portion of the time it would take for the pMHC to randomly encounter another TCR on the surface . It is already known that the actin cytoskeleton is critical for the formation of TCR and signaling microclusters following simultaneous engagement of multiple TCR molecules ( 1 , 2 ) . It is therefore possible that TCR clustering induced by a single pMHC is also induced or stabilized by the F - actin network , thereby leading to enhanced TCR triggering ( Figure 1 . 2 ) . In support of this , direct tethering of transmembrane proteins to cortical actin induces nanoclustering ( 105 ) , and the TCR associates with the F - actin network through both ITAM dependent and independent mechanisms ( 106 - 108 ) . While the ITAM dependent mechanism requires phosphorylation by Lck , and is therefore likely to take place after initial TCR triggering , the ITAM independent mechanism is mediated by two RRR sequences in the CD3 ζ chain , and causes the constitutive association of a portion of the TCR with F - actin . This association is essential for clustering of the TCR , IS formation , and T cell activation following TCR engagement . Conformational change and the mechanical induction of TCR triggering 24 Recently , the idea that conformational change and mechanosensing may play a critical role in TCR triggering has gained significant traction ( 5 , 25 , 109 ) . Structural studies by multiple labs have suggested the existence of several different conformational changes that can occur upon pMHC binding ( 110 - 113 ) . While these authors found evidence of various conformational changes , in many cases changes in the TCR structure were not found to propagate away from the pMHC binding site . Conformational changes that were found to occur in the constant domain , away from the antigen binding site , were subtle , and it remains unclear if these represent conserved changes found in all triggering interactions . Furthermore , it is unclear how such a small change can propagate to the intracellular portion of the signaling CD3 chains . This brings us to the one key problem faced by models proposing conformational changes initiated in the TCR by pMHC binding alone . Specifically , any conformational change must be present in all TCR / agonist pMHC interactions , and absent from TCR / non - agonist pMHC interactions . Given the near limitless variation in the TCR and pMHC binding sites it is hard to imagine that all productive interactions occur with a given binding geometry necessary to initiate the same structural changes . In support of this , activating antibodies can perform their function in the absence of any overt structural change to the TCR structure in solution ( 114 ) . Further complicating the matter , multiple groups have observed that soluble monomeric pMHC is poorly suited to activating T cells , even at extremely high concentrations ( 115 - 119 ) , despite TCR / pMHC half - lives otherwise associated with TCR triggering in a 2D environment ( 100 ) . Finally , as mentioned earlier , simple elongation of the pMHC reduces TCR triggering despite efficient binding to the TCR , again suggesting that binding - induced conformational change is unlikely to represent a concerted TCR 25 triggering mechanism . Interestingly , slight modifications to the conformational change model that bring TCR / pMHC binding into the physiologically relevant setting of the IS provides a mechanism whereby all of these problems can be overcome . Within the IS , the TCR is dynamically associated with the F - actin network through multiple direct and indirect interactions ( Figure 1 . 1 ) ( 22 , 67 , 107 , 108 , 120 , 121 ) . These interactions allow F - actin generated force to be applied to the TCR via the actin – TCR linkage . Any resistance to this force provided by surface - bound pMHC could then be converted into a conserved conformational change in the TCR . One key result of refocusing the driver of conformational change from molecular interactions occurring at the site of pMHC engagement to mechanical force applied on the TCR is that these changes in protein structure can occur regardless of the molecular contacts occurring between the TCR and pMHC . As long as the interaction is of sufficient affinity to stay bound in the presence of force , productive TCR triggering will ensue , thus overcoming the challenge created by the diversity in pMHC / TCR interactions . Additionally , any changes in conformation do not necessarily have to occur within the ecto - domains of the TCR subunits , and can be localized to the ITAM - containing intracellular domains ( 122 ) . Several lines of evidence suggest just such a mechanotransduction - based mechanism for TCR triggering , and shine new light on old observations . As mentioned , observations that soluble monomeric pMHC cannot initiate efficient TCR triggering pose a particular problem for the conformational change model ( 115 ) . Interestingly , surface anchoring of monomeric pMHC overcomes this limitation ; very low numbers of surface - bound monomeric pMHC can initiate TCR triggering ( 77 , 123 ) . In part , this sensitivity to pMHC and continued signaling is dependent on an intact 26 cytoskeleton , as addition of actin depolymerizing agents causes rapid loss of calcium flux without loss of IS formation ( 1 , 123 , 124 ) . This effect of actin inhibition is specific to 2D stimulatory settings , as actin depolymerization when the TCR is cross - linked in solution leads to prolonged calcium responses ( 125 ) . Additionally , actin does not simply act as a passive scaffold for continued signaling , since freezing the actin network in place through combined inhibition of actin nucleation , depolymerization , and Myosin contractility leads to a concomitant drop in calcium flux ( 2 ) . A likely explanation for these observations is that in the 2D setting , as opposed to monomer in solution , the cytoskeleton can generate force on the pMHC / TCR bond , thereby initiating signaling . Indeed , it has been shown that strong stimulatory anti - CD3 ε antibodies bind to the side of the complex in a way that induces a bending of the CD3 molecule , in contrast to non - activating antibodies that bind more perpendicularly at the membrane - distal portion of the CD3 complex ( 126 ) . In addition , tangential force applied on the TCR through the non - activating antibody resulted in initiation of calcium flux . These data support a model in which force on the TCR / pMHC complex applied laterally , and not normally , causes the TCR to act as a lever , causing the bending and activation of the associated CD3 complexes ( Figure 1 . 2 ) ( 127 ) . Critically , the actin flow at the IS is radially symmetric and directed towards the center of the IS . Force vector measurements at the IS show that this actin flow results in a similarly directed force applied to the substratum through the TCR ( 128 ) . This force is consistent with the F - actin driven centralization of TCR microclusters and would apply a tangential force on the TCR / pMHC bond . Interestingly , an external normal force also initiates TCR triggering , though whether normal and tangential force act by the same or different conformational 27 triggering mechanisms is unknown ( 129 ) . Critically , it was shown that simple contact between the TCR and pMHC probe was insufficient to induce signaling . Instead , continuous force was required to maintain calcium flux ; signaling stopped and resumed with the cessation and reapplication , respectively , of external force . Consistent with this , the loss of TCR triggering that occurs with the elongation of the pMHC , usually used as evidence for the kinetic segregation model , can be overcome through the application of tangential or normal force to the TCR / pMHC bond . This finding is important in that it suggests that prior findings interpreted as support for the kinetic segregation model can be reevaluated to fit into a coherent theory of TCR triggering based on the application of force on the TCR / pMHC bond . While these findings strongly suggest the existence of conformational changes induced through the application of normal or tangential force , the structural basis of these changes with each type of force are still unclear . This is complicated by the fact that conformational changes under strain are particularly difficult to study , as they are not likely to exist with pMHC binding to purified , soluble , TCR components . How exactly force is applied to the TCR is an important question . As already mentioned , the TCR can interact both directly and indirectly with the actin cytoskeleton . The direct association of CD3 ζ is mediated by two stretches of basic amino acids , and mutation of these residues results in decreased synapse formation and T cell activation ( 107 ) . Interestingly , these same amino acid stretches also mediate binding of the CD3 ζ to the negatively charged inner leaflet of the plasma membrane , limit the phosphorylation of ITAMs ( 130 , 131 ) , and are required for synaptic recruitment of CD3 ( 132 ) . The dual role of the basic stretch suggests a possible competition of binding for the basic residues in 28 the CD3 cytoplasmic domain , with binding to the inner leaflet acting as a negative regulator for activation , and binding to the actin cytoskeleton acting as a positive regulator . It also raises the possibility that following ligand binding , force provided by the actin cytoskeleton on CD3 chain may physically pull the CD3 chains away from their association with the plasma membrane , helping to expose the ITAMs for subsequent phosphorylation ( Figure 1 . 2 ) . Similar binding of the CD3 ε chain to the plasma membrane also restricts ITAM phosphorylation by Lck within the ε chain ( 133 ) . Though no direct CD3 ε / F - actin interaction has been discovered , it is known that CD3 ε can bind directly to Nck following TCR engagement prior to detectable phosphorylation of ITAMs , and the Nck binding site is exposed following TCR engagement , and independently of TCR signal initiation ( 122 , 134 ) . This interaction is critical for the initiation of TCR triggering at very early steps , since mutating the residues involved in Nck binding or blocking the interaction with cell permeant peptides results in greatly diminished phosphorylation of CD3 ζ , CD3 ε , and Zap70 , reduced recruitment of CD3 to the synapse , and inhibition of proliferation and effector function ( 135 , 136 ) . Nck is linked to actin polymerization through recruitment and binding of N - WASp and WASp ( 137 , 138 ) . Since a similar link to N - WASp leads to the induction of force - dependent activation of p130Cas , it is likely that the connection of CD3 ε to the F - actin network through Nck can transduce a similar force ( 139 ) . Therefore , CD3 ε ITAM phosphorylation could be regulated by actin - generated force in a way similar to the one proposed for CD3 ζ . Following initial TCR triggering , increases in intracellular Ca 2 + have been shown to decrease membrane association of the CD3 cytoplasmic domains by neutralizing the negative charge of the plasma membrane , suggesting that a strong 29 positive feedback loop regulates this pathway . As F - actin polymerization and retrograde flow are critical for sustained calcium flux through an unknown mechanism , actin dynamics are likely to play a critical role in maintaining this pathway ( 1 , 2 ) . Recently demonstrated TCR / pMHC catch bonds ( 102 ) , provide strong circumstantial evidence for the existence of an as - of - yet undefined conformational change at the site of TCR / pMHC interaction , since many of the theoretical mechanisms involved in catch bond formation require an accompanying conformational change ( 140 ) . In the study by Liu et al . , a tensile normal force was applied through retraction of an extracellular probe bearing pMHC , though it has been theorized that a similar normal force can be generated internally through the action of the F - actin network ( 109 ) . In this case , the F - actin flow at the IS , or force present during kinapse formation , would pull on the TCR , and , if engaged to an agonist pMHC , a conformational change would occur to strengthen that interaction ( Figure 1 . 2 ) . In this way , force on the TCR induces a conformational change that doesn’t necessarily initiate signaling , but could enhance the probability of TCR triggering based on the kinetic proofreading model , as discussed earlier . Additionally , this may provide a way to reconcile models based on local conformational change and those based on force ; as in the case of catch bonds , force would be required for the conformational change associated with TCR triggering to occur . In the absence of force there would be no driver of conformational change . Regulation of integrin function by cytoskeletal forces Integrins are heterodimeric cell surface receptors that mediate cell - cell and cell - matrix interactions . In T cell – APC contacts , integrins are primarily responsible for the molecular forces that maintain cell - cell contact ( 141 , 142 ) . Each integrin consists of 30 an α and a β subunit . Between the known 18 α and 8 β , there are 24 known pairs , only a subset of which are expressed in the immune system ( Figure 1 . 3 ) . In T cells , integrins are required for firm adhesion to endothelium during diapedesis and for formation of stable T cell – APC interactions , resulting in T cell activation or effector function . As such , integrins must function in a variety of extra - cellular environments , even under the extraordinary strain placed on the integrin – ligand bonds by the shear flow in blood vessels . Furthermore , integrin activation must be tightly regulated to prevent improper lymphocyte function . In general , integrins are regulated at two distinct levels ; affinity or the strength of interaction between each individual integrin molecule and its ligand , and valency or integrin density at the cell – cell interface . Both valency and affinity contribute to adhesion ( 143 ) . Therefore , the overall strength of interaction , or avidity , is a product of valency , affinity , and relative contact area ( 144 ) . In T cells , intracellular signals emanating from chemokine receptors or the TCR have been shown to increase the activation state of integrins on the cell surface . This “inside out” signaling can result in either changes in valency or affinity , and a large body of work has accumulated defining the biochemical pathways leading to integrin activation ( 144 - 146 ) . Recently new data has emerged demonstrating the regulation of integrin activation through applied forces ( 147 - 149 ) . In the following section , the signaling pathways governing integrin activation at the IS will be covered in detail , with a particular focus on the role cytoskeletal forces play in initiating and sustaining changes in integrin valency and affinity . The α L β 2 ( CD11a / CD18 ) integrin LFA - 1 is expressed exclusively in leukocytes and is essential for T - cell trafficking and IS formation . LFA - 1 is composed of two large subunits CD11a / CD18 ( α L / β 2 ) that heterodimerize in a 1 to 1 ratio ( Figure 1 . 3B ) . In 31 Figure 1 . 3 Integrin regulation by applied forces . 32 A ) Known α and β integrin chains and pairings , integrin pairs expressed in leukocytes are depicted in red . B ) Domain structure of the integrin LFA - 1 . The α chain consists of an intracellular tail , two calf and one thigh domains , and a β - propeller domain with an inserted ligand binding I domain . The β chain consists of an intracellular tail , transmembrane region , a β tail domain , 4 EGF repeats , a hybrid domain with an inserted β I domain , and a PSI domain . C ) The retrograde flow and associated forces at the IS could drive LFA - 1 into the IS from the cell periphery . This could lead to increased local concentrations of LFA - 1 , thereby increasing the valency of the interaction and leading to adhesive strengthening . D ) LFA - 1 can exist in roughly three conformations : a bent , low affinity conformation ; an extended intermediate affinity conformation ; and an extended conformation where the hybrid domain on the β chain is swung out allowing for downward movement of the α 7 helix in the β I domain . This downward movement allows the β I domain to bind an internal ligand in the α I domain , causes a downward movement of the α I domain α 7 helix and opening of the ligand binding site . These changes generate a high affinity , extended - open conformation . The increase in affinity that is associated with the application of force may stabilize this high affinity conformation by stabilizing the hybrid domain swing - out independently , and in addition to , ligand binding . The connection of the β chain intracellular domain to the F - actin network at the IS may be enough to drive the swing - out of the hybrid domain following initiation of the retrograde flow at the IS . E ) In addition to the force - based regulation of the affinity of LFA - 1 for ligand applied force can also strengthen the connection of LFA - 1 to the underlying actin cytoskeleton . Talin , one of the main proteins that link integrins to the underlying actin network can stretch upon the application of force . This stretching reveals up to 11 cryptic vinculin binding sites . Vinculin can then bind to the exposed sites and reinforce the linkage of talin to the F - actin network through its own F - actin binding ability . resting T cells , LFA - 1 is maintained in an inactive , bent conformation with very low ligand binding capacity ( Figure 1 . 3D ) . Signals generated through the TCR and CD28 result in the activation of the small GTPase RAP1A / B through the activation of a combination of RAP1 guanine - nucleotide - exchange factors downstream of PLC γ , PKC θ , and CrkL ( 150 - 153 ) ( Figure 1 . 1 ) . Following RAP1 activation , talin is recruited to the IS through the action of RIAM , which links talin to the membrane targeting CAAX domain of activated RAP1 ( 154 ) . The recruitment of talin to the IS is required for LFA - 1 affinity and valency modulation as well as conjugate formation ( 155 ) . Binding of the talin head domain to the cytoplasmic domain of the integrin β chain causes alterations to the β transmembrane domain , thereby relieving interactions between the α and β chains that are required to maintain the bent conformation . This process allows unfolding of LFA - 1 and the adoption of an intermediate conformation , with 10 fold increased affinity over the bent conformation ( 156 - 164 ) . This “switch - blade” like unfolding occurs in the presence 33 of activating antibodies or ligand - mimetic peptides , and exposes epitopes that report on integrin activation ( 165 , 166 ) . Importantly , over - expression of the talin head domain is enough to result in extension of the majority of LFA - 1 on the cell surface and adoption of the intermediate affinity conformation , but it does not result in full rescue of cell adhesion , suggesting that the actin binding domain of talin is essential for full LFA - 1 - mediated cell adhesion ( 155 , 167 ) . In addition to talin , other proteins , including members of the kindlin family of adaptors , are known to bind the β cytoplasmic domain of integrins and link them to the cytoskeleton , conveying a general concept that cytoskeletal linkage is of critical importance for proper integrin function ( 149 , 168 ) . Connection of LFA - 1 to the dynamic actin network could provide the force required to initiate integrin recruitment to the IS , and clustering once there , thereby increasing valency of the interaction , and could also provide the force theorized to bring LFA - 1 to the high affinity conformation ( Figure 1 . 3 , green arrows ) . The role of the cytoskeleton in mediating changes in LFA - 1 valency is not straightforward . Early studies proposed a mechanism whereby cytoskeletal restraints limited the mobility of LFA - 1 in resting cells , thus preventing clustering . Upon activation , cytoskeletal restraints were released , allowing the free diffusion and coalescence of LFA - 1 , thus increasing valency ( 169 - 171 ) . In this model , the increased association of high affinity LFA - 1 with the cytoskeleton limits the ability to support firm adhesion ( 172 ) . In support of this idea , low does CytoD increase LFA - 1 mobility and clustering , and increase cell adhesion to ICAM - 1 coated surfaces . These changes do not induce , and function independently of , changes to integrin affinity and conformational change ( 143 , 173 ) . Importantly , later studies demonstrated that the integrin clustering 34 mediated by actin depolymerization only occurs in the presence of ligand , and suggested a trapping mechanism aided by the increased diffusivity of LFA - 1 in the absence of the cytoskeleton ( 173 ) . This would indicate that LFA - 1 interaction with the cytoskeleton is a limiting factor in avidity , and is in contradiction with the requirement of talin , the main link between LFA - 1 and the cytoskeleton , for LFA - 1 synaptic accumulation ( 155 ) . In contrast , LFA - 1 / ICAM - 1 microcluster transport at the IS is dependent on an intact acto - myosin network ( 3 , 20 ) . One of the key confounding factors is that studies that identified the actin cytoskeleton as a negative regulator of LFA - 1 valency were not looking within the context of an immunological synapse , and were looking at simple adhesion to ICAM - 1 bearing surfaces . In the context of the IS , actin polymerization and retrograde flow may enhance valency through linkage of LFA - 1 to the actin cytoskeleton and active , rather than passive , recruitment to the IS . In this way the actin cytoskeleton may increase the valency of LFA - 1 / ICAM - 1 interactions at the IS ( Figure 1 . 3 ) . In addition to the regulation of valency , integrin avidity can be regulated at the level of affinity , or the strength of each receptor ligand bond . Changes in integrin affinity are generally associated with conformational changes in integrin structure ( 147 ) ( Figure 1 . 3 ) . I have already talked about the “inside out” regulation of integrin extension that mediates the transition from the low affinity to the high affinity conformation . Conformational change from the intermediate affinity to the high affinity stage results in a further 100 fold increase in affinity for ligand and has been proposed to be mediated by forces generated by the T cell actin cytoskeleton ( 148 , 164 ) . Structural changes associated with integrin activation have been characterized using activating mutations and antibodies ( 165 , 174 - 176 ) . Typically , integrin activation and ligand binding are 35 associated with a lateral swing - out of the hybrid domain and downward movement of the α 7 helix in the β I domain . This induces the high affinity conformation of the β I domain , and has been shown to occur through a series of conformational intermediates ( 177 ) ( Figure 1 . 3D ) . In α I domain - containing integrins such as LFA - 1 , the activated β I domain binds an invariant glutamate residue in the C - linker region between the α I and β - propeller region . This results in downward movement of the α I domain α 7 helix and adoption of the extended open , high affinity , α I domain . Importantly , antibodies that stabilize the extended and extended open conformations greatly increase LFA - 1’s affinity for ligand , resulting in a 1000 fold dynamic affinity range from the bent to the extended - open conformations ( 164 , 178 ) . Furthermore , shortening of the C - linker region to mimic the downward motion exerted by the β I domain results in constitutively active LFA - 1 ( 175 ) . Steered molecular dynamic simulations have demonstrated that conversion between different integrin conformations can occur through the application of physical forces . Pulling on the headpiece or on bound ligand can overcome interactions between the hybrid and β - tail domains that help maintain the bent conformation , resulting in integrin extension . Importantly forces applied to the headpiece were not sufficient in these simulations to induce the opening of the headpiece or separation of the integrin legs ( 179 ) . Interestingly , similar simulations have shown that a tensile force applied parallel to the membrane on the β cytoplasmic tail can be propagated along the β chain and results in hybrid domain swing - out and affinity modulation ( 176 ) . Since talin binds to the integrin β cytoplasmic domain , any force applied on LFA - 1 through talin’s linkage to the retrograde actin flow at the IS would result in a similar tensile force , and should mediate integrin affinity maturation . Intriguingly , it is known that high affinity LFA - 1 36 is more tightly bound to the actin cytoskeleton than intermediate or low affinity integrin , suggesting that linkage to the underlying cytoskeleton may be involved in conformational regulation ( 180 ) . Consistent with the prediction that force can enhance LFA - 1 affinity , integrins engage in catch bond interactions , in which force on the bonds increases the strength and longevity of the interaction ( 181 - 183 ) . As with other adhesion molecules such as selectins , integrin bond lifetime increases as tensile normal force is applied , until a threshold known as critical force is reached where bonds are rapidly ruptured ( 140 , 184 ) . Importantly , blocking binding of the α I internal ligand by the open β I domain inhibits catch bond behavior , suggesting that conformational change initiated by hybrid domain swing - out is required to initiate catch bond interactions . Furthermore , it has been shown that α 5 β 1 and LFA - 1 bond lifetimes are increased following a short , transient , period of high force application . For LFA - 1 / ICAM - 1 interactions , loading and then unloading of applied force stabilized the integrin / ligand bond , increasing the average bond lifetime from 1 . 5 to over 35 seconds ( 185 ) . So far I have talked about the mechanosenstive aspects of LFA - 1 regulation with a focus on the integrin ligand interactions . Importantly , the connection between the T cell and the APC mediated by the integrin ligand bond is only as strong as the weakest link in the pathway ( 186 ) . Whereas catch bond interactions between integrins and their ligands exhibit increased affinity with the application of force , the links that connect integrins to the cytoskeleton are thought to behave as more conventional slip bonds , where force decreases bond lifetime . Nonetheless , the talin - mediated linkage of LFA - 1 to the actin cytoskeleton is regulated by the application of force . Once talin binds to the 37 integrin β tail through its head domain to F - actin through its rod domain , actin - myosin mediated force pulls on talin . This causes talin to unfold , like an uncoiling spring , thereby exposing up to 11 cryptic vinculin binding sites ( 187 , 188 ) ( Figure 1 . 3E ) . Binding of vinculin to the talin rod domain then allows vinculin to bind to F - actin and enforces the integrin linkage to the actin cytoskeleton ( 149 , 189 - 192 ) . While this process is reversible , such that loss of force leads to diminished vinculin binding , vinculin binding can stabilize the unfolded conformation of talin ( 193 ) . In T cells , vinculin is recruited to the IS and is required for talin recruitment and conjugate formation , suggesting that the destabilized talin – F - actin bond is not enough to maintain LFA - 1 activation ( 194 ) . Thus , talin - vinculin binding represents another force - dependent step in the pathway leading to integrin activation , and another mechanism through which this pathway can be enhanced by F - actin flow at the IS ( Figure 1 . 3 ) . Integrin mediated outside - in signaling has been mentioned earlier as a driver of multiple pathways of T cell activation . Importantly , the conformational changes that mediate LFA - 1 conformational change and affinity maturation are also required for outside - in signal initiation . Blocking LFA - 1 affinity maturation leads to decreased IL - 2 production and T cell proliferation ( 195 ) . Likewise , inhibition of the separation of the transmembrane domains through induction of an inter - subunit disulfide bond results in the loss of outside - in induced stress fiber formation and cell spreading ( 196 ) . Conversely , initiating the conformational changes associated with affinity modulation through the addition of conformational change - inducing antibodies results in the same pattern of outside - in tyrosine phosphorylation as actual ligand binding . This suggests that integrin conformational changes are necessary and sufficient to induce outside - in 38 signaling . Therefore , forces on the integrin - ligand bond that induce and stabilize integrin conformational change are likely to be required to initiate and sustain outside - in signal transduction . Given the accumulating evidence that physical force exerted by the actin cytoskeleton drives conformational changes that mediate LFA - 1 activation and stabilizes this active conformation , we must re - evaluate our understanding of TCR - mediated integrin activation . Under this new paradigm , forces generated by the retrograde flow of the T cell actin cytoskeleton act as a key component of inside - out signaling , and are a critical allosteric regulator of integrin activation at the IS . Regulation of CD28 signaling by rearrangement of the F - actin network Unlike the TCR and LFA - 1 , the role of F - actin in the transduction of co - stimulatory signals downstream of anti - CD28 are relatively understudied . While it is known that microclusters of CD28 form concomitantly with TCR microclusters and then segregate into their own domain right outside of the cSMAC , the role of F - actin in the formation and centralization of these microclusters is unknown . Somewhat surprisingly , CD28 microclusters only require the presence of ligand to form and centralize , and will do so even in the absence the CD28 cytoplasmic tail , though differences in the rate of microcluster formation and centripetal movement were not discussed ( 19 ) . This may suggest that CD28 microcluster formation is primarily the result of kinetic segregation . It will be interesting to see if F - actin generated forces on the T cell membrane can drive CD28 microcluster formation as it may TCR microclusters ( Figure 1 . 4 ) . Several studies suggest that CD28 signaling not only initiates F - actin rearrangement , but also may actually require this rearrangement for signal propagation . Firstly , expression of the F - 39 Figure 1 . 4 Regulation of CD28 Signaling by applied forces . A ) CD28 clustering at the IS may occur in a signaling independent manner through the actin of F - actin , force based , kinetic segregation of bound and unbound molecules . Actin polymerization generates a pushing force into the plane of the IS that can bring the T cell plasma membrane into extremely close proximity with that of the APC . This may limit the size of the extracellular domain that can remain in the area of close proximity , forcing larger molecules to aggregate in areas of less membrane juxtaposition . In the case of a receptor and a surface bound ligand , the free receptor will have an effectively smaller extracellular domain than the bound receptor and could remain in areas of higher membrane proximity while the bound receptors are forced into areas of low membrane proximity , thus increasing receptor clustering . B ) Filamin A ( FLNa ) is a scaffolding protein and an essential CD28 effector that can undergo force dependent conformational change . Force causes the extension of the second rod domain of Filamin A , eliminating binding sites that exist in the relaxed protein and exposing a different set of binding sites that only exist in the extended protein . Thus under tension FLNa can release low force binding partners and recruit new proteins to the IS . A B B B B A Force - dependent actin deformation Stretching of FLNa B . Mechanotransduction of the CD28 effector Filamin A A B Filamin A F - actin Low force binding partner High force binding partner No Force Force Stretched CD28 ABD1 ABD2 CD28 Binding site C C C Force independent binding partner A . F - actin mediated kinetic segregation and formation of CD28 microclusters Dimerization Domain CD28 CD28 CD80 / 86 F - actin 40 actin - uncapping protein Rltpr , which interacts with CD28 , is absolutely required for CD28 signaling , since Rltpr deficient mice mimic the phenotype of CD28 KO mice . Expression of Rltpr was specifically needed for the recruitment of PKC θ to the IS ( 55 ) . Additionally , in cells in which Lck has been activated through the inhibition of Csk , CD28 signaling induces robust F - actin polymerization resulting in the phosphorylation of ERK . This suggests that F - actin reorganization is a critical effect of CD28 mediated costimulation ( 51 ) . In this system many early readouts of TCR mediated signaling were reproduced by inhibition of Csk , though there appeared to be a blockade in the signaling cascade that prevented initiation of Ca 2 + signaling and ERK phosphorylation . Depletion of the F - actin network or F - actin polymerization mediated by CD28 , both removed this signaling blockade , and allowed Ca 2 + signaling and phosphorylation of ERK to occur . This demonstrates that one of the key signaling components of CD28 costimulation is likely to involve rearrangement of the F - actin network as actin inhibitors served the same function as CD28 ligation in this system . Additionally , it has been shown that CD28 cosignaling can induce greater force on stimulatory surfaces than TCR triggering alone ( presumably through regulation of the F - actin network ) . This additional force is not applied through CD28 ; instead force is applied entirely through the TCR , at least in the absence of integrin engagement ( 128 ) . If CD28 costimulation can lead to greater force acting on surface receptors , it may lead to greater activation of all mechano - sensitive receptors , including integrins . This idea is consistent with the finding that CD80 and CD86 on DCs increase the strength of cell – cell interactions with a responding T cell ( 197 ) . Though this data suggests that an essential component of CD28 mediated signaling is the reorganization of F - actin , and possibly the tuning of molecular forces at 41 the IS , it does not represent evidence of CD28 mechano - transduction , per - se . CD28 interacts with the F - actin crosslinking protein filamin A ( FLNa ) , which is recruited to the IS in a CD28 dependent manner following TCR stimulation through the PxxPP motif in the CD28 cytoplasmic tail and domains 10 - 12 of FLNa . CD28 interaction with FLNa is required for T cell costimulation ( 198 ) . FLNa is a large , rod like protein composed of an N terminal actin binding domain and 24 Ig like domains . Ig like domains 1 - 15 are referred to as Rod 1 , while domains 16 - 23 make up Rod 2 , with the 24 th domain allowing for homodimerization . In addition to binding actin , FLNa is a prolific scaffolding protein with over 90 known binding partners including intracellular signaling molecules , receptors , ion channels , transcription factors , and adhesion proteins ( 199 , 200 ) . Critically , many of these interactions can be regulated through the application of either external or internally generated force . Cryptic binding sites in the compact Rod 2 domain are exposed and binding sites in are abolished following the removal of force . This could occur through stretching of the Rod 2 domain under conditions where the F - actin network is under stress ( 200 - 202 ) . This may be particularly relevant at the IS where the robust F - actin flow is likely to apply considerable stress to the network , and may represent an important force dependent aspect of CD28 mediated costimulation ( Figure 1 . 4 ) . Importantly , the mechanical regulation of FLNa binding partners sets up several potential signaling mechanisms . Molecules that are recruited under force could allow for localized signal activation and signal amplification . Conversely , molecules that are released following force removal could function as soluble signaling factors , exerting their function on areas distant from their initial release . FLNa has been shown to be important for PKC θ recruitment to , and NF - κ B inducing kinase ( NIK ) activation at , the 42 IS . Interestingly , while NIK was constitutively associated with FLNa , PKC θ interactions required CD3 / CD28 signaling . It will be of interest to see if FLNa mediated CD28 recruitment of PKC θ is force dependent . Force based activation of other mechanosensitive molecules at the IS In the above sections , I described evidence for cytoskeletal force - induced protein activation at the level of surface expressed receptors and their direct interacting partners at the IS . F - actin generated forces are also involved in the activation of additional cytoplasmic molecules including , but not necessarily limited to , members of the Crk - associated substrate ( Cas ) family of proteins that includes the lymphocyte specific protein CasL . Members of the Cas family of proteins contain a highly conserved Src kinase substrate domain containing multiple phosphorylatable YxxP motifs that are exposed by mechanical stretching of the protein and separation of the N and C termini ( 203 , 204 ) . Following phosphorylation of CasL , Crk is able to bind and activate the small GTPase Rap1 through the Crk associated GEF C3G . Since stretching of Cas and exposure / phosphorylation of the Crk binding site is dependent on integrin binding to an immobilized substrate , and Rap1 activation induces the recruitment of talin and the affinity maturation of multiple integrins , Cas may act as a critical modulator in a positive feedback loop to integrin activation following mechanical integrin activation . At the IS , two independent studies have demonstrated that Myosin and Myosin contractility are required for maximal CasL phosphorylation , though in both studies there was significant CasL phosphorylation left at the IS following Myosin inhibition ( 205 , 206 ) . Interestingly , phosphorylation of Cas within the substrate domain is largely independent of Myosin contractility , but completely dependent on F - actin 43 polymerization ( 139 ) . It is therefore quite likely that continued F - actin polymerization and polymerization driven flow at the IS in the absence of Myosin contractility provides enough molecular force to drive stretch dependent Cas / CasL activation . Cytoskeletal forces create signaling rich and signaling poor zones at the IS Different receptors can apply varying amount of forces on their ligands ( 207 ) , and the maximum amount of force that can be applied is only as strong as the weakest link in the complex that links ligand to receptor and receptor to the actin network ( 186 ) . Because of this , the force that allows for the greatest signaling for each receptor could be very different depending on the strength of these varying molecular interactions . In terms of the IS , TCR – pMHC catch bonds can withstand a maximum force of roughly 10 piconewtons ( pN ) , unfolding of domain 20 in the CD28 binding protein FLNa occurs with the application of roughly 15pN ( 208 ) , while the integrin - ligand bonds are capable of withstanding maximum force of 30pN , with a 4 fold greater average bond lifetime ( 102 , 181 ) . Even the linkage of vinculin to the talin rod domains has a maximum force that can be applied before unbinding occurs as the talin – helices become unstable ( 193 ) . As the F - actin network slows moving inward along the radius of the IS , peak force is likely to decrease concomitantly [ with the major assumption that the force is directly proportional to the rate of F - actin flow , though this may not be so simple ( 186 ) ] . Signaling from force - resistant molecules would be initiated and sustained in regions of high and low F - actin dynamics , while molecular interactions with low force resistance would only be initiated and maintained in areas of lower F - actin dynamics . This could set up intrinsic areas of maximal signaling for each receptor as microclusters form and traverse the IS . Additionally , since it is known that F - actin dynamics are poor or 44 nonexistent in the cSMAC , it is not surprising that the cSMAC represents an area of low force generation during the stable phase of IS formation ( 128 ) . TCR microclusters become poorly phosphorylated towards the center of the contact zone but retain their phosphorylation in the periphery ( 68 ) . This may arise through a loss of mechanical force that maintains signal initiation and signal transduction . Thus the distribution of F - actin generated forces at the IS may serve both to initiate signaling and to limit ongoing signaling by sweeping microclusters into areas of poor F - actin dynamics . In this regard , limiting the centralization of microclusters and maintaining them in the peripheral F - actin rich compartments of the IS could enhance signaling lifetimes by keeping receptors associated with areas of higher molecular forces . Additionally for molecules that engage in catch bond molecular interactions , the bond strength and half life may also be regulated across the IS radius , with stronger interactions occurring in areas of higher F - actin generated force , as long as that force is not above the rupture force . To really understand how changing actin rates and actin generated forces affect T cell signaling differentially across the IS careful measurements of traction forces on different molecules across the IS radius are required . In addition to signaling , these same differential forces across the IS could contribute to the organization of the overall molecular segregation and signaling patterns ( pSMAC / cSMAC ) at the IS . V . The dendritic cell cytoskeleton and the generation of molecular tension during T cell priming DCs form barriers to lateral diffusion and control synaptic patterns 45 Although the APC side of the synapse has long been assumed to play a passive role , a growing body of evidence indicates the DC F - actin network plays a critical role in T cell activation . There are already some hints that APCs , DCs in particular , play an active role in regulating IS formation and structure ( 209 ) . T cells responding to B cells or stimulatory supported lipid bilayers form the classical mature synapse with a characteristic pSMAC and cSMAC pattern ( 210 , 211 ) . This shows that in the absence of barriers to receptor mobility , TCR and LFA - 1 microclusters will be driven towards the IS center in a T cell autonomous fashion . The DC / T cell IS is not characterized by this symmetric pattern and is instead characterized by multiple patches of variable protein overlap , and even at late time points , fails to form a central accumulation of CD3 ( 212 ) . Therefore , it is highly likely that the DC forms barriers to the free diffusion of T cell ligands that are either cytoskeletal or topological in nature . Importantly , these two possibilities are not mutually exclusive and the lateral mobility of some proteins could be regulated through linkage to the DC actin cytoskeleton while others are restricted through topological barriers . In either case , the DC actin cytoskeleton would necessarily play a crucial role in defining and maintaining this diffusive barrier . The creation of such a barrier has important implications for the mechanical regulation of signaling at the IS . While the T cell actin - cytoskeleton could activate mechano - sensitive molecules at the IS by applying force to the receptor – ligand bond , barriers to diffusion provided by the DC actin - cytoskeleton could provide a retention , or counter force on the ligand , thereby increasing tension at the molecular level . Furthermore , regulation of ligand mobility may prevent microcluster centralization and deactivation , thereby enhancing T cell activation . Following upregulation of T cell ligands , control of molecular mobility would thus 46 function as a second stage at which DCs could modulate their T cell stimulatory capacity . The DC cytoskeleton plays a critical role in T cell priming At the functional level , the DC F - actin network polarizes towards a cognate T cell in an MHC dependent manner ( 213 ) , and treatment of DCs with actin depolymerizing agents impairs the DCs ability to prime T cell responses ( 214 ) . Polarization of the F - actin network is mediated by Rho family GTPases , and is required for proper conjugate formation , IL - 2 production , and T cell proliferation ( 215 - 217 ) . Similarly , the ARP2 / 3 complex activator WASp promotes the maintenance of T cell – DC interactions ; WASp - deficient DCs exhibit fewer and shorter - lived contacts with cognate T cells , and a diminished ability to prime T cell proliferation ( 218 , 219 ) . While it is clear that the F - actin network on the DC side of the synapse plays a key role in T cell conjugate formation and T cell activation , how these changes are regulated , and the role in IS mediated signal transduction are open questions in the field . The DC actin network undergoes specific changes during maturation Following recognition of danger signals through pattern recognition receptors , DCs undergo a maturation process that increases their stimulatory potential as APCs . As such , changes in actin - regulatory proteins during maturation are of key interest in understanding the regulation of the DC F - actin network at the IS . Several actin regulatory proteins have been documented to increase in response to inflammatory stimuli including robust upregulation of the actin bundling protein fascin ( 220 , 221 ) and activation of the actin severing protein cofilin ( 222 ) . These proteins may be acting together to create a more dynamic F - actin network ( 223 ) , and are associated with an 47 increase in F - actin content in mature DCs and increased plasma membrane ruffling . Interestingly , fascin polarizes , along with F - actin , to the site of T cell engagement on DCs . Additionally the protein plexin - A1 is upregulated during maturation by CIITA , the master regulator of MHCII expression , and is required for Rho GTPase activation , F - actin polarization to the IS , and T cell activation ( 217 , 224 ) . While many of these changes to the DC F - actin network are likely to be necessary for the migration of DCs from tissues to the lymphnodes , they clearly also play a key role in increasing the stimulatory potential of DCs . Concerted changes in the DC F - actin network could provide the physical reorganization of the DC membrane or provide cytoskeletal tethers that could both limit the lateral mobility of T cell ligands . In the following sections I describe regulated changes in F - actin binding proteins of the Actinin and Ezrin / Radixin / Moesin ( ERM ) families . Furthermore , I show that these changes are required for the control of the lateral mobility of specific T cell ligands on the surface of DCs . Control of MHC lateral mobility While there is little evidence in the literature for APC control of lateral mobility affecting T cell activation , there is significant evidence that the modulation of ligand mobility on artificial APCs can enhance responding T cell activation . Physically trapping TCR microclusters in the periphery of the IS by adding a barrier to diffusion of the α CD3 stimulatory antibody in the artificial APC causes increased localized phosphorylation and increased cellular activation ( 68 ) . Interestingly , limiting the forward mobility of TCR microclusters causes local deformation of the F - actin network ( 22 , 67 , 225 ) . At sites of TCR confinement , molecular forces between the TCR and the viscoelastic actin network 48 are therefore at their maximum , as these actin deformations are not seen with mobile microclusters . Thus , the increased signaling witnessed at such confinement sites may be due to increased mechanical activation of the TCR signaling complex . Though MHC class II lateral mobility is not constrained by the F - actin network in B cells ( 56 ) , the lateral mobility of MHC class I is restricted through interactions with the F - actin network ( 226 , 227 ) . To fully understand mechanotransduction at the IS it is essential to know if the regulated changes in the DC actin cytoskeleton correlate with changes in MHC class I or class II mobility , and if such changes in mobility result in enhanced T cell stimulation . In later sections I will discuss the regulation of , or lack - there - of , MHC II lateral mobility on the surface of DCs and the implications for T cell signaling . Control of integrin ligand lateral mobility As mentioned earlier integrins are known to be mechanosensitive proteins . In addition to the forces applied on the receptor integrins can respond to the physical properties of their environment . As part of this sensitivity to the environmental factors , proper integrin activation requires sufficient retention forces on the integrin ligand . In fact , integrin mediated cell spreading does not occur unless the ligand can withstand roughly 40pN of applied force ( 207 ) . In line with this idea , stiffness of the extracellular matrix correlates with outside in signaling ( 228 ) , and surface immobilization of ICAM - 1 is required for TCR induced LFA - 1 conformational change ( 229 ) . Importantly the regulation of the lateral mobility of ICAM - 1 can have dramatic affects on immune cell function . In particular , NK cells adhere firmly to target cells in which ICAM - 1 lateral mobility is low . Increasing the lateral mobility of ICAM - 1 , and thereby decreasing the tension on the ICAM - 1 / LFA - 1 bond , decreases the efficiency of conjugate formation 49 and granule polarization ( 230 ) . This suggests that restriction of the lateral mobility of integrin ligands is critical for reaching the perceived force barrier of 40pN . In endothelial cells , members of the actinin and ERM family of actin binding proteins limit the lateral mobility of ICAM - 1 through interactions with a concerted polybasic region on the ICAM - 1 cytoplasmic tail . Importantly , the constrained lateral mobility of ICAM - 1 greatly increases the efficiency of T cell diapedesis suggesting that this is a critical determining factor of LFA - 1 adhesiveness ( 231 , 232 ) . This suggests that one way cell - cell interactions can be regulated is through the control of integrin ligand clustering and lateral mobility . As with the control of MHC lateral mobility we will describe in detail how DCs can modulate ICAM - 1 lateral mobility for maximal T cell activation . Control of CD80 / 86 lateral mobility If CD28 signaling is in - fact mechanosensitive , then the control of the lateral mobility of the main stimulatory ligands CD80 and CD86 on the surface of APCs may also be essential for proper APC function . The cytoplasmic domains of CD80 and CD86 have been shown to mediate protein clustering and cytoskeletal interactions through a highly conserved poly - basic motif ( 233 , 234 ) . The cytoplasmic tail of each protein is critical in regulating their costimulatory potential . Additionally , the CD80 cytoplasmic tail mediates the separation of CD28 microclusters from TCR microclusters at the immunological synapse ( 235 ) . The polybasic domains in the CD80 and CD86 cytoplasmic tails are similar to known ERM binding sites in other proteins , including ICAM - 1 ( 236 ) ( 232 ) . As we have discussed for ICAM - 1 the connection to the underlying actin cytoskeleton and limitation of CD80 / CD86 lateral mobility may be important for their functions . Given the importance of F - actin linkage and reorganization to CD28 50 function , it will be interesting to see if DCs can modulate the costimulatory signal through changes in the lateral mobility of CD80 and 86 , and the mechanism by which they do so . VI . T cells and DCs coordinately regulate the mechanical activation of LFA - 1 at the IS While there is increasing evidence that the TCR , CD28 , and integrins can be activated through the application of external forces on individual receptors it is critically important to know if the molecular forces generated internally at the IS can drive these same activation pathways . The work presented in this thesis attempts to answer this central question and defines the molecular mechanisms by which the F - actin networks of the T cell and the APC contribute to the activation of mechanosensitive molecules at the IS . I show that T cell actin retrograde flow drives the activation of the integrin LFA - 1 , and its conformational change into the high affinity form , as well as its accumulation and synaptic patterns . In a reciprocal process , DCs actively limit ICAM - 1 lateral mobility on the plasma membrane through upregulation of the proteins Moesin and α Actinin - 1 . The limitation on ICAM - 1 lateral mobility counteracts the forces applied by the T cell actin cytoskeleton and contributes to LFA - 1 affinity maturation , T cell adhesion , and priming . 51 CHAPTER 2 : T CELL F - ACTIN FLOW REGULATES LFA - 1 AVIDITY AND SPATIAL ORGANIZATION AT THE IS The text and data presented in this chapter are in submission at the Journal of Cell Biology under the working title of F - actin flow drives affinity maturation and spatial organization of LFA - 1 at the immunological synapse . Authors : William Comrie , Alexander Babich , and Janis K . Burkhardt . Alex Babich contributed significantly to the work presented here . These contributions included image analysis and figure preparation , preparation of materials and methods , and design of the bilayer system and experimental design as follows . Figure 2 . 1A and radial profiles were created by Alex , Figure 2 . 1C panel arrangement . Figure 2 . 2G Analysis and panel arrangement . Figure 2 . 4 A radial profiles , 2 . 4B and 2 . 4E image analysis and panel preparation . Figure 2 . 5 radial profile preparation . Figure 2 . 8 B and C average projections and panel preparation . Figure 2 . 9 analysis and preparation of radial profiles . Figure 2 . 10 radial profile generation . Figure 2 . 11 analysis and figure preparation . Figure 2 . 14 creation of model . In general William Comrie , Alex Babich , and Janis Burkhardt designed research , William Comrie performed experiments in current versions , William Comrie and Alex Babich analyzed results , and William Comrie , Alex Babich , and Janis Burkhardt wrote the paper . 52 I . Summary Integrin - dependent interactions between T cells and antigen presenting cells are vital for proper T cell activation , effector function , and memory . Regulation of integrin function occurs via conformational change , which modulates ligand affinity , and receptor clustering , which modulates valency . Here , I show that conformational intermediates of LFA - 1 form a concentric array at the immunological synapse . Using an inhibitor cocktail to arrest F - actin dynamics , I show that organization of this array depends on F - actin flow and ligand mobility . Furthermore , F - actin flow is critical for maintaining the high affinity conformation of LFA - 1 , for increasing valency by recruiting LFA - 1 to the immunological synapse , and ultimately for promoting ICAM - 1 binding . Finally , I show that F - actin forces are opposed by immobilized ICAM - 1 , which triggers LFA - 1 activation through a combination of induced fit and tension - based mechanisms . This data provide direct support for a model in which the T cell actin network generates mechanical forces that regulate LFA - 1 activity at the immunological synapse . II . Introduction T cell activation and effector function require the formation of a regulated cell - cell contact with an antigen - presenting cell ( APC ) termed the immunological synapse ( IS ) . IS architecture varies depending on the physiological setting , and entails separation of signaling complexes into specialized membrane micro - domains ( 237 ) . In the canonical “bulls - eye” IS , a distinct molecular pattern forms in which an outer ring of LFA - 1 and talin surrounds an inner region enriched in T cell receptor ( TCR ) and associated signaling molecules ( 210 , 211 ) . These regions have been termed the peripheral and central 53 supramolecular activation clusters ( pSMAC and cSMAC ) , respectively . A third distal SMAC ( dSMAC ) region enriched in CD45 and F - actin lies at the IS edge ( 65 ) . TCR signaling occurs in microclusters that form in the IS periphery and undergo cytoskeleton - dependent translocation to the cSMAC , where signal extinction takes place ( 1 , 21 ) . The F - actin network plays a central role in IS formation and TCR signaling ( 1 , 18 , 23 , 24 , 238 - 240 ) . Actin dynamics at the IS are characterized by polymerization in the lamellipodium , centripetal flow , and filament disassembly in the central region . Centripetal flow is primarily driven by F - actin polymerization , organized by myosin IIA contraction ( 2 , 3 ) . Simultaneous inhibition of myosin IIA contraction and F - actin polymerization arrests actin flow , with concomitant loss of Ca 2 + signaling . Conversely , conditions that increase F - actin polymerization and centripetal flow correlate with enhanced T - cell activation ( 241 ) . Recent studies indicate that mechanical force on the TCR – pMHC bond can trigger TCR signaling ( 102 , 242 ) . Further evidence for tension - based signaling comes from studies showing that T cells can respond to small numbers of monomeric ligands only when those ligands are surface bound , and when an intact actin network is present ( 123 , 243 ) . Finally , T cells are known to respond differentially to stimulatory substrates of varying stiffness ( 71 , 72 ) . T cells in which myosin contraction has been inhibited exhibit diminished phosphorylation of CasL , a protein that undergoes stretch - dependent unfolding prior to phosphorylation ( 206 ) . Together , these studies provide compelling evidence that the dynamic actin network plays a central role in mechanotransduction by the TCR . Nonetheless , this process remains controversial due to the lack of structure - based evidence for force - dependent TCR conformational change , and the precise role of F - actin dynamics remains unclear . Furthermore , the role of F - 54 actin - dependent mechanical force in regulating integrins and other molecules needed for T cell activation has not been explored . Integrins are heterodimeric transmembrane proteins that mediate cell - cell and cell - matrix interactions . The α L β 2 ( CD11a / CD18 ) integrin LFA - 1 is expressed exclusively in leukocytes and is essential for T cell trafficking and IS formation . In general , integrins are regulated at two distinct levels , valency ( density at the cell – cell interface ) , and affinity ( strength of interaction between individual integrin molecules and ligands ) . The overall strength of interaction ( avidity ) is a product of valency , affinity and contact area ( 144 ) . In resting T cells , LFA - 1 is maintained in an inactive , bent conformation with very low ligand binding capacity . TCR stimulation recruits the actin binding protein talin to the β chain of LFA - 1 , relieving α - β chain interactions that maintain the bent conformation and allowing adoption of the intermediate conformation ( 158 , 161 , 162 ) . This “switch - blade” like unfolding exposes epitopes that report on integrin activation ( Figure 1A ) ( 166 ) . Signaling events that modulate LFA - 1 activation are termed inside - out signaling ( 144 , 145 ) . Binding to ligands ( ICAM - 1 , 2 or 3 ) can also drive conformational change , in a process termed “induced fit” . ( 165 , 174 ) . Typically , integrin activation and ligand binding are associated with lateral swing - out of the hybrid domain and downward movement of the α 7 helix in the β I domain . In α I domain - containing integrins such as LFA - 1 , this conformational change is propagated to the α I domain , activating the ligand binding site ( Figure 1A ) . Induction of the extended conformation results in a 4 - fold increase from baseline levels , and hybrid domain swing - out increases affinity by an additional 100 - fold . Conversely , stabilization of the closed β I domain decreases baseline affinity by a factor of 2 . Thus , conformational change of LFA - 55 1 regulates an 800 - fold change in affinity for ICAM - 1 ( 164 ) . Interestingly , molecular modeling has suggested that a tensile force applied parallel to the membrane on the β tail can induce hybrid domain swing - out and affinity modulation ( 176 ) . Consistent with the prediction that force can enhance LFA - 1 affinity , integrins engage in catch - bond interactions in which force increases bond strength and longevity ( 181 , 182 ) . Bond lifetime increases with tensile normal force until a threshold is reached after which bonds are rapidly ruptured . Importantly , this behavior depends upon interactions between the β I and α I domains , suggesting that hybrid domain swingout is essential for catch - bond interactions . Furthermore , it has been shown that integrin bond lifetimes are increased by a short , transient , period of high force application . For LFA - 1 / ICAM - 1 interactions , force cycling increased the average bond lifetime from 1 . 5 to 35 seconds ( 185 ) . Despite the importance of integrin - dependent adhesion for T cell function , major questions remain about the mechanisms that regulate LFA - 1 activation at the IS . It has been proposed that tensile force on the β chain can be produced via linkage to the dynamic F - actin network ( 148 ) , but this has not been directly tested . We have now investigated the function of the T cell actin cytoskeleton in regulating conformational change , ligand binding , and organization of LFA - 1 at the IS . We show that centripetal flow of the actomyosin network is required to recruit LFA - 1 to the IS , to maintain LFA - 1 in the high affinity conformation , and to promote efficient binding to ICAM - 1 . Our data thus support a model in which mechanical force provided by F - actin centripetal flow promotes integrin - dependent T cell - APC adhesion . More generally , we show that forces 56 generated by actin can trigger the activation of mechanosensitive molecules at the IS . III . Results Extended and open conformations of LFA - 1 display distinct patterns of organization at the IS T cell activation requires clustering and conformational change of LFA - 1 , but the distribution of LFA - 1 conformational intermediates at the IS has not been characterized . To address this , I formed conjugates between human ex vivo CD4 + T cells and SEE - pulsed Raji B cells , and labeled them with conformation - specific antibodies for LFA - 1 . As detailed in Materials and Methods and depicted in Figure 1A , TS2 / 4 binds to α L in a conformation - independent manner , Kim127 binds an epitope in the β 2 knee region that is exposed in the extended and open ( intermediate and high affinity ) conformations , and m24 binds within the β I domain after hybrid domain swing - out and therefore detects only the high affinity , open conformation . Hereafter , labeling with these three antibodies will be respectively designated as α L ( total ) , β 2 extended , and β 2 open . As shown in Figure 2 . 1B and Movie S1 ( available online ) , total LFA - 1 was distributed across the IS , except for the F - actin rich dSMAC region . In contrast , molecules in the extended conformation were enriched in a ring corresponding roughly to the pSMAC region , while those in the open conformation were concentrated in a second , more central ring . Similar results were obtained in naïve CD8 + T cells ( Figure 2 . 2A ) . 57 Figure 2 . 1 LFA - 1 activation intermediates are organized into a concentric array by a T cell intrinsic mechanism ( A ) LFA - 1 conformational states and antibody binding sites . Inactive LFA - 1 is present in a bent conformation on the surface of T cells and exhibits low affinity for ligand . Talin binding to the β chain leads to unbending , yielding the extended intermediate affinity conformation . F - actin flow and ligand engagement cause the hybrid domain of the β chain to swing out , resulting in the high affinity open conformation that efficiently mediates adhesion and signaling . Putative binding sites for monoclonal antibodies are marked with asterisks . ( B ) Human primary CD4 + T cells were conjugated to SEE - pulsed Raji B cells ( asterisk ) for 25 min , labeled for 5 min . with m24 ( β 2 open ) , and then fixed and labeled with CF405M - phalloidin to detect F - actin and monoclonal antibodies TS2 / 4 ( α L total ) , and Kim127 ( β 2 extended ) . . Z stacks of whole conjugates were collected and rendered in 3D in the IS plane . Right panel , radial intensity profiles of synapses from multiple conjugates were analyzed as described in Materials and Methods , and normalized with the maximum intensity for each antibody set equal to 1 . Data represent mean ± SEM . ( C and D ) Cells were allowed to spread on planar bilayers coated with anti - CD3 and 0 . 1µg / ml ICAM - 1 ( C ) or coverglasses adsorbed with anti - CD3 and ICAM - 1 ( D ) and analyzed as in B . Scale bars = 5 µ m . 58 To ask if formation of this pattern is a T cell - intrinsic event , I analyzed T cells interacting with planar lipid bilayers or glass coverslips functionalized with anti - CD3 and ICAM - 1 . A similar concentric pattern was observed in both cases ( Figures 2 . 1C and 1D ) , except that on coverslips , T cell spreading was more extensive and activated LFA - 1 molecules were localized more peripherally . Quantitative analysis ( Figures 2 . 1C and D , right panels ) confirmed the generality of these observations and highlighted the shift of the array toward the periphery in cells responding to immobilized ligand . Previous analysis of LFA - 1 activation state at the IS has relied on visualizing accumulation of laterally mobile ICAM - 1 as a surrogate for engaged LFA - 1 ( 210 ) . To understand the relationship between LFA - 1 conformational intermediates and ICAM - 1 accumulation , we labeled T cells spreading on bilayers containing fluorescent ICAM - 1 . As shown in Figure 2 . 2B and D , the extended conformation of LFA - 1 colocalizes strongly with accumulated ICAM - 1 . A similar region was marked by talin , which induces the extended conformation by binding to the β - integrin tail ( Figure 2 . 2F and G ) . Importantly , m24 , the antibody used to detect β 2 open LFA - 1 is best used on unfixed cells , and this antibody has been shown to stabilize the open LFA - 1 conformation and drive accumulation of LFA - 1 and ICAM - 1 ( 244 ) . In agreement with this , I found that incubation of cells with m24 led to increased accumulation of β 2 open LFA - 1 , in a pattern that spread outward over time . At early time points ( 1 - 5 min ) , β 2 open LFA - 1 colocalized with only the most central region of accumulated ICAM - 1 ( Figure 2 . 2C and E ) , whereas by 10 minutes of incubation , the β 2 open molecules colocalized with the entire ICAM - 1 rich region . The concentration of ICAM - 1 in the planar bilayer influenced 59 Figure 2 . 2 Analysis of LFA - 1 activation intermediates , talin localization and ICAM - 1 binding . 60 ( A ) Human ex vivo CD8 + T cells were conjugated to SEE - pulsed Raji B cells ( asterisk and dashed line ) and analyzed as in Figure 1 . Scale bar = 5 µ m . ( B ) Human ex vivo CD4 + T cells were allowed to spread on planar bilayers coated with OKT3 and Alexa - 488 labeled ICAM - 1 . . Cells were then fixed and stained with TS2 / 4 ( total α L ) and Kim127 ( β 2 extended ) . Representative cells and population average projections are shown . ( C ) Human ex vivo CD4 + T cells were allowed to spread on planar bilayers coated with OKT3 and Alexa - 594 labeled ICAM - 1 and then incubated for the indicated times with m24 ( β 2 open ) . Cells were then fixed and stained with TS2 / 4 . Representative cells and population average projections are shown . Note that longer incubations with m24 not only increase labeling intensity but also alter the distribution of open LFA - 1 , such that the central ring grows outward . In parallel with this change in LFA - 1 distribution , we observe a linear increase in ICAM - 1 accumulation as a function of m24 incubation time , reaching a 2 - fold accumulation after 10 minutes ( graph at right ) . These observations are consistent with m24 - dependent stabilization of LFA - 1 / ICAM - 1 complexes , as reported previously by Smith et al in migrating T cells ( 244 ) . ( D ) Radial profiles from the population average projections shown in B . ( E ) Radial profiles from the population average projections shown in C . ( F ) Human ex vivo CD4 + T cells were conjugated to SEE - pulsed Raji B cells ( asterisk ) for 25 min , and labeled with m24 ( β 2 open ) for five minutes . Cells were then fixed and labeled with CF405M - phalloidin ( F - actin ) , anti - talin and Kim127 ( β 2 extended ) . Z stacks of whole conjugates were collected and rendered in 3D in the IS plane . Pairwise overlays show that talin colocalizes with both the extended and open pools of LFA - 1 . ( G ) Cells were allowed to spread on planar bilayers coated with anti - CD3 and ICAM - 1 and stained as in F . Representative cells population average projections are shown . Scale bars = 5 µ m . the overall accumulation of LFA - 1 at the IS , the proportion of molecules in the extended and open conformations , and the formation of a pSMAC pattern with a central clearance ( Figure 2 . 3 ) . Comparison of this dose - response data with the levels of ICAM - 1 on the surface of mature DCs shows that at physiological levels of ICAM - 1 ( equivalent to 0 . 2 - 0 . 4 ug / ml based on labeling intensity ) , maximal LFA - 1 accumulation and conformational change are observed . On the basis of these studies , I selected 0 . 3ug / ml of ICAM - 1 and 5 min labeling with m24 as optimal conditions for further analysis . Taken together , these results show that LFA - 1 activation intermediates are organized in a concentric array at the IS , with higher affinity conformations localized more centrally . Radial organization of LFA - 1 is imposed by the T cell , though the pattern is modulated by ligand density and mobility . 61 Figure 2 . 3 LFA - 1 conformational change and synaptic patterns vary with ICAM - 1 concentration 62 ( A ) Comparison of ICAM - 1 density on mature bone marrow derived dendritic cells ( BMDCs ) to that on planar supported lipid bilayers functionalized with the indicated concentrations of ICAM - 1 . ( B ) Quantification of TS2 / 4 staining intensity at the IS at the indicated concentrations of ICAM - 1 . ( C ) Proportion of extended LFA - 1 at the IS at the indicated concentrations of ICAM - 1 , as measured by the ratio of Kim127 to TS2 / 4 staining . . ( D ) Proportion of open LFA - 1 at the IS , as measured by the ratio of m24 to TS2 / 4 staining . ( E ) Individual cells and corresponding average projections showing LFA - 1 recruitment and synaptic patterns over a range of ICAM - 1 concentrations . ( F ) Radial profiles of total LFA - 1 and F - actin at the synapse . Note that increasing ICAM - 1 concentration leads to a clear separation of LFA - 1 from the outer region of the IS as marked by actin , and generation of a well - defined central clearance . These likely correspond to the pSMAC / dSMAC and pSMAC / cSMAC boundaries respectively . ICAM - 1 centralization parallels centripetal flow of the actomyosin network . I next addressed the relationship between LFA - 1 conformational intermediates and the F - actin network . Human CD4 + T lymphoblasts expressing Lifeact - GFP were imaged while spreading on stimulatory bilayers containing AlexaFluor594 - ICAM - 1 and AlexaFluor647 - streptavidin bound to anti - CD3 . As shown in Figures 2 . 3A and 2 . 3B , and Movie S2 , ICAM - 1 centralization occurred concomitantly with centripetal F - actin flow , although ICAM - 1 rich features often corresponded to regions low in F - actin . This is especially evident in the kymograph shown in Supplemental Movie S3 . Inward ICAM - 1 movement stopped at the boundary with the cSMAC region marked by streptavidin . Interestingly , however , this boundary existed even in the absence of a clear streptavidin - rich region , suggesting that a mechanism other than molecular exclusion may be involved ( Figure 2 . 4C and Movie S3 ) . Labeling of LFA - 1 conformational intermediates in T lymphoblasts revealed a pattern similar to that found in ex vivo T cells ; the extended conformation was enriched throughout the pSMAC region , while the open conformation accumulated at the pSMAC / cSMAC boundary ( Figure 2 . 4D ) . Finally , I evaluated LFA - 1 distribution with respect to myosin IIA , since the two proteins reportedly interact ( 245 ) . 63 Figure 2 . 4 Analysis of LFA - 1 distribution with respect to the actomyosin network . ( A ) Time - lapse series of human T lymphoblasts expressing Lifeact - EGFP and spreading on planar bilayers coated with anti - CD3 linked to Alexa Fluor 647 labeled streptavidin and Alexa Fluor 594 labeled ICAM - 1 . Imaging was initiated after full spreading was reached . Radial profiles were generated across the indicated dotted line . ( B ) Kymographs generated from the sequence shown in A . ( C ) Human primary CD4 + T cells were conjugated to SEE - pulsed Raji B cells ( dashed outlines and asterisks ) for 25 min , and labeled with antibodies to the CD3 ε chain of TCR and to the β 2 chain in the extended and open conformations . Z stacks of whole conjugates were collected and rendered in 3D in the IS plane ( arrowhead ) . Representative rendered images are shown . ( D ) T lymphoblasts spreading on bilayers for 30 min . were labeled as in Figure 1 . Shown are single cell images and population average projections . ( E ) Ex - vivo T cells spreading on bilayers for 30 min . were labeled with conformation - specific LFA - 1 and anti - myosin IIA antibodies . Scale bars = 5 µ m . 64 Myosin IIA did not colocalize with activated LFA - 1 , but instead localized to a region outside the rings of extended and open LFA - 1 ( Figure 2 . 4E ) . Thus , the distribution of LFA - 1 activation intermediates cannot be explained by simple binding to F - actin or myosin IIA . Since high affinity LFA - 1 preferentially binds to F - actin ( 180 ) , this conformation may be selectively delivered to the inner region of the IS by F - actin flow , and deposited there upon disassembly of actin filaments . Alternatively , LFA - 1 conformational change occurs as it is dragged towards the cSMAC , with maximal activation at the pSMAC / cSMAC boundary . Engagement of immobilized ICAM - 1 retains high affinity LFA - 1 at the IS periphery . I next assessed the role of ligand engagement in organizing LFA - 1 activation intermediates , by analyzing primary T lymphoblasts interacting with coverslips coated with anti - CD3 + / - ICAM - 1 . As anticipated , T cells stimulated with anti - CD3 + ICAM - 1 spread more than cells stimulated with anti - CD3 alone ( Figures 2 . 5A and 2 . 5B ) . In both cases , total and extended LFA - 1 were enriched near the periphery of the IS , with lower intensities at the center . In contrast , ligand engagement had a dramatic effect on the open conformation . In the presence of ICAM - 1 , open LFA - 1 was enriched at the IS periphery , largely colocaizing with the extended conformation , but in the absence of ICAM - 1 , it was shifted toward the center . This pattern is similar to that observed in cells responding to planar bilayers where ICAM - 1 is mobile ( Compare Figures 2 . 5A , 2 . 5B , and 2 . 1C ) . 65 Figure 3 . ICAM - 1 engagement retains the pool of activated LFA - 1 in the IS periphery . ( A , B ) T lymphoblasts were allowed to interact with coverslips coated with anti - CD3 and ICAM - 1 ( A ) or anti - CD3 alone ( B ) for 30 minutes , and analyzed as in Fig . 1 . ( C , D ) T lymphoblasts expressing Lifeact - EGFP were imaged live while spreading on coverslips coated with anti - CD3 alone . ( C ) Single time point of a responding cell , and ( D ) corresponding kymograph of F - actin dynamics generated along the dashed line in C . Arrowhead indicates a mobile fiducial mark in the F - actin network . ( E ) Kymographic analysis of F - actin flow rates along IS radii ( 663 measurements from 13 cells ) superimposed on the normalized radial distribution of F - actin intensity in the same cells . ( F - G ) T lymphoblasts expressing Lifeact - EGFP were imaged live while interacting with coverslips coated with anti - CD3 + ICAM - 1 , analyzed as in C - E ( 1180 measurements from 21 cells ) . Data in E and H represent means ± SEM . Scale bars = 5 µ m . 66 The simplest interpretation of these data is that actin - dependent delivery of open , ligand - bound LFA - 1 to the center of the IS is directly opposed by immobilized ligand . However , it is also possible that binding of LFA - 1 to immobilized ICAM - 1 could retard actin flow , as described for β 1 integrins ( 42 ) . To differentiate between these possibilities , I measured F - actin flow rates in T cells responding to anti - CD3 alone or together with ICAM - 1 . F - actin rates were determined by kymographic analysis as detailed in Materials and Methods , and depicted in Movie S4 . T cells interacting with anti - CD3 alone showed continuous centripetal flow ( Figures 2 . 5C - 2 . 5E , Movie S5 , left ) , with rates of 83±47 nm / s at the IS periphery , and slower rates toward the center . Addition of ICAM - 1 resulted in increased F - actin at the IS center , but only modestly slowed actin flow ( 73±44 nm / s at the periphery , Figures 2 . 5F - 2 . 5H , 2 . 11 , Movie S5 , right ) . Thus , I favor a model in which high affinity LFA - 1 binds to ICAM - 1 in the periphery of the IS , and is shuttled inward by actin flow . If ICAM - 1 is present and immobilized , high affinity LFA - 1 is physically retained in the periphery , whereas if ICAM - 1 is absent or mobile , high affinity LFA - 1 centralizes more extensively . F - actin flow regulates the valency of LFA - 1 at the IS To test the idea that forces exerted by the T cell actin cytoskeleton regulate activity of LFA - 1 , I used an inhibitor cocktail that arrests F - actin flow at the IS . As the Burkhardt lab reported previously ( 2 ) , inhibition of myosin with Y - 27632 ( Y - 27 ) or blebbistatin ( Bleb ) had little effect on F - actin dynamics , but addition of jasplakinolide ( Jas ) to myosin II - inhibited cells arrested F - actin flow ( Movie S6 ) . To analyze the effect 67 Figure 2 . 6 Centripetal flow of the actomyosin network regulates valency and affinity of LFA - 1 68 ( A ) Ex - vivo CD4 + T cells were conjugated with SEE - pulsed Raji B cells and subjected to the indicated experimental paradigm . After fixation , cells were labeled with TS2 / 4 and Kim127 . ( B ) Representative conjugates showing integrin localization and activation . Scale bar = 5 µ m . ( C ) Corresponding 3D rendering of the IS plane . ( D – F ) The effects of drug treatments on intensities of total ( D ) , extended ( E ) and open ( F ) LFA - 1 staining at the IS , each normalized to the untreated control . ( G ) The effects of drug treatments on maintenance of overall LFA - 1 recruitment at the IS . ( H , I ) The effects of drug treatments on the proportion of LFA - 1 in the extended ( H ) or open ( I ) conformations are shown based on signal intensity of conformation - specific antibodies , divided by the intensity of antibody recognizing total LFA - 1 . Data from six independent human donors ( color coded in D ) are shown ; at least 30 conjugates were analyzed per condition for each donor . * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 , * * * p < 0 . 001 . of F - actin flow on redistribution of LFA - 1 , T - B conjugates were treated with myosin inhibitors + / - Jas , and labeled with anti - LFA - 1 antibodies as diagrammed in Figure 2 . 6A . Enrichment was assessed based on labeling intensity at the IS ( Figure 2 . 6D ) normalized to total cell surface intensity ( Figure 2 . 7F ) . To control for donor variability , analysis was performed on multiple donors ; individual measurements from one donor are shown in ( Figures 2 . 7A - 2 . 7E ) . In untreated conjugates , 60 % of total LFA - 1 was concentrated at the IS , where it was relatively uniformly distributed ( Figures 2 . 6B , 2 . 6C and 2 . 6G ) . Inhibition of myosin II contraction had no obvious effect on the distribution or IS enrichment of LFA - 1 . In contrast , cells treated with myosin II inhibitor and Jas to freeze the actin network showed significant loss ( 25 - 30 % ) of LFA - 1 at the IS ( Figures 2 . 6B - 2 . 6D and 2 . 6G ) . Similar results were obtained in T cells spreading on stimulatory bilayers , where arrest of actin flow significantly reduced total levels of IS - associated LFA - 1 ( Figures 2 . 8B , 2 . 8C , 2 . 8F ) . Taken together , these results indicate that F - actin flow continuously drives LFA - 1 toward the IS , thereby increasing LFA - 1 valency . Myosin II contraction and F - actin flow regulate affinity maturation of LFA - 1 at the IS To ask if the actin network regulates LFA - 1 conformational change , inhibitor - 69 Figure 2 . 7 Centripetal flow of the actomyosin network regulates valency and affinity of LFA - 1 : data from a single donor ( A – E ) Fluorescence intensity values of individual conjugates from a single donor ( Donor 2 ) in Figure 4 . The variation among conjugates from this donor is representative of data from all donors . Data are represented as mean with variation range . ( F ) Overall cell surface levels of LFA - 1 after drug treatments . Data from Figure 4D are divided by these values to calculate enrichment of LFA - 1 at the IS , as shown in Figure 4G . * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 , * * * p < 0 . 001 70 dependent changes in labeling of the extended and open conformations at the IS were quantified ( Figures 2 . 6E and 2 . 6F ) . To control for changes in valency and focus analysis on conformational change , data were normalized to labeling for total LFA - 1 in the same region ( Figures 2 . 6H and 2 . 6I ) ( 246 ) . Note that this arbitrary value does not indicate the actual percentage of molecules in a particular conformation , but serves as a useful measure of relative LFA - 1 activation efficiency under different experimental conditions . As shown in Figures 2 . 6B , 2 . 6C , and 2 . 6E , myosin II inhibition with Y - 27 significantly diminished the overall amount of extended LFA - 1 at the IS . Similar results were obtained with Bleb , though this did not reach statistical significance due to donor variability . Arrest of the actin network by addition of Jas to cells pretreated with either myosin inhibitor had even more profound effects . However , normalization to total LFA - 1 revealed that there was no consistent difference in the proportion of IS - associated LFA - 1 in the extended conformation after any treatment ( Figure 2 . 6H ) . Labeling with m24 showed a modest but significant decrease in open LFA - 1 at the IS after inhibition of myosin II with Y - 27 and a similar trend with Bleb . A more profound diminution ( ~ 60 % ) was observed after freezing the F - actin network ( Figure 2 . 6F ) . In contrast to the extended conformation , loss of the open conformation in actin - arrested cells was profound , even after correction for changes in total LFA - 1 . Inhibition of myosin II alone resulted in a 20 % decrease in the proportion of open LFA - 1 , while freezing the F - actin network resulted in a 42 % decrease from control cells ( Figure 2 . 6I ) . These effects were verified in T cells responding to stimulatory bilayers . As in conjugates , I found that absolute levels of both the extended and open conformations decreased upon arrest of F - actin flow ( Figures 2 . 8B - E ) , and these differences remained 71 Figure 2 . 8 F - actin dynamics regulate the organization of activated LFA - 1 ( A ) Ex - vivo CD4 + T cells spreading on bilayers coated with anti - CD3 in the presence or absence of ICAM - 1 were subjected to the indicated experimental paradigm . After fixation , cells were labeled with TS2 / 4 and Kim127 . ( B ) Representative synapses . Scale bar , 5 µ m . ( C ) Average fluorescence intensity distributions for cell populations . ( D - F ) Cells were treated as in B , and the relative labeling intensity of LFA - 1 in the extended conformation ( D ) , open conformation ( E ) , or total LFA - 1 ( F ) was determined . ( G , H ) Ratio of extended ( G ) or open ( H ) conformations of LFA - 1 to total LFA - 1 at the IS . Data represent multiple cells from a single representative donor , n = 3 donors . * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 , * * * p < 0 . 001 . 72 Figure 2 . 9 F - actin flow maintains the high - affinity conformation of LFA - 1 and its localization at the IS . Radial intensity profiles corresponding to average intensity projections shown in Figure 5 . ( A , B ) Radial profiles of β 2 extended ( Kim127 ) intensity across the IS ( C , D ) Radial profiles of β 2 open ( m24 ) intensity across the IS . ( E , F ) Radial intensity profiles of the proportion of β 2 extended LFA - 1 ( ratio of Kim127 : TS2 / 4 ) staining at the IS . ( G , H ) Radial intensity profiles of the proportion of β 2 open ( ratio of m24 : TS2 / 4 ) staining at the IS . statistically significant after correction for diminished synaptic LFA - 1 ( Figure 2 . 8G and 2 . 8H ) . Some loss was also observed upon inhibition of myosin alone , though whether this reached statistical significance was inhibitor dependent . Taken together , these data show that myosin II contraction and F - actin dynamics are crucial for maintaining the high affinity conformation of LFA - 1 at the IS . F - actin dynamics regulate the organization of activated LFA - 1 Freezing F - actin dynamics also affected the radial distribution of LFA - 1 activation intermediates . The images in Figures 2 . 6 and 2 . 8 reveal that the small number of activated LFA - 1 molecules remaining at the IS became more randomly distributed . 73 Analysis of radial intensity profiles showed that inhibition of myosin alone had little effect on the distribution of LFA - 1 in any conformation , while arrest of actin flow profoundly affected both the extended and the open conformations ( Figure 2 . 9 ) . The most dramatic change was the near complete loss of the peak of open LFA - 1 . Taken together , these data demonstrate that the concentric pattern of LFA - 1 activation intermediates is maintained by ongoing F - actin flow . Co - engagement of β 1 integrins slows the F - actin network and attenuates LFA - 1 activation . To complement these pharmacological studies , I sought a more physiological context in which T cell actin flow could be perturbed . In Jurkat T cells , it was previously shown that co - engagement of VLA - 4 with TCR slows actin flow at the IS ( 42 ) . We therefore asked if ligation of VLA - 4 has the same effect on primary T cells in the context of LFA - 1 co - engagement . T cells spreading on coverslips coated with a combination of anti - CD3 , ICAM - 1 , and VCAM - 1 spread to about the same extent as cells spreading on anti - CD3 + ICAM - 1 alone ( data not shown ) . Actin flow rates reached 60±35nm / s at the periphery of the IS , with a 6 - fold decrease in rate near the IS center ( Figures 2 . 10A - 2 . 10C , Movie S7 ) . Within the outer 40 % of the IS radius where most F - actin dynamics occur , the flow rates were significantly lower than in cells spreading on anti - CD3 + ICAM - 1 ( Figure 2 . 11 ) . Correlating with slower actin rates , VCAM - 1 co - ligation resulted in a 34 % decrease in the total levels of open LFA - 1 , and a 20 % decrease in the proportion of molecules in this conformation ( Figure 2 . 10 ) . This effect is probably not due to competition between β 1 and β 2 integrins for adaptor molecules involved in 74 Figure 2 . 10 Co - engagement of VLA - 4 slows F - actin flow and attenuates LFA - 1 activation . ( A - B ) T lymphoblasts expressing Lifeact - EGFP were imaged while interacting with coverslips coated with anti - CD3 , ICAM - 1 and VCAM - 1 . ( A ) Single time point of a responding cell , and ( B ) corresponding kymograph of F - actin dynamics generated along the dashed line in A . Scale bar = 10 µ m . Arrowhead in ( B ) indicates a mobile fiducial mark . ( C ) Kymographic analysis of F - actin dynamics ( 817 measurements from 11 cells ) superimposed with the normalized radial distribution of F - actin intensity in the same cells . Data represent mean ± SEM . ( D ) T cells spreading on coverslips coated with anti - CD3 and ICAM - 1 + / - VCAM - 1 were labeled with the indicated antibodies and analyzed for fluorescence intensity in the IS plane . Results represent mean ± SEM from one of three independent experiments . * * * p < 0 . 001 . Figure 2 . 11 Modulation of centripetal F - actin flow by co - engagement of integrin ligands . Radial distributions of F - actin flow rates from Figures 3E , 3H and 6C were superimposed for comparison . Statistical analysis was performed relative to data from cells spreading on anti - CD3 + ICAM - 1 . n represents the number of cells per condition . Data are represented as mean + / - SEM . * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 , * * * p < 0 . 001 75 inside - out signaling , since the proportion of LFA - 1 molecules in the extended conformation actually increased upon β 1 integrin engagement . Thus , we conclude that β 1 - integrin engagement modulates β 2 - integrin affinity maturation by slowing the flow of the actin network . This result also demonstrates that the actin network can serve as a mechanical link between distinct integrins , and possibly between integrins and other cell surface receptors . Optimal LFA - 1 / ICAM - 1 interactions require ongoing actin flow . Previous studies using the planar bilayer system have shown that depolymerization of actin filaments leads to loss of ICAM - 1 recruitment and organization at the IS ( 1 ) . Since I find that arresting actin flow leads to loss of the high affinity conformation of LFA - 1 , I wondered what impact this has on ICAM - 1 binding . I therefore used planar bilayers containing fluorescent ICAM - 1 in conjunction with conformation specific antibodies and pharmacological inhibition of actin dynamics . As shown in Figure 2 . 12A - C , inhibition of F - actin flow , but not inhibition of myosin alone , caused a loss of ICAM - 1 accumulation in the pSMAC region . As a second measure of ICAM - 1 release , I labeled cells post - fixation with TS1 / 22 , an antibody that competes for ICAM - 1 binding to the α I domain of LFA - 1 , which should detect only unbound LFA - 1 molecules . The proportion of LFA - 1 molecules that bound TS1 / 22 was increased after arrest of actin flow ( Figure 2 . 12D ) , again showing that optimal LFA - 1 / ICAM - 1 interactions require ongoing actin flow , rather than the simple presence of an F - actin network . 76 Figure 2 . 12 LFA - 1 / ICAM - 1 interactions are maintained by ongoing F - actin dynamics . Ex - vivo CD4 + T cells were treated with inhibitors as in Figure 5 , and allowed to spread on planar bilayers functionalized with anti - CD3 and Alexa Fluor - 488 labeled ICAM - 1 . Cells were then fixed and stained with TS2 / 4 , Kim127 , and TS1 / 22 . ( A ) Representative cells and ( B ) population average projections . ( C ) Quantification of ICAM - 1 enrichment under the cell after subtracting background levels of ICAM - 1 . Values are normalized to the untreated control . ( D ) Ratio of unligated to total LFA - 1 defined by staining with TS1 / 22 and TS2 / 4 , respectively . * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 , * * * p < 0 . 001 . 77 LFA - 1 activation requires a polarized TCR stimulus and immobilized ICAM - 1 I was surprised to find significant levels of high affinity LFA - 1 in T cells stimulated by anti - TCR alone ( Figure 2 . 5B ) given previous studies showing that TCR stimulation is insufficient to induce this conformational change ( 164 ) . Importantly , whereas earlier studies used soluble stimuli , I delivered the TCR stimulus on planar surfaces . The architecture of the spreading T cell allows concerted F - actin flow , which could exert force on the cytoplasmic tail of LFA - 1 . In support of this idea , I found that soluble crosslinking of the TCR resulted in no cell spreading and no induction of the open conformation of LFA - 1 ( Figures 2 . 13A - 2 . 13C ) . In contrast , TCR crosslinking on a planar glass surface induced cell spreading and increased the proportion of extended - open LFA - 1 , even in the absence of ligand . As observed in Figure 2 . 5B , the activated LFA - 1 was localized at the very center of the IS , consistent with the idea that actin flow shuttles the unbound integrin inward . Using the same experimental system , I tested the mechanisms through which ICAM - 1 binding promotes LFA - 1 conformational change . Two non - exclusive possibilities exist : 1 ) an induced fit mechanism whereby ICAM - 1 binding results in direct conformational change of LFA - 1 and 2 ) a tension based mechanism , in which ICAM - 1 opposes lateral movement of LFA - 1 , thereby contributing to force - dependent conformational change . To differentiate between these possibilities , I delivered a TCR stimulus on planar surfaces and provided various LFA - 1 stimuli . To test the contribution of induced fit in the absence of tension , soluble ICAM - 1 ( 1ug / ml ) was added . This condition did not lead to increased T cell spreading or LFA - 1 activation , and did not alter LFA - 1 distribution at the IS ( Figures 2 . 13A - 2 . 13C ) . To ask if tension is sufficient to 78 Figure 2 . 13 LFA - 1 activation requires a polarized TCR stimulus and immobilized ICAM - 1 ( A ) T cells were either left untreated or incubated on ice with biotinylated anti - CD3 , and then stimulated at 37°C with either soluble streptavidin ( soluble α CD3 ) or coverslip - adsorbed streptavidin ( immobile α CD3 ) . Some cells were concomitantly stimulated with either soluble ICAM - 1 ( sol . ICAM ) , coverslip - adsorbed TS1 / 22 ( im . TS1 / 22 ) or coverslip - adsorbed ICAM - 1 ( im . ICAM ) . Images show single confocal planes near the contact site . ( B ) Contact area of cells from A . ( C ) Proportion of LFA - 1 in the open conformation on different stimulatory surfaces . increase LFA - 1 activation , we added the mAb TS1 / 22 to the stimulatory coverslips . This antibody binds the ICAM - 1 binding site of the α I domain in all LFA - 1 conformations ( 164 ) , and should therefore mimic tension induced by binding to immobilized ICAM - 1 without the induced fit component . Engagement of LFA - 1 by TS1 / 22 resulted in increased cell spreading , but did not increase the proportion of LFA - 1 in the open 79 conformation ( Figures 2 . 13B and 2 . 13C ) . Interestingly , TS1 / 22 caused existing open LFA - 1 to form a peripheral ring similar to that seen in the presence of immobile ICAM - 1 ( Figure 2 . 13A ) . Finally , to test the combined effect of induced fit and tension , cells were stimulated with immobilized ICAM - 1 . This condition resulted in increased cell spreading and LFA - 1 redistribution similar to that seen with TS1 / 22 . In addition , these cells showed a dramatic increase in the proportion of LFA - 1 in the open conformation . Our finding that ICAM - 1 immobilization is required to induce LFA - 1 conformational change is consistent with previous work from Feigelson et al . ( 229 ) , though that study did not address the question of tension vs . induced fit . I conclude that while tension on LFA - 1 can promote T cell spreading and concentric organization , a combination of induced fit and tension is needed to support adoption of the open conformation . Finally , although the induced fit mechanism is sufficient to support conformational change of purified integrin ectodomains ( 177 ) and at high soluble ligand densities ( 247 ) , this mechanism is not likely to play a large role at physiological ligand concentrations . IV . Discussion These results establish that centripetal flow of the T cell actin cytoskeleton drives LFA - 1 recruitment to and affinity maturation at the IS , greatly enhancing the overall avidity of T cell - APC adhesion . This process also organizes LFA - 1 conformational intermediates into a concentric array at the IS . These findings provide direct evidence in favor of a mechanical model for LFA - 1 activation in which force generated by actin flow acts as a necessary component of integrin regulation at the IS ( Figure 2 . 14 ) . 80 Figure 2 . 14 Model of LFA - 1 activation at the IS . ( A ) Actin - dependent regulation of LFA - 1 valency . Ongoing F - actin flow ( left ) in T cells responding to a polarized TCR stimulus drives activation of LFA - 1 at the IS . Activated LFA - 1 then binds ICAM - 1 , leading to synaptic enrichment . Arrested F - actin dynamics ( right ) abrogates activation of LFA - 1 , allowing passive diffusion of unligated LFA - 1 away from the IS . ( B ) Actin - dependent regulation of LFA - 1 affinity . ( 1 ) Inactive LFA - 1 exists in a bent conformation on the T cell surface . ( 2 ) Inside - out signaling events downstream of TCR engagement lead to recruitment of talin and F - actin to the integrin β tail . This allows for the segregation of the α and β tails , and the unbending of LFA - 1 to yield the extended conformation . ( 3 ) F - actin flow generates tensile force on the LFA - 1 β tail ( green arrow ) facilitating further tail separation and resulting in swing - out of the hybrid domain and induction of the open ( high affinity ) form of LFA - 1 . ( 4 ) The open α I domain primes the molecule for binding of ICAM - 1 , which through induced fit and tension - based mechanisms ( green arrows ) stabilizes LFA - 1 in the high affinity , ligand - bound conformation Alternatively , LFA - 1 affinity maturation can proceed through an ICAM - 1 - bound , extended conformation ( 3’ ) , in which ICAM - 1 weakly interacts with LFA - 1 and induces the open head domain prior to application of force ; force then stabilizes this interaction . Following loss of force on the β chain , ligand unbinding may preferentially occur through the 3’ step , in which there is no stabilization of the open I domain , and therefore much lower affinity for ICAM - 1 . I find that F - actin flow is required for the maintenance of LFA - 1 organization and affinity regulation . Since this requirement was observed even in T cells responding to artificial stimulatory surfaces , I conclude that cell - intrinsic forces are sufficient to produce ectodomain changes associated with affinity maturation . Mechanical force and ligand binding are functionally intertwined , and both are required for full LFA - 1 affinity 81 maturation . Indeed , I observe a concomitant loss of both high affinity LFA - 1 and bound ligand upon inhibition of actin dynamics , indicating that maintenance of the high affinity ligand - bound state requires ongoing tension . This behavior is consistent with known properties of catch - bond molecular interactions ( 140 ) . While our data show that physiological concentrations of surface bound ligand are insufficient to maintain full LFA - 1 activation in the absence of actin flow , it is known that ICAM - 1 can , at high concentrations , induce LFA - 1 conformational change ( 247 ) . Consistent with this , I find that ligand binding clearly enhances LFA - 1 activation , and ligand - induced conformational change probably accounts for the residual levels of open LFA - 1 we observe upon arrest of actin flow . Our data indicate that regulation of LFA - 1 conformational change occurs at several steps ( Figure 2 . 14B ) . First , T cell spreading , and possibly actin polymerization and retrograde flow , drives the equilibrium toward the high affinity conformation in the absence of integrin ligand . Secondly , binding to immobilized ICAM - 1 stabilizes the conformational change by opposing forces exerted on LFA - 1 by the T cell cytoskeleton , as well as by induced fit , driving the equilibrium further toward the high affinity conformation . At the same time , interplay between T cell actin forces and ligand - dependent retention of LFA - 1 organizes active LFA - 1 into concentric rings . The organization of these rings varies with the stimulatory surface , as this alters both ligand mobility and actin network behavior . Exactly how actin flow works to organize LFA - 1 at the IS is not clear . I did not observe direct co - localization of LFA - 1 conformational intermediates with F - actin or myosin IIA . It seems likely that nascent LFA - 1 / ICAM - 1 complexes originate in the F - 82 actin rich periphery and undergo flow - dependent coalescence ( 20 ) . Since high affinity LFA - 1 molecules are tightly linked to the actin cytoskeleton ( 180 ) , this conformation may be selectively delivered to the inner region of the IS by F - actin flow . The alternative possibility is that actin flow activates LFA - 1 as it is being dragged to the cSMAC . Both of these models are consistent with the observation that active LFA - 1 is shifted toward the periphery under conditions of low ICAM - 1 mobility . Distinguishing between these models will require the development of biosensors that can measure LFA - 1 conformational change in real time . Another open question is what defines the inner boundary where open LFA - 1 accumulates . LFA - 1 may be deposited in this region as a result of slowing and disassembly of the actin network . Alternatively , LFA - 1 may be excluded based on molecular crowding or kinetic segregation ( 20 , 83 , 248 ) . Finally , exclusion could be mediated by membrane trafficking events , since this area of the IS is associated with endocytosis and protein degradation as well as extrusion of TCR - enriched extracellular vesicles ( 69 , 249 ) The relative contribution of LFA - 1 valency and affinity to the formation and maintenance of T cell - APC contacts has been a subject of ongoing debate ( 173 , 250 ) . I show here that T cell actin flow drives both aspects of avidity modulation . While flow is required to maintain the high affinity conformation of LFA - 1 independent of changes in valency , it also maintains overall accumulation of LFA - 1 at the IS ( Figure 2 . 14A ) . The combination of these two effects can be measured as the total amount of open LFA - 1 at the IS , a value that drops by 60 % after inhibition of actin flow . In the course of these studies I found that engagement of different integrins by immobilized ligands has distinct effects on F - actin dynamics at the IS . In Jurkat T cells , 83 VLA - 4 binding to VCAM - 1 , but not LFA - 1 binding to ICAM - 1 , brings F - actin flow nearly to a halt ( ( 42 ) and data not shown ) . In primary T cells , engagement of LFA - 1 induced very modest slowing of the actin network , but co - engagement of LFA - 1 and VLA - 4 induced significant slowing . The underlying mechanisms remain to be identified ; one plausible idea is that the β 1 and β 2 chains differ in their interactions with actin - binding adapter molecules . Consistent with the observed slowing of the actin network , I observed diminished LFA - 1 activation with the addition of VCAM - 1 . This has important functional implications , since upregulation of VLA - 4 during T cell activation could effectively down - regulate LFA - 1 dependent interactions . A recurring conundrum in mechanobiology is the difficulty in separating force - dependent processes from conventional signaling events . Since the inhibitor cocktail used here to arrest actin dynamics also perturbs sustained Ca + + elevation ( but not early tyrosine phosphorylation events ) downstream of the TCR ( 2 ) , it is possible that the observed loss of LFA - 1 activation results from impaired conventional signaling rather than cessation of force . Several pieces of data support our interpretation that force plays a key role . First , TCR dependent inside - out signaling is traditionally thought to culminate with talin binding and induction of the extended conformation , but I find that inhibiting actin dynamics has the most profound and consistent effect on transition to the open conformation . Second , slowing the actin network by engaging VLA - 4 also diminishes LFA - 1 conformational change , even though it actually enhances TCR signaling ( 42 ) . Finally , in cells treated with soluble ICAM - 1 , TCR signaling and actin flow are intact , yet LFA - 1 conformational change does not occur because there is no tension generated by immobilized ligand . Indeed , we have found that immobilization of ICAM - 1 by the 84 APC cytoskeleton promotes LFA - 1 conformational change and lowers the antigen threshold for T cell activation ( unpublished data ) . My data showing that the T cell F - actin network directly maintains the high affinity conformation of LFA - 1 do not preclude a role for F - actin in regulating other molecules involved in LFA - 1 activation . In focal adhesions , talin and vinculin both depend on force transmission for proper function . Actin - dependent stretching of talin reveals cryptic binding sites for vinculin , binding of which provides additional F - actin linkages ( 149 , 190 , 191 ) . This process is reversible , such that loss of force leads to diminished vinculin binding . In T cells , vinculin is recruited to the IS and is required for talin recruitment and conjugate formation ( 194 ) . Thus , talin and vinculin could enhance cytoskeletal anchorage of LFA - 1 under conditions where F - actin flow generates tension . This could explain the observation that high affinity LFA - 1 becomes homogeneously distributed following inhibition of F - actin dynamics ; when vinculin dissociates , talin - bound LFA - 1 could diffuse more readily . In addition to maintaining adhesive contacts , integrins act as traditional signaling receptors , in a process termed outside - in signaling . LFA - 1 engagement induces formation of signaling microclusters ( 34 , 36 ) , and leads to activation of multiple signaling intermediates ( 31 - 33 , 251 ) . Indeed , LFA - 1 can be considered a costimulatory molecule in that its co - engagement with TCR lowers the threshold for T cell activation ( 31 , 35 ) . The relationship between conformational change and outside - in signaling for LFA - 1 has not been rigorously addressed , but outside - in signaling by other integrins is associated with their high affinity forms ( 196 , 252 ) . Assuming that the high affinity conformation of LFA - 1 also represents the signaling competent pool , actin flow should promote LFA - 1 85 signaling and costimulation . Further analysis will be needed to directly test this possibility . My data support a model in which ICAM - 1 mobility is an important parameter for LFA - 1 activation . Low mobility ICAM - 1 would provide greater resistance to forces exerted on LFA - 1 by the T cell actin cytoskeleton , and should therefore be better at inducing conformational change . In support of this idea , artificially increasing ICAM - 1 mobility in target cells diminishes conjugate formation and granule polarization by natural killer cells ( 230 ) . This raises the intriguing possibility that APCs could regulate lateral mobility of integrin ligands in order to modulate T cell activation , an idea tested in chapter 3 of this thesis . Indeed , I found that dendritic cells control the mobility of ICAM - 1 through regulated cytoskeletal changes , and that manipulation of ICAM - 1 mobility in DCs modulates LFA - 1 conformational change and alters the antigen threshold for T cell adhesion and priming . In conclusion , these results provide strong evidence that centripetal flow of the T cell F - actin network provides mechanical force contributing to LFA - 1 activation and ICAM - 1 engagement at the IS . I propose that F - actin flow at the IS drives a positive feedback loop for IS - associated signaling events , whereby early TCR signals induce robust actin flow , which in turn increases signaling through mechanosensitive molecules like LFA - 1 . 86 CHAPTER 3 : THE DC F - ACTIN NETWORK CONSTRAINS ICAM - 1 MOBILITY TO ENHANCE LFA - 1 AFFINITY MATURATION , CONJUGATE FORMATION , AND T CELL ACTIVATION The text and data presented in this chapter are in submission at the Journal of Cell Biology under the working title of The dendritic cell cytoskeleton regulates ICAM - 1 clustering and lateral mobility to promote T cell adhesion and activation . Authors : William Comrie , Shuixing Li , Sarah Boyle and Janis K . Burkhardt . William Comrie designed research , conducted experiments , performed analysis , and wrote the paper . Shuixing Li designed and made recombinant DNA constructs used in experiments , Sarah Boyle created protocol for making Fab fragments , and helped in designing and analyzing FRAP experiments in figures 3 . 1 and 3 . 2 . Janis K . Burkhardt helped design experiments and write the paper 87 I . Summary Integrity of the dendritic cell ( DC ) actin cytoskeleton is essential for T cell priming , but the underlying mechanisms are poorly understood . I show that the DC F - actin network regulates the lateral mobility of ICAM - 1 , but not MHCII . ICAM - 1 mobility and clustering is regulated by maturation - induced changes in the expression and activation of moesin and α - actinin - 1 , which associate with actin filaments and the ICAM - 1 cytoplasmic domain . Constrained ICAM - 1 mobility is important for DC function , since DCs expressing a high mobility ICAM - 1 mutant lacking the cytoplasmic domain exhibit diminished antigen - dependent conjugate formation and T cell priming . These defects are associated with inefficient induction of LFA - 1 affinity maturation , consistent with a model in which constrained ICAM - 1 mobility opposes forces on LFA - 1 exerted by the T cell cytoskeleton . My results reveal a novel mechanism through which the DC cytoskeleton regulates mechanotransduction at the immunological synapse . II . Introduction T cell activation by antigen presenting cells ( APCs ) requires the formation of a specialized cell - cell contact termed the immunological synapse ( IS ) , which facilitates the assembly of dynamic molecular signaling complexes . The T cell acto - myosin network plays a critical role in the spatio - temporal regulation of IS organization ( 23 , 24 ) . Importantly , this network does not function as a static scaffold ; continued actin retrograde flow is required to maintain T cell signaling ( 2 ) . Recently , it has been suggested that flow of the T cell acto - myosin network promotes signaling by exerting force on T cell signaling molecules that are bound to ligands on the surface of the APC 88 ( 5 , 148 , 253 ) . Among the various activating and co - activating receptors on the surface of T cells , the TCR and the integrin LFA - 1 have been proposed to act as mechanosensors , molecules that respond to a physical force by changing conformation or initiating downstream signaling . Evidence that the TCR functions as a mechanosensor comes from conformational analysis of the TCR bound to activating antibodies , which shows that force applied tangentially to the pMHC / TCR bond can initiate downstream signaling ( 126 , 127 ) . Moreover , surface bound , but not soluble , pMHC can trigger TCR activation , and this process is dependent on an intact F - actin network ( 115 , 123 ) . One interpretation of this finding is that forces on the TCR provided by the F - actin network when opposed by surface - bound pMHC , induce a deformation in the TCR that induces signaling . Finally , agonist pMHC – TCR interactions have recently been found to engage in catch bond type interactions in which force prolongs bond lifetime , and mechanically pulling on single pMHC / TCR bonds can initiate calcium signaling ( 102 ) . Mechanotransduction by the TCR remains controversial , and many details remain to be elucidated . In contrast , the role of force in integrin activation is well established . Integrins are heterodimeric transmembrane proteins composed of an α and β chain , and are the main adhesion receptors that stabilize the T cell – APC contact . In addition to acting as adhesion receptors , integrins can function as signaling molecules in a process termed “outside - in“ signaling . Integrin adhesion and signaling functions occur coordinately , and together , these processes lower the threshold for T cell activation . For example , engagement of the β 1 integrin VLA - 4 enhances calcium mobilization and the stimulation of the NF - AT promoter ( 42 ) . The canonical integrin involved in IS formation 89 in naïve T cells is the β 2 integrin LFA - 1 . Engagement of LFA - 1 has been shown to enhance activation of key T cell signaling components such as PI3K , PLC γ 1 , ERK1 / 2 , JNK , and Src ( 31 , 32 , 254 ) . Additional evidence shows that the key T cell adapter molecule SLP76 functions in outside - in integrin signaling , possibly through recruitment of the SLP76 binding protein ADAP to sites of LFA - 1 engagement ( 34 , 36 ) . Stronger activation of early signaling events upon costimulation through LFA - 1 has been shown to lead to enhanced IL - 2 production , T cell proliferation , and production of type 1 cytokines ( 31 , 251 ) . Finally , it is known that ICAM - 1 expression on APCs is required for the proper generation of T cell memory responses ( 12 , 13 ) . In order to tightly regulate adhesion and outside - in signaling , integrin activity is controlled through a series of conformational changes , relying on extracellular signals and ligand binding to modulate the affinity for ligand [ reviewed in ( 145 ) ] . Integrins exist in three major conformational states . In resting T cells , they exist in a low affinity , “closed” , conformation in which the α and β chains are bent and the ligand binding I domain lies proximal to the plasma membrane . In a process termed “inside - out” signaling , external stimuli such as engagement of chemokine receptors or TCR induce the adoption of an intermediate affinity , “extended , ” conformation in which the α and β chains are straight and the I domain is distal to the plasma membrane . This process depends in part upon association of talin and kindlins with the cytoplasmic tail of the β chain , relieving charge interactions with the α chain ( 162 , 255 ) . Finally , binding of ligand can induce the high affinity , “extended - open , ” conformation in which the α and β chains are straight and their cytoplasmic domains have been separated from each other . Importantly , integrins are known to engage in catch bonds , in which force applied to 90 the integrin - ligand pair extends bond lifetime and assists LFA - 1 maturation from the intermediate affinity extended conformation to the high affinity extended - open conformation ( 176 , 181 , 183 ) . Separation of the cytoplasmic tails is thought to be facilitated by cytoskeletal forces , transmitted to the β chain via actin binding of talin and kindlins ( 148 ) . On the surface of T cells , transition from the intermediate to the high affinity form of LFA - 1 is energy dependent , consistent with the idea that force provided by the cytoskeleton is required ( 164 ) . The ability to provide a costimulatory , outside - in , signal is highly dependent on the physical separation of the cytoplasmic tails ( 158 ) , and inhibiting tail separation prevents cell spreading and protein phosphorylation downstream of the prototypic integrin α IIb β 3 ( 196 ) . In order to achieve tail separation and adoption of the extended - open conformation , pulling forces on the integrin β chain likely need to be opposed by retention forces on the integrin ligand . In support of this idea , Perez et al . showed that soluble ICAM - 1 fails to costimulate T cell priming ( 31 ) . In agreement with this , glass - immobilized , but not soluble , ICAM - 1 triggers LFA - 1 to adopt the extended - open , signaling competent , conformation ( 229 ) . Additionally , natural killer cells respond best to target cells when ICAM - 1 is highly clustered and immobile on the surface of the target ( 230 ) . Taken together , these studies indicate ICAM - 1 mobility impacts integrin - based adhesion and signaling , and suggest that modulation of ICAM - 1 mobility on the APC surface may be an important variable in T cell activation . The importance of actin dynamics on the T cell side of the IS is well established , but much less is known about the function of the dendritic cell ( DC ) F - actin network . DC maturation in response to inflammatory stimuli is associated with an increase in F - 91 actin content as well as controlled changes in actin regulatory proteins . For example , LPS - induced maturation leads to robust upregulation of the actin bundling protein fascin ( 220 ) and activation of the actin severing protein cofilin ( 222 ) . In addition to regulating antigen uptake and migration , it is becoming clear that the DC cytoskeleton functions to promote signaling events at the IS . F - actin and actin binding proteins such as fascin reportedly accumulate at the IS ( 213 ) , and treatment of DCs with actin depolymerizing agents impairs their ability to prime T cell responses ( 214 ) . Exactly how the DC cytoskeleton promotes T cell priming is unclear . One proposed mechanism involves T cell capture , a process that relies on signaling through Rho family GTPases ( 215 ) . In keeping with this , DCs deficient for the Rho GTPase effector WASp exhibit fewer and shorter - lived contacts with cognate T cells , and a diminished ability to prime T cell proliferation ( 218 ) . I now exhibit that maturation - associated changes in the DC actin cytoskeleton function to restrain ICAM - 1 lateral mobility , a process that promotes affinity maturation of LFA - 1 on interacting T cells and lowers the threshold for T cell activation . These findings reveal a previously unrecognized function for the actin cytoskeleton at the DC side of the IS , whereby retention forces on T cell ligands modulate mechanosensing and force transduction by their cognate receptors on the T cell surface . 92 III . Results Dendritic cells regulate the lateral mobility of ICAM - 1 upon maturation The DC actin cytoskeleton has been shown to promote T cell priming ( 213 , 214 ) , but the underlying mechanisms are unknown . In light of growing evidence that TCR and integrin activation at the IS involves mechano - transduction ( 72 , 126 , 148 , 242 ) , I reasoned that the DC cytoskeleton may promote the activation of these receptors by constraining the mobility of their cognate ligands . To test this idea , I cultured mouse bone marrow derived DCs ( BMDCs ) , and incubated them in the absence or presence of LPS to induce maturation . As anticipated , LPS treatment up - regulated the surface expression of MHCII , ICAM - 1 , CD40 , and CD86 ( Figure . 3 . 1A ) . Immature or mature BMDCs were then surface labeled with fluorescent Fab fragments that recognize MHCII or ICAM - 1 , and lateral mobility of MHCII and ICAM - 1 on the plasma membrane was analyzed using fluorescence recovery after photobleaching ( FRAP ) . As shown in Figure 3 . 1B , MHCII recovered rapidly while ICAM - 1 recovery was minimal . Quantitative analysis showed that the mobile fraction of MHCII does not change significantly upon maturation ( median values were 0 . 51 and 0 . 52 in immature and mature DCs , respectively , Figure 3 . 1C ) . The diffusion coefficient ( which reflects only mobile molecules ) was modestly increased upon maturation , from 0 . 110µm 2 / sec in immature cells to 0 . 138µm 2 / sec in mature cells ( Figure 3 . 1D ) . These values for MHCII mobility in DCs are in good accord with previous findings in B cells ( 56 ) , and are in the range expected for a freely diffusible membrane protein of this size . In contrast with the high mobility observed for MHCII , ICAM - 1 mobility was highly constrained in immature DCs ( median 93 Figure 3 . 1 Dendritic cells regulate the lateral mobility of ICAM - 1 upon maturation . ( A ) BMDCs were untreated ( dashed ) or treated ( Solid ) with 100ng / ml LPS to induce maturation , stained for the indicated proteins and analyzed by flow cytometry . ( B ) Representative images of BMDCs labeled with Fab against MHCII or ICAM - 1 and imaged at the indicated times after photobleaching at t = 0 . ( C ) Mobile fraction and ( D ) diffusion coefficient of MHCII and ICAM - 1 on the ventral surface of control or LPS - matured BMDCs . Data are aggregates of four independent experiments . * = p < . 01 , * * = p < . 001 , * * * = p < . 0001 . 94 value 0 . 36 ) , and was decreased to 0 . 25 upon maturation . The diffusion coefficient of the small mobile pool of ICAM - 1 molecules increased modestly after LPS treatment , from 0 . 025 to 0 . 040µm 2 / sec , though values remained significantly lower than those observed for MHCII . Taken together , these data show that in addition to up - regulating the expression of T cell ligands , DC maturation leads to protein - specific changes in ligand mobility . The DC cytoskeleton clusters ICAM - 1 and constrains its lateral mobility To ask if the DC actin cytoskeleton controls lateral mobility of MHCII and ICAM - 1 , I first examined the distribution of these molecules on the DC membrane before and after treatment with actin depolymerizing agents . In untreated cells , MHCII was relatively evenly distributed over the cell surface , while ICAM - 1 exhibited a highly clustered , punctate distribution ( Figure 3 . 2A ) . Treatment with Latrunculin B ( LATB ) led to complete depletion of F - actin network whereas or Cytochalasin D ( CytoD ) induced the accumulation of disordered F - actin rich zones . Neither LATB nor CytoD had a noticeable effect on the distribution of MHCII . In contrast , both drugs induced a more homogeneous distribution of ICAM - 1 , with loss of the characteristic punctate organization . As shown in Figure 3 . 2B , FRAP analysis revealed that disruption of the F - actin network also induced a significant increase in the mobile fraction of ICAM - 1 . This effect was specific to ICAM - 1 , since MHCII exhibited a decrease in mobile fraction upon actin depolymerization , the magnitude of which was inhibitor specific . Inhibitors had minimal effect on the diffusion coefficient of either protein ( Figure 3 . 2C ) . The increased mobile fraction of ICAM - 1 is consistent with its redistribution on the cell surface shown 95 Figure 3 . 2 The DC actin cytoskeleton clusters ICAM - 1 and constrains its mobility . ( A ) Mature BMDCs were treated with the indicated actin depolymerizing agents , fixed , and labeled for cell surface MHCII and ICAM - 1 , followed by permeabilization and labeling for F - actin . Mag Bar = 10µm . ( B ) Mobile fraction and ( C ) diffusion coefficient of MHCII and ICAM - 1 on mature BMDCs treated with the indicated actin depolymerizing agents . * = p < . 01 , * * = p < . 001 , * * * = p < . 0001 . 96 in Figure 3 . 2A . Together , these data clearly show that ICAM - 1 mobility in mature DCs is selectively constrained by the F - actin network . ICAM - 1 mobility is controlled by interactions with moesin and α - actinin - 1 Immobilization of ICAM - 1 has been documented in endothelial cells , where it has been shown to depend upon binding of the ICAM - 1 cytoplasmic tail to actin binding proteins of the ERM and α - actinin families ( 231 , 232 , 256 , 257 ) . I therefore tested the expression patterns of these proteins in DCs . As shown in Figure 3 . 3A , immature BMDCs express the ERM family members moesin and ezrin in an approximately 8 : 1 ratio . Upon maturation , moesin expression was upregulated , and a greater proportion was in the active form , as measured by phosphorylation at T558 . This effect was clearly detectable after 24 hours , and by 48 hours , mature DCs expressed 10 - fold more active moesin than immature DCs . No change in the expression or phosphorylation of ezrin was observed . In addition to moesin , non - muscle α - actinin was also expressed and was slightly up - regulated after LPS treatment ( Figure 3 . 3B ) . Immunofluorescence microscopy of mature DCs showed that the puncta containing high levels of cell surface ICAM - 1 co - localize with sites of moesin enrichment ( Figure 3 . 3C , inset ) . MHCII and moesin did not colocalize ( Figure 3 . 3D ) , suggesting a specific moesin - ICAM - 1 interaction . In addition to colocalizing on the ventral surface of DCs , moesin , and ICAM - 1 were also observed to cap on one side of DCs , when imaged through a midplane ( Figure 3 . 3E ) . This polarization was not observed for MHCII ( data not shown ) . To determine if moesin and α - actinin - 1 control ICAM - 1 mobility in BMDCs , I used siRNA to suppress each protein separately or in combination . Moesin expression 97 was reduced by 80 % , while only a 50 % reduction in α - actinin 1 could be achieved ( Figure 3 . 3F ) . This may reflect residual expression of α - actinin 1 , or represent the presence of α - actinin 4 , since the available antibody detects both isoforms . As shown in Figure 3 . 3G , suppression of either moesin or α - actinin 1 alone resulted in an increase in the mobile fraction of ICAM - 1 , and simultaneous suppression of both proteins resulted in an additive effect . This change was accompanied by a small , but statistically significant decrease in the diffusion coefficient of ICAM - 1 ( Figure 3 . 3H ) . These changes were specific for ICAM - 1 , as MHCII mobility was unaltered by suppression of moesin and / or α - actinin . Interestingly , I noticed that when DCs were cultured in a cocktail containing both GM - CSF and IL - 4 , moesin was heavily phosphorylated prior to LPS treatment ( Figure 3 . 4A ) . This correlated with a low level of ICAM - 1 mobility in immature cells ( Fig . 3 . 4B , 3 . 4C ) , thus implicating moesin activation as a key element controlling ICAM - 1 mobility . Taken together , these data indicate that maturation - dependent changes in actin binding proteins modulate the lateral mobility of specific molecules on the DC surface . The intracellular tail is critical for regulation of ICAM - 1 mobility in DCs To determine if interactions between moesin / α - actinin - 1 and the ICAM - 1 cytoplasmic tail control ICAM - 1 mobility , I created an ICAM - 1 mutant lacking the majority of the cytoplasmic tail , including the conserved polybasic region proposed to interact with moesin and α - actinin - 1 ( 232 ) ( Figure 3 . 5A ) . BMDCs from ICAM - 1 - / - mice were then lentivirally transduced with either WT ICAM - 1 or the Δ Tail mutant ( Figure 3 . 5B ) , and lateral mobility was measured and compared to measurements from 98 Figure 3 . 3 Actin regulatory proteins moesin and α - actinin - 1 regulate the lateral mobility of ICAM - 1 . 99 ( A and B ) Western blots showing levels of ( A ) total and phosphorylated ERM proteins and ( B ) α - actinin1 in lysates from BMDCs matured with 100ng / ml of LPS for 24 or 48 hours . E , ezrin ; M , moesin . ( C and D ) Immunofluorescence micrographs showing the distribution of F - actin and moesin with respect to cell surface ICAM - 1 ( C ) or MHC II ( D ) . Lower panels show enlarged regions indicated by white box ( Scale bar = 10µM ) . ( E ) Midplane of cell prepared as in ( C ) , demonstrating co - capping of ICAM - 1 and moesin . ( F ) Western blot showing siRNA mediated knockdown of either moesin ( M ) , α - actinin 1 ( A ) , or both proteins ( M / A ) in mature BMDCs . ( G and H ) Mature BMDCs treated with siRNA as in F were surface labeled with Fabs against MHCII or ICAM - 1 , and FRAP analysis was performed to determine mobile fraction ( G ) and diffusion coefficient ( H ) . Data are aggregates from 3 independent experiments . * = p < . 01 , * * = p < . 001 , * * * = p < . 0001 . Figure 3 . 4 High baseline moesin phosphorylation and low ICAM - 1 mobility in IL - 4 treated BMDCs . ( A ) Western blot showing ERM protein expression and phosphorylation in BMDCs cultured in the presence or absence of 10ng / ml of IL - 4 , and in the presence or absence of LPS . ( B and C ) BMDCs were cultured in the presence of 10ng / ml IL - 4 + / - LPS for 24h , and the mobile fraction ( B ) and diffusion coefficient ( C ) of ICAM - 1 was determined using FRAP analysis . * = p < . 01 , * * = p < . 001 , * * * = p < . 0001 . 100 Figure 3 . 5 The cytoplasmic tail of ICAM - 1 mediates clustering and lateral mobility in the plasma membrane of BMDCs . 101 ( A ) Sequence alignments of the ICAM - 1 cytoplasmic tail and ICAM - 1 constructs . . ( B ) ICAM - 1 - / - BMDCs were transduced with ICAM - 1 mutants , and cell surface levels were compared by flow cytometry . ICAM - 1 - / - cells ( shaded gray line ) , WT cells expressing endogenous ICAM - 1 ( solid black line ) , ICAM - 1 - / - cells reconstituted with WT ( solid gray line ) , Δ Tail ( dashed grey line ) , or chimera ( dotted black line ) constructs . ( C and D ) The mobility of ICAM - 1 expressed on BMDCs prepared as in B was analyzed using FRAP , ( C ) Mobile fraction , ( D ) diffusion coefficient . ( E ) Immunofluorescence microscopy showing the distribution of moesin and F - actin with respect to ICAM - 1 in LPS matured ICAM - 1 - / - BMDCs reconstituted with exogenous WT , Δ Tail , or chimera ICAM - 1 . ( F ) Images collected as in ( E ) were analyzed for ICAM - 1 clustering by measuring the coefficient of variation ( standard deviation / mean ) of surface ICAM - 1 intensity . ( G ) Capping of exogenous ICAM - 1 in transduced DCs was quantified from midplane images similar to Figure 3E . * = p < . 01 , * * = p < . 001 , * * * = p < . 0001 . endogenous ICAM - 1 in WT C57Bl / 6 derived BMDCs . Reconstituted WT ICAM - 1 exhibited a higher mobile fraction than the endogenous protein , but a similar diffusion coefficient ( Figure 3 . 5C and 3 . 5D ) . When compared with reconstituted WT ICAM - 1 , the Δ Tail mutant exhibited significantly higher mobile fraction and diffusion coefficient . Indeed , both values were consistent with free mobility ( compare with freely mobile Class II in Figure 3 . 1C and 3 . 1D ) . To test the effect of anchoring ICAM - 1 directly to actin filaments , I created a chimeric molecule in which the cytoplasmic tail was replaced with the flexible linker region and actin - binding domain of moesin ( Figure 3 . 5A ) . The chimera was expressed well in ICAM - 1 - / - BMDCs ( Figure 3 . 5B ) , and demonstrated a mobile fraction that was below that of reconstituted WT ICAM - 1 , and similar to endogenous ICAM - 1 . Not surprisingly , I found that the Δ Tail mutant was much more evenly distributed on the DC surface as compared to WT ICAM - 1 ( Figure 3 . 5E , quantified in Figure 3 . 5F ) . Additionally , Δ Tail ICAM - 1 did not form a polarized cap as often as WT ICAM - 1 , Figure 3 . 5G . Conversely , the chimeric ICAM - 1 was more unevenly distributed than WT protein , and formed caps on the majority of cells ( Figures 3 . 5E - 3 . 5G ) . Together , these data demonstrate that the limitations of ICAM - 1 lateral mobility are almost entirely due to its cytoplasmic domain . Since the chimeric molecule , 102 which can bind directly to actin filaments , shows mobility similar to that of endogenous ICAM - 1 , this implies that most endogenous ICAM - 1 molecules are linked to the actin cytoskeleton . This most likely occurs through the combined action of moesin and α - actinin - 1 . Constrained ICAM - 1 mobility promotes late events needed for efficient T cell priming I next asked if immobilization of ICAM - 1 on the DC surface is important for T cell priming . ICAM - 1 - / - DCs were reconstituted with WT ICAM - 1 or the Δ Tail mutant , or were transduced with GFP alone . Upon LPS treatment , these cells expressed similar levels of MHC II , CD40 , ICAM - 1 , and CD86 ( Figure 3 . 7A ) . Cells were then pulsed with varying doses of Ova 323 - 338 peptide , and used to prime OTII TCR transgenic T cells . As anticipated , ICAM - 1 - / - DCs failed to prime T cells as measured by upregulation of CD25 , production of IL - 2 or CFSE dilution ( Figure 3 . 6A - C ) . Reconstitution with either the WT or Δ Tail ICAM - 1 constructs rescued CD25 upregulation ( Figure 3 . 6A ) induced equivalent production of IL - 2 at all doses of peptide ( Figure 3 . 6B ) . Though it has been reported that ICAM / LFA - 1 interactions are important for early IL - 2 secretion ( 31 ) , I found no difference in the amount of IL - 2 produced at 6 , 12 , or 18 hours , as measured by either ELISA or IL - 2 surface capture ( Figure 3 . 7B - 3 . 7F ) . Despite their ability to drive early T cell activation events , DCs expressing the Δ Tail ICAM - 1 mutant were not as efficient at stimulating T cell proliferation as DCs expressing exogenous WT ICAM - 1 ( Figure 3 . 6C , see also Figures . 3 . 7G and 3 . 8 ) . This was not an absolute defect , but rather a ½ - 1 log shift in the peptide dose response . Addition of exogenous IL - 2 did not rescue the proliferation defect ( Figure 3 . 7G and 3 . 7H ) , consistent with my observation that IL - 2 production and secretion is unaffected . 103 These findings are consistent with a model in which constrained ICAM - 1 mobility promotes late events needed for optimal T cell activation . However , I considered the alternate possibility that the defect in T cell proliferation is the result of defects in ICAM - 1 mediated signaling in the DC . ICAM - 1 signaling is best studied in endothelial cells , where it depends on phosphorylation of tyrosine 518 in the ICAM - 1 tail ( 258 ) . To ask if similar events are required for T cell priming , I mutated the tyrosine 518 to phenylalanine ( Figure 3 . 5A ) . Transduced ICAM - 1 - / - BMDCs expressed similar levels of Y518F and WT ICAM - 1 ( data not shown ) , and stimulated T cell proliferation equally well ( Figure 3 . 6D ) . Thus , the requirement for the ICAM - 1 cytoplasmic tail most likely involves regulation of mobility rather than downstream signaling to the DC . Constrained ICAM - 1 mobility promotes conjugate formation and T cell homotypic interactions Since ICAM - 1 functions as the primary ligand for LFA - 1 dependent T cell adhesion , I next asked if ICAM - 1 mobility is important for T cell - DC conjugation . As shown in Figure 5E , T cells failed to bind to ICAM - 1 - / - DCs , and this defect was rescued by reconstitution with WT ICAM - 1 . In contrast , the Δ Tail ICAM - 1 supported significantly less T cell binding ; conjugation efficiency was only about 50 % of that obtained with WT - ICAM - 1 reconstituted DCs . Since the chimeric ICAM - 1 molecule reduced lateral mobility relative to the WT reconstituted protein , I also asked if DCs expressing this mutant would show enhanced T cell binding . For reasons that are unclear , conjugation frequency for these cells varied widely , and was sometimes as low as the ICAM - 1 - / - controls ( Figure 3 . 8A ) . Nonetheless , the chimera consistently failed to 104 rescue T cell proliferation ( Figure 3 . 8B ) , even in experiments where conjugate formation occurred with high frequency . This result may demonstrate the need to actively redistribute ICAM - 1 on the surface of DCs through transient changes in moesin activity , analogous to the process that has been documented for CD43 on the T cell side of the IS ( 91 , 259 ) . Figure 3 . 6 Altering ICAM - 1 mobility perturbs T cell adhesion and priming . 105 ( A ) ICAM - 1 - / - DCs were transduced with GFP or the indicated ICAM - 1 constructs , pulsed with peptide and used to prime CD4 + OTII T cells . CD25 surface expression was assessed following 18 hours of stimulation . BMDCs were pulsed with the indicated OVA peptide concentration . ( B ) T cells were stimulated as in ( A ) , and IL - 2 secretion was assessed after 18 hours using a surface capture assay . ( C ) CFSE - labeled T cells were stimulated as in ( A ) and CFSE dilution was measured after 96 hours to assess proliferation . ( D ) T cell proliferation was assessed after priming with ICAM - 1 - / - DCs or ICAM - 1 - / - DCs transduced with WT ICAM - 1 or the signaling - incompetent Y518 mutant . ( E ) DCs expressing the indicated ICAM - 1 constructs were pulsed with OVA peptide and allowed to interact with OTII T cells . Conjugate formation was assessed by flow cytometry . ( F ) Representative midplane images showing T cells interacting with DCs that do or do not display capped ICAM - 1 . ( G ) Conjugates were prepared and imaged as in F . DCs interacting with two T cells were randomly selected and scored for homotypic T cell interactions . Data represent the means + / - StDev from four independent experiments , with at least 50 cells each . P < 0 . 05 , based on Student’s T test . After DC binding , responding T cells form homotypic interactions , which augment T cell activation by allowing paracrine signaling of IL - 2 and IFN - γ ( 260 , 261 ) . These stable homotypic interactions occur at preformed areas enriched in microvilli ( 262 ) . Since ERM proteins organize microvilli , I reasoned that these “T cell docking sites” might correspond to the capped regions enriched in moesin and ICAM - 1 ( Figure 3 . 3E ) . In support of this idea , I frequently observed clusters of T cells in association with moesin / ICAM - 1 - rich caps Figure 3 . 6F , top ) . To test if ICAM - 1 mobility and interaction with moesin are important for maintaining homotypic T cell contacts , T cell were allowed to interact with DCs expressing either WT or Δ Tail ICAM - 1 , and randomly selected conjugates were scored for the presence of direct T cell - T cell contact . Analysis was restricted to conjugates consisting of one DC and two T cells , to avoid effects of conjugate efficiency , per se , and to decrease the likelihood of coincidental homotypic T cell contacts . Under these conditions , 35 % of DCs reconstituted with WT ICAM - 1 showed homotypic T cell interactions ( Figure 3 . 6G ) . In contrast , and consistent with their inability to form caps , only 22 % of DCs expressing the Δ Tail ICAM - 1 mutant supported homotypic T cell contacts . Taken together , these data show that constrained 106 Figure 3 . 7 ICAM - 1 mobility does not impact IL - 2 production at early time points , and T cell proliferation defects are not rescued by the addition of exogenous IL - 2 . ( A ) Control C57BL / 6 DCs or ICAM - 1 - / - DCs transduced as indicated were stimulated with LPS and surface expression of maturation markers was analyzed by flow cytometry . Mean fluorescence intensities of triplicate wells are shown from one representative experiment . ( B and C ) ICAM - 1 - / - DCs were transduced with GFP or the indicated ICAM - 1 constructs , pulsed with peptide and used to prime CD4 + OTII T cells . IL - 2 secretion was assessed using a surface capture assay after 6 hours ( B ) or 12 hours ( C ) of stimulation . ( D - F ) Priming of OTII T cells was performed as in B and C . IL - 2 secretion was assessed by ELISA after 6 ( D ) , 12 ( E ) , or 18 ( F ) hours of stimulation . ( G and H ) T cell proliferation after 96 hours stimulation as measured by CFSE dilution in response to transduced BMDCs pulsed with OVA peptide in the absence ( G ) or presence ( H ) of 50units / ml exogenous IL - 2 . 107 Figure 3 . 8 DCs expressing chimeric ICAM - 1 yield inconsistent conjugation results , and do not prime T cells efficiently . ( A ) Three separate conjugation assays demonstrating inconsistent results of chimeric ICAM - 1 expressing DCs binding to cognate T cells , in comparison with ICAM - 1 - / - DCs and ICAM - 1 - / - DCs expressing WT and Δ Tail ICAM - 1 . ( B ) T cell proliferation , as marked by CFSE dilution , after 96 hours of stimulation with ICAM - 1 - / - BMDCs transduced with GFP ( ICAM - 1 KO ) , WT , or chimeric ICAM - 1 . ICAM - 1 mobility promotes the formation of stable T cell – APC conjugates , and that active redistribution of ICAM - 1 encourages T cell homotypic interactions . Both of these processes probably contribute to lowering the antigen threshold for T cell proliferation . 108 LFA - 1 affinity regulation is strengthened by restriction of ICAM - 1 lateral mobility The conformational changes associated with LFA - 1 activation are thought to involve force on the ICAM - 1 - LFA - 1 bond , exerted by the T cell actin cytoskeleton ( Figure 3 . 9B ) ( 148 , 164 , 185 ) . If so , I reasoned that constraining lateral movement of ICAM - 1 could serve to enhance this process by providing resistance on the APC side of the IS . To test this idea , I took advantage of a panel of antibodies specific for conformational intermediates of human LFA - 1 ( Figure 3 . 9B ) ( 164 ) . As surrogate APCs , I generated 293T cell lines stably expressing ICAM - 1 constructs of low mobility ( Chimera ) , medium mobility ( WT ) , and high mobility ( Δ Tail ) , and functionalized the plasma membranes of these cells with α CD3 as detailed in Materials and Methods and diagrammed in Figure 6A . Human peripheral blood CD4 + T cells were then allowed to spread on these artificial APCs , and labeled for LFA - 1 conformational intermediates . The addition of ICAM - 1 to α CD3 - functionalized 293T cells resulted in the adoption of both the intermediate affinity ( marked by Kim127 ) , and the high affinity ( marked by m24 ) conformations . Example images showing antibody labeling are presented in Figure 3 . 9C . To assess the relative efficiency of conformational change independently of any changes in cell surface LFA - 1 levels , total cell surface labeling for the intermediate and high affinity epitopes was measured and normalized to total cell surface LFA - 1 ( marked by TS2 / 4 ) . I observed no correlation between adoption of the intermediate conformation and ICAM - 1 mobility ( Figure 3 . 9D ) . Adoption of the high affinity conformation , correlated with constraint of ICAM - 1 mobility . As shown in Figure 3 . 9E , compared to T cells stimulated with control APCs expressing WT ICAM - 1 , T cells stimulated on 109 APCs expressing the high mobility Δ Tail ICAM - 1 showed reduced LFA - 1 conformational change , while those stimulated on APCs expressing the low - mobility chimera showed increased conformational change . Importantly , I found that the efficiency of LFA - 1 conformational change did not depend on the level of ICAM - 1 expression ; two clones expressing 10 fold different levels of WT ICAM - 1 induced the same amount of high affinity LFA - 1 ( data not shown ) . I also tested the effects of ICAM - 1 mobility on LFA - 1 conformational change in resting T cell blasts , since blasts typically have more basally activated integrins than naïve cells . Again , I found no relationship between ICAM - 1 mobility and the intermediate conformation of LFA - 1 ( Figure 3 . 9F ) , while in two separate donors I found that the adoption of the high affinity conformation correlated inversely with ICAM - 1 mobility ( Figure 3 . 9G and 3 . 9H ) . Consistent with my findings for conjugate formation and T cell proliferation , the effect of liberating ICAM - 1 from mobility constraints was not all - or - nothing . The 293T cells expressing the Δ Tail mutant did support some change to the high affinity conformation above non - transduced 293T cells , though in two of the three donors tested this did not reach statistical significance . These data demonstrate that the mobility of ICAM - 1 on the surface of APCs can influence the conformational change of integrins on responding T cells . Together with my findings from the conjugate assay , these results support a model in which regulation of ICAM - 1 mobility on mature DCs serves to facilitate integrin activation on responding T cells , leading to firm adhesion and enhanced T cell priming ( Figure 3 . 10 ) . 110 Figure 3 . 9 Restriction of ICAM - 1 lateral mobility promotes LFA - 1 affinity maturation . 111 ( A ) Schematic showing 293T cell - based artificial APCs used to stimulate T cells , as detailed in Materials and Methods . ( B ) Diagram of LFA - 1 conformational states with conformation - specific mAb binding sites . ( C ) ex - vivo human T cells were allowed to interact with 293T cell - based artificial APCs lacking ICAM - 1 ( null ) or transduced with WT ICAM - 1 . Conjugates were fixed and labeled with the indicated conformation - specific anti - LFA - 1 antibodies . Representative micrographs are shown . Mag bars = 10 µ m . ( D and E ) Conjugates were prepared as in ( C ) using artificial APCs expressing the indicated ICAM - 1 constructs . ( D ) The relative proportion of LFA - 1 in the extended conformation was assessed based on the ratio of Kim127 : TS2 / 4 labeling intensity . ( E ) The relative proportion of LFA - 1 in the extended open conformation was assessed based on the ratio of m24 : TS2 / 4 labeling intensity . ( F - H ) Conjugates were prepared and analyzed as in ( C - E ) , except that resting T cell blasts were used . Panels G and H show the same analysis with T cells from two different human donors , to show reproducibility between donors . IV . Discussion While actin remodeling on the DC side of the IS is essential for conjugate formation and T cell priming ( 214 , 217 , 218 ) , it has been unclear how the DC F - actin network contributes to T cell activation . I now show that in addition to the well - documented upregulation of T cell stimulatory ligands , DC maturation induces cytoskeletal changes that modulate the mobility of those ligands . In mature DCs , actin binding proteins constrain ICAM - 1 lateral mobility , thereby promoting affinity regulation of LFA - 1 . This process enhances T cell conjugation , T cell homotypic interactions , and T cell proliferation . Controlled immobilization of DC ligands for mechanosensitive T cell molecules represents a novel mechanism by which the DC actin cytoskeleton enhances the potency of DCs as antigen presenting cells . Integrin - dependent adhesion is regulated at two levels , affinity ( the strength of each individual bond ) and valency ( the total number of bonds ) . The product of the two factors gives avidity , or the total strength of the system ( 144 ) . My work shows that both regulatory mechanisms are impacted by the mobility of integrin ligands . With respect to affinity , I found that modulation of ICAM - 1 lateral mobility aids LFA - 1 conformational change and T cell adhesion . Active LFA - 1 is linked to the T cell actin cytoskeleton 112 ( 180 ) , and has been predicted to undergo force - dependent conformational change driven by the T cell actin network ( 148 , 164 , 176 ) . Moreover , the bond lifetime of ICAM - 1 and LFA - 1 increases with force ( 181 , 183 , 185 ) . TCR induced inside - out signaling is not sufficient to induce the high affinity conformation of LFA - 1 , and surface bound ligand supports the high affinity LFA - 1 conformation much more efficiently than soluble ligand ( 229 ) . Thus , the changes mediated by the DC cytoskeleton could synergize with the F - actin flow that takes place on the T cell side of the IS , to maximize the mechanical force on LFA - 1 . In support of this model , I have recently found that ongoing flow of the T cell actin network is required to maintain LFA - 1 in the high affinity conformation at the IS ( unpublished data ) . Interactions between ICAM - 1 and the DC actin cytoskeleton also affect integrin valency . I show that ICAM - 1 is maintained in a clustered state , both at the sub - micron scale and in higher order “caps” at one pole of the DC . T cells adhere to these areas of high ICAM - 1 density . Thus , clustering at both levels enhances adhesion by increasing the local ICAM - 1 concentration . I find that in DCs , lateral mobility of ICAM - 1 is regulated by maturation - induced upregulation and activation of moesin and α - actinin , through a mechanism that involves the cytoplasmic domain of ICAM - 1 . It is currently unclear whether ICAM - 1 lateral mobility is limited by direct tethering or by molecular fences that confine diffusion . The two mechanisms are not mutually exclusive , and precedents for both can be found in the literature . Direct interactions between ICAM - 1 and both ezrin and α - actinin have been demonstrated in endothelial cells ( 231 , 232 , 257 ) . In B cells , moesin has been shown to create cytoskeletal corrals that confine B cell receptor diffusion ( 56 ) . Two pieces of evidence lead us to favor direct tethering . First , I observe close co - localization of ICAM - 113 1 and moesin . Second , and more importantly , reconstituted WT ICAM - 1 , which is overexpressed by approximately 10 - fold , is more mobile than the endogenous protein . This phenomenon is consistent with saturation of direct tethers , but would not be expected in a corral - based mechanism . Single particle tracking studies will be needed to resolve this question with certainty . Regulation of ICAM - 1 mobility by ERM proteins and α - actinin is likely to be of general importance for immune responses that require firm adhesion . In keeping with my findings , Gross et al . have shown that increasing ICAM mobility in target cells leads to decreased NK cell conjugate formation and granule polarization , while decreasing ICAM mobility by overexpression of ezrin has the opposite effect ( 230 ) . Moreover , in endothelial cells , interruption of ICAM - 1 interactions with α - actinin and ezrin inhibits the ability of T cells to undergo diapedesis ( 231 , 232 ) . I show that deletion of the ICAM - 1 tail leads to enhanced mobility , which correlates with diminished LFA - 1 conformational change , as well as diminished conjugate formation and T cell priming . While I attribute the observed functional effects to changes in ICAM - 1 mobility , it is important to consider other known functions of the ICAM - 1 cytoplasmic tail . First , though this has not been documented , ICAM - 1 could deliver signals to the DC . Where such signals have been studied , they depend Y518 in the ICAM - 1 tail ( 258 ) . I show that mutation of this residue has no effect on T cell proliferation ( Figure 3 . 6D ) . Thus , if signaling is involved , it must utilize other , unknown mechanisms . A second known function of the ICAM - 1 tail is to modulate dimerization . On the cell surface , ICAM - 1 exists largely as a homo - dimer , formed by interactions in the extracellular and transmembrane regions and opposed by repulsive interactions 114 between the conserved basic residues in the cytoplasmic domain ( 263 - 265 ) . Thus , the tail mutants may affect ICAM - 1 dimeric status . However this should not affect my results , since monomeric and dimeric ICAM - 1 show virtually identical affinities for LFA - 1 ( 266 ) . Moreover , GPI - anchored ICAM - 1 and tailless ICAM - 1 ( which are largely monomeric and dimeric , respectively ) both fail to support LFA - 1 mediated adhesion , virtually to the same extent ( 263 , 265 ) . In keeping with my findings , Oh et al . point out that both proteins are evenly distributed , and likely highly mobile , compared to WT ICAM - 1 . The authors concluded , however , that ICAM - 1 must be in an intermediate state , between monomer and dimer , and that this state mediates strong adhesion . Given my results that LFA - 1 affinity maturation can be rescued by linking Δ Tail ICAM - 1 to the actin cytoskeleton in a manner that is unlikely to modulate dimerization or deliver downstream signals , I deem it more likely that T cell adhesion and priming are modulated by changes to ICAM - 1 mobility rather than by changes in dimerization or signaling . In a process known as outside - in signaling , engaged integrin receptors can deliver downstream signals that enhance activation of many key T cell signaling molecules ( 31 ) . In this way , LFA - 1 serves a dual purpose at the IS , functioning primarily as an adhesion molecule that stabilizes conjugate formation , but secondly as an costimulatory molecule , adding separate or overlapping signals that enhance T cell activation ( 267 ) . Importantly , the high affinity conformation of integrins generally represents the signaling competent form ( 196 , 252 ) . Thus , in addition to enhancing T cell - APC conjugation , the regulation of ICAM - 1 lateral mobility would be expected to increase costimulatory signaling at the IS . Testing this idea biochemically has proven to be challenging , largely because outside - in signaling by integrins in T cells overlaps with and requires TCR signals . 115 Nonetheless , this concept is in line with the finding that Δ Tail ICAM - 1 can support upregulation of CD25 and IL2 , but does not support full T cell proliferation , a late event that may be particularly dependent on co - stimulation . It remains to be seen if other effector functions of activated T cells are altered by stimulation with mobile vs . immobile ICAM - 1 bearing DCs . Though the APC has largely been regarded as a passive partner during IS formation , there is compelling evidence that it plays an active role in organizing IS structure . The classical “bull’s - eye” IS structure occurs in T - B cell conjugates , as well as in T cells spreading on supported planar lipid bilayers ( 210 , 211 ) . In contrast , T cell interacting with DCs generally form “multifocal” synapses characterized by multiple patches of CD3 and LFA - 1 with variable overlap ( 212 , 237 , 268 ) . The multifocal synapse has been suggested to arise from either topological barriers or cytoskeletal barriers to diffusion ( 209 ) . I now show that ICAM - 1 is , indeed , subject to actin - dependent diffusional barriers . In contrast , I find that mobility of MHCII is not constrained by the DC actin cytoskeleton . Despite the lack of cytoskeletal mobility constraints , MHCII and TCR do not form a well - organized cSMAC in T cell - DC conjugates ( 212 , 237 ) . Thus , it is likely that topological barriers also play a role . Interestingly , moesin , which can directly limit the lateral mobility of ICAM - 1 , also helps to form microvilli , structures that have been observed on the DC side of the IS ( 262 , 269 ) . In this way , moesin could form both cytoskeletal barriers for ICAM - 1 and topological barriers for other proteins , including MHCII . It will be interesting to ask if moesin function is required for maintenance of the multifocal synapse in DC - T cell conjugates , and if so , how B cells differ in this regard . 116 Figure 3 . 10 Model showing how DCs regulate ICAM - 1 mobility to enhance LFA - 1 activation on T cells . Left panel : in immature DCs , levels of active moesin and α - actinin are low , allowing significant lateral mobility of ICAM - 1 . Upon maturation ( right panel ) , moesin and α - actinin are upregulated and activated , leading to immobilization of ICAM - 1 via interactions with the DC cytoskeleton and the ICAM - 1 cytoplasmic tail . Low mobility ICAM - 1 provides increased resistance to forces applied to the LFA - 1 β - chain by the T cell actin cytoskeleton . This process promotes LFA - 1 tail separation , and conformational changes in the extracellular domain associated with increased affinity for ICAM - 1 . Ultimately , these events lead to increased adhesion and T cell activation . Whether or not moesin proves to organize the multifocal synapse , I find that moesin does organize higher order adhesive caps on the DC surface , where T cells preferentially bind and contact one another . Similar clusters of T cells contacting DCs are observed by multiphoton imaging in vivo ( R . Germain and C . Hunter , personal communications ) . Recently , it has been shown that homotypic T cell interactions can 117 enhance paracrine signaling via IL - 2 and IFN γ , and lead to enhanced CD8 + T cell proliferation and memory responses ( 261 , 270 ) . Homotypic T cell interactions are likely to be particularly important in vivo where the frequency of responding T cells is low , and during CD4 + T cell help of CD8 + T cell priming . Thus , it will be interesting to ask if the effect of ICAM - 1 mobility on T cell priming is magnified in vivo . It will also be interesting to ask if increasing ICAM - 1 mobility results in diminished interaction times between T cells and DCs in vivo . If so , memory formation is likely to be impacted , since this requires stable DC - T cell interactions ( 12 ) . One important concept arising from my work is that the mobility of individual T cell ligands is regulated independently on the DC surface . My measurements show that there are few , if any , cytoskeletal limitations to MHCII diffusion . The finding that MHC II is highly mobile has important implications for modeling of TCR - pMHC binding kinetics . Indeed , the differential regulation of ICAM - 1 and MHC II mobility allows for efficient activation of LFA - 1 , while permitting the T cell to scan a large number of pMHC complexes for low frequency antigens . While I focus here on mobility of ICAM - 1 , the mechanism that I have uncovered likely applies to other receptor - ligand pairs that modulate T cell activation . In particular , it seems likely that mobility constraints affect CD28 interactions with CD80 / 86 . CD80 and CD86 interact with the actin cytoskeleton through polybasic motifs similar to those in ICAM - 1 ( 233 , 234 ) . These motifs control localization of CD80 and CD86 , as well as CD28 ( 235 ) , and deletion of this region impairs costimulatory function . Much remains to be learned about mechanotransduction in T cell activation . I show that biophysical properties of the APC play a key role in triggering the activation of 118 mechanosensitive molecules . Indeed , it is likely that the actin cytoskeleton controls not only ligand mobility , but also cortical stiffness , another important parameter for T cell activation ( 71 , 72 ) . Further understanding of these processes will be valuable in modulating APC function in therapeutic settings . 119 CHAPTER 4 : DISCUSSION Summary While the T cell and DC actin networks are known to play a critical role in the priming of naïve T cells , the mechanisms through which actin drives specific signaling events remain poorly understood . Resent studies have suggested that proper activation of the TCR and the integrin LFA - 1 may depend on the application of force to the receptor / ligand at the immunological synapse . These studies primarily relied on the application of external force to the receptor / ligand pairs , and used either Ca 2 + flux ( for the TCR ) or bond lifetime ( for LFA - 1 ) as measures of molecular activation . The question of whether forces generated by either the T cell or the APC can drive molecular activation at the IS through has been largely unexplored . In the present work , I sought to determine the contribution of the T cell and DC actin cytoskeletons in the mechanical activation of LFA - 1 within the context of the IS . I found that the centrosymmetric flow of the T cell F - actin network drives conformational change and affinity maturation of LFA - 1 at the IS . In the absence of this flow , LFA - 1 cannot maintain its high affinity conformation , and reverts back to the low affinity ( inactive ) form , despite the maintenance of enrichment at the IS . Importantly , the force provided by retrograde actin flow must be accompanied by a retention force on ICAM - 1 in order for the conformational change to the high affinity state to occur . In addition to affinity maturation , centrosymmetric actin flow within the T cell also organized LFA - 1 conformational intermediates into a distinct pattern at the IS , with high affinity LFA - 1 driven towards the center of the contact , but excluded from the center of 120 the contact zone , intermediate affinity integrin occupying a more peripherally localized ring , and low affinity integrin relatively evenly distributed throughout the synaptic zone . Following inhibition of F - actin flow at the IS , there was a distinct loss of this concentric pattern of LFA - 1 affinity intermediates at the IS , accompanied by a loss of total LFA - 1 accumulation at the IS . Consistent with the finding that ICAM - 1 surface immobilization was required for LFA - 1 conformational change and affinity maturation on artificial surfaces , I found that ICAM - 1 lateral mobility was highly restrained on the surface of dendritic cells , and this immobilization was critical for the support of LFA - 1 mediated adhesion , LFA - 1 conformational change , and T cell proliferation . Importantly , ICAM - 1 was specifically immobilized in DCs , through maturation - associated increases in expression and activation of the ICAM - 1 and F - actin binding proteins moesin and α - actinin - 1 . This demonstrates that the APC can promote the mechanical activation of receptors expressed on the surface of T cells through directed control of the lateral mobility of APC - expressed ligands . Together , the data described in this thesis demonstrate that T cell and APC cytoskeletal systems can work in tandem to produce the mechanical activation of force - sensitive molecules at the IS , thus demonstrating that cell - intrinsic forces are likely to play a central role in information transfer at the IS during initiation of the immune response . T cells as a unique model for studying mechanical transduction Many aspects of T cell biology differentiate this from other systems in which 121 mechanosensing has been studied in the past . In contrast to most cell types that engage in mechanosensing ( e . g . neurons , muscle cells , and auditory hair cells ) , T cells are highly migratory , and interact with multiple cell types in multiple environments ; each with their own set of external and internally generated forces . During diapedesis , T cells that are rolling on endothelial walls are exposed to high shear stress that , in and of itself , may be able to initiate mechanical activation of cell adhesion molecules ( 6 , 7 ) . Depending on the location of the inflamed tissue , T cells are likely to be exposed to a wide variety of substrate stiffness and densities . Since T cells must be able to migrate , find target cells , and exert their function within all of these extracellular environments , they must possess ways to adapt to the demands placed by each environment . Finally , at the IS , T cells are capable of generating internal molecular forces downstream of actin polymerization , and these forces can initiate and sustain mechanical activation of integrins . Therefore , T cells are not only subjected to a variety of external forces but they also actively generate forces of their own . Adding to this complexity , the cells with which T cells interact undergo conserved changes that can help regulate the mechanical activation of T cell integrins and possibly other molecules . Below , I will discuss some of the complexities and unique aspects of T cell mechano - transduction and the implications for T cell function . Fast actin flow rates but low force transmission at the IS Many of the studies of mechanical transduction have been carried out in the context of static or slow - migratory cells . In contrast to these systems , T cells are highly dynamic , with migration speeds several times faster than fibroblasts , and actin flow rates ( both during cell migration and at the IS ) of over 100nm / sec at times , over 20 times the speeds associated with focal adhesions ( 43 ) . Interestingly , despite these rapid actin 122 rates , the forces transmitted to the substrate at the IS are several fold lower than forces exerted during fibroblast migration . At the IS , forces reached an average of 70pN on individual pillars of an elastomer pillar array , while forces on individual pillars reached 2 - 3nN at the leading edge of migrating fibroblasts ( 128 , 271 ) . While the study demonstrating force measurements at the IS did not include integrin ligands on the surface of the elastomer pillars , it is also interesting to note that I did not see indications of stress fiber or focal adhesion formation at the IS with the addition of VCAM - 1 to my stimulatory surfaces . VLA - 4 engagement , and to a much lower degree LFA - 1 engagement , resulted in a slower rate of F - actin flow . This suggests that integrin engagement , particularly VLA - 4 engagement , can better link the F - actin network to the extracellular environment . A better linkage between the extracellular environment and the actin network is likely to allow for greater force transmission form the actin flow to the stimulatory surface . It is therefore likely that the measurements of force transduced to the extracellular environment at the IS are under - representations of the forces generated between T cells and APCs . Inclusion of integrin ligands on the elastomer pillars would give a better idea of the true forces generated at the IS . Interestingly , there is evidence that F - actin flow rates and firm integrin - mediated adhesion are inversely related ( 43 ) . The authors show that inhibition of vinculin expression resulted in faster flow rates , but lower traction forces on the extracellular matrix . This would fit nicely with actin flow rates and force generation measured at the IS . It may be that T cells actually require lower connection to the extracellular environment , as this may facilitate both fast migration by allowing for easy detachment at the trailing edge , and serial killing by allowing easy detachment from target cells . In other cell types , such as those involved 123 in wound healing , loose attachment to the substratum and to neighboring cells would likely be highly undesirable . Reciprocal regulation of applied forces on receptors and ligand lateral mobility as a general mechanism to enhance receptor activation in T cells One of the most interesting implications of the work presented here is that T cells and dendritic cells exert opposing forces at the IS in order to best activate the integrin LFA - 1 . This demonstrates the coordinated action of the F - actin networks of both cell types for the purpose of initiating firm cell – cell interactions between a naïve T cell and an APC . While the work here focused on LFA - 1 / ICAM - 1 interactions , there are indications that coordinated regulation of ligand mobility on the APC and F - actin generated forces on receptors on the T cell side of the synapse are at work in other receptor / ligand pairs . Additionally , in terms of LFA - 1 / ICAM - 1 interactions , other cell types may undergo similar regulation of ligand mobility in order to better sustain interactions with T cells . As discussed earlier , the TCR has been suggested to function as an anisotropic force sensor ( 126 ) . Additionally , the TCR can engage in catch bond type molecular interactions , suggesting a force - dependent step in antigen discrimination ( 102 ) . This would suggest that immobilization of pMHC on the surface of DCs may be important for productive TCR triggering , in a manner similar to ICAM - 1 immobilization . Interestingly , I show that MHCII is highly mobile on the surface of dendritic cells , and that its mobility is not regulated by changes in the maturation status of the APC . This suggests that for MHCII / TCR interactions , constraint of the lateral mobility of MHCII is 124 not an important aspect of TCR triggering . While this has important implications for TCR / MHCII interactions , it is worth noting that the studies documenting TCR catch bonds were done using the OTI or 2C CD8 TCR transgenic models . In addition , MHC class I has been shown to interact with the underlying actin cytoskeleton , and demonstrates retrained lateral mobility through these interactions ( 227 , 272 ) . It will be interesting to examine the lateral mobility of MHCI in proper APCs , and to ask whether the control of MHCI lateral mobility correlates with TCR triggering . In addition , it is critical to determine if catch bond molecular interactions exist between MHCII and the TCR of CD4 cells . If they do not , this may indicate a signaling requirement that is specific to TCR / MHC I interactions . Additionally , it would be interesting to determine if these catch bond interactions are specific to TCR / pMHC interactions , or are a general principle of TCR - ligand interactions selected for during positive selection . Use of CD4 / CD8 and MHC I / MHC II quadruple knockouts or T cells expressing a non - coreceptor associated Lck molecule allows for selection of non - pMHC restricted T cell clones and would therefore allow a system in which to study this aspect of the TCR selection process ( 273 - 275 ) . In addition to TCR and LFA - 1 , CD28 can form microclusters upon ligand engagement that undergo retrograde transport at the IS ( 19 ) . As discussed in the introduction , CD80 has a conserved polybasic region in its intracellular tail and human CD86 , but not mouse CD86 , also has such a region . Importantly , both have been reported to link these molecules to the underlying actin cytoskeleton and both are important for costimulatory function ( 233 , 234 ) . In the course of these studies , I found that CD80 , but not CD86 , lateral mobility was constrained in mouse BMDCs . However , 125 deletion of the CD80 cytoplasmic domain and re - expression alongside WT CD80 in CD80 / 86 KO mice did not result in a comparative defect in T cell stimulation between the two reconstituted DC populations ( data not shown ) . Though the polybasic domain of CD80 has been proposed to interact with the actin cytoskeleton , I did not see a noticeable difference in the lateral mobility of re - expressed CD80 with or without the cytoplasmic tail ( data not shown ) . Either this interaction is cell type specific , or my system that relied on over - expression of CD80 was not suited to detect subtle changes in the lateral mobility of CD80 . Additionally , whereas previous reports used artificial APCs for the expression of CD80 , my system may hide any defect in CD80 mediated co - signaling ; the presence of other co - signaling molecules like CD40 may obscure a modest change in efficiency . In any case , further investigation is needed to determine if either the CD80 or CD86 polybasic regions are required for their proper function , and if these regions interact with the actin cytoskeleton through members of the α - actinin or ERM families of cytoskeletal adapters . My observation that ICAM - 1 lateral mobility is controlled in DCs and affects ICAM - 1 / LFA - 1 dependent T cell / APC interaction directly parallels research on T cell diapedesis and ICAM - 1 lateral mobility in endothelial cells . In endothelial cells , ICAM - 1 and VCAM - 1 cluster alongside ezrin at sites of T cell docking , forming a unique pedestal ( 256 ) . Interaction between ICAM - 1 and moesin are dependent on the polybasic region of ICAM - 1 , and disruption of this domain results in decreased pedestal formation ( 232 ) . Additionally , in the absence of flow , deletion of the ICAM - 1 cytoplasmic domain results in the inhibition of T cell transmigration across an intact endothelial monolayer . Interestingly , the authors found that T cell adhesion to the monolayer was diminished 126 under shear flow , but not in shear free conditions . As I found that LFA - 1 could adopt the intermediate , but not the high affinity , conformation on highly mobile ICAM - 1 , it may be that the lower affinity interaction can sustain T cell – endothelial cell interactions under mild conditions , but is not enough to support T cell adhesion under more stringent conditions . Therefore , under shear conditions , the regulation of ICAM - 1 lateral mobility may be a critical component of both firm adhesion and transendothelial migration . In support of this , treatment of endothelial cells with TNF α rapidly increases ERM phosphorylation and activation ( 276 ) , mirroring the effects in DCs following treatment with LPS . Interestingly , I see that 48 hours of LPS treatment has more of an effect on moesin phosphorylation that 24 hours . It could be that moesin phosphorylation represents a secondary effect of LPS induced maturation , the first being the production of TNF α . In any case , it would seem that endothelial cells use a very similar mechanism as BMDCs to control ICAM - 1 lateral mobility and promote T cell adhesion , and this may represent a concerted mechanism by which to promote integrin based cell – cell adhesion . The theme that appears is that T cell adhesion to either APCs or to endothelial cells , whether that be brought on by antigen recognition or exposure to chemokine , involves both a concerted change in the T cell and a reciprocal change in the interacting partner . For mechanosensitive molecules involved in T cell function , the physical properties of the ligand on the surface of the other cell type must be considered alongside the forces applied to the receptor in order to gain a complete understanding of T cell function . Tangential or normal force application at the IS ? 127 One question that remains is whether the activating component of the molecular forces applied at the IS is tangential or normal to the plane of the IS . This question is automatically complicated , as the activating force component may be tangential or normal depending on the receptor that is being studied . Experiments done using biomechanical force probes more often apply a pulling , normal , force on receptor ligand pairs rather than a tangential force . While these forces are often activating , the data is confounded by other studies on LFA - 1 ; these implied that a tangential force should be activating while a normal force would likely be inhibitory ( 176 ) . Still other studies have shown that , for the TCR , the direction of the applied force matters less than the actual force application ( 242 ) , though it is difficult to say that either method used to apply external force in this paper did not have a component of both normal and tangential force . Interestingly , at the IS , the direction of the actin flow would indicate a primarily tangential force applied on receptors , though it has been shown that the actin network can promote membrane extrusions into the plane of the IS , clearly adding a normal force component ( 95 ) . Additionally , if force is applied to the cytoplasmic tail of a ligand bound receptor on the T cell side of the synapse , it is quite possible that the receptor in question would be tilted at an angle other than 90 ° in reference to the T cell plasma membrane . If this turns out to be the case , then an applied tangential force on the cytoplasmic side would automatically introduce a normal force vector on the receptor - ligand pair in the extracellular space . It is therefore possible that , regardless of which force vector would be activating , both tangential and normal forces will be applied by the same mechanism . Glycocalyx compression as another source of force at the IS 128 A recent report demonstrates that a bulky and extensive glycocalyx that is upregulated in tumor cells can enhance integrin activation by promoting integrin clustering and can , in and of itself , apply forces required for integrin affinity maturation ( 85 ) . While the authors found that initial contact of integrins with integrin ligands was inhibited by the glycocalyx , the rate of receptor clustering was increased following formation of the first bond by creating smaller areas of close cell - cell contact and preventing integrin engagement outside of these areas . This had the effect of funneling integrins into these limited contact zones . In addition , the spring - like resistance of the glycocalyx was shown to produce strain on integrins and increase markers of activated integrins within focal adhesions . More importantly , this glycocalyx - mediated affinity maturation was independent of Myosin contractility , suggesting that this represented a whole new aspect of molecular force generation at focal adhesions . Though the authors did not investigate this , it is possible that actin - generated forces are required to initially compress the glycocalyx . Simultaneous inhibition of actin polymerization and Myosin contractility would reveal this mechanism . At the IS , this study has vast implications for the kinetic segregation model of TCR triggering ( 83 ) . In particular , it suggests that the very force produced by the compression of larger molecular species around the TCR , such as CD45 or ligated integrins , may produce forces that promote TCR mechanoactivation . In addition , it is interesting to consider the upregulation of large glycocalyx components on tumor cells from the perspective of anti - tumor cytotoxic T cells . If the bulky glycocalyx on the tumor cell can enhance integrin - mediated attachment to the extracellular matrix , it may also allow for enhanced conjugate formation of responding T cells via directly analogous mechanisms . It would therefore 129 be interesting to see if target cell lysis is improved following upregulation of bulky glycoproteins on the tumor cell surface . Additionally , it would be interesting to see if there are any large - scale changes in the expression of bulky glycol - proteins in effector vs . naïve T lymphocytes . Interestingly , CD8 effectors massively upregulate the 130kD glycoform of CD43 , a bulky component of the T cell glycocalyx , and this expression is down regulated in memory T cells , suggesting that large glycoprotein expression is , in fact , upregulated in blasting cells ( 277 ) . All of these aspects make the study of mechanical activation a difficult , but necessary , system to understand . As we gain understanding into the mechanisms by which the TCR , costimulatory molecules , and cell adhesion molecules are regulated and governed by molecular forces , and to what extent these forces are in - fact necessary , I can more rationally design methods to activate or modulate the immune system for therapeutic purposes . Mechanosensing during T cell migration In addition to applied forces driving receptor activation at the IS T cell function also require the application of forces , both internally and externally generated , in order to migrate properly . T cells are extraordinarily motile and , depending on their state of activation , they must migrate and function in a multitude of tissue environments from the relatively soft tissue of the brain to the enormously stiff bone tissue ( 278 , 279 ) . Some environments , such as the endothelial surface of blood vessel walls , expose the T cells to enormous amounts of shear stress , while shear stress is low to non - existent in interstitial environments . T cells must then be able to firmly adhere in the face of enormous extracellular force , while still maintaining the ability to detach from the substratum 130 during rapid interstitial migration . In dealing with the shear stress during diapedesis , T cells express multiple molecules that can engage in catch bond interactions , thereby turning the force provided by the blood flow to their advantage . The catch bonds engaged in by integrins have already been a topic of discussion here , however T cells express a whole other family of cell adhesion molecules that can engage in catch bonds , the selectin family of receptors . Both L - selectin and P - selectin on the surface of leukocytes and endothelial cells , respectively , are capable of engaging in catch bonds under shear which helps support slow rolling prior to firm adhesion ( 7 , 280 , 281 ) . Following slow rolling and firm adhesion , itself possibly mediated by integrin shear enhanced catch bonds ( 6 ) , T cells attached to ICAM - 1 align themselves with the shear flow and migrate upstream , directly against the shear forces ( 282 ) . This demonstrates that T cells are able to respond to extracellular forces , and perhaps use them to their advantage at times . After finding a tight junction at which to cross , T cells must squeeze between the endothelial cells to cross the endothelial barrier . During this process , Myosin IIA contractility is required for squeezing the relatively rigid nucleus through the monolayer ( 283 ) . Following diapedesis , Myosin contractility is required for integrin detachment at the trailing edge of the migrating cell , presumably by providing the pulling force needed to break integrin - ICAM - 1 bonds ( 245 ) . This helps to support rapid migration , particularly in confined environments ; in the absence of Myosin IIA contractility T cells accumulate in lymph nodes due to this slow migration ( 284 , 285 ) . Interestingly , other cell types have been shown to migrate towards areas of higher ECM stiffness in a process termed durotaxis ( 286 ) . While it is not known whether T cells can respond in such a way to ECM stiffness . This unknown aspect of T cell migration would 131 be incredibly interesting given the importance of T cells in atherosclerosis ( 287 ) . The cytoskeletal regulation of molecular patterns and global organization of the IS Role of Myosin contractility vs . actin polymerization in IS structure and mechanosensing The function of Myosin IIA at the IS has been an area of contention in the field , with multiple labs presenting various findings regarding the role of Myosin contractility in T cell synapse formation and activation ( 288 ) . In line with earlier studies , I found that Myosin contractility at the IS was not required for LFA - 1 accumulation at the cell – cell interface , suggesting that general protein accumulation at the IS could be accomplished through F - actin flow driven solely by polymerization ( 289 ) . In contrast with this study , I found that inhibition of ROCK activity with Y - 27632 diminished T cell / B cell conjugate formation ( data not shown ) . This is more in line with Ilani et al . , who found similar results with the direct inhibition of Myosin with blebbistatin ( 4 ) . However , contrary to previous studies I found that inhibition of Myosin contractility alone did not result in gross disorganization of the IS ( 3 , 4 ) . This was more in line with Yu et al . , who found that Myosin contractility only affected early synapse formation ( 205 ) . While I found Myosin function to contribute only minimally to synaptic patterns , freezing the actin network resulted in rapid redistribution of the remaining high affinity LFA - 1 , so that its distribution mirrored the distribution of total LFA - 1 . This suggested that flow of the actin network was the real driving force behind synapse organization . It may be that Myosin contractility contributes differently to this flow based on the cell type ( CD4 vs . CD8 , naïve vs . blast , cell line ) , species ( mouse vs . human ) , stimulatory surface ( bilayer 132 vs . glass vs . APC ) , or timing ( early vs . late synapse formation ) of each study that has looked at its role in synapse structure . In contrast to gross molecular patterns at the IS , I found that Myosin IIA inhibition did affect the activation status of LFA - 1 , particularly its conversion to the high affinity state . This agrees with multiple studies identifying Myosin contractility ( 193 ) . This activation was further affected by the inhibition of F - actin flow , suggesting that either actin polymerization or the actual flow , in combination with Myosin contractility , regulate LFA - 1 affinity maturation / mechanosensing . Mechanism of exclusion of high affinity LFA - 1 from the center of the IS I found that while staining total LFA - 1 was relatively evenly distributed across the IS , LFA - 1 marked by the intermediate affinity and more so the high affinity , ligand bound , form of LFA - 1 were excluded from the center of the IS . The total integrin in the center of the IS likely indicates that in several of my experiments , a large proportion of LFA - 1 was unligated and in the bent conformation , allowing for its even distribution . What controls this distribution of high affinity LFA - 1 ? I believe that it is swept into the center of the IS by ongoing retrograde actin flow , and is deposited at an area where F - actin dynamics are low . Since F - actin flow is weak to non - existent at the center of the IS , high affinity LFA - 1 is not capable of reaching the center despite the presence of the slow F - actin network . However , several other possibilities exist to explain the organization I observe . The first , related , idea is that the connection of LFA - 1 to the actin cytoskeleton is simply not strong enough to be driven into the center by the weak actin flow present there . This is supported by the fact that heavily crosslinking LFA - 1 and driving it into large clusters causes LFA - 1 / ICAM - 1 microclusters to reach the very center of the 133 synapse ( 248 ) . In this case the connection of LFA - 1 to the actin cytoskeleton remains the same , but more connections due to the larger cluster size can support a stronger actin association , and maintain its connection . This study is particularly relevant to this body of work since the antibody for the high affinity conformation was used on live cells , making it a possibility that it was over - represented towards the center of the contact zone . The second possibility is while TCR is actively recruited into the center of the IS through an ubiquitin - dependent sorting process , LFA - 1 does not undergo this same active sorting ( 69 ) . Another simplistic possibility is that the cSMAC acts as a physical barrier to entry , either through molecular crowding or through a kinetic segregation mechanism , whereby proteins with a large ectodomain cannot enter the c - SMAC ( 20 ) . This idea come from single particle tracking experiments that showed that diffusing ICAM - 1 would often deflect off the cSMAC , rather than diffuse through . Interestingly , although ICAM - 1 bound to LFA - 1 occupies a large extracellular space similar to CD45 , it has been shown that CD45 can enter the cSMAC ( 290 ) . This suggests that a kinetic segregation model cannot explain the inability of high affinity or ligand - bound LFA - 1 to enter the center of the synapse . An alternate physical barrier may arise from microvesicles that have been released in a polarized fashion at the center of the cSMAC ( 249 ) . These vesicles may form a barrier to LFA - 1 diffusion through molecular crowding . The only evidence I have against a physical barrier based on crowding is that unligated high affinity LFA - 1 was able to reach the center of the synapse in my experiments . While this argues against a crowding based barrier , it does not argue against a barrier based upon kinetic segregation of proteins with a large ectodomains , since the size constraint would presumably apply only to ICAM - 1 bound to LFA - 1 . In any case , the exact molecular determinants of high 134 affinity LFA - 1 exclusion from the center of the synapse remains to be determined . The DC cytoskeleton and molecular patterns at the IS While T cell actin cytoskeletal flow is clearly a major driver of molecular patterning at the IS , it has been appreciated for some time that the nature of the APC contributes to this patterning . In general terms , a classic bulls - eye synapse is generated on supported planar lipid bilayers and in T cell – B cell synapses , while a multi - focal synapse is maintained in T cell – DC synapses . The limitation of ICAM - 1 lateral mobility and promotion of clustering by the DC actin cytoskeleton likely provides an explanation for this observation . The resistance provided by the DC actin cytoskeleton may be enough to prevent centralization of high affinity , ICAM - 1 bound LFA - 1 , and in the absence of this centralization , the molecular patterns are more likely to resemble the seemingly random clustering of ICAM - 1 on the surface of mature DCs . While planar lipid bilayers are known to present a stimulatory surface with unrestricted lateral mobility , the lateral mobility of ICAM - 1 on the plasma membrane of B cells and B cell lymphoma cell lines is not known . Based on the molecular patterns of the B cell – T cell IS , it would not be surprising if B cells express largely mobile ICAM - 1 possibly due to low levels of ERM / α - actinin expression or phosphorylation . In this regard , over - expression of an ERM dominant negative in DCs or expression of a constitutively active ERM mutant in B cells may dramatically alter synaptic patterns generally attributed to each cell type . Alternative actin flow - dependent pathways leading to LFA - 1 activation While I attribute the loss of high affinity LFA - 1 at the IS following inhibition of 135 F - actin dynamics to an inability to stabilize hybrid domain swing - out through applied forces , there are other possibilities that must be considered as plausible alternatives to my interpretation . These alternatives generally break down into two related but distinct aspects of LFA - 1 activation , those that are still force dependent but different from my proposed mechanism , and those that are force independent ( or at least where force is not a clear contributor ) . As discussed in the introduction , Myosin and Myosin contractility are required for maximal CasL phosphorylation at the IS ( 205 , 206 ) , and studies outside of the immune system show that Cas phosphorylation within the substrate domain is largely dependent on F - actin polymerization ( 139 ) . It is therefore quite likely that my actin freeze condition heavily influences CasL phosphorylation . This is particularly relevant , since stretch - dependent phosphorylation of CasL is required for Crk to be able to bind and activate the small GTPase Rap1 through the Crk associated GEF C3G ( 203 , 204 ) . In this context it is possible that my freeze condition will detrimentally effect Rap1 activation through a force dependent pathway , and negatively impact the inside out activation of LFA - 1 through lower Rap1 activation and diminished talin recruitment to the IS . It would be possible to determine if this is occurring within the timeframe of my studies by determining the effect of my drug treatments on Rap1 ATP loading and talin recruitment to the IS , in addition to determining the association of Crk proteins with CasL . In another force dependent step in integrin regulation , vinculin binds to talin following force dependent stretching and exposure of multiple vinculin binding sites , thereby strengthening talin attachment to the actin cytoskeleton ( Figure 1 . 3 ) . As discussed in Chapters 1 and 3 , relaxation of talin can result in vinculin unbinding , though 136 vinculin attachment will inhibit this relaxation to some extent . In these terms , if my freeze condition results in talin relaxation and vinculin unbinding , I may be inhibiting adhesive strengthening and LFA - 1 affinity maturation through an indirect force - dependent vinculin binding step . It will be important to determine if inhibition of F - acitn dynamics results in diminished vinculin association with talin . In terms of force independent alternative explanations , the most plausible explanation focuses on the observed loss of calcium signaling following inhibition of F - actin dynamics ( 2 ) . As several Rap1 GEFs are , in part , dependent on intracellular calcium concentration , and ionomycin can initiate LFA - 1 dependent T cell adhesion , a drop in intracellular calcium may diminish Rap1 activation following inhibition of actin dynamics ( 152 , 291 ) . This relates to a more general concern that any change in LFA - 1 activation is difficult to separate out from decreases in TCR - mediated signals following inhibition of actin dynamics . This could potentially be addressed through the addition of PMA / ionomycin to actin inhibited cells to determine if reconstitution of a major arm of the TCR signaling pathway known to mediate LFA - 1 activation also restores LFA - 1 conformational change . Even so , it will probably never be possible to formally rule out at least some contribution from altered TCR signaling . In this context , its worth noting that the mobilization of calcium and the loss of LFA - 1 mechanosensing may represent separate , but equally mechanosensitive , events at the IS . Several members of the Transient Receptor Potential ( TRP ) ion channel family are expressed in T cells including TRPC1 , TRPC2 , TRPV2 , TRPV4 , TRPV5 , TRPV6 , and TRPM 1 - 7 ( 292 , 293 ) , and are both positively and negatively involved in maintaining calcium signaling during T cell activation ( 293 - 295 ) . Importantly , several TRP channels , 137 including some of those that are expressed in lymphocytes , are either mechanically gated or are otherwise mechanosensitive ( 296 - 300 ) . It is possible that the drop in calcium signaling seen in earlier studies following inhibition of actin dynamics represented inhibition of one of these force - dependent calcium channels and was relatively independent of ORAI / STIM interactions . Cross - regulation of leukocyte integrins Several different classes of integrins are expressed in various combinations on cells of the immune system . In T cells , the expression patterns of individual integrins vary with activation and differentiation state and determine migration and localization of responding cells during an immune response ( 301 ) . Since many integrins share components involved in inside - out and outside - in signaling , there exist many opportunities for cross - regulation of integrin function . For over a decade , it has been known that soluble and surface bound VCAM - 1 can greatly increase cell migration on surfaces coated with ICAM - 1 ( 302 ) . This correlates with increases in both valency and affinity of β 2 integrins following VCAM - 1 binding or VLA - 4 crosslinking ( 303 , 304 ) . In addition to their endogenous ligands , ligation of α 4 β 1 and α 4 β 7 integrins by the HIV envelope protein can induce substantial affinity maturation of β 2 integrins on the surface of T cell blasts , suggesting that outside - in integrin signaling can regulate the affinity maturation of other integrins within the same cell ( 305 ) . These data suggest that the β 2 integrins LFA - 1 and Mac1 can be activated following the ligation of β 1 integrins . The reverse is not true , as trans - ligation of LFA - 1 , or artificial activation of LFA - 1 actually inhibits binding of the integrins α 4 β 1 and α 5 β 1 to VCAM - 1 and fibronectin ( 306 ) . 138 In contrast to previous reports , I found that VLA - 4 co - engagement during IS formation modestly inhibited LFA - 1 affinity maturation , in particular the transition from the intermediate to the high affinity conformation . While I looked at integrin activation in the context of the IS , where the retrograde actin flow contributes considerably to integrin activation other studies looked at integrin activation in solution or on surfaces coated with VCAM - 1 in the absence of TCR stimulation . It would therefore seem that the context of integrin engagement is extremely important in determining the outcome of their co - engagement . In my system , the slowing of F - actin flow by VLA - 4 engagement diminishes LFA - 1 activation , negating or overcoming any LFA - 1 activating signals that may occur following VCAM - 1 engagement . The precise outcome of integrin co - ligation therefore depends on the context within which it occurs . While conventional outside - in signaling from one integrin may drive the inside - out activation of another , changes in rates of F - actin flow are also critical to the final outcome . The virological synapse and viral control of integrin activation An interesting aspect of HIV infection is the formation of a close cell – cell contact between infected and non - infected cells that promotes viral transfer . This contact has been termed the virological synapse ( VS ) and is highly dependent on the induction of F - actin polymerization and actin - driven protein aggregation at the site of synapse formation ( 307 ) . The VS is marked by recruitment of LFA - 1 to the synapse and is highly dependent on the regulation of LFA - 1 adhesion ( 308 ) . VS formation requires the expression of the viral protein gp120 , which after binding CD4 results in the actin - dependent formation of gp120 microclusters which coalesce into the center of the IS , surrounded by a ring of ICAM - 1 / LFA - 1 , reminiscent of the patterns observed at the 139 IS . gp120 / CD4 interactions lead to initiation of early TCR triggering including phosphorylation of Lck , ZAP70 , LAT , SLP76 , and PLC γ 1 , but stops short of initiating a calcium response ( 309 , 310 ) . These signaling pathways , along with an alternative pathway involving ligation of the gut - homing integrin α 4 β 7 by gp120 can induce rapid induction of the high affinity conformation of LFA - 1 ( 305 , 311 ) . Interestingly , though monomeric gp120 can bind to the α 4 β 7 integrin , it induces poor LFA - 1 activation as measured by conformation specific antibodies or sensitivity to the LFA - 1 high affinity targeting leukotoxin ( LtxA ) , but can do so when surface bound ( 305 , 311 ) . This suggests that cell spreading is required for either the outside - in signaling mediated downstream of α 4 β 7 ligation , or the inside - out activation of LFA - 1 . In agreement with this , inhibition of the actin network with the F - actin depolymerizing agent LatA prevents gp120 microcluster centralization . This , along with the overall architecture of F - actin at the VS ( including an actin - depleted central region ) , suggests that gp120 signaling is capable of initiating a radially symmetric actin flow at the VS ( 309 ) . It would be interesting to know if such an actin flow plays a similar role in signaling and LFA - 1 affinity maturation as I show for the IS . If so , this may point to new ways to prevent cell - to - cell viral spread during HIV infection . Modulating mechanotransduction to enhance in - vitro T cell activation Great interest has been generated in the use of T cells in adoptive immunotherapy in the fight against cancer and infection ( 312 , 313 ) . While many approaches exist for adoptive T cell therapy , including the expansion of endogenous lymphocytes of desired specificity or the creation of tumor specific lymphocytes through genetic engineering and 140 expression of chimeric antigen receptors on polyclonal T cells , a common first step exists in the ex - vivo expansion of T cell subsets . This has primarily been accomplished through the use of paramagnetic beads coated with anti - CD3 stimulatory antibodies and various antibodies directed against costimulatory molecules . Much thought has gone into the antibody cocktail for coating these beads ; however , relatively little has gone into the modulation of the physical properties of the beads to maximize their stimulatory potential . In thinking about the physical properties that could influence T cell activation , three distinct aspects come to mind based upon the biology of professional APCs : size of the bead , bead stiffness , and ligand mobility . Most stimulatory magnetic beads commercially available for T cell activation are on the order of 4µm in diameter . While this is not too far off from the diameter of a human peripheral blood T cell , these cells readily spread to a diameter of 12µm , while resting blasts can spread to a diameter of over 20µm . The ability of a T cell to spread to its maximum allowable area could maximize antigen gathering and T cell activation ; it is therefore unlikely that a bead of 4µm in diameter could allow for this level of cell spreading . In terms of mechanically - based signaling , a bead that is not large enough to induce robust spreading is not likely to induce the symmetric actin flow associated with IS formation . Since I have shown this flow is required for the mechanical activation of certain proteins , the small beads currently used for in - vitro T cell expansion , while being sufficient for robust proliferation , may only activate elements of the T cell activation pathway that do not depend on internal force generation . Further research will be required to determine the bead size threshold required for robust actin polymerization and induction of mechanically - dependent signaling events at the contact site . For this , 141 conformational maturation of LFA - 1 may be a good readout of robust mechanotransduction . My data demonstrate that upon LPS - induced maturation of DCs , the expression and phosphorylation of the ERM family member moesin is greatly increased . In T cells , the ERM family member ezrin is known to mediate cell stiffness and cortical rigidity ( 61 , 314 ) . Additionally , I have shown modest upregulation of the actin bundling protein α - actinin , combined with the massive upregulation of fascin , another bundling protein , ( data not shown ) . Together , these changes are likely to induce a rather large increase in cortical rigidity upon maturation of murine BMDCs . A study using ex - vivo human T cells found that in - vitro stimulation on softer surfaces resulted in increased IL - 2 secretion , proliferation , and effector function independently of any changes in ligand density ( 72 ) . Interestingly , the substrate rigidity range used in that study was 100 - 1000kPA , several orders of magnitude above values for most tissues , and well above the range of elastic moduli other cell types are known to be able to differentiate between ( 286 ) . In this regard , it would be interesting to see if T cells respond even better to surfaces with rigidity in the order of 5 - 20kPA , the range within which other cell types can readily differentiate between . The exact correlation with DC cortical rigidity not withstanding , a better T cell activating bead should be within the optimal range of stiffness as sensed by the responding T cell . The current use of paramagnetic beads allows for easy separation ; however , the nature of the beads with a metallic core and thin polymer shell is unsuitable for modulation of their cortical stiffness . For this , a change in the material that stimulatory beads are made out of is required . One possibility is to build on the earlier study and use PDMS of varying stiffness to create beads , though even 142 PDMS may be too stiff to bring the system to the physical properties of individual cell rigidities . Though the creation of PDMS beads is difficult with current bead manufacturing methods , perfectly round PDMS beads can be created by using microfluidic synthesis techniques ( 315 ) . Furthermore , it is possible to create these beads with magnetic material embedded in the PDMS , thus maintaining the ability to separate beads through the use of a magnetic field ( 316 ) . It is possible to modulate the stiffness of these beads by altering the amount of crosslinking reagent in the PDMS mixture , and by altering the fluidic device parameters beads of different size could easily be created . If PDMS cannot provide the dynamic range of cortical rigidities associated with APCs a different , softer , polymer like acrylamide may need to be used . In this case the polymer may be too soft to hold a spherical shape and a different type of surface would have to be used . Ligand mobility of endogenous proteins is a much harder aspect of APC biology to replicate in an artificial setting . This is particularly true as the mobility of T cell ligands on the APC surface can be independently regulated . While , it is possible to create a mobile ligand surrounding a glass bead support through the use of supported lipid bilayers ( data not shown ) , obtaining individual ligand control on such surfaces presents a difficult challenge to overcome , as unique surface chemistry would have to be used to attach each ligand to the bead . One possibility is that it may be possible to modulate the mobility of ligands independently through the use of lipids of various transition temperatures ( 317 ) . However , any approach to modulating ligand mobility through the use of planar supported bilayers is not scalable as these bilayers require extraordinary measures to clean the glass substrate and their functionality rapidly 143 degrades following deposition of the lipid vesicles . Given these limitations , it is likely that ligand mobility may not be an aspect of APC biology that can be replicated in an artificial setting . As mentioned previously , integrins are uniquely suited to supplying information regarding the extracellular environment and are some of the most well characterized mechanically responsive cell surface receptors . If there is a nominal set of physical APC properties that promote T cell proliferation , effector function , and memory formation , it is likely that integrin outside - in mediated signaling could play a large part in this . In fact , ICAM - 1 mediated signaling plays an important costimulatory role , especially for CD8 + T cell activation and the formation of immunological memory ( 12 , 32 , 195 , 267 , 318 ) . Since effector function and maintenance of a memory phenotype are both critical for adoptive T cell immunotherapy , the addition of LFA - 1 stimulation may generate a much better pool of T cells for transfer ( 319 , 320 ) . Studies to determine the contribution of LFA - 1 / ligand interactions on cells stimulated by artificial APC beads should therefore be conducted . Ideally , an activating antibody against LFA - 1 should be used for this purpose , as ICAM - 1 storage and shelf life are limited . While several activating antibodies exist , it may be best to allow for the proper inside - out regulation of LFA - 1 to occur . In this regard , the ligand mimetic antibody AL - 57 , which binds the active α I domain following hybrid domain swing - out and can discriminate between the low , intermediate , and high affinity states may be a particularly good option ( 321 , 322 ) . An advantage here is that if AL - 57 can mimic ICAM - 1 in terms of outside - in signal induction then LFA - 1 can still undergo its normal cycle of regulation following TCR stimulation . In contrast , activating antibodies would keep LFA - 1 in the intermediate or 144 high affinity conformation irrespective of inside - out regulation , something that could potentially affect cell activation in an undesirable fashion . New tools to study mechanotransduction at the IS Traditional tools for the study of mechanosensing that have already been applied to the study of the IS include the modulation of substrate stiffness , physical manipulation of a responding cell through use of a micropipette , and traction force measurements ( 72 , 128 , 242 ) . While these tools have proven that T cells can sense , interact with , and respond according to physical properties of their environment , they have not yet provided a concrete understanding of how these forces are generated at the IS , which receptors and downstream signaling molecules act as true mechanosensors , and what are their particular mechanisms of action . In this work , I primarily relied upon antibodies that detect specific conformations of the integrin LFA - 1 ( 164 ) . These antibodies can detect mechanically induced changes in protein conformations and can be used in combination with different molecular or pharmacological perturbations of IS function to dissect the role of F - actin generated force in affinity maturation . One big problem with the use of conformationally specific antibodies is that use in live cells should be limited as they are likely to either induce or stabilize their specific conformation . This considerably limits their use , especially in live cell microscopy , and other reagents must be used to truly understand mechano - transduction in live cells . In addition to integrin conformation specific antibodies , antibodies that detect the stretched form of Cas or the stretch - dependent phosphorylation of Cas also exist , and can be used to study force sensing at the IS ( 139 , 206 ) . Importantly , both of these proteins 145 undergo large scale , concerted , changes as part of their regulated function . Given the paucity of robust conformational changes that are detectible in the ectodomains of the TCR , it is perhaps not surprising that similar reagents do not exist for the study of TCR mechanosensing . One conformation specific antibody has been reported for the TCR , though this epitope is exposed upon pMHC binding even in force free conditions , suggesting its use as a mechano reporter will be limited ( 122 ) . If actin generated forces on TCRs engaged to pMHC induce the same bending in the CD3 ε chain as activating antibodies as previously suggested ( 126 ) , it may be possible to detect this conformational change through measuring changes in Fab binding efficiency in the presence or absence of F - actin and F - actin generated force . It may be that the use of antibodies will not be possible to study TCR force sensing and mechanoactivation . In this case other tools must be brought to bear to fully understand the mechanical aspects of TCR triggering . Recent advances in the study of mechanotransduction have included the use of stretch dependent FRET sensors for live cell microscopy . These can be used to detect force on intracellular molecules such as vinculin ( 323 ) . Such a FRET sensor can be inserted in various regions of the CD3 chains in the TCR or in various sections of the α and β chain of VLA - 4 or LFA - 1 to define the molecular connections that regulate force transduction on individual proteins at the IS . Similar biosensors based on FRET or on fluorophore unquenching have been used to create integrin ligands that register force applied by spreading cells ( 324 , 325 ) . Another ligand based approach to study molecular forces involves a tension gauge tether consisting of a piece of double stranded DNA attached to integrin ligand on one strand and to the substratum on the other ( 207 ) . At a certain level of applied force , the DNA strands separate and the integrin ligand becomes 146 unbound from the substratum . The force required for this separation can be modified over a range of 12 to 56pN . Using this technology , Wang et al . showed that integrin ligands must withstand approximately 40pN of force to allow for cell spreading . These types of ligand based force sensors could be extremely useful in measuring the minimal amount of force that must be applied on a receptor - ligand pair to initiate function , and to accurately map the location of forces at the IS . Future studies of mechanotransduction at the IS will undoubtedly take advantage of such techniques to map molecular forces and increase my understanding of how F - actin generated forces are involved in molecular activation at the IS . The true challenge will be in determining whether any force dependent conformational changes occur within the TCR complex , and whether these forces induce robust T cell activation . Concluding remarks Although my understanding of T cell activation has made rapid progress in the last ten years with the advent of new tools to dissect the signaling dynamics at the IS , several key questions remain unanswered . In particular , the role of molecular forces generated at the IS in initiating and sustaining T cell / APC interactions and T cell activation represents a new and exciting field of study . The work presented here demonstrates that the actin - cytoskeleton on both sides of the immunological synapse plays an essential role in the force - based activation of integrins at the IS , and is essential for T cell / APC interactions and T cell activation . The incorporation of force - based mechanisms into the existing models of molecular activation at the IS increases their ability to account for current data and draw us closer to a unified theory of molecular activation at the IS . Despite these advances , multiple questions remain : What 147 molecules at the IS are sensitive to force , and at what stage in their activation ? What are the force transmission pathways and how is force generated on different receptors ? Are T cells primed for the initiation of TCR triggering through the chemokine - based induction of F - actin generated forces at the leading edge of migrating cells ? Do APCs manipulate the mobility of more than just integrin ligands to modulate mechanically sensitive receptor activation ? If so , which ligands are involved and how are they regulated ? Are membrane topology and cortical stiffness also involved ? Finally , can this knowledge be translated into clinically relevant outcomes ? Answering these questions will bring us to a much better understanding of T cell activation , particularly in the context of understanding what is necessary for the triggering and activation of individual receptor pairs at the IS . 148 Chapter 5 : MATERIALS AND METHODS Mice All mice were obtained originally from Jackson Laboratories and housed in the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia animal facility , according to guidelines put forth by the institutional IACUC committee . C57Bl / 6 mice ( WT ) and ICAM - / - mice ( B6 . 129S4 - ICAM1 tm1Jcgr / J ) were used as a source of bone marrow from which to generate DCs ( 326 ) . T cells were prepared from heterozygous OTII TCR Tg mice , which express a TCR specific for ovalbumin 323 - 339 presented on I - A b ( 327 ) . General Reagents and Antibodies Unless otherwise noted , chemicals were from Sigma Aldrich . Y - 27632 and ( - ) - blebbistatin were from EMD Chemicals . Jasplakinolide , Neutravidin , Alexa Fluor 594 phalloidin , Alexa Fluor 647 Streptavidin , Alexa Fluor 488 and Alexa Fluor 594 labeling kits were from Life Technologies . Streptavidin was from Jackson ImmunoResearch . Cytochalasin D and Latrunculin B were from EMD Millipore . TS1 / 22 ( anti - CD18 ) antibody was from Thermo Scientific . CF405M phalloidin was from Biotium . DyLight 650 labeling kits were from Thermo Scientific . Anti - CD43 antibody was from BD Biosciences . Leaf - purified anti - CD3 ( OKT3 ) was from BioLegend and biotinylated OKT3 was from eBioscience . Goat polyclonal antibody against talin was from Santa Cruz . Biotinylated anti - CD3 antibody SK7 was from BioLegend . Rabbit polyclonal antibody against Myosin IIA heavy chain was from Covance . Human ICAM - 1 - Fc and VCAM - 1 - Fc chimeras were from R & D Systems . 293T cells expressing his - tagged mouse ICAM - 1 were generously provided by Dr . Eric Long , National Institutes of 149 Health , and ICAM - 1 - His was purified from these cells as previously described ( 328 ) . Flow Cytometry antibodies ( CD4 APC , CD11c APC , CD40 FITC , CD54 Biotin , CD54 Alexa 488 , CD80 FITC , CD86 FITC , and MHCII Alexa 488 ) were from Biolegend . An anti - moesin antibody that detects all ERM proteins by western blotting was from BD . Anti - moesin for immunofluorescence microscopy , a mAb reactive with an activation - dependent phospho - epitope expressed on all ERM isoforms ( pT567 in ezrin , pT558 in moesin ) , and antibody to α - actinin were all from Cell Signaling . Secondary antibodies for immunofluorescence were from Invitrogen . Anti - GAPDH was from Millipore . Fab Production For Fab production , antibodies to MHCII ( M5 / 114 ) and ICAM - 1 ( YN1 / 1 . 7 . 4 ) were purchased from Bio - X - Cell . The Fab preparation kit and immobilized papain and pepsin were from Pierce . 1mg of each antibody was digested for 3 hours with immobilized papain according to the manufacturer’s protocol . The resulting mixtures of Fab and Fc fragments were then transferred to pepsin digestion buffer by 3 washes with Ultracel - 10kDa centrifugal filters ( Millipore ) , after which Fc fragments were digested by incubation with immobilized pepsin . Samples were then washed 3 times in 10kDa centrifugal filters and resuspended in PBS . Purity of the resulting Fab preparation was verified by reducing SDS page and Coomassie R250 staining . Fab fragments were labeled with Alexa Fluor 488 ( Invitrogen ) according to the manufacturer’s protocol . Labeled Fab was tested by flow cytometry to verify intact antigen binding activity . LFA - 1 Conformation - Specific Antibodies Mouse monoclonal antibodies TS2 / 4 ( anti - CD11a ) and Kim127 ( anti - CD18 ) were 150 harvested from hybridomas ( ATCC ) . Mouse monoclonal antibody m24 ( anti - CD18 ) was from Abcam . TS2 / 4 recognizes an epitope on the β propeller domain of CD11a ( α L ) only in the assembled αβ heterodimer ( 329 ) , and binds in an activation independent manner ( 246 ) . Kim127 binds to an epitope within the EGF2 domain of CD18 ( β 2 ) that is hidden in bent , inactive , integrins , and exposed upon integrin extension and activation . Kim127 therefore reports on the extended and extended open conformations ( 246 , 330 ) . Since Kim127 is an activating antibody , care was taken to use it only post - fixation . m24 binds the activated I domain of CD18 ( β 2 ) following hybrid domain swing - out , and therefore reports on the high affinity extended - open conformation of LFA - 1 ( 164 , 178 , 246 , 331 ) . The epitope bound by m24 is sensitive to aldehyde fixation , necessitating pre - fixation labeling . However , m24 does not induce LFA - 1 conformational change . TS2 / 4 was directly conjugated to DyLight 650 , Kim127 was conjugated to Alexa Fluor 594 , and m24 was conjugated to Alexa Fluor 488 , all according to manufacturer’s protocols . Functionality of antibodies was verified by flow cytometry on unstimulated T cells or cells stimulated with Mn + + . Cell Culture Unless otherwise specified , all tissue culture reagents were from Invitrogen Life Technologies . Unless otherwise indicated , “T cells” refers to ex vivo human peripheral blood CD4 + T cells . Human peripheral blood CD4 + T cells or CD8 + T cells were obtained from the University of Pennsylvania’s Human Immunology Core under an Institution Review Board ( IRB ) - approved protocol . In experiments using ex vivo cells , T cells were used within 3 hours of purification . Alternatively , T lymphoblasts were 151 generated by activation with human T - Activator CD3 / CD28 magnetic beads ( Dynabeads , Life Technologies ) in RPMI ( Invitrogen ) supplemented with 10 % FBS ( Atlanta Biologicals ) , 1 % GlutaMAX ( Invitrogen ) , 1 % Pen / Strep and 50 U / ml of human rIL - 2 ( obtained through the AIDS Research and Reference Reagent Program , Division of AIDS , National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases , National Institutes of Health ; human rIL - 2 from M . Gately , Hoffmann - LaRoche , Nutley , NJ ) . T lymphoblasts were cultured in a humidified 37 o C incubator with 5 % CO 2 . Beads were magnetically removed on day 6 after initial stimulation , and cells were then cultured for an additional day in the absence of IL - 2 . The human B cell line Raji was cultured in RPMI with 10 % FBS , 1 % GlutaMAX , 1 % Pen / Strep . 293T cells ( ATCC ) were grown in DMEM ( Invitrogen ) supplemented with 10mM Hepes , 10 % FBS , 1 % GlutaMAX , 1 % Pen / Strep , and 1 % NEAA ( Invitrogen ) . GM - CSF was produced from the B78H1 / GMCSF . 1 cell line ( 332 ) . To generate BMDCs , leg bones of mice were cleaned of muscle tissues and sterilized in 70 % EtOH . Bone marrow was flushed using IMDM containing 1 % FBS . Cells were centrifuged at 1500 rpm at RT for 5 minutes and resuspended in ACK lysis buffer for 1 minute . After washing in IMDM / 1 % FBS , cells were resuspended in DC culture media ( IMDM , 10 % FBS , penicillin / streptomycin , GlutaMax , 55 µM β - ME , and 1 % GM - CSF supernatant ) at a concentration of 1 × 10 6 cells / ml . 2 mls of cell suspension were added to wells of 6 - well plates and supplemented with 4 mls of DC culture media on day 2 . Starting on day 5 , 3 milliliters of media were replaced daily . Differentiation into CD11c + DCs ( typically 70 – 80 % ) was verified on day 6 by flow cytometry . To induce maturation , DCs on days 7 or 8 were stimulated with 100 ng / ml LPS ( Escherichia coli 055 : B5 ; Sigma ) for 24 – 48 hours . Maturation was verified by flow cytometry . 152 OTII + CD4 + T cells were isolated from spleen and lymph nodes by magnetic bead - based depletion ( Qiagen ) using anti - CD8 ( 2 . 43 ) and anti - MHCII ( M5 / 114 . 15 . 2 ) . T cell activation assays ( detailed below ) were performed in T cell media ( DMEM supplemented with 10 % FBS , GlutaMAX , Hepes , NEAA , and β - mercaptoethanol at 37°C and 10 % CO 2 ) . Plasmids and Transduction Lentiviral packaging constructs psPAX2 and PDM2 . G as well as Gateway donor vector pDONR221 and destination vector PLX301 were all kind gifts of Dr . Nir Hacohen , Broad Institute . Mouse ICAM - 1 cDNA was purchased from Origene . Site directed mutagenesis was performed using Quickchange ( Agilent ) . To create the chimeric ICAM - 1 molecule , ICAM - 1 aa1 - 512 ( comprising the extracellular and transmembrane domains ) were directly fused to mouse moesin aa320 - 577 ( comprising the flexible linker and actin binding domains ) . WT ICAM - 1 , Δ Tail ICAM - 1 , T558D ICAM - 1 , and chimeric ICAM - 1 sequences were then transferred to the Gateway donor vector , and finally to the destination vector according to the manufacturer’s protocol . The GFP expressing lentiviral control vector ( EX - EGFP - Lv105 ) was a gift of Dr . Claudio G . Giraudo , Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia . cDNA encoding the 17 amino acid F - actin binding peptide Lifeact tagged on the C - terminus with EGFP ( 333 ) was subcloned into the pDONR221 donor vector , and subsequently into pLX301 destination vector ( Addgene ) using Gateway Technology . To generate recombinant lentivirus , 18x10 6 293T cells were seeded in 15cm plates the day prior to transfection , and then cotransfected using the calcium phosphate method with 48 µ g of each DNA of interest 153 ( all in pLX301 ) , 36 . 3 µ g of psPAX2 and 12 . 1 µ g of pMD2 . G . Media was exchanged after 18 hours with fresh media . Supernatant was harvested 24 hours later and was immediately used to transduce T cells . T cells were transduced by spin infection with lentivirus on day 3 post activation . Lentivirus and 8 µg / ml Polybrene ( Sigma - Aldrich ) were added along with 2x10 6 T cells to the wells of a 6 - well culture plate and centrifuged at 2000 rpm and 37°C for 2 hours . Lentivirus - containing media was then replaced with T cell , or DC , culture media , and the cultures were maintained as described above . On day 5 of DC culture , puromycin ( Sigma - Aldrich ) was added to a final concentration of 2 µ g / ml to select for virally transduced cells . Dead cells were removed by spinning the cell suspension at 2000rpm for 15 minutes on a cushion of Ficoll - Paque Plus ( GE Healthcare ) . Live cells that accumulated at the interface were then collected and washed 3x in DC culture media prior to use . siRNA - mediated protein suppression Non - targeting siRNA # 2 , siRNA SMARTpool against α ACTN1 , and siMoesin ( GGAGCGUGCUCUCCUGGAAUU ) were all purchased from Dharmacon . Electroporation of immature BMDCs was carried out on day 6 of culture , followed by LPS maturation on day 7 . Briefly , 500pmol total of siRNA was added to 4x10 6 BMDCs at 1x10 7 cell / ml of Opti - MEM media in a 4mm gap cuvette ( Harvard Apparatus ) . Cells and siRNA were then electroporated using a BTX - ECM830 electroporation device with a voltage of 1000V , pulse length 300µsec , 2 pulses , with a pulse interval of 500msec . Cells were then resuspended in DC media lacking GM - CSF for 3hrs , after which GM - CSF was added back . Cells were used at day 8 ( 48h after electroporation ) , which was 154 found to be optimal for both moesin and α - actinin . Preparation of Supported Planar Lipid Bilayers Lipids ( DOPC , DSPE - PEG2000 - biotin and DOGS - NTA nickel salt , Avanti Lipids ) were reconstituted in chloroform at 89 . 9 : 0 . 1 : 10 mol % , respectively . The mixture was then dried under a gentle stream of air and desiccated in a vacuum chamber for 1 hour . The dried lipid cake was hydrated in PBS , sonicated using a tabletop sonicator ( Branson ) for 15 min to generate multilamellar vesicles , and then passed through a 50 nm pore membrane using a mini - extruder ( Avanti Lipids ) . The resulting small unilamellar vesicles were stored at 4 o C and used within 2 - 3 weeks . 25 × 75 mm glass slides ( # 1 . 5 , Thermo Scientific ) were cleaned for 15 min . using Piranha solution ( 3 : 1 ratio of sulfuric acid and 30 % hydrogen peroxide ) ( 334 ) and then washed thoroughly with distilled water . Slides were then air - dried and adhered to Sticky - Slide VI 0 . 4 Luer closed chambers ( Ibidi ) . Small unilamellar vesicles in PBS were added to the chambers to cover the exposed glass surface for 15 min . After thorough rinsing with PBS , the chambers were incubated with ICAM - 1 6X His ( 0 . 3µg / ml unless stated otherwise ) , followed by 1ug / ml streptavidin , or Alexa Fluor 647 streptavidin for 15 minutes , then thoroughly rinsed again with PBS and incubated with 1µg / ml OKT3 - biotin for 15 minutes . Where indicated , bilayers were incubated with 0 . 3ug / ml Alexa Fluor 488 or 594 - labeled ICAM - 1 in place of unlabeled ICAM - 1 . Chambers were rinsed and left in HBS supplemented with Ca 2 + / Mg 2 + , 1 % BSA , and 2mg / ml D - glucose . Lipid bilayers were used for imaging studies on the same day . 155 Preparation of Stimulatory Glass Surfaces For fixed cell studies , 12 mm coverslips ( # 1 . 0 , Bellco ) were coated with 10 µ g / ml OKT3 for 2 hours at 37°C or overnight at 4°C , washed with PBS and incubated with 1 µ g / ml ICAM - 1 His or ICAM - 1 Fc . Where indicated , coverslips were subsequently incubated with VCAM - 1 at 1 µ g / ml for 2 hours at 37°C . Glass surfaces for live cell imaging studies were prepared similarly , except that eight - well Lab - Tek II chambered cover glasses ( Nunc ) were used . Flow cytometry BMDCs were harvested and resuspended at 1x10 6 cells / ml in ice - cold FACS buffer ( PBS , 5 % FBS , 0 . 02 % NaN 3 , 1mM EDTA ) , 1x10 5 cells per sample . After incubating for 20 minutes with Fc blocking antibody 24G2 , cells were washed and resuspended in FACS buffer containing appropriate antibodies and incubated for 30 minutes on ice . Cells were then washed , resuspended in FACS buffer and analyzed on an Accuri C6 flow cytometer ( BD Biosciences ) . Gating was performed based on forward and side scatter ( for live cells ) and expression of CD11c for DCs . Fluorescence Microscopy T cells were harvested and resuspended at 5 × 10 5 / ml in L - 15 medium for coverslip and conjugate experiments and at 1x10 6 / ml in HBS supplemented with Ca 2 + / Mg 2 + , 1 % BSA , and 2mg / ml D - glucose for lipid bilayer experiments . Coverslips or chambers were equilibrated at 37°C , and ~ 5 . 0 × 10 4 cells ( for coverslips ) or ~ 1 . 5 × 10 5 cells ( for lipid bilayers ) were allowed to interact with the surfaces for the indicated times . For T - B conjugates , Raji B cells were pulsed with 2 µ g / ml staphylococcal enterotoxin E 156 ( SEE , Toxin Technologies ) for 1 hour at 37 ° C and allowed to interact with T cells for 30 minutes . Following stimulation , cells were fixed in 3 % paraformaldehyde and labeled as previously described ( 335 ) , except that 50 mM NH 4 Cl was used as a quenching reagent . Cell surface LFA - 1 and TCR were labeled prior to detergent permeabilization , after which cells were permeabilized with saponin and labeled for intracellular proteins . Because the epitope recognized by m24 is destroyed by fixation , m24 antibody was added to live cells for 5 minutes immediately prior to fixation . Kim127 and TS2 / 4 labeling was performed post - fixation with Kim127 added first to minimize possible steric hindrance . To assess the role of TCR and LFA - 1 ligand immobilization on the activation of LFA - 1 , ex vivo CD4 + T cells were either left untreated or incubated with biotinylated OKT3 ( 10 µ g / ml ) on ice for 10 minutes . Cells were then washed , warmed to 37°C in L - 15 imaging medium and stimulated with either soluble or surface - immobilized streptavidin on coverslips coated with α CD43 ( 0 . 5 µg / ml ) and BSA ( 1 mg / ml ) to allow binding without inducing non - specific spreading . Some cells were also additionally stimulated with either soluble ICAM - 1 , coverslip - immobilized TS1 / 22 or coverslip - immobilized ICAM - 1 ( all at 1 µ g / ml ) . After 20 minutes of spreading , cells were fluorescently labeled with the indicated reagents as described above . All imaging was performed using a Zeiss Axiovert 200 equipped with a PerkinElmer Ultraview ERS6 spinning disk confocal system and a 63 × planapo 1 . 4 NA objective . Images were collected using an Orca ER camera ( Hamamatsu ) and analyzed using Volocity 6 . 3 ( Perkin Elmer ) . For fixed cell imaging of T cells spreading on stimulatory planar surfaces , a single plane was imaged at the contact interface , or 0 . 5 - µm 157 thick stacks consisting of three planes ( 0 . 25 µ m apart ) were collected at the contact interface and displayed as maximum intensity projections . For T - B cell conjugates , whole conjugates were imaged as 10 - µ m thick stacks , with planes spaced 0 . 25 µ m apart , and synapses were rendered in Volocity for further analysis . 25 - 50 spread T cells or conjugates were selected per condition and used for further analysis . For live cell imaging , wells were covered with 400 µ l of L - 15 medium and equilibrated to 37°C on the microscope stage . Cells were harvested , resuspended in L - 15 medium at 2 × 10 6 / ml , and 5 - 10 µ l of cell suspension were added to the well . Time - lapse images ( 0 . 5 - µm thick Z stacks of three images ) were collected every 2 s for 2 minutes . 10 - 20 spread T cells per condition were selected for image analysis . For experiments involving BMDCs , 2x10 4 DCs were allowed to spread on 12mm round coverslips for 1 hour at 37°C in DC medium . Cells were fixed in 3 % paraformaldehyde in PBS , permeabilized with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 , and labeled as previously described ( 335 ) . To label ICAM - 1 or MHCII on the cell surface , cells were incubated with antibody prior to permeabilization . Cells were imaged on a Zeiss Axiovert 200M inverted microscope equipped with a spinning disk confocal system ( UltraView ERS 6 ; PerkinElmer ) and a 63X Plan - Apochromat 1 . 4 NA objective . Images were collected using an ORCA - ER camera ( Hamamatsu Photonics ) and analyzed using Volocity software ( v6 . 1 . 1 , PerkinElmer ) . To analyze ICAM - 1 clustering , cells were surface labeled for ICAM - 1 and intracellularly labeled for F - actin . The outline of each cell was defined based on F - actin intensity , and the pixel intensity of ICAM - 1 labeling across each cell was determined . The coefficient of variation was then calculated by dividing the standard deviation by the 158 mean for each cell . To analyze T cell - DC interactions , DCs were labeled with CMAC ( Invitrogen ) incubated for 2 hours at 37 ° C with 1 µ g / ml OVA 323 - 339 peptide ( Anaspec ) , and allowed to spread on coverslips for 10 minutes , at which time CFSE - labeled OTII T cells were added at a 4 : 1 ratio with DCs and allowed to interact for an additional 50 minutes . Conjugates were fixed , labeled for surface ICAM - 1 and intracellular moesin , and imaged as above . To analyze homotypic T cell interactions , conjugates of one DC with two T cells were randomly selected and scored for the presence or absence of direct T cell - T cell contact . Image Analysis Kymographic analysis was performed essentially as described previously ( 2 ) . Movies of T cells expressing Lifeact - EGFP were collected and analyzed in Volocity 6 . 3 . A ray was struck from the center of the IS to the periphery , and vertical kymographs were generated . The flow rate of fiduciary F - actin features was calculated based on the slope of deflection from the vertical direction . Instantaneous velocities were plotted as a function of the IS radius and grouped into ten equally spaced bins . In cases where a single actin feature traversed multiple bins , the instantaneous velocity of that feature was counted separately in each bin . For publication purposes , all kymographs were digitally enhanced using the Smart Sharpen filter in Adobe Photoshop , with 150 % amplification of local maxima within a 2 - pixel radius . Measurements of molecular distribution across the IS were done in two ways . The first method was based on average intensity projections . For this , images of T cells 159 were cropped to the same size , aligned based on the centroid for each cell and imported as a stack into ImageJ 1 . 46r ( NIH ) . The stack of all cells was projected as an average intensity image to generate a pattern of fluorescence distribution for the cell population and the radial profile plug - in was used to obtain average intensity values along the radius of the projected IS . While this method is analytically powerful , it relies on the availability of a large number of images , and works best when cell radii are relatively homogeneous in the population . Therefore an alternate approach was used , based on normalizing cell radii to 1 . This procedure was necessary for analysis of conjugates , because the rendered images of the IS plane lack absolute length scales . For this method , radial intensity values of individual synapses were imported into Microsoft Excel and all radii were normalized to 1 . Fluorescence intensity values based on percent of maximum intensity in the population were binned according to their relative position along the normalized IS radius , and values within each bin were used to determine mean and standard error . The two methods should be considered interchangeable . To assess IS area and total fluorescence intensity , custom algorithms in Volocity software were used to identify T cell IS boundaries based on thresholds for total LFA - 1 ( TS2 / 4 ) or F - actin intensity ( if TS2 / 4 staining was not available ) . IS area was calculated automatically by integrating the pixels within the identified objects . Total fluorescence intensity from the IS area was determined after background correction based on fluorescence from the unoccupied stimulatory surface , and values for control cells were then set equal to 1 . To assess enrichment at the IS in conjugates , a region of interest was defined by eye for the IS and for the entire cell , and labeling intensity at the IS was divided by total cell surface labeling intensity for each cell . Since total integrin levels on 160 the cell surface and at the IS were affected by pharmacological manipulations , the proportion of molecules undergoing conformational change was assessed by determining the total labeling intensity for conformation - specific antibodies ( Kim127 or m24 ) and dividing this value by the total labeling intensity for all TS2 / 4 labeled LFA - 1 molecules for each image . Note that this analysis cannot provide an absolute proportion of molecules in any given conformation , but it can be used to compare changes in relative proportions in response to experimental manipulations . ICAM - 1 enrichment was determined by taking the average ICAM - 1 fluorescence intensity under the responding cell ( cell boundaries were defined by TS2 / 4 localization ) and subtracting the average ICAM - 1 fluorescence intensity of the bilayer away from sites of cell binding . The values were then normalized , with the mean response of the untreated control set equal to 1 . Fluorescence Recovery After Photobleaching ( FRAP ) BMDCs were allowed to spread on 8 chambered coverglasses ( Lab - Tek ) for 2 hours at 37°C in DC media . Slides were then transitioned to 4°C and Fab against MHCII or ICAM - 1 was added at 10ug / ml for 20 minutes . Labeling media was then removed and cells were washed and then resuspended in pre - warmed L15 media ( Invitrogen ) supplemented with 2mg / ml glucose . Coverglasses were equilibrated at 37°C on the microscope stage within an environmental chamber and imaged by spinning disk confocal microscopy using the Volocity FRAP plug - in . Prior to photobleaching , cells were imaged for 3 seconds at the glass / DC interface at 2 fps . 4 - 5 randomly selected circular regions / cell ( 1 . 7µm diameter ) were then bleached , and images captured at 2fps for 20 seconds for MHCII , or 2fps for 20 seconds followed by 1fps for 25 seconds for ICAM - 1 . Samples were corrected for photobleaching , and FRAP analysis was 161 conducted using a single constrained exponential algorithm . For actin depletion experiments , cells were allowed to spread and stained with Fab as before . 15 minutes prior to performing photobleaching , Latrunculin B or Cytochalasin D was added to cells at a final concentration of 1µM or 10µM , respectively . Inhibitors were added as 5x concentrated solution in prewarmed media . Control cells received an equivalent amount of pre - warmed media . T cell activation assays 2x10 4 DCs were added to each well of a flat bottom 96 well tissue culture plate and pulsed for 2 hours with the indicated amount of OVA 323 - 339 peptide . Plates were then spun at 1500RPM for 5 minutes and the media was replaced with fresh T cell media . For proliferation assays , OTII T cells purified by negative selection were labeled with 1µM CFSE for 5 minutes at RT . 4x10 4 CFSE labeled T cells were then added to each well containing peptide - pulsed DCs . Samples were collected after 72 - 96 hours , stained for CD4 , and analyzed by flow cytometry . For early T cell activation markers , OTII cells were incubated with an IL - 2 capture reagent ( Miltenyi Biotec ) according to manufacturer’s protocol , and were added to peptide - pulsed BMDCs . After 18 hours , cells were washed with FACS buffer , stained with α - CD4 APC , α CD25 Alexa 488 , and α IL - 2 PE , and analyzed by flow cytometry . Alternatively , OTII cells were added to DCs and 100uL of supernatant was collected at the indicated times and analyzed by ELISA ( eBioscience ) . T cell - DC conjugation assays 5x10 4 DCs / condition in FACS tubes were pulsed for 2 hours with OVA 323 - 339 162 peptide , washed , and resuspended in 200 µ L pre - warmed T cell media . 1x10 5 CFSE labeled OTII T cells were then added and mixed with DCs . Samples were incubated at 37 ° C for 45 minutes , after which anti - CD11c APC was added to a final dilution of 1 : 500 and incubated for an additional 15 minutes at 37 ° C . At 1 hour after adding T cells , conjugates were vortexed at max speed for 5 seconds to break apart loosely adherent cells , fixed in 1 % PFA in FACS buffer , and analyzed by flow cytometry . Conjugation efficiency was calculated based on the percentage of CD11c positive DCs bound to CFSE labeled T cells . Generation of artificial APCs and analysis of LFA - 1 conformational change 293T cells were transduced with WT , Δ Tail , or Chimeric ICAM - 1 constructs and selected with 4 µ g / ml puromycin . After two rounds of single cell cloning , clones expressing similar levels of exogenous ICAM - 1 molecules ( within a 10 - fold range ) were selected and expanded . 18 hours prior to use , 3x10 5 cells were added to 12mm coverslips [ previously acid washed and coated sequentially with 0 . 1 % w / v poly - L - lysine ( Sigma ) for 15 minutes at RT and 1 µ g / ml human fibronectin in PBS ( R & D Systems ) for 2 hours at 37°C ] . Fusogenic lipid vesicles of DHPE - X - Biotin ( Biotium ) were prepared by evaporating chloroform from the lipid under vacuum for 0 . 5 - 1 hour , and dispersal in H 2 O at a total lipid concentration of 2mg / ml . The solution was vortexed for 2 minutes to create multilamellar liposomes , which were then homogenized in an ultrasonic water bath followed by passing through a 50µm extruder to create lipid vesicles of homogenous size . The vesicle solution was diluted 1 : 100 in pre - warmed 293T cell media and added to the coverslips for 15 minutes at 37°C . Coverslips were then washed in imaging media ( L15 163 + 2mg / ml glucose ) , and incubated with 1 µ g / ml streptavidin for 15 minutes at RT , washed again and incubated with 10µg / ml OKT3 - Biotin ( eBioscience ) for 15 minutes at RT . After final washing of artificial APCs , 1x10 5 freshly isolated human peripheral blood CD4 + T cells or resting CD4 + T cell blasts were then added and allowed to adhere for 20 minutes . Alexa - 488 labeled m24 antibody ( final concentration of 4µg / ml ) was added to the coverslips for 5 minutes at 37 ° C , after which coverslips were quickly washed in PBS with Ca 2 + / Mg 2 + and fixed in 3 % PFA . After quenching excess fixative , cells were sequentially surface labeled with Kim127 and TS2 / 4 . T cell - APC conjugates were imaged by confocal microscopy by collecting z - stacks that encompassed the cell - cell interface and the entire T cell . Total pixel intensity for each antibody was determined from the rendered images , and normalized to T cells responding to APCs lacking ICAM - 1 . To determine the relative efficiency of LFA - 1 conformational change , the ratio of m24 or Kim127 to TS2 / 4 intensities were determined for each cell . Western Blotting Cells were washed in cold PBS and lysed at 4°C in 1X RIPA lysis buffer ( 1 % IGEPAL , 0 . 5 % NaDeoxycholate , 0 . 1 % SDS , 50mM Tris , pH 7 . 5 ) , supplemented with 10 mM NaF , 1 mM Na 3 VO 4 , and Complete protease inhibitor cocktail ( Roche ) . 1x10 5 cell equivalents per lane were separated on 4 - 12 % NuPAGE gradient gels ( Invitrogen ) , transferred to nitrocellulose , probed as indicated , and imaged on a fluorescence scanner ( Odyssey ; LI - COR Biosciences ) within the linear range . Statistical analysis For Chapter 2 , statistical analysis was performed using Microsoft Excel . In 164 individual experiments , statistical significance was determined using a two - tailed Student’s t test for unpaired samples with equal variances . When comparing changes in a donor population , a two - tailed Student’s t test for paired samples was performed . Values 2 StDev from the mean were discounted as outliers . For Chapter 3 , statistical analysis was performed using KaleidaGraph . Pairwise comparisons were made using a two - tailed Student’s t test ( for normally - distributed data ) or a Mann - Whitney test ( for non - normal distributions ) . Where multiple comparisons were made , a Kruskall - Wallis one - way test for variance was first performed , followed by pairwise Mann - Whitney tests . 165 APPENDIX A : MOVIE LEGENDS Movie S1 . LFA - 1 activation intermediates are organized into a concentric array in T cell - B cell conjugates . Human ex vivo CD4 + T cells were conjugated to SEE - pulsed Raji B cells for 25 min , and labeled with phalloidin ( gray ) and with antibodies to total LFA - 1 ( blue ) as well as conformation - specific antibodies to extended ( red ) and open ( green ) LFA - 1 . Z stacks of whole conjugates were collected and rendered in 3D in the IS plane . Movie S2 . Molecular dynamics in T lymphoblasts spreading on stimulatory bilayers . Human T lymphoblasts were transduced with Lifeact - EGFP lentivirus and allowed to interact with planar bilayers functionalized with OKT3 linked to Alexa Fluor 647 streptavidin and Alexa Fluor 594 ICAM - 1 . Confocal 0 . 5 µm thick Z - stacks were acquired every 4 . 6 seconds for 3 minutes and are shown as extended projections . Top panels show movie sequences . Bottom panels show kymographs for each channel , generated along the blue line shown in the top right panel . The place in the time sequence is indicated by the moving blue line . Movie S3 . Molecular dynamics in T lymphoblasts with no apparent cSMAC . spreading on stimulatory bilayers . Human T lymphoblasts were transduced with Lifeact - EGFP lentivirus and allowed to interact with planar bilayers functionalized with OKT3 linked to Alexa Fluor 647 streptavidin and Alexa Fluor 594 ICAM - 1 . Confocal 0 . 5 µm thick Z - stacks were acquired every 4 . 6 seconds for 3 minutes and are shown as extended projections . Top panels show 166 movie sequences . Bottom panels show kymographs generated along the respective blue line in the top right panel . The place in the time sequence is indicated by the moving blue line . Note the clear interdigitation of LFA - 1 and F - actin , and the lack of an accumulation of anti - CD3 bound streptavidin in the cSMAC region of this cell . Movie S4 . Tracking of F - actin dynamics in T cells spreading on stimulatory coverglasses . Human T lymphoblasts were transduced with Lifeact - EGFP lentivirus and allowed to interact with coverglasses coated with anti - CD3 and ICAM - 1 . Confocal 0 . 5 µm thick Z - stacks were acquired every 2 seconds for 2 minutes and are shown as extended projections . Left panel shows a representative movie sequence . Right panels show a kymograph generated along the blue line at left . The place in the time sequence is indicated by the moving blue line . Red lines highlight trackable F - actin structures as they undergo retrograde transport to the cell center . Actin flow rates in Figures 3 , 6 and S5 were calculated from the slopes of such lines . Movie S5 . F - actin dynamics in T lymphoblasts spreading on coverglasses coated with anti - CD3 + / - ICAM - 1 . Human T lymphoblasts were lentivirally transduced with Lifeact - EGFP and allowed to interact with coverglasses coated with anti - CD3 ( left ) or anti - CD3 and ICAM - 1 ( right ) . Confocal 0 . 5 µm thick Z - stacks were acquired every 2 seconds for 2 minutes and are shown as extended projections . 167 Movie S6 . F - actin dynamics persist in human T cells treated with myosin II inhibitors , but cease completely after subsequent addition of jasplakinolide . Human T lymphoblasts were lentivirally transduced with Lifeact - EGFP . Cells were pretreated with Y - 27 or left untreated and allowed to interact with planar bilayers coated with OKT3 and ICAM - 1 . After full spreading had been reached , Jas was added to the imaging chamber . Confocal 0 . 5 µm thick Z - stacks were acquired every 2 seconds for 2 minutes and are shown as extended projections . Top panels show movie sequences . Bottom panels show kymographs generated along the respective red lines . The place in the time sequence is indicated by the moving red line . Movie S7 . F - actin flow is slowed by the addition of immobilized VCAM - 1 . Human T lymphoblasts were lentivirally transduced with Lifeact - EGFP and allowed to interact with stimulatory coverglasses coated with anti - CD3 , ICAM - 1 and VCAM - 1 . Confocal 0 . 5 µm thick Z - stacks were acquired near the coverslip every 2 seconds for 2 minutes and are shown as extended projections . 168 REFERENCES 1 . Varma R , Campi G , Yokosuka T , Saito T , Dustin ML . 2006 . T cell receptor-­‐ proximal signals are sustained in peripheral microclusters and terminated in the central supramolecular activation cluster . Immunity 25 : 117-­‐27 2 . Babich A , Li S , O ' Connor RS , Milone MC , Freedman BD , Burkhardt JK . 2012 . F-­‐ actin polymerization and retrograde flow drive sustained PLCgamma1 signaling during T cell activation . J Cell Biol 197 : 775-­‐87 3 . Yi J , Wu XS , Crites T , Hammer JA , 3rd . 2012 . Actin retrograde flow and actomyosin II arc contraction drive receptor cluster dynamics at the immunological synapse in Jurkat T cells . Mol Biol Cell 23 : 834-­‐52 4 . Ilani T , Vasiliver-­‐Shamis G , Vardhana S , Bretscher A , Dustin ML . 2009 . T cell antigen receptor signaling and immunological synapse stability require myosin IIA . Nat Immunol 10 : 531-­‐9 5 . Chen W , Zhu C . 2013 . Mechanical regulation of T-­‐cell functions . Immunol Rev 256 : 160-­‐76 6 . Alon R , Dustin ML . 2007 . Force as a facilitator of integrin conformational changes during leukocyte arrest on blood vessels and antigen-­‐presenting cells . Immunity 26 : 17-­‐27 7 . Marshall BT , Long M , Piper JW , Yago T , McEver RP , Zhu C . 2003 . Direct observation of catch bonds involving cell-­‐adhesion molecules . Nature 423 : 190-­‐3 8 . Shamri R , Grabovsky V , Gauguet JM , Feigelson S , Manevich E , Kolanus W , Robinson MK , Staunton DE , von Andrian UH , Alon R . 2005 . Lymphocyte arrest requires instantaneous induction of an extended LFA-­‐1 conformation mediated by endothelium-­‐bound chemokines . Nat Immunol 6 : 497-­‐506 9 . Mempel TR , Henrickson SE , Von Andrian UH . 2004 . T-­‐cell priming by dendritic cells in lymph nodes occurs in three distinct phases . Nature 427 : 154-­‐9 10 . Skokos D , Shakhar G , Varma R , Waite JC , Cameron TO , Lindquist RL , Schwickert T , Nussenzweig MC , Dustin ML . 2007 . Peptide-­‐MHC potency governs dynamic interactions between T cells and dendritic cells in lymph nodes . Nat Immunol 8 : 835-­‐44 11 . Henrickson SE , Mempel TR , Mazo IB , Liu B , Artyomov MN , Zheng H , Peixoto A , Flynn MP , Senman B , Junt T , Wong HC , Chakraborty AK , von Andrian UH . 2008 . T cell sensing of antigen dose governs interactive behavior with dendritic cells and sets a threshold for T cell activation . Nat Immunol 9 : 282-­‐ 91 12 . Scholer A , Hugues S , Boissonnas A , Fetler L , Amigorena S . 2008 . Intercellular adhesion molecule-­‐1-­‐dependent stable interactions between T cells and dendritic cells determine CD8 + T cell memory . Immunity 28 : 258-­‐70 13 . Parameswaran N , Suresh R , Bal V , Rath S , George A . 2005 . Lack of ICAM-­‐1 on APCs during T cell priming leads to poor generation of central memory cells . J Immunol 175 : 2201-­‐11 169 14 . Katzman SD , O ' Gorman WE , Villarino AV , Gallo E , Friedman RS , Krummel MF , Nolan GP , Abbas AK . 2010 . Duration of antigen receptor signaling determines T-­‐cell tolerance or activation . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107 : 18085-­‐90 15 . Yokosuka T , Saito T . 2009 . Dynamic regulation of T-­‐cell costimulation through TCR-­‐CD28 microclusters . Immunol Rev 229 : 27-­‐40 16 . Yokosuka T , Saito T . 2010 . The immunological synapse , TCR microclusters , and T cell activation . Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 340 : 81-­‐107 17 . Bunnell SC , Hong DI , Kardon JR , Yamazaki T , McGlade CJ , Barr VA , Samelson LE . 2002 . T cell receptor ligation induces the formation of dynamically regulated signaling assemblies . J Cell Biol 158 : 1263-­‐75 18 . Campi G , Varma R , Dustin ML . 2005 . Actin and agonist MHC-­‐peptide complex-­‐ dependent T cell receptor microclusters as scaffolds for signaling . J Exp Med 202 : 1031-­‐6 19 . Yokosuka T , Kobayashi W , Sakata-­‐Sogawa K , Takamatsu M , Hashimoto-­‐Tane A , Dustin ML , Tokunaga M , Saito T . 2008 . Spatiotemporal regulation of T cell costimulation by TCR-­‐CD28 microclusters and protein kinase C theta translocation . Immunity 29 : 589-­‐601 20 . Kaizuka Y , Douglass AD , Varma R , Dustin ML , Vale RD . 2007 . Mechanisms for segregating T cell receptor and adhesion molecules during immunological synapse formation in Jurkat T cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104 : 20296-­‐301 21 . Yokosuka T , Sakata-­‐Sogawa K , Kobayashi W , Hiroshima M , Hashimoto-­‐Tane A , Tokunaga M , Dustin ML , Saito T . 2005 . Newly generated T cell receptor microclusters initiate and sustain T cell activation by recruitment of Zap70 and SLP-­‐76 . Nat Immunol 6 : 1253-­‐62 22 . Smoligovets AA , Smith AW , Groves JT . 2013 . Ratiometric imaging of the T-­‐cell actin cytoskeleton reveals the nature of receptor-­‐induced cytoskeletal enrichment . Biophys J 105 : L11-­‐3 23 . Billadeau DD , Nolz JC , Gomez TS . 2007 . Regulation of T-­‐cell activation by the cytoskeleton . Nat Rev Immunol 7 : 131-­‐43 24 . Burkhardt JK , Carrizosa E , Shaffer MH . 2008 . The actin cytoskeleton in T cell activation . Annu Rev Immunol 26 : 233-­‐59 25 . Kumari S , Curado S , Mayya V , Dustin ML . 2014 . T cell antigen receptor activation and actin cytoskeleton remodeling . Biochim Biophys Acta 1838 : 546-­‐56 26 . Gomez TS , McCarney SD , Carrizosa E , Labno CM , Comiskey EO , Nolz JC , Zhu P , Freedman BD , Clark MR , Rawlings DJ , Billadeau DD , Burkhardt JK . 2006 . HS1 functions as an essential actin-­‐regulatory adaptor protein at the immune synapse . Immunity 24 : 741-­‐52 27 . Nolz JC , Gomez TS , Zhu P , Li S , Medeiros RB , Shimizu Y , Burkhardt JK , Freedman BD , Billadeau DD . 2006 . The WAVE2 complex regulates actin cytoskeletal reorganization and CRAC-­‐mediated calcium entry during T cell activation . Curr Biol 16 : 24-­‐34 28 . Zhang J , Shehabeldin A , da Cruz LA , Butler J , Somani AK , McGavin M , Kozieradzki I , dos Santos AO , Nagy A , Grinstein S , Penninger JM , Siminovitch KA . 1999 . Antigen receptor-­‐induced activation and cytoskeletal 170 rearrangement are impaired in Wiskott-­‐Aldrich syndrome protein-­‐deficient lymphocytes . J Exp Med 190 : 1329-­‐42 29 . Becart S , Altman A . 2009 . SWAP-­‐70-­‐like adapter of T cells : a novel Lck-­‐ regulated guanine nucleotide exchange factor coordinating actin cytoskeleton reorganization and Ca2 + signaling in T cells . Immunol Rev 232 : 319-­‐33 30 . Sims TN , Dustin ML . 2002 . The immunological synapse : integrins take the stage . Immunol Rev 186 : 100-­‐17 31 . Perez OD , Mitchell D , Jager GC , South S , Murriel C , McBride J , Herzenberg LA , Kinoshita S , Nolan GP . 2003 . Leukocyte functional antigen 1 lowers T cell activation thresholds and signaling through cytohesin-­‐1 and Jun-­‐activating binding protein 1 . Nat Immunol 4 : 1083-­‐92 32 . Li D , Molldrem JJ , Ma Q . 2009 . LFA-­‐1 regulates CD8 + T cell activation via T cell receptor-­‐mediated and LFA-­‐1-­‐mediated Erk1 / 2 signal pathways . J Biol Chem 284 : 21001-­‐10 33 . Tabassam FH , Umehara H , Huang JY , Gouda S , Kono T , Okazaki T , van Seventer JM , Domae N . 1999 . Beta2-­‐integrin , LFA-­‐1 , and TCR / CD3 synergistically induce tyrosine phosphorylation of focal adhesion kinase ( pp125 ( FAK ) ) in PHA-­‐activated T cells . Cell Immunol 193 : 179-­‐84 34 . Baker RG , Hsu CJ , Lee D , Jordan MS , Maltzman JS , Hammer DA , Baumgart T , Koretzky GA . 2009 . The adapter protein SLP-­‐76 mediates " outside-­‐in " integrin signaling and function in T cells . Mol Cell Biol 29 : 5578-­‐89 35 . Suzuki J , Yamasaki S , Wu J , Koretzky GA , Saito T . 2007 . The actin cloud induced by LFA-­‐1-­‐mediated outside-­‐in signals lowers the threshold for T-­‐cell activation . Blood 109 : 168-­‐75 36 . Wang H , Wei B , Bismuth G , Rudd CE . 2009 . SLP-­‐76-­‐ADAP adaptor module regulates LFA-­‐1 mediated costimulation and T cell motility . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106 : 12436-­‐41 37 . Sanchez-­‐Martin L , Sanchez-­‐Sanchez N , Gutierrez-­‐Lopez MD , Rojo AI , Vicente-­‐ Manzanares M , Perez-­‐Alvarez MJ , Sanchez-­‐Mateos P , Bustelo XR , Cuadrado A , Sanchez-­‐Madrid F , Rodriguez-­‐Fernandez JL , Cabanas C . 2004 . Signaling through the leukocyte integrin LFA-­‐1 in T cells induces a transient activation of Rac-­‐1 that is regulated by Vav and PI3K / Akt-­‐1 . J Biol Chem 279 : 16194-­‐205 38 . Nurmi SM , Autero M , Raunio AK , Gahmberg CG , Fagerholm SC . 2007 . Phosphorylation of the LFA-­‐1 integrin beta2-­‐chain on Thr-­‐758 leads to adhesion , Rac-­‐1 / Cdc42 activation , and stimulation of CD69 expression in human T cells . J Biol Chem 282 : 968-­‐75 39 . Mace EM , Zhang J , Siminovitch KA , Takei F . 2010 . Elucidation of the integrin LFA-­‐1-­‐mediated signaling pathway of actin polarization in natural killer cells . Blood 116 : 1272-­‐9 40 . DeMali KA , Barlow CA , Burridge K . 2002 . Recruitment of the Arp2 / 3 complex to vinculin : coupling membrane protrusion to matrix adhesion . J Cell Biol 159 : 881-­‐91 41 . Chorev DS , Moscovitz O , Geiger B , Sharon M . 2014 . Regulation of focal adhesion formation by a vinculin-­‐Arp2 / 3 hybrid complex . Nat Commun 5 : 3758 171 42 . Nguyen K , Sylvain NR , Bunnell SC . 2008 . T cell costimulation via the integrin VLA-­‐4 inhibits the actin-­‐dependent centralization of signaling microclusters containing the adaptor SLP-­‐76 . Immunity 28 : 810-­‐21 43 . Thievessen I , Thompson PM , Berlemont S , Plevock KM , Plotnikov SV , Zemljic-­‐ Harpf A , Ross RS , Davidson MW , Danuser G , Campbell SL , Waterman CM . 2013 . Vinculin-­‐actin interaction couples actin retrograde flow to focal adhesions , but is dispensable for focal adhesion growth . J Cell Biol 202 : 163-­‐ 77 44 . Croft M , Dubey C . 1997 . Accessory molecule and costimulation requirements for CD4 T cell response . Crit Rev Immunol 17 : 89-­‐118 45 . Boomer JS , Green JM . 2010 . An enigmatic tail of CD28 signaling . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2 : a002436 46 . Isakov N , Altman A . 2012 . PKC-­‐theta-­‐mediated signal delivery from the TCR / CD28 surface receptors . Front Immunol 3 : 273 47 . Chen L , Flies DB . 2013 . Molecular mechanisms of T cell co-­‐stimulation and co-­‐inhibition . Nat Rev Immunol 13 : 227-­‐42 48 . Rudd CE , Raab M . 2003 . Independent CD28 signaling via VAV and SLP-­‐76 : a model for in trans costimulation . Immunol Rev 192 : 32-­‐41 49 . Raab M , Pfister S , Rudd CE . 2001 . CD28 signaling via VAV / SLP-­‐76 adaptors : regulation of cytokine transcription independent of TCR ligation . Immunity 15 : 921-­‐33 50 . Dennehy KM , Elias F , Na SY , Fischer KD , Hunig T , Luhder F . 2007 . Mitogenic CD28 signals require the exchange factor Vav1 to enhance TCR signaling at the SLP-­‐76-­‐Vav-­‐Itk signalosome . J Immunol 178 : 1363-­‐71 51 . Tan YX , Manz BN , Freedman TS , Zhang C , Shokat KM , Weiss A . 2014 . Inhibition of the kinase Csk in thymocytes reveals a requirement for actin remodeling in the initiation of full TCR signaling . Nat Immunol 15 : 186-­‐94 52 . Salazar-­‐Fontana LI , Barr V , Samelson LE , Bierer BE . 2003 . CD28 engagement promotes actin polymerization through the activation of the small Rho GTPase Cdc42 in human T cells . J Immunol 171 : 2225-­‐32 53 . Serrano-­‐Pertierra E , Cernuda-­‐Morollon E , Lopez-­‐Larrea C . 2014 . NKG2D-­‐ and CD28-­‐mediated costimulation regulate CD8 + T cell chemotaxis through different mechanisms : the role of Cdc42 / N-­‐WASp . J Leukoc Biol 95 : 487-­‐95 54 . Carlsson AE . 2006 . Stimulation of actin polymerization by filament severing . Biophys J 90 : 413-­‐22 55 . Liang Y , Cucchetti M , Roncagalli R , Yokosuka T , Malzac A , Bertosio E , Imbert J , Nijman IJ , Suchanek M , Saito T , Wulfing C , Malissen B , Malissen M . 2013 . The lymphoid lineage-­‐specific actin-­‐uncapping protein Rltpr is essential for costimulation via CD28 and the development of regulatory T cells . Nat Immunol 14 : 858-­‐66 56 . Treanor B , Depoil D , Gonzalez-­‐Granja A , Barral P , Weber M , Dushek O , Bruckbauer A , Batista FD . 2010 . The membrane skeleton controls diffusion dynamics and signaling through the B cell receptor . Immunity 32 : 187-­‐99 57 . Kumar R , Ferez M , Swamy M , Arechaga I , Rejas MT , Valpuesta JM , Schamel WW , Alarcon B , van Santen HM . 2011 . Increased sensitivity of antigen-­‐ 172 experienced T cells through the enrichment of oligomeric T cell receptor complexes . Immunity 35 : 375-­‐87 58 . Lillemeier BF , Mortelmaier MA , Forstner MB , Huppa JB , Groves JT , Davis MM . 2010 . TCR and Lat are expressed on separate protein islands on T cell membranes and concatenate during activation . Nat Immunol 11 : 90-­‐6 59 . Sherman E , Barr V , Manley S , Patterson G , Balagopalan L , Akpan I , Regan CK , Merrill RK , Sommers CL , Lippincott-­‐Schwartz J , Samelson LE . 2011 . Functional nanoscale organization of signaling molecules downstream of the T cell antigen receptor . Immunity 35 : 705-­‐20 60 . Treanor B , Depoil D , Bruckbauer A , Batista FD . 2011 . Dynamic cortical actin remodeling by ERM proteins controls BCR microcluster organization and integrity . J Exp Med 208 : 1055-­‐68 61 . Faure S , Salazar-­‐Fontana LI , Semichon M , Tybulewicz VL , Bismuth G , Trautmann A , Germain RN , Delon J . 2004 . ERM proteins regulate cytoskeleton relaxation promoting T cell-­‐APC conjugation . Nat Immunol 5 : 272-­‐9 62 . Dustin ML . 2009 . Modular design of immunological synapses and kinapses . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 1 : a002873 63 . Dustin ML . 2008 . Hunter to gatherer and back : immunological synapses and kinapses as variations on the theme of amoeboid locomotion . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 24 : 577-­‐96 64 . Wilson CA , Tsuchida MA , Allen GM , Barnhart EL , Applegate KT , Yam PT , Ji L , Keren K , Danuser G , Theriot JA . 2010 . Myosin II contributes to cell-­‐scale actin network treadmilling through network disassembly . Nature 465 : 373-­‐7 65 . Sims TN , Soos TJ , Xenias HS , Dubin-­‐Thaler B , Hofman JM , Waite JC , Cameron TO , Thomas VK , Varma R , Wiggins CH , Sheetz MP , Littman DR , Dustin ML . 2007 . Opposing effects of PKCtheta and WASp on symmetry breaking and relocation of the immunological synapse . Cell 129 : 773-­‐85 66 . Hashimoto-­‐Tane A , Yokosuka T , Sakata-­‐Sogawa K , Sakuma M , Ishihara C , Tokunaga M , Saito T . 2011 . Dynein-­‐driven transport of T cell receptor microclusters regulates immune synapse formation and T cell activation . Immunity 34 : 919-­‐31 67 . Smoligovets AA , Smith AW , Wu HJ , Petit RS , Groves JT . 2012 . Characterization of dynamic actin associations with T-­‐cell receptor microclusters in primary T cells . J Cell Sci 125 : 735-­‐42 68 . Mossman KD , Campi G , Groves JT , Dustin ML . 2005 . Altered TCR signaling from geometrically repatterned immunological synapses . Science 310 : 1191-­‐ 3 69 . Vardhana S , Choudhuri K , Varma R , Dustin ML . 2010 . Essential role of ubiquitin and TSG101 protein in formation and function of the central supramolecular activation cluster . Immunity 32 : 531-­‐40 70 . Lim TS , Mortellaro A , Lim CT , Hammerling GJ , Ricciardi-­‐Castagnoli P . 2011 . Mechanical interactions between dendritic cells and T cells correlate with T cell responsiveness . J Immunol 187 : 258-­‐65 71 . Judokusumo E , Tabdanov E , Kumari S , Dustin ML , Kam LC . 2012 . Mechanosensing in T lymphocyte activation . Biophys J 102 : L5-­‐7 173 72 . O ' Connor RS , Hao X , Shen K , Bashour K , Akimova T , Hancock WW , Kam LC , Milone MC . 2012 . Substrate rigidity regulates human T cell activation and proliferation . J Immunol 189 : 1330-­‐9 73 . Husson J , Chemin K , Bohineust A , Hivroz C , Henry N . 2011 . Force generation upon T cell receptor engagement . PLoS One 6 : e19680 74 . Wei X , Tromberg BJ , Cahalan MD . 1999 . Mapping the sensitivity of T cells with an optical trap : polarity and minimal number of receptors for Ca ( 2 + ) signaling . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 96 : 8471-­‐6 75 . Negulescu PA , Krasieva TB , Khan A , Kerschbaum HH , Cahalan MD . 1996 . Polarity of T cell shape , motility , and sensitivity to antigen . Immunity 4 : 421-­‐ 30 76 . van der Merwe PA , Dushek O . 2011 . Mechanisms for T cell receptor triggering . Nat Rev Immunol 11 : 47-­‐55 77 . Huang J , Brameshuber M , Zeng X , Xie J , Li QJ , Chien YH , Valitutti S , Davis MM . 2013 . A single peptide-­‐major histocompatibility complex ligand triggers digital cytokine secretion in CD4 ( + ) T cells . Immunity 39 : 846-­‐57 78 . Nika K , Soldani C , Salek M , Paster W , Gray A , Etzensperger R , Fugger L , Polzella P , Cerundolo V , Dushek O , Hofer T , Viola A , Acuto O . 2010 . Constitutively active Lck kinase in T cells drives antigen receptor signal transduction . Immunity 32 : 766-­‐77 79 . Imbert V , Peyron JF , Farahi Far D , Mari B , Auberger P , Rossi B . 1994 . Induction of tyrosine phosphorylation and T-­‐cell activation by vanadate peroxide , an inhibitor of protein tyrosine phosphatases . Biochem J 297 ( Pt 1 ) : 163-­‐73 80 . Imbert V , Farahifar D , Auberger P , Mary D , Rossi B , Peyron JF . 1996 . Stimulation of the T-­‐cell antigen receptor-­‐CD3 complex signaling pathway by the tyrosine phosphatase inhibitor pervanadate is mediated by inhibition of CD45 : evidence for two interconnected Lck / Fyn-­‐ or zap-­‐70-­‐dependent signaling pathways . J Inflamm 46 : 65-­‐77 81 . Secrist JP , Burns LA , Karnitz L , Koretzky GA , Abraham RT . 1993 . Stimulatory effects of the protein tyrosine phosphatase inhibitor , pervanadate , on T-­‐cell activation events . J Biol Chem 268 : 5886-­‐93 82 . James JR , Vale RD . 2012 . Biophysical mechanism of T-­‐cell receptor triggering in a reconstituted system . Nature 487 : 64-­‐9 83 . Davis SJ , van der Merwe PA . 2006 . The kinetic-­‐segregation model : TCR triggering and beyond . Nat Immunol 7 : 803-­‐9 84 . Hui E , Vale RD . 2014 . In vitro membrane reconstitution of the T-­‐cell receptor proximal signaling network . Nat Struct Mol Biol 21 : 133-­‐42 85 . Paszek MJ , DuFort CC , Rossier O , Bainer R , Mouw JK , Godula K , Hudak JE , Lakins JN , Wijekoon AC , Cassereau L , Rubashkin MG , Magbanua MJ , Thorn KS , Davidson MW , Rugo HS , Park JW , Hammer DA , Giannone G , Bertozzi CR , Weaver VM . 2014 . The cancer glycocalyx mechanically primes integrin-­‐ mediated growth and survival . Nature 511 : 319-­‐25 86 . Cordoba SP , Choudhuri K , Zhang H , Bridge M , Basat AB , Dustin ML , van der Merwe PA . 2013 . The large ectodomains of CD45 and CD148 regulate their 174 segregation from and inhibition of ligated T-­‐cell receptor . Blood 121 : 4295-­‐ 302 87 . Irles C , Symons A , Michel F , Bakker TR , van der Merwe PA , Acuto O . 2003 . CD45 ectodomain controls interaction with GEMs and Lck activity for optimal TCR signaling . Nat Immunol 4 : 189-­‐97 88 . Choudhuri K , Wiseman D , Brown MH , Gould K , van der Merwe PA . 2005 . T-­‐ cell receptor triggering is critically dependent on the dimensions of its peptide-­‐MHC ligand . Nature 436 : 578-­‐82 89 . Choudhuri K , Parker M , Milicic A , Cole DK , Shaw MK , Sewell AK , Stewart-­‐ Jones G , Dong T , Gould KG , van der Merwe PA . 2009 . Peptide-­‐major histocompatibility complex dimensions control proximal kinase-­‐phosphatase balance during T cell activation . J Biol Chem 284 : 26096-­‐105 90 . Douglass AD , Vale RD . 2005 . Single-­‐molecule microscopy reveals plasma membrane microdomains created by protein-­‐protein networks that exclude or trap signaling molecules in T cells . Cell 121 : 937-­‐50 91 . Allenspach EJ , Cullinan P , Tong J , Tang Q , Tesciuba AG , Cannon JL , Takahashi SM , Morgan R , Burkhardt JK , Sperling AI . 2001 . ERM-­‐dependent movement of CD43 defines a novel protein complex distal to the immunological synapse . Immunity 15 : 739-­‐50 92 . Kohler K , Xiong S , Brzostek J , Mehrabi M , Eissmann P , Harrison A , Cordoba SP , Oddos S , Miloserdov V , Gould K , Burroughs NJ , van der Merwe PA , Davis DM . 2010 . Matched sizes of activating and inhibitory receptor / ligand pairs are required for optimal signal integration by human natural killer cells . PLoS One 5 : e15374 93 . Almeida CR , Davis DM . 2006 . Segregation of HLA-­‐C from ICAM-­‐1 at NK cell immune synapses is controlled by its cell surface density . J Immunol 177 : 6904-­‐10 94 . Crites TJ , Padhan K , Muller J , Krogsgaard M , Gudla PR , Lockett SJ , Varma R . 2014 . TCR Microclusters Pre-­‐Exist and Contain Molecules Necessary for TCR Signal Transduction . J Immunol 193 : 56-­‐67 95 . Sage PT , Varghese LM , Martinelli R , Sciuto TE , Kamei M , Dvorak AM , Springer TA , Sharpe AH , Carman CV . 2012 . Antigen recognition is facilitated by invadosome-­‐like protrusions formed by memory / effector T cells . J Immunol 188 : 3686-­‐99 96 . McKeithan TW . 1995 . Kinetic proofreading in T-­‐cell receptor signal transduction . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 92 : 5042-­‐6 97 . Dushek O , Das R , Coombs D . 2009 . A role for rebinding in rapid and reliable T cell responses to antigen . PLoS Comput Biol 5 : e1000578 98 . Govern CC , Paczosa MK , Chakraborty AK , Huseby ES . 2010 . Fast on-­‐rates allow short dwell time ligands to activate T cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107 : 8724-­‐9 99 . Aleksic M , Dushek O , Zhang H , Shenderov E , Chen JL , Cerundolo V , Coombs D , van der Merwe PA . 2010 . Dependence of T cell antigen recognition on T cell receptor-­‐peptide MHC confinement time . Immunity 32 : 163-­‐74 100 . Huppa JB , Axmann M , Mortelmaier MA , Lillemeier BF , Newell EW , Brameshuber M , Klein LO , Schutz GJ , Davis MM . 2010 . TCR-­‐peptide-­‐MHC 175 interactions in situ show accelerated kinetics and increased affinity . Nature 463 : 963-­‐7 101 . Huang J , Zarnitsyna VI , Liu B , Edwards LJ , Jiang N , Evavold BD , Zhu C . 2010 . The kinetics of two-­‐dimensional TCR and pMHC interactions determine T-­‐cell responsiveness . Nature 464 : 932-­‐6 102 . Liu B , Chen W , Evavold BD , Zhu C . 2014 . Accumulation of Dynamic Catch Bonds between TCR and Agonist Peptide-­‐MHC Triggers T Cell Signaling . Cell 157 : 357-­‐68 103 . Valitutti S , Muller S , Cella M , Padovan E , Lanzavecchia A . 1995 . Serial triggering of many T-­‐cell receptors by a few peptide-­‐MHC complexes . Nature 375 : 148-­‐51 104 . Dustin ML , Depoil D . 2011 . New insights into the T cell synapse from single molecule techniques . Nat Rev Immunol 11 : 672-­‐84 105 . Gowrishankar K , Ghosh S , Saha S , C R , Mayor S , Rao M . 2012 . Active remodeling of cortical actin regulates spatiotemporal organization of cell surface molecules . Cell 149 : 1353-­‐67 106 . Rozdzial MM , Malissen B , Finkel TH . 1995 . Tyrosine-­‐phosphorylated T cell receptor zeta chain associates with the actin cytoskeleton upon activation of mature T lymphocytes . Immunity 3 : 623-­‐33 107 . Klieger Y , Almogi-­‐Hazan O , Ish-­‐Shalom E , Pato A , Pauker MH , Barda-­‐Saad M , Wang L , Baniyash M . 2014 . Unique zeta-­‐chain motifs mediate a direct TCR-­‐ actin linkage critical for immunological synapse formation and T-­‐cell activation . Eur J Immunol 44 : 58-­‐68 108 . Rozdzial MM , Pleiman CM , Cambier JC , Finkel TH . 1998 . pp56Lck mediates TCR zeta-­‐chain binding to the microfilament cytoskeleton . J Immunol 161 : 5491-­‐9 109 . Ma Z , Janmey PA , Finkel TH . 2008 . The receptor deformation model of TCR triggering . FASEB J 22 : 1002-­‐8 110 . Krogsgaard M , Prado N , Adams EJ , He XL , Chow DC , Wilson DB , Garcia KC , Davis MM . 2003 . Evidence that structural rearrangements and / or flexibility during TCR binding can contribute to T cell activation . Mol Cell 12 : 1367-­‐78 111 . Beddoe T , Chen Z , Clements CS , Ely LK , Bushell SR , Vivian JP , Kjer-­‐Nielsen L , Pang SS , Dunstone MA , Liu YC , Macdonald WA , Perugini MA , Wilce MC , Burrows SR , Purcell AW , Tiganis T , Bottomley SP , McCluskey J , Rossjohn J . 2009 . Antigen ligation triggers a conformational change within the constant domain of the alphabeta T cell receptor . Immunity 30 : 777-­‐88 112 . Reiser JB , Gregoire C , Darnault C , Mosser T , Guimezanes A , Schmitt-­‐Verhulst AM , Fontecilla-­‐Camps JC , Mazza G , Malissen B , Housset D . 2002 . A T cell receptor CDR3beta loop undergoes conformational changes of unprecedented magnitude upon binding to a peptide / MHC class I complex . Immunity 16 : 345-­‐54 113 . Lee JK , Stewart-­‐Jones G , Dong T , Harlos K , Di Gleria K , Dorrell L , Douek DC , van der Merwe PA , Jones EY , McMichael AJ . 2004 . T cell cross-­‐reactivity and conformational changes during TCR engagement . J Exp Med 200 : 1455-­‐66 114 . Fernandes RA , Shore DA , Vuong MT , Yu C , Zhu X , Pereira-­‐Lopes S , Brouwer H , Fennelly JA , Jessup CM , Evans EJ , Wilson IA , Davis SJ . 2012 . T cell receptors 176 are structures capable of initiating signaling in the absence of large conformational rearrangements . J Biol Chem 287 : 13324-­‐35 115 . Cochran JR , Cameron TO , Stern LJ . 2000 . The relationship of MHC-­‐peptide binding and T cell activation probed using chemically defined MHC class II oligomers . Immunity 12 : 241-­‐50 116 . Hamad AR , O ' Herrin SM , Lebowitz MS , Srikrishnan A , Bieler J , Schneck J , Pardoll D . 1998 . Potent T cell activation with dimeric peptide-­‐major histocompatibility complex class II ligand : the role of CD4 coreceptor . J Exp Med 188 : 1633-­‐40 117 . Appel H , Gauthier L , Pyrdol J , Wucherpfennig KW . 2000 . Kinetics of T-­‐cell receptor binding by bivalent HLA-­‐DR . Peptide complexes that activate antigen-­‐specific human T-­‐cells . J Biol Chem 275 : 312-­‐21 118 . Boniface JJ , Rabinowitz JD , Wulfing C , Hampl J , Reich Z , Altman JD , Kantor RM , Beeson C , McConnell HM , Davis MM . 1998 . Initiation of signal transduction through the T cell receptor requires the multivalent engagement of peptide / MHC ligands [ corrected ] . Immunity 9 : 459-­‐66 119 . Casares S , Zong CS , Radu DL , Miller A , Bona CA , Brumeanu TD . 1999 . Antigen-­‐ specific signaling by a soluble , dimeric peptide / major histocompatibility complex class II / Fc chimera leading to T helper cell type 2 differentiation . J Exp Med 190 : 543-­‐53 120 . Barda-­‐Saad M , Braiman A , Titerence R , Bunnell SC , Barr VA , Samelson LE . 2005 . Dynamic molecular interactions linking the T cell antigen receptor to the actin cytoskeleton . Nat Immunol 6 : 80-­‐9 121 . Miletic AV , Graham DB , Sakata-­‐Sogawa K , Hiroshima M , Hamann MJ , Cemerski S , Kloeppel T , Billadeau DD , Kanagawa O , Tokunaga M , Swat W . 2009 . Vav links the T cell antigen receptor to the actin cytoskeleton and T cell activation independently of intrinsic Guanine nucleotide exchange activity . PLoS One 4 : e6599 122 . Gil D , Schrum AG , Alarcon B , Palmer E . 2005 . T cell receptor engagement by peptide-­‐MHC ligands induces a conformational change in the CD3 complex of thymocytes . J Exp Med 201 : 517-­‐22 123 . Ma Z , Sharp KA , Janmey PA , Finkel TH . 2008 . Surface-­‐anchored monomeric agonist pMHCs alone trigger TCR with high sensitivity . PLoS Biol 6 : e43 124 . Valitutti S , Dessing M , Aktories K , Gallati H , Lanzavecchia A . 1995 . Sustained signaling leading to T cell activation results from prolonged T cell receptor occupancy . Role of T cell actin cytoskeleton . J Exp Med 181 : 577-­‐84 125 . Rivas FV , O ' Keefe JP , Alegre ML , Gajewski TF . 2004 . Actin cytoskeleton regulates calcium dynamics and NFAT nuclear duration . Mol Cell Biol 24 : 1628-­‐39 126 . Kim ST , Takeuchi K , Sun ZY , Touma M , Castro CE , Fahmy A , Lang MJ , Wagner G , Reinherz EL . 2009 . The alphabeta T cell receptor is an anisotropic mechanosensor . J Biol Chem 284 : 31028-­‐37 127 . Kim ST , Shin Y , Brazin K , Mallis RJ , Sun ZY , Wagner G , Lang MJ , Reinherz EL . 2012 . TCR Mechanobiology : Torques and Tunable Structures Linked to Early T Cell Signaling . Front Immunol 3 : 76 177 128 . Bashour KT , Gondarenko A , Chen H , Shen K , Liu X , Huse M , Hone JC , Kam LC . 2014 . CD28 and CD3 have complementary roles in T-­‐cell traction forces . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111 : 2241-­‐6 129 . Pryshchep S , Zarnitsyna VI , Hong J , Evavold BD , Zhu C . 2014 . Accumulation of Serial Forces on TCR and CD8 Frequently Applied by Agonist Antigenic Peptides Embedded in MHC Molecules Triggers Calcium in T Cells . J Immunol 193 : 68-­‐76 130 . Zhang H , Cordoba SP , Dushek O , van der Merwe PA . 2011 . Basic residues in the T-­‐cell receptor zeta cytoplasmic domain mediate membrane association and modulate signaling . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 108 : 19323-­‐8 131 . Aivazian D , Stern LJ . 2000 . Phosphorylation of T cell receptor zeta is regulated by a lipid dependent folding transition . Nat Struct Biol 7 : 1023-­‐6 132 . DeFord-­‐Watts LM , Dougall DS , Belkaya S , Johnson BA , Eitson JL , Roybal KT , Barylko B , Albanesi JP , Wulfing C , van Oers NS . 2011 . The CD3 zeta subunit contains a phosphoinositide-­‐binding motif that is required for the stable accumulation of TCR-­‐CD3 complex at the immunological synapse . J Immunol 186 : 6839-­‐47 133 . Xu C , Gagnon E , Call ME , Schnell JR , Schwieters CD , Carman CV , Chou JJ , Wucherpfennig KW . 2008 . Regulation of T cell receptor activation by dynamic membrane binding of the CD3epsilon cytoplasmic tyrosine-­‐based motif . Cell 135 : 702-­‐13 134 . Gil D , Schamel WW , Montoya M , Sanchez-­‐Madrid F , Alarcon B . 2002 . Recruitment of Nck by CD3 epsilon reveals a ligand-­‐induced conformational change essential for T cell receptor signaling and synapse formation . Cell 109 : 901-­‐12 135 . Borroto A , Arellano I , Blanco R , Fuentes M , Orfao A , Dopfer EP , Prouza M , Suchanek M , Schamel WW , Alarcon B . 2014 . Relevance of Nck-­‐CD3 epsilon interaction for T cell activation in vivo . J Immunol 192 : 2042-­‐53 136 . Borroto A , Arellano I , Dopfer EP , Prouza M , Suchanek M , Fuentes M , Orfao A , Schamel WW , Alarcon B . 2013 . Nck recruitment to the TCR required for ZAP70 activation during thymic development . J Immunol 190 : 1103-­‐12 137 . Donnelly SK , Weisswange I , Zettl M , Way M . 2013 . WIP provides an essential link between Nck and N-­‐WASP during Arp2 / 3-­‐dependent actin polymerization . Curr Biol 23 : 999-­‐1006 138 . Zeng R , Cannon JL , Abraham RT , Way M , Billadeau DD , Bubeck-­‐Wardenberg J , Burkhardt JK . 2003 . SLP-­‐76 coordinates Nck-­‐dependent Wiskott-­‐Aldrich syndrome protein recruitment with Vav-­‐1 / Cdc42-­‐dependent Wiskott-­‐ Aldrich syndrome protein activation at the T cell-­‐APC contact site . J Immunol 171 : 1360-­‐8 139 . Zhang X , Moore SW , Iskratsch T , Sheetz MP . 2014 . N-­‐WASP-­‐directed actin polymerization activates Cas phosphorylation and lamellipodium spreading . J Cell Sci 127 : 1394-­‐405 140 . Thomas WE , Vogel V , Sokurenko E . 2008 . Biophysics of catch bonds . Annu Rev Biophys 37 : 399-­‐416 141 . Hosseini BH , Louban I , Djandji D , Wabnitz GH , Deeg J , Bulbuc N , Samstag Y , Gunzer M , Spatz JP , Hammerling GJ . 2009 . Immune synapse formation 178 determines interaction forces between T cells and antigen-­‐presenting cells measured by atomic force microscopy . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106 : 17852-­‐7 142 . Hoffmann S , Hosseini BH , Hecker M , Louban I , Bulbuc N , Garbi N , Wabnitz GH , Samstag Y , Spatz JP , Hammerling GJ . 2011 . Single cell force spectroscopy of T cells recognizing a myelin-­‐derived peptide on antigen presenting cells . Immunol Lett 136 : 13-­‐20 143 . Yu T , Wu X , Gupta KB , Kucik DF . 2010 . Affinity , lateral mobility , and clustering contribute independently to beta 2-­‐integrin-­‐mediated adhesion . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 299 : C399-­‐410 144 . Kinashi T . 2005 . Intracellular signalling controlling integrin activation in lymphocytes . Nat Rev Immunol 5 : 546-­‐59 145 . Hogg N , Patzak I , Willenbrock F . 2011 . The insider ' s guide to leukocyte integrin signalling and function . Nat Rev Immunol 11 : 416-­‐26 146 . Kim C , Ye F , Ginsberg MH . 2011 . Regulation of integrin activation . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 27 : 321-­‐45 147 . Luo BH , Carman CV , Springer TA . 2007 . Structural basis of integrin regulation and signaling . Annu Rev Immunol 25 : 619-­‐47 148 . Springer TA , Dustin ML . 2012 . Integrin inside-­‐out signaling and the immunological synapse . Curr Opin Cell Biol 24 : 107-­‐15 149 . Ciobanasu C , Faivre B , Le Clainche C . 2013 . Integrating actin dynamics , mechanotransduction and integrin activation : the multiple functions of actin binding proteins in focal adhesions . Eur J Cell Biol 92 : 339-­‐48 150 . Katagiri K , Shimonaka M , Kinashi T . 2004 . Rap1-­‐mediated lymphocyte function-­‐associated antigen-­‐1 activation by the T cell antigen receptor is dependent on phospholipase C-­‐gamma1 . J Biol Chem 279 : 11875-­‐81 151 . Letschka T , Kollmann V , Pfeifhofer-­‐Obermair C , Lutz-­‐Nicoladoni C , Obermair GJ , Fresser F , Leitges M , Hermann-­‐Kleiter N , Kaminski S , Baier G . 2008 . PKC-­‐ theta selectively controls the adhesion-­‐stimulating molecule Rap1 . Blood 112 : 4617-­‐27 152 . Ghandour H , Cullere X , Alvarez A , Luscinskas FW , Mayadas TN . 2007 . Essential role for Rap1 GTPase and its guanine exchange factor CalDAG-­‐GEFI in LFA-­‐1 but not VLA-­‐4 integrin mediated human T-­‐cell adhesion . Blood 110 : 3682-­‐90 153 . Nolz JC , Nacusi LP , Segovis CM , Medeiros RB , Mitchell JS , Shimizu Y , Billadeau DD . 2008 . The WAVE2 complex regulates T cell receptor signaling to integrins via Abl-­‐ and CrkL-­‐C3G-­‐mediated activation of Rap1 . J Cell Biol 182 : 1231-­‐44 154 . Lee HS , Lim CJ , Puzon-­‐McLaughlin W , Shattil SJ , Ginsberg MH . 2009 . RIAM activates integrins by linking talin to ras GTPase membrane-­‐targeting sequences . J Biol Chem 284 : 5119-­‐27 155 . Simonson WT , Franco SJ , Huttenlocher A . 2006 . Talin1 regulates TCR-­‐ mediated LFA-­‐1 function . J Immunol 177 : 7707-­‐14 156 . Calderwood DA , Zent R , Grant R , Rees DJ , Hynes RO , Ginsberg MH . 1999 . The Talin head domain binds to integrin beta subunit cytoplasmic tails and regulates integrin activation . J Biol Chem 274 : 28071-­‐4 179 157 . Hughes PE , Diaz-­‐Gonzalez F , Leong L , Wu C , McDonald JA , Shattil SJ , Ginsberg MH . 1996 . Breaking the integrin hinge . A defined structural constraint regulates integrin signaling . J Biol Chem 271 : 6571-­‐4 158 . Kim M , Carman CV , Springer TA . 2003 . Bidirectional transmembrane signaling by cytoplasmic domain separation in integrins . Science 301 : 1720-­‐5 159 . Li R , Mitra N , Gratkowski H , Vilaire G , Litvinov R , Nagasami C , Weisel JW , Lear JD , DeGrado WF , Bennett JS . 2003 . Activation of integrin alphaIIbbeta3 by modulation of transmembrane helix associations . Science 300 : 795-­‐8 160 . Luo BH , Carman CV , Takagi J , Springer TA . 2005 . Disrupting integrin transmembrane domain heterodimerization increases ligand binding affinity , not valency or clustering . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102 : 3679-­‐84 161 . Partridge AW , Liu S , Kim S , Bowie JU , Ginsberg MH . 2005 . Transmembrane domain helix packing stabilizes integrin alphaIIbbeta3 in the low affinity state . J Biol Chem 280 : 7294-­‐300 162 . Tadokoro S , Shattil SJ , Eto K , Tai V , Liddington RC , de Pereda JM , Ginsberg MH , Calderwood DA . 2003 . Talin binding to integrin beta tails : a final common step in integrin activation . Science 302 : 103-­‐6 163 . Kim C , Ye F , Hu X , Ginsberg MH . 2012 . Talin activates integrins by altering the topology of the beta transmembrane domain . J Cell Biol 197 : 605-­‐11 164 . Schurpf T , Springer TA . 2011 . Regulation of integrin affinity on cell surfaces . EMBO J 30 : 4712-­‐27 165 . Takagi J , Petre BM , Walz T , Springer TA . 2002 . Global conformational rearrangements in integrin extracellular domains in outside-­‐in and inside-­‐ out signaling . Cell 110 : 599-­‐11 166 . Nishida N , Xie C , Shimaoka M , Cheng Y , Walz T , Springer TA . 2006 . Activation of leukocyte beta2 integrins by conversion from bent to extended conformations . Immunity 25 : 583-­‐94 167 . Li YF , Tang RH , Puan KJ , Law SK , Tan SM . 2007 . The cytosolic protein talin induces an intermediate affinity integrin alphaLbeta2 . J Biol Chem 282 : 24310-­‐9 168 . Feigelson SW , Grabovsky V , Manevich-­‐Mendelson E , Pasvolsky R , Shulman Z , Shinder V , Klein E , Etzioni A , Aker M , Alon R . 2011 . Kindlin-­‐3 is required for the stabilization of TCR-­‐stimulated LFA-­‐1 : ICAM-­‐1 bonds critical for lymphocyte arrest and spreading on dendritic cells . Blood 117 : 7042-­‐52 169 . Kucik DF , Dustin ML , Miller JM , Brown EJ . 1996 . Adhesion-­‐activating phorbol ester increases the mobility of leukocyte integrin LFA-­‐1 in cultured lymphocytes . J Clin Invest 97 : 2139-­‐44 170 . Bleijs DA , van Duijnhoven GC , van Vliet SJ , Thijssen JP , Figdor CG , van Kooyk Y . 2001 . A single amino acid in the cytoplasmic domain of the beta 2 integrin lymphocyte function-­‐associated antigen-­‐1 regulates avidity-­‐dependent inside-­‐out signaling . J Biol Chem 276 : 10338-­‐46 171 . Stewart MP , McDowall A , Hogg N . 1998 . LFA-­‐1-­‐mediated adhesion is regulated by cytoskeletal restraint and by a Ca2 + -­‐dependent protease , calpain . J Cell Biol 140 : 699-­‐707 172 . Bakker GJ , Eich C , Torreno-­‐Pina JA , Diez-­‐Ahedo R , Perez-­‐Samper G , van Zanten TS , Figdor CG , Cambi A , Garcia-­‐Parajo MF . 2012 . Lateral mobility of 180 individual integrin nanoclusters orchestrates the onset for leukocyte adhesion . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109 : 4869-­‐74 173 . Kim M , Carman CV , Yang W , Salas A , Springer TA . 2004 . The primacy of affinity over clustering in regulation of adhesiveness of the integrin { alpha } L { beta } 2 . J Cell Biol 167 : 1241-­‐53 174 . Shimaoka M , Xiao T , Liu JH , Yang Y , Dong Y , Jun CD , McCormack A , Zhang R , Joachimiak A , Takagi J , Wang JH , Springer TA . 2003 . Structures of the alpha L I domain and its complex with ICAM-­‐1 reveal a shape-­‐shifting pathway for integrin regulation . Cell 112 : 99-­‐111 175 . Weitz-­‐Schmidt G , Schurpf T , Springer TA . 2011 . The C-­‐terminal alphaI domain linker as a critical structural element in the conformational activation of alphaI integrins . J Biol Chem 286 : 42115-­‐22 176 . Zhu J , Luo BH , Xiao T , Zhang C , Nishida N , Springer TA . 2008 . Structure of a complete integrin ectodomain in a physiologic resting state and activation and deactivation by applied forces . Mol Cell 32 : 849-­‐61 177 . Zhu J , Zhu J , Springer TA . 2013 . Complete integrin headpiece opening in eight steps . J Cell Biol 201 : 1053-­‐68 178 . Chen X , Xie C , Nishida N , Li Z , Walz T , Springer TA . 2010 . Requirement of open headpiece conformation for activation of leukocyte integrin alphaXbeta2 . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107 : 14727-­‐32 179 . Chen W , Lou J , Hsin J , Schulten K , Harvey SC , Zhu C . 2011 . Molecular dynamics simulations of forced unbending of integrin alpha ( v ) beta ( 3 ) . PLoS Comput Biol 7 : e1001086 180 . Cairo CW , Mirchev R , Golan DE . 2006 . Cytoskeletal regulation couples LFA-­‐1 conformational changes to receptor lateral mobility and clustering . Immunity 25 : 297-­‐308 181 . Kong F , Garcia AJ , Mould AP , Humphries MJ , Zhu C . 2009 . Demonstration of catch bonds between an integrin and its ligand . J Cell Biol 185 : 1275-­‐84 182 . Chen W , Lou J , Evans EA , Zhu C . 2012 . Observing force-­‐regulated conformational changes and ligand dissociation from a single integrin on cells . J Cell Biol 199 : 497-­‐512 183 . Chen W , Lou J , Zhu C . 2010 . Forcing switch from short-­‐ to intermediate-­‐ and long-­‐lived states of the alphaA domain generates LFA-­‐1 / ICAM-­‐1 catch bonds . J Biol Chem 285 : 35967-­‐78 184 . Thomas W . 2008 . Catch bonds in adhesion . Annu Rev Biomed Eng 10 : 39-­‐57 185 . Kong F , Li Z , Parks WM , Dumbauld DW , Garcia AJ , Mould AP , Humphries MJ , Zhu C . 2013 . Cyclic mechanical reinforcement of integrin-­‐ligand interactions . Mol Cell 49 : 1060-­‐8 186 . Roca-­‐Cusachs P , Iskratsch T , Sheetz MP . 2012 . Finding the weakest link : exploring integrin-­‐mediated mechanical molecular pathways . J Cell Sci 125 : 3025-­‐38 187 . del Rio A , Perez-­‐Jimenez R , Liu R , Roca-­‐Cusachs P , Fernandez JM , Sheetz MP . 2009 . Stretching single talin rod molecules activates vinculin binding . Science 323 : 638-­‐41 188 . Hirata H , Tatsumi H , Lim CT , Sokabe M . 2014 . Force-­‐dependent vinculin 181 binding to talin in live cells : a crucial step in anchoring the actin cytoskeleton to focal adhesions . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 306 : C607-­‐20 189 . Menkel AR , Kroemker M , Bubeck P , Ronsiek M , Nikolai G , Jockusch BM . 1994 . Characterization of an F-­‐actin-­‐binding domain in the cytoskeletal protein vinculin . J Cell Biol 126 : 1231-­‐40 190 . Margadant F , Chew LL , Hu X , Yu H , Bate N , Zhang X , Sheetz M . 2011 . Mechanotransduction in vivo by repeated talin stretch-­‐relaxation events depends upon vinculin . PLoS Biol 9 : e1001223 191 . Hirata H , Tatsumi H , Lim CT , Sokabe M . 2014 . Force-­‐dependent vinculin binding to talin in live cells : a crucial step in anchoring the actin cytoskeleton to focal adhesions . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 192 . Ciobanasu C , Faivre B , Le Clainche C . 2014 . Actomyosin-­‐dependent formation of the mechanosensitive talin-­‐vinculin complex reinforces actin anchoring . Nat Commun 5 : 3095 193 . Schiller HB , Fassler R . 2013 . Mechanosensitivity and compositional dynamics of cell-­‐matrix adhesions . EMBO Rep 14 : 509-­‐19 194 . Nolz JC , Medeiros RB , Mitchell JS , Zhu P , Freedman BD , Shimizu Y , Billadeau DD . 2007 . WAVE2 regulates high-­‐affinity integrin binding by recruiting vinculin and talin to the immunological synapse . Mol Cell Biol 27 : 5986-­‐6000 195 . Wang Y , Li D , Nurieva R , Yang J , Sen M , Carreno R , Lu S , McIntyre BW , Molldrem JJ , Legge GB , Ma Q . 2009 . LFA-­‐1 affinity regulation is necessary for the activation and proliferation of naive T cells . J Biol Chem 284 : 12645-­‐53 196 . Zhu J , Carman CV , Kim M , Shimaoka M , Springer TA , Luo BH . 2007 . Requirement of alpha and beta subunit transmembrane helix separation for integrin outside-­‐in signaling . Blood 110 : 2475-­‐83 197 . Lim TS , Goh JK , Mortellaro A , Lim CT , Hammerling GJ , Ricciardi-­‐Castagnoli P . 2012 . CD80 and CD86 differentially regulate mechanical interactions of T-­‐ cells with antigen-­‐presenting dendritic cells and B-­‐cells . PLoS One 7 : e45185 198 . Tavano R , Contento RL , Baranda SJ , Soligo M , Tuosto L , Manes S , Viola A . 2006 . CD28 interaction with filamin-­‐A controls lipid raft accumulation at the T-­‐cell immunological synapse . Nat Cell Biol 8 : 1270-­‐6 199 . Kim H , McCulloch CA . 2011 . Filamin A mediates interactions between cytoskeletal proteins that control cell adhesion . FEBS Lett 585 : 18-­‐22 200 . Razinia Z , Makela T , Ylanne J , Calderwood DA . 2012 . Filamins in mechanosensing and signaling . Annu Rev Biophys 41 : 227-­‐46 201 . Ehrlicher AJ , Nakamura F , Hartwig JH , Weitz DA , Stossel TP . 2011 . Mechanical strain in actin networks regulates FilGAP and integrin binding to filamin A . Nature 478 : 260-­‐3 202 . Lynch CD , Sheetz MP . 2011 . Cellular mechanotransduction : filamin A strains to regulate motility . Curr Biol 21 : R916-­‐8 203 . Sawada Y , Tamada M , Dubin-­‐Thaler BJ , Cherniavskaya O , Sakai R , Tanaka S , Sheetz MP . 2006 . Force sensing by mechanical extension of the Src family kinase substrate p130Cas . Cell 127 : 1015-­‐26 204 . Tamada M , Sheetz MP , Sawada Y . 2004 . Activation of a signaling cascade by cytoskeleton stretch . Dev Cell 7 : 709-­‐18 182 205 . Yu Y , Fay NC , Smoligovets AA , Wu HJ , Groves JT . 2012 . Myosin IIA modulates T cell receptor transport and CasL phosphorylation during early immunological synapse formation . PLoS One 7 : e30704 206 . Kumari S , Vardhana S , Cammer M , Curado S , Santos L , Sheetz MP , Dustin ML . 2012 . T Lymphocyte Myosin IIA is Required for Maturation of the Immunological Synapse . Front Immunol 3 : 230 207 . Wang X , Ha T . 2013 . Defining single molecular forces required to activate integrin and notch signaling . Science 340 : 991-­‐4 208 . Chen H , Chandrasekar S , Sheetz MP , Stossel TP , Nakamura F , Yan J . 2013 . Mechanical perturbation of filamin A immunoglobulin repeats 20-­‐21 reveals potential non-­‐equilibrium mechanochemical partner binding function . Sci Rep 3 : 1642 209 . Dustin ML , Tseng SY , Varma R , Campi G . 2006 . T cell-­‐dendritic cell immunological synapses . Curr Opin Immunol 18 : 512-­‐6 210 . Grakoui A , Bromley SK , Sumen C , Davis MM , Shaw AS , Allen PM , Dustin ML . 1999 . The immunological synapse : a molecular machine controlling T cell activation . Science 285 : 221-­‐7 211 . Monks CR , Freiberg BA , Kupfer H , Sciaky N , Kupfer A . 1998 . Three-­‐ dimensional segregation of supramolecular activation clusters in T cells . Nature 395 : 82-­‐6 212 . Brossard C , Feuillet V , Schmitt A , Randriamampita C , Romao M , Raposo G , Trautmann A . 2005 . Multifocal structure of the T cell -­‐ dendritic cell synapse . Eur J Immunol 35 : 1741-­‐53 213 . Al-­‐Alwan MM , Liwski RS , Haeryfar SM , Baldridge WH , Hoskin DW , Rowden G , West KA . 2003 . Cutting edge : dendritic cell actin cytoskeletal polarization during immunological synapse formation is highly antigen-­‐dependent . J Immunol 171 : 4479-­‐83 214 . Al-­‐Alwan MM , Rowden G , Lee TD , West KA . 2001 . The dendritic cell cytoskeleton is critical for the formation of the immunological synapse . J Immunol 166 : 1452-­‐6 215 . Benvenuti F , Hugues S , Walmsley M , Ruf S , Fetler L , Popoff M , Tybulewicz VL , Amigorena S . 2004 . Requirement of Rac1 and Rac2 expression by mature dendritic cells for T cell priming . Science 305 : 1150-­‐3 216 . Rothoeft T , Balkow S , Krummen M , Beissert S , Varga G , Loser K , Oberbanscheidt P , van den Boom F , Grabbe S . 2006 . Structure and duration of contact between dendritic cells and T cells are controlled by T cell activation state . Eur J Immunol 36 : 3105-­‐17 217 . Eun SY , O ' Connor BP , Wong AW , van Deventer HW , Taxman DJ , Reed W , Li P , Blum JS , McKinnon KP , Ting JP . 2006 . Cutting edge : rho activation and actin polarization are dependent on plexin-­‐A1 in dendritic cells . J Immunol 177 : 4271-­‐5 218 . Bouma G , Mendoza-­‐Naranjo A , Blundell MP , de Falco E , Parsley KL , Burns SO , Thrasher AJ . 2011 . Cytoskeletal remodeling mediated by WASp in dendritic cells is necessary for normal immune synapse formation and T-­‐cell priming . Blood 118 : 2492-­‐501 183 219 . Pulecio J , Tagliani E , Scholer A , Prete F , Fetler L , Burrone OR , Benvenuti F . 2008 . Expression of Wiskott-­‐Aldrich syndrome protein in dendritic cells regulates synapse formation and activation of naive CD8 + T cells . J Immunol 181 : 1135-­‐42 220 . Ross R , Jonuleit H , Bros M , Ross XL , Yamashiro S , Matsumura F , Enk AH , Knop J , Reske-­‐Kunz AB . 2000 . Expression of the actin-­‐bundling protein fascin in cultured human dendritic cells correlates with dendritic morphology and cell differentiation . J Invest Dermatol 115 : 658-­‐63 221 . Bros M , Ross XL , Pautz A , Reske-­‐Kunz AB , Ross R . 2003 . The human fascin gene promoter is highly active in mature dendritic cells due to a stage-­‐ specific enhancer . J Immunol 171 : 1825-­‐34 222 . Verdijk P , van Veelen PA , de Ru AH , Hensbergen PJ , Mizuno K , Koerten HK , Koning F , Tensen CP , Mommaas AM . 2004 . Morphological changes during dendritic cell maturation correlate with cofilin activation and translocation to the cell membrane . Eur J Immunol 34 : 156-­‐64 223 . Breitsprecher D , Koestler SA , Chizhov I , Nemethova M , Mueller J , Goode BL , Small JV , Rottner K , Faix J . 2011 . Cofilin cooperates with fascin to disassemble filopodial actin filaments . J Cell Sci 124 : 3305-­‐18 224 . Wong AW , Brickey WJ , Taxman DJ , van Deventer HW , Reed W , Gao JX , Zheng P , Liu Y , Li P , Blum JS , McKinnon KP , Ting JP . 2003 . CIITA-­‐regulated plexin-­‐A1 affects T-­‐cell-­‐dendritic cell interactions . Nat Immunol 4 : 891-­‐8 225 . Yu CH , Wu HJ , Kaizuka Y , Vale RD , Groves JT . 2010 . Altered actin centripetal retrograde flow in physically restricted immunological synapses . PLoS One 5 : e11878 226 . Kwik J , Boyle S , Fooksman D , Margolis L , Sheetz MP , Edidin M . 2003 . Membrane cholesterol , lateral mobility , and the phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5-­‐ bisphosphate-­‐dependent organization of cell actin . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 100 : 13964-­‐9 227 . Lavi Y , Gov N , Edidin M , Gheber LA . 2012 . Lifetime of major histocompatibility complex class-­‐I membrane clusters is controlled by the actin cytoskeleton . Biophys J 102 : 1543-­‐50 228 . Friedland JC , Lee MH , Boettiger D . 2009 . Mechanically activated integrin switch controls alpha5beta1 function . Science 323 : 642-­‐4 229 . Feigelson SW , Pasvolsky R , Cemerski S , Shulman Z , Grabovsky V , Ilani T , Sagiv A , Lemaitre F , Laudanna C , Shaw AS , Alon R . 2010 . Occupancy of lymphocyte LFA-­‐1 by surface-­‐immobilized ICAM-­‐1 is critical for TCR-­‐ but not for chemokine-­‐triggered LFA-­‐1 conversion to an open headpiece high-­‐affinity state . J Immunol 185 : 7394-­‐404 230 . Gross CC , Brzostowski JA , Liu D , Long EO . 2010 . Tethering of intercellular adhesion molecule on target cells is required for LFA-­‐1-­‐dependent NK cell adhesion and granule polarization . J Immunol 185 : 2918-­‐26 231 . Celli L , Ryckewaert JJ , Delachanal E , Duperray A . 2006 . Evidence of a functional role for interaction between ICAM-­‐1 and nonmuscle alpha-­‐actinins in leukocyte diapedesis . J Immunol 177 : 4113-­‐21 232 . Oh HM , Lee S , Na BR , Wee H , Kim SH , Choi SC , Lee KM , Jun CD . 2007 . RKIKK motif in the intracellular domain is critical for spatial and dynamic 184 organization of ICAM-­‐1 : functional implication for the leukocyte adhesion and transmigration . Mol Biol Cell 18 : 2322-­‐35 233 . Doty RT , Clark EA . 1998 . Two regions in the CD80 cytoplasmic tail regulate CD80 redistribution and T cell costimulation . J Immunol 161 : 2700-­‐7 234 . Girard T , El-­‐Far M , Gaucher D , Acuto O , Beaule G , Michel F , Mourad W , Sekaly RP . 2012 . A conserved polylysine motif in CD86 cytoplasmic tail is necessary for cytoskeletal association and effective co-­‐stimulation . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 423 : 301-­‐7 235 . Tseng SY , Liu M , Dustin ML . 2005 . CD80 cytoplasmic domain controls localization of CD28 , CTLA-­‐4 , and protein kinase Ctheta in the immunological synapse . J Immunol 175 : 7829-­‐36 236 . Yonemura S , Hirao M , Doi Y , Takahashi N , Kondo T , Tsukita S , Tsukita S . 1998 . Ezrin / radixin / moesin ( ERM ) proteins bind to a positively charged amino acid cluster in the juxta-­‐membrane cytoplasmic domain of CD44 , CD43 , and ICAM-­‐2 . J Cell Biol 140 : 885-­‐95 237 . Thauland TJ , Parker DC . 2010 . Diversity in immunological synapse structure . Immunology 131 : 466-­‐72 238 . Yu Y , Smoligovets AA , Groves JT . 2013 . Modulation of T cell signaling by the actin cytoskeleton . J Cell Sci 126 : 1049-­‐58 239 . Beemiller P , Krummel MF . 2010 . Mediation of T-­‐cell activation by actin meshworks . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2 : a002444 240 . Bunnell SC , Kapoor V , Trible RP , Zhang W , Samelson LE . 2001 . Dynamic actin polymerization drives T cell receptor-­‐induced spreading : a role for the signal transduction adaptor LAT . Immunity 14 : 315-­‐29 241 . Gorman JA , Babich A , Dick CJ , Schoon RA , Koenig A , Gomez TS , Burkhardt JK , Billadeau DD . 2012 . The cytoskeletal adaptor protein IQGAP1 regulates TCR-­‐ mediated signaling and filamentous actin dynamics . J Immunol 188 : 6135-­‐44 242 . Li YC , Chen BM , Wu PC , Cheng TL , Kao LS , Tao MH , Lieber A , Roffler SR . 2010 . Cutting Edge : mechanical forces acting on T cells immobilized via the TCR complex can trigger TCR signaling . J Immunol 184 : 5959-­‐63 243 . Xie J , Huppa JB , Newell EW , Huang J , Ebert PJ , Li QJ , Davis MM . 2012 . Photocrosslinkable pMHC monomers stain T cells specifically and cause ligand-­‐bound TCRs to be ' preferentially ' transported to the cSMAC . Nat Immunol 13 : 674-­‐80 244 . Smith A , Carrasco YR , Stanley P , Kieffer N , Batista FD , Hogg N . 2005 . A talin-­‐ dependent LFA-­‐1 focal zone is formed by rapidly migrating T lymphocytes . J Cell Biol 170 : 141-­‐51 245 . Morin NA , Oakes PW , Hyun YM , Lee D , Chin YE , King MR , Springer TA , Shimaoka M , Tang JX , Reichner JS , Kim M . 2008 . Nonmuscle myosin heavy chain IIA mediates integrin LFA-­‐1 de-­‐adhesion during T lymphocyte migration . J Exp Med 205 : 195-­‐205 246 . Chen J , Yang W , Kim M , Carman CV , Springer TA . 2006 . Regulation of outside-­‐ in signaling and affinity by the beta2 I domain of integrin alphaLbeta2 . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103 : 13062-­‐7 247 . Dustin ML . 1998 . Making a little affinity go a long way : a topological view of LFA-­‐1 regulation . Cell Adhes Commun 6 : 255-­‐62 185 248 . Hartman NC , Nye JA , Groves JT . 2009 . Cluster size regulates protein sorting in the immunological synapse . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106 : 12729-­‐34 249 . Choudhuri K , Llodra J , Roth EW , Tsai J , Gordo S , Wucherpfennig KW , Kam LC , Stokes DL , Dustin ML . 2014 . Polarized release of T-­‐cell-­‐receptor-­‐enriched microvesicles at the immunological synapse . Nature 507 : 118-­‐23 250 . Carman CV , Springer TA . 2003 . Integrin avidity regulation : are changes in affinity and conformation underemphasized ? Curr Opin Cell Biol 15 : 547-­‐56 251 . Varga G , Nippe N , Balkow S , Peters T , Wild MK , Seeliger S , Beissert S , Krummen M , Roth J , Sunderkotter C , Grabbe S . 2010 . LFA-­‐1 contributes to signal I of T-­‐cell activation and to the production of T ( h ) 1 cytokines . J Invest Dermatol 130 : 1005-­‐12 252 . Lefort CT , Hyun YM , Schultz JB , Law FY , Waugh RE , Knauf PA , Kim M . 2009 . Outside-­‐in signal transmission by conformational changes in integrin Mac-­‐1 . J Immunol 183 : 6460-­‐8 253 . Ma Z , Finkel TH . 2010 . T cell receptor triggering by force . Trends Immunol 31 : 1-­‐6 254 . Ni HT , Deeths MJ , Mescher MF . 2001 . LFA-­‐1-­‐mediated costimulation of CD8 + T cell proliferation requires phosphatidylinositol 3-­‐kinase activity . J Immunol 166 : 6523-­‐9 255 . Feng C , Li YF , Yau YH , Lee HS , Tang XY , Xue ZH , Zhou YC , Lim WM , Cornvik TC , Ruedl C , Shochat SG , Tan SM . 2012 . Kindlin-­‐3 mediates integrin alphaLbeta2 outside-­‐in signaling , and it interacts with scaffold protein receptor for activated-­‐C kinase 1 ( RACK1 ) . J Biol Chem 287 : 10714-­‐26 256 . Barreiro O , Yanez-­‐Mo M , Serrador JM , Montoya MC , Vicente-­‐Manzanares M , Tejedor R , Furthmayr H , Sanchez-­‐Madrid F . 2002 . Dynamic interaction of VCAM-­‐1 and ICAM-­‐1 with moesin and ezrin in a novel endothelial docking structure for adherent leukocytes . J Cell Biol 157 : 1233-­‐45 257 . Carpen O , Pallai P , Staunton DE , Springer TA . 1992 . Association of intercellular adhesion molecule-­‐1 ( ICAM-­‐1 ) with actin-­‐containing cytoskeleton and alpha-­‐actinin . J Cell Biol 118 : 1223-­‐34 258 . Liu G , Place AT , Chen Z , Brovkovych VM , Vogel SM , Muller WA , Skidgel RA , Malik AB , Minshall RD . 2012 . ICAM-­‐1-­‐activated Src and eNOS signaling increase endothelial cell surface PECAM-­‐1 adhesivity and neutrophil transmigration . Blood 120 : 1942-­‐52 259 . Delon J , Kaibuchi K , Germain RN . 2001 . Exclusion of CD43 from the immunological synapse is mediated by phosphorylation-­‐regulated relocation of the cytoskeletal adaptor moesin . Immunity 15 : 691-­‐701 260 . Gerard A , Khan O , Beemiller P , Oswald E , Hu J , Matloubian M , Krummel MF . 2013 . Secondary T cell-­‐T cell synaptic interactions drive the differentiation of protective CD8 + T cells . Nat Immunol 14 : 356-­‐63 261 . Sabatos CA , Doh J , Chakravarti S , Friedman RS , Pandurangi PG , Tooley AJ , Krummel MF . 2008 . A synaptic basis for paracrine interleukin-­‐2 signaling during homotypic T cell interaction . Immunity 29 : 238-­‐48 262 . Fisher PJ , Bulur PA , Vuk-­‐Pavlovic S , Prendergast FG , Dietz AB . 2008 . Dendritic cell microvilli : a novel membrane structure associated with the multifocal synapse and T-­‐cell clustering . Blood 112 : 5037-­‐45 186 263 . Miller J , Knorr R , Ferrone M , Houdei R , Carron CP , Dustin ML . 1995 . Intercellular adhesion molecule-­‐1 dimerization and its consequences for adhesion mediated by lymphocyte function associated-­‐1 . J Exp Med 182 : 1231-­‐41 264 . Yang Y , Jun CD , Liu JH , Zhang R , Joachimiak A , Springer TA , Wang JH . 2004 . Structural basis for dimerization of ICAM-­‐1 on the cell surface . Mol Cell 14 : 269-­‐76 265 . Oh HM , Kwon MS , Kim HJ , Jeon BH , Kim HR , Choi HO , Na BR , Eom SH , Song NW , Jun CD . 2011 . Intermediate monomer-­‐dimer equilibrium structure of native ICAM-­‐1 : implication for enhanced cell adhesion . Exp Cell Res 317 : 163-­‐ 72 266 . Jun CD , Shimaoka M , Carman CV , Takagi J , Springer TA . 2001 . Dimerization and the effectiveness of ICAM-­‐1 in mediating LFA-­‐1-­‐dependent adhesion . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 98 : 6830-­‐5 267 . Wang Y , Shibuya K , Yamashita Y , Shirakawa J , Shibata K , Kai H , Yokosuka T , Saito T , Honda S , Tahara-­‐Hanaoka S , Shibuya A . 2008 . LFA-­‐1 decreases the antigen dose for T cell activation in vivo . Int Immunol 20 : 1119-­‐27 268 . Reichardt P , Dornbach B , Rong S , Beissert S , Gueler F , Loser K , Gunzer M . 2007 . Naive B cells generate regulatory T cells in the presence of a mature immunologic synapse . Blood 110 : 1519-­‐29 269 . Bretscher A , Edwards K , Fehon RG . 2002 . ERM proteins and merlin : integrators at the cell cortex . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 3 : 586-­‐99 270 . Steenblock ER , Fadel T , Labowsky M , Pober JS , Fahmy TM . 2011 . An artificial antigen-­‐presenting cell with paracrine delivery of IL-­‐2 impacts the magnitude and direction of the T cell response . J Biol Chem 286 : 34883-­‐92 271 . du Roure O , Saez A , Buguin A , Austin RH , Chavrier P , Silberzan P , Ladoux B . 2005 . Force mapping in epithelial cell migration . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102 : 2390-­‐5 272 . Edidin M , Stroynowski I . 1991 . Differences between the lateral organization of conventional and inositol phospholipid-­‐anchored membrane proteins . A further definition of micrometer scale membrane domains . J Cell Biol 112 : 1143-­‐50 273 . Van Laethem F , Tikhonova AN , Pobezinsky LA , Tai X , Kimura MY , Le Saout C , Guinter TI , Adams A , Sharrow SO , Bernhardt G , Feigenbaum L , Singer A . 2013 . Lck availability during thymic selection determines the recognition specificity of the T cell repertoire . Cell 154 : 1326-­‐41 274 . Van Laethem F , Sarafova SD , Park JH , Tai X , Pobezinsky L , Guinter TI , Adoro S , Adams A , Sharrow SO , Feigenbaum L , Singer A . 2007 . Deletion of CD4 and CD8 coreceptors permits generation of alphabetaT cells that recognize antigens independently of the MHC . Immunity 27 : 735-­‐50 275 . Tikhonova AN , Van Laethem F , Hanada K , Lu J , Pobezinsky LA , Hong C , Guinter TI , Jeurling SK , Bernhardt G , Park JH , Yang JC , Sun PD , Singer A . 2012 . alphabeta T cell receptors that do not undergo major histocompatibility complex-­‐specific thymic selection possess antibody-­‐like recognition specificities . Immunity 36 : 79-­‐91 187 276 . Koss M , Pfeiffer GR , 2nd , Wang Y , Thomas ST , Yerukhimovich M , Gaarde WA , Doerschuk CM , Wang Q . 2006 . Ezrin / radixin / moesin proteins are phosphorylated by TNF-­‐alpha and modulate permeability increases in human pulmonary microvascular endothelial cells . J Immunol 176 : 1218-­‐27 277 . Harrington LE , Galvan M , Baum LG , Altman JD , Ahmed R . 2000 . Differentiating between memory and effector CD8 T cells by altered expression of cell surface O-­‐glycans . J Exp Med 191 : 1241-­‐6 278 . Cox TR , Erler JT . 2011 . Remodeling and homeostasis of the extracellular matrix : implications for fibrotic diseases and cancer . Dis Model Mech 4 : 165-­‐ 78 279 . Swift J , Ivanovska IL , Buxboim A , Harada T , Dingal PC , Pinter J , Pajerowski JD , Spinler KR , Shin JW , Tewari M , Rehfeldt F , Speicher DW , Discher DE . 2013 . Nuclear lamin-­‐A scales with tissue stiffness and enhances matrix-­‐directed differentiation . Science 341 : 1240104 280 . Beste MT , Hammer DA . 2008 . Selectin catch-­‐slip kinetics encode shear threshold adhesive behavior of rolling leukocytes . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105 : 20716-­‐21 281 . Yago T , Wu J , Wey CD , Klopocki AG , Zhu C , McEver RP . 2004 . Catch bonds govern adhesion through L-­‐selectin at threshold shear . J Cell Biol 166 : 913-­‐23 282 . Valignat MP , Theodoly O , Gucciardi A , Hogg N , Lellouch AC . 2013 . T lymphocytes orient against the direction of fluid flow during LFA-­‐1-­‐mediated migration . Biophys J 104 : 322-­‐31 283 . Jacobelli J , Estin Matthews M , Chen S , Krummel MF . 2013 . Activated T cell trans-­‐endothelial migration relies on myosin-­‐IIA contractility for squeezing the cell nucleus through endothelial cell barriers . PLoS One 8 : e75151 284 . Jacobelli J , Friedman RS , Conti MA , Lennon-­‐Dumenil AM , Piel M , Sorensen CM , Adelstein RS , Krummel MF . 2010 . Confinement-­‐optimized three-­‐dimensional T cell amoeboid motility is modulated via myosin IIA-­‐regulated adhesions . Nat Immunol 11 : 953-­‐61 285 . Hung WC , Chen SH , Paul CD , Stroka KM , Lo YC , Yang JT , Konstantopoulos K . 2013 . Distinct signaling mechanisms regulate migration in unconfined versus confined spaces . J Cell Biol 202 : 807-­‐24 286 . Plotnikov SV , Pasapera AM , Sabass B , Waterman CM . 2012 . Force fluctuations within focal adhesions mediate ECM-­‐rigidity sensing to guide directed cell migration . Cell 151 : 1513-­‐27 287 . Mallat Z , Taleb S , Ait-­‐Oufella H , Tedgui A . 2009 . The role of adaptive T cell immunity in atherosclerosis . J Lipid Res 50 Suppl : S364-­‐9 288 . Hammer JA , 3rd , Burkhardt JK . 2013 . Controversy and consensus regarding myosin II function at the immunological synapse . Curr Opin Immunol 25 : 300-­‐ 6 289 . Jacobelli J , Chmura SA , Buxton DB , Davis MM , Krummel MF . 2004 . A single class II myosin modulates T cell motility and stopping , but not synapse formation . Nat Immunol 5 : 531-­‐8 290 . Johnson KG , Bromley SK , Dustin ML , Thomas ML . 2000 . A supramolecular basis for CD45 tyrosine phosphatase regulation in sustained T cell activation . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 97 : 10138-­‐43 188 291 . Dreolini L , Takei F . 2007 . Activation of LFA-­‐1 by ionomycin is independent of calpain-­‐mediated talin cleavage . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 356 : 207-­‐12 292 . Inada H , Iida T , Tominaga M . 2006 . Different expression patterns of TRP genes in murine B and T lymphocytes . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 350 : 762-­‐7 293 . Vassilieva IO , Tomilin VN , Marakhova , II , Shatrova AN , Negulyaev YA , Semenova SB . 2013 . Expression of transient receptor potential vanilloid channels TRPV5 and TRPV6 in human blood lymphocytes and Jurkat leukemia T cells . J Membr Biol 246 : 131-­‐40 294 . Launay P , Cheng H , Srivatsan S , Penner R , Fleig A , Kinet JP . 2004 . TRPM4 regulates calcium oscillations after T cell activation . Science 306 : 1374-­‐7 295 . Wenning AS , Neblung K , Strauss B , Wolfs MJ , Sappok A , Hoth M , Schwarz EC . 2011 . TRP expression pattern and the functional importance of TRPC3 in primary human T-­‐cells . Biochim Biophys Acta 1813 : 412-­‐23 296 . Delmas P , Coste B . 2013 . Mechano-­‐gated ion channels in sensory systems . Cell 155 : 278-­‐84 297 . Inoue R , Jian Z , Kawarabayashi Y . 2009 . Mechanosensitive TRP channels in cardiovascular pathophysiology . Pharmacol Ther 123 : 371-­‐85 298 . Yin J , Kuebler WM . 2010 . Mechanotransduction by TRP channels : general concepts and specific role in the vasculature . Cell Biochem Biophys 56 : 1-­‐18 299 . Delmas P , Hao J , Rodat-­‐Despoix L . 2011 . Molecular mechanisms of mechanotransduction in mammalian sensory neurons . Nat Rev Neurosci 12 : 139-­‐53 300 . Eijkelkamp N , Quick K , Wood JN . 2013 . Transient receptor potential channels and mechanosensation . Annu Rev Neurosci 36 : 519-­‐46 301 . DeNucci CC , Pagan AJ , Mitchell JS , Shimizu Y . 2010 . Control of alpha4beta7 integrin expression and CD4 T cell homing by the beta1 integrin subunit . J Immunol 184 : 2458-­‐67 302 . Rose DM , Grabovsky V , Alon R , Ginsberg MH . 2001 . The affinity of integrin alpha ( 4 ) beta ( 1 ) governs lymphocyte migration . J Immunol 167 : 2824-­‐30 303 . Chan JR , Hyduk SJ , Cybulsky MI . 2000 . Alpha 4 beta 1 integrin / VCAM-­‐1 interaction activates alpha L beta 2 integrin-­‐mediated adhesion to ICAM-­‐1 in human T cells . J Immunol 164 : 746-­‐53 304 . May AE , Neumann FJ , Schomig A , Preissner KT . 2000 . VLA-­‐4 ( alpha ( 4 ) beta ( 1 ) ) engagement defines a novel activation pathway for beta ( 2 ) integrin-­‐dependent leukocyte adhesion involving the urokinase receptor . Blood 96 : 506-­‐13 305 . Arthos J , Cicala C , Martinelli E , Macleod K , Van Ryk D , Wei D , Xiao Z , Veenstra TD , Conrad TP , Lempicki RA , McLaughlin S , Pascuccio M , Gopaul R , McNally J , Cruz CC , Censoplano N , Chung E , Reitano KN , Kottilil S , Goode DJ , Fauci AS . 2008 . HIV-­‐1 envelope protein binds to and signals through integrin alpha4beta7 , the gut mucosal homing receptor for peripheral T cells . Nat Immunol 9 : 301-­‐9 306 . Porter JC , Hogg N . 1997 . Integrin cross talk : activation of lymphocyte function-­‐associated antigen-­‐1 on human T cells alters alpha4beta1-­‐ and alpha5beta1-­‐mediated function . J Cell Biol 138 : 1437-­‐47 189 307 . Jolly C , Kashefi K , Hollinshead M , Sattentau QJ . 2004 . HIV-­‐1 cell to cell transfer across an Env-­‐induced , actin-­‐dependent synapse . J Exp Med 199 : 283-­‐93 308 . Jolly C , Mitar I , Sattentau QJ . 2007 . Adhesion molecule interactions facilitate human immunodeficiency virus type 1-­‐induced virological synapse formation between T cells . J Virol 81 : 13916-­‐21 309 . Vasiliver-­‐Shamis G , Cho MW , Hioe CE , Dustin ML . 2009 . Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 envelope gp120-­‐induced partial T-­‐cell receptor signaling creates an F-­‐actin-­‐depleted zone in the virological synapse . J Virol 83 : 11341-­‐55 310 . Vasiliver-­‐Shamis G , Tuen M , Wu TW , Starr T , Cameron TO , Thomson R , Kaur G , Liu J , Visciano ML , Li H , Kumar R , Ansari R , Han DP , Cho MW , Dustin ML , Hioe CE . 2008 . Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 envelope gp120 induces a stop signal and virological synapse formation in noninfected CD4 + T cells . J Virol 82 : 9445-­‐57 311 . Hioe CE , Tuen M , Vasiliver-­‐Shamis G , Alvarez Y , Prins KC , Banerjee S , Nadas A , Cho MW , Dustin ML , Kachlany SC . 2011 . HIV envelope gp120 activates LFA-­‐1 on CD4 T-­‐lymphocytes and increases cell susceptibility to LFA-­‐1-­‐ targeting leukotoxin ( LtxA ) . PLoS One 6 : e23202 312 . Kalos M , June CH . 2013 . Adoptive T cell transfer for cancer immunotherapy in the era of synthetic biology . Immunity 39 : 49-­‐60 313 . Restifo NP , Dudley ME , Rosenberg SA . 2012 . Adoptive immunotherapy for cancer : harnessing the T cell response . Nat Rev Immunol 12 : 269-­‐81 314 . Liu Y , Belkina NV , Park C , Nambiar R , Loughhead SM , Patino-­‐Lopez G , Ben-­‐ Aissa K , Hao JJ , Kruhlak MJ , Qi H , von Andrian UH , Kehrl JH , Tyska MJ , Shaw S . 2012 . Constitutively active ezrin increases membrane tension , slows migration , and impedes endothelial transmigration of lymphocytes in vivo in mice . Blood 119 : 445-­‐53 315 . Jiang KQ , Thomas PC , Forry SP , DeVoe DL , Raghavan SR . 2012 . Microfluidic synthesis of monodisperse PDMS microbeads as discrete oxygen sensors . Soft Matter 8 : 923-­‐6 316 . Peng SL , Zhang MY , Niu XZ , Wen WJ , Sheng P , Liu ZY , Shi J . 2008 . Magnetically responsive elastic microspheres . Applied Physics Letters 92 317 . Hsu CJ , Hsieh WT , Waldman A , Clarke F , Huseby ES , Burkhardt JK , Baumgart T . 2012 . Ligand mobility modulates immunological synapse formation and T cell activation . PLoS One 7 : e32398 318 . Ye ZM , Shi MQ , Xu SL , Xiang J . 2010 . LFA-­‐1 defect-­‐induced effector / memory CD8 ( + ) T cell apoptosis is mediated via Bcl-­‐2 / Caspase pathways and associated with downregulation of CD27 and IL-­‐15R . Molecular Immunology 47 : 2411-­‐21 319 . Klebanoff CA , Gattinoni L , Restifo NP . 2012 . Sorting through subsets : which T-­‐cell populations mediate highly effective adoptive immunotherapy ? J Immunother 35 : 651-­‐60 320 . Berger C , Jensen MC , Lansdorp PM , Gough M , Elliott C , Riddell SR . 2008 . Adoptive transfer of effector CD8 + T cells derived from central memory cells establishes persistent T cell memory in primates . J Clin Invest 118 : 294-­‐305 190 321 . Shimaoka M , Kim M , Cohen EH , Yang W , Astrof N , Peer D , Salas A , Ferrand A , Springer TA . 2006 . AL-­‐57 , a ligand-­‐mimetic antibody to integrin LFA-­‐1 , reveals chemokine-­‐induced affinity up-­‐regulation in lymphocytes . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103 : 13991-­‐6 322 . Zhang H , Liu JH , Yang W , Springer T , Shimaoka M , Wang JH . 2009 . Structural basis of activation-­‐dependent binding of ligand-­‐mimetic antibody AL-­‐57 to integrin LFA-­‐1 . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106 : 18345-­‐50 323 . Grashoff C , Hoffman BD , Brenner MD , Zhou R , Parsons M , Yang MT , McLean MA , Sligar SG , Chen CS , Ha T , Schwartz MA . 2010 . Measuring mechanical tension across vinculin reveals regulation of focal adhesion dynamics . Nature 466 : 263-­‐6 324 . Morimatsu M , Mekhdjian AH , Adhikari AS , Dunn AR . 2013 . Molecular tension sensors report forces generated by single integrin molecules in living cells . Nano Lett 13 : 3985-­‐9 325 . Stabley DR , Jurchenko C , Marshall SS , Salaita KS . 2012 . Visualizing mechanical tension across membrane receptors with a fluorescent sensor . Nat Methods 9 : 64-­‐7 326 . Xu H , Gonzalo JA , St Pierre Y , Williams IR , Kupper TS , Cotran RS , Springer TA , Gutierrez-­‐Ramos JC . 1994 . Leukocytosis and resistance to septic shock in intercellular adhesion molecule 1-­‐deficient mice . J Exp Med 180 : 95-­‐109 327 . Barnden MJ , Allison J , Heath WR , Carbone FR . 1998 . Defective TCR expression in transgenic mice constructed using cDNA-­‐based alpha-­‐ and beta-­‐chain genes under the control of heterologous regulatory elements . Immunol Cell Biol 76 : 34-­‐40 328 . March ME , Long EO . 2011 . beta2 integrin induces TCRzeta-­‐Syk-­‐ phospholipase C-­‐gamma phosphorylation and paxillin-­‐dependent granule polarization in human NK cells . J Immunol 186 : 2998-­‐3005 329 . Huang C , Springer TA . 1997 . Folding of the beta-­‐propeller domain of the integrin alphaL subunit is independent of the I domain and dependent on the beta2 subunit . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 94 : 3162-­‐7 330 . Lu C , Ferzly M , Takagi J , Springer TA . 2001 . Epitope mapping of antibodies to the C-­‐terminal region of the integrin beta 2 subunit reveals regions that become exposed upon receptor activation . J Immunol 166 : 5629-­‐37 331 . Dransfield I , Hogg N . 1989 . Regulated expression of Mg2 + binding epitope on leukocyte integrin alpha subunits . EMBO J 8 : 3759-­‐65 332 . Levitsky HI , Lazenby A , Hayashi RJ , Pardoll DM . 1994 . In vivo priming of two distinct antitumor effector populations : the role of MHC class I expression . J Exp Med 179 : 1215-­‐24 333 . Riedl J , Crevenna AH , Kessenbrock K , Yu JH , Neukirchen D , Bista M , Bradke F , Jenne D , Holak TA , Werb Z , Sixt M , Wedlich-­‐Soldner R . 2008 . Lifeact : a versatile marker to visualize F-­‐actin . Nat Methods 5 : 605-­‐7 334 . Dustin ML , Starr T , Varma R , Thomas VK . 2007 . Supported planar bilayers for study of the immunological synapse . Curr Protoc Immunol Chapter 18 : Unit 18 3 335 . Dehring DA , Clarke F , Ricart BG , Huang Y , Gomez TS , Williamson EK , Hammer DA , Billadeau DD , Argon Y , Burkhardt JK . 2011 . Hematopoietic lineage cell-­‐ 191 specific protein 1 functions in concert with the Wiskott-­‐Aldrich syndrome protein to promote podosome array organization and chemotaxis in dendritic cells . J Immunol 186 : 4805-­‐18