2246 Research Article Introduction Cell division is highly complex , involving the coordination of a number of cellular processes . At mitosis , in addition to the duplication , condensation and sorting of chromosomes , a cell must also undergo a dramatic series of morphological changes , unique to mitosis , which results in the production of two independent daughter cells ( Zhang and Robinson , 2005 ) . This is known as cytokinesis . In eukaryotes , entry into mitosis coincides with the silencing of the actin cytoskeleton and retraction of cellular protrusions resulting in a round cell . These rounded cells then rapidly pinch in two , by the formation of an equatorial furrow . This is a complex process that is still not completely understood , but requires both myosin II contraction , and exocytosis ( De Lozanne and Spudich , 1987 ; Lecuit and Wieschaus , 2000 ; Mabuchi and Okuno , 1977 ) . Although equatorial constriction appears to be the dominant mechanism for cell division in metazoa , other parallel mechanisms for splitting the cell in two also exist . The first indication of this was in studies using the social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum , which were still able to divide with fairly normal speed and efficiency after genetic disruption of myosin heavy chain ( mhcA ) – provided they were attached to a surface ( De Lozanne and Spudich , 1987 ; Neujahr et al . , 1997 ) . Cytokinesis is therefore so important that Dictyostelium cells possess at least two mechanisms for cell division , working in parallel to ensure success . These have been termed cytokinesis A ( myosin - II dependent ) and cytokinesis B ( myosin - II independent , adhesion dependent ) ( Uyeda et al . , 2000 ; Zang et al . , 1997 ) . Even if both these pathways fail , and a multinucleate cell is produced , Dictyostelium remains able to recover single cells by tearing the enlarged cell apart , in a cell - cycle - independent manner , known as traction - mediated cytofission or cytokinesis C ( De Lozanne and Spudich , 1987 ; Nagasaki et al . , 2002 ) . Dictyostelium is a unicellular organism but there is evidence that a pathway similar to cytokinesis B is conserved in metazoans . In a number of cultured mammalian cell lines , mitotic cells become only weakly attached to the substratum , although others remain adherent . For example , HeLa cells are unable to complete cytokinesis in the presence of myosin II inhibitors ( Straight et al . , 2003 ) , but more adherent cell lines such as NRK ( normal rat kidney ) and HT1080 fibrosarcoma cells are still able to make a furrow in an adhesion - dependent manner ( although cytokinesis ultimately fails ) ( Kanada et al . , 2005 ) . In addition , disruption of Rho , which lies upstream of myosin II , by either treatment with the Rho - kinase inhibitor Y27632 , or microinjection with the Rho inhibitor C3 ribosyltransferase is only able to block the division of weakly adherent cells , whereas strongly attached cells are able to complete cytokinesis ( O’Connell et al . , 1999 ; Kanada et al . , 2005 ) . Like the work with Dictyostelium , these studies demonstrate a similar dependency on substrate adhesion , and therefore mammalian cells are likely to share a common mechanism for generating a furrow , independently of myosin II . However , little is known about the mechanism of myosin - II - independent cytokinesis , and Dictyostelium remains the only organism where cytokinesis A and B can be clearly separated . We know it requires adhesion , and is partially blocked by the disruption of adhesion molecules such as talin , vinculin and paxillin ( Hibi et al . , 2004 ; Nagasaki et al . , 2009 ) but the mechanical process and the signalling pathways responsible for its regulation remain unknown . One clue , however , is provided by the observation that the combined disruption of the actin - binding protein coronin and myosin II leads to a much more severe cytokinesis defect than SCAR / WAVE is activated at mitosis and drives myosin - independent cytokinesis Jason S . King 1 , * , Douwe M . Veltman 1 , Marios Georgiou 2 , Buzz Baum 2 and Robert H . Insall 1 1 Beatson Institute for Cancer Research , Garscube Estate , Switchback Road , Bearsden , Glasgow , G61 1BD , UK 2 MRC - LMCB , University College London , Gower Street , London , WC1E 6BT , UK * Author for correspondence ( j . king @ beatson . gla . ac . uk ) Accepted 7 April 2010 Journal of Cell Science 123 , 2246 - 2255 ©2010 . Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 063735 Summary Cell division requires the tight coordination of multiple cytoskeletal pathways . The best understood of these involves myosin - II - dependent constriction around the cell equator , but both Dictyostelium and mammalian cells also use a parallel , adhesion - dependent mechanism to generate furrows . We show that the actin nucleation factor SCAR / WAVE is strongly activated during Dictyostelium cytokinesis . This activation localises to large polar protrusions , driving separation of the daughter cells . This continues for 10 minutes after division before the daughter cells revert to normal random motility , indicating that this is a tightly regulated process . We demonstrate that SCAR activity is essential to drive myosin - II - independent cytokinesis , and stabilises the furrow , ensuring symmetrical division . SCAR is also responsible for the generation of MiDASes , mitosis - specific actin - rich adhesions . Loss of SCAR in both Dictyostelium and Drosophila leads to a similar mitotic phenotype , with severe mitotic blebbing , indicating conserved functionality . We also find that the microtubule end - binding protein EB1 is required to restrict SCAR localisation and direct migration . EB1 - null cells also exhibit decreased adhesion during mitosis . Our data reveal a spindle - directed signalling pathway that regulates SCAR activity , migration and adhesion at mitosis . Key words : Dictyostelium , SCAR / WAVE , Cytokinesis J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e JCS ePress online publication date 8 June 2010 each individual mutation , even when cells are attached to a surface ( Nagasaki et al . , 2002 ) . Coronin strongly localises to the poles of mitotic cells ( de Hostos et al . , 1993 ) indicating that myosin - II - independent cytokinesis might be driven by actin - dependent processes at the cell extremities . This implies that actin plays a key , but undefined role at the poles as well as the furrow of dividing cells . During Dictyostelium cytokinesis , a number of regulators of the cytoskeleton such as racE and phosphatidylinositol 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate [ PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 ] localise to the poles of dividing cells ( Larochelle et al . , 1996 ; Janetopoulos et al . , 2005 ) . Others have shown that in NRK cells , the localised application of cytochalasin D ( an inhibitor of actin polymerisation ) to the cell poles is catastrophic to cytokinesis , but has little effect at the furrow ( O’Connell et al . , 2001 ) and thus polar actin polymerisation appears to be crucial in mammalian cells too . It is therefore important to understand both the functional role and the nature of the pathways regulating the production of actin at the cortex of dividing cells . Recent work has implicated the SCAR / WAVE complex , a potent activator of the ARP2 / 3 complex ( Machesky and Insall , 1998 ) , in regulating the cytoskeleton of mitotic cells . SCAR function is not essential for Dictyostelium cytokinesis ( Blagg et al . , 2003 ) , but disruption of the Abi subunit of the complex leads to inappropriate SCAR activation ( Pollitt and Insall , 2008 ) , which can disrupt normal cell division . Consistent with this , others showed that cells overexpressing an N - terminal truncation of SCAR also rapidly become multinucleate ( Caracino et al . , 2007 ) indicating that SCAR activity must be tightly regulated for normal cytokinesis . In this study we identify a defined period at the end of mitosis where Dictyostelium cells rapidly migrate apart . We show that during this time the SCAR / WAVE complex is strongly activated and constitutively localised to the polar cortex of dividing cells . This activation is essential in driving the migration of the daughter cells . We further demonstrate that this is crucial for successful myosin - II - independent division and show that the localisation of active SCAR is regulated by astral microtubules . 2247 Activation of SCAR / WAVE at mitosis Results Enhanced migration and activation of SCAR at cytokinesis Mitosis involves a number of sequential rearrangements to the cytoskeleton . As previously described , the Dictyostelium mitotic cycle starts with an initial rounding up and loss of cellular polarity ( Kitanishi - Yumura and Fukui , 1989 ) . The first external sign of the internal polarity formed by the spindle is the formation of ruffles on opposing sides of the otherwise round cell . Subsequently , as the furrow starts to form and ingress , the cells simultaneously start to spread and the polar ruffles change into large , lamellipodia - type protrusions . At this stage , the daughter cells move away from the furrow ( and each other ) with high directionality ( Fig . 1A ; Fig . 7C ) . Interestingly , when we examined this process in more detail , we noticed that the period in which cells maintained a spread , lamella morphology and moved in a directional manner lasted almost 12 minutes from the initiation of furrowing ( as indicated by the sudden change in gradient in Fig . 1A ) . During this hypermotile phase , wild - type cells maintained their directionality away from the furrow and moved much faster ( 6 . 1 m m / minute ) than randomly moving interphase cells ( 3 . 2 m m / minute ; Fig . 7B ) . Importantly , this phase continued for almost 10 minutes after the cells had completed division ( Fig . 1A ) , and therefore cannot be merely explained mechanically by the repression of pseudopod extension at the furrow by myosin II assembly . In addition , the end of this phase occurs as a sudden ‘switch’ back to normal interphase morphology and motility rather than a slow dissipation of polarity . We conclude that the mitotic activation of motility is a highly regulated process , specifically activated for a defined period as the cells begin to separate . Previous work has shown that in Dictyostelium , misregulation of the SCAR complex by disruption of the Abi subunit leads to aberrant mitosis ( Pollitt and Insall , 2008 ) . The only in vivo assay for SCAR activity is to image the localisation of the complex , which coincides with areas of polymerised actin ( Weiner et al . , 2007 ) . The dynamics of the SCAR / WAVE complex can be observed in live neutrophils by imaging GFP - tagged fusions of complex members with TIRF microscopy ( Weiner et al . , 2007 ) . We Fig . 1 . Enhanced migration and SCAR localisation at cytokinesis . ( A )  Dividing wild - type ( Ax3 ) cells were observed by video microscopy and the movement of each daughter cell away from the furrow was analysed . Values are the means of 10 divisions ; error bars represent standard deviation . ( B )  Cytokinesis of Ax3 cells coexpressing HSPC300 - GFP ( green ) and mRFPmars - actin ( red ) was observed by TIRF microscopy , showing a strong localisation and activation of SCAR at the end of mitosis ( see Movie 2 in supplementary material for the full sequence ) . Scale bar : 10  m m . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e expressed a number of different subunits of the SCAR complex fused to GFP in Dictyostelium . Using TIRF microscopy , HSCP300 - GFP , GFP - NapA ( not shown ) and SCAR - GFP all had a highly dynamic localisation , and were clearly recruited to the very leading edge of cellular protrusions ( Fig . 1B ; supplementary material Fig . S1 ) ( D . M . V . and R . H . I . , unpublished ) . Of all the probes , HSPC300 - GFP gave the highest contrast images and was used for all further experiments . The localisation of HSPC300 - GFP was always closely followed by both a narrower band of ARP2 / 3 ( indicated by mRFP - ARPC4 ; supplementary material Fig . S1B and Movie 1 ) and a broad band of mRFP - actin ( Fig . 1B ; supplementary material Movie 2 ) . Therefore , although it is currently impossible to formally prove that SCAR complex localisation is equivalent to its activity , this appears to be the case . Expression of HSPC300 - GFP is able to rescue both morphology and cytokinesis defects of hspc300 - null cells ( data not shown and supplementary material Fig . S3 ) and we conclude that this probe gives an authentic representation of SCAR localisation . This enabled us for the first time to image SCAR dynamics in live Dictyostelium , giving a similar but much clearer localisation than previous images of fixed cells using a SCAR - specific antibody ( Pollitt et al . , 2006 ) and with temporal resolution . During interphase , Ax3 cells only have weak SCAR - complex localisation ( Pollitt et al . , 2006 ) and HSPC300 - GFP only transiently localised to the small pseudopodia that vegetative Dictyostelium cells make ( data not shown ) . However , during cytokinesis , the SCAR complex became strongly localised to the large lamellipodial protrusions of each daughter cell , just ahead of a broad band of actin and ARPC4 and was excluded from the furrow ( Fig . 1B ; supplementary material Movies 1 and 2 ) . This 2248 Journal of Cell Science 123 ( 13 ) strongly suggests that SCAR is highly activated at the poles , leading to local ARP2 / 3 activity and actin polymerisation . The localisation of both HSPC300 - GFP and mRFP - actin is much stronger at cytokinesis than in interphase . Therefore SCAR activity is strongly activated at mitosis , and is specifically localised to the cell poles . SCAR is responsible for generating MiDASes In addition to its localisation at the mitotic cortex , we frequently observed that mRFP - actin localised to small patches beneath the nuclei of dividing cells ( Fig . 2A ) . These actin patches have been described previously and termed MiDASes ( mitosis - specific dynamic actin structures ) ( Itoh and Yumura , 2007 ) . MiDASes are highly dynamic structures formed underneath the mitotic spindle and appear to be the major sites of cell attachment to the substratum at cytokinesis . This and the observation that MiDASes become much more stable in myosin - II - deficient cells led to the hypothesis that they play an important role in adhesion - dependent cytokinesis as points through which the cell can exert a mechanical force ( Itoh and Yumura , 2007 ) . When we coexpressed mRFP - actin and HSPC300 - GFP , we observed that MiDASes always colocalised with the SCAR complex as well as mRFP - ARPC4 ( a subunit of the ARP2 / 3 complex ) ( Fig . 2A ; supplementary material Fig . S1B ) . Furthermore , as MiDASes were transient – often appearing and disappearing several times over the course of the mitosis – we were able to investigate the causal relationship between the two . When we simultaneously imaged HSPC300 - GFP and mRFP - actin we saw that the HSPC300 - GFP localisation always preceded the actin by Fig . 2 . SCAR localisation precedes MiDAS formation . ( A )  HSPC300 - GFP and mRFPmars - actin were imaged simultaneously by TIRF microscopy in dividing Ax3 cells ( see Movie 2 in supplementary material ) . Scale bar : 10  m m . Both MiDAS and SCAR localisation appeared and disappeared over the course of the movie ; the intensity of both the red and the green channels within the circled regions ( labelled L and R ) are plotted in B . Not all cells produced MIDASes , and when Ax3 cells expressing GFP - actin were observed at mitosis ( in widefield ) , cells that produced MiDASes ( at any point ) had a significantly more spread morphology than those that did not . ( C )  Cells dividing either with ( top ) or without ( bottom ) MiDASes . Scale bar : 10  m m . The area of these cells just before abscission was measured and is plotted in D . Error bars indicate the standard deviation . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e ~ 5 seconds ( Fig . 2 ; supplementary material Movie 3 ) . In addition , MiDASes were present in 67 % of mitoses in control cells , but were never observed in any of the 36 scar - null mitoses that we observed ( for example see Fig . 3B ) so we conclude that MiDASes are generated by localised ARP2 / 3 activity driven by SCAR . Dictyostelium cells have two parallel mechanisms for cytokinesis , cytokinesis A that is myosin - II dependent and cytokinesis B that is adhesion dependent . MiDASes are much more frequent and stable in cells lacking myosin - II ( Itoh and Yumura , 2007 ) , and therefore it is probable that they are upregulated as part of a switch to cytokinesis B . When we measured the area of dividing wild - type cells , we noticed that they split into two clear populations , and cells that produced MiDASes had almost twofold the area of cells without ( Fig . 2C , D ) . Cells that had MiDASes also had more cortical actin , and therefore it appears that all SCAR - generated structures are coordinately upregulated . Furthermore , the fact that the two populations are distinct and not part of a continuum indicates that there is a switch that determines whether a cell divides using predominantly SCAR or myosin II as the primary driver of cytokinesis . Cells lacking SCAR have abnormal mitosis The mitotic activation of SCAR at the cortex and MiDASes implies an important role for SCAR in cell division . To investigate this further , we looked at mitosis in cells in which SCAR had been disrupted . Previous work had shown that the loss of SCAR has a surprisingly mild effects on the growth , motility and development of Dictyostelium ( Bear et al . , 1998 ) . Indeed , although hyperactivation of SCAR by disruption of the Abi subunit leads to defects in cytokinesis , cells lacking SCAR remain almost entirely mononucleate in both adherent and suspension culture ( Pollitt and Insall , 2008 ) . When we looked more closely by high - resolution DIC microscopy we observed that although scar - null cells were able to efficiently complete cytokinesis , they did so with a dramatically altered morphology . Unlike wild - type cells , which appeared strongly adhered and formed flat , lamella structures ( Fig . 3A ; supplementary material Movie 4 ) scar - null cells produced numerous large bulbous projections ( Fig . 3A ; supplementary material Movie 5 ) . As these projections do not contain actin ( Fig . 3B ) we conclude that they are membrane blebs , caused by hydrostatic pressure . Similar to the activation of SCAR , these blebs only appeared as the furrow formed and lasted almost 30 minutes , long after division had completed , and twice as long as the hypermotile phase of wild - type cells ( Fig . 3E ) . Similar to the hypermotile phase of wild - type cells , scar - null cells reverted to a normal vegetative morphology with a sudden , rapid change , indicating a specific change in upstream signalling . In addition , although control cells remained adherent throughout mitosis ( 100 % of over 50 divisions ) , scar - null cells frequently detached with at least one daughter cell released from the substrate , indicating reduced adhesion , consistent with the loss of MiDASes ( see supplementary material Table S1 ) . In many divisions , it also appeared that the furrow of scar - null cells was formed in the wrong orientation , pinching off the top of the cell , rather than forming perpendicular to the substratum . When we directly observed the mitotic spindle in three dimensions using GFP - tubulin , we observed that in scar - null cells , the spindle appeared less constrained and more mobile , frequently elongating at an angle to the substratum , whereas in wild - type cells , the spindle always remained parallel to the surface ( see supplementary material Fig . S2 ) . 2249 Activation of SCAR / WAVE at mitosis From these experiments it is impossible to disseminate whether reduced adhesion is responsible for aberrant spindle extension , or caused by it , but it is an attractive hypothesis that interactions between the spindle and the actin cytoskeleton act as a scaffold to hold the spindle in place to orientate the plane of division ( see supplementary material Fig . S2C ) . Nonetheless , the defects in adhesion and furrow orientation , combined with a loss of actin - rich lamellipodial protrusions , lead to a complete loss of directional migration , and scar - null cells moved randomly at cytokinesis ( Fig . 3C , D ) . Therefore SCAR is essential for directed migration at mitosis . In order to investigate the evolutionary conservation of the role SCAR in metazoa , we looked at cell division within columnar epithelial cells in the dorsal thorax of developing Drosophila melanogaster pupae . In this organism , we were able to develop a Fig . 3 . Abnormal mitosis of Dictyostelium cells lacking SCAR . ( A )  DIC images of control ( Ax3 ) and scar - null ( IR46 ) cells dividing on a glass surface . ( B )  Wide - field fluorescence images of dividing cells expressing GFP - actin . Scale bar : 10  m m . Note the lack of MiDASes and cortical actin in IR46 cells . ( C )  Plot indicating the paths of cells at cytokinesis . Movies of dividing cells were orientated such that the furrow was formed perpendicular to the x - axis and the centroids of the daughter cells were tracked manually from the first frame at which the furrow could be seen . Ten divisions of each cell line are superimposed ; the paths of each pair of daughter cells are same colour . ( D )  Directionality of the cell paths plotted in C . ( E )  The duration of the motile phase , from the initiation of furrowing to a return to interphase morphology and behaviour ( i . e . random migration and the cessation of blebbing ) . Values are the means ± standard deviation of 20 cells from 10 divisions . * P < 0 . 005 , Students t - test . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e genetic system where a small , random population of scar - null cells grow and divide within a wild - type tissue . We observed cell division in real time by using Neuralized - Gal4 ( Reddy and Rodrigues , 1999 ) to drive expression of UAS - GFP : Moe , which labels actin filaments , specifically within well - spaced sensory organ precursor cells . The MARCM system ( Lee and Luo , 2001 ) was used to positively label scar mutant cells within this tissue and observe their behaviour over time . When scar - null cells divided , they also produced numerous blebs – strikingly similar to the phenotype of Dictyostelium SCAR mutants ( Fig . 4 ; supplementary material Movies 6 and 7 ) . Wild - type controls did not do this , indicating that SCAR is active at mitosis and suppresses blebbing . Therefore , although dividing cells are unable to migrate apart within a tissue , SCAR is important to maintain cell morphology and form proper F - actin structures . SCAR drives myosin - II - independent cytokinesis Loss of SCAR radically changes the morphology of cells at mitosis , yet both Dictyostelium and Drosophila mutants are still able to complete division . Previous work has shown that both Dictyostelium and some mammalian cell lines in tissue culture are able to form a cleavage furrow independently of myosin II , in an adhesion - dependent manner ( Kanada et al . , 2005 ) and Dictyostelium cells lacking myosin II are still able to divide efficiently , using this alternative pathway ( Uyeda et al . , 2000 ; Zang et al . , 1997 ) . As SCAR is a key regulator of directed migration during cytokinesis , we asked whether SCAR is important for myosin - II - independent division . To test this , we grew both wild - type and scar - null Dictyostelium cells in the presence of the myosin - II - specific inhibitor blebbistatin ( Straight et al . , 2003 ) . Whereas wild - type ( Ax3 ) cells were able to grow and divide normally by adhesion - dependent cytokinesis , scar - null cells rapidly became multinucleate , such that after 3 days 85 % of cells were multinucleate , with the majority having four or more nuclei ( Fig . 5 ) . Previously it has been observed that in Dictyostelium , different genetic backgrounds use SCAR to a greater or lesser extent during vegetative growth ( Pollitt et al . , 2006 ) . When we repeated these experiments with scar - null cells in an Ax2 genetic background [ a kind gift from Jan Faix , Hannover Medical School , Hannover , Germany ( Steffen et al . , 2006 ) ] we saw the same effect , with a large increase in multinucleate cells upon blebbistatin treatment as well as a disorganised , blebby morphology as the cells divided ( supplementary material Fig . S3 and data not shown ) . 2250 Journal of Cell Science 123 ( 13 ) We also tested mutants of other members of the SCAR complex ; consistent with their loss of SCAR function phenotype ( Ibarra et al . , 2006 ; Pollitt and Insall , 2009 ) , disruption of either hspc300 or napA led to multinucleate cells when grown in the presence of blebbistatin ( supplementary material Fig . S3 ) . This was rescued by expression of the HSPC300 - GFP probe in hspc300 - null cells . Loss of the PIR121 subunit leads to increased pseudopod activity ( Blagg et al . , 2003 ) and in this mutant , treatment with blebbistatin had no effect on the number of multinucleate cells . Abi - null cells have a specific defect of increased SCAR activity at cytokinesis ( Pollitt and Insall , 2008 ) and have an intermediate phenotype , becoming only moderately more multinucleate upon blebbistatin treatment ( supplementary material Fig . S3 ) . Fig . 4 . Abnormal mitosis of Drosophila columnar epithelial cells lacking SCAR . Images of ( A ) control and ( B ) scar mutant sensory organ precursor cells undergoing cell division during pupal development . Cells are labelled with GFP - Moe . Scale bar : 5  m m . Optical Z - sections through the tissue were taken every 2 minutes on a confocal microscope and representative slices through a dividing cell are shown . Arrows indicate blebs produced when cells lacking SCAR divide . The full sequences can be viewed in Movies 6 and 7 in supplementary material . Fig . 5 . SCAR is essential for efficient myosin - II - independent cytokinesis . Control ( Ax3 ) and scar - null cells were grown in glass dishes in the presence of 40  m M blebbistatin . JK107 cells grown in the presence of 10  m g / ml doxycycline were transferred to medium lacking it ( i . e . scar expression was repressed ) . ( A )  Every 24 hours cells were fixed , stained with DAPI and the number of nuclei per cell were counted . At least 100 cells were counted for each condition and the values plotted are the means ± standard deviation of three independent experiments . ( B )  Representative images of DAPI stained , fixed cells after 3 days growth in the conditions indicated . Scale bar : 50  m m . ( C )  JK107 cells were grown in medium lacking doxycycline for 24 hours and cytokinesis was imaged by DIC microscopy . Scale bar : 10  m m . Mitosis frequently resulted in a failed ( bottom ) , or asymmetric ( middle ) division , with one daughter cell significantly larger than the other . ( D )  Frequency of symmetrical , asymmetric and failed cytokinesis in JK107 cells grown in either the presence or absence of 10  m g / ml doxycycline . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e Although blebbistatin appears to be a highly specific inhibitor of myosin II , others have shown that in Dictyostelium , the inhibited myosin II molecules form aggregates , leading to additional effects on normally myosin - independent processes ( Shu et al . , 2005 ) . To ensure that this is not responsible for the effects we see upon disruption of scar we developed a genetic system , in which myosin heavy chain ( mhcA ) was constitutively disrupted , but we were able to inducibly switch off SCAR expression using the Tet - On promoter ( supplementary material Fig . S4 ) . These cells ( named JK107 ) divided efficiently and remained mononucleate in the presence of doxycycline ( i . e . with SCAR expressed ) , however , they also rapidly became multinucleate when doxycycline was removed and scar expression was repressed ( Fig . 5A , B ) . Therefore SCAR is a major effector for myosin - II - independent cytokinesis . This inducible system allowed us to study in detail the division of mononucleate cells as they try to divide without myosin II or SCAR . When cells lacking myosin II but expressing SCAR divide they migrate apart , generating a symmetrical furrow and split into two cells of equal size ( Fig . 5D ) . This process is completed in approximately the same time in wild - type , scar - null and mhcA - null cells ( Fig . 6C ) . However , in the absence of both myosin II and SCAR , furrow progression is extremely slow and unstable , leading to an asymmetric ( where one daughter cell is much larger than the other ) or failed division in 60 % of cases ( Figs 5C , D ) . Frequently however , mhcA – / scar – double mutants did succeed in splitting into two cells , but this was very slow , taking four times longer to divide than when SCAR was expressed ( Fig . 6C ) . When we looked at actin and SCAR dynamics in JK107 cells , we saw that when SCAR was induced , HSPC300 - GFP localised to the initial polar ruffles , as well as large lamellae ( supplementary material Movie 8 ) . When SCAR expression was repressed , HSPC300 - GFP became uniformly distributed , and the flat lamella structures were lost ( Fig . 6 ; supplementary material Movie 9 ) . Cells were still able to produce actin - rich ruffles , indicating that these can be generated independently of SCAR , but these ruffles were not sufficient to drive migration . Therefore dividing cells exhibit two overlapping actin processes at the cell poles , SCAR - independent polar ruffling , and a superimposed activation of SCAR at the cortex and under the spindle , driving cell spreading and migration ( supplementary material Fig . S2C ) . The mitotic activation of SCAR may therefore serve two purposes : first , by causing daughter cells to migrate apart , and increasing adhesion via MiDASes , SCAR provides a secondary mechanism for cytokinesis in the absence of myosin II , improving the robustness of mitosis ; second , activation of SCAR appears to stabilise the mitotic furrow , ensuring it is correctly positioned for an equal division . This agrees with previous studies that demonstrated that it is the mechanical properties of both the cortex and the furrow that determine the morphology of the mitotic cell and ensure a symmetrical division ( Girard et al . , 2004 ) . It is interesting that disruption of Abi , which leads to hyperactive SCAR , or coronin , which also regulates polar actin , result in cytokinesis defects in suspension where migration is impossible ( Pollitt and Insall , 2008 ; de Hostos et al . , 1993 ) . Therefore , whereas migration - assisted division may be limited to unicellular organisms or a specific subset of metazoan cells , SCAR - mediated stabilisation of the furrow may be more generally applicable to cell division when movement is restricted . 2251 Activation of SCAR / WAVE at mitosis SCAR is also essential for traction - mediated cytofission Dictyostelium cells are extremely robust at dividing , and in addition to myosin - II - and adhesion - dependent cytokinesis , a number of cytokinetic mutants remain able to maintain a mononucleate population by cytokinesis C ( also known as traction - mediated cytofission ) ( De Lozanne and Spudich , 1987 ; Vithalani et al . , 1996 ) . In this process , multinucleate cells are able to tear themselves into individual cells in a cell - cycle - independent but adhesion - dependent manner . Although cells lacking both SCAR and myosin II have severely defective cytokinesis , they do frequently succeed ( 70 % end up as two cells ; Fig . 5D ) . However after just six generations , over 85 % of scar - null cells grown in blebbistatin have become multinucleate ( Fig . 5A ) . We therefore investigated whether SCAR was also important for traction - mediated cytofission . To do this , we generated multinucleate cells by growing them in suspension with blebbistatin for 2 days , then washed out the drug and let them attach and divide on a surface . In this assay , both wild - type and scar - null cells were initially large and multinucleate , but whereas Fig . 6 . Cytokinesis of cells lacking scar and mhcA . JK107 cells coexpressing HSPC300 - GFP and mRFPmars - actin were grown overnight in the presence ( A ) or absence ( B ) of 10  m g / ml doxycycline and imaged by TIRF microscopy . Scale bar : 10  m m . Note the frame interval in B is twice as long as in A . ( C )  Cells lacking both SCAR and myosin II take significantly longer to divide . Movies were recorded of dividing cells and the time from furrow formation to abscission was measured for control ( Ax3 ) , mhcA - null ( JK103 ) , scar - null ( IR46 ) and inducible scar / mhcA - null cells ( JK107 ) . Values plotted are the mean ± standard deviation of at least five cells . * P < 0 . 005 . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e wild - type cells rapidly tore themselves into smaller fragments , cells lacking SCAR were completely unable to do this , and remained multinucleate throughout the assay unless they divided by a cell - cycle - dependent multinucleate mitosis , resulting in multiple daughter cells from a single mitosis ( supplementary material Fig . S5 ) . Interestingly , although vegetative scar - null cells are still able to move ( Pollitt et al . , 2006 ) multinucleate scar - null cells are stationary and did not significantly move over several hours . SCAR is thus more important for multinucleate cell motility and is essential for traction - mediated cytofission . Localised SCAR activation and motility are regulated by astral microtubules We have demonstrated that at mitosis , SCAR is strongly localised to the distal poles of dividing cells leading to an extended period of rapid , directional migration . What then is responsible for localising and activating SCAR ? Unlike chemotaxing cells , which respond to an extracellular gradient of chemoattractant , the directional migration of a dividing cell must be determined by an intrinsic , intracellular stimulus . The mitotic spindle is an obvious candidate for the regulation of the direction of migration , and it is the astral microtubules that provide the mitotic cell with an intrinsic polarity ( Carminati and Stearns , 1997 ; Pearson and Bloom , 2004 ; Shaw et al . , 1997 ) . Therefore , we looked to see if the astral microtubules were responsible for directing migration and SCAR activation at mitosis . EB1 is one of a number of proteins that bind to the growing ends of microtubules and localises to the astral microtubules , centrosomes and kinetochores at mitosis ( Berrueta et al . , 1998 ; Rehberg and Graf , 2002 ) . Disruption of Dictyostelium EB1 has previously been reported to delay prometaphase progression , but subsequent spindle elongation and division occurs as normal and eb1 - null cells are able to efficiently complete cytokinesis ( Rehberg and Graf , 2002 ) . However , when we observed the motility of eb1 - null cells ( a kind gift from Ralf Gräf , University of Potsdam , Germany ) , we saw that whereas interphase cells were indistinguishable from wild type , at mitosis their directional migration was lost , and they moved randomly ( Fig . 7A , C ) . Like scar - null cells , they also exhibited reduced adhesion , with at least one cell detaching in 73 % of divisions ( supplementary material Table S1 ) . When we examined the localisation of HSPC300 - GFP in eb1 - null cells , similar to control cells , SCAR complex localisation was enhanced at mitosis , and cells had an overall increase in speed compared with interphase cells , and the mitotic activation of SCAR appeared to be intact ( Fig . 7B , E ) . However , whereas wild - type cells have a highly organised SCAR localisation , producing wide protrusions exclusively at the cell extremities , cells lacking EB1 were much less organised producing smaller , incoherent protrusions which frequently extended from the rear of the cell and the furrow ( Fig . 7E ; supplementary material Movie 10 ) . We have shown that EB1 is required for the proper localisation of SCAR at mitosis , and subsequent directed migration of the daughter cells . Consistent with this , when treated with blebbistatin , furrow ingression was severely retarded and eb1 - null cells took 50 % longer to divide than control cells ( P < 0 . 01 , Student’s t - test ; Fig . 7D ) . Unlike scar - null cells , eb1 - null cells did eventually succeed in dividing , and did not become multinucleate ( data not shown ) , showing that although SCAR activity is uncoordinated in these cells , it is sufficient to drive an inefficient cytokinesis . Previous work has also shown that MiDASes colocalise with the microtubule tips underneath the spindle , and that they are 2252 Journal of Cell Science 123 ( 13 ) disrupted by treatment with microtubule depolymerising drugs ( Itoh and Yumura , 2007 ) . Consistent with this , MiDASes were never observed in eb1 - null cells ( n  15 ) and in 73 % of mitoses one of the daughter cells lost contact with the substratum before division was complete . Therefore , we conclude that microtubule plus ends direct the localised activity of SCAR and regulate the adhesion and furrow orientation of dividing cells . Whether the regulation of SCAR by EB1 is constitutive , present in interphase and chemotaxing cells , or is specific to mitosis , requires further investigation . However , Dictyostelium EB1 has been shown to localise to the tips of pseudopodia in migrating cells ( Rehberg and Graf , 2002 ) . In addition , depletion of EB1 in mouse melanoma cells inhibits the formation of lamellae and migration ( Schober et al . , 2009 ) implying a more general role of EB1 and microtubule plus ends in the regulation of SCAR . Discussion In this study , we have shown that at the end of mitosis , cells initiate a highly motile phase , which continues for a defined period of time , ending suddenly . The switch - like characteristics of this motile Fig . 7 . EB1 directs post - mitotic migration . ( A )  Paths of control ( Ax2 ) and eb1 - null cells at cytokinesis . Ten divisions are superimposed and the plots for each pairs of daughter cells are same colour . ( B )  Speed of migration of both dividing and interphase cells and ( C ) Cytokinetic directionality ( defined as the distance moved perpendicular to the furrow divided by the total path length ) of mutant cells . ( D )  Time to complete division , from the initiation of furrowing to abscission of control ( Ax2 ) and eb1 - null cells after treatment for 1 hour with 40  m M blebbistatin . * P < 0 . 01 ; * * P < 0 . 05 , Student’s t - test . ( E )  TIRF images of cells coexpressing HSPC300 - GFP ( green ) and mRFPmars - actin ( red ) . Scale bar : 10  m m . Arrows indicate regions where SCAR is inappropriately localised in eb1 - null cells ( for the full sequence see Movie 10 in supplementary material ) . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e phase indicate that it is a tightly regulated process . Migration is activated simultaneously with furrow formation and it is probable that it shares a common master - regulator with myosin II contraction . Although the primary mitotic signal is unknown , we show that one of the major effectors of this pathway is the SCAR / WAVE complex , which drives both migration and adhesion through the localised activation of the ARP2 / 3 complex . The activation of SCAR at mitosis appears to serve a number of functions . Firstly , we demonstrate that SCAR activity and resultant migration is crucial for cytokinesis B and the completion of cell division when myosin II is compromised . Secondly , the dramatic mitotic blebbing seen upon disruption of SCAR indicates a role in maintaining the cell cortex and shape in order to cope with increased hydrostatic pressure . Thirdly , the demonstration that SCAR directly regulates the formation of MiDASes implies a role in regulating cell adhesion at mitosis . This is consistent with the observation that SCAR - null cells frequently detach when they divide . In addition , others have recently demonstrated that dividing cells possess a robust mechanosensing system , whereby the cell redistributes myosin II and cortexillin I to the cortex in order to dynamically correct for any defects in cell shape that may occur ( Ren et al . , 2009 ) . We show that cells lacking both SCAR and myosin II are unable to correct asymmetric divisions as they progress , implying that SCAR may be an effector of this mechanosensory pathway . Are these roles for SCAR conserved in higher eukaryotes ? Although cells within a tissue cannot migrate when they divide , there is good evidence for the presence of myosin - independent , adhesion - mediated mechanism in mammalian cells . Normal rat kidney ( NRK ) epithelial cells are highly adherent and when treated with blebbistatin , are still able to generate a furrow ( albeit irregular ) provided they have a surface to adhere to ( Kanada et al . , 2005 ) . Others have shown that both NRK cells and 3T3 fibroblasts are able to divide after microinjection of the Rho - inhibitor C3 ribosyltransferase , which also blocks the activity of myosin II ( O’Connell et al . , 1999 ) . This evidence clearly indicates that metazoan cells also possess a secondary , adhesion - dependent pathway that reinforces the predominant myosin - II - dependent furrow formation . Indeed , it has been suggested that migration - dependent division is the more ancient mechanism , with myosin II contraction superimposed later as an adaptation to multicellularity ( Gerisch and Weber , 2000 ) . The activation of SCAR and cell migration is clearly beneficial for the division of independent , single cells , but its importance within a tissue , where migration is obstructed by the surrounding cells is less obvious . Our observation that loss of SCAR results in aberrant mitotic blebbing in both Dictyostelium and Drosophila tissue indicates conserved function . At a basic level , SCAR - generated cortical actin is important to contain the increased hydrostatic pressure generated by myosin contraction at the furrow . There is also some evidence to suggest an additional , more specific role for SCAR at cytokinesis . When the Abi subunit of the SCAR complex is disrupted , cells extend aberrant protrusions and become multinucleate ( Pollitt and Insall , 2008 ) ; as this also occurs when the cells are grown in suspension where migration is impossible , the defect in cytokinesis must be more complex than simple disruption of directional movement . Others have also observed that excessive , or disregulated cortical actin disrupts cell division , and null mutants of coronin , as well as overexpression of a truncated form of SCAR also leading to cytokinesis defects ( Caracino et al . , 2007 ; de Hostos et al . , 1993 ) . There is also evidence that it is the 2253 Activation of SCAR / WAVE at mitosis balance between the forces and mechanical properties at the cortex and the furrow which determines the shape of the dividing cell ( Girard et al . , 2004 ) . As SCAR is a major regulator of the cortical cytoskeleton , it is probable that its tight regulation will be important for cell shape and symmetry independently of any role in migration . In addition , mutants that lack or have uncoordinated SCAR activity and migration share a common defect in spindle and furrow orientation : whereas wild - type cells always produce a furrow perpendicular to the substratum , scar and eb1 - null cells do not , and frequently produce furrows towards the top of the mitotic cell such that one daughter cell is detached ( supplementary material Table S1 ) . As MiDASes are the major points of adhesion within mitotic cells ( Itoh and Yumura , 2007 ) , and are generated by SCAR , this may be simply due to a loss of adhesion , but it is clear that in Dictyostelium at least , SCAR is important for maintaining the orientation of the division plane . In addition , in scar - null cells , the spindle appears to be more motile and we postulate that by pushing out the cell cortex , SCAR is able to increase tension along astral microtubules and stabilise the spindle and furrow ( supplementary material Fig . S2C ) . Indeed , it has been shown that in Drosophila neuroblasts , the repression of asymmetric division relies upon the presence of adherence junctions and is disrupted by depletion of either APC or EB1 ( Lu et al . , 2001 ) . Others have recently shown that formation of cell - cell junctions is inhibited by depletion of SCAR ( Yamazaki et al . , 2007 ) . Therefore the localised activation of SCAR and stabilisation of cell - cell junctions provides a plausible mechanism for orientating the mitotic spindle and organising asymmetric cell division . In conclusion , the actin cytoskeleton plays a number of distinct roles during cell division , and its proper regulation is crucial . In this study we have demonstrated that SCAR is essential for the proper morphology of both Dictyostelium and Drosophila cells during mitosis , and is the major regulator of both migration and adhesion . Further studies are required to investigate the potential implications of this within a whole organism context , or during embryogenesis but it seems probably that , in at least a subset of cell divisions , SCAR is crucial . Materials and Methods Dictyostelium strains and cell culture The genotypes of all the strains of Dictyostelium used are listed in supplementary material Table S1 . When mutant strains were generated in Ax2 ( Watts and Ashworth , 1970 ) or Ax3 ( Sussman and Sussman , 1967 ) backgrounds the appropriate control was used . Unless otherwise stated , all strains were cultured at 22°C adhered to plastic dishes and maintained at low density . Cells were grown in HL - 5 medium ( Formedium ) , which was replaced with low - fluorescent medium ( Formedium ) 2 hours prior to fluorescence microscopy . Cells were transformed by electroporation and extrachromosomal vectors were selected and maintained in 50 m g / ml hygromycin ( Invitrogen ) . Cells inducibly expressing SCAR were maintained in 10 m g / ml doxycycline ( Sigma ) . The pure ( – ) enantiomer of blebbistatin ( Tocris ) was used in all experiments . Generation of mutant strains and expression plasmids An inducible knockout of SCAR was generated using the previously published scar - null cell line IR46 ( Blagg et al . , 2003 ) , and re - expressing SCAR under the control of the Tet - On promoter . The full coding sequence of scar was amplified by adding 5 (cid:2) Bam HI and 3 (cid:2) Spe I sites by PCR and cloning into the Bgl II - Spe I sites of the Tet - On expression vector pDM310 ( Veltman et al . , 2009b ) . The Dictyostelium origin of replication was then removed by Mlu I - Hin dIII digest , blunting with Klenow and re - ligation ( giving pJSK321 ) . This was transformed into IR46 cells by REMI using Xho I ( Kuspa and Loomis , 1992 ) and selection with 10 m g / ml G418 . Several independent transformants were isolated and the regulation of SCAR expression tested by western blotting using a rabbit anti - SCAR antibody ( Blagg et al . , 2003 ) of whole cell lysates after growth in various concentrations of doxycycline ( supplementary material Fig . S4 ) . The strain with the most similar expression to control cells at 10 m g / ml doxycycline was used for further experiments ( named SIKO2 ) . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e 2254 Journal of Cell Science 123 ( 13 ) The mhcA gene was disrupted using the following construct . Briefly , 5 (cid:2) and 3 (cid:2) fragments of mhcA were amplified by PCR from genomic DNA , adding Bgl II and Sal I sites at the 5 (cid:2) and 3 (cid:2) internal ends , respectively . The PCR products were then mixed and used as template for a secondary PCR giving a 2 . 4 kb fragment of the mhcA gene with a 105 bp deletion in the middle replaced by Bgl II and Sal I sites . This was cloned into TOPO blunt II ( Invitrogen ) . The blasticidin - selectable marker was then inserted as a Bam HI - Sal I fragment from pLPBLP ( Faix et al . , 2004 ) . Clones transformed with this construct were screened for disruption of the mhcA locus by PCR and further validated by inability to divide in suspension culture ( data not shown ) . mhcA was disrupted in both Ax3 ( giving JK103 ) and the inducible SCAR knockout strain described above ( giving JK107 ) . The full - length actin gene from Dictyostelium was amplified from genomic DNA and cloned into pDONR221 using the Gateway system ( Invitrogen ) . The actin gene was subsequently cloned into pDM448 ( Veltman et al . , 2009a ) for fusion to GFP ( resulting in pDM478 ) and into pDM449 for fusion to mRFPmars ( resulting in pDM463 ) . The full open reading frame for HSPC300 was amplified by PCR from cDNA and cloned into the expression vector pDM377 ( yielding pDM459 ) and shuttle vector pDM412 ( yielding pDM557 ) ( Veltman et al . , 2009a ) placing it N - terminal to GFP . The HSPC300 - GFP expression cassette was excised from pDM557 with Ngo MIV and ligated into the Ngo MIV site of pDM463 to obtain a single vector expressing both HSPC300 - GFP and mRFPmars - actin ( pJSK352 ) . The full - length coding sequences for  - tubulin , NapA , SCAR and ARPC4 were also amplified from cDNA by PCR and cloned into the vectors pDM449 , pDM448 , 450 and 579 , respectively , to yield expression vectors pJSK336 ( GFP - tubulin ) , pDM479 ( GFP - NapA ) , pDM523 ( SCAR - GFP ) and the shuttle vector pDM601 ( mRFPmars2 - ArpC4 ) . The mRFPmars2 - ArpC4 expression cassette was then excised from pDM601 by Ngo MIV digest and ligated into the Ngo MIV site of pDM459 to yield pDM604 , a HSPC300 - GFP – mRFPmars2 - ArpC4 coexpression vector . Microscopy and image analysis Cell morphology and migration were imaged using differential interference contrast ( DIC ) microscopy . Cells were seeded in glass - bottomed dishes ( MatTek ) and left for 2 hours prior to imaging using an inverted microscope fitted with a 100 (cid:3) / 1 . 40 NA oil objective ( Nikon ) . For analysis of migration , images were acquired every 10 seconds . The paths of daughter cells at cytokinesis were generated by first orientating each movie such that the furrow ingressed along the vertical axis . The centroids of each daughter cell were manually tracked using the MtrackJ plugin for ImageJ ( http : / / rsb . info . nih . gov / ij ) from the start of furrow formation for 5 minutes . Cytokinetic directionality was calculated as the distance moved directly away from the furrow ( i . e . along the x - axis ) divided by the total path length . Total internal reflection fluorescence ( TIRF ) experiments were performed on a Nikon Eclipse TE 2000 - U microscope equipped with a 100 (cid:3) / 1 . 45 NA Nikon TIRF oil immersion objective . The microscope was equipped with a custom condenser in which laser light was introduced into the illumination pathway directly from an optical fibre output oriented parallel to the optical axis of the microscope . The light source for evanescent wave illumination was a 473 nm diode laser or 561 laser ( Omicron ) , independently coupled into the condenser separately to allow individual TIRF angle adjustment . A green - red dual filterblock ( ET - GFP / mcherry ; AHF Analysentechnik , Germany ) was used for 473 / 561 coexcitation . A Multi - Spec dual emission splitter ( Optical Insights , NM ) with a 595 nm dichroic and two bandpass filters ( 510 - 565 for green and 605 - 655nm for red ) was used to separate both emissions . Images were acquired every 5 seconds with a 50 msecond exposure using a Cascade 512F EMCCD camera ( Photometrics UK ) . Wide - field images of live and fixed cells were obtained using a 60 (cid:3) / 1 . 42 NA oil immersion objective ( Nikon ) on an Olympus IX81 inverted microscope . Cell area was measured by manually outlining each daughter cell at the point of abscission . Cells were scored as having MiDASes if at least one MiDAS was observed at any point in mitosis . To image the mitotic spindle in three dimensions , a Z - series ( 0 . 5 m m spacing ) was taken at each time point and either extended focus ( XY ) images , or Z - axis maximum intensity projections produced using Volocity imaging software ( Improvision ) . Drosophilagenetics and live - cell imaging Live - cell imaging was performed with Neuralized GAL4 : UAS GFP - Moesin flies . GFP - Moe is the actin - binding domain of Drosophila Moesin ( C - terminal 137 residues ) fused to GFP ( Edwards et al . , 1997 ) . Positively marked clones for scar  37 ( Zallen et al . , 2002 ) were induced with Ubx - Flp . For live - cell imaging , animals were prepared , at approximately 14 hours after puparium formation , by cutting a window in the pupal case , attached to a slide with double - sided sticky tape . A coverslip with a drop of injection oil was then placed over the notum , supported by coverslips at either end to allow imaging from both upright and inverted Leica SP2 or SP5 microscopes . Counting nuclei Cells were grown without subculture for the duration of the experiment on glass - bottomed dishes ( MatTek ) . Cells were fixed by replacing the medium with – 20°C methanol and left for 5 minutes . Cells were then washed twice in KK2 buffer ( 16 . 5 mM KH 2 PO 4 , 3 . 8 mM K 2 HPO 4 pH 6 . 2 ) and placed in KK2 with 0 . 5 m g / ml Hoechst ( Sigma ) to stain DNA . Cells were imaged on a fluorescence microscope and the number of nuclei were counted in at least 100 cells for each experiment . The authors are grateful to Ralph Gräf for EB1 - null cells and Jan Faix for Ax2 - derived SCAR mutants . We also thank Dave Gillespie for critical reading of the manuscript and the Medical Research Council for a Senior Fellowship ( G117 / 537 ) to R . H . I . and project grant support ( G0600249 ) to J . K . Deposited in PMC for release after 6 months . Supplementary material available online at http : / / jcs . biologists . org / cgi / content / full / 123 / 13 / 2246 / DC1 References Bear , J . E . , Rawls , J . F . and Saxe , C . L . , 3rd ( 1998 ) . SCAR , a WASP - related protein , isolated as a suppressor of receptor defects in late Dictyostelium development . J . Cell Biol . 142 , 1325 - 1335 . Berrueta , L . , Kraeft , S . K . , Tirnauer , J . S . , Schuyler , S . C . , Chen , L . B . , Hill , D . E . , Pellman , D . and Bierer , B . E . ( 1998 ) . The adenomatous polyposis coli - binding protein EB1 is associated with cytoplasmic and spindle microtubules . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 10596 - 10601 . Blagg , S . L . , Stewart , M . , Sambles , C . and Insall , R . H . ( 2003 ) . PIR121 regulates pseudopod dynamics and SCAR activity in Dictyostelium . Curr . Biol . 13 , 1480 - 1487 . Caracino , D . , Jones , C . , Compton , M . and Saxe , C . L . R . ( 2007 ) . The N - terminus of Dictyostelium Scar interacts with Abi and HSPC300 and is essential for proper regulation and function . Mol . Biol . Cell 18 , 1609 - 1620 . Carminati , J . L . and Stearns , T . ( 1997 ) . Microtubules orient the mitotic spindle in yeast through dynein - dependent interactions with the cell cortex . J . Cell Biol . 138 , 629 - 641 . de Hostos , E . L . , Rehfuess , C . , Bradtke , B . , Waddell , D . R . , Albrecht , R . , Murphy , J . and Gerisch , G . ( 1993 ) . Dictyostelium mutants lacking the cytoskeletal protein coronin are defective in cytokinesis and cell motility . J . Cell Biol . 120 , 163 - 173 . De Lozanne , A . and Spudich , J . A . ( 1987 ) . Disruption of the Dictyostelium myosin heavy chain gene by homologous recombination . Science 236 , 1086 - 1091 . Edwards , K . A . , Demsky , M . , Montague , R . A . , Weymouth , N . and Kiehart , D . P . ( 1997 ) . GFP - moesin illuminates actin cytoskeleton dynamics in living tissue and demonstrates cell shape changes during morphogenesis in Drosophila . Dev . Biol . 191 , 103 - 117 . Faix , J . , Kreppel , L . , Shaulsky , G . , Schleicher , M . and Kimmel , A . R . ( 2004 ) . A rapid and efficient method to generate multiple gene disruptions in Dictyostelium discoideum using a single selectable marker and the Cre - loxP system . Nucleic Acids Res . 32 , e143 . Gerisch , G . and Weber , I . ( 2000 ) . Cytokinesis without myosin II . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 12 , 126 - 132 . Girard , K . D . , Chaney , C . , Delannoy , M . , Kuo , S . C . and Robinson , D . N . ( 2004 ) . Dynacortin contributes to cortical viscoelasticity and helps define the shape changes of cytokinesis . EMBO J . 23 , 1536 - 1546 . Hibi , M . , Nagasaki , A . , Takahashi , M . , Yamagishi , A . and Uyeda , T . Q . ( 2004 ) . Dictyostelium discoideum talin A is crucial for myosin II - independent and adhesion - dependent cytokinesis . J . Muscle Res . Cell Motil . 25 , 127 - 140 . Ibarra , N . , Blagg , S . L . , Vazquez , F . and Insall , R . H . ( 2006 ) . Nap1 regulates Dictyostelium cell motility and adhesion through SCAR - dependent and - independent pathways . Curr . Biol . 16 , 717 - 722 . Itoh , G . and Yumura , S . ( 2007 ) . A novel mitosis - specific dynamic actin structure in Dictyostelium cells . J . Cell Sci . 120 , 4302 - 4309 . Janetopoulos , C . , Borleis , J . , Vazquez , F . , Iijima , M . and Devreotes , P . ( 2005 ) . Temporal and spatial regulation of phosphoinositide signaling mediates cytokinesis . Dev . Cell 8 , 467 - 477 . Kanada , M . , Nagasaki , A . and Uyeda , T . Q . ( 2005 ) . Adhesion - dependent and contractile ring - independent equatorial furrowing during cytokinesis in mammalian cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 3865 - 3872 . Kitanishi - Yumura , T . and Fukui , Y . ( 1989 ) . Actomyosin organization during cytokinesis : reversible translocation and differential redistribution in Dictyostelium . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 12 , 78 - 89 . Kuspa , A . and Loomis , W . F . ( 1992 ) . Tagging developmental genes in Dictyostelium by restriction enzyme - mediated integration of plasmid DNA . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 89 , 8803 - 8807 . Larochelle , D . A . , Vithalani , K . K . and De Lozanne , A . ( 1996 ) . A novel member of the rho family of small GTP - binding proteins is specifically required for cytokinesis . J . Cell Biol . 133 , 1321 - 1329 . Lecuit , T . and Wieschaus , E . ( 2000 ) . Polarized insertion of new membrane from a cytoplasmic reservoir during cleavage of the Drosophila embryo . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 849 - 860 . Lee , T . and Luo , L . ( 2001 ) . Mosaic analysis with a repressible cell marker ( MARCM ) for Drosophila neural development . Trends Neurosci . 24 , 251 - 254 . Lu , B . , Roegiers , F . , Jan , L . Y . and Jan , Y . N . ( 2001 ) . Adherens junctions inhibit asymmetric division in the Drosophila epithelium . Nature 409 , 522 - 525 . Mabuchi , I . and Okuno , M . ( 1977 ) . The effect of myosin antibody on the division of starfish blastomeres . J . Cell Biol . 74 , 251 - 263 . Machesky , L . M . and Insall , R . H . ( 1998 ) . Scar1 and the related Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein , WASP , regulate the actin cytoskeleton through the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Biol . 8 , 1347 - 1356 . Nagasaki , A . , de Hostos , E . L . and Uyeda , T . Q . ( 2002 ) . Genetic and morphological evidence for two parallel pathways of cell - cycle - coupled cytokinesis in Dictyostelium . J . Cell Sci . 115 , 2241 - 2251 . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e 2255 Activation of SCAR / WAVE at mitosis Nagasaki , A . , Kanada , M . and Uyeda , T . Q . ( 2009 ) . Cell adhesion molecules regulate contractile ring - independent cytokinesis in Dictyostelium discoideum . Cell Res . 19 , 236 - 246 . Neujahr , R . , Heizer , C . and Gerisch , G . ( 1997 ) . Myosin II - independent processes in mitotic cells of Dictyostelium discoideum : redistribution of the nuclei , re - arrangement of the actin system and formation of the cleavage furrow . J . Cell Sci . 110 , 123 - 137 . O’Connell , C . B . , Wheatley , S . P . , Ahmed , S . and Wang , Y . L . ( 1999 ) . The small GTP - binding protein rho regulates cortical activities in cultured cells during division . J . Cell Biol . 144 , 305 - 313 . O’Connell , C . B . , Warner , A . K . and Wang , Y . ( 2001 ) . Distinct roles of the equatorial and polar cortices in the cleavage of adherent cells . Curr . Biol . 11 , 702 - 707 . Pearson , C . G . and Bloom , K . ( 2004 ) . Dynamic microtubules lead the way for spindle positioning . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 5 , 481 - 492 . Pollitt , A . Y . and Insall , R . H . ( 2008 ) . Abi mutants in Dictyostelium reveal specific roles for the SCAR / WAVE complex in cytokinesis . Curr . Biol . 18 , 203 - 210 . Pollitt , A . Y . and Insall , R . H . ( 2009 ) . Loss of Dictyostelium HSPC300 causes a scar - like phenotype and loss of SCAR protein . BMC Cell Biol . 10 , 13 . Pollitt , A . Y . , Blagg , S . L . , Ibarra , N . and Insall , R . H . ( 2006 ) . Cell motility and SCAR localisation in axenically growing Dictyostelium cells . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 85 , 1091 - 1098 . Reddy , G . V . and Rodrigues , V . ( 1999 ) . Sibling cell fate in the Drosophila adult external sense organ lineage is specified by prospero function , which is regulated by Numb and Notch . Development 126 , 2083 - 2092 . Rehberg , M . and Graf , R . ( 2002 ) . Dictyostelium EB1 is a genuine centrosomal component required for proper spindle formation . Mol . Biol . Cell 13 , 2301 - 2310 . Ren , Y . , Effler , J . C . , Norstrom , M . , Luo , T . , Firtel . , R . A . , Iglesias , P . A . , Rock , R . S . and Robinson D . N . ( 2009 ) . Mechanosensing through cooperative interactions between myosin II and the actin crosslinker cortexillin I . Curr . Biol . 19 , 1421 - 1428 . Schober , J . M . , Cain , J . M . , Komarova , Y . A . and Borisy , G . G . ( 2009 ) . Migration and actin protrusion in melanoma cells are regulated by EB1 protein . Cancer Lett . 284 , 30 - 36 . Shaw , S . L . , Yeh , E . , Maddox , P . , Salmon , E . D . and Bloom , K . ( 1997 ) . Astral microtubule dynamics in yeast : a microtubule - based searching mechanism for spindle orientation and nuclear migration into the bud . J . Cell Biol . 139 , 985 - 994 . Shu , S . , Liu , X . and Korn , E . D . ( 2005 ) . Blebbistatin and blebbistatin - inactivated myosin II inhibit myosin II - independent processes in Dictyostelium . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 1472 - 1477 . Steffen , A . , Faix , J . , Resch , G . P . , Linkner , J . , Wehland , J . , Small , J . V . , Rottner , K . and Stradal , T . E . ( 2006 ) . Filopodia formation in the absence of functional WAVE - and Arp2 / 3 - complexes . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 2581 - 2591 . Straight , A . F . , Cheung , A . , Limouze , J . , Chen , I . , Westwood , N . J . , Sellers , J . R . and Mitchison , T . J . ( 2003 ) . Dissecting temporal and spatial control of cytokinesis with a myosin II Inhibitor . Science 299 , 1743 - 1747 . Sussman , R . and Sussman , M . ( 1967 ) . Cultivation of Dictyostelium discoideum in axenic medium . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 29 , 53 - 55 . Uyeda , T . Q . , Kitayama , C . and Yumura , S . ( 2000 ) . Myosin II - independent cytokinesis in Dictyostelium : its mechanism and implications . Cell Struct . Funct . 25 , 1 - 10 . Veltman , D . M . , Akar , G . , Bosgraaf , L . and Van Haastert , P . J . ( 2009a ) . A new set of small , extrachromosomal expression vectors for Dictyostelium discoideum . Plasmid 61 , 110 - 118 . Veltman , D . M . , Keizer - Gunnink , I . and Haastert , P . J . ( 2009b ) . An extrachromosomal , inducible expression system for Dictyostelium discoideum . Plasmid 61 , 119 - 125 . Vithalani , K . K . , Shoffner , J . D . and De Lozanne , A . ( 1996 ) . Isolation and characterization of a novel cytokinesis - deficient mutant in Dictyostelium discoideum . J . Cell Biochem . 62 , 290 - 301 . Watts , D . J . and Ashworth , J . M . ( 1970 ) . Growth of myxameobae of the cellular slime mould Dictyostelium discoideum in axenic culture . Biochem . J . 119 , 171 - 174 . Weiner , O . D . , Marganski , W . A . , Wu , L . F . , Altschuler , S . J . and Kirschner , M . W . ( 2007 ) . An actin - based wave generator organizes cell motility . PLoS Biol . 5 , e221 . Yamazaki , D . , Oikawa , T . and Takenawa , T . ( 2007 ) . Rac - WAVE - mediated actin reorganization is required for organization and maintenance of cell - cell adhesion . J . Cell Sci . 120 , 86 - 100 . Zallen , J . A . , Cohen , Y . , Hudson , A . M . , Cooley , L . , Wischaus , E . and Schejter , E . D . ( 2002 ) . SCAR is a primary regulator of Arp2 / 3 - dependent morphological events in Drosophila . J . Cell Biol . 156 , 689 - 701 . Zang , J . H . , Cavet , G . , Sabry , J . H . , Wagner , P . , Moores , S . L . and Spudich , J . A . ( 1997 ) . On the role of myosin - II in cytokinesis : division of Dictyostelium cells under adhesive and nonadhesive conditions . Mol . Biol . Cell 8 , 2617 - 2629 . Zhang , W . and Robinson , D . N . ( 2005 ) . Balance of actively generated contractile and resistive forces controls cytokinesis dynamics . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 7186 - 7191 . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e Table S1 . Strains used and attachment at cytokinesis . Genotype , genetic background and source of the strains used in this work . Note that whilst SCAR and myosin II null strains were generated in Ax3 genetic background , other mutants were generated by others in the Ax2 background . The appropriate control was used in all cases . In order to score detachment at mitosis , time‐lapse DIC movies of cells dividing on glass coverslips were captured . Mitoses were scored as detached if at least one of the daughter cells lost contact with the substratum during division . At least 15 divisions were scored for each strain and values are for cells grown in the absence of blebbistatin or doxycycline unless stated . Strain Genotype Reference % Detached Ax3 Wt ( axeA1 , axeB1 , axeC1 ) Sussman and Sussman 1967 0 IR46 Ax3 , pyr5 - 6 - , scrA : : pyr5 - 6 Blagg et al . 2003 - Bleb65 + Bleb0 JK103 Ax3 , mhcA : : bsr This work 0 JK107 Ax3 , scrA : : pyr5 - 6 , mhcA : : bsr , P Tet - ON - scrA This work + Dox0 - Dox0 AP1 Ax3 , hspc300 : : bsr Pollitt and Insall , 2009 IR57 Ax3 , napA : : bsr Ibarra et al . 2006 SB3 Ax3 , pir121 : : bsr Blagg et al . 2003 Ax2 Wt ( axeA2 , axeB2 , axeC2 ) Watts and Ashworth1970 3 EB1 Ax2 , eb1 : : bsr Rehberg and Graf 2002 73 Ax2 scar - Ax2 , scrA : : bsr Steffen et al . 2006