Computer Supported Cooperative Work 8 : 63 – 93 , 1999 . © 1999 Kluwer Academic Publishers . Printed in the Netherlands . 63 Expansive Visibilization of Work : An Activity - Theoretical Perspective YRJÖ ENGESTRÖM The Academy of Finland , Center for Activity Theory and Developmental Work Research , P . O . Box 47 , 00014 University of Helsinki , Finland , E - mail : yrjo . engestrom @ helsinki . ﬁ ; and University of California , San Diego , Laboratory of Comparative Human Cognition , 9500 Gilman Drive , La Jolla , CA 92093 , USA , E - mail : yengestr @ weber . ucsd . edu Abstract . Work is commonly made visible along two dimensions : the linear and the socio - spatial . Both are limited to depicting work in terms of relatively discrete actions . Activity theory introduces the crucial distinction between collective activity systems and individual actions . Expansive visibi - lization of collective activity systems offers a powerful intervention methodology for dealing with major transformations of work . The linear and the socio - spatial dimensions of work actions are seen in the broader perspective of a third , developmental dimension of work activity . Four steps are identiﬁed in a cycle of expansive visibilization , combining activity - level visions and action - level concretizations . The cycle is examined in detail as it unfolded in an intervention study at a children’s hospital in Finland . It is concluded that expansive visibilization , driven by contradictions and seeking to reconceptualize the object and motive of work , is not a straightforward process which can be neatly controlled from above . Coherent analytical explanation and goal - setting may come only after the creation and practical implementation of innovative solutions . Key words : activity theory , action , transformation , expansive learning , intervention , visibilization , health care , medical records Introduction Howard Margolis ( 1993 , p . 17 ) recently pointed out that “when everyone in a community shares a habit , it ordinarily becomes invisible , for what everyone does no one easily recognizes . ” Attempts at making everyday practices of work visible 1 are driven by different motives . In various management techniques , the overriding motive of visibilization is control . In critical ethnographies of work practices , the motive is emancipation , bringing recognition and appreciation to work that usually goes unnoticed . A prominent example of the control effort is Business Process Reengineering , or BPR ( Hammer & Champy , 1993 ; Manganelli & Klein , 1994 ) . In BPR , visibi - lization of work typically takes the form of identifying and representing successive steps in a process which converts business inputs into business outputs by moving from a supplier to a customer ( Manganelli & Klein , 1994 , p . 8 ) . The prototyp - ical visual representation is a linear ﬂowchart . BPR’s important achievement is 64 YRJÖ ENGESTRÖM that processes are analyzed and changed across traditional functional boundaries between organizational entities . BPR’s central limitation is its one - dimensional character . Work is depicted as a linear ﬂow from one task to the next . In these representations , there is no room and no language for representing horizontal inter - actions between various parallel tasks of an actor , or between different actors , or between actors and their artifacts . Even the notion of ’vision’ in BPR refers simply to describing how a given process would operate with all the external and internal performance measures optimized ( Manganelli & Klein , 1994 , pp . 127 – 128 ) . From one - dimensionality follows a quest for complete rationality and elimina - tion of unnecessary steps . Hammer’s ( 1990 ) famous slogan was “Don’t automate , obliterate ! ” The spirit of BPR is elimination . It says essentially nothing about envisioning and creating new customers , new products , and new work . The emancipatory form of visibilization is represented by Suchman ( 1995 ; 1996 ) , Goodwin & Goodwin ( 1996 ) , Heath & Luff ( 1996 ) , and several other ethno - graphers of work . Their achievement consists in showing that work actions are always also interactions , between people and between people and their artifactual surroundings . These ethnographies have opened the socio - spatial dimension of work , manifested in discourse , in gaze , in gesture , in embodied situated action with material artifacts . Preferred visual representations are pictures and diagrams depicting work situations where people and artifacts interact in spatial arrange - ments , juxtaposed with excerpts of discourse transcripts . They show that the prescriptive ﬂowcharts of BPR fail to capture much of what is happening on the shop ﬂoor when practitioners make sense of situations , solve problems and generally make things work . A limitation of this work is that it , too , fails to ask what is driving people in their work and how transformations in the collective organization of work are accomplished . In other words , these ethnographies predominantly operate at the level of actions . In contrast to the prescriptive linear actions of BPR , they are socio - spatially situated actions , to be sure . But they are still relatively isolated from developmental turmoils , as if transformations did not concern them . Cultural - historical activity theory ( Leont’ev , 1978 , 1981 ; Engeström , 1987 ) offers a conceptual and methodological basis for expansive visibilization of work . By expansive I mean an approach in which the linear and socio - spatial dimensions of work actions are seen in the broader perspective provided by a third , develop - mental dimension of work activity . Expansive visibilization aims at integrating the three dimensions of representing work . 2 In the following sections , I will ﬁrst lay out a conceptual framework for expan - sive visibilization , identifying a cycle of four distinctive steps of visibilization . I will then examine each of the four steps , using data from an ongoing transfor - mation at a children’s hospital in Finland . I will conclude by discussing potential implications and possible limitations of expansive visibilization as a strategy of research and design . EXPANSIVE VISIBILIZATION OF WORK 65 Visibilization as expansive movement between actions and activity In activity theory , the distinction between individual goal - directed action and col - lective object - oriented activity is of central importance . Individual actions may be depicted focusing on their linear dimension or focusing on their socio - spatial dimension . In any case , the temporal duration of actions is relatively short . Devel - opment takes place in long historical cycles , typical to the evolution of collective activities . Thus , the developmental dimension can only be grasped when the unit of analysis is expanded to the collective activity system . A collective activity is driven by a communal motive . The motive is formed when a collective need meets an object that has the potential to fulﬁll the need . The motive is thus embedded in the object of the activity . The object , in turn , is to be understood as a project under construction , moving from potential ‘raw material’ to a meaningful shape and to a result or an outcome . In this sense , the object deter - mines the horizon of possible goals and actions . But it is truly a horizon : as soon as an intermediate goal is reached , the object escapes and must be reconstructed by means of new intermediate goals and actions . One and the same goal - directed action may accomplish various different activ - ities and transfer from one activity to another . On the other hand , the object and motive of a collective activity may typically be sought after by means of multiple alternative goals and actions . The object of hospital work is the patient , with his or her health problem or ill - ness . The patient carries the fundamental motive for hospital workers . To maintain that the patient is the object and motive for hospital work is not an idealist statement advocating selﬂess devotion to a higher calling among employees . What more than anything arouses involvement , effort , emotion , excitement and frustration among front - line hospital staff is encounters with real , live patients , no matter how cynical or instrumentally oriented the individual employee may be . This is not to say that the very object of hospital work would be harmonious in itself . To the contrary , the object of any activity is internally contradictory . In cap - italism , the pervasive primary contradiction is that of commoditization : between the use value and the exchange value of objects . In medicine , this takes the form of patient as person to be helped and healed versus patient as source of revenue and proﬁt ( or on the ﬂip side , as opportunity to proﬁt by cutting costs ) . As Leont’ev ( 1981 , p . 255 ) observed : “The doctor who buys a practice in some little provincial place may be very seriously trying to reduce his fellow citizens’ suffering from illness , and may see his calling in just that . He must , however , want the number of the sick to increase , because his life and practical opportunity to follow his calling depend on that . ” Or to put it in more contemporary words ( Gray , 1991 , p . 324 ) : “Paradoxical expectations about physician behavior are also built into those cost - containment programs that reward physicians for saving money in the care 66 YRJÖ ENGESTRÖM Figure 1 . The mediational structure of an activity system ( Engeström , 1987 , p . 78 ) of their patients . . . . Creating economic incentives that encourage providers to perform fewer services or to discharge patients from the hospital more quickly makes sense only if providers can be trusted not to be excessively inﬂuenced . ” How can the energy stemming from the tension - laden object be translated into change efforts ? The key is the realization that the objects – the patients with their problems – are constantly changing , and this historical evolution of the patient is partly constructed by the hospital itself . Any transformation of the hospital is also a transformation of the patient . The motive for change efforts arises from analyzing the contradictions and possibilities in the object and from projecting a new historical form of the object as an expansive solution to the present tensions . Such projection means sketching a zone of proximal development for the collective activity of hospital work . The notion of zone is crucially different from the notion of goal . While a goal is a ﬁxed end point or end state , a zone is the distance or the area between the present and foreseeable future . “It is the distance between the present everyday actions of the individuals and the historically new form of the societal activity that can be collectively gen - erated as a solution to the double bind potentially embedded in the everyday actions . ” ( Engeström , 1987 , p . 174 ) If such a zone is not worked out , speciﬁc goals are built on sand , or pinned onto thin air . Working out a collective zone of proximal development calls for a conceptual model that can be used for representing the activity as an object - oriented system . Such a model is presented in Figure 1 . There are multiple mediations in an activity system . The subject and the object , or the actor and the environment , are mediated by instruments , including symbols and representations of various kinds . This triangle , however , is but ‘the tip of an iceberg’ . The less visible social mediators of activity – rules , community , and divi - sion of labor – are depicted at the bottom of the model . Between the components of the system , there are continuous transformations . The activity system incessantly reconstructs itself . EXPANSIVE VISIBILIZATION OF WORK 67 Figure 2 . The zone of proximal development The zone of proximal development may be depicted as a gray area between actions embedded in the current activity with its historical roots and contradictions , the foreseeable activity in which the contradictions are expansively resolved , and the foreseeable activity in which the contradictions have led to contraction and destruction of opportunities ( Figure 2 ) . In activity theory , developmental transformations are seen as attempts to reorganize , or re - mediate , the activity system in order to resolve its pressing inner contradictions . While the primary contradiction between the use value and exchange value of the object does not go away , it evolves and takes the form of speciﬁc secondary contradictions as the activity system interacts with other activity systems . The emergence , aggravation and resolution of these secondary contradic - tions may be regarded as a developmental cycle in the life of the activity system ( Engeström , 1987 ) . As a simple example of secondary contradictions in the medical ﬁeld , let us consider the following extension to Leont’ev’s account of the village physician . The doctor does face every day the primary contradiction of patients as people to heal versus patients as sources of income ; but he has to live with the contradiction and mostly is able to suppress it out of his conscious awareness . But gradually his patients begin to change . A new district hospital is built in the nearby city , and the patients are starting to ask for modern lab tests , X - rays and other wonders of medical technology as they visit the doctor . Of course the village doctor does not have such tools . This leads to a secondary contradiction between the new kind of object – patients demanding technological medicine – and old tools based on the handicraft mode of doctoring . As this contradiction is aggravated , it leads to crisis and eventual reorganization of medical practice in primary care ( for an examination of this development in Finnish health care , see Engeström , 1993 ; for consequences in medical cognition , see Engeström , 1995 ) . If actors are able to identify and analyze the secondary contradictions of their activity system , they may 68 YRJÖ ENGESTRÖM focus their energy onto the crucial task of resolving those contradictions by means of expanding the object and reorganizing the activity accordingly , instead of being victimized by changes that roll over them as if forces of a natural catastrophe . Four Steps of expansive visibilization The contradictions do not manifest themselves directly . They manifest them - selves through disturbances , ruptures and small unremarkable innovations in practitioners’ everyday work actions . The challenge is to make these disturbances and innovations visible and analyzable to practitioners and researchers . This step ( VISIBILIZATION 1 in Figure 3 ) typically relies on videotaping and collaborative viewing of troublesome work situations and associated interview accounts from practitioners and clients in the ﬁeld . This leads to strong personal involvement , often including emotional encounters with and tense discussions on the data . This ﬁrst step of expansive visibilization includes the identiﬁcation and questioning of myths that are typically invoked by practitioners to explain away and defend disturbing aspects of the work practice . In the ﬁrst step of expansive visibilization , work actions are primarily repre - sented in their socio - spatial dimension . Linear representations , such as ﬂowcharts , may be constructed as auxiliary aides for analysis . The second step ( VISIBILIZATION 2 in Figure 3 ) is to engage researchers and practitioners in analyses that connect these seemingly random incidents with contradictions in the activity system that time and again give rise to such distur - bances and innovations . In this step , the model of activity system depicted above in Figure 1 is used as template for examining the qualities of the work practice in the past and in the present . These representations of the developmental dimension of work open up a possibility to recognize recurring patterns and types of disturbances as manifestations of identiﬁable secondary contradictions in the present activity . This , in turn , leads to tentative conceptualizations of both a possible worst - case future ( contracted activity ) and a possible future in which the contradictions are resolved so as to open up new opportunities ( expanded activity ) . In Figure 3 , the zone of proximal development is represented by the gray area between the triangles representing the past , the present , and the alternative futures of the work activity under scrutiny . The zone of proximal development can only be crossed by means of new kinds of concrete actions . This calls for a move back from activity to actions , a move of design and implementation depicted on the right hand side of Figure 3 . Design and implementation of partial novel solutions to the contradictions requires a third type of visibilization ( VISIBILIZATION 3 in Figure 3 ) . This is the step of actual design of new actions . In this step , work actions and their represen - tations and associated artifacts are re - examined and played with , with the intention of reorganizing them expansively to solve contradictions in the activity . EXPANSIVE VISIBILIZATION OF WORK 69 Figure 3 . Visibilization of work as movement from actions to activity and back As partial solutions , or newly designed actions , are implemented , they lead to intended and unintended practical consequences . In step four ( VISIBILIZATION 4 in Figure 4 ) , these consequences are monitored and the solutions are revised in feedback sessions , using videotaped data as well as actual documents and other artifacts from the newly designed practice . The new actions and their consequences are analyzed with the help of models of the overall actuvity . In this process , the models themselves are speciﬁed and altered . The three dimensions of visibilization of work are integrated . These four steps of expansive visibilization of work differ from the practices of BPR and ethnography in that the linear and the socio - spatial dimension of work actions are embedded in the broader framework of the developmental dimension of the entire activity system . Visibilization 1 primarily operates with the socio - spatial and the linear dimensions of work actions , whereas visibilization 2 primarily oper - ates with the developmental dimension . Visibilization 3 and 4 are characterized by an increasing blending and integration of the three dimensions . In the following , I will demonstrate and analyze the four steps of expansive visibilization , using data from an ongoing transformation at the outpatient clinic of a children’s hospital in Finland . 70 YRJÖ ENGESTRÖM Transformation of work in the children’s hospital In 1997 , the Aurora Children’s Hospital of the City of Helsinki merged into the Children’s Clinic of the Helsinki University Central Hospital ( HUCH ) . After the merger , the Children’s Clinic is ofﬁcially called the HUCH Hospital for Children and Adolescents . The merger was caused by an excess of hospital beds for children and a need to cut costs in the Helsinki area health care . In the fall of 1996 , I was approached by the management of the Children’s Clinic . They asked me to help them prepare and carry out the merger so that the employees of the two hospitals would have a chance to redesign their activity rather than feel victimized by one - way decisions from above . We reached an agreement which allowed my research team 3 to conduct an intervention and research process we call Change Laboratory . The Change Laboratory is a physical space or room in the workplace where the practitioners meet regularly to go through a cycle of analysis and redesign of their work activity . A Change Laboratory cycle typically lasts for 10 to 12 weeks , with a weekly main session and often additional meetings of subgroups or task forces in between the main sessions . Change Laboratory is a setting for expansive visibi - lization of work , relying heavily on the viewing of videotaped material and on the construction and use of diagrammatic models . Details of the Change Laboratory as an intervention method have been described elsewhere ( Engeström , Virkkunen , Helle , Pihlaja & Poikela , 1996 ) . 4 In discussions with the hospital management , we selected the outpatient clinic of the Children’s Clinic as the pilot site for the Change Laboratory process . The outpatient clinic is in many ways the most visible entrance point and hub of the hospital . The outpatient clinic of the Children’s Clinic consisted of urgent care ( which includes the emergency room ) and appointment - based outpatient practices of various specialties . The Children’s Clinic was traditionally oriented at the high end of pediatric medicine and children’s surgery , while the Aurora Hospital was oriented at relatively non - complicated and commonplace medical cases . This rad - ical broadening of the patient material would hit hardest the outpatient clinic . In 1996 , the outpatient clinic of the Children’s Clinic had 40 050 patient visits . It was projected that the number would double to 80 000 annual visits to the post - merger outpatient clinic . The physical merger of the outpatient clinics was scheduled to happen at the beginning of August , 1997 . A good number of physicians and nurses were to move from the Aurora Hospital to the merged outpatient clinic in the Children’s Clinic . Ten weekly Change Laboratory sessions were conducted at the outpatient clinic between January and April , 1997 . The sessions were open to all employees who were to work in the merged outpatient clinic . The average number of participants was about 85 , while there were more than 100 participants in some sessions . In this paper , I will focus on one aspect of the complex transformation , namely the merging of the nurse’s and the physician’s work with the patient into a uniﬁed EXPANSIVE VISIBILIZATION OF WORK 71 episode and the associated creation of a new shared patient record form . These two closely intertwined innovations are but two of the more than 20 speciﬁc innovations designed by the staff of the outpatient clinic during the spring and summer of 1997 . Visibilization 1 : Mirroring and analyzing troublesome actions At the beginning of the expansive visibilization process , my research team col - lected samples of disturbances in the outpatient clinic by means of observing , videotaping and interviewing patients and practitioners at their work , asking specif - ically for accounts of trouble . In preliminary viewings of the videotapes , our attention was drawn to a set of phenomena that seemed to have intriguing , yet somewhat obscure interconnections . One disturbing phenomenon we noticed in the early stages of the visibilization cycle was the widespread dissatisfaction with what was called the nursing plan , a pink paper form the nurse was supposed to ﬁll for every patient visit . This form was the nurses’ equivalent of the physicians’ medical record . Excerpt # 1 and Fig - ure 4 are taken from a videotaped interview with a nurse ( Hospital 1 refers to the Children’s Clinic , Hospital 2 refers to Aurora Hospital in all excerpts ) . EXCERPT # 1 : INTERVIEW WITH A NURSE IN HOSPITAL 2 ( FEBRUARY 4 , 1997 ) Nurse 6 , Hospital 2 : What I use here is this red sheet of ours , which we have tried to alter ever since I entered this house in 1985 . We think that it has never worked very well , but we just haven’t been able to change it . This follows an old nursing science model , called PPGE [ OSTA in Finnish ] , so it should contain problems , planning , goals and evaluation , but this sheet has never really worked in our [ hospital ] . What I actually try to write in here are things that help me , so that the next time I see the children , I see what I’ve discussed the previous time and what would be good to take up again . The nurse’s videotaped interview was viewed and discussed the next day in a Change Laboratory session ( excerpt # 2 ) . EXCERPT # 2 : CHANGE LABORATORY SESSION 3 ( FEBRUARY 5 , 1997 ) Physician 1 , Hospital 1 : This same form has been used to record doctor’s orders . So the form contains legally important data on treatments . I ﬁnd it an odd place to record such data , since it is recorded nowhere else . Nurse 2 , Hospital 1 : We are not happy with the form here in Hospital 1 either . But we haven’t been able to change it because the familiar old form is somehow so convenient , even though we are not happy with it . Nurse 1 , Hospital 1 : We have discussed the form a lot in the outpatient clinic at Hospital 1 . We concluded that it should have a pretty free form , a blank sheet . But the form has not changed . 72 YRJÖ ENGESTRÖM Figure 4 . Nurse 6 criticizes the nursing plan document In the discussion , the dissatisfaction was formulated in fuzzy terms . Physician 1 indicated concern over the fact that some medically important data was recorded in the nursing plan but “nowhere else” . By expressing the desired direction of change as “a pretty free form , a blank sheet” , Nurse 1 from Hospital 1 indirectly implied dissatisfaction with the restrictive structure and contents of the form . We also videotaped events and accounts that we began to call ‘the double undressing of patients’ . At the outpatient clinic , a child patient was typically ﬁrst seen by a nurse who asked the patient to undress , then weighed and measured her while conducting an initial interview with her . The patient then dressed and waited for the doctor . The physician typically asked the patient to undress again , in order to conduct whatever physical examination was deemed necessary . Especially during the cold winter time which requires the children to wear heavy clothing , this double undressing and dressing seemed quite troublesome and awkward . After videotaping such a patient visit , we asked the nurse for her account ( excerpt # 3 ) . EXCERPT # 3 : INTERVIEW WITH A NURSE FROM HOSPITAL 1 ( FEBRUARY 3 , 1997 ) Nurse 4 : That’s also pretty unpleasant , you meet here the family and the child , and you have to measure the weight and the height , and they get frustrated with that , quite many of them . Because they have to undress . And then , when they move on to the doctor , they have to undress again , at least partly . That kind of double undressing , particularly now in the winter time , that’s pretty unpleasant and painful for the family . But we have to follow the weight and the height , and EXPANSIVE VISIBILIZATION OF WORK 73 there isn’t time to be there in the doctor’s ofﬁce simultaneously with the doctor , so that one would take there the weight and height and the doctor would see the patient at the same time . That would be much more ﬂuent and pleasant for the family . [ . . . ] When the nurse and the doctor are in the same room , like they are there on the surgery side , but the nurse is being kind of a secretary , recording immediately the orders and patient information and such . But what I think is a bit bad here is that we are so separate , the physician and the nurse . The nurse’s account is dilemmatic in that she denounces the double undressing , yet sees it as necessary . Billig and his coauthors ( 1988 ) characterize dilemmas in discourse as hedges and hesitations in which the speaker contradicts his or her own previous statements . At least in Finnish language , the use of clusters of ’buts’ is often a marker of intense dilemmas . In excerpt 3 , the string of ’buts’ is marked in italics . We were also told about a physician who refused to follow the practice of double undressing . His interview account gave us an example of an unremarkable innovation from below ( excerpt # 4 ) . EXCERPT # 4 : INTERVIEW WITH AN ENDOCRINOLOGIST WHO HAD RECENTLY MOVED FROM HOSPITAL 2 TO HOSPITAL 1 ( FEBRUARY 3 , 1997 ) Researcher : I heard from the nurses that you are used to weighing and measur - ing patients yourself . Physician 4 : I have insisted that I do that , because ﬁrst of all it’s proven to be the only way to get with nearly one hundred percent certainty the data onto the medical record , and that way I also ﬁnd it there myself . If the patient is measured and weighed somewhere else and it’s written onto some piece of paper and that is thrown away , that data does not exist . In endocrinological child patients , growth is most often the most important information that exists , there is no equally important laboratory test . If it’s missing , it’s lost . And I mostly succeed in recording it correctly the way it is , it doesn’t have to be altered . And also it does not take practically any time . I do the measuring and weighing in the same time that I would discuss with the patient anyway . I have to examine the patient in any case , so it’s much more natural that he or she undresses there for the measures and then is examined , rather than having undressed somewhere else before and then coming here . I think we save time and patients above all beneﬁt from this . A few days later , we presented a selection of videotaped data on double undress - ing to the staff of the outpatient clinics in a Change Laboratory session . The video selection consisted of two undressing sequences from a patient visit and the excerpts from the nurse’s and the physician’s interviews presented above . After the viewing , the following discussion ensued ( excerpt # 5 ; the transcript is slightly abbreviated ) . 74 YRJÖ ENGESTRÖM EXCERPT # 5 : CHANGE LABORATORY SESSION 4 ( FEBRUARY 12 , 1997 ) Surgeon from Hospital 1 : There is a simple solution , the nurse and the physician work in the same room at the same time . Measuring and weighing are done once . Physician 3 from Hospital 1 : Surgeons have got the nurses , but others do not have enough nurses so we don’t work together . Nurse 3 from Hospital 2 : We have physician - nurse pairs , so we work in a different way . Researcher : You don’t undress the patient twice ? Nurse 3 from Hospital 2 : Well , we do that , too . Researcher : Let’s take the patient’s viewpoint . The nurse in the video said that double undressing is inconvenient for the patient . You [ Nurse 1 from Hospital 2 ] said that you , too , do the double undressing . Nurse 3 from Hospital 2 : Yes , we do . We had at one time equipment for weigh - ing and measuring in the doctors’ rooms , I don’t know why that was stopped . Head nurse from Hospital 2 : That equipment was too inaccurate for the doctors , and better equipment was too costly . Nurse 5 from Hospital 1 : I maintain that undressing the patient twice is a result of bad planning . If the nurse and the physician look at and plan the consultation ahead of time , the patient does not need to undress twice . Researcher : According to our observations , a lot of this double undressing is taking place . From the point of view of the total workload , it adds up . Physician 5 from Hospital 2 : This is a typical misunderstanding . Undressing for weighing and measuring is just a way or pretense to get a chance to observe the patient and create a natural contact with him or her . But on the other hand , I agree in that we should not undress them twice . Surgeon from Hospital 1 : It’s a typical misconception to think that the workload will be decreased when the nurse does many things at the same time and the physician works alone . In fact , when the nurse and the physician are in the same consultation room , not only is one undressing enough but also many other things are taken care of simultaneously : the planning of further care , using the computer to check previous visits , or any such taking care of business at once all the way to a completion , that works best when both the doctor and the nurse are there . We need to get rid of the questions and communication gaps that come up after the consultation . All documentation also works better when the nurse is there with the physician . In this discussion , Surgeon 1 from Hospital 1 took a strong stand : the physician and the nurse should work together in the same room with the patient , thus elim - inating double undressing and communication gaps . He informed the others that EXPANSIVE VISIBILIZATION OF WORK 75 surgeons are already working that way . Three counter - arguments were presented : there are not enough nurses , there is not enough adequate equipment in physi - cians’ rooms , and the undressing by the physician is actually necessary for the purposes of establishing contact and dialogue with the patient . The presenter of the third counter - argument ( Physician 5 from Hospital 2 ) immediately softened her argument by a ‘but’ sentence denouncing double undressing . In the course of the expansive visibilization sessions , arguments against inno - vations based on insufﬁcient staff , insufﬁcient space and equipment , or other insufﬁcient resources , were very common . While often sincere expressions of dis - tress at the level of everyday experience , such arguments tend to shut down any further analysis and innovation efforts , delegating the blame and responsibility to external forces , primarily to the management and politicians . These arguments reproduce a myth of incapacitating scarcity . Wodak ( 1997 , p . 55 ) points out such myths “serve to give the contradictions a function which stabilizes the system and maintains the formal institution . ” Much of the work in the cycle of expansive visi - bilization at the children’s hospital consisted of exposing and questioning the myth of incapacitating scarcity . In the Change Laboratory discussions cited above , no explicit connection was noted between the nursing plan issue and the double undressing issue . However , there was a connection , namely the separation of the nurse and the physician . The nurse and the physician typically saw the patient separately and used separate forms as patient records . About two weeks later , a task force group created in the Change Laboratory met to analyze problems in the guidance of patients of the outpatient clinic of Hospital 1 . This meeting was attended by a physician from the city health center responsible for children’s primary care in the area . In the discussion , another disturbing issue was formulated . EXCERPT # 6 : MEETING OF THE PATIENT GUIDANCE TASK FORCE GROUP ( FEBRUARY 24 , 1997 ) Primary care physician : Yes , we could take care of them [ surgery patients com - ing for control visit ] , especially if , of course when they come for control we should have some kind of a . . . Physician 7 , Hospital 2 : . . . report . Primary care physician : . . . report , that’s what one would wish . Physician 7 , Hospital 2 : That’s something you should surely bring up . . . Primary care physician : Yes , yes , we don’t . . . Physician 7 , Hospital 2 : . . . failure to get reports . Primary care physician : . . . yes , yes . Thus far , it’s total zero from Hospital 1 . Not a single report has been received . Physician 7 , Hospital 2 : Isn’t that , what on earth , what on earth / / is it there . . . Nurse 8 , Hospital 2 : / / [ even ] photocopies / / Primary care physician : In ten years , I have not seen a single report , not one . Physician 7 , Hospital 2 : What is it , from the door of that house , it is as if they 76 YRJÖ ENGESTRÖM had been told that through that door “we only say that we’ll send reports , but in reality we are not allowed to send reports” . Primary care physician : Yes , that’s the way it is . . . Physician 7 , Hospital 2 : Really . . . Primary care physician : Yes , it’s like absolutely prohibited . Physician 7 , Hospital 2 : Yes , we [ at Hospital 2 ] have the same experience . Nowadays , when I need it , I walk over there myself , I tell them that I have this patient who has been here for examinations , and now I need the results because I must give further instructions . That’s the only reliable way to get information from them . Nurse 8 , Hospital 2 : But isn’t it possible in the emergency room , since on the surgery side records have usually short text and the physician writes them , to give / / right away a photocopy in the hand . Physician 7 , Hospital 2 : / / Right away a photocopy in the hand / / Nurse 8 , Hospital 2 : So it’s the patient’s responsibility then that the information moves forward . It’s a short time , say two days , until you have to go to control , so its / / not so . . . Nurse 9 , Hospital 2 : / / The nurse , too , is not so busy / / so you pretty quickly guide the patient forward , and I think it’s also the nurse’s duty to give it to the patient . Nurse 8 , Hospital 2 : One must give . If [ the patient ] has to come for control in two days , it won’t work any other way . Nurse 9 , Hospital 2 : Yes , no mail will arrive in such a time . The excerpt shows how failing to act was interpreted as action by those affected : “we only say that we’ll send reports , but in reality we are not allowed to send reports . ” It also demonstrates how the two nurses already began to sketch a solution to the problem : “to give / / right away a photocopy in the hand . ” The latter statement makes it clear that not only was the Children’s Clinic seen to fail in sending reports on patients to primary care ; it also failed to give textual feedback to the patient and the patient’s family upon their departure from the outpatient clinic . Again , the issue of Hospital 1 not returning records to the primary care upon the release of child patients was not explicitly connected to the two previous distur - bances , i . e . , the dysfunctional nursing plan and the double undressing of patients . But there is a connection : it is difﬁcult to return records quickly if they are split into two separate forms . We recorded at least two more disturbance issues that gradually emerged as connected to the three described above . A tremendous amount of overlapping doc - umentation was going on in Hospital 1 . The same or nearly the same information on patients was recorded and stored several times over in different ﬁles and formats by different actors . Physicians , even in very simple cases of urgent care , regularly dictated their medical records on audiotape instead of typing their brief comments on the spot . These two issues are connected to the preceding three in that ( a ) over - lapping documentation began with the separate consultations and separate records EXPANSIVE VISIBILIZATION OF WORK 77 Figure 5 . Five developmental tensions in the activity system of the outpatient clinic of the nurse and the physician , ( b ) multiple overlapping documentation tasks inside the hospital ate up time and energy that could have been used to return records to primary care , ( c ) dictation of medical records meant that they had to be transferred to and transcribed by separate typing staff , which made it impossible to return the records right away to primary care . The ﬁve disturbance issues formed something like a set of search lights com - ing from different directions but gradually focusing on a single , unnamed source of trouble . To become identiﬁed and named , this source of trouble had to be approached through a different lens , namely through theoretical modeling of the activity system and its contradictions . Visibilization 2 : Modeling activity systems In the second step of the expansive visibilization , the staff were ﬁrst asked to con - struct their vision of the worst - case future of the outpatient clinic after the merger . We then embarked on a historical analysis of the evolution of the activity systems of the two outpatient clinics . The historical analysis was led by the question “Why could these two hospitals and their outpatient clinics not continue to operate as they were used to , as separate entities ? ” 5 As a result , a ﬁrst approximation of the inner contradictions of the activity sys - tem of the outpatient clinic of Hospital 1 emerged . We identiﬁed and discussed ﬁve central tensions . These tensions were identiﬁed as giving rise to the disturbances encountered in the ﬁrst step of visibilization . The ﬁve tensions were placed in the model of the activity system as depicted in Figure 5 . Among the tensions depicted in Figure 5 , the ones attached to division of labor , instruments , and outcome are particularly relevant for the analysis of the ﬁve dis - turbances discussed above . In intense sessions , the Change Laboratory generated a vision for the activity system of the outpatient clinic in the year 2000 . To simplify 78 YRJÖ ENGESTRÖM Figure 6 . Key points of the vision for the outpatient clinic’s activity system in the year 2000 the present analysis , only the directly relevant points of these three components of the vision are represented in Figure 6 . The models of the present and envisioned future activity system formed a global framework , a motivating and supporting “where - to” artifact or “upward contextu - alization” ( Engeström , 1990 , pp . 194 – 195 ) , for the subsequent conceptualization and design of speciﬁc solutions . However , these models were so general that they did not directly lead to the recognition and articulation of a common source behind the ﬁve kinds of trouble discussed above . In fact , such a full conceptualization of the speciﬁc source of trouble and target of change emerged only after an innovative practical solution was formulated , that is , in step 4 of the expansive visibilization cycle . This corresponds to Leont’ev’s observation ( 1978 , p . 65 ) that “isolation and perception of goals by no means occurs automatically , nor is it an instantaneous act but a relatively long process of approbation of the goals by action and by their objective ﬁlling . ” It is the object and motive of activity , not the conscious goals of actions that play the leading role in creation of the new ( on goal formation , see also Tikhomirov , 1988 ; on the post - hoc nature of conscious plans and goals , see Suchman , 1987 ; Weick , 1995 ) . 6 Visibilization 3 : Designing and implementing new actions Toward the end of the Change Laboratory sessions , the practitioners , working in task force groups , designed a number of practical solutions which should function as immediate or near - future steps toward the vision . The task force responsible for planning the work in the urgent care unit ( which includes the emergency room ) of the outpatient clinic came up with the following proposal . EXCERPT # 7 : CHANGE LABORATORY SESSION 10 ( APRIL 2 , 1997 ) Physician 1 , Hospital 1 : When we looked at this previous process [ referring to Figure 7 ] , we can say , especially concerning information management and EXPANSIVE VISIBILIZATION OF WORK 79 Figure 7 . Proposal contrasting the present and the redesigned ﬂow of a patient through the urgent care documentation , that this is a pretty fragmented process , it contains a lot of over - lapping documentation and is somehow , sort of inefﬁcient . Now the receiving nurse , for logistic reasons and because of her job as trafﬁc police for patients , must be taken apart from the previously existing process . So we [ in the urgent care planning task force ] thought that we could in some way improve this phase one process , so it must be made more compact . And the proposal , of which we are not at all unanimous , is such that we’ll try and move as much as possible these functions to happen in one and the same room , either working alone or simultaneously [ together ] . The task force made its proposal visible by means of an overhead contrasting the existing and the proposed ﬂow of a patient through the urgent care ( Figure 7 ) . Here the work is represented in its linear dimension , identifying a string of work actions . In their written report , the task force explained the diagram as follows . “The goal is to develop phase 1 of the process so that the work of the receiving nurse is separated into front - line work . The work of the secretary , the nurse , and the physician will be compressed into one process which we ambitiously aim to move as soon as possible into a single space in the consultation room with the patient” . A number of staff members in urgent care soon began to test the proposal in practice , albeit concentrating on the merging of the nurse’s and the physician’s consultations and leaving the secretary’s input aside for practical reasons . As these tests of working together were taking place , we intervened by asking some physician - nurse pairs to examine their separate records after a consultation . This form of visibilization is exempliﬁed in excerpt # 8 and in Figure 8 . EXCERPT # 8 : PHYSICIAN AND NURSE INTERVIEWED ABOUT THEIR RESPECTIVE RECORDS IMMEDIATELY AFTER EXPERIMENTALLY 80 YRJÖ ENGESTRÖM Figure 8 . Physician and nurse compare their separate records after a consultation conducted together ( nurse works on the pink nursing plan document ; physician works on the white medical record document ) CONDUCTING TOGETHER A CONSULTATION OF AN ASTHMATIC INFANT PATIENT ( MAY 5 , 1997 ) Researcher : So you do ﬁnd similar things in there anyway , don’t you ? Physician 1 : Not really [ moving pencil on the nursing plan document ] . Med - ication . . . Not many . Medication order , that is in there and in here [ moving pencil onto the medical record document ] . Nurse 1 : But that does have to be in both . Physician 1 : Is that so ? Is this whole document needed ? [ pounding his ﬁnger on the nursing plan document ] [ pause 3 seconds ] Physician 1 : Why couldn’t you write in here that “Patient resists taking medi - cine ? ” [ putting his pencil on the medical record document ] Nurse 1 : Mmm . . . I could , yes . [ pause 2 seconds , begins to write in the nursing plan document and speak aloud the text ] “Order [ inhalation training for asth - matic babies ] instruction from Raija - Leena” . Physician 1 : Mmm . Nurse 1 : But Raija - Leena could also herself write in there [ pointing at the medical record document ] “Inhalation instruction given” . [ gradually looking up at the physician ] EXPANSIVE VISIBILIZATION OF WORK 81 Physician 1 : Right . Nurse 1 : [ nodding ] Yes , she could . [ pause 3 seconds ] Physician 1 : [ moving to another topic ] How much are we going to charge for this [ visit ] ? Nurse 1 : [ sticking to the previous topic ] Now there isn’t really anything in here that would have to be here . [ moving her pen back and forth on top of the nursing plan document ] Physician 1 : Yes . Correct . How much are we going to charge for this ? The excerpt shows how the idea of a single shared patient record begins to take shape , preceded , stimulated and supported by the practical action of conducting the patient’s consultation together . The idea emerges in interplay between the two pro - fessionals and their respective documents . Pointing at and actually writing into the document and moving between the two documents both mentally and physically are crucial ingredients of the shared cognitive effort . The nurse faces a particularly dilemmatic challenge in that the emerging idea implies giving up the nurses’ own document . The stepwise working out of this dilemma is manifested in her two ‘buts’ as well as in the 3 - second pause , her use of reported speech ( “Inhalation instruction given " ) , the change in the direction of her gaze , and her sticking to the topic in spite of the physician’s move to another one . Two days later , the urgent care staff met to discuss the practical steps toward the vision . The idea of a shared patient record had been discussed informally in a smaller group shortly before . EXCERPT # 9 : URGENT CARE STAFF MEETING ( MAY 7 , 1997 ) Nurse 1 , Hospital 1 : We thought about what will be most troublesome in the process [ of the newly redesigned urgent care patient care ] . We concluded that the most troublesome is that the receiving nurse will be there quite far away in the big lobby , so how will information be transmitted from her to the group responsible for the care which is located here in another hallway , how will this space in between them function . And one thing we came up with is that since papers will be equally difﬁcult to ﬁnd then as they are now , and it often takes time before the patient’s papers have been found , so the idea is that the patient and the receiving nurse cannot stay there waiting for the papers , the patient must somehow be moved forward . So we thought that would it be possible for us to adopt a visit - based , or urgent care visit - based form , something that other emergency rooms are already using . Development of new forms is supposedly forbidden in the hospital , but if we think that this would kind of combine forms that we are now using . Nurse 2 , Hospital 1 : A few years ago representatives of all outpatient clinics of the hospital got together to ﬁgure this out , but it turned out to be extremely 82 YRJÖ ENGESTRÖM difﬁcult . Even though there are good grounds for avoiding the creation of new forms , in our situation we should be able to experiment with it to determine the beneﬁts for the transmission of information . Physician 2 , Hospital 1 : Couldn’t we copy a form already used in other out - patient clinics . Nurse 2 , Hospital 1 : They are designed for adult patients and contain a lot of useless information for our purposes . Our form should be very simple . [ . . . ] Physician 1 , Hospital 1 : The new form would actually be a lot like the simple form currently used in the primary care clinic of Hospital 2 . As to the usefulness of the new form , yesterday [ Nurse 1 ] and I looked at a couple of patients and found out that our current nursing plan document , well , if the nurse gets any chance to write down information in the actual medical record , we can get rid of this pink nursing plan . Nurse 1 , Hospital 1 : Yes , we ﬁgured out with [ Physician 1 ] that I could have jotted down the few names in the medical record just as well . Nurse 2 , Hospital 1 : We certainly cannot abandon the nursing plan document . But how , could we add the information to that so it could be used . Multiple documentation is useless . This is really a very difﬁcult question . Multiple overlapping documentation certainly leads us astray . This discussion shows two ways in which the experiment with physician and nurse working together with the patient in the same room paved way for the redesign of the patient record in the emergency room . First , Nurse 1 introduced the idea of the new patient record document by referring to expected troubles in the new process of working together . She pointed out that traditional medical record ﬁles will still be found and delivered slowly , yet “the patient must somehow be moved forward” . This emphasis on continuous process stems from the newly emerging self - consciousness of the urgent care as core of the outpatient clinic which has a ’compressed’ operating logic , different from hospital wards . This self - consciousness is heightened by the ﬁrst experiences of physician and nurse actually working together , which brings ( or ‘compresses’ ) the two close to one another and invites them to compare their still separate documents . The impact of this experi - ence is demonstrated by Physician 1 who refers to collaborative encounters such as that recorded in Excerpt # 7 : “yesterday [ Nurse 1 ] and I looked at a couple of patients and found out . . . ” Which is conﬁrmed by Nurse 1 : “Yes , we ﬁgured out with [ Physician 1 ] . . . ” The actual design of the new shared patient record took nearly three months . A week before the merger of the two hospitals , the newly appointed head nurse and coordinators of the units of the outpatient clinic met and discussed the new record , based on a draft prepared by one of the nurses . EXPANSIVE VISIBILIZATION OF WORK 83 EXCERPT # 10 : OUTPATIENT CLINIC COORDINATORS’ MEETING ( JULY 23 , 1997 ) [ Coordinator 1 is a pediatrician , the same person as Physician 1 in previous excerpts ; coordinator 2 is a surgeon ; head nurse is the person appointed to be in charge of nursing and other services at the newly merged outpatient clinic ] Coordinator 1 : This is simple enough . I like this . Head nurse : This is the ﬁrst one that I’m also enthusiastic about . Coordinator 1 : In principle , mmm . I don’t feel comfortable about categorizing problems of nursing work as different from other problems of the patient . Head nurse : That’s one thing we should think about . Coordinator 1 : There , implementation and assessment . I understand that the upper part of page two would be paperwork done by nurses , and then there would be a separate part for the doctor , I don’t see it making too much sense . It should rather be a continuous text where the one who writes the text is responsible for its content and signs it . Head nurse : Yes . I agree . Coordinator 2 : If a patient comes to our urgent care and we decide on a control visit somewhere else , would it be a copy of this sheet that would go with him or her , or . . . ? Coordinator 1 : For example , yes . For instance to health checkup . Coordinator 2 : Right . Coordinator 1 : That’s good . Head nurse : Returning to the comment of [ Coordinator 1 ] , one possibility is that there is a single column which one ﬁlls in the situation , and when one passes the responsibility to the next one , one signs it with one’s name and title , whoever one is . Coordinator 1 : Yes . [ . . . ] Coordinator 2 : I would begin to construct this so that the front page would contain information needed about a simple patient . And if it has a second page , it would contain information needed about a somewhat more complicated patient . Then , if the patient goes for instance to the health center for control , it’s enough to make a copy of one page . Head nurse : Yes , yes . In this discussion , four principles emerge . These are ( 1 ) the principle of simplicity that eliminates overlapping and redundant documentation ; ( 2 ) the principle of con - tinuity of care and documentation between the physician , the nurse , and others who contribute to the care , embodied in a single shared record ( “a continuous text” ) ; 84 YRJÖ ENGESTRÖM ( 3 ) the principle of explicitly acknowledged responsibility for actions of care and documentation on part of everyone contributing to the care of the patient ; and ( 4 ) the principle of immediate dissemination of information to primary care and to the patient . Based on these principles , the new shared document was quickly designed and printed . The new patient record form was blue , to distinguish it from the old white and pink ones . The outpatient clinic obtained a permission from the central management of the hospital to test the new form in practice for three months . Starting immediately after the merger of the outpatient clinics , on August 4 , the two innovations – working together and sharing a single record – were combined . All physicians and nurses of the urgent care unit were instructed to use the new shared patient record form . It was left up to the individual physician to decide whether s / he preferred to work separately or together with the nurse , but working together was strongly encouraged . The new shared patient record was to be typed by the physician immediately after the visit unless an unusually complicated case required dictation . Two photocopies were to be made right away , one to be handed to the patient or his / her family upon release from the outpatient clinic , another to be faxed to the patient’s primary care physician within a week from the visit . Visibilization 4 : Following and revising We followed a number of patients through their redesigned visits to the urgent care unit . Figure 9 summarizes in linear form the steps we found in the old ﬂow of the patient through urgent care , as contrasted with the redesigned ﬂow where the physician and the nurse work together . Notice how many more steps these empir - ically driven representations contain , compared to the design - desk representations presented in Figure 7 . This linear dimension of visibilization yields a very positive picture . The num - ber of steps through which a typical patient has to go has been reduced from 16 to 11 , the number of waiting periods has been reduced from six to three , and the number of consultation meetings from four to two . The ‘compression’ works . Analysis of videotapes of the redesigned process enriches the picture by open - ing up the socio - spatial dimension . Six key steps of the redesigned visit are depicted in Figure 10 . Step A in Figure 10 occurs parallel to step 4 of the right hand side of Figure 9 : the receiving nurse has just directed the patient to the waiting room . By following only one line of action , e . g . , the patient , we do not capture other parallel lines . As the patient is walking to the waiting room , Step A in Figure 10 shows the male receiving nurse handing over the new shared patient record to the female nurse who’ll be responsible for the care of the patient . The receiving nurse has ﬁlled the ﬁrst lines on the record , including the patient’s name and the reason for the visit given by the patient ( or his father , in this case ) . EXPANSIVE VISIBILIZATION OF WORK 85 Figure 9 . Steps in a typical patient visit to the urgent care before and after the redesign We can already see that there are at least three parallel lines of action we could follow and analyze : that of the patient ( object ) , that of the staff ( subject ) , and that of the document ( instrument ) . The ﬂowcharts of Figure 9 privilege one of these lines , that of the patient or object . While also arranged in a temporal order , the pictures of Figure 10 follow the document , not the patient . The pictures , being in themselves socio - spatial moments or snapshots , show the patient ( and his father ) and the caregivers as they interact with the patient record in their various socio - 86 YRJÖ ENGESTRÖM Figure 10 . Six steps in the redesigned urgent care visit spatial combinations . In step B , the nurse gives the record to the physician . In step C , the physician and the nurse are commencing the examination of the patient and the record , held by the physician , is literally in the middle . In step D , the nurse ﬁlls the record as the physician examines the patient . In step E , the physician types his notes onto the record . In step F , the nurse has made two photocopies of the record and has just handed one of them to the patient’s father upon the release of the patient . As we analyzed a set of new shared patient records , we noticed two problematic phenomena . First , the physicians commonly ﬁlled the crucial “diagnosis” box of the form with either a name written in Latin or only with a number from the diagnostic classiﬁcation . This practice naturally would have no communicative value for the patient . Secondly , nurses and other caregivers besides physicians typically wrote only very short notes , condensed to minimum technical information EXPANSIVE VISIBILIZATION OF WORK 87 Figure 11 . Compartmentalization vs . continuity and documentation vs . communication as contradictions explaining the ﬁve kinds of trouble – and they often left their notes without their initials . In discussions , some nurses ashamedly told us that they felt insecure now that their notes were seen and sup - posedly also read by physicians . Thus , they had cut down on their notes and tended to forget their initials . These two disturbances in the newly redesigned practice seemed entirely possible to rectify as the staff would learn and get comfortable with it . At this point , in September , we researchers were ﬁnally ready to conceptualize and model the source of the ﬁve kinds of trouble encountered in the ﬁrst step of the expansive visibilization cycle . The outcome of this effort is depicted in Figure 11 . The source of the trouble with double undressing , dysfunctional nursing plan , the hospital not returning records , etc . now appears to boil down to two interrelated systemic contradictions . The ﬁrst contradiction ( number 1 in Figure 11 ) is that between the patient’s need for continuous care and the compartmentalization of the physician’s and the nurse’s tasks as well as their respective records . The second contradiction ( number 2 in Figure 11 ) is that between the patient’s and the primary care provider’s need for communicative tools and the outcome of the hospital care in terms of mainly internal documentation . This modeling made us feel we ﬁnally understood what the redesign effort had been aimed at . The solution the staff developed to this double contradiction could now be mod - eled with the help of Figure 12 . The two problems we identiﬁed in the use of the new shared patient record could be interpreted as glitches in the mastery of the new instrument and consequently in the quality of the records handed to patients . These glitches are marked with small lightning - shaped arrows in Figure 12 . On September 18 , we gave feedback to the staff of the urgent care unit on the implementation of their new solutions . We used videotaped data and presented the analysis discussed above . Contrary to our expectation , several staff members expressed intense criticism of the new shared patient record . In particular , this 88 YRJÖ ENGESTRÖM Figure 12 . The solution worked out by the staff criticism came from surgeons who had met and discussed the situation among themselves . The surgeon representing them in the meeting performed a counter - visibilization by means of two overheads . Her ﬁrst overhead was a summary of the opinions of seven surgeons working in the urgent care unit . Their most serious criticism was that the continuity of the medical record is violated , which makes patient care more difﬁcult and even endangers patient safety . The second overhead bluntly listed three alternatives proposed by the surgeons : “1 . An improved and cleaned - up version of the document remains in the use of the nurses as a form for following up the care – the physician may write care instructions on the form during the patient’s stay in the outpatient clinic . 2 . The document is abandoned . 3 . Pediatricians continue testing the document . ” The ensuing discussion made it clear that the surgeons had an altogether different concept of continuity from that upon which the new shared patient record was built . The new shared record was visit - based . For each visit a new separate sheet was produced . This was to serve continuity of care in two respects : ( a ) between the physician and the nurse inside the outpatient clinic , ( b ) between the outpatient clinic and primary care by being sent to the patient’s primary care doctor without delay and by being handed to the patient ( or patient’s parents ) upon release . The surgeons , on the other hand , were talking about continuity in a third sense , namely ( c ) between the urgent care and the hospital wards . They were concerned with the patients who are sent from urgent care to a ward where the traditional continuous medical record is used . The majority of urgent care patients are medically relatively non - serious cases who return home after the urgent care visit , never entering a hospital ward . But they often do visit their primary care physicians soon after the urgent care visit for EXPANSIVE VISIBILIZATION OF WORK 89 Figure 13 . The new dilemma . control and , for instance , further medication . It was this majority that the designers of the new document had in mind . But clearly they had ignored the signiﬁcant minority for whom a different kind of continuity is vitally important . The staff faced a new dilemma . This is be depicted in Figure 13 . The protest from the hospital wards made us recognize a misconception inherent in the earlier analysis depicted above in Figure 12 . We had assumed a uniﬁed activ - ity system of the children’s hospital . However , the activity system of the outpatient clinic does not have the same object as the wards . Instead of treating the whole hospital as one activity system , it makes more sense to analyze the outpatient clinic and the wards as relatively independent , though closely networked , activ - ity systems . In Figure 13 , the thick lightning - shaped arrow represents the newly recognized contradiction between the visit - based patient record produced by the outpatient clinic and the demand for a continuous medical record essential for the wards . In short , the new visit - based record is a great tool for primary care but an unsatisfactory tool and source of disturbances for the wards . This new dilemma launched an effort of revision . The demands fomulated by the surgeons were neither rejected nor followed as such . Through negotiations , the coordinators of the reorganized outpatient clinic revised the design of the patient record . It was now printed on the same form that is used for the continuous medical record in all the wards of the children’s hospital . For each visit to urgent care , a single sheet is produced , but now this sheet is inserted into the patient’s continuous record as a numbered page . Thus , the revised record is both visit - based and con - tinous . Most importantly , the four principles identiﬁed above remain in force . The form was kept as simple as before . It is still ﬁlled and signed by both the doctor and nurse , as well as any other personnel who contribute to the urgent care of the patient . Doctors are still urged to type their notes onto the record immediately upon 90 YRJÖ ENGESTRÖM the completion of the consultation . And the record is still photocopied and sent without delay to the primary care physician as well as handed over to the patient or patient’s family . The revised shared patient record is currently ( in November , 1997 ) being re - tested by the staff . The question is , can all the three justiﬁed demands for continuity be met : continuity within the outpatient clinic , continuity between the clinic and primary care , and continuity between the outpatient clinic and the wards . It remains to be seen how the staff will succeed in resolving the dilemma . The story has not reached a closure . Conclusion Work activities undergo transformations which sometimes lead to expansive reor - ganization . In activity - theoretical terms , activity systems travel through zones of proximal development . A zone of proximal development is “an invisible battle - ground” ( Engeström , Brown , Christopher & Gregory , 1997 , p . 384 ) , a terrain of constant ambivalence , struggle , and surprise . In the intervention and redesign process described in this paper , parts of the invisible battleground were deliberately made visible . In this effort , we employed three dimensions of representing work – the linear , the socio - spatial , and the developmental dimension . These dimensions played different roles in the four steps of the cycle of expansive visibilization . Together , they provide a robust , multi - layered reﬂective instrumentality for the workplace community . In the process described in this paper , the construction of the patient as object of clinical work began to expand in important ways . The initial standard notion of the patient , particularly in the urgent care of the outpatient clinic , was that of a profession - speciﬁc visit , a narrow slice both temporally and socio - spatially . The implementation of visits where the patient was jointly seen by the physician and the nurse means that both professionals gained access to each others slices of the patient . The implementation of the shared patient record means that both profes - sionals , and any other professionals who contribute to the patient’s care , gained access to one another’s written slices of representing the patient on paper . The implementation of the immediate delivery of a copy of the record to the patient ( or his or her family ) means that the patient has quick access to the professionals’ representations of him or her , and has thus increased possibilities to ask about and comment on the contents of the record – which in itself invites the professionals to consider the patient ( family ) not merely as a recipient of care but as a potential contributor to the care . Finally , the implementation of the fast delivery of the patient record to the patient’s primary care physician means that the primary care physi - cian has access to the hospital professionals representations of the patient , which invites accountability for and reﬂection on the patient’s care trajectory beyond the temporal and socio - spatial limits of the singular visit . EXPANSIVE VISIBILIZATION OF WORK 91 The formation of a new , expanded object is the basis for the formation of a new motive , which in turn is the foundation for opening up the developmental dimen - sion of work and eventually for achieving sustainable transformations . Leont’ev ( 1981 , pp . 401 – 403 ) distinguished between the formation of a ‘merely understand - able motive’ and a truly ‘effective motive . ’ With the former he referred to ideals which are appropriated intellectually ( the top part of the triangle in Figure 1 ) but not yet anchored in the social and emotional fabric of everyday activity ( the bottom part of the triangle in Figure 1 ) . It is too early to say to what extent the staff of the outpatient clinic will succeed in turning their expanded notion of the patient from a merely understandable motive to a truly effective one . Expansive visibilization is not a straightforward process that can be neatly con - trolled by a central authority or well - meaning interventionist . The account given in this paper shows how coherent analytic explanation and goal - setting may come only after the creation and practical implementation of an innovative solution . Fur - thermore , the seemingly successful implementation of an innovative solution may open up a new , unexpected contradiction which requires serious revision and pos - sibly serves as impetus for a new cycle of expansive visibilization . Such negations are essential ingredients and energy sources in an expansive process , not mistakes or anomalies to be eliminated ( Engeström , 1996a ) . I recently reviewed developmental work research interventions conducted in Finland by my colleagues and by my own research groups over the past ﬁfteen years . One of my critical observations was the following . “ . . . in their efforts to create a new model for the activity , a number of projects focused on constructing and appropriating new strategic instruments , both practical and cognitive , which would enable the practitioners to create a new , expanded object for their activity . This emphasis on instrumental re - mediation often entailed a relative neglect of corresponding transformations in the division of labor , community and rules – that is , the social - organizational re - mediation of the activity system . This led to ruptures and setbacks in the institutional implementation , generalization and consolidation of the new mod - els . The new instruments and associated visions of expanded objects of work did not die away , but they often lived as relatively fragmented pockets of advanced action clusters rather than becoming dominant institutional patterns of the collective activity . ” ( Engeström , 1996b , pp . 135 – 136 ) The expansive visibilization process analyzed in this paper led to a solution in which a new instrument – the shared patient record – is intimately intertwined with a new form of division of labor – the nurse and the physician working simul - taneously in the same room together with the patient . This weaving together of novel instrumental and social elements of the activity system made the solution robust , at least robust enough to survive for the time being the harsh criticism and the dilemma of continuity that surfaced in the fourth step of the visibiliza - tion process . In my analysis , this robust weaving together was possible largely because the process was driven not by a list of discrete rationally predetermined 92 YRJÖ ENGESTRÖM goals but by a dialectical movement between activity - level visions and action - level concretizations . Notes 1 . In this paper , I will use the word ‘visibilization’ to denote deliberate attempts at making work visible . I prefer to use this made - up word instead of ‘visualization’ because the latter is often associated with the idea of illustrating and making more accessible some aspects of a message by means of visual images – clearly an insufﬁcient notion for the purpose of understanding what is at stake when work is rendered visible . 2 . The three dimensions discussed here – linear , socio - spatial , and developmental – are not neces - sarily a complete picture . For instance the widely practiced documentation procedures performed for ISO certiﬁcation are an example of categorical visibilization which turns work into a set of predetermined classiﬁcations . 3 . The research team , representing the Center for Activity Theory and Developmental Work Research of the University of Helsinki , consists of Yrjö Engeström ( principal investigator ) , Ritva Engeström , and Tarja Vähäaho . When I use the pronoun “we” , I refer to the research team . 4 . The central idea of the Change Laboratory is cognitive and social re - mediation of the activity by making the practitioners face and conceptualize contradictions of their own practice with the help of videotaped situations on the one hand and theoretical models on the other hand . The Change Laboratory is a conscious attempt to expand Vygotsky’s ( 1978 ) method of dual stimulation . 5 . The theoretical importance and practical procedures of historical analysis of the evolution of contradictions in the activity systems are beyond the scope of this article ; see Engeström ( 1987 , 1990 , 1993 ) for discussions and concrete examples of this aspect of expansive learning . 6 . As Leont’ev ( 1978 , p . 78 ) points out : “The realized activity is richer and truer than the consciousness that precedes it . ” References Billig , M . & et al . ( 1988 ) : Ideological dilemmas : A social psychology of everyday thinking . London : Sage . Engeström , Y . ( 1987 ) : Learning by expanding : An activity - theoretical approach to developmental research . Helsinki : Orienta - Konsultit . Engeström , Y . ( 1990 ) : Learning , working and imagining : Twelve studies in activity theory . Helsinki : Orienta - Konsultit . Engeström , Y . ( 1993 ) : Developmental studies of work as a testbench of activity theory : The case of primary care medical practice . In S . Chaiklin & J . Lave ( Eds . ) , Understanding practice : Perspectives on activity and context . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Engeström , Y . ( 1995 ) : Objects , contradictions and collaboration in medical cognition : An activity - theoretical perspective . Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine , vol . 7 , pp . 395 – 412 . Engeström , Y . ( 1996a ) : Development as breaking away and opening up : A challenge to Vygotsky and Piaget . Swiss Journal of Psychology , vol . 55 , pp . 126 – 132 . Engeström , Y . ( 1996b ) : Developmental work research as educational research . Nordisk Pedagogik : Journal of Nordic Educational Research , vol . 16 , pp . 131 – 143 . Engeström , Y . , K . Brown , L . C . Christopher and J . Gregory ( 1997 ) : Coordination , cooperation , and communication in the courts : Expansive transitions in legal work . In M . Cole , Y . Engeström & O . Vasquez ( eds . ) : Mind , culture and activity : Seminal papers from the Laboratory of Comparative Human Cognition . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . EXPANSIVE VISIBILIZATION OF WORK 93 Engeström , Y . , J . Virkkunen , M . Helle , J . Pihlaja and R . Poikela ( 1996 ) : Change laboratory as a tool for transforming work . Lifelong Learning in Europe , vol . 1 , no . 2 , pp . 10 – 17 . Goodwin , C . and M . H . Goodwin ( 1996 ) : Seeing as situated activity : Formulating planes . In Y . Engeström & D . Middleton ( eds . ) : Cognition and communication at work . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Gray , B . H . ( 1991 ) : The proﬁt motive and patient care : The changing accountability of doctors and hospitals . Cambridge : Harvard University Press . Hammer , M . ( 1990 ) . Reengineering work : Don’t automate , obliterate ! Harvard Business Review , vol . 68 , no . 4 , pp . 104 – 112 . Hammer , M . and J . Champy ( 1993 ) : Reengineering the corporation . New York : Harper Business . Heath , C . and P . Luff ( 1996 ) : Convergent activities : Line control and passenger information on the London Underground . In Y . Engeström & D . Middleton ( eds . ) : Cognition and communication at work / Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Leont’ev , A . N . ( 1978 ) : Activity , consciousness , and personality . Englewood Cliffs : Prentice - Hall . Leont’ev , A . N . ( 1981 ) : Problems of the development of the mind . Moscow : Progress . Manganelli , R . L . and M . M . Klein ( 1994 ) . The reengineering handbook : A step - by - step guide to business transformation . New York : Amacom . Margolis , H . ( 1993 ) : Paradigms and barriers : How habits of mind govern scientiﬁc beliefs . Chicago : The University of Chicago Press . Suchman , L . ( 1987 ) : Plans and situated actions : The problem of human - machine communication . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Suchman , L . ( 1995 ) : Making work visible . Communications of the ACM , vol . 38 , no . 9 , pp . 56 – 64 . Suchman , L . ( 1996 ) : Constituting shared workspaces . In Y . Engeström & D . Middleton ( eds . ) : Cognition and communication at work . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Tikhomirov , O . K . ( 1988 ) : The psychology of thinking . Moscow : Progress . Vygotsky , L . S . ( 1978 ) : Mind in society : The development of higher psychological processes . Cambridge : Harvard University Press . Weick , K . E . ( 1995 ) : Sensemaking in organizations . Thousand Oaks : Sage . Wodak , R . ( 1997 ) : Disorders of discourse . London : Longman .