Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID - 19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID - 19 . The COVID - 19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect , the company ' s public news and information website . Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID - 19 - related research that is available on the COVID - 19 resource centre - including this research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories , such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re - use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source . These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID - 19 resource centre remains active . Newsdesk www . thelancet . com / infection Published online April 17 , 2020 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S1473 - 3099 ( 20 ) 30303 - 0 1 Lancet Infect Dis 2020 Published Online April 17 , 2020 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S1473 - 3099 ( 20 ) 30303 - 0 COVID - 19 in Latin America Several problems undermine the preparedness of countries in Latin America to face the spread of COVID - 19 . Talha Burki reports . Coronavirus disease 2019 ( COVID - 19 ) has arrived late in South America . On February 25 , 2020 , Brazil was the first nation in the region to report the disease . Within weeks , countries across the continent had closed their borders and enforced lockdowns . As of April 14 , Latin America has registered more than 65 000 cases of COVID - 19 . Ecuador , in particular , has been badly affected , with reports of corpses left abandoned on the streets . Pandemic preparedness varies across the region and several countries are particularly vulnerable to a destructive outbreak . For example , Guatemala and Haiti have little more than 100 ventilators between them . Mexico has high rates of hypertension , obesity , and diabetes , all of which are risk factors for severe disease after infection with the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 ( SARS - CoV - 2 ) . “It is a very difficult situation” , explains Alfonso Rodríguez - Morales , Colombian Association of Infectious Diseases , Colombia . “Obviously the healthcare systems are not trained for coronavirus ; we had a little extra time to get ready for the arrival of the disease but some places are really going to struggle . ” Thus far , Brazil has recorded the largest number of cases— more than 23 000 , as of April 13 . The country has a good public healthcare system , and it is experienced in dealing with epidemics . The past few years have seen serious outbreaks of chikungunya , dengue , yellow fever , and Zika . There is also the issue of the favelas , home to around 13 million Brazilians . In the favelas , conditions are crowded and access to clean water is limited . In such circumstances , social distancing and hand - washing are virtually impossible . “The recommendations for preventing infection are based on assumptions that do not apply in the favelas” , said Clare Wenham , Assistant Professor of Global Health Policy , London School of Economics and Political Science , UK . “It is hard to see how they will be able to prevent infection or control the virus once it has been let loose . ” The outlook is similar for slums elsewhere on the continent . Healthcare in Brazil is the responsibility of the municipalities . This includes pandemic preparedness . It means that matters such as the provision of personal protective equipment , rules on social distancing , and testing arrangements vary . But it also limits the influence of President Jair Bolsonaro , which could work in the country’s favour . Bolsonaro has repeatedly minimised the threat of COVID - 19 and undermined efforts to enforce social distancing . After Bolsonaro returned from an official trip to the USA in early March , 24 members of his delegation tested positive for SARS - CoV - 2 . Instead of going into quarantine , the president attended a public rally . In late March , he issued orders preventing the states from restricting people’s movements and removing the requirement for churches to comply with health regulations . Both moves were quickly overturned by the courts . “You have mixed messages in Brazil” , said Wenham . “The president is encouraging people to go out and resume their normal lives , while the mayors and governors are stressing the importance of maintaining quarantine” . Bolsonaro is not the only leader whose behaviour has caused concern . In February 2020 , Mexico’s president Andrés Manuel López Obrado described COVID - 19 as “not even as bad as the flu” . He subsequently urged Mexicans to visit restaurants and diners . Daniel Ortega , president of Nicaragua since 2007 , has not been seen in public since March 12 . In his absence , his wife and vice - president Rosario Murillo has co - ordinated the response to the pandemic . She has declined to close schools and shops . Nicaragua is the only nation in Central America to have kept its borders open . Even the local football league has not been suspended . Nicaragua has only registered nine cases of COVID - 19 , a number experts find implausible and might reflect lack of testing . “We have concerns for the lack of social distancing , the convening of mass gatherings . We have concerns about the testing , contact tracing , the reporting of cases . We also have concerns about what we see as inadequate infection prevention and control” , commented Carissa Etienne , director of PAHO , in a virtual press conference . Experts are more optimistic about Cuba . “Cuba is one of the best prepared locations anywhere in the world to deal with an outbreak” , said Wenham . “They have a very strong , integrated healthcare system which can respond the moment an infectious disease is detected . ” The contrast with Venezuela is stark . “The situation in Venezuela is critical ; when coronavirus hits , it is going to be impossible to contain” , said Tamara Taraciuk Broner , Human Rights Watch , Buenos Aires , Argentina . “Even in hospitals , there are not the facilities for hand - washing with soap . ” Aside from a brief interruption in 2016 , the Venezuelan government has not published epidemiological data for several years . The healthcare system has all but collapsed . The once - impressive laboratory system has been looted . Some 5 million Venezuelans have fled . “There is an ongoing humanitarian F l i c k r – A g e n c i a B r a s i l i a Newsdesk 2 www . thelancet . com / infection Published online April 17 , 2020 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S1473 - 3099 ( 20 ) 30303 - 0 crisis , an access to food crisis , the surveillance system is not running properly , there is very limited diagnostic capacity and very limited access to healthcare” , said Rodríguez - Morales . “Now things are going to become even more complicated for Venezuela with COVID - 19 . ” It is impossible to know how many cases the country has already seen , though the official tally is 171 . Rodríguez - Morales worries about testing capacity across the region . “In a country like Colombia , we will need to run 500 tests per day” , he told The Lancet Infectious Diseases . Brazil has the advantage of a sizeable biotech industry . But it is not clear whether this will be enough to meet the expected demand . The health ministry predicts that by the peak of epidemic , Brazil will have to process 30 000 – 50 000 tests per day . Its current capacity is 6700 tests per day . Diagnostics are mostly centralised in Latin America . “Tests are run by the national institutes of health ; very few countries run regional , local , or university laboratories” , explains Rodríguez - Morales . “But they are going to have to find ways to increase capacity , and in some places that will be a difficult and complicated task” . An ongoing dengue outbreak , which infected more than 3 million people in the Americas last year , further complicates matters . It is too early to tell how SARS - CoV - 2 and dengue virus infection will interact with one another . In any case , addressing two epidemics is a major task . “Brazil has an excellent public health system , but it cannot cope with competing crises” , said Wenham . Cases of COVID - 19 and dengue are likely to peak at the same time . There are also questions over how vector control can be effectively managed during a lockdown . “We could easily end up in a situation where there is a surge of all vector - borne diseases” , said Wenham . In addition to these problems , Latin America has some of the most overcrowded prisons in the world . Thousands of prisoners have yet to face trial . Brazil alone has incarcerated 773 000 people , one - third of whom are in a pretrial detention . Rates of tuberculosis among prisoners in the country are 35 times higher than in the general population . Haiti’s detention facilities have an occupancy rate of 450 % . Countries such as Argentina , Brazil , and Chile are taking steps to reduce their prison populations in light of the pending epidemic . Nonetheless , the prospects for South America’s prisoners are bleak . The coming weeks will show if Latin America can cope with the increase in cases of COVID - 19 , but it is expected that the death toll will be high . Talha Burki