The Journal of Space Syntax ISSN : 2044 - 7507 Year : 2012 volume : 3 issue : 1 Online Publication Date : 13 August 2012 http : / / www . journalofspacesyntax . org / J SS Jan Gehl ( 1987 / 2011 ) , Life Between Buildings : Using Public Space Washington - Covelo - London : Island Press , ISBN : 978 - 1597268271 Jan Gehl ( 2010 ) , Cities for People Washington - Covelo - London : Island Press , ISBN : 978 - 1597265737 Reviewed by : Beatriz Campos Space Syntax São Paulo São Paulo , Brazil Pages : 125 - 128 book review book re J O SS 125 Book Review : Jan Gehl ( 1987 , 2011 revisited ed . ) , Life Between Buildings : Using Public Space Washington - Covelo - London : Island Press , ISBN : 978 - 1597268271 Jan Gehl ( 2010 ) , Cities for People Washington - Covelo - London : Island Press , ISBN : 978 - 1597265737 Reviewed by Beatriz Campos Space Syntax São Paulo São Paulo , Brazil Life Between Buildings , 2011 revisited edition Photo source : < http : / / islandpress . org / ip / books / book / islandpress / L / bo8036913 . html > Jan Gehl is a Danish architect who , in parallel to his academic career , has worked through his ar - chitectural practice on the design of public spaces and urban regeneration projects all over the word , including Brighton , Newcastle and London . 1 His interest in the quality and performance of public spaces started with a research grant from Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts for studies on the form and use of public spaces . Since then Gehl has published extensively ; his success in injecting outdoor life into northern European cities has led to worldwide impact of his design guidance ( Gehl , 1987 ; Gehl & Gemzøe , 2004 , 2000 ; Gehl et al . , 2006 ; and Gehl , 2010 ) . This review focuses on two of his books : Life Between Buildings ( 2011 , revised edition ) and Cities for People ( 2010 ) . The highly influential Life Between Buildings was first published in 1971 with the first English translation in 1987 , whilst this review considers the reissue of the book in its sixth edition last year . The book examines the relationship between patterns of space use , specifically outdoor activities , and the spatial properties of the physical environment . Gehl promotes a straightforward approach to improving urban form , which is derived from systematically documenting the performance of urban spaces and analysing what factors influence their use . Gehl uses the human dimension as the starting point for his analysis 2 and measures the success of the urban environment by quantifying the levels of pedestrian flows , levels and length of stationary activity - includ - ing human contact and social interaction . The book is divided into four main chapters , which range from general to specific models . In Chapter 1 – Life Between Buildings – Gehl intro - duces the concepts of necessary , optimal and social activities ( Gehl , 1987 , p . 9 ) , which sets the background for his analysis on the urban environ - ment physical properties . To support his ideas , Gehl also examines the spatial properties of traditional Notes : 1 E - source , available at : < http : / / www . gehlarchitects . com / ? # / 165291 / > [ Ac - cessed 8 June 2012 ] 2 For Gehl , the urban land - scape must be considered through the five human sens - es and experienced at the speed of walking rather than at the speed of a car . 3 Gehl makes a timely obser - vation when referring to Tra - falgar Square : ‘The pedes - trian landscape of the square in the 1970s consisted of 48 islands that pedestrians could walk between , in con - trast to the situation seen on old photographs , where pedestriansmove across the square in a natural and leisurely fashion in all direc - tions’ ( Gehl , 1987 , p . 139 ) . Refer also to : Space Syntax ( 2003 and 2005 ) Trafalgar Square consultancy reports for Foster and Partners and Hillier ( 1998 ) . 126 J O SS The Journal of Space Syntax Volume 3 • Issue 1 spatial components which will enhance or reduce pedestrian flows across and around the public space : building heights , orientation of entrances , multifunction areas and active frontages , density , modes of transport ( pedestrians and cyclists ) , ac - cessibility and visibility from immediate surrounding areas ( Whyte , 1980 ; Hettiarachchie , 1987 ) . It is here that Gehl acknowledges that well - functioning pedestrian systems facilitate the shortest distances between natural destinations and makes a rather compelling argument about the failure of Trafalgar Square before its redevelopment . 3 Lastly , Gehl is aware that for public spaces to be lively and successful they need to have a com - bination of both moving and stationary activities . In Chapter 4 - Spaces for Walking , Places for Staying - Gehl focuses on static activities and the physical elements that will make people not only stop but also spend time with the space . According to Gehl , the ‘design of individual spaces and of the details , down to the smallest component , are determining factors to quality of public spaces’ ( Gehl , 1987 , p . 129 ) . Gehl also discusses preferable areas for sitting and standing as well as the edge effect 4 and the correlation between static occupancy and levels of pedestrian movement 5 . Interestingly , although Gehl does refer to Sitte’s work ( Gehl , 1987 , p . 43 ) , one of the few typologies which is not explored is the concept of enclosure and irregularity principles . 6 Cities for People was published in 2010 and it is , to a degree , a revised version of Life Between Buildings . In addition to the elements previously discussed , Gehl examines issues such as sustain - ability , shared spaces , mixed use , sense of security , usability and levels of pedestrian comfort . Like in his previous book - Gehl uses systematic and empirical observations of patterns of space use , often making gradual incremental improvements , then document - ing them again to demonstrate what makes public spaces ‘alive’ . Throughout the book , Gehl explains medieval public spaces ( such as dimensions and detailed design ) and relates the identified common denominators to the success or failure of contempo - rary examples . He then discusses the introduction of contemporary urban city planning principles and the reasons why the 20 th century design ideas , such as functionalism ( Gehl , 1987 , p . 43 ) , were central to the lack of vitality in street life . In Chapter 2 - Prerequisites for Planning - Gehl analyses the physical properties of human senses ( such as smell , hearing , seeing ) and social dis - tances . Like many other authors ( Sitte 1889 , 1945 ; Alexander et al . , 1977 ; Lynch , 1971 ) , Gehl believes there must be a correspondence between the di - mension of a public square and a sense of place ( Cullen , 1961 ) . If squares are too big for the number of users , they will feel empty . This leads to a further idea : the ‘self - reinforcing’ process where individual events stimulate others : ‘If activities and people are assembled , individual events will stimulate one another’ ( Gehl , 1987 , p . 107 ) . In line with Gehl’s argument on the importance of the self - reinforcing process , in Chapter 3 – To Assemble or Disperse – Gehl examines a series of Notes : 4 The ‘edge effect’ ( Gehl , 1987 , p . 159 ) is widely ac - knowledged by a number of different researchers . In fact , Gehl adopts this terminology from De Jonge ( 1967 ) . De Jonge , after observations on static occupation in a series of recreation areas ( such as parks and roadside resting places ) claims that ‘other things being equal , the parts of the areas near the main entrances are parking areas and used more intensively than the distance parts… This phenomenon can been called the edge effect’ . Ac - cording to Gehl , the edge is the preferred location for standing or sitting when people first occupy the bor - ders and edges of the public spaces , and only once they are fully occupied , do people tend to move inwards . The edge effect exists because people prefer to sit in areas facing the pedestrian flow , and therefore the location on the boundary of the public spaces will provide the best views , with extensive and richer visual fields . Gehl sug - gests that benches that pro - vide a good view of the sur - rounding activities are used more often than benches with less or no view of others since human activities are the main attraction for users of public spaces . Although Gehl makes a distinction , claiming that the location for sitting is chosen more care - fully than standing , he points out that the edge effect is ob - served in both cases . Refer also to Alexander et al . ( 1977 op cit . ) and Marcus and Francis ( 1990 ) . Cities For People , 2010 Photo source : < http : / / islandpress . org / ip / books / book / islandpress / C / bo8038192 . html > 127 J O SS Book Review : Life Between Buildings & Cities for People Campos , B . the methods and tools he believes are necessary to reconfigure public spaces into the environment he believes they all should be : urban meeting places , places for social cohesion and interaction . The book follows a similar structure to Life Be - tween Buildings . Chapters 3 and 4 are possibly the two chapters that the readers of JOSS might find the most innovative and significant . When stressing the importance of mixed use and active frontages , Gehl points out that mixed functions provide more activities around the clock bringing safety and protection to both residents and ‘visitor’s to the surrounding public space . As for shared spaces : Gehl is sympathetic with the idea and recognizes its benefits , however he points out that although mixing traffic ( pedestrian , cyclists and vehicular ) is possible , mixed traffic solutions must prioritise pedestrians . Gehl also examines the positive relationship between well - functioning urban areas and sus - tainability . However , the significance of sustain - ability is centred on the responsible management of resources and health benefits . Gehl does not examine the social and economic benefits of sus - tainable city centres as a result of what adequate accessibility brings to pedestrian movement and trade as presented in the seminal work of Hillier and colleagues 7 . Another missed opportunity is the lack of reference to city life as an outcome of its emergent morphology and the role of urban spatial configuration , both at local and global levels , on the performance of public spaces ( Arruda Cam - pos , 2000 ) . The space syntax methodology as a design tool and its functionality , which allows the correlation of spatial elements and social variables is paramount for understanding public spaces , mainly the correlation between configuration and pedestrian movement flows and stationary activity ( Hillier et al . , 1993 ) . There is no doubt that Gehl understands the mechanisms behind ‘life between buildings’ . Gehl’s human dimension as the starting point for the design of the urban environment is inspirational . Both books are engaging , logical and rich in case studies , which illustrate Gehl’s approach . If Life Between Buildings was and still is an outstanding contribution to the subject , Cities for People , despite addressing a number of current issues , could have been more engaging and informative about how the spatial morphology of the urban grid shapes the performance of urban spaces . Nevertheless , both books are a must - read for students , designers , as well as anybody interested in the performance of public spaces and the urban environment as a whole . Notes : 5 Gehl produced a survey of patterns of space use in public spaces in Stroget , Denmark . He notes that the levels of static occupancy of public spaces had dramati - cally increased over a period of twenty years and all avail - able squares of ‘good qual - ity’ were filled to capacity every day . He concludes that the main reasons for deter - mining the quality or usability of each space are closely re - lated to its location in relation to the main pedestrian flows , which had also dramatically increased in the previous twenty years , meaning that the static occupancy had in - creased in direct proportion to the levels of pedestrian movement . 6 A very common interpre - tation is that liveable pub - lic spaces should observe enclosure and irregularity principles , which were de - rived from studies of tradi - tional medieval squares . Sitte ( 1889 op cit . ) , Unwin ( 1909 ) and Zucker ( 1959 ) regard enclosure , defined by the grouping of architec - tural masses around an open space , as the fundamental property of public spaces . Only enclosed spaces could provide the users a sense of well - being , comfort and pleasure , and therefore would ultimately determine the preference by the public for such spaces . 7 See Chapter 4 ‘Cities as Movement Economies’ in Hillier ( 1996 ) and Stonor ( 2009 ) . 128 J O SS The Journal of Space Syntax Volume 3 • Issue 1 References Alexander , C . et al . ( 1977 ) , A Pattern Language , New York : Oxford University Press . Arruda Campos , M . B . ( 2000 ) , Urban Public Spaces : A Study of the Relation Between Spatial Configuration and Use Patterns . PhD Thesis , University of London . Cullen , G . ( 1961 ) , Townscape , London : The Architectural Press . De Jonge , D . ( 1967 ) , ‘Applied hodology’ . In : Landscape , Vol . 17 ( 2 ) , p . 10 - 11 . Gehl , J . ( 2010 ) , Cities for People , Washington - Covelo - London : Island Press . Gehl , J . ( 1987 ) , Life Between Buildings : Using Public Space ( transl . by Koch , J . ) , New York : Van Nostrand Reinhold . Gehl , J . and Gemzøe , L . ( 2004 ) , Public Spaces , Public Life , Copenhagen : The Danish Architectural Press . Gehl , J . and Gemzøe , L . ( 2000 ) , New City Spaces , Copen - hagen : The Danish Architectural Press . Gehl , J . et al . ( 2006 ) , New City Life , Copenhagen : The Danish Architectural Press . Hettiarachchie , J . ( 1987 ) , Public Squares in Urban De - sign - A Critical Study of Cases in Rome , Helsinki and Colombo . Master Degree , Department of Architecture , Helsinki University of Technology . Hillier , B . ( 1996 ) , Chapter 4 : ‘Cities as movement econo - mies’ . In : Hillier , B . ( 1996 ) , Space is the Machine , Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Hillier , B . ( 1998 ) , ‘From research to design : Re - engineering the space of Trafalgar Square’ . In : Urban Design Quar - terly , Vol . 68 , p . 35 - 37 . Hillier , B . et al . ( 1993 ) , ‘Natural movement : Or configura - tion and attraction in urban pedestrian movement’ . In : Environment and Planning B , Vol . 20 ( 1 ) , p . 29 - 66 . Lynch , K . ( 1971 ) , Site Planning , Cambridge , MA : The MIT Press . Marcus , C . and Francis , C . ( eds . ) ( 1990 ) , People Places - Design Guidelines for Urban Open Space , New York : Van Nostrand Reinhold . Sitte , C . ( 1889 , 1945 ) , The Art of Building Cities ( transl . by Stewart , C . ) , Connecticut : Hyperion Press . Stonor , T . ( 2009 ) , ‘The spatial components of sustainability’ . In : Xishan Sustainable Development Demonstration & Executive Forum , Taiyuan , China . Available at : < http : / / www . slideboom . com / presentations / 84784 / Tim - Stonor _ Spatial - components - of - sustainability _ Taiyuan > [ Accessed 8 June 2012 ] Unwin , R . ( 1909 ) , Town Planning in Practice , London : Ernest Benn Ltd . Whyte , W . ( 1980 ) , The Social Life of Small Urban Spaces , Washington : The Conservation Foundation . Zucker , P . ( 1959 ) , Town and Square , New York : Columbia University Press .