Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches Yanchuan Sim † Brice Acree ∗ Justin H . Gross ∗ Noah A . Smith † † Language Technologies Institute Carnegie Mellon University ∗ Department of Political Science University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing October 19 , 2013 Seattle , USA Background “Well , I think you hit a reset button for the fall campaign . Everything changes . It’s almost like an Etch - A - Sketch . You can kind of shake it up and restart all over again . ” — Eric Fehrnstrom , Spokesman for Presidential Candidate Mitt Romney , 2012 Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 2 / 28 Background “Well , I think you hit a reset button for the fall campaign . Everything changes . It’s almost like an Etch - A - Sketch . You can kind of shake it up and restart all over again . ” — Eric Fehrnstrom , Spokesman for Presidential Candidate Mitt Romney , 2012 Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 2 / 28 Background Motivation Motivation Successful primary candidates “move to the center” before a general election . (cid:73) In primary elections , voters tend to be ideologically concentrated . (cid:73) In general elections , voters are now more widely dispersed across the ideological spectrum . Hypothesis Obama , McCain , and Romney should use more “extreme” ideological rhetoric in the primaries than the general election . Can we measure candidates’ ideological positions from their prose at diﬀerent times ? Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 3 / 28 Background Motivation Motivation Successful primary candidates “move to the center” before a general election . (cid:73) In primary elections , voters tend to be ideologically concentrated . (cid:73) In general elections , voters are now more widely dispersed across the ideological spectrum . Hypothesis Obama , McCain , and Romney should use more “extreme” ideological rhetoric in the primaries than the general election . Can we measure candidates’ ideological positions from their prose at diﬀerent times ? Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 3 / 28 Background Motivation Motivation Successful primary candidates “move to the center” before a general election . (cid:73) In primary elections , voters tend to be ideologically concentrated . (cid:73) In general elections , voters are now more widely dispersed across the ideological spectrum . Hypothesis Obama , McCain , and Romney should use more “extreme” ideological rhetoric in the primaries than the general election . Can we measure candidates’ ideological positions from their prose at diﬀerent times ? Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 3 / 28 Background Motivation Motivation Successful primary candidates “move to the center” before a general election . (cid:73) In primary elections , voters tend to be ideologically concentrated . (cid:73) In general elections , voters are now more widely dispersed across the ideological spectrum . Hypothesis Obama , McCain , and Romney should use more “extreme” ideological rhetoric in the primaries than the general election . Can we measure candidates’ ideological positions from their prose at diﬀerent times ? Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 3 / 28 Methodology Conceptualizing “ideology” Conceptualizing “ideology” Ideology as categorical ( a typology ) (cid:73) Patterns of commonly held political beliefs , core values , and preoccupations represented by reference to recognizable prototypes . (cid:73) Left , Right , Center , Religious left , Progressive , Libertarian , Far right , etc . . . Ideology as hierarchical (cid:73) Left vs Right – internally diverse set of ﬁner grained distinctions . Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 4 / 28 Methodology Conceptualizing “ideology” Conceptualizing “ideology” Ideology as categorical ( a typology ) (cid:73) Patterns of commonly held political beliefs , core values , and preoccupations represented by reference to recognizable prototypes . (cid:73) Left , Right , Center , Religious left , Progressive , Libertarian , Far right , etc . . . Ideology as hierarchical (cid:73) Left vs Right – internally diverse set of ﬁner grained distinctions . Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 4 / 28 Methodology Conceptualizing “ideology” Ideology tree Left Right Center Progressive Religious Left Far Left Religious Right Center Left Far Right Center Right Libertarian Populist Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 5 / 28 Methodology Conceptualizing “ideology” Cue - lag representation of speeches Instead of putting more limits on your earnings and your options , we need to place clear and ﬁrm limits on government spending . As a start , I will lower federal spending to 20 percent of GDP within four years’ time – down from the 24 . 3 percent today . The President’s plan assumes an endless expansion of government , with costs rising and rising with the spread of Obamacare . I will halt the expansion of government , and repeal Obamacare . Working together , we can save Social Security without making any changes in the system for people in or nearing retirement . We have two basic options for future retirees : a tax increase for high - income retirees , or a decrease in the beneﬁt growth rate for high - income retirees . I favor the second option ; it protects everyone in the system and it avoids higher taxes that will drag down the economy I have proposed a Medicare plan that improves the program , keeps it solvent , and slows the rate of growth in health care costs . — Excerpt from speech by Romney on 5 / 25 / 12 in Des Moines , IA Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 6 / 28 Methodology Conceptualizing “ideology” Cue - lag representation of speeches Instead of putting more limits on your earnings and your options , we need to place clear and ﬁrm limits on government spending . As a start , I will lower federal spending to 20 percent of GDP within four years’ time – down from the 24 . 3 percent today . The President’s plan assumes an endless expansion of government , with costs rising and rising with the spread of Obamacare . I will halt the expansion of government , and repeal Obamacare . Working together , we can save Social Security without making any changes in the system for people in or nearing retirement . We have two basic options for future retirees : a tax increase for high - income retirees , or a decrease in the beneﬁt growth rate for high - income retirees . I favor the second option ; it protects everyone in the system and it avoids higher taxes that will drag down the economy . I have proposed a Medicare plan that improves the program , keeps it solvent , and slows the rate of growth in health care costs . — Excerpt from speech by Romney on 5 / 25 / 12 in Des Moines , IA Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 6 / 28 Methodology Conceptualizing “ideology” Cue - lag representation of speeches Instead of putting more limits on your earnings and your options , we need to place clear and ﬁrm limits on government spending . As a start , I will lower federal spending to 20 percent of GDP within four years’ time – down from the 24 . 3 percent today . The President’s plan assumes an endless expansion of government , with costs rising and rising with the spread of Obamacare . I will halt the expansion of government , and repeal Obamacare . Working together , we can save Social Security without making any changes in the system for people in or nearing retirement . We have two basic options for future retirees : a tax increase for high - income retirees , or a decrease in the beneﬁt growth rate for high - income retirees . I favor the second option ; it protects everyone in the system and it avoids higher taxes that will drag down the economy . I have proposed a Medicare plan that improves the program , keeps it solvent , and slows the rate of growth in health care costs . — Excerpt from speech by Romney on 5 / 25 / 12 in Des Moines , IA . . Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 7 / 28 Methodology Towards a measurement model Towards a measurement model 1 Stage 1 : Build a “dictionary” of cue lexicons (cid:73) Deﬁne the ideological structure . (cid:73) Identify prototypical examples of each ideology → Cue terms that are indicative of ideologies . 2 Stage 2 : Analyze speeches using learned ideological cue lexicons . (cid:73) Build probabilistic sequence model to infer latent ideological states for each cue term in a speech . (cid:73) Model should match our assumptions about cue - ﬁllers and make use of cue lexicon . Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 8 / 28 Methodology Towards a measurement model Towards a measurement model 1 Stage 1 : Build a “dictionary” of cue lexicons (cid:73) Deﬁne the ideological structure . (cid:73) Identify prototypical examples of each ideology → Cue terms that are indicative of ideologies . 2 Stage 2 : Analyze speeches using learned ideological cue lexicons . (cid:73) Build probabilistic sequence model to infer latent ideological states for each cue term in a speech . (cid:73) Model should match our assumptions about cue - ﬁllers and make use of cue lexicon . Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 8 / 28 Stage 1 : Building “dictionary” of cue lexicons Ideological books corpus Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 9 / 28 Stage 1 : Building “dictionary” of cue lexicons Ideological books corpus Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 9 / 28 Stage 1 : Building “dictionary” of cue lexicons Cue discovery model Cue discovery model We would like 1 to take into account for the hierarchical nature of ideological structure , 2 a sparse set of cue terms . Solution : Sparse Additive GenerativE model for text ( Eisenstein et al . , 2011 ) — SAGE Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 10 / 28 Stage 1 : Building “dictionary” of cue lexicons Cue discovery model Sparse additive eﬀects for cue discovery ( Example ) Bag of terms probability p ( w | metadata ) ∝ Y w ∈ d exp (cid:0) η background w + η left w + η far left w + η edu w + η power systems w (cid:1) Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 11 / 28 Stage 1 : Building “dictionary” of cue lexicons Cue discovery model Cue lexicon Center - Right D . Frum , M . McCain , C . T . Whitman ( 1 , 450 ) governor bush ; class voter ; health care ; republican president ; george bush ; state police ; move forward ; miss america ; middle eastern ; water buﬀalo ; fellow citizens ; sam’s club ; american life ; working class ; general election ; culture war ; status quo ; human dignity ; same - sex marriage Libertarian Rand Paul , John Stossel , Reason ( 2 , 268 ) medical marijuana ; raw milk ; rand paul ; economic freedom ; health care ; government intervention ; market economies ; com - merce clause ; military spending ; government agency ; due pro - cess ; drug war ; minimum wage ; federal law ; ron paul ; private property Religious Right ( 960 ) daily saint ; holy spirit ; matthew [ c / v ] ; john [ c / v ] ; jim wallis ; modern liberals ; individual liberty ; god’s word ; jesus christ ; el - ementary school ; natural law ; limited government ; emerging church ; private property ; planned parenthood ; christian nation ; christian faith Browse results at http : / / www . ark . cs . cmu . edu / CLIP / or http : / / is . gd / etchasketch Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 12 / 28 Stage 2 : Cue Lag Ideological Proportions Model Stage 2 : Cue Lag Ideological Proportions Libertarian ( R ) Libertarian ( R ) Right Progressive ( L ) Progressive ( L ) government spending federal spending repeal Obamacare social security tax increase Each speech is generated by a hidden Markov model : (cid:73) ideologies — hidden states , (cid:73) cue terms — emitted , Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 13 / 28 Stage 2 : Cue Lag Ideological Proportions Model HMM with a twist Right Progressive ( L ) repeal Obamacare socialsecurity Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 14 / 28 Stage 2 : Cue Lag Ideological Proportions Model HMM with a twist Background Left Right Center Progressive Religious Left Far Left Religious Right Mainstream Far Right Non Radical Libertarian Populist Right Progressive ( L ) repeal Obamacare socialsecurity Walk in ideology tree : p tree ( s j | s i ; ζ , θ ) = (cid:16)Q h u , v i∈ Path ( s i , s j ) ( 1 − ζ u ) θ u , v (cid:17) ζ s j Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 15 / 28 Stage 2 : Cue Lag Ideological Proportions Model HMM with a twist Right Progressive ( L ) repeal Obamacare social security lag = 7 Restart switch — noisy - OR model : p restart ( continue | lag ) = ( 1 − ρ ) lag + 1 Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 16 / 28 Stage 2 : Cue Lag Ideological Proportions Model An informed emission Progressive ( L ) socialsecurity Informed Dirichlet prior for emission distribution social security | Progressive ∼ Dirichlet ( β Progressive ) where β Progressivesocialsecurity = ( β cue if social security ∈ Progressive cue lexicon β default if social security ∈ any other cue lexicon Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 17 / 28 Stage 2 : Cue Lag Ideological Proportions Model Learning and Inference Gibbs sampling to pick latent ( ideology , restart ? ) variables Slice sampling for hyperparameters Ideological proportions X cue term p ( ideology | cue term ) × 12 ( Lag before and after cue term ) Total lag Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 18 / 28 Stage 2 : Cue Lag Ideological Proportions Model Learning and Inference Gibbs sampling to pick latent ( ideology , restart ? ) variables Slice sampling for hyperparameters Ideological proportions X cue term p ( ideology | cue term ) × 12 ( Lag before and after cue term ) Total lag Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 18 / 28 Stage 2 : Cue Lag Ideological Proportions Etch - a - Sketch : Presidential campaign speeches , 2008 - 2012 Presidential campaign speeches Campaign speeches of 21 candidates each separated into epoches : primary and general elections Run model on each candidate separately with (cid:73) independent transition parameters for each epoch , but (cid:73) shared emission parameters for a candidate . Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 19 / 28 Stage 2 : Cue Lag Ideological Proportions Etch - a - Sketch : Presidential campaign speeches , 2008 - 2012 Mitt Romney Primaries 2012 General 2012 Religious ( L ) Center Center - Right Libertarian ( R ) Religious ( R ) Far Left Progressive ( L ) Left Center - Left Right Populist ( R ) Far Right Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 20 / 28 Stage 2 : Cue Lag Ideological Proportions Etch - a - Sketch : Presidential campaign speeches , 2008 - 2012 Mitt Romney Primaries 2012 General 2012 Religious ( L ) Center Center - Right Libertarian ( R ) Religious ( R ) Far Left Progressive ( L ) Left Center - Left Right Populist ( R ) Far Right Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 20 / 28 Stage 2 : Cue Lag Ideological Proportions Etch - a - Sketch : Presidential campaign speeches , 2008 - 2012 Barack Obama Primaries 2008 General 2008 Far Left Religious ( L ) Left Center - Left Center - Right Libertarian ( R ) Populist ( R ) Religious ( R ) Progressive ( L ) Center Right Far Right Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 21 / 28 Stage 2 : Cue Lag Ideological Proportions Etch - a - Sketch : Presidential campaign speeches , 2008 - 2012 Barack Obama Primaries 2008 General 2008 Far Left Religious ( L ) Left Center - Left Center - Right Libertarian ( R ) Populist ( R ) Religious ( R ) Progressive ( L ) Center Right Far Right Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 21 / 28 Stage 2 : Cue Lag Ideological Proportions Etch - a - Sketch : Presidential campaign speeches , 2008 - 2012 John McCain Primaries 2008 General 2008 Far Left Religious ( L ) Center - Left Center - Right Libertarian ( R ) Religious ( R ) Progressive ( L ) Left Center Right Populist ( R ) Far Right Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 22 / 28 Stage 2 : Cue Lag Ideological Proportions Etch - a - Sketch : Presidential campaign speeches , 2008 - 2012 John McCain Primaries 2008 General 2008 Far Left Religious ( L ) Center - Left Center - Right Libertarian ( R ) Religious ( R ) Progressive ( L ) Left Center Right Populist ( R ) Far Right Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 22 / 28 Stage 2 : Cue Lag Ideological Proportions Preregistered hypothesis Evaluation ? Is there a “gold standard” ? Pre - registered hypothesis Statements made wrt domain experts’ expectations of the model’s output . Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 23 / 28 Stage 2 : Cue Lag Ideological Proportions Preregistered hypothesis Evaluation ? Is there a “gold standard” ? Pre - registered hypothesis Statements made wrt domain experts’ expectations of the model’s output . Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 23 / 28 Stage 2 : Cue Lag Ideological Proportions Preregistered hypothesis Preregistered hypothesis Hypotheses Sanity checks ( strong ) : S1 . Republican primary candidates should tend to draw more from Right than from Left . S2 . Democratic primary candidates should tend to draw more from Left than from Right . S3 . In general elections , Democrats should draw more from the Left than the Republicans and vice versa for the Right . Primary hypotheses ( strong ) : P1 . Romney , McCain and other Republicans should almost never draw from Far Left , and extremely rarely from Progressive . P2 . Romney should draw more heavily from the Right than Obama in both stages of the 2012 campaign . Primary hypotheses ( moderate ) : P3 . Romney should draw more heavily on words from the Libertarian , Populist , Religious Right , and Far Right in the primary compared to the general election . In the general election , Romney should draw more heavily on Center , Center - Right and Left vocabularies . Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 24 / 28 Stage 2 : Cue Lag Ideological Proportions Preregistered hypothesis Baselines Compare against “simpliﬁed” versions of the model : (cid:73) Hmm : Traditional HMM without ideological tree structure (cid:73) NoRes : Weaker Markovian assumptions — never restart (cid:73) Mix : Stronger Markovian assumptions — always restart Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 25 / 28 Stage 2 : Cue Lag Ideological Proportions Preregistered hypothesis Results Clip Hmm Mix NoRes Sanity checks 20 / 21 19 / 22 21 / 22 17 / 22 Strong hypotheses 31 / 34 23 / 33 28 / 34 30 / 34 Moderate hypotheses 14 / 17 14 / 17 12 / 17 11 / 17 Total 65 / 72 56 / 72 61 / 73 58 / 73 Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 26 / 28 Conclusions Conclusions Learn cue terms from lightly labeled books corpus . (cid:73) Incorporating the structure of the ideology “tree” . Cue Lag Ideological Proportions model ( CLIP ) (cid:73) Empirical support for the “etch - a - sketch” hypothesis . Evaluation framework with pre - registered hypotheses . More model results at http : / / www . ark . cs . cmu . edu / CLIP / or http : / / is . gd / etchasketch Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 27 / 28 Conclusions Thank you Output of model can be found at http : / / www . ark . cs . cmu . edu / CLIP / or http : / / is . gd / etchasketch Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 28 / 28 Stage 1 : Building “dictionary” of cue lexicons SAGE for cue discovery Sparse additive eﬀects for cue discovery ( Example ) Well , that gets technical , but there’s very exciting work going on reﬁning the proposed principles of universal grammar . The concept is widely misunderstood in the media and in public discussions . Universal grammar is something diﬀerent : it is not a set of universal observations about language . In fact , there are interesting generalizations about language that are worth studying , but universal grammar is the study of the genetic basis for language , the genetic basis of the language faculty . There can’t be any serious doubt that something like that exists . Otherwise an infant couldn’t reﬂexively acquire language from whatever complex data is around . So that’s not controversial . The only question is what the genetic basis of the language faculty is . — Noam Chomsky . Chapter 7 : “Learning how to discover” . Power Systems ( 2013 ) . Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 1 / 5 Bag of terms probability p ( w | A ( d ) ; η ) ∝ Y w ∈ d exp (cid:0) η background w + η left w + η far left w + η edu w + η power systems w (cid:1) Stage 1 : Building “dictionary” of cue lexicons SAGE for cue discovery Sparse additive eﬀects for cue discovery ( Example ) Well , that gets technical , but there’s very exciting work going on reﬁning the proposed principles of universal grammar . The concept is widely misunderstood in the media and in public discussions . Universal grammar is something diﬀerent : it is not a set of universal observations about language . In fact , there are interesting generalizations about language that are worth studying , but universal grammar is the study of the genetic basis for language , the genetic basis of the language faculty . There can’t be any serious doubt that something like that exists . Otherwise an infant couldn’t reﬂexively acquire language from whatever complex data is around . So that’s not controversial . The only question is what the genetic basis of the language faculty is . — Noam Chomsky . Chapter 7 : “Learning how to discover” . Power Systems ( 2013 ) . Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 1 / 5 Bag of terms probability p ( w | A ( d ) ; η ) ∝ Y w ∈ d exp (cid:16) η background w + η left w + η far left w + η edu w + η power systems w (cid:17) Stage 1 : Building “dictionary” of cue lexicons SAGE for cue discovery Sparse additive eﬀects for cue discovery ( Example ) Well , that gets technical , but there’s very exciting work going on reﬁning the proposed principles of universal grammar . The concept is widely misunderstood in the media and in public discussions . Universal grammar is something diﬀerent : it is not a set of universal observations about language . In fact , there are interesting generalizations about language that are worth studying , but universal grammar is the study of the genetic basis for language , the genetic basis of the language faculty . There can’t be any serious doubt that something like that exists . Otherwise an infant couldn’t reﬂexively acquire language from whatever complex data is around . So that’s not controversial . The only question is what the genetic basis of the language faculty is . — Noam Chomsky . Chapter 7 : “Learning how to discover” . Power Systems ( 2013 ) . Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 1 / 5 Bag of terms probability p ( w | A ( d ) ; η ) ∝ Y w ∈ d exp (cid:16) η background w + η left w + η far left w + η edu w + η power systems w (cid:17) Stage 1 : Building “dictionary” of cue lexicons SAGE for cue discovery Sparse additive eﬀects for cue discovery ( Example ) Well , that gets technical , but there’s very exciting work going on reﬁning the proposed principles of universal grammar . The concept is widely misunderstood in the media and in public discussions . Universal grammar is something diﬀerent : it is not a set of universal observations about language . In fact , there are interesting generalizations about language that are worth studying , but universal grammar is the study of the genetic basis for language , the genetic basis of the language faculty . There can’t be any serious doubt that something like that exists . Otherwise an infant couldn’t reﬂexively acquire language from whatever complex data is around . So that’s not controversial . The only question is what the genetic basis of the language faculty is . — Noam Chomsky . Chapter 7 : “Learning how to discover” . Power Systems ( 2013 ) . Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 1 / 5 Bag of terms probability p ( w | A ( d ) ; η ) ∝ Y w ∈ d exp (cid:16) η background w + η left w + η far left w + η edu w + η power systems w (cid:17) Stage 1 : Building “dictionary” of cue lexicons SAGE for cue discovery Sparse additive eﬀects for cue discovery ( Example ) Well , that gets technical , but there’s very exciting work going on reﬁning the proposed principles of universal grammar . The concept is widely misunderstood in the media and in public discussions . Universal grammar is something diﬀerent : it is not a set of universal observations about language . In fact , there are interesting generalizations about language that are worth studying , but universal grammar is the study of the genetic basis for language , the genetic basis of the language faculty . There can’t be any serious doubt that something like that exists . Otherwise an infant couldn’t reﬂexively acquire language from whatever complex data is around . So that’s not controversial . The only question is what the genetic basis of the language faculty is . — Noam Chomsky . Chapter 7 : “Learning how to discover” . Power Systems ( 2013 ) . Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 1 / 5 Bag of terms probability p ( w | A ( d ) ; η ) ∝ Y w ∈ d exp (cid:16) η background w + η left w + η far left w + η edu w + η power systems w (cid:17) Stage 1 : Building “dictionary” of cue lexicons SAGE for cue discovery Sparse additive eﬀects for cue discovery ( Example ) Well , that gets technical , but there’s very exciting work going on reﬁning the proposed principles of universal grammar . The concept is widely misunderstood in the media and in public discussions . Universal grammar is something diﬀerent : it is not a set of universal observations about language . In fact , there are interesting generalizations about language that are worth studying , but universal grammar is the study of the genetic basis for language , the genetic basis of the language faculty . There can’t be any serious doubt that something like that exists . Otherwise an infant couldn’t reﬂexively acquire language from whatever complex data is around . So that’s not controversial . The only question is what the genetic basis of the language faculty is . — Noam Chomsky . Chapter 7 : “Learning how to discover” . Power Systems ( 2013 ) . Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 1 / 5 Bag of terms probability p ( w | A ( d ) ; η ) ∝ Y w ∈ d exp (cid:0) η background w + η left w + η far left w + η edu w + η power systems w (cid:1) SAGE objective max η X d X w ∈ d log p ( w | A ( d ) ; η ) − X a ∈A λ a k η a k 1 Stage 1 : Building “dictionary” of cue lexicons SAGE for cue discovery Sparse additive eﬀects for cue discovery Word distribution p ( w | A ( d ) ; η ) = exp (cid:16) η 0 w + P a ∈A ( d ) η aw (cid:17) Z ( A ( d ) , η ) a ∈ A ( d ) — attributes of document d . η 0 — background ( log ) frequencies of terms in the corpus . Possible attributes / eﬀects are : η left , η center , η right — coarse ideology eﬀect . η prgrsv , η lbtn , etc — ﬁne ideology eﬀect , corresponding to the ﬁne grained ideologies in our tree η topic — topical eﬀect . Book chapters in our corpus are manually assigned 1 of 61 topics . η d — document speciﬁc eﬀect , which captures idiosyncratic usage within a single document . Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 2 / 5 Stage 1 : Building “dictionary” of cue lexicons SAGE for cue discovery Sparse additive eﬀects for cue discovery SAGE objective max η X d X w ∈ d log p ( w | A ( d ) ; η ) − X a ∈A λ a k η a k 1 A ( d ) — set of attributes / eﬀects in document d . λ a — regularization for attribute a , controls the sparsity of η a . Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 3 / 5 Stage 1 : Building “dictionary” of cue lexicons SAGE for cue discovery Validation 2 6 2 7 2 8 2 9 2 10 2 11 2 12 2 13 2 14 ∞ 0 . 5 0 . 55 0 . 6 0 . 65 0 . 7 PMI WAPMI SAGE SAGE w / topics bigrams , trigrams , 4 - grams unigrams Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 4 / 5 References References Jacob Eisenstein , Amr Ahmed , and Eric P Xing . Sparse additive generative models of text . In Proceedings of ICML , ICML ’11 , 2011 . Measuring Ideological Proportions in Political Speeches ( EMNLP 2013 ) 5 / 5