MAYER AND MORENO WAYS TO REDUCE COGNITIVE LOAD Nine Ways to Reduce Cognitive Load in Multimedia Learning Richard E . Mayer Department of Psychology University of California , Santa Barbara Roxana Moreno Educational Psychology Program University of New Mexico First , weproposeatheoryofmultimedialearningbasedontheassumptionsthathumanspossess separate systems for processing pictorial and verbal material ( dual - channel assumption ) , each channel is limited in the amount of material that can be processed at one time ( limited - capacity assumption ) , and meaningful learning involves cognitive processing including building con - nections between pictorial and verbal representations ( active - processing assumption ) . Second , basedonthecognitivetheoryofmultimedialearning , weexaminetheconceptofcognitiveover - load in which the learner’s intended cognitive processing exceeds the learner’s available cogni - tive capacity . Third , we examine five overload scenarios . For each overload scenario , we offer one or two theory - based suggestions for reducing cognitive load , and we summarize our re - search results aimed at testing the effectiveness of each suggestion . Overall , our analysis shows that cognitive load is a central consideration in the design of multimedia instruction . WHAT IS MULTIMEDIA LEARNING AND INSTRUCTION ? The goal of our research is to figure out how to use words and pictures to foster meaningful learning . We define multimedia learning as learning from words and pictures , and we define multimedia instruction as presenting words and pictures that areintendedtofosterlearning . Thewordscanbeprinted ( e . g . , on - screen text ) or spoken ( e . g . , narration ) . The pictures can bestatic ( e . g . , illustrations , graphs , charts , photos , ormaps ) or dynamic ( e . g . , animation , video , or interactive illustrations ) . An important example of multimedia instruction is a com - puter - based narrated animation that explains how a causal system works ( e . g . , how pumps work , how a car’s braking system works , how the human respiratory system works , how lightning storms develop , how airplanes achieve lift , or how plants grow ) . We define meaningful learning as deep understanding of the material , which includes attending to important aspects of the presented material , mentally organizing it into a coherent cognitive structure , and integrating it with relevant existing knowledge . Meaningful learning is reflected in the ability to applywhatwastaughttonewsituations , sowemeasurelearn - ing outcomes by using problem - solving transfer tests ( Mayer & Wittrock , 1996 ) . In our research , meaningful learning in - volves the construction of a mental model of how a causal system works . In addition to asking whether learners can re - call what was presented in a lesson ( i . e . , retention test ) , we also ask them to solve novel problems using the presented material ( i . e . , transfertest ) . Alltheresultsreportedinthisarti - cle are based on problem - solving transfer performance . In pursuing our research on multimedia learning , we have repeatedly faced the challenge of cognitive load : Meaningful learning requires that the learner engage in substantial cogni - tive processing during learning , but the learner’s capacity for cognitiveprocessingisseverelylimited . Instructionaldesign - ers have come to recognize the need for multimedia instruc - tion that is sensitive to cognitive load ( Clark , 1999 ; Sweller , 1999 ; van Merriënboer , 1997 ) . A central challenge facing de - signersofmultimediainstructionisthepotentialforcognitiveoverload—inwhichthelearner’sintendedcognitiveprocess - ing exceeds the learner’s available cognitive capacity . In this article we present a theory of how people learn from multime - dia instruction , which highlights the potential for cognitive overload . Then , we describe how to design multimedia in - EDUCATIONAL PSYCHOLOGIST , 38 ( 1 ) , 43 – 52 Copyright © 2003 , Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . Requests for reprints should be sent to Richard E . Mayer , Department of Psychology , University of California , Santa Barbara , CA 93106 – 9660 . E - mail : mayer @ psych . ucsb . edu Downloaded By : [ Canadian Research Knowledge Network ] At : 05 : 56 21 Augus t 2010 struction in ways that reduce the chances of cognitive over - load in each of five overload scenarios . HOW THE MIND WORKS We begin with three assumptions about how the human mind works based on research in cognitive science—the dual chan - nel assumption , the limited capacity assumption , and the ac - tive processing assumption . These assumptions are summa - rized in Table 1 . First , the human information - processing system consists of two separate channels—an auditory / verbal channel for processing auditory input and verbal representations and a vi - sual / pictorial channel for processing visual input and picto - rial representations . 1 The dual - channel assumption is a central feature of Paivio’s ( 1986 ) dual - coding theory and Baddeley’s ( 1998 ) theory of working memory , although all theorists do not characterize the subsystems exactly the same way ( Mayer , 2001 ) . Second , each channel in the human information - process - ing system has limited capacity—only a limited amount of cognitive processing can take place in the verbal channel at any one time , and only a limited amount of cognitive process - ingcantakeplaceinthevisualchannelatanyonetime . Thisis the central assumption of Chandler and Sweller’s ( 1991 ; Sweller , 1999 ) cognitive load theory and Baddeley’s ( 1998 ) working memory theory . Third , meaningful learning requires a substantial amount of cognitive processing to take place in the verbal and visual channels . This is the central assumption of Wittrock’s ( 1989 ) generative - learning theory and Mayer’s ( 1999 , 2002 ) select - ing – organizing – integrating theory of active learning . These processes include paying attention to the presented material , mentally organizing the presented material into a coherent structure , and integrating the presented material with existing knowledge . Let us explore these three assumptions within the context of a cognitive theory of multimedia learning that is summa - rized in Figure 1 . The theory is represented as a series of boxes arranged into two rows and five columns , along with arrows connecting them . The two rows represent the two in - formation - processing channels , with the auditory / verbal channel on top and the visual / pictorial channel on the bottom . This aspect of the Figure 1 is consistent with the dual - channel assumption . The five columns in Figure 1 represent the modes of knowledge representation—physical representations ( e . g . , words or pictures that are presented to the learner ) , sensory representations ( in the ears or eyes of the learner ) , shallow working memory representations ( e . g . , sounds or images at - tended to by the learner ) , deep working memory representa - tions ( e . g . , verbal and pictorial models constructed by the learner ) , and long - term memory representations ( e . g . , the learner’s relevant prior knowledge ) . The capacity for physi - callypresentingwordsandpicturesisvirtuallyunlimited , and the capacity for storing knowledge in long - term memory is virtually unlimited , but the capacity for mentally holding and manipulating words and images in working memory is lim - ited . Thus , the working memory columns in Figure 1 are sub - ject to the limited - capacity assumption . The arrows represent cognitive processing . The arrow fromwordstoeyesrepresentsprintedwordsimpingingontheeyes ; the arrow from words to ears represents spoken words impinging on the ears ; and the arrow from pictures to eyes represents pictures ( e . g . , illustrations , charts , photos , anima - tions , and videos ) impinging on the eyes . The arrow labeled selecting words represents the learner’s paying attention to some of the auditory sensations coming in from the ears , whereas the arrow labeled selecting images represents the learner’s paying attention to some of the visual sensations coming in through the eyes . 2 The arrow labeled organizing words represents the learner’s constructing a coherent verbal representation from the incoming words , whereas the arrow labeled organizing images represents the learner’s construct - ing a coherent pictorial representation from the incoming im - ages . Finally , the arrow labeled integrating represents the mergingoftheverbalmodel , thepictorialmodel , andrelevant prior knowledge . In addition , we propose that the selecting 44 MAYER AND MORENO 1 Based on research on discourse processing ( Graesser , Millis , & Zwaan , 1997 ) , itisnotappropriatetoequateaverbalchannelwithanauditorychannel . Mayer ( 2001 ) providedanextendeddiscussionofthenatureofdualchannels . TABLE 1 Three Assumptions About How the Mind Works in Multimedia Learning Assumption Definition Dual channel Humans possess separate information processing channels for verbal and visual material . Limited capacity There is only a limited amount of processing capac - ity available in the verbal and visual channels . Active processing Learning requires substantial cognitive processing in the verbal and visual channels . FIGURE 1 Cognitive theory of multimedia learning . 2 Selecting words refers to selecting aspects of the text information rather thanonlyspecificwords . Selectingimages referstoselectingpartsofpictures rather than only whole pictures . Downloaded By : [ Canadian Research Knowledge Network ] At : 05 : 56 21 Augus t 2010 and organizing processes may be guided partially by prior knowledge activated by the learner . In multimedia learning , active processing requires five cognitive processes : selecting words , selecting images , organizing words , organizing im - ages , and integrating . Consistent with the active - processing assumption , these processes place demands on the cognitive capacity of the information - processing system . Thus , the la - beled arrows in Figure 1 represent the active processing re - quired for multimedia learning . THE CASE OF COGNITIVE OVERLOAD Let us consider what happens in multimedia learning , that is , a learning situation in which words and pictures are pre - sented . A potential problem is that the processing demands evoked by the learning task may exceed the processing ca - pacity of the cognitive system—a situation we call cogni - tive overload . The ever - present potential for cognitive overload is a central challenge for instructors ( including in - structional designers ) and learners ( including multimedia learners ) ; meaningful learning often requires substantial cognitive processing using a cognitive system that has se - vere limits on cognitive processing . We distinguish among three kinds of cognitive demands : essential processing , incidental processing , and representa - tional holding . 3 Essential processing refers to cognitive pro - cesses that are required for making sense of the presented material , such as the five core processes in the cognitive the - ory of multimedia learning—selecting words , selecting im - ages , organizing words , organizing images , and integrating . For example , in a narrated animation presented at a fast pace and consisting of unfamiliar material , essential processing in - volves using a great deal of cognitive capacity in selecting , organizing , and integrating the words and the images . Incidentalprocessing referstocognitiveprocessesthatare not required for making sense of the presented material but are primed by the design of the learning task . For example , adding background music to a narrated animation may in - crease the amount of incidental processing to the extent that the learner devotes some cognitive capacity to processing the music . Representational holding refers to cognitive processes aimed at holding a mental representation in working memory over a period of time . For example , suppose that an illustra - tion is presented in one window and a verbal description of it is presented in another window , but only one window can ap - pear on the screen at one time . In this case , the learner must hold a representation of the illustration in working memory while reading the verbal description or must hold a represen - tation of the verbal information in working memory while viewing the illustration . Table 2 summarizes the three kinds of cognitive - process - ing demands in multimedia learning . The total processing in - tended for learning consists of essential processing plus incidental processing plus representational holding . Cogni - tive overload occurs when the total intended processing ex - ceeds the learner’s cognitive capacity . 4 Reducing cognitive load can involve redistributing essential processing , reducing incidental processing , or reducing representational holding . In the following sections , we explore nine ways to reduce cognitive load in multimedia learning . We describe five dif - ferent scenarios involving cognitive overload in multimedia learning . For each overload scenario we offer one or two sug - gestionsregardinghowtoreducecognitiveoverloadbasedon thecognitivetheoryofmultimedialearning , andwereviewthe effectiveness of our suggestions based on a 12 - year program of research carried out at the University of California , Santa Barbara ( UCSB ) . Our recommendations for reducing cogni - tive load in multimedia learning are summarized in Table 3 . Type 1 Overload : Off - Loading When One Channel is Overloaded With Essential Processing Demands Problem : Onechannelisoverloadedwithessential processing demands . Consider the following situation : A student is interested in understanding how lightning works . She goes to a multimedia encyclopedia and clicks on the entry for lightning . On the screen appears a 2 - min animation depict - ing the steps in lightning formation along with concurrent on - screen text describing the steps in lightning formation . The on - screentextispresentedatthebottomonthescreen , sowhile the student is reading she cannot view the animation , and while she is viewing the animation she cannot read the text . This situation creates what Sweller ( 1999 ) called a split - attention effect because the learner’s visual attention is split between viewing the animation and reading the WAYS TO REDUCE COGNITIVE LOAD 45 3 Essentialprocessing correspondstotheterm germaneload asusedinthe introduction to this special issue . Incidental processing corresponds to the term extraneousload asusedintheintroductiontothisspecialissue . Finally , representational holding is roughly equivalent to the term intrinsic load . 4 To maintain conceptual clarity , we use the term processing demands to refertopropertiesofthelearningmaterialsorsituationandtheterm process - ing to refer to internal cognitive activity of learners . TABLE 2 Three Kinds of Demands for Cognitive Processing in Multimedia Learning Type of Processing Definition Essential processing Aimed at making sense of the presented ma - terial including selecting , organizing , and integrating words and selecting , organiz - ing , and integrating images . Incidental processing Aimed at nonessential aspects of the pre - sented material . Representational holding Aimed at holding verbal or visual represen - tations in working memory . Downloaded By : [ Canadian Research Knowledge Network ] At : 05 : 56 21 Augus t 2010 on - screen text . This problem is represented in Figure 1 by the arrow from picture to eyes ( for the animation ) and the arrow from words to eyes ( for the on - screen text ) ; thus , the eyes re - ceivealotofconcurrentinformation , butonlysomeofthatin - formation can be selected for further processing in visual workingmemory ( i . e . , thearrowfrom eyes to images canonly carry a limited amount of information ) . Solution : Off - loading . One solution to this problem is to present words as narration . In this way , the words are pro - cessed—at least initially—in the verbal channel ( indicated by the arrow from words to ears in Figure 1 ) , whereas the anima - tion is processed in the visual channel ( indicated by the arrow from picture to eyes in Figure 1 ) . The processing demands on the visual channel are thereby reduced , so the learner is better able to select important aspects of animation for further pro - cessing ( indicated by the arrow from eyes to image ) . The pro - cessing demands on the verbal channel are also moderate , so thelearnerisbetterabletoselectimportantaspectsofthenarra - tion for further processing ( indicated by the arrow from ears to sounds ) . In short , the use of narrated animation represents a method for off - loading ( or reassigning ) some of the processing demands from the visual channel to the verbal channel . In a series of six studies carried out in our laboratory at UCSB , students performed better on tests of problem - solving transfer when scientific explanations were presented as ani - mation and narration rather than as animation and on - screen text ( Mayer & Moreno , 1998 , Experiments 1 and 2 ; Moreno & Mayer , 1999 , Experiments 1 and 2 ; Moreno , Mayer , Spires , & Lester , 2001 , Experiments 4 and 5 ) . The median ef - fect size was 1 . 17 . We refer to this result as a modality effect : Students understand a multimedia explanation better when the words are presented as narration rather than as on - screen text . A similar effect was reported by Mousavi , Low , and Sweller ( 1995 ) in a book - based multimedia environment . 46 MAYER AND MORENO TABLE 3 Load - Reduction Methods for Five Overload Scenarios in Multimedia Instruction Type of Overload Scenario Load - Reducing Method Description of Research Effect Effect Size Type 1 : Essential processing in visual channel > cognitive capacity of visual channel Visual channel is overloaded by essential processing demands . Off - loading : Move some essential processing from visual channel to auditory channel . Modality effect : Better transfer when words are presented as narration rather than as on - screen text . 1 . 17 ( 6 ) Type 2 : Essential processing ( in both channels ) > cognitive capacity Both channels are overloaded by essential processing demands . Segmenting : Allow time between successive bite - size segments . Segmentation effect : Better transfer when lesson is presented in learner - controlled segments rather than as continuous unit . 1 . 36 ( 1 ) Pretraining : Provide pretraining in names and characteristics of com - ponents . Pretraining effect : Better transfer when stu - dents know names and behaviors of sys - tem components . 1 . 00 ( 3 ) Type 3 : Essential processing + incidental processing ( caused by extraneous material ) > cognitive capacity One or both channels overloaded by essential and incidental processing ( attributable to extraneous material ) . Weeding : Eliminate interesting but extraneous material to reduce pro - cessing of extraneous material . Coherence effect : Better transfer when ex - traneous material is excluded . 0 . 90 ( 5 ) Signaling : Provide cues for how to process the material to reduce processing of extraneous material . Signaling effect : Better transfer when sig - nals are included . 0 . 74 ( 1 ) Type 4 : Essential processing + incidental processing ( caused by confusing presentation ) > cognitive capacity One or both channels overloaded by essential and incidental processing ( attributable to confusing presenta - tion of essential material ) . Aligning : Place printed words near corresponding parts of graphics to reduce need for visual scanning . Spatial contiguity effect : Better transfer when printed words are placed near cor - responding parts of graphics . 0 . 48 ( 1 ) Eliminating redundancy : Avoid pre - senting identical streams of printed and spoken words . Redundancy effect : Better transfer when words are presented as narration rather narration and on - screen text . 0 . 69 ( 3 ) Type 5 : Essential processing + representational holding > cognitive capacity One or both channels overloaded by essential processing and representa - tional holding . Synchronizing : Present narration and corresponding animation si - multaneously to minimize need to hold representations in memory . Temporal contiguity effect : Better transfer when corresponding animation and nar - ration are presented simultaneously rather than successively . 1 . 30 ( 8 ) Individualizing : Make sure learners possess skill at holding mental representations . Spatial ability effect : High spatial learners benefit more from well - designed instruc - tion than do low spatial learners . 1 . 13 ( 2 ) Note . Numbers in parentheses indicate number of experiments on which effect size was based . Downloaded By : [ Canadian Research Knowledge Network ] At : 05 : 56 21 Augus t 2010 The robustness of the modality effect provides strong evi - dence for the viability of off - loading as a method of reducing cognitive load . Type 2 Overload : Segmenting and Pretraining When Both Channels are Overloaded With Essential Processing Demands in Working Memory Problem : Both channels are overloaded with essential processing demands . Suppose a student views a narrated animation that explains the process of light - ning formation based on the strategies discussed in the previ - ous section . In this case , some of the narration is selected to be processed as words in the verbal channel and some of the ani - mation is selected to be processed as images in the visual channel ( as shown by the arrows in Figure 1 labeled selecting words and selectingimages , respectively ) . However , ifthein - formation content is rich and the pace of presentation is fast , learners may not have enough time to engage in the deeper processes of organizing the words into a verbal model , orga - nizing the images into a visual model , and integrating the models ( as shown by the organizing words , organizing im - ages , and integrating arrows in Figure 1 ) . By the time the learner selects relevant words and pictures from one segment of the presentation , the next segment begins , thereby cutting short the time needed for deeper processing . This situation leads to cognitive overload in which avail - able cognitive capacity is not sufficient to meet the required processing demands . Sweller ( 1999 ) referred to this situation as one in which the presented material has high - intrinsic load ; that is , the material is conceptually complex . Although it might not be possible to simplify the presented material , it is possible to allow learners to digest intellectually one chunk of it before moving on to the next . Solution : Segmenting . A potential solution to this problem is to allow some time between successive segments of the presentation . In segmenting , the presentation is broken down into bite - size segments . The learner is able to select words and select images from the segment ; the learner also has time and capacity to organize and integrate the selected words and images . Then , the learner is ready for the next seg - ment , and so on . In contrast , when the narrated animation is presented continuously—without time breaks between seg - ments—the learner can select words and select images from the first segment ; but , before the learner is able to complete the additional processes of organizing and integration , the nextsegmentispresented , whichdemandsthelearner’satten - tion for selecting words and images . For example , Mayer and Chandler ( 2001 , Experiment 2 ) broke a narrated animation explaining lightning formation into 16 segments . Each segment contained one or two sen - tences of narration and approximately 8 to 10 sec of anima - tion . After each segment was presented , the learner could start the next segment by clicking on a button labeled CON - TINUE . Although students in both groups received identical material , the segmented group had more study time . Students whoreceivedthesegmentedpresentationperformedbetteronsubsequenttestsofproblem - solving transfer than did stu - dents who received a continuous presentation . The effect size in the one study we conducted was 1 . 36 . We refer to this as a segmentation effect : Students understand a multimedia ex - planation better when it is presented in learner - controlled segments rather than as a continuous presentation . Further re - search is needed to determine the separate effects of segment - ing and interactivity , such as comparing how students learn from multimedia presentations that contain built - in or user - controlled breaks after each segment . Solution : Pretraining . Although segmenting appears to be a promising technique for reducing cognitive load , sometimes segmenting might not be feasible . An alternative technique for reducing cognitive load when both channels are overloaded with essential processing demands is pretraining , in which learners receive prior instruction concerning the components in the to - be - learned system . Constructing a men - tal model involves two steps—building component models ( i . e . , representations of how each component works ) and building a causal model ( i . e . , a representation of how a change in one part of the system causes a change in another part , etc . ) . In processing a narrated animation explaining how a car’s braking system works , learners must simultaneously build component models ( concerning how a piston can move forward and back , how a brake shoe can move forward or back , etc . ) and a causal model ( when the piston moves for - ward , brake fluid is compressed , etc . ) . By providing pretraining about the components , learners can more effec - tively process a narrated animation—devoting their cognitive processing to building a causal model . Without pretraining , students must try to understand each component and the causal links between them—a task that can easily overload working memory . In a series of three studies involving narrated animations about how brakes work and how pumps work , students per - formed better on problem - solving transfer tests when the nar - rated animation was preceded by a short pretraining about the names and behavior of the components ( Mayer , Mathias , & Wetzell , 2002 , Experiments 1 , 2 , and 3 ) . The median effect size comparing the pretrained and nonpretrained groups was 1 . 00 . Similar results were reported by Pollock , Chandler , and Sweller ( 2002 ) . We refer to this result as a pretraining effect : Students understand a multimedia presentation better when they know the names and behaviors of the components in the system . Pretraining involves a specific sequencing strategy in which components are presented before a causal system is WAYS TO REDUCE COGNITIVE LOAD 47 Downloaded By : [ Canadian Research Knowledge Network ] At : 05 : 56 21 Augus t 2010 presented . The results provide support for pretraining as a useful method of reducing cognitive load . Type 3 Overload : Weeding and Signaling When the System is Overloaded by Incidental Processing Demands Due to Extraneous Material Problem : One or both channels are overloaded by thecombinationofessentialandincidentalprocessingdemands . In the two foregoing scenarios , the cognitive system was required to engage in too much essential process - ing—such as when complex material is presented at a fast rate . Let us consider a somewhat different overload scenario in which a learner seeks to engage in both essential and inci - dental processing , which together exceed the learner’s avail - ablecognitivecapacity . Forexample , supposealearnerclicks on the entry for lightning in a multimedia encyclopedia , and he or she receives a narrated animation describing the steps in lightning formation ( which requires essential processing ) along with background music or inserted narrated video clips of damage caused by lightning ( which requires incidental processing ) . According to the cognitive theory of multimedia learning , adding interesting but extraneous 5 material to a narrated ani - mation may cause the learner to use limited cognitive re - sources on incidental processing , leaving less cognitive capacity for essential processing . As a result , the learner will be less likely to engage in the cognitive processes required for meaningful learning of how lightning works—indicated by the arrows in Figure 1 . Sweller ( 1999 ) referred to the addition of extraneous material in an instructional presentation as an example of extraneous load . Solution : Weeding . To solve this problem , we suggest eliminating interesting but extraneous material—a load - re - ducing technique can be called weeding . Weeding involves making the narrated animation as concise and coherent as possible , so the learner will not be primed to engage in inci - dentalprocessing . Inaconcisenarratedanimation , thelearner is primed to engage in essential processing . In contrast , in an embellished narrated animation—such as one containing background music or inserted narrated video of lightning damage—the learner is primed to engage in both essential and incidental processing . In a series of five studies carried out in our laboratory at UCSB , students performed better on problem - solving trans - fer tests after receiving a concise narrated animation than an embellished narrated animation ( Mayer , Heiser , & Lonn , 2001 , Experiments 1 , 3 , and 4 ; Moreno & Mayer , 2000 , Ex - periments 1 and 2 ) . The added material in the embellished narrated animation consisted of background music or add - ing short narrated video clips showing irrelevant material . The median effect size was . 90 . We refer to this result as a coherence effect : Students understand a multimedia expla - nation better when interesting but extraneous material is ex - cluded rather than included . The robustness of the coherence effect provides strong evidence for the viability of weeding as a method for reducing cognitive load . Weeding seems to help facilitate the process of selecting rel - evant information . Solution : Signaling . When it is not feasible to remove all the embellishments in a multimedia lesson , cognitive load can be reduced by providing cues to the learner about how to select and organize the material—a technique called signaling ( Lorch , 1989 ; Meyer , 1975 ) . For example , Mautone and Mayer ( 2001 ) constructed a 4 - min narrated animation explain - ing how airplanes achieve lift , which contained many extrane - ous facts and somewhat confusing graphics . Thus , the learner might engage in lots of incidental processing—by focusing on nonessential facts or nonessential aspects of the graphics . A signaled version guided the learner’s cognitive processes of ( a ) selecting words by stressing key words in speech , ( b ) selecting images by adding red and blue arrows to the animation , ( c ) or - ganizing words by adding an outline and headings , and ( d ) or - ganizing images by adding a map showing which of three parts of the lesson was being presented . In the one study we con - ducted on signaling of a multimedia presentation ( Mautone & Mayer , 2001 , Experiment 3 ) , students who received the sig - naled version of the narrated animation performed better on a subsequent test of problem - solving transfer than did students who received the unsignaled version . The effect size was . 74 . Werefertothisresultasa signalingeffect : Studentsunderstand a multimedia presentation better when it contains signals con - cerning how to process the material . Although there is a sub - stantial amount of research literature on signaling of text in printed passages ( Lorch , 1989 ) , Mautone and Mayer’s study offers the first examination of signaling for narrated anima - tions . Signaling seems to help in the process of selecting and organizing relevant information . Type 4 Overload : Aligning and Eliminating Redundancy When the System is Overloaded by Incidental Processing Demands Attributable to How the Essential Material is Presented Problem : One or both channels are overloaded by thecombinationofessentialandincidentalprocessingdemands . The problem is the same in Type 3 and Type 4 overload—the learning task requires incidental process - ing—but the cause of the problem is different . In Type 3 over - 48 MAYER AND MORENO 5 Extraneousmaterialmayberelatedtothetopicbutdoesnotdirectlysup - port the educational goal of the presentation . Downloaded By : [ Canadian Research Knowledge Network ] At : 05 : 56 21 Augus t 2010 load the source of the incidental processing is that extraneous material is included in the presentation , but in Type 4 over - load the source of the incidental processing is that the essen - tial material is presented in a confusing way . For example , Type 4 overload occurs when on - screen text is placed at the bottom of the screen and the corresponding graphics are placed toward the top of the screen . Solution : Aligning words and pictures . In Type 3 overload scenarios , incidental cognitive load was created by adding extraneous material . Another way to create incidental cognitive load is to misalign words and pictures on the screen , such as presenting an animation in one window with concur - rent on - screen text in another window elsewhere on the screen . In this case—which we call a separated presenta - tion —the learner must engage in a great deal of scanning to figure out which part of the animation corresponds with the words—creating what we call incidental processing . In eye - movement studies , Hegarty and Just ( 1989 ) showed that learners tend to read a portion of text and then look at the cor - responding portion of the graphic . When the words are far from the corresponding portion of the graphic , the learner is required to use limited cognitive resources to visually scan the graphic in search of the corresponding part of the picture . The amount of incidental processing can be reduced by plac - ing the text within the graphic , next to the elements it is de - scribing . This form of presentation—which we call inte - grated presentation —allows the learner to devote more cognitive capacity to essential processing . Consistent with this analysis , Moreno and Mayer ( 1999 , Experiment 1 ) found that students who learned from inte - grated presentations ( consisting of animation with integrated on - screen text ) performed better on a problem - solving trans - fer test than did students who learned from separated presen - tations ( consisting of animation with separated on - screen text ) . The effect size in this single study was . 48 . Similar ef - fects have been found with text and illustrations in books ( Mayer , 2001 ) . We refer to this result as a spatial contiguity effect : Students understand a multimedia presentation better whenprintedwordsareplacednearratherthanfarfromcorre - sponding portions of the animation . Thus , spatial alignment of words and pictures appears to be a valuable technique for reducing cognitive load . As you can see , aligning is similar to signaling in that it guides cognitive processing , eliminating the need for incidental processing . Aligning differs from sig - naling in that aligning applies to situations in which essential words and pictures are separated and signaling applies to situ - ations in which extraneous material is placed within the mul - timedia presentation . Solution : Eliminating redundancy . Another example of Type 4 overload occurs when a multimedia presentation consists of simultaneous animation , narration , and on - screen text . In this situation—which we call redundant presenta - tion —the words are presented both as narration and simulta - neously as on - screen text . However , the learner may devote cognitive capacity to processing the on - screen text and recon - ciling it with the narration—thus , priming incidental process - ing that reduces the capacity to engage in essential processing . In contrast , when the multimedia presentation consists of nar - rated animation—which we call nonredundant presenta - tion —the learner is not primed to engage in incidental process - ing . Inaseriesofthreestudies ( Mayeretal . , 2001 , Experiments 1 and 2 ; Moreno & Mayer , 2002 , Experiment 2 ) students who learned from nonredundant presentations performed better on problem - solvingtransferteststhandidstudentswholearnedfrom redundant presentations . The median effect size was . 69 , indicat - ing that eliminating redundancy is a useful way to reduce cogni - tive load . We refer to this result as a redundancy effect : Students understand a multimedia presentation better when words are pre - sentedasnarrationratherthanasnarrationandon - screentext . We use the term redundancy effect in a more restricted sense than Sweller ( 1999 ; Kalyuga , Ayres , Chandler , & Sweller , 2003 ) . As you can see , eliminating redundancy is similar to weeding in that bothinvolvecuttingaspectsofthemultimediapresentation . They differ in that weeding involves cutting interesting but irrelevant material , whereaseliminatingredundancyinvolvescuttinganun - needed duplication of essential material . When no animation is presented , students learn better from a presentation of concurrent narration and on - screen text ( i . e . , verbal redundancy ) than from a narration - only pre - sentation ( Moreno & Mayer , 2002 , Experiments 1 and 3 ) . An explanation for this effect is that adding on - screen text does not overload the visual channel because it does not have to compete with the animation . Type 5 Overload : Synchronizing and Individualizing When the System is Overloaded by the Need to Hold Information in Working Memory Problem : One or both channels are overloaded by the combination of essential processing and representational holding . In the foregoing two sections , cognitive overload occurred when the learner attempted to engage in essential and incidental processing , and the solu - tion was to reduce incidental processing through weeding and signaling ( when extraneous material was included ) , or through aligning words and pictures or reducing redundancy ( when the same essential material was presented in printed and spoken formats ) . In the fifth and final overload scenario , cognitive overload occurs when the learner attempts to en - gage in both essential processing ( i . e . , selecting , organizing , and integrating material that explains how the system works ) and representational holding ( i . e . , holding visual and / or ver - WAYS TO REDUCE COGNITIVE LOAD 49 Downloaded By : [ Canadian Research Knowledge Network ] At : 05 : 56 21 Augus t 2010 bal representations in working memory during the learning episode ) . For example , consider a situation in which a learner clicks on the lightning entry in a multimedia encyclopedia . First , a short narration is presented describing the steps in lightning formation ; next , a short animation is presented depicting the steps in lightning formation . According to a cognitive theory of multimedia learning , this successive presentation can in - crease cognitive load because the learner must hold the verbal representation in working memory while the corresponding animation is being presented . In this situation , cognitive ca - pacity must be used to hold a representation in working mem - ory , thus depleting the learner’s capacity for engaging in the cognitiveprocessesofselecting , organizing , andintegrating . Solution : Synchronizing . A straightforward solution to the problem is to synchronize the presentation of corre - sponding visual and auditory material . When presentation of corresponding visual and auditory material is simultaneous , there is no need to hold one representation in working mem - ory until the other is presented . This situation minimizes cog - nitive load . In contrast , when the presentation of correspond - ing visual and auditory material is successive , there is a need to hold one representation in one channel’s working memory until the corresponding material is presented in the other channel . The additional cognitive capacity used to hold the representation in working memory can contribute to cogni - tive overload . For example , in a series of eight studies carried out in our laboratory at UCSB ( Mayer & Anderson , 1991 , Experiments 1 and 2a ; Mayer & Anderson , 1992 , Experiments 1 and 2 ; Mayer , Moreno , Boire , & Vagge , 1999 , Experiments 1 and 2 ; Mayer & Sims , 1994 , Experiments 1 and 2 ) , students per - formed better on tests of problem - solving transfer when they learned from simultaneous presentations ( i . e . , presenting cor - responding animation and narration at the same time ) than from successive presentations ( i . e . , presenting the complete animationbeforeorafterthecompletenarration ) . Themedian effect size was 1 . 30 , indicating robust evidence for synchro - nizing as a technique for reducing cognitive load . We refer to thisresultasa temporalcontiguityeffect : Studentsunderstand a multimedia presentation better when animation and narra - tion are presented simultaneously rather than successively . Note that the temporal contiguity effect is eliminated when the successive presentation is broken down into bite - size segments that alternate between a few seconds of narration and a few seconds of corresponding animation ( Mayer et al . , 1999 , Experiments 1 and 2 ; Moreno & Mayer , 2002 , Experiment 2 ) . In this situation , working memory is not likely to become overloaded because only a small amount of material is subject to representational holding . Solution : Individualizing . When synchronization may not be possible , an alternative technique for reducing cogni - tive load is to be sure that the learners possess skill in holding mental representations in memory . 6 For example , high - spa - tial ability involves the ability to hold and manipulate mental images with a minimum of mental effort . Low - spatial learn - ers may not be able to take advantage of simultaneous presen - tation because they must devote so much cognitive process - ing to hold mental images . In contrast , high - spatial learners are more likely to benefit from simultaneous presentation by being able to carry out the essential cognitive processes re - quired for meaningful learning . Consistent with this predic - tion , Mayer and Sims ( 1994 , Experiments 1 and 2 ) found that high - spatial learners performed much better on prob - lem - solving transfer tests from simultaneous presentation thanfromsuccessivepresentation , whereaslow - spatiallearn - ers performed at the same low level for both . Across two ex - periments involving a narrated animation on how the human respiratory system works , the median effect size was 1 . 13 . We refer to this interaction as the spatial ability effect , and we note that individualization—matching high - quality multime - dia design with high - spatial learners—may be a useful tech - nique for reducing cognitive load . CONCLUSION Meeting the Challenge of Designing Instruction That Reduces Cognitive Load Amajorchallengeforinstructionaldesignersisthatmeaning - ful learning can require a heavy amount of essential cognitive processing , but the cognitive resources of the learner’s infor - mation processing system are severely limited . Therefore , multimedia instruction should be designed in ways that mini - mize any unnecessary cognitive load . In this article we sum - marized nine ways to reduce cognitive load , with each load - reduction method keyed to an overload scenario . Our research program—conducted at UCSB over the last 12 years—convinces us that effective instructional design de - pends on sensitivity to cognitive load which , in turn , depends on an understanding of how the human mind works . In this ar - ticle , we shared the fruits of 12 years of programmatic re - search at UCSB and related research , aimed at contributing to cognitive theory ( i . e . , understanding the nature of multimedia learning ) and building an empirical database ( i . e . , re - search - based principles of multimedia design ) . Theory . We began with a cognitive theory of multime - dia learning based on three core principles from cognitive sci - ence , which we labeled as dual channel , limited capacity , and active processing ( shown in Table 1 ) . Based on the cognitive theory of multimedia learning ( shown in Figure 1 ) , we de - 50 MAYER AND MORENO 6 Individualization is not technically a design method for reducing cogni - tiveloadbutratherawaytoselectindividuallearnerswhoarecapableofben - efitting from a particular multimedia presentation . Downloaded By : [ Canadian Research Knowledge Network ] At : 05 : 56 21 Augus t 2010 rived predictions concerning various methods for reducing cognitive load . In conducting dozens of controlled experi - ments to test these predictions , we were able to refine the the - ory and offer substantial empirical support . Thus , the seem - ingly practical search for load - reducing methods of multimedia instruction has contributed to theoretical ad - vances in cognitive science—a well - supported theory of how people learn from words and pictures . Overall , our approach has been based on the idea that the best way to improve in - struction is to begin with a research - based understanding of how people learn . Database . Our search for theory - based principles of instructional design led us to conduct dozens of well - con - trolled experiments—thereby producing a substantial re - search base ( summarized in Table 3 ) . For each of our recom - mendations for how to reduce cognitive load , we see the need to conduct multiple experiments . In some cases when we report only a single preliminary study ( i . e . , segmenting , signaling , and aligning ) more empirical research is needed . Clear and replicated effects are the building blocks of both theory and practice . Overall , our approach has been based on the idea that the best way to understand how people learn is to test theory - based predictions in the context of student learning scenarios . Future directions . Additional research is needed on the measurement of cognitive load ( cf . Brüncken , Plass , & Leutner , 2003 ; Paas , Tuovinen , Tabbers , & Van Gerven , 2003 ) . In particular , we need ways to gauge ( a ) cognitive load experiencedbylearners , ( b ) thecognitivedemandsofinstruc - tional materials , and ( c ) the cognitive resources available to individual learners . Although we hypothesize that our nine recommendations reduce cognitive load , it would be useful to have direct measures of cognitive load . Inourresearch , concisenarratedanimationfosteredmean - ingful learning without creating cognitive overload . How - ever , additional research is needed to examine situations in which certain kinds of animation can overload the learner ( Schnotz , Boeckheler , & Grzondziel , 1999 ) and to determine the role of individual differences in visual and verbal learning styles in influencing cognitive overload ( Plass , Chun , Mayer , & Leutner , 1998 ; Riding , 2001 ) . In addition , it would be worthwhile to examine whether the principles of multimedia learning apply to the design of online courses that require many hours of participation , to problem - based simulation games , and to multimedia instruction that includes on - screen pedagogical agents ( Clark & Mayer , 2003 ) . In short , our program of research convinces us that the search for load - reducing methods of instruction contributes to cognitive theory and educational practice . Research on multimedia learning promises to continue to be an exciting venue for educational psychology . ACKNOWLEDGMENT This research was supported by Grant N00014 – 01 – 1 – 1039 from the Office of Naval Research . REFERENCES Baddeley , A . ( 1998 ) . Human memory . Boston : Allyn & Bacon . Brünken , R . , Plass , J . L . , & Leutner , D . ( 2003 ) . Directmeasurementofcogni - tiveloadinmultimedialearning . EducationalPsychologist , 38 , 53 – 61 . Chandler , P . , & Sweller , J . ( 1991 ) . Cognitive load theory and the format of instruction . Cognition and Instruction , 8 , 293 – 332 . Clark , R . C . ( 1999 ) . Developing technical training ( 2nd ed . ) . Washington , DC : International Society for Performance Improvement . Clark , R . C . , & Mayer , R . E . ( 2003 ) . E - learning and the science of instruc - tion . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . Graesser , A . C . , Millis , K . K . , & Zwaan , R . A . ( 1997 ) . Discoursecomprehen - sion . Annual Review of Psychology , 48 , 163 – 189 . Hegarty , M . , & Just , M . A . ( 1989 ) . Understandingmachinesfromtextanddi - agrams . In H . Mandl & J . R . Levin ( Eds . ) , Knowledge acquisition from text and pictures ( pp . 171 – 194 ) . Amsterdam : Elsevier . Kalyuga , S . , Ayres , P . , Chandler , P . , & Sweller , J . ( 2003 ) . The expertise re - versal effect . Educational Psychologist , 38 , 23 – 31 . Lorch , R . F . , Jr . ( 1989 ) . Text signaling devices and their effects on reading and memory processes . Educational Psychology Review , 1 , 209 – 234 . Mautone , P . D . , & Mayer , R . E . ( 2001 ) . Signalingasacognitiveguideinmul - timedia learning . Journal of Educational Psychology , 93 , 377 – 389 . Mayer , R . E . ( 1999 ) . The promise of educational psychology : Vol . 1 , Learning in the content areas . Upper Saddle River , NJ : Prentice Hall . Mayer , R . E . ( 2001 ) . Multimedia learning . New York : Cambridge Univer - sity Press . Mayer , R . E . ( 2002 ) . The promise of educational psychology : Vol . 2 , Teaching for meaningful learning . Upper Saddle River , NJ : Prentice Hall . Mayer , R . E . , & Anderson , R . B . ( 1991 ) . Animationsneednarrations : Anex - perimental test of a dual - coding hypothesis . Journal of Educational Psychology , 83 , 484 – 490 . Mayer , R . E . , & Anderson , R . B . ( 1992 ) . The instructive animation : Helping students build connections between words and pictures in multimedia learning . Journal of Educational Psychology , 84 , 444 – 452 . Mayer , R . E . , & Chandler , P . ( 2001 ) . Whenlearningisjustaclickaway : Does simpleuserinteractionfosterdeeperunderstandingofmultimediames - sages ? Journal of Educational Psychology , 93 , 390 – 397 . Mayer , R . E . , Heiser , J . , & Lonn , S . ( 2001 ) . Cognitive constraints on multi - media learning : When presenting more material results in less under - standing . Journal of Educational Psychology , 93 , 187 – 198 . Mayer , R . E . , Mathias , A . , & Wetzell , K . ( 2002 ) . Fosteringunderstandingof multimedia messages through pre - training : Evidence for a two - stage theoryofmentalmodelconstruction . JournalofExperimentalPsychol - ogy : Applied , 8 , 147 – 154 . Mayer , R . E . , & Moreno , R . ( 1998 ) . A split - attention effect in multimedia learning : Evidence for dual processing systems in working memory . Journal of Educational Psychology , 90 , 312 – 320 . Mayer , R . E . , Moreno , R . , Boire , M . , & Vagge , S . ( 1999 ) . Maximizing constructivist learning from multimedia communications by mini - mizing cognitive load . Journal of Educational Psychology , 91 , 638 – 643 . Mayer , R . E . , & Sims , V . K . ( 1994 ) . For whom is a picture worth a thousand words ? Extensions of a dual - coding theory of multimedia learning . Journal of Educational Psychology , 84 , 389 – 460 . Mayer , R . E . , & Wittrock , M . C . ( 1996 ) . Problem - solvingtransfer . InD . Ber - liner & R . Calfee ( Eds . ) , Handbook of educational psychology ( pp . 45 – 61 ) . New York : Macmillan . WAYS TO REDUCE COGNITIVE LOAD 51 Downloaded By : [ Canadian Research Knowledge Network ] At : 05 : 56 21 Augus t 2010 Meyer , B . J . F . ( 1975 ) . The organization of prose and its effects on memory . New York : Elsevier . Moreno , R . , & Mayer , R . E . ( 1999 ) . Cognitive principles of multimedia learning : The role of modality and contiguity . Journal of Educational Psychology , 91 , 358 – 368 . Moreno , R . , & Mayer , R . E . ( 2000 ) . Acoherenceeffectinmultimedialearning : Thecaseforminimizingirrelevantsoundsinthedesignofmultimediain - structionalmessages . JournalofEducationalPsychology , 92 , 117 – 125 . Moreno , R . , & Mayer , R . E . ( 2002 ) . Verbalredundancyinmultimedialearn - ing : When reading helps listening . Journal of Educational Psychology , 94 , 156 – 163 . Moreno , R . , Mayer , R . E . , Spires , H . A . , & Lester , J . C . ( 2001 ) . The case for social agency in computer - based multimedia learning : Do students learn more deeply when they interact with animated pedagogical agents ? Cognition and Instruction , 19 , 177 – 214 . Mousavi , S . , Low , R . , & Sweller , J . ( 1995 ) . Reducingcognitiveloadbymix - ing auditory and visual presentation modes . Journal of Educational Psychology , 87 , 319 – 334 . Paas , F . , Tuovinen , J . E . , Tabbers , H . , & VanGerven , P . W . M . ( 2003 ) . Cog - nitive load measurement as a means to advance cognitive load theory . Educational Psychologist , 38 , 63 – 71 . . Paivio , A . ( 1986 ) . Mentalrepresentations : Adualcodingapproach . Oxford , England : Oxford University Press . Plass , J . L . , Chun , D . M . , Mayer , R . E . , & Leutner , D . ( 1998 ) . Supporting visual and verbal learning preferences in a second language multime - dia learning environment . Journal of Educational Psychology , 90 , 25 – 36 . Pollock , E . , Chandler , P . , & Sweller , J . ( 2002 ) . Assimilating complex infor - mation . Learning and Instruction , 12 , 61 – 86 . Riding , R . ( 2001 ) . The nature and effects of cognitive style . In R . J . Stern - berg & L . Zhang ( Eds . ) , Perspectivesonthinking , learning , andcogni - tive styles ( pp . 47 – 72 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . Schnotz , W . , Boeckheler , J . , & Grzondziel , H . ( 1999 ) . Individualandco - op - erative learning with interactive animated pictures . European Journal of Psychology of Education , 14 , 245 – 265 . Sweller , J . ( 1999 ) . Instructionaldesignintechnicalareas . Camberwell , Aus - tralia : ACER Press . van Merriënboer , J . J . G . ( 1997 ) . Training complex cognitive skills . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Educational Technology Press . Wittrock , M . C . ( 1989 ) . Generative processes of comprehension . Educa - tional Psychologist , 24 , 345 – 376 . 52 MAYER AND MORENO Downloaded By : [ Canadian Research Knowledge Network ] At : 05 : 56 21 Augus t 2010