The Effects of Interactive Graphics and Text on Social Influence in Computer - Mediated Small Groups Jo . zsefA . Toth Department of Information Science and Joseph Katz Graduate School of Business University of Pittsburgh 600 Epsilon Drive Pittsburgh , PA 15238 , USA Tel : 1 - 412 - 624 - 6413 E - mail : jtoth + @ pitt . edu ABSTRACT Computer - mediated small group research has focused efforts on the medium of electronically networked text - based mes - sages . An experiment which instead combines a synchronous text - based messaging medium with two - dimensional inter - active computer graphics is detailed . Three - person groups participated in a risk - taking choice - dilemma task involving a discussion of the dilemma and consensus attainment , the groups’ prediscussion and postdiscussion opinions were col - lected . Two conditions , one where groups received graphics - based feedback of their individual prediscussion opinions , and a second , which included a graphical representation of the prediscussion average , were coupled with a text - based communication medium . The text - based medium , with - out interactive graphics , served as conmol . In the condi - tion involving the graphical prediscussion opinions and aver - age , groups sent proportionately more messages containing persuasive - style arguments and proportionately fewer mes - sages containing normative - style arguments , In the graph - ical condition without the average , roughly the inverse was found to occur . In the control , the discussion parameters fell propornonately between the two graphics conditions . In both graphics conditions , the first discussant to advocate a decision proposal had a stronger influence on the group decision than in the control , The data suggests that the inclusion of two - dimensional graphics can either augment or inhibit normative and informational forms of social influence during the group decision - making process . KEYWORDS : Computer - mediated small group , discourse analysis , human factors , interactive computer graphics , per - ceptual and cognitive persistence , small group decision - making , social influence Permissionto copy without fee all or part of this material is granted provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage , the ACM copyright notice and the title of the publication and its date appear , and notice is given that copying is by permission of the Association of Computing Machinery . To copy otherwise , or to republish , requwesa fee and / or specific permission . CSCW 94 - 10 / 94 Chapel Hill , NC , USA @ 1994 ACM 0 - 89791 - 669 - 1 / 94 / 0010 . . $ 3 . 50 INTRODUCTION Extant computer - mediated small group research has show - cased effects resulting from the verbal and non - verbal isola - tion of group members . In this realm , communication among the group members has been constrained , only allowing the typing and transmission of synchronous ( e . g . , discussion pro - grams ) or asynchronous ( e . g . , electronic mail ) texr - based messages , By calling upon such groups to perform various tasks , namely risk decision - making or problem - solving , and by comparing certain dependent measures with face - to - face groups performing the same tasks , significant differences between the two types of groups have been found . Included in these findings are the following : the temporal duration of discussion is increased ; the effects of high and low status members on the group decision are equalized , the influence on the group decision of the group member who first advocates a decision proposal is attenuated ; discussants are less inhibited in their remarks ( e . g . , “flaming” ) ; individual participation in the group discussion is equalized , and , the shift between the aggregate opinions held by group members before , dur - ing and after discussions is exacerbated ( see [ 6 ] , [ 22 ] ) . A principal motivator for this research stems , in part , from the rapidly increasing use of , and dependence on , networked computers within and between organizations and other social institutions . A common thread running through most of this research centers on the idea that the removal of social context cues contributes significantly to the effects that have been detected in computer - mediated experimental conditions , Group mem - bers are induced to interpret and import such verbal and non - verbal ( i . e . , paralinguistic ) intent through text - based mes - sages . In other words , when communicating group members perceive written text displayed on a computer monitor , and articulate their own opinions and ideas through a computer keyboard , their ability to express and interpret highly so - cialized verbal and non - verbal mediatory mechanisms – such as head - nodding , frowning , and conversational tum - taking – becomes severely diminished , Thus , what would ordinarily transpire during a face - to - face interaction , when instead ex - pressed through the computerized medium , can take on an 299 entirely different hue . In this impoverished medium , social intent is sometimes impossible to clothe in words . Current theoretical thinking in this area of research suggests that in these kinds of experimental settings , certain aspects of well - documented social phenomena and processes become either more salient or less salient depending on the com - munication condition : face - to - face or computer - mediated . Instances of the better - known aspects , some of which were already mentioned , include first - advocacy , participation , sta - tus , and social awareness . One posture of the research presented herein considers the face - to - face and computer - mediated communication conditions as separate and distinct communication modalities : verbalhon - verbal and written text respectively . Moreover , focusing on computer - medi - ation , this account will endeavor to further refine and ex - tend sentential , text - based notions of the computer - mediated modality by also involving two - dimensional , interactive , net - worked computer graphics . The rationale for this inquiry hinges on the widespread organizational use of written text and graphics , both non - integrated ( e . g . , electronic mail ) and integrated ( e . g . , electronic or paper graphs , tables , and charts coupled with electronic mail ) . Although extant computer - mediated small group research has made great strides in understanding the effects of computer - mediated written text , little is understood regarding how the integration of graphics and written text might affect the aforementioned parameters of small group research . THEORETICAL BACKGROUND To the social scientist , what has been of premiere interest in the area of computer - mediated research is how human interaction differs between the face - to - face and electronically mediated contexts , In both cases , although group members function as social individuals , their interactions are mediated by different factors . In the former case , such interaction is realized through various social norms and practices even involving familiar and enduring technologies , such as mini - vans , telephones and vending machines , These artifacts , over time , have become integrated into the culture , Thus , “tech - nologies , ” in this sense , can entail a device as everyday as the chair or the pencil . The impact of these existing technologies on social behavior is reasonably well understood . In the latter case , the networked computer is undoubtedly perceived by most as serving a vital role in society . Owing to its recency , however , its effect on social interaction is not very well understood and is therefore of great theoretical interest . For instance , the networked computer has facilitated broader and more varied forms of communication over space and time and has extended the speaker - hearer relationship from one - to - one to one - to - many and , in a sense , many - to - many , as in the case of electronic bulletin boards , news groups and discussion groups ( [ 22 ] ) . In the case of electronic mail , networked communication can transpire asynchronously so that recipients needn’t be seated at their computers at the time a message is transmitted to them - messages can instead be automatically received by a computer , stored to disk and read at a later time . And , unlike voice mail , which also possesses the property of asynchrony , readers of the electronic mail message can generate a paper version , and are free to review the contents of the message whenever and wherever they please . In terms of orienting this inquiry towards a particular sci - entific mode of analysis , two pertinent aspects of the phe - nomenon under consideration have been identified : the inter - dental and the intra - mental levels ( e . g . , [ 26 ] ) . The inter - dental level of analysis addresses the patterns of activity that occur among communicating agents . This includes spoken and written language , non - verbal gestures , and inter - action with socially - constructed artifacts , including various technologies . The intra - mental level addresses what occurs within a communicating agent , Usually referred to as “cog - nitive , perceptual , and attentive processes , ” these phenomena are usually studied in an asocial setting . There are no clean boundaries , however . In the prevailing information - theoretical model of communicating agents , the conveyance of an idea from one agent to another is typically envisioned by most to proceed in five quasi - discrete stages : ( 1 ) an idea originates within the mind of the sending agent , ( 2 ) the idea is encoded into a spoken , written , or non - verbal message , ( 3 ) this coded message is transmitted to the receiving agent through a combination of sound , reflected light , or in the case of this research , electronic means , ( 4 ) the receiving agent receives the message and decodes it through the faculties of attention and perception , and ( 5 ) the decoded message becomes an idea within the mind of the receiving agent ( [ 1 1 ] ) . Much foundational controversy arises however , regarding the structure , conten ~ and process within and between the phases of tiis model . Regarding Phases 1 and 5 for instance , what is an idea ? Do ideas have structure , and can they be objectively analyzed and rendered in terms as succinct as “beliefs , ” “desires ; and “intentions” ? ( [ 2 ] ) , or , are they emergent ( [ 3 ] ) , and do they instead arise from a complex web of interactions between the agent , its environment , and other agents ? ( Lotman [ 1 1 ] , [ 26 ] ) Regarding Phases 2 - 4 , what is a message ? How similar or dissimilar , related or unrelated - in both composition and meaning - is an “idea” in comparison with its encoded message ? In addition , inter - agent commu - nication is not always face - to - face and immediate . Thus , how exactly do the intervening Phases 2 - 4 encode , decode and sustain ideas , given the extended temporal and spatial boundaries made possible through written , electronic and organic media , for which books , electronic mail , and culture , respectively , are three well - known vehicles of transmission ? To this end , the intra - mentd and inter - mental levels will be considered in the context of the five - phase communication model . Space does not permit a thorough treatment of these concepts , but it should be kept in mind that this outlook has played a prominent role in driving the analytical framework for the empirical design and analysis present in the ensuing 300 sections . Moreover , this framework also takes on a genetic property , since events which take place in the small group are never frozen in time . The remainder of this section will develop the inter - and intra - mental aspects of computer - mediated small group behavior focusing on influence and decision - making regarding the former , and cognitive and perceptual persistence and salience regarding the latter . Influence and Decision - Making in Small Groups When face - to - face and computer - mediated small groups en - gage in a decision - making exercise , a typical type of task performed is of the risk - taking judgrrteitral variety , for which no absolute or correct answer exists , Following is an example of such a problem , known as a choice - dilemma : Ms . H , a college senior , has studied the piano since childhood . She has won amateur prizes and given small recitals , suggesting that Ms . H has considerable musical talent . As graduation ap - proaches , Ms . H has the choice of going to medical school to become a physician , a profession which would bring certain prestige and financial rewards ; or entering a conservatory of music for advanced training with a well - known pianist . Ms . H realizes that even upon completion of her piano studies , which would take many more years and a lot of money , success as a concert pianist would not be assured . Keep in mind that the riskier alternative , enter - ing a conservatory of music , is always assumed to be more desirable than the safer course , going to medical school . In a typical experimental setting , the goal provided to the group is to discuss the central character’s dilemma by weigh - ing the risky and safe alternatives , and to eventually arrive at a consensus which reflects their aggregate advice to the central character , Ms . H , This advice is articulated as a single risk value ranging from 1 - in - 10 to 9 - in - 10 , which represents the lowest probability of success that the group would consider acceptable for Ms . H to give the risky alternative a try , The odds the group considers indicate the lowest odds that they , as a group , would be willing to take and still advise Ms . H to give the risky alternative a try - where l - in - 10 is riskiest and 9 - in - 10 is safest , Both before the discussion begins , and after the discussion ends , group members are requested to provide , in isolation from the group , what their individual advice to the central character would be . Therefore , as the discussion begirts , group members already have a preconception of what the consensus value should be . Since the individuals’ values are seldom in agreement at the onset of the discussion , they must eventually adjust their initial position as the dkcussion proceeds ; in this fashion , the group consensus , or decision , evolves , eventually settling on a single value . Many theories have been advanced in attempts to explain the phenomena which unravel during the course of decision - making discussions bearing on how group members attempt to swing others around to their own way of thinking . Two of the most popular theories entail social intluence and decision rules . The two varieties of influence most widely discussed are normative and informational ( see [ 19 ] for a review ) , Normutive injluence centers on social norms and how group members adhere to certain norms in order to influence behav - ior and opinion . In order to sway a differing opinion , this type of influence can be as “primal” as brow - beating and shouting , or it can be more implicitly and culturally embedded in social class , gender , or accepted social protocol . Informational influence , by contrast , is more “cerebral” in nature in that discussants tend to employ persuasive arguments that are grounded in fact , logic , and inference in order to argue for or against a particular position . Finally , decision rules , which can , but don’t necessarily , take in normative and informational influence , are analytical heuristics developed by social scientists that , given the group members’ prediscussion opinions , are thought to reliably predict what the group decision will be ( see [ 15 ] for a review ) . One such rule is majority wins , where , if a prediscussion majority exists ( e . g . , with l - in - 10 , 2 - in - 10 , 9 - in - 10 , the two former opinions are polarized against the latter opinion ) , the group decision will tend towards the majority ( e . g . , 3 - in - 10 ) , In this decision rule , the coercion of the majority therefore implies a normative style of influence . Another such maxim is the average rule , which typically occurs when there is an even disrnbution of opinion ( e . g . , l - in - 10 , 5 - in - 10 , 9 - in - 10 ) , and the group either quickly , or as the result of an impasse , decides to take the average of their opinions ( e . g . , 5 - in - 10 ) , This decision rule is more grounded in the regulative principle of informational influence utilizing mathematical principles . Cognitive - Perceptual Persistence and Salience One theoretical assumption in this research asserts that fun - damental differences exist in the way humans perceive and understand spoken and written language versus the way non - linguistic information is apprehended , More specifically , this bears on the differences between the modalities of written text and two - dimensional interactive computer graphics and how interaction in the computer - mediated group might be affected . The relationships between these two modalities and how they bear on human attention , perception , and cognition are still not widely understood , For instance , written ( e . g . , text - based ) and spoken language are presumed to share the same phono - logical component ( [ 24 ] ) . However , it has not been actually determined whether these different types of information are translated and re - encoded into some sort of canonical seman - tic structure which also takes in re - encoded information from other non - linguistic modalities ( [ 4 ] ) or instead resides in a manner consistent with interactive , multi - modal theories ( see [ 18 ] , [ 14 ] ) . The posture in this study does not seek to get to the root of such questions ; rather , it only assumes that the semantics of different modalities - visual , verbal , written , and so forth - must somehow interact within and between 301 various internal modes of processing . For instance , reading the written word DOG might not only evoke a phonological activation of the spoken word “DOG but may also elicit mental images and sounds ( e . g . , barking ) of dogs ( e . g . , [ 17 ] ) , In addition to semantics , however , both the persistence ( i . e . , duration ) and salience ( i , e . , strength ) of these interacting semantics and their effects on reasoning and judgment are also of interest , For example , even in problems that are isomorphic ( [ 8 ] , [ 27 ] ) , the manner in which such problems are represented to the problem solver yields widely disparate response times and levels of performance ( also see [ 9 ] , [ 23 ] ) . A common theme which permeates the work in problem isomorphs suggests that linguistic representations consume more cognitive resources and are more prone to the effects of working - memory ( [ 20 ] ) . In the realm of text processing and comprehension , similar findings have been noted , For instance , the comprehension of text has been known to con - flict with the reader’s inferences and background knowledge , leading to inferences that were not part of the original text ( [ 1 ] ) . In other cases , it has been demonstrated that subjects even erroneously “remember” aspects or details of the story that were not present in the original text ( [ 10 ] , [ 7 ] ) , Regarding non - linguistic information , similar results have been obtained in the recall of novel and permuted visual stimuli ( [ 12 ] , [ 16 ] ) . However , this is not the type of non - linguistic information under consideration . Instead , when visual representations are consistently mapped and exposed over many rnals , what results is a resource - free and highly automatic mode of processing , which is much more imper - vious to the effects of working memory and also possesses a high degree of cognitive impenetrability ( [ 20 ] ) . What this means is that the stimulus , or salient aspects of the stimulus , are available for internal processing even in absence of the original stimulus ( e . g . , keeping one’s eyes closed , sustaining a mental image of the Towers of Hanoi problem , and then solving it ) . Related to the work in this paper , what is of particular interest concerns the semantic impact of the use of one modality over that of another regarding working memory limitations , persistence of the information conveyed by the stimuli , and how both types of modalities interact in the course of perception , cognition and , ultimately , decision - making . It should be noted that this kind of argument is only presently being made for non - novel ( i e . , cwerlewned ) and non - permuted stimuli , such as two - dimensional graphs , with which viewers have had extended experience . Thus , if one modality is more resource - bounded ( e . g . , written language ) and the other is more resource - free ( e . g . , two - dimensional graphs ) if the information conveyed by these two modalities is isomorphic - such as the written number 9 versus the z , y position of 9 on a two - dimensional graph - one might conclude that the resource - free representation will have more of an in - fluence on cognitive processing which takes such information into account . It is being argued that this can persist even after removal of the original stimulus , when such a stimulus entails resource - free processing . HYPOTHESES The empirical parameter singled out for this explorato ~ work entails the opinions that the group members individually hold about the central character’s dilemma ( e , g , , their “advice” to Ms . H ) before the discussion begins . Historically , these pre - discussion opinions , as well as the opinions established early on in the discussion ( realized as proposals for the decision ) are known to have significant effects on the outcome of the discussion , namely the group decision . Varying the modality of the prediscussion opinions that are more resource - bounded ( written text ) versus more resource - free ( two - dimensional graphics ] , should markedly affect subsequent reasoning in the ensuing discussion phase , Since a resource - free presentation of the prediscussion opinions ( e . g . , in the graphical modality ) involves visual information that is more salient and persistent , it is being postulated that such information can sustain the course of a ten - minute discussion , even in the absence of the original stimulus , and can significantly affect the group members’ reasoning . Bearing in mind what has been dis - cussed regarding the way group members seek to influence each others’ opinions , it can be expected that the salient information captured in the two - dimensional graphical rep - resentation will direct the group’s reasoning and discussion to a greater degree , Regarding observable group behavior , this is expected to be rendered either in terms of normative or information influence , Two different graphicai representations were created in order to test possible modality effects on group discussion and decision - making . The first was a mapping of the three in - dividual choice - dilemma prediscussion opinions onto a stan - dard two - dimensional graph whereby risk value corresponds to the spatial y aspect of the graph ( hereafter G , ) . The second type was identical to the first , but also included the graph - ical representation of the prediscussion average ( hereafter G + AVG ) , depicted in Figure 1 . Three hypotheses were established regarding G and G + AVG , with a third text - based representation ( no graphics ) serving as control ( hereafter S ) . Individual and Group Opinion ( HI ) . It was predicted that the value of the group consensus would be most in accord with G + AVG , since the average , as such , would imply an informational , mathematically derived “consensus” which the group would be compelled to utilize , realized as the average decision rule . G was also expected to have an average effect on the group consensus , but was not expected to be as great as G + AVG , since the average would be implicit and , thus , would not necessarily be derived during the group discussion . G and G + AVG were also expected to attenuate the choice shtjl phenomenon ( measured as the average of the absolute value of the difference between each prediscussion opinion and the consensus ) , It was predicted thats would have no average effect and would instead induce the choice - shift noted in earlier work ( [ 2 l ] ) . Group Discussion ( H2 ) . Since G + AVG contained encap - fie opinions that you and the other two grmq nerbers selected are nmr being displayed in the Feedback Vindm , . Note the average of the three opinions . which is represented by the horizontal line . ‘lhis infmmation will be displayed for ninety ( 90 ) seconds . More instructions till appear in this window . w . k an electrical engineer , who is married and has one child , has 3een vorking for a large electronics corporation since graduating from : ollege five years q . H . ? is assured of a lifetime j & m & JI a nodest , thought adequate , salary and liherXl pensim benefits won retirement . on the other hand , it is very unlikely that his salary till increase much before be retires . While attending a cmwentim , ( r . A is offered a j & tith a mall , newly fotmdcd company w % ich has a ! i @ y mcertain future . The new job would pay more to start md muld offer the possibility of a share in the o % mersbip if the corpny mu - wived the cmpetitim of the largwr firm . @ IT M ~ ~ d mat me ri ~ e ~ ~ t - ati ~ , going with the mm , new XOIIMIY . IS ~ WWS = - - cd to be more desirable than the sder course , staying with the current cmpany . ‘west ‘ - ” - 10 + H 8 - in - lo t odds of success for 5 - in - lo nev company 4 - ilblo 1 I 3 - fi - 10 + EEl riskiest l - i . n - 10 t grmq member opi . nims seixinds displayed : 65 l . . - hm jafied Chatmel $ e ~ “ * * . ~ ~ ~ m ~ l , + i , > on chakmel # exp by joe : am > this is a nessagw f rmm mm > this is a message from j oe : tillie > this is a message frmm villie Figure 1 : The layout of the workstation screen used in the experiment . The Feedback Window is displaying the 9rouP members’ prediscuseion opinions , including the average ( G + AVG ) . Although during this phase of the actual e ; perirnental trial , the Discussion Window is not active , for illustrative purposes , it is shown here as being active . sulated , cohesive information about the group ( i . e . , predis - cussion opinions summarized with the average ) , regarding discussion content , it was predicted that discussants would voice more informational influence and less normative influ - ence than in G or S , It was also predicted that discussion duration would be briefer and discussion content more con - cise compared to G or S , since subjects would quickly arrive at the consensus implied by the prediscussion graphical average by way of the average decision rule ( i . e . , Hi ) . Regarding G , discussants were expected to use less informational influence and more normative influence compared to G + AVG or S , since the absence of a group prediscussion average would promote a lack of cohesion in aggregate opinion and instead reinforce individual opinion and attitude . Discussion duration in G was predicted to be briefer and more concise than in S . In S , it was predieted that subjects would spend more time in discussion since group members would have to explicitly articulate their prediscussion opinions at the discussion onset , Extrapolated from Siegel et al . ( [ 2 l ] ) , normative and informational influ - ence were expected to be more equally proportioned in S . Fh - st Advocacy ( H3 ) . Two forms of first advocacy were considered explicit and implicit . Explicit jirst advocate followed the canonical definition from earlier research ( [ 25 ] , [ 13 ] ) , specifying the first person to voice a distinc ~ numerical decision proposal during the discussion phase ( e . g . , “I think it should be 1 in 10” ) . With the inclusion of the graphical modality , however , a second type , hereafter referred to as the implicit $ rst advocate , describes an individual who graphi - cally posts his or her opinion but does not explicitly articulate the value of that opinion during the discussion ( e . g . , instead saying , “1 think he should go for it” during the discussion 303 phase after having graphically selected a value of l - in - l O in the prediscussion phase ) . In the case of S , the implicit first advocate would refer to the opinion that she or he selected on the prediscussion questionnaire , thus following a similar definition in Weisband ( [ 25 ] ) . It was predicted that in G and G + AVG , the first explicit or implicit advocate would have a smonger influence on the group consensus than in S . The source of this influence was postulated to stem from the coupling of the salient and persistent visual information with the subsequent reference to the same information in the discussion , in terms of a primacy effect of the visual information , In S , it was predicted that the first explicit or implicit advocate would not significantly influence the group consensus , replicating results from earlier research ( [ 25 ] ) . METHOD Design and Subjects To test these hypotheses , apilot study was conducted in April , 1993 . The within - groups experimental design was comprised of one independent variable ( representational modality of group prediscussion opinions ) with three levels : S : predis - cussion opinions were articulated in the text - based modality by the group members as their dkcussions began , which served as a control condition and an attempt to replicate re - sults from earlier computer - mediated research ; G : computer graphical feedback of the group’s prediscussion opinions to group members directly before the discussions began ; and , G + AVG : computer graphical feedback of the group’s prediscussion opinions to group members , including the pre - discussion average , directly before the discussions began ( see Figure 1 ) . The 33 subjects were students at the University of Pittsburgh : 18 men and 15 women of varying ages and academic accomplishment . The subjects were assigned to 11 groups of three members each . Five groups were comprised of two females and one male . Five groups consisted of two males and one female . The remaining group contained three males . Procedures The group members were individually seated at a Sun Mi - crosystems SPARCstation IPC with a 13 - inch chromatic mon - itor and , on a few occasions , owing to cases of malfunction , at a Sun SPARCstation IPX with a 16 - inch chromatic monitor . The experimental software was implemented in Lucid 4 . 0 . 2 Common LISP , the Common LISP Object System ( CLOS ) , and the Lucid X Windows - based graphics package in the Sun OpenWindows graphical display environment , The work - stations were connected on a local area network , and the inter - workstation aspects of the experimental software ( i , e , , transmittal of the graphics - based opinions and text - based messages ) utilized the Sun network - based socket facility . Each workstation was equipped with a keyboard ( for discus - sion ) , a three - button mouse ( for G and G + AVG ) , and a pencil to fill out prediscussion and postdiscussion questionnaires ( for S ) . The subjects / workstations were physically separated by rooms and / or office partitions to ensure verbal and non - verbal isolation , The experimental session consisted of four ~ ials , one practice trial and three experimental trials - one for each experimental condition , The practice trial was always first and , to curtail order effects , the three experimental conditions were ordered in 3 ! , or six , combinations . The sessions lasted 60 to 100 minutes . Following the traditional small group experimental paradigm ( e . g . , [ 13 ] ) , each trial was partitioned into four sequence - invariant phases : ( i ) collection of individual prediscussion opinions , ( ii ) group discussion , ( iii ) group consensus at - tainment , and ( iv ) collection of individual postdiscussion opinions . The computer workstation monitor was partitioned into four windows ( see Figure 1 ) and followed the” What You See is What I See” ( WYSIWIS ) interface design philosophy . The display software occupied most of the 13 - and 16 - inch screens . An Instruction window provided instructions in - forming the group what it should do next , For G and G + AVG , an interactive graphics - based Feedback window allowed sub - jects to select prediscussion , consensus , and postdiscussion opinions with the three - button mouse and also displayed aggregate opinions - any of the three buttons on the mouse performed the same function when selecting a graphical item . A Problem window displayed the choice - dilemma problem . For S , the problem was “Ms . H . ” In G , the problem was a college graduate facing the choice of a difficult or easy Ph . D . program . For G + AVG , the central character had to choose between a secure job and ajob offer fi - om a start - up company ( see Problem Window in Figure 1 ) A Discussion window , running the INTERNET Relay Chat ( IRC ) program , allowed subjects to type synchronous messages to each other during the discussion phase . The dimensions of the discussion window were 22 characters high and 80 characters wide and were displayed in fixed - width Courier Bold 12 point font . The discussion text scrolled from bottom to top so that the discussants could see prior statements flom the conversation . The text in the Instruction , Problem and Feedback windows was also displayed in Courier Bold 12 point font , with only a few exceptions . All aspects of the display in the experimental software were achromatic . For the control condition S prediscussion phase ( i ) , a ques - tionnaire was distributed to the group members in which they read the dilemma involving the central character and the risky / safe alternatives . In it , they provided their written individual opinion , After the completed questionnaires were collected by the experimenter , the group was instructed to discuss the problem using the IRC program ( ii ) . The group was permitted to discuss the problem for as long as it took to attain consensus . A timer in the feedback window displayed to each group member the number of minutes elapsed in the conversation . Once consensus was attained ( iii ) , the experimenter again distributed postdiscussion questionnaires to the group ( iv ) , after which the trial was completed . 304 The G and G + AVG trials differed from the S trial in two important ways : ( a ) instead of written questionnaires , predis - cussion ( i ) , consensus ( iii ) and postdiscussion ( iv ) opinions were interactively selected by the subjects via the three - button mouse from the Feedback window , The nine y axis labels , “1 - in - 10” through “9 - in - 10” ( see Figure 1 ) , were “mouse - able” and could be selected by a group member positioning the mouse pointer over the item and clicking any of the three mouse buttons ; ( b ) directly before the discussion began , the group viewed their prediscussion opinions in the Feedback Window , Each subject’s name was enclosed in lower - case in a graphical box and displayed along the y position in the display that corresponded to hisiher prediscussion opinion ( see Figure 1 ) . If two or all three subjects had the same opinion , the boxes were located at the same y position and concatenated in alphabetical order , The boxes were always the width of the longest name of a subject ( shorter names were extended with white space ) so that the boxes would be the same size , Potentially different box widths were not possible so as not to confound a perceived “importance’” of one opinion over another , For G , only the opinions were displayed . G + AVG was identical to G except that the average of the prediscussion opinions was also displayed , denoted by a horizontal line at the g position of that value , along with the numerical value of that average ( Figure 1 ) . For both G and G + AVG , the r position of the boxes in the graph was held constant . The displays in G and G + AVG were presented to the subjects for 90 seconds and then removed before the discussion phase ( ii ) began . The displays during the discussion phase were the same for all three conditions . This sequencing was carefully planned , following the hypothesis that the effects of prediscussion modality would appear during the discussion . Introducing additional interactive graphics during the discus - sion phase would only confound these effects and potentially result in an undesired interaction between the prediscussion and discussion phases . In G and G + AVG , after the consensus value was selected ( iii ) , it was again displayed to the subjects for 45 seconds in the Feedback Window in a format identical to that shown in Figure 1 except that the subjects’ graphical boxes were concatenated and ordered alphabetically at they position , reflecting the group decision . In one case , the group agreed on a non - discrete value ( i . e . , 2 . 33 ) ; hence , they were not able to select the consensus value , The practice trial was the same as G except that the instructions were more verbose . DEPENDENT MEASURES AND RESULTS For the individual and group opinion hypothesis ( Hi ) and a portion of the group discussion hypothesis ( H2 ) , four de - pendent measures were analyzed for statistical significance using the one - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) method ( o ! ! = ( 2 , 30 ) , n = 11 ) ; the results are summarized in Table 1 . No significant differences were found among the three exper - imental conditions involving the duration of the discussions , the total IRC messages sent by group members , the choice - Measure Mean SD F Duration ( min . ) s 7 . 62 3 , 29 n . s , G 8 . 20 4 . 49 G + AVG 8 . 64 5 . 81 Total Messages s 25 , 91 12 . 56 n . s . G 26 . 09 17 . 59 G + AVG 27 . 73 19 , 04 Choice - Shift s 4 . 27 1 , 21 n , s . G 4 , 67 2 , 02 G + AVG 4 . 18 1 . 75 Attitude Polarization s 1 . 30 . 58 n . s . ( d ! ( 2 , 29 ) ) G ( n = 10 ) 1 , 10 . 47 G + AVG 1 , 30 , 48 Table 1 : Discussion magnitudes and opinion results . shift between the prediscussion opinion and consensus , and the attitude polarization between the prediscussion and post - discussion opinions . Therefore , these postulates from H1 and H2 were not made manifest . The magnitude of choice - shiftin this study , however , averaging 4 , 37 for all three conditions , is markedly greater than that detected in earlier research ( [ 2 l ] ) ; where the mean choice - shift using a synchronous text - based discussion program was . 89 . However , in terms of display - style and procedure , the IRC discussion program is radically different from the discussion program used in an earlier study ( Converse running on aDEC - 20 mainffame and VT - 100 - style terminals [ 2 l ] ) . If anything , the more up - to - date windowed , workstation - style technology employed in the current exper - iment provides further corroborating evidence for the theory that computer - mediation indeed exacerbates the choice - shift phenomenon . Regarding group discussion ( H2 ) , the conversational unit of analysis was each subject’s message in the IRC medium - even if it was comprised of two or three sentences . Most messages typically carried one basic theme . The discussions in this experiment took on three salient characteristics that regularly appeared in all 33 trials , reflecting a common discourse structure . Subjects spent their discussion time ( a ) arguing or weighing the risky alternative against the safe alternative and , in turn , providing persuasive arguments for or against either alternative such as , “Will she be happier as doctor who plays piano in her spare time or as a concert pianist ? , ” sometimes in order to support or refute a proposed consensus value – hereafter referred to aspersuasive arguments ; ( b ) proposing various values for what the group consensus should be such as , “Let’s go with 6 - in - 1 O ; sometimes accompanied with social pressure such as , “C’men ! Can’t you come down to 3 - in - 10 ? ” and / or weakly supported , unsubstantiated claims such as , “I think he should go for it’’ – hereafter normative ar - guments ; or ( c ) settling on and affirming the group consensus 305 Measure Mean SD F P % Persuasive Args . s G G + AVG % Normative Args . s G G + AVG % Consensus Attain . s G G + AVG Explicit Ist Advocate s G G + AVG Implicit 1st Advocate s G . 45 . 14 6 . 07 . 006 . 32 , 17 . 58 . 18 . 21 , 17 12 . 41 . 0001 . 38 . 13 . 08 . 12 , 34 . 13 nos . , 30 . 13 . 34 , 17 1 . 82 1 . 33 6 . 11 . 0059 . 79 1 . 17 . 27 . 47 2 . 27 1 . 42 5 . 09 . 0125 . 94 1 . 20 G + AVG . 82 . 87 Table 2 : Discussion content and first advocacy results . value , which invariably ended all 33 discussions – hereafter consensus attainment . All three types , with few exceptions , occurred in contiguous sequences , involving only messages in the context of one of the three types . For instance , subjects would first weigh the risky and safe alternatives for a few messages , switch to proposing different unsubstantiated con - sensus values for several messages , perhaps make substantive arguments for or against their proposals for a few more messages , then come to agreement . The same ANOVA method was used to examine this type of data , and the results are summarized in Table 2 . As Table 2 shows , the number of messages occurring during the persuasive - style arguments phases , as a percentage of the total messages in each discussion , was found to be significant ( p = . 006 ) . In addition , the number of messages involv - ing normative - style arguments , as a percentage of the total messages , was also found to vary significantly ( p = . 0001 ) . The number of messages involving consensus attainment , as a percentage of total messages , was not found to vary significantly . This data confirms hypothesis H2 , establish - ing the fact that the presence of the graphical modality in both G and G + AVG had an effect on discussion structure and content . Turning to H3 , there were significant effects regarding the explicit fuxt advocate @ = . 0059 ) , and the implicit first advocate @ = , 0125 ) . This data supports the hypothesis that the explicit and implicit first advocate would have a greater influence on the group consensus in both graphics conditions than in S . An ANOVA was performed on each of the three experimental positions ; no significant order effects were detected for these four significant dependent variables . The current design involved the assignment of Measure Mean SD p ~ % Persuasive Args . s G s G + AVG G G + AVG % Normative Args . s G s G + AVG G G + AVG Explicit 1st Adv , s G s G + AVG G G + AVG Implicit 1st Adv . s G s G + AVG G . 45 . 32 . 45 . 58 . 32 . 58 . 21 . 38 . 21 . 08 . 38 , 08 1 , 82 . 79 1 , 82 . 27 . 79 . 27 2 . 27 . 94 2 . 27 . 82 . 94 . 14 . 17 . 14 . 18 . 17 . 18 . 16 . 13 . 16 . 11 . 13 . 11 1 . 33 1 . 17 1 . 33 . 47 1 . 17 . 47 1 . 42 1 . 20 1 . 42 . 87 1 . 20 . 1 . 1 , 0001 . 01 . 05 . 01 . 05 . 01 n . s , . 05 . 01 n . s . G + AVG . 82 . 87 Table 3 : Pairwise comparison of significant results . one choice - dilemma problem to each experimental condition ( e . g . , “Ms . H in S ) , In an extended design , assignment of each of the three choice - dilemma problems to each of the three modalities would be required . More detailed pairwise comparisons of the significant results , examined by applying the Duncan’s Multiple Range tes ~ are summarized in Table 3 , Figure 2 and Figure 3 . There were significantly more normative arguments in G ( m = . 38 ) than in S ( m = . 21 ) or G + AVG ( m = . 08 ) . Likewise , for S there were significantly more normative arguments than in G + AVG . In sum , for normative arguments , prOpOrtiOIKitdy G > S > G + AVG , which supports H2 ( see Figure 2 ) . There were significantly more persuasive arguments in G + AVG ( m = . 58 ) than in S ( m = . 45 ) or G ( m = . 32 ) . There were more persuasive arguments in S than in G . In sum , for persuasive arguments , proportionately G + AVG > S > G , which also supports H2 ( see Figure 2 ) . Regarding explicit and implicit fist advocacy ( H3 ) , G and G + AVG did not vary significantly from each other . The differences between S and G , and S and G + AVG , were significan ~ as predicted . The non - significant results in the S condition , however , ( explicit 306 m = 1 . 82 ) are similar to results found in earlier electronic mail research where the mean shift for “self - selected” advocates was 1 . 14 ( [ 25 ] , pg . 165 ) . Although not summarized in Table 2 , there was no significant influence of the second or third explicit advocate on the group decision among the three conditions . For S , G , and G + AVG , the mean shifts for second advocates were 1 . 41 , 1 . 03 , and . 86 , respectively , and for third advocates , 1 . 05 , , 88 , and . 55 , The order of explicit advocacy - first , second , and third - did not vary significantly within each modality , where for S the means were 1 . 82 , 1 . 41 , and 1 . 05 , respectively ; for G : 0 . 79 , 1 , 03 , and , 88 ; and for G + AVG : , 27 , . 86 , and . 55 . DISCUSSION To summarize , the two discourse types , persuasive arguments and normative arguments , varied significantly with respect to the three experimental conditions S , G and G + AVG . The third type , consensus attainment , occurred in equal proportions for all three conditions . These data suggest that the bulk of the modality effects rested exclusively in the phases of discussion where group members attempted to hash out substantiated and unsubstantiated opinions , decision proposals , inference , and logical arguments . In addition , both the explicit and implicit first advocates in the two graphics conditions had significant effects on the outcome of the group discussion . Three parameters are considered central to the ensuing dis - cussion : ( a ) prediscussion opinions , ( b ) individual opinions which emerge during the group discussion , and ( c ) the group consensus , which also emerges during the group discussion , What is considered of theoretical interest - keeping cognitive and perceptual salience and persistence in mind - is the inter - action of these opinions with the communication modalities in the three experimental condhions . First , considering the effect of the graphical modality G + AVG on the group discourse ( referred to in Figure 2 ) , why would groups spend proportionately less time discussing opinions and asserting normative influence , and more time substanti - ating their opinions with persuasive arguments , thus assert - ing more informational influence ? Owing to the theorized effects of perceptual and cognitive salience explicated in the background section , it is being proposed that when the group members see each others’ opinions with the group average ( G + AVG ) , consisting of the horizontal line and the corresponding numerical value , it presents an irrefutable , implied , informational “decision proposal” or “group con - sensus , ” even before any discussion begins , The graphical display frames their individual opinions with a very salient notion of a consensus , denoted by the informational average . Thus , during the discussion , with the explicit knowledge that members will eventually have to adjust their opinions in order to move towards a consensus , they will be more motivated to argue – using persuasive arguments that are grounded in fact , logic , and inference - to justify and protect their own positions . Since individual members are more committed . 6 . 1 Graphics + ~ Average Sentential Text Graphics Consensus Normative Persuasive Attainment Arguments Arguments Discourse Type Figure 2 : Effects of modality on discussion content . to their positions , which are further reinforced by their per - suasive arguments , it certainly would not serve them well to submit alternate positions . This would explain the smaller proportion of normative arguments . Again referring to Figure 2 , regarding the G condition , why do groups engage in discussion proportions that almost di - ametrically oppose those of G + AVG ? It is being proposed that when the discussants encounter the G graphical display , without explicitly seeing the average , as in G + AVG , it can be assumed that no decision proposals or group consensus whatsoever have yet begun to take shape before the onset of the discussion . The discussants have no external reference point against which to measure tieir individual opinions ; they are not compelled to defend their positions , nor do they have a salient notion of opinion ii ~ d consensus as in G + AVG . @ the contrary , the discussants instead have a very strong notion of their own opinions , and these opinions overshadow any sense of a consensus . This contributes to a lack of cohesion as the discussion begins , as individual opinions change , and as the group consensus begins to take shape , all of which transpire in the text - based discussion modality . Working memory effects take their toll to a greater degree regarding the individual opinions and the emerging consensus articulated in the text - based modality than in the resource - free modality of the prediscussion graphical display . Invariably , this “anti - consensual” state of affairs gives tise to a form of discussion in which the primacy of the graphical prediscussion opinions interferes with the discussants’ sense of their own evolving opinions and the group decision . In the presence of this interference , persuasive arguments are more 307 Implicit 1st Adv Explicit 1st Adv Sentential Graphics Graphics + Text Average Modality of Prediscussion Opinions Figure 3 : Effects of modality on first advocacy . difficult to construct , giving way instead to more normative - style arguments that needn’t rely on consistent information in order that they be articulated . Wh . h the S condition serving as a control or reference condi - tion for the experiment , the “neutral” modality of text - based text ( with respect to G and G + AVG ) favored persuasive ar - guments over normative arguments , When the discussants first announce their prediscussion opinions to one another - in contrast with G and G + AVG where they are preannounced – greater emphasis is placed on the cohesiveness of the group opinion . In other words , by stating one’s prediscussion opinion in S , one is already explicitly suggesting a value for fie group consensus . It should also be kept in mind that the group members do not see each others’ questionnaires before the discussion begins , In G + AVG , group members quickly develop a sense of what the consensus value might be , thereby inducing a need to justify one’s own position through persuasive arguments . The influence of the implicit and explicit fwst advocates on the group consensus in G and G + AVG also met with very interesting and favorable results ( see Figure 3 ) . Both graphics conditions demonstrated a statistically greater influence on the consensus than did the control . In both graphics con - ditions , the cognitively and perceptually salient information from the prediscussion graphical feedback , as opposed to the text - based information discussed a moment ago , ostensibly anchored discussants closer to the value of the Ilrst advocate’s position . As compared with the text - based condition , this resulted in a significantly smaller shift of opinion from the Condltlon MaJonty Average Logical s 6 3 2 G 4 5 1 G + AVG 8 3 0 Table 4 : Frequency of decision rules . moment of the first advocacy to the consensus . Owing to the lack of salience , however , the first advocates in the S discussions do not have as much of an influence on the consensus as in the other two conditions . The notions of opinion and consensus are more susceptible to both working memory effects and the recency of information gleaned from the discourse , resulting in the shift of opinion away from the first advocate , as realized in the choice - shift phenomenon . A brief word should be said about the decision rules that discussants consciously or unconsciously employed to arrive at their consensus values . Table 4 summarizes the frequencies of three types : majority rule , in which the group decides to go with a value close to the majority or an approximate average of the majority ; average rule , where the group takes the exact or approximate average of their opinions , or in some cases , the mid - point of the risk scale ( 5 - in - 10 ) ; or logical rule , in which the group decides on whatever sounds like the best decision , based on certain facts or inference derived from the discussion . Lacking any statistical analysis , two pertinent statements can presently be made about these frequencies : ( 1 ) there was a linear relationship of the majority rule among the condhions , and ( 2 ) the average rule occurred slightly more frequently in G than in the other two conditions , Beyond this , it is not yet safe to delve further into these frequencies other than to say that there appears to be an effeet , and that the effect most likely hinges on the salience and persistence associated with the graphical displays . For instance , the linear effect regarding the majority rule might result from the heightened ( i . e . , G + AVG ) or weakened ( i . e . , G ) sense of a three - person consensus in the case of G + AVG , as opposed to a two - person consensus , in the case of G . What is generally interesting about the results compared with trrdkional face - to - face research is the fairly clear delineation between the normative and informational styles of influence that occurred throughout the discussions . In some cases , a decision proposal might have been coupled with an otherwise persuasive argument , but in general , the distinction between the two was quite clear . Also of great interest were the almost identical proportions ( roughly one - third ) that were spent in consensus attainment for all three conditions , along with the non - significant variances of discussion duration , discus - sion times , number of messages , choice - shift , and attitudinal polarization . These aggregate data provided a superlative backdrop against which the foregoing influence - related pa - rameters could be examined . Further decomposition and classification of discourse types in fimre research could reveal other interesting discussion dynamics , 308 FIRST - AND SECOND - LEVEL EFFECTS : IMPLICATIONS FOR COMPUTER - SUPPORTED COOPERATIVE WORK Sproull and Kiesler ( [ 22 ] ) analyze , to a great level of detail , the first - level , or efficiency effects , and second - level , or so - cial effects , of networked communication media . As tlhey suggest , specific technologies are typically first conceived in order to automate and make more efficient a certain human activity , process or procedure , resulting in first - level effects . For instance , automobiles made personal transportation more efficient and telephones made interpersonal communication more efficient . As an outgrowth of first - level effects , second - level effects are the social by - products of such efficiency - seeking endeavors . For example , the automobile facilitated the “urban flight” to the suburbs resulting in entirely new social classes in the process ; including the “suburban middle class , ” In the case of networked , electronic communications , the impact of text - based electronic mail has yielded a growing body of research touching on different forms of second - level effects . Text - based electronic mail serves asa prime example . As discussed in the Introduction , by eliminating the constraint that the recipient be present when the message is actually sent ( i . e . , first - level effect ) , the feature of asynchrony has afforded more efficient interaction among communicating entities who use electronic mail , A side - effect of this efficiency , however , has been the attenuation , equalization , or exacerbation of various social dynamics . High status individuals and first advocates lose their influence , discussants participate more equally and their opinions tend to shift to greater extremes ( i . e , , second - level effects ) . Keeping this mode of analysis in mind , what social ram - ifications might be identified as the result of the research reported herein ? The experiment dealt exclusively with the nature and representation of the discussants’ prediscussion opinions . What resulted , to a reasonable degree of certainty , was that depending on the modality of the representation , group members attempted to assert two different forms of influence , normative vs . informational , to a greater or lesser extent . Regarding first advocacy , there was also a significant influence on the group decision , thus adhering to the tenets presented in related research ( [ 25 ] ) , For the social scientist , both subjective and objective interpretations of these results can be made , Subjectively , many might agree that groups in general , particularly when making important decisions , “should” utilize as many persuasive arguments as possible and equalize the influence of the tlrst advocate . In this fashion , groups might be led to decisions that are of a higher “quality . ” Since more mental effort is presumably expended towards factually weighing risky and safe alternatives , sub - stantiating such alternatives with information - laden opinion , logic and inference appeals to the rationalist tendencies and values of present - day social scientists . A more objective in - terpretation of these results , however , might paint a markedly different picture of this form of group activity . If one relaxes the constraints placed on merncs such as “quality” and “effi - ciency , ” since these are typically in the eye of the beholder , what else might be there for the social scientist to interpret ? As a pertinent and concrete example , consider the circum - stances surrounding the Rodney King incident . The Los Angeles Police Department ( LAPD ) maintains an electronic messaging system – with an interface situated in each patrol car – that permits text - based communication among LAPD patrol officers . These messages are stored centrally and are available for later review for a wide variety of purposes , During the official investigation of the King inciden ~ it was discovered that after the event in question , the patrol officers involved in the altercation with King had boasted to one another and to others , through this messaging medium , about their activities during the incident , and had expressed their opinions regarding the incident as well as King . Given what is known empirically about the exb - emetization of opinion in this type of medium , would it be fair to postulate that the use of the LAPD electronic messaging system might have played a contributory role in mediating such an intense rendering of force ( [ 5 ] ) ? To the reader , fu - st - and second - level effects and how they emerge in this particular scenario should be abundantly clear . What should be considered , extrapolating tlomthe results reported herein , is how the inclusion of graph - ical elements in addition to the text - based - only messaging medium might result in different , more socially acceptable patterns of behavior , To the CSCW systems designer , or the CSCW end - user , such second - level effects , as in the case of Rodney King , can hardly be anticipated , Given the results reported here and elsewhere , however , these kinds of effects should be a prime consideration rather than remain unnoticed , ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Thanks to Ellice Forman , Stephen Hirtle , Jill Larkin , Terri Lenox , Alan Lesgold , John Levine , Mike Lewis , Dirk Mah - ling , Richard Moreland , Walter Schneider , Clement Stone , and two anonymous reviewers . Thanks to the Industrial Networking Institute at Carnegie Mellon and the University of Pittsburgh Department of Information Science for fimd - ing of the subjects who participated in the study , Special thanks to Sara Kiesler , who has helped cultivate many of the foundational ideas that have gone into this research . REFERENCES 1 . Bransford , J , D , Barclay , J , R . , and Franks , J . J . Sentence memory : A constructive versus interpretive approach , Cognitive Psychology 3 ( 1972 ) , 193 - 209 . 2 . Bratman , M . E . What is intention ? In P . R , Cohen , J . Morgan , and M . E . Pollack ( Eds . ) , Intentions in Communication MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 1990 . 3 . Churchland , P . M . Cognitive activity in artificial neural networks , In D . N . Osherson and E . E . Smith ( Eds . ) , Thinking : An Invitation to Cognitive Science . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 1992 . 309 4 . Kaplan , S . , and Simon , H , A . Foundations of cognitive science . In M . I . Posner ( Ed . ) , Foundations of Cognitive Science . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 1989 . 5 . Kiesler , S . Derived from a personal communication . 6 . Kiesler , S . , and Sproull , L . Group decision making and communication technology . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 52 ( 1992 ) , 96 - 123 . 7 . Kintsch , W . , and van Dijk , T . A . Towards a model of text comprehension and production . Psychological Review 851988 , 163 - 182 . 8 . Kotovsky , K . , Hayes , J . R . , and Simon , H . A . Why are some problems hard ? Evidence from tower of hanoi . Cognitive Psychology 17 ( 1985 ) , 248 - 294 . 9 . Lewis , C . M . , and Toth , J . A . Situated cognition in diagrammatic reasoning . In N . H . Narayanan ( Ed . ) , Working Notes , AAAI Spring Symposium on Reasoning with Diagrammatic Representations ( March 25 - 27 , Stanford University ) 1992 , pp . 47 - 52 . 10 . Loftus , E . F , , Miller , D . G . , and Burns , H , J , Semantic integration of verbal information in a visual memory . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Learning and MemoW 4 ( 1978 ) , 19 - 31 . 11 . Lotman , Y . M . Universe of the Mind : A Semiotic Theory of Culture . Indiana University Press , Bloomington , IN , 1990 . 12 , Mandler , J . M . , and Ritchey , G . H . Long - term memory for pictures . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Learning and Memory 3 ( 1977 ) , 386 - 396 . 13 . McGuire , T , W . , Kiesler , S . , and Siegel , J , Group and computer - mediated discussion effects in risk decision making . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 525 , 1987 , 917 - 930 . 14 . McLelland , J . L . , and Rumelhart , D . E . An interactive activation model of context effects in letter perception : Part 1 , An account of basic findings . Psychological Review 88 , 1981 , 375 - 407 . 15 . Miller , C , E . The social psychological effects of group decision rules . In P . B . Paulus ( Ed . ) , Psychology of group injuence ( 2nd cd . ) ( pp . 327 - 355 ) . Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ , 1989 , 16 . Nickerson , R . S . , and Adams , M . J . Long - term memory for a common object . Cognitive Psychology 11 1979 , 287 - 307 . 17 . 18 . 19 . 20 . 21 . 22 , 23 . 24 . 25 . 26 . 27 . Paivio , A . Mental Representations : A Dual Coding Approach . Oxford University Press , New York , NY , 1986 . Posner , M . I . Seeing the mind . Science ( Oct . 29 , 1993 ) , 262 . Ridgeway , C . L . Dominance , performance , and status in groups : A theoretical analysis . In E , J , Lawler ( Ed . ) , Advances in Group Processes ( Vol . 1 ) ( pp . 59 - 93 ) . JAI Press , Greenwich , CT , 1984 . Schneider , W . , and Detweiler , M . A connection - ist / control architecture for working memory . In G . H . Bower ( Ed . ) , The Psychology ofLearning and Motivation ( Vol . 21 ) ( pp . 53 - 1 19 ) . Academic Press , Orlando , FL , 1987 . Siegel , J . , Dubrovsky , V . , Kiesler , S . , and McGuire , T . W . Group processes in computer - mediated communication . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 37 , 1986 , 157 - 187 . Sproull , L . , and Kiesler , S . Connections . ’ New Ways of Working in the Networked Organization . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 1991 . Tabachnek , H . , and Simon , H . A . Reasoning about economic markets . In N . H , Narayanan ( Ed . ) , Working Notes , AA . Al Spring Symposium on Reasoning with Diagrammatic Representations ( March 25 - 27 , Stanford University ) , 1992 , pp . 59 - 64 . Van Orden , G . C . , Pennington , B . F , , and Stone , G . O . Word identification in readhg and the promise of subsymbolic psycholinguistics . Psychological Review 97 , 4 ( 1990 ) , 488 - 522 . Weisband , S . P . Group discussion and first advocacy effects in computer - mediated and face - to - face decision making groups . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 53 , 1992 , 352 - 380 . Wertsch , J . V . Voices of the Mind . A Sociocultural Approach to Mediated Action . Cambridge , MA , Harvard University Press , 1991 . Zhang , J . , and Norman , D . A . Z7ze Interaction of Internal and External Information in a Problem - Solving Task , Technical Report 9005 , Dept of Cognitive Science UCSD , La Jolla , CA , 1990 . 310