A complex network framework for unbiased statistical analyses of DNA – DNA contact maps Kai Kruse 1 , * , Sven Sewitz 1 , 2 and M . Madan Babu 1 , * 1 Structural Studies Division , MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology , Hills Road , Cambridge CB2 0QH and 2 Department of Biochemistry , Cambridge Systems Biology Centre , Tennis Court Road , Cambridge CB2 1QR , UK Received September 12 , 2012 ; Revised October 17 , 2012 ; Accepted October 19 , 2012 ABSTRACT Experimental techniques for the investigation of three - dimensional ( 3D ) genome organization are being developed at a fast pace . Currently , the associated computational methods are mostly specific to the individual experimental approach . Here we present a general statistical framework that is widely applicable to the analysis of genomic contact maps , irrespective of the data acquisition and normalization processes . Within this framework DNA – DNA contact data are represented as a complex network , for which a broad number of directly applicable methods already exist . In such a network representation , DNA segments and contacts between them are denoted as nodes and edges , respectively . Furthermore , we present a robust method for generating randomized contact networks that explicitly take into account the inherent 3D nature of the genome and serve as real - istic null - models for unbiased statistical analyses . By integrating a variety of large - scale genome - wide datasets we demonstrate that meiotic crossover sites display enriched genomic contacts and that cohesin - bound genes are significantly colocalized in the yeast nucleus . We anticipate that the complex network framework in conjunction with the randomization of DNA – DNA contact networks will become a widely used tool in the study of nuclear architecture . INTRODUCTION The development of chromatin conformation capture ( 3C ) provided us with the ﬁrst in situ method for studying the three - dimensional ( 3D ) organization of DNA at genomic loci of interest ( 1 ) . Since its invention , interest in the application and improvement of the 3C approach has been ever increasing . New derivative high - resolution , high - throughput methods that enable us to study DNA – DNA contacts at a much larger scale are rapidly being developed ( 2 ) . The number of available datasets em - ploying the 4C ( 3 , 4 ) , 5C ( 5 ) , GCC ( 6 ) and particularly the Hi - C ( 7 , 8 ) and TCC ( 9 ) approaches is steadily on the rise . In the past 2 years alone , researchers have obtained infor - mation on the global 3D organization of DNA in human lymphoblastoid cells ( 8 – 10 ) , the budding yeast ( 11 , 6 ) and ﬁssion yeast ( 12 ) nuclei , Drosophila embryonic cells ( 13 ) , and , most recently , Arabidopsis thaliana ( 14 ) . These studies provide us with maps of DNA – DNA contacts , and accumulate evidence on both a local and a genome - wide scale that 3D genome architecture is highly non - random . Typically , the analysis of DNA – DNA contact data is intrinsically linked to the individual experimental approach of each study , as is the case for the Hi - C - speciﬁc probabilistic background model of Yaffe and Tanay ( 15 ) . This powerful approach allows us to minimize experimental and computational biases , and to decide whether the observed contacts could have arisen from chance . Since their model is so tightly linked to Hi - C data , however , it is not easily transferrable to non - Hi - C - based approaches . To accommodate and to be able to integrate data from diverse existing and upcoming ex - perimental approaches there is a need for a unifying framework that can be used to study DNA – DNA contact data in general , irrespective of the underlying data acquisition and normalization processes . Within this framework each dataset would undergo ( i ) an experi - mental approach dependent pre - processing , in which false - positive contacts are ﬁltered ; and ( ii ) experimental approach independent representation and analysis , which is based on the inherent 3D nature of the data ( Figure 1 ) . Here we adapt the complex network framework , which has proven successful for many types of genomic data in systems biology ( 16 – 19 ) and offers a large number of existing analysis methods ( 19 – 22 ) , to the study of DNA – DNA contact data . These methods can be used to study a number of important biological questions regarding the 3D arrangement of DNA in a network context : for * To whom correspondence should be addressed . Tel : + 44 1223 40 2479 ; Fax : + 44 1223 21 3556 ; Email : kkruse @ mrc - lmb . cam . ac . uk Correspondence may also be addressed to M . Madan Babu . Tel : + 44 1223 40 2208 ; Fax : + 44 1223 21 3556 ; Email : madanm @ mrc - lmb . cam . ac . uk Published online 21 November 2012 Nucleic Acids Research , 2013 , Vol . 41 , No . 2 701 – 710 doi : 10 . 1093 / nar / gks1096 (cid:2) The Author ( s ) 2012 . Published by Oxford University Press . This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc / 3 . 0 / ) , which permits non - commercial reuse , distribution , and reproduction in any medium , provided the original work is properly cited . For commercial re - use , please contact journals . permissions @ oup . com . instance , is it possible to identify enriched patterns such as cliques or motifs in these networks ( 23 – 25 ) , and what is their biological relevance ? Or can we identify subnetworks with a speciﬁc local functional enrichment ? We demonstrate the framework on a recently published Hi - C dataset for Saccharomyces cerevisiae ( 11 ) by investigating the following questions : ( i ) How can we apply existing methods for Hi - C data normalization to construct a high - conﬁdence network of DNA – DNA contacts ? ; ( ii ) Which topological properties characterize the resulting network of contacts ? ; ( iii ) Can we design a network randomization procedure to obtain an unbiased ‘null - model’ network that mimics the 3D behaviour of the underlying data ? ; and ( iv ) How can the null - model network be used in statistical enrichment tests , and how does the method compare to existing approaches ? Speciﬁcally , we choose the assessment of contact enrich - ment between genomic loci as one particular example of application for our approach : we exploit several a large - scale datasets , including 136 reported meiotic recombin - ation hotspots ( 26 ) and the experimentally veriﬁed binding sites of over 200 chromatin regulatory proteins ( 27 ) , to investigate colocalization between the corresponding genomic loci . MATERIALS AND METHODS Saccharomyces cerevisiae inter - chromosomal DNA SCN To construct the yeast inter - chromosomal DNA segment - contact network ( SCN ) , we ﬁrst generated a ﬁltered list of DNA – DNA contacts from the inter - chromosomal HindIII libraries of a recently published Hi - C experiment in S . cerevisiae ( 11 ) . We use a q - value - based method described in the Supplementary Material of Duan et al . ( 11 ) to ﬁlter unspeciﬁc contacts , with the important difference that we do not assume uniform contact probabilities of all DNA segments . Instead , we applied the procedure described in Yaffe and Tanay ( 15 ) to obtain contact probabilities for each fragment - pair that take into account known biases of Hi - C experiments ( see Supplementary Materials and Methods ) . Figure 1 . Data normalization and ﬁltering , complex network framework and topological network properties ( a ) Log2 contact enrichment of yeast inter - chromosomal DNA – DNA contact data ( 11 ) before and after normalization using the probabilistic model of Yaffe and Tanay ( 15 ) . ( b ) Filtering of contacts . ( c ) The high - conﬁdence map of ﬁltered DNA – DNA contacts is represented as a complex network . ( d ) Randomized networks that maintain essential properties of the original . ( e ) A large number of random networks is generated using the procedure suggested in this study . ( f – h ) Topological analysis of the yeast inter - chromosomal segment contact network ( SCN ) . Green denotes yeast SCN nodes , grey denotes random networks of the same size and degree sequence as the yeast SCN ( ‘rewired networks’ , not to be confused with the randomization approach ) . ( f ) Degree distribution . ( g ) Average clustering coefﬁcient distribution . ( h ) Average clustering coefﬁcient distribution for mixed triangles ( where two nodes are neighbours on the same chromosome ) . 702 Nucleic Acids Research , 2013 , Vol . 41 , No . 2 S . cerevisiae inter - chromosomal GCN We obtained coordinates of open reading frames ( ORFs ) and transposable - element genes from the SGD ( 28 ) . These genes form the set of nodes in the yeast gene – gene contact network ( GCN ) . A gene is assigned to the DNA segment that contains the largest part of its ORF , ensuring a unique segment assignment for each gene . Genes inherit the contacts of their ‘parent’ segments , i . e . every gene – gene combination of an interacting segment pair will be a new edge in the GCN . Random contact data , artiﬁcial SCNs and GCNs We generated 50 sets of random contact data in similar fashion to Witten and Noble ( 29 ) : 500 nodes were randomly distributed uniformly in a unit cube . Euclidean distances between all pairs of nodes were measured and edges drawn between nodes with a distance among the smallest 2 % of all distances , leading to an average node degree of 10 . For each of these 50 artiﬁcial SCNs 1000 corresponding random networks were generated according to the protocol described below ( Network randomization procedure ) and in Figure 5 . Networks are intentionally kept small to decrease to computational workload of randomization . For simulations of larger networks please refer to the Supplementary Materials and Methods , and Control Calculations . From these 50 artiﬁcial SCNs we generated corresponding artiﬁcial GCNs by randomly assigning 1 – 3 ‘genes’ to each node and splitting nodes into their con - stituent genes as described above . Clustering coefﬁcient Here we use the deﬁnition of clustering coefﬁcient of a node provided by Soffer and Vasquez ( 30 ) . The Soffer – Vasquez clustering coefﬁcient explicitly considers joint degree constraints , i . e . it directly takes i account the degree of neighbouring nodes when calculating the clus - tering coefﬁcient of individual nodes : it calculates the clus - tering coefﬁcient of a node as the number of triangles formed with its neighbours divided by the maximum possible number of triangles given the neighbours degree sequence . This is important in the network randomization procedure ( see below ) , as global transitivities might other - wise not be attainable with traditional clustering measures in rewired networks due to degree constraints ( 31 ) . We formulate the clustering coefﬁcient for ‘mixed triangles’ , which we deﬁne as a triplet of nodes s , t , u where u and s are direct ‘chromosomal neighbours’ , i . e . they lie within c base - pairs ( here c = 2500 bp ) of each other on the same chromosome , and the edges ( u , t ) and ( s , t ) exist . For details see Supplementary Materials and Methods . Network randomization procedure We designed a custom randomization procedure for DNA – DNA contact networks , which is based on work by Bansal et al . ( 31 ) and explained in Figure 5 . For the exact details of the algorithm , please refer to the Supplementary Materials and Methods . Randomization approach for colocalization assessment The basics of the randomization approach for colocalization assessment are explained schematically in Figure 2 , more detail can be found in the Supplementary Materials and Methods . Randomly sampled node sets Segment and gene sets were generated by sampling from the respective networks uniformly at random without replacement . For the yeast SCN , we generated 1000 sets of nodes consisting of 200 segments each ; for the yeast GCN we generated 1000 sets of nodes consisting of 250 genes each ; for each of the artiﬁcial SCNs we generated node sets of varying sizes ( 250 (cid:2) 100 nodes , 250 (cid:2) 150 nodes ) . Meiotic recombination hotspot dataset We obtained a dataset of 136 meiotic recombination hotspots and categorized subsets of hotspots into crossover ( CO ) and non - crossover ( NCO ) sites as described by the authors . Hotspots were mapped to DNA segments by their midpoint . Gene and chromatin regulatory protein binding dataset We obtained microarray data of gene and chromatin regulatory protein binding to genes in the budding yeast gen - ome from Venters et al . ( 27 ) . The data for each of the 202 proteins are divided into three groups , based on the location of the microarray probe : upstream activating sequence ( UAS ) , transcription start site ( TSS ) and ORF . For each protein and group we construct a gene set that is bound by the protein at the corresponding position ( UAS , TSS , ORF ) : binding is deﬁned according to the false - discovery rate ( FDR ) cutoff provided by the authors . Note that data are not available for every protein at every microarray probe location , so that the size of each dataset for TSS , UAS and ORF can vary . Correction for multiple testing Due to the size of the dataset and the lower limit of obtainable P - values ( here 10 (cid:3) 3 ) , a strict multiple testing correction ( such as the Bonferroni correction ) might obscure some of the truly colocalized gene sets . Although the randomization process can be slow for large networks , the actual enrichment test is comparatively fast once the random networks have been obtained . Thus , the method lends itself well to a permutation - based P - value correction method ( 32 ) . To obtain the permutation - based P - value , the chromatin regulatory protein binding data are randomly shufﬂed among genes . The adjusted P - value is then the fraction of permuted datasets where the maximum SPI is larger than the original SPI of the investigated protein . A similar approach is very popular , for example , in eQTL studies ( 33 ) . Also see Supplementary Materials and Methods . RESULTS DNA – DNA contact data lend itself well to the represen - tation as a complex network , where DNA loci form the network nodes , and 3D contacts between them are Nucleic Acids Research , 2013 , Vol . 41 , No . 2 703 represented as edges ( 34 , 35 ) . As an example , we focus in this work on the inter - chromosomal DNA – DNA contacts in S . cerevisiae , whose compact , haploid genome allows for an unambiguous mapping of most Hi - C reads to each chromosome , and which has a large number of compre - hensive , genome - wide datasets available , which can be studied in the context of DNA – DNA contacts . We only study inter - chromosomal contact data in S . cerevisiae , because the dependency of the intra - chromosomal contact probability of two DNA loci is hard to control for ( 11 , 13 , 15 ) . However , most of the introduced method - ology can be applied to intra - chromosomal contacts with minor adaptations . Building a DNA SCN that accounts for experimental biases The ﬁrst part of the analysis of 3D genome architecture in a complex network framework is formed by the experi - mental approach dependent data acquisition and ﬁltering to obtain a high - conﬁdence list of DNA – DNA contacts . In the special case of Hi - C sequencing data ( 11 ) the current standard for data normalization is provided by Yaffe and Tanay ( 15 ) . Their probabilistic method explicitly accounts for speciﬁc experimental and computa - tional biases affecting contact probabilities between DNA segments , speciﬁcally GC content , length and computa - tional mappability . Unspeciﬁc contacts are ﬁltered according to both their probability of occurrence and fre - quency of observation ( Figure 1b and Materials and Methods section , details in Supplementary Materials and Methods , Supplementary Table ST1 and Supplementary Figure S1 ) . Filtering strictness has been chosen to maximize the network’s information content while minimizing the inﬂuence of random contacts ( Supplementary Control Calculations , Supplementary Table T2 and Supplementary Figure S2 ) . The ﬁltered contact list is then converted into a DNA SCN , consisting of 44 720 edges ( contacts ) between 4454 nodes ( DNA segments ) ( Figure 1c ) . Inter - chromosomal SCNs are deﬁned by their connectivity and clustering behaviour To distinguish contacts in SCNs that have arisen by chance from biologically signiﬁcant associations it is ne - cessary to design a robust null - model that can be used in unbiased statistical comparisons . To this end it is Figure 2 . Colocalization assessment in DNA – DNA contact networks . ( a ) Colocalization assessment using our randomization approach , in direct comparison to the resampling approach ( Supplementary Materials and Methods ) . Green nodes are the nodes investigated for colocalization . Rectangular nodes correspond to the nodes investigated in each of the random null - models . ( b ) Colocalization assessment tests for 250 random sets of 100 nodes in each of 50 artiﬁcial SCNs ( Materials and Methods section ) . Grey ( background ) : rewired random networks ( no correction of clustering ) , excess of low P - values ( arrow ) . Green ( foreground ) : randomization approach . ( c , d ) Boxplots of node degrees in the above - mentioned sets binned by colocalization P - value for the resampling approach ( light - grey ) and the randomization approach ( green ) , respectively . P - values obtained by Wilcoxon rank - sum test . Outliers have been omitted for clarity . ( e ) Boxplots showing that the degree of nodes in the SCN is dependent on the corresponding segment - lengths . Segments have been binned according to their degree into four categories , where 0 is unconnected , while low , med and high are formed by the ﬁrst , second + third and fourth quartile of nodes , respectively . P - value calculated using the Wilcoxon rank - sum test ( f ) Schematic of colocalized nodes with low versus high degrees . 704 Nucleic Acids Research , 2013 , Vol . 41 , No . 2 important to understand the inherent structure of the original network . In other words , what are the topological properties that describe and deﬁne the yeast inter - chromosomal SCN ? The connectivity ( degree ) of nodes in the network ranges from unconnected to several hundred contacts , as evident from the network’s degree distribution ( Figure 1f ) . The centromeric regions in yeast remain clustered during interphase . DNA segments that lie within this crowded environment have a higher likelihood of making contacts and , consequently , tend to be among the segments with the highest degree . Perhaps the most important characteristic of DNA – DNA contact networks is their inherently strong cluster - ing behaviour . Edges in SCNs describe dynamic spatial relationships , which we expect to see reﬂected in the general structure of the network . As an example consider three DNA segments X , Y and Z . If X is spatially close to both Y and Z it is very likely that Y and Z are also in close proximity . The corresponding nodes in the SCN form a triangle ( schematic in Figure 1g ) . The increased likelihood of contacts in the centromeric regions discussed above also leads to a higher occurrence of triangles in that region of space . Consequently , the average clustering co - efﬁcient increases for segments with a high degree in the yeast SCN ( Figure 1g and Materials and Methods section ) . The same 3D relationship holds for DNA segments that do not share an edge between them in the SCN , but lie within a short linear distance of each other on the same chromosome . Therefore , in ‘mixed triangles’ , where two of the participating DNA segments are ‘chromosomal neighbours’ ( schematic in Figure 1h ) , we can observe the same clustering trend ( Figure 1h and Materials and Methods section ) . Custom randomization procedure for DNA – DNA contact networks maintains important 3D network properties Working with the right null - model is crucial for making biologically relevant interpretations of large amounts of data . A tried and tested approach to obtain a suitable null - model for statistical comparisons is that of network randomization , in which contacts between DNA segments are randomly reassigned ( 36 ) . The challenge for this type of approach lies in reproducing the original network’s properties in the random network to avoid the introduc - tion of artiﬁcial biases ( 24 , 37 , 38 ) . Using the knowledge on topological properties of the yeast SCN gained in the previous section , we can design a null - model network that reproduces the original network’s wide range of segment connectivities and inherently strong clustering behaviour . The most common randomization method , often called rewiring , is insufﬁcient for DNA – DNA contact networks , as it disrupts the network’s global clustering behaviour ( Figure 5 ) . We suggest a tailored randomization approach , which addresses this issue by ﬁrst rewiring contacts in the network ( Step 1 ) , and then , unlike previous approaches , performing add - itional steps to correct the random network’s long - range clustering behaviour ( Step 2 ) and [ optionally ] increase the network’s short - range clustering behaviour ( including chromosomal neighbours ; Step 3 ) . This ensures well - shufﬂed random networks , which maintain both the degree distribution and the clustering behaviour of the original network ( Figure 5 and Supplementary Materials and Methods ) . Randomized SCNs can be used to assess DNA segment colocalization We focus on one particular application for the generated null - model networks : the assessment of colocalization between genomic loci . In other words , which genomic features display a contact enrichment in the 3D genome ? Currently , there are three main approaches used to assess contact enrichment : the Hi - C background model ( 15 ) , comparing observed contacts to expected contacts , the resampling approach ( 12 , 29 ) , comparing observed contact counts to contacts in randomly selected regions , and the hypergeometric test ( 11 , 39 ) , based on contingency tables of genomic contacts . The latter could previously shown to be heavily biased towards low P - values ( 29 ) . Here , we dem - onstrate that our randomization approach is well - suited for assessing the colocalization between genomic regions and can provide substantial advantages over the previously existing approaches ( see Table 1 for summary ) . Figure 2a shows a comparison of our randomization approach to the resampling approach . In both methods , contact counts among DNA segments of interest are compared to contact counts in corresponding null - models . The approaches differ primarily in the choice of this null - model : the resampling approach maintains the original network’s structure and contacts , but randomly selects a new set of segments from the network ( re - labelling ) ; the randomization approach keeps the segment set of interest identical , but shufﬂes the network contacts according to the above - described procedure . In each case , we can obtain a global measure of colocalization , here called the segment - proximity index ( SPI ) , and a corresponding P - value from the comparison of observed to random contacts ( Supplementary Materials and Methods ) . To conﬁrm the validity of the colocalization assessment using our randomization approach , we tested it on a large number of random segment sets in several artiﬁcially created contact networks [ Materials and Methods section , as previously described ( 29 ) ] . If the approach is valid , the distribution of P - values obtained from assessing colocalization on these artiﬁcial networks must be uniform . If the original network is merely rewired , we can observe a clear over - representation of low P - values on the random data ( Figure 2b , background histogram ) , demonstrating the importance of clustering in the network . In random networks that maintain the clustering behaviour of the original , this effect disappears ( Figure 2b , foreground histogram ) . The slight skew in the distribution towards high P - values is an effect of sample size , which can also be observed in the resampling approach ( Supplementary Control Calculations , Supplementary Figure S3 ) . A more exhaustive evaluation of the effects of network size and sample size on the uniformity of P - values can be found in the Supplementary Control Calculations and Supplementary Figure S4 . Nucleic Acids Research , 2013 , Vol . 41 , No . 2 705 The colocalization results on artiﬁcial networks and random segments in real - world yeast Hi - C data are in very good agreement with the enrichment test of Yaffe and Tanay ( 15 ) , demonstrating that our method is consistent with the contact enrichment in the Hi - C back - ground model . It can reproduce results from experimental approach - speciﬁc analyses , while additionally providing P - values for the assessment of statistical signiﬁcance ( Supplementary Control Calculations and Supplementary Figures S5 and S6 ) . We also ensured inde - pendently that the approach using random networks accurately reﬂects colocalization of DNA segments . For each node in the artiﬁcial contact networks we selected its 100 closest neighbours in space and performed a colocalization assessment between them . All resulting P - values were very low ( P < 10 (cid:3) 3 ) . The randomization - based colocalization assessment is not biased by node degree We have shown that the colocalization assessment using random networks produces uniform P - values , but why is it more accurate than the existing resampling approach ? Since the resampling approach does not explicitly take into account the network’s degree sequence when assess - ing colocalization , it will , on average , favour sets of nodes with high degrees . We demonstrate this effect by assessing the colocalization of a large number of random DNA segment sets in the yeast genome , and plotting the degrees of segments in each set in dependence of the re - sulting colocalization P - value ( Figure 2c , and Materials and Methods section ) . The random networks generated according to our protocol preserve the original network’s degree distribution . In addition , the randomization approach never changes the set of investigated nodes in the entire process ( Figure 2a ) . Consequently , it does not suffer from the same degree bias ( Figure 2d ) . Why is this degree bias problematic ? While the prob - abilistic normalization approach developed by Yaffe and Tanay ( 15 ) removes individual unspeciﬁc contacts on a pairwise basis , the total number of contacts ( degree ) made by a particular DNA segment can still be affected by these biases . For example , a long DNA segment can potentially occupy a larger nuclear volume , and thus make more contacts than a short one ( shown in Figure 2e ) . Stricter contact ﬁltering cannot abolish this effect . To avoid these biases , the network’s degree sequence has to be explicitly taken into account when testing for contact enrichment between DNA segments . In addition , we argue that degree - compensating approach is more likely to be able to discover interpretable patterns of contacts among colocalized nodes , since it is difﬁcult to assign meaning to DNA segments with highly promiscuous contacts ( example in Figure 2f ) . In yeast , this is especially crucial , since the degree of DNA segments in the centromeric region outweighs degrees of segments elsewhere in the genome . Meiotic CO site association and conﬁrmation of previous colocalization results We applied the randomization approach to various genome - wide datasets , investigating colocalization between genomic features of interest . First we veriﬁed results from previous analyses ( 11 , 29 ) by conﬁrming tRNA clustering and colocalization of early ﬁring replica - tion origins in S . cerevisiae ( Supplementary Control Calculations and Supplementary Figures S7 and S8 ) . We then mapped a genome - wide , high - resolution dataset of meiotic recombination hotspots ( 26 ) onto the yeast SCN to study the relationship between meiotic COs and 3D genome architecture . The data , which were obtained by studying the products of 56 yeast meiosis using a dense set of genetic markers , provides information on the loca - tions of 136 meiotic recombination hotspots , 72 of which are enriched in COs , and 49 of which are enriched in NCO type recombination . We are unable to detect a signiﬁcant colocalization between meiotic recombination sites , but show that the subset of CO sites is enriched in 3D contacts in the yeast nucleus ( Figure 3a , randomization approach , SPI 1 . 48 , respectively , P = 0 . 098 ) . GCNs can resolve colocalization biases of gene subsets Using the randomization approach , we ﬁnd that ORFs in the yeast genome are signiﬁcantly colocalized ( SPI = 4 . 171 , P < 10 (cid:3) 3 , Figure 3b ) . In a network context this means that the randomized networks on average display fewer contacts among genes than the original network . This inherent colocalization of the full set of genes will bias colocalization assessments of gene subsets in the same direction . The extent of this bias is visible when we select random gene subsets in the yeast SCN and plot a histogram of their colocalization P - values ( Figure 3c ) . So how can we separate the effect of a global gene colocalization from the colocalization of gene Table 1 . Comparison of approaches for colocalization assessment in DNA – DNA contact data Feature / Property Kruse et al . ( randomization approach ) Yaffe and Tanay ( Hi - C background model ) Witten and Noble ( resampling approach ) Dai et al . ( hypergeometric test ) Quantiﬁcation of colocalization 3 3 3 c Uniform P - values on random data 3 NA 3 7 Unaffected by experimental biases 3 3 7 7 Experimental approach independent 3 7 3 7 Widely applicable to other questions 3 7 7 7 Circle in the Dai et al . column signiﬁes that colocalization is indirectly quantiﬁed by the P - value . ‘NA’ in the Yaffe and Tanay column signiﬁes that the method does not produce P - values . 706 Nucleic Acids Research , 2013 , Vol . 41 , No . 2 subsets ? A ﬂexible solution is to break down individual DNA segments into their constituent nodes , rather than restricting the contact partners of individual DNA segments . The genes then form the nodes of the new network , which each inherit the connections to genes their parent segments make ( Materials and Methods section , Figure 3d ) . In this manner , we can convert the original SCN to a GCN . Upon randomization the net - work’s degree sequence , and with it the number of gene – gene contacts , will be preserved . The corresponding distri - bution of P - values of random gene subsets is now much more uniform ( Figure 3e ) ; we do not expect a completely uniform distribution , as we performed the calculations on the real - world yeast GCN . We also ensured that the GCN conversion still produces valid P - values in artiﬁcial networks ( Supplementary Control Calculations and Supplementary Figure S3 ) . An analogous network conver - sion will have to be performed when analysing subsets of data that display a similar ( or inverse ) dependency as the set of genes . Genes bound by the cohesin subunit IRR1p are signiﬁcantly colocalized We apply the colocalization assessment using randomized yeast GCNs to a real - world example : can we identify colocalized sets of genes that are bound by a particular transcription or chromatin regulator ? We exploit a large - scale dataset which documents the DNA binding of over 200 gene or chromatin regulatory proteins in yeast ( 27 ) to study the colocalization of each protein’s target genes . Analyses and permutation - based multiple testing corrections were performed separately for each dataset , which correspond to the approximate binding site of the protein , UAS , TSS and ORF ( Figure 4a and Materials and Methods section ) . The results of the ORF and TSS datasets show only one protein with signiﬁcantly colocalized target genes after P - value adjustment ( Figure 4b ) : IRR1p ( ORF : SPI = 29 . 23 , P < 10 (cid:3) 3 ; TSS : SPI = 10 . 38 , P < 10 (cid:3) 3 ) . Contacts between IRR1p - bound genes in the UAS dataset are enriched , but not signiﬁcantly ( SPI = 3 . 55 , P = 0 . 116 ) . IRR1p is a subunit of the yeast cohesin complex ( the only cohesin subunit examined in the dataset ) , known to be involved in mediating sister chro - matid cohesion during cell division , but also implicated in DNA repair and gene regulation . Full colocalization results for all chromatin regulatory proteins can be found in the Supplementary Datasets 1 – 3 , a description of the ﬁle structure can be found in the Supplementary Control Calculations . Figure 3 . Colocalization assessment results of randomization approach in the yeast SCN and GCN . ( a ) Meiotic recombination hotspot contact enrichment . Figure shows the distribution of contact counts in the randomized networks in comparison to the contact count between recom - bination hotspots in the original network ( violin plot = combined density - and boxplot ) , measured by the SPI . ( b ) ORF colocalization ( c , e ) P - value distribution from the colocalization assessment of 1000 gene subsets of 250 genes each . ( c ) Yeast SCN . Skew towards low P - values is clearly visible . ( d ) Schematic showing the SCN to GCN ( gene contact network ) conver - sion ( e ) Yeast GCN . Skew towards low P - values is no longer visible . Figure 4 . Cohesin subunit IRR1p colocalization ( a ) Cohesin binding sites at the UAS overlaid on a 3D representation of the budding yeast genome ( 11 ) . ( b , c ) Violinplots of SPIs for IRR1p - bound genes in random networks . SPI of original contact count indicated by rectangle and horizontal line . One plot for each of the three datasets ( ORF , TSS and UAS ) . ( b ) SPIs of full dataset—note the broken axis between SPI 10 and 25 . ( c ) SPIs of centromere - distal IRR1p - bound genes . Nucleic Acids Research , 2013 , Vol . 41 , No . 2 707 Since cohesin is known to display enriched binding in centromeric regions ( 40 , 41 ) , we investigated if the observed colocalization can be explained entirely by the known centromeric clustering in yeast . For each dataset , we split the cohesin binding sites on each chromosome into two groups of comparable size : centromere - proximal ( within 100 kb from the centromere ) and centromere - distal ( example for UAS in Figure 4a ) . As expected , the SPI of centromere - proximal genes increases for the TSS and ORF datasets . Interestingly , the SPI of centromere - proximal IRR1p - bound genes in the UAS dataset is also strongly increased ( SPI = 10 . 908 , P < 10 (cid:3) 3 ) . In the centromere - distal groups genes no longer display colocalization in the ORF and TSS datasets ( Figure 4c , ORF : SPI = 0 . 825 , P = 1 . 0 ; TSS : SPI = 3 . 021 , P = 0 . 218 ) . In contrast , the centromere - distal group of IRR1p - bound genes in the UAS dataset now displays signiﬁcant colocalization ( UAS : SPI = 7 . 024 , P < 10 (cid:3) 3 ) . A possible explanation for this observation is that target genes of IRR1p , which are bound at the UAS , are not globally colocalized , but form two or more relatively independent clusters of colocalized genes . The above results have been obtained by only per - forming Steps 1 and 2 in the randomization procedure ( Figure 5 ) , Step 3 has no signiﬁcant inﬂuence . DISCUSSION The study of genome - wide DNA – DNA contacts is starting to reveal the close relationship between the DNA’s 3D architecture and diverse biological processes . However , the computational analysis of genome - wide DNA – DNA contact data is still in its early stages . Most of the currently available methods are speciﬁc to the experimental approach , or subject to various experimental and computational biases ( 15 ) . In this work , we presented a unifying , complex network framework for the computa - tional and statistical analysis of DNA – DNA contact data that builds upon the experiment - speciﬁc normalization and ﬁltering procedures , but provides a robust approach for their analysis independent of the experimental method used . The randomization approach we developed expli - citly takes into account the inherent 3D structure of DNA – DNA contact data , allowing rigorous and unbiased statistical enrichment tests . The colocalization assessment using the randomization approach conﬁrmed the global colocalization of genes observed in other organisms ( 11 , 12 , 13 , 15 ) , as well as previous ﬁndings in S . cerevisiae , such as tRNA and rep - lication origin clustering . The latter has been implicated in human cancer based on somatic copy - number alterations ( SCNAs ) , where it was possible to predict a signiﬁcant proportion of SCNAs using long - range DNA – DNA contacts and replication timing data alone ( 42 ) . In similar fashion , we show that meiotic CO sites have a tendency to colocalize genome - wide in the yeast nucleus . While we cannot show a signiﬁcant colocalization , this is consistent with the ﬁnding that genomic areas with a strong ‘intermingling’ of DNA are associated with a higher frequency of double - strand breaks in these regions ( 43 ) . The 3D association of CO sites could there - fore also be associated with SCNAs in cancer , as discussed by Fudenberg et al . ( 44 ) . It has recently been shown that the higher - order genome organization in yeast can be accurately modelled by merely considering the physical tethering of hetero - chromatic regions to nuclear landmarks and volume exclusion as major driving forces of genomic organization ( 45 ) . This random encounter model satisfactorily explains many of the experimental observations made in the 3D S . cerevisiae nuclear architecture . These results suggest that genome organization works largely independently of biochemically mediated DNA – DNA interactions , and that the linear arrangement of DNA features on the chromosomes can serve to position them in 3D space . This notion is in good agreement with results from a previous study which demonstrates that transcription Figure 5 . Unbiased randomization procedure for DNA – DNA contact networks . Our randomization approach for DNA – DNA contact networks aims at maintaining the deﬁning network properties of the original network , thereby creating an appropriate ‘null - model’ for comparison . The toy example illustrates the effects of each randomization step at the network and the DNA level ( in a 2D representation ) . Step 1 : This ‘rewiring’ part of the randomization procedure shufﬂes the contacts between DNA segments by selecting pairs of edges and swapping their targets . While this maintains the exact degrees of every node , the number of triangles is signiﬁcantly reduced , essentially disrupting the strong clustering behaviour . Thus , no compact representation exists for the rewired network . Step 2 : To correct the long - range clustering behaviour , triangles are introduced into the rewired network by an established Markov - chain procedure ( 31 ) , until the transitivity T ( the ratio of observed triangles to possible triangles in the network ) of the random network matches that of the original network T orig . Step 3 : Since the number of ‘mixed triangles’ ( where two of the participating nodes are not connected by an edge , but are neighbours on the same chromosome ) is also decreased in the rewired networks , this step increases the corresponding mixed transitivity T 0 until it matches the original mixed transitivity T 0 orig in the same fashion as Step 2 . Step 3 is optional , especially in colocalization assessment , because it will only have an effect if genes or DNA segments of interest are actually chromosomal neighbours . In Steps 2 and 3 , the overall clustering behaviour is restored , however , individual nodes are allowed to vary in their clustering behaviour . See Supplementary Figure S9 for comparison of rewired and fully randomized networks . 708 Nucleic Acids Research , 2013 , Vol . 41 , No . 2 factor target genes tend to be encoded within the same area on one chromosome , effectively increasing their spatial proximity ( 21 ) . In this context , the results obtained in this analysis on cohesin suggest that it could serve as global organizer that can tether DNA loci in a seemingly directed fashion . Evidence for this can be found in the strong contact en - richment of IRR1p - bound target genes , both at and away from the centromere . This alone is not sufﬁcient to identify cohesin as a cause of the observed colocalization . There is , however , strong evidence on a local scale that cohesin mediates chromatin looping and tethering in dif - ferent organisms ( 46 ) . This is supported by the structure of the cohesin complex itself , which forms a ring that , at least in theory , could entrap up to two strands of DNA simul - taneously ( 47 ) , providing a mechanism of how the tethering could be achieved . It is unclear why we observe differences in colocalization of cohesin - bound genes based on the location of the binding site . A straightforward assumption would be that the role of ORF - and , in part , TSS - bound cohesin lies primarily in mediating centromeric clustering , whereas UAS binding confers a different functionality , such as gene regulation ( 46 ) . It has been suggested , for example , that cohesin mediates both gene - enhancer and boundary - insulator contacts in humans ( 48 ) . In summary , our complex network framework provides a versatile tool for enrichment analyses in DNA – DNA contact networks . With the steady increase in new experi - mental methods that accelerate the acquisition of genome - wide contact datasets in diverse organisms , cell types and conditions , we expect a complex network approach to become a central tool in the elucidation of nuclear architecture and its relationship to diverse biolo - gical processes . SUPPLEMENTARY DATA Supplementary Data are available at NAR Online : Supplementary Tables T1 and T2 , Supplementary Figures 1 – 9 , Supplementary Materials and Methods , Supplementary Control Calculations , Supplementary Datasets 1 – 3 and Supplementary References [ 49 , 50 ] . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The authors thank Charles Ravarani , Sreenivas Chavali , David Wright and Sarah Teichmann for their comments on this work . FUNDING Medical Research Council [ U105185859 ] ; Human Frontier Science Program [ RGY0073 / 2010 to S . S . ] ; LMB International PhD Programme ( to K . K . ) ; LMB , EMBO Young Investigator Programme , Trinity College , ERASysBio + and HFSP [ RGY0073 / 2010 to M . M . B . ] . Funding for open access charge : Medical Research Council [ U105185859 ] . Conﬂict of interest statement . None declared . REFERENCES 1 . Dekker , J . , Rippe , K . , Dekker , M . and Kleckner , N . ( 2002 ) Capturing chromosome conformation . Science , 295 , 1306 – 1311 . 2 . Osborne , C . S . , Ewels , P . A . and Young , A . N . C . ( 2011 ) Meet the neighbours : tools to dissect nuclear structure and function . Brief . Funct . Genom . , 10 , 11 – 17 . 3 . Zhao , Z . , Tavoosidana , G . , Sjo¨linder , M . , Go¨ndo¨r , A . , Mariano , P . , Wang , S . , Kanduri , C . , Lezcano , M . , Sandhu , K . S . , Singh , U . et al . ( 2006 ) Circular chromosome conformation capture ( 4C ) uncovers extensive networks of epigenetically regulated intra - and interchromosomal interactions . Nat . Genet . , 38 , 1341 – 1347 . 4 . Simonis , M . , Klous , P . , Splinter , E . , Moshkin , Y . , Willemsen , R . , de Wit , E . , van Steensel , B . and de Laat , W . ( 2006 ) Nuclear organization of active and inactive chromatin domains uncovered by chromosome conformation capture - on - chip ( 4C ) . Nat . Genet . , 38 , 1348 – 1354 . 5 . Dostie , J . , Richmond , T . A . , Arnaout , R . A . , Selzer , R . R . , Lee , W . L . , Honan , T . A . , Rubio , E . D . , Krumm , A . , Lamb , J . , Nusbaum , C . et al . ( 2006 ) Chromosome Conformation Capture Carbon Copy ( 5C ) : a massively parallel solution for mapping interactions between genomic elements . Genome Res . , 16 , 1299 – 1309 . 6 . Rodley , C . D . M . , Bertels , F . , Jones , B . and O’Sullivan , J . M . ( 2009 ) Global identiﬁcation of yeast chromosome interactions using Genome conformation capture . Fungal Genet . Biol . FG & B , 46 , 879 – 886 . 7 . van Berkum , N . L . , Lieberman - Aiden , E . , Williams , L . , Imakaev , M . , Gnirke , A . , Mirny , L . A . , Dekker , J . and Lander , E . S . ( 2010 ) Hi - C : a method to study the three - dimensional architecture of genomes . J . Vis . Exp . JoVE , 39 , 1 – 7 . 8 . Lieberman - Aiden , E . , van Berkum , N . L . , Williams , L . , Imakaev , M . , Ragoczy , T . , Telling , A . , Amit , I . , Lajoie , B . R . , Sabo , P . J . , Dorschner , M . O . et al . ( 2009 ) Comprehensive mapping of long - range interactions reveals folding principles of the human genome . Science , 326 , 289 – 293 . 9 . Kalhor , R . , Tjong , H . , Jayathilaka , N . , Alber , F . and Chen , L . ( 2012 ) Genome architectures revealed by tethered chromosome conformation capture and population - based modeling . Nat . Biotechnol . , 30 , 90 – 98 . 10 . Splinter , E . , de Wit , E . , Nora , E . P . , Klous , P . , van de Werken , H . J . G . , Zhu , Y . , Kaaij , L . J . T . , van Ijcken , W . , Gribnau , J . , Heard , E . et al . ( 2011 ) The inactive X chromosome adopts a unique three - dimensional conformation that is dependent on Xist RNA . Genes Dev . , 25 , 1371 – 1383 . 11 . Duan , Z . , Andronescu , M . , Schutz , K . , McIlwain , S . , Kim , Y . J . , Lee , C . , Shendure , J . , Fields , S . , Blau , C . A . and Noble , W . S . ( 2010 ) A three - dimensional model of the yeast genome . Nature , 465 , 363 – 367 . 12 . Tanizawa , H . , Iwasaki , O . , Tanaka , A . , Capizzi , J . R . , Wickramasinghe , P . , Lee , M . , Fu , Z . and Noma , K . - I . ( 2010 ) Mapping of long - range associations throughout the ﬁssion yeast genome reveals global genome organization linked to transcriptional regulation . Nucleic Acids Res . , 38 , 8164 – 8177 . 13 . Sexton , T . , Yaffe , E . , Kenigsberg , E . , Bantignies , F . , Leblanc , B . , Hoichman , M . , Parrinello , H . , Tanay , A . and Cavalli , G . ( 2012 ) Three - dimensional folding and functional organization principles of the Drosophila genome . Cell , 148 , 458 – 472 . 14 . Moissiard , G . , Cokus , S . J . , Cary , J . , Feng , S . , Billi , A . C . , Stroud , H . , Husmann , D . , Zhan , Y . , Lajoie , B . R . , McCord , R . P . et al . ( 2012 ) MORC family ATPases required for heterochromatin condensation and gene silencing . Science , 336 , 1448 – 1451 . 15 . Yaffe , E . and Tanay , A . ( 2011 ) Probabilistic modeling of Hi - C contact maps eliminates systematic biases to characterize global chromosomal architecture . Nat . Genet . , 43 , 1059 – 1065 . 16 . Jeong , H . , Tombor , B . , Albert , R . , Oltvai , Z . N . and Baraba´si , A . L . ( 2000 ) The large - scale organization of metabolic networks . Nature , 407 , 651 – 654 . 17 . Shen - Orr , S . S . , Milo , R . , Mangan , S . and Alon , U . ( 2002 ) Network motifs in the transcriptional regulation network of Escherichia coli . Nat . Genet . , 31 , 64 – 68 . 18 . Maslov , S . and Sneppen , K . ( 2002 ) Speciﬁcity and stability in topology of protein networks . Science , 296 , 910 – 913 . 19 . Jothi , R . , Balaji , S . , Wuster , A . , Grochow , J . A . , Gsponer , J . , Przytycka , T . M . , Aravind , L . and Babu , M . M . ( 2009 ) Genomic Nucleic Acids Research , 2013 , Vol . 41 , No . 2 709 analysis reveals a tight link between transcription factor dynamics and regulatory network architecture . Mol . Syst . Biol . , 5 , 294 . 20 . Strogatz , S . H . ( 2001 ) Exploring complex networks . Nature , 410 , 268 – 276 . 21 . Janga , S . C . , Collado - Vides , J . and Babu , M . M . ( 2008 ) Transcriptional regulation constrains the organization of genes on eukaryotic chromosomes . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA , 105 , 15761 – 15766 . 22 . Baraba´si , A . - L . and Oltvai , Z . N . ( 2004 ) Network biology : understanding the cell’s functional organization . Nat . Rev . Genet . , 5 , 101 – 113 . 23 . Milo , R . , Shen - Orr , S . , Itzkovitz , S . , Kashtan , N . , Chklovskii , D . and Alon , U . ( 2002 ) Network motifs : simple building blocks of complex networks . Science , 298 , 824 – 827 . 24 . Itzkovitz , S . , Milo , R . , Kashtan , N . , Ziv , G . and Alon , U . ( 2003 ) Subgraphs in random networks . Phys . Rev . E , 68 , 1 – 8 . 25 . Itzkovitz , S . and Alon , U . ( 2005 ) Subgraphs and network motifs in geometric networks . Phys . Rev . E , 71 , 1 – 9 . 26 . Mancera , E . , Bourgon , R . , Brozzi , A . , Huber , W . and Steinmetz , L . M . ( 2008 ) High - resolution mapping of meiotic crossovers and non - crossovers in yeast . Nature , 454 , 479 – 485 . 27 . Venters , B . J . , Wachi , S . , Mavrich , T . N . , Andersen , B . E . , Jena , P . , Sinnamon , A . J . , Jain , P . , Rolleri , N . S . , Jiang , C . , Hemeryck - Walsh , C . et al . ( 2011 ) A comprehensive genomic binding map of gene and chromatin regulatory proteins in Saccharomyces . Mol . Cell , 41 , 480 – 492 . 28 . Cherry , J . M . , Hong , E . L . , Amundsen , C . , Balakrishnan , R . , Binkley , G . , Chan , E . T . , Christie , K . R . , Costanzo , M . C . , Dwight , S . S . , Engel , S . R . et al . ( 2012 ) Saccharomyces Genome Database : the genomics resource of budding yeast . Nucleic Acids Res . , 40 , D700 – D705 . 29 . Witten , D . M . and Noble , W . S . ( 2012 ) On the assessment of statistical signiﬁcance of three - dimensional colocalization of sets of genomic elements . Nucleic Acids Res . , 1 – 7 . 30 . Soffer , S . and Va´zquez , A . ( 2005 ) Network clustering coefﬁcient without degree - correlation biases . Phys . Rev . E , 71 , 2 – 5 . 31 . Bansal , S . , Khandelwal , S . and Meyers , L . A . ( 2009 ) Exploring biological network structure with clustered random networks . BMC Bioinform . , 10 , 405 . 32 . Westfall , P . H . and Young , S . S . ( 1993 ) Resampling - Based Multiple Testing . John Wiley & Sons Hoboken , NJ 07030 - 5774 , United States of America . 33 . Kendziorski , C . and Wang , P . ( 2006 ) A review of statistical methods for expression quantitative trait loci mapping . Mamm . Genome : Off . J . Int . Mamm . Genome Soc . , 17 , 509 – 517 . 34 . Botta , M . , Haider , S . , Leung , I . X . Y . , Lio , P . and Mozziconacci , J . ( 2010 ) Intra - and inter - chromosomal interactions correlate with CTCF binding genome wide . Mol . Syst . Biol . , 6 , 426 . 35 . Rajapakse , I . , Scalzo , D . , Tapscott , S . J . , Kosak , S . T . and Groudine , M . ( 2010 ) Networking the nucleus . Mol . Syst . Biol . , 6 , 395 . 36 . Erdo¨s , P . and Renyi , A . ( 1959 ) On random graphs . 290 – 297 . 37 . Artzy - Randrup , Y . and Stone , L . ( 2005 ) Generating uniformly distributed random networks . Phys . Rev . E , 72 , 1 – 7 . 38 . Basler , G . , Ebenho¨h , O . , Selbig , J . and Nikoloski , Z . ( 2011 ) Mass - balanced randomization of metabolic networks . Bioinformatics ( Oxford , England ) , 27 , 1397 – 1403 . 39 . Dai , Z . and Dai , X . ( 2012 ) Nuclear colocalization of transcription factor target genes strengthens coregulation in yeast . Nucleic Acids Res . , 40 , 27 – 36 . 40 . Tanaka , T . , Cosma , M . P . , Wirth , K . and Nasmyth , K . ( 1999 ) Identiﬁcation of cohesin association sites at centromeres and along chromosome arms . Cell , 98 , 847 – 858 . 41 . Blat , Y . and Kleckner , N . ( 1999 ) Cohesins bind to preferential sites along yeast chromosome III , with differential regulation along arms versus the centric region . Cell , 98 , 249 – 259 . 42 . De , S . and Michor , F . ( 2011 ) DNA replication timing and long - range DNA interactions predict mutational landscapes of cancer genomes . Nat . Biotechnol . , 29 , 1103 – 1108 . 43 . Branco , M . R . and Pombo , A . ( 2006 ) Intermingling of chromosome territories in interphase suggests role in translocations and transcription - dependent associations . PLoS Biol . , 4 , e138 . 44 . Fudenberg , G . , Getz , G . , Meyerson , M . and Mirny , L . A . ( 2011 ) High order chromatin architecture shapes the landscape of chromosomal alterations in cancer . Nat . Biotechnol . , 29 , 1109 – 1113 . 45 . Tjong , H . , Gong , K . , Chen , L . and Alber , F . ( 2012 ) Physical tethering and volume exclusion determine higher - order genome organization in budding yeast . Genome Res . , 22 , 1295 – 1305 . 46 . Dorsett , D . and Stro¨m , L . ( 2012 ) The ancient and evolving roles of cohesin in gene expression and DNA repair . Curr . Biol . , 22 , R240 – R250 . 47 . Ocampo - Hafalla , M . T . and Uhlmann , F . ( 2011 ) Cohesin loading and sliding . J . Cell Sci . , 124 , 685 – 691 . 48 . Merkenschlager , M . ( 2010 ) Cohesin : a global player in chromosome biology with local ties to gene regulation . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . , 555 – 561 . 49 . Li , H . , Ruan , J . and Durbin , R . ( 2008 ) Mapping short DNA sequencing reads and calling variants using mapping quality scores . Genome Res . , 18 , 1851 – 1858 . 50 . Yang , S . C . - H . , Rhind , N . and Bechhoefer , J . ( 2010 ) Modeling genome - wide replication kinetics reveals a mechanism for regulation of replication timing . Mol . Syst . Biol . , 6 , 404 . 710 Nucleic Acids Research , 2013 , Vol . 41 , No . 2