a r X i v : 1509 . 00712v1 [ c ond - m a t . s o f t ] 2 S e p 2015 Membrane tension feedback on shape and motility of eukaryotic cells Benjamin Winkler a , Igor S . Aranson b , c , 1 , Falko Ziebert a , 2 a Physikalisches Institut , Albert - Ludwigs - Universit¨at , 79104 Freiburg , Germany b Materials Science Division , Argonne National Laboratory , 9700 S . Cass Avenue , Argonne , IL 60439 , USA c Engineering Sciences and Applied Mathematics , Northwestern University , 2145 Sheridan Road , Evanston , IL 60202 , USA Abstract In the framework of a phase ﬁeld model of a single cell crawling on a substrate , we investigate how the properties of the cell membrane aﬀect the shape and motility of the cell . Since the membrane inﬂuences the cell dynamics on multiple levels and provides a nontrivial feedback , we consider the following fundamental interactions : ( i ) the reduction of the actin polymerization rate by membrane tension ; ( ii ) area conservation of the cell’s two - dimensional cross - section vs . conservation of its circumference ( i . e . membrane inextensi - bility ) ; and ( iii ) the contribution from the membrane’s bending energy to the shape and integrity of the cell . As in experiments , we investigate two pertinent observables – the cell’s velocity and its aspect ratio . We ﬁnd that the most important eﬀect is the feedback of membrane tension on the actin polymerization . Bending rigidity has only minor eﬀects , visible mostly in dynamic reshaping events , as exempliﬁed by collisions of the cell with an obstacle . Keywords : cell motility , non - linear dynamics Email addresses : aronson @ anl . gov ( Igor S . Aranson ) , falko . ziebert @ physik . uni - freiburg . de ( Falko Ziebert ) 1 phone : + 1 630 252 9725 ; fax : + 1 630 252 7777 2 phone : + 49 761 203 97779 ; fax : + 49 761 203 5855 Preprint submitted to Physica D September 3 , 2015 1 . Introduction Motility of cells crawling on substrates attracts substantial interest among biologists , physicists , and material scientists alike . Cell motility is a fun - damental phenomenon that is crucial for a variety of biological processes , from morphogenesis to immune response . It is also involved in pathologies like cancer growth and metastasis . Like swimming microorganisms , crawling motile cells are natural and interesting realizations of active , self - propelled systems , displaying self - organized dynamics , ﬂows , as well as intriguing col - lective eﬀects . Moreover , motile cells and living tissues are inspiring novel adaptive materials with intricate properties like active visco - elastic response and self - healing . Cellular materials , responding to the topography , elasticity , and surface chemistry of the substrate they are in contact with , currently inspire microstructured design strategies for cell sorting and guiding . The main processes involved in the motion of eukaryotic cells ( such as keratocytes , ﬁbroblasts or neutrophils ) are the following : the generation of a propulsive force by actin polymerization against the cell’s membrane , the formation of adhesive contact to the substrate to transfer this propulsion force and to move forward , and ﬁnally , the action of molecular motors in determining the cell’s polarity and to retract the rear of the cell [ 1 ] . All these processes have been modeled in some detail , and models for whole moving cells have been recently developed [ 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 ] . However , there is another important player in the game , that has been neglected ( or its consequences not yet thoroughly studied ) in most of the modeling approaches : namely , the membrane enclosing the cell . The cell membrane represents a movable interface which constitutes an intricate theoretical and numerical problem . In addition , membrane tension leads to a global force feedback , aﬀecting the propulsion by ratcheting the actin ﬁlaments . Moreover , membrane bending rigidity may be relevant in some cases , especially for cell collisions with other cells or obstacles . The ﬁrst detailed experimental study on the eﬀects of membrane ten - sion on spreading cells ( ﬁbroblasts ) dates back no longer than in 2000 [ 7 ] . There , an inverse relation between spreading / lamellipodium extension and membrane tension was found : lowering the membrane tension by adding detergents ( deoxycholic acid ) or lipids led to an increased spreading and ex - tension , while an increase in tension by placing cells in a hypotonic medium reduced both eﬀects . The authors concluded that membrane tension may constitute a global coupling involved in determining both the cell’s shape 2 and the propulsion dynamics , cf . also the recent reviews [ 8 , 9 ] . The eﬀect of membrane tension was studied also for neutrophils , both during pseudopod formation and for fully developed motion [ 10 ] , for spreading ﬁbroblasts [ 11 ] , as well as for moving keratocytes [ 12 ] . Some of the observed eﬀects include : ( i ) increased membrane tension can cause leukocytes to stop moving [ 10 ] ; ( ii ) reducing tension can stimulate moving keratocytes to develop several fronts [ 12 ] ; ( iii ) softening the cell membrane does not aﬀect the velocity of kerato - cytes [ 12 , 13 ] , it only increases the retrograde ﬂow of actin towards the cell’s interior . Membrane tension has been recently taken into account , for instance , in the one - dimensional model for growth cones [ 14 ] , as well as the steady state . The force balance - based model in [ 15 ] includes also explicit adhesion dy - namics between the actin cortex and the membrane . Very recently , tension gradients and ﬂows inside the membrane were addressed [ 16 , 17 ] . However , these models do not take shape changes into account , obviously an impor - tant aspect of the membrane’s feedback . As a result , they can not properly describe the onset / cessation of motion . These two important aspects can be easily and inherently modeled within the phase ﬁeld approach recently developed for motile cells [ 4 , 5 , 18 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 , 23 ] , self - propelled active droplets [ 24 , 25 , 26 ] and synthetic polymeric capsules [ 27 ] . Here we include and study the most pertinent membrane eﬀects – tension and its feedback on polymerization , as well as bending . The study is performed within a simple phase ﬁeld approach for a moving cell . 2 . Phase ﬁeld model for a crawling cell The phase ﬁeld approach to cell motility has been recently reviewed in [ 28 ] . Instead of modeling the cell’s interface ( i . e . the membrane ) explicitly , an auxiliary ﬁeld , the phase ﬁeld ρ ( x , y ; t ) , is introduced . It evaluates to ρ = 1 within the cell and to ρ = 0 outside the cell , with a smooth transition region in between describing the ‘smeared’ interface . The simplest implementation of the phase ﬁeld approach is via a scalar order parameter equation ∂ t ρ = − δF P δρ , where F p = Z (cid:2) f ( ρ ) + D ρ ( ∇ ρ ) 2 (cid:3) dx dy . ( 1 ) Here f ( ρ ) = ρ 2 ( 1 − ρ ) 2 4 is a double well potential with minima at ρ = 0 and ρ = 1 ( the two ‘phases’ ) . The phase ﬁeld free energy F p in addition includes 3 a surface energy term penalizing interfaces . Equation ( 1 ) yields ∂ t ρ = D ρ ∆ ρ − ρ ( 1 − ρ ) ( δ − ρ ) = : λ , ( 2 ) where δ = 12 is the ‘pressure diﬀerence’ between the two ‘phases’ . For δ = 12 the free energy of both phases is equal , and hence a planar interface con - necting states ρ = 0 and ρ = 1 is stationary . In case δ deviates from this value , the interface moves either forward or backward , i . e . the cell expands or retracts . We used this simple framework to model a moving cell [ 5 ] by coupling the phase ﬁeld Eq . ( 2 ) to the polarization ﬁeld p , describing the averaged local orientation of the actin ﬁlaments inside the cell : ∂ t ρ = D ρ ∆ ρ − ρ ( 1 − ρ ) ( δ − σ | p | 2 − ρ ) − α p · ∇ ρ , ( 3 ) ∂ t p = D p ∆ p − β ∇ ρ − τ − 1 1 p − τ − 1 2 ( 1 − ρ 2 ) p − γ [ ( ∇ ρ ) · p ] p . ( 4 ) In this description , the α - term models the propulsion of the cell’s interface by the ratcheting of actin , and the σ - term accounts for acto - myosin contrac - tion . In Eq . ( 4 ) , the terms D p ∆ p and − τ − 1 1 p describe diﬀusion of actin and its degradation ( depolymerization ) in the bulk of the cell , respectively . The term − β ∇ ρ describes the creation of actin polarization at the cell mem - brane ( directed normal to the interface ) with polymerization rate β . The contribution − τ − 1 2 ( 1 − ρ 2 ) p assures a vanishing polarization outside of the cell ( where ρ = 0 ) . Finally , − γ [ ( ∇ ρ ) · p ] p models the front - rear symmetry breaking induced by motors . For details we refer to [ 5 , 28 ] . Since motile cells are rather thin ( typical lamellipodium thicknesses are 200 nm ) the model is eﬀectively two - dimensional , i . e . height averaged . In addition , keratocyte cells are known to preserve their contact area with the substrate . To describe this conservation of the cell’s contact area , we intro - duced the following global constraint δ = δ V = 1 2 + µ V [ V ( t ) − V 0 ] . ( 5 ) Here µ V is the stiﬀness of the constraint and the term in brackets is the diﬀerence between the current area ( or 2D volume ) V ( t ) = R ρ ( t ) dx dy and the prescribed area V 0 . Note that , to avoid confusion , in the following area always corresponds to the 2D area of the cell’s cross - section ( correspond - ing in a 3D description to the cell’s volume ) , while the membrane refers to 4 the surface , i . e . circumference , of this cross - section ( corresponding in a 3D description to the cell’s surface area ) . The position of the interface – which is identiﬁed with the cell membrane – can be deﬁned in the model by the contour at ρ = 12 . However , this interface is not an appropriate description for a cell membrane : it has neither membrane tension nor bending energy , but rather an ( artiﬁcial ) wall energy ( ∝ p D ρ ) that is related to the Ginzburg - Landau - type free energy of the phase ﬁeld , cf . Eq . ( 2 ) . Even more important in the context of cell motility is the fact that mem - brane tension counteracts the polymerization force of the actin ﬁlaments : polymerization rate and hence the cell’s velocity decrease as a function of the counteracting force , as established theoretically on a single ﬁlament level by the Brownian ratchet model [ 29 , 30 ] . Although studies of single / few actin ﬁlaments polymerizing against a load are very diﬃcult , this eﬀect could also been established experimentally [ 31 , 32 , 33 ] . The membrane tension feedback on actin polymerization possibly not only leads to a change in the overall ve - locity of the cell , but also to a global feedback on the actin organization and a change in the overall shape of the cell . 3 . Membrane tension as a counteracting force to polymerization We will ﬁrst focus on the eﬀect of membrane tension on actin polymer - ization within the whole cell model described in the last section . To this eﬀect , we remove the – artiﬁcial – wall energy of the phase ﬁeld , and add the restoring force of the membrane counteracting polymerization . For simplic - ity , we keep the simple volume conservation and ignore at ﬁrst the eﬀect of tension on the phase ﬁeld , a limit corresponding to a strongly adhering cell that keeps its contact area constant . The eﬀect of tension on the phase ﬁeld is added and studied in the next section . The wall energy of the phase ﬁeld potential can be removed – to leading order in the interface width – via addition of the following term to the phase ﬁeld equation [ 34 , 35 ] : ∂ t ρ = . . . + D ρ c | ∇ ρ | , where c = c ( x , y ) is the curvature of the interface . The latter can be calculated from the local normal unit vector , which is determined by the phase ﬁeld like n ( x , y ) = ∇ ρ | ∇ ρ | , via the geometric identity c = −∇ · n . Note that with the given deﬁnition , the normal vector points to the inside of the cell . Second , we introduce the membrane tension ζ ( x , y ) . In the Helfrich pic - 5 ture , the membrane energy reads [ 35 ] E mb = Z ζ | ∇ ρ | dx dy + b 2 Z c 2 | ∇ ρ | dx dy . ( 6 ) The ﬁrst term implements the surface area constraint ( circumference in 2D ) , where ζ is the membrane tension , i . e . the Lagrangian multiplier associated with the constraint . The second contribution is the bending energy with the curvature c already introduced above and b the corresponding bending modulus . The restoring force resulting from this energy has been calculated in [ 36 ] and reads F mb = (cid:20) ζc n − b (cid:26) c 3 2 + t · ∇ ( t · ∇ c ) (cid:27) n + ( t · ∇ ζ ) t (cid:21) | ∇ ρ | . ( 7 ) Herein , the ﬁrst term is the eﬀect of the tension , the second one the contribu - tion from bending and the last one arises from possible variations in tension along the membrane ( similar to the Marangoni eﬀect in thermal convection [ 37 ] ) . Since the polymerization is normal to the membrane , we use only the normal contribution F = n · F mb . In addition , one can estimate that the contribution to the restoring force from bending ( ∝ b ) is negligible , see Appendix A . Hence we simply obtain that at the membrane ( where | ∇ ρ | is non - vanishing ) the restoring force in normal direction is given by F = ζc : the force counteracting polymerization is proportional to the tension and the local curvature . The simplest way to determine the value of the tension ζ is to assume that it is related to the overall relative excess circumference of the membrane ( in 3D : surface area ) via 3 ζ = T δA = T A ( t ) − A 0 A 0 , where A ( t ) = Z | ∇ ρ | ( t ) dx dy . ( 8 ) Here T is the membrane’s compressibility modulus and A 0 is the cell’s cir - cumference in a reference state . For the latter we chose the stationary , round , non - moving state , as it has the smallest circumference . 3 Since ∇ ρ is nonzero only at the interface , R | ∇ ρ | ( t ) dx dy is ( proportional to ) the cell’s circumference . 6 Finally , we have to account for the feedback the membrane tension pro - vides on the actin polymerization dynamics . In the simple model , the term − β ∇ ρ in the equation for p described that at the position of the membrane ( where ∇ ρ is nonzero ) , actin is created with constant rate β in the normal direction 4 . Here , we make use of the ratchet - like process of actin polymeriz - ing against the membrane , where it had been shown that the polymerization rate β decreases exponentially ( in the simplest case ) with the force β ( F ) = β exp (cid:18) − aF k B T (cid:19) = βe − f 0 ζc , ( 9 ) where k B T is the thermal energy and a is the size of the actin monomer [ 29 , 30 ] , which can be absorbed in the constant f 0 . Note that the parameter β associated with actin polymerization is not the free polymerization rate 5 , but the rate reduced by the oﬀset tension present in the reference state , cf . Eq . ( 8 ) . Correspondingly , the propulsion strength , α p , decreases too upon an increase in membrane tension , which is due to the smaller amount of overall actin polarization p . The generalized model then reads ∂ t ρ = D ρ ∆ ρ − ρ ( 1 − ρ ) ( δ − σ | p | 2 − ρ ) + D ρ c | ∇ ρ | − α p · ∇ ρ , ( 10 ) ∂ t p = D p ∆ p − βe − f 0 ζc ∇ ρ − τ − 1 1 p − τ − 1 2 ( 1 − ρ 2 ) p − γ [ ( ∇ ρ ) · p ] p , ( 11 ) with δ given by Eq . ( 5 ) and c = −∇ · n = −∇ · (cid:16) ∇ ρ | ∇ ρ | (cid:17) the curvature as described above . For numerical reasons , the normal vector and the curvature can only be calculated in a ‘tube’ around the interface ( using a threshold value for ∇ ρ ) . Upon multiplication with | ∇ ρ | the respective terms nevertheless lead to smooth contributions at the interface , where they are needed . Results for steady moving cells . We investigated the behavior of the following quantities that can be easily measured in experiments : the aspect ratio of the cell as a measure for the shape change , the cell’s velocity and its 4 Note that ∇ ρ is negative when measured from inside the cell , hence the ‘ - ’sign . 5 Since β is not the free polymerization rate , for negative curvature ( locally concave shape ) there could be a slight acceleration of actin polymerization until the free polymer - ization rate is reached . We neglect this eﬀect here , since it is small and stationary cell shapes are almost exclusively convex , by considering only c > 0 in the exponential . In the wall energy correction term , however , both curvature signs have to be considered . 7 0 50 100 150 200 T 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 h - 1 0 50 100 150 200 T 1 1 . 1 1 . 2 V 0 50 100 150 200 T 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 δΑ 0 50 100 150 200 T 0 10 20 30 ζ a ) b ) c ) d ) Figure 1 : The aspect ratio’s deviation from round shape , h − 1 ( a ) , the center of mass velocity V com ( b ) , the relative excess circumference δA ( c ) , and the membrane tension ζ = T δA ( d ) , for a keratocyte - like cell ( black curves ; α = 2 , β = 2 , σ = 1 . 2 , γ = 0 ) , and for a ﬁbroblast - like cell ( red curves ; α = 3 , β = 1 . 5 , σ = 0 . 9 , γ = 0 . 3 ) vs membrane compressibility constant T . Remark : the volume is conserved by better then 1 % in both cases . relative excess circumference . Note that the latter is not directly restricted via the phase ﬁeld – only the volume is conserved – but only indirectly via the feedback provided on the polymerization rate . The aspect ratio has been characterized as previously [ 5 ] , by determining the ratio h of the eigenvalues of the variance matrix I ij = R ( x i − x c i ) ( x j − x c j ) ρ dx dy , where r c = R r ρ dx dy is the center of mass of the cell . Since a round cell has h = 1 , we treat h − 1 as a measure for the deviation from a circle . Figure 1 displays a ) the aspect ratio’s deviation from the round shape , h − 1 , b ) the center of mass velocity V com , c ) the relative excess circumfer - ence δA and d ) the membrane tension ζ , as a function of the membrane’s compressibility modulus T . Shown are results for two diﬀerent cells , one of keratocyte shape ( black curves ) and one of a more fan - like , ﬁbroblast shape ( red curves ) , cf . also ﬁgure 2 . In case of the ﬁrst cell type , the aspect ratio expectedly decreases by increasing T : at the sides the curvature is highest , 8 T = 10 T = 10 a ) b ) T = 200 T = 200 Figure 2 : The shapes for a ) a keratocyte - like cell ( α = 2 , β = 2 , σ = 1 . 2 , γ = 0 ) and b ) a ﬁbroblast - like cell ( α = 3 , β = 1 . 5 , σ = 0 . 9 , γ = 0 . 3 ) for small ( T = 10 ) and large ( T = 200 ) membrane’s compressibility modulus , cf . also the curves in Fig . 1 . and hence the restoring force leads to a more rounded shape . In contrast , for the second cell type , the aspect ratio increases . This is due to the fan - like , triangular shape of the cell , where membrane tension not only reduces the extension normal to the direction of motion , but also in direction of mo - tion . The velocity is not substantially aﬀected ( in the 10 − 20 % range ) , in accordance with experiments [ 13 , 12 ] . The relative excess surface decreases in both cases , cf . Fig . 1c ) , which shows that in the limit of high T , the surface ( circumference in 2D ) should become rather well conserved , even without explicit inclusion into the phase ﬁeld equation . Although the relative excess surface decreases , the overall tension ζ = T δA increases , cf . Fig . 1d ) , as it should . Experimentally , also the membrane tension is accessible by pulling membrane tethers from moving cells , as has been recently studied in [ 12 ] . Figure 2 shows the respective shape changes , comparing low and high membrane extensibility moduli ( end hence tension values ) for the two kinds of cells . Arrest of cell motion by increased tension . Next we have stud - 9 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 T - 0 . 2 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 V h - 1 T = 20 T = 260 Figure 3 : Evolution of the aspect ratio’s deviation from round shape , h − 1 , and center of mass velocity V com for mildly driven cells ( parameters : α = 1 . 3 , β = 1 . 3 , σ = 1 . 4 , γ = 0 ) . The tension modulus T was increased step by step and the velocity and aspect ratio measured after the cell had equilibrated to its steady state . At a certain critical value T c the cell stops . The snapshots at the left and right show the cell’s shapes for small ( negligible ) tension and for the highest tension value where the cell still is able to move . ied whether the onset / cessation of motion is aﬀected by membrane tension . Mildly driven cells ( i . e . cells with not too large values of the propulsion pa - rameter α , as well as σ and γ ) can indeed be stopped by increasing the compresibility modulus T and hence the tension . This eﬀect has been seen in several experiments , e . g . in [ 10 ] for leukocytes , and is captured by our model as shown in Fig . 3 . Interestingly , while without membrane tension both velocity and aspect ratio exhibit a jump at the arrest of motion , cf . [ 5 ] , with tension present the aspect ratio decreases continuously and the cell be - comes even slightly stretched in the direction of motion , before ﬁnally being stopped for even higher tension . The reason is that the propulsion is pre - dominantly due to the front - rear asymmetry . Increasing T strongly aﬀects the sides ( i . e . the aspect ratio decreases ) , but the feedback on polymerization is small at the front ( and typically also at the rear ) since curvature is small there . Consequently , the jump in the velocity is decoupled from the jump in the aspect ratio , due to tension 6 . Experiments indicated a direct relation between membrane tension and 6 Note that the study in Ref . [ 5 ] indicated that there is not a simple relation between the aspect ratio and the center of mass velocity , e . g . when varying the cell’s contact area ( volume in 3D ) ; here the same is true even for ﬁxed contact area , but for diﬀerent values of tension . Hence again , the aspect ratio is not necessarily related in a simple way to the cell’s velocity . 10 the actin pushing force : reducing the latter results in a decrease in membrane tension , as found by treating keratocytes with blebbistatin and jasplakinoli - dine , leading to a rapid cessation of the actin assembly [ 12 ] . Ref . [ 10 ] found the same , namely that membrane tension increases upon stronger leading - edge protrusion . This relation can be directly inferred from our model : namely , it is the propulsion by actin ∝ α ( and caused by actin polymer - ization ∝ β ) that induces an increase in the excess area δA ( even in the non - motile case ) and hence in tension ζ = T δA / A 0 , cf . Eq . ( 8 ) . Another interesting experiment performed in Ref . [ 12 ] was the fusion of a moving keratocyte with a giant unilammelar vesicle ( GUV ) to increase the available membrane area . The cross - sections of the cells were found to become larger ( i . e . volume entered from the third dimension ) with higher as - pect ratios , while the velocity and tension remained the same . This behavior too is in accordance with our model : after fusing a cell with a GUV , both the contact area V 0 and the circumference A 0 will increase due to spreading . We already studied the behavior of velocity and aspect ratio as a function of the cell’s contact area in [ 5 ] , and found that ( keeping all other parameters ﬁxed ) for not too large cells the aspect ratio increases with area while the velocity remained practically unchanged . Membrane tension will not change this scenario due to the concomitant increase in A 0 ( the restoring force may decrease a little , since it is proportional to curvature , but the leading edge is rather straight anyways ) . In Ref . [ 12 ] it was also observed that an increase in cellular adhesion to the underlying substrate increased the membrane tension . Again , this is consistent with our model since the propulsion force is proportional to the number of adhesive ligands A , α ≃ α 0 A , see Ref . [ 19 ] for a generalization of the model including explicit adhesion dynamics . Consequently , upon in - creased adhesion the cell can spread more eﬃciently , thereby increasing the relative excess area and consequently the tension δAT . Finally , Ref . [ 12 ] found that a decrease of myosin contraction leads to higher tension . This is the only trend not ( yet ) captured in our model : if the parameters associated with the activity of motors ( σ or γ ) are decreased , we do obtain more round shapes , but this is not due to an increase in tension . The reason for this discrepancy might well be that the implementation of the action of motors is still too oversimpliﬁed : we neither implemented explicit motors , nor tensorial active stresses , nor the contractile bundle at the rear present in keratocytes . 11 4 . Contact area vs . contour conservation There arises the question , which quantity should be conserved in an ef - fective 2D model of a cell . For a 3D cell this is rather clear : the volume is conserved since the cytoplasm is incompressible , and the membrane area too since the membrane’s compressibility modulus is very high , implying almost perfect inextensibility ( note , however that there are cells with membrane folds to buﬀer surface area , see also below ) . In contrast , for a height - averaged 2D model as ours , both the contact area could vary – e . g . the cell retracts to the third dimension by reducing its spreading – and the circumference . One can describe this eﬀect on a phenomenological level by considering the phase ﬁeld parameter δ to depend on both the contact area and the length of the circumference : δ = 1 2 + µ V [ V ( t ) − V 0 ] + µ A T [ A ( t ) − A 0 ] . ( 12 ) Here , we tuned µ V and µ A in such a way that for a moderate value of the compressibility modulus , T = 50 , both contributions are of same order ( for a cell of speciﬁc size ; we typically used cell’s of radius r 0 = 15 ) . Hence T = 0 corresponds to pure contact area conservation , while the limit T ≫ 50 leads to a dominating conservation of the circumference . We investigated the model described by Eqs . ( 10 ) and ( 11 ) , with the pa - rameter δ replaced by Eq . ( 12 ) . Figure 4 displays the aspect ratio , the center of mass velocity , the contact area δV , and the circumference δA , as a function of the membrane’s compressibility modulus T . Expectantly , with combined area - circumference conservation , the circumference is better conserved at the cost of the contact area conservation [ see panels c ) and d ) ] . Figures 4a ) and b ) show that the eﬀect of tension on both the aspect ratio and the velocity are much smaller than when only area conservation constraint is imposed . Hence interestingly , although one would naively expect a decrease of speed from the exponential decrease of polymerization with tension , the speed remains al - most unchanged due to the global shape dynamics : one can not conclude the overall speed just from the local polymerization rate . In case of only con - tact area conservation , the velocity decreased by 10 - 20 % , cf . also Fig . 1 . In contrast , if the circumference conservation is important , the overall decrease is below 5 % and probably not even measurable in experiments . Note that keratocytes are known to have only transient , weak adhesion and high mem - brane tension [ 12 ] , hence circumference conservation should be important . 12 0 50 100 150 200 T 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 h - 1 0 50 100 150 200 T 1 1 . 1 1 . 2 1 . 3 V 0 50 100 150 200 T - 0 . 2 - 0 . 1 0 δ V 0 50 100 150 200 T 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 δΑ a ) b ) c ) d ) Figure 4 : Shown are the aspect ratio’s deviation from round shape h − 1 ( a ) , the center of mass velocity V com ( b ) , the excess contact area δV ( c ) , and the relative excess circum - ference δA ( d ) for two cell types as a function of the membrane’s compressibility modulus T : for a keratocyte - like cell ( α = 2 , β = 2 , σ = 1 . 2 , γ = 0 ) with area conservation ( black solid ) and with combined area - circumference conservation ( black dashed ) , as well as for a ﬁbroblast - like cell ( α = 3 , β = 1 . 5 , σ = 0 . 9 , γ = 0 . 3 ) , again with area conservation ( red solid ) and with combined area - circumference conservation ( red dashed ) . Note that the solid curves are identical to those in Fig . 1 . Indeed both experiments [ 13 , 12 ] did not see an eﬀect of membrane tension on the cell’s velocity . We are not aware of such experiments on ﬁbroblasts , but given their higher adhesion and lower tension , the study in the previous section suggests that their velocity might be aﬀected in the 10 - 20 % range . Thus , our study indicates that the exchange of contact area and mem - brane circumference with the third dimension is crucial for understanding the inﬂuence of membrane tension on the shape and speed of cells . Obviously , this problem can only be properly addressed in truly three - dimensional mod - els which are underway [ 22 ] . Note that the membrane’s curvature in this third direction is typically much higher than the in - plane one ( due to the thinness of the lamellipodium ) and might be the dominating curvature [ 38 ] . Another complication arises due to the existence of plasma membrane reser - voirs . While these reservoirs seem not to be present in keratocytes [ 12 ] , they 13 are known to exist for neutrophils ( where they are important for phagocyto - sis [ 39 ] , i . e . the uptake of micron sized objects ) , as well as in ﬁbroblasts . The percentage of area buﬀered / stored can be between 1 % for strongly adhering , up to 10 % for spreading ﬁbroblasts [ 11 , 40 ] . 5 . Eﬀect of bending rigidity & perturbing moving cells The bending rigidity contribution to the force opposing actin polymer - ization is typically negligible compared to the contribution due to tension ( cf . Section 3 and Appendix ) . Nevertheless , bending may aﬀect the shape of the cell directly when its contribution to the phase ﬁeld equation becomes relevant . From the typical 2D radii of curvature ( of order 20 µ m ) and typical membrane rigidities , one expects only moderate eﬀects for stationary mov - ing cells – mostly at the wings where the curvature is the highest . However , bending may well be relevant for the dynamics of cells and for the response to external perturbations , e . g . via modulations of the substrate properties as studied in [ 19 , 20 ] or by obstacles . For vesicles , the bending energy can be introduced similar as the phase ﬁeld energy in Eq . ( 1 ) , by considering the already introduced function λ = D ρ ∆ ρ − f ′ ( ρ ) . Helfrich - Willmore theory [ 41 ] then implies the bending energy to be [ 25 ] E b = 6 √ 2 D ρ p D ρ b Z λ 2 dx dy . ( 13 ) In the sharp interface limit , see Ref . [ 42 ] , this expression tends to b R C 2 M dx dy , where C M is the mean curvature and b is the bending modulus . However , this approach can only be used in the ‘advected ﬁeld’ case , i . e . if the shape of the phase ﬁeld ρ across the interface stays ( close to ) a tanh - proﬁle all the time . This is the case for vesicles in Stokes ﬂow , and also in the active gel hy - drodynamics approach recently studied [ 25 ] , since there are no forces normal to the interface . In the model for a moving cell considered here , however , the active terms ( proportional to α and σ ) are normal forces and deform the interface away from the radial tanh - shape . We checked the overall bend - ing energy using Eq . ( 13 ) for stationary round cells . We obtained that for α & 0 . 5 – already well below values needed to induce motility – the bending energy not only increased in value , but , in addition , did not display anymore the correct behavior E b ∝ bR . Hence in Eq . ( 13 ) one would have to correct 14 for the terms perturbing the radial proﬁle of the phase ﬁeld , which is neither a straightforward task nor very intuitive . We therefore applied a purely 2D formulation for the bending energy [ 36 ] given by Eq . ( 6 ) , i . e . used E b = b 2 Z c 2 | ∇ ρ | dx dy , ( 14 ) leading to the following contribution in the phase ﬁeld 7 ∂ t ρ = . . . + b (cid:26) c 3 2 + t · ∇ ( t · ∇ c ) (cid:27) | ∇ ρ | . ( 15 ) As expected , for steady moving cells the eﬀect of bending is not very noticeable , except for very low tension values and rather strongly elongated cells . Figures 5a ) and b ) show steady moving cells with T = 10 , and b = 0 and 1 , respectively . One can see that bending leads to a rounding of the wings and slightly also of the back . We also investigated collisions of cells with rigid round obstacles , to test whether perturbations externally imposing a curvature lead to stronger ef - fects . For this purpose , the obstacle was implemented by a second stationary phase ﬁeld ρ o ( x , y ) ( that had been relaxed towards a radial tanh - proﬁle of equal width as the stationary cell ) and coupled to the cell via a steric inter - action energy ( as developed previously for multiple cells [ 23 ] ) E steric = 1 2 kρ 2 ρ 2 o → ∂ t ρ = . . . − kρ 2 o ρ . ( 16 ) For the interaction strength we chose k = 10 , typically , to prevent overlap . Figures 5b ) - d ) shows a collision with an obstacle of radius R o = 10 µm for a cell with low tension , T = 10 , and high bending rigidity , b = 1 . For comparison , Figures 5e ) - h ) display a cell with the same bending rigidity but higher tension T = 50 . One can clearly see that the cell with low tension becomes very deformed in spite of its bending rigidity , while the second one much less . The second cell relaxes rapidly to its initial shape , albeit deﬂected in its direction of motion , cf . also Suppl . Movies 1 & 2 . 7 Since the bending contributions scale with the radius of curvature like 1 / R 3 and rapidly grow towards the inside of the cell , for numerical reasons one has to decrease D ρ slightly ( increasing the sharpness of the interface ) and also the tube width around the interface where the terms are calculated . 15 a ) b = 0 , T = 10 e ) b = 1 , T = 50 b ) b = 1 , T = 10 f ) c ) g ) d ) h ) Figure 5 : Sequences of snapshots illustrating the collision between a moving cell and an obstacle . Panel a ) shows a steady moving cell with low tension ( T = 10 ) and no bending . Panels b ) - d ) display the collision of a cell with the same tension and bending rigidity b = 1 with a round obstacle . From the shape of the steady moving cell b ) in comparison to a ) one can infer that bending leads to a slight rounding of the wings and the back . For such a ‘ﬂoppy’ cell of low tension , the collision leads to a strong deformation of the wing hitting the obstacle . Parts e ) - h ) show a collision of a cell with higher tension T = 50 and same bending rigidity , with an obstacle . The cell is much less deformed , recovers its initial shape more rapidly and is slightly deﬂected from its initial direction of motion . The collision events have been traced in the moving frame of the cell . Other parameters : α = β = 1 . 3 , σ = 0 . 6 , γ = 0 . 4 ; D ρ = 0 . 5 in place of D ρ = 1 which was used in the other ﬁgures . Finally , we also studied cells encoutering a narrow channel , a situation increasingly studied experimentally [ 43 ] , cf . also [ 44 ] . Expectantly , for large enough channel widths the cells pass , while narrow channels stop them at the entrance . Suppl . Movies 3 & 4 focus on the intermediate behavior : Movie 3 shows a cell with low tension , T = 10 , that is able to go through the channel albeit being slowed down . Movie 4 , in contrast , shows a cell with high tension , T = 50 , encountering the same channel . It is less deformable and hence does not pass . 6 . Conclusions We investigated the consequences of a variety of physical mechanisms associated with the cell membrane , such as the feedback of membrane ten - sion on actin polymerization , contact area vs . circumference conservation , 16 and membrane bending stiﬀness , on the shape and motility of moving cells . These questions are important in the context of cell motility , since especially the membrane tension acts as a global mechanical feedback that may con - stitute a conduit for rapid – note that tension relaxes on the time scale of few milliseconds – information transfer across the cell . In addition , phys - ical perturbations of cells , by e . g . collisions or substrate modulations , are increasingly investigated . The overall conclusion is that the membrane plays an important role in preserving the integrity of the cell as well as for its dynamical response . We have found that the dominant eﬀect of the membrane on the cell’s motility is its feedback via tension on the ratcheting of actin . This is in accor - dance with the ﬁnding by Lieber et al . [ 12 ] that for keratocytes , membrane tension is dominated by the cytoskeletal forces . Since keratocytes have rather high tension compared to other moving cells , the most appropriate model for this cell type is the one with combined contact area and circumference con - servation , developed in section 4 . Accordingly , bending only leads to small corrections , mostly during cellular reshaping events . Interesting future aspects of membrane eﬀects include generalizations to 3D models of cells . There , the high out - of - plane curvature at the tip of the lamellipodium may dominate the behavior [ 38 ] . Another important aspect is related to the fact that the tension originates not only from the lipid bilayer membrane , but also from the actin cortex directly underneath , adhering to the membrane . A loss of the membrane - cytoskeleton adhesion then can lead to blebbing [ 45 ] , constituting another means of motility , which has not yet been modeled in a whole cell , dynamical model . Acknowledgments B . W . and F . Z . acknowledge funding from the German Science Foundation ( DFG ) via project ZI 1232 / 2 - 1 . I . S . A . was supported by the US Department of Energy ( DOE ) , Oﬃce of Science , Basic Energy Sciences ( BES ) , Materials Science and Engineering Division . The numerical work was in part performed on the Northern Illinois University GPU cluster GAEA . Appendix A . Parameters and estimate of tension vs . bending The typical scales in our model are chosen to be seconds for time , microns for length and piconewtons for force ( see [ 5 ] for details ) . 17 The force given in Eq . ( 7 ) was derived for vesicles [ 36 ] and is a volume force ( entering the Stokes equation ) , i . e . it has units of N / m 3 . To obtain the force acting on an actin ﬁlament , we hence have to multiply by the volume of an actin monomer , roughly a 3 = ( 10 nm ) 3 . In the feedback on the polymerization rate , in the expression exp (cid:16) aFk B T (cid:17) one also has a = 10 nm and k B T ≃ 4 pNnm . The membrane’s compressibility modulus is of order T = 0 . 1J / m 2 [ 9 ] , leading to 10 5 pN / µ m . For numerical reasons we varied T = 0 − 500 . The tension ζ should be of the same order [ 9 ] ; it has been recently measured in [ 12 ] by pulling membrane tethers from moving keratocytes , and was found to be of the order of 250 pN / µ m . The force due to membrane tension can be hence estimated to be ζc | ∇ ρ | a 3 ≃ 0 . 01 − 1 pN , depending on whether one uses the typical phase ﬁeld interface width ( ≃ 1 µ m ) or rather a real membrane thickness ( 5 nm ) . Consequently , the prefactor f 0 in exp ( − f 0 ζc ) occurring in Eq . ( 11 ) should be of order 0 . 01 − 1 , we typically used 1 . In contrast , for the bending rigidity contribution in Eq . ( 7 ) we obtain bc 3 | ∇ ρ | a 3 = 10 − 5 − 10 − 7 pN , using a typical membrane bending modulus of order of b = 100 k B T = 0 . 4 pN µ m . In [ 12 ] also the bending rigidity has been directly measured for keratocytes and found to be slightly lower , 0 . 14 pN µ m . Thus , for the membrane’s feedback on the polymerization rate , bending is completely negligible vs . tension . In the phase ﬁeld equation , however , the bending contribution enters directly i . e . is of order 0 . 14 − 0 . 4 in our units , we typically used b = 0 − 1 . References [ 1 ] M . Abercrombie , The crawling movement of metazoan cells , Proc . R . Soc . London B 207 ( 1980 ) 129 – 147 . [ 2 ] K . Kruse , J . F . Joanny , F . J¨ulicher , J . Prost , Contractility and retro - grade ﬂow in lamellipodium motion , Phys . Biol . 3 ( 2006 ) 130 . [ 3 ] C . W . Wolgemuth , J . Stajic , A . Mogilner , Redundant mechanisms for stable cell locomotion revealed by minimal models , Biophys . J . 101 ( 2011 ) 545 . [ 4 ] D . Shao , W . J . Rappel , H . Levine , Computational model for cell mor - phodynamics . , Phys . Rev . Lett . 105 ( 2010 ) 108104 . 18 [ 5 ] F . Ziebert , S . Swaminathan , I . S . Aranson , Model for self - polarization and motility of keratocyte fragments , J . Royal Soc . Interface 9 ( 2012 ) 1084 . [ 6 ] P . Recho , L . Truskinovsky , Asymmetry between pushing and pulling for crawling cells , Phys . Rev . E 87 ( 2013 ) 022720 . [ 7 ] D . Raucher , M . P . Sheetz , Cell spreading and lamellipodial extension rate is regulated by membrane tension , J . Cell Biol . 148 ( 2000 ) 127 – 36 . [ 8 ] N . Gauthier , T . Masters , M . Sheetz , Mechanical feedback between mem - brane tension and dynamics , Trends Cell Biol . 22 ( 2012 ) 527 . [ 9 ] A . Diz - Munoz , D . Fletcher , O . Weiner , Use the force : membrane tension as an organizer of cell shape and motility , Trends Cell Biol . 23 ( 2013 ) 47 . [ 10 ] A . Houk , A . Jilkine , C . Mejean , R . Boltyanskiy , E . Dufresne , S . An - genent , S . Altschuler , L . Wu , O . Weiner , Membrane tension maintains cell polarity by conﬁning signals to the leading edge during neutrophil migration , Cell 148 ( 2012 ) 175 . [ 11 ] N . C . Gauthier , M . A . Fardin , P . Roca - Cusachs , M . P . Sheetz , Tempo - rary increase in plasma membrane tension coordinates the activation of exocytosis and contraction during cell spreading , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 108 ( 2011 ) 1446714472 . [ 12 ] A . D . Lieber , S . Yehudai - Resheﬀ , E . L . Barnhart , J . A . Theriot , K . Keren , Membrane tension in rapidly moving cells is determined by cytoskeletal forces , Curr . Biol . 23 ( 2013 ) 1409 – 1417 . [ 13 ] T . Fuhs , M . Goegler , C . A . Brunner , C . W . Wolgemuth , J . A . Kaes , Causes of retrograde ﬂow in ﬁsh keratocytes , Cytoskeleton 71 ( 2014 ) 24 – 35 . [ 14 ] E . M . Craig , D . Van Goor , P . Forscher , A . Mogilner , Membrane tension , myosin force , and actin turnover maintain actin treadmill in the nerve growth cone , Biophys . J . 102 ( 2012 ) 1503 . [ 15 ] Y . Schweitzer , A . D . Lieber , K . Keren , M . M . Kozlov , Theoretical anal - ysis of membrane tension in moving cells , Biophys . J . 106 ( 2014 ) 84 . 19 [ 16 ] A . D . Lieber , Y . Schweitzer , M . M . Kozlov , K . Keren , Front - to - rear membrane tension gradient in rapidly moving cells , Biophys . J . 108 ( 2015 ) 1599 . [ 17 ] B . Fogelson , A . Mogilner , Computational estimates of membrane ﬂow and tension gradient in motile cells , PLoS ONE 9 ( 2014 ) e84524 . [ 18 ] D . Shao , H . Levine , W . - J . Rappel , Coupling actin ﬂow , adhesion , and morphology in a computational cell motility model , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 109 ( 2012 ) 6851 . [ 19 ] F . Ziebert , I . S . Aranson , Eﬀects of adhesion dynamics and substrate compliance on the shape and motility of crawling cells , PLoS ONE 8 ( 5 ) ( 2013 ) e64511 . [ 20 ] J . L¨ober , F . Ziebert , I . S . Aranson , Modeling crawling cell movement on soft engineered substrates , Soft Matter 10 ( 2014 ) 1365 – 1373 . [ 21 ] F . Ziebert , I . S . Aranson , Modular approach for modeling cell motility , Eur . Phys . J . Special Topics 223 ( 2014 ) 1265 – 1277 . [ 22 ] E . Tjhung , A . Tiribocchi , D . Marenduzzo , M . E . Cates , A minimal physical model captures the shapes of crawling cells , Nature Comm . 6 ( 2015 ) 5420 . [ 23 ] J . L¨ober , F . Ziebert , I . S . Aranson , Collisions of deformable cells lead to collective migration , Sci . Rep . 5 ( 2015 ) 9172 . [ 24 ] E . Tjhung , D . Marenduzzo , M . E . Cates , Spontaneous symmetry break - ing in active droplets provides a generic route to motility , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 109 ( 2012 ) 12381 – 12386 . [ 25 ] W . Marth , S . Praetorius , A . Voigt , A mechanism for cell motility by active polar gels , J . R . Soc . Interface 12 ( 2015 ) 20150161 . [ 26 ] N . Yoshinaga , Spontaneous motion and deformation of a self - propelled droplet , Physical Review E 89 ( 2014 ) 012913 . [ 27 ] G . V . Kolmakov , A . Schaefer , I . Aranson , A . C . Balazs , Designing mechano - responsive microcapsules that undergo self - propelled motion , Soft Matter 8 ( 2012 ) 180 – 190 . 20 [ 28 ] F . Ziebert , J . L¨ober , and I . S . Aranson , in Physical Models of Cell Moil - ity , I . S . Aranson , Ed . ( Springer ebook , to be published 2015 ) . [ 29 ] C . S . Peskin , G . M . Odell , G . F . Oster , Cellular motions and thermal ﬂuctuations : The brownian ratchet , Biophys . J . 65 ( 1993 ) 316 . [ 30 ] A . Mogilner , G . Oster , Cell motility driven by actin polymerization , Biophys . J . 71 ( 1996 ) 3030 – 45 . [ 31 ] D . R . Kovar , T . D . Pollard , Insertional assembly of actin ﬁlament barbed ends in association with formins produces piconewton forces , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 101 ( 2004 ) 14725 . [ 32 ] M . J . Footer , J . W . Kerssemakers , J . A . Theriot , M . Dogterom , Direct measurement of force generation by actin ﬁlament polymerization using an optical trap , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 104 ( 2007 ) 2181 . [ 33 ] C . Brangbour , O . du Roure , E . Helfer , D . D´emoulin , A . Mazurier , M . Fermigier , M . - F . Carlier , J . Bibette , J . Baudry , Force - velocity mea - surements of a few growing actin ﬁlaments , PLoS Biology 9 ( 2011 ) e1000613 . [ 34 ] R . Folch , J . Casademunt , A . Hernandez - Machado , L . Ramirez - Piscina , Phase - ﬁeld model for hele - shaw ﬂows with arbitrary viscosity contrast . i . theoretical approach , Phys . Rev . E 60 ( 1999 ) 1724 . [ 35 ] T . Biben , C . Misbah , Tumbling of vesicles under shear ﬂow within an advected - ﬁeld approach , Phys . Rev . E 67 ( 2003 ) 031908 . [ 36 ] I . Cantat , C . Misbah , Vesicle dynamics in chemotaxis , haptotaxis , and under shear ﬂow , in : S . C . M¨uller et al . , Ed . , Transport and structure , Lecture Notes in Physics 532 ( 1999 ) 93 – 136 . [ 37 ] S . Chandrasekhar , Hydrodynamic and hydromagnetic stability , Courier Corporation , 2013 . [ 38 ] C . Gabella , E . Bertseva , C . Bottier , N . Piacentini , A . Bornert , S . Jeney , L . Forro , I . F . Sbalzarini , J . - J . Meister , A . B . Verkhovsky , Contact angle at the leading edge controls cell protrusion rate , Current Biol . 24 ( 2014 ) 1126 . 21 [ 39 ] M . Herant , V . Heinrich , M . Dembo , Mechanics of neutrophil phagocyto - sis : experiments and quantitative models , J . Cell Sci . 119 ( 2006 ) 1903 . [ 40 ] D . Raucher , M . P . Sheetz , Characteristics of a membrane reservoir buﬀering membrane tension , Biophys . J . 77 ( 1999 ) 1992 . [ 41 ] Q . Du , C . Liu , R . Ryham , X . Wang , A phase ﬁeld formulation of the willmore problem , Nonlinearity 18 ( 2005 ) 1249 . [ 42 ] G . Bellettini , L . Mugnai , On the approximation of the elastica functional in radial symmetry , Calc . Var . Partial Diﬀer . Equ . 24 ( 2005 ) 1 . [ 43 ] C . G . Rolli , T . Seuﬀerlein , R . Kemkemer , J . P . Spatz , Impact of tu - mor cell cytoskeleton organization on invasiveness and migration : A microchannel - based approach , PLoS ONE 5 ( 2010 ) e8726 . [ 44 ] R . J . Hawkins , M . Piel , G . Faure - Andre , A . M . Lennon - Dumenil , J . F . Joanny , J . Prost , R . Voituriez , Pushing oﬀ the walls : A mechanism of cell motility in conﬁnement , Phys . Rev . Lett . 102 ( 2009 ) 058103 . [ 45 ] J . Dai , M . P . Sheetz , Membrane tether formation from blebbing cells , Biophys . J . 77 ( 1999 ) 3363 . 22