HAL Id : hal - 02617101 https : / / univ - angers . hal . science / hal - 02617101v3 Preprint submitted on 26 Nov 2020 HAL is a multi - disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci - entific research documents , whether they are pub - lished or not . The documents may come from teaching and research institutions in France or abroad , or from public or private research centers . L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL , est destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche , publiés ou non , émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français ou étrangers , des laboratoires publics ou privés . Anatomy of a techno - creative community : the role of places and events in the emergence of videomapping in Nantes Etienne Capron , Dominique Sagot - Duvauroux , Raphaël Suire To cite this version : Etienne Capron , Dominique Sagot - Duvauroux , Raphaël Suire . Anatomy of a techno - creative commu - nity : the role of places and events in the emergence of videomapping in Nantes . 2020 . ￿hal - 02617101v3￿ Anatomy of a techno - creative community – the role of places and events in the emergence of videomapping in Nantes Etienne Capron ( GRANEM , University of Angers ) * Dominique Sagot - Duvauroux ( GRANEM , University of Angers ) Raphaël Suire ( LEMNA , University of Nantes ) May 2020 Word count : 8710 words ( including bibliography ) Abstract This article aims to study the role of places and events in the structuring of a community of innovation whose practice is at the crossroads of art and tech - videomapping . Based on an exploratory case study , we observe the relationships between the different actors who form subgroups , sharing a common interest in a techno - creative practice - but whose collective innovation dynamic is only in its beginnings . We also document the usage of places and events in their intermediation role for these subgroups . This reveals preferential circulations - patterns of moves among a set of focal locations in the city for a community – and the crucial role of these locations in creative communities emergence . Keywords : techno - creative innovation ; places ; knowledge ; network analysis . JEL Code : D85 , O32 , R11 , Z10 Introduction The past two decades have seen a multiplication of regional policies inspired by the creative class ( Florida , 2002 ) and creative cities ( Landry and Bianchini , 1995 ) , based on cultural and creative industries support ( Boix et al , 2016 ) . Related economic sectors ( mainly art , media , digital and technology , video games , etc . ) have become a major source of employment , yet also produce many external effects for other sectors ( Sedita et al , 2016 ) . At the same time , they deeply transform territories in three interwoven dimensions : urban transformation through embellishment of deprived areas ; demography of population through influx of creative and knowledge workers , and economic transformation through convergence toward knowledge intensive economic sectors ( Scott , 2014 ) . However , the spatial coexistence of ( un - ) related creative sectors does bring new opportunities for regional cross - specialization ( Janssen and Frenken , 2019 ; Frenken et al , 2007 ) , and the co - location of different activities could open up a wider , more sustainable range of anchored possibilities for regional development . * : corresponding author . Email adress : etienne . capron @ univ - angers . fr Few studies have documented how some related sectors overlap and produce novelties at their respective knowledge borders , even though there is strong interest in this ( Content and Frenken , 2016 ) . Furthermore , empirical papers reveal valuable potential in the food industry ( Davids and Frenken , 2015 ) and in offshore gas and wind energy ( Ingstrup and Menzel , 2019 ) – though very little is known about how Cultural and Creative Industries ( CCI ) cross over ; contexts in which STEM ( Sciences , Technologies , Engineering , Mathematics ) and artistic activities are co - located are rarely studied . Rodriguez - Pose and Lee ( 2020 ) provided insights at city level , showing that cities in which both types of activities are present are particularly innovative . The cumulative effects of co - location and possible combinations of knowledge need to be studied at a micro level . However , innovations are increasingly based on both symbolic and synthetic knowledge bases ( Asheim and Gertler , 2006 ) such as video games ( Grandadam et al . , 2013 ) or web design ( Christopherson , 2004 ) . Moreover , studies are mostly conducted at macro or organizational levels ( international , national , regional ) . This contribution aims to fill those gaps , firstly by specifying the concept of ‘techno - creative’ activities : those at the knowledge frontier of arts and digital technologies , qualified as STEAM in the Rodriguez - Pose and Lee approach ( op . cit ) , and secondly by pointing out the crucial roles played by places and events in the emergence of these novelties , based on a localized innovation community ( Sarazin et al . , 2017 ) . Our goal is to specify the roles played by places , events , and individuals in the emergence of a localized techno - creative activity ; these could serve as an interface for knowledge transfer and , as such , a specific asset to creative entrepreneurs ( Janssen and Frenken , op . cit ) . This paper is based on an exploratory case study ( Mills et al . , 2010 ) of the videomapping community in Nantes ( France ) as an example of a localized , emergent techno - creative activity . This innovation combines symbolic and synthetic knowledge and is associated with several types of creatives ( architects , video - jockeys ( VJs ) , video artists ) . Results identify preferential circulation of community members , which can be defined as the pattern of moves made by a community between a set of focal locations in the city . Subgroups within the community have specific focal points , though few common places with the other subgroups . This analysis shows that the innovation community frequents a multiplicity of places and events ( in terms of size , orientation , etc . ) , and that access to the resources provided by these places and events is not open to all in the same way . Once emerging activities have been detected by public institutions , a policy of material and economic support to these could benefit their structuring ( provision of workspace , logistical assistance , financing of long - term residencies , etc . ) . The paper is organized as follows : the first part frames the theoretical approach , from which we derive our research questions . The second part is dedicated to methodology , building on semi - directive interviews . The collected data also allows us to conduct network analysis . The third part is devoted to the results , which are discussed in the fourth part , and our conclusion highlights policy implication . Theoretical background Research on the knowledge - based economy that is focused on processes , from creation to the diffusion and use of knowledge , has introduced the notion of knowledge bases and its networks ( Balland et al , 2013 ) in order to specify how innovation processes operate . Within this framework , each activity is based on a knowledge base , according to the industrial sector it belongs to , tacit and codified knowledge used , and skills required . Both Asheim and Gertler , op . cit , and Asheim and Hansen ( 2009 ) describe three types of knowledge base : analytical , which is more associated with science - based industries ( fundamental research , biotechnology , nanotechnology , etc . ) and involves a rational , deductive thinking approach that leads to the creation of highly codified scientific knowledge ; symbolic , which is related to CCI and art because it refers to the creation of knowledge of high aesthetic value , embedded in cultural systems of interpretation and having a strong tacit dimension , and synthetic , which is based on combining existing knowledge , and can be found in industries in which the application of solutions to problems is central ( e . g . engineering ) . Depending of the type of activity , there is either only one knowledge base , or one is dominant - and this affects how new knowledge is integrated and created . As pointed out by Rodriguez - Pose and Lee ( op . cit ) , the amalgamation of activities belonging to both the STEM ( based on synthetic and / or analytical knowledge ) and creative / art sectors could spur innovation at city level . The coexistence of these knowledge bases could produce an ecosystem favorable to the emergence of STEAM innovations ( Rodriguez - Pose and Lee , op . cit ) and smart diversification . There is a lack of empirical studies on how these knowledge bases overlap at the micro level . We use the term techno - creative activities to fill this gap , by which we mean those combining varying degrees of synthetic and symbolic knowledge to produce innovation , and we focus on the socio - spatial processes that underlie their localized emergence . Innovation actors and processes While some knowledge is indeed produced by companies and formal organizations ( Balland et al , 2020 ) , not all of it is created by them . Indeed , a plurality of actors having an interest in a particular field participate in the creation of knowledge . Scholars define these as communities - a set of individuals who regularly and voluntarily exchange information about a common interest or shared goal within a knowledge field ( Amin and Cohendet , 2004 ) . Though these autonomous , informal collectives are not necessarily oriented around market production , they first and foremost share interests , opinions and practices about whatever it is that brings them together . The role of communities in the processes of collective creation is important , because the diverse interactions between members allow the transfer ( formal and / or informal ) of knowledge specific to each ( Bathelt and Cohendet , 2014 ) . This broad definition can be refined by distinguishing between two different types of communities : Communities of Practice ( CoP ) are centered on the sharing of best practices within a specific knowledge field ( Lave and Wenger , 1991 ) . Since they share the same existing practice , members of these communities also share a common interest in a problem or subject . Interacting with others is one way of sharing experiences , tools and best practices , to improve knowledge . Epistemic Communities ( EC ) are focused on the creation , codification and dissemination of new knowledge ( Haas , 1992 ; Cowan et al . , 2000 ) . EC members compare and contrast their diverse knowledge sets , to create or update new knowledge and develop a framework with which to interpret it . ECs can either operate in existing fields or initiate new ones , which are identifiable by actors outside of the community ( Capdevila et al . , 2018 ) . The boundaries of these communities are loose , evolving over time as members come and go , becoming more or less involved . In emerging fields , practices are mostly experimenting and prototyping , and since bricolage is a dominant means of identifying the adjacent possible , knowledge cannot be not fully codified ( Suire , 2019 ) . Members of CoPs and ECs can therefore spill over into a community , collectively producing something new by combining knowledge , adjusting or initiating practices , developing an interpretative framework , and actively disseminating knowledge ( Capdevila et al . , ibid ) . This is what we call an innovation community ( Sarazin et al . , op . cit ) . Proximities dynamic If we consider innovation to be a localized product of the combination of knowledge and skills , then we need to understand the dynamics that are driving this process . The interplay of various proximities is an interesting starting point ( Rallet and Torre , 2004 ; Boschma , 2005 ) . All proximities are relative , and their articulation can either spur or hinder exchanges between actors of innovation , i . e . communities of innovation . The type of proximity that matters most is also sensitive to the stage or maturity of innovation ( Davids and Frenken , 2018 ) . In addition to geographical proximity , which describes both the Euclidean and relative distance between two actors , Boschma identifies four other forms of proximity whose alignment and activation can play a powerful role in collective innovation processes . The first of these is social proximity , defined by the embedding of social relations , i . e . belonging to the same social realm ( Granovetter , 1985 ) . The structure and composition of an actor’s social space is important ; too much homogeneity could limit access to new ideas or opportunities , whereas ties that are too weak ( or even non - existent ) could limit confidence - and thus exchanges of tacit knowledge . The second form is cognitive proximity , which illustrates the degree of relatedness of actors’ knowledge , which can be similar and / or complementary ( Boschma , 2017 ) . The commensurability of knowledge is important for mutual understanding ( Punstein and Glücker , 2020 ) , and an optimal cognitive distance seems crucial to the promotion of innovation ( Nooteboom et al . , 2007 ) . The third form is organizational proximity , which refers to belonging to an organizational arrangement regulated by norms and coordination mechanisms , whether formal or informal ( e . g . an art collective ) . This defines actors’ degree of autonomy as well as their potential for interacting with others . The fourth form is institutional proximity , defined as the capacity of actors to adopt behaviors in line with the formal rules , common procedures and established practices , or informal values , ways of doing , or ideals ( Emin and Sagot - Duvauroux , 2016 ) . In this way , a group develops a collective identity . Where actors are strongly interconnected and interact frequently , shared values and understandings emerge ( Jones et al . , 1997 ) . Relational ( non - geographic ) proximity dynamics are governed by two logics ( Rallet and Torre , op . cit ) : the logic of belonging ( as members of a single organization , actors interact , and their exchanges are facilitated by their shared formal and informal rules ) and the logic of similarity ( actors share a system of representations and knowledge , and this similarity facilitates exchange ) . Proximities , then , allow us to see potential areas of overlap , the interstices in which communities of innovation may form . If they are to facilitate knowledge transfer , innovation communities need relational proximities . But even in a context in which local actors share a single , abiding , geographical space , new combinations involving both synthetic and symbolic knowledge are not guaranteed . Since proximities must be both articulated and activated , we need a more precise investigation of territorial configurations , since these could play a vital role in the emergence and development of communities . The crucial roles played by places , events and people If we consider actors located in the same territory to be potentially proximate , yet no collective innovation dynamics emerge because they don’t share social networks , knowledge or representation frameworks , then we should analyze the endogenous elements of this territory that are capable of promoting crossovers ( whether directly or indirectly ) . The first element is place : an abiding location in which individuals can socialize and share information , and in which social and cognitive flows densify ( Rantisi and Leslie , 2010 ) . Following the notion of third - places ( Oldenburg , 1989 ) , these offer a favorable context for social interactions , knowledge exchanges , and co - creation . A wide variety of places can play this role , whether for production or diffusion , niche - or mainstream - oriented ( Kloosterman , 2014 ) cafés , restaurants , artist - run spaces , fab - labs , etc . The third - place function is created by the community in making it its focal point , and these places can play a crucial role in the process of creation and / or diffusion of innovations ( Kloosterman and Brandellero , 2016 ) . More precisely , the main function of these places can differ from one location to another : creation / production , social interaction , exploitation of knowledge , etc . ( Suire and Vicente , 2015 ; Gibson , 2005 ) . We also assume that places may be more or less open to exploitation ( depending on whether they are institutionalized and highly visible , requiring more accomplished productions for a wider audience ) or exploration , according the actors more freedom ( Suire , 2019 ) . The second element is event : whether regular or not , events act as temporary clusters ( Maskell et al . , 2006 ; Torre , 2008 ) , gathering actors from different territories for a short period of time . By allowing face - to - face encounters , events offer an opportunity to create new social relations ( Storper and Venables , 2004 ) . Where they have a worldwide audience , these favor global pipelines , and events provide communities with access to new trends , knowledge , and peer reviews , building local buzz ( Bathelt et al . , 2004 ; Rantisi , 2014 ; Lavanga , 2018 ) . Another crucial characteristic is the field - configuration role an event can have ( Meyer et al . , 2005 ; Schüßler et al . , 2015 ) . Being both the output of a field and an input to that same field , events can be crucial to the local configuration of a community . Several contributions also emphasis the crucial role played by social networks in the creation and diffusion of creative productions ( Burt , 2004 ; Perry - Smith , 2006 ; Uzzi and Spiro , 2005 ; Cattani and Ferriani , 2008 ) . The structural position of brokers , for example , has been studied in contexts of emergence in artistic fields , highlighting the crucial factor of accessing influential actors and bridging different social worlds and views ( Sgourev , 2015 ; Lingo and O’Mahony , 2010 ) . Brokers can be identified by their position within the network , their activities , and their motivation ( Foster and Ocejo , 2013 ) . Following Gould and Fernandez ( 1989 ) , brokers are defined as individuals who connect previously unconnected alters , whether or not these people belong to a single organization or field . Brokers could be important as they serve as ‘bridges’ between different part of a social realm , thus transforming the dynamics of proximity between actors . On a more structural level , being integrated into the mainstream provides easy access to material and financial resources , as well as peer recognition . Conversely , being located in a peripheral position makes access to these resources more difficult , though because it offers freedom from institutional and peer pressure , it also provides opportunities to create radical new ideas ( Grabher , 2018 ) . In this respect , it also seems necessary to : study which actors are disconnected ( Philipps , 2011 ) , explain why they are disconnected ( whether this disconnection is intentional or not ) , and find out how to promote the connection of actors - since this could potentially lead to fresh cross - fertilization of knowledge . The literature shows strong potential for innovation at the intersection of synthetic and symbolic knowledge bases , and the context of STEAM sector co - location also offers opportunities for innovation and new combinations . Actors from different communities would thus share geographical proximity - but how can these communities meet and foster innovation at the intersection ? Through their practices , some communities illustrate potential for crossover . The aim of this paper is to understand how a community of innovation emerges at the intersection of art and technology . Of the various forms of crossover available , we have chosen to study ‘mappers’ in Nantes . Actors have a shared interest for videomapping , but come from diverse backgrounds ; they do not share the same values , knowledge , or social realm . There is therefore a need to build or activate relational proximities through places and events , as these can provide favorable contexts for face - to - face interactions , access to material resources , and opportunities to disseminate creations ( Rantisi and Leslie , op . cit ; Hauge and Hracs , 2010 ) . Brokers – who bring together parts of the network that are disconnected from social networks – could also play a crucial role in terms of interaction between different knowledge frameworks , or access to new opportunities . We have supposed ( 1 ) that places , events and brokers can both reduce social distance and promote exploration at the frontier of artistic and technological activities . However , ( 2 ) the heterogeneity of actors , their values and their approaches to practice can be obstacles to the constitution of an innovation community . We rely on an empirical study to determine their role in structuring a community of mappers within an ecosystem that combines technological and artistic activities . Methodology and data Field and object of the study Since we were observing a social phenomenon in situ , we chose to adopt a qualitative research design based on an explorative case study , which allowed us to focus on less - studied phenomenon ( Mills et al . , op . cit ) . As our field for this study , we chose Nantes - a city located in western France which , over the past 30 years , has developed a strategy of territorial and economic development based on cultural events ( Ambrosino et al . , 2016 ) ) . More recently , with the creation of a dedicated cluster ( Schieb - Bienfait et al . , 2017 ) , the city has focused on attracting the CCI sectors . Nantes was also named European Capital of Innovation in 2019 , in recognition of its whole strategy of supporting innovative activities . These two trajectories have recently crossed one another , providing a context that fits the goal of our study 1 . In addition , certain places , and events initiated by the city , are actively seeking to foster crossovers between arts and technology , underlining the desire to develop activities at the intersection of these sectors . Rather than studying several techno - creative activities , we decided to focus on a single activity , to deepen the analysis . After two preliminary interviews we chose videomapping - a practice we define as projections of still or moving images onto volumes , using the appropriate software and technology – that is , a combination of symbolic and synthetic knowledge . Videomapping actors ( mappers ) do create content for projection , but also manage the echnological side of that projection . We have assumed that people involved in this practice are capable of initiating innovation , whether radical ( e . g . new aesthetics or new technologies ) or incremental ( e . g . new content ) . Nevertheless , these people are not necessarily intermediaries between a tech community and an artist community . Rather , they are on the edge of the two knowledge fields , using a greater or lesser degree of synthetic and / or symbolic knowledge . We used this example to explore the roles played by places , events , and people , in articulated proximities , that lead to the emergence of a videomapping innovative community . Primary and secondary data Data collection was conducted via semi - directed interviews with two different categories of actors . First , mappers : those who create and manage content . We interviewed 17 individuals who constitute the core of our sample ; some of these people have gathered into collectives . Second , actors having some interest in videomapping , but whose reasons for participating in the community lie elsewhere : event organization , position in a cultural venue , 1 According to the economic development agency Nantes Metropole Entreprises , the city has around 90 , 000 jobs in the cultural and creative industries and 23 , 300 jobs in digital technologies and services . etc . These five individuals provided us with different , though complementary data about this practice in the local context . The sample was constituted using a snowball methodology , as we wanted to identify as many members of the community as possible . However , our sample is not exhaustive . Some mappers could have been overlooked because of being isolated , or invisible to the people we met , and in addition , we were unable to meet every actor we identified , for material reasons ( they were not in the area , or unavailable during the study period ) . The interviews focused on two themes : the functioning of the practice ( what tools and processes are used , with whom they collaborate , what their experiences are , how they learned , etc . ) , and the social , spatial and cognitive resources they mobilize ( what places and events they attend and why they do so , who they know as mappers , etc . ) . We also asked interviewees to hierarchize places , events and people as main resources for meeting other members , nurturing their inspiration , learning , creating and experimenting , and to share their creations . In addition to this primary data collection , we used secondary data sources ( websites , Facebook pages ) to verify and supplement data obtained through interviews . This was important , since the period during which we conducted the interviews spans 7 months ( September 2019 to March 2020 ) . During this time , new creations were presented , new relations were formed , and it integration of these data into our work seemed to be of interest . In total , although we conducted 17 interviews , we identified 40 individuals and collectives , although it was not possible to meet everyone . The data also includes 38 places and 12 events cited by interviewees as resources for their practice , and / or locations they regularly attend . Network analysis In addition to analyzing interview content , the data we obtained allows network analysis . We chose to divide our analysis into three distinct types of networks : one devoted to interpersonal relations ( social network ) , another to relations between individuals and places ( bi - partite network ) , and the last to relations between individuals and events ( bi - partite network ) . In each case , we identify market relationships - that is , when a contract is made regarding the creation , production or diffusion of videomapping content ( i . e . the customer - supplier relationship ) , and non - market relationships ( which can take the form of friendship , exchange of knowledge , ideas or advice , recommendations , co - creation or collaboration , lending of materials , etc ) . For analytical reasons , we have separated the types of relationships each time , but they are embedded ( Granovetter , op . cit ) and may overlap where two actors have both a market and non - market relationship , since the one may be the consequence of the other . In total , we come up with six non - directed networks , which we analyze separately and compare on the basis of their structural properties . Following Uzzi and Spiro ( op . cit ) , we consider that a tie links two places or two events if an individual attends both places ( or events ) . On the basis of attendance data for the locations , gathered through interviews , we obtain one network made up of places , and another made up of events . This is what we call preferential circulation : the pattern of moves made by a given individual or group and observed between a set of places . It reflects the choices , habits , and selection of multiple specific resources ( social , economic , cognitive and material ) . We analyze networks separately , in the same way as social networks . Various structural analyses of the network were conducted 2 , starting with degree centrality ( the number of links a node has ) , which tells us how central a node is in a network , based on whether it has a low or high number of links . We also measured betweenness centrality , which describes the number of times a node is on the shortest path connecting a pair of nodes in the network . This allowed us to identify intermediaries ( such as brokers ) within the social network , as well as intermediary places and events in the other two networks . Lastly , we used degree correlation , which reflects the assortativity of nodes : the idea that nodes having a similar degree connect to each other . A positive coefficient means that nodes sharing the same properties ( here , high degree centrality ) connect to each other . This last measure thus provides us with an element of understanding of the degree of structural homophily in the network ( Crespo et al . , 2014 ) . Results Social networks As specified , our analysis focuses on videomapping practice in Nantes . Since they live and work in the same city , the actors we interviewed share the same geographical space . Moreover , they have the same techno - creative practice ( namely the creation and projection of still and / or moving images using appropriate technology and software ) and constitute , de facto , a community of practice ( Lave and Wenger , op . cit ) . The actors share an interest in videomapping and base their practice on usage of this same tool . However , our interviews highlight the fact that the goals and orientations ascribed to their practice are not universal – they vary , depending on the actors . Representations of the field , aesthetic values attributed to the productions , and conventions regulating the practice are not shared . ( Anand and Watson , 2 Data analysis was conducted with the igraph package of R . 2004 ) . Neither do they belong to the same organizational arrangement ( logic of belonging ) . Actors belong to five distinct sub - groups , which are epistemic communities but do not form a unified community . The first subgroup is made up of mappers from the Nantes School of Architecture , who are former students and teachers . Among them , we find three distinct collectives . The second subgroup is made up of contemporary artists and their technical staff ( involved in video , digital and lighting arts ) , who use this technique in their productions . Some of these people are in a collective and work together regularly . The third subgroup is made of light and video technicians and VJs working in clubs and music venues . They mainly use this technique to enhance festive atmosphere . The fourth group is made up of cultural venue employees having a broad knowledge of cultural activities and practices in the city , but whose interest in videomapping is limited . The fifth subgroup is made up of individuals and collectives who create and take part in cultural events ( music , theater ) that integrate videomapping . These people collaborate with mappers fairly regularly , and constitute the most diverse category . We can say , then , that the logic of similarity is strong within all five groups , but only potential between them . The actors have a common base of knowledge , skills and interest in videomapping , but values , visions and frames of reference diverge . To some extent , this scattered community is characterized by ambiguity ( Sgourev , 2013 ) . We began by analyzing market relationships between members of the field . This is represented as follows : a link is created if two actors have worked together and / or have a customer / supplier relationship . Market relationships represent 17 . 6 % of total relations ( 125 relations ) . We also noted that the network is assortative ( 0 . 4551551 ) , i . e . positive degree correlation of nodes : here , this means that actors have market relationships with others who also have market relationships . In a word , business goes to business . The distribution of the degree of nodes indicates ( Figure 2 ) that the majority have very few market relationships . We also observed , through the distribution of betweenness centrality ( Figure 1 ) , that market relations operate through very few nodes . All market relationships are represented in Graph 1 . Figure 1 and Figure 2 Figures 1 and 2 – Actors betweenness distribution and actors degree distribution for market relationships Graph 1 Graph 1 - Market relationships The second network represents non - market relationships . Here , a link is created if actors know each other , exchange knowledge or produce innovation together . Non - market relations account for 82 . 4 % of all trade relations , revealing a higher number of non - market relationships than market relationships . Graph 2 highlights three clusters , each representing sub - components of the mapper network . The degree distribution ( Figure 4 ) indicates a higher number of relationships for each node . Moreover , this network is assortative ( 0 . 2035827 ) , though to a lesser extent than the previous one . This means that actors who are already highly connected have relationships with each other , while those who have few relationships are linked to others who also have few relationships . Non - market relations strongly predominate over market relations . The majority have low betweenness centrality ( Figure 3 ) . Among identified actors , it is possible for one to have a particularly strong intermediation role , as indicated by their betweenness centrality . We will develop this in the discussion . Figure 3 and Figure 4 Figures 3 and 4 – Actors betweenness distribution and actors degree distribution for non - market relationships Graph 2 Graph 2 - Non - market relationships Places networks and events networks : Next , we traced the network of places attended for market reasons by all sample members . A market relationship is defined here by the fact that an actor has a paid activity in a place ( for example , a residence or the dissemination of a production ) . Thus , when an actor has a market activity in two places , a link is drawn . Graph 3 illustrates this network . Degree centrality indicates that the majority of places have little relationship to one another . This means that not all actors frequent all places ( if they did , we would get a complete network ) . Nevertheless , one place seems to be at the heart of the relationships . This result is confirmed by betweenness centrality . A place would have the role of a strong intermediary for market relations . Figure 5 and Figure 6 Figures 5 and 6 – Places betweenness distribution and places degree distribution for market relationships Graph 3 Graph 3 - Preferential circulation among places for market relationships Regarding non - market relationships , the distribution of degree centrality ( Figure 6 ) shows that relationships are distributed more and are less concentrated around a single place . In spite of this , two places in particular seem to be at the heart of the frequentation habits . Moreover , betweenness centrality confirms that few places have a high score ( Figure 5 ) . The non - market relationships associated with places are visualized in Graph 4 . Figure 7 and Figure 8 Figures 7 and 8 – Places betweenness distribution and places degree distribution for non - market relationships Graph 4 Graph 4 - Preferential circulations among places for market relationships Regarding events ( festivals , fairs , special nights out at a cultural venue ) , we assume that a market relationship exists where a mapper performs during an event . As with places , a link is drawn when an actor has market activity in two events . Results show a reduced number of events attended by sample members . Degree centrality indicates few opportunities for mappers to show their work at local events , since they attend few events likely to build market relationships ( Figure 8 ) . Moreover , the betweenness of events for market relations is low ( Figure 7 ) . The events network of market relations is represented by Graph 5 . Figure 9 and Figure 10 Figures 9 and 10 - Events betweenness distribution and events degree distribution for market relationships Graph 5 Graph 5 - Preferential circulation among events for market relationships Non - market relations , on the other hand , are more distributed , revealing that actors attend various events ( rather than just one ) . One seems to be particularly frequented by the members of the sample , as indicated by degree centrality ( Figure 9 ) . Betweenness centrality also illustrates that it could offer a context for meeting up ( Figure 10 ) . Overall , we can say that both the places and the events attended by mappers are heterogeneous . Graph 6 represents the network of events attended for non - market relationships . Figure 11 and Figure 12 Figures 11 and 12 - Events betweenness distribution and events degree distribution for non - market relationships Graph 6 Graph 6 – Preferential circulation among events for non - market relationships Discussion Analysis of the sample indicates that the actors have compatible heterogeneity , since they are proximate on some points and distant on others . Actors are located in the same city , ( geographical proximity ) and some even attend the same places ( hyper - geographical proximity ) . Some know each other and form collectives ( social proximity and organizational proximity ) , and have similar knowledge and skills ( cognitive proximity ) . However , social networks are fragmented , and we can see that the subgroups are not very well connected to each other . Some links are observed between the architecture school group and the artists group , though we also note that the sub - component related to events and clubs is disconnected from the main component ( Philipps , op . cit ) . We put forward two explanations for this disconnection : first , cognitive distance would be greater than between the other two sets of the network ( architects and artists ) . Even if all share the same technique , the level of deep technical knowledge is not the same , and the fact that they use less advanced techniques might result in negative evaluation by others . More importantly , the aesthetic codes and the objectives sought through the use of this technique are not the same . Artists use it within the framework of their artistic works , and their discourse is full of artistic references . They situate this in an art world ( Becker , 1982 ) that has pre - formed conventions , and refer to this for their productions . Second , mappers in clubs use mapping to build upon or enhance a festive atmosphere already created by music and lights . The aesthetic vision is therefore not the same , and a kind of symbolic border separates club mappers from the others . For architectural mappers , who have developed a particular perspective in the course of their training , mapping is mainly used to project onto volumes and thus reveal different aspects of the environment . We also believe that architects , because of their training , can play a critical role . The School of Architecture is a place where both technical ( synthetic ) and artistic ( symbolic ) knowledge are taught . Mastery of these two knowledge bases could facilitate both the other actors’ understanding and the interpretation / translation of knowledge . We note that no integrated videomapping community exists in this territory . As a result , there is also a lack of visibility and legitimacy ( Cattani et al , 2017 ) . What does exist is a set of distinct epistemic sub - communities , each with its own representation space and functioning but sharing a technical homophily : actors master the same basic knowledge and share an interest in the videomapping technique . Were they to meet , actors would therefore be able to share knowledge and improve their practice collectively . However , the boundary between the subgroup spaces ( which can be linked with institutional proximity ) hinder a collective dynamic at whole network level . Spaces are cognitive constructs in which ideas are transferred , translated and articulated : this is the realm of cognitive relations that forms a common vision ( Cohendet et al . , 2010 ; Capdevila et al . , op . cit ) . Yet , there is a degree of heterophily between these actors that could be optimal for the development and diffusion of innovations ( Rogers , 1983 ) . For the moment , there are no leaders , no actors to guide the practice , and different interpretive frameworks are carried by distinct subgroups . Thus , there is a certain ambiguity as to the aesthetic framework to be developed and the common standards to be adopted . The fragmented subgroups , with their distinct orientations and identities , could be a pre - condition likely to spur knowledge combination and framework reinterpretation ( Sgourev , 2013 ) , potentially initiating a distinct cognitive space . Yet this structural fragmentation is also the signature of an emerging knowledge field that has typified the standards battles observed in nascent technological sectors ( Suire and Vicente , 2014 ) . Despite this , we identify several elements that could help bring these actors together in order to gain a level of collective legitimacy and visibility . First , of the actors identified , there is one who , owing to her betweenness centrality , could play a particularly strong intermediation role . She is a former School of Architecture student who moved to Montreal as part of her training . There , she discovered videomapping , met the founder of the Montreal videomapping festival , and later joined the organization team . Following this experience , she returned to Nantes and ( along with former student peers ) founded the collective that launched the Nantes festival 3 . To achieve this , she had therefore sought out videomappers in Nantes , first through her own friendship network ( former students at the architecture school ) and then beyond . In this , she relied on an actor working at Stereolux ( an important cultural venue in the city ) who 3 For the moment , the first edition of Mapp _ NTS is postponed due to the Covid - 19 pandemic . has a strong expertise in digital art . This first entry point enabled her to identify other mappers , belonging to the artists subgroup . Since she has been able to bridge two previously disconnected parts of the network , she is now in a structural hole position ( Burt , op . cit ) and has a broker role . As noted by Foster and Ocejo ( 2015 ) , the broker position involves a complex process in which an actor may play multiple roles ( connecting actors , taking advantage of their position , translating different visions ) and where motivation is crucial . In this instance , she has created strategic links with those actors she considers important and whose productions are both relevant and a match for her own vision of videomapping ( i . e . those created by architects and artists ) - and would probably include these people in the festival program . Crucially , through her previous position in Montreal , she has integrated the field and created global pipelines and imports knowledge , which feed the local buzz ( Bathelt et al . , 2004 ; Storper and Venables , 2004 ) . Beyond her structural position in the network , both her vision of the practice and her role as organizer of the festival are crucial to connecting the two main sub - components of the network , through both strong and weak ties . In this dynamic , places could also play a catalytic role in this context . Of the available places , two are often cited : Stereolux and Lieu Unique . Both places are multi - disciplinary , publicly funded and highly visible . Their programming often relies on artists whose productions interweave the artistic and technological dimensions . Because many actors attend these places for their offer of a dense ( “there ' s often something to see” ) and varied ( “you don ' t always know what you ' re going to see” ) agenda of artistic events , they have high betweenness centrality in the non - market relationships network . These places , then , are open to a wide audience that includes mappers . They are frontier places that allow for inter - community interactions . The case of Stereolux is particularly interesting . It is a formal organization , highly visible and financed by local public institutions . All year round , the venue programs various types of event - live music , exhibitions and performances ( about 180 annually ) . It is also a place of creation , and hosts artist residencies . Having a market relationship with this place can therefore constitute part of the process of local legitimization and recognition , especially for peripheral actors ( Grabher , op . cit ) . It can also open up new opportunities in other places , both locally and further afield . Most mappers belonging to the artists group have already worked there in residency and / or shared their productions with audiences - but the same is not true of members of other subgroups . This place could thus play a crucial role in promoting face - to - face meetings and helping structure a community . Lieu Unique also schedules numerous events - more than 300 each year . Its agenda includes lectures , concerts and exhibitions of contemporary art . We also found four other places having high betweenness centrality . A local music venue called the Warehouse is a focal point for events and club mappers . The School of Architecture is a place where actual and former students meet , and the venue for events of the forthcoming videomapping festival . These two venues both create and diffuse productions . Caserne Mellinet is the workspace of a collective of artists , and Ateliers Bonus is where other artists using videomapping have their workspace . These last two are primarily dedicated to creation , as opposed to the exploitation / dissemination of videomapping . Events ( especially the forthcoming videomapping festival ) could also play an important role locally . Though it has yet to take place , relationships have already been forged as the program has been put together . As explained above , the organization has sought to combine the artistic and architectural approaches to videomapping , and to this end has created a program featuring members of both subgroups . It will therefore be an event at which encounters can happen , triggering the creation of relationships that do not yet exist . The process of drawing up the program has also been important to the local configuration of this practice . Following the literature focused on field - configuring events ( Meyer et al . , op . cit ; Schüßler et al . , op . cit ) , this process links the macro - dynamics of the field ( regarding trends and conventions ) with local individual actions ( building a collective space and a common aesthetic framework ) . This is all the more true given that the person initiating the festival has established strong ties with other actors in the field elsewhere ; this festival could be a catalyst for the local community ( Sgourev , op . cit ) . Indeed , as stated above , a level of ambiguity exists that is due to a splitting of the community into subgroups associated with different visions of the practice ( Sgourev , op . cit ) . An event with an editorialized program can both orient practice in a particular direction , promoting specific aesthetics , and organize moments of encounter for creators . It also offers an opportunity to meet the public , which can in turn foster recognition and legitimization of the genre ( Hsu et al . , 2006 ; Grabher et al . , 2008 ) . The current degree of heterophily means that there is no common vision ; the festival could actively participate in configuring this practice locally and structuring the community . Overall , we note preferential circulation and sub - preferential circulation among our sample of places and events , which means that some places / events are attended by one subgroup and not others , for various reasons ( geographical proximity of place of work or residence , cultural tastes , etc . ) . There are also places / events attended by most actors , where people belonging to distinct subgroups are able to meet . In reality , the main venues are those at which interdisciplinary programming intersects with arts and technology ( Lieu Unique and Stereolux , Scopitone ) . This provides fertile ground for a community at the intersection of these two sectors , which is a necessary ( though not sufficient in and of itself ) condition for the development of a common framework . Because they create a favorable context for connecting different social and cognitive realms , these interface places are necessary to innovation at the intersection of art and tech . The maintenance of a certain heterogeneity of places is however also necessary , because this is what allows less visible actors to develop niches and experimentation . Conclusion It is clear that a dynamic of innovation is developing locally around a techno - creative practice that combines synthetic and symbolic knowledge . The literature has highlighted a strong potential for innovation at the intersection of the arts and technology sectors . In the case we studied , it does not yet take the form of an innovation community , since different cognitive spaces are in opposition . The actors we have studied do share proximities , and activation of these could enable the emergence of an innovation community . We identify boundary places and events . Like certain connecting platforms , these can play an important role in structuring a collective innovation dynamic , even serving as intra - and inter - community intermediation mechanisms . They allow a community to gain visibility and legitimacy . Depending on the type of place , they can also promote the creation of standards for creative practice . These places and their articulations in a spatialized network therefore appear necessary to facilitating the structuring of communities of innovation . Bibliography Ambrosino , C . , Guillon , V . , & Duvauroux , D . ( 2016 ) . Genius loci reloaded , The creative renaissance of Nantes and Saint Etienne . In P . Long & N . D . Morpeth ( Eds . ) , Tourism and the Creative Industries : Theories , policies and practice ( p . 116 - 133 ) . Routledge . Amin , A . , & Cohendet , P . ( 2004 ) . Architectures of knowledge : Firms , capabilities , and communities . Oxford University Press . Anand , N . , & Watson , M . R . ( 2004 ) . Tournament Rituals in the Evolution of Fields : The Case of the Grammy Awards . The Academy of Management Journal , 47 ( 1 ) , 59 - 80 . Asheim , B . T . , & Gertler , M . S . ( 2006 ) . The Geography of Innovation : Regional Innovation Systems . Oxford University Press . Asheim , B . , & Hansen , H . K . ( 2009 ) . Knowledge Bases , Talents , and Contexts : On the Usefulness of the Creative Class Approach in Sweden . Economic Geography , 85 ( 4 ) , 425 - 442 . Balland , P . A . , Suire , R . and Vicente , J . ( 2013 ) Structural and Geographical Patterns of Knowledge Networks in Emerging Technological Standards : Evidence from the European GNSS Industry , Economics of Innovation and New Technology , 22 ( 1 ) : 47 - 72 Balland , P . , Jara - Figueroa , C . , Petralia , S . G . et al . « Complex economic activities concentrate in large cities” , Nature Human Behaviour 4 , 248 – 254 Bathelt , H . , Malmberg , A . , & Maskell , P . ( 2004 ) . Clusters and knowledge : Local buzz , global pipelines and the process of knowledge creation . Progress in Human Geography , 28 ( 1 ) , 31 - 56 . Bathelt , H . , & Cohendet , P . ( 2014 ) . The creation of knowledge : Local building , global accessing and economic development—toward an agenda . Journal of Economic Geography , 14 ( 5 ) , 869 - 882 . Becker , H . S . ( 1982 ) . Art worlds . University of California Press . Boix , R . , Capone , F . , de Propris , L . , Lazzeretti , L . , and Sanchez , D . 2016 . Comparing creative industries in Europe . European Urban and Regional Studies , 23 ( 4 ) : 935 – 40 . Boschma , R . ( 2005 ) . Proximity and Innovation : A Critical Assessment . Regional Studies , 39 ( 1 ) , 61 - 74 . Boschma , R . ( 2017 ) . Relatedness as driver of regional diversification : A research agenda . Regional Studies , 51 ( 3 ) , 351 - 364 . Burt , R . S . ( 2004 ) . Structural Holes and Good Ideas . American Journal of Sociology , 110 ( 2 ) , 349 - 399 . Capdevila , I . , Cohendet , P . , & Simon , L . ( 2018 ) . From a local community to a global influence . How elBulli restaurant created a new epistemic movement in the world of haute cuisine . Industry and Innovation , 25 ( 5 ) , 526 - 549 . Cattani , G . , & Ferriani , S . ( 2008 ) . A Core / Periphery Perspective on Individual Creative Performance : Social Networks and Cinematic Achievements in the Hollywood Film Industry . Organization Science , 19 ( 6 ) , 824 - 844 . Gino Cattani , Simone Ferriani , Andrea Lanza ( 2017 ) , “Deconstructing the Outsider Puzzle : The Legitimation journey of Novelty” , Organization Science , 28 ( 6 ) : 965 - 992 Christopherson , S . ( 2004 ) . The Divergent Worlds of New Media : How Policy Shapes Work in the Creative Economy1 . Review of Policy Research , 21 ( 4 ) , 543 - 558 . Cohendet , P . , Grandadam , D . , & Simon , L . ( 2010 ) . The Anatomy of the Creative City . Industry & Innovation , 17 ( 1 ) , 91 - 111 . Content , J . , & Frenken , K . ( 2016 ) . Related variety and economic development : A literature review . European Planning Studies , 24 ( 12 ) , 2097 - 2112 . Cowan , R . , David , P . A . , & Foray , D . ( 2000 ) . The explicit economics of knowledge codification and tacitness . Industrial and Corporate Change , 9 ( 2 ) , 211 - 253 . Crespo , J . , Suire , R . , & Vicente , J . ( 2014 ) . Lock - in or lock - out ? How structural properties of knowledge networks affect regional resilience . Journal of Economic Geography , 14 ( 1 ) , 199 - 219 . Davids , M . , & Frenken , K . ( 2015 ) . Proximity , knowledge base and the innovation process : The case of Unilever’s Becel diet margarine . Papers in Evolutionary Economic Geography , 14 ( 4 ) . Utrecht University . Davids , M . and Frenken , K . ( 2018 ) Proximity , knowledge base and the innovation process - towards an integrated framework , Regional Studies , 52 ( 1 ) , 23 - 34 . Emin , S . , & Sagot - Duvauroux , D . ( 2016 ) . L’émergence de dynamiques coopératives : L’exemple d’un réseau d’entreprises créatives co - localisées , Une approche par l’économie des proximités . Géographie Économie Société , 18 ( 4 ) , 525 - 550 . Florida , R . L . ( 2002 ) . The rise of the creative class : And how it’s transforming work , leisure , community and everyday life . Basic Books . Frenken , K . , Van Oort , F . , & Verburg , T . ( 2007 ) . Related Variety , Unrelated Variety and Regional Economic Growth . Regional Studies , 41 ( 5 ) , 685 - 697 . Foster , P . , & Ocejo , R . E . ( 2013 ) . The Oxford Handbook of Creative Industries . In C . Jones , M . Lorenzen , & J . Sapsed ( Eds . ) , Brokerage , Mediation , and Social Networks in the Creative Industries . Oxford University Press . Gibson , C . ( 2005 ) . Recording Studios : Relational Spaces of Creativity in the City . Built Environment , 31 ( 3 ) , 192 - 207 . Grabher , G . ( 2018 ) . Marginality as strategy : Leveraging peripherality for creativity . Environment and Planning A : Economy and Space , 50 ( 8 ) , 1785 - 1794 . Grabher , G . , Ibert , O . , & Flohr , S . ( 2008 ) . The Neglected King : The Customer in the New Knowledge Ecology of Innovation . Economic Geography , 84 ( 3 ) , 253 - 280 . Grandadam , D . , Cohendet , P . , & Simon , L . ( 2013 ) . Places , Spaces and the Dynamics of Creativity : The Video Game Industry in Montreal . Regional Studies , 47 ( 10 ) , 1701 - 1714 . Granovetter , M . ( 1985 ) . Economic Action and Social Structure : The Problem of Embeddedness . American Journal of Sociology , 91 ( 3 ) , 481 - 510 . Haas , P . M . ( 1992 ) . Introduction : Epistemic Communities and International Policy Coordination . International Organization , 46 ( 1 ) , 1 - 35 . Hauge , A . , & Hracs , B . J . ( 2010 ) . See the Sound , Hear the Style : Collaborative Linkages between Indie Musicians and Fashion Designers in Local Scenes . Industry & Innovation , 17 ( 1 ) , 113 - 129 . Hsu , G . , Hannan , M . T . , & Koçak , Ö . ( 2009 ) . Multiple Category Memberships in Markets : An Integrative Theory and Two Empirical Tests . American Sociological Review , 74 ( 1 ) , 150 - 169 . Ingstrup , M . B . , & Menzel , M . - P . ( 2019 ) . The emergence of relatedness between industries : The example of offshore oil and gas and offshore wind energy in Esbjerg , Denmark . Papers in Evolutionary Economic Geography , 19 ( 29 ) . Utrecht University . Janssen , M . J . , & Frenken , K . ( 2019 ) . Cross - specialisation policy : Rationales and options for linking unrelated industries . Cambridge Journal of Regions , Economy and Society , 12 ( 2 ) , 195 - 212 . Jones , C . , Hesterly , W . S . , & Borgatti , S . P . ( 1997 ) . A General Theory of Network Governance : Exchange Conditions and Social Mechanisms . The Academy of Management Review , 22 ( 4 ) , 911 - 945 . Kloosterman , R . C . ( 2014 ) . Cultural Amenities : Large and Small , Mainstream and Niche—A Conceptual Framework for Cultural Planning in an Age of Austerity . European Planning Studies , 22 ( 12 ) , 2510 - 2525 . Kloosterman , R . C , & Brandellero , A . ( 2016 ) . « All these places have their moments » : Exploring the Micro - Geography of Music Scenes : The Indica Gallery and the Chelsea Hotel . M / C Journal , 19 ( 3 ) . Landry , C . , & Bianchini , F . ( 1995 ) . The Creative City . Demos . Lavanga , M . ( 2018 ) . The role of Pitti Uomo trade fair in the menswear fashion industry . In R . Blaszczyk & B . Wubs ( Éds . ) , The Fashion Forecasters : A Hidden History of Color and Trend Prediction ( p . 191 - 209 ) . Lave , J . , & Wenger , E . ( 1991 ) . Situated learning : Legitimate peripheral participation . Cambridge University Press . Lingo , E . L . , & O’Mahony , S . ( 2010 ) . Nexus Work : Brokerage on Creative Projects . Administrative Science Quarterly , 55 ( 1 ) , 47 - 81 . Maskell , P . , Bathelt , H . , & Malmberg , A . ( 2006 ) . Building global knowledge pipelines : The role of temporary clusters . European Planning Studies , 14 ( 8 ) , 997 - 1013 . Meyer , A . D . , Gaba , V . , & Colwell , K . A . ( 2005 ) . Organizing Far from Equilibrium : Nonlinear Change in Organizational Fields . Organization Science , 16 ( 5 ) , 456 - 473 . Mills , A . J . , Durepos , G . , & Wiebe , E . ( Éds . ) . ( 2010 ) . Encyclopedia of case study research . SAGE Publications . Meyer , A . D . , Gaba , V . , & Colwell , K . A . ( 2005 ) . Organizing Far from Equilibrium : Nonlinear Change in Organizational Fields . Organization Science , 16 ( 5 ) , 456 - 473 . Nooteboom , B . , Van Haverbeke , W . , Duysters , G . , Gilsing , V . , & van den Oord , A . ( 2007 ) . Optimal cognitive distance and absorptive capacity . Research Policy , 36 ( 7 ) , 1016 - 1034 . Oldenburg , R . ( 1989 ) . The Great Good Place : Cafes , Coffee Shops , Bookstores , Bars , Hair Salons , and Other Hangouts at the Heart of a Community . Paragon House . 338 p . Perry - Smith , J . E . , & Shalley , C . E . ( 2003 ) . The Social Side of Creativity : A Static and Dynamic Social Network Perspective . The Academy of Management Review , 28 ( 1 ) , 89 - 106 . Phillips , D . J . ( 2011 ) . Jazz and the Disconnected : City Structural Disconnectedness and the Emergence of a Jazz Canon , 1897 – 1933 . American Journal of Sociology , 117 ( 2 ) , 420 - 483 . Punstein , A . M . , & Glückler , J . ( 2020 ) . In the mood for learning ? How the thought collectives of designers and engineers co - create innovations . Journal of Economic Geography , 20 ( 2 ) , 543 - 570 . Rallet , A . , & Torre , A . ( 2004 ) . Proximité et localisation . Économie rurale , 280 ( 1 ) , 25 - 41 . Rantisi , N . M . ( 2014 ) . Exploring the role of industry intermediaries in the construction of ‘Local Pipelines’ : The case of the Montreal Fur Garment Cluster and the rise of Fur – Fashion connections . Journal of Economic Geography , 14 ( 5 ) , 955 - 971 . Rantisi , N . M . , & Leslie , D . ( 2010 ) . Materiality and Creative Production : The Case of the Mile End Neighborhood in Montréal . Environment and Planning A : Economy and Space , 42 ( 12 ) , 2824 - 2841 . Rodríguez - Pose , A . , & Lee , N . ( 2020 ) . Hipsters vs . geeks ? Creative workers , STEM and innovation in US cities . Cities , 100 . Rogers , E . M . ( 1983 ) . Diffusion of innovations . Free Press . Sarazin , B . , Cohendet , P . , & Simon , L . ( Eds . ) . ( 2017 ) . Les communautés d’innovation : De la liberté créatrice à l’innovation organisée . Éditions EMS , Management & Société . Schieb - Bienfait , N . , Saives , A . - L . , & Charles - Pauvers , B . ( 2018 ) . Urban Creative and Cultural Entrepreneurs : A Closer Look at Cultural Quarters and the Creative Clustering Process in Nantes ( France ) . In E . Innerhofer , H . Pechlaner , & E . Borin ( Eds . ) , Entrepreneurship in Culture and Creative Industries : Perspectives from Companies and Regions ( p . 341 - 353 ) . Springer International Publishing . Schüßler , E . , Grabher , G . , & Müller - Seitz , G . ( 2015 ) . Field - Configuring Events : Arenas for Innovation and Learning ? Industry and Innovation , 22 ( 3 ) , 165 - 172 . Scott , A . J . ( 2014 ) . Beyond the Creative City : Cognitive – Cultural Capitalism and the New Urbanism . Regional Studies , 48 ( 4 ) , 565 - 578 . Sedita , S . R . , de Noni , I . , and Pilotti , L . 2016 . Out of the crisis : An empirical investigation of place - specific determinants of economic resilience . European Planning Studies , 25 ( 2 ) : 155 – 80 . Sgourev , S . V . ( 2013 ) . How Paris Gave Rise to Cubism ( and Picasso ) : Ambiguity and Fragmentation in Radical Innovation . Organization Science , 24 ( 6 ) , 1601 - 1617 . Sgourev , S . V . ( 2015 ) . Brokerage as Catalysis : How Diaghilev’s Ballets Russes Escalated Modernism . Organization Studies , 36 ( 3 ) , 343 - 361 . Storper , M . , & Venables , A . J . ( 2004 ) . Buzz : Face - to - face contact and the urban economy . Journal of Economic Geography , 4 ( 4 ) , 351 - 370 . Suire , R . ( 2019 ) . Innovating by bricolage : How do firms diversify through knowledge interactions with FabLabs ? Regional Studies , 53 ( 7 ) 1 - 12 . Suire , R . , & Vicente , J . ( 2015 ) . Récents enseignements de la théorie des réseaux en faveur de la politique et du management des clusters . Revue d’économie industrielle , 152 , 91 - 119 . Suire , R . , & Vicente , J . ( 2014 ) . Clusters for life or life cycles of clusters : In search of the critical factors of clusters’ resilience . Entrepreneurship & Regional Development , 26 ( 1 - 2 ) , 142 - 164 . Torre , A . ( 2008 ) . On the Role Played by Temporary Geographical Proximity in Knowledge Transmission . Regional Studies , 42 ( 6 ) , 869 - 889 . Uzzi , B . , & Spiro , J . ( 2005 ) . Collaboration and Creativity : The Small World Problem . American Journal of Sociology , 111 ( 2 ) , 447 - 504 .