Global loss of fine - scale chromatin architecture and rebalancing of gene expression during early colorectal cancer development Yizhou Zhu 1 , Hayan Lee 1 , Annika K . Weimer 1 , Aaron Horning 1 , Stephanie A . Nevins 1 , Edward D . Esplin 1 , Kristina Paul 1 , Gat Krieger 3 , Zohar Shipony 3 , Meredith Mills 2 , Rozelle Laquindanum 2 , Uri Ladabaum 2 , Roxanne Chiu 1 , Teri Longacre 4 , Jeanne Shen 4 , Ariel Jaimovich 3 , Doron Lipson 3 , Anshul Kundaje 1 , 5 , William J . Greenleaf 1 , 6 , Christina Curtis 1 , 2 , James M . Ford 1 , 2 , Michael P . Snyder 1 , * 1 Department of Genetics , Stanford School of Medicine , Stanford , CA , United States 2 Department of Medicine , Stanford School of Medicine , Stanford , CA , United States 3 Ultima Genomics , Newark , CA , United States 4 Department of Pathology , Stanford School of Medicine , Stanford , CA , United States 5 Department of Computer Science , Stanford University , Stanford , CA , United States 6 Chan Zuckerberg Biohub , San Francisco , CA , United States * Corresponding author : mpsnyder @ stanford . edu ( M . P . S . ) Abstract Although 3D genome architecture is essential for long - range gene regulation , the significance of distal regulatory chromatin contacts is challenged by recent findings of low correlation between contact propensity and gene expression . To better understand the role of long - range interactions between distal regulatory elements during the early transformation from healthy colon to colorectal cancer , here we performed high resolution chromatin conformation capture for 33 samples including non - neoplastic mucosa , adenomatous polyps and adenocarcinomas , mostly from Familial Adenomatous Polyposis ( FAP ) patients . We identified hundreds of thousands of chromatin micro - structures , such as architectural stripes and loops , which originated from active cis - regulatory elements . Surprisingly , these structures progressively decayed throughout cancer progression , particularly at promoters . Meta - analyses revealed that this decay was independent of alterations in DNA methylation and chromatin accessibility . Interestingly , the degree of interaction loss was poorly correlated with gene expression changes . Instead , genes whose expression were disproportionately lower and higher than their relative promoter interaction in mucosa shifted their expression in polyps and adenocarcinomas to yield a more direct relationship between strength of interaction and gene expression . Our work provides the first high resolution 3D conformation maps during early cancer formation and progression , and provides novel insights into transcriptional readouts associated with fine - scale chromatin conformation alterations . Introduction Transcriptional programs in mammalian cells are governed by coordinated function of proximal and distal regulatory elements . Under the constraint of 3D chromatin folding structures known as Topologically Associating Domains ( TADs ) 1 - 3 , long - range physical interactions are formed between cis - regulatory elements ( CREs ) . The process of direct promoter - enhancer ( P - E ) looping has long been proposed as essential for gene regulation 4 . Consistent with this concept , artificial interventions of P - E interactions through forced looping or disruption of TAD insulation have demonstrated direct impact on gene expression 5 - 7 . However , the necessity of stable P - E loops for gene regulation has been challenged by the observations from several recent studies . Fluorescent imaging of functionally paired promoters and enhancers indicated that their distance did not necessarily decrease during gene activation 8 , 9 . In addition , disruption of TAD structures through depletion of CTCF / cohesin or their regulators caused a surprisingly modest impact on the global transcriptome 10 , 11 . Furthermore , drastic expression changes either between cell types or induced by heat shock have been accompanied with only subtle changes in chromatin structure 12 , 13 . Together , these observations raised questions about the extent to which transcription levels are determined by contact propensities between CREs . Our knowledge of high order chromatin folding has been largely driven by the advent of chromatin conformation capture ( 3C ) methodologies . In situ Hi - C , the current state - of - the - art global 3C method , robustly identifies TAD structures but inefficiently captures fine structures such as promoter - enhancer interactions due to resolution and sequencing depth restraints 14 , 15 . To address this caveat , a wide variety of techniques enriching CRE regions through chromatin - binding proteins / histones 16 , sequence - based capture 17 , and chromatin accessibility 18 were developed . However , such approaches have systematic biases that cannot distinguish contact propensity from the availability of corresponding enrichment markers . In contrast , recent low bias mapping techniques , such as micro - C 19 and MCC 20 , detect CRE interactions through improving resolution to sub kilobase levels . We previously found that a similarly high resolution could be obtained through increasing the number of restriction enzymes ( REs ) 21 , and such multi - RE strategy required substantially lower material input and protocol complexity compared to MNase digestion . Consistent with micro - C , the multi - RE digested Hi - C ( mHi - C ) revealed highly detailed interaction networks among CREs including regions that lacked strong binding of CTCF / cohesin , which are considered crucial in mediating interactions in the loop extrusion model 22 , 23 . The development of colorectal cancer ( CRC ) typically involves a standard progression from normal colorectal mucosa to the formation of precancerous polyps that ultimately undergo malignant transformation 24 , 25 . Over 80 % of colorectal carcinomas are initiated by loss - of - function mutations of APC , a key component in the cytosolic complex that targets β - catenin for destruction and suppresses Wnt signaling 26 , 27 . In patients with germline APC mutations , a condition also known as Familial Adenomatous Polyposis ( FAP ) , tens to thousands of precancerous polyps are formed in adolescence or early adulthood 28 , 29 . The large heterogeneous polyp collection arising from the same germline genetic background provides an ideal system to study epigenetic molecular events during pre - malignant to malignant transformation . In this study , we take the advantage of mHi - C to analyze the small sample amounts of FAP polyps and investigate fine - scale conformation changes during early stages of CRC development . Using mHi - C , we generated high resolution chromatin contact maps for 33 colon samples representing different stages of CRC progression , including non - neoplastic mucosa , adenomatous polyps , and adenocarcinoma , from 4 FAP patients and 6 sporadic CRC patients . As part of the Human Tumor Atlas Network ( HTAN ) 30 , we also collected the transcriptome , methylome , and chromatin accessibility profiles from the same patient group . The mHi - C robustly revealed distal interaction activities of CREs , demonstrating that instead of CTCF - binding sites found at TAD boundaries , unmethylated promoter regions most actively formed interaction stripes , i . e . high frequency interaction with entire neighboring domains , and loops . The contact propensities of regulatory elements progressively decreased in polyps and further in adenocarcinomas , with the trend most significant and consistent at active transcription start sites ( TSS ) . The degree of interaction loss was higher in hypermethylated regions and regions that lost accessibility , although hypomethylated regions and those that gained accessibility also showed trends of loss . In mucosa , promoter stripe strength did not linearly correlate with gene expression but instead , a baseline interaction level distinguished the majority of robustly expressed genes from the low - expressed ones . In polyps and cancer , the overall loss of interaction caused the majority of promoter stripes shifting closer to the baseline , and the correlation between stripe and expression was concomitantly increased . This increased correlation was driven by the reduction of the relative gap between stripe strength and expression levels , such that genes with disproportionately strong and weak interaction activities tended to be up - and down - regulated , respectively . Based on this observation , we propose that impaired CRE interaction networks in cancers results in strong stripe - and loop - forming promoters acquiring a transcriptional advantage , and we found genes with such characteristics were highly enriched in cancer - driving gene pathways . Overall , our results show how mapping fine - level chromatin structure at high resolution provides novel insights into gene expression and early stages of oncogenesis . Results mHi - C reveals cis - regulatory element interaction networks We mapped 3D chromatin interactions at high resolution ( 200 - 500 bp ) using mHi - C , a protocol we adapted from the in situ Hi - C protocol 31 ( Figure S1A , Methods ) . In this protocol , we included a cryo - substitution preprocessing step which was found to increase detection of interactions in frozen tissues . In addition , a mild detergent condition was used , and multiple restriction enzyme digestion was performed for preservation and detection of fine interaction signals involving regulatory elements . By using Tn5 tagmentation to construct libraries with improved sample efficiency , the protocol required as low as a few milligrams tissue input , which was important for the very low sample amounts of many of the polyps . We generated mHi - C data for 33 frozen colon tissue samples ( Figure 1A ) . This included 7 non - neoplastic mucosa , 19 adenomatous polyps , and one adenocarcinoma from 4 FAP patients , as well as six additional adenocarcinoma samples from non - FAP individuals who developed sporadic CRC . A total of 1 . 59 billion unique intrachromosomal long - range ( ≧ 1kb ) interaction contacts were mapped ( Figure S1B , C ) . The pooled data from all samples revealed distal interaction at resolutions up to 200 bp ( Figure 1B , S1D ) . At sub - kilobase resolution ( 200 bp – 1 kb ) , we visually observed interaction stripes , which indicate high frequency interactions with the entire domain , that extended from CREs such as promoters and CTCF binding sites . Along the stripes , strong interaction dots indicating long range looping were evident , where the other anchor often overlapped with a distal regulatory element . These interactions were not present in in situ Hi - C despite visualization at same binning resolutions ( Figure S1D ) , suggesting that finer digestion of mHi - C improved the capture of CRE interactions that were previously missing . To statistically identify interaction stripes and loops , we applied a custom peak - calling algorithm and HiCCUPS 32 , respectively , and identified a total of 254 , 642 stripes and 279 , 480 loops from all Figure 1 mHi - C reveals fine - scale chromatin structures associated with CREs . ( A ) Summary of colon tissue samples examined by multi - omics assays . Colors of bars indicate donors . For sporadic colorectal cancers ( CRCs ) , each row represents a distinct donor patient . ( B ) An example locus showing alignment of micro - structures revealed by mHi - C ( top ) at 1 kb resolution with other 1D epigenomic features . Bottom panel indicates significant loop interactions at stages . ( C ) Annotation of stripes and loops by the regulatory element landscape in sigmoid colon . ( D ) Fraction of loops formed between two stripe anchors ( S - S ) , a stripe and a non - stripe ( S - NS ) , or two non - stripe anchors ( NS - NS ) . ( E ) Scatter plot between the stripe strength and the total number of loops formed the anchor . Pearson correlation r is indicated . samples ( Figure 1C , Methods ) . Annotation of the anchors using the Ensembl Regulatory Build database 33 revealed that 45 % of stripes and 88 % of loops were associated with active chromatin regions . Notably , only 39 , 658 ( 15 % ) stripes overlapped with CTCF sites , compared to 75 , 795 ( 30 % ) that intersected functional elements without the factor . Similarly , interactions between pairs of CTCF sites only accounted for a small portion ( 11 % ) of all loops . In particular , almost three fold more Promoter - Promoter ( P - P ) loops were identified compared to CTCF - CTCF loops ( 29 % vs 11 % ) , suggesting that promoters are among the highest interaction activity . Together , these results confirmed that resolution improvement of mHi - C enabled robust identification of a large number of long range interactions of active CREs . Comparative analysis showed that the activities of forming site - specific loops and non - specific interaction stripes were strongly correlated . The anchors of loops and stripes highly overlapped , with 95 % of loops harboring at least one stripe - forming anchor ( Figure 1D ) . Consistently , the quantitative strength of stripes significantly correlated with the number of loops formed by the anchor ( Figure 1E ) . Thus , we consider stripe formation and strength a robust surrogate for investigating the looping activity of a locus . This surrogation is preferred for quantitative analyses since compared to the sparse 2D loop profiles , the stripe signals are typically supported by tens of folds more read counts and thereby more precise and statistically powerful . Trajectorial decay of CRE interaction networks during early colorectal cancer development To study the stage - dependent transition of CRE interactions , we first used DESeq2 34 to identify significant differential stripes . Using a threshold of ≧ 1 . 3 fold change and 10 % FDR cutoff , we obtained 1 , 580 and 58 , 076 differential stripes between mucosa - polyp and mucosa - adenocarcinoma , respectively , ( Figure S2A , B ) . The majority ( 77 % ) of stripes altered in polyps were also changed in adenocarcinoma ( Figure 2A ) . Comparisons of the mean fold enrichment of these stripes in individual samples revealed their higher gains and losses in adenocarcinomas than polyps ( Figure 2B ) . Together these results indicate extensive chromatin conformation changes in polyp formation with alterations further extended during malignant transition . We further examined if stripe alterations were indicative of neoplastic stage progression . Principal component analysis ( PCA ) of differential stripes between non - neoplastic mucosa and adenocarcinoma revealed the first principal component ( PC1 ) explaining the majority ( 71 % ) of cross - sample variation ( Figure S2C ) . Under this projection , mucosa samples showed perfect separation from adenocarcinomas , whereas polyps formed a continuum between the two stages , presumably reflecting their degree of transformation ( Figure 2C ) . Ranking of the samples revealed a total of five samples that did not follow the normal mucosa - polyp - adenocarcinoma trajectory , and hence this simple analysis resulted in a stage classifier with 85 % test accuracy . We further performed PCA separately on the gained and lost stripes , and found the sample positions on the two PC1 axes were highly consistent ( r = 0 . 94 , Figure S2D ) , suggesting that the overall degree of stage - dependent stripe gains and losses were comparable across samples . We next examined if the PC1 was indicative to the heterogeneity of the polyps . Interestingly , the scores of the polyps fell into two clusters , with 4 closer to the adenocarcinomas and the rest nearest to the mucosa samples . Tracing the origin and phenotypes of these polyps , we found that the adenocarcinoma - like polyps were not larger in size , which is considered a signature of higher dysplasia , but instead sourced from the two FAP patients who developed adenocarcinoma ( Figure S2E ) . Indeed , these patients harbored both cancer - like and non - Figure 2 Progressive loss of interactions along cancer development trajectory . ( A ) Overlap of significant differential interaction stripes between mucosa - polyp and mucosa - adenocarcinoma . Only the overlaps that changed in the same direction are included . ( B ) Distribution of mean fold enrichments for stripes significantly lost ( N = 982 ) and gained ( N = 598 ) in polyps . ( C ) Rankings of samples based on PC1 from PCA analysis of significant differential stripes in adenocarcinoma . ( D ) Aggregated peak analyses ( APA ) for stripes and loops at different stages . Fold enrichment ( FE ) and APA scores indicate center to background signal ratios . ( E ) Comparison between baseline stripe strength in mucosa and degree of stripe loss in adenocarcinoma . Center and radius for each ellipse represents mean and standard deviation for stripes annotated with corresponding regulatory elements . Dotted line indicates linear regression of ellipse centers . ( F ) Sample correlation between PC1 values indicated in ( C ) and mean stripe strengths . Pearson coefficient r is indicated . ( G ) Pearson correlation matrix for sample trajectories derived from ( i ) first PCA component of all stripes ( PC1 All ) ( ii ) first PCA component of significant differential stripes between mucosa and adenocarcinoma ( PC1 Sigdiff ) ( iii ) mean stripe strength for all anchors ( Mean Stripe ) ( iv ) fraction of intrachromosomal distal interaction reads mapped to all stripe anchors ( Stripe Enrich ) and ( v ) fraction of intrachromosomal distal interaction reads mapped to all gene promoters ( TSS Enrich ) . neoplastic mucosa - like polyps , suggesting their higher polyp heterogeneity than patients without adenocarcinoma at the time of colectomy , which may contribute to higher likelihood of malignant transformation . We also found that the significantly differential stripes was due to a preferential loss of features , with the loss - gain ratio being 1 . 6 fold in polyps and 3 . 3 fold in adenocarcinomas ( Figure S2A , B ) . Interestingly , such imbalance was observed in similar ratios from the entire stripe profile ( Figure S3A ) . Aggregation Peak Analyses ( APA ) 32 revealed progressively lower average signals for both stripes and loops ( Figure 2D ) at polyp and cancer stages , suggesting an overall loss of interactions at genome - wide level . This stage - dependent loss is consistent with the all feature PCA patterns ( Figure S2F , G ) . To further examine the relationship between interaction decline and stage progression , we first categorized stripe anchors by their functional annotation . We found highest stripe loss at transcription start sites ( TSS ) , followed by epigenetically annotated promoter regions , CTCF , and other regulatory elements ( Figure 2E ) . This order was nearly perfectly inverse - correlated with their average fold enrichments in mucosa ( r = - 0 . 998 ) , indicating that the degree of stripe loss was proportional to their starting values ( Figure S3B - D ) . We then calculated the mean stripe loss for each sample , which formed a new trajectory by ranking in order of degree of loss . Compared with the trajectory derived from differential stripes , we observed strong sample - to - sample correlation ( r = 0 . 9 , Figure 2F ) . Notably , the stripe signal was comparable between non - neoplastic mucosa and mucosa - like polyps , but more reduced in adenocarcinoma and cancer - like polyps , suggesting well correspondence of the severity of stripe loss with malignant transformation . Despite using a careful normalization against both self - ligation frequency and local background to quantify stripe strengths ( Methods ) , the detection of unidirectional genome - wide peak loss is susceptible to potential experimental caveats , particularly with the unstable genomic background of cancer . Hence , we performed multiple quality control analyses to validate stripe loss by ruling out confounding factors . We first calculated the fraction of distal interaction reads in stripe anchors and gene transcriptional start sites ( TSS ) , and observed an expected progressive fraction loss ( Figure S2H , I ) . Such losses among samples were highly correlated with trajectories defined above ( Figure 2G ) , indicating that the degree of signal loss was consistent between measurements . To investigate the impact of cancer - associated genome instability on stripe quantification , we identified loci with copy number changes and rearrangement events in the adenocarcinoma samples ( Figure S4A , B , Methods ) . Stripes in these regions were not found to be significantly different from chromosomal averages , suggesting that the impact of large chromosome abnormality on interaction quantification was controlled by normalization ( Figure S4C , D ) . Lastly , to test if the reduced stripe signals were caused by cell composition changes associated with cancer , we compared promoters for genes specifically expressed in epithelial , stromal , and immune with housekeeping genes ( Table S1 ) . The stage - dependent stripe losses were observed for all four gene groups ( Figure S4E ) , suggesting that this trend was unlikely caused by a shift in cell type compositions . These results proved the validity of the loss of interactions during cancer stage progression . DNA Methylation and chromatin accessibility do not fully explain decays of CRE interaction To investigate the possible underlying mechanism ( s ) of CRE interaction loss , we performed 23 bulk ATAC seq and incorporated 21 EM seq from a separate study 35 for the colon tissues from the same patients examined by mHi - C with high sample overlap ( 23 / 33 samples ; Figure 1A ) . Aligning the methylation profile with stripe strengths in mucosa , we found they were significantly inversely correlated ( r = - 0 . 52 ) . However , such correlation was not linear ; instead , a critical Figure 3 Association between contact propensity and DNA methylation / chromatin accessibility ( A ) Scatter plot between interaction stripe strength ( log10 fold enrichment ) and DNA methylation degree ( percent ) for all stripe anchors with measurable methylation sites ( N = 230 , 658 ) . Pearson correlation was calculated for all dots as well as those falling in the upper - left and bottom - right threshold zones indicated by the dash lines . ( B ) Scatter plot between DNA methylation ( percent ) and loop count for all promoters ( N = 14 , 833 ) in mucosa . Black line indicates Lowess regression . ( C ) KDE plot showing differential methylation versus stripe strength between mucosa and adenocarcinoma for stripe anchors that are unmethylated ( < 25 % , N = 14 , 543 ) and methylated ( > 50 % , N = 200 , 115 ) . Pearson correlation r is indicated for each comparison . ( D ) Overlap between stripe anchors ( N = 254 , 642 ) and ATAC peaks ( N = 258 , 346 ) . ( E ) Scatter plot between stripe and ATAC peak strengths in mucosa and ( F ) their differential changes in adenocarcinoma ( N = 70 , 301 ) . Pearson correlation r was indicated . Colors indicated ( differential ) methylation . ( G ) Correlation between PC1 values from PCA of whole stripe and ATAC seq profiles for samples examined by both assays ( N = 21 ) . ( H ) Boxplots showing mean fold change and ( I ) fraction of reads in all and TSS ATAC peaks by sample stages . Significant p values were calculated using Mann - Whitney U test . threshold of methylation fraction ( 25 % - 30 % ) distinguished strong stripes from the remaining ( Figure 3A ) . For the low methylation regions ( < 25 % ) , further loss of methylation was found to weakly correlate with higher stripe strength ( r = - 0 . 17 ) . Consistent with the stripe signals , lower methylation was also associated with higher loop counts ( Figure 3B ) . These results indicated that high interaction activity is associated with DNA unmethylation . During polyp / adenocarcinoma transition , alteration of DNA methylation is a mix of global hypomethylation of normally methylated ( > 40 % ) loci and specific hypermethylation of a subset of unmethylated ( < 25 % ) CpG sites ( Figure S5A ) , a typical pattern for cancers 36 - 38 . This trend was more significant at the adenocarcinoma stage than in polyps , and also at TSSes relative to all stripe anchors . We found that hypermethylation of normally unmethylated regions in adenocarcinoma was associated with increased stripe loss ( Figure 3C ) , consistent with the known repressive role of DNA methylation . However , among normally methylated regions , 72 % also showed stripe reduction and such change was independent to the degree of their hypomethylation ( r = - 0 . 01 ) . Furthermore , among the loci showing low methylation changes ( < ±10 % ) , unmethylated regions experienced higher stripe loss than methylated ( Figure 3C ) , suggesting that the degree of loss was associated with the absolute methylation level instead of its change during cancer development . We next investigated whether stripe losses were accompanied with chromatin accessibility changes . Using ATAC - seq , we identified a combined 258 , 346 significant open chromatin sites in 23 samples ( Figure 1A ) . Thirty - three percent ( 85 , 782 ) of these sites overlapped with 28 % stripe anchors ( Figure 3D ) . Compared to methylation , the fold enrichment of ATAC peaks was much less correlated with stripe signals ( Figure 3E ) , suggesting distinct underlying factors for the two signals . Correspondingly , alterations of ATAC peaks and stripes in adenocarcinoma were only weakly associated ( r = 0 . 15 , Figure 3F ) , whereas both signals correlated stronger with DNA methylation ( Figure 3C , S5B ) . Interestingly , despite low linear correlation , the PCA analyses of ATAC peaks surprisingly similar to the stripes , in which polyps formed a continuum between clearly separated non - neoplastic mucosa and adenocarcinomas ( Figure 3G ) . Furthermore , consistent with stripes , the ATAC peak signals showed global loss in adenocarcinomas , although not in polyps ( Figure 3H , I ) . We further found that the mild gain of ATAC signals in polyps was a mix of loss on promoters and gain at other CREs such as enhancers and TF binding sites ( Figure S5C , D ) . Altogether , these results showed that the strong loss of contact propensity on promoters was accompanied with loss of accessibility , while alterations of the two signals were less consistent on distal CREs . Deviation of gene expressions from promoter distal interaction predicts their alterations during early cancer progression To understand the functional inferences of the interaction decays , we performed 24 sample - matching bulk RNA seq experiments ( Figure 1A ) , identifying 4 , 497 and 9 , 011 significant differentially expressed genes in polyps and adenocarcinomas . PCA analyses of significant genes or the whole transcriptome resulted in a consistent pattern similar to that found for mHi - C , where samples showed trajectorial cancer stage progressions on PC1 ( Figure S6A , B ) . The differentially expressed genes in polyps largely overlapped with adenocarcinomas ( Figure S6C ) , and the majority of overlapping genes showed higher fold change in the same direction ( Figure S6D ) . These results indicate that a significant portion of oncogenic expression alterations occurred at the early polyp stage . To investigate the relationship between expression and chromatin interaction , we first compared promoter stripes and genes that were significantly different in both polyps and adenocarcinomas Figure 4 Alterations of gene expression in polyps and adenocarcinoma are associated with relative promoter interaction activities but not their changes . ( A ) Venn diagram showing overlap between promoter stripes and gene expression that are significantly different in both polyps and adenocarcinomas against mucosa . Significance of overlap was assessed by chi - squared test ( N . S . : not significant ) . ( B ) Violin plots showing differential stripe strengths for genes up - ( N = 1 , 210 ) or down - regulated ( N = 856 ) in both polyps and adenocarcinoma . Significant differential strengths compared to genome average were determined by t test , with p values indicated on top of the figures . ( C ) Scatter plots between differential stripes and transcription fold changes determined by DESeq2 ( N = 18 , 925 ) . Pearson correlation r and its significance are indicated . ( D ) Violin plot showing mean stripe strengths of consistently up - and down - regulated genes compared to whole genome . Student t test was used to test significant difference . ( E ) Fraction of genes with designated loop counts for commonly up - and down - regulated genes , measured as log2 fold difference compared to genome average , at different stages . and found their overlap was low and insignificant ( Figure 4A ) . Consistent with this observation , the stripe loss for up - and down - regulated gene promoters were strikingly equivalent ( Figure 4B ) , and at genome - wide level , the quantitative stripe difference showed no linear correlation with expression change ( Figure 4C ) . These results together suggested that changes of stripes had little predictable impact on differential expression . Importantly , however , we found that at all stages , the stripe signals of up - regulated and down - regulated gene promoters were consistently higher and lower , respectively , than the genome average ( Figure 4D ) . This trend was further confirmed from other measurements of distal interaction activities , including fraction of stripe - forming genes ( Figure S7A ) , loop counts ( Figure 4E , S7B ) , and loop strengths ( Figure S7C ) . These results demonstrated that cancer - associated differential expression is associated with the relative interaction activity of promoters , which remained largely invariant during tumorigenesis . To further understand how higher and lower promoter interaction activity could respectively be associated with up - and down - regulation in cancer , we compared the stripe fold enrichments and transcription levels ( TPM ) of genes at different stages . In mucosa , the majority of high - expressed and a small cluster of low - expressed ( TPM < 0 . 25 ) genes were associated with stripe levels above and below a baseline threshold , respectively ( Figure S7D ) . This separation was almost exclusively responsible for the overall correlation between stripes and expression ( r = 0 . 43 ) as neither of the two gene clusters showed positive correlation beyond the baseline . Along with cancer progression , loss of stripes resulted in the majority of high - expressed genes approaching and eventually bypassing the baseline ( Figure S7E ) . Correspondingly , in adenocarcinoma , up - and down - regulated genes were respectively enriched at the two sides of the baseline ( Figure S7F ) . These observations suggest a possible scenario where stripe strength correlates with expression at a specific dynamic range near the baseline , and when genes shift into such range due to interaction reduction , gene expressions are shifted toward better correlation with their promoter interaction levels . Contrary to their exceptionally high and low interaction activities , the expression levels of up - and down - regulated genes were similar in mucosa ( Figure S6E ) , suggesting a discrepancy between the two parameters . We examined whether expression changes during tumorigenesis could be associated with such discrepancies . By modeling the relationship between gene expression and stripe signal ( Figure 5A ) or loop count ( Figure S7G ) , we observed a consistent pattern where distal interactions of up - and down - regulated genes predicted by the corresponding gene expression levels were higher and lower , respectively , than the genome average . While such a gap persisted in polyps and adenocarcinoma , the overall rank difference found in mucosa was diminished along with altered gene expression ( Figure 5B ) . This trend of regression between stripe and expression was even more clearly illustrated at genome - wide level , where the Spearman correlation consistently increased with stages ( Figure 5C ) . Correspondingly , the net shift of stripe and expression along cancer progression was consistently directed toward the reduction of their difference , and the degree of such reduction showed significant linear correlation with the degree of the mismatch ( Figure 5D ) . Thus , we conclude that the transcriptomic changes in polyps and cancer can , at least to a certain extent , be described as a process of rebalancing of gene expression levels toward their promoter contact propensities . Finally , if we postulate that the reduction of transcription - distal interaction discrepancy is a driving force for differential gene expression during cancer development , we investigated if any gene categories are trended for up - or down - regulation in cancer conditions based on their degree of mismatch ( Methods ) . A total of 25 significant up - trend pathways were identified , most of which were well known for oncogenesis , including cell cycle , MAPK , Ras , Wnt , PI3K / Akt , growth factor RTK , and mesenchymal transition ( Figure 5E ) . This enrichment was consistent with the ontology of actual up - regulated gene pathways , as expected ( Figure S6G ) . In contrast , no down - trend pathway was identified despite several well - known down - regulated important immune genes ( Figure S6H ) . This discrepancy may be explained by the fact that down - regulated genes with imbalance were only a subset of the whole pathways . Figure 5 Discrepancies between interaction activity and gene expression predicts their rebalancing . ( A ) Regression plot between stripe rank and transcription ( TPM ) rank in different stages . A second - order polynomial model was used to fit the up - and down - regulated genes compared to the whole genome . Dots represent average stripe ranking with standard errors for genes at each one - tenth TPM quartile . Significance of alternative models are indicated . ( B ) Boxplot indicating distributions of rank difference between stripe and expression for differentially expressed genes at different stages . Median values are indicated on top . ( C ) KDE plot comparing expression and stripe ranks for all genes ( N = 18 , 925 ) . Spearman correlation ρ for each stage is indicated . Quiver matrices indicate average directionalities of rank shifts in the next stage for genes at each arrow position . Dashed lines indicate equal ranking . ( D ) Comparison between rank difference ( y - x ) for the quivers indicated in ( C ) versus their net rank correction ( Δ y - Δ x ) in the next stage . Correlation was estimated using first order linear regression , with coefficient alpha and Pearson coefficient r indicated . ( E ) Gene pathways predicted with overall up - or down - regulation trends based on similarity in the stripe / loop - expression imbalance compared to the up - or down - regulated genes . ( F ) A schematic model summarizing the relationship between interaction and gene expression based on the results from this study . Discussion In this study , we examined long range chromatin interaction in colon polyps and cancers using mHi - C , a high resolution chromatin conformation capture that revealed extensive interaction activities of cis - regulatory elements without target enrichment . This improved methodology enabled a deep analysis of the limited amount of FAP polyp material , and we were able to identify hundreds of thousands of interaction stripes and loops associated with promoters and distal regulatory elements in non - neoplastic and adenomatous colon tissues from FAP patients . Our rich data provide a valuable resource for 3D interactions during early stages of colorectal cancer . We observed two major trends regarding the alterations of 3D interactions during early CRC development . First , the CRE contact propensities significantly decreased with neoplastic stages . Second , alterations of gene expression were associated with the relative interaction strengths of promoters , instead of their degree of losses . To reconcile these observations , we propose a simple sigmoid - like relationship between transcription and distal interaction ( Figure 5F ) . In this model , under normal conditions , most gene promoters maintain high levels of contact propensity , which is abundant and not a rate - limiting factor for transcription ( Figure S7D ) . In cancer , however , the overall loss of distal interaction results in higher dependence of gene expression on the interaction strength , thereby yielding a stronger interaction - expression correlation ( Figure S7E ) . Consistent with our model , genes with significantly higher or lower distal expression compared to their promoter interaction strengths tended to shift their expression toward their interaction rank in polyps and cancer . This rebalancing was more significant for genes with larger rank differences ( Figure 5C , D ) , suggesting that the correction toward linearity between interaction and expression was more consistent for the outliers . Interestingly , our sigmoid model implies an asymmetric pattern of expression alteration between up - and down - regulated genes . Since the down - regulated genes are initially closer to the linear phase of the sigmoid curve , they are expected to be more sensitive to the loss of interactions than the up - regulated genes and thus experience a more significant transition from asymptotic to linear correlation ( Figure 5F ) . Strikingly , our differential expression result showed that the fold changes of down - regulated genes were overall higher than up - regulated ( Figure S6F ) , matching with the predicted asymmetry . Together , our model fits well with experimental results . We quantitatively compared the contact propensities of CREs with other 1D epigenetic landscapes . We found that while the correlation between stripe signal and chromatin accessibility was only moderate at each individual locus , their shifts during cancer development were surprisingly similar at genome - wide level . Consistent with the interaction losses , the overall accessibility at promoters showed similar progressive reduction . Furthermore , we also found the rebalancing effect between gene expression and ATAC peak strengths was similar to that for the interaction ( Figure S8 ) , although the trend was less significant . Further investigation is required to uncover the common and distinct regulators affecting chromatin accessibility and interaction activity . With high coverage EM - seq , for the first time we found that anchors of highly interactive stripes largely overlapped with unmethylated DNA . Previous studies proposed that formation of architectural stripes and loops involved cohesin - mediated loop extrusion by the CTCF - binding anchors 22 , 39 . However , this model is insufficient to explain the strong stripe signals and high loop counts we identified on unmethylated CpG - rich promoters , which often lack CTCF and cohesin binding . In fact , the robust interaction activity of promoters was typically not clearly shown by previous Hi - C methods until the recently available high resolution micro - C 19 . In the micro - C study , the CTCF / cohesin binding could not fully explain the newly observed interactions , and proposed Pol II as an alternative looping factor . However , based on our observations , the stripes often extended far beyond the gene body , and for stripes that showed directionality , the side with more robust interaction did not always agree with the direction of transcription ( Figure 1B , S1D ) . These patterns are difficult to explain by the Pol II mechanism and instead suggest the presence of other interaction - mediating factors . Intuitively , the overlap of stripes with unmethylated CpG island promoters suggests that certain high GC motif binding factors could contribute to distal interaction , although the exact candidates remain to be explored . The development of cancer is a chronic process involving environmental , genetic , and epigenetic alterations 40 . Common oncogenic mutations often occur in genes involved in the regulation of cell proliferation , growth , and differentiation 41 - 43 . Interestingly , genes in these pathways are also frequently dysregulated to cause proliferative advantages of cancer cells 44 . While such coincidence could be due to a consequence of natural selection , i . e . only the most proliferative and surviving cells would continue on the course of malignant transformation , our study suggests that the exceptionally high distal interaction activities of cancer driving genes ( Figure 5E ) could be a potential underlying factor for their upregulation . During cancer progression , the transcriptional machinery of these genes is likely to be more resilient to the decay of chromatin architecture , which results in expression advantages of the genes in such conditions . Altogether , our study demonstrated that the progressive CRE interaction loss and its rebalance with gene expression suggested a transition of fine - level chromatin structures from colorectal mucosa to adenoma to the malignant colon cancers . Further research will examine whether this pattern is generally applicable to other cancer types , and whether interaction decay is a broad hallmark of early cancer development . Author Contributions Conceptualization , Y . Z . , M . P . S . ; mHi - C and RNA seq , Y . Z . ; ATAC seq : K . P . , A . W . ; EM seq , H . L . , G . K . , A . J . , D . L . , Z . S . ; Data Analysis , Y . Z . ; Sample Collection , R . L . , M . M . , A . H . , U . L . , E . D . E . , R . C . , J . S . ; Original Draft , Y . Z . , M . P . S . , Review and Editing , All Authors ; Funding Acquisition , A . K . , C . C . , E . D . E , J . M . F . , W . J . G . , M . P . S ; Supervision , E . D . E . , A . K . , J . M . F . , C . C . , W . J . G . , M . P . S . Acknowledgements Illumina sequencing of mHi - C , ATAC seq , and RNA seq were performed by the Stanford Genomics center . The data was generated with instrumentation purchased with NIH funds S10OD025212 and 1S10OD021763 . Some illustration figures were created with BioRender . com . Ethics Declarations G . K , A . J . , D . L . and Z . S . are employees and shareholders of Ultima Genomics . M . P . S . is a cofounder and scientific advisor for Personalis , Qbio , January . ai , Filtricine , Mirvie , Protos and an advisor for Genapsys . Data Availability Raw and processed data are available at NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus ( GEO ) , accession number GSE207954 . Figure S1 mHi - C design and results . ( A ) Schematic for the mHi - C workflow . ( B ) Intrachromosomal interaction frequencies by distance for samples . ( C ) Number of unique interaction contacts by samples . ( D ) Comparison of mHi - C with in situ HiC ( ENCODE ) at various resolutions . Figure S2 Sample stratification by mHi - C . ( A ) Volcano plots for differential analyses of stripes between mucosa - polyp and mucosa - adenocarcinoma . ( B ) PCA analysis of stripes significantly differential between mucosa and adenocarcinoma . ( C ) Sample correlation using PC1 values from PCAs of gained and lost stripes in adenocarcinoma . ( D ) Comparisons of PC1 values shown in ( B ) by sample phenotypes between i ) mucosa and adenocarcinoma , ii ) small ( < 10 mm ) and large ( > = 10mm ) polyps , and iii ) polyps from cancer - developed FAP patients ( A001 , A015 ) versus without ( A002 , A014 ) . ( E ) PCA analysis using the whole stripe profile . ( F ) PCA analysis using the whole loop strength profile . ( G ) Fraction of distal ( > 1 . 5 kb ) intrachromosomal reads on all stripes and ( H ) gene TSS for samples . Figure S3 Alterations of stripe strengths in different cancer stages . ( A ) Scatter plots comparing stripe strengths between different stages . Red numbers indicate significantly differential stripes above and below the line of y = x , while black numbers indicate that for all stripes . ( B ) Scatter plots comparing basic stripe strengths in mucosa versus changes in advanced stages . Linear regression was performed and Pearson correlation r was indicated . ( C ) Scatter plots of stripe strengths by functional annotation in polyps and ( D ) adenocarcinoma versus mucosa . Figure S4 Impact of confounding factors on stripe quantification . ( A ) Manhattan plot showing chromosomal copy number variations in adenocarcinoma samples . ( B ) Examples of visually inspected chromosomal rearrangements . ( C ) Comparison of mean fold enrichments for stripes located within 100kb to the rearrangement junction sites in adenocarcinoma samples with and without the indicated rearrangement . ( D ) Comparisons of stripe strength distributions in chromosomes with polyploidy in subsets of adenocarcinoma samples . Paired t test was performed between mean stripe fold enrichment in samples with diploid and polyploid . No significant difference ( p < 0 . 05 ) was identified for any of five chromosomes . ( E ) Violin plots showing sample mean stripe fold enrichment for genes that are housekeeping or specific to immune , stromal , or epithelial cells . Figure S5 Association between DNA methylation and open accessibility during CRC development . ( A ) Scatter plots between methylation percentage in mucosa and differential methylation in polyps and adenocarcinoma for all stripe anchors ( N = 230 , 658 ) TSS regions ( N = 55 , 093 ) Colors indicate methylation degrees in mucosa . Pearson correlation r is indicated for each comparison . ( B ) Scatter plots comparing differential open accessibility and methylation for gene TSS ( N = 15 , 387 ) . Pearson correlation r is indicated for each comparison . ( C ) Scatter plots comparing strengths of ATAC peak with various annotations between mucosa and polyp or ( D ) adenocarcinoma ( N = 258 , 346 ) . Figure S6 Alterations of transcriptomes during CRC development . ( A ) PCA analysis for the whole transcriptome and ( B ) differential genes between mucosa and adenocarcinoma . ( C ) Overlap of differential genes at stages compared to mucosa . ( D ) Scatter plot comparing differential expression ( log2 fold change ) in polyp and cancer . ( E ) Violin plot showing distributions of expression levels ( log TPM ) for commonly up - and down - regulated genes . Lines within the plot indicate quarter quartiles . P values from two - side t tests are indicated on top . ( F ) Distributions of log differential expressions for commonly up - and down - regulated genes in adenocarcinoma . Dotted lines indicate medians . ( G ) Enriched pathways for commonly up - and ( H ) down - regulated genes . Figure S7 Relationship between promoter distal interaction and gene expression . ( A ) Comparison of fraction with promoter interaction stripes for up - regulated , down - regulated or all expressing genes in mucosa . Numbers on top indicate significance of differential fraction tested by the 2x2 Chi - squared test . ( B ) Cumulative distributions of loop counts for up - , down - regulated or all genes in mucosa . Numbers in legends indicate mean loop counts . ( C ) APA analyses of the complete loop profiles for up - and down - regulated genes at different stages . ( D ) Scatter plot comparing the promoter stripe strength with expression in mucosa . Dotted lines indicate thresholds separating the low stripe - low expression and high stripe - high expression clusters . Pearson correlation r was calculated for the whole plot as well as the lower left and upper right sections . ( E ) KDE plots comparing the promoter stripe strength with expression at different stages . Lines indicate the same thresholds shown in ( D ) . ( F ) Distribution of stripe strengths for commonly differential expressed genes in adenocarcinomas . Dotted lines indicate the stripe threshold defined in ( D ) . ( G ) Regression plot between TSS loop count and transcription ( TPM ) rank in different stages . Similar to Figure 5A , a second - order polynomial model was used to fit the up - and down - regulated genes compared to the whole genome . Significance of alternative models are indicated . Figure S8 Association between differential expression and open accessibility . ( A ) Violin plots showing promoter ATAC seq peak strengths ( log fold change ) and ( B ) changes in polyps and adenocarcinoma for up - and down - regulated genes . Significance of differential distribution compared to the genome was examined with the two - sided t test . ( C ) Scatter plots showing genome - wide association between ATAC peak alteration and differential gene expression in polyps ( N = 14 , 805 ) and adenocarcinoma ( N = 14 , 672 ) . Pearson correlation r is indicated . ( D ) KDE plot comparing expression and ATAC peak ranks for all genes ( N = 15 , 626 ) . Spearman correlation ρ for each stage is indicated . Quiver matrices indicate average directionalities of rank shifts in the next stage for genes at each arrow position . Dashed lines indicate equal ranking . ( E ) Comparison between rank difference ( y - x ) for the quivers indicated in ( D ) versus their net rank correction ( Δ y - Δ x ) in the next stage . Correlation was estimated with first order linear regression , with coefficient alpha and Pearson coefficient r indicated . Methods Sample collection FAP tissues were collected at the time of partial or full colectomies for 4 patients . Immediately after colectomy , patient - matched non - neoplastic colorectal mucosa , adenomatous polyps , and adenocarcinomas were snap frozen and preserved in liquid nitrogen . One FAP adenocarcinoma ( A001 - C - 007 ) was embedded in the optimal cutting temperature compound ( OCT ) prior to storage at - 80°C . Six sporadic CRCs were obtained from the Stanford Tissue Bank . Tissues were examined for histopathology to confirm their disease states . All collection procedures were conducted under IRB protocol 47044 . Multi - digested Hi - C ( mHi - C ) As a derived protocol from Tri - HiC 21 , mHi - C was performed as described previously with minor modifications . Briefly , 5 - 10 mg of snap - frozen tissue was loaded in tissueTUBE - TT05 ( Covaris 520071 ) and cryopulverized using the Covaris CP02 cryoPREP Automated Dry Pulverizer following manufacturer ' s procedure . Pulverized tissues were treated with freeze substitution 45 by submerging in 1ml - 80 o C 0 . 01 % formaldehyde ( ThermoFisher 28906 ) , 97 % ethanol , and 2 % water . Samples were incubated in dry ice for 3 hours on a rotor with spinning speed around 100 rpm , and then placed in a CoolCell Container ( Corning ) , transferred to a - 20 o C freezer for overnight incubation . On day 2 , the Container was transferred to a 4 o C cold room , spinning on a rotor around 100 rpm for 1 hour to bring the sample temperature above freezing point . The tissue samples were separated from ethanol solution by centrifuging at 300 g for 5 min in a 4 o C microcentrifuge . Crosslinking was performed by incubating with 1ml 1 % TBS - formaldehyde for 10 min at room temperature . The solution was quenched by adding 80 μ l 2 . 5 M glycine and incubated for 5 min . Samples were centrifuged , washed once with 1 ml TBS ( pH 7 . 5 ) , and resuspended with 250 μ l Hi - C lysis buffer ( 10 mM Tris - HCl , pH8 . 0 , 10 mM NaCl , 0 . 2 % Igepal CA630 ) plus 50 μ l proteinase inhibitor cocktail ( Sigma P8340 ) . Nuclei extraction was performed on ice by squeezing the samples with 1 . 5 ml disposable pellet pestles ( Fisher Scientific 12 - 141 - 368 ) for 15 - 20 times . The crude suspension was centrifuged at 1500 g , 4 o C for 5 min , resuspended in 800 μ l Hi - C lysis buffer and passed through a 100 μ m strainer ( Sysmex ) . After centrifugation , purified nuclei were resuspended in 170 μ l 10 mM Tris - HCl containing 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 ( Sigma 93443 ) , and incubated at room temperature with rotation for 15 min . Ten microliter of 1 % SDS , 20 μ l Cutsmart buffer ( NEB ) , 3 μ l HinP1I ( NEB R0124S ) , 3 μ l DdeI ( NEB R0175L ) , 3 μ l CviAII ( NEB R0640L ) , 3 μ l FspBI ( ThermoFisher ER1762 ) , and 0 . 6 μ l MseI ( NEB R0525M ) , were added to the suspension in the indicated order . The mixture was incubated at 25 o C and then 37 o C for 2 hours each with rotation . To stop restriction digestion , the suspension was incubated in a 62 o C heating block for 20 min followed by cool down . End repair was carried out by adding a 30 μ l solution containing 0 . 5 mM biotin - 14 - dATP ( Active Motif 14138 ) , 0 . 5 mM biotin - 14 - dCTP ( AAT bio 17019 ) , 0 . 5 mM dTTP , 0 . 5 mM dGTP , and 4 μ l Klenow DNA polymerase ( NEB M0210L ) to the mixture , and incubated for 1 hour at 37 o C with rotation . For ligation , a 750 μ l solution containing 1x NEB T4 DNA ligase buffer ( NEB B0202 ) , 120 μ g BSA ( ThermoFisher AM2616 ) , and 2000 U T4 DNA ligase ( NEB M0202M ) was added . The mixture was incubated at room temperature for 90 min , then 4 o C overnight , and then room temperature for additional 60 min with rotation . To perform reverse crosslinking , the mixture was centrifuged at 1500 g for 5 min , and the supernatant was replaced with a mixture of 300 μ l 1x T4 ligase buffer , 30 μ l 20 mg / ml proteinase K ( ThermoFisher 25530049 ) , 30 μ l 10 % SDS , and 40 μ l 5 M NaCl . The suspension was then incubated at 66 o C for 4 hours . DNA content was then purified by phenol - chloroform extraction and resuspended in 20 μ l 10 mM Tris - HCl . To generate mHi - C sequencing library , 300 ng of purified DNA was tagmented with 2 . 5 μ l Tn5 transposase ( APExBIO K1155 , discontinued ) loaded with equimolar Mosaic Ends containing Illumina Nextera i5 and i7 extensions following the manufacturer ' s protocol . Tagmentation was performed in a 100 μ l buffer containing 10 % DMF , 10 mM Tris - HCl , and 150 mM NaCl , at 55 o C for 10 min . The product was column purified ( Zymo D4014 ) and PCR amplified for 2 cycles using the NEBNext master mix ( NEB M0544L ) with Illumina Nextera primers and conditions . Biotin enrichment was then performed by adding 20 μ l Dynabeads MyOne Streptavidin C1 ( ThermoFisher 65001 ) and incubating at room temperature for 30 min with rotation . The magnetic beads were washed three times with 1x wash buffer ( 10 mM Tris - HCl pH7 . 5 , 1 mM NaCl , 0 . 5 mM EDTA ) and one time with 10 mM Tris - HCl . Final libraries were obtained by amplifying the beads with additional 8 cycles of PCR , followed by purification with SPRI ( Beckman B23318 ) size selection at 0 . 5x - 1 . 1x range . The 33 samples were combined to 2 pools and sequenced using 2 NovaSeq ( Illumina ) S4 200 cycle flow cells . RNA seq Total RNA was extracted from ~ 5 - 10 mg of frozen tissues using Zymo Quick - RNA Miniprep ( Zymo R1054 ) , following the manufacturer’s instructions . After purification , DNA digestion was performed using the DNA - free DNA Removal Kit ( ThermoFisher AM1906 ) . Sequencing libraries of mRNA were prepared from 1 μ g total RNA using the NEBNext Ultra un - stranded preparation kit ( E7775S , E7490S ) , following the manufacturer’s protocol . Samples were sequenced using a NovaSeq S1 flow cell for 50 bp pair - end sequencing . This achieved an average of 86 . 3 million raw paired reads . ATAC seq ATAC seq was carried out using the latest ENCODE tissue protocol as described 46 . Sequencing was carried out on a NovaSeq S1 flow cell using 50 bp pair - end sequencing . On average 53 . 2 million unique fragments were mapped for each sample . EM seq The Enzymatic Methyl seq was performed as described 35 . Libraries were constructed by using the NEBNext Enzymatic Methyl - seq Kit ( NEB ) , following manufacturer’s guidance . Sequencing was conducted using the novel ultrahigh throughput UG - 100 ( Ultima Genomics ) sequencer . Data processing for mHi - C Initial processing of mHi - C data was performed using the distiller pipeline ( https : / / github . com / open2c / distiller - nf ) with default parameters set for SLURM cluster . The deduplicated pair files were fed to Juicer pre 32 to generate KR balanced . hic matrices at resolutions of 200 , 500 , 1k , 2k , 5k , 10k , 20k , 50k , 100k , 250k , 500k , and 1mbp , with a quality score filter at 30 . For generating piled up master matrices for stages and all samples , pair files were first merged and sorted using pairtools ( https : / / github . com / open2c / pairtools ) . Stripe calling was performed as previously described 21 with minor modifications on parameters . Briefly , long - range ( > 1 . 5 kb ) and short - range ( < 1 kb ) mapped read pairs were sorted to two . bam files using awk and samtools . Using Bedtools , these reads were mapped to two binning bed tracks , a local one with 2 kb window and a background one with 50 kb window , both with a 100 bp sliding size . Using MACS2 bdgcmp - m qpois , the local long - range read count for each bin was examined for statistical significance of enrichment against the expected count number , calculated as ( long bg / short bg ) * short local . The log fold change signal ( stripe strength ) was calculated with the same formula by feeding the actual and expected values to MACS2 bdgcmp - m logFE . A pseudo - count of 1 was added to avoid NaN errors . After stripe q values were determined , each 100 bp bin was counted for the number of samples showing significance ( FDR < 0 . 01 ) . We considered bins with at least three sample hits significant . These bins were merged , and only windows with at least 500 bp size were included as final stripe anchors . The anchor stripe strengths for each sample was derived from the mean of logFE signal of bins within the windows . Stripe peaks overlapping ENCODE blacklist regions ( https : / / sites . google . com / site / anshulkundaje / projects / blacklists ) were removed . To avoid gender variations among patients , only autosomal chromosomes were included for downstream analyses . For loop calling , the HiCCUPS algorithm from Juicer tools 32 was applied with the following parameters : - r 500 , 1000 , 2000 , 5000 , 10000 - f 0 . 1 - p 4 , 2 , 2 , 2 , 2 - i 20 , 10 , 10 , 6 , 6 - t 0 . 1 , 1 . 25 , 1 . 75 , 2 - d 2000 , 2000 , 4000 , 10000 , 20000 . Because library complexity enormously affected loop calling power , the analysis was not performed for each individual sample , but instead on pooled libraries of 1 ) all samples , 2 ) all mucosa , 3 ) all polyps , and 4 ) all adenocarcinomas . Post - processed loop pixels from all profiles at different resolutions were merged in the order of high resolution > low resolution from combined > mucosa > polyp > adeca , where a loop with lower priority was filtered if both anchors overlapped with a higher priority loop . This master loop list was then applied to each sample to perform individual loop quantification . To calculate loop strengths , read counts in the identified loops were divided by the expected count from the donut background and log transformed . A pseudo count of 1 was added to avoid NaN error as needed . For stage - specific counting , loops with average loop strengths greater than 1 . 2 fold in samples of the specified stage were considered positive . For annotations of stripe anchors , features from Ensembl regulatory build 33 and TSS from Gencode were mapped using Bedtools . Loop anchors were first annotated with stripe anchors from the analysis . If multiple stripes resided in a loop , the annotation matched the one closest to the loop center . The functional annotation of loop anchors were then considered equivalent to the overlapping stripe anchor . This indirect annotation is underpowered to a certain extent as loop anchors without stripes may also overlap with functional CREs . However , due to the broad size of the loop calling algorithm ( 1 - 5 kb ) , it is sometimes difficult to distinguish true loop signals from potential random overlaps . By contrast , stripe anchors were determined in a much higher resolution ( 100 bp ) , and hence the annotation reflects the direct source of the signal . Since the main interest of this study was to identify the genome - wide behaviors of regulatory elements , we decided to maintain stringent annotation . To identify differential stripes between stages , raw read counts for each stripe were adjusted with the local background by dividing by a background coefficient calculated as the ratio between the total background reads of the examined sample and average background read count from all samples . The adjusted read count was thereby a pseudo fold - change signal against its background , but multiplied by the average coverage of the locus . The adjusted read count matrix was processed with DESeq2 34 using default settings . Comparisons were made between mucosa - polyp and mucosa - adenocarcinoma . Significant differential stripes were defined by greater than 1 . 3 fold difference between stages and adjusted p value < 0 . 1 . For aggregation analysis of loops , APA from Juicer was performed with the parameters - r 200 - u - n - 0 - w 500 - k KR - q 20 . The enrichment score was calculated as the average intensity of 10 * 10 center pixels ( 2 kb ) against the mean of 100 * 100 pixels from bottom left . For aggregation of stripes , the same function was performed with the parameters - r 200 - u - n - 0 - w 250 - k KR - q 20 . Since distance - dependent interaction decay is phenomenal at stripe vicinity , interaction intensities at specific distances ( a . k . a . matrix diagonals ) were normalized against the average intensity of the distance . Fold enrichment of the aggregated stripes was calculated by averaging the normalized values in the center 10 pixels . For visualizations of loop and stripe APA , matrices were log transformed before plotting to the heatmaps . Copy number information Similar to previously described 47 , we treated mHi - C as whole - genome sequencing data to determine chromosomal copy number variations in cancer samples . The mHi - C profiles were sequenced with sufficient coverage ( 30x on average ) to support CNV calling . Reads were mapped to the hg38 genome using bwa - mem . After deduplication , short - range read pairs , a . k . a . the self - ligation products , defined by < 1000 bp distance with a normal forward - reverse mapping orientation , were selected to be processed by the CNVpytor package 48 ( v1 . 2 ) . Identification of CNVs and visualization were conducted with default parameters in 100 kb windows . Chromatin rearrangement identification A visual inspection approach of the mHi - C heatmap matrices was applied to identify rearrangements , as previously described 47 . For this analysis , we focused on intrachromosomal rearrangements only , particularly inversions , since interchromosomal fusions are likely accompanied with polyploidy , which has been included in our analysis above . Generally , rearranged loci were separated by at least 1 mbp , characterized with sharp increase of rectangular - shaped contact intensities . These aberrant interactions were examined on mucosa matrices to confirm their normal absence . While this examination does not exclusively identify all rearrangements , positive hits can be obtained with high confidence . ATAC seq processing ATAC seq results were processed with the ENCODE - DCC atac - seq - pipeline ( https : / / github . com / ENCODE - DCC / atac - seq - pipeline ) using default settings . Parameters such as fractions of reads in peaks and promoters were directly derived from the pipeline . To obtain the integrated peak list from all samples , a 100 bp binning track was mapped with the pseudo - replicated peak regions from each sample using Bedtools . Bins with at least three hits were considered valid . These bins were merged , and only intervals with at least 300 bp size were included as final peak sites . On peak fold enrichments of samples were then obtained from the pipeline - derived fold change bigwig tracks . RNA seq processing RNA seq results were processed using Tomas Bencomo’s pipeline ( https : / / github . com / tjbencomo / bulk - rnaseq ) , a simple workflow using salmon to quantify transcript level and DESeq2 to identify differential genes . Transcription levels ( TPM ) of genes were obtained by summing transcript - based TPM from salmon output ( . rf ) . Gene Ontology Enrichment analysis of significantly up - or down - regulated genes in pathways was performed and visualized using the WEB - based GEne SeT AnaLysis Toolkit 49 . Method of over - representation was selected to test enrichments in the KEGG pathway against the protein - coding genome . Analysis was performed with default parameters . DNA methylation processing We obtained 21 , 175 , 510 CpG sites with measurable methylation ratios in all examined samples . Methylation degree of features , including mHiC hotspots , ATAC peaks , and gene promoters , were calculated by averaging the methylation percentage for all valid CpG sites within the feature . Defining multiomic overlaps For all analyses performed in this study , overlap of features refer to at least 1 bp of common position of two tracks without flank extension . Promoters of genes were defined as a - 1500 bp to + 500 bp window from the start position of the gene . Comparisons between transcription and stripe strength , loop count , or ATAC peak strength were reduced to genes , meaning that the same value was allocated to all TSS it overlapped . Comparisons between stripes and ATAC peaks were mapped to ATAC peaks , meaning that the corresponding stripe strength of each ATAC peak was equal to the mean of all overlaps . For all analyses comparing multiple omics profiles in the study , the number of features was shrunken to those with detected values from all profiles unless indicated otherwise . The only exception was loop counts , where TSS without any loop overlaps were assigned with 0 loop count . Principal component analysis The PCA analyses of mHi - C and RNA seq were performed using the Python sklearn . decomposition . PCA package . Input were untransformed stripe strengths ( in log10 basis ) for stripes , Z - score transformed log fold enrichment for loops , and untransformed DESeq2 - exported normalized read count for the transcriptome . Housekeeping and cell type - specific gene lists The list of housekeeping and cell - specific genes ( Table S1 ) was obtained from public literature and validated by previously reported single cell RNA - seq performed in the same cohort 50 . Modeling transcription - interaction relationship Promoter stripe strengths ( or promoter loop counts ) and expression levels for up - and down - regulated genes and the whole transcriptome were rank - transformed . After filtering out genes at bottom 2000 rank transcription levels ( due to their frequent missing or 0 values in samples ) , the transcription - stripe rank relations were fit to a 2 nd order polynomial regression model . Log - likelihood ratios for differentially expressed genes between their own parameters and the whole transcriptome were calculated . Significance of the alternative model was tested using the chi - squared test following Wilks ' theorem . Ontology for interaction - transcription imbalance WikiPathways gene sets were downloaded from the official website 51 . For each pathway , genes with valid transcription and stripe / loop count values were fed to the polynomial models described above , and calculated the log likelihood ratios between whole genome model and up - / down - regulated model . Pathways with < 0 . 2 FDR corrected q value from the likelihood ratio test were considered having significant trend for up - or down - regulation . Public data usage Unmasked hg38 genome was used as reference for all analyses . Regulatory build for sigmoid colon ( ver 20210107 ) was downloaded from Ensembl ( http : / / www . ensembl . org ) for regulatory annotations . Gencode v38 was used for RNA - seq alignment and defining TSS positions . ENCODE in situ Hi - C for IMR - 90 cell line ( ENCSR852KQC ) was used for comparison with mHi - C . Roadmap histone ChIP - seq tracks for colonic mucosa ( GSM1112779 , GSM916043 , GSM916046 , GSM916045 ) and ENCODE CTCF ( ENCSR833FWC ) , Pol II ( ENCSR322JEO ) ChIP - seqs were used for CRE visualization . Locations of CpG islands were downloaded from UCSC genome browser . Supplementary Tables Table S1 List of housekeeping and cell type - specific genes examined for promoter interaction changes . Reference 1 Nora , E . P . et al . Spatial partitioning of the regulatory landscape of the X - inactivation centre . Nature 485 , 381 - 385 , doi : 10 . 1038 / nature11049 ( 2012 ) . 2 Dixon , J . R . et al . Topological domains in mammalian genomes identified by analysis of chromatin interactions . Nature 485 , 376 - 380 , doi : 10 . 1038 / nature11082 ( 2012 ) . 3 Valton , A . L . & Dekker , J . TAD disruption as oncogenic driver . Curr Opin Genet Dev 36 , 34 - 40 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . gde . 2016 . 03 . 008 ( 2016 ) . 4 Levine , M . , Cattoglio , C . & Tjian , R . Looping back to leap forward : transcription enters a new era . Cell 157 , 13 - 25 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2014 . 02 . 009 ( 2014 ) . 5 Deng , W . et al . Controlling long - range genomic interactions at a native locus by targeted tethering of a looping factor . Cell 149 , 1233 - 1244 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2012 . 03 . 051 ( 2012 ) . 6 Deng , W . et al . Reactivation of developmentally silenced globin genes by forced chromatin looping . Cell 158 , 849 - 860 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2014 . 05 . 050 ( 2014 ) . 7 Hnisz , D . et al . Activation of proto - oncogenes by disruption of chromosome neighborhoods . Science 351 , 1454 - 1458 , doi : 10 . 1126 / science . aad9024 ( 2016 ) . 8 Benabdallah , N . S . et al . Decreased Enhancer - Promoter Proximity Accompanying Enhancer Activation . Mol Cell 76 , 473 - 484 e477 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2019 . 07 . 038 ( 2019 ) . 9 Alexander , J . M . et al . Live - cell imaging reveals enhancer - dependent Sox2 transcription in the absence of enhancer proximity . Elife 8 , doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 41769 ( 2019 ) . 10 Rao , S . S . P . et al . Cohesin Loss Eliminates All Loop Domains . Cell 171 , 305 - 320 e324 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2017 . 09 . 026 ( 2017 ) . 11 Nora , E . P . et al . Targeted Degradation of CTCF Decouples Local Insulation of Chromosome Domains from Genomic Compartmentalization . Cell 169 , 930 - 944 e922 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2017 . 05 . 004 ( 2017 ) . 12 Ray , J . et al . Chromatin conformation remains stable upon extensive transcriptional changes driven by heat shock . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 116 , 19431 - 19439 , doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1901244116 ( 2019 ) . 13 Greenwald , W . W . et al . Subtle changes in chromatin loop contact propensity are associated with differential gene regulation and expression . Nat Commun 10 , 1054 , doi : 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 019 - 08940 - 5 ( 2019 ) . 14 Lajoie , B . R . , Dekker , J . & Kaplan , N . The Hitchhiker ' s guide to Hi - C analysis : practical guidelines . Methods 72 , 65 - 75 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ymeth . 2014 . 10 . 031 ( 2015 ) . 15 Pal , K . , Forcato , M . & Ferrari , F . Hi - C analysis : from data generation to integration . Biophys Rev 11 , 67 - 78 , doi : 10 . 1007 / s12551 - 018 - 0489 - 1 ( 2019 ) . 16 Mumbach , M . R . et al . HiChIP : efficient and sensitive analysis of protein - directed genome architecture . Nat Methods 13 , 919 - 922 , doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 3999 ( 2016 ) . 17 Mifsud , B . et al . Mapping long - range promoter contacts in human cells with high - resolution capture Hi - C . Nat Genet 47 , 598 - 606 , doi : 10 . 1038 / ng . 3286 ( 2015 ) . 18 Luo , Z . et al . NicE - C efficiently reveals open chromatin - associated chromosome interactions at high resolution . Genome Res 32 , 534 - 544 , doi : 10 . 1101 / gr . 275986 . 121 ( 2022 ) . 19 Hsieh , T . S . et al . Resolving the 3D Landscape of Transcription - Linked Mammalian Chromatin Folding . Mol Cell 78 , 539 - 553 e538 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2020 . 03 . 002 ( 2020 ) . 20 Hua , P . et al . Defining genome architecture at base - pair resolution . Nature 595 , 125 - 129 , doi : 10 . 1038 / s41586 - 021 - 03639 - 4 ( 2021 ) . 21 Zhu , Y . & Suh , Y . Tri - 4C : efficient identification of cis - regulatory loops at hundred base pair resolution . bioRxiv , 743005 , doi : 10 . 1101 / 743005 ( 2019 ) . 22 Fudenberg , G . et al . Formation of Chromosomal Domains by Loop Extrusion . Cell Rep 15 , 2038 - 2049 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2016 . 04 . 085 ( 2016 ) . 23 Sanborn , A . L . et al . Chromatin extrusion explains key features of loop and domain formation in wild - type and engineered genomes . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 112 , E6456 - 6465 , doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1518552112 ( 2015 ) . 24 Fodde , R . , Smits , R . & Clevers , H . APC , signal transduction and genetic instability in colorectal cancer . Nat Rev Cancer 1 , 55 - 67 , doi : 10 . 1038 / 35094067 ( 2001 ) . 25 Aoki , K . & Taketo , M . M . Adenomatous polyposis coli ( APC ) : a multi - functional tumor suppressor gene . J Cell Sci 120 , 3327 - 3335 , doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 03485 ( 2007 ) . 26 Parker , T . W . & Neufeld , K . L . APC controls Wnt - induced beta - catenin destruction complex recruitment in human colonocytes . Sci Rep 10 , 2957 , doi : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 020 - 59899 - z ( 2020 ) . 27 Miyoshi , Y . et al . Somatic mutations of the APC gene in colorectal tumors : mutation cluster region in the APC gene . Hum Mol Genet 1 , 229 - 233 , doi : 10 . 1093 / hmg / 1 . 4 . 229 ( 1992 ) . 28 Galiatsatos , P . & Foulkes , W . D . Familial adenomatous polyposis . Am J Gastroenterol 101 , 385 - 398 , doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1572 - 0241 . 2006 . 00375 . x ( 2006 ) . 29 Groden , J . et al . Identification and characterization of the familial adenomatous polyposis coli gene . Cell 66 , 589 - 600 , doi : 10 . 1016 / 0092 - 8674 ( 81 ) 90021 - 0 ( 1991 ) . 30 Rozenblatt - Rosen , O . et al . The Human Tumor Atlas Network : Charting Tumor Transitions across Space and Time at Single - Cell Resolution . Cell 181 , 236 - 249 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2020 . 03 . 053 ( 2020 ) . 31 Rao , S . S . et al . A 3D map of the human genome at kilobase resolution reveals principles of chromatin looping . Cell 159 , 1665 - 1680 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2014 . 11 . 021 ( 2014 ) . 32 Durand , N . C . et al . Juicer Provides a One - Click System for Analyzing Loop - Resolution Hi - C Experiments . Cell Syst 3 , 95 - 98 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cels . 2016 . 07 . 002 ( 2016 ) . 33 Zerbino , D . R . , Wilder , S . P . , Johnson , N . , Juettemann , T . & Flicek , P . R . The ensembl regulatory build . Genome Biol 16 , 56 , doi : 10 . 1186 / s13059 - 015 - 0621 - 5 ( 2015 ) . 34 Love , M . I . , Huber , W . & Anders , S . Moderated estimation of fold change and dispersion for RNA - seq data with DESeq2 . Genome Biol 15 , 550 , doi : 10 . 1186 / s13059 - 014 - 0550 - 8 ( 2014 ) . 35 Lee , H . et al . Ultra high - throughput whole - genome methylation sequencing reveals trajectories in precancerous polyps to early colorectal adenocarcinoma . bioRxiv , 2022 . 2005 . 2030 . 494076 , doi : 10 . 1101 / 2022 . 05 . 30 . 494076 ( 2022 ) . 36 Hansen , K . D . et al . Increased methylation variation in epigenetic domains across cancer types . Nat Genet 43 , 768 - 775 , doi : 10 . 1038 / ng . 865 ( 2011 ) . 37 Feinberg , A . P . , Koldobskiy , M . A . & Gondor , A . Epigenetic modulators , modifiers and mediators in cancer aetiology and progression . Nat Rev Genet 17 , 284 - 299 , doi : 10 . 1038 / nrg . 2016 . 13 ( 2016 ) . 38 Jones , P . A . & Baylin , S . B . The fundamental role of epigenetic events in cancer . Nat Rev Genet 3 , 415 - 428 , doi : 10 . 1038 / nrg816 ( 2002 ) . 39 Vian , L . et al . The Energetics and Physiological Impact of Cohesin Extrusion . Cell 175 , 292 - 294 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2018 . 09 . 002 ( 2018 ) . 40 Baylin , S . B . & Jones , P . A . Epigenetic Determinants of Cancer . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 8 , doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a019505 ( 2016 ) . 41 Hanahan , D . & Weinberg , R . A . Hallmarks of cancer : the next generation . Cell 144 , 646 - 674 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2011 . 02 . 013 ( 2011 ) . 42 Bailey , M . H . et al . Comprehensive Characterization of Cancer Driver Genes and Mutations . Cell 173 , 371 - 385 e318 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2018 . 02 . 060 ( 2018 ) . 43 Kandoth , C . et al . Mutational landscape and significance across 12 major cancer types . Nature 502 , 333 - 339 , doi : 10 . 1038 / nature12634 ( 2013 ) . 44 Li , M . , Sun , Q . & Wang , X . Transcriptional landscape of human cancers . Oncotarget 8 , 34534 - 34551 , doi : 10 . 18632 / oncotarget . 15837 ( 2017 ) . 45 Zheng , W . et al . Freeze substitution Hi - C , a convenient and cost - effective method for capturing the natural 3D chromatin conformation from frozen samples . J Genet Genomics 48 , 237 - 247 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jgg . 2020 . 11 . 002 ( 2021 ) . 46 Luo , Y . et al . New developments on the Encyclopedia of DNA Elements ( ENCODE ) data portal . Nucleic Acids Res 48 , D882 - D889 , doi : 10 . 1093 / nar / gkz1062 ( 2020 ) . 47 Harewood , L . et al . Hi - C as a tool for precise detection and characterisation of chromosomal rearrangements and copy number variation in human tumours . Genome Biol 18 , 125 , doi : 10 . 1186 / s13059 - 017 - 1253 - 8 ( 2017 ) . 48 Suvakov , M . , Panda , A . , Diesh , C . , Holmes , I . & Abyzov , A . CNVpytor : a tool for copy number variation detection and analysis from read depth and allele imbalance in whole - genome sequencing . Gigascience 10 , doi : 10 . 1093 / gigascience / giab074 ( 2021 ) . 49 Wang , J . , Duncan , D . , Shi , Z . & Zhang , B . WEB - based GEne SeT AnaLysis Toolkit ( WebGestalt ) : update 2013 . Nucleic Acids Res 41 , W77 - 83 , doi : 10 . 1093 / nar / gkt439 ( 2013 ) . 50 Becker , W . R . et al . Single - cell analyses reveal a continuum of cell state and composition changes in the malignant transformation of polyps to colorectal cancer . bioRxiv , 2021 . 2003 . 2024 . 436532 , doi : 10 . 1101 / 2021 . 03 . 24 . 436532 ( 2021 ) . 51 Martens , M . et al . WikiPathways : connecting communities . Nucleic Acids Res 49 , D613 - D621 , doi : 10 . 1093 / nar / gkaa1024 ( 2021 ) .