SEPTEMBER 2012 VOLUME 51 (cid:1) NUMBER 3 Introduction to the Special Section JAMES MCHALE MAUREEN R . WALLER Fam Proc 51 : 281 – 283 , 2012 A lthough two of every five births in the United States now occur outside of mar - riage , family scholars are still working hard to understand ways in which infant - family dynamics evolve in these “fragile families” led by unmarried parents ( both those cohabiting and those living apart ) . Federal initiatives to promote healthy mar - riage and responsible fatherhood devoted significant attention to the status and qual - ity of unmarried parents’ romantic unions over the past 10 years , but gave far less consideration to how mothers and fathers in fragile families build coparenting rela - tionships . This was a significant lapse . Gradually , policy experts are beginning to recognize that if positive coparenting alliances can be encouraged , even outside of marital unions , mothers , fathers , and most importantly young children may benefit substantially . This special section features new perspectives on coparenting interven - tions for fragile families , fresh analyses of national survey data establishing charac - teristics and consequences of coparenting in representative samples of unmarried families , and original data from field studies of unmarried families where typically overlooked coparenting phenomena were examined qualitatively . The section opens with a review of interventions designed to support coparenting in fragile families , as well as those marriage and relationship enhancement ( MRE ) and responsible fatherhood initiatives that included any explicit targeting , strength - ening , and assessment of fragile family coparenting in their designs . McHale , Waller , and Pearson ( 2012 ) examine results from Access and Visitation programs for nonresi - dential fathers , MRE programs for low - income , unmarried couples , and the first wave 281 Family Process , Vol . 51 , No . 3 , 2012 © FPI , Inc . P R O C E S S of new programs for fragile families directly designed to target and support coparent - ing per se . The article closes with recommendations for further charting this vitally important new family process terrain . The next set of articles draw on national survey data to address key questions about coparenting and child and family adjustment . First , Cabrera , Scott , Fagan , Steward - Streng , and Chen ( 2012 ) examine long - term direct and indirect links between selected coparenting indicators ( conflict , communication , and shared decision - making ) and preschool adjustment . Analyzing data from a sample of 5 , 650 children and their biological mothers and fathers , all participants in the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study - Birth Cohort , they found that conflicted coparenting interfered with children’s developing social competencies and academic skills both in cohabiting and in married families . Collaborative coparenting , by contrast , promoted better school readiness , in part because mothers in such fami - lies were more responsive to children’s needs . Next , Waller ( 2012 ) draws on data from a representative sample of 2 , 695 unmarried participants in the Fragile Families and Child Well - Being Study to examine how diverse coparenting styles emerge and relate to fathers’ involvement with young children . Findings show that paternal involvement did not differ significantly in families with cooperative and mixed coparenting styles ; when unmarried parents worked together to sup - port one another’s parenting efforts , even if they argued frequently while doing so , fathers remained more involved . At the same time , in families with conflicted coparenting styles father involvement declined more than it did in families with disengaged styles . That is : in the context of poorer quality coparenting relation - ships , it was conflict that mattered for fathering , not just parents’ inability to cooperate . The special issue’s final set of papers magnify the lens typically brought to bear on studies of coparenting in fragile families , exploring the broader network of par - enting adults who have formative influence in the lives of infants and young chil - dren . First , Burton and Hardaway ( 2012 ) draw on longitudinal ethnographic data from 256 low - income , mostly unmarried mothers in the Three - City Study . They examine maternal involvement in multiple partner fertility ( MPF ) relationships , and women’s experiences as “othermothers” to their romantic partners’ children from previous and concurrent intimate unions . Overwhelmingly , respondents did not co - parent partners’ children , even if reporting having “othermothered” children of friends and relatives . Reasons for refraining from coparenting were embedded in : ( a ) gendered scripts around second families or casa chicas ; ( b ) the tenuous nature of pass - through MPF relationships ; and ( c ) mothers’ own desires for their romantic partners to child - swap . Finally , Gaskin - Butler , Engert , Markievitz , Swenson , and McHale ( 2012 ) examine prenatal expectancies of 45 unmarried first - time African American mothers concerning the nature of the coparenting system they would develop with others once their baby arrived . Most women projected partnering with their own mothers and / or babies’ fathers , though other caregivers were explicitly anticipated in a smaller number of cases . Multi - person coparenting systems were the norm , and maternal narratives revealed diverse and complex constructions about postbaby coparenting systems . The strengths and the limitations of work summarized in these reports should inspire systems - oriented thinkers to consider the important roles that they might play www . FamilyProcess . org 282 / FAMILY PROCESS in helping to generatively advance this compelling new stream of family research and practice . REFERENCES Burton , L . , & Hardaway , C . ( 2012 ) . Low - income “othermothers” to their romantic partners’ chil - dren : Women’s coparenting in multiple partner fertility relationships . Family Process , 51 , 343 – 359 . Cabrera , N . , Scott , M . , Fagan , J . , Steward - Streng , N . , & Chen , N . ( 2012 ) . Coparenting and chil - dren’s school readiness : A mediational model . Family Process , 51 , 307 – 324 . Gaskin - Butler , V . , Engert , T . , Markievitz , M . , Swenson , C . , & McHale , J . ( 2012 ) . Prenatal representations of coparenting in unmarried African American mothers . Family Process , 51 , 360 – 375 . McHale , J . , Waller , M . , & Pearson , J . ( 2012 ) . Coparenting interventions for fragile families : What do we know and where do we need to go next ? Family Process , 51 , 284 – 306 . Waller , M . ( 2012 ) . Cooperation , conflict , or disengagement ? Coparenting styles and father involvement in fragile families . Family Process , 51 , 325 – 342 . Fam . Proc . , Vol . 51 , September , 2012 MCHALE & WALLER / 283