JCB : Article The Rockefeller University Press $ 30 . 00 J . Cell Biol . Vol . 197 No . 6 775 – 787 www . jcb . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201201018 JCB 775 Correspondence to Janis K . Burkhardt : jburkhar @ mail . med . upenn . edu Abbreviations used in this paper : APC , antigen - presenting cell ; CB , cell body ; CRAC , calcium release – activated calcium ; cSMAC , central supramolecular acti - vation cluster ; GAPDH , glyceraldehyde 3 - phosphate dehydrogenase ; IS , immuno - logical synapse ; LM , lamellum ; LP , lamellipodium ; MC , microcluster ; MLC , myosin light chain ; PLC , phospholipase C ; TCR , T cell receptor ; Tg , thapsigargin . Introduction T cell activation by antigen - presenting cells ( APCs ) requires the formation of a specialized cell – cell interface , known as the immunological synapse ( IS ) . This process involves extensive spatial and temporal regulation of protein complexes to coordi - nate and tune signaling events . Initial T cell receptor ( TCR ) engagement triggers the formation of submicrometer - scale signaling microclusters ( MCs ) enriched in receptors , kinases , and adaptor proteins that propagate downstream signaling events . In the MCs , the Src kinase Lck phosphorylates the  chains of the TCR complex .  - Chain – associated protein of 70 kD ( Zap70 ) , a kinase crucial in MC assembly , associates with TCR and phosphorylates LAT ( linker of activated T cells ) and SH2 domain – containing leukocyte protein of 76 kD ( SLP - 76 ) . Co - operative assembly of these and other MC components culminates in the recruitment and subsequent activation of phospholipase C ( PLC )  1 at the plasma membrane ( Houtman et al . , 2004 ; Bunnell et al . , 2006 ; Sherman et al . , 2011 ) . Upon activation , PLC  1 cleaves PIP 2 into diacylglycerol and inositol 1 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate ( IP 3 ) . Subsequently , IP 3 stimulates the release of Ca 2 + from ER stores , which in turn leads to the opening of Orai1 channels in the plasma membrane ( Zhang et al . , 1999 ) . The resulting sustained Ca 2 + signaling is required for initiation of gene transcription . Newly generated MCs arise in the periphery of the IS and are the predominant sites for active signaling ( Bunnell et al . , 2002 ; Lee et al . , 2002 ; Yokosuka et al . , 2005 ) . These structures undergo continuous translocation to the center of the IS , the central supramolecular activation cluster ( cSMAC ) , where signaling is extinguished . This provides a clock for MC lifetime and is thought to modulate antigen response ( Valitutti et al . , 2010 ) . MC dynamics are dependent on the actin cytoskeleton in complex ways . Treatment of spreading T cells with the F - actin depo - lymerizing agent latrunculin A inhibits formation of new MCs , indicating that actin filaments promote MC assembly . Once formed , however , MCs are stable in the absence of F - actin , although their A ctivation of T cells by antigen - presenting cells involves assembly of signaling molecules into dynamic microclusters ( MCs ) within a specialized membrane domain termed the immunological synapse ( IS ) . Actin and myosin IIA localize to the IS , and depletion of F - actin abrogates MC movement and T cell activation . However , the mechanisms that coordinate actomyosin dynamics and T cell receptor signaling are poorly under - stood . Using pharmacological inhibitors that perturb individual aspects of actomyosin dynamics without dis - assembling the network , we demonstrate that F - actin polymerization is the primary driver of actin retrograde flow , whereas myosin IIA promotes long - term integrity of the IS . Disruption of F - actin retrograde flow , but not myo - sin IIA contraction , arrested MC centralization and in - hibited sustained Ca 2 + signaling at the level of endoplasmic reticulum store release . Furthermore , perturbation of retro - grade flow inhibited PLC  1 phosphorylation within MCs but left Zap70 activity intact . These studies highlight the impor - tance of ongoing actin polymerization as a central driver of actomyosin retrograde flow , MC centralization , and sustained Ca 2 + signaling . F - actin polymerization and retrograde flow drive sustained PLC  1 signaling during T cell activation Alexander Babich , 1 , 3 Shuixing Li , 1 , 2 Roddy S . O’Connor , 1 , 3 Michael C . Milone , 1 , 3 Bruce D . Freedman , 4 and Janis K . Burkhardt 1 , 2 , 3 1 Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine , 2 Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia , and 3 Perelman School of Medicine , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , PA 19104 4 Department of Pathobiology , University of Pennsylvania School of Veterinary Medicine , Philadelphia , PA 19104 © 2012 Babich et al . This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike – No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the publication date ( see http : / / www . rupress . org / terms ) . After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License ( Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Unported license , as described at http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 / ) . T H E J O U R N A L O F C E L L B I O L O G Y on J anua r y 22 , 2018 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201201018 Supplemental material can be found at : on J anua r y 22 , 2018 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m on J anua r y 22 , 2018 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m on J anua r y 22 , 2018 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m on J anua r y 22 , 2018 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m on J anua r y 22 , 2018 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m on J anua r y 22 , 2018 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m JCB • VOLUME 197 • NUMBER 6 • 2012 776 molecules at the IS . Our studies demonstrate a requirement for F - actin dynamics , rather than a static F - actin scaffold , in promoting T cell activation . Results Quantitative analysis of actomyosin flow at the IS Numerous studies have shown the importance of actin for T cell activation , but the mechanics of actin movement at the IS have not been carefully addressed . Moreover , myosin II function at the IS is poorly understood , and results are conflicting ( Jacobelli et al . , 2004 ; Ilani et al . , 2009 ) . To investigate the actomyosin network as a functional unit , we used Jurkat T cells stably expressing low levels of GFP - actin ( Gomez et al . , 2006 ) and transfected with mKate2 - tagged heavy chain of nonmuscle myosin IIA ( NMHC II - A ) . When these cells were allowed to spread on anti - CD3 – coated coverglasses , they formed charac - teristic actin - rich lamellipodial protrusions . Consistent with previous observations ( Bunnell et al . , 2001 ; Gomez et al . , 2006 ) , cell spreading reached a maximum within 2 – 4 min and was maintained for 15 – 20 min before partial contraction . We con - centrated our studies on the fully spread cells , representing the sustained phase of TCR signaling . Myosin IIA localized to the IS ( Fig . 1 A ) , as reported previously in T cell – APC conjugates ( Jacobelli et al . , 2004 ) . Intensity profile analysis showed that myosin IIA was present throughout the actin - rich region but accumulated most prominently behind the lamellipo - dium ( LP ; Fig . 1 B ) . Importantly , although the distribution of F - actin and myosin IIA are distinct , they are overlapping ; F - actin was detectable throughout the myosin - rich region , albeit at lower levels than in the LP . Indeed , the presence of myosin IIA within the lamellum ( LM ) region highlights a pool of F - actin that is not readily appreciated in images contrasted for optimal observation of the more abundant actin filaments in the LP . Similar distributions were observed using antibody and phalloidin labeling of endogenous myosin IIA and F - actin in fixed cells ( Fig . 1 D ; also see Fig . 3 E ) . Live - cell microscopy revealed that myosin IIA undergoes continuous retrograde flow comparable with that of F - actin ( Video 1 ) . During its centripetal movement , myosin IIA became organized into prominent bundles , and actin was present in these structures ( unpublished data ) . Interestingly , both actin and myosin IIA were nearly undetectable in the central region of the IS . This was not a result of an artifact of cell shape and shallow focal plane , as 3D reconstructions showed that the network exhibits a planar organization only  1 µm in thick - ness . We could readily detect other structures within this region ( e . g . , SLP - 76 MCs in Fig . 1 D and the microtubule - organizing center [ not depicted ] ) . Based on these studies , we define three regions with distinct cytoskeletal topology : the actin - rich LP , the myosin IIA – rich LM , and the cell body ( CB ) , a perinuclear region largely devoid of actomyosin filaments . Next , we quantified the velocity of the F - actin retro - grade flow in two complementary ways . First , videos were digitally sharpened to amplify signal - to - noise , and fiduciary features with  1 – 2 - µm spacing along the radius were tracked centripetal movement ceases upon F - actin depletion . In keeping with the close association between signaling MCs and the actin cytoskeleton , T cell activation is highly dependent on main - tenance of an intact F - actin network . Treatment of T cells with actin depolymerizing agents or disruption of key actin regula - tory proteins leads to loss of Ca 2 + mobilization and downstream transcriptional activation ( Nolz et al . , 2006 ; Varma et al . , 2006 ) . Recent studies have shown that TCR - induced F - actin polymerization depends on activation of the Arp2 / 3 complex by multiple nucleation - promoting factors , including WAVE2 , HS1 , and Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( Zhang et al . , 1999 ; Gomez et al . , 2006 ; Nolz et al . , 2006 ) . However , the mecha - nisms that coordinate F - actin retrograde flow and disassembly of the F - actin network are largely unexplored , and the role of myosin II contractility is poorly understood and controversial . Jacobelli et al . ( 2004 ) showed that nonmuscle myosin IIA is recruited to the IS but found that activity of this motor protein was dispensable for conjugate formation and for recruit - ment of signaling molecules to the IS . In contrast , Ilani et al . ( 2009 ) found that inhibition or knockdown of myosin IIA disrupts T cell – APC conjugates and inhibits multiple aspects of TCR signaling . In that study , centripetal TCR MC move - ment was shown to be myosin II dependent . As myosin II contractility is known to contribute to actin retrograde flow in nonhematopoietic cells ( Cai et al . , 2006 ) , this could reflect a linkage between myosin II function , F - actin retrograde flow , and MC centralization . Understanding this process will require detailed analysis of actomyosin dynamics with respect to distinct MC components . The mechanisms that link the actin cytoskeleton to T cell signaling in general are largely unknown . F - actin could pro - mote signaling in multiple ways , including maintaining cell – cell contact , organizing gross cell polarity , and providing a nanoscale scaffold for assembly of signaling complexes ( Wülfing and Davis , 1998 ; Kaizuka et al . , 2007 ) . Recent studies also point to the exciting possibility that F - actin dynamics could actively promote signaling by exerting force on receptors or signaling molecules ( Alon and Dustin , 2007 ; Beemiller and Krummel , 2010 ) . These possibilities are not mutually exclusive but cannot be distinguished based on manipulations that globally deplete actin filaments . In this study , we have systematically studied the roles of actin polymerization and myosin II contractility in controlling protein dynamics and signaling during T cell activation . We find that F - actin and myosin IIA exhibit distinct but overlapping distributions at the IS . Using a panel of cytoskeletal inhibitors together with an RNAi approach , we find that actin polymer - ization is the primary driver of actomyosin retrograde flow , whereas myosin IIA exerts contractile forces on the network and helps maintain its radial symmetry . We show that simultaneous inhibi - tion of both F - actin turnover and myosin IIA contractility leads to arrest of retrograde flow without disassembling the actin network . Under these conditions , centralization of SLP - 76 MCs is also arrested , and Ca 2 + elevation is abrogated at the level of release from stores . PLC  1 phosphorylation is inhibited after F - actin immobilization , but Zap70 remains active , showing that cytoskeletal dynamics selectively affect specific signaling on J anua r y 22 , 2018 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m 777 F - actin flow regulates T cell activation • Babich et al . jasplakinolide ( JAS ) , an F - actin stabilizing agent that perturbs actin turnover ( Bubb et al . , 1994 ) . T cells pretreated with JAS were not useful for analysis , as this abrogated cell spreading and induced cytoplasmic F - actin aggregates ( unpublished data ) . Therefore , we allowed cells to contact a stimulatory coverglass for 3 min before addition of the drug . Acute addition of JAS collapsed the F - actin network toward the center of the IS . This was true in both Jurkat T cells ( Fig . 2 A and Video 4 [ left ] ) and human primary T cell blasts ( Fig . 2 B and Video 5 ) . Myosin IIA ( Fig . 2 C and Video 4 [ right ] ) behaved similarly , with two important differences . First , the collapse of myosin IIA was more rapid . This is evident in the kymographic analysis of F - actin and myosin IIA dynamics ( Fig . 2 , D and E , respectively ) . Second , unlike F - actin , which accumulated in an irregular ring around the CB , myosin IIA transiently formed a tight symmetrical ring that subsequently disappeared as large aggregates accumu - lated in the periphery . Thus , myosin IIA exerts centripetal force on the T cell cytoskeleton , which is revealed upon stabilization of the F - actin network . Next , we analyzed retrograde flow under conditions in which myosin II activity is perturbed . The Rho kinase inhibitor Y - 27632 blocks phosphorylation of myosin light chain ( MLC ) at S19 and inhibits myosin II filament assembly ( Ueda et al . , 2002 ) . Surprisingly , T cells pretreated with Y - 27632 continued to show retrograde F - actin flow with unchanged rate ( Fig . 3 [ A and B ] and Video 6 ) . The drug successfully inhibited MLC phosphorylation , based on immunoblotting using a phospho - specific antibody ( Fig . 3 B , bottom ) . As a more direct test of myosin II function , we generated Jurkat T cells expressing the F - actin sensor F - tractin labeled with tdTomato ( Johnson and Schell , 2009 ) and measured actin dynamics in cells treated by kymography ( Fig . S1 [ A and B ] and Video 2 ) . Alternatively , a region was photobleached to induce synchronous incorpo - ration of bleached GFP - actin into the network , generating a high - contrast wave that is easily identified by kymography ( Fig . S1 C and Video 3 ) . Results using both approaches were in agreement and showed that F - actin flow within the LP proceeds at 0 . 095 ± 0 . 028 µm / s . Upon closer examination of these kymographs , however , we noted that actin velocity depended on position along the radius of the IS . This is evident in Fig . S1 B , where the slope of the red line drawn near the periphery of the IS is shallower than that of the blue line drawn in the LM region , indicating a slowing of movement toward the IS center . Features within the central CB region track verti - cally ( yellow line in Fig . S1 B ) , indicating that they are immo - bile . Similar behavior is evident in kymographs generated from myosin IIA videos ( Fig . 1 C ) . The distribution of actomyosin dynamics across the IS in a population of cells is shown in Fig . 1 E , with the three regions of the IS indicated for com - parison . Centripetal flow decelerates gradually from the periphery through the LM . The occasional features that show movement within the CB region appear to be diffusive . Myosin IIA exerts contractile force on the F - actin network but is dispensable for F - actin flow The observed centripetal flow could be driven by F - actin polymerization pushing against the membrane edge ( Pollard and Berro , 2009 ) or myosin II contraction pulling against the branched F - actin network ( Cai et al . , 2006 ; Wilson et al . , 2010 ) . To uncouple these components , we used a panel of well - defined pharmacological inhibitors . Initially , we tested the effects of Figure 1 . Distribution and dynamics of the T cell actomyosin network . ( A ) mKate2 – NMHC II - A was transiently expressed in Jurkat T cells sta - bly expressing GFP - actin . The cells were dropped on OKT3 - coated coverglasses and imaged at a single focal plane every 3 s ( also see Video 1 ) . An image from a sequence is shown and is represen - tative of four independent experiments . Bar , 5 µm . ( B ) The intensity profile of F - actin and myosin IIA was acquired along the dashed line in A . ( C ) A composite kymograph of actomyosin dynamics was acquired along the dashed line in A . Bar , 5 µm . ( D ) Jurkat T cells stably expressing GFP – SLP - 76 ( green ) were stimulated as in A , fixed after 5 min , and stained for F - actin with phalloidin ( red ) . Z stacks of whole cells were collected with a 0 . 25 - µm step size and deconvolved using a calculated Point Spread Function in Volocity . A representative cell is shown in XZ and XY planes . Brackets represent 5 µm × 5 µm . ( E ) Kymographic analysis of F - actin features was compiled into a single graph to show the distribution of F - actin velocity across the IS radius . Mean ± SD is shown for each point ( n = 13 cells ) . Similar results were obtained from three independent experiments . on J anua r y 22 , 2018 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m JCB • VOLUME 197 • NUMBER 6 • 2012 778 Moreover , the F - actin network looked thinner and more disor - ganized . Thus , although myosin II activity is dispensable for F - actin flow , it limits cell spreading and maintains synaptic integrity over time . Inhibition of myosin IIA and F - actin turnover arrests cytoskeletal retrograde flow Having analyzed F - actin and myosin II inhibitors separately , we next evaluated their cumulative effect on cytoskeletal dy - namics . T cells were pretreated with Y - 27632 and allowed to interact with the TCR - stimulatory surface to allow spreading . JAS was then added to the chamber , resulting in arrest of F - actin retro - grade flow within  30 s ( Fig . 4 A and Video 8 [ part A ] ) . The frozen network persisted for several minutes but then thinned and eventu - ally dissipated ( unpublished data ) . To verify the complete lack of dynamics , we bleached a region within the LP . Cells treated with Y - 27632 and JAS showed no fluorescence recovery , whereas with blebbistatin , a specific inhibitor of myosin II ATPase activity ( Straight et al . , 2003 ) . As shown in part A of Video 7 and quantified in Fig . 3 C , the rates of retrograde flow were unaffected by blebbistatin pretreatment . Finally , siRNA was used to suppress expression of myosin IIA heavy chain ( Myh9 ) . We could suppress protein levels by 75 % without any effect on the rate of actin retrograde flow ( Fig . 3 D ) . Taken together with the aforementioned results , these studies show that myosin II exerts contractile forces on the T cell actin network , but these forces are dispensable for actin retrograde flow at the IS . T cells responding to ligand - coated surfaces exhibit initial expansion of the contact area , a steady - state period during which the area remains constant , and a contraction phase . Time - course analysis of IS organization showed that control and myosin - inhibited cells looked comparable during the expansion and steady - state phases of the response . After 10 – 15 min , however , myosin - inhibited cells failed to contract normally and became irregularly shaped ( Fig . 3 , E and F ) . Figure 2 . F - actin stabilization leads to contraction of the acto - myosin network . ( A – C ) Time - lapse series of T cells spreading on OKT3 - coated coverslips . Arrowheads indicate times when 1 µM JAS was added . Bars , 10 µm . ( A ) Jurkat T cells stably express - ing GFP - actin ( see Video 4 ) . ( B ) Primary human T cell blasts transiently transfected with GFP - actin ( see Video 5 ) . ( C ) E6 . 1 Jurkat T cells transiently transfected with GFP – NMHC II - A ( see Video 6 ) . ( D and E ) Kymographs of F - actin and myosin dy - namics , generated along the dashed lines in A and C , respec - tively . Arrowheads indicate the addition of 1 µM JAS into the media . Brackets represent 10 µm × 1 min . on J anua r y 22 , 2018 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m 779 F - actin flow regulates T cell activation • Babich et al . show that actin polymerization is the primary engine for retrograde F - actin flow in T cells . Continuous F - actin flow is driven by on - going assembly of actin filaments in the LP , coupled to disassembly in the LM , with overall organization provided by myosin II . F - actin retrograde flow governs SLP - 76 MC centralization The mechanisms linking MC movement and signaling to F - actin dynamics are poorly understood . Furthermore , recent studies control cells recovered normally ( Fig . 4 B ) . Similar results were observed in primary T cell blasts treated with Y - 27632 and JAS ( Video 8 , part B ) and in Jurkat T cells treated with blebbistatin and JAS ( not depicted ) . In T cells suppressed for myosin IIA , JAS treatment did not result in complete loss of actin dynamics ; instead , a slow , partial collapse of the actin network was observed ( Fig . S2 A and Video 7 [ part B ] ) . This may reflect the activity of residual myosin IIA or the function of myosin IIB , which is also expressed in these cells ( Fig . S2 B ) . Collectively , these studies Figure 3 . Myosin IIA is not required for F - actin flow but is necessary for long - term maintenance of the IS . ( A ) GFP - actin – expressing Jurkat T cells were pretreated for 15 min with vehicle or 25 µM Y - 27632 and imaged while spreading on anti - CD3 – coated coverslips . Kymographs were generated along the radii of fully spread cells . The arrowhead indicates the time when photobleaching of lamellipodia was induced . Brackets represent 2 µm × 15 s . ( B , top ) Analysis of velocities calculated from kymographs as in A ( mean ± SD , n = 15 cells ) . ( bottom ) To verify inhibitory activity of Y - 27632 , Jurkat T cells were pretreated with Y - 27632 as in A and stimulated with OKT3 ( 1 µg / ml ) for 5 min . Cells were lysed and analyzed by Western blot analysis with antibodies to phosphorylated MLC ( pMLC ) or GAPDH . ( C ) Jurkat T cells were transiently transfected with F - tractin tdTomato and pretreated with 50 µM blebbistatin ( Bleb . ) or vehicle for 30 min . Actin retrograde flow was analyzed as in B . Values are mean ± SD of 80 – 90 kymographs from 14 – 20 cells . ( D ) GFP - actin – expressing Jurkat T cells were transfected with oligonucleotides specific for myosin IIA heavy chain ( SiM ) or control oligonucleotides ( SiC ) and cultured for 48 h , at which time suppression was found to be optimal . ( top ) Retrograde flow was analyzed as in B . ( bottom ) Lysates were analyzed by Western blotting to assess efficiency of suppression . Values represent relative NMHC II - A levels , normalized to GAPDH . ( E ) Jurkat T cells were untreated or pretreated with 25 µM Y - 27632 or 50 µM blebbistatin and allowed to spread for the indicated times on anti - CD3 – coated coverslips before fixation and labeling with phalloidin and anti – NMHC II - A . Bar , 5 µm . ( F ) Morphometric analysis of cells prepared as in E . Data represent mean ± SEM ( n = 67 – 125 cells per condition ) . * , P < 0 . 05 ; * * , P < 0 . 01 ; * * * , P < 0 . 001 . Similar results were obtained in two independent experiments . on J anua r y 22 , 2018 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m JCB • VOLUME 197 • NUMBER 6 • 2012 780 quantitative measurements of MC velocity to seek clues to the driving mechanism . Particle tracking and kymographic analysis yielded very similar results . Both techniques revealed that SLP - 76 MCs centralized with relatively constant velocity , averaging 0 . 065 ± 0 . 059 µm / s based on particle tracking and 0 . 059 ± 0 . 034 µm / s based on kymography ( Fig . S3 ) . This differs dra - matically from the behavior of F - actin , which decelerated with inward movement . F - actin and SLP - 76 MC centripetal velocity distributions are overlaid in Fig . 5 D . From this analysis , it is evi - dent that although F - actin retrograde flow could drive SLP - 76 MC movement in the periphery of the IS , SLP - 76 MCs actually move faster than the actin network in the LM and CB regions . Thus , a second mechanism is needed to account for MC dynamics in these regions . F - actin dynamics are necessary for sustained Ca 2 + signaling Retention of MCs in the IS periphery by integrin ligands , genetic perturbations , or physical barriers correlates with enhanced T cell activation ( Mossman et al . , 2005 ; Nguyen et al . , 2008 ; Hashimoto - Tane et al . , 2011 ) . To assess the effect of MC arrest in the context of F - actin immobilization , we first examined the effects on sustained Ca 2 + entry , a hallmark of T cell activation ( Negulescu et al . , 1994 ; Oh - hora , 2009 ) . Cells were loaded with the ratiometric dye fura - 2 acetoxymethyl ester and imaged while settling on stimulatory coverslips ( Fig . 6 A ) . Despite previous reports that myosin IIA contractility is essential for Ca 2 + entry ( Ilani et al . , 2009 ) , we found no difference in Ca 2 + mobilization in cells pretreated with Y - 27632 and control cells . Both showed a rapid increase in intracellular Ca 2 + , with levels declining gradually over the next 15 – 30 min . To assess the freeze condition , we pretreated cells with Y - 27632 and allowed them to spread on OKT3 for 5 min before application of JAS ( Fig . 6 B , red line ) . Intracellular Ca 2 + levels began to drop show that microtubules can direct MC movement ( Bunnell et al . , 2002 ; Lasserre et al . , 2010 ; Hashimoto - Tane et al . , 2011 ) . We took advantage of our ability to manipulate actin flow to examine the relationship between the actomyosin network and SLP - 76 MC dynamics . As we were unsuccessful in raising a stable cell line expressing fluorescently tagged actin and SLP - 76 , we imaged a mixture of GFP – SLP - 76 and GFP - actin T cells to conduct side - by - side analysis of these proteins in response to pharmacological intervention . As expected , treatment with Y - 27632 did not perturb F - actin flow ( Fig . 5 A , before arrowhead ) . SLP - 76 MCs also continued to centralize normally in the presence of Y - 27632 , indicating that myosin II activity is dispensable for their dynamics ( Fig . 5 B ) . After addition of JAS , however , MC centralization was arrested concomitantly with the arrest of F - actin ( Fig . 5 A [ after arrowhead ] and Video 9 ) . Interestingly , even MCs close to the center , where F - actin was sparse , stopped their movement . This result is also shown in maximum - over - time projections of video sequences ( Fig . 5 C ) . In these images , moving SLP - 76 MCs , seen as radial streaks , are readily apparent in cells treated with Y - 27632 alone , but only stationary SLP - 76 MCs , visible as spots , are evident after the addition of JAS to freeze the F - actin network . Finally , it is important to note that no new MCs formed in the absence of F - actin retrograde flow ( unpublished data ) . Collectively , these observations suggest that dynamic F - actin , and not simply F - actin accumulation at the IS , is required for SLP - 76 MC nucleation and centripetal movement . SLP - 76 MC dynamics do not correlate with F - actin behavior Qualitatively , SLP - 76 MC centralization did not resemble actomyosin movement ( e . g . , MCs often gathered at the center of the IS , where little F - actin was present to facilitate their move - ment ; Fig . S3 A and Video 10 ) . Therefore , we performed careful Figure 4 . Inhibition of myosin IIA and F - actin stabilization arrests retrograde flow . ( A ) A kymograph was generated along the diameter of a cell pretreated with 25 µM Y - 27632 and spreading on OKT3 - coated coverglasses . The arrowhead along the time axis indicates the addition of 1 µM JAS to the well . The kymograph was sharpened in Photoshop to accen - tuate F - actin features . ( B ) Time - lapse series of cells pretreated with 25 µM Y - 27632 and allowed to interact with the stimula - tory surface for 5 min before addition of either DMSO or 1 µM JAS . 30 s after the treatment , a portion of F - actin , marked with an asterisk , was photobleached , and fluorescence recovery was recorded . Bars , 5 µm . on J anua r y 22 , 2018 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m 781 F - actin flow regulates T cell activation • Babich et al . Loss of intracellular Ca 2 + could result from changes in Ca 2 + release from ER stores or from inhibition of Ca 2 + entry through calcium release – activated calcium ( CRAC ) channels in the plasma membrane . To test whether the defect was at the level of ER store release , we treated cells with either JAS alone ( Fig . 6 C ) or Y - 27632 + JAS ( Fig . 6 D ) to inhibit Ca 2 + sig - naling and then added the sarco / ER Ca 2 + - ATPase pump inhibitor within 30 s of JAS addition , roughly the same lag period observed for F - actin arrest ( Fig . 4 A ) . Within 3 min , Ca 2 + had diminished to baseline levels , as defined by cells interacting with poly - l - lysine alone . A similar loss of sustained intracellular Ca 2 + was observed when cells were treated with JAS alone ( Fig . 6 B , green line ) , indicating that F - actin turnover is essential for sustained Ca 2 + signaling . Figure 5 . F - actin governs MC dynamics but has different velocity distribution across the IS . ( A ) Kymographs were gen - erated along the diameter of cells expressing GFP - actin and GFP – SLP - 76 and sharpened in Photoshop as in Fig . S1 B . The arrowhead along the time axis indicates the addition of 1 µM JAS . Arrows in the kymograph of F - actin dynamics point to a feature that became immobilized upon addition of JAS . Asterisks in the kymograph of SLP - 76 dynamics indicate an MC that was immobilized by addition of JAS . ( B ) Jurkat T cells expressing GFP – SLP - 76 were pretreated with either vehicle control or Y - 27632 and allowed to spread on OKT3 - coated coverglasses . Velocities of SLP - 76 MCs were analyzed by kymography ( mean ± SD , n = 40 – 150 MCs from 10 – 19 cells ) . ( C ) Maximum - over - time ( MOT ) images of GFP – SLP - 76 Jurkat T cells were compiled from the images acquired be - fore or after the addition of JAS . Images are representative of three independent experiments . Bar , 10 µm . ( D ) Comparative analysis of SLP - 76 MC centripetal velocity from a single cell overlaid with F - actin dynamics from Fig . 1 E . Mean ± SEM is shown . Figure 6 . Loss of F - actin dynamics abrogates sus - tained Ca 2 + signaling by perturbing Ca 2 + release from ER stores . ( A ) GFP - actin Jurkat T cells were pretreated with 25 µM Y - 27632 or left untreated and loaded with fura - 2 before plating on OKT3 - or poly - l - lysine ( PLL ) – coated coverglasses in 2 mM Ca 2 + . ( B ) Cells were pretreated as in A and allowed to interact with the stimulatory surfaces for 5 min . DMSO or JAS was then added to the imag - ing chamber , and the response was measured for another 5 min . Similar results were obtained from three independent experiments . ( C and D ) Cells were pretreated as in B . 1 µM Tg was added to the dishes to induce Ca 2 + release from ER stores . on J anua r y 22 , 2018 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m JCB • VOLUME 197 • NUMBER 6 • 2012 782 signal at the IS . Loss of phospho - PLC  1 intensity was detect - able by 2 min after JAS treatment and further decreased over time ; by 10 min , the phospho - PLC  1 signal was only 59 % of control ( Fig . 7 B ) . Interestingly , loss of F - actin dynamics did not affect phosphorylation of Zap70 on Y319 ( Fig . 7 , C and D ) . Fur - thermore , SLP - 76 phosphorylation at positions Y128 or Y145 showed no dependence on myosin IIA or F - actin dynamics ( Fig . S4 ) . These results indicate that F - actin dynamics selec - tively sustain IS - associated PLC  1 activation , leading to sustained Ca 2 + signaling . Discussion The central role of the actin cytoskeleton in T cell activation was recognized in the 1980s , but exactly how actin orchestrates T cell signaling has remained enigmatic . Early studies relying on actin depolymerizing agents could demonstrate a requirement for actin but could not define whether actin functions as a static scaffold or whether dynamic processes such as turnover and motility were involved ( Campi et al . , 2005 ; Varma et al . , 2006 ) . More recent work has successfully addressed the role of indi - vidual actin regulatory proteins ( Burkhardt et al . , 2008 ) , but this approach does not provide a sense of the coordinated behavior of the cytoskeletal network . Here , we took a pharmacological approach to systematically study the roles of actin polymerization and myosin II contractility in controlling protein dynamics and signaling at the IS . Our findings demonstrate that the actomyosin thapsigargin ( Tg ) to pharmacologically empty ER stores . In both cases , Tg treatment restored intracellular Ca 2 + to normal levels , indicating that CRAC activity is intact . Collectively , these data show that F - actin retrograde flow maintains sustained Ca 2 + signaling by regulating Ca 2 + release from ER stores . F - actin retrograde flow maintains activation of PLC  1 in MCs Ca 2 + store release is regulated by signaling through PLC  1 - dependent cleavage of PIP 2 to generate IP 3 , which stimulates receptors in the ER membrane ( Zhang et al . , 1999 ) . To ask whether PLC  1 activation is intact in T cells under conditions in which F - actin dynamics have been perturbed , cells were incubated in the presence or absence of Y - 27632 and allowed to spread on OKT3 - coated surfaces . After 5 min , cells were treated with vehicle alone or with JAS to freeze the actin network . Cells were fixed at either early times of treatment ( 5 min + 2 min ) or late times ( 5 min + 10 min ) and labeled for PLC  1 phosphorylated at Y783 , which represents the active enzyme pool ( Kim et al . , 1991 ) . Control T cells formed numerous MCs containing phospho - PLC  1 , and these became more preva - lent within the central regions of the IS at later time points ( Fig . 7 A ) . Treatment of cells with Y - 27632 alone had little effect on the intensity of phospho - PLC  1 staining or on the distribution of phospho - PLC  1 MCs , consistent with our finding that Ca 2 + signaling is intact in these cells . In contrast , treatment with Y - 27632 together with JAS resulted in a loss of phospho - PLC  1 Figure 7 . F - actin immobilization selectively inhibits PLC  1 phosphorylation . ( A and C ) GFP - actin Jurkat T cells were either pretreated with 25 µM Y - 27632 ( Y - 27 ) or left untreated and plated on OKT3 - coated coverglasses . After 5 min , cells were treated with DMSO or JAS , then fixed at the indicated times , and stained for phospho - Y783 of PLC  1 ( A ) or phospho - Y319 of Zap70 ( C ) . Intensity of antibody staining is pseudocolored . Cont , control . Bars , 5 µm . ( B and D ) Analysis of fluorescence intensities from phospho - PLC  1 ( A ) or phospho - Zap70 ( C ) staining . The IS outlines were gauged by F - actin intensity ; total phosphoprotein intensity per IS was calculated for a mean of 45 cells ( B ) or 35 cells ( D ) per condition . Mean ± SEM is shown . * , P < 0 . 05 ; * * * , P < 0 . 001 . on J anua r y 22 , 2018 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m 783 F - actin flow regulates T cell activation • Babich et al . microtubules are involved , as recent studies show that cyto - plasmic dynein drives TCR MC movement into the cSMAC ( Hashimoto - Tane et al . , 2011 ) . Although a handoff from actin in the IS periphery to microtubules in the IS center could be envisioned , there is evidence for a more complex mechanism . First , MCs do not collapse onto the microtubule - organizing center after F - actin depolymerization ( Varma et al . , 2006 ; Nguyen et al . , 2008 ) . Second , we find that virtually all MC movement is arrested under conditions that freeze actin flow , even within the actin - poor cSMAC region . These findings and studies showing alteration of the microtubule network in response to perturbation of actin binding proteins such as ezrin ( Lasserre et al . , 2010 ) point to intimate cross - talk between the F - actin and microtubule networks and to simulta - neous interaction of MCs with both networks ( Lasserre and Alcover , 2010 ) . The pharmacological approach used here sheds new light on the role of actin scaffolding , actin turnover , and myosin contractility on specific aspects of T cell signaling . The require - ment for myosin II in TCR signaling has been debated . Jacobelli et al . ( 2004 ) found that myosin IIA suppression or inhibition in mouse primary T cells ( which express only myosin IIA ) affected T cell polarity and migration but not IS formation . However , Ilani et al . ( 2009 ) reported that inhibition of myosin II or suppression of myosin IIA heavy chain diminished tyrosine phos - phorylation and ablated Ca 2 + signaling . In our hands , myosin II activity was not needed for cell spreading or F - actin retro - grade flow in Jurkat or human primary T cells . Moreover , in Jurkat T cells , we found that myosin II inhibition did not affect MC centralization , tyrosine phosphorylation , or Ca 2 + flux . The explanation for these conflicting results is not clear but may involve differences in experimental approaches . In particular , whereas we used glass coverslips coated with immobilized anti - CD3 , Ilani et al . ( 2009 ) used supported lipid bilayers coated with anti - CD3 and ICAM - 1 . It will be interesting to assess whether the requirement for myosin IIA depends on ligand mobility or on integrin - mediated adhesion , which is necessary for spreading on bilayers ( Grakoui et al . , 1999 ) . After this manuscript was submitted for review , Yi et al . ( 2012 ) published a closely related study describing the actomyosin network in Jurkat T cells . Our findings support and extend those of Yi et al . ( 2012 ) , and the areas in which our results differ are informative . We observed lamellipodial , lamellar , and actin - poor regions of the IS , which is in excellent agreement with the regions described by Yi et al . ( 2012 ) . Two comparatively minor differences exist between the two studies with respect to cyto - architecture . First , Yi et al . ( 2012 ) emphasize the presence of ac - tomyosin arcs within the lamellar region . We , too , observe these structures , although in our hands , they are rarely obvious and only become prominent in cells expressing high levels of F - tractin or labeled myosin IIA . Second , Yi et al . ( 2012 ) reported a sharp LP / LM boundary , like that found in tightly adherent migrating cells ( Ponti et al . , 2004 ) ; however , we have analyzed retrograde flow rates with 1 – 2 - µm resolution across this region and find that actin deceleration is a linear function of IS radius . Moreover , we observe that actin speckles traverse this boundary . Thus , we conclude that actin flow at the LP / LM boundary undergoes network is a complex functional unit , with retrograde flow driven primarily by actin polymerization and organizing con - tractile forces provided by myosin II . We show that ongoing actin polymerization is required for centralization of signaling MCs and for tyrosine phosphorylation events leading to sus - tained Ca 2 + signaling . The actomyosin network in spreading T cells exhibits an actin - rich periphery , an actomyosin - rich ring , and a central actomyosin – poor region corresponding to the LP , LM , and CB regions of other cell types ( Cai et al . , 2006 ) . In particular , IS cytoarchitecture bears a striking resemblance to that of fish keratocytes ( Yam et al . , 2007 ) , cells used as a model of protrusion - based motility . In keratocytes , as in T cells , actin retrograde flow is very fast ( 40 – 100 vs . 5 – 8 nm / s in some epithelial cells ; Ponti et al . , 2004 ) . Our estimates of actin retrograde flow rates within the LP are in good agreement with values in the literature ( Nguyen et al . , 2008 ; Yu et al . , 2010 ) . However , we find that actin flow slows with movement toward the CB . This behavior has been has been previously noted in T cells ( Yu et al . , 2010 ) and is also observed in keratocytes ( Yam et al . , 2007 ) . Based on a study pioneered in keratocytes ( Wilson et al . , 2010 ) , we used a panel of pharmacological inhibitors to dissect the roles of actin polymerization and myosin contractility in driving overall flow of the T cell actomyosin network . We show that actin polymerization generates most of the force in this system . Previous work shows that this polymerization is performed by the Arp2 / 3 complex in response to activation by WAVE2 , HS1 , and Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( Gomez et al . , 2006 , 2007 ; Nolz et al . , 2006 ) . Although we did not find a role for myosin IIA in driving F - actin flow , we did find that myosin activity maintains the radial symmetry and overall organi - zation of the IS , presumably by cross - linking antiparallel actin filaments and creating a meshed network that functions as a synchronous unit . Moreover , as in nonhematopoietic cells ( Cai et al . , 2006 ) , myosin IIA activity limits T cell spreading and promotes a contraction phase during IS maturation . This contraction phase is similar to , albeit more modest than , the response in B cells during antigen gathering ( Schnyder et al . , 2011 ) . Interestingly , Jurkat T cells also express myosin IIB ( Fig . S2 B ; Jbireal et al . , 2010 ) . Residual contraction was observed in cells suppressed for myosin IIA and treated with JAS , suggesting that myosin IIB contributes to contractile forces in these cells . Quantitative comparison of F - actin and SLP - 76 MC velocities yielded surprising results . Within the LP region , we found that SLP - 76 MC centralization was slower than actin retrograde flow by a factor of  0 . 7 . This effect was reported previously by Nguyen et al . ( 2008 ) and was interpreted as a duty ratio , representing intermittent attachment / detachment of MCs to the continuously moving F - actin network . Similar observations were reported for integrin and TCR MCs , where the duty ratio with actin was  0 . 4 ( Kaizuka et al . , 2007 ) . Strikingly , however , we show that although actin flow slows with centripetal movement , SLP - 76 MCs exhibit relatively uniform velocity and ultimately outpace the actomyosin network . We conclude that actin retrograde flow cannot be the sole driver of MC centrali zation and that other forces must be at play . It seems likely that on J anua r y 22 , 2018 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m JCB • VOLUME 197 • NUMBER 6 • 2012 784 its substrate SLP - 76 , which lie upstream of PLC  1 in the TCR signaling cascade , is intact , indicating that actin immobiliza - tion affects a specific PLC  1 - proximal signaling event , possibly involving its activating kinase Itk . In keeping with this idea , both Itk and PLC  1 interact with actin , and we previously observed de - fects in PLC  1 function in T cells deficient for the actin regula - tory protein HS1 ( Gomez et al . , 2006 ; Carrizosa et al . , 2009 ) . Our ability to freeze actomyosin flow is also informative with respect to the mechanobiology of MC signaling . Retention of MCs in the IS periphery induced by integrin engagement , genetic perturbations , or physical barriers correlates with enhanced T cell activation , and it has been proposed that this reflects the fact that active signaling takes place in peripheral MCs , whereas signal extinction takes place in the cSMAC ( Mossman et al . , 2005 ; Nguyen et al . , 2008 ; Lasserre et al . , 2010 ; Hashimoto - Tane et al . , 2011 ) . However , we find that MC arrest under actin freeze conditions is not sufficient to enhance signaling ; on the contrary , signaling is lost under these conditions . Two models are compati - ble with our data . First , actin flow could promote signaling by generating tension on receptors or signaling complexes . Such tension would be released by inhibiting actin flow but enhanced by restraining ligand or MC movement . The TCR is a mechano - sensor that interacts with the actin cytoskeleton ( Kim et al . , 2009 ; Li et al . , 2010 ) , and actin flow could induce conformational change in the TCR . Given our results showing phosphorylation defects downstream of Zap70 , however , molecules such as Itk or PLC  1 might be the relevant , tension - sensitive molecules . An alternative possibility is that signaling requires ongoing MC biogenesis . F - actin depletion blocks MC formation without per - turbing older MCs and leads to loss of signaling ( Campi et al . , 2005 ; Varma et al . , 2006 ) . Similarly , interruption of TCR – peptide - MHC interactions prevents MC formation and induces loss of intracellular Ca 2 + without affecting MC centralization ( Varma et al . , 2006 ) . Our work extends these findings . Under our freeze condition , no new MCs are formed ( Video 9 ) , demonstrating that the presence of F - actin is not sufficient for MC formation ; ongo - ing polymerization is required . Models based on tension and on new MC formation are not mutually exclusive . Indeed , we hypothesize that the two processes are mechanistically linked . We propose that periph - eral actin - rich sites nucleate assembly of signaling complexes , which are initially associated with both extracellular ligands and the flowing cytoskeleton . Tension - induced signaling would be maximal immediately before initiation of MC movement , and movement would partially relieve tension and dampen sig - naling . This model has significant physiological implications . For example , ligand mobility on the surface of APCs is pre - dicted to be an important parameter for modulating T cell responses , and molecules that link signaling intermediates to the cytoskeletal network should be interesting therapeutic targets . Future studies will be directed at testing these predictions . Materials and methods Reagents and antibodies Y - 27632 and blebbistatin were obtained from EMD Chemicals . JAS , Alexa Fluor 594 phalloidin , fura - 2 acetoxymethyl ester , and goat anti – mouse IgG Alexa Fluor 680 were purchased from Invitrogen . T cells were stimulated a gradual transition similar to that found in loosely adherent cells such as keratocytes ( Yam et al . , 2007 ) . Another area in which our results differ from those of Yi et al . ( 2012 ) concerns the contribu - tion of myosin II to driving actin retrograde flow . Both studies show that actin polymerization provides a large component of the force driving retrograde flow of the actomyosin network , whereas myosin contraction imposes radial organization on the net - work . However , we observed no effect of myosin II inhibition or suppression on actin retrograde flow , whereas Yi et al . ( 2012 ) show slowing of the actin network in blebbistatin - treated cells . This difference may be a result of the stimulatory surfaces used ( immobilized anti - CD3 vs . mobile anti - CD3 and ICAM - 1 ) . Probably the most informative difference between our work and Yi et al . ( 2012 ) involves the relationship of the actomyosin network to MC movement . In both cases , arresting actomyosin flow with a combination of inhibitors arrests centripetal MC movement . However , under steady - state conditions , Yi et al . ( 2012 ) show that centripetal movement TCR MCs track with F - actin flow , whereas we observed a striking disconnect between the rates of SLP - 76 MC movement and actin flow . This is almost certainly a result of differences in the proteins under investiga - tion . SLP - 76 MCs are known to be mobile under conditions in which TCR MCs are not , and we recently showed in collabora - tion with the Baumgart laboratory that the velocity of ZAP - 70 MCs ( which presumably report on TCR localization ) is affected by altered ligand mobility , whereas SLP - 76 MCs are independent of this variable ( Hsu et al . , 2012 ) . As previously discussed , both types of MCs are likely to interact with both the actin and micro - tubule cytoskeletons , but these data point to fundamental differ - ences in the nature or extent of these interactions . Whereas Yi et al . ( 2012 ) focused on describing actomyo - sin dynamics , we took advantage of our ability to manipulate those dynamics to probe T cell signaling under conditions that freeze actomyosin flow but leave the network intact . This is a powerful technique , as it allows us to ask for the first time whether the presence of an actin scaffold is sufficient to support signaling or whether actin turnover and flow are required . Our results clearly show that ongoing actin dynamics are required to sustain TCR signaling . We observed a drop in intracellular Ca 2 + almost immediately after F - actin polymerization was inhibited , regardless of whether the F - actin network was allowed to collapse inward or was immobilized by pretreatment with myosin inhibi - tors . The decrease in intracellular Ca 2 + could be rescued by Tg treatment , indicating that CRAC channels operate normally under conditions in which actin turnover is blocked . This find - ing is consistent with work by Mueller et al . ( 2007 ) , who showed that CRAC channels function independently of cortical actin in T cells . It is currently unclear how to reconcile these findings with our previous work showing that expression of WAVE2 , a key actin nucleation – promoting factor , interferes with coupling of ER store release to CRAC channel opening ( Nolz et al . , 2006 ) . One possibility is that the requirement for WAVE2 does not involve its actin polymerizing activity . The ability of Tg to rescue Ca 2 + influx in actin - immobilized T cells points to a defect in Ca 2 + release from ER stores . In keeping with this , we found dimin - ished levels of phosphorylated PLC  1 at the IS under condi - tions of actin immobilization . Phosphorylation of Zap70 and on J anua r y 22 , 2018 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m 785 F - actin flow regulates T cell activation • Babich et al . in 50 mM Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 5 , 150 mM NaCl , 5 mM EDTA , 1 % Triton X - 100 , 10 mM NaF , 1 mM Na 3 VO 4 , and protease inhibitors . For Western blotting , lysates were separated on a NuPAGE gel ( Invitrogen ) , transferred to nitro - cellulose , probed as indicated , and imaged on a fluorescence scanner ( Odyssey ; LI - COR Biosciences ) within the linear range . Fluorescence microscopy For imaging of fixed cells , 12 - mm coverslips were coated with poly - l - lysine , as previously described ( Bunnell et al . , 2003 ) , followed by 10 µg / ml OKT3 ( 2 h at 37°C or overnight at 4°C ) and washed with PBS . Cells were harvested and resuspended at 5 × 10 5 / ml in L - 15 medium ( Invitrogen ) with 2 mg / ml d - glucose . Coverslips were equilibrated at 37°C , and 1 . 0 × 10 5 cells were allowed to interact with the surface for the indicated times . Cells were fixed in 3 % PFA and labeled as in Dehring et al . ( 2011 ) . Cells were imaged on a microscope ( Axiovert200 ; Carl Zeiss ) equipped with a spinning - disk confocal system ( UltraView ERS 6 ; PerkinElmer ) and a 63× Plan - Apochromat 1 . 4 NA objective . Images were collected using an ORCA - ER camera ( Hamamatsu Photonics ) and analyzed using Volocity software ( v5 . 5 ; PerkinElmer ) . Unless indicated , 1 - µm - thick z stacks of three im - ages were collected at the T cell – coverglass interface and displayed as extended projections . For live - cell imaging , 8 - well chambered coverglasses ( Lab - Tek II ; Thermo Fisher Scientific ) were coated with OKT3 , as described in the pre - ceding paragraph . Immediately before imaging , wells were covered with 400 µl of imaging medium ( phenol red – free RPMI - 1640 and 25 µM Hepes ) and equilibrated to 37°C on the microscope stage within an environmental chamber ( Solent Scientific ) . Cells were harvested and resuspended in imaging medium at 2 × 10 6 / ml , and 5 – 10 µl of cell suspension was added to the well . Time - lapse images were collected at 63× using the same micro - scope as described in the previous paragraph . 1 - µm - thick z stacks of three images were collected every 3 s for 5 – 7 min . Emission discrimination filters were used for multicolor imaging . 20 – 40 randomly selected cells were analyzed per condition . Single - cell Ca 2 + assays Jurkat T cells were loaded with 3 µM fura - 2 acetoxymethyl ester in RPMI for 15 min at 37°C , washed in L - 15 medium supplemented with 2 mM CaCl 2 , and resuspended at 2 × 10 6 / ml . Cell were dropped on OKT3 - coated and heated Delta T dishes ( Bioptechs ) and imaged every 3 s by sequential illu - mination with 340 - and 380 - nm lasers . Acquisition was performed on a microscope ( DMI6000 ; Leica ) using an ORCA - 03G camera ( Hamamatsu Photonics ) and 40× oil objective , and images were analyzed with Meta - Fluor ( Molecular Devices ) . For inhibitor studies , cells were pretreated with 25 µM Y - 27632 concomitant with fura - 2 incubation , washed in L - 15 medium with Y - 27632 , and imaged in drug - containing medium . JAS or DMSO was added after the cells had reached a plateau in Ca 2 + response ( 5 min into spreading ) . In some experiments , 1 µM Tg was added to block Ca 2 + uptake into ER stores . Ca 2 + mobilization was analyzed by plotting 340 / 380 - nm ratios from individual cells over time . Averaged traces from multiple cells are shown . Image analysis and statistical evaluation Retrograde flow of the actin network was measured in two ways . First , videos of T cells expressing GFP - actin were processed using the Smart Sharpen filter in Photoshop ( Adobe ) , with 300 % amplification of local maxima within a 3 - pixel radius . This facilitated identification of individual GFP - actin speckles , which were used as fiduciary marks for analysis . Analysis of sharpened and unprocessed videos yielded similar results , and images are shown without sharpening unless otherwise specified . Alternatively , a region of the F - actin network was photobleached to induce a synchronous wave of bleached GFP - actin propagating toward the cen - ter of the IS . In both cases , a ray was struck from the center of the IS to the periphery , and vertical kymographs were generated in Volocity ( v5 . 5 ) and analyzed in ImageJ 1 . 45k ( National Institutes of Health ) . Actin flow rate was calculated based on the angle of deflection from the vertical direction . Instantaneous velocities were plotted as a function of relative position along the IS radius . SLP - 76 MC tracking was performed using custom algorithms in Volocity and Excel ( Microsoft ) . Objects with intensities 1 . 5 SD above the mean intensity of the IS were identified and filtered by size and then tracked using the Shortest Path algorithm in Volocity . Instantaneous veloci - ties and ( x , y ) coordinates of each MC were exported into Excel , and the distance from the IS centroid was calculated for each MC at each time point . Instantaneous MC velocities within each 1 - µm segment along the IS radius were averaged and plotted as a function of radius . Kymography was used to confirm the findings from particle tracking for individual MCs . with LEAF - purified CD3 -  antibody ( OKT3 ; BioLegend ) . Poly - l - lysine was purchased from Sigma - Aldrich . Rabbit polyclonal antibodies against phospho - MLC ( pS19 ) , phospho - PLC  1 ( pY783 ) , and phospho - Zap70 ( pY319 ) and rabbit polyclonal antibody specific for myosin IIB heavy chain were obtained from Cell Signaling Technology . Rabbit polyclonal antibody against myosin IIA heavy chain was obtained from Covance , mouse anti – glyceraldehyde 3 - phosphate dehydrogenase ( GAPDH ) was obtained from Millipore , and goat anti – rabbit IgG IRDye800 was obtained from Rockland Immunochemicals Inc . Anti - phospho – SLP - 76 ( pY145 ) was purchased from Epitomics , Inc . , and Alexa Fluor 647 anti - phospho – SLP - 76 ( phospho - Y128 ) was purchased from BD . Cell culture Jurkat cells stably expressing GFP - actin ( Gomez et al . , 2006 ) were used , except where indicated . J14 ( SLP - 76 deficient ) Jurkat cells stably reconstituted with GFP – SLP - 76 ( Baker et al . , 2009 ) were obtained from G . Koretzky ( University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , PA ) . Cells were cultured in RPMI - 1640 containing 10 % FBS , GlutaMAX , and penicillin / streptomycin ( Invitrogen ) at 37°C in 5 % CO 2 . Primary peripheral CD4 + T cells were obtained from the University of Pennsylvania’s Human Immuno - logy Core Facility under an Institutional Review Board – approved protocol . T cells were cultured in a humidified 5 % CO 2 atmosphere at 37°C using X - VIVO 15 medium ( Lonza ) supplemented with 5 % human serum ( GemCell ) , 10 mM Hepes , l - GlutaMAX , penicillin G , and streptomycin . T cell blasts were generated by mixing with 4 . 5 - µm paramagnetic Dynabeads ( Invitrogen ) with surface - immobilized antibodies against human CD3 ( clone OKT3 ) and human CD28 ( clone 9 . 3 ) at a 3 : 1 bead / cell ratio , as previously described . 6 d after activation , the stimulatory beads were removed from T cell cultures by magnetic separation to permit reexpression of surface CD3 on the T cell blasts . Plasmids , oligonucleotides , and transfection A construct expressing a full - length NMHC II - A N - terminally tagged with EGFP ( Wei and Adelstein , 2000 ) was obtained from Addgene . A plasmid encoding NMHC II - A tagged with mKate2 was constructed in our laboratory . 5  - tgcaggatcc accggt cgccaccATGGTGAGCGAGCTGATTAAGGAG - 3  and 5  - gccat aagctt tccggaacctcctccaccTCTGTGCCCCAG - 3  were used to PCR amplify mKate2 tag from the pmKate2 –  actin vector ( Evrogen ) ; capital letters indicate the tag , and Age I and Hind III restriction sites are italicized . The PCR product was digested with Age I and Hind III and swapped with EGFP in the pEGFP – NMHC II - A – C3 plasmid . F - tractin ( ITPKA - 9 - 40 ) tagged with tdTomato was a gift from M . Schell ( Uniformed Services University , Bethesda , MD ; Johnson and Schell , 2009 ) . Transient transfection of Jurkat T cells by electroporation was performed as in Carrizosa et al . ( 2009 ) . 16 h after transfection , live cells were enriched using a Ficoll - Paque gradient and imaged as described in the Fluorescence micros - copy section . For protein knockdown , ON - TARGETplus SMARTpool of siRNA duplexes against Myh9 and siGENOME nontargeting siRNA control # 2 were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific . 500 pmol of oligonucleotides was used for transfection . 48 h after transfection , cells were used in live - cell imaging experiments , and protein knockdown was assessed by Western blotting . Transfection of primary human T cells was performed using electro - poration of in vitro transcribed mRNA . To prepare mRNA , the EGFP - actin fusion protein coding sequence was cloned 3  to the T7 promoter of the pGEM - 64A plasmid ( provided by Y . Zhao , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , PA ; Zhao et al . , 2006 ) . In vitro transcription of 7 - mG ( ppp ) G – capped and polyadenylated EGFP - actin mRNA was performed using the mScript mRNA kit ( Epicentre ) in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions . After purification , GFP - actin mRNA was evaluated for polyadenyl - ation and overall RNA quality by electrophoresis using a 1 % agarose gel and ethidium bromide staining . 5 . 0 × 10 6 CD4 + T cell blasts were washed once with PBS and resuspended in 100 µl RPMI - 1640 medium without additives . 10 µg of the in vitro transcribed EGFP - actin mRNA was added to the cell suspension , and the cell / mRNA mixture was transferred to a 2 - mm cuvette ( BTX ) . Electroporation with a single 500 - V pulse of a 720 - µs duration was performed using an ElectroSquarePorator ECM 830 ( BTX ) . Electroporated cells were transferred to a culture flask containing 10 ml RPMI - 1640 medium , 10 % FBS ( HyClone ; Thermo Fisher Scientific ) , and 10 mM Hepes and incubated for 17 – 20 h before use . Biochemical analysis of myosin II inhibition and expression To verify Y - 27632 activity , Jurkat T cells were pretreated for 15 min with DMSO alone or 25 µM Y - 27632 and stimulated with soluble OKT3 ( 1 µg / ml ) for 5 min . Cells were then washed in cold PBS and lysed at 4°C on J anua r y 22 , 2018 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m JCB • VOLUME 197 • NUMBER 6 • 2012 786 polymerization and competitively inhibits the binding of phalloidin to F - actin . J . Biol . Chem . 269 : 14869 – 14871 . Bunnell , S . C . , V . Kapoor , R . P . Trible , W . Zhang , and L . E . Samelson . 2001 . Dynamic actin polymerization drives T cell receptor - induced spreading : A role for the signal transduction adaptor LAT . Immunity . 14 : 315 – 329 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S1074 - 7613 ( 01 ) 00112 - 1 Bunnell , S . C . , D . I . Hong , J . R . Kardon , T . Yamazaki , C . J . McGlade , V . A . Barr , and L . E . Samelson . 2002 . T cell receptor ligation induces the formation of dynamically regulated signaling assemblies . J . Cell Biol . 158 : 1263 – 1275 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200203043 Bunnell , S . C . , V . A . Barr , C . L . Fuller , and L . E . Samelson . 2003 . High - resolution multicolor imaging of dynamic signaling complexes in T cells stimulated by planar substrates . Sci . STKE . 2003 : PL8 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / stke . 2003 . 177 . pl8 Bunnell , S . C . , A . L . Singer , D . I . Hong , B . H . Jacque , M . S . Jordan , M . C . Seminario , V . A . Barr , G . A . Koretzky , and L . E . Samelson . 2006 . Persistence of coopera - tively stabilized signaling clusters drives T - cell activation . Mol . Cell . Biol . 26 : 7155 – 7166 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / MCB . 00507 - 06 Burkhardt , J . K . , E . Carrizosa , and M . H . Shaffer . 2008 . The actin cytoskeleton in T cell activation . Annu . Rev . Immunol . 26 : 233 – 259 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev . immunol . 26 . 021607 . 090347 Cai , Y . , N . Biais , G . Giannone , M . Tanase , G . Jiang , J . M . Hofman , C . H . Wiggins , P . Silberzan , A . Buguin , B . Ladoux , and M . P . Sheetz . 2006 . Nonmuscle myosin IIA - dependent force inhibits cell spreading and drives F - actin flow . Biophys . J . 91 : 3907 – 3920 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1529 / biophysj . 106 . 084806 Campi , G . , R . Varma , and M . L . Dustin . 2005 . Actin and agonist MHC - peptide complex - dependent T cell receptor microclusters as scaffolds for signaling . J . Exp . Med . 202 : 1031 – 1036 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1084 / jem . 20051182 Carrizosa , E . , T . S . Gomez , C . M . Labno , D . A . Klos Dehring , X . Liu , B . D . Freedman , D . D . Billadeau , and J . K . Burkhardt . 2009 . Hematopoietic lineage cell - specific protein 1 is recruited to the immunological synapse by IL - 2 - inducible T cell kinase and regulates phospholipase Cgamma1 Microcluster dynamics during T cell spreading . J . Immunol . 183 : 7352 – 7361 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 0900973 Dehring , D . A . , F . Clarke , B . G . Ricart , Y . Huang , T . S . Gomez , E . K . Williamson , D . A . Hammer , D . D . Billadeau , Y . Argon , and J . K . Burkhardt . 2011 . Hematopoietic lineage cell - specific protein 1 functions in concert with the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein to promote podosome array organization and chemo - taxis in dendritic cells . J . Immunol . 186 : 4805 – 4818 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 1003102 Gomez , T . S . , S . D . McCarney , E . Carrizosa , C . M . Labno , E . O . Comiskey , J . C . Nolz , P . Zhu , B . D . Freedman , M . R . Clark , D . J . Rawlings , et al . 2006 . HS1 functions as an essential actin - regulatory adaptor protein at the immune synapse . Immunity . 24 : 741 – 752 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . immuni . 2006 . 03 . 022 Gomez , T . S . , K . Kumar , R . B . Medeiros , Y . Shimizu , P . J . Leibson , and D . D . Billadeau . 2007 . Formins regulate the actin - related protein 2 / 3 complex - independent polarization of the centrosome to the immunological synapse . Immunity . 26 : 177 – 190 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . immuni . 2007 . 01 . 008 Grakoui , A . , S . K . Bromley , C . Sumen , M . M . Davis , A . S . Shaw , P . M . Allen , and M . L . Dustin . 1999 . The immunological synapse : A molecular machine controlling T cell activation . Science . 285 : 221 – 227 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 285 . 5425 . 221 Hashimoto - Tane , A . , T . Yokosuka , K . Sakata - Sogawa , M . Sakuma , C . Ishihara , M . Tokunaga , and T . Saito . 2011 . Dynein - driven transport of T cell receptor microclusters regulates immune synapse formation and T cell activation . Immunity . 34 : 919 – 931 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . immuni . 2011 . 05 . 012 Houtman , J . C . , Y . Higashimoto , N . Dimasi , S . Cho , H . Yamaguchi , B . Bowden , C . Regan , E . L . Malchiodi , R . Mariuzza , P . Schuck , et al . 2004 . Binding specificity of multiprotein signaling complexes is determined by both cooperative interactions and affinity preferences . Biochemistry . 43 : 4170 – 4178 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1021 / bi0357311 Hsu , C . J . , W . T . Hsieh , A . Waldman , F . Clarke , E . S . Huseby , J . K . Burkhardt , and T . Baumgart . 2012 . Ligand mobility modulates immunological syn - apse formation and T cell activation . PLoS ONE . 7 : e32398 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0032398 Ilani , T . , G . Vasiliver - Shamis , S . Vardhana , A . Bretscher , and M . L . Dustin . 2009 . T cell antigen receptor signaling and immunological synapse stability require myosin IIA . Nat . Immunol . 10 : 531 – 539 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ni . 1723 Jacobelli , J . , S . A . Chmura , D . B . Buxton , M . M . Davis , and M . F . Krummel . 2004 . A single class II myosin modulates T cell motility and stopping , but not synapse formation . Nat . Immunol . 5 : 531 – 538 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ni1065 For this , maximum - over - time projections were generated from videos and used to define the tracks of MC movement . Kymographs were generated along these tracks , and MC velocity was calculated based on the angle of deflection from the vertical direction . To measure the distribution of cytoskeletal components across the IS , a 0 . 5 - µm - thick line was drawn along the diameter of spreading cells , and fluorescence intensity profiles were measured . To assess IS area and shape , custom algorithms in Volocity were used to identify cells based on intensity of the F - actin network . IS area was calculated automatically by integrating the pixels within the identified objects . IS shape ( circularity ) was calculated using the equation S P A = 2 4 π , where S represents IS shape and P and A are perimeter and area , respec - tively . To assess PLC  1 activation , spreading GFP - actin – expressing cells were fixed and labeled with anti – phospho - PLC  1 , and cell boundaries were defined based on actin fluorescence intensity using a custom algo - rithm in Volocity . For each cell profile , background signal was subtracted , and total phospho - PLC  1 signal intensity was quantified . Values from 80 cells were averaged for each experimental condition . Statistical analysis was performed using Excel , with statistical signifi - cance determined using a two - tailed Student’s t test for unpaired samples with unequal variances . Outliers were discounted as being 1 . 5 SD away from the mean . Representative images were selected within 0 . 5 SD from the mean . Online supplemental material Fig . S1 shows measurement of F - actin dynamics at the IS . Fig . S2 shows assessment of F - actin dynamics in response to JAS treatment of cells sup - pressed for myosin IIA . Fig . S3 shows measurement of SLP - 76 MC veloci - ties at the IS . Fig . S4 shows assessment of SLP - 76 phosphorylation in response to F - actin immobilization . Video 1 shows myosin IIA and F - actin dynamics at the IS . Video 2 shows that F - actin features at the IS slow down toward the center of the IS . Video 3 shows photobleaching of GFP - actin , revealing F - actin velocity at the IS . Video 4 shows that actin and myosin IIA collapse to the center of the IS of Jurkat T cells upon stabilization of actin filaments . Video 5 shows that the F - actin network collapses to the center of the IS in human primary T cells upon stabilization of actin filaments . Video 6 shows that F - actin retrograde flow is unperturbed in cells pretreated with Y - 27632 . Video 7 shows that myosin II inhibition with blebbistatin does not affect actin retrograde flow ( part A ) and that myosin IIA suppression does not affect actin retrograde flow and leads to slow actin network collapse upon F - actin stabilization ( part B ) . Video 8 shows that pretreatment with Y - 27632 and acute treatment with JAS arrest F - actin retrograde flow in Jur - kat T cells ( part A ) or in human primary T cells ( part B ) . Video 9 shows that actin dynamics govern SLP - 76 MC movement . Video 10 shows that SLP - 76 MCs coalesce at the center of the IS . Online supplemental material is avail - able at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 201201018 / DC1 . The authors thank Dr . John Hammer , Jason Yi , Dr . Julie Theriot , William Comrie , Dr . Yair Argon , and Dr . Michael Lipscomb for helpful discussions . This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grants R01AI065644 and P01CA093615 ( to J . K . Burkhardt ) , PN2 EY016586 ( to M . C . Milone ) , and 5T32AR7442 - 25 ( to A . Babich ) . The authors have no competing financial interests . Submitted : 4 January 2012 Accepted : 8 May 2012 References Alon , R . , and M . L . Dustin . 2007 . Force as a facilitator of integrin con - formational changes during leukocyte arrest on blood vessels and antigen - presenting cells . Immunity . 26 : 17 – 27 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . immuni . 2007 . 01 . 002 Baker , R . G . , C . J . Hsu , D . Lee , M . S . Jordan , J . S . Maltzman , D . A . Hammer , T . Baumgart , and G . A . Koretzky . 2009 . The adapter protein SLP - 76 medi - ates “outside - in” integrin signaling and function in T cells . Mol . Cell . Biol . 29 : 5578 – 5589 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / MCB . 00283 - 09 Beemiller , P . , and M . F . Krummel . 2010 . Mediation of T - cell activation by actin meshworks . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 2 : a002444 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a002444 Bubb , M . R . , A . M . Senderowicz , E . A . Sausville , K . L . Duncan , and E . D . Korn . 1994 . Jasplakinolide , a cytotoxic natural product , induces actin on J anua r y 22 , 2018 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m 787 F - actin flow regulates T cell activation • Babich et al . Valitutti , S . , D . Coombs , and L . Dupré . 2010 . The space and time frames of T cell activation at the immunological synapse . FEBS Lett . 584 : 4851 – 4857 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . febslet . 2010 . 10 . 010 Varma , R . , G . Campi , T . Yokosuka , T . Saito , and M . L . Dustin . 2006 . T cell receptor - proximal signals are sustained in peripheral microclusters and terminated in the central supramolecular activation cluster . Immunity . 25 : 117 – 127 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . immuni . 2006 . 04 . 010 Wei , Q . , and R . S . Adelstein . 2000 . Conditional expression of a truncated fragment of nonmuscle myosin II - A alters cell shape but not cytokinesis in HeLa cells . Mol . Biol . Cell . 11 : 3617 – 3627 . Wilson , C . A . , M . A . Tsuchida , G . M . Allen , E . L . Barnhart , K . T . Applegate , P . T . Yam , L . Ji , K . Keren , G . Danuser , and J . A . Theriot . 2010 . Myosin II contributes to cell - scale actin network treadmilling through network dis - assembly . Nature . 465 : 373 – 377 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature08994 Wülfing , C . , and M . M . Davis . 1998 . A receptor / cytoskeletal movement triggered by costimulation during T cell activation . Science . 282 : 2266 – 2269 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 282 . 5397 . 2266 Yam , P . T . , C . A . Wilson , L . Ji , B . Hebert , E . L . Barnhart , N . A . Dye , P . W . Wiseman , G . Danuser , and J . A . Theriot . 2007 . Actin – myosin network reorganization breaks symmetry at the cell rear to spontaneously initiate polarized cell motility . J . Cell Biol . 178 : 1207 – 1221 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200706012 Yi , J . , X . S . Wu , T . Crites , and J . A . Hammer III . 2012 . Actin retrograde flow and actomyosin II arc contraction drive receptor cluster dynamics at the immunological synapse in Jurkat T cells . Mol . Biol . Cell . 23 : 834 – 852 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E11 - 08 - 0731 Yokosuka , T . , K . Sakata - Sogawa , W . Kobayashi , M . Hiroshima , A . Hashimoto - Tane , M . Tokunaga , M . L . Dustin , and T . Saito . 2005 . Newly generated T cell receptor microclusters initiate and sustain T cell activation by recruit - ment of Zap70 and SLP - 76 . Nat . Immunol . 6 : 1253 – 1262 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ni1272 Yu , C . H . , H . J . Wu , Y . Kaizuka , R . D . Vale , and J . T . Groves . 2010 . Altered actin centripetal retrograde flow in physically restricted immunologi - cal synapses . PLoS ONE . 5 : e11878 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0011878 Zhang , J . , A . Shehabeldin , L . A . da Cruz , J . Butler , A . K . Somani , M . McGavin , I . Kozieradzki , A . O . dos Santos , A . Nagy , S . Grinstein , et al . 1999 . Antigen receptor - induced activation and cytoskeletal rearrangement are impaired in Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein - deficient lymphocytes . J . Exp . Med . 190 : 1329 – 1342 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1084 / jem . 190 . 9 . 1329 Zhao , Y . , Z . Zheng , C . J . Cohen , L . Gattinoni , D . C . Palmer , N . P . Restifo , S . A . Rosenberg , and R . A . Morgan . 2006 . High - efficiency transfection of pri - mary human and mouse T lymphocytes using RNA electroporation . Mol . Ther . 13 : 151 – 159 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ymthe . 2005 . 07 . 688 Jbireal , J . M . , C . Strell , B . Niggemann , K . Zänker , and F . Entschladen . 2010 . The selective role of myosin VI in lymphoid leukemia cell migration . Leuk . Res . 34 : 1656 – 1662 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . leukres . 2010 . 04 . 018 Johnson , H . W . , and M . J . Schell . 2009 . Neuronal IP3 3 - kinase is an F - actin - bundling protein : Role in dendritic targeting and regulation of spine morphol - ogy . Mol . Biol . Cell . 20 : 5166 – 5180 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E09 - 01 - 0083 Kaizuka , Y . , A . D . Douglass , R . Varma , M . L . Dustin , and R . D . Vale . 2007 . Mechanisms for segregating T cell receptor and adhesion molecules dur - ing immunological synapse formation in Jurkat T cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 104 : 20296 – 20301 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0710258105 Kim , H . K . , J . W . Kim , A . Zilberstein , B . Margolis , J . G . Kim , J . Schlessinger , and S . G . Rhee . 1991 . PDGF stimulation of inositol phospholipid hydrolysis requires PLC - gamma 1 phosphorylation on tyrosine residues 783 and 1254 . Cell . 65 : 435 – 441 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0092 - 8674 ( 91 ) 90461 - 7 Kim , S . T . , K . Takeuchi , Z . Y . Sun , M . Touma , C . E . Castro , A . Fahmy , M . J . Lang , G . Wagner , and E . L . Reinherz . 2009 . The alphabeta T cell receptor is an anisotropic mechanosensor . J . Biol . Chem . 284 : 31028 – 31037 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M109 . 052712 Lasserre , R . , and A . Alcover . 2010 . Cytoskeletal cross - talk in the control of T cell antigen receptor signaling . FEBS Lett . 584 : 4845 – 4850 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . febslet . 2010 . 09 . 001 Lasserre , R . , S . Charrin , C . Cuche , A . Danckaert , M . I . Thoulouze , F . de Chaumont , T . Duong , N . Perrault , N . Varin - Blank , J . C . Olivo - Marin , et al . 2010 . Ezrin tunes T - cell activation by controlling Dlg1 and microtubule positioning at the immunological synapse . EMBO J . 29 : 2301 – 2314 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / emboj . 2010 . 127 Lee , K . H . , A . D . Holdorf , M . L . Dustin , A . C . Chan , P . M . Allen , and A . S . Shaw . 2002 . T cell receptor signaling precedes immunological synapse formation . Science . 295 : 1539 – 1542 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1067710 Li , Y . C . , B . M . Chen , P . C . Wu , T . L . Cheng , L . S . Kao , M . H . Tao , A . Lieber , and S . R . Roffler . 2010 . Cutting Edge : Mechanical forces acting on T cells immobi - lized via the TCR complex can trigger TCR signaling . J . Immunol . 184 : 5959 – 5963 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 0900775 Mossman , K . D . , G . Campi , J . T . Groves , and M . L . Dustin . 2005 . Altered TCR signaling from geometrically repatterned immunological synapses . Science . 310 : 1191 – 1193 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1119238 Mueller , P . , A . Quintana , D . Griesemer , M . Hoth , and J . Pieters . 2007 . Disruption of the cortical actin cytoskeleton does not affect store operated Ca2 + channels in human T - cells . FEBS Lett . 581 : 3557 – 3562 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . febslet . 2007 . 06 . 068 Negulescu , P . A . , N . Shastri , and M . D . Cahalan . 1994 . Intracellular calcium dependence of gene expression in single T lymphocytes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 91 : 2873 – 2877 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 91 . 7 . 2873 Nguyen , K . , N . R . Sylvain , and S . C . Bunnell . 2008 . T cell costimulation via the integrin VLA - 4 inhibits the actin - dependent centralization of signaling microclusters containing the adaptor SLP - 76 . Immunity . 28 : 810 – 821 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . immuni . 2008 . 04 . 019 Nolz , J . C . , T . S . Gomez , P . Zhu , S . Li , R . B . Medeiros , Y . Shimizu , J . K . Burkhardt , B . D . Freedman , and D . D . Billadeau . 2006 . The WAVE2 complex regu - lates actin cytoskeletal reorganization and CRAC - mediated calcium entry during T cell activation . Curr . Biol . 16 : 24 – 34 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2005 . 11 . 036 Oh - hora , M . 2009 . Calcium signaling in the development and function of T - lineage cells . Immunol . Rev . 231 : 210 – 224 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1600 - 065X . 2009 . 00819 . x Pollard , T . D . , and J . Berro . 2009 . Mathematical models and simulations of cel - lular processes based on actin filaments . J . Biol . Chem . 284 : 5433 – 5437 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . R800043200 Ponti , A . , M . Machacek , S . L . Gupton , C . M . Waterman - Storer , and G . Danuser . 2004 . Two distinct actin networks drive the protrusion of migrating cells . Science . 305 : 1782 – 1786 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1100533 Schnyder , T . , A . Castello , C . Feest , N . E . Harwood , T . Oellerich , H . Urlaub , M . Engelke , J . Wienands , A . Bruckbauer , and F . D . Batista . 2011 . B cell receptor - mediated antigen gathering requires ubiquitin ligase Cbl and adaptors Grb2 and Dok - 3 to recruit dynein to the signaling microcluster . Immunity . 34 : 905 – 918 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . immuni . 2011 . 06 . 001 Sherman , E . , V . Barr , S . Manley , G . Patterson , L . Balagopalan , I . Akpan , C . K . Regan , R . K . Merrill , C . L . Sommers , J . Lippincott - Schwartz , and L . E . Samelson . 2011 . Functional nanoscale organization of signaling mol - ecules downstream of the T cell antigen receptor . Immunity . 35 : 705 – 720 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . immuni . 2011 . 10 . 004 Straight , A . F . , A . Cheung , J . Limouze , I . Chen , N . J . Westwood , J . R . Sellers , and T . J . Mitchison . 2003 . Dissecting temporal and spatial control of cytoki - nesis with a myosin II Inhibitor . Science . 299 : 1743 – 1747 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1081412 Ueda , K . , M . Murata - Hori , M . Tatsuka , and H . Hosoya . 2002 . Rho - kinase contributes to diphosphorylation of myosin II regulatory light chain in nonmuscle cells . Oncogene . 21 : 5852 – 5860 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / sj . onc . 1205747 on J anua r y 22 , 2018 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m F - actin flow regulates T cell activation • Babich et al . T H E J O U R N A L O F C E L L B I O L O G Y S1 JCB Supplemental material Babich et al . , http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 201201018 / DC1 Figure S1 . Measurement of F - actin dynamics at the IS . ( A , top ) Raw image of a fully spread IS of a Jurkat T cell expressing GFP - actin . ( bottom ) Same image digitally processed in Photoshop using a filter with 300 % intensity increase for local maxima within a 3 - pixel radius . Bars , 10 µm . ( B ) A kymo - graph generated from the video sequence and along the diameter of the cell depicted and processed as described in A . Brackets represent 10 µm × 1 min . ( C , left ) Image series of a spreading GFP - actin Jurkat T cell subjected to photobleaching in the region marked with an asterisk . Bar , 10 µm . ( right ) A kymograph generated along the dashed line from the sequence on the left .  represents the angle of deflection from the vertical position . This figure is related to Fig . 1 . JCB S2 Figure S2 . Assessment of F - actin dynamics in response to JAS treatment of cells suppressed for myosin IIA . ( A ) Time - lapse series of a Jurkat T cell spreading on an OKT3 - coated coverglass . At the indicated time , 1 µM JAS was added to the imaging well ( arrowhead ) . Bars , 5 µm . ( B ) Western blot analysis of myo - sin IIB expression in Jurkat T cells suppressed for myosin IIA ( same lysates as in Fig . 3 D [ bottom ] ) . This figure is related to Fig . 3 . F - actin flow regulates T cell activation • Babich et al . S3 Figure S3 . Measurement of SLP - 76 MC velocities at the IS . ( A , left ) Maximum - over - time projection of a video of SLP - 76 MCs centralizing at the IS . ( right ) Tracks calculated from the same cell as on the left using the Shortest Path algorithm in Volocity . Bar , 5 µm . ( B ) A kymograph generated along the path of a mobile SLP - 76 MC . Brackets represent 2 µm × 15 s . ( C ) Histogram of apparent instantaneous velocity distribution from the cell in A ( n = 6 , 407 ) . ( D ) Histo - gram of mean velocity distribution from a cell population ( n = 287 ) found using kymographic analysis . This figure is related to Fig . 5 . JCB S4 Figure S4 . Assessment of SLP - 76 phosphorylation in response to F - actin immobilization . ( A ) Jurkat T cells expressing GFP – SLP - 76 were allowed to interact with the stimulatory surface . Cells were fixed after 5 min and stained for F - actin and phospho - Y128 ( pY128 ) of SLP - 76 ; a sample cell is shown . Bar , 5 µm . ( B ) Relative fluorescence intensities along the dashed line in A . ( C ) Mean ratios of fluorescence intensities of phospho - Y128 SLP - 76 and total GFP – SLP - 76 . Cells were pretreated with Y - 27632 ( Y - 27 ) or left untreated and then allowed to spread for 5 min . JAS was added where indicated , and cells were allowed to spread further for the indicated times . Mean ± SEM is shown ( mean n = 3 , 410 MCs from a mean of 23 cells per condition ) . ( D ) Relative total fluorescence intensities of phospho – SLP - 76 ( phospho - Y145 [ pY145 ] ) obtained from synapses of GFP - actin – expressing Jurkat T cells fixed and stained as in A . Mean ± SEM is shown ( mean of 30 cells per condition ) . This figure is related to Fig . 7 . Video 1 . Myosin IIA localizes to the IS and accumulates behind the LP . Jurkat T cells stably expressing GFP - actin were tran - siently transfected with mKate2 – NMHC II - A ( myosin IIA heavy chain ) . After 16 h , cells were allowed to spread on an OKT3 - coated coverglass . Confocal image sequences were acquired every 3 s for 5 min . This video is related to Fig . 1 . Video 2 . F - actin features at the IS slow down toward the center of the IS . Jurkat E6 . 1 cells stably expressing GFP - actin were allowed to interact with an OKT3 - coated coverglass . Confocal 1 - µm - thick z stacks were acquired every 6 s for 12 . 5 min . The video of a spreading cell is shown as a raw extended projection ( left ) or as an enhanced extended projection ( right ) and cor - responds to still images and the kymograph in Fig . S1 ( A and B ) . Video 3 . Bleaching of GFP - actin prominently reveals F - actin velocity at the IS . GFP - actin Jurkat T cells were allowed to spread on OKT3 for 5 min before image acquisition was initiated . Confocal images were acquired every 3 s for 1 – 2 min . ( left ) A spread T cell subjected to a high - intensity laser to bleach GFP - actin in the cytosol . The corresponding time series is in Fig . S1 C . ( right ) An enlarged view of the boxed region on the left , corresponding to the kymograph shown in Fig . S1 C . Video 4 . The actomyosin network collapses to the center of the IS of Jurkat T cells upon stabilization of actin filaments . Jurkat T cells stably expressing GFP - actin ( left ) or transiently transfected with GFP – NMHC II - A ( right ) were allowed to contact OKT3 - coated coverglasses and imaged after full spreading was reached . JAS was added to the wells when indicated . Confocal 1 - µm - thick z stacks were acquired every 3 s for 7 min and are shown as extended projections . This video is related to Fig . 2 . F - actin flow regulates T cell activation • Babich et al . S5 Video 5 . The actomyosin network collapses to the center of the IS in human primary T cells upon stabilization of actin fila - ments . Human primary CD4 + T cell blasts expressing GFP - actin were dropped onto an OKT3 - coated coverglass and allowed to spread for 3 min . After full spreading was reached , 0 . 5 - µm - thick z stack projections were collected every 3 s . JAS was added to the imaging chamber when indicated . Similar results were obtained in two independent experiments . This video is related to Fig . 2 . Video 6 . F - actin retrograde flow is unperturbed in cells pretreated with Y - 27632 . Jurkat T cells stably expressing GFP - actin were pretreated with Y - 27632 for 15 min to inhibit myosin II activity . Cells were then allowed to spread on an OKT3 - coated coverglass and imaged to assess the dynamics of the F - actin network . During imaging , cells were left untreated for comparison with JAS - treated cells in Video 9 . Confocal 1 - µm - thick z stacks were acquired every 3 s for 7 min and are shown as extended projections . This video is related to Fig . 3 . Video 7 . Neither myosin II inhibition with blebbistatin nor myosin IIA suppression with siRNA affects actin retrograde flow . ( Part A ) Jurkat T cells transiently transfected with F - tractin tdTomato were pretreated with blebbistatin ( Bleb . ) for 30 min to inhibit myosin II activity . Cells were then allowed to spread on an OKT3 - coated coverglass and imaged to assess the dynamics of the F - actin network . Confocal 1 - µm - thick z stacks were acquired every 3 s for 1 – 5 min and are shown as extended projections . ( part B ) Jurkat T cells expressing GFP - actin were transfected with siRNA against the heavy chain of myosin IIA ( siMyH9 ) and used 48 h later . Cells were allowed to spread on an OKT3 - coated coverglass , and 1 - µm - thick z - stack projections were collected every 3 s . When indicated , 1 µM JAS was added to the imaging well . This video is related to Figs . 4 and S2 . Video 8 . Pretreatment with Y - 27632 and acute treatment with JAS arrest F - actin retrograde flow in Jurkat and human primary T cells . ( Part A ) Jurkat T cells stably expressing GFP - actin were pretreated with Y - 27632 for 15 min to inhibit myosin IIA activity . Cells were then allowed to spread on an OKT3 - coated coverglass and imaged to assess the dynamics of the F - actin network . During imaging , cells were treated with JAS when indicated . Confocal 1 - µm - thick z stacks were acquired every 3 s for 7 min and are shown as extended projections . ( part B ) Human CD4 + T cell blasts expressing GFP - actin were pretreated with Y - 27632 for 15 min . Cells were then allowed to spread on an OKT3 - coated coverglass for 3 min before imaging . 0 . 5 - µm - thick z - stack projections were acquired every 3 s . When indicated , 1 µM JAS was added to the imaging well . Similar results were obtained in two independent experiments . This video is related to Fig . 4 . Video 9 . Actin dynamics govern SLP - 76 MC movement . Jurkat T cells stably expressing GFP - actin ( left ) or GFP – SLP - 76 ( right ) were mixed in culture and pretreated with Y - 27632 for 15 min . The cell mixture was then dropped onto an OKT3 - coated coverglass to initiate spreading . Fields of view were scanned for cells that had dynamic GFP - actin and SLP - 76 . Confocal 1 - µm - thick z stacks were acquired every 3 s for 2 . 5 min and are shown as extended projections . JAS was added to the well when indicated . After acquisition , videos of individual cells were cropped and tiled to provide side - by - side comparison . Bar , 5 µm . This video is related to Fig . 5 . Video 10 . SLP - 76 MCs move to the center of the IS at constant velocity . Jurkat T cells stably expressing GFP – SLP - 76 were dropped onto an OKT3 - coated coverglass and imaged after full spreading was reached . Confocal 1 - µm - thick z stacks were acquired every 3 . 2 s for 4 min and are shown as extended projections . Bar , 5 µm . This video is related to Fig . 5 .