Cassotti , M . , Agogu´e , M . , Camarda , A . , Houd´e , O . , & Borst , G . ( 2016 ) . Inhibitory control as a core process of creative problem solving and idea generation from childhood to adult - hood . In B . Barbot ( Ed . ) , Perspectives on creativity development . New Directions for Child and Adolescent Development , 151 , 61 – 72 . 5 Inhibitory Control as a Core Process of Creative Problem Solving and Idea Generation from Childhood to Adulthood Mathieu Cassotti , Marine Agogu´e , Ana¨elle Camarda , Olivier Houd´e , Gr´egoire Borst Abstract Developmental cognitive neuroscience studies tend to show that the prefrontal brain regions ( known to be involved in inhibitory control ) are activated during the generation of creative ideas . In the present article , we discuss how a dual - process model of creativity—much like the ones proposed to account for decision making and reasoning—could broaden our understanding of the processes in - volved in creative ideas generation . When generating creative ideas , children , adolescents , and adults tend to follow “the path of least resistance” and propose solutions that are built on the most common and accessible knowledge within a specific domain , leading to fixation effect . In line with recent theory of typ - ical cognitive development , we argue that the ability to resist the spontaneous activation of design heuristics , to privilege other types of reasoning , might be critical to generate creative ideas at all ages . In the present review , we demon - strate that inhibitory control at all ages can actually support creativity . Indeed , the ability to think of something truly new and original requires first inhibiting spontaneous solutions that come to mind quickly and unconsciously and then exploring new ideas using a generative type of reasoning . © 2016 Wiley Peri - odicals , Inc . N EW D IRECTIONS FOR C HILD AND A DOLESCENT D EVELOPMENT , no . 151 , Spring 2016 © 2016 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . Published online in Wiley Online Library ( wileyonlinelibrary . com ) . • DOI : 10 . 1002 / cad . 20153 61 62 P ERSPECTIVES ON C REATIVITY D EVELOPMENT T he ability to inhibit prepotent associations or previous and in - appropriate ideas seems to be a critical process to generate new ideas and creative solutions to problems ( Dietrich & Kanso , 2010 ) . Although considerable efforts in the field of developmental psychology and neuroscience have been devoted to identifying the role of inhibitory control in reasoning and decision making ( Crone & Dahl , 2012 ; Houd´e & Borst , 2014 , 2015 ) , there are to date few studies that have examined whether this executive function may facilitate creative ideation at all ages ( Kleibeuker , Koolschijn , Jolles , De Dreu , & Crone , 2013a ) . This relative lack of interest is partly because of how these two fields define inhibition . Indeed , many studies in the field of creativity considered inhibition as a social process hindering creativity ( Kohn & Smith , 2011 ) . According to this view , social pressure , evaluation , and conformity would lead individuals to inhibit their creative potential ( Amabile , Goldfarb , & Brackfleld , 1990 ) . Even if social inhibition is undoubtedly a fundamental aspect of creative thinking , this concept differs from the process of inhibition at the core of recent theories of typical cognitive development ( Diamond & Lee , 2011 ) . In these mod - els , inhibition , and more specifically inhibitory control , is viewed as a basic process enabling the suppression of prepotent but irrelevant response ten - dencies and previously acquired knowledge ( Houd´e & Borst , 2014 , 2015 ) . In this article , we discuss how developmental models that emphasize the role of inhibitory control in overcoming reasoning and decision - making bi - ases could broaden our understanding of the processes involved in creative problem solving and idea generation . Specifically , we examine whether the ability to think of something truly new ( i . e . , original , unexpected ) and ap - propriate ( i . e . , useful , adaptive concerning task constraints , see Sternberg & Lubart , 1996 ) requires first inhibiting easy solutions that spontaneously come to mind and then generating creative ideas . Dual Process Theory and Reasoning - Biases Inhibition Consider the following example : In a lake , there is a patch of lily pads . Every day , the patch doubles in size . If it takes 48 days for the patch to cover the entire lake , how long would it take for the patch to cover half of the lake ? _ _ _ _ _ _ _ days When trying to answer this problem , an intuitive response sponta - neously comes to mind : 24 days ( Frederick , 2005 ) . It is true that most of the time to get half a set , the most basic solution is to divide it by two . However , this response that immediately jumps to mind is false ! Indeed , we tend to ignore a fundamental and explicitly mentioned part of the problem , which is that every day , the patch doubles in size . Thus , the correct response is “47 days” because the patch of lily pads will cover half of the lake surface N EW D IRECTIONS FOR C HILD AND A DOLESCENT D EVELOPMENT • DOI : 10 . 1002 / cad I NHIBITORY C ONTROL AS A C ORE P ROCESS OF C REATIVE P ROBLEM S OLVING 63 Figure 5 . 1 . Schematic representation of the dual process models ( see Houd´e & Borst , 2014 ) on the 47th day , and doubling it overnight will cover the full surface the 48th day . To explain such reasoning biases , authors have postulated the ex - istence of two distinct system of thinking ( De Neys , Rossi , & Houd´e , 2013 ; Houd´e , 1997 ; Kahneman , 2011 ) . Dual system theories generally oppose an intuitive - heuristic system ( named System 1 ) to a deliberate - analytic sys - tem ( named System 2 ) . System 1 operations are typically effortless , rapid , global , or holistic , and often emotionally charged . System 2 , in contrast , is slow , controlled , serial , effortful , and involves cognitively costly strategies ( see Figure 5 . 1 ) . Consequently , these dual theories predict qualitatively dif - ferent judgments and decisions depending on which system is running . According to this theoretical framework , cognitive biases evidenced in children , adolescents , and adults are not due to a lack of logical skills per se , but result from a specific failure to inhibit intuitive responses generated automatically by System 1 . Thus , to solve reasoning problems such as “the patch of lily pads” problem , one must first inhibit ( System 3 ) the misleading heuristic belonging to System 1 , and then activate the logical algorithm of System 2 . From a developmental perspective , studies converged in showing that an increasing number of heuristics are acquired over the course of devel - opment that are used with increasing frequency ( De Neys & Vanderputte , 2011 ; Houd´e & Borst , 2014 ; Reyna , Wilhelms , McCormick , & Weldon , 2015 ) . With the respective development of the intuitive - heuristic System 1 and the deliberative - analytic System 2 , the experiences of conflict and N EW D IRECTIONS FOR C HILD AND A DOLESCENT D EVELOPMENT • DOI : 10 . 1002 / cad 64 P ERSPECTIVES ON C REATIVITY D EVELOPMENT inhibitory control demand may change with age . In addition , several lines of evidence suggest that the ability to inhibit the misleading intuitive strate - gies improves from childhood to late adolescence ( De Neys & Van Gelder , 2009 ; Houd´e & Borst , 2014 , 2015 ) . Unlike other traditional models of cog - nitive development such as the Piagetian model , these dual - process models , by focusing not only on the development of the two systems but also on the development of inhibitory control abilities , can account for nonlinear pat - terns of development observed in reasoning and decision making ( Houd´e & Borst , 2014 , 2015 ) . Fixation and Inhibition in Creative Problem Solving Much like researchers in the field of reasoning seeking to understand what causes one to fail to reason logically , researchers in the field of creativity seek to determine the factors leading one to fail to provide original ideas or prob - lem solutions . For instance , numerous studies have reported that creative problem - solving capabilities can be blocked by mental fixation ( Storm & Angello , 2010 ) . These studies stress how previous knowledge or ideas can constrain the generation of alternative solutions during creative problem solving . One of the most striking examples of this creativity failure is the so - called functional fixedness phenomenon , initially described by Duncker ( 1945 ) . For instance , in the “candle problem” ( Adamson , 1952 ; German & Barrett , 2005 ) , participants are presented with a tabletop containing a book of matches , a box of tacks , and a candle . They are asked to find a way to fix and light the candle on the wall in such a way that it will burn without dripping wax onto the table below . This problem is difficult to solve because people are fixed on the tra - ditional function of the box as a container . Indeed , the optimal solution requires emptying the box of tacks to use it in an unfamiliar way such as a platform . Frequently , adults fail to easily find this solution when the box is presented as being full of tacks because they remain focused on the typical function of the box . Within the context of dual - process models , functional fixedness may arise from an intuitively - generated mental representation of the classical use of the object belonging to System 1 . Therefore , inhibitory control may allow the suppression of this first intuitive response in order to consider alterna - tive uses of the objects . Although no study has demonstrated a direct rela - tionship between inhibitory control and creative performance in the candle problem , there is increasing evidence that the ability to overcome fixation in various problem - solving situations require inhibitory control ( Dietrich & Kanso , 2010 ; Storm & Angello , 2010 ; Storm & Patel , 2014 ) . Indeed , stud - ies in adults clearly demonstrated that higher level of inhibitory control is associated with greater success on creative problems solving tasks involving mental fixation ( Storm & Angello , 2010 ) . Additional empirical evidences in favor of the hypothesis that inhibitory control is a core component of N EW D IRECTIONS FOR C HILD AND A DOLESCENT D EVELOPMENT • DOI : 10 . 1002 / cad I NHIBITORY C ONTROL AS A C ORE P ROCESS OF C REATIVE P ROBLEM S OLVING 65 creative problem solving came from a developmental neuroimaging study in adolescent and adults ( Kleibeuker et al . , 2013b ) . Greater activation of the inferior frontal gyrus and the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex , two brain re - gions classically associated with executive functions and inhibitory control in particular , were observed when participants provided optimal solutions to the problems . In addition , these two brain structures were more acti - vated in adolescents than in adults , suggesting that the maturation of the prefrontal cortex regions sustaining inhibitory - control ability is still devel - oping during adolescence in agreement with the protracted development of these prefrontal regions until early adulthood ( Giedd et al . , 2009 ) . Developmental studies of functional fixedness have reported , sur - prisingly , that 5 - and 6 - year - old children seem immune to this cognitive bias as opposed to older children and adults ( Defeyter & German , 2003 ; German & Barrett , 2005 ; German & Defeyter , 2000 ) . Indeed , using a child - friendly adaptation of the candle problem , German and Defeyter ( 2000 ) clearly demonstrated that young children are not fixed on the typical func - tion of the object , allowing them to solve the problem more easily than older children . This finding makes sense in light of dual - process models of cognitive development according to which heuristics belonging to System 1 progressively emerge during the course of childhood ( Houd´e & Borst , 2014 ) . This result is also consistent with results in decision - making studies showing that young children are less susceptible to various cognitive biases ( Reyna , Wilhelms , McCormick , & Weldon , 2015 ) . Whereas overcoming functional fixedness in older children and adults requires inhibitory con - trol , younger children might not need inhibitory control to generate alter - native function of objects because the classical functions of the object might not be as strong as in adolescents and adults . In other words , children might not need inhibitory control in these contexts to be creative simply because , unlike adolescents and adults , they experience a lower functional fixedness ( or at least a different type of fixation ) in creative problem solving . Fixation and Inhibition in Creative Ideas Generation Although reasoning and creative problem - solving studies suggest that in - hibitory control is involved in overcoming cognitive biases and mental fixa - tion , one could wonder whether this process is also fundamental in circum - stances where individuals cannot simply choose between existing strate - gies but must propose a variety of new strategies ( DeHaan , 2011 ) . Just as in other contexts , it seems that individuals face numerous cognitive biases when asked to generate creative ideas ( Finke , Ward , & Smith , 1992 ; Ward , Patterson , & Sifonis , 2004 ) . Indeed , people tend to follow “the path of least resistance” and propose solutions that are built on the most common and accessible knowledge within a specific domain ( Agogu´e et al . , 2014 ; Smith , Ward , & Finke , 1995 ) . For example , when individuals must imag - ine and draw an animal that lives on another planet very different from N EW D IRECTIONS FOR C HILD AND A DOLESCENT D EVELOPMENT • DOI : 10 . 1002 / cad 66 P ERSPECTIVES ON C REATIVITY D EVELOPMENT Earth , a number of typical examples of animals living on Earth sponta - neously jump to mind ( Abraham & Windmann , 2007 ) . These intuitive and spontaneous representations of what classically constitute animals on Earth ( bilateral symmetry of the shape , presence of common appendage or sense organs ) impede the creative process , leading to fixation effect in both chil - dren and adults ( Cacciari , Levorato , & Cicogna , 1997 ) . According to the dual - process view and in line with the “path of least resistance” model ( Ward et al . , 2004 ) , the difficulty of generating creative ideas might result from a specific failure to inhibit intuitive responses leading to fixation ef - fect generated automatically by System 1 . Thus , to provide original ideas in a problem such as “the alien drawing task , ” one must first inhibit the intu - itive representations of what classically constitute animals on Earth ( repre - sentations belonging to System 1 ) and then activate conceptual expansion reasoning ( in System 2 ) . Interestingly , the results of a recent study suggest that the nature of fixa - tion effect during the generation of creative ideas may develop with age , ed - ucation , and expertise ( Agogu´e , Poirel , Pineau , Houd´e , & Cassotti , 2014 ) . Using a creative idea generation task that involves designing a method to drop a hen’s egg from a height of 10 meters ( 32 feet ) to ensure that it does not break ( called “the egg task” ) , the authors found that the fixation effect of children diverges qualitatively from that of adults . Indeed , most of the responses proposed by the adults were based on spontaneously activated knowledge and consisted of using an inert device to dampen the shock , protect the egg , or slow the fall ( e . g . , to slow the fall with a parachute ) . On the contrary , more original solutions that consisted of using a living device or of modifying the natural properties of the egg ( e . g . , training a bird to catch the egg during the fall or freezing the egg before dropping it ) were less often provided by the participants . Although 10 - year - old children were also fixed on solutions that consisted of protecting the egg or dampening the shock , they did not spontaneously propose to slow the fall using , for exam - ple , a parachute . In line with dual - process models , these results suggest that the design heuristics belonging to System 1 used by participants to explore the potential solutions to the task and leading to fixation differed between children and adults , although children knew what parachutes were and how parachutes worked . Moreover , a recent study on industrial designer with the same egg task provided indirect evidence that inhibitory control might be involved in the ability to overcome fixation effect during creative ideas generation ( Agogu´e , Le Masson , Dalmasso , Houd´e , & Cassotti , 2015 ) . The authors found that industrial designers outperformed engineers with regard to fluency and originality , and gave more solutions outside of the fixation effect in the egg task . It was argued that industrial designers outper - formed engineers because they were more efficient at inhibiting fixation ef - fect . This assumption is in line with results of a previous study showing that industrial designers exhibited higher scores of creativity assessed with the Torrance Tests of Creative Thinking and showed higher inhibitory control N EW D IRECTIONS FOR C HILD AND A DOLESCENT D EVELOPMENT • DOI : 10 . 1002 / cad I NHIBITORY C ONTROL AS A C ORE P ROCESS OF C REATIVE P ROBLEM S OLVING 67 skills as indicated by the absence of a Stroop interference effect ( i . e . , a clas - sical inhibitory control task ) compared to a control group . In addition , the creative abilities of industrial designers were positively associated with their performance on the Stroop task ( Edl , Benedek , Papousek , Weiss , & Fink , 2014 ) . Additional evidence for the role of inhibitory control and flexible cognitive control in creative ideas generation has been provided by a se - ries of studies showing positive correlations between inhibition measures and divergent thinking performance in adults ( Beaty , Silvia , Nusbaum , Jauk , & Benedek , 2014 ; Benedek , Franz , Heene , & Neubauer , 2012 ; Vartanian , 2009 ; Zabelina & Robinson , 2010 ) . Moreover , neuroimaging studies have consistently reported a relationship between the ability to gen - erate highly creative responses and activations in specific prefrontal brain regions known to be implicated in executive functions ( Benedek et al . , 2014 ; Dietrich & Kanso , 2010 ) . More specifically , verbal and visuospatial creativity elicited activations in the anterior cingulate cortex , the inferior frontal gyri , and the middle frontal gyri , suggesting that conflict monitor - ing , inhibitory control , and working memory might be important for cre - ativity ( Boccia , Piccardi , Palermo , Nori , & Palmiero , 2015 ) . Critically , a re - cent neuroimaging study demonstrated that brain activation in the inferior frontal gyrus—a brain region known to be implicated in inhibitory control ( Houd´e , Rossi , Lubin , & Joliot , 2010 ) —is positively related to originality and appropriateness aspects of divergent thinking ( Benedek et al . , 2014 ) . Studies showing that more creative adults have better inhibitory control ef - ficiency and recruit to a greater extent brain regions involved in inhibitory control than less creative adults are in agreement with the prediction of our dual - process model of creativity that creative idea generation requires the inhibition of dominant and common ideas belonging to System 1 to explore new concepts using a generative type of reasoning ( conceptual expansion or analogical reasoning ) . Despite these recent findings on adults , there are few developmental studies on the relationship between inhibitory control and creative idea gen - eration in children and adolescents . To the best of our knowledge , only one developmental neuroimaging study has directly tested the involvement of inhibitory control brain regions in divergent thinking in a developmental perspective ( Kleibeuker et al . , 2013a ) . In this elegant study , the authors investigated the neural correlates of multiple creative ideas generation in both adolescents and adults . Using an alternative uses task in which partic - ipants were requested to generate alternative uses for conventional every - day objects such as a brick , they reported that brain activations in the left lateral prefrontal cortex regions supporting inhibitory control process were less activated in adolescent than in adults . Consistent with dual - process models postulating that inhibitory control is still developing during ado - lescent , these findings suggest that adolescent may be less effective to ex - ecute inhibitory control on intuitively generated solutions based on the N EW D IRECTIONS FOR C HILD AND A DOLESCENT D EVELOPMENT • DOI : 10 . 1002 / cad 68 P ERSPECTIVES ON C REATIVITY D EVELOPMENT typical function of the objects in the alternative uses task ( i . e . , fixation effect belonging to the intuitive System 1 ) compared to adults . Limitations In the present review , we have discussed how a dual - process model of creativity—much like the ones proposed for reasoning and decision making—may lead to significant progress in the understanding of the pro - cesses involved in creative cognition . Nevertheless , a few limitations of the present study should be acknowledged . First of all , because creativity is a complex phenomenon , different factors such as personality traits , emo - tional context , and social influences are known to highly contribute to cre - ative performance . Although our model provides a basis for studying the de - velopment of creativity , and more specifically here , creative behaviors that include creative problem solving and creative ideas generation , further re - searches are necessary to determine how these critical factors modulate the activation of each system and the interactions between them . The role of inhibitory control in creative ideas generation has been ev - idenced with verbal divergent thinking studies but few studies have inves - tigated whether inhibitory control is also required to be creative in other domains such as in visuospatial or artistic creativity . The results of a meta - analysis of neuroimaging studies of creativity in three different domains in - cluding musical , verbal , and visuospatial ( Boccia et al . , 2015 ) suggest that verbal and visuospatial creativity , but not musical creativity , rely on the acti - vation of a network of executive brain regions including inhibitory control ones . Thus , inhibitory control might be required to be creative only in the verbal and visuospatial domains . Finally , although neuroimaging and behavioral studies converge in showing that better inhibitory control leads to higher creativity , some stud - ies have reported that poorer inhibitory ability can facilitate creative per - formance ( Radel , Davranche , Fournier , & Dietrich , 2015 ) . For example , using noninvasive brain stimulation , Mayseless and Shamay - Tsoory ( 2015 ) reported that decreasing the activity in the left frontal parts of the brain and increasing activity in the right frontal parts of the brain—a brain modula - tion supposed to reduce cognitive control—have a positive effect on cre - ative ideas production . In sharp contrast with this finding , another nonin - vasive brain stimulation study reported that a hyperactivation of the pre - frontal cortex was beneficial for creative production , suggesting that better cognitive control led to better creative ideas generation ( Colombo , Barte - saghi , Simonelli , & Antonietti , 2015 ) . In a similar vein , numerous studies on clinical disorders associated with inhibitory control deficits suggest that impaired cognitive control might facilitate original associations and stimu - late creative ideas generation ( see de Souza et al . , 2014 ) . We note , however , that these patients rarely exhibited specific deficits in inhibitory control . Thus , to account for the discrepancies in the literature regarding the role of N EW D IRECTIONS FOR C HILD AND A DOLESCENT D EVELOPMENT • DOI : 10 . 1002 / cad I NHIBITORY C ONTROL AS A C ORE P ROCESS OF C REATIVE P ROBLEM S OLVING 69 creativity , future researches should explore the respective contribution of latent inhibition , social inhibition , and cognitive inhibition to creativity . Conclusion Taken together , the behavioral and neuroimaging data reviewed in this ar - ticle converge in showing that the development of creative problem solving and idea generation relies not only on the ability to make intuitive asso - ciations but also on the ability to suppress ( inhibit ) previously acquired knowledge or prepotent irrelevant classical solutions . In contrast to the assumption that reduced inhibitory control may fos - ter remote associations and stimulate creativity ( Radel et al . , 2015 ) , we have reported numerous evidence in the literature that the ability to resist ( in - hibit ) intuitive - heuristic reasoning leading to fixation is critical to generate creative solutions to problems at all ages by allowing one to adopt other types of reasoning ( e . g . , analogical thinking and conceptual expansion ) be - longing to System 2 . Although an increasing number of studies in adults focus on the role of inhibitory control in creative thinking ( Beaty et al . , 2014 ; Benedek et al . , 2012 , 2014 ; Dietrich & Kanso , 2010 ; Storm & Angello , 2010 ) , there are still many challenges to be addressed to fully understand the processes that enable to break conventional or obvious patterns of thinking in a devel - opmental perspective of creative ideas generation . Indeed , more research is required to clarify the relationship between creativity and the develop - mental trajectories of fixation effects ( System 1 ) , generative - type of rea - soning ( System 2 ) , and inhibitory control ( System 3 ) . This new line of developmental research should also clarify the interactions between these systems to determine whether System 1 and System 2 are activated seri - ally or in parallel ( De Neys et al . , 2013 ) . Finally , given that previous de - velopmental studies demonstrated that inhibitory control can be improved ( Diamond & Lee , 2011 ) , studies should investigate whether interventions based on training inhibitory control can help children , adolescents , and adults overcome fixation effects during creative problem solving and idea generation . Acknowledgment This research was financed by a grant from the French National Research Agency ( ANR ID´efixE ) . References Abraham , A . , & Windmann , S . ( 2007 ) . Creative cognition : The diverse operations and the prospect of applying a cognitive neuroscience perspective . Methods , 42 , 38 – 48 . Adamson , R . E . ( 1952 ) . Functional fixedness as related to problem solving : a repetition of three experiments . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 44 ( 4 ) , 288 – 291 . N EW D IRECTIONS FOR C HILD AND A DOLESCENT D EVELOPMENT • DOI : 10 . 1002 / cad 70 P ERSPECTIVES ON C REATIVITY D EVELOPMENT Agogu´e , M . , Kazakc¸i , A . , Hatchuel , A . , Masson , P . , Weil , B . , Poirel , N . , et al . ( 2014 ) . The impact of type of examples on originality : Explaining fixation and stimulation effects . Journal of Creative Behavior , 48 ( 1 ) , 1 – 12 . Agogu´e , M . , Le Masson , P . , Dalmasso , C . , Houd´e , O . , & Cassotti , M . ( 2015 ) . Resisting classical solutions : The creative mind of industrial designers and engineers . Psychol - ogy of Aesthetics , Creativity , and the Arts , 9 ( 3 ) , 313 – 318 . Agogu´e , M . , Poirel , N . , Pineau , A . , Houd´e , O . , & Cassotti , M . ( 2014 ) . The impact of age and training on creativity : A design - theory approach to study fixation effects . Thinking Skills and Creativity , 11 , 33 – 41 . Amabile , T . M . , Goldfarb , P . , & Brackfleld , S . C . ( 1990 ) . Social influences on creativity : Evaluation , coaction , and surveillance . Creativity Research Journal , 3 ( 1 ) , 6 – 21 . Beaty , R . E . , Silvia , P . J . , Nusbaum , E . C . , Jauk , E . , & Benedek , M . ( 2014 ) . The role of associative and executive processes in creative cognition . Memory & Cognition , 42 ( 7 ) , 1186 – 1197 . Benedek , M . , Franz , F . , Heene , M . , & Neubauer , A . C . ( 2012 ) . Differential effects of cog - nitive inhibition and intelligence on creativity . Personality and Individual Differences , 53 , 480 – 485 . Benedek , M . , Jauk , E . , Fink , A . , Koschutnig , K . , Reishofer , G . , Ebner , F . , et al . ( 2014 ) . To create or to recall ? Neural mechanisms underlying the generation of creative new ideas . NeuroImage , 88 , 125 – 133 . Boccia , M . , Piccardi , L . , Palermo , L . , Nori , R . , & Palmiero , M . ( 2015 ) Where do bright ideas occur in our brain ? Meta - analytic evidence from neuroimaging studies of domain - specific creativity . Frontiers in Psychology , 6 , 1195 . Cacciari , C . , Levorato . M . C . , & Cicogna , P . ( 1997 ) . Imagination at work : Conceptual and linguistic creativity in children . In T . B . Ward , S . M . Smith , & J . Vaid , Creative thought : An investigation of conceptual structures and processes ( pp . 145 – 177 ) . Wash - ington , DC : American Psychological Association . Colombo , B . , Bartesaghi , N . , Simonelli , L . , & Antonietti , A . ( 2015 ) . The combined ef - fects of neurostimulation and priming on creative thinking . A preliminary tDCS study on dorsolateral prefrontal cortex . Frontiers in Human Neuroscience , 9 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fn - hum . 2015 . 00403 Crone , E . A . , & Dahl , R . E . ( 2012 ) . Understanding adolescence as a period of social – affective engagement and goal flexibility . Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 13 ( 9 ) , 636 – 650 . Defeyter , M . A . , & German , T . P . ( 2003 ) . Acquiring an understanding of design : Evidence from children’s insight problem solving . Cognition , 89 , 133 – 155 . DeHaan , R . J . ( 2011 ) . Teaching creative science thinking . Science , 334 , 1499 – 1500 . De Neys , W . , Rossi , S . , and Houd´e , O . ( 2013 ) . Bats , balls and substitution sensitivity . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 20 , 269 – 273 . De Neys , W . , & Vanderputte , K . ( 2011 ) . When less is not always more : Stereotype knowl - edge and reasoning development . Developmental Psychology , 47 , 432 – 441 . De Neys , W . , & Van Gelder , E . ( 2009 ) . Logic and belief across the life span : the rise and fall of belief inhibition during syllogistic reasoning . Developmental Science , 12 , 123 – 130 . de Souza , L . C . , Guimar˜aes , H . C . , Teixeira , A . L . , Caramelli , P . , Levy , R . , Dubois , B . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Frontal lobe neurology and the creative mind . Frontiers in Psychology , 5 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2014 . 00761 Diamond , A . , & Lee , K . ( 2011 ) . Interventions shown to aid executive function develop - ment in children 4 to 12 years old . Science , 333 ( 6045 ) , 959 – 964 . Dietrich , A . , & Kanso , R . ( 2010 ) . A review of EEG , ERP , and neuroimaging studies of creativity and insight . Psychological Bulletin , 136 ( 5 ) , 822 – 848 . Duncker , K . ( 1945 ) . On problem - solving . Psychological Monographs , 58 ( 5 ) , 1 – 113 . N EW D IRECTIONS FOR C HILD AND A DOLESCENT D EVELOPMENT • DOI : 10 . 1002 / cad I NHIBITORY C ONTROL AS A C ORE P ROCESS OF C REATIVE P ROBLEM S OLVING 71 Edl , S . , Benedek , M . , Papousek , I . , Weiss , E . M . , & Fink , A . ( 2014 ) . Creativity and the stroop interference effect . Personality and Individual Differences , 69 , 38 – 42 . Finke , R . A . , Ward , T . B . , & Smith , S . M . ( 1992 ) . Creative cognition : Theory , research , and applications . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Frederick , S . ( 2005 ) . Cognitive reflection and decision making . Journal of Economic Perspectives , 19 ( 4 ) , 25 – 42 . German , T . P . , & Barrett , H . C . ( 2005 ) . Functional fixedness in a technologically sparse culture . Psychological Science , 16 , 1 – 5 . German , T . P . , & Defeyter , M . A . ( 2000 ) . Immunity to functional fixedness in young children . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 7 ( 4 ) , 707 – 712 . Giedd , J . N . , Lalonde , F . M . , Celano , M . J . , White , S . L . , Wallace , G . L . , Lee , N . R . , & Lenroot , R . K . ( 2009 ) . Anatomical brain magnetic resonance imaging of typically de - veloping children and adolescents . Journal of the American Academy of Child and Ado - lescent Psychiatry , 48 , 465 – 470 . Houd´e , O . ( 1997 ) . The problem of deductive competence and the inhibitory control of cognition . Cahiers de Psychologie Cognitive / Current Psychology of Cognition , 16 , 108 – 113 . Houd´e , O . , & Borst , G . ( 2014 ) . Measuring inhibitory control in children and adults . Frontiers in Psychology , 5 , 616 . Houd´e , O . , & Borst , G . ( 2015 ) Evidence for an inhibitory - control theory of the reasoning brain . Frontiers in Human Neuroscience , 9 , 148 . Houd´e , O . , Rossi , S . , Lubin , A . , & Joliot , M . ( 2010 ) . Mapping numerical processing , reading , and executive functions in the developing brain : An fMRI meta - analysis of 52 studies including 842 children . Developmental Science , 13 ( 6 ) , 876 – 885 . Kahneman , D . ( 2011 ) Thinking fast and slow . New York : Farrar , Straus and Giroux . Kleibeuker , S . W . , Koolschijn , P . C . M . P . , Jolles , D . D . , De Dreu , C . K . W . , & Crone , E . A . ( 2013a ) . The neural coding of creative idea generation across adolescence and early adulthood . Frontiers in Human Neuroscience , 7 , 1 – 12 . Kleibeuker , S . W . , Koolschijn , P . C . M . P . , Jolles , D . D . , Schel , M . A . , De Dreu , C . K . W . , & Crone , E . A . ( 2013b ) . Prefrontal cortex involvement in creative problem solv - ing in middle adolescence and adulthood . Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience , 5 , 197 – 206 . Kohn , N . W . , & Smith , S . M . ( 2011 ) . Collaborative fixation : Effects of others’ ideas on brainstorming . Applied Cognitive Psychology , 25 ( 3 ) , 359 – 371 . Mayseless , N . , & Shamay - Tsoory , S . G . ( 2015 ) . Enhancing verbal creativity : Modulating creativity by altering the balance between right and left inferior frontal gyrus with tDCS . Neuroscience , 291 , 167 – 176 . Radel , R . , Davranche , K . , Fournier , M . , & Dietrich , A . ( 2015 ) . The role of ( dis ) inhi - bition in creativity : Decreased inhibition improves idea generation . Cognition , 134 , 110 – 120 . Reyna , V . F . , Wilhelms , E . A . , McCormick , M . J . , & Weldon , R . B . ( 2015 ) , Development of risky decision making : Fuzzy - trace theory and neurobiological perspectives . Child Development Perspectives , 9 , 122 – 127 . Smith , S . M . , Ward , T . B . , & Finke , R . A . ( 1995 ) . The creative cognition approach . Cam - bridge , MA : MIT Press . Sternberg , R . J . , & Lubart , T . I . ( 1996 ) . Investing in creativity . American Psychologist , 51 ( 7 ) , 677 . Storm , B . C . , & Angello , G . ( 2010 ) . Overcoming fixation : Creative problem solving and retrieval - induced forgetting . Psychological Science , 21 , 1263 – 1265 . Storm , B . C . , & Patel , T . N . ( 2014 ) . Forgetting as a consequence and enabler of cre - ative thinking . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 40 , 1594 – 1609 . N EW D IRECTIONS FOR C HILD AND A DOLESCENT D EVELOPMENT • DOI : 10 . 1002 / cad 72 P ERSPECTIVES ON C REATIVITY D EVELOPMENT Vartanian , O . ( 2009 ) . Variable attention facilitates creative problem solving . Psychology of Aesthetics , Creativity , and the Arts , 3 , 57 – 59 . Ward , T . B . , Patterson , M . J . , & Sifonis , C . M . ( 2004 ) . The role of specificity and abstrac - tion in creative idea generation . Creativity Research Journal , 16 , 1 – 9 . Zabelina , D . L . , & Robinson , M . D . ( 2010 ) . Creativity as flexible cognitive control . Psy - chology of Aesthetics , Creativity , and the Arts , 4 ( 3 ) , 136 . M ATHIEU C ASSOTTI is assistant professor of developmental psychology in the Lab - oratory for the Psychology of Child Development and Education ( CNRS Unit 8240 ) , Paris Descartes University , Sorbonne Paris Cit´e and Caen University , and junior member of the Institut Universitaire de France , France . M ARINE A GOGU ´ E is assistant professor in the Department of Management , HEC Montr´eal , Canada . A NA ¨ ELLE C AMARDA is a doctoral student in the Laboratory for the Psychology of Child Development and Education ( CNRS Unit 8240 ) , Paris Descartes Univer - sity , Sorbonne Paris Cit´e and Caen University , France . O LIVIER H OUD ´ E is professor of developmental psychology in the Laboratory for the Psychology of Child Development and Education ( CNRS Unit 8240 ) , Paris Descartes University , Sorbonne Paris Cit´e and Caen University , and senior member of the Institut Universitaire de France , France . G R ´ EGOIRE B ORST is professor of developmental psychology in the Laboratory for the Psychology of Child Development and Education ( CNRS Unit 8240 ) , Paris Descartes University , Sorbonne Paris Cit ´ e and Caen University , France . N EW D IRECTIONS FOR C HILD AND A DOLESCENT D EVELOPMENT • DOI : 10 . 1002 / cad