The Value of Crowdsourcing : Can Users Really Compete with Professionals in Generating New Product Ideas ? * Marion K . Poetz and Martin Schreier Generating ideas for new products used to be the exclusive domain of marketers , engineers , and / or designers . Users have only recently been recognized as an alternative source of new product ideas . Whereas some have attributed great potential to outsourcing idea generation to the “crowd” of users ( “crowdsourcing” ) , others have clearly been more skeptical . The authors join this debate by presenting a real - world comparison of ideas actually generated by a ﬁrm’s professionals with those generated by users in the course of an idea generation contest . Both professionals and users provided ideas to solve an effective and relevant problem in the consumer goods market for baby products . Executives from the underlying company evaluated all ideas ( blind to their source ) in terms of key quality dimensions including novelty , customer beneﬁt , and feasibility . The study reveals that the crowdsourcing process generated user ideas that score signiﬁcantly higher in terms of novelty and customer beneﬁt , and somewhat lower in terms of feasibility . However , the average values for feasibility—in sharp contrast to novelty and customer beneﬁt—tended to be relatively high overall , meaning that feasibility did not constitute a narrow bottleneck in this study . Even more interestingly , it is found that user ideas are placed more frequently than expected among the very best in terms of novelty and customer beneﬁt . These ﬁndings , which are quite counterintuitive from the perspective of classic new product development ( NPD ) literature , suggest that , at least under certain conditions , crowdsourcing might constitute a promising method to gather user ideas that can complement those of a ﬁrm’s professionals at the idea generation stage in NPD . Introduction C onsider the following experiment in idea gen - eration : A company wishes to develop promis - ing ideas for new products . Who would you suggest should be asked to generate ideas : the profes - sional engineers , marketers , and / or designers who work for the company , or its potential customers or users in general ? Moreover , who would be able to come up with better ideas ? Despite its obvious importance to the ultimate success of a ﬁrm , the idea generation process is an area where scholars generally still have limited insights with regard to the “ideal” process . Schulze and Hoegl ( 2008 , p . 1742 ) , for example , note that “how new product ideas are effec - tively generated still remains an issue of high relevance to both management scholars and practitioners . ” Usually , however , it is a ﬁrm’s marketers , engineers , and / or designers who take on the creative tasks in generating new product ideas . Based on extensive marketing research ( or not ) and using some theoretical approach to creativity in new product development ( NPD ) ( e . g . , Amabile , Barsade , Mueller , and Staw , 2005 ; Goldenberg , Lehmann , and Mazursky , 2001 ; Majchrzak , Cooper , and Neece , 2004 ; Schulze and Hoegl , 2008 ) , those professionals try to iden - tify ( or create ) and solve a relevant consumer problem by inventing a creative solution . The key assumption behind that intuitive approach is that a ﬁrm’s professionals , unlike users , have the experience and expertise required to come up with truly novel and promising ideas that might be appealing to broader parts of the market and might therefore lead to successful new products ( Ulrich , 2007 ; Ulrich and Eppinger , 2008 ) . In a similar vein , Bennett and Cooper ( 1981 , p . 54 ) , for example , argued that a truly creative idea for a new product “is very often out of the scope of the normal experience of the consumer . ” Such opinions have been substantiated by the idea that users might be too accustomed to current consumption condi - tions ( i . e . , the present ) , thus preventing them from pre - dicting and shaping the future ( Leonard and Rayport , 1997 ) . Consequently , the logical conclusion from that Address correspondence to : Marion K . Poetz , Department of Innova - tion and Organizational Economics , Copenhagen Business School , Kilevej 14 A , Frederiksberg 2000 , Denmark . E - mail : mp . ino @ cbs . dk . Tel : + 45 - 3815 - 2914 . * Both authors contributed equally . We would like to thank Felix Klo - bassa , Stephan Roehrig , and Herfried Schwarz for their valuable help in realizing this study , the Bamed / MAM group for their cooperation , and especially Peter Roehrig , Sabine Beer , and Thomas Rohaczek for the time and effort they invested in this project . We also thank Lars Bo Jeppesen , Eric von Hippel , and the participants in the DRUID conference for their comments and feedback on earlier versions of this paper . Finally , we are grateful for the very helpful suggestions made by the editor , Tony di Benedetto , and the two reviewers . J PROD INNOV MANAG 2012 ; 29 ( 2 ) : 245 – 256 © 2012 Product Development & Management Association DOI : 10 . 1111 / j . 1540 - 5885 . 2011 . 00893 . x classic line of literature might be the following : “relying on the method of asking buyers to describe potential future products , big leaps to novel product ideas are gen - erally not likely” ( Schulze and Hoegl , 2008 , p . 1744 ) . In the experiment described above , the answer would be that the company should ask its professionals to generate new product ideas . On the other hand , however , there is a second , alter - native line of literature that posits that it is at least plau - sible that some users might have reasonably good new product ideas ( Jeppesen and Frederiksen , 2006 ) . This idea is supported by a growing body of studies that—contrary to conventional wisdom—show that users often innovate for themselves and that many of those user innovations are characterized by high commercial attrac - tiveness ( von Hippel , 2005 ) . Probably one of the most extreme and most frequently cited examples of user inno - vation is open - source software ( such as Apache or Linux ) , which is developed exclusively by a community of users rather than professional software developers employed by ﬁrms ( Bagozzi and Dholakia , 2006 ; Lakhani and von Hippel 2003 ; Lerner and Tirole , 2002 , 2005 ; Pitt , Watson , Berthon , Wynn , and Zinkhan , 2006 ) . 1 The great success of open - source software—Apache , for example , is outperforming Microsoft in terms of market share in the Web server security software market ( see Netcraft . com ) —has dramatically changed the potential role of users in corporate NPD efforts . In particular , a number of leading companies have already begun to experiment with the idea of harnessing the creative poten - tial among users in order to fuel their own NPD pipelines . Analogous to open - source software , the underlying idea is to outsource the phase of idea generation to a potentially large and unknown population , referred to as the “crowd , ” in the form of an open call . Such initiatives have consequently become known as “crowdsourcing” ( Agerfalk and Fitzgerald , 2008 ; Howe , 2006 ; Pisano and Verganti , 2008 ; Surowiecki , 2004 ) . Although crowd - sourcing can be positioned around many different populations , this study focuses on potential customers or users ( for alternative populations , cf . Jeppesen and Lakhani , 2010 ; for related approaches to open innovation or external sources of innovation through innovation tour - naments , cf . Chesbrough , 2003 ; Terwiesch and Ulrich , 2009 ) . Dell , for example , has launched an initiative called Idea Storm , where users from around the globe have been invited to suggest product improvements and new product ideas online . This initiative has resulted in more than 10 , 000 idea submissions ( see Ideastorm . com ) . Another frequently cited example is the U . S . fashion start - up Threadless ( Fuchs and Schreier , 2011 ; Ogawa and Piller , 2006 ) , which specializes in hip T - shirts designed by users . Its highly active user community submits new design proposals on an ongoing basis , and every week the company chooses the most attractive user - designed T - shirts to be included in its product line . Similar initiatives have been reported for companies across various industries , including Adidas , BBC , BMW , Boeing , Ducati , and Muji ( Berthon , Pitt , McCarthy , and Kates , 2007 ; Ogawa and Piller , 2006 ; Piller and Walcher , 2006 ; Sawhney and Prandelli , 2000 ; Sawhney , Verona , and Prandelli , 2005 ) . Compared with an active company - initiated search for and subsequent collaboration with speciﬁc types of users with the most promising ideas ( e . g . , based on the lead user method ; Hienerth , Poetz , and von Hippel , 2007 ; Lilien , Morrison , Searls , Sonnack , and von Hippel , 2002 ; von Hippel , 1986 ) , crowdsourcing relies on a self - selection process among users willing and able to respond to widely broadcast idea generation com - petitions ( Lakhani , Jeppesen , Lohse , and Panetta , 2007 ; Piller and Walcher , 2006 ) . One of the key questions increasingly discussed by academics and practitioners is whether crowdsourcing initiatives can activate users who are actually willing and able to come up with new product ideas that might be appealing not only to the individual user but also to broader parts of the market . The authors join this debate by bridging the two streams of literature described above and by addressing the following research question BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES Dr . Marion Poetz is an assistant professor at the Department of Innova - tion and Organizational Economics at Copenhagen Business School . Her research focuses on the mechanisms and effects of distributed innovation . She is particularly interested in aspects of search for innovation - related knowledge located outside the boundaries of the searching organization and investigates the role of contextual distance in innovation performance . Dr . Martin Schreier is an associate professor at the Marketing Depart - ment at Bocconi University . His research revolves around the design and marketing of new products and related consumer behavior . He is par - ticularly interested in advancing new ways to harness creative potential among users ( e . g . , user design , lead user research ) and in understanding the broader implications of customer empowerment strategies . 1 . It should be noted , however , that professional software developers have also recently made major contributions to improving open - source software such asApache or Linux on behalf of their employers ( e . g . , IBM ) . Because of the rapid diffusion of open - source software , ﬁrms have an interest in improving it even further , for example in order to improve sales in complementary equipment ( e . g . , server hardware or websphere software ) . 246 J PROD INNOV MANAG M . K . POETZ AND M . SCHREIER 2012 ; 29 ( 2 ) : 245 – 256 empirically : how attractive are new product ideas gener - ated by users through a crowdsourcing process compared with new product ideas generated by a ﬁrm’s profession - als ? This attempt is novel because it offers the ﬁrst real - world empirical comparison of ideas actually generated by a ﬁrm’s professionals with those generated by self - selected users in an idea generation contest . Both profes - sionals and users created ideas for a given , effective , and relevant problem faced by a consumer goods company . Addressing this research question is important because in the long run it will guide a ﬁrm’s decision whether or not to launch crowdsourcing initiatives ( such as idea genera - tion contests ) for speciﬁc problem areas in which the ﬁrm wishes to innovate . Background : Why Users Might ( Not ) Be Able to Compete with Professionals In general , there is a growing body of literature that highlights the beneﬁts of considering user input for NPD activities . Terwiesch and Ulrich ( 2009 ) , for example , note that across industries , about a quarter of innovation opportunities tend to come from interactions with cus - tomers and new customer requirements . More speciﬁ - cally , user input for idea generation might come in two forms : ﬁrst , a certain type of market research might reveal important user needs that are not yet met by commer - cially available products . This needs - based information ( i . e . , what is the problem ? ) might then serve as a prom - ising starting point for a ﬁrm’s professionals to guide their idea generation efforts ( i . e . , how can we solve the problem ? ) . The bulk of classic NPD literature would clearly see this approach as beneﬁcial ( e . g . , Cooper , 2001 ; Crawford and Di Benedetto 2006 ; Ulrich and Eppinger , 2008 ; Urban and Hauser , 1993 ) . Ulrich and Eppinger ( 2008 , p . 54 ) , for example , note that ﬁrms “must interact with customers and experience the use environment of the product . Without this direct experi - ence ( . . . ) innovative solutions to customer needs may never be discovered . ” In a similar vein , literature on inte - grating the “voice of the customer” ( e . g . , Dahan and Hauser , 2002 ; Grifﬁn and Hauser , 1993 ) or quality func - tion deployment ( e . g . , Hauser and Clausing , 1988 ) emphasizes the importance of asking users to describe the beneﬁts to be delivered by a new product in their own words , as “engineers require greater detail on customer needs than is provided by the typical marketing study” ( Grifﬁn and Hauser , 1993 , p . 2 ) . The second and more controversial type of user input might relate to solution - based information—asking users not only about their problems but also about potential ways to solve them ( von Hippel , 2005 ) . The idea genera - tion experiment mentioned above can be speciﬁed in more detail : a company operating in the baby products market , for example , aims to generate new product ideas , and market research has already revealed a major con - sumer problem , that is , consumers would greatly beneﬁt from new solutions to improve the feeding of babies . Who would be able to come up with better ideas : the ﬁrm’s professionals or the users of its products ? Given that the relevant consumer problem has already been identiﬁed through some type of user involvement , the answer would most likely be even more clearly in favor of the ﬁrm’s professionals . It can even be argued that if users provide both needs - based and solution - based informa - tion , ﬁrms should disentangle the two and mainly focus on the former . Ulrich and Eppinger ( 2008 , p . 62 ) , for example , note that “customers often express their prefer - ences by describing a solution concept or an implemen - tation approach ; however , the need statement should be expressed in terms independent of a particular techno - logical solution . ” Thus , users could help in deﬁning what a potential new product should do , but they might be less valuable in deﬁning how it should work . The latter task should be handled by a ﬁrm’s professionals , who are assumed to “have acquired skills and capabilities that allow them to perform most design tasks more effec - tively and at a higher level of quality” ( Ulrich , 2007 , chap . 3 , 5ff ) . Furthermore , Amabile ( 1998 ) points out that besides creative thinking skills and motivation , the expertise of research and development ( R & D ) and marketing person - nel in terms of technical , procedural , and intellectual knowledge is a central driver for generating novel and useful ideas . Ulrich and Eppinger ( 2008 ) and Ulrich ( 2007 ) also argue that there is no way to circumvent the need for a certain level of design knowledge with respect to how existing solutions work and how they can be modiﬁed in the development of new products . By in - creasing their level of expertise , engineers develop a better understanding of the product components and thus invent with greater reliability because they can avoid elements that failed in the past ( Vincenti , 1990 ) . More generally , the more competence and experience inventors possess , the higher the expected quality of their solutions will be ( e . g . , Larkin , McDermott , Simon , and Simon , 1980 ; Magee , 2005 ; Weisberg , 1993 ) . Many companies therefore used to rely exclusively on their internal expertise and knowledge bases when gen - erating ideas for new products . This “local search behav - ior” in NPD still tends to be the predominant approach in practice ( e . g . , Nelson and Winter , 1982 ; Stuart and THE VALUE OF CROWDSOURCING J PROD INNOV MANAG 247 2012 ; 29 ( 2 ) : 245 – 256 Podolny , 1996 ) . This makes sense as ﬁrms can more easily manage and maintain their innovation rents ( e . g . , managing intellectual property rights by building on existing patents and ﬁling for new ones ) , competitive advantage ( being fast on the market ) , and strategic ﬁt ( complementing existing products in a meaningful way ) . Nevertheless , there is also a downside to local searches by a ﬁrm’s professionals : ﬁrms that rely too heavily on their internal expertise might be blocked from ﬁnding alternative , potentially more successful solutions ( Helfat , 1994 ; March , 1991 ; Martin and Mitchell , 1998 ; Stuart and Podolny , 1996 ; von Hippel , 1994 ) . Katila and Ahuja ( 2002 ) , for example , analyze the effects of exploiting company - internal expertise versus exploring external knowledge on new product performance in the global robotics industry . They ﬁnd that using and reusing exist - ing internal knowledge indeed foster the generation of new products , but the relation is curvilinear , indicating that beyond a certain point the additional exploitation of internal expertise will lead to a drop in new product output . Contrary to their expectations , Katila and Ahuja ( 2002 ) also ﬁnd that the extent to which a ﬁrm explores external knowledge is positively related to successful new product innovation . Based on the limits of the classic idea generation process driven exclusively by a ﬁrm’s professionals , a second line of literature has started to challenge the com - monly held assumption that users are of little value for generating new product ideas . A number of empirical studies on the sources of innovation in the ﬁelds of indus - trial as well as consumer goods have revealed that users rather than manufacturers were often the initial develop - ers of products that later gained commercial signiﬁcance ( for an overview , see von Hippel , 2005 ) . Baldwin , Hien - erth , and von Hippel ( 2006 ) even argue that user innova - tors can , under certain conditions , serve as the starting point for industry development by bridging periods of uncertainty in early phases of industry life cycles because of different cost / beneﬁt structures . Moreover , empirical studies have demonstrated that user innovation is not a rare occurrence : up to 30 % of the user populations sur - veyed to date reported that they had already developed new or modiﬁed products themselves , and those products are often characterized by high levels of commercial attractiveness ( Franke and Shah , 2003 ; Franke , von Hippel , and Schreier , 2006 ; Morrison , Roberts , and von Hippel , 2000 ) . Although this line of research has presented strong arguments that users might also possess sufﬁcient exper - tise to come up with commercially attractive new product ideas , there are hardly any studies available that attempt to make a direct comparison between a ﬁrm’s profession - als and users . A few inferences can be made , however , based on studies related to the lead user method . Lilien et al . ( 2002 ) , for example , ﬁnd that new product concepts jointly developed by carefully selected lead users collabo - rating with in - house personnel at 3M were characterized by higher innovativeness and showed a sales potential that was an average of eight times higher than tradition - ally developed 3M concepts . Similarly , Urban and von Hippel ( 1988 ) ﬁnd that a new personal computer CAD system that included lead user innovations was signiﬁ - cantly preferred over the best commercially available system . In an effort more closely related to our research ques - tion , Kristensson , Gustafsson , and Archer ( 2004 ) set out to contrast ideas generated by professionals with those generated by users in the ﬁeld of mobile phone services ( see also Magnusson , 2009 ; Magnusson , Matthing , and Kristensson , 2003 ) . Although their laboratory environ - ment limits the external validity ( e . g . , the users were students ; the professionals did not face real - world incen - tives ) , they offer some interesting insights . Regarding the idea generation process , for example , they ﬁnd that “pro - fessional developers elaborated with informational ele - ments that were not as cognitively remote , ” whereas users seemed to have “access to informational elements that were further apart” ( Kristensson et al . , 2004 , p . 11 ) . As presented by those authors , the reason for this might again be the fact that prior knowledge and experience concerning what has technically worked ( or not ) in the past blocked the divergent thinking skills necessary for developing truly novel solutions . As users were not ham - pered by concerns regarding how current technologies operate , they were able to come up with mobile phone services that were more original . In contrast , professional developers seemed to focus more on how a potential idea could be translated into an actual mobile phone service for the market ( thus stressing the feasibility of the ideas ) . Kristensson et al . ( 2004 ) thus argue that professionals are more driven by a convergent thinking style that results in less novel ideas . Finally , and directly related to the research question addressed in this study , Ogawa and Piller ( 2006 ) were among the ﬁrst to provide anecdotal , real - world evidence indicating that user ideas generated in the course of a crowdsourcing process might also hold commercial potential . They report that at Muji , a Japanese manufac - turer of consumer goods , some new products have been developed on the basis of ideas submitted by users ( e . g . , a beanbag sofa , a portable lamp , and an innovative book - shelf ) . They also indicate that some of those products 248 J PROD INNOV MANAG M . K . POETZ AND M . SCHREIER 2012 ; 29 ( 2 ) : 245 – 256 outperform traditionally developed products in terms of sales—despite the fact that Muji has become famous for its internal design capabilities . Going back to the experiment in idea generation and to the research question set out in the introduction ( i . e . , how attractive are new product ideas generated by users through a crowdsourcing process compared with new product ideas generated by a ﬁrm’s professionals ) , the existing literature remains inconclusive . Overall , the ﬁrst line of research would probably reject—whereas the second line would tend to support—the idea that some new product ideas generated by users might seriously compete with new product ideas generated by company professionals . Thus , a real - world study exploring the topic in more detail certainly appears to be a promising next step . Study Method Overview In order to address the research question outlined above , a ﬁrm that met the following criteria was identiﬁed for collaboration : ( 1 ) it had to have the need and intention to innovate in a certain product area ; ( 2 ) by default , it had to use its internal professionals to generate new product ideas ; and ( 3 ) it had to be willing to launch a simulta - neous idea generation contest in order to collect user ideas . Finally , the company had to be willing and able to evaluate all ideas regardless of their source ( professionals versus users ) along all key dimensions in order to fully assess the quality of available ideas . The Bamed / MAM Group ( http : / / www . mambaby . com ) , a leading company in the baby products market , was identiﬁed as a ﬁrm that fulﬁlled our criteria and was willing to collaborate in this project . The Bamed / MAM Group is based in Austria and has eight sister companies located in Germany , the U . K . , Sweden , Hungary , Spain , Brazil , Thailand , and the United States . The group employs 400 people worldwide , and its products are sold in over 30 countries on 5 continents , with more than 40 million baby products sold each year . Bamed / MAM is the market leader in many countries , and it is positioned as a ﬁrm that is highly capable of designing leading - edge baby products ( as demonstrated by several international design prizes ) . Traditionally , the Bamed / MAM Group has applied a typical stage - gate model in their NPD projects ( e . g . , Cooper , 1990 ) . Using various market research tech - niques , they attempt to identify unmet consumer needs or related consumer problems , which marketers , R & D pro - fessionals , and designers then try to address by generat - ing new product ideas . Only the best ideas make it to later stages , where the group might also cooperate with inter - nationally renowned scientists , health experts , midwives , and child development educators in order to arrive at the ﬁnal products to be introduced on the market . The Bamed / MAM Group currently holds 63 patents for tech - nology and designs . Idea Generation This study relates to an innovation project within the company’s feeding product line . Market research con - ducted by the company within that ﬁeld has shown that consumers experience a strong need for solutions that make the additive feeding of babies with mash and solid food more convenient for both parents and babies . Based on this market need , the Bamed / MAM Group started their regular internal idea generation process and—in parallel—launched an idea generation contest to collect ideas created by users . Company - internal idea generation ( i . e . , ideas gener - ated by professionals ) led to a total of 51 ideas that were ready to be presented to upper management . The users , in contrast , were invited to submit their new product ideas via the company’s Web site , where the idea generation contest was announced . In addition , a link to the compe - tition Web site was posted in several Internet forums and advertised in a number of newsletters . The Web site con - tained an introductory text explaining the contest , a description of the underlying problem for which ideas should be generated , and an online form with which users could submit ideas . After submitting their ideas , users were also asked to complete a short questionnaire in order to provide insights on the sample characteristics . The incentives for participation were a cash prize of € 500 for the winning idea and 50 noncash prizes ( i . e . , personalized paciﬁer boxes with a retail price of approximately € 16 each ) to be rafﬂed off among participants . Overall , 70 users participated in this idea generation contest ( i . e . , submitted an idea via the Web site and completed the questionnaire ) . Evaluation of Ideas The quality of the ideas was assessed by two executives from the company ( the CEO and the head of R & D ) who are also generally among the persons responsible for deciding which ideas should ﬁnally pass the gate to the next NPD stage . Both experts have extensive market and technical knowledge . They were blind to the source of the THE VALUE OF CROWDSOURCING J PROD INNOV MANAG 249 2012 ; 29 ( 2 ) : 245 – 256 ideas ( professionals versus users ) . Similar ideas— regardless of their source—were grouped by the re - searchers prior to the start of the evaluation process in order to facilitate better comparisons . The groups of ideas , as well as the ideas within each group , were pre - sented to the experts for evaluation in random order , with each idea described on a separate sheet . As a ﬁrst step , the experts were asked to look at all of the ideas and to assess ( 1 ) whether the submissions con - stitute true ideas ( and not just comments on the topic , such as “teach your babies how to eat” ) and ( 2 ) whether the ideas could be evaluated properly ( i . e . , they were described in a way that allows serious evaluation ) . Overall , 18 user submissions ( and none of the profes - sional ideas ) were excluded from further analysis on the basis of those two criteria . The remaining 52 user ideas all contained both needs - and solution - based information related to making the additional feeding of babies more convenient . More spe - ciﬁcally , 16 ideas ( 31 % ) were already in use ( i . e . , users had created prototype solutions ) and 36 ideas ( 69 % ) described solutions with “concept” status . This suggests that the participating users had been facing the underly - ing problem for quite some time ( and that they did not tend to create ideas ad hoc ) . The self - selection process in this crowdsourcing strategy thus seems to have worked effectively . Before the experts assessed the ﬁnal quality of ideas in more detail , they were given training with regard to the evaluation criteria as well as their deﬁnition and proper application ( Hayes and Krippendorff , 2007 ; Krippendorff , 2004 ) . After the individual evaluation , the company experts had the opportunity to discuss differ - ences in their assessments and change their individual ratings based on their joint discussion if desired . Following previous research ( e . g . , Amabile et al . , 2005 ; Franke et al . , 2006 ; Kristensson et al . , 2004 ; Moreau and Dahl , 2005 ) , the quality of the ideas was measured using three key variables : ( 1 ) the novelty of the idea compared with existing target market products ; ( 2 ) the value of the idea in terms of its ability to solve the underlying problem ( in our case making the additional feeding of babies with mash and solid food more conve - nient for both parents and babies ) and thus to create customer beneﬁt ; and ( 3 ) the feasibility of an idea in terms of how easily it could be translated into a commer - cial product ( the evaluators considered both technical and economic aspects when assessing an idea’s feasibility ) . Despite being slightly more detailed , these evaluation procedures realistically reproduce the decision - making process usually applied by this company at this NPD stage . All three variables were measured using 5 - point rating scales ( where 1 = low novelty / customer beneﬁt / feasibility and 5 = high novelty / customer beneﬁt / feasibility ) . Interrater reliability was assessed by calculating Krippendorff’s alpha for each quality dimension . Krip - pendorff’s alpha is a conservative index that measures agreement among multiple raters and is considered to be a highly rigorous measure for assessing interrater reliabil - ity for rating scales such as those employed in this study ( values of . 67 and greater are generally considered to be satisfactory ; Krippendorff , 2004 ) . The agreement coefﬁ - cients for novelty , customer beneﬁt , and feasibility are . 65 , . 61 , and . 81 , respectively . Given the difﬁculty of the speciﬁc task ( predicting the attractiveness of potential new products based on ideas ) , those results seem to be satisfactory ( Amabile , Conti , Coon , Lazenby , and Herron , 1996 ; Franke et al . , 2006 ; Krippendorff , 2004 ; Kristensson et al . , 2004 ) . For further analysis , the two experts’ scores for each of the three dimensions were averaged . In addition , a three - way interaction term ( novelty ¥ customer beneﬁt ¥ feasibility ) was created in order to allow a comparison of the overall quality of ideas between the two samples . However , in line with previous research ( e . g . , Kristensson et al . , 2004 ; Urban et al . , 1997 ) , it is noted that novelty is positively correlated with customer beneﬁt ( r = . 36 ) but negatively correlated with feasibility ( - . 36 ) . In addition , customer beneﬁt is also negatively related with feasibility ( - . 24 ; all p ’s < . 01 ) . This implies that the well - known trade - off between maxi - mizing output ( pursuing very promising ideas in terms of high novelty and high customer beneﬁt ) and minimizing input ( pursuing ideas that are the easiest to realize in terms of costs and effort ) is also a factor in this study . From a theoretical and practical perspective , compar - ing mean differences between professional and user - generated ideas in terms of novelty , customer beneﬁt , and feasibility ( and the interaction of those dimensions ) is only one way to look at the data . Another approach that may be even more relevant is to compare the very best ideas with all of the other ideas in terms of the three quality dimen - sions . In other words , it would be especially important to know who came up with the very best ideas because it is those few ideas that a company might wish to identify ( e . g . , in order to determine the number of ideas to be moved to concept development and testing phases , and more broadly in order to maximize a ﬁrm’s expected proﬁts from NPD ; Dahan and Mendelson , 2001 ) . For example , what if the variance ( but not the means ) of professional and user ideas was very different ( e . g . , included a few very attractive professional ideas and many that are around or below average versus many average user 250 J PROD INNOV MANAG M . K . POETZ AND M . SCHREIER 2012 ; 29 ( 2 ) : 245 – 256 ideas but hardly any excellent ideas ) ? In such a situation , looking at means versus the “best versus the rest” would naturally raise fairly different practical and theoretical implications ( Fleming , 2007 ) . Thus , three dummy vari - ables were created where ideas assigned a value greater than three ( or less than or equal to three ) in each dimension are deﬁned as top ( or other ) ideas ( for a similar approach , see Magnusson , 2009 ; Magnusson et al . , 2003 ) . Description of the User Sample What are the main characteristics of the participants in the underlying idea generation contest ? Consistent with the domain of baby products , participating users were pre - dominantly female ( 90 . 4 % ) and on average 31 . 46 years old ( SD = 6 . 54 ) . Next , several user characteristics that have been identiﬁed as positively related to user innova - tiveness were captured ( Franke and Shah , 2003 ; Franke et al . , 2006 ; Jeppesen and Frederiksen , 2006 ; Lüthje , 2004 ; Lüthje , Herstatt , and von Hippel , 2005 ; Schreier and Prügl , 2008 ) . All items ( adapted from those sources ) are measured on 5 - point scales ( where 1 = strongly dis - agree and 5 = strongly agree ) . First , it is found that par - ticipants tend to have experience with the underlying problem , that is , feeding babies ( mean = 3 . 85 ; SD = 1 . 26 ; measured by the single item “I have a lot of experience in the additional feeding of babies with mash and solid food” ) . Second , participants report having a sound tech - nical knowledge of the related products ( mean = 3 . 34 ; SD = 1 . 17 ; measured by the two items “I am particularly interested in the technical aspects of feeding products” and “With regard to feeding products , I consider myself a ‘tinkerer’ ” ; Cronbach’s alpha = . 66 ) . Third , there is some agreement regarding the two lead user characteristics of high expected beneﬁts from innovations ( mean = 3 . 54 ; SD = 1 . 02 ) and being ahead of a trend ( mean = 2 . 89 ; SD = 1 . 01 ) . High expected beneﬁt is measured using the three items “I have already had problems in feeding babies which could not be solved by commercially avail - able products , ” “In my opinion , there are many unresolved problems with products for the additional feeding of babies with mash and solid food , ” and “I have baby - feeding needs that cannot be satisﬁed by existing prod - ucts” ; alpha = . 73 ; being ahead of a trend is measured using the four items “In general , I ﬁnd new solutions or products for feeding babies earlier than others , ” “In the past , I have beneﬁted highly from adopting new feeding products , ” “With regard to buying and using new feeding products , I am often asked for advice , ” and “I have already tried to modify existing products in order to improve the process of feeding babies” ; alpha = . 78 . Finally , participants generally tend to regard themselves as creative personalities ( mean = 3 . 62 ; SD = . 84 ) , as mea - sured by a short form of the established Kirton Adaption Innovation Inventory ( alpha = . 93 ; for items , see Im , Bayus , and Mason , 2003 ; Kirton , 1976 ) . It is noted that none of these measures are signiﬁcantly correlated with the quality of the submitted ideas . While to some extent this might be attributed to the small size of the sample ( n = 52 ) , this can also be interpreted as an indication that an effective self - selection process was at work ( Füller , Matzler , and Hoppe , 2008 ; Jeppesen and Frederiksen , 2006 ; Piller and Walcher , 2006 ) . It appears likely that only those users who have something to discuss regarding the underlying problem decided to participate in this idea generation contest . Yet the mean statistics reported above clearly suggest that not all participants were “true” lead users . This and related aspects are addressed in more detail in the general discussion . Findings First , the results indicate that ideas created by profession - als score signiﬁcantly lower in terms of novelty ( mean = 2 . 12 ) than ideas created by users ( mean = 2 . 60 ; p = . 05 ) . Second , it is also found that professional ideas are attributed signiﬁcantly lower customer beneﬁt ( mean = 1 . 86 ) compared with user ideas ( mean = 2 . 44 ; p < . 01 ) . Third , it appears that ideas created by professionals tend to be signiﬁcantly easier to realize ( mean = 4 . 33 versus mean = 3 . 91 ; p < . 10 ) . However , the relatively high mean statistics indicate that feasibility does not constitute a bottleneck for the underlying ideas . Interestingly , profes - sional ideas also score signiﬁcantly lower ( mean = 16 . 75 ) than user ideas ( mean = 24 . 93 ; p < . 05 ) on the overall quality index ( the three - way interaction term novelty ¥ customer beneﬁt ¥ feasibility ; see Table 1 ) . In addition , for all quality dimensions , the variances for professional and user ideas are not equal ( variances appear to be consistently lower for professional ideas ) . In conjunction with the relatively low mean values for novelty and cus - tomer beneﬁt , this supports the study’s conjecture that it might not be sufﬁcient to look at mean differences alone . Therefore , the next step is to turn to the “best versus the rest” of the ideas ( see Table 2 ) . As noted above , top ideas are deﬁned as those that score higher than three on the 5 - point scale in each of the three quality dimensions . First , the results indicate that 22 of the 103 total ideas are considered very new ( top ideas in terms of novelty ) . More interestingly , this relatively small percentage ( 21 % ) mostly comprises user ideas , as only 6 professional ideas ( compared with 16 user ideas ) belong to this group . Thus , THE VALUE OF CROWDSOURCING J PROD INNOV MANAG 251 2012 ; 29 ( 2 ) : 245 – 256 signiﬁcantly more user ideas ( and fewer professional ideas ) than expected can be assigned to the group of top ideas in terms of novelty ( p < . 05 ) . Second , it appears that only 10 of the 103 ideas qualify as top ideas in terms of customer beneﬁt ( 10 • ) . As in the case of novelty , only two professional ideas ( compared with eight user ideas ) belong to this group . Again , this pattern is statistically signiﬁcant : more user ideas ( and fewer professional ideas ) than expected can be placed in the group of top ideas in terms of customer beneﬁt ( p < . 05 ) . Third , it is found that 79 of the 103 ideas are considered easy to realize ( top ideas in terms of feasibility ) . This very large share ( 77 % ) comprises 42 professional ideas and 37 user ideas . In contrast to the mean ﬁndings reported above , however , there is no signiﬁcant difference in observed and expected frequencies for professional versus user ideas in this quality dimension ( p > . 10 ) . From a company’s perspective , it might also be inter - esting to see whether some ideas that are among the top ideas in one dimension are rated similarly in the other dimensions ( because ideas that are very novel , deliver high customer beneﬁt , and are easy to realize at the same time clearly constitute the most promising opportunities ) . In a ﬁnal step , therefore , those interactions are explored on a descriptive basis . Because of the small observed frequencies ( mostly (cid:2) 3 ) , however , signiﬁcance tests are not reported . Overall , the results indicate that user ideas are at least on par with professional ideas in this analysis ( see Table 3 ) . In particular , only one professional idea and three user ideas qualify as top ideas in all three dimen - sions . Second , only 3 professional ideas ( versus 13 user ideas ) belong to the group of top ideas in at least two dimensions . For example , only one professional idea that received a top rating in terms of novelty is also found to be very easy to realize ( top feasibility ) . In contrast , eight user ideas that belong to the top group in terms of novelty also qualify for the top feasibility group . In terms of customer beneﬁt ¥ feasibility , the ﬁndings are tied : one professional idea and one user idea are attributed high customer beneﬁt and high feasibility at the same time . Finally , none of the professional ideas ( compared with one user idea ) are placed at the top in terms of novelty as well as customer beneﬁt . Discussion Summary and Implications Who can generate better ideas for new products : the professional engineers , marketers , and / or designers who work for given company , or potential customers or users who respond to a crowdsourcing process ? Classic NPD literature would consider this a somewhat odd question or Table 1 . Average Novelty , Customer Beneﬁt , and Feasibility of Professional versus User Ideas Idea Quality Professional Ideas User Ideas Mann – Whitney - U Test Z - value ( p value ) * ( n = 51 ) ( n = 52 ) Mean ( SD ) Mean ( SD ) Novelty 2 . 12 ( 1 . 14 ) 2 . 60 ( 1 . 27 ) - 1 . 956 ( . 050 ) Customer beneﬁt 1 . 86 ( . 66 ) 2 . 44 ( 1 . 01 ) - 3 . 010 ( . 003 ) Feasibility 4 . 33 ( . 91 ) 3 . 91 ( 1 . 21 ) - 1 . 856 ( . 063 ) Three - way interaction 16 . 75 ( 12 . 15 ) 24 . 93 ( 19 . 24 ) - 1 . 973 ( . 048 ) * We use Mann – Whitney - U tests instead of simple t - tests because the dependent variables are not normally distributed . Table 2 . “Best versus the Rest” Ideas in Terms of Novelty , Customer Beneﬁt , and Feasibility Novelty Customer Beneﬁt Feasibility Company Users Company Users Company Users ( n = 51 ) ( n = 52 ) ( n = 51 ) ( n = 52 ) ( n = 51 ) ( n = 52 ) Observed Frequency ( Expected Frequency ) Obs . ( Exp . ) Obs . ( Exp . ) Obs . ( Exp . ) Obs . ( Exp . ) Obs . ( Exp . ) Top ideas a 6 ( 10 . 9 ) 16 ( 11 . 1 ) 2 ( 5 . 0 ) 8 ( 5 . 0 ) 42 ( 39 . 1 ) 37 ( 39 . 9 ) Other ideas 45 ( 40 . 1 ) 36 ( 40 . 9 ) 49 ( 46 . 0 ) 44 ( 47 . 0 ) 9 ( 11 . 9 ) 15 ( 12 . 1 ) Chi - square ( p value ) 5 . 536 ( . 019 ) 3 . 859 ( . 049 ) 2 . 318 ( . 128 ) a Top ideas are deﬁned as those that score higher than three in the respective quality dimension . 252 J PROD INNOV MANAG M . K . POETZ AND M . SCHREIER 2012 ; 29 ( 2 ) : 245 – 256 experiment because it is widely assumed that users might only be useful in identifying important unmet needs ( i . e . , what is the problem ? ) but not in identifying promising ideas to solve them ; after all , this used to be the exclusive domain of a company’s professionals . Nonetheless , this issue was deﬁned as the research question underlying this study because there is an alternative line of literature that suggests that users can , in fact , provide valuable needs - based as well as solution - based information in the idea generation stage of the NPD process . The relevance of this question is high , as many leading companies have already begun to experiment with crowdsourcing initia - tives in order to fuel their own NPD pipelines . This research question was approached by conducting a real - world comparison of the quality of ideas actually generated by a ﬁrm’s professionals compared with those submitted by self - selected users in the course of an idea generation contest . Both users and professionals created ideas for an effective and relevant problem in the con - sumer goods market for baby products . The ﬁndings of the study demonstrate that user ideas clearly score higher on average in terms of novelty and customer beneﬁt , and somewhat lower in terms of feasibility , indicating that professionals are more capable of coming up with ideas that can be developed more easily into a product for the market . However , the average values for feasibility—in sharp contrast to novelty and customer beneﬁt—tended to be relatively high . As a result , this dimension did not constitute a narrow bottleneck in this study ( i . e . , given that they were assessed as promising in terms of novelty and customer beneﬁt , most ideas would have had a fair chance of being developed for the market with a reasonable level of effort ) . Even more interestingly , the study revealed that the best ideas overall tended to be more heavily concen - trated among users compared with a ﬁrm’s professionals . These ﬁndings , which are quite counterintuitive from the perspective of classic NPD literature , suggest that crowdsourcing among users might complement the work of a ﬁrm’s professionals in the idea generation stage of NPD . Here it is important to point out that the aim of this study was not to question the general importance of professionals in idea generation . It is also believed that an “optimal” approach in practice might more often than not lie in a combination of both extremes ( professionals collaborating with users in some way ) . However , the ﬁndings of the study constitute an important contribution to justify the more active involvement of users in idea generation . Generalizability and Future Research The ﬁndings are based on only one case study . Thus , future research is encouraged to conduct similar tests in different settings in order to gain a deeper understanding of the merits of involving users in idea generation . Of course , it is not expected that users will be able to compete with professionals in any situation . However , this case study suggests that users might truly constitute a promising complementary means of idea generation and that it might be valuable to study relevant contingency factors in future research . The authors conclude by dis - cussing some of these factors , including user capabilities and motivation as well as the design of the crowdsourcing process itself . First , the ability of users to come up with promising ideas for new products might depend most heavily on the underlying industry or the respective product category , as well as the nature of the speciﬁc problem for which the ﬁrm wishes to innovate . If the knowledge necessary to generate new product ideas in a given industry / product Table 3 . Top Ideas in Interactions between Novelty , Customer Beneﬁt , and Feasibility Company Users Top Feasibility Ideas Other Ideas Top Feasibility Ideas Other Ideas ( n = 42 ) ( n = 9 ) ( n = 37 ) ( n = 15 ) Observed Frequency Obs . Obs . Obs . Top beneﬁt ideas ( n = 2 ) ( n = 8 ) Top novelty ideas 1 – 3 1 Other ideas 1 – 1 3 Other ideas ( n = 4 9 ) ( n = 4 4 ) Top novelty ideas 1 4 8 4 Other ideas 39 5 25 7 Top ideas are deﬁned as ideas with a score higher than three . Bold signiﬁes top in all three dimensions . Italics signify top in two dimensions . THE VALUE OF CROWDSOURCING J PROD INNOV MANAG 253 2012 ; 29 ( 2 ) : 245 – 256 category is complex and / or difﬁcult and costly to acquire—thus constituting a high entry barrier—users might be less likely to engage and / or succeed in devel - oping their own ideas . If knowledge - based entry barriers are low and / or the knowledge needed to come up with successful ideas is closely linked to aspects of user experience—as in our case of feeding babies—users might be more successful ( Baldwin et al . , 2006 ; Lettl , Herstatt , and Gemünden , 2006 ; Lüthje et al . , 2005 ) . Industries do vary in terms of the amount of knowledge necessary to understand how existing products work and how they can be modiﬁed . As a certain minimum knowl - edge of existing solutions tends to be a prerequisite for coming up with new ideas , the ability of users to generate successful ideas might also depend on the minimum level of knowledge necessary to understand how existing prod - ucts function and can be modiﬁed in a given industry . As a result , there may be a signiﬁcant relationship between knowledge - based entry barriers and the users’ ability and likelihood of coming up with promising new product ideas . Future research might therefore analyze different industries / product categories , which systematically vary in terms of the complexity of relevant knowledge . As for the type of problem for which a ﬁrm wishes to innovate , the results imply that users might generally be better at solving needs - based problems ( e . g . , novel func - tionality ) and worse at technology - based problems ( i . e . , dimensions of merit ) . This is because users have direct access to information on unmet needs and may thus be better equipped to come up with promising ideas for new products with novel functional capabilities ( e . g . , the ﬁrst scientiﬁc instrument of a new type designed to address an unmet need ) . In contrast , companies might be more able to come up with promising “dimensions of merit” innova - tions ( e . g . , performance enhancements in an existing type of scientiﬁc instrument designed to improve the satisfac - tion of a given need ) because they are more familiar with the underlying technology ( Riggs and von Hippel , 1994 ; von Hippel , 2005 ) . The ability of users to come up with promising ideas might depend not only on the type of problem itself but also on the way it is communicated . Jeppesen and Lakhani ( 2010 ) , for example , ﬁnd that a ﬁrm’s experience in articulating problems inﬂuences whether or not the problem is solved successfully by a group of external problem solvers . Future research on how different problem types and their articulation inﬂuence the types of participating users and the quality of their ideas could therefore be useful in generating practical principles for designing crowdsourcing processes . Second , the users’ motivation might be closely tied to their willingness to invest in generating new product ideas and / or to share them with ﬁrms . Although it has been found that users tend to share ideas freely with their peers in communities ( Franke and Shah , 2003 ; Harhoff , Henkel , and von Hippel , 2003 ) , the conditions under which they might be willing to share with ﬁrms are unclear . Up to now , only anecdotal evidence has been found to suggest that certain users do share their ideas with certain ﬁrms—mostly because of ﬁrm recognition as a motivational factor ( Jeppesen and Frederiksen , 2006 ; for additional potential motives , cf . Füller , Jawecki , and Mühlbacher , 2007 ) . Thus , it might be interesting to analyze how a crowdsourcing incentive system affects the outcome ( cf . Franke and Klausberger , 2009 ) . In addition , it might be valuable to investigate which type of user is most likely to be willing to reveal ideas to ﬁrms and whether such behavior depends on certain characteristics of the underlying industry and / or the underlying ﬁrm ( Füller et al . , 2008 ) . Third , in this study many of the top ideas came from users , and the average quality of user - generated ideas was fairly high overall , indicating that the crowdsourcing process attracted qualiﬁed users . However , if it is not possible to attract qualiﬁed users , many of the ideas col - lected might not be valuable at all ( Piller and Walcher , 2006 ) . On the other hand , the description of the sample in this study suggests that not all participants were what we would call lead users . Thus , the results might have been even better if the study had succeeded in attracting the most leading - edge users , who generally tend to con - stitute a minority of the overall user population . In any case , attracting the right people seems to be crucial to the success of any crowdsourcing efforts , as it affects not only the average quality of ideas submitted but also the average quality of the best ideas . Moreover , identifying the top ideas among all ideas submitted might consti - tute another important success factor . As in the case of Dell or Lego , for example , ﬁrms might simply be confronted with “too many” ideas from their user com - munity and face the problem of not being able to ﬁlter and select the most promising ones ( or only being able to do so with tremendous effort ; for ideas on how to have the users themselves solve this problem , cf . Dahan , Soukhoroukova , and Spann , 2010 ; Toubia and Florès , 2007 ) . In sum , it can be argued that factors related to user capabilities and motivation , as well as the design of the crowdsourcing process , might moderate the outcome ( and thus determine when and why the ﬁndings of this study could be replicated ) . Finally , it might be also valuable to study the potential pitfalls of relying too heavily on users . For example , how are proprietary ﬁrm knowledge , intellectual property 254 J PROD INNOV MANAG M . K . POETZ AND M . SCHREIER 2012 ; 29 ( 2 ) : 245 – 256 rights , ﬁrm strategy , and competitive advantage affected ? A case study on 3M ( Lilien et al . , 2002 ) revealed that user - versus ﬁrm - driven innovations did not create greater difﬁculties with regard to intellectual property protection and that there were no differences in the innovations’ ﬁt with existing manufacturing capabilities , distribution channels , and strategies . However , more research on this topic appears necessary in order to gain a better under - standing of the potential trade - offs involved . In conclusion , this study provides an important initial indication that crowdsourcing initiatives among users can actually outperform professional in - house activities for the generation of new product ideas , at least under certain conditions . The underlying company , for its part , was surprised and very enthusiastic about this outcome . They ﬁnally selected several of the best user ideas to pass the gate to the next NPD stage , in which professional design - ers and engineers might transform them into workable prototypes , and they also began to consider future initia - tives to involve users in joint efforts with professionals to generate new product ideas . References Agerfalk , P . J . , and B . Fitzgerald . 2008 . Outsourcing to an unknown work - force : Exploring opensourcing as a global sourcing strategy . MIS Quar - terly 32 ( 2 ) : 385 – 409 . Amabile , T . M . 1998 . How to kill creativity . Harvard Business Review 76 ( 5 ) : 76 – 87 . Amabile , T . M . , S . G . Barsade , J . S . Mueller , and B . M . Staw . 2005 . Affect and creativity at work . Administrative Science Quarterly 50 : 367 – 403 . Amabile , T . M . , R . Conti , H . Coon , J . Lazenby , and M . Herron . 1996 . Assessing the work environment for creativity . Academy of Manage - ment Journal 39 ( 5 ) : 1154 – 84 . Bagozzi , R . P . , and U . M . Dholakia . 2006 . Open source software user communities : A study of participation in Linux user groups . Manage - ment Science 52 ( 7 ) : 1099 – 115 . Baldwin , C . , C . Hienerth , and E . von Hippel . 2006 . How user innovations become commercial products : A theoretical investigation and case study . Research Policy 35 ( 9 ) : 1291 – 313 . Bennett , R . C . , and R . G . Cooper . 1981 . The misuse of marketing . McKinsey Quarterly 3 : 52 – 69 . Berthon , P . R . , L . F . Pitt , I . McCarthy , and S . M . Kates . 2007 . When customers get clever : Managerial approaches to dealing with creative consumers . Business Horizons 50 ( 1 ) : 39 – 47 . Chesbrough , H . W . 2003 . The era of open innovation . MIT Sloan Manage - ment Review 44 ( 3 ) : 25 – 41 . Cooper , R . G . 1990 . Stage - gate systems : A new tool for managing new products . Business Horizons 33 ( 3 ) : 44 – 53 . Cooper , R . G . 2001 . Winning at new products : Accelerating the process from idea to launch ( 3rd ed . ) . Cambridge , MA : Perseus Books . Crawford , C . M . , and C . A . Di Benedetto . 2006 . New products management ( 8th ed . ) . Burr Ridge , IL : Irwin - McGraw Hill . Dahan , E . , and J . R . Hauser . 2002 . The virtual customer . Journal of Product Innovation Management 19 ( 5 ) : 332 – 53 . Dahan , E . , and H . Mendelson . 2001 . An extreme - value model of concept testing . Management Science 47 ( 1 ) : 102 – 16 . Dahan , E . , A . Soukhoroukova , and M . Spann . 2010 . New product develop - ment 2 . 0 : Preference markets . How scalable securities markets identify winning product concepts and attributes . Journal of Product Innovation Management 27 ( 7 ) : 937 – 54 . Fleming , L . 2007 . Breakthroughs and the “long tail” of innovation . MIT Sloan Management Review 49 ( 1 ) : 69 – 74 . Franke , N . , and K . Klausberger . 2009 . The role of perceived fairness in company - centred crowdsourcing communities . Working paper , Vienna University of Economics and Business Administration , Vienna . Franke , N . , and S . Shah . 2003 . How communities support innovative activi - ties . An exploration of assistance and sharing among end - users . Research Policy 32 ( 1 ) : 157 – 78 . Franke , N . , E . von Hippel , and M . Schreier . 2006 . Finding commercially attractive user innovations : A test of lead user theory . Journal of Product Innovation Management 23 ( 4 ) : 301 – 15 . Fuchs , C . , and M . Schreier . 2011 . Customer empowerment in new product development . Journal of Product Innovation Management 28 ( 1 ) : 17 – 32 . Füller , J . , G . Jawecki , and H . Mühlbacher . 2007 . Innovation creation by online basketball communities . Journal of Business Research 60 ( 1 ) : 60 – 71 . Füller , J . , K . Matzler , and M . Hoppe . 2008 . Brand community members as a source of innovation . Journal of Product Innovation Management 25 ( 6 ) : 608 – 19 . Goldenberg , J . , D . R . Lehmann , and D . Mazursky . 2001 . The idea itself and the circumstances of its emergence as predictors of new product success . Management Science 47 ( 1 ) : 69 – 84 . Grifﬁn , A . , and J . R . Hauser . 1993 . The voice of the customer . Marketing Science 12 ( 1 ) : 1 – 27 . Harhoff , D . , J . Henkel , and E . von Hippel . 2003 . Proﬁting from voluntary information spillovers : How users beneﬁt by freely revealing their innovations . Research Policy 32 ( 10 ) : 1753 – 69 . Hauser , J . R . , and D . Clausing . 1988 . The house of quality . Harvard Business Review 66 ( 3 ) : 63 – 73 . Hayes , A . F . , and K . Krippendorff . 2007 . Answering the call for a standard reliability measure for coding data . Communication Methods and Mea - sures 1 : 77 – 89 . Helfat , C . E . 1994 . Firm - speciﬁcity in corporate R & D . Organization Science 5 : 173 – 84 . Hienerth , C . , M . K . Poetz , and E . von Hippel . 2007 . Exploring key char - acteristics of lead user workshop participants : Who contributes best to the generation of truly novel solutions ? DRUID Summer Conference , Copenhagen . Howe , J . 2006 . The rise of crowdsourcing . Wired 14 ( 6 ) . Available at : http : / / www . wired . com / wired / archive / 14 . 06 / crowds . html . Im , S . , B . L . Bayus , and C . H . Mason . 2003 . An empirical study of innate consumer innovativeness , personal characteristics , and new - product adoption behavior . Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 31 ( 1 ) : 61 – 73 . Jeppesen , L . B . , and L . Frederiksen . 2006 . Why do users contribute to ﬁrm - hosted user communities ? The case of computer - controlled music instruments . Organization Science 17 ( 1 ) : 45 – 64 . Jeppesen , L . B . , and K . R . Lakhani . 2010 . Marginality and problem solving effectiveness in broadcast search . Organization Science 21 ( 5 ) : 1016 – 33 . Katila , R . , and G . Ahuja . 2002 . Something old , something new : A longitu - dinal study of search behavior and new product introduction . Academy of Management Journal 45 ( 6 ) : 1183 – 94 . Kirton , M . 1976 . Adaptors and innovators : A description and measure . Journal of Applied Psychology 61 ( 5 ) : 622 – 29 . Krippendorff , K . 2004 . Content analysis : An introduction to its methodol - ogy ( 2nd ed . ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage Publications . Kristensson , P . , A . Gustafsson , and T . Archer . 2004 . Harnessing the creative potential among users . Journal of Product Innovation Management 21 ( 1 ) : 4 – 14 . THE VALUE OF CROWDSOURCING J PROD INNOV MANAG 255 2012 ; 29 ( 2 ) : 245 – 256 Lakhani , K . R . , L . B . Jeppesen , P . A . Lohse , and J . A . Panetta . 2007 . The value of openness in scientiﬁc problem solving . Working Paper No . 07 - 050 . Boston , MA : Harvard Business School . Lakhani , K . R . , and E . von Hippel . 2003 . How open source software works : “Free” user - to - user assistance . Research Policy 32 ( 6 ) : 923 – 43 . Larkin , J . , J . McDermott , D . P . Simon , and H . A . Simon . 1980 . Expert and novice performance in solving physics problems . Science 208 ( 4450 ) : 1335 – 42 . Leonard , D . , and J . F . Rayport . 1997 . Spark innovation through empathic design . Harvard Business Review 75 ( 6 ) : 102 – 13 . Lerner , J . , and J . Tirole . 2002 . Some simple economics of open source . Journal of Industrial Economics 50 ( 2 ) : 197 – 234 . Lerner , J . , and J . Tirole . 2005 . The economics of technology sharing : Open source and beyond . Journal of Economic Perspectives 19 ( 2 ) : 99 – 120 . Lettl , C . , C . Herstatt , and H . G . Gemünden . 2006 . Learning from users for radical innovation . International Journal of Technology Management 33 ( 1 ) : 25 – 45 . Lilien , G . L . , P . D . Morrison , K . Searls , M . Sonnack , and E . von Hippel . 2002 . Performance assessment of the lead user idea - generation process for new product development . Management Science 48 ( 8 ) : 1042 – 59 . Lüthje , C . 2004 . Characteristics of innovating users in a consumer goods ﬁeld : An empirical study of sport - related product consumers . Techno - vation 24 ( 9 ) : 683 – 95 . Lüthje , C . , C . Herstatt , and E . von Hippel . 2005 . User - innovators and “local” information : The case of mountain biking . Research Policy 34 ( 6 ) : 951 – 65 . Magee , G . B . 2005 . Rethinking invention : Cognition and the economics of technological creativity . Journal of Economic Behaviour & Organiza - tion 57 : 29 – 48 . Magnusson , P . R . 2009 . Exploring the contributions of involving ordinary users in ideation of technology - based services . Journal of Product Innovation Management 26 ( 5 ) : 578 – 93 . Magnusson , P . R . , J . Matthing , and P . Kristensson . 2003 . Managing user involvement in service innovation : Experiments with innovating end - users . Journal of Service Research 6 ( 2 ) : 111 – 24 . Majchrzak , A . , L . P . Cooper , and O . E . Neece . 2004 . Knowledge reuse for innovation . Management Science 50 ( 2 ) : 174 – 88 . March , J . G . 1991 . Exploration and exploitation in organizational learning . Organization Science 2 ( 1 ) : 71 – 87 . Martin , X . , and W . Mitchell . 1998 . The inﬂuence of local search and performance heuristics on new design introduction in a new product market . Research Policy 26 : 753 – 71 . Moreau , P . C . , and D . W . Dahl . 2005 . Designing the solution : The impact of constraints on consumers’ creativity . Journal of Consumer Research 32 : 13 – 22 . Morrison , P . D . , J . H . Roberts , and E . von Hippel . 2000 . Determinants of user innovation and innovation sharing in a local market . Management Science 46 ( 12 ) : 1513 – 27 . Nelson , R . R . , and S . G . Winter . 1982 . An evolutionary theory of economic change . Cambridge , MA : Belknap Press . Ogawa , S . , and F . T . Piller . 2006 . Collective customer commitment : Reduc - ing the risks of new product development . MIT Sloan Management Review 47 ( 2 ) : 65 – 72 . Piller , F . T . , and D . Walcher . 2006 . Toolkits for idea competitions : A novel method to integrate users in new product development . R & D Manage - ment 36 ( 3 ) : 307 – 18 . Pisano , G . P . , and R . Verganti . 2008 . Which kind of collaboration is right for you ? Harvard Business Review 86 ( 12 ) : 78 – 86 . Pitt , L . F . , R . T . Watson , P . Berthon , D . Wynn , and G . Zinkhan . 2006 . The penguin’s window : Corporate brands from an open - source perspective . Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 34 ( 2 ) : 115 – 27 . Riggs , W . , and E . von Hippel . 1994 . The impact of scientiﬁc and commer - cial values on the sources of scientiﬁc instrument innovation . Research Policy 23 ( 4 ) : 459 – 69 . Sawhney , M . , and E . Prandelli . 2000 . Communities of creation : Managing distributed innovation in turbulent markets . California Management Review 42 ( 4 ) : 24 – 54 . Sawhney , M . , G . Verona , and E . Prandelli . 2005 . Collaborating to create : The Internet as a platform for customer engagement in product inno - vation . Journal of Interactive Marketing 19 : 4 – 17 . Schreier , M . , and R . Prügl . 2008 . Extending lead - user theory : Antecedents and consequences of consumers’ lead userness . Journal of Product Innovation Management 25 ( 4 ) : 331 – 46 . Schulze , A . , and M . Hoegl . 2008 . Organizational knowledge creation and the generation of new product ideas : A behavioral approach . Research Policy 37 ( 10 ) : 1742 – 50 . Stuart , T . E . , and J . Podolny . 1996 . Local search and the evolution of technological capabilities . Strategic Management Journal 17 ( 1 ) : 21 – 38 . Surowiecki , J . 2004 . The wisdom of crowds . New York : Random House Large Print and Doubleday . Terwiesch , C . , and K . T . Ulrich . 2009 . Innovation tournaments : Creating and selecting exceptional opportunities . Cambridge , MA : Harvard Business School Press . Toubia , O . , and L . Florès . 2007 . Adaptive idea screening using consumers . Marketing Science 26 ( 3 ) : 342 – 60 . Ulrich , K . T . 2007 . Design : Creation of artefacts in society . Philadelphia : Pontiﬁca Press . Ulrich , K . T . , and S . D . Eppinger . 2008 . Product design and development ( 4th ed . ) . New York : McGraw - Hill . Urban , G . L . , and J . R . Hauser . 1993 . Design and marketing of new products ( 2nd ed . ) . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . Urban , G . L . , J . R . Hauser , W . J . Qualls , B . D . Weinberg , J . D . Bohlmann , and R . A . Chicos . 1997 . Information acceleration : Validation and lessons from the ﬁeld . Journal of Marketing Research 34 ( 1 ) : 143 – 53 . Urban , G . L . , and E . von Hippel . 1988 . Lead user analyses for the development of new industrial products . Management Science 34 ( 5 ) : 569 – 82 . Vincenti , W . G . 1990 . What engineers know and how they know it . Balti - more , MD : Johns Hopkins University Press . von Hippel , E . 1986 . Lead users : A source of novel product concepts . Management Science 32 ( 7 ) : 791 – 805 . von Hippel , E . 1994 . “Sticky information” and the locus of problem solving : Implications for innovation . Management Science 40 ( 4 ) : 429 – 39 . von Hippel , E . 2005 . Democratizing innovation . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Weisberg , R . W . 1993 . Creativity : Beyond the myth of genius . New York : Freeman . 256 J PROD INNOV MANAG M . K . POETZ AND M . SCHREIER 2012 ; 29 ( 2 ) : 245 – 256 This document is a scanned copy of a printed document . No warranty is given about the accuracy of the copy . Users should refer to the original published version of the material .