FUNCTIONS OF COATED VESICLES DURING PROTEIN ABSORPTION IN THE RAT VAS DEFERENS DANIEL S . FRIEND and MARILYN G . FARQUHAR From the Department of Pathology , the University of California School of Medicine , San Francisco 94122 ABSTRACT The role of coated vesicles during the absorption of horseradish peroxidase was investi - gated in the epithelium of the rat vas deferens by electron microscopy and cytochemistry . Peroxidase was introduced into the vas lumen in vivo . Tissue was excised at selected intervals , fixed in formaldehyde - glutaraldehyde , sectioned without freezing , incubated in Karnovsky ' s medium , postfixed in OSO4 , and processed for electron microscopy . Some controls and peroxidase - perfused specimens were incubated with TPP , ' GP , and CMP . Attention was focused on the Golgi complex , apical multivesicular bodies , and two populations of coated vesicles ; large ( > 1000 A ) ones concentrated in the apical cytoplasm and small ( < 750 A ) ones found primarily in the Golgi region . 10 min after peroxidase injection , the tracer is found adhering to the surface plasmalemma , concentrated in bristle - coated invaginations , and within large coated vesicles . After 20 - 45 min , it is present in large smooth vesicles , apical multivesicular bodies , and dense bodies . Peroxidase is not seen in small coated vesicles at any interval . Counts of small coated vesicles reveal that during peroxidase absorption they first increase in number in the Golgi region and later , in the apical cytoplasm . In both con - trol and peroxidase - perfused specimens incubated with TPP , reaction product is seen in sev - eral Golgi cisternae and in small coated vesicles in the Golgi region . With GP , reaction prod - uct is seen in one to two Golgi cisternae , multivesicular bodies , dense bodies , and small coated vesicles present in the Golgi region or near multivesicular bodies . The results demonstrate that ( a ) this epithelium functions in the absorption of protein from the duct lumen , ( b ) large coated vesicles serve as heterophagosomes to transport absorbed protein to lysosomes , and ( c ) some small coated vesicles serve as primary lysosomes to transport hydrolytic enzymes from the Golgi complex to multivesicular bodies . INTRODUCTION The mechanisms involved in the absorption of level in several tissues , notably the epithelium of protein have been explored at the ultrastructural the vertebrate nephron ( 1 - 9 ) and epididymis ( 10 ) , ' The following abbreviations are used in this paper : and in insect ( 11 , 12 ) and guppy ( 13 ) oocytes . It AcPase , acid phosphatase ; CMP , cytidine 5 ' - mono - is now clear that cells which actively absorb pro - phosphate ; ER , endoplasmic reticulum ; GP , Na 0 - tein do so by amplification of the general process of glycerophosphate ; TPP , thiamine pyrophosphate ; " heterophagy " ( 14 ) , by which cells take up and TPPase , thiamine pyrophosphatase . degrade large molecules . This is accomplished by 357 incorporation of protein within membrane pockets ( pinocytosis ) followed by segregation and digestion within lysosomes . Whereas the main pathways for absorbed protein are clear , many of the associated events , such as the implied concomitant centrifugal circulation of membrane and enzymes , remain to be clarified . We were particularly interested in exploring the modes of transport or connections which exist between the Golgi complex , lysosomes , and the cell surface in the intact absorptive cell . For this pur - pose , we applied a combined morphological and cytochemical approach , by using peroxidase as a tracer for protein absorption , and thiamine pyro - phosphatase ( TPPase ) l and acid phosphatase ( AcPase ) as markers for Golgi membranes and lysosomes , respectively . Because our interest re - quired an absorptive cell with a well - developed Golgi complex , we initially chose to study the epididymis ( 15 , 16 ) , for its Golgi complex , com - posed of numerous stacks of cisternae and asso - ciated vesicles , has been isolated and partially characterized biochemically ( 17 ) as well as histo - chemically ( 18 , 19 ) . It proved technically difficult , however , to avoid random diffiusion of tracer in this tissue . We therefore shifted our attention to the vas deferens which proved particularly advanta - geous for our purposes since tracer and fixative solutions can be introduced directly into its lumen , and since the epithelium of this structure in the rat resembles that of the epididymis in its fine structure and absorptive function ( 20 ) . This paper reports our findings on the pathway of peroxidase absorption in the vas deferens and on the role of two populations of coated vesicles , multivesicular bodies , and the Golgi complex in the absorption process . MATERIALS AND METHODS The tissue studied was the lining epithelium of the rat vas deferens . 3 doz mature male , Sprague - Dawley rats were used in these experiments . Reagents and substrates were obtained from Sigma Chemical Co . ( St . Louis , Mo . ) as follows : GP ' ( grade I ) , CMP ( disodium salt ) , TPP ( cocarboxylase ) , 3 , 3 ' - diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride , ( type II ) , and horseradish peroxidase ( type II ) . Experimental Procedures EXPOSURE OF THE VAS DEFERENS : Animals were lightly anesthetized with ether and / or sodium penta - barbital , their scrota were incised , and an incision was made into the proximal ( prostatic ) end of the vas deferens . This permitted egress of the seminal fluid , and of the fixative and peroxidase solutions which were subsequently introduced into the duct lumen distally as described below . PEROXIDASE EXPERIMENTS : A 6 % solution of per - oxidase , prepared in isotonic saline with 2 - 5 % sucrose , was injected slowly into the duct lumen at a point approximately 1 cm from the tail of the epididymis . A continuous flow was maintained for several minutes , either manually or with a Harvard infusion pump , until 1 / 2 cc ( 30 mg ) had been injected . The vas deferens was fixed at intervals of 7 - 45 min after initiation of the peroxidase injection . Techniques for Morphological Studies FIXATION : Fixation was initiated by injection of cold fixative into the deferential vein and the vas lumen . The fixative generally employed was a dilute version of that introduced by Karnovsky ( 21 ) and contained 1 - 2 % paraformaldehyde and 3 % glutaral - dehyde in 0 . 067 M cacodylate buffer . The glutaralde - hyde was purified by distillation prior to use as described in reference 22 . After several minutes of fixation in situ , the middle third of the vas deferens was excised , cut into small blocks , and immersed in fresh fixative for 6 hr . In several cases fixation was carried out for 2 hr in 1 % Os04 buffered at pH 7 . 4 with acetate - Veronal or s - collidine ( 23 ) containing 4 . 5 % sucrose . SUBSEQUENT PROCESSING : After fixation , the tissue blocks were washed overnight in 0 . 05 M acetate - Veronal buffer ( pH 7 . 4 ) with 7 % sucrose ( hereafter referred to as Michaelis wash buffer ) . They were then postfixed at 4 0 C for 1X / - 2 hr in s - collidine - buffered OsO4 . Some blocks were treated at room temperature with 0 . 5 % uranyl acetate in acetate - Veronal buffer prior to dehydration ( 24 ) . All tissues were rapidly dehydrated in ethanol and propylene oxide and em - bedded in Epon 812 ( 25 ) . Sections 1 , thick were cut from Epon blocks , affixed to glass slides , stained in 1 % toluidine blue in borax ( 26 ) , mounted in Krylon ( Krylon , Inc . , Norris - town , Pa . ) , and examined by light microscopy . Thin sections , cut on Porter - Blum microtomes with diamond knives , were picked up onto grids covered with a Formvar film reinforced by carbon . The mounted sections were stained with lead salts ( Mil - lonig ' s or Karnovksy ' s " A " ) or doubly stained with uranyl acetate followed by lead . Techniques for Cytochemical Studies FIXATION : Fixation was carried out in paraformal - dehyde - glutaraldehyde as described for morpholog - ical studies except that the time was reduced to 4 hr 358 THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 35 , 1967 for peroxidase - injected specimens and to 3 hr in the case of tissues incubated for AcPase or TPPase . PREPARATION OF NONFROZEN SECTIONS : Nonfrozen sections were cut at 10 - 30 on a Smith - Farquhar tissue sectioner ( 27 ) , and washed overnight in Michaelis wash buffer . PEROXIDASE METHOD : Nonfrozen sections were in - cubated with agitation for 20 - 30 min at 25 0 C in 10 - ml aliquots of Karnovsky ' s medium ( 28 , 7 ) . The latter was prepared by adding 5 mg of diamino - benzidene and 0 . 01 - 0 . 02 % H 2 0 2 to 10 ml of 0 . 05 M Tris - HCI buffer ( pH 7 . 6 ) . Controls consisted of incubations in which substrate or H 2 0 2 was omitted from the medium . The latter two procedures totally suppressed the reaction . THIAMINE PYROPHOSPHATASE METHOD : Incubations were carried out for 14 - 2 hr in the modified Wach - stein - Meisel medium suggested by Novikoff and Goldfischer ( 18 ) : 2 mM TPP , 5 mM MnCI 2 , 3 . 6 mM Pb ( NO0 ) 2 , 80 mM Tris - maleate buffer , pH 7 . 2 . Controls consisted of incubations with TPP omitted , or with 0 . 01 M NaF added to the medium , or the reac - tion carried out at pH 5 . The latter two procedures did not significantly affect the localization or inten - sity of the reaction . ACID PHOSPHATASE METHOD : Some sections were incubated at pH 5 for 1 - 2 hr in the Barka - Anderson modification ( 29 ) of the Gomori medium with GP as substrate . Other sections were incubated with CMP as substrate and manganese as activating ion as suggested by Novikoff ( 30 ) : 3 mM CMP , 3 . 6 mM Pb ( NOZ ) 2 , 20 mM acetate buffer , pH 5 . 0 . Controls consisted of incubations in which GP or CMP were omitted , or 0 . 01 M NaF was added to the medium , or the incubation was carried out at pH 7 . 2 . All these procedures totally suppressed the reaction . PREPARATIVE PROCEDURES FOR LIGHT AND ELECTRON MICROsCOPY : After incubation , sections were rinsed twice for 5 min in Michaelis wash buffer . For light microscopy , 30 - p sections incubated for peroxidase were mounted in glycerogel and were examined directly ; similar sections incubated for TPPase and AcPase were treated with dilute ( NH 4 ) 2 S before mounting . For electron microscopy , 30 - Ap incubated sections were postfixed at 4 0 C for 45 min in s - colli - dine - buffered OSO4 . Some sections were treated for 45 min with 0 . 5 % uranyl acetate in acetate - Veronal buffer prior to dehydration as described for morpho - logical studies . This procedure not only acts as a membrane stain , but also serves to remove some of the diffuse , presumably nonspecific reaction product ( 22 ) . Sections 0 . 5 - 1 p were also routinely cut , affixed to glass slides , and examined by direct light or phase - contrast microscopy in order to evaluate the amount and distribution of the reaction product . The distribu - tion of peroxidase reaction product was determined directly in unstained sections or those lightly stained with toluidine blue as described for morphological studies . The distribution of reaction product with TPP , GP , or CMP was determined in sections treated for 30 min with 2 % ( NH 4 ) 2S before staining to con - vert colorless lead phosphate to brown lead sulfide . Electron Microscopy Micrographs were taken at magnifications of 4 , 600 - 30 , 000 on a Siemens Elmiskop I , operating at 80 kv , with a double condenser and a 50 u molybdenum aperture in the objective . Vesicle Counts The numbers of small coated vesicles were counted on 8 X 11 inch prints prepared at a final magnifica - tion of 46 , 000 . Small coated vesicles in continuity with smooth membranes and those free in the cyto - plasm were included in the counts . The Student ' s t - test and tables of P - values were employed for evaluation of statistical significance . OBSERVATIONS Cytology of the Epithelium of the Vas Deferens The fine structural organization of the principal cells of the rat vas deferens has been described by Niemi ( 20 ) . Accordingly , only those structural features pertinent to this study , namely the or - ganization of the surface membrane , lysosomes , Golgi complex , and populations of coated vesicles , will be described in detail . GENERAL DESCRIPTION : The lining of the vas deferens consists of a layer of tall , columnar epithelium composed of principal cells along with a few dark , mitochondria - rich " pencil cells " ( 20 ) ( Fig . 1 ) . The latter are definitely minority elements and will be described in detail in a separate paper . The principal cells , with which we are exclusively concerned in this study , can be divided into three main zones ( Fig . 2 ) : a basal zone in which the nu - cleus and concentrations of smooth and rough sur - faced ER are located ; a middle region contain - ing a large , prominent Golgi complex ; and an apical zone containing numerous vesicles , vacuoles , multivesicular bodies , and microvilli ( " stereo - cilia " ) ( 15 , 16 ) which project into the vas lumen . APICAL CELL SURFACE : As in the case of other lumen - lining epithelia ( 31 ) , the apical plasma - lemma covering the microvilli is thicker ( 100 A ) than that along the lateral and basal cell surfaces ( 75 A ) . It lacks the rich coating of filamentous knap or " fuzz " seen along the apical surfaces of gastric and intestinal epithelia ( 32 ) . Numerous D . S . FRIEND AND M . G . FARQUIHAR Coated Vesicls During Protein Absorption 359 invaginations are found at the base of the micro - villi , some of which have prominent bristle coats ( 11 ) on their cytoplasmic surface ( Fig . 3 ) . Just beneath this surface membrane are found some large ( > 1000 A ) , spherical , bristle - coated vesicles ( Fig . 3 ) and numerous , spherical and elongate , smooth - sulfaced vesicles . The membrane of the large apical vesicles has the same thickness as that of the apical cell surface . LYSOSOMES : The most commonly encountered lysosomes are large , spherical , multivesicular bodies which occur either singly or in clusters of two to three in the apical cytoplasm . Typically these structures contain relatively few vesicles in a matrix of low density ( Figs . 4 and 5 ) and a clump of finely particulate material ( Fig . 5 ) . Both the limiting membrane of the bodies and that of its contained vesicles are of the thicker ( 100 A ) variety like the apical cell membrane . Frequently , plaques are seen along the cytoplasmic surface of the limiting membrane ( Fig . 4 ) . Sometimes the plane of section does not include any of the internal vesicles , but these bodies are nonetheless distin - guishable by their size , their thick membrane , and the clumps of particulate material present in their matrix . Occasional images are encountered which suggest that the contained vesicles are formed by invagination of the body ' s limiting membrane ( Fig . 20 ) . Smaller multivesicular bodies , less regular in contour , with more vesicles and a denser matrix ( Fig . 6 ) are sometimes seen in the Golgi region . A few dense bodies are commonly present , primarily in the Golgi and basal regions . GOLGI COMPLEX : The Golgi complex consists of abundant stacks of cisternae and associated vesicles forming a supranuclear collar ( Figs . 2 , 7 , and 28 ) . Each stack is composed of six to eleven cisternae with an inner , concave surface and an outer , convex surface . Other smooth - surfaced cisternae usually occur in the cytoplasmic core circumscribed by the Golgi stacks . These have a random orientation and tend to occur singly rather than in stacks ; thereby they resemble similar structures described as " GERL " by Novikoff and his co - workers in Key to Symbols b , basement membrane cm , cell membrane d , dense body Gc , Golgi complex ip , intermicrovillar pit 1 , lumen lv , large coated vesicle my , microvilli mvb , multivesicular body n , nucleus p , pencil cell sv , small coated vesicle FIG . 1 is from rat vas deferens fixed in OsO4 buffered with s - collidine . Figs . 2 and 11 - 40 are from 10 - 80 - A nonfrozen sections fixed in paraformaldehyde - glutaraldehyde and in - cubated in appropriate media as indicated . Figs . 3 - 10 were prepared from 1 mm ' tissue blocks fixed in paraformaldehyde - glutaraldehyde . In all cases except Fig . 1 , the tissue was treated with uranyl acetate prior to dehydration , and sections were doubly stained with uranyl and lead . FIGURE 1 Photomicrograph of the rat vas deferens , showing its tall columnar lining epithelium composed primarily of principal cells with long microvilli which extend into the patent lumen ( 1 ) . Occasional deeply osmiophilic pencil cells ( p ) are also present . A moderately thick basement membrane ( b ) separates the epithelium from its underlying vasculature , connective tissue , and smooth muscle tunic . X 700 . FIGURE 2 Several epithelial cells from the rat vas deferens are shown in this low power electron micrograph . Numerous microvilli ( my ) are seen along the apical cell surface and several multivesicular bodies ( mvbl ) are present in the apical cytoplasm . The Golgi ap - complex , which consists of five to six groups of stacked cisternae , is located midway be - tween the cell surface and the nucleus ( n ) . The cisternae are marked by dense deposits of lead - phosphate reaction product in this specimen which was incubated with TPP . Several multivesicular bodies ( mvb 2 ) occur also in the Golgi region and mitochondria are distrib - uted throughout the cytoplasm . X 8 , 000 . 360 TRE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 35 , 1967 D . S . FRIEND AND M . G . FARQUHAR Coated Vesicles During Protein Absorption 361 FIGURE 3 Portion of the apical epithelial cell surface showing intermicrovillar pits ( ip ) and two sizes of coated vesicles : large ones ( v ) , greater than 1000 A in diameter , and smaller ones ( sv ) measuring 600 - 700 A . The intermicrovillar pit shows a bristle coat similar to that of the vesicles , on its cytoplasmic surface . X 7 , 000 . neurons of rat spinal cord ( 33 ) and parenchymal cells of the liver ( 34 ) . The majority of the vesicles associated with the cisternae are smooth - surfaced and measure 600 A in diameter , but 10 - 20 % of those present are of the coated variety and measure 750 A ( Figs 7 - 10 ) . No secretory product is discernible in the vacuoles or cisternae of the Golgi complex . COATED VESICLES : As can be seen from the fore - going , two types of coated vesicles are evident in these cells : ( a ) large ones , 1000 A or more in diameter , found near the cell surface , and ( b ) smaller ones , 750 A , which are concentrated near the Golgi complex . It is of interest that the content of the smaller coated vesicles is generally more granular and denser than that of the larger ones . Those of both types have a coat with equidistant , radially arranged bristles , 150 - 200 A in length , extending from the outer leaflet of their limiting membrane ; 18 - 25 bristles can be counted around the larger coated vesicles and 8 - 13 around the smaller ones . The bristles represent contiguous , parallel sides of irregular hexagons which cover FIGURES 4 - 6 Multivesicular bodies from controls . Those found in the apical cytoplasm ( Figs . 4 - 5 ) tend to be larger , contain fewer vesicles , and have a lighter background matrix than those present in the Golgi region ( Fig . 6 ) . A moderately dense , finely granular mass ( m ) is often found in the matrix of those in the apical cytoplasm , and occasionally plaques ( arrow , Fig . 4 ) are present along the outer surface of their limiting membrane . Fig . 4 , X 50 , 000 ; Fig . 5 , X 78 , 000 ; Fig . 6 , X 90 , 000 . 362 THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 5 , 1967 FIGURES 7 and 8 Low and high magnification micrographs , respectively , of the Golgi complex ( Gc ) from control preparations sectioned in a plane perpendicular to the long axis of the Golgi cisternae . Numer - ous continuities between small coated vesicles and Golgi cisternae are evident ( arrows ) and several coated vesicles ( sv ) are seen nearby . Fig . 7 , X 40 , 000 ; Fig . 8 , X 93 , 000 . FIGUnES 9 and 10 Similar fields of the Golgi complex ( Gc ) sectioned parallel to the long axis of the cis - ternae with several examples ( arrows ) of continuities between small coated vesicles ( sv ) and Golgi cis - ternae . Fig . 9 , X 53 , 000 ; Fig . 10 , X 90 , 000 . the surface of the unit membrane ( 35 ) . Each wall appear as a " bristle . " As already indicated , the of the polygon is about 30 A in thickness , but it is large coated vesicles are seen exclusively near the not ordinarily preserved sufficiently to be seen as apical cell surface . The smaller ones are most an individual unit . Two sides together , however , numerous in the Golgi zone and occasionally can D . S . FRIEND AND M . G . FARQUHTAR Coated Vesicles During Protein Absorption 363 be seen in continuity with Golgi cisternae ( Figs . 7 - 10 ) or with the smooth - surfaced cisternae in the Golgi cytoplasmic core . However , individual , small coated vesicles can be found distributed throughout the cytoplasm , particularly adjacent to lytic bodies and near the apical and lateral por - tions of the cell membrane ( Fig . 3 ) . Peroxidase Absorption 10 MIN : At 10 min after peroxidase injection the dense tracer material is present ( a ) in the lumen between the microvilli ( b ) concentrated in intermi - crovillar pits , and ( c ) in some of the large coated vesicles near the apical cell surface , ( Figs . 11 14 ) . The heaviest concentrations of peroxidase are seen in the cul de sacs at the deepest end of the in - vaginations ( Fig . 12 ) . Small areas devoid of peroxi - dase are occasionally seen in the neck region of the invagination above such cul de sacs , and rarely , small coated vesicles are found in continuity with the cell membrane in these clear regions ( Fig . 25 ) . FIGURE 11 Portion of the apical cell surface front a specimen fixed 10 min after peroxidase injection . Dense deposits of peroxidase reaction product are seen covering the miclrovilli ( mv ) , in the interllicrovillar pits ( ip ) , and in large apical vesicles ( v ) . X 20 , 000 . At this time increased numbers of small coated vesicles are seen in the Golgi region ( Fig . 22 ) . Results of vesicle counts ( Table I ) reveal that there are roughly twice the number seen in com - parable areas of control preparations . None of these small coated vesicles contains peroxidase . 20 MIN : In addition to the sites described at earlier intervals , peroxidase is seen in smooth apical vesicles and in some of the apical multi - vesicular bodies ( Figs . 15 and 16 ) , and occa - sional images reveal continuity between the limiting membranes of these two structures , their peroxidase content confluent ( Figs . 17 and 18 ) . Within multivesicular bodies , peroxidase is found throughout the matrix but is not present within the contained vesicles ( Figs . 16 , 18 , and 21 ) . At this interval , streams of small coated vesicles which do not contain peroxidase are seen between the Golgi complex and the apical surface . 40 MIN : By this time , the majority of the multi - vesicular bodies are engorged with peroxidase ( Fig . 19 ) , and dense bodies are more numerous than in the controls . The frequency of small coated vesicles in the Golgi region is comparable to that of the controls , but increased numbers are found in the apical cytoplasm ( Table I ) . Clusters of small coated vesicles are commonly encountered surrounding the peroxidase - containing multivesicular bodies ( Fig . 23 ) and beneath the apical cell membrane ( Figs . 24 - 26 ) but , as at earlier time points , these vesicles do not contain peroxidase . It is of interest that , coincident with the appearance of small coated vesicles near the cell surface , small patches devoid of peroxidase can be seen along the apical cell membrane more frequently than at 10 min ; this suggests that some of the small , peroxidase - free vesicles have fused with the surface membrane ( Figs . 25 and 26 ) . Peroxidase is not seen in the cisternae of the ER or Golgi complex at this or any time interval . Furthermore , with the exception of mechanically traumatized areas , it is not seen between cells ( Fig . 27 , inset ) . Results of Vesicle Counts Counts were made of the numbers of small coated vesicles present in 160 randomly selected principal cells of the vas deferens . The data were compiled from four different experiments involving eight rats , four peroxidase - perfused , and four controls . 20 cells were counted from each animal 364 THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 35 , 1967 FIGURES 12 - 16 Higher magnification fields from peroxidase - perfused specimens . At 10 min the tracer is seen in bristle - coated intermicrovillar pits ( ip ) ( Fig . 12 ) and in large coated vesicles ( v ) located near the apical cell membrane ( cm ) ( Figs . 13 - 14 ) . After 20 min peroxidase is found in large , spherical ( Fig . 15 ) or elongate ( Fig . 16 ) smooth vesicles ( lv ) which have apparently lost their bristle coat and lie near multivesicular bodies ( mvb ) . Some of the latter ( mvb 2 and mvb 3 ) also contain peroxidase . In Fig . 15 , a multivesicular body which contains the tracer ( mvb 2 ) is present alongside another ( mvbl ) which does not . Small coated vesicles ( sv ) are also frequently seen in the vicinity of multivesicular bodies ( Fig . 15 ) , but they do not contain the tracer . Figs . 12 - 14 , X 100 , 000 ; Fig . 15 , X 88 , 000 ; Fig . 16 X 78 , 000 . and one or more fields through the Golgi or apical regions were counted per cell . A total of 1 , 134 vesicles were counted . The results ( Table I ) reveal that small coated vesicles in the Golgi region increase from an aver - age of 7 in controls to 18 per field at 10 min after peroxidase injection . At 40 min their number significantly decreases ( P < 0 . 005 ) from 18 to 8 . Congruently , by 40 min , the number of small coated vesicles has increased in the apical cyto - plasm from 8 to 16 . It is of interest that the increase in small coated vesicles found in the apical cyto - plasm is comparable in magnitude to the decrease in small coated vesicles found in the Golgi region at the same time period . P values are < 0 . 005 between each time interval . Thiamine Pyrophosphatase Localization CONTROLS : In specimens incubated with TPP , the first four to five cisternae along the inner , concave surface of the Golgi complex are strongly positive ( Figs . 1 , 28 , and 29 ) . A decreasing inten - sity gradient is sometimes evident , proceeding from the first through the fourth and fifth cisternae . Deposits are rarely present in the single , smooth cisterna ( GERL ) of the Golgi core . D . S . FRIEND AND M . G . FARQUnAR Coated Vesicles During Protein Absorption 365 FIGURES 17 - 21 Small fields from peroxidase - perfused preparations . Figs . 17 - 18 , taken at 20 min , show what appear to represent progressive stages in the mergence of large vesicles ( Iv ) with multivesicular bodies ( mvb ) . A small coated vesicle ( sv ) which does not contain peroxidase is seen near the multivesicular body in Fig . 18 . Fig . 19 , taken at 40 min , shows several multivesicular bodies engorged with peroxidase ; the reaction product adheres to the inner leaflet of the limiting membrane , covers the fibrillar material in the matrix , and loosely fills the formerly clear portion of the matrix . Several large vesicles marked with peroxidase , are also present . Fig . 20 shows an invagination of the limiting membrane of a multi - vesicular body ( arrow ) . Such images suggest that the internal vesicles may be formed by pinching off from the body ' s membrane . Fig . 21 depicts a dense body which was presumably formed by filling of a multivesicular body with peroxidase , followed by condensation of its content . The internal vesicles , which do not contain peroxidase , stand out sharply against the dark background provided by the dense matrix . Fig . 17 , X 65 , 000 ; Fig . 18 , X 70 , 000 ; Fig . 19 , X 38 , 000 ; Figs . 20 and 21 , X 90 , 000 . 366 FIGURE 22 Golgi cisternae from a specimen fixed 10 min after peroxidase injection . The number of small coated vesicles ( arrows ) found in the Golgi region is greater than in controls . X 43 , 000 . FIGURE 23 Peroxidase - perfused specimen ( 40 min ) . Large numbers of small coated vesicles are present around a peroxidase - filled multivesicular body ( mvb ) . An image suggesting fusion between a small coated vesicle and a multivesicular body is seen ( arrow ) . X 52 , 000 . FIGURES 24 - 26 At later time points ( 40 min ) , large numbers of small coated vesicles are present be - neath the apical cell membrane ( cm ) ( Fig . 24 ) . In addition , clear patches devoid of peroxidase are seen in invaginations of the cell membrane ( Fig . 25 ) , and occasional images are seen suggestive of fusion be - tween the two ( Figs . 25 , 26 ; arrows ) . As at earlier time points , small coated vesicles ( sv ) do not contain peroxidase . Fig . 24 , X 68 , 000 ; Fig . 25 , X 75 , 000 and Fig . 26 , X 100 , 000 . No reaction product is seen within the smooth , Golgi - associated vesicles located in continuity with , or in proximity to the Golgi cisternae , but deposits are found in small coated vesicles in the Golgi region ( Figs . 28 and 29 ) . Only rarely are deposits found in small coated vesicles remote from the Golgi region . Large coated vesicles do not contain reac - tion product , and none is seen within the rough ER . PEROXIDASE PERFUSED : With TPP , activity ap - pears slightly increased in specimens perfused with peroxidase for 10 min , and definitely increased by 20 min ; there is a more uniform reaction in the Golgi complex from cell to cell as compared to controls , and reaction product is sometimes seen in D . S . FRIEND AND M . G . FARQUHAR Coated Vesicles During Protein Absorption 367 FIGURE 27 This low power micrograph summarizes the findings at 40 min after peroxidase injection . The tracer is seen in large ristle - coated invaginations of the apical cell surface which apparently migrate basally , lose their coat , and become smooth vesicles ( Is ) which eventually fuse with mnultivesicular bodies ( mvb ) . The latter condense to form dense bodies ( d ) . There is also an increase in the number of small coated vesicles ( sv ) found in the apical region . Peroxidase is not seen in small coated vesicles , the ER , or the Golgi complex . The tracer does not appeal to penetrate between cells , for it is not detectable in the inter - cellular spaces below the level of the occluding zonules ( allrrow , inset ) . Fig . 27 , X 17 , 000 ; inset X 37 , 000 . 368 TIIE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 35 , 1967 five or more Golgi cisternae . As in the controls , some of the small coated vesicles contain reaction product , and those that do are confined virtually exclusively to the Golgi region . Acid Phosphatase Localization CONTROLS : With GP as substrate , reaction product is present within the first one or two cisternae along the concave surface of the Golgi complex ( Figs . 30 and 31 ) , in some Golgi vesicles , multivesicular bodies , and dense bodies ( Figs . 31 - 35 ) . 2 It is also occasionally seen in the smooth TABLE I Average Number of Small Coated Vesicles per Field * from Principal Cells of the Vas Deferens4 Controls Peroxidase - perfused 10 min 40 min Golgi Region 7 ( 41 ) ยง 18 ( 1 ) 8 ( 4 - 1 ) Apex 8 ( 4 - 1 ) 16 ( 4 - 1 ) * 8 X 11 inches print at X 46 , 000 . For each group , 40 - 60 fields were counted . ยง Standard error . cisterna of the Golgi core ( GERL ) . In contrast to the findings with TPP , with GP the reaction prod - uct appears associated with the content rather than the membranes of these compartments . The amount of reaction product in multivesicular bodies is quite variable , but in all instances it is confined to the matrix of these bodies and is not seen within their vesicles ( Figs . 34 and 35 ) . Some small coated vesicles are seen to contain reaction product . These occur in continuity with Golgi cisternae ( Fig . 31 ) , free in the Golgi region , and in the peripheral regions of the cytoplasm adjacent to multivesicular bodies ( Figs . 32 - 34 ) . Unfor - tunately , in specimens incubated at acid pH , the bristles are frequently blurred . Hence it is difficult to determine whether all of the AcPase - positive , small vesicles are coated ( Figs . 33 and 34 ) . Activity is not found in the rough - surfaced ER in the principal cells . In addition to these sites already mentioned , heavy deposits of lead phos - phate are seen along the surface of the microvilli , ( Fig . 36 ) , within some of the intermicrovillar I Figs . 31 - 35 are from specimens incubated with CMP , but the findings are the same as with GP ( see below ) . invaginations , and very rarely in the most super - ficial large coated vesicles . Reaction product is not seen within large vesicles deeper in the cytoplasm . Clumps of reaction product are also seen adhering to sperm in the duct lumen . This extracellular reaction des not appear to be due to nonspecific alkaline phosphatase , for these sites are negative when the reaction is carried out at alkaline pH . It could be due to AcPase from the ventral prostate which is known to be rich in this enzyme . With CMP as substrate , the reaction in Golgi elements , small coated vesicles , multivesicular bodies , and dense bodies is generally the same as with GP except that the reaction in these last two sites is more uniformly distributed and consistently present . A notable difference , however , between the findings with CMP and those with GP is that with the former , no reaction product is seen along the microvilli , along the intermicrovillar invagi - nations , or around sperm present in the duct lu - men . PEROXIDASE PERFUSED : With GP , activity ap - pears increased in specimens perfused with peroxi - dase for 20 min . Reaction product is seen in more cisternae ( 3 - 4 ) and in more Golgi - associated vesicles as compared to the controls ( Figs . 37 - 39 ) . As in the controls , however , it is difficult to distin - guish small coated vesicles in preparations incu - bated at acid pH ' s . Counts of small vesicles with reaction product were therefore not made . The distribution of reaction product was otherwise similar to that described in controls . Curiously , contrary to our findings with GP , in specimens incubated with CMP , a decrease in reaction of the Golgi cisternae is appreciable even after 10 min and is pronounced after 20 min of peroxidase perfusion ( Fig . 40 ) . Congruently , re - action product appears more extensive in multi - vesicular bodies and dense bodies as compared with controls . There is no appreciable difference in the number of labeled , small vesicles . SUMMARY OF FINDINGS : Horseradish peroxidase is taken up in bristle - coated invaginations of the apical cell membrane . These invaginations pinch off and become large coated vesicles in the super - ficial cytoplasm . The large coated vesicles lose their coat , become smooth , and subsequently fuse with , and discharge their peroxidase content into multi - vesicular bodies . The peroxidase content of the latter increases as a function of time . Concomi - tantly , there is a doubling in the number of small coated vesicles and a shift in their distribution from D . S . FRIEND AND M . G . FARQIHAR Coated Vesicles During Protein Absorption 369 FIGURES 8 - 29 Golgi cisternae from a control preparation incubated with TPP . Reaction product is present in four to five cisternae along the concave surface of the Golgi apparatus , and in some small coated vesicles which are in continuity with ( Fig . 28 , arrow ) , or in close apposition to ( Fig . 29 , arrow ) Golgi cisternae . For each figure the vesicles indicated with arrows are enlarged in tile inset . Fig . 28 , X 44 , 000 ; inset X 130 , 000 ; Fig . 29 , X 99 , 000 ; inset X 190 , 000 . the Golgi region to the apical cytoplasm near multivesicular bodies and the apical cell mem - brane with which they apparently fuse . In both control and peroxidase - perfused specimens some of the small coated vesicles found in the Golgi region are reactive with TPP , GP , and CMP . No TPP - positive vesicles are seen elsewhere in the cell . With CMP or GP , some of those present near multivesicular bodies as well as the Golgi - associ - ated coated vesicles are reactive . After peroxidase perfusion , activity with TPP and GP increases in the Golgi apparatus whereas that with CMP decreases ; activity in multivesicular bodies and dense bodies is similar with GP and increased with CMP as compared to controls . As in the controls , some small coated vesicles in peroxidase - perfused specimens are reactive with TPP , GP , and CMP . DISCUSSION The results of this study have verified previous assertions that the vas deferens is absorptive in function . Furthermore , they have corroborated 370 THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 35 , 1967 FIGURES 0 - 31 Stacks of Golgi cisternae from a control preparation incubated with GP ( Fig . 30 ) or CMP ( Fig . 31 ) . Lead - phosphate deposits are seen in the innermost cisterna of the stack . In Fig . 31 , a small coated vesicle , filled with reaction product , is shown in continuity with the reactive cisterna ( ar - row ) . Fig . 30 , X 50 , 000 ; Fig . 31 , X 120 , 000 . FIGiRES 32 - 35 Control preparations incubated with CMP . Reactive , small coated vesicles are present in the Golgi region ( Fig . 32 ) and adjacent to a multivesicular body ( mvb ) ( Fig . 33 ) . Figs . 34 and 35 de - pict multivesicular bodies ( mvb ) and a dense body ( d ) which contain heavy deposits of reaction product . In Fig . 34 a small coated vesicle ( sv ) , filled with reaction product , is seen alongside the multivesicular body . Fig . 32 , X 100 , 000 ; Fig . 33 , X 110 , 000 ; Fig . 34 , X 93 , 000 ; Fig . 35 , X 50 , 000 . D . S . FRIEND AND M . G . FARQUHAR Coated Vesicles During Protein Absorption 371 recent work on the uptake and intracellular pathway for protein absorption . Of greater inter - est , is the new cytochemical and statistical evidence obtained on the direction of movement and trans - port functions of coated vesicles during protein absorption . Specifically , several different types of coated vesicles have been distinguished in the epithelium of the rat vas deferens : one type , the larger in diameter , is formed at the cell surface by pinocytic invagination of the apical cell mem - brane , moves toward and fuses with multivesicular bodies , and serves to transport absorbed protein from the duct lumen to lytic bodies . The other type of coated vesicle is smaller , originates from Golgi cisternae , and moves to a peripheral location in the cell . Some of these apparently transport AcPase , and possibly other acid hydrolases , from their site of packaging ( Golgi complex ) to their site of action ( multivesicular body ) . Others apparently fuse with the surface membrane , but the nature of their content remains unknown . Thus the findings FIGURE 36 Control preparation incubated with GP . Dense clumps of reaction product are seen along the microvilli . This surface reaction is inhibited by adding NaF to , or omittingGP from , the incubation medium . It is not seen when CMP is used as the substrate or when the reaction is carried out at pH 9 . X 15 , 000 . have demonstrated the existence in this epithelium of several functionally distinct types of coated vesicles . Functions of the Vas Deferens The fine structural organization of the vas deferens has been studied previously in the rat by Niemi ( 20 ) who , noting the basic similarity of this epithelium to that of the epididymis , postulated that the vas deferens may function in pinocytosis , as had been demonstrated by Burgos ( 15 ) and Nicander ( 16 ) for the rat epididymis and Sedar ( 10 ) for the hamster epididymis . Our findings confirm the similarities in structure and histo - chemical activities of these two epithelia , and , in addition , have demonstrated the ability of the vas epithelium to absorb protein . It follows that , in the rat , this duct is not simply a passive conduit for transport or sperm , since it can modify the content of the semen through selective absorption . Absorption and Heterolysis Peroxidase seems to follow the same general pathway followed by absorbed protein in other tissues ( 1 - 13 ) : it is taken up in coated invaginations of the absorptive cell surface , transported via smooth vesicles to a digestive vacuole , and sub - sequently degraded . This over - all process has been named " heterolysis " by de Duve and Wattiaux ( 14 ) . According to their systematization , the smooth vesicle , which contains absorbed protein but no hydrolytic enzymes , is called a hetero - phagosome , and the digestive vacuole , with both enzyme and ingested protein , is called a heteroly - sosome . In the vas epithelium the large coated vesicles therefore correspond to heterophagosomes and the multivesicular bodies to heterolysosomes . In previous work on the absorptive process , the mechanism of acquisition of lytic enzymes by digestive vacuoles has been difficult to follow . The work of Straus ( 4 ) at the light microscope level has clearly demonstrated that the phagosomes , in which absorbed protein is sequestered , acquire lytic enzymes within minutes after protein uptake , but it has been difficult to discern whether acquisi - tion occurs by direct delivery of new enzymes to phagosomes or by fusion of the latter with pre - existing lysosomes . In our studies , the phagosomes ( large coated vesicles ) clearly fuse with preexisting lysosomes ( multivesicular bodies ) , but , in addition , new enzyme activity is acquired by the lysosomes . In fact , in our system , introduction of protein 372 THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 35 , 1967 FIGUREs 37 - 39 Stacks of Golgi cisternae ( Ge ) from peroxidase - perfused specimens ( 20 min ) incubated with GP . The amount of reaction product present , the number of reactive cisternae , and the number of reactive , coated vesicles ( arrows ) seen in the vicinity are greater than in controls . Fig . 3 7 , X 70 , 000 ; Fig . 38 , X 105 , 000 ; Fig . 39 , X 78 , 000 . material into the lumen and its subsequent uptake appear to trigger the movement of lytic enzymes from Golgi elements to lysosomes , for increased numbers of small coated vesicles , some of which contain AcPase activity , are seen near multivesicu - lar bodies at 40 min after peroxidase injection . Since the lytic enzymes are carried by small coated vesicles , these structures correspond to primary lysosomes . Previously , Holtzman et al . ( 36 , 37 ) have reported the presence of AcPase activity in coated vesicles of neurons from the rat ganglion nodosum and have concluded that such vesicles are lysosomes derived from GERL ele - ments . Coated Vesicles Specialized vesicles distinguishable by the pres - ence of a highly organized layer of material on the cytoplasmic surface have been described in a variety of tissues as " complex " ( 38 ) , " bristle - coated " ( 11 ) , " alveolate " ( 39 ) , or " dense rimmed " ( 40 ) . It was Roth and Porter who first proposed that such vesicles may have a specialized function . Based on their findings on uptake of yolk protein by insect oocytes ( 11 , 41 ) and on incorporation of ferritin - conjugated albumen into hepatocytes ( 42 ) , they postulated that coated vesicles are specialized for the cellular uptake of protein . Additional work by others on absorption of specific proteins , such as hemoglobin ( 5 , 6 , 31 ) , ferritin ( 9 , 41 , 43 ) , albumen ( 8 ) , peroxidase ( 7 , 10 ) , and hemolymph ( 35 ) , in several tissues ( notably kidney and epididymal epithelia ) support this hypothesis . In addition to their association with the apical cell surface and protein uptake , coated vesicles have also been associated with the lateral cell membrane ( 39 , 44 ) , with elements of the ER , and with the Golgi complex . They have been described as occurring frequently in the Golgi region , some - times in direct continuity with the Golgi cisternae ( 37 , 44 , 45 ) . On the basis of such findings it has been postulated ( 44 ) that coated vesicles are derived from Golgi elements and that they may be involved in the transport of enzymes ( 37 , 44 ) . It has also been suggested ( 34 ) that coated vesicles may transport soluble products of intracellular digestion . Up to the present , however , there has been no direct evidence to support either of these hypotheses , or to indicate the direction of move - ment of the vesicles , i . e . away from or toward Golgi D . S . FRIEND AND M . G . FAR9TIAR Coated Vesicles Puring Protein Absorption 373 cisternae . Our observations provide such evidence by demonstrating that there is a distinct popula - tion of coated vesicles , distinguishable by their smaller size , and lytic enzyme content which is derived from the Golgi complex and which func - tions , in part , in the transport of lytic enzymes to lysosomes . It should be emphasized , however , that in all likelihood the transport functions of coated vesicles are multiple . In this regard , our findings suggest that some of the Golgi - associated coated vesicles fuse with the apical cell membrane and could serve either ( a ) to convey enzymes and / or surface - coat material to the apical plasma - lemma , or ( b ) to replace membrane lost from the cell surface during protein absorption . Our observations also suggest that in the epithe - lium of the rat vas deferens the bristle coat , per - sistent or transient , largely characterizes elements of the vacuolar or lysosomal system ( 14 ) : the apical FIGuRE 40 Golgi region from a peroxidase - perfused specimen ( 20 min ) incubated with CMP . No reaction product is seen in the Golgi cisternae ( Gc ) and asso - ciated vesicles , but dense deposits are present in the multivesicular body ( mvb ) located nearby . X 5 , 000 . pinocytic invaginations , heterophagosomes , diges - tive vacuoles , and primary lysosomes of Golgi origin . Cytochemical Results It is of interest that peroxidase was found within the various elements of the vacuolar system ( 14 ) , but it did not gain access , in concentrations which could be detected by our methods , to other intra - cellular compartments , such as the ER and Golgi complex . Furthermore , contrary to the findings of Sedar ( 10 ) , we did not detect peroxidase between cells , except in those areas which had been noticeably damaged by the experimental pro - cedures . Cytochemical tests with TPP , CMP , and GP were carried out in the hope of identifying the sites of relocation of the small coated vesicles which move away from the Golgi region after peroxidase infusion . Results with TPP were disappointing in that only those coated vesicles in the immediate vicinity of Golgi cisternae or in direct continuity with them were reactive . TPP - positive vesicles were not seen elsewhere in the cytoplasm or in association with other cellular organelles . Hence we conclude that the enzyme activity is usually lost or at least not demonstrable away from the Golgi zone and that this technique is not useful in tracing vesicle relocation in this system . The results with GP and CMP were more rewarding in that some of the small coated vesicles found near multivesicular bodies in the peripheral cytoplasm as well as those in the Golgi zone , were reactive in both control and peroxidase - infused specimens . Based on results of vesicle counts , we have concluded that their direction of movement is from the Golgi complex to lytic bodies and that the small coated vesicles are primary lysosomes . At - tempts to count directly the vesicles in cytochem - ical preparations were abandoned , owing to the variation in reactivity of different specimens and especially to the difficulty in distinguishing be - tween coated and smooth vesicles after incubation at acid pH . Blurring of the coats in such prepara - tions or tissue differences may explain why , with the exception of recent publications by Holtzman et al . ( 36 , 37 ) , in previous studies ( 30 , 22 ) no coats have been recognized around AcPase positive vesicles in the Golgi region . Finally , note should be made of the fact that our results with CMP and with GP were not identical . In both control and peroxidase - perfused 374 THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY - VOLUME 35 , 1967 preparations , considerable activity was present along the surface plasmalemma and in inter - microvillar pits with GP but not with CMP . Furthermore , after peroxidase infusion , activity in Golgi cisternae was increased with GP and reduced with CMP . These findings indicate that the en - zyme activities demonstrated are not strictly paral - lel , and that these two substrates cannot be used interchangeably . This research was supported by grants AM - 09090 and 5T1 - GM - 349 , and research career program award 1 - K3 - GM - 25 , 109 from the United States Public Health Service . We gratefully acknowledge the technical assistance of Miss Irene Rudolf , Miss Cassandra Lista , and Mrs . Karin Taylor . Received for publication 8 May 1967 ; revision accepted 29 June 1967 . REFERENCES 1 . MILLER , F . 1960 . Hemoglobin absorption by the cells of the proximal convoluted tubule in mouse kidney . J . Biophys . Biochem . Cytol . 8 : 689 . 2 . FARQUHAR , M . G . , AND G . E . PALADE . 1960 . Segregation of ferritin in glomerular protein absorption droplets . J . Biophys . Biochem . Cytol . 7 : 297 . 3 . MILLER , F . , AND G . E . PALADE . 1964 . Lytic activities in renal protein absorption droplets An electron microscopical cytochemical study . J . Cell Biol . 23 : 519 . 4 . STRAUS , W . 1964 . Occurrence of phagosomes and phago - lysosomes in different segments of the nephron in relation to the reabsorption , trans - port , digestion , and extrusion of intravenously injected horseradish peroxidase . J . Cell Biol . 21 : 295 . 5 . ERICSSON , J . L . 1964 . Absorption and decomposi - tion of homologous hemoglobin in renal proximal tubular cells ; an experimental light and electron microscopic study . Acta Pathol . Microbiol . Scand . Suppl . 168 . 1 . 6 . ERICSSON , J . L . 1965 . Transport and digestion of hemoglobin in the proximal tubule . II . Elec - tron microscopy . Lab . Invest . 14 : 16 . 7 . GRAHAM , R . C . , AND M . J . KARNOVSKY . 1966 . The early stages of absorption of injected horseradish peroxidase in the proximal tubules of mouse kidney : Ultrastructural cytochemistry by a new technique . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 14 : 291 . 8 . MAUNSBACH , A . B . 1966 . Absorption of I5 - labeled homologous albumin by rat kidney proximal tubule cells . A study of microperfused single proximal . tubules by electron microscopic autoradiography and histochemistry . J . Ultra - struct . Res . 15 : 197 . 9 . MAUNSBACH , A . B . 1966 . Absorption of ferritin by rat kidney proximal tubule cells . Electron microscopic observations of the initial uptake phase in cells of microperfused single proximal tubules . J . Ultrastruct . Res . 16 : 1 . 10 . SEDAR , A . W . 1966 . Transport of exogenous peroxidase across the epididymal epithelium . International Conference for Electron Micros - copy , Kyoto , Japan , 1966 . R . Uyeda , editor . Maruzen Co . Ltd . , Tokyo . 2 : 591 . 11 . ROTH , T . F . , AND K . R . PORTER . 1964 . Yolk protein uptake in the oocyte of the mosquito Aedes aegypti L . J . Cell Biol . 20 , 313 . 12 . STAY , B . 1965 . Protein uptake in the oocytes of the cecropia moth . J . Cell Biol . 26 : 49 . 13 . DROLLER , M . J . , AND T . F . ROTH . 1966 . An electron microscope study of yolk formation during oogenesis in Lebistes reticulatus guppyi . J . Cell Biol . 28 : 209 . 14 . DE DUVE , C . , AND R . WATTIAUX . 1966 . Functions of lysosomes . Ann . Rev . Physiol . 28 : 435 . 15 . BuRcos , M . H . 1964 . Uptake of colloidal par - ticles by cells of the epididymis . Anat . Record . 148 : 517 . 16 . NICANDER . L . 1965 . An electron microscopical study of absorbing cells in the posterior caput epididymis of rabbits . Z . Zellforsch . Mikroskop . Anat . 66 : 829 . 17 . KUFF , E . L . , AND A . J . DALTON . 1959 . Biochemi - cal studies of isolated Golgi membranes . In Subcellular Particles . T . Hayashi , editor . The Ronald Press Company , New York . 114 . 18 . NOVIKOFF , A . B . , AND S . GOLDFISCHER . 1961 . Nucleosidediphosphatase activity in the Golgi apparatus and its usefulness for cytological studies . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . 47 : 802 . 19 . NOVIKOFF , A . B . , R . HIRSH , AND N . QUINTANA . 1965 . Golgi apparatus of rat epididymis and acid phosphatase activity . J . Cell Biol . 27 : 73 A . 20 . NIEMI , M . 1965 . The fine structure and histo - chemistry of the epithelial cells of the rat vas deferens . Acta Anat . 60 : 207 . 21 . KARNOVSKY , M . J . 1965 . A formaldehyde - glu - taraldehyde fixative of high osmolality for use in electron microscopy . J . Cell Biol . 27 : 137 A . 22 . SMITH , R . E . , AND M . G . FARQUHAR . 1966 . Lysosome function in the regulation of the secretory process in cells of the anterior pitu - itary gland . J . Cell Biol . 31 : 319 . D . S . FRIEND AND M . G . FARQUIIAR Coated Veicles During Protein Absorption 375 23 . BENNETT , H . S . , AND J . H . LUFT . 1959 . s - Col - lidine as a basis for buffering fixatives . J . Bio - phys . Biochem . Cytol . 6 : 113 . 24 . FARQUHAR , M . G . , AND G . E . PALADE . 1965 . Cell junctions in amphibian skin . J . Cell Biol . 26 : 263 . 25 . LUFT , J . H . 1961 . Improvements in epoxy resin embedding methods . J . Biophys . Biochem . Cytol . 9 : 409 . 26 . TRUMP , B . F . , E . A . SMUCKLER , AND E . P . BEN - DITT . 1961 . A method for staining epoxy sec - tions for light microscopy . J . Ultrastruct . Res . 5 : 343 . 27 . SMITH , R . E . , AND M . G . FARQUHAR . 1965 . Prep - aration of nonfrozen sections for electron mi - croscope cytochemistry . Sci . Instr . News ( RCA ) . 10 : 13 . 28 . KARNOVSKY , M . J . 1965 . Vesicular transport of exogenous peroxidase across capillary endo - thelium into the T . system of muscle . J . Cell Biol . 27 : 49 A . 29 . BARKA , T . , AND P . J . ANDERSON . 1962 . Histo - chemical methods for acid phosphatase using hexazonium pararosanilin as coupler . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 10 : 741 . 30 . NOVIKOFF , A . B . 1963 . Lysosomes in the physi - ology and pathology of cells : contributions of staining methods . In Ciba Foundation Sym - posium on Lysosmes . A . V . S . de Reuck and M . P . Cameron , editors . Little , Brown and Company , Boston . 36 . 31 . FARQUHAR , M . G . , AND G . E . PALADE . 1963 . Junctional complexes in various epithelia . J . Cell Biol . 17 : 375 . 32 . ITO , S . 1965 . The enteric surface coat on cat intestinal microvilli . J . Cell Biol . 27 : 475 . 33 . NOVIKOFF , A . B . 1964 . GERL , its form and function in neurons of rat spinal ganglia . Biol . Bull . 127 : 358 . 34 . NOVIKOFF , A . B . P . P . S . ROHEIM , AND N . QUINTANA . 1966 . Changes in rat liver cells induced by orotic acid feeding . Lab . Invest . 15 : 27 . 35 . BowERS , B . 1964 . Coated vesicles in the peri - cardial cells of the aphid ( Myzus persicae Sulz ) . Protoplasma . 59 : 351 . 36 . HOLTZMAN , E . , AND A . ALBALA . 1966 . Autoph - agic vacuoles and other lysosomes in the rat ganglion nodosum . J . Cell Biol . 31 : 49 A . 37 . HOLTZMAN , E . , A . B . NOVIKOFF , AND H . VILLAVERDE . 1967 . Lysosomes and GERL in normal and chromatolytic neurons of the rat ganglion nodosum . J . Cell Biol . 33 : 419 . 38 . GRAY , E . G . 1961 . The granule cells , mossy synapses and Purkinje spine synapses of the cerebellum : Light and electron microscope observations . J . Anat . 95 : 345 . 39 . PALAY , S . L . 1963 . Alveolate vesicles in Purkinje cell of the rat ' s cerebellum J . Cell Biol . 19 : 89 A . 40 . BRIGHTMAN , M . W . 1962 . An electron micro - scopic study of ferritin uptake from the cerebral ventricles of rats . Anat . Record . 142 : 219 . 41 . ROTH , T . F . , AND K . R . PORTER . 1962 . Special - ized sites on the cell surface for protein uptake . In Electron Microscopy : Fifth International Congress for Electron Microscopy held in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , August 20th to September 5th , 1962 . S . S . Breese , Jr . , editor . Academic Press Inc . , New York . 2 : LL4 . 42 . ROTH , T . F . , AND K . R . PORTER . 1963 . Mein - brane differentiation for protein uptake . Fed - eration Proc . 22 : 178 . 43 . ROSENBLUTH , J . , AND S . L . WssIG . 1964 . The distribution of exogenous ferritin in toad spinal ganglia and the mechanism of its uptake by neurons . J . Cell Biol . 23 : 307 . 44 . BRUNI , C . , AND K . R . PORTER . 1965 . The fine structure of the parenchymal cell of the nor - mal rat liver . Am . J . Pathol . 46 : 691 . 45 . CUNNINGHAM , W . P . , J . D . MORRE , AND H . H . MOLLENHAUER . 1966 . Structure of isolated plant Golgi apparatus revealed by negative staining . J . Cell Biol . 28 : 169 . 376 THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 35 , 1967