3134 | Y . Chen , L . Ju , et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell MBoC | SPECIAL ARTICLE Receptor - mediated cell mechanosensing ABSTRACT Mechanosensing describes the ability of a cell to sense mechanical cues of its microenvironment , including not only all components of force , stress , and strain but also sub - strate rigidity , topology , and adhesiveness . This ability is crucial for the cell to respond to the surrounding mechanical cues and adapt to the changing environment . Examples of responses and adaptation include ( de ) activation , proliferation / apoptosis , and ( de ) differentiation . Re - ceptor - mediated cell mechanosensing is a multistep process that is initiated by binding of cell surface receptors to their ligands on the extracellular matrix or the surface of adjacent cells . Mechanical cues are presented by the ligand and received by the receptor at the binding in - terface ; but their transmission over space and time and their conversion into biochemical signals may involve other domains and additional molecules . In this review , a four - step model is described for the receptor - mediated cell mechanosensing process . Platelet glycoprotein Ib , T - cell receptor , and integrins are used as examples to illustrate the key concepts and players in this process . INTRODUCTION In all forms of life , survival is based upon the ability to adapt to envi - ronmental pressures , including diverse sets of mechanical forces . Force therefore plays an important role in the shaping , development , and maintenance of tissues and organs . Virtually all organisms have evolved structures from the macroscale ( organs , tissues ) to the mi - croscale ( cells ) and nanoscale ( molecular assemblies , single proteins ) that are sensitive and responsive to myriad forces , including compres - sive , tensile , shear stress , and hydrostatic pressure . At the cellular level , mechanobiology is concerned with how the cell detects , inter - prets , responds , and adapts to the mechanical environment . At the molecular level , mechanobiology includes not only enlisting the molecular players and elucidating their interconnections , but also understanding the design and working principles of various mecha - nosensing machineries so as to re - engineer them for specific applications . Mechanobiology includes the long history of investigations on mechanosensation , referred to as an organism’s active response to environmental mechanical stimuli , such as the functioning of the au - ditory and haptic system ( Gillespie and Walker , 2001 ; Ingber , 2006 ) . The received signals travel across multicellular tissues / organs to the central nervous system ( along the route of a reflex arc ) , so as to trigger the awareness of the organism and its response . The initial reception of the mechanical stimulations , although presented in a macroscopic scale , is via somatic cells . Certain membrane proteins are found to convert extracellularly applied mechanical stimuli into intracellular chemical signals by opening / closing channels formed by their transmembrane domains ( TMDs ) to enable / disable move - ment of substances across the cell membrane ( Ingber , 2006 ) . Mechanobiology is much broader than mechanosensation that can be initiated only by limited types of neurological cells using “professional” components for reception of highly specific types of mechanical signals . By comparison , a wide variety of other cells in all tissues and organs are endowed with machineries that allow them to sense and respond to mechanical cues in their microenvironment , Monitoring Editor Valerie Marie Weaver University of California , San Francisco Received : Apr 10 , 2017 Revised : Sep 6 , 2017 Accepted : Sep 19 , 2017 This article was published online ahead of print in MBoC in Press ( http : / / www . molbiolcell . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E17 - 04 - 0228 ) on September 27 , 2017 . The authors have no conflicting interests to declare . † These authors should be regarded as joint first authors . ‡ Present address : Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine , Scripps Research Institute , La Jolla , CA 92037 . * Address correspondence to : Cheng Zhu ( cheng . zhu @ bme . gatech . edu ) . © 2017 Chen , Ju , et al . This article is distributed by The American Society for Cell Biology under license from the author ( s ) . Two months after publication it is avail - able to the public under an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Unported Creative Commons License ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 ) . “ASCB ® , ” “The American Society for Cell Biology ® , ” and “Molecular Biology of the Cell ® ” are registered trademarks of The American Society for Cell Biology . Abbreviations used : ADAMTS - 13 , a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with a thrombospondin type 1 motif , member 13 ; AFM , atomic force microscopy ; APC , antigen - presenting cell ; BCR , B - cell receptor ; BFP , biomembrane force probe ; CT , cytoplasmic tail ; DFS , dynamic force spectroscopy ; ECM , extracellular matrix ; FAK , focal adhesion kinase ; fBFP , fluorescence BFP ; FRET , fluorescence resonance en - ergy transfer ; GP , glycoprotein ; ICAM - 1 , intercellular adhesion molecule 1 ; ITAM , immunoreceptor tyrosine - based activation motif ; LRRD , leucine - rich repeat do - main ; MD , molecular dynamics ; MIDAS , metal ion – dependent adhesion site ; MP , macroglycopeptide ; MSD , mechanosensitive domain ; MTC , magnetic twisting cytometry ; pMHC , peptide – major histocompatibility complex ; SLE , systemic lupus erythematosus ; TCR , T - cell receptor ; TGT , tension gauge tethers ; TMD , transmem - brane domain ; TSMod , tension sensor module ; VCAM - 1 , vascular adhesion mole - cule 1 ; VWD , von Willebrand disease ; VWF , von Willebrand factor ; WT , wild type . Yunfeng Chen a , b , † , ‡ , Lining Ju c , † , Muaz Rushdi b , d , Chenghao Ge b , d , and Cheng Zhu a , b , d , * a Woodruff School of Mechanical Engineering , b Parker H . Petit Institute for Bioengineering and Bioscience , and d Coulter Department of Biomedical Engineering , Georgia Institute of Technology , Atlanta , GA 30332 ; c Charles Perkins Centre and Heart Research Institute , University of Sydney , Camperdown , NSW 2006 , Australia Volume 28 November 7 , 2017 Receptor - mediated cell mechanosensing | 3135 2007 ; Dustin , 2008 ; Ilani et al . , 2009 ; Hammer and Burkhardt , 2013 ) . Indeed , internal forces generated by T - and B - cells have been observed being exerted via respectively engaged pMHCs and anti - gens on the TCR ( Bashour et al . , 2014a , b ; Liu et al . , 2016 ; Ma et al . , 2016 ) and BCR ( Wan et al . , 2015 ) , respectively . External force applied to the TCR has been shown to induce intracellular calcium flux ( Kim et al . , 2009 ; Li et al . , 2010 ; Liu et al . , 2014a ; Pryshchep et al . , 2014 ; Feng et al . , 2017 ) , regulate pMHC dissociation kinetics from the TCR ( Liu et al . , 2014a ; Das et al . , 2015 ) and pre - TCR ( Mallis et al . , 2015 ; Das et al . , 2016 ) , and potentiate cytotoxic T - cell killing of target cells ( Basu et al . , 2016 ) . Both T - cells ( Axmann et al . , 2012 ; Liu et al . , 2014a ; Das et al . , 2015 , 2016 ; Hong et al . , 2015 ) and B - cells ( Natkanski et al . , 2013 ) are able to use mechanical forces to amplify antigen discrimination . In these examples of the emerging field of mechanoimmunology , TCR and BCR represent signal recep - tors . Unlike receptors for soluble agonists , these receptors bind immobilized ligands and , as such , are subject to mechanical forces . Thus , signaling via these receptors can be modulated or even trig - gered by force ( Upadhyaya , 2017 ) . Receptor - mediated mechanosensing of a cell is hardly a onetime deal in physiology . Rather , it is usually a complex process composed of many concurrent , sequential , and coordinated signaling events triggered by the same and / or different types of receptors throughout the cell surface ( e . g . , in focal adhesions , clusters of integrins receive signals simultaneously ) over a period of time . Moreover , the ability of cells to provide feedback to the sensed mechanical stimulations and to adjust the force and adhesion strength accordingly ( via deforma - tion and modifying cytoskeletal support ) enables constant cross - talk between the cell and the environment ( Roca - Cusachs et al . , 2017 ) . Nonetheless , focusing on the cell sensing of a single wave of unidi - rectional mechanical signal may simplify the problem and provide a useful angle to begin the mechanistic investigation . In this review , a four - step model is described for the receptor - mediated cell mecha - nosensing process , covering the presentation , reception , transmis - sion , and transduction of a single wave of mechanical signal . Kinetics of receptor – ligand interaction and mechanics of the molecular play - ers are discussed . Biophysical nanotools commonly used to study receptor - medicated mechanosensing on cells are summarized . Platelet glycoprotein Ib - IX , T - cell receptor , and integrins are used as examples to illustrate the key players in this process . FOUR - STEP MODEL FOR RECEPTOR - MEDIATED CELL MECHANOSENSING Upon ligand engagement , cell surface receptors can transduce sig - nals across the membrane . When force is exerted upon receptor – ligand bond formation , this can initiate cell mechanosensing . As demonstrated in Figure 1A , in many cases , such a mechanosensing process may be broken down into four steps carried out by distinct structural components of the receptor – ligand axis : Step 1 . Mechanopresentation : In this step , mechanical cues are presented for the cell to sense . If the force to be sensed is ex - erted to a receptor , mechanopresentation requires a ligand that is anchored on a surface ( mechanopresenter ) to support the force upon its exertion ( Figure 1A , step 1 , purple ) . In contrast , soluble ligands do not sustain force , and therefore cannot pres - ent mechanical cues . Step 2 . Mechanoreception : This is the step during which the mechanopresenting ligand is engaged with a cell surface receptor onto which force is exerted ( Figure 1A , step 2 , orange ) . The receptor is termed a mechanoreceptor , because it is the molecule that receives the mechanical signal , which may induce which are also subjects of mechanobiology research . In these cases , the reception and processing of , and the response to the mechanical signals are all accomplished in a single cell . Receptor – ligand en - gagement is absent in the initiation of mechanosensation but is re - quired in such important type of mechanosensing—the receptor - mediated cell mechanosensing . In this review , we will focus on receptor - mediated mechanosensing by cells , discuss its require - ments and steps , and study how a cell can use such an elegant pro - cess to sense and respond to the mechanical environment . Cells can support mechanical loads via specific or nonspecific structures . As an example of the latter , pressure is borne by the entire cell surface . By comparison , targeted mechanical stimula - tions are usually applied to specific receptors on cells in direct phys - ical contact with the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) or adjacent cells through ligand engagement , resulting in receptor - mediated cell mechanosensing . Receptor - mediated cell mechanosensing is of physiological importance , because it plays a crucial role in cell ( de ) activation , ( de ) differentiation , proliferation / apoptosis , and many other cellular processes ( Orr et al . , 2006 ; Vogel and Sheetz , 2006 ) . For example , focal adhesion assembly enables reinforcement of cells’ attachment to the ECM , which requires initial adhesion to transduce force signals to the cytoskeleton , which then regulates actin ( de ) polymerization and integrin convergence ( Wozniak et al . , 2004 ; Roca - Cusachs et al . , 2012 ) . Cell spreading ( Qiu et al . , 2014 ) , contraction ( Lam et al . , 2011 ; Sheehy et al . , 2012 ; Garcia and Garcia , 2014 ; Iskratsch et al . , 2014 ; Myers et al . , 2016 ) , migration ( Pathak and Kumar , 2012 ; Schaefer and Hordijk , 2015 ; Paluch et al . , 2016 ) , and differentiation ( Engler et al . , 2006 ; Moore and Sheetz , 2011 ; Wen et al . , 2014 ) also depend on adhesion receptor – medi - ated mechanosensing , as evidenced by their sensitivity to substrate stiffness ( Elosegui - Artola et al . , 2016 ) , which in population can even fulfill sophisticated tissue - and organ - level tasks like ECM remodel - ing ( Cox and Erler , 2011 ) . In these examples of receptor - mediated mechanosensing , adhe - sion molecules ( e . g . , cadherins and integrins ) have been suggested as , at least parts of , the mechanosensing machineries , for their per - turbation alters whether and how a cell responds to the changing mechanical environment . Using the same strategy , many intracellu - lar proteins have also been identified as candidate molecules that play a role in mechanosensing , including adaptor and scaffolding proteins ( e . g . , talin and vinculin ) , kinases and phosphatases ( e . g . , focal adhesion kinase , FAK ) , and even cytoskeletal components ( i . e . , actin filament and microtubule ) . Unlike cell surface receptors that are at the first - line of mechanosensing , these molecules are further downstream and play different roles , for example , transmitting the mechanical signals into the cell , converting them into biochemical signals , integrating and interpreting these signals for decision mak - ing , and dispatching the decisions to the appropriate cellular organ - elles for actions . There have been a number of excellent reviews for these aspects of mechanobiology ( Dahl et al . , 2008 ; Kuo , 2013 ; Romet - Lemonne and Jegou , 2013 ; Seong et al . , 2013 ; Haining et al . , 2016 ) , and they will not be the focus here . In addition to responding to externally applied forces , cells can internally generate and exert forces on cell surface receptors . For example , forces from actin polymerization , retrograde flow of the actin cytoskeleton , and myosin II – dependent contraction may be transmitted to T - or B - cell receptors ( TCR or BCR ) bound to peptide – major histocompatibility complex ( pMHC ) molecules or antibodies anchored to a surface during signaling activation ( Hu and Butte , 2016 ; Murugesan et al . , 2016 ; Hong et al . , 2017 ) , cell motility ( Mempel et al . , 2004 ; Kim et al . , 2009 ) , and formation of immuno - logical synapses and kinapses ( Mossman et al . , 2005 ; Sims et al . , 3136 | Y . Chen , L . Ju , et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell contains the structure ( s ) undergoing me - chanical changes , together with other participants of the chemical event , is termed the mechanotransducer ( Figure 1A , step 4 , red ) . Importantly , a key property of mecha - notransduction is the capability to dis - tinguish different mechanical stimulations via either a digital or analogous mecha - nism . In other words , it may react to certain stimulations only , remaining inert to others ( digital ) , or the intensity of the triggered biochemical signal may correlate with the strength of the mechanical stimulation ( analogous ) ( Ju et al . , 2016 ) . Mechano - transmission and mechanotransduction are similar in some aspects . However , the cen - tral distinction between these two steps is that the latter translates mechanical signals into chemical signals , but the former does not . It is also important to note that a mol - ecule may play more than one role in the mechanosensing process . For example , platelet glycoprotein ( GP ) Ib α acts as the mechanoreceptor , mechanotransmit - ter , and also part of mechanotransducer in GPIb - mediated cell mechanosensing , which will be demonstrated below in the section that discusses Platelet mechano - sensing via single GPIb . KINETIC AND MECHANICAL ASPECTS Kinetic constraints of mechanopresentation and mechanoreception The first two steps of mechanosensing re - quire binding of a mechanoreceptor to an immobilized ligand to allow force to be ex - erted on the receptor – ligand bond . The receptor – ligand binding kinetics that gov - erns how fast the bond associates and dissociates , quantified by an on - rate and a force - dependent off - rate , are critical to mechano - sensing , because they determine the magnitude , duration , and frequency of force application . In other words , kinetics places a constraint on mechanopresentation and mechanoreception , be - cause it limits the frequency , magnitude , and duration of the force that can be presented by a mechanopresenter to a mechanore - ceptor . For example , the large volumetric fraction of red blood cells in the bloodstream creates a margination effect that pushes platelets toward the vascular wall ( Vahidkhah et al . , 2014 ) . This may decrease the gap distance between the von Willebrand factor ( VWF ) - bearing vascular bed surface and the GPIb - bearing platelet surface , thereby increasing the apparent on - rate of their associa - tion ( Ju et al . , 2015c ) and in turn enabling more frequent mecha - nopresentation and mechanoreception . Even in cases of signal receptors that can be triggered in the absence of force , force may still modulate the signal initiation by impacting the durability of li - gand engagement . At the single - bond level , bond lifetime , that is , the duration of a bond ( which is inversely related to off - rate ) can be prolonged , unaffected , or shortened by force , defining the catch , ideal , or slip FIGURE 1 : Model of mechanosensing with three exemplary systems ( GPIb , TCR , and integrin ) , which is broken into four steps : 1 ) mechanopresentation ; 2 ) mechanoreception ; 3 ) mechanotransmission ; and 4 ) mechanotransduction . Purple , orange , green , and red arrows indicate the location of each step carried out by a molecule or molecular assembly : the mechanopresenter , mechanoreceptor , mechanotransmitter , and mechanotransducer , respectively . Black arrows indicates external force , F . Steps of mechanosensing of a generic model ( A ) and three model systems , GPIb ( B ) , TCR ( C ) , and integrin ( D ) , were depicted in correspondence to the proposed model . Due to the existence of multiple mechanosensing mechanisms in integrins , the talin unfolding mechanism is selected as representative in D . conformational changes in the binding site of the receptor or the ligand to alter the bond properties . Step 3 . Mechanotransmission : This is the step performed by the mechanotransmitter , whereby the mechanical signal propagates away from the ligand binding site ( the business end of the mech - anoreceptor ) toward the cell interior ( Figure 1A , step 3 , green ) . Note that the propagating mechanical signal is not limited to the mechanical force only . As we will show later in the examples of TCR - and integrin - mediated mechanosensing , propagation of force - induced molecular conformational changes should also be counted as part of mechanotransmission , notwithstanding that it may also facilitate mechanotransduction . Step 4 . Mechanotransduction : This is the step when the mechan - ical cue is translated into a biochemical signal . Note that this definition is different from that used in some other articles , wherein “mechanotransduction” is referred to as the entire “cell mechanosensing” process . Usually , a certain region of the recep - tor or its linked subunit ( s ) undergo ( es ) conformational changes in response to the force waveform ( cf . Figure 2 ) , enabling a biochemical event to occur in the cytoplasm . The molecule that Volume 28 November 7 , 2017 Receptor - mediated cell mechanosensing | 3137 1 . Deformation ( Figure 2A ) : Changes in the environment impose mechanical forces and / or hydrophobic effects onto the mechanosensitive proteins and cause deformation of their global shape . By adopting this mechanism , pore - forming membrane ion channels like transient re - ceptor potential channels and bacterial large - conductance mechanosensitive channels can deform in response to membrane tension change and control the channel opening / closing ( Sukharev et al . , 1999 ; Orr et al . , 2006 ) . 2 . Relative displacement ( Figure 2B ) : Two subunits of a transmembrane channel are respectively linked with two external structures . Deflections of these structures cause their relative displacement , which mediates the opening / closing of the channel . This mechanism is mostly stud - ied under mechanosensation , such as in deformation of the skin , vibration of a fly’s bristle , and oscillation of a hair cell’s hair bundle ( Gillespie and Walker , 2001 ) . 3 . Hinge movement ( Figure 2C ) : For proteins or their subunits that consist of two or more distinct globular domains connected by a hinge region , such as integrin ( Luo and Springer , 2006 ) , selectin ( Somers et al . , 2000 ) , and FimH ( Le Trong et al . , 2010 ) , force can relieve the conformational constraints and allosterically promote hinge opening . Take integrin as an example : many studies have demonstrated that force applied through ligand binding facili - tates the conformational switch from a bent to an extended con - formation ( Chen et al . , 2012 , 2016 ; Springer and Dustin , 2012 ) . 4 . Unfolding and unmasking ( Figure 2D ) : Force can unfold and un - mask a specific protein domain to expose cryptic cleaving , bind - ing , or enzymatic sites . For example , several recent studies have demonstrated that force can unfold distinct domains of GPIb α to mediate signal transduction ( Zhang et al . , 2015 ; Deng et al . , 2016 ; Ju et al . , 2016 ) . Force - induced exposure of a binding site has been shown for intracellular proteins such as talin and vincu - lin , as well as extracellular proteins such as fibronectin and VWF ( Smith et al . , 2007 ; Sing and Alexander - Katz , 2010 ; Yao et al . , 2014 ; Elosegui - Artola et al . , 2016 ) . Force - induced exposure of an enzymatic cleavage site has also been shown for Notch acti - vation ( Stephenson and Avis , 2012 ) and VWF proteolysis ( Zhang et al . , 2009 ; Wu et al . , 2010 ) . 5 . Translocation and rotation ( Figure 2E ) : External force applied to a protein noncovalently complexed with a subunit or subunits of a polymeric filament can drag the protein to translocate along the filament , repeatedly breaking old bonds with the subunit ( s ) from one side and forming new bonds with the subunit ( s ) from the other side . This mode of relative movement has been ob - served in the traveling of linear motors ( myosins , kinesins , and dyneins ) on their respective filamentous tracks ( F - actin and mi - crotubules ) ( Cross , 2006 ; Gebhardt et al . , 2006 ; Kodera et al . , 2010 ; Cross and McAinsh , 2014 ) . Myosins are important in adhe - sion - mediated cell cytoskeletal rearrangement and deformation , and have been postulated to play a critical role in substrate rigid - ity sensing of cells ( Holle and Engler , 2011 ) . Kinesins mediate chromosome segregation during anaphase , a key step in cell mitosis . Application of an external force can cause backward bond behavior , respectively ( Dembo et al . , 1988 ) . The physics of the catch bond has been an intriguing problem for biophysicists ever since it was first demonstrated in biological experiments ( Marshall et al . , 2003 ) . Interested readers are referred to reviews that summa - rized current models of the catch bond and the underlying mecha - nisms ( Rakshit and Sivasankar , 2014 ; Liu et al . , 2015a ) . Catch and slip bond characteristics can be important for cell mechanosensing via regulation of bond strength or durability . As demonstrated in the TCR ( Liu et al . , 2014a ) and GPIb ( Ju et al . , 2016 ) systems , the levels of intracellular calcium triggered by the receptor – ligand bonds dis - play a similar force dependency to their corresponding lifetimes . Interactions of TCR with agonist pMHC and of GPIb with wild - type ( WT ) VWF form catch - to - slip bonds , and the levels of Ca 2 + induced by exerting force on the two receptors show the same pattern , first increasing and then decreasing with increasing force ( Liu et al . , 2014a ; Ju et al . , 2016 ) . Furthermore , the force at which the bond lifetime becomes the longest coincides with the force at which the Ca 2 + level become the highest for both interactions . Moreover , changing the respective ligands to antagonist pMHC and type 2B von Willebrand disease ( VWD ) mutant VWF converts their respec - tive interactions with TCR and GPIb to slip - only bonds , and the in - duced Ca 2 + level also changes its pattern , monotonically decreasing with force in both cases ( Liu et al . , 2014a ; Ju et al . , 2016 ) . Mechanical changes in mechanosensing molecules Like any materials , biomolecules undergo mechanical changes in response to mechanical loads . Molecules of mechanosensing ma - chineries usually possess certain motifs that are sensitive to mechan - ical perturbations ( termed mechanosensitive domains , or MSDs ) . Mechanical changes in a MSD may carry out certain mechanosens - ing function by coupling directly or allosterically to a biochemical event , such as binding to , proteolysis by , or enzymatic modification by another molecule ( Ingber , 2006 ) . In this process , the mechanical signals are converted into biochemical signals to propagate further downstream inside the cell , fulfilling mechanotransduction . To date , the most - studied mechanisms of mechanical changes can be classi - fied into six categories : FIGURE 2 : Mechanisms of protein mechanosensitivity . Mechanosensitive proteins contain a motif or motifs that can change structure in response to mechanical forces , giving rise to ( A ) deformation , ( B ) relative displacement , ( C ) hinge movement , ( D ) unfolding and unmasking , ( E ) translocation and rotation , and ( F ) cluster rearrangement . 3138 | Y . Chen , L . Ju , et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell rence of mechanical events . For example , only abruptly increasing , but not constant , forces are able to unfold the LRRD of GPIb α , whereas both modes of force application are able to unfold the MSD of GPIb α ( Ju et al . , 2016 ) . NANOTOOLS FOR STUDYING RECEPTOR - MEDIATED CELL MECHANOSENSING Dynamic force spectroscopy Electron microscopy , crystallography , and antibody mapping are the most commonly used approaches to visualize conformations and characterize behaviors of purified proteins ( Springer and Dustin , 2012 ) . However , these approaches only take snapshots of proteins’ stable states and lack real - time details of transient processes . With the exception of antibody mapping , these methods cannot be used to investigate the coupling of protein conformational changes with subsequent signaling events on live cells . Over the past two de - cades , dynamic force spectroscopy ( DFS ) ( Neuman and Nagy , 2008 ; Dulin et al . , 2013 ; Liu et al . , 2015a ) has provided various biomechani - cal approaches for manipulation , characterization , and visualization of single receptor – ligand interaction and conformational change with tunable force ( Liu et al . , 2015a ) . DFS analyses are usually per - formed using ultrasensitive force probes ( Figure 3A ) such as atomic force microscopy ( AFM ; Figure 3B ) , optical tweezers ( Figure 3C ) , magnetic tweezers ( Figure 3D ) , and biomembrane force probes ( BFPs ; Figure 3E ) , but recently they have been conducted using a novel centrifuge force microscope that enables high - throughput measurements ( Halvorsen and Wong , 2010 ; Yang et al . , 2016 ) . With nanometer spatial , submillisecond temporal , and piconewton force resolutions , these techniques can be used to induce , follow , and ana - lyze single - molecule mechanical events in real time , thus revealing individual molecular details inaccessible by conventional methods . In a DFS experiment , automated precise movement brings to - gether ligands and receptors on the respective force probe ( i . e . , an AFM cantilever in Figure 3B or a bead in Figure 3 , C – E ) and target ( i . e . , a bead in Figure 3A , right , a cell , or a molecule - functionalized surface ) with controlled contact time , area , and force . The following separation of the two surfaces applies a piconewton - level force to the receptor – ligand bond to induce mechanical changes in the mol - ecules and modulate bond dissociation . Usually , a DFS experiment is set to perform in either the force - ramp or force - clamp mode . For force - ramp DFS , the force is continuously ramped until the bond ruptures ( Figure 4C ) . For force - clamp DFS , the force is ramped to and clamped at a preset level until the bond ruptures . The bond lifetime is the clamp period ( Figure 4E ) . The rupture forces mea - sured in force - ramp DFS and bond lifetimes measured in force - clamp DFS are used to characterize the force - dependent dissocia - tion ( off - rate ) of receptor – ligand bonds ( Liu et al . , 2015a ) . In addition , multiplexed modes of operation can also be used to exert different force waveforms on the molecular bond , for example , jump - and - ramp DFS ( Evans et al . , 2004 ) and cyclic - force DFS ( Kong et al . , 2013 ; Li et al . , 2016a ) . In general , DFS experiments have been done to analyze force - dependent receptor – ligand ( un ) binding and pro - tein domain unfolding / refolding . In the context of receptor - medi - ated cell mechanosensing , the force - dependent receptor – ligand ( un ) binding may be involved in mechanopresentation and mecha - noreception , whereas protein domain unfolding / refolding may be involved in mechanotransmission and / or mechanotransduction . Thus , DFS analysis provides a tool to dissect the steps of a receptor - mediated cell mechanosensing process and examine them one at a time . However , DFS alone is not sufficient to fully characterize cell mech - anosensing without readout of the intracellular signaling induced by stepping of a myosin - V on actin , opposite to the direction of ATP - consuming walking ( Gebhardt et al . , 2006 ) . Rotational movement , on the other hand , occurs in rotary motors , for ex - ample , ATPases , where a rod - shaped subunit inserted into the center of a circular complex of subunits can rotate relative to the circular complex ( Noji et al . , 1997 ; Nakanishi - Matsui et al . , 2010 ) . For example , the F 1 portion of ATP synthase , F 1 - ATPase , hydro - lyzes ATP to create a torque that rotates its γ subunit relative to α 3 β 3 subunits ; reversely , an externally applied torque can rotate the γ subunit to result in ATP synthesis ( Itoh et al . , 2004 ; Rondelez et al . , 2005 ) . 6 . Cluster rearrangement ( Figure 2F ) : The external force is dispersed on a group of clustered proteins , which , through their mutual interactions , act on the adjacent structures and change their arrangement . In focal adhesion , a large number of high - affinity integrins are recruited at the dorsal side of the cell , which affects the dynamic structural rearrangement of the cytoskeleton via link - age between the integrin tail and actin network ( Schwartz and DeSimone , 2008 ) . This and the “translocation / rotation” model both achieve mechanosensitivity via cooperation within a group of molecules , in contrast to the other “single - molecule” models . Depending on the specific physiological function of the mecha - notransducer , the type of conformational change ( Figure 2 , A – F ) that it adopts may vary . A specific type of conformational change induces a biochemical signal and generates a functional output , yet it also puts forth limitations . For example , the cluster rearrangement mechanism ( Figure 2F ) found in mechanosensing of large clusters of integrins in focal adhesions is able to facilitate the rearrangement of the actin skeleton . By comparison , on a platelet , the unfolding of the MSD on a single GPIb is apparently not sufficient to mediate the actin network rearrangement . Instead , its intraplatelet calcium flux triggering has to be via a pathway that can be fulfilled by a single GPIb ( Ju et al . , 2016 ) . Besides performing mechanotransduction on cell surface recep - tors and intracellular molecules , mechanical changes can also occur and be important to other steps of mechanosensing . Taking GPIb mechanosensing as an example , in normal blood circulation , VWF multimer , a mechanopresenter in GPIb mechanosensing , adopts a folded , globular conformation that shields the GPIb α binding sites in its A1 domain and the ADAMTS - 13 ( a disintegrin and metallopro - teinase with a thrombospondin type 1 motif , member 13 ) cleavage site in its A2 domain ( Mendolicchio and Ruggeri , 2005 ) . Only when it experiences sufficient fluid shear will its globular structure be straight - ened . The exposure of the A1 functional site makes it available for GPIb α binding , whereas A2 unfolding allows its cleavage by AD - AMTS - 13 to reduce its size , which becomes less adhesive . Therefore , the mechanosensitivity of VWF allows its mechanopresentation to be modulated by force before engaging the GPIb α ( Fu et al . , 2017 ) . While the two previous subsections discuss kinetics and mechan - ics separately , the two can be coupled at the level of single recep - tor – ligand pair . For example , conformational changes can be induced in the receptor or ligand by the bonding force , which in turn modulates their bond strength . Indeed , force has been sug - gested to expose the cryptic sites of fibronectin , which modifies its binding preference against different integrin species ( Vogel , 2006 ) . The leucine - rich repeat domain ( LRRD ) in GPIb α is unfolded by the force on the VWF – GPIb α bond , which in turn strengthens this inter - action . The prolonged bond lifetime in turn increases the unfolding likelihood of the MSD in GPIb α ( Ju et al . , 2015b ) , thus enhancing calcium triggering in platelets ( Ju et al . , 2016 ) . Furthermore , the waveform of the receptor – ligand binding can also affect the occur - Volume 28 November 7 , 2017 Receptor - mediated cell mechanosensing | 3139 tively ( Liu et al . , 2014a ; Ju et al . , 2016 ) . This indicates that cells can distinguish different force waveforms and respond by eliciting differ - ent calcium signals . More recently , the dual biomembrane force probe ( dBFP ) has been developed , which allows examination of the signal reception , initiation , and transduction from one receptor to an - other on a single cell step by step in space and time . It has demon - strated that the mechano - signals induced by TCR – pMHC and GPIb α – VWF lead to the up - regulation of integrin functions on a T - cell and a platelet , respectively ( Ju et al . , 2017 ) . Magnetic twisting cytometry Another powerful technique that has been extensively used in studies of mechanobiology is magnetic twisting cytometry ( MTC ) ( Wang et al . , 1993 ; Kasza et al . , 2011 ) . Instead of applying force , as in DFS experiments , MTC applies a twisting torque to the cell surface via an adherent ligand - functionalized magnetic bead the mechanical cues . To directly observe single receptor - mediated cell mechanosensing events on a living cell requires performing DFS with concurrent imaging of intracellular signaling ( e . g . , calcium flux ) , which was recently achieved by us with fluorescence BFP ( Liu et al . , 2014a ; Chen et al . , 2015 ; Ju et al . , 2016 ) and others using fluores - cence optical tweezers ( Kim et al . , 2009 ; Feng et al . , 2017 ) . This allows one to apply a controlled force waveform and concurrently analyze the resulting receptor – ligand unbinding , receptor mechanical events , and intracellular signaling . In the context of investigating receptor - mediated cell mechanosensing , different force waveforms created by the different DFS modes can respectively mimic the abrupt , sustained , and even more complex mechanical cues a cell may receive physio - logically . As demonstrated in recent studies , only durable forces ap - plied via force - clamp , but not transient forces applied by force - ramp , on the respective TCR – pMHC and GPIb α – VWF bonds are able to effectively trigger calcium signaling in T - cells and platelets , respec - FIGURE 3 : Single - molecule force probe techniques ( A – E ) and microscopic probes for cell tractions and intracellular forces ( F – L ) techniques . ( A ) A generic force probe that applies forces ( F ) to the receptor – ligand bond spanning a surface and a force transducer . ( B ) Atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) : force is applied to individual molecules tethered between a functionalized cantilever and a surface . ( C ) Optical tweezers ( OT ) : a protein - coated bead is held by a laser beam . ( D ) Magnetic tweezers ( MT ) : permanent / electrical magnets are used to manipulate a protein - coated magnetic bead . ( E ) Biomembrane force probe ( BFP ) : the protein - coated bead is attached to the apex of a micropipette - aspirated red blood cell ( RBC ) . ( B – E ) Force is determined respectively by cantilever deflection ( B ) , bead displacement ( C ) , gradient of the magnetic field ( D ) , and RBC deformation ( E ) . ( F ) Extracellular and intracellular tension sensors allow microscopic observation of endogenous forces experienced by different proteins . ( G ) Nanopost : the deflections of the polydimethylsiloxane posts reflect the lateral components of tractions exerted by adhered cells . ( H ) Tension gauge tethers ( TGTs ) : DNA strands with defined tension tolerances are repurposed to test the tension required to activate cell adhesion . ( I ) Molecular tension - based fluorescence microscopic probe . The fluorophore and quencher are coupled to report the force - induced unfolding of the DNA hairpin , thereby unquenching the fluorescence to report the molecular forces . ( J ) Gold nanoparticle - based ratiometric tension probes on supported lipid bilayer monitor hairpin opening due to force while controlling for clustering of mobile ligands using a secondary fluorescent readout . ( K ) Elastomer force probes report drop in FRET signal due to the elongation of the nanospring domain upon force application . ( L ) Intracellular force probes genetically inserted into domains of intracellular proteins allow force measurement of key domains involved in mechanotransduction inside the cell . 3140 | Y . Chen , L . Ju , et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell specialized cell types ( Vogel and Sheetz , 2006 ; DuFort et al . , 2011 ) . A major limitation of the ultrasensitive force techniques de - picted in Figure 3 , A – E , is that they exter - nally apply forces to the cell but provide no information on whether , and if so , how , the cell actively exerts force , and what cytoplas - mic structures support such force intracellu - larly . To overcome such limitations , a variety of microscopic probes have been devel - oped in recent years to visualize cell trac - tions and internal forces ( Figure 3F ) . The limitation , however , is that , unlike DFS , which can control the amount of mechanical stimulation fed to the cell , experiments us - ing microscopic probes are incapable of ob - serving cell mechanosensing of a single wave of mechanical signal , but rather pro - vide a summed result of all mechanosensing events that occurred over the whole cell – substrate interface . Moreover , they cannot dissect the individual steps of mechano - sensing independently , again unlike DFS . The first class of the microscopic probes , traction force microscopy , measures bulk traction forces generated by adherent cells . A cell is seeded onto a ligand - coated sur - face of an elastic substrate , the deformation of which is measured microscopically . The substrate is either an elastic hydrogel con - taining fluorescent fiducial beads ( Plotnikov et al . , 2014 ; Muhamed et al . , 2016 ) or arrays of flexible micro / nanoposts ( Figure 3G ) ( Tan et al . , 2003 ; Fu et al . , 2010 ) . The substrate stiffness in both cases is measurable , so that deconvolution of the fiducial beads’ displacements or deflections of the micro / nanoposts can generate a map of traction force ( Sabass et al . , 2008 ; Jin et al . , 2017 ) . A three - dimensional version of this technique has also been developed by seeding cells within a cubical hydrogel / biopolymer matrix . Fluorescently tagged beads , again , were used as indicators of local deformation ( Legant et al . , 2010 ; Toyjanova et al . , 2014 ; Steinwachs et al . , 2016 ) . In the context of cell mechanosensing , trac - tion force microscopy has been instrumental in understanding focal adhesion - related cell mechanosensing ( Legant et al . , 2010 ) and the adhesion activity of T - cells ( Basu and Huse , 2016 ) . Working with MTC in parallel , traction force microscopy has been used to study how force priming on cadherin cooperated with cell rigidity sensing to induce intracellular signaling ( Andresen Eguiluz et al . , 2017 ) . Combining with other live - cell imaging methods , traction force mi - croscopy allows one to concurrently visualize the distribution and dynamics of traction forces and relevant molecular players during cellular processes ( Feghhi et al . , 2016 ) . Furthermore , using the basic setup of traction force microscopy , a technique called monolayer stress microscopy has been developed , in which a cluster or mono - layer of cells instead of a single cell is seeded . The tension on the junction of adjacent cells and the internal pressure of the cells are calculated using Newton’s laws , given that force balance is achieved on each individual cell ( Trepat and Fredberg , 2011 ) . This technique is capable of capturing the mechanical interaction between the cells ; however , it cannot provide accurate absolute values for the force parameters , because the mechanical properties of cells are still unknown in such settings ( Roca - Cusachs et al . , 2017 ) . ( Andresen Eguiluz et al . , 2017 ) . It is a high - throughput method , as more than one bead is often placed on the surface of a cell , and the responses of many cells are measured spontaneously . This method often involves the engagement of multiple receptors to the bead surface ligands , because a single receptor – ligand bond cannot bear a torque about long axis of the bond . Yet , from the perspective of each single bond , the load still takes the form of mechanical force . A direct readout of an MTC experiment is the rotational angle of the bead in response to the applied torque . Apparent cell stiffness can be calculated as the ratio of the twisting torque to the rotational angle of the bead . MTC experiments generated the first evidence of integrin - mediated mechanosensing by observing stiffening of the cell body in response to a torque ( Wang et al . , 1993 ) . Moreover , when MTC was combined with fluorescence microscopy ( Zhang et al . , 2017 ) , various cell signaling events following the application of torque on cadherin - expressing cells ( le Duc et al . , 2010 ; Barry et al . , 2014 ; Kim et al . , 2015 ; Muhamed et al . , 2016 ) and up - regula - tion of dihydrofolate reductase transcription induced by force - regu - lated integrin ligation ( Tajik et al . , 2016 ) were observed . Microscopic probes for cell traction and internal force Mechanosensing includes two aspects : the cell senses mechanical forces exerted upon it and the cell actively reaches out to extract mechanical information embedded in its environment ( e . g . , stiff - ness , texture , and microtopology ) . The latter is important , because probing the mechanical properties of the surroundings can influ - ence a cell’s behavior , for example , leading cancer cells to become metastatic and mesenchymal stem cells to differentiate into other FIGURE 4 : Identification and characterization of GPIb mechanosensing mechanism . ( A , B ) Schematics of GPIb on the platelet membrane , highlighting the folded ( − ) and unfolded ( + ) LRRD and MSD . Ligand binding domain for VWF - A1 and other regions are indicated . ( C – F ) Illustrative BFP force traces showing zoom - in views of unfolding signatures in both ramping and clamping phases . ( G , H ) Illustrative analysis of GPIb - mediated single - platelet Ca 2 + flux . Top , pseudo - colored images of intracellular Ca 2 + in platelets in time sequences . Bottom , time courses of normalized intracellular Ca 2 + intensity of the α ( G ) and β ( H ) types . Volume 28 November 7 , 2017 Receptor - mediated cell mechanosensing | 3141 current force ranges of these probes cannot provide a “one - size - fits - all” solution to all receptor types , the iteration of new probe designs continues to push boundaries on the capabilities of these probes . Currently , single - molecule imaging of the probes has not been at - tained due to limitations in signal detection . Nevertheless , single molecule – level sensitivity and receptor force monitoring using cur - rent probe designs may become a reality in the near future as better imaging methods continue to mature . PLATELET MECHANOSENSING VIA SINGLE GPIB Next , we will use three systems to illustrate the concepts of receptor - mediated cell mechanosensing outlined earlier . The first example to be looked at in this section is platelet mechanosensing via GPIb receptor . Platelets play a central role in hemostasis and thrombosis . Being anuclear cells with simplified signaling machinery and rapid responses to highly variable mechanical environments , platelets rep - resent a natural model for studying mechanosensing . The subunit of GPIb ( GPIb α ) contains an N - terminal LRRD that interacts with the VWF - A1 , a highly glycosylated long stalk region ( macroglycopeptide region , MP ) ( Fox et al . , 1988 ) , a juxtamembrane MSD ( Zhang et al . , 2015 ) , a single - span TMD , and a short cytoplasmic tail ( CT ) ( Figure 4A ) . GPIb α is covalently linked to GPIb β through disulfides , and to - gether they associate tightly with GPIX to form the GPIb – IX complex ( referred as GPIb β from here below ) ( Luo et al . , 2007b ; McEwan et al . , 2011 ) and interact with cytoplasmic adaptor proteins such as 14 - 3 - 3 ζ ( Figure 1B ) . The plasma protein VWF has a limited binding potential for platelet GPIb in circulation due to autoinhibitory mecha - nisms that mask the GPIb α binding site on VWF - A1 by the adjacent D ′ D3 domain ( Ulrichts et al . , 2006 ) , the N - terminal flanking region of the A1 domain ( residues 1238 – 1260 ) ( Auton et al . , 2012 ; Ju et al . , 2013 ; Deng et al . , 2017 ) , and the A2 domain ( Martin et al . , 2007 ; Aponte - Santamaria et al . , 2015 ) . Once VWF is immobilized onto sub - endothelial collagen and subject to flow , hemodynamic drag forces stretch the macromolecule to adopt an elongated conformation , which facilitates the engagement of A1 to GPIb α ( Barg et al . , 2007 ; Schneider et al . , 2007 ) . Thus , VWF is mechanosensitive and responds to force by unfolding and exposing its A1 domain ( VWF activation ) . Upon binding of GPIb α to immobilized VWF in the presence of shear , intraplatelet Ca 2 + is rapidly triggered to activate integrin α IIb β 3 . Thus , GPIb - mediated mechanosensing is the first step of the platelet adhesion and signaling cascade for which GPIb has long been indi - cated to be the initiating mechanoreceptor ( Mazzucato et al . , 2002 ; Nesbitt et al . , 2002 ) , and VWF - A1 is the mechanopresenter in this hemostatic process . VWF – GPIb α binding kinetics Platelet adhesion to the vascular surface usually occurs in a mechan - ically stressful environment of blood circulation . Upon vascular injury , VWF in plasma is immobilized onto the subendothelium . It becomes a ligand for mechanopresentation , because it presents the binding motif to GPIb α , the mechanoreceptor , on embarking plate - lets under shear flow . The rapid VWF – GPIb α association enables the capture of fast - flowing platelets , and rapid bond dissociation allows platelets to translocate ( Doggett et al . , 2002 , 2003 ; Kumar et al . , 2003 ; Yago et al . , 2008 ; Coburn et al . , 2011 ) . In blood flow , physical transport—convection and diffusion—drives blood cells to collide with the vascular surface , bringing interacting receptors and ligands into close proximity ( Yago et al . , 2007 ) . The three distinct steps of the transport mechanism have been demonstrated to regu - late the VWF – GPIb α association : tethering of platelet to the vascu - lar surface , Brownian motion of the platelet , and rotational diffusion of the interacting molecules ( Ju et al . , 2015c ) . The second class of microscopic force probes inserts a polymer ( e . g . , a double - stranded DNA or a DNA hairpin ) between the ligand and the substrate anchor , which extends when the tension applied via engaged cell receptors exceeds a threshold . Two types of DNA - based force probes have been developed , one to limit and the other to report tension above a designed threshold on a ligand : 1 ) tension gauge tethers ( TGTs ) , for which the idea is to tether ligands to a sub - strate with a double - stranded DNA that has a defined tension toler - ance for rupture ( Wang and Ha , 2013 ; Luca et al . , 2017 ) ( Figure 3H ) . When force generated by the cell and applied through the recep - tor – ligand bonds exceeds the tolerance force , the TGT irreversibly ruptures and reduces the availability of the tethered ligands , thereby inhibiting force - dependent cellular functions such as spreading , mi - gration , or signaling . By observing whether such functions are inhib - ited in cells seeded on ligands tagged to TGTs with a range of toler - ance forces ( from 12 to 56 pN ) , one can define the force required by such functions . 2 ) Molecular tension - based fluorescence microscopy probes , in which a DNA hairpin is used that unfolds under a threshold force ( ranging from 4 to 16 pN ) but refolds upon force removal . The two feet of the hairpin are conjugated with a fluorophore – quencher pair that prevents / allows fluorescent signal when the hairpin is folded / unfolded , thereby reporting whether the force exceeds the unfolding threshold ( Blakely et al . , 2014 ; Zhang et al . , 2014 ; Liu et al . , 2016 ) ( Figure 3I ) . Because unfolding is reversible , this design should not affect cell functions , which allows molecular tension - based fluo - rescence microscopy probes to visualize the spatiotemporal distribu - tions of tensions on the receptor – ligand bonds under more physio - logical conditions . The sensitivity of these DNA - based force probes can be enhanced by immobilizing DNA hairpins on gold nanoparti - cles , because the fluorophore will be dual - quenched by both the molecular quencher and gold nanoparticle to yield ∼ 100 - fold higher signal - to - noise ratio ( Liu et al . , 2016 ) . In addition , the immobility of the probes can be overcome by anchoring on supported lipid bilay - ers ( Figure 3J ) ( Ma et al . , 2016 ) , allowing the probes to provide diffus - ible ligands for mechanosensing by cells . Taking advantage of the fluorescence reporting method , DNA - based force probes also afford the possibilities of dual / multicolor imaging of multiple receptor – ligand species to study their interplay in complex systems . The third class of microscopic force probes is similar to DNA - based force probes , only with the DNA strands replaced by elastic polypeptides . It can report the dynamics and distribution of forces not only extracellularly ( Morimatsu et al . , 2013 ) ( Figure 3K ) but also intracellularly when the polypeptides and the reporter ( e . g . , fluores - cence resonance energy transfer [ FRET ] pair or an organic fluoro - phore ) are genetically encoded into an intracellular protein ( Grashoff et al . , 2010 ) ( Figure 3L ) . A well - known example of polypeptide - based force probes is the tension sensor module ( TSMod ) , which consists of an elastic domain flanked by two fluorophores whose fluorescence intensity is most sensitive to force in the regime of 1 – 6 pN . TSMod was originally encoded into vinculin to measure force applied on intracellular vinculin molecules during their recruit - ment to developing focal adhesions ( Grashoff et al . , 2010 ) . It has also been inserted along the cytoplasmic tails of the integrin α L and β 2 subunits to show that migrating cells exert force through the β but not the α subunit ( Figure 3L ) ( Nordenfelt et al . , 2016 ) . Incorpora - tion of these intracellular tension probes into various key players in the cell will allow researchers to monitor tensions inside the cell in response to specific mechanical perturbations , which is especially advantageous for studying mechanotransduction . The various tension - sensing probes have provided researchers with a set of tools to measure force requirement of cellular behaviors and observe force loading and relaxation on a cell . Although the 3142 | Y . Chen , L . Ju , et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell WT or the mutant VWF . These data suggest a coupling between the unbinding kinetics and the unfolding mechanics . Indeed , BFP ex - periments showed that LRRD unfolding prolonged VWF – GPIb α bond lifetime ( Ju et al . , 2015b , 2016 ) . A simple interpretation for this is a force - induced fit mechanism wherein LRRD unfolding exposes cryptic binding site ( s ) for VWF - A1 , as suggested by MD simulations ( Ju et al . , 2015b ) . In contrast to the membrane - distal LRRD , the juxtamembrane MSD is separated from the VWF binding site by the > 30 - nm MP re - gion . The highly glycosylated MP region is thought to be poorly structured and not known to propagate conformational changes al - losterically ( Ju et al . , 2016 ) . However , it can transmit tensile force from the LRRD to MSD . Thus , the simplest explanation for the cou - pling between VWF unbinding kinetics and MSD unfolding kinetics is that unfolding of MSD requires sustained force and cannot occur after force removal by VWF unbinding . Indeed , a mathematical model based on this idea predicts the MSD unfolding frequencies very well ( Ju et al . , 2016 ) . Importantly , the coupling between ligand binding kinetics and the domain unfolding mechanics generates cooperativity between LRRD and MSD unfolding , such that LRRD unfolding greatly in - creases the probability of MSD unfolding . This cooperativity occurs only when GPIb α is pulled by WT VWF but not by type 2B VWD mutant VWF , and reaches maximum at 25 pN , where the WT VWF – GPIb α bond lifetime is the longest ( Ju et al . , 2016 ) . MSD unfolding and GPIb mechanotransduction Recent work has demonstrated that unfolding of MSD results in platelet intracellular signaling ( Deng et al . , 2016 ; Ju et al . , 2016 ) . The R . Li and X . Zhang groups have combined protein engineering and structural analysis with force ramp DFS via optical tweezers to identify the MSD ( Zhang et al . , 2015 ) and its Trigger sequence ( Deng et al . , 2016 ) . Binding of VWF under physiological shear induced MSD unfolding and intracellular signaling in the platelet . Further - more , mutations that unfolded the MSD and the Trigger sequence therein induced calcium fluxes , filopodia formation , and P - selectin expression in the absence of ligand binding ( Deng et al . , 2016 ) . At the level of single molecular interactions , the role of MSD unfolding in GPIb - mediated mechanosensing has been demon - strated using a fluorescence BFP ( fBFP ) , which enables real - time single - molecule , single - cell correlative analyses of ligand binding kinetics , receptor domain unfolding , and intraplatelet calcium imag - ing ( Ju et al . , 2016 ) . Single - platelet calcium imaging has revealed two types of intracellular Ca 2 + fluxes induced in platelets interro - gated by a VWF - coated probe that forms infrequent , sequential , and intermittent single bonds with GPIb α ( Figure 4 , G and H ) : 1 ) α type , which features an initial latent phase followed by a high spike with a quick decay ( Figure 4G ) ; and 2 ) β type , which features fluctu - ating signals around the baseline or gradually increasing signals to an intermediate level followed by a gradual decay to baseline ( Figure 4H ) ( Ju et al . , 2016 ) . In - depth time - lapse correlative analyses have revealed that MSD unfolding is required to trigger α - type Ca 2 + . Furthermore , the GPIb example meets the criterion for recep - tor - mediated cell mechanosensing , that differential information embedded in the force waveform received by the receptor is trans - duced into distinct biochemical signals . Indeed , it was found that it is the durable force at an optimal level , not the transient force , that triggers maximum calcium . This provides a mechanistic explanation for the bleeding phenotype of VWD patients . The WT VWF – GPIb α catch bond enables sustained binding under high forces to unfold MSD and trigger robust Ca 2 + for platelet activation . The conversion of the VWF – GPIb α catch bond to a slip bond in type 2B VWD Moreover , flow shear results in force on VWF – GPIb α bonds to modulate their dissociation kinetics , eliciting catch bond to prolong bond lifetime at forces < 22 pN ( Yago et al . , 2008 ; Ju et al . , 2013 ) . At forces > 22 pN , VWF – GPIb α interaction displays the ordinary slip bond behavior . Such force - dependent kinetics governs the counter - intuitive flow enhancement of platelet adhesion on VWF ( Savage et al . , 1996 ; Zhu et al . , 2008a ) , which is crucial to the recruitment of platelets to sites of injury in the arterioles . On the other hand , VWF - A1 mutations exhibiting the phenotype of type 2B VWD form slip - only bonds with GPIb α and eliminate flow - enhanced platelet adhesion ( Yago et al . , 2008 ; Ju et al . , 2013 ) . Furthermore , force - de - pendent activation of VWF is also affected by its interaction with collagen upon immobilization at sites of vascular injury . DFS and two - dimensional affinity measurements suggest relative contribu - tions of distinct VWF domains , such that the initial VWF capture is mediated by collagen interaction with the A3 domain while the sub - sequent VWF activation is mediated by interaction with the A1 domain ( Ju et al . , 2015a ) . Given that VWF represents an excellent example of a mechanopresenter ( Figure 1B ) , the relative contribu - tions of its distinct domains ( and their synergy ) to mechanopresenta - tion remain as an interesting topic for future studies . Taken together , the flow / force - enhanced platelet adhesion medi - ated by VWF – GPIb α involves at least three mechanisms that directly affect the binding kinetics : 1 ) relief of the VWF autoinhibitory mecha - nism involving interdomain associations within the A1A2A3 trido - main and between A1 and D ′ D3 to expose the GPIb α binding site ; 2 ) enhancement of VWF – GPIb α association by transport ; 3 ) enhancement of A1 interaction with GPIb α by the catch bond . As discussed in the section that demonstrates Platelet mechanosensing via single GPIb , the force - dependent kinetic properties of VWF – GPIb α interaction have a significant impact on platelet mechano - sensing via GPIb α , not only in their effect on the duration of the force application , but also in both mechanotransmission and mechanotransduction . Force - induced GPIb α domain unfolding mechanics Two types of mechanical events have been observed when the GPIb α molecule is pulled by force , namely , unfolding of the LRRD and MSD ( Ju et al . , 2015b ; Zhang et al . , 2015 ) . The former was iden - tified using combined molecular dynamics ( MD ) simulations and BFP experiments ( Ju et al . , 2015b , 2016 ) . The latter was identified by optical tweezers experiments and mutagenesis studies ( Zhang et al . , 2015 ) . Pulling GPIb α on the platelet surface , both types of unfolding events are possible , but the two can be distinguished by their different unfolding lengths and by their differential susceptibili - ties to varying force waveforms . Unfolding of LRRD and MSD gener - ates lengths of around 36 and 20 nm , respectively . Ramped force can unfold both LRRD and MSD ( Figure 4 , C and D ) , whereas clamped force can only unfold MSD ( Figure 4 , E and F ) . Unfolding of the juxtamembrane MSD following pulling on the GPIb α headpiece indicates the propagation of force along the GPIb α MP ( macrogly - copeptide ) stalk , which defines its role of mechanotransmission . Coupling between unbinding kinetics and the unfolding mechanics Interestingly , the occurrence frequency of MSD unfolding was found to depend on the level of clamped force in the same manner as does the VWF – GPIb α bond lifetime . This is true for both cases of the WT VWF that forms a catch - slip bond with GPIb α and the type 2B VWD mutant VWF that forms a slip - only bond ( Ju et al . , 2016 ) , despite the fact that MSD unfolding rate is accelerated by force , that is , behaving as a slip bond regardless of whether GPIb α is pulled by Volume 28 November 7 , 2017 Receptor - mediated cell mechanosensing | 3143 clear how TCR – pMHC interaction gives the sensitivity and specific - ity for T - cells to recognize rare pathogenic antigens and discriminate them from abundant self - peptides . Nor is it clear how the TCR is triggered , that is , how information embedded in the pMHC is sensed by the TCR at the ligand binding site , transmitted across the membrane , and transduced into signaling events in terms of phos - phorylation of CD3 ITAMs ( van der Merwe and Dushek , 2011 ; Zhu et al . , 2013a ; Malissen and Bongrand , 2015 ) . Unlike GPIb , whose functions in hemostasis include providing adhesion force , hence giving force an ample opportunity to carry mechanical signals , TCR - mediated mechanosensing is a relatively new idea . In the next sec - tion , we compare features of TCR - mediated mechanosensing with those described earlier for GPIb - mediated mechanosensing . We suggest that viewing the TCR signaling process through the lens of the four - step model for receptor - mediated cell mechanosensing helps delineate key properties of T - cell antigen recognition . TCR - mediated mechanosensing Increasing evidence has demonstrated that the TCR can mediate T - cell mechanosensing . T - cells can sense the rigidity of anti - CD3 antibody – coated substrate at least in part by TCR signaling ( Judo - kusumo et al . , 2012 ; O’Connor et al . , 2012 ) . AFM measurements show that T - cells develop adhesion forces with pMHC - presenting APCs in a manner that correlates with the peptide’s potency to in - duce T - cell calcium and interleukin - 2 secretion ( Lim et al . , 2011 ) . Measurements by traction force microscopy ( Hui et al . , 2015 ) and micro / nanoposts ( Figure 3G ) ( Bashour et al . , 2014a , b ) revealed that cytoskeletal forces are generated and exerted by T - cells during acti - vation through TCR ( Basu and Huse , 2016 ) . As more direct evidence , several groups have observed intracellular calcium induction by ex - erting force through the TCR or CD3 chains , both tangential ( Kim et al . , 2009 ; Li et al . , 2010 ; Feng et al . , 2017 ) and normal ( Li et al . , 2010 ; Liu et al . , 2014a ; Pryshchep et al . , 2014 ; Feng et al . , 2017 ) to the cell surface . More recently , oscillatory forces applied to TCR – pMHC bonds was shown to rescue F - actin – dependent T - cell signal - ing , decoupling the actin network from TCR proximal signaling ( Hu and Butte , 2016 ) . All these studies highlighted the importance of force in TCR signal triggering . Although exerting external force to the TCR could induce T - cell signaling , it was not clear how the forces applied were related to endogenous forces experienced by the TCR . The rigidity - responsive mechanosensing and force - generation processes were clearly medi - ated by the TCR , but they occurred on the order of minutes when T - cells usually form an organized immunological synapse of adhe - sion and signaling molecules that convolute the independent mech - anosensing of , and force exerted on , the TCR . These issues were addressed by two recent studies using the DNA hairpin force probe ( Figure 3J ) , demonstrating that T - cells could exert 12 - 19 pN tension on pMHC via TCR and / or CD8 bonding ( Liu et al . , 2016 ; Ma et al . , 2016 ) . This finding also supports the proposal that , even at early time points , the TCR – pMHC bond is likely subject to mechanical forces ( Malissen and Bongrand , 2015 ) . Force - modulated TCR – pMHC kinetics Although most kinetic analyses of TCR – pMHC interactions were con - ducted when ( or assumed that ) no force was exerted on these bonds , several recent studies demonstrated that externally applied forces alter TCR – pMHC dissociation kinetics ( Robert et al . , 2012 ; Liu et al . , 2014a ; Das et al . , 2015 ; Hong et al . , 2015 ) . Similar to VWF – GPIb α interactions , agonist pMHCs form catch - slip bonds with TCR , and like the type 2B VWD mutant VWF , weak agonist / antagonist pMHCs form slip - only bonds with TCR . This peptide - dependent formation of patients ( Yago et al . , 2008 ; Ju et al . , 2013 ) cannot support sustained binding under high forces , and thus fails to trigger adequate mecha - nosensing ( Ju et al . , 2016 ) . Moreover , an interfering peptide that disrupts the interaction of the cytoplasmic adaptor protein 14 - 3 - 3 ζ to GPIb α ( Dai et al . , 2005 ) abolishes the α - type Ca 2 + , implicating the role of 14 - 3 - 3 ζ as a signal - transducing protein for GPIb - mediated mechanosensing ( Ju et al . , 2016 ) . These findings concerning GPIb - mediated mechanosensing can be summarized as follows : 1 . Mechanopresentation ( Figure 1B , step 1 ) : The ligand VWF un - dergoes local and global conformational changes to enhance the GPIb α binding capacity to its A1 domain . 2 . Mechanoreception ( Figure 1B , step 2 ) : The LRRD binds the VWF - A1 and receives the force signal . Force induces LRRD unfolding , which in turn prolongs the duration of force application . 3 . Mechanotransmission ( Figure 1B , step 3 ) : Force propagates from the LRRD through the MP stalk ( Figure 4A ) to induce unfolding of the MSD in the juxtamembrane region . The interplay between the VWF – GPIb α bond lifetime and time required to unfold the MSD drives them to follow the same force dependency . The cou - pling between ligand binding and receptor unfolding results in the cooperative unfolding of LRRD and MSD without the need for allosteric changes in the MP . 4 . Mechanotransduction ( Figure 1B , step 4 ) : To convert mechanical cues to biochemical signals requires exposure of the Trigger sequence within the MSD and association of 14 - 3 - 3 ζ to GPIb without inhibition by the interfering peptide . Structurally , GPIb α may represent a class of mechanoreceptors , containing a distal ligand binding domain and a long , repeated se - quence and / or a heavily glycosylated region to connect to the cell membrane . Notch may be another example in this class of recep - tors . Like GPIb α , Notch1 forms a catch - slip bond with ligand Jag - ged1 to prolong interactions in the range of forces required for Notch activation ( Luca et al . , 2017 ) . Pulling generated by endocyto - sis induces unfolding of the juxtamembrane negative regulatory region , resulting in shedding of its extracellular domain ( Stephenson and Avis , 2012 ) and initiating Notch biochemical signaling inside the cell ( Luca et al . , 2015 ) . Although GPIb α bears little resemblance to Notch in sequence , structure , or function , their mechanosensing models are remarkably similar in three key aspects . First , both re - ceptors form catch - slip bonds with their respective ligands to pro - long the duration of mechanoreception . Second , both receptors contain a polypeptide sequence for long - distance mechanotrans - mission . Third , force induces unfolding of a juxtamembrane MSD , converting the mechanical cue into a conformational change . Therefore , it seems reasonable to propose that GPIb α may repre - sent a fundamental and evolutionarily conserved signaling mecha - nism used by cells to sense their mechanical environment . T - CELL MECHANOSENSING VIA TCR Engagement of TCR by pMHC on antigen - presenting cells ( APCs ) to trigger intracellular signaling is central to T - cell development and function . The TCR complex includes the αβ TCR heterodimer nonco - valently associated with CD3 εγ and CD3 εδ heterodimers and a CD3 ζζ homodimer ( Figure 1C ) . The αβ TCR binds pMHC ligand via the membrane distal end , but its very short CT contains no signaling motif . Conversely , the CTs of the CD3 chains contain a total of 10 immunoreceptor tyrosine - based activation motifs ( ITAMs ) . TCR sig - naling has been extensively analyzed experimentally and modeled based on a number of hypothetical mechanisms . Yet it is still not 3144 | Y . Chen , L . Ju , et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell is likely that of mechanotransmission . The mechanoreception and mechanotransmis - sion is naturally coupled , because the lon - ger the application time , the more likely the force would induce structural changes in the TCR – pMHC complex . This coupling also allows the antigen discrimination property of TCR that produces distinctive force - dependent bond lifetimes for differ - ent antigens ( Liu et al . , 2014a ; Das et al . , 2015 ; Hong et al . , 2015 ) to be passed on from the mechanoreception step to the mechanotransmission step . Models of TCR mechanotransduction and the effect of force direction Both force and the change in the TCR – pMHC structure that induces extension propagate along the binding axis , until reaching downstream of the TCR C do - mains , where a conformational change is thought to be responsible for dislodging the CD3 ε and ζ CTs from the inner leaflet of the plasma membrane , to make ITAMs accessi - ble for phosphorylation , resulting in mecha - notransduction ( Figure 5 ) ( DeFord - Watts et al . , 2011 ; Bettini et al . , 2014 ; Dobbins et al . , 2016 ; Li et al . , 2017b ) . This view is supported by a recent find - ing that three different conformational states of CD3 ε cytoplasmic tails exist with various degrees of association with the plasma mem - brane ( Guo et al . , 2017 ) . The authors suggested that changes in these conformations could be triggered by mechanical force gener - ated by TCR – pMHC binding . However , how the extension in the TCR – pMHC complex is related to conformational changes in the TCR - CD3 complex has not been defined . This is partially due to the fact that the structural data of the membrane - embedded TCR - CD3 complex are still not available . The concept of making ITAMs more available for phosphoryla - tion provides a basis for two models of TCR - mediated mechano - transduction . First , a structurally detailed mechanosensor model ( Wang and Reinherz , 2012 ) proposes that lateral force applied via the pMHC generates a torque to rotate the αβ TCR . With the TCR β TMD acting as a fulcrum , the FG loop pushes on the CD3 εγ to cause a piston - like movement downward through the membrane , expos - ing the cytoplasmic ITAMs for phosphorylation ( Figure 5 , right ) . The second model , which also highlights the importance of the TMD ( Lee et al . , 2015 ) , postulates a steady - state divarication of the CD3 ζζ juxtamembrane regions , with the N - terminal CD3 ζζ TMD acting as the pivot point . Upon pMHC engagement , a conformational change occurs , forcing the CD3 ζζ CTs toward each other from the divarica - tion , providing a potential means of transferring mechanical energy into biochemical energy by exposing ITAMs for phosphorylation by kinases ( Lee et al . , 2015 ) . Unlike the GPIb - mediated mechanosens - ing model , in which only the magnitude of force is considered , the above TCR - triggering models consider the direction of force as a key parameter ( Figure 5 ) . Also , unlike the GPIb - mediated mechano - sensing model , in which the mechanoreceptor can only support lin - ear tension , the TCR - triggering models require that the mechanore - ceptor also supports rotational torque . The mechanical changes in the TCR - CD3 complex may depend on the direction of force applied on the TCR – pMHC bond for several reasons . From a structural perspective , the TCR C α and C β catch and slip bonds enables force to amplify antigen discrimination ( Liu et al . , 2014a ; Das et al . , 2015 ; Hong et al . , 2015 ) . Differential prolongation of bond lifetimes for rare agonists over abundant self - peptides can enhance context discrimination , a well - known property of T - cell antigen recognition , to distinguish between appropriate im - mune response and autoimmunity , respectively . The idea follows the TCR kinetic proofreading model , which postulates that completion of a series of reaction steps must occur while the TCR is bound to pMHC ( McKeithan , 1995 ; Rabinowitz et al . , 1996 ) or upon rebinding ( Dushek et al . , 2009 ; Jansson , 2011 ) to achieve T - cell activation . Force - induced mechanical events and TCR mechanotransmission Like GPIb α that can be unfolded by tension applied via engaged VWF , pulling a TCR – pMHC bond can induce structural changes in the molecular complex , yielding an ∼ 10 - nm extension ( Figure 5 , left ) . Interestingly , similar to GPIb α LRRD unfolding that prolongs GPIb α – VWF lifetime , this structural change impacts the TCR – pMHC disso - ciation such that catch bonds are only formed after the extension , suggesting a correlation between the binding kinetics and the struc - ture of the TCR – pMHC complex . This idea has also been supported by other work ( Das et al . , 2016 ; Schamel et al . , 2017 ) . It is believed that the well - structured FG loop that is present in the C β chains of both TCR and pre - TCR contributes to such coupling , because its elimination diminished or abolished the catch bonds for TCR and pre - TCR , respectively , while stabilizing the FG loop greatly enhances those catch bonds ( Das et al . , 2016 ) . Moreover , the correlation be - tween manipulating hydrophobic hot spots and influencing force - driven kinetic readouts such as double catch bonds highlighted the importance of studying TCR triggering under force ( Das et al . , 2016 ) . The extension in the TCR – pMHC complex correlates with the biological activity of the peptide , suggesting a role of such a struc - tural change in TCR - mediated mechanosensing ( Das et al . , 2015 , 2016 ) . Because the location where this structural change occurs is far from cytoplasm signaling motifs , its role in mechanosensing FIGURE 5 : Models of how force may trigger TCR signaling . Middle , schematic of the ligated , unloaded , and untriggered TCR . Soluble pMHC binds to the TCR V domains , while the CTs of the TCR - associated CD3 chains remain buried in the lower leaflet of the cell membrane , preventing ITAM phosphorylation . Left , a force normal to the cell membrane pulls on the TCR , extending the length of the complex by ∼ 10 nm . While the structural region responsible for such conformational change has not been identified , here the FG loop connecting the C β and V β domains is assumed to unfold to result in an extended conformer and in catch - bond formation . Force propagated across the TCR - CD3 connection is assumed to release the CD3 CTs for phosphorylation of the ITAMs . Right , when a force tangential to the cell surface is applied to the ligand binding site of the TCR that also experiences a lateral reaction force from its membrane anchor , a torque is generated to rotate the complex , which is assumed to allow the FG loop to press down on the CD3 ε ectodomain to expose the cytoplasmic ITAMs in a piston - like manner . Volume 28 November 7 , 2017 Receptor - mediated cell mechanosensing | 3145 robust mechanosensing and implicate a memory mechanism involv - ing sequential accumulation of a number of bonds , allowing reconciliation between seemingly conflicting requirements of disen - gagement and signal maintenance within a serial triggering and kinetic proofreading framework . The subsequent progression of the membrane proximal TCR sig - naling process is regulated by the spatiotemporal balance between kinases and phosphatases such as CD45 . Highlighting this balance concept , the kinetic segregation model of TCR signaling postulates that phosphatases with large ectodomains are excluded by the nar - row cell junction brought together by TCR – pMHC binding , tilting the balance to phosphorylation of ITAMs to trigger signaling ( Davis and van der Merwe , 2006 ) . While details of this model require fur - ther elaboration , the concept of force on the TCR – pMHC bond due to the large CD45 ectodomains is at the core of this model and must be considered in future revisions . Exactly what biochemical activity directly follows the above mechanotransduction remains elusive . Nonetheless , “come and stay” ( Stepanek et al . , 2014 ) , “warm - up” ( Malissen and Bongrand , 2015 ) , and “catch - and - release” ( Katz et al . , 2017 ) models have been proposed to address the timing of the bio - chemical initiation . Specifically , they each describe how signaling molecules can nucleate amplification of T - cell signaling from the CD3 ITAM mechanotransduction . From available data , a combination of the cumulative bond life - time model ( Liu et al . , 2014a ) and models for TCR mechanosensing ( van der Merwe and Dushek , 2011 ; Wang and Reinherz , 2012 ; Bettini et al . , 2014 ; Das et al . , 2015 ; Liu et al . , 2016 ) is summarized below : 1 . Mechanopresentation ( Figure 1C , step 1 ) : pMHC as the mecha - nopresenter binds to the TCR , and a force is applied to this bond externally by relative cell – cell motion or spontaneous cell mem - brane motility , or internally by basal actomyosin transport of TCR clusters . Although the source of force can be internal to the T - cell , from the perspective of the TCR , force is modulated and presented by the pMHC for the TCR to sense . 2 . Mechanoreception ( Figure 1C , step 2 ) : The TCR forms a specific bond with the pMHC to support the force , thereby acting as the mechanoreceptor . Force amplifies the information embedded in the pMHC , eliciting catch bonds to strengthen engagement with agonists but slip bonds to weaken engagement with weak ago - nists / antagonists . In this way , the mechanically modulated infor - mation is received in a form readily transmittable across the TCR - CD3 complex . 3 . Mechanotransmission ( Figure 1C , step 3 ) : The catch bond may be further amplified by the FG loop , which may undergo structural changes to stabilize the extended state of the stressed TCR – pMHC complex ( Das et al . , 2015 ) . The observation that peptide potency correlates with mechanical extension of the TCR – pMHC complex suggests that information embedded in the pMHC has been translated into a mechanical variable from the binding site to the site of structural transition under force ( Das et al . , 2016 ) . This mechanical change further propagates to the CD3 chains , resulting in the release of CD3 CTs from the membrane . 4 . Mechanotransduction ( Figure 1C , step 4 ) : Exposure of the CD3 ITAMs permits phosphorylation , which initiates further signal propagation . This is regulated by the balance of kinases and phosphatases and occurs in a cumulative manner . Recently , emerging cancer immunotherapies such as the TCR - based chimeric antigen receptor approach have demonstrated high response rates but lack broad applicability ( Lim and June , 2017 ) . Genetically modifying TCRs of autologous , tumor - infiltrating T - cells domains vary in size and form different angles with their respective V domains , creating a cavity below the β chain ( Kim et al . , 2012 ) . Taken together with the CD3 heterodimers that organize around this asymmetry ( Birnbaum et al . , 2014 ) , force applied to the αβ TCR may be productive only in specific directions . Furthermore , the FG loop , which connects the V β and C β domains , adds to the structural asym - metry and appears to play a functional role , as described earlier . From the ligand perspective , different peptide or antibody docking topologies of TCR have differential capacities to trigger T - cell signal - ing ( Kim et al . , 2009 ; Adams et al . , 2011 ) . When the force direction does not coincide with the line from the point of force application ( which is determined by the ligand docking topology ) to the mem - brane anchor point of the TCR - CD3 complex ( which is determined by its asymmetric structure ) , a moment will be generated . This mo - ment depends on both the magnitude and direction of force and on the lever arm that could be influenced by the length of the TCR – pMHC complex ( which could be extended , as discussed earlier ) ( Kim et al . , 2012 ) . It has therefore been suggested that tangential force , derived from lateral motions , may provide the specific direc - tionality to trigger the TCR ( Kim et al . , 2009 ) . However , it should be noted that , in reality , applying directional force through a micrometer - sized force probe to the cell does not guarantee the same directionality when the force is applied on the nanometer - sized molecule . Applying force tangential to the inter - face between a pMHC - coated bead and the T - cell ( Kim et al . , 2009 ; Feng et al . , 2017 ) may cause the bead to pivot at the bead – cell an - chor point to pull on the TCR – pMHC bond instead of shearing it . Conversely , pulling a bead away from the T - cell ( Liu et al . , 2014a ) could also induce shear if alignment is not perfect . Recently , both normal and tangential forces applied to T - cells through as few as a single antigenic MHC interaction were shown to induce calcium re - lease , although tangential forces tended to improve activation effi - ciency ( Feng et al . , 2017 ) . Additionally , the surface roughness of the T - cell , due to dynamic microvilli , adds another layer of complexity to affect the force direction ( Hivroz and Saitakis , 2016 ) . Anisotropy may play an important role in TCR triggering , but further studies are re - quired to address the influence of force direction . Maintenance and amplification of TCR triggering A sufficiently long TCR – pMHC bond lifetime would sustain the propagation of force waveform and allow conformational changes to reach the tail end of the TCR - CD3 complex . Yet the time to ex - pose CD3 ITAMs is transitively finite . Is the window of opportunity for TCR signaling limited to the single TCR – pMHC bond lifetime ? On the contrary , Liu and colleagues determined that intracellular calcium flux can be triggered if a T - cell accumulates durable TCR – pMHC bonds with a cumulative lifetime surpassing a threshold of 10 s within a 60 - s window in the first 3 min of contact . Cells not meeting this threshold failed to trigger calcium , even if single bonds with relatively long lifetimes were experienced ( Liu et al . , 2014a ) . This work unraveled a connection between mechanoreception and mechanotransduction in the process of TCR - mediated mechano - sensing . Agonist pMHCs that form catch bonds with the TCR meet this requirement and hence can trigger T - cell activation , whereas antagonist pMHCs that form slip bonds with the TCR are defective in activating T - cells , due , at least in part , to the inability to support a durable force at sufficient levels . This may allow the T - cell to distin - guish different ligands and react to the correct one only ( Liu et al . , 2014a ) . Further , upon including CD8 to form the trimolecular com - plex , sustained calcium signaling can even be achieved by force - ramping the complex to bond rupture ( Pryshchep et al . , 2014 ) . These studies de - emphasize the need of single - bond durability in 3146 | Y . Chen , L . Ju , et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell et al . , 2009 ; Elosegui - Artola et al . , 2014 ; Qiu et al . , 2014 ) . As physi - cal linkages for the mechanochemical coupling between the ECM and the intracellular structures ( Li et al . , 2016b ) , integrins have long been known for their role in mediating force transmission from the ECM across the cell membrane ( Volk et al . , 1990 ; Welch et al . , 1990 ) . The discovery that integrins are a mechanoreceptor was made more than two decades ago in an elegant experiment using MTC , show - ing that twisting ligand - bearing beads bound to β 1 integrins caused endothelial cells to stiffen ( Wang et al . , 1993 ) . The integrin family consists of 18 α and 8 β subunits that combine to form 24 αβ het - erodimeric membrane receptors . Each integrin subunit contains an N - terminal ectodomain consisting of a large head with the ligand binding site and a long leg , a single - pass TMD , and a short C - termi - nal CT ( Figure 6A ) . The heads and the upper legs of the αβ het - erodimer form the headpiece that connects with the α and β lower legs at the knees ( Figure 6A ) . In a resting state , integrin adopts a bent conformation with a closed headpiece ( Figure 6 , B and Ei ) . Upon activation , integrins undergo a series of conformational changes : ectodomain extension , αβ separation below the headpiece ( including the ectodomain lower leg , TMD , and CT ) , and hybrid domain swing - out and head - piece opening ( Takagi et al . , 2002 , 2003 ; Xiao et al . , 2004 ; Nishida et al . , 2006 ; Xie et al . , 2010 ) ( Figure 6 , B and E , middle , right ) . The coordinated transitions between these conformations are essential for the cell to regulate integrins’ adhesive and signaling functions ( Lim and June , 2017 ) to target a vast array of antigens on solid tu - mors also appears to be a promising strategy to combat cancer ( Maus and June , 2016 ) . By further vetting the four - step process of TCR mechanosensing , one could more rationally engineer TCRs and chimeric antigen receptors to detect and respond exclusively to tumor antigens and neoantigens . Receptors could be designed to amplify different responses between cancerous and healthy cells with minute differences in the antigen structure and abundance , through distinctive force - regulated binding and mechanosensing ( Hinrichs and Restifo , 2013 ) . To take such a reverse - engineering ap - proach requires further understanding of TCR - mediated mechano - sensing . For example , specific conformational changes under force within the TCR V domains to elicit catch bonds have yet to be identi - fied . Additionally , because conformational changes were found through the FG loop only when the TCR – pMHC complex was under force , it will be instructive to monitor the CD3 CTs under force to study the force transmission beyond the cell membrane . Elucidating these processes will inform how the T - cell can detect and respond to appropriate antigens with such exquisite sensitivity and specificity , key knowledge needed to improve immunotherapies . INTEGRIN - MEDIATED CELL ADHESION AND MECHANOSENSING Integrins mediate many cellular processes , including adhesion , spreading , migration , proliferation , and differentiation ( Roca - Cusachs FIGURE 6 : Integrin structure and signaling models and illustrative BFP signals that detect integrin bending and unbending . ( A ) Integrin structure . Domains of the integrin and the ranges of integrin head , upper leg , headpiece , and tailpiece ( or lower leg ) are annotated . α I domain that exists only in α I - bearing integrins is distinguished by a lighter color and dashed lines . ( B ) A model of integrin inside - out signaling mediated by RAP1 and RIAM . ( C , D ) Illustrative BFP force vs . time traces depicting respective integrin unbending ( C ) and bending ( D ) conformational change events , denoted by red arrows . The conformations of the integrin are inserted accordingly , with red and blue indicating the extended and bent conformers of the ectodomain , respectively . Widths of the shaded regions reflect the thermal fluctuation amplitude of each trace in the clamping phase . ( E ) Postulated model of integrin - mediated mechanosensing without prior talin engagement . External force pulls on the i ) bent integrin headpiece and allosterically induces ii ) ectodomain extension , iii ) hybrid domain swing - out , and αβ - subunit separation below the headpiece due to an endogenous lateral force pulling on the β CT . The αβ separation at the CT presumably recruits intracellular molecules and initiates downstream signaling . The ligand , integrin domains , and talin are colored based on their respective roles in the four - step mechanosensing model ( cf . Figure 1 ) . Proposed regulatory loops 1 ( between mechanoreception and mechanotransmission ) and 2 ( between mechanotransmission and mechanotransduction ) are denoted . Volume 28 November 7 , 2017 Receptor - mediated cell mechanosensing | 3147 tion to the β - propeller domain but is provided by the binding of an intrinsic ligand at the end of the α 7 helix to the β I domain MIDAS , which also forms an interdomain catch bond ( Chen et al . , 2010 ) . Us - ing this “dual - catch” mechanism , the suppression of α M β 2 – ICAM - 1 catch bonds by an α M β 2 variant R77H ( Rosetti et al . , 2015 ) , which is associated with systemic lupus erythematosus ( SLE ) ( Nath et al . , 2008 ; Han et al . , 2009 ) , can be well explained . The difficulty here is that R77H occurs in the β - propeller domain away from the α I do - main MIDAS , which cannot directly alter the α I ligand binding epit - ope . However , mechanical analysis suggests that R77H loosens the connection of α I to the β - propeller domain , thereby shifting a greater portion of the ligand - transmitted force to the α I – β I interdo - main bond . Consequently , before the total force on the external bond ( between the ligand and the α I domain MIDAS ) reaches a sufficient level to pull the α I domain upward , the component force on the internal bond ( between the α I domain α 7 helix and the β I domain MIDAS ) already exceeds the optimal level . The resulting short - lived slippery internal bond cannot effectively pull down the α 7 helix to induce conformational changes in the α I domain MIDAS , thereby suppressing its ability to form a catch bond with the exter - nal ligand . This example underscores the pathophysiological rele - vance of integrin catch bonds . Conversely , cellular signaling can change a receptor’s ligand binding behavior under force . For ex - ample , the α 4 β 1 – VCAM - 1 catch bond is suppressed by inside - out signaling upon binding of sema3E to plexinD1 ( Choi et al . , 2014 ) . This in turn regulates the signaling outcomes of mechanosensing . Force is inevitably involved in many cases of integrin signaling , owing to the immobilization of the ligand and cytoskeletal linkage of the integrin . Many studies have demonstrated that integrin signal transduction exhibits force sensitivity , recognizing integrins’ role as a mechanoreceptor ( Lefort and Ley , 2012 ; Case and Waterman , 2015 ) . Mutations that reduce integrin binding , for example , those in the α 1 / α 1 ′ - helix of the α IIb β 3 ligand binding β I domain and adjacent to the MIDAS ( ADMIDAS ) region , cause defects in outside - in signaling in transfected cells ( Raborn et al . , 2011 ; Zhang et al . , 2013a ) . Con - versely , T188I , a heterozygous ligand binding – increasing mutation in the β 1 integrin headpiece , promotes cell spreading ( Evans et al . , 2003 ) . Furthermore , like TCR and GPIb , the catch - bond property of an integrin mediates its mechanoreception ( Janostiak et al . , 2014 ; Qiu et al . , 2014 ; Sun et al . , 2016 ) . For example , the endothelial sur - face molecule Thy - 1 ( CD90 ) forms a slip bond with integrin α 5 β 1 or syndecan - 4 when only one receptor is presented . Thy - 1 forms two additive slip bonds at low forces with the two receptors when both are present . However , higher forces induce cooperative binding of both receptors to Thy - 1 , forming a trimolecular catch bond ( Fiore et al . , 2014 ) . This “dynamic catch” correlates with inhibition of intra - cellular tension – and substrate rigidity – dependent FAK activity , indi - cating its relevance to mechanosensing and , with alterations in tumor cell metastasis , suggesting its pathophysiological relevance ( Fiore et al . , 2014 ) . Force - induced integrin conformational changes and integrin mechanotransmission Unlike GPIb and TCR , whose extended or unfolded conformations are induced by force , integrins can exist in three distinct global con - formations in the absence of external force : bent with a closed head - piece ( Figure 6Ei ) , extended with a closed headpiece ( Figure 6Eii ) , and extended with an open headpiece ( Figure 6Eiii ) ( Springer and Dustin , 2012 ) . The transitions between these stable conformations may occur spontaneously , giving rise to the coexistence of multiple conformers in equilibrium ( Xiao et al . , 2004 ; Zhu et al . , 2008b ; Ye et al . , 2010 ) . From a mechanical standpoint , the multidomain dynamically ( Takagi et al . , 2002 ; Nishida et al . , 2006 ; Campbell and Humphries , 2011 ; Springer and Dustin , 2012 ; Cheng et al . , 2013 ; Zhu et al . , 2013b ; Nordenfelt et al . , 2016 ; Su et al . , 2016 ) . Such mechanical changes are accompanied by biochemical changes , making integrins a key component of a cell’s mechanosensing ma - chinery . Especially , the separated integrin β CT can associate with talin , kindlin , and several other adaptors to transduce mechanical / biochemical signals ( Arnaout et al . , 2005 ; Luo and Springer , 2006 ) . In inside - out signaling , cytoplasmic signals are generated from other cell receptors and relayed by an integrin from the β CT to the headpiece for high - affinity ligand binding . Moreover , it is generally assumed that integrin conformational changes are allosteric , hence also operating reversely to achieve outside - in signaling , in which extracellular ligand binding acts as a signal to propagate from the integrin headpiece to the β CT to induce intracellular signaling . Al - though outside - in signaling of integrins has long been recognized , the mechanical aspects of this process often are not sufficiently em - phasized . We suggest that integrin outside - in signaling in many cases is a mechanosensing process and hence can be analyzed by our four - step model . Mechanopresentation by the ECM Besides blood flow , ( sub ) endothelium , and adjacent adherent cells , the ECM represents a major mechanical environment sensed by in - tegrins for many cell types . The mechanical properties of the ECM , for example , stiffness , can directly affect cell functions ( Engler et al . , 2006 ; Fu et al . , 2010 ) . Interestingly , in addition to passively receiving mechanical cues from the ECM , cells can also actively modify the ECM as a response of mechanosensing . For example , certain tissues exhibit a “stress - relaxation” property , such that stretching decreases its stiffness ( Chaudhuri et al . , 2016 ) ; conversely , some biological gels and fibrin networks display a “strain - stiffening” property , such that force - induced deformation increases their stiffness ( Storm et al . , 2005 ; Jansen et al . , 2013 ) . Such properties add a dynamic con - founding factor into the ECM mechanopresentation in the integrin - mediated cell mechanosensing ( Jansen et al . , 2017 ) . In - depth study of cell mechanosensing in this context requires techniques that can adjust the system stiffness in real - time . An example of this is the feedback loop added to an AFM to tune the cantilever stiffness “felt” by the cell in real - time ( Lam et al . , 2011 ) . Force - modulated integrin binding kinetics and mechanoreception The integrin binding kinetics is modulated by force in many biologi - cal processes , for example , in leukocyte inflammatory response and in platelet thrombus formation , wherein hemodynamic forces acting on rolling or adherent cells are balanced by adhesive forces on inte - grin – ligand bonds . Like GPIb and TCR , several integrins have been shown to form catch - slip bonds with their ligands , allowing force to prolong bond lifetimes ( Chen and Zhu , 2013 ) . These include α 5 β 1 – fibronectin ( Kong et al . , 2009 ) , α L β 2 – ICAM - 1 ( intercellular adhesion molecule 1 ) ( Chen et al . , 2010 ) , α 4 β 1 – VCAM - 1 ( vascular adhesion molecule 1 ) ( Choi et al . , 2014 ) , α M β 2 – ICAM - 1 ( Rosetti et al . , 2015 ) , and α V β 3 – fibronectin ( Chen et al . , 2016 ; Elosegui - Artola et al . , 2016 ) interactions . Structural analyses ( Kallen et al . , 1999 ; Luo et al . , 2007a ) and molecular dynamics simulations ( Jin et al . , 2004 ; Xiang et al . , 2011 ) on α I - bearing integrins suggest that pulling on the metal ion – dependent adhesion site ( MIDAS ) of the α I domain causes its anchored α 7 helix to shift downward like a piston relative to the upward - moving α I domain , thereby allosterically inducing the α I domain to bind ligand more stably ( Chen et al . , 2010 ) . Here , the anchor of the α I domain is not at the point of its C - terminal inser - 3148 | Y . Chen , L . Ju , et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell high - affinity state ( Li et al . , 2017a ) . Promoting ectodomain exten - sion , TMD and CT separation and hybrid - domain swing - out by point mutation or functional activating agents greatly enhances integrin reactivity ( Vanhoorelbeke et al . , 2009 ; Rosetti et al . , 2015 ; Su et al . , 2016 ) . Although supported by many studies , not all aspects of this model have been validated , leaving room for alternative models . For example , a recent study revealed a bent but high - affin - ity conformation in the β 2 integrins , implying that ectodomain extension is not necessarily required for the integrin activation ( Fan et al . , 2016 ) . Similar to the force - induced GPIb binding reinforcement by LRRD unfolding ( Figure 4B ) ( Ju et al . , 2015b ) , force - induced exten - sion of α L β 2 immediately prolongs its binding lifetime ( Chen et al . , 2012 ) . In addition , cyclic forces applied to integrin α 5 β 1 – fibronectin and α L β 2 – ICAM - 1 bonds substantially reinforce their lifetimes ( Kong et al . , 2013 ) , suggesting a highly localized force - induced dynamic affinity – conformation interplay within the molecule . Considering the coupling between integrin conformation and affinity , integrin mech - anoreception ( Figure 1D , step 2 ) and mechanotransmission ( Figure 1D , step 3 ) may be able to provide feedback to each other in a back - and - forth “regulatory loop” ( Figure 6Eii , regulatory loop 1 ) , provid - ing force a role in the integrin affinity maturation process . Signal transmission across the membrane and downstream mechanotransduction Downstream of integrins and the linked cytoskeletal proteins , mech - anotransduction involves the recruitment and phosphorylation of kinases . For example , FAK is phosphorylated by integrin signaling ( Harburger and Calderwood , 2009 ) and regulates Rho - family GTPase activation , which mediates cell migration ( Mitra et al . , 2005 ) . As an - other example , following integrin signaling , the Src - family protein tyrosine kinases contribute to the formation of integrin - mediated firm adhesion ( Ginsberg et al . , 2005 ; Giannone and Sheetz , 2006 ; Jansen et al . , 2017 ) . Previously , it was believed that induction of these signals requires integrins to cluster , and mechanotransduction is via rearrangement of a cytoskeletal structure like actin ( de ) polym - erization and accumulation of cytoskeletal proteins ( Miyamoto et al . , 1995 ; Yamada and Miyamoto , 1995 ) . Yet more recent work has sug - gested that single integrins may be capable of transducing mechani - cal signals as well ( Harburger and Calderwood , 2009 ; Lefort et al . , 2009 ; Hu and Luo , 2015 ) . Below we provide three models of single integrin - mediated mechanotransduction that rely on different com - ponents of the molecular network connected to integrin . These models are not mutually exclusive ; rather , they may respectively modulate different stages / scenarios of cell functioning . 1 . The αβ - subunit separation below the headpiece is the most likely mechanical event that allows a single integrin to transmit signal across the membrane ( Kim et al . , 2003 ) . As mentioned ear - lier , during mechanotransmission , the extension of integrin is stabilized by a tensile force pulling on the headpiece . Using molecular dynamic simulations on an integrin ectodomain struc - ture , Zhu and colleagues found that a combination of a tensile force normal to the cell membrane and a lateral force on the lower β leg applied on an extended integrin swings out the hy - brid domain and separates the lower legs ( Zhu et al . , 2008b ) . Integrin β CT is engaged to a number of adaptor proteins , includ - ing talin , kindlin , filamin , and migfilin , among others ( Figure 6B ) , which provide constraints to its lateral diffusion ( Zhang et al . , 2004 ; Roca - Cusachs et al . , 2012 ) . Therefore , the above evidence from Zhu et al . ( 2008b ) suggests that pulling on the headpiece of an extended integrin that is not well aligned with its cytoplasmic quaternary structure of integrins resembles a protein machine , with structural parts for force transmission and moving parts for confor - mational motion connected by ratchets , ropes , and hinges . It is therefore intuitive that the integrin conformation would modulate the transmission of force from the ligand binding site across the main ectodomain down to the cytoplasmic anchor or vice versa . An example is the SLE - associated α M β 2 variant discussed earlier , where the single - residue replacement R77H is suggested to tilt the partition of forces between the N - and C - termini of the α I domain that respectively transmit to the β - propeller and β I domains ( Rosetti et al . , 2015 ) . Conversely , force can directly induce integrin conformational changes . MD simulations have observed that force can activate the headpiece in silico ( Puklin - Faucher and Vogel , 2009 ) , swing out the hybrid domain ( Zhu et al . , 2008b ) , separate the αβ tailpieces ( Zhu et al . , 2008b ) , and extend the ectodomain ( Chen et al . , 2011 ) . Real - time observations of force - regulated dynamic bending ( Figure 6C ) and unbending ( Figure 6D ) of single integrin α L β 2 ( Chen et al . , 2012 ) and α V β 3 ( Chen et al . , 2016 ) using the BFP show that force - induced integrin unbending tilts the conformational equilibrium to favor the extended over the bent conformation . Specifically , tensile force increases the rate ( how soon it occurs ) and speed ( how fast it pro - ceeds ) , and therefore the frequency , of unbending , and at the same time , decreases the corresponding parameters of bending in a mag - nitude - dependent manner ( Chen et al . , 2012 , 2016 ) . Thus , integrins are mechanosensitive via a hinge - motion mechanism ( Figure 2C ) to allow force to facilitate their extension ( unbending ) . The extension in turn facilitates swing - out of the hybrid domain by freeing it from close contact with the tailpiece ( Zhu et al . , 2008b ) . Thus , along with force , conformational changes can also propagate in the integrin in a relayed manner . The force - modulated propagation of conforma - tional changes transmits mechanical signals along the molecule , which is an important part of the integrin mechanotransmission step . The cytoplasmic linkage between integrins and actin is thought to be critical to stabilizing integrins in the extended - open conforma - tion ( Zhu et al . , 2008b ) . Recent structural analyses and MD simula - tions suggest a “cytoskeletal force model , ” in which lateral pulling on the β CT via talin / kindlin bound to actin retrograde flow could pull the α and β CTs and tailpieces apart to stabilize the extended - open conformation for high - affinity ligand binding . Using integrin β CT - TSMod fusion ( Figure 3L ) constructs in cell - spreading experiments ( Nordenfelt et al . , 2016 ) , it has been found that an activated integrin requires the balance between internal forces exerted by retrograde actin flow and external forces applied through engaged ligands by flow - induced shear or substrate stretch . By using the DNA - based force probes , the external force on integrin has been estimated to range from 4 – 13 pN at the initial spreading ( Zhang et al . , 2014 ) and ∼ 40 pN at a stable adhesion ( Wang and Ha , 2013 ) . With the TSMod method , the internal force transmitted across the integrin has been estimated as 2 . 5 pN in focal adhesion ( Grashoff et al . , 2010 ) . Mechanical coupling of integrin mechanoreception and mechanotransmission Integrin conformation and affinity are closely coupled : a bent integ - rin has a low affinity for ligand . Upon the activation , the hybrid do - main swings out to open the headpiece for high - affinity ligand bind - ing . For α I - absence integrins , this requires the headpiece to transition through six intermediate conformations , starting from a closed to a fully open β I ( Zhu et al . , 2013b ) . The opening of the headpiece is allosterically associated with the ectodomain exten - sion ( Liu et al . , 2015b ) . Conversely , locking the integrin in the bent or extended - closed conformation prevents the emergence of the Volume 28 November 7 , 2017 Receptor - mediated cell mechanosensing | 3149 3 . Mechanotransmission : Force propagates along the integrin , un - bends integrin through a “hinge” mechanism ( Figure 6Eii ) , and swings out the hybrid domain . In certain scenarios , force directly propagates onto talin ( Figure 1D , step 3 ) or other cytoplasmic molecules , and the integrin unbending and hybrid domain swing - out may not be necessary . 4 . Mechanotransduction : Propagation of the conformational changes leads to the αβ separation at the lower leg , TMD , and finally CT to expose cytoplasmic sequences to recruit signaling molecules ( Figure 6Eiii ) . Force propagated through the β CT un - folds MSDs in talin rod and exposes multiple cryptic vinculin binding sites . The recruited vinculin then recruits more F - actin and strengthens the talin – actin linkage ( Figure 1D , step 4 ) . In ad - dition , mechanotransduction may also be accomplished via con - formational changes of several other cytoplasmic proteins with varied functions . OTHER CELL MECHANOSENSING MODELS Besides the aforementioned examples , other molecular systems have been shown to be used by cells to sense their mechanical en - vironment . These systems do not necessarily follow the proposed four - step model . However , certain steps are shared , despite the variations among different biological systems and distinctive func - tions to be served . Especially , the step of mechanotransduction has to be included in any mechanosensing mechanism , because it is the step of converting mechanical signals to biochemical signals . Here , we will briefly discuss other cell mechanosensing models that in - clude some , but not all , of the four steps of receptor - mediated cell mechanosensing . In the sound reception of an auditory system , the mechanical signal adopts the form of a soundwave , which is a pure physical signal instead of a mechanical – biological combination . Thus , the mechanopresentation step is not required and is replaced by sound generation . The mechanoreception step , on the other hand , is re - quired , but exists in another form—instead of force - bearing binding to a ligand , the soundwave exerts mechanical load on the hair bun - dles to cause vibration and deflection . Following that is the mecha - notransmission step , wherein the force borne in the deflecting hair bundles propagates across connecting molecules to reach the an - chorage of the cell surface ion channels . Force then controls the opening and closing of the mechanically gated ion channels to con - vert to the first chemical signal , resulting in mechanotransduction with the “clamp movement” mechanism ( Figure 2B ) ( Gillespie and Walker , 2001 ; Gillespie and Muller , 2009 ) . Adopting a similar mech - anism , mechanosensing has also been observed in bristle - based haptic systems of animals , for example , flies ( Gillespie and Walker , 2001 ) . Primary cilia that extend from most mammalian cell types have been proposed to perform cell mechanosensing of pure physi - cal signals . Although the underlying mechanotransduction mecha - nism of this process is still under debate ( Delling et al . , 2016 ) , its mechaotransmission should also be achieved by the force - induced deflection of the primary cilium ( Hoey et al . , 2012 ) . In comparison , the force - sensitive ion channels of somatosen - sory systems adopt another form of mechanosensing . It also lacks mechanopresentation , with a mechanical force being physically exerted onto the skin cell membrane to trigger the mechanorecep - tion . But in contrast to the auditory system , the mechanotransmis - sion here is the propagation of force on the cell that causes it to deform and change shape . The deformation leads to cell membrane stretching , and opens up ion channels that adopt the “deforma - tion” mechanosensitive mechanism ( Figure 2A ) to achieve mecha - notransduction . This mechanosensing mechanism was suggested anchor may result in a lateral component force on the β tail caus - ing it to detach from the α tail . The αβ separation in the CT may in turn unmask binding / catalytic sites within the cytoplasmic do - mains ( e . g . , enable talin association ) , resulting in initiation of bio - chemical signaling and the fulfillment of mechanotransduction ( Jani and Schock , 2009 ) ( Figure 6E ) . 2 . It is widely accepted that talin binding to integrin β CT represents a final common step in integrin activation ( Shattil et al . , 2010 ) . For this reason , talin can play a major role in the mechanotrans - duction step beneath the membrane . Talin associates with integ - rin β CT through its head domain and with actin through its rod domain , making the sequences in between susceptible to con - formational change upon force pulling ( Critchley , 2009 ) . In integ - rin outside - in signaling , force transmitted through the β CT un - folds the attached talin ( Yao et al . , 2016 ) , which in turn recruits vinculin and facilitates downstream signaling ( Yao et al . , 2014 ) . A recent study has provided support for a talin - dependent mecha - notransduction mechanism in relation to cell sensing of substrate stiffness . On a soft surface , integrin – ligand engagement is weak and fails to unfold talin . On a stiff surface , by contrast , integrin binding is reinforced by a catch bond , allowing talin to unfold before ligand dissociation ( Elosegui - Artola et al . , 2016 ; Jansen et al . , 2017 ) . Because the αβ separation below the headpiece would affect the stability of the extended - open conformation of the integrin ( Zhu et al . , 2008b ) , a second “regulatory loop” be - tween mechanotransduction ( Figure 1D , step 3 ) and mechano - transmission ( Figure 1D , step 4 ) may exist ( Figure 6Eiii , regula - tory loop 2 ) . The two regulatory loops described here may even work cooperatively to allow back - and - forth communications among mechanoreception , mechanotransmission , and mecha - notransduction ( Figure 6E ) . 3 . As force propagates through intracellular structures , several other proteins besides talin that are indirectly linked to integ - rins may also change conformation and / or function . Examples include vinculin unfolding that exposes the buried motifs ( Huveneers and Danen , 2009 ) , p130Cas extension ( Sawada et al . , 2006 ) , Src activation ( Wang et al . , 2005 ) , myosin translo - cation on actin ( Figure 2E ) ( Cross , 2006 ) , and deformation of the nuclear membrane ( Wang et al . , 2009 ) . These events re - spectively facilitate focal adhesion maturation ( vinculin , p130Cas , and Src ) , cell deformation ( myosin translocation ) , and directed gene expression and nuclear transport ( nuclear mem - brane deformation ) , and thus represent additional choices of intracellular mechanotransduction . Among the three mechanosensing - mediating receptors dis - cussed in this review , integrins represent the most sophisticated sys - tem , due to its feature of bidirectional signal transduction , multiple conformational states , and a combination of conformational changes associated with its activation . While multiple mechanisms of integrin - mediated mechanosensing coexist , we can nevertheless summarize the integrin mechanosensing process into the following four steps : 1 . Mechanopresentation ( Figure 1D , step 1 ) : Integrin binds to the ligands in its headpiece and external force is applied to this bond by relative cell – matrix motion or spontaneous cell mem - brane movement . 2 . Mechanoreception ( Figure 1D , step 2 ) : The ligand binding site of the integrin headpiece receives the ligand together with the force signal . Catch bonds are formed to reinforce the binding state under a tensile force . 3150 | Y . Chen , L . Ju , et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell identify and characterize molecular players of mechanosensing pathways . Recently , new biophysical nanotools have moved the mechanobiology field into a new era , when it has become possible to address a fundamental question : how are mechanical cues pre - sented , received , transmitted , and transduced by cell surface and intracellular proteins ? Furthermore , the time has come to elucidate the design and working principles of the mechanosensing appara - tus . As summarized in this review , the use of these nanotools allows the investigation of receptor - mediated cell mechanosensing in many biologically significant contexts , including how platelets bal - ance their functions between hemostasis and thrombosis , how T - cells recognize pathogens , how stem cells differentiate into distinct cell types , how cancer cells metastasize , and how neutrophils mi - grate to fight infections . More importantly , the combined kinetic analysis of molecular interactions and mechanical analysis of the molecular conformational changes reveal the working mecha - nisms of each mechanosensing receptor and its MSDs—GPIb α unfolds the LRRD and MSD , TCR – pMHC increases its length , and integrins bend and unbend between the upper and lower legs . In the future , full characterization of these and other modular struc - tures of mechanosensing machineries will provide synthetic biology design principles for a generic mechanosensing machine . The simi - larities and differences between the GPIb and TCR systems imply that , in addition to the general principles , each receptor may have its own details to accommodate its specific function . Future studies will relate the mechanosensing mechanisms of distinct receptors to their physiological context and allow customization based on the general principles and re - engineering of the details . long ago ( Orr et al . , 2006 ) and has recently been demonstrated on mouse epidermal Merkel cells ( Maksimovic et al . , 2014 ) . The same mechanism is shared by muscle mechanosensing , in which stretch - ing of the membrane of the vascular smooth muscle cells opens cation channels . In a similar manner , red blood cells release ATP in response to mechanical deformation , with the only difference being that the mechanotransducer here is the cytoskeletal spectrin – actin network , which is rearranged under force , instead of ion channels ( Wan et al . , 2008 ) . Yet in some other systems , the cell can use surface structures to directly receive mechanical signals without binding to a ligand , hence having a mechanoreceptor but no mechanopresenter . For example , glycocalyx and G proteins on the endothelial cell surface have been found to directly transduce shear stress for mechano - sensing without binding to any ligand ( Chachisvilis et al . , 2006 ; Makino et al . , 2006 ; Orr et al . , 2006 ) . Corresponding mechanisms have been proposed ( Fu and Tarbell , 2013 ) . Although examples in this review only discuss monovalent molecular interactions , multivalent interactions do exist in many receptor – ligand systems . For example , P - and E - selectins ( but not L - selectin ) are dimeric and can form dimeric bonds with the dimeric P - selectin GP ligand 1 ( Ramachandran et al . , 2001 ; Zhang et al . , 2013b ) ; fibrinogen and VWF are both capable of binding multiple copies of their corresponding receptors on the same or even different platelets ( Rooney et al . , 1998 ; Zhou et al . , 2012 ) . The association and dissocia - tion of these complexed bonds follow multistep kinetic mechanisms that involve intermediate steps with additional rate parameters . Also , the force burden is , likely unevenly , dispersed onto multiple bonds , making the force dependency of the bond lifetime more compli - cated ( Friddle et al . , 2012 ) . Nonetheless , it is likely that a multimeric ligand has a higher chance to engage cell receptors for more fre - quent mechanopresentation . The overall bond lifetime is also likely prolonged , because dissociated members of the receptor – ligand cluster are still kept within close proximity by other members , remain - ing associated so that they can quickly re - engage , resulting in more effective mechanoreception . Although receptor cross - linking by mul - timeric ligand is known to facilitate cell signaling in many situations , multivalency may or may not guarantee stronger mechanosensing . While clustering creates a higher local concentration of signaling molecules to strengthen signaling , the formation of more bonds must be accompanied by the decrease of force dispersed over each of the bonds , which may weaken the signaling of each receptor . Should mechanosensing adopt a threshold mechanism that requires certain amplitude of force on single receptors , excessive force dis - persion could even eliminate signaling . In addition , despite not hav - ing a dimeric / multimeric structure , some proteins contain dual or multiple sites that can bind independently or cooperatively . For ex - ample , fibronectin contains a synergy site in the III 9 domain that can strengthen the binding of the III 10 domain RGD sequence to integrin α 5 β 1 ( Friedland et al . , 2009 ; Kong et al . , 2009 ) . Thy - 1 can simultane - ously bind integrin α 5 β 1 and syndecan - 4 in a force - induced coopera - tive manner ( Fiore et al . , 2014 ) . Accordingly , the mechanoreception is reinforced in both cases . Conversely , cellular signaling can directly affect the multimericity of a molecular system . For example , when pMHC binds TCR to induce signaling , the co - receptor CD8 is up - regulated to bind the pMHC pre - engaged with the TCR , which con - verts the TCR – pMHC bimolecular bond to a TCR – pMHC – CD8 trimo - lecular bond ( Jiang et al . , 2011 ; Casas et al . , 2014 ; Liu et al . , 2014b ) . CONCLUSIONS Research in the past few decades focused on developing biochemi - cal and molecular biological approaches , which allowed scientists to ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This study was completed during C . Z . ’s sabbatical at the Heart Re - search Institute in Australia . We thank Shaun P . Jackson and his lab for helpful discussion and support for the sabbatical and writing of the paper . L . J . is supported by the postdoctoral fellowship ( 101285 ) from the National Heart Foundation of Australia , This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grants AI044902 , AI124680 , HL132019 , and CA214354 ( C . Z . ) ; Army Re - search Office grant DODW911NF - 16 - 1 - 0257 ( C . Z . ) ; Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia Kanematsu Research Award ( L . J . ) ; a Diabetes Australia research grant G179720 ( L . J . ) ; a Sydney Medi - cal School 2016 early - career researcher kickstart grant ( L . J . ) ; and National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship DGE - 1650044 ( M . R . ) . REFERENCES Adams JJ , Narayanan S , Liu B , Birnbaum ME , Kruse AC , Bowerman NA , Chen W , Levin AM , Connolly JM , Zhu C , et al . ( 2011 ) . T cell receptor signaling is limited by docking geometry to peptide - major histocompat - ibility complex . Immunity 35 , 681 – 693 . Andresen Eguiluz RC , Kaylan KB , Underhill GH , Leckband DE ( 2017 ) . Substrate stiffness and VE - cadherin mechano - transduction coordinate to regulate endothelial monolayer integrity . Biomaterials 140 , 45 – 57 . Aponte - Santamaria C , Huck V , Posch S , Bronowska AK , Grassle S , Brehm MA , Obser T , Schneppenheim R , Hinterdorfer P , Schneider SW , et al . ( 2015 ) . Force - sensitive autoinhibition of the von Willebrand factor is mediated by interdomain interactions . Biophys J 108 , 2312 – 2321 . Arnaout MA , Mahalingam B , Xiong JP ( 2005 ) . Integrin structure , allostery , and bidirectional signaling . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 21 , 381 – 410 . Auton M , Sowa KE , Behymer M , Cruz MA ( 2012 ) . N - terminal flanking region of A1 domain in von Willebrand factor stabilizes structure of A1A2A3 complex and modulates platelet activation under shear stress . J Biol Chem 287 , 14579 – 14585 . Axmann M , Huppa JB , Davis MM , Schutz GJ ( 2012 ) . Determination of interaction kinetics between the T cell receptor and peptide - loaded Volume 28 November 7 , 2017 Receptor - mediated cell mechanosensing | 3151 Cox TR , Erler JT ( 2011 ) . Remodeling and homeostasis of the extracellular matrix : implications for fibrotic diseases and cancer . Dis Model Mech 4 , 165 – 178 . Critchley DR ( ( 2009 ) . Biochemical and structural properties of the integrin - associated cytoskeletal protein talin . Annu Rev Biophys 38 , 235 – 254 . Cross RA ( ( 2006 ) . Myosin’s mechanical ratchet . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103 , 8911 – 8912 . Cross RA , McAinsh A ( 2014 ) . Prime movers : the mechanochemistry of mitotic kinesins . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 15 , 257 – 271 . Dahl KN , Ribeiro AJ , Lammerding J ( 2008 ) . Nuclear shape , mechanics , and mechanotransduction . Circ Res 102 , 1307 – 1318 . Dai K , Bodnar R , Berndt MC , Du X ( 2005 ) . A critical role for 14 – 3 - 3 ζ protein in regulating the VWF binding function of platelet glycoprotein Ib - IX and its therapeutic implications . Blood 106 , 1975 – 1981 . Das DK , Feng Y , Mallis RJ , Li X , Keskin DB , Hussey RE , Brady SK , Wang JH , Wagner G , Reinherz EL , Lang MJ ( 2015 ) . Force - dependent transition in the T - cell receptor β - subunit allosterically regulates peptide discrimina - tion and pMHC bond lifetime . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 112 , 1517 – 1522 . Das DK , Mallis RJ , Duke - Cohan JS , Hussey RE , Tetteh PW , Hilton M , Wagner G , Lang MJ , Reinherz EL ( 2016 ) . Pre - T cell receptors ( pre - TCRs ) leverage V β complementarity determining regions ( CDRs ) and hydro - phobic patch in mechanosensing thymic self - ligands . J Biol Chem 291 , 25292 – 25305 . Davis SJ , van der Merwe PA ( 2006 ) . The kinetic - segregation model : TCR triggering and beyond . Nat Immunol 7 , 803 – 809 . DeFord - Watts LM , Dougall DS , Belkaya S , Johnson BA , Eitson JL , Roybal KT , Barylko B , Albanesi JP , Wulfing C , van Oers NSC ( 2011 ) . The CD3 zeta subunit contains a phosphoinositide - binding motif that is required for the stable accumulation of TCR - CD3 complex at the immunological synapse . J Immunol 186 , 6839 – 6847 . Delling M , Indzhykulian AA , Liu X , Li Y , Xie T , Corey DP , Clapham DE ( 2016 ) . Primary cilia are not calcium - responsive mechanosensors . Nature 531 , 656 – 660 . Dembo M , Torney DC , Saxman K , Hammer D ( 1988 ) . The reaction - limited kinetics of membrane - to - surface adhesion and detachment . Proc R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 234 , 55 – 83 . Deng W , Wang Y , Druzak SA , Healey JF , Syed AK , Lollar P , Li R ( 2017 ) . A discontinuous autoinhibitory module masks the A1 domain of von Willebrand factor . J Thromb Haemost 15 , 1867 – 1877 . Deng W , Xu Y , Chen W , Paul DS , Syed AK , Dragovich MA , Liang X , Zakas P , Berndt MC , Di Paola J , et al . ( 2016 ) . Platelet clearance via shear - induced unfolding of a membrane mechanoreceptor . Nat Commun 7 , 12863 . Dobbins J , Gagnon E , Godec J , Pyrdol J , Vignali DA , Sharpe AH , Wucher - pfennig KW ( 2016 ) . Binding of the cytoplasmic domain of CD28 to the plasma membrane inhibits Lck recruitment and signaling . Sci Signal 9 , ra75 . Doggett TA , Girdhar G , Lawshe A , Miller JL , Laurenzi IJ , Diamond SL , Diacovo TG ( 2003 ) . Alterations in the intrinsic properties of the GPIb α - VWF tether bond define the kinetics of the platelet - type von Willebrand disease mutation , Gly233Val . Blood 102 , 152 – 160 . Doggett TA , Girdhar G , Lawshe A , Schmidtke DW , Laurenzi IJ , Diamond SL , Diacovo TG ( 2002 ) . Selectin - like kinetics and biomechanics promote rapid platelet adhesion in flow : the GPIb ( α ) - vWF tether bond . Biophys J 83 , 194 – 205 . DuFort CC , Paszek MJ , Weaver VM ( 2011 ) . Balancing forces : architectural control of mechanotransduction . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 12 , 308 – 319 . Dulin D , Lipfert J , Moolman MC , Dekker NH ( 2013 ) . Studying genomic processes at the single - molecule level : introducing the tools and applications . Nat Rev Genet 14 , 9 – 22 . Dushek O , Das R , Coombs D ( 2009 ) . A role for rebinding in rapid and reliable T Cell responses to antigen . PLoS Comput Biol 5 , e1000578 . Dustin ML ( 2008 ) . T - cell activation through immunological synapses and kinapses . Immunol Rev 221 , 77 – 89 . Elosegui - Artola A , Bazellieres E , Allen MD , Andreu I , Oria R , Sunyer R , Gomm JJ , Marshall JF , Jones JL , Trepat X , Roca - Cusachs P ( 2014 ) . Rigidity sensing and adaptation through regulation of integrin types . Nat Mater 13 , 631 – 637 . Elosegui - Artola A , Oria R , Chen Y , Kosmalska A , Pérez - González C , Castro N , Zhu C , Trepat X , Roca - Cusachs P ( 2016 ) . Mechanical regulation of a molecular clutch defines force transmission and transduction in response to matrix rigidity . Nat Cell Biol 18 , 540 – 548 . Engler AJ , Sen S , Sweeney HL , Discher DE ( 2006 ) . Matrix elasticity directs stem cell lineage specification . Cell 126 , 677 – 689 . Evans E , Leung A , Heinrich V , Zhu C ( 2004 ) . Mechanical switching and cou - pling between two dissociation pathways in a P - selectin adhesion bond . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101 , 11281 – 11286 . MHC class II via single - molecule diffusion measurements . Biophys J 103 , L17 – L19 . Barg A , Ossig R , Goerge T , Schneider MF , Schillers H , Oberleithner H , Schneider SW ( 2007 ) . Soluble plasma - derived von Willebrand factor assembles to a haemostatically active filamentous network . Thromb Haemost 97 , 514 – 526 . Barry AK , Tabdili H , Muhamed I , Wu J , Shashikanth N , Gomez GA , Yap AS , Gottardi CJ , de Rooij J , Wang N , Leckband DE ( 2014 ) . α - Catenin cytomechanics—role in cadherin - dependent adhesion and mechano - transduction . J Cell Sci 127 , 1779 – 1791 . Bashour KT , Gondarenko A , Chen H , Shen K , Liu X , Huse M , Hone JC , Kam LC ( 2014a ) . CD28 and CD3 have complementary roles in T - cell traction forces . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111 , 2241 – 2246 . Bashour KT , Tsai J , Shen K , Lee JH , Sun E , Milone MC , Dustin ML , Kam LC ( 2014b ) . Cross talk between CD3 and CD28 is spatially modulated by protein lateral mobility . Mol Cell Biol 34 , 955 – 964 . Basu R , Huse M ( 2016 ) . Mechanical communication at the immunological synapse . Trends Cell Biol 27 , 241 – 254 . Basu R , Whitlock BM , Husson J , Le Floc’h A , Jin W , Oyler - Yaniv A , Dotiwala F , Giannone G , Hivroz C , Biais N , et al . ( 2016 ) . Cytotoxic T cells use mechanical force to potentiate target cell killing . Cell 165 , 100 – 110 . Bettini ML , Guy C , Dash P , Vignali KM , Hamm DE , Dobbins J , Gagnon E , Thomas PG , Wucherpfennig KW , Vignali DAA ( 2014 ) . Membrane association of the CD3 epsilon signaling domain is required for optimal T cell development and function . J Immunol 193 , 258 – 267 . Birnbaum ME , Berry R , Hsiao YS , Chen Z , Shingu - Vazquez MA , Yu X , Waghray D , Fischer S , McCluskey J , Rossjohn J , et al . ( 2014 ) . Molecular architecture of the αβ T cell receptor - CD3 complex . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111 , 17576 – 17581 . Blakely BL , Dumelin CE , Trappmann B , McGregor LM , Choi CK , Anthony PC , Duesterberg VK , Baker BM , Block SM , Liu DR , Chen CS ( 2014 ) . A DNA - based molecular probe for optically reporting cellular traction forces . Nat Methods 11 , 1229 – 1232 . Campbell ID , Humphries MJ ( 2011 ) . Integrin structure , activation , and interactions . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 3 , a004994 . Casas J , Brzostek J , Zarnitsyna VI , Hong JS , Wei Q , Hoerter JA , Fu G , Ampudia J , Zamoyska R , Zhu C , Gascoigne NR ( 2014 ) . Ligand - engaged TCR is triggered by Lck not associated with CD8 coreceptor . Nat Commun 5 , 5624 . Case LB , Waterman CM ( 2015 ) . Integration of actin dynamics and cell adhesion by a three - dimensional , mechanosensitive molecular clutch . Nat Cell Biol 17 , 955 – 963 . Chachisvilis M , Zhang YL , Frangos JA ( 2006 ) . G protein - coupled receptors sense fluid shear stress in endothelial cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103 , 15463 – 15468 . Chaudhuri O , Gu L , Klumpers D , Darnell M , Bencherif SA , Weaver JC , Huebsch N , Lee HP , Lippens E , Duda GN , Mooney DJ ( 2016 ) . Hydrogels with tunable stress relaxation regulate stem cell fate and activity . Nat Mater 15 , 326 – 334 . Chen W , Lou J , Evans EA , Zhu C ( 2012 ) . Observing force - regulated confor - mational changes and ligand dissociation from a single integrin on cells . J Cell Biol 199 , 497 – 512 . Chen W , Lou J , Hsin J , Schulten K , Harvey SC , Zhu C ( 2011 ) . Molecular dynamics simulations of forced unbending of integrin α ( v ) β ( 3 ) . PLoS Comput Biol 7 , e1001086 . Chen W , Lou J , Zhu C ( 2010 ) . Forcing switch from short - to intermediate - and long - lived states of the α A domain generates LFA - 1 / ICAM - 1 catch bonds . J Biol Chem 285 , 35967 – 35978 . Chen W , Zhu C ( 2013 ) . Mechanical regulation of T - cell functions . Immunol Rev 256 , 160 – 176 . Chen Y , Lee H , Tong H , Schwartz M , Zhu C ( 2016 ) . Force regulated conformational change of integrin α V β 3 . Matrix Biol 60 – 61 , 70 – 85 . Chen Y , Liu B , Ju L , Hong J , Ji Q , Chen W , Zhu C ( 2015 ) . Fluorescence biomembrane force probe : concurrent quantitation of receptor - ligand kinetics and binding - induced intracellular signaling on a single cell . J Vis Exp 2015 , e52975 . Cheng M , Li J , Negri A , Coller BS ( 2013 ) . Swing - out of the β 3 hybrid domain is required for α IIb β 3 priming and normal cytoskeletal reor - ganization , but not adhesion to immobilized fibrinogen . PLoS ONE 8 , e81609 . Choi YI , Duke - Cohan JS , Chen W , Liu B , Rossy J , Tabarin T , Ju L , Gui J , Gaus K , Zhu C , Reinherz EL ( 2014 ) . Dynamic control of β 1 integrin adhesion by the plexinD1 - sema3E axis . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111 , 379 – 384 . Coburn LA , Damaraju VS , Dozic S , Eskin SG , Cruz MA , McIntire LV ( 2011 ) . GPIb α - vWF rolling under shear stress shows differences between type 2B and 2M von Willebrand disease . Biophys J 100 , 304 – 312 . 3152 | Y . Chen , L . Ju , et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell Evans RD , Perkins VC , Henry A , Stephens PE , Robinson MK , Watt FM ( 2003 ) . A tumor - associated β 1 integrin mutation that abrogates epithe - lial differentiation control . J Cell Biol 160 , 589 – 596 . Fan Z , McArdle S , Marki A , Mikulski Z , Gutierrez E , Engelhardt B , Deutsch U , Ginsberg M , Groisman A , Ley K ( 2016 ) . Neutrophil recruitment limited by high - affinity bent β 2 integrin binding ligand in cis . Nat Commun 7 , 12658 . Feghhi S , Munday AD , Tooley WW , Rajsekar S , Fura AM , Kulman JD , Lopez JA , Sniadecki NJ ( 2016 ) . Glycoprotein Ib - IX - V complex transmits cytoskeletal forces that enhance platelet adhesion . Biophys J 111 , 601 – 608 . Feng Y , Brazin KN , Kobayashi E , Mallis RJ , Reinherz EL , Lang MJ ( 2017 ) . Mechanosensing drives acuity of αβ T - cell recognition . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 114 , E8204 – E8213 . Fiore VF , Ju L , Chen Y , Zhu C , Barker TH ( 2014 ) . Dynamic catch of a Thy - 1 - α 5 β 1 + syndecan - 4 trimolecular complex . Nat Commun 5 , 4886 . Fox JE , Aggerbeck LP , Berndt MC ( 1988 ) . Structure of the glycoprotein Ib . IX complex from platelet membranes . J Biol Chem 263 , 4882 – 4890 . Friddle RW , Noy A , De Yoreo JJ ( 2012 ) . Interpreting the widespread nonlin - ear force spectra of intermolecular bonds . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109 , 13573 – 13578 . Friedland JC , Lee MH , Boettiger D ( 2009 ) . Mechanically activated integrin switch controls α 5 β 1 function . Science 323 , 642 – 644 . Fu BM , Tarbell JM ( 2013 ) . Mechano - sensing and transduction by endothe - lial surface glycocalyx : composition , structure , function . Wiley Interdiscip Rev Syst Biol Med 5 , 381 – 390 . Fu H , Jiang Y , Yang D , Scheiflinger F , Wong WP , Springer TA ( 2017 ) . Flow - induced elongation of von Willebrand factor precedes tension - depen - dent activation . Nat Commun 8 , 324 . Fu J , Wang YK , Yang MT , Desai RA , Yu X , Liu Z , Chen CS ( 2010 ) . Mechani - cal regulation of cell function with geometrically modulated elastomeric substrates . Nat Methods 7 , 733 – 736 . Garcia JR , Garcia AJ ( 2014 ) . Cellular mechanotransduction : sensing rigidity . Nat Mater 13 , 539 – 540 . Gebhardt JC , Clemen AE , Jaud J , Rief M ( 2006 ) . Myosin - V is a mechanical ratchet . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103 , 8680 – 8685 . Giannone G , Sheetz MP ( 2006 ) . Substrate rigidity and force define form through tyrosine phosphatase and kinase pathways . Trends Cell Biol 16 , 213 – 223 . Gillespie PG , Muller U ( 2009 ) . Mechanotransduction by hair cells : models , molecules , and mechanisms . Cell 139 , 33 – 44 . Gillespie PG , Walker RG ( 2001 ) . Molecular basis of mechanosensory trans - duction . Nature 413 , 194 – 202 . Ginsberg MH , Partridge A , Shattil SJ ( 2005 ) . Integrin regulation . Curr Opin Cell Biol 17 , 509 – 516 . Grashoff C , Hoffman BD , Brenner MD , Zhou RB , Parsons M , Yang MT , McLean MA , Sligar SG , Chen CS , Ha T , Schwartz MA ( 2010 ) . Measuring mechanical tension across vinculin reveals regulation of focal adhesion dynamics . Nature 466 , 263 – 266 . Guo X , Yan C , Li H , Huang W , Shi X , Huang M , Wang Y , Pan W , Cai M , Li L , et al . ( 2017 ) . Lipid - dependent conformational dynamics underlie the functional versatility of T - cell receptor . Cell Res 27 , 505 – 525 . Haining AW , Lieberthal TJ , Del Rio Hernandez A ( 2016 ) . Talin : a mechano - sensitive molecule in health and disease . FASEB J 30 , 2073 – 2085 . Halvorsen K , Wong WP ( 2010 ) . Massively parallel single - molecule manipula - tion using centrifugal force . Biophys J 98 , L53 – L55 . Hammer JA III , Burkhardt JK ( 2013 ) . Controversy and consensus regarding myosin II function at the immunological synapse . Curr Opin Immunol 25 , 300 – 306 . Han SZ , Kim - Howard X , Deshmukh H , Kamatani Y , Viswanathan P , Guthridge JM , Thomas K , Kaufman KM , Ojwang J , Rojas - Villarraga A , et al . ( 2009 ) . Evaluation of imputation - based association in and around the integrin - α - M ( ITGAM ) gene and replication of robust association between a non - synonymous functional variant within ITGAM and systemic lupus erythematosus ( SLE ) . Hum Mol Genet 18 , 1171 – 1180 . Harburger DS , Calderwood DA ( 2009 ) . Integrin signalling at a glance . J Cell Sci 122 , 159 – 163 . Hinrichs CS , Restifo NP ( 2013 ) . Reassessing target antigens for adoptive T - cell therapy . Nat Biotechnol 31 , 999 – 1008 . Hivroz C , Saitakis M ( 2016 ) . Biophysical aspects of T lymphocyte activation at the immune synapse . Front Immunol 7 , 46 . Hoey DA , Chen JC , Jacobs CR ( 2012 ) . The primary cilium as a novel extra - cellular sensor in bone . Front Endocrinol 3 , 75 . Holle AW , Engler AJ ( 2011 ) . More than a feeling : discovering , understand - ing , and influencing mechanosensing pathways . Curr Opin Biotechnol 22 , 648 – 654 . Hong J , Murugesan S , Betzig E , Hammer JA ( 2017 ) . Contractile actomyosin arcs promote the activation of primary mouse T cells in a ligand - depen - dent manner . PLoS ONE 12 , e0183174 . Hong J , Persaud SP , Horvath S , Allen PM , Evavold BD , Zhu C ( 2015 ) . Force - regulated in situ TCR - peptide - bound MHC class II kinetics determine functions of CD4 + T cells . J Immunol 195 , 3557 – 3564 . Hu KH , Butte MJ ( 2016 ) . T cell activation requires force generation . J Cell Biol 213 , 535 – 542 . Hu P , Luo BH ( 2015 ) . Integrin α IIb β 3 transmembrane domain separation mediates bi - directional signaling across the plasma membrane . PLoS ONE 10 , e0116208 . Hui KL , Balagopalan L , Samelson LE , Upadhyaya A ( 2015 ) . Cytoskeletal forces during signaling activation in Jurkat T - cells . Mol Biol Cell 26 , 685 – 695 . Huveneers S , Danen EHJ ( 2009 ) . Adhesion signaling—crosstalk between integrins , Src and Rho . J Cell Sci 122 , 1059 – 1069 . Ilani T , Vasiliver - Shamis G , Vardhana S , Bretscher A , Dustin ML ( 2009 ) . T cell antigen receptor signaling and immunological synapse stability require myosin IIA . Nat Immunol 10 , 531 – 539 . Ingber DE ( 2006 ) . Cellular mechanotransduction : putting all the pieces together again . FASEB J 20 , 811 – 827 . Iskratsch T , Wolfenson H , Sheetz MP ( 2014 ) . Appreciating force and shape - the rise of mechanotransduction in cell biology . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 15 , 825 – 833 . Itoh H , Takahashi A , Adachi K , Noji H , Yasuda R , Yoshida M , Kinosita K ( 2004 ) . Mechanically driven ATP synthesis by F1 - ATPase . Nature 427 , 465 – 468 . Jani K , Schock F ( 2009 ) . Molecular mechanisms of mechanosensing in muscle development . Dev Dyn 238 , 1526 – 1534 . Janostiak R , Pataki AC , Brabek J , Rosel D ( 2014 ) . Mechanosensors in integ - rin signaling : the emerging role of p130Cas . Eur J Cell Biol 93 , 445 – 454 . Jansen KA , Atherton P , Ballestrem C ( 2017 ) . Mechanotransduction at the cell - matrix interface . Semin Cell Dev Biol ( in press ) . Jansen KA , Bacabac RG , Piechocka IK , Koenderink GH ( 2013 ) . Cells actively stiffen fibrin networks by generating contractile stress . Biophys J 105 , 2240 – 2251 . Jansson A ( 2011 ) . Kinetic proofreading and the search for nonself - peptides . Self / nonself 2 , 1 – 3 . Jiang N , Huang J , Edwards LJ , Liu B , Zhang Y , Beal CD , Evavold BD , Zhu C ( 2011 ) . Two - stage cooperative T cell receptor - peptide major histo - compatibility complex - CD8 trimolecular interactions amplify antigen discrimination . Immunity 34 , 13 – 23 . Jin M , Andricioaei I , Springer TA ( 2004 ) . Conversion between three con - formational states of integrin I domains with a C - terminal pull spring studied with molecular dynamics . Structure 12 , 2137 – 2147 . Jin W , Black CT , Kam LC , Huse M ( 2017 ) . Probing synaptic biomechanics using micropillar arrays . Methods Mol Biol 1584 , 333 – 346 . Ju L , Chen Y , Li K , Yuan Z , Liu B , Jackson SP , Zhu C ( 2017 ) . Dual biomembrane force probe enables single - cell mechanical analysis of signal crosstalk between multiple molecular species . Sci Rep 7 , 14185 . Ju L , Chen Y , Xue L , Du X , Zhu C ( 2016 ) . Cooperative unfolding of distinctive mechanoreceptor domains transduces force into signals . eLife 5 , e15447 . Ju L , Chen Y , Zhou F , Lu H , Cruz MA , Zhu C ( 2015a ) . Von Willebrand factor - A1 domain binds platelet glycoprotein Ib α in multiple states with distinctive force - dependent dissociation kinetics . Thromb Res 136 , 606 – 612 . Ju L , Dong J - F , Cruz MA , Zhu C ( 2013 ) . The N - terminal flanking region of the A1 domain regulates the force - dependent binding of von Wil - lebrand factor to platelet glycoprotein Ib . J Biol Chem 288 , 32289 – 32301 . Ju L , Lou J , Chen Y , Li Z , Zhu C ( 2015b ) . Force - induced unfolding of leucine - rich repeats of glycoprotein Ib α strengthens ligand interaction . Biophys J 109 , 1781 – 1784 . Ju L , Qian J , Zhu C ( 2015c ) . Transport regulation of two - dimensional receptor - ligand association . Biophys J 108 , 1773 – 1784 . Judokusumo E , Tabdanov E , Kumari S , Dustin ML , Kam LC ( 2012 ) . Mecha - nosensing in T lymphocyte activation . Biophys J 102 , L5 – L7 . Kallen J , Welzenbach K , Ramage P , Geyl D , Kriwacki R , Legge G , Cottens S , Weitz - Schmidt G , Hommel U ( 1999 ) . Structural basis for LFA - 1 inhibition upon lovastatin binding to the CD11a I - domain . J Mol Biol 292 , 1 – 9 . Kasza KE , Vader D , Koster S , Wang N , Weitz DA ( 2011 ) . Magnetic twisting cytometry . Cold Spring Harb Protoc 2011 , pdb prot5599 . Katz ZB , Novotna L , Blount A , Lillemeier BF ( 2017 ) . A cycle of Zap70 kinase activation and release from the TCR amplifies and disperses antigenic stimuli . Nat Immunol 18 , 86 – 95 . Kim M , Carman CV , Springer TA ( 2003 ) . Bidirectional transmembrane signaling by cytoplasmic domain separation in integrins . Science 301 , 1720 – 1725 . Volume 28 November 7 , 2017 Receptor - mediated cell mechanosensing | 3153 Liu Y , Blanchfield L , Ma VP , Andargachew R , Galior K , Liu Z , Evavold B , Salaita K ( 2016 ) . DNA - based nanoparticle tension sensors reveal that T - cell receptors transmit defined pN forces to their antigens for enhanced fidelity . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 113 , 5610 – 5615 . Luca VC , Jude KM , Pierce NW , Nachury MV , Fischer S , Garcia KC ( 2015 ) . Structural biology . Structural basis for Notch1 engagement of Delta - like 4 . Science 347 , 847 – 853 . Luca VC , Kim BC , Ge C , Kakuda S , Wu D , Roein - Peikar M , Haltiwanger RS , Zhu C , Ha T , Garcia KC ( 2017 ) . Notch - Jagged complex structure impli - cates a catch bond in tuning ligand sensitivity . Science 355 , 1320 – 1324 . Luo BH , Carman CV , Springer TA ( 2007a ) . Structural basis of integrin regula - tion and signaling . Annu Rev Immunol 25 , 619 – 647 . Luo BH , Springer TA ( 2006 ) . Integrin structures and conformational signal - ing . Curr Opin Cell Biol 18 , 579 – 586 . Luo SZ , Mo X , Afshar - Kharghan V , Srinivasan S , Lopez JA , Li R ( 2007b ) . Glycoprotein Ib α forms disulfide bonds with 2 glycoprotein Ib β subunits in the resting platelet . Blood 109 , 603 – 609 . Ma VP , Liu Y , Blanchfield L , Su H , Evavold BD , Salaita K ( 2016 ) . Ratiometric tension probes for mapping receptor forces and clustering at intermem - brane junctions . Nano Lett 16 , 4552 – 4559 . Makino A , Prossnitz ER , Bunemann M , Wang JM , Yao W , Schmid - Schonbein GW ( 2006 ) . G protein - coupled receptors serve as mechanosensors for fluid shear stress in neutrophils . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 290 , C1633 – 1639 . Maksimovic S , Nakatani M , Baba Y , Nelson AM , Marshall KL , Wellnitz SA , Firozi P , Woo SH , Ranade S , Patapoutian A , Lumpkin EA ( 2014 ) . Epider - mal Merkel cells are mechanosensory cells that tune mammalian touch receptors . Nature 509 , 617 – 621 . Malissen B , Bongrand P ( 2015 ) . Early T cell activation : integrating biochemi - cal , structural , and biophysical cues . Annu Rev Immunol 33 , 539 – 561 . Mallis RJ , Bai K , Arthanari H , Hussey RE , Handley M , Li Z , Chingozha L , Duke - Cohan JS , Lu H , Wang JH , et al . ( 2015 ) . Pre - TCR ligand binding impacts thymocyte development before αβ TCR expression . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 112 , 8373 – 8378 . Marshall BT , Long M , Piper JW , Yago T , McEver RP , Zhu C ( 2003 ) . Direct observation of catch bonds involving cell - adhesion molecules . Nature 423 , 190 – 193 . Martin C , Morales LD , Cruz MA ( 2007 ) . Purified A2 domain of von Wil - lebrand factor binds to the active conformation of von Willebrand factor and blocks the interaction with platelet glycoprotein Ib α . J Thromb Haemost 5 , 1363 – 1370 . Maus MV , June CH ( 2016 ) . Making better chimeric antigen receptors for adoptive T - cell therapy . Clin Cancer Res 22 , 1875 – 1884 . Mazzucato M , Pradella P , Cozzi MR , De Marco L , Ruggeri ZM ( 2002 ) . Sequential cytoplasmic calcium signals in a 2 - stage platelet activation process induced by the glycoprotein Ib α mechanoreceptor . Blood 100 , 2793 – 2800 . McEwan PA , Yang WJ , Carr KH , Mo X , Zheng XF , Li RH , Emsley J ( 2011 ) . Quaternary organization of GPIb - IX complex and insights into Bernard - Soulier syndrome revealed by the crystal structures of GPIb β ectodo - main and a GPIb β / GPIX chimera . Blood 118 , 958 – 958 . McKeithan TW ( 1995 ) . Kinetic proofreading in T - cell receptor signal - trans - duction . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 92 , 5042 – 5046 . Mempel TR , Henrickson SE , Von Andrian UH ( 2004 ) . T - cell priming by dendritic cells in lymph nodes occurs in three distinct phases . Nature 427 , 154 – 159 . Mendolicchio GL , Ruggeri ZM ( 2005 ) . New perspectives on von Willebrand factor functions in hemostasis and thrombosis . Semin Hematol 42 , 5 – 14 . Mitra SK , Hanson DA , Schlaepfer DD ( 2005 ) . Focal adhesion kinase : in com - mand and control of cell motility . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 6 , 56 – 68 . Miyamoto S , Akiyama SK , Yamada KM ( 1995 ) . Synergistic roles for receptor occupancy and aggregation in integrin transmembrane function . Sci - ence 267 , 883 – 885 . Moore SW , Sheetz MP ( 2011 ) . Biophysics of substrate interaction : influ - ence on neural motility , differentiation , and repair . Dev Neurobiol 71 , 1090 – 1101 . Morimatsu M , Mekhdjian AH , Adhikari AS , Dunn AR ( 2013 ) . Molecular tension sensors report forces generated by single integrin molecules in living cells . Nano Lett 13 , 3985 – 3989 . Mossman KD , Campi G , Groves JT , Dustin ML ( 2005 ) . Altered TCR signaling from geometrically repatterned immunological synapses . Science 310 , 1191 – 1193 . Muhamed I , Wu J , Sehgal P , Kong X , Tajik A , Wang N , Leckband DE ( 2016 ) . E - cadherin - mediated force transduction signals regulate global cell mechanics . J Cell Sci 129 , 1843 – 1854 . Murugesan S , Hong J , Yi J , Li D , Beach JR , Shao L , Meinhardt J , Madison G , Wu X , Betzig E , Hammer JA ( 2016 ) . Formin - generated actomyosin arcs Kim ST , Shin Y , Brazin K , Mallis RJ , Sun ZY , Wagner G , Lang MJ , Reinherz EL ( 2012 ) . TCR mechanobiology : torques and tunable structures linked to early T cell signaling . Front Immunol 3 , 76 . Kim ST , Takeuchi K , Sun ZY , Touma M , Castro CE , Fahmy A , Lang MJ , Wagner G , Reinherz EL ( 2009 ) . The αβ T cell receptor is an anisotropic mechanosensor . J Biol Chem 284 , 31028 – 31037 . Kim TJ , Zheng S , Sun J , Muhamed I , Wu J , Lei L , Kong X , Leckband DE , Wang Y ( 2015 ) . Dynamic visualization of α - catenin reveals rapid , reversible conformation switching between tension states . Curr Biol 25 , 218 – 224 . Kodera N , Yamamoto D , Ishikawa R , Ando T ( 2010 ) . Video imaging of walk - ing myosin V by high - speed atomic force microscopy . Nature 468 , 72 – 76 . Kong F , Garcia AJ , Mould AP , Humphries MJ , Zhu C ( 2009 ) . Demonstra - tion of catch bonds between an integrin and its ligand . J Cell Biol 185 , 1275 – 1284 . Kong F , Li Z , Parks WM , Dumbauld DW , Garcia AJ , Mould AP , Humphries MJ , Zhu C ( 2013 ) . Cyclic mechanical reinforcement of integrin - ligand interactions . Mol Cell 49 , 1060 – 1068 . Kumar RA , Dong JF , Thaggard JA , Cruz MA , Lopez JA , McIntire LV ( 2003 ) . Kinetics of GPIb α - vWF - A1 tether bond under flow : effect of GPIb α mutations on the association and dissociation rates . Biophys J 85 , 4099 – 4109 . Kuo JC ( ( 2013 ) . Mechanotransduction at focal adhesions : integrating cyto - skeletal mechanics in migrating cells . J Cell Mol Med 17 , 704 – 712 . Lam WA , Chaudhuri O , Crow A , Webster KD , Li TD , Kita A , Huang J , Fletcher DA ( 2011 ) . Mechanics and contraction dynamics of single plate - lets and implications for clot stiffening . Nat Mater 10 , 61 – 66 . le Duc Q , Shi Q , Blonk I , Sonnenberg A , Wang N , Leckband D , de Rooij J ( 2010 ) . Vinculin potentiates E - cadherin mechanosensing and is recruited to actin - anchored sites within adherens junctions in a myosin II - depen - dent manner . J Cell Biol 189 , 1107 – 1115 . Lee MS , Glassman CR , Deshpande NR , Badgandi HB , Parrish HL , Utta - mapinant C , Stawski PS , Ting AY , Kuhns MS ( 2015 ) . A mechanical switch couples T cell receptor triggering to the cytoplasmic juxtamembrane regions of CD3 ζζ . Immunity 43 , 227 – 239 . Lefort CT , Hyun YM , Schultz JB , Law FY , Waugh RE , Knauf PA , Kim M ( 2009 ) . Outside - in signal transmission by conformational changes in integrin Mac - 1 . J Immunol 183 , 6460 – 6468 . Lefort CT , Ley K ( 2012 ) . Neutrophil arrest by LFA - 1 activation . Front Im - munol 3 , 157 . Legant WR , Miller JS , Blakely BL , Cohen DM , Genin GM , Chen CS ( 2010 ) . Measurement of mechanical tractions exerted by cells in three - dimen - sional matrices . Nat Methods 7 , 969 – 971 . Le Trong I , Aprikian P , Kidd BA , Forero - Shelton M , Tchesnokova V , Rajagopal P , Rodriguez V , Interlandi G , Klevit R , Vogel V , et al . ( 2010 ) . Structural basis for mechanical force regulation of the adhesin FimH via finger trap - like β sheet twisting . Cell 141 , 645 – 655 . Li J , Su Y , Xia W , Qin Y , Humphries MJ , Vestweber D , Cabanas C , Lu C , Springer TA ( 2017a ) . Conformational equilibria and intrinsic affinities define integrin activation . EMBO J 36 , 629 – 645 . Li L , Guo X , Shi X , Li C , Wu W , Yan C , Wang H , Li H , Xu C ( 2017b ) . Ionic CD3 - Lck interaction regulates the initiation of T - cell receptor signaling . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 114 , E5891 – E5899 . Li YC , Chen BM , Wu PC , Cheng TL , Kao LS , Tao MH , Lieber A , Roffler SR ( 2010 ) . Cutting edge : mechanical forces acting on T cells immobi - lized via the TCR complex can trigger TCR signaling . J Immunol 184 , 5959 – 5963 . Li Z , Kong F , Zhu C ( 2016a ) . A model for cyclic mechanical reinforcement . Sci Rep 6 , 35954 . Li Z , Lee H , Zhu C ( 2016b ) . Molecular mechanisms of mechanotransduction in integrin - mediated cell - matrix adhesion . Exp Cell Res 349 , 85 – 94 . Lim TS , Mortellaro A , Lim CT , Hammerling GJ , Ricciardi - Castagnoli P ( 2011 ) . Mechanical interactions between dendritic cells and T cells correlate with T cell responsiveness . J Immunol 187 , 258 – 265 . Lim WA , June CH ( 2017 ) . The principles of engineering immune cells to treat cancer . Cell 168 , 724 – 740 . Liu B , Chen W , Evavold BD , Zhu C ( 2014a ) . Accumulation of dynamic catch bonds between TCR and agonist peptide - MHC triggers T cell signaling . Cell 157 , 357 – 368 . Liu B , Chen W , Zhu C ( 2015a ) . Molecular force spectroscopy on cells . Annu Rev Phys Chem 66 , 427 – 451 . Liu B , Zhong S , Malecek K , Johnson LA , Rosenberg SA , Zhu C , Krogsgaard M ( 2014b ) . 2D TCR - pMHC - CD8 kinetics determines T - cell responses in a self - antigen - specific TCR system . Eur J Immunol 44 , 239 – 250 . Liu J , Wang Z , Thinn AM , Ma YQ , Zhu J ( 2015b ) . The dual structural roles of the membrane distal region of the α - integrin cytoplasmic tail during integrin inside - out activation . J Cell Sci 128 , 1718 – 1731 . 3154 | Y . Chen , L . Ju , et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell Roca - Cusachs P , Iskratsch T , Sheetz MP ( 2012 ) . Finding the weakest link : exploring integrin - mediated mechanical molecular pathways . J Cell Sci 125 , 3025 – 3038 . Romet - Lemonne G , Jegou A ( 2013 ) . Mechanotransduction down to indi - vidual actin filaments . Eur J Cell Biol 92 , 333 – 338 . Rondelez Y , Tresset G , Nakashima T , Kato - Yamada Y , Fujita H , Takeuchi S , Noji H ( 2005 ) . Highly coupled ATP synthesis by F1 - ATPase single mol - ecules . Nature 433 , 773 – 777 . Rooney MM , Farrell DH , van Hemel BM , de Groot PG , Lord ST ( 1998 ) . The contribution of the three hypothesized integrin - binding sites in fibrino - gen to platelet - mediated clot retraction . Blood 92 , 2374 – 2381 . Rosetti F , Chen Y , Sen M , Thayer E , Azcutia V , Herter JM , Luscinskas FW , Cullere X , Zhu C , Mayadas TN ( 2015 ) . A lupus - associated Mac - 1 variant has defects in integrin allostery and interaction with ligands under force . Cell Rep 10 , 1655 – 1664 . Sabass B , Gardel ML , Waterman CM , Schwarz US ( 2008 ) . High resolution traction force microscopy based on experimental and computational advances . Biophys J 94 , 207 – 220 . Savage B , Saldivar E , Ruggeri ZM ( 1996 ) . Initiation of platelet adhesion by arrest onto fibrinogen or translocation on von Willebrand factor . Cell 84 , 289 – 297 . Sawada Y , Tamada M , Dubin - Thaler BJ , Cherniavskaya O , Sakai R , Tanaka S , Sheetz MP ( 2006 ) . Force sensing by mechanical extension of the Src family kinase substrate p130Cas . Cell 127 , 1015 – 1026 . Schaefer A , Hordijk PL ( 2015 ) . Cell - stiffness - induced mechanosignaling— a key driver of leukocyte transendothelial migration . J Cell Sci 128 , 2221 – 2230 . Schamel WW , Alarcon B , Hofer T , Minguet S ( 2017 ) . The allostery model of TCR regulation . J Immunol 198 , 47 – 52 . Schneider SW , Nuschele S , Wixforth A , Gorzelanny C , Alexander - Katz A , Netz RR , Schneider MF ( 2007 ) . Shear - induced unfolding triggers adhesion of von Willebrand factor fibers . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104 , 7899 – 7903 . Schwartz MA , DeSimone DW ( 2008 ) . Cell adhesion receptors in mechano - transduction . Curr Opin Cell Biol 20 , 551 – 556 . Seong J , Wang N , Wang Y ( 2013 ) . Mechanotransduction at focal adhesions : from physiology to cancer development . J Cell Mol Med 17 , 597 – 604 . Shattil SJ , Kim C , Ginsberg MH ( 2010 ) . The final steps of integrin activation : the end game . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 11 , 288 – 300 . Sheehy SP , Grosberg A , Parker KK ( 2012 ) . The contribution of cellular mechanotransduction to cardiomyocyte form and function . Biomech Model Mechanobiol 11 , 1227 – 1239 . Sims TN , Soos TJ , Xenias HS , Dubin - Thaler B , Hofman JM , Waite JC , Cam - eron TO , Thomas VK , Varma R , Wiggins CH , et al . ( 2007 ) . Opposing effects of PKC θ and WASp on symmetry breaking and relocation of the immunological synapse . Cell 129 , 773 – 785 . Sing CE , Alexander - Katz A ( 2010 ) . Elongational flow induces the unfolding of von Willebrand factor at physiological flow rates . Biophys J 98 , L35 – L37 . Smith ML , Gourdon D , Little WC , Kubow KE , Eguiluz RA , Luna - Morris S , Vogel V ( 2007 ) . Force - induced unfolding of fibronectin in the extracel - lular matrix of living cells . PLoS Biol 5 , e268 . Somers WS , Tang J , Shaw GD , Camphausen RT ( 2000 ) . Insights into the molecular basis of leukocyte tethering and rolling revealed by structures of P - and E - selectin bound to SLe ( X ) and PSGL - 1 . Cell 103 , 467 – 479 . Springer TA , Dustin ML ( 2012 ) . Integrin inside - out signaling and the immu - nological synapse . Curr Opin Cell Biol 24 , 107 – 115 . Steinwachs J , Metzner C , Skodzek K , Lang N , Thievessen I , Mark C , Munster S , Aifantis KE , Fabry B ( 2016 ) . Three - dimensional force microscopy of cells in biopolymer networks . Nat Methods 13 , 171 – 176 . Stepanek O , Prabhakar AS , Osswald C , King CG , Bulek A , Naeher D , Beaufils - Hugot M , Abanto ML , Galati V , Hausmann B , et al . ( 2014 ) . Coreceptor scanning by the T cell receptor provides a mechanism for T cell tolerance . Cell 159 , 333 – 345 . Stephenson NL , Avis JM ( 2012 ) . Direct observation of proteolytic cleavage at the S2 site upon forced unfolding of the Notch negative regulatory region . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109 , E2757 – E2765 . Storm C , Pastore JJ , MacKintosh FC , Lubensky TC , Janmey PA ( 2005 ) . Nonlinear elasticity in biological gels . Nature 435 , 191 – 194 . Su Y , Xia W , Li J , Walz T , Humphries MJ , Vestweber D , Cabanas C , Lu C , Springer TA ( 2016 ) . Relating conformation to function in integrin α 5 β 1 . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 113 , E3872 – E3881 . Sukharev SI , Sigurdson WJ , Kung C , Sachs F ( 1999 ) . Energetic and spatial parameters for gating of the bacterial large conductance mechanosensi - tive channel , MscL . J Gen Physiol 113 , 525 – 540 . Sun Z , Guo SS , Fassler R ( 2016 ) . Integrin - mediated mechanotransduction . J Cell Biol 215 , 445 – 456 . propel T cell receptor microcluster movement at the immune synapse . J Cell Biol 215 , 383 – 399 . Myers DR , Qiu Y , Fay ME , Tennenbaum M , Chester D , Cuadrado J , Sakurai Y , Baek J , Tran R , Ciciliano JC , et al . ( 2016 ) . Single - platelet nanomechan - ics measured by high - throughput cytometry . Nat Mater 16 , 230 – 235 . Nakanishi - Matsui M , Sekiya M , Nakamoto RK , Futai M ( 2010 ) . The mecha - nism of rotating proton pumping ATPases . Biochim Biophys Acta 1797 , 1343 – 1352 . Nath SK , Han S , Kim - Howard X , Kelly JA , Viswanathan P , Gilkeson GS , Chen W , Zhu C , McEver RP , Kimberly RP , et al . ( 2008 ) . A nonsynonymous functional variant in integrin - α ( M ) ( encoded by ITGAM ) is associated with systemic lupus erythematosus . Nat Genet 40 , 152 – 154 . Natkanski E , Lee WY , Mistry B , Casal A , Molloy JE , Tolar P ( 2013 ) . B cells use mechanical energy to discriminate antigen affinities . Science 340 , 1587 – 1590 . Nesbitt WS , Kulkarni S , Giuliano S , Goncalves I , Dopheide SM , Yap CL , Harper IS , Salem HH , Jackson SP ( 2002 ) . Distinct glycoprotein Ib / V / IX and integrin α IIb β 3 - dependent calcium signals cooperatively regulate platelet adhesion under flow . J Biol Chem 277 , 2965 – 2972 . Neuman KC , Nagy A ( 2008 ) . Single - molecule force spectroscopy : optical tweezers , magnetic tweezers and atomic force microscopy . Nat Methods 5 , 491 – 505 . Nishida N , Xie C , Shimaoka M , Cheng Y , Walz T , Springer TA ( 2006 ) . Activa - tion of leukocyte β 2 integrins by conversion from bent to extended conformations . Immunity 25 , 583 – 594 . Noji H , Yasuda R , Yoshida M , Kinosita K Jr ( 1997 ) . Direct observation of the rotation of F1 - ATPase . Nature 386 , 299 – 302 . Nordenfelt P , Elliott HL , Springer TA ( 2016 ) . Coordinated integrin activa - tion by actin - dependent force during T - cell migration . Nat Commun 7 , 13119 . O’Connor RS , Hao X , Shen K , Bashour K , Akimova T , Hancock WW , Kam LC , Milone MC ( 2012 ) . Substrate rigidity regulates human T cell activation and proliferation . J Immunol 189 , 1330 – 1339 . Orr AW , Helmke BP , Blackman BR , Schwartz MA ( 2006 ) . Mechanisms of mechanotransduction . Dev Cell 10 , 11 – 20 . Paluch EK , Aspalter IM , Sixt M ( 2016 ) . Focal adhesion - independent cell migration . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 32 , 469 – 490 . Pathak A , Kumar S ( 2012 ) . Independent regulation of tumor cell migra - tion by matrix stiffness and confinement . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109 , 10334 – 10339 . Plotnikov SV , Sabass B , Schwarz US , Waterman CM ( 2014 ) . High - resolution traction force microscopy . Methods Cell Biol 123 , 367 – 394 . Pryshchep S , Zarnitsyna VI , Hong J , Evavold BD , Zhu C ( 2014 ) . Accumula - tion of serial forces on TCR and CD8 frequently applied by agonist antigenic peptides embedded in MHC molecules triggers calcium in T cells . J Immunol 193 , 68 – 76 . Puklin - Faucher E , Vogel V ( 2009 ) . Integrin activation dynamics between the RGD - binding site and the headpiece hinge . J Biol Chem 284 , 36557 – 36568 . Qiu Y , Brown AC , Myers DR , Sakurai Y , Mannino RG , Tran R , Ahn B , Hardy ET , Kee MF , Kumar S , et al . ( 2014 ) . Platelet mechanosensing of substrate stiffness during clot formation mediates adhesion , spreading , and acti - vation . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111 , 14430 – 14435 . Rabinowitz JD , Beeson C , Lyons DS , Davis MM , McConnell HM ( 1996 ) . Kinetic discrimination in T - cell activation . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93 , 1401 – 1405 . Raborn J , Wang W , Luo BH ( 2011 ) . Regulation of integrin α IIb β 3 ligand binding and signaling by the metal ion binding sites in the β I domain . Biochemistry 50 , 2084 – 2091 . Rakshit S , Sivasankar S ( 2014 ) . Biomechanics of cell adhesion : how force regulates the lifetime of adhesive bonds at the single molecule level . Phys Chem Chem Phys 16 , 2211 – 2223 . Ramachandran V , Yago T , Epperson TK , Kobzdej MM , Nollert MU , Cum - mings RD , Zhu C , McEver RP ( 2001 ) . Dimerization of a selectin and its ligand stabilizes cell rolling and enhances tether strength in shear flow . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98 , 10166 – 10171 . Robert P , Aleksic M , Dushek O , Cerundolo V , Bongrand P , van der Merwe PA ( 2012 ) . Kinetics and mechanics of two - dimensional interactions between T cell receptors and different activating ligands . Biophys J 102 , 248 – 257 . Roca - Cusachs P , Conte V , Trepat X ( 2017 ) . Quantifying forces in cell biology . Nat Cell Biol 19 , 742 – 751 . Roca - Cusachs P , Gauthier NC , Del Rio A , Sheetz MP ( 2009 ) . Clustering of α ( 5 ) β ( 1 ) integrins determines adhesion strength whereas α ( v ) β ( 3 ) and talin enable mechanotransduction . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106 , 16245 – 16250 . Volume 28 November 7 , 2017 Receptor - mediated cell mechanosensing | 3155 Xiang X , Lee CY , Li T , Chen W , Lou J , Zhu C ( 2011 ) . Structural basis and kinetics of force - induced conformational changes of an α A domain - containing integrin . PLoS ONE 6 , e27946 . Xiao T , Takagi J , Coller BS , Wang JH , Springer TA ( 2004 ) . Structural basis for allostery in integrins and binding to fibrinogen - mimetic therapeutics . Nature 432 , 59 – 67 . Xie C , Zhu J , Chen X , Mi L , Nishida N , Springer TA ( 2010 ) . Structure of an integrin with an α I domain , complement receptor type 4 . EMBO J 29 , 666 – 679 . Yago T , Lou J , Wu T , Yang J , Miner JJ , Coburn L , Lopez JA , Cruz MA , Dong JF , McIntire LV , et al . ( 2008 ) . Platelet glycoprotein Ib α forms catch bonds with human WT vWF but not with type 2B von Willebrand disease vWF . J Clin Invest 118 , 3195 – 3207 . Yago T , Zarnitsyna VI , Klopocki AG , McEver RP , Zhu C ( 2007 ) . Transport gov - erns flow - enhanced cell tethering through L - selectin at threshold shear . Biophys J 92 , 330 – 342 . Yamada KM , Miyamoto S ( 1995 ) . Integrin transmembrane signaling and cytoskeletal control . Curr Opin Cell Biol 7 , 681 – 689 . Yang D , Ward A , Halvorsen K , Wong WP ( 2016 ) . Multiplexed single - mole - cule force spectroscopy using a centrifuge . Nat Commun 7 , 11026 . Yao M , Goult BT , Chen H , Cong P , Sheetz MP , Yan J ( 2014 ) . Mechanical ac - tivation of vinculin binding to talin locks talin in an unfolded conforma - tion . Sci Rep 4 , 4610 . Yao M , Goult BT , Klapholz B , Hu X , Toseland CP , Guo Y , Cong P , Sheetz MP , Yan J ( 2016 ) . The mechanical response of talin . Nat Commun 7 , 11966 . Ye F , Hu G , Taylor D , Ratnikov B , Bobkov AA , McLean MA , Sligar SG , Taylor KA , Ginsberg MH ( 2010 ) . Recreation of the terminal events in physi - ological integrin activation . J Cell Biol 188 , 157 – 173 . Zhang C , Liu J , Jiang X , Haydar N , Zhang C , Shan H , Zhu J ( 2013a ) . Modu - lation of integrin activation and signaling by α 1 / α 1’ - helix unbending at the junction . J Cell Sci 126 , 5735 – 5747 . Zhang HQ , Berg JS , Li ZL , Wang YL , Lang P , Sousa AD , Bhaskar A , Cheney RE , Stromblad S ( 2004 ) . Myosin - X provides a motor - based link between integrins and the cytoskeleton . Nat Cell Biol 6 , 523 – 531 . Zhang W , Deng W , Zhou L , Xu Y , Yang W , Liang X , Wang Y , Kulman JD , Zhang XF , Li R ( 2015 ) . Identification of a juxtamembrane mechanosensi - tive domain in the platelet mechanosensor glycoprotein Ib - IX complex . Blood 125 , 562 – 569 . Zhang X , Halvorsen K , Zhang CZ , Wong WP , Springer TA ( 2009 ) . Mecha - noenzymatic cleavage of the ultralarge vascular protein von Willebrand factor . Science 324 , 1330 – 1334 . Zhang Y , Ge C , Zhu C , Salaita K ( 2014 ) . DNA - based digital tension probes reveal integrin forces during early cell adhesion . Nat Commun 5 , 5167 . Zhang Y , Jiang N , Zarnitsyna VI , Klopocki AG , McEver RP , Zhu C ( 2013b ) . P - selectin glycoprotein ligand - 1 forms dimeric interactions with E - selectin but monomeric interactions with L - selectin on cell surfaces . PLoS ONE 8 , e57202 . Zhang Y , Wei F , Poh YC , Jia Q , Chen J , Chen J , Luo J , Yao W , Zhou W , Huang W , et al . ( 2017 ) . Interfacing 3D magnetic twisting cytometry with confocal fluorescence microscopy to image force responses in living cells . Nat Protoc 12 , 1437 – 1450 . Zhou YF , Eng ET , Zhu J , Lu C , Walz T , Springer TA ( 2012 ) . Sequence and structure relationships within von Willebrand factor . Blood 120 , 449 – 458 . Zhu C , Jiang N , Huang J , Zarnitsyna VI , Evavold BD ( 2013a ) . Insights from in situ analysis of TCR - pMHC recognition : response of an interaction network . Immunol Rev 251 , 49 – 64 . Zhu C , Yago T , Lou J , Zarnitsyna VI , McEver RP ( 2008a ) . Mechanisms for flow - enhanced cell adhesion . Ann Biomed Eng 36 , 604 – 621 . Zhu J , Luo BH , Xiao T , Zhang C , Nishida N , Springer TA ( 2008b ) . Structure of a complete integrin ectodomain in a physiologic resting state and activation and deactivation by applied forces . Mol Cell 32 , 849 – 861 . Zhu J , Zhu J , Springer TA ( 2013b ) . Complete integrin headpiece opening in eight steps . J Cell Biol 201 , 1053 – 1068 . Tajik A , Zhang Y , Wei F , Sun J , Jia Q , Zhou W , Singh R , Khanna N , Belmont AS , Wang N ( 2016 ) . Transcription upregulation via force - induced direct stretching of chromatin . Nat Mater 15 , 1287 – 1296 . Takagi J , Petre BM , Walz T , Springer TA ( 2002 ) . Global conformational rear - rangements in integrin extracellular domains in outside - in and inside - out signaling . Cell 110 , 599 – 511 . Takagi J , Strokovich K , Springer TA , Walz T ( 2003 ) . Structure of integrin α 5 β 1 in complex with fibronectin . EMBO J 22 , 4607 – 4615 . Tan JL , Tien J , Pirone DM , Gray DS , Bhadriraju K , Chen CS ( 2003 ) . Cells ly - ing on a bed of microneedles : an approach to isolate mechanical force . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100 , 1484 – 1489 . Toyjanova J , Hannen E , Bar - Kochba E , Darling EM , Henann DL , Franck C ( 2014 ) . 3D viscoelastic traction force microscopy . Soft Matter 10 , 8095 – 8106 . Trepat X , Fredberg JJ ( 2011 ) . Plithotaxis and emergent dynamics in collec - tive cellular migration . Trends Cell Biol 21 , 638 – 646 . Ulrichts H , Udvardy M , Lenting PJ , Pareyn I , Vandeputte N , Vanhoorelbeke K , Deckmyn H ( 2006 ) . Shielding of the A1 domain by the D ′ D3 domains of von Willebrand factor modulates its interaction with platelet glyco - protein Ib - IX - V . J Biol Chem 281 , 4699 – 4707 . Upadhyaya A ( ( 2017 ) . Mechanosensing in the immune response . Semin Cell Dev Biol 71 , 137 – 145 . Vahidkhah K , Diamond SL , Bagchi P ( 2014 ) . Platelet dynamics in three - dimensional simulation of whole blood . Biophys J 106 , 2529 – 2540 . van der Merwe PA , Dushek O ( 2011 ) . Mechanisms for T cell receptor trig - gering . Nat Rev Immunol 11 , 47 – 55 . Vanhoorelbeke K , De Meyer SF Pareyn I , Melchior C , Plancon S , Margue C , Pradier O , Fondu P , Kieffer N , Springer TA , Deckmyn H ( 2009 ) . The novel S527F mutation in the integrin β 3 chain induces a high affinity α IIb β 3 receptor by hindering adoption of the bent conformation . J Biol Chem 284 , 14914 – 14920 . Vogel V ( 2006 ) . Mechanotransduction involving multimodular proteins : converting force into biochemical signals . Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct 35 , 459 – 488 . Vogel V , Sheetz M ( 2006 ) . Local force and geometry sensing regulate cell functions . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 7 , 265 – 275 . Volk T , Fessler LI , Fessler JH ( 1990 ) . A role for integrin in the formation of sarcomeric cytoarchitecture . Cell 63 , 525 – 536 . Wan J , Ristenpart WD , Stone HA ( 2008 ) . Dynamics of shear - induced ATP release from red blood cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105 , 16432 – 16437 . Wan Z , Chen X , Chen H , Ji Q , Chen Y , Wang J , Cao Y , Wang F , Lou J , Tang Z , Liu W ( 2015 ) . The activation of IgM - or isotype - switched IgG - and IgE - BCR exhibits distinct mechanical force sensitivity and threshold . eLife 4 , e06925 . Wang JH , Reinherz EL ( 2012 ) . The structural basis of αβ T - lineage immune recognition : TCR docking topologies , mechanotransduction , and co - receptor function . Immunol Rev 250 , 102 – 119 . Wang N , Butler JP , Ingber DE ( 1993 ) . Mechanotransduction across the cell surface and through the cytoskeleton . Science 260 , 1124 – 1127 . Wang N , Tytell JD , Ingber DE ( 2009 ) . Mechanotransduction at a distance : mechanically coupling the extracellular matrix with the nucleus . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 10 , 75 – 82 . Wang X , Ha T ( 2013 ) . Defining single molecular forces required to activate integrin and notch signaling . Science 340 , 991 – 994 . Wang Y , Botvinick EL , Zhao Y , Berns MW , Usami S , Tsien RY , Chien S ( 2005 ) . Visualizing the mechanical activation of Src . Nature 434 , 1040 – 1045 . Welch MP , Odland GF , Clark RA ( 1990 ) . Temporal relationships of F - actin bun - dle formation , collagen and fibronectin matrix assembly , and fibronectin receptor expression to wound contraction . J Cell Biol 110 , 133 – 145 . Wen JH , Vincent LG , Fuhrmann A , Choi YS , Hribar KC , Taylor - Weiner H , Chen S , Engler AJ ( 2014 ) . Interplay of matrix stiffness and protein tether - ing in stem cell differentiation . Nat Mater 13 , 979 – 987 . Wozniak MA , Modzelewska K , Kwong L , Keely PJ ( 2004 ) . Focal adhesion regulation of cell behavior . Biochim Biophys Acta 1692 , 103 – 119 . Wu T , Lin J , Cruz MA , Dong JF , Zhu C ( 2010 ) . Force - induced cleavage of single VWFA1A2A3 tridomains by ADAMTS - 13 . Blood 115 , 370 – 378 .