© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015 P . Díaz et al . ( Eds . ) : IS - EUD 2015 , LNCS 9083 , pp . 156 – 170 , 2015 . DOI : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 18425 - 8 _ 11 Social - QAS : Tailorable Quality Assessment Service for Social Media Content Christian Reuter (  ) , Thomas Ludwig , Michael Ritzkatis , and Volkmar Pipek Institute for Information Systems , University of Siegen , Kohlbettstr . 15 , 57072 , Siegen , Germany { christian . reuter , thomas . ludwig , michael . ritzkatis , volkmar . pipek } @ uni - siegen . de Abstract . More than 3 billion people use the Internet , many of whom also use social media services such as the social network Facebook with about 1 . 35 billion active users monthly or the microblogging platform Twitter numbering approximately 284 million active users monthly . This paper researches how a tailorable quality assessment service can assist the use of citizen - generated con - tent from social media . In particular , we want to study how users can articulate their personal quality criteria appropriately . A presentation of related work is followed by an empirical study on the use of social media in the field of emer - gency management , focusing on situation assessment practices by the emergen - cy services . Based on this , we present the tailorable quality assessment service ( QAS ) for social media content , which has been implemented and integrated into an existing application for both volunteers and the emergency services . Keywords : Social media · Information quality · Tailoring · End User Develop - ment · Emergencies 1 Introduction In times of a widespread adoption of interactive web technologies and social media , the importance of citizen - generated content is increasing constantly . According to the definition of the Organization for Economic Co - operation and Development ( OECD ) [ 20 ] , user - generated content is “content that has been made publicly available via the internet” and reflects a “certain amount of creative effort” , and which is “created out - side of professional routines and practices” . In recent emergencies such as the 2012 hurricane Sandy or the 2013 European floods , both the people affected and volunteers alike used social media to communicate with each other and to coordinate private relief activities [ 11 ] . Since the involvement of citizens is mostly uncoordinated and the content is therefore not necessarily created in a structured way , a vast amount of resulting data has to be analyzed . Appropriate methods of valuation are essential for the analysis , whereby a consistent evaluation of the quality of information can be complex [ 6 ] . Especially in cases where a selection has to be made from a variety of information sources and formats , it is helpful if the evaluation can be made easier by applying diverse quality criteria . christian . reuter @ uni - siegen . de Social - QAS : Tailorable Quality Assessment Service for Social Media Content 157 This design case study [ 41 ] aims to examine the challenges arising from the integra - tion of citizen - generated content and especially the evaluation of information from social media . Based on a review of related work , we sommarize the results of our con - ducted empirical study on the use of citizen - generated content and social media by the emergency services . Based on the challenges focusing on individual and dynamic qual - ity assessments of social media data , we have implemented a platform independent quality assessment service ( QAS ) for social media data . Further we have prototypically implemented and evaluated QAS into two reference applications [ 15 , 27 ] . 2 Related Work : Situation Assessment with Social Media Information is essential for situation assessment during emergencies and has to be available at the right time , at the right place and in the right format [ 12 ] . Endsley [ 4 ] distinguishes between situation awareness as a “state of knowledge” and situation assessment as the “process of achieving , acquiring , or maintaining” that knowledge ; and sees information gathering as a selection process leading to the construction of a mental model in accordance with individual goals . Since emergencies are not only time - critical but also unique , they generate a special demand for information that cannot be predicted . It is difficult to have all the essential information available [ 37 ] . The availability of as many sources as possible , which can be accessed without delay , would appear to be indispensable . At the same time , it is crucial to avoid a potential overload of information in such a way that the decision making is not influenced [ 10 ] . Information systems support both situation assessment [ 22 ] and decision making [ 40 ] in crisis management . It is , however , especially when dealing with such seldom used technologies within emergencies and while assessing social media that chal - lenges still arise . Adaptations of these technologies and particularly of the information being considered are necessary and become especially important at ‘use - time’ [ 5 , 21 , 33 ] . Concepts of End - User Development ( EUD ) can support flexible adaptations by enabling end - users to adapt and reconfigure information systems independently [ 13 ] . EUD is understood as all “methods , techniques , and tools that allow users of software sys - tems , who are acting as non - professional software developers , at some point to create , modify or extend a software artifact” [ 13 ] . One important concept of the discourse of EUD is tailoring , referring to the change of a “stable” aspect of an artifact [ 9 ] . How - ever , what is ‘tailoring’ for the one person can be ‘use’ by another . Tailorability es - sentially has to be one important aspect of software with regard to its establishment in practice . Mashups can enable EUD to combine services or information from various sources [ 1 ] . In addition to information that is provided automatically ( meteorological data , water levels , etc . ) , there are two other kinds of information sources provided by people : emergency services in the field from whom information can be requested [ 16 ] and other individuals and organizations not actively participating in dealing with the emergency situation . In the case of a house coal , the number of residents can be re - quested from the registration office , but the estimation of the fire’s size and the num - ber of affected people can only be performed on - site . For example during a power blackout , electricity suppliers can provide the emergency services with better and christian . reuter @ uni - siegen . de 158 C . Reuter et al . faster information about which areas are affected than this information could be ga - thered on - site [ 12 ] . However , a lot of pictures of the emergency itself can be found on social media platforms . Such examples show that external information can speed up the process and sometimes cannot be gathered on - site . Thereby information provided by citizens is not always objective – opposed to data measured by sensors . However , sometimes citizen generated content is very accurate – illustrated at a comparison of Wikipedia and Britannica encyclopedia articles [ 8 ] . In some cases the subjectivity of citizen - provided reports can generate some sort of vigilantism [ 28 ] . Additionally , the misinterpretation of a situation – whether deliberate or not – can lead to potential misinformation ; this can result from the reporter paying too little attention to some aspects of the situation or from an incorrect representation of the facts [ 36 ] . However some information cannot be obtained from other sources [ 42 ] . There are already ap - proaches concerning the selection and use of citizen - generated content but which do not support a complete quality assessment : − Twitcident [ 35 ] is used to select tweets by keywords , the type of message or the user and displaying them on a map . At the moment , quality assessment based on meta - information such as the time of creation is not possible . Further , it does not include any information from other social media platforms . − SensePlace2 [ 29 ] shows another possible solution for displaying georeferenced information on a situation map gained from tweets . The problem is , however , that it collects an extensive amount of data without quality assessment so that the in - formation overload problem is not dealt with . − Tweet4act [ 3 ] enables the tracing and classification of information published on Twitter . It is realized through matching every Tweet against an emergency - specific dictionary to classify them into emergency periods . Methods of machine learning based on dictionaries and language classification are used . − With TwitInfo [ 18 ] , information for a specific event can be collected , classified and visualized . Aside from a graphical visualization , additional information about the quality of the actual information is presented . A personal selection of the quality requirements of the user is not implemented . − Ushahidi [ 19 ] enables citizens to exchange information . Additionally , this informa - tion can be made accessible for emergency services . The direct communication and the spread of unfiltered information can cause an information overload which forces the user to evaluate the information manually according to its quality . − Tweak the Tweet [ 32 ] supports the evaluation and classification of information . Even though the syntax allows variations of the quality assessments , the evaluation of information in only one specific format disables the possibility to show them on a clearly arranged situation map . In summary , it can be stated that there are already many studies and approaches which deal with citizen - generated content ; but with regard to the subjectivity of quality as - sessment , the current approaches are missing a tailorable tool for assessing social media information . Our research question is therefore , how the concepts of EUD can be applied to support individuals in extracting relevant social media information . christian . reuter @ uni - siegen . de Social - QAS : Tailorable Quality Assessment Service for Social Media Content 159 3 Pre - study : Social Media Assessment by Emergency Services To gain a deeper understanding of the impact citizen - generated content has on social media within emergencies , we analyzed the data from a previous empirical study on the current work practices of the emergency services ( focus on fire departments and police ) in two different regions of Germany . The results of this pre - study have already been published [ 15 , 26 ] and we aggregate the main results within this paper . 3 . 1 Methodology The bases for the data analysis were the results of multiple empirical studies from 2010 to 2012 [ 23 ] . The studies were embedded in a scenario framework describing a storm with many minor and connected incidents and energy breakdowns , which had been developed together with actors from the police and fire departments , county administration and an ENO . The purpose of the scenario was to be able to create a common understanding of an occurring emergency quickly and therefore it helped to increase validity and comparability in our interviews . First we conducted observations in order to acquire knowledge regarding the prac - tical work in inter - organizational crisis management . The observations took place in a control center on a normal working day ( observation time : 9 hours ) ; in the crisis man - agement group and the operations management during a crisis communication prac - tice course ( 4 hours ) ; as well as at a major cultural event with about 400 , 000 visitors ( 6 hours ) . In addition to observations , we conducted 5 inter - organizational group discussions ( W1 - W5 , each 4 hours with about 10 participants ) to understand the communication methods of inter - organizational crisis management . Furthermore , we conducted 22 individual interviews with actors from the participating organizations ( I01 - I24 ) . Each interview lasted between 1 and 2 hours and followed a guideline , which was separated into three parts . The first part focused on the participants’ role , qualification , tasks and work activities under normal conditions . The second part cov - ered the participants’ tasks during emergencies in our developed scenario framework . The third part covered applied information and communication systems and perceived problems with these tools . To study mobile collaboration practices more closely , also in regards to the creation , exchange and use of information by the response teams and the control center , an additional 5 , partially structured , interviews were conducted ( IM1 - 5 ; each 1 hour ) . Group discussions and interviews were audio recorded and later transcribed for sub - sequent data analysis . The analysis of the data material was based on the inductive approach found in grounded theory approach [ 34 ] . We chose this systematic metho - dology to discover insights about the work practices through the analysis of data . To be able to use this methodology , the transcripts were coded openly and the agents’ state - ments were divided into text modules and later into categories . The knowledge pre - viously acquired in the literature study was used to heighten theoretical sensitivity [ 34 ] . christian . reuter @ uni - siegen . de 160 C . Reuter et al . 3 . 2 Results I : Use of Citizen - Generated Content for Situation Assessment Generally it is not possible to base a situation assessment solely on the information gathered from one’s own organization . External information can improve the informa - tion basis ( W3 ) . In addition to textual data , pictures provided by citizens are often used . These pictures enable better assessment of how the emergency was caused and what the actual situation looks like : “If you look at information during demonstrations or other events , you can see that it is often provided faster via Twitter than we can manage on police radio or mobile phone [ … ] . When events are taking place , they can also often be found on the inter - net , accompanied by pictures and videos . We will have a lot more to do with that in the future ; I am pretty sure about that . ” ( I02 ) . One example is the debriefing of an event : “Our investigators like to use fire pic - tures because obviously our criminal investigation department is not on - site when the fire starts . Of course , they depend [ on them ] [ … ] to see the fire behavior . ” ( I02 ) . But information is not always necessarily helpful : “Information is only helpful when it affects my behavior . Any information that does not affect my behavior is a sensory overload” ( I06 ) . An attempt is therefore made to gather only that information which is relevant : “We try to obtain information from each and every caller” ( I15 ) . Even in emergency situations , people on - site are becoming involved in supporting the emergency services : “There are many special cases where you need basic skills or previous knowledge but there are also cases in which you can fall back on knowledge and skills provided by citizens” ( I11 ) . Regardless of the large amount of information , the time factor exerts considerable pressure on the emergency services . Due to this , it is always important that each operation is executed promptly . There is “no time to deal with strangers additionally” ( I02 ) . The fact still remains that citizen - generated content may be defective and therefore requires information assessment . 3 . 3 Results II : Selection and Quality Assessment of Social Media Content The question : “Who is going to evaluate this now [ … ] and is it really going to help us to assess the situation ? ” ( I03 ) often appears in emergency situations . The sheer amount of citizen - generated content makes its use especially difficult : “Above all , 290 [ messages ] of 300 are trash . You can only get something from ten reports” ( I02 ) . The mass of information quickly raises the problem of how to handle it : “You have to read them all . Of course it would be helpful if there was a preselection” ( I02 ) . For this reason , automatic selection is recommendable : “It would be nice if there were a selection that separates the important from the unimportant” ( I03 ) . Neverthe - less , information has to appear in a certain quantity to render it trustworthy for the emergency services : “It’s a problem if I only have one source . It is certainly more reliable to have five sources than just one” ( I15 ) . External sources are especially susceptible to providing misinformation ( I14 , I15 ) and have to be verified ( I15 ) be - cause of this : You “have to be careful with the content because it does not always reflect reality” ( I14 ) – “In such cases it becomes obvious that someone is trying to lead us up the garden path [ … ] and we have to evaluate the information for christian . reuter @ uni - siegen . de Social - QAS : Tailorable Quality Assessment Service for Social Media Content 161 ourselves” ( I02 ) . In these cases , misinformation is not always intended ; potentially it can result from the subjective perception of the situation which can appear very dif - ferent to a neutral observer . In conclusion , the use of citizen - generated content from social media fails because of the need for assessment by the emergency services : “There is simply a bottleneck which we cannot overcome” ( I02 ) . Overall it is noticeable that “the more precise information , the more relevant it is” ( I02 ) . This kind of precision can be achieved by assessment . There has to be some form of guarantee that the selected information is useful for the emergency services ( I02 , I03 ) . Global selection also proves to be difficult because “it does not seem poss - ible to me that we can select in advance what is important for the section leader . He might need the same information as the chief of operations – or not” ( IM01 ) . This therefore necessitates the possibility of flexible assessment criteria ( I19 ) . Due to the time - critical aspect of emergency situations , it is imperative that the personal selec - tion of information be supported since every member of the emergency team has to decide “relatively quickly between the important and the unimportant” ( I19 ) . The first impression has to include some amount of significance and has to be help - ful for the situation assessment : “If someone he takes a photo of a window , I know that he was really there . But where is that window exactly ? ” ( I16 ) . This shows that pictures need additional meta - information just as normal textual information does . Pictures can be especially helpful for assessing crowds of people at huge events : “ If someone had noticed that a relevant number of people were congregating in certain areas , you could have closed the entrance immediately with the help of the security ” ( I06 ) . Even though this entails gathering a lot of information , “most people [ … ] do not [ know ] what counts and what kind of information we need” ( I02 ) . There is therefore a risk that the information has no additional value and cannot be used in the emergency situation : “I do not believe that who is not connected in some way to the police or the fire service is capable of providing useful information in these stress situations” ( I02 ) . It is unusual for an untrained citizen to have knowledge of this sort . “You have to be very careful with this kind of information” ( I14 ) . 3 . 4 Results III : Responsibility and Decision Making Ultimately , it is a member of the emergency team who has to take responsibility for actions taken and who also has to decide if the information is used or not ( I15 ) . Misin - terpretation is possible both by humans as well as through computer support . It does not matter how good the assessment mechanism is : there “remains a risk and the person in charge has to bear it , it is as simple as that” ( I15 ) . That is the reason why the emergency services are so careful when using external information . In conclusion it can be stated that “assessing information , assessing it correctly and dealing with it [ … ] is a challenging task” ( I15 ) . Every single piece of information is an input to evaluate the whole situation : “You add more and more flesh to the skeleton you start off with , so that in the end , you have a picture ; not just a silhouette but a whole figure and any actions executed by the police are mostly based on that figure” ( I16 ) . christian . reuter @ uni - siegen . de 162 C . Reuter et al . S ituation assessment influences the actions which in return influence the situation . However , it does not always make sense just to increase the amount of information . Because as the American political scientist Simon has early stated in 1971 , the higher the amount of information , the higher the consumption of information , which in turn creates a “poverty of attention and a need to allocate that attention efficiently among the overabundance of information sources that might consume it” [ 30 ] . 4 Concept : Tailorable Quality Assessment Service for Social Media Content It is not only our literature review and the empirical study which have shown the qual - ity assessment of mass information and extractions of relevant information to be a major challenge . It seems comprehensible that different circumstances require differ - ent assessment methods . The option to combine these methods could therefore contri - bute to the improvement of the quality assessment practice [ 15 ] . Several assessment methods have already been shown in section 2 . In section 3 it has been shown that different assessment methods can support the subjective quality assessment in differ - ent situations . Our concept enables the assessment of ( social media ) content with 15 assessment methods ( Table 1 ) which can be divided into four categories according to their technical execution : 1 . The rating of metadata contains five assessment methods ( author frequency , tem - poral proximity , local proximity , number of followers / likes , amount of metadata ) , in which either the deviation from the entered research criteria or the absolute ap - pearance is determined by assessing the difference . 2 . The rating based on the content provides two assessment methods ( frequency of search keyword , stop words ) , that ascertain the appearance of certain words ( or their synonyms ) from a list . 3 . The rating based on the classification of the message uses six assessment me - thods ( sentiment analysis , fear factor , happiness factor , named entity recognition , emoticon , slang ) , which determine the appearance of words using word lists . In this way , information is graded in different categories . 4 . The rating based on scientific methods applies two assessment methods ( Shan - non Information Theory ( Entropy ) , term frequency , inverse document frequency ) . If the ( non - specified ) end - user of an application based on QAS has the possibility to choose several assessment methods , a subjective quality of information can be determined . Furthermore , this choice and the different categories allow further ap - plication of the quality assessment service within several scenarios . christian . reuter @ uni - siegen . de Social - QAS : Tailorable Quality Assessment Service for Social Media Content 163 Table 1 . Implemented Quality Assessment Methods # Metho d / Criterion Descri p tion A Assessment of met ada t a 1 A u thor Freq u ency ( Rep u tation ) N u mber of messa g es from the same a u thor in the messa g e set . The more messa g es an a u thor writes , the more knowled g e abo u t the sit u ation is as - s u med . 2 Temporal P roximity ( C u rrency ) Temporal proximity of the messa g es to the center of the search period . The closer the messa g e is to the search moment , the more certain it is that the information is relevant 3 Local P roximity Distance between the place the messa g e was created and the incident ’ s place . The shorter the distance , the hi g her the probability that the messa g e is abo u t the c u rrent disaster . 4 Followers / Likes ( Credibility ) An increasin g de g ree of credibility is ass u med in proportion to the g rowin g n u mber of likes / followers conferred on a partic u lar messa g e / a u thor . 5 Metadata ( P ict u res / Links ) Usin g an ima g e or other media material in addition to text u al information can be u sef u l . This assessment criterion meas u res the amo u nt of metadata . B Assessment b a se d on content 6 Freq u ency of search keyword ( Interpretability ) It is ens u red that the keyword is not contained randomly in the messa g e b u t act u ally addresses the iss u e . The messa g e is also searched for synonyms . 7 Stop words The n u mber of stop words ( e . g . “ so ” ) does not increase the validity of the messa g e as these words do not provide information . Therefor the messa g e u tility increases as u se of stop words decreases . C Assessment b a se d on cl a ssific a tion of the mess ag e 8 Sentiment Analysis ( Impartiality ) The messa g e is eval u ated re g ardin g its emotional property . Emotional messa g es can distort the meanin g , especially if they are motivated by fear . 9 Ne g ative Sentiment ( Fear Factor ) The Fear Factor meas u res the de g ree of expression of fear in the messa g e by the freq u ency of words that are related to the s u bject of fear . 10 P ositive Sentiment ( Happiness Factor ) The Happiness Factor , meas u res the de g ree of expression of joy in the messa g e by the freq u ency of words that are related to the s u bject joy . 11 Named Entity Reco g nition ( NER ) N u mber of entities in the messa g e . An entity indicates the connection of the information ’ s content to another information so u rce . Th u s the information q u ality increases by the n u mber of entities in a messa g e . 12 Emoticon Conver - sion P rovides the ability to convert emoticons into lan gu a g e expressions s u p - portin g the readability for different a u diences . 13 Slan g Conversion P rovides the ability to convert slan g words into standard lan gu a g e s u pport - in g the readability for different a u diences . D Assessment b a se d on scientific metho d s 14 tf - Idf ( term freq u ency – Inverse doc u ment freq u ency ) The appearance of individ u al search keywords ( term freq u ency ) with the freq u ency of appearance in all messa g es ( inverse doc u ment freq u ency ) . Usef u l if more than one sin g le keyword is u sed beca u se the appearance of a fra g ment of the whole term which only occ u rs freq u ently in few doc u ments is wei g hted hi g her than the appearance of a fra g ment which occ u rs in many doc u ments b u t less freq u ently . 15 Shannon Infor - mation Theory ( Entropy ) Shannon theory of information . The avera g e amo u nt of information con - tained in each messa g e received . christian . reuter @ uni - siegen . de 164 C . Reuter et al . In general : At first , the individual messages are evaluated absolutely concerning the particular method . Afterwards , the relative score of each message is determined by searching for the highest and the lowest absolute score . The message with the highest absolute score is graded “1 . 0” ( 100 % ) , the one with the lowest absolute score “0 . 0” ( 0 % ) . Subsequently , single scores are weighted and an overall score is obtained . Additionally , in order to address both the requirements of querying multiple sources and enabling the subjectivity of quality assessment , the individual user must be given the opportunity to select the desired social media sources . 5 Implementation and Integration 5 . 1 Implementation of Social - QAS The actual quality assessment service is realized as a service following the paradigm of a web - based , service - oriented architecture ( SOA ) . Using such an architecture , it is possible to perform the rating centrally and thus enable its integration into different applications by providing assessment results along with the original data in JSON format ( JavaScript Object Notation ) . The interface is called “via HTTP - GET” and query parameters are added at the end of the URL ( separated by “ & ” ) . The server - sided information rating is expected to reduce the client’s processing load . The APIs of the particular social network providers are used to extract data from the social networks [ 27 ] . Within the scope of this paper , Twitter and Facebook are considered especially as necessary APIs exist for them : these APIs provide a variety of opportun - ities to both export and import data regarding the related social network . To gather semantic meanings of the content of the message , a Named Entity Re - cognizer ( NER ) ( No . 11 ) is used . The Stanford NER 1 is available as Java library for free . The corpus “deWac generalized classifier” was deployed for the NER because it is especially suitable for German messages from social networks . The library Clas - sifier4J 2 was used for the creation of a Bayes Classifier ( No . 8 ) , that allows the cate - gorization of information into different classes because it can be skilled with lists of words . The list of synonyms ( No . 6 ) was been generated using the Open Thesaurus web services 3 . A geographical reference is needed to visualize the information . As the majority of information does not contain any geographical metadata , it has to be geo - coded . The Gisgraphy Geocoder 4 is usable by web services and geocodes location information for any map material . For reasons of speed , a list is applied for each loca - tion that has already been geolocated , whereof the coordinates can be determined without geolocation . GSON 5 provides an automatic generation of a JSON object by means of a java object model and is therefore used for conversion . 1 http : / / nlp . stanford . edu / software / CRF - NER . shtml 2 http : / / classifier4j . sourceforge . net / 3 http : / / www . openthesaurus . de / 4 http : / / www . gisgraphy . com / 5 https : / / code . google . com / p / google - gson / christian . reuter @ uni - siegen . de Social - QAS : Tailorable Quality Assessment Service for Social Media Content 165 5 . 2 Available Data While working with QAS based on the available type of social media different data attributes are accessible ( Table 2 ) . Furthermore some technical and business oriented limitations become apparent [ 27 ] . Therefore it is not possible to apply all quality as - sessment methods in the same way . Table 2 . Source - based data attributes Attributes Facebook Google + Instagram Twitter YouTube Date , Time Given Given Given Given Given Sender Given Given Given Given Given Title N / A Given Caption N / A Given Tags , Keywords N / A N / A Given N / A Given Comments , Rep - lies , Answers Comments Replies Comments N / A Via Google + Content Given Given Caption Given Description Number of views N / A N / A N / A N / A Given Number of likes Likes Plusoners Likes N / A Likes Number of dislikes N / A N / A N / A N / A Dislikes Number of retweets N / A N / A N / A Given N / A Number of shares Given Resharers N / A N / A N / A Person : Age N / A Age Range N / A N / A Age Range Person : Location Given Given N / A Given Given Person : Number of uploads N / A N / A Given N / A N / A Person : Number of watches N / A N / A N / A N / A N / A Person : Number of total posts N / A N / A N / A Given N / A Person : Real name Given Given Given Given Given 5 . 3 Integration of QAS into a Web Application and a Facebook - App To test the implemented service , we have integrated QAS into a web - based applica - tion specified for emergency services as well as a Facebook - app “XHELP” to support volunteer moderators during disasters . In the following we will outline prototypically the implementation into XHELP , which allows information to be both acquired and distributed cross - media and cross - channel [ 25 ] . Inside this application , it is possible to search for information using different quali - ty parameters and to perform a quality assessment ( Figure 1 ) . For this , the user de - cides which assessment criteria to choose using a slider . Integrating the user in this way meets the requirements for a flexible and manageable quality assessment , as identified in the pre - study . christian . reuter @ uni - siegen . de 166 C . Reuter et al . Fig . 1 . Quality Assessment Service integrated into an application Fig . 2 . Search results ( left ) , degree of completion ( lower left ) and map presentation ( right ) Keywords Network Selection Time Location Area Selection and weighting of Quality Criteria christian . reuter @ uni - siegen . de Social - QAS : Tailorable Quality Assessment Service for Social Media Content 167 The results of a search are illustrated both as a table and visually , on a situation map . A wealth of meta information - such as the degree of completion of particular methods - is displayed as tool tips in the table . At the same time , the situation map enables the direct determination of the proximity of the information to the search loca - tion ( Figure 2 ) . This way , the user is able to choose from various procedures the mode in which s / he wishes to view the results , thus increasing the flexibility of the applica - tion . This user interface is only one of a range of ways in which QAS can be used . 5 . 4 Key Advantages In summary , QAS unifies the following functionalities : • The quality of information generated by citizens can be assessed on the basis of several methods . • Assessment does not only take place on the basis of metadata , but additional on the basis of the content . • The user decides how to weight each method . The subjective quality of a message emerges when all the assessments of every method have been combined . • QAS is very flexible because it provides the opportunity to extend the sources and assessment methods very easily . • The integration and usage in other applications is possible because the implementa - tion is SOA - based . 6 Conclusion This article illustrates how a tailorable quality assessment of citizen - generated infor - mation from social media can support the situation assessment practices of crisis management actors – both emergency services [ 15 ] as well as informal volunteers [ 25 ] . As a starting point , we analyzed the results of an already conducted empirical study involving emergency services regarding the use of citizen - generated content and social media within their current work practices [ 15 ] . Based on literature and empirical findings , we derived different quality criteria and applied them on informa - tion from social media . We implemented QAS , which not only incorporated all the quality criteria but also offered the user the chance to adjust them according to the requirements of the current situation . We contribute three results that extend the cur - rent state of the art : 1 . An analysis of dealing with citizen - generated content in emergency situations through an empirical study which highlights the selection and quality assessment of citizen - generated content in emergencies . 2 . A concept for a tailorable quality assessment service for social media as well as a running SOA - oriented and tailorable implementation that can be integrated into different applications ( section 4 and 5 . 1 ) 3 . A reference implementation of QAS inside an existing web - based application fpr emergency services [ 15 ] and an existing web - app for volunteers [ 25 ] ( section 5 . 2 ) . christian . reuter @ uni - siegen . de 168 C . Reuter et al . In summary , the flexibility in form of tailoring options for source platform selection and quality assessment criteria is helpful due to the fact that situation assessment has been shown to be very subjective . Thus information needs depend on personal feel - ings , experience and the situation itself . Compared to the current state of the art , So - cial - QAS , developed within this work , has a number of advantages : in contrast to Vivacqua et al . [ 39 ] , it is not just the emergency services who receive information ; additionally , the work of unbound volunteers can be supported through flexible as - sessment and free accessibility . A very wide base of information is realized using several social networks as information sources [ 35 ] . Compared to Starbird et al . [ 31 ] , who limit the amount of information by using a fixed syntax , in QAS all the informa - tion from various sources is considered . Verma et al . [ 38 ] place restrictions by only allowing the usage of a number of assessment criteria that can be combined with each other . Our results could prove interesting for other application fields as well . Wherever information is gathered and analyzed and information systems are implemented to support the task , one question still poses a challenge : How can information systems be implemented in such a way as to allow the automatic selection of relevant data and , at the same time , afford end - users the possibility to adapt this automation , thus enabling tailorable quality assessment according to their needs [ 2 ] . This is especially of importance if situations and the context of work differ and if practices evolve over time . Concepts like Social - QAS will help to allow end - users to articulate their needs in a more appropriate way . Our work still has some limitations . Not all the criteria that are relevant for quality assessment are included within QAS . Furthermore , according to the context , the amount of criteria might overburden the cognitive skills of end - users . It is , therefore , important to define standards and to allow end - users to adapt them , whereby different tailoring power might then require different skills , according to MacLean et al . [ 17 ] ; thus local developers may be needed [ 7 ] . Another limitation is that Social - QAS needs a good data base to encompass all its rating mechanisms . But as table 2 has shown , currently not all social media services provide such a sophisticated data base . To get more details about what quality criteria method is appropriated within which scenario , we need to enhance our data base . In future work , we will therefore try to enhance the raw data base from social media to further improve quality assessment for social me - dia content . Our endeavor will be to expand dynamic quality assessment not solely for cross - platform social media content [ 25 ] but also for other types of information sources , such as on - site volunteers [ 14 ] . Acknowledgements . The research project EmerGent’ was funded by a grant of the European Union ( FP7 No . 608352 ) . This paper is an enhanced , refocused and improved version of a paper presented at the 2014 German Informatics Society Conference [ 24 ] . christian . reuter @ uni - siegen . de Social - QAS : Tailorable Quality Assessment Service for Social Media Content 169 References 1 . Cappiello , C . , Daniel , F . , Matera , M . , Picozzi , M . , Weiss , M . : Enabling end user develop - ment through mashups : requirements , abstractions and innovation toolkits . In : Piccinno , A . ( ed . ) IS - EUD 2011 . LNCS , vol . 6654 , pp . 9 – 24 . Springer , Heidelberg ( 2011 ) 2 . Carr , N . : The Glass Cage : Automation and Us . Norton , New York ( 2014 ) 3 . Chowdhury , S . , et al . : Tweet4act : using incident - specific profiles for classifying crisis - related messages . In : Proc . ISCRAM , Baden - Baden , Germany , pp . 834 – 839 ( 2013 ) 4 . Endsley , M . R . : Toward a theory of situation awareness in dynamic systems . Hum . Factors . 37 ( 1 ) , 32 – 64 ( 1995 ) 5 . Fischer , G . , Scharff , E . : Meta - design – design for designers . In : Boyarski , D . , Kellogg , W . ( eds . ) In : Proceedings of the International Conference on Designing Interactive Systems , pp . 396 – 405 . ACM , New York ( 2000 ) 6 . Friberg , T . , et al . : Analysis of information quality criteria in crisis situation as a characte - ristic of complex situations . In : Proc . IQ , Little Rock , USA ( 2010 ) 7 . Gantt , M . , Nardi , B . : Gardeners and gurus : patterns of cooperation among CAD users . In : Proc . CHI , pp . 107 – 117 ( 1992 ) 8 . Giles , J . : Internet encyclopaedias go head to head . Nature 438 , 900 – 901 ( 2005 ) 9 . Henderson , A . , Kyng , M . : There’s no place like home : continuing design in use . In : Greenbaum , J . , Kyng , M . ( eds . ) Design at Work Cooperative Design of Computer Sys - tems , pp . 219 – 240 . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates ( 1991 ) 10 . Hiltz , S . , Plotnick , L . : Dealing with information overload when using social media for emergency management : emerging solutions . In : Proc . ISCRAM , Baden - Baden , Germany , pp . 823 – 827 ( 2013 ) 11 . Kaufhold , M . - A . , Reuter , C . : Vernetzte Selbsthilfe in Sozialen Medien beim Hochwasser 2013 in Deutschland . i - com . 13 ( 1 ) , 20 – 28 ( 2014 ) 12 . Ley , B . , et al . : Supporting improvisation work in inter - organizational crisis management . In : Proc . CHI , pp . 1529 – 1538 . ACM Press , Austin ( 2012 ) 13 . Lieberman , H . , et al . : End - User Development . Springer , Dordrecht ( 2006 ) 14 . Ludwig , T . , et al . : Crowdmonitor : mobile crowd sensing for assessing physical and digital activities of citizens during emergencies . In : Proceedings of the Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ) . ACM Press , Seoul , ( 2015 ) 15 . Ludwig , T . , Reuter , C . , Pipek , V . : Social Haystack : Dynamic Quality Assessment of Citi - zen - Generated Content in Social Media during Emergencies . ToCHI ( 2015 , in press ) 16 . Ludwig , T . , et al . : What you see is what i need : mobile reporting practices in emergencies . In : Bertelsen , O . W . , et al . ( eds . ) Proc . ECSCW , pp . 181 – 206 . Springer , Paphos ( 2013 ) 17 . MacLean , A . , et al . : User - tailorable systems : pressing the issues with buttons . In : Proc . CHI . Seattle , USA ( 1990 ) 18 . Marcus , A . , et al . : Twitinfo : aggregating and visualizing microblogs for event exploration . In : Proc . CHI , Vancouver , Canada , pp . 227 – 236 ( 2011 ) 19 . McClendon , S . , Robinson , A . C . : Leveraging geospatially - oriented social media communi - cations in disaster response . In : Proc . ISCRAM , Vancouver , Canada ( 2012 ) 20 . Organisation for Economic Co - operation and Development ( OECD ) : Participative Web : User - Created Content . http : / / www . oecd . org / internet / ieconomy / 38393115 . pdf 21 . Pipek , V . , Wulf , V . : Infrastructuring : Toward an Integrated Perspective on the Design and Use of Information Technology . J . Assoc . Inf . Syst . 10 ( 5 ) , 447 – 473 ( 2009 ) 22 . Reuter , C . , et al . : Ad Hoc Participation in Situation Assessment : Supporting Mobile Colla - boration in Emergencies . ACM Trans . Comput . Interact . 21 ( 5 ) ( 2014 ) christian . reuter @ uni - siegen . de 170 C . Reuter et al . 23 . Reuter , C . : Emergent Collaboration Infrastructures : Technology Design for Inter - Organizational Crisis Management ( Ph . D . Thesis ) . Springer Gabler , Siegen , Germany ( 2014 ) 24 . Reuter , C . , et al . : Entwicklung eines SOA - basierten und anpassbaren bewertungsdienstes für inhalte aus sozialen medien . In : Plöderereder , E . , et al . ( eds . ) Informatik 2014 , Stuttgart , Germany . GI - LNI , pp . 977 – 988 ( 2014 ) 25 . Reuter , C . , et al . : XHELP : design of a cross - platform social - media application to support volunteer moderators in disasters . In : Proc . CHI . ACM Press , Seoul ( 2015 ) 26 . Reuter , C . , Ritzkatis , M . : Adaptierbare bewertung bürgergenerierter inhalte aus sozialen medien . In : Koch , M . , et al . ( eds . ) Mensch & Computer 2014 , pp . 115 – 124 . Oldenbourg - Verlag , München ( 2014 ) 27 . Reuter , C . , Scholl , S . : Technical limitations for designing applications for social media . In : Koch , M . , et al . ( eds . ) Mensch & Computer 2014 : Workshopband , pp . 131 – 140 . Oldenbourg - Verlag , München ( 2014 ) 28 . Rizza , C . , et al . : Do - it - yourself justice - considerations of social media use in a crisis situa - tion : the case of the 2011 vancouver riots . In : Proc . ISCRAM , Baden - Baden , Germany , pp . 411 – 415 ( 2013 ) 29 . Robinson , A . , et al . : Understanding the utility of geospatial information in social media . In : Proc . ISCRAM , Baden - Baden , Germany , pp . 918 – 922 ( 2013 ) 30 . Simon , H . A . : Designing organizations for an information - rich world . In : Greenberger , M . ( ed . ) Computers , Communication , and the Public Interest , pp . 40 – 41 . The Johns Hopkins Press , Baltimore ( 1971 ) 31 . Starbird , K . , Palen , L . : Voluntweeters : self - organizing by digital volunteers in times of cri - sis . In : Proc . CHI , pp . 1071 – 1080 . ACM - Press , Vancouver ( 2011 ) 32 . Starbird , K . , Stamberger , J . : Tweak the tweet : leveraging microblogging proliferation with a prescriptive syntax to support citizen reporting . In : French , S . , et al . ( eds . ) Proc . ISCRAM . Seattle , USA ( 2010 ) 33 . Stevens , G . , Pipek , V . , Wulf , V . : Appropriation infrastructure : supporting the design of usages . In : Pipek , V . , Rosson , M . B . , de Ruyter , B . , Wulf , V . ( eds . ) IS - EUD 2009 . LNCS , vol . 5435 , pp . 50 – 69 . Springer , Heidelberg ( 2009 ) 34 . Strauss , A . L . : Qualitative Analysis for Social Scientists . Cambridge Press ( 1987 ) 35 . Terpstra , T . , et al . : Towards a realtime twitter analysis during crises for operational crisis management . In : Proc . ISCRAM , Vancouver , Canada , pp . 1 – 9 ( 2012 ) 36 . Thomson , R . , et al . : Trusting tweets : the fukushima disaster and information source credi - bility on twitter . In : Proc . ISCRAM , Vancouver , Canada , pp . 1 – 10 ( 2012 ) 37 . Turoff , M . , et al . : The design of a dynamic emergency response management information system ( DERMIS ) . J . Inf . Technol . Theory Appl . 5 ( 4 ) , 1 – 35 ( 2004 ) 38 . Verma , S . , et al . : Natural language processing to the rescue ? extracting “situational aware - ness” tweets during mass emergency . In : ICWSM , pp . 385 – 392 ( 2011 ) 39 . Vivacqua , A . S . , Borges , M . R . S . : Taking advantage of collective knowledge in emergency response systems . J . Netw . Comput . Appl . 35 ( 1 ) , 189 – 198 ( 2012 ) 40 . Van de Walle , B . , Turoff , M . : Decision support for emergency situations . Inf . Syst . E - bus . Manag . 6 ( 3 ) , 295 – 316 ( 2008 ) 41 . Wulf , V . , et al . : Engaging with practices : design case studies as a research framework in CSCW . In : Proceedings of the Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) , pp . 505 – 512 . ACM Press , Hangzhou ( 2011 ) 42 . Zagel , B . : Soziale netzwerke als impulsgeber für das verkehrs - und sicherheitsmanagement bei großveranstaltungen . In : Koch , A . , et al . ( eds . ) Geoinformationssysteme , pp . 223 – 232 . VDE Verlag GMBH , Berlin ( 2012 ) christian . reuter @ uni - siegen . de