Proc . Nat . Acad . Sci . USA Vol . 72 , No . 8 , pp . 3111 - 3113 , August 1975 Biophysics Brownian motion in biological membranes ( diffusion ) P . G . SAFFMAN AND M . DELBROCK Department of Applied Mathematics and Division of Biology , California Institute of Technology , Pasadena , Calif . 91125 Contributed by M . Delbriick , June 9 , 1975 ABSTRACT Brownian motion ( diffusion ) of particles in membranes occurs in a highly anisotropic environment . For such particles a translational mobility ( independent of veloci - ty ) can be defined if the viscosity of the liquid embedding the membrane is taken into account . The results of a model calculation are presented . They suggest that for a realistic situation translational diffusion should be about four times faster in relation to rotational diffusion than in the isotropic case . For a sphere in an unbounded fluid of viscosity A it is well known that 1 b _ 1 bT = 6r ' bR = 83yl [ 3 ] The ratio between these two mobilities is independent of the viscosity : Rotational and translational diffusion of protein and lipid molecules in biological membranes has recently become ac - cessible to experimental study ( 1 - 4 ) . The problem can be studied theoretically by applying the classical analysis of Brownian motion to a hydrodynamic model . A simple model is one in which . the membrane is taken as an infinite plane sheet of viscous fluid ( lipid ) separating infinite regions of less viscous liquid ( water ) . The protein molecule is regarded as a cylinder , with axis perpendicular to the plane of the sheet , moving about in the sheet under the action of Brownian mo - tion ( Fig . 1 ) . Diffusion of a particle due to Brownian motion is de - scribed by diffusion coefficients , DT and DR , for translation - al and rotational displacements . For motion in a plane and rotation about a perpendicular axis , r2 = 4DTt , = 2DRt , [ 1 ] where ' and B are the mean square displacement and an - gular rotation in time t , respectively . The diffusion coefficients are related to the mobilities of the particle by the Einstein relations DT = kBTbT ; DR = kBTbR [ 2 ] where kB is Boltzmann ' s constant , T is the absolute tempera - ture , and b is the mobility ( independent of force or torque ) defined as the velocity ( or angular velocity ) produced by steady unit force ( or torque ) ( 5 ) . Iipid , qi - 1 water , al FIG . 1 . The hydrodynamic model . A cylindrical particle em - bedded in a lipid bilayer membrane bounded by aqueous phases on both sides . The particle is permitted to move laterally in the x - y plane , and to rotate around the z - axis . bT / bR = 3 a2 [ 4 ] where a denotes the particle radius , it being assumed that the Reynolds number is small so that the equations of slow viscous motion ( inertial terms neglected ) apply . For our model of the protein in the membrane , matters are not so simple . We denote by 1A the viscosity of the fluid representing the membrane and by u ' the viscosity of the ex - terior liquid . It is supposed that , ut ' < < A , If At ' is neglected completely , there is no viscous stress transmitted across the surfaces of the sheet and the hydrodynamical problem is that of the motion of a cylinder through a viscous fluid in di - rections perpendicular to its generators . Finding the rota - tional mobility is a trivial calculation , giving 1 bR = 4rpta2h ' [ 5 ] where h denotes the thickness of the sheet and a now stands for the radius of the cylindrical particle . However , the trans - lational mobility does not exist , for there is no solution of the - slow viscous flow equations for steady translational motion in two dimensions ( the so - called Stokes paradox ) ( 6 ) . A finite translational mobility bT can be obtained by tak - ing account of the inertia of the viscous fluid , replacing the slow viscous flow equations by the Oseen equations ( 6 ) . It is then found that bT = 4 ( log + 2 ) [ 6 ] where p denotes the density of the fluid , U is the ( steady ) translational velocity , and y is Euler ' s constant ( 0 . 5772 ) . But the mobility is now not independent of force and the argu - ment leading to Einstein ' s relation ( Eq . 2 ) fails . One can re - place U by an average value , ( kBT / m ) ' / 2 say , where m = particle mass , but this is conceptually unsatisfactory . There are three alternative ways to proceed . ( i ) Give the membrane a finite size . ( ii ) Take account of the viscosity jL ' of the outer liquid . ( iii ) Calculate the mean square displacement from the Langevin equation ( ref . 7 ) using the drag as given by the slow viscous flow equations for unsteady flow . This ap - proach is sometimes referred to as irreversible thermody - namics . 3111 3112 Biophysics : Saffman and Delbrfick We shall now state the results for these three approaches . It may be kept in mind that although in principle any two or all three effects can be incorporated at the same time , ana - lytical difficulties render this impractical . On the other hand , the methods of calculation imply that the effects add reciprocally ( like resistances in parallel ) , so it is sufficient to treat them separately . Also , these effects are minor correc - tions for the rotational mobility which is given to sufficient accuracy by Eq . 5 . Eqs . 3 , 5 , 7 , and 8 are obtained by using the traditional boundary condition of no slip on the surface of the particle . Recently doubts have been raised about the universal appro - priateness of this boundary condition ( 8 ) . It has been found that in organic solvents rotational relaxation of small mole - cules is better described by a boundary condition implying perfect slip ( no tangential stress ) between solvent and solute , while in aqueous solutions the behavior of small molecules is intermediate , depending on the number of hydrogen bonds formed between solvent and solute ( 9 ) . In real membranes it is not obvious which condition is appropriate . In our model it turns out that the translational mobility is changed little by the choice of boundary condition , and these changes will be given . The rotational mobility , however , could be very high for a very symmetrical particle and a slip boundary condition . For an asymmetric molecule the rotational mobil - ity may be quite similar for " slip " or " stick , " but model cal - culations would be very complicated . ( ) Finite membrane size This is modeled by supposing that the particle is at the cen - ter of a circular sheet of radius R . where R > > a . Then = 4 1 h ( log R a [ 7 ] This result is calculated using a no - slip boundary condition on the surface of the particle . The condition of zero tangen - tial stress simply deletes the term - ' k ( ii ) Finite viscosity of the outer liquid For the calculation of this effect , we note that the mem - brane is composed of amphiphilic molecules ( lipids with polar head groups ) whose structure does not permit shear across the membrane . Thus , the velocity field inside the sheet is exactly two - dimensional . ( This is accomplished for - mally by having an anisotropic viscosity with one coefficient infinite . ) A no - slip boundary condition is imposed at the sur - faces of the sheets , so the external liquid is dragged into mo - tion by the flow in the sheet , and directly by the area of par - ticle in direct contact with the outer liquid . The outer liquid exerts a surface traction on the fluid in the sheet , adding an extra term to the equation of motion for the fluid in the sheet . The mathematical problem can be reduced to the so - lution of a pair of dual integral equations ( 8 ) . But for IA ' < < jut singular perturbation techniques ( 9 ) can be applied directly and lead ( after a difficult calculation ) to the result Ah bT = 4rh ( 10g Ha ly [ 8 ] with zero slip on the surface of the particle . With the alter - native zero tangential stress , a term + 1k is added inside the bracket . These results are independent of the amount by which the particle sticks out of the sheet . ( iii ) Irreversible thermodynamics The drag on a cylinder moving with arbitrary , but not ident - ically zero , acceleration through a viscous fluid is calculated from the unsteady slow viscous flow equations . This infor - mation is fed into the Langevin equation ( ref . 7 ) , and it is found by standard methods of irreversible thermodynamics that the diffusion coefficient corresponds to an effective mo - bility [ 9 ] where ut / pa2 > > l . Note that this is a time - dependent mo - bility . This result is for a no - slip boundary condition on the particle . The alternative zero stress condition now requires that the lengthy calculation leading to 9 be repeated ab ini - tio , and has not been carried out . As mentioned previously , when all three effects are pre - sent , the effective mobility for insertion into Eq . 2 for the diffusion coefficient is the smallest of 7 , 8 , and 9 . The de - tailed calculations for ( mm ) and ( Mi ) are of mathematical in , . terest and will be published elsewhere . For motions of parti - cles in biological membranes expected values of the parame - ters are a h ; 10 - 7 cm , R - 103 cm , 1 poise , , u ' 10 - 2 poise , p 1 g / cm ; kBT - 4 X 10 - 14 ergs t 10 sec . Then case ( ii ) is appropriate . Thus , we predict kBT / ph 47rgh Slog . z ~ T F2 kBT D = 2t = 4r ~ a h [ 10 ] yielding a ratio between the two mobilities depending loga - rithmically on the viscosity ratio : [ 11 ] br / bR = ( 10 h y Y ) a2 Aa Comparing this result with the corresponding ratio ob - tained for diffusion in a homogeneous isotropic fluid ( Eq . 2 ) we see that in membranes the translational mobility ( and diffusion ) is increased , relative to the rotational one , by a factor of about 4 . Perhaps this result can be rationalized intuitively as follows : the velocity field generated by rota - tion falls off as 1 / r2 in 3 D and as Vr in 2 D . The epergy dissipated is , therefore , highly localized . In contrast , the ve - locity field generated by translation falls off more slowly as 1 / r in 3 D and as log r in 2 D . This energy dissipation is , therefore , spread over a greater environment . Thus , in a membrane of high viscosity between aqueous layers of much lower viscosity the rotational drag is almost entirely deter - mined by the membrane , while the translational drag is re - duced because of the low dissipation in the aqueous phases . We may compare our result 11 to the only case for which both translational and rotational diffusion coefficients have been reported , the rhodopsin molecule of the frog retina ' s rod outer segment . Cone ( 1 ) finds DR = 5 X 10 + 4 s - 1 ( with - in a factor of two ) and Poo and Cone ( 3 ) find DT = 3 . 5 1 1 . 5 Proc . Nat . Acad . Sci . USA 72 ( 1975 ) 1 4At b . iii ) 4w log ' Y - 1 , . uh pa ? r2 DT = 4t Biophysics : Saffman and Delbrfick X 10 - 9 cm2 s - 1 . The radius of the rhodopsin molecule must be very close to 2 X 10 - 7 cm . Thus , we obtain expt . 2 - 5 X 109 2 . 5 - 10 X cm2 = 2 - 20 X 10 - 14 cm2 DT / DR = bT / bR [ 12 ] theor . = 4 X ( 2 X 10 - 7 cm ) 2 - 16 X 10 - " 4 cm2 In view of the large experimental error limits , the simpli - fying assumptions of the model ( including the assumption of infinite thickness of the aqueous phases ) and the uncertainty regarding the viscosity of these phases , the agreement can be considered encouraging and perhaps susceptible to refined tests . Proc . Nat . Acad . Sci . USA 72 ( 1975 ) 3113 1 . Cone , R . A . ( 1972 ) Nature New Biol . 236 , 39 - 43 . 2 . Poo , M . & Cone , R . A . ( 1973 ) Exp . Eye Res . 17 , 503 - 510 . 3 . Poo , M . & Cone , R . A . ( 1974 ) Nature 247 , 438 - 441 . 4 . Edidin , M . ( 1974 ) Annu . Rev . Biophys . Bioeng . 3 , 179 - 201 . 5 . Landau , L . D . & Lifshitz , E . M . ( 1959 ) in Fluid Mechanic . ( Pergamon Press , Elmsford , N . Y . ) , sect . 59 . 6 . Lamb , H . ( 1932 ) in Hydrodynamics ( Cambridge University Press , New York ) , sect . 343 . 7 . Wax , N . , ed . ( 1954 ) Selected Papers on Noise and Stochastic Processes ( Dover Press , New York ) . 8 . Hu , C . & Zwanzig , R . ( 1974 ) J . Chem . Phys . 60 , 4354 . 9 . Bauer , D . R . , Brauman , J . I . & Pecora , R . ( 1974 ) J . Am . Chem . Soc . 96 , 6840 - 6843 . 10 . Titchmarsh , E . C . ( 1973 ) in Theory of Fourier Integrals ( Ox - ford Univ . Press , New York ) , chap . XI . 11 . Van Dyke , M . ( 1964 ) Perturbation Methods in Fluid Me - chanics ( Academic Press , New York ) .