Current Biology 16 , 2193 – 2205 , November 21 , 2006 ª 2006 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved DOI 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2006 . 09 . 016 Article Spatial and Temporal Control of Coﬁlin Activity Is Required for Directional Sensing during Chemotaxis Ghassan Mouneimne , 1 , * Vera DesMarais , 1 Mazen Sidani , 1 Eliana Scemes , 2 Weigang Wang , 1 Xiaoyan Song , 1 Robert Eddy , 1 and John Condeelis 1 1 Department of Anatomy and Structural Biology and 2 Department of Neuroscience Albert Einstein College of Medicine 1300 Morris Park Avenue Bronx , New York 10461 Summary Background : Previous work has led to the hypothesis that coﬁlin severing , as regulated by PLC , is involved in chemotactic sensing . We have tested this hypothesis by investigating whether activation of endogenous coﬁ - lin is spatially and temporally linked to sensing an EGF point source in carcinoma cells . Results : We demonstrate that inhibition of endogenous coﬁlin activity with either siRNA or overexpression of LIMK suppresses directional sensing in carcinoma cells . LIMK siRNA knockdown , which suppresses coﬁlin phosphorylation , and microinjection of S3C coﬁlin , a co - ﬁlin mutant that is constitutively active and not phos - phorylated by LIMK , also inhibits directional sensing and chemotaxis . These results indicate that phosphory - lation of coﬁlin by LIMK , in addition to coﬁlin activity , is required for chemotaxis . Coﬁlin activity concentrates rapidly at the newly formed leading edge facing the gradient , whereas coﬁlin phosphorylation increases throughout the cell . Quantiﬁcation of these results indi - cates that the ampliﬁcation of asymmetric actin poly - merization required for protrusion toward the EGF gradient occurs at the level of coﬁlin but not at the level of PLC activation by EGFR . Conclusions : Theseresultsindicatethatlocalactivation of coﬁlin by PLC and its global inactivation by LIMK phosphorylation combinetogeneratethelocalasymme - try of actin polymerization required for chemotaxis . Introduction Chemotaxis is a fundamental process in many physio - logical and pathological events , including embryogene - sis , immune responses , wound healing , and cancer - cell metastasis [ 1 , 2 ] . Metastasis is the ability of cancer cells to spread from a localized primary tumor to secondary sites and is correlated with the migratory ability of the cells [ 3 ] . Metastasis is a characteristic of the progres - sion to malignancy and is distinct from tumor growth . Because chemotaxis is an essential factor in metastasis , understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying chemotaxis is of major importance to cancer diagnosis and therapy [ 3 – 5 ] . Directional sensing in chemotactic cells is character - ized by the ampliﬁcation of an extracellular gradient into a steeper intracellular asymmetric response and is proposed to be the initial step in chemotaxis [ 2 , 6 ] . Sev - eral models have been proposed to explain directional sensing in chemotactic cells [ 2 ] . The ‘‘local excitation – global inhibition’’ model rationalizes that a localized stimulatory event , which occurs transiently in time and space , is counterbalanced by a global inhibitory event for proper sensing to occur [ 7 ] . Directional sensing has been studied most intensively in Dictyostelium and neutrophils . It has been established that PIP3 accumulation at the leading edge is an early in - dicator of chemotactic sensing [ 8 ] . The accumulation of PIP3 is symptomatic of the ampliﬁcation of the extracel - lular signal and is accomplished through the reciprocal regulation by PI3K and PTEN activities [ 7 ] . PIP3 as read - out for directional sensing , however , is not conserved in mammalian cells where it has been shown that PI3K and PTEN do not regulate chemotaxis but are only impli - cated in regulating the motility of cells [ 9 ] . Several can - cer cell types , moreover , exhibit loss of PTEN function , although they sustain high invasive ability [ 10 ] , which further implies that chemoattractant sensing in mamma - lian cancer cells is achieved independently of PIP3 levels . Chemotactic cells , including Dictyostelium and mam - malian cells , respond to stimulation with chemoattrac - tant by generating two transients of actin polymerization [ 6 , 11 ] . In particular , in carcinoma cells , epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) - induced increases in free barbed ends , resulting in actin polymerization at the leading edge of the lamellipod , occurs as two transients at 1 min and at 3 min . Previous results have shown that phospholipase C ( PLC ) is required for the early barbed - endtransient , whereasphosphoinositide - 3kinase ( PI3K ) selectively regulates the late barbed - end transient . Inhi - bition of PLC inhibits coﬁlin activity in cells during the early transient , delays the initiation of protrusions , and inhibits the ability of cells to sense a gradient of EGF . Suppression of coﬁlin activity selectively inhibits the early barbed - end transient [ 12 ] . These results demon - strate that PLC - dependent activation of coﬁlin is driving the initial actin - polymerization transient . However , it is not clear from these results whether coﬁlin is directly responsible for setting the direction of cell migration during chemotaxis . Previous studies have demonstrated that coﬁlin activ - itycooperates withthatof theArp2 / 3 complex inorder to generate the actin dendritic array [ 13 – 15 ] . This places coﬁlin in the position of acting as an initiator of dendritic nucleation , protrusion , andcelldirection [ 13 ] . Thismodel is consistent with experiments in which localized coﬁlin activation by uncaging leads to localized protrusion anddeﬁnesthedirectionofcellmotility [ 16 ] . Coﬁlinactiv - ity is regulated by several mechanisms , including its in - hibition by phosphorylation and binding to phosphoino - sitol 4 , 5 bisphosphate ( PIP2 ) [ 13 ] . Phosphorylation on * Correspondence : ghassan _ mouneimne @ hms . harvard . edu Figure 1 . Coﬁlin Is Essential for Directional Protrusion during Chemotaxis in Carcinoma Cells ( A ) Montage of still imagesfrom atime - lapse movie of GFP - b actin MTLn3cellsstimulatedwith an EGF ﬁlled micropipette . The initial direction of the cell is shown by the arrow in the 2 20 s frame . The direction of cell movement in response to the pipette , which arrived at 0 s and was po - sitioned at the asterisk in the 0 s frame , is indicated with the double arrow in the 180 s and 600 s frames . The arrowheads indicate areas of actin polymerization within the leading edge in response to EGF delivered by the pipette . ( A 0 ) Fluorescence - intensity map of a typical EGF gradient emanating from the pipette . A cell outline is shown to scale as the white contour . Per - cent values are the EGF concentrations at the front and back . ( B ) Still images from time - lapse movies of control and coﬁlin siRNA knockdown ( coﬁlin KD ) MTLn3 cells stimulated with an EGF - ﬁlled micropi - pette ( positioned at the asterisk ) ; the white arrows on the 600 s frames indicate the resulting directions of protrusion . ( C ) Cartoonillustrationshowing ( 1 ) frontprotrusion ( F ) , whichisthemeasurementofmembraneprotrusionalongalinedrawnfromthecentroidof thecelltothetipofthemicropipetteand ( 2 ) backprotrusion ( B ) , whichisthemeasurementofmembrane protrusion alongalinestartingfromthe centroid and forming a 180 (cid:2) angle with the front line . ( D ) Standardizedmembraneprotrusionatthefrontandthebackofcontrolandcoﬁlinknockdown MTLn3cellsversustimeafterthemicropipette stimulation ( closed circle is control front protrusion , open circle is control back , closed triangle is coﬁlin siRNA front , and open triangle is coﬁlin siRNA back ) . Note that all protrusion values are standardized over protrusion values at the back of control cells . Current Biology 2194 Ser3 inhibits coﬁlin severing activity and is regulated by two sets of kinases , LIMK ( 1 and 2 ) and TESK ( 1 and 2 ) [ 17 ] . Dephosphorylation of coﬁlin is mediated by phos - phatase type 1 , 2A [ 18 ] , 2B [ 19 ] , and 2C [ 20 ] , slingshot [ 21 ] , and chronophin [ 22 ] . In resting carcinoma cells , the vast majority of coﬁlin is in a dephosphorylated state but is still inactive [ 12 , 23 , 24 ] , suggesting that coﬁlin ac - tivation in carcinoma cells is accomplished by a mecha - nism other than dephosphorylation . In vitro studies have shown that binding to PIP2 in - hibits the ability of coﬁlin to bind actin [ 25 ] . Binding to PIP2 also inhibits the activity of gelsolin [ 26 , 27 ] and pro - ﬁlin [ 28 ] . PLC g hydrolyzes PIP2 and has been postulated to activate gelsolin , coﬁlin , and proﬁlin in vivo [ 12 , 28 , 29 ] and to weaken plasma - membrane tethering to the actin cytoskeleton [ 30 ] . All of these considerations have led to the hypothesis that coﬁlin severing activity , as regulated by PLC , is in - volved in chemotactic sensing [ 12 ] . In this study , we have tested this hypothesis by investigating whether the activation of endogenous coﬁlin is spatially and tem - porally linked to chemotactic sensing of EGF gradients in carcinoma cells . Here we demonstrate that coﬁlin ac - tivity is concentrated on the side of the cell facing the gradient and is essential for directional sensing . Results Coﬁlin Is Essential for Directional Sensing during Carcinoma Cell Chemotaxis To study directional sensing during chemotaxis in carci - noma cells , we used a spatially restricted EGF gradient ( Figure 1A 0 ) similar to that encountered in vivo [ 4 , 12 ] . With the percent gradient considered as 100 % at the pi - pette tip , we calculated the percent gradient at the front and the back of the cell , where the difference in EGF concentration between both sides was determined to average at 27 % ( Figure 1A 0 and Figure S1A in the Sup - plemental Data available online ) . This analysis shows the difference in gradient across the cell diameter ; the cell must read this difference in order to chemotax . Ex - periments with GFP - b actin - expressing MTLn3 cells [ 31 ] revealed that asymmetric actin polymerization is an early response after the introduction of the EGF pi - pette , which results in a spatially deﬁned protrusion di - rected toward the EGF source ( Figure 1A ) . This result il - lustrates that a new protrusion forms toward the pipette , that the new protrusion is the ﬁrst morphological mani - festation of chemotactic sensing , and that the protru - sion is directed toward the pipette regardless of where the pipette is situated relative to the cell and regardless of whether there was a pre - existing protrusion or not . Thus , we used the directionality of the initial protrusion toward the EGF source as a marker for chemoattractant sensing . Previously , we demonstrated that PLC activity is re - quired for directional protrusion and that coﬁlin activity , and the initial barbed - end transient , depends on PLC [ 12 ] . Therefore , we examined the contribution of coﬁlin to directional protrusion and chemotaxis . To do this , we used the pipette stimulation assay where the front ( F ) protrusion and the back ( B ) protrusion ( retraction ) were measured along a line going through the centroid and the tip of the micropipette ( Figure 1C ) . To suppress the expression of coﬁlin , we used a previously validated siRNA sequence [ 12 , 16 ] , which speciﬁcally targets coﬁ - lin mRNA , to knock down coﬁlin expression levels by at least 95 % in MTLn3 cells . We show here for the ﬁrst timethatcoﬁlinknockdowncellsexhibitadefectinsens - ing , resulting in protrusion in all directions with no signif - icant bias toward the EGF source ( front protrusion ) , and the cells did not display retraction at the rear end ( back protrusion ) ( Figures 1B and 1D ) . To examine chemotaxis in these cells , we measured the chemotactic index , co - sine q , after stimulation with an EGF pipette . The angle q is deﬁned by two reference lines : The line going through the ﬁrst and the last centroid ( taken 10 min after theintroduction ofthepipette ) andthelinegoingthrough the ﬁrst centroid and the position of the pipette tip ( Figure 1E ) . The angle q , therefore , determines how the trajectory followed by the cell is oriented in reference to the position of the chemoattractant source , where thevalueof q isinverselyproportionaltothechemotactic index ( the cosine ) . The trajectory followed by control cells , upon stimulation with a micropipette , showed an average q value of 35 (cid:2) 6 9 (cid:2) ( cos q = 0 . 72 6 0 . 11 ) , whereas trajectories followed by coﬁlin knockdown cells were randomin reference to thepipette , withan average value of cos q = 2 0 . 11 6 0 . 13 ( Figure 1F ) . This analysis reveals that coﬁlin knockdown cells exhibit a low chemotactic index , andhencecoﬁlinknockdown inhibitschemotaxis . Directional Sensing Is Dependent on PLC and Independent of PI3K Activity To investigate the role of PI3K in directional sensing , we examined the chemotactic capability of PI3K - inhibited cells . For this purpose , the micropipette - stimulation as - say described in Figure 1 was performed on MTLn3 cells , either treated with 100 nM wortmannin , a speciﬁc PI3K inhibitor when used at 100 nM [ 32 , 33 ] , or treated with DMSO ( Figure 2A ) . Inhibition of PI3K activity by wortmannin was conﬁrmed by phospho - Akt western blotting ( data not shown ) . Protrusion toward the EGF source was not inhibited in the wortmannin - treated cells ( Figure 2B ) . The extent of protrusion nonetheless was partially suppressed in the PI3K - inhibited cells at later time points after stimulation ( Figure 2B ) . The chemotac - tic index of wortmannin - treated cells , however , was not affected in comparison to DMSO control cells , where both cell groups showed a high cosine q value ( Fig - ure 2C ) . PLC inhibition , on the other hand , led to com - plete suppression of directional sensing ( Figure 2D ) , consistent with the previously reported data showing the dependence of directional protrusion on PLC [ 12 ] . ( E ) Cartoon deﬁnition of angle q of cell direction relative to the micropipette upon stimulation with EGF ( q is the angle between the motility path followedbythecellandthelineformedbytheinitialcentroidandpipettetip ) . Theaverageof q at10minafterEGFstimulationis35 (cid:2) 6 5 (cid:2) incontrol cells and 96 (cid:2) 6 10 (cid:2) , indicating random direction , in coﬁlin siRNA KD cells . ( F ) The average chemotactic index of control ( black bar ) and coﬁlin siRNA KD cells ( white bar ) over 10 min is expressed as cosine ( q ) . Error bars are SEM of at least 20 cells pooled from three independent experiments . The white asterisks in ( A ) and ( B ) indicate approximate positions of the EGF pipette tips . Scale bars represent 10 m m . Coﬁlin Regulates Chemotaxis in Carcinoma Cells 2195 Interestingly , although chemoattractant sensing is not affected when PI3K is inhibited , the motility of the cells is inhibited [ 33 ] . This suggests that PI3K is involved in gen - erating the force for locomotion but not in determining its direction . This could explain the discrepancy among several studies [ 9 , 34 ] that examined the role of PI3K in chemotaxis ; a defect in chemotaxis observed in PI3K - inhibited cells could be due to suppression of cell loco - motion but not directional sensing . Coﬁlin suppression , on the other hand , although showing a drastic inhibition of directional sensing , had no apparent effect on the speed of the cells ; the instantaneous velocity ( m m / min ) of coﬁlin knockdown cells is 1 . 52 6 0 . 20 , similar to the 1 . 25 6 0 . 09 speed of control cells . This suggests that co - ﬁlin is mainly regulating directional sensing in MTLn3 cells and not speed of locomotion . LIMK Activity Is Required for Directional Protrusion and Chemotaxis LIM kinase inhibits coﬁlin activity by phosphorylating it on serine 3 [ 35 ] , whereas coﬁlin activation is correlated with PLC activity ( PIP2 hydrolysis ) in carcinoma cells after EGF stimulation [ 12 ] . Coﬁlin phosphorylation level in tumor cells , however , also increases upon EGF stim - ulation [ 12 , 24 ] . This implies that LIMK activity , and thus coﬁlin inactivation by phosphorylation , is induced by EGF stimulation and places LIMK in the position of the antagonist of the PLC - activated coﬁlin . In particular , the expression of LIMK1 is selectively increased in inva - sive tumor cells that are chemotactic to EGF , making LIMK1 the dominant antagonist of coﬁlin activity during chemotaxis and invasion in vivo [ 5 , 36 ] . To further examine the roles of coﬁlin and LIMK in directional sensing and chemotaxis , we altered the ac - tivity level of LIMK . For this purpose , we used GFP - overexpressing MTLn3 cells and ( GFP - tagged ) cells overexpressing the full - length LIMK ; these cells are de - noted as ‘‘control’’ and ‘‘F ( LIMK ) , ’’ respectively [ 36 ] . The expression level of F ( LIMK ) cells is 2 - to 3 - fold above the endogenous LIMK level , and phospho - coﬁlin levels in these cells are elevated ( 70 % ) in comparison to control cells ( 18 % ) [ 36 ] . Coﬁlin activity in F ( LIMK ) cells is re - duced by 10 - fold [ 36 ] . On the other hand , we knocked down LIMK expression in MTLn3 cells by 80 % by using Figure 2 . Directional Protrusion and Chemotaxis Are Dependent on PLC and Independent of PI3K Activity ( A ) Still images from time - lapse movies of control and wortmannin - treated MTLn3 cells stimulated with an EGF - ﬁlled micropipette ( the white as - terisk indicates the position of the pipette ; arrows indicate the directions of protrusion ; the scale bar represents 10 m m ) . ( B ) Standardized membrane protrusion at the front and the back of control and wortmannin - treated MTLn3 cells versus time after the micropi - pette stimulation ( closed circle is DMSO front , open circle is DMSO back , closed triangle is wortmannin front , and open triangle is wortmannin back ) . Note that all protrusion values are standardized over protrusion values at the back of control cells . ( C ) The chemotactic index ( cos q ) of DMSO control ( black bar ) and wortmannin - treated cells ( white bar ) . ( D ) The chemotactic index ( cos q ) of control ( inactive isoform of the PLC inhibitor ) ( black bar ) and PLC - inhibited cells ( white bar ) . Error bars are SEM of at least 20 cells pooled from three independent experiments . Current Biology 2196 LIMK - speciﬁc siRNA as described previously [ 24 ] , and as a control we used a scrambled version of the siRNA . To study the chemotactic phenotype of these cell lines , where LIMK activity is either elevated or sup - pressed , we performed the pipette stimulation assay ( Figure 3 ) . The F ( LIMK ) cells with 10 - fold - suppressed coﬁlin activity had a similar phenotype to the coﬁlin knockdown cells , where the sensing mechanism was defective and the cells did not protrude directly toward the EGF micropipette but protruded in random direc - tions ( Figure 3B i ) such that the chemotactic index was close to zero ( Figure 3C i ) . This result conﬁrms the re - quirement of coﬁlin activity for proper sensing during chemotaxis . The LIMK siRNA KD cells , moreover , were also defective in chemoattractant sensing ( Figures 3B ii and 3C ii ) . The rate of protrusion in the LIMK KD cells in response to bath stimulation with EGF , however , was not affected , whereas in the F ( LIMK ) cells it was sup - pressed ( Figure S2 in the Supplemental Data available online ) . This suggests that LIMK , and hence coﬁlin phos - phorylation , is not required for protrusion , as previously reported [ 24 ] , but is required for the orientation of the protrusion . Coﬁlin Phosphorylation Is Required for Chemotaxis We examined the chemotactic index of MTLn3 cells af - ter microinjection of S3C coﬁlin , which is active but can - not be phosphorylated by LIMK , to determine whether the phosphorylation of coﬁlin is required for chemotac - tic sensing . S3E coﬁlin , a phospho - mimic coﬁlin mutant lacking severing activity , was used as a control to the S3C mutant as described previously [ 16 ] . S3C microin - jection inhibited directional sensing as compared to that in control cells injected with PBS and S3E coﬁlin ( Figures 4A and 4B ) . These results conﬁrm the impor - tance of coﬁlin phosphorylation in chemotactic sensing . Both PLC and Coﬁlin Activities Are Asymmetrically Localized , and Coﬁlin Activity Is Ampliﬁed , in an EGF Gradient In order to directly examine the outcome of the two an - tagonizing activities of PLC and LIMK with respect to co - ﬁlin activation , we performed double immunostaining for coﬁlin and phospho - coﬁlin on cells placed in an EGF gradient ( Figure 5B ) . We used a radial - sweep macro in ImageJ to quantify the immunostaining signal at the front of the cell ( facing the EGF pipette ) distinctly from the back . The front of the cell is deﬁned in this anal - ysis as the region situated within a sector that is at a 6 35 o angle in reference to the vector linking the centroid and the pipette tip because this is the range of angles of protrusions exhibited by cells during che - moattractant sensing . The back of the cell is this front sector’s mirror image at the back of the cell ( Figure 5A ) . Fluorescent intensity was measured for co - ﬁlin , and phospho - coﬁlin , in resting cells ( 0 s ) and at 60 s after EGF stimulation , the peak time of coﬁlin activity [ 12 ] . Coﬁlin was observed to accumulate by 1 . 6 - fold front to back , 1 min after the introduction of the EGF - ﬁlled pipette , at the leading edge facing the pipette ( Fig - ures 5C i and 5C ii ) , consistent with its peak of severing activity and its proposed role in initiating and promoting protrusion toward the micropipette . Phosphorylated co - ﬁlin levels , on the other hand , increased to the same extent at the front and the back , by 1 . 9 - fold ( Figures 5D i and 5D ii ) . This demonstrates that LIMK activity is not conﬁned to a particular side of the stimulated cell . These results suggest that coﬁlin activity is restricted to the region of the cell facing the pipette and that LIMK inactivation of coﬁlin is global , and thus the spread of coﬁlin activity is restrained in space and time . To directly examine PLC activation , which peaks at 60 s after EGF stimulation [ 12 ] , we performed immuno - staining analysis of phospho - PLC at 60 s after the intro - duction of the EGF pipette ( Figure 6A ) by using anti - bodies that recognize the phosphorylated Y783 of PLC , indicating activation of the enzyme [ 37 ] . The quan - titation method with a sweep macro ( Figure 6B i ) was identical to that described in Figure 5 . This analysis method demonstrated that after stimulation with the EGF micropipette for 60 s , phospho - PLC levels are ele - vated by 40 % front to back ( Figure 6B ii ) , suggesting little ampliﬁcation of the EGF gradient . This result indicates that new PLC activity increases on the side of the cell facing the EGF pipette . Moreover , we observed the actual output of the signal ampliﬁcation by directly examining the increase in coﬁ - lin - dependent free barbed ends , previously shown to be the ﬁrst transient of barbed ends after EGF stimulation and a direct measure of coﬁlin activity [ 12 ] . To identify the ﬁrst barbed - end transient , we performed kymo - graphic analysis on the change in GFP - b - actin intensity in MTLn3 cells as described previously [ 31 ] ( see ‘‘Rate of actin polymerization’’ in the Experimental Procedures ) . This analysis revealed that the early barbed - end tran - sient begins before and peaks by 60 s after stimulation on the side of the cell facing the pipette ( Figure 6C ) . To examine and quantitate the coﬁlin - dependent barbed - end transient at higher resolution , we stained barbed ends in cells 60 s after introduction of the EGF pi - pette ( Figure 6D ) . It should be noted that the barbed ends scored were those generated in response to the pi - pette 60 s after its introduction and were not pre - existing because the pipette was used to stimulate cells at sites distant from pre - existing protrusions . Quantitation of the relative number of coﬁlin - dependent barbed ends revealed an average 3 - fold increase in barbed ends and , therefore , in coﬁlin activity on the side of the cell facing the pipette as compared to the back ( Figure 6E i and 6E ii ) , indicating a large ampliﬁcation of the barbed - end response front to back relative to a shallow gradi - ent . This also further demonstrates that the transient increase in coﬁlin activity is restricted to the front of the cell . We next explored whether coﬁlin activity at 60 s after stimulation , as revealed by staining for barbed ends , is mostly dependent on PLC hydrolysis of PIP2 , which could lead to the release and activation of coﬁlin [ 25 ] , or on a more downstream calcium - triggered event , mainly through PLC - generated IP3 - induced calcium re - lease from internal stores . We therefore inhibited the IP3 - dependent calcium release by using the IP3 recep - tor antagonist 2 - aminoethoxydiphenyl borate ( 2 - APB ) , which does not have an effect on the basal cytosolic cal - cium levels [ 38 ] . Monitoring calcium levels in MTLn3 cells by using FURA - 2 demonstrated that the increase in cytosolic calcium after EGF stimulation is rather small and that this increase is suppressed by 2 - APB Coﬁlin Regulates Chemotaxis in Carcinoma Cells 2197 Figure 3 . LIMK Activity Is Required for Directional Protrusion and Chemotaxis ( A ) Still images from time - lapse movies of GFP control , F ( LIMK ) , and LIMK KD MTLn3cells stimulated with an EGF - ﬁlled micropipette at various time points after stimulation ( the white asterisk indicates the approximate position of the pipette tip ; arrows indicate areas of protrusion ; the scale bar represents 10 m m ) . ( B i ) Standardized protrusion at the front ( closed circle ) and the back ( open circle ) of GFP control cells and at the front ( closed triangle ) and the back ( open triangle ) of F ( LIMK ) cells is plotted from time - lapse movies . ( B ii ) Standardized protrusion at the front ( closed circle ) and the back ( open circle ) of scrambled siRNA control cells and at the front ( closed tri - angle ) and the back ( open triangle ) of LIMK siRNA knockdown cells is plotted from time - lapse movies . Note that all protrusion values are stan - dardized over protrusion values at the back of control cells . ( C i ) The chemotactic index ( cos q ) of GFP control and F ( LIMK ) cells . ( C ii ) The chemotactic index ( cos q ) of scrambled siRNA control cells and LIMK siRNA knockdown cells . Error bars represent SEM of at least 20 cells pooled from three independent experiments . Current Biology 2198 treatment . Inhibition of this calcium response , however , did not have any effect on the generation of barbed ends after stimulation ( Figure S3 ) . This suggests that PLC activation of coﬁlin does not involve an IP3 - mediated calcium release and may involve hydrolysis of PIP2 and the release of coﬁlin at the stimulation site . Discussion In this study , we have investigated whether the activa - tion of endogenous coﬁlin is spatially and temporally linked to chemotactic sensing of EGF gradients in carci - noma cells , and , if so , how its asymmetry of activation is regulated . We show that , like PLC inhibition , the sup - pression of coﬁlin expression by siRNA knockdown sup - presses the chemotactic response toward a gradient of EGF . Coﬁlin knockdown did not affect cell speed , sug - gesting that coﬁlin contribution , immediately after EGF stimulation , is mainly to sensing , and not to locomotion itself . PI3K , on the other hand , did not play a role in di - rectional sensing because its inhibition did not affect the cells’ directional protrusion activity . However , inhibi - tion of PI3K eventually inhibited the general locomotion of the cells [ 33 ] . This indicates that PI3K is important in generating the force for locomotion , but not in setting the direction of the protrusion , which is determined by both PLC and coﬁlin activities . Overexpression of LIMK suppresses sensing and che - motaxis , a phenotype similar to that seen in siRNA coﬁ - lin - knockdown cells , which is consistent with the fact that phosphorylation of coﬁlin by LIMK leads to coﬁlin inactivation . The LIMK - overexpression result supports the requirement for coﬁlin activity for directional sensing during chemotaxis . However , LIMK knockdown also in - hibits directional sensing and chemotaxis , as did micro - injection of S3C coﬁlin , a mutant of coﬁlin that is consti - tutively active and not phosphorylated by LIMK [ 16 ] . These results indicate that the phosphorylation of coﬁlin by LIMK , in addition to coﬁlin activity , is required for di - rectional sensing and chemotaxis . This suggests a model in which the local stimulation of coﬁlin , and its global inactivation by LIMK , might account for the initial asymmetry that is observed in actin polymerization dur - ing directional sensing . Regulation of Coﬁlin Activity by PLC and LIMK Is an Essential Component of the Directional - Sensing Mechanism in Carcinoma Cells As shown here , both PLC and coﬁlin activities were ob - served to localize on the side of the cell facing the EGF stimulus . However , although the phospho - PLC localiza - tion showed only a slight asymmetry of 1 . 4 - fold front to back , indicating little or no ampliﬁcation of the gradient , the localization of the coﬁlin - dependent barbed ends , formed 1 min after stimulation of the cells directionally with EGF from a micropipette , showed at least a 3 - fold higher accumulation of barbed ends on the side of the cell facing the EGF source . Because , on average , a 300 % gradient of coﬁlin - dependent barbed ends was observed in a 40 % gradient of PLC activity , an 8 - fold ampliﬁcation of the EGF gradient by coﬁlin activa - tion occurred during sensing . These results indicate that the ampliﬁcation of the asymmetry of the gradient during chemotaxis is occurring at the level of coﬁlin ac - tivity and not at the level of the EGF - receptor - to - PLC signal , which remains similar to the level of the EGF gradient . A key to understanding how the coﬁlin - mediated am - pliﬁcation of the gradient occurred is the ﬁnding that phospho - coﬁlin was uniformly increased in cells stimu - lated with a gradient of EGF ; this ﬁnding demonstrates that the phosphorylation of coﬁlin is occurring through - out the cell , whereas coﬁlin activity is constrained to the edge of the cell facing the EGF stimulus . This result is consistent with the observation that bath stimulation with EGF results in an increase in LIMK activity and in phospho - coﬁlin simultaneously with the increase in co - ﬁlin activity during the ﬁrst transient of actin polymeriza - tion [ 12 , 24 ] . These results support the model in which the local stimulation of coﬁlin , and global activation of LIMK , can account for an ampliﬁed asymmetry that is re - quired in coﬁlin - dependent actin polymerization in order for directional sensing to occur . Figure 4 . Coﬁlin S3C Microinjection Inhibits Chemotaxis , Whereas S3E Does Not ( A ) Still images from time - lapse movies of PBS - , S3C - , and S3E - microinjected MTLn3 cells stimulated with an EGF - ﬁlled micropi - pette at various time points after stimulation ( the white asterisk indi - cates the position of the pipette ; arrows indicate the direction of protrusion ; the scale bar represents 10 m m ) . ( B ) Chemotactic index ( cos q ) of PBS - , S3C - , and S3E - microinjected cells . Error bars are SEM of at least 20 cells pooled from three inde - pendent experiments . Coﬁlin Regulates Chemotaxis in Carcinoma Cells 2199 Figure 5 . Coﬁlin Accumulates at the Leading Edge Facing the EGF Gradient as Phospho - Coﬁlin Levels Increase throughout the Cell ( A ) Radial sweep of amodel cartooncell explaining the analysis method ; ‘‘front’’inthe sweep represents the region facing the pipette ( within35 (cid:2) on either side of the line between centroid and pipette tip ) , and ‘‘back’’ is the mirror - image region at the opposite side . ( B ) Costaining of coﬁlin and phospho - coﬁlin in MTLn3 cells at 1 min after stimulation with an EGF micropipette . ( C i ) Coﬁlin radial sweep at 60 s ( this sweep is the outermost 1 . 5 m m strip of the cell ; blue spots indicate the position of the ﬁducial marks on the cells ) ; the blowups are representative images of an area from the front and one from the back . Current Biology 2200 Other studies have also found that an increase in the phosphorylation of coﬁlin results from the stimulation of cells with growth factors . However , in these cases the phosphorylation was assumed , but not shown , to in - activate all coﬁlin within the cells and led to the interpre - tation that coﬁlin must be inhibited for cell protrusion and locomotion to occur [ 39 ] . This interpretation is in - consistent with the increases simultaneously observed for both coﬁlin activity and coﬁlin phosphorylation in this and previous studies [ 12 , 24 ] , as well as the require - ment for coﬁlin in cell motility [ 40 ] . The interpretation that coﬁlin must be inhibited for protrusion and locomo - tion to occur is also at odds with the observation that un - caging of coﬁlin activity in vivo is sufﬁcient to cause actin polymerization , protrusion , and locomotion [ 16 ] . In tumor cells , coﬁlin activity occurring in response to EGF stimulation and resulting in the ﬁrst barbed - end transient is uncoupled from coﬁlin phosphorylation and dephosphorylation [ 24 ] . We propose that a more comprehensive explanation for all of these results is that there are two different coﬁlin populations that exist simultaneously in cells during chemotaxis to EGF : one that is locally activated , allowing sensing and localized protrusion , and one that is globally phosphorylated , in - hibiting its activity and resulting in an asymmetric distri - bution of coﬁlin activity . Activation of coﬁlin by PLC could occur either directly through coﬁlin - associated - PIP2 hydrolysis , causing the release of coﬁlin in an active form , or through the PIP2 hydrolysis - dependent IP3 - induced calcium release from internal stores . PLC could therefore be activating coﬁlin either through PIP2 hydrolysis [ 25 ] or through de - phosphorylation by slingshot in a reaction driven by IP3 and dependent on calcium and calcineurin [ 41 ] . Be - cause inhibition of the IP3 receptor did not affect the coﬁlin - dependent early transient of free barbed ends in response to EGF stimulation , it is clear that coﬁlin acti - vation in tumor cells depends on PLC activity in a way not involving IP3 and calcium . Furthermore , the phos - phorylation status of coﬁlin does not depend on PLC activity in tumor cells [ 24 ] . These results suggest a more direct mechanism for activation of coﬁlin by PLC . Restricting the area of coﬁlin activity , moreover , is crucial to ensuring proper directional sensing because the spread of active coﬁlin would degrade the asymme - try of coﬁlin - dependent actin polymerization in re - sponse to a localized source of EGF . Hence , although the activation of PLC is asymmetric in response to a gra - dient of EGF as shown here , it is not ampliﬁed . Thus , the inactivation of coﬁlin would have to be concomitantly achieved globally in order for the area of coﬁlin activity to be conﬁned and for its asymmetry to thus be ampli - ﬁed . This local positive and global negative regulation of coﬁlin activity would result in a spatially and tempo - rally restricted occurrence of the early coﬁlin - dependent transient of barbed ends as observed . Additional mech - anisms that could contribute to spatially restricted coﬁlin activity are trompomyosin inhibition of F - actin severing by coﬁlin [ 42 ] and the regulation of intracellular pH by the sodium - hydrogen exchanger ( NHE ) , which could regulate the level of coﬁlin activity [ 43 ] . The Effect of Coﬁlin Activity on Cell Polarity Dawe et al . have demonstrated that the inhibition of co - ﬁlin by the expression of constitutively active LIMK causes a decrease in the stable ( spontaneous ) cell po - larity in embryonic ﬁbroblasts [ 44 ] . In comparison , here we show that the inhibition of coﬁlin activity causes a de - crease in directional sensing , i . e . , cell polarization to - ward a source of EGF . In embryonic ﬁbroblasts , stable cell polarity requires b - actin mRNA targeting to the lead - ing lamella , and this can be disrupted by the blocking of ZBP1 - mediated mRNA targeting [ 45 ] . The mechanism involves ZBP1 - mediated colocalization and translation of the mRNAs for the subunits of the Arp2 / 3 complex and for their polymerization substrate , b - actin [ 46 , 47 ] . This determines the distribution of actin nucleation sites at the cell periphery in primary ﬁbroblasts [ 48 ] . Hence , mRNA targeting can be thought of as a cell - polarization signal leading to stable cell polarity in the absence of a chemotactic gradient . In invasive and metastatic can - cer cells such as MTLn3 , ZBP1 expression is sup - pressed , and its suppression results in the loss of both mRNA targeting and stable cell polarity , as well as in - creased chemotaxis to EGF [ 5 , 48 ] . In this case there is no stable ( spontaneous ) cell polarity , but cell polarity can be induced by a gradient of EGF , and as shown here , this requires coﬁlin activity . Re - expression of ZBP1 in MTLn3 cells causes the tumor cells to become polarized , and this inhibits chemotaxis both in vitro and in vivo , and invasion and metastasis in vivo [ 5 ] . Hence , coﬁlin activity contributes to cell polarity in both stably polarized and chemotactic cells even though the underlying origin of the cell polarity , mRNA targeting and chemotactic stimulation , respectively , in these two different cell types is different . The Relationship between the PLC - Coﬁlin Pathway and PI3K in Setting the Direction of Migration in Carcinoma Cells during Chemotaxis Our study conﬁrms that PLC activates coﬁlin and that it is thus required for directional sensing in tumor cells , and it suggests that PI3K is not directly involved in sens - ing and chemotaxis in tumor cells . PI3K , however , is required for the late actin - polymerization transient in tumor cells in response to EGF ; this transient is neces - sary for the full extent of protrusion and cell locomotion in these cells [ 12 , 33 ] . This ﬁnding is consistent with studies demonstrating that PI3K signaling to WAVE and Arp2 / 3 complex is necessary for lamellipod protru - sion in tumor cells [ 49 ] . The involvement of both PLC - coﬁlin - complex and PI3K - Arp 2 / 3 - complex pathways in EGF - stimulated lamellipod protrusion is consistent with previous studies showing a synergy between ( C ii ) Quantitationofcoﬁlinﬂuorescenceintensityin‘‘front’’standardizedover‘‘back’’ ( regionsdeﬁnedin [ A ] ) ; theregionsofinterestin0scellsare deﬁned to keep the same size as those in the 60 s spreads ( see ‘‘Analysis of Immunostains’’ in the Experimental Procedures ) . ( D i ) Phospho - coﬁlin radial sweep at 60 s and front and back representative blowup images . ( D ii ) Quantitation of phospho - coﬁlin ﬂuorescence at the front standardized over the back at 0 and 60 s ( the regions of interest are the same as in panel C ii ) . Error bars are SEM of at least 20 cells pooled from three independent experiments . An asterisk represents the pipette tip . The scale bar represents 10 m m . Coﬁlin Regulates Chemotaxis in Carcinoma Cells 2201 Figure 6 . Phospho - PLC and Coﬁlin - Dependent Barbed Ends Are Concentrated at the Leading Edge Facing the EGF Gradient ( A ) Phospho - PLC immunostaining at 0 and 60 s after stimulation with the EGF micropipette . ( B i ) Phospho - PLC radial sweep at 60 s ( this sweep is the outermost 1 . 5 m m strip of the cell ) ; the blowups are representative images of a region from the front and one from the back . ( B ii ) Quantitationofphospho - PLCatthefrontisstandardizedoverthebackat0and60s ( theregionsofinterestaredescribedintheExperimental Procedures ) . ( C ) Leftpanelisamontageofstillimagesat0and180safterstimulation , withapipetteattheasterisk , ofarepresentativecell . Middlepanelisthe kymograph taken along the line drawn from the pipette through the cell edge ( see left panel with an asterisk ) . The ﬂuorescence - intensity map is done with pseudocolor ranging from black as the lowest intensity to white as the highest intensity . Right panel is the average rate of actin po - lymerization after EGF stimulation [ 31 ] . ( D ) Free barbed - end staining ( red ) at 0 and 60 s after stimulation with the EGF micropipette was done as described previously [ 12 ] . Current Biology 2202 coﬁlin - severing and Arp2 / 3 - complex - dependent den - dritic nucleation , which greatly ampliﬁes Arp2 / 3 com - plex - dependent actin polymerization [ 14 , 15 ] . Synergy between coﬁlin and Arp2 / 3 activity suggests a mecha - nism for how localized activation of coﬁlin can have such a major effect on cell protrusion and directional lo - comotion [ 13 ] . The site of initial coﬁlin activation mobi - lizes and concentrates the subsequent activation of the Arp2 / 3 complex to the site of coﬁlin activation and thereby determines the site of protrusion and direction of cell locomotion up the gradient . Experimental Procedures Micropipette - Stimulation Assay The assay was performed as previously described [ 12 ] . The quanti - tation method was used so that membrane protrusion toward the EGF gradient , designated as the front protrusion , could be as - sessed . Front ( F ) and back ( B ) protrusions were measured along alinegoingthrough thecentroid andthe tipof themicropipette ( Fig - ure S1A ) : Front ( F ) protrusion is the distance from the centroid of the cell to the point of intersection between the cell perimeter and the line going through the centroid and pipette tip , at the side of the pi - pette ( the front side ) ; back ( B ) protrusion is the distance from the centroid of the cell to the point of intersection but at the other side of the cell ( the back side ) . Measurements were recorded at 30 s in - tervals after the introduction of the pipette . Standardization of pro - trusion was performed in two steps : ( 1 ) Standardization over time 0 . Accounting for differences in cell size ( the starting distance from the centroid to cell edge varies from cell to cell ) , we expressed pro - trusions as the n - fold change and thus were able to average the n - fold change from different cellswithin the same experimental group . For this purpose , for each cell all protrusion values were standard - ized over the corresponding value at time 0 ( front protrusion at time n / Front protrusion at time 0 and back protrusion at time n / back protrusion at time 0 ) , and then values at the same time point from different cells were averaged . ( 2 ) Standardization over protru - sion at the back of control cells : We used this step to set the protru - sionatthebackofcontrolcellstoavalueof1andtoexpresstherestofthecurveswithinthesameexperimentinreferencetoit . We were thus able to distinguish directional protrusion from translocation of the centroid during the 10 min time lapse . For this purpose , for each plot , protrusion curves ( from control and experimental groups ) were standardized relative to the curve of protrusion at the back of control cells from the same experiment . The chemotactic index , cosine q , was also measured ; q is the angle between the line formed by the initial centroid ( before the micropipette introduction ) and the last centroid ( after 10 min ) , which is the cell’s trajectory over the course of 10 min , and the line going through the ﬁrst centroid and the position of the pipette tip . Measurement of the EGF Gradient FITC - dextran ( 10 , 000 daltons ) was used to determine the decrease in EGF concentration in relation to distance away from the tip of the EGF pipette . Along a line going through the tip of the pipette and the centroid of the stimulated cells , ﬂuorescence intensity was measured at three positions : at the tip of the pipette , at the front of the cell , and at the back of the cell . The percentage of ﬂuores - cence intensity was determined at the front and the back in refer - ence to the intensity at the pipette tip : 100 % EGF at the tip , percent gradient at the front , and percent gradient at the back . The differ - ence in the percent gradient between front and back was calculated for each cell , and then the values were averaged . Rate of Protrusion To measure the rate of protrusion , we starved the cells and then stimulated them with 5 nM EGF ( global stimulation ) in a bath fashion [ 12 , 31 ] . Time - lapse serieswere recorded , and areawas assessed in ImageJ . The rates of protrusion were measured for each cell inde - pendently from calculations of the slopes from the area - versus - time plots [ ( area n – area n 2 1 ) / ( time n – time n 2 1 ) ] . The rates at 2 to 3 min after EGF stimulation were then averaged and graphed for every cell line . Rate of Actin Polymerization To measure the rate of actin polymerization , we used a previously established technique [ 31 ] , where changes in GFP - actin intensity have been shown to directly relate to actin polymerization ( and where it was shown that G - actin does not contribute to changes in GFP intensity ) . In brief , GFP - b - actin MTLn3 cells were stimulated with an EGF - ﬁlled pipette , and time - lapse movies were recorded over the course of 10 min . To determine the time at which the early barbed - end transient occurs , we examined GFP actin accumulation at the leading edge by kymographic analysis during the ﬁrst 2 min afterstimulation . Thekymographwasrecordedalongalinecrossing themembraneandgoingtowardthepipettetip . Fluorescenceinten - sity was measured from the kymographs in 30 s increments in a re - gionstartingatthecelledgeandreceding0 . 7 m mintothelamellipod ; average intensity was measured in boxes traced on the kymograph image , withdimensionsof30sinwidthand0 . 7 m minlength . The rate of actin polymerization is proportional to the number of free barbed ends after stimulation [ 31 ] and was hence determined by measure - ment of the slope in the change in ﬂuorescence intensity ( FI ) versus time of stimulation [ ( FI n – FI n 2 1 ) / ( time n – time n 2 1 ) ] . The rate of polymerization was then standardized over values from the time in - terval before the addition of the EGF pipette and the standardized rates from different cells were averaged and then plotted versus time . Analysis of Immunostains We used a radial - sweep macro in ImageJ to align the most periph - eral points of the cell edge : a line ( starting at an arbitrary position along the cell length ) , going from the centroid to the edge of the cell , rotates around the cell and stacks the generated line scans whilekeepingthe edgeoutermost points aligned , resultinginhaving thecellperipheryspreadopeninalinearfashion ( Figure5A ) . Thisim - age processing allows the immunostaining signal at the front of the cell ( facing the EGF pipette ) to be studied distinctly from the back . The front and back of the cell were deﬁned as described in Figure 5A . We used ﬁducial marks to delineate the front and the back , which are reﬂected in the radial sweep ( Figure 5A ) . The mea - surement of immunostaining signal extended 2 m m from the mem - brane into the cytoplasm , which contains the lamellipod area . For unstimulated cells , the front and back were determined arbitrarily , and the size of the region of interest was kept the same as in stimu - lated cells . Supplemental Data Supplemental data include additional Experimental Procedures and three ﬁgures and are available online at http : / / www . current - biology . com / cgi / content / full / 16 / 22 / 2193 / DC1 / . Acknowledgments We are grateful to the Analytical Imaging Facility at Albert Einstein College of Medicine and especially to Micheal Cammer for his valu - able assistance . This work was supported by National Institute of Health grant GM38511 to J . C . Received : July 7 , 2006 Revised : August 23 , 2006 Accepted : September 6 , 2006 Published : November 20 , 2006 ( E i ) Radialsweepforfree - barbedendstainingat60s ; blowupsarerepresentativeimagesoffront andback . ( E ii ) Quantitation offreebarbedends at the front is standardized over the back at 0 and 60 s . Error bars are SEM of at least 20 cells pooled from three independent experiments . In ( A ) and ( C ) the asterisk represents the pipette tip . The scale bar represents 10 m m . Coﬁlin Regulates Chemotaxis in Carcinoma Cells 2203 References 1 . Bailly , M . , and Condeelis , J . ( 2002 ) . Cell motility : Insights from the backstage . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , E292 – E294 . 2 . Devreotes , P . , and Janetopoulos , C . ( 2003 ) . Eukaryotic Chemo - taxis : Distinctions between directional sensing and polarization . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 20445 – 20448 . 3 . Wang , W . , Goswami , S . , Sahai , E . , Wyckoff , J . B . , Segall , J . E . , and Condeelis , J . S . ( 2005 ) . Tumor cells caught in the act of in - vading : Their strategy for enhanced cell motility . Trends Cell Biol . 15 , 138 – 145 . 4 . Wyckoff , J . , Wang , W . , Lin , E . Y . , Wang , Y . , Pixley , F . , Stanley , E . R . , Graf , T . , Pollard , J . W . , Segall , J . , and Condeelis , J . ( 2004 ) . A paracrine loop between tumor cells and macrophages is re - quired for tumor cell migration in mammary tumors . Cancer Res . 64 , 7022 – 7029 . 5 . Wang , W . , Goswami , S . , Lapidus , K . , Wells , A . L . , Wyckoff , J . B . , Sahai , E . , Singer , R . H . , Segall , J . E . , and Condeelis , J . S . ( 2004 ) . Identiﬁcationandtestingofageneexpression signature ofinva - sive carcinoma cells within primary mammary tumors . Cancer Res . 64 , 8585 – 8594 . 6 . Chen , L . , Janetopoulos , C . , Huang , Y . E . , Iijima , M . , Borleis , J . , and Devreotes , P . N . ( 2003 ) . Two phases of actin polymerization display different dependencieson PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P3 accumulation and have unique roles during chemotaxis . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 5028 – 5037 . 7 . Janetopoulos , C . , Ma , L . , Devreotes , P . N . , and Iglesias , P . A . ( 2004 ) . Chemoattractant - induced phosphatidylinositol 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate accumulation is spatially ampliﬁed and adapts , independent of the actin cytoskeleton . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 8951 – 8956 . 8 . Weiner , O . D . ( 2002 ) . Regulation of cell polarity during eukaryotic chemotaxis : Thechemotacticcompass . Curr . Opin . CellBiol . 14 , 196 – 202 . 9 . Lacalle , R . A . , Gomez - Mouton , C . , Barber , D . F . , Jimenez - Bar - anda , S . , Mira , E . , Martinez , A . C . , Carrera , A . C . , and Manes , S . ( 2004 ) . PTEN regulates motility but not directionality during leukocyte chemotaxis . J . Cell Sci . 117 , 6207 – 6215 . 10 . Wu , H . , Goel , V . , and Haluska , F . G . ( 2003 ) . PTEN signaling path - ways in melanoma . Oncogene 22 , 3113 – 3122 . 11 . Chan , A . Y . , Raft , S . , Bailly , M . , Wyckoff , J . B . , Segall , J . E . , and Condeelis , J . S . ( 1998 ) . EGFstimulatesanincreaseinactinnucle - ation and ﬁlament number at the leading edge of the lamellipod in mammary adenocarcinoma cells . J . Cell Sci . 111 , 199 – 211 . 12 . Mouneimne , G . , Soon , L . , DesMarais , V . , Sidani , M . , Song , X . , Yip , S . C . , Ghosh , M . , Eddy , R . , Backer , J . M . , and Condeelis , J . ( 2004 ) . Phospholipase C and coﬁlin are required for carcinoma cell directionality in response to EGF stimulation . J . Cell Biol . 166 , 697 – 708 . 13 . DesMarais , V . , Ghosh , M . , Eddy , R . , and Condeelis , J . ( 2005 ) . Coﬁlin takes the lead . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 19 – 26 . 14 . DesMarais , V . , Macaluso , F . , Condeelis , J . , and Bailly , M . ( 2004 ) . Synergistic interaction between the Arp2 / 3 complex and coﬁlin drives stimulated lamellipod extension . J . Cell Sci . 117 , 3499 – 3510 . 15 . Ichetovkin , I . , Grant , W . , and Condeelis , J . ( 2002 ) . Coﬁlin pro - duces newly polymerized actin ﬁlaments that are preferred for dendritic nucleation by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Biol . 12 , 79 – 84 . 16 . Ghosh , M . , Song , X . , Mouneimne , G . , Sidani , M . , Lawrence , D . S . , and Condeelis , J . S . ( 2004 ) . Coﬁlin promotes actin polymeriza - tion and deﬁnes the direction of cell motility . Science 304 , 743 – 746 . 17 . Toshima , J . , Toshima , J . Y . , Amano , T . , Yang , N . , Narumiya , S . , and Mizuno , K . ( 2001 ) . Coﬁlin phosphorylation by protein kinase testicular protein kinase 1 and its role in integrin - mediated actin reorganization and focal adhesion formation . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 , 1131 – 1145 . 18 . Ambach , A . , Saunus , J . , Konstandin , M . , Wesselborg , S . , Meuer , S . C . , and Samstag , Y . ( 2000 ) . The serine phosphatases PP1 and PP2A associate with and activate the actin - binding protein coﬁ - lin in human T lymphocytes . Eur . J . Immunol . 30 , 3422 – 3431 . 19 . Meberg , P . J . , Ono , S . , Minamide , L . S . , Takahashi , M . , and Bam - burg , J . R . ( 1998 ) . Actin depolymerizing factor and coﬁlin phosphorylation dynamics : Response to signals that regulate neurite extension . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 39 , 172 – 190 . 20 . Zhan , Q . , Bamburg , J . R . , and Badwey , J . A . ( 2003 ) . Products of phosphoinositide speciﬁc phospholipase C can trigger dephos - phorylation of coﬁlin in chemoattractant stimulated neutrophils . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 54 , 1 – 15 . 21 . Niwa , R . , Nagata - Ohashi , K . , Takeichi , M . , Mizuno , K . , and Ue - mura , T . ( 2002 ) . Control of actin reorganization by Slingshot , a family of phosphatases that dephosphorylate ADF / coﬁlin . Cell 108 , 233 – 246 . 22 . Gohla , A . , Birkenfeld , J . , and Bokoch , G . M . ( 2005 ) . Chronophin , a novel HAD - type serine protein phosphatase , regulates coﬁlin - dependent actin dynamics . Nat . Cell Biol . 7 , 21 – 29 . 23 . Chan , A . Y . , Bailly , M . , Zebda , N . , Segall , J . E . , andCondeelis , J . S . ( 2000 ) . Role of coﬁlin in epidermal growth factor - stimulated ac - tin polymerization and lamellipod protrusion . J . Cell Biol . 148 , 531 – 542 . 24 . Song , X . , Chen , X . , Yamaguchi , H . , Mouneimne , G . , Condeelis , J . S . , and Eddy , R . ( 2006 ) . Initiation of coﬁlin activity in response to EGF is uncoupled from coﬁlin phosphorylation and dephos - phorylation in carcinoma cells . J . Cell . Sci . 119 , 2871 – 2881 . 25 . Yonezawa , N . , Homma , Y . , Yahara , I . , Sakai , H . , and Nishida , E . ( 1991 ) . A short sequence responsible for both phosphoinositide binding and actin binding activities of coﬁlin . J . Biol . Chem . 266 , 17218 – 17221 . 26 . Allen , P . G . ( 2003 ) . Actin ﬁlament uncapping localizes to rufﬂing lamellae and rocketing vesicles . Nat . Cell Biol . 5 , 972 – 979 . 27 . Sun , H . Q . , Yamamoto , M . , Mejillano , M . , and Yin , H . L . ( 1999 ) . Gelsolin , a multifunctional actin regulatory protein . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 33179 – 33182 . 28 . Goldschmidt - Clermont , P . J . , Kim , J . W . , Machesky , L . M . , Rhee , S . G . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 1991 ) . Regulation of phospholipase C - gamma 1 by proﬁlin and tyrosine phosphorylation . Science 251 , 1231 – 1233 . 29 . Kassis , J . , Radinsky , R . , and Wells , A . ( 2002 ) . Motility is rate - limiting for invasion of bladder carcinoma cell lines . Int . J . Bio - chem . Cell Biol . 34 , 762 – 775 . 30 . Raucher , D . , and Sheetz , M . P . ( 2001 ) . Phospholipase C activa - tion by anesthetics decreases membrane - cytoskeleton adhe - sion . J . Cell Sci . 114 , 3759 – 3766 . 31 . Lorenz , M . , DesMarais , V . , Macaluso , F . , Singer , R . H . , and Con - deelis , J . ( 2004 ) . Measurement of barbed ends , actin polymeri - zation , and motility in live carcinoma cells after growth factor stimulation . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 57 , 207 – 217 . 32 . Backer , J . M . ( 2000 ) . Phosphoinositide 3 - kinases and the regu - lation of vesicular trafﬁcking . Mol . Cell Biol . Res . Commun . 3 , 193 – 204 . 33 . Hill , K . , Welti , S . , Yu , J . , Murray , J . T . , Yip , S . C . , Condeelis , J . S . , Segall , J . E . , and Backer , J . M . ( 2000 ) . Speciﬁc requirement for the p85 - p110alpha phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase during epider - mal growth factor - stimulated actin nucleation in breast cancer cells . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 3741 – 3744 . 34 . Iijima , M . , and Devreotes , P . ( 2002 ) . Tumor suppressor PTEN mediates sensing of chemoattractant gradients . Cell 109 , 599 – 610 . 35 . Zebda , N . , Bernard , O . , Bailly , M . , Welti , S . , Lawrence , D . S . , and Condeelis , J . S . ( 2000 ) . Phosphorylation of ADF / coﬁlin abolishes EGF - induced actin nucleation at the leading edge and subse - quent lamellipod extension . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 1119 – 1128 . 36 . Wang , W . , Mouneimne , G . , Sidani , M . , Wyckoff , J . , Chen , X . , Makris , A . , Goswami , S . , Bresnick , A . R . , and Condeelis , J . S . ( 2006 ) . Theactivity statusofcoﬁlinis directlyrelatedtoinvasion , intravasation and metastasis of mammary tumors . J . Cell Biol . 173 , 395 – 404 . 37 . Thomas , S . M . , Coppelli , F . M . , Wells , A . , Gooding , W . E . , Song , J . , Kassis , J . , Drenning , S . D . , and Grandis , J . R . ( 2003 ) . Epidermal growth factor receptor - stimulated activation of phospholipase Cgamma - 1 promotes invasion of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma . Cancer Res . 63 , 5629 – 5635 . 38 . Ma , H . T . , Patterson , R . L . , van Rossum , D . B . , Birnbaumer , L . , Mi - koshiba , K . , and Gill , D . L . ( 2000 ) . Requirement of the inositol trisphosphate receptor for activation of store - operated Ca2 + channels . Science 287 , 1647 – 1651 . Current Biology 2204 39 . Nishita , M . , Tomizawa , C . , Yamamoto , M . , Horita , Y . , Ohashi , K . , and Mizuno , K . ( 2005 ) . Spatial and temporal regulation of coﬁlin activity by LIM kinase and Slingshot is critical for directional cell migration . J . Cell Biol . 171 , 349 – 359 . 40 . Hotulainen , P . , Paunola , E . , Vartiainen , M . K . , and Lappalainen , P . ( 2005 ) . Actin - depolymerizingfactorandcoﬁlin - 1playoverlap - ping roles in promoting rapid F - actin depolymerization in mam - malian nonmuscle cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 649 – 664 . 41 . Wang , Y . , Shibasaki , F . , and Mizuno , K . ( 2005 ) . Calcium signal - induced coﬁlin dephosphorylation is mediated by Slingshot via calcineurin . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 12683 – 12689 . 42 . DesMarais , V . , Ichetovkin , I . , Condeelis , J . , and Hitchcock - DeGregori , S . E . ( 2002 ) . Spatial regulation of actin dynamics : A tropomyosin - free , actin - rich compartment at the leading edge . J . Cell Sci . 115 , 4649 – 4660 . 43 . Patel , H . , and Barber , D . L . ( 2005 ) . A developmentally regulated Na - H exchanger in Dictyostelium discoideum is necessary for cell polarity during chemotaxis . J . Cell Biol . 169 , 321 – 329 . 44 . Dawe , H . R . , Minamide , L . S . , Bamburg , J . R . , and Cramer , L . P . ( 2003 ) . ADF / coﬁlin controls cell polarity during ﬁbroblast migra - tion . Curr . Biol . 13 , 252 – 257 . 45 . Kislauskis , E . H . , Zhu , X . , and Singer , R . H . ( 1994 ) . Sequences re - sponsible for intracellular localization of beta - actin messenger RNA also affect cell phenotype . J . Cell Biol . 127 , 441 – 451 . 46 . Mingle , L . A . , Okuhama , N . N . , Shi , J . , Singer , R . H . , Condeelis , J . , and Liu , G . ( 2005 ) . Localization of all seven messenger RNAs for the actin - polymerization nucleator Arp2 / 3 complex in the pro - trusions of ﬁbroblasts . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 2425 – 2433 . 47 . Huttelmaier , S . , Zenklusen , D . , Lederer , M . , Dictenberg , J . , Lor - enz , M . , Meng , X . , Bassell , G . J . , Condeelis , J . , and Singer , R . H . ( 2005 ) . Spatialregulationofbeta - actintranslationbySrc - depen - dent phosphorylation of ZBP1 . Nature 438 , 512 – 515 . 48 . Shestakova , E . A . , Singer , R . H . , and Condeelis , J . ( 2001 ) . The physiologicalsigniﬁcanceofbeta - actinmRNAlocalizationinde - termining cell polarity and directional motility . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 98 , 7045 – 7050 . 49 . Bailly , M . , Ichetovkin , I . , Grant , W . , Zebda , N . , Machesky , L . M . , Segall , J . E . , and Condeelis , J . ( 2001 ) . The F - actin side binding activity of the Arp2 / 3 complex is essential for actin nucleation and lamellipod extension . Curr . Biol . 11 , 620 – 625 . Coﬁlin Regulates Chemotaxis in Carcinoma Cells 2205