Nearly every cell in our body assembles one primary nonmotile cilium that protrudes from the plasma mem - brane and functions as a key signalling organelle . The broad importance of ciliary signalling is highlighted by a group of diseases , collectively named ciliopathies , that span a wide range of symptoms , including retinal degen - eration , skeletal malformations , obesity and polycystic kidneys 1 . Primary cilia have been known as signalling centres for the light and olfactory transduction path - ways since the 1950s 2 , 3 . Their signalling functions were greatly broadened in 2003 when a forward genetic screen in mice uncovered a requirement for primary cilia in Hedgehog signalling , one of the central developmental signalling pathways that patterns limbs and the neural tube 4 . Since then , a number of signalling pathways have been associated with primary cilia — including WNT 5 , NOTCH 6 , planar cell polarity 7 , receptor tyrosine kinases ( platelet - derived growth factor receptor - α ( PDGFRα ) 8 and insulin - like growth factor 1 ( IGF1 ) 9 ) , G protein - coupled receptors ( GPCRs ) 10 and transforming growth factor - β ( TGFβ ) 11 — although the physiological require - ment for cilia in some of these signalling modalities remains to be conclusively established . The discovery of major cilia - associated signalling pathways is still ongo - ing : it was only in 2018 that the GPCR melanocortin receptor 4 ( MC4R ) , which is the product of the most frequently mutated gene in familial cases of obesity , was shown to utilize the primary cilium for its anorexigenic function 12 ; and the ciliary signalling pathways associated with left – right asymmetry determination and with poly - cystic kidney disease ( PKD ) are still elusive . In addition to primary cilia , motile cilia found on motile cells ( where they are often termed flagella ) and on the surface of spe - cialized epithelia ( for example , in the airways ) also serve signalling functions ( reviewed elsewhere 13 , 14 ) . Given the common signalling roles of primary cilia and motile cilia , they are jointly discussed as cilia . The first paradigms of ciliary signalling emerged from the study of olfactory receptor neurons and photoreceptors in which specialized cilia organize the entirety of light and olfactory transduction cascades . To do so , these cilia statically concentrate the GPCRs that sense photons ( rhodopsin ) and specific odorants ( olfactory receptors ) at concentrations sufficient to enable sensitivity to single photons 15 or a handful of odorant molecules 16 . Activation of these GPCRs alters the levels of the cyclic nucleotides cGMP ( vision ) and cAMP ( smell ) inside cilia to regulate the opening of cyclic - nucleotide - gated ion channels . The resulting change in membrane potential propagates through the photoreceptor and olfactory receptor neurons and reg - ulates neurotransmitter release . Studies of Hedgehog transduction in vertebrates and of fertilization in the motile protist Chlamydomonas reinhardtii introduced a twist in the paradigm of ciliary signalling — rather than depending on static concentration of signalling receptors in cilia , these pathways rely on the dynamic redistribu - tion of signalling proteins between cilia and the rest of the cell to appropriately transduce signals 17 – 21 . Much progress has been made in recent years in our understanding of how protein trafficking in and out of cilia is regulated and how the dynamic relocalization G protein - coupled receptors ( GPCRs ) . Membrane proteins with seven transmembrane domains that sense various external signals ( such as drugs and odorants ) and relay them into the cell through heterotrimeric G proteins . Anorexigenic Refers to an effect related to the loss of appetite ( anorexia ) , thus resulting in lower food consumption and weight loss . Establishing and regulating the composition of cilia for signal transduction Maxence V . Nachury 1 * and David U . Mick 2 , 3 Abstract | The primary cilium is a hair - like surface - exposed organelle of the eukaryotic cell that decodes a variety of signals — such as odorants , light and Hedgehog morphogens — by altering the local concentrations and activities of signalling proteins . Signalling within the cilium is conveyed through a diverse array of second messengers , including conventional signalling molecules ( such as cAMP ) and some unusual intermediates ( such as sterols ) . Diffusion barriers at the ciliary base establish the unique composition of this signalling compartment , and cilia adapt their proteome to signalling demands through regulated protein trafficking . Much progress has been made on the molecular understanding of regulated ciliary trafficking , which encompasses not only exchanges between the cilium and the rest of the cell but also the shedding of signalling factors into extracellular vesicles . 1 Department of Ophthalmology , University of California , San Francisco , San Francisco , CA , USA . 2 Center of Human and Molecular Biology ( ZHMB ) , Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , Saarland University , Homburg , Germany . 3 Center for Molecular Signaling ( PZMS ) , Saarland University School of Medicine , Homburg , Germany . * e - mail : maxence . nachury @ ucsf . edu https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41580 - 019 - 0116 - 4 REvIEwS NATuRe RevIeWS | MOlecular cell BIOlOgy volume 20 | JulY 2019 | 389 of pathway components influences signal processing at the molecular level . Defects in the machineries that mediate the entry and exit of signalling receptors have been found to underlie various ciliopathies such as Bardet – Biedl syndrome , several skeletal dysplasia syn - dromes and some cases of retinal degeneration 1 , 22 . The regulated ciliary accumulation and localized activation of signalling receptors , channels and enzymes are now thought to endow the cilium with the ability to dynami - cally adjust concentrations of signalling molecules , such as Ca 2 + , cAMP and cGMP independently of their con - centrations in the cytoplasm 23 , 24 . Presumably , the ability to separately regulate second messenger levels in the cytoplasm and cilia enabled the last common eukaryotic ancestor to transduce multiple signalling inputs without undesired crosstalk . Furthermore , lipids of the ciliary membrane have emerged as signalling and traffick - ing regulators 25 . In particular , ciliary phosphoinositides function as signposts that may enforce the direction - ality of trafficking processes , while mounting evidence points to sterols as key signalling intermediates in Hedgehog signalling 26 – 28 . Finally , extracellular vesicles budding from cilia tips and packaged with activated signalling molecules represent a novel modality used to dispose of excess signalling molecules and to regulate cilium length 29 – 31 . This Review focuses on how cilia establish their unique composition of proteins , lipids and second mes - sengers and how they dynamically regulate their com - position to function as signalling compartments . After introducing how cilia establish their unique proteome and lipidome , we examine the mechanisms that regu - late protein entry into and exit out of cilia and how they dynamically control cilia composition and shape ciliary signalling pathways . Maintenance of ciliary composition The cilium is a microtubule - based structure consist - ing of a basal body with nine triplet microtubules that extend into an axoneme with nine doublet micro - tubules ensheathed within a ciliary membrane . Typically 2 – 10 µm long , cilia can reach exceptional lengths of 200 µm in olfactory neurons . The transition zone and the transition fibres are two ultrastructural specializa - tions that physically separate the ciliary shaft from the basal body ( FiG . 1a ) . The transition fibres connect the basal body to the plasma membrane and are identical to the distal appendages of the oldest ‘mother’ centriole , while the transition zone typically lines the proximal 0 . 5 µm of the cilium , where Y - links connect the axoneme to the membrane 32 – 34 . Three distinct biological strategies are utilized to enrich molecules in cilia versus the rest of + – a 250 nm Basalbody Transition zone Transition ﬁbre Axoneme Y - links Anterograde IFT Cargo Retrograde IFT Kinesin - 2 b Axoneme Basal body Transitionﬁbres Transition zone Disc Synapticterminal Inner segment Outer segment Connectingcilium Golgi apparatus Vesiculartransport Nucleus Dynein 2 DAM IFT - B IFT - A BBSome Fig . 1 | Organization of primary cilia and photoreceptors . a | Diagram of a primary cilium . The basal body consists of nine triplets of microtubules and is connected to the plasma membrane by the transition fibres . The axoneme is formed by nine doublets of microtubules ( only two are shown ) . At the base of the axoneme is the transition zone , which comprises Y - link connections to the ciliary membrane . Microtubule motors and three intraflagellar transport ( IFT ) complexes ( Box 3 ) assemble into IFT trains that move ciliary cargoes along the axoneme . Kinesin - 2 mediates anterograde IFT and cytoplasmic dynein 2 retrograde IFT . The distal appendage matrix ( DAM ) positioned between the transition fibres together with the transition zone separates the cilium from the rest of the cell by blocking ( STOP signs ) lateral diffusion of membrane proteins and diffusion of soluble proteins . Plus ( + ) and minus ( – ) mark the orientation of the microtubules in the axoneme . b | Diagram of a photoreceptor neuron . The outer segment ( equivalent of the cilium shaft ) comprises hundreds of membrane discs that each concentrates ~ 1 million molecules of rhodopsin . All proteins required for phototransduction are produced in the inner segment , transported through the transition zone ( termed ‘connecting cilium’ ) and are injected into the outer segment . Photoreceptors Sensory neurons that detect light using rhodopsin localized inside a specialized cilium . Rhodopsin A photosensory G protein - coupled receptor ( GPCR ) that transduces light using a tightly bound molecule of retinal . Bardet – Biedl syndrome ( BBS ) . A ciliopathy ( with mutations in 21 different genes identified to date ) characterized by retinal degeneration , obesity , kidney abnormalities and polydactyly . Phosphoinositides Hallmark lipids that mark the cytoplasmic leaflets of cellular membranes . Basal body A specialized mother centriole that is a template for the ciliary axoneme . www . nature . com / nrm R e v i e w s 390 | JulY 2019 | volume 20 the cell : selective diffusion barriers , local production and diffusion to capture . Selective barriers for proteins . How cilia could main - tain their unique protein composition despite topologi - cal continuity between plasma and ciliary membranes and between the ciliary interior and the cytoplasm was long a conundrum . Bulk photokinetic studies , single - molecule tracking and in vitro assays in mammalian cells resolved this problem by demonstrating that mem - brane proteins and large soluble proteins are prevented from freely diffusing in and out of cilia by the transi - tion zone and the transition fibres 35 – 43 ( FiG . 1a ) . Nearly 30 proteins are known to constitute the transition zone , and they assemble into at least four biochemical entities ( MKS , NPHP and CEP290 modules and RPGRIP1L protein ) encoded by genes mutated in ciliopathies : Meckel – Gruber syndrome ( MKS ) , Joubert syndrome and nephronophthisis ( NPHP ) 33 . At timescales of tens of minutes , the MKS module is stably anchored at the transition zone of mammalian cells and nematodes 44 , 45 , whereas the localization of C . reinhardtii CEP290 at the transition zone is dynamic 46 . Intriguingly , localization of NPHP4 to the transition zone is dynamic in mammal - ian cells 45 but static in C . reinhardtii 47 and , at multihour timescales , even the MKS module may undergo dynamic exchange between the transition zone and the ciliary shaft in mammalian cells and nematodes 48 – 50 . It is thus conceivable that some transition zone proteins actually function as trafficking factors with a rate - limiting trans - port step that resides at the transition zone . In photo - receptors ( FiG . 1b ) , the transition zone is augmented with a specific set of proteins that help this specialized cell type cope with the unique demands of transporting 1 , 000 rhodopsin molecules per second from the cell body ( the inner segment ) into a highly specialized ciliary shaft ( the outer segment ) 51 . Compositional differences of the transition zone have also been reported between vari - ous fly and mouse tissues 52 – 54 and may contribute to the morphological and functional diversity of cilia . The find - ing that mutations in transition zone components cause leakage of various proteins into and out of the cilium first established that the transition zone is a diffusion barrier for ciliary proteins 37 , 46 , 47 , 55 – 58 . Single - molecule tracking directly demonstrated that the seven - transmembrane proteins Smoothened ( Hedgehog transducer ) and GPR161 ( negative regulator of Hedgehog signalling ) cannot diffuse freely across the transition zone 42 , 59 . To date , five structural components of the transi - tion fibres have been identified and mapped by super - resolution microscopy 41 , 60 , 61 . Given the large gaps ( 50 nm ) between neighbouring transition fibres and the observation that nematode cilia can be maintained in the absence of transition fibres 62 – 64 , little attention had been given to the hypothesis that transition fibres hin - der protein diffusion . This recently changed with the discovery of a distal appendage matrix ( DAM ) between the transition fibres . The protein FAS - binding factor 1 ( FBF1 ) is currently the only known component of the DAM and is required to confine membrane proteins to cilia 41 . In addition , GPR161 molecules that exit cilia have to cross a periciliary barrier whose dimensions are very similar to those of the DAM 42 ( see below ) . Remarkably , FBF1 is also localized at the tight junctions of epithelial cells and participates in forming the fence between apical and basolateral membranes 65 . Similarly , the NPHP mod - ule of the transition zone localizes to tight junctions and participates in epithelial polarity 66 , 67 . Given that FBF1 is present in nematodes , where it localizes at the base of cilia and functionally interacts with hydro lethalus 1 ( HYLS1 ) 68 to maintain ciliary composition , it is con - ceivable that a DAM composed of FBF1 and HYLS1 assembles in the absence of transition fibres . Local supply of second messengers . Foundational elec - trophysiological and biosensor - based measurements demonstrated that the concentration of free Ca 2 + ( [ Ca 2 + ] ) is 3 – 5 times higher in cilia than in the cytoplasm 69 , 70 . Most importantly , these studies found no evidence for a diffusion barrier that impedes the movement of Ca 2 + between the cilium and the cytoplasm . Instead , [ Ca 2 + ] cilia is the product of Ca 2 + influx through polycystin family ion channels that reside in the ciliary membrane ( Box 1 ) and of passive Ca 2 + efflux into the cytoplasm . Between Axoneme The microtubule core of cilia composed of nine microtubule doublets . Transition fibres identical to the distal appendages of mother centrioles in unciliated cells , transition fibres physically connect the basal body to the membrane in ciliated cells . Y - links Y - shaped electron - dense structures that connect the ciliary axoneme ( bottom of the Y ) to the membrane ( top of the Y ) at the transition zone . Box 1 | Polycystic kidney disease — a case of disrupted ciliary signalling Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease ( PKD ) , the most common monogenic disorder in humans , is caused by dysfunction of polycystin 1 and polycystin 2 ( PC1 and PC2 ; encoded by the PKD1 and PKD2 genes ) 215 , two transmembrane proteins related to transient receptor potential channels that form a complex localized to cilia 216 , 217 . The existence of a PKD2 - dependent cation - selective current within primary cilia of kidney epithelial cells 218 , 219 and of a Ca 2 + channel formed by the polycystin - related proteins PKD1l1 and PKD2l1 in cilia of retinal pigmented epithelial ( RPe ) cells and mouse embryonic fibroblasts 69 suggests that PC1 and PC2 may function as a Ca 2 + channel . It was initially proposed that the PC1 – PC2 complex functions as a mechanosensitive Ca 2 + channel that responds to urine flow inside kidney tubules 220 , but careful investigations have led to the rejection of this model 221 , and the specific stimulus that activates the polycystin channel remains elusive . The presence of numerous cystic lesions in patients with ciliopathy and in mouse models 222 established the important role of cilia in cystogenesis ( reviewed elsewhere 1 , 215 , 223 ) . Because cilia are required for rapid and widespread cystogenesis in mice lacking Pkd1 or Pkd2 ( ReF . 224 ) , polycystins are thought to repress a ciliary cystogenic pathway . The suppression of cyst formation in Pkd mutants by genetic ablation of adenylyl cyclase 5 ( AC5 ) or AC6 placed these ciliary enzymes as positive regulators of the ciliary cystogenic pathway 76 , 77 . on the basis of these genetic interactions , a parsimonious yet speculative model emerges in which a ( currently unidentified ) G protein - coupled receptor ( GPCR ) in kidney cilia , coupled to G α s , activates AC5 and AC6 to elevate ciliary cAmP and thus generates the cystogenic signal . This pathway is normally antagonized by the Ca 2 + - mediated inhibition of AC5 and AC6 made possible by Ca 2 + entry through the ciliary PC1 – PC2 channel ( see figure ) . Currently , the sole approved PKD therapy relies on reduction in cellular cAmP levels 215 . A precise understanding of the ciliary cystogenic pathway promises to lead to more targeted therapies . Wild type Pdk1 – or Pkd2 – PC1 – PC2 Ca 2 + Axoneme Basal body ↑ [ Ca 2 + ] ↓ [ cAMP ] ↓ [ Ca 2 + ] ↑ [ cAMP ] AC5 or AC6 AC5 or AC6 GPCR G α s Cystogenic signal Cystogenic signal NATuRe RevIeWS | MOlecular cell BIOlOgy R e v i e w s volume 20 | JulY 2019 | 391 200 and 300 Ca 2 + ions are sufficient to generate 1 μM [ Ca 2 + ] cilia , and leakage of Ca 2 + from the cilium into the cytoplasm is of negligible consequence to cellular cal - cium homeostasis owing to the 3 – 4 orders of magnitude larger volume of the cytoplasm . Thus , the constitutive supply of a molecule to the interior of cilia is sufficient to maintain a high local concentration in the absence of a diffusion barrier ( FiG . 2a ) . Cyclic nucleotides are well established as critical intermediates in ciliary signalling 24 . cGMP is the second messenger for phototransduction , and cAMP is the sec - ond messenger for olfactory signalling . Concentrations of free cAMP in olfactory cilia 71 and in sperm flagella 72 have been estimated at ~ 100 nM , and one study reported a free cAMP concentration in fibroblast cilia of 800 nM ( ReF . 73 ) . Given the challenges associated with using bio - sensors to measure absolute concentrations when organ - elle dimensions approach the diffraction limit , multiple independent approaches will be required to accurately determine [ cAMP ] cilia in relevant cell types . The enzymes that generate cAMP inside cilia in vertebrates are the adenylyl cyclases : AC3 , AC5 and AC6 . AC3 localizes to neuronal cilia , and mutations in AC3 cause severe obesity — a cardinal symptom of several ciliopathies 74 , 75 . AC5 and AC6 localize to kidney cilia , where they pro - mote cystogenesis in PKD 76 , 77 ( Box 1 ) . AC5 and AC6 are also the major adenylyl cyclase isoforms regulating Hedgehog signalling in primary cilia ( Box 2 ) , as shown in Adenylylcyclase cAMP PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 Ca 2 + Ca 2 + channel a Local supply b Diffusion to capture INPP5E Axoneme Basalbody EB1 + Ciliaryprotein c Passive entry f Protein hierarchy g Active export of non - resident proteins involving the BBSome e Import of lipidated proteins by chaperones d GPCR import by IFT - A Transitionzone Tubulin ? SAG1 Transition ﬁbre Y - links TULP3 PtdIns ( 4 ) P PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 hydrolysis PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 hydrolysis I N PP 5 E ARL3 RP2 ( GAP ) ARL13B ( GEF ) ARL3GDP ARL3GTP P D E 6 δ ARL13B INPP5E PtdIns ( 4 ) P TULP3 – IFT - A ? IFT - A cargoes ARL3GTP PLD BBSome Diffusion BBSome - dependent active export Signal β - arrestin 2 BBSome Endocytosis ? Dynein 2 Dynein 2 PtdIns ( 4 ) P Kinesin - 2 IFT - B GTP GPCR Kinesin - 2 Mechanochemicalcoupling ? Motor - independent passage ? G D P Lateral diffusion ? h Export of activated GPCRs by the BBSome IFT - A IFT - A IFT - B IFT - A IFT - B IFT - A IFT - B Tight junctions The junctions between adjacent epithelial cells that seal the epithelium and function as a barrier for lipid and integral membrane protein diffusion between the apical and basolateral membranes of cells . www . nature . com / nrm R e v i e w s 392 | JulY 2019 | volume 20 fibroblasts and neuroblasts 78 – 80 , and AC6 regulates cilium function in osteocytes 81 . An important functional dif - ference between the ciliary adenylyl cyclases is that AC5 and AC6 are inhibited by submicromolar concentrations of free Ca 2 + whereas AC3 is not 82 . Ciliary Ca 2 + may thus feed into the regulation of ciliary cAMP in cell types in which AC5 and AC6 are the major ciliary ACs ( BoxeS 1 , 2 ) . GPCRs represent the major source of regulatory inputs for adenylyl cyclases , activating all ACs through the heterotrimeric G protein α subunit Gα s and inhibiting AC5 and AC6 through Gα i . All olfactory GPCRs ( ~ 400 in humans ) are expected to be in olfactory cilia , and of the 400 non - olfactory GPCRs in the human genome , 30 have been localized to cilia 83 . Although the physiologi - cal importance of ciliary localization of these GPCRs is coming into focus — one example being ciliary signalling by MC4R in body weight homeostasis 12 — downstream signalling pathways inside cilia remain incompletely characterized for the vast majority of ciliary GPCRs . The regulation of cyclic - nucleotide - gated ion channels in phototransduction and olfactory signalling and the regulation of the processing of GLi transcription factors by ciliary protein kinase A ( PKA ) in Hedgehog signalling ( see Box 2 ) provide the conceptual framework for how ciliary GPCRs may regulate downstream targets . Passive diffusion and capture . Proteins of moderate size ( molecular mass ≲ 100 kDa ) can freely diffuse into cilia and become enriched within cilia by binding to partner proteins or structures ( FiG . 2b ) . One example is the micro - tubule plus - end binding protein EB1 in C . reinhardtii , which localizes to cilia independently of the ciliary import machinery 84 ( see below and Box 3 ) and diffuses inside cilia before becoming enriched at the tip owing to binding to the plus end of the microtubule axoneme 85 . The EB1 example illustrates how diffusion is sufficient to rapidly explore the volume of a femtolitre - scale com - partment and how binding partners determine the localization of proteins . Establishing ciliary membrane identity . Despite their topological continuity , ciliary and plasma membranes appear to have distinct lipid composition . Models of local lipid generation in the cilium are sufficient to explain some of the compositional biases of ciliary lipids . Thus , in contrast to proteins , it is conceivable that there is no ciliary diffusion barrier for lipids . However , careful studies are needed to determine whether this is the case . An example of local lipid generation is provided by phosphatidylino - sitol ( PtdIns ) conversion in the cilium . Ciliary membranes contain high levels of PtdIns - 4 phosphate ( PtdIns ( 4 ) P ) and low levels of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , and the converse compo - sitional bias is found in the plasma membrane 86 , 87 . When the ciliary PtdIns5 - phosphatase INPP5E is defective , PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 is drastically elevated in cilia 86 , 87 . Thus , a compelling model posits that PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 diffuses from the plasma membrane into the cilium , where it becomes hydrolysed into PtdIns ( 4 ) P by INPP5E ( FiG . 2a ) . Besides the well - established enrichment of PtdIns ( 4 ) P , anecdotal evidence suggests high levels of long - chain polyunsaturated lipids 88 – 90 and a general enrichment in sphingolipids , sterols and short - chain saturated fatty acids in cilia 91 – 98 . Lipidomics of isolated sea urchin embryo cilia found that cilia are enriched in at least four dis - tinct oxysterols , two of which were found to activate Smoothened 28 . The existence of cilia - enriched lipid activators of Smoothened may provide an answer to the enigma of why cilia organize Hedgehog signalling in ver - tebrates ( Box 2 ) . Given that no cholesterol or sphingolipid metabolism enzyme has been reported in the cilium , the enrichment of cholesterol and sphingolipids in the cili - ary membrane compared with the plasma membrane 99 – 101 is harder to explain by the local generation model . In Caenorhabditis elegans , a GFP modified with the unsatu - rated lipid anchor geranylgeranyl is excluded from the cilium 102 , suggesting that cilia may exclude certain lipids . The findings that caveolin 1 and flotillin 2 , which mark condensed membrane microdomains , localize to the tran - sition zone in a sterol - dependent manner 103 and that the transition zone membrane is the most detergent resistant of all surface membranes in C . reinhardtii 104 collectively suggest that a liquid - ordered lipid phase exists at the tran - sition zone . Densely packed lipids at the transition zone may thus interfere with lateral diffusion of membrane proteins and lipids between ciliary and plasma mem - branes . Understanding the mechanisms that establish and maintain the unique ‘ raft - like’ composition of the ciliary membrane remains a major challenge in cilia biology . Fig . 2 | Transport processes that shape the ciliary environment . a | Local supply of ciliary molecules . Left : ciliary calcium channels enable local influx of Ca 2 + into cilia , which then passively leaks into the cytoplasm ( dashed arrows ) . Middle : adenylyl cyclases generate cAMP in cilia , which then passively leaks into the cytoplasm ( dashed arrows ) . Right : phosphatidylinositol ( PtdIns ) 5 - phosphatase INPP5E in the ciliary membrane converts PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 into PtdIns ( 4 ) P . Dashed arrows indicate lipid exchange between cilia and plasma membrane ( assuming that there is no diffusion barrier for lipids ) . b | A diffusion - to - capture mechanism can enrich certain ciliary proteins . One example is the microtubule plus - end binding protein EB1 . c | Some membrane proteins , such as Chlamydomonas reinhardtii adhesion receptor SAG1 , can enter cilia and accumulate at the ciliary base in the absence of intraflagellar transport ( IFT ) proteins . How this occurs or whether there are additional factors required is unknown ( question mark ) . Similarly , tubulin dimers enter cilia by passive diffusion ( dashed arrows ) but require consumption of energy ( solid arrow ) to efficiently reach the growing ends of axonemal microtubules by IFT . d | Import of certain G protein - coupled receptors ( GPCRs ) by the TULP3 – IFT - A complex . IFT - A recognizes ciliary targeting signals ( CTSs ) within GPCRs and unloads its cargoes upon hydrolysis of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 to PtdIns ( 4 ) P in the cilium . This ‘injection’ into the cilium may not require mechanochemical coupling of kinesin - 2 . e | Import of prenylated ciliary proteins is facilitated by specific chaperones that shield the hydrophobic prenyl groups . Illustrated here is INPP5E , whose farnesyl group ( zigzag ) is chaperoned by PDE6 δ . Upon entry of the INPP5E – PDE6 δ complex into cilia , the binding of ARF - like family GTPase ARL3 – GTP to PDE6 δ triggers the release of INPP5E , which becomes membrane - associated . GTP loading on ARL3 is promoted by the ciliary protein ARL13B owing to its guanine nucleotide exchange factor ( GEF ) activity , which ensures high levels of ARL3 – GTP in cilia . RP2 at the transition zone functions as a GTPase - activating protein ( GAP ) for ARL3 , ensuring that ARL3 is GDP - bound after exiting cilia . This creates a gradient of ARL3 – GTP , with ARL3 – GTP — and consequently INPP5E release — being restricted to the ciliary shaft . f | Hierarchy of ciliary localizations during protein targeting to cilia . Shown are factors required to allow for an enrichment of IFT - A cargoes in cilia . ARL13B in cilia ensures GTP loading of ARL3 , which is required for INPP5E localization to cilia . INPP5E hydrolyses PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 to PtdIns ( 4 ) P in cilia , which allows cargo release from TULP3 – IFT - A . How ARL13B is enriched in cilia is currently unknown . g | Passive influx of molecules can be overcome by active removal , exemplified by the BBSome - dependent retrieval of phospholipase D ( PLD ) . h | Activated GPCRs are recognized by β - arrestin 2 , followed by capture by nascent BBSome - containing IFT trains at the ciliary tip , processive retrograde IFT and ultimately transition zone crossing . This may be followed by either GPCR endocytosis or lateral diffusion into the plasma membrane , both outcomes leading to receptor retrieval from the cilium into the cell . Dashed lines indicate passive processes and solid lines indicate active processes . Heterotrimeric G protein α subunit The GTPase subunit of heterotrimeric G proteins . it becomes loaded with GTP after encountering an active G protein - coupled receptor ( GPCR ) and modulates downstream activities , such as adenylyl cyclases . G α s – GTP stimulates adenylyl cyclases , while G α i – GTP inhibits them . GLI transcription factors The GLi1 transcription activator was first identified in glioblastoma ( a Hedgehog - driven tumour ) . The paralogues GLi2 and GLi3 are processed into transcription activators or repressors depending upon regulatory inputs from the Hedgehog pathway . ◀ NATuRe RevIeWS | MOlecular cell BIOlOgy R e v i e w s volume 20 | JulY 2019 | 393 Ciliary protein transport The accumulation of molecules against a concentration gradient — which is a paradigm for establishing the cilium as a unique signalling compartment — requires energy and a machinery that transforms chemical energy into directional transport . In the simplest embodiment of this principle , chemical energy is transformed into the directed movement of molecules across lipid bilayers by transmembrane transporters . A more complex model of indirect energy consumption is the nucleocytoplasmic gradient of RAN – GTP , which drives the directionality of nuclear import by promoting the dissociation of impor - tins from their cargoes in the nucleus . Besides the prob - lem of directionality in ciliary entry and exit , the barriers Sphingolipids Lipids formed by a backbone that consists of a sphingosine N - acylated by a fatty acid . Named after the Sphinx because of their once - enigmatic functions . Box 2 | Hedgehog signalling at the cilium Hedgehog signalling patterns limbs and the neural tube and its deregulation can cause cancer 22 . As the most intensely studied ciliary - signalling pathway , Hedgehog signalling has established how signalling molecules interact with the ciliary environment to trigger a transcriptional response . In cilia of unstimulated cells , activation of G α s by the G protein - coupled receptor ( GPCR ) GPR161 leads to elevated cAmP concentration in cilia ( [ cAmP ] cilia ) and activation of protein kinase A ( PKA ) . Phosphorylation ( P ) of the transcription effectors GlI2 and GlI3 by PKA inside cilia commits them to proteolytic processing into transcription repressors ( GlI R ) , thus ensuring low expression of target genes . The main transducer of the Hedgehog signal is the seven - transmembrane protein Smoothened ( Smo ) . multiple lines of evidence suggest that Smo behaves as a G α i - coupled GPCR ( reviewed elsewhere 225 ) . Hedgehog - induced intraciliary activation of G α i will inhibit adenylyl cyclase 5 ( AC5 ) and AC6 , thus decreasing [ cAmP ] cilia and PKA - mediated phosphorylation of GlI2 and GlI3 . This inhibition ultimately shifts the processing of GlI2 and GlI3 from transcription repressors into activators ( GlI A ) . Simultaneously , dephosphorylation of the kinesin KIF7 promotes its accumulation at the tip of cilia where it recruits GlI2 , GlI3 and the BBSome 42 , 226 – 229 . GlI2 and GlI3 may undergo activating modifications at the ciliary tip , and BBSome recruitment to the tip drives GPR161 retrieval to the cell body to further decrease [ cAmP ] cilia ( see figure ) . In the absence of Hedgehog , Smo is catalytically inhibited by Patched 1 ( PTCH1 ) , the Hedgehog receptor . Hedgehog binding to PTCH1 promotes PTCH1 exit from cilia 21 and Smo accumulation in cilia to enable downstream signalling ( see figure ) . The mechanism by which PTCH1 negatively regulates Smo remained an enigma until cholesterol was suggested to serve as the second messenger that links PTCH1 to Smo 26 , 27 . Consistent with its similarity to multidrug transporters , PTCH1 facilitates efflux of hydrophobic drug - like molecules out of the cell 230 , 231 . more specifically , PTCH1 can transport cholesterol out of the cytoplasmic leaflet of the plasma membrane ( presumably into the exoplasmic leaflet ) , and binding of Hedgehog to PTCH1 leads to increased cholesterol concentrations in the cytoplasmic leaflet 232 . Congruently , structural studies uncovered a hydrophobic tunnel that courses from the cytoplasmic leaflet to the extracellular domain ( ECD ) of PTCH1 ( ReFS 232 – 235 ) , and the tunnel becomes obstructed upon binding of Hedgehog to PTCH1 ( ReF . 233 ) ( see figure ) . In a striking parallel , a structure of active Smo identified a hydrophobic tunnel that may allow cholesterol to travel from the inner leaflet to its cysteine - rich extracellular domain ( CRD ) 236 . As cholesterol binding to the CRD of Smo is sufficient to activate Smo 26 , 27 , high cholesterol levels in the inner leaflet of the ciliary membrane may gate Smo activation ( see figure ) . In addition , ciliary oxysterols may participate in Smo activation 28 . Constant trafficking of Smo in and out of cilia ( FiG . 3a ) ensures that increased cholesterol levels in the inner leaflet of the ciliary membrane are rapidly sensed by Smo , causing its activation and trapping within cilia . While several parts of this model are still speculative , it showcases how the cilium integrates second messenger levels , protein trafficking and membrane lipids with the signalling status to generate a transcriptional response . In the figure , dashed lines depict the movement of molecules and solid lines reflect activation or inhibition . GPR161 AC5 or AC6 SMO PTCH1 ↑ [ cAMP ] G α s PKA GLI R GLI ↓ [ cAMP ] G α i PKA GLI A GLI GLI GLI KIF7 Target genes Target genes – Hedgehog + Hedgehog ECD CRD SMO PTCH1 SMO PTCH1 G α i G γ ECD CRD Extracellular Cholesterol G α i GTP Hedgehogligand Hedgehogligand Proteolyticcleavage P Exit from cilia G β GDP www . nature . com / nrm R e v i e w s 394 | JulY 2019 | volume 20 at the base of cilia present a major obstacle on the way in and out of cilia . Moreover , part of the ciliary proteome is dynamic , as certain proteins only enter and exit the cilium upon stimulation with a signal . The mechanisms driving dynamic protein transport into , within and out of cilia are now coming into focus . Intraciliary movements . The processive movement of proteins within cilia is referred to as intraflagellar trans - port ( IFT ) . Three major multisubunit protein complexes — IFT - A , IFT - B and the BBSome — cooperate with the microtubule motors kinesin - 2 and cytoplasmic dynein 2 ( also known as dynein 1b ) to move cargoes within cilia 105 . These complexes assemble into arrays of a few hundred nanometres , known as iFT trains ( Box 3 ) , which transport ciliary proteins along the axoneme in both directions : towards the tip ( anterograde transport ) and towards the base ( retrograde transport ) ( FiG . 1a ) . In addi - tion , the three IFT complexes function in entry into cilia and exit from cilia 106 , 107 . After the seminal observation that the carboxy - terminal tail of tubulin is directly recognized by the IFT - B subcomplex IFT74 – IFT81 ( ReF . 108 ) , persuasive work demonstrated that this interaction underlies the processive transport of tubulin from ciliary base to tip in C . reinhardtii 109 , 110 ( FiG . 2c ) . Axonemal dyneins are responsible for the motility of motile cilia and represent another class of validated IFT - B cargo , but unlike tubu - lin , they use specialized adaptors to bind to IFT - B 111 – 113 . Intriguingly , the loading of tubulin and of the inner dynein arm adaptor onto anterograde IFT is high in growing cilia and low in fully assembled cilia 109 , 113 , suggesting the existence of mechanisms for length - dependent IFT loading . Similarly , cargo loading onto retrograde IFT trains is regulated by demands in cargo transport , as exemplified by the increased rates of retro - grade IFT movement of activated GPCRs that undergo regulated exit from cilia 42 . In contrast to the motor - driven transport of tubulin and axonemal proteins observed in growing cilia , diffu - sion is the primary movement modality for membrane proteins and even for tubulin within fully assembled cilia 59 , 109 , 114 ( FiG . 2c ) . These observations reflect the need for a continuous supply of tubulin subunits to support the growth of the axoneme . Membrane proteins , how - ever , need not be delivered to the tip for their signalling functions , and the demands on tubulin delivery to the tip are likely to decrease considerably once cilia have reached their steady - state length . Protein entry into cilia . Membrane proteins reach the base of the cilium either through vesicular trafficking from the Golgi apparatus or recycling endosomes or through lateral diffusion from the plasma membrane 115 . Several factors function in delivery of membrane proteins to the base of cilia including the RAB GTPases RAB8 , RAB11 , RAB23 and RAB34 , the vesicle tethering com - plexes exocyst , TRAPII and the Golgi - associated IFT - B subunit IFT20 in concert with its partner GMAP210 ( reviewed elsewhere 116 , 117 ) . However , vesicles are too large to cross the ciliary diffusion barrier ; hence , vesicular transport does not mediate protein entry into cilia . The anterograde trafficking machinery offers an appealing candidate for the ciliary importer given that anterograde IFT trains assemble at transition fibres before entry into cilia 118 – 120 . However , recent data have cast doubt on this simple model . In C . reinhardtii , acute inactivation of kinesin - 2 interrupted IFT within min - utes . Notably , even after complete cessation of IFT , the adhesion receptor SAG1 , which is involved in sexual reproduction of the alga , was still able to translocate from the cell body to cilia upon activation of the fertili - zation cascade . The finding that SAG1 still translocates into cilia after kinesin - 2 has been inactivated demon - strates that motor - driven IFT is dispensable for SAG1 entry into cilia 20 ( FiG . 2c ) . Similar experiments have demonstrated that kinesin - 2 is dispensable for ciliary entry of PC2 ( ReF . 121 ) , αβ - tubulin 109 and EB1 ( ReF . 85 ) in C . reinhardtii and of several GPCRs in nematodes 122 . Consistently , in nematode IFT - B mutants , PC2 ( ReF . 123 ) and an olfactory GPCR 124 still localize to cilia , and it has been proposed that IFT - B might be dispensable for the entry of Smoothened into cilia in mammalian cells 125 . Furthering the disconnect between entry and antero - grade IFT , a small N - terminal domain of C . reinhardtii phospholipase D ( crPLD ) confers both anterograde and retrograde IFT yet is not sufficient for entry 126 . This col - lection of results makes a persuasive case for separate factors carrying out ‘injection’ into cilia and intraciliary transport . What , then , are the import complexes ? Given that the cut - off for passive entry into cilia is ~ 100 kDa ( ReFS 35 , 39 ) , some proteins , including αβ - tubulin and EB1 , may enter cilia by simple diffusion . Larger soluble proteins such as the GLI transcription factors ( see Box 2 ) or the dynein arms of motile cilia need spe - cific import factors that remain to be identified . For transmembrane proteins , evidence is emerging that the Oxysterols Products of cholesterol oxidation with hydroxyl , carbonyl or epoxide groups . Their best - established roles are in regulation of cholesterol metabolism . Condensed membrane microdomains Tightly packed and viscous regions of the membrane that can form through clustering of lipid rafts . Liquid - ordered lipid phase Biological membranes are two - dimensional liquids that can phase separate into liquid - ordered ( for example , rafts ) and liquid - disordered ( for example , fluid mosaic ) phases . Raft A relatively ordered membrane domain formed by interactions between proteins and lipids . Rafts typically present as cholesterol and sphingolipiden - riched membrane nanodomains < 200 nm in size that are thought to facilitate interactions between signalling molecules . BBSome A complex of eight Bardet – Biedl syndrome proteins that removes proteins from cilia . Box 3 | Intraflagellar transport dynamics much progress in understanding intraciliary trafficking has been made since the coat - like complexes intraflagellar transport ( IFT ) IFT - A , IFT - B and the BBSome were discovered two decades ago 237 , 238 . IFT - B , a 16 - subunit complex , polymerizes into IFT trains that move processively from base to tip ( anterograde ) and tip to base ( retrograde ) , while IFT - A , a 6 - subunit complex , and the BBSome , an 8 - subunit complex , appear to function as adaptors between IFT - B polymers and membranous cargoes ( reviewed elsewhere 106 , 239 ) . At the base of cilia , the microtubule motor kinesin - 2 directly associates with IFT - B 240 to move IFT - A , inactive cytoplasmic dynein 2 ( also known as dynein 1b ) 241 , cargoes and the BBSome on tracks provided by the microtubule axoneme . once they arrive at the tip , IFT trains must be remodelled to associate with active dynein 2 and mediate retrograde transport . The purpose of retrograde IFT is twofold : it delivers IFT - B complexes back to the base 120 , and it represents the first step in BBSome - mediated retrieval of cargoes back into the cell 42 . Single - molecule and sophisticated imaging of the turnaround step at the tip in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii and Caenorhabditis elegans have revealed that IFT - A complexes and IFT motors rapidly detach from anterograde trains and immediately reattach to retrograde trains , while IFT - B complexes spend several seconds confined at the tip before assembling into retrograde trains 133 , 242 , 243 . This delay in reassembly of IFT - B trains is likely to reflect a step of molecular rearrangement of the IFT - B complexes that is consistent with the drastically altered nanoscale morphology of retrograde trains compared with anterograde trains 244 . The serine / threonine kinase ICK ( also known as intestinal cell kinase ) is likely to be a driver of the tip - remodelling events as it phosphorylates kinesin - 2 and localizes to the tip , and IFT - B , IFT - A , the BBSome and kinesin - 2 accumulate at the ciliary tip in its absence 245 . Furthermore , mutants for the counterparts of ICK in C . reinhardtii , Leishmania mexicana and C . elegans all present with longer cilia 246 – 248 , suggesting impaired ciliary retrieval . NATuRe RevIeWS | MOlecular cell BIOlOgy R e v i e w s volume 20 | JulY 2019 | 395 IFT - A complex mediates entry into cilia 42 , 127 – 132 ( FiG . 2d ) . In this process , IFT - A is accompanied by the tubby family proteins tubby and TULP3 , which are absolutely required for the entry of nearly all known ciliary GPCRs and of the PKD proteins PC1 and PC2 as well as the pro - tein polycystic kidney and hepatic disease 1 ( PKHD1 ; also known as fibrocystin ) into mammalian cilia 42 , 127 , 130 , 132 . The role of IFT - A – tubby proteins in ciliary import is supported by observations that most of the known cili - ary GPCRs fail to accumulate in cilia of mammalian cells deleted of IFT - A components 128 , 129 . Similarly , tubby and IFT - A are required for ciliary accumulation of GPCRs in nematodes 122 , and a number of transmem - brane proteins are absent from cilia in a C . reinhardtii IFT - A mutant 131 . Furthermore , the purified IFT - A complex directly recognizes the ciliary targeting signal ( CTS ) of somatostatin receptor 3 ( SSTR3 ) 42 , and TULP3 interacts — most likely through IFT - A — with the CTSs of PKHD1 , GPR161 and melanocortin concentrating hormone receptor 1 ( MCHR1 ) 127 . An unexpected paradox emerges when one consid - ers that kinesin - 2 - powered IFT - B trains inject IFT - A into cilia 118 , 120 . How then can entry of transmembrane proteins into cilia require IFT - A but not kinesin - 2 ? One possible model to answer this paradox posits that trains consisting of IFT - B , IFT - A and kinesin - 2 assemble at the transition fibres and are injected into cilia without utilizing the mechanochemical coupling of kinesin - 2 . While provocative , this hypothesis is consistent with the very slow anterograde movement of IFT - B through the transition zone measured by single - molecule imaging in C . elegans 133 and in mammalian cells 134 . Anterograde IFT trains accelerate considerably once they have passed the transition zone , suggesting that kinesin - 2 may become active once trains have entered the ciliary shaft . Instead of relying on kinesin - 2 , the injection of IFT - A – IFT - B into cilia may rely on RABL2 , a RAB family GTPase localized to transition fibres that selectively associates with IFT - B when bound to GTP and is required for IFT - B injection into cilia 135 , 136 . If injection of IFT - A – cargo complexes does not rely on mechanochemical coupling , then how do IFT - A cargoes prominently accumulate inside cilia ? Recent studies suggest that the directionality of transport by the IFT - A – TULP3 importer may be driven by a phos - phoinositide switch between the plasma membrane and the cilium . In mammalian cells , TULP3 , IFT - A and its cargoes , GPR161 and PC2 , hyperaccumulate inside cilia when ciliary PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 is no longer hydrolysed into PtdIns ( 4 ) P 86 , 87 , 127 . In Drosophila melanogaster , the sole tubby family protein dTulp is required for the cili - ary import of the transient receptor potential channel Inactive , and Inpp5e mutants accumulate PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , Tulp and Inactive inside cilia 137 , 138 . As TULP3 specifically binds to PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 but not to PtdIns ( 4 ) P , a model can be proposed where cargoes stay bound to IFT - A – TULP3 as long as membranes are rich in PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 . Hydrolysis of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 into PtdIns ( 4 ) P by cili - ary INPP5E triggers unloading of cargoes from the IFT - A – TULP3 import complex ( FiG . 2d ) . Once unloaded from IFT - A – TULP3 , cargoes such as GPR161 exit cilia at a modest constitutive rate because they can be recognized by the ciliary export machinery 42 ( see below ) . Meanwhile , cargoes bound to the IFT - A – TULP3 com - plex inside cilia — as happens in response to elevated levels of ciliary PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 — remain stuck and accu - mulate inside cilia because they are sheltered from the ciliary exit machinery . Direct mechanochemical coupling appears similarly dispensable for the import of lipidated proteins into cilia . Foundational structural and biochemical work has estab - lished that the targeting of N - myristoylated ( for example , Gα ) and prenylated ( for example , INPP5E ) proteins to cilia relies on the ciliary shuttles UNC119 and PDE6δ , which directly recognize lipid groups in the cytoplasm and unload their cargoes inside cilia upon binding to small ARF - like GTPase ARL3 bound to GTP ( ReFS 139 – 142 ; reviewed in ReFS 143 , 144 ) ( FiG . 2e ) . ARL3 is converted into its active GTP - bound state inside cilia because its guanine nucleotide exchange factor ( GEF ) ARL13B constitutively resides inside cilia . Furthermore , the localization of RP2 , the GTPase - activating protein ( GAP ) for ARL3 , at the base of cilia in most mammalian cells , in nematodes and in trypanosomes 145 – 147 is predicted to restrict ARL3 – GTP to the ciliary shaft and to keep ARL3 in its GDP - bound state in the rest of the cell 148 – 150 . Of note , grafting the minimal PDE6δ - binding determinants of INPP5E onto a nonciliary protein only confers equilibration between cilia and cytoplasm in kidney cells 151 . Thus , the cilia - to - cytoplasm ARL3 – GTP gradient may be too shallow to promote sufficient enrichment of lipidated cargoes . This hypothesis is in line with the very weak ARL3 GEF activity detected on ARL13B 148 and the possible pres - ence of some RP2 inside cilia of kidney cells 152 . UNC119 and PDE6δ may thus render lipidated proteins compe - tent for passive diffusion through the transition zone by shielding their lipid moiety and then rely on capture by a ciliary partner ( FiG . 2b ) to drive cargo enrichment in cilia . For example , INPP5E needs to directly bind to ARL13B to achieve enrichment in cilia 153 . The current hierarchy of ciliary enrichment factors places ARL13B as the most upstream regulator ( FiG . 2f ) . How then does this master regulator become enriched in cilia ? Ciliary retention of ARL13B has been proposed to involve direct binding to axonemal tubulin 154 or IFT - B 36 . However , the distance between the membrane and the axoneme renders microtubules unlikely as candidates for the ciliary anchor of ARL13B , and a mutant of ARL13B defective in IFT - B binding still localizes to cilia 155 . Further complicating the linear hierarchy of ciliary local - ization factors , the IFT - A complex is required for ciliary enrichment of ARL13B in C . reinhardtii , in mice and in mammalian cells 128 , 131 , 156 . Meanwhile , several studies have pointed to palmitoylation of ARL13B as the criti - cal mechanism underlying its ciliary enrichment 157 – 159 . Interestingly , palmitoylation is a reversible modifica - tion ( unlike prenylation and N - myristoylation ) that is essential for ciliary targeting of several ciliary proteins , namely , the pseudokinase STRADβ 160 , 161 , the calcium - binding protein calflagin 162 and PKHD1 ( ReF . 163 ) , and it has been estimated that a third of all ciliary proteins are palmitoylated 157 . However , the mechanistic basis for cili - ary enrichment of palmitoylated proteins is currently unknown . Considering that local palmitoylation of the IFT trains High - order oligomers of intraflagellar transport ( iFT ) complexes that transport cargo along the axoneme . Polycystic kidney and hepatic disease 1 ( PKHD1 ) . A large single - pass membrane protein of unknown function mutated in autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease . Ciliary targeting signal ( CTS ) . in the strictest sense , a short stretch of amino acids that is necessary and sufficient for targeting a protein to cilia . Some CTSs ( for example , in somatostatin receptor 3 ) are sufficient but not necessary for ciliary targeting . Somatostatin receptor 3 ( SSTR3 ) . A ciliary G protein - coupled receptor ( GPCR ) expressed in hippocampal neurons and required for novelty recognition . it couples to G α i . Melanocortin concentrating hormone receptor 1 ( MCHR1 ) . A ciliary G protein - coupled receptor ( GPCR ) that has a modest role in body weight homeostasis . ARL3 A small GTPase of the ARF - like family , most members of which regulate vesicular trafficking . www . nature . com / nrm R e v i e w s 396 | JulY 2019 | volume 20 small GTPase HRAS on Golgi membranes traps HRAS at the Golgi apparatus 164 , 165 , it is appealing to consider that intra ciliary palmitoylation may trap ARL13B in cilia . However , none of the known palmitoyltrans - ferases has been found in cilia thus far 157 . Even if a ciliary palmitoyltransferase were to be identified , the current hierarchy of ciliary localizations ( FiG . 2f ) would remain reliant on yet another protein factor . Ultimately , it will be important to define an overarching feature that initi - ates robust self - organization of the ciliary compartment from first principles . Protein exit from cilia . Proteins need to be returned from cilia back into the cell ( retrieval ) in several scenarios . First , ciliary components exit cilia in an indiscriminate manner when cilia shorten , and axonemal proteins are thought to be returned into the cell for future reuse 166 . Second , non - resident proteins that are not efficiently excluded from cilia must be constitutively removed by a quality control machinery , as exemplified by crPLD 161 ( FiG . 2g ) . Finally , some proteins exit cilia in an inducible manner when dictated by specific signalling pathways . For example , signalling receptors undergo signal - dependent retrieval into the cell , and the GLI transcription factors need to exit cilia and return to the cytoplasm before they can regulate transcription in the nucleus ( Box 2 ) . Signal - dependent retrieval applies to nearly all ciliary signalling receptors examined to date , as SSTR3 , the IGF1 receptor , the TGFβ receptor and Patched 1 all exit cilia upon activation by their respective ligands 9 , 11 , 21 , 167 . Finally , GPR161 exits cilia when the Hedgehog path - way is engaged , possibly because it becomes acti - vated under these conditions 168 , although no ligand is known for this GPCR . One notable exception to signal - dependent retrieval is Smoothened , which accumulates in cilia when activated 17 . A body of evidence has now emerged showing that the BBSome is the primary mediator of constitutive cili - ary retrieval 160 , 169 – 171 ( FiG . 2g ) and carries out the signal - dependent removal of GPCRs with the help of β - arrestin 2 , a sensor of GPCR activation 42 , 167 , 168 , 172 , 173 ( FiG . 2h ) . First , both SSTR3 and GPR161 fail to undergo signal - dependent exit in BBSome or β - arrestin 2 mutants 42 , 57 , 167 , 168 , 172 , 173 . Second , the BBSome directly recognizes specific motifs in SSTR3 and GPR161 , and β - arrestin 2 directly recog - nizes the activated form of these GPCRs 42 , 168 , 174 , 175 . Congruently , the BBSome and β - arrestin 2 accumulate in cilia when SSTR3 or GPR161 become activated 42 , 167 . Finally , single - molecule and bulk imaging of SSTR3 and GPR161 revealed that they move in concert with the BBSome on retrograde trains when activated , and they cross the transition zone in a BBSome - dependent manner 42 . The finding that the same domain of crPLD that confers BBSome - dependent intraciliary movements is required for export from cilia but not for import strengthens the notion that the BBSome directs export from cilia 126 . A role for the BBSome in ciliary exit is further sup - ported by a proteomic analysis that found more than 130 nonciliary proteins accumulating in photoreceptor outer segments of Bbs - mutant mice 169 . Here , the extreme rate of transport to the cilium of photoreceptors leads to the entry of inert bystanders lacking CTSs into the outer segment 176 , and the BBSome is needed to remove these bystanders from the outer segment . The clearing of proteins that constitutively enter cilia is likely to extend into signalling mechanisms . Smoothened is absent from cilia of unstimulated cells but accumulates in cilia when dynein 2 or BBSome function is compromised 49 , 172 , 177 , 178 . This suggests that Smoothened constitutively exits cilia at a higher rate than it enters cilia . A decreased rate of ciliary exit may then under - lie ciliary accumulation of Smoothened in Hedgehog - treated cells 42 , 59 , 106 , but how this decrease in ciliary exit could be regulated in coordination with signalling cues is currently unknown . By continuously moving in and out of cilia , Smoothened can sample the ciliary membrane composition and rapidly activate in response to elevated levels of bioactive sterols ( cholesterol or oxysterols ) in the ciliary membrane , resulting from Hedgehog ligand binding to its receptor Patched 1 ( Box 2 ) . This concept of patrolling the cilium by specific sensors is particularly attractive as it enables signalling molecules to rapidly respond to changes in the chemical environment of the cilium ( here , sterol concentration and distribution ) and to initiate a robust response upon stimulation ( FiG . 3a ) . In this context , it is intriguing that a central regulator of metabolism ( AMP kinase ( AMPK ) ) , a Coxsackie and adenovirus receptor ( CAR ) and crPLD become detect - able in cilia when BBSome function is compromised 160 , 171 . One is left to wonder what ciliary stimuli may lead to the accumulation of AMPK , CAR and crPLD in cilia . Selective crossing of the barriers . In contrast to the membrane diffusion barriers at the tight junctions of epithelia and the axon initial segment of neurons , which hermetically block the passage of membrane proteins and must be crossed by vesicular intermediates 179 , the transition zone of cilia excludes non - resident proteins but allows privileged ones to pass through . Although the formation of a picket fence of immobilized membrane proteins is sufficient to explain the properties of the tight junction and the axon initial segment , other mechanisms will need to be uncovered to account for the selective crossing of the transition zone by ciliary cargoes . Two models are conceivable for transition zone crossing . First , the observation that exiting GPR161 molecules cross the transition zone after undergoing processive retrograde IFT suggests that dynein 2 powers transition zone cross - ing of BBSome cargoes exiting cilia 42 . This ‘motorized plough’ model posits that cargoes are physically dragged across a zone that offers resistance to diffusion ( FiG . 3b ) . The accumulation of BBSome cargoes inside cilia when dynein 2 function is compromised 171 , 177 offers support for this model . Meanwhile , the kinesin - 2 - independent entry of a number of cargoes suggests an ‘open sesame’ model 20 , 33 , wherein the import complex ( for example , IFT - A – TULP3 ) instructs the transition zone to let its attached cargoes pass through ( FiG . 3c ) . This privileged passage of cargoes bound to transport complexes through the transition zone is reminiscent of karyopherins ena - bling passage through the nuclear pore 180 . Whether either model holds true remains to be tested experimentally . After BBSome - dependent crossing of the transi - tion zone , activated GPCRs undergo confinement in β - Arrestin 2 Recognizes activated G protein - coupled receptors ( GPCRs ) , blocks GPCR - to - G α communication and promotes GPCR endocytosis , thereby typically driving termination of GPCR signalling . Axon initial segment in neurons , the first few micrometres of the axon . it is an area rich in actin that functionally separates the axonal plasma membrane from the soma plasma membrane . Karyopherins Nuclear transport receptors that ferry proteins across the nuclear pore complex . NATuRe RevIeWS | MOlecular cell BIOlOgy R e v i e w s volume 20 | JulY 2019 | 397 an intermediate compartment analogous to an airlock before finally crossing a periciliary barrier , which may correspond to the DAM 42 ( FiG . 3d ) . In addition to its func - tion as a waystation for sorting between the ciliary shaft and the cell body , the airlock may function as a second ciliary signalling compartment where activated signal - ling receptors accumulate transiently and communicate to the downstream signalling machinery 9 , 11 . Finally , the airlock may serve as an intermediate compartment for both ciliary entry and exit because rhodopsin - containing vesicles destined for the outer segment fuse with a structure whose location corresponds to the suggested ciliary airlock 181 . Molecules may exit the airlock either by lateral dif - fusion into the plasma membrane or by undergoing endocytosis . Support for molecules exiting cilia by endocytosis at the base has accumulated over the past decade ( reviewed elsewhere 182 ) . An increased density of clathrin - coated pits is found at the ciliary pocket 183 , a structural invagination associated with the base of some cilia . Several regulators of endocytosis ( clathrin , β - arrestin 2 and dynamin ) have been shown to be required for ciliary exit of GPR161 ( ReF . 168 ) . Finally , the BBSome localizes to coated vesicles at the ciliary pocket of trypanosome and interacts with clathrin 184 . However , the example of β - arrestin 2 acting within cilia 167 clearly shows that previously characterized regulators of endo - cytosis may be repurposed as regulators of ciliary traf - ficking acting within cilia . Moreover , single - molecule imaging revealed that GPR161 is confined within the focal plane of imaging for more than 10 s after exit - ing the airlock 42 , suggesting that GPR161 is diffusing within the plasma membrane after exiting cilia . However , the very small number of airlock exit events that were vis - ualized makes this evidence far from definitive . Together , these observations highlight the need to follow signal - ling receptors exiting cilia by single - molecule tracking to unequivocally determine the fate of exiting ciliary pro - teins . Whether signalling receptors undergo endo cytosis immediately after exit from cilia or instead remain at the plasma membrane is an important question , as sig - nalling receptors can signal differently at the plasma membrane and at endosomes 185 . Shedding of extracellular vesicles Another pathway for the removal of ciliary content from cilia besides retrieval into the cell body is ciliary ecto - cytosis , a process that describes the shedding of extra - cellular vesicles ( ectosomes ) from the tip of cilia . Ciliary ectocytosis has been described in a variety of organisms and likely originated early in evolution . Mechanistically , it has been shown to rapidly dispose of excess cili - ary material , consistent with the disposal function of extracellular vesicles in cells ( reticulocytes ) or cellular locations ( axons ) that do not possess lysosomes 186 , 187 . Alternatively , ciliary ectocytosis may package ciliary signalling molecules for non - cell - autonomous signalling . Functions of ciliary membrane shedding in disposal . Vertebrate photoreceptors package up to one billion molecules of the light - sensing GPCR rhodopsin into the outer segment . Newly synthesized rhodopsin molecules a Sampling of the ciliary environment Accumulationof ligands ( sensed by SMO ) Axoneme SMO Putativeligand Transitionzone Transition zone Airlock Cargo Cargo b ‘Motorized plough’ model d Intermediate trafﬁcking compartment c ‘Open sesame’ model Basal body Transition ﬁbre Y - links SMO BBSome Dynein 2 IFT - A IFT - B Privilegedpassage Cargo IFT - A Mechanochemicalcoupling Activation blocks exit DAM Fig . 3 | Models of transition zone crossing and of the intermediate compartment . a | Constitutive passage through the cilium enables Smoothened ( SMO ) to continuously sample the environment of the cilium . Elevation of inner leaflet cholesterol ( see Box 2 ) or other second messengers leads to the activation of SMO and blockade of exit to result in ciliary accumulation of activated SMO and activation of downstream signalling . b , c | Membrane proteins cannot cross the transition zone unassisted ( left ) . According to the ‘motorized plough’ model ( part b ) , dynein 2 utilizes the energy of ATP to generate microtubule - based motion and drags retrograde intraflagellar transport ( IFT ) trains and their attached cargoes through the transition zone ( right ) . According to the ‘open sesame’ model ( part c ) , cargo binding to import factors ( exemplified by IFT - A ) enables privileged passage of the transition zone in a motor - independent manner ( right ) . In this model , the transport factors locally remodel the transition zone to allow passage . Note that the models may apply to either trafficking directions . d | Increasing evidence points towards the existence of an intermediate trafficking compartment at the ciliary base that functions as an ‘airlock’ proximal to the transition zone and may thus represent a checkpoint for ciliary import and export . The proximal boundary of the airlock probably corresponds to the distal appendage matrix ( DAM ) located at the membrane between transition fibres . Dashed lines indicate passive processes and solid lines indicate active processes . www . nature . com / nrm R e v i e w s 398 | JulY 2019 | volume 20 are transported from the cell body ( inner segment ) and incorporated into a nascent disc at the base of the outer segment ( FiG . 1b ) , thus creating a gradient of rhodopsin age from base to tip of the outer segment . The large dis - tance between the inner segment and the oldest discs poses a considerable logistical problem for the photo - receptor to recycle its oldest , potentially photodamaged , rhodopsin . To solve this problem , photoreceptors have established a symbiotic relationship with the closely apposed retinal pigmented epithelium , which phago - cytoses a packet of ~ 100 discs shed daily from the tip of each photoreceptor 188 , 189 ( FiG . 4a ) . Described 50 years ago , this process illustrates how ectocytosis enables the rapid and effective disposal of ciliary material when retrieval into the cell body is no longer feasible . The morphogenesis of photoreceptor discs of mice offers further in vivo support for the importance of ecto - cytosis in photoreceptor biology 190 . Discs of the outer segment normally form as evaginations at the base of cilia , but in the absence of the disc protein peripherin , nascent discs are shed as small vesicles . This shedding occurs on a large scale and precludes the discs from forming . This suggests that ciliary ectocytosis must be repressed by peripherin in the nascent discs to enable disc morphogenesis ( FiG . 4b ) . Shedding of GPCRs by cilia is not limited to rho - dopsin and photoreceptors . Upon activation , the GPCR neuropeptide Y receptor type 2 ( NPY2R ) is ectocytosed from the tip of cilia instead of being retrieved back into the cell 29 ( FiG . 4c ) . Signal - dependent ectocytosis also applies to the adhesion receptor SAG1 in C . reinhardtii , which traffics to the cilium tip and is shed into ecto - somes during ciliary adhesion and signalling in gam - etes 191 . Even ciliary GPCRs for which retrieval has been directly observed 42 , such as GPR161 and SSTR3 , undergo signal - dependent ectocytosis when the retrieval machin - ery ( BBSome and β - arrestin 2 ) is compromised or when retrieval motifs are lost from the GPCR 29 ( FiG . 4c ) . The observation that NPY2R lacks the determinants required for recognition by BBSome or β - arrestin 2 ( ReFS 192 , 193 ) rationalizes the exclusive use of ectocytosis for ciliary exit of this GPCR ( FiG . 4c ) , and it is likely that other cili - ary signalling receptors besides NPY2R and SAG1 utilize signal - dependent ectocytosis as their default exit route . By providing a safety valve when retrieval fails , ecto - cytosis may have acted as an evolutionary buffer that allowed for multiple instances of BBSome loss in organ - isms ( fungi , moss and diatoms ) that use cilia only for gamete motility and no longer need to retrieve signalling molecules 194 , 195 . Considering the paucity of direct reports of retrieval 42 , the limited capacity of BBSome - mediated retrieval ( fewer than 10 molecules per minute in mammal - ian cells 42 ) and the tremendous efficiency of ecto cytosis ( which can consume an entire C . reinhardtii cilium in 6 h ( ReF . 196 ) ) , it is conceivable that ectocytosis constitutes the major route for disposal of excess ciliary material . In sup - port of this hypothesis , dynein 2 ablation ( which should block all retrieval activity ; see above ) results in very mild ciliary phenotypes in Tetrahymena 197 and in a sub - set of cilia of nematodes 198 and can be tolerated in mice when combined with IFT - A mutations 199 . In the latter case , the decreased rate of ciliary import brought about by IFT - A mutations may compensate for the decreased rate of retrieval in dynein 2 mutants . Finally , ciliary ecto - cytosis serves as the dominant mechanism for cell cycle - dependent cilium shortening in C . reinhardtii 31 , 196 and in several mammalian cell types 30 , 200 , 201 ( FiG . 4d ) . As ectocytosis results in irreversible loss of proteins from cilia , it can lead to global losses of signalling recep - tors from cilia of retrieval mutants . Such mass depletion of ciliary proteins has been reported for Smoothened in Arrb2 mutants ( loss of β - arrestin 2 ) and for SSTR3 , MCHR1 , Smoothened and PC1 in Bbs mutants 106 and was previously interpreted as a ciliary import defect . This cautionary note emphasizes the need to monitor the dynamics of signalling receptors in real time and at near - endogenous expression levels to properly decon - volve how specific perturbations impact the rates of delivery , retrieval and ectocytosis . Bioactivity of ectosomes . exosomes — which are the best studied example of extracellular vesicles —are known to carry a wide variety of signalling molecules including signalling receptors , enzymes , second messen - gers and RNA molecules , and they have the ability to transfer these molecules between cells 202 . Similarly , bio - activity has been reported for ciliary ectosomes ( FiG . 4e ) . For example , in C . reinhardtii , the cilium is the sole site of extracellular vesicle release as the plasma membrane is covered by a cell wall 203 . Here , ciliary ectosomes have been shown to carry proteolytic enzymes that digest the cell wall to release the daughter cells following mitosis 204 . Furthermore , ciliary fertilization in C . reinhardtii was associated with a release of SAG1 - containing ectosomes , which were biologically active , as shown by the ability to induce cilia - based signalling when applied to gam - etes 191 . In the sleeping sickness parasite Trypanosoma brucei , ciliary ectosomes can transfer virulence fac - tors to other parasites or fuse with host blood cells to promote lysis and eventually cause anaemia 205 . Finally , extracellular vesicles released from male nematodes in a cilium - dependent manner are sufficient to promote mating behaviours in recipient worms 206 . However , despite these exciting advances , it is impor - tant to note that the current literature indicates only that ciliary ectosomes are sufficient to transfer signals outside a given cell . It remains possible that minute amounts of ciliary material disposed into ciliary ectosomes exert a biological effect because these vesicles were experimen - tally concentrated before addition to recipient cells . In this context , the demonstration of a physiological role for ciliary ectocytosis in gamete fertilization , gamete release , transfer of virulence factors or mating behaviour , as discussed above , awaits the development of specific means to interfere with ciliary ectocytosis . Molecular mechanisms of ciliary ectocytosis . Proteomics of ciliary ectosomes from C . reinhardtii and mammalian cells has demonstrated their unique protein composition 30 , 31 , and quantitative assessments of receptor concentration have estimated that activated SAG1 and GPCRs are enriched fivefold in ectosomes compared with cilia 29 , 191 . This indicates that ectosomal cargoes are actively packaged — a process that generally Ectosomes extracellular vesicles that directly bud from the limiting membrane of the cell . Also termed microvesicles . Neuropeptide Y receptor type 2 ( NPY2R ) . A G α s - coupled G protein - coupled receptor ( GPCR ) that regulates appetite under stress conditions . Exosomes extracellular vesicles that originate as vesicles inside the lumen of the multivesicular body and become extracellular upon fusion of the multivesicular body with the plasma membrane . NATuRe RevIeWS | MOlecular cell BIOlOgy R e v i e w s volume 20 | JulY 2019 | 399 RPE Shedding ( ectocytosis ) Photoreceptorcilium Axoneme Axoneme Basalbody Transitionﬁbre No peripherin With peripherin ( wild type ) Disc a b NPY2R NPY Default Safety valve c e Ectosomegeneration Putativebioactivity d Exit SSTR3 SST Exit β - arrestin 2 BBSome IFT Ectocytosis Disassembly Ectosomefusion ? Signallingmolecule Ectocytosis Retrieval block Fusion f Cluster Deform membrane Cut Cargo Actin ring g Constriction Scission Shedding h Scission machinery Actin Actin - induced lipid demixing Scission and ectosomerelease Linetension Ectocytosissuppressed Extensiveectocytosis Fig . 4 | Modalities and mechanisms of ciliary ectocytosis . a | The tips of photoreceptor outer segments are shed daily to remove aged rhodopsin molecules . Shed material is phagocytosed by retinal pigmented epithelial ( RPE ) cells ( and recycled back to photoreceptors ; not shown ) . b | Ectocytosis also negatively regulates outer - segment morphogenesis : the presence of disc protein peripherin blocks ectocytosis and enables retention of ciliary components to form discs . c | Upon activation , some G protein - coupled receptors ( GPCRs ) are removed from cilia by ectocytosis . For example , neuropeptide Y receptor type 2 ( NPY2R ) uses ectocytosis as a primary mechanism for cilia exit ( left ) . Activated somatostatin receptor 3 ( SSTR3 ) becomes ectocytosed when its BBSome - based retrieval ( see FiG . 2h ) is blocked ( right ) . d | Intraflagellar transport ( IFT ) elongates or shrinks the cilium by exchanging material with the rest of the cell . Ectocytosis may serve as an alternative mechanism of ciliary length homeostasis : shedding of fragments of cilia from the tip by ectocytosis reduces ciliary length , whereas the hypothetical fusion of extracellular vesicles with the cilium may increase ciliary length . e | Cilia package signalling molecules into ectosomes . These may be received by other cells to confer putative bioactivity . As exemplified in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii , recipient cells may receive extracellular vesicles via their cilia ; incorporation via the plasma membrane is also conceivable . f | Basic steps of extracellular vesicle formation : clustering of cargoes is followed by membrane deformation , and finally , a forming vesicle is released from the donor membrane by scission . g | Actin may serve to constrict the diameter of the cilium by forming a contractile ring before scission driven by an additional scission machinery , such as ESCRT - III - based complexes . h | A model of how actin may function in ectosome budding and scission . For simplicity , the ciliary membrane is depicted as consisting of two lipid species ( yellow and blue , which blend to green ) . Actin polymerization in cilia causes local lipid demixing . Line tension at the interface between lipid phases ensues , which is resolved by budding and scission of the demixed lipids , releasing a vesicle . NPY , neuropeptide Y ; SST , somatostatin . The image in part b has been adapted from ReF . 190 with permission from Rockefeller University Press . www . nature . com / nrm R e v i e w s 400 | JulY 2019 | volume 20 entails cargo sorting into the forming vesicle , local membrane deformation and scission of the vesicle from the donor membrane ( FiG . 4f ) . Mechanistic insights into ectosomal release are just beginning to emerge . Ectocytosis is a ‘reverse topology’ vesicular bud - ding pathway akin to budding of intralumenal vesicles into the lumen of late endosomes or of viruses at the plasma membrane . Like other examples of reverse topol - ogy membrane budding and scission , ciliary ectocytosis involves endosomal sorting complex required for transport ( ESCRT ) complexes 31 , 207 . Interestingly , in C . reinhardtii , the entire transition zone becomes ectocytosed at the terminal step of flagellar shortening , and the transition - zone - containing ectosomes are enriched for several ESCRT components 208 . In unusual fashion within the realm of reverse topol - ogy budding , actin polymerization within cilia partici - pates in the release of ectosomes 29 , 30 . F - actin and several actin regulators — drebrin , myosin 6 , cofilin , fascin and SNX9 — are specifically enriched at the presumptive site of ciliary ectosome release 29 , 30 . Accordingly , interfer - ence with these regulators or with actin polymerization blocks ectosome release from cilia , results in increased cilium length and inhibits cilium resorption upon cell cycle reentry 29 , 30 . Interestingly , a targeted increase in cili - ary PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 is sufficient to promote branched actin polymerization inside cilia and subsequent ecto cytosis 30 . Thus , local elevation of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 levels may con - stitute the trigger that couples actin polymerization to ciliary ectocytosis . Collectively , these data build a persuasive case for actin and an associated cast of regulators participating in the scission of ectocytic buds , although the specific mechanism by which actin polymerization promotes scission remains to be determined . One way by which F - actin functions in ectocytosis is by constricting the diameter of the cilium ( similar to the activity of actin rings in cytokinesis , for example ) 209 . However , it should be noted that purse - string actomyosin - based constric - tion does not accomplish membrane scission 207 . In this context , actin may cooperate with ESCRT - III ( FiG . 4g ) , consistent with the universally conserved function of ESCRT - III from archaea to man in severing reverse topology tubes 210 , 211 . As another mechanism , actin could drive membrane scission by inducing lipid phase separa - tion at the ciliary membrane tip . Reconstituted systems have shown that raft - like membranes rich in cholesterol , sphingolipids and PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 undergo phase separa - tion into liquid - ordered and liquid - disordered phases when juxta - membraneous branched actin networks form in apposition with PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 headgroups 212 , 213 . The energetically costly mismatch at the boundary between the two lipid phases produces line tension 214 , and energy minimization is achieved by decreasing the length of the boundary line , first by constriction of a bud and ultimately by scission ( FiG . 4h ) . Although it remains to be tested whether actin mediates the scis - sion of ectosomes through line tension , the raft - like lipid composition of the cilium 100 is consistent with this mechanism . Future studies will need to deconvolve the mechanisms and the roles of actin in various cilia - related processes using targeted and acute interference with actin polymerization at specific locations . Conclusions and perspective The explosive progress of the ciliary research field in the past 10 years has taken us from a list of proteins to mechanistic models for ciliary trafficking and sig - nalling . Although some questions have now reached a sophisticated level of understanding , major unknowns remain in the field . First , the molecular mechanisms of selective permeability of the transition zone and of the periciliary barrier remain unknown . Genetic inter - actions and biochemistry have defined proteins that constitute these barriers , but little is known about the biophysical nature of gating . Testing for the molecu - lar and energetic requirements of barrier crossing will likely require acute inactivation of IFT complexes , the BBSome and motors together with innovative imaging of cargoes , trafficking complexes and transition zone markers . Second , the extent of functions for ciliary ecto - cytosis is an open question . To determine whether ciliary ectosomes convey signals or merely serve as a disposal modality will necessitate the interference with specific factors responsible for packaging receptors into ciliary ectosomes . How cargoes are selected for packaging into ciliary ectosomes is currently unknown and is an inter - esting avenue for future studies . The functional dissec - tion of actin , lipid and ESCRT interactions in the cilium promises to enrich our understanding of cilia as well as ESCRT biology . Third , the emerging role of lipids in cilia paints a fascinating picture of a unique membrane compartment that harbours unprecedented second mes - sengers — cholesterol and oxysterols . How cilia maintain their lipid identity is currently an open question . In this regard , single - molecule tracking of specific lipids will be necessary to test the existence of a diffusion barrier for lipids at the base of cilia . The extent of the roles cili - ary lipids play in ciliary signalling pathways also remains to be fully tested . Published online 4 April 2019 Endosomal sorting complex required for transport ( eSCRT ) . A cascade of protein complexes ( 0 , i , ii and iii in order of action ) discovered initially in yeast as factors involved in budding transmembrane proteins from the endosomal membrane into intraluminal vesicles . eSCRTs have since been demonstrated to be necessary for many cellular processes involving a bud - like topology . Line tension The 2D version of surface tension , which reflects the energy minimization of a system in which an energetically costly discontinuity exists between two neighbouring phases . 1 . Reiter , J . F . & Leroux , M . R . Genes and molecular pathways underpinning ciliopathies . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell . Biol . 18 , 533 – 547 ( 2017 ) . 2 . de Robertis , E . Electron microscope observations on the submicroscopic organization of the retinal rods . J . Biophys . Biochem . Cytol . 2 , 319 – 330 ( 1956 ) . 3 . Bloom , G . Studies on the olfactory epithelium of the frog and the toad with the aid of light and electron microscopy . Z . Zellforsch . Mikrosk . Anat . 41 , 89 – 100 ( 1954 ) . 4 . Huangfu , D . et al . Hedgehog signalling in the mouse requires intraflagellar transport proteins . Nature 426 , 83 – 87 ( 2003 ) . 5 . Gerdes , J . M . et al . Disruption of the basal body compromises proteasomal function and perturbs intracellular Wnt response . Nat . Genet . 39 , 1350 – 1360 ( 2007 ) . 6 . Ezratty , E . J . et al . A role for the primary cilium in Notch signaling and epidermal differentiation during skin development . Cell 145 , 1129 – 1141 ( 2011 ) . 7 . Ross , A . J . et al . Disruption of Bardet - Biedl syndrome ciliary proteins perturbs planar cell polarity in vertebrates . Nat . Genet . 37 , 1135 – 1140 ( 2005 ) . 8 . Schneider , L . et al . PDGFR αα signaling is regulated through the primary cilium in fibroblasts . Curr . Biol . 15 , 1861 – 1866 ( 2005 ) . 9 . Yeh , C . et al . IGF - 1 activates a cilium - localized noncanonical G βγ signaling pathway that regulates cell - cycle progression . Dev . Cell 26 , 358 – 368 ( 2013 ) . 10 . Schou , K . B . , Pedersen , L . B . & Christensen , S . T . Ins and outs of GPCR signaling in primary cilia . EMBO Rep . 16 , 1099 – 1113 ( 2015 ) . 11 . Clement , C . A . et al . TGF - β signaling is associated with endocytosis at the pocket region of the primary cilium . Cell Rep . 3 , 1806 – 1814 ( 2013 ) . 12 . Siljee , J . E . et al . Subcellular localization of MC4R with ADCY3 at neuronal primary cilia underlies a common pathway for genetic predisposition to obesity . Nat . Genet . 50 , 180 – 185 ( 2018 ) . NATuRe RevIeWS | MOlecular cell BIOlOgy R e v i e w s volume 20 | JulY 2019 | 401 13 . Bloodgood , R . A . Sensory reception is an attribute of both primary cilia and motile cilia . J . Cell Sci . 123 , 505 – 509 ( 2010 ) . 14 . Wachten , D . , Jikeli , J . F . & Kaupp , U . B . Sperm sensory signaling . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 9 , a028225 ( 2017 ) . 15 . Calvert , P . D . , Schiesser , W . E . & Pugh , E . N . Diffusion of a soluble protein , photoactivatable GFP , through a sensory cilium . J . Gen . Physiol . 135 , 173 – 196 ( 2010 ) . 16 . Bhandawat , V . , Reisert , J . & Yau , K . - W . Signaling by olfactory receptor neurons near threshold . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 18682 – 18687 ( 2010 ) . 17 . Corbit , K . C . et al . Vertebrate Smoothened functions at the primary cilium . Nature 437 , 1018 – 1021 ( 2005 ) . 18 . Haycraft , C . J . et al . Gli2 and Gli3 localize to cilia and require the intraflagellar transport protein polaris for processing and function . PLOS Genet . 1 , e53 ( 2005 ) . 19 . May , S . R . et al . Loss of the retrograde motor for IFT disrupts localization of Smo to cilia and prevents the expression of both activator and repressor functions of Gli . Dev . Biol . 287 , 378 – 389 ( 2005 ) . 20 . Belzile , O . , Hernandez - Lara , C . I . , Wang , Q . & Snell , W . J . Regulated membrane protein entry into flagella is facilitated by cytoplasmic microtubules and does not require IFT . Curr . Biol . 23 , 1460 – 1465 ( 2013 ) . 21 . Rohatgi , R . , Milenkovic , L . & Scott , M . P . Patched1 regulates hedgehog signaling at the primary cilium . Science 317 , 372 – 376 ( 2007 ) . 22 . Bangs , F . & Anderson , K . V . Primary cilia and mammalian Hedgehog signaling . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 9 , a028175 ( 2017 ) . 23 . Pablo , J . L . , DeCaen , P . G . & Clapham , D . E . Progress in ciliary ion channel physiology . J . Gen . Physiol . 149 , 37 – 47 ( 2017 ) . 24 . Johnson , J . - L . F . & Leroux , M . R . cAMP and cGMP signaling : sensory systems with prokaryotic roots adopted by eukaryotic cilia . Trends Cell Biol . 20 , 435 – 444 ( 2010 ) . 25 . Garcia , G . , Raleigh , D . R . & Reiter , J . F . How the ciliary membrane is organized inside - out to communicate outside - in . Curr . Biol . 28 , R421 – R434 ( 2018 ) . 26 . Luchetti , G . et al . Cholesterol activates the G - protein coupled receptor Smoothened to promote Hedgehog signaling . eLife 5 , e20304 ( 2016 ) . 27 . Huang , P . et al . Cellular cholesterol directly activates Smoothened in Hedgehog signaling . Cell 166 , 1176 – 1187 ( 2016 ) . 28 . Raleigh , D . R . et al . Cilia - associated oxysterols activate Smoothened . Mol . Cell 72 , 316 – 327 ( 2018 ) . This paper identifies the oxysterols 24 , 25 - epoxycholesterol and 7 β , 27 - dihydroxycholesterol as ciliary lipids that bind and activate Smoothened . 29 . Nager , A . R . et al . An actin network dispatches ciliary GPCRs into extracellular vesicles to modulate signaling . Cell 168 , 252 – 263 ( 2017 ) . This paper uncovers signal - dependent ectocytosis as a means for ciliary exit of activated GPCRs in mammalian cells ; see also Cao et al . ( 2015 ) . It also discovers a role for actin in ectosome scission ; see also Phua et al . ( 2017 ) . 30 . Phua , S . C . et al . Dynamic remodeling of membrane composition drives cell cycle through primary cilia excision . Cell 168 , 264 – 279 ( 2017 ) . This paper presents the discovery of a role for actin in ectosome release ; see also Nager et al . ( 2017 ) . It also suggests that cilia shorten by shedding ectosomes ; see also Long et al . ( 2016 ) . 31 . Long , H . et al . Comparative analysis of ciliary membranes and ectosomes . Curr . Biol . 26 , 3327 – 3335 ( 2016 ) . This study demonstrates that cilia shorten , at least in part , by shedding ectosomes ; see also Phua et al . ( 2017 ) . It also suggests a role for ESCRT proteins ALG2 and VPS4 in ciliary ectocytosis . 32 . Fisch , C . & Dupuis - Williams , P . Ultrastructure of cilia and flagella — back to the future ! Biol . Cell 103 , 249 – 270 ( 2011 ) . 33 . Garcia - Gonzalo , F . R . & Reiter , J . F . Open sesame : how transition fibers and the transition zone control ciliary composition . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 9 , a028134 ( 2017 ) . 34 . Gonçalves , J . & Pelletier , L . The ciliary transition zone : finding the pieces and assembling the gate . Mol . Cells 40 , 243 – 253 ( 2017 ) . 35 . Breslow , D . , Koslover , E . F . , Seydel , F . , Spakowitz , A . J . & Nachury , M . V . An in vitro assay for entry into cilia reveals unique properties of the soluble diffusion barrier . J . Cell Biol . 203 , 129 – 147 ( 2013 ) . 36 . Cevik , S . et al . Active transport and diffusion barriers restrict Joubert Syndrome - associated ARL13B / ARL - 13 to an Inv - like ciliary membrane subdomain . PLOS Genet . 9 , e1003977 ( 2013 ) . 37 . Chih , B . et al . A ciliopathy complex at the transition zone protects the cilia as a privileged membrane domain . Nat . Cell Biol . 14 , 61 – 72 ( 2011 ) . 38 . Hu , Q . et al . A septin diffusion barrier at the base of the primary cilium maintains ciliary membrane protein distribution . Science 329 , 436 – 439 ( 2010 ) . 39 . Kee , H . L . et al . A size - exclusion permeability barrier and nucleoporins characterize a ciliary pore complex that regulates transport into cilia . Nat . Cell Biol . 14 , 431 – 437 ( 2012 ) . 40 . Lin , Y . - C . et al . Chemically inducible diffusion trap at cilia reveals molecular sieve - like barrier . Nat . Chem . Biol . 9 , 437 – 443 ( 2013 ) . 41 . Yang , T . T . et al . Super - resolution architecture of mammalian centriole distal appendages reveals distinct blade and matrix functional components . Nat . Commun . 9 , 2023 ( 2018 ) . This study establishes the existence of the DAM and suggests that the DAM functions as a barrier for ciliary membrane proteins . 42 . Ye , F . , Nager , A . R . & Nachury , M . V . BBSome trains remove activated GPCRs from cilia by enabling passage through the transition zone . J . Cell Biol . 217 , 1847 – 1868 ( 2018 ) . Using single - molecule tracking , this study directly demonstrates that the transition zone is breached by exiting GPCRs in a BBSome - dependent manner . 43 . Najafi , M . , Maza , N . A . & Calvert , P . D . Steric volume exclusion sets soluble protein concentrations in photoreceptor sensory cilia . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 203 – 208 ( 2012 ) . 44 . Lambacher , N . J . et al . TMEM107 recruits ciliopathy proteins to subdomains of the ciliary transition zone and causes Joubert syndrome . Nat . Cell Biol . 18 , 122 – 131 ( 2016 ) . 45 . Takao , D . , Wang , L . , Boss , A . & Verhey , K . J . Protein interaction analysis provides a map of the spatial and temporal organization of the ciliary gating zone . Curr . Biol . 27 , 2296 – 2306 ( 2017 ) . 46 . Craige , B . et al . CEP290 tethers flagellar transition zone microtubules to the membrane and regulates flagellar protein content . J . Cell Biol . 190 , 927 – 940 ( 2010 ) . 47 . Awata , J . et al . NPHP4 controls ciliary trafficking of membrane proteins and large soluble proteins at the transition zone . J . Cell Sci . 127 , 4714 – 4727 ( 2014 ) . 48 . Scheidel , N . & Blacque , O . E . Intraflagellar transport complex A genes differentially regulate cilium formation and transition zone gating . Curr . Biol . 28 , 3279 – 3287 ( 2018 ) . 49 . Vuolo , L . , Stevenson , N . L . , Heesom , K . J . & Stephens , D . J . Dynein - 2 intermediate chains play crucial but distinct roles in primary cilia formation and function . eLife 7 , e39655 ( 2018 ) . 50 . Jensen , V . L . et al . Role for intraflagellar transport in building a functional transition zone . EMBO Rep . 19 , e45862 ( 2018 ) . 51 . Dharmat , R . et al . SPATA7 maintains a novel photoreceptor - specific zone in the distal connecting cilium . J . Cell Biol . 217 , 2851 – 2865 ( 2018 ) . 52 . Wiegering , A . et al . Cell type - specific regulation of ciliary transition zone assembly in vertebrates . EMBO J . 37 , e97791 ( 2018 ) . 53 . Jana , S . C . et al . Differential regulation of transition zone and centriole proteins contributes to ciliary base diversity . Nat . Cell Biol . 20 , 928 – 941 ( 2018 ) . 54 . Lewis , W . R . et al . Mks6 mutations reveal tissue - and cell type - specific roles for the cilia transition zone . FASEB J . 33 , 1440 – 1455 ( 2018 ) . 55 . Jensen , V . L . et al . Formation of the transition zone by Mks5 / Rpgrip1L establishes a ciliary zone of exclusion ( CIZE ) that compartmentalises ciliary signalling proteins and controls PIP2 ciliary abundance . EMBO J . 34 , 2537 – 2556 ( 2015 ) . 56 . Williams , C . L . et al . MKS and NPHP modules cooperate to establish basal body / transition zone membrane associations and ciliary gate function during ciliogenesis . J . Cell Biol . 192 , 1023 – 1041 ( 2011 ) . 57 . Yee , L . E . et al . Conserved genetic interactions between ciliopathy complexes cooperatively support ciliogenesis and ciliary signaling . PLOS Genet . 11 , e1005627 ( 2015 ) . 58 . Roberson , E . C . et al . TMEM231 , mutated in orofaciodigital and Meckel syndromes , organizes the ciliary transition zone . J . Cell Biol . 209 , 129 – 142 ( 2015 ) . 59 . Milenkovic , L . et al . Single - molecule imaging of Hedgehog pathway protein Smoothened in primary cilia reveals binding events regulated by Patched1 . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 112 , 8320 – 8325 ( 2015 ) . 60 . Shi , X . et al . Super - resolution microscopy reveals that disruption of ciliary transition - zone architecture causes Joubert syndrome . Nat . Cell Biol . 19 , 1178 – 1188 ( 2017 ) . 61 . Tanos , B . E . et al . Centriole distal appendages promote membrane docking , leading to cilia initiation . Genes Dev . 27 , 163 – 168 ( 2013 ) . 62 . Li , W . et al . Centriole translocation and degeneration during ciliogenesis in Caenorhabditis elegans neurons . EMBO J . 36 , 2553 – 2566 ( 2017 ) . 63 . Nechipurenko , I . V . , Berciu , C . , Sengupta , P . & Nicastro , D . Centriolar remodeling underlies basal body maturation during ciliogenesis in Caenorhabditis elegans . eLife 6 , e25686 ( 2017 ) . 64 . Serwas , D . , Su , T . Y . , Roessler , M . , Wang , S . & Dammermann , A . Centrioles initiate cilia assembly but are dispensable for maturation and maintenance in C . elegans . J . Cell Biol . 216 , 1659 – 1671 ( 2017 ) . 65 . Sugimoto , M . et al . The keratin - binding protein Albatross regulates polarization of epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 183 , 19 – 28 ( 2008 ) . 66 . Sang , L . et al . Mapping the NPHP - JBTS - MKS protein network reveals ciliopathy disease genes and pathways . Cell 145 , 513 – 528 ( 2011 ) . 67 . Delous , M . et al . Nephrocystin - 1 and nephrocystin - 4 are required for epithelial morphogenesis and associate with PALS1 / PATJ and Par6 . Hum . Mol . Genet . 18 , 4711 – 4723 ( 2009 ) . 68 . Wei , Q . et al . The hydrolethalus syndrome protein HYLS - 1 regulates formation of the ciliary gate . Nat . Commun . 7 , 12437 ( 2016 ) . 69 . DeCaen , P . G . , Delling , M . , Vien , T . N . & Clapham , D . E . Direct recording and molecular identification of the calcium channel of primary cilia . Nature 504 , 315 – 318 ( 2013 ) . 70 . Delling , M . , DeCaen , P . G . , Doerner , J . F . , Febvay , S . & Clapham , D . E . Primary cilia are specialized calcium signalling organelles . Nature 504 , 311 – 314 ( 2013 ) . 71 . Borisy , F . F . et al . Calcium / calmodulin - activated phosphodiesterase expressed in olfactory receptor neurons . J . Neurosci . 12 , 915 – 923 ( 1992 ) . 72 . Mukherjee , S . et al . A novel biosensor to study cAMP dynamics in cilia and flagella . eLife 5 , e14052 ( 2016 ) . 73 . Moore , B . S . et al . Cilia have high cAMP levels that are inhibited by Sonic Hedgehog - regulated calcium dynamics . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 113 , 13069 – 13074 ( 2016 ) . 74 . Grarup , N . et al . Loss - of - function variants in ADCY3 increase risk of obesity and type 2 diabetes . Nat . Genet . 50 , 172 – 174 ( 2018 ) . 75 . Saeed , S . et al . Loss - of - function mutations in ADCY3 cause monogenic severe obesity . Nat . Genet . 50 , 175 – 179 ( 2018 ) . 76 . Rees , S . et al . Adenylyl cyclase 6 deficiency ameliorates polycystic kidney disease . J . Am . Soc . Nephrol . 25 , 232 – 237 ( 2014 ) . 77 . Wang , Q . et al . Adenylyl cyclase 5 deficiency reduces renal cyclic AMP and cyst growth in an orthologous mouse model of polycystic kidney disease . Kidney Int . 93 , 403 – 415 ( 2018 ) . 78 . Breslow , D . K . et al . A CRISPR - based screen for Hedgehog signaling provides insights into ciliary function and ciliopathies . Nat . Genet . 50 , 460 – 471 ( 2018 ) . 79 . Pusapati , G . V . et al . CRISPR screens uncover genes that regulate target cell sensitivity to the morphogen Sonic Hedgehog . Dev . Cell 44 , 113 – 129 ( 2018 ) . 80 . Vuolo , L . , Herrera , A . , Torroba , B . , Menendez , A . & Pons , S . Ciliary adenylyl cyclases control the Hedgehog pathway . J . Cell Sci . 128 , 2928 – 2937 ( 2015 ) . 81 . Kwon , R . Y . , Temiyasathit , S . , Tummala , P . , Quah , C . C . & Jacobs , C . R . Primary cilium - dependent mechanosensing is mediated by adenylyl cyclase 6 and cyclic AMP in bone cells . FASEB J . 24 , 2859 – 2868 ( 2010 ) . 82 . Sadana , R . & Dessauer , C . W . Physiological roles for G protein - regulated adenylyl cyclase isoforms : insights from knockout and overexpression studies . Neurosignals 17 , 5 – 22 ( 2009 ) . 83 . Hilgendorf , K . I . , Johnson , C . T . & Jackson , P . K . The primary cilium as a cellular receiver : organizing ciliary GPCR signaling . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 39 , 84 – 92 ( 2016 ) . 84 . Pedersen , L . B . , Geimer , S . , Sloboda , R . D . & Rosenbaum , J . L . The microtubule plus end - tracking protein EB1 is localized to the flagellar tip and basal bodies in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii . Curr . Biol . 13 , 1969 – 1974 ( 2003 ) . 85 . Harris , J . A . , Liu , Y . , Yang , P . , Kner , P . & Lechtreck , K . F . Single - particle imaging reveals intraflagellar transport - independent transport and accumulation of EB1 in www . nature . com / nrm R e v i e w s 402 | JulY 2019 | volume 20 Chlamydomonas flagella . Mol . Biol . Cell 27 , 295 – 307 ( 2016 ) . 86 . Chávez , M . et al . Modulation of ciliary phosphoinositide content regulates trafficking and Sonic Hedgehog signaling output . Dev . Cell 34 , 338 – 350 ( 2015 ) . 87 . Garcia - Gonzalo , F . R . et al . Phosphoinositides regulate ciliary protein trafficking to modulate Hedgehog signaling . Dev . Cell 34 , 400 – 409 ( 2015 ) . Chavez et al . ( 2015 ) and Garcia - Gonzalo et al . ( 2015 ) demonstrate that the lipid PtdIns ( 4 ) P is enriched in the ciliary membrane thanks to the phosphatase INPP5E , which converts PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 into PtdIns ( 4 ) P . 88 . Poo , M . & Cone , R . A . Lateral diffusion of rhodopsin in the photoreceptor membrane . Nature 247 , 438 – 441 ( 1974 ) . 89 . Aveldaño , M . I . & Bazán , N . G . Molecular species of phosphatidylcholine , - ethanolamine , - serine , and - inositol in microsomal and photoreceptor membranes of bovine retina . J . Lipid Res . 24 , 620 – 627 ( 1983 ) . 90 . Boesze - Battaglia , K . & Schimmel , R . Cell membrane lipid composition and distribution : implications for cell function and lessons learned from photoreceptors and platelets . J . Exp . Biol . 200 , 2927 – 2936 ( 1997 ) . 91 . Andrews , D . & Nelson , D . L . Biochemical studies of the excitable membrane of Paramecium tetraurelia . II . Phospholipids of ciliary and other membranes . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 550 , 174 – 187 ( 1979 ) . 92 . Chailley , B . & Boisvieux - Ulrich , E . Detection of plasma membrane cholesterol by filipin during microvillogenesis and ciliogenesis in quail oviduct . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 33 , 1 – 10 ( 1985 ) . 93 . Lobasso , S . et al . Lipidomic analysis of porcine olfactory epithelial membranes and cilia . Lipids 45 , 593 – 602 ( 2010 ) . 94 . Montesano , R . Inhomogeneous distribution of filipin - sterol complexes in the ciliary membrane of rat tracheal epithelium . Am . J . Anat . 156 , 139 – 145 ( 1979 ) . 95 . Morris , R . J . & Bone , Q . Metazoan lipids : an unusual association of saturated sterols with relatively saturated fatty acids in the cilia of Ciona intestinalis . Lipids 18 , 900 – 901 ( 1983 ) . 96 . Morris , R . J . & Bone , Q . Highly saturated lipid composition of ctenophore cilia : possible indication of low membrane permeability . Lipids 20 , 933 – 935 ( 1985 ) . 97 . Souto - Padrón , T . & de Souza , W . Freeze - fracture localization of filipin - cholesterol complexes in the plasma membrane of Trypanosoma cruzi . J . Parasitol . 69 , 129 – 137 ( 1983 ) . 98 . Tyler , K . M . et al . Flagellar membrane localization via association with lipid rafts . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 859 – 866 ( 2009 ) . 99 . Emmer , B . T . , Maric , D . & Engman , D . M . Molecular mechanisms of protein and lipid targeting to ciliary membranes . J . Cell Sci . 123 , 529 – 536 ( 2010 ) . 100 . Nachury , M . V . , Seeley , E . S . & Jin , H . Trafficking to the ciliary membrane : how to get across the periciliary diffusion barrier ? Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 26 , 59 – 87 ( 2010 ) . 101 . Serricchio , M . et al . Flagellar membranes are rich in raft - forming phospholipids . Biol . Open 4 , 1143 – 1153 ( 2015 ) . 102 . Nguyen , P . A . T . , Liou , W . , Hall , D . H . & Leroux , M . R . Ciliopathy proteins establish a bipartite signaling compartment in a C . elegans thermosensory neuron . J . Cell Sci . 127 , 5317 – 5330 ( 2014 ) . 103 . Schou , K . B . et al . KIF13B establishes a CAV1 - enriched microdomain at the ciliary transition zone to promote Sonic hedgehog signalling . Nat . Commun . 8 , 14177 ( 2017 ) . This study demonstrates cholesterol - dependent localization of the cholesterol - binding protein caveolin to the transition zone , which suggests a specialized lipid organization at the transition zone . 104 . Kamiya , R . & Witman , G . B . Submicromolar levels of calcium control the balance of beating between the two flagella in demembranated models of Chlamydomonas . J . Cell Biol . 98 , 97 – 107 ( 1984 ) . 105 . Lechtreck , K . F . IFT – cargo interactions and protein transport in cilia . Trends Biochem . Sci . 40 , 765 – 778 ( 2015 ) . 106 . Nachury , M . V . The molecular machines that traffic signaling receptors into and out of cilia . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 51 , 124 – 131 ( 2018 ) . 107 . Nakayama , K . & Katoh , Y . Ciliary protein trafficking mediated by IFT and BBSome complexes with the aid of kinesin - 2 and dynein - 2 motors . J . Biochem . 163 , 155 – 164 ( 2018 ) . 108 . Bhogaraju , S . et al . Molecular basis of tubulin transport within the cilium by IFT74 and IFT81 . Science 341 , 1009 – 1012 ( 2013 ) . 109 . Craft , J . M . , Harris , J . A . , Hyman , S . , Kner , P . & Lechtreck , K . F . Tubulin transport by IFT is upregulated during ciliary growth by a cilium - autonomous mechanism . J . Cell Biol . 208 , 223 – 237 ( 2015 ) . 110 . Kubo , T . et al . Together , the IFT81 and IFT74 N - termini form the main module for intraflagellar transport of tubulin . J . Cell Sci . 129 , 2106 – 2119 ( 2016 ) . 111 . Taschner , M . , Mourão , A . , Awasthi , M . , Basquin , J . & Lorentzen , E . Structural basis of outer dynein arm intraflagellar transport by the transport adaptor protein ODA16 and the intraflagellar transport protein IFT46 . J . Biol . Chem . 292 , 7462 – 7473 ( 2017 ) . 112 . Hou , Y . , Witman , G . B . & Marshall , W . The N - terminus of IFT46 mediates intraflagellar transport of outer arm dynein and its cargo - adaptor ODA16 . Mol . Biol . Cell 28 , 2420 – 2433 ( 2017 ) . 113 . Hunter , E . L . et al . The IDA3 adapter , required for intraflagellar transport of I1 dynein , is regulated by ciliary length . Mol . Biol . Cell 29 , 886 – 896 ( 2018 ) . 114 . Ye , F . et al . Single molecule imaging reveals a major role for diffusion in the exploration of ciliary space by signaling receptors . eLife 2 , e00654 ( 2013 ) . 115 . Monis , W . J . , Faundez , V . & Pazour , G . J . BLOC - 1 is required for selective membrane protein trafficking from endosomes to primary cilia . J . Cell Biol . 216 , 2131 – 2150 ( 2017 ) . 116 . Morthorst , S . K . , Christensen , S . T . & Pedersen , L . B . Regulation of ciliary membrane protein trafficking and signalling by kinesin motor proteins . FEBS J . 285 , 4535 – 4564 ( 2018 ) . 117 . Blacque , O . E . , Scheidel , N . & Kuhns , S . Rab GTPases in cilium formation and function . Small GTPases 9 , 76 – 94 ( 2018 ) . 118 . Brown , J . M . , Cochran , D . A . , Craige , B . , Kubo , T . & Witman , G . B . Assembly of IFT trains at the ciliary base depends on IFT74 . Curr . Biol . 25 , 1583 – 1593 ( 2015 ) . 119 . Deane , J . A . , Cole , D . G . , Seeley , E . S . , Diener , D . R . & Rosenbaum , J . L . Localization of intraflagellar transport protein IFT52 identifies basal body transitional fibers as the docking site for IFT particles . Curr . Biol . 11 , 1586 – 1590 ( 2001 ) . 120 . Wingfield , J . L . et al . IFT trains in different stages of assembly queue at the ciliary base for consecutive release into the cilium . eLife 6 , e26609 ( 2017 ) . 121 . Huang , K . , Diener , D . R . , Mitchell , A . & Rosenbaum , J . L . Function and dynamics of PKD2 in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii flagella . J . Cell Biol . 179 , 501 – 514 ( 2007 ) . 122 . Brear , A . G . , Yoon , J . , Wojtyniak , M . & Sengupta , P . Diverse cell type - specific mechanisms localize G protein - coupled receptors to Caenorhabditis elegans sensory cilia . Genetics 197 , 667 – 684 ( 2014 ) . 123 . Bae , Y . K . et al . General and cell - type specific mechanisms target TRPP2 / PKD - 2 to cilia . Development 133 , 3859 – 3870 ( 2006 ) . 124 . Dwyer , N . D . , Adler , C . E . , Crump , J . G . , L’Etoile , N . D . & Bargmann , C . I . Polarized dendritic transport and the AP - 1 mu1 clathrin adaptor UNC - 101 localize odorant receptors to olfactory cilia . Neuron 31 , 277 – 287 ( 2001 ) . 125 . Eguether , T . , Cordelieres , F . P . & Pazour , G . J . Intraflagellar transport is deeply integrated in hedgehog signaling . Mol . Biol . Cell 29 , 1178 – 1189 ( 2018 ) . 126 . Liu , P . & Lechtreck , K . F . The Bardet – Biedl syndrome protein complex is an adapter expanding the cargo range of intraflagellar transport trains for ciliary export . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 115 , E934 – E943 ( 2018 ) . 127 . Badgandi , H . B . , Hwang , S . , Shimada , I . S . , Loriot , E . & Mukhopadhyay , S . Tubby family proteins are adapters for ciliary trafficking of integral membrane proteins . J . Cell Biol . 216 , 743 – 760 ( 2017 ) . 128 . Fu , W . , Wang , L . , Kim , S . , Li , J . & Dynlacht , B . D . Role for the IFT - A complex in selective transport to the primary cilium . Cell Rep . 17 , 1505 – 1517 ( 2016 ) . 129 . Hirano , T . , Katoh , Y . & Nakayama , K . Intraflagellar transport - A complex mediates ciliary entry and retrograde trafficking of ciliary G protein - coupled receptors . Mol . Biol . Cell 28 , 429 – 439 ( 2017 ) . 130 . Mukhopadhyay , S . et al . TULP3 bridges the IFT - A complex and membrane phosphoinositides to promote trafficking of G protein - coupled receptors into primary cilia . Genes Dev . 24 , 2180 – 2193 ( 2010 ) . 131 . Picariello , T . et al . A global analysis of IFT - A function reveals specialization for transport of membrane - associated proteins into cilia . J . Cell Sci . 132 , jcs . 220749 ( 2019 ) . 132 . Sun , X . et al . Tubby is required for trafficking G protein - coupled receptors to neuronal cilia . Cilia 1 , 21 ( 2012 ) . 133 . Oswald , F . , Prevo , B . , Acar , S . & Peterman , E . J . G . Interplay between ciliary ultrastructure and IFT - train dynamics revealed by single - molecule super - resolution imaging . Cell Rep . 25 , 224 – 235 ( 2018 ) . 134 . Yang , T . , Tran , M . N . T . , Chong , W . M . , Huang , C . - E . & Liao , J . - C . Single - particle tracking localization microscopy reveals nonaxonemal dynamics of intraflagellar transport proteins at the base of mammalian primary cilia . Mol . Biol . Cell 30 , 828 – 837 ( 2019 ) . 135 . Kanie , T . et al . The CEP19 - RABL2 GTPase complex binds IFT - B to initiate intraflagellar transport at the ciliary base . Dev . Cell 42 , 22 – 36 ( 2017 ) . 136 . Nishijima , Y . et al . RABL2 interacts with the intraflagellar transport - B complex and CEP19 and participates in ciliary assembly . Mol . Biol . Cell 28 , 1652 – 1666 ( 2017 ) . 137 . Park , J . et al . dTULP , the Drosophila melanogaster homolog of Tubby , regulates transient receptor potential channel localization in cilia . PLOS Genet . 9 , e1003814 ( 2013 ) . 138 . Park , J . et al . Ciliary phosphoinositide regulates ciliary protein trafficking in Drosophila . Cell Rep . 13 , 2808 – 2816 ( 2015 ) . 139 . Ismail , S . A . et al . Arl2 - GTP and Arl3 - GTP regulate a GDI - like transport system for farnesylated cargo . Nat . Chem . Biol . 7 , 942 – 949 ( 2011 ) . 140 . Ismail , S . A . et al . Structural basis for Arl3 - specific release of myristoylated ciliary cargo from UNC119 . EMBO J . 31 , 4085 – 4094 ( 2012 ) . 141 . Wright , K . J . et al . An ARL3 - UNC119 - RP2 GTPase cycle targets myristoylated NPHP3 to the primary cilium . Genes Dev . 25 , 2347 – 2360 ( 2011 ) . 142 . Zhang , H . et al . UNC119 is required for G protein trafficking in sensory neurons . Nat . Neurosci . 14 , 874 – 880 ( 2011 ) . Ismail et al . ( 2011 ) , Ismail et al . ( 2012 ) , Wright et al . ( 2011 ) and Zhang , H . et al . ( 2011 ) describe the myristoyl shuttle UNC119 and the farnesyl shuttle PDE6 δ and the release of their cargoes by ARL3 – GTP inside cilia as a cogent mechanism of ciliary import of lipidated proteins . 143 . Jensen , V . L . & Leroux , M . R . Gates for soluble and membrane proteins , and two trafficking systems ( IFT and LIFT ) , establish a dynamic ciliary signaling compartment . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 47 , 83 – 91 ( 2017 ) . 144 . Stephen , L . A . & Ismail , S . Shuttling and sorting lipid - modified cargo into the cilia . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 44 , 1273 – 1280 ( 2016 ) . 145 . Evans , R . J . et al . The retinitis pigmentosa protein RP2 links pericentriolar vesicle transport between the Golgi and the primary cilium . Hum . Mol . Genet . 19 , 1358 – 1367 ( 2010 ) . 146 . Blacque , O . E . et al . Functional genomics of the cilium , a sensory organelle . Curr . Biol . 15 , 935 – 941 ( 2005 ) . 147 . Stephan , A . , Vaughan , S . , Shaw , M . K . , Gull , K . & McKean , P . G . An essential quality control mechanism at the eukaryotic Basal body prior to intraflagellar transport . Traffic 8 , 1323 – 1330 ( 2007 ) . 148 . Gotthardt , K . et al . A G - protein activation cascade from Arl13B to Arl3 and implications for ciliary targeting of lipidated proteins . eLife 4 , e11859 ( 2015 ) . 149 . Ivanova , A . A . et al . Biochemical characterization of purified mammalian ARL13B protein indicates that it is an atypical GTPase and ARL3 guanine nucleotide exchange factor ( GEF ) . J . Biol . Chem . 292 , 11091 – 11108 ( 2017 ) . 150 . Zhang , Q . et al . GTP - binding of ARL - 3 is activated by ARL - 13 as a GEF and stabilized by UNC - 119 . Sci . Rep . 6 , 24534 ( 2016 ) . 151 . Fansa , E . K . , Kösling , S . K . , Zent , E . , Wittinghofer , A . & Ismail , S . PDE6 δ - mediated sorting of INPP5E into the cilium is determined by cargo - carrier affinity . Nat . Commun . 7 , 11366 ( 2016 ) . 152 . Hurd , T . et al . The retinitis pigmentosa protein RP2 interacts with polycystin 2 and regulates cilia - mediated vertebrate development . Hum . Mol . Genet . 19 , 4330 – 4344 ( 2010 ) . 153 . Humbert , M . C . et al . ARL13B , PDE6D , and CEP164 form a functional network for INPP5E ciliary targeting . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 19691 – 19696 ( 2012 ) . 154 . Revenkova , E . , Liu , Q . , Gusella , G . L . & Iomini , C . The Joubert syndrome protein ARL13B binds tubulin to maintain uniform distribution of proteins along the ciliary membrane . J . Cell Sci . 131 , jcs212324 ( 2018 ) . NATuRe RevIeWS | MOlecular cell BIOlOgy R e v i e w s volume 20 | JulY 2019 | 403 155 . Nozaki , S . et al . Regulation of ciliary retrograde protein trafficking by the Joubert syndrome proteins ARL13B and INPP5E . J . Cell Sci . 130 , 563 – 576 ( 2017 ) . 156 . Liem , K . F . et al . The IFT - A complex regulates Shh signaling through cilia structure and membrane protein trafficking . J . Cell Biol . 197 , 789 – 800 ( 2012 ) . 157 . Roy , K . et al . Palmitoylation of the ciliary GTPase ARL13b is necessary for its stability and its role in cilia formation . J . Biol . Chem . 292 , 17703 – 17717 ( 2017 ) . 158 . Cevik , S . et al . Joubert syndrome Arl13b functions at ciliary membranes and stabilizes protein transport in Caenorhabditis elegans . J . Cell Biol . 188 , 953 – 969 ( 2010 ) . 159 . Li , Y . , Wei , Q . , Zhang , Y . , Ling , K . & Hu , J . The small GTPases ARL - 13 and ARL - 3 coordinate intraflagellar transport and ciliogenesis . J . Cell Biol . 189 , 1039 – 1051 ( 2010 ) . 160 . Mick , D . U . et al . Proteomics of primary cilia by proximity labeling . Dev . Cell 35 , 497 – 512 ( 2015 ) . 161 . Viau , A . et al . Cilia - localized LKB1 regulates chemokine signaling , macrophage recruitment , and tissue homeostasis in the kidney . EMBO J . 37 , e98615 ( 2018 ) . 162 . Emmer , B . T . et al . Identification of a palmitoyl acyltransferase required for protein sorting to the flagellar membrane . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 867 – 874 ( 2009 ) . 163 . Follit , J . A . , Li , L . , Vucica , Y . & Pazour , G . J . The cytoplasmic tail of fibrocystin contains a ciliary targeting sequence . J . Cell Biol . 188 , 21 – 28 ( 2010 ) . 164 . Goodwin , J . S . et al . Depalmitoylated Ras traffics to and from the Golgi complex via a nonvesicular pathway . J . Cell Biol . 170 , 261 – 272 ( 2005 ) . 165 . Rocks , O . et al . An acylation cycle regulates localization and activity of palmitoylated Ras isoforms . Science 307 , 1746 – 1752 ( 2005 ) . 166 . Huang , K . , Diener , D . R . & Rosenbaum , J . L . The ubiquitin conjugation system is involved in the disassembly of cilia and flagella . J . Cell Biol . 186 , 601 – 613 ( 2009 ) . 167 . Green , J . A . et al . Recruitment of β - arrestin into neuronal cilia modulates somatostatin receptor subtype 3 ciliary localization . Mol . Cell . Biol . 36 , 223 – 235 ( 2015 ) . 168 . Pal , K . et al . Smoothened determines β - arrestin - mediated removal of the G protein - coupled receptor Gpr161 from the primary cilium . J . Cell Biol . 212 , 861 – 875 ( 2016 ) . 169 . Datta , P . et al . Accumulation of non - outer segment proteins in the outer segment underlies photoreceptor degeneration in Bardet - Biedl syndrome . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 112 , E4400 – E4409 ( 2015 ) . 170 . Lechtreck , K . F . et al . The Chlamydomonas reinhardtii BBSome is an IFT cargo required for export of specific signaling proteins from flagella . J . Cell Biol . 187 , 1117 – 1132 ( 2009 ) . 171 . Lechtreck , K . F . et al . Cycling of the signaling protein phospholipase D through cilia requires the BBSome only for the export phase . J . Cell Biol . 201 , 249 – 261 ( 2013 ) . 172 . Eguether , T . et al . IFT27 links the BBSome to IFT for maintenance of the ciliary signaling compartment . Dev . Cell 31 , 279 – 290 ( 2014 ) . 173 . Liew , G . M . et al . The intraflagellar transport protein IFT27 promotes BBSome exit from cilia through the GTPase ARL6 / BBS3 . Dev . Cell 31 , 265 – 278 ( 2014 ) . 174 . Jin , H . et al . The conserved Bardet - Biedl syndrome proteins assemble a coat that traffics membrane proteins to cilia . Cell 141 , 1208 – 1219 ( 2010 ) . 175 . Klink , B . U . et al . A recombinant BBSome core complex and how it interacts with ciliary cargo . eLife 6 , e27434 ( 2017 ) . 176 . Baker , S . A . et al . The outer segment serves as a default destination for the trafficking of membrane proteins in photoreceptors . J . Cell Biol . 183 , 485 – 498 ( 2008 ) . 177 . Ocbina , P . J . R . & Anderson , K . V . Intraflagellar transport , cilia , and mammalian Hedgehog signaling : analysis in mouse embryonic fibroblasts . Dev . Dyn . 237 , 2030 – 2038 ( 2008 ) . 178 . Zhang , Q . et al . Bardet - Biedl syndrome 3 ( Bbs3 ) knockout mouse model reveals common BBS - associated phenotypes and Bbs3 unique phenotypes . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 20678 – 20683 ( 2011 ) . 179 . Trimble , W . S . & Grinstein , S . Barriers to the free diffusion of proteins and lipids in the plasma membrane . J . Cell Biol . 208 , 259 – 271 ( 2015 ) . 180 . Schmidt , H . B . & Görlich , D . Transport selectivity of nuclear pores , phase separation , and membraneless organelles . Trends Biochem . Sci . 41 , 46 – 61 ( 2016 ) . 181 . Papermaster , D . S . , Schneider , B . G . & Besharse , J . C . Vesicular transport of newly synthesized opsin from the Golgi apparatus toward the rod outer segment . Ultrastructural immunocytochemical and autoradiographic evidence in Xenopus retinas . Invest . Ophthalmol . Vis . Sci . 26 , 1386 – 1404 ( 1985 ) . 182 . Pedersen , L . B . , Mogensen , J . B . & Christensen , S . T . Endocytic control of cellular signaling at the primary cilium . Trends Biochem . Sci . 41 , 784 – 797 ( 2016 ) . 183 . Benmerah , A . The ciliary pocket . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 25 , 78 – 84 ( 2013 ) . 184 . Langousis , G . et al . Loss of the BBSome perturbs endocytic trafficking and disrupts virulence of Trypanosoma brucei . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 113 , 632 – 637 ( 2016 ) . 185 . Lobingier , B . T . & von Zastrow , M . When trafficking and signaling mix : how subcellular location shapes G protein - coupled receptor activation of heterotrimeric G proteins . Traffic 20 , 130 – 136 ( 2019 ) . 186 . Pan , B . T . , Teng , K . , Wu , C . , Adam , M . & Johnstone , R . M . Electron microscopic evidence for externalization of the transferrin receptor in vesicular form in sheep reticulocytes . J . Cell Biol . 101 , 942 – 948 ( 1985 ) . 187 . Von Bartheld , C . S . & Altick , A . L . Multivesicular bodies in neurons : distribution , protein content , and trafficking functions . Prog . Neurobiol . 93 , 313 – 340 ( 2011 ) . 188 . Besharse , J . C . , Hollyfield , J . G . & Rayborn , M . E . Turnover of rod photoreceptor outer segments . II . Membrane addition and loss in relationship to light . J . Cell Biol . 75 , 507 – 527 ( 1977 ) . 189 . Young , R . W . & Bok , D . Participation of the retinal pigment epithelium in the rod outer segment renewal process . J . Cell Biol . 42 , 392 – 403 ( 1969 ) . 190 . Salinas , R . Y . et al . Photoreceptor discs form through peripherin - dependent suppression of ciliary ectosome release . J . Cell Biol . 216 , 1489 – 1499 ( 2017 ) . This paper provides an in vivo demonstration of a role for ciliary ectocytosis in disposing of excess membranes . Ectocytosis must hence be suppressed for the formation of fresh discs in photoreceptor outer segments . 191 . Cao , M . et al . Uni - directional ciliary membrane protein trafficking by a cytoplasmic retrograde IFT motor and ciliary ectosome shedding . eLife 4 , e05242 ( 2015 ) . This paper uncovers signal - dependent ectocytosis as a means for ciliary exit of activated adhesion molecules in C . reinhardtii ; see also Nager et al . ( 2017 ) . 192 . Loktev , A . V . & Jackson , P . K . Neuropeptide Y family receptors traffic via the Bardet - Biedl syndrome pathway to signal in neuronal primary cilia . Cell Rep . 5 , 1316 – 1329 ( 2013 ) . 193 . Marion , S . , Oakley , R . H . , Kim , K . - M . , Caron , M . G . & Barak , L . S . A beta - arrestin binding determinant common to the second intracellular loops of rhodopsin family G protein - coupled receptors . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 2932 – 2938 ( 2006 ) . 194 . van Dam , T . J . P . et al . Evolution of modular intraflagellar transport from a coatomer - like progenitor . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 110 , 6943 – 6948 ( 2013 ) . 195 . Shida , T . , Cueva , J . G . , Xu , Z . , Goodman , M . B . & Nachury , M . V . The major alpha - tubulin K40 acetyltransferase alphaTAT1 promotes rapid ciliogenesis and efficient mechanosensation . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 21517 – 21522 ( 2010 ) . 196 . Dentler , W . A . Role for the membrane in regulating Chlamydomonas flagellar length . PLOS ONE 8 , e53366 ( 2013 ) . 197 . Rajagopalan , V . , Subramanian , A . , Wilkes , D . E . , Pennock , D . G . & Asai , D . J . Dynein - 2 affects the regulation of ciliary length but is not required for ciliogenesis in Tetrahymena thermophila . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 , 708 – 720 ( 2009 ) . 198 . Hao , L . , Efimenko , E . , Swoboda , P . & Scholey , J . M . The retrograde IFT machinery of C . elegans cilia : two IFT dynein complexes ? PLOS ONE 6 , e20995 ( 2011 ) . 199 . Ocbina , P . J . R . , Eggenschwiler , J . T . , Moskowitz , I . & Anderson , K . V . Complex interactions between genes controlling trafficking in primary cilia . Nat . Genet . 43 , 547 – 553 ( 2011 ) . 200 . Das , R . M . & Storey , K . G . Apical abscission alters cell polarity and dismantles the primary cilium during neurogenesis . Science 343 , 200 – 204 ( 2014 ) . 201 . Mirvis , M . , Siemers , K . A . , Nelson , W . J . & Stearns , T . Heterogeneous dynamics and mechanisms of primary cilium disassembly in mammalian cells . Preprint at bioRxiv https : / / www . biorxiv . org / content / 10 . 1101 / 433144v2 ( 2018 ) . 202 . Niel , Gvan , D’Angelo , G . & Raposo , G . Shedding light on the cell biology of extracellular vesicles . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 19 , 213 – 228 ( 2018 ) . 203 . Wood , C . R . & Rosenbaum , J . L . Ciliary ectosomes : transmissions from the cell’s antenna . Trends Cell Biol . 25 , 276 – 285 ( 2015 ) . 204 . Wood , C . R . , Huang , K . , Diener , D . R . & Rosenbaum , J . L . The cilium secretes bioactive ectosomes . Curr . Biol . 23 , 906 – 911 ( 2013 ) . 205 . Szempruch , A . J . et al . Extracellular vesicles from Trypanosoma brucei mediate virulence factor transfer and cause host anemia . Cell 164 , 246 – 257 ( 2016 ) . 206 . Wang , J . et al . C . elegans ciliated sensory neurons release extracellular vesicles that function in animal communication . Curr . Biol . 24 , 519 – 525 ( 2014 ) . 207 . Hurley , J . H . ESCRTs are everywhere . EMBO J . 34 , 2398 – 2407 ( 2015 ) . 208 . Diener , D . R . , Lupetti , P . & Rosenbaum , J . L . Proteomic analysis of isolated ciliary transition zones reveals the presence of ESCRT proteins . Curr . Biol . 25 , 379 – 384 ( 2015 ) . 209 . Mierzwa , B . & Gerlich , D . W . Cytokinetic abscission : molecular mechanisms and temporal control . Dev . Cell 31 , 525 – 538 ( 2014 ) . 210 . Chiaruttini , N . et al . Relaxation of loaded ESCRT - III spiral springs drives membrane deformation . Cell 163 , 866 – 879 ( 2015 ) . 211 . Wollert , T . , Wunder , C . , Lippincott - Schwartz , J . & Hurley , J . H . Membrane scission by the ESCRT - III complex . Nature 458 , 172 – 177 ( 2009 ) . 212 . Liu , A . P . & Fletcher , D . A . Actin polymerization serves as a membrane domain switch in model lipid bilayers . Biophys . J . 91 , 4064 – 4070 ( 2006 ) . 213 . Römer , W . et al . Actin dynamics drive membrane reorganization and scission in clathrin - independent endocytosis . Cell 140 , 540 – 553 ( 2010 ) . 214 . Allain , J . - M . , Storm , C . , Roux , A . , Amar , M . B . & Joanny , J . - F . Fission of a multiphase membrane tube . Phys . Rev . Lett . 93 , 158104 ( 2004 ) . 215 . Ma , M . , Gallagher , A . - R . & Somlo , S . Ciliary mechanisms of cyst formation in polycystic kidney disease . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 9 , a028209 ( 2017 ) . 216 . Pazour , G . J . et al . Polycystin - 2 localizes to kidney cilia and the ciliary level is elevated in orpk mice with polycystic kidney disease . Curr . Biol . 12 , R378 – R380 ( 2002 ) . 217 . Yoder , B . K . , Hou , X . & Guay - Woodford , L . M . The polycystic kidney disease proteins , polycystin - 1 , polycystin - 2 , polaris , and cystin , are co - localized in renal cilia . J . Am . Soc . Nephrol . 13 , 2508 – 2516 ( 2002 ) . 218 . Kleene , S . J . & Kleene , N . K . The native TRPP2 - dependent channel of murine renal primary cilia . Am . J . Physiol . Renal Physiol . 312 , F96 – F108 ( 2017 ) . 219 . Liu , X . et al . Polycystin - 2 is an essential ion channel subunit in the primary cilium of the renal collecting duct epithelium . eLife 7 , e33183 ( 2018 ) . 220 . Nauli , S . M . et al . Polycystins 1 and 2 mediate mechanosensation in the primary cilium of kidney cells . Nat . Genet . 33 , 129 – 137 ( 2003 ) . 221 . Delling , M . et al . Primary cilia are not calcium - responsive mechanosensors . Nature 531 , 656 – 660 ( 2016 ) . 222 . Pazour , G . J . et al . Chlamydomonas IFT88 and its mouse homologue , polycystic kidney disease gene Tg737 , are required for assembly of cilia and flagella . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 709 – 718 ( 2000 ) . 223 . Braun , D . A . & Hildebrandt , F . Ciliopathies . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 9 , a028191 ( 2017 ) . 224 . Ma , M . , Tian , X . , Igarashi , P . , Pazour , G . J . & Somlo , S . Loss of cilia suppresses cyst growth in genetic models of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease . Nat . Genet . 45 , 1004 – 1012 ( 2013 ) . 225 . Riobo , N . A . in The Smoothened Receptor in Cancer and Regenerative Medicine ( ed . Ruat , M . ) 13 – 42 ( Springer , 2015 ) . 226 . Liu , Y . C . et al . The PPFIA1 - PP2A protein complex promotes trafficking of Kif7 to the ciliary tip and Hedgehog signaling . Sci . Signal . 7 , ra117 ( 2014 ) . 227 . Cheung , H . O . - L . et al . The kinesin protein Kif7 is a critical regulator of Gli transcription factors in mammalian hedgehog signaling . Sci . Signal . 2 , ra29 ( 2009 ) . 228 . Endoh - Yamagami , S . et al . The mammalian Cos2 homolog Kif7 plays an essential role in modulating Hh signal transduction during development . Curr . Biol . 19 , 1320 – 1326 ( 2009 ) . 229 . He , M . et al . The kinesin - 4 protein Kif7 regulates mammalian Hedgehog signalling by organizing the cilium tip compartment . Nat . Cell Biol . 16 , 663 – 672 ( 2014 ) . 230 . Bidet , M . et al . The hedgehog receptor Patched is involved in cholesterol transport . PLOS ONE 6 , e23834 ( 2011 ) . www . nature . com / nrm R e v i e w s 404 | JulY 2019 | volume 20 231 . Fiorini , L . et al . Natural paniceins from mediterranean sponge inhibit the multidrug resistance activity of Patched and increase chemotherapy efficiency on melanoma cells . Oncotarget 6 , 22282 – 22297 ( 2015 ) . 232 . Zhang , Y . et al . Structural basis for cholesterol transport - like activity of the Hedgehog receptor Patched . Cell 175 , 1352 – 1364 ( 2018 ) . 233 . Gong , X . et al . Structural basis for the recognition of Sonic Hedgehog by human Patched1 . Science 361 , eaas8935 ( 2018 ) . 234 . Qi , X . , Schmiege , P . , Coutavas , E . , Wang , J . & Li , X . Structures of human Patched and its complex with native palmitoylated sonic hedgehog . Nature 560 , 128 – 132 ( 2018 ) . 235 . Qi , X . , Schmiege , P . , Coutavas , E . & Li , X . Two Patched molecules engage distinct sites on Hedgehog yielding a signaling - competent complex . Science 362 , eaas8843 ( 2018 ) . Zhang et al . ( 2018 ) , Gong et al . ( 2018 ) , Qi et al . ( Nature , 2018 ) and Qi et al . ( Science , 2018 ) present structures of Hedgehog receptor Patched 1 that uncover a channel in Patched 1 through which cholesterol may be transported from the inner leaflet to the extracellular domain . Zhang et al . ( 2018 ) also provide direct evidence that Patched 1 transports cholesterol from the inner to the outer leaflet of the membrane . 236 . Huang , P . et al . Structural basis of Smoothened activation in Hedgehog signaling . Cell 174 , 312 – 324 ( 2018 ) . The structure of activated Smoothened , as presented in this paper , reveals a channel through which cholesterol may travel from the inner leaflet to the cysteine - rich extracellular domain , thereby promoting receptor activation . 237 . Cole , D . G . et al . Chlamydomonas kinesin - II - dependent intraflagellar transport ( IFT ) : IFT particles contain proteins required for ciliary assembly in Caenorhabditis elegans sensory neurons . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 993 – 1008 ( 1998 ) . 238 . Nachury , M . V . et al . A core complex of BBS proteins cooperates with the GTPase Rab8 to promote ciliary membrane biogenesis . Cell 129 , 1201 – 1213 ( 2007 ) . 239 . Wingfield , J . L . , Lechtreck , K . - F . & Lorentzen , E . Trafficking of ciliary membrane proteins by the intraflagellar transport / BBSome machinery . Essays Biochem . 62 , 753 – 763 ( 2018 ) . 240 . Funabashi , T . , Katoh , Y . , Okazaki , M . , Sugawa , M . & Nakayama , K . Interaction of heterotrimeric kinesin - II with IFT - B - connecting tetramer is crucial for ciliogenesis . J . Cell Biol . 217 , 2867 – 2876 ( 2018 ) . 241 . Jordan , M . A . , Diener , D . R . , Stepanek , L . & Pigino , G . The cryo - EM structure of intraflagellar transport trains reveals how dynein is inactivated to ensure unidirectional anterograde movement in cilia . Nat . Cell Biol . 20 , 1250 – 1255 ( 2018 ) . 242 . Chien , A . et al . Dynamics of the IFT machinery at the ciliary tip . eLife 6 , e28606 ( 2017 ) . 243 . Mijalkovic , J . , van Krugten , J . , Oswald , F . , Acar , S . & Peterman , E . J . G . Single - molecule turnarounds of intraflagellar transport at the C . elegans ciliary tip . Cell Rep . 25 , 1701 – 1707 ( 2018 ) . 244 . Stepanek , L . & Pigino , G . Microtubule doublets are double - track railways for intraflagellar transport trains . Science 352 , 721 – 724 ( 2016 ) . 245 . Chaya , T . , Omori , Y . , Kuwahara , R . & Furukawa , T . ICK is essential for cell type - specific ciliogenesis and the regulation of ciliary transport . EMBO J . 33 , 1227 – 1242 ( 2014 ) . 246 . Berman , S . A . , Wilson , N . F . , Haas , N . A . , Lefebvre , P . A . A novel MAP kinase regulates flagellar length in Chlamydomonas . Curr . Biol . 13 , 1145 – 1149 ( 2003 ) . 247 . Burghoorn , J . et al . Mutation of the MAP kinase DYF - 5 affects docking and undocking of kinesin - 2 motors and reduces their speed in the cilia of Caenorhabditis elegans . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 7157 ( 2007 ) . 248 . Bengs , F . , Scholz , A . , Kuhn , D . & Wiese , M . LmxMPK9 , a mitogen - activated protein kinase homologue affects flagellar length in Leishmania mexicana : MAP kinase and flagellar length . Mol . Microbiol . 55 , 1606 – 1615 ( 2005 ) . Acknowledgements The authors thank B . Snell , G . Witman , J . Reiter , M . Delling , D . Breslow , I . Ojeda Naharros and S . Shinde for comments on the manuscript and A . Nager for help with drafting the man - uscript . They apologize to their colleagues whose publications they could not cite owing to length restrictions . Research in the Nachury laboratory is supported by NIGMS grant GM089933 , a Stein Innovation Award from Research to Prevent Blindness and , in part , by NEI core grant EY002162 and by an RPB Unrestricted Grant . Research in the Mick lab - oratory is supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft ( DFG ) SFB894 / TPA - 22 . Author contributions The authors contributed equally to all aspects of the article . Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests . Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations . Reviewer information Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology thanks L . B . Pedersen and other anonymous reviewer ( s ) for their contribution to the peer review of this work . NATuRe RevIeWS | MOlecular cell BIOlOgy R e v i e w s volume 20 | JulY 2019 | 405