Predictive Spatial Search Mohamed Ali , Abdeltawab M . Hendawi , Ankur Teredesai Center for Data Science , Institute of Technology , University of Washington , Tacoma , WA , USA { mhali , hendawi , mdecock , ankurt } @ uw . edu Abstract In a typical spatial search problem , ( mobile ) users search for ( stationary or mobile ) entities that have spatial attributes . The user’s current location and / or the entities’ locations are considered to assess the relevance of the search result . On one hand , we believe that the user’s future location is more relevant to the search result than the current location . Hence , we study spatial search queries under predictive models of user locations . On the other hand and with the ubiquity of hand held devices , most users do not utilize the full power of spatial search and they do not know what to search for . Hence , we introduce a framework to answer the question : “given a user’s current and predicted locations , what would the user be interested in searching for and seeing as a query result ? ” More specifically , we propose a predictive spatial search approach that continuously monitors the user’s current location to : ( 1 ) predict the user’s future location and integrate this prediction efficiently in the spatial search query processing pipeline , and ( 2 ) predict the search keywords that are of relevance to the user , given the user’s location and context . The second type of prediction leverages the knowledge of existing search engines about the behavior of a global set of spatial search users and social media users . Such two - phase prediction capability will enable search engines to “pre - search” on behalf of their users and , thereby , leading to gains in user experience , search accuracy , and communication costs . Introduction Commercial search engines recognize the value of tracking the users’ location to provide a better service . The typical straightforward approach is to upload the user’s location every time a search query is issued . However , the vision presented in [ 1 ] proposes a novel approach that utilizes the power of data streaming systems to track the users’ locations based on a route - selection preference policy . In this approach , the system accepts ( voluntarily ) the user’s declared route preferences along with other context - based information . This information helps the system “ predict ” the user’s location even under the absence of the real - time location feed , survive offline periods , reduce communication cost and predict the user’s future location with acceptable accuracy . The next set of challenges is to identify the issues that can help integrate spatial search capabilities with such predictive data streaming systems . This integration is the theme of our vision . Consider the scenario that a user is driving on the highway and searches for a restaurant . It may be desirable and more relevant to direct the user to his favorite restaurant chain ( or similar such chains that are still several minutes ahead from his current location ) than to simply identify a nearby less favorite restaurant chain . It is even better to predict that this user is , for example , heading to a football game . Consequently , we direct the user to the parade , events and activities next to the stadium that the user is not aware of . In this scenario , we notice two main characteristics : first , the search engine is geared up to perform a spatial search around a non - deterministic ( yet to be predicted ) future location ahead of time . Second , the search engine aims at discovering and recommending personalized search topics on a per user basis . Ranking of the search result needs to be performed spatiotemporally taking into consideration the probability of the user’s expected location along the future timeline . Currently , users rely on multiple data sources such as live feeds from social media augmented with organic search to discover related events / facilities at the destination . An advantage of the proposed predictive spatial search frameworks is to help consolidate search results better across various faceted search channels . We believe that future geospatial search engine will inevitably adopt the “we know where you will be and we search before you search ” principle . It is the proactiveness of search engines that will shape the future of spatial search . The search engine is the user’s agent that continuously ( 1 ) adjusts the search result according to the user’s predicted destination and ( 2 ) interacts / socializes with neighboring people / agents to highlight interesting topics that the user is totally unaware of . Predictive Trees : An Index for Predictive Queries on Road Networks Practical experience tells that it is absolutely a myth to assume that commercial search engines know everything about the user’s past locations . Lots of research utilize manufactured databases of historical trajectories and apply machine learning techniques to predict the user’s future location . These trajectory databases are usually collected by researchers or volunteers for research purposes . Yet , from a practical perspective , and due to privacy concerns [ 2 ] , the user location is revealed on a session basis such that each session is no longer than few minutes . Commercial search engines care about users’ privacy . Consequently , techniques that assume full knowledge of the user’s behavior over extended periods of time are not considered practical in our approach . We propose a new index structure , the predictive tree [ 3 , 4 ] , that enables the evaluation of predictive queries [ 5 ] in the absence of the objects’ historical trajectories . Based solely on the connectivity of the road network graph and assuming that the object follows the shortest route to destination , the predictive tree determines the reachable nodes of a moving object within a specified time window T in the future . Moreover , predictive trees utilize every additional piece of information and enhance the probability assignment of the predicted location as more trajectory data becomes available on the user . The predictive tree : ( 1 ) provides a generic infrastructure for answering the common types of predictive queries including predictive point , range , KNN , and aggregate queries , ( 2 ) updates the probabilistic prediction of the object’s future locations dynamically and incrementally as the object moves around on the road network , and ( 3 ) provides an extensible mechanism to customize the probability assignments of the object’s expected future locations , with the help of user defined functions . In our ongoing effort , we leverage predictive trees to support spatial search and integrate this work with predictive data streaming systems . References [ 1 ] Mohamed Ali , Badrish Chandramouli , Balan Raman , and Ed Katibah , Spatio - Temporal Stream Processing in Microsoft StreamInsight . IEEE Data Eng . Bull . 33 ( 2 ) : 69 - 74 ( 2010 ) . [ 2 ] From GPS and Virtual Globes to Spatial Computing - 2020 : The Next Transformative Technology . A Community Whitepaper resulting from the 2012 CCC Spatial Computing 2020 Workshop . [ 3 ] A . M . Hendawi , J . Bao , and M . F . Mokbel . Predictive Tree Source Code and Sample Data . URL : http : / / www - users . cs . umn . edu / ~ hendawi / PredictiveTree / , Aug . 2014 . [ 4 ] A . M . Hendawi and M . F . Mokbel . Panda : A Predictive Spatio - Temporal Query Processor . In ACM SIGSPATIAL GIS , 2012 . [ 5 ] A . M . Hendawi and M . F . Mokbel . Predictive Spatio - Temporal Queries : A Comprehensive Survey and Future Directions . In MobiGIS , California , USA , Nov . 2012 .