Current Biology 24 , 2749 – 2757 , December 1 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2014 . 09 . 048 Article Aip1 Destabilizes Coﬁlin - Saturated Actin Filaments by Severing and Accelerating Monomer Dissociation from Ends Ambika V . Nadkarni 1 and William M . Brieher 1 , * 1 Department of Cell and Developmental Biology , University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign , Urbana , IL 61801 , USA Summary Background : Depolymerization of actin ﬁlaments is vital for the morphogenesis of dynamic cytoskeletal arrays and actin - dependent cell motility . Coﬁlin is necessary for actin disas - sembly in cells , and it severs ﬁlaments most efﬁciently at low coﬁlin to actin ratios , whereas higher concentrations of coﬁlin suppress severing . However , the coﬁlin concentration in thymocytes is too high to allow the severing of single - actin ﬁlaments . Results : We observed that ﬁlaments sever efﬁciently in thymus cytosol . We identiﬁed Aip1 as a critical factor respon - sible for the severing and destabilization of actin ﬁlaments even in the presence of high amounts of coﬁlin . By ﬂuores - cence resonance energy transfer ( FRET ) - based spectroscopy and single - ﬁlament imaging of actin , we show that , besides driving the rapid severing of coﬁlin - actin ﬁlaments , Aip1 also augments the monomer dissociation rate at both the barbed and pointed ends of actin . Our results also demonstrate that Aip1 does not cap the barbed ends of actin ﬁlaments , as was previously thought . Conclusions : Our results indicate that Aip1 is a coﬁlin - depen - dent actin depolymerization factor and not a barbed - end - capping factor as was previously thought . Aip1 inverts the rules of coﬁlin - mediated actin disassembly such that increas - ing ratios of coﬁlin to actin now result in ﬁlament destabili - zation through faster severing and accelerated monomer loss from barbed and pointed ends . Aip1 therefore offers a potential control point for disassembly mechanisms in cells to switch from a regime of coﬁlin - saturation and stabilization to one that favors fast disassembly and destabilization . Introduction The highly dynamic nature of the actin cytoskeleton in cells al - lows for the rapid cytoskeletal reorganization that accom - panies a variety of cellular processes such as cytokinesis , endocytosis , and cell motility . The cell has an array of factors that execute the disassembly of actin ﬁlaments at rates far greater than those achieved by actin alone in pure solution [ 1 ] . Coﬁlin is essential for cellular actin disassembly [ 2 ] and in - ﬂuences the morphogenesis of ﬁlamentous arrays in several ways ( reviewed in Bravo - Cordero et al . [ 3 ] ) . In vitro , coﬁlin severs actin ﬁlaments at low ratios of coﬁlin to actin [ 4 ] , and this severing activity has been shown to be important for cells [ 5 – 7 ] because severing creates more ﬁlament ends that can grow or shrink , and thus increases ﬁlament dynamics . Coﬁlin binds actin cooperatively [ 8 , 9 ] and alters the conﬁg - uration of actin protomers within the ﬁlament [ 10 ] . Contiguous binding sites occupied with coﬁlin are stable , but lateral interfaces between coﬁlin - occupied and unoccupied sites on actin are unstable and sever [ 11 , 12 ] . Interestingly , therefore , coﬁlin severs actin ﬁlaments most efﬁciently when ﬁlaments are bound with an intermediate amount of coﬁlin . Severing is inefﬁcient at higher ratios of coﬁlin to actin , and ﬁlaments are stable in saturating concentrations of coﬁlin [ 4 ] . Nevertheless , actin ﬁlament severing activity detected in vitro with pure coﬁlin alone cannot account for the behavior of Listeria actin comet tails , which disassemble faster with increasing concen - trations of coﬁlin [ 13 , 14 ] . Furthermore , the intrinsic coﬁlin severing and actin depolymerization rates do not account for the rapid actin turnover rates of yeast actin patches [ 15 , 16 ] . Thus , coﬁlin - dependent auxiliary factors present in cytoplasm may be responsible for the destabilization of actin ﬁlaments even in the presence of saturating coﬁlin concentrations . Thymus extract rapidly disassembles Listeria actin comet tails even though it is thought to contain high amounts of coﬁlin that should prevent actin disassembly [ 17 ] . Factors that compete with coﬁlin binding to F - actin such as myosin II can restore ﬁlament severing when saturating amounts of coﬁlin are present [ 18 ] , by preventing coﬁlin binding and increasing the number of heterotypic junctions that promote severing on the ﬁlament . The presence of these factors in cytosol or on the actin comet tail could help account for this observation . However , fractionation and biochemical complementation identiﬁed Aip1 , coronin , and Cyclase Associated Protein ( CAP ) as the major auxiliary factors present in thymus cytosol that directly potentiate coﬁlin - mediated disassembly of Listeria actin comet tails [ 17 , 19 ] . The mechanisms through which these factors promote coﬁlin - mediated ﬁlament disassembly are poorly understood but are thought not to be limited to preventing the binding of coﬁlin . In fact , coronin increased the loading of coﬁlin on Listeria actin comet tails and stabilized them , whereas Aip1 was able to rapidly disassemble these stabilized ﬁlaments [ 17 ] . CAP could substitute for coronin but not Aip1 to augment comet tail disassembly [ 19 ] , and previous work has indicated that Aip1 can exert its activity in the presence of higher coﬁlin to actin ratios [ 20 ] . This indicated to us that Aip1 was a likely candidate to explain the contradic - tory behaviors of pure coﬁlin and actin disassembly in com - plex cell extracts . Aip1 facilitates coﬁlin - mediated actin disassembly in vitro [ 21 – 23 ] , and mutations in Aip1 or perturbation of its function in cells lead to ectopic accumulation of F - actin [ 24 , 25 ] , defects in actin turnover dynamics [ 26 ] , suppression of ﬁlament elon - gation [ 27 ] , and depletion of the actin monomer pool that fuels actin assembly [ 28 ] . Thus , the in vitro and in vivo data are consistent with Aip1 playing a role in cytoskeletal organization by enhancing coﬁlin - mediated ﬁlament disassembly , but the underlying molecular mechanism is not yet known . The apparent ability of Aip1 to cap ﬁlament barbed ends led to a popular model in which Aip1 facilitates coﬁlin - mediated disassembly by preventing the reannealing of severed ﬁla - ments [ 21 , 29 , 30 ] . In this model , coﬁlin alone mediates severing , whereas Aip1 simply blocks the back reaction and does not alter the mechanism of ﬁlament destabilization . Aip1 is therefore thought to control actin ﬁlament dynamics in a manner similar to capping protein ( CapZ ) . CapZ is a * Correspondence : wbrieher @ illinois . edu well - characterized barbed - end binding protein that caps barbed ends with nanomolar afﬁnity thus preventing barbed - end growth or shrinkage [ 31 ] . This model was supported by the fact that CapZ and Aip1 exhibit strong genetic interactions in yeast where null mutations in both CapZ and Aip1 elicit a more severe disruption in actin organization than a null muta - tion for either gene alone [ 27 ] . However , CapZ cannot substi - tute for Aip1 to disassemble Listeria actin comet tails or single ﬁlaments in the presence of coﬁlin and coronin [ 32 ] . In order to test our hypothesis that Aip1 is responsible for the disassembly of ﬁlaments in the presence of stabilizing concentrations of coﬁlin , and to reinvestigate the existing model of Aip1 function , we used single - ﬁlament imaging of actin and ﬂuorescence resonance energy transfer ( FRET ) - based bulk actin depolymerization assays . Results Opposing Behavior of Recombinant Coﬁlin and Coﬁlin in Thymus Extract on Depolymerization of Single Filaments Previous work has shown that the amount of coﬁlin in thymo - cytes is high ( up to the order of 20 m M ) [ 17 ] . We conﬁrmed this result by quantitative western blotting and found the amount of coﬁlin in thymus extract to be 21 6 6 m M ( Fig - ure 1A ) . In our severing assays on single - actin ﬁlaments , we found that recombinant human coﬁlin severed actin most efﬁciently at 1 m M ( Figure 1B ) , whereas severing was inhibited at higher coﬁlin concentrations consistent with previous results [ 4 ] . In order to test if cellular extract can sever single ﬁlaments , bovine thymus extract was diluted so that the ﬁnal concentration of coﬁlin was 5 m M . At these concentrations , thymus extract is able to sever single - actin ﬁlaments ( Movie S1 available online ) , whereas an equimolar amount of re - combinant coﬁlin was unable to sever pure actin ﬁlaments efﬁciently ( Figure 1B , right panel , Figure 1C ) . Actin ﬁlament severing rates were in fact ten times faster in the presence of thymus cytosol than the fastest rates detected with pure coﬁlin alone . Aip1 Can Depolymerize Actin Filaments Even in the Presence of Saturating Amounts of Coﬁlin Previous work has shown that coronin increases coﬁlin loading on Listeria actin comet tails and stabilizes them . These ﬁlaments are destabilized by Aip1 [ 17 ] . Thus , Aip1 appeared to us as the most likely candidate for depolymerization of coﬁlin - saturated stabilized ﬁlaments and could possibly explain this behavior of extract . To test this , we imaged single ﬁlaments in the presence of saturating amounts of coﬁlin , in the pres - ence or absence of Aip1 . Actin ﬁlaments did not sever in the presence of 25 m M coﬁlin . As a control , we also tested severing in the presence of 25 m M coﬁlin and 100 nM capping protein ( CapZ ) ( Figure 2A , top panels ; Movie S2 ) and detected no severing events . However , ﬁlaments did sever in the presence of 25 nM Aip1 and 25 m M coﬁlin ( Figure 2A , bottom panels ; Movie S3 ) . Severing rates increased from zero events per micrometer per second in the presence of 25 m M coﬁlin to 0 . 006 events per micrometer per second in the presence of 25 nM Aip1 ( Figure 2B ) . This experiment provided us with the ﬁrst evidence that Aip1 and capping protein do not appear to act by the same mechanism . Aip1 Does Not Displace Coﬁlin to Promote Severing Coﬁlin - mediated severing involves the destabilization of lateral interfaces between coﬁlin - bound and unbound sec - tions of actin . Therefore , severing by Aip1 could operate by two mechanisms . Either Aip1 could be displacing coﬁlin from actin , thus creating additional unstable lateral interfaces and exploiting coﬁlin’s intrinsic ability to sever , or alternatively Aip1 could be potentiating severing by a different mechanism , but in cooperation with the bound coﬁlin . Figure 1 . Thymus Extract Is More Efﬁcient at Depolymerizing Single - Actin Filaments than a Normalized Amount of Recombinant Coﬁlin ( A ) Quantitative western blot showing standard amounts of recombinant coﬁlin ( 0 . 01 – 0 . 5 m g ) ( left lanes , increasing order ) and ﬁxed amounts of thymus extract . ( B ) Coﬁlin severs only across a narrow range of concentrations ( left graph ) , with activity peaking at approximately 1 m M . Thymus extract is roughly 10 - fold more effective at severing than the peak coﬁlin severing concentration ( right graph ) . Error bars represent SD . n = at least 2 movies . ( C ) Frames from time - lapse movies showing that , when normalized to a coﬁlin concentration of 5 m M , ﬁlaments are stable in the presence of pure coﬁlin ( top panel ) , whereas they are disassembled within 60 s with thymus extract ( bottom panel ) . Scale bar , 2 m M . Current Biology Vol 24 No 23 2750 In order to test if Aip1 displaced bound coﬁlin from actin ﬁlaments , we validated that our recombinant coﬁlin binds cooperatively to actin as demonstrated previously [ 9 ] ( Fig - ure 3A , inset ) . Next , we carried out competitive equilibrium binding assays on actin in the presence of a high initial occu - pancy of coﬁlin ( 3 m M , corresponding to binding density n cof > 0 . 9 ) and increasing concentrations of Aip1 ( Figure 3A ) . Aip1 did not affect pyrene ﬂuorescence by itself ( data not shown ) . As a control , we also carried out the experiment with a known competitive inhibitor of coﬁlin , phalloidin , as described pre - viously ( Figure 3B ) [ 18 ] . Concentrations of phalloidin as low as 0 . 25 m M displaced coﬁlin by w 20 % . Increasing concen - trations of phalloidin displaced coﬁlin from actin nearly completely . However , in the presence of Aip1 there appeared to be no displacement of coﬁlin at the concentrations at which we assayed its activity . There was little to no displacement even at 1 : 1 concentrations of Aip1 : coﬁlin ( Figure 3A ) . Thus , Aip1 does not displace coﬁlin from actin . If Aip1 were to compete with coﬁlin for binding to F - actin , then we would predict that Aip1 should inhibit severing when coﬁlin is present at the optimal concentration where severing rates are highest . In our assay , ﬁlaments severed fastest in the presence of 1 m M coﬁlin corresponding to n = 0 . 3 . Using this concentration of coﬁlin , we observed that severing rates increased with increasing concentrations of Aip1 ( Figure 3C ) . This is the opposite of what is expected if Aip1 functions by displacing coﬁlin . Aip1’s effect was seen even at extremely low ratios of Aip1 : coﬁlin with a roughly 4 - fold increase at 10 nM Aip1 . At equimolar concentrations of Aip1 : coﬁlin , severing rates were increased over ten times the maximal severing rates achieved by any concentration of coﬁlin alone despite the fact that Aip1 does not displace coﬁlin at these concentra - tions ( Figure 3A ) . The displacement hypothesis predicts that Aip1 will inhibit severing at coﬁlin binding densities of 0 . 5 or less and only accelerate severing at concentrations corresponding to n > 0 . 5 [ 18 ] . Therefore , to further test whether Aip1 enhances severing by displacing coﬁlin , we compared severing rates across a range of coﬁlin concentrations in the presence or absence of Aip1 . We observed that 10 nM Aip1 accelerated actin ﬁlament severing rates at all coﬁlin concentrations ( Fig - ure 3D ) . This result is inconsistent with Aip1 displacing coﬁlin from F - actin . Aip1 Accelerates Disassembly from the Barbed and Pointed Ends of Filaments We observed that ﬁlaments treated with Aip1 in the presence of saturating concentrations of coﬁlin appeared to depoly - merize rapidly suggesting that Aip1 also accelerates subunit loss from actin ﬁlament ends . In order to measure depolymer - ization rates from ends , ﬁlaments were immobilized to the coverslip with the actin bundling protein , ﬁlamin , unlike pre - vious experiments where the ﬁlaments were free ﬂoating and imaged in the presence of methylcellulose . In the presence of 2 m M coﬁlin and 0 . 2 m M Aip1 , ﬁlaments rapidly disassembled by shrinking from both barbed and pointed ends . Quantitation of depolymerization rates from barbed ends of polarity marked actin ﬁlaments revealed an average rate of eight to ten subunits per second in the pres - ence of 2 m M coﬁlin with or without 0 . 2 m M Aip1 ( Figure 4A , top panels , Figure 4B ; Movies S4 and S5 ) . Barbed ends of ﬁlaments in the presence of coﬁlin and CapZ , however , were stable , thus once again contradicting previous hypotheses that Aip1 acts in a manner similar to CapZ ( Figure 4A , bottom panel ) . We also measured the effects of increasing amounts of coﬁlin on depolymerization rates . In the presence of 0 . 2 m M Aip1 , barbed - end depolymerization rates increased from an average of ten subunits / second in the presence of 2 m M coﬁlin to 48 subunits / second in the presence of 10 m M coﬁlin ( Figures 4C and 4D ) . These results reveal a new function for Aip1 in accelerating coﬁlin - mediated barbed - end depolymerization rates anywhere from ﬁve to ten times those measured in the presence of coﬁlin alone . This is the opposite of what is expected of a high - afﬁnity barbed - end capping factor and the opposite of what is observed in the presence of CapZ . Aip1 - disassembled coﬁlin - actin ﬁlaments also have a higher pointed end depolymerization rate . Pointed ends depolymer - ized at a rate of approximately one subunit per second in the presence of 2 m M coﬁlin with or without 0 . 2 m M CapZ . In contrast , pointed ends depolymerized approximately four times faster on average in the presence of 2 m M coﬁlin and 0 . 2 m M Aip1 ( Figures 4E and 4F ) . We also observed a statistically signiﬁcant increase in severing rates in the presence of Aip1 and coﬁlin , but not CapZ and coﬁlin ( Figure S1 ) . On average , we also noticed that ﬁlament severing rates were w 2 - fold faster when the ﬁla - ments were bound to ﬁlamin than when they were ﬂoating Figure 2 . Aip1 Can Sever Filaments Saturated by Coﬁlin ( A ) Framesfromtime - lapsemoviesshowingthedynamicsofﬁlamentsinthepresenceofasaturatingamountofcoﬁlin + CapZ ( upperpanels ) orcoﬁlin + Aip1 ( lower panels ) . Filaments fragment in the presence of Aip1 only , not coﬁlin alone or coﬁlin + CapZ . ( B ) Quantitation of severing rates of ﬁlaments in the presence of saturating amounts of coﬁlin . No severing events were detected in the presence of 25 m M coﬁlin alone or coﬁlin + 100 nM CapZ . Severing rates increased with increasing concentrations of Aip1 ( n = 3 movies , error bars represent SD ) . Scale bar , 1 m M . Aip1 Destabilizes Coﬁlin - Saturated Filaments 2751 freely in solution ( compare Figure 1B to Figure S1B ) . The boost in severing rates could be the result of attachment of ﬁlaments along multiple points across their lengths , because this has been demonstrated to contribute to severing [ 33 ] . Aip1 and CapZ Have Differing Effects on Disassembly Rate and Critical Concentration There were multiple lines of evidence indicating that Aip1 was not acting as a barbed - end - capping factor and had additional biochemical roles distinct from CapZ . To further compare Aip1 and CapZ in actin disassembly , we sought to analyze changes in bulk actin polymer mass in the presence of high concentra - tions of coﬁlin . Changes in pyrene ﬂuorescence are a classic measure of the amount of actin polymer . However , pyrene - actin is quenched in the presence of coﬁlin and therefore cannot accurately report on polymer mass during coﬁlin - mediated disassembly [ 14 ] . We therefore used ﬂuorescence energy transfer ( FRET ) to measure the decrease in polymer mass in the presence of the depolymerizers . FRET has been used successfully in the past to measure actin polymerization [ 34 , 35 ] . We performed a number of controls to help validate the assay to measure F - actin in the presence of coﬁlin and those experiments are presented in Figure S2 . We ﬁrst examined the effect of coﬁlin alone on actin , using FRET . The addition of coﬁlin to 2 m M prepolymerized F - actin at pH 7 . 8 caused an initial decrease in FRET , representing a decrease in polymer mass , in a dose - dependent manner over 25 min ( Figure 5A ) . This is consistent with the fact that coﬁlin binds to the newly dissociated ADP actin monomers with an afﬁnity of 150 nM and suppresses ADP to ATP ex - change [ 36 , 37 ] . We used FRET to compare the disassembly characteristics of coﬁlin - actin in the presence of capping protein versus Aip1 ( Figure 5B ) . In the presence of coﬁlin and Aip1 , actin polymer mass decayed roughly six times faster but to the same extent as it did in the presence of coﬁlin alone . This indicated that Aip1 was accelerating the rate of actin depolymerization in conjunction with coﬁlin . However , in the presence of coﬁlin and CapZ , actin polymer mass decayed more slowly than in the presence of Aip1 , but it was converted nearly completely to monomer over a period of 25 min . Thus , CapZ appeared to affect the extent , but not the rate of actin depolymerization in the presence of coﬁlin , unlike Aip1 . Next , we tested the effects of Aip1 and CapZ on actin critical concentration ( Cc ) in the presence of coﬁlin by FRET . The concentration of actin at which we ﬁrst begin to see polymer - ization signiﬁes the critical concentration of actin . Using this approach , we estimate the Cc for pure actin to be 0 . 2 m M ( Fig - ure S3 ) , which is in agreement with previous measurements [ 38 ] . Addition of 1 m M coﬁlin increased the critical concen - tration to between 0 . 3 – 0 . 4 m M ( Figure 5C ) . We conclude that coﬁlin has only a modest effect on the critical concentration , which is consistent with previous results [ 4 ] . We measured the Cc of actin in the presence of 1 m M coﬁlin and 0 . 1 m M Aip1 and found it to be nearly identical to that in the presence of coﬁlin alone ( Cc = 0 . 36 m M in 1 m M coﬁlin alone versus Cc = 0 . 33 m M in the presence of 1 m M coﬁlin and 0 . 1 m M Aip1 ) ( Fig - ure 5C ) . Similarly , treatment of actin with CapZ alone had only a modest effect on Cc ( Figure S3 ) . However , the combination of 1 m M coﬁlin and 0 . 1 m M CapZ raised the critical concentra - tion more than 5 - fold relative to that of pure actin to 1 . 7 m M ( Figure 5D ) , which is the pointed end critical concentration for ADP - actin [ 38 ] . This is consistent with the barbed ends being capped by CapZ and ADP - G - actin in a high - afﬁnity complex with coﬁlin . Therefore , CapZ affects the critical con - centration to a greater extent than Aip1 , and the two proteins are not functionally redundant . Aip1 Does Not Cap Filament Barbed Ends Differences in kinetics of coﬁlin - mediated depolymerization in the presence of Aip1 versus CapZ and coﬁlin as well as differ - ences in the critical concentrations prompted us to directly reinvestigate whether or not Aip1 caps barbed ends . An estab - lished assay for barbed - end capping is the inability of capped barbed ends to seed new actin polymerization . New actin monomer adds to the barbed ends of pre - existing short actin ﬁlament seeds thus shortening the lag phase of polymeri - zation . Filaments with occluded barbed ends such as those bound by CapZ will not be able to reduce the lag phase of new actin assembly . When products of the disassembly reac - tions were used to seed new actin polymerization , F - actin seeds enhanced the initial rate of polymerization ( Figure 6A , yellow line ) , and coﬁlin - actin ﬁlaments seeded polymerization even more efﬁciently due to a large number of free severed ends . As expected , CapZ - bound seeds were unable to enhance the rate of actin polymerization ( black line ) . However , ﬁlaments depolymerized by coﬁlin and Aip1 seeded actin Figure 3 . Aip1 Does Not Displace Coﬁlin from F - Actin to Sever ( A ) 2 m M ﬂuorescent pyrene - actin was treated with 3 m M coﬁlin correspond - ing to v cof > 0 . 9 and increasing concentrations of Aip1 at pH 6 . 8 to assay competitive binding by equilibrium ﬂuorescence titration experiments . The graph was normalized to amount of polymer monitored by a FRET assay . Aip1 does not compete for binding by coﬁlin , as shown by a linear ﬁtofthedata . Wecarriedoutabindingassaytomonitorcooperativebinding of coﬁlin to ﬂuorescently labeled pyrene actin in order to select the concen - tration used for graph ( A ) ( inset ) . ( B ) Phalloidin , a known competitive inhibitor of actin , can displace coﬁlin from actin . ( C ) To validate our results from ( A ) , we measured severing rates of actin in the presence of 1 m M coﬁlin that , in our single - ﬁlament assays , showed maximal severing rates . Adding increasing amounts of Aip1 caused a consistent increase in severing rate . At equimolar coﬁlin to Aip1 ratios , the rate exceeded ten times that obtained by coﬁlin alone . ( D ) Aip1 boosts severing across a wide range of coﬁlin - actin ratios , even when it is present in substoichiometric quantities ( roughly 1 , 000 times less than the coﬁlin concentrations ) . Error bars represent SD , and data from at least two movies were used to compute severing rates . Current Biology Vol 24 No 23 2752 assembly as efﬁciently as the coﬁlin - actin seeding mixture ( blue and pink lines ) . Thus , Aip1 does not form a high - afﬁnity cap on actin ﬁlaments . Additionally , the presence of increasing amounts of Aip1 in the presence of a ﬁxed concentration of coﬁlin increased the number of pre - existing short ﬁlament seeds , consistent with Aip1’s ability to increase severing rates in the presence of coﬁlin as seen by light microscopy ( Figure 6B ) . We used single - ﬁlament imaging to further test whether Aip1 mediates coﬁlin dependent barbed - end capping . Fluo - rescently labeled Oregon green 488 - actin ﬁlaments were polymerized on a bed of ﬁlamin in a perfusion chamber , and ﬁlaments were allowed to elongate by addition of Alexa 647 G - actin monomer , in the presence of 0 . 15 m M coﬁlin and 0 . 2 m M of either Aip1 or CapZ ( Figures 6C and 6D ) . Unlike CapZ , Aip1 did not inhibit elongation of preformed actin ﬁlaments at the level of single - actin ﬁlaments . Therefore , Aip1 does not suppress barbed - end growth even when it is continuously present at high concentrations along with coﬁlin . Discussion We found that thymus extracts rapidly sever and disassemble single - actin ﬁlaments despite having coﬁlin concentrations that are too high to sever actin ﬁlaments in pure solution . We demonstrated that fast actin disassembly in the presence of saturating coﬁlin can be attributed to , at least in part , Aip1 but not to Capping Protein , and our analysis further revealed that Aip1 alters the characteristics of coﬁlin - mediated ﬁlament disassembly , whereas capping protein does not . Previous results proposed that Aip1 caps barbed ends with a high afﬁnity and would therefore be functionally redundant with Capping Protein [ 26 ] . We found , however , that Aip1 does not prevent growth of ﬁlament ends , and ﬁlaments shrink at accelerated rates in the presence of Aip1 , which is the oppo - site of what we would predict if the ﬁlaments were capped . In addition , Aip1 had little to no effect on the critical concentra - tion , whereas CapZ did . Our results are therefore inconsistent with Aip1 forming a stable cap that effectively terminates barbed - end actin dynamics . Rather , our results are more consistent with models proposing that Aip1’s side binding and not its end binding is more important for severing coﬁlin - decorated ﬁlaments [ 22 , 39 ] to create more ﬁlament ends that can grow or shrink . Interestingly though , small quantities of Aip1 show a strong effect on severing coﬁlin - actin ﬁlaments as observed by microscopy but a more modest effect on creating new barbed ends when assayed with bulk ﬁlament polymerization assays . Aip1 might possess the ability to create some unconventional ends that are transiently resistant to growth , as posited in previous work [ 32 ] . Although Aip1 and CapZ are biochemically distinct , they show strong genetic interactions in yeast , playing critical roles in the assembly and morphogenesis of Arp2 / 3 - derived actin arrays by maintaining a pool of actin subunits available for assembly [ 27 ] . CapZ can help maintain a pool of assembly competent actin by suppressing nonproductive barbed - end elongation and funneling actin monomer toward Arp2 / 3 Figure4 . Aip1IncreasesRateofSubunitDissoci - ation from Barbed and Pointed Ends ( A ) Frames and resultant kymographs from a time - lapse movie of polarity marked actin ﬁla - ments ( small letters b [ barbed ] and p [ pointed ] indicate orientation of ends ) showing ﬁlaments shrinking from the barbed end in the presence of coﬁlin 6 Aip1 , but not inthe presence of CapZ . ( B ) Quantitation of ﬁlament depolymerization rates from ( A ) . Filaments shrink at an average of eight to ten subunits in the presence or absence of Aip1 . Black line represents median of observations , n = at least three movies in each scenario , dots represent individual events . Mean , SD indicated . ( C ) Kymographs of polarity marked actin ﬁla - ments disassembled in the presence of 5 and 10 m M coﬁlin and 200 nM Aip1 . ( D ) Quantitation of rates from ( C ) for the barbed end shows barbed - end dissociation rates roughly doubling ( from 10 to 25 to 40 ) subunits per second for each two times increase in coﬁlin concentration . Enhanced barbed - end disas - sembly is coﬁlin dependent . ( E ) Frames from a time - lapse movie showing ﬁla - ments shrinking from the pointed end after a severing event ( white arrowhead ) and resultant kymographs . Theseindicatethatﬁlaments depo - lymerize at increasing rates from the pointed end in the presence of 200 nM Aip1 . ( F ) Quantitation of rates from ( E ) shows a roughly four times increase in subunit dissociation rate from one to ﬁve subunits per second in the pres - ence of Aip1 , but not in the presence of coﬁlin or CapZ . Scale bar , 1 m m . Aip1 Destabilizes Coﬁlin - Saturated Filaments 2753 nucleation sites [ 40 ] . Given our results , Aip1 might help maintain a pool of assembly - competent actin by triggering fast depolymerization of coﬁlin - F - actin . Thus , we propose that Aip1 and CapZ genetically complement one another through distinct mechanisms . Coﬁlin binding to F - actin disrupts lateral interactions be - tween actin subunits [ 41 ] . However , stretches of actin polymer saturated with coﬁlin are stable [ 4 , 10 ] because coﬁlin has two actin binding sites allowing it to bridge two longitudinal sub - units in the ﬁlament [ 8 , 42 , 43 ] . Severing therefore occurs at junctions between decorated and undecorated polymer [ 12 ] explaining why severing is maximal at intermediate levels of coﬁlin occupancy [ 4 , 12 , 18 ] . We found that Aip1 does not displace coﬁlin from F - actin and promotes actin ﬁlament disassembly at all coﬁlin occupancies . Our results imply that it is the sites of actin polymer occupied by coﬁlin themselves that are destabilized by Aip1 ( Figure 7 ) . This model is con - sistent with yeast two hybrid , binding and modeling data supporting that Aip1 forms a ternary complex with F - actin and coﬁlin [ 22 , 44 , 45 ] . Mutagenesis and modeling studies on Aip1 demonstrate that Aip1 contacts coﬁlin while bridging two contiguous actin subunits in the ﬁlament [ 44 ] . Therefore , we can consider two alternative mechanisms through which Aip1 could promote coﬁlin - mediated severing and subunit dissociation . In the ﬁrst , Aip1 binding to coﬁlin occupied polymer might disrupt coﬁlin’s stabilizing interaction with the adjacent actin subunit to cause severing . Mutations in coﬁlin that compromise its F - actin - speciﬁc binding interaction increase severing [ 46 ] , and the Aip1 and coﬁlin binding sites on actin would appear to overlap [ 22 , 45 ] making this an attractive model . However , studies with coﬁlin and Aip1 from C . elegans have shown that the ability of Aip1 to enhance actin disassembly requires coﬁlin’s F - actin binding site [ 47 ] . An alternative possibility then is that Aip1 further distorts actin structure in the presence of coﬁlin to promote severing and increase subunit dissociation rates from ﬁlament ends . It has been hypothesized that a slow isom - erization step follows coﬁlin binding [ 48 ] . If this proposed conformational change were coupled to severing , we could speculate that Aip1 catalyzes the transition between the two states to destabilize the ﬁlament . Recent work on coﬁlin from Plasmodium falciparum shows that it contacts a novel binding site on F - actin to sever ﬁlaments without decorating the Figure 5 . CapZ and Aip1 Have Differing Effects on the Rates and Extents of Coﬁlin - Mediated Disassembly ( A ) Increasing concentrations of coﬁlin cause an initial disassembly of actin inadose - dependentmanner . PrepolymerizedF - actin ( 2 m M ) wasmixedwith varying amounts of coﬁlin , and the ﬂuorescence of Oregon green actin was measured over time . The decrease in FRET represents loss in polymer mass . ( B ) CapZ and Aip1 depolymerize actin at differing rates and to different extents . Prepolymerized actin was treated with 2 m M coﬁlin 6 0 . 2 m M Aip1 or CapZ . Actin depolymerizes initially in the presence of coﬁlin alone as described ( blue line ) . In the presence of Aip1 ( pink line ) , the reaction proceeds roughly six times faster , but to the same extent as coﬁlin alone . CapZ ( 0 . 2 m M ) causes the reaction to proceed at roughly the same rate as coﬁlin alone but almost completely to monomer . ( C and D ) FRET assays to determine the critical concentration ( Cc ) of actin asafunctionofcoﬁlin , CapZ , orAip1 . Fluorescenceintensityinthepresence of polymerizing and nonpolymerizing conditions was measured at various actin concentrations and the equation [ E ] = Emax * [ ( actin 2 Cc ) / actin ] was used to ﬁt the data . The x - intercept represents the critical concentration . In ( C ) , the dark - gray lineshows the condition actin + coﬁlin , and , inthe pres - ence of 1 m M coﬁlin alone , the critical concentration was only moderately raised ( from 0 . 2 to 0 . 36 ) . The addition of 0 . 1 m M Aip1 ( light gray ) did not signiﬁcantly affect the critical concentration ; however , ( D ) the addition of 0 . 1 m M CapZ to coﬁlin raised the critical concentration over 5 - fold to 1 . 73 m M . Thus , Aip1 and CapZ have differing effects on actin critical con - centration in the presence of coﬁlin . See also Figure S3 . Figure 6 . Aip1 Does Not Cap Filament Ends ( A ) Aip1 does not inhibit seeding of pyrene actin polymerization . Actin ﬁla - ments were mixed with 2 m M coﬁlin 6 0 . 2 m M Aip1 or CapZ for 15 min , andthen0 . 25 m Mtotalactinwasusedtoseedpolymerizationof2 m Mpyrene actin . Although the lag phase of unseeded actin is long ( green line ) , actin seeds shorten the lag phase of polymerization ( yellow line ) . Coﬁlin creates many severed ends that seed polymerization more efﬁciently , whereas Aip1 does not inhibit this reaction ( blue and pink lines ) . CapZ , however , inhibits the seeding reaction ( black line ) . ( B ) Increasing amounts of Aip1 in the presence of coﬁlin produce more ﬁlament seeds for elongation . Filaments depolymerized in the presence of 20 , 40 , and 100 nM Aip1 ( yellow , blue , and pink lines , respectively ) and ( a ﬁxed amount ) of coﬁlin show enhanced seeding as compared to coﬁlin alone seeds ( green line ) . ( C ) Oregon green 488 actin ﬁlaments elongate with Alexa 647 G - actin even in the continuous presence of 150 nM coﬁlin and 200 nM Aip1 ( right panel ) ; however , the presence of 200 nM CapZ inhibits this reaction ( left panel ) . Scale bar , 2 m m . ( D ) Quantitation of the relative numbers of elongating ends in the presence of actin alone or actin and 150 nM Coﬁlin 6 200 nM CapZ or Aip1 . Current Biology Vol 24 No 23 2754 polymer as human coﬁlin does [ 49 ] . Thus , multiple coﬁlin binding modes might permit multiple modes of ﬁlament disassembly , and it is tempting to speculate that Aip1 alters ﬁlament structure or induces a conformational change in coﬁlin allowing mammalian coﬁlin to access the novel P . falciparum binding site to destabilize the polymer . Our results demonstrating that the combination of Aip1 and coﬁlin accelerate actin subunit dissociation rates offers one possible mechanism for attaining faster depolymerization rates in vivo . Aip1 therefore offers a potential control point to switch coﬁlin action from one that favors actin assembly [ 4 , 50 ] to one that favors fast depolymerization . Other factors in addition to Aip1 facilitate coﬁlin - mediated actin disas - sembly . It will be important to re - examine each of these auxil - iary factors to test if they , like Aip1 , alter the mechanism of ﬁlament disassembly . Experimental Procedures Full experimental procedures are available in the Supplemental Experi - mental Procedures . Imaging of Actin Single Filaments Single - actin ﬁlaments were prepolymerized , ﬂowed into perfusion cham - bers , and imaged in solution ( Figures 1 , 2 , and 3 ) or polymerized in the chamber and attached to coverslips via ﬁlamin ( Figures 4 and 6 ) . Relevant combinations depolymerizers were ﬂowed into the perfusion chamber , and ﬁlaments were imaged in a buffer containing oxygen scavengers ( 1 3 PhotoBuffer ) . Severing events were enumerated as the number of visual breaks per second normalized to the amount of polymer measured in micrometers . Depolymerization rates were calculated from kymographs generated us - ing Fiji software . ElongationofpolymerizedOregongreenactinﬁlamentswascarriedoutin thepresenceof2 m MmonomericAlexa647actin , 150nMcoﬁlin , and200nM of either CapZ or Aip1 for 60 s . This was compared to a control with actin alone . Fluorescence Equilibrium Binding and Competition Assays Quenching of pyrene ﬂuorescence was used to quantify coﬁlin binding to F - actin in the presence or absence of phalloidin or Aip1 as described previ - ously [ 9 , 18 ] . FRETwasusedtonormalizefortheamountofpolymerpresent at various concentrations of Aip1 . Measurement of FRET Twelve percent to 15 % labeled Oregon green actin and 35 % – 40 % tetrame - thylrhodamine actin were premixed at 20 m M in G buffer ( pH 7 . 4 ) . F - buffer ( 1 3 ) was added to initiate polymerization . Spectroscopic monitoring of ﬂuorescence quenching of OG488 ( l Ex = 490 nm , l Em = 530 nm ) over time was used to report on assembly . For disassembly reactions , actin was prepolymerized and combinations of depolymerizers were added to ﬁnal concentrations of 2 m M coﬁlin , 0 . 2 m M Aip1 , or 0 . 2 m M CapZ . Fluorescence ofOregongreenactinwasmonitoredasmentioned . Depolymerizationleads todequenchingofOG488ﬂuorescence . Normalizedreadingswereobtained by using Origin graphing software . Measurement of Critical Concentration using FRET F - actin was prepolymerized at 10 m M and diluted to the desired concentra - tions in 1 3 F - buffer , in the presence of the indicated concentrations of the depolymerizers . Reactions were allowed to incubate overnight ( 12 hr ) before reading . This was compared to equimolar actin concentrations where there was no FRET . Data were converted to E values as described previously by using the equation E = 1 2 ( F DA / F D ) [ 51 ] . Readings were ﬁt to the equation E * [ actin ] = E max * [ actin ] 2 E max * Cc as described previously [ 51 ] . Seeding Reaction with Actin Pyrene Actin ﬁlaments treated with or without coﬁlin and increasing concentrations of Aip1 for 10 ( Figure 6A ) and 2 min ( Figure 6B ) were added to a solution of 2 m M pyrene labeled G - actin . The ﬁnal concentration of F - actin seeds was 0 . 25 ( Figure 6A ) and 0 . 5 m M ( Figure 6B ) , and the ﬁnal coﬁlin concen - tration was 100 nM ( Figure 6B ) . Final Aip1 concentrations are provided in the main text . Supplemental Information Supplemental Information includes Supplemental Experimental Proce - dures , three ﬁgures , and ﬁve movies and can be found with this article online at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2014 . 09 . 048 . Acknowledgements Spectroscopic studies were carried out at the Roy J . Carver Biotechnology Center ( UIUC ) . We thank Hui - Chia Yu and Kieran Normoyle for the puriﬁca - tion of CapZ , ActA , and ﬁlamin . We also thank the members of W . M . B . ’s lab for their valuable input , and Karthik Murali for math - related discussions . This work was supported by NIH grant R01 - GM106106 to W . M . B . Received : January 7 , 2014 Revised : August 28 , 2014 Accepted : September 16 , 2014 Published : November 6 , 2014 References 1 . Ono , S . ( 2007 ) . Mechanism of depolymerization and severing of actin ﬁlaments and its signiﬁcance in cytoskeletal dynamics . Int . Rev . Cytol . 258 , 1 – 82 . 2 . Lappalainen , P . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 1997 ) . Coﬁlin promotes rapid actin ﬁlament turnover in vivo . Nature 388 , 78 – 82 . 3 . Bravo - Cordero , J . J . , Magalhaes , M . A . , Eddy , R . J . , Hodgson , L . , and Condeelis , J . ( 2013 ) . Functions ofcoﬁlinincelllocomotion andinvasion . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 14 , 405 – 415 . Figure 7 . Model Representing Mode of Aip1 Action on Coﬁlin - Actin Filaments ( A ) Coﬁlin alone binds to the ﬁlament and alters the angular conﬁguration of actin protomers within the polymer lattice . Severing is caused due to unstable heterotypic junctions between coﬁlin - bound and unbound regions on the actin ﬁlament . ( B ) Aip1 preferentially binds stretches of actin polymer occupied with coﬁlin leading to enhanced severing and faster disassembly from both barbed and pointed ends . ( C ) In the presence of Aip1 , coﬁlin - saturated ﬁlaments are no longer stable and can be desta - bilized . Aip1 Destabilizes Coﬁlin - Saturated Filaments 2755 4 . Andrianantoandro , E . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2006 ) . Mechanism of actin ﬁla - ment turnover by severing and nucleation at different concentrations of ADF / coﬁlin . Mol . Cell 24 , 13 – 23 . 5 . Chen , Q . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2011 ) . Actin ﬁlament severing by coﬁlin is more important for assembly than constriction of the cytokinetic contractile ring . J . Cell Biol . 195 , 485 – 498 . 6 . Ono , S . , Baillie , D . L . , and Benian , G . M . ( 1999 ) . UNC - 60B , an ADF / coﬁlin family protein , is required for proper assembly of actin into myoﬁbrils in Caenorhabditis elegans body wall muscle . J . Cell Biol . 145 , 491 – 502 . 7 . Moriyama , K . , and Yahara , I . ( 1999 ) . Two activities of coﬁlin , severing and accelerating directional depolymerization of actin ﬁlaments , are affected differentially by mutations around the actin - binding helix . EMBO J . 18 , 6752 – 6761 . 8 . Hayden , S . M . , Miller , P . S . , Brauweiler , A . , and Bamburg , J . R . ( 1993 ) . Analysis of the interactions of actin depolymerizing factor with G - and F - actin . Biochemistry 32 , 9994 – 10004 . 9 . De La Cruz , E . M . ( 2005 ) . Coﬁlin binding to muscle and non - muscle actin ﬁlaments : isoform - dependent cooperative interactions . J . Mol . Biol . 346 , 557 – 564 . 10 . McGough , A . , Pope , B . , Chiu , W . , and Weeds , A . ( 1997 ) . Coﬁlin changes thetwist ofF - actin : implications foractinﬁlamentdynamics andcellular function . J . Cell Biol . 138 , 771 – 781 . 11 . De La Cruz , E . M . ( 2009 ) . How coﬁlin severs an actin ﬁlament . Biophys . Rev . 1 , 51 – 59 . 12 . Suarez , C . , Roland , J . , Boujemaa - Paterski , R . , Kang , H . , McCullough , B . R . , Reymann , A . C . , Gue´rin , C . , Martiel , J . L . , De la Cruz , E . M . , and Blanchoin , L . ( 2011 ) . Coﬁlin tunes the nucleotide state of actin ﬁlaments and severs at bare and decorated segment boundaries . Curr . Biol . 21 , 862 – 868 . 13 . Rosenblatt , J . , Agnew , B . J . , Abe , H . , Bamburg , J . R . , and Mitchison , T . J . ( 1997 ) . Xenopusactindepolymerizingfactor / coﬁlin ( XAC ) isresponsible fortheturnoverofactinﬁlamentsinListeriamonocytogenestails . J . Cell Biol . 136 , 1323 – 1332 . 14 . Carlier , M . F . , Laurent , V . , Santolini , J . , Melki , R . , Didry , D . , Xia , G . X . , Hong , Y . , Chua , N . H . , and Pantaloni , D . ( 1997 ) . Actin depolymerizing factor ( ADF / coﬁlin ) enhances the rate of ﬁlament turnover : implication in actin - based motility . J . Cell Biol . 136 , 1307 – 1322 . 15 . Sirotkin , V . , Berro , J . , Macmillan , K . , Zhao , L . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2010 ) . Quantitativeanalysisofthemechanismofendocyticactinpatchassem - bly and disassembly in ﬁssion yeast . Mol . Biol . Cell 21 , 2894 – 2904 . 16 . Berro , J . , Sirotkin , V . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2010 ) . Mathematical modeling of endocytic actin patch kinetics in ﬁssion yeast : disassembly requires release of actin ﬁlament fragments . Mol . Biol . Cell 21 , 2905 – 2915 . 17 . Brieher , W . M . , Kueh , H . Y . , Ballif , B . A . , and Mitchison , T . J . ( 2006 ) . Rapid actin monomer - insensitive depolymerization of Listeria actin comet tails by coﬁlin , coronin , and Aip1 . J . Cell Biol . 175 , 315 – 324 . 18 . Elam , W . A . , Kang , H . , and De La Cruz , E . M . ( 2013 ) . Competitive displacement of coﬁlin can promote actin ﬁlament severing . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 438 , 728 – 731 . 19 . Normoyle , K . P . M . , and Brieher , W . M . ( 2012 ) . Cyclase - associated pro - tein ( CAP ) acts directly on F - actin to accelerate coﬁlin - mediated actin severing across the range of physiological pH . J . Biol . Chem . 287 , 35722 – 35732 . 20 . Mohri , K . , Vorobiev , S . , Fedorov , A . A . , Almo , S . C . , and Ono , S . ( 2004 ) . Identiﬁcation of functional residues on Caenorhabditis elegans actin - interacting protein 1 ( UNC - 78 ) for disassembly of actin depolymerizing factor / coﬁlin - bound actin ﬁlaments . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 31697 – 31707 . 21 . Ono , S . , Mohri , K . , and Ono , K . ( 2004 ) . Microscopic evidence that actin - interactingprotein1activelydisassemblesactin - depolymerizingfactor / Coﬁlin - bound actin ﬁlaments . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 14207 – 14212 . 22 . Rodal , A . A . , Tetreault , J . W . , Lappalainen , P . , Drubin , D . G . , and Amberg , D . C . ( 1999 ) . Aip1p interacts with coﬁlin to disassemble actin ﬁlaments . J . Cell Biol . 145 , 1251 – 1264 . 23 . Okada , K . , Obinata , T . , andAbe , H . ( 1999 ) . XAIP1 : aXenopushomologue ofyeastactininteractingprotein1 ( AIP1 ) , whichinducesdisassemblyof actinﬁlamentscooperativelywithADF / coﬁlinfamilyproteins . J . CellSci . 112 ( Pt 10 ) , 1553 – 1565 . 24 . Ren , N . , Charlton , J . , and Adler , P . N . ( 2007 ) . The ﬂare gene , which encodes the AIP1 protein of Drosophila , functions to regulate F - actin disassembly in pupal epidermal cells . Genetics 176 , 2223 – 2234 . 25 . Kato , A . , Kurita , S . , Hayashi , A . , Kaji , N . , Ohashi , K . , and Mizuno , K . ( 2008 ) . Critical roles of actin - interacting protein 1 in cytokinesis and chemotactic migration of mammalian cells . Biochem . J . 414 , 261 – 270 . 26 . Ono , S . ( 2003 ) . Regulation of actin ﬁlament dynamics by actin depoly - merizing factor / coﬁlin and actin - interacting protein 1 : new blades for twisted ﬁlaments . Biochemistry 42 , 13363 – 13370 . 27 . Michelot , A . , Grassart , A . , Okreglak , V . , Costanzo , M . , Boone , C . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 2013 ) . Article actin ﬁlament elongation is controlled by three distinct mechanisms . Dev . Cell 24 , 182 – 195 . 28 . Okreglak , V . , andDrubin , D . G . ( 2010 ) . LossofAip1revealsaroleinmain - taining the actin monomer pool and an in vivo oligomer assembly pathway . J . Cell Biol . 188 , 769 – 777 . 29 . Okada , K . , Blanchoin , L . , Abe , H . , Chen , H . , Pollard , T . D . , and Bamburg , J . R . ( 2002 ) . Xenopusactin - interactingprotein1 ( XAip1 ) enhancescoﬁlin fragmentationofﬁlamentsbycappingﬁlamentends . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 43011 – 43016 . 30 . Okada , K . , Ravi , H . , Smith , E . M . , andGoode , B . L . ( 2006 ) . Aip1andcoﬁlin promote rapid turnover of yeast actin patches and cables : a coordi - nated mechanism for severing and capping ﬁlaments . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 2855 – 2868 . 31 . Wear , M . A . , Yamashita , A . , Kim , K . , Mae´da , Y . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2003 ) . How capping protein binds the barbed end of the actin ﬁlament . Curr . Biol . 13 , 1531 – 1537 . 32 . Kueh , H . Y . , Charras , G . T . , Mitchison , T . J . , and Brieher , W . M . ( 2008 ) . Actin disassembly by coﬁlin , coronin , and Aip1 occurs in bursts and is inhibited by barbed - end cappers . J . Cell Biol . 182 , 341 – 353 . 33 . Pavlov , D . , Muhlrad , A . , Cooper , J . , Wear , M . , and Reisler , E . ( 2007 ) . Actin ﬁlament severing by coﬁlin . J . Mol . Biol . 365 , 1350 – 1358 . 34 . Wang , Y . L . , and Taylor , D . L . ( 1981 ) . Probing the dynamic equilibrium of actin polymerization by ﬂuorescence energy transfer . Cell 27 , 429 – 436 . 35 . Taylor , D . L . , Reidler , J . , Spudich , J . A . , and Stryer , L . ( 1981 ) . Detection of actin assembly by ﬂuorescence energy transfer . J . Cell Biol . 89 , 362 – 367 . 36 . Blanchoin , L . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 1998 ) . Interaction of actin monomers with Acanthamoeba actophorin ( ADF / coﬁlin ) and proﬁlin . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 25106 – 25111 . 37 . Ressad , F . , Didry , D . , Xia , G . X . , Hong , Y . , Chua , N . H . , Pantaloni , D . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 1998 ) . Kinetic analysis of the interaction of actin - depoly - merizing factor ( ADF ) / coﬁlin with G - and F - actins . Comparison of plant and human ADFs and effect of phosphorylation . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 20894 – 20902 . 38 . Howard , J . ( 2001 ) . Mechanics of Motor Proteins and the Cytoskeleton , 1st ed . ( Sunderland : Sinaeur Associates ) . 39 . Shi , M . , Xie , Y . , Zheng , Y . , Wang , J . , Su , Y . , Yang , Q . , and Huang , S . ( 2012 ) . Oryzasativaactin - interactingprotein1isrequiredforricegrowth by promoting actin turnover . Plant J . 73 , 747 – 760 . 40 . Akin , O . , and Mullins , R . D . ( 2008 ) . Capping protein increases the rate of actin - based motility by promoting ﬁlament nucleation by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Cell 133 , 841 – 851 . 41 . McCullough , B . R . , Grintsevich , E . E . , Chen , C . K . , Kang , H . , Hutchison , A . L . , Henn , A . , Cao , W . , Suarez , C . , Martiel , J . - L . , Blanchoin , L . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Coﬁlin - linked changes in actin ﬁlament ﬂexibility promote severing . Biophys . J . 101 , 151 – 159 . 42 . Lappalainen , P . , Fedorov , E . V . , Fedorov , A . A . , Almo , S . C . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 1997 ) . Essential functions and actin - binding surfaces of yeast coﬁlin revealed by systematic mutagenesis . EMBO J . 16 , 5520 – 5530 . 43 . Pope , B . J . , Gonsior , S . M . , Yeoh , S . , McGough , A . , and Weeds , A . G . ( 2000 ) . Uncouplingactinﬁlamentfragmentationbycoﬁlinfromincreased subunit turnover . J . Mol . Biol . 298 , 649 – 661 . 44 . Clark , M . G . , Teply , J . , Haarer , B . K . , Viggiano , S . C . , Sept , D . , and Amberg , D . C . ( 2006 ) . A genetic dissection of Aip1p’s interactions leads to a model for Aip1p - coﬁlin cooperative activities . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 1971 – 1984 . 45 . Clark , M . G . , andAmberg , D . C . ( 2007 ) . Biochemicalandgeneticanalyses provide insight into the structural and mechanistic properties of actin ﬁlament disassembly by the Aip1p coﬁlin complex in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Genetics 176 , 1527 – 1539 . 46 . Ono , S . , McGough , A . , Pope , B . J . , Tolbert , V . T . , Bui , A . , Pohl , J . , Benian , G . M . , Gernert , K . M . , and Weeds , A . G . ( 2001 ) . The C - terminal tail of UNC - 60B ( actin depolymerizing factor / coﬁlin ) is critical for maintaining its stable association with F - actin and is implicated in the second actin - binding site . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 5952 – 5958 . 47 . Mohri , K . , and Ono , S . ( 2003 ) . Actin ﬁlament disassembling activity of Caenorhabditis elegans actin - interacting protein 1 ( UNC - 78 ) is depen - dent on ﬁlament binding by a speciﬁc ADF / coﬁlin isoform . J . Cell Sci . 116 , 4107 – 4118 . Current Biology Vol 24 No 23 2756 48 . De La Cruz , E . M . , and Sept , D . ( 2010 ) . The kinetics of cooperative coﬁlin binding reveals two states of the coﬁlin - actin ﬁlament . Biophys . J . 98 , 1893 – 1901 . 49 . Wong , W . , Webb , A . I . , Olshina , M . A . , Infusini , G . , Tan , Y . H . , Hanssen , E . , Catimel , B . , Suarez , C . , Condron , M . , Angrisano , F . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Amechanism for actin ﬁlament severingby malariaparasite actin depo - lymerizingfactor1viaalowafﬁnitybindinginterface . J . Biol . Chem . 289 , 4043 – 4054 . 50 . Ghosh , M . , Song , X . , Mouneimne , G . , Sidani , M . , Lawrence , D . S . , and Condeelis , J . S . ( 2004 ) . Coﬁlin promotes actin polymerization and de - ﬁnes the direction of cell motility . Science 304 , 743 – 746 . 51 . Bugyi , B . , Papp , G . , Hild , G . , Lo˜rinczy , D . , Nevalainen , E . M . , Lappalainen , P . , Somogyi , B . , and Nyitrai , M . ( 2006 ) . Formins regulate actin ﬁlament ﬂexibility through long range allosteric interactions . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 10727 – 10736 . Aip1 Destabilizes Coﬁlin - Saturated Filaments 2757