BOOK AND SOFTWARE NOTES Structured abstracts of information on newly published books , computer programs , selected Web sites , and other material are provided in this portion of Medical Writings . “Order phone” numbers can be used to place orders directly with publishers . Sorting Things Out : Classiﬁcation and Its Consequences Bowker GC and Star SL . 389 pages . Cambridge , MA , and London : MIT Pr ; 1999 . $ 29 . 95 . ISBN 0262024616 . Order phone 800 - 356 - 0343 . Field of medicine : Public health and medical informatics . Format : Hardcover book ( softcover also available ) . Audience : Physicians and nonphysicians involved in developing or setting policy for classiﬁcation systems , nomenclatures , or vocabular - ies . Purpose : To discuss the idea that classiﬁcations and standardiza - tions have direct impact on social and political aspects of human interaction . Content : The authors organize their presentation into an introduc - tory chapter that frames the issues , followed by three sections ( clas - siﬁcation and large - scale infrastructures , classiﬁcation and biography , and classiﬁcation and work practice ) providing speciﬁc examples , and a conclusion section . The authors use the International Classi - ﬁcation of Diseases , 9th revision , race classiﬁcation under apartheid in South Africa , and the Nursing Intervention Classiﬁcation as pri - mary examples . An extensive bibliography of more than 300 refer - ences , a name index , and a subject index follow the text . Highlights : The authors present fascinating history and insights into the development of various classiﬁcation systems . In addition , they identify issues that arise during the creation of any classiﬁcation system , such as the need to compromise between providing granular classiﬁcations that satisfy needs speciﬁc to a time and place . Finally , the authors draw attention to the implications of choices made in the development of some important classiﬁcation systems . These impli - cations bear on moral judgments , ﬁnancial effects , and political gains or losses . Limitations : The authors’ writing style hinder the reader’s ability to access the interesting information and to understand the implica - tions of choices made in developing classiﬁcation systems . While the overall organization of the book is clear , the themes and ideas do not ﬂow well . Sentences require repeated readings , and a dictionary at your side would be helpful , given the authors’ frequent use of unfa - miliar words . These failings obscure interesting and valuable facts and viewpoints . Related readings : Svenonius’ The Intellectual Foun - dation of Information Organization ( MIT Pr ; 2000 ) and Aitchison and colleagues’ Thesaurus Construction and Use : A Practical Manual ( Fitzroy Dearborn ; 2000 ) . Reviewers : J . Marc Overhage , MD , PhD , and Jeffery G . Suico , MD , Regenstrief Institute for Health Care and Indiana University School of Medicine , Indianapolis , IN . Redi - Reference Clinical Guidelines Handbook Skolnik NS . Redi - Reference ; 2000 . Initial subscription price , $ 19 . 95 ; annual fee for updates . Order at www . redi - reference . com . Field of medicine : General medicine . Format : Personal digital assistant ( PDA ) software package includes Redi - Reference Clinical Guidelines Handbook - PDA application , PC desktop version , and Redi - Reference document reader . System re - quirements : Handheld computer using Palm operating system with 120 Kb of available memory . Accessing the PC version requires any Web browser . Audience : Health care providers who use a handheld computer and are interested in evidence - based practice guidelines . Purpose : To provide general medical reference and practice guide - lines at the point of care . Content : The program includes 31 practice guidelines with sup - porting references . Each guideline contains background , disease clas - siﬁcation , and recommendations for evaluation and management . Topics include cardiology , endocrinology , infectious diseases , neu - rology , psychiatry , and pulmonology . Usability : This downloadable program is easy to install and uses very little memory capacity . The guidelines are well formatted and easy to read . Hyperlinked text is underlined , allowing users to “jump” to the section they desire , and the search function ﬁnds any keyword in the Handbook . The editors use accepted guidelines from nationally recognized organizations , including the American College of Chest Physicians and the National Heart , Lung , and Blood Insti - tute . Highlights : The Clinical Guidelines Handbook is a powerful tool for bringing evidence - based medicine to the point of care . The port - ability of the PDA allows the user to review complicated treatment guidelines ( such as the Adult Treatment Panel III Cholesterol Risk Assessment calculations ) anywhere . Many common inpatient and outpatient topics are covered , and most offer enough detailed evi - dence to improve physicians’ practice . Limitations : Some less detailed guidelines , such as those for otitis media and allergic rhinitis , may not offer enough beneﬁt for the time needed to access the PDA . Guidelines on some important topics are not yet available in the Handbook , such as low back pain , myocardial infarction , and cancer screening recommendations . Related products : Other Redi - Reference Handbooks include Cardiology , Infectious Diseases , and Obstetrics for Primary Care Physi - cians . Another useful PDA tool from Redi - Reference , Biweekly Clin - ical Update , reviews clinically important primary care literature . Reviewer : Thomas Balsbaugh , MD , University of California , Davis , Sacramento , California . Medical Writings 934 © 2001 American College of Physicians – American Society of Internal Medicine