Developmental Cell 13 Supplemental Data Numb Controls Integrin Endocytosis for Directional Cell Migration with aPKC and PAR - 3 Takashi Nishimura and Kozo Kaibuchi Supplemental Experimental Procedures Materials and Chemicals The cDNA encoding Numb and anti - Numb polyclonal antibody ( PRR / 3 ) were obtained as described previously ( Nishimura et al . , 2003 ) . The anti - Numb peptide antibody ( 92425 ) was kindly provided from Drs . A . Tokunaga and H . Okano ( Keio University , Japan ) and was described ( Nishimura et al . , 2006 ) . Anti - pS7 - Numb polyclonal antibody was raised against the peptide corresponding to 1 – 12 aa residues with phospho - Ser - 7 ( Biologica ) and was affinity purified against the respective phosphopeptide . The cDNAs encoding PAR - 3 , aPKC λ , and PAR - 6 were kindly provided from Dr . S . Ohno ( Yokohama City University , Japan ) and were described previously ( Nishimura et al . , 2005 ) . The cDNA encoding zyxin was kindly provided by Dr . H . Saya ( Kumamoto University , Japan ) . The cDNA encoding full - length clathrin - light - chain was cloned from a human fetal brain cDNA library ( Clontech Laboratories ) . Polyclonal anti - PAR - 3 ( 1N and 4N / 3S ) and anti - GST antibodies were produced as described ( Nishimura et al . , 2005 ) . Polyclonal anti - aPKC ζ antibody was from Santa Cruz Biotechnology . Monoclonal anti - aPKC λ antibody , monoclonal anti - integrin - β 1 , monoclonal anti - FAK , monoclonal anti - EEA1 , and monoclonal anti - paxillin antibodies were from BD Biosciences . Polyclonal anti - GFP antiserum was from Molecular Probes . Monoclonal anti - GFP antibody was from Roche . Monoclonal anti - α - adaptin antibody was from Oncogene Research Products . Monoclonal anti - integrin - β 1 and polyclonal anti - integrin - β 3 antibodies were from Chemicon . Monoclonal anti - vinculin , monoclonal anti - α - actinin , monoclonal anti - α - tubulin , and monoclonal anti - talin antibodies were from Sigma . Alexa 488 - , Alexa 594 - , and Alexa 647 - conjugated secondary antibodies against mouse or rabbit IgG or phalloidin were from Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories . Other materials and chemicals were obtained from commercial sources . Plasmid Constructs and Protein Purification cDNA fragments were amplified by PCR and subcloned into pGEX ( Amersham Pharmacia Biotech ) , pCAGGS - myc , and pEGFP ( Clontech Laboratories ) vectors , respectively . Point mutations of Numb were generated by PCR - based site - directed mutagenesis . All fragments were confirmed by DNA sequencing . GST - fusion proteins were produced in BL21 ( DE3 ) cells and purified on glutathione - Sepharose 4B beads ( Amersham ) . Coimmunoprecipitation Experiment Rat brain ( P6 and P7 ) or HeLa cells were extracted by the addition of lysis buffer ( 20 mM Tris / HCl , 1 mM EDTA , 150 mM NaCl , 50 µ g / ml PMSF , 10 µ g / ml leupeptin , 1 . 0 % NP - 40 , pH 7 . 4 ) and then clarified by centrifugation at 100 , 000 × g for 30 min at 4°C . The soluble supernatants were incubated with the indicated antibodies for 1 h at 4°C . The immunocomplexes were then precipitated with protein A - Sepharose 4B ( Amersham ) , washed three times with lysis buffer , eluted by boiling in sample buffer for SDS - PAGE , and then subjected to immunoblot analysis with the indicated antibodies . In Vitro Binding Assay GST - Numb deletion mutants were separately immobilized onto glutathione - Sepharose 4B beads ( Amersham ) . The immobilized beads were incubated with rat brain or HeLa cell lysate in lysis buffer for 1 h at 4°C . The beads were washed five times and then suspended in SDS - PAGE sampling buffer . The bound proteins were subjected to an immunoblot analysis with the indicated antibodies . In Vitro Kinase Assay The reaction was carried out in a 50 - µ l assay mixture containing 20 mM Tris - HCl ( pH 7 . 4 ) , 5 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM EGTA , 1 mM DTT , 50 ng recombinant aPKC ζ ( Calbiochem ) , 10 µ M ATP , 0 . 4 µ Ci [ γ - P 32 ] ATP , and 0 . 4 µ M purified GST - Numb fragment for 30 min at 30°C . The reaction was stopped by the addition of SDS sample buffer , and the products were subjected to SDS - PAGE , followed by a silver staining . The radiolabeled bands were visualized by an image analyzer ( Fuji , Japan ) . Alternatively , assay mixture were incubated with glutathione - Sepharose beads and then mixed with rat brain lysate as described above for 1 h at 4°C . Bound proteins were eluted with SDS sample buffer . Supplemental References Nishimura , T . , Yamaguchi , T . , Kato , K . , Yoshizawa , M . , Nabeshima , Y . , Ohno , S . , Hoshino , M . , and Kaibuchi , K . ( 2005 ) . PAR - 6 - PAR - 3 mediates Cdc42 - induced Rac activation through the Rac GEFs STEF / Tiam1 . Nat . Cell Biol . 7 , 270 – 277 . Nishimura , T . , Yamaguchi , T . , Tokunaga , A . , Hara , A . , Hamaguchi , T . , Kato , K . , Iwamatsu , A . , Okano , H . , and Kaibuchi , K . ( 2006 ) . Role of Numb in dendritic spine development with a Cdc42 GEF intersectin and EphB2 . Mol . Biol . Cell . 17 , 1273 – 1285 . Figure S1 . Efficacy of siRNAs and Specificity of Antibodies ( A - C ) Protein knockdown in HeLa cells . HeLa cells were transfected with each siRNA and fixed at 3 days after transfection . Cells were stained with anti - Numb ( A ) , anti - α - adaptin ( B ) , or anti - clathrin - heavy - chain ( C ) antibodies . Phase contrast ( right ) and fluorescent images ( left ) are presented . The left two panels show control cells transfected with siScramble , and the right two panels are enlarged images containing nonsuppressing ( nontransfected ) cells of the middle two panels , as indicated by arrows . Asterisks indicate nuclear staining of the anti - Numb antibody . Bar , 50 µ m . As judged by immunostaining and immunoblotting ( Figure 1F of the main text ) , the knockdown efficiency of each siRNA in HeLa cells was over 95 % . Of note , knockdown of µ 2 - adaptin caused the suppression of the heterotetrameric AP - 2 complex themselves , probably due to the instability of the remaining subunits ( Motley et al . , 2003 ) . Thus , punctate staining of α - adaptin was significantly reduced in cells over 95 % in immunostaining ( B ) , whereas the suppression of α - adaptin was not complete in immunoblotting ( Figure 1F ) due to the indirect effect of µ 2 - adaptin knockdown . ( D ) Localization of Numb as revealed by a different anti - Numb antibody . HeLa cells were fixed and stained with anti - Numb peptide ( green ) and anti - α - adaptin ( red ) antibodies and phalloidin ( blue ) . The x - z images along with the line in the picture are shown . Bar , 10 µ m . Anti - Numb peptide antibody ( 92425 ) was raised against a peptide corresponding to the 20 C - terminal residues of mouse Numb . Anti - Numb peptide antibody stained punctate structures that were well colocalized with α - adaptin and preferentially distributed at the substratum - facing surface , like anti - Numb PRR / 3 antibody ( Figure 1A of the main text ) . These punctate structures and immunoreactive bands were strongly reduced by knockdown of Numb by siRNA ( data not shown ) . Of note , there are two Numb homologue in mammals , Numb and Numb - like . Although the anti - Numb antibodies used here react equally with both Numb and Numb - like ( unpublished data ; Nishimura et al . , 2006 ) , both immunoreactive bands and punctate staining were strongly reduced upon knockdown of Numb in several cell lines ( data not shown ) , indicating that HeLa , Vero , and ECV304 cells mainly express Numb , but not Numb - like . Figure S2 . Localization of GFP - Fused Numb Mutants ( A , B ) Entire cell images , shown in Figure 1D and Figure 6D of the main text , are displayed . Vero cells transfected with the indicated constructs ( green ) were fixed and stained with anti - α - adaptin antibody ( red ) and phalloidin ( blue ) . The enlarged images in the boxed area ( including a2 ) are shown in the main text . Essentially similar results were observed in HeLa and ECV304 cells ( data not shown ) . Of note , GFP - Numb - full - S7D and GFP - Numb - full - 2D weakly localized to CCSs ( data not shown ) , suggesting that these phosphorylation sites synergistically affect its subcellular localization . ( C ) Clathrin is not required for punctate localization of Numb , although individual signals are slightly reduced . HeLa cells were transfected with clathrin siRNA . Three days after transfection , cells were fixed and stained with the indicated antibodies . Essentially similar results were observed in Vero cells ( data not shown ) . Asterisks indicate the knockdown cells by clathrin siRNA . ( D ) Localization of GFP - Numb - full and GFP - Numb - full - 3A in living HeLa cells . Living HeLa cells transfected with the indicated constructs were directly observed . The x - z images along with the line in the picture are shown ( bottom ) . GFP - Numb - full localized at the substratum - facing surface and diffusely in cytoplasm . GFP - Numb - full - 3A localized to CCSs at both apical and basal surface . Bars , 10 µ m . Figure S3 . Polarized Localization of Numb toward Leading Edge ( A ) Numb localization becomes polarized coincidently with directional migration after wounding in ECV304 cells . Confluent ECV304 cells were scratched for a wound - healing assay , fixed at the indicated time periods , and stained with anti - Numb ( red ) and anti - α - adaptin ( green ) antibodies and phalloidin ( blue ) . Images represent single confocal sections at the substratum - facing surface . The x - z images along with the lines are shown on the bottom . Bar , 10 µ m . ( B ) Quantitative analysis of Numb distribution in directionally migrating ECV304 cells after wounding , shown in ( A ) . Cells were equally divided into five regions from front to back as a function of the direction of cell migration and the fluorescent intensity of Numb and α - adaptin at the basal surface per area were measured simultaneously . Data represents mean and SEM of 25 cells at each time point . Numb became polarized toward the leading edge 4 h after wounding more markedly than α - adaptin , whereas Numb was mainly distributed at the center of cells shortly after wounding and in confluent conditions ( data not shown ) . ( C ) Numb polarizes toward the leading edge in randomly migrating Vero cells . Vero cells were stained with anti - Numb ( red ) and anti - α - adaptin ( green , left ) or anti - EEA1 ( green , right ) antibodies and phalloidin ( blue ) . Insets are enlarged images of the boxed area . Numb colocalized with α - adaptin , but not with EEA1 , an early endosome marker . Bar , 5 µ m . ( D ) Quantitative analysis of Numb distribution in randomly migrating Vero cells and ECV304 cells . Vero cells and ECV304 cells were seeded on coverslips at a low density , fixed at 20 h after seeding , and stained with anti - Numb and anti - α - adaptin antibody and phalloidin . Fluorescent intensity of Numb and α - adaptin at the basal surface per area were evaluated simultaneously . Data represents mean and SEM of 25 randomly migrating cells with an apparent leading edge , as judged by its morphology and phalloidin staining . Quantitative analysis indicated that Numb polarizes toward the leading edge as compared with α - adaptin . Figure S4 . Localization and Functions of Numb ( A ) Numb localizes around focal adhesions in HeLa cells . HeLa cells stably expressing GFP - zyxin or GFP - clathrin - light - chain were treated with cytochalasin - D or nocodazole for 2 h , fixed , and stained with the indicated antibodies , respectively . Images represent single confocal sections at the substratum - facing surface . The enlarged images in the boxed area are shown on the bottom . Top panels represent endogenous Numb , and bottom panels represent α - adaptin or GFP - clathrin - light - chain . Treatment with cytochalasin - D caused the mislocalization of Numb to almost all α - adaptin - or GFP - clathrin - light - chain - positive CCSs at the substratum - facing surface irrespective of the position of remaining adhesions . Treatment with nocodazole caused the accumulation of Numb around adhesion sites among α - adaptin - or GFP - clathrin - light - chain - positive CCSs , which were present throughout the plasma membrane irrespective of the position of adhesions at the cell peripheries . Bars , 10 µ m . ( B ) Numb controls integrin endocytosis . HeLa cells transfected with siNumb were mixed with control HeLa cells and then reseeded on PDL - coated coverslips , followed by internalization assay with anti - integrin - β 1 antibody . Cells were stained with anti - Numb antibody ( red ) and phalloidin ( green ) . Images represent projection views of several confocal sections that covered the middle and bottom regions of cells . Arrows indicate HeLa cells expressing Numb . Bar , 20 µ m . Of note , there was no clear difference regarding surface integrin staining between control and Numb - suppressing cells . The total amount of internalized integrin may be little as compared with those at the cell surface under these conditions . ( C ) Time - course analysis of cell spreading . HeLa cells transfected with the indicated siRNA were replated on fibronectin - coated coverslips and fixed at the indicated time periods . Essentially similar results were obtained on collagen - coated slips ( data not shown ) . Figure S5 . aPKC Controls Function and Localization of Numb by Phosphorylation ( A ) Coimmunoprecipitation of Numb and the PAR complex . Extract of developing rat brain was incubated with rabbit IgG , anti - Numb , anti - PAR - 3 , and anti - aPKC antibodies . The immunoprecipitates were analyzed by immunoblotting with the indicated antibodies . ( B ) Direct interaction of Numb with PAR - 3 . GST - protein immobilized beads were incubated with purified MBP - PAR - 3 fragments . Bound proteins were eluted by the addition of SDS sample buffer and analyzed by immunoblotting with anti - MBP antibody . GST - Numb - PTB specifically bound to MBP - PAR - 3 - 4N . ( C ) Characterization of phospho - specific anti - pS7 - Numb antibody in vitro . Purified GST - Numb mutants were incubated with recombinant aPKC ζ in the presence or absence of ATP in vitro . The reactions were analyzed by immunoblotting with anti - pS7 - Numb or anti - GST - antibodies . ( D ) Characterization of phospho - specific anti - pS7 - Numb antibody in vivo . COS7 cell lysate expressing myc - aPKC and GFP - Numb constructs were analyzed by immunoblotting with anti - pS7 - Numb or anti - GFP - antibodies . aPKC - WT induced the phosphorylation level of Numb , whereas aPKC - kinase - dead ( KD ) reduced it below the basal level . ( E ) Phospho - mimic mutant of Numb ( Numb - full - 3D ) reduces binding affinity to integrin - β s , aPKC , and PAR - 3 . GST - protein immobilized beads were incubated with rat brain lysate . Bound proteins were analyzed by immunoblotting with the indicated antibodies . ( F ) Quantification of phosphorylated Numb after wounding , shown in Figure 6H of the main text . The ratio of phospho - Numb to total Numb is shown . Data represent mean and SD of three independent experiments . Knockdown of aPKC did not completely abolish the Numb phosphorylation ( also see Figure 6B of the main text ) . We cannot neglect the possibility that residual amounts of aPKC are sufficient to induce Numb phosphorylation or another kinase ( s ) phosphorylates Numb at the same sites . In addition , it is possible that aPKC indirectly controls the phosphorylation level of Numb via another kinase ( s ) and / or phosphatase ( s ) . Figure S6 . PAR - 3 and aPKC Knockdown Inhibit Integrin Endocytosis and Cell Migration ( A ) PAR - 3 and aPKC knockdown inhibit integrin endocytosis . Experimental conditions were the same as shown in Figure 4A . Internalized integrin - β 1 and F - actin are shown in red and blue , respectively . Bar , 10 µ m . ( B ) Quantitative analysis of the internalized integrin - β 1 shown in ( A ) . Relatively weak defects of PAR - 3 and aPKC knockdown could be due to the fact that Numb is negatively regulated by aPKC phosphorylation . Of note , PAR - 3 and aPKC knockdown did not affect transferrin endocytosis ( data not shown ) , indicating that the defects are specific to the Numb - dependent pathway . ( C ) Suppression of PAR - 3 and aPKC impairs integrin - stimulated cell migration . Experimental conditions were the same as shown in Figure 4E . HeLa cells were transfected with the indicated siRNA , and the Boyden chamber migration assay toward poly - D - lysin ( PDL ) , fibronectin ( FN ) , or collagen ( Col ) was performed . Asterisks indicate a significant difference ( P < 0 . 01 ) from the value of control siScramble transfected cells . Figure S7 . Behavior of GFP - Numb in Living HeLa Cells ( A ) Time - lapse observations were performed in HeLa cells transfected with GFP - Numb - full . Images were taken with an LSM510 confocal microscope with Plan - Apo 1 . 40 NA 63 × oil immersion objective ( Zeiss ) at 15 - sec intervals . Low - magnification image of single confocal section is shown on the left . Selected images at the indicated times showed that individual GFP - Numb - full puncta at the substratum - facing surface appeared ( blue arrows ) , disappeared ( yellow arrowheads ) , or appeared and then disappeared ( red arrowheads ) . Similar dynamics were observed in Vero cells ( data not shown ) . ( B ) Behavior of GFP - Numb - full - 3A . Images of B1 and B2 represent cells with relatively high and intermediate expression levels , respectively . Many individual puncta of GFP - Numb - full - 3A at the substratum - facing surface were persistent throughout the observations , unlike GFP - Numb - full , while some small puncta appeared and disappeared . Essentially similar behavior was observed in Vero cells ( data not shown ) . Bars , 10 µ m .