In J Sch Cogn Psychol DOI : 10 . 35248 / 2329 - 8901 . 19 . 7 . 215 Effect of Conceptual Metaphors on Memory : A Preliminary Study on the Visual and Auditory Recalling Fatemeh Shafiei Ph . D . student of Cognitive Sciences of Language . Institute of cognitive science studies , Iran Abstract I n this study , we examined the relationship between conceptual metaphor and recalling . For this purpose , 3 metaphorical and 3 equiv - alent non - metaphorical short texts were produced in 2 visual and auditory versions and 47 participants were exposed to the short - term and long - term recalling immediately after reading / listening to the texts and one week later . Results indicated that in some cases it is metaphorical one that has been recalled better than its non - metaphorical equivalent in both short - term memory and long - term memo - ry . This finding can be interpreted as an evidence of the possible facilitative role of conceptual metaphors in memorization . KEYWORDS : Conceptual metaphor , recalling , visual memory , auditory memory . INTRODUCTION The nature of metaphor , metaphoric understanding , and its functions have been recognized as three main issues in research and theoretical formulations on metaphor and metaphor processing ( Allbritton , 1995 ) . In general , metaphor is defined as understanding and experiencing one thing based on another ( Lakoff and Johnson , 1980 / 2003 : 5 ) . Metaphor can also be considered as an expression that has two conceptual domains in which one of the domains is experienced and understood according to the other ( Gentner , 1988 ; Gibbs , 1979 ; Ortony , 1979 ) . These two conceptual domains are known as target domain and source domain ( Gentner and Holyoak , 1997 ) . Target domain refers to the domain that involves the main expression and source domain refers to the domain that is used for explaining the main expression . In the expression “Iron Willed” ( in Persian Language ) , “iron” is the source domain and “will” is the target domain . In this compound , some properties of iron such as strength , stability , and inflexibility are attributed to willed , and we conclude that a strong and invincible phenomenon in a person is being discussed ( “He is an iron willed” ) . Usually , it is said that in metaphorical expression , the element which has a more specific , familiar , and better - known concept ( such as iron ) transfers a relevant part of its meaning to another element which is seemingly less known and may not be directly accessible ( such as will or willed ) . Ob - viously , except strength and stability , iron has other properties which are not transferred to the concept of will and it is believed that these properties are inhibited ( Ghassemzadeh , 2006 ) . Metaphors have different cognitive and communicative functions and they can provide a compressed , memorable , and also under - standable format for expressing many concepts and thoughts that may not be easily expressed in direct verbal expression . In an almost a comprehensive definition , Leary ( 1990 ) defines metaphor as assigning a name to something or proposing a description for something in such a manner that the name or description arbitrarily or commonly belongs to something else ( cited in Ghassemzadeh , 2013 : 10 ) . In another definition , Vosniadou and Ortony ( 1983 ) define metaphors as analogies that allow us to express an experience based on other experiences and as a result , to achieve an understanding of complex issues or new situations . Although metaphor goes beyond its components , words as psycholinguistic units play an important role in metaphoric understand - ing . Therefore , structural unit of metaphor can be considered as “word” . Accordingly , metaphor is a tool and format of psycholinguis - tics and its main mechanism is formed based on polysemy ( Carroll , 1964 ) . As stated by Miller ( 1979 ) , D’Andrade ( 1989 ) , and Luria ( 1981 ) , only rarely do words have just one meaning . Actually , it is the texture of discourse that selects a special meaning or meanings out of a set of probable and / or possible meanings and makes the speaker’s meaning clear . In fact , it can be said that metaphor is formed based on the great capacity of the word as a concept , and it is encoded as a network in the memory ( Ghassemzadeh , 2013 : 24 - 26 ) . From a cognitive perspective , Lakoff and Johnson ( 1980 ) consider metaphor as a cognitive phenomenon and they believe that meta - Correspondence to : Fatemeh Shafiei , Department of Educatinal Psychology , Institute of cognitive science studies , Iran . Email : ireri . anthony @ ku . ac . ke Received : January 12 , 2021 ; Accepted : February 19 , 2021 ; Published : March 08 , 2021 Citation : Fatemeh Shafiei1 ( 2021 ) Effect of Conceptual Metaphors on Memory : A Preliminary Study on the Visual and Auditory Recalling . In J Sch Cogn Psychol . DOI : 10 . 35248 / 2329 - 8901 . 19 . 7 . 215 Copyright : © 2021 Fatemeh Shafiei , et al . This is an open - access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribu - tion License , which permits unrestricted use , distribution , and reproduction in any medium , provided the original author and source are credited . International Journal of School and Cognitive Psychology In J Sch Cogn Psychol DOI : 10 . 35248 / 2329 - 8901 . 19 . 7 . 215 International Journal of School and Cognitive Psychology phors are conceptual in nature . They suggest that metaphor flows in our daily life , not only in our language , but also in the way we think and act ; and our usual conceptual system in which we think and act has a fundamentally metaphorical nature . Regarding the theoretical foundations that have been proposed about metaphor over the past few decades , it seems that metaphor has a very important role in memory and memorization processes . Metaphor comprehension involves forming an abstract connection between two concepts in se - mantic memory ( Glucksberg , 2001 , 2003 ) . Such a link or attributive category , is established by extracting and relating similar properties of different concepts in memory ( Benedek , et al . , 2014 ) . Memory for metaphors has been thought to depend on a number of different attributes such as metaphoricity , imagery , similarity between source and target domains , aesthetic quality , and comprehensibility ( Mc - Cabe , 1988 ) . Gibbs ( 1980 ) argued that the greater memorability of metaphorical sentences may stem from the fact that such sentences are an unconventional use of language ( Gibbs , 1980 ) . In spite of the high importance of metaphorical functions in cognitive activities in general , and in memory and memorization spe - cifically , there are not many studies dedicated to investigating this matter . Only studies conducted by Reynolds and Schwartz ( 1983 ) , Allbritton , Mckoon , and Gerrig ( 1995 ) can be named so far . Allbriton , Mckoon , and Gerrig ( 1995 ) raised an issue in their study under the title of “Metaphor - based schemas” which refers to a schema which is created as a result of a conceptual metaphor in the text . In their study , they presented the subjects forty short texts , half of which had conceptual metaphors , and the other half had the literal equiva - lents . They concluded that at the time of remembering and recognizing the text with conceptual metaphors , metaphor - based schemas are automatically provoked in people’s mind , causing them to better remember and recognize the text ( Allbritton , Mckoon , and Gerrig , 1995 ) . In a coherent research , Reynolds and Schwartz ( 1983 ) investigated the relationship between metaphorical processing , perception , and memory . In their study , adults read eight short stories first , after which they evaluated the quality , effectiveness , and metaphorical aspects of the narratives . Half of those stories ended with a metaphorical conclusion and the other half ended with the literal equivalent of the metaphorical conclusion in the first group . Then , the stories were presented to the subjects as small booklets . When they read the text fully , they were given a memorization and recognition test immediately after and once two weeks later . The results of this study suggested that the texts with metaphorical conclusion were easier to memorize . Furthermore , Reynolds and Schwartz ( 1983 ) concluded from data analysis that not only the metaphorical conclusions have been memorized better than their literal equivalents , but more de - tails of each text had been memorized , as well . The foregoing study was done in the framework of an educational approach ( Reynolds and Schwarz , 1983 ) . T o summarize , as Reynolds and Schwartz ( 1983 ) believe that , metaphors are necessary building blocks of language in that they allow ideas that were previously inexpressible to be expressed , frequently in a vivid , compact form . It is further supposed that the vividness of metaphors , along with the way in which they are comprehended , tends to enhance the memorability of metaphors themselves , as well as that of the information that appears with the help of metaphors ( Reynolds and Schwartz 1983 : 452 ) . Following this direction , the main aim of the present study is to establish metaphor as a topic worthy of discussion in memory studies and to draw out some of its implication for the future studies . In fact , by considering the theoretical foundations of conceptual metaphor on the one hand , and memory - related studies on the other , this preliminary study , which may be considered the first one in the Persian language , is planned to find a possible connection between metaphor and memory , using short metaphorical texts . In addition , this study is intended to survey the way in which texts are presented , i . e . the visual or auditory format . Memory recall has been considered in many studies . The investigations have involved short - term memory , long - term memory , as well as different mediums , including auditory and visual process - ing ( Linder , et al , 2009 ) . The findings of the studies mainly indicate that recall is affected by the medium the information is presented ( Pickering , et al , 1998 ) . In some studies , it is auditory learning which leads to better short - term memory while visual learning results in better long - term memory ( Watkins and Peynircioglu , 1986 ) . Whereas in some other , the results indicate that overall , visual learning leads to better scores in both the immediate and delayed posttest conditions ( Linder , et al , 2009 ) . According to these researches ` results , it seems that medium by which words or texts are run is important to be considered too . Method The main goal of the study is the comparison of memorization of short metaphorical texts and memorization of the same short text in a non - metaphorical narrative . For this purpose , memorization of both metaphorical and non - metaphorical short texts is tested . Participants The sample was selected through convenience sampling which included 80 twenty to twenty - five - year - old students of Foreign Languages School and Management School of Allameh Tabatabai University in Tehran . Since variations in memory capacity can affect the test results , they were given a Persian word recognition test to ensure relative consistency among all participants’ memory capacity ( Jarollahi , 2012 ) . For this purpose , the students were divided into two 40 - subject groups . Word recognition test was visually illustrated for one of the groups and for the other group it was presented as audio . The subjects getting the mean and standard deviation score of ±2 were selected for the main study and those getting a higher or lower score were excluded . At the end , 25 subjects including 15 female and 10 male students were selected for the visual task and 22 people including 13 female and 9 male students were selected for the auditory task . We designed and performed the task in both visual and auditory forms in order to see if there is any difference between the visual and auditory processing of conceptual metaphors . Moreover , it seems that in real life people are exposed to the auditory forms of conceptual metaphors in conversations more than reading them in texts . In J Sch Cogn Psychol DOI : 10 . 35248 / 2329 - 8901 . 19 . 7 . 215 International Journal of School and Cognitive Psychology Stimuli ( tasks ) T he main tools of the study were the texts written in fluent Persian and divided into two categories of metaphorical texts and their equivalent non - metaphorical versions . Both texts have had a shared schema . Furthermore , the number of words were equal in both texts . For the purpose of providing such tasks , the following steps were taken : A . Writing the texts based on some of the metaphors existing in the book Metaphors We Live by ( Lakoff and Johnson , 1980 ) , that seemed to be common in Persian judged by the judgments of the researchers . B . Writing non - metaphorical texts equivalent to the written metaphorical texts . In writing the primary version of the texts , re - searchers tried to keep the number of words equal in both texts having the common schemas . C . Validation of the metaphorical / non - metaphorical versions by Persian speakers . For this purpose , a Likert table was prepared with the scores of 1 to 5 and each of them was assigned a score of 100 to 500 . These scores were considered separately for each text . After explaining the conceptual metaphor for the audience , they were asked to assign a higher score to the text which was more metaphorical according to their idea , and assign the lower scores to the texts with lower metaphorical theme . For achieving the optimal result based on the scores of below 150 for non - metaphorical texts , and the scores of above 400 for metaphorical texts , the process of validation started in three stages by 58 Persian speakers . After each stage , researchers made some changes in the texts and tested them again in order to come up with a satisfying outcome . At the end , the texts that did not get the optimal score were excluded from the study and 4 metaphorical texts and their equivalent 4 non - metaphorical texts were selected as the main task . Then , in order to ensure accuracy of the schema selected by the researchers , the schema of non - metaphorical texts was also evaluated and the speakers were asked to write a main theme they judge appropriate for each text . According to the obtained results , the schemas of 3 texts out of the 4 presented texts were consistent with the schemas selected by the researchers and there were inconsistencies in one of the texts which was eliminated from the study . In order to prevent systematic errors , some texts were added as fillers . Procedure In order to compare memorization of short metaphorical texts and their corresponding short non - metaphorical texts , subjects’ short - term and long - term memory were measured in relation to the presented text immediately and two weeks after the task . After presenting / playing each text , subjects were asked to write down whatever they remember from the presented text . This method was repeated without any changes regarding subjects and texts . After two weeks , participants were asked to write every sentence of any text they recall on the google form that they were provided . The test used in this study was designed by PsychoPy software . Before this stage , the testing tool was performed in a pilot study in order to evaluate its function and to work on its deficiencies . After doing the pilot study and making some necessary changes as well as validating the test , the task was designed in the visual version of PsychoPy software . Then , another pilot study was carried out in order to evaluate the test’s function within the software and overcome its probable inconsistencies . For the second part of the task ( the assessment of the long - term memory when memorizing metaphorical and non - metaphorical texts ) a google questionnaire form was prepared in which participants were asked to write down what they read or heard two weeks before the performance of first stage of experiment . This form was sent to the participants two weeks after the task performance through email . This study was performed in three stages . The first stage was done to select the subjects making sure of their relative consistency in terms of their ability to memorize texts . In this stage , word recognition test was performed in groups and in two groups of visual and auditory where 10 one - syllable words were presented consecutively and each one for 2 seconds on the screen in the visual group , and by 60 - db speaker in the auditory group . Before performing the test , some sheets were distributed among the subjects containing a table of the 10 presented words and 15 additional one - syllable words . The subjects were asked to write some necessary information includ - ing their name and surname , phone number , gender , age , semester , and commencement year , and their major areas . Before the test , the procedure was explained for the subjects and they were asked to return the sheets after the end of presentation of the words , write down their identities , and then , tick the words that they thought to have heard or seen . The second stage of the study which was done after selecting the participants included comparing memorization of the metaphorical short texts and memorization of the equivalent non - metaphorical short texts in visual and auditory short - term memory . This stage was completed , through previous arrangements at Foreign Languages and literature School of Allameh Tabatabai University in the presence of the researcher and each of the subjects indi - vidually . Distractions such as loud sounds , unnecessary traffic , and presence of other people in the room were prevented where possible . Visual test was given using R542UR Asus VivoBook laptop with a 15 . 5 - inch screen , full HD , and resolution of 1920 * 1080 pixels . Also , the subjects were seated about 40 centimeters from the computer . However , this distance could change upon the participant’s request . In the auditory test , the same laptop was used with a Beats Studio headphone with the frequency response of 20 Hz to 20 kHz and wire connection with the cable length of 3 . 1 meters and intensity of 60 - 70 db . In the visual test , the texts and words were displayed on a screen with white background , using B Roya Persian font of size 28 . In the auditory test , the texts were played on a headphone with the sound intensity of 60 - 70 db . Finally , in the third stage which participants completed at home , a google questionnaire form was sent to them in which they were asked to write whatever they could remember from the texts they exposed to them two weeks before . The participants did not have to write exactly what they read or heard . Instead , they could have recited the theme . Before performing the test , the researcher insured subjects that no personal information would be treated as data and what was important was the total score without considering individual scores . Then , the method and stages of the work were fully explained for them . The test started when the subjects declared to be ready and pushed a button on their keyboard . First a text was presented on the screen for 25 seconds ( in the In J Sch Cogn Psychol DOI : 10 . 35248 / 2329 - 8901 . 19 . 7 . 215 International Journal of School and Cognitive Psychology previous studies , this time was dependent on the length of the text and the study goal . In this study , this duration was determined in a pilot test ) . After that , a blank white page appeared for 10 seconds and then , a message appeared on the screen which led the subjects to push a button for starting the next test whenever they were ready , i . e . when they were done with writing the sentences for the previous text . There were eight texts including 3 metaphorical and 3 non - metaphorical ones plus 2 texts that were used as filler texts which were excluded from the final analyses . The texts were organized in such a manner that the metaphorical text played before its corresponding non - metaphorical text with an interval . At the next round , the non - metaphorical text was played before its metaphorical version . The test processes in the visual and auditory tests were the same except in the method of presenting the texts on the screen or playing through the headphone . Data analysis In this study , descriptive and inferential statistical methods were used for analyzing the data and providing tentative answers to the research questions . All the analyses were implemented SPSS V . 23 software . To analyse the data in each of the visual and auditory tasks separately , Friedman non - parameter test was used . For comparing the data of the visual and auditory tasks , Mann - Whitney test was used . Result A . Comparison of visual long - term recalling of metaphorical and non - metaphorical texts According to the table of descriptive statistics ( attachment 1 ) , the average scores of long - term recalling metaphorical and non - metaphor - ical texts for visual stimuli are , respectively , 7 . 6 and 9 . 08 . The difference is related to two pairs of texts : ( 1 ) metaphorical text No . 1a and non - metaphorical text No . 1b , and ( 2 ) metaphorical text No . 3a and non - metaphorical text No . 3b in particular . As shown in table 1 , long - term recalling of non - metaphorical text No . 1b is better than long - term recalling of metaphorical text No . 1a . The difference in long - term recalling is reversed between texts No . 3a and No . 3b , meaning that the long - term recalling of metaphorical text No . 3a is more considerable than long - term recalling of non - metaphorical text No . 3b . The following table and figures present these findings . Table 1 . Comparison of visual long - term recalling of metaphorical and non - metaphorical texts Visual / LTM / Recall comparison of recalled sen - tences of all texts comparison of recalled sentences of text No . 1a and No . 1b comparison of recalled sentences of text No . 2a and No . 2b comparison of r comparison of recalled sentences of text No . 3a and No . 3b x 2 = 1 . 636 x 2 = 7 . 118 x 2 = 1 . 667 x 2 = 5 . 400 P = 0 . 201 P = 0 . 008 P = 0 . 197 P = 0 . 020 B . Comparison of auditory long - term recalling of metaphorical and non - metaphorical texts According to the table of descriptive statistics ( attachment 1 ) , the average scores of long - term recalling metaphorical and non - metaphor - ical texts for auditory stimuli are , respectively 6 . 05 and 6 . 00 . The observed difference is not statistically significant . However , by parti - tioning between texts , as shown in table 2 , there is a significant difference between recalling of metaphorical text No . 3a and non - meta - phorical text No . 3b . Long - term recalling of text No . 3a is more considerable than long - term recalling of text No . 3b . The following table and figures present these findings . Figure A . 1 . Comparison of visual long - term recalling of metaphorical and non - metaphorical texts Figure A . 2 . Comparison of visual long - term recalling of texts No . 1a and No . 1b In J Sch Cogn Psychol DOI : 10 . 35248 / 2329 - 8901 . 19 . 7 . 215 International Journal of School and Cognitive Psychology Visual / LTM / Recall comparison of recalled sen - tences of all texts comparison of recalled sentences of text No . 1a and No . 1b comparison of recalled sentences of text No . 2a and No . 2b comparison of recalled sentences of text No . 3a and No . 3b x 2 = 0 . 053 x 2 = 2 . 250 x 2 = 2 . 571 x 2 = 5 . 333 P = 0 . 819 P = 0 . 134 P = 0 . 109 P = 0 . 021 Table 2 . Comparison of auditory long - term recalling of metaphorical and non - metaphorical texts C . Comparison of auditory and visual long - term recalling of metaphorical and non - metaphorical texts The average scores of recalling metaphorical texts in visual and auditory long - term recalling are 7 . 60 and 6 . 05 , respectively . This aver - age for non - metaphorical texts is 9 . 08 in visual long - term recalling and 6 . 00 for auditory long - term recalling . The following table and figure present these findings . According to table No . 3 and figures C , the difference between auditory and visual long - term recalling is significant in metaphorical text No . 1a . Auditory recalling of metaphorical text No . 1a is more considerable than visual recalling of metaphorical text No . 1a . Visual / Auditory / LTM / Recall / 2Independent samples comparison of recalled sentenc - es of all texts comparison of recalled sentenc - es of text No . 1a and No . 1b comparison of recalled sentenc - es of text No . 2a and No . 2b comparison of recalled sentenc - es of text No . 3a and No . 3b Mann - Whitney ( a ) = 226 . 500 Mann - Whitney ( 1 . a ) = 195 . 000 Mann - Whitney ( 2 . a ) = 245 . 500 Mann - Whitney ( 3 . a ) = 216 . 500 P = 0 . 297 P = 0 . 030 P = 0 . 446 P = 0 . 194 Mann - Whitney ( b ) = 223 . 000 Mann - Whitney ( 1 . b ) = 230 . 000 Mann - Whitney ( 2 . b ) = 249 . 000 Mann - Whitney ( 3 . b ) = 228 . 500 P = 0 . 265 P = 0 . 318 P = 0 . 557 P = 0 . 249 Table 3 . Comparison of auditory and visual long - term recalling of metaphorical and non - metaphorical texts Figure A . 3 . Comparison of visual long - term recalling of texts No . 3a and No . 3b Figure B . 1 . Comparison of auditory long - term recalling of metaphorical and non - metaphorical texts Figure B . 2 . Comparison of auditory long - term recalling of texts No . 3a and No . 3b Figure C . 1 . Comparison of auditory and visual long - term recalling of metaphorical texts Figure C . 2 . Comparison of auditory and visual long - term recalling of non - metaphorical texts Figure C . 3 . Comparison of auditory and visual long - term recalling of metaphorical text No . 1a In J Sch Cogn Psychol DOI : 10 . 35248 / 2329 - 8901 . 19 . 7 . 215 International Journal of School and Cognitive Psychology DISCUSSION The results of data analysis of this study show that auditory and visual long - term recalling of metaphorical text No . 3a has taken place better than its equivalent non - metaphorical text . No difference is observed between recalling the metaphorical text No . 2a and its equivalent non - metaphorical text No . 2b . And finally , recalling the non - metaphorical text No . 1b has been better than its equivalent metaphorical text No . 1a . This procedure and these results have been exactly repeated in short - term recalling of the texts i . e . the subject’s immediate recalling of the texts after hearing them . At the first glance , it seems that the obtained data are idiosyncratic to some extent and the subjects have shown different behaviors in recalling each text . There are some reasons for this variation . First , text No . 1a was the first text presented to the subjects and , at the time of hearing or reading this text , they were not familiar with the process . Therefore , the difference of recalling this text with its equivalent non - metaphorical text is probably due to the fact that the subjects were not aware of the test process and they could not pay enough attention to the task . On the other hand , non - metaphorical text No . 3b was the last text to which the subjects were exposed , and therefore , the subjects were expected to recall better this text than its metaphorical version i . e . text No . 3a that had been presented before text No . 3b . However , the results of data analysis in both visual and in auditory versions show that the subjects had a better performance in recalling the metaphorical text No . 3a . Furthermore , no difference in the recalling texts No . 2a and No . 2b can be due to the similar metaphorical or non - metaphorical nature of these two texts compared with other pairs . In validation of the extent of metaphorical / non - metaphorical nature of the texts , the difference between metaphorical / non - metaphorical nature of texts No . 2a and No . 2b was less than the difference between metaphorical / non - metaphorical nature of the other two pairs . Thus , these two texts were more similar to each other in terms of results in this regard . Hypothetically , the same extent of recalling of these two texts can be related to their similarity in terms of being metaphorical or non - metaphorical . Accordingly , if we exclude texts No . 1a and No . 1b from the analysis due to early exposure of the subjects to text No . 1a and the difference of testing conditions , and on the other hand , if we do not consider texts No . 2a and No . 2b in the main analysis because of a smaller difference between their meta - phorical / non - metaphorical nature than the other two texts , the only texts that remain for the final analysis are No . 3a and No . 3b . These two texts have a statistically significant difference in terms of recalling extent in both auditory and visual versions . The subjects had a higher performance in recalling the sentences , words , and concepts of the metaphorical text 3a than the non - metaphorical text 3b in terms of both short - term and long - term recalling . As mentioned in introduction , conceptual metaphor is one of the psycholinguistic aspects of a cognitive process . In conceptual met - aphors , there are two conceptual areas of origin and destination and the destination area is defined by adaptation or analogy between these two areas . When we talk about adaptation or analogy , memory is also involved . In a classical statement , Whorf ( 1956 ) believed that a person’s conceptual knowledge is formed by his / her language . Later , a weaker form of this hypothesis was introduced suggesting that language affects the formation of perception as well as memory . There is plenty of evidence showing that language directs thinking ( Ervin - Tripp , 1967 ) , affects the concepts of time and place ( Boroditsky , 2001 ) , and also affects memory ( Loftus & Palmer , 1974 ) . Lan - guage and memory are two important cognitive processes of human that are closely related to each other . In its simplest form , human needs memory to follow conversations ( Goldstein , 2010 ) . The relationship between language and memory may not seem clear at first , but when considering memory as a tool and process for storing and retrieving information , or a tool and process for transferring infor - mation , or a means of describing the content of our conscious experience , we may be able to better understand the importance and impact of each of these cognitive processes on the other . In the present study , the effect of one of the most important cognitive functions of language i . e . conceptual metaphor on one of the memory processes i . e . recalling in textual context was investigated . As the data indicate , it seems that when metaphor is used in a text , that text will become more memorable . It is probably due to the fact that metaphors create a wider network of communication in brain or it may be through providing strong cueing system related to metaphoric understanding . Metaphor is not encrypted and decrypted in vacuity . It is obvious that the creator and the hearer of metaphor refer to their memory for understanding the meaning of the metaphor and transmitting its concept . Memory can be considered as the mental capacity for keeping information over time . Based on this crite - rion i . e . time , three types of memory can be recognized : sensory memory that keeps information for less than one second or at most a few seconds ; short - term memory or active memory that keeps information for about 30 seconds ; and long - term memory that may keep information for life . Squire ( 1995 ) divides long - term memory into two types of indicative and non - indicative , and suggests that since different parts of indicative and non - indicative memory are involved in creating or understanding metaphor , it can be used in studies as an indicator of complex brain interactions . Organization of information is done by long - term memory and metaphorical combinations are stored in long - term formats in the form of simile , allegory , metonymy , and proverb . Activation of these combinations takes place through understanding the similarity of a situation of event to the stored schema and also understanding its correlation with those combinations . What happens in the brain when using , perceiving , or recalling metaphor cannot be precisely determined ; but it is obvi - ous that the condition of using the metaphor plays the role of activator and provides a processing network for us that is different from the common non - metaphorical processing network . On the other hand , in addition to the whole memory , meta - lingual context i . e . the conditions and agents used by the person in information exchange , also affect the perception of metaphor . All of these situational stim - uli determine the type of information of long - term memory that are related to perception and interpretation of metaphor . In general , it can be said that metaphorical expression and the individual’s situation play the role of sings for retrieving information of long - term In J Sch Cogn Psychol DOI : 10 . 35248 / 2329 - 8901 . 19 . 7 . 215 International Journal of School and Cognitive Psychology memory . In mentioning the metaphor functions , Gibbs ( 1994 , p . 124 ) suggests that one of the major function of metaphor is providing a coherent and condensed method for communicating . Condensation occurs when a single idea that can include image , thought , or language is replaced for several ideas or associations . Accordingly , when the creator and hearer of metaphor are faced with coherent data , they will recall it more easily than large and scattered data . So , it may be concluded that the texts that are expressed metaphorically contain a great deal of information in a small language data . Therefore , when recalling them , their components can be accessed more easily than their equivalent non - metaphorical texts . Another explanation for metaphors to be better remembered may be that metaphor is based on mental imagery or even is its originator . It is well known that concrete , easily imaged literal sentences are remembered better than abstract , less imaged ones . But evidence concerning imagery and memory for metaphors is conflicting ( McCabe , 1988 ) . Mental imagery is quasi - perceptual experience and is something that people are aware of and experience ( Pecher , Van Dantzig , & Schifferstein , 2009 ) . It resembles perceptual experience , but occurs in the absence of appropriate external stimuli ( Thomas , 2019 Edition ) . The central question about the role of mental imagery in metaphor understanding was raised some time ago by Gibbs and Bogdonovich ( Carston , 2018 ) . Gibbs and Bogdonovich ( 1999 ) thought that imagery has an essential role in an account of metaphor understanding . They said that metaphor theories must be amended to account for the prominence of imagery in metaphor use ( Gibbs and Bogdonovich , 1999 , p . 37 ) . Based on the result of an empirical study , they concluded that mental imagery is essential in understanding at least some metaphors , those that they ( following Lakoff & Turner , 1989 ) call “image metaphors” ( Carston , 2018 ) . Gibbs and Bogdonovich ( 1999 ) expected that participants interpret these metaphors based on mapping of an image from the source domain onto the target domain . However , As Carston ( 2018 ) says , it is difficult , of course , to detect the presence or absence of mental imagery in the mind / brain of the person understanding a metaphor and it is more difficult to tell whether the imagery of the target domain is being mapped onto the target domain . Carston , in a semi experimental study , argues that the experience of mental imagery during the comprehension of a metaphor is probably a by - product or side - effect of other processes , an outcome of such factors as the novelty , creativity , and extendedness of the metaphor . He continues that , however , even if mental imagery is ( merely ) a cognitive side - effect of standard linguistic processes , it can be of considerable significance , in respect of that it may be the most powerful and / or memorable effect a metaphor has on its audience ( Carston , 2018 , p . 215 ) . Finally , the last but not the least possible mechanism that could be a reason for better remembering of metaphor - ical texts , is considering metaphor as a good sign or cue for recalling . A sign is an object , quality , or event whose presence or occurrence indicates the probable presence or occurrence of something else . The same description , somehow , might be true about metaphor . In metaphor , we encounter with something that stands for something else . In fact , we have something specific stored in connection with each metaphor that acts as a cue ( Wearing & college , 2011 ) . Activated cue leads to activate a conceptual network that connects to it and comes with it . Anyway , what mentioned in the explanation of probably better remembering of metaphorical texts is just some possible ways to express and , in this study , remain as a hypothesis or even question whose validity needs to test in future experimental works . And finally , in comparison of auditory and visual processing , although the focus of the present study is primarily to compare met - aphorical and non - metaphorical recalling of texts and not the medium represented texts , results indicate that there is no significant difference between visual and auditory long - term recalling of non - metaphorical texts . But about metaphorical texts the situation was somehow different . Auditory long - term recalling of metaphorical text No . 1a has led to a greater recall on memory performance tests than visual learning . The difference between the results of the present study with previous studies ( Linder , et al , 2009 ) which found that visual long - term memory performed better in recalling might be because of that we have tested long - term recalling in texture context while previous mentioned studies have done in words or even syllabus level . One of the limitations of this study was the small number of subjects studied . By studying more subjects , more relevant and convinc - ing results may be obtained . Furthermore , studying and considering the familiarity of metaphors ( i . e . their novelty and conventionality ) can affect the results of the study especially when discussing the reasons for different results when recalling metaphorical texts compared with each other . Moreover , conducting such a study in different cultures and languages may provide us with new findings about the role of metaphors in memory . References 1 . Allbritton , D . W . ( 1995 ) . When metaphors function as schemas : Some cognitive effects of conceptual metaphors . Metaphor and Symbolic Activity , 10 ( 1 ) , 33 - 46 . 2 . Allbritton , D . , & Mckoon , G . , & Gerrig , R . J . ( 1995 ) . Metaphor - based schemas and text representations : Making connections through conceptual metaphors . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition . 21 ( 3 ) , 612 - 625 . 3 . Anderson , R . C . , & Pearson , P . D . ( 1984 ) . A schema - theoretic view of basic processes in reading comprehension . University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign . 4 . Atkinson , R . L . , et al . ( 1385 ) . Atkinson & Hilgard ` s introduction to Psychology . Translated by Baraahani M , et al . Tehran : Roshd Publication . 5 . Benedek , M . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Intelligence , creativity , and cognitive control : The common and differential involvement of executive functions in intelligence and creativity . Intelligence , 46 ( 1 ) , 73 - 83 . In J Sch Cogn Psychol DOI : 10 . 35248 / 2329 - 8901 . 19 . 7 . 215 International Journal of School and Cognitive Psychology 6 . Boroditsky , L . ( 2001 ) . Does language shape thought ? Mandarin and English speakers ` conceptions of time . Cognitive Psychology , 43 , 1 - 22 . 7 . Carrell , P . , Devine , J . , Eskey , D . ( Eds . ) . ( 1988 ) . Interactive approaches to second language reading . Cambridge University Press . 8 . Carroll , J . B . ( 1964 ) . Language & Thought . Englewood Cliffs , New Jersey : Prentice - Hall . 9 . Carston , R . ( 2018 ) . Figurative language , Mental Imagery , and Pragmatics . Metaphor and Symbol , 33 ( 3 ) , 198 - 217 . 10 . Cunningham , J . W . ( 1976 ) . Metaphor and reading comprehension . Journal of Reading Behavior , 3 ( 4 ) , 363 - 368 . 11 . Ervin - Tripps , S . ( 1967 ) . An Issei learns English . Journal of social issues , ( 2 ) , 78 - 90 . 12 . Fillmore , C . J . ( 1976 ) . Frame semantics and the nature of language . In Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences : Conference on the origin and development of language and speech , 280 , 20 - 32 . 13 . Gentner , D . ( 1988 ) . Metaphor as structure mapping : The relational shift . Child development , 59 ( 1 ) , 47 - 59 . 14 . Gentner , D . , & Markman , A . B . ( 1997 ) . Structure mapping in analogy and similarity . American Psychologist , 52 , 45 - 56 . 15 . Gentner , D . , Holyoak , K . J . , & Kokinov , B . ( Eds . ) . ( 2001 ) . The analogical mind : Perspective from cognitive science . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . 16 . Ghassemzadeh , H . ( 2006 ) . Culture and Mental Schemas . Baztabe Daneash , 1 , 57 - 68 . [ In Persian ] . 17 . Ghassemzadeh , H . ( 2013 ) . Metaphor and Cognition . Tehran : Arjmand publication . [ In Persian ] . 18 . Gibbs , R . W . ( 1980 ) . Spilling the beans on understanding and memory for idioms in conversation . Memory & Cognition , 8 , 449 - 456 . 19 . Gibbs , R . W . ( 1993 ) . Why idioms are not dead metaphors ? In C . Cacciari and P . Tabossi ( Eds . ) , Idioms : processing , structure , and interpretation , 57 - 78 . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . 20 . Gibbs , R . W . ( 1994 ) . The poetics of mind : Figurative thought , language , and understanding . New York : Cambridge University Press . 21 . Gibbs , R . w . , & Bogdonvich , J . ( 1999 ) . Mental imagery in interpreting poetic metaphor . Metaphor and Symbol , 14 ( 1 ) , 37 - 44 . 22 . Gibbs , R . W . , & Colston , H . L . ( 2012 ) . Interpreting figurative meaning . Cambridge University Press . 23 . Gibbs , R . W . , & Gerrig , R . J . ( 1989 ) . How context makes metaphor comprehension seem “special . ” Metaphor and Symbolic Activ - ity , 4 , 145 - 158 . 24 . Gibbs , R . W . , & Nayak , N . P . ( 1989 ) . Psycholinguistic studies on the syntactic behavior of idioms . Cognitive Psychology , 21 , 100 - 138 . 25 . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1983 ) . Schema induction and analogical transfer . Cognitive Psychology , 15 , 1 - 38 . 26 . Glucksberg , S . ( 2001 ) . Understanding figurative language : From metaphors to idioms . Oxford University Press . 27 . Glucksberg , S . ( 2003 ) . The Psycholinguistics of metaphor . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 7 ( 2 ) , 92 - 96 . 28 . Glucksberg , S . , Keysar , B . , & McGlone , M . ( 1992 ) . Metaphor understanding and accessing conceptual schema : Reply to Gibbs ( 1992 ) . Psychological Review , 99 ( 3 ) , 578 - 581 . 29 . Goldstein , E . G . ( 2010 ) . Cognitive psychology : Connecting mind , research and everyday experience . Wadsworth Publishing . 30 . Holyoak , K . J . , & Stamenkoviĉ , D . ( 2018 ) . Metaphor comprehension : A critical review of theories and evidence . American Psycho - logical Association , 144 ( 6 ) , 641 - 671 . 31 . Hudson , J . A . , & Haworth , J . ( 1983 ) . Dimensions of word recognition . Literacy . 17 , 87 - 94 . 32 . Johnson , M . ( 1989 ) . Image - Schematic bases of meaning . Semiotic Inquiry , 109 - 118 . 33 . Lakoff , G . ( 1987 ) . Women , fire , and dangerous things . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . 34 . Lakoff , G . ( 1993 ) . The contemporary theory of metaphor . In Andrew Ortony . ( Ed . ) , Metaphor and Thought . 202 - 251 . New York : Cambridge University Press . 35 . Lakoff , G . , & Johnson , M . ( 1980 ) . Metaphors we live by . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . 36 . Langacker , W . R . ( 1987 ) . Foundations of Cognitive Grammar . California : Stanford University Press . 37 . Linder , K . , Blosser , G . , & Cunigan , K . ( 2009 ) . Visual versus auditory learning and memory recall performance on short - term versus long - term tests . Modern Psychological Studies , 15 ( 1 ) , 38 - 46 . 38 . Loftus , E . F . , & Palmer , J . C . ( 1974 ) . Reconstruction of automobile destruction : an example of the interaction between language and memory . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 13 , 585 - 589 . 39 . McCabe , A . ( 1988 ) . Effect of Different Contexts on Memory for Metaphors . Metaphor and Symbol , 3 ( 2 ) , 105 - 132 . 40 . Miller , G . A . ( 1956 ) . The magical number seven , plus or minus two : some limits on our capacity for processing information . Psy - In J Sch Cogn Psychol DOI : 10 . 35248 / 2329 - 8901 . 19 . 7 . 215 International Journal of School and Cognitive Psychology chological Review , 63 , 81 - 97 . 41 . Pecher , D . , Van Dantzig , S . , & Schifferstein , H . ( 2009 ) . Concepts are not represented by conscious imagery . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 16 ( 5 ) , 914 - 919 . 42 . Pickering , S . , Gathercole , S . , & Peaker , S . ( 1998 ) . Verbal and visuospatial short - term memory in children : evidence for common and distinct mechanisms . Memory & Cognition , 26 ( 6 ) , 1117 - 1130 . 43 . Ping , Kee . Siu . ( 1986 ) . Understanding Chinese prose : Effects of number of ideas , metaphor , and advance organizer on compre - hension . Journal of Educational Psychology , 78 ( 6 ) , 417 - 423 . 44 . Reynolds , R . E . , & Schwartz , R . M . ( 1983 ) . Relation of metaphoric processing to comprehension and memory . Journal of Educa - tional Psychology , 75 ( 3 ) , 450 - 459 . 45 . Squire , L . , & Alvarez , P . ( 1995 ) . Retrograde amnesia and memory consolidation : a neurobiological perspective . Current Opinion in Neurobiology , 5 ( 2 ) , 169 - 177 . 46 . Sternberg , R . ( 1392 ) . Cognitive Psychology . Tehran : Samt Publication . Translated by Kharrazi K , Hejazi E . 47 . Thibodeau , P . H . , Hendricks , R . , & Boroditsky , L . ( 2016 ) . How linguistic metaphor scaffolds reasoning . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 21 , 852 - 863 . 48 . Thomas , N . J . T . , “Mental Imagery” , Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy ( Summer 2019 Edition ) , Edward N . Zalta ( ed . ) , URL = < https : / / plato . stanford . edu / archives / sum2019 / entries / mental - imagery / > . 49 . Vandijk , T . A . , & Kintsch , W . ( 1983 ) . Strategies of discourse comprehension . New York : Academic Press . 50 . Watkins , M . J . , & Peynircioglu , Z . F . ( 1983 ) . Interaction between presentation modality and recall order in memory span . The American Journal of Psychology , 96 ( 3 ) , 315 - 322 . 51 . Wearing , C . , & College , W . ( 2011 ) . Metaphor , Idiom , and Pretense . Wiley Periodicals , Inc , 1 - 26 . 52 . Zitinski , P . Y . , & Baracic , M . , et . al . ( 2010 ) . E - Learning and evaluation in modern educational system . Proceeding of INTED 2010 Conference . 8 - 10 march , Valencia , Spain .