SleepGuru : Personalized Sleep Planning System for Real - life Actionability and Negotiability Jungeun Lee Sungnam Kim Minki Cheon jelee @ postech . ac . kr kimsn @ postech . ac . kr cminki02 @ postech . ac . kr Dept . of CSE Dept . of Life Sciences Dept . of CSE POSTECH POSTECH POSTECH Pohang , South Korea Pohang , South Korea Pohang , South Korea Hyojin Ju JaeEun Lee ∗ Inseok Hwang hyojin . ju @ postech . ac . kr jaeeunl2 @ illinois . edu i . hwang @ postech . ac . kr Dept . of EE Dept . of CS Dept . of CSE & Grad . School of AI POSTECH Univ . of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign POSTECH Pohang , South Korea Urbana , United States Pohang , South Korea Figure 1 : SleepGuru , a system for computing personally optimal sleep plans appreciating the user’s real - life constraints ABSTRACT Widely - accepted sleep guidelines advise regular bedtimes and sleep hygiene . An individual’s adherence is often viewed as a matter of self - regulation and anti - procrastination . We pose a question from a diferent perspective : What if it comes to a matter of one’s social or professional duty that mandates irregular daily life , making it incompatible with the premise of standard guidelines ? We propose SleepGuru , an individually actionable sleep planning system fea - turing one’s real - life compatibility and extended forecast . Adopting theories on sleep physiology , SleepGuru builds a personalized pre - dictor on the progression of the user’s sleep pressure over a course of upcoming schedules and past activities sourced from her on - line calendar and wearable ftness tracker . Then , SleepGuru service provides individually actionable multi - day sleep schedules which respect the user’s inevitable real - life irregularities while regulat - ing her week - long sleep pressure . We elaborate on the underlying ∗ Contributed as an undergraduate intern at HIS Lab , CSE , POSTECH . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the frst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specifc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . UIST ’22 , October 29 - November 2 , 2022 , Bend , OR , USA © 2022 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 9320 - 1 / 22 / 10 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3526113 . 3545709 physiological principles and mathematical models , followed by a 3 - stage study and deployment . We develop a mobile user inter - face providing individual predictions and adjustability backed by cloud - side optimization . We deploy SleepGuru in - the - wild to 20 users for 8 weeks , where we found positive efects of SleepGuru in sleep quality , compliance rate , sleep efciency , alertness , long - term followability , and so on . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → Ubiquitous and mobile comput - ing systems and tools ; Empirical studies in HCI ; • Applied comput - ing → Health informatics . KEYWORDS actionable sleep , computational sleep model , personally optimized sleep schedule , real - life constraints ACM Reference Format : Jungeun Lee , Sungnam Kim , Minki Cheon , Hyojin Ju , JaeEun Lee , and Inseok Hwang . 2022 . SleepGuru : Personalized Sleep Planning System for Real - life Actionability and Negotiability . In The 35th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology ( UIST ’22 ) , October 29 - November 2 , 2022 , Bend , OR , USA . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 16 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3526113 . 3545709 UIST ’22 , October 29 - November 2 , 2022 , Bend , OR , USA Lee et al . 1 INTRODUCTION What time shall we go to bed for healthy life ? How long shall we sleep ? Many people would already know typical answers . It is largely a commonsense that average healthy adults are advised to go to bed regularly around 10 – 11 pm everyday [ 97 ] and consis - tently have 7 – 9 hours of sleep [ 100 ] . Popular sleep - helping apps are grounded on such common guidelines [ 2 , 6 , 7 ] . Now , see our real - life , which is hectic , irregular , and capricious . Common guidelines are often little applicable in our real - life full of duty and responsibility . Ideal sleep timings are , although we are aware of , easily overridden by urgent projects , deadlines , and social responsibility . Late - time meetings with remote collaborators in another time zone are common in academia and global indus - try . Shift workers are impossible to follow standard sleep timings studied for an average person with regular routine life [ 33 ] . These reality trends refect our societal mood that productivity and re - sponsibility ought to take precedence over sleep . People even see it a virtue to sleep less and work more [ 35 ] . Adverse impacts of chronic unhealthy sleeps develop slowly ; one immediately perceiv - able is fatigue [ 69 , 95 , 108 , 117 ] which is often believed that one can ( and should ) endure . As a result , sleep is a frequent victim to accommodate shortly demanding professional or academic work , or even hobbies [ 77 , 81 , 83 , 111 ] . A greedy strategy of ‘ just sleep when you can ’ is prevalent , e . g . , a 12 - hour straight sleep on Sunday , which would rather aggravate the overall fatigue level [ 130 ] . Widely advised sleep guidelines , e . g . , ‘ go to bed at regular hours ’ or ‘ have 7 – 8 hours of sleep every night ’ , are agnostic to each user’s day - to - day constraints . They assume a standard user of a regular life ; failing a guideline is considered a matter of self - regulation [ 77 ] . Accepting the competitive societal mood that prioritizes responsibil - ities over sleep , we address it impractical to recommend a guideline un - executable in the user’s circumstances . We need follow - able , despite less ideal , sleep guidelines that do not confict with our real - life constraints . We envision such guidelines should : • Be considerate to a user’s day - to - day irregularity , e . g . , a call just scheduled at 11 pm tonight , night - shifts every Monday and Tuesday , or a debugging that always overruns your original plan . • Not simply abstract themselves to embrace possible variety ; they should be still as specifc as standard guidelines in terms of when and how long the user takes a sleep action . • Come with alternatives in case that the primary recommenda - tions turn out incompatible due to a newly occurred constraint . • Be explainable why the current recommendation is optimal with the user’s constraints taken into account , so that she considers the recommendation seriously , and may negotiate a ‘soft’ constraint . • ( Although beyond this paper’s scope , ) refect an individual’s biological attributes , e . g . , a natural short - sleeper gene [ 46 ] . Overall , we imagine guidelines such as “ Today , considering your late meeting and the workout you have just done , try to sleep at 1 am and wake up at 8 : 30 am . Tomorrow , as you travel next morning , try to sleep from 11 pm till 5 am . By doing so , you’d be alert enough at your grant presentation scheduled at 7 pm ; your weekly sleep amount would be good enough to keep average sleep - fatigue moderate . At suggested sleep timings , you’d fall asleep easily and your sleep will be time - efcient such that dissipates your sleep - fatigue faster . If something new happens making this plan not work , consider this secondary . . . ” In this paper , we propose SleepGuru , a real - life actionable and personalized sleep planning system . SleepGuru pursues confict - free co - existence of both healthy sleep and the user’s real - life cir - cumstances . Specifcally , SleepGuru delivers the following features . • Sleeping hours feature . SleepGuru recommends user - and time - specifc sleep schedules that are compatible with the user’s real - life constraints and take into account her dynamic physical ac - tivity levels . SleepGuru also provides alternative schedules to accommodate the user’s inevitable deviations and / or preferences . • Waking hours feature . Based on the user’s actual past sleeps and future scheduled sleep , SleepGuru predicts her waking hours alertness levels at a minute granularity along a multi - day period , helping the recommended schedule explainable and motivating . • Explainable & adjustable . SleepGuru delivers those features through the user’s online calendar and a mobile - friendly web - app , providing easy access to the sleep recommendations as well as convenient interfaces to browse other alternatives . Figure 1 illustrates the user interface , sleep - integrated calendar , and iterative optimization process . ( elaborated in Section 3 ) . SleepGuru adopts neurobiology theories on the mathematical models of homeostatic sleep drive and circadian rhythm . Next , SleepGuru derives sleep schedules that optimize the user’s sleep timings and alertness subject to her real - life constraints . We de - signed SleepGuru through preliminary surveys and an initial de - ployment . We evaluated SleepGuru through a 8 - week deployment over three phases : observation , baseline , and SleepGuru . In developing SleepGuru , we addressed the following challenges . Sleep is a multivariate mechanism part of which is yet unknown ; the problem space is inherently vast with respect to many variables . We distilled the computationally quantifable factors and formulated a novel optimization problem of a manageable size but efective in personalizing sleep schedules . Although benefcial , users might be purplexed by blackbox recommendations . We crafted the interfaces to convey that the presented recommendations indeed ft the user’s circumstances and that they would be helpful with her conditions in waking hours over coming days . Our contributions are threefold . First , we newly defned the confict - free sleep recommendations that harmoniously co - exist with the user’s real - life constraints and irregularity . Second , we ini - tially approached this new notion as a computational optimization problem based on neurobiology models , and a dashboard interface being ready in the user’s everyday life . Third , we report the fnd - ings from our 8 - week in - the - wild deployment with 20 participants , showcasing the efcacy of SleepGuru in their actual sleep - life . We organize the paper as follows . Section 2 reviews the phys - iological background of sleep and sleep technologies in HCI and pervasive computing . Section 3 illustrates the architecture , opti - mization formulation , and dashboard interfaces . Section 4 through 6 demonstrate our 3 - stage study and evaluation . We discuss limita - tions and implications in Section 7 before concluding the paper . Terminology . Throughout this paper , we use the following termi - nology to indicate sleep - related time variables . • Bedtime : A point in time when the user begins sleeping . • Wake - up time : A point in time when the user awakens . • Sleeping hours : A period of time when the user is in sleep . • Waking hours : The rest of a day when the user is not in sleep . SleepGuru : Personalized Sleep Planning System for Real - life Actionability and Negotiability UIST ’22 , October 29 - November 2 , 2022 , Bend , OR , USA 2 BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORKS Sleep is a state with reduced mobility and specifc brain activity [ 26 ] . Sleep not just gives resting period but does special work inside the brain . This special work is not fully understood , but their impor - tance for brain functions is well established [ 41 , 42 , 115 , 119 ] . 2 . 1 Physiology of Sleep SleepGuru is based on the theories predicting one’s sleepiness and its temporal progression , established in neuroscience and biology . Utilizing when one sleeps , wakes up , and what she did , it is now possible to predict the degree of sleepiness at every moment [ 31 , 60 , 90 , 123 ] . We summarize the key measures , physiology , and mathematics of sleep , which are the basis of building SleepGuru . 2 . 1 . 1 Sleep measures . There are a number of measures pertaining to sleep . In HCI and pervasive computing , previous works evaluated sleep using simple time - or frequency - related measures ( e . g . , total sleep time , number of awakes , sleep onset latency [ 29 , 110 ] ) or continuous - time measures ( e . g . , polysomnography , sleep phase ) . Many of these sleep measures are limited in accommodating the need of people with irregular life . These measures focus on the sleep itself , rather than its resulting impact on the coming daytime . Also , they lack a cumulative perspective on a series of sleep over multiple days and nights . Given the users whose bedtimes are inevitably irregular , measuring a single sleep is insufcient . Instead , we need to trace past irregular sleeps along a course of the user’s irregular life , estimate their cumulative contribution , and plan ahead a coming series , in a way that regulates the user’s daytime alertness and amortizes the sleep dept that may spike one day . In this light , we employ the sleep pressure [ 17 ] as our key metric , which have been little introduced to previous sleep works in HCI and pervasive computing . Below , we elaborate on the sleep pressure , its implication , physiology , and mathematical models . 2 . 1 . 2 Sleep pressure : overview . Sleep pressure refers to the degree of unawakening largely afected by sleep and wake behaviors , vali - dated by the Psychomotor Vigilance Task ( PVT ) [ 107 ] . In layman’s terms , sleep pressure could be understood by our feeling of sleepi - ness or awake along time . Sleep pressure gradually dissipates during the sleeping hours , and accumulates during the waking hours . In SleepGuru , the use of sleep pressure brings two unique abili - ties over previous works . First , sleep pressure is a continuous - time function covering both sleeping and waking hours . Unlike measures focusing on the sleeping hours only , sleep pressure estimates a past sleep’s impact on the user’s daytime , e . g . , her alertness at an arbi - trary time . Second , thanks to the time - continuity , sleep pressure enables multi - day assessment of sleeps even if they are irregular . Unlike previous works that rely on the measures evaluating individ - ual sleeps separately , sleep pressure provides a continuous function that accurately models and predicts the multi - day carry - over of fatigue cumulatively contributed by past sleep and wake behaviors . Yet , sleep pressure does not replace other measures ; it is rather built on top of those , as accurate measures on single sleeps , such as bed / wake - up times , sleep phase , etc . , yield a more accurate es - timation of sleep pressure . Also , sleep pressure is consistent with single - sleep measures ; sleeping at regular daily timings for a good duration results in sleep pressures to remain under a proper level . Figure 2 : Sleep pressure and underlying bodily mechanisms 2 . 1 . 3 Sleep pressure : physiology and models . Sleep pressure is gov - erned by two bodily systems : circadian rhythm and homeostatic sleep drive [ 39 , 90 , 107 ] . Circadian rhythm refects a diurnal cycle of our body ; it is sleep - independent and controlled by melatonin , a hormone produced from sun exposure . Sleep drive refects the cumulative brain fatigue while awake ; it is sleep - dependent and controlled by adenosine , a decomposition product of ATP – the energy currency of life . Sleep pressure can be measured in the unit of nanomolar ( nM ) , as sleep pressure is essentially a linear combination of two bodily systems representing the molecular con - centration of melatonin and adenosine in the brain , respectively . We normalize its scale , as only its relative value matters in this study . The combination of these two systems determines the temporal axis of sleep [ 17 ] , i . e . , when and how long we desire sleep . Formally , at a time t of a day , the sleep pressure SP ( t ) is defned by sleep drive D s ( t ) and circadian rhythm D w ( t ) as below : SP ( t ) = D s ( t ) − bD w ( t ) where b : a scale coefcient ( 1 ) Figure ? ? illustrates typical curves of one’s sleep drive ( D s ) and circadian rhythm ( D w ) along time of a day and sleeping hours . Figure ? ? illustrates the total sleep pressure ( SP ) . Formal models of D s and D w curves are studied in literature , as we elaborate below . 2 . 1 . 4 Circadian rhythm and melatonin mechanics . Circadian rhythm is induced by a melatonin secretion which follows a 24 - hour cycle regulated by sunlight . Ordinarily , melatonin secretion is at the low - est at 3 – 4 am and the highest at 3 – 4 pm , making people feel sleepy at night and awake in the morning . The 24 - hour circadian rhythm is expressed with a cosine function as follows [ 17 , 63 , 107 ] . π D w = cos ( 12 ( t − 16 ) ) ( 2 ) 2 . 1 . 5 Sleep drive and adenosine mechanics . Sleep drive is induced by adenosine concentration , resulting from our basal forebrain’s ATP usage [ 12 ] . As its ATP usage is high at wake and low at sleep , adenosine concentration increases and decreases during wake and sleep , respectively [ 52 , 103 , 109 ] . In pharmacokinetics , the rate of adenosine concentration changes is modeled proportional to the current concentration . In essence , the adenosine concentration A ( t ) is expressed by a frst - order diferential equation as follows [ 107 ] . dA ( t ) χ = µ − A ( t ) ( 3 ) dt µ : saturation concentration , χ : time constant UIST ’22 , October 29 - November 2 , 2022 , Bend , OR , USA Lee et al . Solving the diferential equation , A ( t ) is given as follows . − 1 A ( t ) = ae χ t + µ where a : coefcient ( 4 ) Eq . 4 predicts one’s adenosine concentration as a function of time without intrusive sampling . Thus , the sleep drive is given by Eq . 5 below as a function of time along a day [ 107 ] . To express the opposite trends depending on whether the user is sleeping or awake , separate coefcients apply for sleep and wake , respectively .  ( a s , k s , µ s ) at sleep − kt D s ( t ) = ae + µ where ( a , k , µ ) = ( a w , k w , µ w ) at wake 1 µ s < µ w , a w < 0 < a s , k = 1 / χ ( 5 ) 2 . 1 . 6 Physical activity and sleep . Intense physical activities usually induce earlier and longer sleep . Some relations between physical activity and sleep have been proven [ 10 , 19 , 20 , 122 , 128 ] . Two major relations are : ( 1 ) more mid - day physical activities induce earlier and longer sleep ; ( 2 ) intense exercises disrupt imminent sleep [ 122 ] . Sleep drive explains these relations . Intense physical activity makes the brain consume more energy , increasing the ATP decom - position rate [ 34 ] . As explained in Section 2 . 1 . 3 and 2 . 1 . 5 , higher adenosine concentration makes people feel more fatigued , result - ing in earlier sleepiness and extended sleep duration [ 10 , 20 , 122 ] . Although the qualitative relation and underlying principles are known , a quantitative model is not frmly established in literature . Intense physical activity immediately before bedtime disrupts deep sleep [ 38 ] . The hypothalamic suprachiasmatic nucleus con - trols the process of falling asleep and decreasing the core body temperature [ 118 ] in a shared mechanism . Intense physical activity activates metabolism keeping the body temperature high , which takes about 2 hours of rest to restore [ 114 ] . As a result , bedtime right after physical activities likely sufers from poor sleep quality . 2 . 2 Factors Afecting Sleep Sleep is a complex process afected by multiple factors . One’s ge - netic background determines a preferred amount [ 46 , 116 ] , time [ 76 , 88 ] , and quality [ 40 ] of sleep . Aging [ 67 , 87 ] , diseases [ 75 , 104 ] , drugs [ 58 , 99 , 124 ] , daily activities [ 16 , 63 , 126 , 127 ] , mood [ 36 , 120 ] and environment [ 18 ] are well known factors . For contemporary people , social constraints’ roles in driving their sleep life are bigger than past . Many of them work and reside in artifcial environments , easily defying the solar cycles [ 30 ] . Globalized industry and infor - mation access unbind their life from a local time zone . To build an automatic software system for actionable sleep sched - ules compelling to people with busy and irregular life , we seek a small set of factors that are : ( 1 ) largely infuential to one’s sleep de - cisions and / or pressure ; ( 2 ) dynamically varying along time of day ; ( 3 ) easily measurable with a commodity device at reliable accuracy ; and ( 4 ) backed by established models with quantitative relationship . We select two major factors from bodily and social dimensions , i . e . , the user’s physical activity and daily work - or academic - schedules , respectively . We acknowledge that incorporating more factors would refect more diverse personal real - life factors . Yet , an initial probe with extensive variables would dilute the cause - and - efect obser - vations . Thus we commence our exploration with a few computa - tionally established factors that still largely steer the daily sleep decisions of busy people . Section 7 discusses potentials and feasi - bility of integrating more factors into SleepGuru . 2 . 3 Sleep Technology The advances in HCI and pervasive computing have enabled to monitor one’s sleep behaviors and promote healthy sleep [ 23 ] . 2 . 3 . 1 Sleep monitoring . A paramount interest in the intersection of sleep and computing has been monitoring the user’s sleep behav - iors and environments . Built - in sensors in commodity mobile or wearable devices have been adopted for cost - efcient sleep sensing platforms [ 21 , 44 , 45 , 94 , 121 ] . Specialized sensors are also em - ployed for a more comprehensive understanding , such as in Lul - laby [ 68 ] , WAKE [ 105 ] , and Zhai et al [ 134 ] . Recently , contactless sensing has been actively applied to sleep , over the modality of wireless [ 32 , 50 , 86 , 110 , 133 , 135 ] and vision [ 8 , 43 , 51 , 84 ] . With proliferation of inexpensive wearables , commercial activity trackers , e . g . , Fitbit [ 3 ] , Mi Band [ 4 ] , Oura Ring [ 5 ] , sense the user’s bedtime , sleep duration , sleep phases , and quality metrics . SleepGuru employs them as an underlying sensing layer , from which it generates estimations , recommendations , and retrospec - tive corrections based on the user’s real actions . Our prototype uses a Fitbit to collect the user’s bedtimes and physical activity , but it is open to other devices as such generic data are not Fitbit - exclusive . For example , physical activities can be derived from IMUs of commodity smartphones or wearables [ 53 , 54 , 59 , 82 , 91 – 93 , 101 ] . 2 . 3 . 2 Sleep feedback and recommendation . Growing penetration of mobile or at - home sleep monitoring technologies spurred the evolution of pervasive feedback and recommendations to promote healthy sleep . Sleep Cycle [ 7 ] , a commercial smartphone app , uses the built - in mic to analyze the user’s sleep pattern and wakes up the user at a light sleep stage . Ravichandran et al . [ 113 ] conducted a large - scale UX study on commercial sleep tracking solutions , deriving design recommendations for efective sleep feedback . Sleep experts have developed standard recommendations that improve sleep hygiene – habits and practices correlated with good quality sleep . In HCI , large eforts have been put to promote users’ awareness on such standard recommendations in their daily life . ShutEye [ 13 ] designs an interactive smartphone wallpaper to be glanced at , visualizing standard sleep recommendations and their signifcance along time - of - day , e . g . , “Cafeinated drinks negatively impact sleep quality at later hours . ” SleepTight [ 24 ] advances further by incorporating the user’s logging of her own sleep - infuential actions and facilitating self - refection with a graphical summary . A next body of works focuses on helping users identify standard recommendations that matter in one’s lifestyle . SleepCoacher [ 29 ] guides a user through a series of self - experimentation with a pool of standard recommendations , e . g . , “For the next 6 days , try going to bed regularly around 11 pm . ” Eventually she fnds a subset of standard recommendations that help her sleep . Daskalova et al . [ 28 ] explores cohort - based sleep recommendations , in which users are grouped by similar physical profles so that the same - group users share a set of selected recommendations . SleepApp [ 112 ] evaluates correlations SleepGuru : Personalized Sleep Planning System for Real - life Actionability and Negotiability UIST ’22 , October 29 - November 2 , 2022 , Bend , OR , USA Figure 3 : SleepGuru system architecture between one’s sleep behaviors and her daytime activities , distilling feedback instructing a specifc action and its efect , e . g . , “Go to bed at the same time everyday , and your alertness would improve by X % . ” The research so far on pervasive sleep feedback helps one be aware of certain standard recommendations in one’s life , and sug - gests a relevant behavioral change leading to better sleep hygiene . However , to the best of our knowledge , they have been agnostic to the user’s other real - life duty , requirements , and constraints that the user often prioritize over sleep . It is noteworthy that Sleep - Coacher [ 29 ] limited the participants to those whose schedules are not rigorous and thus they are able to accept sleep interventions . Often , the user may fnd that the prompted recommendation conficts with one of her real - life constraints , e . g . , a late meeting or a night shift scheduled today . The conficting recommendation is little executable ; she could either discard it or improvise on her own . Furthermore , one day deviation from the standard may produce carry - over efects on coming days , enlarging the gap between the user’s real - life and what is assumed in standard recommendations . SleepGuru does not separate the user’s sleep from what else are important in her real - life . SleepGuru actively accommodates the user’s varying day - by - day constraints and schedules her sleep alongside them with optimality forecast over coming days , based on a physiology - grounded computational sleep pressure model . 3 SLEEPGURU We design and develop SleepGuru , a real - life actionable sleep plan - ning system that accommodates an individual user’s dynamic con - straints , and accordingly recommends sleep plans that are explain - able , negotiable , and executable with respect to her own circum - stances . SleepGuru features the following novel properties . • Accommodation & actionability . SleepGuru accommodates individual users’ real - life constraints and preferences within which actionable sleep recommendations are provided . • Real - life refection & updates . SleepGuru continuously tracks the user’s actual sleep / wake behaviors and physical activities , and updates accordingly the recommendations for coming days . • Explainability & adjustability . SleepGuru provides the user with minute - by - minute estimated sleepiness overlaid on her own daily / weekly calendar as well as alternative options she can ex - plore , so that she can make informed decisions or adjustments . In this section , we describe the key functions , principles , and user interfaces of SleepGuru . Section 4 and 5 will describe our initial probes that eventually shaped the current form of SleepGuru . 3 . 1 Architecture Figure 3 depicts the overall architecture of SleepGuru . User data is continuously monitored and collected in near real - time , i . e . , ≤ 10 minutes from the user’s calendar update and ≤ 20 minutes from the ftness tracker sensing a new activity . From the online calendar ( e . g . , Google calendar ) , SleepGuru retrieves the user’s calendar items for a 6 - day period , i . e . , for [ - 1 , 4 ] - th days from today . A tuple of ( start - time , end - time , name ) is extracted from each future calendar item . From the ftness tracker ( e . g . , a Fitbit ) , SleepGuru retrieves the user’s { actual bedtime , actual wake - up time , heart rate traces , step count traces } . The traces are sampled every minute , bufered at the user’s device , and bulk - fetched to SleepGuru every 20 minutes or shorter . Note that Fitbit provides richer physical activity attributes such as inferred sleep phases or estimated calorie expenditure . Although SleepGuru can utilize those additional attributes , However , our current implementation takes only the low - level attributes also available by various ftness trackers and smartwatches , so that we can keep SleepGuru open to non - Fitbit devices . Service runs on the server , takes the user data , and computes new sleep recommendations . A change in calendar items , a newly detected physical exercise , or a newly monitored actual sleep trig - gers the optimizer to run the model and update the recommended bed / wake - up times for a 5 - day period . The optimization involves three elements : the global objective function , the user’s future ( i . e . , scheduled constraints extracted from her calendar ) , and the user’s past ( i . e . , real activity and sleep traces until now ) . We implemented the services in Python with scipy optimization packages . More details about the optimizer is elaborated in Section 3 . 2 . The service also computes additional information to be returned to the user interface – estimated sleep pressure and alternative recommendations . The user’s momentary sleep pressure levels , a by - product from the optimization , are estimated per minute in the same coming 5 - day period , as predicted by the model assuming that the user follows the recommended bed / wake - up times . Alternative recommendations ( and their associated sleep pres - sure estimations ) are simultaneously generated in case the user adjusts her preferences . Our server of one AMD EPYC 2 . 8 GHz 16 - core CPU and 256 GB memory spends about 10 seconds to compute a new set of recommendations . To ensure interactive responses upon the user’s adjustment , possible alternatives are pre - computed in parallel and stored in the cache . SleepGuru populates the updated bed / wake - up times onto the user’s online calendar . Dashboard , a responsive web app supporting mobiles and desk - tops , is an informative tool for the user to reason the current UIST ’22 , October 29 - November 2 , 2022 , Bend , OR , USA Lee et al . recommendations and explore alternatives . Essentially , the dash - board presents the last - updated bed / wake - up times , along with per - minute estimated sleep pressure levels on the user’s calendar timeline . The dashboard also allows the user to adjust the recommended bed / wake - up times , if necessary . Upon adjustment , the dashboard instantly retrieves a corresponding set of bed / wake - up times and estimated sleep pressure levels from the server’s cache . The user can review the impact of the pending adjustment , and either con - frm or discard it . We implemented the dashboard using React and ApexCharts . js [ 1 ] for the frontend , and Node . js ( Express ) for the backend . Section 3 . 3 details the web app’s interface . Refecting real actions . SleepGuru accepts that users may be capricious ; one may or may not follow a recommendation silently . SleepGuru automatically refects such deviations . As time passes , all the outdated recommendations no longer infuence the next cycle of optimization . The only past items that our optimizer refers to are the activity and sleep traces that the user actually did . Naturally , all the dashboard information for the future timeline is updated based on her real past actions , not past recommendations . Time granularity of sleep pressure estimation is our imple - mentation choice . We clarify that our model can compute the sleep pressure at infnitesimal time steps , but we use a time step of 1 minute in computing and showing the sleep pressure along a time - line . It is because our 3rd - party services ( e . g . , Fitbit ) deliver their data at a 1 - minute resolution . It may take up to 20 minutes for a new calendar event or physical activity to trigger re - computing sleep pressure , due to the 3rd - party services often deferring an update . 3 . 2 Optimization Formulation SleepGuru’s approach to sleep recommendations is to formulate a computational optimization problem based on the neuroscience and biology theories outlined in Section 2 . 1 , as well as using the user’s near real - time personal data described in Section 3 . 1 . 3 . 2 . 1 Objective Function . The goal of optimization is to recom - mend the most efcient sleep schedules subject to given real - life constraints . In essence , the optimization should make sure the schedule not to confict with the user’s constraints , and also fnd a sweet spot between two mutually contending variables – i . e . , sleep duration and sleep pressure reduction . So we design an optimization that ( 1 ) fnds the bedtimes that result in minimal average daytime sleep pressure ( SP ) , ( 2 ) while regulating the total sleep duration ( SD ) as short as possible , ( 3 ) satisfying that no sleep recommendation overlaps with the user’s pre - scheduled calendar items . Considering SD and SP is very important . The sleep drive ( D s ) gradually decrease while sleeping . Thus , a sufcient sleep duration ( SD ) yields a low residual SP at wake - up . Target users of SleepGuru often have packed schedules , intrinsically demanding time - efcient sleep . From this point of view , SD is a double - edged sword that should be long enough to ensure daytime alertness , but not too long to waste valuable time . On a diferent note in terms of computation , a minimization problem on SP without a contending variable yields a trivial solution – spending every free time on sleep . Having SD as a regularizer is important to obtain a practical solution . We also take into account the carry - over efect of sleep ; i . e . , how one sleeps tonight infuences her awakeness tomorrow , and so on . Insufcient sleeps carry over residual adenosine concentration to next days , a . k . a . , sleep debt [ 117 ] . This carry - over efect lasts a period until the debt is resolved by sufcient sleep . Thus , taking account of the carry - over efect is crucial to calculate the daily beginning SP ofsets . It often requires multiple days to resolve a carry - over , and conversely , a goal in optimizing a multi - day sleep plan is to regulate the daily carry - over . Thanks to the continuous - time function form of our SP formulation , our model naturally incorporates the carry - over efects over multiple consecutive days . For these reasons , we optimize over a multi - day period , not a single day . As a result , for a multi - day period involving N times of sleep , we express this goal as a lasso regression as follows . N Õ ∫ t bed i argmin ( ( SP dt + λ | SD i | ) ) s . t . RC T t wake - up i − 1 i = 1 ( 6 ) where ( t bed i , t wake - up i ) ∈ T , i = 1 , 2 , . . . N SD i = t wake - up i − t bed i SP is defned in Eq . 1 . T is a set of N individual sleeps , each denoted by a tuple ( bedtime , wake - up time ) . Note that SP and SD are functions of T . The frst term in the summation represents minimizing the total SP during waking hours . The second term regularizes the total SD from growing excessive . RC represents a set of user’s real - life constraints , explained in Section 3 . 2 . 2 . Benefting users of a busy and irregular life . This formulation exhibits three helpful behaviors . First , the model’s goal , i . e . , reduc - ing the sleep pressure as much as possible while regularizing the sleep duration , suit well the user’s intrinsic need to save her time but keep it sustainable . Second , the model optimizes over a multi - day period . One day the user has a packed calendar and thus less room for sleep ; the model distributes the payments of sleep dept over several days , rather than scheduling a single excessive sleep which may cause adverse efects . Third , the model adapts the user’s unscheduled deviations . Solving Eq . 6 takes SP at t = 0 , which is always refreshed based on actual user actions so far , not past rec - ommendations . Even if the user passed the recommended bedtime , the actual bedtime is captured by the ftness tracker , refreshing SP cumulation , and taken into account in the next optimization run . Inclusive of common norms of sleep . SP already embeds the diurnal cycle of circadian rhythm and the periodically recurring deep / light sleep phases ( explained in Section 3 . 2 . 2 ) . As a result , the model fnds it less efcient in reducing SP to plan a sleep at daytime ( i . e . , high D w ) . Also , the model tends to set a wake - up time around a light sleep phase ; a deep sleep phase rapidly decreases SP , thereby the model tends to have a sleep fully enclose a deep sleep phase . 3 . 2 . 2 Constraints . There are a hard constraint and soft constraints . A hard constraint is a calendar item of ( t start j , t end j ) that the user declared as unable to sleep . RC enforces all the hard constraints so that ( t bed i , t wake - up i ) ∩ ( t start j , t end j ) = ∅ for ∀ i - th sleep and ∀ j - th calendar item . Soft constraints are not mandatory but good to keep . We include ‘wake up at a light sleep phase’ and ‘not to sleep immediately after a physical exercise’ into soft constraints . A sleep cycle , consisting of a REM sleep phase and a NREM sleep phase , repeats every 1 . 5 - hour [ 89 ] . If people wake up at a REM sleep phase ( light sleep ) , they feel more refreshed and easy to wake up . So we adjust D s at sleep , initially defned as Eq . 5 , to incorporate this SleepGuru : Personalized Sleep Planning System for Real - life Actionability and Negotiability UIST ’22 , October 29 - November 2 , 2022 , Bend , OR , USA 1 . 5 - hour cycle as follows . The optimization model tends to schedule a sleep of a length roughly a multiple of 1 . 5 hours and to end around a light sleep phase . f sph represents the periodic function of sleep phases . Note that 43 π means dividing 2 π by a 1 . 5 - hour period . − k s t D s = a s e + µ s − f sph ( t ) at sleep ( 7 ) − k s t e cos ( 43 πt ) f sph ( t ) = k s a s 4 π ( 8 ) 3 Section 2 . 1 discussed a physical exercise disrupts an immediate sleep . Literature reports a recovery time of 2 hours typical [ 114 ] or a range of 0 . 5 – 4 hours [ 38 ] . As ‘time constant’ decides the rate of exponential decay , we modify Eq . 10 so that the time constant of D s to be a function of time elapsed since a preceding exercise . − k x ∆ t = χ s + ce χ s new ( 9 ) where ∆ t = t now − t end exercise , c > 0 Applying this new time constant to Eq . 7 yields a soft constraint efect that temporarily lowers the sleep efciency immediately after an exercise , so that the optimizer tends to schedule a sleep away from the exercise . Solving the diferential Eq . 3 again with the soft constraints of Eq . 10 and Eq . 7 updates D s as follows . 1 − χs kx D s = a s ( χ s e k x t + ce k x t e ) + µ s − f sph ( t ) , at sleep ( 10 ) 3 . 2 . 3 Hyperparameters . A remaining step is to decide hyperpa - rameters to run the optimizations with real user data . • k s , k w in Eq . 5 , inverse time constant for sleep drive at sleep and wake respectively , are taken directly from literature [ 107 ] . • µ s , µ w in Eq . 5 , lower and upper bound of saturation , are set to 0 and 1 respectively , because only a normalized scale matters . • a s , a w in Eq . 5 , signs representing either decline or incline of sleep drive at sleep and awake state , are set - 1 and 1 respectively . • k x , c in Eq . 10 , are empirically set to implement approx . 2 hours of temporary decrease of sleep efciency [ 114 ] . • b in Eq . 1 decides the weight of circadian rhythm on the total sleep pressure . We refer to literature [ 9 , 125 ] reporting that , upon traveling across time zones , it takes a day per hour of shifted time zone for the natural human sleep cycle to adapt . Thereby we set b empirically as 0 . 001 so that , upon shifting a circadian rhythm by n hours , the optimizer produces sleep schedules that gradually move by n hours over n days period . One more parametric extension to our model is to incorporate mid - day physical exercises . Although the mechanism of physical activity accelerating the adenosine accumulation in the brain is known , the scale of acceleration is to be studied . So , we take a data - driven regression based on the initial deploy - ment ( Section 5 ) and an observation phase ( Section 6 ) . We estimate the physical activity intensity based on heart rate ( HR ) . In fact , Fitbit already provides HR - based 5 discrete levels of physical activity in - tensity . To integrate the intensity levels with the sleep drive , we add an intensity - dependent term I L to the waking hours time constant 1 ( χ w = ) of sleep drive in Eq . 5 , as follows . k w = χ w ( 1 − I L ) where L = 0 , 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 ( 11 ) χ w new Solving the diferential equation Eq . 3 again with the physical activity intensity term ( Eq . 11 ) gives an update of D s as follows . ∫ h ( t ) D s = e r ( t ) e h ( t ) dt + c , at wake ∫ ( 12 ) 1 µ h ( t ) = dt r ( t ) = χ w ( 1 − I L ) χ w ( 1 − I L ) To be discussed in Section 5 . 2 , our data - driven regression fts ( I 0 , I 1 , I 2 , I 3 , I 4 ) = ( 0 . 0 , 0 . 6 , 0 . 6 , 0 . 8 , 0 . 8 ) . 3 . 3 Dashboard Interface Figure 4 shows screenshots of the dashboard , a responsive web app supporting both mobile - and desktop - friendly layouts . The web - app provides two tabs : Sleepiness Calculator and Wake - up time Calculator , indicated by A and B in the fgure , respectively . 3 . 3 . 1 Sleepiness Calculator . Sleepiness Calculator A allows the user to ( 1 ) see the original recommended bed / wake - up times along with the per - minute estimated sleepiness levels overlaid on her calendar timeline ; ( 2 ) explore various alternative sleep timings and review the resulting changes in the estimated sleepiness . By doing so , Sleepiness Calculator helps the user make an informed decision on top of the recommended sleep schedules , fnds reasons why those schedules are benefcial subject to her calendar constraints , and gets motivated to seriously consider following the recommendations . Using the sliders A 3 , the user can either advance or defer the today’s recommended bedtime or tomorrow’s wake - up time , by up to ± 3 hours , at a step - size of 1 hour . Our rationale behind the range and step - size is as follows . As outlined under ‘Service’ in Section 3 , SleepGuru service pre - computes and caches all possible alternatives to ensure the dashboard’s immediate responsiveness upon the user’s adjustment . The pre - computation load is O ( n × m ) where n and m are the number of available choices for bedtime and wake - up time adjustments , respectively . We set the time range and step - size to regulate the computation while providing reasonable controllability to the user . Obviously , we can expand the time range and / or reduce the step - size by provisioning more server resources . A 1 indicates the 6 - day long timeline of estimated sleepiness , including 1 past and 4 future days . The 4 - day future projection instantly refreshes upon the user manipulating the sliders , helping her understand the extended impact of her adjustment . Sleepiness Calculator also summarizes key metrics of estimated sleepiness , including : ( 1 ) the time diference in the total high - sleepiness pe - riods 1 ; ( 2 ) the diference in the average sleepiness levels , ( 3 ) the user’s calendar items that overlap with high - sleepiness periods . A 2 indicates the daily timelines , consisting of ‘Original’ , ‘Alter - native’ , and ‘Calendar’ . Original and Alternative are color - coded indicating either per - minute estimated sleepiness ( green to red ) or the recommended sleep hours ( gray ) . A 2 A 5 timelines are scrollable , moving a window over a whole day . A 4 shows the whole day pe - riod visible on a desktop . summarizes the recommended sleep : duration and bed / wake - up times . Adjusting the sliders refreshes the alternative timeline in A 2 and sleep information in A 4 . Overall , Sleepiness Calculator allows the user to check whether the attempted adjustment is worth or not . Typical scenarios would be : ( 1 ) a user attempts to defer her bedtime by 1 hour today , and 1 Defned to be a typical pressure that an average person who sleeps 7 . 5 hours a day would feel at 2 hours before her bedtime . Alternative defnitions can be used . UIST ’22 , October 29 - November 2 , 2022 , Bend , OR , USA Lee et al . Figure 4 : Dashboard interfaces of SleepGuru fnds a high - sleepiness period appears during an important meeting next evening ; ( 2 ) a user attempts to defer her wake - up time by 1 . 5 hour , and fnds it causes carry - overs on her bed / wake - up times for the next 4 days ; ( 3 ) a user wants to decide whether to fnish her work late tonight or save it for tomorrow , and she learns the former yields less increase of high - sleepiness periods for the rest of week . 3 . 3 . 2 Wake - up Time Calculator . Wake - up Time Calculator B serves as a quickly accessible tool in case the user happens to be unable to follow the recommended bedtime , e . g . , her meeting takes longer than she expected . It is imperative to defer her bedtime , but she wants to decide how long to defer in accordance with the new wake - up time being automatically re - optimized . Using the sliders ( the user can defer today’s recommended bedtime by up to + 3 hours , at a step - size of 30 minutes . The adjustable range and step - size are set under the same rationale as in Section 3 . 3 . 1 . B 3 ) , B 1 visualizes the newly optimized wake - up time and corresponding sleep period upon the user’s choice . B 2 summarizes the new sleep timings . 3 . 4 Study Procedure We designed and evaluated SleepGuru along 3 stages of user studies . The whole study plan was approved by our IRB . Preliminary study . We conduct online surveys to develop baseline understandings on : ( 1 ) potential users’ general perspectives to sleep with respect to their professional & personal life , and ( 2 ) major real - life factors that people take into account when making a sleep - related decision . Section 4 summarizes the procedure and fndings . Initial deployment study . We deploy an early version of Sleep - Guru , in order to : ( 1 ) validate that the sleep pressure model adopted from physiology literature in Section 2 . 1 refects user - perceived sleepiness levels ; ( 2 ) calibrate hyperparameters deciding the scale of the user’s physical activity contributions onto her sleep pressure . Section 5 details the observations and the refnement on SleepGuru . Main deployment study . We conduct a full deployment of the refned SleepGuru over an extended period . We report both qualita - tive and quantitative fndings in terms of the users’ experiences and behaviors with SleepGuru , in comparison with those with uniform ideal guidelines . Section 6 elaborates on the main deployment . 4 PRELIMINARY STUDY We conducted surveys over people likely to have irregular life cycles . The study is to fnd their level of general understanding on healthy sleep , as well as their perception on sleep with respect to real - life constraints . We recruited two groups , whose profession or academic duty frequently demands non - uniform day - to - day life : • ( 1 ) 136 from a university , incl . 42 under - & 53 graduate students , 15 faculty & researchers , etc . ( 61F & 75M , age : µ = 26 . 8 , σ = 8 . 87 ) • ( 2 ) 54 from a major airline , incl . 21 cabin crew , 9 pilots , 15 main - tenance & operations , etc . ( 24F & 30M , age : µ = 40 . 3 , σ = 8 . 82 ) Airline employees are a representative group sleeping irregularly – working not only on shifts but also across time zones . College students are well - known poor sleepers [ 85 ] . Their workloads vary over days and weeks , and they live freely , frst time out of parental supervision . Graduate students and professors work heavily driven by deadlines coming irregularly , often set at a foreign time zone . Sleep regularity is evaluated by several measures , including Intra - individual standard deviation ( StDev ) [ 98 ] , Interdaily stabil - ity ( IS ) [ 129 ] , Composite phase deviation ( CPD ) [ 37 ] , and Sleep regularity index ( SRI ) [ 106 ] . In this paper , we mainly use SRI . SRI indicates the probability that a user is at the same sleep / awake state at two points of time that are 24 - hour apart . Therefore SRI can be evaluated over multi - day , solely based on past bed / wake - up times . We confrm that these participants indeed have high sleep irregu - larity . Analyses of their self - reported bed / wake - up times for the last 7 days evaluated a mean SRI of 62 , which falls in the bottom quintile of regularity distribution [ 106 ] – the most irregular sleepers . 4 . 1 Everyday Sleep 4 . 1 . 1 Sleep duration and satisfaction . Asking their sleep duration , the participants answered an average of 7 . 68 hours a day ( university : 7 . 51 , airline : 8 . 85 ) . Both groups also responded neutral ( university : SleepGuru : Personalized Sleep Planning System for Real - life Actionability and Negotiability UIST ’22 , October 29 - November 2 , 2022 , Bend , OR , USA Figure 5 : Response distributions upon greedy - planned sleep 2 . 78 , airline : 3 . 07 ) to the question about sleep satisfaction in a 5 - scale ( 1 : unsatisfactory , 5 : satisfactory ) . No signifcant correlation was found between the satisfaction and the gender nor the age . Interestingly , their sleep satisfaction was not high in spite of their ‘long - enough’ sleep duration which falls in the clinically advised range [ 100 ] . This counter - intuitive result sheds light on the insight that we need to seek a non - duration cause of this inconsistency . 4 . 1 . 2 Sleep with other real - life factors . Regarding their general perception of sleep with respect to real - life factors , we asked how regularly they go to bed , which factors drive them to sleep , how they prioritize sleep over other real - life factors , etc . The participants responded in 5 - point Likert scale ( 1 : least likely , 5 : most likely ) . On average , 72 . 79 % of the university participants and 78 . 89 % of the airline participants responded 4 or 5 on that their sleep schedules are irregular , and they go to bed when they feel tired and are free from a demanding work . In other words , their sleep decisions are like a ‘greedy’ algorithm , exercised on a day - by - day basis , rather than following a constant schedule . Figure 5 illustrates the response distributions per each case of irregular , greedy scheduling of sleep . Regarding the priority of sleep compared to other real - life fac - tors , 60 . 21 % responded 4 or 5 on that they would alter their sleep schedule , and let professional , academic , or social issues to take precedence over sleep . Upon their on - going work expected to over - run a planned bedtime , 69 . 63 % responded that they would not defer residual work after sleep , but rather get the work done now . To be more specifc about real - life factors driving them to alter sleep schedules , the highest - ranked factor was ‘work’ ( 70 . 9 % ) , fol - lowed by ‘fatigue’ ( 48 . 8 % ) . However , factors that the participants would self - regulate to some extent , e . g . , food and drinks , were of low agreement rate ( alcohol : 10 . 8 % , cafeine : 26 . 2 % ) . Figure 6 illustrates the participants’ agreement distributions on various factors . We have identifed that , a sufcient amount of sleep may not nec - essarily lead to high sleep satisfaction , under their job - or academic - originated irregularity and unpredictability easily taking prece - dence over sleep . Importantly , the results call for a new method to harmonize one’s sleep schedule with her real - life priorities while pursuing yet desirable ( despite not ideal ) sleep schedules . 4 . 2 Knowing vs . Exercising Healthy Sleep In this theme , the survey listed the real - life behaviors whose impacts on sleep are well - known in literature , e . g . : “generally , 7 to 8 hours of sleep is healthy” , “sleeping and waking up late would delay one’s sleep cycle” , “sufcient exposure to sunlight would positively afect Figure 6 : Agreement distributions on sleep - steering factors sleep quality” , “blue light from smartphones or laptop screens would negatively afect sleep” , “cafeine would disrupt the sleep at night” . For each behavior , they were asked to choose among three choices if they ( 1 ) ”know and care about” , ( 2 ) ”know but not care about” , or ( 3 ) ”do not know” that behavior . The result would reveal the extent of the participants’ background knowledge , and more importantly , how much they are actually consciously exercising their knowledge on behaviors promoting healthy sleep patterns . It turned out that both the airline and the university groups have good understanding in behaviors promoting healthy sleep . 72 . 2 % responded ‘know’ , i . e . , either ( 1 ) or ( 2 ) . However , only 50 . 8 % of the ‘’know’ respondents ( i . e . , overall 36 . 7 % ) actually care about such behaviors in their real life . The results reveal that knowing healthy sleep behaviors and exer - cising them in real - life are decoupled . They may need interventions to close the gap , rather than strengthen existing knowledge . 4 . 3 Desire to Sleep Planning In this theme , the survey asked if they need personalized sleep schedules that are agreeable to one’s day - to - day circumstances , in a 5 - point Likert scale ( 1 : strongly disagree , 5 : strongly agree ) . 83 . 8 % of them agreed ( scale 4 or 5 ) . No signifcant correlation was found ( ρ = - 0 . 044 ) between the sleep satisfaction and the necessity of sleep schedules . The results indicate that most of them would like to refer to tailer - made sleep schedules refecting their varying professional or academic requirements , regardless of their sleep satisfaction . 5 INITIAL DEPLOYMENT STUDY Based on the fndings from Section 4 and the physiological sleep models ( Section 2 ) , we designed and developed an initial version of SleepGuru . A key diference from the fnal version described in Section 3 is that the dashboard is not implemented yet . Using this initial version , we conducted a 2 - week initial deploy - ment study . The purpose of the study includes : ( 1 ) to validate the trends predicted by the sleep pressure model ( Eq . 1 ) from physi - ology literature , ( 2 ) to fnd the hyperparameter values related to physical exercises that needs to be empirically searched , and ( 3 ) to learn about necessary refnement on SleepGuru’s design . We recruited 11 participants from campus bulletins and word - of - mouth . Following summarizes their demographics . • 5 under - & 6 graduate students . ( 4F & 7M , age : 20 - 27 ) Eligible participants were limited to adults without sleep - related disorders ( e . g . , insomnia , sleep apnea ) . They were asked to use UIST ’22 , October 29 - November 2 , 2022 , Bend , OR , USA Lee et al . Google Calendar , and to fll their weekly calendars with all of their planned activities at which they are unable to sleep : e . g . , work hours , homework , family duty , appointments , etc . Still , they were allowed to freely change their calendars whenever necessary . Once SleepGuru computes their sleep timings and places the schedules in their calendars , they were asked to follow the schedules accordingly . Every day , they were asked to fll a short online survey within 5 minutes since wake up . The questions asked in Likert - scale about their perceived difculty of falling asleep last night and waking up this morning . Their self - reported scales are later compared against our model - predicted sleep pressure . In order to capture their physi - cal activity data , they were asked to always wear a wristband , Fitbit Inspire 2 . After the 2 - week deployment fnished , we conducted 1 - on - 1 semi - structured interviews . We openly asked about their overall impression and room for improvement in SleepGuru system . Each participant was compensated $ 40 - worth amount per week . 5 . 1 Sleep Pressure Validation SleepGuru employs the sleep pressure as the metric representing time - varying levels of sleep - induced fatigue along sleep and wake times , as explained in Section 3 . 2 . As this metric is the basis on which SleepGuru computes proper user - specifc sleep timings , we validate if the predicted sleep pressure levels are consistent with the participants’ self - reported difculty scales . Note that the sleep pressure model validated at this step is the baseline one directly employed from physiology literature ( Eq . 1 ) . The result shows sig - nifcant correlations between sleep pressure levels and responses to “hard to wake - up” ( ρ = 0 . 33 , p = 0 . 0001 ) and “hard to sleep” ( ρ = − 0 . 20 , p = 0 . 02 ) . All the results are obtained by Spearman’s rank correlation . This results supports the consistency between our model - predicted sleep pressure and user - perceived sleep difculty . 5 . 2 Hyperparameters on Physical Exercises Now that the basic sleep pressure model has been validated , we consider the additive infuence from the participant’s physical exer - cises . As discussed in Section 3 . 2 . 2 and 3 . 2 . 3 , we apply a data - driven regression for optimal hyperparameters that describe the rate of adenosine concentration growth along with exercise intensity . By additionally incorporating the exercise factors onto the base - line model , the regression fts the values so that the sum of the absolute value of correlations between the sleep pressure and self - reported difculty scales increases above the baseline correlation observed in Section 5 . 1 and further maximizes . 5 . 3 Participant Feedback & System Refnement Overall , within the frst week , the participants got used to checking and following the SleepGuru - recommended sleep schedules . From their interview responses , we identifed that supplementing the recommendations with some explanatory information would strengthen the participants’ motive to follow the recommended sleep plans . P6 stated : “I prefer fnishing the work ( although not due tonight ) before going to bed . So I often passed the recommended bedtime when my work overran . ” We also identifed that the participants are in need of alternative schedules once they deviated from the recommendation . They were uncertain about what to do once they fnd it impossible to follow the recommended sleep schedule . P3 recalled : “It was unavoidable to pass the bedtime . I went to bed much later , but woke up on time as recommended . I felt too sleepy , ended up taking a nap . ” P6 stated : “It was the exam week ; I had to defer my bedtime frequently . But it was unclear whether I should defer the wake - up time together or not . ” We learned that , upon the participant failing to follow a recom - mended timing , SleepGuru should do a follow - up action : running the optimization again with taking her actual bed / wake - up time from her Fitbit . P1 said : “I woke up ( past the scheduled wake - up time ) too late yesterday ; I couldn’t fall asleep at the next scheduled bedtime . ” Incorporating the lessons , we designed and developed the dash - board so that ( 1 ) the participant can see the key sleep - related metrics of herself , ( 2 ) preview the estimated sleepiness changes along her timeline if she follows the recommendations , and ( 3 ) compare the diferences in the estimated sleepiness according to each alternative option she attempt . Later , this alternative - seeking interfaces turned out to be helping the user proactively negotiate between alternative options and her soft constraints ( e . g . , fexible work , hobbies ) . 6 MAIN DEPLOYMENT STUDY Table 1 : Final deployment demographics Gender Female ( 8 ) , Male ( 12 ) Age 20 - 24 ( 6 ) , 25 - 29 ( 13 ) , 30 - 34 ( 1 ) Occupation Ofce worker ( 1 ) , Undergraduate student ( 2 ) , Graduate student ( 17 ) We conducted the main deployment study to evaluate SleepGuru in - the - wild . Our study identifed multiple indications of positive change in sleep quality , practical compliance , and long - term follow - ability of recommendations . We recruited 20 participants from campus bulletins and word - of - mouth . Table 1 summarizes their demographics . No one from the initial deployment was included . Each participant was compensated $ 25 - worth amount per week . The total study period was 8 weeks , consisting of 3 phases : • Observation ( 2 weeks ) identifes each participant’s baseline sleep patterns . Participants self - scheduled their sleep . • Standard ( 2 weeks ) provides clinically standard [ 47 , 97 ] sleep schedules agnostic to their real - life constraints . • SleepGuru ( 4 weeks ) provides SleepGuru - generated sleep sched - ules while also accepting user - negotiated alternative schedules . To mitigate ordering efects , we switched the order of standard and SleepGuru for half the participants . To mitigate the transition efects between standard and SleepGuru ( and vice versa ) , we in - serted a transition period of 2 days , the recovery period between two drastically diferent sleep patterns [ 107 ] . No recommendations are given in the transition period . The standard phase provides uniform recommendations everyday , i . e . , bedtime at 11 pm , for 8 hours of sleep , the most desirable bedtime for young and middle - age adults [ 47 ] and the optimal sleep duration minimizing cardiovas - cular disease incidence [ 97 ] , respectively . Each participant was surveyed or interviewed daily , weekly , and at exit , as follows : Daily Questionnaires . Each participants was asked to fll two times of online surveys : a wake - up survey right after wake - up , and a mid - day survey around 4 pm . For the wake - up survey , we used KMLSEQ [ 70 ] , a Korean translation of Leeds Sleep Evaluation Ques - tionnaire ( LSEQ ) [ 102 ] . It consists of 10 Likert - scale questions con - cerning these themes : ‘Getting to sleep’ , ‘Quality of sleep’ , ‘Awake SleepGuru : Personalized Sleep Planning System for Real - life Actionability and Negotiability UIST ’22 , October 29 - November 2 , 2022 , Bend , OR , USA 30 40 50 60 LSEQ SleepGuru Standard Observation Figure 7 : LSEQ score distributions in each phase following sleep’ , ‘Behaviour following wakening . ’ They were also asked about any sleep - infuential actions taken last day ( e . g . , alcohol or cafeine intakes ) for the 4 - hour window prior to bedtime . For the mid - day survey , we adopted KESS [ 22 ] ( a Korean - translation of Epworth Sleepiness Scale ( ESS ) [ 62 ] ) and SSS ( Stanford Sleepiness Scale ) [ 48 ] , which assess the perceived daytime sleepiness levels . Weekly interviews . Each participant was interviewed for 30 min - utes in a 1 - on - 1 semi - structured fashion . They provided qualitative feedback on their weekly sleep experiences , sleep recommendations ( if applicable in that week ) , and system usability . Exit interview . After concluding the deployment , we conducted 1 - hour one - on - one interviews . We asked in - depth about their sleep patterns and perceived quality , their perspectives on sleep , compar - ison between the standard and SleepGuru , and so on . 6 . 1 Results Overall , we identifed that the use of SleepGuru involved positive changes in terms of user - perceived sleep quality and their rate of compliance to the recommendations , compared against both their self - scheduling ( i . e . , observation phase ) and clinically desired scheduling but not mindful of their real - life ( i . e . , standard phase ) . Moreover , the participants appreciated that SleepGuru’s recommen - dations are sustainable in their real - life , helping their quality - of - life on both dimensions of professional and sleep health , not either . Also , we observed that the use of SleepGuru involved positive changes in their perspectives on sleep life , e . g . , fnding practical room for improvement and experiencing the feasibility themselves . 6 . 1 . 1 Improvement in sleep quality . We analyzed various measures on sleep quality , sleep efciency , daytime sleepiness , etc . , based on the quantitative survey ratings , Fitbit data , and qualitative interview logs . Below , we report the results compared across phases . Sleep quality . We frstly compared all - participant averages of LSEQ scores per each phase . To minimize possible interference and novelty efects shortly after a transition to a new phase , we referred to the last 7 - day period of each phase for comparison . As shown in Figure 7 , SleepGuru demonstrated 15 % increase of LSEQ score over the observation . We note that the standard showed 11 % increase over the observation ; however , it was shown that much of standard results came at the cost of sacrifcing some of their real - life constraints and thereby they expressed concerns about non - sustainability as detailed in Section 6 . 1 . 2 . Sleep efciency To analyze the potential benefts of the SleepGuru - scheduled sleeps over the users’ self - scheduled sleeps , we compared the average decline of sleep pressure per unit time of a user’s sleep duration between the observation and SleepGuru . Sleep duration includes both net sleeping hours and sleep onset latency ( i . e . , the la - tency from the user attempts to sleep until she actually falls asleep ) . The decline of SP is estimated for the net sleeping hours only . As a result , SleepGuru - scheduled sleeps yield 5 . 5 % faster decline rate of SP , compared to the users’ self - scheduled sleeps . This fnding implies that SleepGuru helps improve the sleep efciency ; users may beneft from a greater reduction of SP with SleepGuru given the same sleep duration . It supports that the optimization model of SleepGuru works as intended – i . e . , reducing the sleep pressure efectively while regularizing the sleep duration not too long . Mid - day sleepiness . Analyses on the ESS and SSS scores ( repre - senting their perceived mid - day sleepiness ) did not show a con - vincing diference between the observation and SleepGuru , when we took the whole set of the participants’ mid - day survey results from the entire periods of each phase . Interestingly , however , we observed 20 % reduction of ESS scores with a statistical signifcance ( p = 0 . 0092 ) when we refer to the last 7 - day period of each phase , based on the same rationale as in the earlier LSEQ analysis . The SSS scores show a reduction ( 8 . 9 % ) for the same period but not convincing ( p = 0 . 13 ) . We do not claim conclusiveness given the insufcient congruence between two measures . Yet , the observa - tions imply SleepGuru - scheduled sleeps’ potentials in reducing the users’ mid - day sleepiness , supporting the operation of SleepGuru model as it aims at suppressing their daytime sleep pressure . For conclusive results , we may need more extended and con - trolled studies . A transition between the phases may leave some fuctuations that dilute the trend for a couple of weeks . Also , the par - ticipants’ mid - day sleepiness was largely masked or overwhelmed by their active daytime events so far ( e . g . , activities , cafeine intake ) . Qualitatively , participants expressed positive responses appreci - ating the improved mid - day sleepiness . P3 commented : “ ( Previously ) I often felt sleepy mid - day and often took a nap . SleepGuru gave me sleep schedules which happened not to include a nap . Sleeping longer at night , I didn’t feel sleepy mid - day anymore , and didn’t need a nap , either . ” P11 commented similarly to P3 . P17 recalled : “My fatigue grows a lot from Monday through Friday . ( With using SleepGuru ) Now my colleagues say I look much better on weekdays . ” P9 com - mented : “Honestly I didn’t think I ever needed SleepGuru . I was fne with my sleep . Now I feel the diference . ( Before SleepGuru ) I should have been tired , even I didn’t realize . ” Restoration of broken sleep cycles . As explained in Section 3 . 2 . 3 , we parameterize SleepGuru to exhibit a small momentum gradually approaching the solar - clocked circadian rhythm in case of a substantial shift , as the user constraints allow . Several partici - pants appreciated that SleepGuru helped them restore their broken sleep cycles ( e . g . , from a sudden all - nighter work ) . P20 recalled : “ ( Previously ) Once I got my sleep cycles broken , the aftermath lasted many days . Now , SleepGuru noticeably expedited my recovery period . ” Interestingly , SleepGuru also exhibited ‘resistance’ to a complete break of sleep cycles . P10 stated : “ ( Previously ) When I got my work done too late , I often just decide not to sleep at all , say ‘Que sera sera , ’ and later sleep at a random time . SleepGuru shows me a clear opportunity that I can actually sleep , making me feel inclined to sleep . ’ 6 . 1 . 2 Improvement in practical compliance . We analyze the practi - cality of sleep recommendations by analyzing the compliance rates . We defne a user complied with a recommended sleep if the sum of UIST ’22 , October 29 - November 2 , 2022 , Bend , OR , USA Lee et al . bedtime and wake - up time diference , between the recommended and the user - reported actual , is less than an hour , as follows . f r f r t − t + t − t < 1 hour b b w w  t b : bedtime , : wake - up time  t w ( 13 )  where t f : user - reported wake - up or bedtime  t r : recommended wake - up or bedtime  Overall compliance . Analyzing the overall compliance rates over all recommended timings , we obtain ( SleepGuru : 0 . 46 , standard : 0 . 16 ) . We had 5 outlying participants who have been constantly in disregard of the experiment protocols they are participating in . If we exclude those fve , we obtain ( SleepGuru : 0 . 58 , standard : 0 . 21 ) . A 3 - times increase over the standard is impressive , but not sur - prising , as SleepGuru - provided recommendations are confict - free in spite of their irregular day - to - day life . Participants commented that , having a standard - phase recommendation overlaid on their events and duty , the recommended timings often made little sense . On the other hand , upon seeing a SleepGuru - provided recommen - dation , they thought : ‘It is doable . ’ , ‘I’d like to . ’ , ‘I can give it a try’ . Despite the 3 - times increase , the absolute compliance rate ( 0 . 58 ) might not seem high . We found that individuals’ familiarity with online calendars difered ; those who have not used an online cal - endar often forgot making calendar entries , where SleepGuru’s recommendations sometimes overlapped with . From in - depth interviews , we elicited the following reasons ac - counting for improved compliance . Sleeps on calendar timeline . Seeing their sleeps as a kind of events of an equal prominence along with other existing calendar events enlightened them to stay conscious of their sleep . P2 stated : “It seemed to me like an appointment that I need to keep ; it actually worked so that I followed better . ” P4 stated : “Seeing my upcoming sleep in my calendar , I tend to refrain from hanging out too late . ” Both participants expressed very high satisfaction on the increased sleep quality that they have perceived . We acknowledge that placing sleeps on the calendar timeline equally applies to the standard phase . However , we fnd that seeing the sleeps that snugly ft in their timeline non - overlapping with other events made the diference . Feeling respected . Many participants expressed feelings that their individual duty , circumstances , and values are being respected . The feeling that they are provided with tailor - made recommendations contributed to the compliance . P4 commented : “ ( With SleepGuru , ) I gave it a try because it seemed doable . ( . . . ) The standard recommen - dations seemed obviously impossible at a frst glance , and I didn’t even try a bit . ” P13 commented : “At frst I was enthusiastic , but the standard recommendations seemed not doable at all , breaking my spirit to keep up with . ” Avoiding bedtime procrastination . Bedtime procrastination is repeatedly reported in literature [ 77 , 96 ] . We learned that SleepGuru would bring mitigation to bedtime procrastination . P13 recalled : “When I joined the experiment , I didn’t have a reason to change my sleep life . I didn’t think I had any problem with it . ( . . . ) With using SleepGuru , I realize that I often just don’t go bed without necessarily doing something . Also I realized that I am terribly under - utilizing my weekend morning , just staying awake in bed too long . ” 6 . 1 . 3 Explainability and Negotiability . In spite of seemingly over - whelming look of the dashboard interfaces , we found a number of episodes that the users benefted from the dashboard in under - standing the rationales of the recommendations as well as seeking a good compromise between their real - life deviations and healthy sleep . In particular , the participants appreciated the juxtaposition of sleepiness and calendar timelines ( A 2 in Figure 4 ) and the summary of calendar items that would sufer from high sleepiness ( commented that these interfaces highlight the direct impact of their sleep onto their real - life schedules ; P9 stated : “Spotting the specifc activity of tomorrow ( where I would feel sleepy ) is more compelling than simply telling me that tomorrow would be a sleepy day . ” A 1 ) . They   Our server logs and interviews unveiled the participants’ fre - quent and fexible negotiation between their real - life schedules , imminent deviations , sleep timings , and sleepiness along time . P19 recalled : “Upon a late - hour meeting newly suggested , the high up - coming sleepiness predicted in the dashboard led me to make efort to adjust it earlier . ” P18 was more specifc : “It taught me how much , and no more than that , I should delay my bedtime when I have to . I often saw a big diference of future sleepiness between delaying by 1 hour and by 2 hours . It really helped me fnd a sweet spot of getting my work done versus not too much sacrifcing my sleep . ” A few participants did not fnd much utility in seeing their pre - dicted sleepiness . A reason was that most of them had fully packed calendars , with little room negotiate for more or less sleepiness . P4 and P6 commented that knowing the sleepiness ahead does not necessarily help when they have an armful of works to get done any - way . We also learned about some limitations . As non - sleep factors ( e . g . , cafeine , meals , and current activities ) that afect the user - perceived sleepiness are not incorporated in the dashboard , some participants found that the predictions shown on the dashboard are not always consistent with what they perceive . 6 . 1 . 4 Long - term follow - ability of recommendations . At the end of each phase , we asked “Are you willing to keep using the system and following the sleep recommendations for a long - term ? ” Most participants responded positively in continuing the SleepGuru rec - ommendations , expecting little challenges in extended compliance . P3 , P8 , P11 , P13 commented that , at the beginning of experiments , they just followed SleepGuru recommendations mostly driven by curiosity or obligation to the experiment . As recommendations continue , they realized the positive change of their sleep experi - ences , resulting in their intrinsic motivations to develop . For the standard recommendations , even high - compliant participants ex - pressed concerns . P2 , whose compliance rate in the standard is 0 . 47 , evaluated : “The standard recommendations are just like a short , tight diet . You can do it for a while , if you are committed . But you certainly cannot keep it much longer . ” P11 complained : “The standard - phase recommendations disregard too many things that matter to my life . ” 7 DISCUSSION We discuss below various implications , limitations , and future work that we have learned from design , deployments , and literature . Individual factors of proper sleep duration . It is known that genetic factors such as DEC2 gene mutation decide natural short - or long - sleepers [ 46 , 116 ] . Note that the current SleepGuru is already capable of accommodating the individual’s intrinsic bias of sleep SleepGuru : Personalized Sleep Planning System for Real - life Actionability and Negotiability UIST ’22 , October 29 - November 2 , 2022 , Bend , OR , USA duration , which can be done by making an individual adjustment on λ in Eq . 1 . However , we chose not to accommodate the varia - tion in this experiment . Identifying one’s intrinsic short ( or long ) sleeper temperament would require an extended observation under controlled settings detached from her real - life , assuming examining her genes is not an option . We believe that a longitudinal deploy - ment , long enough to amortize her real - life diversity , may reveal propensity indicative of an individual bias towards either short - or long - sleeper . A structured self - experimentation [ 29 ] may also help identify one’s sleep duration bias . Now having the initial efcacy of SleepGuru confrmed with major variables whose computational models or measurability is established , it would serve as momentum to plan for further individualization over additional dimensions . Deployment period . Our main deployment lasted for 8 weeks , in which the condition of SleepGuru was exercised for 4 weeks . Our study period is comparable to those of recent deployment - driven HCI works [ 61 , 65 , 72 ] , and major sleep intervention works in HCI and pervasive computing , notably : 2 weeks in Lullaby [ 68 ] and SleepApp [ 112 ] , and 4 weeks in SleepTight [ 24 ] and Daskalova et al [ 28 ] . SleepCoacher [ 29 ] conducted the fnal study for 6 weeks , but each intervention condition lasted for 5 days . Still , we acknowl - edge that a longer period of deployment would embrace the users’ even more diverse real - life constraints , leading to an evaluation of SleepGuru further inclusive of greater degree of real - life diversity . Environmental factors Through the wake - up surveys and weekly interviews , we spotted a number of environmental factors afecting sleep . Many of those factors were consistent with the literature - reported factors listed in Section 2 . 2 such as foor noise , roommates , alcohol , cafeine . A sole unexpected deviation was COVID - 19 ; 1 . 3 % of nights were seriously afected by COVID - 19 infection or vacci - nation . We excluded such nights from the analysis , as they are a pandemic - specifc outlier and would not generalize much longer . Our 8 - week deployment period ranged from late winter till mid - spring , covering a good mix of diferent times in an academic calen - dar – vacation , semester opening , major exam . As the deployment phases were shufed therein , each phase was exposed to a roughly equivalent distribution of academic workload levels . Therefore the deployment design would mitigate concerns about either phase being biased to a particularly idle or busy time . It is also known that sleep timings tend to difer between seasons [ 74 ] , which may have introduced seasonal biases to our deployment . We did not fnd a cor - relation between the participants’ bed / wake - up time changes and seasonal progression ( i . e . , late winter → early spring → mid - spring ) . No participant commented on seasonal factors in their interviews . We believe that our participants’ sleeps have been afected mainly by their social factors and our recommendations . Automating calendar items entry . SleepGuru relies on the user’s online calendar to retrieve her existing constraints of time . While most participants fnd it doable to input their non - sleep activities into their calendar , several participants mentioned meetings or ap - pointments ‘fash - scheduled’ with little heads - up , rendering them unable to make a calendar entry . We note automatic calendar en - try features being deployed . Gmail and WhatsApp automatically extract calendar - related tokens from emails and messages . Voice assistants are able to make a calendar entry from a natural speech query ; near - future conversational agents [ 56 , 57 , 78 , 80 ] may auto - insert a calendar item extracted from our conversations that they always listen . We envision that on - going advance of sensing and AI would eventually lessen the burden of manual calendar entry . Calibrating circadian rhythm ofset . As reviewed in Section 2 . 1 . 4 , circadian rhythm is governed by melatonin secretion whose dominant controller is the sunlight [ 39 , 90 , 107 ] . Exposure to artif - cial light at night would interfere with melatonin secretion , drifting the circadian rhythm ofset [ 16 , 63 ] . We believe that leveraging the built - in light sensor of our mobile devices [ 11 , 49 ] , which are increasingly serving as a pervasive sensing platform [ 25 , 55 , 71 , 73 , 79 , 131 , 132 ] , would enable SleepGuru to automatically adjust one’s circadian rhythm ofset based on her night - time light exposure . Incorporating mealtimes . Taking a meal is known to infuence one’s sleepiness [ 127 ] . Also , when to take meals regulates human circadian system [ 126 ] . We envision that SleepGuru can leverage both past and future mealtimes . Incorporating latest wearable or IoT technologies detecting past eating [ 14 , 15 , 27 ] or inferring din - ing contexts at home [ 64 ] , SleepGuru can further sophisticate its prediction on momentary sleep pressure . Furthermore , SleepGuru may also schedule mealtimes altogether with sleep times and other constraints , to the best interest of sleep efcacy . Extremely packed calendar . A few participants had to work on an imminent deadline . Having their calendars nearly full for some days , the degrees of freedom for SleepGuru were extremely limited . As a result , SleepGuru almost fell back on greedy scheduling , ‘Sleep when you can . ’ This limitation would be inevitable as we cannot create the 25th hour of a day [ 66 ] while keeping all time - demanding works intact . After all , such extremes will be outlying few as it is not sustainable beyond a few days . For the majority with busy , irregular yet sustainable calendars , we have observed that SleepGuru operate on reasonable degrees of freedom in scheduling sleeps , many of which elicited satisfactory responses compared to the baselines . 8 CONCLUSION Widely - accepted sleep guidelines require excessive self - regulation and sacrifce of social duties in return for healthy sleep . We de - veloped SleepGuru , a real - life actionable sleep planning system that accommodates an individual’s dynamic constraints , and ac - cordingly recommends sleep plans that are explainable , negotiable , and executable with respect to her own circumstances . An 8 - week in - the - wild deployment identifed that the use of SleepGuru elicited multiple indications of positive change in sleep quality , efciency , alertness , compliance , and long - term follow - ability of recommen - dations . With lessons and limitations found , we envision a future system promoting one’s healthy sleep life with a more comprehen - sive understanding of the user’s real - life and sleep principles . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This research was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea ( NRF ) grant funded by the Korea government ( MSIT ) ( No . 2021R1A2C200386612 ) . This research was also partly supported by the IITP grants by the MSIT , Korea ( IITP - 2020 - 0 - 01778 , IITP - 2022 - 0 - 00240 ) , and by the KOCCA grant funded by the Ministry of Culture , Sports and Tourism in 2022 ( Project Number : R2021040136 , Contribution Rate : 10 % ) . UIST ’22 , October 29 - November 2 , 2022 , Bend , OR , USA Lee et al . REFERENCES [ 1 ] [ n . d . ] . ApexCharts . js . Retrieved July . 27 , 2022 from https : / / apexcharts . com / [ 2 ] [ n . d . ] . AutoSleep . Retrieved Apr . 4 , 2022 from http : / / autosleep . tantsissa . com / [ 3 ] [ n . d . ] . Fitbit . Retrieved Apr . 3 , 2022 from https : / / www . ftbit . com [ 4 ] [ n . d . ] . Mi Band . Retrieved Apr . 3 , 2022 from https : / / www . mi . com / global / miband [ 5 ] [ n . d . ] . Oura Ring . Retrieved Apr . 3 , 2022 from https : / / ouraring . com / [ 6 ] [ n . d . ] . Pillow . Retrieved Apr . 4 , 2022 from https : / / pillow . app / [ 7 ] [ n . d . ] . Sleep Cycle . Retrieved Apr . 3 , 2022 from https : / / www . sleepcycle . com / [ 8 ] Sina Akbarian , Ghazaleh Delf , Kaiyin Zhu , Azadeh Yadollahi , and Babak Taati . 2019 . Automated non - contact detection of head and body positions during sleep . IEEE Access 7 ( 2019 ) , 72826 – 72834 . [ 9 ] Josephine Arendt . 2009 . Managing jet lag : Some of the problems and possible new solutions . Sleep medicine reviews 13 , 4 ( 2009 ) , 249 – 256 . [ 10 ] Greg Atkinson and Damien Davenne . 2007 . Relationships between sleep , physi - cal activity and human health . Physiology & behavior 90 , 2 - 3 ( 2007 ) , 229 – 235 . [ 11 ] Martin Azizyan and Romit Roy Choudhury . 2009 . SurroundSense : mobile phone localization using ambient sound and light . ACM SIGMOBILE Mobile Computing and Communications Review 13 , 1 ( 2009 ) , 69 – 72 . [ 12 ] Radhika Basheer , Robert E Strecker , Mahesh M Thakkar , and Robert W McCarley . 2004 . Adenosine and sleep – wake regulation . Progress in neurobiology 73 , 6 ( 2004 ) , 379 – 396 . [ 13 ] Jared S Bauer , Sunny Consolvo , Benjamin Greenstein , Jonathan Schooler , Eric Wu , Nathaniel F Watson , and Julie Kientz . 2012 . ShutEye : encouraging aware - ness of healthy sleep recommendations with a mobile , peripheral display . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1401 – 1410 . [ 14 ] Abdelkareem Bedri , Diana Li , Rushil Khurana , Kunal Bhuwalka , and Mayank Goel . 2020 . Fitbyte : Automatic diet monitoring in unconstrained situations using multimodal sensing on eyeglasses . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 12 . [ 15 ] Abdelkareem Bedri , Richard Li , Malcolm Haynes , Raj Prateek Kosaraju , Ishaan Grover , Temiloluwa Prioleau , Min Yan Beh , Mayank Goel , Thad Starner , and Gregory Abowd . 2017 . EarBit : using wearable sensors to detect eating episodes in unconstrained environments . Proceedings of the ACM on interactive , mobile , wearable and ubiquitous technologies 1 , 3 ( 2017 ) , 1 – 20 . [ 16 ] Christine Blume , Corrado Garbazza , and Manuel Spitschan . 2019 . Efects of light on human circadian rhythms , sleep and mood . Somnologie 23 , 3 ( 2019 ) , 147 – 156 . [ 17 ] Alexander A Borbély . 1982 . A two process model of sleep regulation . Hum neurobiol 1 , 3 ( 1982 ) , 195 – 204 . [ 18 ] Zachary A Caddick , Kevin Gregory , Lucia Arsintescu , and Erin E Flynn - Evans . 2018 . A review of the environmental parameters necessary for an optimal sleep environment . Building and environment 132 ( 2018 ) , 11 – 20 . [ 19 ] Paula Cavalcanti , Tania Campos , and John Araujo . 2012 . Actigraphic analysis of the sleep – wake cycle and physical activity level in patients with stroke : Implications for clinical practice . Chronobiology international 29 , 9 ( 2012 ) , 1267 – 1272 . [ 20 ] Maria F Ceolim and Luiz Menna - Barreto . 2000 . Sleep / wake cycle and physical activity in healthy elderly people . Sleep Research Online 3 , 3 ( 2000 ) , 87 – 95 . [ 21 ] Liqiong Chang , Jiaqi Lu , Ju Wang , Xiaojiang Chen , Dingyi Fang , Zhanyong Tang , Petteri Nurmi , and Zheng Wang . 2018 . SleepGuard : Capturing rich sleep infor - mation using smartwatch sensing data . Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive , Mobile , Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 2 , 3 ( 2018 ) , 1 – 34 . [ 22 ] Yong Won Cho , Joo Hwa Lee , Hyo Kyung Son , Seung Hoon Lee , Chol Shin , and Murray W Johns . 2011 . The reliability and validity of the Korean version of the Epworth sleepiness scale . Sleep and Breathing 15 , 3 ( 2011 ) , 377 – 384 . [ 23 ] Eun Kyoung Choe , Sunny Consolvo , Nathaniel F . Watson , and Julie A . Kientz . 2011 . Opportunities for Computing Technologies to Support Healthy Sleep Be - haviors . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Vancouver , BC , Canada ) ( CHI ’11 ) . Association for Computing Machin - ery , New York , NY , USA , 3053 – 3062 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979395 [ 24 ] Eun Kyoung Choe , Bongshin Lee , Matthew Kay , Wanda Pratt , and Julie A Kientz . 2015 . SleepTight : low - burden , self - monitoring technology for capturing and refecting on sleep behaviors . In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 121 – 132 . [ 25 ] Woohyeok Choi , Jeungmin Oh , Taiwoo Park , Seongjun Kang , Miri Moon , Uichin Lee , Inseok Hwang , and Junehwa Song . 2014 . MobyDick : an interactive multi - swimmer exergame . In Proceedings of the 12th ACM Conference on Embedded Network Sensor Systems . 76 – 90 . [ 26 ] Sudhansu Chokroverty et al . 2010 . Overview of sleep & sleep disorders . Indian J Med Res 131 , 2 ( 2010 ) , 126 – 140 . [ 27 ] Keum San Chun , Sarnab Bhattacharya , and Edison Thomaz . 2018 . Detecting eating episodes by tracking jawbone movements with a non - contact wearable sensor . Proceedings of the ACM on interactive , mobile , wearable and ubiquitous technologies 2 , 1 ( 2018 ) , 1 – 21 . [ 28 ] Nediyana Daskalova , Bongshin Lee , Jef Huang , Chester Ni , and Jessica Lundin . 2018 . Investigating the efectiveness of cohort - based sleep recommendations . Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive , Mobile , Wearable and Ubiquitous Tech - nologies 2 , 3 ( 2018 ) , 1 – 19 . [ 29 ] Nediyana Daskalova , Danaë Metaxa - Kakavouli , Adrienne Tran , Nicole Nugent , Julie Boergers , John McGeary , and Jef Huang . 2016 . SleepCoacher : A person - alized automated self - experimentation system for sleep recommendations . In Proceedings of the 29th annual symposium on user interface software and technol - ogy . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 347 – 358 . [ 30 ] Horacio O De La Iglesia , Eduardo Fernández - Duque , Diego A Golombek , Nor - berto Lanza , Jeanne F Dufy , Charles A Czeisler , and Claudia R Valeggia . 2015 . Access to electric light is associated with shorter sleep duration in a traditionally hunter - gatherer community . Journal of biological rhythms 30 , 4 ( 2015 ) , 342 – 350 . [ 31 ] Derk - Jan Dijk and Charles A Czeisler . 1995 . Contribution of the circadian pacemaker and the sleep homeostat to sleep propensity , sleep structure , elec - troencephalographic slow waves , and sleep spindle activity in humans . Journal of Neuroscience 15 , 5 ( 1995 ) , 3526 – 3538 . [ 32 ] Michael Dixon , Logan Schneider , Jefrey Yu , Jonathan Hsu , Anupam Pathak , D Shin , Reena Singhal Lee , Mark Rajan Malhotra , Ken Mixter , Mike McConnell , et al . 2021 . Sleep - wake Detection With a Contactless , Bedside Radar Sleep Sensing System . ( 2021 ) . [ 33 ] Christopher L Drake , Timothy Roehrs , Gary Richardson , James K Walsh , and Thomas Roth . 2004 . Shift work sleep disorder : prevalence and consequences beyond that of symptomatic day workers . sleep 27 , 8 ( 2004 ) , 1453 – 1462 . [ 34 ] M Dworak , P Diel , S Voss , W Hollmann , and HK Strüder . 2007 . Intense exercise increases adenosine concentrations in rat brain : implications for a homeostatic sleep drive . Neuroscience 150 , 4 ( 2007 ) , 789 – 795 . [ 35 ] Anne - Marie Feyer . 2001 . Fatigue : time to recognise and deal with an old problem : It’s time to stop treating lack of sleep as a badge of honour . , 808 – 809 pages . [ 36 ] Patrick H Finan , Phillip J Quartana , and Michael T Smith . 2015 . The efects of sleep continuity disruption on positive mood and sleep architecture in healthy adults . Sleep 38 , 11 ( 2015 ) , 1735 – 1742 . [ 37 ] Dorothee Fischer , Céline Vetter , and Till Roenneberg . 2016 . A novel method to visualise and quantify circadian misalignment . Scientifc reports 6 , 1 ( 2016 ) , 1 – 10 . [ 38 ] Emmanuel Frimpong , Melodee Mograss , Tehila Zvionow , and Thien Thanh Dang - Vu . 2021 . The efects of evening high - intensity exercise on sleep in healthy adults : A systematic review and meta - analysis . Sleep medicine reviews 60 ( 2021 ) , 101535 . [ 39 ] BD Fulcher , Andrew JK Phillips , and Peter Alexander Robinson . 2010 . Quantita - tive physiologically based modeling of subjective fatigue during sleep depriva - tion . Journal of theoretical biology 264 , 2 ( 2010 ) , 407 – 419 . [ 40 ] Philip R Gehrman , Brendan T Keenan , Enda M Byrne , and Allan I Pack . 2015 . Genetics of sleep disorders . Psychiatric Clinics 38 , 4 ( 2015 ) , 667 – 681 . [ 41 ] Andrea N Goldstein and Matthew P Walker . 2014 . The role of sleep in emotional brain function . Annual review of clinical psychology 10 ( 2014 ) , 679 – 708 . [ 42 ] Michael A Grandner . 2017 . Sleep , health , and society . Sleep medicine clinics 12 , 1 ( 2017 ) , 1 – 22 . [ 43 ] Timo Grimm , Manuel Martinez , Andreas Benz , and Rainer Stiefelhagen . 2016 . Sleep position classifcation from a depth camera using bed aligned maps . In 2016 23rd International Conference on Pattern Recognition ( ICPR ) . IEEE , 319 – 324 . [ 44 ] Weixi Gu , Longfei Shangguan , Zheng Yang , and Yunhao Liu . 2015 . Sleep hunter : Towards fne grained sleep stage tracking with smartphones . IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing 15 , 6 ( 2015 ) , 1514 – 1527 . [ 45 ] Tian Hao , Guoliang Xing , and Gang Zhou . 2013 . isleep : Unobtrusive sleep quality monitoring using smartphones . In Proceedings of the 11th ACM Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 14 . [ 46 ] Ying He , Christopher R Jones , Nobuhiro Fujiki , Ying Xu , Bin Guo , Jimmy L Holder Jr , Moritz J Rossner , Seiji Nishino , and Ying - Hui Fu . 2009 . The transcrip - tional repressor DEC2 regulates sleep length in mammals . Science 325 , 5942 ( 2009 ) , 866 – 870 . [ 47 ] Max Hirshkowitz , Kaitlyn Whiton , Steven M Albert , Cathy Alessi , Oliviero Bruni , Lydia DonCarlos , Nancy Hazen , John Herman , Eliot S Katz , Leila Kheirandish - Gozal , et al . 2015 . National Sleep Foundation’s sleep time duration recommen - dations : methodology and results summary . Sleep health 1 , 1 ( 2015 ) , 40 – 43 . [ 48 ] E Hoddes , W Dement , and V Zarcone . 1972 . The development and use of the stanford sleepiness scale . https : / / eurekamag . com / research / 027 / 581 / 027581817 . php . Psychophysiology 9 , 1 ( 1972 ) , 150 . [ 49 ] Ashton Holmes , Sunny Desai , and Ani Nahapetian . 2016 . Luxleak : capturing computing activity using smart device ambient light sensors . In Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Experiences in the Design and Implementation of Smart Objects . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 47 – 52 . [ 50 ] Chen - Yu Hsu , Aayush Ahuja , Shichao Yue , Rumen Hristov , Zachary Kabelac , and Dina Katabi . 2017 . Zero - efort in - home sleep and insomnia monitoring using radio signals . Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive , mobile , wearable and ubiquitous technologies 1 , 3 ( 2017 ) , 1 – 18 . SleepGuru : Personalized Sleep Planning System for Real - life Actionability and Negotiability UIST ’22 , October 29 - November 2 , 2022 , Bend , OR , USA [ 51 ] Zhengjie Huang , Wenjin Wang , and Gerard de Haan . 2021 . Nose breathing or mouth breathing ? A thermography - based new measurement for sleep monitor - ing . In Proceedings of the IEEE / CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 3882 – 3888 . [ 52 ] Zhi - Li Huang , Yoshihiro Urade , and Osamu Hayaishi . 2011 . The role of adenosine in the regulation of sleep . Current topics in medicinal chemistry 11 , 8 ( 2011 ) , 1047 – 1057 . [ 53 ] Inseok Hwang , Hyukjae Jang , Lama Nachman , and Junehwa Song . 2010 . Ex - ploring inter - child behavioral relativity in a shared social environment : a feld study in a kindergarten . In Proceedings of the 12th ACM international conference on Ubiquitous computing . 271 – 280 . [ 54 ] Inseok Hwang , Hyukjae Jang , Taiwoo Park , Aram Choi , Youngki Lee , Chanyou Hwang , Yanggui Choi , Lama Nachman , and Junehwa Song . 2012 . Leveraging children’s behavioral distribution and singularities in new interactive environ - ments : Study in kindergarten feld trips . In International Conference on Pervasive Computing . Springer , 39 – 56 . [ 55 ] Inseok Hwang , Youngki Lee , Taiwoo Park , and Junehwa Song . 2012 . Toward a mobile platform for pervasive games . In Proceedings of the frst ACM international workshop on Mobile gaming . 19 – 24 . [ 56 ] Inseok Hwang , Youngki Lee , Chungkuk Yoo , Chulhong Min , Dongsun Yim , and John Kim . 2019 . Towards interpersonal assistants : next - generation conversa - tional agents . IEEE Pervasive Computing 18 , 2 ( 2019 ) , 21 – 31 . [ 57 ] Inseok Hwang , Chungkuk Yoo , Chanyou Hwang , Dongsun Yim , Youngki Lee , Chulhong Min , John Kim , and Junehwa Song . 2014 . TalkBetter : family - driven mobile intervention care for children with language delay . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work & social computing . 1283 – 1296 . [ 58 ] Andreas Jaehne , Barbara Loessl , Zsuzsanna Bárkai , Dieter Riemann , and Mag - dolna Hornyak . 2009 . Efects of nicotine on sleep during consumption , with - drawal and replacement therapy . Sleep medicine reviews 13 , 5 ( 2009 ) , 363 – 377 . [ 59 ] Hyukjae Jang , Sungwon Peter Choe , Inseok Hwang , Chanyou Hwang , Lama Nachman , and Junehwa Song . 2012 . RubberBand : augmenting teacher’s aware - ness of spatially isolated children on kindergarten feld trips . In Proceedings of the 2012 ACM conference on ubiquitous computing . 236 – 239 . [ 60 ] Megan E Jewett and Richard E Kronauer . 1999 . Interactive mathematical models of subjective alertness and cognitive throughput in humans . Journal of biological rhythms 14 , 6 ( 1999 ) , 588 – 597 . [ 61 ] Eunkyung Jo , Hyeonseok Bang , Myeonghan Ryu , Eun Jee Sung , Sungmook Leem , and Hwajung Hong . 2020 . MAMAS : Supporting Parent – Child Mealtime Interactions Using Automated Tracking and Speech Recognition . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 4 , CSCW1 ( 2020 ) , 1 – 32 . [ 62 ] Murray W Johns . 1991 . A new method for measuring daytime sleepiness : the Epworth sleepiness scale . sleep 14 , 6 ( 1991 ) , 540 – 545 . [ 63 ] JooEunyean . 2006 . Neurobiology of circadian rhythm . sleep 3 , 1 ( 2006 ) , 1 – 5 . [ 64 ] Bumsoo Kang , Inseok Hwang , Jinho Lee , Seungchul Lee , Taegyeong Lee , Young - jae Chang , and Min Kyung Lee . 2018 . My being to your place , your being to my place : Co - present robotic avatars create illusion of living together . In Proceedings of the 16th Annual International Conference on Mobile Systems , Applications , and Services . 54 – 67 . [ 65 ] Bumsoo Kang , Seungwoo Kang , and Inseok Hwang . 2021 . MomentMeld : AI - augmented Mobile Photographic Memento towards Mutually Stimulatory Inter - generational Interaction . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 16 . [ 66 ] Bumsoo Kang , Chulhong Min , Wonjung Kim , Inseok Hwang , Chunjong Park , Seungchul Lee , Sung - Ju Lee , and Junehwa Song . 2017 . Zaturi : We put together the 25th hour for you . create a book for your baby . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing . 1850 – 1863 . [ 67 ] Mjeg Karasek . 2004 . Melatonin , human aging , and age - related diseases . Experi - mental gerontology 39 , 11 - 12 ( 2004 ) , 1723 – 1729 . [ 68 ] Matthew Kay , Eun Kyoung Choe , Jesse Shepherd , Benjamin Greenstein , Nathaniel Watson , Sunny Consolvo , and Julie A Kientz . 2012 . Lullaby : a capture & access system for understanding the sleep environment . In Proceedings of the 2012 ACM conference on ubiquitous computing . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 226 – 234 . [ 69 ] William DS Killgore . 2010 . Efects of sleep deprivation on cognition . Progress in brain research 185 ( 2010 ) , 105 – 129 . [ 70 ] Inja Kim , Heejung Choi , and Beomjong Kim . 2014 . Psychometric properties of Korean version of modifed Leeds sleep evaluation questionnaire ( KMLSEQ ) . The Korean Journal of Rehabilitation Nursing 17 , 1 ( 2014 ) , 10 – 17 . [ 71 ] Wonjung Kim , Seungchul Lee , Youngjae Chang , Taegyeong Lee , Inseok Hwang , and Junehwa Song . 2021 . Hivemind : social control - and - use of IoT towards democratization of public spaces . In Proceedings of the 19th Annual International Conference on Mobile Systems , Applications , and Services . 467 – 482 . [ 72 ] Wonjung Kim , Seungchul Lee , Seonghoon Kim , Sungbin Jo , Chungkuk Yoo , Inseok Hwang , Seungwoo Kang , and Junehwa Song . 2020 . Dyadic Mirror : Everyday Second - person Live - view for Empathetic Refection upon Parent - child Interaction . Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive , Mobile , Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 4 , 3 ( 2020 ) , 1 – 29 . [ 73 ] Yuhwan Kim , Seungchul Lee , Inseok Hwang , Hyunho Ro , Youngki Lee , Miri Moon , and Junehwa Song . 2014 . High5 : promoting interpersonal hand - to - hand touch for vibrant workplace with electrodermal sensor watches . In Proceedings of the 2014 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing . 15 – 19 . [ 74 ] M Kohsaka , N Fukuda , K Honma , S Honma , and N Morita . 1992 . Seasonality in human sleep . Experientia 48 , 3 ( 1992 ) , 231 – 233 . [ 75 ] Suresh Kotagal and Eileen Broomall . 2012 . Sleep in children with autism spec - trum disorder . Pediatric neurology 47 , 4 ( 2012 ) , 242 – 251 . [ 76 ] Daniel F Kripke , Walter T Klimecki , Caroline M Nievergelt , Katharine M Rex , Sarah S Murray , Tatyana Shekhtman , Gregory J Tranah , Richard T Loving , Heon - Jeong Lee , Min Kyu Rhee , et al . 2014 . Circadian polymorphisms in night owls , in bipolars , and in non - 24 - hour sleep cycles . Psychiatry investigation 11 , 4 ( 2014 ) , 345 . [ 77 ] Floor M Kroese , Denise TD De Ridder , Catharine Evers , and Marieke A Adriaanse . 2014 . Bedtime procrastination : introducing a new area of procrastination . Frontiers in Psychology 5 ( 2014 ) , 611 . [ 78 ] Jinho Lee , Inseok Hwang , Thomas S Hubregtsen , Anne E Gattiker , and Christo - pher M Durham . 2019 . Accelerating conversational agents built with of - the - shelf modularized services . IEEE Pervasive Computing 18 , 2 ( 2019 ) , 47 – 57 . [ 79 ] Youngki Lee , Seungwoo Kang , Chulhong Min , Younghyun Ju , Inseok Hwang , and Junehwa Song . 2015 . CoMon + : A cooperative context monitoring system for multi - device personal sensing environments . IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing 15 , 8 ( 2015 ) , 1908 – 1924 . [ 80 ] Youngki Lee , Chulhong Min , Chanyou Hwang , Jaeung Lee , Inseok Hwang , Younghyun Ju , Chungkuk Yoo , Miri Moon , Uichin Lee , and Junehwa Song . 2013 . Sociophone : Everyday face - to - face interaction monitoring platform using multi - phone sensor fusion . In Proceeding of the 11th annual international conference on Mobile systems , applications , and services . 375 – 388 . [ 81 ] Yu Jin Lee , Juhyun Park , Soohyun Kim , Seong - Jin Cho , and Seog Ju Kim . 2015 . Academic Performance among Adolescents with Be - haviorally Induced Insufcient Sleep Syndrome . Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine 11 , 01 ( 2015 ) , 61 – 68 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5664 / jcsm . 4368 arXiv : https : / / jcsm . aasm . org / doi / pdf / 10 . 5664 / jcsm . 4368 [ 82 ] Jonathan Lester , Carl Hartung , Laura Pina , Ryan Libby , Gaetano Borriello , and Glen Duncan . 2009 . Validated caloric expenditure estimation using a single body - worn sensor . In Proceedings of the 11th international conference on Ubiquitous computing . 225 – 234 . [ 83 ] PF Lima , ALD Medeiros , and JF Araujo . 2002 . Sleep - wake pattern of medical students : early versus late class starting time . Brazilian Journal of Medical and Biological Research 35 , 11 ( 2002 ) , 1373 – 1377 . [ 84 ] Shuangjun Liu and Sarah Ostadabbas . 2017 . A vision - based system for in - bed posture tracking . In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision workshops . 1373 – 1382 . [ 85 ] Hannah G Lund , Brian D Reider , Annie B Whiting , and J Roxanne Prichard . 2010 . Sleep patterns and predictors of disturbed sleep in a large population of college students . Journal of adolescent health 46 , 2 ( 2010 ) , 124 – 132 . [ 86 ] Priyanka Mary Mammen , Camellia Zakaria , Tergel Molom - Ochir , Amee Trivedi , Prashant Shenoy , and Rajesh Balan . 2021 . WiSleep : Scalable Sleep Monitoring and Analytics Using Passive WiFi Sensing . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2102 . 03690 ( 2021 ) . [ 87 ] Bryce A Mander , Joseph R Winer , and Matthew P Walker . 2017 . Sleep and human aging . Neuron 94 , 1 ( 2017 ) , 19 – 36 . [ 88 ] Gianna W Maurer , Alina Malita , Stanislav Nagy , Takashi Koyama , Thomas M Werge , Kenneth A Halberg , Michael J Texada , and Kim Rewitz . 2020 . Analysis of genes within the schizophrenia - linked 22q11 . 2 deletion identifes interaction of night owl / LZTR1 and NF1 in GABAergic sleep control . PLoS genetics 16 , 4 ( 2020 ) , e1008727 . [ 89 ] Robert W McCarley . 2007 . Neurobiology of REM and NREM sleep . Sleep medicine 8 , 4 ( 2007 ) , 302 – 330 . [ 90 ] Peter McCauley , Leonid V Kalachev , Daniel J Mollicone , Siobhan Banks , David F Dinges , and Hans PA Van Dongen . 2013 . Dynamic circadian modulation in a biomathematical model for the efects of sleep and sleep loss on waking neurobehavioral performance . Sleep 36 , 12 ( 2013 ) , 1987 – 1997 . [ 91 ] Chulhong Min , Youngki Lee , Chungkuk Yoo , Inseok Hwang , Younghyun Ju , Junehwa Song , and Seungwoo Kang . 2019 . Scalable Power Impact Prediction of Mobile Sensing Applications at Pre - Installation Time . IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing 19 , 6 ( 2019 ) , 1448 – 1464 . [ 92 ] Chulhong Min , Youngki Lee , Chungkuk Yoo , Seungwoo Kang , Sangwon Choi , Pillsoon Park , Inseok Hwang , Younghyun Ju , Seungpyo Choi , and Junehwa Song . 2015 . PowerForecaster : Predicting smartphone power impact of continuous sensing applications at pre - installation time . In Proceedings of the 13th ACM Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems . 31 – 44 . [ 93 ] Chulhong Min , Chungkuk Yoo , Inseok Hwang , Seungwoo Kang , Youngki Lee , Seungchul Lee , Pillsoon Park , Changhun Lee , Seungpyo Choi , and Junehwa Song . 2015 . Sandra helps you learn : The more you walk , the more battery your phone drains . In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM international joint conference on UIST ’22 , October 29 - November 2 , 2022 , Bend , OR , USA pervasive and ubiquitous computing . 421 – 432 . [ 94 ] Jun - Ki Min , Afsaneh Doryab , Jason Wiese , Shahriyar Amini , John Zimmerman , and Jason I Hong . 2014 . Toss’n’turn : smartphone as sleep and sleep quality detector . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 477 – 486 . [ 95 ] Harvey Moldofsky , FA Lue , JR Davidson , and R Gorczynski . 1989 . Efects of sleep deprivation on human immune functions . The FASEB Journal 3 , 8 ( 1989 ) , 1972 – 1977 . [ 96 ] Sanne Nauts , Bart A Kamphorst , Wim Stut , Denise TD De Ridder , and Joel H Anderson . 2019 . The explanations people give for going to bed late : A qualitative study of the varieties of bedtime procrastination . Behavioral Sleep Medicine 17 , 6 ( 2019 ) , 753 – 762 . [ 97 ] Shahram Nikbakhtian , Angus B Reed , Bernard Dillon Obika , Davide Morelli , Adam C Cunningham , Mert Aral , and David Plans . 2021 . Accelerometer - derived sleep onset timing and cardiovascular disease incidence : a UK Biobank cohort study . European Heart Journal - Digital Health 2 , 4 ( 2021 ) , 658 – 666 . [ 98 ] Anthony D Ong and Nilam Ram . 2017 . Fragile and enduring positive afect : Implications for adaptive aging . Gerontology 63 , 3 ( 2017 ) , 263 – 269 . [ 99 ] Frances O’Callaghan , Olav Muurlink , and Natasha Reid . 2018 . Efects of cafeine on sleep quality and daytime functioning . Risk management and healthcare policy 11 ( 2018 ) , 263 . [ 100 ] Consensus Conference Panel , Nathaniel F Watson , M Safwan Badr , Gregory Belenky , Donald L Bliwise , Orfeu M Buxton , Daniel Buysse , David F Dinges , James Gangwisch , Michael A Grandner , et al . 2015 . Recommended amount of sleep for a healthy adult : a joint consensus statement of the American Academy of Sleep Medicine and Sleep Research Society . Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine 11 , 6 ( 2015 ) , 591 – 592 . [ 101 ] Taiwoo Park , Jinwon Lee , Inseok Hwang , Chungkuk Yoo , Lama Nachman , and Junehwa Song . 2011 . E - gesture : a collaborative architecture for energy - efcient gesture recognition with hand - worn sensor and mobile devices . In Proceedings of the 9th ACM Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems . 260 – 273 . [ 102 ] AC Parrott and I Hindmarch . 1980 . The Leeds Sleep Evaluation Questionnaire in psychopharmacological investigations—a review . Psychopharmacology 71 , 2 ( 1980 ) , 173 – 179 . [ 103 ] Wanling Peng , Zhaofa Wu , Kun Song , Siyu Zhang , Yulong Li , and Min Xu . 2020 . Regulation of sleep homeostasis mediator adenosine by basal forebrain glutamatergic neurons . Science 369 , 6508 ( 2020 ) , eabb0556 . [ 104 ] Laure Peter - Derex , Pierre Yammine , Hélène Bastuji , and Bernard Croisile . 2015 . Sleep and Alzheimer’s disease . Sleep medicine reviews 19 ( 2015 ) , 29 – 38 . [ 105 ] Nhat Pham , Tuan Dinh , Zohreh Raghebi , Taeho Kim , Nam Bui , Phuc Nguyen , Hoang Truong , Farnoush Banaei - Kashani , Ann Halbower , Thang Dinh , et al . 2020 . WAKE : a behind - the - ear wearable system for microsleep detection . In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Mobile Systems , Applications , and Services . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 404 – 418 . [ 106 ] Andrew JK Phillips , William M Clerx , Conor S O’Brien , Akane Sano , Laura K Barger , Rosalind W Picard , Steven W Lockley , Elizabeth B Klerman , and Charles A Czeisler . 2017 . Irregular sleep / wake patterns are associated with poorer academic performance and delayed circadian and sleep / wake timing . Scientifc reports 7 , 1 ( 2017 ) , 1 – 13 . [ 107 ] Andrew JK Phillips , Elizabeth B Klerman , and James P Butler . 2017 . Modeling the adenosine system as a modulator of cognitive performance and sleep patterns during sleep restriction and recovery . PLoS computational biology 13 , 10 ( 2017 ) , e1005759 . [ 108 ] June J Pilcher and Allen I Hufcutt . 1996 . Efects of sleep deprivation on perfor - mance : a meta - analysis . Sleep 19 , 4 ( 1996 ) , 318 – 326 . [ 109 ] Tarja Porkka - Heiskanen , RE Strecker , and RW McCarley . 2000 . Brain site - specifcity of extracellular adenosine concentration changes during sleep depri - vation and spontaneous sleep : an in vivo microdialysis study . Neuroscience 99 , 3 ( 2000 ) , 507 – 517 . [ 110 ] Tauhidur Rahman , Alexander T Adams , Ruth Vinisha Ravichandran , Mi Zhang , Shwetak N Patel , Julie A Kientz , and Tanzeem Choudhury . 2015 . Dopplesleep : A contactless unobtrusive sleep sensing system using short - range doppler radar . In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 39 – 50 . [ 111 ] Abigail Nirandhi Ranasinghe , R . Gayathri , and V . Vishnu Priya . 2018 . Awareness of efects of sleep deprivation among college students . Drug Invention Today 10 , 9 ( 2018 ) , 1806 – 1809 . https : / / search . ebscohost . com / login . aspx ? direct = true & db = asx & AN = 131123668 & site = eds - live [ 112 ] Ruth Ravichandran , Shwetak N Patel , and Julie A Kientz . 2020 . SleepApp : Providing Contextualized and Actionable Sleep Feedback . In Proceedings of the 14th EAI International Conference on Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 336 – 346 . [ 113 ] Ruth Ravichandran , Sang - Wha Sien , Shwetak N Patel , Julie A Kientz , and Laura R Pina . 2017 . Making sense of sleep sensors : How sleep sensing technologies support and undermine sleep health . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI conference Lee et al . on human factors in computing systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 6864 – 6875 . [ 114 ] Stephen Seiler , Olav Haugen , and Erin Kufel . 2007 . Autonomic recovery after exercise in trained athletes : intensity and duration efects . Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise 39 , 8 ( 2007 ) , 1366 – 1373 . [ 115 ] Terrence J Sejnowski and Alain Destexhe . 2000 . Why do we sleep ? Brain research 886 , 1 - 2 ( 2000 ) , 208 – 223 . [ 116 ] Guangsen Shi , Lijuan Xing , David Wu , Bula J Bhattacharyya , Christopher R Jones , Thomas McMahon , SY Christin Chong , Jason A Chen , Giovanni Coppola , Daniel Geschwind , et al . 2019 . A rare mutation of β 1 - adrenergic receptor afects sleep / wake behaviors . Neuron 103 , 6 ( 2019 ) , 1044 – 1055 . [ 117 ] Karine Spiegel , Rachel Leproult , and Eve Van Cauter . 1999 . Impact of sleep debt on metabolic and endocrine function . The lancet 354 , 9188 ( 1999 ) , 1435 – 1439 . [ 118 ] Ronald Szymusiak . 2018 . Body temperature and sleep . Handbook of clinical neurology 156 ( 2018 ) , 341 – 351 . [ 119 ] Eva H Telzer , Andrew J Fuligni , Matthew D Lieberman , and Adriana Galván . 2013 . The efects of poor quality sleep on brain function and risk taking in adolescence . Neuroimage 71 ( 2013 ) , 275 – 283 . [ 120 ] Dorthe Kirkegaard Thomsen , Mimi Yung Mehlsen , Søren Christensen , and Robert Zachariae . 2003 . Rumination—relationship with negative mood and sleep quality . Personality and Individual Diferences 34 , 7 ( 2003 ) , 1293 – 1301 . [ 121 ] Roxana Tiron , Graeme Lyon , Hannah Kilroy , Ahmed Osman , Nicola Kelly , Niall O’Mahony , Cesar Lopes , Sam Cofey , Stephen McMahon , Michael Wren , et al . 2020 . Screening for obstructive sleep apnea with novel hybrid acoustic smartphone app technology . Journal of Thoracic Disease 12 , 8 ( 2020 ) , 4476 . [ 122 ] Sunao Uchida , Kohei Shioda , Yuko Morita , Chie Kubota , Masashi Ganeko , and Noriko Takeda . 2012 . Exercise efects on sleep physiology . Frontiers in neurology 3 ( 2012 ) , 48 . [ 123 ] Hans PA Van Dongen and David F Dinges . 2003 . Investigating the interaction between the homeostatic and circadian processes of sleep – wake regulation for the prediction of waking neurobehavioural performance . Journal of sleep research 12 , 3 ( 2003 ) , 181 – 187 . [ 124 ] Marith van Schrojenstein Lantman , Thomas Roth , Timothy Roehrs , and Joris C Verster . 2017 . Alcohol hangover , sleep quality , and daytime sleepiness . Sleep and Vigilance 1 , 1 ( 2017 ) , 37 – 41 . [ 125 ] Jim Waterhouse , Thomas Reilly , Greg Atkinson , and Ben Edwards . 2007 . Jet lag : trends and coping strategies . The lancet 369 , 9567 ( 2007 ) , 1117 – 1129 . [ 126 ] Sophie MT Wehrens , Skevoulla Christou , Cheryl Isherwood , Benita Middleton , Michelle A Gibbs , Simon N Archer , Debra J Skene , and Jonathan D Johnston . 2017 . Meal timing regulates the human circadian system . Current Biology 27 , 12 ( 2017 ) , 1768 – 1775 . [ 127 ] Anita S Wells , Nicholas W Read , Chris Idzikowski , and Jane Jones . 1998 . Efects of meals on objective and subjective measures of daytime sleepiness . Journal of applied physiology 84 , 2 ( 1998 ) , 507 – 515 . [ 128 ] Schantel Williams , Maggie Han , Xiaoling Ye , Hanjie Zhang , Anna Meyring - Wösten , Marcee Bonner , Candace Young , Stephan Thijssen , Daniel Marsh , and Peter Kotanko . 2017 . Physical activity and sleep patterns in hemodialysis patients in a suburban environment . Blood purifcation 43 , 1 - 3 ( 2017 ) , 235 – 243 . [ 129 ] Wil Witting , IH Kwa , Pieter Eikelenboom , Majid Mirmiran , and Dick F Swaab . 1990 . Alterations in the circadian rest - activity rhythm in aging and Alzheimer’s disease . Biological psychiatry 27 , 6 ( 1990 ) , 563 – 572 . [ 130 ] Amy R Wolfson and Mary A Carskadon . 2003 . Understanding adolescent’s sleep patterns and school performance : a critical appraisal . Sleep medicine reviews 7 , 6 ( 2003 ) , 491 – 506 . [ 131 ] Chungkuk Yoo , Inseok Hwang , Seungwoo Kang , Myung - Chul Kim , Seonghoon Kim , Daeyoung Won , Yu Gu , and Junehwa Song . 2017 . Card - stunt as a service : Empowering a massively packed crowd for instant collective expressiveness . In Proceedings of the 15th Annual International Conference on Mobile Systems , Applications , and Services . 121 – 135 . [ 132 ] Chungkuk Yoo , Inseok Hwang , Eric Rozner , Yu Gu , and Robert F Dickerson . 2016 . Symmetrisense : Enabling near - surface interactivity on glossy surfaces using a single commodity smartphone . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 5126 – 5137 . [ 133 ] Shichao Yue , Yuzhe Yang , Hao Wang , Hariharan Rahul , and Dina Katabi . 2020 . Bodycompass : Monitoring sleep posture with wireless signals . Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive , Mobile , Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 4 , 2 ( 2020 ) , 1 – 25 . [ 134 ] Bing Zhai , Ignacio Perez - Pozuelo , Emma AD Clifton , Joao Palotti , and Yu Guan . 2020 . Making sense of sleep : Multimodal sleep stage classifcation in a large , diverse population using movement and cardiac sensing . Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive , Mobile , Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 4 , 2 ( 2020 ) , 1 – 33 . [ 135 ] Mingmin Zhao , Shichao Yue , Dina Katabi , Tommi S Jaakkola , and Matt T Bianchi . 2017 . Learning sleep stages from radio signals : A conditional adversarial archi - tecture . In International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR , 4100 – 4109 .