* asliva @ cra . com ; phone 617 . 491 . 3474 x751 ; www . cra . com Dual Node Decision Wheels : an Architecture for Interconnected Information Fusion and Decision Making Amy Sliva * a , Joe Gorman a , Christopher Bowman b , Martin Voshell a a Charles River Analytics , 625 Mount Auburn Street , Cambridge , MA , USA 02138 ; b Data Fusion & Neural Networks , LLC , 1643 Hemlock Way , Broomfield , CO , USA 80020 ABSTRACT As the modern information environment continues to expand with new technologies , military Command and Control ( C2 ) has increasing access to unprecedented amounts of data and analytic resources to support military decision making . However , with the increasing quantity and heterogeneity of multi - INT data—from new collection platforms , new sensors , and new analytic tools—comes a growing information fusion challenge . For example , increasingly distributed processing , exploitation , and dissemination ( PED ) capabilities and analyst intelligence resources must identify and integrate the most relevant data sources to support and improve operational command and control and situation awareness without becoming overwhelmed by data and potentially missing critical information . We present an innovative new information fusion and organizational decision - making architecture—Dual Node Decision Wheels ( DNDW ) —that integrates multi - INT PED , information analysis , and C2 processes through a novel combination of goal - directed information fusion and data - driven decision making , helping alleviate “big data” challenges through more fluid coordination of organizations and technologies . DNDW applies the dual node network for fusion and resource management with semantic links between organizational processes and decision aides , ensuring that each organizational role has access to the right information . DNDW can map fusion onto any organizational structure and provide a cost - effective solution methodology for integrating new technologies . Keywords : Data fusion , decision ladder , multi - INT , data - driven decision making , Processing , Exploitation , and Dissemination ( PED ) 1 . INTRODUCTION Over the last several decades , the world has witnessed a dramatic increase in the variety , availability , and complexity of data , particularly digital data that is produced or collected by new information technologies . Large - scale data continues to accumulate at an impressive rate each day—experts estimate that the digital universe will reach 40 , 000 exabytes ( 40 trillion gigabytes ) by 2020 [ 1 ] . However , exactly how to leverage this “big data” information environment remains a challenge for many organizations ; although there is an unprecedented amount of information available , it is only valuable insofar as it can be interpreted , understood , and used effectively to support decision making and operations . Data - driven decision making is the practice of basing decisions on the analysis of these vast data resources , rather than purely on intuition or experience [ 2 ] , and has been widely adopted by both commercial and military decision makers to gain an advantage over competitors or adversaries . Case studies from the MIT Sloan School of Management [ 3 ] indicate that organizations that adopt data - driven decision making processes are 5 - 6 % more productive and profitable , and the U . S . Military has invested heavily in achieving decision superiority through improving the quality and quantity of information . In spite of these widely acknowledged benefits , implementing a data - driven decision process is often much easier to accomplish , as it is often difficult or impossible to identify the right data at the right time for the right part of the organization and then integrate this often heterogeneous , complex , and dynamic data into an information product that can best support organizational processes and structures . While solving this growing information fusion challenge is necessary for any large organization to fully exploit available data resources , it is particularly crucial for military Command and Control ( C2 ) where successfully employing multiple intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance ( ISR ) data sources is essential to the military decision - making process ( MDMP ) in highly dynamic environments . The situation awareness ( SA ) and intelligence focus derived from effective multi - INT processing , exploitation , and dissemination ( PED ) directly supports all - source and multi - INT analysis and decision making necessary for operations planning and selecting the most robust courses of action . The DOD has invested significant capabilities and resources into multi - source intelligence collection , advanced sensor platforms , and analytic Ground / Air Multisensor Interoperability , Integration , and Networking for Persistent ISR VI edited by Tien Pham , Michael A . Kolodny , Proc . of SPIE Vol . 9464 , 94640F © 2015 SPIE · CCC code : 0277 - 786X / 15 / $ 18 · doi : 10 . 1117 / 12 . 2176587 Proc . of SPIE Vol . 9464 94640F - 1 tools to provide intelligence analysts and Commanders with increasing amounts of high - quality data for improved SA . Increasingly distributed PED capabilities and analyst resources must identify and integrate the most relevant data sources for improving operational C2 and SA without becoming overwhelmed and potentially missing critical information . As a result , the content , timeliness , and format of intelligence data are often not aligned with evolving analysis requirements or C2 decision needs . More fluid coordination between distributed PED operators , intelligence analysts , and C2 can help mitigate “big data” problems and improve these processes , providing analysts with more useful mission context when building SA and improving the quality of operational decisions driven by more timely and relevant intelligence products . Selection and integration of the most relevant data sources is still very time consuming and manually intensive , and PED operators and intelligence analysts closest to the point of collection often receive minimal guidance regarding mission context that may help focus or re - direct their efforts . That is not to say personnel are not aware of current information requirements ( IRs ) , Priority Intelligence Requirements ( PIRs ) , and Commander’s intent , but rather , military collection operations are directed towards understanding the activities of intelligent , motivated , and adaptive adversaries . Therefore , IRs are necessary but not sufficient to capture the whole mission context . For example , if IRs are directed toward more abstract constructs such as “patterns of life” , those require significant re - framing based on current and recently passed mission objectives . Furthermore , when intelligent adversaries adapt , literal interpretations of IRs can become ineffective . PED systems require additional mission context to adequately process and exploit larger volumes of data . Increasingly advanced data analytic tools ( e . g . , the Advanced Video Activity Analytics ( AVAA ) components for the Video Processing and Exploitation Framework ( VPEF ) ) and enterprise data processing and collaboration platforms have the potential to improve and extend upon current toolsets ( e . g . , the Army’s Distributed Common Ground System ( DCGS ) ) to assist operators in processing , analyzing , and producing intelligence . However , determining which sources are most relevant , integrating these sources , and identifying meaningful patterns remain predominantly manual tasks with enormous personnel requirements . While C2 customers provide intelligence shops with requirements to guide multi - INT collection , there is no process for specifying how the current mission context affects their information needs . With an increasing demand for real - time SA that overwhelms PED systems , C2 processes are subsequently inundated with an unmanageable quantity of unfocused information that is often not delivered in formats that help Commanders understand the elements of the situation most critical for mission success and decision making . Automated support synchronization and planning tools can mitigate some analytic burdens , but require relevant SA in particular formats as input . Failure to align the information needs of C2 processes with intelligence products simply pushes the challenge of large - scale data integration and exploitation downstream to Commanders . Finally , more effective C2 use of multi - INT requires mechanisms that bridge the gap between evolving PED , intelligence analysis processes , and decision - making processes , while also integrating both human and technology systems . Current organizational models view these tasks separately , making joint workflows difficult to implement . On one end of the spectrum are classical information fusion models . These models can conceptually describe the tasks in PED workflows , but most only vaguely refer to subsequent decision making or consider the context of the information . ( A notable exception is the Context Assessment & Conformity Management ( CACM ) [ 4 ] , [ 5 ] , [ 6 ] ) . One of the most widely used models of data fusion is the Joint Directors of Laboratories ( JDL ) data fusion model , originally created by the JDL Data Fusion Group of the U . S . Department of Defense . The revised JDL model [ 7 ] , illustrated in Figure 1 , provides a general framework for describing and designing fusion applications layer systems , defining data fusion as a process comprised of five levels : Level 0 , Signal / Feature Assessment , for the estimation and prediction of states of signals or features of entities of interest ; Level 1 , Entity Assessment , for the estimation and prediction of the states of entities of interest for the application ; Level 2 , Situation Assessment , for the estimation and prediction of relationships between these entities ; Level 3 , Impact Assessment , for the estimation and prediction of the effects of entities and situation states on mission objectives ; and Level 4 , System Process Assessment , for the estimation and prediction of the performance and effectiveness of the underlying fusion system . Levels 0 and 1 are often considered to be “low level” fusion , while Levels 2 and 3 are “high level” fusion processes that support sensemaking and subsequent decision making . Level 4 provides system performance assessment functions . Though later revisions propose a Level 5 fusion for human interaction with the fusion system [ 8 ] , Levels 0 - 4 are assumed to apply to the fusion done by processes or humans , rather than human interface Proc . of SPIE Vol . 9464 94640F - 2 Multi - INT Sensors ) 4 - Level 0 Signal / Feature Assessment Level 1 Entity Assessment s Level 2 Situation Assessment Level 3 Impact Assessment s Level 4 Process Assessment s Data Management System - + Human - Computer { J Interface Task ani Situation Awareness i Environmental Factors State of the environment / system < Projection Level Perception of elements in the environment Level 2 Comprehension of the meaning of the Level 3 of future states and events situati on Decision Individual Factors Performance Action processes , which are an inherent aspect of higher level fusion layers necessary for optimally aligning the lower database , transport , and communications layers with specific organizational decision making needs . A popular alternative to the JDL data fusion model is the Endsley situation awareness ( SA ) model [ 9 ] , shown in Figure 2 , which is notionally based on concepts of cognitive psychology and human factors . The original SA model is a sequential / linear process that follows from data , to perception , to apprehension , to decision , and to performance of action [ 9 ] . As an alternative to information processing models , SA itself consists of three levels of mental representation : ( 1 ) perception of the elements in the environment ; ( 2 ) comprehension of the current situation based on synthesis of these elements , and ( 3 ) projection of future status . Endsley’s model can be thought of as a model of human cognitive processes applied to fusion , and as such has many parallels to the JDL model , while acknowledging the role that humans play in selecting data to process as information and develop SA ( but ignores the critical step of identifying what available data is [ 10 ] . ) Further , while Endsley’s 3 Levels of SA are intended to support decision making , the hierarchical and linear structure of the model does not capture how the decisions will be made—either by an individual or an organization—nor the iterative nature of most decision - making processes . While shortcomings have been raised with the changing SA model over the years , its misuse and ill - defined nature [ 10 ] , [ 11 ] , [ 12 ] , make it problematic . The Boyd Control Loop fusion model ( see Figure 3 ) , or Observe , Orient , Decide , and Act ( OODA ) loop , represents SA and C2 as a cyclic process [ 12 ] , [ 14 ] . The observe and orient steps of gathering information from the environment and gaining SA essentially encompass the fusion processes described by the JDL and Endsley models and adds the sensors , while the decide and act steps add the resources and acknowledge the fact that this SA is going to be used for decision making and , ultimately , for taking some action with these resources that will change the state of the world , necessitating successive iterations . This model is very operationally focused , and has been popular among military commanders and decision makers . However , it does not provide much information on how to structure the human and automated processes that comprise the observe and orient steps or how they should be tailored , aligned , and decomposed with the decide and act functions . In all of these fusion models , the general flow from data to information is clear , but they all stop short of explaining how this process should be integrated into decision making and how these decisions operate at an organizational rather than individual level . Figure 1 . The JDL Data Fusion Model . Figure 2 . The Endsley SA Model . Proc . of SPIE Vol . 9464 94640F - 3 While the OODA loop can be very useful for representing individual information fusion and decision making , it does not capture the fact that in many interesting cases—such as business or military contexts—this process occurs at an organizational or community level . One of the biggest challenges when making such decisions comes from the higher levels of fusion—maintaining accurate SA in a dynamic environment and interpreting this to update and redirect an understanding of the current environment and the best course of action [ 15 ] . Weick’s model of sensemaking in organizations is one attempt to bridge this gap between individual and organizational fusion [ 16 ] . In Weick’s model , organizations respond to observations about their environment and enact processes or actions to respond accordingly . The key insight here is that individuals in an organization first have to make sense of what they are experiencing or observing—e . g . , fuse various data sources and human mental models—in the current environment , and then collectively develop SA that can drive a better informed evaluation and decision process . However , while this model can be used to describe organizational psychology , it is not very practical or informative for designing real world fusion systems . In cognitive systems engineering and joint cognitive systems , several models of decision making , e . g . , decision ladders or “the decision wheel” for enterprise decision processes [ 17 ] , have been developed that can describe organizational processes , but assume some form of SA as a prerequisite or input to the decision process rather than integrating SA and C2 operations . Decision ladders provide a valuable framework for representing reasoning processes used when gathering information and making a decision without addressing where or how this information is obtained or aligning these human reasoning processes with technical data fusion systems . Further , none of these data fusion or decision making approaches provide technical guidance for how to actually implement a system linking intelligence with decision making to coordinate existing and future data streams , technologies , and workflows . The Department of Defense Architecture Framework ( DoDAF ) specifies technical architectures that indicate how to develop , implement , and build systems architectures , but all of the above models fall short of such a specification . Structured fusion frameworks , such as the Dual Node Network ( DNN ) technical architecture for data fusion and resource management ( DF & RM ) [ 17 ] provide a step in the right direction by linking fusion processes to resource and process management steps and continuously adjusting the settings of fusion nodes to identify the optimal configuration for the users’ current tasks . However , this approach still does not incorporate the rich body of knowledge on cognitive decision making contexts , discussed in more detail in the following sections . In this paper , we present an innovative new information fusion and organizational decision making architecture—Dual Node Decision Wheels ( DNDW ) —that integrates multi - INT data PED , information analysis , and C2 processes through a novel combination of goal - directed information fusion and data - driven decision making , helping alleviate “big data” challenges through more fluid coordination of organizations and technologies . DNDW applies the dual node network ( DNN ) fusion architecture , and extends this architecture with explicit associations to organizational processes and supported decision aides . Using semantic technologies to link the operational context with available data resources , DNDW aligns each organizational role with the information or tools that will best support the mission . This approach represents a fundamentally new perspective on both information fusion and organizational decision making , viewing these not as distinct phases in an operational pipeline , but as highly interconnected processes . We describe the technical attributes of DNDW and case study analyses to illustrate how DNDW can map fusion onto any organizational structure and provide a cost - effective “plug and play” environment for integrating new technologies . In Sections 2 and 3 we review fundamental aspects of the dual node network along with cognitive systems engineering support requirements based on studies of intelligence analysis . Then , in Section 4 we present our DNDW architecture that Figure 3 . The Boyd Control Loop ( OODA Loop ) model . Proc . of SPIE Vol . 9464 94640F - 4 Multi - INT Sources & 1 Prior DF Nodes J Higher Level Management Node Data Fusion Node Data Preparation ( Common Referendng ) Hypothesis Generation Data Assodation Hypothesis Hypothesis Evaluation Selection A T State Estimation - Target / Situation Estimates - System State Estimates - Response Plans - Controls Response Preparation ( Common Referencing ) Plan Generation Response Planning jPlan _ _ _ Evaluation l Plan Selection Tasking / Control User or Next DF Node Resource Management Node Lower Level \ Management Nodes combines these two approaches into a fusion system that explicitly incorporates feedback and information needs from the decision - making process . In Section 5 , we discuss an example of the DNDW architecture as a high - level fusion system for managing and adapting lower level fusion processes as part of an enterprise organization . Finally , in Section 6 we discuss the implications of the DNDW architecture and conclude . 2 . THE DUAL NODE NETWORK FUSION ARCHITECTURE To effectively align data and information with organizational processes to facilitate effective data - driven decision making , we must first be able to identify which data and information products support various aspects of planning and execution and communicate dynamic information needs to the underlying fusion processes . The Dual Node Network ( DNN ) technical architecture [ 17 ] supports effective assessment and management of the expanded portfolio of data sources , resources , entities of interest models , and algorithms , including goal - driven pattern learning and abnormal behavior discovery plus external Context Assessment & Conformity Management ( CACM ) , through two - way communication between fusion and resource management processes . It is useful to consider a data fusion system as being comprised of one or more data fusion nodes , each of which performs some or all of the three basic functions shown in Figure 4 : 1 . Data Preparation ( sometimes referred to as Data Alignment or Common Referencing ) ; 2 . Data Association ; and 3 . State Estimation . Data Association , in turn , involves three sub - functions : a ) Hypothesis Generation ; b ) Hypothesis Evaluation ; and c ) Hypothesis Selection . For the present purpose , a hypothesis is a postulation that a set of data ( e . g . a particular batch of sensor measurements or reports ) constitutes all the reports relevant to estimating the state of one object . State Estimation functions differ in the broadest sense according to the objects whose states are to be estimated . This is the basis for the JDL model’s partitioning into data fusion “levels” as described in the previous section . The data fusion process has the role of estimating the states of such types of real - world objects ; generating corresponding estimates of patterns , individuals , situations , scenarios / outcomes and the system ( generally taken to include information sources , the fusion itself and all other system resources : weapons and other effectors and resources management processes ) . Bowman has argued that Resource Management ( RM ) can be understood as the formal dual of Data Fusion ( DF ) [ 17 ] . The separation principle for estimation and control for locally linear systems can generally be extended to achieve a separation of data fusion from resource management processes . Furthermore , planning is found to be a formal dual to data association , just as stochastic control is the dual of estimation [ 5 ] . Therefore , resource management can be represented in terms of a Figure 4 . DNN Technical Architecture representation of Data Fusion ( DF ) and Resource Management ( RM ) nodes [ 17 ] . Proc . of SPIE Vol . 9464 94640F - 5 canonical node structure isomorphic to the data fusion node structure as shown in Figure 4 . RM comprises three basic functions : 1 . Task Preparation ; 2 . Task Planning ; and 3 . Tasking / Control . Further extending the duality , the DNN defines a system of RM “levels” corresponding to the JDL DF levels , summarized in Table 1 . Table 1 . Data Fusion and “Dual” Resource Management Levels [ 4 ] . Level Data Fusion Level Data Fusion Level Description Resource Management Level Resource Management Level Description 0 Signal / Feature Assessment Estimate patterns : features of an observed region of the world , or signal parameters ( e . g . , entity detections ) Signal Management Control individual signals / system observables 1 ( Individual ) Entity Assessment Estimate states of entities considered as individuals or entities of interest ( paradigmatically physical objects or events of interest ) Individual Resource Management Task / control individual resources ( e . g . modes , specific controls , responses ) 2 Situation Assessment Estimate situations : Interactions , other relationships and aggregations ( networks of relationships ) Resource Relationship Management Task / control resource relationships ( e . g . aggregation , coordination , de - confliction ) 3 Impact Assessment Estimate scenarios and outcomes : Courses of Action ( COAs ) , interactions of COAs with their environment , to include other COAs ( e . g . , projection from one situation to another Mission Objective Management Establish / modify the objective of level 0 , 1 or 2 actions , responses or relationships 4 System / Process Assessment System’s self - estimation ; the state of one’s organic sensors and other information sources , other system resources , system processes , performance and products System / Process Management Task / control / adjudicate system states and processes , for performance and distributed consistency This enables a more mature fusion state of the art to ‘bootstrap’ automated management system development much as estimation did for control in the late 20 th century . Since management is typically a ‘fan - out’ process whereas fusion is a ‘fan - in’ process , an operational information exploitation system will typically be implemented as an interlaced network of DF & RM nodes providing rapid reaction feedback as necessary at all the DF & RM levels . Proc . of SPIE Vol . 9464 94640F - 6 Organic Source & Resources Data Fusion Level 0 Signal / Feature Assessment Level 1 Entity Assessment Level 2 Situation Assessment Level 3 Impact Assessment Level 4 Process Assessment Model KB A Level 0 Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4 Resource Signal Individual Resource Mission System Management Resource Relationship Objective Management Mangaement Management Management Resource Management External Source & Resources Figure 5 depicts a notional information exploitation system represented in terms of interlaced data fusion and resource management nodes . The primary flow is left to right across the top ( i . e . , fan in DF ) and then down and right to left across the bottom ( i . e . , fan out RM ) with fast responses shown down across the middle , then to the left . This system features adaptive control of organic resources , to include multi - INT sensors and other information sources , data flow and data processing within the system , as well as adaptive control of models that the system uses in interpreting and analyzing acquired data and in planning responses , aligning the data sources and information products to the evolving needs of planning and operations . System users may participate in data fusion and resource management tasks at all levels . An information exploitation system will generally require predictive models for entities of some or all of these levels . For example , a simple Level 1 data system will use models of multi - INT sensors ( which are Level 4 models ) and of potential entities ( Level 1 models ) to recognize and track such objects . A system that incorporates sensor registration or calibration is one that permits modification of these sensor models as sensor states change or new information sources come online . Note that the control flow is right to left and up from higher to lower Resource Management levels ( i . e . , fan - out versus DF fan - in ) . As noted in the figure , Resource Management functions provide tasking to sensors and other system information sources , as well as to other system resources specific to the given system ( e . g . platforms , weapons , countermeasures , personnel , and processing resources ) . Although the focus in data fusion has generally been on the left to right flow of information ( i . e . , fan - in ) , it is possible for a data fusion system to employ feedback from higher to lower fusion processes via local fast response RM nodes . The estimated object environment can provide expectations ( e . g . in the form of prior probabilities for the signal / feature environment ; the estimated situation can provide expectations for object states ; the estimated scenarios ( situation evolution ) can provide expectations for an observed situation ; the estimated system state and performance can provide expectations for reaction by external entities ( priors for Levels 0 - 3 ) as well as expectations for measurements and inferences ( likelihood functions for Levels 0 - 3 ) . Thus , the upper DF levels can be seen as providing internal contexts or perspectives for the lower level processes that can reduce their search spaces . Similarly , the lower RM levels provide perspectives on the resource status ( e . g . , reaction times , conflicts , limitations , inventory , etc . ) for the higher ones . In a dual manner these perspectives reduce the task planning search spaces and can help provide crucial information for data - driven decisions , such as when an individual resource is controlled as a subtask of a higher - level coordination of multiple resources . We can partition Level 4 System Assessment and Level 4 System Management into performance assessment and management , DF & RM process assessment and management , external CACM , distributed consistency assessment and management , model assessment and management , source / resource assessment and management . Clearly , the DNN technical architecture is a rich framework for implementing integrated fusion and resource management processes , aligning and updating the required data sources and information products according to stages in the planning and execution processes . However , the sensemaking and decision - making aspects of Level 3 fusion still require an iterative comparison of alternative states that is currently exogenous to the fusion and resource management architecture , rather than providing a formalism that integrates this decision - making process with the fusion system . Figure 5 . Conceptual information exploitation system . Proc . of SPIE Vol . 9464 94640F - 7 3 . COGNITIVE DECISION MAKING IN INTELLIGENCE ANALYSIS In the current work , we are looking at the Dual Node Network ( DNN ) i n the context of military intelligence ( MI ) environments , where processing , exploitation , dissemination ( PED ) and information analysis of data from multi - INT sources increasingly pressures analyst and operator decision making and coordination [ 19 ] . As a form of cognitive work , the underlying decision making involved in such information analysis and synthesis plays out in a number of different contexts . For analytic operations throughout MI operations , analysts and sensor operators face many unique cognitive challenges that extend beyond the barriers of individual problem solving and into the realm of joint and distributed activities . While elements of different SA and “Team SA” approaches have had some success in the MI domain , we instead look at the operational MI environment through fundamental concepts of human perception , attention , and human expertise to explore and define how people cope in highly context sensitive environments . As described by Trent et al . [ 20 ] , in MI multiple coordinating agencies must effectively collaborate to provide intelligence support to their commanders as distributed staffs and agencies across multiple echelons continuously make decisions based on available information . This entails : ( 1 ) assessing the problem , ( 2 ) verifying information , ( 3 ) identifying solutions , ( 4 ) anticipating the consequences of decisions , ( 5 ) informing others of the decision and rationale , and ( 6 ) evaluating these decisions . Senior commanders and their staffs must then engage in deliberate decision - making processes to formulate plans for future operations . Collection and analysis assets must ingest and analyze the resulting data to identify possible enemy courses of action , relative strengths and weaknesses of the adversary , and areas of uncertainty within these assessments . To be effective , the intelligence section requires a deep understanding of the capabilities and limitations of the available collection systems and how they are tasked . Otherwise , inaccurate mental models can greatly impact the effective use of collection resources [ 20 ] . Conducting information analysis in such environments entails supporting the cognitive work required to successfully make inferences from data . As defined by Patterson , Roth , and Woods [ 21 ] , analysis is event - driven and inferential by nature , where analysts work to come up with the “best explanation” given uncertain , contradictory , and incomplete data . In this sense , the process can be seen as being both inferential and abductive as reasoning processes continuously move from states of doubt to a state of belief . A fundamental problem in the military domain ( or any situation where there is an intelligent and adaptive adversary ) , is that there is not always an absolutely correct answer from available data . The intelligence analysis process , borrowing from Johnston [ 22 ] , is the application of individual and collaborative cognitive methods to weigh this available data and test hypotheses . Elm et al . [ 23 ] developed a hypothesized functional support model that serves as a framework to define the decision - making support requirements for such intelligence analysis tools and systems . They stress the need for new systems to support the cognitive work of abductive inferential analysis—which is the core of intelligence analysis—and to support the collaboration and interaction with automated systems . Based on findings in Patterson [ 21 ] the support function model is built around an iterative broadening , narrowing , and convergence process . This consists of primarily three functions—Down Collect , Conflict and Corroboration , and Hypothesis Exploration . Each of these primary functions have sets of support functions and their integration represents a number of support system requirements . Of these requirements , one of the most endemic is how data overload influences the cognitive work of hypothesis exploration [ 21 ] , [ 24 ] . As a function , hypothesis exploration is related to the cognitive work involved in the construction of coherent stories / hypotheses to explain the interpretations of the findings . Hypothesis exploration requires the integration of both hypotheses and assessments to support decision makers . While the support function model for intelligence analysis provides specifics of information and data selection critical for organizing inputs from fusion systems , this model also shares a commonality with Boyd’s OODA loop and Endsley’s SA model , by including the general notion of a cyclical process . Each of these models first starts by sampling aspects of the environment , which then modifies knowledge , which then directs exploration , which again leads to sampling of the environment . The fundamental dynamic that plays out across all of these models is essentially that of Neisser’s ( 1976 ) perceptual cycle . By grounding the decision making functions in such contexts , natural decision - making support requirements emerge for fusion architectures , such as the DNN , that must be able to help operators and analysts apprehend or notice interesting information and events by informing their selection of where to shift their attention next [ 26 ] . Effectively incorporating additional information ( e . g . , from DNN , from other sources , etc . ) then supports the broadening process that is critical to achieving and extending such SA [ 27 ] . To guard against the potential for fixation , vagabonding , confirmation biases , and premature narrowing in these analytic activities , the analysts and operators must be provided with decision support for cross - checks and broadening that promote fluidly shifting attention to other sources of information and toward different groups . Ultimately , developing systems that provide information and knowledge that broadens the analytic space Proc . of SPIE Vol . 9464 94640F - 8 MDMP / Mission Planning ) Commander Impact Assessment A Evaluate t1 ¡Decision Maker Predict i < Mission Goals & Context COA Selection / Objective Management Intelligence Analyst s PED Operator Dissemination Requirements & Context Updates Relationship * Management J Level 2 Level 3 Identify Relationships i Entity Information Observe Entities Detection / Alerts Multi - INT Sensors PED / Data Fusion Y Define Task Individual Management Formulate Subtasks Signal Management Execute 0 Mission Execution / Resource Management Level 1 Level 0 is critical to help analysts and operators transition from data gathering toward information syntheses [ 28 ] necessary to support data - driven decision making at the C2 level . 4 . DUAL NODE DECISION WHEELS : ALIGNING FUSION AND DECISIONS Individually , the DNN technical architecture and cognitive decision making models each provide a solution to only part of the problem facing PED operators , analysts , and C2 personnel . DNN provides a means of organizing data fusion and analysis , while cognitive decision models describe how to most effectively make decisions from available information . However , the data fusion and decision making processes are still not formally aligned , and the obstacles to realizing the full potential of data - driven decision making still remain . In order to address all of these challenges , we propose to integrate fusion , intelligence , and decision making in a new technical architecture , Dual Node Decision Wheels ( DNDW ) . DNDW is a novel combination of goal - directed multi - source information fusion and data - driven decision making . Figure 6 illustrates the components of the DNDW architecture , combining aspects of both the DNN and cognitive decision models to align and coordinate PED , analytic , and C2 processes . The bottom portion of the diagram is essentially a DNN , capturing the processing and exploitation of multi - INT data—detection of features of interest , observations of entities ( e . g . , high value targets ) , and SA of relationships between entities—using the JDL model and providing links for aligning intelligence and C2 tasks through communications between resource management and fusion nodes . These links enable rapid response to organizational and C2 needs , as updates to dissemination requirements and operational context can be communicated to the fusion system . This DNN is interwoven with a decision ladder , indicating the processes and tasks— Figure 6 : Dual Node Decision Wheels ( DNDW ) architecture combining the Dual Node Network technical architecture for data fusion and resource management with decision ladders and decision wheels . Proc . of SPIE Vol . 9464 94640F - 9 which may be either automated or human cognitive processes—that occur as data flows through the fusion system and operations occur in the resource management network . However , JDL - based systems , including the DNN DF & RM solution , often get bogged down at Level 3 fusion , which estimates and predicts the impact of the situation on the current mission . While the DNN includes feedback loops in the architecture to facilitate communication between fusion and resource management processes , the existing model does not capture the iterative nature of Level 3 fusion how this is inherently integrated with C2 processes . DNDW uses insights from decision trees and decision wheels , adding a cyclic , integrated process at Level 3 of the architecture ( shown at the top of Figure 1 ) . The decision cycle models the military decision making process and mission planning , but also includes additional information flows of mission goals and operational context from the Level 3 decision wheel to the PED systems at lower fusion levels in the DNN to align fusion processes not only to their resource management levels , but to the high - level decision needs of the Commander . DNDW represents a new , integrated approach to information fusion and organizational decision making . Selection and integration of data resources and analytic technologies most relevant to the evolving needs of decision - makers is currently one of the most time and cost intensive aspect of PED and intelligence processes for developing situation awareness . Given the quantity and variety of multi - INT data resources , PED operators and intelligence analysts are faced with an unmanageable quantity of unfocused data , making it difficult to triage and identify key products to support C2 needs . Unlike classic information fusion and even data fusion and resource management frameworks , DNDW contains explicit pathways to provide PED systems focused on low - level data—by both human operators and automated tools—with higher level analytic and C2 goals and mission context to guide multi - INT processing and exploitation . This alignment between goals and information produces a framework that more accurately represents high - level fusion and the required feedback between C2 and fusion processes necessary to support effective data driven decisions . In addition to enabling PED operators and analysts to access the most mission relevant information resources , the alignment provided by DNDW also supports Level 5 fusion ( shown in Figure 6 as the interaction of PED operators , intelligence analysts , and decision - makers with the DF & RM systems ) , ensuring that actionable intelligence is disseminated to Commanders in format that supports their decision making processes and guiding the implementation of interface components . The DNDW architecture leverages the flexible two - way communication of the DNN between data fusion and resource management nodes , using these links to communicate not only Commanders’ information needs , but also the required intelligence formats or products for specific mission tasks . As with mission context , the specifications of intelligence products can also be communicated using standard semantic technologies and an ontology to map dissemination needs to mission tasks , again supporting both automated reasoning and human understanding . Using a standard format to describe desired intelligence products will facilitate the discovery and chaining of complementary system components , where the outputs of processing and exploitation can be used as the inputs to decision support tools . This standard representation of dissemination requirements can even be applied to human - driven tasks , such as the preparation of PowerPoint briefings , ensuring that the results will be relevant and useful for C2 customers . Finally , DNDW provides the foundation for a new technical architecture for integrating PED , analysis , and C2 processes and implementing a system that promotes the effective use of multi - INT resources . In addition to describing more fluid coordination between PED and C2 , DNDW provides a template for the actual implementation of a network centric service - oriented architecture ( SOA ) that integrates these processes and technologies . A DNDW system will be a collection of services—multi - INT sensors , processing and exploitation , decision support—linked according to SOA standards to facilitate the alignment of intelligence products and C2 requirements . This SOA will be a flexible system - of - systems , allowing analysts and Commanders to “plug and play” the most effective tools or system chains at each node in Figure 1 - 1 , easily incorporating new sensors and systems as they come online . This agility makes DNDW suitable for integrating processes across any organizational structure and scalable to information flows across echelons and enterprise systems , e . g . , providing a method whereby strategic goals can inform PED systems at lower operational levels . The proposed DNDW architecture will provide fundamental enhancements to the production of SA and data - driven decision making , supporting alignment of human and technical systems with organizational operations and decision making processes . This integration will ultimately enhance the value of large - scale multi - INT and improve the quality of operational decision making . By providing PED with more guidance of evolving mission context and information requirements , DNDW will facilitate a reduction in manual effort and personnel requirements , allowing PED operators to focus on the most mission - relevant multi - INT data . The flexible SOA implementation of DNDP will support more Proc . of SPIE Vol . 9464 94640F - 10 coordinated use of the available PED , intelligence analysis , and decision - making technologies and can easily adapt as new multi - INT platforms come online . 5 . USING DNDW FOR PROCESS ALIGNMENT & HIGH LEVEL FUSION In this section we discuss in more detail how the DNDW architecture can be used to fill two important gaps in cognitive systems engineering and fusion science : ( 1 ) the design and implementation of fusion systems that support established organizational or business processes ; and ( 2 ) the design and implementation of an effective Level 4 fusion system that can align and manage an enterprise of Level 0 - 3 fusion systems . The first use case is essentially a straightforward application of the intuition behind DNDW . Using the DNDW , it is possible to take existing organizational or business process descriptions and translate these processes into an actual technology system that supports data - driven decision making . For example , suppose we have a process for a new power plant process monitoring systems for dynamic fault management that has been described using a cognitive systems engineering approach . By formalizing this process using the DNDW architecture , the stages and conditions necessary for choosing a COA and effectively identifying and responding to abnormal conditions can be decomposed as a decision ladder , and the component management tasks described as a resource - management network ; each management task requires the appropriate mental model to adequately plan and allocate the proper resources . The decision ladder representation indicates what the specific information needs are for sensemaking and SA , allowing systems engineers to identify the decision aids or information products that must be produced by fusion nodes to support their dual resource management nodes . Rather than starting from technologies or fusion systems and trying to make them fit in with organizational structures , the DNDW architecture allows organizations to specifically design flexible data fusion and resource management systems that are aligned with their particular requirements and integrated with their decision making processes , enabling more efficient systems designs and lower procurement costs . DNDW allows systems engineers to identify the right alignment so fusion products are provided where they are needed on the organizational side , facilitating updates to these requirements in dynamic or shifting contexts . The second use case indicates the potential for DNDW to enhance existing concepts of high - level fusion systems . Recall from Section 1 that the revised JDL fusion model [ 7 ] outlines five levels of fusion ranging from Level 0 to Level 4 . Level 4 fusion and resource management—process assessment and system management of the underlying fusion system—is generally regarded as the most challenging , because it is orthogonal to the rest of the fusion and resource management architecture , cross - cutting all of the levels below . Currently , there is no particular resource or formalism for designing Level 4 fusion systems . However , the DNDW architecture described above can actually be utilized as a Level 4 framework , overseeing and controlling the behavior of PED , analysis , and decision making tools at Levels 0 - 3 , ensuring that they are optimally aligned with organizational structures . If we think about the previous example , we saw that for each particular organizational process or task we can create a specifically aligned fusion process that supports data - driven decisions . Using the same logic , we can use DNDW to design a framework that orchestrates and controls a network of such DF & RM systems , aligning the behaviors and performance of these fusion systems with the overall goals of the organization . This example illustrates that the DNDW model can be highly scalable and composable , representing enterprise systems where each node is itself a DNDW fusion system optimally aligned to the organizational context . 6 . DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS In this paper , we have presented Dual Node Decision Wheels ( DNDW ) , a novel approach to a technical architecture that integrates PED , analysis , and C2 technologies and workflows . The specification and communication of Commanders’ goals and information needs as a planning and execution ontology provides guidance for processing and execution systems . By extending the DNN fusion architecture , dissemination also becomes a two - way communication for re - tasking intelligence activities and ensuring that Commanders receive SA in a format that supports their mission . Perhaps the biggest impact of DNDW is capturing the inherent integration necessary between C2 and fusion processes , documenting and formalizing a feedback mechanism that undoubtedly already occurs in an ad hoc method . While our examples discussed using DNDW in a military C2 and PED context , the same architecture can support any type of organizational structure with various levels of data fusion , operations , and decision making . As future work , we plan to extend the DNDW model into a full technical architecture to provide a template for system implementation using a service - oriented architecture , incorporating PED and C2 components—multi - INT sensors , data integration and analytic tools , and human - centered analyses—and workflows in a modular “plug and play” system . One Proc . of SPIE Vol . 9464 94640F - 11 clear target for DNDW in the military intelligence domain is the challenging and under - supported work related to hypothesis exploration . Improved fusion systems , such as DNDW , when coupled with rich intelligence databases , have the potential to drastically help analyst cognitive work in broadening the set of hypotheses under consideration to avoid premature narrowing . Using these fusion systems to critique analysts has the potential for producing deeper and more rigorous evaluations [ 29 ] , [ 30 ] . We will explore various semantic technologies , such as the Web Ontology Language ( OWL ) , to span the barrier between PED and C2 workflows by aligning fusion processes ( both automated and human ) with operational processes using a planning and execution ontology ( see Thaler [ 31 ] ) consisting of a hierarchy of mission goals , their tasks and subtasks , and their information requirements . This approach will allow automated inference methods to identify the optimal data resources and analysis techniques for particular mission goals according to their semantic compatibility , as well as facilitate Level 5 fusion through interface designs that improved human understanding of fusion products and communication of goals . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Gantz , J . and Reinsel , D . , “The Digital Universe in 2020 : Big Data , Bigger Digital Shadows , and Biggest Growth in the Far East , IDC iView : IDC Analyze the Future ( 2012 ) . [ 2 ] Provost , F . and Fawcett , T , “Data Science and its Relationship to Big Data and Data - Driven Decision Making , ” Big Data 1 ( 1 ) , 51 - 59 ( 2013 ) . [ 3 ] Brynjolfsson , E . , Hitt , L . M . , and Kim , H . H . , “Strength in Numbers : How Does Data - Driven Decision Making Affect Firm Performance ? ” SSRN , 22 April 22 2011 , < http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 2139 / ssrn . 1819486 > ( 2011 ) . [ 4 ] Bowman , C . L . , “Process Assessment and Process Management for Intelligent Data Fusion & Resource Management Systems” , Proc . AIAA Space ( 2012 ) . [ 5 ] Steinberg , A . N . and Bowman , C . L . , “Revisions to the JDL Data Fusion Model , ” Chapter 3 of Handbook of Multisensor Data Fusion , ed . Martin E . Liggins , David L . Hall and James Llinas , CRC Press , London ( 2009 ) . [ 6 ] Steinberg , A . N . , “Foundations of Situation and Threat Assessment , ” Chapter 18 of Handbook of Multisensor Data Fusion , ed . Martin E . Liggins , David L . Hall and James Llinas , CRC Press , London ( 2009 ) . [ 7 ] Steinberg , A . N . , Bowman , C . L . , and White , F . E . , “Revisions to the JDL Data Fusion Model” , Proc . SPIE 3719 ( 1999 ) . [ 8 ] Blasch , E . P . and Plano , S . , “Level 5 : User Refinement to Aid the Fusion Process” , Proc SPIE 5099 ( 2003 ) . [ 9 ] Endsley , M . R . , “Toward a Theory of Situation Awareness in Dynamic Systems , ” Human Factors Journal 37 ( 1 ) , 32 - 64 ( 1995 ) . [ 10 ] Klein , G . , “Whose Fallacies ? ” Journal of Cognitive Engineering and Decision Making ( 2014 ) . [ 11 ] Sarter , N . B . and Woods , D . D . , “Situation Awareness : A Critical but Ill - Defined Phenomenon , ” International Journal of Aviation Psychology 1 , 45 - 57 ( 1991 ) . [ 12 ] Hoffman , R . , “Origins of Situation Awareness Cautionary Tales From the History of Concepts of Attention , ” Journal of Cognitive Engineering and Decision Making 9 ( 1 ) , 73 - 83 ( 2015 ) . [ 13 ] Boyd , J . , “Destruction and Creation , ” Unpublished 16 - page essay archived at the Marine Corps University Research Archives ( 1976 ) . [ 14 ] Boyd , J . “Discourses on Winning and Losing , ” Unpublished briefing slides archived at the Marine Corps University Research Archives ( 1986 ) . [ 15 ] Salerno , J . , Sudit , M . , Yang , S . J . , Tadda , G . P . , Kadar , I . , and Holsopple , J . , “Issues and Challenges in Higher Level Fusion : Threat / Impact Assessment and Intent Modeling , ” Proc . Information Fusion ( 2010 ) . [ 16 ] Weick , K . E . , [ Sensemaking In Organizations ] , Sage Publications , Thousand Oaks , CA ( 1995 ) [ 17 ] Rasmussen , J . , Pejtersen , A . M . , and Goodstein , L . P . , [ Cognitive Systems Engineering ] , Wiley and Sons , New York ( 1994 ) . [ 18 ] Bowman , C . L . , “The Dual Node Network ( DNN ) Data Fusion & Resource Management ( DF & RM ) Architecture , ” AIAA Intelligent Systems Conference ( 2004 ) . [ 19 ] Voshell , M . , Tittle , J . S . , Lofdahl , C . , Fichtle , T . , Roth , E . M . , and Woods , D . D . , “Application of Emerging Technologies to Support Army Processing Exploitation and Dissemination , ” United States Army Research , Development & Engineering Command ( 2013 ) . [ 20 ] Trent , S . A . , Patterson , E . S . , and Woods , D . D . , “Challenges for cognition in Intelligence Analysis , ” Journal of Cognitive Engineering and Decision Making 1 ( 1 ) , 75 – 97 ( 2007 ) . Proc . of SPIE Vol . 9464 94640F - 12 [ 21 ] Patterson , E . S . , Roth , E . M . , and Woods , D . D . , “Predicting Vulnerabilities in Computer - Supported Inferential Analysis Under Data Overload , ” Cognition , Technology and Work 3 , 224 – 237 ( 2001 ) . [ 22 ] Johnson , R . , [ Analytic Culture in the US Intelligence Community : An Ethnographic Study ] , Government Printing Office , Washington ( 2005 ) . [ 23 ] Elm , W . , Potter , S . , Tittle , J . , Woods , D . , Grossman , J . , and Patterson , E . , “Finding Decision Support Requirements for Effective Intelligence Analysis Tools , ” Proc . Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 49th Annual Meeting , 297 - 301 ( 2005 ) . [ 24 ] Woods , D . D . , Patterson , E . S . , and Roth , E . M . , “Can We Ever Escape from Data Overload ? A Cognitive Systems Diagnosis , ” Cognition , Technology , and Work 4 ( 1 ) , 22 - 36 ( 2002 ) . [ 25 ] Neisser , U . , [ Cognition and Reality : Principles and Implications of Cognitive Psychology ] , W . H . Freeman and Company , ( 1976 ) . [ 26 ] Woods , D . and Sarter , N . , “Capturing the Dynamics of Attention Control from Individual to Distributed Systems : the Shape of Models to Come , ” Theoretical Issues in Ergonomics Science 11 ( 1 ) , 7 - 28 ( 2010 ) . [ 27 ] Watts - Perotti , J . and Woods , D . D . , “How Anomaly Response is Distributed across Functionally Distinct Teams in Space Shuttle Mission Control , ” Journal of Cognitive Engineering and Decision Making , 1 , 405 - 433 ( 2007 ) . [ 28 ] Roesler , A . and Woods , D . D . , “Designing for Expertise” , In : Product Experience – A Multidisciplinary Approach , ed . Schifferstein , R . and Hekkert , P . , Elsevier , Oxford ( 2007 ) [ 29 ] Miller , J . E . , Patterson , E . S . , and Woods , D . D . , “Elicitation by Critiquing as a Cognitive Task Analysis Methodology , ” Cognition , Technology & Work , 8 , 90 - 102 ( 2006 ) . [ 30 ] Zelik , D . , Patterson , E . , and Woods , D . , “Judging Sufficiency : How Professional Intelligence Analysts Assess Analytical Rigor , ” Proc . Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 51st Annual Meeting ( 2007 ) . [ 31 ] Thaler , D . E . , “Strategies to Tasks : A Framework for Linking Means and Ends , ” DTIC Document ( 1993 ) . Proc . of SPIE Vol . 9464 94640F - 13