Journal of Muscle Research and Cell Motility 13 , 272 - 284 ( 1992 ) REVIEW Tightly - bound divalent cation of actin JAMES E . ESTES I ' 3 . , LYNN A . SELDEN x , HENRY J . , KINOSIAN 3 and LEWIS C . GERSHMAN 2 - 4 ~ Research Service and 2 Medical Service , Veterans Administration Medical Centre , Albany , New York 12208 , USA 3 Department of Physiology and Cell Biology and 4 Department of Medicine , Albany Medical College , Albany , New York 12208 , USA Received 25 April 1991 ; revised and accepted 23 July 1991 Summary Actin is known to undergo reversible monomer - polymer transitions that coincide with various cell activities such as cell shape changes , locomotion , endocytosis and exocytosis . This dynamic state of actin filament self - assembly and disassembly is thought to be regulated by the properties of the monomeric actin molecule and in vivo by the influence of actin - associated proteins . Of major importance to the properties of the monomeric actin molecule are the presence of one tightly - bound ATP and one tighly - bound divalent cation per molecule . In vivo the divalent cation is thought to be Mg 2 + ( Mg - actin ) but in vitro standard purification procedures result in the preparation of Ca - actin . The affinity of actin for a divalent cation at the tight binding site is in the nanomolar range , much higher than earlier thought . The binding kinetics of Mg z + and Ca z + at the high affinity site on actin are considered in terms of a simple competitive binding mechanism . This model adequately describes the published observations regarding divalent cation exchange on actin . The effects of the tightly - bound cation , Mg 2 + or Ca z + , on nucleotide binding and exchange on actin , actin ATP hydrolysis activity and nucleation and polymerization of actin are discussed . From the characteristics that are reviewed , it is apparent that the nature of the bound divalent cation has a significant effect on the properties of actin . Abbreviations : N - iodoacetyl - N ' - ( 5 - sulpho - 1 - naphthyl ) ethylenediamine , I - AEDANS ; 2 - ( 2 - bis - carboxymethylamino - 5 - methylphenoxyl ) methyl - 6 - methoxy - 8 - biscarboxymethyl aminoquinoline , Quin 2 ; 1 , 2 - bis ( o - aminophenoxy ) - ethane - N , N , N ' , N ' - tetraacetic acid , BAPTA ; N - ( - pyrenyl ) iodoacetamide , pyrene ; divalent cation - free actin , DCF - actin . Introduction The protein actin is now known to exist in virtually every eukaryotic cell , where it is associated with a variety of cellular motile events . It is also well established that monomeric actin ( G - actin ) contains one tightly - bound divalent cation and one tightly - bound adenosine nucleo - tide per molecule . In recent years , a large body of evidence has accumulated that documents a variety of structural and functional differences between actin con - taining tightly - bound Mg z + ( Mg - actin ) and actin contain - ing tightly - bound Ca z + ( Ca - actin ) . Our understanding of actin chemistry has been compli - cated by apparently conflicting observations concerning the binding of the tightly - bound cation and nucleotide to actin . Recent evidence which has shown that the tightly - bound divalent cation is bound with a dissociation * To whom correspondence should be addressed . 0142 - 4319 (cid:14)9 1992 Chapman & Hall constant in the nanomolar range ( Gershman et al . , 1986 ) along with other independent evidence that the tightly - bound cation interacts directly with the bound nucleotide on actin ( Valentin - Ranc and Carlier , 1989 ; Kabsch et al . , 1990 ) has provided the basis for a simple and comprehen - sive model for cation and nucleotide exchange on actin that describes the experimental observations . Appreciation of the importance of the tightly - bound divalent cation to the properties of actin has developed more or less to a point of consensus within the field . The time has come for a review that clarifies the recent advances in actin research ( see Pollard , 1990 , Carlier , 1991 ) as they relate to the actin - bound divalent cation . Identity of actin - bound cation Early measurements of the cation content in crude actin preparations found varying amounts of Ca 2 + and Mg 2 + ( Feuer et al . , 1948 ; Hasselbach , 1957 ; Chrambach et al . , Tightly - bound divalent cation of actin 1961 ) , with the notion that monomeric G - actin tightly binds approximately one mole Ca 2 + per mole protein becoming generally accepted ( Grubhofer & Weber , 1961 ; Maruyama & Gergely , 1961 ; Tonomura & Yoshimura , 1961 ; Strohman & Samorodin , 1962 ; Martonosi et al . , 1964 ) . At about the same time , it became appreciated that the G - actin - bound metal ion was freely exchangeable with exogenous divalent cations . ( Martonosi & Gouvea , 1961 ; Barany et al . , 1962 ; Drabikowski & Strzelecka - Golaszewska , 1963 ; Oosawa et al . , 1964 ; Strzelecka - Golaszewska & Drabikowski , 1968 ; Kasai & Oosawa , 1968 , 1969 ) . The divalent cation tightly - bound to actin is probably Mg 2 + in vivo ( see below ) but is generally Ca z + in standard in vitro preparations . G - actin is usually extracted with a dilute ATP solution from an acetone powder of skeletal muscle , commonly prepared by the method of Szent - Gyorgyi ( 1951 ) , which includes several washes of the tissue with solutions containing 0 . 1 mM CaC12 . Sub - sequent purification of actin generally involves one or more polymerization - depolymerization cycles and a final dialysis against a CaClz - containing buffer ( Mommaerts , 1951 , 1952 ) . In recent years additional purification steps frequently include chromatographic separation of mono - meric actin from oligomeric , denatured or aggregated actin , and any actin - associated proteins , using a low ionic strength buffer solution containing 0 . 2 mM ATP and 0 . 02 - 0 . 2 mM CaC12 , frequently referred to as buffer G . ( Failure to column purify fluorescent - labelled monomeric actin immediately before experimental use often results in a preparation with variable properties ( Selden et al . , 1989 ) . ) Thus , in view of the amounts of CaClz in the solutions used to prepare actin , it is not surprising that in vitro analyses of the cation content of actin predomi - nantly found Ca z + tightly bound to the protein . From the results of a study with EDTA - washed myofibrils ( pH 7 . 3 ) , Weber and colleagues ( 1969 ) specu - lated that in vivo the bound divalent cation in myofibrillar actin is Mg 2 + and not Ca 2 + because is was not possible to reduce the amount of Mg 2 ยง bound to the myofibrils below 4 Ixmol per g protein . Subsequently Somlyo ' s laboratory ( Kitazawa et al . , 1982 ) reported an electron probe analysis of ultrathin cryosections of frog skeletal muscle in which the tightly - bound Mg z + in the I - band was found to be equal to the amount of actin present , while the amount of Ca 2 + bound to the I - band was negligible . Their results indicated that Mg 2 + , rather than Ca 2 + , is the tightly - bound divalent cation present in the F - actin of thin filaments in situ . Thus G - actin , as usually prepared in vitro , contains one mole of tightly - bound Ca 2 + per mole protein , but in vivo the tightly - bound divalent cation is most likely Mg 2 + . Affinity of actin for the tightly - bound divalent cation In initial studies , equilibrium dialysis and ultracentrifugal techniques provided estimates of the order of 273 10L10 ~ M - 1 for the apparent affinity constants for tight binding of Ca 2 + or Mg 2 + to actin ( Martonosi et al . , 1964 ) . Several groups demonstrated that tightly - bound Ca z + can be replaced by other divalent cations whose relative affinities decrease in the sequence Ca > Mn > Cd > Mg > Zn > Ni > Sr ( Kasai & Oosawa , 1968 ; Strzelecka - Golaszewska and Drabikowski , 1968 , 1978 ; Strzelecka - Golaszewska , 1973 ; Loscalzo & Reed , 1976 ) . Then , in 1985 , Konno and Morales ( 1985 ) reported the obser - vation that two thiol groups in actin , Cys - lO and Cys - 257 , become exposed at very low Ca z + concen - trations . This implied that the affinity of Ca z + for actin might be very strong , and this suggestion was substanti - ated by the demonstration ( Gershman et al . , 1986 ) that actin binds Ca z + and Mg 2 + with dissociation constants in the nanomolar range . Subsequent work by Carlier and colleagues ( 1986a ) , Zimmerle and colleagues ( 1987 ) and Nowak and colleagues ( 1988 ) corroborated this finding . Figure 1 illustrates an experiment in which release of the Ca z + tightly - bound to actin was both induced and monitored with the fluorescent Ca 2 + chelator Quin 2 . The time - dependent increase in fluorescence intensity up to the first plateau ( t ~ 2 . 5 min ) is caused by the release of actin - bound Ca 2 + from the high - affinity site . Addition of Mg 2 + ( at t ~ 2 . 5 rain ) causes the fluorescence intensity to increase to a second plateau as the remaining actin - bound Ca 2 + is replaced by Mg 2 + ( forming Mg - actin ) . This particular experiment is especially illustrative as the Ca - actin is approximately half - dissociated at the first plateau ; thus the equilibrium dissociation constant for Ca 2 + ( Kc ~ ) is approximately equal to the free Ca 2 + concentration at this first plateau , which is 2 . 1 nM for this 8oseline 500 uM Quin2 In Woter SarnDle ~ JJ HSuM Actin 150uM 5OOoM0o , n2 I ' . P c ' 2 . . . . . . I aOO ~ M . TP I ~ . 5rnM MOPS pHT . O / ~ " r r / IOuM CaCI 2 Baseline Added ~ " = 5OOuM Quin 2 in H20 Time ( rain ) Fig . 1 . Time course of Ca 2 + dissociation from the high affinity site on actin . The fluorescence intensity of Quin 2 versus time is shown . Baseline indicates the fluorescence intensity of Quin 2 added to water without CaC12 . Sample fluorescence intenstiy increases to the first plateau as Ca 2 + dissociates from actin and binds to Quin 2 . The fluorescence intensity of Quin 2 increases further ( to the second plateau ) as the remaining Ca z + is replaced by Mg a + . Conditions are indicated in the figure . Additional details can be found in Gershman and colleagues ( 1986 ) . > . 0 ~ w E w 0 ~ o = i ,