Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes Vol . 87 , No . 1 , January , pp . 156 – 179 , 2002 doi : 10 . 1006 / obhd . 2001 . 2961 , available online at http : / / www . idealibrary . com on Computer - Mediated Communication and Group Decision Making : A Meta - Analysis Boris B . Baltes , Marcus W . Dickson , Michael P . Sherman , Cara C . Bauer , and Jacqueline S . LaGanke Wayne State University A meta - analysis of research comparing decision making in face - to - face versus computer - mediated communication groups was conducted . Results suggest that computer - mediated communica - tion leads to decreases in group effectiveness , increases in time required to complete tasks , and decreases in member satisfaction compared to face - to - face groups . All of the moderators tested ( anonymity in the group process , limited versus unlimited time to reach decisions , group size , and task type ) were significant for at least one of the dependent variables . The article concludes with cautions about the unbridled rush by organizations to adopt computer - mediated communication as a medium for group deci - sion making and implications of the present findings for theory and research on computer - mediated communication and group decision making . q 2001 Elsevier Science Face - to - face meetings are no longer the sole communication method used by small groups within organizations to discuss problems and make decisions . Over the past 20 years , the integration of computers and communication tech - nologies has revolutionized communication and made possible new and ex - panded forms of group work . In fact , for many people , electronic messaging and computer conferencing are becoming more commonplace than using the postal service or even the telephone . The increased use of computer networks to conduct business has been stimulated by decreasing costs ; increased accessi - bility of information ; and the rapid exchange of documents , databases , and messages ( Siegel , Dubrovsky , Kiesler , & McGuire , 1986 ) . Not surprisingly , as Portionsofthis articlewereoriginallypresentedat the107thAnnualConvention oftheAmerican Psychological Association in Boston , MA , August 20 – 24 , 1999 . The third through fifth authors contributed equally . Address correspondence and reprint requests to Boris B . Baltes , Psychology Department , 71 W . Warren , Wayne State University , Detroit , MI 48202 . E - mail : bbaltes @ sun . science . wayne . edu . 156 0749 - 5978 / 01 $ 35 . 00 q 2001 Elsevier Science All rights reserved . CMC AND GROUP PERFORMANCE 157 national and local computer networks proliferate , computer - mediated commu - nication ( CMC ) has become an integral component of organizational communi - cation ( Abdul - Gader , 1996 ; Straus & McGrath , 1994 ; Zeffane & Cheek , 1995 ) and provides new ways to support work in groups distributed by time and space . Although current electronic communication technologies make collaboration between dispersed groups more convenient and less expensive than traveling to meet face - to - face , questions arise as to whether CMC enhances or debases group processes or outcomes and whether there are any negative consequences associated with reliance upon CMC . Researchers have very quickly begun to focus on the question of how com - puter - mediated communication affects various outcome variables such as group performance and member satisfaction . While the research findings have been unequivocal in some areas ( e . g . , computer - mediated groups take longer to make a decision ) , inconsistent results have also been found ( e . g . , quality of group decision has been found to both increase and decrease ) . Furthermore , to date the only attempts to consolidate and summarize the research on CMC have been narrative literature reviews ( e . g . , Bordia , 1997 ) . To better understand the extant literature , we conducted a meta - analysis in an attempt to quantify the effects of CMC on several outcome variables : decision quality , time to decision , and member satisfaction . COMPUTER - MEDIATED COMMUNICATION It is becoming quite common to see advertisements in business periodicals for computer systems and software designed to allow organizational members to communicate and hold meetings . These advertisements typically focus on the time and dollar savings of an “electronic meeting” versus a “face - to - face meeting , ” which would require plane fares , hotels , rental cars , and so on . In fact , as it becomes more common for organizations of various sizes to conduct business across national boundaries , meeting face - to - face may be neither eco - nomically feasible nor the most effective mode of communication . It can also be challenging logistically to arrange meeting times and locations when mem - bers of organizations are dispersed throughout geographical locations . Thus , many organizations have implemented various forms of computer conferencing systems as a means of augmenting or replacing face - to - face meetings among geographically dispersed groups of people ( Perry , 1992 ) . Unfortunately , the advertisements that tout the convenience and savings associated with electronic communication systems pay little to no attention to questions about the quality of the decisions made using these computer systems or to differences in the ways in which people interact with each other online versus face to face . We believe that these are important issues for managers to understand before making decisions ( and investments ) affecting the ways in which their organizational members communicate . Recognizing the need for greater understanding of the dynamics of CMC , researchers have very quickly begun to focus on these questions . In a synthesis of the experimental literature comparing face - to - face and computer - mediated 158 BALTES ET AL . communication , Bordia ( 1997 ) points out that researchers have looked at CMC to study social psychological effects , organizational influences , human factors’ assessments , and educational use . Of the experimental studies conducted , many have examined the impact of communication media on group processes and outcomes . Within the domain of CMC research , however , a wide range of dependent variables have been considered , including quality of decisions made using CMC ( assessed objectively ) , quality of decisions made using CMC ( as - sessed subjectively ) , satisfaction of users with the CMC system , length of time to reach a decision using CMC , number of ideas generated using CMC , decision confidence in the CMC setting , quality of interaction among CMC participants in group decision making , and patterns of influence in CMC groups . Additionally , subsumed under the realm of computer - mediated communica - tion research , there is a wide range of communications media examined , includ - ing synchronous , text - based communication ( i . e . , “chat” ) ; asynchronous , text - based communication ( i . e . , e - mail ) ; videoconferencing ; group decision making with and without a “Group Decision Support System” ; and group decision making with and without verbal interaction in addition to the computer - medi - ated interaction . Further , in some studies the participants are students and in others they are practicing managers , in some studies the participants are people of equivalent status and in others people of differential levels of status , and there are many other variations in sample characteristics as well . The studies also differ in the nature of the group task , the assessment of the group’s performance ( objec - tive vs subjective ratings ) , the time allotted to complete the task , and the degree of anonymity in the CMC condition . These myriad dependent variables , conditions , participant pools , and study features have made it difficult to inter - pret the large number of findings in recent research , especially when at first glance the findings appear to be inconsistent . Our review of the literature does , however , reveal one general point of consis - tency , though it was often expressed in differing ways across studies . This is that the various communications media can be generally described by the extent to which the media are synchronous and the extent to which the media convey paraverbal and nonverbal aspects of communication . Further , to the extent that a particular medium is high on one or both of these dimensions , the greater will be the success of the communications and decision making process . Figure 1 shows a variety of communications media along these two dimensions , suggesting that , for example , a text - based synchronous media ( i . e . , “chat” ) will be less effective than face - to - face ( FTF ) communication because chat is lower than face - to - face communication on both of the dimensions . However , as mentioned above , we encountered a great many inconsistencies across studies as well . These inconsistencies include differences in the types of tasks used ( e . g . , intellective and idea generation ) , the samples examined ( e . g . , students and managers ) , the time allotted to complete tasks , the type of communication medium ( synchronous versus asynchronous ) , and the degree of anonymity . As Bordia ( 1997 ) suggested in his review of the literature , some CMC AND GROUP PERFORMANCE 159 FIG . 1 . Placement of six communications media according to degree of synchronization ( simul - taneity ) of communication and degree of nonverbal and paraverbal cues present . of the differences across studies might help explain some of the contradictions and inconsistencies in the findings . Consequently , we conducted a meta - analysis on computer - mediated commu - nication to try to quantify the true effects of CMC vs FTF communication on certain outcome variables . In order to increase the internal validity of our study , we included only studies that met two criteria . First , the studies examined had to include either a synchronous or asynchronous text - based communication system . This criterion was adopted because ( a ) the majority of studies to date have used text - based systems , and we believed it to be important to have a common baseline for comparison , and ( b ) text - based communication is increas - ingly common in organizational settings and thus has importance theoretically and practically . Second , the studies selected had to incorporate a face - to - face communication condition against which to compare the CMC condition . Interestingly , in coding the studies for the present investigation , two trends were readily apparent . First , the vast majority of studies utilized ad hoc groups of students engaging in hypothetical tasks as participants as opposed to organi - zational members role - playing realistic tasks for their work setting . Second , although e - mail is the most commonly used form of communication augmen - tation in organizations , most existing studies ( and thus the majority of studies included herein ) examine synchronous , text - based conferencing systems ( i . e . , “chat” ) . This may in part be due to the fact that many studies have been conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of Group Decision Support Systems ( GDSS ) , systems specifically designed and marketed as decision support tools for organizational use . These systems differ from traditional chat systems in that they commonly incorporate features such as highly structured interac - tions , voting tools , and group facilitators . Unfortunately , data on the extent to which such systems are actually used to facilitate organizational communica - tion and decision making are currently lacking . The outcome criteria considered in this study are group effectiveness , length of time to decision , and satisfaction of participants in decision making groups . We believe these DVs are critical for understanding and predicting the use and usefulness of CMC in organizational settings . For example , if the use of CMC systems leads to lower quality group outcomes , organizations should be 160 BALTES ET AL . extremely cautious about when and how to implement the technology . In addi - tion , if the use of CMC fundamentally changes group dynamics , and familiar group tasks require more time than in the traditional face - to - face setting , organizations need to make accommodations to meet the needs of the technol - ogy . Further , if the use of CMC leads to significant dissatisfaction among participants in group decision making , then there will be significant resistance within the organization to its use and to the implementation of decisions reached using the technology regardless of the quality of decisions reached . MODERATORS In addition to examining the overall effects of the three dependent variables mentioned above ( i . e . , decision quality , time to decision , and user satisfaction ) , the studies included allowed us to code for the following moderators : anonymous vs nonanonymous group discussions , open - ended vs timed discussions , group size , and task type . Our initial coding included many additional moderators , such as synchronous vs asynchronous communication . However , if there were not enough studies in one of the components ( i . e . , groups ) of a moderator then it was dropped from further consideration . It should also be pointed out that extant literature provided us with theoretical arguments on which to base hypotheses for three of the previously mentioned moderators . However , for “anonymity , ” prior literature provided inconsistent evidence as to the form of moderation to be expected . Thus , for this moderator no hypothesis is presented and , consequently , it was tested in exploratory fashion . Anonymity The first potential moderator of the effect of CMC vs FTF communication on group effectiveness , satisfaction , and time to decision that we considered is anonymity . Anonymity is a feature of many text - based conferencing systems that allows group members to contribute to discussions without attaching their names , potentially motivating them to participate differently ( Dennis , 1996 ) . A review of the literature suggests that anonymity decreases conformance pressure ( Nunamaker , Dennis , Valacich , Vogel , & George , 1991 ; Valacich , Jessup , Dennis , & Nunamaker , 1992 ) and allows individual group members to be less inhibited in their expression of ideas ( El - Shinnaway & Vinze , 1997 ) . Since contributions are anonymous , there is also less risk of embarrassment for making comments that might be interpreted by other participants as worthless . Furthermore , thoughts and ideas expressed under conditions of anonymity are more likely to be evaluated based on their merit rather than on the status of the person presenting the information ( Jessup , Connolly , & Galegher , 1990 ; Zigurs , Poole , & DeSanctis , 1988 ) . If anonymity does indeed decrease performance pressure and allow individu - als to be less inhibited during group interaction , one would expect differences in performance between anonymous and nonanonymous groups . However , less CMC AND GROUP PERFORMANCE 161 inhibited interaction of group members and potentially more equitable partici - pation does not necessarily equate to enhanced group effectiveness . For exam - ple , in some instances , anonymity has increased instances of “flaming” behav - iors ( i . e . , uninhibited and often profane criticism of other group members ; Connolly , Jessup , & Valacich , 1990 ; Diehl & Stroebe , 1987 ) . Further , it may also be that less inhibited group interaction increases the amount of off - task behavior during group processes . For these reasons , we refrain from hypothesiz - ing the direction of effects associated with anonymity / nonanonymity in the CMC setting and analyze these data in an exploratory fashion . Discussion Time A second potential moderator of our dependent variables is discussion time . Specifically , we were interested in whether open - ended discussions versus dis - cussions with time limits differentially influence our outcome variables . It is consistently reported in the literature that synchronous , text - based conferenc - ing groups take longer to complete assigned tasks ( Hiltz , Johnson , & Turoff , 1986 ; Hollingshead , 1996b ; McGuire , Kiesler , & Siegel , 1987 ; Reid , Ball , Mor - ley , & Evans , 1997 ; Siegel et al . , 1986 ; Weisband , 1992 ) than face - to - face groups . In fact , computer - mediated groups have been found to take 4 to 10 times longer than face - to - face groups to make a decision or to reach consensus , with the greatest differential occurring under no time constraints ( Dubrovsky , Kiesler , & Sethna , 1991 ; Siegel et al . , 1986 ) . It has also been consistently reported in the literature that CMC groups produce fewer remarks than face - to - face groups ( Hiltz et al . , 1986 ; Kiesler , Zubrow , & Moses , 1985 ; McGuire et al . , 1987 ; Siegel et al . , 1986 ) . Although two studies report the production of remarks as about equal ( Dubrovsky et al . , 1991 ; Weisband , 1992 ) , these studies differ in that the groups used were given as much time as needed to complete their task . There - fore , although computer supported groups took longer to complete the task , the number of total remarks was similar ( Bordia , 1997 ) . The above findings suggest that computer - mediated groups are capable of performing on par with face - to - face groups if given ample time to perform their tasks . However , many studies comparing computer - mediated groups and face - to - face groups impose time restrictions on group tasks . Given previous research and theory we propose the following hypotheses : Hypothesis 1 : CMC groups will be as effective as face - to - face groups when task time is open ended but less effective when task time is limited . Hypothesis 2 : CMC groups with open - ended discussion time will be as satisfied as open - ended face - to - face groups with the group decision making process due to decreased time pressure to complete tasks . Hypothesis 3 : Time to decision differences between CMC and face - to - face groups will become more pronounced when there is no time limit on the discussion . Group Size Another potential moderator of our three outcome variables is group size . It has been argued that the positive impact of group technology may be significant 162 BALTES ET AL . only in large groups ( DeSanctis & Gallupe , 1987 ) . Specifically , because large groups may experience more communication difficulties , electronic communica - tion media may have a more positive impact on larger groups . For this reason , we propose the following hypothesis : Hypothesis 4 : Any positive outcomes associated with CMC , relative to FTF groups , will be enhanced in larger groups and any negative outcomes associated with CMC will be minimized in larger CMC groups . Task Type Last , we examined task type as a moderator of our dependent variables . As Hiltz et al . ( 1986 ) point out , much of the variation between media in group process and outcome is dependent on or interacts with task type . Therefore , in an attempt to evaluate the influence of task type on our outcome variables for both face - to - face and computer - mediated groups , task type was classified and evaluated according to McGrath’s ( 1984 ) group task circumplex . This classi - fication system separates tasks into the following four quadrants : ( a ) generat - ing , ( b ) choosing , ( c ) negotiating , and ( d ) executing . According to Straus and McGrath ( 1994 ) , the quadrants and the tasks they contain are related to one another within a two - dimensional space . The horizontal dimension reflects the degree to which the task entails cognitive ( choosing ) versus behavioral performance requirements ( executing ) . The vertical dimension reflects the de - gree and form of interdependence among group members ( generating versus negotiating ) . According to McGrath’s ( 1984 ) circumplex model , two types of tasks are included within each quadrant . Quadrant I ( Generate ) contains planning tasks and creativity tasks . Planning tasks involve generating plans or problem solv - ing and the essential notion is developing an action - oriented plan . Creativity tasks , on the other hand , involve generating ideas ( e . g . , brainstorming tasks ) and the essential notion is creativity . Quadrant II ( Choose ) contains intellective tasks and decision making tasks . Intellective tasks are tasks that involve solving problems with verifiably correct answers . These types of tasks include logic problems or tasks for which expert consensus defines the solution . Decision making tasks , on the other hand , are tasks for which the group’s agreed - upon answer is the correct solution . The essential notion here involves the group determining a preferred answer . Quadrant III ( Negotiate ) contains cognitive conflict tasks and mixed - motive tasks . Cognitive conflict tasks ( e . g . , some jury tasks ) involve resolving conflicts of viewpoint . Mixed - motive tasks , on the other hand , involve resolving conflicts of motive - interest and include negotiation , bargaining , mixed - motive dilemma , and coalition formation / reward allocation tasks . The essential notion here is resolving payoff conflicts . Last , Quadrant IV ( Execute ) includes contests / battles and performance tasks . Contests / battles are tasks dealing with resolving conflicts of power or competing for victory . The essential notion here is winning . Performance tasks , on the other hand , involve psychomotor tasks performed against objective or absolute standards of excellence . These types of tasks include physical tasks and the essential CMC AND GROUP PERFORMANCE 163 notion is exceling . While tasks in Quadrants I and IV do not always require decision making we did choose to include effect sizes from studies classified in these quadrants if there was a decision - making process involved in the group process ( i . e . , the primary task of the group is to generate creative solutions to a task , but the group must then come to agreement about the best solution . ) According to Straus and McGrath ( 1994 , p . 89 ) , a “communication medium is more likely to affect group outcomes when there is a need for the expression and perception of emotions , when tasks require coordination and timing among members’ activities , when one is attempting to persuade others , or when tasks require consensus on issues that are affected by attitudes or values of the group members . ” The tasks included in Quadrant II ( intellective and decision - making tasks ) and Quadrant III ( cognitive conflict and mixed - motive tasks ) require a greater amount of coordination and group member interaction than the tasks included in Quadrant I . Therefore , the failure of CMC systems to transmit social context cues should more greatly affect group effectiveness in the computer - mediated setting as compared to face - to - face groups performing the same tasks . For this reason , we propose the following hypothesis : Hypothesis 5 : CMC groups will be less effective than face - to - face groups when performing tasks located in Quadrants II and III . Additionally , it seems logical to assume that the difficulty of coordinating group members in the CMC setting , in addition to the process losses associated with the lack of social context cues in the CMC setting , will lead to the frustra - tion and dissatisfaction of CMC group members . Therefore , we propose the following hypothesis : Hypothesis 6 : CMC groups will be less satisfied with the group process than face - to - face groups when performing tasks located in Quadrants II and III . Due to a lack of theoretical justification , no hypotheses will be generated regarding the effects of task type on time to decision . However , since many studies include time to decision as a dependent variable , we thought that it was logical to examine the possibility that task type influences time to decision in an exploratory manner . Additionally , since the tasks included in Quadrant IV ( contests / battles and performances ) primarily include psychomotor tasks and are not of major interest in computer - mediated research , the examination of time differences with regards to the tasks in Quadrant IV was deemed unnecessary . 1 METHOD Sample of Studies Computer - based literature searches were conducted on Psychological Ab - stracts ( PsycLit , 1887 to August 2000 ) , ABI / INFORM ( 1977 to August 2000 ) , 1 It should be pointed out that we also had hypotheses regarding group effectiveness and member satisfaction for Quadrant 1 tasks . Unfortunately , the data did not allow us to test this hypothesis ( i . e . , there were not enough effect sizes ) and thus we have left it out of the article . 164 BALTES ET AL . Business Periodicals Index ( 1977 to August 2000 ) , and Dissertation Abstracts ( 1891 to August 2000 ) . These searches were conducted using the following key terms : all forms of computer - mediated communication , all forms of computer - mediated communication , and GDSS ( GSS ) , all forms of email , and all forms of chat . Furthermore , authors were contacted who presented related research and theory during the previous three years at the conferences of the American Psychological Association , the Society for Industrial / Organizational Psychol - ogy , and the Academy of Management , asking them if they had unpublished studies we could include and if they could suggest other references or other researchers to contact . We also originally searched for studies that had exam - ined the use of videoconferencing and teleconferencing . Unfortunately , only one videoconferencing and three teleconferencing studies met our criteria . A meta - analysis on these two types of communication systems is clearly inappropriate at this time , and thus , both videoconferencing and teleconferencing were dropped from further analysis in the present study . Inclusion Criteria for Studies As noted above , studies were initially selected if they evaluated a face - to - face condition and a computer - mediated communication condition . The computer - mediated communication systems included in the study ranged from simple e - mail to group decision support systems with the majority of the studies being in the latter category . The GDSS systems used in our studies almost exclusively fell into the level 1 category ( i . e . , primary purpose of GDSS is to remove common communication barriers ) proposed by DeSanctis and Gallupe ( 1987 ) . By includ - ing studies that compared face - to - face to computer - mediated communication , we could calculate effect sizes that would reflect the effect that computer - mediated communication had on various criteria versus a face - to - face group . Furthermore , to insure that this comparison was really between verbal and electronic communication , only studies that did not allow their computer - medi - ated communication groups to verbally communicate were included . This crite - rion eliminated many GDSS studies from consideration because they allowed groups to simultaneously communicate both verbally and electronically . In addition , because we were interested in group decision making , two additional study criteria were added . First , only studies that had “true” groups ( i . e . , three people or larger ) were included . Second , only studies that had groups come to either a consensus or a majority decision were included . Finally , only studies that had the necessary statistics to be included in a meta - analysis ( or for which data could be obtained by contacting the authors ) could be used . Our final criteria for inclusion in the sample resulted in a total of 22 published sources and 5 unpublished sources remaining for analysis , several of which contained more than one study . These studies provided us with a total of 52 effect sizes . The key characteristics of the studies are presented in Table 1 . Variables Coded from Each Study The following information was coded from each report : ( a ) outcome criteria , ( b ) sample size , ( c ) anonymity of group members , ( d ) time to decision , ( e ) limited CMC AND GROUP PERFORMANCE 165 TABLE 1 Study Characteristics and Effect Sizes for Computer - Mediated Communication Studies Effect Size ( r ) Group Task Study EFF TIME SAT ANON a DISC b size c type d Arunachalam & Dilla 2 . 381 — — NA Limited Small 6 ( 1995 ) Benbuana - Fich & Hiltz . 070 — . 051 NA Limited — 3 ( 1999 ) Carey & Kacmar ( 1997 ) 2 . 285 2 . 814 2 . 670 AN Unlimited Large 3 Chidambaram ( 1996 ) — — 2 . 429 AN ? Large 4 Chidambaram ( 1989 ) 2 . 020 — — AN Limited Large 4 Dennis , Hilmer & Taylor 2 . 653 2 . 912 2 . 078 AN Limited Large 3 ( 1997 ) Dubrovsky , Kiesler & — 2 . 833 — NA ? Large 4 Sethna ( 1991 ) Gallupe & McKeen ( 1990 ) . 093 2 . 454 2 . 461 AN Unlimited Small 3 Hedlund , Ilgen & 2 . 287 — — NA Limited Large 3 Hollenbeck ( 1998 ) Hiltz , Johnson & Turoff . 003 — — NA Limited Large 3 ( 1986 ) Hollingshead ( 1996a ) . 087 2 . 336 — NA Limited Small 3 Huang , Wei & Tan ( 1999 ) A — — 2 . 534 AN Limited Large 3 Huang , Wei & Tan ( 1999 ) B — — 2 . 008 AN Limited Large 4 Johnson ( 1997 ) 2 . 352 — 2 . 726 ? Limited — 3 Lim & Benbasat ( 1997 ) . 012 — — NA ? Small 3 McLeod , Baron , Marti & 2 . 649 — — AN Limited Large 3 Yoon ( 1997 ) A McLeod , Baron , Marti & 2 . 768 — — NA Limited Large 3 Yoon ( 1997 ) B Ocker & Yaverbaum 2 . 376 — 2 . 107 NA Unlimited Large 3 ( 1999 ) Offerman & Eller ( 1999 ) 2 . 280 2 . 555 2 . 344 ? Unlimited Large 3 Olaniran ( 1996 ) — — 2 . 011 NA Unlimited Small 1 Olarniran ( 1994 ) . 090 2 . 276 — ? Unlimited Small 2 Siegel , Dubrovsky , — 2 . 614 — AN Limited Small 4 Kiesler & McGuire ( 1986 ) 1A Siegel , Dubrovsky , — 2 . 547 — NA Limited Small 4 Kiesler & McGuire ( 1986 ) 1B Siegel , Dubrovsky , — 2 . 793 — ? Limited Small 4 Kiesler & McGuire ( 1986 ) 2A Siegel , Dubrovsky , — 2 . 771 — NA Limited Small 4 Kiesler & McGuire ( 1986 ) 2B Smith & Hayne ( 1997 ) A . 238 — — NA Unlimited Large 7 Smith & Hayne ( 1997 ) B . 392 2 . 643 — NA Limited Large 7 Straus ( 1996 ) — — 2 . 269 NA Limited Small 3 166 BALTES ET AL . TABLE 1 —Continued Effect Size ( r ) Group Task Study EFF TIME SAT ANON a DISC b size c type d Straus & McGrath ( 1994 ) A 2 . 079 — — NA Limited Small 3 Straus & McGrath ( 1994 ) B 2 . 545 — — NA Limited Small 6 Valacich & Schwenk ( 1995 ) 2 . 048 — 2 . 254 AN Limited Large 4 Weisband ( 1992 ) — 2 . 544 — NA Unlimited Small 4 Winniford ( 1989 ) A 2 . 643 — . 134 NA Limited Small 3 Winniford ( 1989 ) B 2 . 110 — 2 . 196 NA Limited Large 3 Wyatt ( 1993 ) . 825 — — AN Unlimited Small 6 Note . Positive effect sizes refer to positive effects of computer - mediated communication ( positive effect for time means a shorter amount of time ) ; ? refers to instance in which the study did not provide the information needed ; and — refers to instances where the study included groups that spanned the range of the moderator variable . Superscripts A , B , and C refer to different types of task conditions ( e . g . , time pressure vs no time pressure and anonymous vs nonanonymous ) ; superscripts 1 and 2 refer to different experiments . a Anonymity : AN 5 anonymous , NA 5 nonanonymous . b Discussion time : limited vs unlimited . c Group size : small 5 3 group members ; large 5 4 or more group members . d Task type : 1 5 Planning Tasks ; 2 5 Creativity Tasks ; 3 5 Intellective Tasks ; 4 5 Decision - Making Tasks ; 5 5 Cognitive Conflict Tasks ; 6 5 Mixed - Motive Tasks ; 7 5 Contests / Battles ; 8 5 Performances . vs unlimited discussion , ( f ) group size , and ( g ) task type ( McGrath’s circumplex ) . While many other variables were initially coded from each study ( e . g . , location of sample , gender ratio of sample , and synchronous vs asynchronous ) , these variables were not included in the present analyses because of the small number of studies which either measured these variables or which provided this infor - mation . For example , only two of the studies included an asynchronous commu - nication medium and , thus , it would not be appropriate to test this variable as a moderator . The outcome criteria from the studies were coded into the following dimen - sions : group effectiveness , time to reach decision , and member satisfaction . Criteria in the group effectiveness dimension included both objective criteria ( e . g . , number of correct answers ) and subjective criteria ( researcher and / or Subject Matter Expert ratings of decision quality ) that focused on the quality of the group decision . We did not include pure productivity measures such as number of ideas generated , as we were instead interested in the quality of decisions . All time to decision scores were objective in nature . Finally , the member satisfaction dimension included various self - rating scales that touched on satisfaction with the decision ( i . e . , group outcome ) and the discussion process itself . We did not include measures that assessed satisfaction with other mem - bers or the communication medium itself . All of the studies were coded by two of the authors and interrater agreement percentages were calculated for all facets of the coding procedure that required CMC AND GROUP PERFORMANCE 167 subjective decisions . The interrater agreements were as follows : anonymity of group members ( 100 % ) , limited vs unlimited discussion ( 93 % ) , type of effective - ness criterion ( 88 % ) , task type ( 94 % ) . The few disagreements that arose were resolved through discussion . Computation of Effect Sizes A critical preliminary step in the analysis involved converting the results of the various studies to a common statistic . These conversions were done using Johnson’s ( 1993 ) DSTAT computer program , which converted statistics from all the studies into d statistics ( corrected for sample size ) . A d score of above 1 1 . 00 or below 2 1 . 00 indicates a very large effect ( i . e . , correlation of about 6 . 45 or higher if the sample sizes of the comparison groups are equal ) . The overall progression of analyses was based on Hedges and Olkin’s ( 1985 ) approach to meta - analysis . Categorical model analyses of the effects of com - puter - mediated communication on our outcome criteria were conducted first . Then , categorical model analyses of the effects of moderators were conducted on each outcome criteria separately . The homogeneity of within - class effect sizes and the significance of the between - class effects were assessed using Hedges and Olkin’s statistical procedures , which are incorporated into Johnson’s ( 1993 ) DSTAT computer program . The between - class effect was esti - mated by Q B , which has a chi - square distribution with p - 1 degrees of freedom where p represents the number of classes . The homogeneity of effect sizes within each class was estimated by Q W , which has a chi - square distribution with k - 1 degrees of freedom where k represents the number of effect sizes within the class . RESULTS The results in Table 2 include both the overall impact of computer - mediated communication on work outcomes ( i . e . , all outcome criteria combined ) and the impact of computer - mediated communication on each outcome criteria sepa - rately . Significant effect sizes are indicated by 95 % confidence intervals that do not include zero . The significant and negative effect size ( d 5 2 . 72 ) associ - ated with the overall impact of computer - mediated communication indicates that its use is associated with more negative work outcomes than occur in face - to - face groups . Specifically , the significant effect sizes associated with each outcome criteria point to decreased group effectiveness ( d 5 2 . 40 ) , increased time to decision ( d 5 2 1 . 71 ) , and decreased member satisfaction ( d 5 2 . 52 ) . However , each of these effect sizes was not homogeneous ( i . e . , their Q W esti - mates were large and significant ) , which may indicate the existence of modera - tors . Consequently , the potential moderators discussed previously were consid - ered for each outcome criteria separately . Group Decision Making Effectiveness Table 3 depicts the effects of computer - mediated communication on group decision making effectiveness when considering the various moderators . The 168 BALTES ET AL . TABLE 2 Effects of Computer - Mediated Communication on Work Outcomes with Between - and Within - Homogeneity Tests Mean weighted Mean Homogeneity tests effect size weighted Moderators k ( d ) 95 % CI for d ( r ) ( Q b ) a ( Q w ) b Overall 52 2 0 . 72 2 0 . 81 2 0 . 63 2 . 34 411 . 00 * * * Type of Outcome Criteria 134 . 74 * * * Group Effectiveness 24 2 0 . 40 2 0 . 54 2 0 . 27 2 . 20 123 . 31 * * * Time to Decision 13 2 1 . 71 2 1 . 91 2 1 . 52 2 . 65 76 . 23 * * * Member Satisfaction 15 2 0 . 52 2 0 . 67 2 0 . 37 2 . 25 81 . 69 * * * Note . Significanteffectsizesareindicatedbyconfidenceintervalsthatdonotinclude0 . Positive effect sizes refer to positive effects of computer - mediated communication ( i . e . , effects for time have been reversed—negative effect size reflects longer amounts of time ) . k 5 number of effect sizes ; CI 5 confidence interval . a Significance indicates effects differ as a function of the outcome measure . b Significance indicates rejection of the hypothesis of homogeneity . * p , . 05 . * * p , . 01 . * * * p , . 001 . first moderator considered was anonymity of the group members . There was a significant difference between groups that were anonymous and groups that were nonanonymous as indicated by the significant Q B statistic , x 2 ( 1 ) 5 5 . 45 , p , . 05 . Anonymous groups were associated with a nonsignificant effect size and thus did not exhibit significantly lower or higher group effectiveness than face - to - face groups . Nonanonymous groups , however , were associated with a significant negative effect size ( d 5 2 . 51 ) , indicating that these groups were less effective than face - to - face groups . The next moderator considered was limited vs unlimited discussion time . A significant difference was found between groups in each condition , x 2 ( 1 ) 5 10 . 01 , p , . 01 . As predicted in hypothesis 1 , a significant negative effect size was associated with groups that had limited discussion time ( d 5 2 . 54 ) , while computer - mediated groups that had unlimited time to discuss showed no de - crease in effectiveness when compared to face - to - face groups . Contrary to our hypothesis 4 , no significant effects were found for group size . That is , group size did not have an impact on any differences between face - to - face groups and computer - mediated groups with respect to decision quality . No significant effect of task type was found , x 2 ( 1 ) 5 0 . 11 , ns . That is , task type did moderate the type of difference ( if any ) between face - to - face and computer - mediated groups when examining the quality of their decisions . However , the computer - mediated groups did perform more poorly on both intellective ( d 5 2 . 50 ) and mixed - motive tasks ( d 5 2 . 56 ) , supporting hypoth - esis 5 . CMC AND GROUP PERFORMANCE 169 TABLE 3 Effects of Computer - Mediated Communication on Group Effectiveness with Between - and Within - Homogeneity Tests across Study Characteristics Mean weighted Mean Homogeneity tests effect size weighted Moderators k ( d ) 95 % CI for d ( r ) ( Q b ) a ( Q w ) b Overall 24 2 0 . 40 2 0 . 54 2 0 . 27 2 . 20 123 . 31 * * * Anonymous vs Non - anon groups 5 . 45 * Anonymous 7 2 0 . 14 2 0 . 39 0 . 11 2 . 07 66 . 73 * * * Nonanonymous 14 2 0 . 51 2 0 . 69 2 0 . 33 2 . 25 47 . 47 * * * Limited vs Unlimited Discussion 10 . 01 * * Limited 16 2 0 . 54 2 0 . 70 2 0 . 39 2 . 26 60 . 61 * * * Unlimited 7 0 . 01 2 0 . 29 0 . 31 . 00 50 . 83 * * * Group size 3 . 25 Small c 8 2 0 . 34 2 0 . 49 2 0 . 19 2 . 17 76 . 10 * * * Large 14 2 0 . 52 2 0 . 71 2 0 . 32 2 . 25 41 . 81 * * * Task type 0 . 11 Intellective 16 2 0 . 50 2 0 . 68 2 0 . 32 2 . 24 43 . 10 * * * Mixed motive 3 2 0 . 56 2 0 . 86 2 0 . 27 2 . 27 67 . 14 * * * Note . Significanteffectsizesareindicatedbyconfidenceintervalsthatdonotinclude0 . Positive effect sizes refer to positive effects of computer - mediated communication . k 5 number of effect sizes ; CI 5 confidence interval . a Significance indicates effects differ as a function of study characteristics . b Significance indicates rejection of the hypothesis of homogeneity . c Group size : Small 5 3 group members ; Large 5 4 or more group members . * p , . 05 . * * p , . 01 . * * * p , . 001 . Time to Decision In Table 4 , the effects of computer - mediated communication on time to deci - sion are examined when considering four moderators . Only two moderators were found to have significant effects : anonymity , x 2 ( 1 ) 5 9 . 55 , p , . 01 , and group size , x 2 ( 1 ) 5 6 . 77 , p , . 01 . The results suggest that computer - mediated groups that are anonymous take even more time ( with respect to face - to - face groups ) then their nonanonymous counterparts to complete their tasks . Con - trary to our prediction in hypothesis 4 , the time to decision difference between computer - mediated and face - to - face groups was actually largest when the group size in both conditions was large . In addition , contrary to our hypothesis 3 , time to decision differences between CMC and face - to - face groups did not become significantly greater when there was no time limit on discussion . 2 2 We were initially surprised by the null impact of Time Limits on Time to Decision . However , we believe that a certain study artifact caused this counterintuitive result . That is , the time limits in many studies seemed to be so long that no groups would have a problem meeting the deadline . Thus , it is understandable that we might find no differences between studies that claimed to have 170 BALTES ET AL . TABLE 4 Effects of Computer - Mediated Communication on Time to Decision with Between - and Within - Homogeneity Tests across Study Characteristics Mean weighted Mean Homogeneity tests effect size weighted Moderators k ( d ) 95 % CI for d ( r ) ( Q b ) a ( Q w ) b Overall 13 2 1 . 71 2 1 . 91 2 1 . 52 2 . 65 76 . 23 * * * Anonymous vs Nonanon 9 . 55 * * groups Anonymous 4 2 2 . 33 2 2 . 74 2 1 . 93 2 . 76 16 . 51 * * Nonanonymous 6 2 1 . 58 2 1 . 84 2 1 . 32 2 . 62 37 . 19 * * * Limited vs Unlimited 0 . 06 Discussion Limited 7 2 1 . 53 2 1 . 84 2 1 . 22 2 . 61 27 . 25 * * * Unlimited 5 2 1 . 58 2 1 . 85 2 1 . 31 2 . 62 28 . 71 * * * Group size 31 . 38 * * * Small c 8 2 1 . 29 2 1 . 53 2 1 . 05 2 . 54 20 . 95 * * Large 5 2 2 . 43 2 2 . 75 2 2 . 12 2 . 78 23 . 90 * * * Task type 0 . 51 Intellective 5 2 1 . 70 2 2 . 01 2 1 . 39 2 . 65 39 . 62 * * * Decision Making 6 2 1 . 85 2 2 . 11 2 1 . 59 2 . 68 27 . 76 * * * Note . Significanteffectsizesareindicatedbyconfidenceintervalsthatdonotinclude0 . Positive effect sizes refer to positive effects of computer - mediated communication . ( i . e . , effects for time have been reversed—negative effect size reflects longer amounts of time ) . k 5 number of effect sizes ; CI 5 confidence interval . a Significance indicates effects differ as a function of study characteristics . b Significance indicates rejection of the hypothesis of homogeneity . c Group size : Small 5 3 group members ; Large 5 4 or more group members . * p , . 05 . * * p , . 01 . * * * p , . 001 . Group Member Satisfaction Table 5 depicts the effects of computer - mediated communication on member satisfaction when considering our moderators . Three of the moderators ( ano - nymity , discussion time , and group size ) were found to have effects on the difference between member satisfaction in the computer - mediated and face - to - face groups ( i . e . , Q b statistics were significant ) . The results with respect to anonymity as a moderator indicate that there was a decrease in member satisfaction in the computer - mediated groups only when they were anonymous ( d 5 2 . 82 ) and not when they were nonanonymous . In the case of limited vs unlimited discussion time , the results were somewhat supportive of hypothesis 2 . That is , computer - mediated groups with unlimited discussion time showed a time limit and those that did not . In other words , time limitation may not be an adequate operationalization of the perception of time pressure , and we believe that the presence or absence of perceived time pressure would lead to the hypothesized results . CMC AND GROUP PERFORMANCE 171 TABLE 5 Effects of Computer - Mediated Communication on Member Satisfaction with Between - and Within - Homogeneity Tests across Study Characteristics Mean weighted Mean Homogeneity tests effect size weighted Moderators k ( d ) 95 % CI for d ( r ) ( Q b ) a ( Q w ) b Overall 15 2 0 . 52 2 0 . 67 2 0 . 37 2 . 25 81 . 69 * * * Anonymous vs Non - anon groups 14 . 96 * * * Anonymous 7 2 0 . 82 2 1 . 11 2 0 . 53 2 . 38 16 . 88 * Nonanymous 6 2 0 . 13 2 0 . 32 0 . 06 2 . 06 6 . 06 Limited vs Unlimited Discussion 3 . 72 * Limited 7 2 0 . 66 2 0 . 87 2 0 . 44 2 . 31 31 . 92 * * * Unlimited 7 2 0 . 36 2 0 . 57 2 0 . 15 2 . 18 44 . 98 * * * Group size 7 . 21 * * Small c 3 2 0 . 14 2 0 . 37 0 . 09 2 . 07 4 . 05 Large 10 2 0 . 57 2 0 . 78 2 0 . 36 2 . 27 27 . 60 * * Task type 1 . 58 Intellective 11 2 0 . 81 2 1 . 02 2 0 . 61 2 . 38 57 . 48 * * Decision Making 3 2 0 . 54 2 0 . 92 2 0 . 16 2 . 26 2 . 02 Note . Significanteffectsizesareindicatedbyconfidenceintervalsthatdonotinclude0 . Positive effect sizes refer to positive effects of computer - mediated communication . k 5 number of effect sizes ; CI 5 confidence interval . a Significance indicates effects differ as a function of study characteristics . b Significance indicates rejection of the hypothesis of homogeneity . c Group size : Small 5 3 group members ; Large 5 4 or more group members . * p , . 05 . * * p , . 01 . * * * p , . 001 . less of a decrease in member satisfaction ( d 5 2 . 36 ) versus face - to - face groups than computer - mediated groups with limited discussion time ( d 5 2 . 66 ) . As predicted , group size also moderated the effect of computer - mediated communi - cation on member satisfaction , however , in the opposite direction than was predicted in hypothesis 4 . That is , large computer - mediated groups showed more of a decrease in member satisfaction ( d 5 2 . 57 ) than small computer - mediated groups ( d 5 2 . 14 ) . Finally , hypothesis 6 was supported in that CMC groups performing tasks in Quadrant II ( i . e . , Intellective and Decision Making Tasks ) were less satisfied then their face - to - face counterparts . DISCUSSION One of the most surprising findings in the present study was that , despite the wealth of writing and research on the topic of computer - mediated communi - cation , there are relatively few studies that include the basic methodological rigor and statistical detail to be included in a meta - analysis . Further , several 172 BALTES ET AL . of the studies we initially identified did not include assessment of the effective - ness of the group decision making process , but rather focused solely on member satisfaction . We find satisfaction measures without effectiveness measures to be only minimally useful to organizations and researchers interested in the question of whether organizations should make use of computer - mediated com - munication systems for group decision making . Theoretical Implications Because our initial focus in this meta - analysis was on the outcomes rather than the process of group decision making , we did not gather studies based on their theoretical orientation , nor did we attempt a priori to establish a theoretical model to explain the results of the meta - analysis . Nonetheless , the results do have several significant implications for theory building and theory modification . Communication openness . Many authors in both the popular and academic press have suggested that computer - mediated communication will yield supe - rior results to face - to - face communication because CMC causes status differen - tiation to be less salient and thus yields greater participation from all partic - ipants ( e . g . , Dubrovsky et al . , 1991 ; Hiltz et al . , 1986 ; McGuire et al . , 1987 ; Siegel et al . , 1986 ; Weisband , 1992 ) . The implication is that CMC leads to enhanced Communication Openness ( e . g . , O’Reilly & Roberts , 1977 ) , which is encouraging , or at least permitting , the open expression of views divergent from one’s own . This is important because Communication Openness has been shown to be related to quality of group decision making ( e . g . , Buchanan , 1997 ) . However , the meta - analytic results presented here suggest that this is not necessarily true , at least not in all conditions . When specific steps are taken to protect individuals’ identities ( i . e . , when there is anonymity in CMC ) , CMC performance does not differ significantly from face - to - face performance . Pre - sumably , this is because anonymity allows participants to feel more secure , thus allowing higher levels of Communication Openness . However , when CMC group members’ contributions are not anonymous , group performance is signifi - cantly worse than face - to - face group performance . Thus , there may be a differ - ence between the willingness on the part of group members to express opinions that are incongruent with those of other members and the willingness of group members to hear others’ incongruent opinions . While the CMC condition may enhance the former , it does not necessarily enhance the latter . It does not appear , therefore , that the computer - mediated condition in and of itself is the cause of enhanced Communication Openness . Thus , popular beliefs about CMC and enhanced participation may not hold true across all conditions of CMC , but may hold true when steps are taken to allow high levels of Communication Openness . We would propose that other approaches to enhancing Communication Openness ( e . g . , explicit statements about everyone’s ideas being valued and specific sanctions against criticism of others’ ideas ) in CMC may prove as useful in nonanonymous conditions as they do in face - to - face conditions . CMC AND GROUP PERFORMANCE 173 Functional perspective on group decision making . In recent years , a “func - tional perspective” has emerged as one of the most prominent theoretical per - spectives in the study of group decision - making quality ( Cragan & Wright , 1990 ) , and Hirokawa and colleagues are among the foremost advocates of this perspective ( Barge & Hirokawa , 1989 ; Gouran & Hirokawa , 1996 ; Hirokawa , 1985 , 1988 , 1994 ; Hirokawa , Gouran , & Martz , 1988 ; Hirokawa & Johnston , 1989 ) . This approach is of special interest because , while it has become a dominant paradigm in the group decision making literature , it has not to date been applied to the domain of computer - mediated communication . From this perspective , the importance of group communication in group decision making is functional —“it represents the means by which group mem - bers attempt to meet the requisites for successful group decision making” ( Gouran & Hirokawa , 1983 , p . 170 ) . Decision making effectiveness is seen as largely dependent on the successful satisfaction of several critical requirements ( Hirokawa , 1988 , pp . 489 – 490 ) : ( 1 ) appropriate understanding of the problem - atic situation , ( 2 ) appropriate understanding of the requirements for an effec - tive choice , ( 3 ) appropriate assessment of the positive qualities of alternative choices , and ( 4 ) appropriate assessment of the negative qualities of alterna - tive choices . The extent to which groups successfully complete these critical requirements is predictive of the ultimate decision making effectiveness of face - to - face groups ( e . g . , Hirokawa , 1985 ; 1988 ) . The meta - analytic results presented here , how - ever , imply that something about synchronous text - based computer - mediated reduces the likelihood that groups will successfully navigate their way through the four critical tasks . An obvious potential culprit is the absence of nonverbals and paraverbals in CMC . Thus , our results do not suggest that the functional perspective on group decision making is in any way in error . The meta - analytic results do suggest , however , that CMC introduces procedural / structural factors that affect the extent to which the critical functions of group decision making are accom - plished . This is consistent with the issues raised by Gouran and Hirokawa ( 1996 ) , though they do not explicitly address CMC . In fact , to our knowledge , there is no research to date that examines the group decision making process in face - to - face and CMC groups from a functional perspective , and this in an obvious gap in the functional perspective literature . Organizational Implications Given the lack of research on the most common implementations of computer - mediated communication ( i . e . , electronic mail and videoconferencing ) , a reason - able question would be “To what extent do the findings presented here have implications for organizational practice ? ” We believe there are several implica - tions here . First , the common suggestion of a few years ago that relatively few people use synchronous , text - based messaging systems is now demonstrably false—according to several recent press reports , there are now well over 100 million active users of online message systems ( e . g . , America Online’s AOL 174 BALTES ET AL . Instant Messenger ) . Indeed , interoperability of the variety of message systems was a major issue for the U . S . Federal Trade Commission regulators in the AOL / Time – Warner merger . Additionally , several new text - based instant messaging systems are being developed and marketed for profession - specific uses ( e . g . , lawyers and physicians ; see for example , Gaskin , 2000 ) . Thus , the results of this meta - analysis , using only face - to - face versus synchronous text - based CMC ( i . e . , “chat” ) , have direct implications for the actual usage patterns of large numbers of computer users . Second , the present analyses allow one to draw reasonable conclusions about the likely impact of the use of other computer / electronic media on decision making effectiveness , time to decision , and user satisfaction . To do so requires an understanding of how different media compare to each other on important theoretical dimensions . As noted above , two important dimensions that differ - entiate between the various computer - mediated conditions are ( a ) the degree of synchronization and ( b ) the degree to which paraverbals and nonverbals are present in the communication channels . Figure 1 shows a variety of computer - mediated communications media along these two dimensions . The results presented in this meta - analysis are comparisons between face - to - face decision making groups ( high on both synchronization and presence of nonverbals and paraverbals ) and “chat” groups ( moderate on both dimensions ) . Hypotheses about the relative effectiveness of other communications media are easily generated by considering how these other media are distributed along these two dimensions , even though there is very little research on these other media . Of these other media , research on electronic mail may be especially critical because e - mail is clearly becoming a very common means of disseminating information and reaching decisions . However , e - mail has no nonverbal or para - verbal cues and is asynchronous and thus may be an even less effective method for reaching group decisions than chat . The findings presented here could thus be under estimates of the decrement in effectiveness , increase in time required , and changes in member satisfaction between face - to - face and computer - medi - ated communication . Videoconferencing , on the other hand , is both synchronous and includes nonverbal and paraverbal cues ( though perhaps to a lesser degree than does a face - to - face meeting ) . One might infer that group decision - making effectiveness when using videoconferencing could be highly similar to that of face - to - face meetings , though even with high - bandwidth systems there are differences between face - to - face and computer - mediated communication patterns ( O’Con - naill & Whittaker , 1997 ) . Similar arguments can be made for the likely effective - ness of audioconferencing . An additional concern for organizations is raised by the finding that , while anonymous CMC groups do not differ significantly from face - to - face groups in terms of decision - making effectiveness , anonymous CMC groups have signifi - cantly lower satisfaction with the decision making process than face - to - face groups . Thus , anonymous groups perform as well as face - to - face groups but are less satisfied with the decision - making process , while nonanonymous groups CMC AND GROUP PERFORMANCE 175 perform more poorly than face - to - face groups but are equally satisfied with the decision - making process . In our view , neither of these situations is particularly desirable for organizations . Finally , given the current wave of seemingly unquestioned public support for and interest in all things related to the Internet , we were surprised to find that the conditions in which computer - mediated communication shows no decrement in decision - making effectiveness are precisely those conditions that are least likely to exist in organizations . Specifically , no decrement in perfor - mance between face - to - face and computer - mediated groups in decision - making effectiveness is shown when contributions to discussions are anonymous and when groups have unlimited time to reach decisions . Neither of these circum - stances is very common in organizations . More common is the situation in which time pressure is high and the individuals are selected for the decision making - group based on their expertise and thus their identities are quite salient to other members . This raises significant questions about the appropri - ateness of heavy reliance on computer - mediated communication for organiza - tional group decision making . CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS We conclude our presentation and interpretation of these findings by encour - aging researchers and practitioners to exercise significant caution when in - vestigating and adopting computer - mediated means for group decision making . Computer - mediated communication may be an efficient and rapid means of disseminating information , but the research to date suggests that it is not the most effective means of making group decisions . While researchers must begin to attend to the increasingly common media of electronic mail and videoconfer - encing , managers must make the decision as to whether the cost savings in travel expenses and time outweigh the potential decrements in quality of deci - sions reached . Unfortunately , primary research on these other increasingly important communications media is presently in short supply . All in all , our results suggest that computer - mediated decision - making groups are rarely if ever more effective than face - to - face groups , that CMC group members are rarely if ever more satisfied than members of face - to - face groups , and that CMC groups rarely if ever take less time than face - to - face groups . At best , CMC groups are not significantly worse than face - to - face groups , and even these results occur only in very unusual and uncommon organizational conditions . Managers , researchers , and theorists are thus cau - tioned against blindly joining in the current trend toward embracing all things Internet . REFERENCES * Abdul - Gader , A . ( 1996 ) . The impact of user satisfaction on computer - mediated communication acceptance : A causal path model . Information Resources Management Journal , 9 , 17 – 26 . * Studies included in the meta - analysis are marked with an asterisk . 176 BALTES ET AL . * Arunachalam , V . , & Dilla , W . N . ( 1995 ) . Judgment accuracy and outcomes in negotiation : A causal modeling analysis of decision - aiding effects . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Proc - esses , 61 , 289 – 304 . Barge , J . K . , & Hirokawa , R . Y . ( 1989 ) . Toward a communication competency model of group leadership . Small Group Behavior , 20 ( 2 ) , 167 – 189 . * Benbunan - Fich , R . , & Hiltz , S . R . ( 1999 ) . Impactsofasynchronouslearningnetworksonindividual and group problem solving : A field experiment . Group Decision and Negotiation , 8 , 409 – 426 . Bordia , P . ( 1997 ) . Face - to - faceversus computer - mediatedcommunication : Asynthesisof theexperi - mental literature . The Journal of Business Communication , 34 , 99 – 120 . Buchanan , K . ( 1997 ) . Control and openness communication ingroup decision - making . Unpublished doctoral dissertation , University of Denver . * Carey , J . M . , & Kacmar , C . J . ( 1997 ) . The impact of communication mode and task complexity on small groupperformance and member satisfaction . Computers inHuman Behavior , 13 , 23 – 49 . * Chidambaram , L . ( 1996 ) . RelationalDevelopmentinComputer - SupportedGroups . MISQuarterly , June , 143 – 159 . * Chidambaram , L . ( 1989 ) . An empirical investigation of the impact of computer support on group development and decision - making performance . Unpublished doctoral dissertation , Indiana Uni - versity , Bloomington , Indiana . Citera , M . ( 1998 ) . Distributed teamwork : The impact of communication media on influence and decision quality . Journal of the American Society for Information Science , 49 , 792 – 800 . Connolly , T . , Jessup , L . M . . , & Valacich , J . S . ( 1990 ) . Effects of anonymity and evaluative tone on idea generation in computer - mediated groups . Management Science , 36 , 689 – 703 . Cragan , J . F . , & Wright , D . W . ( 1990 ) . Small group communication research of the 1980s : A synthesis and critique . Communication Studies , 41 , 212 – 236 . Dennis , A . R . ( 1996 ) . Information exchange and use in small group decision - making . Small Group Research , 27 , 532 – 550 . * Dennis , A . R . , Hilmer , K . M . , & Taylor , N . J . ( 1997 ) . Information exchange and use in GSS and verbal group decision - making : Effects of minority influence . Journal of Management Information Systems , 14 , 61 – 88 . DeSanctis , G . , & Gallupe , R . B . ( 1987 ) . A foundation for the study of group decision support systems . Management Science , 33 , 589 – 609 . Diehl , M . , & Strobe , W . ( 1987 ) . Productivity loss in brainstorming groups : Toward a solution of a riddle . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 53 , 497 – 509 . * Dubrovsky , V . J . , Kiesler , S . , & Sethna , B . N . ( 1991 ) . The equalization phenomenon : Status effects in computer - mediated and face - to - face decision - making groups . Human - Computer Interaction , 6 , 119 – 146 . Eady , P . M . , & Lafferty , J . C . ( 1975 ) . The subarctic survival situation . Plymouth , MI : Experiential Learning Methods . El - Shinnawy , M . , & Vinze , A . S . ( 1997 ) . Technology , culture , and persuasiveness : A study of choice - shifts in group settings . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies , 47 , 473 – 496 . * Gallupe , R . B . , & McKeen , J . D . ( 1990 ) . Enhancing computer - mediated communication : An experi - mental investigation into the use of a group DSS for face - to - face versus remote meetings . Information and Management , 18 , 1 – 13 . Gaskin , J . E . ( 2000 , April 24 ) . Once a novelty item , IM is becoming a more serious tool for business users . Internetweek , 55 – 58 . Gouran , D . S . , & Hirokawa , R . Y . ( 1983 ) . The role of communication in decision - making groups : A functional perspective . In M . S . Mandler ( Ed . ) , Communication in transition ( pp . 168 – 185 ) . New York : Praeger . CMC AND GROUP PERFORMANCE 177 Gouran , D . S . , & Hirokawa , R . Y . ( 1996 ) . Functional theory and communication in decision - making and problem - solving groups : An expanded view . In R . Y . Hirokawa & M . S . Poole ( Eds . ) , Communication and group decision - making ( 2nd ed . , pp . 55 – 80 ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Hedges , L . V . , & Olkin , I . ( 1985 ) . Statistical methods for meta - analysis . Orlando , FL : Academic Press . * Hedlund , J . , Ilgen , D . R . , & Hollenbeck , J . R . ( 1998 ) . Decision accuracy in computer - mediated versus face - to - face decision - making teams . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Proc - esses , 76 , 30 – 47 . * Hiltz , S . R . , Johnson , K . , & Turoff , M . ( 1986 ) . Experiments in group decision - making : Communica - tion process and outcome in face - to - face versus computerized conferences . Human Communica - tion Research , 13 , 225 – 252 . Hirokawa , R . Y . ( 1985 ) . Discussion procedures and decision - making performance : A test of a functional perspective . Human Communication Research , 12 ( 2 ) , 203 – 224 . Hirokawa , R . Y . ( 1988 ) . Group communication and decision - making performance : A continued test of the functional perspective . Human Communication Research , 14 ( 4 ) , 487 – 515 . Hirokawa , R . Y . ( 1994 ) . Functional approaches to the study of group discussion : Even good notions have their problems . Small Group Research , 25 ( 4 ) , 542 – 550 . Hirokawa , R . Y . , & Johnston , D . D . ( 1989 ) . Toward a general theory of group decision - making : Development of an integrated model . Small Group Behavior , 20 ( 4 ) , 500 – 523 . Hirokawa , R . Y . , Gouran , D . S . , & Martz , A . E . ( 1988 ) . Understanding the sources of faulty group decision - making : A lesson from the Challenger disaster . Small Group Behavior , 19 ( 4 ) , 411 – 433 . * Hollingshead , A . B . ( 1996a ) . Information suppression and status persistence in group decision - making : The effects of communication media . Human Communication Research , 23 , 193 – 219 . Hollingshead , A . B . ( 1996b ) . Therank - ordereffectingroupdecision - making . OrganizationalBehav - ior and Human Decision Processes , 68 , 181 – 193 . * Huang , W . , Wei , K . , & Tan B . C . Y . ( 1999 ) . Compensating effects of GSS on group performance . Information and Management , 35 , 195 – 202 . Jessup , L . M . , Connolly , T . , & Galegher , J . ( 1990 , September ) . The effects of anonymity on group process in an idea - generation task . MIS Quarterly , 313 – 321 . Johnson , B . T . ( 1993 ) . DSTAT 1 . 10 : Software for the meta - analytic review of research literatures . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . * Johnson , D . L . ( 1997 ) . The effect of task difficulty on accounting - based decisions in face - to - face versus computer - mediated group settings : An experimental investigation . Unpublished doctoral dissertation , Texas A & M Univ . Kiesler , S . , Zubrow , D . , & Moses , A . M . ( 1985 ) . Affect in computer - mediated communication : An experiment in synchronous terminal - to - terminal discussion . Human – Computer Interaction , 1 , 77 – 104 . Koike , H . , Gudykunst , W . B . , Stewart , L . P . , TingToomey , S . , etal . ( 1988 ) . Communicationopenness , satisfaction , and length of employment in Japanese organizations . Communication Research Reports , 5 ( 2 ) , 97 – 102 . * Lim , L . - H . , & Benbasat , I . ( 1997 ) . The debiasing role of group support systems : An experimental investigationoftherepresentativenessbias . InternationalJournalofHuman – ComputerStudies , 47 , 453 – 471 . McGrath , J . E . ( 1984 ) . Groups : Interaction and performance . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . McGuire , T . W . , Kiesler , S . , & Siegel , J . ( 1987 ) . Group and computer - mediated discussion effects in risk decision - making . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 52 , 917 – 930 . * McLeod , P . L . , Baron , R . S . , Marti , M . W . , & Yoon , K . ( 1997 ) . The eyes have it : Minority influence in face - to - face and computer - mediated group discussion . Journal of Applied Psychology , 82 , 706 – 718 . 178 BALTES ET AL . Nunamaker , J . F . , Jr . , Dennis , A . R . , Valacich , J . S . , Vogel , D . R . , & George , J . F . ( 1991 ) . Electronic meeting systems to support group work . Communications of the ACM , 34 , 40 – 61 . O’Conaill , B . , & Whittaker , S . ( 1997 ) . Characterizing , predicting and measuring video - mediated communication : A conversational approach . In K . E . Finn & A . J . Sellen ( Eds . ) , Video - mediated communication . Computers , cognition , and work ( pp . 107 – 131 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . O’Reilly , C . A . , & Roberts , K . H . ( 1977 ) . Task group structure , communication , and effectiveness in three organizations . Journal of Applied Psychology , 62 ( 6 ) , 674 – 681 . * Ocker , R . J . , & Yaverbaum , G . J . ( 1999 ) . Asynchronous computer - mediated communication versus face - to - face collaboration : Results on student learning , quality and satisfaction . Group Decision and Negotiation , 8 , 427 – 440 . * Offerman , L . R . , & Eller , S . L . ( 1999 ) . Teams on line : Performance and preferences in face - to - face and electronically - mediated teams . Presented at SIOP in Atlanta . * Olaniran , B . A . ( 1996 ) . A model of group satisfaction in computer - mediated communication and face - to - face meetings . Behavior and Information Technology , 15 , 24 – 36 . * Olarniran , B . A . ( 1994 ) . Groupperformanceincomputer - mediatedandface - to - facecommunication media . Management Communication Quarterly , 7 , 256 – 281 . Perry , T . S . ( 1992 ) . E - mail at work . IEEE Spectrum , 29 , 24 – 28 . Reid , F . J . M . , Ball , L . J . , Morley , A . M . , & Evans , J . B . T . ( 1997 ) . Styles of group discussion in computer - mediated decision - making . British Journal of Social Psychology , 36 , 241 – 262 . * Siegel , J . , Dubrovsky , V . , Kiesler , S . , & McGuire , T . W . ( 1986 ) . Group processes in computer - mediatedcommunication . OrganizationalBehavior andHuman DecisionProcesses , 37 , 157 – 187 . * Smith , C . A . P . , & Hayne , S . C . ( 1997 ) . Decision - making under time pressure : An investigation of decision speed and decision quality of computer - supported groups . Management Communication Quarterly , 11 , 97 – 126 . * Strauss , S . G . ( 1996 ) . Gettingaclue : Theeffectsofcommunicationmediaandinformationdistribu - tion on participation and performance in computer - mediated and face - to - face groups . Small Group Research , 27 , 115 – 142 . * Strauss , S . G . & McGrath , J . E . ( 1994 ) . Does the medium matter ? The interaction of task type and technology on group performance and member reactions . Journal of Applied Psychology , 79 , 87 – 97 . * Valacich , J . S . , Paranka , D . , George , J . F . , & Nunamaker , J . F . ( 1993 ) . Communication concurrency and the new media . Communication Research , 20 , 249 – 276 . Valacich , J . S . , Jessup , L . M . , Dennis , A . R . , & Nunamaker , J . F . , Jr . ( 1992 ) . A conceptual framework of anonymity in group support systems . Group Discussion and Negotiation , 1 , 219 – 241 . * Valacich , J . S . , & Schwenk , C . ( 1995 ) . Devil’s advocacy and dialectical inquiry effects on face - to - face and computer - mediated group decision - making . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 63 , 158 – 173 . * Vanjani , M . B . ( 1996 ) . Distributed electronic meetings : A comparison of performance and satisfac - tion between synchronous legislative sessions and virtual legislative sessions . Unpublished doc - toral dissertation , Univ . of Mississippi . Weisband , S . P . ( 1992 ) . Group discussion and first advocacy effects in computer - mediated and face - to - face decision - making groups . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 53 , 352 – 380 . * Winniford , M . ( 1989 ) . The effects of electronic meeting support on large and small decision - making groups . Unpublished doctoral dissertation , University of Arizona , Arizona . * Wyatt , R . L . ( 1993 ) . The effect of electronic meeting systems on group performance : The case of thebudgetingdecision . Unpublisheddoctoraldissertation , MemphisStateUniversity , Tennessee . CMC AND GROUP PERFORMANCE 179 Zeffane , R . , & Cheek , B . ( 1995 ) . The differential use ofwritten , computer - based and verbal informa - tion in an organizational context : An empirical exploration . Information & Management , 28 , 107 – 121 . Zigurs , I . , Poole , M . S . , & DeSanctis , G . L . ( 1988 ) . A study of influence in computer - mediated group decision - making . MIS Quarterly , Dec . , 625 – 644 . Received March 9 , 2000 ; published online June 19 , 2001