Neuron Article Nervous Wreck Interacts with Thickveins and the Endocytic Machinery to Attenuate Retrograde BMP Signaling during Synaptic Growth Kate M . O’Connor - Giles , 1 , * Ling Ling Ho , 1 and Barry Ganetzky 1 1 Laboratory of Genetics , University of Wisconsin - Madison , Madison , WI 53706 , USA * Correspondence : oconnorgiles @ wisc . edu DOI 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2008 . 03 . 007 SUMMARY Regulation of synaptic growth is fundamental to the formation and plasticity of neural circuits . Here , we demonstrate that Nervous wreck ( Nwk ) , a negative regulator of synaptic growth at Drosophila NMJs , in - teracts functionally and physically with components of the endocytic machinery , including dynamin and Dap160 / intersectin , and negatively regulates retro - grade BMP growth signaling through a direct inter - action with the BMP receptor , thickveins . Synaptic overgrowth in nwk is sensitive to BMP signaling levels , and loss of Nwk facilitates BMP - induced over - growth . Conversely , Nwk overexpression suppresses BMP - induced synaptic overgrowth . We observe anal - ogous genetic interactions between dap160 and the BMP pathway , conﬁrming that endocytosis regulates BMP signaling at NMJs . Finally , we demonstrate a correlation between synaptic growth and pMAD levels and show that Nwk regulates these levels . We propose that Nwk functions at the interface of endo - cytosis and BMP signaling to ensure proper synaptic growth by negatively regulating Tkv to set limits on this positive growth signal . INTRODUCTION The formation and plasticity of neural circuits depend on the proper establishment and remodeling of synapses in response to environment and experience . The Drosophila larval neuromus - cular junction ( NMJ ) has become a powerful model system for dissecting the molecular mechanisms that regulate synaptic growth ( Collins and DiAntonio , 2007 ) . NMJs are dynamic struc - tures that coordinate their size and strength with muscle growth and undergo changes in morphology and physiology in response to environmental stimuli and altered levels of activity ( Budnik et al . , 1990 ; Sigrist et al . , 2003 , 2002 ) . It is well established that neurons and muscles are in commu - nication to coordinate the development and reﬁnement of pre - and postsynaptic terminals ( Haghighi et al . , 2003 ; Marrus and DiAntonio , 2004 ; Nakayama et al . , 2006 ; Packard et al . , 2002 ; Pielage et al . , 2006 ; Saitoe et al . , 2001 ) . Identiﬁcation of the factors that mediate trans - synaptic coordination of NMJ de - velopment has been a key objective for understanding synaptic growth and plasticity . Several recent studies have identiﬁed the bone morphogenic protein ( BMP ) signaling pathway as a critical retrograde ( muscle to neuron ) growth signal that regulates NMJ development ( Aberle et al . , 2002 ; Marques et al . , 2002 ; McCabe et al . , 2004 , 2003 ; Rawson et al . , 2003 ; Sweeney and Davis , 2002 ) . BMPs are members of the transforming growth factor - b ( TGF - b ) superfamily of signaling proteins ( Miyazono et al . , 2001 ) . At Drosophila NMJs , the BMP glass bottom boat ( Gbb ) is released , presumably by muscles , to activate BMP receptors , wishful thinking ( Wit ) , thickveins ( Tkv ) and saxophone ( Sax ) at presynaptic terminals . These receptors represent two classes of transmembrane serine / threonine kinases . Upon ligand bind - ing , Wit , a type - II receptor , forms a complex with the type - I receptors Tkv and Sax . In turn , phosphorylation of Tkv and Sax by Wit induces them to phosphorylate the receptor - regulated R - Smad mothers against Dpp ( Mad ) . Mad is a cytoplasmic signal transduction effector that , when phosphorylated , binds the co - Smad medea ( Med ) and translocates to the nucleus where the complex activates or represses transcription of target genes ( Ke - shishian and Kim , 2004 ) . Mutations in gbb , wit , tkv , sax , mad , and medea all result in pronounced NMJ undergrowth ( Aberle et al . , 2002 ; Marques et al . , 2002 ; McCabe et al . , 2004 , 2003 ; Rawson et al . , 2003 ) . An important open question is whether BMP signaling is re - quired simply as a permissive switch to initiate synaptic growth or instead is instructive , modulating synaptic growth in a graded fashion in proportion to signal levels . In the latter case , BMP sig - naling is itself likely to be subject to positive and negative regu - lation to ﬁne tune signaling levels in response to external and internal cues . Such regulation could occur at a number of levels , including presynaptic regulation of available receptors or traf - ﬁcking of activated receptor signaling complexes and postsyn - aptic regulation of Gbb release . nervous wreck ( nwk ) was identiﬁed as a neuron - speciﬁc negative regulator of NMJ growth in a secondary screen of temperature - sensitive paralytic mutants for aberrant synaptic morphology ( Coyle et al . , 2004 ) . Nwk is the Drosophila represen - tative of a family of proteins , conserved from yeast to humans . A human family member has been identiﬁed as the affected gene in a heritable form of severe cognitive and motor impairment , high - lighting a conserved role for Nwk and Nwk - related proteins in neural development . Nwk - family proteins share a distinctive do - main architecture , including a newly deﬁned F - BAR domain ( Itoh et al . , 2005 ) , two SH3 domains ( or in some cases one SH3 and Neuron 58 , 507 – 518 , May 22 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 507 one RhoGAP domain ) , and a C - terminal proline - rich domain ( PRD ) with numerous PxxP SH3 - binding sites . F - BAR domains induce membrane invagination and have been identiﬁed in pro - teins associated with both actin regulation and endocytosis . SH3 domains mediate protein - protein interactions and are com - monly found in adaptor proteins in signal transduction pathways . The activity of the Wiscott - Aldrich syndrome protein , Wasp , which promotes F - actin assembly by activating the ARP2 / 3 ( actin - related protein ) complex , is regulated in part by interacting directly with SH3 - domain - containing proteins transmitting up - stream growth signals ( Takenawa and Suetsugu , 2007 ) . Nwk was found to bind Wasp via its ﬁrst SH3 domain ( Coyle et al . , 2004 ) . Furthermore , mutations in wasp result in synaptic over - growth similar to that of nwk and enhance nwk mutants in a dose - dependent manner , suggesting that Nwk and Wasp are components of a common pathway regulating NMJ growth . These data suggest that Nwk may function by linking growth cues to reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton during synaptic growth . A number of endocytic proteins , among them dynamin , Dap160 / intersectin , endophilin , synaptojanin , Rab11 , and spin - ster ( Spin ) , have also been identiﬁed as negative regulators of NMJ growth ( Dickman et al . , 2006 ; Khodosh et al . , 2006 ; Koh et al . , 2004 ; Marie et al . , 2004 ; Sweeney and Davis , 2002 ) . Muta - tions in the majority of these genes share with nwk the speciﬁc morphological defect of supernumerary or satellite bouton for - mation ( Dickman et al . , 2006 ) . shibire ( shi , Drosophila dynamin ) encodes a GTPase that is required for the scission of endocytic vesicles from the plasma membrane . Dap160 , originally identi - ﬁed as a binding partner of dynamin , is a scaffolding protein required for the stable formation of a complex of endocytic pro - teins at presynaptic terminals . In addition to the deﬁned role of these proteins in synaptic vesicle endocytosis at the NMJ , dis - rupted endocytosis and trafﬁcking of growth signaling receptors may underlie their synaptic overgrowth phenotypes . In fact , spin encodes a late endosomal / lysosomal protein proposed to func - tion , at least in part , in the downregulation of BMP signaling at synapses ( Sweeney and Davis , 2002 ) . Recent evidence from a variety of experimental systems has shown that endocytosis is dependent on the precise spatial and temporal regulation of actin assembly ( Itoh and De Camilli , 2006 ; Kim and Chang , 2006 ; Smythe and Ayscough , 2006 ) . Further , it is becoming in - creasingly apparent that endocytosis is a key mechanism for the integration and regulation of cell signaling pathways ( Conner and Schmid , 2003 ; Di Fiore and De Camilli , 2001 ) . Together , these ﬁndings raise the possibility that nwk mutants disrupt an actin - dependent endocytic mechanism required for the negative regulation of a synaptic growth signal . In support of this idea , we have found that Nwk interacts func - tionally and physically with components of both the endocytic machinery and the BMP signaling pathway . Synaptic overgrowth in nwk is sensitive to the dosage of presynaptic BMP receptors , and loss of Nwk facilitates BMP - induced synaptic overgrowth . We also found that ectopic BMP signaling results in varying levels of synaptic overgrowth depending on the dose of acti - vated receptor , supporting an instructive role for BMP signaling in synaptic growth , and we demonstrate that overexpression of Nwk suppresses this phenotype . Consistent with a role for NwkintheregulationofBMPsignalinglevels , weobserveadirect physical interaction between Nwk and Tkv . Finally , we demon - strate a correlation between synaptic growth and pMAD levels and show that these levels are regulated by Nwk . Based on these results , we propose that Nwk functions at the intersection of ac - tin - dependent endocytosis and BMP signaling to constrain syn - aptic growth through the endocytic regulation of the presynaptic BMP receptor Tkv . RESULTS Synaptic Overgrowth in nwk Is Dominantly Enhanced by Endocytic Mutations Previous work suggests that Nwk negatively regulates synaptic growth at least in part through effects on actin assembly via its direct interactions with Wasp ( Coyle et al . , 2004 ) . Although actin is involved in a number of mechanisms required for synaptic growth , includingcell adhesionand processextension , anumber of observations led us to hypothesize that Nwk may function at the convergence of actin assembly and endocytosis . First , nwk NMJs display a distinctive phenotype of satellite bouton forma - tion and hyperbudding , in which a given bouton sprouts three or more daughter boutons . A similar phenotype has recently been observed in a number of endocytic mutants , including endophilin ( endo ) and dap160 , suggesting a link between the formation of satellite boutons and defects in endocytosis ( Dickman et al . , 2006 ; Khodosh et al . , 2006 ; Koh et al . , 2004 ; Marie et al . , 2004 ) . Second , Nwk colocalizes with endocytic proteins at the periactive zones of boutons , including sites of active endocyto - sis as indicated by dynamin - positive ‘‘hot spots’’ ( Coyle et al . , 2004 ; Estes et al . , 1996 ; Roos and Kelly , 1999 ) . Third , Nwk levels are reduced in the absence of the endocytic scaffolding protein Dap160 ( Koh et al . , 2004 ) . Fourth , a large body of recent work has revealed that endocytosis is accompanied by spatially and temporally regulated bursts of actin assembly . Moreover , there is extensive overlap between endocytic proteins and regulators of actin assembly , reﬂecting the importance of actin - dependent steps in the internalization and trafﬁcking of endocytic vesicles ( Itoh and De Camilli , 2006 ; Kim and Chang , 2006 ; Smythe and Ayscough , 2006 ) . Finally , recent work in vertebrates has identi - ﬁed a novel domain , named F - BAR , that is able to induce plasma membrane invagination ( Itoh et al . , 2005 ) . An F - BAR domain is present in Nwk and its vertebrate orthologs . To explore the possibility that Nwk functions in a common pathway with endocytic proteins during synaptic growth , we as - sayed genetic interactions between nwk and mutations in a num - ber of known endocytic genes , including dap160 , endo , and shi . For each of these , we observe signiﬁcant dominant enhance - ment of both bouton number and satellite bouton formation at all nwk NMJs ( Figure 1 ) . To quantify this phenotypic enhance - ment , we focused on NMJ 4 , a simple , stereotypic synapse formed by motor neuron 4 - 1b on the face of muscle 4 ( Hoang and Chiba , 2001 ) . Satellite boutons were deﬁned in accordance with Dickman et al . ( 2006 ) as extensions of ﬁve or fewer boutons emanating from the main branch of the nerve terminal ( see ar - rows in Figure 1B ) . Mutations in nwk result in a 1 . 5 - fold increase in bouton number and a 3 - fold increase in the formation of satel - lite boutons ( Figures 1A , 1B , 1I , and 1J ) . Loss of one copy of endo Neuron Nwk Downregulates BMP Signaling at Synapses 508 Neuron 58 , 507 – 518 , May 22 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . in a nwk mutant background increases bouton number 1 . 5 - fold and causes a 3 . 4 - fold increase in satellite bouton formation but has limited effect in a wild - type background ( Figures 1C , 1D , 1I , and 1J ) . Similarly , heterozygous mutations in dap160 have no effect on wild - type synapses but cause a 2 . 5 - fold increase in satellite bouton formation and a 1 . 2 - fold increase in bouton number at nwk synapses ( Figures 1E , 1F , 1I , and 1J ) . It was pre - viously shown that shi ts1 mutant larvae raised at the semirestric - tive temperature of 25 (cid:2) C exhibit a 5 - fold increase in satellite boutons compared with wild - type ( Dickman et al . , 2006 ) . At this temperature , we did not observe a signiﬁcant increase in sat - ellite bouton formation in shi heterozygotes alone ( Figures 1G and 1J ) but did see signiﬁcant dominant enhancement of the nwk phenotype ( Figures 1H – 1J ) . These results place Nwk in a common pathway with endocytic proteins at presynaptic terminals . Nwk Physically Interacts with the Endocytic Machinery Given the strong phenotypic interactions between nwk and mu - tations affecting known endocytic proteins as well as the coloc - alization of these proteins at presynaptic periactive zones and endocytic hot spots , we investigated whether Nwk physically as - sociates with the endocytic machinery by GST - pull - down and yeast two - hybrid experiments . Both Dap160 and dynamin GST - fusion proteins precipitate Nwk from ﬂy lysates with high ef - ﬁciency . Furthermore , pull - down experiments with GST fusions of speciﬁc Dap160 and dynamin domains demonstrate that it is the SH3 domains of Dap160 and the proline - rich domain ( PRD ) of dynamin that bind Nwk ( Figures 2A and 2B ) . To determine whether the interactions of Nwk with Dap160 and dynamin are direct , we performed yeast two - hybrid experi - ments . Growth of yeast cells cotransformed with Nwk and either Dap160 or dynamin constructs and grown on multiple selective media reveals direct binding between Nwk and both endocytic proteins ( Figure 2C ) . Finally , we investigated the potential for Nwk , dynamin , and Dap160 to interact as a complex . Because Nwk binds dynamin through its SH3 domains and binds Dap160 through its PRD , it has the capacity to bind both proteins simultaneously . On the other hand , both Nwk and dynamin bind the SH3 domains of Dap160 and might compete for the same binding site . The interaction between Dap160 and dynamin is mediated exclusively by the SH3a and - b domains of Dap160 ( Roos and Kelly , 1998 ) . We performed pull - down experiments with GST constructs containing either the SH3a and - b or the SH3c and - d domains of Dap160 . The SH3c and - d domains of Dap160 precipitate Nwk with high afﬁnity , while the SH3a and - b domains do not ( Figure 2D ) . Thus , Dap160 has the capacity to form a multiprotein complex containing Nwk and dynamin . These ﬁndings are consistent with data from Drosophila and ver - tebrates , indicating that Dap160 / intersectin is a scaffolding pro - tein responsible for coordinating the activities of a number of proteins that bind sequentially as endocytosis progresses ( Hus - sain et al . , 2001 ; Koh et al . , 2004 ; Marie et al . , 2004 ; Roos and Kelly , 1998 ; Zamanian and Kelly , 2003 ) . Figure 1 . Synaptic Overgrowth in nwk Is Dominantly Enhanced by Endocytic Mutations ( A – H ) Confocal images of NMJ 4 labeled with FITC - conjugated anti - HRP . ( A ) Wild - type NMJs are relatively unbranched and contain few satellite boutons . ( B ) nwk NMJs are more branched than wild - type and have increased numbers of total boutons and satellite boutons . ( C and D ) Loss of onecopyof endo hasnoeffectontotalandasmall effect on satellite bouton formation in a wild - type background ( C ) but results in a large increase in both parameters in a nwk background ( D ) . ( E and F ) Lossofonecopyof dap160 doesnotaffectbou - ton number or satellite bouton formation in a wild - type background ( E ) but leads to a signiﬁcant increase in total and satellite bouton number in nwk mutants ( F ) . ( G and H ) At the semirestrictive temperature of 25 (cid:2) C , heterozygosity for shi does not affect total or satellite bouton number at wild - typeNMJs ( G ) , butina nwk background , total bouton number and satellite bouton formation are signiﬁcantly increased ( H ) . ( I and J ) Quantiﬁcation of total ( I ) and satellite ( J ) bouton number at NMJ 4 in wild - type , nwk 1 / 2 , endo 2730 / + , endo EY02730 nwk 2 / + nwk 1 , dap160 D 1 / + , dap160 D 1 / + ; nwk 1 / 2 , shi ts1 / + , and shi ts1 / + ; nwk 1 / 2 backgrounds . * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 , * * * p < 0 . 001 . p values above individual bars refer to comparisons between nwk and the indicated genotype . Error bars represent SEM . Arrows in ( B ) point to examples of satellite boutons . Scale bar , 20 m M . Neuron Nwk Downregulates BMP Signaling at Synapses Neuron 58 , 507 – 518 , May 22 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 509 Synaptic Overgrowth in nwk Depends on the Level of Retrograde BMP Signaling Nwk’s role as a negative regulator of synaptic growth together with the phenotypic , genetic , and biochemical evidence indicat - ing a functional association between Nwk and the endocytic ma - chinery suggested that Nwk might be required for downregula - tion of a positive growth signal at the NMJ . A number of recent studies demonstrate that the BMP signaling pathway constitutes the primary positive retrograde growth signal at developing NMJs ( Aberle et al . , 2002 ; Marques et al . , 2002 ; McCabe et al . , 2004 , 2003 ; Rawson et al . , 2003 ; Sweeney and Davis , 2002 ) , so we examined genetic interactions between nwk and BMP pathway components . The BMP pathway is required for synaptic overgrowth in nwk mutants , as loss of wit fully suppresses the synaptic overgrowth observed in nwk mutants ( Figures 3A – 3H and 3K ) . At NMJ 4 , wild - type synapses have an average of 21 boutons ( Figures 3B and 3K ) , compared with 30 in nwk ( Figures 3D and 3K ) . Con - versely , wit mutants are severely undergrown , with an average of 7 . 9 boutons per NMJ 4 ( Figures 3F and 3K ) . In nwk wit double mutants , the average number of boutons at NMJ 4 is essentially the same as in wit single mutants ( Figures 3H and 3K ) . Thus , synaptic overgrowth in nwk requires BMP signaling . Furthermore , we have found that the nwk phenotype depends on wild - type levels of Wit , supporting the idea of a direct link be - tween the level of BMP signaling and synaptic overgrowth in nwk . Loss of one copy of wit , which has no effect in a wild - type background , signiﬁcantly suppresses synaptic overgrowth in nwk mutants ( Figures 3I and 3K ) . We observe similar dos - age - sensitive interactions between nwk and all other compo - nents of the BMP signaling pathway analyzed , including gbb , tkv , med , and mad ( data not shown ) . These ﬁndings are consis - tent with a model in which Nwk restrains synaptic growth via the endocytic downregulation of BMP signaling . Nwk Constrains BMP - Induced Synaptic Overgrowth Overexpression of a constitutively active Tkv receptor ( Tkv ACT ) causes striking gain - of - function phenotypes in a number of tis - sues , notably the developing wing ( Hoodless et al . , 1996 ) . At the NMJ , neuronal expression of Tkv ACT does not affect synaptic growth ( McCabe et al . , 2004 ; Figures 4A , 4C , and 4E ) . One pos - sibility is that BMP signaling is constrained at the NMJ by mech - anisms that set upper limits on the pathway . If Nwk were acting to set a limit on BMP signaling , we would expect its removal to permit Tkv ACT - induced synaptic overgrowth . In analogous ex - periments , expression of Tkv ACT in highwire ( hiw ) mutants re - sulted in an increase in bouton formation beyond that observed in the absence of Hiw alone ( McCabe et al . , 2004 ) . We found that neuronal expression of Tkv ACT in nwk mutants does not cause a signiﬁcant increase in bouton number compared with nwk alone ( data not shown ) . However , Tkv ACT expression in a nwk background results in a 1 . 7 - fold increase in satellite bouton for - mation over that observed in nwk alone ( Figures 4B – 4E ) . These results indicate that indeed Nwk does play a role in downregulat - ing BMP signaling at the NMJ and that this regulation is particu - larly important for controlling the emergence of satellite boutons . BMP - Induced Synaptic Overgrowth Is Suppressed by Overexpression of Nwk If the level of BMP signaling at the NMJ plays an instructive role in determining the extent of synaptic growth , further manipulation of Tkv ACT expression might result in synaptic overgrowth . In fact , we found that neuronal expression of two copies of UAStkv ACT via C155GAL4 results in a 2 - fold increase in bouton number and 4 - fold increase in satellite bouton formation ( Figures 5A – 5D , 5K , and 5L ) . We do not observe overgrowth in the absence of GAL4 , indicating that the phenotype is dependent on overexpression of tkv ACT and not the result of a second - site mutation ( Figures 5K and 5L ) . Consistent with previous studies in the embryonic CNS , we also found that co - overexpression of one copy each of Tkv ACT and Sax ACT results in synaptic overgrowth ( Allan et al . , 2003 ; data not shown ) . Hence , increased levels of BMP signaling cause corresponding increases in synaptic growth in general and the formation of satellite boutons in particular . The similarity of this phenotype to that associated with defects in Figure 2 . Nwk Physically Interacts with Dynamin and Dap160 ( A ) A dynamin - PRD - GST - fusion protein precipitates Nwk - RFP from C155GAL4 ; UASnwk - RFP ﬂy lysates with high afﬁnity , while GST alone does not . ( B ) GST - Dap160SH3a - d precipitates Nwk - RFP from cellular lysates . ( C ) Yeast two - hybrid interactions demonstrate a direct association between full - length Nwk and the proline - rich domain ( PRD ) of dynamin and between Nwk and the SH3 domains of Dap160 . Full - length Nwk is fused to the GAL4 DNA - binding domain ( bait ) , and the dynamin PRD and Dap160 SH3 domains are fused to the GAL4 activation domain ( prey ) . After 3 days at 30 (cid:2) C , yeast transformed with either bait or prey alone grow only in the absence of selec - tion , whereas yeast coexpressing both bait and prey fusion proteins exhibit growth on SD medium lacking either histidine or adenine , indicating that tran - scription of reporter genes has been activated . 3AT inhibits His3p activity and increases the stringency of selection . ( D ) Dap160 - SH3c - d , butnotDap160 - SH3a - b , GST - fusion protein precipitates Nwk - RFP from cell lysates . ( A ) , ( B ) , and ( D ) are probed with rabbit anti - dsRed ; input lanes contain lysate equal to 1 / 10 of the amount used for the pull - down assays . Neuron Nwk Downregulates BMP Signaling at Synapses 510 Neuron 58 , 507 – 518 , May 22 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . endocytosis is consistent with the idea that a common mecha - nism is disrupted in both cases . If Nwk acts to downregulate BMP signaling , then simultaneous overexpression of wild - type nwk in neurons should counteract the effect of two doses of UAStkv ACT . We found that coexpres - sion of a single copy of UASnwk suppresses the increase in both bouton number and satellite boutons ( Figures 5E , 5F , 5K , and 5L ) , while UASnwk expression in a wild - type background does not affect synaptic growth ( Figures 5K and 5L ) . The sup - pression of synaptic overgrowth by UASnwk is not simply an indirect consequence of the dilution of GAL4 by the presence of a third UAS element because coexpression of UASmyrRFP does not suppress the overgrowth phenotypes ( Figures 5K and 5L ) . These results demonstrate the ability of Nwk to limit BMP signaling levels at NMJs . Synaptic Overgrowth in Dad Mutants Is Suppressed by Overexpression of Nwk The NMJ phenotypes of larvae ectopically expressing Tkv ACT in - dicate that sufﬁciently high levels of BMP signaling cause synap - tic overgrowth . To investigate this further , we examined NMJ morphology in Dad mutants , in which loss of the inhibitory Smad should result in a substantial increase in endogenous BMP signaling ( Sweeney and Davis , 2002 ) . We observed signif - icant synaptic overgrowth in all Dad mutant combinations exam - ined . For example , bouton number in Dad J1e4 mutants is 1 . 8 - fold greater than wild - type , and satellite bouton formation is in - creased 4 . 8 - fold ( Figures 5G , 5H , 5K , and 5L ) . At Dad J1e4 / Dad 271 - 68 NMJs , bouton number is doubled , with a 4 . 8 - fold increase in satellite boutons ( Figures 5K and 5L ) . We observed similar levels of overgrowth in hemizygous backgrounds , con - ﬁrming a role for Dad in the negative regulation of BMP - depen - dent synaptic growth at larval NMJs . If Nwk downregulates BMP signaling , then increased levels of Nwk should also mitigate the phenotypic effects of loss of nega - tive regulation of endogenous BMP signaling by Dad . To test this , we expressed UASnwk panneuronally in Dad mutants and found that Nwk overexpression does , in fact , suppress Dad . Speciﬁcally , we found that bouton number is signiﬁcantly reduced by Nwk expression in a Dad mutant , as is the incidence of satellite boutons ( Figures 5I – 5L ) . These data provide further evidence that Nwk normally acts to limit BMP signaling at NMJs . dap160 Interacts with BMP Signaling Pathway Components Our genetic and biochemical data suggest that synaptic over - growth and satellite bouton formation in nwk and other endocytic mutants may occur through a common mechanism , speciﬁcally the failure to appropriately downregulate BMP signaling . This model predicts that satellite bouton formation and synaptic over - growth in other endocytic mutants are also sensitive to BMP signaling levels . We directly tested this by investigating genetic interactions between dap160 and components of the BMP Figure 3 . Synaptic Overgrowth in nwk Is Sensitive to BMP Signaling Levels ( A – J ) ConfocalimagesofNMJ6 / 7 ( A , C , E , G , andI ) and NMJ4 ( B , D , F , H , and J ) labeledwithFITC - conjugatedanti - HRP . ( AandB ) wild - type . ( CandD ) nwk 1 / 2 mutants exhibit synaptic overgrowth . ( E and F ) wit A12 / B11 mutants have dra - matically undergrown synapses . ( G and H ) wit A12 nwk 2 double mutants exhibit synaptic undergrowth that is essentially identical to that observed in wit single mutants . ( I and J ) Loss of one copy of wit dominantly suppresses synaptic overgrowth of nwk ( wit A12 / + nwk 1 / 2 ) . ( K ) Quantiﬁcation of bouton number at NMJ 4 in wild - type , nwk 1 / 2 , wit A12 / B11 , wit A12 nwk 2 , wit A12 / + , and wit A12 nwk 2 / + nwk 1 backgrounds . Error bars represent SEM . * * * p < 0 . 001 . Scale bars , 20 m M . Neuron Nwk Downregulates BMP Signaling at Synapses Neuron 58 , 507 – 518 , May 22 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 511 signaling pathway . First , we analyzed dap160 ; wit double mu - tants and the effect of reducing wit dosage on synaptic over - growth at dap160 NMJs . dap160 ; wit double mutants exhibit synaptic undergrowth similar to that observed in wit mutants , and loss of one copy of wit suppresses synaptic overgrowth at dap160 synapses ( Figures 6A – 6C and 6G ) . These results dem - onstrate that synaptic overgrowth in dap160 mutants , as in nwk , is dependent upon and sensitive to the dosage of BMP sig - naling . Next , we tested whether Dap160 also constrains BMP signaling levels by assaying the effect of removing dap160 on the ability of one copy of Tkv ACT to induce synaptic overgrowth . We found that loss of one copy of dap160 is sufﬁcient to enable one copy of Tkv ACT to induced synaptic overgrowth ( Figures 6D , 6G , 6H ) . Finally , we investigated the ability of Dap160 overex - pression to suppress BMP - induced synaptic overgrowth . At NMJs expressing two copies of Tkv ACT or mutant for Dad , we found that neuronal expression of UASdap160 suppressed both total and satellite bouton number ( Figures 6E – 6H ) . These results demonstrate that Dap160 regulates BMP signaling and provide strong support for our model that BMP - dependent growth at presynaptic terminals is attenuated via endocytic reg - ulation by proteins such as Nwk , Dap160 , and their interacting partners . Nwk Physically Associates with the BMP Receptor Tkv The model that Nwk functions with the presynaptic endocytic machinery to downregulate retrograde BMP growth signaling implies that Nwk is a component of an endocytic mechanism that acts to limit the abundance or signaling capacity of mem - brane - associated BMP receptors . Thus , Nwk may physically interact with one or more of the BMP receptors , providing a link between BMP receptors and the endocytic machinery , to regulate their trafﬁcking or degradation via receptor - mediated endocytosis . Consistent with the possibility of physical associ - ation in vivo , we found that Nwk and neuronally expressed Tkv - GFP both localize to presynaptic periactive zones where they colocalize to puncta that likely represent endocytic vesicles ( Figures 7A and 7B ; Hsiung et al . , 2005 ) . Moreover , the intracel - lular domain of Tkv ( Tkv - IC ) expressed as a GST - fusion con - struct efﬁciently precipitates Nwk from ﬂy lysates ( Figure 7C ) . We also conducted the reciprocal pull - down experiment and found that GST - Nwk precipitates full - length Tkv from ﬂy lysates ( Figure 7D ) . Thus , either full - length Tkv or its intracellular domain alone can physically associate with Nwk . The presence of mul - tiple PxxP SH3 - binding domains in Tkv - IC raised the possibility of a direct interaction and yeast two - hybrid experiments conﬁrm that the association between Nwk and Tkv - IC is direct ( Figure 7E ) . Together , these ﬁndings support the mechanistic in - terpretation that Nwk attenuates BMP signaling via endocytic regulation of Tkv . Presynaptic pMAD Levels Correlate with Synaptic Growth and Are Regulated by Nwk Activation of BMP receptors leads to the phosphorylation of Mad . Thus , pMAD levels serve as a molecular read out of BMP signaling levels at presynaptic terminals . Our model that Nwk negatively regulates BMP signaling at presynaptic terminals pre - dicts an increase in pMAD levels in nwk mutants . To test this , we quantiﬁed pMAD levels at wild - type and nwk synapses and found that pMAD levels are substantially higher ( 3 . 3 - fold ) in nwk mutants ( Figures 8A , 8B , and 8I ) . A recent study posited an anterograde BMP signal at the NMJ based on the observation of postsynaptically localized pMAD ( Dudu et al . , 2006 ) . To con - ﬁrm that the ectopic pMAD that we observe is presynaptic , we colabeled nwk synapses with pMAD and pre - and postsynaptic markers , including bruchpilot ( Brp ) , which labels presynaptic ac - tive zones , and discs large ( Dlg ) , which labels postsynaptic membrane . We found signiﬁcant overlap between pMAD and Brp but essentially no overlap between pMAD and Dlg at nwk NMJs , indicating that the ectopic pMAD is primarily or entirely presynaptic ( Figures 8B and 8C ) . The model that Nwk is functioning with the endocytic machin - ery to regulate BMP signaling suggests that mutations in other endocytic proteins will also result in increased pMAD levels . In fact , a recent study of the Drosophila spastic paraplegia protein spichthyin ( Spict ) , an early endosome - associated protein that negatively regulates synaptic growth , reported a more than 3 - fold increase in presynaptic pMAD levels at spict NMJs ( Wang et al . , 2007 ) . We investigated pMAD levels in dap160 , sh i , and endo mutants and observed increases in all three back - grounds , with the most signiﬁcant increase ( 5 . 7 - fold ) found in endo mutants ( Figures 8D and 8I ) . Our model further predicts a correlation between BMP - induced synaptic growth and pMAD levels and the modulation of these levels by Nwk . A previous study found an (cid:3) 50 % increase in nuclear pMAD levels in larvae expressing Tkv ACT ( Collins et al . , 2006 ) . We observe a similar Figure 4 . Nwk Constrains BMP - Induced Synaptic Overgrowth ( A – D ) Confocal images of NMJ 4 labeled with FITC - conjugated anti - HRP . ( A ) wild - type . ( B ) nwk 1 / 2 . ( C ) Neuronal expression of Tkv ACT in a wild - type background does not result in an increase in satellite bouton number . ( D ) Tkv ACT expression in the absence of nwk resultsin an increase insatelliteboutons over that resulting from loss of nwk alone . ( E ) Quantiﬁcation ofsatelliteboutonnumberatNMJ4inwild - type , nwk 1 / 2 , elavGAL4 / UAStkv ACT , and elavGAL4 nwk 2 / UAStvk ACT nwk 2 backgrounds . Error bars represent SEM . * p < 0 . 05 . Scale bar , 20 m M . Neuron Nwk Downregulates BMP Signaling at Synapses 512 Neuron 58 , 507 – 518 , May 22 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . Tkv ACT - induced increase both in motor neuron nuclei and at the NMJ , where pMAD levels are 42 % higher than wild - type ( Figures 8E and 8I ) . Consistent with our model , we observe a much larger ( 6 . 4 - fold ) increase in presynaptic pMAD when two copies of Tkv ACT are expressed ( Figures 8G and 8I ) . Signiﬁcantly , we also found that these levels are regulated by Nwk . Removing Nwk from larvae expressing one copy of Tkv ACT , which we have found causes a further increase in synaptic growth , results in a 7 . 8 - fold increase in pMAD levels over wild - type and a 2 . 3 - fold increase over nwk levels ( Figures 8F and 8I ) . Conversely , overexpression of Nwk in larvae expressing two copies of Tkv ACT reduces pMAD levels 3 . 3 - fold , which is consistent with Nwk’s ability to suppress BMP - induced synaptic overgrowth ( Figures 8H and 8I ) . Finally , we observe a correspondence between pMAD levels and satellite bouton formation ( Figure 8I ) . These data demonstrate a clear relationship between synapse morphology and BMP signaling levels and conﬁrm that Nwk regulates these levels . DISCUSSION This work presents a model for the endocytic regulation of retro - grade BMP signaling at synapses , integrating the roles of known positive and negative regulators of synaptic growth into a com - mon molecular pathway . Speciﬁcally , our ﬁndings indicate that Nwk negatively regulates Tkv trafﬁcking through an endocytic mechanism to limit retrograde BMP signaling , thereby constrain - ing synaptic growth . A Role for Nwk in Receptor Endocytosis Nwk interacts functionally and physically with anumber of known endocytic proteins , notably dynamin and Dap160 . FM1 - 43 Figure 5 . BMP - Induced Synaptic Overgrowth Is Suppressed by Neuronal Overexpression of Nwk ( A – J ) Confocal images of NMJ 6 / 7 ( A , C , E , G , and I ) and NMJ 4 ( B , D , F , H , and J ) labeled with FITC - conjugated anti - HRP . ( A and B ) wild - type . ( C and D ) C155GAL4 ; UAStkv ACT / UAStkv ACT synapses display an increase in bouton number and satellite bouton formation , demonstrating that sufﬁciently high levels of BMP signaling can induce synaptic overgrowth . ( E and F ) Neuronal overexpression of Nwk suppresses Tkv ACT - induced synaptic overgrowth . ( G and H ) In - creased bouton number and satellite bouton formation are observed in Dad J1e4 mutants , demonstrating that loss of negative regulation of BMP signaling results in synaptic overgrowth . ( I and J ) Synaptic overgrowth in Dad J1e4 is suppressed by neuronal overexpression of Nwk . ( K and L ) Quantiﬁcation of total ( K ) and satellite ( L ) bouton number at NMJ 4 in wild - type , C155GAL4 ; UAStkv ACT / UAStkv ACT , UAStkv ACT / UAStkv ACT , C155GAL4 ; UAStkv ACT UASnwk / UAStkv ACT , C155GAL4 ; UASnwk / + , C155GAL4 ; UAStkv ACT UASmyrRFP / UAStkv ACT , Dad J1e4 , Dad J1e4 / Dad 271 - 68 , and C155GAL4 ; Dad J1e4 UASnwk / Dad J1e4 backgrounds . ErrorbarsrepresentSEM . * p < 0 . 05 , * * * p < 0 . 001 . pvaluesaboveindividualbarsrefertocomparisons between wild - typeandtheindicated genotype . Scalebars , 20 m M . Neuron Nwk Downregulates BMP Signaling at Synapses Neuron 58 , 507 – 518 , May 22 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 513 uptake experiments showed that Nwk does not function in an internalization step of synaptic vesicle endocytosis ( Coyle et al . , 2004 ) , suggesting that Nwk affects a later step in endocytic traf - ﬁcking . In agreement , we observe colocalization between Nwk and the recycling endosome - associated Rab GTPase Rab11 , but not between Nwk and Rab proteins associated with either early or late endosomes ( unpublished data ) . Consistent with this observation , Khodosh et al . ( 2006 ) found that hypomorphic mutations in Drosophila rab11 result in a synaptic overgrowth phenotype that very closely resembles nwk . Importantly , Nwk , Dap160 , and dynamin are all linked to regu - lation of actin assembly ( Coyle et al . , 2004 ; Engqvist - Goldstein and Drubin , 2003 ; Hussain et al . , 2001 ) . Recent experiments demonstrate that dynamin - mediated vesicle ﬁssion requires ac - tin polymerization . For example , Itoh et al . ( 2005 ) found that inhib - iting actin polymerization blocks ﬁssion . Nwk likely facilitates a critical interaction between the endocytic machinery and actin polymerization at NMJs because it directly binds both dynamin and Wasp . Nwk also contains an F - BAR domain , which promotes membrane invagination ( Itoh et al . , 2005 ) . These do - mains are found almost exclusively in adaptor proteins that asso - ciate both with actin regulators and the endocytic machinery , highlightingthe important links between these cellular processes . The critical role of endocytic accessory proteins in linking the core endocytic machinery to cell signaling molecules is becom - ing increasingly clear ( Conner and Schmid , 2003 ; Di Fiore and De Camilli , 2001 ) . In addition to attenuating signaling by targeting re - ceptors for degradation , endocytic adaptor proteins play key roles in spatial and temporal regulation of signal transduction from ligand - activated receptors . Recent work in other systems also suggests a critical role for endocytic trafﬁcking during TGF - b / BMP signal transduction . For example , Smad phosphor - ylation and nuclear translocation in vertebrates depend on local - ization of the endosomal protein Smad anchor for receptor activation ( SARA ) and activated type - I and - II receptors to EEA1 - positive endosomal compartments ( Hayes et al . , 2002 ) . Similarly , in the Drosophila wing , targeting of Sara , Tkv , and the ligand decapentaplegic ( Dpp ) to early endosomes is required for productive signaling ( Bokel et al . , 2006 ) . Nwk is ideally situated to bridge endocytosis and growth signal regulation at presynaptic terminals because of its links to actin assembly and endocytosis as well as its capacity for binding a number of Figure 6 . dap160 Interacts with BMP Signaling Pathway Components ( A – F ) Confocal images of NMJ 4 labeled with FITC - conjugated anti - HRP . ( A ) Synaptic overgrowth in dap160 D 1 / EMS . ( B ) dap160 D 1 ; wit A12 / B11 double mutants ex - hibit the wit synaptic undergrowth phenotype . ( C ) Loss of one copy of wit suppresses synaptic overgrowth in dap160 mutants . ( D ) Reducing the dose of dap160 by 50 % facilitates Tkv ACT - induced synaptic overgrowth . ( E and F ) Neuronal overexpression of Dap160 suppresses synaptic overgrowth in neurons expressing two copies of Tkv ACT ( E ) and lacking Dad ( F ) . ( G ) Quantiﬁcation of total bouton number at NMJ 4 in dap160 D 1 / EMS , wit A12 / B11 , dap160 D 1 / D 1 ; wit A12 / B11 , dap160 D 1 / D 1 ; wit A12 / + , C155GAL4 ; UAStkv ACT / + , C155GAL4 ; dap160 D 1 / + ; UAStkv ACT / + , C155GAL4 ; UAStkv ACT / UAStkv ACT , C155GAL4 ; UAStkv ACT UASdap160 / UAStkv ACT , Dad J1e4 / J1e4 , and C155GAL4 ; Dad J1e4 UASdap160 / Dad J1e4 backgrounds . ( H ) Quantiﬁcation of satellite boutons at NMJ 4 in C155GAL4 ; UAStkv ACT / + , C155GAL4 ; dap160 D 1 / + ; UAStkv ACT / + , C155GAL4 ; UAStkv ACT / UAStkv ACT , C155GAL4 ; UAStkv ACT UASdap160 / UAStkv ACT , Dad J1e4 / J1e4 , and C155GAL4 ; Dad J1e4 UASdap160 / Dad J1e4 . Error bars represent SEM . * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 , * * * p < 0 . 001 . Scale bar , 20 m M . Neuron Nwk Downregulates BMP Signaling at Synapses 514 Neuron 58 , 507 – 518 , May 22 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . proteins—including Tkv—through its multiple protein - protein interaction domains . Endocytosis , Growth Signaling , and Satellite Bouton Formation Loss of endocytic proteins results in the speciﬁc morphological phenotype of excessive satellite bouton formation ( Dickman et al . , 2006 ) , as do mutations in actin - associated proteins , in - cluding Nwk , Wasp , and components of the Scar complex ( Coyle et al . , 2004 ; Koh et al . , 2004 ; Marie et al . , 2004 ; Schenck et al . , 2004 ) . These observations suggest that satellite bouton formation may result from impairment of an actin - dependent step in endocytosis . Dickman et al . ( 2006 ) suggested the possi - ble misregulation of a signaling pathway responsible for bouton growth and morphology in endocytic mutants and , because satellite bouton formation had not been linked with any known pathway , postulated the existence of either an unidentiﬁed positive growth signal downregulated by endocytosis or an endocytosis - dependent negative growth signal . Here , we show that BMP signaling regulates satellite bouton formation . Increasing levels of BMP signaling , either by express - ing UAStkv ACT or by reducing endogenous negative regulation of the pathway , generates a signiﬁcant increase in satellite bouton formation . Further , overexpression of Nwk or Dap160 sup - presses BMP - induced overgrowth , including satellite bouton formation . Finally , we observe a direct correlation between pMAD levels and satellite bouton formation in each of the genetic backgrounds analyzed . Together , these results indicate that im - paired endocytic regulation of retrograde BMP signaling results in generation of satellite boutons at NMJs . In the case of endo - cytic and Dad mutants , downregulation of endogenous BMP sig - naling is impaired , while in Tkv ACT - expressing larvae , ectopic BMP signaling apparently overwhelms the usual mechanisms of negative regulation . A Model of Nwk - Dependent Endocytic Regulation of BMP Signaling Although BMP signaling is required for NMJ growth , it has re - mained unclear whether the signal acts merely as a switch to ini - tiate or permit growth or instead plays a more instructive role in regulating and coordinating synaptic growth ( Aberle et al . , 2002 ; Marques et al . , 2002 ; McCabe et al . , 2004 , 2003 ; Rawson et al . , 2003 ; Sweeney and Davis , 2002 ) . Here , we demonstrate a direct relationship between levels of BMP signaling and extent of syn - aptic growth . Neuronal expression of a single copy of Tkv ACT re - sults in a modest increase in pMAD and no signiﬁcant increase in synaptic growth , whereas expression of two copies induces a dramatic increase in pMAD levels and extensive synaptic over - growth—both of which are suppressed by overexpression of Nwk . Further , in agreement with Sweeney and Davis ( 2002 ) , we ﬁnd that mutations in the endogenous negative regulator Dad also cause increased synaptic growth ( Sweeney and Davis , 2002 ) . These data indicate that the level of BMP signaling has an instructive role in governing synaptic size and complexity and reveal the importance of interactions between positive and negative regulators that modulate the growth signal in response to internal and external cues . Our results demonstrate that endocytosis is an important reg - ulatory mechanism for attenuating BMP signaling at synapses . Previous work suggested that Hiw , an E3 ubiquitin ligase and negative regulator of synaptic growth , also acted to limit BMP signaling ( McCabe et al . , 2004 ) . However , subsequent work demonstrated that pMAD levels are not increased in hiw , and no effects of Hiw overexpression on BMP signaling have been described ( Collins et al . , 2006 ) . In addition , hiw synapses are ex - tremely expansive , elaborately branched , and contain numerous small boutons , but no satellite boutons ( Wan et al . , 2000 ) . This phenotype is distinct from that associated with Tkv ACT overex - pression or other genotypes believed to elevate BMP signaling , Figure 7 . Nwk Physically Associates with Tkv ( A ) Z series projection of C155GAL4 ; UAStkv - GFP boutons colabeled with antibodies to Nwk . Note that while both proteins exhibit periactive zone localization , both also localize to discrete puncta . ( B ) Thin ( 0 . 1 m m ) optical cross - section of C155GAL4 ; UAStkv - GFP boutons colabeled with antibodies to Nwk . Arrows indicate several exam - ples of colocalization of Nwk and Tkv - GFP to membrane - associated puncta . ( C ) GST - Tkv - IC precipitates Nwk - RFP from C155GAL4 ; UASnwk - RFP ﬂy lysates with high afﬁnity . Nwk - RFP is detected with rabbit anti - dsRed . We obtained similar results in analogous experiments using lysate from wild - type ﬂies expressing only endogenous Nwk , excluding potential artifacts due to overexpression of Nwk or the RFP tag ( data not shown ) . ( D ) GST - Nwk precipitates full - length tagged - Tkv from C155GAL4 ; UAStkv - GFP lysatesasdetected by rabbit anti - GFP . Input lanes in ( C ) and ( D ) contain lysate equal to (cid:3) 1 / 10 of the amount used for the pull - down assays . ( E ) Yeast two - hybrid interactions demonstrate direct binding of full - length Nwk ( bait ) and Tkv - IC ( prey ) . After 3 days at 30 (cid:2) C , only yeast coexpressing both bait and prey fusion proteins exhibit growth on SD medium lacking either histidine or adenine . Neuron Nwk Downregulates BMP Signaling at Synapses Neuron 58 , 507 – 518 , May 22 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 515 including Dad , nwk , and known endocytic genes—all of which exhibit satellite boutons . Together with the recent ﬁnding that Hiw regulates MAPKKK - dependent Fos activity , these observa - tions suggest that Hiw and BMP signaling may regulate different aspects of synaptic growth . In their recent study of Spict , Wang et al . ( 2007 ) demonstrated the localization of Spict to early endosomes along with data sug - gesting that Spict plays a role in BMP receptor trafﬁcking ( Wang et al . , 2007 ) . For example , Spict overexpression in S2 cells caused Wit to relocalize to early endosomes , suggesting nega - tive regulation of BMP signaling by sequestering Wit receptor and / or Wit - Gbb signaling complexes . However , studies of Wit trafﬁcking at spict NMJs , which are limited by the small size of boutons and the lack of reliable antibodies , did not uncover this trafﬁcking defect but instead revealed increased Wit levels consistent with a role for Spict in the degradation of Wit . None - theless , the results from the analysis of Spict support the idea that endocytic regulation of BMP signaling is required for proper synaptic growth . It will be interesting to determine whether Spict interacts with Nwk or plays a distinct role in the regulation of BMP signaling at synapses . Overall , our ﬁndings support a model in which Nwk constrains synaptic growth by regulating endocytic trafﬁcking of Tkv to at - tenuate positive retrograde growth signaling . While the simplest model is that Nwk targets Tkv for degradation , we do not observe gross differences in levels of ectopically expressed Tkv - GFP in otherwise wild - type , nwk , and C155GAL4 ; UAS - nwk larvae ( unpublished data ) . A caveat is that , without the necessary antibody reagents , we are unable to look at endogenous Tkv . Thus , these observations might not accurately reﬂect normal re - ceptor trafﬁcking but rather the fact that high levels of Tkv can override endogenous regulation . Nonetheless , together with our observation that Nwk colocalizes with Rab11 , this ﬁnding is consistent with a role for Nwk in BMP receptor recycling . For example , Nwk might attenuate BMP signaling levels by regulat - ing the rate at which vacant Tkv receptors are recycled back to the plasma membrane following activation and internalization . Nwk might also regulate the trafﬁcking of unbound receptors from the plasma membrane . Previous work in vertebrates dem - onstrates that TGF - b receptors are recycled through a Rab11 - dependent mechanism independent of ligand binding , possibly as a means of rapidly and dynamically regulating surface recep - tor number and , thus , sensitivity to TGF - b ( Mitchell et al . , 2004 ) . Interestingly , we observe the relocalization of Nwk from a more uniform to a more punctate expression pattern upon overexpres - sion of Tkv ( see Figure 7A ) , consistent with recruitment of Nwk to regulate trafﬁcking of ectopic Tkv . Nwk might also have localized effects within boutons , for example , by restricting sites of BMP signaling through spatial regulation of receptor recycling . It is in - triguing to speculate that disruption of spatial constraints on BMP signaling results in ectopic bouton division and , thus , sat - ellite bouton formation . Such a mechanism could provide a criti - cal means for effecting localized changes to existing synapses that underlie neural plasticity . A conceptually similar Rab11 - de - pendent process for the asymmetric activation of Notch signal - ing in the developing nervous system has recently been de - scribed ( Emery et al . , 2005 ; Jafar - Nejad et al . , 2005 ) . A future challenge will be to further dissect the regulatory mechanisms Figure 8 . pMAD Levels Vary withNwk Expression and Correlate with Satellite Bouton Formation ( A , B , and D – H ) High - magniﬁcation images of boutons labeled with rabbit anti - pMAD ( red ) andmouseanti - Dlg ( green ) in ( A ) wild - type , ( B ) nwk 1 / 2 , ( D ) endo EY02730 , ( E ) C155GAL4 ; UAStkv ACT / + , ( F ) C155GAL4 ; nwk 1 / UAStvk ACT nwk 2 , ( G ) C155GAL4 ; UAStkv ACT / UAStkv ACT , and ( H ) C155GAL4 ; UAStkv ACT UASnwk / UAStkv ACT boutons . pMAD levels are increased in endocytic mutants ( B and D ) andinresponsetoectopicBMPsignaling ( EandG ) . WhilelossofNwkenhances ( F ) , overexpression of Nwk suppresses ( H ) BMP - induced pMAD expression . ( C ) A high - magniﬁcation image of nwk boutons labeled with rabbit anti - pMAD ( red ) andmouseanti - NC82 ( green ) , whichlabelstheactivezoneproteinbruch - pilot ( Brp ) , shows localization of pMAD to presynaptic terminals . Note that in ( B ) , pMAD does not colocalize with the postsynaptic marker Dlg . ( I ) Quantiﬁcation of pMAD levels normalized for control ( discs large ) intensity ( redbars ) . pMADlevelsshowastrongcorrespondencetosatelliteboutonnum - ber ( gray bars ) . ErrorbarsrepresentSEM . * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 , * * * p < 0 . 001 . pvaluesabovein - dividual bars refer to comparisons between wild - type and the indicated genotype . Scale bar , 5 m M . Neuron Nwk Downregulates BMP Signaling at Synapses 516 Neuron 58 , 507 – 518 , May 22 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . that control the levels , timing , and localization of BMP signaling at synapses . These studies will advance our understanding of the dynamic regulation of synaptic growth and plasticity and likely provide additional general insights into the intricate role of endocytosis in signal transduction . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Fly Stocks The following ﬂy stocks were used : nwk 1 , nwk 2 , and UASnwk 33D ( Coyle et al . , 2004 ) ; dap160 EMS , dap160 D 1 , and UASdap160 ( Koh et al . , 2004 ) ; mad 12 ( Sekelsky et al . , 1995 ) ; gbb D20 ( Chen et al . , 1998 ) ; elavGAL4 ( A . DiAntonio ) ; UAStkvA B3 ( Hoodlessetal . , 1996 ) ; Dad 271 - 68 ( Tsuneizumietal . , 1997 ) ; UASrab5 - GFP and UASrab7 - GFP ( M . Gonza´lez - Gaita´n ) ; and UAStkv - GFP ( Hsiung et al . , 2005 ) . All other stocks were obtained from Bloomington Stock Center . Immunoﬂuorescence Studies All larvae were obtained from crosses of ten females and ten males ( to control for crowding ) conducted at 25 (cid:2) C . shi ts1 crosses were kept at room tempera - ture and progeny shifted to 25 (cid:2) C during embryogenesis . Wandering third - in - star larvae were dissected in ice - cold Ca 2 + - free saline and ﬁxed for 15 min in4 % formaldehydeinPBS . Larvaewereincubatedinprimaryantibodiesover - night at 4 (cid:2) C or for 4 hr at room temperature and secondary antibodies for 1 – 2hratroomtemperature , thenmountedinVectashield ( VectorLaboratories ) for microscopic analysis . For comparison of pMAD levels , larvae of all geno - types analyzed were stained in the same dish . wit null mutants were analyzed as a control for potential crossreactivity with Mad . We used the following antibodies : FITC - conjugated anti - HRP at 1 : 100 ( Jackson ImmunoResearch ) ; mouse anti - NC82 ( bruchpilot ) at 1 : 100 ( E . Buchner ) , rat anti - Nwk at 1 : 1000 ( Coyle et al . , 2004 ) ; rabbit anti - Dap160 and anti - dynamin at 1 : 100 ( Roos and Kelly , 1998 ) ; rabbit anti - GFP at 1 : 500 ( Molecular Probes ) ; rabbit anti - PS1 at 1 : 500 ( Persson et al . , 1998 ) ; rabbit anti - pMAD at 1 : 100 ( Cell Signaling ) and mouse anti - Dlg at 1 : 500 ( Developmental Hybridoma Studies Bank ) . Species - speciﬁc Alexa - 488 and Alexa - 568 ( Molecular Probes ) were used at 1 : 200 . Imaging and Quantiﬁcation Quantiﬁcation of bouton number was performed at NMJ 4 in segments A2 – A4 as described ( Coyle et al . , 2004 ) . The muscle size of all larvae analyzed was similar . Satellite boutons were deﬁned as extensions of ﬁve or fewer boutons emanating from the main branch of the nerve terminal . The same control data setswereusedformultiplecomparisons . Weperformedthestatisticalanalysis by ANOVA and conducted post hoc tests with the appropriate Bonferroni ad - justment for multiple comparisons to ensure an experimentwise simultaneous signiﬁcance level of 0 . 05 . While we conducted each comparison at the re - duced critical p value , we report the signiﬁcance levels at the corresponding experimentwise levels of less than 0 . 05 , less than 0 . 01 , or less than 0 . 001 , by one , two , and three stars , respectively . Error bars denote SEM . Confocal images were obtained on a Bio - Rad Radiance 2100 MP Rainbow mounted onaNikonEclipseTE2000andprocessedinNIHImageJ . Brightnessandcon - trast were adjusted using Adobe Photoshop . Quantiﬁcation of pMAD intensity was performed on confocal images captured with identical settings using NIH ImageJ software . Yeast Two - Hybrid Analysis Yeast two - hybrid experiments were performed using the Clontech Match - maker system according to their protocols . Drop tests were performed by plating 5 m l of serial dilutions of mid - log - phase liquid cultures on appropriate selection media . GST Pull - Downs Nwk , dynamin , Dap160 , and Tkv constructs were cloned into the pGEX - 6P - 3 vectorusingstandardmoleculartechniquesandexpressedinbacteria . Fusion proteins were immobilized on glutathione - Sepharose beads and incubated with cell extracts prepared from C155GAL4 ; UASnwk - RFP or C155GAL4 ; UAStkv - GFP adult ﬂies . Beads were washed three times in lysis buffer . Bound proteinswereelutedandanalyzedbywesternanalysisusingrabbitanti - dsRed ( Clontech ) at 1 : 750 or puriﬁed rabbit anti - GFP ( Abcam ) at 1 : 1000 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Hugo Bellen , Erich Buchner , Graeme Davis , Aaron DiAntonio , Marcos Gonza´lez - Gaita´n , Regis Kelly , Thomas Kornberg , Allen Laughon , SeanSweeney , PetertenDijke , KristiWharton , theBloomingtonStockCenter , and the Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank for generously providing ﬂy stocks and antibodies . We are grateful to members of the Ganetzky lab and Avital Rodal for helpful discussions and to Heather Broihier , Tim Fergestad , and Daniel Miller for critical comments on the manuscript . We also thank Katherine Hannon and Veena Rao for the many dissections they performed during the course of this work and Noah Rozich for assistance with biochem - ical experiments . This research was supported by an NIH grant ( NS - 15390 ) to B . G . and a fellowship from The Jane Cofﬁn Childs Memorial Fund for Medical Research to K . M . O . - G . Received : August 20 , 2007 Revised : January 28 , 2008 Accepted : March 10 , 2008 Published : May 21 , 2008 REFERENCES Aberle , H . , Haghighi , A . P . , Fetter , R . D . , McCabe , B . D . , Magalhaes , T . R . , and Goodman , C . S . ( 2002 ) . wishful thinking encodes a BMP type II receptor that regulates synaptic growth in Drosophila . Neuron 33 , 545 – 558 . Allan , D . W . , St Pierre , S . E . , Miguel - Aliaga , I . , and Thor , S . ( 2003 ) . Speciﬁcation ofneuropeptidecellidentitybytheintegrationofretrogradeBMPsignalingand a combinatorial transcription factor code . Cell 113 , 73 – 86 . Bokel , C . , Schwabedissen , A . , Entchev , E . , Renaud , O . , and Gonzalez - Gaitan , M . ( 2006 ) . Sara endosomes and the maintenance of Dpp signaling levels across mitosis . Science 314 , 1135 – 1139 . Budnik , V . , Zhong , Y . , and Wu , C . F . ( 1990 ) . Morphological plasticity of motor axons in Drosophila mutants with altered excitability . J . Neurosci . 10 , 3754 – 3768 . Chen , Y . , Riese , M . J . , Killinger , M . A . , and Hoffmann , F . M . ( 1998 ) . A genetic screen for modiﬁers of Drosophila decapentaplegic signaling identiﬁes muta - tions in punt , Mothers against dpp and the BMP - 7 homologue , 60A . Develop - ment 125 , 1759 – 1768 . Collins , C . A . , and DiAntonio , A . ( 2007 ) . Synaptic development : insights from Drosophila . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 17 , 35 – 42 . Collins , C . A . , Wairkar , Y . P . , Johnson , S . L . , and DiAntonio , A . ( 2006 ) . Highwire restrains synaptic growth by attenuating a MAP kinase signal . Neuron 51 , 57 – 69 . Conner , S . D . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 2003 ) . Regulated portals of entry into the cell . Nature 422 , 37 – 44 . Coyle , I . P . , Koh , Y . H . , Lee , W . C . , Slind , J . , Fergestad , T . , Littleton , J . T . , and Ganetzky , B . ( 2004 ) . Nervous wreck , an SH3 adaptor protein that interacts with Wsp , regulates synaptic growth in Drosophila . Neuron 41 , 521 – 534 . Di Fiore , P . P . , and De Camilli , P . ( 2001 ) . Endocytosis and signaling . an insep - arable partnership . Cell 106 , 1 – 4 . Dickman , D . K . , Lu , Z . , Meinertzhagen , I . A . , and Schwarz , T . L . ( 2006 ) . Altered synaptic development and active zone spacing in endocytosis mutants . Curr . Biol . 16 , 591 – 598 . Dudu , V . , Bittig , T . , Entchev , E . , Kicheva , A . , Julicher , F . , andGonzalez - Gaitan , M . ( 2006 ) . Postsynaptic mad signaling at the Drosophila neuromuscular junc - tion . Curr . Biol . 16 , 625 – 635 . Emery , G . , Hutterer , A . , Berdnik , D . , Mayer , B . , Wirtz - Peitz , F . , Gaitan , M . G . , andKnoblich , J . A . ( 2005 ) . AsymmetricRab11endosomesregulatedeltarecy - clingandspecifycellfateinthe Drosophila nervoussystem . Cell 122 , 763 – 773 . Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 2003 ) . Actin assembly and endo - cytosis : from yeast to mammals . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 19 , 287 – 332 . Neuron Nwk Downregulates BMP Signaling at Synapses Neuron 58 , 507 – 518 , May 22 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 517 Estes , P . S . , Roos , J . , vanderBliek , A . , Kelly , R . B . , Krishnan , K . S . , andRamas - wami , M . ( 1996 ) . Trafﬁc of dynamin within individual Drosophila synaptic bou - tons relative to compartment - speciﬁc markers . J . Neurosci . 16 , 5443 – 5456 . Haghighi , A . P . , McCabe , B . D . , Fetter , R . D . , Palmer , J . E . , Hom , S . , and Good - man , C . S . ( 2003 ) . Retrograde controlofsynaptictransmissionbypostsynaptic CaMKII at the Drosophila neuromuscular junction . Neuron 39 , 255 – 267 . Hayes , S . , Chawla , A . , and Corvera , S . ( 2002 ) . TGF beta receptor internaliza - tion into EEA1 - enriched early endosomes : role in signaling to Smad2 . J . Cell Biol . 158 , 1239 – 1249 . Hoang , B . , and Chiba , A . ( 2001 ) . Single - cell analysis of Drosophila larval neu - romuscular synapses . Dev . Biol . 229 , 55 – 70 . Hoodless , P . A . , Haerry , T . , Abdollah , S . , Stapleton , M . , O’Connor , M . B . , Atti - sano , L . , andWrana , J . L . ( 1996 ) . MADR1 , aMAD - relatedproteinthatfunctions in BMP2 signaling pathways . Cell 85 , 489 – 500 . Hsiung , F . , Ramirez - Weber , F . A . , Iwaki , D . D . , and Kornberg , T . B . ( 2005 ) . De - pendence of Drosophila wing imaginal disc cytonemes on Decapentaplegic . Nature 437 , 560 – 563 . Hussain , N . K . , Jenna , S . , Glogauer , M . , Quinn , C . C . , Wasiak , S . , Guipponi , M . , Antonarakis , S . E . , Kay , B . K . , Stossel , T . P . , Lamarche - Vane , N . , and McPher - son , P . S . ( 2001 ) . Endocytic protein intersectin - l regulates actin assembly via Cdc42 and N - WASP . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 927 – 932 . Itoh , T . , and De Camilli , P . ( 2006 ) . BAR , F - BAR ( EFC ) and ENTH / ANTH domains in the regulation of membrane - cytosol interfaces and membrane curvature . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1761 , 897 – 912 . Itoh , T . , Erdmann , K . S . , Roux , A . , Habermann , B . , Werner , H . , and De Camilli , P . ( 2005 ) . Dynamin and the actin cytoskeleton cooperatively regulate plasma membrane invagination by BAR and F - BAR proteins . Dev . Cell 9 , 791 – 804 . Jafar - Nejad , H . , Andrews , H . K . , Acar , M . , Bayat , V . , Wirtz - Peitz , F . , Mehta , S . Q . , Knoblich , J . A . , and Bellen , H . J . ( 2005 ) . Sec15 , a component of the exo - cyst , promotes notch signaling during the asymmetric division of Drosophila sensory organ precursors . Dev . Cell 9 , 351 – 363 . Keshishian , H . , andKim , Y . S . ( 2004 ) . Orchestratingdevelopmentandfunction : retrograde BMP signaling in the Drosophila nervous system . Trends Neurosci . 27 , 143 – 147 . Khodosh , R . , Augsburger , A . , Schwarz , T . L . , and Garrity , P . A . ( 2006 ) . Bchs , a BEACH domain protein , antagonizes Rab11 in synapse morphogenesis and other developmental events . Development 133 , 4655 – 4665 . Kim , Y . , andChang , S . ( 2006 ) . Ever - expandingnetworkofdynamin - interacting proteins . Mol . Neurobiol . 34 , 129 – 136 . Koh , T . W . , Verstreken , P . , and Bellen , H . J . ( 2004 ) . Dap160 / intersectin acts as astabilizing scaffold required for synaptic developmentand vesicle endocyto - sis . Neuron 43 , 193 – 205 . Marie , B . , Sweeney , S . T . , Poskanzer , K . E . , Roos , J . , Kelly , R . B . , and Davis , G . W . ( 2004 ) . Dap160 / intersectin scaffolds the periactive zone to achieve high - ﬁdelity endocytosis and normal synaptic growth . Neuron 43 , 207 – 219 . Marques , G . , Bao , H . , Haerry , T . E . , Shimell , M . J . , Duchek , P . , Zhang , B . , and O’Connor , M . B . ( 2002 ) . The Drosophila BMP type II receptor Wishful Thinking regulates neuromuscular synapse morphology and function . Neuron 33 , 529 – 543 . Marrus , S . B . , and DiAntonio , A . ( 2004 ) . Preferential localization of glutamate receptors opposite sites of high presynaptic release . Curr . Biol . 14 , 924 – 931 . McCabe , B . D . , Marques , G . , Haghighi , A . P . , Fetter , R . D . , Crotty , M . L . , Haerry , T . E . , Goodman , C . S . , and O’Connor , M . B . ( 2003 ) . The BMP homolog Gbb provides a retrograde signal that regulates synaptic growth at the Drosophila neuromuscular junction . Neuron 39 , 241 – 254 . McCabe , B . D . , Hom , S . , Aberle , H . , Fetter , R . D . , Marques , G . , Haerry , T . E . , Wan , H . , O’Connor , M . B . , Goodman , C . S . , andHaghighi , A . P . ( 2004 ) . Highwire regulatespresynapticBMPsignalingessentialforsynapticgrowth . Neuron 41 , 891 – 905 . Mitchell , H . , Choudhury , A . , Pagano , R . E . , and Leof , E . B . ( 2004 ) . Ligand - de - pendentand - independenttransforminggrowthfactor - betareceptorrecycling regulated by clathrin - mediated endocytosis and Rab11 . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 4166 – 4178 . Miyazono , K . , Kusanagi , K . , and Inoue , H . ( 2001 ) . Divergence and conver - gence of TGF - beta / BMP signaling . J . Cell . Physiol . 187 , 265 – 276 . Nakayama , H . , Kazama , H . , Nose , A . , and Morimoto - Tanifuji , T . ( 2006 ) . Activity - dependent regulation of synaptic size in Drosophila neuromuscular junctions . J . Neurobiol . 66 , 929 – 939 . Packard , M . , Koo , E . S . , Gorczyca , M . , Sharpe , J . , Cumberledge , S . , and Budnik , V . ( 2002 ) . The Drosophila Wnt , wingless , provides an essential signal for pre - and postsynaptic differentiation . Cell 111 , 319 – 330 . Persson , U . , Izumi , H . , Souchelnytskyi , S . , Itoh , S . , Grimsby , S . , Engstrom , U . , Heldin , C . H . , Funa , K . , andtenDijke , P . ( 1998 ) . TheL45loopintypeIreceptors for TGF - beta family members is a critical determinant in specifying Smad iso - form activation . FEBS Lett . 434 , 83 – 87 . Pielage , J . , Fetter , R . D . , and Davis , G . W . ( 2006 ) . A postsynaptic spectrin scaffold deﬁnes active zone size , spacing , and efﬁcacy at the Drosophila neuromuscular junction . J . Cell Biol . 175 , 491 – 503 . Rawson , J . M . , Lee , M . , Kennedy , E . L . , and Selleck , S . B . ( 2003 ) . Drosophila neuromuscularsynapse assembly andfunctionrequiretheTGF - betatypeIre - ceptorsaxophoneandthetranscriptionfactorMad . J . Neurobiol . 55 , 134 – 150 . Roos , J . , and Kelly , R . B . ( 1998 ) . Dap160 , a neural - speciﬁc Eps15 homology and multiple SH3 domain - containing protein that interacts with Drosophila dy - namin . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 19108 – 19119 . Roos , J . , and Kelly , R . B . ( 1999 ) . The endocytic machinery in nerve terminals surrounds sites of exocytosis . Curr . Biol . 9 , 1411 – 1414 . Saitoe , M . , Schwarz , T . L . , Umbach , J . A . , Gundersen , C . B . , and Kidokoro , Y . ( 2001 ) . Absence of junctional glutamate receptor clusters in Drosophila mu - tants lacking spontaneous transmitter release . Science 293 , 514 – 517 . Schenck , A . , Qurashi , A . , Carrera , P . , Bardoni , B . , Diebold , C . , Schejter , E . , Mandel , J . L . , and Giangrande , A . ( 2004 ) . WAVE / SCAR , a multifunctional com - plex coordinating different aspects of neuronal connectivity . Dev . Biol . 274 , 260 – 270 . Sekelsky , J . J . , Newfeld , S . J . , Raftery , L . A . , Chartoff , E . H . , and Gelbart , W . M . ( 1995 ) . Genetic characterization and cloning of mothers against dpp , a gene required for decapentaplegic function in Drosophila melanogaster . Genetics 139 , 1347 – 1358 . Sigrist , S . J . , Thiel , P . R . , Reiff , D . F . , and Schuster , C . M . ( 2002 ) . Thepostsynap - tic glutamate receptor subunit DGluR - IIA mediates long - term plasticity in Drosophila . J . Neurosci . 22 , 7362 – 7372 . Sigrist , S . J . , Reiff , D . F . , Thiel , P . R . , Steinert , J . R . , and Schuster , C . M . ( 2003 ) . Experience - dependent strengthening of Drosophila neuromuscular junctions . J . Neurosci . 23 , 6546 – 6556 . Smythe , E . , and Ayscough , K . R . ( 2006 ) . Actin regulation in endocytosis . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 4589 – 4598 . Sweeney , S . T . , and Davis , G . W . ( 2002 ) . Unrestricted synaptic growth in spin - ster - a late endosomal protein implicated in TGF - beta - mediated synaptic growth regulation . Neuron 36 , 403 – 416 . Takenawa , T . , and Suetsugu , S . ( 2007 ) . The WASP - WAVE protein network : connecting the membrane to the cytoskeleton . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell . Biol . 8 , 37 – 48 . Tsuneizumi , K . , Nakayama , T . , Kamoshida , Y . , Kornberg , T . B . , Christian , J . L . , andTabata , T . ( 1997 ) . Daughters against dppmodulates dpporganizing activ - ity in Drosophila wing development . Nature 389 , 627 – 631 . Wan , H . I . , DiAntonio , A . , Fetter , R . D . , Bergstrom , K . , Strauss , R . , and Good - man , C . S . ( 2000 ) . Highwire regulates synaptic growth in Drosophila . Neuron 26 , 313 – 329 . Wang , X . , Shaw , W . R . , Tsang , H . T . , Reid , E . , and O’Kane , C . J . ( 2007 ) . Drosophila spichthyin inhibits BMP signaling and regulates synaptic growth and axonal microtubules . Nat . Neurosci . 10 , 177 – 185 . Zamanian , J . L . , and Kelly , R . B . ( 2003 ) . Intersectin 1L guanine nucleotide ex - change activity is regulated by adjacent src homology 3 domains that are also involved in endocytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 1624 – 1637 . Neuron Nwk Downregulates BMP Signaling at Synapses 518 Neuron 58 , 507 – 518 , May 22 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc .