3077 RESEARCH ARTICLE INTRODUCTION Sequences that help to organize chromatin into functional domains can have a profound influence on gene regulation . Enhancers are capable of activating transcription across tens or hundreds of kilobases ( kb ) along a chromosome . Paradoxically , gene - rich genomic regions contain many genes within that distance , without known functional crosstalk . Insulator sequences have been identified that can prevent inappropriate enhancer - promoter ( E - P ) communication , helping to resolve this apparent paradox ( Bushey et al . , 2008 ; Dorman et al . , 2007 ; Gaszner and Felsenfeld , 2006 ; Valenzuela and Kamakaka , 2006 ) . Insulators are typically found between genes , or within complex loci such as the bithorax complex ( BX - C ) ( Maeda and Karch , 2006 ; Maeda and Karch , 2007 ) , where they act in combination with other sequences to orchestrate complex regulatory programs during development . Underlying mechanisms appear to involve the formation of loops , possibly organizing chromatin into functionally isolated domains ( Bushey et al . , 2008 ; Dorman et al . , 2007 ; Gaszner and Felsenfeld , 2006 ; Valenzuela and Kamakaka , 2006 ) . The scs and scs (cid:2) insulators ( Udvardy et al . , 1985 ) are each bound by distinct protein complexes ( Gaszner et al . , 1999 ; Hart et al . , 1997 ; Zhao et al . , 1995 ) that interact with each other , resulting in a chromosomal loop that encompasses the 87A7 hsp70 genes ( Blanton et al . , 2003 ) . The gypsy transposon exhibits enhancer - blocking activity ( Geyer and Corces , 1992 ; Geyer et al . , 1988 ; Modolell et al . , 1983 ; Peifer and Bender , 1988 ) that requires the Suppressor of Hairy wing protein ( Parnell et al . , 2006 ; Ramos et al . , 2006 ; Spana et al . , 1988 ) , as well as CP190 and Mod ( mdg ) 4 , which form a complex ( Gause et al . , 2001 ; Ghosh et al . , 2001 ; Pai et al . , 2004 ) . Vertebrate insulators often bind the CTCF protein ( Bell and Felsenfeld , 2000 ; Bell et al . , 1999 ; Hark et al . , 2000 ; Kanduri et al . , 2000 ) , and CTCF interacts with cohesins ( Parelho et al . , 2008 ; Wendt et al . , 2008 ) , an interaction that correlates with its enhancer - blocking activity . Insulators can cooperate with other regulatory sequences . In the BX - C , gene activities in early embryos are differentially regulated , and these patterns of gene activity are maintained through Polycomb - and Trithorax - response elements ( PREs and TREs , respectively ) ( Maeda and Karch , 2006 ) . The regulatory regions Mcp ( Busturia et al . , 1997 ; Karch et al . , 1994 ; Muller et al . , 1999 ) , Fab - 7 ( Gyurkovics et al . , 1990 ; Karch et al . , 1994 ; Mihaly et al . , 1997 ) and Fab - 8 ( Barges et al . , 2000 ; Zhou et al . , 1999 ) each contain closely linked PRE / TREs and insulators . CTCF binds to Mcp and Fab - 8 ( Holohan et al . , 2007 ) , whereas Fab - 7 binds other factors ( Aoki et al . , 2008 ; Schweinsberg and Schedl , 2004 ) . CTCF can facilitate repressive interactions between an insulator and a promoter that involve Polycomb group ( PcG ) complexes ( Li et al . , 2008 ) . In addition , promoter targeting sequences can overcome insulator activity to maintain an active state ( Zhou and Levine , 1999 ) , and promoter specificity sequences , such as the promoter - tethering element in Abdominal - B ( Akbari et al . , 2008 ) , facilitate specific E - P interactions . Loop formation by insulators ( Cleard et al . , 2006 ) and PRE / TREs ( Lanzuolo et al . , 2007 ) may be an essential component of maintaining proper gene expression through development . The DNA - binding GAGA factor , which binds to many PRE / TREs , can also contribute to enhancer blocking ( Belozerov et al . , 2003 ; Ohtsuki and Levine , 1998 ; Schweinsberg et al . , 2004 ; Schweinsberg and Schedl , 2004 ) . Loop attachment sites may block the propagation along the DNA of chromatin modifications or protein complexes that enhance transcription ( Bushey et al . , 2008 ; Dorman et al . , 2007 ; Gaszner and Felsenfeld , 2006 ; Valenzuela and Kamakaka , 2006 ) . Much remains to be discovered concerning how chromosomal architecture affects gene expression , and how regulatory elements that control this architecture carry out their functions . In Drosophila , it has been observed that some sequences cause transgenes to insert non - randomly in the genome , near the site of origin of those sequences . This transgene homing has been observed for regions of engrailed ( Hama et al . , 1990 ; Kassis , 2002 ; Kassis et A chromatin insulator mediates transgene homing and very long - range enhancer - promoter communication Miki Fujioka , Xian Wu and James B . Jaynes * Insulator sequences help to organize the genome into discrete functional regions by preventing inappropriate cross - regulation . This is thought to be mediated in part through associations with other insulators located elsewhere in the genome . Enhancers that normally drive Drosophila even skipped ( eve ) expression are located closer to the TER94 transcription start site than to that of eve . We discovered that the region between these genes has enhancer - blocking activity , and that this insulator region also mediates homing of P - element transgenes to the eve - TER94 genomic neighborhood . Localization of these activities to within 0 . 6 kb failed to separate them . Importantly , homed transgenic promoters respond to endogenous eve enhancers from great distances , and this long - range communication depends on the homing / insulator region , which we call Homie . We also find that the eve promoter contributes to long - distance communication . However , even the basal hsp70 promoter can communicate with eve enhancers across distances of several megabases , when the communication is mediated by Homie . These studies show that , while Homie blocks enhancer - promoter communication at short range , it facilitates long - range communication between distant genomic regions , possibly by organizing a large chromosomal loop between endogenous and transgenic Homies . KEY WORDS : Insulator , Homing , Enhancer blocking , Epigenetics , Even skipped , Drosophila Development 136 , 3077 - 3087 ( 2009 ) doi : 10 . 1242 / dev . 036467 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and the Kimmel Cancer Center , Thomas Jefferson University , Philadelphia , PA 19107 , USA . * Author for correspondence ( jaynes @ jci . tju . edu ) Accepted 7 July 2009 D E V E L O P M E N T 3078 al . , 1992 ) , linotte ( Taillebourg and Dura , 1999 ) , also known as derailed , and the BX - C ( Bender and Hudson , 2000 ) . The BX - C homing element may contain an insulator that separates two enhancer regions ( Bender and Hudson , 2000 ) , whereas for engrailed , the homing element is associated with a PRE ( Kwon et al . , 2009 ) . Homed reporter transgenes have been seen to communicate with enhancers from the endogenous locus across several other genes ( Devido et al . , 2008 ; Hama et al . , 1990 ; Kassis et al . , 1992 ; Kwon et al . , 2009 ) . The Drosophila even skipped ( eve ) locus has been particularly well characterized ( Fujioka et al . , 1999 ; Goto et al . , 1989 ; Harding et al . , 1989 ; Sackerson et al . , 1999 ; Small et al . , 1992 ; Small et al . , 1996 ) , including the identification of a PRE at its 3 (cid:2) end ( Fujioka et al . , 2008 ; Oktaba et al . , 2008 ) . The 3 (cid:2) - adjacent gene , TER94 ( Leon and McKearin , 1999 ; Pinter et al . , 1998 ; Ruden et al . , 2000 ) , is expressed in the syncytial blastoderm and , by embryonic stage 11 , throughout the central nervous system ( CNS ; this study and Berkeley Drosophila Genome Project ) ( Tomancak et al . , 2002 ) . Several of the eve enhancers are close to TER94 , yet TER94 is not expressed in an eve pattern ( or vice versa ) . We found that the region between these genes has enhancer - blocking activity . The same region also mediates transgene homing , and homed transgenes communicate with the endogenous eve enhancers . Long - range E - P communication occurs from as far away as 3300 kb . This E - P communication requires the insulator / homing region in the transgene , but not the PRE . Thus , regulatory interactions between enhancers and promoters can occur between linearly distant genomic regions , and such interactions can be mediated by sequences with insulator properties that also mediate transgene homing . MATERIALS AND METHODS Plasmid construction and transgenic analysis All sequence coordinates in this study are relative to the transcription start site of eve ( + 1 ) ( Frasch et al . , 1988 ) , unless otherwise stated . Details of eZ , hZ , eZ46 - 15W and eZAR - MeW constructs , and derivatives of pCfhL , are available on request . For the Φ C31 - RMCE ( Bateman et al . , 2006 ) attP target plasmid , two attP sequences derived from pUAST - P2 ( Bateman et al . , 2006 ) were inserted ( in opposite orientations ) into eZRR11K , flanking eve - lacZ and mini - white . To replace transgenic attP - flanked targets , various donor regions ( described in the Results section ) were cloned into attB Δ 2 ( Fujioka et al . , 2008 ) , a modified piB - GFP plasmid ( Bateman et al . , 2006 ) . RMCE events were identified by loss of mini - white - dependent eye color , and confirmed by PCR . P - element insertion sites were identified by inverse PCR ( Ochman et al . , 1988 ; Huang et al . , 2000 ) and homed sites were confirmed using one PCR primer from the flanking genomic sequence and one from within the P - element . Transgenesis ( Fujioka et al . , 2000 ; Rubin and Spradling , 1982 ) , in situ hybridization and antibody staining ( Fujioka et al . , 1999 ) were performed as previously described . RESULTSEnhancer blocking by the eve - TER94 border region Although some eve enhancers are closer to the TER94 promoter than to the eve promoter , the expression patterns of the two genes are distinctive ( Fig . 1 ) . TER94 is expressed ubiquitously in embryos , whereas eve is expressed in a discrete pattern in several tissues . Based on this , we tested whether the border region acts as an enhancer - blocking insulator . We began by examining the region from + 8 . 4 to + 10 . 5 kb ( SR105 ) in three enhancer - blocking assay constructs . One of these constructs ( eZ46 - 15W ) contains eve early - stripe enhancers ( for stripes 4 + 6 , 1 and 5 ) , an eve - promoter - lacZ reporter gene ( eZ ) , and the mini - white gene ( W ) , with the two promoters divergently transcribed . The stripe 4 + 6 enhancer is proximal to the eve - promoter - lacZ reporter , and the stripe 1 and 5 enhancers are proximal to mini - white . Transgenes carrying this construct showed expression of both reporter genes in all four stripes , even when a 2 kb stretch of phage λ DNA was inserted between the two stripe enhancers ( Fig . 2A , B ) . By contrast , when SR105 was placed between the enhancers , lacZ was expressed strongly in stripes 4 and 6 , but only very weakly ( five out of seven lines ) or not at all ( two out of seven lines ) in stripes 1 and 5 , whereas mini - white was expressed in the complementary pattern ( Fig . 2C , D ) , showing that SR105 has enhancer - blocking activity . Some variation in blocking activity with the site of insertion is expected based on studies with other insulators ( Belozerov et al . , 2003 ; Majumder and Cai , 2003 ) . Next , we tested whether this enhancer - blocking region works with heterologous elements , using a standard vector ( pCfhL ) . This vector consists of the fushi tarazu ( ftz ) neuronal enhancer proximal to a heat shock promoter - lacZ reporter gene , and the ftz 7 - stripe element proximal to mini - white ( Hagstrom et al . , 1996 ) . When either SR105 ( three lines ) or a smaller element of 1 . 3 kb ( R105 , from + 9 . 2 to + 10 . 5 kb ; eight lines ) was inserted between the two enhancers , each activated the proximal reporter gene much more strongly than the distal one ( Fig . 2E - H ) . Again , we observed some minor variation in the strength of enhancer blocking with the site of insertion ( not shown ) , but in each case , the element specifically reduced expression driven by the distal enhancer . Thus , this enhancer - blocking insulator can function with heterologous E - P combinations . Finally , we tested enhancer - blocking activity at later embryonic stages using a construct ( eZAR - MeW ) with the eve anal plate ring ( AR ) enhancer proximal to the same eve - promoter - lacZ reporter ( eZ ) described above for eZ46 - 15W , and the eve mesodermal enhancer proximal to mini - white . When SR105 was placed between these two enhancers , lacZ was expressed in the AR but not the RESEARCH ARTICLE Development 136 ( 18 ) Fig . 1 . The eve and TER94 expression patterns are distinct . Staged Drosophila embryos were subjected to in situ hybridization against eve ( A - D ) or TER94 ( E - H ) . Stage 4 ( A , E ) and stage 11 ( B , F ) embryos , and lateral ( C , G ) and ventral ( D , H ) views of stage 13 embryos . Bottom panel : map of the eve locus and 3 (cid:2) border region . The start sites and direction of transcription of eve and TER94 are shown as arrows . Green and blue boxes , eve enhancers ; yellow box , a PRE ( Fujioka et al . , 2008 ) ; red box , the core insulator / homing element . D E V E L O P M E N T mesoderm ( Fig . 2I ) , whereas mini - white was expressed in the mesoderm but not the AR ( Fig . 2J ) . By contrast , when λ DNA was inserted between the two enhancers , both reporters were expressed in both patterns ( Fig . 2K , L ) . Thus , the directional enhancer - blocking activity of SR105 is also functional at later stages of embryogenesis . Enhancer blocking depends on the continued presence of the element When either SR105 ( data not shown ) or the smaller R105 sequence ( Fig . 2M ) was flanked by FLP recombination target ( FRT ) sites ( Golic and Lindquist , 1989 ) in the eZAR - MeW construct , enhancer - blocking activity was the same as for SR105 . After subsequent removal of the element through FLP - mediated recombination , lacZ expression was observed in both tissues ( Fig . 2N ) . This rules out the possibility that the apparent enhancer blocking is due to transgenes targeted to genomic sites that inactivate one reporter gene but not the other . Enhancer blocking conferred by a 600 bp element We dissected the insulator first of all by deleting from each end . The region from + 9 . 2 to + 10 . 0 kb ( Fig . 3 , R100 ) retained activity . Then , internal deletions of ~ 100 bp were made ( Fig . 3 ) . We saw three distinct levels of activity . Whereas some regions blocked E - P communication completely in both directions , others blocked the interaction between the AR enhancer and mini - white completely , while only partially blocking lacZ expression in the mesoderm . This partial blocking could be further quantified based on the developmental stage at which mesodermal β - galactosidase ( β - gal ) accumulated to detectable levels . Strong blocking caused a delay until embryonic stages 13 - 14 , whereas weak blocking allowed an earlier appearance of mesodermal β - gal ( at stages 11 - 12 ) . Furthermore , there was some variation in activity with the site of insertion , as detailed in Fig . 3 . Deletion of subregions A - E ( see Fig . 3 ) individually caused little or no reduction in activity . By contrast , deletion of all five subregions together strongly reduced activity ( Δ AE , Fig . 3 ) . Deletion of region F ( Δ F ) resulted in only weak activity in most lines . Nonetheless , two non - overlapping regions , one containing region F ( Δ AE ) and the other not ( Δ FH ) , both showed partial activity ( Fig . 3 ) . Thus , multiple small regions contribute to activity . R100 contains the TER94 start site and , with some other insulators , a region near a transcription start site is needed for enhancer blocking ( Avramova and Tikhonov , 1999 ; Kellum and Schedl , 1992 ; Kuhn et al . , 2004 ) . Here , subregion G contains the start site , and although it might contribute to enhancer blocking , it is not required ( Δ GH , Fig . 3 ) . Δ GH ends 45 bp upstream of the TER94 start site , yet retains strong activity . Thus , although it seems likely that the functional region overlaps with TER94 regulatory sequences , transcription initiation within the insulator is apparently not required for enhancer blocking . This conclusion is reinforced by the fact that subregion A - F ( Δ GH ) , which does not include the TER94 start site , retains considerably more activity than subregion F - H ( Δ AE ) , which spans the start site , and includes more than 100 bp of upstream sequence . The 3 (cid:2) end of the eve locus contains a homing element ; homed transgenes engage in long - range enhancer - promoter communication While investigating activities in the border region between eve and TER94 , we created a transgene carrying sequences from + 7 . 9 to + 11 . 3 kb driving the eve - promoter - lacZ reporter ( RR11K , Fig . 3 ) . This region contains a single eve enhancer ( Fujioka et al . , 1999 ) , the eve 3 (cid:2) PRE ( Fujioka et al . , 2008 ) and the 5 (cid:2) portion of TER94 ( FlyBase ) ( Tweedie et al . , 2009 ) . Even though this construct contains only one eve enhancer , which is active only in the RP2 and a / pCC cells of the CNS , many lines carrying it nonetheless showed β - gal expression in a full eve pattern ( Fig . 4A - D ) . Inverse PCR revealed that these transgenes had inserted in the chromosomal neighborhood of the eve locus ( within 130 kb of eve , green arrowheads in Fig . 5A ) . We see this phenomenon only when transgenes are inserted in the eve neighborhood . Thus , the transgenic promoter is communicating with endogenous eve enhancers over large distances , across a number of other genes ( Fig . 5A ) . The eve locus has been analyzed for enhancer activities in our lab using hundreds of transgenic lines with the same reporter ( Fig . 4 , middle 3079 RESEARCH ARTICLE Very long - range insulator effects Fig . 2 . The region between eve and TER94 has enhancer - blocking activity . Top diagram : enhancer - blocking test vector ( eZ46 - 15W ) for A - D . The tested sequence ( red box marked ‘insul ? ’ ) is flanked by two distinct enhancers ( green boxes ) , upstream of divergently transcribed reporter genes ( lacZ and mini - white ) . Middle ( pCfhL ) and lower ( eZAR - MeW ) diagrams , test vectors for E - H and I - N , respectively , have the same design , with different enhancers . The ‘insul ? ’ test sequence is shown on the left for each row : either λ phage DNA ( negative control ) , SR105 or R105 ( the latter flanked by FRT sites ) . SR105 and R105 were in the same orientation relative to the direction of transcription of mini - white as they normally are relative to that of eve ( and TER94 ) . Transgenic embryos carrying these constructs were subjected to in situ hybridization against lacZ or white . ( A - D ) Stage 5 embryos carrying eZ46 - 15W . ( E - H ) Stage 6 ( E , F ) or stage 11 ( G , H ) embryos carrying pCfhL . ( I - N ) Stage 13 embryos carrying eZAR - MeW . Arrows and arrowheads indicate positions of mesodermal and AR expression , respectively . The lateral ectopic expression in J is not relevant for this assay , and is possibly due to a position effect . With R105 flanked by FRT sites as ‘insul ? ’ , lacZ was driven only by the proximal AR enhancer ( M ) . When R105 was removed by FLP - mediated recombination in vivo , activation by the distal mesodermal enhancer is seen ( N , arrows ) . D E V E L O P M E N T 3080 diagram ) , but we have never before observed this phenomenon . This suggested that both homing activity and long - range E - P communication were conferred by the region from + 7 . 9 to + 11 . 3 kb , which also contains the insulator . The homing / insulator element can mediate strong E - P communication from over 170 kb away To further investigate long - range E - P communication , lacZ reporter - carrying transgenes without eve stripe , mesodermal or AR enhancers were used ( listed above the dashed line in Fig . 3 ) . Out of 171 lines obtained with these constructs , 143 were examined for an eve - like pattern throughout embryogenesis , and 13 showed such a pattern ( Fig . 4A - D ) . All 13 were localized by inverse PCR to between ~ 140 kb upstream and 180 kb downstream of eve ( Fig . 5A , narrow green and blue arrowheads ) . We refer to lines inserted within this neighborhood of eve as ‘homed’ . An additional 44 of these lines that were inserted on the second chromosome but did not show an eve - like pattern were localized by inverse PCR , and three of them were found to be homed ( narrow yellow and red arrowheads , Fig . 5A ) . One of these showed β - gal expression only in the AR ( CR105 ) , whereas the other two showed no eve - like expression . One of these two carried the hsp70 basal promoter - lacZ reporter ( SR105 ) , and the other carried eve - promoter - lacZ ( RR11K ) . In the 13 homed lines that show an eve - like lacZ pattern , expression begins around stage 5 , with the early eve stripe pattern , and is followed by later eve - like expression in both the mesoderm and AR ( Fig . 4A - RESEARCH ARTICLE Development 136 ( 18 ) Fig . 3 . Enhancer - blocking and homing activity conferred by the eve - TER94 border region . Diagrams on the left represent the eve - TER94 border region ( top ) , and subregions ( line diagrams below ) tested for enhancer - blocking and homing activity . Distances ( in kb ) are relative to the eve transcription start site . Green box , a PRE ; orange boxes , TER94 exons ; blue box , RP2 enhancer . R100 was subdivided into eight ~ 100 bp regions ( A - H ) , and these were deleted individually or in combination , as indicated . Columns on the right list the number of independent transgenic insertion lines tested for either enhancer - blocking activity or homing , as well as the number of lines found to be homed . Enhancer blocking : below the dotted line , the region diagrammed on the left was present in an eZAR - MeW transgene , analyzed as shown in Fig . 2I - N . Colored bars indicate the percentage of lines showing enhancer blocking , with either complete , strong , or weak activity ( see key ) . Those with ‘complete’ activity showed full enhancer blocking in both directions , i . e . neither lacZ nor mini - white expression driven by the distal enhancer was detected . Those lines in which lacZ expression driven by the distal ( mesodermal ) enhancer led to detectable lacZ levels only at later stages ( embryonic stages 13 - 14 ) and showed no mini - white expression driven by the distal ( AR ) enhancer were considered to have ‘strong’ activity . Those in which mesodermal lacZ accumulated to detectable levels by stage 11 - 12 but showed no AR mini - white expression were counted as having ‘weak’ activity . Those that showed both early mesodermal lacZ and AR mini - white expression were considered to have no activity ( ‘none’ ) . In four of the SR105 lines ( out of 15 ) , the element was between the eve - promoter - lacZ reporter and the two enhancers . Each of these lines showed no lacZ expression , which was counted as complete enhancer blocking ( mini - white was driven by both enhancers , as expected ) . Homing : under ‘homed’ is the number of independent insertions carrying the region on the left that were within 200 kb of eve . Under ‘tested’ is the number of lines stained for β - gal expression ; the total number of lines established is in parentheses . Above the dotted line , the region diagrammed on the left was present upstream of an eve - promoter - lacZ reporter in a P - element transgene , except for 11 of the 19 SR105 lines , which carried the hsp70 - lacZ reporter ( one of each was homed ) . Most of the homed lines were discovered to be homed because they expressed β - gal in an eve pattern . The locations of these and of a subset of the ‘non - homed’ insertions were determined by inverse PCR and sequencing . Overall , 57 eZ , 7 hsp70 - lacZ and 77 eZAR - MeW insertions that were found by genetic mapping to be on the second chromosome were localized in this way ( listed in Table S1 in the supplementary material ) . As not all of the second chromosome lines were localized by inverse PCR , the number of homed lines might be an underestimate , i . e . there might be additional homed lines among those that do not express β - gal in an eve - like pattern . In most cases , untested lines were not stained because they were not healthy . In other cases , a subset of healthy lines was chosen at random for analysis . Details of insulator / homing regions in eZ constructs : in most cases , the 5 (cid:2) end of the region ( i . e . the end that is normally closer to eve ) was oriented towards the eve - lacZ reporter ; exceptions are noted below . RR11K lines ( which contain eZ constructs ) include both attP lines ( 4 out of 49 established lines found to be homed ) and non - attP lines ( 5 / 43 homed ) . The non - attP RR11K lines include : the wild - type element in the orientation described above ( 3 / 10 homed ) ; the wild - type element in the opposite orientation ( 0 / 5 homed ) ; and modified elements with sequence alterations within the PRE , which is not required for either enhancer blocking or homing ( Fujioka et al . , 2008 ) ( 2 / 28 homed ) . NR11K includes lines with the region in the normal orientation ( 0 / 9 homed ) and lines with the inverted orientation ( 1 / 17 homed ) . RR105 include a homed transgene with an eGFP reporter , which expresses GFP in an eve - like pattern ( 1 / 10 homed ) . D E V E L O P M E N T D ) . Endogenous eve is also expressed in RP2 , a / pCC , CQ / U and EL neurons . Although most of these transgenic insertions ( RR11K and RR105 ; Fig . 3 ) carry the RP2 + a / pCC enhancer ( so that expression in these neurons cannot be attributed to the endogenous enhancer ) , even those that do not carry this enhancer ( NR11K , CR105 and SR105 ; Fig . 3 ) express β - gal in these neurons . Furthermore , expression of β - gal is also seen in CQ / U and EL neurons , which is attributable only to communication with endogenous eve enhancers . This expression is often weaker and delayed in its appearance relative to endogenous eve expression . Overall , most transgenic insertions within the ‘homed’ region communicate with all of the endogenous eve enhancers , with some variation in the strength of the interaction . All of those insertions that communicate carry the eve - promoter - lacZ reporter , whereas the one that carries hsp70 - lacZ ( described above ) does not . This suggested that promoter specificity might contribute to long - range E - P communication , an idea that we test below . 3081 RESEARCH ARTICLE Very long - range insulator effects Fig . 4 . The eve - TER94 insulator is required for , and the eve promoter contributes to , long - range E - P communication . Staged embryos were subjected to anti - β - gal staining , except Q and R , which show anti - Eve staining ( orange ) with either lacZ ( Q ) or CG1623 ( R ) RNA in situ hybridization ( blue ) . ( A - D ) RR11K - I ( see Table S1 in the supplementary material ; diagram below A , B ) inserted in the third exon of TER94 . Note eve - like stripe ( A , B ) , mesodermal ( arrows in C ) , AR ( arrowheads in C and D ) and CNS ( D ) expression . Expression in cells near the midline is from the RP2 + a / pCC enhancer ( transgenic and / or endogenous ) , and expression away from the midline , indicated by arrows in D , is from the endogenous eve U / CQ and EL enhancers ( compare with Fig . 1C , D ) . ( E ) attP - eZRR11K - II , inserted at – 1652 kb ( relative to the eve start site ; see Table S1 in the supplementary material ) . Note that although AR expression is robust ( arrowhead ) , mesodermal expression is weaker ( arrows ; it becomes clearly detectable only at this slightly later stage relative to C , M and U ) . ( F ) attP - eZRR11K - NN , inserted at – 3322 kb ( see Table S1 in the supplementary material ) . Note that AR expression is robust ( arrowhead ) but that , unlike in D , off - midline CNS expression is not clearly detectable . ( G - J ) SR105 with the eve - promoter - lacZ reporter ( diagram below K , L ) inserted on chromosome 1 . Note that there is no eve - like expression , showing that the eve insulator and promoter do not have the ability to drive expression unless they communicate with endogenous enhancers . ( K - N ) The original attP - RR11K insertion at – 142 kb ( attP - eZRR11K - X , which showed indistinguishable expression ) was replaced by SR105 with the eve - promoter - lacZ reporter ( diagram below K , L ) . This and other replacements also differed from the original insertion in not having the mini - white gene . Note the eve - like expression , as seen in A - D . ( O - R ) The same attP insertion was replaced by the eve - promoter - lacZ reporter without a homing / insulator element ( diagram to the left of Q ) . Note the lack of eve - like expression , showing that the insulator is required for long - range E - P communication . Instead , lateral and midline CNS expression ( blue arrows ) in non - eve - expressing cells is seen . This was confirmed by double staining for Eve protein and lacZ RNA ( Q , shown at higher magnification ) . The same cells express the gene into which the transgene is inserted ( R ) , showing that without the insulator , the reporter acts as a typical enhancer trap . ( S - V ) The same attP insertion was replaced by the eve - promoter - lacZ reporter with the 600 bp Δ AB region ( diagram below S , T ; see Fig . 3 ) . Note that expression is like that in A - D and K - N , showing that this minimal insulator supports long - range E - P communication . ( W , X ) The same – 142 kb attP insertion was replaced by SR105 with the hsp70 - lacZ reporter ( diagram to the lower left of W ) . Note that expression in the mesoderm ( arrows ) and AR ( arrowhead ) is weaker , and that expression in the CNS ( X ) is similar to that of TER94 ( compare with Fig . 1H ) . Early stripe expression was barely detectable ( not shown ) . D E V E L O P M E N T 3082 Transgene clustering outside the ‘homed’ region The tendency of the homing element to induce transgene insertion in a larger region of chromosome 2R might be observed as an increased frequency of insertion on the entire second chromosome . Based on a random sampling of transgenes not carrying this region from previous studies in our laboratory , the second chromosome insertion frequency is 42 % ( based on 485 lines ) . By contrast , even when homed lines are excluded , 47 % of transgenes carrying the homing region inserted on the second chromosome ( 211 out of 446 lines obtained ) . As can be seen in Fig . 5B , many of these insertions occurred just centromere proximal from the ‘homed’ region , and there are also a number of other regions where several insertion sites are clustered . Within these clusters on the second chromosome , there are five regions ( outside the ‘homed’ region ) where two or more insertions occurred within 2 . 5 kb , suggesting that the homing element might be tethering to regions other than the eve - TER94 locus . It will be interesting to determine whether these regions harbor insulators . It is also noteworthy that within the ‘homed’ region , four insertions are within 2 kb of each other near the promoter of the Mef2 gene , ~ 20 kb upstream of the eve promoter ( Fig . 5A ; see Table S1 in the supplementary material ) . Such regions might bind protein complexes that interact with the homing element , facilitating transgene insertion and also organizing chromosomal architecture in developing tissues . The homing / insulator element can mediate E - P communication from 3300 kb away In addition to homed insertions , there is also clustering of insertions in a larger region of chromosome 2R , mostly centromere proximal from eve . Within this larger region , many lines showed communication with the endogenous eve AR and mesodermal enhancers ( Fig . 5B ) . Out of the aforementioned 143 lines examined for eve - like β - gal expression , ten that were not homed ( green triangles , Fig . 5B ) showed AR expression ( Fig . 4E , F ) , and in some cases eve - like mesodermal expression ( Fig . 4E ) , but not stripe or CNS ( CQ / U and EL neuronal ) expression . Two of these lines carried hsp70 - lacZ , and eight carried eve - promoter - lacZ . At least nine of these ten lines were inserted on chromosome 2R , within 3400 kb of eve ( but outside the ‘homed’ region ) ; the other line could not be localized by inverse PCR . Among these 143 lines , three others were also found to be within this distance of eve , but did not show β - gal expression with any aspect of the eve pattern . Insertions on chromosomes 1 , 2L and 3 were also examined , and none showed eve - like expression ( Fig . 4G - J ) . The other insertions in this region ( shown in Fig . 5B as black diamonds ) carried the AR and mesodermal enhancers ( in the context of the eZAR - MeW enhancer - blocking construct ) , preventing the determination of whether they communicate with the endogenous eve enhancers . Conversely , the possibility of long - range E - P communication resulted in ambiguity as to whether transgenic eve - promoter - lacZ reporters inserted in this part of the genome were driven by transgenic or endogenous enhancers . Therefore , these lines were not considered in the analysis of enhancer blocking . The insulator mediates homing The transgenes constructed for the dissection of enhancer - blocking activity were also tested for homing activity and long - range E - P communication ( Figs 3 and 5 ) . We found that there is a close correlation among the required regions for these activities . Thus , the 600 bp Δ AB construct , which retains clear enhancer - blocking activity , RESEARCH ARTICLE Development 136 ( 18 ) Fig . 5 . Insertion sites of transgenes carrying the insulator / homing region . ( A ) Genetic map covering 350 kb of chromosome 2R , from 5700 to 6050 kb . The transcription start site of eve ( at 5867 kb on this scale ) is marked with a vertical gray line . Transcription units ( as seen in FlyBase ) are shown as blue boxes . Insertion sites of homed lines are indicated by narrow arrowheads for eZ and hsp70 - lacZ constructs ( above the dotted line in Fig . 3 ) , and wide arrowheads for eZAR - MeW constructs ( below the dotted line in Fig . 3 ) . Colors indicate the following : green , transgenes expressing β - gal in an essentially complete eve pattern ; blue , attP RR11K insertions that also show an eve - like pattern ; red , an SR105 transgene with an hsp70 - lacZ reporter not expressed in an eve - like pattern ; yellow ( near the red arrowhead ) , CR105 with an eve - promoter - lacZ reporter that gave expression only in the AR ; yellow ( just upstream of the eve start site ) , an attP - RR11K insertion that does not give an eve - like β - gal expression . ( B ) Distribution of insertion sites of eZ and eZAR - MeW transgenes on the second chromosome . The region shown in A is bracketed by two vertical green lines . Note that insertion sites are concentrated near the eve locus , and transgenes that communicate with endogenous eve ( green arrowheads ) are up to 3300 kb away . Most other insertion lines within this region ( all but three of the black diamonds ) carry the AR and mesodermal eve enhancers ( eZAR - MeW ) , obscuring potential long - range interactions ( see text ) . Gray squares correspond to the most likely locations of transgenes where inverse PCR - derived sequences gave somewhat ambiguous results ( see Table S1 in the supplementary material ) . D E V E L O P M E N T is also sufficient for homing and long - range E - P communication , as two homed lines were obtained with this construct ( out of 18 tested , Fig . 3 ) , and each showed communication with the endogenous eve enhancers ( Fig . 4S - V ) . Furthermore , out of 210 transgenes tested for homing that carry all or part of the R100 insulator ( R100 and those below it in Fig . 3 ) , nine ( 4 . 3 % ) were homed . These data show that the eve 3 (cid:2) border region confers three distinct activities , enhancer blocking , homing and long - range E - P communication . The analysis described below further addresses the extent to which these activities are related . The homing / insulator element mediates long - range E - P communication To analyze long - range E - P communication further , we used Φ C31 recombinase - mediated cassette exchange ( RMCE ) . In this system , an attB - carrying insertion plasmid can replace an existing attP insertion in a target line , allowing modified elements to be compared in the same chromosomal environment ( Bateman et al . , 2006 ; Groth et al . , 2004 ) . To create homed target sites , an attP cassette carrying the eve - promoter - lacZ reporter and the homing region from + 7 . 9 to + 11 . 3 kb ( RR11K ; top diagram in Fig . 4 ) was inserted by conventional P - element transformation . Two resulting lines inserted at – 142 and + 180 kb ( Fig . 5A , blue arrowheads ) were used to dissect the requirements for long - range E - P communication . These lines showed β - gal expression in an eve - like pattern throughout embryogenesis ( similar to Fig . 4K - N ; data not shown ) . When each of these insertions was replaced by one that lacked the homing / insulator element , β - gal expression in an eve - like pattern was completely lost ( Fig . 4O , P ) . Instead , expression was observed in non - eve - expressing cells of the CNS , suggesting that the transgenic reporter is responding to non - eve enhancers near the insertion site . This was verified for both insertion sites ( Fig . 4Q , R ; see Fig . S1 in the supplementary material ; data not shown ) . Thus , the transgenic enhancer - blocking element is required for long - range communication with endogenous eve enhancers . We next tested whether smaller regions with insulator activity support long - range E - P communication . When we exchanged in the SR105 insulator / homing region , the eve - like β - gal pattern was maintained ( Fig . 4K - N ) . In this version of RMCE , either direction of insertion is possible ( Bateman et al . , 2006 ) . Although one direction of the modified insertion at – 142 kb showed increased ectopic β - gal expression in some cells ( see Fig . S1 in the supplementary material ) , in no case were the eve aspects of pattern affected . Thus , SR105 fully supports long - range E - P communication . We also exchanged both insertions with one carrying the minimal 600 bp insulator ( Δ AB , Fig . 3 ) . The β - gal pattern was not affected ( Fig . 4S - V ; see Fig . S1 in the supplementary material ) , showing that the minimal insulator is sufficient for long - range E - P communication . Promoter specificity in long - range communication with eve enhancers To test whether the transgenic eve promoter contributes to long - range E - P communication , a cassette carrying hsp70 - lacZ ( along with the SR105 insulator / homing element ) was exchanged into both attP target sites . Compared with the same cassette carrying eve - promoter - lacZ , the early striped pattern was severely weakened ( see Fig . S1 in the supplementary material ; data not shown ) , and AR and mesoderm expression were delayed and at a reduced intensity ( Fig . 4W ; see Fig . S1 in the supplementary material ) . Moreover , in the CNS , β - gal was expressed ubiquitously , which is similar to the expression of TER94 ( Fig . 4X , compare with Fig . 1H ) . These data indicate that , although the insulator / homing region is required for long - range E - P communication , the transgenic eve promoter also contributes to the efficient communication with endogenous eve enhancers . These data further suggest that the eve promoter communicates preferentially with eve enhancers over those of TER94 . However , as described above , we have also seen that this basal hsp70 promoter can communicate with the endogenous eve AR and mesodermal enhancers over much greater distances ( Fig . 4E , F ) , when present in a transgene with the insulator / homing element . Thus , the insulator / homing element is the primary determinant of long - range E - P communication , and the eve promoter contributes to its strength and enhancer preference . DISCUSSIONAn insulator separates eve and TER94 Some of the eve enhancers are close to the TER94 promoter , yet they do not activate TER94 . Although TER94 is expressed nearly ubiquitously in embryos , it is expressed only at a low level in the mesoderm and anal plate , where eve expression is high in a subset of cells , making it unlikely that eve enhancers acting on TER94 would be masked by this expression ( Fig . 1 ) . Therefore , something isolates TER94 from eve enhancers ( and probably vice versa ) . Indeed , the region between the 3 (cid:2) - most eve regulatory element , a PRE , and the TER94 transcription start site has the properties of an enhancer - blocking insulator ( Figs 2 and 3 ) . It exhibits directional enhancer blocking in transgenes carrying eve enhancers in combination with either the eve promoter region or heterologous promoters , as well as between heterologous enhancers and promoters . The role of the TER94 promoter in enhancer blocking We dissected this insulator region in the context of transgenes carrying two different enhancers between divergently transcribed reporter genes ( Fig . 2I - N ) . Some deletion mutants were still able to block the AR enhancer from activating the mini - white reporter , while allowing the eve mesodermal enhancer to activate the eve - promoter - lacZ reporter across the mutant insulator ( Fig . 3 ) . This might result from a relatively weak interaction between the eve AR enhancer and the heterologous mini - white promoter , which suggests a degree of specificity of eve enhancers for their cognate promoter . This mechanism also contributes to long - range E - P communication mediated by the insulator , as discussed below . Furthermore , the recently discovered presence of an insulator at the 3 (cid:2) end of mini - white ( Chetverina et al . , 2008 ) might contribute to stronger enhancer blocking in this direction . We first narrowed enhancer - blocking activity down to an 800 bp sequence ( R100 , Fig . 3 ) that spans the 5 (cid:2) end of TER94 . Further dissection showed that the start site of TER94 is not required ( Δ GH , Fig . 3 ) . This makes it unlikely that transcriptional interference ( Martianov et al . , 2007 ; Mazo et al . , 2007 ) makes a strong contribution to our results , although it could be significant in some cases , such as for Δ F , which retains the TER94 start site . Notably , region F , extending from ~ 150 to 45 bp upstream of this start site , seems particularly important for enhancer blocking . A similar situation pertains to the well - studied insulators scs and scs (cid:2) ( Avramova and Tikhonov , 1999 ; Geyer , 1997 ; Kellum and Schedl , 1992 ; Kuhn et al . , 2004 ) . Perhaps some promoter regions induce a chromatin configuration that blocks the progression of activating complexes or chromatin modifications , through which enhancers communicate with target promoters . 3083 RESEARCH ARTICLE Very long - range insulator effects D E V E L O P M E N T 3084 The eve - TER94 insulator and homing activity The region between eve and TER94 also induces transgene homing . About 7 % of transgenes carrying this region ( 27 out of 380 lines tested ) inserted within 180 kb of eve . Among 27 homed lines , eight inserted within 1 . 5 kb of the endogenous insulator ( Fig . 5 ) , suggesting that homing involves direct tethering , possibly through a homophilic protein complex formed on the element in the germline , where transgenic insertion occurs . We call the responsible element Homie , for homing insulator at eve . Although it is more difficult to dissect the region required for homing than it is to dissect the region required for enhancer blocking ( due to the number of transgenic insertions required to validate a negative result ) , there is a clear correlation between these activities . Of the 210 transgenes tested for homing that carry all or part of the 800 bp R100 insulator ( Fig . 3 ) , nine of them ( 4 . 3 % ) were homed , even though the ‘homed’ region is less than 0 . 4 % of the genome . Protein - protein interactions among insulators , when they occur in the germline , might lead to transgene homing . The eve PRE and homing activity In previous studies of the eve 3 (cid:2) region , we produced hundreds of lines that carried the eve PRE , yet we did not observe homing . Therefore , the eve PRE is not sufficient for homing . Furthermore , as the minimal homing element does not contain the PRE , this PRE is not required for either homing activity or long - range E - P communication . However , the engrailed homing region has PRE activity ( Kwon et al . , 2009 ) , indicating that some PREs may engage in homotypic interactions that facilitate homing . Consistent with this , long - range interactions among PREs were seen in the BX - C ( Lanzuolo et al . , 2007 ) . Furthermore , the engrailed PRE may also facilitate long - distance E - P communication ( Devido et al . , 2008 ) . An extensive genomic region is a target for Homie - mediated homing and very long - range E - P communication The eve - promoter - lacZ reporter in a homed transgene is usually expressed in a full eve pattern , showing communication with all of the endogenous eve enhancers from as far away as 180 kb , and across a number of other genes ( Fig . 4 ; Fig . 5A ) . Beyond the homing target region , there is a tendency for Homie - carrying transgenes to insert on chromosome 2R , particularly centromere proximal from eve ( Fig . 5B ; additionally , Table S1 in the supplementary material lists the locations of all these mapped transgenic inserts ) . We have not referred to these insertions as ‘homed’ , mainly to distinguish them from transgenes that pick up a full eve pattern of expression . However , they usually ( 9 out of 12 ) pick up a partial eve pattern . Intriguingly , Homie - carrying transgenes inserted as far as 3300 kb away ( Fig . 5B ; see Table S1 in the supplementary material ) , are capable of interacting with the endogenous eve AR and mesodermal enhancers ( Fig . 4E , F ) . Previous indications of long - range E - P interactions mediated by transgenic insulators have come from the genetic and phenotypic analysis of transvection ( Kravchenko et al . , 2005 ) and related regulatory interactions ( Hendrickson and Sakonju , 1995 ; Hopmann et al . , 1995 ; Sipos et al . , 1998 ) . We directly tested the requirement for Homie in long - range E - P communication using Φ C31 - RMCE to compare transgenes with and without this region at the same chromosomal insertion site . Removal of Homie resulted in complete loss of the eve pattern . The same results were obtained at two different landing sites , at opposite ends of the homing region ( Fig . 5A , blue arrowheads ) . Communication of distant ‘shadow’ enhancers with promoters across several intervening genes has recently been proposed , based upon bioinformatics - based identification of functionally conserved enhancer regions with no other apparent target promoters ( Hong et al . , 2008 ) . Our results suggest that for such distant enhancers to communicate effectively , they may need promoter - targeting and / or promoter - tethering sequences ( Akbari et al . , 2008 ; Zhou and Levine , 1999 ) , and that some of these sequences might also act as insulators , generating a chromosomal architecture that facilitates functionally important interactions while preventing deleterious ones . How does Homie mediate such long - range E - P communication ? Both preferential insertion and the ability to pick up a partial eve pattern from long range could be explained by a homologous tethering mechanism ( Bantignies et al . , 2003 ; Vazquez et al . , 2006 ) , if we assume that this region of 2R is in relative proximity to the eve locus within a chromosome territory ( Cremer and Cremer , 2001 ) , both in the germline and in the developing AR and mesoderm . Homologous tethering might stabilize a functional E - P interaction , which in turn might facilitate transcription initiation through a combination of mechanisms , including targeting to regions of active transcription within the nucleus ( de Laat and Grosveld , 2003 ; Fraser , 2006 ; Simonis and de Laat , 2008 ) . Promoter specificity in long - range E - P communication We used RMCE to test the role of promoter specificity in long - range communication . Exchanging a basal hsp70 promoter for the eve promoter caused a complete loss of communication with some endogenous eve enhancers but not others . The communication that remained was with the AR and mesodermal enhancers , the same ones that often communicate with either the eve or hsp70 promoters in transgenes inserted up to 3300 kb away ( Fig . 5B ; see Table S1 in the supplementary material ) . The ability of these enhancers to communicate at a much longer range than others might indicate relatively stable E - P interactions that can survive entropic forces tending to randomize their positions in the nucleus . Alternatively , the interactions of these enhancers might be specifically facilitated by Homie . Another indication of the effects of promoter specificity in long - range E - P communication is that when the eve promoter was replaced by that of hsp70 , β - gal reporter expression in the CNS changed from an eve - like pattern to one similar to that of TER94 ( Fig . 4X ) . Although it is possible that this TER94 - like expression is driven by enhancers located near the insertion site , it is clear that which enhancers are targeted by the transgenic promoter depends in part on promoter specificity . Similar influences have recently been found on E - P communication at the engrailed locus ( Kwon et al . , 2009 ) . Reconciling insulator with long - range facilitator functions How can Homie act as an insulator and also mediate long - range communication ? The key may lie in the details of the resulting chromosomal architecture . Precedence for this idea comes from the phenomenon of insulator bypass , in which the enhancer - blocking activity of a single insulator can be negated by placing a second insulator between the enhancer and promoter ( Cai and Shen , 2001 ; Muravyova et al . , 2001 ) . This phenomenon is consistent with data from those homed insertions that lie just downstream of endogenous Homie . In these cases , both the transgenic and endogenous Homies are interposed between the lacZ reporter and the endogenous enhancers that drive its expression . Our data also show that the apparent bypass of endogenous Homie does not require that transgenic Homie lies between the interacting enhancer and RESEARCH ARTICLE Development 136 ( 18 ) D E V E L O P M E N T promoter . In one case , the transgenic promoter lies between the two Homies , with the interacting enhancers on the outside . We propose that Homie has directionality , so that the two copies of Homie line up in parallel with each other within a wall - like structure . In the cases where both Homies are between the interacting enhancer and promoter , the Homies are inverted in orientation , whereas in the other case they are in the same orientation . In both cases , their lining up in parallel would tend to place the interacting enhancer and promoter on the same side of this wall - like structure , facilitating their communication . By contrast , a single copy of Homie would tend to block communication between sequences on either side , by placing them on opposite sides of the structure . Similar effects of insulator directionality have been seen for the Fab - 8 and Mcp insulators ( Kyrchanova et al . , 2007 ; Kyrchanova et al . , 2008 ) . Insulator directionality in facilitating long - range communication In most homed lines , we did not see mini - white expression in an eve pattern . This might be due to the mini - white promoter being relatively weak and / or less compatible with eve enhancers than is the eve promoter , or even the hsp70 promoter , which also often picked up AR or mesodermal enhancer activity from great distances ( facilitated by Homie ) . Intriguingly , however , although in most of the transgenes carrying Homie its 5 (cid:2) end was oriented toward the lacZ reporter , in one line ( inserted at + 46 kb ) , this orientation was reversed , and in that line mini - white was expressed in the eve pattern . Thus , it is possible that Homie directionality , through the mechanism described above for insulator bypass , might play a role in determining whether or not a weak E - P interaction is facilitated . What is the normal function of Homie ? There are two likely possibilities for how Homie functions in the regulation of eve and TER94 . The first is that it simply prevents eve enhancers from activating TER94 , and also prevents eve from being expressed broadly in the CNS like TER94 , which would probably cause mis - specification of neurons ( Broihier and Skeath , 2002 ) . Another , not mutually exclusive , possibility is that Homie works in conjunction with the nearby PRE to orchestrate functionally appropriate chromosomal architectures during development . Known insulators in the BX - C are each situated near a PRE ( Maeda and Karch , 2006 ) , and these PRE - insulator regions interact with promoters in several contexts ( Cleard et al . , 2006 ; Lanzuolo et al . , 2007 ) . Our data suggest a similar interaction with the eve promoter region , based on the fact that three of our homed lines are inserted within the eve promoter region . Such an interaction might help enhancers from the 3 (cid:2) end of the eve locus communicate with the eve promoter , while also preventing inappropriate interaction with TER94 enhancers . One motivation for such a model is that in mutants for the PcG gene polyhomeotic , eve is ectopically expressed throughout the CNS ( Smouse et al . , 1988 ) , which is reminiscent of normal TER94 expression . Thus a loss of PcG repression , acting through the PRE , might disrupt the normal insulator function that prevents inappropriate activation of eve . This suggests that the functions of the PRE and Homie are coordinated during development , allowing the PRE to maintain either an activated or repressed state of eve in different cells ( Fujioka et al . , 2008 ) , while maintaining the functional isolation of eve from TER94 . Acknowledgements We thank Galina Yusibova and Jian Zhou for excellent technical assistance , Michele P . Calos , C . - Ting Wu and Jack R . Bateman for Φ C31 system reagents , Paul Schedl for pCfhL , and Judy Kassis for helpful discussions and for comments on the manuscript . This work was supported by NSF - MCB0818118 and NIH - R01GM050231 awards to J . B . J . and M . F . Deposited in PMC for release after 12 months . Supplementary material Supplementary material for this article is available at http : / / dev . biologists . org / cgi / content / full / 136 / 18 / 3077 / DC1 ReferencesAkbari , O . S . , Bae , E . , Johnsen , H . , Villaluz , A . , Wong , D . and Drewell , R . A . ( 2008 ) . A novel promoter - tethering element regulates enhancer - driven gene expression at the bithorax complex in the Drosophila embryo . Development 135 , 123 - 131 . Aoki , T . , Schweinsberg , S . , Manasson , J . and Schedl , P . ( 2008 ) . A stage - specific factor confers Fab - 7 boundary activity during early embryogenesis in Drosophila . Mol . Cell . Biol . 28 , 1047 - 1060 . Avramova , Z . and Tikhonov , A . ( 1999 ) . Are scs and scs’ ‘neutral’ chromatin domain boundaries of the locus ? Trends Genet . 15 , 138 - 139 . Bantignies , F . , Grimaud , C . , Lavrov , S . , Gabut , M . and Cavalli , G . ( 2003 ) . Inheritance of Polycomb - dependent chromosomal interactions in Drosophila . Genes Dev . 17 , 2406 - 2420 . Barges , S . , Mihaly , J . , Galloni , M . , Hagstrom , K . , Muller , M . , Shanower , G . , Schedl , P . , Gyurkovics , H . and Karch , F . ( 2000 ) . The Fab - 8 boundary defines the distal limit of the bithorax complex iab - 7 domain and insulates iab - 7 from initiation elements and a PRE in the adjacent iab - 8 domain . Development 127 , 779 - 790 . Bateman , J . R . , Lee , A . M . and Wu , C . T . ( 2006 ) . Site - specific transformation of Drosophila via phiC31 integrase - mediated cassette exchange . Genetics 173 , 769 - 777 . Bell , A . C . and Felsenfeld , G . ( 2000 ) . Methylation of a CTCF - dependent boundary controls imprinted expression of the Igf2 gene . Nature 405 , 482 - 485 . Bell , A . C . , West , A . G . and Felsenfeld , G . ( 1999 ) . The protein CTCF is required for the enhancer blocking activity of vertebrate insulators . Cell 98 , 387 - 396 . Belozerov , V . E . , Majumder , P . , Shen , P . and Cai , H . N . ( 2003 ) . A novel boundary element may facilitate independent gene regulation in the Antennapedia complex of Drosophila . EMBO J . 22 , 3113 - 3121 . Bender , W . and Hudson , A . ( 2000 ) . P element homing to the Drosophila bithorax complex . Development 127 , 3981 - 3992 . Blanton , J . , Gaszner , M . and Schedl , P . ( 2003 ) . Protein : protein interactions and the pairing of boundary elements in vivo . Genes Dev . 17 , 664 - 675 . Broihier , H . T . and Skeath , J . B . ( 2002 ) . Drosophila homeodomain protein dHb9 directs neuronal fate via crossrepressive and cell - nonautonomous mechanisms . Neuron 35 , 39 - 50 . Bushey , A . M . , Dorman , E . R . and Corces , V . G . ( 2008 ) . Chromatin insulators : regulatory mechanisms and epigenetic inheritance . Mol . Cell 32 , 1 - 9 . Busturia , A . , Wightman , C . D . and Sakonju , S . ( 1997 ) . A silencer is required for maintenance of transcriptional repression throughout Drosophila development . Development 124 , 4343 - 4350 . Cai , H . N . and Shen , P . ( 2001 ) . Effects of cis arrangement of chromatin insulators on enhancer - blocking activity . Science 291 , 493 - 495 . Chetverina , D . , Savitskaya , E . , Maksimenko , O . , Melnikova , L . , Zaytseva , O . , Parshikov , A . , Galkin , A . V . and Georgiev , P . ( 2008 ) . Red flag on the white reporter : a versatile insulator abuts the white gene in Drosophila and is omnipresent in mini - white constructs . Nucleic Acids Res . 36 , 929 - 937 . Cleard , F . , Moshkin , Y . , Karch , F . and Maeda , R . K . ( 2006 ) . Probing long - distance regulatory interactions in the Drosophila melanogaster bithorax complex using Dam identification . Nat . Genet . 38 , 931 - 935 . Cremer , T . and Cremer , C . ( 2001 ) . Chromosome territories , nuclear architecture and gene regulation in mammalian cells . Nat . Rev . Genet . 2 , 292 - 301 . de Laat , W . and Grosveld , F . ( 2003 ) . Spatial organization of gene expression : the active chromatin hub . Chromosome Res . 11 , 447 - 459 . Devido , S . K . , Kwon , D . , Brown , J . L . and Kassis , J . A . ( 2008 ) . The role of Polycomb - group response elements in regulation of engrailed transcription in Drosophila . Development 135 , 669 - 676 . Dorman , E . R . , Bushey , A . M . and Corces , V . G . ( 2007 ) . The role of insulator elements in large - scale chromatin structure in interphase . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 18 , 682 - 690 . Frasch , M . , Warrior , R . , Tugwood , J . and Levine , M . ( 1988 ) . Molecular analysis of even - skipped mutants in Drosophila development . Genes Dev . 2 , 1824 - 1838 . Fraser , P . ( 2006 ) . Transcriptional control thrown for a loop . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 16 , 490 - 495 . Fujioka , M . , Emi - Sarker , Y . , Yusibova , G . L . , Goto , T . and Jaynes , J . B . ( 1999 ) . Analysis of an even - skipped rescue transgene reveals both composite and discrete neuronal and early blastoderm enhancers , and multi - stripe positioning by gap gene repressor gradients . Development 126 , 2527 - 2538 . Fujioka , M . , Jaynes , J . B . , Bejsovec , A . and Weir , M . ( 2000 ) . Production of transgenic Drosophila . Methods Mol . Biol . 136 , 353 - 363 . Fujioka , M . , Yusibova , G . L . , Zhou , J . and Jaynes , J . B . ( 2008 ) . The DNA - binding Polycomb - group protein Pleiohomeotic maintains both active and 3085 RESEARCH ARTICLE Very long - range insulator effects D E V E L O P M E N T 3086 repressed transcriptional states through a single site . Development 135 , 4131 - 4139 . Gaszner , M . and Felsenfeld , G . ( 2006 ) . Insulators : exploiting transcriptional and epigenetic mechanisms . Nat . Rev . Genet . 7 , 703 - 713 . Gaszner , M . , Vazquez , J . and Schedl , P . ( 1999 ) . The Zw5 protein , a component of the scs chromatin domain boundary , is able to block enhancer - promoter interaction . Genes Dev . 13 , 2098 - 2107 . Gause , M . , Morcillo , P . and Dorsett , D . ( 2001 ) . Insulation of enhancer - promoter communication by a gypsy transposon insert in the Drosophila cut gene : cooperation between suppressor of hairy - wing and modifier of mdg4 proteins . Mol . Cell . Biol . 21 , 4807 - 4817 . Geyer , P . K . ( 1997 ) . The role of insulator elements in defining domains of gene expression . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 7 , 242 - 248 . Geyer , P . K . and Corces , V . G . ( 1992 ) . DNA position - specific repression of transcription by a Drosophila zinc finger protein . Genes Dev . 6 , 1865 - 1873 . Geyer , P . K . , Green , M . M . and Corces , V . G . ( 1988 ) . Mutant gene phenotypes mediated by a Drosophila melanogaster retrotransposon require sequences homologous to mammalian enhancers . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 85 , 8593 - 8597 . Ghosh , D . , Gerasimova , T . I . and Corces , V . G . ( 2001 ) . Interactions between the Su ( Hw ) and Mod ( mdg4 ) proteins required for gypsy insulator function . EMBO J . 20 , 2518 - 2527 . Golic , K . G . and Lindquist , S . ( 1989 ) . The FLP recombinase of yeast catalyzes site - specific recombination in the Drosophila genome . Cell 59 , 499 - 509 . Goto , T . , Macdonald , P . and Maniatis , T . ( 1989 ) . Early and late periodic patterns of even skipped expression are controlled by distinct regulatory elements that respond to different spatial cues . Cell 57 , 413 - 422 . Groth , A . C . , Fish , M . , Nusse , R . and Calos , M . P . ( 2004 ) . Construction of transgenic Drosophila by using the site - specific integrase from phage phiC31 . Genetics 166 , 1775 - 1782 . Gyurkovics , H . , Gausz , J . , Kummer , J . and Karch , F . ( 1990 ) . A new homeotic mutation in the Drosophila bithorax complex removes a boundary separating two domains of regulation . EMBO J . 9 , 2579 - 2585 . Hagstrom , K . , Muller , M . and Schedl , P . ( 1996 ) . Fab - 7 functions as a chromatin domain boundary to ensure proper segment specification by the Drosophila bithorax complex . Genes Dev . 10 , 3202 - 3215 . Hama , C . , Ali , Z . and Kornberg , T . B . ( 1990 ) . Region - specific recombination and expression are directed by portions of the Drosophila engrailed promoter . Genes Dev . 4 , 1079 - 1093 . Harding , K . , Hoey , T . , Warrior , R . and Levine , M . ( 1989 ) . Autoregulatory and gap gene response elements of the even - skipped promoter of Drosophila . EMBO J . 8 , 1205 - 1212 . Hark , A . T . , Schoenherr , C . J . , Katz , D . J . , Ingram , R . S . , Levorse , J . M . and Tilghman , S . M . ( 2000 ) . CTCF mediates methylation - sensitive enhancer - blocking activity at the H19 / Igf2 locus . Nature 405 , 486 - 489 . Hart , C . M . , Zhao , K . and Laemmli , U . K . ( 1997 ) . The scs’ boundary element : characterization of boundary element - associated factors . Mol . Cell . Biol . 17 , 999 - 1009 . Hendrickson , J . E . and Sakonju , S . ( 1995 ) . Cis and trans interactions between the iab regulatory regions and abdominal - A and Abdominal - B in Drosophila melanogaster . Genetics 139 , 835 - 848 . Holohan , E . E . , Kwong , C . , Adryan , B . , Bartkuhn , M . , Herold , M . , Renkawitz , R . , Russell , S . and White , R . ( 2007 ) . CTCF genomic binding sites in Drosophila and the organisation of the bithorax complex . PLoS Genet . 3 , e112 . Hong , J . W . , Hendrix , D . A . and Levine , M . S . ( 2008 ) . Shadow enhancers as a source of evolutionary novelty . Science 321 , 1314 . Hopmann , R . , Duncan , D . and Duncan , I . ( 1995 ) . Transvection in the iab - 5 , 6 , 7 region of the bithorax complex of Drosophila : homology independent interactions in trans . Genetics 139 , 815 - 833 . Huang , A . M . , Rehm , E . J . and Rubin , G . M . ( 2000 ) . Recovery of DNA sequences flanking P - element insertions : inverse PCR and plasmid rescue . In Drosophila Protocols ( ed . W . Sullivan , M . Ashburner and R . S . Hawley ) , pp . 429 - 437 . Cold Spring Harbor , NY : Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press . Kanduri , C . , Pant , V . , Loukinov , D . , Pugacheva , E . , Qi , C . F . , Wolffe , A . , Ohlsson , R . and Lobanenkov , V . V . ( 2000 ) . Functional association of CTCF with the insulator upstream of the H19 gene is parent of origin - specific and methylation - sensitive . Curr . Biol . 10 , 853 - 856 . Karch , F . , Galloni , M . , Sipos , L . , Gausz , J . , Gyurkovics , H . and Schedl , P . ( 1994 ) . Mcp and Fab - 7 : molecular analysis of putative boundaries of cis - regulatory domains in the bithorax complex of Drosophila melanogaster . Nucleic Acids Res . 22 , 3138 - 3146 . Kassis , J . A . ( 2002 ) . Pairing - sensitive silencing , polycomb group response elements , and transposon homing in Drosophila . Adv . Genet . 46 , 421 - 438 . Kassis , J . A . , Noll , E . , VanSickle , E . P . , Odenwald , W . F . and Perrimon , N . ( 1992 ) . Altering the insertional specificity of a Drosophila transposable element . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 89 , 1919 - 1923 . Kellum , R . and Schedl , P . ( 1992 ) . A group of scs elements function as domain boundaries in an enhancer - blocking assay . Mol . Cell . Biol . 12 , 2424 - 2431 . Kravchenko , E . , Savitskaya , E . , Kravchuk , O . , Parshikov , A . , Georgiev , P . and Savitsky , M . ( 2005 ) . Pairing between gypsy insulators facilitates the enhancer action in trans throughout the Drosophila genome . Mol . Cell . Biol . 25 , 9283 - 9291 . Kuhn , E . J . , Hart , C . M . and Geyer , P . K . ( 2004 ) . Studies of the role of the Drosophila scs and scs’ insulators in defining boundaries of a chromosome puff . Mol . Cell . Biol . 24 , 1470 - 1480 . Kwon , D . , Mucci , D . , Langlais , K . K . , Americo , J . L . , DeVido , S . K . , Cheng , Y . and Kassis , J . A . ( 2009 ) . Enhancer - promoter communication at the Drosophila engrailed locus . Development 136 , 3067 - 3075 . Kyrchanova , O . , Toshchakov , S . , Parshikov , A . and Georgiev , P . ( 2007 ) . Study of the functional interaction between Mcp insulators from the Drosophila bithorax complex : effects of insulator pairing on enhancer - promoter communication . Mol . Cell . Biol . 27 , 3035 - 3043 . Kyrchanova , O . , Toshchakov , S . , Podstreshnaya , Y . , Parshikov , A . and Georgiev , P . ( 2008 ) . Functional interaction between the Fab - 7 and Fab - 8 boundaries and the upstream promoter region in the Drosophila Abd - B gene . Mol . Cell . Biol . 28 , 4188 - 4195 . Lanzuolo , C . , Roure , V . , Dekker , J . , Bantignies , F . and Orlando , V . ( 2007 ) . Polycomb response elements mediate the formation of chromosome higher - order structures in the bithorax complex . Nat . Cell Biol . 9 , 1167 - 1174 . Leon , A . and McKearin , D . ( 1999 ) . Identification of TER94 , an AAA ATPase protein , as a Bam - dependent component of the Drosophila fusome . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 3825 - 3834 . Li , T . , Hu , J . F . , Qiu , X . , Ling , J . , Chen , H . , Wang , S . , Hou , A . , Vu , T . H . and Hoffman , A . R . ( 2008 ) . CTCF regulates allelic expression of Igf2 by orchestrating a promoter - polycomb repressive complex 2 intrachromosomal loop . Mol . Cell . Biol . 28 , 6473 - 6482 . Maeda , R . K . and Karch , F . ( 2006 ) . The ABC of the BX - C : the bithorax complex explained . Development 133 , 1413 - 1422 . Maeda , R . K . and Karch , F . ( 2007 ) . Making connections : boundaries and insulators in Drosophila . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 17 , 394 - 399 . Majumder , P . and Cai , H . N . ( 2003 ) . The functional analysis of insulator interactions in the Drosophila embryo . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 5223 - 5228 . Martianov , I . , Ramadass , A . , Serra Barros , A . , Chow , N . and Akoulitchev , A . ( 2007 ) . Repression of the human dihydrofolate reductase gene by a non - coding interfering transcript . Nature 445 , 666 - 670 . Mazo , A . , Hodgson , J . W . , Petruk , S . , Sedkov , Y . and Brock , H . W . ( 2007 ) . Transcriptional interference : an unexpected layer of complexity in gene regulation . J . Cell Sci . 120 , 2755 - 2761 . Mihaly , J . , Hogga , I . , Gausz , J . , Gyurkovics , H . and Karch , F . ( 1997 ) . In situ dissection of the Fab - 7 region of the bithorax complex into a chromatin domain boundary and a Polycomb - response element . Development 124 , 1809 - 1820 . Modolell , J . , Bender , W . and Meselson , M . ( 1983 ) . Drosophila melanogaster mutations suppressible by the suppressor of Hairy - wing are insertions of a 7 . 3 - kilobase mobile element . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 80 , 1678 - 1682 . Muller , M . , Hagstrom , K . , Gyurkovics , H . , Pirrotta , V . and Schedl , P . ( 1999 ) . The mcp element from the Drosophila melanogaster bithorax complex mediates long - distance regulatory interactions . Genetics 153 , 1333 - 1356 . Muravyova , E . , Golovnin , A . , Gracheva , E . , Parshikov , A . , Belenkaya , T . , Pirrotta , V . and Georgiev , P . ( 2001 ) . Loss of insulator activity by paired Su ( Hw ) chromatin insulators . Science 291 , 495 - 498 . Ochman , H . , Gerber , A . S . and Hartl , D . L . ( 1988 ) . Genetic applications of an inverse polymerase chain reaction . Genetics 120 , 621 - 623 . Ohtsuki , S . and Levine , M . ( 1998 ) . GAGA mediates the enhancer blocking activity of the eve promoter in the Drosophila embryo . Genes Dev . 12 , 3325 - 3330 . Oktaba , K . , Gutierrez , L . , Gagneur , J . , Girardot , C . , Sengupta , A . K . , Furlong , E . E . and Muller , J . ( 2008 ) . Dynamic regulation by polycomb group protein complexes controls pattern formation and the cell cycle in Drosophila . Dev . Cell 15 , 877 - 889 . Pai , C . Y . , Lei , E . P . , Ghosh , D . and Corces , V . G . ( 2004 ) . The centrosomal protein CP190 is a component of the gypsy chromatin insulator . Mol . Cell 16 , 737 - 748 . Parelho , V . , Hadjur , S . , Spivakov , M . , Leleu , M . , Sauer , S . , Gregson , H . C . , Jarmuz , A . , Canzonetta , C . , Webster , Z . , Nesterova , T . et al . ( 2008 ) . Cohesins functionally associate with CTCF on mammalian chromosome arms . Cell 132 , 422 - 433 . Parnell , T . J . , Kuhn , E . J . , Gilmore , B . L . , Helou , C . , Wold , M . S . and Geyer , P . K . ( 2006 ) . Identification of genomic sites that bind the Drosophila suppressor of Hairy - wing insulator protein . Mol . Cell . Biol . 26 , 5983 - 5993 . Peifer , M . and Bender , W . ( 1988 ) . Sequences of the gypsy transposon of Drosophila necessary for its effects on adjacent genes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 85 , 9650 - 9654 . Pinter , M . , Jekely , G . , Szepesi , R . J . , Farkas , A . , Theopold , U . , Meyer , H . E . , Lindholm , D . , Nassel , D . R . , Hultmark , D . and Friedrich , P . ( 1998 ) . TER94 , a Drosophila homolog of the membrane fusion protein CDC48 / p97 , is accumulated in nonproliferating cells : in the reproductive organs and in the brain of the imago . Insect Biochem . Mol . Biol . 28 , 91 - 98 . Ramos , E . , Ghosh , D . , Baxter , E . and Corces , V . G . ( 2006 ) . Genomic organization of gypsy chromatin insulators in Drosophila melanogaster . Genetics 172 , 2337 - 2349 . RESEARCH ARTICLE Development 136 ( 18 ) D E V E L O P M E N T Rubin , G . M . and Spradling , A . C . ( 1982 ) . Genetic transformation of Drosophila with transposable element vectors . Science 218 , 348 - 353 . Ruden , D . M . , Sollars , V . , Wang , X . , Mori , D . , Alterman , M . and Lu , X . ( 2000 ) . Membrane fusion proteins are required for oskar mRNA localization in the Drosophila egg chamber . Dev . Biol . 218 , 314 - 325 . Sackerson , C . , Fujioka , M . and Goto , T . ( 1999 ) . The even - skipped locus is contained in a 16 - kb chromatin domain . Dev . Biol . 211 , 39 - 52 . Schweinsberg , S . E . and Schedl , P . ( 2004 ) . Developmental modulation of Fab - 7 boundary function . Development 131 , 4743 - 4749 . Schweinsberg , S . , Hagstrom , K . , Gohl , D . , Schedl , P . , Kumar , R . P . , Mishra , R . and Karch , F . ( 2004 ) . The enhancer - blocking activity of the Fab - 7 boundary from the Drosophila bithorax complex requires GAGA - factor - binding sites . Genetics 168 , 1371 - 1384 . Simonis , M . and de Laat , W . ( 2008 ) . FISH - eyed and genome - wide views on the spatial organisation of gene expression . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1783 , 2052 - 2060 . Sipos , L . , Mihaly , J . , Karch , F . , Schedl , P . , Gausz , J . and Gyurkovics , H . ( 1998 ) . Transvection in the Drosophila Abd - B domain : extensive upstream sequences are involved in anchoring distant cis - regulatory regions to the promoter . Genetics 149 , 1031 - 1050 . Small , S . , Blair , A . and Levine , M . ( 1992 ) . Regulation of even - skipped stripe 2 in the Drosophila embryo . EMBO J . 11 , 4047 - 4057 . Small , S . , Blair , A . and Levine , M . ( 1996 ) . Regulation of two pair - rule stripes by a single enhancer in the Drosophila embryo . Dev . Biol . 175 , 314 - 324 . Smouse , D . , Goodman , C . , Mahowald , A . and Perrimon , N . ( 1988 ) . polyhomeotic : a gene required for the embryonic development of axon pathways in the central nervous system of Drosophila . Genes Dev . 2 , 830 - 842 . Spana , C . , Harrison , D . A . and Corces , V . G . ( 1988 ) . The Drosophila melanogaster suppressor of Hairy - wing protein binds to specific sequences of the gypsy retrotransposon . Genes Dev . 2 , 1414 - 1423 . Taillebourg , E . and Dura , J . M . ( 1999 ) . A novel mechanism for P element homing in Drosophila . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 6856 - 6861 . Tomancak , P . , Beaton , A . , Weiszmann , R . , Kwan , E . , Shu , S . , Lewis , S . E . , Richards , S . , Ashburner , M . , Hartenstein , V . , Celniker , S . E . et al . ( 2002 ) . Systematic determination of patterns of gene expression during Drosophila embryogenesis . Genome Biol . 3 , 0088 . 1 - 0088 . 14 . Tweedie , S . , Ashburner , M . , Falls , K . , Leyland , P . , McQuilton , P . , Marygold , S . , Millburn , G . , Osumi - Sutherland , D . , Schroeder , A . , Seal , R . et al . ( 2009 ) . FlyBase : enhancing Drosophila Gene Ontology annotations . Nucleic Acids Res . 37 , D567 - D570 . Udvardy , A . , Maine , E . and Schedl , P . ( 1985 ) . The 87A7 chromomere . Identification of novel chromatin structures flanking the heat shock locus that may define the boundaries of higher order domains . J . Mol . Biol . 185 , 341 - 358 . Valenzuela , L . and Kamakaka , R . T . ( 2006 ) . Chromatin insulators . Annu . Rev . Genet . 40 , 107 - 138 . Vazquez , J . , Muller , M . , Pirrotta , V . and Sedat , J . W . ( 2006 ) . The Mcp element mediates stable long - range chromosome - chromosome interactions in Drosophila . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 2158 - 2165 . Wendt , K . S . , Yoshida , K . , Itoh , T . , Bando , M . , Koch , B . , Schirghuber , E . , Tsutsumi , S . , Nagae , G . , Ishihara , K . , Mishiro , T . et al . ( 2008 ) . Cohesin mediates transcriptional insulation by CCCTC - binding factor . Nature 451 , 796 - 801 . Zhao , K . , Hart , C . M . and Laemmli , U . K . ( 1995 ) . Visualization of chromosomal domains with boundary element - associated factor BEAF - 32 . Cell 81 , 879 - 889 . Zhou , J . and Levine , M . ( 1999 ) . A novel cis - regulatory element , the PTS , mediates an anti - insulator activity in the Drosophila embryo . Cell 99 , 567 - 575 . Zhou , J . , Ashe , H . , Burks , C . and Levine , M . ( 1999 ) . Characterization of the transvection mediating region of the Abdominal - B locus in Drosophila . Development 126 , 3057 - 3065 . 3087 RESEARCH ARTICLE Very long - range insulator effects D E V E L O P M E N T