Lampi and Reinhart - King , Sci . Transl . Med . 10 , eaao0475 ( 2018 ) 3 January 2018 S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E V I E W 1 of 14 MECHANOMEDICINE Targeting extracellular matrix stiffness to attenuate disease : From molecular mechanisms to clinical trials Marsha C . Lampi 1 and Cynthia A . Reinhart - King 2 * Tissues stiffen during aging and during the pathological progression of cancer , fibrosis , and cardiovascular dis - ease . Extracellular matrix stiffness is emerging as a prominent mechanical cue that precedes disease and drives its progression by altering cellular behaviors . Targeting extracellular matrix mechanics , by preventing or reversing tissue stiffening or interrupting the cellular response , is a therapeutic approach with clinical potential . Major drivers of changes to the mechanical properties of the extracellular matrix include phenotypically converted myofibro - blasts , transforming growth factor  ( TGF  ) , and matrix cross - linking . Potential pharmacological interventions to overcome extracellular matrix stiffening are emerging clinically . Aside from targeting stiffening directly , alterna - tive approaches to mitigate the effects of increased matrix stiffness aim to identify and inhibit the downstream cellular response to matrix stiffness . Therapeutic interventions that target tissue stiffening are discussed in the context of their limitations , preclinical drug development efforts , and clinical trials . INTRODUCTION Increased tissue stiffness is associated with a diverse array of pathol - ogies , including the two leading causes of death in the United States : cancer and cardiovascular disease ( 1 , 2 ) . Decreased extracellular matrix ( ECM ) compliance also occurs with fibrosis , advanced age , and di - abetes due to enhanced matrix deposition , cross - linking of existing matrix , and fiber alignment . ( 3 – 5 ) . The expansion of the mechano - biology field over the past decade has integrated the engineering and biological landscapes to advance our understanding of the con - tributions of increased ECM stiffness on disease . Although it is well established that changes in tissue mechanics are hallmarks of specif - ic pathological states , more recently , it has become apparent that tissue stiffening can precede disease development and that mechanical cues can drive its progression ( 6 , 7 ) . Hence , mechanomedicine is an emerg - ing field focused on therapeutically targeting tissue mechanics , either by directly altering the mechanical cues presented to cells or by dis - rupting the cellular response to mechanics . The ECM is a cell - secreted network that surrounds cells and is pri - marily composed of proteoglycans and fibrous proteins , the most abundant being collagen . In addition to providing structural sup - port , the ECM imparts biochemical and mechanical cues that regu - late cell behaviors ( 8 ) . Tensional , compressive , and shear forces are translated into biochemical signaling cascades through a process known as mechanotransduction , and evidence suggests that cells play an active role in remodeling their matrix to maintain an ECM stress set point through a process known as tensional homeostasis ( 9 ) . The ECM exhibits viscous and elastic properties , both of which govern cell fate ( 9 ) . Aberrant increased ECM stiffness , which can be described in terms of the Young’s elastic modulus , is associated with pathological states and is emerging as a critical factor that influences cell behavior ( 9 – 11 ) . The elastic modulus represents the ability of a material to resist deformation , and is calculated as the stress applied to the material divided by the resulting strain ( 9 , 10 ) . ECM stiffness sensing is achieved through protein deformation caused by cell - generated force loading on transmembrane integrins adhered to the matrix ( 9 ) . Because individual cell types exhibit unique mechanosensitivities that can promote pathological progression , mechano - based thera - pies represent an emerging clinical strategy ( 12 ) . Here , we discuss mechanisms that cause ECM stiffening during natural aging and pathological progression . Therapeutic approaches to prevent or reverse matrix stiffening , including their clinical rele - vance , are described . Because elevated ECM stiffness is deleterious in multiple pathologies and difficult to attenuate , we examine several potential cellular targets to disrupt the cellular response to increased matrix mechanics . We describe drug development efforts and chal - lenges of individual cellular targets , as well as the translational potential of available drugs , preclinical studies , and clinical trials . Aberrant ECM mechanical properties play a critical role in numerous pathol - ogies , and thus , mechanomedicine is a therapeutic approach to treat disease with important clinical implications . TARGETING TISSUE STIFFENING TO LIMIT PATHOLOGICAL PROGRESSION Myofibroblasts A major cause of increased ECM stiffness during cancer and fibrotic diseases is dysregulated matrix synthesis and remodeling by activated fibroblasts that have dedifferentiated into myofibroblasts ( Fig . 1 ) . Remodeling of the tumor stroma and organ fibrosis exhibit striking similarities to the wound healing response , except in the pathological state the response is sustained : Activated fibroblasts do not undergo apoptosis or become quiescent ( 13 ) . To date , no distinct phenotypic or molecular markers have been identified to distinguish functional differences between cancer - associated fibroblasts ( CAFs ) and fibrosis - associated fibroblasts ( FAFs ) ; therefore , here , CAFs and FAFs are collectively referred to as myofibroblasts ( 13 ) . Myofibroblasts are a heterogeneous cell population with pathology - specific precursor cells originating from multiple cell sources , including tissue - resident cells , bone marrow , and immune cells ( 14 ) . The de novo expression of  - smooth muscle actin (  - SMA ) organized into contractile stress fibers is tradition - ally used as the defining myofibroblast molecular marker . However ,  - SMA – negative proto - myofibroblasts can also exhibit a contrac - tile myofibroblast - like phenotype ( 15 ) . Other features of activated myofibroblasts include a stellate cell shape compared to the spindle morphology of quiescent cells , increased proliferation and migration , 1 Meinig School of Biomedical Engineering , Cornell University , Ithaca , NY 14850 , USA . 2 Department of Biomedical Engineering , Vanderbilt University , Nashville , TN 37212 , USA . * Corresponding author . Email : cynthia . reinhart - king @ vanderbilt . edu Copyright © 2018 The Authors , some rights reserved ; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science . No claim to original U . S . Government Works Lampi and Reinhart - King , Sci . Transl . Med . 10 , eaao0475 ( 2018 ) 3 January 2018 S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E V I E W 2 of 14 and the expression of fibroblast activation protein ( 13 ) . Myofibro - blasts are distinct from fibroblasts that lack a contractile cytoskele - ton and , despite shared expression of  - SMA , do not express the same machinery used by smooth muscle cells for reversible Ca 2 + - mediated contractions ( 16 ) . Because of the expression of  - SMA , myofibro - blasts exert high contractile forces that , combined with excess ECM deposition , stiffen the local microenvironment . Castella et al . ( 16 ) proposed a lock - step model of matrix remod - eling to explain how the unique contractile behavior of myofibroblasts irreversibly re - models the matrix through forces transmit - ted across extremely large , “super - mature” focal adhesions . Sustained Rho / Rho - associated kinase ( ROCK ) intercellular stress releases tension on ECM fibers ; these ECM fibers are then pulled with weaker Ca 2 + - dependent os - cillatory contractions and stabilized in a re - tracted position by enzymatic cross - linking that stiffens the matrix through an irrevers - ible event . The stiffened ECM further stim - ulates myofibroblast activity through positive feedback loops , including the mechanically driven release of matrix - bound latent trans - forming growth factor  ( TGF  ) ( 17 ) . Targeting myofibroblasts or their differen - tiation may hold clinical potential to mitigate fibrosis . Historically , a lack of myofibroblast - exclusive molecular biomarkers has limited cell - level targeting approaches . The hetero - geneity of the myofibroblast precursor cell population suggests cell type – specific sen - sitivities to chemical and mechanical stimuli . Unique targeting approaches may be required for cancer and fibrosis applications , which further complicates these efforts . Using com - putational methods , Jia et al . ( 18 ) recently iden - tified elevated COL11A1 gene expression as a distinguishing signature of CAFs found across 13 types of epithelial cancer . Although this find - ing is a considerable advance in the identifi - cation of targetable myofibroblast biomarkers , up - regulation was not conserved in noncan - cerous fibrotic tissues or even among all types of cancer , thus revealing that myofibroblast - specific therapies may require high degrees of tailoring ( 18 ) . Because of the diversity of organs affected by myofibroblast activity , an - other challenge will be localizing drugs to the intended site at therapeutic concentrations , es - pecially when systemic administration routes are used . For example , the unique physiology of the lungs , kidneys , liver , and solid tumors will necessitate specific drug delivery strate - gies ( 19 ) . Preclinical studies have demonstrated proof - of - concept success targeting differentiated myofibroblasts to mitigate their fibrotic ac - tivity . The monoclonal antibody C1 - 3 specifically bound to a transmembrane protein expressed by hepatic myofibroblasts and selectively induced apoptosis in vivo when conjugated to the fungal toxin gliotoxin ( 20 ) . Inhibition of myofi - broblast contraction was achieved with the delivery of an  - SMA N - terminal peptide ( 21 ) . The extra domain A – fibronectin ( EDA - FN ) splice variant , the growth factor TGF  , and an intact ECM to gener - ate cellular tension are essential to induce myofibroblast differenti - ation and therefore represent therapeutic targets to mitigate early Nucleus Actin Focal adhesion Integrin LINC complex Latencycomplex TGF β AGE cross - link TG2 cross - link LOX cross - link Lamins NewECM ECM Nucleus Nucleus F F F F A B B C C Fig . 1 . Putative mechanisms of ECM stiffening and cellular contractile forces generated in response to increased microenvironment stiffness . ( A ) Matrix cross - linking by lysyl oxidase ( LOX ) , tissue transglutaminase ( TG2 ) , and advanced glycation end products ( AGEs ) in concert with increased matrix deposition are major con - tributors of pathological matrix stiffening . Inside - out and outside - in extracellular matrix ( ECM ) rigidity sensing is transmitted across cell adhesions composed of integrins and focal adhesion complexes . ( B ) Actomyosin cell contractility forces are increased in response to elevated matrix stiffness , and traction forces are exerted against the ECM . Cellular force is also propagated across the cell cytoplasm to the nucleus . ( C ) Stiffness - mediated trac - tion forces transmitted across integrins cause a conformational change in the transforming growth factor  ( TGF  ) latency complex to release TGF  ligand and activate positive feedback cycles of ECM synthesis and stiff - ening . Solid blue arrows represent directionality of force transmission . C RE D I T : A . K I TT ER M A N / S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E Lampi and Reinhart - King , Sci . Transl . Med . 10 , eaao0475 ( 2018 ) 3 January 2018 S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E V I E W 3 of 14 fibrotic states ( 22 ) . Mechanistic studies have also identified signaling by reactive oxygen species , microRNAs ( miRs ) , chemokines , and cyto - kines as additional mediators of the myofibroblast phenotypic conver - sion that could be targeted therapeutically ( 23 – 26 ) . A miR - 29 mimic , MRG - 201 , recently completed a phase 1 clinical trial as an antifibrotic therapy ( NCT02603224 ) ( Table 1 ) ( 26 ) . Despite their widely recognized contribution as mediators of fibrotic pathologies and their associated role in cancer progression , paradoxical results from mouse models of cancer indicate an additional layer of complexity associated with myofibroblast targeting ( 13 , 14 , 27 ) . In these models , depleting myofibroblasts from the stroma resulted in in - creased tumor aggressiveness and decreased survival ( 27 ) . Myofibroblast - depleted tumors had decreased collagen content , were less stiff , and had altered immune cell infiltration , indicating that , collectively , the myofibroblast - depleted tumor milieu was drastically different than the untreated tumor stroma ( 27 ) . Reconciling these data with the robust body of work indicating pathological roles for myofibroblasts and a stiffened ECM is necessary to appropriately direct therapeutic targeting and identify the factors most critical to tumor aggressive - ness ( 6 , 13 ) . Growth factors Aberrant overexpression of TGF  is common among myofibroblast - driven pathologies . TGF  promotes myofibroblast differentiation , cell proliferation , and matrix production . Extracellular TGF  ligands bind to its serine / threonine kinase receptor ( TGF  R1 ) and activate the ca - nonical SMAD pathways that induce collagen and fibronectin gene expression ( 28 ) . Simultaneously , TGF  signaling inhibits matrix metallo - proteinase ( MMP ) matrix degradation by inducing the expression of tissue inhibitors of MMPs to drive microenvironment stiffening ( 29 ) . Notably , cells exert increased contractile pulling forces against their matrix in response to elevated matrix stiffness , which activates Table 1 . Therapeutics in latest clinical trials with primary end points specific to ECM stiffness . Target Drug name ( trade name / company ) Category Highest completed trial Current trials relevant to ECM stiffness References miR - 29 MRG - 201 ( miRagen Therapeutics Inc . ) MicroRNA Phase 1 None ( 26 ) NCT02603224 CTGF FG - 3019 ( Fibrogen ) Monoclonal antibody Phase 2 Phase 2 ( 33 , 34 ) NCT01890265NCT01262001 TGF  signaling Pirfenidone ( Esbriet / Genentech ) Small molecule , mechanism unknown Approved : Idiopathic lung fibrosis Phase 1 – 3 ( 36 ) NCT01872689NCT02552849NCT02408744NCT03068234NCT01872689 TGF  GC1008 ( Fresolimumab / Genzyme ) Monoclonal antibody Phase 2 Phase 1 – 2 ( 37 ) NCT01401062NCT02581787NCT01665391 VEGF , FGF , and PDGF receptors Nintedanib ( Ofev / Boehringer Ingelheim ) Small molecule , tyrosine kinase inhibitor Approved : Idiopathic lung fibrosis Phase 1 – 3 NCT01284322 LOXL2 GS - 6624 ( Simtuzumab / Gilead ) Monoclonal antibody Phase 2 No efficacy in fibrosis or cancer None ( 56 – 58 ) NCT01472198NCT01759511NCT 01769196 LOX Tetrathiomolybdate Copper chelator Phase 3 ( Wilson’s disease ) Phase 2 ( 60 ) NCT00805805NCT00195091NCT01837329  v  6 BG00011 / STX - 100 ( Biogen ) Monoclonal antibody Phase 2 None ( 89 ) NCT01371305 FAK VS - 6063 / PF - 04554878 ( Defactinib / Verastem ) Small molecule Phase 2 Phase 1 – 2 ( 117 ) NCT02943317NCT02758587NCT02546531NCT02465060 FAK GSK - 2256098 ( GlaxoSmithKline ) Small molecule Phase 1 Phase 1 – 2 ( 117 ) NCT02551653NCT02428270NCT02523014 NF -  B Bortezomib ( Velcade / Takeda ) Small molecule Approved : Multiple myeloma Phase 2 ( 138 , 139 ) NCT02370693 Lampi and Reinhart - King , Sci . Transl . Med . 10 , eaao0475 ( 2018 ) 3 January 2018 S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E V I E W 4 of 14 a feed - forward cycle of matrix production by releasing sequestered TGF  from the matrix through mechanical force ( 17 , 30 ) . A mediator of TGF  expression and signaling is connective tissue growth factor ( CTGF ) , which is cyclically expressed through TGF  pathways and subsequently acts to induce additional TGF  produc - tion ( 31 ) . CTGF directly binds to TGF  to enhance receptor associa - tions and is essential to TGF  - mediated fibrotic effects ( 32 ) . Thus , CTGF drives ECM remodeling and fibrotic pathologies through indi - rect regulation of the myofibroblast phenotype , ECM synthesis , and MMP expression . In vivo murine studies demonstrated prevention and regression of lung fibrosis after treatment with FG - 3019 , a human monoclonal antibody against CTGF ( 31 ) . Open - label phase 1 and 2 clinical trials have demonstrated favorable patient tolerability of FG - 3019 , but clinical efficacy assessed on the basis of healthy tissue compliance will await the results of an ongoing placebo - controlled trial for idiopathic lung fibrosis ( NCT01890265 ) ( 33 , 34 ) . Because of their dominant role in stimulating proliferation and ECM production , growth factor therapies , especially those targeted against TGF  , are a promising avenue to inhibit pathological cycles of ECM synthesis . Targeting TGF  is an active area of research for fibro - sis and cancer applications , and therapeutics in development range from in vitro preclinical studies to phase 3 clinical trials ( 35 ) . Disrupt - ing the pathological role of TGF  has been approached from multi - ple angles , including inhibiting receptor - ligand interactions , tyrosine kinase activity , and protein synthesis using peptides , antisense oli - gonucleotides , small - molecule inhibitors , and monoclonal antibodies ( 35 ) . Once developed , TGF  - targeting therapeutics could have widespread applications when repurposed across organ - specific diseases , given the central role of TGF  in propagating fibrosis ( Table 2 ) . For example , the small - molecule pirfenidone is a breakthrough drug that inhibits TGF  pathways and was approved by the U . S . Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) in 2014 to treat idiopathic lung fibrosis ( 36 ) . Pirfenidone is being explored in clinical trials for kidney fibrosis ( NCT02408744 ) and sys - temic sclerosis ( NCT03068234 ) . GC1008 is a monoclonal antibody against TGF  that is also being actively pursued in clinical trials for its anti - fibrotic effects in cancer ( NCT01401062 and NCT02581787 ) and com - pleted phase 1 trials for kidney sclerosis ( NCT00464321 ) and systemic sclerosis ( NCT01284322 ) ( 37 ) . Other growth factors , such as platelet - derived growth factor ( PDGF ) and vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) , also contribute to fibrotic development and are potential therapeutic targets ( 38 , 39 ) . Nintedanib , a small - molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitor of VEGF , fibroblast growth factor ( FGF ) , and PDGF receptors , is approved for use in idiopathic lung fibrosis and may hold therapeutic potential for other pathologies , as evidenced by 119 registered clinical trials ( clinicaltrials . gov ) ( 40 ) . A challenge with therapeutically targeting growth factor – mediated ECM synthesis is that the ECM imparts tissue integrity , and regulating ECM turnover is one of many downstream growth factor signaling outcomes . Despite its identification as the key regulator of fibrosis , the pleiotropic effects of TGF  impose challenges to its therapeutic target - ing . During cancer , TGF  can have both pro - and antitumorigenic effects , and TGF  is important for inflammatory regulation ( 35 ) . Paradoxical roles for growth factors underscore the difficulty of targeting them therapeutically and highlight a necessary role for spatial and temporal control in drug administration . Short , single - stranded DNA or RNA oligonucleotides called aptamers may represent the future for targeted therapeutics , including growth factor inhibition ( 41 ) . Although conceptually similar to antibody ap - proaches , aptamers are synthetic oligonucleotides with three - dimensional structure that are produced without animal intermediates and can be designed to engage in distinct , location - specific protein interactions with tailored pharmacokinetics ( 41 ) . With continued contributions from next - generation sequencing and bioinformatics , improved se - lection methods , and low costs , it is anticipated that aptamers can fill a critical therapeutic niche ( 41 ) . Currently , pegaptanib ( Pfizer ) , which targets VEGF - 165 to inhibit angiogenesis related to macular degen - eration , is the only aptamer on the market ; nevertheless , it demon - strates the successful translation of aptamer technology to the clinic for effective , isoform - specific , growth factor targeting ( 42 ) . Advanced glycation end products In concert with increased ECM deposition , increased cross - linking also contributes to tissue stiffening . Collagen and elastin have low turnover rates , and covalent cross - links by advanced glycation end products ( AGEs ) that occur from a reaction between reducing sugars and matrix proteins accumulate with aging ( 10 ) . Hyperglycemic Table 2 . Select FDA - approved drugs with repurposing potential for mechano - based therapeutic interventions . Drug Trade name Company Disease Target Reference Pirfenidone Esbriet Genentech Idiopathic lung fibrosis TGF  signaling ( 36 ) Nintedanib Ofev Boehringer Ingelheim Idiopathic lung fibrosis VEGF , FGF , and PDGF receptors ( 40 ) Statins Multiple Multiple Cardiovascular disease Rho , YAP / TAZ ( 98 , 125 ) Verteporfin injection Visudyne Novartis Macular degeneration YAP ( 126 ) Bortezomib Velcade Takeda Multiple myeloma NF -  B ( 138 , 139 ) Ixazomib Nilaro Takeda Multiple myeloma NF -  B ( 139 ) Carfilzomib Kyprolis Amgen Multiple myeloma NF -  B ( 138 , 139 ) Vemurafenib Zelboraf Genentech Melanoma B - Raf ( 146 ) Dabrafenib Tafinlar Novartis Melanoma B - Raf ( 145 , 146 ) Cobimetinib Cotellic Genentech Melanoma MEK ( 146 ) Trametinib Mekinist Novartis Melanoma MEK ( 145 , 146 ) Lampi and Reinhart - King , Sci . Transl . Med . 10 , eaao0475 ( 2018 ) 3 January 2018 S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E V I E W 5 of 14 diabetic individuals have increased susceptibility to glycation and therefore experience accelerated tissue cross - linking ( 3 ) . Dysregulated enzymatic cross - linking of matrix components also contributes to stiffening . Lysyl oxidase ( LOX ) and tissue transglutaminase ( TG2 ) are implicated in these processes during cancer , fibrotic progression , and age - related arterial stiffening ( 43 , 44 ) . Breaking or preventing ECM cross - links is an attractive therapeutic approach to stall , reverse , or prevent pathologies that are partially driven by increased matrix stiffness , and appears promising from reports that hepatic stellate cells respond to both the mechanical stiffening and softening of their ECM in situ ( 45 ) . Despite initial indications of clinical potential , there are no glycation - related therapeutics on the market . The pioneering AGE breaker , alagebrium , and the AGE inhibitor , aminoguanidine , had contra - dictory clinical trial results , and toxicity risks ultimately prohibited further consideration of their therapeutic use ( 46 ) . Other therapeu - tics to break or inhibit glycation cross - links have been investigated and are reviewed extensively elsewhere ; however , despite a diverse range of candidate compounds , limited clinical success targeting AGEs has been achieved ( 46 ) . Repeatedly , in vitro results are not replicated in vivo . Progress is hindered by poorly defined mechanisms of tar - get compounds , and the widespread use of bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) as a model protein does not capture the diversity of glycation cross - links found in vivo . Synthetic AGE - BSA compounds produced in vitro behave differently than native AGEs ( 47 ) . Toxicity and low efficacy are common outcomes of clinical trials , indicating the need for AGE therapeutics with increased specificity . In addition to growth factor targeting , preliminary studies sug - gest that aptamers are also effective at ameliorating the deleterious effects of AGEs ( 48 ) . Aptamer therapy prevented increases in serum AGEs in a diabetic rat model ( 48 ) . Long - term administration was well tolerated , suggesting that aptamer translation to clinical use may not be hindered by the same toxicological limitations of small - molecule AGE inhibitors and breakers . In light of the challenges to develop drugs against glycation , diet adjustments that reduce circulating AGEs , and evidence that exercise reduces AGE cross - linking in tissues , should also be emphasized for their therapeutic potential and ease of im - plementation ( 49 , 50 ) . Lysyl oxidase LOX and TG2 are cell - produced proteins ; therefore , enzymatic cross - linking can be targeted at the transcriptional , posttranslational , and catalytic levels . The paradoxical outcomes of LOX activity , and the specific contexts in which it is pro - or antipathogenic , are ongoing areas or research ( 51 ) . LOX is increasingly considered as a therapeutic target because of its dual role in the formation of the tumor stroma and the premetastatic niche , in addition to its deleterious activity during fibrosis and atherosclerosis . The effectiveness of inhibiting LOX cross - linking to reduce ECM stiffness and improve pathological outcomes has been well established using the competitive inhibitor  - aminopropionitrile ( BAPN ) . In the apolipoprotein E ( ApoE ) knockout mouse model of atherosclerosis , BAPN inhibition of LOX decreased aortic stiffness and atherosclerotic plaque burden ( 52 ) . BAPN treatment attenuated stiff - ness and reduced malformed microvasculature in murine tumors ( 53 ) . In a murine model of fibrosis , BAPN inhibited liver fibrosis and pro - moted its reversal ( 54 ) . Although BAPN is a valuable research tool and validates LOX as a clinical target to prevent pathological pro - gression caused by matrix cross - linking , high toxicity during clini - cal trials precludes its clinical use ( 55 ) . Monoclonal antibody inhibition of LOX - like 2 ( LOXL2 ) was pursued by Gilead Sciences with GS - 6624 , but the culmination of phase 2 clinical trials during late 2016 revealed no benefit for cancer and fibrotic disease patients ( NCT01472198 ; NCT01769196 ; NCT017595110 ) ( 56 – 58 ) . A sizeable challenge in the race to create effective LOX inhibitors is that the complete crystal structure , which is typically used to guide small - molecule development pipelines , remains unknown for mammalian LOX ( 59 ) . Therefore , alternative approaches that include inhibiting the LOX transcription factor or preventing posttranslational cleavage of the precursor peptide by BMP - 1 have been proposed ( 59 ) . Treatment with the nonspecific copper chelator tetrathiomolybdate , which de - pletes the LOX catalytic site of copper , resulted in lowered serum LOXL2 concentrations during phase 2 clinical trials in individuals with moderate - to high - risk primary stage breast cancer ( NCT00195091 ) ( 60 ) . Corresponding murine models demonstrated that copper depletion contributed to antipathogenic ECM remodeling by decreasing LOX , collagen deposition , and collagen fiber length in premetastatic lungs ( 60 ) . Tetrathiomolybdate has also been pursued in biliary cirrhosis ( NCT00805805 ) and non – small cell lung cancer ( NCT01837329 ) . Tetra - thiomolybdate treatment is favorable because of its simple oral ad - ministration route , excellent tolerability , and greater LOX inhibition when compared to BAPN ( 60 ) . Tissue transglutaminase Pharmacological inhibition of TG2 is in preclinical stages with classical small - molecule competitive , reversible , and irreversible inhibitors ( 61 ) . A TG2 inhibitor was investigated in Canadian clinical trials where poor efficacy was demonstrated , and an irreversible TG2 inhibitor is in phase 1b clinical trials in Europe , but limited information is available about these efforts ( 61 , 62 ) . TG2 is found in almost all tissues : It is a cytosolic protein with catalytic , G protein , kinase , cell survival , and transcription - regulating roles ( 44 ) . The ubiquitous nature of TG2 and its multifaceted impact on cell behaviors beyond ECM cross - linking make it a difficult therapeutic target . The challenge of developing effec - tive small - molecule inhibitors is exacerbated by evidence that TG2 exists in multiple conformational states and has several structural domains ( 44 ) . Therefore , less conventional methods that abolish TG2 activity by limiting its expression are also being pursued . Upstream inhibitors of the extracellular signal – regulated kinase ( ERK ) pathway that down - regulate TG2 expression and small interfering RNA ( siRNA ) have successfully demonstrated preclinical potential as antifibrotic therapies ( 63 , 64 ) . TG2 siRNA coupled with liposome delivery yielded effective organ - specific targeting to the liver and lungs in mice ( 64 ) . Matrix metalloproteinases ECM homeostasis is an intricate balance of matrix synthesis , modi - fication , and degradation . In vitro models of matrix softening demon - strated a reversion of the myofibroblast phenotype and  - SMA expression in activated hepatic stellate cells ( 45 ) . Paradoxically , dysregulated pro - teolytic activity also contributes to the progression of stiffness - mediated pathologies . Microarray analysis of fibrotic lung biopsies from pa - tients demonstrated that up - regulated expression of matrix proteins occurred in concert with altered degradome expression that included MMP up - regulation ( 65 ) . Cancer , fibrosis , and cardiovascular disease are all associated with dysregulated MMP activity ( 66 ) . Although MMPs are most recognized for their proteolytic activity that directly degrades the ECM , matrix components account for only 20 % of MMP substrates , and their ability to cleave and activate growth factors , chemokines , cytokines , and receptors is associated with conflicting Lampi and Reinhart - King , Sci . Transl . Med . 10 , eaao0475 ( 2018 ) 3 January 2018 S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E V I E W 6 of 14 cell processes that promote and inhibit stiffness - mediated pathologies ( 67 ) . For example , MMPs can release matrix - bound latent TGF  , but their expression can also have antifibrotic effects that promote apopto - sis , and MMPs have a critical role in fibrotic resolution ( 68 – 70 ) . Evi - dence indicates that MMP activity is mediated by substrate stiffness , suggesting that MMPs can have an evolving role during disease pro - gression ( 71 ) . MMPs were heavily pursued in clinical trials to over - come cancer metastasis but failed in patients . Therefore , because of the varied , context - specific effects of MMPs and the precedence of major clinical shortcomings , strategies that rely on altering MMP activity to overcome ECM stiffness have to be pursued with caution ( 72 ) . Therapeutics with high specificity are necessary but are chal - lenging to develop because of similarities between catalytic sites and functional redundancy among the 24 mammalian MMP family mem - bers ( 72 ) . The success of MMP therapeutic strategies will also rely on correctly identifying the appropriate pathological stage during which to administer the drugs to avoid amplifying MMP disease - promoting effects . A disintegrin and metalloproteinase / a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin motifs Although less well studied than MMPs , microarray analysis from fi - brotic and cancerous tissues identified altered gene expression pro - files of other ECM proteases ( 65 , 73 ) . Subsequent mechanistic studies are elucidating critical roles for both direct and indirect ECM re - modeling by the closely related a disintegrin and metalloproteinase ( ADAM ) and ADAMs with thrombospondin motifs ( ADAMTS ) pro - tease family members ( 74 ) . One notable example is ADAMTS1 , which has been identified as an activator of TGF  . Up - regulated ADAMTS1 expression increased collagen I production , and administration of a competitive ADAMTS1 peptide prevented fibrotic liver damage in mice ( 75 ) . In pancreatic cancer , pleiotropic effects of ADAMTS1 in - clude degrading veriscan to create a protumorigenic microenviron - ment , cleaving epithelial - like growth factors to promote metastasis , and recruiting CAFs ( 76 ) . Similar to MMPs , ADAMs and ADAMTSs can be both tumor promoters and inhibitors , underscoring the im - portance of controlled proteolytic activity to homeostasis ( 74 ) . The utility of targeting ADAMs and ADAMTSs in the context of ECM remodeling will depend on future studies that identify isoform func - tions that are ECM - specific . Feasibility and safety of generating inhibi - tors against these protease families can be gleaned from early clinical trial pursuits with INCB7839 , an inhibitor of ADAM10 and ADAM17 , to treat breast cancer and diffuse large B cell non - Hodgkin lymphoma ( NCT00820560 , NCT00864175 , NCT01254136 , and NCT02141451 ) ( 77 ) . The contribution of the ECM in promoting cancer malignancy , atherogenesis , and fibrosis is becoming increasingly appreciated , but many questions remain unanswered . Data now indicate that stiffen - ing precedes fibrosis and hypertension , that proliferation and migration increase with increased matrix stiffness , and that epithelial - mesenchymal transition and TGF  stimulation are matrix stiffness – dependent ( 78 – 81 ) . In addition , similar gene expression profiles observed between cells originating from dense breast tissue and the tumor stroma suggest that mechanically mediated epigenetic regulation may initiate disease ( 82 ) . If matrix stiffness is a driving factor that causes an even stiffer ECM , then what are the initial mechanisms contributing to prepatho - logical increases in matrix rigidity ? As these pathways are unveiled , it is anticipated that new therapeutic targets will also be identified to interrupt matrix stiffening at earlier stages of disease development . Advances in mitigating matrix stiffness directly will likely draw on clinical successes from other settings where matrix turnover is crit - ical , such as scar and wound healing ( 62 ) . INTERRUPTING CELLULAR RESPONSES TO INCREASED ECM STIFFNESS Integrins Instead of preventing ECM stiffening , which occurs with advanced age and can precede disease , an alternative approach to overcome the adverse effects of microenvironment stiffening is to inhibit the cellular response to increased matrix mechanics that contributes to pathogen - esis . The ECM activates integrin - mediated signaling pathways to elicit cellular outcomes ; therefore , aberrant mechanotransduction can be dis - rupted at the cell - ECM level and at downstream signaling targets . Integrin targeting is a logical first choice to interrupt ECM mech - anosensing , because these transmembrane adhesion proteins are con - duits of bidirectional signaling , directly connecting extracellular inputs to intracellular outputs . Integrins have been attributed to cancer ma - lignancy , metastasis , and drug resistance , as evidenced by 30 regis - tered clinical trials that include the integrin inhibitor cilengitide ( clinicaltrials . gov ) ( 83 ) . In addition , local proteolytic activity of MMP - 9 disrupts  v  3 integrin engagement , resulting in activated stellate cell apoptosis , suggesting an intersection between matrix softening , inte - grin engagement , and fibrotic resolution ( 70 ) . Studies in fibroblasts indicate that integrin expression alone does not drive the cellular re - sponse to increased substrate mechanics ( 12 ) . Selecting which integrins to antagonize to ameliorate matrix stiffness sensing is not straight - forward , and the regulation of diverse cellular events that result from integrin binding is an active area of investigation . The  integrin sub - unit recruits focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) to initiate downstream sig - naling cascades that include Rho , Src , and ERK and therefore is a potential target to mediate matrix stiffness responses ( 84 ) . In fibroblasts cultured on fibronectin - coated substrates , rigidity sensing through  5  1 - stimulated Rho - mediated contractility and  v integrins activated the GEF - H1 Rho pathway , suggesting other potential targets ( 85 ) . The current understanding of force sensing across focal adhesions is centered around a shared sequence of events among autonomous adhesions that begins when integrin dimers bind their ECM ligands ( 86 ) . Extracellular integrin deformation from cytoskeletal forces is dependent on substrate compliance , which then drives the intracel - lular recruitment of scaffolding proteins , actin - binding reinforcement , and the activation of downstream effectors ( 86 ) . A stiffened ECM is well established to increase Rho - mediated cellular contractile forces that are necessary for protein conformational changes contributing to focal adhesion maturation , and cell - ECM adhesions are stronger on rigid matrices ( 86 ) . However , the individual contributions of spe - cific integrin dimer pairs to stiffness sensing and mechanotransduction in a multicomponent ECM have not been fully delineated . Fibronectin and collagen are often used interchangeably as ECM proteins during in vitro experiments studying cellular forces despite groundwork that ECM ligand biochemistry , and thus integrin engagement , influ - ences cellular mechanoresponses ( 87 ) . Among integrins , the  v family has been identified as a possible therapeutic target for fibrotic pathologies , not for their mechanosen - sitive signaling but rather for facilitating ECM deposition . Engagement of the arginine – glycine – aspartic acid sequence on the latency - associated peptide of TGF  1 by integrins coupled with traction forces releases TGF  1 from a latency complex ( 17 , 88 ) . A phase 2 clinical trial tested BG00011 / STX - 100 , a humanized monoclonal antibody against  v  6 , Lampi and Reinhart - King , Sci . Transl . Med . 10 , eaao0475 ( 2018 ) 3 January 2018 S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E V I E W 7 of 14 for idiopathic lung fibrosis ( NCT01371305 ) ( 89 ) ; however , to date , Biogen has not publicly published the results of the trial . Whether  v integrin inhibitors in development for other applications , such as cilengitide for glioblastoma , also have efficacy against TGF  1 remains to be established ( 90 ) . Integrin inhibition is championed when com - pared to other strategies that target TGF  1 because it targets a pop - ulation of TGF  1 that becomes active as an outcome of pathological stiffening and circumvents the inflammatory reactions that plague systemic TGF  inhibition ( 91 ) . Rho GTPase As a critical regulator of cytoskeletal dynamics and cellular force through the formation of actin stress fibers , dysregulated Rho sig - naling has been causally attributed to pathological cell contractility , motility , gene expression , cell cycle progression , and survival ( 92 , 93 ) . Elevated Rho guanosine triphosphatase ( GTPase ) signaling and con - tractile traction forces activated by integrin engagement with the ECM is one of the most widely documented downstream consequences of increased ECM stiffness ( Fig . 2 ) ( 94 ) . However , Rho is considered “un - druggable” from the standpoint of traditional small - molecule inhibitors because of its three - dimensional structure . Classical small - molecule drugs , designed to bind large hydrophobic pockets on target proteins to form stable inhibitor - protein complexes , cannot bind to Rho be - cause it lacks these hydrophobic clefts ( 95 ) . As an intracellular protein , Rho is also in - accessible to protein biologics , which are too large to cross the plasma membrane ( 95 ) . Bacterial toxins that interfere with Rho activity through irreversible modi - fication may hold clinical potential if tight control of their potency and localiza - tion can be achieved . The only known bac - terial secreted Rho - specific inhibitors are clostridial C3 enzymes , but they are lim - ited by poor cellular uptake in cell types other than macrophages and monocytes ( 96 ) . Given these limitations , the Rho path - way has been targeted upstream or down - stream of the mature GTPase to inhibit Rho localization , prevent Rho activation by guanine nucleotide exchange factors ( GEFs ) , and target downstream effectors . Rho localization is important to its ac - tivation and is regulated by posttransla - tional modification ( 97 ) . Rho is targeted to the plasma membrane where it main - tains close proximity to GEFs that catalyze the exchange of guanosine diphosphate ( GDP ) for GTP , which activates Rho in a rapid , switch - like manner ( 97 ) . Statins are widely prescribed to lower serum cho - lesterol by competitive inhibition of the enzyme HMG - CoA reductase during cho - lesterol synthesis and have been pursued to inhibit Rho ( 98 ) . Because statins block cholesterol synthesis , they also inhibit pre - nylated protein intermediates , including geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate , which interferes with Rho local - ization and activation ( 98 ) . Repurposing statins for clinical use be - yond cholesterol lowering is a potential clinical tool to overcome the effects of matrix stiffening that occurs with age or pathology ( Table 2 ) . The statin simvastatin attenuated elevated Rho activity caused by increased matrix stiffness in endothelial cells , reduced contractility , and improved endothelial barrier function ( 99 ) . In fi - broblasts derived from fibrotic lungs , simvastatin attenuated the myofibroblast phenotype and reduced growth factor expression ( 100 ) . Despite common deleterious roles for increased matrix stiff - ness and elevated Rho , the benefits of statins in cancer are less clear and even conflicting . Pharmacokinetic differences between lipo - philic and hydrophilic statins , heterogeneity between patient cancers , and data extracted from clinical trials designed with cardiovascular end points , rather than as cancer studies , are cited as causes of the inconsistencies ( 101 ) . Nevertheless , because the off - target effects of statins extend beyond Rho , and noting that matrix stiffness is one of many factors that compound to drive disease progression , the suc - cess or failure of statin repurposing cannot be attributed to altered Rho activity alone . GEF - H1 Increased ECM stiffness LARG ROCK Rho MLCP MRTF - A Survival MigrationProliferationECM synthesis ECM YAP / TAZ MAPK NF - κ B MLC P P P P Rho GTP GDP Nucleus F F Fig . 2 . Increased ECM stiffness activates the Rho - mediated cell contractility pathway . Mechanical force on integrins activates the Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factors ( GEFs ) , GEF - H1 and LARG , to catalyze the exchange of guanosine diphos - phate ( GDP ) for GTP . The major Rho effector Rho - associated kinase ( ROCK ) induces actomyosin cell contractility by phosphorylat - ing myosin light chain phosphatase ( MLCP ) and myosin light chain ( MLC ) . Downstream of Rho activation , myocardin - related transcription factor A ( MRTF - A ) , yes - associated protein ( YAP ) / transcriptional coactivator with PDZ - binding motif ( TAZ ) , nuclear factor  B ( NF -  B ) , and mitogen - activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) pathways regulate gene expression , and Rho ac - tivity has pathological implications on cell survival , migration , proliferation , and ECM synthesis . Solid arrows indicate direc - tion of cellular traction force generation ( blue ) and Rho - mediated contractility pathway events ( black ) . Dashed black arrows represent cellular responses downstream of Rho - mediated cell contractility . C RE D I T : A . K I TT E R M A N / S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E Lampi and Reinhart - King , Sci . Transl . Med . 10 , eaao0475 ( 2018 ) 3 January 2018 S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E V I E W 8 of 14 Rho GEFs GEFs are a therapeutic target to control Rho activity because of their direct role in activating Rho signaling . GEF targeting has the poten - tial to impart Rho - specific inhibition due to the identification of more than 80 GEFs and the diversity of cellular behaviors that result from intricate upstream signaling pathways that converge at Rho ( 102 ) . GEF inhibitors can be designed to block GEF - Rho interac - tions or target the GEF catalytic site , both of which terminate for - ward movement of the signal cascade . For example , the compound Rhosin blocks a GEF docking site on RhoA , and a class of compounds named Y16 bind to the GEF catalytic site ( 103 , 104 ) . These RhoA in - hibitors were effective in fibroblasts , neuronal cells , and mammary epithelial cells ( 103 , 104 ) . Within the Rho family of GTPases , Rhosin only inhibits RhoA activity without interrupting the function of other Rho GTPase family members , and Y16 binds to just three RhoA GEFs ( LARG , p115 , and PDZ ) , demonstrating high specificity with GEF targeting approaches ( 104 ) . In silico methods were used to discover these two Rho GEF inhibitors and are becoming powerful tools for rational drug discovery . Because the siRNA techniques used to study GEFs in experimental settings are not applicable to clinical transla - tion , there is a need to develop small - molecule inhibitors . However , similar to Rho , GEFs engage in protein - protein interactions and lack large structural pockets , which make them poor candidates for traditional small - molecule inhibitors . The combination of compu - tational methods with data - driven structural knowledge is identify - ing novel surface sites that are energetically favorable on proteins that were previously deemed undruggable , and because of the high clinical need , it is anticipated that these methods will yield addition - al sites to target Rho signaling and the associated GEFs ( 105 ) . In fi - broblasts , the Rho GEFs LARG and GEF - H1 have been identified as critical mediators of the cellular response to integrin force and there - fore are ideal GEF targets for dampening cell - ECM mechano - transduction ( 106 ) . As the ability to target Rho signaling expands , a more complete understanding of the expression , function , regula - tion , and activation of individual GEFs in specific cell types will be necessary . Rho - associated kinase ROCK is the major downstream effector of Rho that drives cell con - tractility and is a mediator of fibrotic pathologies ( 93 , 107 ) . ROCK phosphorylates myosin light chain and myosin light chain phos - phatase to induce the generation of cellular force from actomyosin filament contraction . Recently , a stiffness - dependent role for ROCK in driving fibroblast to myofibroblast conversion in pulmonary fibro - sis was identified , and ROCK inhibition attenuated increased endo - thelial permeability caused by age - related increased intima stiffness ( 107 , 108 ) . ROCK inhibition can be pursued using traditional small - molecule discovery efforts but is also plagued by nonspecificity . The two most prominent small - molecule ROCK inhibitors , fasudil and Y27632 , not only target the adenosine 5 ′ - triphosphate ( ATP ) – dependent ROCK kinase domain but also show nonspecific interactions with other kinases ( 109 ) . The effectiveness of fasudil and Y27632 is hypothesized to be partially due to their off - target effects with other kinases ( 109 ) . In addition to its pathological role , ROCK helps maintain homeostatic vascular tone via vascular smooth muscle cell contraction ( 109 ) , and ROCK inhibitors such as fasudil can be designed and used with this motivation . However , drugs that are successful in vitro for different clinical applications of ROCK inhibition can also induce unwanted decreases in blood pressure when transferred to animal models or humans , creating a barrier to their clinical adaptation . Nevertheless , fasudil has been used in Japan since 1995 for the treatment of cere - bral vasospasms , and ROCK inhibitors have been widely investigated to treat a variety of pathologies either alone or as a combination treat - ment ( 109 ) . Fasudil has an impressive record of safety and efficacy but has not been commercially marketed in the United States . The composition of matter patent on fasudil expired in early 2016 , and although its commercial future is unknown , it continues to be eval - uated in preclinical and clinical studies ( U . S . Patent 5 , 942 , 505 ) . A timely preclinical investigation in mice recently reported that prim - ing with fasudil to inhibit Rho pathway – mediated ECM remodeling markedly improved the efficacy of the current standard - of - care pan - creatic chemotherapies gemcitabine and Abraxane at both the pri - mary tumor and metastatic sites ( 110 ) . New ROCK inhibitors , such as ripasudil ( a fasudil derivative ) , have emerged from the clinical need to lower ocular pressure in glaucoma ( 111 ) . One approach to mitigate the off - target effects of ROCK in - hibitors is the development of “soft inhibitors , ” which are designed to degrade into inactive metabolites when not at their target site for improved patient tolerability ( 112 ) . The soft inhibitor AMA0076 , which completed phase 2 clinical trials ( NCT02136940 and NCT01693315 ) , is structurally based on Y27632 but exhibits tissue - specific hydrolysis rates in the eye ( 112 ) . Pharmacological efforts distinguishing the dis - tinct roles of the two ROCK isoforms , ROCK1 and ROCK2 , are also in progress ( 113 ) . The development of small - molecule inhibitors that exhibit greater specificity toward the ROCK family kinases or its spe - cific isoforms are using high - throughput screening and fragment - based approaches ( 109 ) . New patents for clinical siRNA inhibition of ROCK have also been filed ( 109 ) . Focal adhesion kinase FAK is a cytosolic nonreceptor tyrosine kinase activated by integrin clustering and is a regulator of focal adhesion dynamics and Rho ac - tivity ( 114 ) . FAK activation is upstream of the Ras – mitogen - activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) cascade ( 115 ) . FAK integrates ECM signals from integrins to activate downstream pathways that control adhesion , proliferation , motility , and survival ( 114 ) . In addition , focal adhesions are sites of actomyosin force transmission to the ECM ; therefore , FAK is a potential upstream target to inhibit cellular responses to matrix mechanical cues . Increased matrix stiffness increases phosphorylation of FAK at Tyr 397 , which is necessary for Src binding , and complete FAK activation through additional phosphorylation ( 114 , 116 ) . Dysregulated FAK - Src signaling is widely appreciated for its role in cancer invasion and metastasis , and consequently , the development of FAK inhibi - tors is concurrently being pursued by GlaxoSmithKline , Novartis , Merck , Takeda , and Pfizer , in addition to efforts by smaller pharma - ceutical companies ( 117 , 118 ) . These inhibitors primarily target the FAK catalytic site and have reached clinical trials as mono - or com - bination therapies ( 117 , 118 ) . Stiffness - induced up - regulated FAK activation is also deleterious in noncancer pathologies . Constitutive phosphorylation of the kinase is found in fibrotic fibroblasts , and FAK signaling potentiates growth factor signaling and the myofibroblast phenotype ( 119 ) . In addition , mechanically driven FAK - ERK pathways activate the Rho GEF , GEF - H1 ( 106 ) . As a druggable protein , FAK suffers from the same limitations as other kinases , namely , similarity in the catalytic domain that imparts nonspecific cross - reactivity of small - molecule inhibitors . Among a subset of kinases , improved selectivity has been demonstrated with Lampi and Reinhart - King , Sci . Transl . Med . 10 , eaao0475 ( 2018 ) 3 January 2018 S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E V I E W 9 of 14 allosteric inhibitors directed to a flexible Aps - Phe - Gly ( DFG ) amino acid trio at the N terminus of the activation loop ( 120 ) . In these ki - nases , the DFG portion undergoes dramatic conformational changes as it switches between active and inactive states and has been iden - tified as a domain that imparts selectivity when targeted in the inac - tive state ( 120 ) . Inhibitors stabilizing a unique  - helical conformation of the FAK DFG domain have exhibited robust selectivity and effi - cacy when tested in mice ( 121 ) . Other recent efforts to target FAK signaling are designed to inhibit scaffolding interactions with down - stream effectors ( 117 ) . These approaches are advantageous , because they target specific lineages of FAK signaling ( 117 ) . Another current approach to targeted FAK inhibition prevents autophosphorylation at Tyr 397 , which is particularly relevant to attenuating aberrant FAK activation caused by increased ECM stiffness ( 122 ) . For detailed discussions on FAK pharmacological development , the reader is di - rected to reviews by Golubovskaya ( 117 ) and Lee et al . ( 118 ) . Yes - associated protein / transcriptional coactivator with PDZ - binding motif The cellular response to increased ECM stiffness also occurs at the transcriptional level . The downstream effectors of the Hippo pathway , yes - associated protein ( YAP ) and transcriptional coactivator with PDZ - binding motif ( TAZ ) , known for mediating transcriptional reg - ulation of apoptosis and proliferation , are also activated by increased matrix rigidity independent of the canonical Hippo cascade ( 123 ) . YAP / TAZ activation by matrix stiffness contributes to fibroblast pheno - typic conversion , increased collagen deposition , and cell proliferation by augmenting feed - forward cycles that enhance microenvironment stiffening ( 124 ) . YAP / TAZ also potentiates TGF  signaling ( 124 ) . Acto - myosin contractility is necessary for stiffness - induced YAP activation , and inhibiting intercellular tension by abrogating Rho activation atten - uates YAP / TAZ nuclear localization ( 123 ) . The ongoing efforts to de - velop therapeutic Rho antagonists represent an indirect mechanism to inhibit stiffness - mediated YAP / TAZ activation . Already , statins have been identified as strong inhibitors of YAP / TAZ nuclear local - ization due to the crossover between the synthesis of cholesterol in - termediates and the synthesis of geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate for Rho posttranslational modification ( 125 ) . Direct inhibition of YAP / TAZ has been pursued using small - molecule inhibitors that prevent YAP / TAZ from associating with their target TEA / ATTS domain ( TEAD ) transcription factors in the nucleus ( 126 ) . The Novartis photosensi - tizer Visudyne prevented YAP from interacting with TEAD during treatment for macular degeneration , and Visudyne attenuated YAP - mediated oncogenic liver overgrowth in transgenic mouse models ( 126 ) . A peptide designed to mimic the native inhibition of YAP - TEAD association by vestigial - like family member 4 ( VGLL4 ) inhibited YAP ( 127 ) . As our understanding of the cross - talk between the Hippo and mechanotransduction pathways and regulation of YAP / TAZ in both normal and pathological settings increases , new therapeutic ap - proaches to target YAP / TAZ will likely emerge . YAP inhibition in he - patic stellate cells impeded the activated cell phenotype in vitro and prevented liver fibrosis in mice , indicating that transcriptional regu - lation may be a method to inhibit tissue stiffening ( 128 ) . Screens of avail - able drugs have yielded candidates that can be repurposed to inhibit YAP / TAZ , suggesting an accelerated track for druggable efforts . Myocardin - related transcription factor – A Myocardin - related transcription factor – A ( MRTF - A ) is another transcriptional coactivator with ECM remodeling implications that undergoes nuclear localization with increasing matrix stiffness ( 129 ) . MRTF - A induces fibrogenesis downstream of cellular force genera - tion by Rho activation and actin polymerization ( 129 ) . In addition to activation by cellular tension , TGF  intersects with MRTF - A ac - tivation and also induces its nuclear translocation , further linking matrix stiffness and TGF  in a self - propagating cycle ( 130 ) . The com - pound CCG - 1423 inhibited transcription along the Rho / MRTF / serum response factor ( SRF ) pathway , downstream of Rho activation , by bind - ing to the MRTF - A nuclear localization sequence ( 131 ) . Although CCG - 1423 suffered from high toxicity , structural insights into the rational design of Rho - mediated transcription inhibitors informed the devel - opment of new compounds with improved cytocompatibility . Atten - uated collagen - I and  - SMA expression induced by TGF  was achieved in myofibroblasts treated with the second - generation MRTF - A inhib - itors , CCG - 100602 and CCG - 20397 , validating stiffness - mediated Rho transcription as a therapeutic target ( 129 ) . Nuclear factor  B Rho - generated contractile forces initiated by ECM rigidity cues have been identified as regulators of the transcription factor nuclear factor  B ( NF -  B ) ( 132 ) . NF -  B is a key regulator of inflammation , con - sistent with the observation that aberrant connective tissue growth in the tumor stroma and fibrosis reflect a dysregulated wound heal - ing process ( 13 , 133 ) . In cell culture experiments , Rho - dependent nuclear localization of NF -  B was shown to increase with substrate stiffness and resulted in the expression of the inflammatory markers interleukin - 1  ( IL - 1  ) , IL - 8 , and MMP9 ( 132 ) . Nuclear translation of NF -  B scaled with ECM stiffness in both nonmetastatic and meta - static breast cancer cells stimulated with tumor necrosis factor –  ( TNF -  ) ( 134 ) . Because cell shape , cytoskeletal tension , and cell - cell adhesions regulate NF -  B , Rho can also negatively regulate NF -  B independent of stiffness in the presence of other cues and TNF -  stimulation ( 134 ) . Both NF -  B and YAP / TAZ activation share depen - dencies on cell shape and ECM stiffness ; however , nuclear localization of NF -  B is transient and rapid , occurring within hours , whereas mea - surable YAP / TAZ translocation requires days . These data suggest unique sensitivities of transcription factors regulated by ECM - mediated , Rho - generated actomyosin forces ( 132 , 135 ) . Therapeutic targeting of NF -  B for cancer is also applicable to fi - brosis ( for example , NF -  B contributes to hepatic injury progression to cirrhosis ) ( 136 ) . However , NF -  B inhibition is limited by side ef - fects resulting from systemic disruption of the innate immune response and overproduction of the inflammatory cytokine IL - 1  ( 137 ) . FDA - approved therapeutics that inhibit NF -  B activity include bortezomib , carfilzomib , and ixazomib , with registered clinical trials to study their efficacy in cancers ( 138 , 139 ) . Initial clinical trials of bortezomib out - side of hematological cancers had disappointing results , but there are currently 848 registered clinical trials for bortezomib , 144 registered for carfilzomib , and 90 for ixazomib , demonstrating the strong clin - ical interest in NF -  B inhibitors , with others in preclinical develop - ment ( clinicaltrials . gov ) ( 140 ) . Mitogen - activated protein kinase Force - dependent integrin activation can initiate MAPK cascades to affect cell survival , gene transcription , and myofibroblast differenti - ation ( 141 , 142 ) . Stiffness - mediated activation of MAPK signaling through ERK is FAK - dependent , consistent with an established role for FAK as an intermediate in integrin - mediated mechanotransduc - tion ( 106 , 115 ) . TGF  induces CTGF expression through Ras - ERK Lampi and Reinhart - King , Sci . Transl . Med . 10 , eaao0475 ( 2018 ) 3 January 2018 S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E V I E W 10 of 14 signaling , and emerging data from mesenchymal stem cell differen - tiation suggest that CTGF expression is , in part , dependent on ECM stiffness ( 143 , 144 ) . Matrix stiffness and Rho activation have already been reported to intersect with MAPK pathway activation . In mam - mary epithelial cells , sustained activation of Rho induced by elevated ECM stiffness activated Ras - ERK signaling to promote increased cell proliferation and invasiveness , both of which are signatures of cancer malignancy ( 115 ) . Because of the high occurrence of aberrant MAPK signaling in cancer , inhibitors of MAPK pathway intermedi - ates Ras , Raf , MEK ( MAPK kinase ) , and ERK have been pursued ; how - ever , intrinsic and acquired drug resistance have emerged as major limitations of these therapies ( 145 ) . Aberrant signal initiation from receptor tyrosine kinases ( RTKs ) on the cell surface is one cause of poor long - term success of MAPK pathway inhibitors ( 145 ) . Matrix - mediated MAPK signaling is initiated through integrins rather than RTKs ; therefore , it is possible that sustained therapeutic inhibition could be achieved in the specific context of attenuating ECM stiff - ness effects ( 115 ) . Combination therapies and new inhibitors are being pursued to circumvent acquired inhibitor resistance and complement the approved MAPK cascade inhibitors : vemurafenib ( B - Raf inhibi - tor ) , dabrafenib ( B - Raf inhibitor ) , cobimetinib ( MEK inhibitor ) , and trametinib ( MEK inhibitor ) ( 145 , 146 ) . Alternative splicing Variations in gene expression by alternative splicing were recently found to be regulated by ECM mechanics . Bordeleau et al . ( 147 ) reported that expression of the extra domain B – fibronectin ( EDB - FN ) splice variant , commonly found in tumors and proposed to contribute to tumorigenesis , is regulated by increased matrix stiffness in vitro and in murine models . The splicing event depends on Rho - mediated cell contractility . Alternative splicing of protein kinase C ( PKC ) BII and VEGF 165b were also identified as matrix stiffness – dependent . The phosphorylation of serine - arginine – rich ( SR ) proteins that mediate splicing increased with matrix stiffness via phosphoinositide 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) / protein kinase B ( AKT ) signaling . These data suggest that other splice variant proteins that aberrantly appear in the ECM milieu of stiffened tissues , such as EDA - FN that induces myofibroblast differen - tiation ( 22 , 142 ) , may also be mediated by matrix mechanics through a similar pathway . TGF  is often up - regulated in pathologically stiff microenvironments and contributes to splicing events , suggesting that alternative splicing may involve synergistic contributions be - tween mechanical cues and ECM components ( 148 ) . SR proteins or the PI3K / AKT pathways are potential therapeutic targets to control stiffness - mediated splicing events , in addition to current approach - es using oligonucleotides and small molecules ( 149 ) . Nuclear mechanics The cell nucleus is mechanically coupled to the actin cytoskeleton by an assembly of proteins that comprise the linker of nucleoskele - ton and cytoskeleton ( LINC ) complex and by extension to integrins and the ECM ( 150 ) . Externally applied force , as well as cell - generated intercellular tension , is propagated to the nucleus , which itself is a mechanotransducer ( 150 ) . Force propagation across the cytoskele - ton occurs orders of magnitude faster than biochemical signaling , and the nucleus is involved in the integration of and response to these mechanical inputs ( 150 ) . Because cellular DNA is stored in the nu - cleus , transmitted forces that induce changes in protein conformation , alter protein associations , or deform chromatin may have transcrip - tional implications ( 151 ) . Lamins are nuclear intermediate filaments that create a struc - tured protein network associated with the interior nuclear mem - brane and are implicated in both nuclear mechanotransduction and matrix stiffening responses ( 151 ) . Lamin - A content in murine tis - sues increased with matrix stiffness , and nuclear envelope stability and stiffness correlate with increased lamin - A content ( 152 ) . In addi - tion to transducing force , lamins are scaffolding proteins that interact with transcription factors and bind chromatin ( 151 ) . Lamin - dependent regulation of the MRTF - A / SRF and YAP / TAZ pathways may explain the excessive ECM production in many laminopathies and demon - strate another mechanism by which ECM protein transcription is regulated by matrix stiffness ( 153 ) . Therapeutic targets for nuclear mechanotransduction are likely to be discovered in parallel with the development of improved technologies to study subcellular pro - cesses . However , the complexity and delicacy of the nucleus , coupled with our current understanding of mechanotransduction , suggest that the best therapeutic options to intervene lie within already dis - cussed mechanotransduction sensing components . Force transmis - sion to the nucleus requires cells under prestress , which can be modulated by Rho contractility ( 150 ) . In addition , MRTF - A and YAP / TAZ path - ways can be targeted independent of lamin regulation as already described . CONCLUSION AND FUTURE OUTLOOK Two key players emerge from the discussion of potential therapeutic targets to overcome pathological ECM stiffening : TGF  and Rho . Their pleiotropic effects converge as they function in concert to pro - mote feed - forward cycles that amplify ECM production and stiffening . However , they also represent elusive therapeutic targets because of their ubiquitous expression and key functions in tissue homeostasis . A common underlying theme is a need for high potency and specific - ity among druggable efforts . Off - target interactions are a major hurdle for developing kinase inhibitors , and high toxicities have been crip - pling to the development of small molecules to prevent or disrupt matrix cross - linking . Moreover , these interventions need to be localized to the organs of interest to further minimize deleterious side effects . Improved specificity is anticipated with the development of aptamer technologies and new approaches to small - molecule drug develop - ment that use multifaceted approaches combining thermodynamics , structural biology , and mathematical computation ( 41 , 105 ) . The iden - tification of inhibitor sites on previously undruggable proteins , in - cluding Rho , should vastly expand the available therapeutic library . With the recognition of ECM stiffness as a contributing factor to multiple pathologies , the development of clinical technologies to non - invasively measure local tissue mechanics is necessary to achieve earlier diagnoses and better patient outcomes . From an academic perspec - tive , these modalities will contribute to increased understanding of pathological stiffening in its earliest stages at a resolution beyond the current clinical limit and will drive research efforts to identify novel clinical targets—perhaps even preventing full disease manifestation . Building off the strong foundation of the mechanotransduction field and the importance of microenvironment stiffness established over the past two decades , we can now work toward mitigating the effects of increased ECM stiffness in the emerging field of mechanomedicine . As has already been discovered for other pathologies , the most success - ful mechano - based therapeutic interventions for tissue stiffening will likely include combination therapies to reach more than one tar - get and overcome cellular redundancies . Lampi and Reinhart - King , Sci . Transl . Med . 10 , eaao0475 ( 2018 ) 3 January 2018 S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E V I E W 11 of 14 REFERENCES AND NOTES 1 . M . B . Barton , R . Harris , S . W . Fletcher , Does this patient have breast cancer ? The screening clinical breast examination : Should it be done ? How ? JAMA 282 , 1270 – 1280 ( 1999 ) . 2 . S . Sidney , C . P . Quesenberry , M . G . Jaffe , M . Sorel , M . N . Nguyen - Huynh , L . H . Kushi , A . S . Go , J . S . Rana , Recent trends in cardiovascular mortality in the United States and public health goals . JAMA Cardiol . 1 , 594 – 599 ( 2016 ) . 3 . V . M . Monnier , G . T . Mustata , K . L . Biemel , O . Reihl , M . O . Lederer , D . Zhenyu , D . R . Sell , Cross - linking of the extracellular matrix by the maillard reaction in aging and diabetes : An update on “a puzzle nearing resolution” . Ann . N . Y . Acad . Sci . 1043 , 533 – 544 ( 2005 ) . 4 . A . M . Handorf , Y . Zhou , M . A . Halanski , W . - J . Li , Tissue stiffness dictates development , homeostasis , and disease progression . Organogenesis 11 , 1 – 15 ( 2015 ) . 5 . K . M . Riching , B . L . Cox , M . R . Salick , C . Pehlke , A . S . Riching , S . M . Ponik , B . R . Bass , W . C . Crone , Y . Jiang , A . M . Weaver , K . W . Eliceiri , P . J . Keely , 3D collagen alignment limits protrusions to enhance breast cancer cell persistence . Biophys . J . 107 , 2546 – 2558 ( 2014 ) . 6 . M . W . Pickup , J . K . Mouw , V . M . Weaver , The extracellular matrix modulates the hallmarks of cancer . EMBO Rep . 15 , 1243 – 1253 ( 2014 ) . 7 . B . M . Kaess , J . Rong , M . G . Larson , N . M . Hamburg , J . A . Vita , D . Levy , E . J . Benjamin , R . S . Vasan , G . F . Mitchel , Aortic stiffness , blood pressure progression , and incident hypertension . JAMA 308 , 875 – 881 ( 2012 ) . 8 . C . Frantz , K . M . Stewart , V . M . Weaver , The extracellular matrix at a glance . J . Cell Sci . 123 , 4195 – 4200 ( 2010 ) . 9 . J . D . Humphrey , E . R . Dufresne , M . A . Schwartz , Mechanotransduction and extracellular matrix homeostasis . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 15 , 802 – 812 ( 2014 ) . 10 . J . C . Kohn , M . C . Lampi , C . A . Reinhart - King , Age - related vascular stiffening : Causes and consequences . Front . Genet . 6 , 112 ( 2015 ) . 11 . C . Bonnans , J . Chou , Z . Werb , Remodelling the extracellular matrix in development and disease . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 15 , 786 – 801 ( 2014 ) . 12 . T . Yeung , P . C . Georges , L . A . Flanagan , B . Marg , M . Ortiz , M . Funaki , N . Zahir , W . Ming , V . Weaver , P . A . Janmey , Effects of substrate stiffness on cell morphology , cytoskeletal structure , and adhesion . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 60 , 24 – 34 ( 2005 ) . 13 . R . Kalluri , The biology and function of fibroblasts in cancer . Nat . Rev . Cancer 16 , 582 – 598 ( 2016 ) . 14 . B . Hinz , S . H . Phan , V . J . Thannickal , A . Galli , M . - L . Bochaton - Piallat , G . Gabbiani , The myofibroblast : One function , multiple origins . Am . J . Pathol . 170 , 1807 – 1816 ( 2007 ) . 15 . F . Klingberg , B . Hinz , E . S . White , The myofibroblast matrix : Implications for tissue repair and fibrosis . J . Pathol . 229 , 298 – 309 ( 2013 ) . 16 . L . F . Castella , G . Gabbiani , C . A . McCulloch , B . Hinz , Regulation of myofibroblast activities : Calcium pulls some strings behind the scene . Exp . Cell Res . 316 , 2390 – 2401 ( 2010 ) . 17 . P . - J . Wipff , D . B . Rifkin , J . - J . Meister , B . Hinz , Myofibroblast contraction activates latent TGF -  1 from the extracellular matrix . J . Cell Biol . 179 , 1311 – 1323 ( 2007 ) . 18 . D . Jia , Z . Liu , N . Deng , T . Z . Tan , R . Y . - J . Huang , B . Taylor - Harding , D . - J . Cheon , K . Lawrenson , W . R . Wiedemeyer , A . E . Walts , B . Y . Karlan , S . Orsulic , A COL11A1 - correlated pan - cancer gene signature of activated fibroblasts for the prioritization of therapeutic targets . Cancer Lett . 382 , 203 – 214 ( 2016 ) . 19 . S . Yazdani , R . Bansal , J . Prakash , Drug targeting to myofibroblasts : Implications for fibrosis and cancer . Adv . Drug Deliv . Rev . 121 , 101 – 116 ( 2017 ) . 20 . A . Douglass , K . Wallace , R . Parr , J . Park , E . Durward , I . Broadbent , C . Barelle , A . J . Porter , M . C . Wright , Antibody - targeted myofibroblast apoptosis reduces fibrosis during sustained liver injury . J . Hepatol . 49 , 88 – 98 ( 2008 ) . 21 . B . Hinz , G . Gabbiani , C . Chaponnier , The NH 2 - terminal peptide of  – smooth muscle actin inhibits force generation by the myofibroblast in vitro and in vivo . J . Cell Biol . 157 , 657 – 663 ( 2002 ) . 22 . B . Hinz , Masters and servants of the force : The role of matrix adhesions in myofibroblast force perception and transmission . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 85 , 175 – 181 ( 2006 ) . 23 . N . Sampson , R . Koziel , C . Zenzmaier , L . Bubendorf , E . Plas , P . Jansen - Dürr , P . Berger , ROS signaling by NOX4 drives fibroblast - to - myofibroblast differentiation in the diseased prostatic stroma . Mol . Endocrinol . 25 , 503 – 515 ( 2011 ) . 24 . Q . Yao , S . Cao , C . Li , A . Mengesha , B . Kong , M . Wei , Micro - RNA - 21 regulates TGF -  - induced myofibroblast differentiation by targeting PDCD4 in tumor - stroma interaction . Int . J . Cancer 128 , 1783 – 1792 ( 2011 ) . 25 . B . Hinz , G . Gabbiani , Fibrosis : Recent advances in myofibroblast biology and new therapeutic perspectives . F1000 Biol . Rep . 2 , 78 ( 2010 ) . 26 . S . O’Reilly , MicroRNAs in fibrosis : Opportunities and challenges . Arthritis Res . Ther . 18 , 11 ( 2016 ) . 27 . B . C . Özdemir , T . Pentcheva - Hoang , J . L . Carstens , X . Zheng , C . - C . Wu , T . R . Simpson , H . Laklai , H . Sugimoto , C . Kahlert , S . V . Novitskiy , A . De Jesus - Acosta , P . Sharma , P . Heidari , U . Mahmood , L . Chin , H . L . Moses , V . M . Weaver , A . Maitra , J . P . Allison , V . S . LeBleu , R . Kalluri , Depletion of carcinoma - associated fibroblasts and fibrosis induces immunosuppression and accelerates pancreas cancer with reduced survival . Cancer Cell 25 , 719 – 734 ( 2014 ) . 28 . A . Biernacka , M . Dobaczewski , N . G . Frangogiannis , TGF -  signaling in fibrosis . Growth Factors 29 , 196 – 202 ( 2011 ) . 29 . D . R . Edwards , G . Murphy , J . J . Reynolds , S . E . Whitham , A . J . Docherty , P . Angel , J . K . Heath , Transforming growth factor beta modulates the expression of collagenase and metalloproteinase inhibitor . EMBO J . 6 , 1899 – 1904 ( 1987 ) . 30 . C . M . Kraning - Rush , J . P . Califano , C . A . Reinhart - King , Cellular traction stresses increase with increasing metastatic potential . PLOS ONE 7 , e32572 ( 2012 ) . 31 . K . E . Lipson , C . Wong , Y . Teng , S . Spong , CTGF is a central mediator of tissue remodeling and fibrosis and its inhibition can reverse the process of fibrosis . Fibrog . Tissue Repair 5 , S24 ( 2012 ) . 32 . J . G . Abreu , N . I . Ketpura , B . Reversade , E . M . De Robertis , Connective - tissue growth factor ( CTGF ) modulates cell signalling by BMP and TGF -  . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 599 – 604 ( 2002 ) . 33 . G . Raghu , M . B . Scholand , J . de Andrade , L . Lancaster , Y . Mageto , J . Goldin , K . K . Brown , K . R . Flaherty , M . Wencel , J . Wanger , T . Neff , F . Valone , J . Stauffer , S . Porter , FG - 3019 anti - connective tissue growth factor monoclonal antibody : Results of an open - label clinical trial in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis . Eur . Respir . J . 47 , 1481 – 1491 ( 2016 ) . 34 . S . G . Adler , S . Schwartz , M . E . Williams , C . Arauz - Pacheco , W . K . Bolton , T . Lee , D . Li , T . B . Neff , P . R . Urquilla , K . L . Sewell , Phase 1 study of anti - CTGF monoclonal antibody in patients with diabetes and microalbuminuria . Clin . J . Am . Soc . Nephrol . 5 , 1420 – 1428 ( 2010 ) . 35 . R . J . Akhurst , A . Hata , Targeting the TGF  signalling pathway in disease . Nat . Rev . Drug Discov . 11 , 790 – 811 ( 2012 ) . 36 . A . S . Selvaggio , P . W . Noble , Pirfenidone initiates a new era in the treatment of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis . Annu . Rev . Med . 67 , 487 – 495 ( 2016 ) . 37 . J . C . Morris , A . R . Tan , T . E . Olencki , G . I . Shapiro , B . J . Dezube , M . Reiss , F . J . Hsu , J . A . Berzofsky , D . P . Lawrence , Phase I study of GC1008 ( fresolimumab ) : A human anti - transforming growth factor - beta ( TGF  ) monoclonal antibody in patients with advanced malignant melanoma or renal cell carcinoma . PLOS ONE 9 , e90353 ( 2014 ) . 38 . C . - H . Heldin , Targeting the PDGF signaling pathway in the treatment of non - malignant diseases . J . Neuroimmune Pharmacol . 9 , 69 – 79 ( 2014 ) . 39 . D . Schuppan , Y . O . Kim , Evolving therapies for liver fibrosis . J . Clin . Invest . 123 , 1887 – 1901 ( 2013 ) . 40 . P . L . McCormack , Nintedanib : First global approval . Drugs 75 , 129 – 139 ( 2015 ) . 41 . J . Barman , Targeting cancer cells using aptamers : Cell - SELEX approach and recent advancements . RSC Adv . 5 , 11724 – 11732 ( 2015 ) . 42 . E . W . M . Ng , D . T . Shima , P . Calias , E . T . Cunningham Jr . , D . R . Guyer , A . P . Adamis , Pegaptanib , a targeted anti - VEGF aptamer for ocular vascular disease . Nat . Rev . Drug Discov . 5 , 123 – 132 ( 2006 ) . 43 . L . Santhanam , E . C . Tuday , A . K . Webb , P . Dowzicky , J . H . Kim , Y . J . Oh , G . Sikka , M . Kuo , M . K . Halushka , A . M . Macgregor , J . Dunn , S . Gutbrod , D . Yin , A . Shoukas , D . Nyhan , N . A . Flavahan , A . M . Belkin , D . E . Berkowitz , Decreased S - nitrosylation of tissue transglutaminase contributes to age - related increases in vascular stiffness . Circ . Res . 107 , 117 – 125 ( 2010 ) . 44 . N . Agnihotri , K . Mehta , Transglutaminase - 2 : Evolution from pedestrian protein to a promising therapeutic target . Amino Acids 49 , 425 – 439 ( 2017 ) . 45 . S . R . Caliari , M . Perepelyuk , E . M . Soulas , G . Y . Lee , R . G . Wells , J . A . Burdick , Gradually softening hydrogels for modeling hepatic stellate cell behavior during fibrosis regression . Integr . Biol . 8 , 720 – 728 ( 2016 ) . 46 . A . Nenna , C . Spadaccio , M . Lusini , L . Ulianich , M . Chello , F . Nappi , Basic and clinical research against advanced glycation end products ( AGEs ) : New compounds to tackle cardiovascular disease and diabetic complications . Recent Adv . Cardiovasc . Drug Discov . 10 , 10 – 33 ( 2015 ) . 47 . J . V . Valencia , M . Mone , C . Koehne , J . Rediske , T . E . Hughes , Binding of receptor for advanced glycation end products ( RAGE ) ligands is not sufficient to induce inflammatory signals : Lack of activity of endotoxin - free albumin - derived advanced glycation end products . Diabetologia 47 , 844 – 852 ( 2004 ) . 48 . S . Maeda , T . Matsui , A . Ojima , M . Suematsu , K . Kaseda , Y . Higashimoto , R . Yamakawa , S . Yamagishi , DNA aptamer raised against advanced glycation end products prevents abnormalities in electroretinograms of experimental diabetic retinopathy . Ophthalmic Res . 54 , 175 – 180 ( 2015 ) . 49 . J . Uribarri , M . Peppa , W . Cai , T . Goldberg , M . Lu , C . He , H . Vlassara , Restriction of dietary glycotoxins reduces excessive advanced glycation end products in renal failure patients . J . Am . Soc . Nephrol . 14 , 728 – 731 ( 2003 ) . 50 . C . Couppé , R . B . Svensson , J . - F . Grosset , V . Kovanen , R . H . Nielsen , M . R . Olsen , J . O . Larsen , S . F . E . Praet , D . Skovgaard , M . Hansen , P . Aagaard , M . Kjaer , S . P . Magnusson , Life - long endurance running is associated with reduced glycation and mechanical stress in connective tissue . Age 36 , 9665 ( 2014 ) . 51 . H . E . Barker , T . R . Cox , J . T . Erler , The rationale for targeting the LOX family in cancer . Nat . Rev . Cancer 12 , 540 – 552 ( 2012 ) . 52 . D . Kothapalli , S . - L . Liu , Y . H . Bae , J . Monslow , T . Xu , E . A . Hawthorne , F . J . Byfield , P . Castagnino , S . Rao , D . J . Rader , E . Puré , M . C . Phillips , S . Lund - Katz , P . A . Janmey , Lampi and Reinhart - King , Sci . Transl . Med . 10 , eaao0475 ( 2018 ) 3 January 2018 S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E V I E W 12 of 14 R . K . Assoian , Cardiovascular protection by ApoE and ApoE - HDL linked to suppression of ECM gene expression and arterial stiffening . Cell Rep . 2 , 1259 – 1271 ( 2012 ) . 53 . F . Bordeleau , B . N . Mason , E . M . Lollis , M . Mazzola , M . R . Zanotelli , S . Somasegar , J . P . Califano , C . Montague , D . J . LaValley , J . Huynh , N . Mencia - Trinchant , Y . L . Negrón Abril , D . C . Hassane , L . J . Bonassar , J . T . Butcher , R . S . Weiss , C . A . Reinhart - King , Matrix stiffening promotes a tumor vasculature phenotype . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 114 , 492 – 497 ( 2017 ) . 54 . S . B . Liu , N . Ikenaga , Z . - W . Peng , D . Y . Sverdlov , A . Greenstein , V . Smith , D . Schuppan , Y . Popov , Lysyl oxidase activity contributes to collagen stabilization during liver fibrosis progression and limits spontaneous fibrosis reversal in mice . FASEB J . 30 , 1599 – 1609 ( 2016 ) . 55 . H . R . Keiser , A . Sjoerdsma , Studies on beta - aminopropionitrile in patients with scleroderma . Clin . Pharmacol . Ther . 8 , 593 – 602 ( 1967 ) . 56 . A . B . Benson III , Z . A . Wainberg , J . R . Hecht , D . Vyushkov , H . Dong , J . Bendell , F . Kudrik , A phase II randomized , double‐blind , placebo‐controlled study of simtuzumab or placebo in combination with gemcitabine for the first‐line treatment of pancreatic adenocarcinoma . Oncologist 22 , 241 - e15 ( 2017 ) . 57 . G . Raghu , K . K . Brown , H . R . Collard , V . Cottin , K . F . Gibson , R . J . Kaner , D . J . Lederer , F . J . Martinez , P . W . Noble , J . W . Song , A . U . Wells , T . P . M . Whelan , W . Wuyts , E . Moreau , S . D . Patterson , V . Smith , S . Bayly , J . W . Chien , Q . Gong , J . J . Zhang , T . G . O’Riordan , Efficacy of simtuzumab versus placebo in patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis : A randomised , double - blind , controlled , phase 2 trial . Lancet Respir . Med . 5 , 22 – 32 ( 2017 ) . 58 . J . R . Hecht , A . B . Benson III , D . Vyushkov , Y . Yang , J . Bendell , U . Verma , A phase II , randomized , double‐blind , placebo‐controlled study of simtuzumab in combination with FOLFIRI for the second‐line treatment of metastatic KRAS mutant colorectal adenocarcinoma . Oncol . 22 , 243 - e23 ( 2017 ) . 59 . T . R . Cox , A . Gartland , J . T . Erler , Lysyl oxidase , a targetable secreted molecule involved in cancer metastasis . Cancer Res . 76 , 188 – 192 ( 2016 ) . 60 . N . Chan , A . Willis , N . Kornhauser , M . M . Ward , S . B . Lee , E . Nackos , B . R . Seo , E . Chuang , T . Cigler , A . Moore , D . Donovan , M . Vallee Cobham , V . Fitzpatrick , S . Schneider , A . Wiener , J . Guillaume - Abraham , E . Aljom , R . Zelkowitz , J . D . Warren , M . E . Lane , C . Fischbach , V . Mittal , L . Vahdat , Influencing the tumor microenvironment : A phase II study of copper depletion using tetrathiomolybdate in patients with breast cancer at high risk for recurrence and in preclinical models of lung metastases . Clin . Cancer Res . 23 , 666 – 676 ( 2017 ) . 61 . J . W . Keillor , K . Y . P . Apperley , Transglutaminase inhibitors : A patent review . Expert Opin . Ther . Pat . 26 , 49 – 63 ( 2016 ) . 62 . N . L . Occleston , S . O’Kane , N . Goldspink , M . W . J . Ferguson , New therapeutics for the prevention and reduction of scarring . Drug Discov . Today 13 , 973 – 981 ( 2008 ) . 63 . K . C . Olsen , A . P . Epa , A . A . Kulkarni , R . M . Kottmann , C . E . McCarthy , G . V . Johnson , T . H . Thatcher , R . P . Phipps , P . J . Sime , Inhibition of transglutaminase 2 , a novel target for pulmonary fibrosis , by two small electrophilic molecules . Am . J . Respir . Cell Mol . Biol . 50 , 737 – 747 ( 2014 ) . 64 . N . Daneshpour , M . Griffin , R . Collighan , Y . Perrie , Targeted delivery of a novel group of site - directed transglutaminase inhibitors to the liver using liposomes : A new approach for the potential treatment of liver fibrosis . J . Drug Target . 19 , 624 – 631 ( 2011 ) . 65 . M . Selman , A . Pardo , L . Barrera , A . Estrada , S . R . Watson , K . Wilson , N . Aziz , N . Kaminski , A . Zlotnik , Gene expression profiles distinguish idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis from hypersensitivity pneumonitis . Am . J . Respir . Crit . Care Med . 173 , 188 – 198 ( 2006 ) . 66 . B . Fingleton , MMPs as therapeutic targets—Still a viable option ? Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 19 , 61 – 68 ( 2008 ) . 67 . K . J . Isaacson , M . Martin Jensen , N . B . Subrahmanyam , H . Ghandehari , Matrix - metalloproteinases as targets for controlled delivery in cancer : An analysis of upregulation and expression . J . Control . Release 259 , 62 – 75 ( 2017 ) . 68 . S . Cabrera , M . Gaxiola , J . L . Arreola , R . Ramírez , P . Jara , J . D’Armiento , T . Richards , M . Selman , A . Pardo , Overexpression of MMP9 in macrophages attenuates pulmonary fibrosis induced by bleomycin . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 39 , 2324 – 2338 ( 2007 ) . 69 . Q . Yu , I . Stamenkovic , Cell surface - localized matrix metalloproteinase - 9 proteolytically activates TGF -  and promotes tumor invasion and angiogenesis . Genes Dev . 14 , 163 – 176 ( 2000 ) . 70 . X . Zhou , F . R . Murphy , N . Gehdu , J . Zhang , J . P . Iredale , R . C . Benyon , Engagement of  v  3 integrin regulates proliferation and apoptosis of hepatic stellate cells . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 23996 – 24006 ( 2004 ) . 71 . A . Haage , I . C . Schneider , Cellular contractility and extracellular matrix stiffness regulate matrix metalloproteinase activity in pancreatic cancer cells . FASEB J . 28 , 3589 – 3599 ( 2014 ) . 72 . R . E . Vandenbroucke , C . Libert , Is there new hope for therapeutic matrix metalloproteinase inhibition ? Nat . Rev . Drug Discov . 13 , 904 – 927 ( 2014 ) . 73 . U . Lendeckel , J . Kohl , M . Arndt , S . Carl - McGrath , H . Donat , C . Röcken , Increased expression of ADAM family members in human breast cancer and breast cancer cell lines . J . Cancer Res . Clin . Oncol . 131 , 41 – 48 ( 2005 ) . 74 . N . Rocks , G . Paulissen , M . El Hour , F . Quesada , C . Crahay , M . Gueders , J . M . Foidart , A . Noel , D . Cataldo , Emerging roles of ADAM and ADAMTS metalloproteinases in cancer . Biochimie 90 , 369 – 379 ( 2008 ) . 75 . K . Bourd - Boittin , D . Bonnier , A . Leyme , B . Mari , P . Tuffery , M . Samson , F . Ezan , G . Baffet , N . Theret , Protease profiling of liver fibrosis reveals the ADAM metallopeptidase with thrombospondin type 1 motif , 1 as a central activator of transforming growth factor beta . Hepatology 54 , 2173 – 2184 ( 2011 ) . 76 . S . Cal , C . López - Otín , ADAMTS proteases and cancer . Matrix Biol . 44 – 46 , 77 – 85 ( 2015 ) . 77 . S . Friedman , R . Levy , W . Garrett , D . Doval , S . Bondarde , T . Sahoo , D . Lokanatha , P . Julka , K . Shenoy , R . Nagarkar , G . Bhattacharyya , K . Kumar , S . Nag , P . Mohan , N . Narang , D . Raghunadharao , M . Walia , W . Yao , J . Li , T . Emm , S . Yeleswaram , P . Scherle , R . Newton , Clinical benefit of INCB7839 , a potent and selective inhibitor of ADAM10 and ADAM17 , in combination with trastuzumab in metastatic HER2 positive breast cancer patients . Cancer Res . 69 , 5056 ( 2009 ) . 78 . P . D . Arora , N . Narani , C . A . McCulloch , The compliance of collagen gels regulates transforming growth factor -  induction of  - smooth muscle actin in fibroblasts . Am . J . Pathol . 154 , 871 – 882 ( 1999 ) . 79 . P . C . Georges , J . - J . Hui , Z . Gombos , M . E . McCormick , A . Y . Wang , M . Uemura , R . Mick , P . A . Janmey , E . E . Furth , R . G . Wells , Increased stiffness of the rat liver precedes matrix deposition : Implications for fibrosis . Am . J . Physiol . Gastrointest . Liver Physiol . 293 , G1147 – G1154 ( 2007 ) . 80 . R . M . Weisbrod , T . Shiang , L . Al Sayah , J . L . Fry , S . Bajpai , C . A . Reinhart - King , H . E . Lob , L . Santhanam , G . Mitchell , R . A . Cohen , F . Seta , Arterial stiffening precedes systolic hypertension in diet - induced obesity . Hypertension 62 , 1105 – 1110 ( 2013 ) . 81 . S . C . Wei , L . Fattet , J . H . Tsai , Y . Guo , V . H . Pai , H . E . Majeski , A . C . Chen , R . L . Sah , S . S . Taylor , A . J . Engler , J . Yang , Matrix stiffness drives epithelial – mesenchymal transition and tumour metastasis through a TWIST1 – G3BP2 mechanotransduction pathway . Nat . Cell Biol . 17 , 678 – 688 ( 2015 ) . 82 . R . A . DeFilippis , H . Chang , N . Dumont , J . T . Rabban , Y . - Y . Chen , G . V . Fontenay , H . K . Berman , M . L . Gauthier , J . Zhao , D . Hu , J . J . Marx , J . A . Tjoe , E . Ziv , M . Febbraio , K . Kerlikowske , B . Parvin , T . D . Tlsty , CD36 repression activates a multicellular stromal program shared by high mammographic density and tumor tissues . Cancer Discov . 2 , 826 – 839 ( 2012 ) . 83 . L . Seguin , J . S . Desgrosellier , S . M . Weis , D . A . Cheresh , Integrins and cancer : Regulators of cancer stemness , metastasis , and drug resistance . Trends Cell Biol . 25 , 234 – 240 ( 2015 ) . 84 . W . Guo , F . G . Giancotti , Integrin signalling during tumour progression . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 5 , 816 – 826 ( 2004 ) . 85 . H . B . Schiller , M . - R . Hermann , J . Polleux , T . Vignaud , S . Zanivan , C . C . Friedel , Z . Sun , A . Raducanu , K . - E . Gottschalk , M . Théry , M . Mann , R . Fässler ,  1 - and  v - class integrins cooperate to regulate myosin II during rigidity sensing of fibronectin - based microenvironments . Nat . Cell Biol . 15 , 625 – 636 ( 2013 ) . 86 . B . D . Hoffman , C . Grashoff , M . A . Schwartz , Dynamic molecular processes mediate cellular mechanotransduction . Nature 475 , 316 – 323 ( 2011 ) . 87 . V . Maruthamuthu , B . Sabass , U . S . Schwarz , M . L . Gardel , Cell - ECM traction force modulates endogenous tension at cell – cell contacts . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 108 , 4708 – 4713 ( 2011 ) . 88 . N . I . Reed , H . Jo , C . Chen , K . Tsujino , T . D . Arnold , W . F . DeGrado , D . Sheppard , The  v  1 integrin plays a critical in vivo role in tissue fibrosis . Sci . Transl . Med . 7 , 288ra79 ( 2015 ) . 89 . H . V . Woodcock , T . M . Maher , The treatment of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis . F1000Prime Rep . 6 , 16 ( 2014 ) . 90 . R . Stupp , M . E . Hegi , T . Gorlia , S . C . Erridge , J . Perry , Y . - K . Hong , K . D . Aldape , B . Lhermitte , T . Pietsch , D . Grujicic , J . P . Steinbach , W . Wick , R . Tarnawski , D . - H . Nam , P . Hau , A . Weyerbrock , M . J . B . Taphoorn , C . - C . Shen , N . Rao , L . Thurzo , U . Herrlinger , T . Gupta , R . - D . Kortmann , K . Adamska , C . McBain , A . A . Brandes , J . C . Tonn , O . Schnell , T . Wiegel , C . - Y . Kim , L . B . Nabors , D . A . Reardon , M . J . van den Bent , C . Hicking , A . Markivskyy , M . Picard , M . Weller , Cilengitide combined with standard treatment for patients with newly diagnosed glioblastoma with methylated MGMT promoter ( CENTRIC EORTC 26071 - 22072 study ) : A multicentre , randomised , open - label , phase 3 trial . Lancet Oncol . 15 , 1100 – 1108 ( 2014 ) . 91 . N . C . Henderson , D . Sheppard , Integrin - mediated regulation of TGF  in fibrosis . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1832 , 891 – 896 ( 2013 ) . 92 . M . Parri , P . Chiarugi , Rac and Rho GTPases in cancer cell motility control . Cell Commun . Signal . 8 , 23 ( 2010 ) . 93 . C . A . Street , B . A . Bryan , Rho kinase proteins—Pleiotropic modulators of cell survival and apoptosis . Anticancer Res . 31 , 3645 – 3657 ( 2011 ) . 94 . D . E . Discher , P . Janmey , Y . - L . Wang , Tissue cells feel and respond to the stiffness of their substrate . Science 310 , 1139 – 1143 ( 2005 ) . 95 . G . L . Verdine , L . D . Walensky , The challenge of drugging undruggable targets in cancer : Lessons learned from targeting BCL - 2 family members . Clin . Cancer Res . 13 , 7264 – 7270 ( 2007 ) . 96 . H . Barth , S . Fischer , A . Möglich , C . Förtsch , Clostridial C3 Toxins target monocytes / macrophages and modulate their functions . Front . Immunol . 6 , 339 ( 2015 ) . 97 . R . G . Hodge , A . J . Ridley , Regulating Rho GTPases and their regulators . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 17 , 496 – 510 ( 2016 ) . 98 . C . - Y . Wang , P . - Y . Liu , J . K . Liao , Pleiotropic effects of statin therapy : Molecular mechanisms and clinical results . Trends Mol . Med . 14 , 37 – 44 ( 2008 ) . Lampi and Reinhart - King , Sci . Transl . Med . 10 , eaao0475 ( 2018 ) 3 January 2018 S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E V I E W 13 of 14 99 . M . C . Lampi , C . J . Faber , J . Huynh , F . Bordeleau , M . R . Zanotelli , C . A . Reinhart - King , Simvastatin ameliorates matrix stiffness - mediated endothelial monolayer disruption . PLOS ONE 11 , e0147033 ( 2016 ) . 100 . K . L . Watts , E . M . Sampson , G . S . Schultz , M . A . Spiteri , Simvastatin inhibits growth factor expression and modulates profibrogenic markers in lung fibroblasts . Am . J . Respir . Cell Mol . Biol . 32 , 290 – 300 ( 2005 ) . 101 . S . Pisanti , P . Picardi , E . Ciaglia , A . D’Alessandro , M . Bifulco , Novel prospects of statins as therapeutic agents in cancer . Pharmacol . Res . 88 , 84 – 98 ( 2014 ) . 102 . M . L . Kutys , K . M . Yamada , Rho GEFs and GAPs : Emerging integrators of extracellular matrix signaling . Small GTPases 6 , 16 – 19 ( 2015 ) . 103 . X . Shang , F . Marchioni , N . Sipes , C . R . Evelyn , M . Jerabek - Willemsen , S . Duhr , W . Seibel , M . Wortman , Y . Zheng , Rational design of small molecule inhibitors targeting RhoA subfamily Rho GTPases . Chem . Biol . 19 , 699 – 710 ( 2012 ) . 104 . X . Shang , F . Marchioni , C . R . Evelyn , N . Sipes , X . Zhou , W . Seibel , M . Wortman , Y . Zheng , Small - molecule inhibitors targeting G - protein – coupled Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factors . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 110 , 3155 – 3160 ( 2013 ) . 105 . F . Bai , F . Morcos , R . R . Cheng , H . Jiang , J . N . Onuchic , Elucidating the druggable interface of protein−protein interactions using fragment docking and coevolutionary analysis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 113 , E8051 – E8058 ( 2016 ) . 106 . C . Guilluy , V . Swaminathan , R . Garcia - Mata , E . T . O’Brien , R . Superfine , K . Burridge , The Rho GEFs LARG and GEF - H1 regulate the mechanical response to force on integrins . Nat . Cell Biol . 13 , 722 – 727 ( 2011 ) . 107 . S . S . Htwe , B . H . Cha , K . Yue , A . Khademhosseini , A . J . Knox , A . M . Ghaemmaghami , Role of Rho - associated coiled - coil forming kinase isoforms in regulation of stiffness - induced myofibroblast differentiation in lung fibrosis . Am . J . Respir . Cell Mol . Biol . 56 , 772 – 783 ( 2017 ) . 108 . J . Huynh , N . Nishimura , K . Rana , J . M . Peloquin , J . P . Califano , C . R . Montague , M . R . King , C . B . Schaffer , C . A . Reinhart - King , Age - related intimal stiffening enhances endothelial permeability and leukocyte transmigration . Sci . Transl . Med . 3 , 112ra122 ( 2011 ) . 109 . C . Hahmann , T . Schroeter , Rho - kinase inhibitors as therapeutics : From pan inhibition to isoform selectivity . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 67 , 171 – 177 ( 2010 ) . 110 . C . Vennin , V . T . Chin , S . C . Warren , M . C . Lucas , D . Herrmann , A . Magenau , P . Melenec , S . N . Walters , G . del Monte - Nieto , J . R . W . Conway , M . Nobis , A . H . Allam , R . A . McCloy , N . Currey , M . Pinese , A . Boulghourjian , A . Zaratzian , A . A . S . Adam , C . Heu , A . M . Nagrial , A . Chou , A . Steinmann , A . Drury , D . Froio , M . Giry - Laterriere , N . L . E . Harris , T . Phan , R . Jain , W . Weninger , E . J . McGhee , R . Whan , A . L . Johns , J . S . Samra , L . Chantrill , A . J . Gill , M . Kohonen - Corish , R . P . Harvey , A . V . Biankin ; Australian Pancreatic Cancer Genome Initiative ( APGI ) , T . R . J . Evans , K . I . Anderson , S . T . Grey , C . J . Ormandy , D . Gallego - Ortega , Y . Wang , M . S . Samuel , O . J . Sansom , A . Burgess , T . R . Cox , J . P . Morton , M . Pajic , P . Timpson , Transient tissue priming via ROCK inhibition uncouples pancreatic cancer progression , sensitivity to chemotherapy , and metastasis . Sci . Transl . Med . 9 , eaai8504 ( 2017 ) . 111 . S . K . Wang , R . T . Chang , An emerging treatment option for glaucoma : Rho kinase inhibitors . Clin . Ophthalmol . 8 , 883 – 890 ( 2014 ) . 112 . S . Boland , O . Defert , J . Alen , A . Bourin , K . Castermans , N . Kindt , N . Boumans , L . Panitti , S . Van de Velde , I . Stalmans , D . Leysen , 3 - [ 2 - ( Aminomethyl ) - 5 - [ ( pyridin - 4 - yl ) carbamoyl ] phenyl ] benzoates as soft ROCK inhibitors . Bioorg . Med . Chem . Lett . 23 , 6442 – 6446 ( 2013 ) . 113 . J . Shi , L . Wei , Rho kinases in cardiovascular physiology and pathophysiology : The effect of fasudil . J . Cardiovasc . Pharmacol . 62 , 341 – 354 ( 2013 ) . 114 . F . J . Sulzmaier , C . Jean , D . D . Schlaepfer , FAK in cancer : Mechanistic findings and clinical applications . Nat . Rev . Cancer 14 , 598 – 610 ( 2014 ) . 115 . P . P . Provenzano , D . R . Inman , K . W . Eliceiri , P . J . Keely , Matrix density - induced mechanoregulation of breast cell phenotype , signaling and gene expression through a FAK – ERK linkage . Oncogene 28 , 4326 – 4343 ( 2009 ) . 116 . M . J . Paszek , N . Zahir , K . R . Johnson , J . N . Lakins , G . I . Rozenberg , A . Gefen , C . A . Reinhart - King , S . S . Margulies , M . Dembo , D . Boettiger , D . A . Hammer , V . M . Weaver , Tensional homeostasis and the malignant phenotype . Cancer Cell 8 , 241 – 254 ( 2005 ) . 117 . V . M . Golubovskaya , Targeting FAK in human cancer : From finding to first clinical trials . Front . Biosci . 19 , 687 – 706 ( 2014 ) . 118 . B . Y . Lee , P . Timpson , L . G . Horvath , R . J . Daly , FAK signaling in human cancer as a target for therapeutics . Pharmacol . Ther . 146 , 132 – 149 ( 2015 ) . 119 . Y . Mimura , H . Ihn , M . Jinnin , Y . Asano , K . Yamane , K . Tamaki , Constitutive phosphorylation of focal adhesion kinase is involved in the myofibroblast differentiation of scleroderma fibroblasts . J . Invest . Dermatol . 124 , 886 – 892 ( 2005 ) . 120 . D . K . Treiber , N . P . Shah , Ins and outs of kinase DFG motifs . Chem . Biol . 20 , 745 – 746 ( 2013 ) . 121 . D . Lietha , M . J . Eck , Crystal structures of the FAK kinase in complex with TAE226 and related bis - anilino pyrimidine inhibitors reveal a helical DFG conformation . PLOS ONE 3 , e3800 ( 2008 ) . 122 . V . M . Golubovskaya , S . Figel , B . T . Ho , C . P . Johnson , M . Yemma , G . Huang , M . Zheng , C . Nyberg , A . Magis , D . A . Ostrov , I . H . Gelman , W . G . Cance , A small molecule focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) inhibitor , targeting Y397 site : 1 - ( 2 - Hydroxyethyl ) - 3 , 5 , 7 - triaza - 1 - azoniatricyclo [ 3 . 3 . 1 . 1 3 , 7 ] decane ; bromide effectively inhibits FAK autophosphorylation activity and decreases cancer cell viability , clonogenicity and tumor growth in vivo . Carcinogenesis 33 , 1004 – 1013 ( 2012 ) . 123 . S . Dupont , L . Morsut , M . Aragona , E . Enzo , S . Giulitti , M . Cordenonsi , F . Zanconato , J . Le Digabel , M . Forcato , S . Bicciato , N . Elvassore , S . Piccolo , Role of YAP / TAZ in mechanotransduction . Nature 474 , 179 – 183 ( 2011 ) . 124 . F . Liu , D . Lagares , K . M . Choi , L . Stopfer , A . Marinkovi ć , V . Vrbanac , C . K . Probst , S . E . Hiemer , T . H . Sisson , J . C . Horowitz , I . O . Rosas , L . E . Fredenburgh , C . Feghali - Bostwick , X . Varelas , A . M . Tager , D . J . Tschumperlin , Mechanosignaling through YAP and TAZ drives fibroblast activation and fibrosis . Am . J . Physiol . Lung Cell . Mol . Physiol . 308 , L344 – L357 ( 2015 ) . 125 . G . Sorrentino , N . Ruggeri , V . Specchia , M . Cordenonsi , M . Mano , S . Dupont , A . Manfrin , E . Ingallina , R . Sommaggio , S . Piazza , A . Rosato , S . Piccolo , G . Del Sal , Metabolic control of YAP and TAZ by the mevalonate pathway . Nat . Cell Biol . 16 , 357 – 366 ( 2014 ) . 126 . Y . Liu - Chittenden , B . Huang , J . S . Shim , Q . Chen , S . - J . Lee , R . A . Anders , J . O . Liu , D . Pan , Genetic and pharmacological disruption of the TEAD – YAP complex suppresses the oncogenic activity of YAP . Genes Dev . 26 , 1300 – 1305 ( 2012 ) . 127 . S . Jiao , H . Wang , Z . Shi , A . Dong , W . Zhang , X . Song , F . He , Y . Wang , Z . Zhang , W . Wang , X . Wang , T . Guo , P . Li , Y . Zhao , H . Ji , L . Zhang , Z . Zhou , A peptide mimicking VGLL4 function acts as a YAP antagonist therapy against gastric cancer . Cancer Cell 25 , 166 – 180 ( 2014 ) . 128 . I . Mannaerts , S . B . Leite , S . Verhulst , S . Claerhout , N . Eysackers , L . F . R . Thoen , A . Hoorens , H . Reynaert , G . Halder , L . A . van Grunsven , The Hippo pathway effector YAP controls mouse hepatic stellate cell activation . J . Hepatol . 63 , 679 – 688 ( 2015 ) . 129 . L . A . Johnson , E . S . Rodansky , A . J . Haak , S . D . Larsen , R . R . Neubig , P . D . R . Higgins , Novel Rho / MRTF / SRF inhibitors block matrix - stiffness and TGF -  – induced fibrogenesis in human colonic myofibroblasts . Inflamm . Bowel Dis . 20 , 154 – 165 ( 2014 ) . 130 . M . A . Scharenberg , B . E . Pippenger , R . Sack , D . Zingg , J . Ferralli , S . Schenk , I . Martin , R . Chiquet - Ehrismann , TGF -  - induced differentiation into myofibroblasts involves specific regulation of two MKL1 isoforms . J . Cell Sci . 127 , 1079 – 1091 ( 2014 ) . 131 . K . Hayashi , B . Watanabe , Y . Nakagawa , S . Minami , T . Morita , RPEL proteins are the molecular targets for CCG - 1423 , an inhibitor of Rho signaling . PLOS ONE 9 , e89016 ( 2014 ) . 132 . S . Ishihara , M . Yasuda , I . Harada , T . Mizutani , K . Kawabata , H . Haga , Substrate stiffness regulates temporary NF -  B activation via actomyosin contractions . Exp . Cell Res . 319 , 2916 – 2927 ( 2013 ) . 133 . T . Lawrence , The nuclear factor NF -  B pathway in inflammation . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 1 , a001651 ( 2009 ) . 134 . J . E . Sero , H . Z . Sailem , R . C . Ardy , H . Almuttaqi , T . Zhang , C . Bakal , Cell shape and the microenvironment regulate nuclear translocation of NF -  B in breast epithelial and tumor cells . Mol . Syst . Biol . 11 , 790 ( 2015 ) . 135 . M . Aragona , T . Panciera , A . Manfrin , S . Giulitti , F . Michielin , N . Elvassore , S . Dupont , S . Piccolo , A mechanical checkpoint controls multicellular growth through YAP / TAZ regulation by actin - processing factors . Cell 154 , 1047 – 1059 ( 2013 ) . 136 . T . Luedde , R . F . Schwabe , NF -  B in the liver—Linking injury , fibrosis and hepatocellular carcinoma . Nat . Rev . Gastroenterol . Hepatol . 8 , 108 – 118 ( 2011 ) . 137 . V . Baud , M . Karin , Is NF -  B a good target for cancer therapy ? Hopes and pitfalls . Nat . Rev . Drug Discov . 8 , 33 – 40 ( 2009 ) . 138 . B . A . Teicher , K . C . Anderson , CCR 20 th anniversary commentary : In the beginning , there was PS - 341 . Clin . Cancer Res . 21 , 939 – 941 ( 2015 ) . 139 . B . Muz , R . N . Ghazarian , M . Ou , M . J . Luderer , H . D . Kusdono , A . K . Azab , Spotlight on ixazomib : Potential in the treatment of multiple myeloma . Drug Des . Devel . Ther . 10 , 217 – 226 ( 2016 ) . 140 . P . Godwin , A . M . Baird , S . Heavey , M . P . Barr , K . J . O’Byrne , K . Gately , Targeting nuclear factor - kappa b to overcome resistance to chemotherapy . Front . Oncol . 3 , 120 ( 2013 ) . 141 . A . Plotnikov , E . Zehorai , S . Procaccia , R . Seger , The MAPK cascades : Signaling components , nuclear roles and mechanisms of nuclear translocation . Biochim . Biophys . Acta Mol . Cell Res . 1813 , 1619 – 1633 ( 2011 ) . 142 . M . Kohan , A . F . Muro , E . S . White , N . Berkman , EDA - containing cellular fibronectin induces fibroblast differentiation through binding to  4  7 integrin receptor and MAPK / Erk 1 / 2 - dependent signaling . FASEB J . 24 , 4503 – 4512 ( 2010 ) . 143 . G . A . Secker , A . J . Shortt , E . Sampson , Q . P . Schwarz , G . S . Schultz , J . T . Daniels , TGF  stimulated re - epithelialisation is regulated by CTGF and Ras / MEK / ERK signalling . Exp . Cell Res . 314 , 131 – 142 ( 2008 ) . 144 . J . - H . Hwang , M . R . Byun , A . R . Kim , K . M . Kim , H . J . Cho , Y . H . Lee , J . Kim , M . G . Jeong , E . S . Hwang , J . - H . Hong , Extracellular matrix stiffness regulates osteogenic differentiation through MAPK activation . PLOS ONE 10 , e0135519 ( 2015 ) . 145 . A . A . Samatar , P . I . Poulikakos , Targeting RAS – ERK signalling in cancer : Promises and challenges . Nat . Rev . Drug Discov . 13 , 928 – 942 ( 2014 ) . 146 . R . M . Webster , Combination therapies in oncology . Nat . Rev . Drug Discov . 15 , 81 – 82 ( 2016 ) . Lampi and Reinhart - King , Sci . Transl . Med . 10 , eaao0475 ( 2018 ) 3 January 2018 S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E V I E W 14 of 14 147 . F . Bordeleau , J . P . Califano , Y . L . Negrón Abril , B . N . Mason , D . J . LaValley , S . J . Shin , R . S . Weiss , C . A . Reinhart - King , Tissue stiffness regulates serine / arginine - rich protein - mediated splicing of the extra domain B - fibronectin isoform in tumors . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 112 , 8314 – 8319 ( 2015 ) . 148 . E . Balza , L . Borsi , G . Allemanni , L . Zardi , Transforming growth factor  regulates the levels of different fibronectin isoforms in normal human cultured fibroblasts . FEBS Lett . 228 , 42 – 44 ( 1988 ) . 149 . K . - q . Le , B . S . Prabhakar , W . - j . Hong , L . - c . Li , Alternative splicing as a biomarker and potential target for drug discovery . Acta Pharmacol . Sin . 36 , 1212 – 1218 ( 2015 ) . 150 . N . Wang , J . D . Tytell , D . E . Ingber , Mechanotransduction at a distance : Mechanically coupling the extracellular matrix with the nucleus . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 , 75 – 82 ( 2009 ) . 151 . G . R . Fedorchak , A . Kaminski , J . Lammerding , Cellular mechanosensing : Getting to the nucleus of it all . Prog . Biophys . Mol . Biol . 115 , 76 – 92 ( 2014 ) . 152 . J . Swift , I . L . Ivanovska , A . Buxboim , T . Harada , P . C . D . P . Dingal , J . Pinter , J . D . Pajerowski , K . R . Spinler , J . - W . Shin , M . Tewari , F . Rehfeldt , D . W . Speicher , D . E . Discher , Nuclear lamin - A scales with tissue stiffness and enhances matrix - directed differentiation . Science 341 , 1240104 ( 2013 ) . 153 . A . T . Bertrand , S . Ziaei , C . Ehret , H . Duchemin , K . Mamchaoui , A . Bigot , M . Mayer , S . Quijano - Roy , I . Desguerre , J . Lainé , R . Ben Yaou , G . Bonne , C . Coirault , Cellular microenvironments reveal defective mechanosensing responses and elevated YAP signaling in LMNA - mutated muscle precursors . J . Cell Sci . 127 , 2873 – 2884 ( 2014 ) . Funding : The authors acknowledge support from the NSF ( award number 1435755 ) to C . A . R . - K . and the NIH ( award number HL 127499 ) to C . A . R . - K . We also acknowledge support from a NSF Graduate Research Fellowship ( award number 2013155462 ) , a Cornell Sloan Foundation Fellowship , and a Ford Foundation Fellowship awarded to M . C . L . Competing interests : The authors declare that they have no competing interests . Submitted 12 June 2017 Accepted 8 December 2017 Published 3 January 2018 10 . 1126 / scitranslmed . aao0475 Citation : M . C . Lampi , C . A . Reinhart - King , Targeting extracellular matrix stiffness to attenuate disease : From molecular mechanisms to clinical trials . Sci . Transl . Med . 10 , eaao0475 ( 2018 ) .