Computers and Composition 20 ( 2003 ) 3 – 22 Argument in hypertext : Writing strategies and the problem of order in a nonsequential world Joyc e L . Carter Texas Tech University , Box 43091 , Lubbock , TX 79409 - 3091 , USA Abstract The qualities of nonsequentiality that make hypertext so appealing to writers and readers of informa - tive and literary texts are also those that problematize arguments in the same settings . For a hypertextual argument to succeed , it should clearly employ the fundamentals of giving good reasons and ample ev - idence . But such an essay should also deal with the loss of control over order by making use of recent developments in rhetoric and argument theory . Speciﬁcally , I present concepts of informal logic , stasis theory , primacy / recency / repetition effects , spatial metaphors , and textual coherence as a starting point for building a rhetorical understanding of argumentation strategies in hypertext . © 2002 Elsevier Science Inc . All rights reserved . Keywords : Argument ; Argumentation ; Discourse ; Hypertext ; Rhetoric ; Writing 1 . Introduction To echo what John Slatin ( 1991 ) observed several years ago , the point I would like to make in this article is embarrassingly simple : People write arguments in hypertext differ - ently than they do in a more traditional format . When faced with the task of construct - ing single - author , self - contained arguments in a hypertext environment—whether it be in S tory S pace , M acromedia D irector , a series of web pages , W in H elp , or something similar— authors must overcome the expectation of order . After all , at ﬁrst blush , arguments would seem to rely heavily on sequential structures such as if – then sentences , ﬁrst - came - this presentations of evidence and reasons , and the building of cases in which each new piece of information builds upon previously established reasons . In contrast , the spirit of a hypertextual essay is that it does not privilege a sequential structure . The apparent loss of sequence in hypertext Email address : Joyce . Carter @ ttu . edu ( J . Carter ) . 8755 - 4615 / 02 / $ – see front matter © 2002 Elsevier Science Inc . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / S8755 - 4615 ( 02 ) 00176 - 7 4 L . Carter / Computers and Composition 20 ( 2003 ) 3 – 22 gives rise to argumentative strategies that are more ﬂexible because concepts normally taken for granted in sequential discourse take on a new look in a hypertextual environment . For example , it has always been assumed that the job of selecting arguments and putting them into the best sequence is something that the author does , but in a hypertext program , this task ( or at least part of it ) belongs to the reader . Because questions about the nature , order , and success of arguments belong to the realm of rhetoric , we can apply these rhetorical concepts of structure , order , and sequence to build the basis for understanding and teaching hypertextual arguments . 2 . Argumentative hypertexts Although many people tend to think of hypertext as synonymous with the World Wide Web , I would like to use a broader concept . Theodore Nelson ( 1987 ) , who coined the term , described hypertext as “nonsequential writing—text that branches and allows choices to the reader , best read at an interactive screen” ( p . 2 ) . For readers , this navigation involves such actions as selecting parts of the hypertext , deciding which other parts they want to jump to , and displaying the document in ways that make sense to them . Within hypertext the reader can become something of a co - author because the order of a nonsequential document is determined only at the time of the reading . Despite the widely varied uses of hypertext , as well as the disparate discourse about hypertext , the core concepts that most people can agree on are the node and link . The node is a chunk of something : text , graphic , or sound—the raw information that , when connected to other nodes , constitutes the meat of the hypertext . Nodes are joined by links , electronic connectors that can or cannot have an explicit meaning ( depending on which theorist you read ) . Although all hypertext writers agree on these two terms , they do not agree on their deﬁnitions . Nodes can be as general as data or as speciﬁc as paragraph . These can be graphic , audio , textual , or any combination of the three . Links are sometimes described as mere connectors ; other times they are compared to knots in fabric , holding together concepts and making meaning out of their relationships . All the nodes and links that comprise hypertext , as well as the action that they enable , occur with the aid of computers—computer screens today and electronic paper tomorrow . This action can take place in web browsers employing a document metaphor interface or in online UNIX help employing a text - only interface . Users can use the mouse to click on a node to read its contents , or they can use only their keyboards to navigate the hyperdocument . Links are signaled through typographic convention ( boldface , italics , and so on ) , through color , or through graphic buttons and other pictures on the screen . Jumps between nodes can involve a movie - like transition or can simply replace the text on the screen . The text on the screen can appear to belong to many “containers” that are distinct from one another , or it can appear as one uniﬁed text , even though its parts are stored in different ﬁles . Even if every feature and every program were enumerated , you would simply scratch the surface . Hypertext changes on every screen and with every reader . It is not like a static printed book where once we all agree on the deﬁnitive edition ; we can all progress merrily along with the assurance that we are looking at the same artifact . With hypertext , it is unlikely that different readers ever read the same text . What is the point of studying and / or writing such essays ? First , there are clearly occasions when an author wants to create a hypertextual argument , either for the pages of online academic L . Carter / Computers and Composition 20 ( 2003 ) 3 – 22 5 journals like Kairos , personal web pages , or specialized software packages like S tory S pace or A uthorware . Although my primary aim in this article is to explore what happens to arguments when writers employ hypertext , my secondary purpose is to begin exploring the rhetorical principles most applicable and useful in these situations . The questions of when hypertext is appropriate for which kind of argument or which arguments are better suited to hypertext is beyond the scope of this article . Such questions are highly relevant and applicable to anyone producing text for a purpose ; they are part of the larger issue of picking the medium that works best for a particular aim . But even if no one were interested in writing arguments in hypertext , exploring the new intersection of mode and medium is worthwhile , if for no other reason than for testing our theories of discourse , argument , and rhetoric . As James Kinneavy ( 1980 ) pointed out , all dis - course serves one of four basic aims corresponding to where its main emphasis lies . Discourse can focus on the objective world ( informative aim ) , on the speaker ( expressive aim ) , on the audience ( persuasive aim ) , or on the language itself ( literary aim ) . Most of the energy in hy - pertext studies has been generated about two broad categories of hypertext : informational and literary . Hypertext that serves the informative aim of discourse is seen as a way of making large amounts of information manageable . The majority of scholarship on hypertext deals with this aspect , for hypertext promises its users instant and easy access to volumes of information , easy navigation , easy search capabilities , and easy retrieval of data . Theorists with this aim have worked on the technology and the navigational challenges we face as we put more and more information online . The literary application of hypertext is radically different from its informa - tive aim , often seeking to exploit the ambiguity and inherent nonlinearity of a hyper - narrative . In contrast , literary hypertext emphasizes the inherent playfulness of the nonlinear order and its natural reader - oriented potential . Almost all discourse has a persuasive component . Indeed , with electronic commerce expand - ing , and with the Internet bursting with commercial sites , it is difﬁcult not to ﬁnd persuasion— advertising—in hypertext . In this article , however , I am using the much narrower term argu - mentation for two simple reasons . Argumentation aims at a higher level of commitment from the audience : It not only seeks to persuade , but also to convince , or to bring about a change in the audience . Further , rhetoricians have always acknowledged that persuasion contains nondis - cursive elements , such as personal charisma and the character of the speaker . Theoretically , at least , argumentation generally focuses on the intellect . Chaim Perelman ( 1982 ) saw argu - mentation as the discursive techniques aimed at winning the audience’s assent for one’s ideas . The difference in convincing and persuading , he noted , is not as clear as we might hope : “To the person concerned with results , persuading surpasses convincing , because conviction is merely the ﬁrst stage in progression towards action . . . . On the other hand , to someone con - cerned with the rational character of adherence to an argument , convincing is more crucial than persuading” ( p . 27 ) . Perelman applied “the term persuasive to argumentation that only claims validity for a particular audience , and the term convincing to argumentation that pre - sumes to gain the adherence of every rational being” ( p . 28 ) . In hypertext studies , the work on argumentation ( Conklin & Begeman , 1987 ; Marshall , 1987 ; Trigg , 1983 ; and others ) has tended to focus on describing , capturing , and enabling argument structures . David Kolb ( 1994 , 1997 ) explored the sophisticated requirements of scholarly discourse and its use of argument , as well . 6 L . Carter / Computers and Composition 20 ( 2003 ) 3 – 22 3 . Argumentation theory Argumentative hypertexts are ultimately worth writing and studying because argumentation has received a lot of attention over the past ten years , with a new focus on argumentative writing in both the workforce and academia . Beginning in the 60s , the old concepts of formal logic and debate came under ﬁre , and argument theory acquired new energy , accompanied by a new set of grounds . The New Rhetoric of Kenneth Burke and Chaim Perelman helped theorize the audience back into the argumentation process . Philosophical inquiries into argument’s role in human activity , like Jürgen Habermas’s ( 1984 ) Theory of Communicative Action , placed argumentation in the center of society . And Informal Logic emerged in the 60s , led by Stephen Toulmin ( 1958 ) , Johnson and Blain ( 1978 ) , as a focus on the structures and procedures that real - world language and actions engaged in . The still emerging ﬁeld of modern argumentation recognizes three aspects to argument . The products of argument—reasons , claims , premises— belong to the realm of logic ; the procedures for conducting arguments belong to the realm of dialectic ; and the processes of argumentation belong to the realm of rhetoric . In this article , I emphasize products and processes because I am primarily focused on single - author hypertexts that link to themselves , or what Roy Rada ( 1991 ) called microtexts . Much can be gained in understanding how the medium affects structure , even by focusing on argument - as - product . Before we can address questions of hypertextual , collaborative argu - ments , however , we ﬁrst must examine the dynamics of these microtext arguments . With such grounding , we can look at arguments as social events and procedures such as those we might see in a linked email discussion list . Before the recent rise in argument theory , standard presentational order prescribed by Cicero was the norm ; it is still omnipresent , probably because it applies to most kinds of spoken and written argumentation . But alternative approaches to order are available . Today , argument theory is less obsessed with the right order of arguments and more focused on the constructing , chosing , and using of arguments . For example , instead of focusing on debate , with its goal of winning , argument theory follows Perelman’s ( 1969 ) more rhetorical goal of “securing the adherence of the audience . ” And instead of studying logical structures of proofs , it listens to the way people actually argue . The ﬁeld of informal logic certainly strives to observe language as it is used , not to prescribe a correct use . Toulmin ( 1958 ) , Perelman and Lucy Olbrechts - Tyteca ( 1969 ) , Charles Hamblin ( 1970 ) , and others who espoused informal logic did so because it described how reasons are given in real , everyday language . Syllogisms and analytic rules might be well - suited for certain sciences and pure math , but common sense will show even the most brazen skeptic that the vast majority of arguments are conducted successfully day to day based on something else . Everyday argument must be based not on the rules of formal logic , but on a kind of informal logic . This reasoning is always dependent on the audience to whom arguments are addressed . 4 . Order As we try to grasp arguments in hypertext , part of our difﬁculty lies in trying to map our existing expectations of argumentation and reason onto this new medium . Indeed , Jay David L . Carter / Computers and Composition 20 ( 2003 ) 3 – 22 7 Bolter ( 1991a ) suggested that argumentation without linearity is contradiction and that hyper - text reveals what Sontag called the “impossibility or irrelevance of producing a continuous , systematic argument” ( quoted in Bolter , 1991a , p . 117 ) . In this new age of hypertext , Bolter said : the new works do not have a single linear order , corresponding to the pages of the book or the columns of the papyrus roll , and so there is no order to violate . It is precisely the lack of a ﬁxed order and commitment to a linear argument that will frustrate those used to working with and writing for the medium of dialog . For writers of the new dialog , the task will be to build , in place of a single argument , a structure of possibilities . ( p . 119 ) George Landow ( 1992 ) also had problems with what hypertext does to argumentation : “Hypertextual linking , reader control , and variation not only mitigate against the modes of argumentation to which we have become accustomed but have other , far more general effects” such as randomness of the text , the writer’s loss of control , and the inevitable fragmentation and tightening of increasingly self - contained nodes ( p . 52 ) . Unlike textual units—paragraphs and chapters—that depend on neighbor text units to create coherence , these self - contained nodes are like islands of meaning , no longer relying on other nodes for context . This fragmentation and self - contained tightening is what makes argumentation much more difﬁcult . The speech writer and paper writer are responsible for arranging their points to achieve the best effect , and that order can reasonably be expected to be adhered to . But the writer’s job of carefully arranging arguments shifts radically in a hypertext setting . For with the exception of the initial conditions ( that is , the recommended starting point and the recommended path ( s ) through the argument ) , the author has no idea of how the reader will arrange the text . In other words , virtually the entire job of arrangement ( dispositio , in classical rhetoric ) now lies with the reader , not with the writer . The writer is now somewhat like the person who sets up the pieces in the proper order , then sits back and watches the chess players move pieces around until there is a draw or a victory . So how does a hypertextual writer take responsibility for order ? Hypertext arguments resemble “natural arguments , ” which Ralph Johnson and Anthony Blair ( 1978 ) described as “digressive , rhetorical , repetitive , ill - organized , incomplete , and multi - functional” ( p . 20 ) . In such arguments , persuasion does not depend on a particular formula or order , as the work of Carl Hovland ( 1957 ) , Perelman and Olbrechts - Tyteca ( 1969 ) , Perelman ( 1982 ) , and Toulmin ( 1958 ) illustrated . Furthermore , in such arguments , it is reasonable to expect that the auditor ( or reader ) will allow inconsistencies to pass , rather than dispute them point by point . The good faith we hold in writing is that the reader will ﬁnish , or at least skim , the argument . In hypertext , faith involves both parties . The readers assume the author will eventually reveal important parts of an argument and not waste their time ; the author expects the readers to explore the entire hypertext , or at least those nodes that are easy to access . But the speaker or writer must make choices , said Perelman ( 1982 ) , for “whatever be the beneﬁt of an accumulation of arguments , there are psychological , social , and economic limits that prevent a thoughtless ampliﬁcation of the discourse , ” including cost of printing , attention span of listeners , and time available for debate . “Since the number of arguments is a priori indeﬁnite , a choice must inevitably be made , guided by the idea one has of the respective arguments” ( pp . 139 – 140 ) . Arguments in hypertext raise these same issues of choice , for although a computer could store massive numbers of reasons , rebuttals , and claims in a hypertextual argument , both the attention span 8 L . Carter / Computers and Composition 20 ( 2003 ) 3 – 22 of readers and the time they are willing to devote to reading an online argument are clearly limited . The following sections attempt to specify some types of tactical choices that writers of hypertextual argument could make in dealing with such limitations . Although the purpose of this article is primarily to explore and describe a model of complementary argumentative and hypertextual structures and techniques , no doubt the seeds of a rhetoric for writers of hypertext arguments is found in these choices . The following observations come from my 1997 study of hypertext writers , from watching students in my classes struggle with online writing , and from personal frustration and experience in attempting to craft nonlinear arguments . I have classiﬁed these tactics broadly as ( 1 ) reducing the number of nodes , ( 2 ) making use of one or more well - known effects involving the placement of ideas such as primacy , recency and repetition , ( 3 ) employing an existing argument structure or genre such as a Toulmin model or a recognizable stasis , ( 4 ) using the reader’s sense of space , both cognitive and visual , and ( 5 ) writing prose with an eye to fundamentals of textual coherence . 4 . 1 . Use fewer chunks One choice that a writer might make is to avoid using too much fragmentation of the argument’s main parts , saving large - scale chunking and linking for ancillary materials such as context , warrants , and so on . Kolb ( 1994 ) ( online ) took this approach in Socrates in the Labyrinth , favoring a hybrid of traditional argument structures and speech acts . This hybrid structure would be relatively linear , at least at the gross level of the logic of the argument ; an argument based on , say , a Toulmin model would not split up the claims , grounds , warrants , and data , but would keep these critical elements together . The all - inclusive nature of hypertext would come in at the level of what Kolb calls the “surrounding material” of arguments , namely all the discussion , facts , opinions , and dead - ends that accompany a real - world argument . The strength of such an approach would be core arguments insulated from the indeterminacy inher - ent in hypertext , but the argument essay would beneﬁt from that same quality : “By not using hypertext to model every move , we would assist perception rather than burdening it” ( p . XX ) . After a writer has taken these steps , we can no longer speak of a proper order of reasons , but rather an order visually or textually suggested to the reader . This suggested order could employ labels to guide the reader . More likely , the writer could use spatial metaphors like a Western top - down , left - to - right , ﬂowchart , hub - and - spoke , inside - and - out , or mandala structure . Mark Bernstein ( 1998 ) catalogued nine complex hypertext structures in an attempt to provide a common vocabulary for “large linked structures” ( online ) . 4 . 2 . Exploit primacy , recency , and repetition effects Establishing a suggested order is one technique the writer can use to deal with the loss of control over their readers reading order . Even if we do not know the speciﬁcs of a given reading , we can describe speciﬁc visits to chunks of information in a hypertext with specialized terms . The primacy effect refers to the ﬁrst thing the audience encounters and the recency effect to the last . Studying the effects of presentation on the audience , Hovland ( 1957 ) reported that , within certain constraints , primacy and recency are real , observable effects that should be taken L . Carter / Computers and Composition 20 ( 2003 ) 3 – 22 9 Fig . 1 . Structure of primacy effect . into account . Richard Rieke and Randall Stutman ( 1990 ) also discovered that , up to a point , a larger number of arguments is more persuasive than a smaller number : This repetition effect “generally refers to the propensity of receivers to regard repeated statements as more true than new statements” ( p . 205 ) . But this effect seems only to be true up to a point , for “excessive repetition ( more than three times ) can be viewed as irritating or even offensive to an audience” ( p . XX ) . If hypertext puts sequence into question , is it even possible to speak of primacy and recency ? In a word , yes . The reader does experience parts of electronic argumentation in a certain order , just not necessarily in the author’s intended order . Hovland’s and Rieke’s ﬁndings suggest that hypertext authors must at least be aware of these effects , especially if to argue convincingly . In most hypertexts , the author establishes a starting point . Whether in a program like S tory S pace or in a document destined for the Web , this known starting point will act as the user’s ﬁrst contact with the hypertext . In these situations , then the primacy effect can be used to the author’s advantage . As Figure 1 illustrates , the reader can traverse the various parts of a hypertext in any order , but before the author can have an advantage in laying out the argument if the starting point is known . The author also chooses to link other parts of the hypertext together any way she pleases , perhaps encouraging a suggested path , or building ease or difﬁculty of navigation into the inherent cross - linking of the hypertext . In other words , the author can make it relatively difﬁcult to encounter less favorable information by linking it to the main body of the argument with a single link . More favorable arguments / points can be linked to the main corpus by redundant links , increasing the likelihood that the reader will encounter these ideas . Figure 2 illustrates this design approach . I use the term encounter deliberately , for before readers can read and understand an idea they must ﬁnd it . As haphazard as this process of discovery can seem , the author can have a degree Fig . 2 . Structure of repetition effect . 10 L . Carter / Computers and Composition 20 ( 2003 ) 3 – 22 of control over it . In a complicated hypertext , it is possible that certain places or ideas will not be read or encountered by the reader . The larger and more richly linked the document is , the less likely the reader’s discovery of every single nook and cranny . Through rich cross - linking , the author can skew the number of times a reader comes across a certain idea ; encounter takes on a frequency connotation , invoking the repetition effect . Another sense of encounter involves the primacy issue : Without guaranteeing that part of a hypertext will function as a reader’s ﬁrst encounter—or a later one—an author can strategically place a node where it would fall earlier—or later—in the reader’s path . Finally , the author controls language within a node ; after all , nodes are not usually single words , but coherent points or illustrations . The author can dampen primacy or recency effects through internal wording ( transitions , summaries , and the like ) , so that regardless of the path taken to a node , ideas contained in it are treated as a mini - argument , with order and effect considered within that node . 4 . 3 . Employ existing structures and genres Structuring arguments to try to take advantage of primacy , recency , and repetition effects is one answer to the question of order in argumentation . Another involves taking advantage of pre - existing argument structures , which can provide a ready framework for the argument writer . One such structure used in hypertext literature rests on Toulmin’s view of argumenta - tion . Toulmin ( 1958 ) identiﬁed two kinds of logic , analytic or formal logic , the tool of science and mathematics ; and substantive logic , the practical reasoning that informs everyday argu - mentation . He chose the positive name substantive because informal logic is negative , deﬁning its scope only by what it is not—formal . Each kind of argument employs different terminolo - gies , different approaches , and promotes completely different kinds of argument . Formal logic is concerned with truth and falsity , premise and conclusion , validity and invalidity . Substantive logic deals with the more ambiguous affairs of humans and uses terms like claims and grounds , shaky and sound , presumably and unfounded . Toulmin’s concept of a well - formed argument founded on substantive logic is more like a grid with categories to be completed . As long as all its elements are accounted for , the logic of the argument is sound . This view of argumentation could be seen as a model for answering and anticipating questions from a critical audience . In other words , it is not really important whether one begins with narration or refutation , as long as these elements are ﬂeshed out for use in an actual situation with an actual audience . Frans van Eemeren , Rob Grootendorst , and Tjark Kruiger’s ( 1987 ) explanation of Toulmin ( Table 1 ) foregrounded this dialogic nature in making explicit the auditor’s questions , something that Toulmin only suggested . The model for this six - part argumentation structure might look like Figure 3 , with each component of the argument separated in a hypertext , but with relationships among the parts well established . As a means of evaluating hypertext arguments and as a way of creating complete ones , this grid can suggest that nodes be identiﬁed as claim , grounds , rebuttal , and so on , and that these nodes be linked together in the proper way . In Dialectics and the Macrostructure of Argument , James Freeman ( 1991 ) advanced an - other approach in argument structure geared especially for longer arguments . Freeman used Toulmin’s approach , but omitted warrants and backing , siding with critics who believe these L . Carter / Computers and Composition 20 ( 2003 ) 3 – 22 11 Table 1 Discursive view of Toulmin terms ( pp . 176 – 177 ) Claim “Harry is a British subject” “What have you got to go on ? ” Datum “Harry was born in Bermuda” “How do you get there ? ” Warrant “A Man born in Bermuda will generally be a British subject” “Is that always the case ? ” Rebuttal “No , but it generally is . If his parents are foreigners or if he has become a naturalized American , then the rule doesn’t apply” “Then you can’t be so deﬁnite in your claim , can you ? ” Qualiﬁer “True : it is only presumably so” “Come to think of it , what makes you think people are generally British just because they were born in Bermuda ? ” Backing “It’s embodied in the following legislation . . . ” two elements are nothing more than additional reasons , or data , in the same argument . Free - man did , however , reﬁne the concept of linked arguments by having two or more premises combine before bringing the force of their reason to the claim , as shown in Figure 4 . He also improved argument diagramming considerably through adding a modality , which corresponds to Toulmin’s Q ( ualiﬁer ) so that he can account for the “presumably” or “almost certainly” in an argument . Freeman ( 1991 ) showed how the structures can be combined in different ways to represent a larger argument , an illustration that provides writers of hypertext a possible node and link structure for arguments . In Figure 5 , the diagram on the left , for example , illustrates an argument with six reasons , all ﬁltered through the one modality M . Two groups of reasons are linked , P2 and P3 , and P5 and P6 , while P1 and P4 are independent reasons . The diagram on the right illustrates how the modality M can work elsewhere in an argument , as well as how a linking can be required of all reasons . This diagram might read something like this : Possibly reasons 1 and 2 , and certainly reasons 3 and 4 , make the claim valid . All the chains of reasoning are linked so that all propositions must join to give sufﬁcient force to the claim . A less rigid approach might be called hyper - enthymemic argument , where one premise overtly identiﬁed as a component within a hypertext and other premises either remain unstated or are left to be discovered within the hypertext in the course of exploring the author’s argument . It is worth observing that the enthymeme can mean something different in hypertext . Unstated or implied premises , the hallmark of the enthymeme , might mean that the author has truly Fig . 3 . Toulmin argument diagram . 12 L . Carter / Computers and Composition 20 ( 2003 ) 3 – 22 Fig . 4 . Freeman’s argument analysis model . omitted these arguments , or it might also mean that the author truly did include what appears to be missing or assumed , but that the reader never encountered that node . It is becoming evident in the Web that whatever one is looking for is out there somewhere ; if this is so , then we are all a single link away from making those formerly implied premises explicit . Conklin and Begeman’s ( 1987 ) g I bis , a hypertext system that helps users structure critical discussion , used the node types of Position , Issue , and Argument . Paul Smolensky et al . ( 1987 ) described how E uclid , another hypertext system designed for organizing discussions , does something similar to g I bis , namely to “support user – computer interaction that revolves speciﬁcally around logical structure , ” ( p . 216 ) with node types of Claim , Argument , and Author . Another approach that can be used in providing structure to nonsequential arguments is stasis theory , a concept of argumentation that does not necessarily involve order , but relies more on Fig . 5 . More complex arguments in Freeman’s model . L . Carter / Computers and Composition 20 ( 2003 ) 3 – 22 13 required elements . Recent presentations of stasis theory revisit the classical legalistic notion of stasis or set of conditions that must be present in a well - formed argument . Each category involves a different set of conditions . These conditions do not necessarily have to be presented in any order , but they must be put forward to have a well - formed argument . If these conditions are not met , then no argument has been advanced for that stasis ; the arguer , however , can look for another category that might work better . Not surprisingly , this model of argumentation seems to work best with legal examples . Jeanne Fahnestock and Marie Secor ( 1985 ) observed that “stasis theory has always been associated with technical rhetoric because of its forensic genesis and because its philosophical signiﬁcance cannot be easily teased out of its courtroom setting” ( p . 217 ) . Richard Fulkerson ( 1988 ) , attacking what he called “Comp - Logic , ” or formal logic forced into composition classrooms , wrote that we should look to stasis theory as the answer to teaching logic in the classroom and used the legal example of a charge of battery and the conditions necessary to make a case for it : [ Prima facie ] means that the case ( extended argument ) made for a claim is structurally and substantively complete so that if no counter - case were presented then the claim would stand . For each type of stasis being argued , certain elements must be present before the case can be regarded as complete and in need of evaluating . As an example , in a court of law , a prima facie case for the charge of battery must normally include four items : • There must have been a touching by the defendant , • The touching must have been either offensive or harmful , • The touching must have been unconsented , • And it must have been intentional rather than accidental . If anything is lacking , the prosecution has presented a “bad” argument , and the case will be dismissed without any defense being necessary . Handling all four , however , does not mean that the prosecution will win . It merely means that an argument of sufﬁcient strength has been presented to necessitate some response . The prima facie case is thus a minimum but crucial criterion for a satisfactory argument . ( pp . 448 – 449 ) In the introduction to A Rhetoric of Argument , Fahnestock and Secor ( 1990 ) described how these categories help students learn to write arguments : The answers [ to questions of how best to support given arguments ] grouped themselves into piles and the piles into heaps under four headings , each representing a question that the thesis statement answers : ‘What is it ? ’ ‘How did it get that way ? ’ ‘Is it good or bad ? ’ ‘What should we do about it ? ’ Students were quick to grasp the simplicity and completeness of this four - part division , and of course , it is not completely new . The classical stases of Cicero , Quintillian , and Hermogenes describe a similar taxonomy of arguments , though the number of basic questions varies slightly from one thinker to another . ( p . 2 – 3 ) Susan Kline ( 1979 ) took a different approach in modernizing stasis theory in “Toward a Contemporary Linguistic Interpretation of the Concept of Stasis , ” arguing that the various stases not only provide us external conditions or demands for structural “properness , ” but also operate as internal conditions of felicity in communicative acts . In other words , a given stasis describes well - formed , or felicitous , speech acts between two arguers , a view she says is supported by a growing body of empirical audience ( p . 102 ) . 14 L . Carter / Computers and Composition 20 ( 2003 ) 3 – 22 The more general view of stasis theory as a set of conditions that must be met to have a well - formed argument also informs hypertextual writing . Although order is still important to the reception of ideas by the audience , stasis theory holds that the order of an argument is not one of the requirements for a good argument . For this inquiry , this means that a hypertext author can use a given stasis as an invention heuristic to insure that a user , by browsing the argument , and the author , in absentia , can constitute the argument on these common grounds . The effectiveness of this argument will be subject to the actual order in which the nodes are traversed , but mentioned earlier , the hypertext author could mitigate primacy and recency effects through thoughtful linking , naming , and writing techniques . Because stasis theory views the entire “argument act” as one set of items with little regard to order , hypertext argumentation can proﬁt from adapting the classical stases and developing new ones . A stasis - theory approach to hypertext would mean that writers can fairly present their reasons , chunked in whatever way makes the most sense to them , linked in simple or complex relationships ; as long as the reader encounters these reasons , the argument can be assumed to be adequate or well - formed . But this approach can imply that the author needs to make the approach visible , concealing nothing from the reader . 4 . 4 . Make an appeal to space A completely different approach to the problem of order involves two different kinds of space—cognitive and graphic . Cognitive space is the mental representation of the world where we live , move , and operate . A writer of hypertext arguments can choose spatial metaphors within a hypertext argument to overlay the content and hence to suggest a path through the argument . As George Lakoff and Mark Johnson ( 1980 ) told us , “Most of our fundamental concepts are organized in terms of one or more spatialization metaphors” ( p . 17 ) . Metaphors of space , of simply being embodied beings moving through that space , are tools that we use to help organize our minds . Unless we concentrate on them , they are probably largely invisible to us . But in places like hypertexts and cyberspace , these unconscious mnemonics become more conscious . The ﬁeld of cognitive psychology , with its broad brush of theory about learning , memory , metaphors , computing , and language , offers new perspectives on how we could study what hypertext does to our reception of concepts , and conversely , to our production of those concepts . Lakoff and Johnson ( 1980 ) , and Mark Turner ( 1991 ) explored metaphors that buttress our conscious activities , shedding light on just how much our cognitive processes rely on metaphor - ical images , thoughts , utterances , and how those poetic devices help us organize our worlds . For them , metaphors are the fundamental cognitive blocks , like phonemes or morphemes are the building blocks of meaning . Metaphor does more than enable poetic language ; we use phys - ical metaphors of space to make sense of abstract concepts . For instance , “I was stuck in this mindset and couldn’t get out” illustrates the root metaphor “Mental states are rooms . ” “Where are you going in your life ? ” illustrates the metaphor “Life is a journey . ” Our very concepts of argumentation , according to Turner ( 1991 ) , depend greatly on metaphors of physical action of two forces and of landscape topology . In this view , physical force refers to arguers and the argument they conduct , and the landscape topology refers to the grounds of that argument . Our very notion of the grounds for an argument embodies the metaphor for a location , a surface L . Carter / Computers and Composition 20 ( 2003 ) 3 – 22 15 upon which one constructs good reasons , much as one would construct a solid house on solid ground . Orientational metaphors are the norm in hypertext literature ; among the ubiquity of travel and orientation metaphors , perhaps the most useful is Landow’s ( 1991 ) : Clicking on a hot text is a departure and Displaying subsequent text is an arrival , as it seems to capture both the physical action of abandoning one bit of text on a computer screen to replace it with newer ones , as well as the psychology of leaving the known page and not knowing exactly what one will ﬁnd . The view of argumentation as physical forces moving in space provides a useful perspective on hypertext , where metaphors of space abound . Hypertext theorists warn writers to orient the readers so they don’t get lost in hyperspace . Nodes are often called places or spaces , and the term link often consciously evokes physical action so that a reader goes from one node to another through a link , as if it were a tunnel or a highway . Readers of hypertext are conceived as explorers , wanderers , browsers , and so on . These navigational metaphors— rhetorical moves like Landow’s arrival , departure , and orientation—are not just ﬁgurative , but literal , at least at a cognitive level . The second kind of space a reader encounters is the space on the page , and involves areas of study that have received a great deal of attention in recent years : visual rhetoric , layout , and graphic design . These screen ( or document or node ) components can be considered important argumentative tools through the author’s choices in using space to juxtapose nodes , display links , and lay out text and graphical elements within hypertextual nodes . Clearly , some of these choices cannot be present in all variants of hypertext viewing systems ; if they are , however , they provide writers with an additional layer of tools for establishing their arguments . This spatial approach to understanding hypertexts is beginning to receive more attention . For example , Catherine Marshall and Frank Shipman ( 1993 ) found that the nature of implicit structures that arise from spatial representations of complicated ideas within hypertexts “can usefully augment the staccato traversal suggested by a node - link model of hypertext [ , allowing ] readers to interpret intertextual relationships according to perceptual conventions” ( p . 227 ) . In an earlier study ( Carter , 1997 ) , I found that the spatial layout of writers’ arguments—including node and link names , the layout of graphical representations of spaces in S tory S pace , and the overall arrangement of arguments—was one of the most carefully wrought aspects of their work , far outweighing the logical force of their arguments . One of the most important graphic spaces available to a writer is the overview space , a bird’s - eye view of the nodes and links of a hypertext that might function as a starting point for the actual argument . Such a space can use principles of layout to guide the reader towards a preferred path . In web sites , the overview space would be the home page or perhaps the site map . In other words , it suggests possibilities although it still encourages the reader to begin in particular places . Ben Shneiderman and Greg Kearsley ( 1989 ) believed that “the ﬁrst challenge is to structure the knowledge in a way that an overview can be presented to the reader in the root document or introductory article . The overview should identify the key subsidiary ideas and the breadth of coverage” ( p . 61 ) . In Figure 6 , for example , the argument written in S tory S pace not only functions as a home page for the essay , but also helps orient the reader as to where main claims and evidence are located . The overview space is but one aspect of a larger issue , orientation and clarity in navi - gation . Andrew Dillon , Cliff McKnight , and John Richardson ( 1993 ) argued for geographic metaphors of space to orient the reader , schemata ( general and instantiated expectations of 16 L . Carter / Computers and Composition 20 ( 2003 ) 3 – 22 Fig . 6 . Argument overview space . place ) , landmarks , routes , and surveys , all of which increase from egocentric to world - centric . Jakob Nielsen ( 1990b ) assumed the tourist metaphor worked within larger hypertexts , and suggested the overview diagram : “In addition to showing users the layout of the information space , overview diagrams can also help users understand their current location and their own movements” ( p . 132 ) . Landow ( 1991 ) , taking a slightly more general approach to the problem , introduced probably the best metaphorical terms to the discussion so far . Focusing on the reader , he drew on a travel analogy to explore actions that take place in hypertext : “The ﬁrst problem concerns navigation information necessary for making one’s way through the materials . The second concerns exit or departure information and the third arrival or entrance information” ( p . 82 ) . From this generalization , he offered 19 rules for writing hypertext organized into three categories : ( 1 ) the rhetoric of reader orientation , ( 2 ) the rhetoric of departure , and ( 3 ) the rhetoric of arrival . The foundation of these rules is a concern for the reader . The rhetorics of departure and arrival can help a reader choose possible movements and the length of time spent within chunks of information , as well as provide users with maps to show where they have been . L . Carter / Computers and Composition 20 ( 2003 ) 3 – 22 17 Although hypertext is enabled through computer programs , the user sees text that comes into being through writing . Bolter ( 1991a ) used the term topographic writing : “Electronic writing is both a visual and a verbal description . It is not the writing of a place , but rather a writing with places , with spatially realized topics” ( p . 112 ) . In other words , once we have broken out texts into small units , arranged them into a meaningful structure , and considered them as textual and visual , wrote Bolter , “we are writing topographically” ( p . 112 ) . Such a topographic view of arguing would involve using spaces themselves as a part of the argument , not as simply a medium for that argument . This appeal to space , or what I call argumentum ad locum , would be employed properly if it functioned as an invitation to explore the argument’s claims on its own grounds , with all facets of the argument open to exploration . We should be able to retrace our steps , ﬁnd more information , test validity claims , and explore contradictory claims in such an argument . Both appeals and fallacies are suggested in such an argument . Just as an appeal to emotion is not necessarily fallacious , so , too , can an appeal that is based on spaces be either felicitous or fallacious . To commit an ad locum fallacy , the writer would construct unfair spaces , metaphorically resembling a house of cards , a house of mirrors , a labyrinth , uneven ground , and so on , where readers have no opportunity to check the grounds , retrace their steps , or make choices . In debate , as in deliberative arguments , the battleﬁeld metaphor dominates , and as Turner ( 1991 ) pointed out , the winner becomes king of the hill , winning by repelling challenges to his position . It is possible , however , to construct arguments by convincing someone to come and stand with you ; using the metaphorical questions such as “Are you following me ? ” and “Where do you stand on this one ? ” reveal such a topology . Successful hypertextual argumentation can employ this cooperative model because • hypertext does not lend itself to a brute force approach , • hypertext makes possible constructing multiple arguments within one document so readers can pick the argument that best suits them , and • the action within a hypertext is ultimately determined by the reader , who must be willing to be convinced , rather than conquered . This model suggests that the terrain a hypertext argument builds should be equitable , bal - anced , free of tricks , similar to informal logic’s expectations of charity , or the stasis theory’s legally neutral rules . It also suggests that if nodes are content and links are perceived as moves within that content , then Landow’s advice is well taken . If links have to stand in for leading the arguer through a cooperative space , they must have a clear function , a felicitous reasoning , and a comprehensible meaning . To take advantage of this view , writers must create friendly , memorable spaces and paths . The grounds upon which an argument takes place must be con - structed so that readers want to wander around , learn about the topic wherever they go , and are convinced . But it is also important that readers not wander aimlessly . Because hypertext is reader - oriented , readers must be free to convince themselves ; a writer’s argument must not ignore counter - points and must not force the reader through one - way doors or labyrinths to the answer . That would be an ad locum fallacy . An argument I can wish to advance in this article is that hypertext documents , particularly arguments , require readers and writers alike to rely heavily on metaphoric space , perhaps more heavily than they would in a sequential document . The spatial metaphors inherent in hypertexts are central to conducting business within those texts . But metaphoric space is also important in 18 L . Carter / Computers and Composition 20 ( 2003 ) 3 – 22 conducting the argument , as Turner ( 1991 ) illustrated . Foregrounding those metaphors enables hypertextual argumentation to advance , rather than to become muddled . Considering the broad metaphor of the entire document is also an important consideration . Authors choose a metaphor that will , in Turner’s terms , provide good grounds on which to convince the reader , or bring him or her along with the author’s line of thinking . Generalizing about which metaphors work best is difﬁcult because the audience determines what does and does not work . We could construct a huge hypertext essay with all possible arguments and then tailor a given reading for each reader . But even taking this approach , the writer would have to provide different metaphorical forms required by certain arguments and certain types of evidence . For example , in the stasis of deﬁnition , a hypertextual metaphor of a tree diagram might suggest itself over , say , a mandala . Note also that readers and writers from different cultures might be familiar with different argumentative , rhetorical , and visual patterns . Although metaphors of movement , life , or Earth have a certain universality about them , not all readers share the same sense of space , print and graphic conventions , or a Western orientation of logic or argument . Indeed , Anne Wysocki ( 1998 ) argued that we must not ignore the social or historical nature of visual design in consid - ering visual rhetoric . Recommending speciﬁc graphical tactics suitable for writing arguments for other cultures is beyond the scope of this article . However , sound rhetorical practices of analyzing the audience and considering the context and medium of use should guide writers of hypertext argument . 4 . 5 . Write for coherence Even if the gross metaphorical structure of the hypertextual argument is reader friendly , the actual text—words , sentences , paragraphs—must still do its job for the reader . In hyper - text , readers must detect coherence , regardless of the sequence they encounter . After all , any individual reading is sequential , a particular instantiation of many possibilities inherent in a hypertext , and readers will provide whatever is necessary to unify their reading . Slatin ( 1991 ) called our attention to the notion of prediction as a key to the user’s experience , prediction at the macroscopic ( document ) level , the microscopic ( sentence or paragraph ) level , and the metatextual ( the large context ) level ( p . 155 ) . Although many textual conventions are not suit - able for building coherence across nodes ( ordered lists , for example ) , writers can employ other textual techniques to convey coherence , techniques that survive the chunking of concepts into nodes and actively and strategically aim at building predictive possibilities in the reader’s mind . Although repetition is , I think , the predominate strategy , we could presumably employ any other ﬁgure of speech or thought to the text to provide the readers with the glue necessary to convince them that it is a single document , rather than a collection of multiple nodes . A successful hypertextual argument gives good reasons and ample evidence , but it is also creative in drawing conclusions from that evidence because the reader might or might not stumble across those conclusions . An example of this kind of creativity is to encapsulate the full argument within each reason so that the entire argument is composed of many sub - ( but complete ) arguments . Thus , the writer might exploit the recency effect , anticipating that any node may become a conclusion for users who decide to call it quits at that spot . Stylistically , each node must sound like a conclusion , a technique described in my 1997 study of hypertext essay writers . In that study , I reported about how one of the writers in my class repeated key L . Carter / Computers and Composition 20 ( 2003 ) 3 – 22 19 claims in every node of his argument so that no matter which path readers took , they would see the claims repeated in various forms . Furthermore , he crafted the ﬁnal sentence of each node to function as an ending by summarizing the main argument and using a stylistic ﬂair characteristic of conclusions . In the following passage from an argument about the visibility of homosexuals in society , “ﬁnally” functions as the conclusion to the node and to the entire essay : Finally , I would note that it is important politically that these issues be raised , but it is even more important that they are being raised where they are—in the living rooms and around the dining tables of the nation . I as a gay man and we as a nation are , at last , learning to speak , and we have been silent for so long . ( p . 125 ) A different approach is to offer , but not to force , a suggested argument so that this preferred path contains the best arguments , but the weaker arguments , rebuttals , and problems are still available to the exploring reader . Such an approach ( if it is explicit ) not only asks readers to create the path of the reading , but also asks them to choose the kind of appeals that they want to read , casting the readers as co - authors of both the argument and the document . In “Comprehension , Coherence , and Strategies in Hypertext and Linear Text , ” Peter Foltz ( 1996 ) examined coherence strategies in hypertext , particularly text and comprehension within hypertext . It is clear , he said , that coherence is a problem in hypertext by its very nature , and comprehension depends greatly on it . Text strategies that Foltz observed include titles , fre - quency of mention , enumeration , and initial sentences . These items “not only affect compre - hension , but they also determine what a reader looks for in text and what the reader ignores” ( p . 119 ) . Comparing coherence between a text and a hypertext containing identical informa - tion , Foltz found no real difference in comprehension and reading strategies because the text in both cases used the same textual coherence , the same sentences , the same markers . Foltz also looked at considering the additional overhead of coherence within the nodes in a hypertext , noting that “the coherence between linked nodes is not often considered” ( p . 128 ) . Although hypertext authors are supposed to link nodes , there are few guidelines that tell them to make the text of linked nodes cohere . It is typically assumed that because two nodes are linked by some common piece of information , the reader can then generate the correct inferences about the link and incorporate the new information into his or her representation of the text . Foltz’s study showed that “subjects avoided the cases of ‘loosely’ linked information ( cross hierarchical links ) , and instead , primarily made transition to highly related nodes” ( p . 128 ) . Nielsen ( 1990a ) observed that just as there are large overviews , which are like maps , to guide users , small - scale overviews , also help users keep track of their location within a small , bounded spaces . The small - scale overview functions much like narrative or argumentative coherence . Nielsen used the term context - in - the - large to describe the global , graphic , or overview level , and context - in - the - small to describe the immediate vicinity , even the text within any node that the user is currently reading . A loss of small context “could well damage overall usability more than the added context - in - the - large improves it . ” He warned that “we should remember that users need context not just in - the - large but also in - the - small when reading hypertexts , and that different mechanisms are usually required to provide the two kinds of context” ( p . 196 ) . At 20 L . Carter / Computers and Composition 20 ( 2003 ) 3 – 22 the level of the computer , mechanisms that help the small - context can be simple as having a clear screen that is large enough to hold an entire node’s text , for if the screen prevents the user from recognizing the author’s textual techniques , then small - context becomes more difﬁcult . At the level of the text itself , using simple writing techniques can strengthen a hypertext’s context or coherence . Conklin and Begeman ( 1987 ) warned that the loss of context is one of the great unsolved issues in hypertext theory . When linear or a traditional sequence is disrupted , the reader has to rejoin these pieces of the puzzle to make them whole again . The text has its own context , maintained in traditional ways , and the hypertext has its own context , maintained through graphic conventions , consistent names , and so on . Stated another way , the entire context for an original text document is split into two parts—text and hypertext—each carrying a portion of the burden of coherence . At the hypertextual level , coherence is also achieved through the repetition of link names and link names . Using nomenclature to parallel node names and luknams can tie parts of the document to each other . We can also use nontextual means to create coherence . If we take cohere to mean stick together , then we can use linking conventions and visual juxtaposition of nodes as nontextual strategies for coherence . The visual arrangement of an overview place suggests certain genres or stases , with their own internally required coherency rules , so a deﬁnition essay , for example , derives some generic meaning from the appearance of deﬁnition in the map view . Even without suggesting stasis or genre , the visual relationship among nodes establishes a necessary coherence . If we ﬁnd three nodes together , unlinked , we can assume a kind of parallelism among them . Perelman ( 1969 , 1982 ) spoke of association of concepts , as a technique by which the speaker or writer constructs connections among terms that cannot have been linked previously . We cannot be able to speak of order , but we can speak of simultaneity , and when several nodes are together , they are associated , to use Perelman’s term . Clustered items are always associated because of this gestalt . Conversely similar ideas that are never seen together are disassociated . Links can also add coherence in a hypertext document , providing direct connections from one node to the next , somewhat like a footnote marker or a “see above” note in the text . The common practice of creating ways for a web page reader to return to the overview space is a good example . Navigation , then , is an aspect of coherence so that hypertextual structure contributes to the overall coherence of the essay . Structure becomes a substitute for text , speciﬁcally text that is usually devoted to transition and orientation in a traditional essay . In other words , in the conversion from traditional text to hypertext , conventions of coherence are replaced by links , nodes , clusters of nodes , and so on . It is not possible , in hypertext , to distinguish form from content because the form is the content , or at least part of it . 5 . Conclusion When we look at how hypertext arguments are constructed by real writers who are grappling with the difﬁculty of order , rhetoric provides us with the best analytical tools for describing both the process and the products . We can employ concepts of textual and graphical coherence . We can use the broadened conceptions of spatial representations and metaphors to help describe a writer’s techniques of orienting the reader and suggesting paths through the argument . We L . Carter / Computers and Composition 20 ( 2003 ) 3 – 22 21 can use classical stasis theory as one strategy for getting around the issue of order . These traditional strategies , along with new cognitive rhetorics and new approaches to argumentation , form the rhetorical foundation for describing and prescribing arguments written in a variety of hypertextual environments . Joyc e Carter is an assistant professor of rhetoric and technical communication at Texas Tech University , currently emphasizing argumentation theory and economic aspects of the disciplines of applied rhetoric . Sh e can be reached at Joyc e . Carter @ ttu . edu . References Bernstein , Mark . ( 1998 ) . Patterns of hypertext . In Proceedings of Hypertext ’98 ( pp . 21 – 29 ) . Pittsburgh , PA : Association of Computing Machinery . Bolter , Jay David . ( 1991a ) . Topographic writing : Hypertext and the electronic writing space . In Paul Delany & George P . Landow ( Eds . ) , Hypermedia and literary studies ( pp . 105 – 118 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Carter , Locke . ( 1997 ) . Arguments in hypertext : Order and structure in non - sequential essays . UMI No . AAG 9824882 . Conklin , Jeff , & Begeman , Michael L . ( 1987 ) . g I bis : A hypertext tool for team design deliberation . In Proceedings of Hypertext ’87 ( pp . 247 – 268 ) . Chapel Hill , NC : Association of Computing Machinery . Dillon , Andrew , McKnight , Cliff , & Richardson , John . ( 1993 ) . Space—The ﬁnal chapter , or why physical representations are not semantic intentions . In Cliff McKnight , Andrew Dillon , & John Richardson ( Eds . ) , Hypertext : A psychological perspective ( pp . 169 – 191 ) . New York : Ellis Horwood . Eemeren , Frans H . van , Grootendorst , Rob , & Kruiger , Tjark . ( 1987 ) . Handbook of argumentation theory : A critical study of classical backgrounds and modern studies . Providence , RI : Foris . Fahnestock , Jeanne R . , & Secor , Marie J . ( 1985 ) . Towards a modern version of stasis . In Charles W . Kneupper ( Ed . ) , Oldspeak / newspeak : Rhetorical transformations ( pp . 217 – 226 ) . Arlington , VA : Rhetoric Society of America . Fahnestock , Jeanne R . , & Secor , Marie J . ( 1990 ) . A rhetoric of argument ( 2nd ed . ) . New York : McGraw - Hill . Foltz , Peter W . ( 1996 ) . Comprehension , coherence , and strategies in hypertext and linear text . In Jean - François Rouet , Jarmo J . Levonen , Andrew Dillon , & R . J . Spiro ( Eds . ) , Hypertext and cognition ( pp . 109 – 136 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Freeman , James B . ( 1991 ) . Dialectics and the macrostructure of arguments : A theory of argument structure . Berlin : Foris . Fulkerson , Richard . ( 1988 ) . Technical logic , comp - logic , and the teaching of writing . College Composition and Communication , 39 , 436 – 452 . Habermas , Jürgen . ( 1984 ) . Thetheoryofcommunicativeaction ( ThomasMcCarthy , Trans . ) , ( vol . 1 ) . Boston : Beacon Press . Hamblin , Charles L . ( 1970 ) . Fallacies . London : Metheun Press . Hovland , Carl I . ( 1957 ) . The order of presentation in persuasion . New Haven , CT : Yale University Press . Johnson , Ralph H . , & Blair , Anthony J . ( 1978 ) . Introduction . In Ralph H . Johnson & Anthony J . Blair ( Eds . ) , Informal logic : The First International Symposium ( pp . 1 – 25 ) . Inverness , CA : Edge Press . Kinneavy , James . ( 1980 ) . A theory of discourse . New York : Norton . Kline , Susan L . ( 1979 ) . Toward a contemporary linguistic interpretation of the concept of stasis . Journal of the American Forensic Association , 16 , 95 – 103 . Kolb , David . ( 1994 ) . Socrates in the labyrinth : Hypertext , argument , philosophy [ Diskette ] . Watertown , MA : Eastgate Systems . 22 L . Carter / Computers and Composition 20 ( 2003 ) 3 – 22 Kolb , David . ( 1997 ) . Scholarly hypertext : Self - represented complexity . In Proceedings of Hypertext ’97 ( pp . 247 – 68 ) . Southhampton : Association of Computing Machinery . Lakoff , George , & Johnson , Mark . ( 1980 ) . Metaphors we live by . Chicago , IL : University of Chicago Press . Landow , George P . ( 1991 ) . The rhetoric of hypermedia : Some rules for authors . In Paul Delany & George P . Landow ( Eds . ) , Hypermedia and literary studies ( pp . 81 – 104 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Landow , George P . ( 1992 ) . Hypertext : The convergence of contemporary critical theory and technology . Baltimore , MD : Johns Hopkins University Press . Marshall , Catherine C . ( 1987 ) . Constraint - based hypertext for argumentation . In Proceedings of Hypertext ’87 ( pp . 253 – 268 ) . Chapel Hill , NC : Association of Computing Machinery . Marshall , C . , & Shipman , Frank . ( 1993 ) . Searching for the missing link : Discovering implicit structure in spatial hypertext . In Proceedings of Hypertext ’93 ( pp . 217 – 230 ) . Seattle , WA : Association of Computing Machinery . Nelson , Theodore Holm . ( 1987 ) . Literary machines . N . p . : Theodore Nelson . Nielsen , Jakob . ( 1990a ) . The art of navigating through hypertext . Communications of the ACM , 33 , 296 . Nielsen , Jakob . ( 1990b ) . Hypertext and hypermedia . New York : Academic Press . Perelman , Chaim . ( 1982 ) . The realm of rhetoric ( William Kluback , Trans . ) . Notre Dame : Notre Dame University Press . Perelman , Chaim , & Olbrechts - Tyteca , Lucy . ( 1969 ) . The new rhetoric ( William Kluback , Trans . ) . Notre Dame : Notre Dame University Press . Rada , Roy . ( 1991 ) . Hypertext : From text to expertext . New York : McGraw - Hill . Rieke , Richard D . , & Stutman , Randall K . ( 1990 ) . Communication in legal advocacy . Columbia : University of South Carolina Press . Shneiderman , Ben , & Kearsley , Greg . ( 1989 ) . Hypertext hands - on ! : An introduction to a new way of organizing and accessing information . Reading , MA : Addison - Wesley . Slatin , John . ( 1991 ) . Reading hypertext : Order and coherence in a new medium . In Paul Delany & George P . Landow ( Eds . ) , Hypermedia and literary studies ( pp . 153 – 170 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Smolensky , Paul , et al . ( 1987 ) . Constraint - based hypertext for argumentation . In Proceedings of Hypertext ’87 ( pp . 215 – 245 ) . Chapel Hill , NC : Association of Computing Machinery . Toulmin , Stephen Edelston . ( 1958 ) . The uses of argument . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Trigg , Randall . ( 1983 ) . A network - based approach to text handling for the online scientiﬁc community . Retrieved September 22 , 2002 , from < http : / / www . parc . xerox . com / spl / members / trigg / thesis / > . Turner , Mark . ( 1991 ) . Reading minds : The study of English in the age of cognitive science . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Wysocki , Anne F . ( 1998 ) . Monitoring order : Visual desire , the organization of web pages , and teaching the rules of design . Kairos : A Journal for Teachers of Writing in Webbed Environments , 3 ( 2 ) . Retrieved September 22 , 2002 , from < http : / / english . ttu . edu / kairos / 3 . 2 / features / wysocki / bridge . html > .