Open innovation and company culture : Internal openness makes the difference Jan Kratzer a , b , Dirk Meissner b , ⁎ , Vitaly Roud b a Technische Universtitaet Berlin , Moscow , Germany b National Research University Higher School of Economics , Russian Federation a b s t r a c t a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 7 February 2017 Received inrevised form 13 March 2017 Accepted 15 March 2017 Available online xxxx There is a common agreement that innovation is driven by the people that form the heart of any company ' s in - novation activity . Still , people perform innovation in a special institutional environment characterized by rules and regulations that might support or impede innovation . The open innovation paradigm expects companies toengageinexternalrelationshipsforinnovation ; howevercompaniesoftenneglecttheactualinternalopenness ofemployees , whichisanabsolutemustbeforepartneringwithexternalpartners . Thearticle ﬁ ndsthatcompany innovation culture comes in ﬁ ve main forms : closed innovation ( driven by internal capabilities ) ; doing , using , interacting ( ad hoc processes , no link to knowledge providers ) ; outsourcing innovation capabilities ; extramural innovation , no matching internal culture / procedures and proactive innovation ( match of internal and external openness ) . The empirical analysis shows that the closed innovation behavior is by far the most widespread among Russian companies whereas proactive innovation behavior remains an exception in the overall sample . © 2017 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . Keywords : Open innovation Company culture Human resource for innovation Innovation climate Innovation culture 1 . Introduction The term “ open innovation ” ( OI ) has been discussed in the litera - ture for over a decade . This term encompasses the most important changes in company innovation activities , which can be character - ized as more distributed , multidisciplinary , trans - border , cross - institutional and inter - temporal processes than in the 20th century , all contained in one conceptual framework ( Bianchi et al . , 2011 ; Chiaroni et al . , 2011 ; Dahlandera and Gann , 2010 ; Huizingh , 2011 ) . This framework postulates that innovation is signi ﬁ cantly beyond R & D activities alone , instead it views innovation as a result of the smart and targeted combined use and application of knowledge and competences with special emphasis on the willingness to inte - grate third parties ' knowledge and abilities into one organizations ' activities ( Vanhaverbeke and Cloodt , 2014 ) . In such a broad sense the main understanding of ‘ open innovation ’ implies that innova - tions result from the sharing of competences between different players along and beyond the value chain , with deep implications for a company ' s external relationships ( Chesbrough , 2003 ; Chesbrough et al . , 2006 ) . In particular , new forms of complements between private and public research arise as a result of the need to reconcile speed in the commercial exploitation of new ideas on high - ly competitive global markets with continuous investments and long lead - times to develop radical innovation capabilities . Therefore , innovators need to accumulate competences and resources to ex - ploit the opportunities that arise from multi - faceted demands . Although the required knowledge increases exponentially , the opportunities for innovative responses to more diverse demands have grown even more rapidly ( Ferrary , 2011 ) . This , however , re - quires different competences and perceptions of innovation by inno - vators , which share the common features of complex underlying user needs and the respective application ( market knowledge ) and technological knowledge . In this respect , the open innovation para - digm emphasizes a two - directional knowledge and technology transfer by simultaneously opening the innovation process inward and outward instead of either in - source knowledge and technologies ( inward ) or the use of multiple exploitation paths for innovation , knowledge and technology , and thus inventions ( Brunswicker and Vanhaverbeke , 2015 ) . However , it is important to recall the basics features of almost any kind of innovation : this means the combina - tion of knowledge and technologies that exist or are developed and generated for special purposes ( Cohen and Levinthal , 1990 ; Doz et al . , 2004 ) . Knowledge and technology in turn are developed and generated by people , which highlights the centrality and importance of the human factor within the innovation process and hence for in - novation management . Innovative efforts are typically executed using a project - management approach , with teams as the organiza - tional nucleus ( Grif ﬁ n , 1997 ; Leenders et al . , 2007 ) . Like other crucial organizational outcomes , innovative outcomes of the teams stem not only from overall ﬁ rm strategy and access to resources but , more fundamentally , from the minds of the individual employees who , with others , carry out the work on a daily basis ( Amabile et al . , Technological Forecasting & Social Change xxx ( 2017 ) xxx – xxx ⁎ Corresponding author . E - mail address : dmeissner @ hse . ru ( D . Meissner ) . TFS - 18898 ; No of Pages 11 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . techfore . 2017 . 03 . 022 0040 - 1625 / © 2017 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Technological Forecasting & Social Change Please cite this article as : Kratzer , J . , et al . , Open innovation and company culture : Internal openness makes the difference , Technol . Forecast . Soc . Change ( 2017 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . techfore . 2017 . 03 . 022 2004 ; Kratzer et al . , 2008 ) . The extent to which they will produce in - novative – novel and useful – ideas during their everyday work de - pends not only on their individual characteristics , but also mainly on the work environment around them ( Amabile et al . , 2004 ; Gavrilova et al . , 2014 ; Miles , 2011 ; Perry - Smith and Shalley , 2003 ; Reiter - Palmon and Illies , 2004 ) . “ Innovation culture ” and “ innovation openness ” are crucial for teams when it comes to striving for innovation . Although many papers havebeen writtenonopeninnovationand theimportance of humanre - sources for innovation activities , a signi ﬁ cant gap in the understanding of soft factors , hence company innovation culture and openness , re - mains . The paper therefore attempts to deliver empirical evidence of the features of company innovation culture and openness , which in - tends to explain how open innovation is implemented at the operation - al level . With this the paper aims to synthesize research efforts in theorizing on human resources and studies that describe practical methods . 2 . Innovation culture and openness Labor mobility and widely dispersed knowledge across multiple public and private organizations force companies to reconsider the spectrum of innovation activities they can deliver independently , and rather consider the need to engage in alternative innovation practices . However , the opportunities for innovation from teams de - pend on overcoming obstacles . First , competition within teams about an individual ' s knowledge advantage is important . Human re - source ( HR ) strategies often place a special emphasis on knowledge generated and used by individuals , which in the long term does not support knowledge sharing . Simultaneously , HR strategies formulate incentive schemes to encourage knowledge sharing between team members . Second , team members ' educational and pro - fessional backgrounds are important . Successful teamwork involves integrating complementary knowledge and competences to leverage the innovation potential from teams with diverse community back - grounds ( Doz et al . , 2004 ) . But the dif ﬁ culty of integrating diverse kinds of knowledge remains a challenge because the complementary elements between different knowledge communities are not guar - anteed ; on the contrary , a mismatch is likely ( Fallick et al . , 2004 ) . Communities can vary in terms of the degree of formalization , open - ness , and mechanisms employed for operations and communities ' strategic intentions , thus , corporations tend to create and in ﬂ uence communities according to their interests and ambitions ( Almirall , 2008 ; West and Lakhani , 2008 ) . In a broader community sense , it can be argued that suppliers are becoming ever more important not only as sources but also contributors to innovation and commer - cial success ( Chiaroni et al . , 2011 ; Dahlandera and Gann , 2010 ; Harison and Koski , 2009 ; Huizingh , 2011 ; Lee et al . , 2010 ; Van den Biesen , 2008 ) . Consequently , although the innovation process of combining knowledge and information towards use and application may initially seem easy to manage , it becomes more complex when integrating market and customer knowledge . Accordingly , quite recently , intra - company innovation processes show a shift from stage gate to ‘ probe and learn ’ processes ( Gassmann et al . , 2010 ) which lay the ground for inward and out - ward knowledge transfer . Still , the transfer of knowledge and tech - nology is only one part of innovation activity embedded in the overall management of knowledge and innovation ( Abd Razak et al . , 2016 ; Gokhberg and Meissner , 2013 ) . The latter develops in a more challenging and complex manner , especially when it comes to a remote market and technological knowledge , because the need arises to transfer and incorporate knowledge into the place ( loca - tion ) and the team ( or individual ) , which are removed from the place of origin ( Bondarenko , 2015 ; Cooke , 2005 ; Döring and Schnellenbach , 2004 ; Fritsch and Franke , 2004 ; Kotsemir and Meissner , 2013 ; Kuemmerle , 1997 ; Simmie , 2003 ; Spithoven et al . , 2010 ) . In such situations , knowledge holders with different educational , professional and cultural backgrounds must be brought together by adjusting individuals ' knowledge to the speci ﬁ c institu - tional and local environments , which is a time - consuming yet neces - sary process and hence must be incorporated into any innovation project from the very beginning ( Kesidou and Szirmai , 2007 ) . The described features of innovation management impose addition - al challenges to the abilities and quali ﬁ cations of people by also stressing soft skills for management of the activities . These soft skills can be considered a reasonable determinant of the company innovation culture . However , although thought to have a reasonable impact on the innovation performance of individuals , teams , departments and organi - zations innovation culture remains a broad and vague term ( Mancusi , 2008 ) . Furthermore , it requires a more systemic understanding and ap - proachtowards thecompany ' s internal frameworkconditionsincluding incentive systems , innovation culture and anorganization supportive of innovation . The main challenges in building and developing an innovation culture are the changes in the organization ' s mindset , in mobilizing organizations as teams to bring new products and services to the market quickly , and in bringing an organization together to translate product and service initiatives into sustained results ( Angel , 2006 ) . The underlying challenge is that companies need to incorporate a view on innovation shared not only by the company leaders but also by employees ( Carayannis and Meissner , 2016 ; Gershman and Kuznetsova , 2012 ) . However , making innovation ‘ alive ’ in em - ployees ' mindsets risks making innovation misunderstood : em - ployees may be enthusiastic about generating ideas and engaging in innovation related projects but they may lose sight of the end goal of the project to apply the innovation in multiple ways . This im - plies that innovation culture has to span the full innovation process , emphasizing especially the use and application of original ideas for - mulated by the company ' s employees regardless of the ideas ' source ( Kotsemir and Meissner , 2013 ) . Furthermore , cultural thinking is strongly associated with peoples ' behavior and attitudes , which are important elements in shaping a corporation ' s work culture and in - novation culture and therefore make the innovation process ‘ open ’ . By that de ﬁ nition , ‘ openness ’ includes the corporations ' openness to - wards employees ' attitudes about innovation , frequently expressed as innovation culture and the institutional openness towards exter - nal relationships and partnerships . To make the term ‘ innovation openness ’ more clear , we argue that the following features are reasonable for describing and eventually measuring innovation culture and openness : 1 . Risk feature It ' s a commonly understood fact that innovation is inherently risky especially at the early stages , e . g . ﬁ nancial risks , technical risks and the risk of rejection by the market . Therefore , we argue that corpo - rate openness needs to provide opportunities for employees to per - form risky projects which aim at innovation . 2 . Belief feature Successful innovation projects require strongbeliefs of thepeople in - volved in the project and recognition in the organization . According - ly , management needs to encourage individuals to ﬁ nd ways to solve non - standard problems . 3 . Exchange and share feature In line with the ever - increasing scope and complexity of science , technology and innovation , challenges arise to detect special compe - tences and knowledge that need to be aligned and focused on a solu - tion and application . Since these abilities are often also of a rather tacit nature , the exchange and sharing of knowledge between indi - viduals , units and the outside world is essential for sustainable inno - vation performance . Knowledge and information sharing is done voluntarily instead of by management order . 2 J . Kratzer et al . / Technological Forecasting & Social Change xxx ( 2017 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Kratzer , J . , et al . , Open innovation and company culture : Internal openness makes the difference , Technol . Forecast . Soc . Change ( 2017 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . techfore . 2017 . 03 . 022