Standardization in Action : Achieving Local Universality through Medical Protocols Author ( s ) : Stefan Timmermans and Marc Berg Source : Social Studies of Science , Vol . 27 , No . 2 ( Apr . , 1997 ) , pp . 273 - 305 Published by : Sage Publications , Ltd . Stable URL : http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 285471 . Accessed : 30 / 12 / 2013 19 : 07 Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use , available at . http : / / www . jstor . org / page / info / about / policies / terms . jsp . JSTOR is a not - for - profit service that helps scholars , researchers , and students discover , use , and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive . We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship . For more information about JSTOR , please contact support @ jstor . org . . Sage Publications , Ltd . is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize , preserve and extend access to Social Studies of Science . http : / / www . jstor . org This content downloaded from 128 . 97 . 207 . 6 on Mon , 30 Dec 2013 19 : 07 : 05 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions * ABSTRACT In this paper , we argue that universality is always ' local universality ' . The achievement of local universality depends on how standards manage the tension involved in transforming work practices , while simultaneously being grounded in those practices . We investigate how this is done in two case studies - an oncology protocol and the Cardio Pulmonary Resuscitation ( CPR ) protocol . These protocols are viewed as technoscientific scripts which crystallize multiple trajectories . In the process of obtaining local universality , we illustrate how protocols feed off previous standards and practices . We then indicate how the protocols function through the distributed work of a multitude of heterogeneous actors . Finally , we argue that , in this process , the protocols themselves are necessarily changed and partially reappropriated . Standardization in Action : Achieving Local Universality through Medical Protocols Stefan Timmermans and Marc Berg Universality through standardization is at the heart of medical and scientific practice . 1 In his obligatory book of passage , Science in Action , Bruno Latour made it the sixth principle of technos - cience : ' The history of technoscience is in a large part the history of the resources scattered along networks to accelerate the mobility , faithfulness , combination , and cohesion of traces that make action at a distance possible ' . 2 Standards aim at making actions comparable over time and space ; they are mobile and stable , and can be combined with other resources . According to Latour , our task as social scientists is to follow the transformation , from weak and short to strong and long , of the networks which provide the conditions and links for the achievement of universality . In his case study of Louis Pasteur ' s work on the anthrax vaccine , Latour discusses how the vaccine would only work universally if the farmers respected some crucial laboratory standards such as ' disinfection , cleanliness , conservation , inoculation gesture , timing , and recording ' . 3 Latour Social Studies of Science ( Copyright ? SAGE Publications London , Thousand Oaks , CA and New Delhi ) , Vol . 27 ( 1997 ) , 273 - 305 [ ISSN : 0306 - 3127 ] This content downloaded from 128 . 97 . 207 . 6 on Mon , 30 Dec 2013 19 : 07 : 05 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Social Studies of Science offers a detailed analysis of how Pasteur managed to change the work practices of farmers to adhere to those laboratory standards . In this process , the extension and strengthening of networks is the trick that allows universality to take place : ' Scientific facts are like trains , they do not work off their rails . You can extend the rails and connect them but you cannot drive a locomotive through a field ' . 4 We agree with this focus on the importance of establishing networks to allow universality . However , we would like to highlight two interrelated aspects of this process which tend to be under - represented in many actor - network studies . First , Latour emphasizes the process of creating associations and enrolments de novo . But Pasteur did not raise the world just with the anthrax vaccine : the world was already raised in many different ways . The terrible anthrax disease was fought with isolation techniques , immunology , herbal wisdom , and other forms of emerging medicine . An anthrax vaccine was one more element that was inserted into a set of already existing interests , associations , and practices . The anthrax vaccine was able to change the world through an extension - and im - portantly , a transformation - of networks already firmly in place . 5 One of the central tensions in creating and achieving universal - izations is the relationship with past infrastructures , procedures , and practices . Standards will attempt to change and replace those prac - tices but , we will argue , the same standards need , to a certain degree , to incorporate and extend those routines . To understand the ' universalization ' of standards , it is crucial to look at these pro - cesses of incorporation and transformation . Second , although an actor - network analysis can in principle be written from the viewpoint of every actor in the network , 6 in most case studies the perspective of scientists or engineers is chosen . For example , in Michel Callon ' s scallops study , the three scientists remain ' the primum movens ' . 7 Latour repeatedly emphasizes how Pasteur is the actor handling the lever to change the world : ' this interest of outsiders for lab experiments is not a given : it is the result of Pasteur ' s work in enrolling and enlisting them ' . 8 In those case studies , the result is that the prime movers become the spokespersons talking in unison for the entities which are brought together - and these entities become docile ' points ' in the network . But feminist scholars have shown that the perspective of an actor - network analysis radically changes if one takes the viewpoint of those who have to be enrolled , or those who are excluded from the proposed translation . 9 Here we argue that ' universality ' does not 274 This content downloaded from 128 . 97 . 207 . 6 on Mon , 30 Dec 2013 19 : 07 : 05 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Timmermans & Berg : Standardization in Action necessarily imply the presence of centralized ( scientific ) control . First of all , we will demonstrate that standardization efforts do not require a central actor - in fact , they often do without it . Achieving universality should be seen as a distributed activity . ' 0 In addition , non - docile actants may well be a sine qua non for universality in practice . Rather than being antagonistic to it , a certain looseness in the network may be the preferred ( or only possible ) way to achieve standardization . These points taken together add up to an ambiguous and pre - carious status of ' universality ' . We introduce the term local univer - sality to address these ambiguities . Local universality emphasizes that universality always rests on real - time work , and emerges from localized processes of negotiations and pre - existing institutional , infrastructural , and material relations . ' Universality ' , here , has be - come a non - transcendental term - no longer implying a rupture with the ' local ' , but transforming and emerging in and through it . To capture the way in which standardization achieves a universal character while feeding off already existing networks , to grasp the emergent and distributed qualities of universality , and to explore the consequences of local universality , we focus on the construction and use of some specific means of standardization : medical stan - dards or protocols . In our conceptualization , a medical standard is viewed as a technoscientific script which crystallizes multiple trajectories . Three elements are important in our conceptualization . First , we analyze protocols as embedding technoscientific scripts , a point of view which originated in Madeleine Akrich ' s fieldwork . " The ' script ' of a technological artefact refers to the hypotheses , em - bedded in the artefact , about the entities which make up the world in which the artefact will be inserted . A technoscientific script speci - fies actions , settings , and actors who are defined with specific tastes , motives , aspirations , political prejudices , and a value system . For example , the French electrical car was designed for ' post - industrial consumers who were grappling with new social movements ' . 12 The designers of the car envisaged consumers who would see cars not as status symbols but as simple , useful objects , and who would rely on public transportation and their own means of transportation . These elements - consumers wary of pollution , a post - industrial society , and public transportation - are inscribed in the script by designers and de - scribed by users . l3 As Akrich shows , designers and users negotiate about the script to follow : still , ' it is only when the script 275 This content downloaded from 128 . 97 . 207 . 6 on Mon , 30 Dec 2013 19 : 07 : 05 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Social Studies of Science set out by the designer is acted out - whether in conformity with the intentions of the designer or not - that an integrated network of technical objects and actors is stabilized ' . 14 The second element in our conceptualization concerns the tempo - ral location of the different actors brought together in the protocol . Following the conceptual work of Anselm Strauss , 15 each actor follows a trajectory which refers to a past , a present , and a possible future . For the patient , a medical event such as a cardiac arrest could be an outcome of a medical history with high cholesterol levels , high blood pressure , numerous diets , and forgotten New Year ' s resolutions . The doctor who orders the protocol , while , for example , following a research trajectory , sees the patient as one case in a project . The trajectory of the nurse who administers the protocol might be characterized by the tasks of her shift . Everett Hughes has hinted at the intertwining of different trajectories in the same situation when he stated that one person ' s emergency is another ' s routine . 16 For the patient a coronary bypass is a life - changing event ; for the surgeon , one of several done in a week . 17 Not only people but things , such as measurement instruments and medications , follow trajectories as well . A particular anaesthetic drug has a research history of instances in which its use is war - ranted , and led to its certification by organizations such as the Federal Drug Administration ; it has a lifespan of about 15 minutes when injected in a certain dose ; and is expected to be absorbed by the body after an hour . A machine such as a defibrillator has a history and a life course situated in the electric heart activity it monitors and the electric shocks it administers . Things and humans alike follow trajectories flowing from their pasts towards possible futures . Protocols themselves have trajectories - they are con - structed and reconstructed both by their designers and in concrete use . Third , it is this protocol as a standard which intervenes in the different trajectories of patients , instruments , drugs , and staff , re - directing their courses . The protocol functions as a crystallization instance : in putting the protocol to work , the different trajectories are temporarily brought together and , as we will show , transformed . Crystallization refers to the fact that the protocol makes the implicit trajectories explicit in specific ways . It makes the roles and require - ments of the involved actors visible : it puts forward that the goal of the doctor is to save a life or limb , and that the purpose of drug Y is to counteract hypoxic acidosis . At the same time , crystallization 276 This content downloaded from 128 . 97 . 207 . 6 on Mon , 30 Dec 2013 19 : 07 : 05 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Timmermans & Berg : Standardization in Action emphasizes the contingent and temporary character of articulating these multiple trajectories . The roles and requirements could have been specified differently ; and other scripts can and will articulate them in different ways . During the crystallization process the prescriptions of the protocol might be ' betrayed ' , 18 or altered beyond recognition , by the actors using the protocol . Also , the trajectories of the actors might diverge for many reasons , instead of being brought together by the protocol . Here , we follow standardization in action in the analysis of two case studies of medical protocols . Our goal is to assess how the universal character of medical protocols depends on previously established networks , how universality is contingently and col - lectively produced , and how localization and universality are inevi - tably intertwined . This analysis is based on research by the two authors . Stefan Timmermans observed 112 resuscitative efforts over a period of 14 months in the emergency departments of two US hospitals , and he complemented this empirical material by inter - viewing 57 emergency department personnel about their involve - ment with resuscitative efforts in three American and one Belgian hospital . Marc Berg studied the development of several research protocols through interviews and participatory observation , and spent two months studying the usage of research protocols in everyday medical work in a Dutch hospital . The Protocols Cardio Pulmonary Resuscitation ( CPR ) and Advanced Cardiac Life Support ( ACLS ) are international protocols , ' 9 aimed at saving the lives of patients experiencing cardiac arrest or apparent sudden death resulting from electric shock , drowning , respiratory arrest , or other causes . 20 The three major components of CPR are securing an open airway , artificial ventilation , and closed - chest cardiac mas - sage . 21 As can be seen from Figure 1 , the protocol details what needs to be done when , by whom , and in what order . The script of the protocol defines a rescuer , a victim , an emergency medical system , and a narrative . It assumes that the victim is kept in a supine position , and that the emergency medical system needs to be alerted before the resuscitative effort starts . The rescuer bends over the victim and is able to feel for a carotid pulse and listen for breathing ; knows how to locate the xiphoid complex , and then is able to 277 This content downloaded from 128 . 97 . 207 . 6 on Mon , 30 Dec 2013 19 : 07 : 05 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 278 Social Studies of Science FIGURE 1 The CPR Protocol American Heart foAssociation - CPR and ECC Performance Sheet Adult One - Rescuer CPR Na Step Objective Critical Performance S U 1 . AIRWAY Assessment : Determine Tap or gently shake shoulder . unresponsiveness . Call for help . Shout ' Are you OK ? ' Position the victim . Call out ' Help ! ' Open the airway Turn on back as unit , if necessary , supporting head and neck ( 4 - 10 sec . ) Use head - tilt / chin - lift maneuver . 2 . BREATHING Assessment : Determine Maintain open airway . breathlessness . Ear over mouth , observe chest : look , listen , feel for breathing ( 3 - 5 sec ) . Ventilate twice . Maintain open airway . Seal mouth and nose properly . Ventilate 2 times at 1 - 1 . 5 sec / inspiration . Observe chest rise ( adequate ventilation volume ) . Allow deflation between breaths . 3 . CIRCULATION Assessment : Determine Feel for carotid pulse on near side of victim ( 5 - 10 sec ) pulselessness . Activate EMS Maintain head - tilt with other hand . system . If someone responded to call for help , send him / her to activate EMS system . Total time , Step I - Activate EMS system : 15 - 35 sec . Rescuer kneels by victim ' s shoulders . Begin chest Landmark check prior to hand placement . compressions . Proper hand position throughout . Rescuer ' s shoulders over victim ' s sternum . Equal compression - relaxation . Compress 1I / 2 to 2 inches . Keep hands on sternum during upstroke . Complete chest relaxation on upstroke . Say any helpful mnemonic . Compression rate : 80 - 100 / min ( 15 per 9 - 11 sec ) . 4 . Compression / Do 4 cycles of 15 Proper compression / ventilation ratio 15 compressions Ventilation Cycles compressions and 2 to 2 ventilations per cycle . ventilations . Observe chest rise : 1 - 5 sec / inspiration ; 4 cycles / 52 - 73sec . 5 . Reassessment * Determine pulselessness Feel for carotid pulse ( 5 sec ) . t If there is no pulse , go to Step 6 . 6 . Continue CPR Ventilate twice . Ventilate 2 times . Resume Observe chest rise : 1 - 1 . 5 sec / inspiration . compression / ventilation cycles . Feel for carotid pulse every few minutes . * If 2nd rescuer arrives to replace 1st rescuer : ( a ) 2nd rescuer identifies self by saying ' I Know CPR . Can I help ? ' ( b ) 2nd rescuer then does pulse check in Step 5 and continues with Step 6 . ( During practice and testing only one rescuer actually ventilates the manikin . The 2nd rescuer simulates ventilation . ) ( c ) 1st rescuer assesses the adequacy of 2nd rescuer ' s CPR by observing chest rise during ventilations and by checking the pulse during chest compressions . t If pulse is present , open airway and check for spontaneous breathing : ( a ) if breathing is present , maintain open airway and monitor pulse and breathing . ( b ) If breathing is absent , perform rescue breathing at 12 times / min and monitor pulse . Instructor Check : Satisfactory Unsatisfactory Source : AHA , Instructor ' s Manual for Basic Life Support ( Dallas , TX : American Heart Association , 1987 , 1990 ) , n . p . Copyright ? American Heart Association . Reproduced with permission . This content downloaded from 128 . 97 . 207 . 6 on Mon , 30 Dec 2013 19 : 07 : 05 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Timmermans & Berg : Standardization in Action maintain an airway , ventilate the patient and perform chest com - pressions . All these different actions - the ABC sequence ( or Airway , Breathing , and Circulation ) 22 - are ordered and co - ordinated by the protocol . The script of CPR is constructed in such a way that it can function in almost any setting . CPR does not require any props or additional equipment , only a hard surface and enough space to bend over the patient . Finally , the values inscribed in CPR are that lives are worth saving and should be saved fast . 23 FRAM - 6 is an oncological research protocol for the treatment of patients with Hodgkin ' s disease24 who have not reacted adequately to ' ordinary ' chemotherapeutic treatment . For patients deemed suit - able , the protocol prescribes so - called ' high - dose ' chemotherapeutic treatment , followed by bone marrow transplantation . The protocol is an ' international collaborative study ' , in which nine Dutch and two American centres participate . The 30 - page manuscript starts by discussing the background to the study ( the reasons for selecting this disease and these drugs ) , and outlines the study ' s objective and its design . After summarizing the known information on the drugs used in the protocol , the patients ' eligibility criteria are discussed . To name a few : * patients must have histologically proven Hodgkin ' s disease at diagnosis . * patients should have shown resistance to MOPP , 25 as shown by either progression while receiving MOPP , or failure to achieve a Complete Remission after six cycles of MOPP , or relapse within a year of completion of MOPP . * patients must have adequate cardiac ( > 0 . 5 ejection fraction ) and pulmonary function ( vital capacity > 70 % of predicted and a diffusion capacity of > 50 % ) , and so forth . The treatment plan requires patients first to receive two courses of cisplatin , cytarabine , and dexamethosone ( abbreviated as DHAP ) , in three - to - four - week cycles . If hematological or renal toxicity should occur , the doses should be reduced , according to included tables ( see Table 1 ) . Next , the high - dose chemotherapy regimen is out - lined ( see Table 2 ) . This table is explained as follows : * CYCLOPHOSPHAMIDE : 1 . 5 g / m2 will be dissolved in 500 cc of D5 / W and given over two hours intravenously daily for 4 days ( days - 6 through - 3 ) . 279 This content downloaded from 128 . 97 . 207 . 6 on Mon , 30 Dec 2013 19 : 07 : 05 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Social Studies of Science TABLE 1 Dose Reduction in Case of Renal Toxicity Serum Creatinine Creatinine Clearance Modification ( mg / % pmol / l ) ( cc / min ) Cisplatin 0 . 6 - 1 . 4 or > 60 None 50 - 120 1 . 5 - 2 . 0 or 40 - 60 25 % reduction of CDDP 130 - 180 > 2 . 0 or < 40 Delete DDP > 180 Source : FRAM - 6 protocol . * BCNU : 26 300 mg / m2 will be dissolved in 100 cc of D5 / W and will be given IV piggyback over 30 minutes on day - 6 only . * ETOPOSIDE : will be started on day - 6 and given two times / day for three days , each dose being 125 mg / m2 . Etoposide is dis - solved in D5 / W NS at a concentration of 1 . 0 mg / ml and infused intravenously at the rate of 250 mg / hr . To ensure stability of the drug at this concentration , doses greater than 250 mg will be divided into bags of equal strengths . The pharmacy will mix each bag on call after the completion of the previous dose . The protocol further specifies that patients will be admitted to the hospital for the duration of the treatment programme : Patients shall be nursed either in the protective environment or in a private room . All patients shall receive oral prophylactic antibiotics starting 10 days prior to TABLE 2 Chemotherapy Regimen Day - 6 - 5 - 4 - 3 - 2 - 1 0 BCNU X 300 mg / m2 Cyclophosphamide X X X X 1 . 5 g / m2 Etoposide X X X 125 mg / m2 X X X ABMT X Source : FRAM - 6 protocol . 280 This content downloaded from 128 . 97 . 207 . 6 on Mon , 30 Dec 2013 19 : 07 : 05 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Timmermans & Berg : Standardization in Action [ high dose treatment ] in order to provide selective decontamination of the gastro - intestinal tract . This will be done according to local protocols . Patients shall be discharged from the hospital when the absolute granulocyte count is over 500 / mm3 for two consecutive days . The resuscitation and oncology protocols are very different . In most Western countries CPR is a default treatment for sudden death . Although the protocol is tinkered with every couple of years during an international conference , the ABC of resuscitation is taught in a drill - like fashion . In order to be successful it should be used by ' lay ' and medical people alike . Literally ' anyone , anywhere ' should be resuscitated . 27 In contrast , FRAM - 6 is primarily aimed at gathering research findings for a new treatment plan . Careful procedures to secure informed consent and elaborate deliberations need to be followed if patients are to be included in the protocol . Linking a particular patient to the protocol is a strictly medical prerogative . But the important similarity is that both protocols standardize a set of practices , actors , and situations . They intervene in a specified situation and prescribe a set of medical interventions which should be performed in a similar way , to achieve results which are comparable over time and space . According to the protocol design - ers , it should not matter whether a housewife or a retired golf player resuscitates a person suffering from a cardiac arrest , whether they know the patient or not , whether the patient is transported to a small rural emergency department or to a major teaching hospital . What matters is that the first responders , the paramedics , and the emer - gency department follow the steps of the protocol . Similarly , once a patient fulfils the FRAM - 6 criteria and is included in the study , the protocol designers and people interpreting the results obtained from the study assume that the protocol follows its pre - charted course . To understand the functioning of protocols , we will analyze them as technoscientific scripts which crystallize multiple trajectories . It is important to point out that a technoscientific script is not simply equal to the prescriptions in the protocol . Some of the roles a script defines might be drawn directly from the text , such as the precise dosage of Cyclophosphamide and the expected toxicity it can bring . Similarly , the script prescribes meticulously who the patient is , what the role of the pharmacist is ( ' who shall mix the bag of Etoposide on call ' ) , the rescuer , and so forth . However , when the protocol is studied as an artefact immersed in practice , more trajectories appear to be affected , and in more ways than is apparent from a bare reading of its text . The interests at stake , the redistribution of costs , 281 This content downloaded from 128 . 97 . 207 . 6 on Mon , 30 Dec 2013 19 : 07 : 05 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Social Studies of Science the research careers involved , the technologies which are skipped , the laboratory tests which are deemed more crucial than others - all these issues often only come into view when the protocol is being implemented and / or used . Only then does it become clear what is not explicitly mentioned in the protocol , how the protocol changes pre - existing practices , what stipulations are assumed but are not explicitly written out . The sheer scope and depth of both protocols ' impacts on patients lives , histories and futures , for example , go far beyond anything explicated in the protocols - however meticulously the virtual patient is dissected in their pages . It is , in our view , in this extended layer of reverberations where the significance of the concept of ' script ' lies . It is to this deep influencing and reshaping of a broad and heterogeneous array of trajectories that we think attention needs to be drawn . In the next section , we will show how universality is achieved during the creation of the medical protocols . Historical Trajectories of Local Universality Research protocols , such as oncology protocols , are the contingent outcome of processes of negotiations between heterogeneous actors , as the following fragment ( based on fieldnotes and derived from a discussion of a new research protocol ) illustrates : Together with Pearson , a pulmonologist , oncologist Jeff Bear discusses Peters ' last version of his research protocol . Ross Peters is a resident working on his PhD thesis , and Bear is Peters ' supervisor . The protocol they are discussing should become a chapter in Peters ' thesis - and , if possible , a publication in a renowned oncology journal . Following Bear ' s suggestion , Peters has written a draft for Peripheral Stem Cell transplant therapy for patients with small - cell carcinoma of the lung . 28 This is an aggressive form of lung cancer , which does not react very well to traditional chemotherapy . Drawing from a plethora of studies , Peters comes up with suggestions to add to the list of drugs he uses in the protocol . It is a variation of an existing protocol designed for Hodgkin ' s Disease . They discuss the steps in the draft . ' Were we going to check contamination of the peripheral blood ? [ whether cancer cells are present in the blood , which might then be present in the peripheral stem cell transplantation as well ] ' , asks Peters . ' No ' , Bear says . ' We shouldn ' t do that . That is too costly and time - consuming , and it is quite hard to achieve good results . So we better skip that . ' They discuss radiotherapy , but Bear says that he has not been able to persuade the radiologists to cooperate : they apparently do not believe in local irradiation in such patients . Pearson objects to the BCNU , one of the high - dose drugs : ' I ' ve never seen that 282 This content downloaded from 128 . 97 . 207 . 6 on Mon , 30 Dec 2013 19 : 07 : 05 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Timmermans & Berg : Standardization in Action work . ' Peters counters that he has some articles claiming some effect , but Bear sides with Pearson and says that we can do without that . Peters is silent : he realizes that Bear is eager to keep Pearson interested ; all the patients , after all , have to be entered by the pulmonologists , who ' have ' the lung - cancer patients . ' Now we have room for something else ' , Bear says . ' What about Carbo ? ' Pearson asks . ' Well , that would be excellent ' , Bear says , ' but then we ' d have to get into a fight with our dispensary again . It ' s a terribly expensive drug , and it ' d have to be paid for by his budget . You ' d have to count on $ 4000 per patient in these amounts . And I could try to use some other funding , but that would take so much time and trouble to arrange ' . The protocol designers , funding agencies , the different groups of involved physicians , patients ' hopes and desires , organizational facilities , laboratory capabilities , drug companies , the patients ' or - gans ' own resilience , and so forth , all come into play in the negotiation processes leading up to the ' final ' protocol . 29 What kind of drugs are used , how they are to be dosed , who should receive them : all these ' decisions ' are not so much a product of consciously developed plans as a result of these continuous , dispersed and often contingent interactions . The actual shape of the tool , in other words , resembles no one ' blueprint ' but is accomplished ' in - course ' . 30 In addition , the widespread usage of research protocols in the field of oncology can only be understood by the dispersed force of many previous network - building activities . 31 Oncology practices , partially through their historical ties with research protocols , are already heavily pre - structured in ways congenial to new protocols . Through time , the settings in which they function have become configured in such a way as to ensure a relatively smooth fit between tool and practice . Medical personnel are used to these intervening instruments , the ward ' s infrastructure is already pre - structured to provide the complex chemotherapeutic treatments on the required strictly regulated basis , and data items or criteria are often taken over from earlier protocols . Moreover , research proto - cols thrive on the existence of institutions that aid in the proper execution of protocols , financially reward compliance , distribute centralized equipment , and so on . Similarly , practices have become more amenable for research protocols through such developments as the expansion of administrative bureaucracy , standardization efforts , the increasing usage of uniformly ' packaged ' technologies , increasing computerization of laboratories , and so forth . 32 This same process of grafting on to a strongly pre - configured world can be seen in the case of resuscitation protocols . At this moment , CPR and its more advanced twin protocol , ACLS , are the 283 This content downloaded from 128 . 97 . 207 . 6 on Mon , 30 Dec 2013 19 : 07 : 05 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Social Studies of Science only ways in Western medicine to save patients who suffer from a cardiac arrest . 33 However , these are fairly recent developments . From the turn of the century up until World War II , the Schafer or prone pressure technique was considered the best technique to restore life . 34 After 1944 , this method was discredited , and was replaced by an array of manual ventilation techniques , aimed at restoring inspiration and expiration by alternately pushing and pulling diverse body parts ( see Figure 2 ) . 35 This menu of manual resuscitation techniques was in turn replaced by mouth - to - mouth ventilation . Before 1960 , resuscitation was thus a matter of artifi - cially restoring the ventilation . CPR was formulated for the first time in 1960 when closed - chest cardiac massage was discovered , and combined with mouth - to - mouth ventilation . 36 At every transition point , the previous technique was disqualified after extensive medical testing , and the next technique was hailed as being more effective , and having the potential to save more lives . 37 In each situation , medical researchers presented their findings as definitive , solid , simple , and fool - proof . The national conferences at which they presented their findings concluded with the recom - mendation that the research phase was over and that all efforts should be put into educating and training the public . But every time the researchers were proved wrong when new developments showed that the current techniques were unsatisfactory ( manual and only mouth - to - mouth techniques ) , 38 or plainly ineffective ( in the case of the Schafer technique ) . 39 Even now , part of the technique and protocols are altered every eight years at national conferences , and research is geared at finding ways to resuscitate not only lungs and heart but also the brain . 40 In 1960 , mouth - to - mouth ventilation , one of CPR ' s two core components , was already taught to the general public while sur - geons practised open - chest cardiac massage . 41 The technique and protocols clearly benefited from an infrastructure which was in place . In the US , the American Red Cross , diverse electric utility organizations , the Armed Forces , and Scouting groups had been teaching the succession of resuscitation techniques . Before CPR was even developed , it was already decided that a resuscitation script needed to be applicable in every setting , be simple enough to be learned by adults and children alike , and should not require any props . Also , along with the development of the resuscitation proto - cols , an entire emergency medical system consisting of ambulances with paramedics , centralized rescue phones , and emergency medical 284 This content downloaded from 128 . 97 . 207 . 6 on Mon , 30 Dec 2013 19 : 07 : 05 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Timmermans & Berg : Standardization in Action FIGURE 2 Inspiratory and Expiratory Phases of Normal Respiration Source : Archer S . Gordon , David S . Fainer and A . C . Ivy , ' Artificial Respiration : A New Method and a Comparative Study of Different Methods in Adults ' , JAMA , Vol . 144 , No . 17 ( 23 December 1950 ) , 1455 - 64 , at 1456 . Copyright ? JAMA . Reproduced with kind permission . 285 This content downloaded from 128 . 97 . 207 . 6 on Mon , 30 Dec 2013 19 : 07 : 05 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Social Studies of Science departments in hospitals was developed . 42 The resuscitation proto - cols tapped into these resources and flourished along with this infrastructure : their emergence and current shape can only be understood if their origin is seen as highly dispersed and pre - structured . There was also not just one mastermind ( or even one organiza - tion ) that centralized the discovery - dissemination - usage of resusci - tative efforts . When Kouwenhoven and his collaborators discovered closed - chest cardiac massage in 1960 , 43 they envisaged a protocol in which people would resuscitate victims by performing only heart massage . However , other researchers and other agencies almost immediately incorporated the new technique within existing proto - cols . 44 Also , performance of CPR by the general public involved a long struggle in which different actors such as patient organizations , the Red Cross , and utility organizations argued with medical pro - fessionals . The first obstacle was surgeons who , up until 1960 , had exclusively performed open - heart cardiac massage . The surgeons were sceptical that closed - chest cardiac massage would be as effective as open - heart massage , and they were unwilling to give up their privileged practice . 45 However , the fact that closed - chest massages were not plagued by serious infection problems was an important advantage over open - heart massage . 46 A second difficulty arose when medical researchers published an alarming number of case studies in which closed - chest massage caused broken ribs and punctured lungs , livers , and other organs . 47 Along with the argu - ment that the general public could not be trusted to assess a patient and would endanger the victim by applying the technique in improper situations , this posed long delays in opening up the technique for the general public . 48 Only in 1973 , after many studies by different researchers and lobbying work by several organiza - tions , were ' lay ' people allowed to perform CPR . 49 In 1977 , the American Heart Association made resuscitation protocols central to its mission , and became one of several spokespersons for the technique . Even today , many researchers make a career out of improving resuscitation techniques and protocols , while right - to - die proponents attempt to challenge the default character of resuscita - tion protocols . Several groups now act as spokespersons for the technique . 50 The protocols here discussed indeed ' managed to raise the world ' . 51 Resuscitation protocols now are a default option for sudden deaths , and FRAM - 6 and its contemporaries have shaped 286 This content downloaded from 128 . 97 . 207 . 6 on Mon , 30 Dec 2013 19 : 07 : 05 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Timmermans & Berg : Standardization in Action the appearance of moder oncology . All importantly latched on to ( and transformed ) existing trajectories of other actors . The re - suscitation protocols replaced previous protocols and guidelines , and were inserted in a pre - existing educational infrastructure . Scep - tical surgeons and the entire medical profession were convinced that universal lay CPR was a better alternative than merely mouth - to - mouth ventilation or open - chest cardiac massage . In addition , the CPR protocol hooked up with the emergency medical system , and the protocol became established in and through the rapid growth of this system . The creation of a protocol , then , is the result of work widely and loosely dispersed through space and time . Neither its origin nor its development can be traced back to singularities - whether a central actor or a central historical event . It is a struggle fought on many different fronts , in different times , by many differ - ent network - builders . The protocol itself materializes contingently out of the crystallization of multiple trajectories , yet its ' universal ' content can never be wholly traced back to the interests , hopes , or goals of any of these . The creation of a protocol is open - ended ; closure is never really achieved . Creators often end up as the first users of their inventions , systems , or protocols . Users blend together with creators when they record their experiences , send feedback to researchers , and modify the protocol itself . Next , we examine the protocols in practice , demonstrating the multiplicity of local universality . Taking our analysis one step further , we demonstrate that this multiplicity is essential for the protocol to operate . Practices of Local Universality Discussions about introducing and using protocols in the medical literature abound with images of domination . Critics argue that by determining the path of action , the protocols render physicians ' skills superfluous . Physicians would merely have to be able to understand directions , and do what they are told ; they would certainly not be expected to think for themselves . The doctor would be reduced ' to a mindless cook ' . 52 The American Heart Association literally warns : ' The team leader must be ever observant . Though the algorithms provide a good " cookbook " , the team leader must remain a " thinking cook " ' . 53 In short , protocols can become a form of ' tyrannical domination ' against which physicians ' discretion 287 This content downloaded from 128 . 97 . 207 . 6 on Mon , 30 Dec 2013 19 : 07 : 05 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Social Studies of Science should be protected . 4 Universality , in this view , necessarily comes about through domination , through unequivocally subjecting the course of involved trajectories to the network - builder ' s goals - that is , to the protocol designers . On this issue of domination , actor - network accounts often produce similar tales . Although such ac - counts would oppose simplistic ' deskilling ' stories and rather speak of skills that are redelegated ( see further ) , creating universality implies extending the network by enrolling and ' tying together ' more and more allies . As the central network - builder gains strength , as the network tightens , the individual elements in the network are made increasingly docile . 55 We have shown already how the origin of universal standards is the result of historically situated , distributed work of a multitude of actors . Similarly , we want to draw attention to mutuality in the real - time process of making and maintaining the links of the trajectories to the protocol ' s script . In observing the utilization of research protocols in medical practices , the first thing that becomes obvious is how patients and medical personnel are not turned into mindless followers of some pre - set script . On the contrary , seen from their perspectives , it is the protocol ' s trajectory which is secondary and which is aligned to their own goals and trajectories , if need be . For all those involved , the protocol is an additional , sometimes highly relevant , factor in the shaping of their own trajectory , but it is dealt with in terms of local specificities . 56 For example , viewed from the trajectory of patients , a protocol such as FRAM - 6 is a source of hope , often the only perceived means to combat the disease that has stricken them . For many patients enrolled in FRAM - 6 , the research protocol in which they participate is the last Western medical therapy possible with ( albeit little ) chance of cure . They rarely care about the research goals of the protocol ( although some patients sometimes do ) ; all they care about is preserving life and creating a possible future . Drawing upon the protocol in this way , patients will often negotiate their eligibility for a protocol , try to adjust the times of the chemotherapy courses to their convenience , or skip courses when they no longer see a meaningful link between their own future and the protocol ' s trajectory . Similarly , some protocols require patients to register the amount of fluids or food they take in , or the quantities of urine they produce . Here as well , patients are sometimes little motivated to fulfil these chores , which they often see as ' superfluous ' . 288 This content downloaded from 128 . 97 . 207 . 6 on Mon , 30 Dec 2013 19 : 07 : 05 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Timmermans & Berg : Standardization in Action Protocols also vary in importance in the trajectories of medical workers as individuals and professional groups . FRAM - 6 and similar protocols are tied to the research interests of many oncolo - gists and nurses . A major reason why the physicians Peters , Bear , and Pearson go through all the trouble of refining the protocol criteria and drugs is that their careers are tied up with publishing research results . Also , the protocol affords them , and the institution in which they work , status , new patients , and so forth . Protocols allow nurses contact with new drugs , with new possibilities for cure , with a wider variety of patients and treatment plans , and with the status and career - opportunities that come with clinical research work in highly - specialized fields . But all these reasons are no guarantee that the protocol will be followed to the minutest detail . Thus when a nurse remarks in an interview : ' I don ' t think that anybody follows the protocol strictly ' , it should be viewed as an instance of protocol reappropriation by medical personnel . In the case of the resuscitation protocols , several respondents emphasized that the protocols are mainly written guidelines , and that many years of experience or a strong familiarity with the literature supersedes following the protocol to the letter . 57 The following example under - scores how the protocol becomes ' do - able ' in light of patient and staff trajectories . 58 In a regional oncology meeting , Grafson , a young man suffering from Hodgkin ' s disease , is discussed . He has had an early relapse after MOPP treatment , and the bone - scan shows several infiltrations in his skeleton . The question from the oncologist of a nearby hospital is whether this patient would be eligible for FRAM - 6 , in which case he can refer him to West University Hospital . The discussion centres around whether bone - infiltrations preclude bone - marrow transplantation : the bone marrow could then itself contain tumorous cells , which would be reinfused after the high - dose therapy . The protocol , however , does not exclude such patients : it merely demands that the bone marrow , upon puncture , is ' clean ' . Still , the physicians doubt whether they want to take this risk . ' It ' s safety first ' , one of them remarks . ' We can also use one of his family - members as a bone - marrow donor ' . This , however , is a less established approach in these types of patients - and FRAM - 6 would not apply . ' And if we go outside of FRAM - 6 ' , the oncologist continues , ' we can think whether we know any better drugs than DHAP . We ' re out of the protocol now anyway ' . For the physicians discussing Grafson , FRAM - 6 was one of the possible things they could do for this patient . Patient interests , here , are primary . Rather than searching for the right patients for the protocol , 59 oncologists often search for the right protocol for their 289 This content downloaded from 128 . 97 . 207 . 6 on Mon , 30 Dec 2013 19 : 07 : 05 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Social Studies of Science patient . FRAM - 6 did not exclude Grafson - but the physicians chose not to enrol him anyway . 60 Similar situations , in which protocols are tinkered with in the light of the patient ' s condition , arise in resuscitative efforts . In certain regions of Belgium , a paramedic and nurse always have to start and continue a resuscitative effort until an emergency physi - cian arrives and decides to quit the life - saving attempt . However , in interviews nurses confided that in certain situations they disregarded those standing orders : Depending on the physician who is on duty and will arrive in the second ambulance , we will not start the very hopeless resuscitations . This would happen , for example , with a patient who hanged himself and whose mouth is already stiffening . In principle , we should start on those patients . With certain patients , greater deviation from the protocol ' s prescrip - tions is practised . A physician gives an example in which she combines the guidelines of several of the protocols written for specific EKG rhythms in resuscitative efforts : What we do more is we combine some of the protocols together . All of a sudden you are in asystole and then all of a sudden you go in , what is called , pulseless activity . So you treat asystole and they start gaining a little and they go into a different rhythm , so you are going back and forth . However , I try to stay mainly within the guidelines . Often , nurses and other health care personnel , although not in charge , grab more control than allotted to them in the protocol , and attempt to influence both the courses and the final outcomes of protocols . 61 For example , during resuscitative efforts , we regularly observed nurses dropping hints to inexperienced physicians that there probably was not much they could do for the patient , or suggesting other treatments instead . A nurse labelled this process ' egging them along ' . A house officer62 described her task as being ' a constant reminder ' to the team , and readily admitted that her reminders were aimed at what she considered fair results . A col - league gave an example : There was a resuscitative effort not so long ago where the patient was a drug addict and we are going through the code and I say : ' This guy is a known drug addict ' . And the doctor turns around and says smartly : ' No kidding ' . ' Well ' , I say , ' you might want to try some N ' . And he said : ' Oh , okay yes , that is probably a good idea ' . In this case , the nurse ' s reminder is a subtle way of prompting the physician to a more aggressive treatment . If a different result is 290 This content downloaded from 128 . 97 . 207 . 6 on Mon , 30 Dec 2013 19 : 07 : 05 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Timmermans & Berg : Standardization in Action anticipated , the nurse in charge of the resuscitative effort might choose not to remind physicians of the next step in the protocol or , and this happens regularly , opt for not mentioning variations in physical parameters which warrant a change in the protocol . Often , medical personnel go beyond the boundaries of the medi - cal protocols in adjusting them to their primary work tasks . The use of magnesium sulphate in resuscitative efforts is such an example . Although this drug is not part of the protocols , it is sometimes given as a last resort . One respondent explained : ' It ' s like throwing the kitchen sink at them ' . Researchers cannot explain the effects of magnesium sulphate , which is labelled a ' voodoo drug ' or a ' radical Swedish thing ' [ physician in interview ] . Nevertheless , some cardi - ologists use the drug in resuscitative efforts , arguing that it appears to be beneficial for certain categories of patients . Similarly , proto - cols can be primarily a means to obtain drugs free of charge ( in the case of industry - subsidized trials , for example ) , or a place where a patient can be sent for whom ' there is really nothing more to do ' - so that the final verdict can be delayed . A protocol to save lives can be used to give family members the opportunity to come to grips with the impending death , rather than being an attempt to revive a patient . 63 The cycles of drugs , compressions , and ventilations are then repeated mainly to stretch time , and to allow the physician to ' soften the blow for the family ' . 64 Likewise , an emergency depart - ment team might work through the resuscitation protocol in order not to discourage paramedics who brought in a patient on whom they worked very hard , but who is considered non - viable . 65 In all of these examples , the protocol ' s explicit written demands are tinkered with to make the protocol workable in practice - to articulate the protocol ' s demands to heterogeneous actors ' own trajectories . The strict guidelines of protocols are thus considerably loosened in light of the multiplicity of trajectories which were brought together by the protocol in the first place . This tinkering with the protocol , however , is not an empirical fact showing the limits of standardization in practice . We do not point at these instances in order to demonstrate the ' resistance ' of actors to domination . Rather , we argue that the ongoing subordination and ( re ) articulation of the protocol to meet the primary goals of the actors involved is a sine qua non for the functioning of the protocol in the first place . Leaving the enrolled actors some leeway or discretion is often the preferred way to ensure their cooperation . 66 For example , total control of physicians ' doings and non - doings is 291 This content downloaded from 128 . 97 . 207 . 6 on Mon , 30 Dec 2013 19 : 07 : 05 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Social Studies of Science impossible in current medical practice ; they would simply not cooperate , or sabotage the protocol by not entering patients . With - out the pulmonologist Pearson ' s support , Peters ' protocol would lie dormant forever ; nobody would be deemed ' eligible ' by the pulmo - nologists . So Bear is quick to get rid of some drugs mentioned in the protocol when Pearson seems to disagree . Whether Bear agrees with Pearson ' s doubts is irrelevant . For nurses , similarly , attempting total protocol control can lead to subtle sabotage . By ' working to the rule ' , nurses can create total chaos ; or by informing patients in the ' right ' way , they can ensure that no patient gives permission for a certain research protocol to be used on them . Attempting to control too tightly is infeasible for many of the non - human elements as well : white blood cells can behave errati - cally ; X - rays can show unexpected results ; drugs can cause rare side effects ; machines might break down - all matters which , when too tightly prescribed , would continually explode the meticulously pre - scribed path of the protocol . 67 Finally , as ethnomethodological texts have repeatedly shown , 68 full control in specifications is impossible . Even if one stipulates in 347 pages how two workers need to change a light bulb in a nuclear plant , 69 the guidelines simply cannot capture the full extent of the requisite work in the finest details . All such attempts are necessarily at once overcomplete and continually indeterminate . 70 Granted the practical infeasibility of a network which consists of fully docile elements , given the phenomenon that all these elements are themselves already part and parcel of cross - cutting trajectories , standardization cannot be seen as the extension of increasingly tight and irreversible networks . Standardization does not necessarily emerge out of an ever increasing docility of the individual entities which constitute the network involved . Yet how does standardiza - tion then emerge ? How can non - docile elements result in something which , at the overall level , warrants the label ' universality ' ? The point is that the looseness of the network we witnessed here can be turned into a stabilizing feature . 71 In the practices studied here , standardization was achieved , in part , through delegating the task of maintaining and producing the protocol ' s requirements in real time to medical personnel . Their active ( not mindless ) support is crucial to maintain the protocol ' s trajectory on course . Continually , unfore - seen contingencies occur , threatening the protocol ' s path ; con - tinually , nurses or physicians have to take ad hoc measures to keep the protocol functioning : 292 This content downloaded from 128 . 97 . 207 . 6 on Mon , 30 Dec 2013 19 : 07 : 05 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Timmermans & Berg : Standardization in Action John , senior resident , is doing some paper work when a nurse comes up to him . ' John , look here , they messed this up . FRAM - 6 says you need this drug dissolved in 500 ml NaCl - and the pharmacy dissolved it in 1000 ml . What do I do now ? ' . John checks the protocol ' s drug - schedule : ' Well . . . I don ' t think it ' s too problematic . . . look , if you must reduce that 1000 ml of NaCl to 500 , he will get the same total amount ' . Dispensaries dissolve drugs erroneously , protocols can exert too high demands on a patient ' s veins ( doing four blood cultures a day requires puncturing a vein four times ) , doctors ' mistakes have to be corrected by nurses , and so on . A sudden dip in the white blood cell counts can require ad hoc intervention to keep the patient ' s trajec - tory linked to the protocol . Here , a nurse sums up in an interview what is involved in making a protocol work with patients , families , residents , and getting to know a new protocol : Look , all those protocols . It ' s interesting stuff . But they [ the physicians ] tend to just dump these things on us . I mean , they tell us we ' re such a great ward , so capable and all that . But then they just hand us the protocol and tell us that ' they ' ll hear from us when there is a problem ' . They don ' t realize the extra work it takes , the extra time you have to spend with family . And if it is a new protocol , and they don ' t give us the details , what can we tell the family ? How sick are they going to be ? When ? If they don ' t tell us , if we don ' t know how these protocols tick , we ' re at a loss when we ' ve got to inform them . Also , you get more insecure when , say , a fever develops . If you know the protocol , you know , for instance , that a brief fever at time X is nothing to worry about ; that you don ' t need to do a blood culture ( which you ' re supposed to according to our in - house protocols ) , since that will be lots of wasted work for nothing . And even if there is an inexperienced resident , who is unsure about this fever , we can still steer them in the right direction . That ' s no problem . They ask us for the right dosages for medication all the time . But if you don ' t know the protocol , again , we also do not know what to expect - and you end up doing more blood cultures , harassing the patient sometimes four times a day , doing more X - rays , and so forth . Tinkering , having the leeway to adjust the protocol to unforeseen events and repair unworkable prescriptions is a prerequisite for the protocol ' s functioning : 72 in these practices , the overall stability of the network is at the same time challenged and dependent upon the instabilities within its configuration . This often comes down to actors repairing each others ' interpretations of , or deviations from , the protocol : respiratory therapists intervene whenever a patient interprets a protocol ' s guidelines too liberally , or when a physician mistakenly attempts to inject a drug instead of adding it to the intravenous lines . Residents repair the omissions of their superiors , of the pharmacy , or of nurses , and so forth . The required com - pliance with the protocol ' s script is continually eroded by the 293 This content downloaded from 128 . 97 . 207 . 6 on Mon , 30 Dec 2013 19 : 07 : 05 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Social Studies of Science tendency to adjust the tool ' s demands to the exigencies of the actors ' own trajectories ; on the other hand , the different actors also continually repair appearing cracks when adherence to the protocol helps them to shape their own trajectory . One form this repair and maintenance often takes is reminding - most often done by physicians and nurses . 73 Reminding becomes an issue in resuscitation situations where the ( non - recovery ) outcome of the effort is often known after a couple of minutes , but where the protocol prescribes ten to fifteen minutes of action . In order to counteract the lack of motivation ( and to avoid a self - fulfilling prophecy ) , a nurse or physician will remind the team that they are supposed to follow protocols . Here is one example of such a cueing during a resuscitative effort : The patient arrives with the ambulance . When the nurse sees the condition the patient is in , she sends a respiratory therapist back to the Operating Room , saying : ' You can go . He ' s pretty much . . . ' . She makes a slicing movement with her hand under her head . [ Next , the patient is shocked twice and given medication . ] The physician in charge asks : ' Do we have a temperature for this patient ? ' The nurse puts the thermometer in the ear and says : ' It ' s 99 . 8 ' . On the monitor the patient seems to go back into ventricular fibrillation . The physician asks to shock again . When the nurse and technician keep talking about a class they are taking , he exclaims : ' Come on , people . This is a code ' . The statement , ' this is a code ' , is a disciplining reminder to the team that although the patient might not make it , the physician wanted the basic step of the protocol ( ventricular fibrillation needs to be defibrillated ) executed . 74 Similarly , machines might need a recali - bration or replacement when they fail or fall out of sync with the expectations specified in protocols . In all those situations , the protocol ' s trajectory has become too subservient to the primary trajectory at hand . Instead of coordinated unison , the result may become a cluttered disarray or no action at all . The common ground that the protocol provided is lost . No crystallization will occur . This not only threatens the issue of standardization or universality , but also , more profoundly , the ontology of the protocol . A resuscitative effort in which protocols are not followed is no longer a life - saving attempt . Oncological treatments which stray too far from protocols lose their reasons for existence . Reminders to protocol users by other users is a real - time means of maintaining the protocol ' s structuring role . 75 294 This content downloaded from 128 . 97 . 207 . 6 on Mon , 30 Dec 2013 19 : 07 : 05 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Timmermans & Berg : Standardization in Action Discussion : The Legacy of Local Universality The functioning of these protocols rests on distributed work : proto - col designers , medical personnel and patients ( among others ) are all crucial in achieving the temporary articulation of the diverse , heterogeneous trajectories involved - including their own . The outcome of all this work is a crystallization of an already existing world , and simultaneously also a crystallization of a changed world . The world is the same because protocols feed off existing infra - structures and power relationships . In the protocols we studied , the physician remained in charge and carried the final responsibility , while nurses provided the necessary repairwork so that the hier - archical impression could be maintained . 76 The physician ' s permis - sion had to be secured before the protocol could be introduced on the oncology ward or in the emergency department ; nurses admin - istered the drugs and , more generally , provided the direct patient care at the bedside . Technicians , pharmacists , respiratory therapists , chaplains and social workers were all enrolled in the protocols in ways that reinforced pre - existing institutional relations . Similarly , the research protocol itself is grounded in a well - established re - search tradition in which prestige and status is measured in publica - tions in highly acclaimed journals , and resuscitation protocols are aligned with an elaborate emergency medical system . The world also remains the same in the sense that it preserves and perpetuates local variations and cultural traditions . The same American CPR protocol is , in Belgium , aimed at ' reanimating ' a patient , while in the US the goal is to ' resuscitate ' a patient . 77 Reanimation ( bringing back the anima ) includes reviving cerebral functioning , while resuscitating is limited to restoring cardiac and respiratory functions . 78 Research protocols consolidate the hier - archical divisions between hospitals , and more often than not carry local definitions of ' appropriate therapies ' or ' suitable diagnostics ' which are not accepted by others . North - American protocols are often dismissed by European oncologists as overly aggressive , while within Europe the Dutch perceive the French as highly interventionist , and so on . Similarly , US oncology centres some - times cannot participate in European clinical trials . For some types of cancer , for example , bone - marrow therapy was already a ' stand - ard therapy ' in the US , so that it could not be compared to ' conventional ' chemotherapeutic treatment , which was still feasible in Europe . 79 295 This content downloaded from 128 . 97 . 207 . 6 on Mon , 30 Dec 2013 19 : 07 : 05 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Social Studies of Science But the world is also changed with medical protocols : through the continuous infrastructural work of all those involved , 80 the protocol allows more complex and detailed treatment plans to become possible . Once implemented , the protocol can articulate activities and events over time and space - staff members can delegate coordinating tasks to it , transforming the nature of their work . With CPR some lives are saved , and with FRAM - 6 a new treatment plan is being tested . The protocol , in this network , is an active trans - formative agent , articulating and revising the involved trajectories in novel ways . A protocol can be depicted as a coordinating tool : 81 throughout its path , it contains explicit criteria on whether , when and how next steps are to be taken . Personnel delegate some of their coordinating tasks to it , and the protocol appoints specific tasks to them . It is there to create ( a new ) order , to realign the heterogeneous elements of the practice so as to reproduce some ' optimal ' approach . It articulates activities over different sites and times : nurses know when to do which laboratory tests , when to shift from one chemo - therapeutic drug to another , and when to start which emergency procedure . Likewise , physicians know when what is expected of them , and how their actions fit in the overall picture . Through this redelegation of tasks , several goals can be served . In addition to being a carrier of prescriptions for ' good medical practice ' , a protocol can , and typically does , increase the overall complexity of activities through taking coordinating tasks out of the hands of the medical staff . Both the highly complex oncological treatment schedules and the intricate procedures of the emergency department ' s resuscitative effort , for instance , are only possible through the protocol ' s core role . Only through its continual pres - ence as coordinator , as a ' list ' of pre - set articulations , 82 can these complex tasks be smoothly fulfilled . Finally , protocols can create comparability of activities over time and place . Latour has drawn the attention of students of science to the work involved in transporting a fact out of the laboratory . Alliances have to be forged in order to turn a lab into an obligatory point of passage , and once the ' facts ' have left the hands of their creators , controlling their usage or interpretation is even more difficult . This is the art of metrology , as Latour has aptly named it , the work of constructing the infrastructure without which a ' fact ' or ' technology ' would not travel very far . 83 In this light , the resuscita - tion protocols and FRAM - 6 are remarkable metrological tools . 296 This content downloaded from 128 . 97 . 207 . 6 on Mon , 30 Dec 2013 19 : 07 : 05 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Timmermans & Berg : Standardization in Action They collapse the two problems of constructing a fact and of exporting it to the outer world into one , by finding a means to construct knowledge in the very place where the protocols will have to be used . 84 Only through the performance of actions relatively standardized over space and time does the generation of knowledge about the effectiveness of resuscitation , or the effect of the experi - mental chemotherapeutic combination , become possible . Equally , only through the presence of these same protocols can the facts become a part of everyday medical practice . The protocols , thus , turn practice itself into a laboratory : by prescribing highly detailed sequences of action , they become the means through which facts can be produced and , at the same time , a crucial part of the networks through which the facts can be performed . 85 The core of universality lies precisely in the changes built up on local infrastructures . Universality is always local universality . We have chosen this ironic , seeming contradiction in terms to express the fundamental ambiguity of ' universality ' , and to avoid resorting to a dichotomous emphasis on ' locality ' as the only ' true ' reality . Local universality is the alignment of protocols which is col - lectively achieved through the converging of different trajectories . CPR and FRAM - 6 are made universal when previously existing trajectories are sufficiently crystallized , and when the distributed work required to get and keep the tool functioning is constantly performed . 86 In this dynamic , uncertain reality , stability is a con - sequence of a continuous balancing of temporary agreements , sus - pended disbeliefs , or mini - social contracts ( in the Rousseauian sense of that term ) . To claim that something - a protocol , a scientific fact , or a technical artefact - is ' universal ' tout court , means that one assumes highly improbable - and undesirable ceteris paribus conditions . Local universality , then , is about being in several locales at the same time , yet being always also located as a product of contingent negotiations and pre - existing institutional and material relations . It is simultaneously about transcending locales and about being constantly collectively produced . It is about potentially large - scale consequences and about the awareness of different universalities , of inevitable partiality . It is about distributed medical knowledge , which could have been different . It is about the need to take the transformative power of these tools seriously ( both analytically and politically ) , while simultaneously remaining aware of what is left out , what is omitted . 87 In sum , local universality depends on how standards manage the tensions among transforming 297 This content downloaded from 128 . 97 . 207 . 6 on Mon , 30 Dec 2013 19 : 07 : 05 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Social Studies of Science work practices while simultaneously being grounded in those practices . Local universality , then , implies a context of practice , of multiple crystallizing and dispersed trajectories , of reappropriation , repair - ing , combining , and even circumventing the protocols and stan - dards , of leaving margins of freedom , of reminding , of long pro - cesses of negotiation , of diverse interests , and so forth . It points at the distributed origins of standards , and at their distributed produc - tion and maintenance . Editors of prominent medical journals are afraid that medical protocols will stifle decision - making , and im - prison expertise in written guidelines enforced by the medical profession ' s ' natural enemies ' - insurance clerks , government officials , lawyers . In the everyday practices of constructing and using science , protocols , and technology , however , expertise is not ' captured ' and skills are not ' depleted ' . The construction of medical protocols shifts the expertise of being and becoming a resident , patient , or nurse to a different plane , making some skills obsolete and requiring others . This is similar to what happens when new automated or information technology is introduced in the work - place . In contrast with many studies of such processes , 88 however , we have indicated that not only the work of medical practitioners changes , but that the protocol itself is also constantly in a flux , and emerges as both the result and the cause of crystallization of multiple trajectories . Like the trajectories of patients in hospitals , 89 the protocol is managed by , and in turn manages , the trajectories with which it intersects . No one actor ( including the protocol itself ) or mastermind can be said to be in control : rather , universality emerges from this seemingly chaotic interaction of multiple trajecto - ries . The crystallization of these trajectories in the protocol is an ongoing process in which all actors are actively involved , and all are continuously transformed - including the protocol itself . The illusion of total bureaucratic supervision and control , prevalent in too many tales ( both dystopian and utopian ) , is a chimera : the multiplicities and contingencies embedded in the workings of a protocol cannot themselves be controlled . Rather than attempting to implement more guidelines and enhance control , standardization is achieved in and through the intersecting of disciplining efforts and the real - time work of medical personnel . Rather than being the product of ever increasingly tightened networks , medical protocols can coordinate activities over space and time because of the non - docility of the actants which populate these practices . 298 This content downloaded from 128 . 97 . 207 . 6 on Mon , 30 Dec 2013 19 : 07 : 05 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Timmermans & Berg : Standardization in Action 299 * NOTES We would like to thank Geof Bowker , Laura Neumann , Andy Pickering , Evelleen Richards , Leigh Star , Irma van der Ploeg and four anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments . 1 . Geoffrey Bowker , ' How to be Universal : Some Cybernetic Strategies , 1943 - 70 ' , Social Studies of Science , Vol . 23 ( 1993 ) , 107 - 27 ; Bruno Latour , We Have Never Been Modem ( Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press , 1993 ) ; James O ' Connell , ' Metrology : The Creation of Universality by the Circulation of Particulars ' , Social Studies of Science , Vol . 23 ( 1993 ) , 129 - 73 . 2 . Bruno Latour , Science in Action : How to Follow Scientists and Engineers through Society ( Milton Keynes , Bucks . : Open University Press , 1987 ) , 287 . 3 . Bruno Latour , ' Give Me a Laboratory and I will Raise the World ' , in Karin D . Knorr - Cetina and Michael Mulkay ( eds ) , Science Observed ( Beverly Hills , CA : Sage Publications , 1983 ) , 140 - 70 , quote at 152 . 4 . Ibid . , 155 . 5 . See also Annemarie Mol , ' What is New ? Doppler and its Others : An Empirical Philosophy of Innovations ' , in Ilana Lowy ( ed . ) , Medicine and Change : Historical and Sociological Studies of Medical Innovation ( Paris : INSERM , 1993 ) , 107 - 25 . 6 . Bruno Latour ( personal communication , letter dated 22 October 1995 ) . 7 . Michel Callon , ' Some Elements of a Sociology of Translation : Domestication of the Scallops and the Fishermen of St Brieuc Bay ' , in John Law ( ed . ) , Power , Action , and Belief : a New Sociology of Knowledge ? ( London : Routledge & Kegan Paul , 1986 ) , 196 - 233 , quote at 203 . 8 . Latour , op . cit . note 2 , 143 . 9 . Joan Fujimura , ' On Methods , Ontologies and Representation in the Sociology of Science : Where do We Stand ? , in David Maines ( ed . ) , Social Organization and Social Processes : Essays in Honor of Anselm Strauss ( Hawthorne , NY ; Aldine de Gruyter , 1991 ) , 207 - 38 ; Susan Leigh Star , ' Power , Technologies and the Phenom - enology of Conventions : On Being Allergic to Onions ' , in John Law ( ed . ) , A Sociology of Monsters : Essays on Power , Technology and Domination ( London : Routledge , 1991 ) , 25 - 56 . 10 . Importantly , the notion ' distributed activity ' does not imply that there is a central distributor doing the distributing . The way that we use the word here draws upon usages which emphasize the lack of such a central actor - either in the distributing or in the distributed activity itself . See , for example , Susan Leigh Star , ' The Structure of Ill - Structured Solutions : Boundary Objects and Heterogeneous Distributed Problem Solving ' , in Marc Huhns and Les Gasser ( eds ) , Distributed Artificial Intelligence , Vol . 2 ( London : Pitman , 1989 ) , 37 - 54 ; Edwin Hutchins , Cognition in the Wild ( Cambridge , MA : MIT Press , 1995 ) . 11 . Madeleine Akrich , ' The De - Scription of Technical Objects ' , in Wiebe E . Bijker and John Law ( eds ) , Shaping Technology / Building Society : Studies in Sociotechnical Change ( Cambridge , MA : MIT Press , 1992 ) , 205 - 25 ; Akrich and Bruno Latour , ' A Summary of a Convenient Vocabulary for the Semiotics of Human and Non - human Assemblies ' , ibid . , 259 - 65 . See also Stephen Hill , The Tragedy of Technology ( London : Pluto Press , 1988 ) . 12 . Michel Callon , ' Society in the Making : The Study of Technology as a Tool This content downloaded from 128 . 97 . 207 . 6 on Mon , 30 Dec 2013 19 : 07 : 05 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 300 Social Studies of Science for Sociological Analysis ' , in Wiebe E . Bijker , Thomas P . Hughes , and Trevor Pinch ( eds ) , The Social Construction of Technological Systems ( Cambridge , MA : MIT Press , 1987 ) , 83 - 107 , see especially 84 - 85 . 13 . It is important to note that we do not want to reify the distinction between designers and users . Everyone is both user and designer , the difference is gradual . Some people are more of the latter , some more of the former . 14 . Akrich , op . cit . note 11 , 222 . 15 . Anselm L . Strauss , Continual Permutations of Action ( New York : Aldine de Gruyter , 1993 ) . 16 . Everett Hughes , The Sociological Eye ( Chicago & New York : Aldine de Gruyter , 1970 ) , 316 . 17 . Another important dimension of trajectories is that they are partly unique to the individual and partly collective . In the case of medical protocols , the collective dimension refers to the background of the actor . For example , during resuscitative efforts , technicians have well circumscribed job responsibilities which differ vastly from the tasks of , for example , chaplains or social workers . However , the personal experiences with death of either a particular chaplain or the technician will colour their trajectories . See Stefan Timmermans , Saving Lives ? A Historical and Ethno - graphic Study of Resuscitation Techniques ( Urbana , IL : unpublished PhD disserta - tion , University of Illinois , 1995 ) . 18 . Callon , op . cit . note 7 , 219 . 19 . These are international protocols because they form the basis of resuscitative care in many countries where Western medicine is practised . 20 . American Heart Association , Textbook of Advanced Cardiac Life Support ( Dallas , TX : American Heart Association , 1990 ) . 21 . James D . Heckman ( ed . ) , Emergency Care and Transportation ( Park Ridge , IL : American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons , 1987 ) . 22 . Archer S . Gordon , ' A History of Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation ' , in Gordon ( ed . ) , Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation Conference Proceedings ( Washington , DC : NRC - NAC , 1967 ) , 3 - 26 . 23 . Stefan Timmermans , ' Saving Lives or Saving Multiple Identities : The Dou - ble Dynamic of Resuscitation Scripts ' , Social Studies of Science , Vol . 26 , No . 4 ( November 1996 ) , 767 - 97 . 24 . A type of cancer of the lymphatic tissues . We are using the pseudonym ' FRAM - 6 ' to protect the confidentiality of the protocol designers . 25 . MOPP stands for a combination of drugs . 26 . BCNU stands for a combination of drugs . Dosage is expressed in mg per square metre of body surface . 27 . William B . Kouwenhoven , James R . Jude and Guy G . Knickerbocker , ' Closed Chest Cardiac Massage ' , Journal of the American Medical Association ( JAMA ) , Vol . 173 ( 9 July 1960 ) , 1064 - 67 , quote at 1064 . 28 . This therapy is a recent alternative for bone - marrow transplantation , where bone - marrow cells are harvested from the patient ' s pelvic bone . The advantages of this new technique are claimed to be more convenience for the patient , and a more rapid restoration of normal blood cell levels . 29 . Marc Berg , ' Order ( s ) and Disorder ( s ) : Of Protocols and Medical Practices ' , in Berg and Annemarie Mol ( eds ) , Differences in Medicine : Unravelling Practices , Techniques and Bodies ( under review ) . 30 . Michael Lynch , Art and Artefact in Laboratory Science : A Study of Shop This content downloaded from 128 . 97 . 207 . 6 on Mon , 30 Dec 2013 19 : 07 : 05 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Timmermans & Berg : Standardization in Action Work and Shop Talk in a Research Laboratory ( London : Routledge & Kegan Paul , 1985 ) , 147 . 31 . Marc Berg , Rationalizing Medical Work : A Study of Decision Support Techniques and Medical Practices ( Cambridge , MA : MIT Press , forthcoming ) . 32 . Evelleen Richards , Vitamin C and Cancer : Medicine or Politics ? ( London : Macmillan ; New York : St Martin ' s Press , 1991 ) ; Geoffrey Bowker , Science on the Run : Information Management and Industrial Geophysics at Schlumberger , 1920 - 1940 ( Cambridge , MA : MIT Press , 1994 ) ; Bowker and Susan Leigh Star , ' Knowledge and Infrastructure in International Information Management : Problems of Classification and Coding ' , in Lisa Bud ( ed . ) , Information Acumen : The Under - standing and Use of Knowledge in Moder Business ( London : Routledge , 1994 ) , 187 - 213 ; Joan H . Fujimura , ' Crafting Science : Standardized Packages , Boundary Objects , and " Translation " ' , in Andrew Pickering ( ed . ) , Science as Practice and Culture ( Chicago , IL : The University of Chicago Press , 1992 ) , 168 - 211 ; O ' Connell , op . cit . note 1 . 33 . This is especially true in comparison with the period before World War II , when a range of manual resuscitation methods was used to restore life , or in the previous centuries when an amalgam of methods were being employed : see Heather P . Liss , ' A History of Resuscitation ' , Annals of Emergency Medicine , Vol . 15 , No . 1 ( January 1986 ) , 65 - 72 . 34 . In 1889 , Professor Schafer developed a resuscitation method where inter - mittent pressure was exerted on the thorax of the patient in the prone position . 35 . Julius H . Comroe , ' Retrospectroscope . " . . . In Comes the Good Air " . Part I : Rise and Fall of the Schafer Method ' , American Review of Respiratory Disease , Vol . 119 ( 1979 ) , 803 - 09 ; Comroe , ' Part II : Mouth - to - Mouth Method ' , ibid . , 1025 - 31 . 36 . Kouwenhoven , Jude & Knickerbocker , op . cit . note 27 . 37 . Stefan Timmermans , ' From " Out Goes the Bad Air " to " ABC " : A Sociohistorical Analysis of the Development of Resuscitation Techniques ' ( paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Society for Social Studies of Science [ 4S ] , Purdue , IN , 18 - 21 November 1993 ) . 38 . Peter Safar , ' Ventilatory Efficacy of Mouth - to - Mouth Artificial Respiration ' , JAMA , Vol . 167 ( 17 May 1958 ) , 335 - 41 . 39 . Archer S . Gordon , Max S . Sadove and Frank Raymon , ' Critical Survey of Manual Artificial Respiration ' , JAMA , Vol . 147 ( 8 December 1951 ) , 1444 - 53 . 40 . Peter Safar , ' Cerebral Resuscitation ' , Annals of Emergency Medicine , Vol . 22 , No . 2 ( February 1993 ) , 324 - 50 . 41 . Hugh E . Stephenson , Cardiac Arrest and Resuscitation ( St Louis , MO : The C . V . Mosby Company , 1958 ) . 42 . ' CPR - ECC , Standards for Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and Emergency Cardiac Care ' , JAMA , Vol . 227 ( 18 February 1974 ) , 836 - 68 . 43 . Kouwenhoven , Jude & Knickerbocker , op . cit . note 27 . 44 . Peter Safar , Torrey C . Brown and Warren J . ioltey , ' Ventilation and Circulation with Closed - Chest Cardiac Massage in Man ' , JAMA , Vol . 176 ( 20 May 1961 ) , 574 - 76 . 45 . The Alan Mason Chesney Medical Archives of the Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions , Kouwenhoven papers , Box 917 . 46 . James R . Jude , William B . Kouwenhoven and Guy G . Knickerbocker , 301 This content downloaded from 128 . 97 . 207 . 6 on Mon , 30 Dec 2013 19 : 07 : 05 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Social Studies of Science ' External Cardiac Resuscitation ' , Monographs in the Surgical Sciences , Vol . 1 ( 1964 ) , 59 - 119 . 47 . See , for example , Robert R . Morgan , ' Laceration of the Liver from Closed - Chest Cardiac Massage ' , New England Journal of Medicine , Vol . 265 ( 13 July 1961 ) , 82 - 83 . 48 . Gordon , op . cit . note 22 . 49 . CPR - ECC , op . cit . note 42 . 50 . See , for example , the special issue of Annals of Emergency Medicine , Vol . 23 , No . 2 ( February 1993 ) , 275 - 511 . 51 . Latour , op . cit . note 4 . 52 . Franz J . Ingelfinger , ' Algorithms , Anyone ? ' , New England Journal of Medi - cine , Vol . 288 ( 19 April 1973 ) , 847 - 48 . 53 . AHA , op . cit . note 20 , 238 . 54 . William E . May , ' Consensus or Coercion ' , JAMA , Vol . 254 ( 23 / 30 August 1985 ) , 1077 . 55 . For such explications of actor - network theory , see , for example , Latour , op . cit . note 4 , and Michel Callon , ' Techno - Economic Networks and Irreversibility ' , in Law ( ed . ) , op . cit . note 9 , 132 - 61 . Perceptive critiques of this tendency of actor - network theory are : Donna J . Haraway , ' A Game of Cat ' s Cradle : Science Studies , Feminist Theory , Cultural Studies ' , Configurations , Vol . 1 ( 1994 ) , 59 - 71 ; Nick Lee and Steve Brown , ' Otherness and the Actor - Network : The Undiscovered Con - tinent ' , American Behavioral Scientist , Vol . 37 ( 1994 ) , 772 - 90 ; John Law and Annemarie Mol , ' On Hidden Heterogeneities : The Design of An Aircraft ' ( Keele , Staffs . : Department of Sociology & Social Anthropology , Keele University , un - published manuscript , 1995 ) . 56 . In Leigh Star ' s terms , protocols are boundary objects : Susan Leigh Star and James R . Griesemer , ' Institutional Ecology , " Translations " and Boundary Objects : Amateurs and Professionals in Berkeley ' s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology , 1907 - 39 ' , Social Studies of Science , Vol . 19 ( 1989 ) , 387 - 420 . 57 . Nurses often explicitly referred to the work of Pat Benner , who in her writing legitimized the value of accumulating clinical expertise : see , especially , P . Benner , From Novice to Expert : Excellence and Power in Clinical Nursing Practice ( Menlo Park , CA : Addison - Wesley , 1984 ) . 58 . Joan Fujimura , ' Constructing " Do - able " Problems in Cancer Research : Articulating Alignment ' , Social Studies of Science , Vol . 17 ( 1987 ) , 257 - 93 . 59 . See the in - and exclusion criteria every medical research protocol begins with . 60 . For another example of how standardized protocols function in practice , see Linda Hogle ' s analysis of the standardization of organ donation in practice : L . Hogle , ' Standardization across Non - Standard Domains : The Case of Organ Procure - ment ' , Science , Technology , & Human Values , Vol . 20 , No . 4 ( Autumn 1995 ) , 482 - 501 . 61 . David Hughes , ' When Nurse Knows Best : Some Aspects of Nurse / Doctor Interaction in a Casualty Department ' , Sociology of Health and Illness , Vol . 10 ( 1988 ) , 1 - 22 . 62 . A nurse with mainly administrative functions who writes down the events during a resuscitative effort . 302 This content downloaded from 128 . 97 . 207 . 6 on Mon , 30 Dec 2013 19 : 07 : 05 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Timmermans & Berg : Standardization in Action 303 63 . Stefan Timmermans , ' High Tech in High Touch : The Presence of Family Members during Resuscitative Efforts ' ( draft manuscript , under review ) . 64 . Physician in interview . 65 . David Sudnow , Passing On : The Social Organization of Dying ( Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall , 1967 ) . 66 . Star & Griesemer , op . cit . note 56 . 67 . S . L . Star , Regions of the Mind ( Stanford , CA : Stanford University Press , 1989 ) . 68 . Harold Garfinkel , Ethnomethodological Studies of Work ( Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall , 1967 ) ; Garfinkel , Michael Lynch and Eric Livingston , ' The Work of a Discovering Science Construed with Materials from the Optically Discovered Pulsar ' , Philosophy of the Social Sciences , Vol . 11 ( 1981 ) , 131 - 58 ; Lynch , op . cit . note 30 . 69 . This example was given in the US television programme 60 Minutes , in a report by Leslie Stahl titled : ' How many does it take to change a light bulb in . . . ? ' ( CBS television , 18 December 1994 ) . 70 . Stefan Timmermans , Geoffrey C . Bowker and Susan Leigh Star , ' The Architecture of Difference : Visibility , Controllability , and Comparability in Build - ing a Nursing Interventions Classification ' , in Berg & Mol ( eds ) , op . cit . note 29 ; Berg , op . cit . note 31 . 71 . We owe this insight to Vicky Singleton and Mike Michael : see their ' Actor - Networks and Ambivalence : General Practitioners in the UK Cervical Screening Programme ' , Social Studies of Science , Vol . 23 ( 1993 ) , 227 - 64 ; Vicky Singleton , ' Stabilizing Instabilities : The Laboratory in the UK Cervical Screening Program ' , in Berg & Mol ( eds ) , op . cit . note 29 ; John Law , ' Traduction / Trahison : Notes on ANT ' ( Keele , Staffs . : Department of Sociology & Social Anthropology , Keele University , unpublished manuscript , 1995 ) . See also Berg , op . cit . note 31 . 72 . For similar arguments regarding a different type of formal tools , see : H . M . Collins , Artificial Experts : Social Knowledge and Intelligent Machines ( Cambridge , MA : MIT Press , 1990 ) ; Les Gasser , ' The Integration of Computing and Routine Work ' , ACM Transactions on Office Information Systems , Vol . 4 ( 1986 ) , 205 - 25 ; Susan Leigh Star , ' Layered Space , Formal Representations and Long - Distance Control : The Politics of Information ' , Fundamenta Scientiae , Vol . 10 ( 1989 ) , 125 - 54 . 73 . It is important to note that this reminding occurs in the light of the situation at hand , and is not necessarily instigated by the protocol designers , hospital administrators , or outsiders . Also reminding doesn ' t result in more rules or a stricter set of protocols , but in adherence to or facilitating compliance with the already existing guidelines . 74 . Again , too liberal interpretations of the protocol by people other than physicians will most likely result in a warning or order from the physician . When other team members find that physicians interpret the protocol too loosely , they usually vent their concern afterwards and might go as far as to formulate a formal complaint . 75 . On other forms of maintenance , on keeping formalisms at work in real time , see the studies cited in note 72 ; and Berg , op cit . note 31 . 76 . Ina Wagner , ' Hard Times : The Politics of Women ' s Work in Computerized This content downloaded from 128 . 97 . 207 . 6 on Mon , 30 Dec 2013 19 : 07 : 05 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 304 Social Studies of Science Environments ' ( paper presented at 5th IFIP Working Conference on Women , Work and Computerization , Manchester , 2 - 5 July 1994 ) . 77 . This observation was especially apparent in the interview data , when we asked health - care providers from the two countries to define a successful re - suscitative effort . Almost without exception , the Belgian health - care providers emphasized the reanimation aspect , while their US colleagues talked mostly in terms of resuscitation . 78 . See Safar , op . cit . note 40 . 79 . Interview with an oncologist ; see also Ilana L6wy , ' " Nothing More To Be Done " : Palliative Care versus Experimental Therapy in Advanced Cancer ' , Science in Context , Vol . 8 ( 1995 ) , 209 - 30 ; Richards , op . cit . note 32 , 112 - 24 , 188 - 91 ; Lynn Payer , Medicine and Culture : Notions of Health and Sickness in Britain , the US , France , and West Germany ( London : Victor Gollancz , 1989 ) . 80 . See Bowker , op . cit . note 32 . 81 . Berg , op . cit . note 31 . 82 . Callon , op . cit . note 55 ; Jack Goody , The Domestication of the Savage Mind ( New York : Cambridge University Press , 1977 ) , Chapter 5 . 83 . Latour , op . cit . note 2 . 84 . Our protocols are not the first historical examples of this development . Foucault situates the origin of this particular form of knowledge production in the medical institutional arrangements following the French Revolution , which culmi - nated in the anatomo - clinical gaze of the clinic : see Michel Foucault , The Birth of the Clinic : An Archaeology of Medical Perception ( New York : Vintage Books , 1973 [ 1963 ] ) . 85 . Harry M . Marks , Ideas as Reforms : Therapeutic Experiments and Medical Practice , 1900 - 1980 ( Cambridge , MA : unpublished PhD dissertation , Department of Political Science , MIT , 1987 ) ; Marks , ' Notes from the Underground : The Social Organization of Therapeutic Research ' , in Russell C . Maulitz and Diana E . Long ( eds ) , Grand Rounds : 100 Years of Internal Medicine ( Philadelphia , PA : University of Pennsylvania Press , 1988 ) , 297 - 336 . 86 . Bowker , op . cit . note 32 ; Berg , op . cit . note 31 ; Timmermans , Bowker & Star , op . cit . note 70 . 87 . See , for example : Donna J . Haraway , Simians , Cyborgs , and Women : The Reinvention of Nature ( New York : Routledge , 1991 ) ; Susan Leigh Star , Misplaced Concretism and Concrete Situations : Feminism , Method and Information Technol - ogy ( in preparation ) ; Lucy Suchman , ' Working Relations of Technology Production and Use ' , Computer Supported Cooperative Work , Vol . 2 ( 1994 ) , 21 - 40 . On unraveling differences in medical practices , bodies and techniques , see Berg & Mol ( eds ) , op . cit . note 29 . 88 . See , for example : David F . Noble , Forces of Production : A Social History of Industrial Automation ( Oxford : Oxford University Press , 1986 ) ; Peter Miller and Ted O ' Leary , ' " Economic Citizenship " and the Spatial Reordering of Manu - facture ' , Accounting , Organizations and Society , Vol . 19 ( 1994 ) , 15 - 43 ; Shoshana Zuboff , In the Age of the Smart Machine : The Future of Work and Power ( New York : Basic Books , 1987 ) . 89 . Anselm Strauss , Susan Fagerhaugh , Barbara Suczek and Carolyn Wiener , The Social Organization of Medical Work ( Chicago , IL : The University of Chicago Press , 1985 ) . This content downloaded from 128 . 97 . 207 . 6 on Mon , 30 Dec 2013 19 : 07 : 05 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Timmermans & Berg : Standardization in Action Stefan Timmermans is a sociology lecturer at Brandeis University . His main interest is in medical technology and medical research , and he has published articles on terminal care in both Dutch and English . His current research project focuses on laboratory technicians . Marc Berg is a postdoctoral researcher at the University of Maastricht , the Netherlands . He is the author of Rationalizing Medical Work : Decision Support Technologies and Medical Practices ( Cambridge , MA : MIT Press , forthcoming ) . Together with Annemarie Mol , he is currently completing Differences in Medicine : Unravelling Practices , Techniques and Bodies . His current research focuses on the electronic patient record . Authors ' addresses : ( ST ) : Sociology Department , Brandeis University , Waltham , Massachusetts 02254 - 9110 , USA . Fax : + 1 617 736 2653 ; Email : Timmermans @ binah . cc . brandeis . edu ; ( MB ) : Department of Health Ethics and Philosophy , University of Limburg , PO Box 616 , 6200 MD Maastricht , The Netherlands . Fax : + 31 43 670932 ; Email : Marc . Berg @ GW . RuLimburg . NL 305 This content downloaded from 128 . 97 . 207 . 6 on Mon , 30 Dec 2013 19 : 07 : 05 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions