Interactive Annotations in Web - based Learning Systems Stefan Fürlinger , Andreas Auinger , Christian Stary Department of Communications Engineering , Kepler University of Linz ABSTRACT Web - based knowledge - transfer environments aim towards self - directed and collaborative learning . They not only require enablers for personalizing content and context - sensitive interaction , but also for collaboration . In order to overcome deficiencies of current approaches with respect to contextual knowledge transfer , we consider concept building to link content to communication essential . Our technical enablers are tuned and enriched features for personalization and collaboration which we term interactive annotations . They have been implemented as overarching concept to hypermedia handling and peer - to - peer communication in the Web - based knowledge - transfer platform ScholionWB + 1 [ 7 , 8 ] . Our solution is highly flexible , coupling hypermedia content with common communication tools in traditional browsers settings . 1 . Introduction One of the long term goals in advanced distributed learning is to put learners in control of the knowledge - transfer process . Today’s knowledge - transfer processes occur increasingly through asynchronous as well as location - independent communication or interaction . Depending on the applied didactic principles and individual involvement they might occur in a many - to - many communication environment . They are also increasingly based on hypermedia , computer - mediated interactive software systems [ 1 ] . With respect to the learner control , both , the personalization of content , and context - sensitive communication in the course of knowledge transfer are critical to establish user - centered Quality of Service ( QoS ) [ 2 , 3 ] . Annotations in electronic documents are considered to enable the aforementioned quality parameters [ 4 ] . In [ 5 ] this enabler function is described along the process of creating content in a collaborative way : “The author writes a prototypical paper , makes revisions and hands the paper over to one or more ‘critical’ users . Critical reading in this case means reading and annotating the document to give the author hints to remove mistakes and redesign the 1 ScholionWB + is a web - based knowledge - transfer environment developed at the Johannes Kepler University ( cf . [ 8 ] ) . paper structure and hence improve the paper’s quality . ” In a review and revision context , annotations can not only be suggestions for modifying a document , but might also point to related ideas in other resources , such as books or articles . Interactive annotations enable individual electronic versions of content that can be utilized in the course of knowledge transfer and collaborative learning . There already exist empirical data on the increase of knowledge , when students work with the personalized content in networked , interactive hypertext systems [ 6 ] . Ideally , interactive annotations ( i . e . electronic annotations on electronic content ) should be manipulated similar to traditional annotations , e . g . , overlaying some transparent slide , and thus , decoupling individual entries from the original material [ 7 , 8 ] . So far , traditional , html - based web applications do not support interactive annotations , although the W3C - Annotation Working Group [ 9 ] has already specified their meaning in general terms : “In general , an annotation is defined as any object that is associated with another object by some relationship . The annotation object may be of any type and the relationship between the annotation object and the object it annotates may also be of any type . ” In [ 10 ] we find annotations explained more specific as the „complement of a document in order to textual or graphical notes at meta level“ . Finally , in [ 11 ] annotations are explained in the context of web - based content management : “An annotation of a web page is any object , which is displayed within or accessible from the original by accessing the original . ” Allowing learners to personalize content according to their needs and individual mental associations ( cf . [ 2 , 7 ] ) , an annotation concept should enable textual notes to content ( elements ) , markings of content elements , and multimedia attachments to content . Those enrichments should become part of the content for context - oriented learning [ 3 ] . In this way , learners can adapt content to their individual knowledge and experience [ 12 ] , as well as actively change it ( as demanded in [ 1 , 2 , 13 ] ) . Since self - directed knowledge transfer should also allow for communication , collaborative and context - sensitive learning ( cf . [ 3 , 14 - 16 ] ) , learners should also be able to interact from different locations and in different time periods . However , the respective technology should preserve the context of interaction at any time , without Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies ( ICALT’04 ) 0 - 7695 - 2181 - 9 / 04 $ 20 . 00 © 2004 IEEE respect to the location . Consequently , typical tools for communication , such as asynchronous discussion boards or synchronous text - / voice - chats , need to be enriched with links to the content they are referring to . Then , they facilitate virtual team building among learners and involve teachers as coaches in the course of effective collaborative learning [ 1 - 3 ] . A comprehensive annotation concept has thus also to capture references of communication entries to ( individualized ) content . Although the World - Wide - Web facilitates sharing of information and distributed processing of data , none of the standard web - browsers has adopted any annotation functionality so far . However , the use of this mainstream technology allows to address a large user community . Thus , we had to enrich existing browsers with the features enabling personalization of content and context - sensitive collaboration . We did that as part of the ScholionWB + ( scaleable technologies for teleteaching / learning webbased ) project that is also described in the following . In section 2 we review related work with respect to personalization and context - sensitive communication through annotation systems . In section 3 we elaborate our concept for annotation systems and introduce technical enablers . In section 4 we discuss the implementation of the annotation concept meeting the requirements listed above . Section 5 concludes the paper , reframing the results of the presented work . 2 . Related Work Although , at a first glance at benchmark and evaluation studies [ 19 ] , the migration of hypermedia concepts with features for personalization or vice versa does not seem to be highly developed , there exist some concepts to that direction . For instance , using Adobe’s Acrobat Reader [ 20 ] readers can individualize PDF - documents , entering arbitrary text as a note to a document page . The note can then be dragged to any position on the document and edited . Notes can be exported and imported , thus requiring to send only small note files from the annotator to the author of a document instead of the entire PDF document . Acrobat Reader also allows creating a note summary document , but does not support context - sensitive communication at all . In Hyperwave [ 17 ] annotations are part of the Information - Server - 6 functionality . They enable users to attach annotations to documents regardless to their write permission . Annotations can be attached to single words , phrases or parts of a document . Notes may also be bound to specific positions within the document , an entire document , or a collection of documents . Although Hyperwave also provides communication support , it does not allow to trace back discussions to content elements . In 4 Instruments and results of the evaluation are available at http : / / scholion . ce . jku . at contrast to Hyperwave , Kolumbus [ 3 ] enables computer - supported collaborative learning ( CSCL ) primarily by means of communication . Students give feedback to others’ content through annotations . Evaluation results show that this concept is highly appreciated . Students add annotations to singles items and use existing content as ( explicit ) contextual information . Amaya [ 18 ] is a software system for browsing , authoring and individualizing web pages . Using Amaya users can create web pages and upload them onto a server . Authors can either create a document from scratch , or browse the web to find information they need to create individual content . They might copy and paste Web content to their pages , and create links to other web sites within their pages . All those actions can be performed in a straightforward way within a single environment . In this way , maintaining the consistency of content is facilitated . Amaya allows users to display the document structure at the same time as the layout . The system allows annotations to be shown as external comments , notes , or remarks that can be attached to any web document or a selected part of the document . This feature is based on the Resource Description Framework ( RDF ) , XLink , and XPointer [ 9 ] recommendations . Besides the technology - driven approaches to interactive annotation systems ( resulting in systems as listed above ) , in the field of CSCW the early recognized need for socially adaptive technologies has led to a well established tradition of empirical and conceptual investigations to that respect . Empirical results indicate , e . g . , [ 21 ] , that the lack of socially responsive developments can be caused by the isolated use of tools . From these results we understand that an annotation system has to be an integral and context - sensitive part of any interactive transfer environment . So far , there exists no method support for the accurate embodiment of annotation features into transfer environments , in particular , on how to derive concrete design requirements from annotation concepts . To our knowledge , ( hypermedia - ) environments for self - directed learning have not incorporated conceptual and empirical findings to the extent that teachers and learners have reported an added value when using these enriched technologies . 3 . Conceptual Design and Enabler Prospectus The annotation concept has been developed in the course of the ScholionWB + project , and is instantiated through features for individualization ( ind ) , collaboration ( coll ) , and linking content to communication ( concom ) in the knowledge transfer platform . The individualization of content should enable the customization of content to learner needs with respect to mental maps , networked thinking and information linking [ 8 , 14 , 15 ] . The ScholionWB + developments are based on common e - learning and metadata specifications and standards ( e . g . Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies ( ICALT’04 ) 0 - 7695 - 2181 - 9 / 04 $ 20 . 00 © 2004 IEEE LOM , IMS , SCORM ) . They have been extended for annotation purposes . Annotations Users require a variety of easy - to - understand types of annotations [ 8 ] : ( i ) Markings allow for highlighting individually important text passages . They also concern the text layout - bold , italic , big , small etc . ( ind ) ( ii ) Textual annotations support adding ( public or private ) text that can be inserted directly into the content or laid over the content as layered annotations . ( ind ) ( iii ) Multimedia annotations link multimedia files to content when adapting hypermedia to personal needs . ( ind ) ( iv ) Link annotations embed links to internal ( targets inside content ) or external resources ( e . g . www - URLs ) into content . ( ind ) ( v ) Library annotations enable links to library entries , e . g . , for details provided by the teacher . ( ind ) ( vi ) Discussion and Chat annotations link communication to content . ( ind , coll , concom ) ( vii ) Knowledge - atom annotations : Learners may search knowledge atoms from a content pool , e . g . , structured as semantic network , and link it to content elements . Additional resources from standard textbooks , e . g . , selected by a coach , might also become part of individual content ( ind , concom ) . Views Annotations , such as the ones mentioned above , can be stored in user - specific views , in order to separate interaction from content . A view can be compared to a transparent slide laid over content . All annotations become part of the transparency . Users might use either existing views ( slides ) or an empty slide and start a new series of annotations . For personalization ( and collaboration ) , users always have to select a view before content can be loaded and displayed . Users might also remove views , put them to a public directory ( to all users or to a group of users ) , or copy a public slide for private use and append own annotations to that slide . This principle of cascaded viewing is illustrated in figure 1 . Figure 1 : Cascaded Viewing Cascaded viewing is considered to be one of the key concepts to support collaboration . Since views can be set public to become available for others , users might apply annotations of various types of other users or communities . They also might benefit from the comments and supplements of others as provided through the annotations to an identical content . Annotations can also be linked to content items according to the context of use , i . e . representing context - sensitive collaboration through communication links . Finally , the view concept is also crucial for achieving high performance . Once content has been loaded , further data transfer is only required for view data ( rather than content ) . Hence , technical communication is kept minimal . Technology Prospectus Increasingly , web - based applications strictly separate presentation from the business logic and from data management , mainly through the use of XML and XSLT . Unlike the HTML - based architecture which leads to maintenance problems when web sites grow in size and complexity , an XML - based architecture is highly beneficial . Using the latter there is minor impact on maintenance as content becomes more complex . The ease of content management results from the basic property of XML . It provides a total separation of content ( source ) and style . The separation can be accomplished by combining Java servlets and XSL style sheets . In association with graphical user - interface editors , model - view - controller ( MVC ) frameworks seem to be a precondition for high productivity keeping a 3 - tier architecture . Most of the common browser technologies should be capable to support annotation features , namely the Microsoft Internet Explorer 5 . 0 , Mozilla compatible browsers ( Mozilla 1 . 2 , Netscape 6 . 0 ) . In ScholionWB + , the only precondition to achieve that goal is the support of DOM 1 . 0 and CSS 1 . 0 ( 2 . 0 ) . Otherwise learners are only able to browse through content , and can not utilize annotation features . The implementation of annotation features for the Microsoft Internet Explorer ( MS IE ) is facilitated through enhanced concepts of DOM 1 . 0 that have been integrated in this web - browser . Accordingly , MS IE supports various possibilities modifying ( X ) HTML content ( pages ) . Textual content can be manipulated easily by addressing selected content parts . For instance , a content part can be marked by selecting appropriate words and then change its textual ( re ) presentation using Microsoft’s DOM implementation . In contrast to Microsoft’s Internet Explorer , Mozilla - compatible web browsers do not support manipulating web content in this way . However , annotation concepts can be implemented by pre - annotating content pages . Therefore , content has to be Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies ( ICALT’04 ) 0 - 7695 - 2181 - 9 / 04 $ 20 . 00 © 2004 IEEE complemented introducing ( X ) HTML elements ( meta tags ) . They grant indirect approachability , and consequently , the implementation of various annotation concepts . The pre - annotation process ( i . e . inserting meta - tags ) is based on a recursive client - side algorithm . It decomposes a DOM / ( X ) HTML document ( content and style ) into to smaller chunks ( e . g . , words ) and encapsulates each chunk through an actively acting start and close element . These elements allow to reflect user interactions ( e . g . , when users select content elements ) by saving temporary data of selected elements . By means of this procedure each user interaction can be traced through the ( pre - annotated ) DOM / ( X ) HTML document , similar to MS IE . 4 . Implementation The annotation concept has been implemented in the ScholionWB + advanced distributed knowledge - transfer environment . Its technical architecture is based on 3 tiers , utilizing the MVC framework and providing database - management - system independency for data management , presentation and the business logic . Most instances of ScholionWB + use a Oracle 9i ( 10g ) database capturing all data ( including all media files and slides stored in BLOBs ) and Tomcat 4 . 1 . 30 . The application’s servlet technology is based on Java 1 . 4 and generates a XML meta language , similar to HTML , however , independent from styles and web - browser specific characteristics . The language is rendered to XHTML 1 . 0 , DOM 1 . 0 and CSS 1 . 0 ( 2 . 0 ) . ScholionWB + ’s architecture enables personalization of the graphical user interface as well as annotations and individual views . ScholionWB + ’s architecture grants the following benefits : ( i ) Re - use of model components : The separation of model and view allows multiple views using the same model . ( ii ) Enabling high design complexity ( iii ) Support for new types of clients ( iv ) Clarity of design ( v ) Efficient modularity Figure 2 : Annotations for Individualizing Content Annotations for personalising content In order to illustrate the interactive and integrated use of the addressed annotation features , figure 2 shows a browser - window with the different kinds of annotations available in ScholionWB + . They comprise highlighting , textual layer annotations and hidden textual annotations , links to discussions ( as discussion annotations ) , multimedia and library annotations , link annotations and the corresponding menus for manipulating the annotations . On the left side of the screen shot the annotation icon bar gives an overview of the different types of annotations currently available in ScholionWB + . Linking Content to Communication Communication can be considered to be most important for collaborative learning procedures . Features to that respect can be implemented in advanced distributed knowledge - transfer environments in various ways . ScholionWB + supports the currently predominant synchronous and asynchronous communication features . Figure3 shows an instant messenger ( right hand side of the figure ) and a discussion forum ( center part of the figure ) . Figure 3 : Annotations , Communication and Collaboration Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies ( ICALT’04 ) 0 - 7695 - 2181 - 9 / 04 $ 20 . 00 © 2004 IEEE In addition to conventional communication elements , the ScholionWB + system provides several possibilities to link content and communication , thus enabling context - sensitive interaction : ( i ) Annotations in the content which refer to discussion contributions or chat logs – see figure 3 ‘Linking Content to Communication’ and ‘Discussion Annotation’ . Note that the discussion forum is directly opened in the content , exactly at that position that matters for the individual user . ( ii ) Links to content elements from the chat forum , the discussion board or the infoboard ( ii ) Links to library entries or to multimedia files in chat contributions , discussion contributions or infoboard entries ( iv ) Insert capability for content elements from a semantic network into discussion contributions ( knowledge - atom annotations ) ( v ) Cascaded viewing ( see figure 1 ) 5 . Conclusion Putting learners in control knowledge transfer processes requires increased Quality of Service of distributed learning environments . Making advanced use of annotations for supporting the individualization of content and collaborative learning allows to bridge the gap between content management and communication . As demonstrated through the Web platform ScholionWB + learners might ( re ) design content individually , as well as learn in collaborative and highly interactive knowledge - transfer settings without having to care about context - sensitivity and consistency . In addition , the sophisticated view concept provides firsthand feedback from learners to teachers for the sake of continuous quality management and content improvement . The implemented concept does not only comprise several features for enhancing content ( through text comments , questions , media files etc . ) for individual link management , but also the capability to adapt , share and cascade views ( that are required for individual as well as group task accomplishment ) . The results of an evaluation of ScholionWB + 4 [ 22 ] concerning the adjustment of learning materials to individual needs clearly show that the provided functionality influences learning habits of learners in a positive way . In particular , the annotation tool enabling a link between content and communication was highly appreciated by the students . Additional value has also been perceived when multimedia functions for collaboration have been combined with hypertext documents . Expecting an increased use of digital documents , annotations have to be considered crucial for user acceptance of web - based knowledge - transfer applications . Our future research will focus on developing further personalization features , and integrating annotation functionalities into mobile learning devices 5 ( e . g . , PDA and Phone ) . 6 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Harasim , L . : A Framework for Online Learning : The Virtual - U . Computer 1999 , Vol . 32 , No . 9 , p . 44 - 49 [ 2 ] Vouk , M . A . , Bitzer , D . L . , Klevans , R . L . : Workflow and End - User Quality of Service , Issues in Web - Based Education . IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering , Vol . 11 , No . 4 , July / August 1999 , p . 673 - 687 [ 3 ] Herrmann , T . , Kienle , A . : Context - oriented communication support in a collaborative learning environment , SECIII 2002 , p . 251 - 260 [ 4 ] Schulmeister , R . : Grundlagen hypermedialer Lernsysteme , Theorie , Didaktik , Design . Bonn , Addison - Wesley , 1996 [ 5 ] Götze , M . , Schlechtweg , S . , Strothotte , T . : ViDio – Virtual Digital Annotations . GI / ACM Mensch & Computer , Stuttgart , 2002 [ 6 ] Ballin , D . ; Brater M . ; Handlungsorientiert lernen mit Multimedia : Lernarrangements planen , entwickeln und einsetzen . BW , Bildung und Wissen , Verlag Blume , D . , Nürnberg , 1996 [ 7 ] Auinger , A . ; Stary , Ch . : Verknüpfung von Content und Kommunikation für selbstgesteuerten , webbasierten Wissenstransfer . GI / ACM Mensch & Computer 2003 , Stuttgart [ 8 ] Auinger , A . ; Stary , Ch . : Embedding Self - Management and Generic Learning Support into Courseware Structures . IEEE HICCS’35 , 2002 [ 9 ] World Wide Web Consortium , http : / / www . w3 . org , 2004 [ 10 ] Mayer , E . : Synchronisation in kooperativen Systemen . Vieweg Braunschweig / Wiesbaden , 1994 [ 11 ] Hummes , J . , Karesently , A . , Merialdo , B . : Active Annotations of Web Pages . Int . Conf . Voting , Rating , Annotation , Wien , 1997 [ 12 ] Henze , N . , Naceur , K . , Neidl , W . , Wolpers , M . : Adaptive Hyperbooks for Constructivist Teaching . Künstliche Intelligenz , 4 / 99 , p . 26 - 31 [ 13 ] Brusilovsky , P . : Adaptive and Intelligent Technologies for Web - based Education . Künstliche Intelligenz , Heft 4 / 99 , p . 19 - 25 [ 14 ] Chang , S . , Hassanein , E . , Hsieh , S - Y . : A Multimedia Micro - University . IEEE Multimedia 1998 , pp . 60 - 68 [ 15 ] Greif , S . , Kurtz , H . - J . : Handbuch selbstorganisiertes Lernen ; 2 . Auflage , Göttingen : Verlag für Angewandte Psychologie , 1998 5 see http : / / www . mobilearn . at , http : / / scholion . ce . jku . at Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies ( ICALT’04 ) 0 - 7695 - 2181 - 9 / 04 $ 20 . 00 © 2004 IEEE [ 16 ] Baumgartner , P . , Payr , S . : Lernen mit Software , Österreichischer Studien Verlag , Innsbruck , 1994 [ 17 ] Hyperwave : http : / / www . hyperwave . de , 2004 [ 18 ] Aamaya : http : / / www . amaya . com , 2004 [ 19 ] Leutner , D . : Individual Differences and the Acquisition of Knowledge . Multimedia Learning , Multimedia Learning , Peter Lang , Frankfurt 2001 , p . 139 - 157 [ 20 ] Adobe : http : / / www . adobe . com , 2004 [ 21 ] M . L . Markus , T . Connolly : Why CSCW - Applications Fail : Problems in the Adoption of Interdependent Work Tools , ACM CSCW’90 , pp . 371 - 380 [ 22 ] Stary , C . ; Auinger , A ; Schwan , S . ; Mielach , E . : Evaluierung von selbstgesteuertem Wissenstransfer . GI DeLFI 2003 , p . 361 - 371 Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies ( ICALT’04 ) 0 - 7695 - 2181 - 9 / 04 $ 20 . 00 © 2004 IEEE