Empowered to Make a Change Guidelines for Empowering the Young Generation in and through Digital Technology Design Marianne Kinnula INTERACT Research Unit University of Oulu Oulu , Finland marianne . kinnula @ oulu . fi Netta Iivari INTERACT Research Unit University of Oulu Oulu , Finland netta . iivari @ oulu . fi ABSTRACT This paper scrutinizes how children can be empowered to make a change through acquiring skills in digital technology design . We propose a framework that integrates theoretical understanding from literature on nexus analysis , values , and value as well as empowerment and genuine participation of children , and a related tool for educators and researchers advocating empowerment and inclusion . They should benefit from this tool when planning , analyzing , and evaluating their projects . We argue that the tool is useful beyond studies with children and can be used as a practical tool when planning and implementing digital technology design projects with any group of people and as a theoretical tool when studying such endeavors , especially when working with vulnerable or underserved participants . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing ~ HCI theory , concepts and models • Social and professional topics ~ Children KEYWORDS Children ; Empowerment ; Inclusion ; Exclusion ; Genuine participation ; Protagonist ; Design ; Making ; Digital fabrication ACM Reference format : Marianne Kinnula and Netta Iivari . 2019 . Empowered to Make a Change – Guidelines for Empowering the Young Generation in and through Digital Technology Design . In Proceedings of FabLearn Europe conference ( FABLEARN EUROPE’19 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 9 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3335055 . 3335071 1 Introduction This paper addresses how children can be empowered to make a change through acquiring skills in digital technology design – we discuss what this entails in practice as well as show a variety of options from which educators and researchers working with children can choose their approach to empowerment . Our work is motivated by the ever - increasing digitalization of our society and everyday life . Despite digital technology being thoroughly embedded into all aspects of our everyday life , there is a huge variety in young people’s skills and capabilities around making meaningful use out of it . This disparity is referred to as the digital divide or a polarization between those who have access to and ability to develop their skills related to digital technology , and those who do not [ 50 ] . This is a serious concern as regards the young generation , who will definitely be living their lives full of digital technology . It is pivotal to provide the young generation with equal opportunities to access , use , and gain benefit from digital technology [ 31 , 50 ] . Thus , digital divide does not merely concern access to digital technology but also its meaningful use [ 44 , 45 , 66 ] , i . e . , being able to make use of digital technology in meaningful social practices , which requires a wide range of physical , digital , human , and social resources [ 66 ] . Lack of this may lead to digital exclusion that prevents full participation in society , controlling one’s destiny and reaching one’s full potential [ 31 , 66 ] . We [ 31 ] , moreover , maintain that it is not merely the access and meaningful use of digital technology that is important for digital inclusion and prevention of the digital divide , but the young generation needs to gain skills and capabilities to innovate , design , program , make , and build digital technology [ 3 , 14 , 25 , 45 ] . We firmly believe that in the future world all citizens will need those skills ; young people need abilities to manage and master in the ever - digitalizing world . It is not only computer professionals , who should be able to innovate , design , build , and reflect upon digital technology but it is increasingly important that ordinary people possess such skills and competencies . Digital , technological , and computer literacy as well as computational thinking and computer self - efficacy of young people are significant here [ 8 , 15 , 18 , 19 , 60 , 65 ] ; however , we see that design of and innovation in and with digital technology are also significant , in addition to computational aspects [ 2 , 3 , 59 ] . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . FabLearn Europe’19 , May 28 - 29 , 2019 , Oulu , Finland © 2019 Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 6266 - 5 / 19 / 05… $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3335055 . 3335071 FABLEARN EUROPE’19 , May , 2019 , Oulu , Finland M . Kinnula and N . Iivari Overall , we should empower children to make and shape digital technology to suit their purposes and interests [ 3 , 14 , 25 , 45 ] i . e . , in relation to digital technology , children should adopt a protagonist role that entails understanding , critically reflecting on , and driving the development of digital technology [ 29 , 36 ] . Inviting children to take part in digital technology development as testers , informants , and even in the powerful role of a design partner [ 17 , 67 ] has been a long tradition in the Child Computer Interaction ( CCI ) research community . Programming , digital fabrication , making , and tinkering as done by children have recently been examined in the CCI community as well ( e . g . [ 2 , 9 , 11 , 28 , 30 , 36 , 38 , 59 ] ) . The tenets of the Maker Movement that emphasizes democratization of innovation and empowerment of people to make tools for themselves by themselves through free access to cutting edge digital fabrication and physical manufacturing technology [ 3 , 16 , 24 ] have given inspiration to the recent work within CCI community . However , it is acknowledged that the design , education , and empowerment aspects need further work even in Making projects with children [ 2 , 9 , 10 , 28 , 30 , 36 , 38 , 59 ] . The role of the protagonist frees children from the role of a mere partner ( cf . the role of the design partner ) and empowers them to explore and develop the world on their own , as informed and skilled actors . So far , research on children ' s digital literacies and digital inclusion from this perspective is severely limited while badly needed . Thus , we aim to show in this paper what empowerment of children in and through design and making means and how educators and researchers can strive for it in practice , particularly if they aim for the protagonist role for the children but also in any kind of project . In addition to various literature sources , this work is based on our interdisciplinary work with children in digital technology design projects for over ten years , inspired by Scandinavian Participatory Design tradition and Maker Movement . A central interest in our studies has been to understand what children’s empowerment really means as well as can and should mean in relation to digital technology design and making . As our research framework , ‘nexus analysis’ [ 56 ] has provided valuable insights ( see [ 30 , 31 ] ) . Nexus analysis is suitable for studying complex topics in depth . In nexus analysis , the influence of various social , cultural , discursive and historical aspects on any social action is underscored [ 56 ] . Insights from the literature on genuine participation of children [ 7 ] , moreover , have been particularly useful source of inspiration in considering what meaningful and effective participation of children should be ( see [ 28 , 30 , 32 ] ) . More general literature on empowerment of people [ 22 ] , additionally , has revealed interesting variety in the forms of empowerment one may aim ( see [ 29 , 41 ] ) . Our work has also been inspired by theoretical insights on value ( e . g . [ 13 , 63 ] ) and values ( e . g . [ 20 , 34 , 46 ] ) ; these analytical concepts enable getting a wider view and understanding the value compositions , not only value chains related to the phenomenon of empowering children in and through design and making ( see [ 30 , 39 , 40 ] ) . The guidelines presented in this paper , thus , are based on the insights gained during our work with children as well as on the various theoretical lenses and frameworks . The guidelines were developed collaboratively by the authors through careful analysis , reflection , and discussion on the work done and insights gained . We discussed each theoretical lens and identified its specific contributions for our work and subsequently on the guidelines for empowering children in and through design and making . When presenting the theoretical lenses , these contributions will be highlighted in italics . The paper is structured as follows : Next section introduces the theoretical background of this work in more detail : literature on nexus analysis , genuine participation of children , empowerment , values , and value are reviewed . Then we propose practical advice on what kind of aspects educators and researchers working with children should consider when they aim at empowering children in and through design and making . The last section concludes the paper by summarizing the results , discussing their implications for research and practice and identifying limitations of the results and associated paths for future work . 2 Theoretical Framework In this section , we present our theoretical framework on which we base our advice . 2 . 1 Nexus Analysis Nexus analysis is based on insights derived from various research fields and disciplines such as sociolinguistics , conversation analysis , anthropological linguistics , ethnography of communication , critical discourse analysis , practice theories , activity theory , social semiotics , multimodal discourse analysis , new literacy studies , and cultural geography [ 57 ] . Due to this background , discourses and their analysis play a central role in this research strategy . However , nexus analysis is interested both in discursive and non - discursive practices through which our social reality is being constituted [ 57 ] . Nexus analysis places social action as the unit of analysis [ 56 ] . Social action is seen as constituted by three facets : historical bodies of the participants , interaction order among them , and discourses in place , circulating around [ 57 ] . The concept of historical body was coined by the philosopher Nishida . This concept refers to the overall accumulated life experiences of people that are seen to shape and underlie their behaviour . Scollon and Scollon [ 56 ] see Bourdieu’s [ 4 ] concept of habitus as referring to a similar phenomenon : habitus is formed through a social process and guides people’s behaviour and thinking . However , in nexus analysis the concept of historical body is preferred as it is seen more explicitly to include bodily aspect compared to the concept of habitus . Overall , the concept of historical body makes visible how our background , histories , experiences , knowledge , skills , expertise and dispositions are shaping and underlying our action [ 56 ] [ 57 ] . Thus , nexus analysis informs us that histories and backgrounds of actors shape what happens and what is even possible to happen . The concept of interaction order , on the other hand , was coined by Goffman [ 21 ] . Generally , it refers to social interaction among people and how it is constituted . In nexus analysis the attention is directed to participants of social action and how they and their interaction shape the social action in question . The participants may be present or distant , still affecting the interaction . FABLEARN EUROPE’19 , May , 2019 , Oulu , Finland M . Kinnula and N . Iivari One may focus on socially situational aspects that include for example participants’ involvement and attention but one may also consider various conventions , norms , and rules involved in maintaining social order . Generally , it is assumed we behave differently depending on who we are interacting with and the concept of interaction order enables us to examine this issue in social action [ 56 ] . Thus , nexus analysis informs us that interactions and relationships between different actors ( both present and distant ones ) shape what happens . Discourses are another significant element in social action . Nexus analysis emphasizes the complex interplay between discourse and action and one should ask related to any social action what is the role of discourse in that action [ 55 , 57 ] . Both micro and macro levels are to be considered in the analysis of discourses : face - to - face interaction between participants in situ as well as broader sets of concerns circulating around in society . Nexus analysis sees as one of its central tasks to be to “explicate and understand how the broad discourses of our social life are engaged ( or not ) in the moment - by - moment social actions of social actors in real time activity” [ 55 : 139 ] . The concept of discourses in place also forefronts that all social action takes place in real time and place by human actors and their bodies [ 56 ] . Overall , nexus analysis informs us that discourses are part of what happens and powerfully shape it . Altogether , nexus analysis encourages the analyst to “avoid uprooting words and actions from the historical bodies of the individuals performing them , or disconnecting the discourses and actions from the sociocultural context of their formation and realization , or ignoring the history of these actions and discourses for the individual and in the situation . ( … ) The individual accumulates experience in the course of his / her trajectory across time and space , social orders open up and close and are rearranged , discourses in place are transformed as buildings are refashioned , innovative technologies are introduced , new texts and discourses circulate . ” [ 57 : 72 ] Hence , nexus analysis emphasizes specific contexts – historical and social / societal , specific places and times in which social action happens and in which human actors and their bodies are engaged . Thus , central message of nexus analysis is that everything happens in context . Overall , nexus analysis has provided us useful conceptual tools with which to make sense of the complex topic of children’s empowerment in and through design and making ( see e . g . [ 30 , 31 ] ) : it has enabled us to see the complexity involved with it as well as offered tools to make visible and analyse the complexity from different perspectives . Nexus analysis has made visible how participants’ ( children’s and adults’ alike ) background and experiences , their relationships and interactions , and various kinds of discourses circulating around shape the social action of empowering children in and through design and making . 2 . 2 Genuine Participation of Children Children’s genuine participation has been pondered on in different research fields . In this enduring research stream , various kinds of models and guidelines for children’s genuine participation have been proposed . Those can be used for planning and evaluating projects involving children as well as for reflecting on the motives , values and practices underlying children’s participation . Generally , children’s participation usually aims at one or several of the following goals : to generate knowledge about children , to enable children’s voices to be heard , to impact decision making , to empower children , to improve products and services for children , and / or to educate children . Researchers have tried to understand and evaluate children’s participation as to whether it has real impact , i . e . , it is genuine , or whether it is only tokenistic or decorative . The genuineness of children’s participation has been defined from the viewpoint of the participatory process itself [ 23 ] or the resulting outcomes [ 27 ] . In the CCI field , there is a long history of developing methods for giving children a voice in technology design , starting already from 1980s [ 17 ] . From genuine participation point of view , researchers have examined roles of children in technology design projects ( e . g . [ 1 , 17 ] ) , called for foregrounding the values of researchers and practitioners when working with children [ 30 , 35 , 67 ] , and discussed empowerment of children in and through technology design [ 28 , 35 , 36 , 67 ] . They have considered negotiating values of both adult designers and children [ 62 ] as well as brought forth models for ethics and transparency in working with children [ 51 , 53 ] . A broader reflection on what children’s genuine participation means in technology design with children is still lacking , however , [ 28 ] even though some attempts to address this already exist [ 29 , 30 , 32 , 36 , 37 , 41 , 47 , 54 ] . Of the various models for children’s genuine participation proposed within other disciplines , we have found the one presented by Chawla and Heft [ 7 : 204 ] as particularly useful in planning our work with children as well as in evaluating and analysing the projects afterwards ( see e . g . [ 28 , 30 , 32 ] ) . The model comprehensively captures aspects to be considered when aiming at truly empowering children . That model is based on the results of a workshop interested in children’s participation in community development projects . Chawla and Heft [ 7 ] in their paper discuss what “participation at its best” is and they present a set of conditions that should be considered when facilitating children’s meaningful and effective participation – i . e . , participation that actually has an effect ( see Table 1 ) . We interpret these conditions as criteria on how to empower children in design and making projects and argue that these conditions need all to be considered when we want to truly involve children and want their work to have a genuine impact . 2 . 3 Empowerment Literature on genuine participation of children underscores giving children responsibility and a possibility to influence . However , literature on empowerment enables going deeper into what this means and into the variety that can be associated with this . Different forms of empowerment we have identified from the literature , i . e . critical , mainstream , functional , democratic , and empowerment as learning and competence development [ 41 ] , show that this responsibility and influence can be interpreted in different ways . The mainstream form of empowerment sees Conditions of Convergence Conditions for Competence Whenever possible , the project builds on existing community organizations and structures that support children’s participation . As much as possible , project activities make children’s participation appear to be a natural part of the setting . The project is based on children’s own issues and interests . Children have real responsibility and influence . Children understand and have a part in defining the goals of the activity . Children play a role in decision - making and accomplishing goals , with access to the information they need to make informed decisions . Children are helped to construct and express their views . There is a fair sharing of opportunities to contribute and be heard . The project creates occasions for the gradual development of competence . The project sets up processes to support children’s engagement in issues they initiate themselves . The project results in tangible outcomes . Conditions of Entry Participants are fairly selected . Children and their families give informed consent . Children can freely choose to participate or decline . The project is accessible in scheduling and location . Conditions of Social Support Conditions for Reflection Children are respected as human beings with essential worth and dignity . There is mutual respect among participants . Children support and encourage each other . There is transparency at all stages of decision - making . Children understand the reasons for outcomes . There are opportunities for critical reflection . There are opportunities for evaluation at both group and individual levels . Participants deliberately negotiate differences in power . Table 1 . Characteristics of meaningful and effective projects for children’s participation [ 7 : 204 ] empowerment as motivating people through increased decision - making power that is achieved through the powerful giving some power of decision to the power - weak , whereas the critical form sees this as insufficient and , instead , emphasizes the oppressed challenging the oppressing conditions of status quo , combating the oppressors , and gaining more power of decision this way [ 22 , 26 , 49 ] . The functional form of empowerment views empowerment in the sense of improving life conditions of people while maintaining the status quo e . g . through development of better tools for people to use , whereas the democratic form emphasizes people’s ability to affect decisions concerning them [ 12 ] . Finally , empowerment as learning and competence development emphasizes giving people skills and competencies for the future to enable them to flourish in their full potential , participate fully in society , and to control their destinies [ 41 ] . The CCI research community has already pointed out that for children to grow up as protagonists in regard to digital technology they need to feel “empowered to shape technology development and critically reflect on the role of technology in their practices” ( [ 29 ] see also [ 36 ] ) . We , however , emphasize that when organizing activities for children , it is central to explicitly ask what kind of empowerment we want to aim for in this particular activity . 2 . 4 Values and Value The genuine participation literature is clearly driven by values . Researchers aim to enable children’s voices to be heard , to impact decision making , to empower children , to improve products and services for children , and / or to educate children – motivated by value laden and ethical issues and questions . In addition , value to be generated for the participants is significant to consider for sustainable practice . However , the frameworks discussed earlier do not address value or values in depth . Hence , we have extended the theoretical framework with literature on value and values ( see [ 30 , 39 , 40 ] ) . The importance of values in driving or underlying our behavior has been acknowledged within a number of disciplines and research fields ( e . g . [ 5 , 6 , 43 , 58 ] ) , including HCI and CCI ( e . g . [ 20 , 30 , 33 , 34 , 35 , 39 , 46 , 48 , 68 ] . HCI research has shown values driving and underlying our research and design practice ( e . g . [ 20 , 30 , 34 , 35 , 46 , 67 ] ) as well as values driving and underlying people’s use of particular technology ( e . g . [ 33 , 48 , 68 ] ) . Studies have also shown that both value compatibility and conflicts are possible in digital technology design and use – value compatibility contributing to the activity while conflicts hindering it [ 64 ] . Overall , it has been shown that everything we do is affected by our ( cultural ) values and that compatibility or fit with cultural values is to be aimed for . Indeed , in the CCI research , there have been specific calls for foregrounding the values when working with children [ 30 , 35 , 62 , 67 ] as well as attempts to , for example , create practical tools for identifying , reflecting , and negotiating values in a design project [ 61 , 62 ] and considering different ethical issues [ 52 , 53 ] . Values can also be connected with value , i . e . , worth . Values refer to what is considered important , good , and right in life ( e . g . [ 20 , 34 , 46 ] ) and this influences what is considered as value , i . e . , as a benefit experienced – perceived and determined – by the beneficiary [ 63 ] : something that a person judges to be worthwhile [ 13 ] . Kujala and Väänänen - Vainio - Mattila [ 42 ] note that in order to understand users’ perspective to value , one needs to understand what is important for them and what motivates them . Hence , FABLEARN EUROPE’19 , May , 2019 , Oulu , Finland M . Kinnula and N . Iivari Figure 1 . Tool for educators and researchers interested in empowering children in and through digital technology design : theoretical understanding and related questions FABLEARN EUROPE’19 , May , 2019 , Oulu , Finland M . Kinnula and N . Iivari values and value are intertwined . In the context of genuine participation , important is that the work aligns with the values of the actors as well as that the actors perceive and experience benefits from the work , i . e . , they derive value . The genuine participation literature informs us that the value generated may relate either to the process or to the outcome , or to both . The value gained may concern some tangible outcome but also learning and competence development [ 7 , 28 , 40 ] 3 Guidelines for Educators and Researchers In this section , we present our guidelines in form of a tool ( Figure 1 ) for educators and researchers who work with children in the context of digital technology design and making and who are interested in empowering children in and through these activities , possibly even aiming for children to become protagonists in relation to digital technology . The tool is based on and inspired by the different theoretical sources presented above as well as by our empirical work with children . The tool includes a set of questions that help educators and researchers to reflect on , consider , and ensure aspects contributing to children’s empowerment when planning , executing , or evaluating their digital technology design and making projects with children . Some of the questions are quite general without one and only correct answer , mainly aiming at arousing educators’ and researchers’ awareness of the variety of aspects shaping children’s empowerment in and through design and making . Some of the questions , then again , are more empowerment specific , indicating what kind of issues should be ensured in case of striving for empowerment of children . However , also in the case of these questions , it is left open for the utilizer of the guidelines to decide how much and what form of empowerment can and should be aimed at . The questions in the tool ( Figure 1 ) show a variety of aspects involved in empowerment of children in and through design and making . Nexus analytic concepts emphasize that our work is always conducted in particular time and place and that should be critically reflected upon : why were those selected , how do they shape the activities and influence the participants ? Nexus analysis also helps us to look beyond and behind single occurrences in time and place and open our eyes to see how there is a variety of , sometimes invisible , audiences and actors who nevertheless affect what is done . Similarly , our histories and backgrounds shape what we do and produce in the projects and what kind of interaction is born . The discourse perspective gives us a possibility to consider how the participants construct and constitute , e . g . , participation and its effects . As can be seen from the exemplary questions in Figure 1 , interactions , histories and experiences , and discourses intersect in any social action and shed different light on the same phenomenon . We feel that merely being aware of this complexity is significant . Researchers and educators can also try to anticipate these issues beforehand , observe how they intertwine and unfold during the work with children , as well as evaluate their impact after the work . The lens of genuine participation of children brings forth many additional and complementary aspects . It also highlights the importance of existing life world of children and how we should take advantage of it and integrate beneficial aspects from it as much as possible . It also underscores that voluntariness , inclusiveness , and accessibility need to be paid serious attention to in any project aiming at empowering children . Moreover , it emphasizes social relationships , respect , and encouragement as essential to be nurtured also in this type of projects . Children’s possibility to have a say and impact on the outcome are also forefronted : children need to be given enough information to be able to make informed decisions , they should take part in defining the goals of the activities , they should be allowed to have real responsibility and influence . We should also carefully consider the outcomes of the projects : both competence development and tangible outcomes are stressed . Finally , the lens brings in children’s essential role in the evaluation and critical reflection on the project progress and outcomes . Power differences should also be critically reflected upon and negotiated in this type of projects . Additionally to this , the literature on empowerment enables us to reflect upon what form of empowerment is actually aimed at : Whether empowerment means motivating children through giving them some decision - making power by the powerful ones ; improving their life conditions through developing useful means and tools for them with them ; enabling them to engage in more democratic decision - making processes ; supporting their learning and competence development for the future ; or encouraging them to criticize the status quo and combat their oppressors . Some of these goals can also be combined in one project only , while some are quite conflictual in nature and cannot be integrated ( e . g . mainstream vs . critical one ) . Finally , we wished to explicitly include considerations on value and values into this tool . Here important is to remember that each participant should perceive as deriving some kind of value from participation – otherwise their participation will not last long . What each participant considers as value is shaped by their values . Their values are underlying their actions – this applies both to adult and child participants . We adults should also critically consider what kind of values are underlying and driving our actions and the compatibility of our values with those of other participants and the context . Sometimes value conflicts are unavoidable , e . g . , when radically changing how children are taught in schools , while many times value compatibility is something that should be aimed at to ensure smooth operation , high quality outcomes , and the participants perceiving as deriving value from it . Overall , when using the tool you should answer the questions in the tool and then reflect on your answers in relation to 1 ) the context and the participants – would it be possible to do things in another way in this context , with these participants who have certain histories and interact in certain ways ; 2 ) the aspects of genuine participation – what are you aiming for and does it seem possible to reach that with your choices ; 3 ) forms of empowerment – are your answers in line with the form of empowerment you are aiming for ; 4 ) your values – are your answers in line with them ; 5 ) value to the participants – are your answers in line with what kind of value you wish the participants to experience . You need to always ask yourself “why has this approach been chosen . ” FABLEARN EUROPE’19 , May , 2019 , Oulu , Finland M . Kinnula and N . Iivari We propose using the tool presented in Figure 1 when planning the activities , during the activities , and when evaluating and reflecting on the activities . When planning the activities , it can be used both as a check list and as orienting lens on issues considered important in the context at hand . During the activities , the ongoing process can be critically reflected on based on the tool . When analyzing the results , the tool can once again be used for focusing the analysis on how the aimed form of empowerment was reached . 4 Conclusion In this paper , we have presented literature as well as practical guidance on how to empower children in and through digital technology design and making , having in mind an ultimate goal of children becoming protagonists in relation to digital technology . The guidelines have been inspired by the theoretical insights presented in this paper as well as by our extensive work with children , spanning over ten years , having children’s empowerment , inclusion , participation , and impact as central goals . As can be seen from the tool in Figure 1 , many aspects we introduced are overlapping and intertwined . This indicates we are addressing a complex phenomenon and context . For the purposes of this paper we have analytically separated them according to the lens from which they emerged . We argue that the working practices in design and making should be critically examined , throughout the process . We want to stress that if the intention is to empower children to make a change , if we want them to adopt a protagonist role [ 29 , 36 ] as regards digital technology , it is central to consider what kind of conditions and contexts support this aim and what can possibly hinder it – how the theoretical issues presented in this paper should be reflected on practice . As to the limitations to this study , even though the tool we propose in Figure 1 is based on the existing understanding on human behavior as well as practical studies on children’s participation in digital technology design and making , it has not been empirically evaluated . Thus , we invite other researchers as well as practitioners to try out the tool to see whether it helps them in finding ways to empower children in and through digital technology design and making . We acknowledge that children actually represent a diverse group of people in many respects , their age being one of the obvious aspects . The guidelines are general and should be applicable with different age groups , but the utilizer of the guidelines needs to carefully consider how children’s age and associated skills and abilities affect the work . We also want to make it clear that even though we see the protagonist role as an important goal , we still acknowledge that it is not realistic to expect every project to aim for that , and that in many contexts the thoughts presented in this paper may feel rather idealistic and even utopian . We also acknowledge that even if the tool has been constructed with children in mind , it should be valuable also in projects with other kinds of participants – especially with different kinds of underserved , marginalized or vulnerable participants . Finally , we think that the guidelines are useful even in projects aiming at empowering children through some other means than digital technology . We think the questions proposed in our tool are pivotal in any endeavour aiming at empowering children – or people in general . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors would like to extend a special gratitude to Tonja Molin - Juustila , Leena Kuure , and Tiina Keisanen for the collaboration and exchange of insights that have , over the past 10 years , been highly influential to the thinking and items presented in this paper . This research has been funded by The Finnish Cultural Foundation’s North Ostrobothnia Regional Fund ( DeMaKids project ) as well as by European Union’s Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation programme under grant agreement No 787476 ( COMnPLAY SCIENCE project ) . REFERENCES [ 1 ] W . Barendregt , M . M . Bekker , P . Börjesson , E . Eriksson , and O . Torgersson . 2016 . The Role Definition Matrix : Creating a Shared Understanding of Children ' s Participation in the Design Process . In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC’16 ) , 577 - 582 . [ 2 ] T . Bekker , S . Bakker , I . Douma , J . Van Der Poel , and K . Scheltenaar . 2015 . Teaching children digital literacy through design - based learning with digital toolkits in schools . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 5 , September : 29 - 38 . [ 3 ] P . Blikstein . 2013 . Digital fabrication and ‘making’ in education : The democratization of invention . In FabLab : Of machines , makers and inventors , Julia Walter - Herrmann and Corinne Büching eds . , transcript Verlag , 1 - 21 . [ 4 ] P . Bourdieu . 1984 . Distinction : A social critique of the judgement of taste . Harvard University Press , Cambridge MA . [ 5 ] M . Carrigan and A . Attalla . 2001 . The myth of the ethical consumer - do ethics matter in purchase behaviour ? Journal of Consumer Marketing 18 , 7 : 560 - 578 . [ 6 ] M . J . Carrington , B . A . Neville , and G . J . Whitwell . 2010 . Why Ethical Consumers Don’t Walk Their Talk : Towards a Framework for Understanding the Gap Between the Ethical Purchase Intentions and Actual Buying Behaviour of Ethically Minded Consumers . Journal of Business Ethics 97 , 1 : 139 – 158 . [ 7 ] L . Chawla and H . Heft . 2002 . Children’s Competence and the Ecology of Communities : A Functional Approach to the Evaluation of Participation . Journal of Environmental Psychology 22 , 1 - 2 : 201 - 216 . [ 8 ] R . Christensen , G . Knezek , and T . Tyler - Wood . 2015 . Alignment of Hands - on STEM Engagement Activities with Positive STEM Dispositions in Secondary School Students . Journal of Science Education and Technology 24 , 6 : 898 - 909 . [ 9 ] S . L . Chu , F . Quek , S . Bhangaonkar , A . B . Ging , and K . Sridharamurthy . 2015 . Making the maker : a means - to - an - ends approach to nurturing the maker mindset in elementary - aged children . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 5 , September : 11 - 19 . [ 10 ] S . L . Chu , R . Schlegel , F . Quek , A . Christy , and K . Chen . 2017 . ' I Make , Therefore I Am ' : The Effects of Curriculum - Aligned Making on Children ' s Self - Identity . In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 109 - 120 . [ 11 ] S . L . Chu , E . Deuermeyer , R . Martin , F . Quek , A . Berman , M . Suarez , N . Zarei , B . Nam , and C . Banigan . 2017 . Becoming Makers : Examining Making Literacy in the Elementary School Science Classroom . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC’17 ) , 316 - 321 . [ 12 ] A . Clement . 1996 . Computing at work : empowering action by low - level users . In Computerization and Controversy : Value Conflicts and Social Choices , Rob Kling ( ed . ) . Morgan Kauffmann . [ 13 ] G . Cockton . 2006 . Designing worth is worth designing . In Proceedings of the 4th Nordic conference on Human - Computer Interaction ( NordiCHI ' 06 ) , 165 - 174 . [ 14 ] A . Cornwall and J . Gaventa . 2000 . From users and choosers to makers and shapers repositioning participation in social policy . IDS Bulletin 31 , 4 : 50 - 62 . [ 15 ] R . S . Davies . 2011 . Understanding technology literacy : A framework for evaluating educational technology integration . TechTrends 55 , 5 : 45 - 52 . [ 16 ] D . Dougherty . 2012 . The maker movement . innovations 7 , 3 : 11 - 14 . [ 17 ] A . Druin . 2002 . The role of children in the design of new technology . Behaviour and information technology 21 , 1 : 1 - 25 . [ 18 ] Y . Eshet - Alkalai . 2004 . Digital literacy : A conceptual framework for survival skills in the digital era . Journal of Educational Multimedia and Hypermedia 13 , 1 : 93 - 106 . FABLEARN EUROPE’19 , May , 2019 , Oulu , Finland M . Kinnula and N . Iivari [ 19 ] Z . Ezziane . 2007 . Information technology literacy : Implications on teaching and learning . Educational Technology & Society 10 , 3 : 175 - 191 . [ 20 ] B . Friedman , P . H . Kahn Jr , A . Borning , and A . Huldtgren . 2013 . Value sensitive design and information systems . In Early engagement and new technologies : Opening up the laboratory . Springer , Netherlands , 55 - 95 . [ 21 ] E . Goffman . 1983 . The interaction order . American Sociological Review 48 , 1 : 1 - 17 . [ 22 ] C . Hardy and S . Leiba - O ' sullivan . 1998 . The power behind empowerment : Implications for research and practice . Human relations 51 , 4 : 451 - 483 . [ 23 ] R . Hart . 1992 . Children’s Participation : From Tokenism to Citizenship . Innocenti Essays , 4 . [ 24 ] M . Hatch . 2014 . The Maker Movement Manifesto . McGraw - Hill Education , New York . [ 25 ] M . Heeley and L . Damodaran . 2009 . Digital inclusion : A review of international policy and practice . Loughborough University . [ 26 ] D . Howcroft and M . Wilson . 2003 . Paradoxes of participatory practices : the Janus role of the systems developer . Information and organization 13 , 1 : 1 - 24 . [ 27 ] D . Iacofano . 1990 . Public Involvement as an Organizational Development Process . Garland Publishing , New York . [ 28 ] N . Iivari and M . Kinnula . 2016 . Inclusive or Inflexible - a Critical Analysis of the School Context in Supporting Children’s Genuine Participation . In Proceedings of the Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction ( NordiCHI ' 16 ) , 1 - 10 . [ 29 ] N . Iivari and M . Kinnula . 2018 . Empowering Children through Design and Making – towards Protagonist Role Adoption . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Participatory Design ( PDC’18 ) . [ 30 ] N . Iivari , M . Kinnula , and L . Kuure . 2015 . With best intentions - a Foucauldian examination on children’s genuine participation in ICT design . Journal of Information Technology & People 28 , 2 : 246 - 280 . [ 31 ] N . Iivari , M . Kinnula , T . Molin - Juustila , and L . Kuure . 2018 . Exclusions in social inclusion projects : Struggles in involving children in digital technology development . Information Systems Journal 28 , 6 : 1020 - 1048 . [ 32 ] N . Iivari , T . Molin - Juustila , and M . Kinnula . 2016 . The Future Digital Innovators : Empowering the Young Generation with Digital Fabrication and Making . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Information Systems ( ICIS ' 16 ) , 1 - 16 . [ 33 ] M . Isomursu , M . Ervasti , M . Kinnula , and P . Isomursu . 2011 . Understanding Human Values in Adopting New Technology - A Case Study and Methodological Discussion . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 69 , 4 : 183 - 200 . [ 34 ] O . S . Iversen , K . Halskov , and T . W . Leong . 2010 . Rekindling Values in Participatory Design . In Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory Design Conference ( PDC ' 10 ) , 91 - 100 . [ 35 ] O . S . Iversen and R . Smith . 2012 . Scandinavian participatory design : dialogic curation with teenagers . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Interaction Design and Children conference ( IDC’12 ) , 106 - 115 . [ 36 ] O . S . Iversen , R . Smith , and C . Dindler . 2017 . Child as Protagonist : Expanding the Role of Children in Participatory Design . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Interaction Design and Children conference ( IDC’17 ) , 27 - 37 . [ 37 ] O . S . Iversen , R . Smith , and C . Dindler , 2018 . From Computational Thinking to Computational Empowerment : A 21st Century PD Agenda . In Proceedings of the Participatory Design Conference ( PDC ' 18 ) ACM . [ 38 ] E . S . Katterfeldt , N . Dittert , and H . Schelhowe . 2015 . Designing digital fabrication learning environments for Bildung : Implications from ten years of physical computing workshops . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 5 , September : 3 - 10 . [ 39 ] M . Kinnula , N . Iivari , M . Isomursu , and H . Kinnula . 2018 . Socializers , achievers or both ? Roles of children in technology design projects . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 17 , September : 39 - 49 . [ 40 ] M . Kinnula , N . Iivari , M . Isomursu , and S . Laari - Salmela . 2018 . “Worksome but Rewarding” – Stakeholder Perceptions on Value in Collaborative Design Work . Computer - Supported Cooperative Work 27 , 3 : 463 - 494 . [ 41 ] M . Kinnula , N . Iivari , T . Molin - Juustila , E . Keskitalo , T . Leinonen , E . Mansikkamäki , T . Käkelä , and M . Similä . 2017 . Cooperation , Combat , or Competence Building – What Do We Mean When We Are ‘Empowering Children’ in and through Digital Technology Design ? In Proceedings of the Thirty eighth International Conference on Information Systems ( ICIS’17 ) . [ 42 ] S . Kujala and K . Väänänen - Vainio - Mattila . 2009 . Value of Information systems and products : understanding the users’ perspective and values . Journal of Information Technology Theory and Application ( JITTA ) 9 , 4 : 23 – 39 . [ 43 ] A . W . Lai . 1995 . Consumer values , products benefits , and customer value : a consumption behavior approach . Advances in Consumer Research 22 : 381 - 388 . [ 44 ] S . Livingstone and E . Helsper . 2007 . Gradations in digital inclusion : Children , young people and the digital divide . New media & society 9 , 4 : 671 - 696 . [ 45 ] I . Mariën and J . A . Prodnik . 2014 . Digital inclusion and user ( dis ) empowerment : A critical perspective . info 16 , 6 : 35 - 47 . [ 46 ] J . K . Miller , B . Friedman , G . Jancke , and B . Gill . 2007 . Value tensions in design : the value sensitive design , development , and appropriation of a corporation ' s groupware system . In Proceedings of the Supporting group work , 281 - 290 . [ 47 ] M . Nouwen , S . Schepers , K . Mouws , K . Slegers , N . Kosten , and P . Duysburgh . 2016 . Designing an educational music game : What if children were calling the tune ? International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 9 - 10 : 20 - 32 . [ 48 ] M . Nouwen , M . Van Mechelen , and B . Zaman . 2015 . A value sensitive design approach to parental software for young children . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Interaction Design and Children conference ( IDC’15 ) , 363 - 366 . [ 49 ] E . O’Connor . 1995 . Paradoxes of Participation : textual analysis and organizational change . Organization Studies 16 , 5 : 769 - 803 . [ 50 ] OECD , 2012 . Connected minds : Technology and today’s learners . OECD ( Organisation for Economic Co - operation and Development ) Publishing . [ 51 ] J . C . Read , M . Horton , D . Fitton , and G . Sim . 2017 . Empowered and Informed : Participation of Children in HCI . In Proceedings of the Human - Computer Interaction ( INTERACT 2017 ) - 16th IFIP TC 13 International Conference , 431 - 446 . [ 52 ] J . C . Read , M . Horton , G . Sim , P . Gregory , D . Fitton , and B . Cassidy . 2013 . CHECk : a tool to inform and encourage ethical practice in participatory design with children . In Proceedings of the CHI ' 13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 187 - 192 . [ 53 ] J . C . Read , D . Fitton , and M . Horton . 2014 . Giving Ideas an Equal Chance : Inclusion and Representation in Participatory Design with Children . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC’14 ) , 105 - 114 . [ 54 ] S . Schepers , K . Dreessen , and B . Zaman . 2018 . Rethinking children’s roles in Participatory Design : The child as a process designer . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction , 16 : 47 - 54 . [ 55 ] R . Scollon . 2001 . Mediated Discourse : The Nexus of Practice . Routledge , London . [ 56 ] R . Scollon and S . Scollon . 2004 . Nexus Analysis : Discourse and the Emerging Internet . Routledge , London . [ 57 ] S . Scollon and I . De Saint - Georges . 2013 . Mediated Discourse Analysis . In The Routledge Handbook of Discourse Analysis , J . P Gee and M . Hartford ( eds . ) Routledge , London , 66 - 78 . [ 58 ] J . N . Sheth , B . I . Newman , and B . L . Gross . 1991 . Why we buy what we buy : A theory of consumption values . Journal of business research 22 , 2 : 159 - 170 . [ 59 ] R . C . Smith , O . S . Iversen , and M . Hjorth . 2015 . Design thinking for digital fabrication in education . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 5 , September : 20 - 28 . [ 60 ] J . B . Thatcher and P . L . Perrewe . 2002 . An empirical examination of individual traits as antecedents to computer anxiety and computer self - efficacy . MIS Quarterly 26 , 4 : 381 - 396 . [ 61 ] M . Van Mechelen , J . Derboven , A . Laenen , B . Willems , D . Geerts , and V . Vanden Abeele . 2017 . The GLID method : Moving from design features to underlying values in co - design . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 97 . [ 62 ] M . Van Mechelen , G . Sim , B . Zaman , P . Gregory , K . Slegers , and M . Horton . 2014 . Applying the CHECk tool to participatory design sessions with children . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Interaction Design and Children conference ( IDC’14 ) , 253 - 256 . [ 63 ] S . L . Vargo and R . F . Lusch . 2016 . Institutions and axioms : an extension and update of service - dominant logic . Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 44 , 1 : 1 - 19 . [ 64 ] L . Ventä - Olkkonen , A . Lanamäki , and N . Iivari . 2017 . In sweet harmony or in bitter discord ? How cultural values and stakeholder requirements shape and users read an urban computing technology . AI & Society : 1 - 22 . [ 65 ] J . Walden , M . Doyle , R . Garns , and Z . Hart . 2013 . An informatics perspective on computational thinking . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM conference on Innovation and technology in computer science education ( ITiCSE ' 13 ) , 4 - 9 . [ 66 ] M . Warschauer . 2002 . Reconceptualizing the digital divide . First monday 7 , 7 . [ 67 ] S . Yarosh , I . Radu , S . Hunter , and E . Rosenbaum . 2011 . Examining values : an analysis of nine years of IDC research . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Interaction Design and Children conference ( IDC’11 ) , 136 - 144 . [ 68 ] B . Zaman and V . Abeele . 2010 . Laddering with young children in User eXperience evaluations : theoretical groundings and a practical case . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC’10 ) , 156 - 165 .