108 | S . Xie et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell MBoC | ARTICLE The endocytic recycling compartment maintains cargo segregation acquired upon exit from the sorting endosome ABSTRACT The endocytic recycling compartment ( ERC ) is a series of perinuclear tubular and vesicular membranes that regulates recycling to the plasma membrane . Despite evidence that cargo is sorted at the early / sorting endosome ( SE ) , whether cargo mixes downstream at the ERC or remains segregated is an unanswered question . Here we use three - dimensional ( 3D ) structured illumination microscopy and dual - channel and 3D direct stochastic optical re - construction microscopy ( dSTORM ) to obtain new information about ERC morphology and cargo segregation . We show that cargo internalized either via clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) or independently of clathrin ( CIE ) remains segregated in the ERC , likely on distinct car - riers . This suggests that no further sorting occurs upon cargo exit from SE . Moreover , 3D dSTORM data support a model in which some but not all ERC vesicles are tethered by con - tiguous “membrane bridges . ” Furthermore , tubular recycling endosomes preferentially traf - fic CIE cargo and may originate from SE membranes . These findings support a significantly altered model for endocytic recycling in mammalian cells in which sorting occurs in periph - eral endosomes and segregation is maintained at the ERC . INTRODUCTION The plasma membrane ( PM ) of mammalian cells is a highly dynamic compartment that continuously samples the environment and inter - nalizes receptors and membrane lipids . Generally , internalization oc - curs via two major routes : 1 ) cargoes with specific signals in their cytoplasmic tails , including transferrin receptor ( TfR ) and low - den - sity - lipoprotein receptor ( LDLR ) , enter the cell through clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ; Kirchhausen et al . , 2014 ) , and 2 ) car - goes such as CD59 and β 1 - integrin are internalized via clathrin - independent endocytosis ( CIE ; Sandvig et al . , 2008 ) . Re - gardless of their entry mechanism , endosomes carrying cargoes from both CME and CIE usually fuse with early / sorting endosomes ( SEs ) after their internalization ( Naslavsky et al . , 2003 ) . In SEs , the fate of cargoes is determined by either sorting to lysosomes for deg - radation or trafficking through the recycling pathway and return of cargo to the PM ( Jovic et al . , 2010 ) . To maintain the required balance of these molecules at the cell surface , recycling of the internalized molecules is a tightly regulated process . Aside from PM homeosta - sis , cell shape , and receptor retrieval , endocytic recycling is also key for a variety of cellular processes , including furrow cleavage and cy - tokinesis ( Skop et al . , 2001 ; Montagnac et al . , 2008 ) , cell migration ( Caswell and Norman , 2008 ) , and even polarity ( Wang et al . , 2000 ) . Simplistically , recycling pathways have been described as either “fast recycling” or “slow recycling , ” depending on whether the recy - cling cargo is returned to the PM directly from SEs or is first trans - ported to an additional organelle known as the endocytic recycling compartment ( ERC ) , which is often localized near the microtubule - organizing center ( MTOC ) at the perinuclear region of the cell ( Grant and Donaldson , 2009 ) . Whereas the fast recycling route returns Monitoring Editor Jennifer Lippincott - Schwartz National Institutes of Health Received : Jul 20 , 2015 Revised : Oct 19 , 2015 Accepted : Oct 23 , 2015 This article was published online ahead of print in MBoC in Press ( http : / / www . molbiolcell . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E15 - 07 - 0514 ) on October 28 , 2015 . The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest . Address correspondence to : Steve Caplan ( scaplan @ unmc . edu ) . © 2016 Xie et al . This article is distributed by The American Society for Cell Biol - ogy under license from the author ( s ) . Two months after publication it is available to the public under an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Unported Creative Commons License ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 ) . “ASCB ® , ” “The American Society for Cell Biology ® , ” and “Molecular Biology of the Cell ® ” are registered trademarks of The American Society for Cell Biology . Abbreviations used : CIE , clathrin - independent endocytosis ; CME , clathrin - medi - ated endocytosis ; 2D , two - dimensional ; 3D , three - dimensional ; dSTORM , direct stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy ; EM , electron microscopy ; ERC , endocytic recycling compartment ; LDLR , low - density - lipoprotein receptor ; MICAL - L1 , molecules interacting with Cas - like1 ; MTOC , microtubule - organizing center ; NA , numerical aperture ; PA , phosphatidic acid ; PBS , phosphate - buffered saline ; PM , plasma membrane ; RE , recycling endosome ; SE , early / sorting endo - some ; SIM , structured illumination microscopy ; TfR , transferrin receptor ; TRE , tubular recycling endosomes ; WGA , wheat germ agglutinin . Shuwei Xie a , Kriti Bahl a , James B . Reinecke a , Gerald R . V . Hammond b , Naava Naslavsky a , and Steve Caplan a a Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and the Fred and Pamela Buffett Cancer Center , University of Nebraska Medical Center , Omaha , NE 68198 - 5870 ; b Department of Cell Biology , University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine , Pittsburgh , PA 15261 Volume 27 January 1 , 2016 Segregation at the recycling compartment | 109 have addressed the differential internalization requirements for re - ceptors that traffic via CME as compared with CIE , whether these cargoes undergo mixing at the ERC or remain segregated through - out their recycling itineraries has yet to be determined . The ERC is typically considered to be a highly complex series of vesicles and tubules concentrated at the perinuclear area . However , given the lack of cryo - EM tomography or superresolution data , the precise nature of the ERC region is unknown . To address the nature and organization of the ERC , we applied superresolution SIM imag - ing and compared it with micrographs obtained by confocal micros - copy ( Figure 1 ) . Whereas ∼ 300 - nm resolution by confocal micros - copy images depict Rab11a ( the ERC marker selected ) in a compact perinuclear region ( Figure 1A ; yellow arrows ) , 3D SIM imaging at ∼ 110 - nm resolution suggests that although the Rab11a structures are indeed densely packed , many appear to be single , isolated ves - icles , suggesting that the ERC may not be entirely enveloped by a single , contiguous membrane ( Figure 1B and inset ; see also Supple - mental Movie S1 ) . To ensure that membrane - contiguous organelles were not disrupted by our SIM fixation process , we costained for Rab11a and the Golgi marker GM130 and subjected the cells to SIM analysis . As demonstrated in Figure 1 , C – E , and Supplemental Movie S2 , the Golgi retained its typical contiguous , ribbon - like structure under these conditions , whereas Rab11a was mostly local - ized to vesicles as expected . These observations support the notion that the ERC may be a compartment that contains a complex com - bination of linked endosomal membranes and potentially indepen - dent structures . Because Rab11a can segregate into microdomains of sorting en - dosomes ( Sonnichsen et al . , 2000 ) , we cannot rule out the possibility that “membrane bridges” ( with or without Rab11a bound to the membrane ) may connect individual membrane - bound vesicles in the recycling compartment . To help address this prospect , we applied 3D SIM imaging to cells that we pulsed and chased with labeled transferrin . We then monitored ERC - localized TfR and endogenous cellubrevin , a soluble N - ethylmaleimide – sensitive factor attachment protein receptor and marker of ERC membranes ( Daro et al . , 1996 ) . As demonstrated in Figure 2 , A – C , although many TfR - containing endosomes appeared to be on distinct membranes , the 3D SIM im - aging allowed us to frequently observe “membrane bridges” marked by cellubrevin ( green ) that linked TfR - containing endosomes ( Figure 2 , A – C ; green arrows ) . In some cases , we detected structures containing both cellubrevin and TfR ( Figure 2D , bottom left corner ) , whereas in other cases , TfR - and cellubrevin - containing structures clearly remained distinct from one another ( Figure 2D , top half of micrograph ) . Cellubrevin “bridges” between transferrin - labeled membranes were as long as 400 – 500 nm in some cases ( Figure 2E ) . To better resolve the potential linkage between apparently distinct endosomal structures within the ERC , we turned to 3D dSTORM im - aging . 3D dSTORM displayed a dramatic increase in resolution com - pared with standard epifluorescence ( compare Figure 2 , G with F ) . Although the ∼ 60 nm lateral x / y precision ( 88 - nm Nyquist resolution ) obtained with 3D dSTORM ( Figure 2H ) did not approach the resolu - tion that we typically achieved for 2D dSTORM ( see later discussion of Figures 4 and 7 ) , the 3D imaging allowed us to identify connec - tions of up to 500 nm between Rab11a - containing endosomes at the ERC ( Figure 2G ( 1 ) ) . On the other hand , other Rab11a - containing clusters of endosomes within the ERC appeared to be independent of one another ( Figure 2G ( 2 ) ) , suggesting the possibility that parts of the ERC maintain an underlying connection , whereas others do not . Given the complexity of the ERC , we next asked whether cargo internalized via CME and CIE would both localize to the same Rab11a - containing regions of this compartment . To address this question , we glycosphingolipids to the PM and is regulated by Rab4 ( van der Sluijs et al . , 1992 ; Choudhury et al . , 2004 ) , many receptors recycle via a Rab11 - mediated pathway that traverses the ERC ( Ren et al . , 1998 ) . Despite the significance of the ERC , surprisingly little is known about its composition and structure and the mode by which this organelle functions . It has been described as a group of tubular and vesicular membrane – bound structures that often condense around the MTOC ( Maxfield and McGraw , 2004 ) and are likely connected by an elaborate network of tubular cisternae ( Hopkins , 1983 ) . Al - though resolution of the precise three - dimensional ( 3D ) nature of the ERC will ultimately require complex cryo – electron microscopy ( EM ) and tomography , it is a crucial unanswered question whether cargo internalized via distinct pathways merges at the ERC or re - mains segregated in distinct regions or subcompartments within the ERC . Indeed , this question has important biological ramifica - tions ; previous studies pointed to the possibility of different car - goes returning to the PM via separate pathways ( Mayor et al . , 2014 ) , suggesting an active mechanism ( s ) to maintain segregation of cargo postsorting at the SEs . Understanding the composition and function of the ERC has been further complicated in recent years by the plethora of mem - brane - bound tubular recycling endosomes ( TREs ) that have been identified ( Naslavsky and Caplan , 2011 ) . TREs are defined as tubular endosomes with lengths of up to 10 μm and diameters of up to 200 nm . We previously showed that the biogenesis of these structures occurs by a mechanism that includes the in situ generation of phos - phatidic acid ( PA ) on membranes ( Xie et al . , 2014 ) , which helps to recruit both molecules interacting with CasL - like1 ( MICAL - L1 ) and syndapin2 to the endosomal membrane and facilitates the bending of these structures by the syndapin2 F - BAR domain to form TREs ( Giridharan et al . , 2013 ) . However , whereas the mechanism of TRE biogenesis has been addressed , key questions regarding TRE func - tion are unresolved . For example , although there is evidence of TREs regulating the transport of receptors from the perinuclear ERC back to the PM ( “outgoing cargo” ; Radhakrishna and Donaldson , 1997 ; Caplan et al . , 2002 ; Sharma et al . , 2009 ; Giridharan et al . , 2013 ) , it is unclear whether TREs also transport cargo from SEs to the ERC ( “incoming cargo” ) . In addition , the relationship between the “classical” Rab11a tubulovesicular endosomes ( at or near the ERC ) and MICAL - L1 – containing TREs is poorly understood . In par - ticular , it is unclear whether Rab11a endosomes and TRE transport distinct or overlapping cargo . In this study , we used superresolution microscopy to address the composition , morphology , and structure of the ERC at subdiffrac - tion resolution . Using structured illumination microscopy ( SIM ) and dual - channel two - dimensional ( 2D ) direct stochastic optical recon - struction microscopy ( dSTORM ) , as well as 3D dSTORM , we ob - tained new information about ERC morphology and cargo segrega - tion . We show that CME and CIE cargo remain segregated at the ERC , suggesting that after exit from the SE , additional sorting may not occur . In addition , SIM and 3D dSTORM data support the no - tion that some but not all ERC vesicles are tethered by contiguous “membrane bridges . ” Finally , we demonstrate that TREs preferen - tially facilitate CIE cargo trafficking and that some TREs originate from SE membranes rather than from the ERC . Overall our study supports a model for endocytic recycling in which sorting occurs in peripheral endosomes and segregation is maintained at the ERC . RESULTS Despite considerable advances in understanding internalization and early endocytic events , the nature and the function of the ERC re - main incompletely understood . Although a multitude of studies 110 | S . Xie et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 30 min ( pulse ) to examine peripheral SEs or for 30 min followed by a 30 - min chase into the ERC and subjected the cells to SIM analysis ( Figure 4 , A – C ) or dSTORM ( Figure 4 , D and E , and Supplemental Figures S1 and S2 ) . SIM analysis partially resolved the CD59 and TfR after chase into the dense ERC region ( Figure 4 , A – C and insets ) . In particular , rotation of the 3D images along the y - axis shows that CD59 - and TfR - containing structures are either mostly distinct or at least well segregated ( Supplemental Movie S5 ) . dSTORM imaging at ∼ 10 - nm precision and 33 - to 39 - nm Nyquist resolution further sup - ported the SIM data , showing that CD59 and TfR were mostly segre - gated within the ERC ( Figure 4E and Supplemental Figure S2 ) . dSTORM imaging in the periphery of cells that had taken up both cargoes for 30 min also yielded very limited colocalization of TfR and CD59 ( Figure 4D and Supplemental Figure S1 ) , although areas of overlap could be discerned ( see arrows ) . Although we cannot rule out the possibility that these are distinct compartments that have not been clearly resolved in the z - axis , they most likely represent micro - domains of peripheral SEs displaying ongoing sorting . followed TfR and CD59 , a glycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchored protein transported via EHD1 - and MICAL - L1 – containing TREs ( Cai et al . , 2011 ) . As demonstrated by high - resolution SIM imaging , TfR displayed a high level of overlap with Rab11a ( Figure 3 , A – C and insets , and Supplemental Movie S3 ) . To monitor CD59 at the ERC , we incubated cells with anti - CD59 antibody for 30 min . We then stripped noninternalized antibody from receptors still at the cell sur - face , and chased the internalized CD59 – antibody complex for 2 h to allow it to reach the ERC . Although standard confocal microscopy micrographs suggest some potential overlap between CD59 and Rab11a ( Figure 3 , D – F ) , higher - resolution SIM images ( Figure 3 , G – I and insets , and Supplemental Movie S4 ) depict only limited colocalization . On the basis of these experiments showing that TfR but not CD59 displays considerable overlap with Rab11a at the ERC , we next pre - dicted that cargo internalized either via CME ( i . e . , TfR ) or CIE ( i . e . , CD59 ) would remain segregated after being trafficked to the ERC . To test this , we cointernalized transferrin and anti - CD59 antibody for FIGURE 1 : The 3D SIM characterization of Rab11a recycling endosomes in the ERC . ( A , B ) Rab11a - labeled recycling endosomes were immunostained with anti - Rab11a and Alexa 488 – conjugated anti - rabbit secondary antibody and visualized by confocal microscopy ( A ) and SIM ( B ) . Yellow arrows point to the dense perinuclear area ( A ) . The dashed rectangle in the SIM micrograph ( B ) is shown enlarged in the inset . ( C – E ) HeLa cells were stained with anti - Rab11a and anti - GM130 together with the corresponding secondary antibodies and imaged by SIM . Scale bar , 10 μm . Rab11 GM130 Merge D C E C on f o c a l M i c r o sc op y Rab11 S t r u c t u r ed I ll u m i na t i on M i c r o sc op y ( S I M ) A B B - inset Volume 27 January 1 , 2016 Segregation at the recycling compartment | 111 FIGURE 2 : Linkage between recycling endosomes in the ERC via “membrane bridges” as observed by SIM and 3D dSTORM imaging . ( A – E ) HeLa cells on coverslips were transiently transfected with GFP - cellubrevin for 18 h , serum starved for 1 h , and then allowed to internalize Alexa 568 – conjugated transferrin for 15 min at 37°C , followed by a 15 - min incubation in fresh medium before fixation . The sample was subjected to SIM imaging . ( F – H ) Endogenous Rab11a in the perinuclear area is depicted by epifluorescence microscopy ( F ) or a reconstructed 3D dSTORM image ( G ) . HeLa cells plated on glass - bottom MatTek dishes were fixed and stained with anti - Rab11a antibody , followed by Alexa 647 – conjugated anti - rabbit antibody . The 3D dSTORM was performed by acquiring > 9 × 10 6 localizations during 40 , 000 frames obtained every 50 ms . The single - molecule localizations were reconstructed into a normalized Gaussian image at 10 - nm pixel size using the ThunderSTORM plug - in in ImageJ . Enlarged images of the dashed box areas in G are shown in ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) . A histogram ( H ) representing the calculated uncertainty was plotted on frequency distribution graphs with 27 bins , and the mode of the distribution was taken as the lateral precision . ( I ) The Nyquist resolution . Tf Tf cellubrevin Tf Tf cellubrevin cellubrevin Tf Tf cellubrevin Tf Tf Tf 400 nm 500 nm cellubrevin Tf Tf Tf Tf Tf ( S t r u c t u r ed I ll u m i na t i on M i c r o sc op y ) S I M A D C B E 100 nm 100 nm 100 nm 100 nm ( 1 ) ( 2 ) 500 nm 400 nm ( 1 ) ( 2 ) n ( R a b 11 ) 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 0 20000 40000 60000 80000 1 µm 1 µm 900 nm 1200 nm F G H Nyquist resolution ( nm ) 88 I 112 | S . Xie et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell of very limited post - SE sorting , as these two classes of cargoes remain separate through - out their recycling itinerary to the PM . To clarify the role of Rab11a in sorting of dis - tinct cargo classes , we used the myosin Vb tail as a “surrogate” for Rab11a ( Hales et al . , 2002 ) . This truncated motor protein be - comes trapped in the ERC , and , due to its coupling with Rab11a , cargoes that use the Rab11a - myosin Vb pathway are similarly co - alesced in the ERC . As demonstrated , the CME cargoes TfR ( Figure 5 , A – C , green ar - rows ) and LDLR ( Figure 5 , D – F , blue arrows ) were retained in the ERC and highly colocal - ized with the myosin Vb tail ( quantified in Figure 5M and with profile scans in Supple - mental Figure S3 , A and B ) . On the other hand , CIE cargo , such as CD59 ( Figure 5 , G – I , red arrows ) and β 1 - integrin ( see Figure 7 , J – L , yellow arrows , later in the paper ) dis - played very limited localization to the myo - sin Vb tail structures ( quantified in Figure 5M and profile scan in Supplemental Figure S3 , C and D ) . Moreover , the myosin Vb tail did not interfere with TRE generation as dis - cerned by MICAL - L1 or syndapin2 immu - nostaining ( Supplemental Figure S3 , E – J ) , both of which are required to facilitate TRE biogenesis and endocytic recycling ( Girid - haran et al . , 2013 ) , although occasionally MICAL - L1 could also be observed in partial overlap with the myosin Vb tail . These data support the idea that MICAL - L1 acts inde - pendently of Rab11a in controlling endo - cytic recycling and that CME and CIE car - goes undergo distinct recycling pathways from their internalization and throughout their recycling itineraries . To address further the seclusion of the clathrin - independent recycling pathway and its lack of reliance on Rab11a , we depleted Rab11a from cells ( Figure 6A ) and deter - mined the degree to which TfR recycling is affected compared with the CIE cargoes CD59 and β 1 - integrin . As demonstrated , whereas reduced Rab11a expression se - verely impaired TfR recycling , no significant effect was measured for CD59 or β 1 - integrin ( Figure 6 , B and C ) . Moreover , overexpres - sion of a dominant - negative Rab11 slowed the rate of TfR recycling without significantly affecting the rate of CD59 recycling ( Figure 6 , D and E ) . Overall these data are consis - tent with the notion that recycling CME and CIE cargoes are segregated within the ERC and that Rab11a regulates recycling of CME but not CIE cargoes . TREs containing MICAL - L1 and Rab11a are partially concentrated in the ERC . A major unanswered question concerns the relationship between MI - CAL - L1 - TRE and Rab11a - RE . On the basis of the segregation that we observed between CME and CIE cargoes and the select role of The significant segregation between CME and CIE cargoes at the ERC , along with the failure of the latter cargoes to localize to Rab11a - containing recycling endosomes ( REs ) raised the possibility FIGURE 3 : The CIE cargo CD59 is absent from perinuclear Rab11a recycling endosomes in the ERC . ( A – C ) HeLa cells were fixed and stained with anti - TfR and anti - Rab11a antibodies , along with corresponding secondary antibodies . The localization of TfR ( A ) and Rab11a recycling endosomes ( B ) was analyzed with SIM . Insets highlight the boxed area with higher magnification . Scale bar , 10 μm . ( D – F ) HeLa cells were incubated with anti - CD59 antibody for 30 min at 37°C , followed by an acid strip . The cells were then incubated in fresh medium for 2 h before fixation . CD59 was visualized with Alexa 568 – conjugated anti - mouse antibody ( D ) . Rab11a was visualized with rabbit anti - Rab11a antibody and Alexa 488 – conjugated anti - rabbit antibody ( E ) . Cells were imaged by confocal microscopy . Scale bar , 10 μm . ( G – I ) The same sample from D – F was subjected to SIM analysis . The dashed box denotes the perinuclear area . Insets exhibit the boxed area with higher magnification . Scale bars , 10 μm . Rab11 Merge C on f o c a l M i c r o sc op y ( S t r u c t u r ed I ll u m i na t i on M i c r o sc op y ) S I M D E F G H I G - inset H - inset I - inset CD59 30 min pulse , 2 h chase CD59 30 min pulse , 2 h chase ( S t r u c t u r ed I ll u m i na t i on M i c r o sc op y ) S I M A B C A - inset B - inset C - inset Transferrin Receptor Volume 27 January 1 , 2016 Segregation at the recycling compartment | 113 sent from the TREs containing both MICAL - L1 and Rabenosyn - 5 ( Figure 9 , K – N ; quantified in Supplemental Figure S7 , D and E ) . These data further support the notion that MICAL - L1 - TREs preferen - tially mediate the transport of CIE cargo from SEs to the ERC . To further support or negate the idea that TREs transport CD59 to the ERC from SEs , we carried out live - cell imaging experiments to follow CD59 trafficking along newly generated TREs ( Figure 10 ) . To this aim , we first incubated cells with PLD inhibitors to disrupt TREs . We then washed out the inhibitors ( leading to acute TRE biogenesis ) and provided anti - CD59 to the cells so that CD59 could be internal - ized and monitored . At the initial time point imaged ( Figure 10 ; 45 s ) , we observed little or no CD59 in the ERC ( marked by a dashed yellow region of interest ) , and the TRE monitored had not yet under - gone biogenesis and was not visible . At the 1 : 45 time point , no CD59 had yet reached the ERC ( dashed yellow region of interest and blue arrow ) , but the MICAL - L1 – marked TREs began to grow in the cell periphery ( red arrow ) . At 2 : 45 and 3 : 45 time points , the TREs continued to grow from the periphery toward and into the ERC re - gion , with some CD59 accumulating at the ERC . Finally , at the 4 : 45 time point , the newly generated TREs , marked by MICAL - L1 and CD59 , were extended fully into the ERC ( dashed yellow region of interest and blue arrow ) . Although the signal was weaker than that of MICAL - L1 , CD59 partially colocalized with MICAL - L1 on the TREs and reached the ERC . These data strongly support the notion that , in addition to its characterized role in regulating ERC - to - PM traffick - ing , the source of some TRE membrane derives from peripheral SEs , and these TREs can transport CIE such as CD59 from SEs to the ERC . DISCUSSION Composition of the ERC The long - standing paradigm for the ERC holds that it is situated in a perinuclear region of the cell adjacent to the MTOC and comprises a complex series of tubular - vesicular endosomes ( Yamashiro et al . , 1984 ; Mayor et al . , 1993 ; Marsh et al . , 1995 ; Maxfield and McGraw , 2004 ) . Distinguishing whether the ERC is enveloped mostly by a single contiguous membrane as originally proposed by Hopkins ( 1983 ) or is a region of mostly individual vesicles and tubules has been a difficult question to resolve . Although ultimately techniques that directly label membranes and allow 3D analysis ( such as cryo - EM coupled with tomography ) will help determine the nature of the ERC more precisely , the inherent fusion - fission dynamics of this organelle may complicate this endeavor . In this study , however , we took advan - tage of advanced superresolution and single - molecule imaging techniques to address cargo segregation within the ERC and the physical separation of cargo localized to ERC vesicles and TREs . Given that a growing body of evidence , including our findings here , supports the idea that CME and CIE cargo sorting occurs at the SEs before transport to the ERC , it was rational to hypothesize that the cargoes remain segregated to either distinct ERC endo - somes or membrane subdomains within the ERC until they are re - cycled back to the PM ( see later discussion of the model presented in Figure 11 ) . To address this question and circumvent the limita - tions of light microscopy in resolving distances less than ∼ 300 nm , we used both SIM and dSTORM to reexamine the ERC organization and cargoes that recycle via this compartment . By these two super - resolution techniques , with Rab11a and cellubrevin as ERC markers , and following the distribution of internalized TfR and CD59 by “pulse - chase , ” we provide evidence suggesting that some of the endosomes at the ERC are linked by “membrane bridges” as long as 500 nm . On the other hand , other endosomes appear to be indi - vidual structures and have no detectable Rab11a or cellubrevin Rab11a in regulating the recycling of CME cargoes , we hypothe - sized that Rab11a and MICAL - L1 may segregate within the ERC . As demonstrated by SIM imaging ( Figure 7 , A – C , and Supplemental Movie S6 ) , despite the localization of the distal TRE tips to the dense ERC , the TREs show no appreciable overlap with Rab11a . Because SIM is limited to ∼ 100 - nm resolution , we turned to study the ERC at higher resolution , using two - channel dSTORM to image cells costained for endogenous Rab11a and MICAL - L1 ( Figure 7D and Supplemental Figure S4 ) . Two areas of the cell were enlarged in Figure 7D ; Figure 7Da represents a TRE in the midst of the dense Rab11a ERC , whereas Figure 7Db depicts a TRE from a more pe - ripheral area of the cell . With calculated precision levels of 10 and 13 nm for MICAL - L1 and 18 and 16 nm for Rab11a in Figure 7D , a and b , respectively , and Nyquist resolution of 31 – 48 nm ( Supple - mental Figure S4 ) , we observed minimal colocalization between Rab11a and MICAL - L1 both at the ERC and in the periphery . These data support our model in which the ERC maintains segregation of resident proteins and cargoes . Previous studies support a role for TREs in regulating cargo transport from the ERC to the PM ( Caplan et al . , 2002 ; reviewed in Maldonado - Baez et al . , 2013 ) . Establishing whether TREs might also carry cargo from the SE to the ERC has been a difficult question to address ( Figure 8A ) . We previously showed that phospholipase D ( PLD ) inhibitors ( which prevent PA generation ) induce the loss of TRE ( Figure 8 , B and C ; Giridharan et al . , 2013 ) . To determine the membrane origin of TREs , we developed an assay in which washout of the PLD inhibitors led to synchronized de novo TRE generation ( “burst” ) beginning within 20 min ( Figure 8D ) and reaching a peak at 1 h after inhibitor removal ( Figure 8E ) . Using this assay , we costained cells undergoing TRE regeneration 20 min after washout with markers for the ERC and SEs . As demonstrated ( Figure 8 , F – H ) , the SE marker Rabenosyn - 5 could be detected on punctae at the apex of TREs ( see inset ; arrows ) and along TRE membranes , and this colocalization was also observed in untreated cells ( Supplemen - tal Figure S5 , A – C , and insets ) . However , other markers for SE , such as Rab5 and EEA1 , were not observed , suggesting that TREs are derived from a select subset of SEs ( unpublished observations ) . Moreover , surface - stained wheat germ agglutinin ( WGA ) internal - ized for 5 min did not appear in MICAL - L1 – containing TREs , indi - cating that these TREs are not derived from the PM ( Supplemental Figure S6 ) . In addition , we observed that newly generated TREs localize to the periphery and are typically absent from the ERC . Overall these data lead us to suggest that some TREs originate from a subset of SEs containing Rabenosyn - 5 , and likely transport cargo from SEs to the ERC . Our next goal was to determine which cargoes might potentially be transported along peripheral TREs to the ERC . To address cargo selectivity in TRE , we initially examined the carriers that transport the CIE cargo CD59 . As depicted by SIM micrographs in Figure 9 , A – C , CD59 internalized for 9 min clearly localized to MICAL - L1 - TRE . On the other hand , TfR internalized via CME was absent from MICAL - L1 - TRE after either 3 min ( Figure 9 , D – F ) or 9 min of internalization ( Sup - plemental Figure S7 , A – C , and insets ) . We next analyzed cargo selectivity on newly generated TREs derived from Rabenosyn - 5 – con - taining SEs . To this aim , we treated cells for 30 min with PLD inhibi - tors , followed by a 20 - min washout in complete media , to allow gen - eration of MICAL - L1 – containing TREs . In the last 10 min of washout , we monitored internalized cargo . As demonstrated ( Figure 9 , G – J ) , internalized CD59 was sorted into newly formed Rabenosyn - 5 – and MICAL - L1 – containing TREs ( quantified in Supplemental Figure S7 , D and E ) . In contrast , whereas TfR was detected in partial overlap with Rabenosyn - 5 at SEs ( Figure 9 , K – N ; yellow arrow ) , it was entirely ab - 114 | S . Xie et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell FIGURE 4 : Segregation of CME and CIE cargoes in the ERC . ( A – C ) HeLa cells were serum starved for 1 h and then incubated with anti - CD59 antibody ( A ) and Alexa 568 – conjugated transferrin for 30 min at 37°C ( B ) and then acid stripped . The cells were then incubated in fresh medium for 30 min before fixation . CD59 was visualized with Alexa 488 – conjugated mouse secondary antibody ( A ) . The cells were subjected to SIM analysis . Dashed boxes denote the Transferrin 568 CD59 Merge 30 min pulse , 30 min chase ( SIM ) A B C A - inset B - inset C - inset Transferrin 647 / CD59 ( dSTORM ) 30 min pulse and 30 min chase Perinuclear area 30 min pulse Cell periphery 500 nm E D Volume 27 January 1 , 2016 Segregation at the recycling compartment | 115 “linking” them . Although tomography will be needed to ascertain the individual nature of these vesicles , the ERC appears to comprise of a network of both partially connected and individual vesicles and tubules . While the issue of ERC continuity cannot be entirely re - solved from our study , our data are consistent with the notion that the ERC maintains segregation of CME and CIE cargo . Moreover , we demonstrate that whereas CME cargoes are transported to the PM via myosin Vb / Rab11a - FIP2 / Rab11a complexes , CIE cargoes are recycled independently of Rab11a and myosin Vb . Overall these findings hint at the intriguing possibility that CIE may be coupled directly to microtubules , whereas CME may rely first on a connec - tion with myosin Vb and microfilaments before being linked to mi - crotubule - dependent transport to the cell surface . The selectivity of TREs The routes for cargo entry into the cell have been studied intensively and can be categorized into two very general mechanisms , CME and CIE , depending on whether the clathrin - coated pits are assem - bled during endocytosis ( see model in Figure 11 ) . In comparison to the “canonical” internalization via CME , CIE controls the internaliza - tion of distinct cargoes and is mediated by a different set of regula - tory proteins and lipids ( Mayor et al . , 2014 ) . However , much less is known about the fates and itineraries of these proteins and lipids after their entry via different internalization mechanisms . Some reg - ulatory proteins were identified that regulate the recycling of CIE cargoes , such as Rab22a ( Weigert et al . , 2004 ) , Rab8 ( Hattula et al . , 2006 ) , and Arf6 ( Radhakrishna and Donaldson , 1997 ; Powelka et al . , 2004 ) . Although potentially selective for CIE cargo , these regulators may also exert a regulatory role in the recycling of CME cargoes such as TfR ( Hattula et al . , 2006 ; Magadan et al . , 2006 ) . We deter - mined that the TRE biogenesis proteins MICAL - L1 and its interac - tion partner syndapin2 serve as markers for TREs that selectively transport CIE cargoes from SEs into the ERC in addition to their role in regulating ERC - to - PM trafficking . Moreover , MICAL - L1 and the CIE cargoes remain in segregated endosomal structures throughout their retention in the ERC and as they recycle back to the PM . Our data are consistent with the notion that additional sorting at the ERC is unlikely to occur once cargo has exited the SEs . Accordingly , once sorting has been established , cargoes remain in distinct endosomes or regions of the ERC and are returned to the PM independently of one another . These findings shed new light on the mechanism of cargo sorting into different REs . How are select CME cargoes sorted to Rab11a - decorated mem - branes , whereas CIE cargoes localize to MICAL - L1 – containing TREs at the SEs ? Potential mechanisms distinguishing CME and CIE car - goes at the SEs include the following : 1 ) Cargoes entering through CME often contain signals in their cytoplasmic domains that are rec - ognized by specific regulatory proteins such as ACAP1 ( Dai et al . , 2004 ) . It is possible that there are regulators for the recognition of CIE cargoes that have yet to be identified . 2 ) The lipid microenviron - ment that escorts CME and CIE cargoes from the PM to SEs differs . Vesicles derived from CME typically contain phosphatidylinositol - ( 4 , 5 ) - bisphosphate from the PM ( Antonescu et al . , 2011 ) . On the other hand , generation of tubular invaginations bearing CIE cargoes is often from cholesterol - enriched domains ( Donaldson et al . , 2009 ) . In addition , MICAL - L1 is recruited onto the membrane of TREs by PA ( Giridharan et al . , 2013 ) . The differential lipid microenvironments of recycling endosomes likely also account for the longer and wider tubular structures observed in TREs . The significance of TREs in endocytic trafficking Tubular endocytic carriers play an important role in mediating transport within the endocytic pathways ( Chi et al . , 2015 ) . We iden - tified MICAL - L1 as a TRE marker that stably resides on the endo - somal membrane and facilitates its tubulation and biogenesis ( Sharma et al . , 2009 ) . MICAL - L1 – decorated TREs bear different lipid components than the tubular invaginations at the PM , and MICAL - L1 does not localize to PM tubules labeled by WGA ( Sup - plemental Figure S5 ; Flesch et al . , 1998 ) . Indeed , TRE are crucial for the recycling of internalized receptors and lipids . Because deple - tion of either MICAL - L1 or EHD1 resulted in the failure of TfR and β 1 - integrin to exit the ERC , TREs have been primarily considered as carriers of cargoes returning to the PM from the ERC ( Jovic et al . , 2007 ; Donaldson et al . , 2009 ; Sharma et al . , 2009 ) . Despite this evi - dence , the directionality and transport itinerary of TRE have not been firmly established , and whether TRE might also support SE - to - ERC trafficking has been an open question until now . Our study demonstrates that MICAL - L1 – decorated TRE can be generated from Rabenosyn - 5 – containing SEs , suggesting that TREs are responsible for the movement of cargo from peripheral SEs to the perinuclear ERC ( see model in Figure 11 ) . Furthermore , MICAL - L1 recruits EHD1 to the TRE membrane , which mediates the fission of tubules and supports vesicular transport ( Naslavsky and Caplan , 2011 ) . Our findings indicate that cargo - containing TREs can originate from SEs and that EHD1 likely cleaves TREs to generate vesicular endosomes that ultimately bring in cargoes to the ERC . This notion is reinforced by the imaging of TREs either by SIM or dSTORM ( Figure 7 ) and by live imaging ( Figure 10 ) . In these images , MICAL - 1 localizes to a contiguous tubular membrane in the cell periphery , whereas it resides on more vesicular structures in the perinuclear area . As noted , the effect of either MICAL - L1 or EHD1 depletion leads to cargo accumulation in the ERC . These phenotypic observations fit a model in which TREs facilitate the exit of cargo from the ERC rather than the transport of cargo into the ERC . This raises the ques - tion of why cargo appears to be delayed at the ERC rather than the SE . One possibility is that TRE might bidirectionally transport car - goes both to and out of the ERC . In this scenario , we hypothesize that cargo at the SEs has various compensatory or alternate path - ways to reach the ERC ( in the absence of EHD1 or MICAL - L1 ) but fewer alternate pathways to exit the ERC . Thus the absence of MI - CAL - L1 / EHD1 may induce nonphysiological transport of cargo to the ERC via alternate pathways but then cause the cargo to remain trapped within the ERC . Indeed , impaired function of Rab11 , which appears to be involved in sorting at the SEs ( Sonnichsen et al . , 2000 ) as well as ERC - to - PM trafficking , also causes accumulation of cargo at the ERC ( Ren et al . , 1998 ) . It has been proposed that EHD pro - teins mediate membrane scission upon ATP hydrolysis ( Daumke et al . , 2007 ) . In this scenario , EHD1 depletion would impair TRE perinuclear area where CD59 and TfR were highly concentrated . Insets , magnified images of the boxed areas . Scale bars , 10 μm . ( D , E ) HeLa cells plated on glass - bottom MatTek dishes were serum starved for 1 h , followed by incubation of anti - CD59 antibody , as well as of Alexa 647 – conjugated transferrin , for 30 min at 37°C . Then the cells were acid stripped and either fixed ( D ; periphery ) or chased in fresh medium for 30 min before fixation ( E ; perinuclear area ) . The plates were then incubated with Atto 488 – conjugated anti - mouse antibody . dSTORM was performed by acquiring > 1 × 10 6 localizations during > 20 , 000 frames obtained every 50 ms . The single - molecule localizations were reconstructed into a normalized Gaussian image at 10 - nm pixel size using the ThunderSTORM plug - in in ImageJ . Scale bar , 500 nm . 116 | S . Xie et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell FIGURE 5 : Myosin Vb tail overexpression selectively traps CME cargoes in the perinuclear area . ( A – C ) HeLa cells transfected with GFP – myosin Vb tail were incubated with transferrin for 30 min at 37°C , washed , and then incubated in fresh medium for 2 h . Green arrows point to the perinuclear area where TfR ( A ) colocalized with the GFP – myosin Vb tail ( B ) . ( D – F ) HeLa cells transfected with GFP – myosin Vb tail were incubated with anti - LDLR antibody for 30 min M ande r ' s C oe ff i c i en t s ( f r a c t i o n o f M y o s i n V b t a il o v e r l app i ng c a r go s ) CD 59 C l a t h r i n - i ndependen t c a r go L D L R GFP - Myosin Vb tail Merge T r an s f e rr i n C l a t h r i n - dependen t c a r go Cargo C B A F E D I H G L K J M β 1 - i n t eg r i n Tf LDLR * * * CD59 1 - Integrin 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 Volume 27 January 1 , 2016 Segregation at the recycling compartment | 117 gift from James R . Goldenring ( Vanderbilt University Medical Center , Nashville , TN ; Lapierre et al . , 2001 ) . GFP - cellubrevin was kindly provided by J . Donaldson ( National Heart , Lung , and Blood Institute , National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , MD ) . Dominant - negative GFP - Rab11 ( S25N ) was kindly provided by Robert Lodge ( University of Montreal , Montreal , Canada ) . HeLa cells were trans - fected for 18 h at 37°C with X - tremeGENE 9 ( Roche Applied Science , Indianapolis , IN ) according to the manufacturer’s protocol . Small interfering RNA ( siRNA ) oligonucleotides targeting human Rab11A were synthesized by Dharmacon ( Lafayette , CO ) : sense ( 5 ′ - GAGU AAUCUCCUG UCU CGA ( dT ) ( dT ) - 3 ′ ) . Rab11a - siRNA treat - ment was carried out with Lipofectamine RNAiMAX ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) for 48 h according to the manufacturer’s protocol , using 0 . 3 μM oligonucleo tide ( Dharmacon ) . Antibody and reagents Mouse monoclonal MEM - 43 ascites antibody against CD59 was kindly provided by V . Horejsi ( Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic , Prague , Czech Republic ) and used previously ( Cai et al . , 2011 , 2012 , 2014 ) . Other commercial antibodies used were mouse anti - human β 1 - integrin ( CD29 ; AbD Serotec , Raleigh , NC ) , rabbit anti - LDLR ( Progene , Lenexa , KS ) , mouse anti - human TfR ( Zymed , Lafayette , CO ) , mouse anti – MICAL - L1 ( Novus Biologicals , Littleton , CO ) , mouse anti - actin ( Novus Biologicals ) , rabbit anti – Rabeno - syn - 5 ( Novus Biologicals ) , rabbit anti - Rab11a ( US Biologicals , Salem , MA ) , rabbit anti - HA ( Signalway , College Park , MD ) , goat anti - mouse horseradish peroxidase ( HRP ; Jackson Immuno - Research Laboratories , West Grove , PA ) , donkey anti - rabbit HRP ( GE Healthcare , Pittsburgh , PA ) , and Alexa 568 – conjugated goat anti - mouse , Alexa 488 – conjugated goat anti - rabbit . Secondary antibodies used in dSTORM imaging were Alexa 647 goat anti - mouse F ( ab ) 2 ( Invitrogen ) , Atto 488 – conjugated anti - rabbit ( Sigma - Aldrich , St . Louis , MO ) , Atto 488 – conjugated anti - mouse ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , and Alexa 647 goat anti - rabbit ( Life Technologies , Carlsbad , CA ) . Anti - CD59 antibody was conjugated to Alexa 555 with the APEX Alexa Fluor 555 Antibody Labeling Kit ( Life Tech - nologies ) according to the manufacturer’s instructions . Reagents used include Alexa 568 – conjugated transferrin , Alexa 633 – conjugated transferrin , Alexa 647 – conjugated transferrin , and WGA from Life Technologies , CAY inhibitor cocktail ( CAY10593 , CAY10594 ) from Cayman Chemical Company ( Ann Arbor , MI ) , and 20 % glucose solution , glucose oxidase from Aspergillus niger , cata - lase from bovine liver , cysteamine hydrochloride ( MEA ) , and 100 - nm - diameter gold nanoparticles , all purchased from Sigma - Aldrich . Immunoblotting HeLa cells were harvested and lysed on ice for 30 min in lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris , pH 7 . 4 , 150 mM NaCl , 1 % Nonidet P - 40 , 0 . 5 % sodium deoxycholate , and protease inhibitor mixture ( Roche Molecular Biochemicals ) . Total protein levels in the lysate were then determined by Bio - Rad protein assay ( Bio - Rad Laboratories , vesiculation , and we speculate that this process might also be es - sential for exit of recycling cargo from the ERC once cargo has ar - rived from the SEs . Another potential reason for cargo accumulation at the ERC ( as opposed to the peripheral SEs ) upon EHD1 or MICAL - L1 deple - tion is that it might result from the coalescence of entire SE popu - lations into the ERC region . A study from our lab suggested that MICAL - L1 is linked to dynein - mediated trafficking via the collapsin response mediator protein 2 ( CRMP2 ) and that MICAL - L1 or CRMP2 depletion led to more rapid cargo transport to the ERC ( Rahajeng et al . , 2010 ) . We cannot rule out the possibility that in - tact peripheral SEs migrate and cluster to the ERC region ; if this is the case , then one explanation for delayed cargo recycling at the ERC upon EHD1 or MICAL - L1 depletion could be failure of the cargo to exit intact SEs that have already migrated and coalesced into the ERC region . It is of interest that recycling endosomes are tightly connected with the appendages of the mother centriole , since they are both found in the perinuclear region ( Hehnly et al . , 2012 ) . Accordingly , we hypothesized that MICAL - L1 and EHD1 might serve as a link between RE and centrosomes ( Reinecke et al . , 2015 ) . MICAL - L1 / EHD1 may have a nonselective effect on RE attachment to the microtubules for transportation to the PM and thus contribute to the regulation of endocytic recycling from the ERC . Our studies alter the current understanding of the role that TREs play in endocytic recycling . Because we view receptor sorting as less likely to occur in the ERC , we speculate that the transport of endosomes to this central area of the cell may serve to focus REs at a “staging ground” where REs ( from both CME and CIE ) are linked to microtubule tracks and / or the actin cytoskeleton by select motor proteins ( see model in Figure 11 ) . Accordingly , the involvement of myosin Vb in CME trafficking hints at a possible requirement for both microfilament - and microtubule - dependent transport mechanisms , whereas we predict that CIE might rely more exclusively on microtubules . Although future studies are needed to address this idea , we speculate that the ERC region provides a concentrated platform on which vesicles / tubules , mo - tor proteins , and the cytoskeleton may be coupled to facilitate ef - ficient transport to the PM . MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell lines HeLa cells from the American Type Culture Collection ( Manassas , VA ) were grown in DMEM containing 10 % fetal bovine serum , 2 mM glutamine , 100 U / ml penicillin , and 100 U / ml streptomycin . DNA constructs , transfection , and small interfering RNA treatment Human hemagglutinin ( HA ) - MICAL - L1 and HA - syndapin2 were previously described ( Sharma et al . , 2009 ; Giridharan et al . , 2013 ) . The green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) – myosin Vb tail construct was a at 37°C and then acid stripped and incubated in fresh medium for 2 h . Blue arrows point to the perinuclear area where LDLR ( D ) colocalized with the GFP – myosin Vb tail ( E ) . ( G – I ) HeLa cells transfected with GFP – myosin Vb tail were incubated with CD59 for 30 min at 37°C and then acid stripped and incubated in fresh medium for 2 h . Magenta arrows point to the perinuclear area where GFP – myosin Vb tail ( H ) is highly compact , whereas CD59 ( G ) displayed limited localization to this region . ( J – L ) HeLa cells transfected with GFP – myosin Vb tail were incubated with β 1 - integrin for 30 min at 37°C , acid stripped , and incubated in fresh medium for 2 h . Yellow arrows denote the perinuclear area where β 1 - integrin ( J ) showed limited colocalization with the GFP – myosin Vb tail ( K ) . Scale bar , 10 μm . ( M ) The degree of colocalization between GFP – myosin Vb tail and different cargoes was measured using ImageJ with Manders overlap coefficients . One hundred twenty cells from three independent experiments were measured and subjected to statistical analysis . Error bars , SD . * * * p < 0 . 0005 . 118 | S . Xie et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell FIGURE 6 : Rab11a regulates the recycling of CME but not CIE cargo . ( A ) HeLa cells were treated with siRNA against Rab11a for 48 h before cell lysis . Rab11a expression was measured by immunoblotting . Actin was used as a loading control . ( B ) Mock - and Rab11a siRNA – treated cells were serum starved for 1 h , pulsed with Alexa 633 – conjugated transferrin for 1 h at 37°C , and then chased in fresh medium for 30 min . The remaining transferrin in the cell was measured by flow cytometry . Statistical analysis was performed with data from three independent flow cytometry assays . SD is shown . * p < 0 . 05 . ( C ) Mock - and Rab11a siRNA – treated cells were pulsed with anti – β 1 - integrin or anti - CD59 antibody for 30 min at 37°C , acid stripped , and chased for 3 h before fixation . The cells were then stained with Alexa 568 anti - mouse antibody in the absence of saponin . The total levels of β 1 - integrin and CD59 were also measured with fixed cells incubated with anti – β 1 - integrin or anti - CD59 antibody in the presence of saponin . The return of β 1 - integrin / CD59 to the cell surface after a 3 - h chase was calculated as a portion of the total protein level . One hundred eighty cells from three independent experiments were analyzed with ImageJ . Bars indicate SD . ( D ) HeLa cells transfected with dominant - negative GFP - Rab11 ( S25N ) were serum starved for 1 h , pulsed with Alexa 568 – conjugated transferrin for 1 h at 37°C , and then chased in fresh medium for 30 min . The samples were imaged by confocal microscopy , and the remaining transferrin in nontransfected and dominant - negative GFP - Rab11 – transfected cells was determined by ImageJ intensity measurements . SD is shown . * * p < 0 . 01 . ( E ) HeLa cells transfected with dominant - negative GFP - Rab11 ( S25N ) were pulsed with anti - CD59 antibody for 30 min at 37°C , acid stripped , and chased for 3 h before fixation . The cells were then stained with Alexa 568 anti - mouse antibody in the absence of saponin . The total levels of CD59 were also measured with fixed cells incubated with anti - CD59 antibody in the presence of saponin . The return of CD59 to the cell surface after a 3 - h chase was calculated as a portion of the total protein level . One hundred twenty cells from three independent experiments were analyzed with ImageJ . SD is shown . Mock Actin Rab11a Rab11a - siRNA A B C % T r a n s f e rr i n r e m a i n i n g i n t he c e ll M o c k R a b1 1 a - s iR NA 0 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 * ( - ) ( + ) ( - ) ( + ) 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 n s % β 1 - i n t e g r i n / CD 59 r e cyc l ed t o t he p l a s m a m e m b r ane Rab11a - siRNA : 30 min pulse 3 h chase : β1 - integrin CD59 % T r a n s f e rr i n r e m a i n i ng i n t he c e ll non - tr ansfected R ab11 dominant negative 0 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 * * D % C D 5 9 r e c yc l e d t o t he p l a s m a m e m b r ane non - transfe cte d R ab11 dominant ne gativ e 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 ns E Volume 27 January 1 , 2016 Segregation at the recycling compartment | 119 FIGURE 7 : SIM and dSTORM visualization of Rab11a and MICAL - L1 – labeled TREs . ( A – C ) HeLa cells were stained with anti - Rab11a and anti - MICAL - L1 together with the corresponding secondary antibody and imaged by SIM . Scale bar , 10 μm . ( D ) Reconstructed dSTORM image showing Rab11a and MICAL - L1 in the perinuclear area ( a – a ′′ ) and in the periphery ( b – b ′′ ) . HeLa cells plated on glass - bottom MatTek dishes were fixed and stained with anti - Rab11a and anti – MICAL - L1 antibodies , followed by Atto 488 – conjugated anti - rabbit and Alexa 647 – conjugated anti - mouse antibody . dSTORM was performed by acquiring > 1 × 10 6 localizations during > 20 , 000 frames obtained every 50 ms . The single - molecule localizations were reconstructed into a normalized Gaussian image with a pixel size of 10 nm using the ThunderSTORM plug - in in ImageJ . The entire cell from where these images are cropped is shown in D ( dashed rectangles a and b ) . b b’ b’’ Rab11 MICAL - L1 Merge a b dSTORM ( 10 nm pixels ) 100 nm a a’ a” Rab11 MICAL - L1 Merge 10 µm 100 nm 100 nm 100 nm 100 nm 100 nm Rab11 A MICAL - L1 B Merge C S t r u c t u r ed I ll u m i na t i on M i c r o sc op y ( S I M ) D 120 | S . Xie et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell FIGURE 8 : MICAL - L1 – decorated TRE are derived from SEs . ( A ) Schematic diagram depicting the ERC and potentially SEs as likely sources of TRE membrane . ( B – E ) TRE analysis by confocal microscopy was done on ( B ) untreated cells , ( C ) cells incubated with phospholipase D inhibitors for 30 min , or ( D ) after inhibitor washout and chase in fresh DMEM for 20 min ( D ) or 1 h ( E ) . Scale bar , 10 μm . ( F – H ) TREs colocalized with the endosomal marker Rabenosyn - 5 upon regeneration . HeLa cells treated with PLD inhibitors for 30 min and then chased in fresh DMEM for 20 min ( as in D ) were costained with MICAL - L1 ( F ) and Rabenosyn - 5 ( G ) antibodies . Arrows depict the nucleation of a MICAL - L1 – containing TREs from a Rabenosyn - 5 – endosome . Scale bars , 10 μm . PLD inhibitor 30 min , chase 20 min MICAL - L1 Rabenosyn - 5 F G H F - inset G - inset H - inset Merge 1 h chase ( washout ) Pre - treatment B C 30 min CAY treatment 20 min chase ( washout ) D MICAL - L1 E A Volume 27 January 1 , 2016 Segregation at the recycling compartment | 121 FIGURE 9 : TREs selectively transport cargoes from SE . ( A – F ) HeLa cells on coverslips were transiently transfected with HA - MICAL - L1 for 18 h and incubated with anti - CD59 antibody for 9 min at 37°C ( A – C ) or pulsed for 3 min with Alexa 568 – conjugated transferrin ( D – F ) . Surface - bound CD59 antibody was removed by acid strip before fixation . Internal CD59 was visualized with Alexa 568 – conjugated anti - mouse antibody ( B ) in the presence of saponin . MICAL - L1 was visualized with rabbit anti - HA antibody and Alexa 488 – conjugated anti - rabbit antibody ( A ) . Scale bar , 10 μm . ( G – N ) HeLa cells transfected with GFP – MICAL - L1 were treated for 30 min with PLD inhibitors and then either incubated with mouse anti - CD59 antibody for 10 min at 37°C , followed by staining with Alexa 568 – conjugated anti - mouse antibody ( G – J ) , or incubated with Alexa 568 – conjugated transferrin for 10 min at 37°C . Rabenosyn - 5 endosomes were detected by rabbit anti – Rabenosyn - 5 , followed by Alexa 647 – conjugated anti - rabbit secondary antibody . All images are maximal projections of ∼ 20 SIM slices separated by 110 nm in the Z - axis . Arrows in K – N depict TfR in Rabenosyn - 5 – containing endosomes that are absent from TREs . Scale bar , 1 μm . The degree of colocalization between different cargoes and Rabenosyn - 5 or MICAL - L1 is quantified and summarized in Supplemental Figure S6 , D and E . CD59 9 min pulse HA - MICAL - L1 Merge A B C Transferrin 568 3 min pulse MICAL - L1 Mergeggggg D E F Cargo 10 min pulse Rabenosyn - 5 GFP - MICAL - L1 Merge Transferrin 30 min PLD inhibitor + 20 min washout K L M N CD59 1 µm G H I J 122 | S . Xie et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell FIGURE 10 : TREs transport CD59 into the recycling compartment . HeLa cells on 35 - mm glass - bottom plates were transiently transfected with GFP – MICAL - L1 for 18 h and incubated with PLD inhibitors for 30 min at 37°C . The cells were then washed three times and incubated in fresh complete medium for 10 min at 37°C , followed by a 10 min - pulse of Alexa 555 – conjugated anti - CD59 antibody . The cells were then washed and imaged in prewarmed Ringer’s solution . Red arrows indicate the initiation site of a newly generated MICAL - L1 - TRE . Blue arrows point to the growing ERC . Dashed boxes denote the perinuclear area and are shown with higher magnification in the insets . Scale bars , 10 μm . 30 m i n P L D i nh i b i t o r + 20 m i n w a s hou t + 10 m i n CD 59 pu l s e CD59 chase GFP - MICAL - L1 Inset ERC ERC ERC ERC ERC ERC ERC ERC ERC ERC Volume 27 January 1 , 2016 Segregation at the recycling compartment | 123 paraformaldehyde and incubated in presonicated 100 - nm - diame - ter gold nanoparticles for 20 min at room temperature before dSTORM acquisition . Live - cell imaging HeLa cells on 35 - mm glass - bottom tissue culture dishes ( World Pre - cision Instruments , Sarasota , FL ) were transiently transfected with GFP - MICAL - L1 for 18 h and incubated with PLD inhibitors for 30 min at 37°C . The cells were then washed three times and incubated in fresh complete medium for 10 min at 37°C , followed by a 10 - min pulse of anti - CD59 antibody conjugated with Alexa 555 . Then the cells were washed and imaged in prewarmed Ringer’s solution ( 152 mM NaCl , 25 mM 4 - ( 2 - hydroxyethyl ) - 1 - piperazineethanesulfonic acid , pH 7 . 4 , 5 . 6 mM glucose , 4 . 8 mM KCl , 1 . 3 mM CaCl 2 , 1 . 2 mM KH 2 PO 4 , 1 . 2 mM MgSO 4 ) covered by a thin layer of mineral oil . Confocal microscopy imaging was done with a Zeiss LSM 5 Pascal confocal microscope ( Carl Zeiss ) using a 63 × objective with NA of 1 . 4 and appropriate filters . Images in each channel were obtained at 512 × 512 pixels with the pinhole set at z - slices of 1 . 6 μm . The imag - ing was performed every 15 s , and images taken at 45 s ; 1 min , 45 s ; 2 min , 45 s ; 3 min , 45 s ; and 4 min , 45 s are presented . Structured illumination microscopy imaging and data processing SIM images were collected with a Zeiss ELYRA PS . 1 illumination sys - tem ( Carl Zeiss ) using a 63 × oil objective lens with NA of 1 . 4 . Three lasers were used in the image acquisition : 642 , 568 , and 488 nm . Hercules , CA ) and normalized for equal protein loading on gels . Protein samples were separated on 10 % SDS – PAGE and detected by immunoblotting with appropriate antibodies . Immunofluorescence staining Cells grown on coverslips were fixed with 4 % ( vol / vol ) paraformalde - hyde in phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) for 10 min as previously described ( Xie et al . , 2014 ) . Cells were then incubated with primary antibody in staining buffer containing 0 . 2 % saponin ( wt / vol ) and 0 . 5 % bovine serum albumin ( wt / vol ) in PBS for 1 h at room tempera - ture . The appropriate fluorochrome - conjugated secondary antibody was applied in the same staining buffer for 1 h at room temperature . Coverslips were mounted on glass slides in Fluoromount G ( South - ernBiotech , Birmingham , AL ) . Confocal microscopy imaging was done with a Zeiss LSM 5 Pascal confocal microscope ( Carl Zeiss , Oberkochen , Germany ) using a 63 × objective with a numerical ap - erture ( NA ) of 1 . 4 and appropriate filters , and SIM was done with a Zeiss Elyra PS . 1 Microscope ( Carl Zeiss ) by using a 63 × objective with NA of 1 . 4 . To measure colocalization , at least 60 cells from three independent confocal microscopy experiments or 12 cells from three independent SIM experiments were assessed using ImageJ ( National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , MD ) with Manders colocalization using the JaCoP plug - in . For dSTORM sample preparation , cells plated on glass - bottom MatTek dishes were fixed and stained with primary antibody in staining buffer , washed , and then incubated with secondary anti - body . The stained cells were fixed again for 10 min in 4 % ( vol / vol ) FIGURE 11 : Proposed model depicting the recycling of CME and CIE . Cargoes internalized through CME and CIE merge in Rabenosyn - 5 – containing sorting endosomes ( SEs ) . Rab11a vesicles ( or small labile tubules ) are formed to escort CME cargoes such as TfR and LDLR to the perinuclear area . MICAL - L1 – decorated TREs are also generated from Rabenosyn - 5 – containing SEs , carrying CIE cargoes such as CD59 , CD98 , and β 1 - integrin to the perinuclear area . The sorted cargoes remain segregated in the dense perinuclear ERC . Cargoes are then linked to motor proteins along microtubules in either vesicular or tubular recycling endosomes and transported back to the PM . 124 | S . Xie et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell dSTORM imaging and data processing dSTORM was performed on a Zeiss Elyra PS . 1 microscope with a 100 × oil - immersion objective with 1 . 46 NA . For the imaging of Alexa 647 and Atto 488 , we used 642 - , 488 - , and 405 - nm laser lines . Cell samples were kept in imaging buffer ( 50 mM Tris , 10 mM NaCl , 10 % glucose , pH 8 . 0 ) containing 100 mM MEA , 0 . 56 mg / ml glucose oxidase , and 34 μg / ml catalase and imaged sequentially to detect Alexa 647 and then Atto 488 . Images in each channel were ob - tained at 256 × 256 pixels . The imaging acquisition was performed at 33 Hz . From 10 , 000 to 25 , 000 frames were obtained for each channel . The 3D dSTORM was performed as described , except us - ing a 63 × oil - immersion objective with 1 . 4 NA and a 3D - PALM slider . We obtained 40 , 000 frames for 3D dSTORM . Acquired data were processed using the ImageJ plug - in Thun - derSTORM ( Ovesny et al . , 2014 ) . The parameters used in the pro - cessing are listed in Table 1 . Lateral drift was corrected using the ThunderSTORM correlation algorithm , and pixels displaying uncer - tainty ( precision ) > 60 nm were filtered out before reconstruction to normalized Gaussian images with 10 - nm pixel size . Regions of inter - est ( ROIs ) were selected , and the number of pixels ( n ) within the ROI and the area ( A , nm 2 ) of the ROI were calculated . The Nyquist reso - lution ( r ) of the ROI was calculated as r = n A 2 1 / . The precision for each pixel within the ROI was plotted on the frequency distribution graph with 30 bins . To carry out dual - channel alignment , at least three fiducial gold nanoparticles fluorescing at both corresponding green and red wavelengths were used for calibration . The lateral ( X and Y ) dis - tances for the same particles at the two wavelengths were measured by ImageJ , and the reconstructed image was adjusted accordingly . Before 3D dSTORM processing , a cylindrical lens calibration was performed . Fiducial gold nanoparticles were plated on glass - bot - tom MatTek dishes and imaged with 3D dSTORM conditions with a Z stage step of 10 nm and 4000 - nm Z - range limit . The image series was analyzed by Thunderstorm 3D calibration using the parameters listed in Table 2 . The calibration files were saved for 3D analysis . The 3D dSTORM processing was carried out using ThunderSTORM with parameters listed in Table 3 . The processed data were drift cor - rected and filtered as described for 2D dSTORM and rendered into normalized Gaussian images with 40 Z - slices of 25 nm thickness . Single - slice images were presented . To validate the image processing , the data collected were recon - structed into normalized Gaussian images with 200 - nm pixel size us - ing ThunderSTORM as described . The images were then convolved by a Gaussian blur filter with the mean point spread function ( PSF ) . Colocalization was determined by ImageJ . Histogram images of both channels with 10 - nm pixel size were generated respectively and then aligned as described . The pixels from each image were converted to 0 ( no pixel intensity ) or 1 ( pixel intensity from 1 to 255 ) . Colocalization was defined as a pixel with values of 1 in each chan - nel . Total two - channel represents the number of pixels , and total colocalized is the number of those pixels that have values of 1 in each channel . Degree of colocalization was determined by the ratio of total colocalized to total in two channels . Histograms representing the calculated uncertainty for each channel were plotted on frequency distribution graphs with 30 bins , and the mode of the plotted curve was calculated as the precision for the image . Pulse - chase recycling assay HeLa cells grown on coverslips were incubated with anti – CD59 / β 1 - integrin antibody for 30 min at 37°C ( pulse ) . The surface - bound and Three orientation angles of the excitation grid were acquired for each Z - plane , with Z spacing of 110 nm between planes . SIM processing was performed with the SIM module of the Zen BLACK software ( Carl Zeiss ) . The processed SIM images were then exported in TIF format . Selected cell regions were cropped in ImageJ , rendered into a 3D reconstruction with a 180 - frame rotation series along the Y - axis of the processed SIM images , and exported as AVI videos . Pixel size ( nm ) 200 Photoelectron per A / D count 7 . 0 Base level ( A / D count ) 100 . 0 EM gain 250 . 0 Filter Wavelet filter ( B - spline ) B - spline order 3 B - spline scale 2 . 0 Approximate localization of molecules Method Local maximum Peak intensity threshold Std ( Wave . F1 ) Connectivity Eight - neighborhood Subpixel localization of molecules Method PSF : integrated Gaussian Fitting radius ( pixels ) 3 Fitting method Least squares Initial sigma ( pixels ) 1 . 6 TABLE 1 : Parameters used in the ThunderSTORM analysis . Pixel size ( nm ) 320 Photoelectron per A / D count 7 . 0 Base level ( A / D count ) 100 . 0 EM gain 250 . 0 Filter Wavelet filter ( B - spline ) B - spline order 3 B - spline scale 2 . 0 Approximate localization of Molecules Method Local maximum Peak intensity threshold 2 * Std ( Wave . F1 ) Connectivity Eight - neighborhood Subpixel localization of molecules Method Elliptic Gaussian with angle Fitting radius ( pixels ) 3 Fitting method Least squares Initial sigma ( pixels ) 1 . 6 3D defocus model ThunderSTORM Z stage step ( nm ) 10 . 0 Z - range limit ( nm ) 4000 . 0 TABLE 2 : Parameters used in the 3D dSTORM calibration . Volume 27 January 1 , 2016 Segregation at the recycling compartment | 125 REFERENCES Antonescu CN , Aguet F , Danuser G , Schmid SL ( 2011 ) . Phosphatidylinositol - ( 4 , 5 ) - bisphosphate regulates clathrin - coated pit initiation , stabilization , and size . Mol Biol Cell 22 , 2588 – 2600 . Cai B , Caplan S , Naslavsky N ( 2012 ) . cPLA2alpha and EHD1 interact and regulate the vesiculation of cholesterol - rich GPI - anchored protein - con - taining endosomes . Mol Biol Cell 23 , 1874 – 1888 . Cai B , Katafiasz D , Horejsi V , Naslavsky N ( 2011 ) . Pre - sorting endosomal transport of the GPI - anchored protein , CD59 , is regulated by EHD1 . Traffic 12 , 102 – 120 . Cai B , Xie S , Liu F , Simone LC , Caplan S , Qin X , Naslavsky N ( 2014 ) . Rapid degradation of the complement regulator , CD59 , by a novel inhibitor . J Biol Chem 289 , 12109 – 12125 . Caplan S , Naslavsky N , Hartnell LM , Lodge R , Polishchuk RS , Donaldson JG , Bonifacino JS ( 2002 ) . A tubular EHD1 - containing compartment involved in the recycling of major histocompatibility complex class I molecules to the plasma membrane . EMBO J 21 , 2557 – 2567 . Caswell P , Norman J ( 2008 ) . Endocytic transport of integrins during cell migration and invasion . Trends Cell Biol 18 , 257 – 263 . Chi RJ , Harrison MS , Burd CG ( 2015 ) . Biogenesis of endosome - derived transport carriers . Cell Mol Life Sci 72 , 3441 – 3455 . Choudhury A , Sharma DK , Marks DL , Pagano RE ( 2004 ) . Elevated endo - somal cholesterol levels in Niemann - Pick cells inhibit rab4 and perturb membrane recycling . Mol Biol Cell 15 , 4500 – 4511 . Dai J , Li J , Bos E , Porcionatto M , Premont RT , Bourgoin S , Peters PJ , Hsu VW ( 2004 ) . ACAP1 promotes endocytic recycling by recognizing recy - cling sorting signals . Dev Cell 7 , 771 – 776 . Daro E , van der Sluijs P , Galli T , Mellman I ( 1996 ) . Rab4 and cellubrevin de - fine different early endosome populations on the pathway of transferrin receptor recycling . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93 , 9559 – 9564 . Daumke O , Lundmark R , Vallis Y , Martens S , Butler PJ , McMahon HT ( 2007 ) . Architectural and mechanistic insights into an EHD ATPase involved in membrane remodelling . Nature 449 , 923 – 927 . Donaldson JG , Porat - Shliom N , Cohen LA ( 2009 ) . Clathrin - independent endocytosis : a unique platform for cell signaling and PM remodeling . Cell Signal 21 , 1 – 6 . Flesch FM , Voorhout WF , Colenbrander B , van Golde LM , Gadella BM ( 1998 ) . Use of lectins to characterize plasma membrane preparations from boar spermatozoa : a novel technique for monitoring membrane purity and quantity . Biol Reprod 59 , 1530 – 1539 . Giridharan SS , Cai B , Vitale N , Naslavsky N , Caplan S ( 2013 ) . Cooperation of MICAL - L1 , syndapin2 , and phosphatidic acid in tubular recycling endosome biogenesis . Mol Biol Cell 24 , S1 – S151776 – 1790 . Grant BD , Donaldson JG ( 2009 ) . Pathways and mechanisms of endocytic recycling . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 10 , 597 – 608 . Hales CM , Vaerman JP , Goldenring JR ( 2002 ) . Rab11 family interacting protein 2 associates with Myosin Vb and regulates plasma membrane recycling . J Biol Chem 277 , 50415 – 50421 . Hattula K , Furuhjelm J , Tikkanen J , Tanhuanpaa K , Laakkonen P , Peranen J ( 2006 ) . Characterization of the Rab8 - specific membrane traffic route linked to protrusion formation . J Cell Sci 119 , 4866 – 4877 . Hehnly H , Chen CT , Powers CM , Liu HL , Doxsey S ( 2012 ) . The centrosome regulates the Rab11 - dependent recycling endosome pathway at ap - pendages of the mother centriole . Curr Biol 22 , 1944 – 1950 . Hopkins CR ( 1983 ) . Intracellular routing of transferrin and transferrin recep - tors in epidermoid carcinoma A431 cells . Cell 35 , 321 – 330 . Jovic M , Naslavsky N , Rapaport D , Horowitz M , Caplan S ( 2007 ) . EHD1 regulates beta1 integrin endosomal transport : effects on focal adhe - sions , cell spreading and migration . J Cell Sci 120 , 802 – 814 . noninternalized antibody was removed by a 1 - min acid strip ( 0 . 5 M NaCl , 0 . 5 % acetic acid , pH 3 . 0 ) . The cells were then incubated in complete medium for the indicated times at 37°C ( chase ) and then washed three times in PBS before fixation . An additional coverslip was treated with only 30 - min pulse and acid strip to determine the initial level of antibody on the cell surface . Both coverslips were stained with Alexa 568 goat anti - mouse antibody in the absence of detergent for 1 h at room temperature . To determine the total CD59 / β 1 - integrin level , another coverslip was fixed and stained with anti – CD59 / β 1 - integrin antibody and then Alexa 568 anti - mouse antibody in saponin - containing staining buffer . All coverslips were subjected to confocal microscopy and ImageJ analysis . The rate of CD59 / β 1 - integrin recycling was presented as the percentage of total CD59 / β 1 - integrin recycled to the PM . For TfR recycling , HeLa cells were grown on 100 - mm dishes , re - suspended with cell stripper ( Mediatech , Corning , NY ) , and then washed with PBS . The cells were first pulsed with Alexa 633 transfer - rin for 1 h at 37°C ( pulse ) , followed by washes with PBS . Cells were then divided into two groups . One ( group A ) was fixed directly with 4 % ( vol / vol ) paraformaldehyde in PBS for 10 min , and the other ( group B ) was washed three times and incubated in fresh medium for 30 min ( chase ) before fixation . The amount of transferrin internal - ized after the pulse ( A ) , as well as that remaining in the cells after the chase ( B ) , was measured by flow cytometry . The recycling rate of TfR is presented as the percentage of internalized transferrin remaining in the cell after a 30 - min chase , which was calculated as B / A . For both measurements , the values from three independent experi - ments were normalized . Tubular endosome regrowth assay HeLa cells were incubated with 100 nM ( wt / vol ) CAY inhibitor cock - tail ( CAY10593 plus CAY10594 ) for 30 min at 37°C , and the inhibi - tor was then washed away with complete medium . The cells were incubated in fresh medium for 20 min or 1 h before fixation with 4 % ( vol / vol ) paraformaldehyde . The coverslips were stained for MICAL - L1 to observe the loss and regrowth of TREs by confocal microscopy . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This research is supported by National Institutes of Health Grants R01GM087455 and R01GM074876 . Support for the UNMC Advanced Microscopy Core Facility was provided by the Nebraska Research Initiative , a Fred and Pamela Buffett Cancer Center Support Grant ( P30CA036727 ) , and an Institutional Development Award from the National Institute of General Med - ical Sciences of the National Institutes of Health ( P30GM106397 ) . The Zeiss Elyra PS . 1 superresolution microscope that we used is a National Institutes of Health Shared Instrumentation Grant – funded instrument . Pixel size ( nm ) 320 Photoelectron per A / D count 7 . 0 Base level ( A / D count ) 100 . 0 EM gain 250 . 0 Filter Wavelet filter ( B - spline ) B - spline order 3 B - spline scale 2 . 0 Approximate localization of molecules Method Local maximum Peak intensity threshold 2 * Std ( Wave . F1 ) Connectivity Eight - neighborhood Subpixel localization of molecules Method PSF : elliptical Gaussian ( 3D astigmatism ) Fitting radius ( pixels ) 3 Fitting method Least squares Initial sigma ( pixels ) 1 . 6 TABLE 3 : Parameters used in the 3D dSTORM analysis . 126 | S . Xie et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell Rahajeng J , Giridharan SS , Naslavsky N , Caplan S ( 2010 ) . Collapsin response mediator protein - 2 ( Crmp2 ) regulates trafficking by linking endocytic regulatory proteins to dynein motors . J Biol Chem 285 , 31918 – 31922 . Reinecke JB , Katafiasz D , Naslavsky N , Caplan S ( 2015 ) . Novel functions for the endocytic regulatory proteins MICAL - L1 and EHD1 in mitosis . Traffic 16 , 48 – 67 . Ren M , Xu G , Zeng J , De Lemos - Chiarandini C , Adesnik M , Sabatini DD ( 1998 ) . Hydrolysis of GTP on rab11 is required for the direct delivery of transferrin from the pericentriolar recycling compartment to the cell surface but not from sorting endosomes . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95 , 6187 – 6192 . Sandvig K , Torgersen ML , Raa HA , van Deurs B ( 2008 ) . Clathrin - indepen - dent endocytosis : from nonexisting to an extreme degree of complexity . Histochem Cell Biol 129 , 267 – 276 . Sharma M , Giridharan SS , Rahajeng J , Naslavsky N , Caplan S ( 2009 ) . MICAL - L1 links EHD1 to tubular recycling endosomes and regulates receptor recycling . Mol Biol Cell 20 , 5181 – 5194 . Skop AR , Bergmann D , Mohler WA , White JG ( 2001 ) . Completion of cytoki - nesis in C . elegans requires a brefeldin A - sensitive membrane accumula - tion at the cleavage furrow apex . Curr Biol 11 , 735 – 746 . Sonnichsen B , De Renzis S , Nielsen E , Rietdorf J , Zerial M ( 2000 ) . Distinct membrane domains on endosomes in the recycling pathway visual - ized by multicolor imaging of Rab4 , Rab5 , and Rab11 . J Cell Biol 149 , 901 – 914 . van der Sluijs P , Hull M , Webster P , Male P , Goud B , Mellman I ( 1992 ) . The small GTP - binding protein rab4 controls an early sorting event on the endocytic pathway . Cell 70 , 729 – 740 . Wang E , Brown PS , Aroeti B , Chapin SJ , Mostov KE , Dunn KW ( 2000 ) . Api - cal and basolateral endocytic pathways of MDCK cells meet in acidic common endosomes distinct from a nearly - neutral apical recycling endosome . Traffic 1 , 480 – 493 . Weigert R , Yeung AC , Li J , Donaldson JG ( 2004 ) . Rab22a regulates the recycling of membrane proteins internalized independently of clathrin . Mol Biol Cell 15 , 3758 – 3770 . Xie S , Naslavsky N , Caplan S ( 2014 ) . Diacylglycerol kinase alpha regulates tubular recycling endosome biogenesis and major histocompatibility complex class I recycling . J Biol Chem 289 , 31914 – 26 . Yamashiro DJ , Tycko B , Fluss SR , Maxfield FR ( 1984 ) . Segregation of trans - ferrin to a mildly acidic ( pH 6 . 5 ) para - Golgi compartment in the recycling pathway . Cell 37 , 789 – 800 . Jovic M , Sharma M , Rahajeng J , Caplan S ( 2010 ) . The early endosome : a busy sorting station for proteins at the crossroads . Histol Histopathol 25 , 99 – 112 . Kirchhausen T , Owen D , Harrison SC ( 2014 ) . Molecular structure , function , and dynamics of clathrin - mediated membrane traffic . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 6 , a016725 . Lapierre LA , Kumar R , Hales CM , Navarre J , Bhartur SG , Burnette JO , Provance DW Jr , Mercer JA , Bahler M , Goldenring JR ( 2001 ) . Myosin vb is associated with plasma membrane recycling systems . Mol Biol Cell 12 , 1843 – 1857 . Magadan JG , Barbieri MA , Mesa R , Stahl PD , Mayorga LS ( 2006 ) . Rab22a regulates the sorting of transferrin to recycling endosomes . Mol Cell Biol 26 , 2595 – 2614 . Maldonado - Baez L , Williamson C , Donaldson JG ( 2013 ) . Clathrin - indepen - dent endocytosis : a cargo - centric view . Exp Cell Res 319 , 2759 – 2769 . Marsh EW , Leopold PL , Jones NL , Maxfield FR ( 1995 ) . Oligomerized transferrin receptors are selectively retained by a lumenal sorting signal in a long - lived endocytic recycling compartment . J Cell Biol 129 , 1509 – 1522 . Maxfield FR , McGraw TE ( 2004 ) . Endocytic recycling . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 5 , 121 – 132 . Mayor S , Parton RG , Donaldson JG ( 2014 ) . Clathrin - independent pathways of endocytosis . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 6 , a016758 . Mayor S , Presley JF , Maxfield FR ( 1993 ) . Sorting of membrane components from endosomes and subsequent recycling to the cell surface occurs by a bulk flow process . J Cell Biol 121 , 1257 – 1269 . Montagnac G , Echard A , Chavrier P ( 2008 ) . Endocytic traffic in animal cell cytokinesis . Curr Opin Cell Biol 20 , 454 – 461 . Naslavsky N , Caplan S ( 2011 ) . EHD proteins : key conductors of endocytic transport . Trends Cell Biol 21 , 122 – 131 . Naslavsky N , Weigert R , Donaldson JG ( 2003 ) . Convergence of non - clathrin - and clathrin - derived endosomes involves Arf6 inactivation and changes in phosphoinositides . Mol Biol Cell 14 , 417 – 431 . Ovesny M , Krizek P , Borkovec J , Svindrych Z , Hagen GM ( 2014 ) . Thunder - STORM : a comprehensive ImageJ plug - in for PALM and STORM data analysis and super - resolution imaging . Bioinformatics 30 , 2389 – 2390 . Powelka AM , Sun J , Li J , Gao M , Shaw LM , Sonnenberg A , Hsu VW ( 2004 ) . Stimulation - dependent recycling of integrin beta1 regulated by ARF6 and Rab11 . Traffic 5 , 20 – 36 . Radhakrishna H , Donaldson JG ( 1997 ) . ADP - ribosylation factor 6 regulates a novel plasma membrane recycling pathway . J Cell Biol 139 , 49 – 61 .