How Ideas make it through to Designs : Process and Practice Janet C Read , Daniel Fitton , Gavin Sim , Matt Horton University of Central Lancashire Preston , PR1 2HE , UK jcread { dbfitton , grsim , mplhorton } @ uclan . ac . uk ABSTRACT This paper describes a process called RAId ( Rapid Analysis of design Ideas ) , which assists , in the ethical and inclusive analysis of large sets of design data . It is described against an activity with 120 teenagers working in small groups contributing ideas for the design of an interactive water - drinking bottle . Four investigators systematically examined fifty designs from the teenagers using six different lenses – two concerned with the purpose of the designed technology ( hydration and re - use ) , two with its desirability ( aesthetics and cool ) and two with the product concept ( business and innovation ) . The investigators used these lenses to focus their examination . Each proposed a candidate solution based on what they had seen from the teen designs . The resulting concepts are examined against the teenagers’ ideas that inspired them with attention being paid to when , and how often , ideas were put in mind . This analysis revealed three different idea types , core , add - ons and novel , each of which needed different treatment to bring it to fruition . Author Keywords Ideation ; teenagers ; ethics ; design ; participatory design . ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous . INTRODUCTION Involving potential end users of technologies in design is a common theme in HCI . Typically such involvement is couched within the philosophy of Participatory Design ( PD ) where end users actively engage with designers and developers to collaboratively explore future design solutions [ 7 ] . Those working with children in HCI have adopted this practice in order to better understand design for children and young people . When used with children , PD practices are typically used to gather insights , creative and functional , that can be used in product design . Participatory design practices with school aged children take many forms and the form is often dictated by the elements of the problem and the possibilities of the solution space in terms of the nature of the intended product development , the timescale of the project , and the ease and constraints around access to children . A range of models exist for engaging with children in participatory ways including having small teams working over several weeks outside of a school curriculum ( small numbers , lengthy exposure ) , holding day - long events with groups during holiday periods ( medium numbers , medium length of exposure ) , and tightly constrained sessions with large numbers of children facilitated around school based activities and squeezed into a timetabled day ( large numbers , short exposure ) . This latter approach could be described as being a significantly reduced form of PD , being at the ‘fast and furious’ end of participation in design as it provides a rapid delivery of many design ideas . These ideas may typically be under polished and from a large group of children ; there will seldom be time for such children to develop ideas around design thinking or for children to come to a design consensus . The HCI community has written at length on the engagement of children in PD but has so far paid only scant attention to the examination of how best to analyse or interpret designs that children contribute at this ‘fast and furious’ end of design . The cornerstone of PD is the democratic inclusion of ideas and the empowerment of contributors . This implies a ‘moral’ need for the HCI community to examine how , with reduced participatory design activities , the facilitators or developers actions after the design activity ensure reasonable representation of , or at least adequate reference to , the children’s ideas [ 2 ] . This paper contributes to this space with a study that examines , against a backdrop of teenagers delivering designs in a ‘fast and furious’ way to an interactive sustainability product , how four investigators brought ideas through from the designs of over a hundred teenagers . The Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . NordiCHI ' 16 , October 23 - 27 , 2016 , Gothenburg , Sweden © 2016 ACM . ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 4763 - 1 / 16 / 10… $ 15 . 00 DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2971485 . 2971560 paper outlines the research underpinning the work and then describes the design project . An investigation process ( RAId – Rapid Analysis of Ideas ) , designed to assist the investigators in examining a large set of design sketches , is described and then applied on the sketched designs from the teenagers’ work . The paper unpicks how the RAId process facilitated investigation and how different design components found their way through to the end of the examination where design concepts were created . The paper then draws together the main findings from the work where a key observation is on how different sorts of ideas each made their way differently through the analysis stage . RELATED WORK Participatory Design , Participation in Design , and Children Participatory Design ( PD ) has been used to inform the design of interactive technologies for a considerable length of time . The term is a broad descriptor that covers a range of approaches that typically have ‘end - users’ engaging with software development teams to specify and ideate the products that they will eventually come to use . PD has been well used in HCI [ 1 ] , [ 19 ] , [ 10 ] . Participatory Design can be aligned to two traditions – one being the technological rationalization tradition which came out of the USA and spawned initiatives like Joint Application Design ( JAD ) , and the other from the socio - technical traditions around labour autonomy and socialist thinking ; this tradition coming from Europe with the Scandinavian countries being especially prevalent . Key contributions to this space include the socio - technical work of Enid Mumford , [ 20 ] , and the work deriving from the Norwegian work experiments [ 26 ] . The move towards Participatory Design with children was not an obvious one to take . Participatory Design with adults grew from work place innovation and was aimed in many instances at empowering users to infill to design projects in order to improve user acceptance and thus create effective work places . Moves towards some semblance of PD with children have been rather looser than what is commonly considered PD with adults and have included cooperative working with children in design sessions as promoted in the late 1990s with influential work by Scaife et al . [ 25 ] and then with a more iterative approach being proposed by Druin et al . [ 6 ] . The main ‘selling point’ for children’s participation in design processes is that children are well placed to ‘inform’ designers as to their needs and likes . This is especially useful given that designers are typically adults and so less able to understand child design requirements . Researchers in Child Computer Interaction ( CCI ) have taken different approaches when considering how to enable children to participate in design . Some studies have focused on designing with a small team of children who work over an extended time with a team of adults – this is the most common approach used at the research lab at Maryland where Druin et al . [ 6 ] pioneered a Co - Design practice in which children develop skills as designers in a collaborative incremental process that leads ideas into a single design brief [ 28 ] . More often , however , PD studies are described as having taken place in schools or museums where the participating children typically only attend for one or two sessions and where they are given little chance to develop the same level of collaborative design skills as those engaged in Co - Design teams [ 14 ] , [ 24 ] , [ 16 ] . This reduced practice , where designers design just for a single day for a day long or even a much shorter , session can engage large numbers of children in short bursts . The aim in such cases is to end up with many ideas that can then be examined by a design team for trends – as employed in idea concept generation [ 12 ] . A secondary aim is to get a good representation of ideas – this is one criticism of the small team Co - Design practices where the economics and the practicalities for children to come together over several weeks out of school can limit diversity of input . This ‘fast and furious’ or ‘reduced PD’ is some distance from traditional PD ; indeed it could be maybe better referred to as a ‘ crowdsourcing of ideas’ . The outputs from such events are entirely different than those from Co - Design where children in an intergenerational team come together on many occasions to develop a single design concept . Studies of PD practice with children tend to focus on a ) the philosophical arguments around the involvement of children in the practice , b ) on the examination of methods to facilitate children’s involvement , and c ) on the quality of the products and ideas that are generated . Philosophical debate centres on the role of the children and on the extent to which they can meaningfully participate in design activities [ 9 ] . These roles have been modelled by Druin who layered children’s’ roles as participants in HCI work onto an onion model [ 5 ] , and by Read et . al . who offered a model showing the different involvement of children along a power imbalance continuum ranging from facilitated , through balanced and then to informant . This continuum was useful to separate out the different foci used in different PD studies [ 23 ] . The ethics of children’s participation in participatory style design activities has been questioned especially in regard to the time they put in to the process and also in regards to whether or not they are given full information about their involvement [ 22 ] , [ 8 ] . Research on methods for enabling children to participate in design has mainly focused on processes and tools for the engagement of children during the designing activity . Outcomes here have included schemas proposed to structure design sessions as well as activities developed to improve the design process [ 3 ] , [ 4 ] , [ 25 ] . Methods to generate ideas , in such workshops have required innovations in approaches , for example in [ 12 ] where young adults designed scenarios around a fictional persona to envisage what data this person might interact with . The CCI community has also thought to study the usefulness of participatory design practices in terms of their efficiency and effectiveness for gathering ideas and inspirations from children and the extent to which such ideas can then be useful to developers . Studies have looked at the idea generation process [ 18 ] and on how to engage with special user groups [ 27 ] , [ 9 ] . User groups that have been shown to be able to participate in design activities include very young children [ 15 ] as well as teenagers [ 17 ] . Accounting for Participation As outlined in the introduction , studies that concern themselves with the way design ideas and design sketches are treated post the design activity are relatively rare . When reading design papers , there is often a veiled mystery as to what happens to the design ideas between them being articulated and the intended product or system being specified or even made . In many academic papers it is common to read that the designs from the users were studied and used to ‘ inform ’ the designs . There is often very little detail given about that ‘ informing ’ process . Whilst this is not necessarily a bad thing , after all designers take inspiration from many sources and design is not reducible to a systematic process , it does raise some questions about the accountability of the participation process especially when this process involves children . Accountability of eventual design decisions may not be the first concern in the minds of a designer when he or she is collecting and seeking ideas from a group of adult informants but it is surely good practice to consider accountability and traceability in the context of children’s participation in design as these individuals come to the design event against a narrative typically framed around the need for their ideas for great product design . When adults participate in traditional PD practices at work they are thinking in work time and doing work things . When children and young people come to similar events they are often in leisure time , they are sometimes almost unable to consent as they are within a school or at some sort of workshop and they are typically quite remotely associated with any eventual product ; it being unlikely to be being designed to make their specific lives easier as was the model in the early PD work based processes . Participation and Representation The 2004 ‘Mixing Ideas’ paper [ 11 ] by Guha et . al . was one of the first papers in Child Computer Interaction ( CCI ) to broach the subject of what happens to design ideas that children have contributed . This paper described how the authors adapted Co - Design for use in a single session . In this instance they began with a crowd sourcing of ideas but then aimed to apply a Co - Design style process to bring the session towards a single design concept . The central theme of this paper was about the children wanting to understand how their ideas were included in the emerging design . That the children asked this is unsurprising to anyone who has worked in design ideation with children , that so few studies have considered this is much more of a surprise given the ‘ vulnerability of children to not fully understand’ , when consenting to such activities . Guha et . al . proposed a method by which ideas were mixed up by adults , in small groups , and then mixed again and again until only one ‘big idea’ remained . The process took place in a consensus discussion with the participating children . In the 2014 IDC paper by Read et al . [ 21 ] the authors sought to ensure that all the ideas from a large cohort in a crowdsourcing of ideas style design event were examined . The process used what the researchers considered to be the ‘best’ ideas from each of a large set of sketches from children and then filtered these ‘winning’ ideas through a process that ensured fair representation across children’s ideas throughout . In critiquing the work , the authors remarked that this process lead to relatively dull ideas making it onto the final list and they suggested that whilst the examination process had shown rigour and was able to evidence that all the design sketches had been looked at , and that at least some ideas from all of the clusters of children had been represented , the end results were not especially inspirational . The study described in this current paper seeks to bring together the evolutionary design thinking aimed for by Guha et . al . [ 11 ] with the systematic design consideration approach proposed in our earlier work [ 21 ] , in a new idea examination process for crowdsourced style design practice . The study described here retrospectively studies what is eventually designed , using the new process ( RAId ) , against what has been seen . This is enabled in the RAId process by systemizing the inspection of children’s designs but not by systemizing what makes it through to the design concept . In so doing , the paper sheds new light on the evolution of ideas in participatory design spaces . THE INTERACTIVE BOTTLE FOR LIFE PROJECT The Bottle for Life project was aiming to design an interactive ‘Bottle for Life’ that would be a refillable Internet of Things style water / drink bottle that would replace throwaway plastic drink containers . The intended consumers for this product were teenagers of high school age ( 11 – 16 ) and thus the project needed to consider how such a product would be made attractive for this age group . The intention was to build such a product and so ideas had to be ‘realisable’ . To inform the design of the product , a set of design sessions were initiated in order to gather insights and ideas from a group of school age teenagers . The sessions took place during a science event in which 120 teenagers aged 13 to 14 participated . The teenagers came to each design session in small groups of between 2 and 4 with each of these small groups’ members collaborating to develop a single design concept . Each session had several such groups in it – and these groups were from the same schools , hence the room , at any one time , had several small groups of pupils all from a single school . In the next session , the teenagers were typically from a different school . Each design session took around 45 minutes during which design concepts were captured on pre - printed A4 sheets of paper that had an image of a bottle drawn on both sides with the words ‘Front’ and “Back’ already showing . Each session was managed in exactly the same way . Firstly the design activity was introduced and motivated by a short talk to the pupils outlining the environmental cost of plastic bottles ( which introduced the requirement that the bottle be re - usable / green ) and the personal need for keeping hydrated ( which introduced the requirement that the bottle would interactively encourage hydration ) . The pupils were then informed about developments in Nano Technology and the Internet of Things to highlight the possibilities for making an interactive bottle . The pupils were then asked to design an interactive ‘Bottle for Life’ that would replace the ubiquitous plastic bottle as is commonly found in fridges in stores across the world . At the end of the design activity , the designs by the pupils were collected in . The designs from each session – from each individual school – were kept together – hitherto referred to as proximity groups . Designs were labelled with the proximity group ( 1 – 18 ) and the group number within that set ( 2 , 4 etc . ) so an individual design concept had a code of the type 18 / 4 ( proximity group 18 , design 4 ) . At the end of the Bottle for Life event 50 design concepts had been created ready for analysis with most of the designs being two sided . A typical design , as seen in figure 1 , had between ten and fifteen design features . Across the full set of design concepts the participating teenagers had between them specified something in the region of 700 design features . Principles for the Analysis of Participant Design Ideas In developing a method for analysis , the first requirement was to respect the teenagers’ effort by ensuring that all the designs were examined and considered . The investigators aimed to be able to look at all the contributed ideas , in as fair a way as possible taking account of all the ideas . Given the size of the corpus of design features ( at least 700 ) , the RAId ( Rapid Analysis of Ideas ) process was developed to facilitate the team to work through the ideas . Building on our own earlier work [ 21 ] , as well as work on ethical research with children [ 22 ] , [ 13 ] , an approach was designed that was intended to meet the needs outlined above . A set of ( Analysis of Participant Design Ideas – APDI ) principles were derived , the first four being concerned with the ethical aspects of asking teenagers ( and children ) to contribute design ideas to research and design projects and the fifth seeking to address criticisms of the work in [ 21 ] , where thinking was not facilitated . • APDI principle 1 . Ensure general representation ( by being sure that all the designs could be looked at and looked at thoroughly ) Figure 1 . Design made during the event . • APDI principle 2 . Ensure useable results ( by making sure a mixture of functional and innovative ideas was captured ) • APDI principle 3 . Remain manageable ( by keeping the process of investigation reasonably compact and not too onerous ) . • APDI principle 4 . Reduce investigator fatigue and bias ( by not requiring every investigator to look for everything in every design ) Seeking to free some space for design thinking into the process , the approach did not demand the religious tracking and an algorithmic analysis of ideas ( as described in [ 21 ] ) , but rather sought to encourage investigators to notice ideas and allow them to incubate towards a designer constructed design concept fuelled by the teenagers’ ideas and imagination . This highlighted a fifth principle : • APDI principle 5 . Ensure opportunities for design thinking The RAId process , aiming to ensure that the teenagers’ designs were treated with respect , is described in the following sections within the context of the Bottle for Life study . RAId - Rapid Analysis of ( Design ) Ideas RAId progresses in three phases ( shown in Figure 2 ) with the first phase taking place directly after the design session where the developer / investigator team decide what it is they are seeking to find in the designs . This phase develops a set of constructs and a scoring mechanism that is then used in the second phase where the designs are analysed . This phase 2 analysis ensures that all the designs are looked at and also identifies some ‘winning’ designs chosen for their interest to the investigators . In phase 3 , having gone through the analysis process , the investigating team members each create design concepts . A further phase could be imagined beyond this stage as competing ideas evolve into a product specification – this phase is not considered in this paper . Phase 1 – Constructs and Scoring When looking at sketched images with many annotations it is very easy to fail to see certain aspects and to only focus on some of the design features . In seeking an effective way to keep investigators alert when parsing many similar drawings , RAId used lenses for inquiry with the aim being to decide what the investigators should ‘look for’ when perusing the design set . This met the requirements of the RAId principles 1 , 2 , 3 and 4 . Figure 2 . The RAId process showing the different phases . The approach taken was to define a small group of constructs that could ‘cover’ the ideas in the designs and could also ‘ capture’ the essence of the design space . The constructs that were chosen in this instance were : • The encouragement of Re - use ( R ) and Hydration ( H ) – both being part of the specification of the product as was given to the teenage designers • Teen friendly Aesthetics ( A ) and evidence of Cool ( C ) design - both being considered to be essential elements for the target community of potential users of a subsequent product • Innovation ( I ) and Business ( B ) – being within the context of the eventual product being interactive , novel , and being economically viable . These six constructs were applied to a small sample of design concepts from the set under investigation ( not from the 50 studied here ) to confirm the extent to which they covered the design space , the ease with which each construct could be applied to the designs and the ability to define each construct with some rigour . It is not the intention of this paper to dictate that these are useful constructs for any analysis of design sketches – they were chosen specifically for this context to create different lenses through which designs could be considered . Having decided on a set of constructs for the study , the four investigators came together to ensure a shared meaning of the constructs and to develop a simple rating scale that could be used with the constructs . For the purposes of scoring , a scale from 1 – 5 with the following descriptors was described : 1 . Negligible or nothing 2 . Some – a bit but not much 3 . A reasonable / average amount 4 . Fair amount – more than average 5 . Loads and loads It is important to state that there was not a desire to ‘rate the ideas’ per se . The rating scales were solely used to assist the investigators in focusing and thinking about the constructs that they were considering with the main purpose of keeping a good general focus on each design . Phase 2 – Analysis of Designs For the purpose of analysis , the 50 designs were gathered into five clusters ( buckets ) of ten such that no single bucket ( labelled here as A , B , C , D , E ) had more than two representative designs from one proximity group ( this was not essential to the process but helped to assist in ensuring variety for the inspecting investigators ) . It could be perhaps more simply described as the designs were shuffled before allocating to five groups of ten so no single group had a set of designs coming only from a single school . An analysis document was prepared for each investigator made up of the scoring rubric ( 1 to 5 ) , some simple instructions and five grids ( seen in Figure 3 ) , one for each bucket of ideas . The instructions included a description ( that the four had agreed on as being meaningful ) for each of the six constructs that were being used as lenses . The five grids , ( one is shown in Figure 3 ) , were each used to score each design concept against two of the six constructs . Each of the four investigators began with a different construct and each began with a different bucket of designs but the order through both the designs and the constructs remained the same for all four . As an example – investigator 1 looked at the designs in the order A , B , C , D , E and began with Aesthetics then Cool , Re - use , Hydration , Innovation and Business whereas investigator 3 looked at the designs in the order C , D , E , A , B and started with the construct Innovation moving then through Business , Aesthetics , Cool , Re - use , and Hydration . This improved the validity of the process by ensuring that different designs were among the first to be seen by different investigators and also so that there was a similar distribution of constructs . This could not provide a fully counterbalanced study but did eliminate some bias . The analysis required each investigator to study each design concept through two lenses and each lens was applied twice in a row such that each bucket after the first one required the investigator to think with one new construct and one familiar one . This was intended to make the task of switching focus easier , was designed to ensure that each bundle of designs was ‘ranked’ against each construct , and was intended to add variety . An example of a completed analysis page is shown in Figure 3 where the code on the left hand side refers to an individual design concept and the two headings on the top refer to the constructs being considered . This way of looking at the designs met the requirements of the RAId principles 1 , 3 and 4 , ensuring coverage ( principle 1 ) , keeping the activity manageable ( principle 3 ) and limiting fatigue ( principle 4 ) . Figure 3 . Image of completed sheet . Each investigator recorded a score from 1 – 5 for each construct against each design and also wrote a line to say why that score was given . At the end of each bucket of designs , each investigator was asked to nominate and explain a ‘winning design’ from that bucket . This was written on the foot of the page with an explanation . It is important to note here that the ‘winning’ design idea was part of a process to ensure that the investigators looked at the designs – it was NOT about a design idea really being touted as a winner per se . Phase 3 – Create Integrated Design Concepts Once investigators had completed the analysis , i . e . seen all 50 designs , and used different constructs they were each given a blank piece of paper on which to design their own ‘Bottle for Life’ . This is where the RAId process integrated principle 5 , which was to ensure some design thinking still gets into the process . These designs were to be annotated where necessary to ensure understandability and were also required to fit the design brief as given to the teenagers . Two of the integrated design concepts are presented in Figure 4 . The four designs from the investigators were quite different with each having a different focus . This process of the analysis of teenagers’ ideas took place in a quiet lab where the four investigators worked individually on a large table passing the design bundles from person to person as they were completed without discussion . The process took around 90 minutes . EVALUATING THE RAId PROCESS The evaluation of the RAId process is presented here in two sections . The first section is concerned with the extent to which the lenses used influenced the choices made by the investigators , the second section is concerned with the way ideas were carried through the analysis to the end point . Winning Scores and Winning Designs The aim of the RAId process was primarily to ensure that each design would be considered in a careful way whilst also facilitating a rapid analysis of ideas . Lenses were intended to facilitate investigation – it was hoped that this was not a blinker that would limit the vision of the investigators . In the event , it appeared that the constructs did not exert much influence on the specific designs on which they applied but they did exert influence across the design set . This can be evidenced in a study of the winning designs chosen by the investigators as they worked their way through the designs . As each investigator completed the analysis of a set of ten design concepts , the RAId documentation prompted him / her to select a ‘winner’ from that set . The 20 winning designs are detailed in table 1 which shows the total score given by the investigator , against the lens applied . For each of the winning designs for each choice for each investigator ( the maximum score here would be 10 – i . e . 5 for each of the two constructs examined ) and the rank of that design , amongst its peers , where a ranking of 1 = ( 2 ) means that the design was the top scoring from its selection of ten designs but shared that score with 1other ( joint equal top ) in the bucket . The column on the left of this table lists the 4 investigators . Numbers 12 / 2 and 8 / 4 ( for example ) are the codes that refer to design concepts . A B C D E 1 winner 8 / 4 19 / 4 7 / 4 1 / 2 6 / 6 rank 1 = ( 2 ) 1 = ( 2 ) 1 1 9 = ( 2 ) score 6 7 9 9 4 2 winner 11 / 4 19 / 4 17 / 6 1 / 2 14 / 4 rank 2 6 = ( 2 ) 2 = ( 3 ) 1 2 = ( 2 ) score 8 5 7 8 7 3 winner 8 / 4 15 / 4 17 / 6 18 / 6 4 / 2 rank 1 1 = ( 4 ) 1 = ( 2 ) 5 = ( 3 ) 1 = ( 2 ) score 7 5 8 6 8 4 winner 12 / 2 19 / 4 4 / 5 15 / 2 8 / 8 rank 1 = ( 2 ) 1 = ( 3 ) 4 3 = ( 3 ) 2 = ( 2 ) score 9 8 6 6 7 Table 1 . Ranking and total score for the twenty winning designs . Figure 4 . Integrated Design Concepts Created by Investigators . As an example , investigators 1 , 2 and 4 all selected design concept 19 / 4 as a winner – for investigator 1 this was scored 7 which was the joint highest score in that bucket , for investigator 2 this scored 5 which was quite low being 6th equal in the rank and investigator 4 score it 8 where it was equal top with two other designs . It can be seen from table 1 that in general these winning designs had high overall scores but out of the 20 winning designs only 11 choices were the top scoring in their ‘buckets’ . Given that the scores were allocated according to the two constructs under investigation , this demonstrates that the investigators were not simply applying the numbers to the designs to decide on winners and were quite possibly also thinking about the other – non - rated constructs , when looking across a set . It suggests that the constructs themselves did not limit the view of the investigator in identifying good ideas ; that is to say – ‘good ideas come through irrespective of what is being looked for’ . Carrying Ideas to the End - Integrated Idea Concepts To analyse how the ideas moved through to each investigator’s final integrated design idea , each of the four end designs was broken down into its salient features and a list made of these features . The four designs incorporated 45 design features in total with some being unique to only one design and others being found across two or more designs . As the RAId process systematically took each investigator through the full set of design ideas from the teenagers it was possible to identify exactly when and exactly how often any of the four investigators met a particular teen - delivered design idea . The design ideas that were found in the integrated design concepts of the four investigators were thus each mapped to the first and subsequent instances of them being encountered within the buckets that were investigated . The design ideas that were found in the integrated design concepts can be described against four categories . These were : • Ideas that many teenagers suggested and more than one investigator used ( CORE ) • Ideas that many teenagers suggested but only one investigator used ( ADD - ONS ) • Ideas suggested by only one teenager that one or more investigators used ( NOVEL ) • Ideas that came from outside the design space These first three idea types , which came from the teenagers , are unpicked in the following three sections . Core designs - making their way through regardless Table 2 lists the design ideas that were found in two or more of the four integrated design concepts ( InDeCs ) and that were also seen in multiple designs from the pupils . In this table the use of only the bucket letters for the ideas masks to a considerable extent the number of times these ideas surfaced but it does evidence clearly that these ideas came from many sources . Some ( like the interactive display used in 35 individual designs ) were evident in significant numbers of the designs . These CORE ideas , the ideas that were seen in many of the teenage designs , and that made their way into multiple designs at the end tended to be the ideas that either defined the functionality of the intended product – in this case the need for it to hydrate and be re - used , or that represented almost ‘obvious’ elements for the product design – things like an interactive screen , a filter , flavourings and phone integration . InDeCs Where seen filter 1 , 3 A , B , D , E flavours 1 , 2 , 4 A , B , C , D Hydration indicator 1 , 2 A , C , D , E Phone integration 1 , 2 , 3 A , B , D , E Temperature / cooling features 1 , 2 , 3 A , B , C , D , E Interactive display 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 A , B , C , D , E Name on the bottle 2 , 4 C , E Hydration sensing 1 , 2 A , C , E Rewards for re - use 2 , 4 B , C , D Table 2 . CORE designs . Add - Ons - Not so popular features need champions Add - ons , as shown in table 3 , are those elements that were seen in multiple versions of the teenagers’ designs yet were only incorporated in one of the four integrated design concepts . Examples include the use of the display to tell the time , the incorporation of solar panels for energy and the inclusion of a music player . InDeCs Where seen Solar panel 2 A , B , D Music system 2 A , C , D Toughened glass 3 A , B , D Motivational messages 4 A , C , E Charity icon 4 B . E Fizzy water feature 4 A , B Locates nearest water filler 4 D , E Time 4 A , C , D Table 3 . ADD - ONS - Ideas needing champions . It is interesting to note that these were almost exclusively secondary design ideas that were not core to the main idea . Because every investigator saw all the teenagers’ designs , these were presumably features that each of the four investigators had met and each had considered . That they did not end up in all the eventual integrated designs suggests that these ADD - ONS were chosen for their ‘specific appeal’ to the individual investigator . This process , of individuals as decision makers , is one of the areas that RAId aimed to capture . Novel - Unusual ideas linger The most interesting group of ideas is the group of those that only featured only once in the 50 design ideas ( and therefore 1 in 700 or thereabout when considering all the idea elements ) yet , these NOVEL ideas still made it to the integrated design ideas . Table 4 notes when , in terms of the timeline of investigation , each of the four investigators met these ideas ( 1 st , 2 nd , 3 rd or 4 th bucket ) . It is encouraging to observe that these highly unusual ideas ‘survive the onslaught’ of idea saturation and time and can be met at any time during a design investigation and should that idea resonate with the investigator then it will remain in mind . InDeCs Where and when seen Inside self - cleaning system 1 B ( 2 nd ) Fills from the bottom 1 D ( 4 th ) Keypad for payment system 2 A ( 5 th ) Wifi 2 D ( 3 rd ) Straw 3 C ( 1 st ) Bomb proof 3 B ( 5 th ) Water inside lights up 3 A ( 4 th ) Hot and cold drinks 3 D ( 2 nd ) Individual art work 3 , 4 C ( 1 st , 5 th ) Rotating sleeve like middle 3 , 4 D ( 1 st , 2 nd ) Table 4 . NOVEL ideas . Ideas from elsewhere Three of the four investigators added to the sum of the parts in one or more ways . Investigator 1 added detail to the visualization display by specifying an e - ink display – this was preferred , as it would use ‘less energy’ to power . Investigator 3 came up with a totally new shape ( which felt like a bit of a cheat ! ) but also suggested different size cups for boys and girls and added for the product to be dishwasher safe . There had not been any ‘single sex’ designs specifically in the buckets but clearly there were some more ‘girl - like’ and more ‘boy - like’ designs . This may have been the seed for that idea . The dishwasher safe mode may have been inspired from the self - cleaning mechanism ( see Fig . 1 ) . Whilst flavour featured across many designs the slot - in flavour pods in the InDeCs from investigator 1 were directly inspired from the Tassimo ( Lavazzo , Keurig ) pods that are found in coffee cups . This is an example of a related design concept being brought alongside the one being considered . DISCUSSION The three key motivations for this work were to develop a method that was as inclusive as possible when dealing fairly , effectively and reasonably with the large volume of designs created in a ‘fast and furious’ participation focused design process , to enable discussion about the attribution of design ideas to young design participants , and to enhance the participatory nature of ‘fast and furious’ design activities . These are considered in turn in the following sections . The RAId Process The RAId process developed in this work enabled the investigators to systematically consider a set of 50 designs in approximately 90 minutes . While the method included some defined lenses and an associated scoring mechanism ( used in Phase 2 ) it appears that this ‘narrow focus’ on a set of designs did not constrain the designs created by the investigators in Phase 3 and great ideas came through in any case . The origin of the ideas seen in the Phase 3 designs was considered in detail in the previous section , the three different categories of ideas were highly valuable and each had a different role to play . The Core ideas were relatively obvious features that may have arisen without any input from the teenagers . These ideas included the functional aspects for the design and some visual aspects . Nothing in the core list ( seen in Table 2 ) was especially novel or innovative . It is worth noting that nothing in the core list was chosen as a ‘winning’ design in Phase 2 . This is important as , if a restrictive process were to be followed where only ‘winning’ designs from Phase 2 went forward , almost all of the core elements would have been lost . The ideas that fell into the Add - On category were probably largely influenced by the context of use of the bottle anticipated by investigators in Phase 3 . For example , the design that was focused on sports use had music features . The Novel ideas , which were the most unusual design concepts , were the ideas that were unlikely to have emerged without input from the teenagers . Other Novel ideas not included in the integrated design concepts included a tele - porter for transporting water into the bottle , and wings on the bottle so it could fly to its owner . Novel ideas that made it into the integrated design concepts were self - cleaning mechanisms , bombproof constructions and bottom filling bottles . With the exception of the bombproof construction , all the novel ideas that made their way to the integrated design concepts were also ‘winning’ ideas in Phase 2 . Attribution of Ideas One key aim in this work was to ensure that all designs created by the participants were treated with no ideas being discarded without consideration . One reason for this is so that , eventually , ideas that were used could be traced back to their contributor ( s ) . This is a key challenge for PD style activities with children , and whilst not a main focus for this work , it is a concern that the authors are keen to work towards reducing . In terms of ensuring fairness , giving each design its best chance , so to speak , the use of six different constructs in this study meant that designs were considered through multiple different lenses in Phase 2 and this helped minimize investigators applying their own potentially subjective criteria . Every time a new construct was introduced the investigator had to refocus and think again as to what he or she was looking for . This change of focus when considering different sets of designs was considered by the investigators to be key in ensuring all the designs were considered carefully and objectively . In this process every design accrued eight scores and eight comments . Whilst every investigator did not look at every construct against every design , the different lenses , while providing points for focus , clearly had the effect of helping the investigators consider more holistic aspects of each design . Better Design with Teenagers The RAId process and the study presented here suggest that more work is needed to understand how designers consider and use what is produced by participants in ‘fast and furious’ design activities . There is still work needed to better understand how to ensure the fair and respectful representation and consideration of the ideas of teenagers ( and children ) . One challenge is to be able to reasonably assert that an idea , especially one of the novel ideas , came from one child . In this study there were a handful of designs that directly contributed novel ideas that were used in their entirety in the integrated design concepts . CONCLUSION This paper has presented the RAId method for use to effectively , respectfully and inclusively consider a large body of design ideas gathered from teenagers in short timed participatory sessions . The method is based on five APDI principles that are considered essential for the analysis of products from children’s design sessions and that have justification for use in many contexts . The RAId process described here has been shown to be easy to apply and appears effective in allowing the systematic consideration of large numbers of ideas in a short space of time to enhance a follow - on design process without constraining design thinking . Using RAId , investigators were shown to have considered design ideas with appropriate care and respect and the method especially allowed novel ideas to be tracked from , and attributed back to , contributing youngsters . The RAId method showed up three interesting types of ideas that emerged from the initial designs . These were categorized as Core , Add - on and Novel and related to both the qualities of the ideas themselves and their use in proceeding designs created by the investigators . It was shown that Novel ideas tended to be judged as ‘winners’ in Phase 2 of the RAId method , and that the Core ideas would potentially be lost if only ‘winning’ ideas were carried forwards to proceeding designs . Add - on ideas were assumed to be incorporated according to the context of use anticipated by the investigator . Currently , the members of the design team are using RAId and other techniques to study the contributions from children and then taking their findings back to the same children who have contributed the design ideas for discussion about how to bring many ideas together . In this way evaluation of ideas is expanded out to new stakeholders . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Thanks to the participating school , the pupils and the teachers . The work in this paper was partially funded through EPSRC research grant EP / I000720 / 1 . REFERENCES 1 . Bjerknes , G . , Ehn , P . , and Kyng , M . , Computers and democracy : A scandinavian challenge , Avebury ( 1987 ) . 2 . Carroll , J . M . and Rosson , M . B . , Participatory design in community informatics . Design Studies 28 , 3 , ( 2007 ) , 243 - 261 . 3 . Churchman , C . W . , The systems approach . Delaconte Press , New York , 1968 4 . Druin , A . , Cooperative inquiry : Developing new technologies for children with children . In Proc of CHI99 , ACM Press ( 1999 ) , 592 - 599 . 5 . Druin , A . , The role of children in the design of new technology . Behaviour and Information Technology 21 , 1 , ( 2002 ) , 1 - 25 . 6 . Druin , A . , Bederson , B . , Boltman , A . , Miura , A . , Knotts - Callaghan , D . , and Platt , M . , Children as our technology design partners . In The design of children ' s technology , A . Druin Ed . Morgan Kaufmann , San Francisco , CA , ( 1999 ) , 51 - 72 . 7 . Ehn , P . , Scandinavian design : On participation and skill . In Participatory design : Principles and processes , D . Shuler and A . Namioka Eds . Erlbaum Associates , Hillside , NJ , ( 1993 ) , 41 - 70 . 8 . Frauenberger , C . , Good , J . , Fitzpatrick , G . , and Iversen , O . S . , In pursuit of rigour and accountability in participatory design . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 74 , ( 2015 ) , 93 - 106 . 9 . Frauenberger , C . , Good , J . , and Keay - Bright , W . , Designing technology for children with special needs : Bridging perspectives through participatory design . CoDesign 7 , 1 , ( 2011 ) , 1 - 28 . 10 . Grudin , J . and Pruitt , J . , Personas , participatory design and product development : An infrastructure for engagement . . In Proc of PDC ' 02 , ACM Press ( 2002 ) , 144 - 161 11 . Guha , M . L . , Druin , A . , Chipman , G . , A , F . J . , Simms , S . , and Farber , A . , Mixing ideas : A new technique for working with young children as design partners . In Proc of IDC 2004 , ACM Press ( 2004 ) , 35 - 42 . 12 . Häkkilä , J . , Alhonsuo , M . , Virtanen , L . , Rantakari , J . , Colley , A . , and Koivumäki , T . , Mydata approach for personal health - - a service design case for young athletes . In Proc of HICSS , ( 2016 ) , 3493 - 3502 . 13 . Horton , M . , Read , J . C . , Mazzone , E . , Sim , G . , and Fitton , D . , School friendly participatory research activities with children . In Proc of CHI2012 , ACM Press ( 2012 ) , 14 . Kam , M . , Ramachandran , D . , Raghavan , A . , Chiu , J . , Sahni , U . , and Canny , J . , Practical considerations for participatory design with rural school children in underdeveloped regions : Early reflections from the field . In Proc of IDC2006 , ACM ( 2006 ) , 25 - 32 15 . Marco , J . , Cerezo , E . , Baldasarri , S . , Mazzone , E . , and Read , J . C . , User - oriented design and tangible interaction for kindergarten children . In Proc of IDC2009 , ACM Press ( 2009 ) , 190 - 193 . 16 . Mazzone , E . , Ivari , N . , Tikkanen , R . , Read , J . C . , and Beale , R . , Considering context , content , management , and engagement in design activities with children . In Proc of IDC2010 , ACM Press ( 2010 ) , 108 - 117 . 17 . Mazzone , E . , Read , J . C . , and Beale , R . , Design with and for disaffected teenagers . In Proc of Nordichi 2008 ACM Press ( 2008 ) , 290 - 297 . 18 . Mazzone , E . , Read , J . C . , and Beale , R . , Understanding children ' s contributions during informant design . In Proc of BCS - HCI ' 08 , BCS ( 2008 ) , 61 - 64 . 19 . Muller , M . J . , Participatory design : The third space in hci . In The human - computer interaction handbook , A . J . Julie and S . Andrew Eds . L . Erlbaum Associates Inc . , ( 2003 ) , 1051 - 1068 . 20 . Mumford , E . , The ethics approach . Commun . ACM 36 , 6 , ( 1993 ) , 82 . 21 . Read , J . C . , Fitton , D . , and Horton , M . , Giving ideas an equal chance : Inclusion and representation in participatory design with children . In Proc of IDC2014 , ACM Press ( 2014 ) , 105 - 114 22 . Read , J . C . and Fredrikson , M . , What do we take ? What do we keep ? What do we tell ? Ethical concerns in the design of inclusive socially connected technology for children . In Proc of Ethicomp 2011 , ( 2011 ) , 23 . Read , J . C . , Gregory , P . , Macfarlane , S . J . , Mcmanus , B . , Gray , P . , and Patel , R . , An investigation of participatory design with children - informant , balanced and facilitated design . In Interaction Design and Children Shaker Publishing ( 2002 ) , 53 - 64 . 24 . Roussou , M . , Kavalieratou , E . , and Doulgeridis , M . , Children designers in the museum : Applying participatory design for the development of an art education program . In Proc of IDC2007 , ACM ( 2007 ) , 77 - 80 25 . Scaife , M . , Rogers , Y . , Aldrich , F . , and Davies , M . , Designing for or designing with ? Informant design for interactive learning environments . In Proc of CHI ' 97 ACM Press ( 1997 ) , 343 - 350 . 26 . Schuler , D . and Namioka , A . , Participatory design : Principles and practices Lawrence Erlbaum ( 1993 ) . 27 . Theng , Y . L . , Nasir , N . M . , Thimbleby , H . , Buchanan , G . , Jones , M . , Bainbridge , D . , and Cassidy , N . , Children as design partners and testers for a children ' s digital library . In Proc of ECDL2000 , Springer Verlag ( 2000 ) , 249 - 253 . 28 . Yip , J . , Clegg , T . , Bonsignore , E . , Gelderblom , H . , Rhodes , E . , and Druin , A . , Brownies or bags - of - stuff ? Domain expertise in cooperative inquiry with children . In Proc of IDC2013 , ACM Press ( 2013 ) , 201 - 210