Visual Analytics for Corporate Foresight - A Conceptual Approach Lennart B . Sina , Cristian A . Secco , Midhad Blazevic , Kawa Nazemi Human - Computer Interaction and Visual Analytics Darmstadt University of Applied Sciences , Darmstadt , Germany lennart . b . sina @ h - da . de , cristian . a . secco @ h - da . de , midhad . blazevic @ h - da . de , kawa . nazemi @ h - da . de Abstract —Corporate Foresight is a strategic planning process that helps organizations anticipate and prepare for future trends and developments that may impact their operations . It involves analyzing data , identifying potential scenarios , and creating strategies to address them to ensure long - term success and sustainability . Visual Analytics approaches have been introduced to cover parts of the Corporate Foresight process . These concepts present different approaches to integrate machine learning meth - ods and artiﬁcial intelligence with interactive visualizations to solve tasks such as identifying emerging trends . A holistic concept for synthesizing Visual Analytics with Corporate Foresight does not exist yet . We propose in this work a holistic Visual Analytics approach that covers the main aspects of Corporate Foresight by including strategic management and considers different or - ganizational forms . Our model goes beyond the state - of - the - art by providing , besides foresight also , hindsight and insight . Our main contributions are the revised Visual Analytics model and its proof of concept through implementation as a web - based system with real data . Index Terms —Visual Analytics , Corporate Foresight , Corpo - rate Strategy , Organizational Resilience I . I NTRODUCTION The increasing uncertainty that companies face in a world of rapid technological changes with global competitors requires advanced analytical strategies and related technologies to an - alyze and predict . Corporate Foresight is a substantial vehicle for companies to anticipate the future and develop strategies to remain competitive in future markets [ 1 ] . Visual Analytics is applied in many application areas to extract knowledge from large and heterogeneous data resources . Using artiﬁcial intelligence and interactive visualizations , information from data sources can be extracted to derive meaningful hindsight , insight , and even foresight [ 1 , 2 ] . Visual Analytics approaches covering partial aspects of the Corporate Foresight process have been presented in the past [ 2 ] . Aspects such as identifying emerging trends [ 3 ] , integrating hybrid forecasting methods in Visual Analytics [ 4 ] , or supporting strategic decision - making [ 2 ] were presented . All these works have addressed important aspects of Corporate Foresight . However , a holistic concept for integrating technologies and approaches into a Corporate Foresight process for strategy development that covers the entire process from hindsight to foresight does not exist . We propose in this work a holistic approach that covers the entire process of hindsight , insight , and foresight through Visual Analytics by combining methods for weak signal detection , trend detection , and forecasting with interactive visualizations . Therefore , we investigate the process of Corpo - rate Strategy and propose a Visual Analytics model dedicated to Corporate Foresight , including the main strategic decision support and sensemaking methods . We ﬁrst provide a state - of - the - art overview of Corporate Foresight in Visual Analytics . Therefore , we investigate both aspects of Corporate Foresight in Visual Analytics ( 1 ) Cor - porate Foresight processes and techniques already used in Visual Analytics and ( 2 ) Corporate Foresight processes and techniques having the potential to be used in Visual Analytics . Thereafter , we propose a general model that includes the strategic elements of Corporate Foresight . The model based on the well - known approach of Keim et al . [ 5 ] is enhanced with those elements and methods of particular interest for strategic decision - making in Corporate Foresight . This includes gen - eral strategy aspects like strategic management , organizational forms , and different methods of interactive visualizations . We provide a proof of concept through the implementation of our approach with real data and illustrate how the related visual structures could be assigned to the different steps of strategic decision - making with Visual Analytics for Corporate Foresight . Our main contributions are ( 1 ) a concept for a Visual Analytics approach to enable strategic decision - making for Corporate Foresight tasks by investigating the past , the present , and the future and ( 2 ) the proof of concept by implementing our approach as a web - based system with real data . II . R ELATED W ORK Our related work focuses on Visual Analytics concepts and concepts for Corporate Foresight and other closely related ﬁelds , since we could not ﬁnd any Visual Analytics concepts or systems that directly address Visual Analytics concepts for this very speciﬁc topic . Keim et al . proposed one of the earliest and most well - established concepts and deﬁnitions for Visual Analytics [ 5 ] . As presented in Figure 1 they stated that the need for Visual Analytics derives from the information overload prob - lem and affects stakeholders from different domains with different levels of expertise [ 5 ] . Keim et al . conceptualized Visual Analytics as an iterative process consisting of four reversely connected steps by a feedback loop . The ﬁnal step 244 2023 27th International Conference Information Visualisation ( IV ) 2375 - 0138 / 23 / $ 31 . 00 ©2023 IEEE DOI 10 . 1109 / IV60283 . 2023 . 00050 2023 27 t h I n t e r n a t i o n a l C o n f e r e n c e I n f o r m a t i o n V i s u a li s a t i o n ( I V ) | 979 - 8 - 3503 - 4161 - 4 / 23 / $ 31 . 00 © 2023 I EEE | D O I : 10 . 1109 / I V 60283 . 2023 . 00050 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . Fig . 1 . Visual Data - Exploration concept adapted from [ 5 , p . 156 ] . of their concept is knowledge derived from data through direct coupling between the data models through data mining with interactive visualizations [ 5 ] . We proposed a Visual Analytics approach for technology and innovation Management to detect emerging trends for strategic decision - making as part of the Corporate Foresight process [ 3 ] . Our approach focuses heavily on interaction de - sign . Based on the works of Bonino et al . [ 6 ] , we differentiated between macro and micro analysis and monitoring [ 3 ] . On the macro level , trends from the whole dataset can be displayed , whereas detailed information about a speciﬁc term is displayed on the micro level [ 3 ] . Monitoring can be used to observe speciﬁc trends , technologies , or competitors [ 3 , 7 ] . In our previous work [ 2 ] , we proposed a Visual Analytics approach for strategic decision - making in technology manage - ment [ 2 ] . We applied Corporate Foresight and Visual Analytics methods to create a machine learning - based approach for “Technology Roadmapping” . Fig . 2 . Innovation management through Visual Analytics adapted from [ 2 , p . 42 ] . As presented in Figure 2 , our approach for innovation management through Visual Analytics foresees three steps . We proposed the ﬁrst step as “situation analysis” , which includes an analysis of competitors , markets , technology , and key players [ 2 ] . We propose the second step as “forecasting” . This step involves forecasting future scenarios using enhanced predictive analytics methods based on historical data to gather probabilities of future events . This step includes emerging trend analytics , future trend analytics , future technology pre - diction , and future market prediction . The probabilities ob - tained can validate the hypotheses from the ﬁrst step and provide information about potential future scenarios [ 2 ] . The last step of the model is strategy implementation , which is based on information gathered in the ﬁrst two steps . This step is more organizational and commonly leads to strategy formulation . Comprehensive market analysis and technology implementation can be performed based on the formulation , with the ideation process supported by a Visual Analytics system . The tasks are primarily performed by humans , and the ideation process can be supported through Visual Analytics [ 2 ] . The concept of Sensemaking originates from the domain of psychology and was ﬁrst applied to the context of business by Weick [ 8 ] . Russel et al . [ 9 ] stated that the goal of Sensemaking is creating a structured representation of information that minimizes the effort required to perform an information task [ 9 ] . Fig . 3 . Learning Loop Complex for Sensemaking adapted from [ 9 , p . 2 ] . As presented in Figure 3 they proposed a model that foresees an iterative process they describe as “Learning Loop Complex” . This process involves searching for a suitable rep - resentation , encoding information , identifying inconsistencies , and adjusting the representation for better coverage , resulting in a more concise representation of the essential information . For routine tasks , experts may focus on encoding rather than adjusting the representation [ 9 , 10 ] . Pirolli and Card inves - tigated Sensemaking in the context of analysis technologies for intelligence analysis [ 10 ] . They proposed a concept for intelligence analysis that builds upon the model of Russel et al . [ 9 , 10 ] . Sensemaking was also already investigated and integrated into Visual Analytics systems by Attﬁeld et al . [ 11 ] . An integral part of the foresight process is organizational resilience [ 12 ] . Organizational resilience enables organizations to deal effectively with unexpected events , recover from crises , and ideally , even promote future success [ 12 ] . Tengblad et al . proposed a model for organizational resilience based on the four aspects respond , monitor , learn , and anticipate [ 13 ] , 245 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . which they adapted from the resilience engineering approach by Hollnagel [ 14 ] . Here , “learn” refers to understanding what has happened before , and “respond“ refers to knowing what to do in the present . “Monitor” and “anticipate” are future - oriented . Monitoring refers to knowing exactly what to look for , and anticipation refers to knowing what to expect in the future [ 13 ] . Understanding the past , present , and future through hindsight , insight , and foresight ultimately deﬁnes the entire Corporate Foresight process based on the analyzed data and time span of interest in form of “hinsight” , “insight” and “foresight” [ 1 ] . Organizational resilience is also an integral part of the foresight strategy of the European Commission . They propose resilience dashboards to monitor capacities and vulnerabilities as a follow - up of the 2020 foresight report [ 15 , 16 ] . As we stated in [ 17 ] , theoretical concepts in strategic management , such as weak signals [ 18 , 19 ] and environmental scanning [ 20 ] , may serve as the basis for detecting early warnings and systematically monitoring an organization’s en - vironment for pertinent information [ 17 , 21 ] . These ideas have inspired various research areas to incorporate them into different software systems , which aim to identify knowledge to assist strategic decision - making semiautomatically . According to De Toni et al . Corporate Foresight is not limited to de - tecting weak signals as initially proposed by Ansoff [ 18 , 19 ] . They expanded the scope of Corporate Foresight to anticipate emerging trends and markets . The forecasting of trends and technologies also plays a crucial role . As stated in [ 3 , 22 ] , emerging trends and technologies can be extracted from texts such as scientiﬁc publications [ 3 , 22 ] . In [ 4 ] , we already suggested that forecasting , especially hybrid forecasting meth - ods have the potential to enhance existing Visual Analytics approaches to assist decision - making . Fig . 4 . Organization of Corporate Foresight adapted from [ 1 , p . 93 ] . As presented in Figure 4 , the Corporate Foresight approach proposed by De Toni et al . connects foresight , marketing , de - velopment , and research with strategy development [ 1 ] . They propose a differentiation between today’s - and tomorrow’s market . Foresight and research are conducted for tomorrow’s market , whereas marketing and development are conducted for today’s market . The strategy forms the center and connects everything . Furthermore , De Toni et al . also distinguishes between innovation types and their orientation . While research and foresight are explorative and cause a technology push , there is a market pull in today’s market by exploiting existing technologies [ 1 ] . Becker investigated Corporate Foresight in Europe and determined three organizational forms for foresight [ 23 ] . He proposed the collecting post , the observatory , and the think tank [ 1 , 23 ] . These three organization forms are very dif - ferent from each other . This applies to the intensity with which foresight is dealt with and the tasks and activities . The collecting post is used in companies with relatively few foresight activities . The responsible persons are only partially engaged in the foresight process and perform other activities in the company . Only basic information should be collected to support decision - making [ 23 ] . The observatory is a specialized foresight unit with full - time staff , a budget , and a clear mandate to focus on future - related issues for the company . Its activities include generating new future - related knowledge and relying on external contacts , mostly from the same or similar ﬁelds of expertise ( micro level [ 1 ] ) . Corporate think tanks can use different method sets such as scenario techniques , design thinking , or design sprints to unfold their full effect [ 24 ] . Its primary addressee is the corporate development department . It fulﬁlls the company’s highly specialized and singular purpose , such as identifying socio - economic trends or forecasting future trafﬁc ﬂows [ 23 ] . The think tank uses a special foresight unit that is forward - looking for their company , consisting of full - time futurists , experts , and researchers who explore a wide range of future - related issues . They have a broader range of tasks ( macro level [ 1 ] ) than the observatory and must be more generalists than specialists . They build a global network of experts from within and outside the company and conduct foresight activities for selected external clients [ 23 ] . III . C ONCEPTUAL A PPROACH We propose our Visual Analytics concept for Corporate Foresight based on the general Visual Analytics concept of Keim et al . [ 5 ] . We have combined and extended the model of Keim et al . with the concept of De Toni et al . [ 1 ] and other important work from the ﬁeld of Corporate Foresight . The following will explain the individual steps and their integration and interrelationships . A . Data As proposed in the concept by Keim et al . [ 5 ] , the starting point of our concept is the data . For the Corporate Foresight process , this data can be , for example , scientiﬁc publications , patents , annual reports , or social media data . These data can contain valuable information about technologies at different 246 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . Fig . 5 . Our conceptual model for Visual Analytics for Corporate Foresight is based on the general Visual Analytics model of Keim et al . [ 5 , p . 156 ] . Starting from data , humans deﬁne , based on the analytical task to be performed , a strategy and decide whether they want to investigate the past , the present , the future , or a combination of those . The strategy and , accordingly , the models can be reﬁned at any stage . Humans’ decisions are based on organizational forms , and they interact with visualizations . technological stages or more general trends . For further anal - ysis , it is important that temporal aspects are included in the form of metadata . For our concept , we focus primarily on scientiﬁc publications as a data basis since these present research on technologies at a very early stage and thus cause a technology push . The data form the basis for the various models and visualizations . Furthermore , they also inﬂuence the strategy . B . Models According to Keim et al . , the main challenge is not collect - ing data but ﬁnding effective methods and models to transform the data into trustworthy and veriﬁable knowledge [ 5 ] . At the model level , various procedures can be applied . We identiﬁed three aspects of Corporate Foresight that can be assisted through computer - supported methods like artiﬁcial intelligence or statistical approaches . We propose trends , weak signals , and forecasting at the model level for Corporate Foresight . In our concept , the models depend on the data , and the human can manipulate the models indirectly through the data feedback loop and the strategy . A change in strategy may inﬂuence the models directly or through adaptions of the data . The models may also be directly inﬂuenced through the model feedback loop by the human user . New models may also lead to a new strategy . C . Visualization The visualizations represent the data and models graphi - cally . They are directly connected to the human in the process and can optionally be used in different organizational forms . The visualizations can lead to a new strategy , and a new strategy may lead to new visualizations . We have extended visualizations by three different levels as we proposed in [ 3 ] . We propose monitoring - , micro - and macro levels . On the macro - and monitoring levels , emerging trends from the overall data can be represented by suitable visualizations . Small multiple representations [ 25 , 26 ] such as sparklines or trend lines are particularly suitable for this purpose [ 3 ] . Individual technologies and trends can be analyzed more deeply on the micro level . For this purpose , different analyses and visualizations may be applied for this purpose , such as the comparative analysis we have already presented in [ 3 , 27 ] . D . Strategy Strategy is the center of our concept and is strongly linked to all other aspects . Based on the knowledge people derive from the visualizations of the data and models , they can develop new strategies or adapt to the current ones . The human may specify the strategy from the beginning or evolve during the iterative process . The strategy is ambiguous . On the one hand , it can represent processes such as the search strategy through which users change from the macro to the micro level , but it can also refer to the entire strategy , i . e . , the corporate strategy . E . Human The last step in the Visual Analytics model by Keim et al . [ 5 ] was knowledge . We consider this step as human . The human user has a very important role , as he can interact 247 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . Fig . 6 . Trend Monitoring view of the Visual Analytics front - end client . The main menu ( 1 ) provides various settings like database selection , search ( micro level ) , and reporting functionalities . Moreover , it provides login functionalities for users to save their monitoring items . The right navigation bar ( 2 ) provides different visualizations that may be dragged and dropped into the dashboard to support other tasks than trend monitoring in the Visual Analytics system . The chart - speciﬁc top - controls ( 3 ) provide different aggregations for the trend data and also the monitoring view which is currently selected . The data is also normalized . Monitoring items can be managed in the settings menu after clicking the gear icon . The trendline visualization ( 4 ) displays the monitoring entities chosen by the user . with all levels in a Visual Analytics system . Moreover , the different organizational forms and strategic management can only be conducted by humans . Humans can join together in different organizational forms to develop a strategy or obtain new knowledge for the tasks of strategic management through the organizational form . By reﬁning the strategy , the human being can indirectly inﬂuence the overall system or receive a new strategy through the system . By selecting different data sources , he may adjust the data through the data feedback loop by selecting different data sources . The human may adjust the models directly through the model feedback loop . This includes the use of different models as well as their parameterization . The models can also be inﬂuenced indirectly through strategy reﬁnement . In addition , humans can directly inﬂuence the visualization form . F . Organizational Forms We decided to use the two organizational forms , observatory and think tank , according to Becker [ 23 ] , for our conceptual model . Those organization forms may optionally bridge the gap between visualizations and humans . They can give an organizational structure but are not mandatory for using Visual Analytics systems [ 23 ] . The two organizational forms we propose differ in their scope . While the think tank has a very broad scope , it can be supported primarily by visualizations at the macro level . Whereas the observatory has a smaller scope and can be supported primarily by visualizations on the micro level [ 23 ] . The connections between visualization , organizational forms , human and strategic management are bidirectional as a suitable organizational form may be selected by humans that choose the right visualizations as part of the sensemaking process or dependant on the available visualiza - tions the organizational form is selected . In general , structuring the organizational forms represents a form of the ideation process . The light bulb represented this in the model as an iterative process . G . Strategic Management The knowledge humans gain through the system can ul - timately be used to support tasks of strategic management . We have chosen decision - making , sensemaking , and resilience . In [ 2 ] , we already outlined how decision - making can be supported through Visual Analytics and how knowledge may be externalized through reporting functionalities . As we stated in section II , organizational resilience as part of the Corporate Foresight process covers the past , present , and future , whereas Corporate Foresight as a whole aims to enhance hindsight , insight , and foresight . For that reason , we included both in our conceptual model . The knowledge derived from the different data models and visualizations can ultimately assist resilience tasks . The sensemaking process , as proposed in the “learning loop complex” by Russel et al . , can be achieved through the direct connection of the human and the visualization [ 9 ] . H . Technology Push vs . Market Pull It is not easy to distinguish between technology push and market pull in the context of this Visual Analytics concept . 248 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . In this approach , because we ﬁrst use scientiﬁc publications as the database , representing research on technologies at a very early stage , the data , models , and visualizations tend to be closer to the technology push . This also applies to the visualizations and models . The strategy forms an intersection between the technology push and the market pull since this represents the strategy of the human interacting with the system . The human user knows today’s market and uses the system to analyze tomorrow’s market . Since humans can use different organizational forms to make strategic decisions based on the knowledge of the market of today and tomor - row , the human , the organizational forms , and the strategic management belong to both the technology push and market pull . IV . V ISUAL A NALYTICS FOR C ORPORATE F ORESIGHT We outlined in our concept that a Visual Analytics system for Corporate Foresight and Corporate Strategy development must provide suitable models and visualizations for various tasks that may be used in different organizational forms . It is important to note that there is a difference in the scope of those organizational forms . Methods such as the corporate think tank deal with a broad range of scope and issues and have a broader range of tasks ( macro level [ 3 ] ) . In contrast , the Observatory’s organizational form is more focused on the micro level , as the analysts deal with similar ﬁelds of expertise . A Visual Analytics system for Corporate Foresight needs different visualization approaches to cover the different scopes of organizational forms . In this work , we propose a trendline visualization to support the Corporate Foresight process at the macro and monitoring levels . Moreover , we propose a forecast visualization on micro level . For this purpose , we will brieﬂy explain the Visual Analytics system and exemplify one visualization on the macro level that can also be used for monitoring tasks and one visualization on the micro level . Figure 6 shows the initial view of the Visual Analytics system , which is the overview or macro level . A search can be conducted through the main menu ( 1 ) to switch to the micro level . Moreover , in the main menu , the database and the theme may be adapted and can be used to switch to the reporting view . In ( 2 ) , several alternative macro - level visualizations can be chosen to display and may be orchestrated as a visualization dashboard [ 7 ] . Through the top controls ( 3 ) , normalization according to [ 22 ] may be applied , and the trend lines may be sorted by different aggregations . In ( 4 ) , the visual layout we propose is displayed . It is a small multiples visualization [ 25 , 26 ] displaying trends of the overall document collection . The monitoring view is currently selected , which displays only previously selected trendlines . In [ 28 ] , we proposed a micro - level forecast visualization that displays forecast results and indicates the forecast accu - racy through saturation [ 28 ] . As shown in Figure 7 , we now integrated this visualization into our Visual Analytics system . The forecast visualization , presented in Figure 7 , is displayed on our Visual Analytics system’s detail ( micro ) level . The facet navigation ( 1 ) is always Fig . 7 . Micro level view on the Visual Analytics front - end client after a search was performed . The facet navigation ( 1 ) enables ﬁltering through facet ﬁlters and POI - based ﬁltering . The right navigation bar ( 1 ) displays alternative micro - level visualizations . The sub - navigation ( 3 ) displays all active ﬁlters . The micro - level forecast visualization is displayed in ( 4 ) . The saturation indicates the accuracy of the predictions . Less accurate predictions are displayed with low saturation . displayed on this level of detail . It enables ﬁltering through methods like POI and facet ﬁlters based on the attributes in the data [ 29 ] . In ( 2 ) , several alternative micro level visualizations can be chosen to be displayed . The currently active Gap Analysis is indicated through the blue background of the icon . Area ( 3 ) displays all active ﬁlters and POIs . In ( 4 ) , an area chart visualizes the time series and the forecast results . The forecast accuracy is indicated through saturation . V . C ONCLUSIONS AND F UTURE W ORK We proposed in this work a holistic approach to cover the entire process of hindsight , insight , and foresight through Visual Analytics by combining weak signal detection , trend detection , and forecasting methods with interactive visualiza - tions . Therefore , we investigated the process of Corporate Strategy and proposed a Visual Analytics model dedicated to Corporate Foresight , including strategic decision support and sensemaking methods . We ﬁrst provided a state - of - the - art overview of Corporate Foresight in Visual Analytics . We investigated both aspects of Corporate Foresight in Visual Analytics ( 1 ) Corporate Foresight processes and techniques already used in Visual Analytics and ( 2 ) Corporate Foresight processes and techniques having the potential to be used in Visual Analytics . Thereafter , we proposed our general model that includes the strategic elements of Corporate Foresight . The model based on the well - known approach of Keim et al . [ 5 ] is enhanced with elements and methods of particular inter - est for strategic decision - making in Corporate Foresight . This included general strategy aspects like strategic management , organizational forms , and different methods of interactive vi - sualizations . We provided a proof of concept by implementing our approach with real data . We also illustrated how the related visual structures could be assigned to the different steps of strategic decision - making with Visual Analytics for Corporate Foresight . The holistic concept proposed in this work focuses on some crucial aspects of Corporate Foresight and closely related 249 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . topics and has not yet covered all aspects . This includes further integration of innovation management that could signiﬁcantly impact the Corporate Foresight process . Furthermore , the databases we used to implement our concept were primarily scientiﬁc publications that present trends and technologies in their early stages . Adapting this concept to other databases with more mature technologies , such as patents , could enhance the proposed system . Furthermore , our proposal requires an extensive assessment to examine its impact on Corporate Fore - sight , including strategic decision support and sensemaking . A CKNOWLEDGMENT This work was conducted within the research group on Human - Computer Interaction and Visual Analytics ( https : / / vis . h - da . de ) and was partially funded by the Hessian Center for AI ( hessian . AI ) , Germany . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] A . De Toni , R . Siagri , and C . Battistella , Corporate Foresight : Anticipating the Future , 10 2020 . [ 2 ] K . Nazemi , T . Feiter , L . B . Sina , D . Burkhardt , and A . Kock , Visual Analytics for Strategic Decision Making in Technology Management . Cham : Springer International Publishing , 2022 , pp . 31 – 61 . [ 3 ] K . Nazemi , D . Burkhardt , and A . Kock , “Visual analytics for technology and innovation management , ” Multimedia Tools and Applications , vol . 81 , pp . 14803 – 14830 , 2021 . [ 4 ] M . Blazevic , L . B . Sina , C . A . Secco , and K . Nazemi , “Recommendation of scientiﬁc publications - a real - time text analysis and publication recommendation system , ” Electronics , vol . 12 , no . 7 , 2023 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . mdpi . com / 2079 - 9292 / 12 / 7 / 1699 [ 5 ] D . Keim , G . Andrienko , J . - D . Fekete , C . G¨org , J . Kohlhammer , and G . Melanc¸on , “Visual analytics : Deﬁnition , process , and challenges , ” in Information Visualization : Human - Centered Is - sues and Perspectives , A . Kerren , J . T . Stasko , J . - D . Fekete , and C . North , Eds . Berlin , Heidelberg : Springer Berlin Heidelberg , 2008 , pp . 154 – 175 . [ 6 ] D . Bonino , A . Ciaramella , and F . Corno , “Review of the state - of - the - art in patent information and forthcoming evolutions in intelligent patent informatics , ” World Patent Information , vol . 32 , no . 1 , pp . 30 – 38 , 2010 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii / S0172219009000465 [ 7 ] L . Sina , D . Burkhardt , and K . Nazemi , “Visual dashboards in trend analytics to observe competitors and leading domain experts , ” in Proceedings of CERC 2020 , ser . CEUR Workshop Proceedings , vol . Vol . 2815 . Aachen , Germany : CEUR - WS . org , 2020 , pp . 222 – 235 . [ 8 ] K . E . Weick , The social psychology of organizing , 2nd ed . , ser . Topics in social psychology . New York : McGraw - Hill , Inc , 1979 . [ 9 ] D . M . Russell , M . J . Steﬁk , P . Pirolli , and S . K . Card , “The cost structure of sensemaking , ” in Proceedings of the INTERACT ’93 and CHI ’93 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ser . CHI ’93 . New York , NY , USA : Association for Computing Machinery , 1993 , p . 269 – 276 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 169059 . 169209 [ 10 ] P . Pirolli and S . Card , “The sensemaking process and leverage points for analyst technology as identiﬁed through cognitive task analysis , ” in Proceedings of International Conference on Intelligence Analysis , 2005 , pp . 2 – 4 . [ 11 ] S . J . Attﬁeld , S . K . Hara , and B . L . W . Wong , “Sensemaking in Visual Analytics : Processes and Challenges , ” in EuroVAST 2010 : International Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology , J . Kohlhammer and D . Keim , Eds . The Eurographics Association , 2010 . [ 12 ] S . Duchek , “Organizational resilience : a capability - based con - ceptualization , ” Business Research , vol . 13 , no . 1 , pp . 215 – 246 , 2020 . [ 13 ] S . Tengblad , Organizational Resilience : Theoretical Frame - work . Singapore : Springer Singapore , 2018 , pp . 19 – 38 . [ 14 ] E . Hollnagel , “Resilience engineering and the built environ - ment , ” Building Research & Information , vol . 42 , no . 2 , pp . 221 – 228 , 2014 . [ 15 ] European Comission , “2020 strategic foresight report , ” https : / / commission . europa . eu / strategy - and - policy / strategic - planning / strategic - foresight / 2020 - strategic - foresight - report en , April 2023 . [ 16 ] —— , “Resilience dashboards , ” https : / / commission . europa . eu / strategy - and - policy / strategic - planning / strategic - foresight / 2020 - strategic - foresight - report / resilience - dashboards en , April 2023 . [ 17 ] Christian Stab , Matthias Breyer , Dirk Burkhardt , Kawa Nazemi , and J¨orn Kohlhammer , “Analytical semantics visualization for discovering latent signals in large text collections , ” in Proceedings of SIGRAD 2012 ; Interactive Visual Analysis of Data ; November 29 - 30 ; 2012 ; V¨axj¨o ; Sweden , Andreas Kerren and Stefan Seipel , Eds . Link¨oping University Electronic Press , 2012 , pp . 83 – 86 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . ep . liu . se / ecp / 081 / 011 / ecp12081011 . pdf , fulltext [ 18 ] H . I . Ansoff , “Managing strategic surprise by response to weak signals , ” California Management Review , vol . 18 , no . 2 , pp . 21 – 33 , dec 1975 . [ 19 ] —— , “The emerging paradigm of strategic behavior , ” Strategic Management Journal , vol . 8 , no . 6 , pp . 501 – 515 , 1987 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / onlinelibrary . wiley . com / doi / abs / 10 . 1002 / smj . 4250080602 [ 20 ] F . J . Aguilar , Scanning The Business Environment . New York : Collier Macmillan , 1967 . [ 21 ] J . O . Schwarz , “Pitfalls in implementing a strategic early warning system , ” Foresight , vol . 7 , no . 4 , pp . 22 – 30 , 2005 . [ 22 ] K . Nazemi and D . Burkhardt , “Visual analytics for analyzing technological trends from text , ” in 2019 23rd International Conference Information Visualisation ( IV ) , 2019 , pp . 191 – 200 . [ 23 ] P . Becker , “Corporate foresight in europe , ” 2002 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . foresight - platform . eu / wp - content / uploads / 2011 / 04 / EFMN - Brief - No . - 82 - Corporate - Foresight - in - Europe . pdf [ 24 ] S . Poguntke . Wiesbaden : Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden , 2016 . [ 25 ] E . R . Tufte , The Visual Display of Quantitative Information , 2nd ed . Cheshire , CT : Graphics Press , 2001 . [ 26 ] —— , Envisioning Information . Cheshire , CT : Graphics Press , 1990 . [ 27 ] K . Nazemi and D . Burkhardt , “Visual analytical dashboards for comparative analytical tasks – a case study on mobility and transportation , ” Procedia Computer Science , vol . 149 , pp . 138 – 150 , 2019 . [ 28 ] L . B . Sina , C . A . Secco , M . Blazevic , and K . Nazemi , “Hybrid forecasting methods - a systematic review , ” Electronics , vol . 12 , no . 9 , 2023 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . mdpi . com / 2079 - 9292 / 12 / 9 / 2019 [ 29 ] L . B . Sina and K . Nazemi , “Visual analytics for systematic reviews according to prisma , ” in 2022 26th International Con - ference Information Visualisation ( IV ) . IEEE , 2022 . 250 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply .