articles NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOL 3 MAY 2001 http : / / cellbio . nature . com 466 Force and focal adhesion assembly : a close relationship studied using elastic micropatterned substrates Nathalie Q . Balaban * , Ulrich S . Schwarz† , Daniel Riveline‡ , Polina Goichberg * , Gila Tzur * , Ilana Sabanay * , Diana Mahalu § , Sam Safran† , Alexander Bershadsky * , Lia Addadi¶ and Benjamin Geiger * # * Department of Molecular Cell Biology , The Weizmann Institute of Science , Rehovot , Israel †Department of Materials and Interfaces , The Weizmann Institute of Science , Rehovot , Israel ‡Laboratoire de Spectrometrie Physique , Universite Joseph Fourier , Grenoble , France § Braun Center for Submicron Semiconductor Research , The Weizmann Institute of Science , Rehovot , Israel ¶Department of Structural Biology , The Weizmann Institute of Science , Rehovot , Israel # e - mail : benny . geiger @ weizmann . ac . il Mechanical forces play a major role in the regulation of cell adhesion and cytoskeletal organization . In order to explore the molecular mechanism underlying this regulation , we have investigated the relationship between local force applied by the cell to the substrate and the assembly of focal adhesions . A novel approach was developed for real - time , high - resolution measurements of forces applied by cells at single adhesion sites . This method combines micropatterning of elastomer substrates and fluorescence imaging of focal adhesions in live cells expressing GFP - tagged vinculin . Local forces are correlated with the orientation , total fluorescence intensity and area of the focal adhesions , indicating a constant stress of 5 . 5 ± 2 nN m m - 2 . The dynamics of the force - dependent modulation of focal adhesions were characterized by blocking actomyosin contractility and were found to be on a time scale of seconds . The results put clear constraints on the possible molecular mechanisms for the mechanosensory response of focal adhesions to applied force . C ell adhesion plays a critical role in many fundamental processes such as embryonic morphogenesis , angiogenesis , inflammation and wound healing 1 – 3 . One of the unique fea - tures of adhesion to a rigid surface , unlike binding to soluble lig - ands , is the ability of forces to develop at the contact site . Such forces can be external , such as shear flow in blood vessels , or can be generated by the cell’s own contractile apparatus . There is a close relationship between the abilities of cells such as fibroblasts to gen - erate force and to assemble matrix adhesions 4 – 7 . The primary sites of cell adhesion to the substrate are focal adhe - sions . These complex multimolecular assemblies link the extracellu - lar matrix , via membrane - bound receptors , to the cell’s cytoskele - ton 8 , 9 . Focal adhesions are therefore also the sites at which forces are transmitted to the substrate . They can be detected as dark areas in interference reflection microscopy 10 , by electron microscopy or with fluorescence labelling of specific adhesion molecules such as vin - culin , paxillin and integrins . It has been recently shown that tension ‘reinforces’ focal adhesions 11 , which are stimulated to grow after the application of a local external force 12 . Does the cell use its own con - tractility to reinforce its adhesion sites in a local targeted process ? If so , the force applied at focal adhesions should determine their assembly . With this in mind , we explored the possibility that the mechanosensory response of focal adhesions is involved in autoreg - ulation of their development . This was achieved by quantitatively mapping the relationships between the force applied at single focal adhesions and the assembly of the adhesion sites . Several methods have been developed for measuring the forces that cells exert on their substrate , mainly involving the use of deformable substrates 13 – 17 . On the wrinklable substrates introduced by Harris 13 , the tangential forces exerted by the cell are translated into out - of - plane wrinkles . More quantitative approaches to force measurements included the use of cantilevers 15 , an improvement of the wrinklable substrate 17 , 18 and elastomer substrates of either pre - stressed thin polymer films 14 or thick polymer gels 16 . These methods provided quantitative evaluations of the forces , and some com - bined this with visualization of the adhesion sites 18 . Their capacity to compare the forces applied at the various focal adhesions of a cell is , however , limited . To measure the forces exerted by single focal adhesions directly in real time and in live cells , we have developed a novel method based on the simultaneous visualization of the displacements ( using a high - resolution micropatterned transparent elastomer ) and the corresponding focal adhesions ( using a green - fluorescent - protein ( GFP ) fusion protein of vinculin ) . The force applied by the cell to the substrate was calculated down to the level of a single adhesion site using elasticity theory , based on the measured dis - placements and the locations of the focal adhesions . Mature focal adhesions are elongated structures , mostly orient - ed in the direction of the main stress fibres . We found that the direction of the force applied at each focal adhesion correlates with the main axis of this elongation . Furthermore , the measured local forces are linearly related to the total fluorescence intensity and area of GFP – vinculin at the respective focal adhesions . The linear dependence shows that a constant stress is applied by the cell at its various focal adhesions , despite large variations in their area and shape , as well as in the force applied to them . By interfering with the actomyosin - driven contractility of the cell , we monitored the force relaxation together with the dynamics of the focal adhesions . The disruption of the focal adhesions was found to follow closely the relaxation of force . The results suggest that the force the cell exerts , via actomyosin contraction , at its focal adhesion determines their assembly , on a time scale below seconds . Results The patterning method developed ( see Methods ) allowed the pro - duction of shallow patterns with a depth of 0 . 3 m m on the upper surface of the elastomer ( Fig . 1a , d ) . The pattern could be visual - © 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd articles NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOL 3 MAY 2001 http : / / cellbio . nature . com 467 ized by phase contrast ( Fig . 1b , c ) or fluorescence ( Fig . 1e ) microscopy . The Young’s modulus of the elastomer was determined by monitoring the displacements in the pattern produced by micropipettes of known flexibility ( Fig . 1g , h ; see Methods ) . The pattern size ( 2 – 30 m m ) and shape were chosen according to the spatial resolution of displacements needed . Large pitch patterns ( Fig . 2a , b ) were used to get a rapid semiquantitative evaluation of the generation of force in the culture , without need for a reference to the unstressed pattern . More precise measurements of the dis - placements were performed with the finer pattern ( Fig . 1b , e ) , con - sisting in an array of small dots with diameter ~ 0 . 8 m m and pitch of 2 m m . Patterns of widely differing size and topography were test - ed ( Fig . 1j ) . The forces and focal adhesions of the cells were , how - ever , similar in the various patterns . Human foreskin fibroblasts transiently expressing GFP – vin - culin were plated on the patterned elastomer substrates , to deter - mine the locations of the focal adhesions . The cells spread , develop focal adhesions ( Fig . 1f ) and proliferate on these substrates , similar to their behaviour on glass coverslips . The forces applied by the cells deform the initially regular pattern of the surface . The position Topographic modulation Fluorescent photoresist markers thickness 0 . 3 m m b c e f a d g h i j [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] PDMS made with Si – photoresist mould PDMS made with GaAs – photoresist mould PDMS made with Si – PMMA mould C o v e r s li p E l a s t o m e r C o v e r s li p E l a s t o m e r 40 m m 0 . 3 m m 40 m m 40 m m 2 – 30 m m Pit : 0 . 8 · 0 . 8 · 0 . 3 m m Pad : 0 . 8 · 0 . 8 · 0 . 3 m m Tip : 0 . 4 · 0 . 4 · 0 . 3 m m 2 m m 2 m m Figure 1 Fabrication and calibration of the patterned elastomer . a , Peeling off the elastomer from the Si mould results in a topographic modulation with a depth of 0 . 3 m m . b , Phase - contrast image of a pattern of dots obtained with Si moulds . c , Phase - contrast image of a pattern of lines obtained with Si moulds . d , Peeling off the elastomer from the GaAs mould results in the embedding of the photoresist pattern ( seen as small dots ) in the upper layer of the elastomer . e , Fluorescent image of the embedded photoresist dots . Bars a – e = 6 m m . f , Transmission elec - tron microscopy image of a human foreskin fibroblast on top of the embedded fluo - rescent photoresist ( red arrows ) . Bar = 1 m m . Inset : a focal adhesion ( between black arrows ) on the elastomer . Bar = 0 . 5 m m . g , Phase - contrast image of the cali - bration of the patterned elastomer ( Young’s modulus = 19 kPa ) before pulling and ( h ) while pulling with a force of 450 nN . Notice the deformation of the regular pat - tern in the vicinity of the pipette . i , After relaxation . Bar = 6 m m . j , Different moulds result in different elastomer topography . 1 , Small square pits of 0 . 8 m m width and 0 . 3 m m depth , with pattern size ranging from 2 m m to 30 m m . 2 , Flat topography with embedded fluorescent photoresist markers ( red boxes ) . 3 , Small tips of 0 . 4 m m diameter and 0 . 3 m m height defined using electron - beam lithography . The bottom panels show the cross sections of the respective elastomers through the pattern . PDMS , polydimethylsiloxane ; PMMA , polymethylmethacrylate . © 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd articles NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOL 3 MAY 2001 http : / / cellbio . nature . com 468 of the centre of the dots is recorded together with the fluorescence picture of the focal adhesions , marked by GFP – vinculin , using a high - resolution fluorescence imaging system connected to a com - puter interface 19 . Using this system , it has previously been shown that the local intensity of the GFP - tagged proteins such as vinculin , paxillin and tensin is proportional to their levels in focal adhesions as revealed by immunofluorescence labelling 20 . The undistorted pattern is regular and so any deviation from regularity indicates an application of force . Full recovery of the regular pattern was con - firmed by removing the cells from the substrate with trypsin . The displacements of the dots relative to their original position are determined using the ‘water’ algorithm 20 for automatic detection of the dot centre . Once the displacements are mapped ( Fig . 3a , c ) , the forces generated at each focal adhesion are computed using elastic - ity theory for the semi - infinite space 21 ( Fig . 3a , b ) . The only assumption included in the computation of the force pattern that fits the measured displacements is that the forces originate from the measured locations of the focal adhesions ( see Methods ) . This assumption was supported by the fact that , on all the cells studied ( n = 40 ) , displacements were never observed in areas without well - developed focal adhesions . To test possible cell - type - specific variability in focal - adhesion - mediated traction , we have examined elastomer deformation by highly contractile cardiac myocytes . The cells were isolated from neonatal rat hearts ( see Methods ) and directly plated on patterned elastomer substrates covered with fibronectin . Two days after plat - ing , beating of many cells was observed at ~ 1 Hz frequency . Cells were recorded in the contracted ( Fig . 2c ) or relaxed ( Fig . 2d ) phase ( see Supplementary Information ) . The red arrows and the magen - ta dots emphasize the pinching motion of the dots under the cell as it contracts . In many cells , contraction of the dorsal side was noted , without significant deformation of the substrate . Considerable deformation of the substrate occurred only in those cells whose contractile apparatus was anchored to the substrate by large focal adhesions , associated with the termini of contractile sarcomeric actin bundles . After observation of beating activity , the cardiac myocytes were fixed , permeabilized and stained for vinculin and actin , to visualize focal adhesions and the contractile apparatus . The analysis of the force applied to the substrate during beating was performed as described above for fibroblasts . The vinculin pattern of focal adhesions in cardiac myocytes was , however , often too dense to allow the resolution of distinct focal adhesions . Forces were therefore taken as applied by groups of vinculin - rich adhe - sions ( Fig . 4 ) . In human foreskin and cardiac fibroblasts , the force applied at single focal adhesions varied from below the noise level to 30 nN . The area of vinculin or paxillin containing focal adhesions was variable too , ranging from small ( < 1 m m 2 ) dots resembling focal complexes 22 to ~ 10 m m 2 . Only focal adhesions with a centre - to - cen - tre separation of at least 3 m m from other focal adhesions were measured . Comparison of the local traction force to the dimen - sions of individual focal adhesions shows a correlation between the force and the area or total intensity of the focal adhesions ( Fig . 5a , b ) . The orientation of the force is also correlated with that of the focal adhesion ( Fig . 5c ) , indicating that the increase in area owing to force is not isotropic but is mainly in the direction of force appli - cation . In cardiac myocytes , the direction of the force is also parallel to the direction of the long axis of the focal adhesions , namely paral - lel to the sarcomeric apparatus ( Fig . 4 ) . We analysed the total force applied within a defined area , as well as the total area of the vin - culin - rich patches . As expected for myocytes , the forces ( ~ 70 nN ) in a given cell area were higher than the corresponding forces in fibroblasts ( ~ 20 nN ) . However , the total area of the vinculin - rich Fibroblast before relaxation Fibroblast after relaxation Cardiac cell in contracted phase Cardiac cell in relaxed phase a b c d Figure 2 Cells plated on the patterned elastomer create distortions . a , Phase - contrast image of a rat cardiac fibroblast plated on a large grid pattern . The cell creates distortions ( arrowheads ) by applying force to the elastomer ( Young’s modulus = 18 kPa ) . b , The same cell as in a 10 min after BDM - induced relaxation . Notice the recovery of the regular grid pattern . Grid pitch = 30 m m . c , Phase - contrast image of a contracting cardiac myocyte plated on elastomer with embedded photoresist pattern of dots ( Young’s modulus = 19 kPa , bar = 6 m m ) . The dots can be clearly seen even under thick parts of the cell . The arrowheads and the magenta dots underline the pinching action of the contraction on the elas - tomer . Grid pitch = 2 m m . d , Relaxed phase . © 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd articles NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOL 3 MAY 2001 http : / / cellbio . nature . com 469 patches was also significantly higher . The ratio of these parameters ( the stress ) was found to vary between 2 nN m m – 2 and 5 nN m m – 2 . This value is similar to the one measured in focal adhesions of fibroblasts , as discussed below . The simultaneous visualization , in live cells , of each focal adhe - sion and of the associated force ( Fig . 5a – d ) makes it possible to monitor the dynamics of the system . To establish the relationship between changes in the assembly of the structure and force over time , 2 , 3 - butanedione monoxime ( BDM , a known inhibitor of actomyosin contraction 23 ) was added to fibroblasts . The time dependence of the relaxation of the forces was then recorded , together with the disruption of the focal adhesions ( Fig . 5e – h ) . The illumination time was minimized in order to avoid bleaching . The relaxation of the matrix is apparent within seconds after the appli - cation of BDM . The relationship between force and area in all focal adhesions at all time points is plotted in Fig . 5e ( each symbol rep - resents a different focal adhesion ) . The correlation seen at t = 0 ( Fig . 5a ) is now more apparent and the determined linear depend - ence defines a constant stress , P f = 5 . 5 – 2 nN m m – 2 , applied at the focal adhesions . Extrapolation of this linear dependence to zero force shows that the tension - independent area of focal adhesions is ~ 1 m m 2 . This residual area is similar to the typical size of focal com - plexes , which are the precursors of the larger adhesions formed once force is applied 12 . The time dependence of the force ( red squares ) and the total GFP – vinculin intensity ( black circles ) of a single focal adhesion after BDM treatment are plotted in Fig . 5f . The correlation between the two parameters is evident . The dynamic behaviour of single focal adhesions is consistent with the dependence found when plot - ting different adhesions at t = 0 . Applying BDM is thus equivalent to moving the force axis at t = 0 . A close correlation between force and total intensity is found for the various focal adhesions , as shown in Fig . 5g , which plots the average values obtained for all the single , spatially separated adhesions ( n = 10 ) from Fig . 5d , h . The time dependence of the disassembly of focal adhesions after BDM is very similar to the force relaxation ( Fig . 5f , g ) . Thus , the relax - ation of actomyosin contraction is rapidly followed by the disrup - tion of focal adhesions , while maintaining the linear dependence of focal adhesion assembly on force . Discussion A novel approach was developed , allowing a real - time and direct measurement of forces applied by stationary cells to the underlying matrix at individual focal adhesions . This approach was used to investigate the relationship between local forces at focal adhesions and their assembly . The area and total intensity of the focal adhe - sions are found to be linearly dependent on the local force applied by the cell . Furthermore , the time dependence of this relation is found to be below a few seconds . The linear dependence between force and area of the focal adhesion shows that a constant stress is applied to the various focal adhesions of the cell . Thus , the force applied by the cell on its substrate is closely linked to the assembly of the adhesion sites . The measurements were performed on cells expressing GFP derivatives of specific focal adhesion molecules , cultured on micropatterned elastic substrates . The displacements of the pattern Figure 3 Visualization of forces and focal adhesions . a , Fluorescence image of a human foreskin fibroblast expressing GFP – vinculin , which localizes to focal adhe - sions . Red arrows correspond to forces extracted from the displacements of the patterned elastomer ( Young’s modulus = 18 kPa ) . Note the alignment of force with the direction of elongation of large focal adhesions . Inset , phase - contrast image of the upper part of the cell ( white rectangle ) , showing displacements of the dots ( green arrows ) ; the pattern consists of small square pits ( see Fig . 1j , 1 ) . b , Fluorescence image of a human foreskin fibroblast stained with antibodies against paxillin , which also localizes at focal adhesions . Red arrows correspond to forces extracted from the displacements of the patterned elastomer ( Young’s modulus = 21 kPa ) ; the pattern consists of small tips formed by electron - beam lithography ( see Fig . 1j , 3 ) . c , Phase - contrast image of the same cell immediately before fixa - tion . White scale bars represent 4 m m ; red scale bars represent 30 nN . Figure 4 Distribution of forces in a cardiac myocyte . After recording the dis - placements of the pattern caused by beating ( Fig . 2c , d ) , the cardiac myocytes are stained for vinculin ( red ) to visualize the sites of force transmission , and for actin ( green ) . Yellow regions correspond to overlap of actin and vinculin . The light - blue arrows denote the forces applied to the substrate at the vinculin - rich areas . White bar = 6 m m ; blue bar = 70 nN . © 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd articles NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOL 3 MAY 2001 http : / / cellbio . nature . com 470 allow the direct visualization and quantification of forces applied to the surface , when combined with elasticity theory . The expression of a GFP fusion protein enables the visualization of individual adhesion sites in live cells and the determination of their dimen - sions and labelling intensity . The use of an elastomeric substrate was inspired by the elegant studies of Lee et al . 14 and Dembo et al . 16 We have , however , added features that proved to be essential for assigning specific forces to individual focal adhesions . First , the simultaneous detection of each focal adhesion , and of the associat - ed displacement , allows quantification of the force exerted at dis - tinct focal adhesions . Second , the use of a regular pattern allows direct visualization of distortions , by serving as an internal spatial reference . The pattern is created on the upper layer of the substrate and is firmly anchored to the bulk . This leads to more precise and uniform force quantification , compared to wrinkles or systems in which the markers ( e . g . beads ) are randomly embedded in the bulk . Last , the calculation of force from the displacements is based on the localization of discrete forces , without assuming the smoothness of the force field ( see Methods ) . The forces exerted at single focal adhesions in fibroblasts are found to be of the order of 10 nN , with a peak value at 30 nN . The stress measured at the different focal adhesions is constant at 5 . 5 – 2 nN m m – 2 . These results are consistent with previous estima - tions performed by separately measuring force and focal adhesion density 15 , 16 . The latter estimations , however , related mainly to forces developed during locomotion , whereas our focus is on the regula - tion of adhesion by force in stationary cells . The forces during loco - motion and their relation to focal adhesion assembly might follow a different regime because adhesion sites have to be disrupted as the cell migrates 18 , 24 . The quantitative analysis of the dynamic relaxation of force together with the disruption of focal adhesions after the treatment with BDM ( Fig . 5e – h ) provides new insight into the mechanism relating force and focal adhesion assembly . The striking finding is that the decreases in force and total intensity occur simultaneously . Thus , force and focal adhesion intensity are linked on a time scale that is faster than a few seconds ( our experimental resolution ) . This result puts a clear constraint on the possible mechanisms that have been proposed to account for the relationship between force and focal adhesion assembly . It supports models involving direct con - formational changes or molecular rearrangements in focal adhe - sions upon relaxation or application of force . The mechanism for focal adhesion response to force might be similar to the process that was recently proposed for the assembly of fibronectin under ten - sion , which involves exposing or hiding specific binding sites 25 , 26 . Recent studies have clearly indicated that integrin signalling depends on cellular contractility 4 , 5 , 27 , 28 , but the nature of the ‘mechanical switch’ or ‘sensor’ in focal adhesions is still unknown . In principle , two mechanisms can be considered . The forces applied at focal adhesions might affect the organization and assem - bly of the multimolecular complexes present in the adhesion sites . Alternatively , the applied force might directly induce unfolding of domains in the integrin itself 29 or in associated molecules 25 , thus affecting their binding activity . Can the linear dependence of the assembly on force and the value of the force applied at individual focal adhesions provide information on the nature of this putative mechanosensor ? The constant relating force and focal contact area is found to be 5 . 5 – 2 nN m m – 2 . A rough estimate , assuming two - dimensional close packing of integrins , leads to a force per mole - cule in the adhesion site of the order of 1 pN , similar to the force a c e g d h Force ( nN ) Before BDM After BDM Force ( nN ) Time ( s ) Time ( s ) Force ( nN ) Force orientation ( rad ) A r ea ( m m 2 ) A r ea ( m m 2 ) T o t a l i n t en s i t y ( a . u . ) F A o r i en t a t i on ( r ad ) ForceTotal intensity Normalized average force Normalized average intensity 5 . 0 2 . 5 0 0 5 10 15 20 25 0 5 10 15 20 25 – 200 0 200 – 200 0 200 8 , 000 6 , 000 4 , 000 2 , 000 0 0 0 1 . 0 2 . 0 3 . 0 5 10 15 20 25 3 . 0 2 . 0 1 . 0 0 7 . 5 5 . 0 2 . 5 0 b f F o r c e ( n N ) T o t a l i n t en s i t y ( a . u . ) 15 10 5 0 1 . 0 0 . 8 0 . 5 0 . 2 0 8 , 000 6 , 000 4 , 000 2 , 000 0 Figure 5 Correlation between force and focal adhesion structure . a – d , Before the addition of BDM . a , Correlation between force and area of single focal adhe - sions . b , Correlation between force and total fluorescence intensity of single focal adhesions . c , Correlation between the direction of the force and the elongation of the focal adhesion . The angles ( in radians ) were measured relatively to the x axis of the pictures . Each point represents a single focal adhesion from Fig . 5d . Absence of error bars indicates an error below the size of the symbol . d , Fluorescence image of a human foreskin fibroblast expressing GFP – vinculin , which localizes to the focal adhesions . The red arrows show the forces transmitted at the focal adhe - sions . Inset : fluorescence image of the pattern of dots below the left - hand side of the cell ; green arrows denote displacements . e – h , After the addition of 15 mM 2 , 3 - butanedione monoxime ( BDM ) . e , Correlation between the area and force of the focal adhesions of the cell shown in Fig . 5d , at all time points . Each different sym - bol represents a different focal adhesion . The black line is the correlation line of the linear part of the plot . Its slope defines a stress of 5 . 5 – 2 nN m m – 2 at the focal adhesions . f , Time dependence of the relaxation of force ( red squares ) and total GFP – vinculin intensity ( black dots ) of a single focal adhesion . g , Time dependence of the relaxation of force and total intensity as a normalized average over all focal adhesions . Notice the close correlation between force and total intensity , as both decrease with time . h , Same cell as in d 2 min after BDM treatment . White bar = 4 m m ; red bar = 10 nN ; Young’s modulus = 12 kPa . © 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd articles NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOL 3 MAY 2001 http : / / cellbio . nature . com 471 exerted by a single myosin molecule 30 . This constitutes a lower limit and is an order of magnitude below the rupture forces that were measured for individual cell – cell adhesion molecules 31 or the force needed reversibly to unfold single domains of proteins like tenascin 32 . However , it has been shown for single proteins that the unfold - ing rate depends exponentially on the load 33 . Even a force an order of magnitude below rupture can increase the probability of unfold - ing 34 , particularly at a low loading rate 35 . It can therefore be assumed that the force that a cell generates on its adhesion molecules is suffi - cient to induce a ‘feedback response’ by locally modulating molecu - lar interactions . The cell could thus use its own contractile appara - tus to regulate adhesion in a rapid and local fashion , directing the response exactly to the location at which force must be applied , namely to the binding sites to a rigid surface . Such a mechanism could have developed to , for example , allow the cell to respond dif - ferently to ligands that are firmly anchored to a surface than to sol - uble ligands , or to distinguish between substrates with different rigidities . It would therefore be interesting to unveil the first module affected by force within the focal adhesion complex . Methods Micropatterned elastic surfaces . The preparation of the micropatterned surfaces was carried out in two steps . First , the negative pattern was prepared using standard optical or electron - beam lithography on solid substrates ( Si or GaAs wafers , see below ) . The solid substrates and their photoresist or polymethylmethacrylate ( PMMA ) pat - tern were then used as a mould for patterning the surface of the elastomer 36 . The advantage of the Si – photoresist moulds lies in their ability to be reused many times , avoiding repeated lithography . However , the GaAs – photoresist moulds resulted in a fluorescent pattern embedded in the upper layer of the elastomer , which is easily detected under the cells . This embedding method can thus be used for the patterning of shallow fluorescent markers for focusing marks on the substrate , for example . The different moulds used resulted in substrates of different topography ( Fig . 1j ) . However , the results were similar for the various patterns used . Thus , the pattern was chosen according to the resolution needed . Si wafers were spin - coated with photoresist ( Microposit S1805 , Shipley , Marlborough , Massachusetts ) for 30s at 5 , 000rpm and cured for 5min at 80 (cid:176) C . The thickness of the photoresist coating was 0 . 3 m m , measured using a stylus surface profiler ( Tencor Instruments , Milpitas , California ) . The photoresist was illuminated with UV light ( Mask - aligner , Karl Suss MJB3 , Germany ) ; l = 405nm ) through a chrome - etched mask with different patterns ( Figs1b , c and 2a ) produced by electron - beam lithography . The wafers were washed with developer ( Microposit MF - 319 , Shipley ) for 7s , rinsed with water and dried under a nitrogen stream , followed by an additional curing at 120 (cid:176) C for 5min . GaAs – photoresist moulds were prepared similarly and etched for 2min , using a 1 : 1 : 50 solution of H 3 PO 4 – H 2 0 2 – H 2 0 . Si – PMMA moulds were prepared from direct - write electron - beam writing on dou - ble - layer PMMA . After development , the wafers were backed at 100 (cid:176) C for 5min . The silicone elastomer was thoroughly mixed with the silicone elastomer curing agent ( Sylgard 184 , Dow Corning ) in a 50 : 1 ratio in order to obtain a polydimethylsiloxane ( PDMS ) with a Young’s modu - lus of ~ 15kPa , and the mixture was poured on glass coverslips # 1 . The coated coverslips were then cured at 65 (cid:176) C for 25min . The Si – resist moulds were put in contact with the elastomer and cured again at 65 (cid:176) C overnight . The Si – resist moulds were carefully separated from the coverslips , resulting in a shallow topographic modulation of 0 . 3 m m at the upper layer of the elastomer ( Fig . 1a ) . The resist thickness determines the depth of the final topographic modulation . In order to avoid known effects of topography on cell spreading and polarization 37 , we reduced this depth to the minimum needed for optical detection of the pattern . Fibroblasts plated on parallel lines ( pattern of Fig . 1c ) with a depth of 0 . 3 m m did not show any particular orientation , whereas the same pattern with a depth of 1 m m led to a clear polarization of the fibroblasts along the direction of the lines ( data not shown ) . Alternatively , etched GaAs – photoresist moulds were put in contact with the elastomer . As the adhe - sion of the photoresist layer to the etched GaAs substrate is weak , the fluorescent photoresist detached during the peeling step ( Fig . 1d ) and remained embedded in the upper surface of the elastomer , thus creating a fluorescent pattern ( Fig . 1f ) . The yield was lower than for the Si – resist moulds and some of the markers could be missing in the final pattern . This did not have any effect on the final resolution , however , because the coverage of the displacements is dense . The pattern made with Si – resist moulds was observed with standard phase optics ( Fig . 1b , c ) but it was difficult to resolve the finer patterns under thick parts of the cell . Etched GaAs – photoresist moulds were thus used in experiments with rel - atively thick cells ( e . g . cardiac myocytes ) because the photoresist pattern embedded in the elastomer layer can be visualized using either phase - contrast ( Fig . 2c , d ) or fluorescence ( Fig . 1e ) ( excitation l = 555nm ; emission l = 617nm microscopy . Characterization of the elastomer . The bulk elastomer was characterized by suspending known masses on the end of strips , as described by Pelham et al . 38 . The elastomer strips return to their original length even after applying a force that induces an elongation of 70 % for 24h . The Poisson ratio was found to be ~ 0 . 5 by following changes in volume upon stretching . The Young’s modulus varied between 12kPa and 1000kPa as the ratio of the silicone elastomer to curing agent varied from 50 : 1 to 10 : 1 . Additional calibration of the surface properties was performed in situ under the microscope . The patterned elastomer surfaces were immersed in culture medium for several days and a calibrated micropipette was used to deflect the surface . The deflection of the micropipette was measured and translated into a force , together with the deformation of the patterned elastomer ( Fig . 1g , h ) . The dis - tortions of the elastomer with and without embedded markers decay linearly with distance and are proportional to the applied force . Knowing the force applied by the micropipette , the Young’s modulus of the elastomer was calculated from the displacements and found to be consistent with the value measured in the bulk . The micropipettes were calibrated by hanging wires of known mass on the tip of the pipettes and measuring the resulting deflection under the microscope 14 . The pipettes were pulled with laser - based programmable micropipette puller ( Sutter P - 2000 ; Instruments Company , Novato , CA ) , and their elastic constant was in the range of 20 – 50nN m m – 1 . The forces applied with the pipettes to the substrates were between 120nN and 500nN . The relaxation time of the patterned elastomer after mechanical perturbation was measured by phase - contrast microscopy using a video system ( 25frames per second ) . The typical time for rapid recoiling to 80 % of the distance to the original position was 100ms , with full relaxation ( > 95 % ) occurring within 400ms . Calculation of forces at focal adhesions . The displacement of the elastic substrate under cell traction was reconstructed by processing the phase - contrast images with the ‘water’ algorithm 20 . N different displacement vectors were obtained by comparing the distorted pattern of dots on a square lattice with its undistorted counterpart recorded after trypsinization ( typically , N = 1000 ) . We assumed that the cells apply significant cellular forces exclusively at focal adhesion sites , an assumption supported by the fact that displacements were only detected in close proximity to well - developed focal adhesions . Using the ‘water’ algorithm for the fluo - rescence images for GFP – vinculin , we find M focal adhesions per cell ( typically , M = 100 ) . With a Young’s modulus of between 10kPa and 20kPa , surface displacements of the order of micrometres resulted from cell traction . As this is considerably smaller than the film thickness ( 40 m m ) , the thick polymer film can be assumed to be an elastic halfspace under tangential traction . Video microscopy for monitoring recovery after micropipette traction confirms that the viscoelastic response can be neglected . Detailed considerations of the elasticity of an isotropic halfspace also show that each focal adhesion can be modelled as one point force exerted at the centre of mass , as long as no defor - mations are picked up within the focal adhesion area itself or its immediate vicinity . The elastic sub - strate has a Poisson ratio close to 0 . 5 and so no out - of - plane deformations occur for tangential trac - tion and the entire elastic problem of the substrate surface is two - dimensional . Using the well - known Green function for the upper surface of an elastic halfspace with Poisson ratio of 0 . 5 under tangential traction 39 , one arrives at a set of linear equations of the form u = GF that relates the forces F at the site of focal adhesions to the displacements u of the elastic substrate by the action of a matrix G . We know both u and G and want to find F , and so we have to solve the reverse problem , which is ‘ill - posed’ owing to the presence of noise . We use zero - order regularization—that is , we minimize | GF – u | 2 + l 2 | F | for F using singular value decomposition 40 . The regularization parameter l is chosen so that the residual norm | GF – u | 2 attains the value 2 ( N – M ) s 2 , which is its theoretical value if one assumes a Gaussian distribution of the variance s for the noise in the displacement vector compo - nents . Higher order regularization is less appropriate because the force field exerted by focal adhesions cannot be assumed to be smooth in general . The spatial resolution of measurement of the displacement of the centres of the dots is less than a micrometre . The centre of the dots can be determined with an accuracy below the optical resolution , and we estimate it to be 0 . 13 m m with a · 100 objective . However , it is not trivial to translate this uncertainty or noise in the displacement measurement to a limit on the force resolution . Our goal was to determine how separate two focal contacts should be in order to measure their respective forces accurately . In order to estimate this , we have added the experimental noise level to a set of known forces ( bootstrap ) 41 and then retrieved the forces . We found that forces that are 3 m m apart can be reli - ably retrieved . The error on the force estimate owing to noise is found to be – 2nN ( U . S . Schwarz et al . , unpublished results ) . Cells and immunofluorescence staining . Human foreskin fibroblasts from primary stock ( passages 14 – 28 ) were grown in Dulbecco’s modified eagle’s medium ( DMEM ) supplemented with antibiotics and 10 % foetal calf serum . Primary neonatal rat cardiomyocyte and cardiac fibroblasts cell cultures were prepared according to a protocol provided by H . M . Eppenberger ( ETH , Zurich , Switzerland ) 42 . Fibroblasts were treated on the microscope stage with 15 mM of the inhibitor BDM ( Sigma ) . Immunofluorescence staining was performed as described 20 , 43 . Digital microscopy of live cells . The methods for image acquisition were as previously described 19 . For live cell observation , the pat - terned elastomer substrates , set on coverslips , were mounted into chambers by attaching the coated coverslips to the bottom of 35mm tissue culture plates with 15mm diameter holes . The plates were then sterilized by UV for 60min , washed extensively with PBS and incubated at 4 (cid:176) C overnight with a 10 m gml - 1 solution of fibronectin ( Sigma ) in PBS . Before plating the cells , the coverslips were washed twice with plating medium and incubated with fresh plating medium for ~ 1hour at 37 (cid:176) C . For micro - scopic observation , the cells were maintained in DMEM lacking sodium bicarbonate , supplemented with 10 % foetal calf serum and buffered with 10mM HEPES , pH7 . 2 . Cells were observed with an Axiovert microscope ( Zeiss , Oberkochen , Germany ) using the DeltaVision acquisition system ( Applied Precision , Issaquah , Washington ) . For live cell experiments , Plan - Apochromat objectives ( Zeiss ) were used ( · 100 , Ph3 / 1 . 3NA and · 40 , Ph3 / 1 . 0NA ) . The temperature of cells under observation was main - tained at 37 (cid:176) C by temperature control of the oil - immersion objectives , using a heating ring and con - troller ( CT15 , Minco , Minneapolis , Minnesota ) 12 . Images were processed with Priism software 20 . Expression of GFP – vinculin fusion protein . Full - length vinculin cDNA was ligated in frame into the GFP expression vector pGZ21 as previously described 20 . Transfection was done by electroporation as previously described 19 . Transmission electron microscopy ( TEM ) Cells were cultured for 48h on the patterned surfaces . The cells were fixed as previously described 44 . After post - fixation , the elastomer was peeled off , while the pattern remained in the embedding materi - al . The samples were than re - embedded and cut , as previously described 44 . © 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd articles NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOL 3 MAY 2001 http : / / cellbio . nature . com 472 RECEIVED 17 AUGUST 2000 ; REVISED 14 DECEMBER 2000 ; ACCEPTED 11 JANUARY 2001 ; PUBLISHED 6 APRIL 2001 1 . Yang , J . T . , Rayburn , H . & Hynes , R . O . Cell adhesion events mediated by alpha 4 integrins are essential in placental and cardiac development . Development 121 , 549 – 560 ( 1995 ) . 2 . Sheetz , M . P . , Felsenfeld , D . P . & Galbraith , C . G . Cell migration : regulation of force on extracellu - lar - matrix – integrin complexes . Trends Cell Biol . 8 , 51 – 54 ( 1998 ) . 3 . Rossiter , H . , Alon , R . & Kupper , T . S . Selectins , T - cell rolling and inflammation . Mol . Med . Today 3 , 214 – 222 ( 1997 ) . 4 . Burridge , K . & Chrzanowska - Wodnicka , M . Focal adhesions , contractility , and signaling . Annu . Rev . Cell . Dev . Biol . 12 , 463 – 518 ( 1996 ) . 5 . Bershadsky , A . & Geiger , B . Cytoskeleton - associated anchor and signal transduction proteins . In Guidebook to the Extracellular Matrix , Anchor , and Adhesion Proteins ( eds Kreis , T . & Vale , R . ) 3 – 11 ( Oxford Univ . Press , 1999 ) . 6 . Helfman , D . M . et al . Caldesmon inhibits nonmuscle cell contractility and interferes with the for - mation of focal adhesions . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 3097 – 3112 ( 1999 ) . 7 . Ingber , D . Integrins as mechanochemical transducers . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 3 , 841 – 848 ( 1991 ) . 8 . Yamada , K . M . & Geiger , B . Molecular interactions in cell adhesion complexes . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 9 , 76 – 85 ( 1997 ) . 9 . Geiger , B . , Yehuda - Levenberg , S . & Bershadsky , A . D . Molecular interactions in the submembrane plaque of cell – cell and cell – matrix adhesions . Acta Anat . ( Basel ) 154 , 46 – 62 ( 1995 ) . 10 . Abercrombie , M . & Dunn , G . A . Adhesions of fibroblasts to substratum during contact inhibition observed by interference reflection microscopy . Exp . Cell Res . 92 , 57 – 62 ( 1975 ) . 11 . Choquet , D . , Felsenfeld , D . P . & Sheetz , M . P . Extracellular matrix rigidity causes strengthening of integrin – cytoskeleton linkages . Cell 88 , 39 – 48 ( 1997 ) . 12 . Riveline , D . et al . Externally applied local mechanical force induces growth of focal contacts by a mDia1 - dependent and ROCK - independent mechanism . J . Cell Biol . ( in the press ) . 13 . Harris , A . K . , Wild , P . & Stopak , D . Silicone rubber substrata : a new wrinkle in the study of cell locomotion . Science 208 , 177 – 179 ( 1980 ) . 14 . Lee , J . , Leonard , M . , Oliver , T . , Ishihara , A . & Jacobson , K . Traction forces generated by locomoting keratocytes . J . Cell Biol . 127 , 1957 – 1964 ( 1994 ) . 15 . Galbraith , C . G . & Sheetz , M . P . A micromachined device provides a new bend on fibroblast trac - tion forces . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 9114 – 9118 ( 1997 ) . 16 . Dembo , M . & Wang , Y . L . Stresses at the cell - to - substrate interface during locomotion of fibrob - lasts . Biophys . J . 76 , 2307 – 2316 ( 1999 ) . 17 . Burton , K . & Taylor , D . L . Traction forces of cytokinesis measured with optically modified elastic substrata . Nature 385 , 450 – 454 ( 1997 ) . 18 . Burton , K . , Park , J . H . & Taylor , D . L . Keratocytes generate traction forces in two phases . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 3745 – 3769 ( 1999 ) . 19 . Zamir , E . et al . Dynamics and segregation of cell - matrix adhesions in cultured fibroblasts . Nature Cell Biol . 2 , 191 – 196 ( 2000 ) . 20 . Zamir , E . et al . Molecular diversity of cell – matrix adhesions . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 1655 – 1669 ( 1999 ) . 21 . Dembo , M . , Oliver , T . , Ishihara , A . & Jacobson , K . Imaging the traction stresses exerted by locomot - ing cells with the elastic substratum method . Biophys . J . 70 , 2008 – 2022 ( 1996 ) . 22 . Nobes , C . D . & Hall , A . Rho , rac , and cdc42 GTPases regulate the assembly of multimolecular focal complexes associated with actin stress fibers , lamellipodia , and filopodia . Cell 81 , 53 – 62 ( 1995 ) . 23 . Cramer , L . P . & Mitchison , T . J . Myosin is involved in postmitotic cell spreading . J . Cell Biol . 131 , 179 – 189 ( 1995 ) . 24 . Beningo , K . A . , Dembo , M . , Kaverina , I . N . , Small , J . V . & Wang , Y . - L . Nascent focal adhesions are responsible for the generation of strong traction forces in migrating cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 4 ( 2000 ) . 25 . Zhong , C . et al . Rho - mediated contractility exposes a cryptic site in fibronectin and induces fibronectin matrix assembly . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 539 – 551 ( 1998 ) . 26 . Shaub , A . Unravelling the extracellular matrix . Nature Cell Biol . 1 , E173 – E175 ( 2000 ) . 27 . Howe , A . , Aplin , A . E . , Alahari , S . K . & Juliano , R . L . Integrin signaling and cell growth control . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 10 , 220 – 231 ( 1998 ) . 28 . Felsenfeld , D . P . , Schwartzberg , P . L . , Venegas , A . , Tse , R . & Sheetz , M . P . Selective regulation of inte - grin – cytoskeleton interactions by the tyrosine kinase Src . Nature Cell Biol . 1 , 200 – 206 ( 1999 ) . 29 . Chicurel , M . E . , Chen , C . S . & Ingber , D . E . Cellular control lies in the balance of forces . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 10 , 232 – 239 ( 1998 ) . 30 . Finer , J . T . , Mehta , A . D . & Spudich , J . A . Characterization of single actin – myosin interactions . Biophys . J . 68 , 291S – 296S ( 1995 ) . 31 . Benoit , M . , Gabriel , D . , Gerish , G . & Gaub , H . E . Discrete interactions in cell adhesion measured by single - molecule force spectroscopy . Nature Cell Biol . 2 , 313 – 317 ( 2000 ) . 32 . Oberhauser , A . F . , Marszalek , P . E . , Erickson , H . P . & Fernandez , J . M . The molecular elasticity of the ECM protein tenascin . Nature 393 , 181 – 185 ( 1998 ) . 33 . Carrion - Vazquez , M . et al . Mechanical and chemical unfolding of a single protein : a comparison . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 3694 – 3699 ( 1999 ) . 34 . Bell , G . I . Models for the specific adhesion of cells to cells . Science 200 , 618 – 627 ( 1978 ) . 35 . Merkel , R . , Nassoy , P . , Leung , A . , Ritchie , K . & Evans , E . Energy landscapes of receptor – ligand bonds explored with dynamic force spectroscopy . Nature 397 , 50 – 53 ( 1999 ) . 36 . Chen , C . S . , Mrksich , M . , Huang , S . , Whitesides , G . M . & Ingber , D . E . Geometric control of cell life and death . Science 276 , 1425 – 1428 ( 1997 ) . 37 . Dow , J . A . , Clark , P . , Connolly , P . , Curtis , A . S . & Wilkinson , C . D . Novel methods for the guidance and monitoring of single cells and simple networks in culture . J . Cell Sci . ( Suppl . ) 8 , 55 – 79 ( 1987 ) . 38 . Pelham , R . J . Jr & Wang , Y . Cell locomotion and focal adhesions are regulated by substrate flexibili - ty . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 13661 – 13665 ( 1997 ) . 39 . Landau , L . D . & Lifshitz , E . M . Course of Theoretical Physics : Theory of Elasticity . Vol . 7 , 2nd edn ( Pergamon Press , Oxford , 1970 ) . 40 . Press , W . H . , Teukolsky , S . A . , Vetterling , W . T . & Flannery , B . P . Numerical recipes in FORTRAN . The art of scientific computing . 2nd edn ( Cambridge Univ . Press , 1992 ) . 41 . Efron , B . & Tibshirani , R . J . Monographs on Statistics and Applied Probability : An Introduction to the Bootstrap . Vol . 57 ( Chapman and Hall , 1993 ) . 42 . Harder , B . A . , Hefti , M . A . , Eppenberger , H . M . & Schaub , M . C . Differential protein localization in sarcomeric and nonsarcomeric contractile structures of cultured cardiomyocytes . J . Struct . Biol . 122 , 162 – 175 ( 1998 ) . 43 . Katz , B . Z . et al . Physical state of the extracellular matrix regulates the structure and molecular composition of cell – matrix adhesions . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 1047 – 1060 ( 2000 ) . 44 . Levenberg , S . , Katz , B . Z . , Yamada , K . M . & Geiger , B . Long - range and selective autoregulation of cell – cell or cell – matrix adhesions by cadherin or integrin ligands . J . Cell Sci . 111 , 347 – 357 ( 1998 ) . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We wish to thank E . Zamir and E . Moses for illuminating discussions and technical assistance . This study was supported by the Israel Science Foundation , administrated by the Israel Academy of Science and the Minerva Foundation . B . G . holds the E . Neter chair for Cell and Tumor Biology . L . A . is incum - bent of the Dorothy and Patrick Gorman Professorial chair of Biological Ultrastructure . U . S . S . was supported by the Minerva Foundation . A . B . holds the J . Moss chair of Biomedical Research . Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to B . G . Supplementary Information is available on Nature Cell Biology ’s website ( http : / / cellbio . nature . com ) . © 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd supplementary infomation NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOL 3 MAY 2001 http : / / cellbio . nature . com 1 Movie 1 Two beating cardiac myocytes on the micropatterned elastomer . Beating is reconstructed from pictures acquired either in the contracted or the relaxed phase . The border between patterned and non - patterned elastomer can be seen in the lower part of the picture . Movie 2 A cardiac myocyte plated on the micropatterned elastic substrate . Reconstruction from pictures acquired sequentially either in the relaxed or the contract - ed phase . White crosses indicate regions of contraction ; black cross in the upper left shows a non - disturbed location . © 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd