INTRODUCTION Cells are able to take up materials from their environment through endocytic processes . In receptor - mediated endocyto - sis , the engulfed materials ( cargo ; ligand and receptor ) move to a specialized region of the plasma membrane , such as clathrin - coated pits ( Mukherjee et al . , 1997 ) . In the clathrin - coated pits , the cargo is wrapped by the plasma membrane , which is coated with clathrins , leading to the formation of na - scent vesicle buds ( Pearse , 1976 ) . As newly formed vesicles mature , they separate from the plasma membrane to form intracellular vesicles ( van der Bliek et al . , 1993 ) . Receptor - mediated endocytosis is characterized by the highly selective sorting of molecules to be ingested by the cell . This selectiv - ity results from the specific interaction between a receptor on the plasma membrane and its extracellular ligand . The func - tional role of receptor - mediated endocytosis is interpreted as the regulation of receptor functions rather than ingestion of ligands from the cell exterior . Following agonistic stimulation , G protein - coupled recep - tors ( GPCRs ) undergo conformational changes that allow binding to G proteins ( Gilman , 1987 ) , leading to the activation of various signaling pathways and initiation of intracellular traf - ficking . After agonist stimulation , the receptor is phosphory - lated by GPCR kinases ( GRKs ) ( Pitcher et al . , 1998 ) , enhanc - ing the binding of b - arrestins , which connect to adaptors , such as adaptor protein ( AP ) - 2 and clathrin ( Ferguson et al . , 1996 ; Goodman et al . , 1996 ; Laporte et al . , 1999 ) . These cellular processes are classified as homologous ( agonist - induced , GRK - mediated ) regulation of receptor responsiveness . By contrast , heterologous regulation of receptor responsiveness occurs regardless of agonists occupying the receptor . Recep - tor phosphorylation mediated by second - messenger - mediat - ed kinases [ protein kinase A ( PKA ) or protein kinase C ( PKC ) ] is a key cellular event that leads to heterologous regulation . The molecular mechanisms involved in GPCR endocyto - sis are highly conserved . GRKs / b - arrestins and PKA / PKCs are two protein families that mediate homologous and het - erologous regulation , respectively . However , as described in the following sections , various cellular environments and components are involved in the regulation of GPCR endocy - tosis . Among these multiple factors , this review focused on the functional interactions between homologous and heterolo - gous pathways and the roles of small guanosine triphosphate 26 Multifactorial Regulation of G Protein - Coupled Receptor Endocytosis Xiaohan Zhang and Kyeong - Man Kim * Pharmacology Laboratory , College of Pharmacy , Chonnam National University , Gwangju 61186 , Republic of Korea Endocytosis is a process by which cells absorb extracellular materials via the inward budding of vesicles formed from the plasma membrane . Receptor - mediated endocytosis is a highly selective process where receptors with specific binding sites for extracel - lular molecules internalize via vesicles . G protein - coupled receptors ( GPCRs ) are the largest single family of plasma - membrane receptors with more than 1000 family members . But the molecular mechanisms involved in the regulation of GPCRs are believed to be highly conserved . For example , receptor phosphorylation in collaboration with b - arrestins plays major roles in desensitization and endocytosis of most GPCRs . Nevertheless , a number of subsequent studies showed that GPCR regulation , such as that by endocytosis , occurs through various pathways with a multitude of cellular components and processes . This review focused on i ) functional interactions between homologous and heterologous pathways , ii ) methodologies applied for determining receptor en - docytosis , iii ) experimental tools to determine specific endocytic routes , iv ) roles of small guanosine triphosphate - binding proteins in GPCR endocytosis , and v ) role of post - translational modification of the receptors in endocytosis . Key Words : G protein - coupled receptor , Endocytosis , Ral , ARF6 , Glycosylation , Palmitoylation Abstract Biomol Ther 25 ( 1 ) , 26 - 43 ( 2017 ) * Corresponding Author E - mail : kmkim @ jnu . ac . kr Tel : + 82 - 62 - 530 - 2936 , Fax : + 82 - 62 - 530 - 2949 Received Aug 18 , 2016 Revised Nov 21 , 2016 Accepted Nov 30 , 2016 Published Online Jan 1 , 2017 Copyright © 2017 The Korean Society of Applied Pharmacology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4062 / biomolther . 2016 . 186 Open Access This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Com - mons Attribution Non - Commercial License ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licens - es / by - nc / 4 . 0 / ) which permits unrestricted non - commercial use , distribution , and reproduction in any medium , provided the original work is properly cited . www . biomolther . org Invited Review www . biomolther . org Zhang and Kim . Endocytosis of GPCRs 27 ( GTP ) - binding proteins and receptor post - translational modifi - cation on the regulation of receptor endocytosis . FUNCTIONAL CROSSTALK BETWEEN HOMOLOGOUS AND HETEROLOGOUS REGULATION OF GPCRs Although not mandatory , a major mechanism underlying GPCR regulation is receptor phosphorylation ( Stadel et al . , 1983 ; Barak et al . , 1994 ; Ferguson , 2007 ; Cho et al . , 2010 ) . Second - messenger - dependent protein kinases , such as PKA and PKC , are responsible for agonist - nonspecific heterolo - gous regulation . Alternatively , GRK2 / 3 is responsible for ago - nist - specific homologous regulation . Initially , GPCR phosphor - ylation by PKA or PKC was regarded as the sole mechanism of GPCR regulation ( Benovic et al . , 1985 ) ; however , it was found that b 2 adrenoceptor ( b 2 AR ) could be phosphorylated in S49 lymphoma cells , which lack functional PKA ( Strasser et al . , 1986 ) , suggesting the existence of additional protein kinases capable of phosphorylating GPCRs and leading to identification of the novel protein kinase family of GRKs ( Ben - ovic et al . , 1986 , 1989 ) . Subsequent studies showed that b - ar - restins ( Lohse et al . , 1990 ; Attramadal et al . , 1992 ) , analogues of visual arrestin , were required for receptor desensitization ( Benovic et al . , 1987 ) and potentiation of receptor endocytosis ( Ferguson et al . , 1996 ; Goodman et al . , 1996 ) . Second - messenger - dependent protein kinases such as PKA and PKC can phosphorylate GPCRs at consensus phos - phorylation sites and interfere with receptor - G protein cou - pling . Since PKA and PKC can phosphorylate agonist - unoc - cupied receptors , as well as agonist - occupied receptors , they inhibit not only ongoing signaling , but also prevent subsequent signaling activation . A complete understanding of the selective involvement of second - messenger - dependent protein kinases Fig . 1 - Zhang and Kim Gs AC cAMP ATP 5’AMP PDE Gq PLC PIP2 IP3 DAG PA DGK β - Arrestin PKC PKA Ago Ago PM A ( Recruit ) Mdm2 Mdm2 β - Arr2 β - Arr2 Ub Ago PKC β II Endocytosis PM Nuclearmembrane B Fig . 1 . Functional interactions between homologous and heterologous regulatory pathways of GPCRs . ( A ) Functional antagonism of b - arrestins on G s - or G q - coupled receptors downstream of receptor - G protein coupling . For G s - coupled receptors , b - arrestins recruit phospho - diesterases to inhibit cAMP accumulation . For G q - coupled receptors , b - arrestins recruit DGK to convert DAG to phosphatidic acid . ( B ) Ef - fects of PKC b II on b - arrestin2 ubiquitination . PKC b II inhibits b - arrestin2 ubiquitination by interfering with the nuclear export of Mdm2 , which occurs in response to agonist stimulation of GPCRs that have a tendency to undergo endocytosis . Ago , agonist ; PM , plasma membrane ; AC , adenylyl cyclase ; PKA , protein kinase A ; PDE , phosphodiesterase ; PIP2 , phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ; PLC , phospholipase C ; DAG , diacylglycerol ; IP3 , inositol 1 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate ; DGK , diacylglycerol kinase ; PA , phosphatidic acid ; PKC , protein kinase C ; b - Arr , b - arrestin ; Ub , ubiquitin ; Mdm2 , Mouse double - minute - 2 homolog ; cAMP , cyclic adenosine monophosphate ; GPCR , G protein - coupled receptor . 28 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4062 / biomolther . 2016 . 186 in heterologous regulatory processes remains elusive . Per - haps G s - or G q - coupled receptors , which are phosphorylated by GRK2 / 3 , could be subjected to feedback regulation by ac - tivated PKA or PKC , suggesting that receptor phosphorylation mediated by second - messenger - dependent protein kinases could also contribute to homologous desensitization ( Clark et al . , 1988 ; Kelly et al . , 2008 ) . Along with ligand selectivity , the main difference between ho - mologous and heterologous regulation is the concentration of agonist required to induce receptor phosphorylation . Agonists B . Hydrophilic radioligand method Fig . 2 - Zhang and Kim Vehicle Agonist Antibody Antibody A . Flow cytometry or ELISA method PM Washing Washing GPCR - tagged with epitope at N - terminus Vehicle Agonist Washing Radioligand Radioligand PM Washing Fig . 2 . Common methodologies used for determining GPCR endocytosis . ( A ) Determination of receptor endocytosis using epitope - tagged GPCRs at the N - terminus . This process involves induction of receptor internalization through agonist treatment for a desired period of time , washing , and labeling with primary and secondary antibodies . Receptors located on the cell surface are determined by flow cytometry or ELISA . According to the diagram , 60 percent of cell surface receptors are internalized . ( B ) Determination of receptor endocytosis using hy - drophilic radioligands . This process involves induction of receptor endocytosis through agonist treatment for a desired period of time , thor - ough washing , and labeling with hydrophilic radioligands . Due to the hydrophilicity of radioligands , only receptors located on the cell surface are counted . According to the diagram , 60 percent of cell surface receptors are internalized . GPCR , G protein - coupled receptor ; ELISA , enzyme - linked immunosorbent assay . Biomol Ther 25 ( 1 ) , 26 - 43 ( 2017 ) www . biomolther . org Zhang and Kim . Endocytosis of GPCRs 29 in the nanomolar range are sufficient for PKA / PKC - mediated GPCR phosphorylation and desensitization ( Jimenez - Baran - da et al . , 2007 ; Kim et al . , 2008 ) . In the case of PKA / PKC - mediated receptor phosphorylation , the signaling cascade ini - tiated from the agonist - activated receptor is strongly amplified i . e . , G protein→cyclic adenosine monophosphate ( cAMP ) / diacylglycerol ( DAG ) →PKA / PKC . By contrast , GRK2 / 3 - me - diated receptor phosphorylation , which depends upon ago - nist occupancy , requires higher concentrations of agonist as compared with those required for PKA / PKC - mediated phos - phorylation . Additionally , higher levels of receptor expression are needed to facilitate b - arrestin translocation to mediate re - ceptor desensitization and endocytosis . Therefore , GRK2 / 3 - mediated receptor phosphorylation plays important roles in synaptic nerve terminals where high concentrations of neu - rotransmitters are attainable . By contrast , PKA / PKC - mediated receptor phosphorylation might affect tissues with low concen - trations of circulating agonists ( Arriza et al . , 1992 ; Tran et al . , 2004 ; Pollok - Kopp et al . , 2007 ; Kelly et al . , 2008 ) . Understanding the functional interaction between homolo - gous and heterologous pathways of GPCR regulation is an important field of study . Reports implicated the involvement of GRK2 and b - arrestins on PKC / PKA - mediated regulatory path - ways . For example , activated GRK2 binds to PKC b through its pleckstrin homology domain , resulting in PKC inhibition ( Ji et al . , 2003 ) . b - Arrestins inhibit PKC - mediated regulatory path - ways by activating DAG kinase , which subsequently mediates conversion of DAG to phosphatidic acid ( PA ) ( Nelson et al . , 2007 ) . Another study showed that b - arrestins recruit cAMP phosphodiesterases to ligand - activated receptors , promoting the degradation of cAMP and thus inhibiting PKA activation ( Perry et al . , 2002 ) ( Fig . 1A ) . There have been various and sometimes contradictory reports regarding the effects of PKA or PKC on the homolo - gous regulatory pathway . For example , PKA or PKC activates GRK2 by enhancing its translocation to the plasma membrane ( Winstel et al . , 1996 ; Cong et al . , 2001 ) . A subsequent study showed that GRK2 is phosphorylated by PKC a , PKC δ , and PKC δ in vitro , relieving the tonic inhibition by calmodulin ( Kra - sel et al . , 2001 ) . By contrast , other studies showed that Raf - kinase - inhibitor protein is phosphorylated on Ser153 by PKC activation , leading to its association with GRK2 and the inhibi - tion of GRK2 activity ( Lorenz et al . , 2003 ; Huang et al . , 2007 ) . Furthermore , a recent study showed that PKC b II inhibits the homologous regulatory pathway by inhibiting b - arrestin - 2 ubiquitination ( Zheng et al . , 2015 ) ( Fig . 1B ) . Ubiquitination in - volves addition of ubiquitin , a small ( 8 . 5 kDa ) regulatory pro - tein and is a frequent cue for the degradation of the acceptor protein by the proteasome ( Glickman and Ciechanover , 2002 ) . In addition to protein degradation , ubiquitination is required for other functions , including b - arrestin2 - mediated endocytic ac - tivities ( Shenoy et al . , 2001 ) . Therefore , it is suggested that functional interactions be - tween homologous and heterologous pathways occur in two layers : between the major players of each endocytic pathway ( PKA / PKC , GRK2 / b - arrestins ) or through manipulation of sec - ond - messenger levels . Further studies are needed to clarify the contradictory reports regarding the functional roles of PKC in the homologous regulation of GPCRs . METHODOLOGIES USED FOR DETERMINATION OF RECEPTOR ENDOCYTOSIS The terms ‘endocytosis’ , ‘internalization’ , and ‘sequestra - tion’ are usually used interchangeably to describe the inward movement of extracellular material across the plasma mem - brane through endocytic processes . Strictly speaking , se - questration describes the isolation of ligands from receptors located on the cell surface ; thus , it does not necessarily rep - resent inward movement of materials from the exterior of the cell into the cytosol . Various experimental approaches have been utilized to assess GPCR internalization ( endocytosis ) or sequestration . In the case of receptor endocytosis or internalization , the most universally utilized methodology is tagging of receptors at the N - terminus with specific epitopes , usually hemagglu - tinin ( HA ) or FLAG ( Kim et al . , 2001 ; Zhang and Kim , 2016 ) ( Fig . 2A ) . Antibody labeled receptors on the cell surface can be detected using either enzyme - linked immunosorbent assay ( ELISA ) or fluorescence - activated cell sorting ( FACS ) . For the ligand - binding methodology , radiolabeled hydrophilic ligands Fig . 3 - Zhang and Kim ( 1 ~ 5 min ) Pharmacological Sequestration  Receptors undergo conformational change Ago Hydrophilic ligand  Recepors translocate toward more hydrophobic region within the plasma membrane PM Fig . 3 . Diagram showing the pharmacological sequestration of GPCRs . In pharmacological sequestration , receptors undergo conforma - tional changes and translocate toward more hydrophobic regions within the plasma membrane . Pharmacologically sequestered receptors do not actually translocate to the cytosol , but cannot bind to hydrophilic ligands , because they are located within more hydrophobic regions of the plasma membrane . GPCR , G protein - coupled receptor ; PM , plasma membrane . 30 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4062 / biomolther . 2016 . 186 are commonly used to directly label receptors on the cell sur - face ( Fig . 2B ) . Radiolabeled hydrophobic ligands are some - times combined with hydrophilic ligands ( to compete with surface binding of hydrophobic radioligands ) to measure total receptor levels , as well as intracellular receptor levels ( Itoka - wa et al . , 1996 ; Kim et al . , 2001 ; Zhang et al . , 2016b ) . In our personal experience , the radioligand - binding assay is more convenient and accurate when compared with other meth - odologies . Receptor internalization can also be measured by fluorescence ( Thompson and Whistler , 2011 ) or cell - surface biotinylation ( Vickery and von Zastrow , 1999 ) ; however , these two methods can result in either difficultly in selectively quan - tifying receptors on the cell membrane and in the cytosol or the necessity to supplement with immunoprecipitation and im - munoblot assays , which could introduce large variations in the measurements . When receptor sequestration accompanies conformational changes and short - distance trafficking within the plasma membrane , resulting in failure to bind hydrophilic ligands ( pharmacological sequestration ; Fig . 3 ) , hydrophilic radioligands are used to label receptors on the cell surface . FACS analysis Detection of GPCR endocytosis by FACS requires an N - terminal epitope - tagged GPCR . Because the location of the N - terminus changes from the exterior to the interior of the cell following GPCR internalization , FACS can be used to quantify the decrease in GPCR localization at the exterior surface of the plasma membrane ( Kim et al . , 2001 ) . In this procedure , cells are transfected with a GPCR containing an epitope - tagged N - terminus . Cells are distributed in 6 - well plates , stimulated with a vehicle or agonist for a desired period , and labeled with antibodies specific to the corresponding epitope . The mean cell - surface fluorescence and the number of fluorescent cells are then determined by FACS , and the percentage of receptor endocytosis is calculated from the FACS values of vehicle - or agonist - treated cells [ i . e . , ( vehicle - treated−agonist - treated ) / ( vehicle - treated ) ] . ELISA The principle behind determining receptor internalization by ELISA is essentially the same as that for FACS analysis : pres - ence of an N - terminal epitope tag on the receptor ( Zhang et al . , 2016a ) ; the epitope is no longer recognized by the cognate antibody once the receptor is internalized . For ELISA , cells are transfected with a receptor tagged at the N - terminus with a specific epitope , stimulated with agonist for a period of time , and labeled with antibodies corresponding to the specific epi - tope , followed by labeling with horseradish peroxidase - con - jugated secondary antibodies . o - Phenylenediamine , a horse - radish - peroxidase substrate , is then added , and the optical density ( OD ) of the supernatants is read using an ELISA read - er . The background reading obtained from mock - transfected cells is subtracted to calculate the percentage of internaliza - tion . It is important to have a sufficient margin between the OD values of the cells transfected with receptor cDNA and mock plasmid . The percentage of receptor endocytosis is calculated from the OD values of vehicle - and agonist - treated cells [ i . e . , ( vehicle - treated−agonist - treated ) / ( vehicle - treated ) ] . Radioligand binding Hydrophilic radiolabeled ligands can be used to selectively label receptors expressed on the cell surface ( Kim et al . , 2001 ; Zheng et al . , 2016 ) . Cells are transfected with a GPCR , dis - tributed in a 24 - well plate , and stimulated with an agonist for a desired period of time . Cells need to be thoroughly washed with ice - cold serum - free media or low - pH buffer to stop further Fig . 4 . Selectivity of endocytic inhibitors on clathrin - mediated and caveolae - dependent endocytosis . Epsin ( 204 - 458 ) , low pH , and MDC can be used to block CME . M b CD is selective for caveolar endocytosis . Careful dosage adjustment is needed for MDC and M b CD . Su - crose , K44A - dynamin , and Con A do not show selectivity . Con A inhibits GPCR signaling independent of its effects on endocytosis . Epsin , epidermal growth factor receptor - pathway substrate 15 - interacting protein ; AP - 2 , adaptor protein 2 ; CME , clathrin - mediated endocytosis ; Con A , concanavalin A ; MDC , monodansylcadaverine ; M b CD , methyl - b - cyclodextrin . AP - 2 Clathrin Caveolae CME Dynamin Caveolin Sucrose ConA Epsin ( 204 - 458 ) Low pH MDC Signaling Fig . 4 - Zhang and Kim K44A - Dyn Agonist M β CD Biomol Ther 25 ( 1 ) , 26 - 43 ( 2017 ) www . biomolther . org Zhang and Kim . Endocytosis of GPCRs 31 Fig . 5 . Different modes of Ral regulation of receptor endocytosis . ( A ) Three downstream effectors of Ral in the regulation of receptor en - docytosis . ( B ) RalBP1 ( formerly known as RLIP76 or Ral - interacting protein ) is involved in Ral - mediated regulation of endocytosis of recep - tors , such as EGF receptor and insulin receptor . Agonist - activated receptors transmit signals through Ral , RalBP1 , and POB1 to Epsin and Eps15 . Epsin and Eps15 bind to the AP - 2 / clathrin complex , leading to formation of clathrin - coated vesicles , which contain transmembrane receptors . This diagram was modified based on a previous publication ( Nakashima et al . , 1999 ) . ( C ) Ral - mediated activation of PLD is in - volved in the endocytosis of EGF receptor and metabotropic glutamate receptor . PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 is synthesized from PI ( 4 ) P by PI ( 4 ) P5K , which is activated by PA , a product of PLD . ( D ) RalA regulates GPCR endocytosis in an activity dependent manner . GTP - bound RalA sequesters GRK2 from binding to its receptor , resulting in the inhibition of receptor endocytosis . When cells are treated with agonist , G bγ translocates to the cytosol as a complex with RGL , resulting in the dissociation of RGL from RalA and conversion of GTP - RalA to GDP - RalA , to which GRK2 has low affinity . GRK2 dissociated from GTP - RalA is the prepared for interaction with a receptor or other endocytic regulators . Ral - BP1 , Ral - binding protein ; EGF , epidermal growth factor receptor , Eps15 , EGF - pathway substrate 15 ; Epsin , Eps15 - interacting protein ; AP - 2 , adaptor protein 2 ; PLD , phospholipase D ; PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 , phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ; PI ( 4 ) P , phosphatidylinositol 4 - phosphate ; PI ( 4 ) P5K , phosphatidylinositol 4 - phosphate 5 - kinase ; PA , phosphatidic acid ; GPCR , G protein - coupled receptor ; GRK , GPCR kinase ; GDP , gua - nosine diphosphate ; RGL , Ral - GDP - dissociation - stimulator - like protein ; GTP , guanosine triphosphate . Ral GTP Ral POB1 RalBP1 Ral POB1 RalBP1 1 EPS15 Epsin AP2 Clathrin Endocytosis EGF / Insulin receptor A C D Fig . 5 - Zhang and Kim Ral RalBP1 / POB1 PLD GRK2 Endocytosis B GTP GDP GTP Ral ( Active Ral ) PLD Phosphotidylcholine Choline  Endocytic Vesicle Formation  AP2 Recruitment Endocytosis PA PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 PI ( 4 ) P PI4P5K + + Ago GDP Ral GRK2 Ral GTP RGL RGL Endocytosis - G α G βγ G βγ 32 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4062 / biomolther . 2016 . 186 intracellular trafficking and to completely remove the agonist bound to the receptors . During the initial stage of the assay protocol , it is important to confirm that all of the agonists are removed under washing conditions . Cells are labeled with a hydrophilic radioligands on ice , during which time , further in - tracellular trafficking is blocked . Half of the experimental group needs to be labeled with a radioligand along with an excess concentration of non - labeled ligand to determine non - specific binding . Cells are washed thoroughly , lysed with detergent , and counted using a liquid - scintillation counter . The percent - age of receptor endocytosis is calculated from the specific binding values of vehicle - and agonist - treated cells [ i . e . , ( vehi - cle - treated−agonist - treated ) / ( vehicle - treated ) ] . Pharmacological sequestration Agonist - induced intracellular trafficking of GPCRs typically involves the actual movement of receptors from the exterior surface of the plasma membrane into the cytosol ( Moore et al . , 2007 ) . Both the radioligand - binding method and epitope - tagged receptor approaches can be applied to measure this internalization . By contrast , pharmacological sequestration in - volves conformational changes of the receptors accompanied by a shift toward more hydrophobic domains within the plasma membrane without movement into other intracellular compart - ments ( Mostafapour et al . , 1996 ) . A recent study showed that pharmacological sequestration can be performed to predict the acute tolerance ( desensitization ) of the dopamine D 3 re - ceptor ( Min et al . , 2013 ) . Since pharmacological sequestration does not accompany actual translocation of receptors across the plasma membrane , the ligand - binding method , but not flow cytometry or ELISA , can be applied to determine the extent of pharmacological sequestration ( failure of hydrophilic ligand binding ) . In this procedure , cells are transfected with a GPCR and stimulated with vehicle or agonist for 1 to 5 min , during which time , typical receptor endocytosis does not occur . The reaction is stopped by placing the cells on ice , followed by washing with ice - cold low - pH buffer to completely remove all of the agonist bound to the receptor on the cell surface . Cells are then incubated with hydrophilic radioligands on ice in the absence or presence of excess unlabeled ligand . The cells are washed and lysed , and the remaining radioactivity is counted using a liquid scintillation counter . The percentage of pharma - cological sequestration is calculated from the binding values of vehicle - treated and agonist - treated cells [ i . e . , ( vehicle - treat - ed−agonist - treated ) / ( vehicle - treated ) ] . SELECTIVE REGULATION OF CLATHRIN - MEDIATED AND CAVEOLAE - DEPENDENT ENDOCYTIC PATHWAYS Clathrin - mediated and caveolae - dependent pathways are the best - characterized internalization routes of GPCRs ( Han - sen et al . , 1993 ; Do herty and McMahon , 2009 ; Guo et al . , 2015 ) . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) is initiated by the formation of specialized membrane regions called clathrin - coated pits , into which cell - surface receptors concentrate and form clusters . Through a series of highly regulated steps , the pits bud off to form clathrin - coated vesicles with the help of dynamin , a protein that separates the newly - formed vesicles from the plasma membrane ( Schmid , 1997 ; Marchese et al . , 2003 ; Cho et al . , 2006 ) . A number of adaptor and accessory molecules are involved in this process , including the AP - 2 complex , amphiphysin , GRK2 / 3 , and b - arrestins that phos - phorylate and connect receptors to clathrin and the AP - 2 com - plex ( Claing et al . , 2002 ; Wolfe and Trejo , 2007 ; Ivanov , 2008 ; Romer et al . , 2010 ) . Caveolae are flask - shaped invaginations of the plasma membrane and contain caveolin1 as a main component ( Rothberg et al . , 1992 ; Anderson , 1998 ; Parton and Simons , 2007 ) . Caveolae are involved in mediating receptor signaling ( Parton and Simons , 2007 ) and clathrin - independent , raft - de - pendent receptor endocytosis ( Nabi and Le , 2003 ; Lajoie and Nabi , 2010 ) . Caveolar endocytosis is sensitive to cholesterol depletion and requires dynamin ( Henley et al . , 1998 ; Rodal et al . , 1999 ) . A number of molecular biological tools and pharmacologi - cal agents have been used to selectively inhibit CME and ca - veolar endocytosis . Molecular biology approaches include the use of dominant - negative mutants or RNA - interference tech - nology to compete with or downregulate the expression of en - dogenous proteins involved in CME . With the stipulations that they do not exhibit serious cytotoxicity and that their selectivity be established , pharmacological agents might be more con - venient than molecular biological approaches , because they are easy to use and influence the entire cell population equally ( Ivanov , 2008 ) . There have been a number of reports suggesting selectiv - ity of various cellular environments and chemical inhibitors of CME . For example , clathrin - coated pits can be blocked by decreasing cytosolic pH ( Sandvig et al . , 1987 ; Cosson et al . , 1989 ) . Monodansylcadaverine ( MDC ) , an inhibitor of tissue transglutaminase ( Mishra and Murphy , 2004 ) , was used to block CME of insulin - like growth factor - 1 and the a 2 adren - ergic receptor ( Chow et al . , 1998 ; Pierce et al . , 2000 ) . Trans - glutaminase is involved in protein cross - linking ( Davies et al . , 1980 ) , which mediates clathrin clustering and internalization ( Budd et al . , 1999 ) . Pitstop2 ( N - [ 5 - ( 4 - bromobenzylidene ) - 4 - oxo - 4 , 5 - dihydro - 1 , 3 - thiazol - 2 - yl ] naphthalene - 1 - sulfonamide ) is a recently developed CME inhibitor of transferrin , with an IC 50 value of 12 µ M to 15 µ M . Pitstop2 inhibits the association between the terminal domain of clathrin and amphiphysin ( von Kleist et al . , 2011 ) . However , the selectivity of these inhibitors was not clearly established , because criteria used to evaluate their selectivity were not properly implemented . In a recent study , clathrin heavy chain - or caveolin1 - knock - down cells were employed to determine the specificity of vari - ous chemical and molecular biological tools for CME and ca - veolar endocytosis ( Guo et al . , 2015 ) . The study showed that sucrose , concanavalin A ( Con A ) , and dominant - negative mu - tants of dynamin blocked other endocytic pathways , as well as the clathrin - mediated pathway . In particular , Con A non - spe - cifically interfered with the signaling of several GPCRs tested in the study . Decreased pH , MDC , and dominant - negative epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) - receptor - pathway substrate 15 ( Eps15 ) - interacting protein ( Epsin ) mutants are specific for CME when used properly , whereas Pitstop2 is marginally se - lective for CME ( Dutta et al . , 2012 ; Guo et al . , 2015 ) . These results are summarized in Fig . 4 . ROLES OF SMALL G PROTEINS IN GPCR ENDOCYTOSIS GTP - binding proteins ( GTPases ) are classified into two Biomol Ther 25 ( 1 ) , 26 - 43 ( 2017 ) www . biomolther . org Zhang and Kim . Endocytosis of GPCRs 33 families : heterotrimeric large G proteins , which are composed of three subunits ( a , b , and γ ) , and small G proteins . Based on the amino acid sequence of the G a subunit , heterotrimeric G proteins are divided into G s , G i , G q / 11 , and G 12 / 13 . The small G - protein superfamily is generally classified into five subfami - lies : the Ras family ( Ras , Rap , and Ral ) , the Rho family ( Rho , Rac , and cdc42 ) , the adenosine diphosphate ribosylation fac - tor ( Arf ) family ( Arf1 - 6 , Arl1 - Arl7 , and Sar ) , the Rab family , and the Ran family ( Burgoyne , 1989 ; Takai et al . , 2001 ) . All of these small GTPases control cell function by cycling be - tween a GDP - bound ‘inactive’ state and a GTP bound ‘active’ state ( Bos , 1998 ; Takai et al . , 2001 ) . An increasing number of studies show that GPCRs crosstalk with small G proteins . For example , small G proteins and related regulators [ e . g . , RhoA , Rabs , Arfs , and Arf - guanine nucleotide - exchange fac - tors ( GEFs ) ] can associate directly with GPCRs , and GPCRs may also function as GEFs for small GTPases ( Bhattacharya et al . , 2004a ) . In this review , we focused on the roles of Ral , Rab5 , and Arf in GPCR endocytosis . Effects of Ral on GPCR endocytosis Ral , a member of the Ras family , possesses multiple regula - tory roles , such as gene transcription , cytoskeletal regulation , and cell differentiation and migration ( Chardin and Tavitian , 1986 ; Feig et al . , 1996 ; Bos , 1998 ; Takai et al . , 2001 ) . Addi - tionally , Ral is implicated in the endocytosis of receptors con - taining single transmembrane domains ( van Dam and Robin - son , 2006 ) . Three downstream components of Ral have been reported : Ral - binding protein 1 ( RalBP1 ) or Ral - interacting protein - 76 kDa , phospholipase D ( PLD ) , and GRK2 ( Fig . 5A ) . First , Ral may regulate receptor endocytosis through RalBP1 . RRalBP1 contains a GTPase - activating protein domain for the Rho family proteins and a Ral - binding domain . Thus , RalBP1 could play a role in connecting Rho - and Ras - family signaling ( Mott and Owen , 2014 ) . Active Ral and a dominant - negative mutant of RalBP1 inhibit endocytosis of insulin receptor , trans - ferrin receptor , EGF receptor , and activin type II receptor ( Na - kashima et al . , 1999 ; Jullien - Flores et al . , 2000 ; Matsuzaki et al . , 2002 ) . RalBP1 associates with POB1 , which forms a com - plex with Eps15 , Epsin , AP - 2 , and clathrin to regulate endocy - tosis of transmembrane receptors ( Fig . 5B ) . Second , Ral ap - pears to regulate receptor endocytosis through PLD activation ( Jiang et al . , 1995 ; Kim et al . , 1998 ) ( Fig . 5C ) . For example , endocytosis of EGF receptor requires Ral - dependent PLD ac - tivation ( Shen et al . , 2001 ) , and both metabotropic glutamate receptor ( mGluR ) - 1a and - 5a can be internalized constitutively by a Ral / PLD2 - mediated endocytic mechanism ( Bhattacharya et al . , 2004b ) , which requires PLD2 - dependent phosphatidic acid ( PA ) formation . Additionally , PA plays a regulatory role in clathrin - coated vesicle formation and receptor - mediated endocytosis by activating phosphatidylinositol 4 - phosphate 5 - kinase [ PI ( 4 ) P5K ] ( Jenkins et al . , 1994 ; Antonescu et al . , 2010 ) . PI ( 4 ) P5K is a type I lipid kinase that generates the lipid second messenger phospholipid phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate [ PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 ] , which is critically important in clathrin - coated pit dynamics ( Zoncu et al . , 2007 ; Nakatsu et Fig . 6 . Roles of Arf6 in regulating GPCR endocytosis . Studies of b 2 AR indicated b - arrestin involvement in recruiting ARNO to convert GDP - bound Arf to the GTP - bound form . GTP - bound Arf6 regulates different routes of receptor endocytosis . For example , by recruiting NM23 - H1 , Arf6 converts GDP - dynamin to GTP - dynamin to enhance receptor endocytosis . GTP - Arf6 activates PI ( 4 ) P5K to convert PI ( 4 ) P to PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 . Arf6 protein also can activate PI4K to convert PI to PI ( 4 ) P . Additionally , GTP - Arf6 activates PLD2 to produce PA . ADP , adenosine diphos - phate ; Arf , ADP - ribosylation factor ; ARNO , Arf nucleotide - binding - site opener ; GDP , guanosine diphosphate ; GTP , guanosine triphosphate ; PI , phosphatidylinositol ; PI ( 4 ) P , phosphatidylinositol 4 - phosphate ; PI ( 4 ) P5K , phosphatidylinositol 4 - phosphate 5 - kinase ; PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 , phos - phatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ; PI4K , phosphatidylinositol 4 - kinase ; NM23 - H1 , nucleoside diphosphate kinase ; PA , phosphatidic acid ; GPCR , G protein - coupled receptor ; GTP , guanosine triphosphate ; PLD , phospholipase D . PLD Phosphotidyl - choline PA Choline  Endocytic Vesicle Formation Endocytosis ARF6 + PI ( 4 ) P PI4P5K Nm23 - H1 Nm23 - H1 ARF6 GDP Endocytosis Dynamin GTP Dynamin GTP GTP ARNO ARF6 GDP GTP ARNO ARNO β - Arr PI PI4K + PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 + + + Ago β 2 AR β - Arr β - Arr Fig . 6 - Zhang and Kim 34 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4062 / biomolther . 2016 . 186 al . , 2010 ) . Furthermore , AP - 2 can bind clathrin in collabora - tion with PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 ( Kelly et al . , 2014 ) . Third , Ral might regu - late receptor endocytosis through a functional interaction with GRK2 ( Fig . 5D ) . Ral regulates the signaling or endocytosis of lysophosphatidic acid receptor - 1 by modulating the interac - tion between the receptor and GRK2 ( Aziziyeh et al . , 2009 ) . Zheng et al . ( 2016 ) recently showed that GTP - bound RalA inhibits the GPCR endocytosis by sequestering GRK2 from the activated receptors . Agonist - induced conversion of GTP - to GDP - bound RalA , which presumably releases sequestered GRK2 , was observed selectively with the GPCRs , which have a tendency to undergo endocytosis . According to this study , agonist - induced G bγ - mediated conversion of GTP - RalA to GDP - RalA is suggested as a critical cellular event that allows receptor - mediated endocytosis to occur . Effects of Rab5 on GPCR endocytosis The Rab GTPase family regulates multiple steps of vesicu - lar - membrane trafficking , including vesicle budding , docking , and fusion . Thus , Rab is referred to as a master regulator of intracellular transport ( Pfeffer , 1994 ; Olkkonen and Stenmark , 1997 ; Hutagalung and Novick , 2011 ) . Rab5 is associated with the plasma membrane and early endosomes , and regulates multiple steps involved in vesic - ular trafficking ( Bucci et al . , 1992 ; Novick and Zerial , 1997 ) . Evidence for the roles of Rab5 were obtained using the Rab5 mutants Rab5 - S34N and Rab5 - Q79L , a dominant - negative mutant and a constitutively active mutant , respectively . Rab5 mediates the formation of clathrin - coated vesicles at the cell surface . Rab5 is a component of clathrin - coated vesicles , and a complex of Rab5 and Rab - guanine nucleotide - dissociation inhibitor is necessary for the invagination of clath - rin - coated pits ( Bucci et al . , 1992 ; McLauchlan et al . , 1998 ; Seachrist et al . , 2000 ; Weir et al . , 2014 ) . A possible isotype - specific interaction of Rab5 with clathrin was recently reported in Leishmania donovani ( Rastogi et al . , 2016 ) . Furthermore , Rab5 mediates the transport and fusion of en - docytic vesicles with early endosomes . The Rab5 - Q79L mu - tant stimulates endosome fusion and endocytosis , whereas the Rab5 - S34N mutant blocks these processes . These ef - fects are observed with transferrin receptor , endothelin recep - tors , neurokinin - 1 receptor , and b 2 AR ( Stenmark et al . , 1994 ; Bremnes et al . , 2000 ; Seachrist et al . , 2000 ; Schmidlin et al . , 2001 ) . Rab5 was also reported to be phosphorylated by pro - tein kinases , such as leucine - rich repeat kinase 2 or PKC e ( Ong et al . , 2014 ; Yun et al . , 2015 ) , suggesting intricate func - tional interactions with other signaling pathways . Effects of Arf in GPCR endocytosis Mammalian Arfs are divided into three classes : class I ( Arf1 - 3 ) , class II ( Arf4 - 5 ) , and class III ( Arf6 ) ( Moss and Vaughan , 1995 ) . Arf1 and Arf6 are the best - characterized Arf subtype in terms of their roles in the intracellular trafficking of membrane proteins . Arf1 can be recruited to the plasma mem - brane on activation of some GPCRs ( Mitchell et al . , 2003 ) , and Arf1 activation promotes the recruitment of components ER Transport PAR1 PM + + + Ago Ago + Ago ( Selectivity ? ) Receptor transport from ER to PM Endocytosis pathway Treatment with agonist Positive effect N - terminal glycosylation EL2 glycosylation + Fig . 7 - Zhang and Kim Fig . 7 . Glycosylation in the regulation of receptor endocytosis . Glycosylation on the N - terminus of GPCRs is involved in GPCR localization on the plasma membrane . Studies on dopamine D 3 receptor and PARs suggest that glycosylation on different regions of the receptor is involved in the regulation of different receptor functions . Glycosylation on the N - terminus of D 2 R , D 3 R , or PAR1 is required for cell - membrane localiza - tion . Glycosylation on the N - terminus of D 2 R and D 3 R mediates their endocytosis within caveolae and CCP microdomains of the plasma mem - brane , respectively . Glycosylation within the second extracellular loop of D 3 R and PAR1 is important for internalization . ( Selectivity ? ) next to PAR1 represents that it is not known whether palmitoylation on the second extracellular loop of PAR1 mediates CME or caveolar endocytosis . GPCR , G protein - coupled receptor ; D 3 R , dopamine D 3 receptor ; D 2 R , dopamine D 2 receptor ; PAR , protease activator receptor ; CCP , clathrin - coated pit . Biomol Ther 25 ( 1 ) , 26 - 43 ( 2017 ) www . biomolther . org Zhang and Kim . Endocytosis of GPCRs 35 needed for the formation of trafficking vesicles , such as coats for non - clathrin ( coatomer for COP1 vesicles ) ( Donaldson et al . , 1992 ; Orcl et al . , 1993 ) and clathrin ( AP - 1 and AP - 3 ) ( Traub et al . , 1993 ; Ooi et al . , 1998 ) . Additionally , Arf1 - mediat - ed PLD activation is required for endocytosis of M 3 muscarinic receptors and µ - opioid receptor ( Luo et al . , 1998 ; Koch et al . , 2003 ; Mitchell et al . , 2003 ) . Arf6 is mainly found on the plasma membrane , but not within clathrin - coated vesicles ( D’Souza - Schorey et al . , 1995 ; Cavenagh et al . , 1996 ) . A previous study proposed that the GDP - bound form of Arf6 localizes to the plasma membrane , the GDP - GTP cycle of Arf6 occurs at the plasma membrane , and activated Arf6 triggers clathrin translocation onto the membrane ( Macia et al . , 2004 ) . Two Arf6 mutants ( Q67L and T27N ) , despite unclear application of T27N ( Macia et al . , 2004 ) , are considered to mimic the GTP - and GDP - bound forms of Arf6 , respectively , and have been used extensively to elucidate Arf6 localization and function . Arf6 plays an essential role in the internalization of sev - eral GPCRs , regardless of their endocytic route ( Houndolo et al . , 2005 ) . For example , in response to agonist stimulation of b 2 AR , b - arrestins recruit Arf nucleotide - binding - site opener ( ARNO ; Arf6 - GEF ) to a position near the plasma membrane to form a complex comprising b - arrestin , Arf6 , and ARNO . These processes result in Arf6 activation , which is essential for b 2 AR internalization ( Claing et al . , 2001 ; Lawrence et al . , 2005 ) ( Fig . 6 , upper panel ) . Similar to Arf1 , Arf6 regulates GPCR endocytosis via PLD2 activation , which leads to the hydrolysis of phosphatidylcholine to PA and choline ( West et al . , 1997 ; Rankovic et al . , 2009 ) . Additionally , Arf6 is capable of increasing PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 concentration and facilitating clathrin - coated pit assembly ( Krauss et al . , 2003 ; Posor et al . , 2015 ) . PI ( 4 ) P5K , which catalyzes the conversion of PI ( 4 ) P to PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 , is a downstream effector of Arf6 ( Godi et al . , 1999 ; Honda et al . , 1999 ) . Arf6 requires PA , the product of PLD , to activate PI ( 4 ) P5K ( Czech , 2000 ) , and PI ( 4 ) P5K can also be directly activated by PA . PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 plays a regulatory role in a wide variety of cellular functions , including exocytosis , endocytosis , endosomal recycling , and membrane - ruffle formation ( Honda et al . , 1999 ; Funakoshi et al . , 2011 ) . PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 is also required for the initial targeting of AP - 2 to the plasma membrane , as well as for cargo recognition , which stabilize nascent coated pits during clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Wenk et al . , 2001 ; Loerke et al . , 2009 ) . Alternatively , Arf6 - GTP might recruit other proteins , such as Nm23 - H1 , a nucleoside diphosphate kinase that provides a source of GTP for dynamin - dependent fission of coated vesicles ( Palacios et al . , 2002 ) . These hypotheses are sum - marized in Fig . 6 . ROLES OF POST - TRANSLATIONAL MODIFICATIONS IN GPCR ENDOCYTOSIS GPCRs are post - translationally modified in a number of ways , including phosphorylation , ubiquitination , glycosylation , and palmitoylation . Receptor phosphorylation has been exten - sively investigated , and its roles in receptor endocytosis are well established ( McCaffrey et al . , 1984 ; Sibley et al . , 1987 ) , whereas the roles of ubiquitination in receptor endocytosis are clear only for yeast GPCRs ( Hicke and Riezman , 1996 ; Shenoy et al . , 2001 ; Zhang et al . , 2016c ) . In this review , we focused on the roles of ubiquitination , glycosylation , and pal - mitoylation in receptor endocytosis . Roles of ubiquitination in receptor endocytosis During ubiquitination , ubiquitin , a small ( 8 . 5 kDa ) regulatory protein , is added to a substrate protein . Ubiquitination requires three enzymes : activating , conjugating , and ubiquitin ligases ( E1 , E2 , and E3 , respectively ) . The carboxyl group of Gly76 , the terminal amino acid of ubiquitin , is bound to the epsilon group of the target lysine residue on the substrate ( Pickart , 2001 ; Marotti et al . , 2002 ) . Of the several lysine residues lo - cated within the ubiquitin molecule , Lys48 is involved in the formation of polyubiquitin chains that signal proteins for pro - teasomal processing . Alternatively , Lys63 - linked chains are involved in endocytic processes ( Boname et al . , 2010 ) . While the major role of ubiquitination involves mediation of protein degradation ( Glickman and Ciechanover , 2002 ) , ubiquitination also mediates various other cellular functions , such as gene transcription , cell division , differentiation , signal transduction , protein trafficking , and protein interactions ( Alaluf et al . , 1995 ; Conaway et al . , 2002 ; Adlanmerini et al . , 2014 ) . A role of ubiquitination in GPCR trafficking was originally reported from studies in yeast a - mating factor pheromone re - ceptor ( Ste2p ) . In 1993 , it was found that Lys337 is required for Ste2p endocytosis ( Rohrer et al . , 1993 ) . Using a yeast mutant lacking multiple ubiquitin - conjugating enzymes , it was shown that ubiquitination is required for Ste2p endocytosis and subsequent lysosomal degradation ( Hicke and Riezman , 1996 ; Kim et al . , 2005 ) . Several studies demonstrated diverse roles for ubiquitina - tion in the regulation of mammalian GPCR trafficking . An es - sential role of ubiquitination was proposed in post - endocytic lysosomal sorting rather than in endocytosis ( Koch et al . , 1994 ; Holtmann et al . , 1996 ; Jacob et al . , 2005 ; Kim et al . , 2007 ; Lahaie et al . , 2016 ; Zhang et al . , 2016c ) . By contrast , some GPCRs , including δ - opioid receptor , protease - activated receptor 1 ( PAR1 ) , and the P2Y1 purinergic receptor , are de - livered to the lysosome independent of receptor ubiquitination ( Tanowitz and Von Zastrow , 2002 ; Dores et al . , 2012 , 2016 ) . Roles of glycosylation in receptor endocytosis N - linked glycosylation is a highly conserved post - transla - tional modification that occurs on the Asn - X - Ser / Thr motif on GPCR extracellular domains ( Kim et al . , 1997 ; Ulloa - Aguirre et al . , 1999 ; Filipek et al . , 2003 ) . Glycosylation aids the as - sociation of proteins with specific plasma - membrane micro - domains ( Rands et al . , 1990 ; Boer et al . , 2000 ; Kohno et al . , 2002 ; Lichnerova et al . , 2015 ) . A recent study showed that N - linked glycosylation of the N - terminus of dopamine D 2 and D 3 receptors determines the endocytic pathways used by these receptors via their interactions with specific microdomains ( Min et al . , 2015 ) . Glycosylation also plays an important role in the ligand - binding affinity of many receptors , such as the EP3 a receptor ( Huang and Tai , 1998 ) , human urokinase receptor ( Moller et al . , 1993 ) , and human transferrin receptor ( Williams and Enns , 1993 ) . Deglycosylation of these receptors causes significant decreases in ligand - binding affinity . Additionally , the roles of glycosylation could be specific to the receptor region where glycosylation occurs . For example , N - linked glycosylation of the D 3 receptor on the N - terminus is responsible for surface expression , desensitization , and inter - 36 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4062 / biomolther . 2016 . 186 nalization , whereas N - linked glycosylation within the second extracellular loop is exclusively responsible for internalization ( Min et al . , 2015 ) . As in D 3 R , glycosylation on the N - terminus and within the second extracellular loop of PAR1 is important for its transport to the cell surface and internalization , respec - tively ( Soto and Trejo , 2010 ) ( Fig . 7 ) . A similar effect was re - ported for the prostacyclin receptor ( Zhang et al . , 2001 ) . The extent of glycosylation and its influence on receptor function seem to vary according to receptor type and cellular environment . Therefore , carefully controlled experiments are necessary to understand the broader functional roles of glyco - sylation and the underlying regulatory mechanisms . Roles of palmitoylation in receptor endocytosis Palmitoylation is mediated by palmitoyl transferase , which contains a characteristic Cys - rich Asp - His - His - Cys domain ( Fukata et al . , 2004 ; Greaves and Chamberlain , 2011 ) . Pal - mitoylation is reversible and usually occurs on either Cys resi - dues of membrane proteins or , less frequently , on Ser and Thr residues ( Bizzozero , 1997 ; Qanbar and Bouvier , 2003 ) . Pal - mitoylation exhibits various effects on receptor localization on the plasma membrane . For example , palmitoylation is needed for the proper localization of receptors , such as dopamine D 3 receptor ( Zhang et al . , 2016b ) , CB1 cannabinoid receptor ( Oddi et al . , 2012 ) , and PAR2 ( Adams et al . , 2011 ) . Palmi - toylation of the NR2 subunit of the N - methyl - D - aspartate re - ceptor in the C - terminal region differentially affects surface ex - pression , depending on the location of specific palmitoylation sites ( Hayashi et al . , 2009 ) . Plasma membrane versus nuclear localization of estrogen receptors is also controlled by differ - ential palmitoylation , which may promote the interaction be - tween these estrogen receptors and caveolins ( Acconcia et al . , 2005 ; Boulware et al . , 2005 ; Meitzen et al . , 2013 ; Adlan - merini et al . , 2014 ) . In caveolae , estrogen receptors associate with mGluRs and activate them ( Meitzen et al 2013 ) . Palmitoylation regulates both G proteins and their receptors ( Wedegaertner et al . , 1993 ; Ross , 1995 ) , and is required for efficient signaling by most GPCRs , including b 2 AR ( O’Dowd et al . , 1989 ; Moffett et al . , 1993 ) , endothelin receptor type B ( Okamoto et al . , 1997 ) , CB1 cannabinoid receptor ( Oddi et al . , 2012 ) , PAR 2 ( Adams et al . , 2011 ) , and µ - opioid receptor ( Zheng et al . , 2012 ) . b 2 AR palmitoylation on Cys341 inhibits PKA access , allowing for more efficient coupling with G pro - teins ( Moffett et al . , 1996 ) . By contrast , palmitoylation is not required for normal signaling by some GPCRs , such as a 2A AR ( Kennedy and Limbird , 1993 ; Eason et al . , 1994 ) and thyro - tropin receptor ( Kosugi and Mori , 1996 ) . In the case of tumor necrosis factor ( TNF ) a receptor , a member of the cytokine - receptor family , the affinity of the receptor for TNF decreases when the TNF ligand is palmitoylated ( Poggi et al . , 2013 ) , suggesting that palmitoylation of ligand rather than receptor could regulate signaling . Palmitoylation - mediated redistribu - tion of GPCRs between lipid raft and non - raft microdomains on the plasma membrane indirectly implicates palmitoylation in biased signaling ( Zheng et al . , 2008 , 2013 ) . The concept of biased signaling involves the agonists of one particular re - ceptor activating downstream signaling pathways with differ - ent efficacies . The µ - opioid receptor can activate extracellular signal - regulated kinase ( ERK ) phosphorylation through either G protein - or b - arrestin - dependent pathways , depending on the association of the receptor with lipid raft or non - lipid raft microdomains , respectively ( Zheng et al . , 2008 ) . Similar to GPCRs , the a subunits of G proteins are palmi - toylated ( Linder et al . , 1993 ; Parenti et al . , 1993 ) , with palmi - toylation regulated by agonist stimulation of GPCRs , such as b 2 AR ( Mumby et al . , 1994 ) or 5 - hydroxytryptamine 1A recep - tor ( Chen and Manning , 2000 ) . Palmitoylation also influences membrane association , subcellular localization , and protein - protein interactions of G a subunits . For example , palmito y - lation regulates G a q and G a s attachment to the membrane and signaling by controlling interactions with cognate recep - tors or G bγ ( Wedegaertner et al . , 1993 ; Edgerton et al . , 1994 ; Iiri et al . , 1996 ; Sikarwar et al . , 2014 ) . A recent study involving G a i showed that palmitoylation regulates selective associa - tion with membrane microdomains having different composi - tions of fatty acids ( Alvarez et al . , 2015 ) . Palmitoylation exhibits various effects on receptor endocy - tosis . First , palmitoylation is required for the endocytosis of thyrotropin - releasing hormone receptor ( Groarke et al . , 2001 ) , somatostatin receptor 5 ( Hukovic et al . , 1998 ) , PAR2 ( Adams et al . , 2011 ) , and dopamine D 3 receptor ( Zhang et al . , 2016b ) . Second , palmitoylation has minimal or no effects on endocy - tosis of some GPCRs , such as b 2 AR ( Moffett et al . , 1993 ) , a 1 AR ( Gao et al . , 1999 ) , and C - C chemokine receptor type 5 ( Blanpain et al . , 2001 ) . Third , palmitoylation has inhibitory effects on the endocytosis of luteinizing hormone / human cho - riogonadotropin receptor ( Kawate and Menon , 1994 ) and V 1A vasopressin receptor ( Hawtin et al . , 2001 ) . Interestingly , mutation of palmitoylation sites in the a 2A AR does not affect receptor endocytosis , but completely inhibits agonist - induced downregulation ( Eason et al . , 1994 ) . More diverse functional roles and palmitoylation sites were report - ed for b 2 AR , including mutation of the previously established palmitoylation site Cys341 , which does not affect receptor endocytosis , but alters the endocytic route to a b - arrestin - independent and caveolae - dependent pathway ( Liu et al . , 2012 ) . A recent study showed that b 2 AR , in response to ago - nist treatment , is palmitoylated at Cys265 via palmitate trans - ferase , which is localized within the Golgi complex ( Adachi et al . , 2016 ) . As discussed , GPCR post - translational modifications affect various receptor functions , including cell - surface expression , signaling , endocytosis , and agonist affinity . Caution is needed when interpreting the functional consequences of post - trans - lational modifications , given the possibility that the effects of palmitoylation could be indirect and secondary to those on re - ceptor surface expression . FUNCTIONAL ROLES OF GPCR ENDOCYTOSIS Defects in GPCR signaling have been implicated in multiple human diseases , including autoimmunity , vascular diseases , and cancer ( Rosenthal et al . , 1993 ; O’Hayre et al . , 2014 ) . Because receptor trafficking is crucial for the temporal and spatial control of GPCR signaling , GPCR endocytosis could exhibit various degrees of physiological and pathological im - portance ( Roth et al . , 1998 ; Shapiro et al . , 2000 ; von Zastrow , 2001 ; Booden et al . , 2004 ) . Receptor endocytosis , which results in a decreased num - ber of receptors on the cell surface , can be perceived as a mechanism of negative feedback to protect cells from agonis - tic overstimulation ( Sibley and Lefkowitz , 1985 ) . It is gener - ally accepted that receptors are desensitized ( uncoupled with Biomol Ther 25 ( 1 ) , 26 - 43 ( 2017 ) www . biomolther . org Zhang and Kim . Endocytosis of GPCRs 37 effectors ) within seconds to minutes after agonist stimulation via receptor phosphorylation and association with b - arrestins ( Sibley et al . , 1987 ; Dang and Christie , 2012 ) . According to this molecular paradigm , most receptors undergoing endocy - tosis are already desensitized ( phosphorylated and bound to b - arrestins ) , and are dephosphorylated by protein phospha - tase type A2 in acidic environments . Thereafter , receptors recycle back to the cell surface in a resensitized state or are degraded in the lysosome ( Menard et al . , 1996 ; McDonald et al . , 2000 ) . Therefore , combined with receptor recycling , the main functional role of receptor endocytosis is considered to be a restoration of receptor responsiveness rather than a decrement in signaling ( Yu et al . , 1993 ; Pippig et al . , 1995 ; Cho et al . , 2010 ) . However , endocytosis / recycling might not be mandatory for the resensitization of receptor responsive - ness , because receptors can be rapidly dephosphorylated on the cell surface without the need for endocytosis and recycling ( Nelson et al . , 2007 ) . Thus , interpretations of experimental re - sults related to receptor endocytosis need to be handled with precaution . The uncertainty in the consequences of receptor endocyto - sis might arise from limitations in experimental design ( Connor et al . , 2004 ) , especially when experiments involve receptor overexpression or employ assays in which intense amplifica - tion of signaling processes occurs . Under these conditions , the effects of a decrease in the number of receptors on the cell surface would be underestimated . Another problem is employ - ment of endocytic inhibitors or mutant receptors to make con - clusions about the functional meaning of receptor endocytosis without their endocytic properties having been fully character - ized ( Yu et al . , 1993 ; Pippig et al . , 1995 ; Hanley and Hensler , 2002 ; Cho et al . , 2010 ) . Although it is difficult to completely overcome the obstacles in selective regulation of specific endocytic routes , several points need to be carefully considered . First , the selectivity of inhibitors for specific endocytic routes ( e . g . , CME or ca - veolar endocytosis ) is always relative ( Guo et al . , 2015 ) , and at the same time there could be mutual interactions between endocytic pathways ( Rodal et al . , 1999 ; Subtil et al . , 1999 ) . Second , pharmacological and molecular biological blockade of endocytic processes can inhibit endocytosis of a GPCR , but simultaneously affect other membrane proteins . For example , it was initially concluded that ERK activation requires GPCR endocytosis ( Luttrell et al . , 1997 ) . Later , it was suggested that the endocytosis of epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) , which crosstalks with GPCRs , is required for ERK activation ( Vieira et al . , 1996 ; DeGraff et al . , 1999 ; Pierce et al . , 2000 ) . There still exist some conflicting issues . For example , studies on protease - activated receptor ( PAR ) 1 , the neurokinin - 1 re - ceptor , and the angiotensin 1A receptor showed that internal - ized GPCRs form complexes on internal membranes via b - ar - restin , with downstream components of the mitogen - activated protein kinase - signaling pathway , including Raf1 , meiosis - specific serine / threonine - protein kinase ( MEK ) 1 , and ERK2 ( DeFea et al . , 2000 ; Luttrell et al . , 2001 ; Teis et al . , 2002 ) . Based on these observations , the authors suggested that en - docytosis of other signaling components , such as phosphory - lated MEK rather than activated GPCRs or EGFRs might be required for ERK activation . Third , some experiments inevita - bly need to be conducted using indirect approaches that may alter protein function . For example , determination of roles as - sociated with receptor phosphorylation through site - directed mutagenesis of potential and consensus phosphorylation sites or through abolishment of endogenous protein kinases . The introduction of point mutations could affect other aspects of receptor function in conjunction with receptor phosphoryla - tion . Moreover , knockdown or knockout of endogenous pro - tein kinases not only affects receptor phosphorylation , but also other cellular proteins , which could directly or indirectly affect receptor functions . Finally , studies using HEK - 293 cells sug - gested that heterogeneity within the same cell line or among different cells can introduce response diversity and add to the complexity of the regulatory mechanisms of each receptor ( Lefkowitz et al . , 2002 ) . CONCLUSIONS GPCRs are the largest group of cell membrane receptors , with as many as 800 - 1000 different human genes predicted to encode GPCRs , resulting in highly variable structural fea - tures , signaling mechanisms , and tissue distribution . Never - theless , the molecular mechanisms involved in the regulation of GPCR functions are perceived as being highly conserved , with only several protein kinases and a couple of arrestin iso - types playing central roles in receptor endocytosis . However , as described here , complicated regulatory mechanisms are involved in GPCR endocytosis through a multitude of cellular components and processes , including heterogeneity of endo - cytic routes , functional interactions between different endocyt - ic processes and pathways , post - translational modifications of receptor and endocytic vehicles , as well as other regulatory components , such as small G proteins . Beside the intrinsic complexity of endocytic processes , a primary obstacle in this research area involves the lack of powerful experimental tools and techniques to dissect the critical events associated with endocytosis . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was funded by KRF - 2014R1A2A2A01002547 . REFERENCES Acconcia , F . , Ascenzi , P . , Bocedi , A . , Spisni , E . , Tomasi , V . , Trenta - lance , A . , Visca , P . and Marino , M . ( 2005 ) Palmitoylation - depen - dent estrogen receptor a membrane localization : regulation by 17 b - estradiol . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 231 - 237 . Adachi , N . , Hess , D . T . , McLaughlin , P . and Stamler , J . S . ( 2016 ) S - palmitoylation of a novel site in the b 2 - adrenergic receptor associ - ated with a novel intracellular itinerary . J . Biol . Chem . 291 , 20232 - 20246 . Adams , M . N . , Christensen , M . E . , He , Y . , Waterhouse , N . J . and Hooper , J . D . ( 2011 ) The role of palmitoylation in signalling , cellular trafficking and plasma membrane localization of protease - activat - ed receptor - 2 . PLoS ONE 6 , e28018 . Adlanmerini , M . , Solinhac , R . , Abot , A . , Fabre , A . , Raymond - Letron , I . , Guihot , A . L . , Boudou , F . , Sautier , L . , Vessières , E . , Kim , S . H , Lière , P . , Fontaine , C . , Krust , A . , Chambon , P . , Katzenellenbogen , J . A . , Gourdy , P . , Shaul , P . W . , Henrion , D . , Arnal , J . F . and Lenfant , F . ( 2014 ) Mutation of the palmitoylation site of estrogen receptor a in vivo reveals tissue - specific roles for membrane versus nuclear actions . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 111 , E283 - E290 . Alaluf , S . , Mulvihill , E . R . and McIlhinney , R . A . ( 1995 ) Palmitoylation of metabotropic glutamate receptor subtype 4 but not 1 a expressed 38 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4062 / biomolther . 2016 . 186 in permanently transfected BHK cells . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 23 , 87S . Alvarez , R . , López , D . J . , Casas , J . , Lladó , V . , Higuera , M . , Nagy , T . , Barceló , M . , Busquets , X . and Escribá , P . V . ( 2015 ) G protein - mem - brane interactions I : G a i1 myristoyl and palmitoyl modifications in protein - lipid interactions and its implications in membrane microdo - main localization . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1851 , 1511 - 1520 . Anderson , R . G . ( 1998 ) The caveolae membrane system . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 67 , 199 - 225 . Antonescu , C . N . , Danuser , G . and Schmid , S . L . ( 2010 ) Phosphatidic acid plays a regulatory role in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 21 , 2944 - 2952 . Arriza , J . L . , Dawson , T . M . , Simerly , R . B . , Martin , L . J . , Caron , M . G . , Snyder , S . H . and Lefkowitz , R . J . ( 1992 ) The G - protein - coupled receptor kinases b ARK1 and b ARK2 are widely distributed at syn - apses in rat brain . J . Neurosci . 12 , 4045 - 4055 . Attramadal , H . , Arriza , J . L . , Aoki , C . , Dawson , T . M . , Codina , J . , Kwa - tra , M . M . , Snyder , S . H . , Caron , M . G . and Lefkowitz , R . J . ( 1992 ) b - arrestin2 , a novel member of the arrestin / b - arrestin gene family . J . Biol . Chem . 267 , 17882 - 17890 . Aziziyeh , A . I . , Li , T . T . , Pape , C . , Pampillo , M . , Chidiac , P . , Possmayer , F . , Babwah , A . V . and Bhattacharya , M . ( 2009 ) Dual regulation of lysophosphatidic acid ( LPA1 ) receptor signalling by Ral and GRK . Cell . Signal . 21 , 1207 - 1217 . Barak , L . S . , Tiberi , M . , Freedman , N . J . , Kwatra , M . M . , Lefkowitz , R . J . and Caron , M . G . ( 1994 ) A highly conserved tyrosine residue in G protein - coupled receptors is required for agonist - mediated b 2 - adrenergic receptor sequestration . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 2790 - 2795 . Benovic , J . L . , DeBlasi , A . , Stone , W . C . , Caron , M . G . and Lefkowitz , R . J . ( 1989 ) b - adrenergic receptor kinase : primary structure delin - eates a multigene family . Science 246 , 235 - 240 . Benovic , J . L . , Kühn , H . , Weyand , I . , Codina , J . , Caron , M . G . and Lefkowitz , R . J . ( 1987 ) Functional desensitization of the isolated b - adrenergic receptor by the b - adrenergic receptor kinase : poten - tial role of an analog of the retinal protein arrestin ( 48 - kDa protein ) . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 84 , 8879 - 8882 . Benovic , J . L . , Pike , L . J . , Cerione , R . A . , Staniszewski , C . , Yoshi - masa , T . , Codina , J . , Caron , M . G . and Lefkowitz , R . J . ( 1985 ) Phosphorylation of the mammalian b - adrenergic receptor by cyclic AMP - dependent protein kinase . Regulation of the rate of recep - tor phosphorylation and dephosphorylation by agonist occupancy and effects on coupling of the receptor to the stimulatory guanine nucleotide regulatory protein . J . Biol . Chem . 260 , 7094 - 7101 . Benovic , J . L . , Strasser , R . H . , Caron , M . G . and Lefkowitz , R . J . ( 1986 ) b - adrenergic receptor kinase : identification of a novel protein ki - nase that phosphorylates the agonist - occupied form of the recep - tor . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 83 , 2797 - 2801 . Bhattacharya , M . , Babwah , A . V . , Godin , C . , Anborgh , P . H . , Dale , L . B . , Poulter , M . O . and Ferguson , S . S . ( 2004b ) Ral and phospho - lipase D 2 - dependent pathway for constitutive metabotropic gluta - mate receptor endocytosis . J . Neurosci . 24 , 8752 - 8761 . Bhattacharya , M . , Babwah , A . V . and Ferguson , S . S . ( 2004a ) Small GTP - binding protein - coupled receptors . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 32 , 1040 - 1044 . Bizzozero , O . A . ( 1997 ) The mechanism and functional roles of protein palmitoylation in the nervous system . Neuropediatrics 28 , 23 - 26 . Blanpain , C . , Wittamer , V . , Vanderwinden , J . M . , Boom , A . , Ren - neboog , B . , Lee , B . , Le Poul , E . , El Asmar , L . , Govaerts , C . , Vas - sart , G . , Doms , R . W . and Parmentier , M . ( 2001 ) Palmitoylation of CCR5 is critical for receptor trafficking and efficient activation of intracellular signaling pathways . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 23795 - 23804 . Böer , U . , Neuschäfer - Rube , F . , Möller , U . and Püschel , G . P . ( 2000 ) Requirement of N - glycosylation of the prostaglandin E2 receptor EP3 b for correct sorting to the plasma membrane but not for cor - rect folding . Biochem . J . 350 Pt 3 , 839 - 847 . Boname , J . M . , Thomas , M . , Stagg , H . R . , Xu , P . , Peng , J . and Lehner , P . J . ( 2010 ) Efficient internalization of MHC I requires lysine - 11 and lysine - 63 mixed linkage polyubiquitin chains . Traffic 11 , 210 - 220 . Booden , M . A . , Eckert , L . B . , Der , C . J . and Trejo , J . ( 2004 ) Persistent signaling by dysregulated thrombin receptor trafficking promotes breast carcinoma cell invasion . Mol . Cell . Biol . 24 , 1990 - 1999 . Bos , J . L . ( 1998 ) All in the family ? New insights and questions regard - ing interconnectivity of Ras , Rap1 and Ral . EMBO J . 17 , 6776 - 6782 . Boulware , M . I . , Weick , J . P . , Becklund , B . R . , Kuo , S . P . , Groth , R . D . and Mermelstein , P . G . ( 2005 ) Estradiol activates group I and II metabotropic glutamate receptor signaling , leading to opposing in - fluences on cAMP response element - binding protein . J . Neurosci . 25 , 5066 - 5078 . Bremnes , T . , Paasche , J . D . , Mehlum , A . , Sandberg , C . , Bremnes , B . and Attramadal , H . ( 2000 ) Regulation and intracellular trafficking pathways of the endothelin receptors . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 17596 - 1604 . Bucci , C . , Parton , R . G . , Mather , I . H . , Stunnenberg , H . , Simons , K . , Hoflack , B . and Zerial , M . ( 1992 ) The small GTPase rab5 func - tions as a regulatory factor in the early endocytic pathway . Cell 70 , 715 - 728 . Budd , D . C . , Rae , A . and Tobin , A . B . ( 1999 ) Activation of the mitogen - activated protein kinase pathway by a Gq / 11 - coupled muscarinic receptor is independent of receptor internalization . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 12355 - 12360 . Burgoyne , R . D . ( 1989 ) Small GTP - binding proteins . Trends Biochem . Sci . 14 , 394 - 396 . Cavenagh , M . M . , Whitney , J . A . , Carroll , K . , Zhang , C . J . , Boman , A . L . , Rosenwald , A . G . , Mellman , I . and Kahn , R . A . ( 1996 ) In - tracellular distribution of Arf proteins in mammalian cells . Arf6 is uniquely localized to the plasma membrane . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 21767 - 21774 . Chardin , P . and Tavitian , A . ( 1986 ) The ral gene : a new ras related gene isolated by the use of a synthetic probe . EMBO J . 5 , 2203 - 2208 . Chen , C . A . and Manning , D . R . ( 2000 ) Regulation of g a i palmi - toylation by activation of the 5 - hydroxytryptamine - 1A receptor . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 23516 - 23522 . Cho , D . , Zheng , M . , Min , C . , Ma , L . , Kurose , H . , Park , J . H . and Kim , K . M . ( 2010 ) Agonist - induced endocytosis and receptor phosphoryla - tion mediate resensitization of dopamine D 2 receptors . Mol . Endo - crinol . 24 , 574 - 586 . Cho , D . I . , Beom , S . , Van Tol , H . H . , Caron , M . G . and Kim , K . M . ( 2006 ) Characterization of the desensitization properties of five dopamine receptor subtypes and alternatively spliced variants of dopamine D 2 and D 4 receptors . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 350 , 634 - 640 . Chow , J . C . , Condorelli , G . and Smith , R . J . ( 1998 ) Insulin - like growth factor - I receptor internalization regulates signaling via the Shc / mi - togen - activated protein kinase pathway , but not the insulin receptor substrate - 1 pathway . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 4672 - 4680 . Claing , A . , Chen , W . , Miller , W . E . , Vitale , N . , Moss , J . , Premont , R . T . and Lefkowitz , R . J . ( 2001 ) b - Arrestin - mediated ADP - ribosylation factor 6 activation and b 2 - adrenergic receptor endocytosis . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 42509 - 42513 . Claing , A . , Laporte , S . A . , Caron , M . G . and Lefkowitz , R . J . ( 2002 ) Endocytosis of G protein - coupled receptors : roles of G protein - coupled receptor kinases and b - arrestin proteins . Prog . Neurobiol . 66 , 61 - 79 . Clark , R . B . , Kunkel , M . W . , Friedman , J . , Goka , T . J . and Johnson , J . A . ( 1988 ) Activation of cAMP - dependent protein kinase is required for heterologous desensitization of adenylyl cyclase in S49 wild - type lymphoma cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 85 , 1442 - 1446 . Conaway , R . C . , Brower , C . S . and Conaway , J . W . ( 2002 ) Emerging roles of ubiquitin in transcription regulation . Science 296 , 1254 - 1258 . Cong , M . , Perry , S . J . , Lin , F . T . , Fraser , I . D . , Hu , L . A . , Chen , W . , Pitcher , J . A . , Scott , J . D . and Lefkowitz , R . J . ( 2001 ) Regulation of membrane targeting of the G protein - coupled receptor kinase 2 by protein kinase A and its anchoring protein AKAP79 . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 15192 - 15199 . Connor , M . , Osborne , P . B . and Christie , M . J . ( 2004 ) Mu - opioid recep - tor desensitization : is morphine different ? Br . J . Pharmacol . 143 , 685 - 696 . Cosson , P . , de Curtis , I . , Pouysségur , J . , Griffiths , G . and Davoust , J . ( 1989 ) Low cytoplasmic pH inhibits endocytosis and transport from the trans - Golgi network to the cell surface . J . Cell Biol . 108 , 377 - 387 . Biomol Ther 25 ( 1 ) , 26 - 43 ( 2017 ) www . biomolther . org Zhang and Kim . Endocytosis of GPCRs 39 Czech , M . P . ( 2000 ) PIP2 and PIP3 : complex roles at the cell surface . Cell 100 , 603 - 606 . Dang , V . C . and Christie , M . J . ( 2012 ) Mechanisms of rapid opioid re - ceptor desensitization , resensitization and tolerance in brain neu - rons . Br . J . Pharmacol . 165 , 1704 - 1716 . Davies , P . J . , Davies , D . R . , Levitzki , A . , Maxfield , F . R . , Milhaud , P . , Willingham , M . C . and Pastan , I . H . ( 1980 ) Transglutaminase is es - sential in receptor - mediated endocytosis of a 2 - macroglobulin and polypeptide hormones . Nature 283 , 162 - 167 . DeFea , K . A . , Zalevsky , J . , Thoma , M . S . , Déry , O . , Mullins , R . D . and Bunnett , N . W . ( 2000 ) b - arrestin - dependent endocytosis of protein - ase - activated receptor 2 is required for intracellular targeting of ac - tivated ERK1 / 2 . J . Cell Biol . 148 , 1267 - 1281 . DeGraff , J . L . , Gagnon , A . W . , Benovic , J . L . and Orsini , M . J . ( 1999 ) Role of arrestins in endocytosis and signaling of a 2 - adrenergic re - ceptor subtypes . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 11253 - 11259 . Doherty , G . J . and McMahon , H . T . ( 2009 ) Mechanisms of endocytosis . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 78 , 857 - 902 . Donaldson , J . G . , Cassel , D . , Kahn , R . A . and Klausner , R . D . ( 1992 ) ADP - ribosylation factor , a small GTP - binding protein , is required for binding of the coatomer protein b - COP to Golgi membranes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 89 , 6408 - 6412 . Dores , M . R . , Chen , B . , Lin , H . , Soh , U . J . , Paing , M . M . , Montagne , W . A . , Meerloo , T . and Trejo , J . ( 2012 ) ALIX binds a YPX 3 L motif of the GPCR PAR1 and mediates ubiquitin - independent ESCRT - III / MVB sorting . J . Cell Biol . 197 , 407 - 419 . Dores , M . R . , Grimsey , N . J . , Mendez , F . and Trejo , J . ( 2016 ) ALIX Regulates the Ubiquitin - Independent Lysosomal Sorting of the P2Y1 Purinergic Receptor via a YPX 3 L Motif . PLoS ONE 11 , e0157587 . Dutta , D . , Williamson , C . D . , Cole , N . B . and Donaldson , J . G . ( 2012 ) Pitstop 2 is a potent inhibitor of clathrin - independent endocytosis . PLoS ONE 7 , e45799 . D’Souza - Schorey , C . , Li , G . , Colombo , M . I . and Stahl , P . D . ( 1995 ) A regulatory role for ARF6 in receptor - mediated endocytosis . Sci - ence 267 , 1175 - 1178 . Eason , M . G . , Jacinto , M . T . , Theiss , C . T . and Liggett , S . B . ( 1994 ) The palmitoylated cysteine of the cytoplasmic tail of a 2A - adrenergic re - ceptors confers subtype - specific agonist - promoted downregula - tion . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 91 , 11178 - 11182 . Edgerton , M . D . , Chabert , C . , Chollet , A . and Arkinstall , S . ( 1994 ) Pal - mitoylation but not the extreme amino - terminus of Gq a is required for coupling to the NK2 receptor . FEBS Lett . 354 , 195 - 199 . Feig , L . A . , Urano , T . and Cantor , S . ( 1996 ) Evidence for a Ras / Ral signaling cascade . Trends Biochem . Sci . 21 , 438 - 441 . Ferguson , S . S . ( 2007 ) Phosphorylation - independent attenuation of GPCR signalling . Trends Pharmacol . Sci . 28 , 173 - 179 . Ferguson , S . S . , Downey , W . E . , 3rd , Colapietro , A . M . , Barak , L . S . , Ménard , L . and Caron , M . G . ( 1996 ) Role of b - arrestin in mediating agonist - promoted G protein - coupled receptor internalization . Sci - ence 271 , 363 - 366 . Filipek , S . , Stenkamp , R . E . , Teller , D . C . and Palczewski , K . ( 2003 ) G protein - coupled receptor rhodopsin : a prospectus . Annu . Rev . Physiol . 65 , 851 - 879 . Fukata , M . , Fukata , Y . , Adesnik , H . , Nicoll , R . A . and Bredt , D . S . ( 2004 ) Identification of PSD - 95 palmitoylating enzymes . Neuron 44 , 987 - 996 . Funakoshi , Y . , Hasegawa , H . and Kanaho , Y . ( 2011 ) Regulation of PIP5K activity by Arf6 and its physiological significance . J . Cell . Physiol . 226 , 888 - 895 . Gao , Z . , Ni , Y . , Szabo , G . and Linden , J . ( 1999 ) Palmitoylation of the recombinant human A1 adenosine receptor : enhanced proteolysis of palmitoylation - deficient mutant receptors . Biochem . J . 342 , 387 - 895 . Gilman , A . G . ( 1987 ) G proteins : transducers of receptor - generated signals . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 56 , 615 - 649 . Glickman , M . H . and Ciechanover , A . ( 2002 ) The ubiquitin - proteasome proteolytic pathway : destruction for the sake of construction . Physi - ol . Rev . 82 , 373 - 428 . Godi , A . , Pertile , P . , Meyers , R . , Marra , P . , Di Tullio , G . , Iurisci , C . , Luini , A . , Corda , D . and De Matteis , M . A . ( 1999 ) ARF mediates recruitment of PtdIns - 4 - OH kinase - b and stimulates synthesis of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 on the Golgi complex . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 280 - 287 . Goodman , O . B . , Jr . , Krupnick , J . G . , Santini , F . , Gurevich , V . V . , Penn , R . B . , Gagnon , A . W . , Keen , J . H . and Benovic , J . L . ( 1996 ) b - arrestin acts as a clathrin adaptor in endocytosis of the b 2 - adrenergic receptor . Nature 383 , 447 - 450 . Greaves , J . and Chamberlain , L . H . ( 2011 ) DHHC palmitoyl transferas - es : substrate interactions and ( patho ) physiology . Trends Biochem . Sci . 36 , 245 - 253 . Groarke , D . A . , Drmota , T . , Bahia , D . S . , Evans , N . A . , Wilson , S . and Milligan , G . ( 2001 ) Analysis of the C - terminal tail of the rat thyrotro - pin - releasing hormone receptor - 1 in interactions and cointernaliza - tion with beta - arrestin 1 - green fluorescent protein . Mol . Pharmacol . 59 , 375 - 385 . Guo , S . , Zhang , X . , Zheng , M . , Zhang , X . , Min , C . , Wang , Z . , Cheon , S . H . , Oak , M . H . , Nah , S . Y . and Kim , K . M . ( 2015 ) Selectivity of commonly used inhibitors of clathrin - mediated and caveolae - dependent endocytosis of G protein - coupled receptors . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1848 , 2101 - 2010 . Hanley , N . R . and Hensler , J . G . ( 2002 ) Mechanisms of ligand - induced desensitization of the 5 - hydroxytryptamine ( 2A ) receptor . J . Phar - macol . Exp . Ther . 300 , 468 - 477 . Hansen , S . H . , Sandvig , K . and van Deurs , B . ( 1993 ) Clathrin and HA2 adaptors : effects of potassium depletion , hypertonic medium , and cytosol acidification . J . Cell Biol . 121 , 61 - 72 . Hawtin , S . R . , Tobin , A . B . , Patel , S . and Wheatley , M . ( 2001 ) Pal - mitoylation of the vasopressin V1a receptor reveals different con - formational requirements for signaling , agonist - induced receptor phosphorylation , and sequestration . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 38139 - 38146 . Hayashi , T . , Thomas , G . M . and Huganir , R . L . ( 2009 ) Dual palmi - toylation of NR2 subunits regulates NMDA receptor trafficking . Neuron 64 , 213 - 226 . Henley , J . R . , Krueger , E . W . , Oswald , B . J . and McNiven , M . A . ( 1998 ) Dynamin - mediated internalization of caveolae . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 85 - 99 . Hicke , L . and Riezman , H . ( 1996 ) Ubiquitination of a yeast plasma membrane receptor signals its ligand - stimulated endocytosis . Cell 84 , 277 - 287 . Holtmann , M . H . , Roettger , B . F . , Pinon , D . I . and Miller , L . J . ( 1996 ) Role of receptor phosphorylation in desensitization and internaliza - tion of the secretin receptor . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 23566 - 23571 . Honda , A . , Nogami , M . , Yokozeki , T . , Yamazaki , M . , Nakamura , H . , Watanabe , H . , Kawamoto , K . , Nakayama , K . , Morris , A . J . , Frohm - an , M . A . and Kanaho , Y . ( 1999 ) Phosphatidylinositol 4 - phosphate 5 - kinase a is a downstream effector of the small G protein ARF6 in membrane ruffle formation . Cell 99 , 521 - 532 . Houndolo , T . , Boulay , P . L . and Claing , A . ( 2005 ) G protein - coupled receptor endocytosis in ADP - ribosylation factor 6 - depleted cells . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 5598 - 5604 . Huang , C . and Tai , H . H . ( 1998 ) Prostaglandin E2 receptor EP3 a sub - type : the role of N - glycosylation in ligand binding as revealed by site - directed mutagenesis . Prostaglandins Leukot . Essent . Fatty Acids 59 , 265 - 271 . Huang , J . , Mahavadi , S . , Sriwai , W . , Grider , J . R . and Murthy , K . S . ( 2007 ) Cross - regulation of VPAC ( 2 ) receptor desensitization by M ( 3 ) receptors via PKC - mediated phosphorylation of RKIP and in - hibition of GRK2 . Am . J . Physiol . Gastrointest . Liver Physiol . 292 , G867 - G874 . Hukovic , N . , Panetta , R . , Kumar , U . , Rocheville , M . and Patel , Y . C . ( 1998 ) The cytoplasmic tail of the human somatostatin receptor type 5 is crucial for interaction with adenylyl cyclase and in mediat - ing desensitization and internalization . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 21416 - 21422 . Hutagalung , A . H . and Novick , P . J . ( 2011 ) Role of Rab GTPases in membrane traffic and cell physiology . Physiol . Rev . 91 , 119 - 149 . Iiri , T . , Backlund , P . S . , Jr . , Jones , T . L . , Wedegaertner , P . B . and Bourne , H . R . ( 1996 ) Reciprocal regulation of G s a by palmitate and the bγ subunit . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 93 , 14592 - 14597 . Itokawa , M . , Toru , M . , Ito , K . , Tsuga , H . , Kameyama , K . , Haga , T . , Arinami , T . and Hamaguchi , H . ( 1996 ) Sequestration of the short and long isoforms of dopamine D 2 receptors expressed in Chinese hamster ovary cells . Mol . Pharmacol . 49 , 560 - 566 . 40 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4062 / biomolther . 2016 . 186 Ivanov , A . I . ( 2008 ) Pharmacological inhibition of endocytic pathways : is it specific enough to be useful ? Methods Mol . Biol . 440 , 15 - 33 . Jacob , C . , Cottrell , G . S . , Gehringer , D . , Schmidlin , F . , Grady , E . F . and Bunnett , N . W . ( 2005 ) c - Cbl mediates ubiquitination , degradation , and down - regulation of human protease - activated receptor 2 . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 16076 - 16087 . Jenkins , G . H . , Fisette , P . L . and Anderson , R . A . ( 1994 ) Type I phos - phatidylinositol 4 - phosphate 5 - kinase isoforms are specifically stimulated by phosphatidic acid . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 11547 - 11554 . Ji , S . , Liu , X . , Li , S . , Shen , L . , Li , F . , Wang , J . , Han , J . and Yao , L . ( 2003 ) PH domain of G protein - coupled receptor kinase - 2 binds to protein kinase C ( PKC ) and negatively regulates activity of PKC kinase . Front . Biosci . 8 , a34 - a39 . Jiang , H . , Luo , J . Q . , Urano , T . , Frankel , P . , Lu , Z . , Foster , D . A . and Feig , L . A . ( 1995 ) Involvement of Ral GTPase in v - Src - induced phospholipase D activation . Nature 378 , 409 - 412 . Jimenez - baranda , S . , Gómez - Moutón , C . , Rojas , A . , Martínez - Prats , L . , Mira , E . , Ana Lacalle , R . , Valencia , A . , Dimitrov , D . S . , Viola , A . , Delgado , R . , Martínez - A , C . and Mañes , S . ( 2007 ) Filamin - A regulates actin - dependent clustering of HIV receptors . Nat . Cell Biol . 9 , 838 - 846 . Jullien - Flores , V . , Mahé , Y . , Mirey , G . , Leprince , C . , Meunier - Bisceuil , B . , Sorkin , A . and Camonis , J . H . ( 2000 ) RLIP76 , an effector of the GTPase Ral , interacts with the AP2 complex : involvement of the Ral pathway in receptor endocytosis . J . Cell Sci . 113 , 2837 - 2844 . Kawate , N . and Menon , K . M . ( 1994 ) Palmitoylation of luteinizing hor - mone / human choriogonadotropin receptors in transfected cells . Abolition of palmitoylation by mutation of Cys - 621 and Cys - 622 residues in the cytoplasmic tail increases ligand - induced internal - ization of the receptor . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 30651 - 30658 . Kelly , B . T . , Graham , S . C . , Liska , N . , Dannhauser , P . N . , Höning , S . , Ungewickell , E . J . and Owen , D . J . ( 2014 ) Clathrin adaptors . AP2 controls clathrin polymerization with a membrane - activated switch . Science 345 , 459 - 463 . Kelly , E . , Bailey , C . P . and Henderson , G . ( 2008 ) Agonist - selective mechanisms of GPCR desensitization . Br . J . Pharmacol . 153 Sup - pl 1 , S379 - S388 . Kennedy , M . E . and Limbird , L . E . ( 1993 ) Mutations of the a 2A - adrenergic receptor that eliminate detectable palmitoylation do not perturb receptor - G - protein coupling . J . Biol . Chem . 268 , 8003 - 8011 . Kim , J . , Ahn , S . , Ren , X . R . , Whalen , E . J . , Reiter , E . , Wei , H . and Lefkowitz , R . J . ( 2005 ) Functional antagonism of different G pro - tein - coupled receptor kinases for b - arrestin - mediated angiotensin II receptor signaling . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 102 , 1442 - 1447 . Kim , J . H . , Cho , E . Y . , Min , C . , Park , J . H . and Kim , K . M . ( 2008 ) Char - acterization of functional roles of DRY motif in the 2nd intracel - lular loop of dopamine D2 and D3 receptors . Arch . Pharm . Res . 31 , 474 - 481 . Kim , J . H . , Lee , S . D . , Han , J . M . , Lee , T . G . , Kim , Y . , Park , J . B . , Lam - beth , J . D . , Suh , P . G . and Ryu , S . H . ( 1998 ) Activation of phospho - lipase D1 by direct interaction with ADP - ribosylation factor 1 and RalA . FEBS Lett . 430 , 231 - 235 . Kim , J . Y . , Soede , R . D . , Schaap , P . , Valkema , R . , Borleis , J . A . , Van Haastert , P . J . , Devreotes , P . N . and Hereld , D . ( 1997 ) Phosphory - lation of chemoattractant receptors is not essential for chemotaxis or termination of G - protein - mediated responses . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 27313 - 27318 . Kim , K . M . , Pae , H . O . , Zheng , M . , Park , R . , Kim , Y . M . , Chung , H . T . ( 2007 ) Carbon monoxide induces heme oxygenase - 1 via activation of protein kinase R - like endoplasmic reticulum kinase and inhib - its endothelial cell apoptosis triggered by endoplasmic reticulum stress . Circ . Res . 101 , 919 - 927 . Kim , K . M . , Valenzano , K . J . , Robinson , S . R . , Yao , W . D . , Barak , L . S . and Caron , M . G . ( 2001 ) Differential regulation of the dopamine D2 and D3 receptors by G protein - coupled receptor kinases and b - arrestins . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 37409 - 37414 . Koch , T . , Brandenburg , L . O . , Schulz , S . , Liang , Y . , Klein , J . and Hollt , V . ( 2003 ) ADP - ribosylation factor - dependent phospholipase D 2 ac - tivation is required for agonist - induced mu - opioid receptor endocy - tosis . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 9979 - 9985 . Koch , W . J . , Hawes , B . E . , Inglese , J . , Luttrell , L . M . and Lefkowitz , R . J . ( 1994 ) Cellular expression of the carboxyl terminus of a G protein - coupled receptor kinase attenuates G bγ - mediated signal - ing . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 6193 - 6197 . Kohno , T . , Wada , A . and Igarashi , Y . ( 2002 ) N - glycans of sphingosine 1 - phosphate receptor Edg - 1 regulate ligand - induced receptor in - ternalization . FASEB J . 16 , 983 - 992 . Kosugi , S . and Mori , T . ( 1996 ) Cysteine - 699 , a possible palmitoylation site of the thyrotropin receptor , is not crucial for cAMP or phos - phoinositide signaling but is necessary for full surface expression . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 221 , 636 - 640 . Krasel , C . , Dammeier , S . , Winstel , R . , Brockmann , J . , Mischak , H . and Lohse , M . J . ( 2001 ) Phosphorylation of GRK2 by protein kinase C abolishes its inhibition by calmodulin . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 1911 - 1915 . Krauss , M . , Kinuta , M . , Wenk , M . R . , De Camilli , P . , Takei , K . and Haucke , V . ( 2003 ) ARF6 stimulates clathrin / AP - 2 recruitment to synaptic membranes by activating phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinase type I γ . J . Cell Biol . 162 , 113 - 124 . Lahaie , N . , Kralikova , M . , Prézeau , L . , Blahos , J . and Bouvier , M . ( 2016 ) Post - endocytotic deubiquitination and degradation of the metabotropic γ - aminobutyric acid receptor by the ubiquitin - specific protease 14 . J . Biol . Chem . 291 , 7156 - 7170 . Lajoie , P . and Nabi , I . R . ( 2010 ) Lipid rafts , caveolae , and their endo - cytosis . Int . Rev . Cell Mol . Biol . 282 , 135 - 163 . Laporte , S . A . , Oakley , R . H . , Zhang , J . , Holt , J . A . , Ferguson , S . S . , Caron , M . G . and Barak , L . S . ( 1999 ) The b 2 - adrenergic receptor / b arrestin complex recruits the clathrin adaptor AP - 2 during endocy - tosis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 96 , 3712 - 3717 . Lawrence , J . , Mundell , S . J . , Yun , H . , Kelly , E . and Venkateswarlu , K . ( 2005 ) Centaurin - a 1 , an ADP - ribosylation factor 6 GTPase activat - ing protein , inhibits b 2 - adrenoceptor internalization . Mol . Pharma - col . 67 , 1822 - 1828 . Lefkowitz , R . J . , Pierce , K . L . and Luttrell , L . M . ( 2002 ) Dancing with different partners : protein kinase a phosphorylation of seven mem - brane - spanning receptors regulates their G protein - coupling speci - ficity . Mol . Pharmacol . 62 , 971 - 974 . Lichnerova , K . , Kaniakova , M . , Park , S . P . , Skrenkova , K . , Wang , Y . X . , Petralia , R . S . , Suh , Y . H . and Horak , M . ( 2015 ) Two N - gly - cosylation sites in the GluN1 subunit are essential for releasing N - methyl - d - aspartate ( NMDA ) receptors from the endoplasmic re - ticulum . J . Biol . Chem . 290 , 18379 - 18390 . Linder , M . E . , Middleton , P . , Hepler , J . R . , Taussig , R . , Gilman , A . G . and Mumby , S . M . ( 1993 ) Lipid modifications of G proteins : a subunits are palmitoylated . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 90 , 3675 - 3679 . Liu , R . , Wang , D . , Shi , Q . , Fu , Q . , Hizon , S . and Xiang , Y . K . ( 2012 ) Palmitoylation regulates intracellular trafficking of b 2 adrenergic receptor / arrestin / phosphodiesterase 4D complexes in cardiomyo - cytes . PLoS ONE 7 , e42658 . Loerke , D . , Mettlen , M . , Yarar , D . , Jaqaman , K . , Jaqaman , H . , Danus - er , G . and Schmid , S . L . ( 2009 ) Cargo and dynamin regulate clath - rin - coated pit maturation . PLoS Biol . 7 , e57 . Lohse , M . J . , Benovic , J . L . , Codina , J . , Caron , M . G . and Lefkowitz , R . J . ( 1990 ) b - Arrestin : a protein that regulates b - adrenergic receptor function . Science 248 , 1547 - 1550 . Lorenz , K . , Lohse , M . J . and Quitterer , U . ( 2003 ) Protein kinase C switches the Raf kinase inhibitor from Raf - 1 to GRK - 2 . Nature 426 , 574 - 579 . Luo , J . Q . , Liu , X . , Frankel , P . , Rotunda , T . , Ramos , M . , Flom , J . , Jiang , H . , Feig , L . A . , Morris , A . J . , Kahn , R . A . and Foster , D . A . ( 1998 ) Functional association between Arf and RalA in active phospholi - pase D complex . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 95 , 3632 - 3637 . Luttrell , L . M . , Daaka , Y . , Della Rocca , G . J . and Lefkowitz , R . J . ( 1997 ) G protein - coupled receptors mediate two functionally distinct path - ways of tyrosine phosphorylation in rat 1a fibroblasts . Shc phos - phorylation and receptor endocytosis correlate with activation of Erk kinases . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 31648 - 31656 . Luttrell , L . M . , Roudabush , F . L . , Choy , E . W . , Miller , W . E . , Field , M . E . , Pierce , K . L . and Lefkowitz , R . J . ( 2001 ) Activation and targeting of extracellular signal - regulated kinases by b - arrestin scaffolds . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 98 , 2449 - 2454 . Macia , E . , Luton , F . , Partisani , M . , Cherfils , J . , Chardin , P . and Franco , Biomol Ther 25 ( 1 ) , 26 - 43 ( 2017 ) www . biomolther . org Zhang and Kim . Endocytosis of GPCRs 41 M . ( 2004 ) The GDP - bound form of Arf6 is located at the plasma membrane . J . Cell Sci . 117 , 2389 - 2398 . Marchese , A . , Chen , C . , Kim , Y . M . and Benovic , J . L . ( 2003 ) The ins and outs of G protein - coupled receptor trafficking . Trends Biochem . Sci . 28 , 369 - 376 . Marotti , L . A . , Jr . , Newitt , R . , Wang , Y . , Aebersold , R . and Dohlman , H . G . ( 2002 ) Direct identification of a G protein ubiquitination site by mass spectrometry . Biochemistry 41 , 5067 - 5074 . Matsuzaki , T . , Hanai , S . , Kishi , H . , Liu , Z . , Bao , Y . , Kikuchi , A . , Tsuchi - da , K . and Sugino , H . ( 2002 ) Regulation of endocytosis of activin type II receptors by a novel PDZ protein through Ral / Ral - binding protein 1 - dependent pathway . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 19008 - 19018 . McCaffrey , P . G . , Friedman , B . and Rosner , M . R . ( 1984 ) Diacylglycer - ol modulates binding and phosphorylation of the epidermal growth factor receptor . J . Biol . Chem . 259 , 12502 - 12507 . McDonald , P . H . , Chow , C . W . , Miller , W . E . , Laporte , S . A . , Field , M . E . , Lin , F . T . , Davis , R . J . and Lefkowitz , R . J . ( 2000 ) b - arrestin 2 : a receptor - regulated MAPK scaffold for the activation of JNK3 . Sci - ence 290 , 1574 - 1577 . McLauchlan , H . , Newell , J . , Morrice , N . , Osborne , A . , West , M . and Smythe , E . ( 1998 ) A novel role for Rab5 - GDI in ligand sequestra - tion into clathrin - coated pits . Curr . Biol . 8 , 34 - 45 . Meitzen , J . , Luoma , J . I . , Boulware , M . I . , Hedges , V . L . , Peterson , B . M . , Tuomela , K . , Britson , K . A . and Mermelstein , P . G . ( 2013 ) Palmitoylation of estrogen receptors is essential for neuronal mem - brane signaling . Endocrinology 154 , 4293 - 4304 . Menard , L . , Ferguson , S . S . , Barak , L . S . , Bertrand , L . , Premont , R . T . , Colapietro , A . M . , Lefkowitz , R . J . and Caron , M . G . ( 1996 ) Members of the G protein - coupled receptor kinase family that phosphorylate the b 2 - adrenergic receptor facilitate sequestration . Biochemistry 35 , 4155 - 4160 . Min , C . , Zheng , M . , Zhang , X . , Caron , M . G . and Kim , K . M . ( 2013 ) Novel roles for b - arrestins in the regulation of pharmacological se - questration to predict agonist - induced desensitization of dopamine D3 receptors . Br . J . Pharmacol . 170 , 1112 - 1129 . Min , C . , Zheng , M . , Zhang , X . , Guo , S . , Kwon , K . J . , Shin , C . Y . , Kim , H . S . , Cheon , S . H . and Kim , K . M . ( 2015 ) N - linked Glycosylation on the N - terminus of the dopamine D 2 and D3 receptors deter - mines receptor association with specific microdomains in the plas - ma membrane . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1853 , 41 - 51 . Mishra , S . and Murphy , L . J . ( 2004 ) Tissue transglutaminase has in - trinsic kinase activity : identification of transglutaminase 2 as an insulin - like growth factor - binding protein - 3 kinase . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 23863 - 23868 . Mitchell , R . , Robertson , D . N . , Holland , P . J . , Collins , D . , Lutz , E . M . and Johnson , M . S . ( 2003 ) ADP - ribosylation factor - dependent phospholipase D activation by the M3 muscarinic receptor . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 33818 - 33830 . Moffett , S . , Adam , L . , Bonin , H . , Loisel , T . P . , Bouvier , M . and Mouillac , B . ( 1996 ) Palmitoylated cysteine 341 modulates phosphorylation of the b 2 - adrenergic receptor by the cAMP - dependent protein kinase . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 21490 - 21497 . Moffett , S . , Mouillac , B . , Bonin , H . and Bouvier , M . ( 1993 ) Altered phos - phorylation and desensitization patterns of a human b 2 - adrenergic receptor lacking the palmitoylated Cys341 . EMBO J . 12 , 349 - 356 . Moller , L . B . , Pöllänen , J . , Rønne , E . , Pedersen , N . and Blasi , F . ( 1993 ) N - linked glycosylation of the ligand - binding domain of the human urokinase receptor contributes to the affinity for its ligand . J . Biol . Chem . 268 , 11152 - 11159 . Moore , C . A . , Milano , S . K . and Benovic , J . L . ( 2007 ) Regulation of receptor trafficking by GRKs and arrestins . Annu . Rev . Physiol . 69 , 451 - 482 . Moss , J . and Vaughan , M . ( 1995 ) Structure and function of ARF pro - teins : activators of cholera toxin and critical components of intra - cellular vesicular transport processes . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 12327 - 12330 . Mostafapour , S . , Kobilka , B . K . and von Zastrow , M . ( 1996 ) Pharma - cological sequestration of a chimeric b 3 / b 2 adrenergic receptor oc - curs without a corresponding amount of receptor internalization . Recept . Signal Transduct . 6 , 151 - 163 . Mott , H . R . and Owen , D . ( 2014 ) Structure and function of RLIP76 ( RalBP1 ) : an intersection point between Ras and Rho signalling . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 42 , 52 - 58 . Mukherjee , S . , Ghosh , R . N . and Maxfield , F . R . ( 1997 ) Endocytosis . Physiol . Rev . 77 , 759 - 803 . Mumby , S . M . , Kleuss , C . and Gilman , A . G . ( 1994 ) Receptor regula - tion of G - protein palmitoylation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 91 , 2800 - 2804 . Nabi , I . R . and Le , P . U . ( 2003 ) Caveolae / raft - dependent endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 161 , 673 - 677 . Nakashima , S . , Morinaka , K . , Koyama , S . , Ikeda , M . , Kishida , M . , Okawa , K . , Iwamatsu , A . , Kishida , S . and Kikuchi , A . ( 1999 ) Small G protein Ral and its downstream molecules regulate endocytosis of EGF and insulin receptors . EMBO J . 18 , 3629 - 3642 . Nakatsu , F . , Perera , R . M . , Lucast , L . , Zoncu , R . , Domin , J . , Gertler , F . B . , Toomre , D . and De Camilli , P . ( 2010 ) The inositol 5 - phos - phatase SHIP2 regulates endocytic clathrin - coated pit dynamics . J . Cell Biol . 190 , 307 - 315 . Nelson , C . D . , Perry , S . J . , Regier , D . S . , Prescott , S . M . , Topham , M . K . and Lefkowitz , R . J . ( 2007 ) Targeting of diacylglycerol deg - radation to M1 muscarinic receptors by b - arrestins . Science 315 , 663 - 666 . Novick , P . and Zerial , M . ( 1997 ) The diversity of Rab proteins in vesicle transport . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 9 , 496 - 504 . Oddi , S . , Dainese , E . , Sandiford , S . , Fezza , F . , Lanuti , M . , Chiurchiù , V . , Totaro , A . , Catanzaro , G . , Barcaroli , D . , De Laurenzi , V . , Cen - tonze , D . , Mukhopadhyay , S . , Selent , J . , Howlett , A . C . and Mac - carrone , M . ( 2012 ) Effects of palmitoylation of Cys ( 415 ) in helix 8 of the CB ( 1 ) cannabinoid receptor on membrane localization and signalling . Br . J . Pharmacol . 165 , 2635 - 2651 . O’Dowd , B . F . , Hnatowich , M . , Caron , M . G . , Lefkowitz , R . J . and Bou - vier , M . ( 1989 ) Palmitoylation of the human b 2 - adrenergic receptor . Mutation of Cys341 in the carboxyl tail leads to an uncoupled non - palmitoylated form of the receptor . J . Biol . Chem . 264 , 7564 - 7569 . O’Hayre , M . , Degese , M . S . and Gutkind , J . S . ( 2014 ) Novel insights into G protein and G protein - coupled receptor signaling in cancer . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 27 , 126 - 135 . Okamoto , Y . , Ninomiya , H . , Tanioka , M . , Sakamoto , A . , Miwa , S . and Masaki , T . ( 1997 ) Palmitoylation of human endothelinB . Its critical role in G protein coupling and a differential requirement for the cy - toplasmic tail by G protein subtypes . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 21589 - 21596 . Olkkonen , V . M . and Stenmark , H . ( 1997 ) Role of Rab GTPases in membrane traffic . Int . Rev . Cytol . 176 , 1 - 85 . Ong , S . T . , Freeley , M . , Skubis - Zegadło , J . , Fazil , M . H . , Kelleher , D . , Fresser , F . , Baier , G . , Verma , N . K . and Long , A . ( 2014 ) Phosphory - lation of Rab5a protein by protein kinase C is crucial for T - cell mi - gration . J . Biol . Chem . 289 , 19420 - 19434 . Ooi , C . E . , Dell’Angelica , E . C . and Bonifacino , J . S . ( 1998 ) ADP - Ribo - sylation factor 1 ( ARF1 ) regulates recruitment of the AP - 3 adaptor complex to membranes . J . Cell Biol . 142 , 391 - 402 . Orcl , L . , Palmer , D . J . , Amherdt , M . and Rothman , J . E . ( 1993 ) Coated vesicle assembly in the Golgi requires only coatomer and ARF pro - teins from the cytosol . Nature 364 , 732 - 734 . Palacios , F . , Schweitzer , J . K . , Boshans , R . L . and D’Souza - Schorey , C . ( 2002 ) ARF6 - GTP recruits Nm23 - H1 to facilitate dynamin - medi - ated endocytosis during adherens junctions disassembly . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 929 - 936 . Parenti , M . , Vigano , M . A . , Newman , C . M . , Milligan , G . and Magee , A . I . ( 1993 ) A novel N - terminal motif for palmitoylation of G - protein a subunits . Biochem . J . 291 , 349 - 353 . Parton , R . G . and Simons , K . ( 2007 ) The multiple faces of caveolae . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 8 , 185 - 194 . Pearse , B . M . ( 1976 ) Clathrin : a unique protein associated with intra - cellular transfer of membrane by coated vesicles . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 73 , 1255 - 1259 . Perry , S . J . , Baillie , G . S . , Kohout , T . A . , McPhee , I . , Magiera , M . M . , Ang , K . L . , Miller , W . E . , McLean , A . J . , Conti , M . , Houslay , M . D . and Lefkowitz , R . J . ( 2002 ) Targeting of cyclic AMP degradation to b 2 - adrenergic receptors by b - arrestins . Science 298 , 834 - 836 . Pfeffer , S . R . ( 1994 ) Rab GTPases : master regulators of membrane trafficking . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 6 , 522 - 526 . Pickart , C . M . ( 2001 ) Mechanisms underlying ubiquitination . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 70 , 503 - 533 . 42 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4062 / biomolther . 2016 . 186 Pierce , K . L . , Maudsley , S . , Daaka , Y . , Luttrell , L . M . and Lefkowitz , R . J . ( 2000 ) Role of endocytosis in the activation of the extracellular signal - regulated kinase cascade by sequestering and nonseques - tering G protein - coupled receptors . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 97 , 1489 - 1494 . Pippig , S . , Andexinger , S . and Lohse , M . J . ( 1995 ) Sequestration and recycling of b 2 - adrenergic receptors permit receptor resensitiza - tion . Mol . Pharmacol . 47 , 666 - 676 . Pitcher , J . A . , Freedman , N . J . and Lefkowitz , R . J . ( 1998 ) G protein - coupled receptor kinases . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 67 , 653 - 692 . Poggi , M . , Kara , I . , Brunel , J . M . , Landrier , J . F . , Govers , R . , Bonardo , B . , Fluhrer , R . , Haass , C . , Alessi , M . C . and Peiretti , F . ( 2013 ) Pal - mitoylation of TNF a is involved in the regulation of TNF receptor 1 signalling . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1833 , 602 - 612 . Pollok - Kopp , B . , Hüttenrauch , F . , Rethorn , S . and Oppermann , M . ( 2007 ) Dynamics of protein kinase C - mediated phosphorylation of the complement C5a receptor on serine 334 . J . Biol . Chem . 282 , 4345 - 4353 . Posor , Y . , Eichhorn - Grünig , M . and Haucke , V . ( 2015 ) Phosphoinositi - des in endocytosis . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1851 , 794 - 804 . Qanbar , R . and Bouvier , M . ( 2003 ) Role of palmitoylation / depalmi - toylation reactions in G - protein - coupled receptor function . Pharma - col . Ther . 97 , 1 - 33 . Rands , E . , Candelore , M . R . , Cheung , A . H . , Hill , W . S . , Strader , C . D . and Dixon , R . A . ( 1990 ) Mutational analysis of b - adrenergic recep - tor glycosylation . J . Biol . Chem . 265 , 10759 - 10764 . Rankovic , M . , Jacob , L . , Rankovic , V . , Brandenburg , L . O . , Schröder , H . , Höllt , V . and Koch , T . ( 2009 ) ADP - ribosylation factor 6 regulates mu - opioid receptor trafficking and signaling via activation of phos - pholipase D 2 . Cell Signal . 21 , 1784 - 1793 . Rastogi , R . , Verma , J . K . , Kapoor , A . , Langsley , G . and Mukhopadhy - ay , A . ( 2016 ) Rab5 Isoforms Specifically Regulate Different Modes of Endocytosis in Leishmania . J . Biol . Chem . 291 , 14732 - 14746 . Rodal , S . K . , Skretting , G . , Garred , O . , Vilhardt , F . , van Deurs , B . and Sandvig , K . ( 1999 ) Extraction of cholesterol with methyl - b - cyclodextrin perturbs formation of clathrin - coated endocytic vesi - cles . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 961 - 974 . Rohrer , J . , Bénédetti , H . , Zanolari , B . and Riezman , H . ( 1993 ) Identifi - cation of a novel sequence mediating regulated endocytosis of the G protein - coupled a - pheromone receptor in yeast . Mol . Biol . Cell 4 , 511 - 521 . Romer , W . , Pontani , L . L . , Sorre , B . , Rentero , C . , Berland , L . , Cham - bon , V . , Lamaze , C . , Bassereau , P . , Sykes , C . , Gaus , K . and Jo - hannes , L . ( 2010 ) Actin dynamics drive membrane reorganization and scission in clathrin - independent endocytosis . Cell 140 , 540 - 553 . Rosenthal , W . , Antaramian , A . , Gilbert , S . and Birnbaumer , M . ( 1993 ) Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus . A V2 vasopressin receptor unable to stimulate adenylyl cyclase . J . Biol . Chem . 268 , 13030 - 13033 . Ross , E . M . ( 1995 ) Protein modification . Palmitoylation in G - protein signaling pathways . Curr . Biol . 5 , 107 - 109 . Roth , B . L . , Willins , D . L . and Kroeze , W . K . ( 1998 ) G protein - coupled receptor ( GPCR ) trafficking in the central nervous system : rel - evance for drugs of abuse . Drug Alcohol Depend . 51 , 73 - 85 . Rothberg , K . G . , Heuser , J . E . , Donzell , W . C . , Ying , Y . S . , Glenney , J . R . and Anderson , R . G . ( 1992 ) Caveolin , a protein component of caveolae membrane coats . Cell 68 , 673 - 682 . Sandvig , K . , Olsnes , S . , Petersen , O . W . and van Deurs , B . ( 1987 ) Acidification of the cytosol inhibits endocytosis from coated pits . J . Cell Biol . 105 , 679 - 689 . Schmid , S . L . ( 1997 ) Clathrin - coated vesicle formation and protein sorting : an integrated process . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 66 , 511 - 548 . Schmidlin , F . , Dery , O . , DeFea , K . O . , Slice , L . , Patierno , S . , Sternini , C . , Grady , E . F . and Bunnett , N . W . ( 2001 ) Dynamin and Rab5a - dependent trafficking and signaling of the neurokinin 1 receptor . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 25427 - 25437 . Seachrist , J . L . , Anborgh , P . H . and Ferguson , S . S . ( 2000 ) b 2 - ad - renergic receptor internalization , endosomal sorting , and plasma membrane recycling are regulated by rab GTPases . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 27221 - 27228 . Shapiro , M . J . , Weiss , E . J . , Faruqi , T . R . and Coughlin , S . R . ( 2000 ) Protease - activated receptors 1 and 4 are shut off with distinct kinet - ics after activation by thrombin . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 25216 - 25221 . Shen , Y . , Xu , L . and Foster , D . A . ( 2001 ) Role for phospholipase D in receptor - mediated endocytosis . Mol . Cell . Biol . 21 , 595 - 602 . Shenoy , S . K . , McDonald , P . H . , Kohout , T . A . and Lefkowitz , R . J . ( 2001 ) Regulation of receptor fate by ubiquitination of activated b 2 - adrenergic receptor and b - arrestin . Science 294 , 1307 - 1313 . Sibley , D . R . , Benovic , J . L . , Caron , M . G . and Lefkowitz , R . J . ( 1987 ) Regulation of transmembrane signaling by receptor phosphoryla - tion . Cell 48 , 913 - 922 . Sibley , D . R . and Lefkowitz , R . J . ( 1985 ) Molecular mechanisms of receptor desensitization using the b - adrenergic receptor - coupled adenylate cyclase system as a model . Nature 317 , 124 - 129 . Sikarwar , A . S . , Hinton , M . , Santhosh , K . T . , Chelikani , P . and Dak - shinamurti , S . ( 2014 ) Palmitoylation of G a q determines its associa - tion with the thromboxane receptor in hypoxic pulmonary hyperten - sion . Am . J . Respir . Cell Mol . Biol . 50 , 135 - 143 . Soto , A . G . and Trejo , J . ( 2010 ) N - linked glycosylation of protease - ac - tivated receptor - 1 second extracellular loop : a critical determinant for ligand - induced receptor activation and internalization . J . Biol . Chem . 285 , 18781 - 18793 . Stadel , J . M . , Nambi , P . , Shorr , R . G . , Sawyer , D . F . , Caron , M . G . and Lefkowitz , R . J . ( 1983 ) Catecholamine - induced desensitization of turkey erythrocyte adenylate cyclase is associated with phosphory - lation of the b - adrenergic receptor . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 80 , 3173 - 3177 . Stenmark , H . , Parton , R . G . , Steele - Mortimer , O . , Lütcke , A . , Gruen - berg , J . and Zerial , M . ( 1994 ) Inhibition of rab5 GTPase activity stimulates membrane fusion in endocytosis . EMBO J . 13 , 1287 - 1296 . Strasser , R . H . , Sibley , D . R . and Lefkowitz , R . J . ( 1986 ) A novel cate - cholamine - activated adenosine cyclic 3’ , 5’ - phosphate independent pathway for b - adrenergic receptor phosphorylation in wild - type and mutant S49 lymphoma cells : mechanism of homologous desensiti - zation of adenylate cyclase . Biochemistry 25 , 1371 - 1377 . Subtil , A . , Gaidarov , I . , Kobylarz , K . , Lampson , M . A . , Keen , J . H . and McGraw , T . E . ( 1999 ) Acute cholesterol depletion inhibits clathrin - coated pit budding . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 96 , 6775 - 6780 . Takai , Y . , Sasaki , T . and Matozaki , T . ( 2001 ) Small GTP - binding pro - teins . Physiol . Rev . 81 , 153 - 208 . Tanowitz , M . and Von Zastrow , M . ( 2002 ) Ubiquitination - independent trafficking of G protein - coupled receptors to lysosomes . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 50219 - 50222 . Teis , D . , Wunderlich , W . and Huber , L . A . ( 2002 ) Localization of the MP1 - MAPK scaffold complex to endosomes is mediated by p14 and required for signal transduction . Dev . Cell 3 , 803 - 814 . Thompson , D . and Whistler , J . L . ( 2011 ) Dopamine D ( 3 ) receptors are down - regulated following heterologous endocytosis by a specific interaction with G protein - coupled receptor - associated sorting pro - tein - 1 . J . Biol . Chem . 286 , 1598 - 1608 . Tran , T . M . , Friedman , J . , Qunaibi , E . , Baameur , F . , Moore , R . H . and Clark , R . B . ( 2004 ) Characterization of agonist stimulation of cAMP - dependent protein kinase and G protein - coupled receptor kinase phosphorylation of the b 2 - adrenergic receptor using phos - phoserine - specific antibodies . Mol . Pharmacol . 65 , 196 - 206 . Traub , L . M . , Ostrom , J . A . and Kornfeld , S . ( 1993 ) Biochemical dis - section of AP - 1 recruitment onto Golgi membranes . J . Cell Biol . 123 , 561 - 573 . Ulloa - Aguirre , A . , Timossi , C . , Damián - Matsumura , P . and Dias , J . A . ( 1999 ) Role of glycosylation in function of follicle - stimulating hor - mone . Endocrine 11 , 205 - 215 . van Dam , E . M . and Robinson , P . J . ( 2006 ) Ral : mediator of membrane trafficking . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 38 , 1841 - 1847 . van der Bliek , A . M . , Redelmeier , T . E . , Damke , H . , Tisdale , E . J . , Mey - erowitz , E . M . and Schmid , S . L . ( 1993 ) Mutations in human dyna - min block an intermediate stage in coated vesicle formation . J . Cell Biol . 122 , 553 - 563 . Vickery , R . G . and von Zastrow , M . ( 1999 ) Distinct dynamin - dependent and - independent mechanisms target structurally homologous do - pamine receptors to different endocytic membranes . J . Cell Biol . 144 , 31 - 43 . Vieira , A . V . , Lamaze , C . and Schmid , S . L . ( 1996 ) Control of EGF receptor signaling by clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Science 274 , Biomol Ther 25 ( 1 ) , 26 - 43 ( 2017 ) www . biomolther . org Zhang and Kim . Endocytosis of GPCRs 43 2086 - 2089 . von Kleist , L . , Stahlschmidt , W . , Bulut , H . , Gromova , K . , Puchkov , D . , Robertson , M . J . , MacGregor , K . A . , Tomilin , N . , Pechstein , A . , Chau , N . , Chircop , M . , Sakoff , J . , von Kries , J . P . , Saenger , W . , Kräusslich , H . G . , Shupliakov , O . , Robinson , P . J . , McCluskey , A . and Haucke , V . ( 2011 ) Role of the clathrin terminal domain in regu - lating coated pit dynamics revealed by small molecule inhibition . Cell 146 , 471 - 484 . von Zastrow , M . ( 2001 ) Role of endocytosis in signalling and regulation of G - protein - coupled receptors . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 29 , 500 - 504 . Wedegaertner , P . B . , Chu , D . H . , Wilson , P . T . , Levis , M . J . and Bourne , H . R . ( 1993 ) Palmitoylation is required for signaling functions and membrane attachment of Gq a and Gs a . J . Biol . Chem . 268 , 25001 - 25008 . Weir , D . L . , Laing , E . D . , Smith , I . L . , Wang , L . F . and Broder , C . C . ( 2014 ) Host cell virus entry mediated by Australian bat lyssavirus G envelope glycoprotein occurs through a clathrin - mediated endo - cytic pathway that requires actin and Rab5 . Virol . J . 11 , 40 . Wenk , M . R . , Pellegrini , L . , Klenchin , V . A . , Di Paolo , G . , Chang , S . , Daniell , L . , Arioka , M . , Martin , T . F . and De Camilli , P . ( 2001 ) PIP kinase I γ is the major PI ( 4 , 5 ) P ( 2 ) synthesizing enzyme at the syn - apse . Neuron 32 , 79 - 88 . West , M . A . , Bright , N . A . and Robinson , M . S . ( 1997 ) The role of ADP - ribosylation factor and phospholipase D in adaptor recruitment . J . Cell Biol . 138 , 1239 - 1254 . Williams , A . M . and Enns , C . A . ( 1993 ) A region of the C - terminal por - tion of the human transferrin receptor contains an asparagine - linked glycosylation site critical for receptor structure and function . J . Biol . Chem . 268 , 12780 - 12786 . Winstel , R . , Freund , S . , Krasel , C . , Hoppe , E . and Lohse , M . J . ( 1996 ) Protein kinase cross - talk : membrane targeting of the b - adrenergic receptor kinase by protein kinase C . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 93 , 2105 - 2109 . Wolfe , B . L . and Trejo , J . ( 2007 ) Clathrin - dependent mechanisms of G protein - coupled receptor endocytosis . Traffic 8 , 462 - 470 . Yu , S . S . , Lefkowitz , R . J . and Hausdorff , W . P . ( 1993 ) b - adrenergic receptor sequestration . A potential mechanism of receptor resensi - tization . J . Biol . Chem . 268 , 337 - 341 . Yun , H . J . , Kim , H . , Ga , I . , Oh , H . , Ho , D . H . , Kim , J . , Seo , H . , Son , I . and Seol , W . ( 2015 ) An early endosome regulator , Rab5b , is an LRRK2 kinase substrate . J . Biochem . 157 , 485 - 495 . Zhang , X . , Choi , B . G . and Kim , K . M . ( 2016a ) Roles of dopamine D 2 receptor subregions in interactions with b - Arrestin2 . Biomol . Ther . ( Seoul ) 24 , 517 - 522 . Zhang , X . , Le , H . T . , Zhang , X . , Zheng , M . , Choi , B . G . and Kim , K . M . ( 2016b ) Palmitoylation on the carboxyl terminus tail is required for the selective regulation of dopamine D 2 versus D3 receptors . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1858 , 2152 - 2162 . Zhang , X . , Sun , N . , Zheng , M . and Kim , K . M . ( 2016c ) Clathrin - me - diated endocytosis is responsible for the lysosomal degradation of dopamine D3 receptor . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 476 , 245 - 251 . Zhang , X . and Kim , K . M . ( 2016 ) Palmitoylation of the carboxyl - termi - nal tail of dopamine D4 receptor is required for surface expression , endocytosis , and signaling . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 479 , 398 - 403 . Zhang , Z . , Austin , S . C . and Smyth , E . M . ( 2001 ) Glycosylation of the human prostacyclin receptor : role in ligand binding and signal transduction . Mol . Pharmacol . 60 , 480 - 487 . Zheng , H . , Chu , J . , Qiu , Y . , Loh , H . H . and Law , P . Y . ( 2008 ) Agonist - selective signaling is determined by the receptor location within the membrane domains . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 105 , 9421 - 9426 . Zheng , H . , Loh , H . H . and Law , P . Y . ( 2013 ) Posttranslation modifica - tion of G protein - coupled receptor in relationship to biased ago - nism . Meth . Enzymol . 522 , 391 - 408 . Zheng , H . , Pearsall , E . A . , Hurst , D . P . , Zhang , Y . , Chu , J . , Zhou , Y . , Reggio , P . H . , Loh , H . H . and Law , P . Y . ( 2012 ) Palmitoylation and membrane cholesterol stabilize mu - opioid receptor homodimeriza - tion and G protein coupling . BMC Cell Biol . 13 , 6 . Zheng , M . , Zhang , X . , Guo , S . , Zhang , X . , Choi , H . J . , Lee , M . Y . and Kim , K . M . ( 2015 ) PKC b II inhibits the ubiquitination of b - arrestin2 in an autophosphorylation - dependent manner . FEBS Lett . 589 , 3929 - 3937 . Zheng , M . , Zhang , X . , Guo , S . , Zhang , X . , Min , C . , Cheon , S . H . , Oak , M . H . , Kim , Y . R . and Kim , K . M . ( 2016 ) Agonist - induced changes in RalA activities allows the prediction of the endocytosis of G protein - coupled receptors . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1863 , 77 - 90 . Zoncu , R . , Perera , R . M . , Sebastian , R . , Nakatsu , F . , Chen , H . , Balla , T . , Ayala , G . , Toomre , D . and De Camilli , P . V . ( 2007 ) Loss of endo - cytic clathrin - coated pits upon acute depletion of phosphatidylinosi - tol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 104 , 3793 - 3798 .