LETTER TO THE EDITOR Obesity and COVID - 19 : Take Two — Has Our Saw Been Adequately Sharpened ? Marvin Wei Jie Chua 1 Received : 18 May 2021 / Revised : 25 May 2021 / Accepted : 26 May 2021 # The Author ( s ) , under exclusive licence to Springer Science + Business Media , LLC , part of Springer Nature 2021 31 st December 2019 : a date which will undoubtedly be etched in our memories as the first time the world became aware of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 ( SARS - CoV - 2 ) virus . The rest , as they say , is history . The first case of COVID - 19 hit our shores on 23 rd January 2020 , with an alarming increase in community transmission prompting the institution of a “ circuit breaker ” in April 2020 , which included stay - home measures , telecommuting and closure of schools , not dissimilar to the more common term “ lockdown ” . At that time , I observed and reported the worrisome bidirectional re - lationship between COVID - 19 and obesity , which indeed re - inforce each other in an inexorable vicious cycle [ 1 , 2 ] . Obesity increases the risk of COVID - 19 , including severe COVID - 19 and death [ 1 ] . At the same time , implementation of the aforementioned measures to curb virus transmission led to increased consumption of processed , high - caloric food and an increasingly sedentary lifestyle [ 3 ] , all of which threatened to lead to sky - rocketing rates of obesity and its associated complications in the “ clash of two pandemics ” [ 1 ] . However , it was precisely at that time when medical atten - tion and services for patients with obesity were most urgently needed , that they seemed to be the most lacking . Non - essential clinic appointments including weight management services and bariatric surgeries were postponed to conserve resources and reduce the risk of viral transmission . Many pa - tients also elected not to turn up for their clinic appointments due to fear of infection . Recognizing the need for physicians to “ sharpen the saw ” in view of this “ new normal ” , I had described methods to rebuild our clinical pathways for the future to manage the post - COVID - 19 fallout , including telemedicine , motivational interviewing and mindfulness [ 2 ] . By December 2020 , community transmission rates had fallen to a sufficiently low rate that a flicker of light at the end of a long tunnel was in sight . Alas , recent new clusters of infection sprung up in May 2021 , prompting the swift reintroduction of restrictions including stay - home measures , reduction in size of group gatherings and prohibition of dining - in . Similar to the situation 1 year ago , elective surgeries and non - essential clinic appointments were postponed . The same clinics which were bustling 1 month ago were now near - empty , likely contributed by increased public fears due to a recent cluster arising within an acute hospital . Many countries would be no stranger to this “ second com - ing ” , with repeated widespread waves of infections after initial apparent control . That said , as an Endocrinologist managing patients with obesity who was seemingly in the “ building back ” phase following the initial wave of COVID - 19 , only to be pushed back into the “ ravine ” , I had a few reflections which might be useful for fellow physicians . Firstly , it appears that there are a growing number of COVID - 19 cases in children . It was previously established that children are at lower risk of viral infection and transmis - sion [ 4 , 5 ] . However , based on the cases to date locally , it appears that a significant number of children have been affect - ed , with a number of clusters being linked to schools and enrichment centres . Children may also be at increased risk of long - COVID , a debilitating post - COVID illness [ 6 ] , and to date , there is no approved vaccine for young children . At the same time , childhood obesity is a burgeoning problem . In a health survey done in Singapore in 2017 , 13 % of school children and 10 % of 5 - year - old children were overweight — most concerningly , 70 % of children who were overweight at the age of 7 remained overweight as adults . Therefore , the “ clash of two pandemics ” clearly starts from childhood and intensifies throughout the lifespan . An interesting perspective reported by De Rubeis et al . is that disasters , including pan - demics , might have long - term adverse effects on cardio - metabolic health which may only be evident later in life [ 7 ] . We need to urgently take action to curb the growing rates of * Marvin Wei Jie Chua marvin . chua . w . j @ singhealth . com . sg 1 Endocrinology Service , Department of General Medicine , Sengkang General Hospital , 110 Sengkang East Way , 544886 Singapore , Singapore https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11695 - 021 - 05506 - 7 / Published online : 9 June 2021 Obesity Surgery ( 2021 ) 31 : 4645 – 4646 childhood obesity and focus our efforts on preventive mea - sures to try to “ nip the problem in the bud ” and decrease the burden of upstream problems . Although the importance of tackling obesity from child - hood is undisputed , it clearly involves large - scale changes on a societal , national or indeed global level . While this is ongoing , in our capacity as individual physicians , is there an immediate difference we can make to our patients in the cur - rent climate ? Telemedicine is a powerful tool that allows continued de - livery of healthcare services while circumventing the afore - mentioned concerns of virus transmission [ 8 , 9 ] . A systematic review in children with obesity found that compared to face - to - face consultation , telemedicine led to similar outcomes in - cluding body mass index ( BMI ) , nutrition , physical activity and satisfaction scores . However , telemedicine is not without its downsides [ 9 ] . Ensuring privacy and data security is of utmost importance to maintain patient confidentiality . Anthropometric and laboratory data , which are often essential in making further treatment decisions , may not be readily obtained . The key question is , can telemedicine truly replace face - to - face consultations ? The management of patients with obesity requires an emphasis on not just physical , but also psycholog - ical and social health — consistent with the World Health Organization ( WHO ) definition of “ health ” , as obesity is as - sociated with increased psycho - social distress . This in turn relies heavily on the patient - physician relationship — one that is based on trust and requires consistent effort and time to nurture . In a study , physicians were found to have lower levels of emotional rapport during consultation with overweight and obese patients , which may diminish adherence to recommen - dations and decrease the effectiveness of behavioural change counselling [ 10 ] . Therefore , the importance of forging a strong patient - physician relationship cannot be overstated , but how can we effectively do so from behind a screen ? This is where two tools which I had earlier described — motivational interviewing and mindfulness , may be applied [ 2 ] . With motivational interviewing , we “ walk the path ” with the patient regardless of the state of readiness for behavioural change , giving the freedom to change on his / her own terms while providing constant support [ 2 ] . In a mindful state , we may be able to detect subtle changes in a patient ’ s body lan - guage which might otherwise be easily missed over a virtual platform , especially if we are intent on pushing forward the agenda of our consultation [ 2 ] . Nonetheless , telemedicine remains an effective tool in our armamentarium in these times . Physicians should focus on “ sharpening the saw ” , with the goal of delivering the same , if not better care through telemedicine . On a larger scale , per - haps a “ hybrid ” model , where teleconsultation is default while face - to - face consultation is reserved for initial consultation and patients with significant psycho - social issues , could be a model of care delivery in the future . In conclusion , we physicians managing patients with obe - sity have an uphill task ahead — when will the pandemic truly end ? Only time will tell . Until then , I present two proposed changes which are complementary to each other — one on a large scale , societal level to focus our efforts on tackling child - hood obesity , and the other on a one - to - one , patient - physician level to deliver the best possible care through telemedicine . Declarations Human and animal rights This article does not contain any studies with human participants or animals performed by the author . Informed consent Informed consent does not apply , as this article does not include data or description of any individual patient . Conflict of interest The author declares that there is no conflict of interest . References 1 . Chua MWJ , Zheng S . Obesity and COVID - 19 : the clash of two pandemics . ObesRes ClinPract . 2020 ; 14 : 380 – 2 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . orcp . 2020 . 06 . 003 . 2 . Chua MWJ . Managing patients with obesity in the post COVID - 19 world : time to sharpen the saw . Obes Res Clin Pract . 2021 ; 15 : 85 – 8 . 3 . Chew HSJ , Lopez V . Global impact of COVID - 19 on weight and weight - related behaviors in the adult population : a scoping review . Int J Environ Res Public Health . 2021 ; 18 4 . Yung CF , Kam KQ , Chong CY , et al . Household transmission of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 from adults to children . J Pediatr . 2020 ; 225 : 249 – 51 . 5 . Yung CF , Kam KQ , Nadua KD , et al . Novel coronavirus 2019 transmission risk in educational settings . Clin Infect Dis Off Publ Infect Dis Soc Am . 2021 ; 72 : 1055 – 8 . 6 . Thomson H . Children with long covid . New Sci . 1971 ; 2021 ( 249 ) : 10 – 1 . 7 . De Rubeis V et al . Impact of disasters , including pandemics , on cardiometabolic outcomes across the life - course : a systematic re - view . BMJ Open . 2021 ; 11 : e047152 . 8 . Umano GR , di Sessa A , Guarino S , et al . Telemedicine in the COVID - 19 era : taking care of children with obesity and diabetes mellitus . World J Diabetes . 2021 ; 12 : 651 – 7 . 9 . Whitley A , Yahia N . Efficacy of clinic - based telehealth vs . face - to - face interventions for obesity treatment in children and adolescents in the United States and Canada : a systematic review . Child Obes Chi . 2021 ; 2020 : 0347 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1089 / chi . 2020 . 0347 . 10 . Gudzune KA , Beach MC , Roter DL , et al . Physicians build less rapport with obese patients . Obes Silver Spring Md . 2013 ; 21 : 2146 – 52 . Publisher ’ s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdic - tional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations . 4646 OBES SURG ( 2021 ) 31 : 4645 – 4646