Educational Research for Policy and Practice ( 2021 ) 20 : 325 – 347 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10671 - 020 - 09286 - 2 ORIGINAL ARTICLE Supportive learning environments at elementary level in China Lili Hernández - Romero 1 · Xiaokun Sun 2 Received : 11 April 2019 / Accepted : 5 November 2020 / Published online : 3 January 2021 © Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd . 2021 Abstract Since the ﬁrst curriculum reform in the 1990s , education reforms in China have aimed at creating a student - centred education model based on creativity . The effectiveness of such strategies is , however , questionable . This paper explores the current level of supportive learn - ing environment at elementary schools . Through empirical research conducted at a primary school in China , the study sheds light on situations that affect the implementation of cre - ativity at school . The researchers adopted qualitative methodologies for the examination of three aspects : classroom activities , teaching behaviour and assessments . The results suggest that , to a certain extent , teachers at the selected primary school are aware of the signiﬁcance of facilitating a creative learning environment . Interviews with students and researchers’ observations demonstrate , nonetheless , that strategies to foster student creative potential are put into practice at a very low level , bringing forth a learning environment that is far from creative . Keywords Creativity · Learning environment · China · Policy · Education reform · Elementary school · Teachers 1 Introduction Creativity has been recognised as a driving force in promoting individual’s competence in an era where innovation and creative problem - solving skills are widely advocated . Accord - ingly , it has been considered a necessary step to build a supportive learning environment that fosters creativity at school . This is deemed signiﬁcant in order to encourage students to take ownership of the learning process . Since the ﬁrst curriculum reform in the 1990s , Chinese education system has shown an inclination to move away from the traditional rote learning B Lili Hernández - Romero Lili . Hernandez @ nottingham . edu . cn Xiaokun Sun xs247 @ cam . ac . uk 1 School of International Communications , The University of Nottingham Ningbo China , Room 317 , Admin Building , 199 Taikang East Road , Ningbo 315100 , China 2 Department of Sociology , University of Cambridge , Floor 2 , 16 Mill Lane , Cambridge CB2 1SB , UK 123 326 L . Hernández - Romero , X . Sun scheme that has hitherto prevailed in the Chinese education system . Allegedly , education reform sides instead with a student - centred approach based on the enhancement of creativity in the classroom . Questions have been raised , nevertheless , about the effectiveness of the strategies used to foster creativity in this learning environment in China . This paper investi - gates the current level of a supportive learning environment that fosters creativity promoted by teachers at elementary schools in that country . It provides a detailed examination of how creativity is purportedly promoted while de facto hindered at one primary school in Dalian , shedding light on customary practices that affect the enhancement of creativity at schools in China . An education system heavily driven by exam results points in that direction . The prevalence of rote learning as opposed to critical thinking is another major factor . On the whole , education in China continues to be focused on results and achievements , leaving aside the creative process behind . 2 Literature review 2 . 1 Creativity Creativity is a subject that has been widely discussed in the academic milieu . Scholars from various disciplines have studied different aspects of creativity ( Amabile 1996 ; Craft 2001 ; Weigberg 2006 ; Sternberg and Lubart 2009 ) . Misha and Koehler identiﬁed creativity as a ‘goal driven process of developing solutions’ with components of ‘novel , effective and whole’ ( Mishra and Henriksen 2013 , p . 10 ) . Attention is increasingly paid to develop adequate methodologies to foster creative capacities in educational contexts . The National Advisory Committee on Creative and Cultural Education ( NACCCE ) deﬁnes creativity as : ‘imaginative activity fashioned so as to produce outcomes that are both original and of value’ ( NACCCE 1999 , p . 30 ) . According to this approach , creativity is a process that features the following four elements : imagination , purpose , originality and value . This entails that creativity is an imaginative process where new and visionary ideas are appreciated . Additionally , creativity leads to the exploration of new domains and new realms of experiences . The suggestion that outcomes should be of value , however , entails measurability . This is problematic particularly when it comes to young children as it is difﬁcult to measure their creative potential strictly based on outcomes . In this sense , studies have revealed that not only should outcomes be evaluatedtodeterminecreativitybutthattheoriginalthinkingprocessisanimportantcriterioninassessingyoungstudentcreativityintheeducationalcontext ( Tegano et al . 1991 ; Barbot , Besancon and Lubart 2011 ) . As young children might not be sufﬁciently skilful to produce sophisticated creative outcomes , it is suggested that the process by which they generate and represent their ideas should take a larger weight when considering their creative abilities . Traditionally , creativity used to be associated with the arts . As part of the education sys - tem , it was stimulated mainly through art related subjects . It was believed that only certain people , e . g . artists , were born with this quality . Scholars have suggested , however , that cre - ativity should be cultivated , in every aspect of the education process ( Morris 2006 ; Sahlberg 2010 ) . The argument is that creativity pertains to all people and that , rather than being an inborn quality , it is an ability that can be cultivated at all levels of the education system and for all students . This entails a rather broad understanding of the concept of creativity , which is considered not only a part of arts education but a function of the education system in a broader sense . This has brought forth the idea of ‘democratic creativity’ ( NACCCE 1999 ) considered as a general ability to be enhanced through education . Hernández - Romero ( 2017 ) 123 Supportive learning environments at elementary level in China 327 uses Maturana’s ideas about the patriarchal and the matristic to argue that while young chil - dren have a great creative potential , this is gradually blocked as the patriarchal takes over the matristic . This means that aspects such as competitiveness , emphasis on results , measurabil - ity and rationality are given priority over cooperation , emotions , spontaneity and sensuality . As a result , creativity is largely blocked in adulthood as subjective aspects do not ﬁt within a rationally oriented society . It is suggested , thus , this is a quality to be unblocked and re - learnt and that every person is capable of pursuing the actualisation of their creative potential in everyday life . This view is in agreement with Spendlove ( 2008 ) and Craft ( 2001 ) who claim that creativity can be categorised into two types : ‘big creativity’ and ‘little creativity’ . Big creativity refers to a high - level intelligence by which people are considered as gifted and tal - ented . Little creativity , on the other hand , is recognised as a basic skill which enables people to think originally and intuitively as part of daily life . While big creativity can be recognised as the force behind the most remarkable discoveries of the world , little creativity entails the belief that everyone can develop creativity and put it in practice in everyday life . Taking such an idea into consideration , numerous studies have attempted to explain how to enhance creativity through educational means . Some studies suggested that educators may cultivate creativity by helping learners to think across disciplines ( Mishra et al . 2015 ; Mishra and Henriksen 2019 ) . The idea of trans - disciplinary creativity made the way of measur - ing creativity feasible as it listed seven cognitive skills for a creative person to think in a trans - disciplinary way . These skills include : ‘perceiving , patterning , abstracting , embodied thinking , modelling , play and synthesis’ ( Mishra et al . 2015 , p . 698 ) . However , the trans - disciplinary framework has only focused on an individual’s personal cognitive thinking skills across disciplines . Their research makes no attempt to address the question of a supportive learning environment for the enhancement of creativity . Another strand that suggests the development of creativity in education places emphasis in motivation . The concept of moti - vation has been a crucial factor in creative thinking . Sternberg and Lubart ( 2009 ) demonstrate that motivation is a crucial factor in enhancing creativity . Creative thinking demands a high degree of motivation that equates to the individual’s passion , purpose , patience and devotion . A number of studies , however , have found that not all kinds of motivation lead to increase the individual’s creativity . Motivation has been categorised into two types : intrinsic and extrinsic ( Amabile 1996 ; Collin and Amabile 2009 ; Nickerson 2009 ; Hennessey and Amabile 2011 ) . Intrinsic motivation refers to an inherent interest in performing a task , whereas extrinsic motivation comes from external incentives such as praise or recognition . In the educational context , students exhibit intrinsic motivation when they pursue their own agendas in the learning process . In this case , they would study because they enjoy the contents of the class rather than to obtain a particular outcome or grade . Csikszentmihalyi ( 1988 ) contends that a person is more likely to develop his / her creative abilities under the condition of high - level intrinsic motivation and relatively low - level extrinsic motivation . The individual’s intrinsic motivation lays the foundation to experience passion in an activity contributing , successively , to the enhancement of creativity . Santrock ( 2006 ) highlights that a learning environment that fosters creativity entails a climate where young children are intrinsically motivated to learn based on their own initiative . Brophy ( 1998 ) notes that extrinsic incentives such as positive rewards can be effectively used to inﬂuence intrinsic motivation . On the other hand , negative extrinsic motivation , such as a teacher’s criticism , will reduce a student’s intrinsic motivation , leading to lack of self - conﬁdence to think creatively . On the whole , studies agree on the need to increase student intrinsic motivation while considering the extrinsic incentives merely as encouraging factors to cultivate student creativity in the learning environment . A step further is the suggestion that ‘if reformers and teachers are oblivious to those qualities ( creative qual - ities ) in themselves , it is expected that they will be equally blind to the presence of those in 123 328 L . Hernández - Romero , X . Sun the student’s’ ( Hernández - Romero 2017 , p . 133 ) . This points to an additional factor that has been largely underestimated by research on creativity in education , namely , that in order to enhance creativity as part of education , all those involved in the education system , including education reformers , school authorities and teachers have to undergo themselves an honest process of evaluation of their creative qualities so that they are able to stimulate those in their pupils ( ibid . ) . 3 Creative learning environments Creativity provides opportunities to see what is not there and to establish connections among seemingly unrelated aspects ( Hernández - Romero 2017 ) . It is not only a fundamental force in boosting economic development but it provides also the impetus to shape new patterns of living . Given the numerous challenges posed by competition and social change , creative problem - solving skills and the ability to take risks are widely advocated in education ( NAC - CCE 1999 ) . It is argued that creativity as part of the education system lays the foundation to stimulate student’s curiosity , increasing their motivation and encouraging them to take risks ( Hare 2011 ) . OECD ( 2019 ) also showed that students need a conducive learning envi - ronment that can reward their creative ideas . The OECD report indicates that a number of studies have suggested that a supportive learning environment and classroom culture are vital in cultivating students’ creative thinking skills . Sternberg and Lubart’s Investment Theory identiﬁes six core factors to enhance creativity through education : intelligence , knowledge , thinking styles , personality , motivation and the environment ( Sternberg and Lubart 2009 ) . In their analysis , they discuss the process of creativity as an investment . People have the potential to become more creative when they invest in those six main components of creativity . Investment Theory draws people’s attention to the considerable inﬂuence that the environment has in the individuals’ creativity . Studies have been carried out to prove the impact of different environments on creativity ( Craft 2001 ; Sternberg and Williams 1996 ) . Environmental factors contribute signiﬁcantly to developing people’s creativity by reducing potential obstacles that hinder the emergence of creative ideas . These studies not only suggest a removal of obstacles , but also emphasise a requirement for a wide range of student support , to promote intrinsic motivation and creativity . Based on the ideas above , a supportive learning environment that cultivates creativity is thus a climate where teachers apply appropriate pedagogies to support children’s creativity , reducing obstacles that may prevent the ﬂow of their creative stream . There is a large volume of studies that describe the role of the learning environment in developing student creativity ( Cole et al . 1999 ; Hasirci and Demirkan 2003 ; Barbot et al . 2011 ) . Spatial , cultural and social environments have been identiﬁed as having a leading role in fostering the creative performance . Smith ( 1996 ) suggests that in the educational context , a favourable classroom environment is one which encourages students to explore new ideas in order to achieve their goals . Rather than being commanded or controlled , they are supported to take ownership of their learning process ( Jeffrey 2006 ; Gregerson et al . 2013 ) . The learning environment in this research is deﬁned not only in terms of the physical conditions of the classroom and the school but also as the overall atmosphere for developing student’s learning process . It includes classroom practices , activities and teaching behaviour that affectively and cognitively inﬂuence student creativity ( Smith 1996 ) . Given that the term ‘teaching behaviour’ can mean both ‘behaviours of the teacher’ and the process of ‘teaching students about behaviour’ , it is important to clarify here that our use coincides with the former . 123 Supportive learning environments at elementary level in China 329 The learning environment is concerned with how students interact with the subject matter cognitively , affectively and physically ( Tegano et al . 1991 ) . It entails an ambience where students perceive the classroom as a physically and psychologically safe environment where they feel free to develop and express their creativity ( ibid ) . In alignment with such ideas , Iqbal Ahmad et al . , ( 2014 ) refer to Dewey’s model of the democratic classroom considered as a safe environment for students to engage actively in their learning . Such learning environment is characterised by the absence of the traditional authoritative ﬁgure of the teacher who becomes insteadafacilitatoroftheprocess . Thisalsoentailsopennesstoallkindsofideasandproposals without the need to ﬁt into ﬁxed boundaries . Environmental factors in the classroom have been identiﬁed to signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the degree to which students express their creative potential . Nevertheless , scant empirical research exists of the extent that teachers are able to build , in practice , a supportive learning environment that fosters creativity in the classroom , particularly in elementary school in China . 4 The learning environment in China The imperative to promote creativity at school in China might be better understood look - ing at the country’s current economic model . China’s ever - increasing GDP has come at the cost of social maladies including environmental pollution ( Roubini 2011 ; Kuhn 2012 ) . The ecological unsustainability of the country’s economic system can be explained through the prevalence of a manufacturing industry which generates income for a vast number of peo - ple while , at one and the same time , it pollutes the air , the water and the soil . The current situation requires China to move away from a highly industrialised economic structure into a knowledge - oriented economy . In order to shift paradigms from ‘Made in China’ to ‘Cre - ated in China’ , creativity ought to be at the core of the education system ( Keane 2011 ) . The creative industries , as the backbone of Chinese future economic development , could have great potential in boosting intellectual property . They also could provide opportunities for a sustainable creative industry with a huge employment potential in emerging high tech - nology services—architecture , design and ﬁlm industries ( Wang 2011 ) . Such a structure for development requires talented people with creative thinking skills that may contribute to a knowledge - based industry . The education system is , in theory , the natural step to foster such creative talents . In particular , elementary school plays an important role as it lays the foundation for student further creative development . In China , it occupies a peculiar position in the education system . At the elementary level , the pressure from family and teachers is still lower than at further stages where students start climbing up the competitive ladder that will lead them to the college entrance examination ( Gaokao ) . The relative lower emphasis on exams makes elementary schools a suitable starting point to examine the application of policy directed towards cultivating creativity in the classroom . Research on the implementation of creativity at elementary school in China is , nonetheless , scarce . According to the Bibliomet - ric and Content Analysis of Creative Education Research , only 15 . 6 % of studies published in Chinese core journals focused on primary school stage , calling for more research , especially empirical , with a focus on elementary level ( Chen and Zhao 2013 ) . Furthermore , among those studies , there has been little discussion about teaching practices arising from the application of Chinese educational reform . Therefore , an empirical case study , with in - depth analysis of creative learning environment at elementary schools in China , addressing the extent to which Chinese policy is put in practice in the classroom becomes extremely necessary . 123 330 L . Hernández - Romero , X . Sun There is no doubt that teachers play a key role in fostering creativity . Although a number of studies have focused their attention on the teacher , only a few of them address the role that teachers have in building an appropriate learning environment for creativity ( Amabile 1996 ; Sternberg and Lubart 2009 ) . Chinese educational reforms conducted since the 1990s were introduced with the view to shift from traditional rote learning to a student - centred learning environment ( Yin and Lee 2012 ; Liu 2013 ) . In 2001 , The Chinese Education Bureau issued policies on a compulsory education curriculum to cultivate a ‘non - traditional’ classroom environment with a strong emphasis on creativity ( Ryan 2012 ) . In order to train personnel ‘who are innovative , practical or possessing multiple skills’ , the ‘National Guidelines for Medium and Long - term Development and Educational Reform 2010 – 2020’ suggested to shift educational focus from ‘discipline - based knowledge’ towards comprehensive knowl - edge learning process ( Lockette 2012 p . 37 ) . For example , arts courses as elective modules are available for students to take . Meanwhile , teamwork and inter - disciplined structure of class were encouraged in class ( OECD 2011 ) . In the ongoing Chinese national education reform , the Ministry of Education in China proposed six goals to guide the reform , includ - ing ‘changing the teaching and learning focus , developing a balanced curriculum structure , changing from textbooks to a greater focus , advocating active and engaged learning , assessing students’ from multidimensional angles , and implementing a comprehensive administration system among national , local and school levels ( Kang , et al . 2011 ) . There is an increas - ing number of Chinese primary and middle schools starting to conduct reform in Science , Technology , Engineering and Math ( STEM ) ( Marginson et al . 2013 ) . The current Chinese national education reform also pushed teachers to change from a teacher - centred approach to a more student - centred method of teaching ( Jin and Cortazzi 2011 ) . Accordingly , Chi - nese schools have gradually introduced more customised mathematics courses as a result of ‘decentralisation of curriculum’ policies ( Seah 2011 , p . 171 ) . Speciﬁcally , students are encouraged to have team - based discussions to learn new concepts rather than merely reciting mathematical formulas . Similarly , the use of Information and Communication Technologies ( ICT ) has helped to better understand the nature of mathematical concepts . Thus , some inno - vative teaching methods and education reforms , particularly on STEM education , have been gradually integrated into students’ daily courses in China . Education reforms oriented towards fostering student creativity , however , have met signiﬁ - cant barriers associated , mainly , to traditional and standardised assessment methods . We have seen primary schools highlight the innovation of students’ ‘soft’ abilities but we rarely know the extent to which the capacities of being creative are met in the Chinese educational con - text ( Seah 2011 ) . In the international ‘attainment and learning environment survey’ organised by OECD’s Programme for International Student Assessment ( PISA ) since 2000 , Chinese students ( Shanghai - China ) demonstrated an extremely high performance in reading literacy and reading performance among six countries / regions ( Canada , England , France , Norway , Switzerland and Shanghai - China ) . Although Shanghai is often regarded as a pioneer in Chi - nese educational reform , the particularly high performance of literacy ability is still the result of the high pressure of an exam - oriented Chinese education system ( Baird et al . 2011 ) . Since its educational reform , China has decided , nevertheless , to change its classroom pedagogy and to transform its exam orientation practices ( OECD ) . China’s economic goals entail a shift from basic literacy and rote learning to creativity . Teachers are thus required to be more prepared to promote creative skills in the classroom environment . After three decades of carrying on educational reform , the question as to whether the curriculum reform has been put into practice in the classroom has acquired a new signiﬁcance . Education authorities are now called to respond to the need for creative talents for future sustainable development . 123 Supportive learning environments at elementary level in China 331 Building a supportive learning environment that fosters creativity is necessary if creativity is to have a strong presence at schools . There are , however , a number of barriers that hinder the development of student creativity , especially when teachers are unaware of what is required to cultivate such an atmosphere . A case in point is the traditional Chinese education model , which encourages the learner to show absolute obedience towards the teacher’s authority ( Staats 2011 ; NG and Smith 2004 ) . Far from being liberated from teacher - centred learning , students are expected to uncritically accept teacher instruction . They are encouraged to keep silence and to not express their views and interpretations . This leads to a suppression of creativity during the learning process . In addition , Confucianism has left a strong imprint in Chinese society , which might explain the fact that hard work and effort are highly valued in the Chinese education system at the expense of intuition . As suggested by Huang , Ruan and Capps ( 2014 ) , teachers , parents and peers place a strong emphasis on the signiﬁcance of hard work for academic achievement . This along with the necessity to conform to parent’s or signiﬁcant others’ expectations bring forth an environment that lacks the spontaneous and sensuous qualities required for creativity . What has been discussed above explains the need for the present study . The literature suggests the relevance of the learning environment in the promotion of creativity at school , calling attention to the conditions that either facilitate or hinder creativity at schools in China . Policy is only the departure point of a road that may lead to a more creative education system . The manifold barriers that are part of the Chinese education system , however , represent a limitation to the extent to which those policies may succeed in practice . The present study is thus needed in order to bring to light those drawbacks , putting into question what so far remains only as an overall strategic plan . 5 Research questions Since the ﬁrst curriculum reform at the end of the 1990s , various education reforms have targeted young student creative performance in China ( Lockette 2012 ) . A series of strategic attempts were introduced in order to achieve China’s goal of quality education . From 2000 , the Chinese government has published a number of guidance information to alleviate stu - dents’ academic burden ( Government of the People’s Republic of China 2019 ) . In 2011 , the government realised an outline for ‘National Mid - Term and Long - Term Educational Reform and Development Planning ( 2010 – 2020 ) ( Zhao et al . 2015 , p . 4 ) . From the ofﬁcial guidelines , the Ministry of Education has required school to control their total teaching hours , reduce the amount of homework and reduce the number of daily tests , in order to achieve a well - rounded education including creative thinking skills . For example , schools have adopted new curricu - lum design and textbooks that aimed at transforming curriculum from a discipline - centred to an experience - centred curriculum ( ibid . ) . As mentioned earlier , although the Chinese educa - tion system has made several attempts to override traditional rote learning , the extent to which this has been effectively put into practice in the classroom remains highly questionable . Our main research question is , what is the actual teacher’s level to build a creative learning envi - ronment in the Chinese classroom at elementary level ? Further research questions are , what are teachers’ attitudes towards creativity and , how do they measure student creativity ? How do teachers organise classroom activities to foster students’ creativity ? What is the teachers’ attitude in dealing with nonconformity and to what extent they control student learning ? How do teachers assess students’ creativity and , to what extent the assessment methods used contribute to a creative learning environment ? 123 332 L . Hernández - Romero , X . Sun Fig . 1 Developmental Ecological Model of Creative Potential in Young Children ( Source Tegano et al . 1991 , p . 11 ) 6 Theoretical frameworks It has been argued that constructing a supportive learning environment fosters student creative potential . Two main theoretical frameworks have identiﬁed factors that have an inﬂuence in the learning environment . These frameworks are : ‘The Developmental Ecological Model of Creative Potential in Young Children’ and ‘The Model of Open Classrooms’ . Tegano et al . ( 1991 ) developed the Developmental Ecological Model in which they explore dynamicfactorsthatinﬂuencecreativity . Theyidentifyﬁvefactorsincludingcultural , biologi - cal , cognitive , personality and contextual , which have an inﬂuence on the dynamic expression of creativity . The contextual dimensions are set at the core of this model , interacting with the other four factors in the expression of creative ideas and their ﬂuency , as shown in Fig . 1 . According to this model , contextual dimensions such as play opportunities , teacher behaviour , external constraints and parenting style have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the creative performance in young children . Play opportunities refer to the classroom activities and time that teachers provide to students in order to foster the free exploration of their creativity . In addition , teacher behaviour also contributes to student willingness to express their creative ideas . For example , the degree to which teachers control student creative expression . Mean - while , external constraints such as time , choices and rewards also inﬂuence the establishment of a creative learning environment in the class . Finally , parenting style in the family environ - ment contributes to the development of children’s creative potential when parents consider creativity as a core value to be cultivated as part of children’s personalities ( Fearon et al . 2013 ) . The Open Classroom Climate ( Amabile 1996 ) , on the other hand , is based on a classroom environment that enables a ﬂexible teaching style with various choices of activities during the learning process . The criteria to evaluate an open classroom has been identiﬁed as classroom activities and assessment . Unlike the traditional classroom environment that is based on high - pressure standard examinations and authoritative models , the open classrooms pursue the creation of an atmosphere for critical thinking , curiosity and self - directed study . Accordingly , non - standard examinations to evaluate student learning outcomes in the class are suggested in order to foster an open climate to enhance creativity . In addition , group work and frequent play opportunities are advocated to cultivate a creative learning environment . In view of what has been mentioned above , some of the factors that may have an impact on the creative learning environment are consistent in these two theories . Firstly , accord - ing to Developmental Ecological Model , contextual aspects have a signiﬁcant effect on the development of creativity in young children . Aspects discussed by Tegano et al . include play opportunities ( classroom activities ) , teacher behaviour , external constraints and parenting style . Given the scope of the present study we left aside the last two dimensions , which 123 Supportive learning environments at elementary level in China 333 Classroom Activities Type of activities Play opportunities ( Time ) Teaching Behaviour Nonconformity behaviour Control behaviour Assessments Attitudes for achieving high marks One right answer Choices of assessments Fig . 2 Factors that affect the creative learning environment remain outside the boundaries of the classroom . Instead , the ﬁrst two guided our research both with respect to methodology and result analysis . Secondly , regarding the Open Class - room Climate framework , two criteria that evaluate an open classroom are assessment and classroom activities . Thus based on the theories above , we chose three contextual factors as the criteria to assess the teacher’s level to build a creative learning environment at the Dalian elementary school . These were classroom activities , teaching behaviour and assessments . This criteria based on the Developmental Ecological Model ( Tegano et al . 1991 ) and Open Classroom Climate framework ( Amabile 1996 ) was selected as key factor to guide the present study . Factors that affect the creative learning environment are displayed in Fig . 2 , as follows : The researchers developed these three factors as the criteria for assessing the extent to which the teachers , at the targeted school , fostered creativity in the learning environment . 7 Methods In order to conduct our research , the researchers were asked to keep the name of the case study school anonymous . In this paper , thus , we will refer to this school as ‘Dalian Elementary School’ . Thisschoolwaschosenbytheresearchersforvariousreasons . Firstly , theresearchers decided to choose a school in the city of Dalian due to the convenience to conduct the present research , given that this is the home town of one of the authors of this paper . An important reason for the choice of this particular school was the fact that not all schools in China might be open to a study like this , due to the fear of losing face and being exposed . This school , however , agreed to this investigation , requesting only conﬁdentiality with respect to its original name . Of vital importance for our choice of this school was the fact that Dalian Elementary School is an urban school which was targeted by the Dalian Education Bureau as an experimental unit for testing new educational policies . As a municipal school in an economically developed area Dalian Elementary School conducted educational reform with privileged teaching resources and assigned experienced teachers . Being a part of the pilot programme of Chinese educational reform , Dalian Elementary School is a pioneer in implementing the initiative to cultivate creative thinking in the classrooms by taking ‘open classroom and independent learning’ as its teaching goals , as these were deﬁned in the education reform . Therefore , this research seeks to validate the practice of fostering creativity in the Chinese classroomatelementarylevel , focusingonthisprimaryschoolinDalian . Anin - depthanalysis of the teachers’ role in building a creative learning environment is conducted through multiple sources of evidence in practice . As the research aims to shed light on the practice situations of creativity in China , the in - depth analysis of one school may prove useful as a starting point for identifying difference and similarities with future case studies and research elsewhere in China . That was a signiﬁcant aspect that inﬂuenced our choice of this school for our 123 334 L . Hernández - Romero , X . Sun Table 1 Interview and observation design Methodologies Class 1 Class 2 Class 3 Teacher Interviews Teacher A Teacher B Teacher C Teacher D Teacher E Teacher F Student Interviews Student 1 , 2 , 3 Student 4 , 5 , 6 Student 7 , 8 , 9 Classroom Observations Chinese Maths Chinese Calligraphy Chinese Art case study . Our research followed a qualitative methodology comprising semi - structured interviews with both teachers and students and , classroom observations . The aim of our research was to investigate the quality and the level of the creative learning environment built by teachers , scrutinising three contextual factors—classroom activities , teaching behaviour and assessment . The research evaluated the following three aspects in relation to teacher attitudes towards creative education : ( a ) their ideas in conducting classroom activities that foster creativity ; ( b ) their teaching behaviour related to teaching creatively ; and , ( c ) their attitudestowardsassessment . Toincreasereliability , methodologicaltriangulationwascarried out , combining interviews with observations . The aim of those interviews was to explore what teachers think about fostering creativity in the classroom . The research also examined student opinions in relation to the questions asked to the teachers . This was a way to verify , from the perspective of the student , the effectiveness of the creative strategies that , allegedly , are used by the teacher . Finally , the results obtained in the interviews were compared with non - participant classroom observation . The focus of this study was mainly the teacher . Student interviews and observations are thus considered supplementary in the assessment of the teachers’ role in fostering creative learning . This research followed qualitative methodologies comprising : teacher interviews , student interviews and classroom observations . Semi - structured interviews of teachers and students were used to allow respondents to have freedom in expressing their thoughts . Additionally , classroom observations provided an alternative perspective to what teachers mentioned in the interviews . Such observations offered insight into teachers’ role in the classroom , showing the degree of congruence between what they said they do and what they actually do in practice . In terms of the sample and in order to carry out the data collection , this research randomly chose three classes in Grade Five ( labelled as Class I , Class II and Class III ) . The reason for choosing relatively senior - year students is because these students seemed more independent in evaluating their teacher behaviour and could clearly describe their impressions in the interviews . Nine students ( three students per class ages 10 – 11 ) were randomly chosen to be interviewed . In addition , six teachers who have worked over 5 years in this school were recruited from these three classes ( two teachers from each ) . Furthermore , six class observations in total corresponding to each teacher were conducted during lesson time . Each of those observations was thirty - ﬁve minutes long . Detailed numbers of interviews and observations are presented in Table 1 as follows : Asfordataanalysis , theresearchersconductedthematicanalysis . Thedatawasrecordedon a digital recorder , transcribed into Word documents , segmented and categorised into groups of codes ; and , subsequently sorted by developing themes . The thematic coding analysis provided interpretations based on themes emerging from the raw data . Contextual factors were also considered for each case . In terms of ethical considerations , we received approval from school leaders and teachers toconductourinvestigationandtorecruitsenior - yearstudentsasparticipants . Theresearchers guaranteed and maintained the anonymity and conﬁdentiality of participants as asked . Since 123 Supportive learning environments at elementary level in China 335 the investigation involved young students , the researchers avoided any inﬂuence in their learning process . Lastly , all the participants were given a clear explanation of the research purpose , procedures and potential risks and they all signed a consent form before being interviewed . Detailed interview questions and observation criteria have been included at the end of this paper ( see Appendices ) . 8 Findings In this section , the authors synthesise the ﬁndings from teachers’ and students’ interviews and non - participant observations in order to address the research questions . Before investigating the three main factors—classroom activities , teaching behaviour and assessment—this study explored the teacher general attitude towards creativity . Given that teacher attitude towards creativity affect their teaching practice , it was crucial to explore the extent to which they were conscious of their role in fostering student creative potential . Accordingly , teachers were asked ﬁrst to express their opinion about the relationship between creative potential and education . The aim of this question was to investigate whether the teachers thought creativity could be enhanced through education . Findings revealed that all teachers believed there is a synergistic relationship between creativity and education . Student creativity , however , is thought to be more inherent talent than school taught skill . As Teacher E pointed out : I have to admit the fact that our children’s creativity is not something that we can teach . Creativity is something that is genetic from their families . But what teachers can do is to stimulate such inherent ability . By and large , participants focused on what was previously discussed as big creativity and they believed that the creative potential is a by - product of education rather than a function of education . In this sense , teachers in this study overlooked the democratic model of creativity whereby every individual can be creative when provided with the freedom and the tools to express , imagine and be critical . This attitude towards creativity set indeed the tone for the teaching practice . In addition , teachers were asked to explain how they measure the student’s creativity level in the classroom . As mentioned earlier , since young children are not always sophisticated in making creative products , a teaching attitude grounded in the ‘process - over - product’ is considered beneﬁcial to children’s development of creativity . The majority of those who responded to this item felt that the process of student creativity should be valued most when assessing their creativity . Only one teacher emphasised that both the process and product of creativity should be given the same weight in evaluating student creativity . The fact that most teachers privilege process over product reﬂected their recognition of their role in fostering creativity . As Teacher D , who teaches Calligraphy , commented : I never judge a student based on their writing products . Rather , the process of how they think through the questions and how they propose questions is what interests me most . Overall , teachers’ general attitude towards creativity suggests that they pay more attention to the process of creativity rather than to the results . In what follows , we will discuss the teacher responses to the three contextual factors that concern this investigation—classroom activities , teaching behaviour and assessment . 123 336 L . Hernández - Romero , X . Sun 9 Classroom activities As revealed in the interviews , the activities that teachers use to foster creativity include situational teaching activities , group work , presentations , debates and games . From these , situational teaching activities and group work were mentioned more frequently . Situational teaching activities have the potential to nurture student willingness to think creatively by involving them in imaginary situations . Teacher F , who teaches art , indicated , ‘I usually set a situational scene on the topic of my class . By setting a situational activity , I try to help children think more’ . This was veriﬁed in our observation of her teaching where she encouraged students to design a blueprint of a toothbrush . The following is a scene observed in her art class : Teacher : Now , let’s imagine you are a designer . What fancy toothbrush will you design ? Imagine if we have a client who does not like to brush his teeth , could you design a custom toothbrush for him ? Who has any ideas ? Student : I want to design a toothbrush that can show a ﬁlm while he is brushing his teeth . Three teachers in the sample mentioned the use of group work to cultivate student cre - ativity . Teacher E suggested : The ideas that children communicate with their peers are different to what they com - municate with the teacher . I encourage them to be inspired by their peers in group discussion . In our observations , we noticed that teachers do use group activities in their teaching , encouraging students to generate new ideas as part of the group discussion . What remains questionable , however , both from the students’ perceptions and from our observations , is the efﬁcacy of these activities . Firstly , the teachers that were observed arranged the classroom in the most traditional fashion , having students sitting in rows with no dynamic interaction among them . Such physical space restricted student ability to actively engage in the activities . Furthermore , although teachers agreed that group activities are relevant to foster creativity in the learning environment , time to conduct creative thinking during those activities was very short . In all six observations , the time allowed for each group discussion was limited to about 30 s . In one art class , students were given only 10 s to have a discussion with their partners . Students , thus , have no time to put in practice creative thinking . As the open classroom climate model suggests , an open classroom should allow adequate time for learners to think creatively . Since creativity does not come out in a ﬂash , classroom activities do not only require the adoption of various forms to generate creative insights . Sufﬁcient time should be allowed so that learners can understand the problem or situation and ﬁnd alternative solutions to deal with it . The limitations in terms of time were brought up by the majority of students who were interviewed as a factor that prevented their creativity . As one student mentioned : I think my teachers did not give me enough time for discussing . Sometimes , I feel that I have not ﬁnished thinking but my teacher calls my name to answer those questions . I wish she could give me ten seconds more to think about it . However , in response to our question about time , the majority of teachers believed that they have provided enough time for students to think creatively . Only one teacher demonstrated awareness about time constraints : 123 Supportive learning environments at elementary level in China 337 Sometimes , I realize that I did not give them ( students ) enough time . I have to catch up with the course schedule . I must teach them as much as I can because I know , if they learn less , they will fall behind others when it comes to the exams . I have to give the answer to students directly because there is really no time left for them . This teacher realises the problem of the insufﬁcient time allowed for classroom activities . On the contrary , the majority of teachers demonstrated no awareness about time constraints to allow for creative thinking . Cross - checking the teacher interviews with our observations , it became evident that teachers believed they have allowed more than ten minutes for creative thinking , while actually they only left approximately two minutes for students to answer several complex questions . This means that , despite the fact that teachers promote creativity through the encouragement of various activities ; the classroom environment is affected by a shortage of time for students to develop such activities . What is even worse , the majority of teachers in our sample are not even aware of this problem , rendering a possible solution to this situation ever more inaccessible . 10 Teaching behaviour Teaching behaviour in this study refers to the teacher attitude in dealing with nonconformity and the extent to which they control student learning . Our aim was to investigate how teachers proceed in the classroom and how active they are in fostering student creativity . According to the idea of the Developmental Ecological Model proposed by Tegano et al . ( 1991 ) , creative students are those who are willing to take the risk of departing from the norm and do things differently . Therefore , high tolerance to nonconformity is required from teachers in order to cultivate originality . Firstly , in response to the question : ‘what do you think of allowing nonconformity in the learning process ? ’ a range of responses was elicited from teachers . This question aimed to test the teachers’ attitude in relation to student divergent thought and risk - taking . Half of the teacher respondents demonstrated positive encouragement towards nonconformity . For instance , Teacher A suggested : If my students try out their own ideas and deviate from what I expect them to think , I deﬁnitely encourage them to do so . However , a degree of contradiction was evident . On the one hand , teachers indicated that they encourage nonconformity . Yet , on the other hand , three teachers recalled a base line which restricts students to think beyond the norm . This was the case , for example , of Teacher C who suggested that a common pattern of answers in class is needed to prevent students to go too far : Well , I permit them to have their own personalities in class but they have to have some common ground with others . That’s the base line ( for thinking ) . You can’t go beyond that too far . In that sense , teachers encouragement of risk - taking and divergent thought is restricted by thepremisethat , whilenewideasareallowed , theycannotdeviatetoomuchfromthestandard . Ageneraltendencytosupportnonconformistattitudesintheclassroomwasalsodemonstrated in teachers response to the question , ‘what do you expect from a creative student ? ’ , a question to which the majority of them responded that they expect student willingness to express 123 338 L . Hernández - Romero , X . Sun different ideas . It seems , nonetheless , that a creative learning environment is achieved only to a certain extent because nonconformity is at one and the same time limited in practice . Creativity is more likely to be stimulated in an atmosphere where students can engage in creative thinking without the fear of reprimand ( Amabile 1996 ) . This does not mean that there should be no regulation over student behaviour . It is necessary to have a degree of discipline and a classroom structure that facilitate student free expression of ideas and innovativeness . Ideally , teachers should keep a balance between control of behaviour and freedom in the learning environment so that creativity can be cultivated as optimally as possible ( Tegano , et al . 1991 ; Nickerson 2009 ; Gregerson et al . 2013 ) . Teachers in our sample , however , seem to go off balance . One of the behaviours that notably conspire against a creative learning environment was teacher willingness to take control over the student learning process . Teacher A suggested , ‘I normally take 70 per cent control of children’s learning’ . Similarly , Chinese Language Teacher E reﬂected : I do control , to a large extent , children’s behaviour in learning . First , I control because of examination . Then , I control in order to help them organise thoughts . As suggested in the interviews , they even attempt to control how student should organise theirideaswhileansweringquestions . Thisposesalimitationtotheﬂexibilityandadaptability required in the learning environment by which children should themselves determine the nature of the problem and how to respond to that . The teacher excessive control over the learning process is reﬂected in our interviews with students , in which the majority of them explained their fear to express new ideas . As Student 3 suggested : I do not dare to tell a differing thought . If it is a question that has been taught by the teacher , I’m afraid to give a wrong answer because she may get angry . Similarly , seven students out of nine felt anxious in the class because they feared their teachers would be annoyed . Teacher dominance is also reﬂected in our observations . In one Chinese Language class , Teacher A seriously criticised one student because of his negligence when it came to writing : Teacher ( pointing at the student ) : Student A , stand up ! Didn’t you listen that you need to write the homework ? You must write with pen . You are doing exactly the opposite to what I require . Couldn’t you be obedient to my words ? The student who was admonished remained silent . Although Teacher A encouraged stu - dents to have new ideas through writing diaries , the classroom felt repressive under her strict control . It can be observed that the extent to which a supportive learning environment can be built is far from optimum in terms of teaching behaviour . In teachers’ perceptions , they were willing to encourage nonconformity in class . In practice , however , they exercise a strong degree of control , which hinders students’ free expression of deviant thoughts . In this case , a controlling teaching behaviour undermines a supportive learning environment that fosters creativity . 11 Assessment as part of the learning environment As mentioned earlier , assessment is a signiﬁcant factor in the creative learning environment . Three questions were asked to evaluate the extent to which the assessment methods contribute 123 Supportive learning environments at elementary level in China 339 to a creative learning environment—the ﬁrst about high marks , the second about the no - right - answer and the last one about alternative methods in the assessment of student learning outcomes . Those questions intended to investigate teachers’ readiness to change traditional assessments methods into non - standard ones , in order to foster the intrinsic motivation of students to learn creatively . When teacher participants were asked to comment on the signiﬁcance of high examina - tion grades , ﬁve of them attached great importance to students getting high marks in the assessments . Their answers reﬂected that their expectation of high marks responds to the social criteria for assessing learning outcomes . As suggested by Teacher A : High marks . That’s important . Our society selects talents according to high marks . You need high marks to get approval from others . To a large extent , comments from other teachers agreed with that . Only one teacher showed a different perspective to low marks . Teacher E proposed : I don’t believe getting high marks is the only way to judge student learning . If the exam is difﬁcult , I’ll allow them to get 90 out of 100 . Sometimes , getting 80 is also OK . Although Teacher E seemed to indicate that she does not pay much attention to high marks , she determines nonetheless the minimum mark that is acceptable for students to obtain . In that sense , she , like most of the other teachers interviewed , placed importance on high mark achievement . Non - standard assessments are considered as one of the basic elements of an open class - room climate to evaluate student learning outcomes . These are regarded as assessment for learning , which help students to enhance their learning by providing feedback in various forms ( Amabile 1996 ; NACCCE 1999 ) . Teachers were asked about their use of alternative assessment methods to increase student interest towards learning . Only a small number of unconventional assessment methods were employed—peer review , presentations , homework and individual project . Four teachers mentioned the use of only one of those methods each , while two teachers applied only formal examinations and did not use any non - standard assess - ment . It seems , thus , that usage rate of non - standard assessment methods is very low . This is in ﬂagrant contradiction to their opinion about the value of an open class , which all of them allegedly endorse . Correspondingly , when students were asked to describe methods that their teachers use to assess their grasp of knowledge , none of the participants mentioned any alternative form of assessment . Student 2 complained : ‘I don’t have any choice to decide how I can be assessed . I have to take exams’ . In agreement to their traditional view on assessment methods , teachers in the sample continue to teach students the one right answer . The following is one scene observed in a Chinese class . Teacher C was checking answers from student homework . The teacher posed a question from the textbook . This open - ended question was about a line of poetry that described the spring . Students expressed various answers which , in the eyes of the researcher , seemed appropriate . The teacher , on the contrary , disregarded all such answers and instructed students to write a particular line of poetry in the textbook to ensure they were all right in the exam . Teachers in the sample considered that an open learning environment is needed to increase studentintrinsicmotivationandtofostertheircreativity . Theﬁeldresearchdemonstratedhow - ever that , in practice , this was not as true . Although the teachers seem to employ some form of informal assessment to evaluate student learning outcomes , on the whole , they mostly use standard examinations . High marks were given priority in evaluating student learning . 123 340 L . Hernández - Romero , X . Sun Moreover , the one right answer concept was pursued in the teaching practice even when , supposedly , they supported an open classroom that rejects the right answer model . In addi - tion , students were not allowed to have a choice over assessment methods . A low level use of alternative assessment methods for learning was demonstrated as part of the teaching environment . 12 Discussion Through the analysis of qualitative data , teacher contribution to a creative learning environ - ment was evaluated at Dalian Primary School . Our ﬁrst ﬁnding revealed that teachers consider creativity as inherent talent rather than a quality that can be taught at school . A degree of contradiction was found in that despite holding on to such a belief , teachers seemed to be aware of some teaching strategies that can contribute to a creative learning environment . In particular , teachers manifested their readiness to carry out activities that foster creativity , such as situational activities , group work and classroom games . In terms of teaching behaviour , they expressed tolerance for nonconformity . Additionally , some of the teachers argued that occasionally they attempt to use non - standard assessment methods to evaluate student learn - ing outcomes . All of this reveals that they are aware of what a creative learning environment is and what this entails . Their teaching practice , nevertheless , differs from such positive alle - giance . The researchers’ observations , the interviews with students and even some of the teachers’ claims , show an extremely different panorama . Firstly , although various classroom activities like group work were conducted , time allowed for creative thinking was insufﬁcient . Secondly , teacher dominant behaviour restricted student possibility to practise creative think - ing . Thirdly , while teachers expressed their support to nonconformity , their overwhelming control suppressed student free expression of ideas . Students were fearful even of exposing their concerns . Fourthly , it was demonstrated that teachers rarely use non - standard assess - ment methods . Excessive attention paid to high marks and to the correct answer undermines , to a large extent , the development of a creative learning environment in the classroom . The abovementioned ﬁndings go against the Open Classroom Climate suggested by Amabile ( 1996 ) that was discussed earlier , which stresses the need for an atmosphere that allows for critical thinking , non - standard examinations and myriad opportunities for group work and play . It seems that the learning environment facilitated by teachers at Dalian Primary School can hardly foster creativity in any of its forms . Undoubtedly , differentcontextsleadtospeciﬁcsocialandculturaldynamicsthatchallenge the implementation of creativity in the classroom . Some teachers in this case study expressed their helplessness in altering the current situation . As suggested by teacher E : I have to exert control because of the exam . I really want to leave time for my children to think more but exams are there . What can I do ? I have to tell children how they should answer the exam , because if I don’t , they’ll fail the exam and exam results are what evaluate us . What Teacher E suggested was common to other teachers in the sample . They all expressed they have no choice given that they deal with a high - pressure education system . Teachers in China are part of an exam - oriented system where schools are required by the Local Education Bureau to publicly rank student exam results . Although teachers demonstrated awareness of the signiﬁcance of fostering a creative learning environment , they have no choice but to adapt to a deep - rooted and old model that , above all , continues to value student grades . This may 123 Supportive learning environments at elementary level in China 341 account for the discrepancy between the teacher positive opinions about creativity and what was actually observed in the classroom . The repressive nature of the Chinese exam - oriented education system restricts possibilities to foster a creative learning environment in practice . A learning environment that lacks in creativity , thus , is not something for which teachers should take full responsibility . Despite the various education reforms carried through , the Chinese education system is , on the whole , one that contributes to smother creativity in the learning environment rather than to promote it . It may be argued that quality - oriented education reform in China has not been successfully implementedbecausethetraditionalideathat‘everythingisaboutresults’pervadesthesystematalllevels , affecting teacher practices in the classroom . What drives the Chinese education model is mainly the College Entrance Examination , or Gaokao , for which students have to endeavour to pass endless examinations . In contrast to myriad promises made by Chinese education reform in terms of fostering creativity at schools , there is little evidence in this case study of anything closer to a creative learning environment . It may be worth questioning the extent to which those in charge of education reform in China and those who have the responsibility to implement this in the classroom are themselves creative in their own right ( Hernández - Romero 2017 ) . A lack of strategies directed towards monitoring the extent to which educational policies are implemented in the classroom is evident . This , however , can be expected from the point of view of an exam - oriented education system where there is no space for creativity in the classroom . Despite any attempts at education reform , teachers lack the autonomy to teach creatively . Some teachers may attempt to employ a number of methods to foster creativity in the classroom but external constraints bear a signiﬁcant effect on what they are , indeed , able to put into practice . With respect to teacher discrepancies between their perceptions and their practices in relation to creativity , those could be attributed to deep - rooted cultural factors . Teachers that were part of this case study adhere to a Chinese Confucian ideology in which , up to date , teacher authority should be absolutely respected by the student . The impact of this ideology was amply demonstrated to the extent that the majority of teachers do not realise that their teaching style is autocratic . Teaching practices have been embedded in such philosophy throughout generations . Dewey’s philosophy of the democratic classroom is far from being applicable to the Chinese context . The abovementioned cultural and social aspects are obviously not considered by the theoretical models used in this study . They are , however , very relevant for an understanding of the dynamics that are part of the learning environment at elementary schools in China . 13 Conclusion In conclusion , this study has investigated the extent to which a creative learning environment fostered by teachers at an elementary school in the city of Dalian , China . Based on two theoretical models , the Developmental Ecological Model of Creative Potential in Young Children and the Open Classroom Climate , this study has proposed a new theoretical model to evaluate the extent to which teachers develop creativity in the learning environment using three main criteria—classroom activities , teaching behaviour and assessment . The results suggest that teachers in this case study are aware of the signiﬁcance of facilitat - ing student creativity in the learning environment . The student responses and our observations demonstrated , nonetheless , that the extent to which those ideas are put into practice is indeed 123 342 L . Hernández - Romero , X . Sun very low . In this respect , the overall learning environment fostered by teachers is far from creative . The exam - oriented education system in China is one of the major factors leading to the dearthofcreativityintheclassroom . Highpressurefromcollegeentranceexaminationsforces teachers to follow the traditional rote learning path , contributing subsequently to suffocate student creativity . Teachers could be willing , to a certain extent , to make creativity a part of the learning environment . The education system , however , gets in the way of their creative teaching practices as teachers have to focus on results and achievements . Taking into account such restricting circumstances , it could be argued that the extent to which a creative learning environment is built by the teachers is not as low as what the ﬁndings might indicate in the ﬁrst place . However , teacher role in impeding creativity in the learning environment should not be overlooked . Teachers in this case study adhere to traditional Chinese cultural views , which emphasise teacher authority and control . This contribute to teacher complicit role in a low - level creative learning environment . The abovementioned is conﬁrmed by teacher general attitudes towards creativity in which they believed imagination cannot be enhanced by education . Adequate teacher training , is necessary , thus , to gradually enable a transition between ancient principles which are centred on the teacher and current trends in education which recognise the signiﬁcance of an open learning environment with the student at its core . If other educational systems are interested to learn from the school experiences of this paper , the opportunity lies in monitoring the extent to which policy is put in practice in the classroom , identifying traditional barriers that might interfere in such endeavour . The study reveals that , to a degree , teachers are aware of the role they need to play to foster creativity at school . Teachers’ awareness , however , is not an indicator of the extent to which they might be able to enhance student creativity . Constraining factors such as assessment methods , emphasis on results and similar limitations of the overall education system affect the development of creativity in the classroom . One of the valuable aspects in this study is the methodology used , which allows for a correlation to be established across teachers’ comments , students’ voice and the researcher’s observations . This represents an opportunity to capitalise on in future studies and educational systems . This study contributes to assert the complexity of creating a supportive learning environment for creativity in primary schools in China . This research provides insight into the practice of Chinese education reform in relation to creativity at elementary schools in China . Limitations should to be acknowledged , nev - ertheless . Firstly , the fact that the use of non - participant observation affects , inevitably , the interaction between teachers and students in the class . Accordingly , teachers may hesitate about carrying out certain classroom activities or about performing certain behaviours while being observed . However , the conjunction of methods—interviews with both teachers and students and non - participant observation—makes the ﬁeld research data gathered in this study signiﬁcant for further research . Needless to say that the results cannot be extrapolated to all primary schools in China . The need to conduct further empirical research about the creative learning environment at schoolsinChinaisevident . Itmightbeimportanttoconductfurtherresearchtoexploresimilar and related issues in other schools and cities in that country . Future research in this area might be directed to ﬁnd out strategies that may enable elementary school teachers in China to ﬁnd a balance between discipline and freedom in the classroom . Similarly , something to look into , in further studies , is the extent to which teachers are continuously instructed about new trends in education where creativity takes on a key role . Furthermore , research directed to investigate the extent to which elementary school teachers are trained to explore and put in practice their own creativity might also be of high importance . Research in these areas may contribute to 123 Supportive learning environments at elementary level in China 343 provideamorecomprehensivepictureofthecreativelearningenvironmentatprimaryschoolsinChina , raising awareness of aspects that ought to be taken in consideration by policymakers in terms of the use and implementation of creativity in the classroom . Finally , future practice towards establishing learning environments should consider the feasibility to apply education reform within the constraints of the education system . The voice of teachers and students should be further heard in relation to practical limitations faced in the establishment of a creative learning environment . Appendix 1 Interview Questions ( For Teachers ) —Semi - structured General Part1 Teacher’s attitude towards creativity : 1 . What do you value most in education ? 2 . What is your opinion towards relationship between creative potential and education ? 3 . How can you measure a student’s creativity level in classroom ? Part2 Teacher’s expectation towards student’s development of creativity What are your expected characteristics of a creative student ? Part3 Teacher’s practice in overall classroom climate Classroom activities 1 . What kinds of activities do you usually do to foster creativity in classrooms ? 2 . Have you ever deliberately given time for students to think ? Why or why not ? 3 . How many minutes are encouraged for students to do classroom activities ? Teaching behaviour 1 . What do you think of nonconformity in learning process ? ( How do you feel of if your students trying out their own ideas and deviating from what you have shown them ? ) 2 . What do you think of risk - taking in learning process ? 3 . To what extent do you think you should control student’s behaviour in learning process ? In what ways ? Assessment 1 . What do you think of the importance of getting high achievement test scores in assess - ment ? 2 . What do you think of getting the ‘right’ answer in assessment ? 3 . What do you usually do to assess students’ learning ? 4 . Have you used any special assessment form to increase students’ interest in learning ? Could you give me examples of them ? Appendix 2 Interview Questions ( For Students ) Part1 Student’s attitude towards their teacher : 123 344 L . Hernández - Romero , X . Sun 1 . What do you like most of your teacher ? 2 . If you ﬁnish the task according to teacher’s requirement , which one do you think your teacher will be happy to see , the process you went through or your ﬁnal result ? Part2 : Student’s idea of teacher’s expectation towards a creative student 1 . Could you name the ﬁve most important things that you think your teacher expects from you ? Part3 : Student’s idea of the overall classroom climate Classroom activities 1 . Are there any activities that your teachers do in the classroom that allow you to imagine or create new ideas by yourself ? List of them . 2 . What kinds of activities does your teacher do in the classroom that you are particularly interested about ? 3 . How many minutes do you have to do classroom activities in class ? What do you think of it ? Teaching behaviour 1 . Do you think your class is relaxed enough for you to express yourself openly ? Why ? 2 . If you response your teacher with a different answer from the right one , what do you think your teacher will do ? 3 . What do you think about the atmosphere in class ? Assessment 1 . What do you think of the importance of getting high achievement test scores in exami - nation ? 2 . What do you think if your teacher asks only have one right answer ? 3 . Do you have choice when it comes to doing assignments ? 4 . Name some methods / forms by which your teacher evaluates your learning . Appendix 3 Classroom Observation Form Date : Class : Teacher : Seating Arrangements ( Physical Environment ) : General Information in Classroom Teacher - Emotion and Feeling : Student - Emotion and Feeling : 1 . Classroom activities 1 . 1 . Record of classroom activities ( activity type , time of duration ) : ( What kind of activities does this teacher do to foster creativity in class ? How much time is given to each activity ? ) 1 . 2 . Time duration for students to think : ( Does the teacher deliberately give time for students to think ? How many minutes are given for that ? ) 123 Supportive learning environments at elementary level in China 345 2 . Teaching behaviour 2 . 1 Nonconformity in learning process : ( Is there any nonconformity allowed in the class ? How does the teacher encourage nonconformity behaviour in the classroom ? ) 2 . 2 Control behaviour : ( What is the teacher’s role in controlling students’ behaviour ? ) 3 . Assessment 3 . 1 Teacher’s attitude towards high marks : ( Is getting high marks encouraged by the teacher ? How ? ) 3 . 2 One right answer in teaching : ( Does the teacher encourage the one right answer in teaching ? How ? ) 3 . 3 Assessment types : ( What kind of assessments does the teacher use to increase students’ interest in learning ? Do students have choices of assessments ? ) References Ahmad , I . , Said , H . , Mansor , S . , Mokhtar , M . , & Hassan , Z . ( 2014 ) . How teacher moderates the relationship between democratic classroom , environment and student engagement . Review of European Studies , 6 ( 4 ) , 239 – 248 . Amabile , T . M . ( 1996 ) . Creativity in context . Oxford : Westview Press . Baird , J . , Isaacs , T . , Johnson , S . , Stobart , G . , Yu , G . , Sprague , T . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Policy effects of PISA . Oxford , UK : Oxford University Centre for Educational Assessment . Barbot , B . , Besancon , M . , & Lubart , T . ( 2011 ) . Assessing creativity in the classroom . The Open Education Journal , 4 ( 1 ) , 58 – 66 . Brophy , J . ( 1998 ) . Motivating students to learn . New York : The McGraw - Hill Companies . Chen , H . , & Zhao , G . ( 2013 ) . The bibliometric and content analysis of creative education researches from the year 1990 to 2012 in China ( In Chinese ) . Conference on creative education . Beijing : Scientiﬁc Research Publishing . Cole , D . G . , Sugioka , H . L . , & Yamagata - Lynch , L . C . ( 1999 ) . Supportiveclassroomenvironmentsforcreativity in higher education . The Journal of Creative Behaviour , 33 ( 4 ) , 277 – 293 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / j . 2162 - 6057 . 1999 . tb01407 . x . Collins , M . A . , & Amabile , T . M . ( 2009 ) . Motivation and creativity . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Handbook of creativity ( pp . 297 – 312 ) . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Craft , A . ( 2001 ) . An analysis of research and literature on creativity in education measurement . Report for the Qualiﬁcations and Curriculum Authority . http : / / ncys . ksu . edu . sa / sites / ncys . ksu . edu . sa / ﬁles / Creativity % 2 0and % 20innovation % 2020 . pdf . Retrieved 30 October 2018 . Csikszentmihalyi , M . ( 1988 ) . Motivation and creativity : Toward a synthesis of structural and energistic approaches to cognition . New Ideas in Psychology , 6 ( 2 ) , 159 – 176 . Fearon , D . D . , Copeland , D . , & Saxon , T . F . ( 2013 ) . The relationship between parenting styles and creativity in a sample of Jamaican children . Creativity Research Journal . , 25 ( 1 ) , 119 – 128 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 108 0 / 10400419 . 2013 . 752287 . Government of the People’s Republic of China . ( 2019 ) . Information about alleviate academic burden for primary and secondary school Students . Resource document . http : / / www . gov . cn / xinwen / 2018 - 12 / 29 / content _ 5353316 . htm . Retrieved 3 rd May , 2020 . Gregerson , M . B . , Snyder , H . T . , & Kaufman , J . C . ( 2013 ) . Teachingcreativelyandteachingcreativity . London : Springer . Hare , J . ( 2011 ) . Unlock your creativity . Croydon : Hodder Education . Hasirci , D . , & Demirkan , H . ( 2003 ) . Creativity in learning environments : The case of two sixth grade art - rooms . The Journal of Creative Behaviour , 37 ( 1 ) , 17 – 41 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / j . 2162 - 6057 . 2003 . tb0 0824 . x . Hennessey , B . A . , & Amabile , T . M . ( 2011 ) . The conditions of creativity . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , The nature of creativity ( pp . 11 – 42 ) . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . 123 346 L . Hernández - Romero , X . Sun Hernandez - Romero , L . ( 2017 ) . Re - evaluating creativity : The individual , society and education . New York : Palgrave . Huang , S . , Ruan , J . , & Capps , M . ( 2014 ) . What Chinese cultural values and instructional practices inﬂuence Chinese middle school students’ reading motivation in Taiwan 1 . Quarterly Journal of Chinese Studies , 3 ( 2 ) , 55 – 76 . Jeffrey , B . ( 2006 ) . Creative teaching and learning : towards a common discourse and practice . Cambridge Journal of Education , 36 ( 3 ) , 399 – 414 . Jin , L . , & Cortazzi , M . ( 2011 ) . The changing landscapes of a journey : Educational metaphors in China . In J . Ryan ( Ed . ) , Education reform in China : Changing concepts , contexts and practices ( pp . 113 – 131 ) . London and New York : Routledge . Kang , C . , Erickson , G . , Ryan , J . , & Mitchell , I . ( 2011 ) . Constructingacross - culturalteacherprofessionallearn - ing community in the context of China’s basic education curriculum . In J . Ryan ( Ed . ) , Education reform in China : changing concepts , contexts and practices ( pp . 41 – 60 ) . London and New York : Routledge . Keane , M . ( 2011 ) . How creativity is changing China . Gordonsville : Bloomsbury Publishing PLC . Kuhn , R . L . ( 2012 ) . Economic model must change . China Daily , Sep 14 – 20 . Liu , H . ( 2013 ) . Process and development trend of local education institution creativity . In D . Yang ( Ed . ) , Annual report on China’s education ( pp . 154 – 168 ) . Beijing : Social Sciences Academic Press . Lockette , K . F . ( 2012 ) . Creativity and Chinese education reform . International Journal of Global Education , 1 ( 4 ) , 34 – 39 . Marginson , S . , Rytler , R . , Freeman , B . , & Roberts , K . ( 2013 ) . STEM : Country Comparisons : International Comparisons of Science , Technology , Engineering and Mathematics ( STEM ) Education . Final Report . Melbourne : Australian Council of Learned Academies . Mishra , P . , & Henriksen , D . ( 2013 ) . A new approach to deﬁning and measuring creativity : Rethinking tech - nology & creativity in the 21st century . Techtrends Tech Trends , 57 , 10 – 13 . Mishra , P . , & Henriksen , D . ( 2019 ) . Creativity , technology & education : Exploring their convergence . The International Entrepreneurship and Management Journal , 15 , 1041 – 1044 . Mishra , P . , Henriksen , D . , & Mehta , R . ( 2015 ) . Creativity , digitality , and teacher professional development : Unifying theory , research , and practice . In M . Niess & H . Gillow - Wiles ( Eds . ) , Handbook of research on teacher education in the digital Age ( pp . 691 – 722 ) . Hershey : Information Science Reference . Morris , W . ( 2006 ) . Creativity - its place in education . Resource document . www . jpb . com / creative / Creativity _ in _ Education . pdf . Retrieved 25 January 2014 . NACCCE . ( 1999 ) . All our futures : Creativity , culture and education . London : Department for Education and Employment . Ng , A . K . , & Smith , I . ( 2004 ) . Why is there a paradox in promoting creativity in the Asian classroom . In Lau , et al . ( Eds . ) , Creativity : When east meets west ( pp . 87 – 112 ) . River Edge : World Scientiﬁc Publishing Co . Nickerson , R . S . ( 2009 ) . Enhancing creativity . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Handbook of creativity ( pp . 392 – 430 ) . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . OECD . ( 2011 ) . Lessons from PISA for the United states , strong performers and successful reformers in education . Paris : OECD Publishing . OECD ( 2019 ) . PISA 2021 Creative Thinking Framework ( Third Draft ) . OECD Publishing Roubini , N . ( 2011 ) . China’s Unbalanced , Uncoordinated and Unsustainable Growth Model . www . dis . uniroma1 . it / ~ fsr / ROUBINI % 20Blog . pdf . Retrieved 29 November 2018 . Ryan , J . ( 2012 ) . Changing concepts and practices of curriculum in China . In Y . Hong - Biao & J . L . Chi - Kin ( Eds . ) , Education in a competitive and globalizing world - China in the 21th century : Curriculum reform in china : Changes and challenges ( pp . 13 – 30 ) . New York : Nova Science Publishers . Sahlberg , P . ( 2010 ) . The role of education in promoting creativity : Potential barriers and enabling factors . In E . Villalba ( Ed . ) , Measuring creativity ( pp . 337 – 344 ) . Luxemburg : OPOCE . Santrock , J . W . ( 2006 ) . Educational psychology : Update : Preparing for PRAXIS and practice . New York : McGraw - Hill . Seah , W . T . ( 2011 ) . Ten years of curriculum reform in China : A soft knowledge perspective . In J . Ryan ( Ed . ) , Education reform in China : Changing concepts , contexts and practices ( pp . 161 – 184 ) . London and New York : Routledge . Smith , M . K . ( 1996 ) . Fosteringcreativityintheearlychildhoodclassroom . EarlyChildhoodEducationJournal , 24 ( 2 ) , 77 – 82 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / BF02353284 . Spendlove , D . ( 2008 ) . Creativity in education : A review . Design and Technology Education : An International Journal , 10 ( 2 ) , 9 – 18 . Staats , L . K . ( 2011 ) . The cultivation of creativity in the Chinese culture - past , present , and future . Journal of Strategic Leadership , 3 ( 1 ) , 45 – 53 . Sternberg , R . J . , & Lubart , T . I . ( 2009 ) . The concept of creativity : Prospects and paradigms . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Handbook of creativity ( pp . 3 – 15 ) . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . 123 Supportive learning environments at elementary level in China 347 Sternberg , R . J . , & Williams , W . M . ( 1996 ) . How to develop student creativity . Alexandria : Association for Supervision & Curriculum Development . Tegano , D . W . , Moran , J . D . , III , & Sawyers , J . K . ( 1991 ) . Creativityinearlychildhoodclassrooms . Washington , D . C . : National Education Association . Wang , F . ( 2011 ) . Development of Creative Industries in China and Its Human Resources Strategy . www . ccsenet . org / journal / index . php / ass / article / … / 8081 . Retrieved 16th April 2020 . Weigberg , R . W . ( 2006 ) . Creativity—understanding innovation in problem solving , science , invention , and the arts . New Jersey : John Wiley & Sons Inc . Yin , H . , & Lee , J . C . ( 2012 ) . China’s national curriculum reform in the global era . In Y . Hong - Biao & J . L . Chi - Kin ( Eds . ) , Educationin acompetitive and globalizingworld - Chinain the 21thcentury : Curriculum reform in china : Changes and challenges ( pp . 1 – 12 ) . New York : Nova Science Publishers . Zhao , X . , Selman , Rl , & Haste , H . ( 2015 ) . Academic stress in Chinese schools and a proposed preventive intervention program . Cogent Education , 2 ( 1 ) , 1000477 . Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations . 123