309 “What is the topic of the group , please ? ” On Migration , Care and the Challenges of Participation in Design MAX KRÜGER , Universität Siegen , Germany ANNE WEIBERT , Universität Siegen , Germany DÉBORA DE CASTRO LEAL , Universität Siegen , Germany DAVE RANDALL , Universität Siegen , Germany VOLKER WULF , Universität Siegen , Germany An increasing number of people around the world are forced to leave their homes due to the climate catastrophe , regional conflict or poverty . In their new host countries however , refugees and migrants are frequently met by a wide range of challenges , including wider societal participation . The difficulties migrants and refugees face have also increasingly become the topic of HCI and CSCW work . In this paper we report on a three year - long project , involving refugees , migrants and activist supporters in a co - design project to develop tools that aid the process of resettling . Several aspects have challenged equal participation in the project , including divergent motives , unequal power distribution and cultural heterogeneity . Despite these challenges the project outcomes are in use and maintained beyond the project runtime through voluntary actors . We reflect on this discrepancy between process and outcome drawing on the concept of care . CCS Concepts : • Human - centered computing → Empirical studies in HCI ; Participatory design . Additional Key Words and Phrases : Participation ; Migration ; Refugees ; Matters of Care ; Participatory Design ACM Reference Format : Max Krüger , Anne Weibert , Débora de Castro Leal , Dave Randall , and Volker Wulf . 2021 . “What is the topic of the group , please ? ” On Migration , Care and the Challenges of Participation in Design . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 5 , CSCW2 , Article 309 ( October 2021 ) , 29 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3476050 1 INTRODUCTION In 2015 , what has been called the Long Summer of Migration began [ 57 , 64 ] , and millions of people escaping from war or poverty , moved into and through Europe . While migration is not a temporary phenomenon , suddenly happening in the summer of 2015 in an otherwise still world , but a global constant as well as a central element in European history , refugees and migration had never ( or at least for a long time ) been as visible in central and western Europe as during these months [ 90 ] . For many the destination was Germany . Between 2015 and 2016 about one million people arrived in the country . It is not surprising that this very heterogeneous population was in need of a significant degree of support . Authors’ addresses : Max Krüger , Universität Siegen , Siegen , Germany , maximilian . krueger @ uni - siegen . de ; Anne Weibert , Universität Siegen , Siegen , Germany , anne . weibert @ uni - siegen . de ; Débora de Castro Leal , Universität Siegen , Siegen , Germany , debora . dleal @ uni - siegen . de ; Dave Randall , Universität Siegen , Siegen , Germany , dave . randall @ uni - siegen . de ; Volker Wulf , Universität Siegen , Siegen , Germany , volker . wulf @ uni - siegen . de . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . © 2021 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . 2573 - 0142 / 2021 / 10 - ART309 $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3476050 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 309 . Publication date : October 2021 . 309 : 2 Max Krüger et al . In this study we report on a design - research project in two medium - sized cities in Germany , in which we developed a series of digital tools to support forced and precarious migrants , 1 volunteers and professionals in their efforts to assist in the process of arriving and settling in this new environment , aligning ourselves with this movement of precarious migrants and volunteers . While the project was planned and conceived in 2015 , its execution took place over a three - year span between 2016 and 2019 . Since then , the tools which were developed are in use and continue to be maintained and developed further by various voluntary and professional actors with minimal to no involvement of the researchers . A symmetry of ignorance and difficult relations of care between all participants , as we shall see , along with a rapidly evolving situation , made the conduct of the project challenging . Initial challenges consisted of coordinating more or less emergency support for people who had literally just arrived in the city , to challenges they faced while trying to create a stable , fulfilling new life in this foreign country , including finding work or education , accessing health care , building a new social life , caring adequately for ones’ family and generally navigating an unfamiliar social and bureaucratic environment . Subsequently , the management of heterogeneous interests , ideologies and commitments made the co - design process a fraught and difficult one . We reflect below on the fact that , despite this , the resulting artifacts were , and continue to be , regularly used . As a background , forced and precarious migrants were met with divergent responses upon their arrival in Germany . On the one hand they were faced with an increasingly hostile political climate [ 101 , 102 ] as ever more restrictive laws and regulations were instantiated [ 89 ] , impacting on our project work . At the same time , there was substantial voluntary engagement and growing activism in response to , and in solidarity with , the newly arriving migrants ( see e . g . , [ 23 ] ) . In our project we aimed to align ourselves with this movement of migrants and volunteers to support their efforts to create a new permanent home . Our own convictions led us to adopt a collaborative design approach in our project , taking inspiration from Participatory Design’s emancipatory aims and convictions ( see e . g . , [ 15 ] ) . Indeed , participatory principles were enshrined in the project proposal . We tried to involve both precarious migrants themselves and voluntary and professional supporters . Cooperation was not only encour - aged with the aim of developing better tools by involving future users and other stakeholders thus supporting them to take ownership early on , but also with the goal of creating an emancipatory dialogue within our project [ 60 ] . As we will show , this aim of fostering the participation of various groups in our design project was difficult to realize in practice . Our own initial assumptions were based on inexperience with this rapidly evolving situation and arguably naïve , and as the project evolved so did our stakeholder groups , their relations to each other and to the project , with concomitant coordinative difficulties . Our project brought together a complex network of precarious migrants , volunteers with and without a background in migration , workers of non - governmental social service institutions as well as public administrators . Ultimately , as we shall see , this led to serious limitations in participation 1 As has been mentioned elsewhere and will become apparent in our own account , the term „refugee” is rejected by many of the people it is applied to . Furthermore , we have come to learn how such terms take on a political / moral force , notably in the case of “refugees” and “migrants” – since they implicate different rules of access to support . To avoid this distinction , as well as the casual labelling of people , we will in this paper either use the term precarious migrants or migrants , with both of which we refer to refugees , who have fled from war and conflict , as well as migrants who have to come to Germany for other reasons , such as escaping poverty , and find themselves in highly precarious situations in their new host country . Exceptions are within quotes by our participants where we did not change the term and in a specific part of the paper , where issues with the term itself are discussed . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 309 . Publication date : October 2021 . “What is the topic of the group , please ? ” 309 : 3 in the design process . Nevertheless , the project resulted in several successful applications which are being used on a daily basis , indicating a curious discrepancy between process and product . Below , we reflect on the entire design process and its evolution and detail our initial assumptions and how they were challenged during the course of the project , and on the difference between process and outcome . Contributing to an emerging literature on HCI in the context of migration , we situate our study in a canon of work that has explored challenges to participation in a variety of contexts . Aiming to understand better how participation in our project came to be problematic and the discrepancy with the outcome , we use the notion of care [ 35 , 115 ] to understand both the challenges to participation we experienced as well as the lasting outcome of the project , and thereby contribute to future participatory design projects addressing challenges of migration and other matters of care [ 32 , 35 ] . 2 RELATED WORK 2 . 1 Co - design , participation and its problems Co - design is a broad term used in CSCW and the wider HCI community to describe the active involvement of users throughout the design process , from the framing of the design problem to the prototype ( s ) and finished artefact ( [ 95 ] ) . It can describe pragmatic approaches ( [ 84 ] in [ 26 ] ) or it can be business oriented ( see e . g . [ 99 , 118 ] ) . In the form of Participatory Design ( PD ) it typically takes a democratic , emancipatory approach , driven by explicit democratic or even Marxist ideals ( see e . g . [ 13 , 46 ] . Its origins are to be found in Scandinavian work - place democracy ( see e . g . [ 17 ] or [ 45 ] ) but more recently participatory ambitions have expanded across the globe ( see e . g . [ 36 ] or [ 38 ] ) and out of the workplace into many other domains ( see e . g . [ 12 , 50 , 97 , 103 ] . PD has , in this time , explored a variety of principled positions in relation to co - design , including for example postcolonial design [ 61 , 62 ] , prefigurative design [ 10 ] or design for social justice [ 31 , 104 ] . Some authors have attempted to disentangle how people participate in design [ 117 ] and how participation unfolds over time [ 92 , 93 ] . A concern for democracy also entails examination of power relations . Bratteteig and Wagner [ 18 , 19 ] have , for instance , carefully examined what sharing power in design entails , and the role of knowledge by including the Foucauldian concept of Power - Knowledge ( see e . g . [ 48 ] ) . 2 . 1 . 1 Problems of Participation . In the last decade or more , the idea of participation itself has increasingly come under closer scrutiny . In an influential paper Sherry Arnstein presented a " ladder of participation " [ 9 ] , with eight rungs ranging from different forms of " nonparticipation " to degrees of tokenism all the way to partnership between government bodies and communities of citizens and full citizen control . The paper represented a critique of an urban planning program in the USA , where the language of citizen participation was not accompanied by a strong commitment to what that might mean , leading to cooptation and tokenistic participation . There is , then , a risk of rendering participation an empty ritual , unless participatory processes move to the higher rungs of the ladder , giving citizens actual power and control in planning matters by the government . Nevertheless , her ladder model has been subject to critique from a variety of sources . Kelty [ 66 ] , for example , points out that participation is often presented as an unalloyed normative good despite the fact that participation is not always voluntary and problems of co - optation and ill - defined participation remain , leading to " too much democracy in all the wrong places " [ 66 ] . Others have expressed much more critical positions . Focusing specifically on participation in development , a collection of essays edited by Cooke & Kothari [ 30 ] points to possible manipulative or even harmful consequences of participation for those that participate , and observes that tyranny , running counter to participations democratic ideas , can be a real consequence . Miessen later called participation a nightmare [ 79 ] , as its consensus - oriented nature and unfounded assumptions about the good Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 309 . Publication date : October 2021 . 309 : 4 Max Krüger et al . intentions of the actors involved , make it impossible to oppose power and produce change . In conversations with political philosopher Chantal Mouffe , they develop a conflictual model of participation , building on her concept of agonistic pluralism [ 83 ] . Building on Actor Network Theory , others have also sought to create more complex visions of participation . For example , Callon [ 24 ] sketches how a variety of actors , including non - humans , can be drawn into participatory projects , sometimes without consent . By pointing to the complex networks of relationships within such projects and the co - opted nature of participation this presents a further challenge to ladder - like models . Both Chantal Mouffe’s Agonistic Pluralism [ 82 ] as well as Bruno Latour’s matters of concern [ 71 , 72 ] have served as a challenge to casual assumptions about participation , by pointing out that participation itself can be a matter of concern [ 8 ] . Building on Latour and Mouffe , Agonistic Design [ 15 , 16 ] focuses less on the consensual creation of technical artefacts and instead on the creation of democratic spaces , in which conflictual positions around shared matters of concern can be played out . Conflict between participants can for example constructively influence design in various ways , result in different features or even become a feature itself [ 49 ] , without the need to resolve the conflict or solve problems . This is supposed to enable the questioning of power structures , increasing the chances of realising PD’s emancipatory ideals [ 67 ] . The creation of such agonistic spaces , however , has also been found to be beset by a number of problems , for example a negation of the violence of capitalism and the power of ( financialisation ) capitalism to frame projects within such supposedly democratic settings [ 14 ] which inhibits critique from the margins from the start . In a similar vein , Kraff [ 67 ] points to pre - existing differences and inequalities between actors participating in agonistic processes , which disables equal participation in agonism by all and privileges already dominant positions . Furthermore , the focus on the design process is sometimes at the expense of the outcome , as has been observed by Björgvinsson et al . [ 15 ] and reflected on by e . g . Wagner [ 119 ] , who point out that many of the systems designed through participatory processes are no longer in use or no longer work . Put simply , participation and collaboration in design is not a straightforward process . In our own work we have encountered several challenges to participation , including heterogeneity within stakeholder groups , unequal relations between the involved actors and different preferences and abilities about how to participate , and add our account to a discourse that aims to understand challenges to participation in design . In the following we will mention a few examples of projects from various domains , where participation in design has been proven to be beset by several problems . One such example is community informatics and the design and management of IT systems by community groups , NGOs , and local level government bodies [ 26 ] , where the democratic ethos of participatory approaches can easily be undermined in such complex settings if specific voices or organisations are forgotten and thereby excluded [ 91 ] . International Development is a second example . Dearden et al . have compared participatory approaches in international development and in the design of interactive systems [ 36 ] . Drawing on [ 98 ] , they highlight capacity building to influence development goals , increased social capital , new skills and growing independence as potential benefits of participatory approached to international development . However , they also point to costs . Participation is risky , as the outcomes are unclear , and local commitments cannot be guaranteed . Furthermore , participation can also mask abuses of power , for example by ignoring pre - existing power relations and politics behind a veneer of equal participation [ 56 ] . Several difficulties for participatory design efforts have been identified when working with elderly people . Grönvall & Kyng for example [ 52 , 53 ] found that the fluctuating wellbeing and health of elderly participants made it difficult to plan the process , as sessions frequently needed to be rescheduled depending on participants wellbeing . Diverging interests among participants was also identified as problematic . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 309 . Publication date : October 2021 . “What is the topic of the group , please ? ” 309 : 5 In a recent study Harrington and colleagues [ 55 ] have reflected on difficulties with participation in a series of projects they have worked on with underserved populations in the USA . In their study they illustrate how a variety of factors , including the very methods of Participatory Design and historical relations between communities and research institutions can contribute to PD becoming an affluent and privileged activity that falls short of its aim of envisioning equitable design solutions for the challenges underserved communities face . We should be very clear at this point that we are not seeking to devalue the opportunities inherent in participatory approaches . Quite the converse . There are of course numerous examples of successful work ( e . g . [ 39 , 105 ] , amongst many others ) . Nonetheless , our own account will show that distinct communities of interest in a real world , urban context constituted , for us , dealing with a wide variety of – at times conflicting – interests and complicated power relationships . Our investigation of a participatory design project addressing issues of migration and arrival therefore adds to this canon of literature aiming to understand and overcome challenges to participation and co - design in specific contexts . 2 . 2 ICT & Migration Since 2014 in particular , HCI and related disciplines have paid increasing attention to the role ICTs play in the migration and resettling process . Such studies have examined , for instance , social media behaviour of migrants with regards to decision making and planning migration activities prior and during their journey [ 37 , 86 ] . They point out , however , that the same technology is used by , for instance , European agencies to control or prevent immigration [ 51 ] Latonero & Kift [ 70 ] make a similar point , showing how digital technology has not only become the default infrastructure for enabling migration , but also how it is employed to control migration by traffickers , digital companies and especially the EU . Several studies investigated the role of ICT to address challenges related to settling in a new place [ 3 , 27 , 28 , 59 , 65 , 94 , 122 ] . Here too , phones have been found to play a crucial role in the process of settling [ 65 ] as they facilitate for example language learning and translation , the acquisition of cultural and language competencies [ 3 ] or staying in touch with family [ 122 ] . ICT play an equally crucial role for support organisations [ 74 , 80 ] . Kaufman [ 65 ] did however also find that navigating bureaucratic space has not necessarily become easier through accessing information online and in some cases becomes even more difficult [ 27 , 94 ] . The importance of ICT in processes of migration and arrival have not been unnoticed by the HCI and CSCW community , which is for example illustrated by the organization of several workshops [ 1 , 68 , 107 , 108 , 111 ] and special issues [ 110 ] , focusing on the role of HCI research and design in addressing issues of migration and refugees . To provide a basic understanding of the supportive role HCI design can play in supporting processes of flight , migration and settlement Almohamed and colleagues [ 5 ] investigated opportunities for IT to address the challenges migrants in Australia face after arrival , including the loss of social capital [ 6 ] . Duarte et al . have attempted to study how well existing solutions address challenges migrants in Germany face [ 43 ] . Focussing on the supporters of migrants , Tachtler [ 106 ] have investigated the potential for ICTs to support the mentors of unaccompanied migrant youth , thereby increasing the resilience of young migrants . A few studies from within the HCI and CSCW communities have attempted to design technology applications to assist with settlement challenges , including geospatial digital services [ 11 , 40 ] , using connected technologies to facilitate contact and interaction between new arrivals and existing local communities [ 7 ] , dealing with trauma and stress [ 4 ] or addressing problems related to the unfamiliar language of the new host country [ 2 , 22 , 120 ] . While the studies cited here present an important backdrop for our own work , few of them have explicitly addressed the complications of engaging in co - design processes with migrants and other stakeholders involved in support and care Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 309 . Publication date : October 2021 . 309 : 6 Max Krüger et al . for their concerns . Exceptions include [ 21 ] who focus on the role of care in designing with young migrants in Australia and how to adequately deal , in the co - design process , with prior traumatic experiences . Duarte et al . [ 41 ] have proposed the creation of " safe spaces " as a crucial component when engaging in co - design processes with migrants , and the respective roles and differences between " participatory design " and " participatory research " [ 42 ] . Talhouk has reported on the experience of involving Syrian migrants in Lebanon in a co - design and research process [ 109 ] . They found that HCI design - researchers needed to adopt a variety of roles , which can be challenging , and highlighted the need to tailor the design process according to participant preferences . Pei & Nardi [ 88 ] reflect on a participatory design project that failed to deliver lasting positive change to resettled migrants and asylum seekers by focusing on needs rather than assets . Our own account adds a specific study to this discourse that involves both precarious and forced migrants and their supporters and reveals challenges to participation in design . We will argue that , although participation was and is a desired objective in our project work , it is not on its own sufficient . Successful outcomes as well as shortcomings in our work , we argue , were due to ‘care’ and by applying a lens of ’care’ , insights with relevance to other CSCW researchers are provided . 2 . 3 Notions of Care in HCI As noted by Martin et al . [ 77 , page 625 ] , " Care is a slippery word " . Its variety of usages in everyday and academic language make a clear definition difficult . Nevertheless ( or perhaps because of this openness ) it has become an influential concept , especially in Science and Technology Studies ( STS ) . In an early and influential book , feminist philosopher Joan Tronto [ 115 ] examined the notion of care and attempted to define an ethic of care . Building on a definition by Berenice Fisher and herself of care as " everything that we do to maintain , continue , and repair our ’world’ so that we can live in it as well as possible " [ 47 ] , she suggests a four - phase model of care , consisting of Caring About , Taking Care Of , Care - giving and Care - receiving , later adding a fifth phase : Caring With [ 116 ] . Caring With is defined as the care for democracy and for citizens , so that all members of a society may live in it as well as possible . More recently , Maria Puig de la Bellacasa has explored the role of care in the study of science and technology [ 32 ] . Drawing and expanding on Latour’s notion of matters of concern she examines the role of care as an ethico - political concern and its meaning for knowledge politics in STS , suggesting matters of care [ 35 ] and that caring is an ethical and political obligation for all . Such a vision is firstly pluralistic and avoids the placing of responsibility onto specific partners , and secondly emphasizes non - exploitative relations of co - existence . [ 33 ] . The notion ( s ) of care has since been applied in the study of a wide variety of domains , from health care and health research [ 54 , 81 ] , environmental justice [ 112 ] and the care for soil [ 34 ] to the study of maintenance [ 78 ] and of sea rescue [ 25 ] . Care has also found reception within CSCW and the wider HCI community . For example , studies have included the investigation of care in the maintenance of community networks in Cuba [ 44 ] , technologically mediated care in responding to natural disasters [ 121 ] or in the upkeep of global logistics networks for humanitarian purposes [ 63 ] . Toombs et al . [ 113 ] highlight the role of systematized care as a driver in sustaining the community of a hackerspace . Moving the investigative focus towards the relationships between researchers and participants in studies , Light & Akama [ 73 ] study the commitments and responsibilities of participatory designers to become ’custodians of care’ amongst participants , focusing on the ongoing relations between participants instead of solely on artefacts to be designed , " creating spaces for others to reflect , make mistakes , learn and debate " [ 73 , page 160 ] - a concern for the creation of space and interaction similar to the concept of Agonistic Design discussed earlier . Pointing out the shortcomings of an approach based on matters of concern in the design of feminist coalitions between women coffee workers in Latin America , Eleutério and van Amstel [ 87 ] posit Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 309 . Publication date : October 2021 . “What is the topic of the group , please ? ” 309 : 7 Bellacasa’s matters of care as uniting people in feminist coalitions , with members that care about each other . Toombs et al . [ 114 ] highlight the role of care in the relationships between researchers and participants of studies and how such a focus can bring greater disclosure of the positions of researchers . Finally , Irani et al . [ 58 ] study the consequences for knowledge production " when research subjects care " about the topic of the study . Despite these justified calls for researchers and participatory practitioners to take care seriously , and to embed it into our practices , care , however , is neither unproblematic nor innocent . Tronto [ 115 ] has already highlighted the dangers inherent in care of relationships between care - givers and - receivers becoming profoundly unequal [ 115 , page 170 ] . Expanding on this warning , Michelle Murphy has asked to " unsettle care " [ 85 ] , to go beyond non - innocent narratives and gestures of rescue or sympathy often part of matters of care . She points to the " romantic temptations " and " acts that feel good " [ 85 , page 725 ] in projects of care , that obscure their implications . As matters of care become distributed into racialised , postcolonial or economic contexts , " empire and capital operate through acts of affection and care " [ 85 , page 722 ] . As we will illustrate in our account , these risks were also very present in our own project . The existence of unequal relations of care between the participating supporters ( volunteers and professionals ) and precarious migrants , and to a certain extend also us , troubled participation and its democratic goals . 3 SETTING & METHODOLOGY 3 . 1 Setting The paper is based on a three - year research and design project taking place in two mid - sized cities in western Germany , subsequently called City A and City B . City A is located in a densely populated area of the country and thus of very urban character . City B is located in a very rural area and although it counts about 100 . 000 inhabitants , it is much more rural in nature compared to City A . City A had been one of the country’s migration “hotspots” in 2015 , with many thousand people arriving during the summer by train from eastern countries . 3 . 2 Outcome and Participants The project was intended to benefit precarious migrants directly by designing tools that would assist them with any difficulties encountered in the process of resettling . It was also intended to benefit them indirectly by developing tools in such a manner , that they would also assist volunteers and professional supporters of migrants . Both were intended users of whatever technology was to be designed . Intended participants in our project were thus migrants , and voluntary as well as professional supporters , such as members of NGOs and specific public institutions offering advice or other forms of support . In City A , participants came from all of these stakeholder groups . Here , we collaborated early on with a loose network of 6 - 8 volunteers and shortly after the beginning of the project also with a growing group of migrants . Throughout the project we would occasionally also collaborate with members of professional support organizations on specific topics , e . g . as experts with regards to educational opportunities . The participating volunteers were either born in Germany or had been there for several decades and included people of ages between ca . 30 and 70 years old . Outside of this specific project their volunteering consisted of a wide variety of activities , including accompanying newly arriving families or individuals to all necessary institutions , helping with the application for asylum , finding language classes , gaining access to financial support , residency , finding accommodation , work , education and more , it consisted of offering language classes or finding legal assistance , or taking on administrative roles in NGOs . By late 2016 , when the project Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 309 . Publication date : October 2021 . 309 : 8 Max Krüger et al . began , many had been engaged in this for over a year , with some having decades of experience . In total we engaged with ca . 20 voluntary or professional supporters of migrants in City A , 7 of which participated regularly in our activities . Depending on the time available , some offered this support next to their professional obligations , others , whenever their specific situation such as retirement allowed , even 40 hours a week or more . The participating migrants came from Syria , Iraq , Iran , Afghanistan and India , and were between ca . 25 and 40 years old , including both male and female participants . Throughout the project we engaged with ca . 40 migrants as part of this project , 10 of which we met regularly . All members were literate in at least one language , many in several and some went on to begin education programs during our collaboration that required formal literacy qualifications . Activities were conducted in German , as this was the most common language amongst all participants . When needed , translations to other languages were conducted by members of the research team or by participants who spoke German or English and another language sufficiently . Participants were invited through a variety of channels , including the personal networks of those who were already involved , existing collaborations outside of this specific project with other relevant organisations , e . g . a neighbourhood center offering support to migrants and immigrants , and NGOs . The extensive duration of the project and its open nature enabled us to get in contact with a variety of local networks and organizations for participant involvement . Due to the length of the project and the evolving nature of the situation around us , participation by all groups fluctuated throughout the project . A small number of people participated throughout the entire project and continue to do so , while a larger number of people participated only for a limited amount of time . Some volunteers for example lost interest in volunteering . Some migrants found work or began educational programs that would reduce their available time or otherwise lost interest in our project . In City B our intended participant groups also included precarious migrants , voluntary and professional supporters , although recruitment here was more difficult and the resulting number of participants much smaller than in City A . Early on we collaborated with two members of a regional administrative office that were interested in providing digital tools for migrants . We organized open meetings and reached out to potential participants with regular written and digital invitations in a variety of languages ( Arabic , Farsi , English , German , Kurdish / Kurmanji ) through a variety of contacts we already had with NGOs , individual migrants and through the local public administrative contacts mentioned above . These meetings were predominantly attended by professional supporters , with very few migrants or volunteers . We initially managed to attract about 30 participants , who were predominantly professionals of NGOs , welfare organisations or public organisations an only very few volunteers or migrants . Even though we continued to reach out to other potential participant groups , changed times or places of the meetings to accommodate our different intended collaborators , over the course of one year participation overall diminished significantly . After one year we therefore ceased to hold regular meetings and continued to work closely with a small group of professional supporters from a variety of public institutions and NGOs , coming from Germany , Syria and Iraq . This group consists of 8 people . The project resulted in two websites , one for each city , that were home to a variety of digital interactive tools developed during the project . These included a ) a tool to find suitable local language classes , sorting results according to price , proficiency level as well as access regulations ( some publicly offered classes are only available to citizens of a very limited number of countries , actively and deliberately creating difficulties for other nationals , or are only free of cost to persons in certain economic or administrative situations ) , b ) a map , searchable through questions , that would offer general orientation to new arrivals in a city , e . g . doctors that speak specific languages , opportunities for childcare / work / education , administrative offices but also leisure opportunities , parks and playgrounds to visit with children or cultural venues that were aiming to be free of Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 309 . Publication date : October 2021 . “What is the topic of the group , please ? ” 309 : 9 racism , c ) a tool to navigate the German professional education system , highlighting possible paths based on a person’s specific requests and pointing out the relevant local support opportunities and finally d ) a tool to prepare medical appointments by asking a questions in the users chosen language ( available in seven languages ) and translating them into German , thereby diminishing difficulties and time pressure at the appointment . In addition to these interactive tools the websites also offered information in a more static manner , e . g . on support organisations and offers with regards to work , education , health care , child care , tenant protection or asylum . Most parts of the website were available in a variety of languages including German , English , Arabic , Farsi , Kurdish / Kurmanji , Spanish , French , but , as translation often depended on voluntary efforts , not all parts were available in all languages . The websites were designed for mobile as well as desktop use . The two websites were not identical . They referred to local information and resources , which differed , but also because local participants had different demands for different information . While the tool to search language classes , for example , was difficult to populate with appropriate data in City B , our participants in the same city went to great lengths to gather information about local support opportunities for work and education , and this section of the website therefore received more attention . At the time of writing in January 2021 , the websites in both cities are maintained by collectives of supporters , by now for well over a year after the official end of the project . In City A , an NGO assumed legal responsibility for the website . Content is maintained by a collective of volunteers and professional supporters . In City B another NGO assumed legal responsibility with the support of a public administrational organisation . Content is developed and maintained by a collective of five employees of public institutions , two of which are migrants from Syria , three employees of the NGO and one researcher . 3 . 3 Methodology The data this account is based on field notes made during activities and in conversations with participants . These notes were taken and kept by the main researchers , Author One and Author Two . Because our work was ‘action oriented’ [ 100 ] , the ‘revolving door’ nature of our participants’ involvement and the contingent nature of the process , we adopted a pragmatic , opportunistic , approach to data collection , relying substantially on data from meetings , conversations and activities , which will be described below in the Project Chronology a well as the Findings section . In total we engaged with over 80 people throughout the project’s runtime , but only a small number of these were present for the whole of the project . All participants were aware that we were researchers and their interactions with us were therefore part of our ongoing research activities . All names in this paper were changed to preserve our subjects’ anonymity . The data was shared with a limited number of colleagues and thematically coded , and codes compared and discussed by the authors . The data was inductively coded , broadly following the emergent logic of Thematic Analysis [ 20 ] and through subsequent sharing , comparing and combin - ing codes amongst the authors of this paper we arrived at the present narrative . In Section Four below we will present challenges we encountered to participation in our design project , organised along the four topics of Motive , Power , Conflict and Culture . Afterwards we will discuss these challenges engaging the concept of Care as introduced above . 3 . 4 Positionality Our position in this project was not only that of researchers and designers , but also , to a certain extent , that of activist . We were aware of the political and social tensions around the topic of migration , critical of the positions that national government figures were voicing and aware of the difficulties local official institutions were at times creating for precarious migrants . Our explicit aim Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 309 . Publication date : October 2021 . 309 : 10 Max Krüger et al . was to support migrants in their efforts to make themselves at home . We were positioned so as to define ‘inclusivity’ only with respect to organizations and individuals who manifested at least broad sympathy for our work . Volunteers , we assumed , played a crucial role in this and took on important support roles . The conceptualization of the project and writing of the project proposal was to a large extent driven by one researcher’s ( Author Two ) previous decade - long involvement with project works concerned with the role ( s ) of ICT for community building and learning , migration and the inclusion of marginalized groups . Furthermore , working and – in one case also living – in one of the cities of concern to this study , the researchers experienced first - hand the readiness to help characterizing the situation in 2015 . All authors have a longstanding commitment to participatory principles in some form . As such , several assumptions were implicitly made at the beginning of the project , especially with regards to the design process and the different participant groups . These assumptions included the following : 1 ) Volunteers and migrants have largely the same goals with regards to which problems are worth addressing and how they should be addressed . 2 ) Designer / researchers and volunteers have similar goals and a shared understanding of the importance of participation and co - design . 3 ) Migrants are one or more distinct communities with shared goals . 4 ) Migrants have an intrinsic interest in the participation in a design project that aims to develop technological applications addressing problems they face . These assumptions were only explicitly formulated in retrospect , looking back on the process described in this paper , and were only implicitly present at the beginning of the project . They are therefore not rooted in literature , but in the experience of attempting to offer practical support to migrants some of us had acquired previously , and in the inexperience of others . It is perhaps important to point out , that the two researchers ( Author One and Author Two ) carrying out the project , themselves were born in Germany to German parents and have no experience of being a migrant in this country . While Author Two had significant experience of supporting migrants , Author One did not have this experience , although we had experience working with NGOs in different contexts . However , the situation itself was unique to us , with very large numbers of people arriving in the cities in a short space of time as well as the mobilizing of non - professional volunteers aiming to offer support . Our assumptions were thus rooted in inexperience regarding a rapidly evolving and highly complex situation . 3 . 5 Project Chronology The project began officially in 2016 . As described earlier , city A had a special role in the countries’ response to the arrival of migrants and for several months hundreds to thousands of people arrived daily . The response from civil society was large , with hundreds of citizens trying to support the new arrivals in various kinds of ways . The lack of coordination , however , also was apparent . The idea was to build a website to coordinate various activities and funding was obtained to do so in late 2016 . The main partners of the consortium included a 2 - person research team from the university and a software development company . An additional researcher was involved sporadically at various points of the project , but especially at the beginning . The project ran for three years until November 2019 but continues at the date of writing ( April 2021 ) in a less official way and we as researchers continue to be involved albeit in a lesser , now voluntary capacity ( although an academic interest remains ) . From the beginning we opted for a co - design approach for three reasons : 1 ) with the goal of creating an emancipatory dialogue which would contribute towards self - determination , 2 ) to share ownership to ensure sustainable impact beyond the official runtime of the funding , and 3 ) to bring together different knowledges to understand better what the challenges were and how best to address them . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 309 . Publication date : October 2021 . “What is the topic of the group , please ? ” 309 : 11 3 . 5 . 1 City A . At an early stage , before even submitting the grant proposal that would come to fund this project , a researcher from the team met a representative of a local network of volunteers in City A . This network had come together to share knowledge and create an overview over the various volunteer activities that were taking place in City A , and it became an important part member of the project consortium . This group had been attempting for several months to create a website that would display valuable information to migrants and their supporters , but had failed , mainly because of a lack of technical prowess . Together with the software development company and the university researchers they made up the core group of the consortium . In the beginning of the project then , in early 2017 , the participant group loosely consisted of seven volunteers from the group in City A , three researchers , one journalist who was paid by funds acquired by the volunteers and whose role was to prepare content to be published , and one member of the development company . We met regularly in a freely available meeting room in the city hall and began to work on the website . Because the volunteers had been planning a website for some considerable time already , we quickly established a WordPress - based website that allowed the publication of static information . At the same time , we started to work on the design of more interactive elements , tools that could address the challenges that migrants faced during this time . In this context we began to involve migrants into the project , by cooperating with a neighborhood organization , focused on participatory city planning . Even though we , the researchers , had planned to do so right from the start and had involved this neighborhood organization into the consortium for this aim , the volunteer group did not consider this a necessity . Together with the neighborhood organization , we therefore initiated a separate weekly meeting , choosing a more welcoming venue and a more suitable time ( early evening instead of morning ) to allow more people to partake . For several weeks , before the first meeting , we invited participants through all channels and networks that were available to us , including personal contacts but also advertising in specific local magazines and flyers in various languages . In the first meeting a mixed group of participants were present , including migrants that had arrived very recently and some that had been in the city for several years , volunteers as well as some representatives of NGOs . At the beginning of the meeting , we presented the existing website and our plan for continued development . We aimed to initiate discussion of topics that were important aspects of their experience , the difficulties they experienced through a collaborative blog in several languages . We also aimed to produce texts and tools that would assist others that faced similar experiences and hurdles . We also set up a shared WhatsApp group early on for internal communication and coordination . Over time , the style and setting of these meetings changed considerably , from a pre - planned workshop to a more casual arrangement in which we shared tea and snacks , and from the initial setting in a former industrial hall - turned - event space to the office of an NGO and finally a Turkish café . Also , the participants in this group continually changed during the entire duration of the project . Some people would attend every meeting , some irregularly , some stopped coming but new faces also appeared constantly . Meanwhile , the volunteer group continued to meet every four to six weeks in the formal rooms of the city hall . Given their early engagement and enthusiasm , it was decided that they would be legally responsible for the website and would be responsible for its maintenance in the long run . For this they would need to form an association as a legal body . In the meantime , Hans , a leading member , assumed formal legal responsibility . During the second half of the project , it became clear that several members of this volunteer group had rather lost interest in the website and were unwilling to go through the legal and organizational bother of forming an NGO , leaving Hans alone . Finally , a friendly NGO , in whose office we had already been meeting , agreed to take on the responsibility , and remains today in that role . This was generally welcomed by all participants , since the loss of interest in forming a formal association had created a gap that urgently needed to be filled . There were initial worries about maintaining editorial freedom , which were resolved Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 309 . Publication date : October 2021 . 309 : 12 Max Krüger et al . through a specific meeting with the NGO . Several of the participants volunteered to assume all editorial tasks such as keeping content and data up to date and creating new content , maintaining the editorial freedom we had enjoyed throughout the entire project , while the NGO provided its legal body . 3 . 5 . 2 City B . The initial project proposal included parallel development of the website and its tools in a separate city , City B . Our plan was to set up regular meetings , similar to the ones we were already managing in the other city and which had become foundational to our work there , but we had learned about the difficulties entailed in working with two separate groups and hoped to avoid this by starting the project with the organization of regular , open meetings , to which we would invite migrants , volunteers , professionals from government institutions and NGOs . For about a year we held monthly open meetings to work on the website and the design of interactive tools together , with the goal of also establishing connections for the long - term stewardship of the project , similarly to our contacts in City A . This however proved to be very challenging . Our contacts in City B were more limited than in City A , which meant our invitations reached a smaller group of people . Participants also disagreed on how to participate : the majority were professionally engaged in the care for precarious migrants , with very few volunteers or migrants attending , and we did not manage to find the common ground necessary to build up a group of people that could be engaged beyond the monthly one - hour meetings , or were able to engage beyond their professional commitments ( which restricted the time they were available ) . Towards the end of the second project year , attendance of the meetings in City B plummeted . However , during these meetings throughout the year we build up a solid connection to two employees of a local public institution , the task of which it was to coordinate educational measures for migrants throughout the entire region . Our plans overlapped considerably with their professional tasks which allowed us to collaborate sustainably – and we continue to do so . Even though we effectively now had developed two websites , each catering for a separate region , several aspects of the development were common , since our goal was to create digital interactive tools that would be applicable in different locales . The format of the websites , both the static content as well as the more interactive aspects were the same on both sites , but filled with local content . Finally , at City B , a friendly NGO agreed to formally take on the website after the project funding ended . Our collaborators from the public institution were allowed to continue their engagement indefinitely , as long as the goals of website and their professional role overlapped . Furthermore , after the NGO had already agreed to continue the website , they offered a grant to pay a small salary to a person to help with technical tasks . With the official end of the funding period in late 2019 , the software company could no longer be officially involved . Even though the version at that point was fully functional and in fact had been in use for three years , there remained some maintenance work to be done by a professional developer . A member of the company , who had been working on the project the entire time , asked us if he could continue working on the platform as a volunteer . Together with a member of the university he continues to provide technological maintenance and development of the website to date . At the time of writing , the websites in both cities continue to be used regularly by supporters ( professionals and volunteers ) in their practice of offering support and in direct collaboration with migrants , e . g . when looking for language classes together , as well as by migrants directly . They continue to be maintained in both locations through a combination of professional and voluntary efforts and will continue be maintained for the foreseeable future . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 309 . Publication date : October 2021 . “What is the topic of the group , please ? ” 309 : 13 4 FINDINGS As mentioned above , our intention is not to cast doubt on the value of participation but to try to understand how outcomes may depend on rather more than ideological commitment . On the evidence of continued and regular use of the applications we designed , the project can be considered to be a success and , moreover , the outcomes we hoped for have been sustained well beyond the life of the project . Despite this , our prior assumptions , as suggested , were challenged by what unfolded , and equal and emancipatory participation in design significantly challenged . In the following section we present data about the reality of participation and collaboration in this context . We do so by rehearsing differences in motivation , power imbalances , conflicts between participants and the heterogeneous cultures involved . 4 . 1 Motive Throughout the project it became quite apparent that participants were drawn to the project for a variety of reasons and had different motives to participate . The group of volunteers we collaborated with in City A , where we started the project , had very clear goals with regards to the project , even before we began . As mentioned , they had previously attempted to create a website but had failed to create a satisfactory result for a variety of reasons including lack of technical prowess : “this idea with the platform came very early , it was very adventurous for us , no one knew how to do this , a group of us started , but it failed because it was completely voluntary : who creates content , structure , etc . ” Hans , a core member of the group told us . The website was supposed to gather and display the knowledge they had acquired through their work , such as the necessary steps to assist migrants to get their families safely to Germany , and make this knowledge available to other volunteers and migrants . They supported the proposal with a letter of intent . This sentence from the letter summarizes the situation “What is missing – which we have been debating for months – is a website that connects us all” . They had thus a clear , and very strong , idealistic interest in the project . Their idealistic motivation is illustrated by the experiences of a member of this volunteer group who frequently accompanied migrants to appointments with official institutions . He told us : “I had been to the BAMF 2 , I knew how the interviews worked , and all these abominations , [ . . . ] this was so unbelievable and degrading how they treated these people , this really emotionally grabbed me . ” Such motivations came out of what Hans described as a “volunteer scene” in the city and who displayed a fairly coherent consensus . Hans reflected on the events he organized for other volunteers : “to every event there were 40 , 50 , 60 people , all volunteers , young people . When I asked them ’Why are you doing this ? ’ they said ’this is a social change we want to take part in , we want to shape it . ’ . To some open meeting , he told us , more than 400 people showed up . Our goals , though similar in respect to providing knowledge and expertise , were different insofar as participation was an explicit agenda for us . Even so , for the core group of volunteers who sustained their interest ( though some dropped out ) , shared idealism provided more than sufficient ground for collaboration and participation , which we were able to sustain throughout the entire project and beyond . This , however , was very different in the evening group we organized to broaden engagement in our project . Over time it became clear that people attended for a variety of reasons : some came because they were interested in a participatory development of a helpful website . Some came because it provided an opportunity to write down and publish ideas about injustices experienced in the process of applying for asylum in Germany . Some came for company . Some came because the meetings provided an opportunity to practice their German language skills . Put simply , though levels of participation were often high , design work was not high on many agendas . This diversity 2 Bundesamt für Migration und Flüchtlinge – Federal Agency for Migration and Refugees Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 309 . Publication date : October 2021 . 309 : 14 Max Krüger et al . in interests overlapped with evolving participation . Over time the character of these weekly evening meetings as well as the members of the participant group changed considerably . Some people attended regularly , some infrequently , some left completely , but also new ones came – each with slightly different motives . To respond to the diverge of motivations , we engaged in a large variety of activities , at the suggestion of participants . In addition to participatory design activities , we visited a museum , theater plays , readings and a discussion about racism . We organised an art workshop , we made music together , and organised a concert where some of our participants performed , we went on a bicycle tour and ate ice cream , we invited experts on housing and tenant rights and experts on education for discussions and spent evenings in the park chatting . We often tried to use these shared experiences to spark further discussion within the group and tried to document parts of it in blogposts , to create FAQ sections on specific issues on the website based on questions that came up , and generally to inform design moves . The fact was , however , that it mainly reflected contributions from the volunteers and the research team’s designerly interests . One main goal of these activities was to make the time together joyful and interesting . Importantly , the sessions also provided opportunities to address practical challenges , such as answering questions about education in Germany or to practice the German language . As Hussain , a young man from Syria said once : “this group is right now my only opportunity to speak German in the entire week . ” The WhatsApp group served a similar purpose . It was also a place to ask questions and potentially find help for issues supposedly unrelated to the topic of developing a digital platform : migrant members in the group posed questions such as „Is it ok if I use a gas camping stove in my newly found flat , as I have no functioning regular stove in there ? “ and „I got this official letter – can someone explain to me , what this means ? “ and " Tomorrow I have to take this exam at the Jobcenter - does anyone have experience what to expect there ? “ or " The [ name of a public organisation responsible for matters of asylum ] has invited me to yet another interview – what does this mean ? " . The motives to participate amongst the migrants in the group were thus largely of a very practical nature : participation provided an opportunity to address specific pressing issues that they individually faced . Their interest could not be described as ideologically motivated . Participating in the design of the website was of little concern to most , albeit with exceptions : Umar for example , a young man who had arrived in Germany only months before , told us he has been politically active since coming to Europe in 2015 , raising his voice against deportation . Even though his own asylum status was insecure , he used our meetings to improve the language of a speech he had written for a large demonstration against deportation and published the speech on the website’s blog . In City B this situation was somewhat different . Here , we began the project with a loose coopera - tion with the local regional government , who had seen the results of the work already accomplished in city A . The two members of the local government we began the project with reached out to contacts at other institutions and organizations they regularly worked with and who were profes - sionally engaged in the care of the issues of migrants . Their professional approach was expressed in requests to make meetings concise and as short and effective as possible , in order to be able to convince their superiors that participation was valuable and keep them within working hours , or at least as close to working as hours as possible , to leave room for people whose engagement was voluntary . This was quite different from the group meetings in City A , where drinking tea and coffee together in the non - professional environment of a café and to talk sometimes until late , rather than to workshop within a specific timeframe had become the preferred mode of participation . These requests were not everyone’s liking and created conflict , which we will detail below . Over the first twelve months of starting the project in City B participation plummeted and we ceased to hold regular open meetings . Instead , we began to work closely with a few members of a local government institution who began to see an overlap with their task of collecting and providing information about educational opportunities . Here , a fruitful collaboration developed . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 309 . Publication date : October 2021 . “What is the topic of the group , please ? ” 309 : 15 They had their own professional partners in other institutions and tried to design the website in such a way , that it would also become a resource to these partners , frequently advertising the site in meetings . Our collaboration and the efforts of these two participants ultimately resulted in the development of a constellation of actors that still sustains the website . 4 . 2 Power At their core , participatory design efforts are concerned with sharing power in design decisions [ 18 ] . In our project however pre - existing power imbalances between participants made participation in the project troublesome . 4 . 2 . 1 Power as Ownership . Power as ‘ownership’ was one feature of this . In City A , there were worries amongst the volunteers that we would “take away” the website from them . Their perception was that the power to make decisions regarding the website would be appropriated by us and , as a consequence , they were hesitant to collaborate . Considerable reassurance was necessary before they agreed to allow ‘shared’ choices to be made . This was far from the only instance in which power imbalances limited participation . Because of the urgency the volunteer group felt , the website was named , a URL was registered , and first content was developed in a short time without the inclusion of migrants into the design team . These early decisions were difficult to overcome . The URL included the German word for “refugee” , a term which - as we learned later - was resisted by many of those to whom it was applied . The website was quickly publicized by the volunteers ( who were very well connected in the city ) , this URL was established , and therefore difficult to change . Even though we voiced the concerns of migrants , the volunteers preferred to stick to the term for the reason that it describes “what the website is about” and they were worried others would not understand the focus of the work . Subsequently ( after some years ) , however , the some of the participants , together with the NGO that took on responsibility , are in the process of finding another , alternative title and URL . 4 . 2 . 2 Power as Decision - Making . The commitment of the volunteers in city A to take on stewardship of the website actually gave them considerable power in design decisions . Nevertheless , their worries about the power we as researchers and designers and official coordinators of the project held were not completely unfounded . By attempting to open up participation and establishing a group that expressly sought to include migrants we transferred some decision - making power to this second group . Even though we tried to merge the groups , the reluctance of the volunteers meant that it became our duty to carry information between the two groups and mediate decisions – a powerful position . In City A , access to the back end of the technical infrastructure and admin rights was given to the developer company , some volunteers , the researchers and other members of the group who participated regularly and actually had interest in having access ( many did not ) . We implemented a process by which any participant could get editorial rights if they desired . However , as project administrators we were also the main contact point for the developers . Our ‘mediating’ potential here , again , put us in a powerful position , as it was up to us to ensure that such decisions were communicated as faithfully as possible . Given that not everything could be planned ahead , questions appeared in meetings with the developers and ad hoc decisions needed to be made . 4 . 2 . 3 Power as Knowledge . Furthermore , the developers themselves held considerable power due to specific technical knowledge no one else in the design team possessed – our admin rights only got us so far when it came to specific technical implementations . Organizing participation in two , geographically remote cities further complicated this , as we also needed to carry knowledge and decisions between the two locations . Many of the topics our tools were meant to address involved complex legal situations and complex constellations of institutional involvement . A statement from Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 309 . Publication date : October 2021 . 309 : 16 Max Krüger et al . Werner , a member of the City A’s administration , illustrates this : “When a refugee approaches the city with a specific issue it is very common in our city that the person says : ’that is not my business , please go to ABC’ . I can even say this from my own experience , that I have gone from office to office looking for the right answer to a problem that a refugee I am working with has . ” A statement from volunteer Hans about his experiences when supporting an unaccompanied minor in helping his family to get to Germany supports this : “You cannot imagine what this was like , this was unbelievable , I have all my experiences from this . I made it , but with great great luck ! I had to go to all the institutions , and because I was so well connected , I received tips here and there on what to do next , where to go . ” This statement demonstrates the complex distribution of knowledge that pertained , but also that certain factors influence access to it : Hans could only gain access to certain information because he was very well connected . Because several of the volunteers had accompanied many migrants to offices and institutions , they had gathered significant knowledge about administrative processes , steps and institutions involved , and sometimes they had a better overview than even administrators . 4 . 2 . 4 Power as Social Status . The social and legal position of participants was often critical . Umar for example , who had written and published the speech on our website , at a later point expressed regret : he had also shared the speech via his own website and Facebook page . Weeks later , his Facebook page was blocked . He was certain that this happened because he had shared the speech , in which he expressed criticism towards the EU . “It was against the rules of Europe” he said , and refused to write another text , even though he previously had been politically active . For him , of course , this was about far more than access to Facebook . Given that he was involved in a legal case about his asylum , he now worried that his critical perspective would have a negative impact on this process . Ibrahim from Syria found himself in a similar situation . One day a discussion about the situation in Syria came up in the group , a topic which we only discussed very rarely , for good reasons . In this instance , Ibrahim told us , that he does not want to talk about politics anymore , ever again . Engaging in politics , talking about it , destroyed his group of friends in Syria he said , created a rift between supporters and opponents of the Asad regime and ended in violence . He said : “Politics is not a good topic . My German is not good . I do not know my way around here , I do not want to hurt anybody . How can I say my opinion and be sure that my words do not hurt anybody ? ” Several aspects influenced his unwillingness to participate in this discussion : traumatic experience , language skills , his fear the reaction of the people around him and his perceived inexperience , and an inability to anticipate the reaction of his German companions . 4 . 2 . 5 Power as Presence . An oddly relevant inequality lies in availability and the ability to be present . Often people apologized that they would not be able to participate as they had other matters to attend to : German classes , educational measures prescribed the job center or simply that they were too tired from such engagements . For some of our volunteer participants time was less of an issue , as they were in a more stable situation , did not worry about employment or were even retired and therefore more flexible with their time . An important observation about the relationship between volunteers and migrants was made by Hans towards the end of the funded project time , when he reflected on the participation in the project and the difficulties of merging the two groups . He said “Of course I have contact with refugees , but that is different , that was always a hierarchical relationship : I worry for you , I take care of you , but an encounter on eye - level , in which we are doing something together , that did not exist . [ . . . ] My view was very narrow , luckily we worked on this together , broadening it , we discussed it in the process” . Availability , that is , was initially determined in a very one - sided way and a more democratic collaboration required considerable adjustment . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 309 . Publication date : October 2021 . “What is the topic of the group , please ? ” 309 : 17 4 . 3 Conflict Power and conflict are , of course , intimately connected . Even so , conflicts can be thought of as being , for the most part , overt . This became apparent early on , when establishing cooperation with the volunteer group . The fact that this website had been on their mind already for a considerable time meant that they were hoping for , and expecting , results quickly . We did not feel the same urgency , as the project was planned for three years . Hans reflected on his impatience in the early days “I was naive , thinking that this will be finished very quickly [ . . . ] I always wanted to be finished in the next four days , thinking the refugees are here NOW , they need this information NOW” . The volunteers , understandably , wanted to display their information in a simple , static , fashion . They knew little about , and initially cwere less interested in , interactive tools . Perhaps as a result , volunteers saw no need for investment in a collaborative effort that involved migrants . For our main contact person , Hans , only volunteers needed to be involved , along with additional expertise from professionals whenever their domain knowledge was required . Hans initially also expected the website to be exclusively for newly arriving migrants from Syria , Iran , Iraq , Afghanistan and other war - torn countries , but not from Eastern European countries , even though many former inhabitants of Eastern Europe live in this particular city , facing similar challenges . On both points , we disagreed : we wanted to involve migrants from the beginning and also imagined this website to directly address people that might not have fled from conflict , but who face similar challenges in Germany , including people who had come from eastern European countries or ( northern ) Africa . This disagreement created some conflict in the group , and slight level of mistrust . We were able to resolve the disagreement about target groups by showing that only few adjustments would need to be made to solve issues for several groups . To broaden participation , we began a second group , as described earlier . Later on , Hans regretted his initial position : “self - critically I have to say that refugees were not previously involved anywhere [ . . . ] This is still a problem today , and you are the most progressive , that you have contact with refugees and work with them . ” The differences in motives for participation also led to conflicts . Difficulties in bringing the two groups in City A together illustrate this . The city hall group , who saw the sessions as “work - meetings” , in contrast to the more relaxed atmosphere of a café and the after work - hours’ meeting times . A similar dilemma played out in the WhatsApp group . Perhaps reflecting a more ‘bureaucratic’ attitude , one official , who had joined the group very recently , reprimanded a participant from Afghanistan who had asked a question about tenant rights , for not ‘staying on topic’ , to which a person from Syria , who had been a member for a long time replied : “What is the topic of the group , please ? ” There were also explicit disagreements within the volunteer group , especially with regards to the sustainability of the efforts . As mentioned previously , over a year into the project , Hans’ colleagues from the volunteer network that had joined us early on , decided against forming an association . As Hans told us in a later conversation : “At the end several members of the network said that this platform is not so important to them , which hit me very hard , because with that it was declared to be my personal hobby [ . . . ] they did not identify with the page . My colleague wanted to do his own site , Susanne ( another member of the network ) was at some point overwhelmed , and then left completely , so that in the end they detached themselves from this” . But the perhaps most crucial and fundamental conflict was the resistance and hesitation of migrants to take on the role of " refugees " in the group , whenever we discussed challenges , topics and issues of migration and arriving . This happened more than once , for example when volunteers and professionals , German and non - German , encouraged migrants to use the website as a platform to write and publish their experiences of coming to Germany and of settling here : “we want you to tell your point of view there ! ” , as Timo , a German volunteer , said during a meeting . This sparked a Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 309 . Publication date : October 2021 . 309 : 18 Max Krüger et al . debate about being a refugee : several members of the group said that this is a term they do not like , and many made it clear that this was a status they were eager to transcend . While there was nothing wrong with the term " refugee " itself , it however constantly reduced them to the status of refugee and made them other . The topic of challenges migrants experience in Germany and specifically where our project was located were the core of our design work , but also the core of the work of volunteers . It was impossible to avoid the topic entirely , even if we tried to consciously avoid it and discussed how we want to interact as a group . A year later , the debate erupted again . On that specific date we had been discussing challenges of finding housing . At one point , Mustafa , a young Syrian man got up and said : “I do not want that we talk about the challenges of ‘the refugees’ – we are we , we are all of us , more than refugees” . Waseem , another young man from Syria , agreed with him . It is certainly ( and regretfully ) the case that our migrants were much more aware of the ‘othering’ process entailed in such topics than we were . The problem never quite went away , since caring about the problems and trying to overcome them was at the core of the activities of the volunteer participants , as well as of our design project . 4 . 4 Culture Our project saw very different groups of people coming together , some forming a very coherent unity with a stable structure , others much more loosely connected and with very different cultures and backgrounds . The volunteer group , early on , had a very strong , unified , identity , with - in their view - having unique expertise to fight for the needs and rights of new arrivals . They saw themselves as , for the most part , in opposition to what they perceived as an institutional regime and were proud of the fact that they existed outside of it . Professionals , in contrast , typically work within institutional frameworks and are much more bound by legal structures , financial and other binding regulations . Much more loosely connected were the people who had arrived as precarious migrants . They came from different countries , bringing different cultures , languages , histories , perspectives , beliefs , conflicts . The one uniting element was their experience of forced migration – a status , which for the most part , they wanted to leave behind them as quickly as possible . In many other significant ways the migrants engaged in our project were not a coherent community , and at times significantly divided , as an example makes clear : several months after we had started the evening group in City A , we noticed that a young Syrian Kurdish man no longer attended . This , it turned out , was because another Syrian Arabic participant had made a condescending remark about Kurdish people – in Arabic , without us noticing . We managed to solve the issue by addressing it in the group , with due care , but the false assumption of coherence on our part was sometimes problematic . These different degrees of connection within the groups determined the course of events in various ways . Most visibly this played out in the choice of meeting locations : the project started conducting its meetings in the very formal and ‘important’ atmosphere of the city hall ; a separate location was chosen later on for the evening group that allowed more social interactions and had a less work - meeting - like atmosphere . Instead of sitting around a table on office chairs we sat on couches . We moved from an old factory remodeled as event space to the office of an NGO that offered us to use their space for free to finally a Turkish café . This had quite a dramatic effect . The first evening we spent at the café , Hassan , an architect from Iran , exclaimed : “this is really nice , can we come here more often ? ” . The café prompted a much more relaxed atmosphere , and one where discussion rather than the ‘order of the day’ became normalized . It was in this space that we also finally managed to bring the two groups together , as members of the morning city hall group began to attend the evening meetings . Nevertheless , the different cultures played out differently in the two cities . In the eyes of officials in City B , meetings should ideally be short and concise , not too late and in a professional environment and manner – very different from the café which Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 309 . Publication date : October 2021 . “What is the topic of the group , please ? ” 309 : 19 we had found to be pleasant and attractive in City A . In the latter , meetings involved much more wide - ranging , and constructive , debate and sharing of experiences . A constant hurdle accompanying our project activity in City B in particular was a persistent skepticism amongst participants about the project’s sustainability , again reflecting a ‘job of work’ attitude among professional participants . It is all the more remarkable then , and after the many tribulations that we describe above , that the project has been sustained well beyond its funded lifespan . We discuss the reasons for this below . 5 DISCUSSION As our experiences above make clear , participation in our project , as we had imagined it , became severely challenged during the course of the project due to a variety of factors . The account , however , also exhibits a curious discrepancy between the process and the outcome in the form of two functioning websites . The process did not evolve as expected , and participation by diverse stakeholders in the design of the tools was challenged throughout the entire process . Nevertheless , a useful set of artefacts was designed and implemented and remains in constant use , in both cities . The websites continue to be maintained through voluntary and professional efforts , with various groups and individuals continuing to show commitment . By engaging a lens of care [ 115 ] , we will now reflect further on the challenges and how engaging in matters of care [ 32 , 35 ] can at the same time work independently of participation and its democratic goals . Paying attention to the different ways in which people care also allows us to understand the discrepancy between process and resulting artefacts . We believe this constitutes a cautionary tale for participatory practitioners attempting to engage with similar matters of care . As we have mentioned above , when we decided on engaging a co - design process and planning the project , we made several assumptions . Our findings show how various factors we encountered during the process challenged these assumptions , and ultimately resulted in a design process that was less participatory than what was envisaged . We will begin the discussion by reflecting on these assumptions and how they came to be challenged : 1 . Volunteers and migrants have largely the same goals with regards to which problems are worth addressing and how they should be addressed . The three different groups actually demonstrated , broadly speaking , three different sets of motivations . For professionals , their engagement was in large part a ‘job of work’ , with some idealistic overlay . For volunteers , idealism spoke loudly and consisted in the strong desire to help a disprivileged group , a motivation which was very similar to our own . Our migrant participants had a much more pragmatic attitude , being largely concerned with how they might make progress in the host country . The design work tried to address these problems in the abstract , mediated by the digital tools we were designing , while migrant participants looked for ways to solve their problems very concretely for themselves : the meetings provided a way , for instance , to practice a language , and they were an opportunity to ask about official letters one received or to meet job advisors and to make and strengthen social contacts . Our mistake , in short , was to presume that the design of supportive technologies was a common objective . The different motivations can all be understood as care around the challenges faced by migrants , albeit in a variety of forms . Whereas volunteers , professionals and we as researchers and designers cared for migrants , migrants cared about the specific practical challenges and problems they faced in their efforts to create a new home for themselves in Germany . Identifying earlier exactly what it is that participants cared about or for would have clarified much of the challenges we faced and helped us resolve them in the design process . At the same time , caring for precarious migrants was something different and , quite independently of participatory objectives , explains the persistence of the technology in use . The notion of caring then , in two distinct senses , had two different impacts . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 309 . Publication date : October 2021 . 309 : 20 Max Krüger et al . This difference also provides a small challenge to ladder - like models [ 9 ] in which more participa - tion is presented as better . At least more participation in technology design , as we had envisioned it , did not seem to be of great interest to our migrant participants . 2 . Us designer / researchers and volunteers have similar goals and a shared understanding of the importance of participation and co - design . The designer - researchers and volunteers agreed in principle on the need to support migrants through the design of technology , but did not share a common vision of how this was to be done . The indifference , at the outset , of some of the volunteers to participatory principles played out as initial indifference to sophisticated interactive tools . This was further complicated by differences between the groups regarding how they preferred to engage with each other , which made it difficult to create a shared space where decisions regarding design are made together and power could be equally shared . The value placed by volunteers on inclusion nevertheless did change towards the end of the project , as Hans ( above ) made clear . Overall , however , differences in goals and assumptions about practice either led to separation as in City A and the need to carry out design decisions while mediating two contexts , or to the exclusion of specific forms of participation as in City B . This reveals a tension between care and participation . Even though the volunteers and profes - sionals ( and us ) cared for precarious migrants , which could be understood as caring with as Tronto puts it [ 116 ] , that care is not necessarily democratic . As Tronto has warned , relationships between caregivers and - receivers can easily become unequal and hierarchical , which to a certain extent was the case here . Migrant participants , however , by refusing to assume the role of " refugees " , also refused this position of care - receivers and their interests repeatedly ( and understandably ) mediated the process . Care , when it becomes undemocratic , is not always consistent with participation in design or elsewhere . 3 . Migrants are one or more distinct communities with shared goals . Several factors throughout the project made it clear that migrants are not a community in any useful sense of the term . While many of the challenges people who are new in the country face are similar , this is the extent of what connects them . Migrants , as we experienced it , are a very diverse group of people who , with good reason , actually refuse to be a community as the discussions about the term “refugee” made clear . We falsely assumed that the similar challenges , a shared matter of concern [ 71 ] , would provide sufficient ground for interest in the participation of the design process . Furthermore , our participant group changed over time . While several volunteers and professionals were involved for a substantial amount of time throughout the project , only very few migrants engaged for similar amounts of time , either attending meetings regularly , but for a shorter period of time , or attending irregularly , sometimes not coming for weeks or months . Arnstein [ 9 ] already self - critically warned of such an oversimplification of politics and power dynamics existing within groups . However , without the commonalities we associate with the term community on the side of the migrant participants , there was no stance that could be said to represent community interests . This was in contract to the volunteers and professional supporters in both cities , whose shared idealism and interest in caring for was more obviously communal . 4 . Migrants have an intrinsic interest in the participation in a design project that aims to develop technological applications that address problems they face . Participation in design is able to provide value . Even though engaging in design does not directly address the practical problems people might face , we assumed that precarious migrants would be able to gain some benefit from doing so , as the tools to be developed would provide avenues to address the practical challenges they face and the possibility to determine how they should be solved . We failed to recognize that our longer - term Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 309 . Publication date : October 2021 . “What is the topic of the group , please ? ” 309 : 21 design objectives were at some distance from the pressing , day - to - day problems faced by our target group . In City A , what the migrant participants cared about were the pressing , individual , challenges they faced . They cared appreciably less for the abstract benefits design might bring . However , this care about specific practical challenges and the openness of the engagements in the meetings enabled an appropriation of the project and of participation itself . This resulted in activities such as meetings with educational advisors , which addressed practical challenges in a more direct manner , and provided joyful shared activities such as bike rides , eating ice cream or seeing a play in a theater . Their participation in the evolution of a design rationale may not have been purposeful , but shared experiences nevertheless influenced the design of the websites , as they helped us understand the practical challenges better . Cooke and Kothari asked whether participation is tyranny [ 30 ] , and Markus Miessen proclaimed , “Participation is war” [ 79 ] , both pointing to the potential of conflict in participatory processes , where different interests need to be combined , the inherent difficulty of doing so and the danger of cooptation and imposition of decisions , when the failure of participation is not realised . We do not share this somewhat polemical approach , and continue to believe in the potential value of participation , but the lessons , even so , have been salutary . Together with the fact that migration was and continues to be a contested issue , this conflict embodies what Latour termed a matter of concern [ 71 ] . Even though agonistic approaches to participatory design aim to create space for the contested nature of such matters of concern without necessarily resolving them , this assumes that participants meet on equal ground , an assumption which Kraff [ 67 ] and Björgvinsson [ 14 ] have already challenged , and which we also found was not the case in our project . It was , however , also a matter of care [ 32 , 35 ] in which participants were not just brought together around a shared concern , but in which all participants , including us as researcher - designers , were also entangled in at times unequal relations of care . Thus , by focusing on the relations and different forms of care that participants brought to our project we may begin to understand the discrepancy between process and outcome better . This difference in care about and care for , that we have observed above , is also analogous to the difference in motives we have elaborated above as well as the different forms participation took : work - like meetings and workshops to efficiently design a website versus relaxed and friendly meetings to talk without pressure of efficiency , that also provided an opportunity to ask questions about specific issues . These differences in care , on the one hand , made it difficult for migrants , volunteers and professionals to participate seamlessly in the design processes . On the other hand , the existence of care meant that ownership was taken and resources mobilized . It is important to recognize that , despite the differences we recount , it was care that drove and continues to motivate the use of the applications we ultimately designed , as well as their ongoing maintenance . In addition to the differences in caring for vs caring about precarious migrants , volunteers , professionals and researcher - designers were furthermore bound up in unequal relations of care [ 115 ] , as we have observed above , further problematizing participation in the project . Volunteers , professionals and activist - leaning academics as we were in this project , cared for migrants out of an idealism to “help” , whereas migrants care about their specific practical problems . Migrants are thus the object of care for volunteers and professionals and continued to be so in the context of this project . As Joan Tronto pointed out in her treatise on the political ethics of care , relations of care involve the potential for conflict as care givers and care receivers can have different ideas about how care needs are best met . Furthermore , care relations might be characterized by a certain maternalism / paternalism . Care - givers might come to see themselves as more capable to assess and meet needs of care receivers . The inequality of such relationships becomes more profound if care - giving becomes tied to a sense of duty and importance , which was certainly the case here Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 309 . Publication date : October 2021 . 309 : 22 Max Krüger et al . [ 115 ] . As a result , volunteers and other involved supporters had a stronger influence on the design outcome . Tronto further points out that such relations can very easily lead to the development of undemocratic forms of care , which likely manifested in our project to a certain extent , undermining the very goal of cooperative and participatory design projects to support democracy . Although existing work mentioned above , such as Grönvall and Kyng [ 52 ] or Heeks [ 56 ] do not explicitly engage the concept of care in their analysis , our own case is somewhat reminiscent of the difficulties they encountered in their own participatory projects , where for example the diverging interests and unequal power distribution between the care - receiving elderly at home and their care - givers such as family members and physiotherapists challenged equal participation in the process [ 52 , 53 ] . The issue of care was further problematized by Michelle Murphy [ 85 ] . They observed , that matters of care have already become located in racialised , economic or postcolonial contexts , and that therefore " capital and empire can operate through acts of affection and care " [ 85 , page 722 ] . This is also the case in our context . Caring for migrants that have left their homes due , at least partially , to the workings of " empire and capital " and who face deeply unequal conditions for progress in the often hostile environment of their host country is an act of affection in a racialised and ( post ) - colonial context , caried out by volunteers , professional supporters and researcher - designers in much more privileged positions . Even though these acts of care aim to overcome these unequal relationships they also reproduce them , as the refusal to take on the role of " refugee " on behalf of some of our participants make clear . By engaging with a politically contested issue , as we have attempted here , PD projects come to embody the caring with Tronto described in later works [ 116 ] , a care for citizens and democracy that transcends care for specific other individuals . Even though participation aims to enable this care for democracy , unequal relationships of care between participants within such design settings provide hurdles to these very aims . Trying to practice care , whether that means volunteering or designing a website , is thus also a potentially problematic issue . Care and relations of giving and receiving care thus partially hindered the emergence of a democratic participatory design process as we had imagined and planned . Employing a lens of care thus reveals challenges to participation’s democratic aims , adding to critical perspectives on participation in design as for example exhibited by Harrington [ 55 ] , Kraff [ 67 ] and even Callon [ 24 ] . At the same time , a critique of the process and the difficulties of participation are not sufficient to understand the process as described above . While the undemocratic forms of care as exhibited by volunteers , professionals and to certain extend us as coordinators might be reminiscent of what has elsewhere be called " white saviourism " [ 76 , 96 ] , there is a possible answer , which is to ask what the practical alternatives might be , given precisely the inequalities we have discussed above . Asymmetries of knowledge and power we would argue , leave those who ‘care about’ with few alternatives . As many of the difficulties precarious migrants face in Germany are created by policy as well as frequent hostility within official institutions they depend on , the support of volunteers takes on a crucial role , and many of the volunteers were proud to operate outside of government or even NGO structures , which allowed them to remain in opposition . Malkki [ 75 ] has highlighted the neediness of humanitarian helpers , which is mirrored in some of the volunteers we encountered , who were also needy to help . While a focus on their own neediness and this relationship is honest and helpful to see the whole picture , it does not necessarily diminish the importance of their care . It does , however , point out areas where their care can be improved . Perhaps more critically , care that was at times highly problematic , was also a crucial factor . This is often true for the support that volunteers and professionals provide outside of our design project , but it also provided the foundation for the resulting artefacts . The website and its applications continue to be regularly used and are maintained almost entirely by volunteers and professional supporters , by now ( April 2021 ) for more than a year since the project officially ended in October Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 309 . Publication date : October 2021 . “What is the topic of the group , please ? ” 309 : 23 2019 ( we have written elsewhere about this ongoing maintenance , see [ 69 ] ) . It was this continuity of care which is responsible for the ongoing maintenance of the tools developed in the process . While the care given was certainly problematic in several contexts , it was also sincere , effective and helpful . The platform has become an effective resource as a guide to people when navigating their way through complex rules and regulations and , moreover , for publishing critical statements about new laws aiming to restrict the rights or possibilities of migrants , promoting critical demonstrations and organisations or organizing public meetings . 6 CONCLUSION AND LESSONS FOR PARTICIPATORY PRACTITIONERS In our account above we have reflected on a three - year long participatory design project , involving a complex and evolving cast of stakeholders , including precarious migrants and volunteer or professional supporters of migrants . We have aimed to show how participation within our project became challenging , as a result of unequal relations of care between the different stakeholders . At the same time , the care practices of volunteers and professional supporters of precarious migrants significantly contributed to developing the envisioned technological artefacts as well as their ongoing use and maintenance by the same participants . As participatory design projects leave the industrial work environments and engage with complex political issues in other domains of social life , they often aim to provide what Joan Tronto has termed caring with , a care for citizens and democracy that transcends individual care relationships [ 116 ] . In a climate in which care for other people , including care for migrants in mortal danger in the Mediterranean Sea [ 25 ] , becomes increasingly challenged and marginalised [ 29 ] , PD projects aiming to engage in such matters of care can provide important support , as we have attempted with the project presented in this paper . Yet , as our account also makes clear , this is not an unproblematic project . Participation is often connected to feelings of " making the world better " [ 66 ] , where uncritically engaging might disguise unequal and undemocratic relationships , thereby undermining participation’s emancipatory aims , and can result in " too much democracy in all the wrong places " [ 66 ] , recreating the very conditions one set out to overcome . This provides a problem for ladder - like conceptualisations of care [ 9 ] , which assume more participation as always better . Nevertheless , while care might prove problematic for participatory aims , as it did for us , it is also a vital and crucial resource that motivated some of our volunteer and professional participants to take a strong position in the project and led to sustained use and maintenance of the designed artefacts , at the time of writing for over a year after the official end of the project . The designed tools provide resources for migrants as well as the care practice of their supporters . Our findings thus point towards a tension between participation between care and participation in democratic design projects . How this tension can be resolved , however , is still unclear . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS First and foremost , we would like to thank our collaborators in both cities . We are honoured that you ever trusted us enough to collaborate with us and it was and continues to be a joy to work with you . We are also grateful to the colleagues in Locating Media for their immensely helpful , kind and encouraging comments and suggestions on earlier versions of this paper . Lastly , we would like to thank our reviewers . Their comments were thorough , critical and supportive and everything we could have wanted from a review . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Konstantin Aal , Anne Weibert , Reem Talhouk , Vasilis Vlachokyriakos , Karen Fisher , and Volker Wulf . 2018 . Refugees & Technology : Determining the Role of HCI Research . In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM Conference on Supporting Groupwork . 362 – 364 . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 309 . Publication date : October 2021 . 309 : 24 Max Krüger et al . [ 2 ] Victoria Abou - Khalil , Samar Helou , Brendan Flanagan , Niels Pinkwart , and Hiroaki Ogata . 2019 . Language Learning Tool for Refugees . Languages 4 , 3 ( Sept . 2019 ) , 71 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 18452 / 20923 [ 3 ] Amanda Alencar . 2018 . Refugee Integration and Social Media : A Local and Experiential Perspective . Information , Communication & Society 21 , 11 ( Nov . 2018 ) , 1588 – 1603 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 1369118X . 2017 . 1340500 [ 4 ] Asam Almohamed , Arindam Dey , Jinglan Zhang , and Dhaval Vyas . 2019 . Extended Reality for Refugees : Pragmatic Ideas through Ethnographic Research with Refugees in Australia . In 2019 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality Adjunct ( ISMAR - Adjunct ) . IEEE , Beijing , China , 422 – 425 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / ISMAR - Adjunct . 2019 . 00046 [ 5 ] Asam Almohamed and Dhaval Vyas . 2016 . Vulnerability of Displacement : Challenges for Integrating Refugees and Asylum Seekers in Host Communities . ACM Press , 125 – 134 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3010915 . 3010948 [ 6 ] Asam Almohamed and Dhaval Vyas . 2019 . Rebuilding Social Capital in Refugees and Asylum Seekers . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction 26 , 6 ( Dec . 2019 ) , 1 – 30 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3364996 [ 7 ] Asam Almohamed , Dhaval Vyas , and Jinglan Zhang . 2018 . Designing for Refugees : Insights from Design Workshop . In Proceedings of the 30th Australian Conference on Computer - Human Interaction - OzCHI ’18 . ACM Press , Melbourne , Australia , 92 – 96 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3292147 . 3292196 [ 8 ] Lars Bo Andersen , Peter Danholt , Kim Halskov , Nicolai Brodersen Hansen , and Peter Lauritsen . 2015 . Participation as a Matter of Concern in Participatory Design . CoDesign 11 , 3 - 4 ( Oct . 2015 ) , 250 – 261 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15710882 . 2015 . 1081246 [ 9 ] Sherry R . Arnstein . 1969 . A Ladder Of Citizen Participation . Journal of the American Institute of Planners 35 , 4 ( July 1969 ) , 216 – 224 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 01944366908977225 [ 10 ] MariamAsad . 2019 . PrefigurativeDesignasaMethodforResearchJustice . ProceedingsoftheACMonHuman - Computer Interaction 3 , CSCW ( Nov . 2019 ) , 200 : 1 – 200 : 18 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359302 [ 11 ] Jennifer Baranoff , R . Israel Gonzales , Jay Liu , Heidi Yang , and Jimin Zheng . 2015 . Lantern : Empowering Refugees Through Community - Generated Guidance Using Near Field Communication . ACM Press , 7 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702613 . 2726950 [ 12 ] Wolmet Barendregt , Peter Börjesson , Eva Eriksson , Olof Torgersson , Tilde Bekker , and Helle Marie Skovbjerg . 2018 . Modelling the Roles of Designers and Teaching Staff When Doing Participatory Design with Children in Special Education . In Proceedings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference : Full Papers - Volume 1 ( PDC ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , Hasselt and Genk , Belgium , 1 – 11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3210586 . 3210589 [ 13 ] Gro Bjerknes , Pelle Ehn , Morten Kyng , and Kristen Nygaard . 1987 . Computers and Democracy : A Scandinavian Challenge . Gower Pub Co . [ 14 ] E Björgvinsson . 2017 . Managing Collaborative Critique in Times of Financialisation Capitalism . Parse Journal Issue # 5 Management 5 ( 2017 ) , 91 – 111 . [ 15 ] Erling Björgvinsson , Pelle Ehn , and Per - Anders Hillgren . 2010 . Participatory Design and Democratizing Innovation . In Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory Design Conference . ACM , 41 – 50 . [ 16 ] Erling Björgvinsson , Pelle Ehn , and Per - Anders Hillgren . 2012 . Agonistic Participatory Design : Working with Marginalised Social Movements . CoDesign 8 , 2 - 3 ( June 2012 ) , 127 – 144 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15710882 . 2012 . 672577 [ 17 ] Susanne Bødker . 1987 . A Utopian Experience : On Design of Powerful Computer - Based Tools for Skilled Graphic Workers . Computers and Democracy - a Scandinavian Challenge ( 1987 ) , 251 – 278 . [ 18 ] Tone Bratteteig and Ina Wagner . 2012 . Disentangling Power and Decision - Making in Participatory Design . In Proceedings of the 12th Participatory Design Conference on Research Papers : Volume 1 - PDC ’12 . ACM Press , Roskilde , Denmark , 41 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2347635 . 2347642 [ 19 ] Tone Bratteteig and Ina Wagner . 2014 . Design Decisions and the Sharing of Power in PD . In Proceedings of the 13th Participatory Design Conference on Short Papers , Industry Cases , Workshop Descriptions , Doctoral Consortium Papers , and Keynote Abstracts - PDC ’14 - Volume 2 . ACM Press , Windhoek , Namibia , 29 – 32 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2662155 . 2662192 [ 20 ] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke . 2006 . Using Thematic Analysis in Psychology . Qualitative Research in Psychology 3 , 2 ( Jan . 2006 ) , 77 – 101 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1191 / 1478088706qp063oa [ 21 ] Alice V . Brown and Jaz Hee - jeong Choi . 2018 . Refugee and the Post - Trauma Journeys in the Fuzzy Front End of Co - Creative Practices . In Proceedings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference on Full Papers - PDC ’18 . ACM Press , Hasselt and Genk , Belgium , 1 – 11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3210586 . 3210598 [ 22 ] Deana Brown and Rebecca E . Grinter . 2016 . Designing for Transient Use : A Human - in - the - Loop Translation Platform for Refugees . ACM Press , 321 – 330 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858230 [ 23 ] Bundesministerium für Familie , Senioren , Frauen und Jugend . 2017 . Engagement in der Flüchtlingshilfe . Technical Report . 63 pages . [ 24 ] Michel Callon . 1984 . Some Elements of a Sociology of Translation : Domestication of the Scallops and the Fishermen of St Brieuc Bay . The Sociological Review 32 , 1 _ suppl ( May 1984 ) , 196 – 233 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 954X . 1984 . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 309 . Publication date : October 2021 . “What is the topic of the group , please ? ” 309 : 25 tb00113 . x [ 25 ] Pirate Care . 2019 . Pirate Care , a Syllabus . https : / / syllabus . pirate . care / . [ 26 ] John M . Carroll and Mary Beth Rosson . 2007 . Participatory Design in Community Informatics . Design Studies 28 , 3 ( May 2007 ) , 243 – 261 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2007 . 02 . 007 [ 27 ] Lizzie Coles - Kemp and Rikke Bjerg Jensen . 2019 . Accessing a New Land : Designing for a Social Conceptualisation of Access . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’19 . ACM Press , Glasgow , Scotland Uk , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300411 [ 28 ] Lizzie Coles - Kemp , Rikke Bjerg Jensen , and Reem Talhouk . 2018 . In a New Land : Mobile Phones , Amplified Pressures and Reduced Capabilities . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 584 : 1 – 584 : 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3174158 [ 29 ] The Care Collective and Inc Recorded Books . 2020 . The Care Manifesto . The Politics of Interdependence . Verso , S . l . [ 30 ] Bill Cooke , Professor Bill Cooke , and Uma Kothari . 2001 . Participation : The New Tyranny ? Zed Books . [ 31 ] Sasha Costanza - Chock . 2020 . Design Justice : Community - Led Practices to Build the Worlds We Need . MIT Press . [ 32 ] Maria Puig de la Bellacasa . 2011 . Matters of Care in Technoscience : Assembling Neglected Things . Social Studies of Science 41 , 1 ( Feb . 2011 ) , 85 – 106 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0306312710380301 [ 33 ] María Puig de la Bellacasa . 2012 . ‘Nothing Comes Without Its World’ : Thinking with Care . The Sociological Review 60 , 2 ( May 2012 ) , 197 – 216 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 954X . 2012 . 02070 . x [ 34 ] Maria Puig de la Bellacasa . 2015 . Making Time for Soil : Technoscientific Futurity and the Pace of Care . Social Studies of Science 45 , 5 ( Oct . 2015 ) , 691 – 716 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0306312715599851 [ 35 ] María Puig de la Bellacasa . 2017 . Matters of Care : Speculative Ethics in More than Human Worlds . Number 41 in Posthumanities . University of Minnesota Press , Minneapolis . [ 36 ] Andy Dearden , Haider Rizvi , Rogerio dePaula , Cecilia Oyugi , and Heike Winschiers - Theophilus . 2008 . Participatory Design and International Development . In Proceedings of the Tenth Anniversary Conference on Participatory Design 2008 ( PDC ’08 ) . Indiana University , Bloomington , Indiana , 293 – 294 . [ 37 ] Rianne Dekker , Godfried Engbersen , Jeanine Klaver , and Hanna Vonk . 2018 . Smart Refugees : How Syrian Asy - lum Migrants Use Social Media Information in Migration Decision - Making . Social Media + Society 4 , 1 ( 2018 ) , 2056305118764439 . [ 38 ] Chiara Del Gaudio , Alfredo Jefferson de Oliveira , and Carlo Franzato . 2014 . The Influence of Local Powers on Participatory Design Processes in Marginalized Conflict Areas . In Proceedings of the 13th Participatory Design Con - ference : Research Papers - Volume 1 ( PDC ’14 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , Windhoek , Namibia , 131 – 139 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2661435 . 2661440 [ 39 ] Catherine D’Ignazio , Alexis Hope , Becky Michelson , Robyn Churchill , and Ethan Zuckerman . 2016 . A Feminist HCI Approach to Designing Postpartum Technologies : " When I First Saw a Breast Pump I Was Wondering If It Was a Joke " . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , San Jose , California , USA , 2612 – 2622 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858460 [ 40 ] Ana Maria Bustamante Duarte . 2018 . Participation & ( Re ) Settlement : Envisioning Mobile Services with Young Forced Migrants . ( Nov . 2018 ) . [ 41 ] Ana Maria Bustamante Duarte , Mehrnaz Ataei , Auriol Degbelo , Nina Brendel , and Christian Kray . 2019 . Safe Spaces in Participatory Design with Young Forced Migrants . CoDesign 0 , 0 ( Sept . 2019 ) , 1 – 23 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15710882 . 2019 . 1654523 [ 42 ] Ana Maria Bustamante Duarte , Nina Brendel , Auriol Degbelo , and Christian Kray . 2018 . Participatory Design and Participatory Research : An HCI Case Study with Young Forced Migrants . ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . 25 , 1 ( Feb . 2018 ) , 3 : 1 – 3 : 39 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3145472 [ 43 ] Ana Maria Bustamante Duarte , Auriol Degbelo , and Christian Kray . 2018 . Exploring Forced Migrants ( Re ) Settlement & the Role of Digital Services . ( 2018 ) , 21 . [ 44 ] Michaelanne Dye , David Nemer , Neha Kumar , and Amy S . Bruckman . 2019 . If It Rains , Ask Grandma to Disconnect the Nano : Maintenance & Care in Havana’s StreetNet . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 3 , CSCW ( Nov . 2019 ) , 1 – 27 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359289 [ 45 ] Pelle Ehn . 1988 . Work - Oriented Design of Computer Artifacts . PhD Thesis . Arbetslivscentrum . [ 46 ] Pelle Ehn , Ignacio Farías , Technical University of Munich , Tomás Sánchez Criado , and Technical University of Munich . 2018 . On the Possibility of Socialist - Democratic Design Things : Interview with Pelle Ehn . Interviewers : I . Farías & T . Sánchez Criado . Revista Diseña 12 ( Jan . 2018 ) , 52 – 69 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7764 / disena . 12 . 52 - 69 [ 47 ] Berenice Fisher and Joan Tronto . 1990 . Toward a Feminist Theory of Caring . In Circles of Care : Work and Identity in Women’s Lives , Emily K . Abel and Margaret K . Nelson ( Eds . ) . SUNY Press , 35 – 62 . [ 48 ] Michel Foucault and Colin Gordon . 1980 . Power / Knowledge : Selected Interviews and Other Writings , 1972 - 1977 ( 1st american ed ed . ) . Pantheon Books , New York . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 309 . Publication date : October 2021 . 309 : 26 Max Krüger et al . [ 49 ] Christopher Frauenberger , Katta Spiel , Laura Scheepmaker , and Irene Posch . 2019 . Nurturing Constructive Disagree - ment - Agonistic Design with Neurodiverse Children . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , Glasgow Scotland Uk , 1 – 11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300501 [ 50 ] Jonas Geuens , Luc Geurts , Thijs W Swinnen , René Westhovens , Maarten Van Mechelen , and Vero Vanden Abeele . 2018 . Turning Tables : A Structured Focus Group Method to Remediate Unequal Power during Participatory Design in Health Care . In Proceedings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference : Short Papers , Situated Actions , Workshops and Tutorial - Volume 2 ( PDC ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , Hasselt and Genk , Belgium , 1 – 5 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3210604 . 3210649 [ 51 ] Marie Gillespie , Souad Osseiran , and Margie Cheesman . 2018 . Syrian Refugees and the Digital Passage to Europe : Smartphone Infrastructures and Affordances . Social Media + Society 4 , 1 ( 2018 ) , 2056305118764440 . [ 52 ] Erik Grönvall and Morten Kyng . 2011 . Beyond Utopia : Reflections on Participatory Design in Home - Based Healthcare with Weak Users . In Proceedings of the 29th Annual European Conference on Cognitive Ergonomics - ECCE ’11 . ACM Press , Rostock , Germany , 189 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2074712 . 2074750 [ 53 ] Erik Grönvall and Morten Kyng . 2013 . On Participatory Design of Home - Based Healthcare . Cognition , Technology & Work 15 , 4 ( Nov . 2013 ) , 389 – 401 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10111 - 012 - 0226 - 7 [ 54 ] B . C . Groot , M . Vink , A . Haveman , M . Huberts , G . Schout , and T . A . Abma . 2019 . Ethics of Care in Participatory Health Research : Mutual Responsibility in Collaboration with Co - Researchers . Educational Action Research 27 , 2 ( March 2019 ) , 286 – 302 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09650792 . 2018 . 1450771 [ 55 ] Christina Harrington , Sheena Erete , and Anne Marie Piper . 2019 . Deconstructing Community - Based Collaborative Design : Towards More Equitable Participatory Design Engagements . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 3 , CSCW ( Nov . 2019 ) , 216 : 1 – 216 : 25 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359318 [ 56 ] Richard Heeks . 1999 . The Tyranny of Participation in Information Systems : Learning from Development Projects . Development Informatics working paper 4 ( 1999 ) . [ 57 ] Sabine Hess , Bernd Kasparek , Stefanie Kron , Mathias Rodatz , Maria Schwertl , and Simon Sontowski ( Eds . ) . 2017 . Der lange Sommer der Migration . Assoziation A , Berlin , Germany . [ 58 ] Dorothy Howard and Lilly Irani . 2019 . Ways of Knowing When Research Subjects Care . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’19 . ACM Press , Glasgow , Scotland Uk , 1 – 16 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300327 [ 59 ] Joey Chiao - Yin Hsiao and Tawanna R . Dillahunt . 2018 . Technology to Support Immigrant Access to Social Capital and Adaptation to a New Country . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 2 , CSCW ( Nov . 2018 ) , 1 – 21 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3274339 [ 60 ] Nikolai Huke . 2019 . Teilhabe trotz staatlicher Ausgrenzungspolitik . Forschungsjournal Soziale Bewegungen 32 , 3 ( Sept . 2019 ) , 394 – 407 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1515 / fjsb - 2019 - 0045 [ 61 ] Lilly Irani , Janet Vertesi , Paul Dourish , Kavita Philip , and Rebecca E Grinter . 2010 . Postcolonial Computing : A Lens on Design and Development . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 1311 – 1320 . [ 62 ] Lilly C . Irani and Paul Dourish . 2009 . Postcolonial Interculturality . In Proceedings of the 2009 International Workshop on Intercultural Collaboration ( IWIC ’09 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , Palo Alto , California , USA , 249 – 252 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1499224 . 1499268 [ 63 ] Margaret Jack and Steven J . Jackson . 2016 . Logistics as Care and Control : An Investigation into the UNICEF Supply Division . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 2209 – 2219 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858503 [ 64 ] Bernd Kasparek and Marc Speer . 2015 . Of Hope . Ungarn und der lange Sommer der Migration | bordermonitoring . eu . [ 65 ] Katja Kaufmann . 2018 . Navigating a New Life : Syrian Refugees and Their Smartphones in Vienna . Information , Communication & Society 21 , 6 ( June 2018 ) , 882 – 898 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 1369118X . 2018 . 1437205 [ 66 ] Christopher M . Kelty . 2017 . Too Much Democracy in All the Wrong Places : Toward a Grammar of Participation . Current Anthropology 58 , S15 ( Feb . 2017 ) , S77 – S90 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1086 / 688705 [ 67 ] Helena Kraff . 2020 . A Critical Exploration of Agonistic Participatory Design . The Design Journal 23 , 1 ( Jan . 2020 ) , 31 – 48 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 14606925 . 2019 . 1684730 [ 68 ] Maximilian Krüger , Konstantin Aal , Volker Wulf , Franziska Maria Tachtler , Reem Talhouk , Ana María Bustamante Duarte , Karen E Fisher , Eiad Yafi , and Koula Charitonos . 2019 . Technology at / of the border : a workshop about stories and experiences . In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Communities & Technologies - Transforming Communities . 336 – 342 . [ 69 ] Max Krüger , Anne Weibert , Debora de Castro Leal , Dave Randall , and Volker Wulf . 2021 . It Takes More Than One Hand to Clap : On the Role of ‘Care’in Maintaining Design Results . . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 14 . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 309 . Publication date : October 2021 . “What is the topic of the group , please ? ” 309 : 27 [ 70 ] Mark Latonero and Paula Kift . 2018 . On Digital Passages and Borders : Refugees and the New Infrastructure for Movement and Control . Social Media + Society 4 , 1 ( 2018 ) , 2056305118764432 . [ 71 ] Bruno Latour . 2004 . Why Has Critique Run out of Steam ? From Matters of Fact to Matters of Concern . ( 2004 ) , 24 . [ 72 ] Bruno Latour . 2005 . From Realpolitik to Dingpolitik . Making things public : Atmospheres of democracy ( 2005 ) , 14 – 44 . [ 73 ] Ann Light and Yoko Akama . 2014 . Structuring Future Social Relations : The Politics of Care in Participatory Practice . In Proceedings of the 13th Participatory Design Conference on Research Papers - PDC ’14 . ACM Press , Windhoek , Namibia , 151 – 160 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2661435 . 2661438 [ 74 ] Thomas Ludwig , Christoph Kotthaus , and Robin Stumpf . 2016 . Koordination der ungebundenen Flüchtlingshilfe durch soziale Medien . ( 2016 ) , 8 . [ 75 ] Liisa H . Malkki . 2015 . The Need to Help : The Domestic Arts of International Humanitarianism . Duke University Press . [ 76 ] Firoze Manji . Fri , 01 / 02 / 2015 - 12 : 00 . White Saviorism , Victimization and Violence . https : / / www . newsclick . in / white - saviorism - victimization - and - violence . [ 77 ] Aryn Martin , Natasha Myers , and Ana Viseu . 2015 . The Politics of Care in Technoscience . Social Studies of Science 45 , 5 ( Oct . 2015 ) , 625 – 641 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0306312715602073 [ 78 ] Shannon Mattern . 2018 . Maintenance and Care . Places Journal ( Nov . 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 22269 / 181120 [ 79 ] Markus Miessen . 2011 . The Nightmare of Participation : Crossbench Praxis as a Mode of Criticality . Sternberg Pr , Berlin . [ 80 ] Paul Mihailidis . 2016 . Digital Crossroads . Civic Media and Migration . ( 2016 ) , 64 . [ 81 ] Annemarie Mol . 2008 . The Logic of Care : Health and the Problem of Patient Choice . Routledge , London ; New York . [ 82 ] Chantal Mouffe . 2000 . Deliberative Democracy or Agonistic Pluralism . Reihe Politikwissenschaft ( 2000 ) , 31 . [ 83 ] Chantal Mouffe and Markus Miessen . 2011 . Democracy Revisited : In Conversation with Chantal Mouffe . In The Nightmare of Participation : Crossbench Praxis as a Mode of Criticality . Sternberg Pr , Berlin . [ 84 ] Michael J . Muller , Leslie G . Tudor , Daniel M . Wildman , Ellen A . White , Robert W . Root , Tom Dayton , Rebecca Carr , Barbara Diekmann , and Elizabeth Dykstra - Erickson . 1995 . Bifocal Tools for Scenarios and Representations in Participatory Activities with Users . In Scenario - Based Design : Envisioning Work and Technology in System Development . John Wiley & Sons , Inc . , USA , 135 – 163 . [ 85 ] Michelle Murphy . 2015 . Unsettling Care : Troubling Transnational Itineraries of Care in Feminist Health Practices . Social Studies of Science 45 , 5 ( Oct . 2015 ) , 717 – 737 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0306312715589136 [ 86 ] Sarah Nikkhah , Andrew D . Miller , and Alyson L . Young . 2018 . Telegram as An Immigration Management Tool . In Companion of the 2018 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing ( CSCW ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , Jersey City , NJ , USA , 345 – 348 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3272973 . 3274093 [ 87 ] Rafaella P . Eleutério and Frederick C . M . Van Amstel . 2020 . Matters of Care in Designing a Feminist Coalition . In Proceedings of the 16th Participatory Design Conference 2020 - Participation ( s ) Otherwise - Volume 2 . ACM , Manizales Colombia , 17 – 20 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3384772 . 3385157 [ 88 ] Lucy Pei and Bonnie Nardi . 2019 . We Did It Right , But It Was Still Wrong : Toward Assets - Based Design . In Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290607 . 3310434 [ 89 ] Maximilian Pichl . 2017 . Die Asylpakete I Und II . Der Politische Und Rechtliche Kampf Um Die Asylrechtsverschärfun - gen . Hess , Sabine / Kasparek , Bernd / Kron , Stefanie / Rodatz , Mathias / Schwertl , Maria / Sontowski , Simon ( Hg . ) : Der lange Sommer der Migration . Grenzregime III 2 ( 2017 ) , 163 – 175 . [ 90 ] Fiorenza Picozza . 2021 . The Coloniality of Asylum : Mobility , Autonomy and Solidarity in the Wake of Europe’s Refugee Crisis . Rowman & Littlefield Publishers . [ 91 ] Bill Pitkin . 2001 . Community Informatics : Hope or Hype ? . In Proceedings of the 34th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences . [ 92 ] Joanna Saad - Sulonen , Eva Eriksson , Kim Halskov , Helena Karasti , and John Vines . 2018 . Unfolding Participation over Time : Temporal Lenses in Participatory Design . CoDesign 14 , 1 ( Jan . 2018 ) , 4 – 16 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15710882 . 2018 . 1426773 [ 93 ] Joanna Saad - Sulonen , Kim Halskov , Liesbeth Huybrechts , John Vines , Eva Eriksson , and Helena Karasti . 2015 . Unfolding Participation . What Do We Mean by Participation – Conceptually and in Practice . Aarhus Series on Human Centered Computing 1 , 1 ( Oct . 2015 ) , 4 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7146 / aahcc . v1i1 . 21324 [ 94 ] Dina Sabie and Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed . 2019 . Moving into a Technology Land : Exploring the Challenges for the Refugees in Canada in Accessing Its Computerized Infrastructures . In Proceedings of the Conference on Computing & Sustainable Societies - COMPASS 19 . ACM Press , Accra , Ghana , 218 – 233 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3314344 . 3332481 [ 95 ] Elizabeth B . - N . Sanders and Pieter Jan Stappers . 2008 . Co - Creation and the New Landscapes of Design . CoDesign 4 , 1 ( March 2008 ) , 5 – 18 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15710880701875068 [ 96 ] Rebecca Schisler . 2020 . Tales from the Field : Putting Compassion Into Action . In Transformative Leadership in Action : Allyship , Advocacy & Activism , Jacklyn A . Bruce and Katherine E . McKee ( Eds . ) . Emerald Publishing Limited , 91 – 99 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / S2058 - 88012020016 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 309 . Publication date : October 2021 . 309 : 28 Max Krüger et al . [ 97 ] Anna Seravalli . 2018 . Infrastructuring Urban Commons over Time : Learnings from Two Cases . In Proceedings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference : Full Papers - Volume 1 ( PDC ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , Hasselt and Genk , Belgium , 1 – 11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3210586 . 3210593 [ 98 ] WDR Severo . 2002 . Participatory Development in Poverty Reduction Strategies : An Analysis of the Contributions of Participation . Ph . D . Dissertation . M . Sc . Dissertation Submitted to IDD , School of Social Policy , University of . . . . [ 99 ] Patricia B Seybold . 2006 . Outside Innovation : How Your Customers Will Co - Design the Future of Your Business . Collins New York , NY ( 2006 ) . [ 100 ] Stephen A . Small and Lynet Uttal . 2005 . Action - Oriented Research : Strategies for Engaged Scholarship . Journal of Marriage and Family 67 , 4 ( 2005 ) , 936 – 948 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1741 - 3737 . 2005 . 00185 . x [ 101 ] DER SPIEGEL . 2016 . Andreas Scheuer : CSU - Generalsekretär über Flüchtlinge " Das Schlimmste ist ein ministrierender Senegalese " - DER SPIEGEL - Politik . https : / / www . spiegel . de / politik / deutschland / andreas - scheuer - ueber - fluechtlinge - a - 1112830 . html . [ 102 ] DER SPIEGEL . 2018 . Seehofer : 69 Abschiebungen zum 69 . Geburtstag - DER SPIEGEL - Politik . https : / / www . spiegel . de / politik / deutschland / seehofer - 69 - abschiebungen - zum - 69 - geburtstag - a - 1217747 . html . [ 103 ] Katta Spiel , Emeline Brulé , Christopher Frauenberger , Gilles Bailly , and Geraldine Fitzpatrick . 2018 . Micro - Ethics for Participatory Design with Marginalised Children . In Proceedings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference : Full Papers - Volume 1 . ACM , Hasselt and Genk Belgium , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3210586 . 3210603 [ 104 ] Angelika Strohmayer , Jenn Clamen , and Mary Laing . 2019 . Technologies for Social Justice : Lessons from Sex Workers on the Front Lines . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300882 [ 105 ] Angelika Strohmayer , Jenn Clamen , and Mary Laing . 2019 . Technologies for Social Justice : Lessons from Sex Workers on the Front Lines . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , Glasgow , Scotland Uk , 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300882 [ 106 ] Franziska Tachtler , Toni Michel , Petr Slovák , and Geraldine Fitzpatrick . 2020 . Supporting the Supporters of Unaccompanied Migrant Youth : Designing for Social - Ecological Resilience . arXiv : 2003 . 04799 [ cs ] ( March 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376458 arXiv : 2003 . 04799 [ cs ] [ 107 ] Reem Talhouk , Konstantin Aal , Anne Weibert , Max Krüger , Volker Wulf , Karen Fisher , Franziska Tachtler , Suleman Shahid , Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed , and Ana Maria Bustamante Duarte . 2019 . Refugees & HCI SIG : Situating HCI Within Humanitarian Research . In Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , Glasgow , Scotland Uk , 1 – 4 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290607 . 3311754 [ 108 ] Reem Talhouk , Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed , Volker Wulf , Clara Crivellaro , Vasilis Vlachokyriakos , and Patrick Olivier . 2016 . Refugees and HCI SIG : The Role of HCI in Responding to the Refugee Crisis . ACM Press , 1073 – 1076 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2851581 . 2886427 [ 109 ] Reem Talhouk , Madeline Balaam , Austin L . Toombs , Andrew Garbett , Chaza Akik , Hala Ghattas , Vera Araujo - Soares , Balsam Ahmad , and Kyle Montague . 2019 . Involving Syrian Refugees in Design Research : Lessons Learnt from the Field . In Proceedings of the 2019 on Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( DIS ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , San Diego , CA , USA , 1583 – 1594 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3322276 . 3322335 [ 110 ] Reem Talhouk , Ana Bustamante , Konstantin Aal , Anne Weibert , Koula Charitonos , and Vasilis Vlachokyriakos . 2018 . HCI and Refugees : Experiences and Reflections . interactions 25 , 4 ( 2018 ) , 46 – 51 . [ 111 ] Reem Talhouk , Vasillis Vlachokyriakos , Anne Weibert , Konstantin Aal , Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed , Karen Fisher , and Volker Wulf . 2017 . Refugees & HCI Workshop : The Role of HCI in Responding to the Refugee Crisis . ACM Press , 558 – 565 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3027063 . 3027076 [ 112 ] Manuel Tironi and Israel Rodríguez - Giralt . 2017 . Healing , Knowing , Enduring : Care and Politics in Damaged Worlds . The Sociological Review 65 , 2 _ suppl ( July 2017 ) , 89 – 109 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0081176917712874 [ 113 ] Austin Toombs , Shaowen Bardzell , and Jeffrey Bardzell . 2015 . The Proper Care and Feeding of Hackerspaces : Care Ethics and Cultures of Making . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ) , Vol . 24 . 629 – 638 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3068259 [ 114 ] Austin Toombs , Shad Gross , Shaowen Bardzell , and Jeffrey Bardzell . 2017 . From Empathy to Care : A Feminist Care Ethics Perspective on Long - Term Researcher – Participant Relations . Interacting with Computers 29 , 1 ( Jan . 2017 ) , 45 – 57 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / iwc / iww010 [ 115 ] Joan C . Tronto . 1993 . Moral Boundaries : A Political Argument for an Ethic of Care . Routledge , New York . [ 116 ] Joan C . Tronto . 2013 . Caring Democracy : Markets , Equality , and Justice . NYU Press . [ 117 ] John Vines , Rachel Clarke , Peter Wright , John McCarthy , and Patrick Olivier . 2013 . Configuring Participation : On How We Involve People in Design . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 429 – 438 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2470716 [ 118 ] Eric von Hippel . 2005 . Democratizing Innovation : Users Take Center Stage . ( 2005 ) . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 309 . Publication date : October 2021 . “What is the topic of the group , please ? ” 309 : 29 [ 119 ] Ina Wagner . 2018 . Critical Reflections on Participation in Design . In Socio - Informatics . A Practice - Based Perspective on the Design and Use of IT Artifacts , Volker Wulf , Volkmar Pipek , Dave Randall , Markus Rohde , Kjeld Schmidt , and Gunnar Stevens ( Eds . ) . Oxford University Press , 243 – 278 . [ 120 ] Anne Weibert , Max Krüger , Konstantin Aal , Setareh Sadat Salehee , Renad Khatib , Dave Randall , and Volker Wulf . 2019 . Finding Language Classes : Designing a Digital Language Wizard with Refugees and Migrants . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 3 , CSCW ( Nov . 2019 ) , 116 : 1 – 116 : 23 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359218 [ 121 ] Marisol Wong - Villacres , Cristina M . Velasquez , and Neha Kumar . 2017 . Social Media for Earthquake Response : Unpacking Its Limitations with Care . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 1 , CSCW ( Dec . 2017 ) , 112 : 1 – 112 : 22 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3134747 [ 122 ] Susan P . Wyche and Rebecca E . Grinter . 2012 . " This Is How We Do It in My Country " : A Study of Computer - Mediated Family Communication among Kenyan Migrants in the United States . In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ’12 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , Seattle , Washington , USA , 87 – 96 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2145204 . 2145222 Received October 2020 ; revised January 2021 ; accepted May 2021 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 309 . Publication date : October 2021 .