The Choreographer’s Notebook - A Video Annotation System for Dancers and Choreographers Vikash Singh , Celine Latulipe , Erin Carroll HCILab University of North Carolina at Charlotte { vsingh7 , clatulip , e . carroll } @ uncc . edu Danielle Lottridge Department of Communication Stanford University lottridg @ stanford . edu ABSTRACT We present a collaborative tool for choreographers and dancers , the Choreographer’s Notebook , which allows mul - timodal annotation of rehearsal videos during the dance pro - duction process . The dance production process is a creative process in which exploration and expression are paramount and we describe issues we have observed over four differ - ent dance production cycles . The Choreographer’s Note - book addresses the recurring problem of scarcity of rehearsal time and space , which is a limiting factor for exploration and expression . The tool is a web - based video application that enables choreographers to provide multimodal , context - sensitive instructions and feedback to the dancers outside of formal rehearsal time . The novelty of this tool is its ability to provide a multimodal collaborative video - based workﬂow . This article also presents a thorough ethnographic investi - gation of the dance production process and results from the use of the Choreographer’s Notebook as an artifact within that process . Author Keywords Dance , Choreography , Video Annotation , Picture - in - Picture , multi - modal communication , collaborative creativity ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords H . 4 Information Systems Applications : Miscellaneous General Terms Human Factors INTRODUCTION Dance production is a very creative process and requires exploration of a variety of movement expressions through many trial and error cycles . This creative process starts with an idea and goes through different stages ( development , learning , cleaning ) leading up to the ﬁnal performances . The Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior speciﬁc permission and / or a fee . C & C’11 , November 3 – 6 , 2011 , Atlanta , Georgia , USA . Copyright 2011 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 0820 - 5 / 11 / 11 . . . $ 10 . 00 . process depends heavily on dance rehearsals and one of the major constraints in this creative process is the availability of studio / rehearsal time . The scarcity of time in rehearsal studios limits the amount of exploration that is possible . The lack of useful tools in a contemporary dance production to assist the choreographers and other stakeholders to efﬁ - ciently utilize the available studio / rehearsal time is a major concern . This paper proceeds as follows : ﬁrst we describe our obser - vations of the dance production and rehearsal process , and highlight a number of salient issues as well as our assess - ment of opportunities for technological interventions . Sec - ond , we discuss related work in video annotation systems and in integrating technology into the dance production pro - cess . Next , we present the Choreographer’s Notebook , de - tailing the interaction and how it is designed to facilitate the dance production process . The Choreographer’s Notebook has been used in various dance productions at our institu - tion , and so in the Results section we give initial responses to the system from the choreographers and dancers . Finally , we conclude with a summary and plans for future work . THE DANCE PRODUCTION PROCESS As part of a long - term interdisciplinary dance and technol - ogy project at our institution [ 20 ] , we have had the oppor - tunity to observe a number of different casts of dancers and choreographers work through complete production cycles . This ethnographic approach to studying the dance produc - tion process involved members of our team participating in and observing dance rehearsals and performances , typically for 2 - 5 hours per week and as much as 15 hours per week during performance weeks . In the following paragraphs we present our observations from this experience , generalized into the typical stages in a dance production process . Process Stages The dance production process typically involves the fol - lowing stages : choreographic development , choreographic learning , cleaning , stage readiness , performance . We de - scribe our observations of the activity during these stages , based on dance productions at our educational institution . 197 Choreographic Development The ﬁrst stage in the dance production process may be long or short , depending on whether the choreographer is devel - oping a completely new piece of choreography or adapting or re - staging an existing piece of choreography . Though the choreographer may have some ideas about dance move - ments from the very beginning of the project , usually they start working on development of movements through exper - imentation and innovation with dancers as soon as possible . If the choreographer is developing completely new material , this is a long process . While the work is going on in the dance studio , there is also much work going on in the mind of the choreographer while away from the studio . The de - velopment of movement phrases and sections of the dance is done over time , sometimes in serial order , sometimes out of order . As parts of the choreographic material are set , this de - velopment process may overlap with the next phase , where the cast of dancers learns the material . Although a dance piece is based mainly on a choreographer’s vision , communication and interaction among all the peo - ple involved is a major part of the choreographic develop - ment process . Choreographers shape their vision in dance studios where they develop deﬁnite movements that dancers will learn . In a more exploratory creation , a choreographer may involve his / her dancers in a process of shared investiga - tion through improvisation . If a choreographer is adapting an existing piece of choreog - raphy , the length of development time will depend on the magnitude of the changes being made to the existing ma - terial , as well as the familiarity of the choreographer with the material . If a choreographer is adapting or re - staging their own work , they will be more familiar with the material than if they are re - staging another choreographer’s work . If the choreographer is simply re - staging a piece and there is no adaptation being made , the development process may be skipped altogether . Choreographic Learning Once the choreography is set , the dancers must learn the ma - terial . It is sometimes the case that choreographers develop material for speciﬁc dancers that they have already hired ( in which case those dancers work with the choreographer to de - velop the material , and learn it while it is being developed ) . In most university dance productions , the material is devel - oped independent of the dancers and the dancers are selected after the material is set . Sometimes advanced or especially talented dancers are recruited early to help the choreogra - pher explore and experiment with the material . During the learning phase , dancers are taught the choreog - raphy , a few minutes at a time . As they master more and more of the dance , they continue to rehearse what they have learned . Dancers’ muscle memory is taken advantage of by constant repetition of movement . If the dancers are learn - ing existing material , they often take advantage of videos of previous productions to learn the movements , playing the videos in slow motion . If the material is new , the option of watching videos is not available . However , it is typical for choreographers to video - tape parts of rehearsals where material has been set . These videos are then reviewed at the end of the rehearsal or the beginning of the next rehearsal , with the choreographer us - ing the video to point out problems or corrections . This is critical for the dancers , since they are able to see a third - person’s view of themselves in the space and in relation to the other performers . This allows them to better understand their part in the piece as a whole , and their spatial , positional relationship to other dancers . Choreographic Cleaning Once the dancers have learned the material , the rehearsals turn to movement cleaning and detailing , adding subtle nu - ances and intentions to the gestures . The choreographer works to make sure each individual dancer is executing the movements as they were intended and then ensures that the relationships between and among dancers is clear in terms of the spatial and temporal aspects of the movement as well as the speciﬁc physical articulation . For instance , the chore - ographer will work to make a unison section ﬂawless by addressing differences in timing , directional facing , height level of arms or legs , etc . Likewise , the choreographer will pay attention to everything from proper technical execution of the movements ( is the dancer’s leg fully stretched or is her body alignment precise ? ) to more subtle aspects of in - ternal intent of the gesture ( is the focus correctly projected or is the movement quality commensurate with the feeling to be conveyed ) ? Choreographers typically record rehearsal videos during this stage and much time is spent discussing the ﬁne details of every second of the dance ( while watching the videos ) , in order to perfect these subtleties . In dance pieces with multiple dancers , a choreographer will spend time working with the group as a whole , working with small groups and working with individual dancers . Stage Readiness In the week or two leading up to the scheduled perfor - mances , the dance production goes through a process of stage readiness . The dance , which is rehearsed in a rehearsal studio , is put on the stage for spacing . This allows the chore - ographer to see the piece on the stage and make adjustments to take advantage of the width / depth and wing size of the stage . The next step in stage - readiness is called lighting cue - to - cue , where lighting effects are set and ﬁne - tuned for each phase of the dance piece . After this , there will be a few tech rehearsals where the piece is rehearsed on stage with light - ing and any stage effects that are required . The ﬁnal steps of stage - readiness involve dress rehearsals , where dancers are in full costume and makeup , and lighting and stage effects are employed . The ﬁnal dress rehearsal typically happens the evening before opening night . Performance During the days in which performances happen , the dancers engage in warm - ups , makeup and costume , and then per - form . We have observed that the choreographer’s work is done at this stage , and although the choreographer usually attends opening night , he or she may not attend the rest of 198 the performances . The production does not change after the ﬁnal dress rehearsal , although every performance is unique , even for the most well - trained dancers . Post - Performance Our observations of educational dance productions have shown that there is little to no activity in the production pro - cess that occurs after the ﬁnal performance . The activity of ‘striking the stage’ , i . e . removing all stage props , lighting , lifting of the marley dance ﬂoor , etc . takes place immedi - ately after ﬁnal curtain call and the student performers are expected to help with this . This is quite different from pro - fessional dance productions , in which the hired stage crew takes care of strike . Beyond this activity , there may be an in - formal cast party , but there are no formal meetings or other activities . In the dance productions we have been involved with , we have introduced the concept of post - performance focus groups as a debrieﬁng method , and this practice has become quite popular with the dancers . It is evident that the dance production process depends heav - ily on rehearsals . Rehearsals not only help in reﬁnement of movements but also in many cases help the choreographer to revisit and redeﬁne their vision for the piece . The dance production process for a dance piece at a university usually spans 2 - 3 months , framed by the semester . In commercial dance companies , the process may span 3 - 6 months but will typically involve many more rehearsal hours per week . In the next session we highlight some of the issues that we ob - served in the dance production process . Production issues Our main focus is the rehearsal , given its importance in the dance production process . Choreographers face two major problems in arranging rehearsals , related to availability of time and space . They require not only dancers’ time ( and must work around their schedules ) but also access to a dance studio . Choreographers often have a very tight budget , and if not carefully planned , paying the dancers and paying for the rehearsal space can quickly put a project over budget . Rehearsal Space and Time A rehearsal space is generally a dance studio which has a sprung marley ﬂoor , mirrors on the walls and ballet bars . Rehearsal space is critical in the phases of the dance pro - duction process from choreographic development to clean - ing . Though some large private dance companies have their own rehearsal space , most small and mid - size dance compa - nies cannot afford their own rehearsal space and must rent . In cities where rehearsal spaces are limited in number , high demand makes the rehearsal spaces very expensive . In the Manhattan area , a 1000 square foot dance studio , costs $ 100 - 400 per hour . A typical rehearsal may last 3 - 4 hours and a professional production generally has rehearsals daily for months before the show is staged . Clearly this can be a very expensive process and choreographers will want to make the most of this expensive time . In educational settings studio space is part of the infrastruc - ture , and so does not have to be rented . However , it is shared amongst different choreographers and productions , and so access is scarce . At our institution , a choreographer typi - cally has rehearsal space available for only 3 - 6 hours per week for each production . A dance performance involves many people including dancers and technicians . They are often involved in more than one project at a time and hence gathering everyone to - gether at the same time for a rehearsal can be challenging . In private dance companies , full - time dancers may be salaried , but many dancers will be paid hourly . Technicians and other support staff ( rehearsal assistants , costumers ) may also be hourly workers , adding to the hourly expense of a rehearsal . The scarcity of space and time is a prevalent concern that im - pacts the quality of a production in both the commercial and university dance environments . Thus , it is very important to utilize these spaces and the time of the dancers judiciously and for everyone involved in a production to make the best use of the rehearsal time . For dancers and choreographers , the best use of time in a dance studio with a sprung marley ﬂoor and mirrored walls involves actual dancing . However , in our observations of dance productions , we have seen sig - niﬁcant amounts of time spent in discussion and critique , rather than in practicing and reﬁning movement . Consider the following scenario , which is typical of many rehearsals we observed : The dancers and choreographer arrive at rehearsal and warm up with stretches . The choreographer then pulls out a television cart and hooks up a camera that was used to record a run - through of the piece at the last re - hearsal . The dancers sit on the ﬂoor in a circle , watch - ing the video , with notebooks out . The choreogra - pher continually pauses the video to talk about some - thing that she would like changed or something that is not quite working . Sometimes the choreographer will rewind a portion of the video so the dancers can watch it again . The dancers take notes in their notebooks , based on what the choreographer tells them , but also based on their own observations of movements that they want to work on improving . The dancers occasionally stop the choreographer and ask questions about something they see on the video . When they have ﬁnished watch - ing the video , the choreographer may also give general comments about overall issues in performance that she wants the dancers to think about . After this , the dancers do a formal warm - up and begin to rehearse . The process described above is typical and may take any - where from 15 minutes to a full hour . While the discussion that occurs during this time period is obviously very impor - tant to the dance production process , it could just as easily take place in a conference room . So , while this is an effective use of dancer and choreographer’s time , it is not an efﬁcient use of the dance studio space . Stage Readiness Issues While studio rehearsal time is expensive , it pales in com - parison to stage time . While a few large dance companies 199 may have their own performance stage , it is much more typ - ical for dance companies to arrange for stage space at other venues . Stages are often fully utilized , and it is common for dance productions to have initial access to the actual perfor - mance stage only a week or two before the ﬁrst performance . During the stage readiness phase , lighting , stage effects and props must be put into place , tested and reﬁned . The amount of time available for this process is extremely limited , and we have observed that there is often a feeling that the pro - duction is short - changed at this stage , because there is not enough time to fully explore lighting effects , sound level variations and stage effect possibilities . BACKGROUND The use of computing technology has not been applied to some of the major issues of dance production that we dis - cussed earlier . We noticed that computing technology is al - most absent in the process of rehearsal and ﬁne tuning . We propose that the effective use of computing technology can enhance the rehearsal process so that more time during re - hearsals can be dedicated to movement . This could lead to a decrease in the time needed in the rehearsal studio space ( therefore saving money and freeing up the space for oth - ers to use ) or to an increase in the quality of the dance pro - duction because more rehearsal time is actually spent de - veloping , learning and perfecting movement . Based on the issues described here , we developed the Choreographer’s Notebook , to allow choreographers and dancers to commu - nicate online , using rehearsal videos as the main artifact for discussion . Choreography and Computing Merce Cunnigham was among the ﬁrst to introduce com - puting to choreography by using animated stick ﬁgures to plan choreography [ 16 ] . A system of dance notations called Labanotation , similar to music notations , was developed by choreographers in the 1990s which is now widely used in North America [ 22 ] . Schiphorst and Calvert developed an interface based on Laban movements that allowed choreog - raphers to visually compose pieces in space and time [ 23 ] . Calvert developed Life Forms software ( later DanceForms ) that Cunningham used for dance productions [ 14 ] . In recent years software like Poser ( Curious Labs ) , Motion Builder ( Alias ) and 3dsMax ( AutoCad ) have offered features for hu - man ﬁgure animation , however , not all of them are cus - tomized for dance purposes . Troika Ranch , a well - known in - teractive dance company , use their custom designed Isadora software for managing interactive dance performances [ 3 ] . Choreographers have also used computer graphics and inter - active technologies in live performances , which are gener - ally pre - programmed and sometimes reﬂect the movement of dancers using sensors . A team at Purdue University pro - duced a dance performance which looked into issues related to the collaborative design of live - motion capture and multi - image projection in dance [ 21 ] . The Dance . Draw project has investigated IT support in creative dance design and the use of wearable sensors on dancers to generate live projected vi - suals [ 20 ] . Dance - tech . net is an online platform that show - cases the work of a community of dancers and choreogra - phers embracing technology with varying levels of assis - tance [ 24 ] . Video Interfaces and Annotation Support The Choreographer’s Notebook is an application that sup - ports multi - modal annotation of a video . Video annotations , similar in concept to notes in the margin of a book , are meta - data associated with video content . Annotations are an - chored to a point in the timeline of a video but are stored ex - ternally . Annotations are a good platform for asynchronous collaboration as different users can insert annotations for the same video content across multiple sessions separated in time . Furthermore , annotations enhance the end - user ex - perience when they are displayed in - context ( at the anchor point where they were made ) . Video annotation interfaces to facilitate communication be - tween different stakeholders has been explored by differ - ent groups in the past decade . Many interfaces were de - veloped to support multimedia annotation as educational tools for the distance learning market , such as the Class - room 2000 project [ 9 ] and the Microsoft Research Anno - tation System [ 11 ] . The ‘WACTool’ supports P2P capabili - ties that allow user collaboration and content sharing using voice and digital ink comments over individual frames of a video [ 15 ] . ‘Project Pad’ is a standalone web application for adding text notes to media clips and sharing those notes with others [ 2 ] . ‘Video Image Annotation’ tool is a Windows ap - plication that provides an interface to manually annotate a video with text [ 6 ] . ‘VideoANT’ is a web - based video an - notation application developed for e - learning , to annotate videos with time point markers and text [ 18 ] . ‘Advene’ allows people to design and exchange videos with annota - tions [ 10 ] . ‘Anvil’ is another tool that allows annotation of audiovisual material by inserting time - anchored comments and gesture elements [ 19 ] . There are many video - based interfaces with text annotation that are commercially available . Youtube allows user to an - notate videos they upload , while others can see the annota - tion [ 7 ] . ‘BubblePLY’ is a web application that allows users to annotate remote videos hosted on other websites such as Youtube . Users can add text , drawing , pre - deﬁned clipart , subtitles etc . on a remote video to create bubbles ( anno - tated videos ) and can edit their own bubbles [ 1 ] . ‘veotag’ [ 4 ] and ‘viddler’ [ 5 ] also support annotations of video content . Sports and News broadcast domains have also seen a signif - icant amount of work dealing with video annotations [ 8 , 13 , 12 ] . The applications discussed typically support annotations in only one form ( mostly text ) and lack multimodal capabili - ties ( Figure 1 ) . While the majority of interfaces developed share similarities with the Choreographer’s Notebook , none support ﬁne - grained access and navigational control , multi - modal annotation grouping , rich annotation positioning and user - based color coding . All of the applications discussed allow some form of video annotation but none of them com - prehensively address the issues of collaboratively working on a creative temporal project , such as dance . In the dance 200 Figure 1 . Comparison of features of existing video annotation systems that supports multiple user collaboration on a single video . production process , we observed that choreographers were using video cameras to record the rehearsals . Then , all par - ticipants would sit on the studio ﬂoor and discuss and cri - tique the rehearsal , watching the video on a small TV . How - ever , the VCR playback restricted their ability to navigate the rehearsal video . This observation led us to believe that a digital video interface with annotation support would ease the rehearsal process . Any tool targeted towards these issues should : • Support various modalities of annotations including text , digital ink and video . • Allow for the synchronized video playback with anno - tated comments . • Have a simple interface for users with varying degrees of technological expertise . • Provide an archival system of video . • Promote collaboration and facilitate discussion among all stakeholders . • Provide context - related video navigational tools . THE CHOREOGRAPHER’S NOTEBOOK The Choreographer’s Notebook ( Figure 4 ) is a tool designed to address the scarcity of rehearsal space and time in the dance production process . It is a web - based application that allows users to annotate a rehearsal video using a variety of modalities including text , digital ink and video . The applica - tion also supports visual indexing of annotations and a rich navigational control for inserting and editing video annota - tions . Annotations are anchored to a point in the timeline of a video , but are stored externally in a separate ﬁle . They en - able synchronous collaboration as multiple users can login and work simultaneously , as well as asynchronous collabo - ration as different users can insert annotations across mul - tiple sessions separated in time . Furthermore , annotations enhance the end - user experience when they are displayed in context ( at the cue - point where they were made ) . The ap - plication also provides a self - documenting archival system which captures not only the choreographic movements but also the choreographer’s intent for the dance . This docu - mentation is important because it provides ﬁner details of a dance without any extra cost to the choreographer . Architecture An overall architecture of the Choreographer’s Notebook is shown in Figure 2 . The Choreographer’s Notebook is imple - mented in the Adobe Flex framework and works in all major web browsers , supporting mp4 and ﬂv video ﬁles . After log - ging in , users can load videos , play them and insert an anno - tations . The application sends the text , digital ink drawings or video annotations to a MySQL database via PHP . Text is stored as a string while digital ink drawings are stored as a snapshot of the transparent canvas on which the drawing was made . Video comments are stored as an . ﬂv ﬁle in a separate folder . Information is then retrieved by the Choreographer’s Notebook as annotations from the MySQL database . The annotations are ﬁrst retrieved as a proxy XML feed , which is written dynamically using PHP , and then are rendered in the application . Interface When the application is loaded , the user must ﬁrst login as rehearsal videos are not publicly available . Each user is as - signed a username and password and has a color assigned to them so that each user’s comments are color - coded . A choreographer can upload a rehearsal video and post her comments in the form of text , digital sketches or video com - 201 Figure 2 . Choreographer’s Notebook architecture . ments . Dancers can then log in , analyze their rehearsal per - formance and read comments posted by the choreographers in context . If the comments are related to their dance move - ments they can review them to reﬁne their movements and respond with video , ink or text comments . Dancers are able to add comments about their own movements or about the movements of other dancers . However , in practice , we ob - served that the dancers did not use the commenting system to comment on other dancers . They did add comments to ask questions of the choreographer or to self - critique their own dancing . Uploading / Selecting Videos After signing in , a user can upload a new video or open an existing video . If the user opens an existing video the appli - cation opens the “main screen” , which shows the video and comments posted to that video by any user . The main screen consists of a large video window on the left with a timeline scrubber , a control bar beneath it and a comment data - grid on the right ( Figure 4 ) . Inserting Comments On the main screen , comments can be inserted on the video timeline in three different modalities by clicking the ‘Add Comment’ button . Once a user chooses to insert a com - ment , he can choose between text , sketch or video or any combination of these three modalities . Sketch commenting currently supports multi - color sketching with two different pen widths . The user has the option of clearing the canvas if she is not satisﬁed with her sketch ( Figure 4 ) . Video com - menting ( Figure 7 ) requires a web - cam to capture the video comment of the user . Once a comment is submitted , it is Figure 3 . UI for selecting a video ﬁle to open . This UI provides an archive of all the videos . added to the data - grid and a cue - point marker ( a color - coded circle ) appears over the video timeline showing the position of the inserted comment in the video . Exploring and Editing Comments Each user’s comments are color - coded , which helps in vi - sual identiﬁcation of comments while navigating ( Figure 4 ) . Posted comments can be explored three different ways . A user can click on any comment in the data - grid or on a col - ored circle ( cue - point marker in Figure 6 ) on the video time - line . This seeks the video play - head to the cue - point and pauses the video . Comments related to that cue - point are then overlaid on the main video . This feature delivers com - ments in context , which makes it easy for dancers to corre - late comments with their movements . The third way for a user to explore comments is by watching the video while the ‘Show All Comments’ checkbox is checked . In this interac - tion , the video plays through , pausing at all comment points to display each comment . Users can click in the data - grid to edit or delete their own comments . Journaling Choreographers and dancers sometimes keep a journal doc - umenting notes on their progress and ideas and images to be explored . In some production processes journal is an explicit aspect of the development [ 17 ] . The Choreographer’s Note - book supports a journal feature which can be used by chore - ographers or dancers to record and review private thoughts about the dance . A user can access this feature anytime while using the application , once logged in , and journal en - tries cannot be seen by other users . 202 Figure 4 . The Choreographer’s Notebook main screen showing video panel and comments Figure 5 . Sketch overlaid on the video panel with the choreographer’s comments . EVALUATION The development of the Choreographer’s Notebook has been and continues to be an iterative process . It has evolved over four different dance productions based on input from all stakeholders . The choreographers and the dancers have remained enthusiastic about this application and have pro - vided us with valuable feedback . Two choreographers and more than 25 dancers have used the Choreographer’s Note - book during four production cycles . To evaluate whether the tool enabled more creative exploration and enhanced the quality of the creative process , we have conducted three fo - cus groups with dancers and two interviews with choreogra - phers . We asked : • How did you use the Choreographer’s Notebook ? • When / where / why did you use it ? • How did using it affect dance rehearsals ? • Would you want to use it again ? Why / Why not ? For any application it is important to understand how the application was actually used in practice [ 25 ] . Hence we also implemented an instrumentation module in the appli - cation to track the usage pattern of different types of users . We categorized all users in two different groups called ‘the dancers’ and ‘the choreographers’ . We recorded total time spent by different users in each session as well as their us - age of different features in the application . We also tracked the commands used , high - level user interface events and the time of the day when the application was used . The log data provided insights into the usage behavior of different groups . Results The usage pattern of the choreographers and the dancers was very different in nature . While the choreographers spent sig - niﬁcant time critically reviewing recorded video , frequently making comments on dancers’ positions and movements , the dancers spent most of their time navigating through posted comments . The choreographers spent signiﬁcantly more time in each session than the dancers . Choreographer1 logged into the system three times per week and spent an average of 62 minutes in each session and Choreographer2 spent about 40 minutes per session three times per week . The dancers spent an average time ranging from 8 minutes to 26 minutes per session . The rehearsals were scheduled twice a week in the evening and the choreographers gen - erally made it a point to post their comments before noon 203 Figure 6 . A close - up of the control bar showing video controls and timeline cue - point markers for navigation . Figure 7 . Video - in - video commenting . the next day to provide enough time for the dancers to go through the posted comments before the next rehearsal . The dancers exhibited a wide range of usage time . Some of the dancers preferred to go through the annotated video late at night while others used the application to review the last re - hearsal an hour or two before the next rehearsal . Though the application was designed to be fairly democratic in na - ture , allowing everyone to post comments , we noticed that most of the comments came from the choreographers and the dancers used the commenting feature mainly to ask ques - tions about their own movements . While using the Chore - ographer’s Notebook , the choreographers mostly used text commenting to communicate their remarks to the dancers in comparison to the other modalities which were used less frequently . The focus groups and interviews provided qualitative feed - back . All stakeholders found the Choreographer’s Notebook very useful and said that it helped them in the choreographic learning and cleaning process . They used it often in their leisure time as well as just before coming to the rehearsal . One dancer said that , “It was actually nice that you could integrate a dance rehearsal into the rest of your life . It be - came part of my routine , my computer routine , like gmail , school email , Facebook and Choreographer’s Notebook . ” Awareness of the fact that their rehearsal was being recorded helped them to remain in what the choreographer referred to as “performance mode” . One dancer noted that , “ . . . it made me feel more in my character and in my story . ” One choreographer liked the ability to watch a rehearsal video whenever she needed to . She said , “ . . . I was kind of multi - tasking , drinking morning coffee and reading the Choreog - rapher’s Notebook . ” She also liked the ability to jump from scene to scene while annotating , which she was unable to do with her VCR . While video players are old technology , we note that this older technology is still common in the under - funded arts world . Even where choreographers may be us - ing DVDs , most DVD players do not allow easy scrubbing through video . Both choreographers and dancers felt that using the Chore - ographer’s Notebook allowed them to devote more time to actual dancing in the dance studio and that this had posi - tive impacts on the quality of the ﬁnal performance . Some - times they also projected the commented video during re - hearsal and used it as a rehearsal tool . Some of the dancers asked for permission to use the Choreographer’s Notebook for their own work in their choreography classes . The two choreographers we interviewed have asked to continue us - ing the tool . We also noted that during performance week of one production , the choreographer used the tool to celebrate the work of the dancers by posting many positive comments about each night’s performance . The choreographer noted that there is never time for standard video review during per - formance week , but the Choreographer’s Notebook allowed this . In the Spring of 2011 a guest lighting designer also used the tool to view the production from outside of the country , demonstrating the use of the tool to enable remote , asyn - chronous collaboration . The lighting designer used the tool to familiarize himself with the dance , which helped him to plan lighting effects in advance of actually visiting the uni - versity . DISCUSSION Interviews and focus groups brought out some exciting themes which are contextual as well as behavioral . The over - arching context of use of the Choreographer’s Note - book was high expectations for excellence and responsive - ness . The choreographers felt that the dancers who used the application could be ‘trusted’ . During the rehearsal process , there existed a tension of how best to utilize rehearsal time . The choreographers wanted to take advantage of viewing re - hearsal video as a group , but on the other hand didn’t want to spend a lot of time just sitting and watching video during rehearsal time . Choreographers noted that as dancers had already done their home - work ( watching videos with com - ments ) , it took less time in group discussion and so they were able to spend more time dancing . Choreographers also noted that ﬁlming rehearsals and putting them on the Choreographer’s Notebook made dancers step up their performance by dancing at 100 % dur - ing rehearsals . This was remarkable because dancing at 100 % is an important quality for professional dancers and important to foster in students . For example , dancers made mistakes work ; they did not stop and request to start again . Instead , they dealt with the mistake to the best of their abil - ity . This is a critical skill that is important to teach and the application provided an excellent platform for promot - ing that . 204 Dance Critiquing Process One of the major themes which emerged from the focus group studies and the interviews was the change in the dance critiquing process because of the use of this application . The Choreographer’s Notebook greatly modiﬁed the traditional critiquing and correction process . Before Choreographer’s Notebook , the practice was for choreographers to quickly scribble down notes while the dancers danced . Sometimes these notes could be difﬁcult to read , and it was also difﬁ - cult to know what part of the dance the notes referred to . Imagine the difﬁculty in taking detailed notes while watch - ing a continuous string of dozens of movements , each last - ing only a few seconds . The Choreographer’s Notebook supplemented this process by providing the choreographer a ‘pause - able’ and ‘scrub - able’ video , and a commenting fea - ture to make clean and clear annotations . Sometimes when watching one part of the video , it reminded the choreogra - pher to make a note at another point in the dance . This is an important behavior that could not be supported without video annotation . The choreographers noted that watching and annotating a 22 minute long dance video took approxi - mately two hours . This is illustrative of the wealth of feed - back and critique that is missed when commenting on dance in real - time . This application enabled the choreographer to decide that only main critiques were made during rehearsal , while details were saved until later . As in the traditional cri - tiquing process , the choreographers attempted to manage the psychosocial and emotional burden of critique . They made sure they critiqued all dancers , so that no one was singled out . Some dance - related tasks were clearly appropriate to be computerized and / or done at home , and others were best communicated in rehearsal . For example , the Choreogra - pher’s Notebook was very helpful in highlighting spatial re - lational aspects that involved multiple bodies , like matching arm angles . Watching this feedback was beneﬁcial in terms of instantly communicating the problem and necessary ad - justment ( s ) . SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORK The Choreographers Notebook has proven to be instrumen - tal in augmenting the creative process of dance productions . Not only has it helped to create a workﬂow that increased the efﬁciency of rehearsal time , but it also provided choreogra - phers and dancers a platform where they could collaborate and critically analyze their progress . The qualitative anal - ysis further shows that the tools usage increased the time available for actual dancing during the rehearsals which had a positive impact on the quality of the ﬁnal performances . There are limitations to address and features to add . The dancers and choreographers would like comment threading and more powerful navigation mechanisms to help them re - view short segments of a video on a loop . We are currently working on the second version of the Choreographer’s Note - book , which will make this application accessible on mo - bile devices such as smart - phones and tablets . We want to make the application available for the choreographers at re - hearsal so that they can easily add comment markers while watching rehearsal . It is also important to note that dancers have their own critical eye . An open research question is how do dancers watch an annotated video , versus one that has not been annotated ? Would it be beneﬁcial to encour - age or require dancers to watch the video with and without annotations ? We are also interested in exploring the socio - technical impact of this tool . The Choreographer’s Note - book can be further expanded in the future to enable cre - ative exploration of elements such as lighting and interac - tive effects . This would expand the creative participation to include other stakeholders such as lighting directors , stage managers and interactive technologists . We will continue this interdisciplinary work and plan to test the application in other performance domains . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We would like to thank our dancers and choreographers for providing valuable feedback . This work is supported by an NSF CreativeIT grant . REFERENCES 1 . Plymedia - bubbleply . http : / / www . plymedia . com / products / bubbleply / bubbleply . aspx [ Last accessed : 04 / 19 / 2011 ] . 2 . Project pad - home page . http : / / dewey . at . northwestern . edu / ppad2 / [ Last accessed : 04 / 19 / 2011 ] . 3 . TroikaTronix - isadora . http : / / www . troikatronix . com / isadora . html [ Last accessed : 04 / 19 / 2011 ] . 4 . veotag . http : / / www . veotag . com / whatis / [ Last accessed : 04 / 19 / 2011 ] . 5 . Viddler . http : / / www . viddler . com / [ Last accessed : 04 / 19 / 2011 ] . 6 . Video image annotation tool - informatics and telematics institute ( CERTH - ITI ) . http : / / mklab . iti . gr / via / [ Last accessed : 04 / 19 / 2011 ] . 7 . YouTube - broadcast yourself . http : / / www . youtube . com / t / annotations _ about [ Last accessed : 04 / 19 / 2011 ] . 8 . Click - it : Interactive television highlighter for sports action replay . In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Pattern Recognition - Volume 2 - Volume 2 , ICPR ’98 , pages 1484 – , Washington , DC , USA , 1998 . IEEE Computer Society . 9 . G . D . Abowd , C . G . Atkeson , A . Feinstein , C . Hmelo , R . Kooper , S . Long , N . Sawhney , and M . Tani . Teaching and learning as multimedia authoring : the classroom 2000 project . In MULTIMEDIA ’96 : Proceedings of the fourth ACM international conference on Multimedia , pages 187 – 198 , New York , NY , USA , 1996 . ACM . 10 . O . Aubert and Y . Pri´e . Advene : an open - source framework for integrating and visualising audiovisual 205 metadata . In Proceedings of the 15th international conference on Multimedia , MULTIMEDIA ’07 , pages 1005 – 1008 , New York , NY , USA , 2007 . ACM . 11 . D . Bargeron , A . Gupta , J . Grudin , and E . Sanocki . Annotations for streaming video on the web . In CHI ’99 : CHI ’99 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems , pages 278 – 279 , New York , NY , USA , 1999 . ACM . 12 . M . Beetz , N . von Hoyningen - Huene , B . Kirchlechner , S . Gedikli , F . Siles , M . Durus , and M . Lames . ASpoGAMo : Automated Sports Game Analysis Models . International Journal of Computer Science in Sport , 8 ( 1 ) , 2009 . 13 . D . C . A . Bulterman , P . Cesar , and A . J . Jansen . An architecture for viewer - side enrichment of tv content . In Proceedings of the 14th annual ACM international conference on Multimedia , MULTIMEDIA ’06 , pages 651 – 654 , New York , NY , USA , 2006 . ACM . 14 . T . W . Calvert , A . Bruderlin , S . Mah , T . Schiphorst , and C . Welman . The evolution of an interface for choreographers . In CHI ’93 : Proceedings of the INTERACT ’93 and CHI ’93 conference on Human factors in computing systems , pages 115 – 122 , New York , NY , USA , 1993 . ACM . 15 . R . G . Cattelan , C . Teixeira , R . Goularte , and M . D . G . C . Pimentel . Watch - and - comment as a paradigm toward ubiquitous interactive video editing . ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing , Communications , and Applications ( TOMCCAP ) , 4 : 28 : 128 : 24 , Nov . 2008 . ACM ID : 1412201 . 16 . M . Cunningham . Changes : Notes on Choreography . Something Else Press , New York , NY , USA , 1969 . 17 . R . Grove . Thinking in four dimensions : creativity and cognition in contemporary dance . Melbourne University , Carlton Vic . , 2004 . 18 . B . Hosack , C . Miller , and D . Ernst . Videoant : Extending video beyond content delivery through annotation . In T . Bastiaens , J . Dron , and C . Xin , editors , Proceedings of World Conference on E - Learning in Corporate , Government , Healthcare , and Higher Education 2009 , pages 1654 – 1658 , Vancouver , Canada , October 2009 . AACE . 19 . M . Kipp . Anvil - A Generic Annotation Tool for Multimodal Dialogue . In Proceedings of the 7th European Conference on Speech Communication and Technology ( Eurospeech ) , pages 1367 – 1370 , Aalborg , Sept . 2001 . 20 . C . Latulipe , D . Wilson , S . Huskey , M . Word , A . Carroll , E . Carroll , B . Gonzalez , V . Singh , M . Wirth , and D . Lottridge . Exploring the design space in technology - augmented dance . In CHI EA ’10 : Proceedings of the 28th of the international conference extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems , pages 2995 – 3000 , New York , NY , USA , 2010 . ACM . 21 . W . S . Meador , T . J . Rogers , K . O’Neal , E . Kurt , and C . Cunningham . Mixing dance realities - collaborative development of live - motion capture in a performing arts environment . Computers in Entertainment ( CIE ) , 2 : 1212 , Apr . 2004 . ACM ID : 1008233 . 22 . J . Newlove . Laban for Actors and Dancers : Putting Laban’s Movement Theory Into Practice : A Step - by - Step Guide . Routledge , 1 edition , Aug . 1993 . 23 . T . Schiphorst , T . Calvert , C . Lee , C . Welman , and S . Gaudet . Tools for interaction with the creative process of composition . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems : Empowering people , pages 167 – 174 , Seattle , Washington , United States , 1990 . ACM . 24 . M . B . Solano . dance - tech . net / producer . http : / / www . dance - tech . net / [ Last accessed : 04 / 19 / 2011 ] . 25 . M . Terry , M . Kay , B . V . Vugt , B . Slack , and T . Park . Ingimp : introducing instrumentation to an end - user open source application . In CHI ’08 : Proceeding of the twenty - sixth annual SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems , pages 607 – 616 , New York , NY , USA , 2008 . ACM . 206