Every day , parents observe the growing behavioural repertoires of their infants and young children , and the corresponding changes in cognitive and emotional functions . These changes are thought to relate to normal brain development , particularly the development of the hippocampus , the amygdala and the frontal lobes , and the complex circuitry that connects these brain regions . At the other end of the age spectrum , we observe changes in cognition that accompany aging in our parents . These changes are related to both normal and pathological brain processes associated with aging . Studies in animals and humans have shown that during both early childhood and old age the brain is particularly sensitive to stress , probably because it undergoes such important changes during these periods . Furthermore , research now relates exposure to early - life stress with increased reactivity to stress and cognitive deficits in adulthood , indicating that the effects of stress at different periods of life interact . Stress triggers the activation of the hypothalamus - pituitary - adrenal ( HPA ) axis , culminating in the pro - duction of glucocorticoids by the adrenals ( FIG . 1 ) . Receptors for these steroids are expressed throughout the brain ; they can act as transcription factors and so regulate gene expression . Thus , glucocorticoids can have potentially long - lasting effects on the functioning of the brain regions that regulate their release . This Review describes the effects of stress during pre - natal life , infancy , adolescence , adulthood and old age on the brain , behaviour and cognition , using data from ani - mal ( BOX 1 ) and human studies . Here , we propose a model that integrates the effects of stress across the lifespan , along with future directions for stress research . Prenatal stress Animal studies . In animals , exposure to stress early in life has ‘ programming ’ effects on the HPA axis and the brain 1 . A single or repeated exposure of a pregnant female to stress 2 or to glucocorticoids 3 increases mater - nal glucocorticoid secretion . A portion of these gluco - corticoids passes through the placenta to reach the fetus , increasing fetal HPA axis activity and modifying brain development 4 . In rats prenatal stress leads to long - term increases in HPA axis activity 5 . Controlling glucocor - ticoid levels in stressed dams by adrenalectomy and hormone replacement prevents these effects , indicating that elevations in maternal glucocorticoids mediate the prenatal programming of the HPA axis 6 . Glucocorticoids are important for normal brain maturation : they initiate terminal maturation , remodel axons and dendrites and affect cell survival 7 ; both sup - pressed and elevated glucocorticoid levels impair brain development and functioning . For example , admin - istration of synthetic glucocorticoids to pregnant rats delays the maturation of neurons , myelination , glia and vasculature in the offspring , significantly altering neuronal structure and synapse formation and inhibit - ing neurogenesis 4 . Furthermore , juvenile and adult rats exposed to prenatal stress have decreased numbers of mineralocorticoid receptors ( MRs ) and glucocorticoid recep - tors ( GRs ) in the hippocampus , possibly because of epi - genetic effects on gene transcription 8 . The hippocampus * Université de Montréal , Mental Health Research Centre , Fernand Seguin Hôpital Louis‑H Lafontaine , Montreal , Quebec , H1N 3V2 , Canada . ‡ Laboratory of Neuroendocrinology , The Rockefeller University , 1230 York Avenue , New York , New York 10021 , USA . § Institute of Child Development , University of Minnesota , Minneapolis , Minnesota 55455 , USA . | | Department of Psychiatry , Emory University , 101 Woodruff Circle , Suite 4000 , Atlanta , Georgia 30307 , USA . Correspondence to S . J . L . e‑mail : sonia . lupien @ umontreal . ca doi : 10 . 1038 / nrn2639 Published online 29 April 2009 Programming When an environmental factor that acts during a sensitive developmental period affects the structure and function of tissues , leading to effects that persist throughout life . Effects of stress throughout the lifespan on the brain , behaviour and cognition Sonia J . Lupien * , Bruce S . McEwen ‡ , Megan R . Gunnar § and Christine Heim | | Abstract | Chronic exposure to stress hormones , whether it occurs during the prenatal period , infancy , childhood , adolescence , adulthood or aging , has an impact on brain structures involved in cognition and mental health . However , the specific effects on the brain , behaviour and cognition emerge as a function of the timing and the duration of the exposure , and some also depend on the interaction between gene effects and previous exposure to environmental adversity . Advances in animal and human studies have made it possible to synthesize these findings , and in this Review a model is developed to explain why different disorders emerge in individuals exposed to stress at different times in their lives . R E V I E W S 434 | junE 2009 | VoluME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / neuro R E V I E W S © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Neuroscience Hippocampus Hypothalamus Amygdala CRHAVP ACTH Glucocorticoids Adrenal cortex Anterior pituitary Frontal cortex GRs GRs GRs MRs and GRs Mineralocorticoid receptor A receptor that is activated by mineralocorticoids , such as aldosterone and deoxycorti - costerone , as well as glucocorticoids , such as cortisol and cortisone . It also responds to progestins . Glucocorticoid receptor A receptor that is activated by cortisol , corticosterone and other glucocorticoids and is expressed in almost every cell in the body . It regulates genes controlling development , metabolism and the immune response . inhibits HPA axis activity ( FIG . 1 ) , and a prenatal stress - induced reduction in hippocampal MRs and GRs could decrease this inhibition , with a resulting increase in basal and / or stress - induced glucocorticoid secretion . In rhe - sus monkeys , prenatal treatment with the synthetic GR agonist dexamethasone causes a dose - dependent degen - eration of hippocampal neurons , leading to a reduced hippocampal volume at 20 months of age 9 . Effects on other brain regions are also apparent . Rats exposed to stress during the last week of gestation have significantly decreased dendritic spine density in the anterior cingulate gyrus and orbitofrontal cortex 10 . Furthermore , prenatal exposure to glucocorticoids leads to increased adult corticotropin - releasing hormone ( CRH ) levels in the central nucleus of the amygdala , a key region in the regulation of fear and anxiety 11 . Exposure to prenatal stress has three major effects on adult behaviour : learning impairments , especially in aging rats 12 ; enhanced sensitivity to drugs of abuse 13 ; and increases in anxiety - and depression - related behav - iours 14 . The impaired learning is thought to result from the effects of prenatal stress on hippocampal function 15 , whereas the effects on anxiety are thought to be medi - ated by prenatal stress - induced increases in CRH in the amygdala 11 . Prenatal glucocorticoid exposure affects the developing dopaminergic system , which is involved in reward - or drug - seeking behaviour 16 , and it has been suggested that the increased sensitivity to drugs of abuse is related to the interaction between prenatal stress , glucocorticoids and dopaminergic neurons 16 . Human studies . In agreement with animal data , findings from retrospective studies on children whose mothers experienced psychological stress or adverse events or received exogenous glucocorticoids during pregnancy suggest that there are long - term neurodevelopmental effects 17 . First , maternal stress or anxiety 18 , depression 19 and glucocorticoid treatment during pregnancy 17 have been linked with lower birthweight or smaller size ( for gestational age ) of the baby . More importantly , mater - nal stress , depression and anxiety have been associated with increased basal HPA axis activity in the offspring at different ages , including 6 months 20 , 5 years 21 and 10 years 22 . Disturbances in child development ( both neurologi - cal and cognitive ) and behaviour have been associated with maternal stress 23 and maternal depression dur - ing pregnancy 24 , and with fetal exposure to exogenous gluco corticoids in early pregnancy 25 . These behavioural alterations include unsociable and inconsiderate behav - iours , attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and sleep disturbances as well as some psychiatric disorders , including depressive symptoms , drug abuse and mood and anxiety disorders . Very few studies have measured Figure 1 | The stress system . When the brain detects a threat , a coordinated physiological response involving autonomic , neuroendocrine , metabolic and immune system components is activated . A key system in the stress response that has been extensively studied is the hypothalamus - pituitary - adrenal ( HPA ) axis . Neurons in the medial parvocellular region of the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus release corticotropin - releasing hormone ( CRH ) and arginine vasopressin ( AVP ) . This triggers the subsequent secretion of adrenocortico - tropic hormone ( ACTH ) from the pituitary gland , leading to the production of glucocorticoids by the adrenal cortex . In addition , the adrenal medulla releases catecholamines ( adrenaline and noradrenaline ) ( not shown ) . The responsiveness of the HPA axis to stress is in part determined by the ability of glucocorticoids to regulate ACTH and CRH release by binding to two corticosteroid receptors , the glucocorticoid receptor ( GR ) and the mineralocorticoid receptor ( MR ) . Following activation of the system , and once the perceived stressor has subsided , feedback loops are triggered at various levels of the system ( that is , from the adrenal gland to the hypothalamus and other brain regions such as the hippocampus and the frontal cortex ) in order to shut the HPA axis down and return to a set homeostatic point . By contrast , the amygdala , which is involved in fear processing 142 , activates the HPA axis in order to set in motion the stress response that is necessary to deal with the challenge . Not shown are the other major systems and factors that respond to stress , including the autonomic nervous system , the inflammatory cytokines and the metabolic hormones . All of these are affected by HPA activity and , in turn , affect HPA function , and they are also implicated in the pathophysiological changes that occur in response to chronic stress , from early experiences into adult life . R E V I E W S nATuRE REVIEwS | NeuroscieNce VoluME 10 | junE 2009 | 435 f o c u S o n S t R E S S © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved changes in the brain as a function of prenatal stress in humans . However , a recent study showed that low birth - weight combined with lower levels of maternal care was associated with reduced hippocampal volume in adult - hood 26 . This finding is consistent with evidence that effects of prenatal stress in humans are often moderated by the quality of postnatal care , which in turn is consist - ent with the protracted postnatal development of the human brain . Postnatal stress Animal studies . Although in rodents the postnatal period is relatively hyporesponsive to stress ( BOX 2 ) , one of the most potent stressors for pups is separation from the dam . long separation periods ( 3 h or more each day ) activate the pups’ HPA axis , as evidenced by increased plasma levels of adrenocorticotropic hormone and glucocorticoids 27 . Protracted maternal separation also reduces pituitary CRH binding sites 28 , and low levels of maternal care reduce GR levels in the hippocampus 29 . The effects of maternal deprivation extend beyond the HPA axis . Early prolonged maternal separation in rats increases the density of CRH binding sites in the prefrontal cortex , amygdala , hypothalamus , hippo - campus and cerebellum , as measured post - infancy 28 . In the hippocampus CRH mediates stress - related loss of branches and spines 30 , and in the amygdala and hypotha - lamus elevated CRH levels are associated with increased anxiety and HPA axis activity , respectively 31 . Thus , the increase in CRH - binding sites induced by maternal sep - aration might have negative effects over time . The long - term effects of prolonged separation depend on the age of the pup and the duration of the deprivation , with the effects noted above generally being greater when these separations occur earlier in infancy and last for longer durations 32 . Although the rodent work provides a rich frame - work for conceptualizing the impact of early - life stress , the fact that the rodent brain is much less developed at birth than the primate brain makes translation of the findings to humans somewhat challenging ( BOX 3 ) . non - human primates have more human - like brain matura - tion at birth and patterns of parent – offspring relations , and so provide an important bridge in the translation of the rodent findings . Studies in monkeys have shown that repeated , unpredictable separations from the mother 33 , unpredictable maternal feedings 34 or spontaneous mater - nal abusive behaviour 35 increases CRH concentrations in the cerebrospinal fluid and alters the diurnal activity of the HPA axis for months or even years after the period of adversity : cortisol levels are lower than normal early in the morning ( around wake - up ) and slightly higher than normal later in the day , an effect that seems to reverse over time in the absence of continued , ongoing psy - chosocial stress 35 . These diurnal effects have not been noted in rodents , but the effects on higher brain regions seem to be comparable to the rodent findings and include heightened fear behaviour 36 , exaggerated startle responses 33 , hippocampal changes such as an increase in the intensity of non - phosphorylated neurofilament pro - tein immunoreactivity in the dentate gyrus granule cell layer 37 , and atypical development of prefrontal regions involved in emotion and behaviour control 38 . Human studies . A human equivalent of the rodent maternal separation paradigms might be studies of children who attend full - day , out - of - home day care centres . Studies have reported that glucocorticoid levels rise in these children over the day , more so in toddlers than in older preschool - aged children 39 , 40 . However , it is important to note that the elevated glucocorticoid levels observed are less pronounced than those observed in rodents and monkeys exposed to maternal separation . Moreover , although age accounts for most of the varia - tion in the rise in glucocorticoid levels by late afternoon , the quality of care is also important , with less supportive care producing larger increases , especially for children who are more emotionally negative and behaviour - ally disorganized 39 . So far , there is no evidence that the elevated glucocorticoid levels associated with being in day care affect development ; however , children who are exposed to poor care for long hours early in develop - ment have an increased risk of behaviour problems later in development 41 . Parent – child interactions and the psychological state of the mother also influence the child’s HPA axis activity . Beginning early in the first year , when the HPA system of the infant is quite labile , sensitive parenting is associ - ated with either smaller increases in or less prolonged activations of the HPA axis to everyday perturbations 42 . Maternal depression often interferes with sensitive and supportive care of the infant and young child ; there is increasing evidence that offspring of depressed mothers , Box 1 | Models to study stress in animals and humans The hypothalamus - pituitary - adrenal axis can be activated by a wide variety of stressors . Some of the most potent are psychological or processive stressors ( that is , stressors that involve higher - order sensory cognitive processing ) , as opposed to physiological or systemic stressors . Many psychological stressors are anticipatory in nature — that is , they are based on expectation as the result of learning and memory ( for example , conditioned stimuli in animals and the anticipation of threats , real or implied , in humans ) or on species - specific predispositions ( for example , avoidance of open space in rodents or the threat of social rejection and negative social evaluations in humans ) . Animal studies allow the development of experimental protocols in which animals are submitted to acute and / or chronic stress and the resulting effects on brain and behaviour are studied . Experimental stressful ‘early - life’ manipulations in animals can be broadly split into prenatal and postnatal manipulations . Prenatal manipulations involve maternal stress , exposing the mother to synthetic glucocorticoids or maternal nutrient restriction . Postnatal manipulations include depriving the animal of maternal contact , modifying maternal behaviour and exposing the animal to synthetic glucocorticoids . In these protocols , the cause – effects relationship between stress and its impact on the brain can be demonstrated . By contrast , and because of ethical issues , the cause – effects impact of stress on the brain cannot be studied in humans , and most human studies are correlational by nature . However , there are some ‘experiments of nature’ that can be used to inform scientists about the effects of chronic exposure to early adversity on brain development and of adulthood and late - life stress effects on the brain . Intrauterine under - growth and low birth weight are considered indices of prenatal stress ( including malnutrition ) in humans . In terms of postnatal stress , low socio - economic status , maltreatment and war are considered adverse events . In adults and older adults , studies of chronic caregivers ( spouses of patients with brain degenerative disorders , parents of chronically sick children and health - care professionals ) provide a human model of the impact of chronic stress on the brain , behaviour and cognition . R E V I E W S 436 | junE 2009 | VoluME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / neuro R E V I E W S © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved especially those who were clinically depressed in the child’s early years , are at risk of heightened activity of the HPA axis 43 or of developing depression during ado - lescence ( controlling for maternal depression during adolescence ) 44 . However , it should be noted that it can be difficult to exclude potentially confounding genetic factors in such studies . Furthermore , preschool - aged children of depressed mothers exhibit electroencephalo - graphic alterations in frontal lobe activity that corre - late with diminished empathy and other behavioural problems 45 . In contrast to findings of elevated glucocorticoid lev - els in conditions of low parental care , studies in human children exposed to severe deprivation ( for example , in orphanages or other institutions ) , neglect or abuse report lower basal levels of glucocorticoids , similar to what has been observed in primates 39 . one proposed mechanism for the development of hypocortisolism is downregulation of the HPA axis at the level of the pitui - tary in response to chronic CRH drive from the hypoth - alamus 46 , whereas a second possible mechanism is target tissue hypersensitivity to glucocorticoids 47 . Importantly , this hypocortisolism in humans in response to severe stress may not be permanent : sensitive and supportive care of fostered children normalizes their basal gluco - corticoid levels after only 10 weeks 48 . Another impor - tant finding comes from a recent study which showed that exposure to early adversity is associated with epi - genetic regulation of the GR receptor , as measured in the post - mortem brains of suicide victims 49 . Stress in adolescence Animal studies . In rodents the period of adolescence has three stages : a prepubescent or early adolescent period from day 21 to 34 , a mid - adolescent period from day 34 to 46 and a late adolescent period from day 46 to 59 ( ReF . 50 ) . In humans , adolescence is often considered to demarcate the period of sexual maturation ( that is , starting with menarche in girls ) . Although adolescence is a time of significant brain development , particularly in the frontal lobe 51 , there has been relatively little research on stress during this period in rodents . In adolescent rodents , HPA function is char - acterized by a prolonged activation in response to stres - sors compared with adulthood . Moreover , prepubertal rats have a delayed rise of glucocorticoid levels and prolonged glucocorticoid release in response to several types of stressors compared with adult rats 52 , owing to incomplete maturation of negative - feedback systems 53 . In contrast to adult rats , which show a habituation of the stress response with repeated exposure to the same stressor 54 , juvenile rats have a potentiated release of adrenocorticotropic hormone and glucocorticoids after repeated exposure to stress 55 , suggesting that the HPA axis responses to acute and chronic stress depend on the developmental stage of the animal . Compared with exposure to stress in adulthood alone , exposure to stress as both a juvenile and an adult increases basal anxiety levels in the adult 56 . Moreover , exposure to juvenile stress results in greater HPA axis activation than a dou - ble exposure to stress during adulthood 56 , and this effect is long - lasting . These results suggest that repeated stress in adolescence leads to greater exposure of the brain to glucocorticoids than similar experiences in adulthood . The fact that the adolescent brain undergoes vigor - ous maturation and the fact that , in rats , the hippocam - pus continues to grow until adulthood suggest that the adolescent brain may be more susceptible to stressors and the concomitant exposure to high levels of gluco - corticoids than the adult brain . Consistent with this hypothesis are findings that increased glucocorticoid levels before but not after puberty alter the expression of genes for nMDA ( N - methyl - d - aspartate ) receptor sub - units in the hippocampus 57 . In addition , chronic , vari - able stress during the peripubertal juvenile period results in reduced hippocampal volume in adulthood , which is accompanied by impairments in Morris water maze navigation and delayed shutdown of the HPA response to acute stress 58 . These differences became evident only in adulthood 58 , suggesting that stress in adolescence reduces hippocampal growth . Finally , the effects of juve - nile stress are long - lasting : adult rats exposed to juvenile stress exhibit reduced exploratory behaviour and poor avoidance learning 59 . Moreover , stress in adolescence increases susceptibility to drugs of abuse during the adolescent period 60 and in adulthood 61 . Human studies . Interestingly , studies in human adoles - cents also suggest that the adolescent period is associ - ated with heightened basal and stress - induced activity of the HPA axis 62 . This could be related to the dramatic changes in sex steroid levels during this period , as these steroids influence HPA axis activity 50 . However , studies of stress in adolescent rats cannot be translated directly to humans because the brain areas that are undergoing development during adolescence differ between rats and humans : although the rodent hippocampus continues to Box 2 | The stress hyporesponsive period : from animals to humans Despite there being clear evidence that corticotropin - releasing hormone - containing neurons are present in the fetal rat 139 , in rodents noxious stimuli evoke only a subnormal hypothalamus - pituitary - adrenal ( HPA ) axis response during the first 2 weeks of life 140 . During this so - called stress hyporesponsive period ( SHRP ) , baseline plasma glucocorticoid levels are lower than normal and are only minimally increased by exposure to a noxious stressor 140 . The SHRP is due to a rapid regression of the HPA axis after birth 140 and may have evolved in rodents to protect the rapidly developing brain from the impact of elevated glucocorticoids . Evidence is accumulating that in children there may be a comparable hyporesponsive period that emerges in infancy and extends throughout most of childhood 141 . At birth , glucocorticoid levels increase sharply in response to various stressors , such as a physical examination or a heel lance . However , over the course of the first year the HPA axis becomes more insensitive to stressors . No study has assessed the exact period over which this human SHRP may occur , but in adolescents glucocorticoid levels can become elevated in response to a psychosocial stressor 141 , which suggests that the SHRP could extend throughout childhood . In rodents the SHRP is maintained primarily by maternal care ( that is , the presence of the dam seems to suppress HPA axis activity ) ; indeed , maternal separation is a potent inducer of a stress response , even during the SHRP . Similarly , in humans the apparent hyporesponsivity of the HPA axis might reflect the fact that during the first year of life the HPA axis comes under strong social regulation or parental buffering 141 . Here again , stressors that involve a lack of parental care or social contact can induce a stress response in children . R E V I E W S nATuRE REVIEwS | NeuroscieNce VoluME 10 | junE 2009 | 437 f o c u S o n S t R E S S © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved develop well into adulthood , in humans it is fully devel - oped by 2 years of age 63 . The frontal cortex and amygdala continue to develop in both species , but humans have larger ontogenic bouts of development in frontal regions than do rodents ( BOX 3 ) . There are indications that the adolescent human brain might be especially sensitive to the effects of elevated levels of glucocorticoids and , by extension , to stress . Recent studies on the ontogeny of MR and GR expres - sion show that GR mRnA levels in the prefrontal cortex are high in adolescence and late adulthood compared with in infancy , young adulthood and senescence 64 . This suggests that the cognitive and emotional processes that are regulated by these brain areas might be sensitive to GR - mediated regulation by glucocorticoids in an age - dependent manner . Various forms of psychopathology , including depression and anxiety , increase in prevalence in adolescence 65 , 66 . Periods of heightened stress often precede the first episodes of these disorders , raising the possibility that heightened HPA reactivity during adoles - cence increases sensitivity to the onset of stress - related mental disorders . Adolescence is also a period in which the long - lasting effects of earlier exposures to stress become evi - dent . Adolescents who grew up in poor economic condi - tions have higher baseline glucocorticoid levels 67 , as do adolescents whose mothers were depressed in the early postnatal period 44 . High early - morning glucocorticoid levels that vary markedly from day to day during the transition to adolescence are not associated with depres - sive symptoms at that time , but they predict increased risk for depression by age 16 ( ReF . 44 ) . Although early - life stress impairs hippocampal devel - opment in rodents , there is currently little evidence of comparable effects in humans . Children exposed to physical or sexual abuse early in life do not exhibit reduced hippocampal volume ( relative to whole - brain size ) as adolescents , although adults with these histo - ries do show volume reductions 68 . This finding holds even when the abused children have been selected for chronic post - traumatic stress disorder ( PTSD ) , and even though in some cases they exhibit overall reductions in brain volume 69 . By contrast , alterations in grey matter volume and the neuronal integrity of the frontal cortex , and reduced size of the anterior cingulate cortex , have been reported in adolescents exposed to early ( and con - tinued ) adversity 70 . Together , these results suggest that in humans the frontal cortex , which continues to develop during adolescence , might be particularly vulnerable to the effects of stress during adolescence . By contrast , the hippocampus , which develops mainly in the first years of life , might be less affected by exposure to adversity in adolescence . Stress in adulthood Animal studies . Studies on adult stress in rodents have delineated the effects of acute versus chronic stress on brain and behaviour . The impact of acute stressors depends on the level of glucocorticoid elevations , with small increases resulting in enhanced hippocampus - mediated learning and memory , and larger , prolonged elevations impairing hippocampal function 71 . The inverted - u - shaped effects of acute glucocorticoid ele - vations might serve adaptive purposes by increasing vigilance and learning processes during acute challenges . The mechanism that underlies the acute bipha - sic actions of glucocorticoids on cognition involves the adrenergic system in the basolateral nucleus of the amygdala . By enhancing noradrenergic function in the amygdala , glucocorticoids have a permissive effect on the priming of long - term potentiation in the den - tate gyrus by the basolateral nucleus 72 . This modulation of noradrenergic function by glucocorticoids has been linked to the enhanced memory for emotional events that occur under stress 73 . Chronic stress or chronic exogenous administration of glucocorticoids in rodents causes dendritic atrophy in hippocampal CA3 pyramidal neurons 74 . However , these changes take several weeks to develop and are reversed by 10 days after the cessation of the stressor 75 . Chronic stress in adult rats also inhibits neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus 76 and causes hippocampal volume loss 77 . Importantly , this volume decrease is not associ - ated with reduced neuron numbers and is not limited to the dentate gyrus 78 , suggesting that reduced neuro - genesis might not be the only contributing factor . The morphological changes that take place in the hippocam - pus after chronic stress have been related to changes in spatial learning 79 , which are reversed following 21 days of withdrawal from stress 80 . Here , it is interesting to note that in contrast to the effects of chronic or severe stress on the brain and behaviour earlier in life , which are long - lasting , effects of adulthood stress — even chronic stress — are reversed after a few weeks of non - stress . These differences between the effects of early and adulthood Box 3 | Stress effects on the brain : timing is crucial In animals that give birth to relatively mature young ( for example , primates , sheep and guinea pigs ) , maximal brain growth and most of the neuroendocrine maturation occurs in utero . However , in rats , rabbits and mice the mother gives birth to immature young and most of the neuroendocrine development occurs in the postnatal period 17 . In humans the hypothalamus - pituitary - adrenal axis is highly responsive at birth , but brain development is not finished . The volume of the hippocampal formation increases sharply until the age of 2 years , whereas amygdala volume continues to increase slowly until the late 20s 63 . By contrast , the development of the frontal cortex in humans takes place mostly between 8 and 14 years of age 63 . The late increase in prefrontal volumes is consistent with data showing that this region develops latest in terms of myelination and synaptic density in humans 136 . Prenatal and postnatal stress can both thus have contrasting effects in different species because perinatal manipulations will affect different stages of development as a function of the species studied . Consequently , stress in the first week of the rodent’s life is often developmentally equated with stress during the last trimester of human gestation . Significant decreases in brain volume have been reported in aged animals and humans , although most of the studies performed are cross - sectional . In men the volume of the hippocampus starts to decrease by the second decade of life , whereas in women this decrease is delayed until around 40 years of age , possibly owing to the protective effects of oestrogen 137 . By contrast , amygdala volume decreases around the sixth decade of life in humans 63 . In the frontal cortex , different subregions are differentially affected by aging . For example , aging is associated with shrinking of the dorsolateral and inferior frontal cortices , but no age effects have been reported for the anterior cingulate cortex , the frontal pole or the precentral gyrus 138 . R E V I E W S 438 | junE 2009 | VoluME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / neuro R E V I E W S © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved stress might be related to differences in the severity of stressors to which pups and adult rats are exposed or in the development of the hippocampus at the time of exposure . Pyramidal neurons in layers II / III of the prefron - tal cortex also show dendritic retraction and a reduc - tion in spine number 81 in response to chronic stress in adulthood — this can be observed 24 h after a single forced - swim stress 82 — but remodelling occurs after ces - sation of the stressor 83 . In accordance with these find - ings , glucocorticoid hypersecretion is associated with reduced volume of at least the right anterior cingulate cortex in rodents 84 . Contrary to the reduction in hip - pocampal and frontal volumes , chronic stress in adult rodents leads to dendritic hypertrophy in the baso lateral amygdala 85 . Moreover , a recent study showed that even a single acute administration of glucocorticoids caused dend ritic hypertrophy in this area 12 days later 86 . The dendritic hypertrophy was correlated with anxi - ety in both the acute 86 and the chronic 85 administration paradigms . Human studies . In humans , studies of the effects of acute stress confirm animal studies and report the presence of an inverted - u - shaped relationship between gluco - corticoid levels and cognitive performance 87 . However , contrary to animal studies , in which most laboratory tests for learning and memory involve a fear and / or an emotional process 88 , tests of learning and memory in humans can differentiate the effects of glucocorticoids on the processing of neutral versus emotional informa - tion . Most studies to date have shown that acute gluco - corticoid elevations significantly increase memory for emotional information , whereas they impair the retrieval of neutral information 89 . only a few reports suggest that there is an association between exposure to chronic stress and reduced hippo - campal volume in individuals not suffering from men - tal health disorders ( for a review see ReF . 90 ) . However , a recent study reported that low self - esteem , a potent predictor of increased reactivity to stress in humans 91 , is associated with reduced hippocampal volume 92 . Most of the studies of chronic - stress effects on the adult human brain have concentrated either on stress - related psychopathologies or on the impact of early - life stress on adult psychopathology . A large number of stud - ies have reported elevated basal glucocorticoid levels in individuals with some forms of depression 93 , whereas reduced basal glucocorticoid concentrations have been reported in patients with PTSD 94 , although this finding has been controversial 95 . Given that low glucocorticoid concentrations seem to develop in early childhood in response to neglect or trauma , it is possible that low cortisol predicts vulnerability to developing PTSD in response to trauma in adulthood . Studies of adults who suffered childhood abuse also reveal hyper - reactivity of the HPA axis in abused , depressed individuals 96 and hypoactivity in those with PTSD 94 . The changes in abused , depressed adults have been associated with CRH - induced ‘escape’ of gluco - corticoid secretion from suppression by treatment with dexamethasone 97 , suggesting that the glucocorticoid feedback of the HPA axis is impaired under conditions of increased hypothalamic drive . Thus , a decreased capac - ity of glucocorticoids to inhibit the HPA axis when it is stimulated could further accentuate CnS responses to stressors . In agreement with this suggestion , increased cerebrospinal fluid CRH levels have been reported in individuals who reported childhood stress 98 and childhood abuse 99 . Decreased hippocampal volume and function are landmark features of depression and PTSD 100 , 101 . one cross - sectional study 102 found that a smaller hippo - campus in women with major depression was associ - ated with experiences of childhood trauma , whereas depressed women without such trauma had hippocam - pal volumes similar to healthy controls . This supports the notion that certain brain changes in patients with depression or PTSD could represent markers of vulner - ability for the disorder rather than markers of the dis - order itself . This finding is in line with results from a twin study of Vietnam veterans 103 which showed that decreased hippocampal volume is not a consequence of combat exposure or PTSD : decreased volume was also present in unexposed co - twins , and thus it might be a pre - existing risk factor for PTSD that could be genetic or rooted early in life . Stress in aging Animal studies . Approximately 30 % of aged rats have basal glucocorticoid hypersecretion , which is correlated with memory impairments and reduced hippocampal volume 104 . If a middle - aged rat is exposed for a long period to high levels of exogenous glucocorticoids , it will develop memory impairments and hippocampal atrophy 105 similar to those observed in these 30 % of aged rats . Conversely , artificially keeping glucocorticoid lev - els low in middle - aged rats prevents the emergence of both memory deficits and hippocampal atrophy in old age 106 . Several groups have also found that chronic stress in aged rats can accelerate the appearance of biomarkers of hippocampal aging ( for example , frequency potentia - tion and synaptic excitability thresholds ) and that excess endogenous or exogenous glucocorticoids induce hip - pocampal dendritic atrophy and inhibit neurogenesis 107 . Finally , in aged monkeys 108 chronic glucocorticoid treat - ment can increase amyloid - β pathology , similar to that reported in Alzheimer’s disease . These results have given rise to the glucocorticoid cascade hypothesis 109 , which suggests that there is a rela - tionship between cumulative exposure to high glucocor - ticoid levels and hippocampal atrophy . It was recently renamed the neurotoxicity hypothesis 103 , because the proposed explanation for this relationship is that pro - longed exposure to stress hormones reduces the ability of neurons to resist insults , thus increasing the rate at which they are damaged by other toxic challenges or ordinary attrition 109 . Glucocorticoids might have a similar neuro - toxic effect in the prefrontal cortex . A study demon - strated an enhanced elevation of extracellular glutamate levels post - stress in the hippocampus and medial pre - frontal cortex of aged rats compared with young rats 110 . R E V I E W S nATuRE REVIEwS | NeuroscieNce VoluME 10 | junE 2009 | 439 f o c u S o n S t R E S S © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Stress in adolescence Stress in adulthood Stress in aging Postnatal stress Prenatal stress Birth 2 8 18 30 60 90 Amygdala Frontal cortex Hippocampus Programming effects Differentiation effects Outcome Maintenance / manifestation effects Maintenance / manifestation effects ↑ Glucocorticoids ↑↑ Glucocorticoids ↓↓ Glucocorticoids Amygdala Frontal cortex Hippocampus Nature Reviews | Neuroscience ↑ Glucocorticoids ( maternal separation ) ↓ Glucocorticoids ( severe trauma ) ↑ Glucocorticoids ( depression ) ↓ Glucocorticoids ( PTSD ) Potentiation / incubation effects ↓ Glucocorticoids ( PTSD ) ↑ Glucocorticoids ( cognitive decline ) Effect on HPA axis Increased glutamate levels after stress , and perhaps other neurotoxic insults , might thus increase the vulnerability of the aging brain to neuronal damage . Human studies . Aging , healthy humans exhibit higher mean diurnal levels of cortisol than younger individu - als 111 , and a longitudinal study has found that elevated plasma glucocorticoid levels over years in older adults negatively correlates with hippocampal volume and memory 112 . Given that aged individuals with Alzheimer’s disease present both memory impairments and hippo - campal atrophy , studies have assessed basal glucocor - ticoid levels in this population and found that they are higher than in controls 113 . In addition , chronic glucocor - ticoid treatment has been shown to worsen cognition in people with Alzheimer’s disease 114 . The frontal lobe also seems to be sensitive to glucocor - ticoid effects during human aging . using a novel in vitro post - mortem tracing method on human brain slices , Dai et al . 115 found an inverted - u - shaped effect of glucocor - ticoids on axonal transport in prefrontal neurons with , in most cases , a stimulating effect at low concentrations and a depressing effect at high concentrations . Given that axonal transport plays a crucial part in neuronal survival and function , these results suggest that gluco - corticoids potentially have negative effects on prefrontal cortex neurons’ survival and / or function . A model of stress effects throughout life The data obtained in animals and humans suggest that chronic or repeated exposure to stress has enduring effects on the brain , through activation of the HPA axis and the release of glucocorticoids , with the highest impact on those structures that are developing at the time of the stress exposure ( in young individuals ) and those that are undergoing age - related changes ( in adult and aged indi - viduals ) . Stress in the prenatal period affects the devel - opment of many of the brain regions that have a role in regulating the HPA axis — that is , the hippocampus , the frontal cortex and the amygdala ( programming effects ( FIG . 2 ) ) . During childhood the hippocampus — which continues to develop after birth — might be the brain region that is most vulnerable to the effects of chronic stress , possibly through a process of increased CRH drive in the hippocampus 116 . Because it modulates HPA axis activity , altered functioning of the hippocampus Figure 2 | The life cycle model of stress . How the effects of chronic or repeated exposure to stress ( or a single exposure to severe stress ) at different stages in life depend on the brain areas that are developing or declining at the time of the exposure . Stress in the prenatal period affects the development of many of the brain regions that are involved in regulating the hypothalamus - pituitary - adrenal ( HPA ) axis — that is , the hippocampus , the frontal cortex and the amygdala ( programming effects ) . Postnatal stress has varying effects : exposure to maternal separation during childhood leads to increased secretion of glucocorticoids , whereas exposure to severe abuse is associated with decreased levels of glucocorticoids . Thus , glucocorticoid production during childhood differentiates as a function of the environment ( differentiation effects ) . From the prenatal period onwards , all developing brain areas are sensitive to the effects of stress hormones ( broken blue bars ) ; however , some areas undergo rapid growth during a particular period ( solid blue bars ) . From birth to 2 years of age the hippocampus is developing ; it might therefore be the brain area that is most vulnerable to the effects of stress at this time . By contrast , exposure to stress from birth to late childhood might lead to changes in amygdala volume , as this brain region continues to develop until the late 20s . During adolescence the hippocampus is fully organized , the amygdala is still developing and there is an important increase in frontal volume . Consequently , stress exposure during this period should have major effects on the frontal cortex . Studies show that adolescents are highly vulnerable to stress , possibly because of a protracted glucocorticoid response to stress that persists into adulthood ( potentiation / incubation effects ) . In adulthood and during aging the brain regions that undergo the most rapid decline as a result of aging ( red bars ) are highly vulnerable to the effects of stress hormones . Stress during these periods can lead to the manifestation of incubated effects of early adversity on the brain ( manifestation effects ) or to maintenance of chronic effects of stress ( maintenance effects ) . PTSD , post - traumatic stress disorder . R E V I E W S 440 | junE 2009 | VoluME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / neuro R E V I E W S © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved might cause glucocorticoid hyposecretion in cases of severe abuse , or increased basal cortisol levels in cases of maternal deprivation ( differentiation effects ( FIG . 2 ) ) . By contrast , in adolescence the frontal cortex , which undergoes major development at this stage , may be most vulnerable to the effects of stress , possibly leading to a protracted glucocorticoid response to stress that persists into adulthood ( potentiation / incubation effects ( FIG . 2 ) ) . In adulthood and old age the brain regions that undergo the most rapid decline as a result of aging are highly vul - nerable to the effects of stress hormones . For example , in the hippocampus glucocorticoids affect neurogen - esis , neuronal survival rate and dendritic arborization ( manifestation / maintenance effects ( FIG . 2 ) ) . The neurotoxicity and vulnerability hypotheses . The data obtained in adults and older animals and humans have led to the neurotoxicity hypothesis 109 , which sug - gests that prolonged exposure to glucocorticoids reduces the ability of neurons to resist insults , increasing the rate at which they are damaged by other toxic challenges or ordinary attrition 109 . This hypothesis implies that a reduced hippocampal size is the end product of years or decades of PTSD , depressive symptoms or chronic stress . Although the neurotoxicity hypothesis has been confirmed by various animal and human studies , it does not explain the hyposecretion of glucocorticoids that occurs in patients suffering from PTSD , who also present reduced hippocampal volume . Data obtained in children , adolescents or adult ani - mals and humans exposed to acute or early - life trauma have led to the vulnerability hypothesis 103 . In contrast to the neurotoxicity hypothesis , the vulnerability hypoth - esis suggests that reduced hippocampal volume in adult - hood is not a consequence of chronic exposure to PTSD , depression or chronic stress , but is a pre - existing risk fac - tor for stress - related disorders that is induced by genetics and / or early exposure to stress 117 . unlike the neurotoxicity hypothesis , the vulnerability hypothesis can explain gluco - corticoid hyposecretion in patients with PTSD . Indeed , studies in children facing significant adversity , such as abuse , report the development of glucocorticoid hypo - secretion 39 , which might last until adulthood and confer vulnerability to developing PTSD as a result of trauma . we think that the two hypotheses are not mutually exclusive when viewed from a developmental perspec - tive . Indeed , the data summarized in this Review suggest that there might be early windows of vulnerability ( or sensitive periods 68 ) during which specific regions of the developing brain are most susceptible to environmental influences , through a neurotoxicity process . Exposure to stress and / or adversity during these key vulnerable periods might slow the development of those brain regions for the duration of the adversity . when meas - ured in adulthood , the reduced volumes of these brain regions could be a strong marker of the time of exposure to early adversity rather than of the effects of specific traumas on various brain regions . These windows of vul - nerability could also be used to predict the nature of the psychopathology that will result from exposure to stress at different ages . Exposure to adversity at the time of hippocampal development could lead to hippocampus - dependent emotional disorders , which would be differ - ent from disorders arising from exposure to adversity at times of frontal cortex development . Two recent studies support this hypothesis . The first reported that women who experienced trauma before the age of 12 years had increased risk for major depression , whereas women who experienced trauma between 12 and 18 years of age more frequently developed PTSD 118 . The second study reported that repeated episodes of sexual abuse were associated with reduced hippocampal volume if the abuse occurred early in childhood , but with reduced prefrontal cortex volume if the abuse occurred during adolescence 119 . These results suggest that , similar to what has been observed in animals 120 , there may be distinct structural , neuropsy - chological and neuropsychiatric sequelae of early abuse , depending in part on the age or developmental stage of the brain when the insult occurred . Besides slowing down the development of the brain during the time of adversity , leading to reduced brain volumes in adulthood , stress in early life could modify the developmental trajectory of the brain . The potential immediate benefit of such modifications is that they might increase acute survival probability , but they could have negative long - term effects . During child - hood and adolescence the brain undergoes a period of overproduction and pruning of synapses 121 . one of the brain regions that shows the slowest development over the lifespan is the amygdala ( BOX 3 ) . It is interest - ing to note that contrary to the hippocampus and the frontal lobe — which show volume reduction as a result of chronic stress — the amygdala increases in volume under chronic stress , owing to increased dendritic arborization . Given that the amygdala plays a significant part in the detection of fear and threat , it is possible that throughout evolution increases in amygdala volume in response to stress might have improved the detection of threatening information and so increased survival probability . If this is indeed the case , young children exposed to adversity should also have increased amygdala volume , but no study has yet examined this important question . This acute effect of adversity on brain organization could have negative long - term consequences . Stress at key periods of synaptic organization could modify the trajectories of connections , leading to an incubation period , such that the effects of stress would not be appar - ent at the time of adversity but would emerge later , when the synaptic organization has been completed . Studies showing protracted effects of early - life stress that emerge at puberty support this suggestion 44 . Furthermore , although depression is the most extensively documented outcome of exposure to chronic sexual abuse in adults , it is not a common occurrence in children suffering abuse . Indeed , the average time from the onset of abuse to the emergence of clinical depression is 11 . 5 years , with the first major episode occurring during adolescence 122 . It is thus conceivable that in susceptible individuals expo - sure to early adversity during a window of vulnerability sets into motion a series of events that lead to a hetero - typic reorganization of synaptic development , resulting in a protracted expression of depression or PTSD . R E V I E W S nATuRE REVIEwS | NeuroscieNce VoluME 10 | junE 2009 | 441 f o c u S o n S t R E S S © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved This same process could also explain the develop - ment of resilience in face of adversity . Environmental enrichment in rodents is a potent inducer of changes in neurogenesis and / or dendritic arborization in the hippocampus , and has been documented to lead to increases in hippocampal volume 123 . In children facing early adversity , forms of environmental enrichment , such as support from a family member , enriched day care or school environment or social support from members of the community , could induce a similar het - erotypic reorganization of synaptic development , pro - gramming of neurotrophic factors or changes in gene expression that could lead to resilience later in life . If this is the case , it could be suggested that any type of intervention performed during the early years could not only have a tremendous effect in preventing the deleteri - ous impact of chronic stress and / or early abuse on the developing brain , but could also help to prevent effects on the brain of chronic stress occurring in adulthood or during aging . Conclusions and future directions Although studies on stress have provided a wealth of data delineating the effects of acute and chronic stress on the developing brain , much remains to be done to fully understand how the brain develops pathology or resilience in the face of adversity . we believe that three main factors should receive special consideration in future studies on stress in both animals and humans . The first factor is sex and gender . Sex refers to the bio - logical differences between males and females , whereas gender refers to the different roles ( gender role and gen - der identity ) that men and women may have during their lifetime . Both sex and gender might have potent influ - ences on stress reactivity in humans of all ages . However , most studies of the effects of stress on the brain , behav - iour and cognition have tested only male animals or humans . This is a major issue considering that studies in both animals 50 and humans 124 report sex differences in response to stress , and considering the gender gap ratio ( two girls for one boy ) that emerges in early adoles - cence for the risk of depression 125 . To this day , a consist - ent finding in the endocrine literature is that the risk of depression in adolescent girls increases with decreasing age at menarche 126 . An increased sensitivity of girls to environmental and / or family adversity , along with inter - actions between glucocorticoids and gonadal steroids , could be a potential explanation for the increased risk of depressive disorders in females . Recent results show - ing an earlier age at menarche in girls exposed to early adversity 127 support this suggestion . The second factor that should be considered in future studies is exposure to environmental toxins . Today , chil - dren in many cities are chronically exposed , at back - ground levels , to a range of common toxins that are environmentally persistent and that tend to be lipophilic and bioaccumulate , such as lead and bisphenol A 128 . These agents reach humans mainly through food and food additives , and they can be transferred to the fetus through the placenta and to infants through maternal milk 129 . They have been shown to affect the endocrine system in laboratory animals and in wildlife , and conse - quently have been called ‘endocrine - disrupting chemi - cals’ ( ReF . 130 ) . A recent study showed that prenatal and postnatal exposure to lead is associated with increased glucocorticoid responses to acute stress in children 131 . Also , perinatal exposure to endocrine - disrupting chemicals is associated with an earlier age at menarche among girls 132 . Taken together , these results suggest that both the timing of sexual maturation and stress reactivity may be sensitive to relatively low levels of endocrine - disrupting chemicals in the environment . The third factor that should receive greater attention is circadian rhythmicity . Sleep deprivation , shift work and jet lag all disrupt normal biological rhythms and have major impacts on health . Interestingly , circadian disorganization is often observed in stress - related dis - orders such as depression 133 and PTSD 134 . The discovery of the molecular clock that is responsible for the genera - tion of circadian rhythms 135 provides new insights into how rhythm abnormalities might lead to greater vulner - ability to stress at various ages . Most studies performed in animals and humans do not measure the circadian fluctuations in glucocorticoid levels , but rather concen - trate on specific time points across the day . Although such measurements are easier , they do not provide the full spectrum of circadian variations , which could inform us about specific changes in circadian organi - zation in response to chronic stress across the lifespan . Consequently , studies assessing multiple time points for glucocorticoid secretion across a whole day or sev - eral days are needed in order to document the complex relationships that exist between reactivity to stress and circadian ( dis ) organization . Animal and human studies have provided a wealth of results showing the negative effects of chronic expo - sure to stress and / or adversity on the developing brain . However , stress is not and should not be considered as a negative concept only . Stress is a physiological response that is necessary for the survival of the spe - cies . The stress response that today can have negative consequences for brain development and mental health may have conferred the necessary tools to our ances - tors in prehistorical times for surviving in the presence of predators . Studies of modern individuals who have developed resilience by facing significant adversity should inform us about the physiological and psy - chological mechanisms at the basis of vulnerability or resilience to stress . understanding these mechanisms , which are possibly rooted in genes and modulated by the family environment , is extremely important if one wants to provide interventions early enough to individ - uals who are the most likely to respond to them . This article has reviewed the potential for early intervention to prevent the deleterious effects of stress on the brain , behaviour and cognition . After more than 30 years of research on the negative effects of stress on the brain , it is now time to turn our attention to the potential posi - tive impact of early interventions on brain development . These results could help us to develop social policies that treat the problem of early - life stress at its root — that is , in the family home . R E V I E W S 442 | junE 2009 | VoluME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / neuro R E V I E W S © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 1 . Barker , D . J . The foetal and infant origins of inequalities in health in Britain . J . Public Health Med . 13 , 64 – 68 ( 1991 ) . 2 . Cadet , R . , Pradier , P . , Dalle , M . & Delost , P . Effects of prenatal maternal stress on the pituitary adrenocortical reactivity in guinea - pig pups . J . Dev . Physiol . 8 , 467 – 475 ( 1986 ) . 3 . Dean , F . & Matthews , S . G . Maternal dexamethasone treatment in late gestation alters glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid receptor mRNA in the fetal guinea pig brain . Brain Res . 846 , 253 – 259 ( 1999 ) . 4 . Seckl , J . R . Glucocorticoids , developmental ‘programming’ and the risk of affective dysfunction . Prog . Brain Res . 167 , 17 – 34 ( 2008 ) . A superb review that summarized prenatal work and linked it to clinical implications . 5 . Koehl , M . et al . Prenatal stress alters circadian activity of hypothalamo - pituitary - adrenal axis and hippocampal corticosteroid receptors in adult rats of both gender . J . Neurobiol . 40 , 302 – 315 ( 1999 ) . 6 . Barbazanges , A . , Piazza , P . V . , Le Moal , M . & Maccari , S . Maternal glucocorticoid secretion mediates long - term effects of prenatal stress . J . Neurosci . 16 , 3943 – 3949 ( 1996 ) . 7 . Meyer , J . S . Early adrenalectomy stimulates subsequent growth and development of the rat brain . Exp . Neurol . 82 , 432 – 446 ( 1983 ) . 8 . Weaver , I . C . et al . Epigenetic programming by maternal behavior . Nature Neurosci . 7 , 847 – 854 ( 2004 ) . The first paper to show that early experience has epigenetic effects , altering methylation patterns . 9 . Uno , H . et al . Brain damage induced by prenatal exposure to dexamethasone in fetal rhesus macaques . I . Hippocampus . Brain Res . Dev . Brain Res . 53 , 157 – 167 ( 1990 ) . 10 . Murmu , M . S . et al . Changes of spine density and dendritic complexity in the prefrontal cortex in offspring of mothers exposed to stress during pregnancy . Eur . J . Neurosci . 24 , 1477 – 1487 ( 2006 ) . 11 . Cratty , M . S . , Ward , H . E . , Johnson , E . A . , Azzaro , A . J . & Birkle , D . L . Prenatal stress increases corticotropin - releasing factor ( CRF ) content and release in rat amygdala minces . Brain Res . 675 , 297 – 302 ( 1995 ) . 12 . Vallee , M . et al . Long - term effects of prenatal stress and postnatal handling on age - related glucocorticoid secretion and cognitive performance : a longitudinal study in the rat . Eur . J . Neurosci . 11 , 2906 – 2916 ( 1999 ) . 13 . Deminiere , J . M . et al . Increased locomotor response to novelty and propensity to intravenous amphetamine self - administration in adult offspring of stressed mothers . Brain Res . 586 , 135 – 139 ( 1992 ) . 14 . Vallee , M . et al . Prenatal stress induces high anxiety and postnatal handling induces low anxiety in adult offspring : correlation with stress - induced corticosterone secretion . J . Neurosci . 17 , 2626 – 2636 ( 1997 ) . 15 . Lemaire , V . , Koehl , M . , Le Moal , M . & Abrous , D . N . Prenatal stress produces learning deficits associated with an inhibition of neurogenesis in the hippocampus . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 97 , 11032 – 11037 ( 2000 ) . 16 . Piazza , P . V . & Le Moal , M . L . Pathophysiological basis of vulnerability to drug abuse : role of an interaction between stress , glucocorticoids , and dopaminergic neurons . Annu . Rev . Pharmacol . Toxicol . 36 , 359 – 378 ( 1996 ) . 17 . Kapoor , A . , Petropoulos , S . & Matthews , S . G . Fetal programming of hypothalamic - pituitary - adrenal ( HPA ) axis function and behavior by synthetic glucocorticoids . Brain Res . Rev . 57 , 586 – 595 ( 2008 ) . 18 . Hedegaard , M . , Henriksen , T . B . , Sabroe , S . & Secher , N . J . Psychological distress in pregnancy and preterm delivery . BMJ 307 , 234 – 239 ( 1993 ) . 19 . Orr , S . T . & Miller , C . A . Maternal depressive symptoms and the risk of poor pregnancy outcome . Review of the literature and preliminary findings . Epidemiol . Rev . 17 , 165 – 171 ( 1995 ) . 20 . Lyons - Ruth , K . , Wolfe , R . & Lyubchik , A . Depression and the parenting of young children : making the case for early preventive mental health services . Harv . Rev . Psychiatry 8 , 148 – 153 ( 2000 ) . 21 . Gutteling , B . M . , de Weerth , C . & Buitelaar , J . K . Prenatal stress and children’s cortisol reaction to the first day of school . Psychoneuroendocrinology 30 , 541 – 549 ( 2005 ) . 22 . O’Connor , T . G . et al . Prenatal anxiety predicts individual differences in cortisol in pre - adolescent children . Biol . Psychiatry 58 , 211 – 217 ( 2005 ) . 23 . Glover , V . Maternal stress or anxiety in pregnancy and emotional development of the child . Br . J . Psychiatry 171 , 105 – 106 ( 1997 ) . 24 . Stott , D . H . Follow - up study from birth of the effects of prenatal stresses . Dev . Med . Child . Neurol . 15 , 770 – 787 ( 1973 ) . 25 . Trautman , P . D . , Meyer - Bahlburg , H . F . , Postelnek , J . & New , M . I . Effects of early prenatal dexamethasone on the cognitive and behavioral development of young children : results of a pilot study . Psychoneuroendocrinology 20 , 439 – 449 ( 1995 ) . 26 . Buss , C . et al . Maternal care modulates the relationship between prenatal risk and hippocampal volume in women but not in men . J . Neurosci . 27 , 2592 – 2595 ( 2007 ) . 27 . Levine , S . & Wiener , S . G . Psychoendocrine aspects of mother - infant relationships in nonhuman primates . Psychoneuroendocrinology 13 , 143 – 154 ( 1988 ) . 28 . Anisman , H . , Zaharia , M . D . , Meaney , M . J . & Merali , Z . Do early - life events permanently alter behavioral and hormonal responses to stressors ? Int . J . Dev . Neurosci . 16 , 149 – 164 ( 1998 ) . 29 . Liu , D . et al . Maternal care , hippocampal glucocorticoid receptors , and hypothalamic - pituitary - adrenal responses to stress . Science 277 , 1659 – 1662 ( 1997 ) . 30 . Fenoglio , K . A . , Brunson , K . L . & Baram , T . Z . Hippocampal neuroplasticity induced by early - life stress : functional and molecular aspects . Front . Neuroendocrinol . 27 , 180 – 192 ( 2006 ) . 31 . Schulkin , J . , Gold , P . W . & McEwen , B . S . Induction of corticotropin - releasing hormone gene expression by glucocorticoids : implication for understanding the states of fear and anxiety and allostatic load . Psychoneuroendocrinology 23 , 219 – 243 ( 1998 ) . 32 . de Kloet , E . R . & Oitzl , M . S . Who cares for a stressed brain ? The mother , the kid or both ? Neurobiol . Aging 24 ( Suppl . 1 ) , S61 – S65 ; discussion S67 – S68 ( 2003 ) . 33 . Sanchez , M . M . et al . Alterations in diurnal cortisol rhythm and acoustic startle response in nonhuman primates with adverse rearing . Biol . Psychiatry 57 , 373 – 381 ( 2005 ) . 34 . Coplan , J . D . et al . Persistent elevations of cerebrospinal fluid concentrations of corticotropin - releasing factor in adult nonhuman primates exposed to early - life stressors : implications for the pathophysiology of mood and anxiety disorders . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 93 , 1619 – 1623 ( 1996 ) . 35 . Sanchez , M . M . The impact of early adverse care on HPA axis development : nonhuman primate models . Horm . Behav . 50 , 623 – 631 ( 2006 ) . 36 . Rosenblum , L . A . et al . Differing concentrations of corticotropin - releasing factor and oxytocin in the cerebrospinal fluid of bonnet and pigtail macaques . Psychoneuroendocrinology 27 , 651 – 660 ( 2002 ) . 37 . Siegel , S . J . et al . Effects of social deprivation in prepubescent rhesus monkeys : immunohistochemical analysis of the neurofilament protein triplet in the hippocampal formation . Brain Res . 619 , 299 – 305 ( 1993 ) . 38 . Sanchez , M . M . , Ladd , C . O . & Plotsky , P . M . Early adverse experience as a developmental risk factor for later psychopathology : evidence from rodent and primate models . Dev . Psychopathol . 13 , 419 – 449 ( 2001 ) . 39 . Gunnar , M . R . & Donzella , B . Social regulation of the cortisol levels in early human development . Psychoneuroendocrinology 27 , 199 – 220 ( 2002 ) . 40 . Geoffroy , M . C . , Cote , S . M . , Parent , S . & Seguin , J . R . Daycare attendance , stress , and mental health . Can . J . Psychiatry 51 , 607 – 615 ( 2006 ) . 41 . NICHD Early Child Care Research Network . Early child care and children’s development prior to school entry : results from the NICHD Study of Early Child Care . Am . Educ . Res . J . 39 , 133 – 164 ( 2002 ) . 42 . Albers , E . M . , Riksen - Walraven , J . M . , Sweep , F . C . & de Weerth , C . Maternal behavior predicts infant cortisol recovery from a mild everyday stressor . J . Child . Psychol . Psychiatry 49 , 97 – 103 ( 2008 ) . 43 . Lupien , S . J . , King , S . , Meaney , M . J . & McEwen , B . S . Child’s stress hormone levels correlate with mother’s socioeconomic status and depressive state . Biol . Psychiatry 48 , 976 – 980 ( 2000 ) . 44 . Halligan , S . L . , Herbert , J . , Goodyer , I . & Murray , L . Disturbances in morning cortisol secretion in association with maternal postnatal depression predict subsequent depressive symptomatology in adolescents . Biol . Psychiatry 62 , 40 – 46 ( 2007 ) . Provided some of the first evidence that adverse early life experiences in humans , in this case rearing by a mother suffering from post - partum depression , are associated with heightened HPA activity years later , and that the HPA axis hyperactivity mediates the association between early risk exposure and later psychiatric symptoms . 45 . Jones , N . A . , Field , T . & Davalos , M . Right frontal EEG asymmetry and lack of empathy in preschool children of depressed mothers . Child . Psychiatry Hum . Dev . 30 , 189 – 204 ( 2000 ) . 46 . Fries , E . , Hesse , J . , Hellhammer , J . & Hellhammer , D . H . A new view on hypocortisolism . Psychoneuroendocrinology 30 , 1010 – 1016 ( 2005 ) . 47 . Yehuda , R . , Yang , R . K . , Buchsbaum , M . S . & Golier , J . A . Alterations in cortisol negative feedback inhibition as examined using the ACTH response to cortisol administration in PTSD . Psychoneuroendocrinology 31 , 447 – 451 ( 2006 ) . 48 . Gunnar , M . R . & Quevedo , K . M . Early care experiences and HPA axis regulation in children : a mechanism for later trauma vulnerability . Prog . Brain Res . 167 , 137 – 149 ( 2008 ) . 49 . McGowan , P . O . et al . Epigenetic regulation of the glucocorticoid receptor in human brain associates with childhood abuse . Nature Neurosci . 12 , 342 – 348 ( 2009 ) . This study examined epigenetic differences in a neuron - specific glucocorticoid receptor ( NR3C1 ) promoter between post - mortem hippocampus obtained from suicide victims with a history of childhood abuse and hippocampus from either suicide victims with no childhood abuse or controls . It found decreased levels of glucocorticoid receptor mRNA , as well as mRNA transcripts bearing the glucocorticoid receptor 1F splice variant and increased cytosine methylation of an NR3C1 promoter in suicide victims with early abuse . 50 . McCormick , C . M . & Mathews , I . Z . HPA function in adolescence : role of sex hormones in its regulation and the enduring consequences of exposure to stressors . Pharmacol . Biochem . Behav . 86 , 220 – 233 ( 2007 ) . A very good review on the acute and chronic effects of stress during adolescence . 51 . O’Donnell , S . , Noseworthy , M . D . , Levine , B . & Dennis , M . Cortical thickness of the frontopolar area in typically developing children and adolescents . Neuroimage 24 , 948 – 954 ( 2005 ) . 52 . Vazquez , D . M . & Akil , H . Pituitary - adrenal response to ether vapor in the weanling animal : characterization of the inhibitory effect of glucocorticoids on adrenocorticotropin secretion . Pediatr . Res . 34 , 646 – 653 ( 1993 ) . 53 . Goldman , L . , Winget , C . , Hollingshead , G . W . & Levine , S . Postweaning development of negative feedback in the pituitary - adrenal system of the rat . Neuroendocrinology 12 , 199 – 211 ( 1973 ) . 54 . Girotti , M . et al . Habituation to repeated restraint stress is associated with lack of stress - induced c - fos expression in primary sensory processing areas of the rat brain . Neuroscience 138 , 1067 – 1081 ( 2006 ) . 55 . Romeo , R . D . et al . Stress history and pubertal development interact to shape hypothalamic - pituitary - adrenal axis plasticity . Endocrinology 147 , 1664 – 1674 ( 2006 ) . 56 . Avital , A . & Richter - Levin , G . Exposure to juvenile stress exacerbates the behavioural consequences of exposure to stress in the adult rat . Int . J . Neuropsychopharmacol . 8 , 163 – 173 ( 2005 ) . 57 . Lee , P . R . , Brady , D . & Koenig , J . I . Corticosterone alters N - methyl - d - aspartate receptor subunit mRNA expression before puberty . Brain Res . Mol . Brain Res . 115 , 55 – 62 ( 2003 ) . 58 . Isgor , C . , Kabbaj , M . , Akil , H . & Watson , S . J . Delayed effects of chronic variable stress during peripubertal - juvenile period on hippocampal morphology and on cognitive and stress axis functions in rats . Hippocampus 14 , 636 – 648 ( 2004 ) . One of the first papers to show protracted effects of adolescent stress on adulthood stress reactivity in rodents . 59 . Tsoory , M . & Richter - Levin , G . Learning under stress in the adult rat is differentially affected by ‘juvenile’ or ‘adolescent’ stress . Int . J . Neuropsychopharmacol . 9 , 713 – 728 ( 2006 ) . 60 . Kabbaj , M . , Isgor , C . , Watson , S . J . & Akil , H . Stress during adolescence alters behavioral sensitization to amphetamine . Neuroscience 113 , 395 – 400 ( 2002 ) . 61 . McCormick , C . M . , Robarts , D . , Gleason , E . & Kelsey , J . E . Stress during adolescence enhances locomotor sensitization to nicotine in adulthood in female , but not male , rats . Horm . Behav . 46 , 458 – 466 ( 2004 ) . 62 . Gunnar , M . R . , Wewerka , S . , Frenn , K . , Long , J . D . & Griggs , C . Developmental changes in hypothalamus - pituitary - adrenal activity over the transition to adolescence : normative changes and associations with puberty . Dev . Psychopathol . 21 , 69 – 85 ( 2009 ) . R E V I E W S nATuRE REVIEwS | NeuroscieNce VoluME 10 | junE 2009 | 443 f o c u S o n S t R E S S © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 63 . Giedd , J . N . et al . Quantitative magnetic resonance imaging of human brain development : ages 4 – 18 . Cereb . Cortex 6 , 551 – 560 ( 1996 ) . 64 . Perlman , W . R . , Webster , M . J . , Herman , M . M . , Kleinman , J . E . & Weickert , C . S . Age - related differences in glucocorticoid receptor mRNA levels in the human brain . Neurobiol . Aging 28 , 447 – 458 ( 2007 ) . 65 . Dahl , R . E . Adolescent brain development : a period of vulnerabilities and opportunities . Keynote address . Ann . NY Acad . Sci . 1021 , 1 – 22 ( 2004 ) . 66 . Paus , T . , Keshavan , M . & Giedd , J . N . Why do many psychiatric disorders emerge during adolescence ? Nature Rev . Neurosci . 9 , 947 – 957 ( 2008 ) . A very interesting review on the state of research into why adolescents have a greater vulnerability to mental health disorders . 67 . Evans , G . W . & English , K . The environment of poverty : multiple stressor exposure , psychophysiological stress , and socioemotional adjustment . Child Dev . 73 , 1238 – 1248 ( 2002 ) . 68 . Andersen , S . L . & Teicher , M . H . Stress , sensitive periods and maturational events in adolescent depression . Trends Neurosci . 31 , 183 – 191 ( 2008 ) . 69 . De Bellis , M . D . et al . A . E . Bennett Research Award . Developmental traumatology . Part II : brain development . Biol . Psychiatry 45 , 1271 – 1284 ( 1999 ) . One of the first clear demonstrations that , in children who were physically healthy at birth , severe abuse in the early years of life is associated with reduced brain volume . The reduction correlates negatively with the age of onset and positively with the duration of the maltreatment . 70 . Cohen , R . A . et al . Early life stress and morphometry of the adult anterior cingulate cortex and caudate nuclei . Biol . Psychiatry 59 , 975 – 982 ( 2006 ) . 71 . Diamond , D . M . , Bennett , M . C . , Fleshner , M . & Rose , G . M . Inverted - U relationship between the level of peripheral corticosterone and the magnitude of hippocampal primed burst potentiation . Hippocampus 2 , 421 – 430 ( 1992 ) . 72 . Vouimba , R . M . , Yaniv , D . & Richter - Levin , G . Glucocorticoid receptors and β - adrenoceptors in basolateral amygdala modulate synaptic plasticity in hippocampal dentate gyrus , but not in area CA1 . Neuropharmacology 52 , 244 – 252 ( 2007 ) . 73 . Roozendaal , B . , Brunson , K . L . , Holloway , B . L . , McGaugh , J . L . & Baram , T . Z . Involvement of stress - released corticotropin - releasing hormone in the basolateral amygdala in regulating memory consolidation . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . U S A 99 , 13908 – 13913 ( 2002 ) . 74 . Magarinos , A . M . & McEwen , B . S . Stress - induced atrophy of apical dendrites of hippocampal CA3c neurons : involvement of glucocorticoid secretion and excitatory amino acid receptors . Neuroscience 69 , 89 – 98 ( 1995 ) . 75 . Conrad , C . D . , LeDoux , J . E . , Magarinos , A . M . & McEwen , B . S . Repeated restraint stress facilitates fear conditioning independently of causing hippocampal CA3 dendritic atrophy . Behav . Neurosci . 113 , 902 – 913 ( 1999 ) . 76 . Gould , E . , McEwen , B . S . , Tanapat , P . , Galea , L . A . & Fuchs , E . Neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus of the adult tree shrew is regulated by psychosocial stress and NMDA receptor activation . J . Neurosci . 17 , 2492 – 2498 ( 1997 ) . 77 . McEwen , B . S . Effects of adverse experiences for brain structure and function . Biol . Psychiatry 48 , 721 – 731 ( 2000 ) . 78 . Pham , K . , Nacher , J . , Hof , P . R . & McEwen , B . S . Repeated restraint stress suppresses neurogenesis and induces biphasic PSA - NCAM expression in the adult rat dentate gyrus . Eur . J . Neurosci . 17 , 879 – 886 ( 2003 ) . 79 . McEwen , B . S . Plasticity of the hippocampus : adaptation to chronic stress and allostatic load . Ann . NY Acad . Sci . 933 , 265 – 277 ( 2001 ) . 80 . Luine , V . , Villegas , M . , Martinez , C . & McEwen , B . S . Repeated stress causes reversible impairments of spatial memory performance . Brain Res . 639 , 167 – 170 ( 1994 ) . 81 . Joels , M . , Karst , H . , Krugers , H . J . & Lucassen , P . J . Chronic stress : implications for neuronal morphology , function and neurogenesis . Front . Neuroendocrinol . 28 , 72 – 96 ( 2007 ) . 82 . Izquierdo , A . , Wellman , C . L . & Holmes , A . Brief uncontrollable stress causes dendritic retraction in infralimbic cortex and resistance to fear extinction in mice . J . Neurosci . 26 , 5733 – 5738 ( 2006 ) . 83 . Shansky , R . M . , Hamo , C . , Hof , P . R . , McEwen , B . S . & Morrison , J . H . Stress - induced dendritic remodeling in the prefrontal cortex is circuit specific . Cereb . Cortex 4 Feb 2009 ( doi : 10 . 1093 / cercor / bhp003 ) . 84 . Cerqueira , J . J . et al . Corticosteroid status influences the volume of the rat cingulate cortex - a magnetic resonance imaging study . J . Psychiatr . Res . 39 , 451 – 460 ( 2005 ) . 85 . Mitra , R . , Jadhav , S . , McEwen , B . S . , Vyas , A . & Chattarji , S . Stress duration modulates the spatiotemporal patterns of spine formation in the basolateral amygdala . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 9371 – 9376 ( 2005 ) . 86 . Mitra , R . & Sapolsky , R . M . Acute corticosterone treatment is sufficient to induce anxiety and amygdaloid dendritic hypertrophy . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 5573 – 5578 ( 2008 ) . This interesting study addressed endocrine effects on the brain , with a focus on the amygdala and anxiety ( rather than on hippocampus and memory ) . Of note , a single dose of glucocorticoids was sufficient to induce changes in amygdala structure 10 days later , which might be useful to model in animals PTSD . 87 . Lupien , S . J . & McEwen , B . S . The acute effects of corticosteroids on cognition : integration of animal and human model studies . Brain Res . Brain Res . Rev . 24 , 1 – 27 ( 1997 ) . 88 . Roozendaal , B . Glucocorticoids and the regulation of memory consolidation . Psychoneuroendocrinology 25 , 213 – 238 ( 2000 ) . 89 . Lupien , S . J . et al . Stress hormones and human memory function across the lifespan . Psychoneuroendocrinology 30 , 225 – 242 ( 2005 ) . 90 . Lupien , S . J . et al . Hippocampal volume is as variable in young as in older adults : implications for the notion of hippocampal atrophy in humans . Neuroimage 34 , 479 – 485 ( 2007 ) . This study showed that ~ 25 % of young adults present hippocampal volumes as small as those of older adults . The presence of small hippocampal volumes in healthy young individuals supports the vulnerability hypothesis . 91 . Pruessner , J . C . , Lord , C . , Meaney , M . & Lupien , S . Effects of self - esteem on age - related changes in cognition and the regulation of the hypothalamic - pituitary - adrenal axis . Ann . NY Acad . Sci . 1032 , 186 – 194 ( 2004 ) . 92 . Pruessner , J . C . et al . Self - esteem , locus of control , hippocampal volume , and cortisol regulation in young and old adulthood . Neuroimage 28 , 815 – 826 ( 2005 ) . 93 . Burke , H . M . , Davis , M . C . , Otte , C . & Mohr , D . C . Depression and cortisol responses to psychological stress : a meta - analysis . Psychoneuroendocrinology 30 , 846 – 856 ( 2005 ) . 94 . Yehuda , R . , Golier , J . A . & Kaufman , S . Circadian rhythm of salivary cortisol in Holocaust survivors with and without PTSD . Am . J . Psychiatry 162 , 998 – 1000 ( 2005 ) . 95 . Meewisse , M . L . , Reitsma , J . B . , de Vries , G . J . , Gersons , B . P . & Olff , M . Cortisol and post - traumatic stress disorder in adults : systematic review and meta - analysis . Br . J . Psychiatry 191 , 387 – 392 ( 2007 ) . This paper presented the first meta - analysis of cortisol findings in PTSD , to elucidate the determinants of hypocortisolism and resolve the inconsistency in findings . 96 . Heim , C . et al . Pituitary - adrenal and autonomic responses to stress in women after sexual and physical abuse in childhood . JAMA 284 , 592 – 597 ( 2000 ) . 97 . Heim , C . , Mletzko , T . , Purselle , D . , Musselman , D . L . & Nemeroff , C . B . The dexamethasone / corticotropin - releasing factor test in men with major depression : role of childhood trauma . Biol . Psychiatry 63 , 398 – 405 ( 2008 ) . 98 . Carpenter , L . L . et al . Cerebrospinal fluid corticotropin - releasing factor and perceived early - life stress in depressed patients and healthy control subjects . Neuropsychopharmacology 29 , 777 – 784 ( 2004 ) . 99 . Heim , C . , Newport , D . J . , Mletzko , T . , Miller , A . H . & Nemeroff , C . B . The link between childhood trauma and depression : insights from HPA axis studies in humans . Psychoneuroendocrinology 33 , 693 – 710 ( 2008 ) . A crucially important review which documents that the disturbances in the HPA axis that are observed in many adults with depression may be specific to those who experienced trauma or maltreatment in childhood . 100 . Videbech , P . & Ravnkilde , B . Hippocampal volume and depression : a meta - analysis of MRI studies . Am . J . Psychiatry 161 , 1957 – 1966 ( 2004 ) . 101 . Smith , M . E . Bilateral hippocampal volume reduction in adults with post - traumatic stress disorder : a meta - analysis of structural MRI studies . Hippocampus 15 , 798 – 807 ( 2005 ) . 102 . Vythilingam , M . et al . Childhood trauma associated with smaller hippocampal volume in women with major depression . Am . J . Psychiatry 159 , 2072 – 2080 ( 2002 ) . 103 . Gilbertson , M . W . et al . Smaller hippocampal volume predicts pathologic vulnerability to psychological trauma . Nature Neurosci . 5 , 1242 – 1247 ( 2002 ) . The first paper to study whether the reduced hippocampal volume observed in PTSD patients is due to the disorder , to trauma exposure or to a pre - existing factor . 104 . Issa , A . M . , Rowe , W . , Gauthier , S . & Meaney , M . J . Hypothalamic - pituitary - adrenal activity in aged , cognitively impaired and cognitively unimpaired rats . J . Neurosci . 10 , 3247 – 3254 ( 1990 ) . 105 . Landfield , P . W . , Waymire , J . C . & Lynch , G . Hippocampal aging and adrenocorticoids : quantitative correlations . Science 202 , 1098 – 1102 ( 1978 ) . 106 . Landfield , P . W . , Baskin , R . K . & Pitler , T . A . Brain aging correlates : retardation by hormonal - pharmacological treatments . Science 214 , 581 – 584 ( 1981 ) . The first study to show that chronic exposure to high levels of glucocorticoids in rodents is associated with memory impairments and reduced hippocampal volume . 107 . Landfield , P . W . , Blalock , E . M . , Chen , K . C . & Porter , N . M . A new glucocorticoid hypothesis of brain aging : implications for Alzheimer’s disease . Curr . Alzheimer Res . 4 , 205 – 212 ( 2007 ) . 108 . Kulstad , J . J . et al . Effects of chronic glucocorticoid administration on insulin - degrading enzyme and amyloid - β peptide in the aged macaque . J . Neuropathol . Exp . Neurol . 64 , 139 – 146 ( 2005 ) . 109 . Sapolsky , R . M . , Krey , L . C . & McEwen , B . S . The neuroendocrinology of stress and aging : the glucocorticoid cascade hypothesis . Endocr . Rev . 7 , 284 – 301 ( 1986 ) . The first paper to present the glucocorticoid cascade hypothesis , now referred to as the neurotoxicity hypothesis . 110 . Lowy , M . T . , Wittenberg , L . & Yamamoto , B . K . Effect of acute stress on hippocampal glutamate levels and spectrin proteolysis in young and aged rats . J . Neurochem . 65 , 268 – 274 ( 1995 ) . 111 . Raskind , M . A . , Peskind , E . R . & Wilkinson , C . W . Hypothalamic - pituitary - adrenal axis regulation and human aging . Ann . NY Acad . Sci . 746 , 327 – 335 ( 1994 ) . 112 . Lupien , S . J . et al . Cortisol levels during human aging predict hippocampal atrophy and memory deficits . Nature Neurosci . 1 , 69 – 73 ( 1998 ) . 113 . Giubilei , F . et al . Altered circadian cortisol secretion in Alzheimer’s disease : clinical and neuroradiological aspects . J . Neurosci . Res . 66 , 262 – 265 ( 2001 ) . 114 . Aisen , P . S . et al . A randomized controlled trial of prednisone in Alzheimer’s disease . Alzheimer’s Disease Cooperative Study . Neurology 54 , 588 – 593 ( 2000 ) . 115 . Dai , J . , Buijs , R . & Swaab , D . Glucocorticoid hormone ( cortisol ) affects axonal transport in human cortex neurons but shows resistance in Alzheimer’s disease . Br . J . Pharmacol . 143 , 606 – 610 ( 2004 ) . 116 . Chen , Y . , Dube , C . M . , Rice , C . J . & Baram , T . Z . Rapid loss of dendritic spines after stress involves derangement of spine dynamics by corticotropin - releasing hormone . J . Neurosci . 28 , 2903 – 2911 ( 2008 ) . 117 . Charney , D . S . & Manji , H . K . Life stress , genes , and depression : multiple pathways lead to increased risk and new opportunities for intervention . Sci . STKE 2004 , re5 ( 2004 ) . 118 . Maercker , A . , Michael , T . , Fehm , L . , Becker , E . S . & Margraf , J . Age of traumatisation as a predictor of post - traumatic stress disorder or major depression in young women . Br . J . Psychiatry 184 , 482 – 487 ( 2004 ) . 119 . Teicher , M . H . , Tomoda , A . & Andersen , S . L . Neurobiological consequences of early stress and childhood maltreatment : are results from human and animal studies comparable ? Ann . NY Acad . Sci . 1071 , 313 – 323 ( 2006 ) . 120 . Hall , F . S . Social deprivation of neonatal , adolescent , and adult rats has distinct neurochemical and behavioral consequences . Crit . Rev . Neurobiol . 12 , 129 – 162 ( 1998 ) . R E V I E W S 444 | junE 2009 | VoluME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / neuro R E V I E W S © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 121 . Andersen , S . L . Trajectories of brain development : point of vulnerability or window of opportunity ? Neurosci . Biobehav . Rev . 27 , 3 – 18 ( 2003 ) . A superb review paper which suggested that trauma at different time points during early development might be associated with different outcomes , depending on the brain structure that was affected at the time of exposure to adversity . 122 . Widom , C . S . , DuMont , K . & Czaja , S . J . A prospective investigation of major depressive disorder and comorbidity in abused and neglected children grown up . Arch . Gen . Psychiatry 64 , 49 – 56 ( 2007 ) . 123 . Clayton , N . S . & Krebs , J . R . Hippocampal growth and attrition in birds affected by experience . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 91 , 7410 – 7414 ( 1994 ) . 124 . Kudielka , B . M . , Buske - Kirschbaum , A . , Hellhammer , D . H . & Kirschbaum , C . HPA axis responses to laboratory psychosocial stress in healthy elderly adults , younger adults , and children : impact of age and gender . Psychoneuroendocrinology 29 , 83 – 98 ( 2004 ) . 125 . Kessler , R . C . Epidemiology of women and depression . J . Affect . Disord . 74 , 5 – 13 ( 2003 ) . 126 . Harlow , B . L . , Cohen , L . S . , Otto , M . W . , Spiegelman , D . & Cramer , D . W . Early life menstrual characteristics and pregnancy experiences among women with and without major depression : the Harvard study of moods and cycles . J . Affect . Disord . 79 , 167 – 176 ( 2004 ) . 127 . Zabin , L . S . , Emerson , M . R . & Rowland , D . L . Childhood sexual abuse and early menarche : the direction of their relationship and its implications . J . Adolesc . Health 36 , 393 – 400 ( 2005 ) . 128 . Jones , K . C . & de Voogt , P . Persistent organic pollutants ( POPs ) : state of the science . Environ . Pollut . 100 , 209 – 221 ( 1999 ) . 129 . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . Second National Report on Human Exposure to Environmental Chemicals . ( CDC , Atlanta , Georgia , 2003 ) . 130 . Daston , G . P . , Cook , J . C . & Kavlock , R . J . Uncertainties for endocrine disrupters : our view on progress . Toxicol . Sci . 74 , 245 – 252 ( 2003 ) . 131 . Gump , B . B . et al . Low - level prenatal and postnatal blood lead exposure and adrenocortical responses to acute stress in children . Environ . Health Perspect . 116 , 249 – 255 ( 2008 ) . 132 . Denham , M . et al . Relationship of lead , mercury , mirex , dichlorodiphenyldichloroethylene , hexachlorobenzene , and polychlorinated biphenyls to timing of menarche among Akwesasne Mohawk girls . Pediatrics 115 , e127 – e134 ( 2005 ) . 133 . Turek , F . W . From circadian rhythms to clock genes in depression . Int . Clin . Psychopharmacol . 22 ( Suppl . 2 ) , S1 – S8 ( 2007 ) . 134 . Lamarche , L . J . & De Koninck , J . Sleep disturbance in adults with posttraumatic stress disorder : a review . J . Clin . Psychiatry 68 , 1257 – 1270 ( 2007 ) . 135 . Antoch , M . P . et al . Functional identification of the mouse circadian Clock gene by transgenic BAC rescue . Cell 89 , 655 – 667 ( 1997 ) . 136 . Yakovlev , P . L . & Lecours , A . R . in Regional Development of the Brain in Early Life ( ed . Minkowski , A . ) 3 – 70 ( Blackwell , Oxford , 1967 ) . 137 . Pruessner , J . C . et al . Volumetry of hippocampus and amygdala with high - resolution MRI and three - dimensional analysis software : minimizing the discrepancies between laboratories . Cereb . Cortex 10 , 433 – 442 ( 2000 ) . 138 . Tisserand , D . J . et al . Regional frontal cortical volumes decrease differentially in aging : an MRI study to compare volumetric approaches and voxel - based morphometry . Neuroimage 17 , 657 – 669 ( 2002 ) . 139 . Insel , T . R . , Battaglia , G . , Fairbanks , D . W . & De Souza , E . B . The ontogeny of brain receptors for corticotropin - releasing factor and the development of their functional association with adenylate cyclase . J . Neurosci . 8 , 4151 – 4158 ( 1988 ) . 140 . Levine , S . The ontogeny of the hypothalamic - pituitary - adrenal axis . The influence of maternal factors . Ann . NY Acad . Sci . 746 , 275 – 288 ; discussion 289 – 293 ( 1994 ) . 141 . Gunnar , M . R . & Cheatham , C . L . Brain and behavior interfaces : stress and the developing brain . Infant Ment . Health J . 24 , 195 – 211 ( 2003 ) . A superb paper that summarized the effects of stress during development and how this knowledge can be used to develop effective interventions . 142 . LeDoux , J . E . The Emotional Brain : The Mysterious Underpinnings of Emotional Life ( Simon & Schuster , New York , 1996 ) . Acknowledgements Sonia Lupien holds a Research Chair on Gender and Mental Health by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research . FURTHER INFORMATION Sonia J . Lupien’s homepage : http : / / www . humanstress . ca All liNks Are AcTive iN The oNliNe pdf R E V I E W S nATuRE REVIEwS | NeuroscieNce VoluME 10 | junE 2009 | 445 f o c u S o n S t R E S S © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved