Filaggrin in atopic dermatitis Grainne M . O’Regan , MB , a Aileen Sandilands , PhD , b W . H . Irwin McLean , PhD , DSc , b and Alan D . Irvine , MD , FRCPI a , c Dublin , Ireland , and Dundee , United Kingdom The recent identiﬁcation of loss - of - function mutations in the structural protein ﬁlaggrin as a widely replicated major risk factor for eczema sheds new light on disease mechanisms in eczema , a disease that had heretofore largely been considered to have a primarily immunologic etiopathogenesis . The ﬁlaggrin gene ( FLG ) mutation ﬁndings are consistent with a recently proposed unifying hypothesis that offers a mechanistic understanding of eczema pathogenesis synthesizing a heritable epithelial barrier defect and resultant diminished epidermal defense mechanisms to allergens and microbes , followed by polarized T H 2 lymphocyte responses with resultant chronic inﬂammation , including autoimmune mechanisms . Although compelling evidence from genetic studies on FLG implicates perturbed barrier function as a key player in the pathogenesis of eczema in many patients , much is still unknown about the sequence of biologic , physicochemical , and aberrant regulatory events that constitute the transition from an inherited barrier defect to clinical manifestations of inﬂammatory eczematous lesions and susceptibility to related atopic disorders . The exact contribution of FLG to the wider atopic story , factors modifying FLG expression , and the role of other barrier proteins remain to be delineated . In this review we highlight recent advances in our understanding of the FLG genetics in the cause of eczema and related complex diseases . ( Reprinted from J Allergy Clin Immunol 2008 ; 122 : 689 - 93 . ) Key words : atopic dermatitis , barrier function , corniﬁed cell envelope , eczema , epidermal differentiation complex , ﬁlaggrin , ichthyosis vulgaris , natural moisturizing factor , pH , proteases , Staphylococcus aureus The epidermis provides an essential attribute of adaptation to terrestrial life , namely an occlusive interface barrier , restricting both water loss from the body and ingress of pathogens . This barrier is formed after a complex , integrated , and exquisitely regulated series of biochemical events culmi - nating in a program of cell death by terminally differentiating keratinocytes . 1 Epithelial keratinocytes replace their plasma membrane with a tough , insoluble macromolecular layer called the corniﬁed envelope ( CE ) to achieve and maintain this barrier . Initial steps in the formation of the CE result in the sequential expression of several major protein products , but only certain proteins from a choice of more than 20 are used in the ﬁnal stages of CE reinforcement to meet site - speciﬁc requirements , of which ﬁlaggrin is one of the ﬁnal proteins to be incorporated . 1 These structural proteins are extensively cross - linked by transglutamin - ases and act as a scaffold for the attachment of a layer of lipids covalently bound to the extracellular surface , forming an outer lipid envelope . In response to deﬁciency , injury , or other environ - mental triggers , proteins forming the CE might be upregulated in an effort to compensate and maintain an effective barrier . 1 Cell differentiation , death , and desquamation occur sequentially , with recent convergent approaches affording insight into the mo - lecular mechanisms and diseases associated with defects in the pathways of corniﬁcation . Many of the key proteins involved in corniﬁcation are encoded for in a gene - dense locus on chromosome 1q21 , which is termed the epidermal differentiation complex ( EDC ) . 2 The EDC spans an area of 1 . 62 megabases containing more than 70 genes expressed during the late stages of terminal differentiation , and genome - wide screens have shown signiﬁcant linkage colocalization with psoriasis , autoimmune diseases , and eczema , heightening interest in this locus . 3 Many EDC proteins share signiﬁcant sequence sim - ilarities , and phylogenic data suggest that these proteins derived from a common ancestor , evolving to meet tissue - speciﬁc de - mands . These genes cluster within the EDC according to expres - sion pattern and are in tight linkage disequilibrium , suggesting that they might also be coregulated . Genes found within this locus encode for proteins such as loricrin , involucrin , small proline - rich proteins , late envelope proteins , and the S100 calcium - binding proteins , of which ﬁlaggrin is a key member . There is consider - able evidence for redundancy mechanisms in CE assembly , in that the absence of 1 CE reinforcement protein can be compen - sated by increased expression of others in experimental animal models . 4 This is exempliﬁed by the loricrin 2 / 2 mouse , which dis - plays mild epidermal erythema at birth that normalizes within days , in spite of the fact that loricrin typically comprises 70 % to 85 % of the protein content of CE . This phenotype is associated with the compensatory upregulation of the EDC structural pro - teins Sprr2D , Sprr2H , and repetin . Targeted ablation of the murine involucrin gene , a near - ubiquitous component of CE , From a the Department of Paediatric Dermatology , OurLady’s Children’s Hospital , Dub - lin ; b theEpithelialGeneticsGroup , DivisionofMolecularMedicine , Dundee ; and c the Department of Clinical Medicine , Trinity College Dublin . Disclosureofpotentialconﬂictofinterest : W . H . I . McLeanhasreceivedresearchsupport from DEBRA UK and the Medical Research Council . The rest of the authors have declared that they have no conﬂict of interest . ReceivedforpublicationJuly18 , 2008 ; revisedAugust1 , 2008 ; acceptedforpublication August 1 , 2008 . Available online September 9 , 2008 . Reprint requests : Alan D . Irvine , MD , FRCPI , Department of Paediatric Dermatology , Our Lady’s Children’s Hospital , Crumlin , Dublin 12 , Ireland . E - mail : irvinea @ tcd . ie . 0091 - 6749 / $ 36 . 00 (cid:2) 2009 American Academy of Allergy , Asthma & Immunology doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jaci . 2009 . 07 . 013 Abbreviations used CE : Corniﬁed envelope EDC : Epidermal differentiation complex FLG : Filaggrin gene IV : Ichthyosis vulgaris KLK7 : Kallikrein 7 NMF : Natural moisturizing factor SC : Stratum corneum SPINK5 : Serine protease inhibitor Kazal type 5 R2 similarly lacks a discernable phenotype . The recent development of a composite triple - knockout mouse deﬁcient in involucrin , en - voplakin , and periplakin demonstrates delayed barrier formation during embryogenic development , defects in the assembled CE , and excessive accumulation of corniﬁed layers throughout post - natal life , suggesting that these initiator CE proteins are critical for barrier acquisition . 4 Strikingly , reduced epidermal protease activity , as opposed to upregulation of structural proteins , rescues the phenotype from lethality , with a marked increase of the prote - ase inhibitor serpina1b , resulting in a compensatory reduction in desquamation , with secondary downstream defects in defective ﬁlaggrin gene ( FLG ) processing . 4 For a more detailed consider - ation of the epidermal barrier in atopic dermatitis , please see an earlier article in this series by Elias et al . 5 FLG EXPRESSION AND FUNCTION The giant inactive precursor proﬁlaggrin is a large , complex , highly phosphorylated polypeptide that is the main constituent of the keratohyalin F granules that are visible in the granular cell layer of the epidermis ( Fig 1 , A ) . During formation of the corni - ﬁed cell envelope , proﬁlaggrin is dephosphorylated and proteolyt - ically cleaved by serine proteases , including channel - activating serine protease / Prss and matriptase / matriptase , to release multi - ple copies of the functional FLG repeat peptide units . Control of protease activity is balanced by a series of inhibitors , which are abundant and pivotal in epithelial differentiation , the most characterized of which is lymphoepithelial Kazal - type trypsin in - hibitor , the polyvalent protein product encoded by serine protease inhibitor Kazal type 5 ( SPINK5 ) . After cleavage , liberated ﬁlag - grin binds to and collapses the keratin cytoskeleton , resulting in a ﬂattened squame aligned parallel to the outer surface of the epidermis . The cleaved N - terminal S100 - like calcium - binding domain of proﬁlaggrin enters the nucleus , where it is postulated to have an additional role in regulating terminal differentiation . Subsequently , within the stratum corneum ( SC ) itself , the ﬁlag - grin peptide is progressively degraded by posttranslational mod - iﬁcation enzymes ( including peptidylarginine deiminase 1 and 3 isoforms ) into a pool of hydrophilic amino acids , including urocanic acid , pyrrolidone carboxylic acid , and alanine . This FIG 1 . FLG expression and putative functions in the skin barrier : schematic summarizing the ﬁlaggrin ex - pression pattern and putative functions . A , The precursor proprotein proﬁlaggrin is strongly expressed within keratohyalin granules , tightly limited to and accounting for the typical appearance of the granular layer . The SC stains strongly positive for ﬁlaggrin . B , Filaggrin has several proposed site - speciﬁc functions under the inﬂuence of the epidermal terminal differentiation program through the outer granular layer ( cleavage ofproﬁlaggrintoﬁlaggrin ) andthe lipidbilayeroftheinner SC ( ﬁlamentcompaction , contribution to barrier integrity ) and during desquamation of the outer SC ( production of amino acid degradation pro - ducts that contribute to the hydration of these outer layers and likely contribute to the ‘‘acid mantle’’ ) . C , Summary of current knowledge of molecular control of ﬁlaggrin homeostasis . Proﬁlaggrin is dephos - phorylated in conditions of increasing calcium concentration and is then proteolytically cleaved by the pro - teasesmatriptase ( inhibitedbytheproteaseinhibitor LETKI ) andCAP1 / Prss . Afterproteolysis , theﬁlaggrinB domain locates to the nucleus as part of the terminal differentiation process . Free ﬁlaggrin protein is cross - linked to keratin ﬁlaments by transglutaminases and subsequently deiminated by peptidylarginine deimi - nases ( PADs ) 1 and 3 . Further posttranslational modiﬁcation is undertaken by caspase 14 to produce the free amino acid hygroscopic degradation products urocanic acid ( UCA ) and pyrrolidone carboxylic acid ( PCA ; collectively known as NMF ) , which contribute to SC hydration . TGMs , Transglutaminases . REPRINTED FROM J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL VOLUME 122 , NUMBER 4 , OCTOBER 2008 , 689 - 93 R3 combined pool of amino acids , their metabolites , and various ions make up what is known as the natural moisturizing factor ( NMF ; Fig 1 , C ) . 6 NMF is highly hygroscopic and plays a central role in maintaining hydration of the SC . NMF might additionally play a critical role in the maintenance of the pH of the skin , regulating key biochemical events , including protease activity , barrier per - meability , and cutaneous antimicrobial defense , functions that are fundamentally linked and coregulated . The importance of ﬁl - aggrin - derived breakdown products and the profound effect on barrier function in their absence is underscored by the remarkably short half - life ofﬁlaggrin , which exists for only 6 hours before full proteolysis . Expression of FLG and subsequent activation of hy - drolysis of ﬁlaggrin peptides into NMF are additionally deter - mined by the properties of the microenvironment , including local pH , external humidity , and transepidermal water loss . 6 FLG MUTATIONS CONFER STRONG GENETIC SUSCEPTIBILITY TO ECZEMA The discovery of the association of FLG mutations with atopic diseases followed insights into a common disorder of keratiniza - tion , ichthyosis vulgaris ( IV ) . IV is the most common of the ich - thyotic disorders , estimated to affect 1 in 250 individuals , and is characterized by generalized ﬁne white scale , palmoplantar hy - perlinearity , and keratosis pilaris . For more than 20 years , much indirect evidence pointed toward mutations in FLG as causative ; however , many confounders delayed conﬁrmation of this associ - ation . These included inconsistencies in the reported inheritance pattern , with apparent dominant and recessive inheritance , erroneously reported linkage , and a repetitive gene sequence lim - iting ampliﬁcation . Two loss - of - function FLG mutations ( R501X and 2282del4 ) were ultimately detected by using long - range se - quencing and multiple alignment techniques , revealing a semi - dominant pattern of inheritance with incomplete penetrance . 7 The number of mutations identiﬁed has increased dramatically in the past 2 years , each predicting nonsense or out - of frame de - letion / insertion mutations , with population - speciﬁc patterns emerging worldwide . To date , the number of FLG mutations identiﬁed in European populations is 20 , of which 6 are prevalent and 14 are of low frequency . In Asian populations an additional 17 muta - tions , of which 8 are prevalent and 9 are of low frequency , have been identiﬁed ( Fig 2 , A ) . Of note , more distal mutations allow limited expression of proﬁlaggrin but no production of functional ﬁlaggrin subunits , implying a critical role of the C - terminus for FLG processing ; there is also some early evi - dence of a trend toward reduced penetrance of more distal mu - tations . 8 The combined allele frequency of the initial mutations translates into a carrier frequency of almost 10 % in individuals of European ancestry . 8 This unexpected ﬁnding combined with the known clinical association of IV with eczema and de - creased expression of FLG in patients with eczema pointed to a possible association in the pathogenesis of eczema . This association has now been unambiguously established in a series of replication studies , making this one of the most robust gene associations thus far identiﬁed in complex trait genetics . 8 - 15 FIG 2 . Protein organization and location of mutations . FLG is composed of a large transcript encoded by 3 exons , of which the third exon encodes the FLG protein repeats . The bulk of FLG protein sequences consist of a tandem array of repeating units of 35 kd separated by a 7 - to 10 - amino - acid linker peptide . There are 10 highly homologous FLG polypeptide units , with a variable number of FLG - repeat units consisting of 10 , 11 , or 12 units . The locations of 37 known mutations are shown . Reported mutations resulting in functional null alleles are numbered ; positional locations of as - yet - unreported mutations are demonstrated by unmarked arrows . Prevalent mutations are indicated by red font , and family - speciﬁc mutations are in black ( A ) . Recur - rent mutations can occur on the background of a 10 - , 11 - , or 12 - repeat allele ( B ) . UTR , Untranslated region . REPRINTED FROM J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL VOLUME 122 , NUMBER 4 , OCTOBER 2008 , 689 - 93 R4 Overall , between 18 % and 48 % of all eczema collections carry FLG - null alleles . 14 The relatively high allele frequency of several haplotypically independent null alleles in the population is intriguing and suggests that these have not arisen because of genetic drift alone but might be as a result of balanced selec - tion caused by an as - yet - unclear evolutionary heterozygote advantage . 16 The FLG mutation ﬁndings were corroborated in 2 recent , large , population - based studies on more than 6700 English chil - dren 17 and 3000 German children , in whom the 2 common FLG mutations R501X and 2282del4 and 3 rare variants were ana - lyzed . 18 In the German study FLG variants increased the risk for eczema 3 - fold ( odds ratio , 3 . 12 ; 95 % CI , 2 . 33 - 4 . 17 ; P 5 2 . 5 3 10 2 14 ) with a population - attributable risk of 13 . 5 % . Impor - tantly , these mutations are highly associated with allergen sensi - tization and the subsequent development of asthma associated with eczema , an association that has been consistently reported . 14 At a population level FLG mutations appear to confer an overall risk of asthma of approximately 1 . 8 but only in the context of prior eczema . 19 Because FLG is not expressed in bronchial mucosa , transcutaneous sensitization is one suggested mechanistic possi - bility for FLG to confer asthma risk . 9 , 20 FLG : EPISTATIC EFFECTS ? Other genetic associations within pathways that modulate ﬁlaggrin have been reported , including common maternally derived polymorphisms in the serine protease inhibitor SPINK5 ( particularly Glu420Lys ) that have been shown to modify the risk of eczema , asthma , and IgE , suggesting that this pathway might lie in altered expression of environmental proteases . Pathologic loss - of - function mutations in SPINK5 , as found in patients with Netherton syndrome , are associated with a pro - found barrier defect and severe atopic diathesis , resulting in un - checked proteolysis by processing enzymes , such as matriptase , and other serine proteases of an extracellular desmosomal component ( corneodesmosin ) and lipid - processing enzymes . 21 Gain - of - function polymorphisms in the kallikrein 7 gene ( KLK7 ) encoding the protease stratum corneum chemotrypic en - zyme , have been additionally reported to adversely affect barrier function , are postulated to affect the proteolytic processing of proﬁlaggrin , and are potentially regulated by lymphoepithelial Kazal - type trypsin inhibitor . Recently , we studied these reported mutations in several large patient collections involving more than 2500 patients and 10 , 000 control subjects . We were able to conﬁrm a role for maternally inherited SPINK5 mutations in a German family cohort but could not replicate the KLK7 ﬁnd - ings . Neither KLK7 nor SPINK5 had any epistatic effects with FLG - null alleles . 22 FLG AND ECZEMA PATHOGENESIS : MECHANISMS AND SPECULATIONS Although the very strong genetic association of FLG mutations with eczema is now clear , the mechanistic pathways from inher - ited FLG haploinsufﬁciency to the typical inﬂammatory lesions of eczema requires further elucidation . FLG deﬁciency leads to re - duced NMF , 23 which is likely a contributor to the xerotic pheno - type seen in many patients with eczema . The initiation of the typical inﬂammatory response is of great interest , and with this in mind , one should remember that around 40 % of all carriers of FLG - null alleles never have any signs of eczema . 17 The envi - ronmental and genetic modiﬁers ( discussed above ) of this risk are currently unclear , although recent evidence also indicates that ﬁlaggrin skin expression could be modulated by the atopic in - ﬂammatory response mediated by the cytokines IL - 4 and IL - 13 , 24 thus providing a link between this structural molecule and the inﬂammatory response in eczema . Other currently speculative mechanisms include the possibility that FLG haploinsufﬁciency might critically modify pH - related altered commensal bacteria expression , thus manipulating host immunity . Altered host immunity to bacterial infections is a nota - ble feature of atopic dermatitis . 25 Growth of Staphylococcus aureus is facilitated by increased pH , and it colonizes the skin of more than 90 % of patients with eczema . Exposure of a naive immune system to S aureus superantigens can trigger and estab - lish a permanent T H 2 immune response through activation and ampliﬁcation of innate immune responses . The neutralizing acid SC pH has also been shown to independently facilitate excessive protease activity and reduce the activity of key lipid - processing enzymes , resulting in the formation of defective lamellar membranes and a disrupted permeability barrier . CONCLUSION FLG mutations are the strongest and most widely replicated genetic risks for eczema identiﬁed to date . They have a clear per - missive effect in the early inﬂammatory effects that characterize eczema and affect both priming of disease and chronicity . The identiﬁcation of these mutations has enlivened the ﬁeld of eczema genetics . Their identiﬁcation raises the potential for targeted in - tervention and therapy and might lead to a consideration of a new molecular classiﬁcation of eczema . The environmental and genetic interactions with FLG - null alleles that contribute to the pathogenesis of this distressing , fascinating , and complex disease will be of great interest in the next several years . REFERENCES 1 . Candi E , Schmidt R , Melino G . The corniﬁed envelope : a model of cell death in the skin . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2005 ; 6 : 328 - 40 . 2 . Mischke D , Korge BP , Marenholz I , Volz A , Ziegler A . Genes encoding structural proteins of epidermal corniﬁcation and S100 calcium - binding proteins form a gene complex ( ‘‘epidermal differentiation complex’’ ) on human chromosome 1q21 . J Invest Dermatol 1996 ; 106 : 989 - 92 . 3 . Cookson W . The immunogenetics of asthma and eczema : a new focus on the epithelium . Nat Rev Immunol 2004 ; 4 : 978 - 88 . 4 . Sevilla LM , Nachat R , Groot KR , Klement JF , Uitto J , Djian P , et al . Mice deﬁcient in involucrin , envoplakin , and periplakin have a defective epidermal barrier . J Cell Biol 2007 ; 179 : 1599 - 612 . 5 . Elias PM , Hatano Y , Williams ML . Basis for the barrier abnormality in atopic der - matitis : outside - inside - outside pathogenic mechanisms . J Allergy Clin Immunol 2008 ; 121 : 1337 - 43 . 6 . Rawlings AV , Harding CR . Moisturization and skin barrier function . Dermatol Ther 2004 ; 17 ( suppl 1 ) : 43 - 8 . 7 . Smith FJ , Irvine AD , Terron - Kwiatkowski A , Sandilands A , Campbell LE , Zhao Y , et al . Loss - of - function mutations in the gene encoding ﬁlaggrin cause ichthyosis vulgaris . Nat Genet 2006 ; 38 : 337 - 42 . 8 . Sandilands A , Terron - Kwiatkowski A , Hull PR , O’Regan GM , Clayton TH , Watson RM , et al . Comprehensive analysis of the gene encoding ﬁlaggrin un - covers prevalent and rare mutations in ichthyosis vulgaris and atopic eczema . Nat Genet 2007 ; 39 : 650 - 4 . 9 . Palmer CN , Irvine AD , Terron - Kwiatkowski A , Zhao Y , Liao H , Lee SP , et al . Common loss - of - function variants of the epidermal barrier protein ﬁlaggrin are a major predisposing factor for atopic dermatitis . Nat Genet 2006 ; 38 : 441 - 6 . 10 . Weidinger S , Illig T , Baurecht H , Irvine AD , Rodriguez E , Diaz - Lacava A , et al . Loss - of - function variations within the ﬁlaggrin gene predispose for atopic derma - titis with allergic sensitizations . J Allergy Clin Immunol 2006 ; 118 : 214 - 9 . REPRINTED FROM J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL VOLUME 122 , NUMBER 4 , OCTOBER 2008 , 689 - 93 R5 11 . Marenholz I , Nickel R , Ruschendorf F , Schulz F , Esparza - Gordillo J , Kerscher T , et al . Filaggrin loss - of - function mutations predispose to phenotypes involved in the atopic march . J Allergy Clin Immunol 2006 ; 118 : 866 - 71 . 12 . Ruether A , Stoll M , Schwarz T , Schreiber S , Folster - Holst R . Filaggrin loss - of - functionvariant contributes to atopic dermatitis risk in the population of Northern Germany . Br J Dermatol 2006 ; 155 : 1093 - 4 . 13 . Stemmler S , Parwez Q , Petrasch - Parwez E , Epplen JT , Hoffjan S . Two common loss - of - function mutations within the ﬁlaggrin gene predispose for early onset of atopic dermatitis . J Invest Dermatol 2007 ; 123 : 722 - 4 . 14 . Irvine AD . Fleshing out ﬁlaggrin phenotypes . J Invest Dermatol 2007 ; 127 : 504 - 7 . 15 . Baurecht H , Irvine AD , Novak N , Illig T , Buhler B , Ring J , et al . Toward a major risk factor for atopic eczema : meta - analysis of ﬁlaggrin polymorphism data . J Allergy Clin Immunol 2007 ; 120 : 1406 - 12 . 16 . Irvine AD , McLean WH . Breaking the ( un ) sound barrier : ﬁlaggrin is a major gene for atopic dermatitis . J Invest Dermatol 2006 ; 126 : 1200 - 2 . 17 . Henderson J , Northstone K , Lee SP , Liao H , Zhao Y , Pembrey M , et al . The burden of disease associated with ﬁlaggrin mutations : a population - based , longitudinal birth cohort study . J Allergy Clin Immunol 2008 ; 121 : 872 - 7 . 18 . Weidinger S , O’Sullivan M , Illig T , Baurecht H , Depner M , Rodriguez E , et al . Fil - aggrin mutations , atopic eczema , hay fever , and asthma in children . J Allergy Clin Immunol 2008 ; 121 : 1203 - 9 . 19 . McLean WH , Palmer CN , Henderson J , Kabesch M , Weidinger S , Irvine AD . Fil - aggrin variants confer susceptibility to asthma . J Allergy Clin Immunol 2008 ; 121 : 1294 - 6 . 20 . Hudson TJ . Skin barrier function and allergic risk . Nat Genet 2006 ; 38 : 399 - 400 . 21 . Descargues P , Deraison C , Bonnart C , Kreft M , Kishibe M , Ishida - Yamamoto A , et al . Spink5 - deﬁcient mice mimic Netherton syndrome through degradation of desmoglein 1 by epidermal protease hyperactivity . Nat Genet 2005 ; 37 : 56 - 65 . 22 . Weidinger SB , Wagenpfeil S , Henderson J , Novak N , Sandilands A , Chen H , et al . Analysis of the individual and aggregate genetic contributions of previously iden - tiﬁed SPINK5 , KLK7 and FLG polymorphisms to eczema risk . J Allergy Clin Immunol 2008 ; 122 : 560 - 8 . 23 . Kezic S , Kemperman PM , Koster ES , de Jongh CM , Thio HB , Campbell LE , et al . Loss - of - function mutations in the ﬁlaggrin gene lead to reduced level of natural moisturizing factor in the stratum corneum . J Invest Dermatol 2008 ; 128 : 2117 - 9 . 24 . Howell MD , Kim BE , Gao P , Grant AV , Boguniewicz M , Debenedetto A , et al . Cytokine modulation of atopic dermatitis ﬁlaggrin skin expression . J Allergy Clin Immunol 2007 ; 120 : 150 - 5 . 25 . Schauber J , Gallo RL . Antimicrobial peptides and the skin immune defense sys - tem . J Allergy Clin Immunol 2008 ; 122 : 261 - 6 . REPRINTED FROM J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL VOLUME 122 , NUMBER 4 , OCTOBER 2008 , 689 - 93 R6