J . theor . Biol . ( 2001 ) 210 , 201 } 219 doi : 10 . 1006 / jtbi . 2000 . 2287 , available online at http : / / www . idealibrary . com on Non - local Concepts and Models in Biology C . T . L EE , M . F . H OOPES , J . D IEHL , W . G ILLILAND , G . H UXEL , E . V . L EAVER , K . M C C ANN , J . U MBANHOWAR AND A . M OGILNER Institute of „ heoretical Dynamics , ; niversity of California , Davis , CA 95616 , ; . S . A . ( Received on 21 October 1998 , Accepted in revised form on 21 January 2000 ) In this paper , we consider local and non - local spatially explicit mathematical models for biological phenomena . We show that , when rate di ! erences between fast and slow local dynamics are great enough , non - local models are adequate simpli " cations of local models . Non - local models thus avoid describing fast processes in mechanistic detail , instead describing the e ! ects of fast processes on slower ones . As a consequence , non - local models are helpful to biologists because they describe biological systems on scales that are convenient to observa - tion , data collection , and insight . We illustrate these arguments by comparing local and non - local models for the aggregation of hypothetical organisms , and we support theoretical ideas with concrete examples from cell biology and animal behavior . ( 2001 Academic Press 1 . Introduction Biological interactions occur at speci " c locations and frequently involve the redistribution of or - ganisms or molecules in space . Even from ini - tially homogeneous states , striking patterns can form that make space heterogeneous ( Levin & Segel , 1985 ; Levin , 1992 ; Mackas & Boyd , 1979 ; Steele , 1974 , 1976 , 1978 ) . Recognizing the importance of space , biologists have struggled with the di $ culties of collecting data over numer - ous spatial scales . Models can facilitate biological explorations by allowing researchers to make predictions and explore questions di $ cult to ad - dress with " eld or lab studies . Over the past seven decades , researchers have developed a variety of ways of modeling spatial interactions in biology , starting with Fisher ’ s ( 1937 ) seminal work on gene spread . This paper examines the ways in which spatially explicit non - local models help biologists to capture essential features of spatial phenomena . We begin our investigation by brie # y describ - ing several di ! erent approaches to modeling biological systems . Because our discussion en - compasses widely di ! erent biological disciplines including ecology , genetics , physiology , and cell biology , the language of this initial summary is intentionally general . For the purposes of this paper , for instance , we consider biological sys - tems to be collections of interacting individuals that coexist on a spatial landscape . These & & indi - viduals ’’ can represent cells , molecules , or organ - isms . In order for individuals to interact , they may move across space themselves or some agent related to them may move . Keeping the possibi - lity of related agents in mind , however , we will refer only to & & interacting individuals ’’ . Mean - while , modelers may capture individual move - ment by following the individuals themselves or by following their densities . For the present , we restrict our attention to models that consider density as a response variable . 0022 } 5193 / 01 / 100201 # 19 $ 35 . 00 / 0 ( 2001 Academic Press One approach to modeling spatial biological interactions is to treat space implicitly . Implicitly spatial & & mean - " eld ’’ models , which do not distin - guish between di ! erent locations in space , in - volve the simplifying assumption that individuals are well mixed and that each is therefore equally likely to interact with individuals at any other location ( Durrett & Levin , 1994 ) . This assump - tion , analogous to the mass action approxima - tion of chemistry , requires the spatial movement scale of individuals to be large compared to the spatial scale on which interactions occur and , conversely , the temporal scale of movement to be smaller than that of interactions . Most non - spa - tial models of biological systems that are systems of ordinary di ! erential or di ! erence equations fall into this category . Many of these models take the general form d f ( t ) d t " R ( f ( t ) ) , ( 1 ) where f and R are vector functions . The elements of f quantify the total densities of di ! erent classes of individuals as functions of time , while elements of R represent corresponding rates of reactions . Familiar models of this sort describe Michaelis } Menten enzyme kinetics , Lotka } Volterra popula - tion dynamics , and neural activity ( Murray , 1989 ) . Another major approach to modeling bio - logical systems is to treat space explicitly . By distinguishing among di ! erent locations in space , spatially explicit models can address situations in which the mass action approximation fails . Inter - actions in spatially explicit models are often local , with individuals interacting only between adjac - ent locations in space . This limitation implies that the spatial and temporal scales of movement and interaction are comparable . Reaction } di ! u - sion equations are examples of local models that are continuous in space and in time . These famil - iar models typically take the form L f ( x , t ) L t " R ( f ( x , t ) ) # D ) L 2 f ( x , t ) L x 2 , ( 2 ) where x is a spatial coordinate , and f and R are de " ned as in the spatially implicit case except for an additional explicit dependence on spatial coordinates . The second term in this equation describes dispersal of di ! erent classes of indi - viduals , where D is a vector whose elements represent corresponding constant dispersal mag - nitudes . Reaction } di ! usion - type models have a rich history in biology . Fisher ( 1937 ) , Skellam ( 1951 ) , and Andow et al . ( 1990 ) examined rates of gene and population spread using simple reac - tion } di ! usion equations . Following Turing ’ s ( 1952 ) initial investigation of the reaction and di ! usion of chemicals important in morpho - genesis , researchers have used similar equations to explain diverse examples of biological pattern formation , ranging from neurological mapping ( Ermentrout & Cowan , 1979 ) , cell alignment ( Murray et al . , 1983 ; Odell et al . , 1981 ) , and leaf vein formation ( Mitchison , 1980 ) to morphologi - cal development ( Murray , 1981 ) . Mathematical biologists have applied the same types of reac - tion } di ! usion mathematical formulations to the aggregating behavior of cells ( Grindrod et al . , 1989 ; Oster & Murray , 1989 ) and multicellular organisms ( Grindrod , 1988 ; Keller & Segel , 1970 ; Kierstead & Slobodkin , 1953 ; Levin & Segel , 1985 ; Okubo , 1980 ) . Non - local spatially explicit models are the focus of this paper . These are models in which interactions occur between non - adjacent loca - tions . The presence of non - local interactions indi - cates that the spatial scale of movement is large and the temporal scale is small in comparison to other processes that are modeled explicitly , but not so much as for di ! erent locations to become indistinguishable . We examine the relationship between model framework and di ! erences in pro - cesses ’ rates in detail in the next section . For now , we simply note that in continuous space , many non - local models take the partial integro - di ! er - ential form L f ( x , t ) L t " P = ~ = W ( x , x @ ) ) R ( f ( x @ , t ) ) d x @ ! R ( f ( x , t ) ) ) P = ~ = W ( x @ , x ) d x @ ( 3 ) or the di ! erence form f ( x , t # 1 ) " P = ~ = W ( x , x @ ) ) R ( f ( x @ , t ) ) d x @ . ( 4 ) 202 C . T . LEE E „ A ‚ . The de " nitions of x , f , and R are unchanged in these equations , and W and W 3 are vector func - tions , which are linear dispersal kernels , that gives probabilities of rates of motion from point x @ to point x . Examples of non - local models are becoming more common in biology ( Mollison , 1977 ; Kot & Scha ! er , 1986 ; Lewis , 1994 ; Neubert et al . , 1995 ; Mogilner & Edelstein - Keshet , 1999 ) . Models that express non - local interactions are useful to biologists for several reasons . Most im - portantly , non - local models lend themselves to the types of data biologists frequently collect . Although many biological variables of interest may be a ! ected by processes that occur on small spatial or temporal scales , collecting su $ cient data to characterize these processes may be pro - hibitively di $ cult . For example , substantial movement of seeds or of animals may take place on a time - scale of several minutes . Biologists interested in measuring individual movement , however , may collect data on the scale of hours or days by setting seed traps at given distances from individual plants , or marking animals re - leased at one location and attempting to recap - ture them at varying distances from that location . Because non - local models describe the e ! ects of small - scale processes on larger spatial scales and longer temporal scales , they provide a theoretical framework that naturally corresponds to the data that empiricists collect . Other advantages , to be explained as we develop the mathematical frame - work of non - local models in the next section , include an intuitive description of slower - scale processes and e $ ciency in numerical solution . In the next section , we examine the scales of biological interactions , formalize scaling argu - ments and cover the mathematical relationship between non - local and local models . In Section 3 , we apply the concepts developed in Section 2 to two concrete examples , demonstrating non - local models ’ potential to facilitate understanding of complex processes and to accommodate biologi - cal data . We conclude with a general discussion on non - local models ’ utility for biological problems . 2 . Mathematical Formulation of Non - local Dynamics To demonstrate how the relative scales of im - portant processes can determine the appropriate form for spatial models , we develop a simple model to describe the changes in population den - sity of a hypothetical organism . We treat indi - vidual density as the response variable of interest and individual movement as the process coupling locations across space . Individual movement is in turn mediated by a signal that is produced by the organisms themselves . Such situations are com - mon in biology . For example , the bird cherry - oat aphid , Rhopalosiphum padi , forms aggregations on its winter host , Prunus padus , in patterns that suggest that R . padi individuals secrete and re - spond to an aggregation pheromone ( Pettersson , 1993 ) . In a similar situation , individual myxobac - teria glide randomly within colonies ( Dworkin & Kaiser , 1985 ) but begin to aggregate when starved . One proposed mechanism that can ex - plain this behavior is that the bacteria commun - icate by secreting and responding to di ! using chemoattractants ( Shi & Zusman , 1994 ) . The es - sential feature of both the aphid system and the myxobacteria system is that changes in densities of moving individuals are mediated by signals that the individuals produce themselves . Since aggregations of aphids may enjoy greater access to plant resources ( Way & Cammell , 1970 ) or reduced risk of predation ( Turchin & Kareiva , 1989 ) and since aggregated myxobacteria may share some important enzymes , a model that could reliably describe aggregation in these two systems would help to elucidate important as - pects of their biology . We develop a simple model for aggregation and examine the e ! ects of separ - ations of scale among the response , coupling , and signalling processes . We begin with general , local , and nonlinear equations to describe changes in the density of organisms due to movement and changes in the density of signalling chemicals due to secretion and decay . Scaling analysis demonstrates that , given appropriate separations between impor - tant processes , a non - local formulation can ap - proximate the local model . The non - local model describes changes in individual density without explicit reference to signal dynamics or detailed descriptions of individual movement . We argue that , although the two - model formulations yield the same biological predictions , non - local de - scriptions may provide more insight into biolo - gical systems and can be more e $ cient to solve NON - LOCAL MODELS 203 numerically . We support our qualitative argu - ments with numerical results and linear stability analysis . 2 . 1 . SIMPLE MODEL OF SELF - AGGREGATION We begin with some basic modeling approxi - mations that are appropriate to R . padi and myxobacteria aggregation . Space in our model is a one - dimensional domain of length ‚ , and both space and time are continuous . We also consider the population to be closed , with no births or deaths so that spatial changes in density are due to movement alone . We describe the population with a density function , f ( x , t ) , with dimensions numbers of individuals per unit length . This con - tinuous description is valid when ( i ) the total number of organisms N < 1 , and ( ii ) the average distance between neighbor organisms is much less than relevant spatial scales of the system ( Lin & Segel , 1974 ) . Both of these conditions are satis - " ed in the above - mentioned biological situations . We consider individuals to move by biased di ! u - sion , which is a combination of random motion and drift : L f ( x , t ) L t " D L 2 f ( x , t ) L x 2 ! L L x [ < ( x , t ) f ( x , t ) ] . ( 5 ) Here D is the di ! usion coe $ cient in dimensions length squared per time , and < is the drift velocity in length per time . Others have investigated in great detail how this continuous model can be derived from microscopic processes such as mov - ing and turning ( Alt , 1980 ; Othmer et al . , 1988 ; Othmer & Stevens , 1997 ) . Here we do not con - cern ourselves with detailed mechanisms , and we focus instead on modifying the basic advec - tion } di ! usion model to capture the relevant fea - tures of aphid or myxobacteria biology . The rates at which individuals move in nature depend upon biological information obtained from the environment . We assume that indi - viduals move in response to a pheromone or chemoattractant signal " eld s ( x , t ) and that their movement depends on the gradient of the signal rather than on the signal ’ s local value . This rule approximates the movement of insects or cells in the direction of higher chemical concentrations regardless of local concentration . To capture this rule , we write that the rate of deterministic drift is proportional to the spatial gradient of the signal , < ( x , t ) " k L s / L x . ( 6 ) Here k is a proportionality coe $ cient , in dimen - sions length squared per signal density per time , which measures the sensitivity of the drift rate to the signal gradient . Meanwhile , we assume that individual movement due to stimuli other than the signal of interest is random , and represent it by a signal - and density - independent di ! usion coe $ cient , D " const . To capture the situation in which individuals produce the signal " eld themselves , we assume that each individual aphid or bacterial cell can produce the pheromone or chemoattractant that triggers aggregation . We postulate that the pro - duction of such a signal must therefore be pro - portional to the individual ’ s density . If we assume that the signal chemical di ! uses through space and decays exponentially with time , we may write the following equation to describe the change in the concentration of signal with respect to time and space : L s ( x , t ) L t " D s L 2 s ( x , t ) L x 2 # a f ( x , t ) ! b s ( x , t ) . ( 7 ) Here a and b are rate constants of production and decay in dimensions signal density per indi - vidual density per time and per time , respectively , and D s is the di ! usion coe $ cient for the signal . Together , eqns ( 5 } 7 ) provide a general , closed system of nonlinear partial di ! erential equations for a model of aggregation . We consider this model to be local because the two reaction } di ! u - sion - type equations imply a mechanistic know - ledge of how individuals and signal molecules move at every point in time and space . Biolo - gically , realistic boundary conditions on these equations specify no # ux of organisms or signal at the edges of the spatial domain , which for aphids may be a single leaf ( Pettersson , 1993 ) and for myxobacteria in vitro may be a Petri dish . This model is similar to the Keller } Segel model for bacterial chemotaxis , whose solutions and properties have been extensively studied 204 C . T . LEE E „ A ‚ . ( Childress & Percus , 1981 ; Mimura et al . , 1993 ; Nanjundiah , 1973 ; Othmer & Stevens , 1997 ) . 2 . 2 . LINEAR STABILITY ANALYSIS To determine when aggregation occurs in our model , we conduct a linear stability analysis of its spatially homogeneous steady state . One may verify that homogeneous distributions of organ - isms and signal molecules across the spatial domain : f ( x , t ) " f M " N ‚ , s ( x , t ) " s N " a N b ‚ ( 8 ) constitute a steady - state solution of model equa - tions ( 5 } 7 ) . Indeed , when the spatial derivatives of both distributions are equal to zero , the rate of drift of the organisms is equal to zero ( 6 ) , and density changes due to di ! usion stop as well . Also , at the level of the signal given by eqn ( 8 ) the rate of signal secretion is equal to the rate of decay . Linear stability analysis answers the question of how fast small - amplitude , harmonic density pro " le perturbations to the homogeneous steady state grow or decay . Representing the densities in the form f ( x , t ) " f M # f I ( x , t ) , s ( x , t ) # s N # s J ( x , t ) , where f I ( x , t ) and s J ( x , t ) are small perturbations , we substitute these expressions into eqns ( 5 } 7 ) and keep only terms that are linear with respect to small perturbations . We obtain the following system of linear equations : L f I L t " D L 2 f I L x 2 ! kf I L 2 s N L x 2 , ( 9 ) L s J L t " D s L 2 s J L x 2 # a f I ! b s J . ( 10 ) The model ’ s temporal invariance suggests the following form for the perturbations : f I ( x , t ) " f 0 e j t g ( x ) , s J ( x , t ) " s 0 e j t g ( x ) . Substituting these expressions into eqns ( 9 and 10 ) , we " nd that the following harmonics satisfy eqns ( 9 and 10 ) and no - # ux boundary conditions : g ( x ) " cos ( qx ) , 0 ) x ) ‚ , q " n j ‚ , j " 1 , 2 , 2 . Since perturbations are characterized by their linear growth rate , j , and wavelength , 2 ‚ / j , where j represents the wavenumber , we rewrite di ! erential equations ( 9 and 10 ) as linear alge - braic equations for the amplitudes of the per - turbations : j f 0 " ! Dq 2 f 0 # kf M q 2 s 0 , j s 0 " ! D s q 2 s 0 # a f 0 ! b s 0 . These equations have non - trivial solutions if and only if the following relation between the linear growth rate and the wavenumber is satis " ed : A j # n 2 Dj 2 ‚ 2 B A j # b # n 2 D s j 2 ‚ 2 B ! k a f M n 2 j 2 ‚ 2 " 0 . ( 11 ) Simple analysis shows that if the inequality k a f M b D ( 1 # n 2 D s b ‚ 2 holds , then at each wavenumber the linear growth rate is negative , perturbations decay , and the homogeneous steady state is stable . If the left - hand side of the inequality becomes greater than the right - hand side , however , then at small wavenumbers the linear growth rate becomes positive , perturbations start to grow , and the stability is broken . Speci " cally , if 1 # n 2 D s b ‚ 2 ( k a f M b D ( 1 # 4 n 2 D s b ‚ 2 , then the only unstable mode of perturbation corresponds to the wavenumber j " 1 and wavelength 2 ‚ . In other words , under the above inequality we expect perturbations of only this mode to grow . These results of the stability analysis lend themselves to biological interpretation . The ratio NON - LOCAL MODELS 205 k a f M / b D " ks N / D is the ratio of the magnitude of individuals ’ signal - dependent drift , ks N , to their di ! usion via random motion . Because the quanti - ty ks N determines the magnitude of drift and car - ries the same dimensions length squared per time as di ! usion coe $ cients , we consider it a measure of the & & aggregation strength ’’ of the system . The " rst inequality in the preceding paragraph thus indicates that when the aggregation strength overcomes di ! usion , perturbations of the homo - geneous steady - state result in aggregation . As the ratio becomes greater , we expect denser and more compact aggregations to evolve . When , as indicated by the second inequality , the aggrega - tion strength is only slightly greater than the di ! usion coe $ cient , we expect the resulting ag - gregation of individuals to be of a spatial scale comparable to the size of the " nite domain , ‚ . Thus , in the case of weak to moderate aggrega - tion , the size of the domain is a meaningful length scale of the biological system . 2 . 3 . SCALING ANALYSIS AND PERTURBATION THEORY To reveal important relationships between the scales of processes relevant to aggregation , we perform a non - dimensionalization of our local model . The " rst step in the non - dimensionaliz - ation is to choose an appropriate unit of time . Since the purpose of our modeling e ! ort is to understand the grouping behavior of individuals , the chosen unit should be relevant to changes in individual density rather than to changes in sig - nal density . The two processes that directly a ! ect individual density are random di ! usion and sig - nal - dependent advection . We restrict our atten - tion to the case in which the rates of these two processes are comparable , with aggregative drift only slightly greater than di ! usion . In this case , as we showed in the preceding section , the size of the aggregation that results is on the scale of the domain size ‚ . Thus , an appropriate choice of temporal unit for the development of aggrega - tion is the characteristic time for an individual to drift or di ! use across the spatial domain : „ " ‚ 2 / D . The constant steady - state densities of the or - ganisms and the signal , f M and s 6 , are natural choi - ces for their characteristic densities . Given these choices and the temporal unit „ , we introduce the non - dimensional quantities : x @ " x ‚ , t @ " t „ " Dt ‚ 2 , f @ " f f M " ‚ f N , s @ " s s N " b ‚ s a N , which enable us to re - write nonlinear model equations ( 5 } 7 ) in the non - dimensional form : L f @ L t @ " L 2 f @ L x @ 2 ! k @ L L x @ C f @ L s @ L x @ D , k @ " k a f M b D , ( 12 ) e 1 e 2 L s @ L t @ " e 2 L 2 s @ L x @ 2 # ( f @ ! s @ ) , e 1 " D D s , e 2 " D s b ‚ 2 . ( 13 ) Equations ( 12 and 13 ) show that the values of the dimensionless parameters k @ , e 1 , and e 2 com - pletely determine the behavior of the model . Since each of these three ratios represents a com - parison between the rates of two processes , an investigation of their magnitudes sheds light on the relative scales of those processes . The para - meter k @ coincides with the ratio of the aggrega - tion strength to di ! usion that appeared in the linear stability analysis , so under conditions of moderate aggregation k @ & 1 . To determine rea - sonable values of e 1 and e 2 , we return to our two illustrative examples . The parameter e 1 is a dimensionless quantity that compares the rate of organisms ’ di ! usion with the rate of the signal ’ s di ! usion . In the case of myxobacteria , the e ! ective di ! usion coe $ cient of the cells is of the order of magnitude D & 10 ~ 9 cm 2 s ~ 1 ( estimated using data from ( Spormann & Kaiser , 1995 ) ) , while the di ! usion coe $ cient of chemoattractants in an aqueous environment is typically on the order of D s & 10 ~ 5 cm 2 s ~ 1 ( Weast et al . , 1983 , p . F - 46 ) . A rea - sonable e ! ective di ! usion coe $ cient characteriz - ing the random motion of aphids is D & 1 cm 2 s ~ 1 ( estimated using data from Pettersson , 1993 ) , while the estimated di ! usion coe $ cient of pheromones in the air is D s & 0 . 1 cm 2 s ~ 1 ( Weast et al . , 1983 , p . F - 46 ) . Thus , in both of our biolo - gical examples , e 1 ; 1 ( e 1 & 0 . 0001 for bacteria , 206 C . T . LEE E „ A ‚ . and e 1 & 0 . 1 for aphids ) . In biological terms , the smallness of e 1 indicates that the motion of the signal is much faster than the motion of individuals . If we write the dimensionless parameter e 2 in the form : e 2 " b ~ 1 / ( ‚ 2 / D s ) , its meaning as the ratio of the signal chemical ’ s half - life time to the characteristic time for the chemical to di ! use across the spatial domain is clear . The latter time is of the same order of magnitude for both biolo - gical systems : in the experiments with myxobac - teria , ‚ & 1 cm and ‚ 2 / D s & 10 5 s , and in the aphid case , ‚ & 100 cm and ‚ 2 / D s & 10 5 s . Thus , if the value of b ~ 1 ; 10 5 s K 1 day , which is reason - able to assume in both cases , then e 2 ; 1 . The interpretation of this inequality is that the signal decays well before it can di ! use across the spatial domain , so boundary conditions have little in - u - ence on the dynamics of the signal . With knowledge of the magnitudes of para - meters e 1 and e 2 in hand , we identify a quantitat - ive hierarchy of the three terms in eqn ( 13 ) . If our choices for the characteristic temporal and spa - tial scales were appropriate , which can only be justi " ed a posteriori , then the last term on the right - hand side is on the order of unity . The " rst term on the right - hand side is much smaller , on the order of e 2 ; 1 . Finally , the left - hand term is smaller still , on the order of e 1 e 2 ; e 2 . Because this term is so small , we can neglect it according to & & naive ’’ perturbation theory ( Lin & Segel , 1974 ) , thereby simplifying the model consider - ably . Biologically , such a simpli " cation is justi - " ed because the smallness of the left - hand term in eqn ( 13 ) means that the dynamics of the signal are very fast . After brief signal transients de - crease , therefore , dynamic changes in the signal are negligible . Using this reasoning , can we simplify our model further by also neglecting the small di ! u - sion term in eqn ( 13 ) ? Doing so implies that very little of the information about signal dynamics is relevant , and that signal density simply re # ects the density of the organisms without any appreci - able di ! erence in the rates of the two processes : s @ " f @ . We would then obtain the following closed , local equation for the density of the organisms : L f @ L t @ " L 2 f @ L x @ 2 ! k @ L L x @ C f @ L f @ L x @ D . This equation , however , is ill - posed mathemat - ically , which becomes clear from the linear stabil - ity analysis . Substituting a perturbed density of the form f @ ( x @ , t @ ) " 1 # f 0 e j { t { cos ( n jx @ ) into this equation and linearizing with respect to the small perturbation amplitude f 0 , we obtain the disper - sion relation : j @ " ( k @ ! 1 ) ( n j ) 2 . In the biolo - gically interesting situation when aggregation takes place , k @ ’ 1 , so j @ PR as j PR , or ( ‚ / j ) P 0 . This calculation means that small - wavelength perturbations grow in " nitely fast , which is biologically unrealistic . To understand why neglecting the signal ’ s dif - fusion term invalidates the model , consider a signal inhomogeneity of spatial scale d . This in - homogeneity generates local organismal drift with a rate on the order of < & ks N / d . This drift causes an inhomogeneity in the distribution of the organisms of spatial scale D / < & ( D / ks N ) d " d / k @ . In cases when aggregation takes place and k @ ’ 1 , this result means that the spatial scale of perturbations to the density of the organisms , d / k @ , is less than that of perturbations to the signal , d . Without signal di ! usion , the signal dy - namics lose their spatial dimension , which for - mally means that their spatial scale becomes equal to zero . To be consistent , the spatial scale of the organism ’ s density must also be equal to zero , which implies that a spatially explicit model is inappropriate for this system . Mathematically , this phenomenon indicates that a small signal di ! usion term is a singular , rather than regular , perturbation of the signal kinetics ( Lin & Segel , 1974 ) . Indeed , one may verify that the regular perturbation series s @ " f @ # + = i / 1 e i 2 ( d 2 i f @ / d x @ 2 i ) , which can be ob - tained from the equation e 2 ( d 2 s @ / d x @ 2 ) # ( f @ ! s @ ) " 0 , is not asymptotic , meaning that the corresponding local approximation is not valid . One of the ways to solve this singular perturba - tion problem is to attempt a non - local approxima - tion of the local nonlinear model ( 12 and 13 ) . 2 . 4 . NON - LOCAL APPROXIMATION Returning to the full non - dimensional model ( 12 and 13 ) , we examine the validity of retaining the signal ’ s di ! usion term but neglecting the much smaller term on the left - hand side of eqn ( 13 ) . As explained in the previous section , NON - LOCAL MODELS 207 this simpli " cation is justi " ed biologically by the fact that signal movement is much faster than individual movement . After taking advantage of this separation of scales between the two move - ment processes , we can solve the simpli " ed linear ordinary di ! erential equation for the signal ’ s spa - tial distribution , e 2 ( d 2 s @ / d x @ 2 ) ! s @ " f @ , on an in , - nite domain using the Green ’ s functions technique ( Morse & Feshbach , 1953 , Chapter 7 ) : s @ ( x @ ) " P = ~ = d x @ @ G ( x @ ! x @ @ ) f @ ( x @ @ ) , G ( d ) " 1 2 J e 2 exp A ! D d D J e 2 B . ( 14 ) Since we are concerned with a " nite domain , we must use a di ! erent Green ’ s function G than this one for an in " nite domain . In the case when e 2 ; 1 , however , which means that the domain ’ s boundaries have little e ! ect on the signal ’ s distri - bution , we can consider the desired " nite - domain Green ’ s function to be a small perturbation of the function given for the in " nite domain ( Morse & Feshbach , 1953 ) . We can then approximate the signal distribution as follows : s @ ( x @ ) K 1 2 J e 2 P 1 0 d x @ @ exp A ! D x @ ! x @ @ D J e 2 B f @ ( x @ @ ) . The model equation for the motion of the organ - isms assumes the closed non - local form : L f @ L t @ " L 2 f @ L x @ 2 ! L L x @ C < @ ( x @ ) L s @ L x @ D , ( 15 ) < @ ( x @ ) K ! k @ 2 e 2 P 1 0 d x @ @ sign ( x @ ! x @ @ ) ] exp A ! D x @ ! x @ @ D J e 2 B f @ ( x @ @ ) . ( 16 ) This spatially non - local model describes density changes as a result of direct , long - distance inter - actions between individuals without reference to the signal . We have used a separation of scales between the rates of signal movement and individual movement to eliminate information that is unimportant to the larger - scale processes of interest . The linear stability analysis of the spatially non - local model ( 15 and 16 ) is di $ cult on the " nite domain , but is much simpler on an in " nite domain . The in " nite - domain result is relevant to the " nite domain because the boundary condi - tions should not a ! ect the aggregation behavior strongly . Substituting a density of the form f @ ( x , t ) " 1 # f 0 e j { t { cos ( qx @ ) into eqns ( 15 and 16 ) , where q is a continuous wave vector playing the role of a discrete wave number and where the limits of integration are in " nite , we discard terms not linear with respect to the small perturbation amplitude f 0 to obtain the dispersion relation , j ( q ) " ! q 2 # k @ q 2 q 2 # 1 . This relation gives approximately the same insta - bility criterion as the original model : k @ ’ 1 . At such values of k @ , the linear growth rate is positive for small values of the wave vector , so aggrega - tion should occur on large spatial scales . Therefore , system ( 15 and 16 ) is an adequate approximation for the original system ( 12 and 13 ) . Furthermore , as in the original local model , at large values of the wave number the linear growth rate is negative and proportional to the square of the wave number . This demonstrates the quick decay of small - wavelength perturba - tions , which indicates that the non - local approxi - mation is well posed : small - scale # uctuations in the density become insigni " cant , rather than growing so large as to dominate the models ’ behavior . The simpli " ed non - local system ( 15 and 16 ) o ! ers an advantage over the local system ( 12 and 13 ) in the form of a clear picture of apparently direct interactions between individuals . Avoiding explicit reference to the very fast dynamics of the signal that mediates interactions allows eqns ( 15 and 16 ) to provide an intuitively satisfying ex - pression of interactions on a slower scale . For example , expression ( 16 ) explicitly demonstrates the attraction , or convergence , between indi - viduals at locations x @ and x @ @ . The only factor that in # uences the sign of the velocity of the 208 C . T . LEE E „ A ‚ . F IG . 1 . The solid line shows the steady - state density of individuals in the non - local self - aggregation model that evolves from random initial conditions . We used the conser - ved average initial density as the unit of density , and the length of the spatial domain as the unit of distance . individual at x @ is the sign of ( x @ ! x @ @ ) , so that if x @ ’ x @ @ , then the velocity is negative and x @ de - creases . On the other hand , if x @ ( x @ @ , then the velocity is positive and x @ increases . In both cases , the distance D x @ ! x @ D diminishes , indicating con - vergence between individuals . Because of the negative exponential term in eqn ( 16 ) , the rate of this convergence realistically decreases exponen - tially with increasing distances between loca - tions . This information is more di $ cult to obtain from the local system of equations ( 12 and 13 ) , making the non - local system ( 15 and 16 ) a natural choice for describing the biology of aggregation . A second advantage of non - local equations is that they may be easier to solve numerically because they take advantage of separations of scale . To demonstrate this point , we solved the dimensionless non - local equation ( 15 ) numer - ically , with no - # ux boundary conditions and us - ing the explicit forward - time centered - space " nite di ! erence scheme ( Garcia , 1994 ) . We discretized the domain of unit length with 20 grid points , and used parameter values k @ " 1 . 3 and e 2 " 0 . 1 . At each time step we computed the convolution integral ( 16 ) numerically using the composite trapezoidal rule . The density pro " le illustrated in Fig . 1 evolved within 0 . 5 time units under various initial conditions . The pro " le shows that indi - viduals aggregate at the center of the domain , forming a group of a size comparable to the size of the domain . These results are in agreement with the predictions of the stability and scaling analyses . The numerical procedure used to solve the non - local equation was stable at time steps as large as 0 . 005 time units . Meanwhile , a numerical solution of the corresponding local system of equations ( 12 and 13 ) using the same " nite di ! er - ence scheme and e 1 " 0 . 1 gave similar results only with time steps that were one to two orders of magnitude smaller . This di ! erence in stability results from the fact that the signal changes on much faster time - scale than the density of the individuals , so a smaller time step is required to solve a model that explicitly includes signal dy - namics . Since the computation of the convolu - tion integral ( 16 ) in the non - local model can be programmed in a vector form that does not in - crease total computational time , the non - local model provides an order - of - magnitude improve - ment in total computational time over the local model . In this section , we showed that a simpli " ed , non - local model adequately captures the behav - ior of a full , local model when some process is su $ ciently fast compared to the process of pri - mary biological interest . Thus , whereas a local model speci " es mechanistic detail about all pro - cesses that interact in a given system , a non - local model represents only the e ! ects of fast processes on the scale of a slower one . In the next section , we show how this encapsulation of fast processes helps non - local models to accommodate biolo - gical data . 3 . The Relationship between Mathematical Formulations and Biological Data We use two concrete examples , one from cellu - lar biology and one from animal behavior , to demonstrate that non - local models are a parti - cularly convenient theoretical framework for the types of data that biologists often collect and the kinds of questions they often ask . 3 . 1 . SELF - ORGANIZATION OF THE CYTOSKELETON Microtubules are long protein " bers found in all eukaryotic cells ( Bray , 1994 ) . An important part of the cytoskeleton , microtubules provide NON - LOCAL MODELS 209 lines of transport , communication , and control in the cell and also organize cell movements . In a typical animal cell , for instance , microtubules radiate from a position close to the nucleus to the cell periphery . In association with a cytoplasmic protein called dynein , these microtubule asters help move organelles from the cell ’ s periphery to its center . In an aster , microtubules are arranged with their negatively charged & & minus ’’ ends em - bedded in a centrosome and their positively charged & & plus ’’ ends stabilized at the cell mem - brane . The organelle - carrying dynein molecules contain a & & head ’’ of ATPase that uses the energy of hydrolysis to move along microtubules toward the minus ends , resulting in organelle motion toward the cell ’ s center ( Bray , 1994 ) . A very " ne microsurgical procedure recently demonstrated that the presence of dynein mol - ecules may also contribute to the organization of microtubule structures . Researchers cut an ob - long fragment from the periphery of a " sh melanophore cell ( Rodionov & Borisy , 1997 ) . The fragment contained microtubules and pig - ment - containing granules that are associated with dynein molecules . To rule out the competing hypothesis that the centrosome organizes aster formation , however , the fragment contained no centrosomal material . Although the pigment granules associated with dynein motors were ori - ginally distributed in the fragment with uniform density , they gradually aggregated at the edge of the fragment that had been closer to the nucleus before the microsurgical procedure . Similarly , the microtubules ’ minus ends did not remain distrib - uted throughout the fragment but instead accu - mulated at the same edge of the fragment as the granules . Later , the aggregate of the granules started to move slowly to the center of the frag - ment , but here we do not attempt to model or explain this slow self - centering process . This example of in vitro self - organization sug - gests a hypothesis for the formation of in vivo cytoskeletal structure . Dynein motors aggregate towards microtubules ’ minus ends . Microtubules cannot move because they are crosslinked into a meshwork of actin . Apparent motion occurs , however , as the asymmetric globular subunits of the polymer assemble to and disassemble from the plus and minus ends of the microtubule . This process causes microtubules ’ plus ends to grow and minus ends to shrink , so that the " bers tread - mill with an overall appearance of translational movement toward the plus ends ( Bray , 1994 ) . In the presence of dynein motors , minus ends disas - semble more slowly than plus ends assemble , with rate < m ( < p . If , as in the experiment with " sh melanocytes , the polymers are initially oriented with their minus ends to the left and their plus ends to the right , the movement of the dynein molecules slows the disassembly of minus ends at the left and increases their concentration there . This , in turn , causes even greater aggrega - tion of the dynein molecules , further increasing the concentration of the minus ends . If dynein molecules can also initiate the assembly of new microtubule " bers , the described positive feed - back loop could provide a qualitative explana - tion for minus - end anchoring near the nucleus . Using the techniques outlined in the previous section , we develop a non - local model to explore this hypothesis in more detail . We demonstrate that a model that takes advantage of separations of scale between important processes yields valu - able biological predictions . 3 . 1 . 1 . ‚ ocal Model of Dynein - mediated Microtubule Organization We describe the cell } fragment system on the one - dimensional domain 0 ( x ( ‚ by the dens - ities of the dyneins and microtubule plus and minus ends , d ( x , t ) , p ( x , t ) and m ( x , t ) , respectively . The equations for plus and minus end densities have the form : L p L t " ! < p L p L x # nd , ( 17 ) L m L t " ! L L x ( < m m ) # nd , ( 18 ) where the " rst term describes the drift of the plus and minus ends due to assembly and disas - sembly , respectively . The second term describes nucleation of plus and minus ends . Since the nucleation of a " ber is a simultaneous appear - ance of plus and minus ends in the same place , the rates of change of the two kinds of ends due to nucleation are equal . Because we assume that dyneins cause nucleation , the nucleation rate is 210 C . T . LEE E „ A ‚ . proportional to the dynein density with corre - sponding proportionality coe $ cient n . We de - scribe the dynamics of dynein density with the advection } di ! usion equation : L d L t " L L x ( < d d ) # D L 2 d L x 2 , ( 19 ) where < d is the rate of directional drift of the motors to the left , toward microtubule minus ends , and D is the constant di ! usion coe $ cient characterizing the e ! ectively random motion of the pigment particles associated with the dynein molecules . To complete the model , we need constitutive relations for the non - constant velocities < d and < m . The e ! ective net disassembly rate of the minus ends decreases monotonically as the den - sity of the dynein molecules increases : < m " < p exp ( ! d / d I ) . ( 20 ) This rate is equal to < p at d " 0 , decreases signi " - cantly with decreases in dynein density on the order of d I , where d I is a parameter for this charac - teristic dynein density , and approaches zero at d PR . Meanwhile , a reasonable assumption about the velocity of the dynein motors < d is that it depends on the local length density of micro - tubules , l ( x , t ) . When microtubules are abundant , dynein ’ s velocity saturates to its maximal value , < M d . When microtubules are absent , there are no & & tracks ’’ for motors to move on , and the motors ’ drift velocity drops to zero . The phenomenologi - cal expression : < " < M d ( 1 ! exp ( ! l / l I ) ) , ( 21 ) where l I is the parameter for a characteristic microtubule length density , accounts for these features of the dynein motion . Having introduced the new dynamic variable l ( x , t ) , we must now derive an equation for its changes with time . Over the time interval d t , p plus ends moving to the right with speed < p & & deposit ’’ new total microtubule length < p d t . At the same time , m minus ends moving to the right with speed < m & & annihilate ’’ a previously existing length < m d t . Then , the rate of change of the microtubule ’ s length density is simply d l d t " < p p ! < m m . ( 22 ) Equations ( 17 } 22 ) , together with initial and boundary conditions specifying no plus or minus ends at the left edge of the fragment and no # ux of dynein density across either edge : p ( 0 , t ) " 0 , m ( 0 , t ) " 0 , ( 23 ) < ( 0 , t ) d ( 0 , t ) # D L d ( 0 , t ) L x " < ( ‚ , t ) d ( ‚ , t ) # D L d ( ‚ , t ) L x " 0 , ( 24 ) complete the mathematical description of the microtubule } dynein system . 3 . 1 . 2 . Scaling Analysis and Non - local Model The purpose of modeling the microtubule } dynein system is to try to understand cytoskeletal dynamics , which occur on a much slower tem - poral scale than the motion of the dynein motors : < M d & 1 l m s ~ 1 < < p & 0 . 1 l m s ~ 1 . Thus , to focus on microtubule organization , we non - dimen - sionalize equations ( 17 } 22 ) by choosing charac - teristic length and time units to correspond to the relatively slower rate . For instance , we choose the size of the fragment , ‚ , as the natural unit of length , with corresponding temporal unit „ " ‚ / < p being the time needed for a " ber to treadmill across the fragment . Since the density of the dynein molecules was initially constant in the " sh melanophore experiment , we choose a con - stant density , d ( 0 , t ) " d M , for the characteristic density of dynein . To obtain characteristic plus and minus end densities , we balance the total nucleation rate , which is of order nd M ‚ , with plus and minus end # uxes out of the right edge of the fragment of order < p p N and < p m N , respectively . While the ends of the immobile microtubules do not actually move across the boundaries of the fragment , an e ! ective # ux of plus ends occurs as polymerization - inhibiting proteins stabilize plus ends at the cell membrane . Similarly , an apparent # ux of minus ends occurs when " bers ’ minus ends NON - LOCAL MODELS 211 approach the membrane and the entire " ber dis - appears . We balance these processes with the creation of new " bers to obtain the characteristic densities p N " m N " nd M ‚ / < p . Finally , the scale of the microtubule ’ s length density can be estimated as the scale of the rate of the length density change , < p p N , times the characteristic time scale : l M " nd M ‚ 2 / < p . Introducing the non - dimensional variables x @ " x / ‚ , t @ " t / „ , d @ " d / d M , p @ " p / p N , m @ " m / m N , l @ " l / l M , assuming for simplicity that l I " l M and d I " d M , and dropping prime signs for convenience , we arrive at the non - dimensionalized system of equations : e L d L t " L L x ( vd ) # a L 2 d L x 2 , v " 1 ! e ~ l , a " < p D < M 2 d ‚ , e " < p < M d ; 1 , ( 25 ) L p L t " ! L p L x # d , ( 26 ) L m L t " ! L L x ( v m m ) # d , v m " e ~ d , ( 27 ) d l d t " p ! v m m . ( 28 ) We focus on the case where the dimensionless parameter a & 1 , meaning that the rate of random dynein movement is of the same order of magni - tude as the maximum motor speed . As in Section 2 , the smallness of the parameter e in front of the time derivative of the dynein density suggests that we may use arguments of perturbation the - ory to neglect the dynein dynamics . Biologically , this neglect is justi " ed because the distribution of dynein is expected to reach a quasi - steady state on the fast time - scale , ‚ / < M d . The quasi - steady state is determined implicitly by the micro - tubule ’ s length density , which changes on the slow time - scale , ‚ / < p . We can " nd the quasi - steady dynein distribution from the equation : d d x C ( 1 ! e ~ l ) d # a d d x ( d ) D " 0 . Integrating this equation once , taking into ac - count the fact that the # ux of the dynein molecu - les has to be equal to zero in an equlibrium , and integrating a second time , we obtain the quasi - steady dynein density in the dimensionless form : d ( x ) K exp ( ! a [ : x 0 d y ( 1 ! e ~ l ( y ) ) ] ) : 10 d x M exp ( ! a [ : x 0 d y ( 1 ! e ~ l ( y ) ) ] ) N . ( 29 ) The denominator in expression ( 29 ) is a normal - ization constant . The numerator contains the non - local expression for the quasi - steady dynein distribution in terms of slow - scale changes in microtubule length density . Together with eqns ( 26 } 28 ) , this equation for the dynein density constitutes a non - local formulation for the original local model ( 25 } 28 ) . The non - local system ( 26 } 29 ) is more helpful from a biological point of view than the original local model because it expresses dynamics in terms of readily measurable quantities . For example , dynein dynamics occur on what may be an unmeasurably fast time - scale . Using the separ - ation of scale between dynein dynamics and microtubule movement ; however , we avoid de - tailed descriptions of fast , complex - behavior and obtain eqn ( 29 ) , which gives us a qualitative un - derstanding of the motors ’ behavior . Because the exponential factor in the integrand is less than one , the dynein density is a decreasing function of distance from the left end . This decrease indicates aggregation of the dynein molecules at the left , which agrees with observations of the slow - scale distribution of dynein . Moreover , as the dynein density is low everywhere except at the very left edge of the fragment , the e ! ective minus end drift rate v m K 1 , and according to eqn ( 28 ) , l K const across the domain . This indicates an exponential decay of the dynein density away from the left edge of the fragment . Thus , the non - local model provides helpful analytical information about the dynein distribution that we can easily compare to experimental results . 212 C . T . LEE E „ A ‚ . F IG . 2 . Symbols indicate the asymptotically stationary concentrations of dynein molecules ( s ) and minus ( ! ) and plus ( # ) ends of microtubules computed from the non - local cellular model . Minus ends and dynein motors aggregate at the left edge of the domain . Units of density are introduced in the text . The length of the spatial domain was used as the unit of distance : ( ! ) density of minus ends ; ( # ) density of plus ends ; ( s ) density of dynein molecules . Besides this useful qualitative information , the non - local model L p L t " ! L p L x # d , L m L t " ! L L x ( e ~ d m ) # d , d l d t " p ! e ~ d m , p ( 0 , t ) " m ( 0 , t ) " 0 , ( 30 ) where d is given by eqn ( 29 ) , o ! ers a computa - tional advantage because we can concentrate on the microtubule ’ s dynamics on the slow time - scale . We solved the dimensionless system of equations ( 30 ) numerically on the unit - length do - main discretized into 20 intervals . We used the downwind " nite di ! erence scheme for the hyper - bolic equations , and the forward Euler method of integration for all equations ( Garcia , 1994 ) . The integrals in eqn ( 29 ) were computed at each step of integration with the composite trapezoidal rule . We used the initial conditions p ( x , 0 ) " m ( x , 0 ) " l ( x , 0 ) " 0 . The density pro " les shown in Fig . 2 evolved within 10 time units . These numerical results agree with experimental obser - vations of the aggregation of the dynein molecu - les and microtubule ’ s minus ends at the left edge of the fragment . The numerical procedure was stable with time steps as large as 0 . 01 time units . Similar numerical analysis of the original local model ( 25 } 28 ) gave similar results only with time steps of an order of magnitude less , signi " cantly increasing the time needed for computation . Having shown how the techniques we de - veloped in Section 2 help us to derive a non - local model that conveniently describes microtubule organization , we now show how non - local mod - els can help us understand a complex problem in animal behavior . 3 . 2 . COORDINATION OF PRIMATE GROUPS USING CONTACT CALLS Some species of social primates emit quiet , frequent vocal calls during the course of daily activities . Early researchers conjectured that these & & contact calls ’’ promote group cohesion and coordination ( Gautier & Gautier , 1977 ; Lindburg , 1971 ) . More recently , researchers have explicitly addressed the question of whether or not primates use contact calls to regulate intra - group spacing ( Robinson , 1982 ; Palombit , 1992 ) . Robinson ( 1982 ) investigated the e ! ects of three acoustically intergrading types of spacing - depen - dent calls in wedge - capped capuchins , Cebus nig - rivittatus . He found that the capuchins emit heh calls when crowded , arrawh calls when separated , and huh calls at intermediate spacing . Following hehs , neighboring individuals generally move away from the calling individual ; following arrawhs , they move toward it . Meanwhile , Robinson found that huhs have no statistically signi " cant e ! ect on group spacing unless they are unusually frequent , in which case neighbors tend to move toward the focal animal . Robinson ( 1982 ) concluded that vocal communication does help to maintain intragroup spacing . Detailed information about how primates gather , process , and respond to auditory cues is scarce because it is di $ cult to obtain . Since ex - perimentally establishing the importance of vocal communication in maintaining group spacing is likewise di $ cult , a simple model that demon - strates whether auditory cues alone can plausibly NON - LOCAL MODELS 213 mediate group cohesion would be a useful tool in understanding primate behavior . Such a model would treat contact calls as the signal that organ - izes individual movement . Acoustic information about the calls suggests that they propagate through space much faster than animals can move , since the sound of a call covers tens of meters in a tenth of a second . Meanwhile , al - though Robinson ( 1982 ) does not explicitly spec - ify the scale of the capuchins ’ movement , the way in which he scores changes in group spacing clearly indicates that they move on the spatial scale of meters and temporal scale of seconds . Since we can therefore safely assume that the signal propagates quickly relative to animal movement , the maintenance of group cohesion via vocal communication is a promising candi - date for non - local modeling . A discrete , individual - based modeling frame - work is more appropriate to capuchin aggrega - tion than a density - based approach because the number of individuals in a primate troop does not exceed 20 or 30 animals ( Robinson , 1982 ) . Within the individual - based framework , we in - troduce the simplest possible equation for the motion of a group in one dimension : d x i d t " < ( x i ) , i " 1 , 2 , N , ( 31 ) where t is the time , x i is the coordinate of the ith animal , N is the number of primates under con - sideration , and < ( x i ) is the rate of motion of the ith animal at position x i . One of the assumptions underlying eqn ( 31 ) is that the animals respond to the signal by adjusting their rate of motion rather than their acceleration , as is assumed in many individual - based models ( Warburton & Lazarus , 1991 ) . Secondly , the model formulation implies that individual motion has a continuous character . Although monkeys may move by tak - ing discrete steps , this assumption is reasonable if the average step size is much smaller than both the average distance between animals and the characteristic size of the whole group ( Ja K ger & Segel , 1992 ) . Individual velocity depends on the signal , s , which in turn depends on spatial location : < ( x i ) " < ( s ( x i ) ) . Since we lack information about how individuals process the signal , we avoid specifying any functional dependence of movement on the variable s . We do assume , how - ever , that movement is memoryless with respect to the signal : current levels of signal , not a weighted average of signals received prior to a response , determine rates of motion . We also assume that the time individuals require to pro - cess the signal is negligible . We know , however , that the signal propagates quickly relative to the speed of capuchin ’ s motion : < M ; c , where c is the velocity of sound and < 1 is the order of magnitude of the capuchins ’ speed . The natural length scale ‚ in this situation is the characteristic distance between the animals . Given our assumptions that signal processing is instantaneous and memory free , two character - istic temporal scales emerge : one fast , ‚ / c , which is the time for the signal to propagate between neighbors , and one slow , ‚ / < M , representing the time needed for an animal to approach a neighbor . When we choose the scale of animal movement as the characteristic time - scale of the system , we can ignore the term describing the signal ’ s time derivative because its order of mag - nitude is proportional to the small parameter ( < M / c ) . Thus , we use a separation of scale to elim - inate the temporal dynamics of the signal . Having simpli " ed the model , we no longer concern ourselves with short - term changes in the signal . Instead , we now consider the function describing the e ! ective signal & & " eld ’’ that indi - viduals generate . As the form of the argument of this function should re # ect the translational in - variance of the system , we introduce the function S ( x ! x j , x i ! x j ) , which describes the amount of signal produced by the jth individual . Because the jth individual , located at position x j , pro - duces signal in response to the presence of the ith individual at position x i , the resulting amount of signal at x depends on the distance x i ! x j as well as the distance x ! x j . The signal produced by the jth individual that is perceived by the ith individual is therefore S ( x i ! x j , x i ! x j ) or sim - ply S I ( x i ! x j ) . Thus , the ith individual ’ s velocity , which results as a response to this signal , depends on the distance between the animals : < ( x i ) " < ( S I ( x i ! x j ) ) " < I ( x i ! x j ) . This reason - ing shows clearly that the rate of motion of each individual depends on the positions of other 214 C . T . LEE E „ A ‚ . animals . Because we e ! ectively eliminated the signal from the model on the slow time - scale , the equations of motion are now non - local The non - local character of the equations for call - dependent changes in velocity is a helpful improvement over the original , local model . We cannot specify a function for velocity because mechanistic information about how vocaliz - ations a ! ect capuchin movement is unavailable . Our elimination of signal dynamics , however , reveals that on the time - scale of interest , each individual ’ s velocity depends only on the posi - tions of other individuals . This dependence corresponds nicely to the kinds of observations behavioral scientists make in the wild . Thus , we can use qualitative observations from Robinson ( 1982 ) to postulate the form of the function < I ( x ) : ( 1 ) The direction of the responding indi - vidual ’ s motion depends on its direction relative to the calling individual , while the distance moved depends only on the dis - tance between the two animals . In other words , if the positions of the caller and the respondent were exchanged , the respon - dent would move the same distance as pre - viously but in the opposite direction . This situation requires that < I be odd , such that < I ( x ) " ! < I ( ! x ) . ( 2 ) If the initial distance between animals is small , then heh calls lead to the animals ’ divergence . This condition requires that < I ( x ) ’ 0 when x is small and positive . ( 3 ) If the initial distance between animals is large , then arrawh or huh calls lead to con - vergence , and the sign of < I ( x ) is negative at su $ ciently large positive x . ( 4 ) When the distance between capuchins is very large , individuals do not perceive the sounds that others make . Interactions over su ! ciently large distances are absent be - cause individuals move a distance < I ( x ) " 0 in response to calls they cannot hear . One of the simplest functions < I ( x ) satisfying requirements ( 1 ) } ( 4 ) is < I ( x ) " G R sign ( x ) , D x D ) r , ! A sign ( x ) , a 1 ) D x D ) a 2 , 0 , otherwise , ( 32 ) where r ( a 1 ( a 2 . The parameters R and A gov - ern the amplitude of divergent and convergent animal motion , respectively . The parameter r de - scribes the range of distances over which repul - sive interactions are signi " cant . Between r and a 1 , animals maintain & & comfortable ’’ distances among themselves : when a caller is at such a dis - tance from a respondent , the respondent ’ s motions are too small to be detected . If indi - viduals are farther apart than a 1 , they start to converge . Beyond the distance a 2 there is no response . We also allow a certain amount of randomness in the distance that individuals move in response to calls by adding a normally distrib - uted random variable to the right - hand side of eqn ( 31 ) . In order to translate this description of indi - vidual behavior to a description of the move - ments of a whole troop , we make an assumption about how individuals respond to many calling animals at di ! erent distances . The simplest such assumption is that individuals add up the signals they receive from di ! erent animals in a linear fashion . This assumption is probably a gross oversimpli " cation of complex decision - making processes on the part of the capuchins , but is a reasonable " rst step given the absence of other information . The assumption allows us to write the following nonlinear , spatially non - local model for the aggregations of capuchins : d x i d t " N + j / 1 < I ( x i ! x j ) # random terms , i " 1 , 2 , N , ( 33 ) where the function < I is given by eqn ( 32 ) . Numerical analysis of this model yields some interesting predictions about capuchin aggrega - tion , such as the expected troop density and the distribution of distances between animals . From the data in Robinson ( 1982 ) we " nd that r K 10 m , a 1 K 20 m , and a 2 K 100 m . Unfortu - nately , however , information about the para - meters R and A and the amplitude of random terms is lacking . In our simulations , therefore , we varied the parameters R and A and the amplitude of random terms . We solved eqns ( 32 and 33 ) using the forward Euler method . We assigned the NON - LOCAL MODELS 215 F IG . 3 . Sample run of the stochastic , non - local , indi - vidual - based model of primate aggregation . From an ini - tially random uniform distribution of 20 animals over a 400 m region , an aggregation forms so that the average distance between the neighbors in the group becomes about 10 m . Curves represent trajectories of each individual . Ani - mals that are initially far from the group converge to the rest of the troop , while initially crowded subgroups diverge . Time units are not speci " ed in the model . initial positions of N " 20 individuals randomly , and ran simulations until the average distance between the animals and the sizes of groups stop - ped changing . We found that the absolute values of R and A do not a ! ect the process of aggrega - tion signi " cantly as long as the value of the diver - gence amplitude , R , is much greater than that of convergence , A . Otherwise , animals & & collapse ’’ into a very dense group . The results of one of the numerical runs of the model are shown in Fig . 3 . This " gure shows that the initial size of the group , about 400 m from end to end , decreased to only 225 m . The average distance between neighbors in the group became stable at about 10 m . Two individuals venturing away from the group ( the one initially at position 350 m , more than 60 m away from the group , and the one left behind at position ! 50 m between 15 and 30 time units ) were attracted back to the group . On the other hand , " ve individuals initially crowded between ! 26 and 8 m , with average distance between neighbors less than q , quickly diverged from each other . Our simple model demonstrates that vocal cues alone can mediate the spatial organization of primate groups . Although mechanistic information about individuals ’ responses to vocal communication is di $ cult to obtain , the non - local quality of our model allows us to use the larger - and slower - scale observations that behav - iorists commonly collect to construct a reason - able characterization of the biological system . As more data become available , of course , we can revise our model to re # ect new " ndings . As a " rst step , however , this simple , non - local model yields helpful qualitative results that are relevant to the types of information readily available in the " eld . The two examples we have presented in this section demonstrate that non - local models , by focusing on the larger and slower scales that are often of interest in biological systems , lend them - selves more naturally to empirical observations than do local models that specify small - scale de - tail . Since a major goal of modeling biological systems is to interpret available data and make testable predictions , non - local models represent a promising approach to understanding complex phenomena . 4 . Discussion The types of models we discuss in this paper have a rich history in theoretical biology . Turing ’ s ( 1952 ) seminal paper on the role of di ! u - sion in pattern formation introduced spatially explicit models to biology . In the early 1970s , researchers added continuous , deterministic , di - rected motion to random di ! usive motion in the framework of chemotaxis models ( Keller & Segel , 1970 ) . These advection } di ! usion models im - mediately found application in ecology ( see re - views in Levin & Segel , 1985 ; Holmes et al . , 1994 ) . The familiar continuous description of di ! usion can be considered a limit of the random walk , where individuals take random steps between nearest - neighboring points . Thus , di ! usion and advection } di ! usion equations are local in a mathematical as well as a mechanistic sense . The next step in modeling longer - distance in - teractions is to allow movement between next - nearest - neighboring points . Mathematically , this kind of movement results in higher - derivative terms in the continuous description . Cohen & Murray ( 1981 ) took this initial step away from local models of continuum transport by 216 C . T . LEE E „ A ‚ . generalizing di ! usion terms with a fourth - order spatial derivative . This & & semi - local ’’ approxima - tion successfully explained some long - range phe - nomena that are impossible to represent in a local model , including pattern formation in mechanochemical systems ( Murray , 1989 ) , for example . However , the semi - local approximation eliminates certain non - local e ! ects ( Grunbaum & Okubo , 1994 ) . For example , semi - local ap - proximations cannot account for abrupt changes in individual density as can non - local models ( Mogilner & Edelstein - Keshet , 1999 ) . The " rst truly long - range transport e ! ects ap - peared in mathematical ecology in the early 1980s , most notably in Nagai & Mimura ( 1983 ) . As in later work ( Lewis , 1994 ; Mogilner & Edel - stein - Keshet , 1999 ) , early papers considered the rate of organims ’ advection to be a non - local function , weighted by an integral kernel , of the density of organisms . Integrals over a spatial domain where , in the integrand , a model - depen - dent variable is weighted by a kernel , is the main formal mathematical indicator of the non - local character of such models . Using a similar tech - nique , Turchin ( 1986 ) obtained a more satisfac - tory description of insect dispersal by making its di ! usion coe $ cient a non - local weighted function of density . In all these cases , poorly understood and presumably fast processes of information exchange between individuals underlie the structure of the integral kernels . Sim - ilar models are very popular in neurobiology ( Ermentrout & Cowan , 1979 ) , where the local dynamics of membrane potential governed by neuron - generated spikes reduce to distance - dependent strengths of recurrent excitatory connections between neurons . In ecology and epidemiology , a di ! erent type of non - local model accomodates non - simulta - neous reaction and transport for organisms that breed and disperse in di ! erent seasons ( Hardin et al . , 1988 ; Kot & Scha ! er , 1986 ; Kot et al . , 1996 ; Van Kirk & Lewis , 1997 ) . These models have a form similar to eqn ( 4 ) , which implicitly de - pends on the assumption that dispersal occurs on a much faster temporal scale than does popula - tion growth . The non - local coupling implies that the reduction of the dispersion of individuals to a spatial distribution of organisms and , therefore , to a dispersal kernel , is possible . Neubert et al . ( 1995 ) show elegant derivations of some of these kernels from reaction } di ! usion equations . In this paper , we restricted ourselves to ana - lyses of interactions in real , physical space . Researchers have applied very similar ideas and mathematical techniques to the description of non - local e ! ects in angular space ( Geigant et al . , 1998 ) and abstract & & aspect ’’ space such as dominance space ( Ja K ger & Segel , 1992 ) , shape space ( Segel & Perelson , 1988 ) , group size space ( Gueron & Levin , 1995 ) and age space ( Metz & Diekmann , 1986 ) . In all these models unknown fast local processes , such as , for example , in - formation exchange between bumble bees ( Jager & Segel , 1992 ) or the action of a host of align - ment - mediating proteins ( Geigant et al . , 1998 ) , underlie non - local e ! ects . In conclusion , we have shown that non - local models are simpli " cations of complex processes that are fundamentally local . Non - local simpli " - cation is valid given a su $ cient separation of scales between important processes . Although less detailed than local models , non - local models are valuable because they focus attention on the variable of primary biological interest . Even when underlying local processes are well under - stood , as in the chemotaxis and cellular examples in this paper , a non - local approximation may provide important insight , such as an intuitive description of distance dependence in the drift rates of individuals . When our understanding of underlying local mechanisms is not complete , non - local models are particularly useful . They provide phenom - enological descriptions of these mechanisms that may be adequate on the scale of the variable of interest . Similarly , gathering data on spatial pat - tern is often easier than gathering data on the processes underlying the pattern . Consequently , biological data for spatial systems are often insuf - " cient to parameterize or test a mechanistic local model but are suitable for a reduced non - local model . A further advantage of non - local models is that they can accommodate discreteness in a biolo - gical system far more easily than can local mod - els . For instance , when the number of individuals to be modeled is small , local models written in terms of density functions become very awkward . On the other hand , non - local models can be NON - LOCAL MODELS 217 written in terms of individuals ’ coordinates , thereby accommodating discrete individuals . In particular , Durrett & Levin ( 1994 ) have shown that non - local discrete models may exhibit fun - damentally di ! erent dynamics from local models , in essence because of a separation of scales . In addition to their suitability for biological situations , non - local models are often no more di $ cult to analyse than are local models . Linear stability analysis ( Levin & Segel , 1985 ) , numerical analysis ( Bellomo & Preziosi , 1995 ) and singular perturbation theory ( Mogilner et al . , 1996 ) are equally applicable to both local and non - local models . The extra cost of evaluating integrals at each iteration in the non - local models is al - leviated by the fact that non - local approxima - tions e ! ectively eliminate processes occurring at fast temporal scales . Therefore , one may choose large steps of numerical integration , vastly reduc - ing the computational expense of the integro - PDE . In all , we conclude that non - local modeling is a powerful technique that can greatly facilitate continuing e ! orts to use mathematics to under - stand biology . This paper is a result of a research and training project of a multidisciplinary group concerned with understanding the role of non - locality in nonlinear biological dynamics . The corresponding activities were made possible by the support from RTG NSF Grant DBI - 9602226 & & Nonlinear dynamics in bio - logy ’’ . The grant is administered through the Institute for Theoretical Dynamics at the University of California at Davis . We are grateful for long and fruitful discussions with M . Lewis , M . Kot , B . Ermen - trout and E . Holmes that helped us to formulate the ideas of the present work . We also thank A . Amezcua and G . Takimoto for their help at early stages of this project . The co - PIs for this grant , A . Hastings , J . Keizer , A . Cheer and M . Stanton , provided us with constant inspiration and support . We particularly wish to acknowledge Joel Keizer , whose insight , critical thinking , and frank kindness were invaluable to us as individuals and as a group . We dedicate this paper to his memory , and we hope that this and future work meet the high standards that he set for us by his example . REFERENCES A LT , W . ( 1980 ) . Biased random walk models for chemotaxis and related di ! usion approximation . J . Math . Biol . 9 , 147 } 177 . A NDOW , D . A . , K AREIVA , P . M . , L EVIN , S . A . & O KUBO , A . ( 1990 ) . Spread of invading organisms . ‚ andscape Ecol . 4 , 177 } 188 . B ELLOMO , N . & P REZIOSI , L . ( 1995 ) . Modelling Mathemat - ical Methods and Scienti , c Computations . Boca Raton , FL : CRC Press . B RAY , D . ( 1992 ) . Cell Movements . New York : Garland . C HILDRESS , S . & P ERCUS , J . K . ( 1981 ) . Nonlinear aspects of chemotaxis . Math . Biosci . 56 , 217 } 237 . C OHEN , A . H . & M URRAY , J . D . ( 1981 ) . A generalized di ! u - sion model for growth and dispersal in a population . J . Math . Biol . 12 , 237 } 249 . D URRETT , R . & L EVIN , S . A . ( 1994 ) . The importance of being discrete and spatial . „ heor . Popul . Biol . 46 , 363 } 394 . D WORKIN , M . & K AISER , D . ( 1985 ) . Cell interactions in myxobacterial growth and development . Science 230 , 18 } 24 . E DELSTEIN - K ESHET , L . & E RMENTROUT , G . B . ( 1990 ) . Mod - els for contact mediated pattern formation . J . Math . Biol . 29 , 33 } 58 . E RMENTROUT , G . B . & C OWAN , J . D . ( 1979 ) . A mathemat - ical theory of visual hallucination patterns . Biol . Cybernet . 34 , 137 } 150 . F ISHER , R . A . ( 1937 ) . The wave of abundance of advantage - ous genes . Ann . Eugenics 7 , 335 } 369 . G ARCIA , A . L . ( 1994 ) . Numerical Methods for Physics . Engle - wood Cli ! s , NJ : Prentice - Hall . G AUTIER , J . - P . & G AUTIER , A . ( 1977 ) . Communication in Old World monkeys . In : How Animals Communicate ( Sebeok , T . , ed . ) , pp . 890 } 964 . Bloomington : Indiana Uni - versity Press . G EIGANT , E . , L ADIZHANSKY , K . & M OGILNER , A . ( 1998 ) . Integro - di ! erential model for orientational distribution of polymers in cells . SIAM J . Appl . Math . 59 , 787 } 809 . G RINDROD , P . ( 1988 ) . Models of individual aggregation or clustering in single and multi - species communities . J . Math . Biol . 26 , 651 } 660 . G RINDROD , P . , M URRAY , J . D . & S INHA , S . ( 1989 ) . Steady - state spatial patterns in a cell - chemotaxis model . IMA J . Math . Appl . Med . Biol . 6 , 69 } 79 . G RUNBAUM , D . & O KUBO , A . ( 1994 ) . Modelling social ani - mal aggregation . In : Frontiers in Mathematical Biology ( Levin , S . , ed . ) , pp . 296 } 325 . New York : Springer . G UERON , S . & L EVIN , S . A . ( 1995 ) . The dynamics of group formation . Math . Biosci . 128 , 243 } 264 . H ARDIN , D . P . , T AKAC , P . & W EBB , G . F . ( 1988 ) . A compari - son of dispersal strategies for survival of spatially heterogeneous populations . SIAM J . Appl . Math . 48 , 1396 } 1423 . H OLMES , E . E . , L EWIS , M . A . , B ANKS , J . E . & V EIT , R . R . ( 1994 ) . PDE in ecology : spatial interactions and popula - tion dynamics . Ecology 75 , 17 } 29 . J A G GER , E . & S EGEL , L . A . ( 1992 ) . On the distribution of dominance in populations of social organisms . SIAM J . Appl . Math . 52 , 1444 } 1468 . K ELLER , E . F . & S EGEL , L . A . ( 1970 ) . Initiation of slime mold aggregation viewed as an instability . J . theor . Biol . 26 , 399 } 415 . K IERSTEAD , H . & S LOBODKIN , L . B . ( 1953 ) . The size of water masses containing plankton bloom . J . Marine Res . 12 , 141 } 147 . K OT , M . , L EWIS , M . A . & V AN DEN D RIESSCHE , P . ( 1996 ) . Dispersal data and the spread of invading organisms . Ecol - ogy 77 , 2027 } 2042 . 218 C . T . LEE E „ A ‚ . K OT , M . & S CHAFFER , W . M . ( 1996 ) . Discrete - time growth - dispersal models . Math . Biosci . 80 , 109 } 136 . L EVIN , S . A . ( 1992 ) . The problem of pattern and scale in ecology . Ecology 73 , 1943 } 1967 . L EVIN , S . A . & S EGEL , L . A . ( 1985 ) . Pattern generation in space and aspect . SIAM Rev . 27 , 45 } 67 . L EWIS , M . A . ( 1994 ) . Spatial coupling of plant and herbivore dynamics * the contribution of herbivore dispersal to transient and persistent waves of damage . „ heor . Popul . Biol . 45 , 277 } 312 . L IN , C . C . & S EGEL , L . A . ( 1974 ) . Mathematics Applied to Deterministic Problems in the Natural Sciences . New York : Macmillan . L INDBURG , D . G . ( 1971 ) . The rhesus monkey in North India : an ecological and behavioral study . In : Primate Behavior ( Rosenblum , L . A . , ed . ) , pp . 1 } 106 . New York : Academic Press . M ACKAS , D . L . & B OYD , C . M . ( 1979 ) . Spectral analysis of zooplankton spatial heterogeneity . Science 204 , 62 } 64 . M ETZ , J . A . J . & D IEKMANN , O . ( 1986 ) . „ he Dynamics of Physiologically Structured Populations , Berlin : Springer . M IMURA , M . , T SUJIKAWA , T . , K OBAYASHI , R . & U EYAMA , D . ( 1993 ) . Dynamics of aggregating patterns in a chemotaxis } di ! usion } growth model equation . Forma 8 , 179 } 195 . M ITCHISON , G . ( 1980 ) . A model for vein formation in higher plants . Proc . R . Soc . ‚ ondon B 207 , 79 } 109 . M OGILNER , A . & E DELSTEIN - K ESHET , L . ( 1999 ) . A non - local model for a swarm . J . Math . Biol . 38 , 534 } 570 . M OGILNER , A . , E DELSTEIN - K ESHET , L . & E RMENTROUT , G . B . ( 1996 ) . Selecting a common direction . II . Peak - like solutions representing total alignment of cell clusters . J . Math . Biol . 34 , 811 } 842 . M OLLISON , D . ( 1977 ) . Spatial contact models for ecological and epidemic spread . J . R . Stat . Soc . Ser . B 39 , 283 } 326 . M ORSE , P . M . & F ESHBACH , H . ( 1953 ) . Methods of „ heoret - ical Physics . New York : McGraw - Hill . M URRAY , J . D . ( 1981 ) . A prepattern formation mechanism for animal coat markings . J . theor . Biol . 88 , 161 } 199 . M URRAY , J . D . ( 1989 ) . Mathematical Biology . New York : Springer - Verlag . M URRAY , J . D . , O STER , G . F . & H ARRIS , A . K . ( 1983 ) . A mechanical model for mesynchymal morphogenesis . J . Math . Biol . 17 , 125 } 129 . N AGAI , T . & M IMURA , M . ( 1983 ) . Asymptotic behaviour for a nonlinear degenerate di ! usion equation in population dynamics . SIAM J . Appl . Math . 43 , 449 } 464 . N ANJUNDIAH , V . ( 1973 ) . Chemotaxis , signal relaying and aggregation morphology . J . theor . Biol . 42 , 63 } 105 . N EUBERT , M . G . , K OT , M . & L EWIS , M . A . ( 1995 ) . Dispersal and pattern formation in a discrete - time predator } prey model . „ heor . Popul . Biol . 48 , 7 } 43 . O DELL , G . , O STER , G . , A LBERCH , P . & B URNSIDE , B . ( 1981 ) . The mechanical basis of morphogenesis . I . Epithelial folding and invagination . Dev . Biol . 85 , 446 } 462 . O KUBO , A . ( 1980 ) . Di + usion and Ecological Problems : Math - ematical Models . Berlin : Springer . O STER , G . & M URRAY , J . D . ( 1989 ) . Pattern formation models and developmental constraints . J . Exp . Zool . 251 , 186 } 202 . O THMER , H . G . , D UNBAR , S . R . & A LT , W . ( 1988 ) . Models of dispersal in biological systems . J . Math . Biol . 26 , 263 } 298 . O THMER , H . G . & S TEVENS , A . ( 1997 ) . Aggregation , blowup and collapse : the ABC ’ s of generalized taxis . SIAM J . Appl . Math . 57 , 1044 } 1081 . P ALOMBIT , R . A . ( 1992 ) . A preliminary study of vocal com - munication in wild long - tailed macaques ( Macaca fascicularis ) . II . Potential of calls to regulate intragroup spacing . Int . J . Primatol . 13 , 183 } 207 . P ETTERSSON , J . ( 1993 ) . Odour stimuli a ! ecting autumn mi - gration of Rhopalosiphum padi . Ann . Appl . Biol . 122 , 417 } 425 . R OBINSON , J . G . ( 1982 ) . Vocal systems regulating within - group spacing . In : Primate Communication ( Snowdon , C . T . , Brown , C . H . & Petersen , M . R . , eds ) , pp . 94 } 116 . Cam - bridge : Cambridge University Press . R ODIONOV , V . I . & B ORISY , G . B . ( 1997 ) . Self - centring activ - ity of the cytoplasm . Nature 386 , 170 } 173 . S EGEL , L . A . & P ERELSON , A . S . ( 1988 ) . Computations in shape space : an approach to network theory . In : „ heoret - ical Immunology II ( Perelson , A . S . , ed . ) , pp . 321 } 343 . Reading , MA : Addison } Wesley . S HI , W . & Z USMAN , D . R . ( 1994 ) . Sensory adaptation during negative chemotaxis in Myxococcus xanthus . J . Bacteriol . 176 , 1517 } 1520 . S KELLAM , J . G . ( 1951 ) . Random dispersal in theoretical populations . Biometrica 38 , 196 } 218 . S PORMANN , A . M . , & K AISER , D . ( 1995 ) . Gliding move - ments in Myxococcus xanthus . J . Bacteriol . 177 , 5846 } 5852 . S TEELE , J . H . ( 1974 ) . „ he Structure of Marine Ecosystems . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . S TEELE , J . H . ( 1976 ) . Patchiness . In : „ he Ecology of the Sea ( Cushing , D . H . & Walsh , J . H . , eds ) , pp . 98 } 115 . Philadel - phia : Saunders . S TEELE , J . H . ( 1978 ) . Spatial Pattern in Plankton Communi - ties . New York : Plenum Press . T URCHIN , P . ( 1986 ) . Models for aggregating populations . In : Mathematical Ecology ( Hallam , T . G . , ed . ) , pp . 101 } 127 . Singapore : World Scienti " c . T URCHIN , P . & K AREIVA , P . ( 1989 ) . Aggregation in Aphis varians : an e ! ective strategy for reducing predation risk . Ecology 70 , 1008 } 1061 . T URING , A . M . ( 1952 ) . The chemical basis of morphogenesis . New Phytol . 54 , 39 } 48 . V AN K IRK , R . W . & L EWIS , M . A . ( 1997 ) . Integrodi ! erence models for persistence in fragmented habitats . Bull . Math . Biol . 59 , 107 } 137 . W ARBURTON , K . & L AZARUS , J . ( 1991 ) . Tendency - distance models of social cohesion in animal groups . J . theor . Biol . 150 , 473 } 488 . W AY , M . & C AMMELL , M . ( 1970 ) . Aggregation behavior in relation to food utilization in aphids . In : Animal Populations in Relation to „ heir Food Resources ( Watson , A . , ed . ) , pp . 229 } 247 . London : Blackwell Scienti " c Publica - tions . W EAST , R . C . , A STLE , M . J . & B EYE , W . H . ( 1983 ) . CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics . Boca Raton , FL : CRC Press . NON - LOCAL MODELS 219