REVIEW ARTICLE Mechanisms regulating skeletal muscle growth and atrophy Stefano Schiafﬁno 1 , 2 , Kenneth A . Dyar 1 , Stefano Ciciliot 1 , Bert Blaauw 1 , 3 and Marco Sandri 1 , 3 1 Venetian Institute of Molecular Medicine , Padova , Italy 2 Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche , Institute of Neuroscience , Padova , Italy 3 Department of Biomedical Sciences , University of Padova , Italy Keywords FoxO ; IGF1 ; mTOR ; myostatin ; muscle atrophy ; muscle hypertrophy ; protein degradation ; protein synthesis ; satellite cells Correspondence S . Schiafﬁno ; M . Sandri , Venetian Institute of Molecular Medicine , Via Orus 2 , 35129 Padova , Italy Fax : + 39 49 7923 250 Tel : + 39 49 7923 232 ; + 39 49 7923 258 E - mail : stefano . schiafﬁno @ unipd . it ; marco . sandri @ unipd . it Website : www . vimm . it ( Received 25 January 2013 , revised 13 March 2013 , accepted 14 March 2013 ) doi : 10 . 1111 / febs . 12253 Skeletal muscle mass increases during postnatal development through a process of hypertrophy , i . e . enlargement of individual muscle ﬁbers , and a similar process may be induced in adult skeletal muscle in response to con - tractile activity , such as strength exercise , and speciﬁc hormones , such as androgens and b - adrenergic agonists . Muscle hypertrophy occurs when the overall rates of protein synthesis exceed the rates of protein degradation . Two major signaling pathways control protein synthesis , the IGF1 – Akt – mTOR pathway , acting as a positive regulator , and the myostatin – Smad2 / 3 pathway , acting as a negative regulator , and additional pathways have recently been identiﬁed . Proliferation and fusion of satellite cells , leading to an increase in the number of myonuclei , may also contribute to muscle growth during early but not late stages of postnatal development and in some forms of muscle hypertrophy in the adult . Muscle atrophy occurs when protein degradation rates exceed protein synthesis , and may be induced in adult skeletal muscle in a variety of conditions , including starva - tion , denervation , cancer cachexia , heart failure and aging . Two major pro - tein degradation pathways , the proteasomal and the autophagic – lysosomal pathways , are activated during muscle atrophy and variably contribute to the loss of muscle mass . These pathways involve a variety of atrophy - related genes or atrogenes , which are controlled by speciﬁc transcription factors , such as FoxO3 , which is negatively regulated by Akt , and NF - j B , which is activated by inﬂammatory cytokines . Introduction Skeletal muscle mass and muscle ﬁber size vary accord - ing to physiological and pathological conditions . An increase in muscle mass and ﬁber size , i . e . muscle growth or hypertrophy , occurs during development and in response to mechanical overload ( incapacitation or ablation of synergistic muscles , strength training , Abbreviations 4E - BP1 , eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E - binding protein 1 ; ACVR2 , activin receptor 2 ; ALK4 / 5 , activin receptor - like kinase 4 / 5 ; AMPK , AMP - activated protein kinase ; BNIP3 , BCL2 / adenovirus E1B 19 kDa protein - interacting protein 3 ; Fbxo , F - box only protein ; Fn14 , ﬁbroblast growth factor - inducible 14 ; FoxO , Forkhead box O ; HDAC , histone deacetylase ; IGF1 , insulin - like growth factor 1 ; IKK b , I j B kinase b ; IL , interleukin ; KLF15 , Kr € uppel - like factor 15 ; MAFbx , muscle atrophy F - box ; mTOR , mammalian target of rapamycin ; mTORC1 / 2 , mTOR complex 1 / 2 ; MuRF1 , muscle RING ﬁnger 1 ; NF - j B , nuclear factor j light - chain enhancer of activated B cells ; nNOS , neuronal nitric oxide synthase ; PPAR , peroxisome proliferator - activated receptor ; PGC - 1 a , PPAR - c co - activator - 1 a ; PI3K , phosphatidylinositide - 3 - kinase ; PINK1 , phosphatase and tensin homolog - induced putative kinase 1 ; REDD1 , regulated in development and DNA damage responses 1 ; SRF , serum response factor ; TGF β , transforming growth factor β ; TNF a , tumor necrosis factor a ; TRAF , TNF receptor - associated factor ; Trim32 , tripartite motif - containing protein 32 ; TWEAK , TNF - like weak inducer of apoptosis ; VPS34 , vacuolar protein sorting 34 ; YY1 , Yin Yang 1 . FEBS Journal ( 2013 ) ª 2013 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2013 FEBS 1 reloading after unloading ) or anabolic hormonal stimu - lation ( testosterone or b 2 - adrenergic agonists ) . A decrease in muscle mass and ﬁber size , i . e . muscle atro - phy , results from aging , starvation , cancer , diabetes , bed rest , loss of neural input ( denervation , motor neu - ron disease ) or catabolic hormonal stimulation ( corti - costeroids ) . The regulation of muscle mass and ﬁber size essentially reﬂects protein turnover , i . e . the balance between protein synthesis and degradation within the muscle ﬁbers . However , skeletal muscle ﬁbers are multi - nucleated structures , thus protein turnover may also be affected by cell or nuclear turnover , i . e . addition of new myonuclei , due to fusion of satellite cells , or loss of myonuclei , due to nuclear apoptosis . Before separately considering conditions of muscle growth and muscle atrophy , it is useful to make some general points . First , skeletal muscles and muscle ﬁber types vary , often dras - tically , in their response to the same stimulus . This point is evident in many experimental models used in muscle research , without considering extreme cases such as the differential response to testosterone in sexually dimor - phic , androgen - sensitive muscles . For example , denerva - tion in the rat diaphragm muscle causes atrophy of type 2X and 2B ﬁbers , no change in type 2A ﬁbers and slight hypertrophy of type 1 ﬁbers [ 1 ] . Similar changes are found in other fast rat muscles ( S . Schiafﬁno and S . Ciciliot , unpublished data ) ; however , the type 1 ﬁbers of the slow soleus show marked atrophy after denerva - tion , thus the same ﬁber type may undergo opposite changes in different muscles . With regard to nutrient deprivation , slow muscles , such as the soleus , are less sensitive to starvation compared to fast muscles [ 2 ] . This response is presumably related to the different sensitiv - ity of fast and slow muscles to corticosteroids [ 3 ] . Even within the same muscle , for example the rat diaphragm , corticosteroid treatment causes atrophy of type 2B and 2X ﬁbers but not type 2A and 1 ﬁbers [ 4 ] . This differen - tial response probably reﬂects the fact that contractile activity , which is greater in the continuously active type 1 and 2A ﬁbers , opposes the atrophic process , possibly via the transcriptional co - activator PPAR - c co - activator - 1 a ( PGC - 1 a ) [ 5 ] . Second , changes in protein turnover leading to muscle hypertrophy or atrophy do not always pro - ceed according to the simplistic equations suggested by the ‘balance’ analogy , i . e . muscle hypertrophy results from increased protein synthesis and decreased protein degradation , while muscle atrophy results from decreased protein synthesis and increased pro - tein degradation . Goldberg’s analyses of muscle growth in hypophysectomized rats showed that , dur - ing hypertrophy of the soleus muscle induced by ten - otomy of the gastrocnemius , there is decreased protein catabolism as well as increased synthesis of new proteins , while during hypertrophy of the soleus induced by growth hormone , there is increased pro - tein synthesis without any change in protein degrada - tion rates [ 6 ] . Starvation causes decreased protein synthesis and increased protein degradation in both fast and slow rat muscles [ 2 ] . However , muscle dener - vation is accompanied by increased protein degrada - tion and increased rather than decreased protein synthesis [ 7 , 8 ] . One must also consider that fast and slow muscles differ in their protein turnover rates , with slow muscles showing higher rates of both pro - tein synthesis and degradation [ 2 ] . Third , changes in protein turnover and cell / nuclear turnover in skeletal muscle do not always proceed in parallel , thus myonuclear domains may vary . The myo - nuclear domain size , deﬁned as the cytoplasmic volume per myonucleus , varies among ﬁber types , being larger in type 2B and 2X ﬁbers compared to type 2A and 1 ﬁbers , and , in contrast to initial reports , is not constant in various conditions [ 8a ] . For example , during muscle atrophy caused by denervation or corticosteroids , there is no loss of myonuclei ; therefore the myonuclear domain decreases in proportion to the decrease in cross - sectional area [ 1 , 4 , 9 , 10 ] . Conversely , myonuclear domains may increase during postnatal muscle growth and in different hypertrophy models ( see below ) . Muscle growth In this section , we focus on muscle growth processes that take place after birth , including muscle growth during postnatal development and the process of mus - cle hypertrophy induced in adult muscle by functional overload . We do not deal speciﬁcally with muscle growth during regeneration , which has been discussed previously [ 11 ] . Major signaling pathways controlling muscle growth Two major signaling pathways control skeletal muscle growth : the insulin - like growth factor 1 – phosphoino - sitide - 3 - kinase – Akt / protein kinase B – mammalian target of rapamycin ( IGF1 – PI3K – Akt / PKB – mTOR ) path - way acts as a positive regulator of muscle growth , and the myostatin – Smad3 pathway acts as a negative regu - lator ( Fig . 1A ) . The role of the IGF1 pathway has been supported by a variety of gain - and loss - of - func - tion genetic approaches [ 12 ] . For example , muscle - spe - ciﬁc inactivation of the IGF1 receptor impairs muscle growth due to reduced muscle ﬁber number and size [ 13 ] . Conversely , muscle - speciﬁc over - expression of 2 FEBS Journal ( 2013 ) ª 2013 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2013 FEBS Mechanisms regulating muscle growth and atrophy S . Schiafﬁno et al . IGF1 causes muscle hypertrophy [ 14 ] . In vivo transfec - tion studies in adult mouse and rat muscles have helped to elucidate the pathways downstream of the IGF1 receptor . IGF1 is known to activate both the mitogen - activated protein kinase / extracellular signal - regulated kinase ( MAPK / ERK ) and the PI3K – Akt pathways . However , only a Ras mutant that selectively activates the PI3K – Akt pathway was able to induce hypertrophy of transfected ﬁbers , whereas a Ras mutant acting speciﬁcally on the ERK pathway did not [ 15 ] . Accordingly , constitutively active Akt results in a striking hypertrophy of transfected muscle ﬁbers [ 16 , 17 ] , with a similar effect being seen using inducible muscle - speciﬁc transgenic models [ 18 – 20 ] . Akt stimulates protein synthesis by activating mTOR and its downstream effectors . The kinase mTOR interacts with several proteins to form two complexes : mTOR complex 1 ( mTORC1 ) containing raptor and mTOR complex 2 ( mTORC2 ) containing rictor . Here , we focus on mTOR signaling as it relates to skeletal muscle growth , as a detailed general discus - sion of mTOR function and regulation has been pub - lished previously [ 21 ] . It should be stressed that mTOR responds to multiple upstream signals in addi - tion to Akt , including amino acids , and it controls sev - eral cellular processes in addition to protein synthesis , including autophagy . The crucial role of mTOR in mediating muscle growth is supported by genetic and pharmacological evidence . Muscle - speciﬁc mTOR knockout causes reduced postnatal growth , due to the reduced size of fast but not slow muscle ﬁbers , and severe myopathy [ 22 ] . A similar phenotype is found in A B Fig . 1 . Signaling modules responsible for skeletal muscle growth during development , regeneration and overload - induced hypertrophy in the adult . We postulate that all these modules converge to a ﬁnal common pathway centered on mTOR and its effectors that control protein synthesis . ( A ) Major signaling pathways . IGF1 stimulates mTOR activity and muscle growth via PI3K – Akt . Follistatin induces muscle growth by inhibiting myostatin and activin A . The two pathways cross - talk by direct interaction between Smad3 and Akt . In addition , transcriptional regulation by Smad3 / Smad4 heterodimers may repress mTOR and protein synthesis through mechanisms that have not yet been deﬁned . The arrow connecting mTOR with a myonucleus indicates transcriptional roles of mTOR . ( b ) Additional pathways controlling mTOR activity and protein synthesis . The SRF ( serum response factor ) , PA ( phosphatidic acid ) and nNOS ( neuronal nitric oxide synthase ) pathways may be activated by mechanical overload . The dotted arrow connecting newly fused myonuclei ( new mn ) to the mTOR pathway indicates the postulated increase in protein synthesis and myotube / myoﬁber growth associated with myoblast / satellite cell fusion . SC , satellite cell ; SSC , satellite stem cell . FEBS Journal ( 2013 ) ª 2013 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2013 FEBS 3 S . Schiafﬁno et al . Mechanisms regulating muscle growth and atrophy mice lacking raptor in skeletal muscle , whereas those lacking rictor have a normal phenotype , supporting a major role of mTORC1 in mediating the effect of mTOR on protein synthesis [ 23 ] . Rapamycin , a speciﬁc mTOR inhibitor , acts especially on mTORC1 , although mTORC2 is also affected during chronic treatment [ 21 ] . Rapamycin inhibits muscle growth dur - ing postnatal development [ 24 ] , muscle regeneration [ 17 ] ( Fig . 2 ) and compensatory muscle hypertrophy induced by synergist elimination [ 16 ] . Muscle growth during reloading of unloaded muscles is only partially inhibited by rapamycin [ 24 ] . Muscle ﬁber hypertrophy induced by transfection of adult muscles with a consti - tutively active Akt construct is also blunted by rapa - mycin [ 16 , 17 ] . Two major effectors of mTORC1 that promote pro - tein synthesis are eukaryotic translation initiation fac - tor 4E - binding protein 1 ( 4E - BP1 ) and S6 kinase 1 . Muscle growth is apparently unaffected by 4E - BP1 knockout [ 25 ] . In contrast , deletion of S6 kinase 1 causes muscle atrophy and partially prevents the response to constitutively active Akt [ 26 ] . However , the control of protein synthesis by mTOR is still incompletely characterized [ 21 ] . The growth - promoting effect of mTORC1 is repressed by AMP - activated pro - tein kinase ( AMPK ) , and hypertrophy of soleus mus - cle has been described in AMPK - deﬁcient mice [ 26 ] . Another aspect of mTOR function that is incom - pletely understood is the role of mTOR in transcrip - tional regulation . In both yeast and mammalian cells , TOR / mTOR controls cell growth by coordinately reg - ulating the synthesis of ribosomes and tRNAs and activating transcription by all three nuclear RNA polymerases ( I , II and III ) . However , ribosomal RNA accumulation induced in overloaded muscles after syn - ergist ablation is only partially inhibited by rapamycin [ 27 ] . On the other hand , blockade of mTOR by rapamycin in cultured myotubes is sufﬁcient to block most IGF1 - induced changes in transcription [ 28 ] . What are the downstream effectors of mTOR that reg - ulate transcription ? The transcription factor Yin Yang 1 ( YY1 ) physically interacts with mTORC1 and mediates mTOR - dependent regulation of mito - chondrial gene expression via a YY1 – PGC - 1 a complex [ 29 ] . More recently , active mTORC1 was found to induce YY1 phosphorylation , resulting in displacement of the polycomb repressor complex , thereby activating transcription of many genes of the insulin / IGF1 – Akt pathway , including Igf1 , Irs1 , Irs2 , Akt1 and Akt2 . Conversely , mTORC1 inactivation induced by rapa - mycin results in YY1 dephosphorylation and recruit - ment of the polycomb repressor complex to the promoter of these genes , with a consequent block of transcription [ 30 ] . Muscle - speciﬁc inactivation of the Yy1 gene leads to up - regulation of genes of the insu - lin / IGF1 – Akt pathway [ 30 ] ; however , the effect of this knockout on muscle growth has not been described . The second major signaling pathway that controls skeletal muscle growth involves myostatin , a member of the transforming growth factor b ( TGF b ) superfam - ily . Myostatin is produced by skeletal muscle and acts as a negative regulator of muscle growth , as shown by the ﬁnding that myostatin mutations in various mam - malian species cause muscle hypertrophy [ 31 ] . Puriﬁed myostatin inhibits protein synthesis and reduces myo - tube size when added to differentiated myotubes in culture [ 32 ] . Furthermore , muscle atrophy is induced in mice by systemically administered myostatin [ 31 ] . Muscle hypertrophy may also be induced by inhibitory extracellular binding proteins , such as follistatin , whose effect is even greater than the lack of myostatin , because it binds to other TGF b superfamily members , such as activin A , that act as negative regulators of muscle growth like myostatin does ( Fig . 1A ) . Myosta - Fig . 2 . Muscle growth in regenerating skeletal muscle is dependent on mTOR activity . Rapamycin , a speciﬁc mTOR inhibitor , inhibits growth of regenerating muscle . The section was stained with an antibody speciﬁc for embryonic myosin heavy chain [ 177 ] . Modiﬁed from [ 17 ] . Scale bar = 50 l m . 4 FEBS Journal ( 2013 ) ª 2013 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2013 FEBS Mechanisms regulating muscle growth and atrophy S . Schiafﬁno et al . tin and activin A interact and activate a heterodimeric receptor complex with serine – threonine kinase activity , comprising a type II receptor , activin receptor 2 ( ACVR2 and ACVR2B ) , and a type I receptor , activin receptor - like kinase 4 and 5 ( ALK4 and ALK5 ) . A soluble form of ACVR2B acts as a myostatin / acti - vin A inhibitor that is capable of inducing muscle hypertrophy in adult mice . Myostatin / activin A signal - ing in myoﬁbers is mediated by phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of Smad2 or Smad3 transcription factors , and formation of heterodimers with Smad4 . Although the transcriptional targets of the Smad2 / Smad4 and Smad3 / Smad4 complexes that mediate the inhibitory effect on growth are not known , it is possi - ble that myostatin / activin A signaling interferes with the Akt – mTOR pathway [ 33 , 34 ] . For example , muscle hypertrophy induced by transfection of dominant - neg - ative ACVR2B is partially prevented by mTOR - spe - ciﬁc siRNAs or by rapamycin [ 33 ] . Likewise , follistatin - induced muscle hypertrophy is blunted by blocking the IGF1 – Akt – mTOR pathway at the level of the IGF1 receptor , via a dominant - negative IGF1 receptor , at the level of Akt , via dominant - negative Akt , or at the level of mTOR , via rapamycin . How - ever , follistatin - induced muscle hypertrophy was unchanged in S6 kinase 1 / 2 knockout mice [ 35 ] . Another recent study showed that virus - mediated over - expression of a form of follistatin that remains localized within the injected muscle stimulates Akt phosphorylation , mTOR signaling and protein synthe - sis , leading to a striking muscle hypertrophy that is inhibited by rapamycin [ 36 ] . Inhibition of Smad3 activ - ity by follistatin is critical for activation of Akt – mTOR signaling , as constitutively active Smad3 was found to suppress follistatin - induced muscle growth and mTOR activation . It is also possible that a direct interaction between Smad3 and Akt , as demonstrated in other cell systems [ 37 , 38 ] , may be involved in cross - talk between the myostatin / activin A and IGF1 path - ways in skeletal muscle . Additional signaling pathways controlling muscle growth As shown in Fig . 1B , other important signaling path - ways are also known to control skeletal muscle growth . The transcription factor SRF ( serum response factor ) is required for muscle growth during development , as shown by muscle - speciﬁc SRF knockout [ 39 , 40 ] . Using an inducible , muscle - speciﬁc knockout model , SRF was also found to be required for muscle hypertrophy induced by synergist elimination [ 41 ] . In this model , the effect of SRF is apparently mediated via release of interleukins 4 and 6 ( IL - 4 and IL - 6 ) , which act in a paracrine manner to induce satellite cell proliferation and fusion [ 41 ] ( see below ) . Akt phosphorylation is apparently unchanged in control and SRF mutant mus - cles at various time points after synergist ablation . However , a previous study reported that SRF is able to activate the Akt pathway via a muscle - enriched microRNA , miR - 486 , that targets the phosphatase and tensin homolog PTEN , which negatively affects PI3K – Akt signaling [ 42 ] . In addition , as activation of mTOR and its downstream effectors were not examined in the previous study [ 41 ] , it is possible that mTOR activity and protein synthesis are increased by SRF in muscles undergoing overload - induced hypertrophy , either via a transcriptional mechanism mediated by SRF itself or as a secondary consequence of incorporation of new myonuclei resulting from satellite cell activation and fusion . Finally , it should be stressed that SRF is known to control the transcription of several cytoskeletal and sarcomeric protein genes , including those for a - actin , by binding to CArG box regulatory elements . The Akt – mTOR pathway is also a point of conver - gence for additional signaling pathways that are known to promote muscle growth . This appears to be the case for androgens and b 2 - adrenergic agents , which both have well - known anabolic effects on skeletal mus - cles . Androgens potently stimulate muscle growth : tes - tosterone loss in male mice decreases muscle Igf1 mRNA , Akt phosphorylation and the rate of myoﬁbr - illar protein synthesis ; these changes are all reversed by nandrolone treatment [ 43 ] . Muscle hypertrophy induced by b 2 - adrenergic agents , such as clenbuterol or formoterol , is accompanied by a signiﬁcant increase in Akt phosphorylation [ 44 ] and is completely blocked by rapamycin [ 45 ] . Another signaling pathway that controls muscle growth involves Wnt7a , an extracellu - lar protein that acts both on satellite stem cells , increasing their numbers , and on myoﬁbers by activat - ing the PI3K – Akt pathway via its receptor Fzd7 [ 46 , 47 ] . A pathway linked to mTOR activation involves neuronal nitric oxide synthase ( nNOS ) . When activated in myoﬁbers by functional overload , nNOS generates nitric oxide ( NO ) and causes peroxynitrite - dependent activation of the cation channel Trpv1 , located in the sarcoplasmic reticulum . The resulting increase in intracellular Ca 2 + induced by Trpv1 - medi - ated Ca 2 + release triggers activation of mTOR [ 48 ] . Furthermore , mTOR is also activated by mechanical stimulation via an Akt - independent pathway involving phosphatidic acid and activated phospholipase D [ 49 ] . A novel form of PGC - 1 a ( PGC - 1 a 4 ) , which results from alternative promoter usage and splicing of the primary transcript , is involved in muscle growth , as FEBS Journal ( 2013 ) ª 2013 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2013 FEBS 5 S . Schiafﬁno et al . Mechanisms regulating muscle growth and atrophy shown by the ﬁnding that mice with skeletal muscle - speciﬁc transgenic expression of PGC - 1 a 4 show increased muscle mass and strength [ 50 ] . PGC - 1 a 4 , which is expressed at signiﬁcant levels in skeletal mus - cle , is a shorter , truncated form of the previously described PGC - 1 a [ 50a ] , now referred to as PGC - 1 a 1 , which is involved in mitochondrial biogenesis and not in muscle growth . In cultured muscle cells , PGC - 1 a 4 was found to induce IGF1 and repress myostatin , thus promoting myotube hypertrophy , which was blocked by an IGF1 receptor inhibitor . Myotube growth induced by treatment with clenbuterol was also blunted by PGC - 1 a 4 knockdown . Satellite cell fusion and increase of myonuclei during muscle growth The issue of whether satellite cell proliferation and fusion contributes to muscle growth has been the sub - ject of debate [ 51 ] . There is no doubt that myoblast fusion is essential for muscle growth during early stages of muscle differentiation . For example , myotube growth in culture is impaired when myoblast fusion is inhibited , either during formation of the nascent myo - tube or during the transition from nascent to mature myotube [ 52 ] . IL - 6 and IL - 4 released by the myotubes act on myoblasts , promoting their proliferation and fusion , respectively [ 53 , 54 ] . Muscle cells lacking IL - 4 or the IL - 4 a receptor subunit form smaller myotubes with fewer myonuclei [ 53 ] . Muscle growth during early post - natal development ( from P0 to approximately P21 in mice and rats ) is also accompanied by , and presumably dependent on , a continuous increase in the number of myonuclei resulting from satellite cell fusion [ 55 ] ( an approximately ﬁvefold increase from P3 to P21 in mouse extensor digitorum longus muscle [ 56 ] ) . Muscle regeneration recapitulates many aspects of embryonic and neonatal myogenesis , with satellite cells acting as a major myogenic stem cell , and undergoing active prolif - eration and fusion during formation of new myoﬁbers [ 11 ] . A distinct feature of muscle regeneration , which is missing in normal muscle development , is the central role of inﬂammation and of various macrophage popu - lations in the muscle growth process [ 57 ] . On the other hand , muscle hypertrophy at late post - natal stages takes place without a signiﬁcant contribu - tion of satellite cell fusion . For example , the approximately twofold increase in myoﬁber cross - sec - tional area from P21 to P56 in mouse extensor digito - rum longus muscle occurs with a negligible change in myonuclear number [ 56 ] . In adult skeletal muscle , clen - buterol - induced hypertrophy does not involve satellite cell fusion [ 58 ] , although satellite cell activation is induced by androgens [ 59 ] . Similarly , myonuclear number is not increased during muscle growth upon reloading of unloaded muscles [ 9 , 60 ] . Satellite cell pro - liferation and fusion were not detected during muscle hypertrophy induced by a muscle - speciﬁc , inducible and constitutively active Akt1 transgene [ 18 ] , or by over - expression of JunB [ 61 ] . The contribution of satellite cells to muscle hypertrophy induced by block - ade of the myostatin / activin A pathway is controver - sial . In two studies , satellite cell activation was not detected after injection of vectors encoding the myost - atin propeptide , which binds non - covalently to myost - atin and inhibits its activity [ 62 ] , or in hypertrophic muscles expressing dominant - negative ACVR2B [ 33 ] . In contrast , another study reported an increase in BrdU - positive myonuclei and increased numbers of satellite cells when using a soluble ACVR2B to block this pathway [ 63 ] . A recent detailed study concluded that satellite cells play little or no role in myostatin / activin A signaling in vivo , based on the ﬁnding that satellite cell and myonuclear number were unchanged in hypertrophic muscles after injection of soluble ACVR2B , and that muscle hypertrophy induced by over - expressing follistatin also occurs in mice lacking syndecan4 or Pax7 , which have compromised satellite cell function or number , respectively [ 64 ] . A widely used model of muscle hypertrophy in adult mice or rats is compensatory hypertrophy induced by ablation of synergist muscles : for example hypertrophy of the plantaris or soleus muscle after removal of the gastrocnemius , or hypertrophy of the extensor digito - rum longus after removal of the tibialis anterior mus - cle . This model of acute functional overload causes immediate satellite cell proliferation and fusion [ 65 , 66 ] , with a consequent increase in the number of myonuclei [ 54 , 67 ] . A similarly dramatic increase in mechanical load may be induced in human skeletal muscle by high - intensity eccentric contractions , which also cause proliferation of satellite cells [ 68 ] and , when repeated , are known to induce muscle hypertrophy . Depending on the intensity of the exercise and the trained / untrained state of the host , eccentric contractions may cause a spectrum of responses , ranging from severe muscle damage and local inﬂammation to mild muscle damage ( myoﬁbrillar disruptions ) without inﬂamma - tion , to remodeling of the extracellular matrix without obvious damage to the muscle ﬁbers . Similar changes have been reported in rat or mouse muscles after elimi - nation of synergists , and it is possible that the satellite cell activation seen in each of these conditions may reﬂect a response that is similar to that observed in muscle regeneration . A role of satellite cells in IGF1 - induced muscle hypertrophy was suggested by the 6 FEBS Journal ( 2013 ) ª 2013 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2013 FEBS Mechanisms regulating muscle growth and atrophy S . Schiafﬁno et al . inhibitory effect of gamma radiation [ 69 ] ; however , exposure to radiation may affect protein synthesis within the myoﬁbers , thus complicating interpretation of this experiment [ 70 ] . IL - 6 produced by myoﬁbers and satellite cells is increased in overloaded muscles , suggesting a role for IL - 6 and downstream signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 ( STAT3 ) signaling in satellite cell proliferation , myonuclear accretion and hypertrophy [ 54 ] . IL - 4 was found to control myoblast fusion , thus promoting the transition from nascent to mature myo - tubes in cultured muscle cells and during postnatal growth [ 53 ] . A recent study indicated that satellite cell proliferation and fusion during overload - dependent hypertrophy are induced by IL - 6 and IL - 4 , respec - tively , and that both cytokines are released by over - loaded myoﬁbers under the control of SRF [ 41 ] . IL - 4 expression is decreased by muscle - speciﬁc SRF knock - out , which causes reduced postnatal muscle growth and reduced hypertrophy after synergist ablation [ 40 ] , with both defects being rescued by IL - 4 but not IL - 6 over - expression [ 41 ] . However , another recent study reported that recruitment of satellite cells is not required for muscle hypertrophy , because hypertrophy was unchanged in mice in which more than 90 % of satellite cells were ablated by diphtheria toxin A using an inducible Pax7 – diphtheria toxin A transgene [ 71 ] . How may these opposite conclusions about the mecha - nism of muscle hypertrophy induced by functional overload be reconciled ? It is clear that skeletal muscle has the capacity to activate two modes of hypertrophy , either with or without satellite cell involvement , as clearly shown by the two stages of muscle growth during postnatal development . These two modes of hypertrophy are also observed at later stages , and may be activated in the adult in response to various stimuli . It is likely that satellite cells are activated and contribute to hypertro - phy when an acute stimulus is involved , such as after elimination of synergistic muscles , or after strong exer - cise with eccentric contractions , i . e . under conditions when some form of muscle damage occurs . In con - trast , more gradual exercise , or reloading of unloaded muscles , does not trigger satellite cell activation and fusion . It may be envisaged that , when one of the two available modes of response is artiﬁcially impaired , as is the case in gene or cell ablation models , the muscle will use the remaining available mode . Thus , in the absence of satellite cells , a growth response is still induced by functional overload , but via increased pro - tein synthesis alone . Loss - of - function approaches , involving either genes or cells , should thus be inter - preted with caution , because compensatory adapta - tions may occur , not only when the perturbation is produced during development , as in traditional knock - out models , but also when it is produced in the adult using inducible systems . Muscle atrophy Muscle atrophy involves the shrinkage of myoﬁbers due to a net loss of proteins , organelles and cytoplasm . Acute muscle atrophy , as occurs in many pathological conditions , is due to hyperactivation of the cell’s main degradation pathways , including the ubiquitin – protea - some system and the autophagy – lysosome pathway . Recent studies have highlighted a complex scenario whereby these catabolic pathways modulate one another at different levels , and are also coupled at var - ious points to biosynthetic pathways . The result is a coordinated balance between protein degradation and synthesis that reﬂects the physiological state of the muscle ﬁber . As muscle accounts for such a large pro - portion of total body mass , particularly total body protein , this local balance has a signiﬁcant effect on general protein homeostasis . The ubiquitin – proteasome and autophagy – lysosome machinery are activated in atrophying muscles Activation of the cell’s proteolytic systems is transcrip - tionally regulated , and a subset of genes that are com - monly up - or down - regulated has been identiﬁed in atrophying skeletal muscle , regardless of the catabolic condition [ 72 – 75 ] . These common genes are thought to regulate the loss of muscle components , and were thus designated atrophy - related genes or ‘atrogenes’ [ 75 – 77 ] . Among the up - regulated atrophy - related genes are transcripts belonging to the ubiquitin – proteasome and autophagy – lysosome systems . The up - regulation of several ubiquitin – proteasome and autophagy - related genes is normally blocked by Akt through negative regulation of Forkhead box O ( FoxO ) transcription factors [ 77 – 79 ] . In muscle , the ubiquitin – proteasome system is required to remove sarcomeric proteins in response to changes in muscle activity . The rate - limiting step of the ubiquitination process , which affects subsequent proteasome - dependent degradation , is catalysed by the E3 enzyme , which is a ubiquitin ligase . Among the known E3s , only a few are both muscle - speciﬁc and up - regulated during muscle loss . The ﬁrst to be identiﬁed were atrogin - 1 / MAFbx ( muscle atrophy F - box ) and muscle RING ﬁnger 1 ( MuRF1 ) . Mice lack - ing atrogin - 1 / MAFbx and MuRF1 are resistant to FEBS Journal ( 2013 ) ª 2013 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2013 FEBS 7 S . Schiafﬁno et al . Mechanisms regulating muscle growth and atrophy muscle atrophy induced by denervation [ 72 ] . More - over , knockdown of atrogin - 1 prevents muscle loss during fasting [ 80 ] , whereas MuRF1 knockout mice ( but not atrogin - 1 knockout mice ) are also resistant to dexamethasone - induced muscle atrophy [ 81 ] . So far , very few muscle proteins have been identiﬁed as sub - strates for atrogin - 1 , and those that have been identi - ﬁed appear to be involved in growth - related processes or survival pathways . For example , atrogin - 1 promotes degradation of MyoD , a key muscle transcription fac - tor , and of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3 subunit F ( eIF3 - f ) , an important activator of protein synthesis [ 82 , 83 ] . In the heart , atrogin - 1 ubiquitinates and reduces the levels of calcineurin A , an important factor triggering cardiac hypertrophy in response to pressure overload [ 84 ] . Interestingly , immunoprecipita - tion experiments in C2C12 myoblasts and myotubes have found that atrogin - 1 interacts with sarcomeric proteins , including myosins , desmin and vimentin , as well as transcription factors , components of the trans - lational machinery , enzymes involved in glycolysis and gluconeogenesis , and mitochondrial proteins [ 85 ] . Whether atrogin - 1 ubiquitinates these proteins has yet to be proven . Conversely , MuRF1 was reported to interact with and control the half - life of many impor - tant muscle structural proteins , including troponin I [ 86 ] , myosin heavy chains [ 87 , 88 ] , actin [ 89 ] , myosin binding protein C and myosin light chains 1 and 2 [ 90 ] . Presumably , additional E3s that have not yet been identiﬁed are also activated during atrophy to promote the clearance of soluble cellular proteins and to limit / regulate anabolic processes . A recent paper reported that Trim32 ( tripartite motif - containing pro - tein 32 ) is a crucial E3 ligase for the degradation of thin ﬁlaments ( actin , tropomyosin and troponins ) , a - actinin and desmin [ 91 ] . However , Trim32 knockout mice are not protected from atrophy , but instead show impaired recovery of muscle mass after atrophy [ 92 ] . Another E3 ubiquitin ligase that has been found to play a critical role in atrophy is TRAF6 ( TNF recep - tor - associated factor ) [ 93 ] , which mediates the conjuga - tion of Lys63 - linked polyubiquitin chains to target proteins . Lys48 - linked polyubiquitin chains are a sig - nal for proteasome - dependent degradation , but Lys63 - linked polyubiquitin chains play other roles , such as regulating autophagy - dependent cargo recognition by interacting with the scaffold protein p62 ( also known as SQSTM1 ) [ 94 – 96 ] . Muscle - speciﬁc TRAF6 knock - out mice have a decreased amount of polyubiquitinat - ed proteins , almost no Lys63 - polyubiquitinated proteins in starved muscles [ 97 ] , and are resistant to muscle loss induced by denervation , cancer or starva - tion [ 93 , 97 , 98 ] . The mechanism of this protection involves both direct and indirect effects of TRAF6 on protein breakdown . In fact , TRAF6 - mediated ubiquiti - nation is required for the optimal activation of c - Jun N - terminal kinase , AMPK , FoxO3 and NF - j B [ 97 ] . All of these factors are crucial regulators of atrogin - 1 and MuRF1 expression and of several autophagy - related genes . Inhibition of TRAF6 reduces the induction of atrogin - 1 and MuRF1 , thereby preserving muscle mass under catabolic conditions . Speciﬁc ubiquitin ligases may be involved in differ - ent models of muscle wasting and at different stages of the atrophy process . For instance , the HECT domain ubiquitin ligase Nedd4 - 1 has been reported to be up - regulated mainly during muscle disuse . Indeed , dele - tion of the Nedd4 - 1 gene speciﬁcally in skeletal muscle results in partial protection from muscle atrophy in denervated type II ﬁbers . However , Nedd4 - 1 knockout mice have smaller muscles , suggesting that this E3 may play additional roles during myogenesis or in the con - trol of protein synthesis [ 99 ] . Mul1 is a mitochondrial ubiquitin ligase that plays an important role in mitochondrial network remodel - ing . Mul1 is up - regulated by the FoxO family of tran - scription factors under catabolic conditions , such as fasting or denervation , and causes mitochondrial frag - mentation and removal via autophagy ( mitophagy ) [ 100 ] . Importantly , knocking down Mul1 spares muscle mass during fasting . Mul1 ubiquitinates the mitochon - drial pro - fusion protein mitofusin 2 , causing its degra - dation via the proteasome system . The exact mechanism that triggers Mul1 - dependent mitochon - drial dysfunction and mitophagy is unclear , but it has been reported that mitofusin degradation is permissive for mitochondrial ﬁssion and mitophagy [ 101 ] . Carboxy terminus of Hsc70 interacting protein ( CHIP ) is another ubiquitin ligase , which regulates ubiquitination and lysosomal - dependent degradation of ﬁlamin C , a muscle protein found in the Z - line [ 102 ] . Filamins undergo unfolding and refolding cycles during muscle contraction , and are therefore prone to irreversible damage [ 102 ] . Alterations to ﬁlamin struc - ture trigger binding of the co - chaperone BAG3 , which is a complex comprising the chaperones Hsc70 and HspB8 , as well as the ubiquitin ligase CHIP . CHIP ubiquitinates BAG3 and ﬁlamin , which are recognized and delivered to the autophagy system by p62 [ 102 ] . Interestingly , ﬁlamin B half life is controlled , at least during myogenesis , by another ubiquitin ligase , ASB2 b , which is mainly expressed in muscle cells . In this case , ubiquitination of ﬁlamin B by ASB2 b leads to proteasome - dependent degradation [ 103 ] . In skeletal muscle , E3 ligases also have important regulatory functions in signaling pathways . For 8 FEBS Journal ( 2013 ) ª 2013 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2013 FEBS Mechanisms regulating muscle growth and atrophy S . Schiafﬁno et al . example , it was recently found that the ubiquitin ligase Fbxo40 ( F - box only protein ) regulates anabolic signals [ 104 ] . Fbxo40 ubiquitinates and affects the degradation of insulin receptor substrate 1 , a downstream effector of insulin receptor - mediated signaling . Inhibition of Fbxo40 by RNAi induces hypertrophy in myotubes , and Fbxo40 knockout mice display bigger muscle ﬁbers [ 104 ] . Although some E3 ligases involved in muscle protein ubiquitination and breakdown have been identiﬁed , very little is known about how ubiquitinated proteins are recognized and delivered to the proteasome . ZNF216 has been identiﬁed as an important player in the recognition and delivery of ubiquitinated proteins to the proteasome during muscle atrophy . Interest - ingly , ZNF216 is up - regulated by FoxO transcription factors in atrophying muscles , and ZNF216 - deﬁcient mice are partially resistant to muscle loss during dener - vation . The absence of ZNF216 in muscle leads to accumulation of polyubiquitinated proteins [ 105 ] . Another important system for extraction and degra - dation of ubiquitinated proteins from larger structures is the p97 / valosin containing protein ( VCP ) ATPase complex . p97 / VCP is induced during denervation , and over - expression of a dominant - negative p97 / VCP reduces overall proteolysis by the proteasome and lysosome pathways , and blocks the accelerated protein breakdown induced by FoxO3 . Interestingly , p97 and its co - factors , Ufd1 and p47 , have been found to be associated with speciﬁc myoﬁbrillar proteins , suggest - ing a role for p97 in extracting ubiquitinated proteins from myoﬁbrils [ 106 ] . Although a great body of research has focused on the ubiquitination process , little is known about the role of deubiquitination and its contribution to muscle atrophy . The largest class of deubiquitinating enzymes are ubiquitin - speciﬁc proteases . So far , only two ubiquitin - speciﬁc proteases ( USP14 and USP19 ) have been found to be up - regulated in atrophying muscles [ 73 , 107 ] . Knockdown of USP19 in myotubes results in decreased protein degradation and reverts dexametha - sone - induced loss of myosin heavy chain [ 108 ] . Macroautophagy , hereafter referred to as auto - phagy , is the other proteolytic system that is acti - vated in catabolic conditions and that is under FoxO regulation [ 109 ] . The various types of autophagy , including their regulation and involvement in muscle homeostasis , have been reviewed recently [ 110 ] . Brieﬂy , autophagy is a highly conserved homeostatic mechanism that is used for the degradation and recy - cling , through the lysosomal machinery , of bulk cyto - plasm , long - lived proteins and organelles [ 111 ] . Although autophagy was initially considered a non - selective degradation pathway , the presence of more selective forms of autophagy is becoming increasingly evident . Indeed , autophagy may trigger the selective removal of speciﬁc organelles , such as mitochondria , via mitophagy . In mammals , parkin , PINK1 ( phosphatase and tensin homolog - induced putative kinase 1 ) , and BCL2 / adenovirus E1B 19 kDa protein - interacting protein 3 ( Bnip3 and Bnip3L ) have been shown to regulate mitophagy , and inactivation of the genes encoding these proteins leads to mito - chondrial abnormalities [ 112 , 113 ] . PINK1 is normally absent in healthy mitochondria because it is constitu - tively degraded by mitochondrial proteases . However , once mitochondria are damaged , PINK1 is no longer degraded and accumulates . PINK1 induces parkin recruitment to mitochondria , promoting mitophagy through ubiquitination of outer mitochondrial mem - brane proteins that are recognized by p62 , which then brings autophagic vesicles to ubiquitinated mitochon - drial proteins [ 114 , 115 ] . Bnip3 and Bnip3L are BH3 - only proteins that are localized at the outer membrane of the mitochondria after cellular stress , and reportedly bind directly to LC3 ( MAP1LC3A microtubule - associated protein 1 light chain 3 alpha ) , thereby recruiting the autophagosome to damaged mitochondria [ 116 , 117 ] . In atrophying muscle , the mitochondrial network is dramatically remodeled fol - lowing fasting or denervation , and autophagy via Bnip3 contributes to mitochondrial remodeling [ 101 , 118 – 120 ] . Expression of the ﬁssion machinery is sufﬁcient to cause muscle wasting in mice , whereas inhibition of mitochondrial ﬁssion prevents muscle loss during denervation , indicating that disruption of the mitochondrial network is a crucial ampliﬁcatory loop of the muscle atrophy program [ 101 , 118 ] . Con - versely , impairment of basal mitophagy is deleterious to muscle homeostasis , and leads to the accumulation of damaged and dysfunctional mitochondria [ 121 ] . Accordingly , the phenotype of mice with muscle - spe - ciﬁc inactivation of various genes coding for auto - phagy - related proteins , such as Atg7 , Atg5 or nutrient - deprivation autophagy factor - 1 ( NAF - 1 ) , a Bcl - 2 - associated autophagy regulator , results in atro - phy , weakness and various myopathic features [ 122 – 124 ] . In addition , altered regulation of auto - phagy - related genes leads to muscle dysfunction . His - tone deacetylases 1 and 2 ( HDACs ) were found to regulate muscle autophagy by controlling the expres - sion of autophagy genes . Muscle - speciﬁc ablation of both HDAC1 and HDAC2 results in partial perinatal lethality , and the HDAC1 / 2 knockout mice that do survive develop a progressive myopathy characterized by impaired autophagy [ 125 , 126 ] . FEBS Journal ( 2013 ) ª 2013 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2013 FEBS 9 S . Schiafﬁno et al . Mechanisms regulating muscle growth and atrophy IGF1 – AKT – FoxO signaling Several studies have shown that the IGF1 and / or insu - lin signaling suppress protein breakdown while pro - moting muscle growth [ 127 – 129 ] . Additional data supporting the role of the IGF1 pathway in regulating muscle atrophy have been obtained from studies of Akt . Electroporation of constitutively active Akt in adult myoﬁbers completely blocks muscle atrophy induced by denervation [ 16 ] . Akt transgenic mice dis - play muscle hypertrophy and protection from denerva - tion - induced atrophy [ 19 , 20 , 130 ] , showing that the Akt pathway promotes muscle growth and simultaneously blocks protein degradation [ 20 , 33 ] . In particular , Akt regulates both the ubiquitin – proteasome system and the autophagy – lysosome pathway , and this action is mediated by FoxO transcription factors . The FoxO family members that are important for skeletal muscle include three isoforms : FoxO1 , FoxO3 and FoxO4 . Akt phosphorylates all FoxOs , promoting their export from the nucleus to the cytoplasm . As predicted , the reduced activity of the Akt pathway observed in vari - ous models of muscle atrophy leads to decreased levels of phosphorylated FoxO in the cytoplasm and a marked increase in nuclear FoxO [ 131 ] ( Fig . 3 ) . The translocation and transcriptional activity of FoxO members is sufﬁcient to promote atrogin - 1 and MuRF1 expression , and muscle atrophy . Studies utiliz - ing FoxO3 over - expression in adult muscle or muscle - speciﬁc FoxO1 transgenic mice showed markedly reduced muscle mass and ﬁber atrophy [ 77 , 132 , 133 ] . In contrast , FoxO knockdown by RNAi blocks the up - regulation of atrogin - 1 expression during atrophy and prevents muscle loss [ 77 , 134 ] . Cross - talk between protein breakdown and protein synthesis is not limited to Akt , but also involves FoxO . Activation of FoxO in Drosophila muscle up - regulates 4E - BP1 [ 135 ] and represses mTOR via sestrin [ 136 ] . Consistently , in mammals , FoxO3 reduces total protein synthesis in adult muscle [ 137 ] . Thus , when Akt is active , protein breakdown is suppressed , and when FoxO is induced , protein synthesis is further suppressed . This is not trivial , as FoxO activity is reg - ulated by several post - translational modiﬁcations , including phosphorylation , acetylation and mono - and polyubiquitination [ 138 ] . Adding an additional level of complexity , the regulatory consequences of these changes appear to be speciﬁc for individual FoxO members . For example , recent evidence suggests that acetylation negatively regulates FoxO3 activity , but has no effect on FoxO1 [ 139 ] . Mutants of FoxO3 that mimic the effect of acetylation have cytosolic localiza - tion and a reduced capacity to induce transcription of the gene encoding atrogin - 1 , and cause muscle atrophy [ 140 ] . Most of these regulatory mechanisms are Akt - independent , and may play a role in muscle atrophy induced by oxidative or energy stress . Other studies have revealed a connection between AMPK and FoxO3 . AMPK phosphorylates several Akt - independent sites on FoxO3 , thereby stimulating its transcriptional activity [ 141 , 142 ] . Indeed , treatment Fig . 3 . Protein degradation regulates protein synthesis . In the presence of growth factors , the PI3K – Akt / protein kinase B pathway sequesters FoxO1 / 3 / 4 transcription factors in the cytoplasm . In the absence of growth factors , Akt is inactive , and therefore , FoxOs are translocated into the nucleus and induce the transcription of target genes that regulate the ubiquitin – proteasome and autophagy – lysosome systems . mTOR senses the amino acids derived from the proteasome , or , when localized on lysosomes , the amino acid ﬂux derived from lysosomal protein breakdown , and is therefore activated . 10 FEBS Journal ( 2013 ) ª 2013 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2013 FEBS Mechanisms regulating muscle growth and atrophy S . Schiafﬁno et al . of muscle cultures with 5 - aminoimidazole - 4 - carboxa - mide riboside ( AICAR ) , an activator of AMPK , increases protein breakdown and atrogin - 1 expression via the FoxO family [ 143 ] . It has recently been shown that FoxO3 is activated via AMPK in myoﬁbers to induce expression of atrogin - 1 and MuRF1 under con - ditions of energy stress [ 101 , 144 ] . Activation of AMPK also leads to induction of some autophagy - related genes encoding proteins such as LC3 and Bnip3 . Increased oxidative stress occurs during denervation and hindlimb suspension . During these disuse condi - tions , nNOS moves from the sarcolemma , where it is bound to the dystrophin – glycoprotein complex , to the cytosol . Free cytosolic nNOS induces oxidative stress and enhances FoxO3 - mediated transcription of atro - gin - 1 and MuRF1 , thereby causing muscle loss [ 145 ] . Interestingly , the NF - j B pathway is not involved in nNOS - mediated muscle atrophy [ 145 ] . Similarly , when dihydropyridine receptor ( DHPR ) is reduced in adult muscle by RNAi , muscle atrophy is triggered via nNOS relocalization and FoxO3 activation [ 146 ] . However , in this latter setting , the genes up - regulated by FoxO3 are those encoding the autophagy regulators LC3 , vacuolar protein sorting 34 ( VPS34 ) and Bnip3 as well as the lysosomal enzyme cathepsin L . In humans , the diaphragm of patients that are mechani - cally ventilated undergoes rapid atrophy caused by activation of proteolytic systems , including autophagy , through Akt inhibition and FoxO1 induction [ 147 ] . Interestingly , oxidative stress is increased and therefore contributes to FoxO activation in this example of dis - use - mediated atrophy . FoxO activity is also modulated by direct or indirect actions of co - factors and by interaction with other transcription factors . FoxOs have been found to inter - act with PGC - 1 a , a critical co - factor for mitochondrial biogenesis [ 148 , 149 ] . Maintaining high levels of PGC - 1 a under catabolic conditions ( either in transgenic mice or by transfecting adult myoﬁbers ) spares muscle mass during denervation , fasting , heart failure , aging and sarcopenia – similar to the effect observed for expression of constitutively active FoxO3 [ 5 , 150 , 151 ] . Similar beneﬁcial effects were recently obtained by over - expression of PGC - 1 b , a homolog of PGC - 1 a [ 152 ] . The positive action on muscle mass of these co - factors is due to inhibition of autophagy – lysosome and ubiquitin – proteasome degradation . PGC - 1 a and PGC - 1 b reduce protein breakdown by inhibiting the transcriptional activity of FoxO3 and NF - j B , but do not affect protein synthesis . Thus , these co - factors pre - vent the excessive activation of proteolytic systems by inhibiting the action of the pro - atrophy transcription factors without perturbing the translational machinery . We recently reported that the transcription factor JunB blocks atrophy and promotes hypertrophy in adult muscles [ 61 ] . Indeed , JunB blocks myoﬁber atro - phy of denervated tibialis anterior muscles and cul - tured myotubes induced by FoxO3 over - expression , dexamethasone treatment or starvation . Under these conditions , JunB prevents activation of atrogin - 1 and partially prevents activation of MuRF1 , thereby reduc - ing the increase in overall protein degradation induced by activated FoxO3 . Further analysis revealed that JunB does not inhibit FoxO3 - mediated activation of the autophagy – lysosome system , but only ubiquitin – proteasome degradation , by inhibiting atrogin - 1 and MuRF1 induction under catabolic conditions . In fact , JunB directly binds FoxO3 , thereby preventing its recruitment to the promoters of key atrogenes . More - over , JunB over - expression is sufﬁcient to induce dra - matic hypertrophy of myotubes and adult muscle . These hypertrophic changes depend on increased pro - tein synthesis , without affecting the basal rate of pro - tein degradation . The growth - promoting effects mediated by JunB in muscle resemble the effects of inhibiting the TGF b pathway [ 33 , 34 ] . Indeed , JunB over - expression markedly suppresses myostatin expres - sion in transfected myotubes and decreases the phos - phorylation of Smad3 , the transcription factor downstream of the myostatin – TGF b signaling path - way [ 61 ] . Inﬂammatory cytokines and NF - j B signaling NF - j B transcription factors are expressed in skeletal muscle and are activated by inﬂammatory cytokines , particularly tumor necrosis factor a ( TNF a ) . Indeed , inﬂammation is a potent trigger of muscle wasting and cachexia [ 153 ] . NF - j B is maintained in the inactive state by binding of a family of inhibitory proteins called I j B . The increase in the TNF a level induces activation of an I j B kinase ( IKK b ) complex that phosphorylates I j B , resulting in its ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation . This leads to nuclear trans - location of NF - j B and activation of NF - j B - mediated gene transcription [ 153 ] . Transgenic mice that over - express IKK b speciﬁcally in muscle show severe muscle wasting that is mediated , at least in part , by the ubiquitin ligase MuRF1 , but not by atrogin - 1 [ 154 ] . In contrast , muscle - speciﬁc inhibition of NF - j B by transgenic expression of a con - stitutively active I j B mutant does not induce an overt phenotype , but denervation atrophy is substantially reduced [ 155 ] . Mice deﬁcient for the p105 / p50 subunit of NF - j B are partially resistant to muscle atrophy induced by hindlimb unloading [ 156 ] . However , one of FEBS Journal ( 2013 ) ª 2013 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2013 FEBS 11 S . Schiafﬁno et al . Mechanisms regulating muscle growth and atrophy the effects of TNF a and pro - inﬂammatory cytokines is to induce insulin resistance and suppression of the IGF1 – Akt pathway [ 157 – 159 ] . Therefore , Akt phos - phorylation should always be monitored when NF - j B signaling is altered , as Akt inhibition may substantially contribute to muscle wasting . Indeed IKK b condi - tional knockout mice are resistant to muscle atrophy but show activation of Akt [ 160 ] . The signiﬁcance of decreased muscle atrophy following IKK b ablation and the degree to which this effect is Akt - dependent remains unclear . Nevertheless , these ﬁndings highlight the relevance of the cross - talk between the two path - ways , and future studies are required to elucidate the respective contributions of the IKK b – NF - j B and Akt – FoxO pathways to muscle atrophy . A recent study revealed an unexpected connection between TNF a signaling and myogenin on MuRF1 and atrogin - 1 expression : TNF a treatment causes up - regula - tion of myogenin , MuRF1 and atrogin - 1 . Interestingly , a G protein - coupled receptor blocks TNF a - mediated myogenin up - regulation by activating G a i2 [ 161 ] and expression of muscle - speciﬁc ubiquitin ligases . However , the precise mechanisms of TNF a - mediated myogenin regulation , the interplay with G a i2 and the implications for muscle wasting are still far from fully understood . TNF - like weak inducer of apoptosis ( TWEAK ) is a member of the TNF superfamily that was recently found to induce muscle atrophy [ 158 , 162 ] . TWEAK acts on responsive cells by binding to ﬁbroblast growth factor - inducible 14 ( Fn14 ) , a small cell - surface recep - tor . Fn14 is up - regulated in denervated muscle , allow - ing NF - j B activation and consequently MuRF1 ( but not atrogin - 1 ) expression [ 162 ] . TWEAK knockout mice display reduced atrophy after denervation , as well as reduced NF - j B activation and MuRF1 expression . However , Fn14 does not increase under all conditions of muscle atrophy ; for instance , it is not induced by dexamethasone treatment . Another important player in NF - j B signaling is the ubiquitin ligase TRAF6 , which is required for Fn14 up - regulation during fast - ing [ 97 ] . As noted earlier , TRAF6 is also required for activation of FoxO3 and AMPK in starved muscles and for induction of the ubiquitin – proteasome and autophagy – lysosome systems [ 97 ] . The pro - inﬂammatory cytokines TNF a , IL - 6 and IL - 1 also activate the Janus kinase / signal transducer and activator of transcription ( JAK / STAT ) pathway . Interestingly , sepsis and cancer induce STAT3 phos - phorylation in muscles , and STAT3 inhibition spares muscle mass in tumor - bearing mice [ 163 ] . Moreover , over - expression of Stat3 is sufﬁcient to induce muscle atrophy and to up - regulate atrogin - 1 . However , another recent study identiﬁed an unexpected role of Stat3 in autophagy regulation . Stat3 has been reported to block VPS34 expression , resulting in alteration of assembly of the Vps34 – Beclin1 – Vps15 – Atg14 complex , and therefore autophagy inhibition and muscle degen - eration [ 164 ] . This Stat3 - dependent regulation of auto - phagy occurs downstream of Fyn tyrosine kinase . Other signaling pathways Myostatin inhibition and its role in muscle growth has been described above ; however , the mechanism of myo - statin activation and its role and capacity to trigger muscle atrophy remain unclear . Myostatin activation has been reported to induce massive [ 165 ] , mild or no atrophy at all [ 166 , 167 ] . However , in muscle cell cul - tures , myostatin was reported to up - regulate essential atrophy - related ubiquitin ligases . This regulation was found to be FoxO - dependent and NF - j B - independent [ 168 ] . Importantly , myostatin expression is controlled by FoxO1 , supporting the concept that the myostatin pathway synergizes with Akt – FoxO signaling [ 169 ] . A recent study showed that inhibition of myostatin by sol - uble ACVR2B prevents and fully reverses skeletal mus - cle loss and atrophy of the heart in tumor - bearing animals [ 63 ] . Such treatment dramatically prolongs the survival of these animals , suggesting potential therapeu - tic efﬁcacy in patients with cancer cachexia . Reports attempting to dissect the downstream signaling have shown that Smad2 and Smad3 are the principle tran - scription factors that mediate myostatin’s effects on muscle mass [ 33 , 34 , 36 , 100 ] . However , as mentioned above , speciﬁc transcriptional targets of Smad2 and Smad3 are still unknown , and mechanisms of Smad - dependent atrophy remain to be established . Glucocorticoid levels are increased in many patholog - ical conditions associated with muscle loss . Glucocorti - coid treatment induces atrogin - 1 and MuRF1 expression and muscle wasting in cell culture and in vivo [ 16 , 77 , 88 , 127 , 170 ] . In contrast , adrenalectomy or treat - ment with a glucocorticoid receptor antagonist attenu - ate muscle loss in some diseases [ 170 , 171 ] . The mechanisms of glucocorticoid - mediated muscle atrophy were recently unraveled . Once in the nucleus , the gluco - corticoid receptor activates expression of two target genes , encoding REDD1 ( regulated in development and DNA damage responses 1 ) and KLF15 ( Kr € uppel - like factor 15 ) [ 172 ] . REDD1 inhibits mTOR activity by sequestering 14 - 3 - 3 and increasing TSC1 / 2 activity . Inhibition of mTOR is permissive for activation of an atrophy program via KLF15 . Indeed , mTOR activation attenuates glucocorticoid - induced muscle atrophy . KLF15 is a transcription factor that is involved in sev - eral metabolic processes in skeletal muscle , for instance 12 FEBS Journal ( 2013 ) ª 2013 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2013 FEBS Mechanisms regulating muscle growth and atrophy S . Schiafﬁno et al . up - regulation of branched - chain aminotransferase 2 . KLF15 participates in muscle catabolism via transcrip - tional regulation of FoxO1 , atrogin - 1 and MuRF1 . Moreover , KLF15 negatively affects mTOR through up - regulation of branched - chain aminotransferase 2 , which in turn induces branched - chain amino acid degra - dation . Interestingly , FoxO1 and glucocorticoid recep - tor cooperate to up - regulate MuRF1 expression [ 173 ] . Proteolysis - dependent regulation of protein synthesis Synthesis and degradation of proteins are two pro - cesses that are intimately connected . Indeed , most of the above - mentioned pathways concomitantly regulate both synthesis and degradation , such that when pro - tein synthesis is induced , degradation is suppressed and vice versa . However , this control appears to be a compensatory mechanism to limit energy expenditure for the production of novel proteins under catabolic conditions . As mentioned above , in denervated mus - cles , net protein synthesis is increased rather than decreased compared to innervated muscles [ 8 ] . This is because a proportion of the amino acids released from protein breakdown stimulate protein synthesis via mTOR , and , if this mechanism is blocked , muscle loss is exacerbated [ 8 ] . The direct action of amino acids on translation plays an important role in the rewiring of protein synthesis during catabolic conditions , changing the metabolism and expression of sarcomeric proteins in order to optimize muscle homeostasis and perfor - mance . An important example of amino acid - depen - dent regulation of gene transcription during a catabolic state has recently been described [ 174 ] for lysosomal - dependent protein degradation . Nutrients , especially free amino acids , are sensed by the mTOR kinase , which then inhibits autophagy by blocking for - mation of the Atg1 / unc - 51 - like kinase 1 complex , an important regulatory step for autophagy initiation . The mTORC1 complex is therefore at the center of a variety of cellular process such as protein synthesis , autophagy , aging , mitochondrial function and energy production . These various actions of mTORC1 are exploited by its localization / recruitment to various cel - lular compartments . For instance , the Rag GTPase complex , which senses lysosomal amino acids , pro - motes localization of mTORC1 to the lysosomal sur - face . Accumulation of amino acids within the lysosomal lumen generates an activating signal that is transmitted to the Rag GTPases via vacuolar H + - adenosine triphosphatase ATPase ( v - ATPase ) , recruit - ing mTORC1 to the lysosomes . This mTOR localiza - tion initiates amino acid signaling and protein synthesis [ 174 ] ( Fig . 3 ) . Concomitantly , mTOR also inhibits transcription factor EB , a master regulator of lysosome biogenesis [ 175 ] . Activation of mTORC1 induces phosphorylation and localization of transcrip - tion factor EB at the lysosomal membrane , thus inhib - iting its transcriptional activity [ 176 ] . These data indicate that the content / activity of the lysosome directly regulates lysosome biogenesis via an mTOR – transcription factor EB axis . The implication of this signaling as it relates speciﬁcally to muscle homeostasis has yet to be investigated . Conclusions and perspectives Our understanding of the mechanisms that control muscle growth and atrophy has greatly advanced dur - ing the last ten years . Major milestones in this progress have been identiﬁcation of the transduction pathways that mediate myostatin and IGF1 signals , in particular the crucial role of Akt and its main downstream effec - tors , mTOR , which controls protein synthesis , and FoxO3 , which controls protein degradation via the pro - teasomal and autophagic / lysosomal systems . In addi - tion , other pathways , such as SRF , have emerged as potential players in regulation of muscle ﬁber size , and the contribution of satellite cells has been the object of intensive investigation . It is clear that there is no com - mon mechanism that applies to all models of muscle growth or wasting , and an important objective for future studies will be to deﬁne the pathways that are operative in the various situations . For example , auto - phagy is highly up - regulated in skeletal muscles during starvation , but its induction after denervation , when the ubiquitin – proteasome pathway is strongly acti - vated , is much less important . Satellite cell activation may likewise vary in different models of muscle hyper - trophy , and its contribution to the increase in muscle ﬁber size remains to be established . Dissection of the pathways that control muscle mass and function will provide useful indications for the development of drugs that are able to boost muscle growth and prevent muscle wasting , a target that is now being actively pursued in both academic and biotech - nology / pharmaceutical research , and may have great therapeutic importance for treatment of neuromuscular diseases , systemic disorders , muscle disuse and aging . Acknowledgements Original work reported here is supported by the EC FP7 Project MYOAGE ( grant number 223576 to S . S . and M . S . ) and the European Research Council ( grant number 282310 - MyoPHAGY to M . S . ) . FEBS Journal ( 2013 ) ª 2013 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2013 FEBS 13 S . Schiafﬁno et al . Mechanisms regulating muscle growth and atrophy References 1 Aravamudan B , Mantilla CB , Zhan WZ & Sieck GC ( 2006 ) Denervation effects on myonuclear domain size of rat diaphragm ﬁbers . J Appl Physiol 100 , 1617 – 1622 . 2 Li JB & Goldberg AL ( 1976 ) Effects of food deprivation on protein synthesis and degradation in rat skeletal muscles . Am J Physiol 231 , 441 – 448 . 3 Goldberg AL & Goodman HM ( 1969 ) Relationship between cortisone and muscle work in determining muscle size . J Physiol 200 , 667 – 675 . 4 Verheul AJ , Mantilla CB , Zhan WZ , Bernal M , Dekhuijzen PN & Sieck GC ( 2004 ) Inﬂuence of corticosteroids on myonuclear domain size in the rat diaphragm muscle . J Appl Physiol 97 , 1715 – 1722 . 5 Sandri M , Lin J , Handschin C , Yang W , Arany ZP , Lecker SH , Goldberg AL & Spiegelman BM ( 2006 ) PGC - 1 a protects skeletal muscle from atrophy by suppressing FoxO3 action and atrophy - speciﬁc gene transcription . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103 , 16260 – 16265 . 6 Goldberg AL ( 1969 ) Protein turnover in skeletal muscle . I . Protein catabolism during work - induced hypertrophy and growth induced with growth hormone . J Biol Chem 244 , 3217 – 3222 . 7 Argadine HM , Hellyer NJ , Mantilla CB , Zhan WZ & Sieck GC ( 2009 ) The effect of denervation on protein synthesis and degradation in adult rat diaphragm muscle . J Appl Physiol 107 , 438 – 444 . 8 Quy PN , Kuma A , Pierre P & Mizushima N ( 2012 ) Proteasome - dependent activation of mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 ( mTORC1 ) is essential for autophagy suppression and muscle remodeling following denervation . J Biol Chem 288 , 1125 – 1143 . 8a Van der Meer SF , Jaspers RT & Degens H ( 2011 ) Is the myonuclear domain size ﬁxed ? J Musculoskelet Neuronal Interact 11 , 286 – 297 . 9 Bruusgaard JC , Egner IM , Larsen TK , Dupre - Aucouturier S , Desplanches D & Gundersen K ( 2012 ) No change in myonuclear number during muscle unloading and reloading . J Appl Physiol 113 , 290 – 296 . 10 Bruusgaard JC & Gundersen K ( 2008 ) In vivo time - lapse microscopy reveals no loss of murine myonuclei during weeks of muscle atrophy . J Clin Invest 118 , 1450 – 1457 . 11 Ciciliot S & Schiafﬁno S ( 2010 ) Regeneration of mammalian skeletal muscle . Basic mechanisms and clinical implications . Curr Pharm Des 16 , 906 – 914 . 12 Schiafﬁno S & Mammucari C ( 2011 ) Regulation of skeletal muscle growth by the IGF1 – Akt / PKB pathway : insights from genetic models . Skelet Muscle 1 , 4 . 13 Mavalli MD , DiGirolamo DJ , Fan Y , Riddle RC , Campbell KS , van Groen T , Frank SJ , Sperling MA , Esser KA , Bamman MM , et al . ( 2010 ) Distinct growth hormone receptor signaling modes regulate skeletal muscle development and insulin sensitivity in mice . J Clin Invest 120 , 4007 – 4020 . 14 Musaro A , McCullagh K , Paul A , Houghton L , Dobrowolny G , Molinaro M , Barton ER , Sweeney HL & Rosenthal N ( 2001 ) Localized Igf - 1 transgene expression sustains hypertrophy and regeneration in senescent skeletal muscle . Nat Genet 27 , 195 – 200 . 15 Murgia M , Serrano AL , Calabria E , Pallafacchina G , Lomo T & Schiafﬁno S ( 2000 ) Ras is involved in nerve - activity - dependent regulation of muscle genes . Nat Cell Biol 2 , 142 – 147 . 16 Bodine SC , Stitt TN , Gonzalez M , Kline WO , Stover GL , Bauerlein R , Zlotchenko E , Scrimgeour A , Lawrence JC , Glass DJ , et al . ( 2001 ) Akt / mTOR pathway is a crucial regulator of skeletal muscle hypertrophy and can prevent muscle atrophy in vivo . Nat Cell Biol 3 , 1014 – 1019 . 17 Pallafacchina G , Calabria E , Serrano AL , Kalhovde JM & Schiafﬁno S ( 2002 ) A protein kinase B - dependent and rapamycin - sensitive pathway controls skeletal muscle growth but not ﬁber type speciﬁcation . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99 , 9213 – 9218 . 18 Blaauw B , Canato M , Agatea L , Toniolo L , Mammucari C , Masiero E , Abraham R , Sandri M , Schiafﬁno S & Reggiani C ( 2009 ) Inducible activation of Akt increases skeletal muscle mass and force without satellite cell activation . FASEB J 23 , 3896 – 3905 . 19 Izumiya Y , Hopkins T , Morris C , Sato K , Zeng L , Viereck J , Hamilton JA , Ouchi N , Lebrasseur NK & Walsh K ( 2008 ) Fast / glycolytic muscle ﬁber growth reduces fat mass and improves metabolic parameters in obese mice . Cell Metab 7 , 159 – 172 . 20 Lai KM , Gonzalez M , Poueymirou WT , Kline WO , Na E , Zlotchenko E , Stitt TN , Economides AN , Yancopoulos GD & Glass DJ ( 2004 ) Conditional activation of Akt in adult skeletal muscle induces rapid hypertrophy . Mol Cell Biol 24 , 9295 – 9304 . 21 Laplante M & Sabatini DM ( 2012 ) mTOR signaling in growth control and disease . Cell 149 , 274 – 293 . 22 Risson V , Mazelin L , Roceri M , Sanchez H , Moncollin V , Corneloup C , Richard - Bulteau H , Vignaud A , Baas D , Defour A , et al . ( 2009 ) Muscle inactivation of mTOR causes metabolic and dystrophin defects leading to severe myopathy . J Cell Biol 187 , 859 – 874 . 23 Bentzinger CF , Romanino K , Cloetta D , Lin S , Mascarenhas JB , Oliveri F , Xia J , Casanova E , Costa CF , Brink M , et al . ( 2008 ) Skeletal muscle - speciﬁc ablation of raptor , but not of rictor , causes metabolic changes and results in muscle dystrophy . Cell Metab 8 , 411 – 424 . 24 Bodine SC ( 2006 ) mTOR signaling and the molecular adaptation to resistance exercise . Med Sci Sports Exerc 38 , 1950 – 1957 . 14 FEBS Journal ( 2013 ) ª 2013 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2013 FEBS Mechanisms regulating muscle growth and atrophy S . Schiafﬁno et al . 25 Le Bacquer O , Petroulakis E , Paglialunga S , Poulin F , Richard D , Cianﬂone K & Sonenberg N ( 2007 ) Elevated sensitivity to diet - induced obesity and insulin resistance in mice lacking 4E - BP1 and 4E - BP2 . J Clin Invest 117 , 387 – 396 . 26 Mounier R , Lantier L , Leclerc J , Sotiropoulos A , Foretz M & Viollet B ( 2011 ) Antagonistic control of muscle cell size by AMPK and mTORC1 . Cell Cycle 10 , 2640 – 2646 . 27 Goodman CA , Frey JW , Mabrey DM , Jacobs BL , Lincoln HC , You JS & Hornberger TA ( 2011 ) The role of skeletal muscle mTOR in the regulation of mechanical load - induced growth . J Physiol 589 , 5485 – 5501 . 28 Latres E , Amini AR , Amini AA , Grifﬁths J , Martin FJ , Wei Y , Lin HC , Yancopoulos GD & Glass DJ ( 2005 ) Insulin - like growth factor - 1 ( IGF - 1 ) inversely regulates atrophy - induced genes via the phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase / Akt / mammalian target of rapamycin ( PI3K / Akt / mTOR ) pathway . J Biol Chem 280 , 2737 – 2744 . 29 Cunningham JT , Rodgers JT , Arlow DH , Vazquez F , Mootha VK & Puigserver P ( 2007 ) mTOR controls mitochondrial oxidative function through a YY1 – PGC - 1 a transcriptional complex . Nature 450 , 736 – 740 . 30 Blattler SM , Cunningham JT , Verdeguer F , Chim H , Haas W , Liu H , Romanino K , Ruegg MA , Gygi SP , Shi Y , et al . ( 2012 ) Yin Yang 1 deﬁciency in skeletal muscle protects against rapamycin - induced diabetic - like symptoms through activation of insulin / IGF signaling . Cell Metab 15 , 505 – 517 . 31 Lee SJ ( 2004 ) Regulation of muscle mass by myostatin . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 20 , 61 – 86 . 32 Taylor WE , Bhasin S , Artaza J , Byhower F , Azam M , Willard DH Jr , Kull FC Jr & Gonzalez - Cadavid N ( 2001 ) Myostatin inhibits cell proliferation and protein synthesis in C2C12 muscle cells . Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 280 , E221 – E228 . 33 Sartori R , Milan G , Patron M , Mammucari C , Blaauw B , Abraham R & Sandri M ( 2009 ) Smad2 and 3 transcription factors control muscle mass in adulthood . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 296 , C1248 – C1257 . 34 Trendelenburg AU , Meyer A , Rohner D , Boyle J , Hatakeyama S & Glass DJ ( 2009 ) Myostatin reduces Akt / TORC1 / p70S6K signaling , inhibiting myoblast differentiation and myotube size . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 296 , C1258 – C1270 . 35 Kalista S , Schakman O , Gilson H , Lause P , Demeulder B , Bertrand L , Pende M & Thissen JP ( 2011 ) The type 1 insulin - like growth factor receptor ( IGF - IR ) pathway is mandatory for the follistatin - induced skeletal muscle hypertrophy . Endocrinology 153 , 241 – 253 . 36 Winbanks CE , Weeks KL , Thomson RE , Sepulveda PV , Beyer C , Qian H , Chen JL , Allen JM , Lancaster GI , Febbraio MA , et al . ( 2012 ) Follistatin - mediated skeletal muscle hypertrophy is regulated by Smad3 and mTOR independently of myostatin . J Cell Biol 197 , 997 – 1008 . 37 Remy I , Montmarquette A & Michnick SW ( 2004 ) PKB / Akt modulates TGF - b signalling through a direct interaction with Smad3 . Nat Cell Biol 6 , 358 – 365 . 38 Conery AR , Cao Y , Thompson EA , Townsend CM Jr , Ko TC & Luo K ( 2004 ) Akt interacts directly with Smad3 to regulate the sensitivity to TGF - b induced apoptosis . Nat Cell Biol 6 , 366 – 372 . 39 Li S , Czubryt MP , McAnally J , Bassel - Duby R , Richardson JA , Wiebel FF , Nordheim A & Olson EN ( 2005 ) Requirement for serum response factor for skeletal muscle growth and maturation revealed by tissue - speciﬁc gene deletion in mice . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102 , 1082 – 1087 . 40 Charvet C , Houbron C , Parlakian A , Giordani J , Lahoute C , Bertrand A , Sotiropoulos A , Renou L , Schmitt A , Melki J , et al . ( 2006 ) New role for serum response factor in postnatal skeletal muscle growth and regeneration via the interleukin 4 and insulin - like growth factor 1 pathways . Mol Cell Biol 26 , 6664 – 6674 . 41 Guerci A , Lahoute C , Hebrard S , Collard L , Graindorge D , Favier M , Cagnard N , Batonnet - Pichon S , Precigout G , Garcia L , et al . ( 2012 ) Srf - dependent paracrine signals produced by myoﬁbers control satellite cell - mediated skeletal muscle hypertrophy . Cell Metab 15 , 25 – 37 . 42 Small EM , O’Rourke JR , Moresi V , Sutherland LB , McAnally J , Gerard RD , Richardson JA & Olson EN ( 2010 ) Regulation of PI3 - kinase / Akt signaling by muscle - enriched microRNA - 486 . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107 , 4218 – 4223 . 43 White JP , Gao S , Puppa MJ , Sato S , Welle SL & Carson JA ( 2012 ) Testosterone regulation of Akt / mTORC1 / FoxO3a signaling in skeletal muscle . Mol Cell Endocrinol 365 , 174 – 186 . 44 Koopman R , Gehrig SM , Leger B , Trieu J , Walrand S , Murphy KT & Lynch GS ( 2010 ) Cellular mechanisms underlying temporal changes in skeletal muscle protein synthesis and breakdown during chronic b - adrenoceptor stimulation in mice . J Physiol 588 , 4811 – 4823 . 45 Kline WO , Panaro FJ , Yang H & Bodine SC ( 2007 ) Rapamycin inhibits the growth and muscle - sparing effects of clenbuterol . J Appl Physiol 102 , 740 – 747 . 46 Le Grand F , Jones AE , Seale V , Scime A & Rudnicki MA ( 2009 ) Wnt7a activates the planar cell polarity pathway to drive the symmetric expansion of satellite stem cells . Cell Stem Cell 4 , 535 – 547 . FEBS Journal ( 2013 ) ª 2013 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2013 FEBS 15 S . Schiafﬁno et al . Mechanisms regulating muscle growth and atrophy 47 von Maltzahn J , Renaud JM , Parise G & Rudnicki MA ( 2011 ) Wnt7a treatment ameliorates muscular dystrophy . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109 , 20614 – 20619 . 48 Ito N , Ruegg UT , Kudo A , Miyagoe - Suzuki Y & Takeda S ( 2012 ) Activation of calcium signaling through Trpv1 by nNOS and peroxynitrite as a key trigger of skeletal muscle hypertrophy . Nat Med 19 , 101 – 106 . 49 Hornberger TA , Chu WK , Mak YW , Hsiung JW , Huang SA & Chien S ( 2006 ) The role of phospholipase D and phosphatidic acid in the mechanical activation of mTOR signaling in skeletal muscle . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103 , 4741 – 4746 . 50 Ruas JL , White JP , Rao RR , Kleiner S , Brannan KT , Harrison BC , Greene NP , Wu J , Estall JL , Irving BA , et al . ( 2012 ) A PGC - 1 a isoform induced by resistance training regulates skeletal muscle hypertrophy . Cell 151 , 1319 – 1331 . 50a Puigserver P , Wu Z , Park CW , Graves R , Wright M & Spiegelman BM ( 1998 ) A cold - inducible coactivator of nuclear receptors linked to adaptive thermogenesis . Cell 92 , 829 – 839 . 51 Pallafacchina G , Blaauw B & Schiafﬁno S ( 2013 ) Role of satellite cells in muscle growth and maintenance of muscle mass . Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis , in press . 52 Abmayr SM & Pavlath GK ( 2012 ) Myoblast fusion : lessons from ﬂies and mice . Development 139 , 641 – 656 . 53 Horsley V , Jansen KM , Mills ST & Pavlath GK ( 2003 ) IL - 4 acts as a myoblast recruitment factor during mammalian muscle growth . Cell 113 , 483 – 494 . 54 Serrano AL , Baeza - Raja B , Perdiguero E , Jardi M & Munoz - Canoves P ( 2008 ) Interleukin - 6 is an essential regulator of satellite cell - mediated skeletal muscle hypertrophy . Cell Metab 7 , 33 – 44 . 55 Moss FP & Leblond CP ( 1971 ) Satellite cells as the source of nuclei in muscles of growing rats . Anat Rec 170 , 421 – 435 . 56 White RB , Bierinx AS , Gnocchi VF & Zammit PS ( 2010 ) Dynamics of muscle ﬁbre growth during postnatal mouse development . BMC Dev Biol 10 , 21 . 57 Saclier M , Cuvellier S , Magnan M , Mounier R & Chazaud B ( 2013 ) Monocyte / macrophage interactions with myogenic precursor cells during skeletal muscle regeneration . FEBS J , doi : 10 . 1111 / febs . 12166 . 58 Maltin CA & Delday MI ( 1992 ) Satellite cells in innervated and denervated muscles treated with clenbuterol . Muscle Nerve 15 , 919 – 925 . 59 Kadi F ( 2008 ) Cellular and molecular mechanisms responsible for the action of testosterone on human skeletal muscle . A basis for illegal performance enhancement . Br J Pharmacol 154 , 522 – 528 . 60 Jackson JR , Mula J , Kirby TJ , Fry CS , Lee JD , Ubele MF , Campbell KS , McCarthy JJ , Peterson CA & Dupont - Versteegden EE ( 2012 ) Satellite cell depletion does not inhibit adult skeletal muscle regrowth following unloading - induced atrophy . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 303 , C854 – C861 . 61 Raffaello A , Milan G , Masiero E , Carnio S , Lee D , Lanfranchi G , Goldberg AL & Sandri M ( 2010 ) JunB transcription factor maintains skeletal muscle mass and promotes hypertrophy . J Cell Biol 191 , 101 – 113 . 62 Amthor H , Otto A , Vulin A , Rochat A , Dumonceaux J , Garcia L , Mouisel E , Hourde C , Macharia R , Friedrichs M , et al . ( 2009 ) Muscle hypertrophy driven by myostatin blockade does not require stem / precursor - cell activity . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106 , 7479 – 7484 . 63 Zhou X , Wang JL , Lu J , Song Y , Kwak KS , Jiao Q , Rosenfeld R , Chen Q , Boone T , Simonet WS , et al . ( 2010 ) Reversal of cancer cachexia and muscle wasting by ActRIIB antagonism leads to prolonged survival . Cell 142 , 531 – 543 . 64 Lee SJ , Huynh TV , Lee YS , Sebald SM , Wilcox - Adelman SA , Iwamori N , Lepper C , Matzuk MM & Fan CM ( 2012 ) Role of satellite cells versus myoﬁbers in muscle hypertrophy induced by inhibition of the myostatin / activin signaling pathway . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109 , E2353 – E2360 . 65 Schiafﬁno S , Bormioli SP & Aloisi M ( 1972 ) Cell proliferation in rat skeletal muscle during early stages of compensatory hypertrophy . Virchows Arch B Cell Pathol 11 , 268 – 273 . 66 Snow MH ( 1990 ) Satellite cell response in rat soleus muscle undergoing hypertrophy due to surgical ablation of synergists . Anat Rec 227 , 437 – 446 . 67 Bruusgaard JC , Johansen IB , Egner IM , Rana ZA & Gundersen K ( 2010 ) Myonuclei acquired by overload exercise precede hypertrophy and are not lost on detraining . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107 , 15111 – 15116 . 68 Crameri RM , Langberg H , Magnusson P , Jensen CH , Schroder HD , Olesen JL , Suetta C , Teisner B & Kjaer M ( 2004 ) Changes in satellite cells in human skeletal muscle after a single bout of high intensity exercise . J Physiol 558 , 333 – 340 . 69 Barton - Davis ER , Shoturma DI & Sweeney HL ( 1999 ) Contribution of satellite cells to IGF - I induced hypertrophy of skeletal muscle . Acta Physiol Scand 167 , 301 – 305 . 70 Adams GR , Caiozzo VJ , Haddad F & Baldwin KM ( 2002 ) Cellular and molecular responses to increased skeletal muscle loading after irradiation . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 283 , C1182 – C1195 . 71 McCarthy JJ , Mula J , Miyazaki M , Erfani R , Garrison K , Farooqui AB , Srikuea R , Lawson BA , Grimes B , Keller C , et al . ( 2011 ) Effective ﬁber hypertrophy in satellite cell - depleted skeletal muscle . Development 138 , 3657 – 3666 . 16 FEBS Journal ( 2013 ) ª 2013 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2013 FEBS Mechanisms regulating muscle growth and atrophy S . Schiafﬁno et al . 72 Bodine SC , Latres E , Baumhueter S , Lai VK , Nunez L , Clarke BA , Poueymirou WT , Panaro FJ , Na E , Dharmarajan K , et al . ( 2001 ) Identiﬁcation of ubiquitin ligases required for skeletal muscle atrophy . Science 294 , 1704 – 1708 . 73 Gomes MD , Lecker SH , Jagoe RT , Navon A & Goldberg AL ( 2001 ) Atrogin - 1 , a muscle - speciﬁc F - box protein highly expressed during muscle atrophy . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98 , 14440 – 14445 . 74 Lecker SH , Jagoe RT , Gilbert A , Gomes M , Baracos V , Bailey J , Price SR , Mitch WE & Goldberg AL ( 2004 ) Multiple types of skeletal muscle atrophy involve a common program of changes in gene expression . FASEB J 18 , 39 – 51 . 75 Sacheck JM , Hyatt JP , Raffaello A , Jagoe RT , Roy RR , Edgerton VR , Lecker SH & Goldberg AL ( 2007 ) Rapid disuse and denervation atrophy involve transcriptional changes similar to those of muscle wasting during systemic diseases . FASEB J 21 , 140 – 155 . 76 Sandri M ( 2008 ) Signaling in muscle atrophy and hypertrophy . Physiology ( Bethesda ) 23 , 160 – 170 . 77 Sandri M , Sandri C , Gilbert A , Skurk C , Calabria E , Picard A , Walsh K , Schiafﬁno S , Lecker SH & Goldberg AL ( 2004 ) Foxo transcription factors induce the atrophy - related ubiquitin ligase atrogin - 1 and cause skeletal muscle atrophy . Cell 117 , 399 – 412 . 78 Stitt TN , Drujan D , Clarke BA , Panaro F , Timofeyva Y , Kline WO , Gonzalez M , Yancopoulos GD & Glass DJ ( 2004 ) The IGF - 1 / PI3K / Akt pathway prevents expression of muscle atrophy - induced ubiquitin ligases by inhibiting FOXO transcription factors . Mol Cell 14 , 395 – 403 . 79 Lee SW , Dai G , Hu Z , Wang X , Du J & Mitch WE ( 2004 ) Regulation of muscle protein degradation : coordinated control of apoptotic and ubiquitin – proteasome systems by phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase . J Am Soc Nephrol 15 , 1537 – 1545 . 80 Cong H , Sun L , Liu C & Tien P ( 2011 ) Inhibition of atrogin - 1 / MAFbx expression by adenovirus - delivered small hairpin RNAs attenuates muscle atrophy in fasting mice . Hum Gene Ther 22 , 313 – 324 . 81 Baehr LM , Furlow JD & Bodine SC ( 2011 ) Muscle sparing in muscle RING ﬁnger 1 null mice : response to synthetic glucocorticoids . J Physiol 589 , 4759 – 4776 . 82 Csibi A , Cornille K , Leibovitch MP , Poupon A , Tintignac LA , Sanchez AM & Leibovitch SA ( 2010 ) The translation regulatory subunit eIF3f controls the kinase - dependent mTOR signaling required for muscle differentiation and hypertrophy in mouse . PLoS One 5 , e8994 . 83 Tintignac LA , Lagirand J , Batonnet S , Sirri V , Leibovitch MP & Leibovitch SA ( 2005 ) Degradation of MyoD mediated by the SCF ( MAFbx ) ubiquitin ligase . J Biol Chem 280 , 2847 – 2856 . 84 Li HH , Kedar V , Zhang C , McDonough H , Arya R , Wang DZ & Patterson C ( 2004 ) Atrogin - 1 / muscle atrophy F - box inhibits calcineurin - dependent cardiac hypertrophy by participating in an SCF ubiquitin ligase complex . J Clin Invest 114 , 1058 – 1071 . 85 Lokireddy S , Wijesoma IW , Sze SK , McFarlane C , Kambadur R & Sharma M ( 2012 ) Identiﬁcation of atrogin - 1 - targeted proteins during the myostatin - induced skeletal muscle wasting . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 303 , C512 – C529 . 86 Kedar V , McDonough H , Arya R , Li HH , Rockman HA & Patterson C ( 2004 ) Muscle - speciﬁc RING ﬁnger 1 is a bona ﬁde ubiquitin ligase that degrades cardiac troponin I . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101 , 18135 – 18140 . 87 Fielitz J , Kim MS , Shelton JM , Latif S , Spencer JA , Glass DJ , Richardson JA , Bassel - Duby R & Olson EN ( 2007 ) Myosin accumulation and striated muscle myopathy result from the loss of muscle RING ﬁnger 1 and 3 . J Clin Invest 117 , 2486 – 2495 . 88 Clarke BA , Drujan D , Willis MS , Murphy LO , Corpina RA , Burova E , Rakhilin SV , Stitt TN , Patterson C , Latres E , et al . ( 2007 ) The E3 ligase MuRF1 degrades myosin heavy chain protein in dexamethasone - treated skeletal muscle . Cell Metab 6 , 376 – 385 . 89 Polge C , Heng AE , Jarzaguet M , Ventadour S , Claustre A , Combaret L , Bechet D , Matondo M , Uttenweiler - Joseph S , Monsarrat B , et al . ( 2011 ) Muscle actin is polyubiquitinylated in vitro and in vivo and targeted for breakdown by the E3 ligase MuRF1 . FASEB J 25 , 3790 – 3802 . 90 Cohen S , Brault JJ , Gygi SP , Glass DJ , Valenzuela DM , Gartner C , Latres E & Goldberg AL ( 2009 ) During muscle atrophy , thick , but not thin , ﬁlament components are degraded by MuRF1 - dependent ubiquitylation . J Cell Biol 185 , 1083 – 1095 . 91 Cohen S , Zhai B , Gygi SP & Goldberg AL ( 2012 ) Ubiquitylation by Trim32 causes coupled loss of desmin , Z - bands , and thin ﬁlaments in muscle atrophy . J Cell Biol 198 , 575 – 589 . 92 Kudryashova E , Kramerova I & Spencer MJ ( 2012 ) Satellite cell senescence underlies myopathy in a mouse model of limb - girdle muscular dystrophy 2H . J Clin Invest 122 , 1764 – 1776 . 93 Paul PK , Gupta SK , Bhatnagar S , Panguluri SK , Darnay BG , Choi Y & Kumar A ( 2010 ) Targeted ablation of TRAF6 inhibits skeletal muscle wasting in mice . J Cell Biol 191 , 1395 – 1411 . 94 Kirkin V , Lamark T , Sou YS , Bjorkoy G , Nunn JL , Bruun JA , Shvets E , McEwan DG , Clausen TH , Wild P , et al . ( 2009 ) A role for NBR1 in autophagosomal degradation of ubiquitinated substrates . Mol Cell 33 , 505 – 516 . FEBS Journal ( 2013 ) ª 2013 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2013 FEBS 17 S . Schiafﬁno et al . Mechanisms regulating muscle growth and atrophy 95 Komatsu M , Waguri S , Koike M , Sou YS , Ueno T , Hara T , Mizushima N , Iwata J , Ezaki J , Murata S , et al . ( 2007 ) Homeostatic levels of p62 control cytoplasmic inclusion body formation in autophagy - deﬁcient mice . Cell 131 , 1149 – 1163 . 96 Pankiv S , Clausen TH , Lamark T , Brech A , Bruun JA , Outzen H , Overvatn A , Bjorkoy G & Johansen T ( 2007 ) p62 / SQSTM1 binds directly to Atg8 / LC3 to facilitate degradation of ubiquitinated protein aggregates by autophagy . J Biol Chem 282 , 24131 – 24145 . 97 Paul PK , Bhatnagar S , Mishra V , Srivastava S , Darnay BG , Choi Y & Kumar A ( 2012 ) The E3 ubiquitin ligase TRAF6 intercedes in starvation - induced skeletal muscle atrophy through multiple mechanisms . Mol Cell Biol 32 , 1248 – 1259 . 98 Kumar A , Bhatnagar S & Paul PK ( 2012 ) TWEAK and TRAF6 regulate skeletal muscle atrophy . Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care 15 , 233 – 239 . 99 Nagpal P , Plant PJ , Correa J , Bain A , Takeda M , Kawabe H , Rotin D , Bain JR & Batt JA ( 2012 ) The ubiquitin ligase nedd4 - 1 participates in denervation - induced skeletal muscle atrophy in mice . PLoS One 7 , e46427 . 100 Lokireddy S , Wijesoma IW , Teng S , Bonala S , Gluckman PD , McFarlane C , Sharma M & Kambadur R ( 2012 ) The ubiquitin ligase Mul1 induces mitophagy in skeletal muscle in response to muscle - wasting stimuli . Cell Metab 16 , 613 – 624 . 101 Romanello V , Guadagnin E , Gomes L , Roder I , Sandri C , Petersen Y , Milan G , Masiero E , Del Piccolo P , Foretz M , et al . ( 2010 ) Mitochondrial ﬁssion and remodelling contributes to muscle atrophy . EMBO J 29 , 1774 – 1785 . 102 Arndt V , Dick N , Tawo R , Dreiseidler M , Wenzel D , Hesse M , Furst DO , Saftig P , Saint R , Fleischmann BK , et al . ( 2010 ) Chaperone - assisted selective autophagy is essential for muscle maintenance . Curr Biol 20 , 143 – 148 . 103 Bello NF , Lamsoul I , Heuze ML , Metais A , Moreaux G , Calderwood DA , Duprez D , Moog - Lutz C & Lutz PG ( 2009 ) The E3 ubiquitin ligase speciﬁcity subunit ASB2 b is a novel regulator of muscle differentiation that targets ﬁlamin B to proteasomal degradation . Cell Death Differ 16 , 921 – 932 . 104 Shi J , Luo L , Eash J , Ibebunjo C & Glass DJ ( 2011 ) The SCF – Fbxo40 complex induces IRS1 ubiquitination in skeletal muscle , limiting IGF1 signaling . Dev Cell 21 , 835 – 847 . 105 Hishiya A , Iemura S , Natsume T , Takayama S , Ikeda K & Watanabe K ( 2006 ) A novel ubiquitin - binding protein ZNF216 functioning in muscle atrophy . EMBO J 25 , 554 – 564 . 106 Piccirillo R & Goldberg AL ( 2012 ) The p97 / VCP ATPase is critical in muscle atrophy and the accelerated degradation of muscle proteins . EMBO J 31 , 3334 – 3350 . 107 Combaret L , Adegoke OA , Bedard N , Baracos V , Attaix D & Wing SS ( 2005 ) USP19 is a ubiquitin - speciﬁc protease regulated in rat skeletal muscle during catabolic states . Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 288 , E693 – E700 . 108 Sundaram P , Pang Z , Miao M , Yu L & Wing SS ( 2009 ) USP19 - deubiquitinating enzyme regulates levels of major myoﬁbrillar proteins in L6 muscle cells . Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 297 , E1283 – E1290 . 109 Sandri M ( 2010 ) Autophagy in skeletal muscle . FEBS Lett 584 , 1411 – 1416 . 110 Bonaldo P & Sandri M ( 2013 ) Cellular and molecular mechanisms of muscle atrophy . Dis Model Mech 6 , 25 – 39 . 111 Mizushima N & Komatsu M ( 2011 ) Autophagy : renovation of cells and tissues . Cell 147 , 728 – 741 . 112 Bothe GW , Haspel JA , Smith CL , Wiener HH & Burden SJ ( 2000 ) Selective expression of Cre recombinase in skeletal muscle ﬁbers . Genesis 26 , 165 – 166 . 113 Hara T , Nakamura K , Matsui M , Yamamoto A , Nakahara Y , Suzuki - Migishima R , Yokoyama M , Mishima K , Saito I , Okano H , et al . ( 2006 ) Suppression of basal autophagy in neural cells causes neurodegenerative disease in mice . Nature 441 , 885 – 889 . 114 Narendra DP & Youle RJ ( 2011 ) Targeting mitochondrial dysfunction : role for PINK1 and Parkin in mitochondrial quality control . Antioxid Redox Signal 14 , 1929 – 1938 . 115 Youle RJ & Narendra DP ( 2011 ) Mechanisms of mitophagy . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 12 , 9 – 14 . 116 Hanna RA , Quinsay MN , Orogo AM , Giang K , Rikka S & Gustafsson AB ( 2012 ) Microtubule - associated protein 1 light chain 3 ( LC3 ) interacts with Bnip3 to selectively remove endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria via autophagy . J Biol Chem 287 , 19094 – 19104 . 117 Novak I , Kirkin V , McEwan DG , Zhang J , Wild P , Rozenknop A , Rogov V , Lohr F , Popovic D , Occhipinti A , et al . ( 2010 ) Nix is a selective autophagy receptor for mitochondrial clearance . EMBO Rep 11 , 45 – 51 . 118 Romanello V & Sandri M ( 2010 ) Mitochondrial biogenesis and fragmentation as regulators of muscle protein degradation . Curr Hypertens Rep 12 , 433 – 439 . 119 O’Leary MF , Vainshtein A , Iqbal S , Ostojic O & Hood DA ( 2012 ) Adaptive plasticity of autophagic proteins to denervation in aging skeletal muscle . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 304 , C422 – C430 . 120 Mofarrahi M , Sigala I , Guo Y , Godin R , Davis EC , Petrof B , Sandri M , Burelle Y & Hussain SN ( 2012 ) 18 FEBS Journal ( 2013 ) ª 2013 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2013 FEBS Mechanisms regulating muscle growth and atrophy S . Schiafﬁno et al . Autophagy and skeletal muscles in sepsis . PLoS One 7 , e47265 . 121 Grumati P , Coletto L , Sabatelli P , Cescon M , Angelin A , Bertaggia E , Blaauw B , Urciuolo A , Tiepolo T , Merlini L , et al . ( 2010 ) Autophagy is defective in collagen VI muscular dystrophies , and its reactivation rescues myoﬁber degeneration . Nat Med 16 , 1313 – 1320 . 122 Chang NC , Nguyen M , Bourdon J , Risse PA , Martin J , Danialou G , Rizzuto R , Petrof BJ & Shore GC ( 2012 ) Bcl - 2 - associated autophagy regulator Naf - 1 required for maintenance of skeletal muscle . Hum Mol Genet 21 , 2277 – 2287 . 123 Masiero E , Agatea L , Mammucari C , Blaauw B , Loro E , Komatsu M , Metzger D , Reggiani C , Schiafﬁno S & Sandri M ( 2009 ) Autophagy is required to maintain muscle mass . Cell Metab 10 , 507 – 515 . 124 Raben N , Hill V , Shea L , Takikita S , Baum R , Mizushima N , Ralston E & Plotz P ( 2008 ) Suppression of autophagy in skeletal muscle uncovers the accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins and their potential role in muscle damage in Pompe disease . Hum Mol Genet 17 , 3897 – 3908 . 125 Moresi V , Carrer M , Grueter CE , Rifki OF , Shelton JM , Richardson JA , Bassel - Duby R & Olson EN ( 2012 ) Histone deacetylases 1 and 2 regulate autophagy ﬂux and skeletal muscle homeostasis in mice . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109 , 1649 – 1654 . 126 Moresi V , Williams AH , Meadows E , Flynn JM , Potthoff MJ , McAnally J , Shelton JM , Backs J , Klein WH , Richardson JA , et al . ( 2010 ) Myogenin and class II HDACs control neurogenic muscle atrophy by inducing E3 ubiquitin ligases . Cell 143 , 35 – 45 . 127 Sacheck JM , Ohtsuka A , McLary SC & Goldberg AL ( 2004 ) IGF - I stimulates muscle growth by suppressing protein breakdown and expression of atrophy - related ubiquitin ligases , atrogin - 1 and MuRF1 . Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 287 , E591 – E601 . 128 Monier S , Le Cam A & Le Marchand - Brustel Y ( 1983 ) Insulin and insulin - like growth factor I . Effects on protein synthesis in isolated muscles from lean and goldthioglucose - obese mice . Diabetes 32 , 392 – 397 . 129 Rommel C , Bodine SC , Clarke BA , Rossman R , Nunez L , Stitt TN , Yancopoulos GD & Glass DJ ( 2001 ) Mediation of IGF - 1 - induced skeletal myotube hypertrophy by PI ( 3 ) K / Akt / mTOR and PI ( 3 ) K / Akt / GSK3 pathways . Nat Cell Biol 3 , 1009 – 1013 . 130 Mammucari C , Milan G , Romanello V , Masiero E , Rudolf R , Del Piccolo P , Burden SJ , Di Lisi R , Sandri C , Zhao J , et al . ( 2007 ) FoxO3 controls autophagy in skeletal muscle in vivo . Cell Metab 6 , 458 – 471 . 131 Calnan DR & Brunet A ( 2008 ) The FoxO code . Oncogene 27 , 2276 – 2288 . 132 Kamei Y , Miura S , Suzuki M , Kai Y , Mizukami J , Taniguchi T , Mochida K , Hata T , Matsuda J , Aburatani H , et al . ( 2004 ) Skeletal muscle FOXO1 ( FKHR ) transgenic mice have less skeletal muscle mass , down - regulated type I ( slow twitch / red muscle ) ﬁber genes , and impaired glycemic control . J Biol Chem 279 , 41114 – 41123 . 133 Southgate RJ , Neill B , Prelovsek O , El - Osta A , Kamei Y , Miura S , Ezaki O , McLoughlin TJ , Zhang W , Unterman TG , et al . ( 2007 ) FOXO1 regulates the expression of 4E - BP1 and inhibits mTOR signaling in mammalian skeletal muscle . J Biol Chem 282 , 21176 – 21186 . 134 Liu CM , Yang Z , Liu CW , Wang R , Tien P , Dale R & Sun LQ ( 2007 ) Effect of RNA oligonucleotide targeting Foxo - 1 on muscle growth in normal and cancer cachexia mice . Cancer Gene Ther 14 , 945 – 952 . 135 Demontis F & Perrimon N ( 2010 ) FOXO / 4E - BP signaling in Drosophila muscles regulates organism - wide proteostasis during aging . Cell 143 , 813 – 825 . 136 Lee JH , Budanov AV , Park EJ , Birse R , Kim TE , Perkins GA , Ocorr K , Ellisman MH , Bodmer R , Bier E , et al . ( 2010 ) Sestrin as a feedback inhibitor of TOR that prevents age - related pathologies . Science 327 , 1223 – 1228 . 137 Reed SA , Sandesara PB , Senf SM & Judge AR ( 2012 ) Inhibition of FoxO transcriptional activity prevents muscle ﬁber atrophy during cachexia and induces hypertrophy . FASEB J 26 , 987 – 1000 . 138 Huang H & Tindall DJ ( 2007 ) Dynamic FoxO transcription factors . J Cell Sci 120 , 2479 – 2487 . 139 Senf SM , Sandesara PB , Reed SA & Judge AR ( 2011 ) p300 acetyltransferase activity differentially regulates the localization and activity of the FOXO homologues in skeletal muscle . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 300 , C1490 – C1501 . 140 Bertaggia E , Coletto L & Sandri M ( 2012 ) Posttranslational modiﬁcations control FoxO3 activity during denervation . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 302 , C587 – C596 . 141 Greer EL , Dowlatshahi D , Banko MR , Villen J , Hoang K , Blanchard D , Gygi SP & Brunet A ( 2007 ) An AMPK – FOXO pathway mediates longevity induced by a novel method of dietary restriction in C . elegans . Curr Biol 17 , 1646 – 1656 . 142 Greer EL , Oskoui PR , Banko MR , Maniar JM , Gygi MP , Gygi SP & Brunet A ( 2007 ) The energy sensor AMP - activated protein kinase directly regulates the mammalian FOXO3 transcription factor . J Biol Chem 282 , 30107 – 30119 . 143 Nakashima K & Yakabe Y ( 2007 ) AMPK activation stimulates myoﬁbrillar protein degradation and expression of atrophy - related ubiquitin ligases by increasing FOXO transcription factors in C2C12 myotubes . Biosci Biotechnol Biochem 71 , 1650 – 1656 . 144 Sanchez AM , Csibi A , Raibon A , Cornille K , Gay S , Bernardi H & Candau R ( 2012 ) AMPK promotes skeletal muscle autophagy through activation of FEBS Journal ( 2013 ) ª 2013 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2013 FEBS 19 S . Schiafﬁno et al . Mechanisms regulating muscle growth and atrophy forkhead FoxO3a and interaction with Ulk1 . J Cell Biochem 113 , 695 – 710 . 145 Suzuki N , Motohashi N , Uezumi A , Fukada S , Yoshimura T , Itoyama Y , Aoki M , Miyagoe - Suzuki Y & Takeda S ( 2007 ) NO production results in suspension - induced muscle atrophy through dislocation of neuronal NOS . J Clin Invest 117 , 2468 – 2476 . 146 Pietri - Rouxel F , Gentil C , Vassilopoulos S , Baas D , Mouisel E , Ferry A , Vignaud A , Hourde C , Marty I , Schaeffer L , et al . ( 2010 ) DHPR a 1S subunit controls skeletal muscle mass and morphogenesis . EMBO J 29 , 643 – 654 . 147 Levine S , Nguyen T , Taylor N , Friscia ME , Budak MT , Rothenberg P , Zhu J , Sachdeva R , Sonnad S , Kaiser LR , et al . ( 2008 ) Rapid disuse atrophy of diaphragm ﬁbers in mechanically ventilated humans . N Engl J Med 358 , 1327 – 1335 . 148 Puigserver P , Rhee J , Donovan J , Walkey CJ , Yoon JC , Oriente F , Kitamura Y , Altomonte J , Dong H , Accili D , et al . ( 2003 ) Insulin - regulated hepatic gluconeogenesis through FOXO1 – PGC - 1 a interaction . Nature 423 , 550 – 555 . 149 Wu Z , Puigserver P , Andersson U , Zhang C , Adelmant G , Mootha V , Troy A , Cinti S , Lowell B , Scarpulla RC , et al . ( 1999 ) Mechanisms controlling mitochondrial biogenesis and respiration through the thermogenic coactivator PGC - 1 . Cell 98 , 115 – 124 . 150 Geng T , Li P , Yin X & Yan Z ( 2011 ) PGC - 1 a promotes nitric oxide antioxidant defenses and inhibits FOXO signaling against cardiac cachexia in mice . Am J Pathol 178 , 1738 – 1748 . 151 Wenz T , Rossi SG , Rotundo RL , Spiegelman BM & Moraes CT ( 2009 ) Increased muscle PGC - 1 a expression protects from sarcopenia and metabolic disease during aging . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106 , 20405 – 20410 . 152 Brault JJ , Jespersen JG & Goldberg AL ( 2010 ) Peroxisome proliferator - activated receptor c coactivator 1 a or 1 b overexpression inhibits muscle protein degradation , induction of ubiquitin ligases , and disuse atrophy . J Biol Chem 285 , 19460 – 19471 . 153 Peterson JM , Bakkar N & Guttridge DC ( 2011 ) NF - j B signaling in skeletal muscle health and disease . Curr Top Dev Biol 96 , 85 – 119 . 154 Cai D , Frantz JD , Tawa NE Jr , Melendez PA , Oh BC , Lidov HG , Hasselgren PO , Frontera WR , Lee J , Glass DJ , et al . ( 2004 ) IKK b / NF - j B activation causes severe muscle wasting in mice . Cell 119 , 285 – 298 . 155 Judge AR , Koncarevic A , Hunter RB , Liou HC , Jackman RW & Kandarian SC ( 2007 ) Role for I j B a , but not c - Rel , in skeletal muscle atrophy . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 292 , C372 – C382 . 156 Hunter RB & Kandarian SC ( 2004 ) Disruption of either the Nfkb1 or the Bcl3 gene inhibits skeletal muscle atrophy . J Clin Invest 114 , 1504 – 1511 . 157 de Alvaro C , Teruel T , Hernandez R & Lorenzo M ( 2004 ) Tumor necrosis factor a produces insulin resistance in skeletal muscle by activation of inhibitor j B kinase in a p38 MAPK - dependent manner . J Biol Chem 279 , 17070 – 17078 . 158 Dogra C , Changotra H , Wedhas N , Qin X , Wergedal JE & Kumar A ( 2007 ) TNF - related weak inducer of apoptosis ( TWEAK ) is a potent skeletal muscle - wasting cytokine . FASEB J 21 , 1857 – 1869 . 159 Hirosumi J , Tuncman G , Chang L , Gorgun CZ , Uysal KT , Maeda K , Karin M & Hotamisligil GS ( 2002 ) A central role for JNK in obesity and insulin resistance . Nature 420 , 333 – 336 . 160 Mourkioti F , Kratsios P , Luedde T , Song YH , Delafontaine P , Adami R , Parente V , Bottinelli R , Pasparakis M & Rosenthal N ( 2006 ) Targeted ablation of IKK2 improves skeletal muscle strength , maintains mass , and promotes regeneration . J Clin Invest 116 , 2945 – 2954 . 161 Minetti GC , Feige JN , Rosenstiel A , Bombard F , Meier V , Werner A , Bassilana F , Sailer AW , Kahle P , Lambert C , et al . ( 2011 ) G a i2 signaling promotes skeletal muscle hypertrophy , myoblast differentiation , and muscle regeneration . Sci Signal 4 , ra80 . 162 Mittal A , Bhatnagar S , Kumar A , Lach - Triﬁlieff E , Wauters S , Li H , Makonchuk DY & Glass DJ ( 2010 ) The TWEAK – Fn14 system is a critical regulator of denervation - induced skeletal muscle atrophy in mice . J Cell Biol 188 , 833 – 849 . 163 Bonetto A , Aydogdu T , Jin X , Zhang Z , Zhan R , Puzis L , Koniaris LG & Zimmers TA ( 2012 ) JAK / STAT3 pathway inhibition blocks skeletal muscle wasting downstream of IL - 6 and in experimental cancer cachexia . Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 303 , E410 – E421 . 164 Yamada E , Bastie CC , Koga H , Wang Y , Cuervo AM & Pessin JE ( 2012 ) Mouse skeletal muscle ﬁber - type - speciﬁc macroautophagy and muscle wasting are regulated by a Fyn / STAT3 / Vps34 signaling pathway . Cell Rep 1 , 557 – 569 . 165 Zimmers TA , Davies MV , Koniaris LG , Haynes P , Esquela AF , Tomkinson KN , McPherron AC , Wolfman NM & Lee SJ ( 2002 ) Induction of cachexia in mice by systemically administered myostatin . Science 296 , 1486 – 1488 . 166 Durieux AC , Amirouche A , Banzet S , Koulmann N , Bonnefoy R , Pasdeloup M , Mouret C , Bigard X , Peinnequin A & Freyssenet D ( 2007 ) Ectopic expression of myostatin induces atrophy of adult skeletal muscle by decreasing muscle gene expression . Endocrinology 148 , 3140 – 3147 . 167 Reisz - Porszasz S , Bhasin S , Artaza JN , Shen R , Sinha - Hikim I , Hogue A , Fielder TJ & Gonzalez - Cadavid NF ( 2003 ) Lower skeletal muscle mass in male transgenic mice with muscle - speciﬁc 20 FEBS Journal ( 2013 ) ª 2013 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2013 FEBS Mechanisms regulating muscle growth and atrophy S . Schiafﬁno et al . overexpression of myostatin . Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 285 , E876 – E888 . 168 McFarlane C , Plummer E , Thomas M , Hennebry A , Ashby M , Ling N , Smith H , Sharma M & Kambadur R ( 2006 ) Myostatin induces cachexia by activating the ubiquitin proteolytic system through an NF - j B - independent , FoxO1 - dependent mechanism . J Cell Physiol 209 , 501 – 514 . 169 Allen DL & Unterman TG ( 2007 ) Regulation of myostatin expression and myoblast differentiation by FoxO and SMAD transcription factors . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 292 , C188 – C199 . 170 Schakman O , Gilson H & Thissen JP ( 2008 ) Mechanisms of glucocorticoid - induced myopathy . J Endocrinol 197 , 1 – 10 . 171 Menconi M , Fareed M , O’Neal P , Poylin V , Wei W & Hasselgren PO ( 2007 ) Role of glucocorticoids in the molecular regulation of muscle wasting . Crit Care Med 35 , S602 – S608 . 172 Shimizu N , Yoshikawa N , Ito N , Maruyama T , Suzuki Y , Takeda S , Nakae J , Tagata Y , Nishitani S , Takehana K , et al . ( 2011 ) Crosstalk between glucocorticoid receptor and nutritional sensor mTOR in skeletal muscle . Cell Metab 13 , 170 – 182 . 173 Waddell DS , Baehr LM , van den Brandt J , Johnsen SA , Reichardt HM , Furlow JD & Bodine SC ( 2008 ) The glucocorticoid receptor and FOXO1 synergistically activate the skeletal muscle atrophy - associated MuRF1 gene . Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 295 , E785 – E797 . 174 Zoncu R , Bar - Peled L , Efeyan A , Wang S , Sancak Y & Sabatini DM ( 2011 ) mTORC1 senses lysosomal amino acids through an inside - out mechanism that requires the vacuolar H + - ATPase . Science 334 , 678 – 683 . 175 Settembre C , Di Malta C , Polito VA , Garcia Arencibia M , Vetrini F , Erdin S , Erdin SU , Huynh T , Medina D , Colella P , et al . ( 2011 ) TFEB links autophagy to lysosomal biogenesis . Science 332 , 1429 – 1433 . 176 Settembre C , Zoncu R , Medina DL , Vetrini F , Erdin S , Huynh T , Ferron M , Karsenty G , Vellard MC , Facchinetti V , et al . ( 2012 ) A lysosome - to - nucleus signalling mechanism senses and regulates the lysosome via mTOR and TFEB . EMBO J 31 , 1095 – 1108 . 177 Schiafﬁno S , Gorza L , Sartore S , Saggin L & Carli M ( 1986 ) Embryonic myosin heavy chain as a differentiation marker of developing human skeletal muscle and rhabdomyosarcoma . A monoclonal antibody study . Exp Cell Res 163 , 211 – 220 . FEBS Journal ( 2013 ) ª 2013 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2013 FEBS 21 S . Schiafﬁno et al . Mechanisms regulating muscle growth and atrophy