International Journal of Molecular Sciences Review Membrane Lipid Composition : E ﬀ ect on Membrane and Organelle Structure , Function and Compartmentalization and Therapeutic Avenues Doralicia Casares 1 , 2 , Pablo V . Escrib á 1 , 2 and Catalina Ana Rossell ó 1 , 2 , * 1 Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biomedicine , University of the Balearic Islands , 07121 Palma de Mallorca , Spain ; doralicia . casares @ lipopharma . com ( D . C . ) ; pablo . escriba @ uib . es ( P . V . E . ) 2 Lipopharma Therapeutics , Isaac Newton , 07121 Palma de Mallorca , Spain * Correspondence : ca . rossello @ uib . es ; Tel . : + 34 - 971 - 173 - 331 Received : 1 April 2019 ; Accepted : 30 April 2019 ; Published : 1 May 2019 (cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8) (cid:1) (cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7) Abstract : Biological membranes are key elements for the maintenance of cell architecture and physiology . Beyond a pure barrier separating the inner space of the cell from the outer , the plasma membrane is a sca ﬀ old and player in cell - to - cell communication and the initiation of intracellular signals among other functions . Critical to this function is the plasma membrane compartmentalization in lipid microdomains that control the localization and productive interactions of proteins involved in cell signal propagation . In addition , cells are divided into compartments limited by other membranes whose integrity and homeostasis are ﬁnely controlled , and which determine the identity and function of the di ﬀ erent organelles . Here , we review current knowledge on membrane lipid composition in the plasma membrane and endomembrane compartments , emphasizing its role in sustaining organelle structure and function . The correct composition and structure of cell membranes deﬁne key pathophysiological aspects of cells . Therefore , we explore the therapeutic potential of manipulating membrane lipid composition with approaches like membrane lipid therapy , aiming to normalize cell functions through the modiﬁcation of membrane lipid bilayers . Keywords : membrane ; lipid ; therapy ; endomembrane ; structure ; composition ; 2OHOA 1 . Introduction Biological membranes define cell boundaries and internal organelles in eukaryotes . These assemblies are highly dynamic in order to allow maintenance of the integrity and identity of the enclosed structures [ 1 ] . In 1972 , the publication by Singer and Nicolson of the ﬂuid mosaic model of the structure of cell membranes [ 2 ] encouraged the study of membranes and the role of each of their components . Membranes are formed by a ﬂuid lipid bilayer which confers exceptional physical properties to the cell [ 3 ] and whose lipids interact with proteins by hydrophobic and Coulomb forces [ 4 ] . These interactions allow membranes to create a variety of domains based on the type of lipid components [ 5 ] . Those domains , in turn , conform di ﬀ erent structures and exert speciﬁc functions , such as the propagation of di ﬀ erent cell signals [ 6 ] . To maintain their structure , membranes also interact with cytoskeleton [ 7 ] . Membranes are essential for cell survival and can provide us with information about the origin of life and other events in cell history ( e . g . , bioenergetic organelles acquisition or endomembrane system formation ) [ 1 ] . However , the word evolution is not usually related to biomembranes in textbooks [ 4 ] , and the origins and evolution of the membrane tra ﬃ cking system have not been properly addressed [ 8 ] . To study the evolution of membranes , the nature optimization of biological properties has to be taken into account [ 4 ] . For many years , di ﬀ erent types of cells were distinguished by the presence ( eukaryotes ) or absence ( prokaryotes ) of a nucleus . We now know that prokaryotes can also be separated into Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 2167 ; doi : 10 . 3390 / ijms20092167 www . mdpi . com / journal / ijms Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 2167 2 of 30 bacteria and archaea which share many characteristics and come from a common ancestor called LUCA ( last universal common ancestor ) [ 1 ] . One di ﬀ erential trait between archaea and bacteria is their di ﬀ erent lipid membrane composition due to di ﬀ erences in the enzymes that synthesize them [ 1 ] . Eukaryotes , which were formed later in life history , have a similar lipid biochemistry to bacteria , but not to archaea ( reviewed in [ 1 ] ) . The ﬁrst cellular systems on Earth arose from three molecular species : molecules which stored information for replication , catalysts encoded by that information and molecules which could encapsulate both previous species [ 9 ] . Also , these primitive cells needed energy - storing molecules to create ordered biologically active molecules [ 10 ] . In fact , as reviewed by Gould , ATP synthase is conserved in bacteria and archaea while membrane lipids are not , which points to the fact that lipid biosynthesis was a late step in the emergence of cells , but an essential trait to acquire a free - living state [ 1 ] . Although we can ﬁnd prokaryotes with internal compartments , none of them have developed the endomembrane system eukaryotes possess [ 1 , 8 ] and these structures are not homologous to eukaryotic structures [ 11 ] . However , all three domains of life ( Bacteria , Archaea and Eukarya ) have replication machinery , transcription , translation and key metabolic pathways , which suggest that these systems must have been already present in proto - eukaryotes [ 12 ] . Eukaryogenesis increased cell complexity by creating new membranous compartments which carry out specialized functions and vesicle tra ﬃ cking with a speciﬁc source and destination [ 1 ] . The development of this tra ﬃ cking system , as reviewed in [ 8 ] , has been explained by two di ﬀ erent hypotheses over the years : endosymbiotic theory and autogenesis . In modern studies , eukaryotes derive from the integration of proteobacterium ( now mitochondria ) into archaeal cells , however , the complexity of the archaeal ancestor at that time is still subject to debate [ 1 ] . Evidence such as the similarity between mitochondria - derived vesicles and prokaryotes’ outer membrane vesicles support this theory [ 1 ] . Another controversial point is the speed of this tra ﬃ cking - system evolution . The last eukaryotic common ancestor ( LECA ) did probably possess an internal complexity so the evolution might have been fast [ 8 ] . According to the presence of di ﬀ erent organelles , the LECA is told to have possessed a basic membrane - tra ﬃ cking system including an endoplasmic reticulum , stacked Golgi , endosomes and lysosomes , which are now shared by all studied eukaryotes [ 8 ] . In fact , there is a common core of protein factors involved in transport and compartment speciﬁcity [ 13 ] . Genomic studies further demonstrate these LECA features studying the members of the coat protein complex I and II ( COPI , COPII ) and clathrin complexes , and on the soluble N - ethylmaleimide - sensitive factor ( NSF ) attachment protein receptor ( SNARE ) families , Guanosine - 5’ - triphosphate hydrolases ( GTPase ) – activating proteins , guanine nucleotide exchange factors ( GEFs ) and NSF ATPases , endosomal sorting complexes required for transport ( ESCRT ) complexes , GTPases and homologues of the retromer complex ( reviewed in [ 8 ] ) . Di ﬀ erent organelles share homologous membrane - tra ﬃ cking components originated from gene duplication which might have occurred simultaneously to organelle formation or might even be itself responsible for organelle development [ 8 ] . In addition , other tra ﬃ cking components were apparently added separately while some others were lost throughout membrane evolution in the adaptation of LECA’s descendants to new environments [ 8 ] . Four billion years of evolution that began with prokaryotic cells produced the current eukaryotic cells containing di ﬀ erent organelles with a particular membrane composition and function . Membrane lipid composition in the plasma membrane ( PM ) and endomembrane compartments is responsible of sustaining organelle structure and function and is reviewed here . Studying the diversity of lipid species in membranes has become a ﬁeld of research in itself . Eukaryotic cell membranes are formed by hundreds of lipid species assembled following a functional asymmetry [ 1 ] . What is more , alterations in membrane lipid composition generate pathological conditions in cells and manipulating the membrane lipid composition is a therapeutic approach beginning to be exploited with strategies like membrane lipid therapy . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 2167 3 of 30 2 . Repertoire of Membrane Lipids Membrane lipids are the least studied biomolecules . First , the tools for the study of lipids are not as powerful as the tools used for investigating genes and proteins . Second , lipids occur in membranes in the form of ensembles , including around tens of thousands of individual members , which in turn are representative of a variety of hundreds of di ﬀ erent molecular species [ 14 ] . Third , the high plasticity and ﬂexibility of biological membranes allow them to maintain their bioactivity despite the e ﬀ ect of external insults ( reviewed in [ 15 ] ) . Nonetheless , cells depend upon lipids for three main functions , namely energy storage , compartmentalization and signaling ( reviewed in [ 16 ] ) : 1 . Energy storage : lipid droplets used for this function contain mainly triacylglycerol and steryl esters thanks to their relatively reduced state . These anhydrous reservoirs are needed for the e ﬃ cient storage of caloric reserves and as stores of fatty acid and sterol components for membrane biogenesis . 2 . Compartmentalization : the milieu of cellular membranes is made of lipids of amphipathic nature , comprising both a hydrophobic and a hydrophilic portion . This amphipathic nature provides the physical basis for spontaneous membrane formation because the hydrophobic moieties are prone to self - associate when dissolved in water . This predisposition to self - associate enabled the segregation of an internal milieu from the external milieu when the ﬁrst cells originated . Later on , this scheme was repeated inside the cell to generate discrete organelles allowing , ﬁrst , the separation of speciﬁc chemical reactions , second , the limitation in the spreading of reaction products and , third , an improvement in biochemical e ﬃ ciency . Furthermore , lipids are responsible of membrane ability of budding , tubulation , ﬁssion and fusion , all them indispensable for cell division , biological reproduction and intracellular membrane tra ﬃ cking . 3 . Signaling : in signal transduction , lipids ﬁrst deﬁne membrane domains that allow the aggregation and dispersion of particular proteins , and subsequently organize secondary signaling or e ﬀ ector complexes ; they can also act as ﬁrst and second messengers . The rupture of amphipathic lipids generates bipartite signaling elements , which can be spread both within a membrane ( by hydrophobic portions of the molecule ) and through the cytosol ( by soluble / polar portions of the molecule ) . Phospholipids ( PL ) constitute the bulk of the membrane’s lipid matrix ( Figure 1 ) . They resemble the triglycerides in being ester or amide derivatives of glycerol ( glycerophospholipids , GPL ) or sphingosine ( Sph – sphingolipids , SL ) with fatty acids and phosphoric acid . Glycerophospholipids ( GPL ) are the major structural lipids in eukaryotic membranes . They are generally composed of two fatty acids linked through two hydrophobic acyl chains and a phosphate head group ester linked to a glycerol . In GPL , the phosphate moiety of the resulting phosphatidic acid is further esteriﬁed with choline , ethanolamine , serine or inositol in the phospholipid itself . Therefore , GPL branch from phosphatidic acid ( PA ) and are classiﬁed upon the structure of the PL head group . Phosphatidylcholine ( PtdCho ) and phosphatidylethanolamine ( PtdEtn ) heads are zwitterionic , whereas phosphatidylserine ( PtdSer ) and phosphatidylinositol ( PtdIns ) heads are anionic ( reviewed in [ 16 , 17 ] ) . Each of these phospholipid classes is deﬁned by a shared structure but then includes a battery of molecular species upon the length and degree of saturation in their acyl chains . Both head group and acyl chain composition inﬂuence the physical properties of the membrane [ 18 ] . Sphingolipids ( SL ) are the second most abundant structural lipid . SL contain one hydrophobic acyl chains and a phosphate head group ester linked to a Sph backbone . Their hydrophobic backbone is an ester or amide derivative of Sph with fatty acids being ceramide ( Cer ) the simplest representative . Sphingomyelin ( SM ) contains a phosphorylcholine headgroup associated to the sphingoid base . SM is the more abundant SL in the plasma membrane ( PM ) of mammalian cells . Within the total PL fraction of the PM , SM accounts for 2 % – 15 % upon the cell type ( reviewed in [ 19 ] ) . Other SLs are glycosphingolipids ( GSLs ) . GSLs are based on glucosylceramide ( GlcCer ) or on galactosylceramide ( GalCer ) and contain mono - , di - or oligosaccharides [ 20 ] . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 2167 4 of 30 GPL and SL generate comparable series of messenger lipids upon signaling - induced hydrolysis . GPL hydrolysis produces the messenger lipids : lysoPtdCho ( LPC ) , lysoPA ( LPA ) , PA and diacylglycerol ( DAG ) . Whereas SL hydrolysis produces the messenger lipids : sphingosylphosphorylcholine ( SPC ) , Sph , sphingosine - 1 - phosphate ( S1P ) , ceramide - 1 - phosphate ( C1P ) and Cer ( reviewed in [ 16 ] ) . Cholesterol ( Chol ) is a crucial element of mammalian cell membranes . Chol molecule involves four fused rings ( steroid backbone ) showing a hydroxyl group ( A - ring ) and a small branched hydrophobic tail ( D - ring ) . In membranes , the rigid steroid backbone of Chol favors its interaction with SL . Chol - SL platforms are the basic element of lipid rafts . Chol content is strictly controlled by three mechanisms : de novo synthesis , uptake and esteriﬁcation [ 21 ] . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 30 diacylglycerol ( DAG ) . Whereas SL hydrolysis produces the messenger lipids : sphingosylphosphorylcholine ( SPC ) , Sph , sphingosine - 1 - phosphate ( S1P ) , ceramide - 1 - phosphate ( C1P ) and Cer ( reviewed in [ 16 ] ) . Cholesterol ( Chol ) is a crucial element of mammalian cell membranes . Chol molecule involves four fused rings ( steroid backbone ) showing a hydroxyl group ( A - ring ) and a small branched hydrophobic tail ( D - ring ) . In membranes , the rigid steroid backbone of Chol favors its interaction with SL . Chol - SL platforms are the basic element of lipid rafts . Chol content is strictly controlled by three mechanisms : de novo synthesis , uptake and esterification [ 21 ] . Figure 1 . Several forms of triglycerides and phospholipids found in the cell . The left - most scheme is a triglyceride formed by a three - carbon glycerol backbone with a FA tail bound to each carbon . Second left - most scheme is a phospholipid bearing two FA tails with the third carbon of glycerol bound to a phosphate group . The middle scheme is an ether glycerolipid , who shares with the two previous structures the three - carbon glycerol backbone and is slightly modified with an ether group . In second right - most scheme , a sphingosine is shown as backbone instead of glycerol and first fatty acid tail of glycerol is modified slightly . This is a sphingophospholipid since it bears a phosphate group , it is called sphingomyelin . Right - most scheme shows the scheme of sphingolipids called glycolipids , since the phosphate group is replaced with a sugar ( carbohydrate group ) . 3 . Lipids in Sustaining Organelle Structure , Function and Identity Lipids are distributed heterogeneously in several ranges : subcellular organelles show varied lipid arrangements , furthermore PM and organelle membranes present foci of specific lipid domains , and finally lipid distribution shows lateral differences and / or transversal asymmetry , i . e . , asymmetric distribution in both membrane leaflets ( Figure 2 , reviewed in [ 22 ] ) . 3 . 1 . Endoplasmic Reticulum The secretory pathway is the best characterized model of lipid localization and involves the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) , Golgi apparatus , and PM . These three compartments display growing amounts of Chol and SL concentrations , with higher levels in PM . In fact , this Chol and SL gradient is responsible of the increased membrane thickness and stiffness of the PM . These two physical properties ( thickness and stiffness ) are crucial to determine the particular functions and identities of the different organelles . Furthermore , they might be related with the sorting of membrane proteins and lipids between the organelles . Because of this , lipid composition and , further on , membrane thickness and stiffness , must be homeostatically maintained [ 23 – 26 ] . The ER , for instance , maintains Figure 1 . Several forms of triglycerides and phospholipids found in the cell . The left - most scheme is a triglyceride formed by a three - carbon glycerol backbone with a FA tail bound to each carbon . Second left - most scheme is a phospholipid bearing two FA tails with the third carbon of glycerol bound to a phosphate group . The middle scheme is an ether glycerolipid , who shares with the two previous structures the three - carbon glycerol backbone and is slightly modiﬁed with an ether group . In second right - most scheme , a sphingosine is shown as backbone instead of glycerol and ﬁrst fatty acid tail of glycerol is modiﬁed slightly . This is a sphingophospholipid since it bears a phosphate group , it is called sphingomyelin . Right - most scheme shows the scheme of sphingolipids called glycolipids , since the phosphate group is replaced with a sugar ( carbohydrate group ) . 3 . Lipids in Sustaining Organelle Structure , Function and Identity Lipids are distributed heterogeneously in several ranges : subcellular organelles show varied lipid arrangements , furthermore PM and organelle membranes present foci of speciﬁc lipid domains , and ﬁnally lipid distribution shows lateral di ﬀ erences and / or transversal asymmetry , i . e . , asymmetric distribution in both membrane leaﬂets ( Figure 2 , reviewed in [ 22 ] ) . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 2167 5 of 30 Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 30 its membrane fluidity using sensory machinery [ 27 , 28 ] , which also operates to pair the synthesis of proteins and lipids with membrane biogenesis needs [ 29 , 30 ] . The ER produces the bulk of the structural PL and Chol , together with significant levels of triacylglycerol and cholesteryl esters with non - structural roles [ 31 ] . In addition , the ER produces Cer , which is the precursor for complex SL . In the ER of myelinating and epithelial cells GalCer is produced to stabilize myelin and apical membranes [ 32 ] . Chol in the ER is only about 1 % – 2 % of total Chol because , right after being synthesized , Chol is transferred from the ER to the PM . This ATP - dependent and non - vesicular transport is extremely rapid : in mammals , the half - life of Chol in the ER is only 10 – 20 min ( reviewed in [ 22 ] ) . The fast transport of Chol and other lipids to other organelles causes a loose arrangement of membrane lipids in ER membrane . This loose lipid organization is critical for ER function as it eases the insertion and the transport of recently synthesized lipids and proteins ( reviewed in [ 16 ] ) . Furthermore , the ER is the main supplier for a large percentage of membrane lipids in the Golgi and PM , which are distal secretory organelles with restricted or null capacity to produce their own lipids ( reviewed in [ 17 ] ) . In addition , the ER includes minor lipids known to be both pathway intermediates and legitimate pathway end products ( including DAG , cytidine diphosphoDAG , PA , lysophospholipids ) and dolichol ( reviewed in [ 16 ] ) . Finally , a subfraction of the ER , that cofractionates with mitochondria and is known as the mitochondria - associated membrane , is particularly enriched in specific lipid biosynthetic enzymes . Figure 2 . Lipids in organelle identity . For each organelle , the main lipid components are listed according to their contribution to the total lipid content of the organelle ( in percentage , from the most abundant to the least abundant ) . Only lipids representing at least 5 % of the total lipids for each organelle are shown . BmP : bis ( monoacylglycero ) phosphate ; Chol : cholesterol ; CL : cardiolipin ; PtdCho : phosphatidylcholine ; PtdEtn : phosphatidylethanolamine ; PtdIns : phosphatidylinositol ; PtdSer : phosphatidylserine ; SM : sphingomyelin . Not to scale . Adapted from [ 19 ] . 3 . 2 . Golgi Mammalian Golgi is the main producer of SL : SM , GlcCer , lactosylceramide ( LacCer ) and higher - order GSLs , whose final destination is the PM [ 33 ] . For SL production in the lumen of the trans - Golgi , Cer issued by the ER is required [ 34 ] . Later on , SL will accumulate in the PM whereas SL levels in the ER will be low . As it happens with SL , sterols are scarce in the ER , representing only 5 mol % of lipids , in contrast to the trans - Golgi and PM where sterols are abundant ( 30 mol % – 40 mol % ) [ 16 , 35 ] . Sterols favorably interact with lipids containing large head groups and saturated fatty acyl chains , as is the case for SL [ 36 ] . Figure 2 . Lipids in organelle identity . For each organelle , the main lipid components are listed according to their contribution to the total lipid content of the organelle ( in percentage , from the most abundant to the least abundant ) . Only lipids representing at least 5 % of the total lipids for each organelle are shown . BmP : bis ( monoacylglycero ) phosphate ; Chol : cholesterol ; CL : cardiolipin ; PtdCho : phosphatidylcholine ; PtdEtn : phosphatidylethanolamine ; PtdIns : phosphatidylinositol ; PtdSer : phosphatidylserine ; SM : sphingomyelin . Not to scale . Adapted from [ 19 ] . 3 . 1 . Endoplasmic Reticulum The secretory pathway is the best characterized model of lipid localization and involves the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) , Golgi apparatus , and PM . These three compartments display growing amounts of Chol and SL concentrations , with higher levels in PM . In fact , this Chol and SL gradient is responsible of the increased membrane thickness and sti ﬀ ness of the PM . These two physical properties ( thickness and sti ﬀ ness ) are crucial to determine the particular functions and identities of the di ﬀ erent organelles . Furthermore , they might be related with the sorting of membrane proteins and lipids between the organelles . Because of this , lipid composition and , further on , membrane thickness and sti ﬀ ness , must be homeostatically maintained [ 23 – 26 ] . The ER , for instance , maintains its membrane ﬂuidity using sensory machinery [ 27 , 28 ] , which also operates to pair the synthesis of proteins and lipids with membrane biogenesis needs [ 29 , 30 ] . The ER produces the bulk of the structural PL and Chol , together with signiﬁcant levels of triacylglycerol and cholesteryl esters with non - structural roles [ 31 ] . In addition , the ER produces Cer , which is the precursor for complex SL . In the ER of myelinating and epithelial cells GalCer is produced to stabilize myelin and apical membranes [ 32 ] . Chol in the ER is only about 1 % – 2 % of total Chol because , right after being synthesized , Chol is transferred from the ER to the PM . This ATP - dependent and non - vesicular transport is extremely rapid : in mammals , the half - life of Chol in the ER is only 10 – 20 min ( reviewed in [ 22 ] ) . The fast transport of Chol and other lipids to other organelles causes a loose arrangement of membrane lipids in ER membrane . This loose lipid organization is critical for ER function as it eases the insertion and the transport of recently synthesized lipids and proteins ( reviewed in [ 16 ] ) . Furthermore , the ER is the main supplier for a large percentage of membrane lipids in the Golgi and PM , which are distal secretory organelles with restricted or null capacity to produce their own lipids ( reviewed in [ 17 ] ) . In addition , the ER includes minor lipids known to be both pathway intermediates and legitimate pathway end products ( including DAG , cytidine diphosphoDAG , PA , lysophospholipids ) and dolichol ( reviewed in [ 16 ] ) . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 2167 6 of 30 Finally , a subfraction of the ER , that cofractionates with mitochondria and is known as the mitochondria - associated membrane , is particularly enriched in speciﬁc lipid biosynthetic enzymes . 3 . 2 . Golgi Mammalian Golgi is the main producer of SL : SM , GlcCer , lactosylceramide ( LacCer ) and higher - order GSLs , whose ﬁnal destination is the PM [ 33 ] . For SL production in the lumen of the trans - Golgi , Cer issued by the ER is required [ 34 ] . Later on , SL will accumulate in the PM whereas SL levels in the ER will be low . As it happens with SL , sterols are scarce in the ER , representing only 5 mol % of lipids , in contrast to the trans - Golgi and PM where sterols are abundant ( 30 mol % – 40 mol % ) [ 16 , 35 ] . Sterols favorably interact with lipids containing large head groups and saturated fatty acyl chains , as is the case for SL [ 36 ] . Both SL and sterols will eventually concentrate on the PM . This , together with a remodeling of PL acyl chains to a more saturated pattern , generates a tight lipid packing of sterols with PL . This packing is indeed responsible of the rigidity and thickness of this barrier isolating the intracellular from the extracellular milieu . The trans - Golgi is critical in the transition from the thin and loosely packed membrane found in the ER to the thick and rigid bilayer found at the PM . This transition , mediated by SL and sterols , is easily recognized following the single - spanning membrane proteins involved in the secretory pathway . Those membrane proteins contain transmembrane domains ( TMDs ) whose length and composition vary during the transition from the ER to the PM . Thus , for ER and Golgi - resident proteins , TMDs are considerably shorter than those for PM proteins [ 34 ] . Both TMD length and volume decide the fate of these proteins , i . e . , Golgi retention or export to the PM [ 37 , 38 ] . Since selective associations between matching lipids and TMDs have proven su ﬃ cient to drive their co - segregation in model membranes [ 39 ] , the preservation of the distinctive mixtures of membrane proteins and lipids that allow the ER and PM to execute their fundamentally unique tasks might be achieved by the Golgi exploiting physical principles such as hydrophobic mismatch and packing density . In turn , the outlined di ﬀ erent TMD features in ER and PM exert temporal and spatial control over the main events governing the secretory pathway . Hence , early secretory organelles contain proteins bearing neutral amphipathic lipid packing sensor ( ALPS ) motifs . Those proteins show bulky hydrophobic residues that easily accommodate into lipid - packing imperfections . In contrast , late secretory organelles concentrate peripheral membrane proteins bearing polybasic motifs [ 40 – 43 ] . 3 . 3 . Plasma Membrane Di ﬀ erent cell types contain di ﬀ erent lipid and protein compositions of their PM . Furthermore , PM is compartmentalized into microdomains with speciﬁc physico - chemical properties , e . g . , signalosomes , the platforms where signaling partners exert productive interactions . Those microdomains are deﬁned by the speciﬁc type and abundance of a given collection of proteins and lipids , including fatty acid speciﬁc composition of the latter . As an example , the cis - monounsaturated FA , oleic acid , leads the arrangement of nonlamellar phases in model membranes , in contrast to its saturated and trans - monounsaturated counterparts ( stearic and elaidic , respectively ) [ 44 ] . Indeed , varied raft microdomains exist upon their speciﬁc lipid composition and subsequent biophysical properties [ 45 ] . Lipid rafts are rich in SM , GSLs and Chol which arrange into rigid and liquid - ordered ( Lo ) microdomains . In contrast , the small polar heads of PtdEtn endow PtdEtn - rich regions with more ﬂuidity and less surface packing density and pressure , these regions are then called liquid - disordered ( Ld ) microdomains [ 46 ] . Lipid heterogeneous distribution gives rise to both transient and stable membrane microdomains . Transient membrane microdomains include lipid rafts , caveolae and coated pits , among others , while stable membrane microdomains involve tight junctions , synaptosomes , brush border , etc . This segregation between transient and stable membrane microdomains is led by speciﬁc proteins and remarkably by lipids such as Chol [ 45 , 47 , 48 ] . Furthermore , in eukaryotes , both leaﬂets of the PM contain speciﬁc lipid compositions . The outer leaﬂet of the PM contains mostly PtdCho and SLs . The inner leaﬂet , in contrast , involves PtdEtn , Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 2167 7 of 30 the negatively charged PtdSer , and PtdIns [ 49 ] . This membrane asymmetry is created and maintained by two types of ATP - driven pumps : ﬂippases and ﬂoppases [ 50 – 52 ] . A rapid collapse of these pumps , called phospholipid scrambling , externalizes PtdSer allowing it to exert its e ﬀ ector role in many cell activities , for instance , the phagocytic clearance of apoptotic bodies and blood coagulation [ 53 – 58 ] ( and reviewed in [ 59 ] ) . PM does not participate in autonomous synthesis of its structural lipids , as above mentioned . However , in several signaling cascades , the synthesis or degradation of lipids at the PM has been extensively reported [ 60 ] . For SM turnover , for example , the PM contains sphingomyelin synthase 2 ( SMS2 ) , which allows the ( re ) synthesis of SM from Cer at PM and even has a partial e ﬀ ect on whole cell SM content [ 61 , 62 ] . The multiple functions of membranes depend on this lipid composition , which confers relevant functions to cells . Signalosomes , by instance , may mediate incomplete signaling cascades whose activation depends upon the recruitment of one further signaling entity ( e . g . , the receptor ) to the lipid raft [ 63 ] . Endosomes PM lipid domains are indispensable for the assembly of signalosomes and subsequently play a key role in their internalization [ 64 , 65 ] . Remarkably , the role of PL in internalization and maturation is biologically so signiﬁcant among di ﬀ erent phyla that it has been conserved during evolution . In all eukaryotic organisms and their compartments , PL work as membrane identiﬁers , controlling the circulation of individual compartments ( reviewed in [ 66 ] ) . PL are not only bulk building units of membranes , but also operational controllers of main physiological events e . g . , cytokinesis , chemotaxis and exocytosis . In addition , PL confer plasticity to biological membranes , for instance the PM continuously undergoes deformation , invagination , scission and fusion . Intracellular budding from the PM is the starting point of endocytosis ( reviewed in [ 22 ] ) . Endocytosis comprehends several unrelated internalization routes , e . g . , phagocytosis , clathrin - mediated endocytosis , and macropinocytosis . PM lipids are continuously endocytosed and later recycled in return to the PM ( reviewed in [ 66 ] ) . Together with the GPL , Chol and SL crucially participate in several routes of endocytosis , mainly the caveolae and the clathrin - independent carrier / glycosylphosphatidylinositol ( GPtdIns ) - anchor - enriched endocytic compartment - mediated ( CLIC / GEEC ) pathways ( reviewed in [ 66 ] ) . All along the endocytic pathway , the presence and abundance of speciﬁc lipids was found to be ﬁnely tuned . While early endosome lipid composition matches pretty much that of the PM , alongside maturation to late endosomes , sterols and PtdSer are decreased in favor of a massive rise in bis ( monoacylglycero ) phosphate ( BmP ) [ 67 ] . BmP is later implicated in fusion events , in production of multivesicular bodies , and in SL hydrolysis [ 68 , 69 ] . A dedicated collection of kinases and phosphatases generate and terminate speciﬁc phosphoinositides , among them phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 ) on plasma membranes , phosphatidylinositol 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P3 ) on early endosomes , phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 3 , 5 ) P2 ) on late endosomes and phosphatidylinositol 4 - phosphate ( PtdIns4P ) on the ( trans ) - Golgi network [ 70 ] . As already mentioned , the production of SL may have an important role in the sorting of membrane proteins and lipids between the ER , the plasma membrane and endosomes , or the vacuole through lipid rafts . 3 . 4 . Mitochondria Mitochondria rely on lipid and protein import for proper function [ 71 ] . Mitochondria present an intricate structure enclosing two sheaths : the outer ( OMM ) and the inner mitochondrial membrane ( IMM ) . In turn , the intensely folded cristae generate two aqueous compartments , i . e . , the intermembrane space ( IMS ) and the matrix ( reviewed in [ 72 ] ) . While mitochondria were shown to synthesize several lipids on their own , they pretty much rely upon the transference and gathering of lipids mostly produced in the ER ( reviewed in [ 73 – 80 ] ) . Lipids autonomously synthesized by mitochondria include phosphatidylglycerol ( PtdGro ) , cardiolipin Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 2167 8 of 30 ( CL diphosphatidylglycerol ) and in part PtdEtn , PA and cytidine diphosphate diacylglycerol ( CDP - DAG ) . The major sites of lipid biosynthesis are the ER and its speciﬁc subfraction , the mitochondria associated membrane ( MAM ) . Other mitochondrial membrane lipids such as PtdCho , PtdSer , PtdIns , sterols and SL have to be imported . The continuous supply and exchange of lipids is required for maintaining mitochondrial membrane integrity and overall cellular function ( reviewed in [ 72 ] ) . Mitochondrial lipid composition is mostly shared by all di ﬀ erent mammalian cells and tissues and is characterized by : ( i ) Low PL to protein ratio and sterol to protein ratio versus other subcellular fractions . ( ii ) High levels of PtdCho and PtdEtn ( major PL members near 80 % of total PL ) ; ( iii ) High CL content ( 10 % – 15 % of total lipid composition ) , and ( iv ) Low sterols and SL amounts ( reviewed in [ 72 ] ) . The bacterial origin of this membrane is revealed by the occurrence , in the IMM , of PtdGro and of CL ( up to 25 mol % ) and by the high PtdEtn / PtdCho ratio . In turn , those two features might be mandatory for oxidative phosphorylation [ 81 ] . Regarding the low sterol content of mitochondria , an exception is found in cells implicated in steroid hormone synthesis . The mitochondria of those cell types coordinate with the ER for the importing and metabolization of cholesterol [ 82 ] . Other exceptions are mitochondria from heart , brain and other tissues which additionally contain 5 % – 30 % of total PL of PtdCho and PtdEtn plasmalogens [ 83 , 84 ] . Plasmalogens are a class of PL whose structure confers to them strong lipophilic properties . This feature of plasmalogens allows them to generate inverse hexagonal phase structures , which in turn promote membrane fusion [ 85 , 86 ] . Plasmalogens are the major membrane lipid in neurons [ 86 – 89 ] and , in speciﬁc tissues , they are crucial for the function of several transmembrane proteins and for membrane - related cholesterol transport both at the intracellular and extracellular levels [ 86 – 89 ] . Recent mass spectrometry - based lipidome analyses conﬁrmed lipid species patterns described in mitochondria with earlier analysis techniques . Lipidome analyses fully recapitulate the found di ﬀ erences in FA composition of every lipid class , while this is only partially true for organelles . The role of mitochondrial lipids is now recognized for almost all lipid classes . Some of these lipids of mitochondrial membrane might be dispensable , but most contribute to the structural and functional characteristics of this organelle in a quite speciﬁc manner . Particularly mitochondrial lipids were shown to be a feasible target to modulate of the arrangement of mitochondrial supercomplexes ( reviewed in [ 72 ] ) . 3 . 5 . Lysosomes Lysosomes contain the enzymatic tools for the degradation of extracellular molecules . The transcription factor EB ( TFEB ) partially controls lysosome biogenesis [ 90 ] . TFEB e ﬀ ect ﬁrst enhances lysosomal exocytosis [ 91 ] , second promotes the degradation of autophagic substrates and third helps the clearance of lipid droplets and of mitochondria [ 92 – 94 ] . Low amounts of cholesterol and high amounts of SL characterize the lysosomal lipid signature , indeed increased cholesterol levels in lysosomes are used as an early trait of numerous lysosomal storage diseases ( LSDs ) ( reviewed in [ 19 , 95 ] ) . Lysosomal lipids are fully obtained by lipid transport from other organelles particularly through the budding and fusion of membrane vesicles . Lysosomes form contact sites with organelles such as mitochondria , peroxisomes , and the ER . Through this contact sites Chol is transported between organelles , among other activities ( reviewed in [ 16 ] ) . The lysosome is a hub where several tra ﬃ cking pathways converge . Thus , the lysosome is a key coordinator in the sorting and delivery of lipids to several membrane compartments ( reviewed in [ 96 ] ) . For instance , exogenous TG , sterols and PL transported by low - density lipoproteins ( LDLs ) ﬁrst enter the cell through receptor - mediated endocytosis , and secondly , they are processed by the lysosome . Endogenous lipids are also sorted by the lysosome when it fuses with double - membraned autophagosomes . Hence , the role of lysosomes is well - established in lipid catabolism and in dietary lipid overload , when cellular lipid content or composition induces changes to alter autophagic activity in a tissue - speciﬁc manner ( reviewed in [ 97 ] ) . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 2167 9 of 30 3 . 6 . Nuclear Membrane Eukaryotic nucleus encloses this chromatin using a double membrane ( nuclear envelope , NE ) . NE includes three interconnected domains with morphological di ﬀ erences : the inner ( INM ) and outer ( ONM ) nuclear membranes ( NM ) and the pore membranes . These two individual lipid bilayers are separated by a luminal space , of 30 – 50 nm in human cells , named lumen or perinuclear space . Both the INM and ONM possess unique composition and metabolic / signaling patterns ( reviewed in [ 98 , 99 ] ) . Cell nucleus contains GPL , SL , and Chol . Major nuclear GPL include polyphosphoinositides ( PPIn ) including phosphatidylinositol phosphate ( PInsP ) , phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 ) , and phosphatidylinositol 1 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 1 , 4 , 5 ) P3 ) , PtdChol , PtdSer , and PtdEtn . SL include SM , Cer , ceramide - 1 - phosphate ( C1P ) , Sph , S1P and gangliosides as well as Chol and its hydroxyl and oxygenated derivatives . Total GPL contents of nuclei are reported as 3 % by weight compared with 75 % for protein and 22 % for DNA . Cellular nuclei contain high levels of PtdCho and SM , which are partially linked with Chol and proteins to form lipid – protein complexes . The most abundant nuclear SL is SM and is the most prominent member of the SL contributing to the signaling through NE [ 100 ] . Gangliosides are another SL associated with the nucleus ( reviewed in [ 101 , 102 ] ) . SM not only occurs in the nuclear envelope , but also at intranuclear sites . Nuclear lipids exert di ﬀ erent functions upon their localization , including the regulation of ﬂuidity of both NM and nuclear matrix . Another function of nuclear lipids is serving as platforms in signal transduction for vitamin and hormone receptors and for anchoring active chromatin . Furthermore , nuclear lipids play a role in DNA duplication and the regulation of gene expression and transcription ( reviewed in [ 102 ] ) . The nucleus further hosts the metabolizing enzymes for gangliosides and Cer , including sphingomyelin synthase ( SMS ) and sphingomyelinase ( SMase ) , ceramide kinase ( CerK ) and sphingosine kinase ( SphK ) activities ( reviewed in [ 101 ] ) . In short , the nuclear envelope contains the bulk of nuclear lipids , while the nuclear matrix contains enzymes and metabolites necessary for autonomous lipid metabolism in the nucleus [ 103 ] . 3 . 6 . 1 . Nuclear Size During NE reassembly after cell division , cell needs to adjust the proper nuclear size . With this aim , cells adjust the portion of ER membrane integrated into the NE ( ﬁrst integrated into the ONM and then integrated into the INM ) . A possible mechanism to adjust this integration is limiting the movement of PL from the ONM to the INM by using nuclear pore complexes ( NPCs ) as a steric barrier proﬁting from their location at the intersection of both membranes . Another possible mechanism to modulate nuclear size also involves NPCs , those structures a ﬀ ect PL metabolism by constraining the subcellular position of the e ﬀ ector enzymes . This is the case of lipin and numerous other lipid - generating proteins recognized in the NE proteome ( reviewed in [ 104 ] ) . 3 . 6 . 2 . Nuclear Phospholipid Regulation of Chromatin Lipid – nucleic acid interactions have been hypothesized to be the basis for the organization and expression of cellular genome ( reviewed in [ 105 ] ) . Around 50 years ago , a role of bacterial membrane was hypothesized in the segregation of bacterial chromosomes [ 106 ] . This was the seed of subsequent studies on DNA – membrane ( DNA – lipid ) interactions , mostly in the 1970s and 1980s , and led to the isolation of DNA – membrane complexes ( DMC ) . PL in the nucleus can be found far from the membranes linked to water - soluble proteins . PL’s presence in the nucleoplasm was reported for sterols , PL , sphingosines , and very hydrophobic FA where those molecules were implicated in transcriptional regulation ( reviewed in [ 107 ] ) . Furthermore , lipids were reported to serve as hormone - like ligands within the nuclear receptor superfamily . This family involves ligand - regulated transcription factors exerting both the activation and repression of transcription . Identiﬁed ligands include some PL , hydrophobic , Chol - based molecules ( e . g . , steroids and oxy - sterols ) , and FA ( reviewed in [ 108 ] ) . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 2167 10 of 30 4 . Cellular Mechanisms of Physicochemical Membrane Homeostasis The amphiphilic nature of PL leads their spontaneous distribution into bilayers in aqueous environments , which are the basic component of all cellular membranes . The nature of their head - group and the length and saturation of their acyl chains deﬁne the category of PL species and the structural features of the membrane , i . e . , viscosity , curvature , and electrostatic charge of the bilayer ( reviewed in [ 66 ] ) . The physiological particularities of subcellular organelles are based on their membrane properties , including lipid composition which indeed needs to be homeostatically preserved to maintain the organelle’s physiological purpose . Membrane protein abundance and composition also a ﬀ ect the physicochemical properties of biological membranes . The most robust demonstration of this inﬂuence comes from experiments where lipids isolated from biological membranes self - assemble into non - lamellar phases , not into bilayers as they do in their natural , protein - rich environment [ 109 ] . Further focusing on PL , PtdCho amount is beyond 50 % of all PL in most eukaryotes . PtdCho commonly involves one cis - unsaturated acyl chain , for instance oleic acid ( C18 : 1 ) . This cis - double bond makes a strong kink that undoubtedly decreases the packing compactness of the acyl chains and in turn rises membrane ﬂuidity [ 110 ] . PtdCho owes to its cylindrical shape the capability to self - assemble spontaneously ( Figure 3 ) . Hence , at a physiological temperature , PtdCho arranges into closed bilayers in a liquid crystalline state . All in all , PtdCho is specially endowed to keep a stable and ﬂuid ground for cellular membranes ( reviewed in [ 17 ] ) . By contrast , the conical shape of PtdEtn , due to the relatively small polar head group , imposes negative curvature stress on the membrane . Acyl chain unsaturation in PtdEtn further increases the non - bilayer propensity of this PL , creating lipid - packing defects that facilitate membrane fusion and inﬂuence the binding and activity of peripheral membrane proteins [ 111 , 112 ] . Though in comparatively low abundance , PtdSer and PtdIns are crucial determinants of membrane surface charge and , further on , mediate operational connections with positively charged portions of membrane proteins , both peripheral and integral [ 40 , 41 ] ( reviewed in [ 17 ] ) . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 30 Further focusing on PL , PtdCho amount is beyond 50 % of all PL in most eukaryotes . PtdCho commonly involves one cis - unsaturated acyl chain , for instance oleic acid ( C18 : 1 ) . This cis - double bond makes a strong kink that undoubtedly decreases the packing compactness of the acyl chains and in turn rises membrane fluidity [ 110 ] . PtdCho owes to its cylindrical shape the capability to self - assemble spontaneously ( Figure 3 ) . Hence , at a physiological temperature , PtdCho arranges into closed bilayers in a liquid crystalline state . All in all , PtdCho is specially endowed to keep a stable and fluid ground for cellular membranes ( reviewed in [ 17 ] ) . By contrast , the conical shape of PtdEtn , due to the relatively small polar head group , imposes negative curvature stress on the membrane . Acyl chain unsaturation in PtdEtn further increases the non - bilayer propensity of this PL , creating lipid - packing defects that facilitate membrane fusion and influence the binding and activity of peripheral membrane proteins [ 111 , 112 ] . Though in comparatively low abundance , PtdSer and PtdIns are crucial determinants of membrane surface charge and , further on , mediate operational connections with positively charged portions of membrane proteins , both peripheral and integral [ 40 , 41 ] ( reviewed in [ 17 ] ) . Figure 3 . Membrane homeostasis and circuits of lipids between organelles . ( a ) Lipid bilayers can form a number of different structures upon their composition in PL species . Some examples of lipid shapes and their influence on membrane structure are shown . Lipids with a small polar head ( blue ) , such as PtdEtn , have a molecular shape that resembles a truncated cone . They induce a negative curvature strain . Lipids with a bulky polar head and only one acyl chain ( e . g . , lysophospholipids , green ) have a molecular shape similar to an inverted cone and induce a positive curvature strain in membranes . Lipids such as PtdCho have similar cross - sectional areas for the polar head and hydrophobic region and resemble cylinders ( red ) . They form lamellar phases , with no curvature strain . Not to scale . Adapted from [ 113 ] . ( b ) Mechanisms of lipid homeostasis maintenance between cell compartments . Chol : cholesterol ; ER : endoplasmic reticulum ; MCS : membrane contact sites ; LTPs : lipid transfer proteins ; PM : plasma membrane ; PtdCho : phosphatidylcholine ; PtdEtn : phosphatidylethanolamine . As previously introduced , at least some lipids in every organelle were synthesized elsewhere and gained through transportation . Lipid transport between organelles needs to be specific in order to preserve the exclusive lipid composition of the organelles involved in the transfer ( reviewed in [ 16 ] ) . The plasma membrane , endosomes and lysosomes depend completely on lipid transport from other organelles ( reviewed in [ 16 ] ) . Lipid transport can occur by several mechanisms . The first mechanism is diffusion : lipids can laterally diffuse through membrane continuities , such as those that exist between the ER and the ONM and INM . Membrane contact sites ( MCS ) with ER were reported for almost every other organelle . MCS are defined as confluence points where the membranes of two organelles are positioned close to each other so as to offer a milieu where proteins in one membrane are accessible to the opposite membrane . Indeed , MCS are the purpose - built platforms for the allocation of distinct classes of lipids from the ER to other organelles using non - vesicular transport . This transfer is mediated by lipid transfer proteins ( LTPs ) , which , in MCS , can easily reach the lipid molecules to be transferred between organelles ( reviewed in [ 114 ] ) . Tubular connections have been Figure 3 . Membrane homeostasis and circuits of lipids between organelles . ( a ) Lipid bilayers can form a number of di ﬀ erent structures upon their composition in PL species . Some examples of lipid shapes and their inﬂuence on membrane structure are shown . Lipids with a small polar head ( blue ) , such as PtdEtn , have a molecular shape that resembles a truncated cone . They induce a negative curvature strain . Lipids with a bulky polar head and only one acyl chain ( e . g . , lysophospholipids , green ) have a molecular shape similar to an inverted cone and induce a positive curvature strain in membranes . Lipids such as PtdCho have similar cross - sectional areas for the polar head and hydrophobic region and resemble cylinders ( red ) . They form lamellar phases , with no curvature strain . Not to scale . Adapted from [ 113 ] . ( b ) Mechanisms of lipid homeostasis maintenance between cell compartments . Chol : cholesterol ; ER : endoplasmic reticulum ; MCS : membrane contact sites ; LTPs : lipid transfer proteins ; PM : plasma membrane ; PtdCho : phosphatidylcholine ; PtdEtn : phosphatidylethanolamine . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 2167 11 of 30 As previously introduced , at least some lipids in every organelle were synthesized elsewhere and gained through transportation . Lipid transport between organelles needs to be speciﬁc in order to preserve the exclusive lipid composition of the organelles involved in the transfer ( reviewed in [ 16 ] ) . The plasma membrane , endosomes and lysosomes depend completely on lipid transport from other organelles ( reviewed in [ 16 ] ) . Lipid transport can occur by several mechanisms . The ﬁrst mechanism is di ﬀ usion : lipids can laterally di ﬀ use through membrane continuities , such as those that exist between the ER and the ONM and INM . Membrane contact sites ( MCS ) with ER were reported for almost every other organelle . MCS are deﬁned as conﬂuence points where the membranes of two organelles are positioned close to each other so as to o ﬀ er a milieu where proteins in one membrane are accessible to the opposite membrane . Indeed , MCS are the purpose - built platforms for the allocation of distinct classes of lipids from the ER to other organelles using non - vesicular transport . This transfer is mediated by lipid transfer proteins ( LTPs ) , which , in MCS , can easily reach the lipid molecules to be transferred between organelles ( reviewed in [ 114 ] ) . Tubular connections have been observed between Golgi cisternae . On the contrary , mitochondria and peroxisomes do not take part into the vesicle transport system and lipids are probably coming in and out of these organelles as monomers , aided by both water - soluble and membrane - based proteins ( revised in [ 16 ] ) . The second mechanism is fusion : the major membrane transport pathway between cellular organelles in the secretory and endocytic pathways is through the budding and fusion of membrane vesicles . Particularly remarkable is the transport of Chol between ER and the PM . The PM concentrates 80 % of total cellular cholesterol but lacks sterol regulatory element - binding proteins ( SREBPs ) . In contrast , the ER membrane , with less than 1 % of total cellular cholesterol , contains both SREBPs and the sensors controlling SREBP activation [ 115 ] ( reviewed in [ 116 ] ) . Careful coordination of the lipid transport between PM and ER enables ER cholesterol sensors to continuously follow PM cholesterol content [ 117 ] . Control of the carrying of cholesterol from the PM to the ER is governed by the arrangement of cholesterol in PM , which in turn is crucially restrained by the connection of cholesterol with SM [ 118 ] ( reviewed in [ 116 ] ) . The electrostatic charge of the bilayer is another element responsible for the maintenance of an organelle’s physiological identity and function . Asymmetric distribution of PLs between both leaﬂets is strongly dependent upon the Golgi apparatus . In the Golgi , the precise asymmetric distribution of PLs between both leaﬂets of the PM is established , and therefore the corresponding e ﬀ ect on membrane electrostatics . On one hand , PtdSer ﬂuctuates from a higher concentration in the luminal leaﬂet of the ER to an opposite distribution at the PM , where PtdSer faces the cytoplasm and contributes to the negative surface charge [ 16 , 119 ] . Type 4 P - type ATPases ( P4 - ATPases ) in the trans - Golgi are the responsible for translocating PtdSer and other PL from the luminal to the cytoplasmic leaﬂet [ 120 , 121 ] . On the other hand , PtdIns restriction to highly dynamic sub - compartments of the ER further suggests that cytoplasmic surface of ER is overall relatively neutral [ 43 ] . As a reﬂection of physicochemical membrane homeostasis , the lipidome of cellular organelles is remodeled , and it does much faster than the proteome [ 122 – 125 ] . Two examples of physiological processes modulating the lipidome are metabolic challenge [ 124 ] and acute stress [ 125 ] . A third example is cellular di ﬀ erentiation [ 122 , 123 ] : dramatic lipid composition remodeling was reported in early post - natal di ﬀ erentiation of synaptic membranes from mammalian neurons [ 122 ] . Against this lipidome ﬂexibility , the ﬂuidity and packaging of the membranes remained intact in this neural model , suggesting that physical homeostasis prevails over changes in lipid composition [ 122 ] . A very tempting prospect might be that instead of preserving membrane lipid compositions , cells pursue the retention of their attributes by adjusting the multifactorial lipidome ( reviewed in [ 15 ] ) . 5 . Lipid Imbalances and Human Pathologies The lipidome of cellular organelles is remodeled not only upon physiological conditions but also under pathological conditions ( Figure 4 ) . Those changes in the cell membrane lipid composition , in turn , a ﬀ ect the biophysical properties of microdomains and the ability of signal propagation by proteins and signaling lipids ( reviewed in [ 19 ] ) . For instance , several di ﬀ erent pathologies develop Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 2167 12 of 30 with alterations in lipid raft composition and structure [ 126 – 128 ] . With further detail , PL regulate endocytic processes which are required for properly regulated growth , immune surveillance , synaptic transmission , cell migration , and many other functions . Hence , alterations in PL metabolism during endocytosis were reported in chronic infections , metastatic tumors , and neurological disorders ( reviewed in [ 66 ] ) . A further example involves human disorders , such as Alzheimer’s disease and type II diabetes , which develop with accumulations of peptide and protein ﬁbrillar aggregates . In those cases , oligomer - mediated cytotoxicity does not depend simply on the protein aggregates themselves , but also on the chemical composition and physicochemical features of the cell membranes with which the oligomers interact [ 129 – 132 ] . Cystic ﬁbrosis causes lipid imbalances which impair surfactant ability in the lungs and promote bacterial growth , leading to decreased breathing ability [ 133 , 134 ] . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 30 Cancer cells require significant cellular growth and therefore membrane biosynthesis to survive . In accordance , PL biosynthetic pathways are up - regulated in cancer [ 102 , 135 ] . Several alterations in membrane composition and PL synthesis , distribution , or catabolism reported in cancer are listed below : • PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P3 concentration is also elevated in numerous cancers . This example of abnormal lipid catabolism is due to ineffective degradation by the tumor suppressor phosphatase and tensin homolog ( PTEN ) [ 136 , 137 ] . • Total SM levels are decreased and PtdEtn levels are increased in tumor cells compared to non - tumor controls [ 138 ] . As a consequence , the PtdEtn : SM ratio in tumor cells is ca . 10 - fold the ratio in normal cells . In fact , PtdEtn : SM ratio might work as a switch where high PtdEtn : SM ratio is a ‘ON’ state allowing propagation of proliferation signals received at the PM , while a low PtdEtn : SM ratio is a ‘OFF’ state where the PM is impaired for transduction of proliferative signals [ 139 ] . • Other SL involved in cancer pathology include Cer , Sph and S1P ( reviewed in [ 140 ] ) . Cer mediates numerous cell - stress responses , such as induction of apoptosis [ 141 ] and cell senescence [ 142 ] , whereas S1P in contrast exerts its role in cell survival , migration , and inflammation [ 143 ] . Further investigations point to an abnormal SL signaling in carcinogenesis of various types of cancer due to alterations in the activity of enzymes that participate in the metabolism of SL [ 144 ] . • Other lipid metabolism genes related with cancer are Oxidized Low Density Lipoprotein Receptor 1 ( OLR1 ) and Glutaredoxin ( GLRX ) , which are upregulated in breast and prostate cancer tissues [ 145 ] . The oncogenic antigen - 519 , a molecular marker found in breast cancer patients with poor prognosis , was identified as FA Synthase ( FASN ) already twenty - five years ago [ 146 ] . Other proteins related to FA biosynthesis and lipid metabolism regulation , such as acetyl - CoA carboxylase ( ACC ) , Insulin induced gene 1 ( INSIG1 ) , and sterol regulatory element - binding protein 1 ( SREBP1 ) , are highly expressed in breast cancer tumors and associated with low patient survival [ 147 ] while colorectal carcinoma risk has been associated with hepatic lipase polymorphisms [ 148 ] . Alterations in lysosomal SL metabolism are another trait of many cancers [ 149 ] . Figure 4 . Lipid imbalances and human pathologies . Snapshot of the alterations in the lipidome which have been described in a variety of pathological situations . ▲ , increased levels or pathway activity ; PL : phospholipid ; PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P3 : phosphatidylinositol 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate ; PtdEtn : phosphatidylethanolamine ; SM : sphingomyelin ; OLR1 : Oxidized Low Density Lipoprotein Receptor 1 ; GLRX : Glutaredoxin ; FASN : FA Synthase ; ACC : acetyl - CoA carboxylase ; INSIG1 : Insulin induced gene 1 ; SREBP1 : sterol regulatory element - binding protein 1 ; LSD : Lysosomal disorder ; SL : sphingolipid ; Chol : cholesterol ; FA : fatty acid ; PtdSer : phosphatidylserine ; GPL : Glycerophospholipids . Figure 4 . Lipid imbalances and human pathologies . Snapshot of the alterations in the lipidome which have been described in a variety of pathological situations . (cid:78) , increased levels or pathway activity ; PL : phospholipid ; PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P3 : phosphatidylinositol 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate ; PtdEtn : phosphatidylethanolamine ; SM : sphingomyelin ; OLR1 : Oxidized Low Density Lipoprotein Receptor 1 ; GLRX : Glutaredoxin ; FASN : FA Synthase ; ACC : acetyl - CoA carboxylase ; INSIG1 : Insulin induced gene 1 ; SREBP1 : sterol regulatory element - binding protein 1 ; LSD : Lysosomal disorder ; SL : sphingolipid ; Chol : cholesterol ; FA : fatty acid ; PtdSer : phosphatidylserine ; GPL : Glycerophospholipids . 5 . 1 . Cancer Cancer cells require signiﬁcant cellular growth and therefore membrane biosynthesis to survive . In accordance , PL biosynthetic pathways are up - regulated in cancer [ 102 , 135 ] . Several alterations in membrane composition and PL synthesis , distribution , or catabolism reported in cancer are listed below : • PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P3 concentration is also elevated in numerous cancers . This example of abnormal lipid catabolism is due to ine ﬀ ective degradation by the tumor suppressor phosphatase and tensin homolog ( PTEN ) [ 136 , 137 ] . • Total SM levels are decreased and PtdEtn levels are increased in tumor cells compared to non - tumor controls [ 138 ] . As a consequence , the PtdEtn : SM ratio in tumor cells is ca . 10 - fold the ratio in normal cells . In fact , PtdEtn : SM ratio might work as a switch where high PtdEtn : SM ratio is a ‘ON’ state allowing propagation of proliferation signals received at the PM , while a low PtdEtn : SM ratio is a ‘OFF’ state where the PM is impaired for transduction of proliferative signals [ 139 ] . • Other SL involved in cancer pathology include Cer , Sph and S1P ( reviewed in [ 140 ] ) . Cer mediates numerous cell - stress responses , such as induction of apoptosis [ 141 ] and cell senescence [ 142 ] , whereas S1P in contrast exerts its role in cell survival , migration , and inﬂammation [ 143 ] . Further Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 2167 13 of 30 investigations point to an abnormal SL signaling in carcinogenesis of various types of cancer due to alterations in the activity of enzymes that participate in the metabolism of SL [ 144 ] . • Other lipid metabolism genes related with cancer are Oxidized Low Density Lipoprotein Receptor 1 ( OLR1 ) and Glutaredoxin ( GLRX ) , which are upregulated in breast and prostate cancer tissues [ 145 ] . The oncogenic antigen - 519 , a molecular marker found in breast cancer patients with poor prognosis , was identiﬁed as FA Synthase ( FASN ) already twenty - ﬁve years ago [ 146 ] . Other proteins related to FA biosynthesis and lipid metabolism regulation , such as acetyl - CoA carboxylase ( ACC ) , Insulin induced gene 1 ( INSIG1 ) , and sterol regulatory element - binding protein 1 ( SREBP1 ) , are highly expressed in breast cancer tumors and associated with low patient survival [ 147 ] while colorectal carcinoma risk has been associated with hepatic lipase polymorphisms [ 148 ] . Alterations in lysosomal SL metabolism are another trait of many cancers [ 149 ] . The above - mentioned lipid traits of tumors reﬂect their important roles during tumor initiation and disease progression at di ﬀ erent points ( reviewed in [ 135 ] ) : (cid:4) Disruption of normal tissue architecture : The collapse of normal tissue architecture is a mark of malignancy . Polarized epithelia turn into disorganized structures that can occupy the adjacent tissues . In epithelial tissues , aberrant FA synthesis was linked to the loss of cell polarity . Also , the ordinary expression of SREBPs is needed to maintain the apical surface of normal epithelial cells and is lost in many cancers ( reviewed in [ 135 ] ) (cid:4) Cancer cell migration : Cell migration stimulation by pro - migratory signaling lipids , such as DAG , LPA and prostaglandins , has been well characterized ( reviewed in [ 150 ] ) . In addition , other ﬁndings suggest that dietary - derived lipids might enlarge the overall lipid composition of malignant cells and so inﬂuence multiple signaling events within tumors [ 151 ] . (cid:4) Interaction of cancer cells with components of the tumor stroma : This is another key element affecting tumor growth [ 152 ] and lipids were also involved in this communication . Examples include the support to cancer - associated ﬁbroblasts by the expression of FASN [ 153 ] , the compromise of proper macrophage functioning upon FA biosynthesis [ 134 , 154 ] and of proper immune response upon prostaglandin presence [ 155 ] . (cid:4) Lipid metabolic reprogramming in cancer cells : cancer cells display an enlarged metabolic inventory that allows the ﬂexibility to survive and grow in the severe tumor environment . Highly proliferative cancer cells display a strong lipid and Chol avidity , which they fulﬁll by raising the incorporation of exogenous ( or dietary ) lipids or increasing their endogenous synthesis . Excessive lipids and cholesterol in cancer cells stored in lipid droplets are considered marks of cancer aggressiveness ( reviewed in [ 156 ] ) . 5 . 2 . Metabolic Diseases Several lysosomal storage disorders ( LSDs ) a ﬀ ect lysosomal hydrolases , membrane transporters , accessory or tra ﬃ cking proteins and derive into lipid storage disorders ( sphingolipidoses , gangliosidoses , leukodystrophies ) ( reviewed in [ 95 ] ) . The most common LSD is Gaucher disease ( GD ) , which impairs the function of ( lyso ) glucosylceramide degrading enzyme β - glucocerebrosidase ( EC 3 . 2 . 1 . 45 ) . Fabry disease ( FD ) , in contrast , develops with deﬁciency of the lysosomal α - galactosidase A ( EC 3 . 2 . 1 . 22 ) . Krabbe disease ( KD ) interferes with the function of the enzyme galactocerebrosidase ( EC : 3 . 2 . 1 . 46 ) , so that undegraded galactolipids accumulate and cause the progressive demyelination of cells in the nervous system . Niemann – Pick type C disease originates by intralysosomal Chol and SL accumulation and develops with severe neurological and visceral pathology ( reviewed in [ 95 ] ) . Another example is Tay Sachs disease , a rare inherited disorder that progressively destroys nerve cells ( neurons ) in the brain and spinal cord . This disease is a type of sphingolipidosis which shows toxic accumulation of the molecule GM2 ganglioside within cells [ 157 ] . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 2167 14 of 30 Obesity is another metabolic disease initiated by a lipid imbalance . Particularly , it has been linked to the intake of saturated ( or trans - monounsaturated fatty acid – MUFA ) fats ( reviewed in [ 19 ] ) . One of these saturated FA , palmitic acid , has been shown to induce of ER stress and cell death [ 158 ] . Diabetes is a disease highly inﬂuenced by the dietary FA content . In diabetic patients , increased saturated : unsaturated FA ratio is found in erythrocyte membranes compared to healthy controls [ 159 ] . In addition , dysregulation of PtdSer asymmetric distribution in the PM may contribute to the development of diabetes [ 160 , 161 ] . Focusing on the molecular mechanism behind the onset of lipid imbalance - driven obesity and diabetes , both lipid homeostasis and physical principles governing lipid arrangements in the membranes are involved . Two examples illustrate this mechanism in liver disease ( reviewed in [ 17 ] ) . The liver is a crucial metabolic organ in controlling body energy metabolism . It functions as a metabolic hub linking several tissues , skeletal muscle and adipose tissue included . In fat metabolism , the liver cells break down fats and produce energy ( reviewed in [ 162 ] ) . (cid:4) In the ﬁrst example , excessive intake of saturated FA is highly toxic for hepatocytes due to its limited capacity to integrate them into TG [ 163 ] . In parallel , an elevated degree of membrane saturation disrupts calcium homeostasis and triggers liver ER stress [ 164 ] . Chronic activation of ER stress dysregulates lipid homeostasis and might lead to dyslipidemia , insulin resistance , type II diabetes , and obesity [ 163 ] . (cid:4) A second example involves the previously introduced TFEB , transcription factor partially dictating lysosome biogenesis . As above mentioned , TFEB participates in autophagy and in the clearance of lipid droplets . Furthermore , it governs liver lipid catabolism and energy metabolism interfering with peroxisome proliferator - activated receptor - γ ( PPAR - γ ) signaling [ 165 ] . In obese animals , TFEB overexpression rescues obesity and associated metabolic syndrome by promoting lipophagy [ 166 ] . A high fat diet can likewise obstruct the formation of lipid rafts needed for the uptake of exogenous factors such as insulin from the blood [ 167 , 168 ] . Hypercholesterolemia disease shows defective clearance of low - density lipoproteins ( LDL ) due to mutations in elements of the sterol and lipoprotein pathways . Furthermore , elevated plasma Chol levels associate with higher levels of Chol in the PM of cardiovascular and other cells , and in turn alter PM structure and signal transduction ( reviewed in [ 169 ] ) . 5 . 3 . Neurological Disorders The neural membrane lipid composition has been reported to change in neurodegeneration . Particularly , changes a ﬀ ected GPL , SL , and Chol levels both in acute neural trauma ( head injury , ischemia , and spinal cord trauma ) and in neurodegenerative diseases ( Alzheimer’s , Parkinson’s and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ) . In accordance , signiﬁcant increased levels of in GPL - , SL - , and Chol - derived lipid mediators have been shown to accompany these variations in lipid composition both in the PM and in the cell nucleus ( reviewed in [ 101 ] ) . 5 . 4 . Immunological Disorders Anti - phospholipid syndrome ( APS ) is an autoimmune disease caused by the appearance of anti - PL antibodies and developed with vascular thromboembolism and miscarriages ( reviewed in [ 170 ] ) . Anti - PL involve lupus anticoagulant ( LA ) , anti - β 2GPI antibodies and anti - cardiolipin ( anti - CL ) . The mechanism linking the binding of anti - PL antibodies to endothelial cells with cell activation is still under investigation . A great variety of infections are accompanied by increases in anti - PL mostly in viral infections ( Hepatitis C virus , Epstein - Barr virus , Varicella virus , human immunodeﬁciency virus ) ( reviewed in [ 171 ] ) . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 2167 15 of 30 The avoidance of autoreactivity to the broadly distributed self - PL is a key instrument to prevent autoimmune diseases . However , little is known on the molecular mechanisms responsible of T cell autoreactivity on lipid antigens ( reviewed in [ 172 ] ) . 5 . 5 . Regulation of Cellular Activities by Prenylation Protein prenylation is a ubiquitous covalent post - translational modiﬁcation . It is the ﬁrst critical step for membrane targeting and binding and mediates protein - protein interactions [ 173 ] . This modiﬁcation increases the hydrophobicity of the protein [ 174 ] , favors its temporary attachment to the membrane [ 175 ] and is essential for a correct protein activity [ 173 ] . Protein prenylation consists of the attachment of farnesyl ( 15 carbon ) or geranylgeranyl ( 20 carbon ) groups to the protein [ 176 ] . First described in fungi [ 177 ] , farnesylation was described in mammals on lamin B [ 178 , 179 ] . Defective prenylation of proteins is linked to tumor pathogenesis among others [ 180 ] . Three enzymes catalyze the prenylation of proteins : farnesyltransferase ( FTase ) and geranylgeranyltransferases type I and II ( GGTase I and GGTase II ) . They are heterodimers recognising C - terminal consensus sequences in the target proteins . FTase and GGTase I transfer a single farnesyl or geranylgeranyl group to a cysteine residue located in the “CaaX box” ( C - terminal consensus sequence in which “C” represents a cysteine , “a” is an aliphatic amino acid and “X” determines the attached isoprenoid ) [ 176 ] . Proteins modiﬁed by FTase or GGTase I need two additional processing steps : cleavage of “aaX” tripeptide by an endoprotease and methylation of prenylcysteine [ 174 ] . The structure and enzymology of FTase and GGTase I are similar , although most studies focus on farnesylation . First , farnesyl residue binds to FTase [ 181 , 182 ] , secondly the protein with a CaaX - box binds and the C - S bond is formed . While the prenylated protein remains bound to the enzyme , another prenyl group binds to the enzyme and , lastly , the product ( prenylated protein ) is dissociated before or while a new CaaX - box substrate binds [ 173 ] . As a consequence , stereochemistry at C - 1 position of the isoprenoid is inverted [ 183 – 185 ] but this causes minimal di ﬀ erences in protein conformation [ 186 ] . FTase and GGTase I have not mutually exclusive substrate speciﬁcity [ 187 ] , although there are preferences depending on the “X” aminoacid in CaaX box , as said above , so some prediction tools have been developed . GGTase II , also called Rab GGTase , catalyzes the transference of two geranylgeranyl groups to two cysteine residues located in sequences such as CXC or CCXX close to C - terminus of Rab proteins [ 176 ] . Its enzymology is more complex and needs an escort protein to catalyze the reaction [ 188 ] . Although , only a few prenyltransferase substrates ( e . g . , Ras family GTPases and heterotrimeric G - proteins ) have been identiﬁed , this modiﬁcation is essential for the proper activity of some proteins which are altered in di ﬀ erent diseases . This is the basis for the e ﬀ orts made in the therapeutic targeting of protein prenylation . Inhibitors of prenylation have been tested for the treatment of cancer , parasite causing diseases , viral and bacterial infections , multiple sclerosis or progeria [ 173 ] . Proteins involved in signal transduction pathways require prenylation . An interesting example of these proteins is Ras protein family . Many cancers present activating mutations in the RAS genes causing malignant activity of the protein [ 189 ] . For this reason , prenyltransferase inhibitors have been tested in vitro and in animals for the inhibition of Ras proteins , showing promising results . Firstly , farnesyltransferase inhibitors ( FTIs ) were used to inhibit the farnesylation of proteins in cancer cells . FTIs promoted apoptosis , cell cycle arrest ( mainly mitotic arrest at prometaphase ) and inhibition of proliferation , cell migration and angiogenesis by a ﬀ ecting signal transduction pathways such as RAF - MEK - MAPK or PI3K - Akt and other oncogenic and survival pathways [ 180 ] . Unfortunately , clinical studies did not show robust anticancer activity [ 190 ] with only several patients responding to FTIs both alone and in combination with other agents . In sum , some tumors depend on farnesylated proteins for survival , but further development is needed to apply this knowledge to the clinic [ 180 ] . More recently , geranylgeranyltranseferase inhibitors ( GGTIs ) were developed . Ras protein isoforms were found to be geranylgeranylated when FTase was inhibited and some pathways downstream Ras were mediated by geranylgeranylated proteins [ 191 ] . In cell and animal models , GGTIs block cell cycle in the G1 phase [ 192 ] , induce apoptosis , and inhibit tumor cell growth [ 180 ] . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 2167 16 of 30 Other protein susceptible to be targeted by prenylation inhibitors include proteins being exclusively farnesylated ( e . g . , HRAS and RAS homologue enriched in brain – RHEB ) or geranylgeranylated ( e . g . , RHOA , RHOC , RALA and RALB ) ; although some can be both farnesylated or geranylgeranylated ( e . g . , RHOB ) or become geranylgeranylated when farnesylation is inhibited ( e . g . , KRAS , as said above , and HRAS ) . Other prenylation inhibitors’ targets include tumor suppressors ( such as ARHI , RERG , DBC2 , RIG , RRP22 ) and other proteins ( such as CENPE , CENPF , PRL phosphatases , lamin A and B , HDJ2 , RND3 , PEX19 , RHOD , RHO6 , RHO7 , TC10 and PTGIR ) ( reviewed in [ 180 ] ) . 6 . New Lipid - Based Therapeutic Avenues : Membrane Lipid Therapy 6 . 1 . Molecular Bases of Targeting the Plasma Membrane In the above sections it was made clear that many cell functions take place in membranes and their surroundings [ 160 ] . Furthermore , it was reviewed how membrane components participate in functions altered in many human diseases [ 19 ] . Those functions include changing the localization of key proteins in the cell , in turn , altering key protein - protein interactions in membrane microdomains . Subsequently , signaling cascades are altered and correct functioning of the cell is compromised . Hence , the new therapeutic approach , membrane lipid therapy ( MLT ) , aims to target membrane components to modify membrane composition or structure , i . e . , the drug - induced regulation of membrane lipid composition and structure [ 113 ] . This strategy has shown not only e ﬃ cacy , but also higher speciﬁcity and safety , and has become a potential alternative to conventional drugs [ 6 ] . The variety of membrane microdomains based on di ﬀ erent compositions and bearing speciﬁc biological properties was already introduced [ 45 ] . Furthermore , membrane microdomain composition , and subsequently function , may be modiﬁed by both lipid intake and enzymatic regulation [ 19 ] . Proteins involved in cell signaling interact with these microdomains and assemble crucial signaling platforms whose alteration might be pathological [ 126 , 127 ] . Thus , MLT aims to alter this protein signaling by modifying the composition and structure of the membrane microdomains and subsequently modulate cell signaling , o ﬀ ering potentially e ﬀ ective treatments for a variety of conditions [ 113 , 193 – 195 ] . The overall membrane lipid composition , the composition of membrane microdomains or the composition of internal organelles can be targeted by natural or modiﬁed lipids or drugs [ 196 – 198 ] . For instance , proteins such as G proteins or protein kinase C ( PKC ) , as well as stress response proteins or enzymes such as SMS alter their binding to membrane according to membrane composition and structure [ 19 ] . Di ﬀ erent regulatory e ﬀ ects might be obtained when targeting plasma membrane for therapy ( Figure 5 ) : • Direct regulation through membrane structure modiﬁcation : Dietary lipids and environmental changes modify cell membranes changing their properties and microdomain organization , thus controlling the localization and activity of proteins such as G proteins ( interaction with membrane and downstream signaling ) [ 199 , 200 ] , the transcription of proteins involved in stress response such as heat shock proteins ( Hsp ) [ 201 ] , or the production of second messengers such as Cer [ 202 ] . Thus , MUFA treatments can change the order of Lo and Ld microdomains . • Regulation of enzymatic activity to alter membrane lipid levels : Enzymatic activity of SMS and other enzymes from SL metabolism are altered in cancer and consequently modify membrane composition and structure . Hydroxyl - C18 unsaturated fatty acids ( hydroxyoleic , hydroxilinoleic , hydroxy - α - linolenic and hydroxy - γ - linolenic acids ) have e ﬀ ects on SMS activity [ 138 ] . • Modiﬁcation of gene expression that results in alterations of membrane lipid composition : this gene expression change might a ﬀ ect the activity of an enzyme , protein - lipid interactions or protein - protein interaction . DNA - associated PL are found in nuclear membrane [ 203 ] and their e ﬀ ects on nuclear functions have been documented [ 103 ] . Evidence of this type of MLT include the increased SM levels in di ﬀ erentiated cells in contrast to low levels of this lipid on Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 2167 17 of 30 proliferating cells [ 138 ] . This increase does not take place with SM addition but for SMS increased activity [ 138 , 139 ] , which supports the concept of MLT - induced gene expression alteration . • Lipid alterations that a ﬀ ect protein - protein interactions in speciﬁc membrane microdomains : The alteration of lipid ratios or the presence of particular lipids in membranes cause changes in protein - protein interactions . For example , low PtdEtn / SM ratios reduce Ras interactions both with membrane components and with downstream partners , in turn , inhibiting the transduction through proliferative signaling cascades and preventing proliferation in cancer cells [ 139 ] . • Direct MLT - drug binding to a protein that alters its membrane binding a ﬃ nity or that of other signaling proteins : In that case , the MLT formulated molecule binds to a protein rather than a lipid . This is the case of prenylation inhibitors , which prevent Ras from binding to membrane and subsequently inhibit cancer cell proliferation while inducing cell di ﬀ erentiation and cell death [ 139 ] . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , x FOR PEER REVIEW 17 of 30 Figure 5 . Molecular bases of Membrane - Lipid Therapy . Snapshot of the rationale behind targeting membrane composition or structure i . e . , the drug - induced regulation of membrane lipid composition and structure . 6 . 2 . Development of Membrane Lipid Therapy in Different Therapeutic Areas In MLT , synthetic fatty acids are newly designed with the aim of regulating membrane microdomain distribution mimicking natural lipids [ 204 ] . Thus , MLT is a sophisticated therapeutic approach to make protein – protein interactions targetable in an environment where those interactions are not amenable to manipulation [ 139 , 205 , 206 ] . Many diseases are already being targeted by MLT . The most relevant fields in which MLT molecules are being developed are listed below and further reviewed in [ 19 ] ( Figure 6 ) . Figure 6 . Membrane - Lipid Therapy molecules are currently being developed for several medical conditions . • Oncology . The basis of developing MLT in oncology comes from the finding that membrane lipid composition might work as a switch allowing or compromising propagation of proliferation signals received at the PM in tumor cells [ 196 , 207 ] . Many molecules have been developed since the discovery membrane - altering mechanism of action of doxorubicin [ 199 ] . One of the most promising molecules is rationally - designed 2 - OHOA ( 2 - hydroxyoleic acid ) [ 208 ] , which is currently being tested in clinical trials for the treatment of glioma . 2 - OHOA activates SMS increasing its product , SM , and decreasing its substrate PtdEtn in membranes of cancer cells but not of healthy cells because of the higher levels of SM found in tumor cells [ 138 ] . 2OHOA was the first rationally designed MLT molecule to arrive clinical trials . It has shown good pharmaceutical efficacy and safety against cancer in humans ( ClinicalTrials . gov identifier # NCT01792310 ) . After a first - in - man phase I / IIA trial in patients with solid tumors , 43 % glioma patients responded to treatment , although this percentage almost doubled ( ca . 80 % ) if patients previously pretreated with avastin were disregarded [ 6 ] . Other molecules being explored in oncology follow here : 2 - hydroxylinoleic acid is on phase II clinical trial . This PUFA binds to Figure 5 . Molecular bases of Membrane - Lipid Therapy . Snapshot of the rationale behind targeting membrane composition or structure i . e . , the drug - induced regulation of membrane lipid composition and structure . 6 . 2 . Development of Membrane Lipid Therapy in Di ﬀ erent Therapeutic Areas In MLT , synthetic fatty acids are newly designed with the aim of regulating membrane microdomain distribution mimicking natural lipids [ 204 ] . Thus , MLT is a sophisticated therapeutic approach to make protein – protein interactions targetable in an environment where those interactions are not amenable to manipulation [ 139 , 205 , 206 ] . Many diseases are already being targeted by MLT . The most relevant ﬁelds in which MLT molecules are being developed are listed below and further reviewed in [ 19 ] ( Figure 6 ) . • Oncology . The basis of developing MLT in oncology comes from the ﬁnding that membrane lipid composition might work as a switch allowing or compromising propagation of proliferation signals received at the PM in tumor cells [ 196 , 207 ] . Many molecules have been developed since the discovery membrane - altering mechanism of action of doxorubicin [ 199 ] . One of the most promising molecules is rationally - designed 2 - OHOA ( 2 - hydroxyoleic acid ) [ 208 ] , which is currently being tested in clinical trials for the treatment of glioma . 2 - OHOA activates SMS increasing its product , SM , and decreasing its substrate PtdEtn in membranes of cancer cells but not of healthy cells because of the higher levels of SM found in tumor cells [ 138 ] . 2OHOA was the ﬁrst rationally designed MLT molecule to arrive clinical trials . It has shown good pharmaceutical e ﬃ cacy and safety against cancer in humans ( ClinicalTrials . gov identiﬁer # NCT01792310 ) . After a ﬁrst - in - man phase I / IIA trial in patients with solid tumors , 43 % glioma patients responded to treatment , although this percentage almost doubled ( ca . 80 % ) if patients previously pretreated with avastin were disregarded [ 6 ] . Other molecules being explored in oncology follow here : 2 - hydroxylinoleic acid is on phase II clinical trial . This PUFA binds to membrane and inhibits the Akt / mTORC1 axis and induces speciﬁc cancer cell autophagy [ 209 ] . Hydroxytriolein is a triacylglycerol mimetic synthetic lipid analogue of triolein shown to block cancer cell growth in vitro through the β - catenin Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 2167 18 of 30 pathway , downregulation of the MEK - ERK axis , and production of Reactive Oxygen Species and apoptosis [ 210 ] . Worth mentioning are propofol - docosahexaenoic acid ( P - DHA ) and its analogue edelfosine ( reviewed in [ 6 ] ) . Examples of anticancer therapies based on inhibitors targeting enzyme regulators of lipid metabolism are orlistat ( Roche Xenical ® ) , a FASN inhibitor administered in the treatment of breast cancer [ 211 ] ; and ABC294640 , a sphingosine kinase 2 and dihydroceramide desaturase inhibitor currently under an Ib / II clinical trial ( ClinicalTrials . gov identiﬁer # NCT02757326 ) . • Metabolic and cardiovascular diseases : The use of dietary lipids for the treatment of diabetes or obesity is a clear case of MLT . For example , body weight reductions where achieved in rats with daily supplements of olive oil ( made of 70 % – 80 % oleic acid ) but not with supplements of its trans analogue elaidic acid , due to the di ﬀ erent structure of both FA [ 44 , 212 ] . Furthermore , oleic acid analogues induce reduction of body weight in rats by promoting overexpression of uncoupling proteins UCP1 and UCP3 and decreasing food intake [ 212 ] . A high intake of oleic acid has also been shown to improve glycemic status and reduce saturated FA levels of diabetic patients while increasing those of unsaturated FA [ 159 ] . In the case of cardiovascular conditions , high oleic acid intake and ω - 3 FA consumption were linked to reduced blood pressure values [ 213 , 214 ] . This reduction is even greater with 2 - hydroxioleic acid treatment [ 215 , 216 ] . Furthermore , unsaturated FA are cardioprotective [ 217 ] . • Neurodegenerative disorders : Behind adipose tissue , the central nervous system concentrates the largest depot of lipids in the body making it a primary target for MLT strategies . Alzheimer’s disease risk has been inversely associated with ω - 3 polyunsaturated fatty acid ( PUFA ) consumption [ 218 ] . In detail , the altered amyloid precursor protein ( APP ) proteolysis upon DHA abundance was the basis to design 2 - hydroxioleic - DHA ( 2 - OHDHA ) . A four - month treatment with 2 - OHDHA in a severe Alzheimer’s disease mice model ( 5XFAD ) restored cognition to control values [ 219 , 220 ] . Spinal cord injury might also beneﬁt from MLT approaches ( reviewed in [ 19 ] ) . Albumin - oleic acid complex induces signiﬁcant motor recovery ( ~ 40 % ) in rats with spinal cord injury ( SCI ) [ 221 ] , ameliorating both spasticity and pain . The oleic acid analogue NFX88 ( Neuroﬁx ) is undergoing clinical trials for the treatment of neuropathic pain in patients with SCI . Finally , a phase II / III clinical trial ( ClinicalTrials . gov identiﬁer # NCT00706147 ) is being developed to evaluate the e ﬃ cacy of the lipid interacting hydroxylamine derivative arimoclomol in familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis . • Other conditions that are bound to be ameliorated using MLT include infectious diseases , chemotherapeutic neuropathy , wound healing , retinopathies , nephropathies , acetaminophen liver toxicity , sunburn , ischemia reperfusion , intracranial hemorrhage , atrial ﬁbrillation , vascular hypertension damage , and myocardial infarction as reviewed in [ 19 ] . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , x FOR PEER REVIEW 17 of 30 Figure 5 . Molecular bases of Membrane - Lipid Therapy . Snapshot of the rationale behind targeting membrane composition or structure i . e . , the drug - induced regulation of membrane lipid composition and structure . 6 . 2 . Development of Membrane Lipid Therapy in Different Therapeutic Areas In MLT , synthetic fatty acids are newly designed with the aim of regulating membrane microdomain distribution mimicking natural lipids [ 204 ] . Thus , MLT is a sophisticated therapeutic approach to make protein – protein interactions targetable in an environment where those interactions are not amenable to manipulation [ 139 , 205 , 206 ] . Many diseases are already being targeted by MLT . The most relevant fields in which MLT molecules are being developed are listed below and further reviewed in [ 19 ] ( Figure 6 ) . Figure 6 . Membrane - Lipid Therapy molecules are currently being developed for several medical conditions . • Oncology . The basis of developing MLT in oncology comes from the finding that membrane lipid composition might work as a switch allowing or compromising propagation of proliferation signals received at the PM in tumor cells [ 196 , 207 ] . Many molecules have been developed since the discovery membrane - altering mechanism of action of doxorubicin [ 199 ] . One of the most promising molecules is rationally - designed 2 - OHOA ( 2 - hydroxyoleic acid ) [ 208 ] , which is currently being tested in clinical trials for the treatment of glioma . 2 - OHOA activates SMS increasing its product , SM , and decreasing its substrate PtdEtn in membranes of cancer cells but not of healthy cells because of the higher levels of SM found in tumor cells [ 138 ] . 2OHOA was the first rationally designed MLT molecule to arrive clinical trials . It has shown good pharmaceutical efficacy and safety against cancer in humans ( ClinicalTrials . gov identifier # NCT01792310 ) . After a first - in - man phase I / IIA trial in patients with solid tumors , 43 % glioma patients responded to treatment , although this percentage almost doubled ( ca . 80 % ) if patients previously pretreated with avastin were disregarded [ 6 ] . Other molecules being explored in oncology follow here : 2 - hydroxylinoleic acid is on phase II clinical trial . This PUFA binds to Figure 6 . Membrane - LipidTherapymoleculesarecurrentlybeingdevelopedforseveralmedicalconditions . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 2167 19 of 30 7 . Future Directions and Conclusions Initially described as pure barriers , biological membranes are currently viewed as active players in cell and organelle architecture and physiology . Lipid composition peculiarities of the di ﬀ erent cell compartments is behind their speciﬁc structural properties and functionalities . Indeed , lipid dysregulation is a relevant factor in the etiology of many diseases . To exploit these new therapeutic avenues , lipids ( both natural and synthetic ) are being developed as potential drugs for di ﬀ erent conditions using the MLT approach and are bound to constitute alternative or innovative therapies for ﬁelds in which there are no available or promising treatments . Author Contributions : D . C . wrote and revised the manuscript . P . V . E . provided guidance and funding ; C . A . R . conceived and designed the manuscript , collected the relevant references and , wrote and revised the manuscript . Funding : This research was funded by Spanish Ministerio de Econom í a y Competitividad and European Regional Development Fund ( grant numbers RTC - 2015 - 3542 and RTC - 2015 - 4094 ) , the Marathon Foundation , the European Commission H2020 Framework Programme ( agreement number 755179 ) , the Spanish research agency ( grant DI - 17 - 09187 ) , the European Commission Seventh Framework Programme ( agreement number PIEF - GA - 2013 - 627441 ) and the Balearic Island Government and European Social Fund ( grant number PD / 036 / 2016 ) . Acknowledgments : We apologize to all authors whose work could not be cited due to space constraints . The authors thank C Ho ﬀ mann for editorial assistance . Conﬂicts of Interest : The authors declare no conﬂict of interest . Abbreviations 2 - OHDHA 2 - hydroxydocosahexanoic acid 2 - OHOA 2 - hydroxyoleic acid ACC acetyl - CoA carboxylase ALPS amphipathic lipid packing sensor APP amyloid precursor protein APS anti - phospholipid syndrome BmP bis ( monoacylglycero ) phosphate C1P ceramide - 1 - phosphate CLIC clathrin - independent carrier CDP - DAG cytidine diphosphate diacylglycerol Cer ceramide CerK ceramide kinase Chol cholesterol CL cardiolipin COP coat protein complex DAG diacylglycerol DMC DNA – membrane complexes ER endoplasmic reticulum ESCRT endosomal sorting complexes required for transport FASN fatty acid synthase FD Fabry disease FTase farnesyltransferase FTI farnesyltransferase inhibitor GalCer galactosylceramide GD Gaucher disease GEEC ( GptdIns ) - anchor - enriched endocytic compartment GEF guanine nucleotide exchange factors GGTase geranylgeranyltransferase GGTI geranylgeranyltransferase inhibitor GlcCer glucosylceramide GLRX glutaredoxin GPL glycerophospholipids GptdIns glycosylphosphatidylinositol Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 2167 20 of 30 GSL glycosphingolipid GTPase guanosine - 5 (cid:48) - triphosphate hydrolase Hsp heat shock protein IMM inner mitochondrial membrane IMS intermembrane space INM inner nuclear membrane INSIG1 insulin induced gene 1 KD Krabbe disease LA lupus anticoagulant LacCer lactosylceramide Ld Liquid - disordered LDL low - density lipoprotein LECA last eukaryotic common ancestor Lo Liquid - ordered LPA lysoPA LPC lysoPtdCho LSD lysosomal storage disease LTP lipid transfer protein LUCA last universal common ancestor MAM mitochondria associated membrane MCS membrane contact site MLT membrane lipid therapy MUFA monounsaturated fatty acid NE nuclear envelope NM nuclear membrane NPC nuclear pore complex NSF N - ethylmaleimide - sensitive factor OLR1 oxidized low density lipoprotein receptor 1 OMM outer mitochondrial membrane ONM outer nuclear membrane P4 - ATPase type 4 P - type ATPases P - DHA propofol - docosahexaenoic acid PA phosphatidic acid PKC protein kinase C PL phospholipids PM plasma membrane PPAR - γ peroxisome proliferator - activated receptor - γ PPIn polyphosphoinositides PtdCho phosphatidylcholine PtdEtn phosphatidylethanolamine PtdGro phosphatidylglycerol PtdIns phosphatidylinositol PtdIns ( 1 , 4 , 5 ) P3 phosphatidylinositol 1 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P3 phosphatidylinositol 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate PtdIns4P phosphatidylinositol 4 - phosphate PtdInsP phosphatidylinositol phosphate PtdSer phosphatidylserine SL sphingolipids SM sphingomyelin SMase sphingomyelinase SMS sphingomyelin synthase SNARE soluble N - ethylmaleimide - sensitive factor attachment protein receptor SPC sphingosylphosphorylcholine Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 2167 21 of 30 Sph sphingosine SphK sphingosine kinase SREBP sterol regulatory element - binding protein TFEB transcription factor EB TMDs transmembrane domains UCP uncoupling protein References 1 . Gould , S . B . Membranes and evolution . Curr . Biol . 2018 , 28 , R381 – R385 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 2 . Singer , S . J . ; Nicolson , G . L . The Fluid Mosaic Model of the Structure of Cell Membranes . Science 1972 , 175 , 720 – 731 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 3 . Bloom , M . ; Evans , E . ; Mouritsen , O . G . Physical properties of the ﬂuid lipid - bilayer component of cell membranes : a perspective . Q . Rev . Biophys . 1991 , 24 , 293 . [ CrossRef ] 4 . Bloom , M . ; Mouritsen , O . G . The Evolution of Membranes . In Handbook of Biological Physics ; Elsevier BV : Amsterdam , The Netherlands , 1995 ; Vol . 1 , pp . 65 – 95 . ISBN 0008 - 4042 . 5 . Karnovsky , M . J . The concept of lipid domains in membranes . J . Cell Biol . 1982 , 94 , 1 – 6 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 6 . Escrib á , P . V . Membrane - lipid therapy : A historical perspective of membrane - targeted therapies — From lipid bilayer structure to the pathophysiological regulation of cells . Biochim . Biophys . Acta BBA - Biomembr . 2017 , 1859 , 1493 – 1506 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 7 . Sackmann , E . Molecular and global structure and dynamics of membranes and lipid bilayers . Can . J . Phys . 1990 , 68 , 999 – 1012 . [ CrossRef ] 8 . Dacks , J . B . ; Field , M . C . Evolution of the eukaryotic membrane - tra ﬃ cking system : origin , tempo and mode . J . Cell Sci . 2007 , 120 , 2977 – 2985 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 9 . Deamer , D . W . Boundary structures are formed by organic components of the Murchison carbonaceous chondrite . Nature 1985 , 317 , 792 – 794 . [ CrossRef ] 10 . Morowitz , H . J . ; Heinz , B . ; Deamer , D . W . The chemical logic of a minimum protocell . Orig . Life Evol . Biosph . 1988 , 18 , 281 – 287 . [ CrossRef ] 11 . Glöckner , F . O . ; Kube , M . ; Bauer , M . ; Teeling , H . ; Lombardot , T . ; Ludwig , W . ; Gade , D . ; Beck , A . ; Borzym , K . ; Heitmann , K . ; et al . Complete genome sequence of the marine planctomycete Pirellula sp . strain 1 . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2003 , 100 , 8298 – 8303 . [ CrossRef ] 12 . Ranea , J . A . G . ; Sillero , A . ; Thornton , J . M . ; Orengo , C . A . Protein Superfamily Evolution and the Last Universal Common Ancestor ( LUCA ) . J . Mol . Evol . 2006 , 63 , 513 – 525 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 13 . Bonifacino , J . S . ; Glick , B . S . The Mechanisms of Vesicle Budding and Fusion . Cell 2004 , 116 , 153 – 166 . [ CrossRef ] 14 . Shevchenko , A . ; Simons , K . Lipidomics : coming to grips with lipid diversity . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2010 , 11 , 593 – 598 . [ CrossRef ] 15 . Ernst , R . ; Ballweg , S . ; Levental , I . Cellular mechanisms of physicochemical membrane homeostasis . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 2018 , 53 , 44 – 51 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 16 . Van Meer , G . ; Voelker , D . R . ; Feigenson , G . W . Membrane lipids : where they are and how they behave . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2008 , 9 , 112 – 124 . [ CrossRef ] 17 . Holthuis , J . C . M . ; Menon , A . K . Lipid landscapes and pipelines in membrane homeostasis . Nature 2014 , 510 , 48 – 57 . [ CrossRef ] 18 . De Kroon , A . I . P . M . ; Rijken , P . J . ; De Smet , C . H . Checks and balances in membrane phospholipid class and acyl chain homeostasis , the yeast perspective . Prog . Lipid Res . 2013 , 52 , 374 – 394 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 19 . Escrib á , P . V . ; Busquets , X . ; Inokuchi , J . ; Balogh , G . ; Török , Z . ; Horv á th , I . ; Harwood , J . L . ; V í gh , L . Membrane lipid therapy : Modulation of the cell membrane composition and structure as a molecular base for drug discovery and new disease treatment . Prog . Lipid Res . 2015 , 59 , 38 – 53 . [ CrossRef ] 20 . Van Meer , G . ; Lisman , Q . Sphingolipid Transport : Rafts and Translocators . J . Biol . Chem . 2002 , 277 , 25855 – 25858 . [ CrossRef ] 21 . Ikonen , E . Cellular cholesterol tra ﬃ cking and compartmentalization . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2008 , 9 , 125 – 138 . [ CrossRef ] 22 . Hullin - Matsuda , F . ; Taguchi , T . ; Greimel , P . ; Kobayashi , T . Lipid compartmentalization in the endosome system . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 2014 , 31 , 48 – 56 . [ CrossRef ] Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 2167 22 of 30 23 . Diaz - Rohrer , B . B . ; Levental , K . R . ; Simons , K . ; Levental , I . Membrane raft association is a determinant of plasma membrane localization . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2014 , 111 , 8500 – 8505 . [ CrossRef ] 24 . Diaz - Rohrer , B . ; Levental , K . R . ; Levental , I . Rafting through tra ﬃ c : Membrane domains in cellular logistics . Biochim . Biophys . Acta BBA - Biomembr . 2014 , 1838 , 3003 – 3013 . [ CrossRef ] 25 . Sharpe , H . J . ; Stevens , T . J . ; Munro , S . A Comprehensive Comparison of Transmembrane Domains Reveals Organelle - Speciﬁc Properties . Cell 2010 , 142 , 158 – 169 . [ CrossRef ] 26 . Lorent , J . H . ; Diaz - Rohrer , B . ; Lin , X . ; Spring , K . ; Gorfe , A . A . ; Levental , K . R . ; Levental , I . Structural determinants and functional consequences of protein a ﬃ nity for membrane rafts . Nat . Commun . 2017 , 8 , 1219 . [ CrossRef ] 27 . Covino , R . ; Ballweg , S . ; Stordeur , C . ; Michaelis , J . B . ; Puth , K . ; Wernig , F . ; Bahrami , A . ; Ernst , A . M . ; Hummer , G . ; Ernst , R . A Eukaryotic Sensor for Membrane Lipid Saturation . Mol . Cell 2016 , 63 , 49 – 59 . [ CrossRef ] 28 . Ballweg , S . ; Ernst , R . Control of membrane ﬂuidity : the OLE pathway in focus . Biol . Chem . 2017 , 398 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 29 . Loewen , C . J . R . Phospholipid Metabolism Regulated by a Transcription Factor Sensing Phosphatidic Acid . Science 2004 , 304 , 1644 – 1647 . [ CrossRef ] 30 . Halbleib , K . ; Pesek , K . ; Covino , R . ; Hofbauer , H . F . ; Wunnicke , D . ; Hänelt , I . ; Hummer , G . ; Ernst , R . Activation of the Unfolded Protein Response by Lipid Bilayer Stress . Mol . Cell 2017 , 67 , 673 – 684 . e8 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 31 . Bell , R . M . ; Ballas , L . M . ; Coleman , R . A . Lipid topogenesis . J . Lipid Res . 1981 , 22 , 391 – 403 . [ PubMed ] 32 . Sprong , H . ; Kruithof , B . ; Leijendekker , R . ; Slot , J . W . ; van Meer , G . ; van der Sluijs , P . UDP - Galactose : Ceramide Galactosyltransferase Is a Class I Integral Membrane Protein of the Endoplasmic Reticulum . J . Biol . Chem . 1998 , 273 , 25880 – 25888 . [ CrossRef ] 33 . Futerman , A . H . ; Riezman , H . The ins and outs of sphingolipid synthesis . Trends Cell Biol . 2005 , 15 , 312 – 318 . [ CrossRef ] 34 . Holthuis , J . C . M . ; Pomorski , T . ; Raggers , R . J . ; Sprong , H . ; Van Meer , G . The Organizing Potential of Sphingolipids in Intracellular Membrane Transport . Physiol . Rev . 2001 , 81 , 1689 – 1723 . [ CrossRef ] 35 . Radhakrishnan , A . ; Goldstein , J . L . ; McDonald , J . G . ; Brown , M . S . Switch - like Control of SREBP - 2 Transport Triggered by Small Changes in ER Cholesterol : A Delicate Balance . Cell Metab . 2008 , 8 , 512 – 521 . [ CrossRef ] 36 . Slotte , J . P . Biological functions of sphingomyelins . Prog . Lipid Res . 2013 , 52 , 424 – 437 . [ CrossRef ] 37 . Munro , S . An investigation of the role of transmembrane domains in Golgi protein retention . EMBO J . 1995 , 14 , 4695 – 4704 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 38 . Quiroga , R . ; Trenchi , A . ; Gonzalez Montoro , A . ; Valdez Taubas , J . ; Maccioni , H . J . F . Short transmembrane domains with high - volume exoplasmic halves determine retention of Type II membrane proteins in the Golgi complex . J . Cell Sci . 2013 , 126 , 5344 – 5349 . [ CrossRef ] 39 . Kaiser , H . - J . ; Orlowski , A . ; Rog , T . ; Nyholm , T . K . M . ; Chai , W . ; Feizi , T . ; Lingwood , D . ; Vattulainen , I . ; Simons , K . Lateral sorting in model membranes by cholesterol - mediated hydrophobic matching . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2011 , 108 , 16628 – 16633 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 40 . Magalhaes , M . A . O . ; Glogauer , M . Pivotal Advance : Phospholipids determine net membrane surface charge resulting in di ﬀ erential localization of active Rac1 and Rac2 . J . Leukoc . Biol . 2010 , 87 , 545 – 555 . [ CrossRef ] 41 . Grinstein , S . Imaging signal transduction during phagocytosis : phospholipids , surface charge , and electrostatic interactions . Am . J . Physiol . - Cell Physiol . 2010 , 299 , C876 – C881 . [ CrossRef ] 42 . Bigay , J . ; Antonny , B . Curvature , Lipid Packing , and Electrostatics of Membrane Organelles : Deﬁning Cellular Territories in Determining Speciﬁcity . Dev . Cell 2012 , 23 , 886 – 895 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 43 . Vanni , S . ; Vamparys , L . ; Gautier , R . ; Drin , G . ; Etchebest , C . ; Fuchs , P . F . J . ; Antonny , B . Amphipathic Lipid Packing Sensor Motifs : Probing Bilayer Defects with Hydrophobic Residues . Biophys . J . 2013 , 104 , 575 – 584 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 44 . Funari , S . S . ; Barcel ó , F . ; Escrib á , P . V . E ﬀ ects of oleic acid and its congeners , elaidic and stearic acids , on the structural properties of phosphatidylethanolamine membranes . J . Lipid Res . 2003 , 44 , 567 – 575 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 45 . Lindner , R . ; Naim , H . Y . Domains in biological membranes . Exp . Cell Res . 2009 , 315 , 2871 – 2878 . [ CrossRef ] 46 . Ibarguren , M . ; L ó pez , D . J . ; Encinar , J . A . ; Gonz á lez - Ros , J . M . ; Busquets , X . ; Escrib á , P . V . Partitioning of liquid - ordered / liquid - disordered membrane microdomains induced by the fluidifying effect of 2 - hydroxylated fatty acid derivatives . Biochim . Biophys . Acta BBA - Biomembr . 2013 , 1828 , 2553 – 2563 . [ CrossRef ] Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 2167 23 of 30 47 . Epand , R . M . Proteins and cholesterol - rich domains . Biochim . Biophys . Acta ( BBA ) - Biomembr . 2008 , 1778 , 1576 – 1582 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 48 . Mabrey , S . ; Mateo , P . L . ; Sturtevant , J . M . High - sensitivity scanning calorimetric study of mixtures of cholesterol with dimyristoyl - and dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholines . Biochemistry 1978 , 17 , 2464 – 2468 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 49 . Kobayashi , T . ; Menon , A . K . Transbilayer lipid asymmetry . Curr . Biol . 2018 , 28 , R386 – R391 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 50 . Pomorski , T . ; Menon , A . K . Lipid ﬂippases and their biological functions . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 2006 , 63 , 2908 – 2921 . [ CrossRef ] 51 . Daleke , D . L . Phospholipid Flippases . J . Biol . Chem . 2007 , 282 , 821 – 825 . [ CrossRef ] 52 . Sebastian , T . T . ; Baldridge , R . D . ; Xu , P . ; Graham , T . R . Phospholipid ﬂippases : building asymmetric membranes and transport vesicles . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 2012 , 1821 , 1068 – 1077 . [ CrossRef ] 53 . Bevers , E . M . ; Williamson , P . L . Getting to the Outer Leaﬂet : Physiology of Phosphatidylserine Exposure at the Plasma Membrane . Physiol . Rev . 2016 , 96 , 605 – 645 . [ CrossRef ] 54 . van Kruchten , R . ; Mattheij , N . J . A . ; Saunders , C . ; Feijge , M . A . H . ; Swieringa , F . ; Wolfs , J . L . N . ; Collins , P . W . ; Heemskerk , J . W . M . ; Bevers , E . M . Both TMEM16F - dependent and TMEM16F - independent pathways contribute to phosphatidylserine exposure in platelet apoptosis and platelet activation . Blood 2013 , 121 , 1850 – 1857 . [ CrossRef ] 55 . Hochreiter - Hu ﬀ ord , A . E . ; Lee , C . S . ; Kinchen , J . M . ; Sokolowski , J . D . ; Arandjelovic , S . ; Call , J . A . ; Klibanov , A . L . ; Yan , Z . ; Mandell , J . W . ; Ravichandran , K . S . Phosphatidylserine receptor BAI1 and apoptotic cells as new promoters of myoblast fusion . Nature 2013 , 497 , 263 – 267 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 56 . Segawa , K . ; Suzuki , J . ; Nagata , S . Constitutive exposure of phosphatidylserine on viable cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2011 , 108 , 19246 – 19251 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 57 . Yeung , T . ; Gilbert , G . E . ; Shi , J . ; Silvius , J . ; Kapus , A . ; Grinstein , S . Membrane Phosphatidylserine Regulates Surface Charge and Protein Localization . Science 2008 , 319 , 210 – 213 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 58 . Wanderley , J . L . M . ; Moreira , M . E . C . ; Benjamin , A . ; Bonomo , A . C . ; Barcinski , M . A . Mimicry of apoptotic cells by exposing phosphatidylserine participates in the establishment of amastigotes of Leishmania ( L ) amazonensis in mammalian hosts . J . Immunol . Baltim . Md 1950 2006 , 176 , 1834 – 1839 . [ CrossRef ] 59 . Lee , B . - C . ; Khelashvili , G . ; Falzone , M . ; Menon , A . K . ; Weinstein , H . ; Accardi , A . Gating mechanism of the extracellular entry to the lipid pathway in a TMEM16 scramblase . Nat . Commun . 2018 , 9 , 3251 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 60 . Di Paolo , G . ; De Camilli , P . Phosphoinositides in cell regulation and membrane dynamics . Nature 2006 , 443 , 651 – 657 . [ CrossRef ] 61 . Tafesse , F . G . ; Huitema , K . ; Hermansson , M . ; van der Poel , S . ; van den Dikkenberg , J . ; Upho ﬀ , A . ; Somerharju , P . ; Holthuis , J . C . M . Both Sphingomyelin Synthases SMS1 and SMS2 Are Required for Sphingomyelin Homeostasis and Growth in Human HeLa Cells . J . Biol . Chem . 2007 , 282 , 17537 – 17547 . [ CrossRef ] 62 . Li , Z . ; Hailemariam , T . K . ; Zhou , H . ; Li , Y . ; Duckworth , D . C . ; Peake , D . A . ; Zhang , Y . ; Kuo , M . - S . ; Cao , G . ; Jiang , X . - C . Inhibition of sphingomyelin synthase ( SMS ) a ﬀ ects intracellular sphingomyelin accumulation and plasma membrane lipid organization . Biochim . Biophys . Acta BBA - Mol . Cell Biol . Lipids 2007 , 1771 , 1186 – 1194 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 63 . Pike , L . J . Lipid rafts : bringing order to chaos . J . Lipid Res . 2003 , 44 , 655 – 667 . [ CrossRef ] 64 . Lippincott - Schwartz , J . ; Phair , R . D . Lipids and Cholesterol as Regulators of Tra ﬃ c in the Endomembrane System . Annu . Rev . Biophys . 2010 , 39 , 559 – 578 . [ CrossRef ] 65 . Lingwood , D . ; Simons , K . Lipid Rafts As a Membrane - Organizing Principle . Science 2010 , 327 , 46 – 50 . [ CrossRef ] 66 . Bohdanowicz , M . ; Grinstein , S . Role of Phospholipids in Endocytosis , Phagocytosis , and Macropinocytosis . Physiol . Rev . 2013 , 93 , 69 – 106 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 67 . Dove , S . K . ; Cooke , F . T . ; Douglas , M . R . ; Sayers , L . G . ; Parker , P . J . ; Michell , R . H . Osmotic stress activates phosphatidylinositol - 3 , 5 - bisphosphate synthesis . Nature 1997 , 390 , 187 – 192 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 68 . Odorizzi , G . ; Babst , M . ; Emr , S . D . Fab1p PtdIns ( 3 ) P 5 - Kinase Function Essential for Protein Sorting in the Multivesicular Body . Cell 1998 , 95 , 847 – 858 . [ CrossRef ] 69 . Sbrissa , D . ; Ikonomov , O . C . ; Shisheva , A . PIKfyve , a Mammalian Ortholog of Yeast Fab1p Lipid Kinase , Synthesizes 5 - Phosphoinositides . J . Biol . Chem . 1999 , 274 , 21589 – 21597 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 2167 24 of 30 70 . Platta , H . W . ; Stenmark , H . Endocytosis and signaling . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 2011 , 23 , 393 – 403 . [ CrossRef ] 71 . Tatsuta , T . ; Scharwey , M . ; Langer , T . Mitochondrial lipid trafficking . Trends Cell Biol . 2014 , 24 , 44 – 52 . [ CrossRef ] 72 . Horvath , S . E . ; Daum , G . Lipids of mitochondria . Prog . Lipid Res . 2013 , 52 , 590 – 614 . [ CrossRef ] 73 . Mannella , C . A . ; Buttle , K . ; Rath , B . K . ; Marko , M . Electron microscopic tomography of rat - liver mitochondria and their interactions with the endoplasmic reticulum . BioFactors 1998 , 8 , 225 – 228 . [ CrossRef ] 74 . Daum , G . ; Vance , J . E . Import of lipids into mitochondria . Prog . Lipid Res . 1997 , 36 , 103 – 130 . [ CrossRef ] 75 . Voelker , D . R . Bridging gaps in phospholipid transport . Trends Biochem . Sci . 2005 , 30 , 396 – 404 . [ CrossRef ] 76 . Raturi , A . ; Simmen , T . Where the endoplasmic reticulum and the mitochondrion tie the knot : The mitochondria - associated membrane ( MAM ) . Biochim . Biophys . Acta BBA - Mol . Cell Res . 2013 , 1833 , 213 – 224 . [ CrossRef ] 77 . Rowland , A . A . ; Voeltz , G . K . Endoplasmic reticulum – mitochondria contacts : function of the junction . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2012 , 13 , 607 – 615 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 78 . Osman , C . ; Voelker , D . R . ; Langer , T . Making heads or tails of phospholipids in mitochondria . J . Cell Biol . 2011 , 192 , 7 – 16 . [ CrossRef ] 79 . Voelker , D . R . Genetic analysis of intracellular aminoglycerophospholipid tra ﬃ c . Biochem . Cell Biol . 2004 , 82 , 156 – 169 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 80 . Vance , J . E . Molecular and Cell Biology of Phosphatidylserine and Phosphatidylethanolamine Metabolism . In Progress in Nucleic Acid Research and Molecular Biology ; Elsevier BV : Amsterdam , The Netherlands , 2003 ; pp . 69 – 111 . ISBN 0 - 12 - 540075 - 6 . 81 . Daum , G . Lipids of mitochondria . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1985 , 822 , 1 – 42 . [ CrossRef ] 82 . Strauss , J . F . ; Kishida , T . ; Christenson , L . K . ; Fujimoto , T . ; Hiroi , H . START domain proteins and the intracellular tra ﬃ cking of cholesterol in steroidogenic cells . Mol . Cell . Endocrinol . 2003 , 202 , 59 – 65 . [ CrossRef ] 83 . Mitchell , T . W . ; Bu ﬀ enstein , R . ; Hulbert , A . J . Membrane phospholipid composition may contribute to exceptional longevity of the naked mole - rat ( Heterocephalus glaber ) : A comparative study using shotgun lipidomics . Exp . Gerontol . 2007 , 42 , 1053 – 1062 . [ CrossRef ] 84 . Albert , C . J . ; Anbukumar , D . S . ; Monda , J . K . ; Eckelkamp , J . T . ; Ford , D . A . MyocardialLipidomics . Developments in myocardial nuclear lipidomics . Front . Biosci . 2007 , 12 , 2750 . [ CrossRef ] 85 . Han , X . ; Gross , R . W . Plasmenylcholine and phosphatidylcholine membrane bilayers possess distinct conformational motifs . Biochemistry 1990 , 29 , 4992 – 4996 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 86 . Wallner , S . ; Schmitz , G . Plasmalogens the neglected regulatory and scavenging lipid species . Chem . Phys . Lipids 2011 , 164 , 573 – 589 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 87 . Mandel , H . ; Sharf , R . ; Berant , M . ; Wanders , R . J . A . ; Vreken , P . ; Aviram , M . Plasmalogen Phospholipids Are Involved in HDL - Mediated Cholesterol E ﬄ ux : Insights from Investigations with Plasmalogen - Deﬁcient Cells . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 1998 , 250 , 369 – 373 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 88 . Munn , N . J . ; Arnio , E . ; Liu , D . ; Zoeller , R . A . ; Liscum , L . Deﬁciency in ethanolamine plasmalogen leads to altered cholesterol transport . J . Lipid Res . 2003 , 44 , 182 – 192 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 89 . P é richon , R . ; Moser , A . B . ; Wallace , W . C . ; Cunningham , S . C . ; Roth , G . S . ; Moser , H . W . Peroxisomal Disease Cell Lines with Cellular Plasmalogen Deﬁciency Have Impaired Muscarinic Cholinergic Signal Transduction Activity and Amyloid Precursor Protein Secretion . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 1998 , 248 , 57 – 61 . [ CrossRef ] 90 . Napolitano , G . ; Ballabio , A . TFEB at a glance . J . Cell Sci . 2016 , 129 , 2475 – 2481 . [ CrossRef ] 91 . Medina , D . L . ; Fraldi , A . ; Bouche , V . ; Annunziata , F . ; Mansueto , G . ; Spampanato , C . ; Puri , C . ; Pignata , A . ; Martina , J . A . ; Sardiello , M . ; et al . Transcriptional Activation of Lysosomal Exocytosis Promotes Cellular Clearance . Dev . Cell 2011 , 21 , 421 – 430 . [ CrossRef ] 92 . Nezich , C . L . ; Wang , C . ; Fogel , A . I . ; Youle , R . J . MiT / TFE transcription factors are activated during mitophagy downstream of Parkin and Atg5 . J . Cell Biol . 2015 , 210 , 435 – 450 . [ CrossRef ] 93 . Settembre , C . ; Di Malta , C . ; Polito , V . A . ; Arencibia , M . G . ; Vetrini , F . ; Erdin , S . ; Erdin , S . U . ; Huynh , T . ; Medina , D . ; Colella , P . ; et al . TFEB Links Autophagy to Lysosomal Biogenesis . Science 2011 , 332 , 1429 – 1433 . [ CrossRef ] 94 . Settembre , C . ; Fraldi , A . ; Medina , D . L . ; Ballabio , A . Signals from the lysosome : a control centre for cellular clearance and energy metabolism . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2013 , 14 , 283 – 296 . [ CrossRef ] 95 . Marques , A . R . A . ; Saftig , P . Lysosomal storage disorders – challenges , concepts and avenues for therapy : beyond rare diseases . J . Cell Sci . 2019 , 132 , jcs221739 . [ CrossRef ] Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 2167 25 of 30 96 . Thelen , A . M . ; Zoncu , R . Emerging Roles for the Lysosome in Lipid Metabolism . Trends Cell Biol . 2017 , 27 , 833 – 850 . [ CrossRef ] 97 . Jaishy , B . ; Abel , E . D . Lipids , lysosomes , and autophagy . J . Lipid Res . 2016 , 57 , 1619 – 1635 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 98 . Tapley , E . C . ; Starr , D . A . Connecting the nucleus to the cytoskeleton by SUN – KASH bridges across the nuclear envelope . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 2013 , 25 , 57 – 62 . [ CrossRef ] 99 . Suntharalingam , M . ; Wente , S . R . Peering through the Pore : Nuclear Pore Complex Structure , Assembly , and Function . Dev . Cell 2003 , 4 , 775 – 789 . [ CrossRef ] 100 . Cascianelli , G . ; Villani , M . ; Tosti , M . ; Marini , F . ; Bartoccini , E . ; Viola Magni , M . ; Albi , E . Lipid Microdomains in Cell Nucleus . Mol . Biol . Cell 2008 , 19 , 5289 – 5295 . [ CrossRef ] 101 . Farooqui , A . A . Lipid mediators in the neural cell nucleus : Their metabolism , signaling , and association with neurological disorders . Neuroscientist 2009 , 15 , 392 – 407 . [ CrossRef ] 102 . Garcia - Gil , M . ; Albi , E . Nuclear Lipids in the Nervous System : What they do in Health and Disease . Neurochem . Res . 2017 , 42 , 321 – 336 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 103 . Ledeen , R . W . ; Wu , G . Thematic Review Series : Sphingolipids . Nuclear sphingolipids : metabolism and signaling . J . Lipid Res . 2008 , 49 , 1176 – 1186 . [ CrossRef ] 104 . Takagi , M . ; Imamoto , N . Control of Nuclear Size by NPC Proteins . In Advances in Experimental Medicine and Biology ; Springer : New York , NY , USA , 2014 ; pp . 571 – 591 . ISBN 978 - 1 - 4899 - 8031 - 1 . 105 . Kuvichkin , V . V . Lipid - nucleic acids interactions as base for organization and expression of cellular genome . Int . J . Quantum Chem . 2010 , 110 , 120 – 126 . [ CrossRef ] 106 . Jacob , F . ; Brenner , S . ; Cuzin , F . On the Regulation of DNA Replication in Bacteria . Cold Spring Harb . Symp . Quant . Biol . 1963 , 28 , 329 – 348 . [ CrossRef ] 107 . Hamann , B . L . ; Blind , R . D . Nuclear phosphoinositide regulation of chromatin . J . Cell . Physiol . 2018 , 233 , 107 – 123 . [ CrossRef ] 108 . Benoit , G . ; Cooney , A . ; Giguere , V . ; Ingraham , H . ; Lazar , M . ; Muscat , G . ; Perlmann , T . ; Renaud , J . - P . ; Schwabe , J . ; Sladek , F . ; et al . International Union of Pharmacology . LXVI . Orphan Nuclear Receptors . Pharmacol . Rev . 2006 , 58 , 798 – 836 . [ CrossRef ] 109 . Hazel , J . Thermal Adaptations in Biological Membranes : Is Homeoviscous Adaptation the Explanation ? Annu . Rev . Physiol . 1995 , 57 , 19 – 42 . [ CrossRef ] 110 . Koynova , R . ; Ca ﬀ rey , M . Phases and phase transitions of the phosphatidylcholines . Biochim . Biophys . Acta BBA - Rev . Biomembr . 1998 , 1376 , 91 – 145 . [ CrossRef ] 111 . Marsh , D . Lateral Pressure Proﬁle , Spontaneous Curvature Frustration , and the Incorporation and Conformation of Proteins in Membranes . Biophys . J . 2007 , 93 , 3884 – 3899 . [ CrossRef ] 112 . Frolov , V . A . ; Shnyrova , A . V . ; Zimmerberg , J . Lipid Polymorphisms and Membrane Shape . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 2011 , 3 , a004747 . [ CrossRef ] 113 . Escrib á , P . V . Membrane - lipid therapy : a new approach in molecular medicine . Trends Mol . Med . 2006 , 12 , 34 – 43 . [ CrossRef ] 114 . Cockcroft , S . ; Raghu , P . Phospholipid transport protein function at organelle contact sites . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 2018 , 53 , 52 – 60 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 115 . Lange , Y . ; Steck , T . L . Active membrane cholesterol as a physiological e ﬀ ector . Chem . Phys . Lipids 2016 , 199 , 74 – 93 . [ CrossRef ] 116 . Endapally , S . ; Frias , D . ; Grzemska , M . ; Gay , A . ; Tomchick , D . R . ; Radhakrishnan , A . Molecular Discrimination between Two Conformations of Sphingomyelin in Plasma Membranes . Cell 2019 , 176 , 1040 – 1053 . e17 . [ CrossRef ] 117 . Infante , R . E . ; Radhakrishnan , A . Continuous transport of a small fraction of plasma membrane cholesterol to endoplasmic reticulum regulates total cellular cholesterol . eLife 2017 , 6 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 118 . Simons , K . ; Ikonen , E . How cells handle cholesterol . Science 2000 , 290 , 1721 – 1726 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 119 . Fairn , G . D . ; Schieber , N . L . ; Ariotti , N . ; Murphy , S . ; Kuerschner , L . ; Webb , R . I . ; Grinstein , S . ; Parton , R . G . High - resolution mapping reveals topologically distinct cellular pools of phosphatidylserine . J . Cell Biol . 2011 , 194 , 257 – 275 . [ CrossRef ] 120 . Natarajan , P . ; Wang , J . ; Hua , Z . ; Graham , T . R . Drs2p - coupled aminophospholipid translocase activity in yeast Golgi membranes and relationship to in vivo function . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2004 , 101 , 10614 – 10619 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 2167 26 of 30 121 . Alder - Baerens , N . ; Lisman , Q . ; Luong , L . ; Pomorski , T . ; Holthuis , J . C . M . Loss of P4 ATPases Drs2p and Dnf3p Disrupts Aminophospholipid Transport and Asymmetry in Yeast Post - Golgi Secretory Vesicles . Mol . Biol . Cell 2006 , 17 , 1632 – 1642 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 122 . Tulodziecka , K . ; Diaz - Rohrer , B . B . ; Farley , M . M . ; Chan , R . B . ; Di Paolo , G . ; Levental , K . R . ; Waxham , M . N . ; Levental , I . Remodeling of the postsynaptic plasma membrane during neural development . Mol . Biol . Cell 2016 , 27 , 3480 – 3489 . [ CrossRef ] 123 . Levental , K . R . ; Surma , M . A . ; Skinkle , A . D . ; Lorent , J . H . ; Zhou , Y . ; Klose , C . ; Chang , J . T . ; Hancock , J . F . ; Levental , I . $ ømega $ - 3 polyunsaturated fatty acids direct di ﬀ erentiation of the membrane phenotype in mesenchymal stem cells to potentiate osteogenesis . Sci . Adv . 2017 , 3 , eaao1193 . [ CrossRef ] 124 . Klose , C . ; Surma , M . A . ; Gerl , M . J . ; Meyenhofer , F . ; Shevchenko , A . ; Simons , K . Flexibility of a Eukaryotic Lipidome – Insights from Yeast Lipidomics . PLoS ONE 2012 , 7 , e35063 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 125 . Surma , M . A . ; Klose , C . ; Peng , D . ; Shales , M . ; Mrejen , C . ; Stefanko , A . ; Braberg , H . ; Gordon , D . E . ; Vorkel , D . ; Ejsing , C . S . ; et al . A Lipid E - MAP Identiﬁes Ubx2 as a Critical Regulator of Lipid Saturation and Lipid Bilayer Stress . Mol . Cell 2013 , 51 , 519 – 530 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 126 . Michel , V . ; Bakovic , M . Lipid rafts in health and disease . Biol . Cell 2007 , 99 , 129 – 140 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 127 . Marin , R . ; Rojo , J . A . ; Fabelo , N . ; Fernandez , C . E . ; Diaz , M . Lipid raft disarrangement as a result of neuropathological progresses : A novel strategy for early diagnosis ? Neuroscience 2013 , 245 , 26 – 39 . [ CrossRef ] 128 . Woodman , S . ; Kim , K . Membrane Lipids : Implication for Diseases and Membrane Tra ﬃ cking . SM J . Biol . 2017 , 3 , 1016 . 129 . Evangelisti , E . ; Cecchi , C . ; Cascella , R . ; Sgromo , C . ; Becatti , M . ; Dobson , C . M . ; Chiti , F . ; Stefani , M . Membrane lipid composition and its physicochemical properties deﬁne cell vulnerability to aberrant protein oligomers . J . Cell Sci . 2012 , 125 , 2416 – 2427 . [ CrossRef ] 130 . Zhang , X . ; St . Clair , J . R . ; London , E . ; Raleigh , D . P . Islet Amyloid Polypeptide Membrane Interactions : E ﬀ ects of Membrane Composition . Biochemistry 2017 , 56 , 376 – 390 . [ CrossRef ] 131 . Soria , M . A . ; Cervantes , S . A . ; Bajakian , T . H . ; Siemer , A . B . The Functional Amyloid Orb2A Binds to Lipid Membranes . Biophys . J . 2017 , 113 , 37 – 47 . [ CrossRef ] 132 . Brown , A . M . ; Bevan , D . R . Inﬂuence of sequence and lipid type on membrane perturbation by human and rat amyloid β - peptide ( 1 – 42 ) . Arch . Biochem . Biophys . 2017 , 614 , 1 – 13 . [ CrossRef ] 133 . Gunasekara , L . ; Al - Saiedy , M . ; Green , F . ; Pratt , R . ; Bjornson , C . ; Yang , A . ; Schoel , W . M . ; Mitchell , I . ; Brindle , M . ; Montgomery , M . ; et al . Pulmonary surfactant dysfunction in pediatric cystic ﬁbrosis : Mechanisms and reversal with a lipid - sequestering drug . J . Cyst . Fibros . 2017 , 16 , 565 – 572 . [ CrossRef ] 134 . Grassm é , H . ; Henry , B . ; Ziobro , R . ; Becker , K . A . ; Riethmüller , J . ; Gardner , A . ; Seitz , A . P . ; Steinmann , J . ; Lang , S . ; Ward , C . ; et al . β 1 - Integrin Accumulates in Cystic Fibrosis Luminal Airway Epithelial Membranes and Decreases Sphingosine , Promoting Bacterial Infections . Cell Host Microbe 2017 , 21 , 707 – 718 . e8 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 135 . Baenke , F . ; Peck , B . ; Miess , H . ; Schulze , A . Hooked on fat : the role of lipid synthesis in cancer metabolism and tumour development . Dis . Model . Mech . 2013 , 6 , 1353 – 1363 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 136 . Cantley , L . C . ; Neel , B . G . New insights into tumor suppression : PTEN suppresses tumor formation by restraining the phosphoinositide 3 - kinase / AKT pathway . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 1999 , 96 , 4240 – 4245 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 137 . Zheng , H . ; Ying , H . ; Yan , H . ; Kimmelman , A . C . ; Hiller , D . J . ; Chen , A . - J . ; Perry , S . R . ; Tonon , G . ; Chu , G . C . ; Ding , Z . ; et al . P53 and Pten control neural and glioma stem / progenitor cell renewal and di ﬀ erentiation . Nature 2008 , 455 , 1129 – 1133 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 138 . Barcel ó - Coblijn , G . ; Martin , M . L . ; de Almeida , R . F . M . ; Noguera - Salv à , M . A . ; Marcilla - Etxenike , A . ; Guardiola - Serrano , F . ; Lüth , A . ; Kleuser , B . ; Halver , J . E . ; Escrib á , P . V . Sphingomyelin and sphingomyelin synthase ( SMS ) in the malignant transformation of glioma cells and in 2 - hydroxyoleic acid therapy . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2011 , 108 , 19569 – 19574 . 139 . Teres , S . ; Llado , V . ; Higuera , M . ; Barcelo - Coblijn , G . ; Martin , M . L . ; Noguera - Salva , M . A . ; Marcilla - Etxenike , A . ; Garcia - Verdugo , J . M . ; Soriano - Navarro , M . ; Saus , C . ; et al . 2 - Hydroxyoleate , a nontoxic membrane binding anticancer drug , induces glioma cell di ﬀ erentiation and autophagy . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2012 , 109 , 8489 – 8494 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 140 . Furuya , H . ; Shimizu , Y . ; Kawamori , T . Sphingolipids in cancer . Cancer Metastasis Rev . 2011 , 30 , 567 – 576 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 2167 27 of 30 141 . Obeid , L . M . ; Linardic , C . M . ; Karolak , L . A . ; Hannun , Y . A . Programmed cell death induced by ceramide . Science 1993 , 259 , 1769 – 1771 . [ CrossRef ] 142 . Venable , M . E . ; Lee , J . Y . ; Smyth , M . J . ; Bielawska , A . ; Obeid , L . M . Role of Ceramide in Cellular Senescence . J . Biol . Chem . 1995 , 270 , 30701 – 30708 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 143 . Hla , T . Physiological and pathological actions of sphingosine 1 - phosphate . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 2004 , 15 , 513 – 520 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 144 . Liu , X . ; Cheng , J . C . ; Turner , L . S . ; Elojeimy , S . ; Beckham , T . H . ; Bielawska , A . ; Keane , T . E . ; Hannun , Y . A . ; Norris , J . S . Acid ceramidase upregulation in prostate cancer : role in tumor development and implications for therapy . Expert Opin . Ther . Targets 2009 , 13 , 1449 – 1458 . [ CrossRef ] 145 . Hirsch , H . A . ; Iliopoulos , D . ; Joshi , A . ; Zhang , Y . ; Jaeger , S . A . ; Bulyk , M . ; Tsichlis , P . N . ; Shirley Liu , X . ; Struhl , K . A Transcriptional Signature and Common Gene Networks Link Cancer with Lipid Metabolism and Diverse Human Diseases . Cancer Cell 2010 , 17 , 348 – 361 . [ CrossRef ] 146 . Kuhajda , F . P . ; Jenner , K . ; Wood , F . D . ; Hennigar , R . A . ; Jacobs , L . B . ; Dick , J . D . ; Pasternack , G . R . Fatty acid synthesis : a potential selective target for antineoplastic therapy . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 1994 , 91 , 6379 – 6383 . [ CrossRef ] 147 . Hilvo , M . ; Denkert , C . ; Lehtinen , L . ; Muller , B . ; Brockmoller , S . ; Seppanen - Laakso , T . ; Budczies , J . ; Bucher , E . ; Yetukuri , L . ; Castillo , S . ; et al . Novel Theranostic Opportunities O ﬀ ered by Characterization of Altered Membrane Lipid Metabolism in Breast Cancer Progression . Cancer Res . 2011 , 71 , 3236 – 3245 . [ CrossRef ] 148 . Crous - Bou , M . ; Rennert , G . ; Salazar , R . ; Rodriguez - Moranta , F . ; Rennert , H . S . ; Lejbkowicz , F . ; Kopelovich , L . ; Lipkin , S . M . ; Gruber , S . B . ; Moreno , V . Genetic polymorphisms in fatty acid metabolism genes and colorectal cancer . Mutagenesis 2012 , 27 , 169 – 176 . [ CrossRef ] 149 . Dielschneider , R . F . ; Henson , E . S . ; Gibson , S . B . Lysosomes as Oxidative Targets for Cancer Therapy . Oxid . Med . Cell . Longev . 2017 , 2017 , 1 – 8 . [ CrossRef ] 150 . Park , J . B . ; Lee , C . S . ; Jang , J . - H . ; Ghim , J . ; Kim , Y . - J . ; You , S . ; Hwang , D . ; Suh , P . - G . ; Ryu , S . H . Phospholipase signalling networks in cancer . Nat . Rev . Cancer 2012 , 12 , 782 – 792 . [ CrossRef ] 151 . Nomura , D . K . ; Long , J . Z . ; Niessen , S . ; Hoover , H . S . ; Ng , S . - W . ; Cravatt , B . F . Monoacylglycerol Lipase Regulates a Fatty Acid Network that Promotes Cancer Pathogenesis . Cell 2010 , 140 , 49 – 61 . [ CrossRef ] 152 . Joyce , J . A . ; Pollard , J . W . Microenvironmental regulation of metastasis . Nat . Rev . Cancer 2009 , 9 , 239 – 252 . [ CrossRef ] 153 . Santolla , M . F . ; Lappano , R . ; Marco , P . D . ; Pupo , M . ; Vivacqua , A . ; Sisci , D . ; Abonante , S . ; Iacopetta , D . ; Cappello , A . R . ; Dolce , V . ; et al . G Protein - coupled Estrogen Receptor Mediates the Up - regulation of Fatty Acid Synthase Induced by 17 β - Estradiol in Cancer Cells and Cancer - associated Fibroblasts . J . Biol . Chem . 2012 , 287 , 43234 – 43245 . [ CrossRef ] 154 . Im , S . - S . ; Yousef , L . ; Blaschitz , C . ; Liu , J . Z . ; Edwards , R . A . ; Young , S . G . ; Ra ﬀ atellu , M . ; Osborne , T . F . Linking Lipid Metabolism to the Innate Immune Response in Macrophages through Sterol Regulatory Element Binding Protein - 1a . Cell Metab . 2011 , 13 , 540 – 549 . [ CrossRef ] 155 . Heusinkveld , M . ; de Vos van Steenwijk , P . J . ; Goedemans , R . ; Ramwadhdoebe , T . H . ; Gorter , A . ; Welters , M . J . P . ; van Hall , T . ; van der Burg , S . H . M2 Macrophages Induced by Prostaglandin E2 and IL - 6 from Cervical Carcinoma Are Switched to Activated M1 Macrophages by CD4 + Th1 Cells . J . Immunol . 2011 , 187 , 1157 – 1165 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 156 . Beloribi - Djefaﬂia , S . ; Vasseur , S . ; Guillaumond , F . Lipid metabolic reprogramming in cancer cells . Oncogenesis 2016 , 5 , e189 . [ CrossRef ] 157 . Reference , G . H . Tay - Sachs Disease . Available online : https : / / ghr . nlm . nih . gov / condition / tay - sachs - disease ( accessed on 25 April 2019 ) . 158 . Marcilla - Etxenike , A . ; Mart í n , M . L . ; Noguera - Salv à , M . A . ; Garc í a - Verdugo , J . M . ; Soriano - Navarro , M . ; Dey , I . ; Escrib á , P . V . ; Busquets , X . 2 - Hydroxyoleic Acid Induces ER Stress and Autophagy in Various Human Glioma Cell Lines . PLoS ONE 2012 , 7 , e48235 . [ CrossRef ] 159 . Perona , J . S . ; Vogler , O . ; Sanchez - Dominguez , J . M . ; Montero , E . ; Escriba , P . V . ; Ruiz - Gutierrez , V . Consumption of Virgin Olive Oil Inﬂuences Membrane Lipid Composition and Regulates Intracellular Signaling in Elderly Adults With Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus . J . Gerontol . A . Biol . Sci . Med . Sci . 2007 , 62 , 256 – 263 . [ CrossRef ] 160 . Escrib á , P . V . ; Gonz á lez - Ros , J . M . ; Goñi , F . M . ; Kinnunen , P . K . J . ; Vigh , L . ; S á nchez - Magraner , L . ; Fern á ndez , A . M . ; Busquets , X . ; Horv á th , I . ; Barcel ó - Coblijn , G . Membranes : a meeting point for lipids , proteins and therapies . J . Cell . Mol . Med . 2008 , 12 , 829 – 875 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 2167 28 of 30 161 . Wali , R . K . ; Jaffe , S . ; Kumar , D . ; Kalra , V . K . Alterations in Organization of Phospholipids in Erythrocytes as Factor in Adherence to Endothelial Cells in Diabetes Mellitus . Diabetes 1988 , 37 , 104 – 111 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 162 . Samuel , V . T . ; Shulman , G . I . Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease as a Nexus of Metabolic and Hepatic Diseases . Cell Metab . 2018 , 27 , 22 – 41 . [ CrossRef ] 163 . Basseri , S . ; Austin , R . C . Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress and Lipid Metabolism : Mechanisms and Therapeutic Potential . Biochem . Res . Int . 2012 , 2012 . [ CrossRef ] 164 . Fu , S . ; Yang , L . ; Li , P . ; Hofmann , O . ; Dicker , L . ; Hide , W . ; Lin , X . ; Watkins , S . M . ; Ivanov , A . R . ; Hotamisligil , G . S . Aberrant lipid metabolism disrupts calcium homeostasis causing liver endoplasmic reticulum stress in obesity . Nature 2011 , 473 , 528 – 531 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 165 . Lin , J . ; Handschin , C . ; Spiegelman , B . M . Metabolic control through the PGC - 1 family of transcription coactivators . Cell Metab . 2005 , 1 , 361 – 370 . [ CrossRef ] 166 . Settembre , C . ; De Cegli , R . ; Mansueto , G . ; Saha , P . K . ; Vetrini , F . ; Visvikis , O . ; Huynh , T . ; Carissimo , A . ; Palmer , D . ; Jürgen Klisch , T . ; et al . TFEB controls cellular lipid metabolism through a starvation - induced autoregulatory loop . Nat . Cell Biol . 2013 , 15 , 647 – 658 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 167 . Schöneberg , J . ; Lehmann , M . ; Ullrich , A . ; Posor , Y . ; Lo , W . - T . ; Lichtner , G . ; Schmoranzer , J . ; Haucke , V . ; No é , F . Lipid - mediated PX - BAR domain recruitment couples local membrane constriction to endocytic vesicle ﬁssion . Nat . Commun . 2017 , 8 , 15873 . [ CrossRef ] 168 . Gray , S . M . ; Aylor , K . W . ; Barrett , E . J . Unravelling the regulation of insulin transport across the brain endothelial cell . Diabetologia 2017 , 60 , 1512 – 1521 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 169 . Trapani , L . Regulation and deregulation of cholesterol homeostasis : The liver as a metabolic “power station” . World J . Hepatol . 2012 , 4 , 184 . [ CrossRef ] 170 . Radic , M . ; Pattanaik , D . Cellular and Molecular Mechanisms of Anti - Phospholipid Syndrome . Front . Immunol . 2018 , 9 , 969 . [ CrossRef ] 171 . Asherson , R . A . ; Cervera , R . Antiphospholipid antibodies and infections . Ann . Rheum . Dis . 2003 , 62 , 388 – 393 . [ CrossRef ] 172 . Shahine , A . ; Van Rhijn , I . ; Cheng , T . - Y . ; Iwany , S . ; Gras , S . ; Moody , D . B . ; Rossjohn , J . A molecular basis of human T cell receptor autoreactivity toward self - phospholipids . Sci . Immunol . 2017 , 2 , eaao1384 . [ CrossRef ] 173 . Palsuledesai , C . C . ; Distefano , M . D . Protein prenylation : Enzymes , therapeutics , and biotechnology applications . ACS Chem . Biol . 2015 , 10 , 51 – 62 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 174 . Ghomashchi , F . ; Zhang , X . ; Liu , L . ; Gelb , M . H . Binding of prenylated and polybasic peptides to membranes : a ﬃ nities and intervesicle exchange . Biochemistry 1995 , 34 , 11910 – 11918 . [ CrossRef ] 175 . Resh , M . D . Tra ﬃ cking and signaling by fatty - acylated and prenylated proteins . Nat . Chem . Biol . 2006 , 2 , 584 – 590 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 176 . Zhang , F . L . ; Casey , P . J . Protein Prenylation : Molecular Mechanisms and Functional Consequences . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 1996 , 65 , 241 – 269 . [ CrossRef ] 177 . Kamiya , Y . ; Sakurai , A . ; Tamura , S . ; Takahashi , N . ; Abe , K . ; Tsuchiya , E . ; Fukui , S . ; Kitada , C . ; Fujino , M . Structure of rhodotorucine A , a novel lipopeptide , inducing mating tube formation in Rhodosporidiumtoruloides . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 1978 , 83 , 1077 – 1083 . [ CrossRef ] 178 . Farnsworth , C . C . ; Wolda , S . L . ; Gelb , M . H . ; Glomset , J . A . Human lamin B contains a farnesylated cysteine residue . J . Biol . Chem . 1989 , 264 , 20422 – 20429 . [ PubMed ] 179 . Wolda , S . L . ; Glomset , J . A . Evidence for modiﬁcation of lamin B by a product of mevalonic acid . J . Biol . Chem . 1988 , 263 , 5997 – 6000 . [ PubMed ] 180 . Berndt , N . ; Hamilton , A . D . ; Sebti , S . M . Targeting protein prenylation for cancer therapy . Nat . Rev . Cancer 2011 , 11 , 775 – 791 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 181 . Pompliano , D . L . ; Schaber , M . D . ; Mosser , S . D . ; Omer , C . A . ; Shafer , J . A . ; Gibbs , J . B . Isoprenoid diphosphate utilization by recombinant human farnesyl : protein transferase : Interactive binding between substrates and a preferred kinetic pathway . Biochemistry 1993 , 32 , 8341 – 8347 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 182 . Dolence , J . M . ; Cassidy , P . B . ; Mathis , J . R . ; Poulter , C . D . Yeast protein farnesyltransferase : steady - state kinetic studies of substrate binding . Biochemistry 1995 , 34 , 16687 – 16694 . [ CrossRef ] 183 . Omer , C . A . ; Gibbs , R . A . On the Stereochemical Course of Human Protein - Farnesyl Transferase . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 1996 , 118 , 1817 – 1823 . 184 . Edelstein , R . L . ; Weller , V . A . ; Distefano , M . D . ; Tung , J . S . Stereochemical Analysis of the Reaction Catalyzed by Yeast Protein Farnesyltransferase . J . Org . Chem . 1998 , 63 , 5298 – 5299 . [ CrossRef ] Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 2167 29 of 30 185 . Clausen , V . A . ; Edelstein , R . L . ; Distefano , M . D . Stereochemical Analysis of the Reaction Catalyzed by Human Protein Geranylgeranyl Transferase † . Biochemistry 2001 , 40 , 3920 – 3930 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 186 . Long , S . B . ; Casey , P . J . ; Beese , L . S . Reaction path of protein farnesyltransferase at atomic resolution . Nature 2002 , 419 , 645 – 650 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 187 . Ochocki , J . D . ; Distefano , M . D . Prenyltransferase inhibitors : treating human ailments from cancer to parasitic infections . Med . Chem . Commun . 2013 , 4 , 476 – 492 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 188 . Desnoyers , L . ; Anant , J . S . ; Seabra , M . C . Geranylgeranylation of Rab proteins . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 2015 , 24 , 699 – 703 . [ CrossRef ] 189 . Bos , J . L . Ras oncogenes in human cancer : a review . Cancer Res . 1989 , 49 , 4682 – 4689 . 190 . Bishop , W . R . ; Doll , R . ; Kirschmeier , P . Farnesyl Transferase Inhibitors . In Enzymes ; Academic Press : Cambridge , MA , USA , 2011 ; pp . 275 – 303 . 191 . Hamad , N . M . Distinct requirements for Ras oncogenesis in human versus mouse cells . Genes Dev . 2002 , 16 , 2045 – 2057 . [ CrossRef ] 192 . Vogt , A . ; Sun , J . ; Qian , Y . ; Hamilton , A . D . ; Sebti , S . M . The Geranylgeranyltransferase - I Inhibitor GGTI - 298 Arrests Human Tumor Cells in G 0 / G 1 and Induces p21 WAF1 / CIP1 / SDI1 in a p53 - independent Manner . J . Biol . Chem . 1997 , 272 , 27224 – 27229 . [ CrossRef ] 193 . Mollinedo , F . ; de la Iglesia - Vicente , J . ; Gajate , C . ; Estella - Hermoso de Mendoza , A . ; Villa - Pulgarin , J . A . ; Campanero , M . A . ; Blanco - Prieto , M . J . Lipid raft - targeted therapy in multiple myeloma . Oncogene 2010 , 29 , 3748 – 3757 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 194 . Bäumer , W . ; Wla´z , P . ; Jennings , G . ; Rundfeldt , C . The putative lipid raft modulator miltefosine displays immunomodulatory action in T - cell dependent dermal inﬂammation models . Eur . J . Pharmacol . 2010 , 628 , 226 – 232 . [ CrossRef ] 195 . Dölle , S . ; Hoser , D . ; Rasche , C . ; Loddenkemper , C . ; Maurer , M . ; Zuberbier , T . ; Worm , M . Long - term reduction in local inﬂammation by a lipid raft molecule in atopic dermatitis . Allergy 2010 , 65 , 1158 – 1165 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 196 . Llad ó , V . ; L ó pez , D . J . ; Ibarguren , M . ; Alonso , M . ; Soriano , J . B . ; Escrib á , P . V . ; Busquets , X . Regulation of the cancer cell membrane lipid composition by NaCHOleate . Biochim . Biophys . Acta BBA - Biomembr . 2014 , 1838 , 1619 – 1627 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 197 . Torres , M . ; Price , S . L . ; Fiol - deRoque , M . A . ; Marcilla - Etxenike , A . ; Ahyayauch , H . ; Barcel ó - Coblijn , G . ; Ter é s , S . ; Katsouri , L . ; Ordinas , M . ; L ó pez , D . J . ; et al . Membrane lipid modiﬁcations and therapeutic e ﬀ ects mediated by hydroxydocosahexaenoic acid on Alzheimer’s disease . Biochim . Biophys . Acta BBA - Biomembr . 2014 , 1838 , 1680 – 1692 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 198 . Nicolson , G . L . ; Ash , M . E . Lipid Replacement Therapy : A natural medicine approach to replacing damaged lipids in cellular membranes and organelles and restoring function . Biochim . Biophys . Acta BBA - Biomembr . 2014 , 1838 , 1657 – 1679 . [ CrossRef ] 199 . Escriba , P . V . ; Sastre , M . ; Garcia - Sevilla , J . A . Disruption of cellular signaling pathways by daunomycin through destabilization of nonlamellar membrane structures . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 1995 , 92 , 7595 – 7599 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 200 . Escriba , P . V . ; Morales , P . ; Smith , A . Membrane Phospholipid Reorganization Di ﬀ erentially Regulates Metallothionein and Heme Oxygenase by Heme – Hemopexin . DNA Cell Biol . 2002 , 21 , 355 – 364 . [ CrossRef ] 201 . Vigh , L . ; Maresca , B . ; Harwood , J . L . Does the membrane’s physical state control the expression of heat shock and other genes ? Trends Biochem . Sci . 1998 , 23 , 369 – 374 . [ CrossRef ] 202 . Moulin , M . ; Carpentier , S . ; Levade , T . ; Arrigo , A . - P . Potential roles of membrane fluidity and ceramide in hyperthermia and alcohol stimulation of TRAIL apoptosis . Apoptosis 2007 , 12 , 1703 – 1720 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 203 . Irvine , R . F . Nuclear lipid signalling . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2003 , 4 , 349 – 361 . [ CrossRef ] 204 . Ibarguren , M . ; L ó pez , D . J . ; Escrib á , P . V . The e ﬀ ect of natural and synthetic fatty acids on membrane structure , microdomain organization , cellular functions and human health . Biochim . Biophys . Acta BBA - Biomembr . 2014 , 1838 , 1518 – 1528 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 205 . Cox , A . D . ; Fesik , S . W . ; Kimmelman , A . C . ; Luo , J . ; Der , C . J . Drugging the undruggable RAS : Mission Possible ? Nat . Rev . Drug Discov . 2014 , 13 , 828 – 851 . [ CrossRef ] 206 . Moreira , R . A . ; Mendanha , S . A . ; Hansen , D . ; Alonso , A . Interaction of Miltefosine with the Lipid and Protein Components of the Erythrocyte Membrane . J . Pharm . Sci . 2013 , 102 , 1661 – 1669 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 2167 30 of 30 207 . Fern á ndez - Garc í a , P . ; Rossell ó , C . A . ; Rodr í guez - Lorca , R . ; Beteta - Göbel , R . ; Fern á ndez - D í az , J . ; Llad ó , V . ; Busquets , X . ; Escrib á , P . V . ; Fern á ndez - Garc í a , P . ; Rossell ó , C . A . ; et al . The Opposing Contribution of SMS1 and SMS2 to Glioma Progression and Their Value in the Therapeutic Response to 2OHOA . Cancers 2019 , 11 , 88 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 208 . Mart í nez , J . ; Vögler , O . ; Casas , J . ; Barcel ó , F . ; Alemany , R . ; Prades , J . ; Nagy , T . ; Baamonde , C . ; Kasprzyk , P . G . ; Ter é s , S . ; et al . Membrane Structure Modulation , Protein Kinase C Activation , and Anticancer Activity of Minerval . Mol . Pharmacol . 2005 , 67 , 531 – 540 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 209 . Erazo , T . ; Lorente , M . ; L ó pez - Plana , A . ; Muñoz - Guardiola , P . ; Fern á ndez - Nogueira , P . ; Garc í a - Mart í nez , J . A . ; Bragado , P . ; Fuster , G . ; Salazar , M . ; Espadaler , J . ; et al . The New Antitumor Drug ABTL0812 Inhibits the Akt / mTORC1 Axis by Upregulating Tribbles - 3 Pseudokinase . Clin . Cancer Res . 2016 , 22 , 2508 – 2519 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 210 . Guardiola - Serrano , F . ; Beteta - Göbel , R . ; Rodr í guez - Lorca , R . ; Ibarguren , M . ; L ó pez , D . J . ; Ter é s , S . ; Alvarez , R . ; Alonso - Sande , M . ; Busquets , X . ; Escrib á , P . V . The Novel Anticancer Drug Hydroxytriolein Inhibits Lung Cancer Cell Proliferation via a Protein Kinase C α – and Extracellular Signal - Regulated Kinase 1 / 2 – Dependent Mechanism . J . Pharmacol . Exp . Ther . 2015 , 354 , 213 – 224 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 211 . Menendez , J . A . ; Vellon , L . ; Lupu , R . Antitumoral actions of the anti - obesity drug orlistat ( Xenical TM ) in breast cancer cells : blockade of cell cycle progression , promotion of apoptotic cell death and PEA3 - mediated transcriptional repression of Her2 / neu ( erbB - 2 ) oncogene . Ann . Oncol . 2005 , 16 , 1253 – 1267 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 212 . Vögler , O . ; L ó pez - Bellan , A . ; Alemany , R . ; Tof é , S . ; Gonz á lez , M . ; Quevedo , J . ; Pereg , V . ; Barcel ó , F . ; Escriba , P . V . Structure – e ﬀ ect relation of C18 long - chain fatty acids in the reduction of body weight in rats . Int . J . Obes . 2008 , 32 , 464 – 473 . [ CrossRef ] 213 . Teres , S . ; Barcelo - Coblijn , G . ; Benet , M . ; Alvarez , R . ; Bressani , R . ; Halver , J . E . ; Escriba , P . V . Oleic acid content is responsible for the reduction in blood pressure induced by olive oil . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2008 , 105 , 13811 – 13816 . [ CrossRef ] 214 . Liu , J . C . ; Conklin , S . M . ; Manuck , S . B . ; Yao , J . K . ; Muldoon , M . F . Long - Chain Omega - 3 Fatty Acids and Blood Pressure . Am . J . Hypertens . 2011 , 24 , 1121 – 1126 . [ CrossRef ] 215 . Alemany , R . ; Ter é s , S . ; Baamonde , C . ; Benet , M . ; Vögler , O . ; Escrib á , P . V . 2 - Hydroxyoleic Acid . Hypertension 2004 , 43 , 249 – 254 . [ CrossRef ] 216 . Alemany , R . ; Vögler , O . ; Ter é s , S . ; Egea , C . ; Baamonde , C . ; Barcel ó , F . ; Delgado , C . ; Jakobs , K . H . ; Escrib á , P . V . Antihypertensive action of 2 - hydroxyoleic acid in SHRs via modulation of the protein kinase A pathway and Rho kinase . J . Lipid Res . 2006 , 47 , 1762 – 1770 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 217 . Borchert , G . H . ; Giggey , M . ; Kolar , F . ; Wong , T . M . ; Backx , P . H . ; Escriba , P . V . 2 - Hydroxyoleic acid a ﬀ ects cardiomyocyte [ Ca2 + ] i transient and contractility in a region - dependent manner . Am . J . Physiol . - Heart Circ . Physiol . 2008 , 294 , H1948 – H1955 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 218 . Hashimoto , M . ; Hossain , S . Neuroprotective and Ameliorative Actions of Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids Against Neuronal Diseases : Beneﬁcial E ﬀ ect of Docosahexaenoic Acid on Cognitive Decline in Alzheimer’s Disease . J . Pharmacol . Sci . 2011 , 116 , 150 – 162 . [ CrossRef ] 219 . Martin , M . L . ; Barcel ó - Coblijn , G . ; de Almeida , R . F . M . ; Noguera - Salv à , M . A . ; Ter é s , S . ; Higuera , M . ; Liebisch , G . ; Schmitz , G . ; Busquets , X . ; Escrib á , P . V . The role of membrane fatty acid remodeling in the antitumor mechanism of action of 2 - hydroxyoleic acid . Biochim . Biophys . Acta BBA - Biomembr . 2013 , 1828 , 1405 – 1413 . [ CrossRef ] 220 . Fiol - deRoque , M . A . ; Gutierrez - Lanza , R . ; Ter é s , S . ; Torres , M . ; Barcel ó , P . ; Rial , R . V . ; Verkhratsky , A . ; Escrib á , P . V . ; Busquets , X . ; Rodr í guez , J . J . Cognitive recovery and restoration of cell proliferation in the dentate gyrus in the 5XFAD transgenic mice model of Alzheimer’s disease following 2 - hydroxy - DHA treatment . Biogerontology 2013 , 14 , 763 – 775 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 221 . Avila - Martin , G . ; Galan - Arriero , I . ; G ó mez - Soriano , J . ; Taylor , J . Treatment of Rat Spinal Cord Injury with the Neurotrophic Factor Albumin - Oleic Acid : Translational Application for Paralysis , Spasticity and Pain . PLoS ONE 2011 , 6 , e26107 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] © 2019 by the authors . Licensee MDPI , Basel , Switzerland . This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution ( CC BY ) license ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / ) .