A Meta - Model for Inferring Inter - Theory Relationships of Causal Theories Roland M . Mueller Berlin School of Economics and Law , Germany roland . mueller @ hwr - berlin . de Abstract This paper suggests a new way of comparing and analyzing causal theories . The main contribution is a meta - model that represents causal theories and a taxonomy of inter - theory relationships . The inter - theory relationships can be automatically calculated for two theories that are described with the meta - model . Two visualizations are presented with which to analyze set of theories : the inter - theory relationship matrix and the theory evolution graph . An exemplary application of the approach is shown for a small set of information systems theories . The proposed approach should help researchers improve their understanding of the contribution and evolution of theories . Keywords : causality , theory , theory comparison , conceptual model 1 . Introduction Theories are central to scientific practice in any field . Therefore , it is unsurprising that theory is a topic in itself in science and epistemology [ 3 ] . The nature of theories is discussed in the information systems ( IS ) field [ 6 ] , [ 8 ] . Theories should help to explain why a phenomenon occurred [ 11 ] and predict the consequences of interventions or observations [ 6 ] . Even though causality is essential for these two tasks , little attention is paid to causal thinking in IS [ 7 ] . This paper adds a meta - model of causal theories , which is specified with a conceptual model in UML , to the theory discussion in the IS field . Analyzing and comparing previously published work is essential in every scientific endeavor . Webster and Watson [ 25 ] suggested not just to report the findings of each paper in a linear narrative fashion ( author - centric method ) but also to compare the papers with a concept matrix ( concept - centric approach ) . We want to go a step further with our approach . Based on the developed conceptual model of causal theories , we define a typology of inter - theory relationships . Based on these relationships , we present two novel visualizations for sets of related theories : the inter - theory relationship matrix and the theory evolution graph . We show an example of the analysis of a small set of knowledge - sharing theories to show the applicability of the approach . Weber [ 24 , p . 17 ] complains that , “a ‘clutter’ of partially articulated , partially tested theories in the information systems discipline’ [ … ] leads to ‘overload’ and ‘disarray . ’” The proposed approach tries to solve parts of these problems by helping researchers 1 ) visualize the evolution of theories , 2 ) identify the contributions of a theory in its theory networks , and 3 ) develop existing theories further as well as create new ones by identifying the differences and similarities of related theories more easily . 2 . Related Work Thagard [ 22 ] was one of the earliest researchers to describe the possibility of a computational philosophy of science . However , his approach was rule based and not comparable to our causal approach . Qualitative Probabilistic Networks ( QPNs ) , developed by Wellman [ 26 ] are qualitative abstractions of a probabilistic or Bayesian ( belief ) network . Our work adds the following aspects to QPN : 1 ) the proposed meta - model represents a Causal Bayesian Network [ 19 ] with the respective causal semantics , 2 ) we look at the relationships between networks , and 3 ) we add ontological propositions ( generalizations and synonyms ) to the meta - model . Hars [ 10 ] created several meta - models for theories based on the work of Popper , Nagel , Dubin , and Bunge and synthesized them into a common meta - model . Haines [ 9 ] suggested an XML language to describe theories called TheoryML . The main difference between our meta - model and these models is that they did not present any relationship between theories as we do . Larsen et al . [ 16 ] defined the theory’s identity as all publications that intend to contribute to the theory by extension , testing , or refining or by invoking the theory to make a contribution to an unrelated theory . However , in our meta - model , a theory is not defined by its publications or citations but by its theory structure that is described according to the meta - model . If a theory extends , refines , or uses another theory , it represents a different theory . The goal of our presented taxonomy of inter - theory relationships is to precisely 2015 48th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences 1530 - 1605 / 15 $ 31 . 00 © 2015 IEEE DOI 10 . 1109 / HICSS . 2015 . 582 4908 infer how the two theories are related independently from their cross citations . Our paper adds to the work in nomological networks and inter - nomological networks [ 15 ] , [ 12 ] by inferring how causal theories are related and if the theories can be integrated . To the best of our knowledge , nobody has suggested a typology of inter - theory relationships based on a formal model of causal theories . In the seminal work , Dubin [ 3 ] suggested seven elements of a theory and how to connect them . Gregor [ 6 ] extended the work and defined four mandatory and three optional elements of a theory . Table 1 compares the meta - model , which we will present in Section 3 , with these elements . Table 1 . Comparison of proposed meta - model with Gregor [ 6 ] Gregor [ 6 ] Proposed Meta - Model Theory component ( components common to all theories ) Means of representa - tion Possibilities : Words Math Symbolic logic X Computational graph - based Tables Diagrams , graphically X Causal graph Statements of relation - ship Possibilities : Associative Compositional X Hypernymic proposition Unidirectional Bidirectional X Synonymous proposition Conditional Causal X Causal proposition Scope X Modal qualifiers and statement of boundaries Theory component ( components contingent on theory purpose ) Causal explanations X Causal explanations can be stated through inter - theory relationships . ( Explains working mechanism by a more general theory or by cause - effect chain . ) Testable propositions ( hypotheses ) Testable hypotheses can be inferred based on measurements and research settings . Not explicitly part of the meta - model . Prescriptive statements Possible interventions to achieve a goal can be inferred based on causal graphs . Not explicitly part of the meta - model . Gregor [ 6 ] also proposed a taxonomy of five theory types in IS research . These five types are theories for I . analysis , II . explanation , III . prediction , IV . explanation and prediction , and V . design and action . This paper is limited to types I and IV . Weber [ 24 ] used Bunge’s ontology to define three necessary parts of a theory : its constructs , its associations between the constructs , and the states that are covered by the theory . We limit the types of associations to causal , synonymous , and hypernymic propositions ( see Table 2 ) . Table 2 . Comparison of proposed meta - model with Weber [ 24 ] Weber [ 24 ] Proposed Meta - Model Theory parts Constructs X Constructs Associations X Only causal , hypernymic , and synonymous proposition States X Scope Events ( optional ) X Can also be represented by constructs . Quality criteria for the whole theory Not part of the meta - model 3 . Meta - Model of Causal Theories According to Weber [ 24 , p . 4 ] , a theory is an “account for some subset of phenomena in the real word” . However , contrary to Weber [ 24 ] , we do not distinguish between a theory and a ( theoretical ) model nor between a weak and a strong theory . Also , the meta - model is limited to causal theories . In our meta - model , a causal theory has three mandatory parts : 1 ) a set of constructs , 2 ) a set of relationships between the constructs , and 3 ) a scope . Figure 1 shows the UML class diagram of the theory meta - model . 1 0 . . * 1 . . * ScopeName Theory NameDeﬁnitionClass of Things Construct has ▼ 1 effect ▼ subordinate ▼ 1 0 . . * Relationship superordinate ▼ 1 0 . . * synonym ▼ 2 0 . . * OntologicalProposition 0 . . * 2 is connected with ► is automatically calculated Inter - Theory Relationship Interaction Type Interaction Effect 0 . . * 1 ◀ from 0 . . * 1 ◀ to Interaction effects are only allowed between two causal propositions with the same effect (cid:1) uses 0 . . * 2 . . * 0 . . * 1 cause ▼ Sign Causal Proposition Synonymous Proposition Hypernymic Proposition Figure 1 . Meta - model of causal theories A theory must have a ( implicit or explicit ) scope ( boundary conditions ) . Because a theory is designed to model some part of the empirical world , it is important to define precisely what part of the world it models . 4909 The scope defines the size of the domain covered by the theory [ 24 , p . 11 ] . A theory is bounded when the limiting values on the constructs comprising the model are known . Limiting values may be either internal or external : defined by constructs included in the theory or by constructs outside the theory . However , often the scope of a theory is not formally specified but only textually described . The theory context in which the theory should be empirically valid can either be specified for the whole theory via the scope or for individual propositions via moderating variables . A theory might also have a name . A construct has a name and a clear semantic definition [ 24 , p . 7 ] . However , there might be polysemous construct names ; that is , constructs with the same name but with different semantic definitions [ 15 ] . These are treated as different constructs . A construct is an attribute of a class of things [ 24 , p . 7 ] . Therefore , we add the class of things ( e . g . , individual , team , organization ) to which the construct is related to the meta - model . Often , there are different possibilities to operationalize a construct . However , we abstract from the specific scales and measurements of the construct and describe theories without specifying in advance how to measure the constructs . A theory should be valid no matter how its constructs are measured . If a theory is valid with one way of measurement and not valid with another way of measurement , the two measurements are measuring different constructs . Therefore , we do not consider measurement as part of a theory [ 6 ] . A causal proposition expresses a direct , causal , qualitative influence between two constructs ( cause and effect ) . We assume the influence is stochastic and not deterministic . The constructs and causal propositions represent a qualitative causal graph [ 19 ] with nodes ( constructs used in the theory ) and directed edges ( causal propositions ) . For the precise semantic meaning of causality and causal graphs , we refer to Pearl [ 19 ] . The sign of a proposition can have the value + , - , 0 , or ? in our meta - model . A proposition between a cause and an effect with a positive ( + ) sign means increasing the value of the cause construct makes a higher value of the effect more likely even if we hold all other constructs of the theory constant . A positive or negative sign is meaningful only for binary , ordinal , or cardinal constructs . If cause and effect are binary constructs , the positive proposition means that if we change the value of the cause to true , a true value of the effect is more probable even if we hold all other constructs of the theory constant . We can define the meaning for the negative sign analogously for binary , ordinal , or cardinal scales . The 0 sign means there is no direct causal influence between the two constructs . This is implicitly assumed among all constructs in a theory that are not directly connected with a proposition . The ? sign describes an ambiguous ( nonzero ) influence . Propositions involving nominal constructs must not have a positive or negative sign but must be limited to no causal effect ( sign 0 ) or an ambiguous effect ( sign ? ) . Two or more propositions with the same effect might have interaction effects between them , which means one of the causes in a proposition is treated as a moderator . The moderating variable allows for the ability to discern conditions under which a proposition is most and least likely to hold [ 20 ] , [ 21 ] . This is similar to the theory scope : the theory scope specifies the boundary conditions for the whole theory where the moderating variables specify the conditions for a proposition . However , according to Pearl’s [ 19 ] axiomatic theory of causality , both constructs are causes of the effect . For the following discussion , we assume three constructs A , B , C , where C is a ( probabilistic ) function of A and B ( C = f ( A , B ) ) . We can distinguish among the following interaction types : • Synergetic interaction : In this multiplicative interaction effect ( fuzzy - and ) of the two interacting propositions , the effect of A on C will be bigger as B increases and , vice versa , the effect of B on C will be bigger as A increases . Both A and B are quasi - moderators [ 20 ] . The choice of which of the causes of the two propositions is called the moderating variable , depends on which construct should be emphasized as the main cause of the theory and which should be seen as the context of the theory . For binary constructs , this is similar to an ( probabilistic ) and - gate . • Anti - Synergetic interaction : In this fuzzy - or interaction effect , the effect of A on C will be lower as B increases and , vice versa , the effect of B on C will be lower as A increases . Both A and B are quasi - moderators [ 20 ] . Also here , the choice of which of the causes of the two propositions is called the moderating variable , depends on which construct should be emphasized as the main cause of the theory . For binary constructs , this is similar to an ( probabilistic ) or - gate . • Causal blocking : The causal effect of A on C is only present if B is false or low ( fuzzy - and - not ) . In this case , B would be a pure moderator [ 20 ] . For binary constructs , this is similar to an ( probabilistic ) and - not - gate . In addition to causal propositions , the presented meta - model allows ontological propositions . We distinguish between hypernymic and synonymous propositions . The hypernymic propositions of a theory 4910 are connecting constructs in a noncausal hierarchical manner . A hypernymic ( is - a ) relationship describes a subtype relationship between two constructs . For example , the construct “lung cancer” is a subtype of the construct “cancer . ” If the subconstruct is true for an observation ( e . g . , “lung cancer” is true ) , the super - construct is also true ( e . g . , “cancer” is true ) . The opposite does not follow logically ( e . g . , if “cancer” is true , that does not mean “lung cancer” is true ) . Hypernymic propositions are also falsifiable . If a causal proposition is considered valid , the causal proposition that replaces the constructs with its subconstructs should also be valid . The opposite is not true : a valid causal proposition in which a construct is replaced by its super - constructs might not be valid . A theory that only consists of hypernymic propositions can be classified as a type I theory ( theory of analyzing ) according to Gregor’s [ 6 ] typology . The second type of an ontological proposition is a synonymous proposition . It connects constructs that might have different names or slightly different definitions or measurements and defines them as synonymous [ 17 ] . A synonymous proposition between two binary constructs means that in every situation where one construct is true , the synonym should be true and vice versa . If a causal proposition is considered valid , it should also be valid when one of the constructs is exchanged with its synonym . The meta - model can be used to visualize theories . We present how a theory can be visualized for a small example with ontological ( Table 3 ) and causal propositions ( Table 4 ) . Table 3 : Ontological propositions Hypernymic Propositions Super - Construct Subconstruct A B Synonymous Propositions Construct Construct E F Table 4 : Causal propositions Causal Proposition Cause Effect Sign B D + D E - C D + Interaction Effect From To Type C (cid:2) D B (cid:2) D Synergy We use the following conventions ( see Figure 2 ) : Constructs are visualized as ovals , and causal propositions are represented as arrows with a symbol and color indicating the sign . Hypernymic propositions are visualized as enclosures of the subconstruct by the super - construct . Interaction effects are visualized by an arrow leading to the proposition and synonymous propositions by an undirected line between the constructs with an = symbol . Theory D + A B E - F = C + Figure 2 . Visualization of a theory 4 . Total Causal Influence for One Theory To calculate the total causal influence of a construct c 1 on a construct c 2 , where both constructs are part of a theory t 1 , we conduct the following steps : 1 . Standardization : Using the synonymous propositions , synonymous constructs will be treated as identical , and one of the synonymous construct names will be used . 2 . Specialization : Using the hypernymic propositions , causal propositions between more general constructs are replaced by causal propositions between subconcepts . 3 . Path construction : All directed paths from c 1 to c 2 are computed . If there is no path from c 1 to c 2 , then there is no causal influence from c 1 to c 2 , that means , the sign of the influence is 0 . 4 . Calculating the sign of a path : The sign of a path can be calculated by multiplying all signs of the propositions in the path . The rules for sign addition ( ⊕ ) and multiplication ( ⊗ ) are shown in Figure 3 . ⊕ + - 0 ? ⊗ + - 0 ? + + ? + ? + + - 0 ? - ? - - ? - - + 0 ? 0 + - 0 ? 0 0 0 0 0 ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? 0 ? Figure 3 . Rules for sign addition and sign multiplication [ 26 ] 5 . Calculating total causal influence : The sign of the total causal influence of c 1 on c 2 can be calculated by adding up all signs of all paths from c 1 to c 2 . 5 . Types of Inter - Theory Relationships 4911 We are interested in the relationships among theories . We want to automatically find all theories that are contradicting or agreeing with a given theory . We define four high - level types of relationships between two theories : unrelated , connected , contradicting , and agreeing . Figure 4 shows the UML class diagram of the top hierarchical level of the taxonomy of inter - theory relationships . Each of the four types is additionally symbolized with a color ( white , yellow , red , green ) and a symbol . Inter - Theory Relationship Unrelated Connected Contradicting Agreeing { exhaustive , non overlapping } ✓ (cid:2) ∅ Figure 4 . Types of inter - theory relations At this level , all four inter - theory relationships are symmetric . That means if t 1 agrees with t 2 , t 2 also agrees with t 1 . For the calculation of the type of inter - theory relationship , the common used constructs of two theories are important . The computation can be done in two steps : 1 . Based on the synonymous and hypernymic propositions , the constructs are standardized and specialized ( see Section 4 ) . 2 . The set of constructs that appear in both theories are computed ( the intersection of both sets of used constructs ) . 5 . 1 Unrelated Theories Two theories are unrelated if they have no common used constructs ( see Figure 5 ) . Theory 1 + A B Theory 2 + C D Figure 5 . Theories 1 and 2 are unrelated . 5 . 2 Connected Theories Two theories are connected if they have exactly one common used construct . We can distinguish between two connected cases ( see Figure 6 ) : Connected Causes Independent Variable Alternative Cause for Effect { non exhaustive , non overlapping } Symmetric Symmetric Inverse : Independent Variable is caused by Figure 6 . Types of connected theories 1 . Causes independent variable : An independent construct of one theory is an effect in the other theory ( see Figure 7 ) . This case is a candidate for merging the theories . However , merging is only possible if there is no additional direct causal relationship between other constructs , except the common one . For example , in Figure 7 , both theories might be merged to A (cid:2) B (cid:2) C if there are no additional direct causes from A to C that are not going through B . The relationship is not symmetric . The corresponding inverse relationship type represents “independent variable is caused by . ” Theory 1 + A B Theory 3 + B C Figure 7 . Theories 1 and 3 are connected : theory 1 causes the independent variable of theory 3 . 2 . Alternative Cause for Effect : The dependent construct of one theory is also a dependent variable of the other theory ( see Figure 8 ) . This inter - theory relationship is symmetric . Theory 1 + A B Theory 4 + C B Figure 8 . Theories 1 and 4 are connected : alternative cause for effect . 5 . 3 Contradicting Theories Two theories are contradicting if the two theories have two or more common used constructs and there exists an ordered pair of common used constructs where the total causal influence is different for the two theories . 4912 We can distinguish four types of contradictions ( see Figure 9 ) . Two theories can be contradicting for multiple reasons ; therefore , the four types are overlapping . Contradicting (cid:3) Different Effect Sign ± Missing Causal Effect (cid:2) Different Causal Direction ⇄ { exhaustive , overlapping } Symmetric Symmetric Inverse : has Causal Effect → Symmetric { non exhaustive , overlapping } Common Cause Inverse : has Causal Effect → Figure 9 . Types of contradicting theories 1 . Different effect sign : There exists an ordered pair of common used constructs with a total causal influence that has a different nonzero sign in one of the theories ( see Figure 10 ) , meaning both theories assume a causal effect between the two constructs , but the total effect sign is different . This inter - theory relationship is symmetric . Theory 1 + A B Theory 5 A B - Figure 10 . Theories 1 and 5 are contradicting : different effect sign . 2 . Missing causal effect : There exists an ordered pair of constructs for which the total causal influence in one theory is not zero and is zero in the other theory ( see Figure 11 ) . This inter - theory relationship is not symmetric . The inverse inter - theory relationship is “has causal effect . ” Theory 1 + A B Theory 6 A B Figure 11 . Theories 1 and 6 are contradicting : missing causal effect . 3 . Common cause : There exists an ordered pair of constructs for which the total causal influence in one theory is not zero and is zero in the other theory , but both constructs have a common cause ( see Figure 12 ) . This inter - theory relationship is not symmetric . The inverse inter - theory relationship is “has causal effect . ” This is a special case of the missing causal effect relationship . Theory 1 + A B Theory 7 C A B + + Figure 12 . Theories 1 and 7 are contradicting : common cause . 4 . Different causal direction : There exists an ordered pair of constructs for which the total causal influence in one theory is not zero and is zero in the other , but in the other theory the total causal influence for the swapped ordered pair is not zero ( see Figure 13 ) . This inter - theory relationship is symmetric . This is a special case of the missing causal effect relationship . Theory 1 + A B Theory 8 + B A Figure 13 . Theories 1 and 8 are contradicting : different causal direction . 5 . 4 Agreeing Theories Two theories agree if they both have two or more common used constructs and if the same total causal influence exists in both theories for all ordered pairs of common used constructs . We can distinguish seven different basic types of agreeing theories that are subtypes of six agreeing relationships ( see Figure 18 ) . The types are partially overlapping ; multiple subtypes might be true for two agreeing theories . 1 . Identical : Both theories use the same constructs and have the same relationships between them ( see Figure 14 ) . The identical relationship is symmetric and nonoverlapping with all other agreeing inter - theory relationships . Theory 1 + A B Theory 9 + A B Figure 14 . Theories 1 and 9 are identical . 2 . Superset : A theory t 1 is a superset of a theory t 2 if t 1 has all the constructs and propositions of t 2 and has at least one additional construct ( see Figure 15 ) . This inter - theory relationship is not symmetric . The inverse relationship of superset is “subset . ” 4913 3 . Additional effect : There are one or more additional dependent variables in one of the theories ( see Figure 15 ) . The inverse inter - theory relationship is “missing effect . ” Theory 1 + A B Theory 10 A B C + + Figure 15 . Theories 1 and 10 agree : One has an addition effect . Theory 10 is superset . 4 . Additional cause : There are one or more additional independent variables in one of the theories ( see Figure 16 ) . The inverse inter - theory relationship is “missing cause . ” Theory 1 + A B Theory 11 A B C + + Figure 16 . Theories 1 and 11 agree : theory 11 has an additional cause . 5 . Alternative working mechanism : The causal path between two common constructs has , in one theory at least , one different mediating variable ( see Figure 17 ) . This inter - theory relationship is symmetric . Theory 12 + A M B + Theory 13 + A K B + Figure 17 . Theories 12 and 13 agree : both have alternative working mechanisms . The next types are explanations for working mechanisms by either zooming into the cause - effect chain or by using a more general theory . 6 . Explains working mechanism by cause - effect chain : The effect from one common construct to the other is the same in both theories ; in one , the effect is direct ; the other has one or more mediating variables between them ( see Figure 19 ) . The inverse inter - theory relationship is “working mechanism is explained by cause - effect chain . ” Theory 1 + A B Theory 14 + A M B + Figure 19 . Theories 1 and 14 agree : theory 14 explains the working mechanism of theory 1 by its cause - effect chain . 7 . Explains working mechanism of a more specific theory ( specialization ) : A proposition in one theory has either a more specific effect , a more specific cause , or both in the other theory ( see Figure 20 ) . The inverse inter - theory relationship is “working mechanism is explained by a more general theory ( generalization ) . ” Theory 1 + A B Theory 15 D + B A C Figure 20 . Theories 1 and 15 agree : theory 1 explains the working mechanism of a more specific theory 15 Inverse : Working mechanism is explained by zoom in cause - effect chain Agreeing ✓ Identical ≡ Alternative working mechanism (cid:2) Explains working mechanism Explains working mechanism of a more speciﬁc theory ⇓ Superset ⊃ Additional Effect (cid:2) Additional Cause (cid:3) Explains working mechanism by cause - effect - chain (cid:4) (cid:5)(cid:5) ͎ { non exhaustive , overlapping } Symmetric Inverse : Subset ⊂ Symmetric Symmetric Inverse : Missing Effect (cid:2) Inverse : Missing Cause (cid:3) Inverse : Working mechanism is explained by a more general theory ⇑ Inverse : Working mechanism is explained by (cid:4) (cid:5)(cid:5) ͎ Figure 18 . Types of agreeing theories 4914 6 . Visualization : Inter - Theory Relationship Matrix and Theory Evolution Graph The defined inter - theory relationship taxonomy can be used to analyze and visualize the connections between sets of theories in different ways . One way to do this is by using the inter - theory relationship matrix ( see Figure 21 ) . Rows and columns represent theories the researcher wants to compare ( e . g . , the theories t 1 , … , t 6 ) . The inter - theory relationships between the theory in the row and in the column are shown in the intersecting cells . The inter - theory relationships can be calculated by following the steps in Sections 4 and 5 . The cell color indicates the top - level relationship ( white : unrelated ; yellow : related ; red : contradicting ; green : agreeing ) . In each cell , one or more symbols further specify the detailed relationship types ( e . g . , ⊃ : superset ) . The diagonal of the matrix is filled with the identity symbol ( ≡ ) . t 1 t 2 t 3 t 4 t 5 t 6 t 1 ≡ ⇓ ⊂ t 2 ⇑ ≡ → ± t 3 ⊃ (cid:8) ≡ ⇓ ⇒ t 4 ± ⇑ ≡ t 5 ⇒ (cid:2)(cid:2) ≡ (cid:10) t 6 (cid:10) ≡ (cid:2) Figure 21 . Inter - theory relationship matrix Another way to visualize inter - theory relationships is with an inter - theory graph . Here , each node represents a theory , and each edge between nodes represents the inter - theory relationship . The type of the inter - theory relationship is visualized with the color of the edge ( no link : unrelated ; yellow : related ; red : contradicting ; green : agreeing ) and with one or more symbols attached to the edge . The edge between two theories is either bidirectional if the inter - theory relationship is symmetric or one - directional if the relationship is not symmetric . The inter - theory graph can be refined further so the position of the theory nodes encodes additional information . One way is that the x - dimension of the theory node is related to the publishing year , so younger theories are positioned on the right side of older theories . The y - axis is used to indicate the generality of the theory . More general theories are positioned above more specific theories . This diagram type is a theory evolution graph ( see Figure 22 ) . T1 T2 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 T3 ⇓ ⊂ T4 (cid:2) (cid:2) T5 (cid:2) T6 ⇄ (cid:3) ⇓ Figure 22 . Theory evolution graph 7 . Exemplary Application of the Approach For illustrative purposes , we will show how the presented meta - model can be used to analyze the information systems research question Why do people share knowledge in a knowledge management system ? The phenomenon of interest in this research question is knowledge sharing . Knowledge - sharing theories appear regularly in the leading IS journals and are widely cited ; for example , the MISQ papers of Wasko and Faraj [ 23 ] and of Kankanhalli et al . [ 13 ] are cited more than 2 , 400 and 1 , 300 times , respectively . However , space precludes an exhaustive structured literature review . We will limit our analysis to several knowledge - sharing theories for illustrative purposes only . The theories were created by way of analyses of the diagrams , propositions , and measurements of the selected papers . We also adapted and simplified the theories and concentrated on the effect of incentives for knowledge sharing . The first theory from the IS field ( adapted and simplified from Kankanhalli et al . [ 13 ] ) explains the knowledge contribution to an electronic knowledge repository as an economic decision that is influenced by the benefits and costs of knowledge contribution ( see Figure 23 ) . Cost of Behavior Kankanhalli at al . ( adapted and simpliﬁed ) Beneﬁt of Behavior Codiﬁcation Effort Knowledge Sharing Incentives Behavior Knowledge Contribution + - Enjoy Helping + Altruism = Figure 23 . Kankanhalli et al . [ 13 ] ( simplified ) This last theory is a specialization of the more general economic exchange theory [ 2 ] , which states that engaging in a behavior depends on the costs and benefits of this behavior ( see Figure 24 ) . 4915 Economic Exchange Theory Beneﬁt of Behavior + Cost of Behavior Behavior - Figure 24 . Economic exchange theory [ 2 ] The next IS theory ( adapted and simplified from Wasko and Faraj [ 23 ] ) explains knowledge contribution through altruism , similar to Kankanhalli et al . [ 13 ] but also includes the influence of centrality of the knowledge sharer in an organization ( see Figure 25 ) . Wasko and Faraj ( adapted and simpliﬁed ) Beneﬁt of Behavior Enjoy Helping Behavior Knowledge Contribution + Altruism = Structural Capital Centrality + Figure 25 . Wasko and Faraj [ 23 ] ( simplified ) The next theory is more critical about incentives for knowledge sharing ( adapted and simplified from Osterloh and Frey [ 18 ] ) ( see Figure 26 ) . It argues that monetary incentives will reduce the altruistic motives for knowledge sharing . Intrinsic Beneﬁts Osterloh and Frey Extrinsic Beneﬁts Altruism Knowledge Sharing Incentives Behavior Knowledge Sharing - + + Knowledge Contribution = Figure 26 . Osterloh and Frey [ 18 ] ( simplified ) The last theory is a specialization of the motivational crowding theory [ 4 ] , which suggests that extrinsic benefits can crowd out intrinsic benefits ( see Figure 27 ) . Motivational Crowding Theory Beneﬁt of Behavior Extrinsic Beniﬁts + Intrinsic Beneﬁt Behavior + - Figure 27 . Motivational crowding theory [ 4 ] Figure 28 shows the inter - theory matrix for the five theories in this example . Figure 29 shows the theory evolution diagram . 1 2 3 4 5 1 . Kankanhalli et al . ≡ ⇑ ± ± 2 . Economic Exchange Theory ⇓ ≡ ⇓ ± ± 3 . Wasko & Faraj ⇑ ≡ 4 . Osterloh & Frey ± ± ≡ ⇑ 5 . Motivational Crowding Theory ± ± ⇓ ≡ (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) Figure 28 . Inter - theory matrix for selected knowledge - sharing theories 2 . Economic Exchange Theory 1970 1980 1990 2000 5 . Motivational Crowding Theory 4 . Osterloh & Frey ⇓ (cid:2) (cid:2) ⇓ 3 . Wasko & Faraj 1 . Kankanhalli et al . ⇓ (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) Figure 29 . Theory evolution graph for selected knowledge - sharing theories 8 . Conclusion The presented approach represents a novel contribution to the analyses of sets of theories , which can be used , for example , in literature reviews . This enhances the concept matrix approach that Webster and Watson [ 25 ] suggested . However , only with computational help it is realistic to compare dozens of theories in this way . Nonetheless , the theory does not have to be automatically extracted from a paper ; the meta - model can be filled by manually coding papers or by using text mining . Automatic hypotheses extraction with text mining is error - prone because the 4916 descriptions of theories in papers are often imprecise [ 24 , p . 16 ] and automatic text mining is limited . A limitation of this paper is its focus on causal theories . We are aware that other theory types exist in the IS field , such as process theories or qualitative theories of analysis , explanation , or design ( type I , II , or V theories [ 6 ] ) created , for example , with the Grounded Theory Method ( GTM ) [ 5 ] . The presented meta - model cannot describe all IS theories . Though causal theories primarily appear in quantitative research , qualitative and GTM theories also sometimes use causal propositions to explain sociotechnical mechanisms [ 1 ] . In future work , we want to conduct a more thorough evaluation of the meta - model and the proposed inter - theory relationships than are in the exemplary application in Section 7 . We want to test the validity and robustness of the approach by analyzing more complex theories for one phenomenon of interest . The evaluation should test whether all causal theories can be described by the meta - model and whether researchers find the inter - theory relationships and their visualizations fertile for their theoretical work . Our aim is to better identify the relationships and evolutions of theories and the different patterns that might indicate normal continuous scientific progress or periodic paradigm shifts [ 14 ] . Finally , we want to add empirical findings to the theory evolution graph . References [ 1 ] C . Avgerou , “Social Mechanisms for Causal Explanation in Social Theory Based IS Research” , Journal of the Association for Information Systems , vol . 14 , no . 8 , August 2013 , pp . 399 – 419 . [ 2 ] P . M . Blau , Exchange and Power in Social Life , Transaction Publishers , New York , 1964 . [ 3 ] R . Dubin , Theory Building , 2nd edition , Free Press , New York , 1978 . [ 4 ] B . S . Frey and F . Oberholzer - Gee , “The Cost of Price Incentives : An Empirical Analysis of Motivation Crowding - Out” , The American Economic Review , vol . 87 , no . 4 , September 1997 , pp . 746 – 755 . [ 5 ] B . G . Glaser and A . L . Strauss , The Discovery of Grounded Theory : Strategies for Qualitative Research , Aldine de Gruyter , Chicago , 1967 . [ 6 ] S . Gregor , “The Nature of Theory in Information Systems” , MIS Quarterly , vol . 30 , no . 3 , September 2006 , pp . 611 – 642 . [ 7 ] S . Gregor and D . Hovorka , “Causality : The Elephant in the Room in Information Systems Epistemology” , Proceedings of the European Conference on Information Systems ( ECIS ) , 2011 . [ 8 ] S . Gregor and D . Jones , “The Anatomy of a Design Theory” , Journal of the Association for Information Systems , vol . 8 , no . 5 , May 2007 , pp . 313 – 335 . [ 9 ] M . Haines , “Capturing the Essence of Scientific Knowledge : A Framework for Representing and Analyzing Theories” , AMCIS 2005 Proceedings , 2005 . [ 10 ] A . Hars , “Designing Scientific Knowledge Infrastructures : The Contribution of Epistemology” , Information Systems Frontiers , vol . 3 , no . 1 , March 2001 , pp . 63 – 73 . [ 11 ] D . S . Hovorka , M . Germonprez , and K . R . Larsen , “Explanation in Information Systems” , Information Systems Journal , vol . 18 , no . 1 , January 2008 , pp . 23 – 43 . [ 12 ] D . S . Hovorka , K . R . Larsen , J . Birt , and G . Finnie , “A Meta - Theoretic Approach to Theory Integration in Information Systems” , 46th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS ) , 2013 , pp . 4656 – 4665 . [ 13 ] A . Kankanhalli , B . C . Y . Tan , and Kwok - Kee Wei , “Contributing Knowledge to Electronic Knowledge Repositories : An Empirical Investigation” , MIS Quarterly , vol . 29 , no . 1 , March 2005 , pp . 113 – 143 . [ 14 ] T . S . Kuhn , The Structure of Scientific Revolutions , University of Chicago Press , Chicago , 1962 . [ 15 ] K . R . Larsen and D . S . Hovorka , “Developing Interfield Nomological Nets” , 45th Hawaii International Conference on System Science ( HICSS ) , 2012 , pp . 5194 – 5203 . [ 16 ] K . R . Larsen , D . Hovorka , J . West , J . Birt , J . R . Pfaff , T . W . Chambers , Z . R . Sampedro , N . Zager , and B . Vanstone , “Theory Identity : A Machine - Learning Approach” , 47th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS ) , 2014 , pp . 4639 – 4648 . [ 17 ] J . Li and K . Larsen , “Establishing Nomological Networks for Behavioral Science : A Natural Language Processing Based Approach” , ICIS 2011 Proceedings , 2011 . [ 18 ] M . Osterloh and B . S . Frey , “Motivation , Knowledge Transfer , and Organizational Forms” , Organization Science , vol . 11 , no . 5 , September 2000 , pp . 538 – 550 . [ 19 ] J . Pearl , Causality : Models , Reasoning , and Inference , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , 2000 . [ 20 ] S . Sharma , R . M . Durand , and O . Gur - Arie , “Identification and Analysis of Moderator Variables” , Journal of Marketing Research , vol . 18 , no . 3 , August 1981 , pp . 291 – 300 . [ 21 ] R . I . Sutton and B . M . Staw , “What Theory is Not” , Administrative Science Quarterly , vol . 40 , no . 3 , September 1995 , pp . 371 – 384 . [ 22 ] P . R . Thagard , Computational Philosophy of Science . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 1988 . [ 23 ] M . McLure Wasko and S . Faraj , “Why Should I Share ? Examining Social Capital and Knowledge Contribution in Electronic Networks of Practice” , MIS Quarterly , vol . 29 , no . 1 , March 2005 , pp . 35 – 57 . R . [ 24 ] Weber , “Evaluating and Developing Theories in the Information Systems Discipline” , Journal of the Association for Information Systems , vol . 13 , no . 1 , January 2012 , pp . 1 – 30 . [ 25 ] J . Webster and R . T . Watson , “Analyzing the Past to Prepare for the Future : Writing a Literature Review” , MIS Quarterly , vol . 26 , no . 2 , June 2002 , pp . 13 – 23 . [ 26 ] M . P . Wellman , “Fundamental Concepts of Qualitative Probabilistic Networks” , Artificial Intelligence , vol . 44 , no . 3 , August 1990 , pp . 257 – 303 . 4917