Cryo - electron Tomography of Clathrin - coated Vesicles : Structural Implications for Coat Assembly Yifan Cheng 1 ⁎ , Werner Boll 2 , Tomas Kirchhausen 2 Stephen C . Harrison 3 and Thomas Walz 1 1 Department of Cell Biology , Harvard Medical School , 240 Longwood Avenue , Boston , MA 02115 , USA 2 Department of Cell Biology and CBR Institute for Biomedical Research , Harvard Medical School , 200 Longwood Avenue , Boston , MA 02115 , USA 3 Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology , Harvard Medical School , 250 Longwood Avenue , Boston , MA 02115 , USA Clathrin - coated vesicles mediate vesicular traffic in cells . Three - dimensional image reconstructions of homogenous populations of in vitro assembled clathrin coats have yielded a molecular model for clathrin and its interactions with some of its partners . The intrinsic averaging required for those calculations has precluded detailed analysis of heterogeneous populations of clathrin - coated vesicles isolated from cells . We have therefore used cryo - electron tomography to study the lattice organization of individual clathrin - coated vesicles and the disposition of the captured vesicle with respect to the surrounding coat . We find a wide range of designs for the clathrin lattice , with different patterns of pentagonal , hexagonal , and occasionally heptagonal facets . Many coats , even smaller ones , enclose membrane vesicles , which are generally offset from the center of the clathrin shell . The electron density distribution between the coat and the underlying vesicle is not uniform , and the number of apparent contacts that anchor the clathrin lattice to the vesicle membrane is significantly less than the number of clathrin heavy chains in the assembly . We suggest that the eccentric position of the vesicle reflects the polarity of assembly , from initiation of coat formation to membrane pinching . © 2006 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . * Corresponding author Keywords : clathrin ; clathrin - coated vesicles ; endocytosis ; cryo - electron tomography ; cryo - electron microscopy Introduction Clathrin - coated vesicles are specialized organelles that carry endocytic membrane traffic from the plasma membrane to endosomes and secretory traffic between the trans - Golgi network and endosomes ; 1 , 2 they also participate in synaptic vesicle recycling . 3 Clathrin , the protein that forms the lattice - like coat of these structures , is a spider - like trimer ( a triskelion ) , with three legs radiating from a central hub . Adaptor proteins link the clathrin scaffold to the enclosed membrane vesicle and to membrane - anchored cargo proteins . 1 , 4 – 6 The formation of clathrin - coated vesicles follows a sequence of coordinated steps , in which mem - brane invagination is coupled to growth of the clathrin lattice , leading to lattice closure and vesicle budding . 1 , 7 , 8 Early electron microscopy ( EM ) studies of negatively stained clathrin - coated vesicles pur - ified from pig brain showed coats with a wide variety of designs accommodating vesicles of differ - ent sizes and shapes . 4 In vitro assembled clathrin lattices 9 – 11 can have more uniform and symmetrical designs ( e . g . lattices with icosahedral , D6 or tetra - hedral symmetry ) , particularly if assembled with the endocytic adaptor protein complex AP - 2 . A recent study based on cryo - electron microscopy of cla - thrin / AP - 2 coats imaged in vitrified ice produced electron density maps at sub - nanometer resolution , obtained from averaged images of these structures . 12 When combined with the atomic structures of individual clathrin domains , 13 , 14 these maps yielded a molecular model for a clathrin lattice . 12 The approach was extended to the analysis of how auxilin , the co - factor required for the Hsp70 and ATP - dependent dissociation of the coat , interacts with clathrin within the lattice . 15 Clathrin - coated vesicles purified from tissues contain many protein components in addition to Present address : Y . Cheng , Department of Biochemistry & Biophysics , University of California San Francisco , 600 16th Street , San Francisco , CA 94158 , USA . E - mail address of the corresponding author : ycheng @ biochem . ucsf . edu doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jmb . 2006 . 10 . 036 J . Mol . Biol . ( 2007 ) 365 , 892 – 899 0022 - 2836 / $ - see front matter © 2006 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . adaptors , mostly in sub - stoichiometric ratios with respect to clathrin , and our understanding of their disposition with respect to the encapsulated , cargo - carrying lipid vesicles remains largely inferential . We describe here reconstructions of individual coated vesicles obtained by cryo - electron tomogra - phy . Even the smallest of the many lattices we detect can enclose a vesicle , which has an unexpected eccentric disposition with respect to the surrounding coat . Results and Discussion Cryo - electron tomography of single clathrin - coated vesicles Clathrin - coated vesicles were purified from bo - vine brain , 16 using a gentle isosmotic procedure to prevent membrane shrinkage , 17 and embedded in vitreous ice . Cryo - electron microscopy images ( Figure 1 ( a ) ) of these frozen hydrated coated vesicles recorded with a conventional low dose of ∼ 20e – / Å 2 show that the individual assemblies differ in size and shape , and that many contain membrane vesicles . These preparations contain all the assembly components : clathrin triskelions , adaptor protein complexes , membrane vesicles and possibly cargo proteins trapped within the vesicles ( data not shown ) . Because of their obvious heterogeneity , we could not use single - particle averaging ( as used to reach sub - nanometer resolution from images of reassembled coats 12 ) to analyze these structures , and we have therefore used cryo - electron tomogra - phy to obtain 3D reconstructions of individual frozen hydrated coated vesicles at lower resolution . Images in a tilt series ( Figure 1 ( b ) – ( d ) ) , recorded as described in Materials and Methods , were aligned with each other to calculate the electron tomograms . Figure 2 ( a ) shows a central section from a recon - structed tomogram of a vitreous ice slab with embedded clathrin - coated structures . The mem - brane vesicles are clearly visible within many of the coats ( arrow heads ) . One of them ( circled in Figure 2 ( a ) ) , boxed out from the tomogram , is presented as a series of sequential parallel 62 Å thick slices ( Figure 2 ( b ) ) . Comparison with similarly sliced views of an empty clathrin coat boxed out from the same field ( Figure 3 ) makes it clear that the particle shown in Figure 2 ( b ) is indeed a vesicle surrounded by a clathrin coat . The continuous membrane of the vesicle and the lattice of the coat ( especially its relatively highly contrasted vertices ) are all clearly visible . It has been suggested that coats smaller than the icosahedral “ soccer ball ” might not be able to accommodate a membrane vesicle . 18 Without a full reconstruction , it has not been possible to test this proposal , because it is difficult to distinguish between a coated vesicle and a reassembled empty coat with randomly captured protein content . The tomographic reconstructions here show that even the smallest lattices we have isolated often contain membrane vesicles . The vesicle in Figure 2 ( b ) is spherical , with a mean diameter of about 340 Å ; the clathrin lattice has an outer diameter of about 700 Å . The 3D density map of this coated vesicle ( Figure 2 ( c ) ) , viewed along the ice slab and perpendicular to the tilt axis , shows that the missing wedge effect leads to non - uniformity in the resolution of the tomographic 3D reconstruction . 19 The details in the equator of the reconstruction are substantially sharper than at its top and bottom . The representa - tion of the vesicle membrane is continuous in the vicinity of the equator but broken axially , and the reconstructed image elongates perpendicular to the vitreous - ice slab . Nevertheless , the pentagons and hexagons of the clathrin lattice on the surfaces of the assemblies , including the top and bottom of the reconstruction , are all well resolved ( Figure 2 ( b ) and ( c ) ) . The density surrounding the membrane vesicle divides into two layers ( Figure 2 ( d ) ) . The outer layer clearly defines the hexagons and pentagons of the clathrin lattice . The much higher ( ∼ 8 Å ) resolution images obtained from single - particle averaging of in vitro assembled clathrin coats show that the hex - agonal and pentagonal edges of the polyhedron are Figure 1 . ( a ) Cryo - electron microscopy image of clathrin - coated vesicles embedded in vitreous ice . The particle marked by a continuous circle is probably the top view of a D6 barrel . From the projection image alone , it is difficult to determine whether the coat contains a vesicle . The particles marked by broken circles are larger and contain vesicles obviously offset from the centers of the coats . ( b ) – ( d ) Three representative raw images of a tilt series used to calculate cryo - tomograms of vitrified clathrin - coated vesicles . The tilt axis is approximately along the vertical direction . 893 Imaging of Single Clathrin - coated Vesicles bundles ( about 70 Å in diameter ) of two anti - parallel clathrin heavy - chain proximal segments ( each with an associated light chain ) and two anti - parallel distal segments . 12 Therefore , the inner density layer in the tomographic reconstruction must correspond to the heavy - chain N - terminal domains and linkers ; it is weaker than the outer layer and less defined in its features . There appear to be some connections between the inner layer and the vesicle membrane . The membrane vesicle is of uniform curvature with a relatively smooth surface , except where contacts from the clathrin coat impinge . Adjusting the threshold of the 3D density map reveals within the vesicle a feature , perhaps protein cargo , connecting to the membrane opposite a position where inner - layer density from the clathrin coat makes contact . Density inside the vesicle varies from particle to particle , but the inner spaces of these brain - derived coated vesicles are clearly not crowded . Clathrin lattices We have analyzed in detail the tomographic 3D reconstructions of eight individual coated vesicles ( Figure 4 ( a ) and ( b ) ) . The lattices , reconstructed without ambiguity , show different designs , ranging from 36 to 60 triskelions ( Table 1 ) . The smallest ( 36 triskelions ) has the so - called tennis - ball structure , 4 Figure 2 . Tomography of clathrin - coated vesicles . ( a ) Central section ( 155 Å thick ) of an electron tomogram of coated vesicles embedded in a slab of vitreous ice over a hole in a carbon film . The diameter of the hole is 1 μ m . ( b ) Slices through a single coated vesicle ( circled in ( a ) , and particle 3 in Figure 4 ) . The slice thickness is 62 Å . ( c ) Isodensity surface for the coated vesicle shown in ( b ) viewed from the side . ( d ) Central section of the same density map , corresponding to the broken lines in ( c ) , viewed from the top . The black broken circles mark the locations of two separate layers of density that surround the vesicle ; the blue broken circle marks the membrane of the vesicle itself . 894 Imaging of Single Clathrin - coated Vesicles with D2 symmetry ( particle 8 in Figure 4 ( b ) ) . The number of triskelions is the same as in the D6 barrel , frequently found in clathrin coats assembled in vitro , but the 12 pentagons form a continuous chain , like the seam of a tennis ball , rather than two distinct rings of six . The vesicle inside this tennis - ball coat has a diameter of about 310 Å . The largest lattice ( particle 1 in Figure 4 ( b ) ) has the same number of triskelions as does an icosahedral coat . The coat of particle 1 , like that of particle 4 in Figure 4 ( b ) , contains a heptagon and 13 pentagons . In a lattice composed entirely of hexagons and pentagons , exactly 12 pentagons are needed to form a closed shell . Inclusion of one or more heptagons requires a corresponding number of additional pentagons . Heptagons have been observed in clathrin lattices , especially near edges of the flat clathrin arrays that form where fibroblasts in culture make contact with the substrate on which they are growing . 20 Of the two heptagons in the eight structures described here , one is surrounded by six pentagons and one hexagon and the other is surrounded by four pentagons and three hexagons . In both lattices , the heptagon creates a larger opening as well as a larger radius of curvature in the coat . Contrary to our expectations , we found that most of the lattices shown in Figure 4 ( b ) lack overall symmetry ( the tennis ball with D2 symmetry is an exception ) , and they deviate in different degrees from a spherical shape . The deviations of the coats from a circular outline come not from the inevitable distortion of a tomographic reconstruction with a missing wedge , but rather reflect the designs of the clathrin lattices themselves . Surface tension or other physical forces are unlikely to have produced the departure from an overall spherical shape , as the distortions appear in all orientations even though the illustrations in Figure 4 ( b ) are oriented so that the direction of view is always perpendicular to the surface of the ice . Interactions between coats and vesicle membrane The density of the inner layer of the coat is not as well defined as that of the lattice - like outer layer . We can nonetheless identify , especially near the equator where missing - wedge effects are least , connections between inner - layer features and the membrane vesicle within ( see asterisk ( * ) , Figure 5 ( a ) ) . These are presumably positions at which the N - terminal domains of clathrin and AP - 2 adaptor proteins ( or other proteins ) come together in the vicinity of the lipid bilayer . It is difficult to determine how many contacts of this kind are present in any one of the coated vesicles studied here , because of the rela - tively noisy electron density at the top and bottom of the 3D reconstructions . Nevertheless , these contacts are clearly resolved around the equators ( Figure 6 ) , and in some cases they contain a sufficiently large volume to accommodate a heterotetrameric adaptor complex ( Figure 7 ) . Figure 5 ( b ) shows an equatorial section of the 3D reconstruction in Figure 5 ( a ) , together with the Figure 3 . Slices through a single clathrin coat that does not contain a membrane vesicle . Coats like this are probably assembled spontaneously from clathrin triske - lions during the purification process . Figure 4 . Outline of clathrin lattices in individual coated vesicles . ( a ) The particles correspond to the clathrin - coated vesicles indicated in the tomogram shown in Figure 2 ( a ) . The images correspond to central sections ( 62 Å thick ) viewed from the top . ( b ) Clathrin lattices were determined by manual tracing along the electron density of the individual tomograms . The spheres inside the lattices represent the sizes and locations of the membrane vesicles contained within each coat . The views are presented in the same orientation as the central sections of the coated vesicles in ( a ) . 895 Imaging of Single Clathrin - coated Vesicles atomic structures of clathrin triskelions ( in red ) placed into that reconstruction . The fit confirms our assignment of the inner density layer to the N - terminal domains of the clathrin heavy chains . The eccentric position of the vesicle brings these terminal domains into contact with densities anchored on the membrane . On the left - hand side of the image , there is a gap of 50 – 100 Å between the vesicle membrane and the terminal domains , and the vesicle surface is rather smooth on that side , except for one extended connection . A similar gap between the vesicle membrane and the N - terminal domains of clathrin heavy chains can be detected in others of our to - mographically reconstructed coated vesicles ( Figure 6 ) . As seen in Figure 4 ( a ) and ( b ) , and Table 1 , the diameter of the membrane vesicle is generally proportional to the number of the triskelions in the assembly , but the relationship is not a strict one . The vesicle inside lattice 4 is slightly larger than the vesicles inside lattices 2 and 3 , which have more triskelions ( Table 1 ) . As a result , the vesicles in 2 and 3 are encased more loosely , with more obvious gaps between coat and membrane . In the smallest structure analyzed here ( 8 in Figure 4 ) , with 36 clathrin triskelions and hence 108 heavy chains , the membrane vesicle has a diameter of about 310 Å . If tightly covered , its surface could accommodate a total of about 30 – 40 AP - 2 com - plexes , but the reconstruction shows clearly that such a dense coating is not present . We can conclude that the total number of AP - 2 - mediated contacts between the clathrin coat and the vesicle membrane is substantially less than the total number of clathrin heavy chains in the lattice . Most of the coated vesicles in our tomogram probably correspond to precursors of synaptic ves - icles . 21 The eccentric locations of the vesicles inside the coats are more obvious than in larger coated vesicles observed by electron microscopy of thin sectioned tissues , 22 in part because the difference between the maximum and minimum vesicle - to - coat spacing is easier to detect in these highly curved structures . To confirm that this eccentricity is not a property of vesicles that have uncoated and then recoated during isolation , we prepared coated vesicles from bovine brain by essentially our standard procedure ( see Materials and Methods ) , but isolated and purified at somewhat higher ionic strength and pH ( 25 mM NaMes ( pH 7 . 0 ) , 100 mM NaCl , 1 mM EGTA , 0 . 5 mM MgCl 2 ) , to minimize even more the possibility of reassembly and artificial recoating of synaptic vesicles . 21 We recorded Table 1 . Reconstructed clathrin lattices from the cryo - electron tomogram of coated vesicles Numberofedges Number of triskelions Number of pentagons Number of hexagons Number of heptagons Vesicle diameter ( Å ) 1 : 90 60 13 18 1 500 2 : 75 50 12 16 0 390 3 : 66 44 12 12 0 370 4 : 60 40 13 8 1 400 5 : 60 40 12 10 0 370 6 : 57 38 12 9 0 360 7 : 57 38 12 9 0 340 8 : 54 36 12 8 0 310 Vesicles 6 and 7 have the same number of triskelions , but the lattices are mirror images of each other . Figure 5 . Details of coated vesicle 4 from Figure 4 . ( a ) Surface - rendered density map ; the asterisk ( * ) marks a feature anchored in the vesicle membrane . Red lines within the density outline the lattice . ( b ) Central section of the same density map , with the ribbon diagrams of vertices of a clathrin lattice positioned within it . The two broken circles represent the vesicle membrane ( smaller circle ) and the radial location of the N - terminal domains of the clathrin heavy chains ( larger circle ) . 896 Imaging of Single Clathrin - coated Vesicles untilted cryo - electron microscopy images of these particles and examined a number of fields ; many particles are still seen to have the vesicle off - center within the coats ( Figure 8 ( a ) and ( b ) ) . We suggest that the eccentric position of the vesicle within the coat comes from the polarity of initiation and completion of the lattice . The positions of close contacts of lattice and vesicle may corre - spond to preferential locations of adaptors and other proteins that mark the region within a coat at which assembly began , as concluded from recent live - cell imaging studies ( S . Saffarian and T . K . , unpublished results ) . Unlike initiation , completion of a clathrin lattice , which occurs in vitro even when no vesicle is present , does not require membrane contact by clathrin . In summary , cryo - electron tomography has allowed us to relate the structural properties of authentic coated vesicles to molecular details derived from higher - resolution methods . The recon - structed images shows that coats containing as few as 36 triskelions ( e . g . the tennis - ball structure and , presumably , the D6 barrel ) can engulf a mem - brane vesicle of just over 350 Å diameter , similar to the observed diameter of neurotransmitter - loaded synaptic vesicles . 23 The variety of lattices in a single preparation is consistent with assembly by sequential incorporation of individual clathrin Figure 7 . ( a ) Enlarged view of Figure 5 ( a ) , showing a feature an - chored on the vesicle membrane . ( b ) Ribbon diagram of the AP - 1 core structure ( PDB code 1W63 ) 29 at the same scale as the density map . The size of the AP - 1 core matches the size of the density anchored on the membrane in ( a ) . Figure 6 . Central sections of the tomographic density maps of each of the eight coated vesicles shown in Figure 4 , illustrating the eccentric positions of the membrane vesicles and the positions of the N - terminal domains of the clathrin heavy chains with respect to the vesicles . 897 Imaging of Single Clathrin - coated Vesicles triskelions , as postulated from live - cell imaging data on the kinetics of coat formation . 8 A defined region of close association between the membrane bilayer and the protein shell may mark the position at which assembly was initiated , and further analysis may therefore provide evidence for how coat formation starts . Materials and Methods Sample preparation and data collection Clathrin - coated vesicles were isolated from bovine brain 16 and subjected to a final purification step by equilibrium centrifugation for 20 h ( at 112 , 700 g ) of the crude coated vesicles applied to the top of a linear gradient ranging from 2 % ( v / v ) Ficoll , 9 % ( v / v ) 2 H 2 O to 20 % Ficoll , 90 % 2 H 2 O in isolation buffer . 17 The fractions enriched in coated vesicles were pooled , diluted tenfold with isolation buffer , and centrifuged for 10 min at 10 , 000 g ; the super - natant containing coated vesicles was used for subsequent analysis within one day after purification . Frozen hydrated samples of clathrin - coated vesicles were pre - pared by applying a 2 . 5 μ l drop of sample ( a protein concentration of about 1 mg / ml ) to a glow - discharged 200 - mesh Quantifoil holey carbon grid ( Quantifoil Micro Tools GmbH , Germany ) . Before plunging the grid into liquid ethane at − 180 °C , 1 μ l of 10 nM colloidal gold particles ( BBInternational , UK ) was added to the sample , followed by blotting with filter - paper . A tilt series of 62 images from − 55° to + 67° with 2° increments was collected using a Tecnai F20 field - emission microscope ( FEI company , USA ) operated at an acceleration voltage of 200 kV . Following strict low - dose procedures , images of the tilt series were recorded manually at a nominal magnification of 29 , 000× on a 2K×2K CCD camera with the defocus set to − 7 μ m . The electron dose used for collecting each image of the tilt series was 1 . 5 e – / Å 2 , and the total electron dose for the series was about 100 e – / Å 2 ; the total dose used for tracking during the data collection was only about 0 . 5 e – / Å 2 . The particles were clearly visible even in the last image of the tilt series ( Figure 1 ( d ) ) , and there was no evident radiation - induced bubbling . All the images were binned 2×2 before further pro - cessing , corresponding to a final calibrated pixel size of 15 . 5 Å / pixel . Image processing The program package IMOD was used to process the images of the tomographic tilt series . 24 After initial coarse alignment using cross - correlation between images from different tilt angles , 44 colloidal gold particles were selected as fiducial markers to align all the images of the tilt series . The thickness of the calculated tomogram was 100 pixels ( ∼ 1550 Å ) , corresponding to the thickness of the layer of vitreous ice . No segmentation , either manual or automated , was performed to interpret the cryo - electron tomogram . Individual assemblies were boxed out from the 3D reconstructed tomogram using the program label . exe in the MRC package . 25 Noise in the boxed - out 3D density maps was reduced by a 3×3×3 median filter . 26 Structure analysis The program O was used to analyze the individual coats . 27 An artificial multi - Ala α - helix was used as a fi - ducial to mark the edges of the clathrin lattice and ultimately to draw its outlines as shown in Figure 4 ( b ) . Views of the 3D density maps were prepared for illustration using the program Chimera . 28 Acknowledgements This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grant GM62580 ( to David DeRosier ) and GM36548 ( to T . K . ) . The molecular EM facility at Harvard Medical School was established by a generous donation from the Giovanni Armenise Harvard Center for Structural Biology . References 1 . Kirchhausen , T . ( 2000 ) . Clathrin . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 69 , 699 – 727 . 2 . Brodsky , F . M . , Chen , C . Y . , Knuehl , C . , Towler , M . C . & Wakeham , D . E . ( 2001 ) . Biological basket weaving : formation and function of clathrin - coated vesicles . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 17 , 517 – 568 . 3 . Sudhof , T . C . ( 2004 ) . The synaptic vesicle cycle . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 27 , 509 – 547 . Figure 8 . ( a ) A cryo - electron microscopy image of clathrin - coated vesicles embedded in vitreous ice . The coated vesicles were purified at high ionic strength and pH to prevent recoating during purification . Vesicles within two of the coats ( arrow head ) are obviously eccentric . ( b ) A gallery of selected clathrin - coated vesicles boxed out from various areas of the sample . 898 Imaging of Single Clathrin - coated Vesicles 4 . Crowther , R . A . , Finch , J . T . & Pearse , B . M . ( 1976 ) . On the structure of coated vesicles . J . Mol . Biol . 103 , 785 – 798 . 5 . Kirchhausen , T . & Harrison , S . C . ( 1981 ) . Protein organization in clathrin trimers . Cell , 23 , 755 – 761 . 6 . Ungewickell , E . & Branton , D . ( 1981 ) . Assembly units of clathrin coats . Nature , 289 , 420 – 422 . 7 . Conner , S . D . & Schmid , S . L . ( 2003 ) . Regulated portals of entry into the cell . Nature , 422 , 37 – 44 . 8 . Ehrlich , M . , Boll , W . , Van Oijen , A . , Hariharan , R . , Chandran , K . , Nibert , M . L . & Kirchhausen , T . ( 2004 ) . Endocytosis by random initiation and stabilization of clathrin - coated pits . Cell , 118 , 591 – 605 . 9 . Vigers , G . P . , Crowther , R . A . & Pearse , B . M . ( 1986 ) . Three - dimensional structure of clathrin cages in ice . EMBO J . 5 , 529 – 534 . 10 . Smith , C . J . , Grigorieff , N . & Pearse , B . M . ( 1998 ) . Clathrin coats at 21 A resolution : a cellular assembly designed to recycle multiple membrane receptors . EMBO J . 17 , 4943 – 4953 . 11 . Musacchio , A . , Smith , C . J . , Roseman , A . M . , Harrison , S . C . , Kirchhausen , T . & Pearse , B . M . ( 1999 ) . Functional organization of clathrin in coats : combin - ing electron cryomicroscopy and X - ray crystallogra - phy . Mol . Cell , 3 , 761 – 770 . 12 . Fotin , A . , Cheng , Y . , Sliz , P . , Grigorieff , N . , Harrison , S . C . , Kirchhausen , T . & Walz , T . ( 2004 ) . Molecular model for a complete clathrin lattice from electron cryomicroscopy . Nature , 432 , 573 – 579 . 13 . ter Haar , E . , Musacchio , A . , Harrison , S . C . & Kirchhausen , T . ( 1998 ) . Atomic structure of clathrin : a beta propeller terminal domain joins an alpha zigzag linker . Cell , 95 , 563 – 573 . 14 . Ybe , J . A . , Brodsky , F . M . , Hofmann , K . , Lin , K . , Liu , S . H . , Chen , L . et al . ( 1999 ) . Clathrin self - assembly is mediated by a tandemly repeated superhelix . Nature , 399 , 371 – 375 . 15 . Fotin , A . , Cheng , Y . , Grigorieff , N . , Walz , T . , Harrison , S . C . & Kirchhausen , T . ( 2004 ) . Structure of an auxilin - bound clathrin coat and its implications for the mechanism of uncoating . Nature , 432 , 649 – 653 . 16 . Matsui , W . & Kirchhausen , T . ( 1990 ) . Stabilization of clathrin coats by the core of the clathrin - associated protein complex AP - 2 . Biochemistry , 29 , 10791 – 10798 . 17 . Woodman , P . G . & Warren , G . ( 1991 ) . Isolation of functional , coated , endocytic vesicles . J . Cell Biol . 112 , 1133 – 1141 . 18 . Pearse , B . M . & Crowther , R . A . ( 1987 ) . Structure and assembly of coated vesicles . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biophys . Chem . 16 , 49 – 68 . 19 . Baumeister , W . ( 2005 ) . From proteomic inventory to architecture . FEBS Letters , 579 , 933 – 937 . 20 . Heuser , J . ( 1980 ) . Three - dimensional visualization of coated vesicle formation in fibroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 84 , 560 – 583 . 21 . Maycox , P . R . , Link , E . , Reetz , A . , Morris , S . A . & Jahn , R . ( 1992 ) . Clathrin - coated vesicles in nervous tissue are involved primarily in synaptic vesicle recycling . J . Cell Biol . 118 , 1379 – 1388 . 22 . Perry , M . M . & Gilbert , A . B . ( 1979 ) . Yolk transport in the ovarian follicle of the hen ( Gallus domesticus ) : lipoprotein - like particles at the periphery of the oocyte in the rapid growth phase . J . Cell Sci . 39 , 257 – 272 . 23 . Schikorski , T . & Stevens , C . F . ( 1997 ) . Quantitative ultrastructural analysis of hippocampal excitatory synapses . J . Neurosci . 17 , 5858 – 5867 . 24 . Kremer , J . R . , Mastronarde , D . N . & McIntosh , J . R . ( 1996 ) . Computer visualization of three - dimensional image data using IMOD . J . Struct . Biol . 116 , 71 – 76 . 25 . Crowther , R . A . , Henderson , R . & Smith , J . M . ( 1996 ) . MRC image processing programs . J . Struct . Biol . 116 , 9 – 16 . 26 . Winkler , H . & Taylor , K . A . ( 2006 ) . Accurate marker - free alignment with simultaneous geometry determi - nation and reconstruction of tilt series in electron tomography . Ultramicroscopy , 106 , 240 – 254 . 27 . Jones , T . A . , Zou , J . Y . , Cowan , S . W . & Kjeldgaard ( 1991 ) . Improved methods for building protein models in electron density maps and the location of errors in these models . Acta Crystallog . sect . A , 47 , 110 – 119 . 28 . Pettersen , E . F . , Goddard , T . D . , Huang , C . C . , Couch , G . S . , Greenblatt , D . M . , Meng , E . C . & Ferrin , T . E . ( 2004 ) . UCSF Chimera — A visualization system for exploratory research and analysis . J . Comput . Chem . 25 , 1605 – 1612 . 29 . Heldwein , E . E . , Macia , E . , Wang , J . , Yin , H . L . , Kirchhausen , T . & Harrison , S . C . ( 2004 ) . Crystal structure of the clathrin adaptor protein 1 core . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA , 101 , 14108 – 14113 . Edited by W . Baumeister ( Received 1 August 2006 ; received in revised form 24 September 2006 ; accepted 5 October 2006 ) Available online 14 October 2006 899 Imaging of Single Clathrin - coated Vesicles