INTRODUCTION “Context” has become the word of the moment . Context - aware computing is a hot topic , the focus of research grants , workshops , conferences , development programs and a stream of publications . Systems that take advantage of con - text in different ways are seen as the natural solution to the information explosion , as ways to smooth interaction with an increasingly complicated information infrastructure , and as a way to build service and brand loyalty in commercial infor - mation operations . Technically , the incorporation of context into interactive software systems may take many different forms . Contextual information can be exploited in many dif - ferent ways – e . g . by capturing contextual information for later recall and review , by exploiting contextual factors to customise the interactive experience , by sharing contextual information between collaborators , or by storing context along with data to help disambiguate it at a later date . Simi - larly , my own work on context has also taken many different forms , from explorations of the role of physical context in multimedia communication [ 2 , 6 ] , to the role of context in information interpretation [ 1 ] , and most recently the role of context to solve specific problems in collaborative informa - tion management [ 3 , 4 ] . In this position paper , I want to take a step back and consider the elements of a foundational understanding of context . I want to explore some core ideas that underpin a range of work on context – a range , perhaps , broader than is normally considered – and try to understand what implications can be drawn from an exploration of these fundamental issues . One starting point for this exploration is a conundrum which was , interestingly , raised for me by the call for this work - shop . The call coins the term “situated computing” to refer to the set of technologies and usage experiences that make up the burgeoning area of contextually informed system design . The term I use myself is “Embodied Interaction” ( for reasons that will become clear . However , I think “situated comput - ing” is an excellent term , because it captures two distinct elements of the area . First , it captures its technological foun - dations , and the relationship to other , related technological explorations such as the Ubiquitous Computing work spear - headed at PARC in the early 1990s . Weiser [ 9 ] set out a vision of a world in which technology supported us more intimately by retreating into the background , one in which the world around us was imbued with computational power that could be called upon intrinsically as part of everyday activity . At the same time , the word “situated” evokes the “situated action” perspective that has played a dominant role in the sociological foundations of Computer - Supported Cooperative Work . Suchman [ 8 ] , drawing on the eth - nomethodology of Harold Garfinkel [ 5 ] , radically revised cognitivist accounts of natural activity to turn attention to the improvised and contingent nature of the sequential organisa - tion of activity – its situated character . However , at the same time as using this term to capture the range of areas that contribute to our emerging understanding of what situated computing could and should be , the work - shop announcement provides a list of topic areas that are technologically dominated . Augmented reality , ubiquitous computing , wearable , mobile and tangible computing are all current areas of research that are driven primarily by the technological opportunities . What should we make of this ? Certainly , not that the authors of the workshop announcement have little to say about the social ; they are each skilled proponents of multidisciplinary approaches to interactive technology . I think , instead , that the imbalance is a more general one . I think that , as a disci - pline , we are missing the tools to make sense of the relationship between the technical and social in this particu - lar domain . We can understand how the technology works , and how the sociology works ; we have a more difficult time putting them together . FOUNDATIONS This is the problem that I have been tackling in recent work ( and , in particular , in a book currently in progress ) . I have been attempting to understand the relationship between the different perspectives at work in this new area of research , and to articulate the foundational relationships between them , for various purposes . One is to be able to able to under - stand the contributions that each domain can make ; a second is to explore the opportunities for cross - fertilization ; and a third is to develop a unified model for design and analysis . The argument I have been developing has four parts . First , that the different strands of recent research activity , such as work on augmented environments and tangible media on the one hand and socially - grounded system design on the other , have a common foundation ; second , that this common foun - dation is a notion of embodiment ; third , that embodiment is not a new idea , but rather one that has been extensively explored throughout the twentieth century , most particularly in the branch of philosophy called phenomenology ; and , fourth , that by turning to phenomenology , we can develop a A Foundational Framework for Situated Computing Paul Dourish Computer Science Laboratory Xerox Palo Alto Research Center 3333 Coyote Hill Road Palo Alto CA 94304 USA dourish @ parc . xerox . com http : / / www . parc . xerox . com / dourish set of common understandings that support the design and analysis of situated computing ( or embodied interaction ) systems . Since this workshop is predicated on part of the first premise , I’ll concentrate , here , on the notion of embodiment and its implications . Embodiment First , I need to be clear about what I mean by “embodiment . ” For some , particularly those coming from a technical per - spective , it implies some sort of physical reality . To others , particularly those familiar with current debates in the sociol - ogy of science and technology , it instead refers to the reconsideration of the role of the body in technology that has been explored in Critical Theory . For my purposes here , embodiment refers to the way in which interactive resources are manifest in an interface . It does not refer simply to phys - ical reality , but denotes a participative status . It points to the ways in which we interact as involved participants rather than detached observers . The relevance of embodiment for the tangible media / augmented reality side of situated com - puting lies in the way that this approach attempts to direct embody computation in the world ; that is , it strikes to make computation ( rather than computers ) directly manifest in the world so that we can engage it using the same sets of skills with which we , as embodied individuals , encounter an embodied world . So , it exploits our physical skills , the ways in which we occupy and move around in space , and the ways in which we configure space to suit our needs . Embodiment , for this side of the research activity , explores the relationship between the environment and the task in hand . The relevance of embodiment for the sociological side of sit - uated computing is also a question of interaction . What Suchman’s work drew attention to was the way that action emerges not as the outcome of disconnected cognitivism , but rather from a direct , reflexive conversation with the setting of its production . Accomplishing the sequential organisation of action is a real - time affair . As a simple example , this approach explores spoken language as social action rather than the verbalisation of internal mental dispositions . Sack’s [ 7 ] Conversation Analysis reveals everyday conversation to be something that emerges from the real - time , direct engage - ment of participants in the mutual construction of meaning . So , the conversation , as an activity in which people engage , cannot be separated from its immediate manifestation in and of the everyday world – its embodiment . What this points to is that the idea of embodiment underpins much of what we currently include under the term “situated computing” , and does so in a way that directly addresses the relationship between the social and technical programs . It also hints at a direction for further foundational explorations , because this same notion of embodiment runs through much of the philosophy of the last hundred years or so , most par - ticularly phenomenology . Phenomenology has its origin in the work of Edmund Hus - serl . Reacting to , amongst other things , the increasing abstraction of mathematics and the emergence of a variety of challenges to the completeness and consistency of mathe - matical reasoning , Husserl called for a science to return to a grounding the direct phenomena of human experience . Over time , this developed into a philosophical psychology which emphasised “the things themselves” , experiential phenom - ena , over the abstractions that were often used to explain them . Husserl argued that the phenomena , not abstract knowledge , had to be the primary source of human experi - ence , both physical and mental . Husserl’s philosophy was further developed by his students . Where Husserl had explored the mental life of the individual , Alfred Schutz turned to explore the question of intersubjectivity – how two individuals can share an understanding – in phenomenologi - cal terms that Garfinkel would subsequently build on . The best known of Husserl’s students , Martin Heidegger , reworked phenomenology and incorporated the embodied experience of technology into his explorations of the basis of “being . ” Meantime , although not a phenomenologist , Wit - tgenstein , in his later work on the philosophy of language , adopted a perspective similar to Heidegger’s in that he placed practice at the centre of his account of meaning . FRAMEWORK Heidegger’s work provided the structure for Winograd and Flores’ [ 10 ] work . However , embodied interaction goes beyond their focus on language and action . Phenomenol - ogy’s concern with meaning , in various forms ( intentionality , ontology and intersubjectivity ) , and its con - nection to practice , runs throughout these accounts of embodiment and provides a critical link to the role that embodiment plays in the development of the different strands of situated computing . It also furnishes us with a set of resources for developing an analytic framework for the design and analysis of technologies for embodied interac - tion , founded on the way in which embodied interaction places action on and action through technology within the same frame . This framework is currently under development . REFERENCES 1 . Paul Dourish , Victoria Bellotti , Wendy Mackay and Chao - Ying Ma . 1993 . Information and Context : Lessons from a Study of Two Shared Information Systems . Proc . ACM Conf . Organisational Computing Systems COOCS’93 . New York : ACM . 2 . Paul Dourish , Annette Adler , Victoria Bellotti and Austin Henderson . 1996 . Your Place or Mine ? Learning from Long - Term Use of Audio - Video Communications . Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , 5 ( 1 ) , 33 - 62 . 3 . Paul Dourish , John Lamping and Tom Rodden . 1999 . Building Bridges : Customisation and Mutual Intelligibility in Shared Category Management . Proc . ACM Conf . Supporting Group Work GROUP’99 . New York : ACM . 4 . Paul Dourish , Richard Bentley , Rachel Jones and Allan MacLean . 1999 . Getting Some Perspective : Using Process Representations to Index Document History . Proc . ACM Conf . Supporting Group Work GROUP’99 . New York : ACM 5 . Harold Garfinkel . 1967 . Studies in Ethnomethodology . Englewood Cliffs : Prentice Hall . 6 . Steve Harrison and Paul Dourish . 1996 . Re - Place - ing Space : The Roles of Space and Place in Collaborative Systems . Proc . ACM Conf . Computer - Supported Cooperative Work CSCW’96 . New York : ACM . 7 . Harvey Sacks , 1992 . Lectures on Conversation . Cambridge : Blackwell . 8 . Lucy Suchman . 1987 . Plans and Situated Actions : The Problem of Human - Machine Communication . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . 9 . Mark Weiser . 1989 . The Computer in the Twenty - First Century . Scientific American , 265 ( 3 ) , 94 - 104 . 10 . Terry Winograd and Fernando Flores . 1986 . Understanding Computers and Cognition : A New Foundation for Design . Norwood : Ablex .