T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . Relations Between Perceptual and Conceptual Scope : How Global Versus Local Processing Fits a Focus on Similarity Versus Dissimilarity Jens Fo¨rster University of Amsterdam Nine studies showed a bidirectional link ( a ) between a global processing style and generation of similarities and ( b ) between a local processing style and generation of dissimilarities . In Experiments 1 – 4 , participants were primed with global versus local perception styles and then asked to work on an allegedly unrelated generation task . Across materials , participants generated more similarities than dissimilarities after global priming , whereas for participants with local priming , the opposite was true . Experiments 5 – 6 demonstrated a bidirectional link whereby participants who were first instructed to search for similarities attended more to the gestalt of a stimulus than to its details , whereas the reverse was true for those who were initially instructed to search for dissimilarities . Because important psychological variables are correlated with processing styles , in Experiments 7 – 9 , temporal distance , a promotion focus , and high power were predicted and shown to enhance the search for similarities , whereas temporal proximity , a prevention focus , and low power enhanced the search for dissimilarities . Keywords : similarity , processing styles , power , construal level , regulatory focus Whether people search for similarities or dissimilarities in two given stimulus sets has important implications for affect , motiva - tion , and cognition . Such a search is said to make a certain subset of information highly accessible , which can then be used as a basis for judgments and behavior . To give just a few examples , the perceived similarity between ourselves and another person predicts whether we like or love him or her ( e . g . , Berscheid & Reis , 1998 ) and whether we would help the person ( e . g . , Stu¨rmer , Snyder , & Omoto , 2005 ) . Perceived similarity further predicts whether we are satisfied with our partners ( e . g . , Antill , 1983 ; Barry , 1970 ; Eysenck & Wakefield , 1981 ) , whether we consider a person a role model ( or a “standard of comparison” ; e . g . , Festinger , 1954 ) , and whether we assimilate our judgments toward a standard ( Fo¨rster , Liberman , & Kuschel , 2008 ; Mussweiler , 2003 ; Stapel & Koomen 2000 , 2001 ; Stapel & Suls , 2004 ) ; similarity is also well - established to moderate outgroup discrimination ( e . g . , Gaertner , Dovidio , Anastasio , Bachman , & Rust , 1993 ) . Furthermore , per - ception of similarities between two cases influences decision mak - ing , such as , for example , in medical decisions ( e . g . , Brooks , Norman , & Allen , 1991 ) , and , finally , subjective similarity be - tween stimuli reduces their recognition ( King , Jones , Pearlman , Fishman , & Felix , 2002 ) . The question remains , however , When do people focus on dissimilarities and when do they focus on similarities ? Most stim - uli in the world , for example , people and social situations , are rather complex stimulus sets that usually contain both similar and dissimilar features ( Medin , Goldstone , & Gentner , 1993 ) . For example , when we are introduced to a colleague , what cognitive mechanisms lead us to focus on his or her similarities to us or our group ( e . g . , that he or she is a psychologist and speaks English ) or on the dissimilarities ( e . g . , that he or she dislikes experiments as a research paradigm and is much older ) ? The current article proposes that a global processing style is linked to a focus on similarity , whereas a local processing style is linked to a dissimilarity focus . Thus , if a global processing style is induced ( participants are asked to look at the entire gestalt of a stimulus configuration ) , they would directly start a search for similarities in an unrelated stimulus set ; in contrast , if a local processing style is induced ( participants are asked to look at the constituent compo - nents of the stimulus configuration ) , they would immediately begin a search for dissimilarities ( see Macrae & Lewis , 2002 ) . It is suggested here that this link is overlearned and bidirectional , so that a search for similarities will also enhance global processing , whereas a search for dissimilarities will enhance local processing , quite automatically . The first aim of this article is to point out that perceiving similarities or dissimilarities depends on both the stimulus and the perceiver . Next , the importance of global versus local processing styles for higher order cognitive processes is highlighted . Finally , experiments are presented that test these assumptions . SIMILARITIES AND CATEGORIZATION The perception of similarity or dissimilarity involves an inter - action between the objectively shared and distinct features of two I would like to thank Markus Denzler , Stefanie Kuschel , and Amina O¨zelsel for organizing the experiments and Sarah Horn , who edited the manuscript . I would also like to thank Aga Bojarska , Alexandra Vulpe , Anna Rebecca Sukkau , Basia Pietrawska , Elena Tsankova , Gosia Skorek , Hana Fleissigova , Inga Schulte - Bahrenberg , Kira Grabner , Konstantin Mihov , Laura Dannenberg , Maria Kordonowska , Nika Yugay , Regina Bode , Rodica Damian , Rytis Vitkauskas , and Sarah Horn , who served as experimenters . Ron Friedman and Nira Liberman are thanked for invalu - able discussions . Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Jens Fo¨rster , Department of Social Psychology , Universiteit van Amsterdam , Roetersstraat 15 , 1018 WB Amsterdam , the Netherlands . E - mail : j . a . forster @ uva . nl Journal of Experimental Psychology : General © 2009 American Psychological Association 2009 , Vol . 138 , No . 1 , 88 – 111 0096 - 3445 / 09 / $ 12 . 00 DOI : 10 . 1037 / a0014484 88 THIS ARTICLE HAS BEEN RETRACTED . SEE LAST PAGE R E T R A C T E D T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . comparison targets and the perceiver . Generally , one could assume that there are never any two events that are completely alike , but , at the same time , those two events could fit a certain ( sufficiently broad ) category ( see Mervis & Rosch , 1981 ; Rosch , 1975 ) . Con - sequently , ( dis ) similarity judgments about a target are subjective and can fluctuate between individuals and situations ( Medin et al . , 1993 ) . The process of similarity judgments has been thoroughly exam - ined within the field of cognitive psychology . In such investiga - tions , structure mapping approaches ( Gentner & Markman , 1997 ; Medin et al . , 1993 ) challenged seminal feature matching models ( Tversky , 1977 ) by implying that comparisons involve a process of matching features or attributes of the target and a comparison standard : The resulting numbers of shared and unshared features are then weighed . Structure mapping researchers pointed to the importance of structural relations between features . More specifi - cally , these approaches suggest that while comparing two objects , people are influenced not only by sets of separate properties but also by how the properties are interrelated within the standard and the target . There is considerable research demonstrating that peo - ple first determine a general relational structure among individual properties that is shared by the target and the standard of compar - ison and that they then base their comparison on properties that are related to the shared relational structure ( for a recent review , see Markman & Gentner , 2005 ) . From this perspective , the impact of individual attributes on similarity judgments critically depends on their role in the overall aligned structure ( see Gentner & Markman , 1997 ) . Notably , most of the classic accounts have focused on the interaction between perceiver and stimulus object , opening the door for research on a variety of motivational , cognitive , and affective mechanisms that influence when people decide to start a search for similarities or dissimilarities ( Markman & Gentner , 2005 ) . In the current article , I suggest that global versus local processing styles are involved in this process and that they auto - matically trigger a search for similarities or dissimilarities in two given stimulus sets . The next section provides a brief introduction of the distinction between local and global processing styles and how these relate to more complex cognitive processes . PROCESSING STYLES AND SIMILARITY VERSUS DISSIMILARITY FOCUS A processing style may be described as the way we look at or attend to information : We may perceive the entire gestalt or focus only on the details ( Navon , 1977 ; Schooler , 2002 ) . The distinction between global and local processing is probably best exemplified in a classic study by Navon ( 1977 ) . In order to test the global dominance hypothesis ( predicting that people , by default , tend to look for the gestalt rather than at the details ) , Navon presented participants with large letters that were made of small letters and asked them whether a target letter was presented on the screen . He showed that , in general , participants’ decisions were faster when the target matched the global letters than when it matched the local letters . Simple as this might seem , such processing styles proved to be of central importance in cognitive , clinical , and social psychology . For example , global processing has been shown to be associated with psychological distance ( Liberman , Trope , & Stephan , 2007 ) , creative thought ( Friedman , Fishbach , Fo¨rster , & Werth , 2003 ) , better face recognition ( Macrae & Lewis , 2002 ) , a promotion focus on ideals ( Fo¨rster & Higgins , 2005 ) , positive moods ( Gasper & Clore , 2002 ) , interdependent selves ( Ku¨hnen & Oyserman , 2002 ) , high power ( Smith & Trope , 2006 ) , right hemispheric activation ( Derryberry & Tucker , 1994 ) and lower levels of obsessionality ( Yovel , Revelle , & Mineka , 2005 ) and of anxiety ( Mikulincer , Kedem , & Paz , 1990 ; Mikulincer , Paz , & Kedem , 1990 ) , to name just a few . Furthermore , the interest in global versus local process - ing stems from the finding that a perceptual scope of processing is related to a conceptual scope of processing ( see Derryberry & Tucker , 1994 ; Tucker & Williamson , 1984 ) . More generally , according to prominent views in cognitive psychology , high - level cognition derives from , and is connected to , perception ( Barsalou , 1999 ; Finke , 1985 ; Gilbert , 1991 ; Mas - son , 1995 ) . In line with a number of cognitive theorists ( Anderson & Spellman , 1995 ; Neill & Westberry , 1987 ; Neumann & De - Schepper , 1992 ; Posner , 1987 ) , Derryberry and Tucker ( 1994 ; see Friedman & Fo¨rster , 2008 ) suggested that the attentional selection mechanism utilized on a perceptual level ( e . g . , to visually focus on percept X while excluding percepts Y and Z ) may be correlated with the attentional mechanism used to select conceptual nodes within the semantic network ( i . e . , to regulate the extensiveness of spreading activation ) . As an illustration , when viewing mountain scenery , attention may be directed narrowly ( e . g . , to the flow - ers , the stones and peaks , the animals ) or broadly ( e . g . , to the flowers , the stones and peaks , and the animals together ) . Likewise , when the concept of “mountain” is semantically primed , concep - tual attention may be directed narrowly ( e . g . , allocating activation to the concept of “stone” and its close associates ) or broadly ( e . g . , collectively allocating activation to the concepts “stone , ” “nature , ” “animals , ” and “flowers” and to remote associates such as “eter - nity” ) . There are some similarities between global processing and sim - ilarity focus and between local processing and dissimilarity focus . Recent research on Navon’s global precedence effect showed that global processing involves finding structural relations between stimuli , a process that , according to structure mapping approaches , is assumed to drive similarity judgments ( Gentner , 1983 ; Gentner & Markman , 1997 ) . In order to rule out mere conspicuity of global letters as an explanation for global precedence ( i . e . , global letters are processed better because they are easier to see ; see , for exam - ple , Kimchi , 1992 ; Kinchla & Wolfe , 1979 ; Lamb & Robertson , 1990 ) , Love , Rouder , and Wisniewski ( 1999 ) invented a paradigm in which conspicuity was controlled for by same – difference esti - mates of global figures ( composed of smaller figures ) , whose identification necessitated the perception of structural relations among their constituent elements . For example , participants were presented with two squares that were each made of three columns depicting three squares , three triangles , and three circles , with a different order of these columns presented in the two figures . On a global level , the two squares were similar to each other ( i . e . , they shared the same spatial relationship of equivalence classes ) , whereas they differed on the local level . Because a global prece - dence effect took place , the authors reasoned that equivalence classes form prior to local identification . In other words , global processing is closely related to finding the structural relations between stimuli . It seems that while searching for similarities between two targets , individuals focus on their relational structure , 89 PROCESSING STYLES AND SIMILARITY FOCUS R E T R A C T E D T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . thereby enhancing inclusion to a category ( e . g . , two birds in the category of robins ) . When , instead , people search for differences , they focus on ways of separating targets from one another ( e . g . , one of the birds lacks feathers ) , breaking them into their constit - uent parts . Thus , global processing may enhance inclusive catego - rization , whereas local processing may enhance exclusion from a category ( see Schwarz & Bless , 2007 ) . Indirect evidence for such inclusion – exclusion processes was found in a recent set of studies , which showed that participants were more likely to assimilate toward a standard ( i . e . , to include a target in the standard ) when they were primed with global pro - cessing styles ; participants went against the standard ( i . e . , ex - cluded a target from the standard ) when they were primed with a local processing style ( Fo¨rster et al . , 2008 ) . In one of the studies , participants were primed with a manipulated version of the orig - inal Navon task and afterwards were asked to compare themselves with high and low standards with respect to their alcohol consump - tion . More specifically , borrowing a paradigm by Macrae and Lewis ( 2002 ) , the procedure called for one group of participants having only to detect large letters , thus procedurally priming a global processing style , and another group having only to detect the small letters , thus procedurally priming a local processing style . The control group was instructed to detect both large and small letters during the priming phase . Afterwards , an allegedly unrelated task was given to participants , in which they were instructed to compare themselves to either Steffi Graf ( a former tennis champion ; a low standard ) or Robbie Williams ( a pop singer ; a high standard ) with respect to alcohol consumption ; they then had to give an estimate as to the number of times they consume alcohol per month . Results of the Fo¨rster et al . ( 2008 ) study showed stronger assimilation effects after global , as compared with control , priming in that participants thought they drank more alcohol after compar - ison with Robbie Williams than after comparison with Steffi Graf . However , a contrast effect occurred after local priming : Partici - pants thought they drank less after comparison with Robbie Wil - liams and more after comparison with Steffi Graf in comparison with the control group . On the basis of Schwarz and Bless’s ( 1992 , 2007 ) exclusion – inclusion model of social judgment , Fo¨rster et al . ( 2008 ) introduced the GLOMO ( global local model of social judgment ) : This suggested that global perception widened the scope of conceptual processing , allowing the inclusion of both the target and the standard of comparison into the same category , whereas local processing narrowed the conceptual scope , thereby fostering perception of the prime and the target as belonging to different categories . One may suggest that these findings have implications for the basic processes of dissimilarity and similarity focus in that , upon inclusion in one category , participants search for similarities , whereas upon exclusion , they search for dissimilarities . Visualiz - ing these exclusion and inclusion processes can be enhanced with a simple metaphor . Suppose that the two objects are two blobs . Whereas in a broad , global processing approach , the viewer “zooms out” on the two blobs , subjectively decreasing their dis - tance and increasing their perceived similarity , with a narrow , local processing style , the viewer “zooms in” on the two blobs , subjectively increasing their distance and their perceived dissimi - larity . Thus , when people are processing information globally , this leads to inclusion in a category . Likewise , when people engage in local processing , they tend to exclude a target from the category . Furthermore , the aforementioned process of finding structural relations that occurs at a very early stage of information processing within the context of global processing ( see Love et al . , 1999 ) may carry over to finding structural relations on the conceptual level . Local processing , instead , should help to break the stimulus set into its constituents , leading the individual to eventually find more dissimilarities . Schooler and colleagues ( Schooler , 2002 ; Schooler , Fiore , & Brandimonte , 1997 ) have suggested and shown that processes elicited in one task can carry over to other , unrelated tasks . Thus , I propose that global processing elicits a transfer - appropriate processing shift in a task that warrants the generation of similarities , whereas the generation of dissimilarities should profit from previous local processing . If similarity testing and global processing naturally involve finding structural relations , this relationship should also be reversed : Searching for dissimilarities should facilitate local processing , whereas searching for similari - ties should enhance global processing . The first set of studies ( Experiments 1 – 6 ) involved testing this structural relations hypothesis . I do not challenge existing models on similarity versus dissimilarity focus ; however , I believe that the advantage of first providing evidence for a relationship between processing styles and similarity focus lies in the fact that global versus local processing is related to important psychological vari - ables . The second set of studies ( Experiments 7 – 9 ) , therefore , involved testing some real - world variables affecting global versus local processing , namely , temporal distance ( Liberman & Trope , 1998 ) , regulatory focus ( Higgins , 1997 ) , and power ( Smith & Trope , 2005 ) . In this way , these studies may pave the way to considering similarity versus dissimilarity focus in a broad psy - chological context . EXPERIMENTS Overview of Experiments The first set of experiments represents an effort to induce the aforementioned processing styles in different ways , as theoreti - cally they could be primed by various variables and should not depend on one manipulation alone . Therefore , global versus local processing was induced by a variant of the Navon task ( in Exper - iments 1 and 3 ; Macrae & Lewis , 2002 ) or a map task ( in Experiments 2 and 4 ; Friedman et al . , 2003 ) . For both paradigms , the elicited processing styles were expected to be shifted to the subsequent generation phase , which involved searching for simi - larities or dissimilarities ( see Dodson , Johnson , & Schooler , 1997 ; Schooler , 2002 ) . More specifically , in Experiment 1 , participants were primed with either global or local processing using the Navon task , as described above ( Macrae & Lewis , 2002 ) . Whereas one group of participants was instructed to detect large letters only , thus proce - durally priming a global processing style , another group was instructed to detect the small letters only , thus procedurally prim - ing a local processing style . Afterwards participants were asked to find similarities and dissimilarities between TV shows . In Exper - iment 2 , participants were primed with a map task , as was used originally in Friedman et al . ( 2003 ; see also Fo¨rster et al . , 2008 ) . The map task asks participants to look at either the gestalt of a city 90 FO¨RSTER R E T R A C T E D T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . map ( the global processing condition ) or a specific detail of the same map ( the local processing condition ) : The map thus proce - durally primes broad versus narrow perception . Because in Exper - iment 1 the TV shows differed on a concrete level but were similar on an abstract level , the comparison set was modified to include targets ( dolphins and sharks ) that differed more on the abstract level ( mammal versus fish ) but were similar in details ( they swim ; they have gray skin , small eyes , and a dorsal fin ) . Whereas in Experiments 1 and 2 , participants compared two rather similar objects with each other , in Experiment 3b , participants were primed with the Navon task and asked to compare two seemingly dissimilar objects , namely the statue by Rodin entitled The Thinker and methane gas . In Experiment 3a , participants were asked to compare two copies of the same statue with each other . In Exper - iment 4 , the different processing styles were induced with the map task , and participants were then asked to compare two pictures of people that differed with respect to skin color and gender . Fur - thermore , in order to test spontaneous descriptions , in this task , the two pictures were presented without any mention of similarities or dissimilarities ; rather , participants were asked to simply describe the pictures ; afterwards experts rated whether their descriptions reflected similarities or dissimilarities . These variations with re - spect to the dependent and independent variables were thought to show the generalizability of the phenomenon : Whereas global processing should enhance similarity focus , local processing should enhance dissimilarity focus . A second set of experiments ( Experiments 5 and 6 ) was con - ducted to show that dissimilarity focus and similarity focus can also enhance processing styles . Thus , the order of the generation and perceptual tasks was reversed , with the expectation that global perception would be enhanced after searching for similarities and that local perception would be enhanced after searching for dis - similarities . A third set of experiments was conducted to replicate the effects with temporal distance ( Experiment 7a and 7b ) , regulatory focus ( Experiments 8a and 8b ) , and power ( Experiment 9 ) . It was pre - dicted that a distant temporal perspective , a promotion focus on ideals , and high power would trigger a similarity focus , whereas a close temporal perspective , a prevention focus on oughts and responsibilities , and low power would trigger a search for dissim - ilarities . I . Investigating the Link Between Processing Styles and Similarity Focus Experiment 1 In the first study , participants were primed with global versus local processing styles and then , in an allegedly unrelated task , were asked to generate similarities or dissimilarities for two TV shows ( see Markman & Gentner , 1996 , for similar paradigms ) . Method Participants . A total of 54 undergraduate students ( 27 female , 27 male ; gender had no effects ) were recruited for a 2 - hr experi - mental session consisting of “a number of diverse psychological tests . ” Participants were randomly assigned to conditions and were paid 16 Euros ( approximately $ 20 ) . The study was based on a 3 ( priming : global vs . local vs . both ) (cid:1) 2 ( generation : similarities vs . dissimilarities ) factorial design . Whereas the first variable assessed differences between participants , the second was a within - participants variable . Number of generated similarities and dissim - ilarities as well as similarity judgments served as the dependent variables . Materials . In order to induce global versus local perception , the experiment used a global – local reaction time task ( see Fo¨rster & Higgins , 2005 ) , which was modeled after Macrae and Lewis ( 2002 ) . For this task , which was computer based , participants were presented with a series of global letters ( approximately 2 . 5 (cid:1) 2 . 5 cm ) made up of local letters ( approximately 0 . 5 (cid:1) 0 . 5 cm ) . Each horizontal or vertical line making up a global letter was formed of seven closely spaced local letters . On each trial , participants were first presented with a fixation cross ( “ (cid:2) ” ) in the center of the screen for 500 ms . Then , one of eight global composite letters was randomly presented , and participants were instructed to press a blue response key if the stimulus contained the letter “L ” and to press a red response key if the stimulus contained the letter “H . ” Participants were asked to respond as quickly as possible . The task was set up so that , by random assignment , participants were asked to decide whether either letter was presented on the screen : For one third of the participants , this was always the global letter ; for another third , this was always the local letter ; and for the last third , both local and global letters were offered . More specifically , in the global priming condition , eight of the composite letters included global targets ( an “H” made of “F”s , an “H” made of “T”s , an “L ” made of “T”s , and a “T”s made of “F”s ) and no local targets , whereas in the local priming condition , eight stimuli types in - cluded local targets ( an “F” made of “H”s , an “F” made of “L”s , a “T” made of “H”s , and a “T” made of “L”s ) . Overall , 48 trials were presented . In the control condition , four global and four local letters were presented , with 24 local and 24 global trials . Because an objective for this project was to rule out moods as the underlying mechanism , the task was pretested with 90 partic - ipants from the same population , assessing moods and feelings before and after participants completed the task as described above . More specifically , prior to the task , participants were ad - ministered the complete Positive and Negative Affect Schedule ( PANAS ) mood questionnaire ( Watson , Clark , & Tellegen , 1988 ) , with randomized question order . General mood was also assessed by self - report on a scale ranging from 1 ( very bad ) to 9 ( very good ) , along with specific questions as to how “eager , ” “vigilant , ” and “aroused” participants felt ( “How _ _ _ _ _ do you feel right now ? ” ) . Upon completion of the priming task , participants were given the same questionnaire in another random order . Addition - ally , participants were asked how difficult the task was , how effortful it was , how much effort they had invested , how much they liked the task , how important the task was to them , and how motivated they were to succeed in the task on a scale anchored at 1 ( not at all ) and 9 ( very much ) . On the same scale , participants were asked to rate whether they felt more “open - minded” or “narrow - minded . ” Several one - way analyses of variance ( ANOVAs ) for each dependent variable were conducted respec - tively , showing no effects ( F s (cid:3) 1 . 16 ; p s (cid:4) . 32 ) . Procedure . Upon participants’ arrival , the experimenter pointed out that all studies were completely unrelated and were only administered together for efficiency reasons . Experimenters were blind with respect to conditions and hypotheses . This was 91 PROCESSING STYLES AND SIMILARITY FOCUS R E T R A C T E D T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . true in all of the experiments reported below as well . First , par - ticipants completed the global – local reaction time measure , as described above . Next , participants received a folder containing instructions of the alleged generation task . They were asked to generate either as many similarities or as many dissimilarities as they could for two well - known German TV shows ( the daily news shows “heute” and “Tagesschau” ) . Afterwards , the Navon priming task was repeated : This was done to refresh the priming before the second generation task started . Participants who had first been asked to generate similarities were now asked to generate dissim - ilarities , and vice versa . For each task , participants were given 2 min : They were stopped after this time by stopwatch . ( Order of generation tasks had no effects and is thus not reported below . ) Ninety minutes later , after having worked on several unrelated tasks , participants were asked to indicate how similar the TV shows were to each other on a scale anchored at 1 ( very dissimilar ) and 9 ( very similar ) . After completion of all of the tasks , the participants were probed for suspicions as to the purpose of the experiment , debriefed , paid , and thanked for their participation . When asked , none of the participants reported seeing any relation among the study parts . Results Global priming was expected to facilitate generation of similar - ities relative to dissimilarities , and the opposite was expected to be the case for local priming . In a 2 ( generation ) (cid:1) 3 ( priming ) ANOVA for mixed designs , this hypothesis was confirmed statis - tically by a significant two - way interaction , F ( 2 , 51 ) (cid:5) 8 . 38 , p (cid:3) . 001 , (cid:6) p 2 (cid:5) . 25 , the latter statistic , partial eta - squared , being a measure of effect size ( see Table 1 ) . When exposed to global priming , participants generated more similarities ( M (cid:5) 8 . 67 , SD (cid:5) 2 . 25 ) than dissimilarities ( M (cid:5) 6 . 17 , SD (cid:5) 3 . 54 ) , t ( 17 ) (cid:5) 2 . 51 , p (cid:5) . 02 , whereas following local priming , participants generated fewer similarities ( M (cid:5) 4 . 67 , SD (cid:5) 2 . 35 ) than dissimilarities ( M (cid:5) 7 . 33 , SD (cid:5) 3 . 22 ) , t ( 17 ) (cid:5) 3 . 10 , p (cid:3) . 01 . In the control group , participants generated similarities and dissimilarities to the same extent ( M dissimilarity (cid:5) 6 . 72 , SD (cid:5) 2 . 74 ; M similarity (cid:5) 6 . 56 , SD (cid:5) 2 . 53 ; t (cid:3) 1 ) . None of the main effects were significant : for priming , F (cid:3) 1 ; for generation , F ( 2 , 51 ) (cid:5) 2 . 11 ; p (cid:5) . 13 . The similarity ratings that were taken 90 min after the genera - tion tasks were also examined . Use of Kolmogorov – Smirnov’s Z reflected the fact that the similarity ratings tendentiously violated the assumption of normal distribution . Even though ANOVA is usually robust against violation of normal distributions ( see Glass , Peckham , & Sanders , 1972 ; Stevens , 1996 ) , in this case ( and in other cases reported below ) , a nonparametric Kruskal – Wallis Test was conducted that statistically confirmed the proposed hypothe - sis , (cid:7) 2 ( 2 ) (cid:5) 16 . 44 , p (cid:3) . 001 , Cramer’s V (cid:5) . 51 . Participants primed with global perception judged the objects to be more similar ( M (cid:5) 6 . 78 , SD (cid:5) 2 . 16 ) than did participants primed with local perception ( M (cid:5) 3 . 89 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 84 ) , whereas the results for the control group fell between those for the two conditions ( M (cid:5) 5 . 22 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 44 ) . All simple contrasts were significant : local versus control , (cid:7) 2 ( 1 ) (cid:5) 5 . 24 , p (cid:3) . 02 ; global versus control , (cid:7) 2 ( 2 ) (cid:5) 6 . 43 , p (cid:3) . 01 ; global versus local , (cid:7) 2 ( 1 ) (cid:5) 13 . 17 , p (cid:3) . 0001 . The results confirmed predictions ; however , one may argue that the predicted effects were partly based on a confound . When comparing two TV shows , similarities are likely to be found on a global or an abstract level ( both are shows , both appear on tele - vision ) , and dissimilarities are likely to be found on a local or concrete level ( one starts earlier , they have different anchor women ) . In other words , a critic may suggest that Study 1 merely shows that inducing a global processing style led participants to focus on abstract information , where—because of the specific materials used—they happened to find more similarities . Extend - ing this interpretation , inducing a local processing style simply may have led participants to focus on the concrete details , where— again because of the specific materials used—participants hap - pened to find more differences . Theoretically , however , similari - ties can be found on both the abstract and concrete levels of construal . In other words , it is possible that the study found a link between global processing and abstract construals and a link between local processing and concrete construals ( see Liberman & Trope , 1998 ) rather than a link between global processing and similarity focus and between local processing and dissimilarity focus . When making comparisons among a different set of stimuli , however , the exact opposite may be the case . A dolphin and a shark , for example , are more likely to be similar on a local level ( both have gray skin and a dorsal fin ) but different on a global level ( one is a mammal ; the other is a fish ) . Experiment 2 , therefore , was designed to replicate the first experiment with material in which similarities more naturally appear on the local level and in which dissimilarities naturally manifest on the global level . Experiment 2 Experiment 2 was similar to Experiment 1 ; thus , only the differences are described here . Method Participants . A total of 88 undergraduate students ( 46 female , 42 male ; gender had no effects ) were tested in a group session in a classroom , were randomly assigned to conditions , and received course credit for participation . The study was based on a 3 ( prim - ing : global vs . local vs . both global and local ) (cid:1) 2 ( generation : similarities vs . dissimilarities ) factorial design ; in this experiment both variables were manipulated between participants . Amount of generation and similarity judgments served as the dependent vari - ables . Procedure . In an effort to show that the effect found was independent of a special methodology , global versus local process - Table 1 Experiment 1 : Mean Number of Similarities Versus Dissimilarities for Two TV Shows Generated by Condition Measure Priming Local Control Global Similarities 4 . 67 ( 2 . 35 ) 6 . 56 ( 2 . 53 ) 8 . 67 ( 2 . 25 ) Dissimilarities 7 . 33 ( 3 . 22 ) 6 . 72 ( 2 . 74 ) 6 . 17 ( 3 . 54 ) Note . Standard deviations are presented in parentheses . 92 FO¨RSTER R E T R A C T E D T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . ing was induced in a manner similar to procedures in Friedman et al . ( 2003 ) . Participants were presented with a map of the inner city of Oldenburg projected on the screen of the lecture hall and asked to examine it for 3 min in a global , a local , or a global and local manner . More specifically , participants of an introductory social psy - chology class were asked to participate in an experimental session . The instructor announced a class demonstration of two different experiments on different psychological questions . He asserted that students were welcome to participate but could also choose not to participate without any further consequences . Participants were given three different folders ; dissemination was random . The first folder contained the general instructions . In the instructions , par - ticipants were informed that they were about to take part in two separate studies : one on geographic abilities and one on genera - tion . It was pointed out that the two studies were unrelated and were administered together solely for efficiency reasons . The materials were printed in different fonts and on different types of paper . As in Experiment 1 , ruling out moods , task difficulty , and liking of the task as underlying mechanisms was an objective . The tasks were pretested with 45 students from the same population in a similar manner as described in Experiment 1 , except that the Navon - like task by Macrae and Lewis ( 2002 ) was now replaced by the map task . With one - way analyses for each rating , no significant results were found ( F s (cid:3) 1 . 29 , p s (cid:4) . 29 ) . The second folder contained the alleged geographic abilities task used to induce a global versus a local processing style . Participants were asked to focus on the map projected on the screen of the lecture hall . In the global processing condition , participants were instructed to look at the map as a whole in order to answer later questions about the overall shape of the map . In the local processing condition , participants were asked to look at the details of the map in order to answer questions about the details on the map . In the control condition , participants were asked to focus on both details and shape . After 3 min of watching the map , the experimenter asked the participants to return to the folder and answer a questionnaire on the map , which was intended to render credibility to the cover story , but was not subsequently analyzed . The third folder contained the similarity judgments task , which was introduced as a pretest of materials that would later be used to examine generation performance . Participants were instructed to compare a dolphin with a shark and were asked to write down as many similarities or dissimilarities as they could . They were stopped after 2 min by stopwatch . A final set of questions examined participants’ awareness of the actual purpose of the study , which was discovered by none of them . Participants were also asked whether sharks and dolphins are fish or mammals in a forced - choice test , to ensure that they knew about the difference on the global level . All answers were correct with respect to this question . In order to prevent any experimenter biases , the experimenter did not interact with any of the partici - pants during the session , and he could not see which condition was assigned to participants . After completing the folders , participants were thanked and debriefed . A class discussion revealed that no one felt that one task influenced the next and that participants felt interested and enjoyed participating . Results Replication of the results of Experiment 1 was expected : Global priming was predicted to facilitate the generation of similarities relative to dissimilarities , and the opposite was predicted for local priming . With a 2 ( generation ) (cid:1) 3 ( priming ) ANOVA , this hypothesis was confirmed statistically by a significant two - way interaction , F ( 2 , 82 ) (cid:5) 5 . 10 , p (cid:3) . 01 , (cid:6) p2 (cid:5) . 11 ( see Table 2 ) . After global priming , participants generated more similarities ( M (cid:5) 7 . 71 , SD (cid:5) 3 . 93 ) than dissimilarities ( M (cid:5) 5 . 00 , SD (cid:5) 2 . 08 ) , t ( 26 ) (cid:5) 2 . 30 , p (cid:3) . 03 , whereas after local priming , they generated fewer similarities ( M (cid:5) 5 . 43 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 83 ) than dissimilarities ( M (cid:5) 7 . 36 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 86 ) , t ( 26 ) (cid:5) 2 . 76 , p (cid:3) . 01 . In the control group , participants generated similarities and dissimilarities to the same extent ( M dissimilarity (cid:5) 6 . 31 , SD (cid:5) 2 . 77 ; M similarity (cid:5) 6 . 60 , SD (cid:5) 3 . 16 ; t (cid:3) 1 ) . None of the main effects were significant ( for priming and generation , both F s (cid:3) 1 ) . The similarity ratings were consistent with predictions . Partic - ipants primed with local processing judged the animals to be less similar ( M (cid:5) 2 . 71 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 33 ) than did participants in the control group ( M (cid:5) 4 . 22 , SD (cid:5) 2 . 11 ) or the global processing group ( M (cid:5) 5 . 50 , SD (cid:5) 2 . 81 ) . Furthermore , it seems that when participants were asked to search for similarities , they found the animals to be more similar ( M (cid:5) 4 . 69 , SD (cid:5) 2 . 42 ) than did participants who searched for dissimilarities ( M (cid:5) 3 . 64 , SD (cid:5) 2 . 32 ) . Because data were not normally distributed , Kruskal – Wallis tests were used to examine the hypotheses . Significant effects were found for prim - ing , (cid:7) 2 ( 2 ) (cid:5) 16 . 47 , p (cid:3) . 001 , Cramer’s V (cid:5) . 52 , and for gener - ation , (cid:7) 2 ( 1 ) (cid:5) 4 . 37 , p (cid:3) . 04 , Cramer’s V (cid:5) . 31 . All contrasts were significant : local versus control , (cid:7) 2 ( 1 ) (cid:5) 9 . 48 , p (cid:3) . 002 ; global versus control , (cid:7) 2 ( 1 ) (cid:5) 3 . 76 , p (cid:3) . 05 ; local versus global , (cid:7) 2 ( 1 ) (cid:5) 12 . 37 , p (cid:3) . 001 . In summary , processing modes triggered different ways to per - ceive the stimuli : Looking at two objects in a global manner led to a search for similarities and impeded a search for dissimilarities , whereas viewing two objects in a local manner led to the opposite . Furthermore , within this between - participants design , a focus on similarities or dissimilarities produced an independent effect for the generation task , which was probably due to positive hypothesis testing strategies ( Trope & Liberman , 1996 ) . The results of Experiments 1 and 2 were consistent and in line with predictions . The finding held true regardless of whether ( a ) generation of dissimilarity or similarity was measured between or within participants , ( b ) the stimulus materials carried ( dis ) similar - ities on a more abstract or concrete level , and ( c ) the processing styles were induced by the map task or the Navon task . Table 2 Experiment 2 : Mean Number of Similarities Versus Dissimilarities for Dolphin Versus Shark Generated by Condition Measure Priming Local Control Global Similarities 5 . 43 ( 1 . 83 ) 6 . 60 ( 3 . 16 ) 7 . 71 ( 3 . 93 ) Dissimilarities 7 . 36 ( 1 . 86 ) 6 . 31 ( 2 . 77 ) 5 . 00 ( 2 . 08 ) Note . Standard deviations are presented in parentheses . 93 PROCESSING STYLES AND SIMILARITY FOCUS R E T R A C T E D T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . Notably , in the experiments described above , the control groups showed no difference between number of dissimilarities and num - ber of similarities . However , this situation may be artificial given that in everyday situations , comparison targets can differ enor - mously in a priori similarity judgments . Research has shown that , in general , it is easier for people to generate dissimilarities than similarities for highly similar objects , whereas it is easier to generate similarities than dissimilarities for objects that are rather dissimilar a priori ( Gentner & Gunn , 2001 ; Gentner & Markman , 1994 ) . Experiment 3 utilized materials that were either relatively similar ( in Experiment 3a , two copies of a statue by Rodin ) or dissimilar ( in Experiment 3b , methane gas and a statue by Rodin ) . Because perception of similarities entails an interaction between stimulus object and perceiver , the following results were expected : a relative decline of similarities deriving from local processing and an enhanced perception of similarities stemming from global pro - cessing for rather dissimilar objects . Also expected were a relative decline of obvious dissimilarities due to global processing and an enhanced perception of dissimilarities resulting from local pro - cessing for rather similar objects . Experiments 3a and 3b Again , these experiments were similar to the former ones , and only differences are described . Method Participants . For Experiment 3a , a total of 75 undergraduate students ( 46 female , 29 male ; gender had no effects ) were recruited for a 2 - hr experimental session consisting of “a number of diverse psychological tests . ” Participants were randomly assigned to con - ditions and were paid 16 Euros ( approximately $ 20 ) . The study was based on a 3 ( priming : global vs . local vs . both ) (cid:1) 2 ( gener - ation : similarities vs . dissimilarities ) factorial design . All variables were assessed between participants . Amount of generation for rather similar objects , namely , two different color printouts of a statue by Rodin ( The Thinker ) , and similarity judgments served as the main dependent variables . Experiment 3b replicated the study with 71 undergraduate stu - dents ( 41 female , 30 male ; gender had no effects ) in a different experimental battery under very similar conditions . The only dif - ference was the use of two rather dissimilar objects , namely , methane gas and a printout of The Thinker by Rodin . Procedure . As in the experiments described above , the exper - imenter pointed out that all of the studies were completely unre - lated and were only administered together for efficiency reasons . Experimenters were blind with respect to conditions and hypoth - eses . Afterwards , participants completed the global – local reaction time measure , as described in Experiment 1 . Upon completion , participants received a folder containing instructions for the al - leged generation task . In Experiment 3a , participants were asked to generate as many similarities or dissimilarities as they could for two copies of the Rodin sculpture : The copies were prerated as being rather similar ; pretest results with 30 participants using a scale ranging from 1 ( very dissimilar ) to 9 ( very similar ) yielded M (cid:5) 7 . 90 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 09 . In Experiment 3b , the term “methane gas” was presented in German , printed on a sheet of paper together with a picture of the Rodin sculpture , reflecting a rather dissimilar comparison pair ( with results on the same pretest as for similar objects yielding M (cid:5) 2 . 46 ; SD (cid:5) 1 . 38 ) . In both experiments , some participants were instructed to generate similarities , whereas others were asked to generate dissimilarities between the objects . The generation tasks were stopped after 4 min with a stopwatch . Forty minutes later , after having worked on several unrelated tasks , participants were asked to indicate how similar the two objects were to each other on a scale anchored at 1 ( very dissimilar ) and 9 ( very similar ) . After completion of all of the tasks , participants were probed for suspicions , debriefed , paid , and thanked for their participation . None of the participants reported seeing any relation between the priming phase and the generation task . Results It was predicted that Experiments 3a and 3b would replicate the results of Experiments 1 – 2 . To test the hypothesis , 2 ( genera - tion ) (cid:1) 3 ( priming ) ANOVAs were used . Experiment 3a . With two seemingly similar comparison ob - jects , the main effect of generation was found to be significant ( see Table 3 for a summary of results ) . In this case , participants who searched for dissimilarities generated more solutions ( M (cid:5) 5 . 32 , SD (cid:5) 2 . 15 ) than did participants who searched for similarities ( M (cid:5) 4 . 00 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 45 ) , F ( 1 , 69 ) (cid:5) 14 . 72 , p (cid:3) . 0001 , (cid:6) p 2 (cid:5) . 18 . This pattern replicates former findings from other labs ( Gentner & Gunn , 2001 ; Gentner & Namy , 2004 ) . The main effect of priming was not significant ( F (cid:3) 1 ) . However , a significant two - way interaction was found , F ( 2 , 69 ) (cid:5) 19 . 22 , p (cid:3) . 0001 , (cid:6) p 2 (cid:5) . 36 . The results of this interaction reflect that among participants who were asked to find dissimilarities , the subgroup primed with local pro - cessing performed best ( M (cid:5) 7 . 00 , SD (cid:5) 0 . 95 ) , followed by those primed with both global and local processing ( M (cid:5) 5 . 23 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 83 ) and , lastly , by globally primed participants ( M (cid:5) 3 . 75 , SD (cid:5) 2 . 18 ) . In this experiment , a decision was made to conduct contrast analyses separately for dissimilarity and similarity conditions , because in this situation all participants generated more dissimi - larities than similarities . All contrasts were significant for the dissimilarity conditions : for local processing versus control , t ( 34 ) (cid:5) 2 . 55 , p (cid:3) . 02 ; for global processing versus control , t ( 34 ) (cid:5) 2 . 13 , p (cid:3) . 05 ; and for local processing versus global processing , t ( 34 ) (cid:5) 4 . 58 , p (cid:3) . 0001 . For participants asked to find similarities , the opposite was true : They generated more solutions after global priming ( M (cid:5) 5 . 00 , SD (cid:5) 0 . 71 ) , as compared with control priming ( M (cid:5) 4 . 00 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 54 ) or local priming ( M (cid:5) 3 . 00 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 29 ) . Again , all contrasts were significant : local processing versus con - trol , t ( 35 ) (cid:5) 2 . 05 , p (cid:3) . 05 ; global processing versus control , t ( 35 ) (cid:5) 2 . 05 , p (cid:3) . 05 ; local processing versus global processing , t ( 35 ) (cid:5) 4 . 18 , p (cid:3) . 0001 . Ratings of similarity that were not normally distributed were examined with Kruskal – Wallis tests . An effect was found for priming , (cid:7) 2 ( 2 ) (cid:5) 13 . 08 , p (cid:3) . 001 , Cramer’s V (cid:5) . 34 ( M global (cid:5) 8 . 44 , SD (cid:5) 0 . 71 ; M local (cid:5) 7 . 44 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 00 ; M control (cid:5) 7 . 76 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 01 ) as well as for generation , (cid:7) 2 ( 1 ) (cid:5) 5 . 12 , p (cid:3) . 03 , Cramer’s V (cid:5) . 37 ( M similarity (cid:5) 8 . 11 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 01 ; M dissimilarity (cid:5) 7 . 65 , SD (cid:5) 0 . 95 ) . Significant contrasts were found between global and local priming , (cid:7) 2 ( 1 ) (cid:5) 12 . 98 , p (cid:3) . 0001 , and between global and control priming , (cid:7) 2 ( 1 ) (cid:5) 6 . 01 , p (cid:3) . 02 ; the contrast between the local processing and control groups was not significant , (cid:7) 2 ( 1 ) (cid:5) . 85 , 94 FO¨RSTER R E T R A C T E D T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . p (cid:5) . 36 . It is possible that the scale used for very similar objects was not sensitive enough to detect influences by processing styles . Experiment 3b . Results for seemingly dissimilar comparison objects with a different participant sample mirrored those of Ex - periment 3a ( see Table 4 ) : Participants who searched for similar - ities generated more solutions ( M (cid:5) 6 . 43 , SD (cid:5) 2 . 36 ) than did participants who searched for dissimilarities ( M (cid:5) 3 . 83 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 98 ) , F ( 1 , 65 ) (cid:5) 35 . 34 , p (cid:3) . 0001 , (cid:6) p2 (cid:5) . 35 , for a main effect of generation ; in contrast , the main effect of priming was not signif - icant ( F (cid:3) 1 ) . However , the predicted two - way interaction was obtained , F ( 2 , 65 ) (cid:5) 18 . 84 , p (cid:3) . 0001 , (cid:6) p2 (cid:5) . 37 . Among participants asked to find dissimilarities , those who were primed with local processing performed best ( M (cid:5) 5 . 50 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 63 ) , followed by those who were primed with both global and local processing ( M (cid:5) 3 . 64 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 43 ) and , in turn , globally primed participants ( M (cid:5) 2 . 46 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 56 ) . Local versus control , t ( 33 ) (cid:5) 2 . 89 , p (cid:3) . 01 , and local versus global t ( 33 ) (cid:5) 4 . 91 , p (cid:3) . 0001 , contrasts were significant ; global processing versus the control approached significance , t ( 33 ) (cid:5) 1 . 86 , p (cid:3) . 07 . For those participants asked to find similarities , the opposite was true : They generated more solutions after global priming ( M (cid:5) 8 . 00 , SD (cid:5) 2 . 49 ) , as compared with control priming ( M (cid:5) 6 . 42 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 88 ) or local priming ( M (cid:5) 4 . 72 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 42 ) . Again , all contrasts were significant or approached significance : local versus control , t ( 32 ) (cid:5) 2 . 03 , p (cid:3) . 05 ; global versus control , t ( 32 ) (cid:5) 1 . 95 , p (cid:3) . 06 ; and local versus global , t ( 32 ) (cid:5) 3 . 93 , p (cid:3) . 001 . Again , the distribution of errors for the ratings was not normal , and thus the effects of priming and generation were examined separately with Kruskal – Wallis tests . An effect of priming was found , (cid:7) 2 ( 2 ) (cid:5) 11 . 01 , p (cid:3) . 01 , Cramer’s V (cid:5) . 33 ( M global (cid:5) 3 . 32 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 18 ; M control (cid:5) 2 . 87 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 32 ; M local (cid:5) 2 . 09 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 08 ) , in addition to an effect of generation , (cid:7) 2 ( 1 ) (cid:5) 8 . 18 , p (cid:3) . 01 , Cramer’s V (cid:5) . 42 ( M similarity (cid:5) 3 . 17 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 15 ; M dissimilarity (cid:5) 2 . 39 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 32 ) . Contrasts were significant for local versus control processing , (cid:7) 2 ( 1 ) (cid:5) 4 . 12 , p (cid:3) . 05 , and for global versus local processing , (cid:7) 2 ( 1 ) (cid:5) 10 . 87 , p (cid:3) . 0001 ; the difference between global processing and the control condition was not significant , (cid:7) 2 ( 1 ) (cid:5) 1 . 35 , p (cid:4) . 25 . Again , the lack of significance could be traced back to the insensitivity of the scale for highly dissimilar objects . Thus , in general , the results replicated findings of the former study with highly dissimilar objects . Generally , Experiments 3a and 3b confirmed expectations and conceptually replicated Experiments 1 – 2 with highly different and highly similar comparison targets . In addition , results showed that similarity generation and estimates are a function of both stimulus and perceiver . It is generally easier to find similarities for highly dissimilar objects and to find dissimilarities for highly similar objects ; however , these naturally occurring effects are further moderated by the processing styles people activate in the situations wherein they make their judgments . In Experiment 4 , yet another dependent variable was introduced , namely , portraits of people as stimuli that differed with respect to skin color and gender . It seemed important to replicate the results found for objects with people , as in many respects faces are processed differently ( see Macrae & Lewis , 2002 ) ; furthermore , people constitute complex stimuli for which different processes may apply . In this scenario , participants were instructed to describe two pictures without any explicit instructions to search for similarities or dissimilarities . The descriptions were subsequently rated with respect to whether participants used similarities or dissimilarities . This enabled examination of whether global versus local process - ing styles spontaneously trigger a similarity versus a dissimilarity focus . Experiment 4 Experiment 4 was similar to the previous experiments , so only differences are described here . Method Participants . A total of 55 freshmen ( 36 female , 19 male ; gender had no effects ) , who were asked to participate on a volun - tary basis , were tested in a group session in a classroom and were randomly assigned to conditions . The study was based on a 3 ( priming : global vs . local vs . both ) (cid:1) 2 ( generation : similarities vs . dissimilarities ) factorial design . Whereas the first variable was a between - participants variable , the second was a within - participant variable . Because in this experiment , participants were not in - structed to produce similarities or dissimilarities but rather were asked to describe two simultaneously presented pictures , experts subsequently counted the number of similarities versus dissimilar - ities that appeared in such descriptions . Procedure . As in Experiment 2 , global versus local processing was induced with the map task ( Friedman et al . , 2003 ) . Participants were presented with a map of Oldenburg projected on the screen of a lecture hall and were asked to examine it for 3 min in a global or a local manner or , in the control condition , were asked to look at it without any further instructions . The control group was different from that in Experiment 2 in that no instructions to focus on both details and gestalt were now given . This was done to show that the Table 3 Experiment 3a : Mean Number of Similarities Versus Dissimilarities for Similar Copies of Rodin’s “The Thinker” Generated by Condition Measure Priming Local Control Global Similarities 3 . 00 ( 1 . 29 ) 4 . 00 ( 1 . 54 ) 5 . 00 ( 0 . 71 ) Dissimilarities 7 . 00 ( . 95 ) 5 . 23 ( 1 . 83 ) 3 . 75 ( 2 . 18 ) Note . Standard deviations are presented in parentheses . Table 4 Experiment 3b : Mean Number of Similarities Versus Dissimilarities for Methane Gas Versus Rodin’s “The Thinker” Generated by Condition Measure Priming Local Control Global Similarities 4 . 72 ( 1 . 42 ) 6 . 42 ( 1 . 88 ) 8 . 00 ( 2 . 49 ) Dissimilarities 5 . 50 ( 1 . 62 ) 3 . 64 ( 1 . 43 ) 2 . 46 ( 1 . 56 ) Note . Standard deviations are presented in parentheses . 95 PROCESSING STYLES AND SIMILARITY FOCUS R E T R A C T E D T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . differences between global and local processing and the control group were not due to a certain methodology . A first folder contained the general instructions , stressing the point that the different phases of the experiments were unrelated to each other . The second folder contained the alleged geographic abilities task designed to induce the processing styles . After 3 min , the exper - imenter asked the participants to return to the folder , and some questions were asked about the map to render credibility to the cover story ( answers to these questions were not analyzed ) . The third folder contained an alleged “person perception task , ” which was introduced as a pretest of materials for a person perception study . Participants received two printouts of color portraits , each 9 (cid:1) 14 cm , printed together on one sheet of paper . One picture portrayed an African American woman , whereas the other showed a Caucasian man Both faces were prerated by 20 students from the same population as equally ( highly ) attractive ( M s (cid:5) 7 . 2 and 7 . 3 on a scale ranging from 1 [ not attractive at all ] to 9 [ very attrac - tive ] ) and friendly ( M s (cid:5) 8 . 1 and 8 . 0 on a scale ranging from 1 [ not friendly at all ] to 9 [ very friendly ] ) . Participants were asked to briefly describe the people presented . They were stopped after 5 min by stopwatch . The participants were then asked a final set of questions , which examined their awareness of the actual purpose of the study and included a question on how similar the persons appeared to them , rated on the same scale as used in the prior experiments : 1 ( very dissimilar ) to 9 ( very similar ) . After com - pleting the folders , participants were thanked and debriefed . The experimenter was blind to conditions and did not interact with any of the participants during the session . A class discussion revealed that no one felt that one task influenced the next and that the students generally enjoyed participating and found the topic im - portant . Results Analyzing the descriptions . Two experts , blind to the condi - tions and hypotheses , were asked to evaluate the descriptions with respect to the amount of similarities or dissimilarities contained therein . Experts were trained to count different contents ( similar - ities and dissimilarities ; dependent variable of amount ) . This vari - able was independent of length ; thus , if a participant referred to the fact that both stimuli depicted persons who were seemingly in a good mood and wrote “both smiled , ” this counted as one event , similar to the case in which participants continued explaining the smile ( by describing how good the persons appeared to feel and why ) . As an additional dependent variable , the experts also counted the length of the statements used to describe dissimilari - ties or similarities in relation to the entire length of the text ( dependent variable of length , specifically , overall length of the description ) . With respect to only 2 participants did the raters have highly different opinions , and the raters clarified these cases before the data were entered . A closer look at the results follows . Descriptives . A first look at the data showed that , according to the experts , 13 out of 19 ( 68 % ) participants in the global condition wrote down one or more similarities , 4 ( 21 % ) listed one or more dissimilarities , and 2 ( 11 % ) reported neither dissimilarities nor similarities ; no participant listed both . In the local condition , the opposite pattern occurred : 11 out of 18 ( 61 % ) participants listed at least one similarity but no dissimilarities , 4 ( 22 % ) listed dissimi - larities but no similarities , 2 ( 11 % ) listed both , and 1 ( 6 % ) listed neither dissimilarities nor similarities . In the control group , 9 ( 50 % ) out of 18 participants wrote down both similarities and dissimilarities , 3 ( 17 % ) listed at least one similarity and no dis - similarities , 5 ( 28 % ) wrote down at least one dissimilarity and no similarities , and 1 ( 6 % ) listed neither dissimilarities nor similari - ties . This pattern of results provides some preliminary support for the main hypothesis . Participants’ length of descriptions was not influenced by priming ( F (cid:3) 1 ) . The experts also rated the number of dissimilarities and simi - larities . Examples of similarities included “both people seem to be very happy” or “both people are fashion models” or “I think that they belong to the same modeling agency” ; examples for dissim - ilarities included “it seems to me that the male person has more problems than the other” and “I think the guy is faking the smile , whereas she is not . ” It was predicted that after global priming , participants would spontaneously search for similarities relative to dissimilarities and that the opposite would be true for local priming . In this case , because Kolmogorov – Smirnov Z reflected violation of normal distribution , nonparametric Kruskal – Wallis tests were used to ex - amine the hypotheses . Participants exposed to global priming generated more similarities ( M (cid:5) 1 . 79 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 44 ) than did the control group ( M (cid:5) 1 . 17 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 04 ) , followed by those exposed to local priming ( M (cid:5) 0 . 83 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 29 ) , (cid:7) 2 ( 2 ) (cid:5) 4 . 92 , p (cid:3) . 09 , Cramer’s V (cid:5) . 33 . Contrast analyses revealed significant effects for local versus global processing , (cid:7) 2 ( 1 ) (cid:5) 3 . 98 , p (cid:3) . 05 ; however , the difference between the local priming and control groups and the difference between the global priming and control groups were not significant ( (cid:7) 2 s (cid:3) 1 . 9 ) . For dissimilarities , the opposite pattern was found : After global priming , participants found the fewest dissimilarities ( M (cid:5) 0 . 42 , SD (cid:5) 0 . 90 ) , followed by the control group ( M dissimilarity (cid:5) 1 . 50 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 15 ) and , in turn , by the local priming group ( M (cid:5) 2 . 56 , SD (cid:5) 2 . 36 ) , (cid:7) 2 ( 2 ) (cid:5) 12 . 86 , p (cid:3) . 002 , Cramer’s V (cid:5) . 53 . Contrasts were significant for control versus global conditions , (cid:7) 2 ( 1 ) (cid:5) 9 . 70 , p (cid:3) . 002 , and local versus global conditions , (cid:7) 2 ( 1 ) (cid:5) 9 . 74 , p (cid:3) . 002 , whereas the difference be - tween the local and control conditions failed to reach significance , (cid:7) 2 ( 1 ) (cid:5) 1 . 36 , p (cid:5) . 24 . A more pronounced pattern was found when length of the text was controlled for . The percentage ( number of words used for passages describing similarities or dissimilarities (cid:1) 100 / number of words used overall in the description ) and found that similarities were more likely to be found by globally primed participants ( 52 % ; SD (cid:5) 41 % ) , followed by the participants in the control group ( 31 % ; SD (cid:5) 25 % ) and , in turn , those in the local priming group ( 9 % ; SD (cid:5) 14 % ) , (cid:7) 2 ( 2 ) (cid:5) 12 . 32 , p (cid:3) . 002 , Cramer’s V (cid:5) . 78 . Contrasts were significant for the locally versus globally primed participants , (cid:7) 2 ( 1 ) (cid:5) 9 . 04 , p (cid:3) . 003 , and for the local priming versus the control group , (cid:7) 2 ( 1 ) (cid:5) 6 . 98 , p (cid:3) . 01 , and approached significance for the control versus the global priming group , (cid:7) 2 ( 1 ) (cid:5) 3 . 45 , p (cid:5) . 06 . By contrast , dissimilarities were least likely to be found when participants were primed with global processing , ( 11 % ; SD (cid:5) 23 % ) , followed by the control group ( 34 % ; SD (cid:5) 24 % ) and , in turn , the locally primed participants ( 55 % ; SD (cid:5) 44 % ) , (cid:7) 2 ( 2 ) (cid:5) 12 . 66 , p (cid:3) . 002 , Cramer’s V (cid:5) . 79 . Contrasts for the control versus global priming groups , (cid:7) 2 ( 1 ) (cid:5) 8 . 08 , p (cid:3) . 004 , and for the local versus global priming groups , (cid:7) 2 ( 1 ) (cid:5) 9 . 82 , p (cid:3) . 002 , were significant ; the contrast for the local priming versus control groups 96 FO¨RSTER R E T R A C T E D T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . showed a trend , (cid:7) 2 ( 1 ) (cid:5) 2 . 78 p (cid:5) . 09 . Table 5 summarizes these findings . Furthermore , the similarity ratings ( which were normally dis - tributed ) were entered as a dependent variable into a one - way ANOVA ; the predicted main effect of priming was found to be significant , F ( 2 , 52 ) (cid:5) 7 . 47 , p (cid:3) . 001 , (cid:6) p2 (cid:5) . 22 . That is , partic - ipants primed with local processing judged the portraits to be less similar ( M (cid:5) 2 . 56 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 65 ) than did participants in the control group ( M (cid:5) 4 . 17 , SD (cid:5) 2 . 73 ) or the global processing group ( M (cid:5) 5 . 68 , SD (cid:5) 2 . 81 ) . The contrast between global and local priming was significant , t ( 52 ) (cid:5) 3 . 86 , p (cid:3) . 001 , whereas the contrasts between the local priming and control groups , t ( 52 ) (cid:5) 1 . 96 , p (cid:3) . 06 , and between the global priming and control groups , t ( 52 ) (cid:5) 1 . 87 , p (cid:3) . 07 , approached significance . The data of this experiment replicate findings of Experiments 1 – 3 and extend beyond these . They show that even spontaneous descriptions are affected by global versus local processing styles when participants are describing two pictures . The results also show that the effects occur with more socially relevant stimulus materials , such as portraits . In summary , the first set of studies demonstrated a consistent and replicable pattern of global ( local ) processing styles facilitat - ing ( Experiments 1 – 3 ) and triggering ( Experiment 4 ) similarity ( dissimilarity ) generation and judgment . This pattern was obtained with comparison objects sharing similarities on an abstract ( Ex - periment 1 ) and a concrete ( Experiment 2 ) level , with highly similar objects ( Experiment 3a ) and highly dissimilar objects ( Ex - periment 3b ) and with portraits of people differing in gender and skin color ( Experiment 4 ) . The pattern of results was obtained for generation of similarities and dissimilarities as realized within participants ( Experiment 1 ) or between participants ( Experiments 2 – 3 ) and was found even when no special reference to similarities or dissimilarities was given ( Experiment 4 ) . It seems possible that the link between perception and more complex processes may be such that one level of processing could activate another . Therefore , the possibility of a bidirectional link was examined . Consequently , in Experiment 5 the order of the tasks was examined , with the Navon ( 1977 ) task acting as a measure of attention and the Gestalt Completion Task ( GCT ; Ekstrom , French , Harman , & Derman , 1976 ) acting as a measure of perceptual integration ; a similarity generation task served as the independent variable . Section II . Investigating the Bidirectionality of the Processing Styles—Similarity Focus Relation Experiment 5 Method Participants . A total of 50 undergraduate students ( 28 female , 22 male ; gender had no effects ) were recruited for a 2 - hr experi - mental session consisting of “a number of diverse psychological tests . ” Participants were randomly assigned to conditions and were paid 16 Euros ( approximately $ 20 ) for their participation . Exper - iment 5 is based on a 3 ( priming : similar vs . dissimilar vs . unspec - ified ) (cid:1) 2 ( processing level : global vs . local letters ) design . The first variable was realized between participants , and the second was realized within participants . Procedure . Upon arrival , participants were asked to complete a variety of unrelated tasks that took about 70 min . Experimenters were blind with respect to conditions and hypotheses . Participants were given 5 min to complete a generation task : Half of the participants were instructed to find similarities between Saudi Arabia and the Netherlands , and the other half were instructed to find dissimilarities between these countries . A third , control group was not primed . These priming tasks were pretested with respect to mood , as described in Experiments 1 and 2 , namely , by simply replacing the global / local processing tasks with the similarity or dissimilarity inductions . A total of 60 participants from the same population were tested , and no effects on feelings or emotions were found ( F s (cid:3) 1 . 14 , p s (cid:4) . 33 ) . Subsequently , a different task was introduced in which partici - pants were instructed to complete the global – local reaction time measure , which they were led to believe was an entirely unrelated concentration task . This was basically the same task as used for the control group in Experiment 1 , except that participants were pre - sented with both local and global targets : Four of the composite letters included global targets , and four included local targets . Overall , 24 local and 24 global trials were randomly presented , in addition to 12 practice trials that were not analyzed . Participants were instructed to complete the trials as quickly and accurately as possible ( see Fo¨rster & Higgins , 2005 ) . After the entire session was completed , participants were probed for suspicions , debriefed , paid , and dismissed . No suspicions re - garding the connection between the generation task and the global – local reaction time measure were voiced . Results Fazio’s ( 1990 ) guidelines for analyzing data collected in reac - tion time tasks were followed . Response times were excluded for incorrect responses ( 3 % of the sample ) , and outlying responses ( those exceeding three standard deviations from the mean for each stimulus : 6 . 5 % of the sample ) were removed . The number of exclusions did not vary by condition . Two participants were ex - cluded entirely , because they provided more than 40 % incorrect answers . Reaction times were z - transformed , but because results did not differ from analyses with raw means , the latter are re - ported . The data were analyzed with an ANOVA for mixed de - signs ( see Table 6 ) . Overall , the typical global dominance effect was found in this task : Average reaction times across conditions Table 5 Experiment 4 : Mean Number of Similarities Versus Dissimilarities Used in Descriptions and Mean Percentage of Sentences Used for Similarities or Dissimilarities for Two Portraits by Condition Measure Priming Local Control Global No . of similarities 0 . 83 ( 1 . 29 ) 1 . 17 ( 1 . 04 ) 1 . 79 ( 1 . 44 ) No . of dissimilarities 2 . 56 ( 2 . 36 ) 1 . 50 ( 1 . 15 ) 0 . 42 ( 0 . 90 ) % of similarities 9 % ( 14 ) 31 % ( 25 ) 52 % ( 41 ) % of dissimilarities 55 % ( 44 ) 34 % ( 24 ) 11 % ( 23 ) Note . Standard deviations are presented in parentheses . 97 PROCESSING STYLES AND SIMILARITY FOCUS R E T R A C T E D T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . for global letters were faster ( M (cid:5) 684 ms , SD (cid:5) 127 ms ) than those for local letters ( M (cid:5) 730 ms , SD (cid:5) 83 ms ) , F ( 1 , 45 ) (cid:5) 16 . 35 , p (cid:3) . 001 , (cid:6) p2 (cid:5) . 27 , yielding a main effect of processing level . As predicted , however , this difference was especially pro - nounced in the similarity priming condition ( M global (cid:5) 594 ms , SD (cid:5) 88 ms ; M local (cid:5) 786 ms , SD (cid:5) 86 ms ) and was reversed in the dissimilarity priming condition ( M global (cid:5) 759 ms , SD (cid:5) 138 ms ; M local (cid:5) 675 ms , SD (cid:5) 63 ms ) , with the control group falling in between the two conditions ( M global (cid:5) 689 ms , SD (cid:5) 91 ms ; M local (cid:5) 735 ms , SD (cid:5) 63 ms ) . In support of the hypothesis , the interaction between variables was significant , F ( 2 , 45 ) (cid:5) 39 . 00 , p (cid:3) . 0001 , (cid:6) p 2 (cid:5) . 63 . The main effect of priming was not signif - icant ( F (cid:3) 1 ) . By way of determining whether the differences between local versus global processing ( i . e . , the relative global dominance effect ) were significantly influenced by priming , a ( redundant ) one - way ANOVA with the difference scores was conducted . Simple contrast analyses revealed that all of the dif - ference scores ( M similarity (cid:5) (cid:8) 192 , SD (cid:5) 60 ; M control (cid:5) (cid:8) 47 , SD (cid:5) 79 ; M dissimilarity (cid:5) 84 , SD (cid:5) 113 ) significantly differed from one another : similarity versus dissimilarity , t ( 45 ) (cid:5) (cid:8) 8 . 83 , p (cid:3) . 0001 ; similarity versus control , t ( 45 ) (cid:5) (cid:8) . 4 . 58 , p (cid:3) . 0001 ; and control versus dissimilarity , t ( 45 ) (cid:5) (cid:8) 4 . 25 , p (cid:3) . 0001 . Experi - ment 6 was undertaken in order to replicate the results with the GCT , which measures perceptual integration ( Schooler & Melcher , 1995 ) . Experiment 6 Experiment 6 was a conceptual replication of Experiment 5 but used a different dependent measure , namely , items from the GCT ( Ekstrom et al . , 1976 ; see Friedman & Fo¨rster , 2000 , 2001 ) . Recent research has shown that the two perceptual tasks—the Navon and the GCT—are highly correlated ( Fo¨rster , 2008 ) . In the GCT , participants view a series of fragmented pictures of familiar objects and must perceptually integrate and recognize them , that is , “complete” each gestalt . Performance on the GCT is said to benefit from a relatively global processing of the fragmented images ( e . g . , seeing them as a “collection of blobs” ) . However , whereas in the Navon task , participants merely have to detect global versus local letters , in the GCT , they must integrate , restructure , and put together disconnected pieces of information in a meaningful way ( Kimchi , 1992 ; Schooler & Melcher , 1995 ) . Method Participants . A total of 42 business managers ( 7 female , 35 male ; gender had no effects ) who were enrolled in a seminar on social psychology were asked to participate in an experimental demonstration . Participants were randomly assigned to conditions . The experiment was based on a three - level ( priming : similar vs . dissimilar vs . unspecified ) between - participants design . As a dependent measure , the number of correct solutions of 10 GCT items obtained within 2 min was used . Procedure . A similarity and dissimilarity focus was induced , as described in Experiment 5 , except that in this experiment the priming took place in a conference center during a 1 - day social psychology training seminar for managers of diverse ranks who worked at different international companies . Participants were assured that participation was voluntary . In a first phase , participants were asked to find either similarities or dissimilarities between the two TV shows used in Experiment 1 over a 5 - min period and to write these down . The control group was asked to think about one of the TV shows only . Subsequently , an allegedly unrelated new “perceptual” task was introduced . Each of the 10 GCT items was printed on a separate 8 . 5 - in . (cid:1) 11in . ( 21 . 6 (cid:1) 27 . 9 cm ) sheet of paper ; the 10 sheets were presented in a folder . Participants were asked to solve one picture after another but to go on if they felt they could not solve a particular one . In an effort to keep motivation constant across conditions , participants were told that the results would reflect aspects of human intelli - gence . They were asked to open the folder at the same time and were stopped by stopwatch after 2 min . After completing the GCT , participants were debriefed and interviewed , and results were discussed in a subsequent session . Experimenters were blind with respect to conditions and did not interact with participants to prevent any demand or experimenter effects . None of the partici - pants saw any relationships between the two tasks . Results It had been hypothesized that searching for similarities would enhance solution of the GCT , whereas searching for dissimi - larities would impair it . Because the data were not equally distributed , a Kruskal – Wallis test was conducted , with the total number of GCT solutions ( out of 10 ) as a dependent variable . Very much in line with predictions , this analysis revealed a significant main effect of priming , (cid:7) 2 ( 2 ) (cid:5) 12 . 82 , p (cid:3) . 002 , demonstrating that solving the GCT items was easier for par - ticipants who had been primed with a search for similarity ( M (cid:5) 8 . 93 , SD (cid:5) 0 . 83 ) than for those who had not been primed ( M (cid:5) 8 . 00 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 62 ) ; in contrast , performance on the task was impaired when participants were initially primed with a search for dissimilarities ( M (cid:5) 7 . 10 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 14 ) . Results conceptually replicated Experiment 5 on the Navon task with gestalt completion , using a different induction of similarity and a different population of managers . Altogether , the results demonstrate a bidirectional link between perception styles and similarity focus . One strength of the structural relations hypothesis is its integra - tive character , because global versus local processing can be triggered by a variety of important psychological variables ( see Fo¨rster et al . , 2008 ) . The following section presents an examina - tion of some of these , namely , temporal distance , regulatory focus , and power . Table 6 Experiment 5 : Mean Reaction Times for Global and Local Letters in the Navon task by Condition Measure Priming Dissimilarity Control Similarity Global letters 759 ( 138 ) 689 ( 91 ) 594 ( 88 ) Local letters 675 ( 63 ) 735 ( 63 ) 786 ( 86 ) Note . Standard deviations are presented in parentheses . 98 FO¨RSTER R E T R A C T E D T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . III . Examining the Role of Temporal Distance , Regulatory Focus , and Power on Similarity Focus Different research traditions have found correlations between processing styles and temporal distance , power , and regulatory focus . On the basis of this research , I predicted that a larger temporal distance , a promotion focus on ideals , and high power would immediately spur global processing , thereby leading to a search for similarities . For a proximal temporal distance , a pre - vention focus on oughts , and low power , I predicted an automatic elicitation of local processing and , thus , a dissimilarity focus . The general logic of the following experiments involved an experimen - tal induction of the respective moderator ( with an exception made in Experiment 8a , in which a regulatory focus was measured rather than induced ) : This induction was expected to trigger a certain processing style , which should then have the effect of shifting the participant to ( dis ) similarity generation tasks , as described above ( see Schooler , 2002 ) . The respective variables are discussed in more detail in the introductory passages of the respective experi - ments . In all of the experiments , in order to demonstrate a direct influence of the respective variables , an aim was to rule out mediation by mood . It has previously been shown that positive ( negative ) moods elicit different global ( local ) processing styles ( see Gasper , 2004 ) . Notably , even though temporal distance , power , and regulatory focus have been related to moods in differ - ent ways , research has shown that all of these variables can produce effects on processing styles that are independent of mood . In other words , temporal construal , power , and regulatory focus have been shown to trigger global and local processing styles without invoking full - blown moods , as measured by self - reports of participants’ moods , affective states , or emotions . In the following experiments , mood was controlled for , and subtle inductions were used that have been shown not to produce strong moods . Experiment 7a and 7b : Temporal Distance Construal level theory ( Liberman et al . , 2007 ; Trope & Liber - man , 2003 ) suggests that increasing a perceiver’s psychological distance from a stimulus causes him or her to construe that stim - ulus in a more abstract manner . Several lines of research are consistent with this analysis : For example , Liberman , Sagristano , and Trope ( 2002 , Study 1 ) found that temporal distance influenced the way in which participants classified objects that were part of future activities ( e . g . , a camping trip ) . The same items ( e . g . , potato chips , boots , hot dogs , blanket ) were classified into fewer , broader categories when the items pertained to more distant future activi - ties . Related to this finding , Fo¨rster , Friedman , and Liberman ( 2004 ) showed that temporal distance increases performance in the Snowy Pictures Test and in the GCT , both of which require abstracting a global visual image and ignoring local details that comprise noise . Conceptually similar effects on abstraction and global processing have been demonstrated with other dimensions of psychological distance as well , specifically , spatial distance ( Fujita , Henderson , Eng , Trope , & Liberman , 2006 ; Henderson , Fujita , Trope , & Liberman , 2006 ) , hypotheticality ( Wakslak , Trope , Liberman , & Alony , 2006 ) , and social distance ( Liberman et al . , 2007 ; see also Idson & Mischel , 2001 ) . Recently , distancing has been shown to also affect performance on the Navon task , increasing the efficiency of global perception and decreasing local perception ( Liberman & Fo¨rster , 2008 ) . Fur - thermore , in the domain of social comparison , participants were more likely to assimilate to a given standard ( e . g . , they thought they could do more consecutive push - ups following comparison with high athletic standards as opposed to comparison with low athletic standards ) after they had imagined a competition a year from now , whereas participants who imagined a competition to - morrow contrasted themselves away from the standard ( Fo¨rster et al . , 2008 ) . Such effects typically have been shown to be unrelated to full - blown moods . If the reasoning of the argument posed here is correct , temporal distance would be expected to increase the tendency for inclusion and thus lead to a similarity focus ; in contrast , the tendency toward exclusion , and therefore a dissimi - larity focus , would then be decreased . In Experiment 7a , Experi - ment 1 was replicated : The only difference was that , instead of global versus local processing priming , participants in the current experiment were asked to imagine a trip to New Zealand that would start the next day ( inducing a proximal time perspective ) or one that would begin a year from this point ( inducing a distant time perspective ) . Furthermore , in Experiment 7b , both global percep - tion and similarity generation were assessed within the same experiment to examine mediation by global processing . Method Experiments 7a and 7b are conceptual replications of Experi - ment 1 ; thus , only the differences are described here . Participants . For Experiment 7a , a total of 101 undergraduate students ( 82 female , 19 male ; gender had no effects ) were tested in a group session in a classroom , were randomly assigned to con - ditions , and received course credit for participation . The study was based on a 3 ( time perspective priming : proximal vs . distant vs . control ) (cid:1) 2 ( generation : similarities vs . dissimilarities ) factorial design ; both variables were manipulated between participants . Amount of generation and similarity ratings served as the depen - dent variables . For Experiment 7b , a total of 60 undergraduate students ( 41 female , 19 male ; gender had no effects ) were tested individually within an experimental battery examining diverse research ques - tions . Participants received 20 Euro ( approximately $ 25 ) for the entire session . The experiment was based on a 3 ( time perspective priming : proximal vs . distant vs . control ) (cid:1) 2 ( generation : simi - larities vs . dissimilarities ) factorial design , with the first variable manipulated between participants and the second within partici - pants . Amount of generation , global perception , and similarity ratings served as the dependent variables . Procedure . For Experiment 7a , students in a lecture were handed several folders of presumably unrelated studies . The first folder contained some general instructions , the second one asked participants to imagine for 5 min a trip to New Zealand . Whereas one third of the participants were asked to imagine this happening the next day , another third of the students were asked to imagine it happening a year from then ( see Liberman & Trope , 1998 ) . A control group was asked to think about New Zealand , without any time indication . Upon completion , participants were asked to work on the third folder , which contained the generation task , a task introduced as a pretest of materials that would later be used to examine generation performance . Participants were instructed to compare two TV news shows and were then asked to write down 99 PROCESSING STYLES AND SIMILARITY FOCUS R E T R A C T E D T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . either as many similarities or as many dissimilarities as they could . They were stopped after 2 min by stopwatch . Experimenters were blind with respect to conditions and did not interact with any of the participants . In Experiment 7b , participants were asked to complete the PANAS and mood questions , as described in the pretest of Exper - iment 1 , before and after the temporal priming task , in order to more carefully rule out mood as a potential moderator . No mood effects were expected , as former experiments have not found elicitation of mood on self - report scales by these kinds of induc - tions ( for a review , see Liberman et al . , 2007 ) . In this experiment , participants were also asked how easy it was for them to imagine the event , how much they liked the task , how difficult the imag - ination task was for them , and how positive the imagined event was for them . The questionnaire also contained questions on effort , difficulty , and motivation ( see Experiment 1 pretest ) . A variant of the Navon task was assessed between the priming and similarity generation tasks . More specifically , global versus local processing was evaluated with an alleged visual matching task ( see Gasper , 2004 ; and Gasper & Clore , 2002 ) . Participants were instructed to decide as quickly as possible , by pressing one of two designated keys , whether a target figure presented on the screen looked like one of the sample figures presented . The target was a figure ( e . g . , a square ) made of other small figures ( e . g . , triangles ) , and the samples were large figures made of the same figures ( e . g . , Sample 1 consisted of a triangle made of triangles , and Sample 2 consisted of a square made of squares ) . The size of the targets and samples and the number of small figures that constituted the large ones varied . Number of global choices ( Sam - ple 2 in the example described would count as a global choice ) reflected global processing . All participants completed 48 experi - mental trials . Participants were then asked to generate similarities and dissim - ilarities . As in Study 1 , the task was assessed within participants . Participants were asked to write down dissimilarities and similar - ities for TV shows in separate columns presented on a sheet of paper labeled with “similarity” and “dissimilarity . ” This experi - ment was self - paced ; participants were told to stop whenever they felt they could not generate any further meaningful solutions . It is possible that in one of the former experiments of the study , participants ruminated more in one or the other of the conditions or were more likely to be distracted from the main task , which in itself could have produced effects . A final set of questions examined participants’ awareness of the actual purpose of the study , which was discovered by none of them . After completing the folders , participants were thanked and debriefed . As in the experiments above , experimenters were kept unaware of the conditions and hypotheses in order to avoid de - mand effects . It appeared that no one felt that one task influenced the next and that participants felt interested and enjoyed partici - pating . Results Experiment 7a . This experiment was expected to conceptually replicate the results of Experiment 1 with temporal perspective ( see Table 7 ) : Distant time perspective should facilitate generation of similarities relative to dissimilarities , and the opposite should be true for the proximal time perspective . With a 2 ( generation ) (cid:1) 3 ( priming ) ANOVA , this hypothesis was confirmed statistically by a significant two - way interaction , F ( 2 , 95 ) (cid:5) 6 . 69 , p (cid:3) . 02 , (cid:6) p2 (cid:5) . 12 . Participants primed with a distant time perspective gener - ated more similarities ( M (cid:5) 8 . 59 , SD (cid:5) 2 . 09 ) than dissimilar - ities ( M (cid:5) 6 . 24 , SD (cid:5) 3 . 56 ) , t ( 32 ) (cid:5) 2 . 35 , p (cid:3) . 03 , whereas those primed with a proximal time perspective generated fewer similarities ( M (cid:5) 4 . 76 , SD (cid:5) 2 . 39 ) than dissimilarities ( M (cid:5) 7 . 35 , SD (cid:5) 3 . 14 ) , t ( 32 ) (cid:5) 2 . 71 , p (cid:3) . 01 . In the control group , participants generated similarities and dissimilarities to the same extent ( M dissimilarity (cid:5) 7 . 00 , SD (cid:5) 2 . 80 ; M similarity (cid:5) 6 . 76 , SD (cid:5) 2 . 46 ) , t (cid:3) 1 . None of the main effects were significant ( priming and generation : both F s (cid:3) 2 ) . Again , because of unequal distribution of errors , similarity ratings were examined with separate Kruskal – Wallis tests . Results showed that participants primed with the proximal time perspec - tive judged the shows to be less similar ( M (cid:5) 4 . 26 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 54 ) than did participants in the control group ( M (cid:5) 5 . 55 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 58 ) or those in the distant time perspective group ( M (cid:5) 6 . 41 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 89 ) . Whereas the effect of distance priming was significant , (cid:7) 2 ( 2 ) (cid:5) 24 . 15 , p (cid:3) . 0001 , Cramer’s V (cid:5) . 43 , the effect of generation was not , (cid:7) 2 ( 1 ) (cid:5) 2 . 52 , p (cid:5) . 11 , Cramer’s V (cid:5) . 38 . All contrasts were significant : proximal versus control , (cid:7) 2 ( 1 ) (cid:5) 9 . 99 , p (cid:3) . 002 ; distant versus proximal , (cid:7) 2 ( 1 ) (cid:5) 20 . 96 , p (cid:3) . 001 ; and distal versus control , (cid:7) 2 ( 1 ) (cid:5) 5 . 14 , p (cid:3) . 03 . It seems that the processing modes triggered by time perspective led to different ways of perceiving the stimuli . The global pro - cessing style triggered by thinking about the very same event in the distant future led to a search for similarities , whereas the local processing style triggered by thinking about proximal future events led to a dissimilarity focus . Experiment 7b was undertaken to rule out influence of full - blown moods more carefully and to test for mediation by global versus local perception . Experiment 7b . With a 2 ( generation ) (cid:1) 3 ( priming ) ANOVA for mixed designs , the proposed hypothesis was confirmed statis - tically by a significant two - way interaction , F ( 2 , 57 ) (cid:5) 7 . 35 , p (cid:3) . 001 , (cid:6) p2 (cid:5) . 21 ( see Table 8 ) : Participants primed with a distant time perspective generated more similarities ( M (cid:5) 11 . 00 , SD (cid:5) 2 . 37 ) than dissimilarities ( M (cid:5) 8 . 00 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 95 ) , whereas those primed with a proximal time perspective generated fewer similar - ities ( M (cid:5) 8 . 20 , SD (cid:5) 2 . 84 ) than dissimilarities ( M (cid:5) 10 . 05 , SD (cid:5) 3 . 25 ) . In the control group , participants generated similarities and dissimilarities to the same extent ( M dissimilarity (cid:5) 9 . 15 , SD (cid:5) 3 . 01 ; M similarity (cid:5) 9 . 90 , SD (cid:5) 2 . 63 ) . None of the main effects were significant ( priming and generation : both F s (cid:3) 1 . 45 ) . Contrast analyses conducted with the difference scores of number of similar and dissimilar generations showed that the difference between proximal and control groups , t ( 57 ) (cid:5) 2 . 08 , p (cid:3) . 05 , and the Table 7 Experiment 7a : Mean Number of Similarities Versus Dissimilarities for Two TV Shows Generated by Condition Measure Priming Proximal Control Distal Similarities 4 . 76 ( 2 . 39 ) 6 . 76 ( 2 . 46 ) 8 . 59 ( 2 . 09 ) Dissimilarities 7 . 35 ( 3 . 14 ) 7 . 00 ( 2 . 80 ) 6 . 24 ( 3 . 56 ) Note . Standard deviations are presented in parentheses . 100 FO¨RSTER R E T R A C T E D T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . difference between proximal and distal groups , t ( 57 ) (cid:5) 13 . 83 , p (cid:3) . 001 , were significant , whereas the difference between distal and control groups , t ( 57 ) (cid:5) 1 . 75 , p (cid:5) . 09 , showed a trend . Following procedures of the Gasper ( 2004 ) task , the number of “global choices” was counted , with the resultant replication of the general pattern found in Experiments 1 – 4 : Participants selected more global figures after distal priming ( M (cid:5) 40 . 85 , SD (cid:5) 7 . 20 ) in comparison with participants primed with a proximal perspec - tive ( M (cid:5) 27 . 45 , SD (cid:5) 10 . 22 ) , t ( 57 ) (cid:5) 5 . 07 , p (cid:3) . 001 ; the control group ( M (cid:5) 35 . 75 , SD (cid:5) 7 . 26 ) , fell between the distal group , t ( 57 ) (cid:5) 1 . 93 , p (cid:5) . 06 , and the proximal group , t ( 57 ) (cid:5) 3 . 15 , p (cid:5) . 03 , F ( 2 , 57 ) (cid:5) 13 . 13 , p (cid:3) . 0001 , (cid:6) p 2 (cid:5) . 32 . Furthermore , the similarity ratings were entered into a one - way ANOVA as a dependent variable ; the predicted main effect of distance priming was found to be significant , F ( 2 , 57 ) (cid:5) 5 . 01 , p (cid:3) . 01 , (cid:6) p 2 (cid:5) . 15 : Participants primed with a proximal time perspec - tive judged the shows to be less similar ( M (cid:5) 4 . 15 , SD (cid:5) 2 . 37 ) than did participants in the control group ( M (cid:5) 5 . 60 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 78 ) or those in the distant time perspective group ( M (cid:5) 6 . 30 , SD (cid:5) 2 . 36 ) . Contrast analyses reflected significant contrasts between proximal and control groups , t ( 57 ) (cid:5) 2 . 09 , p (cid:3) . 05 , and between distal and proximal groups , t ( 57 ) (cid:5) 3 . 10 , p (cid:3) . 003 . In this instance , the comparison between the distal perspective and the control group was not significant , t ( 57 ) (cid:5) 1 . 01 , p (cid:3) . 31 . Finally , the experiment included an examination of whether the relative global versus local processing style elicited by temporal distance would partially mediate the difference scores of similarity – dissimilarity generation , following recommendations of mediation analysis methodology ( Kenny , Kashy , & Bolger , 1998 ) . Close distance was coded as (cid:8) 1 , the control group was coded as 0 , and the distal group was coded as 1 . An initial regression analysis showed that temporal distance was positively correlated with relative similarity generation , (cid:9) (cid:5) . 452 , t ( 58 ) (cid:5) 3 . 86 , p (cid:3) . 0001 . A second regression analysis showed that the higher the relative global processing was , the higher the similarity generation , (cid:9) (cid:5) . 800 , t ( 58 ) (cid:5) 10 . 14 , p (cid:3) . 0001 . Most importantly , in a third analysis in which global processing and temporal distance were both entered into the analysis , with similarity generation as the dependent variable , the effect of global processing remained sig - nificant , (cid:9) (cid:5) . 794 , t ( 57 ) (cid:5) 8 . 29 , p (cid:5) . 001 , whereas the influence of temporal distance was reduced , (cid:9) (cid:5) . 01 , t ( 57 ) (cid:5) 0 . 11 , p (cid:5) . 91 . A Sobel test showed that the mediation analysis was significant ( Z (cid:5) 3 . 92 , p (cid:3) . 0001 ) . Thus , it cannot be concluded that global processing partially mediated the relation between the moderator of temporal distance and the dependent variable of relative simi - larity focus . Additionally , all control variables described above—such as moods , perception of the task , and motivation to perform the task—were examined , yielding no effects , either with one - way ANOVAs in which processing styles served as the variable ( all F s (cid:3) 1 ) or with covariance analyses in which the aforementioned dependent variables and moods or motivation were entered as covariates . These results suggest that the closer an event approaches in time , the more individuals tend to see the specific features of it ( see Liberman & Trope , 1998 ) . A focus on the specific features may then lead to the impression that the event is rather dissimilar to other events , which may increase the likelihood of excluding it from given categories . The model presented here is not restricted to temporal construal , as other , conceptually unrelated variables may also trigger pro - cessing styles . The next section reports evaluation of the influence of another variable , namely , regulatory focus ( Higgins , 1997 ) , which is independent of distance but is related to global versus local processing ( Fo¨rster & Higgins , 2005 ) . Experiments 8a and 8b : Regulatory Focus Recently , global versus local processing has been found to be related to regulatory focus ( Higgins , 2000 ) . Fo¨rster and Higgins ( 2005 ) suggested that individuals in a prevention focus , whose attention is on security and vigilance , should attend to their con - crete surroundings in a dangerous situation so that they may maintain their sense of safety ( see Gasper & Clore , 2002 ; Schwarz , 1990 ; Schwarz & Bless , 1991 ) . In case of a threat , an individual may screen the environment to identify and eliminate obstacles to fulfill this goal . Concrete means are instrumental in attaining the goal , and the vigilant encoding of local details is crucial . In addition , oughts , rules , and responsibilities within a prevention focus are usually described in a rather concrete fashion so that an individual knows what should be avoided in order to obtain a feeling of security or to fulfill his or her duty . For example , a person who construes his or her wedding party as an ought might concentrate on details that will facilitate meeting this responsibility ( e . g . , being on time , drinking in moderation ) . Over time , the link between security concerns , oughts , and responsibilities may be - come proceduralized so that any situation reminding a person of oughts will trigger the local processing style . In contrast , in a promotion focus , in which concerns of security are replaced by an emphasis on self - fulfillment , growth , and ac - complishment , and where vigilance is replaced by eagerness , pro - cessing the concrete surroundings would be insufficient or even detrimental for effective goal pursuit . Fulfillment of growth needs might profit from abstract rather than concrete construals , that is , from construals that go beyond the given information and that lead to an exploratory and global processing style . For example , a person who construes his or her wedding as an ideal might con - strue means toward goal fulfillment in a rather abstract way ( e . g . , writing a poem ; seeking to do something symbolic and romantic reflecting the bond ) . Again , this strategy of going beyond the concrete and necessary in such situations might be proceduralized and automatically trig - gered by situational cues of promotion . Regulatory focus is both a situational and a personality variable ( see Higgins , Roney , Crowe , & Hymes , 1994 ) . Situations may trigger concerns with oughts and Table 8 Experiment 7b : Mean Number of Similarities Versus Dissimilarities for Two TV Shows Generated by Condition Measure Priming Proximal Control Distal Similarities 8 . 20 ( 2 . 84 ) 9 . 90 ( 2 . 63 ) 11 . 00 ( 2 . 37 ) Dissimilarities 10 . 05 ( 3 . 25 ) 9 . 15 ( 3 . 01 ) 8 . 00 ( 1 . 95 ) Note . Standard deviations are presented in parentheses . 101 PROCESSING STYLES AND SIMILARITY FOCUS R E T R A C T E D T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . ideals , but people may also be chronically concerned with ideals versus oughts . Thus , an inclination to process information in a global manner might evolve among people with a chronic promo - tion focus on ideals , whereas an inclination to process information locally might evolve among people with a chronic prevention focus on oughts . Fo¨rster and Higgins ( 2005 ) measured participants’ chronic pro - motion versus prevention focus ( see Higgins , Shah , & Friedman , 1997 ) and gauged their performance in the Navon task . The strength of a promotion focus ( i . e . , a chronic focus on ideals and aspirations ) was found to be positively correlated with the speed of processing global letters and to be negatively correlated with the speed of processing local letters , whereas the reverse was true for strength of prevention focus ( i . e . , a chronic focus on security and oughts ) . In a different experiment , the authors demonstrated that experimentally inducing regulatory foci ( by instructing partici - pants to focus on gains / non - gains vs . losses / non - losses ) was like - wise related to perceptual processing . Importantly , the effects were not further mediated by ( self - reported ) mood . More generally , according to regulatory focus theory ( Higgins , 2000 ; Higgins et al . , 1997 ) , when individuals who are pursuing promotion - focused goals subjectively perceive that they are suc - ceeding , cheerfulness - related emotions are aroused in them , whereas when such individuals subjectively perceive that they are failing , dejection - related emotions are engendered . Correspond - ingly , when individuals who are pursuing prevention - focused goals perceive that they are succeeding , they are posited to feel quiescence - related affect , whereas when they perceive that they are failing , they are posited to experience agitation - related affect ( see Carver , Sutton , & Scheier , 2000 ) . However , regulatory focus theory suggests that these distinct qualities of emotional arousal are only keenly felt when the individual is provided with , or reminded of , feedback concerning goal progress . As such , the sheer cognitive anticipation of appetitive or aversive end states ( i . e . , regulatory focus ) during the course of self - regulation may entail little in the way of conscious affective experience . Although emotional arousal or full - blown affect is a by - product of motivational states related to a regulatory focus , these states can be elicited , and , at least initially , guide action in the absence of emotional experience . In an extensive research program , Friedman and Fo¨rster ( 2001 , 2002 , 2005 ; for a review , see Friedman & Fo¨rster , 2008 ) were able to show that a promotion focus induces creative thinking without elicitation of moods , whereas a preven - tion focus induces analytic thinking without eliciting moods . In the following two experiments , the aim was to demonstrate the operation of both a chronic and a situationally induced regu - latory focus . Toward this end , regulatory focus strength was mea - sured in Experiment 8a and induced in Experiment 8b . Method Experiments 8a and 8b are conceptual replications of Experi - ments 1 and 2 ; thus , only differences are described here . Participants . For Experiment 8a , a total of 40 undergraduate students ( 20 female , 20 male ; gender had no effects ) were tested in an experimental battery , were randomly assigned to the generation conditions , and received 20 Euros ( approximately $ 25 ) for the entire session . The study was based on a two - way ( generation task : similarities vs . dissimilarities ) factorial design , with regulatory focus ( promotion vs . prevention ) as a continuous personality vari - able . The generation task was manipulated between participants . Participants were asked to compare a dolphin and a shark ( see Experiment 2 ) ; amount of word generation and similarity ratings served as the dependent variables . For Experiment 8b , a total of 45 undergraduate students ( 23 female , 22 male ; gender had no effects ) were tested in a group session in a classroom , were randomly assigned to conditions , and received course credit for participation . The design was a 2 ( gen - eration task : similarities vs . dissimilarities ) (cid:1) 3 ( regulatory focus priming : promotion vs . prevention vs . control ) factorial design , with all variables being assessed between participants . Participants were asked to compare two TV shows ( see Experiment 1 ) ; amount of generation and similarity ratings served as the dependent vari - ables . Procedure . For Experiment 8a , participants were invited to complete an experimental battery and , upon arrival , were asked to fill out a series of personality questionnaires , which included the regulatory strength measure , as developed by Higgins et al . ( 1997 ) . Building on the concept that goal strength is reflected in goal accessibility , this computerized “strength of guide” measure records the time it takes participants to enter three of their promo - tion goals ( i . e . , ideals : hopes or aspirations , concerns with accom - plishment ) and three of their prevention goals ( i . e . , oughts : duties or obligations , concerns with security ) . Faster entry times reflect greater accessibility ( Fazio , 1986 ) and thereby greater strength of concern . Theoretically speaking , the accessibility of promotion or prevention goals increases as their importance for self - regulation increases . Data coding ( see Higgins et al . , 1997 ) resulted in an index of promotion strength , indicating the importance of promo - tion concerns , and an index of prevention strength , indicating the importance of prevention concerns . After working on unrelated tasks for 60 min , participants were asked to generate similarities between a dolphin and a shark , as described in Experiment 2 . Again mood was controlled for by measuring affect changes several times during the battery with a translation of the PANAS . For Experiment 8b , a classroom setting similar to the ones reported above was used . Participants received different folders according to condition and were asked to ( a ) either list their ideals and how they currently relate to these or ( b ) to describe their oughts and how they currently relate to them ( see Higgins , Roney , Crowe , & Hymes , 1994 ) . Participants in a control group were asked to describe their life goals in both concrete and abstract ways for 5 min , as timed by stopwatch . Mood was measured with the PANAS both before the manipulation and after the similarity task . Upon completion , participants were asked to work on the sim - ilarity task that was introduced in the same way as described above . Participants were instructed to compare two TV news shows and then to write down as many similarities or dissimilar - ities as they could for a total of 2 min . In both experiments , experimenters were blind with respect to conditions and hypoth - eses . Participants were thanked and debriefed ; questionnaires ask - ing for any suspicions with respect to the hypothesis indicated that participants did not see any relations among the study phases . Results Experiment 8a . Several multiple regression analyses were conducted to examine the relation between similarity versus dis - 102 FO¨RSTER R E T R A C T E D T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . similarity focus and strength of regulatory focus . The independent continuous variables for the analyses were participants’ ought strength and their ideal strength ( the log - transformed raw scores were multiplied by (cid:8) 1 so that higher values signified higher strengths ) . The mean number of statements of dissimilarity was the dependent variable in the first multiple regression analysis . As predicted , ought strength was positively related to amount of dissimilarity generation , (cid:9) (cid:5) . 70 , t ( 17 ) (cid:5) 3 . 72 , p (cid:3) . 002 , and ideal strength was negatively related to number of generated dissimilar - ities , (cid:9) (cid:5) (cid:8) . 55 , t ( 17 ) (cid:5) (cid:8) 2 . 95 , p (cid:3) . 01 . In another regression analysis , the mean number of statements of similarity was the dependent variable . As predicted , ideal strength was positively related to generation of similarities , (cid:9) (cid:5) 1 . 00 , t ( 17 ) (cid:5) 3 . 07 , p (cid:3) . 01 , and ought strength was negatively related to generation of similarities , (cid:9) (cid:5) (cid:8) . 73 , t ( 17 ) (cid:5) (cid:8) 2 . 24 , p (cid:3) . 04 . Each of these findings was independent of mood when this was included as an additional variable in the analysis . The similarity ratings were examined with regression analyses , with the continuous ideal and ought strength entered as indepen - dent variables . In both the dissimilarity and the similarity focus conditions , the higher the ideal strength , the more similar a shark and a dolphin appeared : for similarity focus , (cid:9) (cid:5) 1 . 06 , t ( 17 ) (cid:5) 3 . 46 , p (cid:3) . 003 ; for dissimilarity focus : (cid:9) (cid:5) . 45 , t ( 17 ) (cid:5) 2 . 16 , p (cid:3) . 05 . For ought strength , the higher the level that was obtained , the more dissimilar a shark seemed from a dolphin : for similarity focus , (cid:9) (cid:5) (cid:8) . 69 , t ( 17 ) (cid:5) (cid:8) 2 . 24 , p (cid:3) . 04 ; for dissimilarity focus , (cid:9) (cid:5) (cid:8) . 61 , t ( 17 ) (cid:5) (cid:8) 2 . 92 , p (cid:3) . 01 . Again , mood did not correlate with any of the findings when entered as an additional variable in the analysis . In sum , the results of Study 8a were consistent with the proposal that similarity focus fits a promotion focus and that dissimilarity focus fits a prevention focus . The next section examines whether similar findings can be obtained with experimentally induced regulatory foci . Experiment 8b . With a 2 ( generation ) (cid:1) 3 ( priming ) ANOVA , the hypothesis was confirmed statistically by a significant two - way interaction , F ( 2 , 84 ) (cid:5) 9 . 01 , p (cid:3) . 001 , (cid:6) p 2 (cid:5) . 18 ( see Table 9 ) : Participants primed with a promotion focus generated more simi - larities ( M (cid:5) 8 . 53 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 73 ) than dissimilarities ( M (cid:5) 6 . 27 , SD (cid:5) 2 . 02 ) , t ( 28 ) (cid:5) 3 . 31 , p (cid:3) . 003 , whereas participants primed with a prevention focus generated fewer similarities ( M (cid:5) 5 . 00 , SD (cid:5) 2 . 00 ) than dissimilarities ( M (cid:5) 7 . 13 , SD (cid:5) 2 . 20 ) , t ( 28 ) (cid:5) 2 . 78 , p (cid:3) . 01 . In the control group , participants generated simi - larities and dissimilarities to the same extent ( M dissimilarity (cid:5) 6 . 73 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 87 ; M similarity (cid:5) 7 . 40 , SD (cid:5) 2 . 32 ; t (cid:3) 1 ) . The main effect of regulatory focus also was significant , F ( 2 , 84 ) (cid:5) 3 . 50 , p (cid:3) . 04 , (cid:6) p2 (cid:5) . 08 , showing that a promotion focus led to better perfor - mance ( M (cid:5) 7 . 40 , SD (cid:5) 2 . 18 ) than did a prevention focus ( M (cid:5) 6 . 07 ; SD (cid:5) 2 . 33 ) , with the control group falling in between ( M (cid:5) 7 . 07 , SD (cid:5) 2 . 10 ) . This result is in line with former studies showing that , in general , participants with a promotion focus on gains , growth , and ideals outperform participants with a prevention focus in generation tasks ( see Friedman & Fo¨rster , 2001 , 2005 ) . The main effect of generation task was not significant ( F (cid:3) 1 ) . Analyses on similarity ratings as a dependent variable reflected a significant main effect of regulatory focus , F ( 2 , 84 ) (cid:5) 11 . 64 , p (cid:3) . 001 , (cid:6) p2 (cid:5) . 22 : Participants primed with a prevention focus judged the shows to be less similar ( M (cid:5) 4 . 37 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 47 ) than did participants in the control group ( M (cid:5) 5 . 77 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 28 ) or those in the promotion focus group ( M (cid:5) 6 . 30 , SD (cid:5) 2 . 00 ) . There was a marginal main effect of similarity focus , showing that when participants were asked to search for similarities , they found the TV shows to be more similar ( M (cid:5) 5 . 76 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 67 ) than did participants who searched for dissimilarities ( M (cid:5) 5 . 20 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 90 ) , F ( 1 , 84 ) (cid:5) 2 . 70 , p (cid:3) . 10 , (cid:6) p2 (cid:5) . 03 . The interaction between the two variables was not significant ( F (cid:3) 1 ) . Again , when mood was examined , it was found not to be influenced by the regulatory focus conditions ( all F s (cid:3) 1 ) nor did it show any effects when entered as an additional covariate into the analyses reported above . Thus , again , full - blown moods or con - scious arousal did not mediate the results . In sum , it seems that both a chronic and a situationally induced regulatory focus acti - vated similarity versus dissimilarity focus via processing styles . The next study examined another important social variable , namely , power . Recent research has shown power to be related to global versus local processing ( Smith & Trope , 2006 ) ; therefore , one may predict that high power would lead to a similarity focus and low power to a dissimilarity focus . Experiment 9 : Power Power is associated with a global processing style , as shown recently by Smith and Trope ( 2006 ) . On the basis of construal level theory ( see above ; Trope & Liberman , 2003 ) , Smith and Trope predicted that elevated power increases the psychological distance one feels in relation to others and that this distance should lead to more abstract information processing . Thus , high power , relative to low power , should be associated with more global processing and abstract thinking : focusing on primary aspects of stimuli and detecting patterns and structure to get the gist of things , as well as categorizing stimuli at a higher level . Because in powerful situa - tions , such a processing style may have some advantages ( see Liberman et al . , 2007 ) , a link may evolve so that upon detection of cues of power , this processing style is elicited automatically . In one of their experiments , Smith and Trope asked participants to unscramble sentences that contained notions of high versus low power , activating experimentally different semantic networks of power . The experimenters subsequently administered a version of the GCT ( see Experiment 6 ) , which showed better performances for participants primed with high power than for those primed with low power . Beyond motivational explanations for such an effect , one may assume that a situation of high power might procedurally prime a global processing style that classifies information into categories at the expense of perception of details or individual information . It may be expected that such a global processing style elicited by high power could also lead to a focus on similarities . Table 9 Experiment 8b : Mean Number of Similarities Versus Dissimilarities for Two TV Shows Generated by Condition Measure Priming Prevention Control Promotion Similarities 5 . 00 ( 2 . 00 ) 7 . 40 ( 2 . 32 ) 8 . 53 ( 1 . 73 ) Dissimilarities 7 . 13 ( 2 . 20 ) 6 . 73 ( 1 . 87 ) 6 . 27 ( 2 . 02 ) Note . Standard deviations are presented in parentheses . 103 PROCESSING STYLES AND SIMILARITY FOCUS R E T R A C T E D T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . Even though theory and research have suggested a relation between good mood and high power ( Keltner , Gruenfeld , & Anderson , 2003 ) , effects of power on processing styles have been shown to be independent of conscious mood effects . The afore - mentioned priming task used by Smith and Trope ( 2006 ; see also Galinsky , Gruenfeld , & Magee , 2003 ; Smith & Bargh , 2008 ) only rarely induced different affect , and even if it did , mood never mediated the observed effects on processing styles . Method Experiment 9 conceptually replicated Experiment 8b . Thus , only the differences are described here . Participants . A total of 90 undergraduate students ( 55 female , 35 male ; gender had no effects ) in a classroom setting were randomly assigned to conditions . The design was a 2 ( generation task : similarities vs . dissimilarities ) (cid:1) 3 ( power priming : high vs . low vs . control ) factorial ANOVA , with all variables assessed between participants . Participants were asked to compare two TV shows ( see Experiment 1 ) , and amount of statement generation and similarity ratings served as the dependent variables . Procedure . For Experiment 9 , a classroom setting similar to the ones reported above was used . Participants received different folders , which included variations on a task to unscramble 16 sentences . Five words for each item were listed , and participants were told to use four of the words to make a grammatically correct sentence ( see Smith & Trope , 2006 ) . For the high - power prime , 8 of the 16 sets of words contained a word related to having power ( i . e . , authority , captain , commands , controls , dominates , execu - tive , influenced , privileged ) . For the low - power prime , those same 8 sets contained a word related to lacking power ( i . e . , complied , janitor , obey , passive , servant , submits , subordinate , yield ) . For the control prime , all 16 sets contained only power - irrelevant words . Mood was measured with the PANAS before the manipu - lation and after the similarity task . Upon completion , participants were asked to work on the similarity task ( comparing two TV shows ) as described above ( total time of 2 min ) . The experimenter was blind to the conditions and did not interact with any of the participants . Participants were debriefed afterwards , and responses to questionnaires asking for any suspicions with respect to the hypothesis indicated that participants did not see any relations between the study phases . Results High power should facilitate generation of similarities relative to dissimilarities , and the opposite should be true for low power . Using a 2 ( generation ) (cid:1) 3 ( power priming ) ANOVA , this hy - pothesis was confirmed statistically by a significant two - way in - teraction , F ( 2 , 84 ) (cid:5) 9 . 85 , p (cid:3) . 001 , (cid:6) p2 (cid:5) . 19 ( see Table 10 ) . Participants primed with high power generated more similari - ties ( M (cid:5) 8 . 67 , SD (cid:5) 2 . 06 ) than dissimilarities ( M (cid:5) 5 . 67 , SD (cid:5) 2 . 97 ) , t ( 28 ) (cid:5) 3 . 22 , p (cid:3) . 01 , whereas those primed with low power generated fewer similarities ( M (cid:5) 4 . 87 , SD (cid:5) 2 . 17 ) than dissimilarities ( M (cid:5) 7 . 67 , SD (cid:5) 3 . 11 ) , t ( 28 ) (cid:5) 2 . 86 , p (cid:3) . 01 . In the control group , participants generated similarities and dis - similarities to the same extent ( M dissimilarity (cid:5) 7 . 00 , SD (cid:5) 2 . 23 ; M similarity (cid:5) 6 . 67 , SD (cid:5) 2 . 47 ; t (cid:3) 1 ) . None of the main effects were significant ( priming and generation : both F s (cid:3) 1 ) . Furthermore , the similarity ratings were examined as a depen - dent variable . Again , the distribution of errors for the ratings was not normal , and thus , the effects of power and generation were examined differently with Kruskal – Wallis tests . Whereas the ef - fect of power was significant , (cid:7) 2 ( 2 ) (cid:5) 19 . 81 , p (cid:3) . 0001 , Cramer’s V (cid:5) . 43 ; the effect of generation was only marginally significant , (cid:7) 2 ( 1 ) (cid:5) 2 . 84 , p (cid:3) . 10 , Cramer’s V (cid:5) . 40 ( M similarity (cid:5) 5 . 84 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 77 ; M dissimilarity (cid:5) 5 . 09 , SD (cid:5) 2 . 04 ) . Participants primed with low power judged the shows to be less similar ( M (cid:5) 4 . 30 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 62 ) than did participants in the control group ( M (cid:5) 5 . 67 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 58 ) or those in the high - power group ( M (cid:5) 6 . 43 , SD (cid:5) 1 . 99 ) . Contrast analyses showed that the difference between high and low power was significant , (cid:7) 2 ( 1 ) (cid:5) 16 . 70 , p (cid:3) . 001 , as was the difference between the low - power and control groups , (cid:7) 2 ( 1 ) (cid:5) 9 . 41 , p (cid:3) . 002 ; the difference between high power and control group approached significance , (cid:7) 2 ( 1 ) (cid:5) 3 . 66 , p (cid:3) . 06 . Mood did not differ with respect to conditions ( F s (cid:3) 1 . 2 ) ; when entered as a covariate into the above designs , no mediation could be detected . This experiment yielded initial evidence for the fact that power , another variable connected to global versus local processing , is related to a similarity versus dissimilarity focus . The findings are discussed in detail below . GENERAL DISCUSSION The experiments in this study consistently found a link between a global processing style and a focus on similarity in the compar - ison of two events . At the same time , a local processing style was linked to a focus on dissimilarity in the comparison of the same two events . Experiments 1 – 4 showed that , when primed with global processing , participants found more similarities than dis - similarities , whereas the opposite was true for participants primed with local processing . In addition , Experiments 5 – 6 showed that after having searched for similarities , perception of global figures was faster and perceptual integration was enhanced , whereas a search for dissimilarities facilitated local perception and impeded perceptual integration relative to control groups . These effects occurred out of participants’ awareness in that they did not see any relation between the respective priming phases and the test phases . Furthermore , temporal distance , a promotion focus , and high power were found to enhance similarity focus , whereas temporal proximity , a prevention focus , and low power enhanced dissimi - larity focus ( Experiments 7 – 9 ) . Notably , whereas in some studies participants were exposed to two presented objects ( Experiments 3b and 4 ) , in others they had to imagine them ( as was the case in Experiments 1 , 2 , 7a , 8a , 8b , and 9 , in which participants had to Table 10 Experiment 9 : Mean Number of Similarities Versus Dissimilarities for Two TV Shows Generated by Condition Measure Priming Low power Control High power Similarities 4 . 87 ( 2 . 17 ) 7 . 00 ( 2 . 23 ) 8 . 67 ( 2 . 06 ) Dissimilarities 7 . 67 ( 3 . 11 ) 6 . 67 ( 2 . 47 ) 5 . 67 ( 2 . 97 ) Note . Standard deviations are presented in parentheses . 104 FO¨RSTER R E T R A C T E D T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . imagine TV shows and animals ) . It seems that both interpretation of a feature ( e . g . , a smile ) and generation of similarities versus dissimilarities in memory are affected by global versus local processing . The present results do not seem to contradict classic models on similarity . Like others , the results of these experiments show perceiver – stimulus interactions ( see Gentner & Gunn , 2001 ; Mark - man & Gentner , 1993a , 1993b , 2005 ; Tversky , 1977 ; Tversky & Gati , 1982 ) . In the current investigation , however , an explicit prediction was made of a bidirectional relation between content - free perceptual processing styles and higher order cognitive pro - cesses . This striking link may bring research areas together that were formerly rather disconnected from each other . Thus , the structure accounts explaining the global dominance effect in per - ception by processes related to finding structural relations between stimuli ( see Kimchi , 1992 ; Love , Rouder , & Wisniewski , 1999 ) fit nicely with the assumption made by structure mapping approaches ( Gentner & Markman , 1997 ; Medin et al . , 1993 ) that similarity focus is based on finding structural relations between percepts and concepts in memory . Furthermore , the current study examined important real - world variables , such as psychological distance , regulatory focus , and power , which are related to both similarity focus and processing styles . Experiment 7b provided an illustration that global processing partially mediates the effect of temporal distance on generation of similarities , exemplifying the potential role of such variables as moderators . In the following discussion , I consider implications of this research for domains related to the generation and perception of similarity . From there , I expand on the common possible moder - ators . Similarity , Comparison , and Categorization As mentioned in the introduction , similarity drives a variety of effects . Because of the obvious link between similarity and liking judgments , it would be interesting to see whether a global pro - cessing style affects liking of unknown or unfamiliar targets or strangers , as these might simply be integrated into existing , broad - ened categories and thus would appear less strange . One may , for example , suggest that global processing reduces discrimination or intergroup conflict , because a stranger can be integrated into the wider boundaries of one’s ingroup or into a generally broader category ( e . g . , he or she is a human being rather than being seen only as an African American ; see Levy , Freitas , & Salovey , 2002 ) . Future research should examine such an intriguing possibility . In recent research , Schimmel and Fo¨rster ( 2008 ) examined a related hypothesis within the realm of the arts . Borrowing from preference - for - prototype models ( e . g . , Martindale , 1988 ; Whit - field , 1983 ) , this line of research suggested that a positive evalu - ation of works of art heavily depends on whether the particular works are included in the category of art . When primed with a global processing style , participants were found to prefer uncon - ventional art ( e . g . , The Fountain , by Marcel Duchamps , which is actually a urinal ) . Presumably , broadening attention led to a broad - ening of the category of art and allowed for the inclusion of this unconventional work . The results of the experiments reported above may suggest that the participants in this study of artwork generated or focused more on the similarities of the works of art to the prototype of art when primed with global perception . Moreover , a search for similarities or dissimilarities could have consequences for assimilation and contrast effects in social com - parisons when one evaluates oneself . Most prominently , Muss - weiler and Bodenhausen ( 2002 ) argued and demonstrated that assimilation effects are more pronounced with similar comparison standards ( e . g . , if the standard belongs to one’s ingroup ) . In a different set of studies , Mussweiler ( 2001 ) induced a similarity focus comparable to that in Experiments 5 and 6 in the present study , showing assimilation effects after searching for similarities and contrast effects after searching for dissimilarities ( see also Stapel & Koomen , 2000 , 2001 ; Stapel & Suls , 2004 ) . These effects may be based on processing styles , as Fo¨rster et al . ( 2008 ) showed that a global processing style leads to assimilation effects , whereas a local processing style leads to contrast effects . This perspective is further bolstered by the current research demonstrating a direct link between global versus local processing and similarity foci . In summary , I suggest that global processing enhances assimilation effects , whereas local processing enhances contrastive effects via a ( dis ) similarity focus . As a consequence , for example , if a global processing style broadens the category of one’s salient ingroup ( e . g . , from German to European ) , this may facilitate a search for similarities , with assimilation effects on social judgments as a consequence . In some of their studies , Fo¨rster et al . ( 2008 ) showed the implications of such a notion : When primed with global processing , assimilation effects occurred even with highly extreme and dissimilar exemplars that are known to be usually excluded from the self , producing contrast effects ( see Herr , 1986 ) . Even though the direct priming of the processing styles bor - rowed from Macrae and Lewis ( 2002 ) is a straightforward exper - imental procedure that thoroughly takes care of differences in prime contents ( all participants watched the same letters ) , the current literature on processing styles allows for interesting pre - dictions concerning related variables , such as psychological dis - tance , regulatory focus , and power . First , I discuss implications of the current findings for the diverse fields of research . This is followed by a discussion of commonalities of such content - wise unrelated variables . Implications for Construal Level Theory , Regulatory Focus Theory , and Research on Power Experiments 7—9 examined a variety of psychological vari - ables that are important in their own right and conceptually inde - pendent of one another . These variables were tested with respect to similarity focus to show the breadth of the processing assumption posited here . Because each of the research domains has their own research agendas and fields of interest , in the following passages , I suggest some new research questions that arise from the current research . Construal Level Theory Thinking about a more distant event was found to enhance a similarity focus , whereas thinking about a proximal event was observed to enhance a dissimilarity focus . Further research may examine some implications of this finding for various fields , such as people’s emotions and decision making . As an example , a freshman facing his or her first examination at a university may be more afraid if the student perceives it from a close than from a 105 PROCESSING STYLES AND SIMILARITY FOCUS R E T R A C T E D T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . distal temporal distance ; the closer the exam , the more the student may perceive this to be different from exam situations he or she knows from high school , which may increase uncertainty and fear . It may also matter whether the category of exams is associated with good or bad experiences : If the student has had bad experi - ences with exams , anxiety may be the result of including the university exam in the category of exams as a whole . Moreover , temporal distance may affect decisions on the basis of different perceptions of similarity . For example , a social psychologist who accepted an invitation to give a keynote address to a clinical psychology convention a year before the meeting takes place might have underestimated the challenge of such a task , because from a distance , he or she might simply have ignored the differ - ences between the disciplines . These are only some of the research questions this preliminary data set may trigger . Recently , construal level theory has been applied to spatial and social distance as well . According to construal level theory , an event is psychologically distant whenever it is not part of one’s direct experience ; inasmuch as there are multiple dimensions along which an event can be removed from direct experience , there are multiple dimensions of psychological distance ( Liberman et al . , 2007 ) . Future research could expand the current hypothesis to other kinds of distance . As an example , the classic “outgroup homogeneity effect” ( see Linville & Jones , 1980 ) may reflect the mechanism of searching for similarities as a function of social distance . Because , naturally , social distance to outgroup members is increased , people may overlook individual details of outgroup members and may thus perceive that they “all look the same” compared with ingroup members , whose individual features are better known . Adding spatial and temporal distance may even enhance such effects . From a Western perspective , Chinese people who lived a thousand years ago may appear to be even more similar to each other than contemporary Chinese people . In the current research , power was used as a variable of social distance ( Smith & Trope , 2006 ) , with consistent evidence found for a link between situational power and similarity focus . Interest - ingly , research on power also showed relatively more stereotyping in person perception when people have high power . Beyond di - verse motivational processes , one underlying factor may be a rather cognitive one : people in high power simply use broader categories , overlooking individual information ( Fiske , 1993 ) , re - sulting in perceptual homogeneity effects with respect to employ - ees . At the same time , increased perceptual breadth may help people in high - power positions to integrate ideas and to provide a perspective that goes beyond the information given , thus allowing them to look at the “big picture” of group goals . One may spec - ulate that such a perspective is functional for group life : Whereas the leader makes plans for the future and defines abstract goals , preventing him or her from getting caught in minutiae , subordi - nates take care of the details and everyday hassles ( see Smith & Bargh , 2008 ) . In sum , on the basis of the present findings , future research could examine whether other kinds of psychological distance may influence similarity and dissimilarity focus , expand - ing this notion even further . Regulatory Focus Theory A promotion focus has been shown to enhance a number of diverse behaviors , such as approach behavior ( Fo¨rster , Higgins , & Idson , 1998 ; Shah , Higgins , & Friedman , 1998 ) , risk behavior ( Crowe & Higgins , 1997 ; Fo¨rster , Higgins , & Bianco , 2003 ) , creative thinking ( Friedman & Fo¨rster , 2001 ) , and openness to novelty ( Liberman , Idson , Camacho , & Higgins , 1999 ) , to name only a few . In the research presented in the current article , I showed that a promotion focus is related to similarity focus , whereas a prevention focus is related to dissimilarity focus . One may speculate that the process identified here could serve as an explanation for some of the former effects . It is possible that people with a promotion focus relative to those with a prevention focus are less afraid of novel tasks because through their focus on similarities , they perceive novel events to be less unfamiliar . When exposed to these novel events , they may integrate them into preexisting categories and , as a result , may be less threatened by them . Thus , regulatory focus may influence the decision - making process at the time of stimulus perception rather than at later states of information processing , such as when people try to downregu - late threats or motivate themselves to take on a challenge . Further research is needed to more directly examine this notion . The next section discusses the relations among the variables examined in the study . Relations Among Temporal Distance , Regulatory Focus , and Power The results of the experiments showed that some subtle cues of regulatory foci , power , and distance seem to be linked to process - ing styles , producing similar effects . Cues representing these vari - ables may serve as a signal for a certain processing style or procedurally prime a certain way of perceiving one’s environment ( Fiore & Schooler , 1998 ; Schooler , 2002 ; Schwarz & Bless , 1991 ) . I neither profess that the list of variables used is extensive ( one could , e . g . , proceed to test the influence of moods , psychiatric disorders , and independent versus interdependent selves , to name a few ) nor intend to suggest that the processes producing their effects were necessarily the same . However , given the fact that all of these variables are related to similarity focus and processing styles , one may wonder whether there is a common underlying process triggering the effects . The next section contains a discus - sion of the candidates of affect and hemisphere activation . Affect Notably , processing styles , power , regulatory focus , and dis - tance have all been related to moods , raising the question of whether ( some kind of ) affect drove the effects . As mentioned before , prior research has shown that induced positive ( negative ) affect can trigger global ( local ) processing styles ( see Gasper , 2004 ; Gasper & Clore , 2002 ) . Moreover , Isen and her colleagues showed enhanced categorical breadth and similarity generation when participants were in a good mood ( see Isen & Daubman , 1984 ; Isen , Daubman , & Nowicki , 1987 ; Isen , Johnson , Mertz , & Robinson , 1985 ; for a summary , see Friedman & Fo¨rster , 2008 ; Isen , 2000 ) . High power , temporal distance , and a promotion focus have also been said to be related to certain kinds of moods . Most prominently , Keltner et al . ( 2003 ) linked positive mood to power . However , even though research has shown a link between power and positive affect , it is questionable whether affect drove the current effects on processing styles in the experiments reported 106 FO¨RSTER R E T R A C T E D T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . here . Mood differences were not detectable because of the power manipulations : This mirrors other null results from studies in other labs ( Smith & Bargh , 2008 ; Smith & Trope , 2006 ) . Consistent with those studies , the present results did not reveal any hint of the mediation of mood for the observed effects . The link between temporal distance and affect has been dis - cussed recently by Liberman et al . ( 2007 ) , who argued that certain emotions , such as pride , are more distanced from the self than others ( e . g . , joy ) and thus may be construed on different levels of abstractness . This example , including the two positive emotions of pride and joy illustrates that temporal distance does not necessarily vary with respect to negative or positive valence ( see Liberman & Trope , 1998 ) . Consistent with many studies in the domain of construal level theory , the current manipulations did not lead to differences in valence of imagination ; people’s mood states were not systematically affected , and , again , no mediation by mood was found . Furthermore , regulatory focus theory ( Higgins , 1997 ; Higgins et al . , 1997 ) makes specific predictions about emotional states ( Hig - gins , Grant , & Shah , 1999 ) . On the one hand , success in a promo - tion focus concerning ideals , hopes , and aspirations leads to cheerfulness - related emotions , whereas success in a prevention focus concerning oughts , responsibilities , and obligations leads to quiescence - related emotions . On the other hand , failure in a pro - motion focus leads to dejection - related emotions , whereas failure in a prevention focus leads to agitation - related emotions ( see Higgins et al . , 1997 ) . Regulatory focus theory thus does not predict differences in general affect ( e . g . , that people in a promotion focus generally feel better than those in a prevention focus ) . Research has also shown that specific emotions are elicited especially when feedback is given ( see Fo¨rster & Friedman , 2008 ; Higgins , 1997 ) . However , in the current experiments , no feedback was given and , consistently , no differences in mood were reported by participants . This is in line with former studies by Friedman and Fo¨rster ( 2001 , 2005 ) and Fo¨rster and Higgins ( 2005 ) , which showed no effects of regulatory focus manipulations on moods and no mediation of moods with respect to creative thinking or global versus local processing styles . In summary , with the same affective self - report scales that were used by researchers to find effects of emotions on processing styles , across nine experiments , I found no evidence for full - blown moods as the driving factor for the effects . Furthermore , the manipulations were carefully pretested with classic mood ques - tionnaires ( Experiments 1 , 2 , and 5 ) and ( self - reported ) moods and emotions were statistically controlled for in many of the experi - ments . It is fair to say that even though undoubtedly mood can have an effect on processing styles , in the current experiments , no evidence was found for underlying mood effects . However , one may consider an alternative mechanism for how affect could have influenced the obtained effects , by decoupling the arousal , or feeling , component in goal pursuit and attainment from the anticipation , or strategic part ( see Fo¨rster & Friedman , 2008 ; Friedman & Fo¨rster , 2008 ; Heller , Koven , & Miller , 2003 ; Heller & Nitschke , 1998 ; Heller , Nitschke , Etienne , & Miller , 1997 ; Nitschke , Heller , Palmieri , & Miller , 1999 ) . Higgins ( 1997 ; Higgins et al . , 1999 ) , for example , suggested that even though feelings can certainly accompany goal pursuit , the mere focus on , or anticipation of , desired or undesired outcomes can drive peo - ple’s behavior without concomitant involvement of affective ex - perience . Mere anticipation of positive end states can signal to the individual that the situation is benign and trigger a global percep - tion , whereas anticipation of undesired end states may signal an unsafe situation , which can lead to perception of concrete details ( Fo¨rster & Higgins , 2005 ) . More recently Friedman and Fo¨rster ( 2001 , 2005 ) developed a paradigm that procedurally and semantically primed a promotion versus a prevention focus in a subtle and unobtrusive way . Spe - cifically , in the promotion framing condition , participants were asked to complete an easily solvable paper - and - pencil maze in which they were instructed to lead a cartoon mouse in the center of the maze to a piece of cheese located outside the maze . Corre - spondingly , in the prevention condition , participants completed an analogous maze in which they were to lead the mouse out of the maze to escape an owl . These rudimentary tasks were meant to elicit a sheer focus on attaining a desired end state or avoiding an undesired end state , respectively . 1 These manipulations were efficient in influencing breadth of scope of perceptual attention . For example , in a study by Fo¨rster , Friedman , O¨zelsel , and Denzler ( 2006 ; Experiment 1 ) , following either cheese or owl maze completion , participants were asked to work on the Navon task mentioned above ( see Derryberry & Reed , 1998 ; Navon , 1977 ; Pomerantz , 1983 ) . In line with predictions , participants in the promotion - framing condition were indeed signifi - cantly faster in responding to global than to local targets ; in contrast , prevention - focused individuals were faster in responding to local than to global targets ( see also , for conceptual replications , ( Fo¨r - ster & Higgins , 2005 ; Friedman & Fo¨rster , 2000 , Experiment 1 ) . On the basis of the present results , it cannot be ruled out that the cognitive component involved in affect—namely anticipation— was partially driving the effects in a more subtle way . It is possible that high power , a distant event , and a promotion focus trigger anticipations of gains or success that , in themselves , do not lead to full - blown moods , but are able to signal benign versus unsafe environments , which further elicit appropriate processing styles ( see Friedman & Fo¨rster , 2001 ) . Future research might more thoroughly examine this possibility . In the following section , how - ever , I discuss one different intriguing possibility , namely , that the processes are related via brain hemispheres . Brain Hemispheres Most prominently , Tucker and colleagues ( Derryberry & Tucker , 1994 ; Tucker & Williamson , 1984 ) argued that the rela - tion between perceptual and conceptual scope is hardwired . Whereas the right hemisphere is associated with both global per - 1 Construct validity of these maze tasks as manipulations of regulatory focus was examined by Friedman and Fo¨rster ( 2001 ) , who showed that the mazes influence a “risky” decision - making bias ( see Crowe & Higgins , 1997 ) . Using a signal detection analysis , the authors showed that although the mazes did not involve personal approach or avoidance goals , comple - tion of the promotion , relative to the prevention , maze produced a yes - saying bias in recognition memory . Notably , there were no effects of the maze manipulation on self - reported emotional arousal , indicating that the effects were obtained without full - blown elicitation of moods . In sum , these findings suggest that despite the fact that they merely entail “virtual” self - regulation , completion of the cheese and owl mazes is sufficient to elicit distinct regulatory foci . 107 PROCESSING STYLES AND SIMILARITY FOCUS R E T R A C T E D T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . ception and broad conceptual scope , the left hemisphere is said to be associated with both local perception and narrow conceptual scope ( e . g . , Beeman , 1998 ; Burgess & Simpson , 1988 ; Fink et al . , 1996 ; Friedman & Fo¨rster , 2005 , 2008 ; Martinez et al . , 1997 ; Van Kleeck , 1989 ) . For example , there is extensive empirical evidence showing that trait anxiety is associated with greater left hemi - spheric activity ( Tucker , Antes , Stenslie , & Barnhardt , 1978 ; Tyler & Tucker , 1982 ; see also , e . g . , Baxter et al . , 1987 ; Buchsbaum et al . , 1985 ) and that this enhanced left hemispheric activation is associated with a narrowed focus of perceptual attention ( Derry - berry & Reed , 1998 ) . Using the maze tasks reported above , Friedman and Fo¨rster ( 2005 ) examined the relation between regulatory focus and brain hemispheres . More specifically , they used a behavioral task as - sessing relative brain hemisphere activation , namely , a variant of the Milner line bisection task ( Milner , Brechmann , & Pagliarini , 1992 ; see e . g . , Baumann , Kuhl , & Kaze´n , 2005 ; Morton , 2003 ; Shrira & Martin , 2005 ) . Friedman and Fo¨rster ( 2005 ) found greater right hemisphere activation after promotion - focus priming , whereas right hemispheric activation was reduced in comparison with the control group for participants with an induced prevention focus . Similarly , Smith and Trope ( 2006 ) induced power and subsequently assessed the Milner line bisection task , showing that right hemispheric activation was more pronounced for participants primed with high power compared with control and the low - power groups . Furthermore , Fo¨rster and Fujita ( 2008 ) found that partic - ipants who were asked to think about a trip to Greenland starting a year from then had higher right hemispheric activation than participants who thought about the same trip starting the next day . The authors also found evidence for the hypothesis that a similarity focus ( induced as in Experiments 5 – 6 ) triggers right hemispheric activation more than does a dissimilarity focus ( Fo¨rster & Fujita , 2008 ) . One may conclude that distal ( close ) events , high ( low ) power , a promotion ( prevention ) focus , global ( local ) processing and a similarity ( dissimilarity ) focus may share a common neural basis . Before jumping to conclusions , however , there is a clear need for future research to employ measures with far greater spatiotemporal resolution ( e . g . , functional magnetic resonance im - aging ) than was used in the line bisection task . Final Remarks The question of when people perceive similarities and when they perceive dissimilarities is of central importance in psychol - ogy . Returning to the introductory examples , it would be interest - ing to see whether a global processing style leads to liking others better or whether it increases helping behavior among strangers because they look more similar to oneself . It would also be interesting to determine whether global processing reduces dis - crimination against strangers . On the other hand , it is also possible for global processing to decrease differentiation , such as , for example , when two patients with slightly different symptoms are categorized within the same disease category . Because similarity between two events decreases memory formation , it is possible that global processing leads to decreased memory performances and increases confusion at the time of retrieval . In a similar vein , polling and survey research may be affected by diverse processing styles that bias reports in an unwanted way . For example , perception of two items in a ques - tionnaire as similar may artificially increase their correlation . I hope that the present data may trigger more research questions of this kind . In the current experiments , processing styles were induced mo - mentarily ; however , it may also be the case that personality dif - ferences evolve . Experiment 8a indicated that a chronic promotion focus may lead to a chronic focus on similarities . Other personality variables may lead to similar effects . Witkin , Dyk , Fattuson , Goodenough , and Karp ( 1962 ) introduced the personality traits of sharpeners ( e . g . , those who tend to chronically adopt a local processing style ) and levelers ( e . g . , those who tend to chronically adopt a global processing style ) . Similarly , Vallacher and Wegn - er’s ( 1989 ) Level of Personal Agency questionnaire assesses stable individual differences in action identification that vary on the level of abstraction and is said to be related to global versus local processing ( see Fo¨rster et al . 2004 ) . It would be interesting to investigate whether some people are chronically searching for similarities , whereas others most likely see dissimilarities in a stimulus set . Thus , the effects found in the current study may expand to personality differences as well . In any case , the present research offers plenty of food for thought . I hope that future research will expand on the theories regarding this exciting new link . References Anderson , M . C . , & Spellman , B . A . ( 1995 ) . On the status of inhibitory mechanisms in cognition : Memory retrieval as a model case . Psycho - logical Review , 102 , 68 – 100 . Antill , J . K . ( 1983 ) . Sex role complementarity versus similarity in married couples . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 45 , 145 – 155 . Barry , W . A . ( 1970 ) . Marriage research and conflict : An integrative re - view . Psychological Bulletin , 73 , 41 – 54 . Barsalou , L . W . ( 1999 ) . Perceptual symbol systems . Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 22 , 577 – 660 . Baumann , N . , Kuhl , J . , & Kaze´n , M . ( 2005 ) . Left - hemispheric activation and self - infiltration : Testing a neuropsychological model of internaliza - tion . Motivation and Emotion , 29 , 135 – 163 . Baxter , L . R . , Phelps , M . E . , Mazziotta , J . C . , Guze , B . H . , Schwartz , J . M . , & Selin , C . E . ( 1987 ) . Local cerebral glucose metabolic rates in obsessive – compulsive disorder : A comparison with rates in unipolar depression and in normal controls . Archives of General Psychiatry , 44 , 211 – 218 . Beeman , M . ( 1998 ) . Coarse semantic coding and discourse comprehension . In M . Beeman & C . Chiarello ( Eds . ) , Right hemisphere language com - prehension : Perspectives from cognitive neuroscience ( pp . 255 – 284 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Berscheid , E . , & Reis , H . T . ( 1998 ) . Attraction and close relationships . In D . T . Gilbert , S . T . Fiske , & G . Lindzey ( Eds . ) , The handbook of social psychology ( Vol . 2 , 4th ed . , pp . 193 – 281 ) . New York : McGraw - Hill . Brooks , L . R . , Norman , G . R . , & Allen , S . W . ( 1991 ) . Role of specific similarity in a medical diagnostic task . Journal of Experimental Psy - chology : General , 120 , 278 – 287 . Buchsbaum , M . S . , Hazlett , E . , Sicotte , N . , Stein , M . , Wu , J . , & Zetin , M . ( 1985 ) . Topographic EEG changes with benzodiazepine administration in generalized anxiety disorder . Biological Psychiatry , 20 , 832 – 842 . Burgess , C . , & Simpson , G . B . ( 1988 ) . Cerebral hemispheric mechanisms in the retrieval of ambiguous word meanings . Brain and Language , 33 , 86 – 103 . Carver , C . S . , Sutton , S . K . , & Scheier , M . F . ( 2000 ) . Action , emotion , and personality : Emerging conceptual integration . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 26 , 741 – 751 . 108 FO¨RSTER R E T R A C T E D T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . Crowe , E . , & Higgins , E . T . ( 1997 ) . Regulatory focus and strategic incli - nations : Promotion and prevention in decision - making . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 69 , 117 – 132 . Derryberry , D . , & Reed , M . A . ( 1998 ) . Anxiety and attentional focusing : Trait , state and hemispheric influences . Personality and Individual Dif - ferences , 25 , 745 – 761 . Derryberry , D . , & Tucker , D . M . ( 1994 ) . Motivating the focus of attention . In P . M . Niedenthal & S . Kitayama ( Eds . ) , Heart’s eye : Emotional influences in perception and attention ( pp . 167 – 196 ) . New York : Aca - demic Press . Dodson , C . S . , Johnson , M . K . , & Schooler , J . W . ( 1997 ) . The verbal overshadowing effect : Why descriptions impair face recognition . Mem - ory & Cognition , 25 , 129 – 139 . Ekstrom , R . B . , French , J . W . , Harman , H . H . , & Derman , D . ( 1976 ) . Kit of factor - referenced cognitive tests . Princeton , NJ : Educational Testing Service . Eysenck , H . J . , & Wakefield , J . A . ( 1981 ) . Psychological factors as predictors of marital satisfaction . Advances in Behavior Research and Therapy , 3 , 151 – 192 . Fazio , R . H . ( 1986 ) . How do attitudes guide behavior ? In R . M . Sorrentino & E . T . Higgins ( Eds . ) , Handbook of motivation and cognition : Foun - dations of social behavior ( pp . 204 – 243 ) . New York : Guilford Press . Fazio , R . H . ( 1990 ) . A practical guide to the use of response latencies in social psychological research . In C . Hendrick & M . S . Clark ( Eds . ) , Review of personality and social psychology ( Vol . 11 , pp . 74 – 97 ) . Newbury Park : Sage . Festinger , L . ( 1954 ) . A theory of social comparison processes . Human Relations , 7 , 117 – 140 . Fink , G . R . , Halligan , P . W . , Marshall , J . C . , Frith , C . D . , Frackowiak , R . S . , & Dolan , R . J . ( 1996 ) . Where in the brain does visual attention select the forest and the trees ? Nature , 382 , 626 – 628 . Finke , R . A . ( 1985 ) . Theories relating mental imagery to perception . Psychological Bulletin , 98 , 236 – 259 . Fiore , S . M . , & Schooler , J . W . ( 1998 ) . Right hemisphere contributions to creative problem solving : Converging evidence for divergent thinking . In M . Beeman & C . Chiarello ( Eds . ) , Right hemisphere language com - prehension : Perspectives from cognitive neuroscience ( pp . 349 – 372 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Fiske , S . T . ( 1993 ) . Controlling other people : The impact of power on stereotyping . American Psychologist , 48 , 621 – 628 . Fo¨rster , J . ( 2008 ) . Creativity tasks : Correlations , mediators , and processes . Unpublished manuscript , University of Amsterdam . Fo¨rster , J . , & Friedman , R . S . ( 2008 ) . Expression entails anticipation : Towards a self - regulatory model of bodily feedback effects . In G . Semin & E . Smith ( Eds . ) , Embodied grounding ( pp . 289 – 307 ) . Cambridge , United Kingdom : Cambridge University Press . Fo¨rster , J . , Friedman , R . S . , & Liberman , N . ( 2004 ) . Temporal construal effects on abstract and concrete thinking : Consequences for insight and creative cognition . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 87 , 177 – 189 . Fo¨rster , J . , Friedman , R . S . , O¨zelsel , A . , & Denzler , M . ( 2006 ) . Enactment of approach and avoidance behavior influences the scope of perceptual and conceptual attention . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 42 , 133 – 146 . Fo¨rster , J . , & Fujita , K . ( 2008 ) . Hemisphere activation and level of con - strual . Unpublished manuscript , Ohio State University . Fo¨rster , J . , & Higgins , E . T . ( 2005 ) . How global versus local perception fits regulatory focus . Psychological Science , 16 , 631 – 636 . Fo¨rster , J . , Higgins , E . T . , & Bianco , A . T . ( 2003 ) . Speed / accuracy in task performance : Built - in trade - off or separate strategic concerns ? Organi - zational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 90 , 148 – 164 . Fo¨rster , J . , Higgins , E . T . , & Idson , L . C . ( 1998 ) . Approach and avoidance strength during goal attainment : Regulatory focus and the “goal looms larger” effect . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 75 , 1115 – 1131 . Fo¨rster , J . , Liberman , N . , & Kuschel , S . ( 2008 ) . The effect of global versus local processing styles on assimilation versus contrast in social judg - ment . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 94 , 579 – 599 . Friedman , R . , Fishbach , A . , Fo¨rster , J . , & Werth , L . ( 2003 ) . Attentional priming effects on creativity . Creativity Research Journal , 15 , 277 – 286 . Friedman , R . S . , & Fo¨rster , J . ( 2000 ) . The effects of approach and avoid - ance motor actions on the elements of creative insight . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 79 , 477 – 492 . Friedman , R . , & Fo¨rster , J . ( 2001 ) . The effects of promotion and preven - tion cues on creativity . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 81 , 1001 – 1013 . Friedman , R . S . , & Fo¨rster , J . ( 2002 ) . The influence of approach and avoidance motor actions on creative cognition . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 38 , 41 – 55 . Friedman , R . S . , & Fo¨rster , J . ( 2005 ) . Effects of motivational cues on perceptual asymmetry : Implications for creativity and analytical prob - lem solving . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 88 , 263 – 275 . Friedman , R . S . , & Fo¨rster , J . ( 2008 ) . Activation and measurement of motivational states . In A . J . Elliott ( Ed . ) , Handbook of approach and avoidance motivation ( pp . 235 – 248 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Fujita , K . , Henderson , M . , Eng , J . , Trope , Y . , & Liberman , N . ( 2006 ) . Spatial distance and mental construal of social events . Psychological Science , 17 , 278 – 282 . Gaertner , S . L . , Dovidio , J . F . , Anastasio , P . A . , Bachman , B . A . , & Rust , M . C . ( 1993 ) . The common ingroup identity model : Recategorization and the reduction of intergroup bias . In W . Stroebe & M . Hewstone ( Eds . ) , European review of social psychology ( Vol . 4 , pp . 1 – 26 ) . Lon - don : Wiley . Galinsky , A . D . , Gruenfeld , D . H . , & Magee , J . C . ( 2003 ) . From power to action . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 85 , 453 – 466 . Gasper , K . ( 2004 ) . Do you see what I see ? Affect and visual information processing . Cognition and Emotion , 18 , 405 – 421 . Gasper , K . , & Clore , G . ( 2002 ) . Attending to the big picture : Mood and global versus local processing of visual information . Psychological Science , 13 , 34 – 40 . Gentner , D . ( 1983 ) . Structure - mapping : A theoretical framework for anal - ogy . Cognitive Science , 7 , 155 – 170 . Gentner , D . , & Gunn , V . ( 2001 ) . Structural alignment facilitates the no - ticing of differences . Memory & Cognition , 29 , 565 – 577 . Gentner , D . , & Markman , A . B . ( 1994 ) . Structural alignment in compari - son : No difference without similarity . Psychological Science , 5 , 152 – 158 . Gentner , D . , & Markman , A . B . ( 1997 ) . Structure mapping in analogy and similarity . American Psychologist , 52 , 45 – 56 . Gentner , D . , & Namy , L . L . ( 2004 ) . The role of comparison in children’s early word learning . In D . G . Hall & S . R . Waxman ( Eds . ) , Weaving a lexicon ( pp . 533 – 568 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Gilbert , D . T . ( 1991 ) . How mental systems believe . American Psycholo - gist , 46 , 107 – 119 . Glass , G . V . , Peckham , P . D . , & Sanders , J . R . ( 1972 ) . Consequences of failure to meet assumptions underlying the fixed effects analysis of variance and covariance . Review of Educational Research , 42 , 237 – 288 . Heller , W . , Koven , N . S . , & Miller , G . A . ( 2003 ) . Regional brain activity in anxiety and depression , cognition / emotion interaction , and emotion regulation . In K . Hugdahl & R . J . Davidson ( Eds . ) , The asymmetrical brain ( pp . 533 – 564 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Heller , W . , & Nitschke , J . B . ( 1998 ) . The puzzle of regional brain activity in depression and anxiety : The importance of subtypes and comorbidity . Cognition and Emotion , 12 , 421 – 447 . Heller , W . , Nitschke , J . B . , Etienne , M . A . , & Miller , G . A . ( 1997 ) . Patterns 109 PROCESSING STYLES AND SIMILARITY FOCUS R E T R A C T E D T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . of regional brain activity differentiate types of anxiety . Journal of Abnormal Psychology , 106 , 376 – 385 . Henderson , M . D . , Fujita , K . F . , Trope , Y . , & Liberman , N . ( 2006 ) . The effect of spatial distance on social judgment . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 91 , 845 – 856 . Herr , P . M . ( 1986 ) . Consequences of priming : Judgment and behavior . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 51 , 1106 – 1115 . Higgins , E . T . ( 1997 ) . Beyond pleasure and pain . American Psychologist , 52 , 1280 – 1300 . Higgins , E . T . ( 2000 ) . Beyond pleasure and pain . In E . T . Higgins & A . W . Kruglanski ( Eds . ) , Motivational science : Social and personality per - spectives ( pp . 231 – 255 ) . Philadelphia : Taylor & Francis . Higgins , E . T . , Grant , H . , & Shah , J . ( 1999 ) . Self - regulation and quality of life : Emotional and non - emotional life experiences . In D . Kahneman , E . Diener , & N . Schwarz ( Eds . ) , Well - being : The foundations of hedonic psychology ( pp . 244 – 266 ) . New York : Russell Sage Foundation . Higgins , E . T . , Roney , C . J . R . , Crowe , E . , & Hymes , C . ( 1994 ) . Ideal versus ought predilections for approach and avoidance distinct self - regulatory systems . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 66 , 276 – 286 . Higgins , E . T . , Shah , J . , Friedman , R . S . ( 1997 ) . Emotional responses to goal attainment : Strength of regulatory focus as moderator . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 72 , 515 – 525 . Idson , L . C . , & Mischel , W . ( 2001 ) . The personality of familiar and significant people : The lay perceiver as a social – cognitive theorist . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 80 , 585 – 596 . Isen , A . M . ( 2000 ) . Positive affect and decision making . In M . Lewis & J . Haviland - Jones ( Eds . ) , Handbook of emotions ( 2nd ed . , pp . 417 – 435 ) . New York : Guilford Press . Isen , A . M . , & Daubman , K . A . ( 1984 ) . The influence of affect on categori - zation . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 47 , 1206 – 1217 . Isen , A . M . , Daubman , K . A . , & Nowicki , G . P . ( 1987 ) . Positive affect facilitates creative problem solving . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 52 , 1122 – 1131 . Isen , A . M . , Johnson , M . M . S . , Mertz , E . , & Robinson , G . F . ( 1985 ) . The influence of positive affect on the unusualness of word associations . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 48 , 1413 – 1426 . Keltner , D . J . , Gruenfeld , D . H . , & Anderson , C . ( 2003 ) . Power , approach , and inhibition . Psychological Review , 110 , 265 – 284 . Kenny , D . A . Kashy , D . A . , & Bolger , N . ( 1998 ) . Data analysis in social psychology . In D . Gilbert , S . T . Fiske , & G . Lindsey ( Eds . ) , Handbook of social psychology ( 4th ed . , Vol . 1 , pp . 233 – 265 ) . New York : McGraw - Hill . Kimchi , R . ( 1992 ) . Primacy of wholistic processing and global / local par - adigm : A critical review . Psychological Bulletin , 112 , 24 – 38 . Kinchla , R . A . , & Wolfe , J . M . ( 1979 ) . The order of visual processing : Top down , bottom up or middle out . Perception & Psychophysics , 25 , 225 – 231 . King , D . L . , Jones , F . L . , Pearlman , R . C . , Fishman , A . , & Felix , C . A . ( 2002 ) . The length of the retention interval , forgetting , and subjective similarity . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 28 , 660 – 671 . Ku¨hnen , U . , & Oyserman , D . ( 2002 ) . Thinking about the self influences thinking in general : Cognitive consequences of salient self - concept . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 38 , 492 – 499 . Lamb , M . R . , & Robertson , L . C . ( 1990 ) . The effect of visual angle on global and local reaction times depends on the set of visual angles presented . Perception & Psychophysics , 47 , 489 – 496 . Levy , S . R . , Freitas , A . L . , & Salovey , P . ( 2002 ) . Construing action abstractly and blurring social distinctions : Implications for perceiving homogeneity among , but also empathizing with and helping , others . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 83 , 1224 – 1238 . Liberman , N . , & Fo¨rster , J . ( 2008 ) . Psychological distance and global versus local perception : Evidence for bidirectional links . Manuscript submitted for publication . Liberman , N . , Idson , L . C . , Camacho , C . J . , & Higgins , E . T . ( 1999 ) . Promotion and prevention choices between stability and change . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 77 , 1135 – 1145 . Liberman , N . , Sagristano , M . D . , & Trope , Y . ( 2002 ) . The effect of temporal distance on level of mental construal . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 38 , 523 – 534 . Liberman , N . , & Trope , Y . ( 1998 ) . The role of feasibility and desirability considerations in near and distant future decisions : A test of temporal construal theory . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 75 , 5 – 18 . Liberman , N . , Trope , Y . , & Stephan , E . ( 2007 ) . Psychological distance . In A . W . Kruglanski & E . T . Higgins ( Eds . ) , Social psychology : Handbook of basic principles ( pp . 353 – 381 ) . New York : Guilford Press . Linville , P . W . , & Jones , E . E . ( 1980 ) . Polarized appraisals of outgroup members . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 38 , 689 – 703 . Love , B . C . , Rouder , J . N . , & Wisniewski , E . J . ( 1999 ) . A structural account of global and local processing . Cognitive Psychology , 38 , 291 – 316 . Macrae , C . N . , & Lewis , H . L . ( 2002 ) . Do I know you ? Processing orientation and face recognition . Psychological Science , 13 , 194 – 196 . Markman , A . B . , & Gentner , D . ( 1993a ) . Splitting the differences : A structural alignment view of similarity . Journal of Memory and Lan - guage , 32 , 517 – 535 . Markman , A . B . , & Gentner , D . ( 1993b ) . Structural alignment during similarity comparisons . Cognitive Psychology , 25 , 431 – 467 . Markman , A . D . , & Gentner , D . ( 1996 ) . Commonalities and differences in similarity comparisons . Memory & Cognition , 24 , 235 – 249 . Markman , A . D . , & Gentner , D . ( 2005 ) . Nonintentional similarity process - ing . In R . R . Hassin , J . S . Uleman , & J . A . Bargh ( Eds . ) , The new unconscious ( pp . 107 – 137 ) . New York : Oxford University Press . Martindale , C . ( 1988 ) . Psychological approaches to the study of literary narratives . Hamberg , Germany : Helmut Buske Verlag . Martinez , A . , Moses , P . , Frank , L . , Buxton , R . , Wong , E . , & Stiles , J . ( 1997 ) . Hemispheric asymmetries in global and local processing : Evi - dence from fMRI . Neuroreport , 8 , 1685 – 1689 . Masson , M . E . ( 1995 ) . A distributed memory model of semantic priming . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cogni - tion , 21 , 3 – 23 . Medin , D . L . , Goldstone , R . L . , & Gentner , D . ( 1993 ) . Respects for similarity . Psychological Review , 100 , 254 – 278 . Mervis , C . B . , & Rosch , E . ( 1981 ) . Categorization of natural objects . Annual Review of Psychology , 32 , 89 – 115 . Mikulincer , M . , Kedem , P . , & Paz , D . ( 1990 ) . Anxiety and categorization : 1 . The structure and boundaries of mental categories . Personality and Individual Differences , 11 , 805 – 814 . Mikulincer , M . , Paz , D . , & Kedem , P . ( 1990 ) . Anxiety and categorization : 2 . Hierarchical levels of mental categories . Personality and Individual Differences , 11 , 815 – 821 . Milner , A . D . , Brechmann , M . , & Pagliarini , L . ( 1992 ) . To halve and to halve not : An analysis of line bisection in normal subjects . Neuropsy - chologia , 30 , 515 – 526 . Morton , B . E . ( 2003 ) . Two - hand line - bisection task outcomes correlate with several measures of hemisphericity . Brain and Cognition , 51 , 305 – 316 . Mussweiler , T . ( 2001 ) . Seek and ye shall find : Antecedents of assimilation and contrast in social comparison . European Journal of Social Psychol - ogy , 31 , 499 – 509 . Mussweiler , T . ( 2003 ) . Comparison processes in social judgment : Mech - anisms and consequences . Psychological Review , 110 , 472 – 489 . Mussweiler , T . , & Bodenhausen , G . ( 2002 ) . I know you are but what am I ? Self - evaluative consequences of judging in - group and out - group members . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 82 , 19 – 32 . 110 FO¨RSTER R E T R A C T E D T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . Navon , D . ( 1977 ) . Forest before trees : The precedence of global features in visual perception . Cognitive Psychology , 9 , 353 – 383 . Neill , W . T . , & Westberry , R . L . ( 1987 ) . Selective attention and the suppression of cognitive noise . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 13 , 327 – 334 . Neumann , E . , & DeSchepper , B . G . ( 1992 ) . An inhibition - based fan effect : Evidence for an active suppression mechanism in selective attention . Canadian Journal of Psychology , 46 , 1 – 40 . Nitschke , J . B . , Heller , W . , Palmieri , P . A . , & Miller , G . A . ( 1999 ) . Contrasting patterns of brain activity in anxious apprehension and anx - ious arousal . Psychophysiology , 36 , 628 – 637 . Pomerantz , J . R . ( 1983 ) . Global and local precedence : Selective attention in form and motion perception . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 112 , 515 – 540 . Posner , M . I . ( 1987 ) . Selective attention and cognitive control . Trends in Neuroscience , 10 , 13 – 17 . Rosch , E . ( 1975 ) . Cognitive representations of semantic categories . Jour - nal of Experimental Psychology : General , 104 , 192 – 233 . Schimmel , K . , & Fo¨rster , J . ( 2008 ) . How temporal distance changes novices’ attitudes towards unconventional arts . Psychology of Aesthet - ics , Creativity , and the Arts , 2 , 53 – 60 . Schooler , J . W . ( 2002 ) . Verbalization produces a transfer inappropriate processing shift . Applied Cognitive Psychology , 16 , 989 – 997 . Schooler , J . W . , Fiore , S . M . , & Brandimonte , M . A . ( 1997 ) . At a loss from words : Verbal overshadowing of perceptual memories . In D . Medin ( Ed . ) , The psychology of learning and motivation ( Vol . 37 , pp . 293 – 334 ) . San Diego , CA : Academic Press . Schooler , J . W . , & Melcher , J . ( 1995 ) . The ineffability of insight . In S . M . Smith , T . B . Ward , & R . A . Finke ( Eds . ) , The creative cognition approach ( pp . 97 – 133 ) . Cambridge , MA : The MIT Press . Schwarz , N . ( 1990 ) . Feelings as information : Informational and motiva - tional functions of affective states . In E . T . Higgins & R . M . Sorrentino ( Eds . ) , Handbook of motivation and cognition : Foundations of social behavior ( Vol . 2 , pp . 527 – 561 ) . New York : Guilford Press . Schwarz , N . , & Bless , H . ( 1991 ) . Happy and mindless , but sad and smart ? The impact of affective states on analytic reasoning . In J . Forgas ( Ed . ) , Emotion and social judgments ( pp . 55 – 71 ) . Oxford , United Kingdom : Pergamon Press . Schwarz , N . , & Bless , H . ( 1992 ) . Constructing reality and its alternatives : An inclusion / exclusion model of assimilation and contrast effects in social judgment . In L . L . Martin & A . Tesser ( Eds . ) , The construction of social judgments ( pp . 217 – 245 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Schwarz , N . , & Bless , H . ( 2007 ) . Mental construal processes : The inclu - sion / exclusion model . In D . A . Stapel & J . Suls ( Eds . ) , Assimilation and contrast in social psychology ( pp . 119 – 141 ) . Philadelphia : Psychology Press . Shah , J . , Higgins , E . T . , & Friedman , R . S . ( 1998 ) . Performance incentives and means : Regulatory focus influences goal attainment . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 74 , 285 – 293 . Shrira , I . , & Martin , L . L . ( 2005 ) . Stereotyping , self - affirmation , and the cerebral hemispheres . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 31 , 846 – 856 . Smith , P . K . , & Bargh , J . A . ( 2008 ) . Nonconscious effects of power on basic approach and avoidance tendencies . Social Cognition , 26 , 1 – 24 . Smith , P . K . , & Trope , Y . ( 2006 ) . You focus on the forest when you’re in charge of the trees : Power priming and abstract information processing . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 90 , 578 – 596 . Stapel , D . A . , & Koomen , W . ( 2000 ) . Distinctness of others and mallea - bility of selves : Their impact on social comparison effects . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 79 , 1068 – 1087 . Stapel , D . A . , & Koomen , W . ( 2001 ) . I , we , and the effects of others on me : How self - construal moderates social comparison effects . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 80 , 766 – 781 . Stapel , D . A . , & Suls , J . ( 2004 ) . Method matters : Effects of explicit versus implicit social comparisons on activation , behavior , and self - views . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 87 , 860 – 875 . Stevens , J . ( 1996 ) . Applied multivariate statistics for the social sciences . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Stu¨rmer , S . , Snyder , M . , & Omoto , A . M . ( 2005 ) . Prosocial emotions and helping : The moderating role of group membership . Journal of Person - ality and Social Psychology , 88 , 532 – 546 . Trope , Y . , & Liberman , N . ( 1996 ) . Social hypothesis testing : Cognitive and motivational mechanisms . In E . T . Higgins & A . W . Kruglanski ( Eds . ) , Social psychology : Handbook of basic principles ( pp . 239 – 270 ) . New York : Guilford Press . Trope , Y . , & Liberman , N . ( 2003 ) . Temporal construal . Psychological Review , 110 , 403 – 423 . Tucker , D . M . , Antes , J . R . , Stenslie , C . E . , & Barnhardt , T . M . ( 1978 ) . Anxiety and lateral cerebral function . Journal of Abnormal Psychology , 87 , 380 – 383 . Tucker , D . M . , & Williamson , P . A . ( 1984 ) . Asymmetric neural control systems in human self - regulation . Psychological Review , 91 , 185 – 215 . Tversky , A . ( 1977 ) . Features of similarity . Psychological Review , 84 , 327 – 352 . Tversky , A . , & Gati , I . ( 1982 ) . Similarity , separability , and the triangle inequality . Psychological Review , 89 , 123 – 154 . Tyler , S . K . , & Tucker , D . M . ( 1982 ) . Anxiety and perceptual structure : Individual differences in neuropsychological function . Journal of Ab - normal Psychology , 91 , 210 – 220 . Vallacher , R . R . , & Wegner , D . M . ( 1989 ) . Levels of personal agency : Individual variation in action identification . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 57 , 660 – 671 . Van Kleeck , M . H . ( 1989 ) . Hemispheric differences in global versus local processing of hierarchical visual stimuli by normal subjects : New data and a meta - analysis of previous studies . Neuropsychologia , 27 , 1165 – 1178 . Wakslak , C . , Trope , Y . , Liberman , N . , & Alony , R . ( 2006 ) . Seeing the forest when entry is unlikely : Probability and the mental representation of events . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 135 , 641 – 653 . Watson , D . , Clark , L . A . , & Tellegen , A . ( 1988 ) . Development and vali - dation of brief measures of positive and negative affect : The PANAS scales . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 54 , 1063 – 1070 . Whitfield , T . W . ( 1983 ) . Predicting preference for familiar , everyday objects : An experimental confrontation between two theories of aes - thetic behaviour . Journal of Environmental Psychology , 3 , 221 – 237 . Witkin , H . A . , Dyk , R . B . , Fattuson , H . F . , Goodenough , D . R . , & Karp , S . A . ( 1962 ) . Psychological differentiation . New York : Wiley . Yovel , I . , Revelle , W . , & Mineka , S . ( 2005 ) . Who sees trees before forest ? The obsessive - compulsive style of visual attention . Psychological Sci - ence , 16 , 123 – 129 . Received March 4 , 2008 Revision received August 13 , 2008 Accepted October 7 , 2008 (cid:1) 111 PROCESSING STYLES AND SIMILARITY FOCUS R E T R A C T E D T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . Retraction of Förster ( 2009 ) The following article from the February 2009 issue is being retracted : Förster , J . ( 2009 ) . Relations between perceptual and conceptual scope : How global versus local processing fits a focus on similarity versus dissimilarity . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 138 ( 1 ) , 88 – 111 . doi : 10 . 1037 / a0014484 The retraction is at the request of the author and the University of Amsterdam . This retraction follows the results of an investigation by the University of Amsterdam into the work of Jens Förster . The University requested the retraction of this article based on its qualitative judgement of “strong statistical evidence for low veracity” . The author joined in the request for the retraction . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a0040143