University of Pennsylvania ScholarlyCommons Marketing Papers Wharton School 4 - 1 - 1984 Review of Daniel Kahnemann , Paul Slovic , and Amos Tversky ( eds . ) , Judgment Under Uncertainty : Heuristics and Biases J . Scott Armstrong University of Pennsylvania , armstrong @ wharton . upenn . edu Follow this and additional works at : http : / / repository . upenn . edu / marketing _ papers Part of the Marketing Commons Postprint version . Published in Journal of Forecasting , Volume 3 , Issue 2 , April 1984 , pages 235 - 239 . Publisher URL : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / for . 3980030211 This paper is posted at ScholarlyCommons . http : / / repository . upenn . edu / marketing _ papers / 76 For more information , please contact libraryrepository @ pobox . upenn . edu . Recommended Citation Armstrong , J . S . ( 1984 ) . Review of Daniel Kahnemann , Paul Slovic , and Amos Tversky ( eds . ) , Judgment Under Uncertainty : Heuristics and Biases . Retrieved from http : / / repository . upenn . edu / marketing _ papers / 76 Review of Daniel Kahnemann , Paul Slovic , and Amos Tversky ( eds . ) , Judgment Under Uncertainty : Heuristics and Biases Abstract This book provides a convenient collection of important papers relevant to a subset of judgmental forecasting . My review discusses : ( i ) the scope of the readings ( ii ) the importance of the readings ( iii ) what is new ( iv ) how the book is organized ( v ) advice on using the book , and ( vi ) who should read the book . Disciplines Marketing Comments Postprint version . Published in Journal of Forecasting , Volume 3 , Issue 2 , April 1984 , pages 235 - 239 . Publisher URL : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / for . 3980030211 This review is available at ScholarlyCommons : http : / / repository . upenn . edu / marketing _ papers / 76 1 REVIEWS OF BOOKS ON FORECASTING Principles of Forecasting Web Site Daniel Kahneman , Paul Slovic , and Amos Tversky ( eds . ) , Judgment Under Uncertainty : Heuristics and Biases , New York and Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 1982 . Reviewed by : J . Scott Armstrong , The Wharton School , University of Pennsylvania ; published in the Journal of Forecasting , 3 , 1984 , 236 - 239 . This book provides a convenient collection of important papers relevant to a subset of judgmental forecasting . My review discusses : ( i ) the scope of the readings ( ii ) the importance of the readings ( iii ) what is new ( iv ) how the book is organized ( v ) advice on using the book , and ( vi ) who should read the book . It ends with a note on the use of judgmental research . The Scope of the Readings Assume the following problem : you must select a set of k items from a population of N , where the boundaries of N are ill - defined and no census of the population is available . How should you proceed ? According to the research in Judgment Under Uncertainty ( JUU ) , decision - makers are prone to numerous errors in such tasks . More specifically , the problem Kahneman , Slovic , and Tversky ( KST ) faced was to select , from a large number of existing papers , those that would be most useful to their potential audience . As nearly as I can tell , they made their selections by unaided intuition . As a result , the book suffers from the very problems that the book discusses ( e . g . , anchoring , availability and representativeness ) . The preface of KST was vague about the criteria for selection . They did state , however , that ( p . xii ) : In recent years , a large body of research has been devoted to uncovering judgmental heuristics and explaining their effects . The present volume provides a comprehensive sample of this approach . My understanding of the term “judgmental heuristic” proved to be broader than theirs . An unstated criterion used by KST was to include papers that were based on a series of experiments ( Paul Slovic , personal communication ) . Beyond this , KST provided few clues as to the criteria . Also , KST provided little information on their decision making process . I must add 2 that the result is a collection of 35 papers that differed substantially from my expectations . It presents , primarily the pioneering work of Kahneman and Tversky along with some closely related research . Of the 35 papers , over 1 / 3 were written by the team of Kahneman and Tversky . This seems overly representative of their work . Contrast this with the fact that papers by these authors represent less than 2 per cent of the total references cited in JUU . Contrast it also with Hogarth ( 1980 ) , where Kahneman and Tversky make up about 6 percent of the references . My intuitive selections of research representative of heuristics and biases for judgments under uncertainty would have been somewhat different . I would probably have included researchers such as L . R . Goldberg , P . B . Meeh l , C . R . Mynatt , W . A . Wagenaar , B . C . Webster , and others . Furthermore , sometimes my selection of the best work published by an author differed from the on reprinted by KST ( e . g . , I refer Chapman and Chapman ( 1969 ) to the Psychology Today version used by KST ) . Although my selections would have differed , I believe the KST selections to be both valuable and exciting . These papers represent perhaps the most influential line of research in an important and rapidly expanding field . The growth rate of the field ( as measured by the literature cited in JUU ) over the last 30 years is in excess of 14 percent per year . This is substantially in excess of the growth rate for publications on forecasting which I estimated , on the basis of my literature review ( Armstrong , 1978 ) , to be about 8 percent per year over this time period . This , in turn , exceeds the growth rate for papers in the social sciences of about 6 per cent per year , based on data from the social science citation index from 1969 - 1979 . Importance The selections in KST have had an immense impact on research in the judgmental area . The importance of these papers can . be seen from an examination of the citation rates for the papers . I examined citations for 16 of the papers , including all journal articles , plus the oft - cited unpublished paper by Alpert and Raiffa . The source , the Social Science Citation Index ( Institute for Scientific information , 1970 - 1982 ) , includes many , but not all of the references made in journal articles and in selected edited books . The average citation rate for these 10 papers was about 13 per year . The seven most frequently cited papers were ; Citations per year Tversky and Kahnernan ( 1974 ) 56 Kahnernan and Tversky ( 1973 ) 31 Tversky and Kahneman ( 1973 ) 24 Langer ( 1975 ) 8 Dawes ( 1979 ) 17 Kahneman and Tversky ( 1972 ) l6 Tversky and Kahneman ( 1971 ) 15 These strike me as impressive figures . Many papers are never cited in their life . Of those papers that are cited in a given year , the average number or citations for that year is 1 . 4 ( Social Science Citation Index ) . 3 The preface to KST implied that the collection would examine methods to correct biases in judgment . To see if this was accomplished , I attempted to list the corrective steps from each paper . That is , what could one do to avoid a specified type of bias ? My failure rate was high . Often , the authors did not provide enough advice for me to use their findings . However . many of the papers did imply action steps . For example : a ) “Judgment of and by representativeness , ” by Tversky and Kahnernan ( new contribution ) . suggests that scenarios provide a poor way to predict the likelihood of events . b ) “Popular induction , ” by Nisbett et al . ( 1976 ) , suggests that the use of vivid examples may unduly influence perceived probability . c ) Fischoff ' s chapter on “Debiasing” implies a number of action steps . Rather than corrective action , the emphasis was on clever experiments that show what is wrong with unaided judgments . My failure to find specific steps occurred even in the section of the book labeled “Corrective procedures . ” This lack of practical solutions may be distressing to practicing forecasters , especially those who believe the findings of some research indicating that awareness of shortcomings often fails to prevent the problem . I expect that this research will lead to further research on how to avoid the problems . In fact , such research is appearing in journals currently ( e . g . see Gregory , Cialdini and Carpenter , 1984 ) . Newness Eight of the 35 papers in KST were new , six were revised for this book , and ten abridged . What is the value of the new contributions ? I rated each paper in the collection on overall importance ( my subjective rating ) . The rating was either “good” or “fair . ” I then counted the percentage of “good” papers for new vs . previously published papers . Only 25 percent of the eight new papers were rated “good” whereas 74 per cent of the previously published papers were rated “good . ” ( My ratings had construct validity , as they were later found to be correlated with citations . For the older papers , each of the 12 most frequently - cited papers had been rated “good , ” whereas only one of the four least - cited papers bad been rated “good . ” ) Some of the new papers gave the appearance of having been written hastily . The new papers I rated as “good” were Tversky and Kahneman ' s “Judgments of and by representativeness , ” and Fischhoff’s “Debiasing . ” It was not easy to evaluate the revisions that had been made in the papers because the nature and extent of the revisions were not described . A note from the editors , or a different typeface , would have been helpful for those readers who had read the earlier versions . The editors did show where papers were abridged , although no summary was provided on what wasmissing . The abridgement often occurred in the “conclusions” section of the papers . and 4 perhaps this is why I often felt that the papers were weak on advice . To make things worse , all abstracts had been removed . Organization The book is organized for researchers who are divergent thinkers . I expect this organization will make little sense to a practicing forecaster . Rather than being organized to show how to select or train suitable experts , pose questions , and obtain forecasts , the major sections of the book are labeled : ( i ) Representativeness ( the probability of an event is assessed by the extent that it is similar to its parent population even in cases where this provides no relevant information ) . ( ii ) Causality and attribution ( e . g . frequently , people are not influenced by knowledge or how others behave in a given situation which they predict their own responses to the situation ) . ( iii ) Availability ( the probability of events that are easier to remember is overestimated ) . ( iv ) Covariation and control ( e . g . people ' s predictions are influenced by their actions even when they clearly have no control over the event ) . ( v ) Overconfidence ( experts are typically overconfident , especially when feedback is poor ) . ( vi ) Multistage evaluation ( e . g . , people tend to add probabilities , rather than multiply , in situations involving compound probabilities ) . ( vii ) Corrective procedures ( e . g . , asking people to think of reasons why a prediction may be wrong helps them to assess the likelihood of an event . ( viii ) Risk perception ( e . g . , the way in which information is presented has a strong influence on the perception of risk ) . A short introduction to each section would have been useful . A glossary at the end of the book would have helped . Fortunately , the index does indicate where some of the terms are defined . The references are assembled in a single list at the end of the book and are cross - referenced to the chapters in which they are cited ; this is a convenient arrangement . A brief index is provided that I found to be useful . Advice on Using this Book The organization of the book leaves the reader with flexibility as to how to use it . In view of its historical importance , I suggest you start with Part I ( which consists of Tversky and Kahneman , 5 1974 ) . After that the parts can be read in any order . Within parts , I suggest that the papers be read in chronological order . ( I was unable to infer the reason for the existing order . ) Because the abstracts have been removed , I suggest that you first read the last section of each paper to ensure that it is relevant to your needs . Do not rush through this book . While the writing is good and , at times , exciting , you will find much that is thought - provoking and requires contemplation . Furthermore , it requires much effort to integrate the various materials , as the editors provided little assistance in this area . Who Should Read This Book Teachers of judgmental forecasting and decision - making will find this to be a useful reader . I cannot think of a reasonable competitor . I would recommend , however , that you provide guidance on the best way for your students to use the book . Practicing forecasters will find that the cleverness of the papers often pales against the lack of practical advice . Borrow the book and read selectively . Researchers who are interested in judgmental forecasting but are unfamiliar with the area will find much of interest . Buy the book . At $ 15 U . S . , the paperback version provides a good way to start your collection , especially as some of the papers are difficult to obtain otherwise . Researchers who try to stay current with this area may find , as I did , that they had overlooked a number of excellent papers . Ask your library to purchase the hardcover version and duplicate those previously published papers that you might have overlooked . On the Use of Judgmental Research I believe that the research in JUU is of great practical importance . It has implications even for such tasks as deciding what papers would be representative of the best work in an area . By using their own research , the editors could have produced an even more useful volume . References Armstrong , J . Scott , Long - Range Forecasting : From Crystal Ball to Computer , New York : Wiley , 1978 . Chapman , Loren J . and Chapman , S . P . , “Illusory correlations as an obstacle to the use of valid psychodiagnostic signs , ” Journal of Abnormal Psychology , 74 ( 1969 ) , 271 - 280 . Dawes , Robyn , " The robust beauty of improper linear models in decision making , ” American Psychologist , 34 ( 1979 ) , 571 - 582 . Gregory , W . Larry , Cialdini , R . B . and Carpenter , K . M . , ”Self - relevant scenarios as mediators of likelihood estimates and compliance : Does imagining make it so ? ” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 43 ( 1982 ) , 89 - 99 . 6 Hogarth , Robin , Judgment and Choice ; The Psychology of Decisions , New York ; Wiley , 1980 . Institute for Scientific Information , Social Sciences Citation Index , l970 - 1982 . Kahneman , Daniel and Tversky , Amos , “Subjective probability : A judgment of representativeness , ” Cognitive Psychology , 3 ( 1972 ) , 430 - 454 . Kahneman , Daniel and Tversky , Amos , “On the psychology of prediction , ” Psychological Review , 80 ( 1973 ) , 237 - 251 . Langer . Ellen S . , “The illusion of control , ” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 32 ( 1975 ) , 311 - 328 . Nisbett , Richard B . , Borgida , F . , Crandall , R . and Reed , H . , “Popular induction : Information is not necessarily informative , ” in Carroll , J . S . and Payne , S . W . ( eds . ) , Cognition and Social . Behavior , Hillsdale , N . S . : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . , 1976 . Tversky , Amos and Kahneman , Daniel , “Belief in the law of small numbers , ” Psychological Bulletin , 2 ( 1971 ) , 105 - 110 . Tversky , Amos and Kahneman , Daniel , “Availability : A heuristic for judging relevency and Probability , ” Cognitive Psychology , 4 ( 1973 ) , 207 - 232 . Tversky , Amos and Kahneman , Daniel , “Judgment under uncertainty : Heuristics and biases , ” Science , 185 ( 1974 ) , 1124 - 1131 .