The role of problem - based learning in developing creative expertise Shelagh A . Gallagher 1 Published online : 28 April 2015 (cid:2) Education Research Institute , Seoul National University , Seoul , Korea 2015 Abstract Contemporary real - world problems require creative solutions , necessitating the preparation of a new generation of creative experts capable of ﬁnding original solutions to ill - structured problems . Although much school - based training in creativity focuses on discrete skills , real - world creativity results from a multidimensional interaction between and among personal attributes , speciﬁc processes , internal or external Press for invention , and a valued Product . All of these are often set into action by an individual’s Passion to create something new . Creative experts also tend to see creativity and problem - solving as deeply intertwined , especially when solving ill - structured problems . Students must experience all of these elements , including the emotional catalyst , if they are to understand the full creative process . Problem - based learning ( PBL ) can be used to immerse students in authentic scenarios that necessitate creative thought . An alignment is drawn be - tween creativity theory and the inquiry - based structure of PBL . Evidence is provided documenting the efﬁcacy of using PBL to promote various dimensions of creative thought from discrete strategies to more general charac - teristics of ‘‘ﬂow’’ . Evidence is also presented that PBL can be a tool in a reconceptualization of giftedness or talent by allowing teachers to see a more complete set of skills and abilities among their students . Keywords Gifted (cid:2) Talent (cid:2) Problem - based learning (cid:2) Creativity (cid:2) Flow (cid:2) Problem solving Introduction The American Bullfrog was originally brought to Asia because its meaty legs were very desirable to restaurateurs . What does this have to do with creativity ? Everything . The importation of the American Bullfrog to Asia is a classic example of unintended consequences : Today , the Amer - ican Bullfrog is an invasive species that is decimating ecosystems in Asia and many other regions around the world . The twenty - ﬁrst century has ushered in an era of com - plex problems associated with climate change ; techno - logical development ; and the rapid transport of goods , people , and ideas . A seemingly simple act such as im - porting frogs can become a complex problem requiring both local and global solutions . The problems are often unique , their particulars unclear , and their solutions un - charted . This has led for a call from leaders of science and industry for a new generation of innovators capable of ﬁnding creative solutions to ill - structured problems . Beyond brainstorming : creativity as a multidimensional goal Efforts at improving creativity among schoolchildren have focused primarily on speciﬁc cognitive skills such as di - vergent thinking , or heuristics such as the Creative Prob - lem - Solving model ( Osborn 1993 ) . Students’ use of discrete skills improves under such targeted training ( Ma 2006 ; Scott et al . 2004 ) ; however , this approach has limited value when trying to predict later creative achievement , and it falls short of the larger goal of preparing students to independently engage with a complex problem in the manner of a creative expert ( Rose and Lin 1984 ) . & Shelagh A . Gallagher sgallagher5 @ carolina . rr . com 1 Engaged Education , Charlotte , NC , USA 123 Asia Paciﬁc Educ . Rev . ( 2015 ) 16 : 225 – 235 DOI 10 . 1007 / s12564 - 015 - 9367 - 8 A primary reason that strategy - based approaches appear insufﬁcient is that creativity is the result of more than skilled application of strategies . Over 50 years ago , Rhodes ( 1961 ) presented four ‘‘Ps’’ that combine to describe the multifaceted nature of creativity . Each of the four Ps rep - resents a set of conditions , characteristics , behaviors , or skills associated with creativity : • Person : psychological traits and characteristics includ - ing openness to experience , persistence , risk - taking , and tolerance of ambiguity ; • Process : generic ( brainstorming , divergent thinking ) and domain - speciﬁc ( scientiﬁc method , artistic compo - sition ) tools of creative thinking ; • Press : environmental conditions that stimulate and support creativity , including discernible need , opportu - nity ( time , resources ) , and challenge ; and • Product : mental or tangible output that is judged both new and valuable by a segment of society . According to the Rhodes model , creativity occurs when an individual with particular attributes ( Person ) in gener - ally favorable circumstances ( Press ) uses set of skills ( Process ) to create something new ( Product ) . Each com - ponent is necessary at some point , often in combination ; an exclusive focus on one is not sufﬁcient to train students for creative achievement . Of particular interest to those concerned with talent development for gifted students is the source of what Csikszentmihalyi ( 2013 ) calls ‘‘capital C’’ creativity , or creative Products that have a signiﬁcant impact on society . Ideas , innovations , and inventions that cause shifts in the cultural fabric result from a synergy of Person , Process , and Press ( Runco et al . 2011 ; Simonton 1997 ; Subotnik and Arnold 1999 ) , but they are also affected by other Ps . While many people are capable of ‘‘small c’’ personal creativity , signiﬁcant creative output is more likely from individuals who have Potential or above average intelligence ( Jauk et al . 2013 ) , who are Prepared with a deep knowledge base , who have a Preference for inquiry - oriented thinking styles , who are skilled in Persuasion ( Simonton 1990 ) , and who have a sense of Purpose or motivation ( Sternberg and Lubart 1966 ) . The expanded list of skills and attributes provides a more comprehensive view of the complex interactions between individual and environment that results in a cre - ative achievement ; yet , none explain the expert’s un - prompted choice to engage in a process that is as likely to be frustrating as exhilarating . Another P is needed for the list , the one that serves as the catalyst of creative endeav - ors : Passion . The role of Passion in creativity has not been researched extensively , but there is some indication that it is a distinct factor independent of motivation , and that it makes direct and indirect contributions to artistic and academic expertise ( Vallerand et al . 2007 ; Vallerand and Houlfort 2003 ) . This research echoes experts’ reﬂections on creativity , which are replete with references to deep emotional engagement . Consider , for example , Nobel Laureate Horace Judson’s exclamation that : ‘‘Curiosity is not enough . … Passion is indispensable for creation , no less in the sciences than in the arts . … This is the rage to know . ’’ ( 1987 , p . 5 , emphasis added ) , or cellist Yo Yo Ma’s insistence that , ‘‘Passion is one great force that unleashes creativity , because if you’re passionate about something , then you’re more willing to take risks . ’’ ( in Ball 2012 ) . Passion is the catalyst , leading to and justifying the hard work that is to follow . In the words of musician Wynton Marsalis ( 2005 , p . 63 ) , ‘‘Love is the … essence of what we do . Technique is the manifestation of the preparation and investment as a result of the love . ’’ A deﬁning feature of an expert’s passion is that it tends to be directed toward ill - structured problems . This is where problem - solving , creativity , and expertise merge ; they share common ground in an expert’s desire to resolve an incongruity or create something new . Torrance’s deﬁnition of creativity reﬂects the parallel it shares with ill - structured problem - solving : [ creativity is ] … The process of sensing difﬁculties , problems , gaps in information , missing elements , something askew ; making guesses and formulating hypotheses about these deﬁciencies ; evaluating and testing these guesses and hypotheses ; possibly revis - ing and retesting them ; and ﬁnally communicating the results . ( Torrance 1988 , p . 47 ) Similarly , descriptions of expertise reﬂect both creativity and problem - solving : … when an expert learns , she must either create a new perspective in a situation when a learned perspective has failed , or improve the action guided by a par - ticular intuitive perspective … . A master will … al - so … be open to a new intuitive perspective and accompanying action … ( Dreyfus and Dreyfus 2008 , p . 121 ) Whether contending that , ‘‘ﬁrst and obviously , [ creativity ] is initially ill - structured’’ ( Stokes 2005 , p . 5 ) or that ‘‘successful ill - structured problem solving is creative by deﬁnition’’ ( Goldschmidt 1999 , p . 533 ) experts recognize that creativity and problem - solving share substantial over - lap when the problem is ill - structured . This desire to pursue an unanswered question leads an expert into the challenging work of creation , requiring immersion in meaningful content , skill in using the tools of the trade , and personal attributes that will help sustain ef - fort and withstand setbacks . Training in creative ill - struc - tured problem - solving requires an educational setting that 226 S . A . Gallagher 123 elicits all of the Ps , individually and collectively , as they are used in the real world . Increasingly , educational ana - lysts and forecasters are calling for educational reform that creates environments that will provide students with prac - tice in negotiating this ambiguous terrain ( Rutherford and Ahlgren 1990 ; Banaji et al . 2010 ) . However , to be fully successful in increasing the pool of creative adults who are both capable and willing to engage with ambiguity , the training has to be accomplished in a way that also reveals to students the intrigue that motivates experts . PBL as a platform for creativity training Problem - based learning ( PBL ) was designed to teach stu - dents how to contend with ill - structured problems . The model originated in medical school to create a better par - allel between medical school and medical practice ( Bar - rows and Tamblyn 1980 ) . Whether used in graduate school or kindergarten , PBL provides students with apprenticeship in solving ill - structured problems in a holistic transforma - tion that open the doors to authentic creative problem - solving . PBL founder Barrows outlined the deﬁning qua - lities that characterize PBL at any grade level . In PBL : 1 . Learning is initiated and framed in the context of an ill - structured problem , 2 . Ill - structured problems are interdisciplinary , 3 . Learning is collaborative , 4 . Information learned during independent research is related back to the problem , 5 . Student’s self - and peer - assessments are integral to class activity , 6 . Teachers’ assessments of students are consistent with the goals of PBL , and 7 . Students become increasingly self - directed over the course of PBL experiences ( Barrows and Tamblyn 1980 ; Savery 2006 ) . Each of these requirements makes a contribution to the model ; however , the centerpiece of PBL is the use of an ill - structured problem to initiate and scaffold a learning sequence . Ill - structured problems and problem - based learning Well - structured and ill - structured problems A long history of educational literature is devoted to the discussion of well - and ill - structured problems ( Carter 1988 ; Reitman 1965 ; Runco 1994 ; Simon 1973 ; Sternberg 1985 ) . The two forms of problems are so different they require different consideration at all levels of cognition , from metacognition to information acquisition ( King and Kitchener 1984 ; Shin et al . 2003 ) . A well - structured problem is a ‘‘ … mental exercise concocted so that one model or way of thinking is the appropriate pathway to a solution . ’’ ( Churchman , in King and Kitchener 2002 , p . 10 ) . This form of problem provides students with valu - able practice in speciﬁc routines or heuristics , and is sometimes associated with an information - processing ap - proach to problem - solving ( Jonassen 1997 , 2000 ) . How - ever , well - structured problems contain little room for ﬂexible thinking ; in fact , creative thinking would lead a student off track . Moreover , there is little compelling about a well - structured problem . As Carter points out they , ‘‘ … offer no impetus for problem - solving : problems are simply presented to solvers who have no motivation to ﬁnd a solution beyond the pleasure of performing the task or the need to demonstrate that they can perform the task . ’’ ( 1988 , p . 556 ) . Ill - structured problems best suited to the classroom are grounded in real - world situations ; many real - world prob - lems can be transformed into instructional problems ap - propriate for use with students of different ages and intellectual readiness . Table 1 contains two examples of ill - structured problems related to the invasion of the American Bullfrog into Asian habitats ; one is designed for younger or less experienced students , the other for sec - ondary or advanced students . In each case , the lack of structure immediately necessitates tolerance of ambiguity and stimulates questions . In the ﬁrst example , young stu - dents would ask , ‘‘Why are the people picketing ? ’’ ‘‘Why should the frogs be freed ? ’’ ‘‘What should we do ? ’’ In the second example , questions would include , ‘‘Why do the frogs need to be euthanized ? ’’ ‘‘Why use the term ‘esca - pee’ ? ’’ ‘‘What exactly is the proposed rule ? ’’ Neither problem has a handy formula that can be applied to ﬁnd a solution ; in fact , students will have to become immersed in information about how a species can become invasive and the challenges this brings to a native habitat before they can think about a solution to the problem . A substantial research base supports the use of ill - structured problems as a stimulus for instruction . An ill - structured problem immerses students in a story , and sto - ries are more memorable than other forms of narrative ( Graesser et al . 2002 ) even capturing the attention of children who are typically distractible ( Willingham 2004 ) . Cognitive psychologists also note that anchoring instruc - tion in a meaningful context makes learning more engaging ( Barron et al . 1998 ; Bransford et al . 1990 ; Brophy et al . 2008 ; Buxton 2010 ; Klassen 2007 ) . The real - world settings of most ill - structured problem lend immediate relevance to the content and skills students are required to learn , leading to higher levels of achievement than in traditional in - struction ( Hickey et al . 2001 ) . Stories also activate prior knowledge as the mind attempts to interpret the story in the The role of problem - based learning in developing creative expertise 227 123 context of already familiar territory ( Graesser et al . 2002 ) . Together , story details and missing information create a context for children to build inferences ( Graesser et al . 1994 ) , and inferences are the building blocks of both higher - order and creative thinking . Stakeholder roles and cognitive apprenticeship Unlike simulations where many roles are assigned , in PBL all students view the problem from a single stakeholder role . The stakeholder is someone with responsibility for taking care of some aspect of the problem , a central character in the story . The assignment of a single stake - holder is consistent with the goal of creating a ‘‘cognitive apprenticeship , ’’ requiring students to solve the problem using a particular point of reference . As Gallagher notes , ‘‘The single role … increases the opportunity for children to reﬂect together about the way a job or role someone holds can affect problem solving , affecting the scope of the problem , tools used to solve the problem , even attitudes towards different elements of the problem’’ ( 2012a , p . 19 ) . A related advantage of using the story - like ill - structured problem with a speciﬁed stakeholder is that it places stu - dents in the midst of the domain of practice . Expertise is situational , that is , the creative expert operates in the context of a particular domain ( Manley and Garbett 2000 ) . The stakeholder role situated students’ within a subject or ﬁeld of study and requires them to learn content within that ﬁeld while at the same time encouraging them to see the beneﬁts of thinking beyond traditional limits in search of new insight . From entertainment to engineering , professional cre - ativity is increasingly the result of teams of people who have a single job , but who bring different bodies of knowledge to the table ( Catmull and Wallace 2014 ; Tho - mas 1995 ) . This is emulated in PBL when students sharing the same stakeholder role research different questions in order to make efﬁcient progress . The result is several ‘‘pockets of expertise’’ held by different individuals and groups . As each group shares its information , a common knowledge pool is gathered and analyzed , and together the class learns to think using an expert’s frame of reference . Sequence of instruction in problem - based learning In the traditional classroom , learning begins with the pre - sentation of information , typically presented in a reading or lecture . In PBL , the ﬁrst act of learning is speculation as students begin to grapple with problem . Students’ minds engage as they recognize gaps in the story , and they begin to ask questions . The initial learning environment during problem engagement is opening and accepting as students offer a variety of possible explanations for the situation and gather questions they would like to have answered . When the students realize that this list of questions— their ques - tions—will form the learning agenda for the unit , their motivation increases . Students begin to search for answers to their questions during inquiry and investigation . New information forces them to reassess the problem , leading to new questions and sometimes to additional research . Once they understand the situation better , students create a precise problem deﬁnition that identiﬁes both issues and constraints that create a context for ﬁnding a resolution . During problem resolution , students gather solution options , compare alternatives , and identify a solution , or a solution set , that addresses the critical elements of the problem deﬁnition . After they present their solution , the teacher and students debrief the problem to review the content and processes they learned and to reﬂect on how to improve performance in their next PBL experience . Throughout , students are encouraged to ask questions , search for information , revise their thinking , consider alternate ideas , reﬁne their understanding , test solutions , and justify their reasoning . At each stage , there is an opportunity to generate options and then select from among choices . In addition to considering what questions to answer , students could consider what kind of resources they will use , what thinking strategies they should apply , and how to conﬁgure their working groups . Choices made about any of these could change the course of the students’ research and the nature of the answers they ﬁnd . Table 1 Elementary - and secondary - level ill - structured problems Example A : Ill - structured problem for elementary students . You own a popular restaurant . In response to popular demand you are going to offer a frog’s legs , a local delicacy . You are seated at a table with all the information you need to calculate the price for the dish when you hear angry voices outside . People are carrying signs are marching in front of your door . The signs read , ‘‘Fairness for Frogs ! ’’ and ‘‘Free the Frogs ! ’’ You pick up a leaﬂet that has dropped to the ground and learn that the protesters are calling for a boycott of your business unless you agree to give up the idea of selling frog legs ! What are you going to do ? Example B : Ill - structured problem for secondary students . You are a member of a team of university research biologists . You have just received an appeal from the ministry of the environment to review a proposed rule requiring the American Bullfrogs be euthanized at the time they are sold at market instead of at restaurants . There is some indication that restaurant owners do not like this solution to the ‘‘escapee’’ problem . What will your recommend ? 228 S . A . Gallagher 123 PBL instruction : an apprenticeship in creative expertise The ill - structured problem is designed with speciﬁc learn - ing objectives in mind . To this extent , the PBL problem is more ill - structured for students than it is for their instruc - tor . In fact , an ill - structured problem both widens the problem space for students and opens instructional space for teachers , allowing them to think ahead about the kinds of information students will need and skills they will need to cultivate . In this respect , the PBL emulates a ‘‘ﬂipped’’ classroom where students acquire information from sources other than the teacher , freeing the teacher to focus on showing her students how to work with information . Part of the job of the PBL teacher is to handle the information ﬂow , so that it is broad and diverse , but manageable . In - formation can come from a wide range of sources : The Internet , videos , podcasts , guest speakers , ﬁeld trips , laboratory experiments , email mentors , or museum exhibits could all contribute to the students’ database . Modulating challenge Difﬁculty level is managed ﬁrst through manipulation of the story line . In both the elementary and secondary ill - structured problems in Table 1 , students will learn that the American Bullfrog was brought to Asia out of a desire for frogs legs . Live frogs are in Asian markets , but inevitably some escape , and others have been released in response to protests from animal rights activists . Before long , the unusually proliﬁc frog became invasive , taking over local amphibian habitats . Students will also acquire information about the habitats that are at risk and the various factors that make it difﬁcult to rebalance an unbalanced ecosystem . The problem could be made even more complex with the addition of ‘‘kickers’’ or twists to the story line that introduces new dimensions to the problems . For instance , students could be informed that the American Bullfrog is also a carrier of the chytrid fungus , which is deadly to many amphibians but not the American Bullfrog . Or they could receive a letter from an international trading com - pany to introduce trade law , or read an editorial that em - phasizes ethical issues of raising animals for food . Making unexpected changes in the problem increases the landscape of possible creative responses and gives students practice in agile thinking , requiring shifts in their mental models of the problem ( Dolmans et al . 2005 ) . As teachers manage the scope of the problem , it is important to avoid oversimpli - fying , as students tend to prefer problems that are complex enough to provide them with an appropriate level of challenge ( Hmelo and Ferrari 1997 ) . Introducing cognitive skills to enhance creativity PBL instructors are liberated from daily lectures because information is gathered by students and brought into the classroom . As a consequence , they can devote more time to showing students how to gather , organize , and construct meaning from a complex data set . The teacher’s job in the PBL classroom is to build the students’ inquiry toolkit , providing instruction in how to research , analyze , test generalizations , take differing perspectives , judge the worthiness of ideas , and reﬂect on personal and collective problem - solving processes . The instructor also encourages students to become intentional and self - regulated , deter - mining when thinking should be broad and ﬂexible and when it should narrow to reﬁned analysis ( Gallagher 2009 ; Hmelo - Silver et al . 2007 ) . By embedding instructional moments into the units , teachers can integrate opportunities to support creative thinking in a number of different ways . Content knowledge A deep knowledge base is a prerequisite for creative thinking , as ready access to a substantial pool of infor - mation provides more opportunities for original connec - tions ( Amabile 1992 ; Simonton 2000 ) . The setting for a creative expert’s practice may by situational , but the cog - nition of that expert must extend beyond the boundaries of the situation in order to ﬁnd unusual connections and ori - ginal solutions . Most ill - structured problems are inherently interdisciplinary , and interdisciplinary thinking is a critical element of non - routine problem - solving . There is general recognition of the danger of becoming overspecialized when learning content ( Klein 1991 ; Spinelli and McGowan 2014 ) , hence the recommendation that , ‘‘we must strike a balance between depth and breadth of knowledge in order to maximize our creative potential’’ ( Johansson 2004 , p . 104 ) . Again , the sequence is pivotal—students explore a substantial data pool before beginning to reﬁne their thinking , just as experts recommend : ‘‘ … work very hard trying to understand , trying to ﬁll yourself full of the problem , just to know what barriers you’re trying to crack . ’’ ( Gel Manns , in Judson 1987 , p . 16 ) Conceptual reasoning Creative thinking is enhanced when an individual’s knowledge base is both broad and organized in hierarchical layers of understanding because , ‘‘A cognitively complex person is capable of constructing broader aspects of reality and reconstructing it in more innovative ways . ’’ ( Morc¸o¨l 2007 , p . 567 ) . In a study of creative idea generation , Ward et al . ( 2004 ) found that students created more original so - lutions to problems when they were asked to think about The role of problem - based learning in developing creative expertise 229 123 the problem in abstract terms . Conceptual reasoning is also a hallmark of expert practice ( Bransford et al . 2000 ) . Be - cause PBL problems are drawn from the real world , they lend themselves to conceptual analysis . The beneﬁt of in - troducing concepts in the context of PBL is that the ideas are more than abstractions ; they are tools , providing stu - dents with another means of interpreting data . Successful examples include the integration of ‘‘systems’’ in PBL science units ( Center for Gifted Education 2007 ) and ‘‘risk’’ in PBL social studies ( Gallagher 2012b ) . Building mental models Creative responses tend to increase when problem - solvers have established mental models of their problem ( Barrett et al . 2013 ) . The wide array of information students acquire compels the creation of an organizational structure . As students compare their different models or forms of orga - nization , their mental models will shift . Students can also practice many different ways to represent their mental models as they present their knowledge in a variety of formats including pictures , diagrams , and graphic orga - nizers , as well as the written word ( Riley and Matheson 2010 ) . Speciﬁc strategies Ample opportunities exist to engage in a variety of speciﬁc thinking strategies that contribute to creative reasoning , including generic strategies such as brainstorming ( What are the possible causes of this situation ? ) , morphological analysis ( How does each component of the situation con - tribute to the problem ? How might we combine individual ideas to create a solution ? ) , and analogical reasoning ( How is an invasive species like an infection ? How might that analogy change the way we view the problem ? ) , as well as domain - speciﬁc problem - solving tools . Creative thinking can also be supported through student assessment in PBL , both in the evaluation of student products and also via formative assessment and feedback on qualities of thought associated with creativity . The Developing Perspectives Rubric is one example of how students can be prompted to keep their minds open to a wide range of issues when considering solution options ( Gallagher 2012a ) . Collaboration PBL is structured to provide students with practice in collaborative learning and shared responsibility . Emphasis is placed on dividing questions among individuals and groups in the class , leading to a more effective information search and more authentic sharing of research results . This simulates the process followed by professional teams in - volved in research and development activities ( Kelly and Littman 2001 ) . Effective collaboration , characterized by open communication , mutual respect , and shared mental models are essential to achieving a satisfactory outcome to this problem - solving environment ( West 2002 ) . Lateral questioning Throughout the PBL process , teachers prompt discussion and direct students to new insights . Questions that promote ﬂexible , open - minded , and conceptual thinking are easily integrated into these discussions : What motives could these picketers have beyond saving the frogs ? What reasons besides health issues might prompt this kind of protest ? Are the frogs the real issue or is it a symptom of something else ? What issues involve frogs , but go beyond them ? What are you assuming about the beneﬁts or risks of releasing the frogs instead of euthanizing them ? What are other ways to control population growth ? Roberts ( 2013 ) has noted that PBL tends to focus on correcting ﬂaws and suggests that teachers also integrate ‘‘Appreciative Inquiry’’ to ensure that students attend to positive aspects of the situation and take advantage of proactive opportunities to innovate . What aspects of this situation do we want to protect or save as we solve the problem ? What larger beneﬁt could we create for the envi - ronment as we try to solve the problem ? Direct attention to problem deﬁnition Experts have long contended that the process of problem ﬁnding , or problem deﬁnition , is the pivotal moment in the problem - solving process , because the way a problem is deﬁned sets a course to the eventual solution ( Getzels and Csikszentmihalyi 1976 ; Runco 1994 ; Stokes 2005 ) . Prob - lem deﬁnition is , in effect , an expert’s attempt to impose a structure on the ill - structured situation for the sake of ﬁnding a solution . In PBL , problem deﬁnition occurs after students have spent time acquiring , analyzing , and structuring their thinking about the problem . This sequence serves to ex - pand the problem space as much as possible , so that the problem - solver has an expansive view of the variables that might have an impact on the problem deﬁnition and ulti - mately the solution . 230 S . A . Gallagher 123 The literature in both problem - solving and creativity recognizes two elements in an effective problem deﬁnition . The ﬁrst element is a goal state , which is usually either an issue to resolve or the creation of something new . The second element is the identiﬁcation of constraints or barriers that limit solution options ( Carter 1988 ; Sturt 2013 ) . Whether these are external or self - imposed , ‘‘ … constraints structure the problem space to preclude ( or limit search among ) fa - miliar , reliable responses and promote ( or direct search among ) novel , surprising ones . … can re - create its solution path . ’’ ( Stokes 2005 , p . 5 ) . The imposition of a reasonable number of constraints can result in enhanced creative per - formance when solving a problem ( Medeiros et al . 2014 ) . The problem space created by the ill - structured problem is large enough to allow for many variations on the prob - lem deﬁnition , again giving students volition over their learning path and room to create an original ( but justiﬁable ) deﬁnition . In the elementary - level ill - structured problem , the deﬁnition , ‘‘How can we continue to serve frogs legs ( issue ) taking into account our desire to handle only heal - thy frogs ( constraint 1 ) and to respect our local habitat ( constraint 2 ) , ’’ is very different from ‘‘How can we par - ticipate in the Save the Frog movement ( issue ) taking into account that we do not want to spread chytrid fungus ( constraint 1 ) and we don’t want to loose customers ( constraint 2 ) . ’’ By identifying core issues and important constraints , students have carved a more structured prob - lem out of the original ill - structured mess . Promoting and supporting self - directed learning The overarching goal of a PBL instructor is to help students learn to become self - directed and self - regulated in all di - mensions of learning . From the ﬁrst day , students are prompted to become aware of their thinking through the guiding questions : ( 1 ) What are your assumptions ? ( 2 ) What do you know ? ( 3 ) What do you need to know ? and ( 4 ) What is your plan of action ? These questions prompt students to sort their thinking into one of the four categories : assumptions , facts , questions , and plans . This is one of the primary ways a teacher reveals how experts structure information . Inten - tional control over cognition and especially the ability to change cognitive tools when necessary is a related element of creative thinking ( Zabelina and Robinson 2010 ) . From the use of an ill - structured problem as a catalyst for learning to embedded skills and strategies to build creative capacity , PBL has many parallels with the au - thentic practice of creativity , as summarized in Table 2 . Research evidence on PBL and creativity Hundreds of studies have been conducted testing the efﬁ - cacy of PBL , but most of them focus on testing whether students learn necessary content and critical thinking skills . Although the alignment between PBL and creativity theory is clear ( Tan 2009 ) , research directly associated with cre - ativity is sparse . Evidence supports the assumption that simply using an ill - structured problem and going through the process of working through a problem can enhance creativity skills . Tan ( 2009 ) investigated the impact of PBL in a study where 158 graduate students were enrolled in either PBL or traditional sections of engineering or applied science . All students completed the Cognitive Ability Test Nonverbal Battery , which assesses ﬂuid and ﬂexible thinking . A pre - and posttest analyses of students’ scores revealed sig - niﬁcant increases among PBL students who were not ob - served among traditionally instructed students . In another study , twenty - two pre - service teachers in a PBL course were asked to rate the impact of their PBL experience . All of the students agreed that the PBL case study helped them think more creatively , and over 45 % strongly agreed ( Ball and Knobloch 2004 ) . Gallagher et al . ( 1992 ) compared high school students in PBL and non - PBL environments . They gave students a problem - solving prompt as a pre - and posttest and asked the students what steps they would follow to solve the problem . These steps were coded according to their alignment to stages in the Osborn – Parnes Creative Prob - lem - Solving process . Students in the PBL class were sig - niﬁcantly more likely to list problem deﬁnition as a part of the problem - solving process in the posttest , unlike the control group who showed little change on any dimension of problem - solving . A precursor to any creative activity is the willingness to fully engage in the problem space . Among the most con - sistent ﬁndings in PBL research is that students ﬁnd learning more motivating and engaging when it is pre - sented through PBL ( e . g . , Faessler et al . 2006 ; Hmelo - Silver 2004 ; Maxwell et al . 2001 ) . Studies using structural equation modeling indicate that student engagement in PBL experiences may be unrelated to prior knowledge ( O’Grady et al . 2012 ) , meaning that even students with limited experience in the content of the problem ﬁnd learning through PBL more enticing than traditional instruction . Two studies have drawn connections between PBL and ‘‘ﬂow’’ states . In one qualitative study , Barrett ( 2010 ) conducted a discourse analysis of focus group interviews with two PBL tutorial groups . She identiﬁed several ways that the students pursued and created ﬂow states as they moved from messy uncertainty to self - directed investment in problem solutions . A quantitative approach to the question was taken by Vasiliou et al . ( 2014 ) , who inves - tigated the impact of a technology - rich PBL learning en - vironment on 21 graduate students’ ﬂow experience . The role of problem - based learning in developing creative expertise 231 123 Students were afforded ﬂexible access to multiple forms of technology including computers , tablets , cell phones , and social network media . The researchers gave students a questionnaire assessing their level of ﬂow three times during a 12 - week PBL course ; they also conducted focus group discussions . Although students self - reported a modest sense of ﬂow in the focus group discussions , av - erage scores on most ﬂow dimensions increased over 12 weeks . Of particular note was that students believed the problems and collaboration , not the technology , were the sources of their sense of ﬂow . Students reported the most intense sense of the ﬂow in the dimension ‘‘transformation of time . ’’ Self - directed learning also seems to improve in a PBL environment . Several studies have documented positive change in both self - directed and self - regulated learning Table 2 Alignment of elements of creativity with PBL Element of creativity Components PBL alignment Person : motivation / purpose Compulsion to move ahead Risk taker Low need for closure Drive to seek something new Love of variety Ill - structured problems motivate students to ask question and become engaged . The stakeholder role enhances student investment in the problem Person : properties / preferences Tolerant of ambiguity Flexible Independent Nonconforming Inner - directed Open - minded The ill - structured problem prompts students to become open - minded , viewing the problem from multiple perspectives Person : feelings Pleasure with novel solutions Excited by uncertainty and the prospect of a problem Enjoyment of challenge even when unsuccessful Students experience excitement in , or more comfort with , uncertainty Process Fact ﬁnding Divergent thinking Convergent thinking Brainstorming Conceptual reasoning Teachers can embed instruction in cognitive strategies during inquiry and investigation and problem resolution . Students engage in problem deﬁnition as a speciﬁc moment in the problem - solving process Press Time Tools Challenge Social value Freedom Support Trust Debate Ill - structured problems create a context where students are free to question and explore ideas ; students derive a well - deﬁned problem from the ill - structured problem space during problem deﬁnition Product Tangible or intangible ( ideas ) results deemed both new and valuable by a sector of the public ( not always in the lifetime of the creator ) Students must create a resolution to their problem that addresses the identiﬁed issue and constraints Persuasion Capacity to persuade others of the value of creative products Students must justify the solutions to their problems Potential / preparedness Substantial knowledge base and a threshold of intelligence Students engage in a wide - ranging search for relevant information . They then must synthesize the database and apply it back to the ill - structured problem Passion Creative problem - solvers self - initiate in order to pursue a problem they ﬁnd compelling . Deep personal commitment to the problem sustains the creative effort Stories are inherently engaging , especially stories that are presented as mysteries Incomplete information generates curiosity and personal investment . Viewing the problem from the inside helps students understand why experts become passionate about the topic 232 S . A . Gallagher 123 ( Hmelo and Lin 2000 ; Kivela and Kivela 2005 ; Loyens et al . 2008 ; Sungur and Tekkaya 2006 ) . Students need help and scaffolding to become more self - directed , but it is reasonable to expect students to become increasingly self - directed as a result of PBL and more self - directed with increasing numbers of PBL experiences ( Hmelo - Silver 2004 ) . A reconceptualization of ability One of the most exciting transformations of PBL is that of teacher perspective . Particularly germane in this case is how teachers perceive student ability . Chamberlin ( 2009 ) used a PBL scenario during a summer program to identify students with potential for mathematical creativity . Teachers in this study reported seeing new and unexpected characteristics in their students . Similarly , Gallagher and Gallagher ( 2013 ) used PBL in sixth - grade classrooms of three middle schools to identify students with academic potential . Independent ratings of assignments gathered from the pool of students’ teachers identiﬁed as ‘‘ad - vanced’’ via in situ observation during PBL indicated they performed as well as students who were already identiﬁed as gifted using traditional measures . In one respect , this validates the notion that traditional testing misses some students who have advanced potential but limited back - ground knowledge . Another intriguing interpretation is that the PBL experience shifts the teacher’s perception of ‘‘giftedness’’ from a fact - based orientation to a ‘‘complex thinking’’ constructivist orientation that is much more consonant with twenty - ﬁrst century learning goals . Creative for everyone Like similar innovations , PBL invites creativity among all involved . It opens the door to the integration of many different learning modalities , of greater interaction be - tween teachers and content experts , and the utilization of many dimensions of online learning . Representative ex - periments worth watching include multisite and intergen - erational problem - based learning ventures using online delivery ( see Tan 2009 ) . Along with the opportunities come challenges , and a requirement that we reconsider many elements of educa - tion’s current structure . It is unrealistic to think that schools will achieve different outcomes while maintaining the same structure regarding the use of time , facilities , and human or information resources . In his inﬂuential book Outliers , Gladwell ( 2011 ) claims it takes 10 , 000 h of practice to become a creative expert capable of innovating in a ﬁeld or domain . However , this begs the question 10 , 000 h of what ? Repeated exposure to routine learning will not produce creative adults . Instead , what is required is a learning environment that will place students in the heart of expert practice so they can expe - rience early on not only the knowledge and the skills but also the fascination that drives the creative process . References Amabile , T . M . ( 1992 ) . Growing up creative . Scituate , MA : Creative Education Foundation . Ball , P . ( 2012 ) . The music instinct : How music works and why we can’t do without it . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Ball , A . L . , & Knobloch , N . A . ( 2004 ) . An exploration of the outcomes of utilizing ill - structured problems in pre - service teacher preparation . Journal of Agricultural Education , 45 ( 2 ) , 62 – 71 . Banaji , S . , Cranmer , S . , & Perrotta , C . ( 2010 ) . Expert perspectives on creativity and innovation in European schools and teacher training . Seville : Institute for Prospective Technological Studies . Barrett , T . ( 2010 ) . The problem - based learning process as ﬁnding and being in ﬂow . Innovations in Education and Teaching Interna - tional , 47 ( 2 ) , 165 – 174 . Barrett , J . D . , Peterson , D . R . , Hester , K . S . , Robledo , I . C . , Day , E . A . , Hougen , D . P . , & Mumford , M . D . ( 2013 ) . Thinking about applications : Effects on mental models and creative problem - solving . Creativity Research Journal , 25 ( 2 ) , 199 – 212 . Barron , B . J . S . , Schwartz , D . L . , Vye , N . J . , Moore , A . , Petrosino , A . , Zech , L . , et al . ( 1998 ) . Doing with understanding : Lessons from research on problem - and project - based learning . Journal of the Learning Sciences , 7 ( 3 / 4 ) , 271 – 311 . Barrows , H . S . , & Tamblyn , R . M . ( 1980 ) . Problem - based learning : An approach to medical education . New York , NY : Springer . Bransford , J . D . , Brown , A . L . , & Cocking , R . R . ( Eds . ) . ( 2000 ) . How people learn . Washington , DC : National Academies Press . Bransford , J . D . , Sherwood , R . D . , Hasselbring , T . S . , Kinzer , C . K . , & Williams , S . M . ( 1990 ) . Anchored instruction : Why we need it and how technology can help . In D . Nix & R . Spiro ( Eds . ) , Advances in computer - video technology . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Brophy , S . , Klein , S . , Portsmore , M . , & Rogers , C . ( 2008 ) . Advancing engineering education in P - 12 classrooms . Journal of Engineer - ing Education , 97 ( 3 ) , 369 – 387 . Buxton , C . A . ( 2010 ) . Social problem solving through science : An approach to critical , place - based , science teaching and learning . Equity & Excellence in Education , 43 ( 1 ) , 120 – 135 . Carter , M . ( 1988 ) . Problem solving reconsidered : A pluralistic theory of problems . College English , 50 ( 5 ) , 551 – 565 . Catmull , E . , & Wallace , A . ( 2014 ) . Creativity Inc : Overcoming the unseen forces that stand in the way of true inspiration . New York , NY : Random House . Center for Gifted Education . ( 2007 ) . Electricity city : Designing an electrical system ( 2nd ed . ) . Dubuque , IA : Kendall Hunt . Chamberlin , S . ( 2009 ) . Using problem - based learning activities to identify creatively gifted mathematics students . In O . S . Tan ( Ed . ) , Problem - based learning and creativity ( pp . 155 – 172 ) . Singapore : Cengage Learning Asia . Csikszentmihalyi , M . ( 2013 ) . Creativity : The psychology of discovery and invention . New York , NY : Harper Perennial . Dolmans , D . H . J . M . , DeGrave , W . , Wolfhagen , I . H . A . P . , & Van Der Vleuten , C . P . M . ( 2005 ) . Problem - based learning : Future challenges for educational practice and research . Medical Education , 39 ( 7 ) , 732 – 741 . Dreyfus , H . L . , & Dreyfus , S . E . ( 2008 ) . Beyond expertise : Some preliminary thoughts on mastery . In K . Nielsen & P . Masaeus The role of problem - based learning in developing creative expertise 233 123 ( Eds . ) , A qualitative stance ; Essays in honor of Steiner Kvale ( pp . 113 – 124 ) . A˚rhus , Denmark : Aarhus University Press . Faessler , L . , Hinterberger , H . , Dahinden , M . , & Wyss , M . ( 2006 ) . Evaluating student motivation in constructivistic , problem - based introductory computer science courses . In T . Reeves & S . Yamashita ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of world conference on e - learn - ing in corporate , government , healthcare , and higher education 2006 ( pp . 1178 – 1185 ) . Chesapeake , VA : AACE . Gallagher , S . A . ( 2009 ) . What do you need to know ? Becoming an effective PBL teacher . In B . MacFarlane & T . Stambaugh ( Eds . ) , Leading change in gifted education : The festschrift of Dr . Joyce VanTassel - Baska ( pp . 337 – 350 ) . Waco , TX : Prufrock Press . Gallagher , S . A . ( 2012a ) . Problem - based learning in your classroom . Unionville , NY : Royal Fireworks Press . Gallagher , S . A . ( 2012b ) . Black death . Unionville , NY : Royal Fireworks Press . Gallagher , S . A . , & Gallagher , J . J . ( 2013 ) . Using problem - based learning to explore unseen academic potential . Interdisciplinary Journal of Problem - based Learning , 7 ( 1 ) , 111 – 131 . doi : 10 . 7771 / 1541 - 5015 . 1322 . Gallagher , S . A . , Stepien , W . J . , & Rosenthal , H . ( 1992 ) . The effect of problem - based learning on problem solving . Gifted Child Quarterly , 36 ( 4 ) , 195 – 201 . Getzels , J . , & Csikszentmihalyi , M . ( 1976 ) . The creative vision : A longitudinal study of problem ﬁnding in art . New York , NY : Wiley . Gladwell , M . ( 2011 ) . Outliers : The story of success . New York , NY : Bay Back Books . Goldschmidt , G . ( 1999 ) . Design . In M . A . Runco & S . R . Prizker ( Eds . ) , Encyclopedia of creativity ( Vol . 1 , pp . 525 – 536 ) . San Diego , CA : Academic Press . Graesser , A . C . , Olde , B . , & Klettke , B . ( 2002 ) . How does the mind construct and represent stories ? In M . C . Green , J . J . Strange , & T . C . Brock ( Eds . ) , Narrative impact : Social and cognitive foundations ( pp . 231 – 263 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . Graesser , A . C . , Singer , M . , & Trabasso , T . ( 1994 ) . Constructing inferences during narrative text comprehension . Psychological Review , 101 ( 3 ) , 371 – 395 . Hickey , D . T . , Moore , A . L . , & Pellegrino , J . W . ( 2001 ) . The motivational and academic consequences of elementary mathematics environments : Do constructivist innovations and reforms make a difference ? American Educational Research Journal , 38 ( 3 ) , 611 – 652 . Hmelo , C . E . , & Ferrari , M . ( 1997 ) . The problem - based learning tutorial : Cultivating higher - order thinking skills . Journal for the Education of the Gifted , 20 ( 4 ) , 401 – 422 . Hmelo , C . E . , & Lin , X . ( 2000 ) . Becoming self - directed learners : Strategy development in problem - based learning . In D . Evensen & C . E . Hmelo ( Eds . ) , Problem - based learning : A research perspective on learning interactions ( pp . 227 – 250 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Hmelo - Silver , C . E . ( 2004 ) . Problem - based learning : What and how do students learn ? Educational Psychology Review , 16 ( 3 ) , 235 – 266 . doi : 10 . 1023 / B : EDPR . 0000034022 . 16470 . f3 . Hmelo - Silver , C . E . , Duncan , R . G . , & Chinn , C . A . ( 2007 ) . Scaffolding and achievement in problem - based and inquiry learning : A response to Kirschner , Sweller , and Clark ( 2006 ) . Educational Psychologist , 42 ( 2 ) , 99 – 107 . Jauk , E . , Benedek , M . , Dunst , B . , & Neubauer , A . C . ( 2013 ) . The relationship between intelligence and creativity : New support for the threshold hypothesis by means of empirical breakpoint detection . Intelligence , 41 ( 4 ) , 212 – 221 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . intell . 2013 . 03 . 003 . Johansson , F . ( 2004 ) . The medici effect : Breakthrough insights at the intersection of ideas , concepts , and cultures . Boston , MA : Harvard Business School Press . Jonassen , D . H . ( 1997 ) . Instructional design models for well - structured and ill - structured problem - solving learning outcomes . Educational Technology Research and Development , 45 ( 1 ) , 65 – 94 . Jonassen , D . J . ( 2000 ) . Toward a design theory of problem solving . Educational Technology Research and Development , 48 ( 4 ) , 63 – 85 . Judson , H . F . ( 1987 ) . The search for solutions : How we know about the universe and how we know it is true . Baltimore , MD : The Johns Hopkins University Press . Kelly , T . , & Littman , J . ( 2001 ) . The art of innovation : Lessons in creativity from IDEO , America’s leading design ﬁrm . New York , NY : Crown Business . King , P . M . , & Kitchener , K . S . ( 1984 ) . Developing reﬂective judgment : Understanding and promoting intellectual growth and critical thinking in adolescents and adults . San Francisco , CA : Jossey - Bass . King , P . M . , & Kitchener , K . S . ( 2002 ) . The reﬂective judgment model : Twenty years of research on epistemic cognition . In B . K . Hofer & P . R . Pintrich ( Eds . ) , Personal epistemology : The psychology of beliefs about knowledge and knowing ( pp . 37 – 62 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . Kivela , J . , & Kivela , R . J . ( 2005 ) . Student perceptions of an embedded problem - based learning instructional approach in a hospitality undergraduate programme . International Journal of Hospitality Management , 24 ( 3 ) , 437 – 464 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ijhm . 2004 . 09 . 007 . Klassen , S . ( 2007 ) . The application of historical narrative in science learning : The Atlantic cable story . Science & Education , 16 ( 3 ) , 335 – 352 . Klein , J . T . ( 1991 ) . Interdisciplinarity : History , theory , & practice . Detroit , MI : Wayne State University Press . Lewis , T . ( 1995 ) . Late night thoughts on listening to Mahler’s ninth symphony . New York , NY : Penguin Books . Loyens , S . M . M . , Magda , J . , & Rikers , R . J . ( 2008 ) . Self - directed learning in problem - based learning and its relationship with self - regulated learning . Educational Psychological Review , 20 ( 4 ) , 411 – 427 . Ma , H . ( 2006 ) . A synthetic analysis of the effectiveness of single components and packages in creativity training programs . Creativity Research Journal , 18 ( 4 ) , 435 – 446 . Manley , K . , & Garbett , R . ( 2000 ) . Paying Peter and Paul : Reconciling concepts of expertise with competency for a clinical career structured . Journal of Clinical Nursing , 9 ( 3 ) , 347 – 359 . Marsalis , W . ( 2005 ) . To a young jazz musician : Letters from the road . New York , NY : Random House Inc . Maxwell , N . L . , Bellisimo , Y . , & Mergendoller , J . ( 2001 ) . Problem - based learning : Modifying the medical school model for teaching high school economics . The Social Studies , 92 ( 2 ) , 73 – 78 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 00377990109603981 . Medeiros , K . E . , Partlow , P . J . , & Mumford , M . D . ( 2014 ) . Not too much , not too little : The inﬂuence of constraints on creative problem solving . Psychology of Aesthetics , Creativity and the Arts , 8 ( 2 ) , 198 – 210 . Morc¸o¨l , G . ( 2007 ) . Methods of assessing and enhancing creativity for public policy decision making . In G . Morc¸o¨l ( Ed . ) , Handbook of decision making ( pp . 565 – 586 ) . Boca Raton , FL : CRC Press . O’Grady , G . , Yew , E . , Goh , K . P . L . , & Schmidt , H . ( Eds . ) . ( 2012 ) . One - day , one - problem : An approach to problem - based learning . New York , NY : Springer . Osborn , A . F . ( 1993 ) . Applied imagination : Principles and procedures of creative problem - solving ( 3rd ed . ) . Buffalo , NY : Creative Education Foundation Press . ( Original work published 1953 ) . Reitman , W . ( 1965 ) . Cognition and thought . New York , NY : Wiley . Rhodes , M . ( 1961 ) . An analysis of creativity . Phi Delta Kappa , 42 ( 7 ) , 305 – 310 . 234 S . A . Gallagher 123 Riley , J . , & Matheson , R . ( 2010 ) . Promoting creative thinking and innovative practice through the use of problem - based learning . In T . J . Clouston , L . Westcott , S . W . Whitcombe , J . Riley , & R . Matheson ( Eds . ) , Problem - based learning in health and social care ( pp . 125 – 138 ) . West Sussex , UK : Wiley . Roberts , G . W . ( 2013 ) . Appreciative inquiry—a new dimension in problem - based learning . The International HETL Review , 71 – 81 . https : / / www . hetl . org / wp - content / uploads / 2013 / 09 / HETL Review2013SpecialIssueArticle7 . pdf Rose , L . H . , & Lin , H . T . ( 1984 ) . A meta - analysis of long - term creativity training . The Journal of Creative Behavior , 18 ( 1 ) , 11 – 22 . Runco , M . A . ( 1994 ) . Problem ﬁnding , problem solving and creativity . Norwood , NJ : Ablex Publishing . Runco , M . A . , Millar , G . , Acar , S . , & Cramond , B . ( 2011 ) . Torrance Tests of Creative Thinking as predictors of personal and public achievement : A ﬁfty year follow up . Creativity Research Journal , 22 ( 4 ) , 361 – 368 . Rutherford , F . J . , & Ahlgren , A . ( 1990 ) . Science for all Americans . New York , NY : Oxford University Press . Savery , J . R . ( 2006 ) . Overview of problem - based learning : Deﬁni - tions and distinctions . Interdisciplinary Journal of Problem - Based Learning . doi : 10 . 7771 / 1541 - 5015 . 1002 . Scott , G . , Leritz , L . E . , & Mumford , M . D . ( 2004 ) . The effectiveness of creativity training : A quantitative review . Creativity Research Journal , 16 ( 4 ) , 327 – 361 . Shin , N . , Jonassen , D . H . , & McGee , S . ( 2003 ) . Predictors of well - structured and ill - structured problem solving in an astronomy simulation . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 40 , 6 – 33 . doi : 10 . 1002 / tea . 10058 . Simon , H . A . ( 1973 ) . The structure of ill - structured problem . Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 4 ( 3 – 4 ) , 181 – 201 . Simonton , D . K . ( 1990 ) . In M . A . Runco & R . S . Albert ( Eds . ) , Theories of creativity . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . Simonton , D . K . ( 1997 ) . Creative productivity : A predictive and explanatory model of career trajectories and landmarks . Psy - chological Review , 104 , 66 – 89 . Simonton , D . K . ( 2000 ) . Creativity : Cognitive , developmental , personal and social aspects . American Psychologist , 55 ( 1 ) , 151 – 158 . Spinelli , S . , & McGowan , H . ( 2014 ) . Disrupt together : How teams consistently innovate . New Jersey : Pearson Press . Sternberg , R . J . ( 1985 ) . Teaching critical thinking , part 1 : Are we making critical mistakes ? Phi Delta Kappan , 67 ( 3 ) , 194 – 198 . Sternberg , R . , & Lubart , T . I . ( 1966 ) . Investing in creativity . American Psychologist , 51 ( 7 ) , 677 – 688 . Stokes , P . D . ( 2005 ) . Creativity from constraints : The psychology of breakthrough . New York , NY : Springer . Sturt , D . ( 2013 ) . Great work : How to make a difference people love . New York , NY : McGraw - Hill . Subotnik , R . E . , & Arnold , K . D . ( 1999 ) . Longitudinal studies of creativity . In M . A . Runco & S . Pritzker ( Eds . ) , Encyclopedia of creativity ( Vol . 2 , pp . 163 – 168 ) . San Diego , CA : Academic Press . Sungur , S . , & Tekkaya , C . ( 2006 ) . Effects of problem - based learning and traditional instruction on self - regulated learning . The Journal of Educational Research , 99 ( 5 ) , 307 – 317 . doi : 10 . 3200 / JOER . 99 . 5 . 307 - 320 . Tan , O . S . ( 2009 ) . Problem - based learning and creativity . Singapore : Cengage Learning Asia . Thomas , L . ( 1995 ) . Late night thoughts on listening to Mahler’s Ninth Symphony . New York , NY : Penguin Publishing Group . Torrance , E . P . ( 1988 ) . The nature of creativity as manifest in testing . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , The nature of creativity : Contemporary psychological perspectives ( pp . 43 – 75 ) . New York , NY : Cam - bridge University Press . Vallerand , R . J . , & Houlfort , N . ( 2003 ) . Passion at work : Toward a new conceptualization . In D . Skarlicki , S . Gilliland , & D . Steiner ( Eds . ) , Social issues in management ( Vol . 3 , pp . 175 – 204 ) . Greenwich , CT : Information Age Publishing . Vallerand , R . J . , Salvy , S . J . , Mageau , G . A . , Elliot , A . J . , Denis , P . , Grouzet , F . M . E . , & Blanchard , C . B . ( 2007 ) . On the role of passion in performance . Journal of Personality , 75 ( 3 ) , 505 – 534 . Vasiliou , C . , Ioannou , A . , & Zaphiris , P . ( 2014 ) . Measuring students’ ﬂow experience in a multimodal learning environment : A case study . In P . Zaphiris & A . Ioannou ( Eds . ) Learning and collaboration technologies : Designing and developing novel learning experiences ( pp . 346 – 357 ) . New York , NY : Springer . http : / / www . academia . edu / 6722707 / Measuring _ Students _ Flow _ Experience _ in _ a _ Multimodal _ Learning _ Environment _ A _ Case _ Study Ward , T . B . , Patterson , M . J . , & Sifonis , C . M . ( 2004 ) . The role of speciﬁcity and abstraction in creative idea generation . Creativity Research Journal , 16 ( 1 ) , 1 – 9 . West , M . A . ( 2002 ) . Sparkling fountains or stagnant ponds : An integrative model of creativity and innovation implementation in work groups . Applied Psychology , 51 ( 3 ) , 355 – 387 . Willingham , D . T . ( 2004 ) . The privileged status of story . Ask the cognitive scientist . http : / / www . aft . org / periodical / american - educa tor / summer - 2004 / ask - cognitive - scientist . Zabelina , D . L . , & Robinson , M . D . ( 2010 ) . Creativity as ﬂexible cognitive control . Psychology of Aesthetics , Creativity and the Arts , 4 ( 3 ) , 136 – 143 . The role of problem - based learning in developing creative expertise 235 123