or guidelines may be needed to check the marketing of certain services . Many countries face the challenge of developing effective policies that both respect the ethical standpoint of diverse publics and enable the exploration and application of biomedical technologies . China should be given an equal voice in the global discussion about how best to achieve this . Encouragingly , more dialogue is starting to happen . In an unprecedented move , the Chinese Acad - emy of Sciences joined the US and UK scientific academies in organizing the first international summit on human gene editing last year . Establishing appropriate governance for research in the life sciences is hard for everyone given globalization , the pace of technological advances , the complexity of domestic regulatory ecosystems and a growing international movement to make deregulated markets — not government officials or bioethicists — the arbiters of quality and ethicality . We must therefore strive for a better understanding on all sides of the efforts that different coun - tries are making , and of how they can work together to develop a consensus on international governance . Good rules drive good science . ■ Douglas Sipp is a researcher at the RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology , Kobe , Japan , and project professor at the Keio University School of Medicine , Tokyo , Japan . Duanqing Pei is professor at the Key Laboratory of Regenerative Biology , South China Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine , Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health ( GIBH ) , Chinese Academy of Sciences , Guangzhou , China , and is director - general of the GIBH . e - mails : sipp @ cdb . riken . jp ; pei _ duanqing @ gibh . ac . cn 1 . Liang , P . et al . Protein Cell 6 , 363 – 372 ( 2015 ) . 2 . Kang , X . et al . J . Assist . Reprod . Genet . 33 , 581 – 588 ( 2016 ) . 3 . Chen , Y . et al . Cell Res . 13 , 251 – 263 ( 2003 ) . 4 . Guidelines on Human Assisted Reproductive Technologies ( People’s Republic of China Ministry of Health , 2001 ) ; available at http : / / go . nature . com / 1ztc8qb ( in Chinese ) . 5 . Guidelines on Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research ( People’s Republic of China Ministry of Health , 2003 ) ; available at http : / / go . nature . com / 28joycl ( in Chinese ) . 6 . Doring , O . Kennedy Inst . Ethics J . 14 , 39 – 46 ( 2004 ) . 7 . Jin , X . et al . BioMed Res . Int . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1155 / 2013 / 934567 ( 2013 ) . 8 . Nachtigall , R . D . et al . Fertil . Steril . 92 , 2094 – 2096 ( 2009 ) . 9 . Kawakami , M . , Sipp , D . & Kato , K . Cell Stem Cell 6 , 415 – 418 ( 2010 ) . 10 . Gao , F . , Shen , X . Z . , Jiang , F . , Wu , Y . & Han , C . Nature Biotechnol . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nbt . 3547 ( 2016 ) . E P A Boost basic research in China Improving the quality , integrity and applicability of scientific research will underpin long - term economic growth , writes Wei Yang . The Five - hundred - meter Aperture Spherical Telescope in Guizhou is due to be completed in September . C hina’s economy relies on innovation . Developing technologies , improving efficiency and creating and imple - menting new scientific knowledge can invigorate industry and help society . Chi - na’s recent economic slowdown , however , calls for a gear change in how the nation innovates . For several decades , short - term and focused technological research and develop - ment ( R & D ) has been the main driver in China . Large public grants were channelled to promising or urgent areas to deliver new turbine engines , high - speed trains , solar panels or drugs in 5 – 10 years . Now China must take a longer and broader view , and nurture its science roots . Basic research — studies that create sci - entific knowledge and technologies that can be subsequently developed , translated or applied — has a conflicted image in China . Progress has been enormous ( see Nature 481 , 420 ; 2012 ) : China’s share of research papers worldwide ( as counted in Elsevier’s Scopus database ) grew from 2 . 5 % in 1997 to 18 . 8 % in 2015 — but severe criticisms persist ( see ref . 1 and Nature 463 , 142 – 143 ; 2010 ) . For example , critics say that China’s uni - versities have become paper mills induced by metrics that value quantity over quality . Impact remains low : few chemical reactions or processes are named after Chinese schol - ars , even though the nation now publishes more papers in chemistry than any other . Research misconduct — including ghost - writing and reviewing — has been rife , as evidenced by retractions of papers by Chi - nese authors from BioMed Central , Elsevier and Springer journals in the past two years . Industrialists and some government offic - ers complain that many academic studies , such as in pure mathematics or fundamental physics , are irrelevant to the nation’s economy or society . Scientific and technological pro - gress contributed to only 55 % of economic growth in China in 2015 , compared with 88 % in the United States in the same period . And China spends relatively little of its total R & D budget ( public , industrial and private ) on basic research — just 4 . 7 % in China com - pared with 24 . 1 % in France , 17 . 6 % in the United States and 12 . 6 % in Japan in 2013 . Improving the quality and integrity SCIENCE IN CHINA A Nature collection nature . com / chinafocus Nature 2 3 J U N E 2 0 1 6 | V O L 5 3 4 | N AT U R E | 4 6 7 © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . © 2016 Mac m illan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . MISCONDUCT ALLEGATIONS FALL China is on a long march to research integrity , as shown by data from funding agency NSFC . Anti - misconduct campaign began around 2006 – 07 0 1 2 3 4 3 . 37 0 . 81 1999 2003 2007 2011 2015 A ll e g e d m i s c o n d u c t c a s e s i n s u b m i tt e d g r a n t p r o p o s a l s ( ‰ ) of basic research must be the focus of national efforts to boost innovation in China . Quality needs to matter more than quantity , and integrity is the best way to ensure quality . Applicability to techno - logical development justifies drawing more resources into basic research . As the head of the National Natural Science Foundation of China ( NSFC ) , a leading national gov - ernment funding agency for basic - science research , I call for a sustained focus to bring about such a change by 2020 . EMERGING POWERHOUSE China is rising rapidly up the global scien - tific ranks by every measure — quantity and quality of output , R & D spend and increased collaboration ( see page 452 ) . For example , China’s share of high - impact works ( the top 0 . 1 % of papers in Scopus rated by citations ) has grown , from less than 1 % in 1997 to about 20 % now . Founded in 1986 with a starting budget of just 80 million yuan ( US $ 12 . 2 million ) , the NSFC has expanded more than 300 - fold to allocate 24 . 8 billion yuan in 2016 . It funded 62 . 1 % of Chinese research papers , or 11 . 5 % of global aca - demic output , in 2015 . The foundation’s mission is to be a ‘FRIEND’ of scientists : fair in reviews ; rewarding in fostering research ; international in global participation ; effi - cient in management ; numerous in grants ; and diversified in disciplinary coverage . But beyond the buoyant statistics , basic research in China has been slow to develop . For example , there is only one science Nobel laureate from mainland China . And the nation’s research lags behind other countries in terms of citations — its Field Weighted Citation Impact measure was 0 . 86 in 2015 , below the world average of 1 . 0 . Raising the bar on quality — higher cita - tions and more major breakthroughs — must be the top priority . Put another way , China needs to raise the altitude of its basic research landscape and form high mountains . Agreed metrics are needed to track pro - gress . Current measures are heterogeneous and do not work equally well across China’s vast and diverse academic landscape . The country has 1 , 000 research institutions capa - ble of basic research , each with a different focus , and more than 1 , 000 universities , each with a different blend of research and teach - ing . For example , Tsinghua University in Beijing receives nearly 5 billion yuan in annual research grants from all sources , whereas some regional colleges have research budgets of only a few million yuan per year . Measuring publication numbers might work well for a young institute that publishes ten papers a year in relevant international journals , but may eventually distort the disciplinary mix of a large university that pub - lishes 10 , 000 papers a year in diverse journals . So , in practice , each institute must decide for itself what is most important to track . It might choose to look at whether a project or person is producing many publications , whether the work has high impact or is highly cited , if a project is globally signifi - cant or is a major scientific breakthrough . Each institute must plot a trajectory that is consistent with its history , current status and future goal . Evaluation needs must be reas - sessed as a project matures , and as the insti - tute upgrades . In most cases , when institutes are managing their progress healthily , this ‘soft’ approach will work . Interventions such as campaigns to reward high - quality work might be needed for those that deviate from the research commonwealth . Universities need to implement metrics wisely and clarify their aims ( see D . Hicks et al . Nature 520 , 429 – 431 ; 2015 ) . The Chi - nese Academy of Sciences ( CAS ) has taken a lead : some 15 years ago , it was the first in China to include citation in its assessment metrics , leading to an exponential growth in high - impact works . And three years ago , CAS directed each of its 104 research institutes to concentrate on one mission , three near - future breakthroughs and five long - term directions . But setting targets that are too rigid can skew or hinder research . More institutes recognize that emphasizing publication numbers pressures researchers to write lots of incremental papers rather than a few good ones . Merit - based academic evaluations — that account for international recognition , representative works and impacts to the field — can avoid this . Long - term development , which may be slow but steady , must be dis - tinguished from short - term gains that lack sustainability . Many universities and research institutes are downsizing the proportion of researchers’ salaries that are based on perfor - mance ( from more than 70 % to less than 30 % in extreme cases ) , so that a higher percentage goes towards rewarding merit . Another question is how best to apportion basic research funds . Should science address societal ‘grand challenges’ or test bold con - cepts ? Should resources be pooled or shared among many individuals ? One answer is to cover several bases . For example , the NSFC invests 70 % of its funding in blue - skies research , 10 % on supporting talent and 20 % on major research projects for scientific chal - lenges and new research facilities . Later this year , the ministry of education will launch a blueprint for a ‘double excel - lence initiative’ to drive China’s universities and academic programmes towards world - class standards , such as by assembling high - quality teams . It is likely that the evaluation for universities will change to reward the achievement of a few top - quality departments rather than many average ones — with similar goals to the UK Research Excellence Frame - work . Many universities are adjusting their academic structures and realigning leading researchers in anticipation . REINFORCE INTEGRITY China is enduring a long march to research integrity 2 . The United States tops the league table of retracted papers ( see retractionwatch . com ) , partly owing to its formidable quantity of scientific publications , but retractions from China are growing . The countries have taken slightly different educational approaches to reinforcing integrity 3 . In China , research misconduct tends to be portrayed in black - and - white terms — scientists are either on the moral high ground or cast into the ethical abyss . In the United States , educators analyse grey areas by discussing case studies with early - career researchers in class . Both coun - tries can learn from each other . Research misconduct in China is driven by several forces 2 , 3 . These include competition ( owing to the rapid expansion of researcher numbers ) as well as assessment criteria — the need to publish in international journals encourages the use of language services or ghostwriters , and quantification encourages research outputs to be split up and published separately ( known as salami - slicing ) . Other drivers include strengthening of ethical values such as animal rights , and insufficient provi - sion of ethical codes in areas such as genetics and big data . For the past decade , the China Association for Science and Technology , the education ministry and the NSFC have run a well - publicized anti - misconduct campaign in the Chinese scientific community . It is hav - ing results ( see ‘Misconduct allegations fall’ ) . Most research institutions now have procedures in place to tackle suspected or confirmed ethical breaches , and a zero - tolerance policy has been enforced in some , such as Zhejiang University in Hangzhou ( see “Raising the bar on quality must be the top priority . ” S O U R C E : N S F C 4 6 8 | N AT U R E | V O L 5 3 4 | 2 3 J U N E 2 0 1 6 COMMENT © 2016 Mac m illan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . Nature 481 , 134 – 136 ; 2012 ) . The proportion of allegations of misconduct is declining even though more attention is being given to actively detecting cases . Similarities between submitted proposals and published disserta - tions are also going down . The culture of new researchers is changing from ‘why not cheat’ to ‘it is not worth getting caught’ . To go further requires changes on three fronts : attitude , structure and methodology . A change in attitude — from covering up misconduct to exposing it — is essential . The NSFC is implementing a similarity check for submitted grant proposals and now publishes an annual press release detailing notorious misconduct cases . It is also inves - tigating cases of ghostwriting and reviewing . Since 2000 , we have evolved our policies on information handling , from guarding review confidentiality to transparency in research evaluation . Each panel is required to moni - tor the healthy conduct of review in its disci - pline , by voting on the fairness of their fellow panellists’ judgements , for example . Structural changes within institutions are crucial to separate administrative and academic powers and prevent corruption . For instance , the NSFC has exercised vari - ous practices that might be applied in other funding agencies . Agency administrators are no longer involved in academic reviews . NSFC staff members are only authorized to access information that is relevant to their duties , and an independent council of senior academics has been set up to counterbalance the administrators . In many institutions , external advisers are now used to avoid con - flicts of interest , academic committees are being given more power , and committees have been formed to safeguard research and clinical ethics . Methodology changes can remove the soil that nourishes research misconduct . A nationwide campaign against overly quanti - fied measures of research is under way . Caps on human - resource costs are being lifted . A streamlined funding architecture needs to be achieved , which reduces fragmentation in grant sources and mandates that all grant reviews are conducted by professional institu - tions selected by a joint committee rather than by administrators . We also need to use more external reviews by international peers , and account for indirect research costs . PRIORITY TOPICS Which areas of basic science look most promising to develop in the next five years ? The NSFC’s plan for 2016 – 20 includes a list of areas , breakthroughs and interdisci - plinary hotspots in which China could deliver fast . Examples are the ‘Langlands programme’ for mathematics that links number theory , geometry , analysis and theoretical physics , such as at the Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science , CAS ; and the deep underground Earth - physics laboratory near Jinping , Sichuan , that might detect dark matter . There is also the Five - hundred - meter Aperture Spherical Tele - scope ( FAST ) in Guizhou , southwest China , which is due to be completed in September ; and 24 scientific satellites planned for the next 5 years ( 4 of which are due to launch this year ) that will advance astrophysics , cosmology and Earth sciences . Other promising areas and institutes include molecular chemistry and quantum catalysis for chemistry , which is a focus of the Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics at CAS ; quantum computing for information science at the University of Science and Technology of China in Hefei ; and neural circuits and brain science in Shanghai’s biomedical sci - ences and innovation complex . The National Center for Protein Sciences ( the PHOENIX Center ) in Beijing and Shanghai is focusing on proteomics ; and teams are working on gene editing , molecular approaches to cancer , and infectious diseases . A multidisciplinary effort is needed to stimulate the country’s ‘green science’ — Earth , ocean and environ - mental science . MUCH TO DO For basic science innovations to benefit the economy , the full chain of development — from the initial research to technology , prod - ucts and the market — must be nurtured . Not all research will bear fruit beyond the lab ; some is curiosity - driven . But where possi - ble , new knowledge should either be turned into technology or translated from one field to others . The NSFC is feeding the source . The rest of the chain is being encouraged by the Min - istry of Science and Technology , through its major National Initiatives for Technology and Engineering ( 16 of which run to 2020 and 15 that extend to 2030 ) and National Key Research Projects ( 36 launched this year ) . These programmes link researchers , develop - ers and venture capitalists . Examples include addressing air pollution , increasing the use of low - carbon energy in chemical engineering and deep - sea stations for ocean exploration . Barriers between research and commercial development are being dismantled by new policies . These include the recent revisions of knowledge - transfer laws , which assign the benefits of public - funded projects to the researchers and their institutions ( similar to the US Bayh – Dole Act ) . Researchers thus gain incentives of fame and wealth . In summary , four issues need attention . First we must incentivize , not discourage , Chinese scientists for making big scientific breakthroughs . These take time and endur - ance , as the recent detection of gravitational waves illustrates . Areas such as basic physics and astronomy need master plans for long - term development . Second , we must develop and adopt an assessment strategy using appropriate met - rics for evaluating merit . Third , we must create a healthy , congenial academic ecology . We should let researchers spend time on research , rather than overload them with paperwork or leave them to fend off allegations and slog over grant finances . Finally , we must devise a business model for China that identifies and cultivates appli - cable research findings . There are many miles to go before we rest . ■ Wei Yang is a professor of engineering mechanics at Zhejiang University , Hangzhou , China . He is president of the National Natural Science Foundation of China in Beijing . e - mail : yangwei @ nsfc . gov . cn 1 . Shi , Y . & Rao Y . Science 329 , 1128 ( 2010 ) . 2 . Yang , W . Science 342 , 1019 ( 2013 ) . 3 . Frankel , M . S . , Leshner , A . I . & Yang , W . in Handbook of Academic Integrity ( ed . Bretag , T . ) 847 – 866 ( Springer , 2016 ) . X I N H U A / R E X / S H U TT E R S T O C K China’s DAMPE satellite launched in December 2015 ; others are scheduled to follow this year . 2 3 J U N E 2 0 1 6 | V O L 5 3 4 | N AT U R E | 4 6 9 COMMENT © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . © 2016 Mac m illan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved .