Cooperative Support for Computer Work : A Social Perspective on the Empowering of End Users Andrew Clement Faculty of Library and Information Science University of Toronto 140 St . George Street Toronto , Canada M5S 1Al INTRODUCTION The image of computers being used to empower people is a potent and appealing one . For the many working people whose autonomy is routinely challenged by the constraints of large organizations or the vagaries of the market , the spread of sophisticated desktop computers holds the promise of gaining in personal control . While testimonials to the efficacy of desktop computers and announcements of their increased capabilities are regular fare in the media and casual conversation , the easy equation of personal computing power with personal power is an attractive simplification that needs closer scrutiny . An essential ingredient of this equation is mastery over the technology itself . Despite the popular promotion of desktop computers as being “personal” , “easy to use” , and even “friendly” , the reality for many users is quite different . That the technology is in fact complex , often difficult to apply and requires considerable organizational resources is demonstrated by the growing demand for training and technical support . ( George , et al ; 1989 ; Panko , 1988 ) A surprising amount of learning and adaptation effort turns out to be required . Particularly disadvantaged in this respect are secretaries and other workers at the bottom of the office hierarchy . Though numerically a significant group who play a vital support role in organizations , they generally lack the clout to have their needs better The highly social nature of work must also be taken into account . People generally do not work alone but in conjunction with others . Power is therefore not simply a personal matter but depends on organizational relationships . The realization of this fundamentalty collective nature of work is one of the key concepts of computer supported cooperative work ( CSCW ) which distinguishes it from other areas of computing and makes CSCW particularly relevant to fulfilling the promise of computing as a means for empowerment . This paper explores the question of empowerment through computerization by looking at common problems of computer use in the context of office group work . In particular it examines the difficulties that secretaries confront when attempting to master desktop computing and the cooperative solutions they have developed to overcome them . The data used in this analysis is derived from two research projects conducted at a large Canadian university . Based on the findings , the paper outlines proposals for the design and implementation of CSCW applications intended to enhance the power of clerks and secretaries , office workers who are relatively resource weak . We begin our discussion by CSCW 90 Proceedings October 1990 223 examining the notion of power in the context of human computer interaction within work organizations . THE NEED FOR EMPOWERMENT As the organizational sociologist , Rosabeth Moss Kanter , has observed , “power” is a “loaded” term ( 1977 , p . 166 . ) . While everyone appears to want more of it , they often mean quite different things . Kanter defines power simply as the “ability to get things done” ( p . 166 ) , and regards it as “synonymous with autonomy and freedom of action” ( p . 197 ) . This definition is useful in helping us see that power is not just a question of dominance but one of effectiveness . Organizations that have large numbers of relatively powerless members are not only depriving the employees as individuals but also diminishing the contributions they can make to the overall enterprise . When empowerment does not involve the subordination of others , it is something to be encouraged and promoted , especially among those who are least powerful . Computerization of office work presents a particularly valuable opportunity to pursue this goal . Kanter also notes that “the powerful are those with access to the tools for action” ( p . 164 ) . While she makes no specific reference to computers , their relevance in this context is obvious . Many organizational actions involve the performance of information processing tasks that are amenable to computerization and thus expanding the capabilities of computers and extending their availability to a wider group of people can clearly be regarded as a process of empowerment . However , the shortcomings of this interpretation become apparent when we examine the terms “access” and “tool” more closely and especially when we enlarge our notion of action beyond the narrow technical one of the performance of well specified tasks . Contrary to popular usage , a computer is not intrinsically a tool , if by that term we mean a device that is largely under the control of its user . ( Kling , 1987 ) Being a tool implies that the user should at least have discretion about whether or not to use it for any particular task and understand its operation sufficiently to achieve desired results . Desktop computers in organizations often do not meet these criteria - using the machine frequently becomes the only authorized way for those low in the organization’s hierarchy to perform assigned tasks and difficulties in usage are widespread . ( Clement & Parsons , 1990 ; Gasser , 1986 , Kling Jz Scacchi , 1982 ) This also reflects on the notion of access , which obviously means more than physical availability , since the capabilities of the system may be effectively out of reach through ignorance of operation , awkwardness of interface , narrowness of application , etc . In extreme cases , users even experience increased powerlessness when forced to use a rigid , constraining , inscrutable and unreliable computer system - and hence from the users perspective , the very antithesis of the ideal tool . Transforming a given computing facility into an effective tool for action and realizing some of its empowering potential , typically involves users in a prolonged process of learning and adaptation . They must not only do this on their , but also as part of their work groups and the organization . ( Johnson and Rice , 1987 ) This is because the implications for computer use in general cannot be divorced from the wider social worlds within which computing is inevitably embedded . ( see Kling , 1980 ; Kling and Scacchi , 1982 ) It is here that a CSCW perspective has much to offer . By starting with collectivities of workers as the analytic vantage point , it encourages us to see the possibilities and implications of computer use within the context of organizational structures and processes . CSCW 90 Proceedings October 1990 224 Work organizations are not exclusively rational enterprises in which a consensus can be assumed about what tasks should be done and by whom . They are primarily social systems driven not only by clearly articulated common goals but , as well , by a host of varied and often conflicting personal aspirations . Indeed , as sociologist Charles Perrow ( 1979 ) has noted , organizations don’t have goals so much as uses . This means that taking action by computer is not simply the manipulation of abstract information flows but involves influencing the behavior of others . From this social perspective , personal power is not a property of the individual user but depends fundamentally upon the structure of social relationships in which he or she participates . Empowerment cannot be accomplished without both drawing upon , and at the same time changing , existing social relationships . If this is not to be achieved at the expense of others , then it must build on and strengthen relationships in ways that are mutually enhancing - i . e . through cooperative workl . Ben Shneiderman ( 1987 ) argues that designers of human - computer interaction need to “fight” for users . The basic design principle he identifies as necessary for this to work is to recognize the diversity of users ( 1987 , p . 52 ) and typically this means taking into account such factors as differences in users’ experience . Thus , if our aim is to help empower people in their interactions with computers , this principle requires us to understand the prior distribution of power among users and develop strategies attuned to specific user constituencies . Most of the literature on end user computing ( EUC ) focuses explicitly or implicitly on managerial , professional or technical personnel ( e . g . Nelson , 1989 ) , while secretarial and clerical workers have received much less attention . Ray Panko notes , for example , that secretaries have tended to be excluded from access to the dominant means for assisting users , namely Information Centers ( 1988 , p . 16 ) . This has occurred in spite of their large numbers and the critical support role they play in efficient organizational operation . The reasons for this oversight are complex and deeply rooted in historical patterns , but can largely be accounted for by the fact that as women performing low status service jobs involving tacit knowledge , secretaries have not been able to press their needs with regard to computing as effectively as others2 . This lack of power and the consequent lack of resources can be seen as an example of “reinforcement politics” , whereby those already with greater influence are better able to guide computerization to serve their interests ( Danziger et al , 1982 ) . The desire for greater influence can be seen as threatening to established patterns of power . However , as we will illustrate later , the demand by secretaries can be for greater support to enable them to improve work performance with computers . Furthermore , as Ranter and others have suggested , the exaggerated centralization of power that is endemic in contemporary organizations is dysfunctional and influence should be more widely distributed . The preferential empowering of secretaries and other “resource weak” groups low in the organizational hierarchy , should thus in general be seen as a positive development that is beneficial to the organization as a whole . EMPOWERMENT THROUGH COOPERATION In seeking ways to assist resource weak computer users gain in power , it is helpful to examine the strategies they have adopted in the past to compensate for their relative lack of influence . Approaches that build upon existing sources of strength are much more likely to succeed than those ignore them . Two studies conducted with office support groups shed light on this question and reveal the importance of informal mechanisms of cooperation . The research developed in response to the difficulties that office staff experienced in using personal computers , primarily for word processing . CSCW 90 Proceedings October 1990 225 The widespread introduction of desktop computers for office support work at York University began in 1984 when administrators in the Faculty of Arts installed over one hundred PC - compatible computers . The secretaries were not consulted about this beforehand , and in many cases the equipment arrived in the academic department office without warning to the staff . The initial training was minimal and , according the Dean responsible , was intended as much to desensitize secretaries fears as it was to instruct them in the use of the technology . Complaints by staff prompted managers to provide some temporary additional training and support . Secretaries also took their complaints to the Technology Committee of the staff union . This lead to collaboration between the chair of the committee and the author , a computer scientist on the faculty . Together they initiated an action - oriented research project entitled Self - Managed Office Automation ( SMOAP ) . The aim was to help the office staff assess their needs and demonstrate that , with appropriate resources under their control , they could support their own use of computers . A subsequent research study , entitled Office Automation Knowledge Requirements ( OAKR ) was designed to investigate in greater detail what office workers needed to know about computer use and how they acquired the knowledge . It was conducted in the Secretariat of the university , a high - level , Type II ( i . e . non - procedural , Panko and Sprague , 1982 ) secretarial office serving the central governing bodies of the university ( i . e . , the Senate , Board of Governors , and their subcommittees ) . The work group consisted of five women and two men and had a reputation for being an early and effective adopter of desktop computing . It was one of the first administrative groups on campus to install a local area network ( LAN ) to which all members had access through PC’s on their desks . The study examined the ways in which the work group cooperated to make the technology work for them . Informal collaborative networks Early in the SMOAP project we conducted a survey of the entire secretarial support staff in the Faculties of Arts and Fine Arts . More than 90 % responded to the mailed questionnaire , all of whom were women ( N = 96 ) . The results were quite consistent with those of a smaller , but more detailed study of secretaries conducted at Carnegie Mellon University ( Hartman , 1987 ) . Generally they viewed their computers very favorably in terms of potential usefulness , but were frustrated by the way in which the technology had been implemented . They reported learning much more by studying on their own and discussing with co - workers than from formal courses or other external sources of expertise . They dealt with the usage problems primarily through mutual support within the work groups rather than by referring to written manuals or to outside specialists . A comment by one secretary summarized well the overall reaction : I certainly feel that there was a great lack of consultation with the staff in the introduction of computers , and it is only due to the e $ orts of the staff themselves that this has had any success at all . I feel strongly that training has been inadequate in the extreme and that computers are not being used as they should be . With proper training there is so much that could be done . The staff neither have the time nor the facilities to expand on their knowledge . ( Clement , 1989 , p . 38 ) The later OAKR study probed more deeply the problems that staff encountered and the patterns of cooperation they developed in response . The members of the Secretariat faced persistent difficulties in using the computer system despite their training and years of experience . As one of the administrative secretaries commented : CSCW 90 Proceedings October 1990 226 This ofice . . is shameful . . . We have the latest software and all this technology and no one knows how to use it [ properly ] . In the course of using word processing packages , transmitting messages via electronic mail , filing electronic documents , and the like , staff experienced recurrent difficulties . During open ended interviewing within the work group , each member was asked to identify who helps whom in attempting to resolve such difficulties . Figure 1 ( Clement and Parsons , 1990 ) shows the network of co - operation that these inquiries revealed , The arrows depict the direction of information flow indicated by response to the question “Who do you go to for help ? “ . In addition , each person was also asked to main , tain a diary for a two week period to record incidents in which their normal work was interrupted by some lack in their knowledge about the computer systems . The four diaries that were completed report a total of 40 distinct incidents . Of these , 25 involved conferring with someone else when such interruptions arose . The results are shown in Figure 2 . Note that incidents shown as loops on a single person were resolved without consulting another person and that 11 arrows represent multipIe consultations . Both these diagrams reveal a consistent pattern of collaborative support , which , interestingly , corresponds neither to the pattern of work flow through the Secretariat nor to the authority structure ( shown as dashed lines in Figure 1 ) . Like the SMOAP respondents , the Secretariat staff found the assistance they obtained from each other was , in general , more satisfactory than that obtained from outside the group . In effect these users developed an effective , informal network of support based on local expertise that considerably enhanced their mastery over a complex and changing technology . Figure 1 . Who helps me with computer problems ? See : Secretary AdSec : Administrative ExC : External Contact LEGEND : Secretary Figure 2 . Who conferred with whom ? ASec : Assistant Secretary OM : Office Manager ACS : Academic Computing Services CSCW 90 Proceedings October 1990 227 Industrial sociologists have known for decades that group cooperation is a vital ingredient in production work ( e . g . Homans , 1950 ) . Studies of computer users have repeatedly revealed the importance of collaboration based on spontaneously emerging local experts ( see Bannon , 1986 ; Lee , 1986 ; Nelson and Cheney , 1987 ; and Scharer , I983 ) Recent research ( George et al , 1989 ) suggests that even when substantial training is available , this local assistance will remain essential . Thus , given the characteristics of desktop technologies and the “situated” nature of the office work to which it is applied ( Suchman . 1987 ) , these findings on the need for collaboration are not surprising . What is surprising , however , is that there has been so little further exploration of these informal support networks and that the results that are available have not been applied in any systematic way to the implementation of desktop computing . Even those who develop computer supported cooperative work ( CSCW ) applications and thus recognize that people work in groups , concentrate almost exclusively on supporting well defined tasks or general communications while ignoring the informal facilitation of the basic me & task of simply learning to use and adapt the technology3 . This represents an important component of “articulation” work , which Bannon and Schmidt ( 1989 ) argue is a core issue in the CSCW field . These attempts by users to empower themselves through local , informal support networks generally do not represent a challenge to managers . Users may become frustrated over their difficulties with using computers , but seldom is there sufficient motivation or opportunity for an overt dispute to develop . However , as we shall see with the SMOAP project and its aftermath , demands by users for empowerment that are not met adequately by intra - group cooperation can lead to more overt , and contentious , collective action . A self - management alternative The main focus of SMOAP was a microcomputer resource center established by the staff union with the support of the university administration . Twenty - five support staff , all women , from six academic department offices , used the center for instruction , problem solving assistance and access to a small library of software and print materials . The focal activity was a weekly meeting in which the representatives from each department discussed the problems they faced with computer use . Detailed minutes from each meeting were distributed to all participants and served as a principal dam source for the research . Our approach was inspired chiefly by the socio - technical systems ( Mumford and Henshall , 1979 ; Mumford , 1983 ) and Scandinavian ( Bjerknes et al . , 1987 ; Briefs et al . , 1983 ; Howard , 1985 ) schools of systems design . Our original intention was to assist secretaries master desktop computing through the collective analysis and redesign of computer related work tasks ; however , according to wishes they expressed in the early goal setting meetings , we shifted our emphasis to providing more basic software training . While their immediate goal was to increase software competency ( particularly with word processing ) , they also discussed concerns over heavy workloads , upgraded job descriptions , developing new computer uses , ergonomic issues and getting greater recognition from management for their contribution to the operation of the university . A formal questionnaire evaluation conducted upon termination of the five month project showed that the response by the participants was overwhelmingly favorable , They felt that they had learned a great deal about computerization and about the benefits of working together more closely . They expressed a general desire to establish a similar facility on a permanent basis . The following comments reflect the commonly expressed sentiment for CSCW 90 Proceedings October 1990 228 greater control over their interaction with computers and the importance of collective action ( Clement & Zelechow , 1987 ) : [ It’s a ] relief to know that there is a place - on campus - tofind out the how , what , where and when - you can & al with problems arising from understafing and computerization . There are problems and this is a positive ana’ realistic approach to dealing with these . [ The project ] has made me think less about “MY JOB” and more about “OUR JOBS” - collectively . - has given me the incentive to work more closely with the others in my dept . It has given me hope ! Apart from technical knowledge I got from the project , my participation has enabled me to see more deeply into the problem of office automation , and how it has affected most of us as secretaries . I discover I’m not alone in my “struggles” and it’s necessary for us to come together to make the machine workfor UT , not vice - versa . I now feel there is concrete hope for staff demands . re : ergonomics , staff input in decision making , staff independence over access to training and procedure making . Through my own initiative to learn and develop new skills , I have created new systems and procedures for carrying out my responsibilities . I have a greater sense of being able to control my work now - rather than my work controlling me . These remarks take on added significance in light of subsequent events . Several months after the project ended and the resource center closed , the support staff union went on strike . One of the three main issues that kept the 1 , 100 members out for over two weeks , was the demand for staff - run microcomputer training . This demand was ultimately met , and in early 1988 a training programme was established4 . It is modeled on the SMOAP project and is headed by the former project coordinator . The Microcomputer Training Programme now has a regular budget funded by the administration , a former secretary as Trainer / Administrator and trains over 300 staff per year in using software popular for wordprocessing , spreadsheets and hard disk management . It is jointly managed by a committee with equal representation by the support staff union and the administration . The union selects the full - time Coordinator , who is responsible for day to day operation , and has effective veto over decisions . Even though the shape of the Programme continues to be negotiated between the parties , it already presents a distinctively worker - centred alternative , in both focus and management , to the standard Information Centre approach to the support of desktop computing ( Panko , 1988 ) . Although there was no direct involvement of the SMOAP researchers in organizing the strike or mobilizing support for it , the union president who lead the strike felt the experience of the project played an important role . She identified three ways in which the project was influential : it gave a specific focus for union demands regarding training ; it enabled the bargaining committee to articulate the necessary resources in contract language ; and it gave the proposal credibility in the eyes of management . ( Interview , May 1989 ) It was a concrete example the union leadership was proud of and could use to persuade both the membership and the employer that the concept of a staff - run programme was a viable one . CSCW 90 Proceedings October 1990 229 The SMOAP project and the Training Programme clearly represent successful attempts by the office staff themselves to gain additional support needed for working with computers . This required forms of cooperation that go well beyond the local collaboration we discussed earlier . During the project , support staff from different departments who in general did not otherwise work directly together or know each other discovered common difficulties and identified common remedies . This process was carried out on a much larger scale during bargaining with their employer when they developed strong collective pressure for the establishment of their own microcomputer training facility . The significance of the project comes not so much from the specific techniques used in the meetings or other activities but more from the fact that it adopted a worker - centred approach the staff could respond to . The project helped make legitimate and more visible the widely felt concerns the staff had about how they had been treated over computerization and offered a feasible solution . In terms of Lukes’ ( 1974 ) conception of power , it enabled the staff to change the political agenda by translating their numerous but isolated frustrations into an item they could bargain over and win . It is important to recognize that in both of these research projects , the principal concerns of the staff involved was to do better the tasks that were expected of them . What was remarkable was that despite the inadequate support , so many staff became active collectively in seeking the required skills . In this light , the more contentious aspects of the workers reactions should not be seen as dysfunctional , but instead as a healthy response to prevailing difficulties . They are better viewed as symptomatic of the deeper structural adjustments that all organizations must undergo when carrying out rapid and widespread computerization . Certainly if desktop computing was easier to master or the administration had devoted greater attention to its adoption , staff would likely not have responded as strongly as they did . However , we should not expect that the technologists who design desktop computing , and the managers who implement it , will necessarily be willing or able to do so in the best interests of all parties . Rather , we should expect that inter - group and broad collective cooperation by support staff to exert greater control over desktop computerization will continue to be vital to their empowerment . IMPLICATIONS FOR DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION These examples of cooperation can provide some guidance to those who would design and implement desktop computing in the service of support staff . This research underscores the well recognized need for improving the human - computer interface ( see Norman and Draper , 1986 ; Shneiderman , 1987 ) so that many of the frustrations and inefficiencies that staff experienced can be reduced . More importantly , there needs to be greater facilitation of the different ways that users cooperate to master computing technology . While designers have recently given attention to the technical support of cooperative work through “groupware” , both for specific application domains and for general purpose communications ( e . g . electronic mail ) , there has been comparatively little work done to help users collaborate informally in learning to use the technology or in repairing interactional breakdowns when they occur . An unobtrusive way which could assist novices is to implement analog of “beaten tracks” through a system’s menu choices . Just as the cumulative effect of people walking across terrain provides clues as to the route to follow , so indications ( e . g . though relative intensity ) of menu selections that are most frequently selected in the immediate workplace would help newcomers avoid pitfalls . A tempting extension of this is to provide facilities so that when a user experiences difficulties she could request the system to suggest other workers who are likely to be able to assist . Potential collaborators would become known to the system through a CSCW 90 Proceedings October 1990 230 combination of the automatic recording of usage patterns and voluntary self - identification . In essence the system would then act as a kind of “dating service” for matching learners with spontaneously emerging local experts . Useful tips and comments that emerge from the resulting collaboration could then be stored at the relevant nodes to create a user - grown form of Answer Garden ( see Ackerman and Malone , 1990 ) . The systematic recording of usage patterns could also be valuable for identifying common problems and sharing innovations . However , each of these possibilities carry a potential danger in that the records generated could be used by superiors for monitoring work performance , with the possible threat of disciplinary action . Even between peers , there will be reluctance to impose on others or to reveal ignorance . Great care should be taken so that users can maintain their anonymity until they choose otherwise , so that exploratory behavior would not be inhibited by fear of sanction . The great degree of mutual trust that would be required for this to work well is better regarded as a prerequisite to implementation rather than a hoped for outcome . The more general type of cooperation involved in discussing common problems and mobilizing support for particular remedies could be facilitated through standard means such as electronic mail , computer conferencing and bulletin boards . A guiding principle should be one of open communication , but again , in some cases , it may be necessary to protect individual and group privacy . This can be seen in the example of an electronic mail system described by Zuboff . A flourishing discussion among women in a large company about strategies for “professional improvement” quickly died out when it became known that more senior managers started collecting transcripts and asking questions ( 1988 , pp . 382 - 383 ) . There needs to be the electronic equivalent of private meeting spaces where support staff can get together as peers to share experiences and formulate individual or collective responses . They could incorporate the principle of reciprocity , whereby all participants to a discussion , whether silent or contributing , are mutually identifiable ( see Kraut et al , forthcoming ) . At the same time , the anonymity that is valuable in such group processes as idea generation and voting could be selectively preserved . The technical arrangements for this would be obvious extensions of standard measures for security , but would need to be reviewed by auditors selected and trusted by users . The empowerment that can come from the technical facilitation of cooperation is likely to be modest . Our research suggests that the implementation strategy is much more important than any particular characteristics of the technology . For instance , it could have helped reduce staff frustration if instead of IBM PC based technology , management had introduced Apple Macintosh computers with their better support for human computer interaction , However , much of the difficulty of mapping current office work onto computers and adjusting work patterns would have remained . A major source of difficulties that the secretaries faced was the implicit adoption by implementors of the “super typewriter” metaphor , in which the computer is seen as a “personal” , easy to use , more efficient substitute for a secretary’s conventional typewriter . This goes a long way in explaining why almost all resources were devoted to the purchase of hardware and software and very little to training and support . It also contributed to the feelings of frustration and inadequacy the secretaries felt when it turned out to be much more difficult to learn than they had been lead to believe5 . Viewing secretaries largely as typers of documents allows their skills and learning needs to be regarded as peripheral in importance . In these circumstances , the development of local collaborative networks and broader forms of cooperation are belated reactions to a difficult situation . Though necessary , this response is costly in terms of personal frustration and organizational efficiency . CSCW 90 Proceedings October 1990 231 Instead , what is needed is to see desktop computing , especially in office group settings , as a complex and far - reaching intervention into a social system . Secretaries , among others , play a central , if under - rated , role in its successful adoption . In the spirit of G & in’s ( 1990 ) advice to enlarge our notion of “user interface” , we should welcome users organizing themselves into support networks and agents of political action . To help realize this potential requires more than just inviting participation and providing the technical means for cooperation . Designers and implementors can also contribute by adopting attitudes and methods that encourage the self - identified interests of end users to surface as legitimate demands for active consideration . In particular , the implementation metaphor of desktop computing consisting of a collection of intrinsically empowering “products” that need only to be accepted by users must be subordinated to a social “process” oriented approach driven by the evolving needs of users ( Floyd , 1987 ) . A growing body of research into participation in system development by resource - weak groups , particularly women , is available to guide this effort . ( Benston , 1989 ; Bjerknes et al , 1987 ; Bjom - Andersen , 1986 ; Clement et al , 1989 ; Docherty et al , 1987 ; Ehn , 1988 ; Green et al , 1989 ; Kyng , 1988 ; Olerup et al , 1985 ; Tijdens et al , 1989 ) SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS This research supports Shneiderman’s assertion that “the computer revolution will be judged not by the complexity or power of technology but by the service to human needs” ( 1987 , p . 434 ) . The secretaries in our studies were empowered in their interaction with desktop computers not simply by the capabilities of the technology , but in significant ways by their ability to cooperate among themselves . They developed local collaborative networks and collectively drove the estabIishment of their own computer training programme . In the process , they enhanced their power in a broader organizational sense - illustrating interpersonal and political dimensions of cooperative work that has been relatively invisible in CSCW studies to date . Those seeking to empower users through their interaction with computers should recognize and facilitate these forms of cooperative support for computer work . lAs Bannon and Schmidt ( 1989 ) note , the term “cooperative work” has a long history and a range of meanings . They prefer to use it in the general and neutral sense of “multiple persons working together to produce a product or service . ” ( p . 362 ) This is quite appropriate for defining the field of CSCW . We use the term here in a more socially normative sense - to designate voluntary coordination of effort for mutual benefit . 2Much can be said here about the social construction of skill and authoritative knowledge , the sources and consequences of pay / employment inequity , chronic underevaluation , invisibility , etc . pertaining to the historic and complex dynamics of “women’s work” generally and secretarial subordination in particular . See Acker , 1989 ; Cockbum , 1983 , 1985 ; Suchman and Jordan , 1988 ; Olerup et al , 1985 . 3For a notable exception to this , see Kraut et al . ( forthcoming ) . 4The other two staff demands were for ergonomic computer furniture and to negotiate a “pay equity” wage adjustment plan . The staff “won” a committment of $ 250 , 000 for the new furniture , but settled the strike without contract language on pay equity . 5FVesenting a microcomputer running wordprocessing software as a form of typewriter is obviously useful in tmining novices to the technology . ( Mack et al , 1983 ) However , the limitations to the metaphor become apparent if it then blinds one to the complexities that users inevitably face . CSCW 90 Proceedings October 1990 232 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This research refied heavily upon the active collaboration I enjoyed with Ann Zelechow ( SMOAP ) and Darrell Parsons ( OAKR ) . Nor would it have been possible without the participation of more than 100 secretaries at York University . Several administrators also cooperated generously . Funding was provided by Labour Canada and NSERC . Jonathan Grudin and John Bowers gave helpful comments on an earlier draft of the paper . REFERENCES Acker , J . , Doing Comparable Worth : Gender , Class and Pay Equity , Temple University , 1989 . Ackerman , M . S . , and Malone , T . W . , “Answer Garden : A tool for growing organizational memory” , Proceedings of the 5th Conference on Office Information Systems , Cambridge , MA . , April 25 - 27 , 1990 , pp . 31 - 37 . Bannon , L . , “Helping Users Help Each Other” , in Norman and Draper ( eds . ) , User Centered System Design , 1986 . Bannon , L . and Schmidt , K . , “CSCW : Four Characters in Search of a Context” , Proceedings sf the First European Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , London , Sept . 12 - 15 , 1989 . Benston , M . , “Feminism and Systems Design : Questions of Control” , in Tomm , ( ea . ) , The Effect of Feminist Approaches on Research Methodologies , Calgary , University of Calgary , 1989 . Bjerknes , G . , Ehn , P . and Kyng , M . , ( eds . ) , Computers and Democracy - A Scandinavian Challenge , Avebwy , 1987 . Bjorn - Andersen , N . , “Implementation of Office Systems” , in Ojj % e Systems , A . Verrijn - Stuart and R . Hirschheim , ( eds . ) , Elsevier , 1986 , pp . 177 - 191 . Briefs , U . , Ciborra , C . and Schneider L . , ( eds . ) , Systems Design For , With and Ey the Users , North - Holland , 1983 . Clement , A . , and Parsons , D . , “Work Group Knowledge Requirements for Desktop Computing” , Proceedings of the 23rd Hawaii International Conference on System Science , Kailua : Kona , Hawaii , January 2 - 5 , 1990 , pp . 84 - 93 . Clement , A . , Parsons , D . , and Zelechow , A . , “Toward Worker - Centred Support for Desktop Computing” , IFIP Working Conference on Information System , Work and Organization Design , Berlin , GDR , July 10 - 13 , 1989 . Clement , A . , and Zelechow , A . , “Self - Managed Office Automation Project” , Final project report , Technology Impact Research Fund , Labour Canada , Ottawa , 1987 . Clement , A . , “A Canadian Case Study Report : Towards Self - Managed Automation in Small Offices” , Information Technology for Development , Oxford University Press , 1989 , Vol . 4 , # 2 , pp . 185 - 233 . Cockburn , C . , Brothers : Male Dominance and Technological Change , Pluto Press , 1983 . CSCW 90 Proceedings October 1990 233 Cockbum , C . , Machinery of Dominance , Pluto Press , 1985 . Danziger , J . , Dutton , W . , Kling , R . , and Kraemer , K . , Computers and Politics : High Technology in American Local Government , Columbia University Press , 1982 . Docherty , P . , et al , Systems Design for Human Development and Productivity : Participation and Beyond , Elsevier , 1987 . Ehn , P . , Work - Oriented Design of Computer Artifacts , Arbetslivscentrum , 1988 . Floyd , C . , “Outline of a Paradigm Change in Software Engineering” , in Bjerknes , Ehn and Kyng ( eds . ) , Computers and Democracy , 1987 . Gasser , L . , “The Integration of Computing and Routine Work” , ACM Transactions on O & e Information Systems 4 ( 3 ) , 1986 , pp . 205225 . George , J . , Kling , R . , and Iacono , S . , “The Role of Training and Support in Desktop Computing” , PPRO , UC Irvine , 1989 . Green , E . , Owen , J . , Pain , D . and Stone , I . , “Human - Centred Systems . . . Women - Centred Systems ? ‘ : Gender Divisions and Office Computer Systems Design” , paper presented to the BSA Annual Conference ‘Sociology in Action’ , Plymouth Polytechnic , March 20 - 23 , 1989 . Grudin , J . , “interface” , Third Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , Los Angeles , October 10 - 14 , 1990 ( this volume ) . Hartman , K . , “Secretaries and Computers” , in Computing and Change on Campus , Kiesler , S . and Sproull , L . ( eds . ) , Cambridge University Press , 1987 , pp . 114 - 130 . Homans , G . , The Human Group , Harcourt , Brace & World , 1950 . Howard , R . , “UTOPIA : Where Workers Craft New Technology” , Technology Review , April , 1985 , pp . 4349 . Johnson , B . , and Rice , R . , Managing Organizational Innovation : The evolution from word processing to ofice information systems , Columbia University Press , 1987 . Kanter , R . M . , Men and Women of the Corporation , Basic Books , 1977 . Kling , R . , “Social Analysis of Computing : Theoretical orientations in recent empirical research” , Computing Surveys 12 ( 1 ) , 1980 , pp . 61 - 110 . Kling , R . , “Computerization as an Ongoing Social and Political Process” , in Bjerknes et al . ( eds . ) Computers and Democracy , 1987 , pp . 117 - 136 . Kling , R . , and Scacchi , W . , “The Web of Computing : Computer technology as social organization” , in Advances in Computers , Vol . 21 , 1982 , pp . l - 90 . Kraut , R . E . , Fish , R . S . , Root , R . W . and Chalfonte , B . L . , “Informal Communication in Organizations : Form , Function and Technology” , to appear in S . CSCW 90 Proceedings October 1990 234 Oskamp and S . Spacapan ( eds . ) Human Reactions to Technology : Clarement Symposium on Applied Social Psychology , Sage ( forthcoming ) . Kyng , M . , “Designing for a dollar a day” , Proceedings of the Second Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , Portland , pp . 178 - 188 , Sept . 25 - 27 , 1988 . Lee , D . M . , “Usage Patterns and Sources of Assistance for Personal Computer Users” , MIS Quarterly , Dec . , pp . 313 - 325 , 1986 Lukes , S . , Power : A Radical View , Macmillan , 1974 . Mack , R . L . , Lewis , C . H . and Carroll , J . M . , “Learning to Use Word Processors : Problems and Prospects” , ACM Transactions on Office Information Systems l ( 3 ) , 1983 , pp . 254 - 271 . Mumford , E . , Designing Secretaries : The participative design of a word processing system , Manchester Business School , 1983 . Mumford , E . , and Henshall , D . , A Participative Approach to Computer Systems Design , John Wiley , 1979 . Nelson , R . R . and Cheney , P . H . , “Training End Users : An Exploratory Study” , MIS Quarterly , Dec . 1987 , pp . 546 - 559 . Nelson , R . R . , ( ed . ) End - User Computing : Concepts , Issues and Applications , Wiley , 1989 . Norman , D . , and Draper , S . , User Centered System Design : New Perspectives of Human - Computer Interaction , Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Hillsdale , NJ , 1986 . Olerup , A . , Schneider , L . , and Monod , E . Women , Work and Computerization : Opportunities and Disadvantages , North - Holland , 1985 . Panko , R . , and Sprague , R . , “Toward a New Framework for Office Support” , Proceedings of the 1982 Conference on Information Systems , Philadelphia , Association for Computing Machinery , June , 1982 . Panko , R . , End User Computing : Management , Applications and Technology , Wiley , 1988 . Perrow , C . , Complex Organizations : A Critical Essay , 2nd . ed . , Scott , Foresman , 1979 . Scharer , L . L . , “User Training : Less is More” , Datamation , July , pp . 175 - 182 , 1983 . Shneiderman , B . , Designing the User Interface : Strategies for Effective Human - Computer Interaction , Addison - Wesley , 1987 . Suchman , L . , Plans and Situated Actions : The problem of human - machine communication , Cambridge University Press , 1987 . Suchman , L . , and Jordan , B . , “Computerization and Women’s Knowledge” , in Women , Work and Computerization , Tijdens , K . et al , ( eds . ) North Holland , 1989 , pp . pp . ! 53 - 160 . CSCW 90 Proceedings October 1990 235 Tijdens , IL , Jennings , M . , Wagner , I . and Weggelaar , M . , Women , Work and Computerization : Forming New Alliances , North - Holland , 1989 . Zuboff , S . , In the Age of the Smart Machine : The Future of Work and Power , Basic Books , 1988 . Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage , the ACM copyright notice and the title of the publication and its date appear , and notice is given that copying is by permission of the Association for Computing Machinery . To copy otherwise , or to republish , requires a fee and / or specific permission . 0 1990 ACM 089791402 - 3 / 90 / 0010 / 0236 $ 1 . 50 CSCW 90 Proceedings October 1990 236