. 9mrvop , p hok a , soI . I , No I , pp . 17 - 35 . 1993 3 $ 6 . 00 + 0 . 00 Printed m Great Britain Pe on Press Ltd FRONTAL LOBE AND FRONTAL - STRIATAL SUBSTRATES FOR DIFFERENT FORMS OF HUMAN COGNITIVE FLEXIBILITY PAUL J . ESLIN ( , FR * and LYNN M . GRATTANt * Departments of Medicine ( Division of Neurology ) and Behavioral Science . Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine . The Milton S . Hershey Medical Center and tDepartment of Neurology , University of Maryland School of Medicine , U . S . A . ( Receded7 March 1991 ; accepted IS Au ( lust 1992 ) Abstract Frontal lobe and basal ganglia lesions have been associated with similar cognitive impairments , although their specialized roles in behavior are likely to he different . We examined whether these structures mediate distinctive or overlapping aspects of q complex behavioral process that has been associated with both neural sites , i . e . cognitive flexibility . Patients with focal ischemic lesion , to the frontal lobe and basal ganglia were compared on two forms of cognitive flexibility : ( I I shifting response set ( i . e . reactive tlexibilityl , and ( 2 ) producing a diversity of ideas ( i . e . spontaneous flexibility ) . Results indicated that frontal lobe and basal ganglia damage each caused a similar degree of impairment in reactive flexibility , both groups performing at a significantly lower level than posterior cortical lesion and normal comparison groups . However , frontal lobe damage markedly disturbed spontaneous flexibility , while performance after basal ganglia lesion was significantly higher and comparable to posterior cortical lesions . Findings suggest that the frontal lobe and basal ganglia participate differently in the neural substrate of cognitive flexibility . The frontal lobe appears to mediate spontaneous flexibility . The production of diverse ideas may require direct cortical - corti - cal interactions by the frontal lobe in order to access knowledge systems with novel strategies that transcend the most common semantic linkages . In contrast the corticostriate system appears to mediate reactive fexibility , as the frontal lobe , basal ganglia and their interconnections arc required for its operation . INTRODUCTION CoGNrrtvr . FLEXIBILITY commonly refers to the ability to shift avenues of thought and action in order to perceive , process and respond to situations in different ways . It is an essential feature of adaptive human behavior that is frequently altered by brain damage [ 31 , 33 ] . Neuropsychological studies have demonstrated that impairments in cognitive flexibility are predominantly associated with frontal lobe pathology [ 9 , 14 , 35 , 37 , 47 ] . Such findings support an important role for the frontal lobes in higher cognitive organization , including mediation of complex decision - making processes that involve multiple cerebral regions . Impairments in cognitive flexibility , however , have also been reported following non - frontal lesions and more widespread cerebral disease [ 19 , 21 , 33 , 42 ] . This is not surprising for three reasons . First , a variety of cortical and suhcortical lesion sites can disrupt information processing systems - such as visual perception , language and attention - that are utilized in higher cognitive , decision - making tasks . Second , cognitive flexibility is not a unitary process . We argue , based upon available research , that cognitive flexibility has several component processes such as producing a diversity of ideas , considering response * Address for corespondence : Dr P . J . Eslinger . Division of Neurology . Milton S . Hershey Medical Center , 500 University Drive , Hershey , PA 17 ( 133 , U . S . A .