Enabling Deliberations in a Political Party Using Large - Scale Argumentation : A Preliminary Report Mark Klein MIT Center for Collective Intelligence http : / / cci . mit . edu / klein / Paolo Spada Harvard Kennedy School of Government http : / / pspada . com / Raffaele Calabretta National Research Center , Italy http : / / laral . istc . cnr . it / rcalabretta / THE CHALLENGE : ENABLING DELIBERATION AT SCALE Humanity now finds itself faced with a range of highly complex and controversial challenges – such as climate change , the spread of disease , international security , scientific collaborations , product development , and so on - that call upon us to bring together large numbers of experts and stakeholders to deliberate collectively on a global scale . Collocated meetings can however be impractically expensive and are prone to serious dysfunctions , especially at large scales . Social media such as email , blogs , wikis , chat rooms , and web forums provide unprecedented opportunities for interacting on a massive scale , but typically generate vast , poorly - organized , unsystematic and highly redundant corpuses of widely varying quality . Argumentation systems represent a promising approach for addressing these challenges , by virtue of providing a simple systematic structure that radically reduces redundancy and encourages clarity , but these have been used almost exclusively for small - scale deliberations . This paper represents a preliminary report on using an argumentation system to enable large - scale deliberations , involving over 400 members of the Italian Democratic Party , on electoral law reform . It is , to our knowledge , one of very few evaluations of large - scale argumentation , as well as the first to include a systematic comparison with conventional ( web forum based ) online deliberation . We will discuss ( 1 ) the strengths and limitations of current deliberation technologies , ( 2 ) how large - scale argumentation technology can help address these limitations , and ( 3 ) preliminary results from the Democratic Party evaluation of this technology . STRENGTHS AND LIMITATIONS OF EXISTING DELIBERATION TECHNOLOGIES Let us define deliberation as a process where communities ( 1 ) identify possible solutions for a problem , ( 2 ) evaluate their merits , and ( 3 ) select the solution ( s ) from this space that best meet their diverse needs ( Walton and Krabbe , 1995 ) ( Eemeren and Grootendorst , 2003 ) . How well do existing technologies meet this challenge ? A wide range of social computing technologies have emerged in the past few decades , including email , chat , web forums , wikis like wikipedia , media sharing sites like youtube and flickr , open source software development efforts such as Linux , solution competitions such as Innocentive . com , idea - sharing systems such as ideastorm . com , peer - filtering sites such as Slashdot , group decision support ( GDSS ) systems ( Benbasat and Lim , 2000 ) ( Reagan - Cirincione , 1994 ) ( Smallman , 2008 ) ( Shrager et al . , 2010 ) ( Convertino et al . , 2008 ) ( Boland et al . , 1992 ) ( Poole et al . , 1988 ) ( Farnham et al . , 2000 ) ( Kramer and King , 1988 ) ( Pervan and Atkinson , 1995 ) ( Luppicini , 2007 ) ( Gopal and Prasad , 2000 ) ( Macaulay and Alabdulkarim , 2005 ) ( Powell et al . , 2004 ) , and scientific collaboratories ( Finholt , 2002 ) . Experience with such systems has shown that they can foster , by virtue of reducing the cost of participation , voluntary contributions at a vast scale , which in turn can lead to remarkably powerful emergent phenomena ( Tapscott and Williams , 2006 ) ( Sunstein , 2006 ) ( Surowiecki , 2005 ) ( Gladwell , 2002 ) ( Dennis and Valacich , 1993 ) that include : • Idea synergy : the ability for users to share their creations in a common forum can enable a synergistic explosion of creativity , since people often develop new ideas by forming novel combinations and extensions of ideas that have been put out by others . • The long tail : social computing systems enable access to a much greater diversity of ideas than would otherwise be practical : “small voices” ( the tail of the frequency distribution ) that would otherwise not be heard can now have significant impact . • Many eyes : social computing efforts can produce remarkably high - quality results by virtue of the fact that there are multiple independent verifications - many eyes continuously checking the shared content for errors and correcting them . • Wisdom of the crowds : large groups of ( appropriately independent , motivated and informed ) contributors can collectively make better judgments than those produced by the individuals that make them up , often exceeding the performance of experts , because their collective judgment cancels out the biases and gaps of the individual members . On the other hand , group decision - making is also prone to dysfunctional emergent behaviors that can deeply undercut the quality of the deliberation outcomes ( Tversky and Kahneman , 1974 ) ( Sunstein , 2006 ) ( Schulz - Hardt et al . , 2000 ) ( Cook and Smallman , 2007 ) . To more fully understand the strengths and limitations of deliberation technologies , it is helpful to divide them up based on how they structure content . One category is time - centric tools , i . e . tools like email , chat rooms , and web forums where content is organized based on when a post was contributed . Such systems enable large communities to weigh in on topics of interest , but they face serious shortcomings from the perspective of enabling collective : • Scattered content : The content in time - centric tools is typically widely scattered , so it’s hard to find all the contributions on a topic of interest . This also fosters unsystematic coverage , since users are often unable to quickly identify which areas are well - covered , and which need more attention . • Low signal - to - noise ratio . The content captured by time - centric tools is notorious for being voluminous and highly repetitive . This is a self - reinforcing phenomenon : since it can be difficult to find out whether a point has already been made in a large existing corpus , it’s more likely that minor variants will be posted again and again by different people . Some authors may do so simply hoping to win arguments by sheer repetition . This low signal - to - noise ratio makes it difficult to uncover the novel contributions that inspire people to generate creative new ideas of their own . • Balkanization : Users of time - centric systems often tend to self - assemble into groups that share the same opinions – there is remarkably little cross - referencing , for example , between liberal and conservative blogs and forums – so they tend to see only a subset of the issues , ideas , and arguments potentially relevant to a problem . This tends to lead people to take on more extreme , but not more broadly informed , versions of the opinions they already had . • Dysfunctional argumentation : Time - centric systems do not inherently encourage or enforce any standards concerning what constitutes valid argumentation , so postings are often bias - rather than evidence - or logic - based . Enormous effort is typically required to “harvest” the corpuses created by time - centric tools to identify the most important issues , ideas , and arguments . Intel , to give a typical example , ran a web forum on organizational health that elicited a total of 1000 posts from 300 participants . A post - discussion analysis team invested over 160 person - hours to create a useful summary of these contributions ( at 10 minutes a post , probably longer than it took to write many of the posts in the first place ) . The team found that there was lots of redundancy , little genuine debate , and few actionable ideas , so that in the end many of the ideas they reported came from the analysis team members themselves , rather than the forum 1 . It could be argued that many of these concerns are less prominent in topic - centric tools such as wikis and idea - sharing systems . In wikis , for example , all the content on a given topic is captured in a single article . But wikis are deeply challenged by deliberations on controversial topics ( Kittur et al . , 2007 ) ( Viegas et al . , 2004 ) . They capture , by their nature , the “least - common - denominator” consensus between many authors ( any non - consensus element presumably being edited out by those that do not agree with it ) , and the controversial core of deliberations are typically moved to massive talk pages for the article , which are essentially time - centric venues prone to all the limitations we noted above . Idea - sharing tools – such as Dell’s Ideastorm . com , the Obama administrations’ Open for Questions web site , and Google’s project10tothe100 . com - are organized around questions : one or more questions are posted and the community is asked to contribute , rate , and comment on proposed solutions . Such sites can elicit huge levels of activity – the Obama site for example elicited 70 , 000 ideas and 4 million votes in three weeks – but they are prone to several serious shortcomings . One is redundancy : in all of these sites , many of the ideas represent minor variations of each other . When there are thousands of posts submitted , manually pruning this list to consolidate equivalent posts is a massive undertaking . In Google’s case , for example , the company had to recruit 3 , 000 employees to filter and consolidate the 150 , 000 ideas they received in a process that put them 9 months behind their original schedule . Another issue is non - collaborativeness . Idea - sharing sites tend to elicit many fairly simple ideas . The ideas generated by the google project , for example , ( e . g . make government more transparent , help social entrepreneurs , support public transport , create user - generated news services ) were in large part not novel and light on detail . Surely that massive amount of effort could have been used to compose a smaller number of more deeply - considered ideas , but idea - sharing sites provide little support ( or incentive ) for this , because people can not collaboratively refine submitted ideas . LARGE - SCALE ARGUMENTATION Large - scale argumentation represents a promising approach to addressing the weaknesses with current deliberation technologies . We describe this approach below . Argumentation tools ( Kirschner et al . , 2003 ) ( Moor and Aakhus , 2006 ) ( Walton , 2005 ) take an argument - centric approach based on allowing groups to systematically capture their deliberations as tree structures made up of issues ( questions to be answered ) , ideas ( possible 1 Based on personal communication with Catherine Spence , Information Technology Enterprise Architect , Computing Director / Manager at Intel . answers for a question ) , and arguments ( statements that support or detract from an idea or argument ) that define a space of possible solutions to a given problem ( figure 1 ) : Figure 1 . An example of an argument map . Such tools have many advantages . Every unique point appears just once , radically increasing the signal - to - noise ratio , and all content on a given question is co - located , making it easy to find what has and has not been said on any topic , fostering more systematic and complete coverage , and counteracting balkanization by putting all competing ideas and arguments right next to each other . Careful critical thinking is encouraged , because users are implicitly encouraged to express the evidence and logic in favor of the options they prefer ( Carr , 2003 ) , and the community can rate each element of their arguments piece - by - piece . Users , finally , can collaboratively refine proposed solutions . One user can , for example , propose an idea , a second raise an issue concerning how some aspect of that idea can be implemented , and a third propose possible resolutions for that issue . The value of an argument map can extend far beyond the deliberation it was initially generated for , because it represents an entire design space of possible solutions that can be readily harvested , refined and re - combined by other communities facing similar problems . Most argumentation systems have been used by individuals or in small - scale settings , relying in the latter case on a facilitator to capture the free - form interactions of a collocated group as a commonly - viewable argument map ( Shum et al . , 2006 ) . Argumentation systems have also been used , to a much lesser extent , to enable distributed deliberations over the Internet ( Jonassen and Jr , 2005 ) ( Chklovski et al . , 2005 ) ( Lowrance et al . , 2001 ) ( Heng and de Moor , 2003 ) ( Karacapilidis et al . , 2004 ) ( Rahwan , 2008 ) . These maps tend to be poorly structured , however , because many users are not skilled argument mappers , and the scale of participation has been small 2 , typically involving only a handful of authors on any given task . The author and his colleagues have investigated , over the past several years , how an argument - centric approach can be extended to operate effectively at the same large scales as other social computing systems . Our approach is simple . Users are asked to create , concurrently , a network of posts organized into an argument map . We use the IBIS argumentation formalism ( Conklin , 2005 ) because it is simple and has been applied successfully in hundreds of collective decision - making contexts . A set of community conventions ( similar to those that underlie other social computing systems like Wikipedia and Slashdot ) help ensure that the argument map is well - organized . Each post should represent a single issue , idea , pro , or con , should not replicate a point that has been made elsewhere in the argument map , and should be attached to the post it logically refers to . A central tenet is the “live and let live” rule : if one disagrees with an idea or argument , the user should not change that post to undermine it , but should rather create new posts that present their alternative ideas or counter - arguments . Every individual can thus present their own point of view , using the strongest arguments they can muster , without fear of sabotage by anyone else . This process is supported by capabilities that have proven invaluable in other social computing systems , including rating ( to help the community encourage and identify important issues , ideas and arguments ) , watchlists ( which automatically notify users of changes to posts they have registered interest in ) , version histories ( to allow users to roll - back an post to a previous version if it has been “damaged” by an edit ) , and home pages ( which allows users to develop an online presence ) . The system also provides multiple forms of social translucence ( Erickson et al . , 2002 ) ( i . e . visual cues concerning who is doing what in the system ) , thereby fostering a sense of belonging as well as enabling self - organized attention mediation by the community . See ( Klein , 2007 ) for further discussion of the issues underlying the design of large - scale argumentation capability . The system itself is accessible at http : / / deliberatorium . mit . edu / . Because good argument - mapping skills are not universal , moderators help ensure that new posts are correctly structured . Their job is part education , and part quality control . Posts , when initially created , are given a “pending” status and can only be viewed by other authors . If a post doesn’t adequately follow the argument map conventions , moderators will either fix it or leave comments explaining what needs to be done . Once a moderator has verified that a post follows the conventions , the post is “certified” and becomes available to be viewed , edited , commented on , or rated by the general user population . The certification process helps ensures well - structured maps , and provides incentives for users to learn the argument formalism . Moderators serve a relatively modest role in all this : their role is not to evaluate the merits of a post , but simply to work with authors to ensure that the content is structured in a way that maximizes its utility to the community at large . We have implemented an initial version of these ideas , in the form of a web - based tool called the Deliberatorium ( Klein and Iandoli , 2008 ) ( Iandoli et al . , 2009 ) and evaluated it to date with over 2 The one exception we are aware of ( the Open Meeting Project’s mediation of the 1994 National Policy Review ( Hurwitz 1996 ) ) was effectively a comment collection system rather than a deliberation system , since the participants predominantly offered reactions to a large set of pre - existing policy documents , rather than interacting with each other to create new policy options . 700 users deliberating on a wide range of topics . The largest evaluation was performed at the University of Naples with 220 masters students in the information engineering program , who were asked to use the system to deliberate , over a period of three weeks , about the use of bio - fuels in Italy ( Klein and Iandoli , 2008 ) We observed a very high level of user participation . All told , the students posted over 3000 issues ideas and arguments , in addition to 1900 comments . This is , to our knowledge , both the largest single argument map ever created , as well as ( by far ) the largest number of authors for a single argument map . Roughly 1800 posts were eventually certified , and about 70 % of all posts could be certified without changes , demonstrating that , even after a relatively short usage period , most authors were able to create properly - structured posts . The effort needed to get a post certified , in addition , decreased over the duration of the experiment . The breadth and depth of coverage was , in the judgment of content experts , quite good : this community of non - experts was able to create a remarkably comprehensive map of the current debate on bio - fuels , complete with references , exploring everything from technology and policy issues to environmental , economic and socio - political impacts . We were hard - pressed to imagine any other approach that would allow over 200 authors to write what was in effect a substantial book on a complex subject , in a couple weeks , with no one in charge . It can be ( rightfully ) argued , however , that the Naples evaluation represents a somewhat artificial test case , probably far less challenging than what we are apt to encounter in many real world deliberations . The participants were all students with substantial knowledge of information technology , received several hours of instruction about how to participate in an argumentation - based deliberation , and were probably at least partially motivated by the perception that active participation would improve their grades , rather than by a desire to influence a decision they care about . They were also discussing what was probably , for that particular population , a relatively non - contentious topic . The deliberations we hope to enable with our approach are likely , by contrast , to have a much more diverse set of participants , with little or no training in argument mapping , discussing highly contentious decisions in which they have a strong personal stake . Another critical limitation of the Naples study is that it did not compare argument - centric deliberations with those enabled by existing social media such as web forums , so we were unable to test our hypotheses concerning the relative efficacy of these approaches . THE PD EVALUATION The evaluation with the Italian Democratic Party ( PD ) was designed to address these limitations . The users were members of “Insieme per il PD” ( http : / / insiemeperilpd . ning . com / , the largest online group within the PD , with about 5000 enrollees ) , and the topic of the deliberation was the reform of Italian electoral law . Italy moved from a proportional system to a mixed system in the beginning in 1993 . Berlusconi then changed the electoral law again in 2005 to a proportional system with closed list and a majority premium . Many believe he did so to prevent a major political loss . The latter electoral system is considered a disaster for Italy by all the political parties , but a process of cross - vetoing has prevented a change . Last year , a popular movement collected more than a 1 million signatures to propose a referendum to abolish the current electoral law and go back to the previous one 3 . The supreme court of Italy reviewed the proposal at the end of January 2012 and rejected it on the grounds of not being constitutional . Many believe that the real reason is that the current government would have collapsed if the 3 In Italy , referenda can only delete existing legislature , rather than propose new legislature . referendum was approved . Italian newspapers have been actively discussing question of electoral politics , and all the major parties are proposing various solutions . We believe that this environment created a very interesting opportunity to study deliberation in a real - world setting , where a very diverse set of participants are engaged in designing solutions to a contentious problem that they deeply care about . Participants were recruited by advertising on the Insieme’s web site and Facebook pages . All participants had to pre - enroll and enter basic demographic information such as their age , gender , level of internet activity , and level of education . 639 people enrolled , of which 2 / 3rds were male . The enrolled users had an average age of 48 years , with about 25 % over 60 years of age , and 15 % under 30 years of age : Figure 2 . Age distribution of people who enrolled for PD evaluation . This is comparable to the overall age distribution in Italy ( 2011 estimate 4 ) , which is : • 0 - 14 years : 13 . 8 %   • 15 - 64 years : 65 . 9 % • 65 years and over : 20 . 3 % • Median age : 44 58 % of the evaluation participants had more than a high school education , somewhat higher than the overall Italy average of 33 % . The frequency with which participants normally contributed to online discussions ( e . g . web forums , facebook or twitter ) ranged widely : nearly every day 42 % about twice a week 26 % about once a week 18 % 4 http : / / www . indexmundi . com / italy / age _ structure . html once or twice a month 8 % never 6 % Overall , the PD user population was quite different from the one that participated in our Naples evaluation , skewing older , less educated , less active on the internet , and much more representative , demographically , of the adult Italy population . The enrollees were split into four groups of 160 people each that were balanced , using the “blocktools” tool provided by the R statistical package ( http : / / www . R - project . org / ) , based on the demographic data acquired in the enrollment survey . Two groups were assigned to use a web forum , and the other two were assigned to use argument maps . Snapshots of the forum and map tools are included below : Figure 3 : Snapshot of argument map tool . Figure 4 : Snapshot of forum tool . We strove to make the look - and - feel of the forum and argument map tools as similar as possible , to reduce the chance that any performance differences we find are due to spurious differences in the user interfaces . Both interfaces provided , for example , the same set of basic functions , including a chat room , a suggestions tool that lists posts that may be of interest to the users , a search tool for finding post with given keywords , an activity tool that gives information on how active the discussion has been , a profile tool that allows users to change their passwords , a virtual library with background information on electoral reform , a suggestions box where they could leave feedback on how to improve the system , as well as a help facility that included text and brief videos on how to use the system , as well as on such topics as privacy and use of the experimental data . Forum users could add comments to forums , create new sub - forums , and rate other people’s posts . Map users could add new issues , ideas , or arguments to the map , edit posts they created earlier , leave suggestions on other author’s posts , and rate posts . Map moderators were responsible for checking and certifying posts , as described above , while forum moderators just made sure that the posts were free of inappropriate content such as spam or abusive language . Users , in all conditions , received email , every two or three days , notifying them about recent activity in their discussion areas and encouraging them to view and contribute to them . Both the web forums and argument maps listed three topics for discussion : “What electoral law should Italy adopt ? ” , “What other important questions should be asked about the electoral system ? ” and “What topics should be deliberated about in the future ? ” . Users could make whatever contributions they wanted , within these areas . The evaluation ran for three weeks , from April 1 , 2012 to April 21 , 2012 . After that , users were given a brief post - survey that asked about their experiences with the systems , as well as about their opinions on the major electoral reform alternatives enumerated during the deliberation . About three - quarters of the active participants filled out the post survey . In addition to these surveys , the system comprehensively tracked all user actions in a time - stamped event log . In total , nearly 36 , 000 user events were logged . We identified the following hypotheses to be tested using the data from this evaluation : • Adoption : We hypothesize that the level of participation in the argument maps will be at least equal to that in the web forums . Users are asked to do more to structure their contributions in argument maps than in web forums . This might be expected to reduce the number of people who are willing to participate , and / or to reduce how much they contribute . The added cost of participation may be offset , however , by the greater visibility their ideas are likely to get by decision makers when captured in a compact topically - organized argument map rather than an ( unstructured ) web forum . • Discourse Quality : We hypothesize that argument maps will produce more civil discussions than web forums , since they focus more on capturing ideas than direct person - to - person interactions . We can use the Discourse Quality Index ( Steenbergen et al . , 2003 ) to assess how civil the argument map and web forum deliberations were . • Comprehensiveness : We hypothesize that argument maps will produce significantly more comprehensive deliberations than web forums , because the topical structure makes it much easier to see what points are missing and therefore need to be entered . Using the argument map summaries of the web forums , we can compare the number of issues , ideas , and arguments raised in the argument map conditions versus those raised in the web forums . We can assess the topologies of the deliberations in the argument maps versus those in the web forums e . g . how deep the chains of arguments and counter - arguments are . We can , finally , ask electoral law experts to assess the comprehensiveness and quality of the points raised in each condition . • Lifecycle Cost : We hypothesize that the moderator effort needed for an argument map will be substantially greater than that needed by a web forum , since moderators must ensure author make well - structured contributions , rather than merely filtering out clearly inappropriate content . In many cases , however , organizations sponsor deliberations in order to gather the wisdom of the participants into a form that is readily usable by decision - makers . Our hypothesis is that , in this scenario , the moderator cost for argument maps will be substantially less than that needed to run web forums and then summarize their results in a useful form . This is because , in an argument map , users do the bulk of the summarization task as they enter their posts . Even if they require some assistance from the moderators to do so , it seems likely that this will involve much less moderator effort than summarizing a voluminous and completely unstructured corpus . We can test this this by comparing the moderator time needed to run argument maps directly versus the time needed to moderate and then summarize web forums as an argument map . • Usability : We hypothesize that argument maps will produce far more usable results than web forums , for people who wish to learn about or make a decision about the issues being discussed . We can assess by measuring the speed , accuracy , and completeness with which new users can enumerate the key ideas and arguments by looking at the results ( argument map or web forum ) of a deliberation . • User Impact : We hypothesize that participating in an argument map approach will have a greater impact on the participants’ knowledge and opinions of a subject than a web forum . It has been noted that people often become more extreme in their opinions , and thereby less open to opposing ideas and arguments , as a result as participating in deliberations ( Sunstein , 2006 ) . We can assess this , for example , by measuring how much participants know about the topic after participating in the deliberation , by measuring the breadth of ideas and arguments the participants viewed during the deliberation , and by using surveys to assess if their opinions changed in strength or valence as a result . Since the evaluation concluded so recently , we have only had the opportunity to do some preliminary analysis for the “adoption” hypothesis . These results are presented below . Number of unique users : The number of unique users who performed each major event type at least once were : Event Type Forum1 Forum2 Map1 Map2 EDIT 40 47 50 42 CREATE 41 47 57 49 RATE 16 18 54 55 VIEW 79 88 87 87 VOTE ( final ballot ) 83 89 83 84 VIEW RESOURCE ( virtual library ) 25 30 29 31 The map condition had more unique users , in all but one category , than the web forums , and the difference was statistically significant ( p < 0 . 001 ) for ratings . Statistically significant differences are , of course , difficult to detect when there is such a small number of groups . We hypothesize that rating was more frequent in maps than forums because , in the forum , they are more meaningful ; a forum post may make several points , so a rating thereof is potentially ambiguous , while a map posts always makes only a single point . The number of unique users each day , for the forum and map conditions , were as follows : Forum Conditions Map Conditions Figure 6 . The number of users who logged in each day . The average number of users per day was : Forum1 11 . 2 Forum2 13 . 0 Map1 13 . 5 Map2 13 . 8 The map and forum conditions , clearly , had very close to equal participation on this metric . A plot of the number of posts as a function of time shows that both the map and forum conditions remained active throughout the entire evaluation : Forum Conditions Map Conditions Figure 5 . Total number of posts as a function of time . There are fewer map posts ( about 330 ) than forum posts ( about 440 ) , but it is difficult to interpret this difference since forum posts may be redundant , contain multiple points , or both . Finally , these are the ranked activity histograms for the forum and map conditions , where activity is measured in terms of number of logged events per user : Forum Conditions Map Conditions Figure 7 . Ranked histograms of total user activity . While it is difficult to directly compare events from these two conditions , since many of them differ in type and size , there is no striking difference in the two conditions . In addition to these quantitative results , we have some anecdotal observations that we plan to study more formally as the analysis proceeds . In particular , the discussion overall seemed quite civil , and the quality of the contributions quite high , in both the map and forum conditions , which was surprising to some of us given the contentious and highly technical nature of the topic . Some of this may be because the participants shared membership in the Insieme per il PD group , and thus perhaps had some desire to maintain good relationships in that context . CONCLUSIONS This paper presents a comparative evaluation of web forums vs argument maps for supporting large - scale deliberations involving a complex and contentious real - world topic with a large real world user population . While our analysis efforts have just begun , our data suggests that argument maps , despite the additional demands they place on users in terms of structuring their contributions , do not suppress participation compared to the much simpler , and more familiar , medium of web forums . This is , we believe , an important result in terms of the viability of argument - centric large - scale deliberation , and is also potentially relevant to the viability of other social computing approaches ( e . g . collaboratively - authored semantic networks ) that use semi - formal representations . Our immediate plans involve gathering data to test all the hypotheses we listed in the previous section , in order to assess whether argument maps do indeed help large crowds conduct more harvestable , high - quality , and cost - effective deliberations on complex , contentious , and important problems , when compared to web forums . We also plan to conduct larger - scale evaluations , involving thousands rather than hundreds of participants per group , as well as larger numbers of groups , in order to further assess the scalability of out approach as well as strengthen the statistical power of our analysis results . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The authors would like to gratefully acknowledge the participation of the Italian Democratic Party , as well as the invaluable contributions of Rafaelle Calabretta , Luca Iandoli , Anna De Liddo , Ivana Quinto , Ali Gürkan , Ralf Groetker , Alessandro Rossi , Vincenzo Lanzetta , Irma Spada , and Elena Fagotto . The work has been supported by the National Science Foundation . REFERENCES Benbasat , I . , & Lim , J . ( 2000 ) . Information technology support for debiasing group judgments : an empirical evaluation . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 83 ( 1 ) , 167 - 183 . Boland , R . J . , Maheshwari , A . K . , Te ' eni , D . , Schwartz , D . , & Tenkasi , R . V . ( 1992 ) . Sharing Perspectives in Distributed Decision Making . Computer - Supported Cooperative Work . Carr , C . S . ( 2003 ) . Using computer supported argument visualization to teach legal argumentation . In P . A . Kirschner , S . J . B . Shum , & C . S . Carr ( Eds . ) , Visualizing argumentation : software tools for collaborative and educational sense - making ( pp . 75 - 96 ) . Springer - Verlag . Chklovski , T . , Ratnakar , V . , & Gil , Y . ( 2005 ) . User interfaces with semi - formal representations : a study of designing argumentation structures . Proceedings of the 10th international conference on Intelligent user interfaces , 130 - 136 . Conklin , J . ( 2005 ) . Dialogue Mapping : Building Shared Understanding of Wicked Problems . John Wiley and Sons , Ltd . Convertino , G . , Billman , D . , Shrager , J . , Pirolli , P . , & Massar , J . P . ( 2008 ) . The CACHE Study : Group Effects in Computer - Supported Collaborative Analysis . Journal of Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 17 ( 4 ) , 353 - 393 . Cook , M . B . , & Smallman , H . S . ( 2007 ) . Visual Evidence Landscapes : Reducing Bias in Collaborative Intelligence Analysis . Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting Proceedings . Dennis , A . R . , & Valacich , J . S . ( 1993 ) . Computer brainstorms : More heads are better than one . Journal of Applied Psychology , 78 ( 4 ) , 531 - 537 . Eemeren , F . H . v . , & Grootendorst , R . ( 2003 ) . A Systematic Theory of Argumentation : The Pragma - dialectical Approach . Cambridge University Press . Erickson , T . , Halverson , C . , Kellogg , W . A . , Laff , M . , & Wolf , T . ( 2002 ) . Social Translucence : Designing Social Infrastructures that Make Collective Activity Visible . Communications of the ACM , 45 ( 4 ) , 40 - 44 . Farnham , S . , Chesley , H . R . , McGhee , D . E . , Kawal , R . , & Landau , J . ( 2000 ) . Structured online interactions : improving the decision - making of small discussion groups . Computer Supported Cooperative Work . Finholt , T . A . ( 2002 ) . Collaboratories . Annual Review of Information Science and Technology , 36 ( 1 ) , 73 - 107 . Gladwell , M . ( 2002 ) . The Tipping Point : How Little Things Can Make a Big Difference . Back Bay Books . Gopal , A . , & Prasad , P . ( 2000 ) . Understanding GDSS in Symbolic Context : Shifting the Focus from Technology to Interaction . MIS Quarterly , 24 ( 3 ) , 509 - 546 . Heng , M . S . H . , & de Moor , A . ( 2003 ) . From Habermas ' s communicative theory to practice on the internet . Information Systems Journal , 13 ( 4 ) , 331 - 352 . Iandoli , L . , Klein , M . , & Zollo , G . ( 2009 ) . Enabling on - line deliberation and collective decision - making through large - scale argumentation : a new approach to the design of an Internet - based mass collaboration platform . International Journal of Decision Support System Technology , 1 ( 1 ) , 69 - 91 . Jonassen , D . , & Jr , H . R . ( 2005 ) . Mapping alternative discourse structures onto computer conferences . International Journal of Knowledge and Learning , 1 ( 1 / 2 ) , 113 - 129 . Karacapilidis , N . , Loukis , E . , & Dimopoulos , S . ( 2004 ) . A Web - Based System for Supporting Structured Collaboration in the Public Sector . LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE , 218 - 225 . Kirschner , P . A . , Shum , S . J . B . , & Carr , C . S . ( 2003 ) . Visualizing Argumentation : Software tools for collaborative and educational sense - making . Springer . Kittur , A . , Suh , B . , Pendleton , B . A . , & Chi , E . H . ( 2007 ) . He says , she says : conflict and coordination in Wikipedia . SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Klein , M . ( 2007 ) . The MIT Collaboratorium : Enabling Effective Large - Scale Deliberation for Complex Problems . Klein , M . , & Iandoli , L . ( 2008 ) . Supporting Collaborative Deliberation Using a Large - Scale Argumentation System : The MIT Collaboratorium . Directions and Implications of Advanced Computing ; Conference on Online Deliberation ( DIAC - 2008 / OD2008 ) . Kramer , K . , & King , J . ( 1988 ) . Computer - Based Systems for Coperative Work and Group Decision Making . Computing Surveys , 20 ( June ) , 115 - 146 . Lowrance , J . D . , Harrison , I . W . , & Rodriguez , A . C . ( 2001 ) . Capturing Analytic Thought . First International Conference on Knowledge Capture , 84 - 91 . Luppicini , R . ( 2007 ) . Review of computer mediated communication research for education . Instructional Science , 35 ( 2 ) , 141 - 185 . Macaulay , L . A . , & Alabdulkarim , A . ( 2005 ) . Facilitation of e - Meetings : State - of - the - Art Review . e - Technology , e - Commerce and e - Service ( EEE ' 05 ) . Moor , A . d . , & Aakhus , M . ( 2006 ) . Argumentation Support : From Technologies to Tools . Communications of the ACM , 49 ( 3 ) , 93 . Pervan , G . P . , & Atkinson , D . J . ( 1995 ) . GDSS research : An overview and historical analysis . Group Decision and Negotiation , 4 ( 6 ) , 475 - 483 . Poole , M . S . , Holmes , M . , & DeSanctis , G . ( 1988 ) . Conflict Management and Group Decision Support Systems . Proceedings from Proceedings of Computer Supported Cooperative Work . Powell , A . , Piccoli , G . , & Ives , B . ( 2004 ) . Virtual teams : a review of current literature and directions for future research . ACM SIGMIS Database , 35 ( 1 ) , 6 - 36 . Rahwan , I . ( 2008 ) . Mass argumentation and the semantic web . Journal of Web Semantics , 6 ( 1 ) , 29 - 37 . Reagan - Cirincione , P . ( 1994 ) . Improving the accuracy of group judgment : a process intervention combining group facilitation , social judgment analysis , and information technology . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 58 ( 2 ) , 246 - 270 . Schulz - Hardt , S . , Frey , D . , Lüthgens , C . , & Moscovici , S . ( 2000 ) . Biased information search in group decision making . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 78 ( 4 ) , 655 - 669 . Shrager , J . , Billman , D . , Convertino , G . , Massar , J . P . , & Pirolli , P . ( 2010 ) . Soccer Science and the Bayes Community : Exploring the Cognitive Implications of Modern Scientific Communication . Topics in Cognitive Science , 2 ( 1 ) , 53 - 72 . Shum , S . J . B . , Selvin , A . M . , Sierhuis , M . , Conklin , J . , & Haley , C . B . ( 2006 ) . Hypermedia Support for Argumentation - Based Rationale : 15 Years on from gIBIS and QOC . In A . H . Dutoit , R . McCall , I . Mistrik , & B . Paech ( Eds . ) , Rationale Management in Software Engineering . Springer - Verlag . Smallman , H . S . ( 2008 ) . JIGSAW – Joint Intelligence Graphical Situation Awareness Web for collaborative intelligence analysis . In M . P . Letsky , N . Warner , S . Fiore , & C . A . P . Smith ( Eds . ) , Macrocognition in Teams : Theories and Methodologies ( pp . 321 - 337 ) . Aldershot , UK . : Ashgate . Steenbergen , M . R . , Bachtiger , A . , Sporndli , M . , & Steiner , J . ( 2003 ) . Measuring political deliberation : a discourse quality index . Comparative European Politics , 1 ( 1 ) , 21 - 48 . Sunstein , C . R . ( 2006 ) . Infotopia : How Many Minds Produce Knowledge . Oxford University Press . Surowiecki , J . ( 2005 ) . The Wisdom of Crowds . Anchor . Tapscott , D . , & Williams , A . D . ( 2006 ) . Wikinomics : How Mass Collaboration Changes Everything . Portfolio Hardcover . Tversky , A . , & Kahneman , D . ( 1974 ) . Judgments under uncertainty . Heuristics and biases . Science , 185 ( 4157 ) , 1124 - 1131 . Viegas , F . B . , Wattenberg , M . , & Dave , K . ( 2004 ) . Studying cooperation and conflict between authors with history flow visualizations . SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems . Walton , D . N . ( 2005 ) . Fundamentals of Critical Argumentation ( Critical Reasoning and Argumentation ) . Cambridge ( MA ) : Cambridge University Press . Walton , D . N . , & Krabbe , E . C . W . ( 1995 ) . Commitment in dialogue : Basic concepts of interpersonal reasoning . Albany , NY : State University of New York Press .