Covid - 19 : What do we know about “long covid” ? As recognition grows that many patients have long lasting effects , Elisabeth Mahase examines the evidence and the response Elisabeth Mahase clinicalreporter What is it ? “Long covid” is a term being used to describe illness in people who have either recovered from covid - 19 but are still report lasting effects of the infection or have had the usual symptoms for far longer than would be expected . Many people , including doctors whohavebeeninfected , havesharedtheiranecdotal experiencesonsocialmedia , inthetraditionalmedia , and through patients’ groups . Paul Garner , professor of infectious diseases at Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine , detailed his seven week experience with the virus for BMJ Opinion , describing it as “frightening and long . ” 1 As with many of the accounts being shared , Garner was not admitted to hospital , but he reported a long list of symptoms lasting weeks and leaving him feeling unable to function . The Royal College of General Practitioners says it expects GPs to see an influx of patients with “long covid” and has called for a rapid review of the requirements for returning GPs to see whether the streamlined approach introduced during the pandemic can be maintained . 2 Its chair , Martin Marshall , says , “The pressures in general practice prior to the pandemic have been well documented by the college , but we are now gearing up for the wave of new pressures coming our way as a direct result of covid - 19 . “There will be a significant influx of patients with lingering ‘long covid’ illness , both physical and emotional , and GPs must have the necessary resources and support to care for patients and help them come to terms with and readjust to the aftermath . ” What does the evidence say ? Aside from anecdotal evidence , there is as yet little research on this issue . However , it is being actively discussed within the research community . Writing in JAMA , a team of researchers from Italy reported thatnearlyninein10patients ( 87 % ) dischargedfrom a Rome hospital after recovering from covid - 19 were still experiencing at least one symptom 60 days after onset . They found that 13 % of the 143 people were completelyfreeofanysymptoms , while32 % hadone or two symptoms , and 55 % had three or more . 3 Although none of the patients had fever or any signs or symptoms of acute illness , many still reported fatigue ( 53 % ) , dyspnoea ( 43 % ) , jointpain ( 27 % ) , and chest pain ( 22 % ) . Two fifths of patients reported a worsened quality of life . Meanwhile , the team behind the UK Covid - 19 Symptom Study app , which collects symptom informationfromnearlyfourmillionusers , saystheir datashowthatonein10peoplewithcovid - 19aresick forthreeweeksormore . 4 Theteamsaid , “Mosthealth sources suggest that people will recover within two weeksorso . Butit’sbecomingincreasinglyclearthat this isn’t the case for everyone infected with coronavirus . ” The app was developed by the health science company ZOE , and the data are being analysed in collaboration with researchers at King’s College London . Are there any support services for affected people ? NHS England is set to launch an online portal later thismonthwherepeoplewhoaresufferinglongtermeffectsofcovid - 19 ( not just patients who were admitted to hospital ) can communicate with nurses , physiotherapists , and mental health specialists . The service will give people access to a local clinical team that will respond to inquiries and to an online peer support community , exercise tutorials , and mental health support . “Evidence shows that many of those survivors are likely to have significant ongoing health problems , including breathing difficulties , enduring tiredness , reducedmusclefunction , impairedabilitytoperform vital everyday tasks , and mental health problems such as post - traumatic stress disorder , anxiety , and depression , ” NHS England’s announcement said . Later in the summer , it said , the service will make personalisedpackagesofsupportavailable , although access to these will require a face to face assessment . People without online access will be provided with printed materials , “depending on demand . ” Patients’groupsarealsoprovidingpeersupport , and one such group on Facebook called the “Long Covid Support Group” already has more than 7000 members . 5 This group is calling for “proper rehab , research , andrecognition . ”Thehashtag“longcovid” is being used on social media to share personal experiences . What more is needed ? SARS - CoV - 2 is a very novel virus , only reportedly appearing in the human population at the end of 2019 , whichmeansthereisstillmuchthatthemedical andwiderresearchcommunitydonotknow . Tosolve this , well conducted long term research is needed . A new study to assess the long term effects of covid - 9 on hospital patients was announced on 5 July by the health and social care secretary for England , Matt Hancock . The Post - hospitalisation COVID - 19 Study ( PHOSP - COVID ) aimstorecruit10000patientsacross the UK , who will be followed for more than a year . 6 1 the bmj | BMJ 2020 ; 370 : m2815 | doi : 10 . 1136 / bmj . m2815 FEATURE The BMJ emahase @ bmj . com Cite this as : BMJ2020 ; 370 : m2815 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1136 / bmj . m2815 Published : 14 July 2020 The study is being run by the University Hospitals of Leicester NHS Trust and has been funded by the Medical Research Council , UK Research and Innovation , and the National Institute for Health Research . However , since it does not include milder cases that do not require hospital care , it will exclude many patients with stories like Garner’s . Competing interests : None declared . Commissioning and peer review : Not externally peer reviewed 1 Garner P . For 7 weeks I have been through a roller coaster of ill health , extreme emotions , and utterexhaustion . BMJOpinion . 5May2020 . https : / / blogs . bmj . com / bmj / 2020 / 05 / 05 / paul - garner - people - who - have - a - more - protracted - illness - need - help - to - understand - and - cope - with - the - con - stantly - shifting - bizarre - symptoms . 2 Wise J . GPs call for cut in red tape to manage aftermath of covid - 19 . BMJ2020 ; 370 : m2729 . doi : 10 . 1136 / bmj . m2729 pmid : 32636191 3 Carfì A , Bernabei R , Landi FGemelli Against COVID - 19 Post - Acute Care Study Group . Persistent symptoms in patients after acute covid - 19 . JAMA2020 ; 9 . doi : 10 . 1001 / jama . 2020 . 12603 . pmid : 32644129 4 How long does covid last ? Covid symptom study . 8 Jun 2020 . https : / / covid . join - zoe . com / post / covid - long - term . 5 Long Covid . https : / / www . longcovid . org . 6 The Post - hospitalisation COVID - 19 Study ( PHOSP - COVID ) . https : / / www . phosp . org . the bmj | BMJ 2020 ; 370 : m2815 | doi : 10 . 1136 / bmj . m2815 2 FEATURE