Community computing as human ± computer interaction JOHN M . CARROLL Center for Human ± Computer Interaction , Department of Computer Science , Virginia Tech , Blacksburg , VA 24060 - 0106 , USA ; e - mail : carroll @ cs . vt . edu Abstract . There is too little engagement between community computing and human± computer interaction . In the future there should be more . Better integrating community computing and human ± computer interaction can help to make HCI richer and more comprehensive , conceptually and methodologically . It can help HCI to have more of an impact on society and on everyday collective life . Six examples are brie¯y discussed . 1 . Introduction Community computing supports human ± computer interaction among neighbours . It facilitates informa - tion dissemination , discussion and joint activity pertaining to municipal government , public schools , civic groups , local events , community issues and concerns , and regional economic development and social services . It is not a new idea . In the USA , its roots are in 1970s community activismÐjobs , housing and veterans’ issues in the Berkeley Community Memory ( Farrington and Pine 1997 ) , community health in the Cleveland Free Net ( Beamish 1995 ) , and problems of the homeless in the Santa Monica Public Electronic Network ( Rogers et al . 1994 ) . Public education has also been a major focus . For example , Big Sky Telegraph supported teachers in rural Montana , linking one and two - room schools with regional libraries , and providing computer support for the literary and artistic projects of Native Americans ( Uncapher 1999 ) . Social activism remains a strong theme in community computing ( Schuler 1996 ) . It is a rapidly growing segment of computing world wide . A few minutes search of the World Wide web can easily identify hundreds of community networks . Today , activities like sending e - mail to a plumber , posting choral music selections for a church service to a web page , or joining a chat on proposed changes to school - bus routes are everyday computing experiences for many people . Community computing brings computer - supported co - operative work ( CSCW ) to personal computing , integrating two prominent themes of the past two decades in human ± computer interaction . The basic rationale for community computing , as for any compu - ter - supported co - operative work , is that people who want to communicate and collaborate are not always in the same place at the same time . The distinguishing feature is that the collaborators are neighbours , and that computer support supplements diverse opportunities to interact face to face . Although community computing is as old as human ± computer interaction ( HCI ) itself , and encompasses some of the most intimate HCI , there has been little mutual engagement between the two . This may be due to accidents of history . Human ± computer interaction developed out of problems in the commercial software industry . Civic sector computing developed as a topic in computers and society . In the landscape of the Associa - tion for Computing Machinery ( ACM ) , for example , these are largely disjoint special interest group areas ( SIGCHI and SIGSOC , respectively ) . There are , however , many reasons to expect synergies from better incorporating community computing into HCI . In part , these would be realized merely from broadening the scope of HCI , but I think there is potentially more to it than that . Assimilating civic sector computing into HCI would fundamentally enrich the concepts and approaches of HCI : . clarifying the notion of community , used so widely , and yet so lightly , in contemporary HCI discourse ; BEHAVIOUR & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY , 2001 , VOL . 20 , NO . 5 , 307±314 Behaviour & Information Technology ISSN 0144 - 929X print / ISSN 1362 - 3001 online # 2001 Taylor & Francis Ltd http : / / www . tandf . co . uk / journals DOI : 10 . 1080 / 0144929011007894 1 . broadening the range of organizational models countenanced in CSCW ; . emphasizing social engagement and human devel - opment in personal computing software ; . providing a highly accessible and rigorous incu - bator for new HCI technologies and applications ; . expanding the concept of usability to include larger - scope and longer - term social impacts ; and ®nally . complementing formal approaches to the training challenge of an information technology workforce and to the global challenge of the digital divide . In this brief discussion , I develop the suggestion that community computing should be incorporated into HCI under these six headings , though these are clearly not six independent points , and , naturally , re¯ect the provi - sional status of my thinking and on - going research . 2 . A better understanding of ` community’ Though investigations of community computing are not common in HCI , the term ` community’ has become a pervasive mantra . Contemporary writing is peppered with hopeful terminology like online community , user community , design community , virtual community and , of course , HCI community ( permuted in the US as CHI community ) . I believe the popularity of the term re¯ects a desire on the part of many HCI professionals to participate in and contribute to more meaningful social interchange . But the term is also clearly now just a buzzword ; the collection of people who have recently ordered a pair of socks from the same website is a rather impoverished example of community . Traditional proximate communities are of course not utopias . People who live in small , relatively isolated groups really cannot a V ord to initiate avoidable con¯icts . They must deal regularly with one another . They are mutual competitors for local resources , and yet need to rely on one another in times of crisis . Their children will associate with , and perhaps marry into , other families in the community . The underlying tensions of a proximate community are managed through morals and behavioural norms . In a moral community , members share a common ethical system entailing mutual obligation ; such a community is bound by commitment to a common purpose . In a normative community , members share rules for beha - viour and interpretation of behaviour ; such a commu - nity is bound by shared meanings . Thus , the social construction of a traditional community involves con - ¯ating the practical dependencies of living in proximity with commitments to shared purposes and meanings , often referred to as social capital ( see Komito 1998 and Putnam 2000 for further discussion ) . Such a ®rst - order analysis of community dynamics makes it possible to articulate distinctions among types of communities that are otherwise merely ®gures of speech . For example , Komito ( 1998 ) discusses the Ma®a as an example of a moral community , and the medical profession as an example of a normative community . These examples suggest how speci®c qualities of communities can be isolated and contrasted . In Komi - to’s examples , practical dependencies not deriving from living in proximity are supplemented and regulated with social mechanisms . These examples also help to emphasize the signi®cant level of commitment involved in community memberships . The term community appears to capture part of the consensus vision of HCI . An appropriate propaedeutic is a more serious articulation the concept so it can be used with technical content . Instead of merely labelling every newsgroup and chat room a community , we should seek to understand how such interacting groups can be analysed as communities , and what follows from such an analysis . An obvious component of such a project would be the study of how computing and networking facilitates and transforms the clearest cases of human communities , namely , proximate commu - nities . 3 . A richer concept of groups and collaboration One of the most important developments in HCI during the past two decades is the area of computer - supported co - operative work ( CSCW ) . It may seem unbelievable that before the mid - 1980s , HCI was concerned only with isolated individuals , who were interacting only with data . Many types of groups and group work situations have been studied under the aegis of CSCW , but almost all are instances of workplace computing . This focus on workplace interactions derives partly from what is of commercial value to the computing industry , and partly from the contemporary focus of ethnographic research . It can also be seen as a simplifying heuristic : workplace activity is well - struc - tured relative to other areas of human endeavour such as recreation . However , too singular a focus on workplace comput - ing has limited the understanding of groups and group work that can emerge from CSCW . There are many opportunities and challenges for computer - supported collaboration beyond the workplaceÐin recreation , education , informal learning , family and community J . M . Carroll 308 interactions , and so forth . Investigating these other contexts could provide a broader perspective on what groups and group activity can be like , and on issues and possibilities for computer - supported collaboration . Some of the most tantalizing ®eldwork in CSCW describes the tension between formal lines of authority and o(cid:129) cial views of job roles and work¯ow , on the one hand , and the actual ¯ow of work activity and information , on the other ( Button in press ) . In the civic sector , these issues manifest di V erently . Unlike a business , no one is even o(cid:129) cially in charge of a community ; there is no single line of authority . Laws and o(cid:129) cials , like a mayor or town council , have limited scope and impact . O(cid:129) cial actions either have little consequence or tend to be planned and implemented very publicly through extensive negotiation processes . Most community activity occurs through minimally co - ordinated and highly localized initiatives . When the senior citizens community create a mentoring pro - gramme , they only need the concurrence of the subgroups they wish to mentor . Communities function as confederations of largely autonomous subgroups . Groups publicize their activities to inspire themselves , to attract participation and support , and to leverage activities of peer groups . But they co - ordinate only to the extent of avoiding duplication of e V ort and minimizing con¯icts over shared resources , such as the use of meeting rooms in a community centre or public library . The motivation and reward structure for community network use is fundamentally di V erent than for workplace computing , relying almost exclusively on intrinsic motivation and individual initiative - taking . The diversity among the people constituting a community is greater than the range of job roles and relationships constituting most workplace organiza - tions . To be sure , there are interesting distinctions and relationships among lawyers , legal assistants and legal secretaries , but most of these can be understood in terms of a small number of role stereotypes and task dependencies . Proximate communities , in contrast , span all phases of life ( children , teenagers , adults , the elderly ) , all personal roles ( parents , siblings , friends ) , and all occupations ( teachers , shop owners , police ) . Any given community member plays multiple roles ; one is simul - taneously an adult , a parent , a friend , a teacher , a Rotarian , a ®rst - baseman , and so forth . Understanding groups and collaboration is obviously a key to the future of HCI . Studying the development , adoption , use and impact of collaboration technology for existing workplace organizations is an excellent approach to this . But too narrow a focus will limit both the practical and scienti®c utility of such studies . Work organizations of the future may di V er signi®cantly from those of the present . They may be less hierarchical , and more distributed ; they may rely on intrinsic motivation and loosely co - ordinated initiative - taking . CSCW should continually expand its focus to include the greatest variety of organizational models , and speci® - cally , it should investigate proximate communities . 4 . A more engaging vision of personal computing Computing in the home was an early inspiration in the development of HCI . It has now clearly emerged as an important social phenomenon and market . However , like the ®rst visions of o(cid:129) ce automation in the 1970s , many concepts of home computing are focused on individual use , and conceive of the potential users as relatively passive consumers of technology and informa - tion . Typical scenarios emphasize asymmetric interac - tions in which people request items and services , as in home shopping , computer games and video - on - demand . These may be valuable applications , but they address only a part of personal life . Much of what people do in the private portion of their lives is active , productive and collaborative . Tradition - ally , the home and the community are places of inter - generational collaborative learning and working . Fa - milies cook , clean , do laundry , give and receive care from one another and maintain communication with distant family members . They recall and preserve family history , discuss current events and read together . They visit and entertain neighbours . Neighbours work to - gether to plan and build schools , parks and other community infrastructure . Computing has been re - cruited to support many of these more active aspects of personal life : children and parents work together on Internet research projects ; grandparents distribute fa - mily letters via e - mail and participate in genealogy websites . Community computing highlights and facilitates an active concept of personal computing . For example , in our study of the Blacksburg Electronic Village , a community network in southwestern Virginia ( Carroll and Rosson 1996 ) , we observed that senior citizens had organized a mailing list to exchange and develop stories about life in Blacksburg during the 1960s , a period when members of the group were young adults . The group was interested in preserving these stories and making them available to other community members . We worked with them to create a web - based forum , Blacksburg Nostal - gia , for posting and annotating stories ( Carroll et al . 1999 ) . We found that the forum was used not only by other seniors , but also by younger people in the community , as well as by former members of the communityÐpeople who had moved away from Blacks - Community computing as human±computer interaction 309 burg , but who still felt connected to it . This is an example of a very traditional activity , namely community oral history , transformed by community networking . Many visions of ubiquitous computing emphasize the consequences of being unbound to place , for example , the potential ¯exibilities of sending an e - mail from the patio or making stock purchases while in an airport departure lounge . A variety of more personally - signi® - cant interactions are also enabled by ubiquitous computing . Family members and friends reassure us and depend upon us through direct contact , but in modern life one cannot always be co - present with loved ones . Kentaro Go developed the concept of familyware in which simple emotional messagesÐbasically tanta - mount to ` I am thinking of you now’Ðare subtly conveyed to distant loved ones ( Go et al . 2000 ) . Similar concepts are being developed , such as remote monitor - ing of the well - being of distant elderly relatives ( Mynatt and Rowan 2000 ) . A complementary view of ubiquitous computing takes speci®c advantage of being in a particular place . For example , a kitchen could sense and advise on actions taken thereÐmanaging inventory , food expiration dates , dietary constraints , nutrition , and food prepara - tion ( Kellogg et al . 1991 ) . Outside the home , a personal digital assistant alarm might be triggered by proximity to a speci®c resource , for example , passing by the pharmacy when a prescription is ready , the dry cleaner when the clothing is ready , or the post o(cid:129) ce when a package has just arrived . Such noti®cations could also be triggered ` manually’ by to - do items ; for example , passing by the deli with a mozzarella to - do or by the hardware store with a weed - and - feed to - do . Place - based applications may be most e V ective in circumstances where a person’s sense of place is most developed , as in his or her own community . In their personal lives , people utilize and relate to information technology in many ways . Consuming retail products and services and enjoying leisure time are , and will continue to be , important areas for personal computing . But they are not a comprehensive view of personal life . Personal life is also about learning and using tools , and creating and sharing resources . In order to adequately investigate and characterize current and future developments in personal computing , HCI must encompass the active and creative aspects of personal life . To do this , it must encompass community computing . 5 . A robust and accessible technology incubator Communities are often used for home - oriented technology ®eld trials . In the mid - 1990s there were several high - pro®le ®eld studies of home video services , including interactive shopping , games and programme guides , with movies , news and sports on demand . The Time Warner ` Full Service Network’ trial in Orlando , Florida , may have been the largest of these studies , involving over 4000 families . The goal of such trials is to re®ne underlying technologies , to characterize consumer preferences and to provide a testbed for developing products . Such trials function , to some extent , as formative evaluations in that their outcomes often redirect products and corporate strategies . After the three year Orlando trial , Time Warner shifted its focus to television ± Internet integration . But fundamentally , such trials are summative ; they determine what will come to market . Community settings are also appropriate , though less typically used , for incubating new HCI technologies through rapid prototyping and formative evaluation . Communities are highly robust technology incubators ; the diversity among users , applications and hardware and software infrastructures that one ®nds in a community contrasts with the relative homogeneity of work organizations . Communities are also highly accessible technology incubators ; they are easy to get to and inexpensive to use ; we all live in one . Because the culture of community computing depends on intrinsic motivation , it is easy to get rich feedback , one only has to listen . Indeed , had Time Warner taken a more formative perspective , they would surely have noticed before mid - 1997 that interactive video concepts required integration with the Internet . Aspects of our work in the Blacksburg Electronic Village illustrate how community computing can serve as an HCI technology incubator . One of our interests was supporting long - term but intermittent collabora - tions . We worked with middle and high school science teachers who were interested in having their students work together and with community mentors on long - term projects . The school setting models many key requirements for collaboration environments : The inter - action is document based ( that is , not merely chat ) and requires some level of shared editing support . Synchro - nous and asynchronous interactions must be integrated to accommodate di V erences in schedules , and to maintain task awareness over signi®cant spans of time . The environment must incorporate desktop video to enable sharing of physical artefacts . Our solution was an integration of existing collaboration mechanisms that was more comprehensively task - oriented ( Isenhour et al . 2000 ) . Working with community groups has emphasized to us the potential importance of exploiting ` sense of place’ in organizing collaborative virtual environments ( Harri - son and Dourish 1996 ) . For example , we worked with J . M . Carroll 310 the local government in Blacksburg to support colla - borative annotation of zoning plans and other digital artefacts in virtual town meetings . This guided us to eventually develop a new kind of MOO , as an interactive website navigated by a sophisticated point - and - click map ( Carroll et al . 2001 ) . Community applications can also drive underlying technologies . We identi®ed a variety of needs for document - level sharing in commu - nity applications that motivated the development of an architecture for lightweight client - server updating of shared objects ( Isenhour et al . 2001 ) . In these projects , we found that rapid cycles of user feedback and prototyping were enabled by the accessi - bility of our community partners and the informality of our relationships with them . One of our current collaborators in a stream monitoring project rather happily observed that he expected our involvement to enrich the project , though not necessarily to make anything faster or better in the short term . We found the same sort of attitude among the teachers we worked with . Our partners understand that our participation involves investigating computer support by supporting them . This kind of orientation makes it easier to engage users at a higher level , as opposed to getting caught up in details of keystrokes and pixels . It is tremendously useful to have on - going , high - bandwidth feedback ; it contrasts sharply with the Time Warner sense of a community testbed in which only a small number of indicators are tracked . Communities are also good incubators for methods and techniques . Unlike commercial clients , community groups can a V ord greater tolerance for the vagaries of exploring new practices . For example , during the early 1990s various participatory design methods came into wide use in software development . However , in most cases these were incremental re®nements of previous market research practices like focus groups and require - ments interviews . We wanted to explore the conse - quences of involving users directly and pervasively in a 5 ± 6 - year lifecycle project . We were able to create a relationship with a group of public school teachers that allowed us to investigate techniques and consequences for what we now call long - term participatory design ( Carroll et al . 2000 ) . It is di(cid:129) cult to imagine how a commercial organization could have sustained a meth - odology project like this . Standard engineering practice in HCI is to develop methods and tools through an iterative process of prototyping , evaluation and re®nement . This process requires early and continuing access to rich and robust usage contexts . Particularly given the growing focus on personal computing , communities are essential technol - ogy incubators for assuring the relevance and e V ective - ness of new HCI technologies and applications . 6 . A broader notion of usability One of the most interesting threads of development in HCI through the past two decades is the conception of ` usability’ . Initially , the term was taken as synonymous with easy or simple . As understanding of the usage experience and its consequences developed , usability was enriched with ideas from human development to include notions like cognitively stimulating , consistent with prior knowledge and transparently useful in the work at hand . During the 1990s , as CSCW became the dominant problem area for HCI and organizational issues became better understood , usability was further elaborated to incorporate notions like awareness of and access to other people in the performance of a work task , and support for existing workplace roles and practices . As the utilization of computing expands into private and civic life , our understanding of usability should broaden further to encompass qualities like eudaimonic well - being ( Ryan and Deci 2001 ) , collective e(cid:129) cacy ( Bandura 1997 ) , cultural identity ( Cli V ord 1986 ) and social capital ( Putnam 2000 ) . In community computing , people accomplish tasks together , but the most sig - ni®cant consequence of these collaborations is often larger - scale and / or longer - term . In HCI , health and well - being are usually thought of in terms of workplace ergonomicsÐproblems of physi - cal posture and manipulation that can be long - term , and psychological stressors that are generally short - term . Technology can clearly have broader e V ects . People who report being happy when engaged in social interaction , report being bored and unhappy when watching television ( Kubey and Csikszentmihalyi 1990 ) ; television viewing is linked to reduced physical activity , and poorer physical and mental health ( Anderson et al . 1998 , Sidney et al . 1998 ) . These are issues of usability - in - the - large . Indeed concerns about impacts of Internet computing on health and well - being have already been raised quite visibly ( Kraut et al . 1998 ) . People’s beliefs about their own speci®c capabilities exert in¯uence on learning and performance outcomes ( Bandura 1997 ) . High perceived self - e(cid:129) cacy for a domain causes individuals to set more challenging goals , to work harder on di(cid:129) cult aspects of tasks , to master new competencies and to achieve more . Group mem - bers’ beliefs about collective e(cid:129) cacy predict group performance . Collective e(cid:129) cacy is a function of inter - related personal e(cid:129) cacy beliefs , including both mem - bers’ appraisals of personal capability for functions performed within the group ( for example , the belief that there is someone you can turn to for advice about handling problems with your family ) and members’ appraisals of the group’s capability ( for example , the Community computing as human±computer interaction 311 belief that one’s community can improve the quality of public schools without help from the state government ) . The tools people use , such as computers and software , can a V ect their perceptions of both self - e(cid:129) cacy and collective e(cid:129) cacy , and thereby enhance or impair future learning and performance . Although it can seem like the world has been thoroughly homogenized , we are not all members of the same culture . Moreover , the nature of cultural groupings is itself dynamic , as evidenced by the on - going re - examination of multiculturalism in the USA triggered by the 2000 census . Cultural identity , including regional folkways , mores , and concerns , contributes to the creativity of the self and to the diversity of society , but it is a complex social construction that must be accommodated , encouraged and celebrated . It is under assault throughout the world by mass production of all sorts , including , of course , one - size - ®ts - all software and user interfaces . Although the risks of poor usability with respect to cultural identity are becoming better under - stood , it is not now well - understood how to manage HCI design to ensure preferred outcomes ( Prabhu and delGaldo 1999 , Stephanidis 2000 ) . Social capital is a key concept in contemporary studies of the decline of civil society and the rise of utilitarian individualism ( Bellah et al . 1986 , Putnam 2000 ) . The creation of social capital involves the establishment and maintenance of social networks , shared goals and values , and social norms of reciprocity . Social capital is not a transient state , like satisfaction or frustration , or a discrete achievement , either present or absent ; it is a social resource that it developed . It is not an individual state or achievement ; it is a collective good bene®ting everyone who lives in the community . Systems and applications that enhance social capital will have greater long - term usability for the members of the community ; those that diminish the social capital of organizations are less usable . Usability is the touchstone concept of HCI . As our understanding of the usage experience and its con - sequences has grown , the concept of usability has grown . Community computing emphasizes further personal consequences of interacting with technology and , thereby , can help to develop the concept of usability and techniques for evaluating usability ( Carroll and Rosson 2001 ) . 7 . Addressing the challenge of developing an IT work - force Much of the earliest HCI research concerned itself with the problems of ` new users’ . In the 1980s , spreadsheet and word processing applications were widely adopted for routine o(cid:129) ce tasks . O(cid:129) ce workers were , rather abruptly , asked to learn computing skills just to perform their jobs . This was the ®rst information technology workforce crisis ; notions like ` computer phobia’ became common . During this period , HCI research helped to produce e V ective training designs , more transparent user interface metaphors , and mea - surement - oriented approaches to developing usable systems . Today , society faces a broader version of the ` new user’ challenge . Some computing skill is required in almost every job , and a rapidly - increasing proportion of jobs require a variety of highly sophisticated computer skills . Many secondary schools now treat computing as an element of basic literacy , and computer science is now often the largest undergraduate major in univer - sities . However , a large number of adults already in the workforce lack computing skills entirely , or have only basic o(cid:129) ce application skills ( the ones that were the objective of the ®rst ` new user’ challenge ) . Other adults are not currently in the workforce , and thus face the double challenge of attaining the skills that would allow them to enter the workforce ( for example , homemakers , disabled persons , the elderly , and members of margin - alized minority groups ) . In the USA , and I presume in other ` advanced’ nations , many education initiatives are underway to address the challenge of developing an information technology workforce . Most approaches involve formal education , for example , expanding and better utilizing university programmes in computer science . And it is clearly important to increase the capacity and accessi - bility of such programmes . However , formal education is frequently inaccessible to adult learners in a sense more profound than the mere availability of classroom seats . Adult learners are not engaged e V ectively by the ` learning for learning’s sake’ orientation of formal education . For adults it is critically important to learn new skills in a meaningful context , in which real goals are pursued and achieved in the course of the learning ( Knowles 1973 ) . This is not news to HCI ; it proved to be a key to meeting the ®rst ` new user’ challenge 20 years ago ( Carroll 1990 ) . Informal , community - based activities can comple - ment formal approaches to the training challenge of an information technology workforce . Persons not in workforce may still be active and engaged members of their community . Indeed , homemakers and retired people are typically more engaged in community development activities than the fully employed , who often work outside the community . People with existing and active commitments to their communities may ®nd it more meaningful to learn about web programming , J . M . Carroll 312 for example , by helping to create a web application for a community service organization , than by attending an intensive programming class ( Carroll et al . 2001 ) . What we know about adult learners suggests that this would indeed be the case . The training challenge of an information technology workforce in advanced nations is a special case of what is now widely called the ` digital divide’ : the global chasm between those who have access to technology and the skills to use it , and those who do not . The digital divide clearly originates in inequitable distributions of wealth and resources around the world . But the problem will not be remedied just by sending out hardware and software . The bigger issue will be e V ectively engaging the knowledge , interests and experiences of new usersÐ a challenge HCI has successfully confronted before . I believe that the argument for community - based training interventions given above extends , mutatis mutandis , to addressing the broader problem of universal access to information technology . HCI has not played much of a role in addressing either the information technology workforce challenge or the greater challenge of the digital divide , but it de®nitely could . To close this discussion , I suggest that greater engagement with community computing can make HCI richer and more comprehensive in its concepts and methods , as well as helping it to be more e V ective and to have more impact with respect to the signi®cant technical issues facing computing and all of society . The case for this must be made in research and development results , but the possibility should be nurtured by a more ambitiously social conception of what HCI is . Acknowledgements Luckily , there was a hard - stop deadline for this paper , or I would still be working on it . I am grateful to Dennis Neale , Mary Beth Rosson and Wendy Schafer for comments . My research and ideas about community computing are supported by the US National Science Foundation , IIS 0080864 . References A NDERSON , R . E . , C RESPO , C . J . , B ARTLETT , S . J . , C HESKIN , L . J . and P RATT , M . 1998 , Relationship of activity and television watching with body weight and level of fatness among children . Journal of the American Medical Association , 279 , 938 ± 942 . B ANDURA , A . 1997 , Self - e(cid:129) cacy : the Exercise of Control ( New York : W . H . Freeman ) . B EAMISH , A . 1995 , Communities on - line : community - based computer networks . Masters thesis , Department of Urban Studies and Planning , MIT . B ELLAH , R . , M ADSEN , R . , S ULLIVAN , W . , S WINDLER , A . and T IPTON , S . 1986 , Habits of the Heart : Individualism and Commitment in American Life ( California : University of California Press ) . B UTTON , G . in press , Studies of work in HCI . In J . M . Carroll ( ed . ) , Toward a Multidisciplinary Science of Human ± Computer Interaction ( San Francisco : Morgan - Kaufmann ) . C ARROLL , J . M . 1990 , The Nurnberg Funnel : Designing Minimalist Instruction for Practical Computer Skill ( Cam - bridge , MA : MIT Press ) . C ARROLL , J . M . , C HIN , G . , R OSSON , M . B . and N EALE , D . C . 2000 , The Development of cooperation : ®ve years of participatory design in the virtual school . In D . Boyarski and W . Kellogg ( eds ) , DIS’2000 : Designing Interactive Systems , Brooklyn , NY , 17 ± 19 August ( New York : Association for Computing Machinery ) , pp . 239 ± 251 . C ARROLL , J . M . and R OSSON , M . B . 1996 , Developing the Blacksburg Electronic Village . Communications of the ACM , 39 , 69 ± 74 . C ARROLL , J . M . and R OSSON , M . B . 2001 , Better home shopping or new democracy ? Evaluating community network out - comes . Proceedings of CHI 2001 : Conference on Human Factors of Computing Systems , Seattle , WA , 31 March ± 5 April ( New York : ACM ) , pp . 372 ± 379 . C ARROLL , J . M . , R OSSON , M . B . , I SENHOUR , P . L . , V AN M ETRE , C . , S CHAEFER , W . A . and G ANOE , C . H . 2001 , MOOsburg : multi - user domain support for a community network . Internet Research , 11 , 65 ± 73 . C ARROLL , J . M . , R OSSON , M . B . , V AN M ETRE , C . A . , K ENGERI , R . , K ELSO , J . and D ARSHANI , M . 1999 , Blacksburg Nostalgia : A Community History Archive . In M . A . Sasse and C . Johnson ( eds ) , Proceedings of Seventh IFIP Conference on Human ±Computer Interaction INTERACT 99 , Edinburgh , 30 August ± 3 September ( Amsterdam : IOS Press / Interna - tional Federation for Information Processing ( IFIP ) ) , pp . 637 ± 647 . C ARROLL , J . M . , T HOMPSON , J . A . , D UNLAP , D . R . , I SENHOUR , P . L . and R OSSON , M . B . 2001 , Leveraging the World - Wide Web for Informal Learning Through Community Development . Proposal to the National Science Foundation , Information Technology Workforce Initiative . C LIFFORD J . 1986 , Introduction : partial truths . In J . Cli V ord and G . E . Marcus ( eds ) , Writing Cultures : the Poetics and Politics of Writing Ethnography ( Berkeley , CA : University of California Press ) , pp . 1 ± 26 . F ARRINGTON , C . and P INE , E . 1997 , Community memory : a case study in community communication . In P . Agre and D . Schuler ( eds ) , Reinventing Technology , Rediscovering Com - munity ( Mahwah , NJ : Ablex ) . G O , K . , C ARROLL , J . M . and I MAMIYA , A . 2000 , Familyware : communicating with someone you love . IFIP Conference on Information Technology at Home , Wolverhampton , UK , 28± 30 June . In A . Sloane and F . van Rijn ( eds ) , Home Informatics and Telematics : Information , Technology and Society ( Boston , MA : Kluwer Academic ) , pp . 125 ± 140 . H ARRISON , S . and D OURISH , P . 1996 , Re - place - ing space : the roles of place and space in collaborative systems . In Proceedings of CSCW’96 , Boston , 16 ± 20 November , pp . 67± 76 . I SENHOUR , P . L . , C ARROLL , J . M . , N EALE , D . C . , R OSSON , M . B . and D UNLAP , D . R . 2000 , The Virtual School : an integrated collaborative environment for the classroom . Educational Technology and Society , 3 , 74 ± 86 . Community computing as human±computer interaction 313 I SENHOUR , P . , R OSSON , M . B . and C ARROLL , J . M . in press . Supporting interactive collaboration on the Web with CORK . Interacting with Computers , 13 , 655 ± 676 . K ELLOGG , W . A . , C ARROLL , J . M . and R ICHARDS , J . T . 1991 , Making reality a cyberspace . In M . Benedikt ( ed . ) , Cyber - space : First Steps ( Cambridge , MA : MIT Press ) , pp . 411 ± 431 . K NOWLES , M . S . 1973 , The Adult Learner : a Neglected Species ( Houston : Gulf Publishing / American Society for Training and Development ) . K OMITO , L . 1998 , The Net as a foraging society : ¯exible communities . The Information Society , 14 , 97 ± 106 . K RAUT , R . , L UNDMARK , V . , P ATTERSON , M . , K IESLER , S . , M UKOPADHYAY , T . and S CHERLIS , W . 1998 , Internet paradox : a social technology that reduces social involvement and psychological well - being ? American Psychologist , 53 , 1017 ± 1031 . K UBEY , R . and C SIKSZENTMIHALYI , M . 1990 , Television and the Quality of Life : How Viewing Shapes Everyday Experience ( Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum ) . M YNATT , E . D and R OWAN , J . 2000 , Cross - generation commu - nication via digital picture frames . IFIP Conference on Information Technology at Home , Wolverhampton , 28 ± 30 June . In A . Sloane and F . van Rijn ( eds ) , Home Informatics and Telematics : Information , Technology and Society , Vol . 2 ( Wolverhamton , UK : International Federation for Informa - tion Processing ) , pp . 77 ± 83 . P RABHU , G . V . and D ELGALDO , E . M . ( eds ) 1999 , Designing for Global Markets : Proceedings of the First International Workshop on Internationalization of Products and Systems , Rochester , NY , 20 ± 22 May ( Rochester , NY : Backhouse Press ) . P UTNAM , R . 2000 , Bowling Alone : The Crumbling and Revival of American Community ( New York : Simon & Schuster ) . R OGERS , E . M . , C OLLINS - J ARVIS , L . and S CHMITZ , J . 1994 , The PEN Project in Santa Monica : Interactive communication , equality , and political action . Journal of the American Society for Information Science , 45 , 401 ± 410 . R YAN , R . M . and D ECI , E . L . 2001 , On happiness and human potentials : a review of hedonic and eudaimonic well - being . Annual Review of Psychology , 52 , 141 ± 166 . S CHULER , D . 1996 , New Community Networks : Wired for Change ( Reading , MA : Addison - Wesley ) . S IDNEY , S . , S TERNFELD , B . , H ASKELL , W . L . , J ACOBS , D . R . , C HESNEY , M . A . and H ULLEY , S . B . 1998 , Television viewing and cardiovascular risk factors in young adults : the CARDIA study . Annals of Epidemiology , 6 , 154 ± 159 . S TEPHANIDIS , C . ( ed . ) 2000 , User Interfaces for All : Concepts , Methods , and Tools ( Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum ) . U NCAPHER , W . 1999 , New communities / new communication : Big Sky Telegraph and its community . In M . Smith and P . Kollock ( eds ) , Communities in Cyberspace ( London : Rou - tledge ) , pp . 264 ± 289 . J . M . Carroll 314