Strategic Management Journal Strat . Mgmt . J . ( 2012 ) Published online EarlyView in Wiley Online Library ( wileyonlinelibrary . com ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj . 2004 Received 7 July 2010 ; Final revision received 27 June 2012 MICROFOUNDATIONS OF STRATEGIC PROBLEM FORMULATION † MARKUS BAER , KURT T . DIRKS , and JACKSON A . NICKERSON * OlinBusinessSchool , WashingtonUniversityinSt . Louis , St . Louis , Missouri , U . S . A . Before a strategy can be developed , the problem it is supposed to address needs to be formulated . We establish the microfoundations of strategic problem formulation by developing a theory that predicts a core set of impediments to formulation that arise when complex , ill - structured problems are addressed by heterogeneous teams . These impediments fundamentally constrain and narrow problem formulation , thereby limiting solution search and potential value creation . We establish these impediments as a set of design goals , which , if remedied by an appropriately constructed mechanism , can expand problem formulation to be more comprehensive . Finally , we consider how organizations can improve problem formulation by creating a structured process that satisﬁes the theoretically derived design goals and detail a speciﬁc example of this mechanism ( collaborative structured inquiry ) . Copyright  2012 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . INTRODUCTION Designing new business strategies , producing inno - vations to grow proﬁt , or developing novel supply chain conﬁgurations to achieve a cost advantage are some of the complex , ill - structured strate - gic challenges organizations must grapple with in creating sources of competitive advantage ( e . g . , Camillus , 2008 ; Nickerson , Silverman , and Zenger , 2007 ) . 1 Tackling these strategic challenges is often the domain of teams , particularly those that bring together actors from heterogeneous backgrounds Keywords : problem formulation ; teams ; structured pro - cess ; incentives ; selection ∗ Correspondence to : Jackson A . Nickerson , Olin Business School , Washington University in St . Louis , One Brookings Drive . St . Louis , MO 63130 , U . S . A . E - mail : nickerson @ wustl . edu † Authors are listed alphabetically . 1 Challenges include both problems and opportunities . Through - out the remaining paper , we use the more conventional term ‘problem’ but do so with the intent of referring to problems and opportunities . and disciplines , such as top management or cross - functional / interdisciplinary teams ( e . g . , Amason , 1996 ; Bantel and Jackson , 1989 ; Finkelstein , Ham - brick , and Cannella , 2009 ; Nickerson and Zenger 2004 ; Schweiger , Sandberg , and Ragan , 1986 ; Wanous and Youtz , 1986 ) . To create valuable solutions to strategic problems , however , these teams ﬁrst must know what problem they should be addressing . Indeed , as many scientists recog - nize , ‘the formulation of a problem is often more essential than its solution . . . ’ ( Einstein and Infeld , 1938 : 92 ) . Problem formulation has long been acknowl - edged as a core activity in strategic decision mak - ing ( Quinn , 1980 ; Shrivastava and Grant , 1985 ; Witte , 1972 ) . Problem formulation is distinguish - able from the more frequently studied activity of problem solving , which comprises the gener - ation , evaluation , and selection of alternative solu - tions . Problem formulation can , for example , allow ﬁrms to identify fundamental challenges in their value chain for which they can generate alterna - tive innovative solutions and choose the optimal Copyright  2012 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . M . Baer , K . T . Dirks , and J . A . Nickerson one to provide unique value . Thus , problem for - mulation profoundly determines what problem is solved and ultimately the quality of the solution ( e . g . , Ackoff and Emery , 1972 ; Churchman , 1971 ; Duncker , 1945 ; Loasby , 1976 ; Nutt , 1992 ; Simon , 1973 ; Simon and Hayes , 1976 ; Volkema , 1983 ) . Indeed , according to Mitroff and Featheringham ( 1974 ) , one of the most important challenges of the problem solving activity is solving the ‘wrong’ problem by adopting a formulation that is either too narrow or inappropriate . Similarly , Mintzberg , Raisinghani , and Theoret ( 1976 ) concluded that diagnosing or formulating the problem may be the most important aspect of strategic decision making . Despite its long - recognized importance , strate - gic problem formulation ( SPF ) has attracted only limited attention from scholars and there is a lack of understanding as to the microfoundations of this important activity . 2 In fact , the observation by Lyles and Mitroff ( 1980 ) that most efforts have been directed toward identifying and describing optimal methods for solving already well - deﬁned problems and that little is known about how prob - lems are formulated appears to be as true today as it was three decades ago . Mirroring this lack of scholarly attention , Mintzberg et al . ( 1976 ) and Nutt ( 1984 ) portrayed managers as being equally oblivious to the importance of systematically for - mulating problems , frequently skipping or abbre - viating formulation activities . In fact , analyzing 33 case histories of SPF processes in large U . S . companies , Lyles ( 1981 ) found that 75 percent of problems that went through a problem - solving process had to be recycled back to problem formu - lation suggesting that many managers were either initially deﬁning the problem inappropriately or neglecting this stage altogether ( Niederman and DeSanctis , 1995 ) . A systematic approach to effec - tively formulating strategic problems appears to be rare . Given the importance of problem formulation for strategic decision making , however , develop - ing insights into this activity should be of great theoretical and practical relevance . In the present paper , we advance the science and practice of SPF in three ways . First , having highlighted the importance of problem formula - tion for strategic management , we provide a novel 2 We use the term ‘microfoundations’ to refer to the analysis of behaviors and interactions of economic actors that underpin aggregate phenomena , such as strategic problem formulation . conceptualization of the problem formulation activ - ity in teams and the criterion by which to evaluate its success . Our focus is on SPF in teams because tackling multifaceted and difﬁcult - to - deﬁne strate - gic issues typically requires the formation of teams , particularly those that bring together indi - viduals from heterogeneous backgrounds and disciplines , to assemble broadly dispersed informa - tion and knowledge sets ( e . g . , Mason and Mitroff , 1981 ; Mitroff and Emshoff , 1979 ) . We conceptu - alize problem formulation as a collective activity aimed at translating an initial problem symptom or web of symptoms into a set of questions or alternative formulations of the problem that are sufﬁciently well - deﬁned in terms of the causes of the symptoms to enable the subsequent search for or generation of solutions ( Lyles and Mitroff , 1980 ; Mason and Mitroff , 1981 ) . Speciﬁcally , problem formulation encompasses two sets of interdepen - dent activities—one that involves establishing the web of correlated regularities spanning all symp - toms that are related to the initial symptom that launched the inquiry and another activity that involves the formulation of all causes that explain one or more of the previously identiﬁed symptoms . Second , relying on a set of assumptions common to the ﬁeld of strategic management—strategic problems are complex and ill - structured ; individu - als are boundedly rational and may be self - interest seeking with guile ; teams involved in strategic decisions consist of individuals with heteroge - neous information , knowledge , and motivation— we theoretically identify a set of impediments that impact problem formulation . 3 We then consider the set of impediments as criteria—call them design goals—against which mechanisms for improving the problem formulation activity can be evaluated . Third , we consider how organizations can im - prove problem formulation by creating a struc - tured process that satisﬁes the design goals that emerged from our theoretical analysis . The extant literature provides limited guidance as to how ﬁrms can improve their SPF capabilities . Although exist - ing work has provided descriptive accounts of how organizations formulate problems ( e . g . , Lyles and Mitroff , 1980 ) and has begun to explore the strategies and approaches that promote success - ful problem formulation ( e . g . , Mason and Mitroff , 3 Our theory begins with the recognition of a situation to be addressed . Such recognition assumes managerial attention has enabled the identiﬁcation of the symptom ( e . g . , Ocasio , 1997 ) . Copyright  2012 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . ( 2012 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj Strategic Problem Formulation 1981 ; Volkema , 1986 ) , most efforts have lacked theoretical grounding . Our effort represents one of the ﬁrst attempts to theoretically motivate the design of a structured process . We provide an illus - trative example of a structured process that is a unique recombination of known process steps that collectively mitigate the set of impediments and satisfy the design goals . It is the speciﬁc sequence of steps and the ability to verify execution of the steps that is unique about the structured process . In doing so , we integrate theories of individual and group behavior with theories of strategic decision making ( see Coff and Kryscynski , 2011 ) . In addi - tion , as we consider in the Discussion section , our analysis has implications for the dynamic capa - bilities perspective ( Eisenhardt and Martin , 2000 ; Helfat et al . , 2007 ; Teece , Pisano , and Shuen , 1997 ) , particularly , for the various ‘organizational and managerial processes , procedures , systems , and structures that undergird each class of capa - bility’ ( Teece , 2007 : 1321 ) . THEORETICAL BACKGROUND Strategic problems We focus our theoretical development explicitly on the formulation of strategic problems . Strate - gic problems are typically those that have high stakes and are of critical importance to a ﬁrm’s success , especially in the long term ( Ireland and Miller , 2004 ) . We deﬁne a ( strategic ) problem as a deviation from a desired set of speciﬁc or a range of acceptable conditions resulting in a symp - tom or a web of symptoms recognized as needing to be addressed ( e . g . , Cowan , 1986 ; Cyert and March , 1963 ; Newell and Simon , 1972 ) . Strategic problems , by their very nature , are complex and ill - structured ( Kilmann and Mitroff , 1979 ; Lyles and Mitroff , 1980 ; Watson , 1976 ) . A problem is complex when it involves ( 1 ) a large number of different variables , many of which may not be directly observable such that only knowledge about symptoms is available from which the underlying state then has to be inferred ; ( 2 ) a high degree of connectivity among the elements of the problem such that change in any one variable will affect the status of many other variables making it dif - ﬁcult to anticipate the potential consequences of a given situation , especially because the effects of these interactions are generally not immedi - ately observable ; and ( 3 ) a dynamic component resulting in the pattern of interactions changing over time . Due to a general lack of understanding of the variables involved and the interdependen - cies among them , few formalized and agreed upon approaches are in place for formulating and mak - ing decisions regarding such problems , render - ing them not only complex but also ill - structured ( e . g . , Fernandes and Simon , 1999 ; Funke , 1991 ; Mason and Mitroff , 1981 ) . Because of these fea - tures , strategic problems invite the development of multiple , often competing views of the problem . As a result , problem formulation activities have been suggested to be of particular importance with respect to strategic problems and the decision mak - ing activities surrounding them ( Lyles , 1981 ; Lyles and Mitroff , 1980 ; Mason and Mitroff , 1981 ) . In the following sections , we ( 1 ) consider the crite - rion of success for the problem formulation activity and ( 2 ) theoretically analyze the key impediments that ﬁrms face in formulating strategic problems . Evaluating the success of the problem formulation activity What constitutes successful problem formulation ? Ultimately , we expect that problem formulation will result in better quality decisions as well as in decisions that are likely to be more accept - able to senior management and thus more likely to be implemented successfully and expeditiously . It may , however , be difﬁcult to use those downstream metrics as reliable gauges of problem formulation . For example , using acceptability as the criterion carries the risk of curtailing problem formulation as less acceptable or controversial formulations , despite their potential to contribute to the under - standing of the underlying problem , and are likely to be withheld . Using the quality of the decision as the relevant yardstick may also be problematic because activities other than problem formulation ( e . g . , solution derivation , decision implementation ) are likely to impact quality , thereby providing an unreliable and invalid measure of the formulation activity . Given these shortcomings , we propose comprehensiveness as a primary metric by which to judge the success of the problem formulation activity . Comprehensiveness is deﬁned as the extent to which alternative , relevant problem formulations are identiﬁed with respect to an initial symptom or web of symptoms . Although the concept of com - prehensiveness in strategic decision making is not Copyright  2012 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . ( 2012 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj M . Baer , K . T . Dirks , and J . A . Nickerson new ( Fredrickson , 1984 ; Fredrickson and Mitchell , 1984 ) , our use of the concept and term differs in at least two ways from previous work . First , we use comprehensiveness as a criterion to evaluate speciﬁcally and exclusively the problem formu - lation activity , as opposed to the entire strategic decision making process . Second , whereas previ - ous work has used comprehensiveness to evalu - ate the process of strategic decision making ( e . g . , Goll and Rasheed , 1997 ; Miller , Burke , and Glick , 1998 ) , we use this concept to evaluate an outcome of the formulation activity . According to our deﬁnition , comprehensiveness increases as the number of alternative problem for - mulations grows . The ultimate success of the prob - lem formulation activity is intimately connected to the number of alternative formulations pro - posed regarding a symptom or web of symptoms ( Boland , 1978 ; Volkema , 1986 , 1988 ) . For exam - ple , Niederman and DeSanctis ( 1995 ) suggested that a necessary criterion for achieving accurate and complete problem formulation is for teams to engage in intensive search for information—an activity that should allow for alternative problem perspectives to emerge , that is , for equivocality to surface , encouraging more successful problem solving in the future . In a similar vein , Volkema and Gorman ( 1998 ) considered problem formula - tion to ﬂourish to the extent that teams extensively search for information allowing for the genera - tion of alternative , competing problem understand - ings . Lyles and Mitroff ( 1980 ) also suggested that improved formulation entails the generation and selection of alternative views of the problem . It is important to note , however , that , in con - trast to some previous accounts , we do not equate comprehensiveness with completeness ( number of formulations divided by total number of possible formulations ) . The total number of possible formu - lations for a given problem—especially when it is complex and ill - structured and , as a result , multi - ple , competing , yet equally valid views of the prob - lem are plausible—often remains unknown and may even be unknowable . As stated by Rittel and Webber ( 1973 : 161 , emphasis in original ) , ‘the for - mulation of a [ complex ] problem is the problem . ’ This impossibility implies that any optimality cri - terion , such as completeness , is not appropriate for evaluating the success of the problem formulation activity ( Miller et al . , 1998 ; Mitroff , Emshoff , and Kilmann , 1979 ; Rittel and Webber , 1973 ; Smith , 1989 ) . Relevance is the second component of our conceptualization of problem formulation compre - hensiveness . Each alternative formulation must be relevant by illustrating at least one mechanism that causes one or more of the identiﬁed symp - toms ( Mitroff et al . , 1979 ) . A set of formulations that addresses only a subset of symptoms is hence considered to be less relevant and , as a result , less comprehensive than a set that addresses the entire web of symptoms . There is a caveat to this conceptualization . Formulations that suggest mechanisms that produce symptoms outside the web of symptoms , even while explaining some identiﬁed symptoms , are not considered relevant . Thus , comprehensiveness increases to the extent that an additional formulation ( 1 ) adds to the over - all number of identiﬁed symptoms that can be explained without considering irrelevant symptoms or ( 2 ) provides an alternative explanation for at least one of the identiﬁed symptoms . By focusing on formulation comprehensiveness , we assume a probabilistic relation between the comprehensiveness of a problem’s formulation and the likelihood with which the root causes of a particular problem context will be discovered . Although problem formulation comprehensiveness by no means guarantees that teams are able to isolate the root causes of a strategic problem , the likelihood that such causes are detected improves as a function of the number of alternative , relevant problem formulations that are being detected . Heterogeneous teams as vehicles for comprehensive problem formulation Establishing the microfoundations for SPF requires the analysis of the behaviors of and the interac - tions between economic players that collectively constitute and determine the formulation activity . 4 4 Given our focus on the interactions between economic actors that undergird the problem formation activity as an aggregate phenomenon , the level of analysis in the present examination is the team or collective . Consequently , we give limited attention to individual differences and their effects on problem formula - tion comprehensiveness . We recognize , however , that numerous individual - level decision biases exist . One of the reasons for cre - ating heterogeneous teams is to reduce the effect of these biases and we assume that is the case here . Furthermore , we assume that other individual differences will be randomly distributed across teams and will not systematically affect problem formulation comprehensiveness . Evidence supporting this assumption is pro - vided by Papadakis , Lioukas , and Chambers ( 1998 ) . Examining the factors shaping the comprehensiveness of strategic decision making processes , these authors found that none of the wide Copyright  2012 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . ( 2012 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj Strategic Problem Formulation Indeed , comprehensively formulating strategic , that is , complex , ill - structured problems is not an indi - vidual activity ( e . g . , Ireland and Miller , 2004 ; Mitroff and Emshoff , 1979 ) . Given that strategic problems typically constitute complicated mixtures of a range of different , yet highly interdepen - dent issues that cannot be addressed in isola - tion from each other , comprehensively formulating these problems poses extraordinary demands on the breadth and depth of information and knowl - edge required . Such demands naturally confront bounded rationality , that is , the limitations of both knowledge and cognitive capacity ( i . e . , mem - ory and attention ) characterizing human rationality ( Simon , 1955 , 1957 ) . Bounded rationality makes information and knowledge acquisition , accumula - tion , and application costly activities—for exam - ple , new communication channels and codes may have to be established cutting into limited resour - ces , such as time and attention , necessary for other activities—and constrains the ability of any one actor to tackle strategic problems ( Arrow , 1974 ; Simon , 1955 ) . Indeed , research suggests that when confronted with such problems , individuals often only identify the most obvious symptoms , or those to which they are most sensitive , resulting in the problem being described inappropriately ( Mitroff and Featheringham , 1974 ; Watson , 1976 ) or in overly simple terms ( March and Simon , 1958 ) . As noted by Volkema ( 1997 : 31 ) , ‘ [ p ] roblems have a way of growing during discussions , often beyond the limitations of the human mind . When this occurs , there is a temptation to oversimplify the problematic situation to ﬁt human capacity , rather than to ﬁnd ways to extend memory . ’ The challenges associated with comprehensively formulating strategic problems in conjunction with the limitations resulting from bounded rationality and the fact that information processing is costly suggest that no single actor is likely to possess or to be able to easily accumulate the range of infor - mation and breadth of knowledge needed to span the problem space ( Newell and Simon , 1972 ) . We therefore assume that the relevant information sets and cognitive structures ( mental models , knowl - edge sets , etc . ) needed to comprehensively formu - late strategic problems is likely to be dispersed range of top management team personality characteristics stud - ied ( e . g . , risk propensity , need for achievement , etc . ) impacted process comprehensiveness . across multiple individuals . 5 As Mason and Mitroff ( 1981 : 13 – 14 ) noted , ‘the raw material for forg - ing solutions to [ complex , ill - structured ] problems is not concentrated in a single head , but rather is widely dispersed among the various parties at stake . ’ As a consequence , teams comprising indi - viduals with different information sets and cog - nitive structures must be engaged if comprehen - sive formulation of a strategic problem is to be achieved . 6 Along with information sets and cognitive struc - tures , members of heterogeneous teams also are likely to possess different objectives ( Cyert and March , 1963 ) . As a key assumption of the polit - ical perspective of organizations , we subscribe to the view that organizations consist of actors with at least partially competing interests and objec - tives ( e . g . , Allison , 1971 ; Pettigrew , 1973 ; Pfef - fer , 1981 ) . Although we acknowledge that some objectives may be shared among all actors , other objectives may be at odds with each other due to differences among individuals’ interests resulting from occupying different positions , belonging to different departments , or pursuing different career goals ( Eisenhardt and Zbaracki , 1992 ) . It is there - fore inevitable that teams composed of members from different functional and hierarchical back - grounds also possess different interests and objec - tives—both in terms of content ( what objectives are preferred ) and in terms of degree ( the extent to which a given objective is preferred ) ( Dean and Sharfman , 1996 ) . This heterogeneity can be func - tional for problem formulation in that it ensures that no single interest controls the lens through which the problem is viewed . Following a com - mon behavioral assumption in strategy , however , individuals have the potential to pursue this self - interest with guile ( e . g . , Williamson , 1975 ) , which , as we discuss below , has the potential to severely undermine the problem formulation activity , for example , by restricting and distorting the ﬂow of information ( Cyert and March , 1963 ; Nickerson and Zenger , 2004 ; Pettigrew , 1973 ) . 5 We use the term ‘cognitive structure’ to describe the basic mental processes used to make sense of information . Thus , this concept encompasses comparative thinking structures , symbolic representation structures , logical reasoning structures , and men - tal models that serve to govern the interpretation , organization , and use of information . 6 This assumes that the information and cognitive structures within the team span the problem space . We explore the impli - cations of relaxing this assumption in the Discussion section . Copyright  2012 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . ( 2012 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj M . Baer , K . T . Dirks , and J . A . Nickerson With our deﬁnition of problem formulation com - prehensiveness and assumptions about human nature ( i . e . , bounded rationality with the potential to pursue self - interest with guile ) as well as the relevant contextual conditions ( i . e . , need for teams composed of individuals with heterogeneous infor - mation and cognitive structures , existence of het - erogeneous objectives and ‘stakes’ in the issues ) , we consider the team - level impediments to this activity . Impediments to comprehensive problem formulation in heterogeneous teams By combining different sets of information and cognitive structures , in the abstract , a heteroge - neous team is more likely to ﬁnd formulations that encompass the root causes of a problem and engender discovery of more valuable solutions than either an individual alone or a homogenous team . Whether this ideal is achieved in practice , however , is not clear ( e . g . , Watson , Kumar , and Michaelsen , 1993 ) . Some studies seem to sup - port a positive relation between heterogeneity and the quality of the overall strategic decision mak - ing process , or various downstream outcomes of it ( previous research has rarely examined the effects of heterogeneity on formulation comprehensive - ness ) ( see Finkelstein et al . , 2009 ) . For example , Bantel and Jackson ( 1989 ) studied the adoption of various technical and administrative innova - tions at 199 banks and found a positive association between top management team ( TMT ) heterogene - ity of functional backgrounds and innovativeness . Results from the broader TMT literature , however , appear to be mixed . For example , a meta - analysis examining the effects of TMT heterogeneity on ﬁrm performance found no consistent associations between different TMT indicators , such as func - tional and educational heterogeneity , and different indicators of ﬁrm performance ( Certo et al . , 2006 ) . Similarly , in a recent review , van Knippenberg and Schippers ( 2007 ) concluded that there is lit - tle evidence that heterogeneous teams outperform homogeneous teams on a variety of tasks , includ - ing decision making and problem solving . Some studies even report negative associations between TMT heterogeneity and performance . For instance , work by Miller and colleagues ( 1998 ) suggests that diversity among upper echelon executives has the potential to limit strategic decision making . Drawing upon three studies examining the impact of executive cognitive diversity—deﬁned in terms of differences in beliefs and preferences held by upper echelon executives within a ﬁrm—on comprehensiveness of strategic decision making , the authors found that executive diversity inhibits rather than promotes comprehensive examinations of problems and opportunities ( for similar results , see Simons , Pelled , and Smith , 1999 ) . In sum , although heterogeneity creates the poten - tial for improved decision making and problem solving , this potential may not always be realized . Previous research suggests that it is the interac - tions among actors that frequently seem to get in the way of teams fully realizing their potential ( Janis , 1972 ; Steiner , 1972 ) . Consequently , analyz - ing the behaviors and interactions of the individual actors that underpin SPF , that is , establishing the microfoundations of problem formulation , should provide valuable insights into the dynamics that determine whether and when heterogeneity may constrict formulation comprehensiveness . Draw - ing on our assumptions , in the following we theoretically derive a core set of impediments following from the three types of heterogene - ity—information sets , cognitive structures , and objectives—and describe how these impediments , individually and jointly , limit comprehensiveness . Although our list may not reﬂect all possible impediments , it nonetheless derives from only a few assumptions and identiﬁes a set of biases that have been reported to be common and important . Impediments resulting from heterogeneous information sets We begin our theory development assuming homo - geneity of objectives . We relax this assumption in a later section ( entitled ‘Impediments resulting from heterogeneous objectives’ ) to explore the unique effects of heterogeneous objectives , as well as how this heterogeneity interacts with and ampliﬁes the negative effects of heterogeneous information sets and cognitive structures on problem formulation comprehensiveness . The promise of assembling teams of individuals with different sets of information is that it provides the potential for a more complete understanding of the many facets of a strategic problem and the opportunity to derive a more comprehensive for - mulation of the problem . However , the potential is often not realized ( Miller et al . , 1998 ; Simons et al . , 1999 ) . We propose that teams composed Copyright  2012 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . ( 2012 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj Strategic Problem Formulation of executives with homogeneous objectives but heterogeneous information sets will discuss and consider only a small subset of the total amount of information available to the team . There is a ten - dency , as we describe below , to discuss informa - tion that is commonly held at the expense of unique and uncommon information ( when resources are limited ( see effect ‘1’ in Figure 1 ) . In turn , this tendency will narrow and limit the extent to which teams are able to comprehensively formu - late strategic problems . Heterogeneity in information sets implies that although there may be some problem - relevant in - formation that is held in common by the members of a team ( known to most or all members ) , each member also holds unique information ( known only to a single member ) . Given the limitations associated with bounded rationality , individuals will ﬁnd it difﬁcult to initially judge which ele - ments of the information they hold are most likely to be relevant to a particular problem . Team members therefore will begin communicat - ing by sending cues they believe are most likely to be understood . Generally , understanding sig - nals requires recipients to recognize cues and then engage in a conversation to transfer and verify the information sent and received . Individuals are more likely to respond to cues that they recognize , which is far more likely to involve information that they hold in common ( e . g . , Larson et al . , 1996 , 1998 ; Stasser , Taylor , and Hanna , 1989 ) . Shar - ing unique information incurs additional costs for an individual as new communication channels and codes may have to be established before unique information can be understood and appropriately interpreted . With information processing , mem - ory , and attention capacities being limited ( i . e . , the assumptions of bounded rationality ) , teams members are more likely to discuss and consider information that incurs lower communicating and decoding costs , such as information that is held in common , leaving unique , individually held infor - mation less likely to be communicated ( Stasser and Titus , 1985 , 1987 ) . Research on the effectiveness of collective infor - mation sharing processes in decision making groups provides evidence supporting these argu - ments . Hearing other members reveal information makes similar and commonly held information appear more important or relevant ( Wittenbaum , Hollingshead , and Botero , 2004 ) . Moreover , pre - vious research shows that groups often make sub - optimal decisions because they tend to discuss and incorporate information that is shared at the expense of information that is unshared ( e . g . , Lar - son et al . , 1996 ; Stasser et al . , 1989 , Stasser and Figure 1 . Model of strategic problem formulation Copyright  2012 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . ( 2012 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj M . Baer , K . T . Dirks , and J . A . Nickerson Titus , 1985 ) . Finally , earlier work supports the notion that common information has a sampling advantage over unshared information because it is often considered to be more important , relevant , and accurate than unique information ( Postmes , Spears , and Cihangir , 2001 ; Wittenbaum , Hubbell , and Zuckerman , 1999 ) . Sharing and discussing information that is com - monly held by many members rather than reveal - ing unique information is likely to undermine comprehensive problem formulation . Failure to discuss or share information that is unique under - mines the ability of teams to generate not only different or alternative but also relevant problem formulations . This limitation arises because teams are likely to prematurely , that is , before the entire problem space is explored , converge on the ﬁrst common denominator—a problem understanding that everyone can easily agree upon but that does not necessarily reﬂect the complexity of the under - lying problem . Impediments resulting from heterogeneous cognitive structures The promise of teams of individuals with different cognitive structures is that they provide varying perspectives of the problem and describe poten - tial causes in a more multifaceted and intricate way . This promise , in turn , enhances the number of alterative formulations as well as their rele - vance and , ultimately , the comprehensiveness of the strategic problem formulation activity . How - ever , we suggest that teams composed of members with homogeneous objectives ( we consider het - erogeneous objectives later in the section entitled ‘Impediments resulting from heterogeneous objec - tives’ ) but heterogeneous cognitive structures will not fully realize their potential due in part to the emergence of representational gaps . A representa - tional gap is a team - level phenomenon capturing differences in representations—understandings of a problem situation constructed on the basis of an individual’s domain - related knowledge—among the members of a team ( Cronin and Weingart , 2007 ) . Due to the limits associated with bounded rationality , individuals faced with strategic prob - lems are likely to formulate those problems in a way that capitalizes on the knowledge they pos - sess . In other words , existing knowledge and its organization determines how people come to see and formulate a given problem context , resulting in what Mason and Mitroff ( 1981 : 25 ) have termed , ‘tunnel vision’ ( the phenomenon can occur even with homogeneity in information sets ) . 7 Concep - tualizing a problem in accordance with one’s cog - nitive structures allows an individual to focus his or her attention and capitalize on scarce cognitive resources and can have signiﬁcant consequences for comprehensive problem formulation in the con - text of a heterogeneous team . Speciﬁcally , differ - ences in cognitive structures are likely to produce problem understandings that are at least partially incompatible with one another thereby triggering the emergence of representational gaps ( see effect ‘2’ in Figure 1 ) . Such gaps jeopardize problem for - mulation comprehensiveness in at least two ways . First , the emergence of representational gaps makes it difﬁcult and costly for team members to share knowledge and recombine representations to explore additional problem formulations . As dif - ferent representations or problem understandings involve different concepts and terminologies , com - munication across these divides will be difﬁcult . For example , a concept that exists in one domain may not exist or may carry a different meaning in another . Naturally , these differences make the communication of such concepts not only difﬁ - cult but also costly as signiﬁcant time and energy would have to be invested in order for members to be able to identify and bridge the gaps . Different cognitive structures may not only involve different concepts and terminologies but also differences in the assumptions about the way those concepts are interrelated . Such assumptions , which are often unarticulated , provide the foun - dations on which representations are not only constructed but also transferred from one team member to another . Discovering differences in assumptions along with differences in concepts and deﬁnitions , then codifying and transmitting them is costly for boundedly rational actors and , as a result , likely to impede the sharing and recombination of such representations . As both the 7 The tendency of tunnel vision has been supported by previ - ous research ( e . g . , Boland and Greenberg , 1988 ; Walsh , 1988 ) . For example , Dearborn and Simon ( 1958 ) investigated depart - mental afﬁliation as a contributing factor to executives’ problem formulation activities . Their results suggested that problem for - mulation is selectively directed toward the department to which the executive belonged . Looking at the same data , for example , 83 percent of sales executives identiﬁed sales as the most impor - tant problem compared with 29 percent of executives from other areas . Copyright  2012 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . ( 2012 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj Strategic Problem Formulation communication and integration of different prob - lem understandings are essential to formulating problems , differences in assumptions are likely to undermine the comprehensiveness of this activity . Second , differing cognitive structures and the resulting inability of team members to understand each other can promote conﬂict and distrust , which further impedes the sharing and recombination of representations , let alone the recognition of one another’s formulations . In general , task conﬂict consumes scarce cognitive resources , which can negatively impact overall team performance ( De Dreu and Weingart , 2003 ) , particularly when there are also tensions and disagreements over values and beliefs ( i . e . , relationship conﬂict ) ( Shaw et al . , 2011 ) . For instance , Carnevale and Probst ( 1998 ) suggested that conﬂict limits problem solving abil - ities because it makes individuals more rigid in their thinking processes—that is , less able to see or integrate alternative ideas or perspectives—and , as a result , less creative . As strategic problems require that different problem understandings are generated and integrated , such rigidity will neces - sarily undermine the production of alternative and relevant problem formulations , that is , formulation comprehensiveness . Furthermore , in the absence of trust , task conﬂict can turn into relationship con - ﬂict , thereby diverting even more resources away from problem formulation toward the management of relationships ( Shaw et al . , 2011 ; Simons and Peterson , 2000 ) . As a result , formulation compre - hensiveness is even less likely to be achieved . Impediments resulting from heterogeneous objectives The promise of assembling teams of individuals with differing objectives is that it provides the potential that many different interests are repre - sented during the formulation activity and that no single interest controls the lens through which the problem is ultimately viewed—all of which should allow for greater comprehensiveness . We propose , however , that heterogeneity in objectives results in team members engaging in political maneu - verings that consume scarce resources ( attention , memory , time ) and contaminate and constrain the exchange of information and cognitive structures , thereby further limiting and narrowing problem formulation comprehensiveness . Consistent with previous research , we deﬁne political maneuver - ing as ‘intentional acts of inﬂuence to enhance or protect the self - interest of individuals or groups’ ( Allen et al . , 1979 : 77 ) . Previous research has documented that political behavior is a dominant and pernicious factor in problem formulation ( e . g . , Lyles , 1981 ; Lyles and Mitroff , 1980 ; Mason and Mitroff , 1981 ) . Our analysis considers both the individual and joint mechanisms through which heterogeneous objectives result in political behav - ior that ultimately impedes comprehensiveness . Direct effects include the tendency of team members to engage in dominance activities and to jump to solutions ( see effect ‘3’ in Figure 1 ) . First , individuals who have high stakes are more likely to advocate strongly for solutions from which they beneﬁt . Those individuals who have few stakes are likely to acquiesce because the cost to advo - cate a position exceeds the beneﬁt of succeeding . Such dominance behavior , which arises from het - erogeneity of objectives , likely leads to the narrow - ing of formulation comprehensiveness by focusing attention on formulations and solutions that are consistent with those members who have the most at stake . Second , numerous scholars have observed the tendency for team members to prematurely pro - pose solutions at the expense of investing time and energy into comprehensively formulating problems ( Maier and Hoffman , 1960 ; Van de Ven and Del - becq , 1971 ) . Although this tendency may in part derive from bounded rationality ( abbreviating or forgoing the problem formulation activity econ - omizes on bounded rationality ) , heterogeneity of objectives nevertheless creates incentives to jump to a solution . Speciﬁcally , as every solution implic - itly suggests a certain problem formulation or set of formulations ( e . g . , Dutton and Ashford , 1993 ) , actors who prematurely suggest a particular solu - tion are in the unique position to limit problem formulation to such alternatives that support their objectives , as opposed to searching for and con - sidering other relevant formulations . The tendency to jump to solutions quickly forecloses the search and evaluation of alternative formulations , which ultimately limits comprehensiveness . In addition to these direct effects , heterogeneity in objectives can interactively as well as indirectly affect comprehensiveness . Heterogeneous objec - tives may interact with heterogeneous informa - tion sets and heterogeneous cognitive structures to squelch information exchange and the integration of knowledge . Individuals may be motivated to Copyright  2012 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . ( 2012 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj M . Baer , K . T . Dirks , and J . A . Nickerson strategically share information and problem under - standings while strategically withholding others in order to manipulate the formulation activity for personal beneﬁt ( e . g . , Dutton and Ashford , 1993 ; Wittenbaum et al . , 2004 ) . These interac - tions are represented by effect ‘4’ in Figure 1 . In addition , heterogeneity in objectives may indi - rectly shape problem formulation comprehensive - ness . This dynamic process is represented by effect ‘5’ in Figure 1 . Once team members observe or suspect others of engaging in political behaviors such as dominance or proposing solutions that are consistent with their self - interests , they may be inclined to engage in similar behaviors . In short , the introduction of heterogeneity in objectives is likely to amplify the impediments associated with heterogeneous information sets and cognitive structures by initiating strategic behaviors . Ample research supports the dynamics described in the prior paragraph . For instance , Pettigrew ( 1973 ) analyzed the decision making process of a computer adoption . Different managers in the ﬁrm had conﬂicting preferences for outcomes . As a consequence , managers would block and slant information to favor their preferred solution . Like - wise , in an experimental study of problem solving , Ferrin and Dirks ( 2003 ) observed that when the team members faced competing incentives , they perceived the other parties more negatively , trusted their partners less , and withheld and misrepre - sented important information . The results indicate that although team members may have insights on the problem or relevant data , they may with - hold such information when it undermines their objectives , or may choose to emphasize particular elements that support their positions . These polit - ical actions further contribute to a narrowing as well as a biasing of the formulation activity as scarce resources are consumed on political pos - turing instead of comprehensively exploring the problem space . In addition , political maneuver - ing generates mistrust that dynamically and further undermines a team’s willingness to expend scarce resources to create shared understandings because of the limited returns expected from doing so . As a result , unique information is even more unlikely to be shared and representational gaps are even less likely to be bridged , further undermining problem formulation comprehensiveness . So far we have suggested that ( 1 ) problem formulation is a particularly pivotal activity in addressing strategic problems , ( 2 ) comprehensive - ness is the appropriate metric by which to evaluate problem formulation , ( 3 ) the formulation activity typically unfolds in the context of heterogeneous teams , and ( 4 ) the formulation of strategic prob - lems in heterogeneous teams ( along with bounded rationality and self - interest with guile ) is the likely cause of a set of impediments that collectively con - strain and narrow problem formulation . In the next section , we consider how our analysis can provide the basis for developing a mechanism to mitigate the impediments and thus increase comprehensive - ness . Speciﬁcally , we describe why using a ( struc - tured ) process based on the theoretical framework is an effective way to alleviate the impediments and illustrate how the theory can be used to design such a process . DESIGNING A MECHANISM TO EXPAND FORMULATION COMPREHENSIVENESS The problem formulation impediments described above might be addressed via three general approaches—selection / team composition , use of incentives , and process design ( i . e . , input , output , and behavior controls ; see Ouchi , 1977 , Thomp - son , 1967 ) . Selection involves purposely compos - ing teams to capture the gains from heterogene - ity while simultaneously attenuating impediments . However , this mechanism presupposes that man - agers not only have the ability to verify a pri - ori what individuals’ interests and objectives are and how they differ in terms of their cognitive structures and informational sets but also that they have enough control over the composition of work teams to select ideal members for inclusion—both assumptions that are typically not met in orga - nizations ( Wanous and Youtz , 1986 ) . Although some previous research has found that individ - uals’ perceptions of heterogeneity do converge with reality to some extent , suggesting that people should be able to verify individuals’ information sets , cognitive structures , or interests , these rela - tions seem to have currency only in the case of more visible aspects of heterogeneity , such as age , sex , or race / ethnicity ( e . g . , Harrison et al . , 2002 ) . In cases where heterogeneity concerns nonvisible indicators , such as values ( which has implications for individuals’ objectives ) or cause - effect beliefs ( which has implications for individuals’ cognitive Copyright  2012 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . ( 2012 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj Strategic Problem Formulation structures ) , correlations tend to be nonsigniﬁcant or negative and generally too low to guide any selection decision in practice ( e . g . , Harrison et al . , 2002 ; Miller et al . , 1998 ) . These ﬁndings sug - gest that it would be difﬁcult for senior managers to assemble a team of a certain composition in terms of information sets , cognitive structures , or objectives by relying on their perceptions of rel - evant attributes . In fact , the general discrepancy between perceived and objective heterogeneity has lead Harrison and Klein ( 2007 : 1216 ) to conclude that ‘measures of perceived diversity are not likely to be construct - valid measures of “actual” diver - sity . ’ Overall , it appears that selection may be an incomplete and difﬁcult - to - implement mechanism to overcoming the impediments . Incentives offer another alternative mechanism . Similar to selection , however , incentives may be somewhat limited in mitigating the impediments to comprehensive problem formulation . The prob - lems with the use of incentives largely stem from the difﬁculty of objectively and accurately measur - ing effort and performance ( DeMatteo , Eby , and Sundstrom , 1998 ; Hall , 2002 ) , and from the costs associated with selectively intervening in an orga - nization by offering targeted incentive structures ( Nickerson and Zenger , 2008 ; Williamson , 1985 ) . Three fundamental problems—controllability , alignment , and interdependency ( Hall , 2002 ) —are associated with measuring performance accurately , particularly in the context of problem formulation . A range of factors affecting problem formulation comprehensiveness may not be controllable by the team and its members , making ( un ) controllability a concern when measuring the performance of prob - lem formulation teams . Next , problems of align - ment between what can be measured and veriﬁed easily and what actually creates value may arise . Finally , given the collective nature of problem for - mulation , it is difﬁcult , if not impossible , to deter - mine the contributions to the formulation activity of any individual team member creating difﬁculties due to interdependency . 8 8 The controllability problem refers to the notion that like other forms of performance , comprehensively formulating a problem is only partly under the control of the team and the efforts and skills brought to bear by its members . For example , unavail - ability of key individuals who hold relevant information and knowledge may constrict the team in its ability to comprehen - sively formulate a problem . The alignment problem is likely to arise because most of the value creating efforts in problem formulation—cognitive efforts related to sharing unique infor - mation and overcoming representational gaps—are not easily Given the difﬁculties associated with the accu - rate measurement of performance in the problem formulation activity and formulation comprehen - siveness , one alternative may be to measure a more distal outcome of the activity , for example , the acceptance of the problem formulation by senior management or the overall success of the strate - gic decision making process . However , even these alternatives are ﬂawed and limited in their abil - ity to overcome the impediments to comprehensive problem formation . Using the acceptability of the problem formulation as the criterion carries the risk of curtailing comprehensiveness as less accept - able formulations are likely to be withheld . Using the success of the overall decision making pro - cess as the yardstick is problematic because activ - ities other than problem formulation ( e . g . , solution derivation , decision implementation ) are likely to impact the overall success of the process thereby providing a diluted measure of the formulation activity . The mechanisms of selection and incen - tives therefore appear to be difﬁcult to implement and not sufﬁcient to attenuate the impediments associated with SPF . Given the insufﬁciency of these two options to fully address the challenges of problem for - mulation , we explore the potential usefulness of a third category of mechanisms—structured pro - cesses . Van de Ven ( 1992 ) observed that the term ‘process’ has been used in a variety of ways in the management literature ( see also Chakravarthy and White , 2002 ; Maritan , 2007 ) . In this paper , we deﬁne a structured process as a speciﬁed set of rules or guidelines that direct team interac - tion to arrive at a desired outcome ( e . g . , com - prehensiveness ) . Thus , structured processes focus on intermediary steps that cause team heterogene - ity in information , knowledge , and objectives to be reliably transformed into enhanced problem formulation comprehensiveness . Our conceptual - ization is consistent with previous work ( Eisen - hardt and Martin , 2000 ; Maritan , 2007 ) , which considered processes as dealing with the question of how strategies are formed , implemented , and measured . For example , although it may be possible to mea - sure information sharing in general , it is impossible to measure the sharing of unique information as this information , by deﬁni - tion , is only accessible to a few or a single member of the team and is not known a priori . Lastly , the interdependency problem describes the difﬁculties of measuring outcomes that are funda - mentally the result of the joint , interdependent efforts of many people , not the result of the efforts of a single individual . Copyright  2012 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . ( 2012 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj M . Baer , K . T . Dirks , and J . A . Nickerson changed and the identiﬁcation of the routines and mechanisms that undergird this set of activities . In essence , structured processes represent mecha - nisms that may serve to mitigate the biases plagu - ing the formulation of strategic problems into value creating strategies . Our theory provides the opportunity to identify and evaluate alternative structured processes ( or process elements ) for expanding problem formula - tion comprehensiveness . Thus , rather than relying on ad hoc and descriptive accounts of the effective - ness of processes , we determine the effectiveness of process elements by evaluating their ability to mitigate the previously identiﬁed impediments . By theoretically analyzing the impediments and their causes , our approach allows for ﬂexibility in how the design goals are addressed . Put differently , there could be any number of alternative structured processes used to achieve comprehensive problem formulation as long as the process components sat - isfy the design goals of mitigating the speciﬁc set of impediments . In the section below , we describe one example of a structured process that was designed in adher - ence with our design goals and that can be used to mitigate the previously identiﬁed impediments . The purpose of this process is to illustrate how our theory can be used to guide the design of a structured process ; the example is not intended to claim superiority of this speciﬁc process vis - ` a - vis alternative processes or mechanisms . We begin by providing an overview of the structured process and then detail the theory underlying its design . Collaborative structured inquiry : an example of a structured process to mitigate the impediments to comprehensive problem formulation The process we refer to as ‘collaborative structure inquiry’ ( CSI ) involves splitting the problem for - mulation activity into two distinct phases , which we refer to as framing and formulating the prob - lem . The purpose of the framing phase is to iden - tify all empirical regularities ( i . e . , symptoms ) that are correlated with the symptom that launched the inquiry ( a symptom may be a drop in proﬁts , a loss of market share , or some other key issue that has the concern and attention of leaders ) . Once the web of correlated symptoms is identiﬁed and veriﬁed through the framing phase , the next phase formulates the problem by identifying and veri - fying all root causes of the web of symptoms . To help accomplish this split , ‘ground rules’ for discussion are laid out for each phase . For exam - ple , in the framing phase , a facilitator may ask participants to refrain from discussing causes or solutions . Second , participants begin their discus - sion by engaging in a modiﬁed version of the nominal group technique ( mNGT ) ( Van de Ven and Delbecq , 1971 ) . Participants ﬁrst write down individually all possible symptoms correlated with the symptom that launched the inquiry along with supporting evidence of their existence . Then , in a round robin fashion , each group member reveals one symptom he or she has written down until all symptoms are considered . Each symptom and its correlation are then discussed until the team reaches consensus on its inclusion in or exclu - sion from the set of correlated symptoms . Third , using results from the mNGT procedure , team members compile the web of symptoms and sup - porting information into a document on which the team is required to reach consensus in terms of its wording . The formulation phase immediately follows the completion of the framing phase and relies on an approach similar to the one used during the latter , with a few exceptions . First , the ground rules now focus the team members speciﬁcally on the formulation of the problem thereby prohibit - ing the discussion of potential solutions . Second , during the mNGT , instead of identifying the web of symptoms , the team now lists and discusses all causes that could potentially explain one or more of the previously identiﬁed symptoms . It is each of these causes that represent alternative formula - tions . The end product of this phase is a document that offers a set of formulations that represent plau - sible and relevant causes of the previously iden - tiﬁed symptoms . The formulation document and problem framing document are then distributed to relevant stakeholders outside the group for review and input . These individuals are asked to add miss - ing symptoms or causes and to provide evidence supporting their inclusion . A crucial point of the paper is that the CSI pro - cess is not designed in an ad hoc manner , but each element is intended to address one or more of the impediments identiﬁed by our theoretical analysis . Following , we explain how the combination and sequence of elements were intended to mitigate the theoretically derived impediments . Copyright  2012 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . ( 2012 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj Strategic Problem Formulation Structuring CSI into distinct stages is expected to be beneﬁcial given past research document - ing the value of distinguishing between prob - lem formulation and solution generation ( Lipshitz and Bar - Ilan , 1996 ; Maier and Hoffman , 1960 ) . Segmentation is targeted at two impediments . First , it is intended to mitigate being ‘solution minded’ ( Maier and Hoffman , 1960 ) . Speciﬁcally , in the framing and formulation phases members are focused on identifying symptoms or causes , as opposed to prematurely leaping to solutions . Second , the sequential structuring of segments is designed to limit political or strategic behavior . For example , one way that managers may engage in political behavior is by providing solutions that are advantageous to themselves or their department ( Pettigrew , 1973 ) . By ﬁrst focusing on identify - ing relevant symptoms and prohibiting solutions prior to formulating the problem , CSI is designed to limit strategic behavior within the team . For instance , it is unlikely that discussions of symp - toms will trigger political reactions the way that deriving solutions can ( discussing symptoms has fewer direct implications for which actions need to be taken and whom such actions may bene - ﬁt ) . Although it provides no guarantee that polit - ical maneuverings are completely eliminated , we expect that the sequential structuring of segments fosters a context in which team members come to slowly agree on the goal of eliminating the symptoms . Such convergent expectations can then attenuate impediments that derive from heteroge - neous motivations . The modiﬁed NGT is intended to attenuate the impediments of information sampling and repre - sentational gaps , as well as the related problem of dominance by a few members ( Van de Ven and Delbeq , 1971 ) . Speciﬁcally , the mNGT forces individuals to identify and commit to their infor - mation or cognitive structures before being inﬂu - enced by their fellow team members ; this can reduce the tendency for teams to engage in narrow sampling . In addition , by requiring team mem - bers to individually reveal their information ( which prevents low stakes individuals from engaging in ‘social loaﬁng’ ) and specifying rules for dis - cussing and evaluating ideas ( which prevents high stakes individuals from dominating ) , each indi - vidual has an equal chance at participation . By requiring that every listed symptom and cause must be discussed and evaluated , the conversations may reduce representational gaps by causing individu - als to share their knowledge and understand others’ mental models . The unanimity decision rule is used to address two impediments : representational gaps and diver - sity in objectives . Majority and unanimity are the most common decision rules used by teams ( Mohammed and Ringeis , 2001 ) . In contrast to unanimity , majority rule is considered to be less time consuming and more likely to avoid impasses , and less likely to produce post - decision entrap - ment ( Castore and Murnighan , 1978 ; Hare , 1976 ; Kameda and Sugimori , 1993 ; Kerr et al . , 1976 ; Miller , 1989 ) . Most beneﬁts of majority rule , how - ever , are only likely to materialize in teams that are either purely cooperative ( here , majority rule should be more efﬁcient than unanimity at reaching a decision ) or purely competitive ( here , majority rule should be more likely to avoid an impasse and to produce an agreement that is acceptable to the largest number of team members ) ( Thompson , Mannix , and Bazerman , 1988 ) . In contrast , when team members share some objectives but not others ( a likely characteristic of the types of heteroge - neous teams involved in the formulation of strate - gic problems ) , majority rule may produce dysfunc - tional outcomes related to problem formulation . Speciﬁcally , in teams with heterogeneous objec - tives , majority rule may cause members to com - promise early rather than to search for more inte - grative understandings and solutions ( Mohammed and Ringeis , 2001 ; Thompson et al . , 1988 ) . When teams compromise prematurely , it is unlikely that all information is revealed and unlikely that team members invest in the communication codes and channels needed to understand and integrate dif - ferent information and cognitive structures . Thus , the unanimity rule should help teams with hetero - geneous objectives mitigate narrow sampling and representational gaps . Finally , CSI involves external stakeholders . Although the mNGT is intended to maximize information exchange within the team , it is pos - sible that team members may not have the full set of information necessary to comprehensively for - mulate the problem and / or may fail to reveal all unshared information . To address the impediment , a step is included to allow external stakehold - ers to comment on the symptoms or their under - lying causes . As Ancona and Caldwell ( 1992 ) found in the study of new product development teams , reaching out to external teams can partially Copyright  2012 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . ( 2012 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj M . Baer , K . T . Dirks , and J . A . Nickerson address the bounded rationality of the group . Thus , involving external parties by circulating symptoms and problem formulations can expand problem for - mulation comprehensiveness . DISCUSSION The goal of this paper was to build theory - based microfoundations for SPF . Although prob - lem formulation has been discussed in literatures that span several academic disciplines including business strategy , organizational behavior , psy - chology , sociology , and operational management , and despite earlier work having provided impor - tant insights into the problem formulation activ - ity , these largely descriptive accounts are scattered across ﬁelds and have failed to provide a theoret - ical approach , let alone lead to the development of microfoundations for this important activity . Perhaps as a consequence , research on problem formulation has made little progress over the last several decades . As a ﬁrst step toward establishing the micro - foundations of SPF , we identiﬁed a criterion by which to evaluate the success of the formula - tion activity . Next , using a relatively common set of assumptions in strategic management , we sys - tematically and theoretically identiﬁed a critical set of challenges that teams comprising heteroge - neous members are likely to face when formulating strategic problems . While these and other indi - vidual impediments have been described in the literature on group and individual decision mak - ing , we developed a theory that not only identiﬁes which impediments are likely to impact formu - lation comprehensiveness but also describes how they interact to jointly impact problem formation . With the set of impediments identiﬁed , we con - sidered how a mechanism could be designed to mitigate them . Highlighting the limitations of the mechanisms of selection and incentives in atten - uating the impediments associated with SPF , we suggested that the appropriate mechanism could be a structured process . Based on our theory of impediments , we developed one version of a struc - tured process , CSI , for mitigating the impediments to comprehensive problem formulation . Although we borrowed individual elements from processes previously identiﬁed in the literature , the novelty of CSI derives from the particular combination and sequencing of these elements . Put differently , adopting only some of the structured process ele - ments proffered would unlikely satisfy all of our design goals and therefore not mitigate the identi - ﬁed problem formulation impediments . Our theory therefore led to speciﬁc guidance for managers interested in implementing a process to enhance the formulation of complex , ill - structured prob - lems . Although not reported in this manuscript , CSI has been applied in a number of organiza - tions with preliminary evidence of its success in improving SPF . Empirical research that examines the effectiveness this or other structured processes intended to improve problem formulation is now needed in order to advance the science and practice of SPF . Our effort to build the microfoundations for SPF is predicated on several assumptions that deserve attention . For example , we assumed that the mem - bers of the team in aggregate possess sufﬁcient information and knowledge to span the space of the problem . One direction for future theory develop - ment is to relax this assumption and explore mech - anisms to increase the likelihood of encompassing relevant information and knowledge . This may be particularly important when it comes to exploring new opportunities , as it is difﬁcult to predict a priori what expertise is required in such circum - stances . Another direction is to consider problem contexts that are less complex and more struc - tured . We envision that our analytical approach is ﬂexible enough to accommodate such variation in assumptions . These variations may then lead to the discovery of new processes that are particularly suitable for particular situations . Ultimately , we hope to launch the beginnings of a process - design paradigm by establishing the microfoundations of a ﬁrm’s ability to discover , develop , and formu - late strategic challenges in a range of different circumstances . 9 Finally , within the strategy literature , our anal - ysis has important implications for the dynamic capability perspective and the microfoundations that undergird the various capabilities ( Eisenhardt and Martin , 2000 ; Helfat et al . , 2007 ; Teece et al . 1997 ) . According to Teece ( 2007 : 1333 ) , regularly applying procedures to overcome impediments to strategic decision making is ‘not a well - distributed 9 The prior paradigm for a process - based view of strategy for - mulation dates back to Allison ( 1971 ) and Bower ( 1970 ) . In contrast to this earlier paradigm , our approach focuses on identi - fying cognitive , social , and motivational impediments to strategy formulation and developing mechanisms to overcome them . Copyright  2012 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . ( 2012 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj Strategic Problem Formulation skill and may not be for decades to come’ and , thus , competitive advantage can be gained by early adopters of any technique designed to system - atically and reliably overcome biases in strate - gic decision making . The theory outlined in this manuscript and operationalized as a structured pro - cess constitutes such a technique and , as a result , may offer ﬁrms the possibility to achieve competi - tive advantage for some time to come . As such , the insights developed here may constitute the begin - nings of an effort to concretize the foundations upon which dynamic capabilities in the areas of sensing and seizing opportunities are built ( Teece , 2007 ) . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The authors thank Nick Argyres , Nicolai Foss , the members of Organizational Behavior research group at Washington University in St . Louis and participants of the University of Illinois Strategy Seminar , University of Michigan Strategy Semi - nar , and University of Virginia Strategy Seminar for their constructive comments on earlier drafts of this manuscript . REFERENCES Ackoff RL , Emery FE . 1972 . On Purposeful Systems . Aldine - Atherton : Chicago , IL . Allen RW , Madison DL , Porter LW , Renwick PA , Mayes BT . 1979 . Organizational politics : tactics and characteristics of its actors . California Management Review 22 : 77 – 83 . Allison GT . 1971 . Essence of Decision : Explaining the Cuban Missile Crisis . Little Brown : Boston , MA . Amason AC . 1996 . Distinguishing the effects of functional and dysfunctional conﬂict on strategic decision making : resolving a paradox for top management teams . Academy of Management Journal 39 : 123 – 148 . Ancona DG , Caldwell DF . 1992 . Demography and design : predictors of new product team performance . Organization Science 3 : 321 – 41 . Arrow KJ . 1974 . The Limits of Organization . W . W . Norton : New York . Bantel KA , Jackson SE . 1989 . Top management and innovations in banking : does the composition of the top team make a difference ? Strategic Management Journal , Summer Special Section 10 : 107 – 124 . Boland R . 1978 . The process and product of system design . Management Science 24 : 887 – 898 . Boland RJ , Greenberg RH . 1988 . Metaphorical structur - ing of organizational ambiguity . In Managing Ambi - guity and Change , Pondy LR , Boland RJ , Thomas H ( eds ) . Wiley : New York ; 17 – 36 . Bower J . 1970 . Managing the Resource Allocation Process . Irwin : Homewood , IL . Camillus JC . 2008 . Strategy as a wicked problem . Harvard Business Review 86 : 98 – 106 . Carnevale PJ , Probst T . 1998 . Social values and social conﬂict in creative problem solving and categorization . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 74 : 1300 – 1309 . Castore CH , Murnighan JK . 1978 . Determinants of support for group decisions . Organizational Behavior and Human Performance 22 : 75 – 92 . Certo TS , Lester RH , Dalton CM , Dalton DR . 2006 . Top management teams , strategy and ﬁnancial performance : a meta - analytic examination . Journal of Management Studies 43 : 813 – 839 . Chakravarthy BS , White RE . 2002 . Strategy process : forming , implementing and changing strategies . In Handbook of Strategy and Management , Pettigrew A , Thomas H , Whittington R ( eds ) . Sage : Thousand Oaks , CA ; 182 – 205 . Churchman CW . 1971 . Design of Inquiring System : Basic Concepts of Systems and Organizations . Basic Books : New York . Coff R , Kryscynski D . 2011 . Drilling for the micro - foundations of human capital based competitive advantages . Journal of Management 37 : 1429 – 1443 . Cowan DA . 1986 . Developing a process model of problem recognition . Academy of Management Review 11 : 763 – 776 . Cronin MA , Weingart LR . 2007 . Representational gaps , information processing , and conﬂict in functionally diverse teams . Academy of Management Review 32 : 761 – 773 . Cyert RM , March JG . 1963 . A Behavioral Theory of the Firm . Prentice Hall : Englewood Cliffs , NJ . Dean JW , Sharfman MP . 1996 . Does decision process matter ? A study of strategic decision - making effectiveness . Academy of Management Journal 39 : 368 – 396 . Dearborn DC , Simon HA . 1958 . Selective perception : a note on the departmental identiﬁcation of executives . Sociometry 21 : 140 – 144 . De Dreu CKW , Weingart LR . 2003 . Task versus relationship conﬂict and team effectiveness : a meta - analysis . Journal of Applied Psychology 88 : 741 – 749 . DeMatteo JS , Eby LT , Sundstrom E . 1998 . Team - based rewards : current empirical evidence and directions for future research . In Research in Organizational Behavior ( Vol . 20 ) , Staw BM , Cummings LL ( eds ) . JAI Press : Greenwich , CT ; 141 – 183 . Duncker K . 1945 . On problem solving . Psychological Monographs 58 ( 5 ) : Whole No . 270 . Dutton JE , Ashford SJ . 1993 . Selling issues to top management . Academy of Management Review 18 : 397 – 428 . Einstein A , Infeld L . 1938 . The Evolution of Physics . Simon and Schuster : New York . Copyright  2012 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . ( 2012 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj M . Baer , K . T . Dirks , and J . A . Nickerson Eisenhardt KM , Martin JA . 2000 . Dynamic capabilities : what are they ? Strategic Management Journal , October – November Special Issue 21 : 1105 – 1121 . Eisenhardt KM , Zbaracki MJ . 1992 . Strategic decision making . Strategic Management Journal , Winter Special Issue 13 : 17 – 37 . Fernandes R , Simon HA . 1999 . A study of how individuals solve complex and ill - structured problems . Policy Sciences 32 : 225 – 245 . Ferrin DL , Dirks KT . 2003 . The use of rewards to increase and decrease trust : mediating processes and differential effects . Organization Science 14 : 18 – 31 . Finkelstein S , Hambrick DC , Canella AA . 2009 . Strate - gic Leadership : Theory and Research on Executives , Top Management Teams , and Boards . Oxford Univer - sity Press : New York . Fredrickson JW . 1984 . The comprehensiveness of strategic decision processes : extension , observations , future directions . Academy of Management Journal 27 : 445 – 466 . Fredrickson JW , Mitchell TR . 1984 . Strategic decision processes : comprehensiveness and performance in an industry with and unstable environment . Academy of Management Journal 27 : 399 – 423 . Funke J . 1991 . Solving complex problems : exploration and control of complex systems . In Complex Problem Solving : Principles and Mechanisms , Sternberg R , Frensch P ( eds ) . Erlbaum : Hillsdale , NJ ; 185 – 222 . Goll I , Rasheed AMA . 1997 . Rational decision - making and ﬁrm performance : the moderating role of environment . Strategic Management Journal 18 ( 7 ) : 583 – 591 . Hall BJ . 2002 . Incentive Strategy within Organizations . Harvard Business School Note 9 - 902 - 131 . Harvard Business School : Boston , MA . Hare AP . 1976 . Handbook of Small Group Research . Free Press : New York . Harrison DA , Klein KJ . 2007 . What’s the difference ? Diversity constructs as separation , variety , or disparity in organizations . Academy of Management Review 32 : 1199 – 1228 . Harrison DA , Price KH , Gavin JH , Florey AT . 2002 . Time , teams , and task performance : changing effects of surface - and deep - level diversity on group functioning . Academy of Management Journal 45 : 1029 – 1045 . Helfat C , Finkelstein S , Mitchell W , Peteraf M , Singh H , Teece D , Winter S . 2007 . Dynamic Capabilities : Understanding Strategic Change in Organizations . Blackwell Publishing : Malden , MA . Ireland RD , Miller CC . 2004 . Decision - making and ﬁrm success . Academy of Management Executive 18 : 8 – 12 . Janis IL . 1972 . Victims of Groupthink : A Psychological Study of Foreign - policy Decisions and Fiascoes . Houghton - Mifﬂin : Boston , MA . Kamera T , Sugimori S . 1993 . Psychological entrapment in group decision making : an assigned decision rule and a groupthink phenomenon . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 65 : 282 – 292 . Kerr NL , Atkin RS , Stasser G , Meek D , Holt RW , Davis JH . 1976 . Guilt beyond a reasonable doubt : effects of concept deﬁnition and assigned decision rule on the judgments of mock jurors . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 34 : 282 – 294 . Kilmann RH , Mitroff II . 1979 . Problem deﬁning and the consulting / intervention process . California Manage - ment Review 3 : 26 – 33 . Larson JR , Christensen C , Abbott AS , Franz TM . 1996 . Diagnosing groups : charting the ﬂow of information in medical decision - making teams . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 71 : 315 – 330 . Larson JR , Christensen C , Abbot AS , Franz TM . 1998 . Diagnosing groups : the pooling , management , and impact of shared and unshared case information in team - based medical decision - making . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 75 : 93 – 108 . Lipshitz R , Bar - Ilan O . 1996 . How problems are solved : reconsidering the phase theorem . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 65 : 48 – 60 . Loasby B . 1976 . Choice , Complexity , and Ignorance . Cambridge University Press : Cambridge , U . K . Lyles MA . 1981 . Formulating strategic problems : empir - ical analysis and model development . Strategic Man - agement Journal 2 ( 1 ) : 61 – 75 . Lyles MA , Mitroff II . 1980 . Organizational problem formulation : an empirical study . Administrative Science Quarterly 25 : 102 – 119 . Maier NRF , Hoffman LR . 1960 . Quality of ﬁrst and second solutions in group problem solving . Journal of Applied Psychology 44 : 278 – 283 . March J , Simon H . 1958 . Organizations . Wiley : New York . Maritan CA . 2007 . Dynamic capabilities and organiza - tional processes . In Dynamic Capabilities : Under - standing Strategic Change in Organizations , Helfat CE , Finkelstein S , Mitchell W , Peteraf MA , Singh H , Teece DJ , Winter SG ( eds ) . Blackwell Publishing : Malden , MA ; 30 – 45 . Mason RO , Mitroff II . 1981 . Challenging Strategic Plan - ning Assumptions : Theories , Cases and Techniques . Wiley : New York . Miller CC , Burke LM , Glick WH . 1998 . Cognitive diver - sity among upper - echelon executives : implications for strategic decision processes . Strategic Management Journal 19 ( 1 ) : 39 – 58 . Miller CE . 1989 . The social psychological effects of group decision rules . In Psychology of Group Inﬂuence , Paulus PB ( ed ) . Erlbaum : Hillsdale , NJ ; 327 – 355 . Mintzberg H , Raisinghani D , Theoret A . 1976 . The struc - ture of unstructured decision processes . Administrative Science Quarterly 21 : 246 – 275 . Mitroff II , Emshoff JR . 1979 . On strategic assumption - making : a dialectic approach to policy and planning . Academy of Management Review 4 : 1 – 12 . Mitroff II , Emshoff JR , Kilmann RH . 1979 . Assump - tional analysis : a methodology for strategic problem solving . Management Science 25 : 583 – 593 . Mitroff II , Featheringham TR . 1974 . On systemic problem solving and the error of the third kind . Behavioral Science 19 : 383 – 393 . Mohammed S , Ringeis E . 2001 . Cognitive diversity and consensus decision - making : the role of inputs , Copyright  2012 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . ( 2012 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj Strategic Problem Formulation processes , and outcomes . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 85 : 310 – 335 . Newell A , Simon HA . 1972 . Human Problem Solving . Prentice - Hall : Englewood Cliffs , NJ . Nickerson JA , Silverman B , Zenger T . 2007 . The problem of creating and capturing value . Strategic Organization 5 : 211 – 225 . Nickerson JA , Zenger TR . 2004 . A knowledge - based theory of the ﬁrm—the problem - solving perspective . Organization Science 15 : 617 – 632 . Nickerson JA , Zenger TR . 2008 . Envy , comparison costs , and the economic theory of the ﬁrm . Strategic Management Journal 29 ( 13 ) : 1429 – 1449 . Niederman F , DeSanctis G . 1995 . The impact of a structured - argument approach on group problem formulation . Decision Sciences 26 : 451 – 474 . Nutt PC . 1984 . Types of organizational decision processes . Administrative Science Quarterly 29 : 414 – 450 . Nutt PC . 1992 . Formulation tactics and the success of organizational decision making . Decision Sciences 23 : 519 – 540 . Ocasio W . 1997 . Towards an attention - based view of the ﬁrm . Strategic Management Journal , Summer Special Issue 18 : 187 – 206 . Ouchi WG . 1977 . The relationship between organiza - tional structure and organizational control . Adminis - trative Science Quarterly 20 : 95 – 113 . Papadakis VM , Lioukas S , Chambers D . 1998 . Strategic decision - making processes : the role of management and context . Strategic Management Journal 19 ( 2 ) : 115 – 147 . Pettigrew AM . 1973 . Politics of Organizational Decision - Making . Tavistock : London , U . K . Pfeffer J . 1981 . Power in Organizations . Pitman : Marshﬁeld , MA . Postmes T , Spears R , Cihangir S . 2001 . Quality of decision making and group norms . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 80 : 918 – 930 . Quinn JB . 1980 . Strategies for Change : Local Instrumen - talism . Irwin : Homewood , IL . Rittel HWJ , Webber MM . 1973 . Dilemmas in general theory of planning . Policy Sciences 4 : 155 – 169 . Schweiger DM , Sandberg WR , Ragan JW . 1986 . Group approaches for improving strategic decision - making : a comparative analysis of dialectical inquiry , devil’s advocacy , and consensus . Academy of Management Journal 29 : 51 – 71 . Shaw J , Zhu J , Duffy MK , Scott KL , Shih HA , Susanto E . 2011 . A contingency model of conﬂict and team effectiveness . Journal of Applied Psychology 96 : 391 – 400 . Shrivastava P , Grant JH . 1985 . Empirically derived models of strategic decision - making processes . Strategic Management Journal 6 ( 2 ) : 97 – 113 . Simon HA . 1955 . A behavioral model of rational choice . Quarterly Journal of Economics 69 : 99 – 118 . Simon HA . 1957 . Models of Man : Social and Rational . Wiley : New York . Simon HA . 1973 . The structure of ill - structured problems . Artiﬁcial Intelligence 4 : 181 – 201 . Simon HA , Hayes JR . 1976 . The understanding pro - cess : problem isomorphs . Cognitive Psychology 8 : 165 – 190 . Simons T , Pelled LH , Smith KA . 1999 . Making use of difference : diversity , debate , and decision comprehen - siveness in top management teams . Academy of Man - agement Journal 42 : 662 – 673 . Simons TL , Peterson RS . 2000 . Task conﬂict and relationship conﬂict in top management teams : the pivotal role of intergroup trust . Journal of Applied Psychology 85 : 102 – 112 . Smith GF . 1989 . Deﬁning managerial problems : a framework for prescriptive theorizing . Management Science 35 : 963 – 981 . Stasser G , Taylor LA , Hanna C . 1989 . Information sampling in structured and unstructured discussions of three - and six - person groups . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 57 : 67 – 78 . Stasser G , Titus W . 1985 . Pooling of unshared informa - tion in group decision making : biased information sampling during discussion . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 48 : 1467 – 1478 . Stasser G , Titus W . 1987 . Effects of information load and percentage of shared information on the dissemination of unshared information during group discussion . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 53 : 53 – 81 . Steiner ID . 1972 . Group Process and Productivity . Academic Press : New York . Teece DJ . 2007 . Explicating dynamic capabilites : the nature and microfoundations of ( sustainable ) enter - prise performance . Strategic Management Journal 28 ( 13 ) : 1319 – 1350 . Teece DJ , Pisano G , Shuen A . 1997 . Dynamic capabili - ties and strategic management . Strategic Management Journal 18 : 509 – 533 . Thompson JD . 1967 . Organizations in Action . McGraw - Hill : New York . Thompson LL , Mannix EA , Bazerman MH . 1988 . Group negotiation : effects of decision rule , agenda , and aspi - ration . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 54 : 86 – 95 . Van de Ven AH . 1992 . Suggestions for studying strategy process : a research note . Strategic Management Journal , Summer Special Issue 13 : 169 – 188 . Van de Ven AH , Delbecq AL . 1971 . Nominal versus interacting group processes for committee decision - making effectiveness . Academy of Management Journal 14 : 203 – 212 . Van Kippenberg D , Schippers MC . 2007 . Work group diversity . Annual Review of Psychology 58 : 515 – 541 . Volkema RJ . 1983 . Problem formulation in planning and design . Management Science 29 : 639 – 652 . Volkema RJ . 1986 . Problem formulation as a purpo - sive activity . Strategic Management Journal 7 ( 3 ) : 267 – 279 . Volkema RJ . 1988 . Problem complexity and the formu - lation process in planning and design . Behavioral Sci - ence 33 : 292 – 300 . Volkema RJ . 1997 . Managing the problem formulation process : guidelines for team leaders and facilitators . Human Systems Management 16 : 27 – 34 . Copyright  2012 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . ( 2012 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj M . Baer , K . T . Dirks , and J . A . Nickerson Volkema RJ , Gorman R . 1998 . The inﬂuence of cognitive - based group composition on decision - making process and outcome . Journal of Management Studies 35 : 105 – 121 . Walsh JP . 1988 . Selectivity and selective perception : an investigation of managers’ belief structures and information processing . Academy of Management Journal 31 ( 4 ) : 873 – 896 . Wanous JP , Youtz MA . 1986 . Solution diversity and the quality of group decisions . Academy of Management Journal 29 : 149 – 159 . Watson CE . 1976 . The problems of problem solving . Business Horizons 19 : 88 – 94 . Watson WE , Kumar K , Michaelsen LK . 1993 . Cultural diversity’s impact on interaction process and performance : comparing homogenous and diverse task groups . Academy of Management Journal 36 : 590 – 602 . Williamson O . 1975 . Markets and Hierarchies . Free Press : New York . Williamson O . 1985 . The Economic Institutions of Capitalism . Free Press : New York . Witte E . 1972 . Field research on complex decision making processes—the phased theorem . International Studies of Management and Organization 2 : 156 – 182 . Wittenbaum GM , Hollingshead AB , Botero IC . 2004 . From cooperative to motivated information sharing in groups : moving beyond the hidden proﬁle paradigm . Communication Monographs 71 : 286 – 310 . Wittenbaum GM , Hubbel AP , Zuckerman C . 1999 Mutual enhancement : toward an understanding of the collective preference for shared information . . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 77 : 967 – 978 . Copyright  2012 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . ( 2012 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj