HAL Id : hal - 00627470 https : / / hal . archives - ouvertes . fr / hal - 00627470 Submitted on 28 Sep 2011 HAL is a multi - disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci - entific research documents , whether they are pub - lished or not . The documents may come from teaching and research institutions in France or abroad , or from public or private research centers . L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL , est destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche , publiés ou non , émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français ou étrangers , des laboratoires publics ou privés . Visser : Design as construction of representations Willemien Visser To cite this version : Willemien Visser . Visser : Design as construction of representations . Collection , Parsons Paris School of art and design , 2010 , ”Art + Design Psychology” ( 2 ) , pp . 29 - 43 . < hal - 00627470 > This text is a pre - print of a paper published in issue 2 of Collection , on " Art + Design & Psy - chology , " pp . 29 - 43 . There is a French version of this paper : W . Visser ( 2010 ) . Visser : le design comme construc - tion de représentations . Collection [ version française ] ( 2 ) , 29 - 45 . VISSER : DESIGN AS CONSTRUCTION OF REPRESENTATIONS Willemien Visser Abstract In this chapter , we present our own approach to design , as we have described it in The Cognitive Artifacts of Designing : from a cognitive viewpoint , designing is constructing representations . What is this link between design and representations ? Designing consists in specifying an artifact , for example a machine tool – not in its implementation , its fabrication in the workshop . The result of design is a representation : the specifications of the machine tool . These representations are also artifacts , that is , entities created by people – they are " man - made as opposed to natural " ( Simon , 1969 / 1996 ) . Artifacts may be physical ( machine tools , buildings , cars , or garments ) or symbolic ( software , social welfare policies , route plans , or any procedure ) ; they may be internal ( mental representations ) or external ( drawings , mock - ups ) . The term thus pertains not only to material objects . The antonym of an " artifact " is a " natural " – not an " immaterial " entity . After a presentation of our definition of design , this chapter presents three types of activities designers perform on representations , namely generation , transformation , and evaluation . In special subsections , we review the use of knowledge in design , and how collaborative design proceeds through interaction . In the last two divisions of this section , we discuss activities that are specific to collaborative design . VISSER : DESIGN AS CONSTRUCTION OF REPRESENTATIONS In this chapter , we present our own approach to design , as we have described it in The Cognitive Artifacts of Designing ( Visser , 2006 ) . 1 DEFINITION OF DESIGN Definitions are representations : They focus on aspects of the object they aim to cover—even if their authors imagine that their focus is the object ' s essence . In our following review of definitions , we restrict ourselves to cognitive aspects of design . Even considered from such a perspective , the characteristics of design that are selected as essential may still differ . Our focus on the activity of design further orients our view . Definitions may thus focus on characteristics whose relevance we do not deny , but that do not inform us about cognitive aspects of designing . An example is the definition by Moran and Carroll ( 1996 ) : " The primary goal of design is to give shape to an artifact—the product of design . The artifact is the result of a complex of activities—the design process " ( p . 1 ) . Many definitions of design focus on the result of the activity , that is , the artifact product , ignoring the nature of the activity . In their wording , they may use references to actions , such as " specifying , " " defining , " or " creating , " but not detail any activity in developments of the definition . Another characterization by Moran and Carroll ( 1996 , p . 13 ) considers design as " the process of creating tangible artifacts to meet intangible human needs " ( p . 2 ) , to which the authors add , " creating and constructing " are " the defining acts of design . " There are authors , such as Stacey and Eckert ( 2003 , p . 164 ) , who view designing as " modeling . " Both are positions close to ours , but they present no further specification of the cognitive aspects of the activity . Other authors , often from AI - 1 This paper is entirely composed by quotes from our book The Cognitive Artifacts of Designing ( 2006 ) , Hillsdale , NJ , USA , Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . 2 W . Visser : Design as Construction of Representations Pre - print of a paper published in issue 2 of Collection , on " Art + Design & Psychology , " pp . 29 - 43 . related communities , consider design as a constraint - satisfaction activity , but propose methods without any cog - nitive underpinnings ( see Darses , 1990 , for a cognitive - psychology discussion of this approach ) . Designers are not to produce the artifact product , but its specifications . We consider essential to distinguish be - tween these specifications and the artifact product itself . A group of definitions seems to neglect this difference . They qualify design , for example , as " the creation of artifacts that are used to achieve some goal " ( Mayall , 1979 , in his Principles in Design , referred to in Atwood , McCain , & Williams , 2002 ) . For authors focusing on the specifications , design consists of producing plans or descriptions , or still other forms of representations of the artifact product ( Archer , 1965 / 1984 ; Brown & Chandrasekaran , 1989 ; De Vries , 1994 ; Hoc , 1988 ; Jeffries , Turner , Polson , & Atwood , 1981 ; Kitchenham & Carn , 1990 ; Schön , 1988 ; Whitefield , 1989 ) . Applied to software design , for example , this means that design leads to a plan that allows transformation of these specifications into executable code ( Jeffries et al . , 1981 ; Kitchenham & Carn , 1990 ) . Many empirical studies of " software design " focus , however , on elaboration of executable code—that is , coding—rather than design . According to most definitions , the artifact product has to meet certain requirements , that is , accomplish certain functions , fulfill certain needs , satisfy certain constraints , allow attaining certain objectives , and possess certain characteristics . Designing is thus usually defined—even if implicitly—as a goal - oriented activity—even if this goal is not fixed , or preestablished . After a presentation of our definition of design , this chapter presents a characteristic of design that we consider essential , that is , its creative nature . OUR DEFINITION OF DESIGN Globally characterized , from our viewpoint , design consists in specifying an artifact ( the artifact product ) , given requirements that indicate—generally neither explicitly , nor completely—one or more functions to be fulfilled , and needs and goals to be satisfied by the artifact , under certain conditions ( expressed by constraints ) . At a cog - nitive level , this specification activity consists of constructing ( generating , transforming , and evaluating ) repre - sentations of the artifact until they are so precise , concrete , and detailed that the resulting representations—the " specifications " —specify explicitly and completely the implementation of the artifact product . This construction is iterative : Many intermediate representations are generated , transformed , and evaluated , prior to delivery of the specifications that constitute the final design representation of the artifact product together with its implementa - tion . The difference between the final and the intermediate artifacts ( representations ) is a question of degree of specification , completeness , and abstraction ( concretization and precision ) . A similar view is expressed by Goel ( 1995 ) , who writes : " Design , at some very abstract level , is the process of transforming one set of representations ( the design brief ) into another set of representations ( the contract documents ) " ( p . 128 ) . Our focus on the activity and the intermediate representational structures should not lead to forgetting the central role of both the requirements as source and the implementable specifications as goal , that together steer both activity and representations . There are other activities that construct representations ( especially , the interpreta - tion of semiotic expressions ) , but due to their having other types of inputs and outputs than design , the underly - ing activities differ as well ( cf . Hayes - Roth , Hayes - Roth , Rosenschein , & Cammarata , 1979 , August ' s distinction between generation and interpretation problems [ . . . ] ) . In our core definition , we qualify design as construction , rather than transformation of representations , because " transformation " may convey the connotation of the representations to be transformed , being given [ . . . ] . " Con - struction " is more general : [ . . . ] It involves both generation and transformation activities ( and it also requires evaluation ) . DESIGN REPRESENTATION CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES Many recent studies concern representational structures in design , especially external representations , but the cognitive activities and operations involved in their construction and use have not been the object of much re - search . Publications mention activities such as " transformation , " " ( re ) interpretation , " and " restructuring and combining . " Generally , they describe the results that are obtained , but rarely make explicit the underlying cogni - tive activities or operations . We distinguish three types of activities on representations , namely generation , transformation , and evaluation . These activities , their underlying operations , and related activities and operations are discussed in the following 3 W . Visser : Design as Construction of Representations Pre - print of a paper published in issue 2 of Collection , on " Art + Design & Psychology , " pp . 29 - 43 . subsections . In special subsections , we review the use of knowledge in design , and specific aspects of collabora - tive design . PROBLEM REPRESENTATION , SOLUTION GENERATION , AND SOLUTION EVALUATION : THREE STAGES IN DESIGN AS PROBLEM SOLVING From a problem - solving perspective , design has often been described as proceeding through three stages , namely construction of problem representations , solution generation , and solution evaluation . A related , less high - level model sees these stages occurring in iterative cycles that , progressively , lead from the abstract , globally specified problem to its concrete , detailed implementable solution . None of these two models renders the actual design activity . The three stages correspond nevertheless to fundamental design activities , which are completely inter - twined—and not at all consecutive , as stages are supposed to be . The perspective we have adopted , namely to consider design as the construction of representations rather than as problem solving , leads us to consider these three activities as construction of representations , even if they may involve different types of input and output representations . USING KNOWLEDGE IN DESIGN Knowledge is a central resource in the construction and use of representations . The importance of knowledge holds for most professional domains , but it is of course particularly critical in an activity that essentially consists in representational activities . Design requires general , abstract knowledge and weak , generally applicable meth - ods , but designers also need domain - specific knowledge and the corresponding strong , knowledge - intensive methods . We suppose that satisficing , for example , requires more domain - specific knowledge than does opti - mizing . This also holds for the exercise of creativity , which is so important in design . In addition , knowledge is a key element in the exercise of analogical reasoning—which may , in turn , be related to design creativity ( but see Visser , 1996 ) . [ . . . . ] In the presentation of the SIP approach , [ references to the role of knowledge ] were very general , because this problem - solving view insists mainly on generic knowledge and weak methods . In the SIP approach to prob - lem solving , one searches for solutions in the " problem space , " going " from one knowledge state to another , until the current knowledge state includes the problem solution " ( Simon , 1978 , p . 276 ) . [ . . . . ] In our presentation of the SIT view , knowledge did not play an important role neither , but for different , nearly opposite , reasons . SIT - inspired researchers have identified and described in detail much domain - specific knowl - edge . They insist on the role of " knowledge - in - action " —which they oppose to school knowledge , whose role is of course not denied , but ignored in their research . SIT - inspired studies have provided us with extremely rich descriptions of situations that were often so unique that presentation of the knowledge identified would have been rather anecdotal . One may notice that it is undeniably difficult to find a level of description of interest to many different people ( researchers , practitioners , students , general public ) , with different backgrounds and inter - est in different domains . Furthermore , SIT - inspired researchers emphasize that there is more to design—and other professional practice—than knowledge ( cf . Bucciarelli , 1988 ) . [ . . . . ] Yet , without knowledge , no representation ! Knowledge is necessary—but of course not sufficient—for the con - struction of representations . Without knowledge , no interpretation , thus neither the possibility to look at a project in a way different from one ' s colleagues , nor that of seeing things differently than one did during a previous project ! The operative and goal - oriented character of representation results from an interaction between one ' s knowledge and experience , and the situation one is in . Nonalgorithmic activities—necessary in , for example , creativity , satisficing , ( re ) interpretation , and qualitative simulation—require knowledge . In order to proceed to complex calculations , a designer , of course , also needs knowledge , but of a sort that can be learned in school . The knowledge that is very important in design is not gained through formal education , but through experience . Designers may acquire such knowledge because of their work on many different types of projects , and their interaction with colleagues who have other specialties ( see Falzon & Visser , 1989 ) . 4 W . Visser : Design as Construction of Representations Pre - print of a paper published in issue 2 of Collection , on " Art + Design & Psychology , " pp . 29 - 43 . Knowledge determines if a design task constitutes a problem for someone . Working with ill - defined problem data is only possible if one has specific knowledge ( in addition to generic knowledge , of course ) . Furthermore , knowledge is a critical resource underlying most strategies . If simulation via representations works , it is thanks to one ' s knowledge . Reuse is , by definition , impossible without knowledge ( it is not a components library that makes knowledge superfluous ) . Handling constraints ( especially constructed constraints ) would be hard without it . The domains from which this knowledge comes are not only the application domain and that of design methods , but also the underlying technical and theoretical domains ( mathematics , science , engineering ) —and even non - technical domains . In our carrying / fastening device study ( Visser , 1995 ) , we showed the importance of common - sense knowledge ( in the design project examined , this was the knowledge of cycling ) . Additionally , designers , one may hope , also draw on ergonomics and knowledge of social , political , economic , and legal aspects of the artifact and its use . As designers generally are not expert in all these different domains , the need of design pro - jects for wide - ranging knowledge requires collaboration between professionals from various domains . With respect to knowledge of different abstraction levels , designers of course use much generic , abstract knowl - edge ( first principles , general - purpose knowledge , weak methods ) . However , the reuse of specific knowledge related to particular past design projects plays an essential role in design ( Visser , 1995 ) . In our carrying / fastening device study ( Visser , 1995 ) , we observed how the knowledge of cycling is not theoretical , school knowledge , but the result of personal experience in cycling , with or without a backpack , on a mountain bike or other bicycle . We showed how this episodic knowledge ( Tulving , 1972 , 1983 ) grounded in personal experience may be used in various ways ( both in the construction of representations used for the generation of solution ideas , and in the evaluation of solution proposals ) . In this study , we also showed the importance of human informants besides non - human information sources . We observed how designers often use colleagues as informants—and how col - leagues present themselves as such without being requested explicitly ( Berlin , 1993 ; Visser , 1993 ) . These are only a few examples , mentioned in order to indicate the importance of knowledge in design . Expertise and knowledge . [ . . . . ] There are at least three types of research on expertise . The comparison between experts and novices in a domain , that is , studies on levels of expertise , is the classical paradigm in studies on interindividual differences in this domain ( Chi , Glaser , & Farr , 1988 ; Cross , 2004 , 2004 Ed . ; Expertise in De - sign , 2004 ; Glaser , 1986 ; Glaser & Chi , 1988 ; Reimann & Chi , 1989 ) . Experts have also been studied in clinical studies , leading researchers to identify particular characteristics of particular experts ( Cross , 2001 , 2002 ) . We have proposed to distinguish also different types of expertise ( Falzon & Visser , 1989 ; see also Visser & Morais , 1991 ) . We analyzed how experts in the same domain may exhibit different types of knowledge , and observed that this knowledge is also organized differently between the experts . We attributed these differences to different task experience ( workshop vs . laboratory in the context of the aerospace industry ) . Our analysis of previous studies by colleagues who compared experts showed , in addition to the role of one ' s task , the impor - tance of the representation that one constructs of one ' s task . The comparison between the two experts examined led us to qualify the knowledge of one expert ' s as " operative " and that of the other as " general . " " The two experts differ in the same way as a teacher differs from a practitioner , in the same way as an epistemic subject differs from an operative subject " ( Falzon & Visser , 1989 ; see also Visser & Morais , 1991 ) . GENERATION AND TRANSFORMATION OF REPRESENTATIONS [ . . . . ] Generation . A representation is never generated " out of nothing " ( ex nihilo , from scratch ) . We consider it diffi - cult , if not impossible , to decide if an idea or drawing ( or other representation ) is " new . " In accordance with Goel [ . . . ] we consider that design always consists in transformation of representations . We qualify the construc - tion of representations as " generation " [ . . . ] if its main source is one ' s memory—something that will be difficult to observe for an external observer . We insist on " main , " because memory will never be the only source . By defini - tion , the state of a design project ( requirements and their follow - up included ) will influence a designer . In addi - tion to this influence , there will be other contributions " from the outside world . " Designers will interpret the input to a design project , that is , the requirements and other data that they receive or collect ( e . g . , reference documents , similar artifacts ) , in order to generate a first representation—which may con - sist of an ensemble of representations : For example , one or more related mental and external representations . Generation may be implemented by different types of processes and operations : From the " simple " evocation of knowledge from memory to the elaboration of " new " representations out of mnesic knowledge entities without a clear link to the current task ( e . g . , through analogical reasoning and other nondeterministic leaps ; Visser , 1991 ) . 5 W . Visser : Design as Construction of Representations Pre - print of a paper published in issue 2 of Collection , on " Art + Design & Psychology , " pp . 29 - 43 . [ . . . . ] The distinction between generation by evocation and by elaboration of course does not correspond to a clear - cut opposition , but is an analytical distinction that refers to a continuous dimension . Elaboration of a representation always uses mnesic entities , which will have been evoked from memory [ . . . ] . We have illustrated this idea else - where by observations from our composite - structure design study ( Visser , 1991 ) . Schema instantiation is a form of knowledge evocation that has received much attention in software - design studies . Schemata have indeed been the main framework for the analysis of knowledge representation in cogni - tive software - design research ( Détienne , 2002 ) . Generation of representations may use operations and other activities , such as information gathering . Transformation . We propose to distinguish transformation activities according to the type of transformation between input representation r x and output representation r y . We distinguish the following forms . Transformation activities may • duplicate ( Goel , 1995 ) , that is , replicate or reformulate r i . • add , that is , introduce new information or " small alterations " ( Van der Lugt , 2002 ) into r i . • detail , that is , break up r i into components r i1 to r in . • concretize , that is , transform r i into r i ' which represents r i from a more concrete perspective . • modify , that is , transform r i into another version r i ' , neither detailing , nor concretizing it . • revolutionize ( Visser , 2009 ) , that is , replace r i by an alternative representation r j , neither detailing , nor concretizing it ( corresponding to Van der Lugt , 2002 ' s " tangential transformations " , i . e . " wild leaps into a different direction " ) . [ . . . . ] [ We ] consider that both transformations into different versions ( through modifying ) and into alternative representations ( through revolutionizing ) constitute " lateral " transformations . [ . . . . ] Many activities play a more or less direct role in these different types of transformation . Some examples ( vary - ing between operations and activities ) are interpretation , association , brainstorming , reinterpretation , confronta - tion , articulation , integration , analysis , exploration , inference , restructuring , combining , drawing ( sketching , drafting , and other forms ) , hypothesizing , and justifying . In this book , we comment on only some of them . [ . . . . ] Even if it is too simplistic to qualify " analysis " as a first design " stage , " analyzing indeed corresponds to a cen - tral activity in the initial phases of a design project . Constraints analysis is essential to disambiguate design re - quirements . Analyzing the current design state may be a way to introduce detail or concreteness in the project . " Analysis " has , however , a logical undertone , which causes that it can certainly not be the only—or even the main—activity in the initial design phases . Other , more nonalgorithmic activities will also be required , such as interpretation , association , brainstorming , and exploration . Analogical reasoning occurs in all three representational activities . We have mentioned it in different contexts : As a factor of opportunism , in creativity - requiring activities , as a way to tackle ill - defined problems by inter - preting them , and as a possible form to generate " interesting " design ideas . It is also the reasoning form that underlies reuse , which plays an important role in design . We observed its role in different studies , several examples of which have been presented in this book . [ . . . . ] [ We ] described analogical reasoning used by the mechanical - design engineer in our functional - specification study ( see Table 6 . 1 ) . Using analogies , he took advantage of representations that he was constructing and using for his current design actions , to design analogically related design objects . A completely different use of analogy has been observed in the composite - structure aerospace design study [ . . . ] . There , the designer especially employed analogical reasoning in the conceptual - design stage . When elaborating conceptual solutions to design problems , he and his colleagues frequently were observed to be reminded of extradesign domain objects that implemented concepts ( principles , mechanisms ) that they judged potentially useful for development of a solution to the cur - rent design problem . The following example ( from Visser , 1996 ) illustrates this use of analogy that we analyzed as contributing to the innovative character of the design project ( other examples are presented in Visser , 1991 ) . Example . When the composite - structure designer and his colleagues are developing , in a discussion , " unfurling principles " for antennas , they come up with ideas such as an " umbrella " and other " folding " objects . They pro - posed , for example , a " folding photo screen , " a " folding butterfly net , " and a " folding sun hat , " all related to the target by analogical relationships . 6 W . Visser : Design as Construction of Representations Pre - print of a paper published in issue 2 of Collection , on " Art + Design & Psychology , " pp . 29 - 43 . Different forms of inference are of course also used in design . Induction is used much more frequently than deduction . Goel ( 1995 ) identifies only 1 . 3 % " ( overt ) deductive inferences " in his observations . In our composite - structure design study ( see Table 6 . 1 ) , neither did we notice any overt form of deduction . The articulation , combination , and integration of representations play a particular role in collaborative design . So do inform , comment , and request . Such activities are discussed in the subsection Construction of Interdesigner Compatible Representations . Restructuring and combining representations are often mentioned as components of the creative process ( Verstijnen , Heylighen , Wagemans , & Neuckermans , 2001 ; Verstijnen , van Leeuwen , Goldschmidt , Hamel , & Hennessey , 1998 ) . Verstijnen et al . show that restructuring and combining are two separate constituents of crea - tivity that function differently . In distinct ways , each can lead designers to introduce new information in the current design representation—something that is useful in generation and transformation of representations . Restructuring is qualified by the authors as " getting free from an original conception " ( 1998 , p . 545 ) . Verstijnen et al . claim that " mental imagery " operations ( i . e . , operations on mental images ) may lead to discovery of new ideas—but only under certain conditions . Some operations cannot be performed " within mental imagery alone " and other operations " are much easier to perform externally " ( p . 522 ) . It is difficult to restructure completely mentally an existing external representation ( i . e . , a drawing , in Verstijnen et al . ' s experimental studies ) —for novices , it is even impossible . It is facilitated if one is allowed or encouraged to sketch—but this facilitation only holds for experienced designers . However , combining ( synthesizing ) parts of a representation can be performed mentally by only using mental imagery . In that case , " no additional value is obtained from sketching " ( Verstijnen et al . , 1998 , p . 535 ) . One may indeed suppose that the two opera - tions—restructuring and combining—impose different loads on mental processing . Yet , inventors ( such as Kekulé , an example presented by Verstijnen et al . ) seem to be able to restructure exclu - sively " in their head . " Verstijnen et al . ( 1998 , p . 546 ) formulate the interesting hypothesis that " extraordinarily creative individuals " may be able to " construct analogies within imagery , for which others , in more mundane cases , require a sketch " ( 1998 , p . 546 ) . Indeed , what an external representation such as a sketch allows a person is to restructure their image ( i . e . , an internal representation ) in analogy to that external representation . This in - spires in Verstijnen et al . ( 2001 , p . 1 ) the idea that " with no paper available or no expertise to use it , analogies can be used to support the creative process instead of sketches " ( 2001 , p . 1 ) —but perhaps only in " extraordinar - ily creative individuals " ( the addition is ours ) . As tools for reinterpretation , activities such as restructuring and combining may thus be used to come up with new ideas . Drawing ( i . e . , sketching , drafting , and other forms of drawing ) may also be a tool for other activities . Besides restructuring , it may serve , for example , analysis , and simulation . It may also fulfill interactional func - tions , such as informing or explaining . It can even have several functions simultaneously : For example , simula - tion , explanation , and storing . The relatively unstructured , fluid , and imprecise drawings that sketches are , may give access to knowledge not yet retrieved and may evoke new ways of seeing [ . . . ] . Unforeseen views on the design project in progress are supposed to open up unanticipated potentialities for new aspects or even com - pletely new directions . EVALUATION OF REPRESENTATIONS According to design methodologies , the generation and evaluation of solutions are two different stages in a de - sign project . Many empirical studies have shown , however , that designers intertwine the two . The participants in the technical review meetings that we studied ( D ' Astous , Détienne , Visser , & Robillard , 2004 ) were supposed to follow a particular method in which design was not supposed to occur . They came up , however , with alternative solutions ; that is , not only were they recording the underlying negative evaluations , but they also proceeded to design . Evaluating an entity consists in assessing it vis - à - vis one or more references ( Bonnardel , 1991a ) . In the context of design , evaluation may occur when a representation is presented by its author , or interpreted by colleagues , as an " idea " or " solution proposal . " Colleagues may interpret a representation as a solution proposal without its author presenting it explicitly as such , and they may evaluate it without its author explicitly requesting them to do so ( Visser , 1993 ) . Terminology . The terminology around " constraints " and " criteria " is still under debate in the domain of cognitive design studies . Bonnardel ( 1989 ) reserves the term " constraints " for operative evaluative references and " crite - ria " for conceptual references , whereas we use " constraints " for generative references that steer solution genera - 7 W . Visser : Design as Construction of Representations Pre - print of a paper published in issue 2 of Collection , on " Art + Design & Psychology , " pp . 29 - 43 . tion and " criteria " for critical evaluative references guiding solution evaluation ( Visser , 1996 ) . Other distinctions have also been proposed . According to the source of an evaluative reference , researchers distinguish different types of evaluative refer - ences ( Bonnardel , 1991a ; Ullman , Dietterich , & Staufer , 1988 ) : • Prescribed constraints , which are given to the designer or which the designer infers from the problem specifications . • Constructed constraints , for which designers mainly use their domain knowledge . • Deduced constraints , which designers infer based on other constraints , the current state of the design project ( the problem solution ) , and design decisions made during their design problem solving . Depending on the type of reference used by a designer , researchers distinguish three evaluation strategies ( Bonnardel , 1991b ; Martin , Détienne , & Lavigne , 2000 , 2001 ) , all three of which we qualify as " comparative " : 2 • Analytical evaluation : A solution is assessed vis - à - vis a number of constraints . • Comparative * evaluation : Various solution versions or alternatives are compared with each other . • Analogical evaluation : A solution is assessed using knowledge acquired in relation to a previous solution . In an analysis of negotiation patterns between participants in multidisciplinary aeronautical - design meetings , Martin et al . ( 2000 ; 2001 ) show that if such evaluation does not lead to a consensus between the different part - ners , arguments of authority may be used . Evaluative references are forms of knowledge . As expected , designers ' expertise in a domain influences their use of these references ( D ' Astous et al . , 2004 ) . Given that , in a collaborative design setting , designers may have different representations of a project , proposals are evaluated not only based on purely technical , " objective " evaluative criteria . They are also the object of ne - gotiation , and the final agreement concerning a solution also results from compromises between designers ( Martin et al . , 2000 , 2001 ) . In addition , not only solution proposals , but also evaluation criteria and procedures undergo evaluation ( D ' Astous et al . , 2004 ) . The preceding discussion concerned different forms of evaluation by comparison , that is , with respect to evalua - tive references . This type of evaluation is possible if the form of the representation that is to be evaluated allows such a comparison . For example , if one knows already the performance measures of the artifact . This is often the case in engineering , where " objective " measures of artifacts are possible ( e . g . , measures of their future perform - ance ) . The evaluation of other types of artifacts may be based on simulation . The result of such simulation ( e . g . , a cer - tain behavior displayed by the artifact ) may constitute the input of comparative evaluation . Evaluation has functions at both the action - execution and the action - management level of the design activity . The classical solution evaluation occurs at the action - execution level and leads generally to the selection of one proposal—possibly after one or more iterations . At the action - management level , evaluation affects the progress of the design process . Depending on the results , design may be pursued in different ways . Designers , thus , evaluate not only solutions , but also their possible design process , its progression , and direction ( Visser , 1996 ) . COLLABORATIVE DESIGN THROUGH INTERACTION Collaborative design takes different forms and refers to the various representation - construction activities pre - sented earlier . Besides the functions that representations play in both individual and collective design settings ( mainly cognitive offloading , reminding , keeping track , storage , communication , organizing , reasoning , and discovery ) , various aspects of the externalization possibilities of representations provide additional functions specific to collective design . These functions go together with different cooperative activities , which vary ac - cording to the phases of the design project . During distributed design , when the designers ' central activity is coordination in order to manage task interdependencies , representations of course play a role . Yet , it is in co - design that they have a particular function , due to its collaborative setting . 2 We therefore label the specific evaluation mode that is called " comparative evaluation " in the literature , as " comparative * evaluation " in order to distinguish it from the more general " evaluation by comparison , " of which it is only one particular form and that also includes the analytical and analogical evaluation modes . 8 W . Visser : Design as Construction of Representations Pre - print of a paper published in issue 2 of Collection , on " Art + Design & Psychology , " pp . 29 - 43 . In collaborative - design situations , individual design plays of course also an important role ( as we have empha - sised at different occasions in this text , see also Visser , 1993 ; 2002 ) . Yet , an essential part of collaborative de - sign , especially during co - design , takes place—that is , advances—through interaction . This apparently une - quivocal statement—it may even seem tautological—conveys characteristics of design thinking that we consider essential . Indeed , the different forms that interaction may take in collaborative design—especially , linguistic , graphical , gestural , and postural—are , in our view , not the simple expression and transmission ( communication ) of ideas previously developed in an internal medium ( such as Fodor ' s " language of thought " ) . They are more and of a different nature than the trace of a so - called " genuine " design activity , which would be individual and occur internally , and which verbal and other forms of expression would allow sharing with colleagues . On this issue , we do not concur with Goldschmidt ( 1995 ) when she writes that " thinking aloud and conversing with others can be seen as similar reflections of cognitive processes , " which we can accept as " equal windows into the cognitive processes involved in design thinking " ( p . 193 ) . Notice that , in these collaborative contexts , a fundamental part is played by other factors than cognitive ones ( representations , knowledge ) . These are especially emotional factors , and social , institutional , and interactional factors , such as the roles of the different design participants ( formal , static roles that depend on one ' s predefined function in the design project , and informal roles that emerge and evolve depending on the interaction , see D ' Astous , Robillard , Détienne , & Visser , 2001 ; Fagan , 1976 ; Herbsleb et al . , 1995 ; McGrath , 1984 ; Seaman & Basili , 1998 ) . In the following and last two divisions of this section , we discuss activities that are specific to collaborative design . CONSTRUCTION AND USE OF INTERMEDIARY REPRESENTATIONS IN COLLABORATIVE DESIGN Many notions referring to the interdesigner intermediary function of representations in collaborative design have been proposed in the literature , such as " intermediary objects , " " coordinative artifacts " ( Schmidt & Wagner , 2002 ) , " entities for cooperation " ( Boujut & Laureillard , 2002 ) , and " boundary objects " ( cf . also Star , 1988 ' s boundary objects , discussed below ) . Emphasizing the material setting and the artifactual nature of these entities that are essential in designers ' inter - action , Schmidt and Wagner ( 2002 ) emphasize that , in cooperative work , their main role is not informative , but coordinative : They contribute to a more or less effortless and fluent coordination and integration of individual activities in coordinative practices . For architects , a particular form of coordinative artifacts is " layered artifacts . " They are a tool that architects use " for communicating things that need to be taken account of or changed . " Schmidt & Wagner ( 2002 ) describe that architects construct them by " making annotations on a document , e . g . , putting a red circle around a problem , adding details ( correct measures , material ) , marking a part of a drawing with a post - it with some instructions for changes , corrections ( e . g . , in pencil directly on a plan ) , sketching either directly on a plan copy or on transparent tracing paper . . . . Layered artifacts facilitate coordination between activities ( and the people who are responsible for them ) . They , for example , provide a collective or individual space for experimentation and change . The CAD drawing itself is a layered artifact , which builds on a particular mix of codes for functions and materials and has been tailored to a particular division of labor . " ( Schmidt & Wagner , 2002 , pp . 10 - 11 ) The benefit of visual expression in creative collective activity has been examined by Van der Lugt ( 2002 ) . One of the supposed specific contributions of visual expression to idea generation in a collective setting is that , through conversation with the drawings of colleagues , people may build on each other ' s ideas . Van der Lugt shows that sketching using brainsketching tools indeed contributes to creative activity in idea - generation groups , but not as expected : It especially supports reinterpretation of one ' s own ideas , and so stimulates creativity in individual idea generation . Reinterpretation of ideas generated by other group members is not enhanced . Collec - tive working is thus not the panacea for all complex processes . Individually conducted activities in collective settings may sometimes lead to " better " results . The visual expression in a collective setting may nevertheless improve integration of the group process , by facilitating the access to previously expressed ideas . Van der Lugt emphasizes that his results may be specific to the techniques and tools examined , and thus cannot be generalized to other sketching and idea - generation tools . Indeed , in another study on sketching tools , using a 9 W . Visser : Design as Construction of Representations Pre - print of a paper published in issue 2 of Collection , on " Art + Design & Psychology , " pp . 29 - 43 . different technique ( visual brainstorming ) , Van der Lugt ( 2000 ) observed a breakdown in the idea - generation process . Another communicative situation in design projects is the interaction between people involved in design and in implementation . Eckert ' s study of knitwear design ( presented in Stacey & Eckert , 2003 ) constitutes an interesting example of the difficulties that these situations may bring about . The knitwear designers examined by Eckert use " technical sketches " in order to communicate their patterns and garment shapes to the machine technicians who are to implement the knitwear designs in garments . In addition to a freehand drawing part ( the actual sketches ) , these documents comprise a short verbal description and a set of dimensions ( Stacey & Eckert , 2003 , p . 157 ) . These technical sketches are supposed to clarify the designer ' s specifications , but " are often excessively imprecise or ambiguous . " The technicians tend to ignore the actual sketch part , and " rely mainly on the verbal descriptions , which only give broad indications of categories " ( pp . 157 – 158 ) . The technicians are not able to distinguish in these documents the important and relatively ex - actly specified design aspects from unimportant details and elements that are placeholders for broad categories ( e . g . , the type of neckline or the chest pattern ) . As they " have no way of judging what to believe , [ they ] usually take what is standard as more likely to be reliable " ( p . 174 ) . This leads to the products , that is , the garments , often being more traditional than intended by their designers . The technicians repeatedly produce garments " that violate the designers ' intentions . " They also often state that " what the designers want can ' t be done " ( p . 174 ) . Notice that this conclusion—technicians refer to standards for understanding the specifications they receive—is not restricted to these specific technicians and these particular technical sketches . It may hold for anybody who is to interpret any semiotic expression produced by other people . Both designers and other participants in the development process of an artifact , interpret the language as well as the graphical expressions by their col - leagues , in terms of the standards they are familiar with—and of their own past experience of artifacts more or less similar to the current object of the design project . Still another communicative situation—but one that is not necessarily present in every design project—is that between designers and users . With respect to interactive - software design , Carroll ( 2006 ) notices that there is a big and crucial " gap " between the worldviews held by designers of software and its potential users . Participatory design is one way to bridge this gap . Research in this domain has produced many proposals for possible design representations enabling the two parties to communicate : " Many of these approaches essentially implement a user interface design at the earliest stage of system devel - opment : Designers can show concretely what they have in mind , rather than specifying it mathematically , and other stakeholders can react and critique what they can actually see and manipulate . . . . A slightly more ab - stract approach is scenario - based design in which system functionality and the experience of using that func - tionality are described in narrative episodes of user interaction . " ( Carroll , 2006 ) Argumentation—a " hot item " in studies on cooperative activities—has only been touched on in this book ( cf . Rittel , 1972 / 1984 ' s argumentative model ) . Authors attribute a more or less broad sense to the notion . We con - ceive argumentation as an attempt to modify the representations held by one ' s interlocutors . Many activities in co - design are thus argumentative . Boundary representations . As advanced by Star ( 1988 ) , in collaborative design , one needs " boundary objects " to serve as an interface between people from different " communities of practice . " These objects may take many artifactual forms , for example , representational . We have proposed to qualify as " boundary representations " ( no connection to the b - rep model for representing a cube ) the representational version of boundary objects ( Visser , 2009 ) . The fact that they work does not mean that partners from different communities view or use them in the same way . Different partners may interpret them differently , but they work if they contain sufficient details un - derstandable by these parties . No party needs to understand the full context of use adopted by their interaction partners . It is the acknowledgment and discussion of the differences that enable people to use them successfully together . An example of a representation meant as a boundary representation is the technical sketch used by the knitwear designers examined by Eckert ( see Stacey & Eckert , 2003 , p . 163 , see also our presentation above ) . They do not work as boundary objects , because they do not contain sufficient detail to be understandable by the different parties involved . Successful communication depends not only on " the sender ' s use of appropriate representations for information , " but also on " the recipients ' ability to construct meaning from those representations " ( Stacey & Eckert , 2003 , p . 158 ) . According to Stacey and Eckert ( 2003 ) , two factors play herein a particularly important role : 10 W . Visser : Design as Construction of Representations Pre - print of a paper published in issue 2 of Collection , on " Art + Design & Psychology , " pp . 29 - 43 . " The extent to which the participants share context and share expertise ; and the tightness of the feedback loops . . . . In face - to - face communication , failures of comprehension can be identified and conveyed very quickly , and speech , gestures and sketches are used to explain and disambiguate each other . . . . In less tightly coupled exchanges , the need to prevent rather than correct misunderstanding is correspondingly greater . " ( p . 162 ) With respect to these factors , Eckert observed that in nearly all companies that she had visited , designers do their conceptual design without any input from the technicians that are to implement their designs . This absence of communication may explain , at least in part , that the technical sketches used as specification documents by the knitwear designers are ambiguous—that is , in the form that the two parties use them : Without any other interac - tion allowing them to be acknowledged and discussed . " The less the participants discuss , and the less knowledge and contextual information they share , the more sketches , diagrams and other communications need to carry with them the means of their own interpretation " ( Stacey & Eckert , 2003 , p . 163 ) . CONSTRUCTION OF INTERDESIGNER COMPATIBLE REPRESENTATIONS In a paper on " bringing different points of view together , " Fischer ( 2000 ) writes : " Because complex problems require more knowledge than any single person possesses , communication and collaboration among all the involved stakeholders are necessary ; for example , domain experts understand the practice , and system designers know the technology . Communication breakdowns are often experienced be - cause stakeholders belonging to different cultures ( Snow , 1993 ) use different norms , symbols , and represen - tations . Rather than viewing this symmetry of ignorance ( Rittel , 1984 ) ( or ' asymmetry of knowledge ' ) as an obstacle during design , we view it as an opportunity for creativity . The different perspectives help in discov - ering alternatives and can help uncover tacit aspects of problems . " ( Fischer , 2000 , p . 3 ) Construction of interdesigner compatible representations when co - designing proceeds through activities quali - fied as " grounding " ( Clark & Brennan , 1991 ) and " cognitive synchronization " ( D ' Astous et al . , 2004 ; Falzon , 1994 ) , through a negotiation process resulting in " social constructions " ( Bucciarelli , 1988 ) or through argumen - tation resulting in the settling , " dodging , " or substitution of " issues " ( Kunz & Rittel , 1979 ) . A great amount of time is spent on these activities ( Herbsleb et al . , 1995 ; Karsenty , 1991 ; Olson , Olson , Carter , & Storrosten , 1992 ; Olson et al . , 1996 ; Stempfle & Badke - Schaub , 2002 ) . Recent studies have observed that synchronization can also take a gestural form ( cf . research in Tversky ' s STAR team , http : / / www - psych . stanford . edu / ~ bt / gesture / , retrieved August 16 , 2005 ) . In our study on software - review meetings ( D ' Astous et al . , 2004 ) , we showed that the construction of interd - esigner compatible representations of the to - be - reviewed design solution was a prerequisite for the occurrence of evaluation activities , which were the prescribed task . We also observed that cognitive synchronization concerned not only the problem solutions but also the criteria and the evaluation procedures . Given that designers have their personal representations , collaboration between designers calls for confrontation , articulation , and integration of these different representations , in order for the designers to be able to reach a solution that is adopted for the common activity . The confrontation of personal representations also leads to conflicts between designers , which they are to resolve ( see a remarkable early study in the domain of architec - tural design by Klein & Lu , 1989 ) . An interesting reading of ( Simon , 1969 / 1996 ) thinking about representations is provided by Carroll ( 2006 ) . Carroll notices that in the second edition of Sciences of the Artificial , Simon ' s view seems changed . In " Social Planning , " a new chapter in this edition , Simon " suggested that organizations could be considered design repre - sentations ( pp . 141 – 143 ) , using the example of the Economic Cooperation Administration ( ECA ) , the entity that implemented the Marshall Plan in 1948 " ( p . 12 ) . At the outset , people involved in ECA did not agree on this agency . Carroll quotes Simon who " observes ( p . 143 ) , ' What was needed was not so much a ' correct ' conceptu - alization as one that would facilitate action rather than paralyze it . The organization of ECA , as it evolved , pro - vided a common problem representation within which all could work ' " ( p . 12 ) . As the ECA proceeded , one of the six original conceptions prevailed . Carroll comments , " many uses of prototypes in participatory design are compatible with this suggestion ; prototypes provide an evolving framework for exploring design options and gradually focusing on a final solution " ( Carroll , 2006 ) . 11 W . Visser : Design as Construction of Representations Pre - print of a paper published in issue 2 of Collection , on " Art + Design & Psychology , " pp . 29 - 43 . REFERENCES Archer , L . B . ( 1965 / 1984 ) . Systematic method for designers . In N . Cross ( Ed . ) , Developments in design method - ology ( pp . 57 - 82 ) . Chichester , England : Wiley ( Originally published by The Design Council , London , 1965 ) . Atwood , M . E . , McCain , K . W . , & Williams , J . C . ( 2002 , June 25 - 28 ) . How does the design community think about design ? Paper presented at DIS ' 02 , the conference on Designing interactive systems : Processes , practices , methods , and techniques , London . Berlin , L . M . ( 1993 ) . Beyond program understanding : A look at programming expertise in industry . In C . R . Cook , J . C . Scholtz & J . C . Spohrer ( Eds . ) , Empirical Studies of Programmers : Fifth workshop ( ESP5 ) ( pp . 8 - 25 ) . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . Bonnardel , N . ( 1989 ) . L ' évaluation de solutions dans la résolution de problèmes de conception [ Solution evaluation in design problem solving ] ( Rapport de recherche No . 1072 ) . Rocquencourt , France : Institut National de Recherche en Informatique et en Automatique . Bonnardel , N . ( 1991a ) . Criteria used for evaluation of design solutions . In Y . Quéinnec & F . Daniellou ( Eds . ) , 11th Congress of the International Ergonomics Association : Designing for everyone and everybody ( Vol . 2 , pp . 1043 - 1045 ) . London : Taylor & Francis . Bonnardel , N . ( 1991b ) . L ' évaluation de solutions dans la résolution de problèmes de conception et dans les systèmes experts critiques [ Solution evaluation in design problem solving and in critic expert systems ] . In D . Hérin - Aime , R . Dieng , J . P . Regouard & J . P . Angoujiard ( Eds . ) , Knowledge modeling & expertise transfer ( pp . 371 - 381 ) . Amsterdam : IOS Press . Boujut , J . - F . , & Laureillard , P . ( 2002 ) . A co - operation framework for product - process integration in engineering design . Design Studies , 23 , 497 - 513 . Brown , D . , & Chandrasekaran , B . ( 1989 ) . Design problem solving . Knowledge structures and control strategies . London : Pitman . Bucciarelli , L . ( 1988 ) . An ethnographic perspective on engineering design . Design Studies , 9 ( 3 ) , 159 - 168 . Carroll , J . M . ( 2002 , March ) . Dimensions of participation . Elaborating Herbert Simon ' s " Science of Design " . Paper presented at the Workshop " User - Centred Design " of the International Conference in Honour of Herbert Simon , " The Sciences of Design . The Scientific Challenge for the 21st Century " , INSA , Lyon , France . Chi , M . T . H . , Glaser , R . , & Farr , M . J . ( Eds . ) . ( 1988 ) . The nature of expertise . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Clark , H . H . , & Brennan , S . E . ( 1991 ) . Grounding in communication . In L . Resnick , J . - M . Levine & S . D . Tea - sley ( Eds . ) , Perspectives on socially shared cognition ( pp . 127 - 149 ) . Washington , DC : American Psychological Association Press . Cross , N . ( 2001 ) . Strategic knowledge exercised by outstanding designers . In J . S . Gero & K . Hori ( Eds . ) , Stra - tegic knowledge and concept formation III ( pp . 17 - 30 ) . Sydney , Australia : University of Sydney , Key Centre of Design Computing and Cognition . Cross , N . ( 2002 ) . Creative cognition in design : Processes of exceptional designers . In T . Kavanagh & T . Hewett ( Eds . ) , Creativity and Cognition 2002 ( C & C ' 02 , the 4th conference on Creativity & Cognition ) ( pp . 14 - 19 ) . New York : ACM Press . Cross , N . ( 2004 ) . Expertise in design . Introduction . The Journal of Design Research , 4 ( 2 ) . Cross , N . ( Ed . ) . ( 2004 ) . Expertise in design [ Special issue ] . Design Studies , 25 ( 5 ) . D ' Astous , P . , Détienne , F . , Visser , W . , & Robillard , P . N . ( 2004 ) . Changing our view on design evaluation meetings methodology : A study of software technical review meetings . Design Studies , 25 , 625 - 655 . Also acces - sible at http : / / hal . inria . fr / inria - 00117060 / en / . D ' Astous , P . , Robillard , P . N . , Détienne , F . , & Visser , W . ( 2001 ) . Quantitative measurements of the influence of participant roles during peer review meetings . Empirical Software Engineering , 6 , 143 - 159 . Also accessible at http : / / hal . inria . fr / inria - 00117298 / en / . Darses , F . ( 1990 ) . Gestion de contraintes au cours de la résolution d ' un problème de conception de réseaux informatiques [ Constraint management during a computer - network design task ] ( Rapport de recherche No . 1164 ) . Rocquencourt , France : Institut National de Recherche en Informatique et en Automatique . De Vries , E . ( 1994 ) . Structuring information for design problem solving ( Doctoral dissertation , Eindhoven Uni - versity of Technology , Eindhoven , Netherlands ) . Den Haag , Netherlands : Koninklijke Bibliotheek . Détienne , F . ( 2002 ) . Software design . Cognitive aspects . London : Springer . Expertise in Design [ Special issue ] . ( 2004 ) . The Journal of Design Research , 4 ( 2 ) . Fagan , M . E . ( 1976 ) . Design and code inspections to reduce errors in program development . IBM Systems Jour - nal , 15 ( 3 ) , 182 - 211 . 12 W . Visser : Design as Construction of Representations Pre - print of a paper published in issue 2 of Collection , on " Art + Design & Psychology , " pp . 29 - 43 . Falzon , P . ( 1994 ) . Dialogues fonctionnels et activité collective [ Functional dialogs and collective activity ] . Le Travail Humain , 57 ( 4 ) , 299 - 312 . Falzon , P . , & Visser , W . ( 1989 ) . Variations in expertise : Implications for the design of assistance systems . In G . Salvendy & M . J . Smith ( Eds . ) , Designing and using human - computer interfaces and knowledge based systems ( Vol . II , pp . 121 - 128 ) . Amsterdam : Elsevier . Fischer , G . ( 2000 ) . Symmetry of ignorance , social creativity , and meta - design [ Internet version : Social creativ - ity : Bringing different points of view together ] . Knowledge - Based Systems , 13 ( 7 - 8 ) , 527 - 537 . Retrieved October 512 , 2005 , from http : / / l2003d . cs . colorado . edu / ~ gerhard / papers / kbs2000 . pdf . Glaser , R . ( 1986 ) . On the nature of expertise . In F . Klix & H . Hagendorff ( Eds . ) , Human memory and cognitive performances . Amsterdam : North - Holland . Glaser , R . , & Chi , M . T . H . ( 1988 ) . Overview . In M . T . H . Chi , R . Glaser & M . J . Farr ( Eds . ) , The nature of expertise ( pp . xv - xxviii ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Goel , V . ( 1995 ) . Sketches of thought . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Goldschmidt , G . ( 1995 ) . The designer as a team of one . Design Studies , 16 ( 2 ) , 189 - 209 . Hayes - Roth , B . , Hayes - Roth , F . , Rosenschein , S . , & Cammarata , S . ( 1979 , August , 20 / 08 / 1979 ) . Modeling plan - ning as an incremental , opportunistic process . Paper presented at the 6th International Joint Conference on Arti - ficial Intelligence , Tokyo . Herbsleb , J . D . , Klein , H . , Olson , G . M . , Brunner , H . , Olson , J . S . , & Harding , J . ( 1995 ) . Object - oriented analy - sis and design in software project teams . Human - Computer Interaction , 10 ( 2 & 3 ) , 249 - 292 . Hoc , J . - M . ( 1988 ) . Cognitive psychology of planning . London : Academic Press . Jeffries , R . , Turner , A . A . , Polson , P . G . , & Atwood , M . E . ( 1981 ) . The processes involved in designing soft - ware . In J . R . Anderson ( Ed . ) , Cognitive skills and their acquisition ( pp . 255 - 283 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erl - baum Associates . Karsenty , L . ( 1991 ) . Design strategies in database conceptual modelling . In Y . Quéinnec & F . Daniellou ( Eds . ) , 11th Congress of the International Ergonomics Association : Designing for everyone and everybody . London : Taylor & Francis . Kitchenham , B . , & Carn , R . ( 1990 ) . Research and practice : Software design methods and tools . In J . - M . Hoc , T . R . G . Green , R . Samurçay & D . Gilmore ( Eds . ) , Psychology of Programming ( pp . 271 - 284 ) . London : Academic Press . Klein , M . , & Lu , S . ( 1989 ) . Conflict resolution in cooperative design . Artificial Intelligence in Engineering , 4 , 168 - 180 . Kunz , W . , & Rittel , H . W . J . ( 1970 ) . Issues as elements ( Working Paper No . 131 ; reprinted 1979 ) . Retrieved August 5 , 2005 , from http : / / www - iurd . ced . berkeley . edu / pub / abstract _ wp131 . htm Martin , G . , Détienne , F . , & Lavigne , E . ( 2000 , 17 - 20 juillet ) . Negotiation in collaborative assessment of design solutions : An empirical study on a concurrent engineering process . Paper presented at the International Confer - ence on Concurrent Engineering , CE ' 2000 , Lyon , France . Martin , G . , Détienne , F . , & Lavigne , E . ( 2001 , July 9 - 13 ) . Analysing viewpoints in design through the argumen - tation process . Paper presented at Interact 2001 , Tokyo , Japan . McGrath , J . E . ( 1984 ) . Groups : Interaction and performance . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall . Moran , T . P . , & Carroll , J . M . ( 1996 ) . Overview of design rationale . In T . P . Moran & J . M . Carroll ( Eds . ) , De - sign rationale : Concepts , techniques , and use ( pp . 1 - 19 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Olson , G . M . , Olson , J . S . , Carter , M . R . , & Storrosten , M . ( 1992 ) . Small group design meetings . An analysis of collaboration . Human - Computer Interaction , 7 , 347 - 374 . Olson , G . M . , Olson , J . S . , Storrotsen , M . , Carter , M . R . , Herbsleb , J . D . , & Rueter , H . ( 1996 ) . The structure of activity during design meetings . In T . P . Moran & J . M . Carroll ( Eds . ) , Design rationale : Concepts , techniques and uses ( pp . 217 - 239 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Reimann , P . , & Chi , M . T . H . ( 1989 ) . Human expertise . In K . J . Gilhooly ( Ed . ) , Human and machine problem solving ( pp . 161 - 191 ) . New York : Plenum . Rittel , H . W . J . ( 1972 / 1984 ) . Second - generation design methods ( Interview with Donald P . Grant and Jean - Pierre Protzen ) . In N . Cross ( Ed . ) , Developments in design methodology ( pp . 317 - 327 ) . Chichester , England : Wiley ( Originally published in The DMG 5th Anniversary Report : DMG Occasional Paper No . 1 , 1972 , pp . 5 - 10 ) . Schmidt , K . , & Wagner , I . ( 2002 ) . Coordinative artifacts in architectural practice . In M . Blay - Fornarino , A . M . Pinna - Dery , K . Schmidt & P . Zaraté ( Eds . ) , Cooperative systems design : A challenge of the mobility age ( Pro - ceedings of the Fifth International Conference on the Design of Cooperative Systems , COOP 2002 ) ( pp . 257 - 274 ) . Amsterdam : IOS Press . Schön , D . A . ( 1988 ) . Designing : Rules , types and worlds . Design Studies , 9 ( 3 ) , 181 - 190 . 13 W . Visser : Design as Construction of Representations Pre - print of a paper published in issue 2 of Collection , on " Art + Design & Psychology , " pp . 29 - 43 . Seaman , C . B . , & Basili , V . R . ( 1998 ) . Communication and Organization : An Empirical Study of Discussion in Inspection Meetings . IEEE Transaction on Software Engineering ( July ) , 559 - 572 . Simon , H . A . ( 1969 / 1996 ) . The sciences of the artificial ( 3rd , rev . ed . 1996 ; Orig . ed . 1969 ; 2nd , rev . ed . 1981 ) ( 3 ed . ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Simon , H . A . ( 1978 ) . Information - processing theory of human problem solving . In W . K . Estes ( Ed . ) , Handbook of learning and cognitive processes ( Vol . V . Human information processing , pp . 271 - 295 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Law - rence Erlbaum Associates . Stacey , M . , & Eckert , C . ( 2003 ) . Against ambiguity . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 12 ( 2 ) , 153 - 183 . Star , S . L . ( 1988 ) . The structure of ill - structured solutions : Heterogeneous problem - solving , boundary objects and distributed artificial intelligence . In M . Huhns & L . Gasser ( Eds . ) , Distributed artificial intelligence ( Vol . 3 , pp . 37 - 54 ) . Los Altos , CA : Morgan Kaufman . Stempfle , J . , & Badke - Schaub , P . ( 2002 ) . Thinking in design teams . An analysis of team communication . Design Studies , 23 ( 5 ) , 473 – 496 . Tulving , E . ( 1972 ) . Episodic and semantic memory . In E . Tulving & W . Donaldson ( Eds . ) , Organization of memory ( pp . 381 - 403 ) . New York : Academic Press . Tulving , E . ( 1983 ) . Elements of episodic memory . Oxford , England : Oxford , England University Press . Ullman , D . G . , Dietterich , T . G . , & Staufer , L . A . ( 1988 ) . A model of the mechanical design process based on empirical data . AI EDAM , 2 , 33 - 52 . Van der Lugt , R . ( 2000 ) . Developing a graphic tool for creative problem solving in design groups . Design Stud - ies , 21 ( 5 ) , 505 - 522 . Van der Lugt , R . ( 2002 ) . Functions of sketching in design idea generation meetings . In T . Kavanagh & T . Hewett ( Eds . ) , Creativity and Cognition 2002 ( C & C ' 02 , the 4th conference on Creativity & Cognition ) . New York : ACM Press . Verstijnen , I . M . , Heylighen , A . , Wagemans , J . , & Neuckermans , H . ( 2001 , 17 - 19 July ) . Sketching , analogies , and creativity . On the shared research interests of psychologists and designers . Paper presented at the 2nd Inter - national Conference on Visual and Spatial Reasoning in Design , VR ' 01 , Bellagio , Lake Como , Italy . Verstijnen , I . M . , van Leeuwen , C . , Goldschmidt , G . , Hamel , R . , & Hennessey , J . M . ( 1998 ) . Sketching and creative discovery . Design Studies , 19 ( 4 ) , 519 - 546 . Visser , W . ( 1991 ) . Evocation and elaboration of solutions : Different types of problem - solving actions . An em - pirical study on the design of an aerospace artifact . In T . Kohonen & F . Fogelman - Soulié ( Eds . ) , Cognitiva 90 . At the crossroads of artificial intelligence , cognitive science and neuroscience . Proceedings of the third COGNITIVA symposium , Madrid , Spain , 20 - 23 November 1990 ( pp . 689 - 696 ) . Amsterdam : Elsevier . Also ac - cessible at http : / / hal . inria . fr / inria - 00000165 / en / . Visser , W . ( 1993 ) . Collective design : A cognitive analysis of cooperation in practice . In N . F . M . Roozenburg ( Ed . ) , Proceedings of ICED 93 , 9th International Conference on Engineering Design ( Vol . 1 , pp . 385 - 392 ) . Zürich , Switzerland : HEURISTA . Visser , W . ( 1995 ) . Use of episodic knowledge and information in design problem solving . Design Studies , 16 ( 2 ) , 171 - 187 . Also in N . Cross , H . Christiaans & K . Dorst ( Eds . ) ( 1996 ) , Analysing design activity ( Ch . 13 , pp . 271 - 289 ) . Chichester , England : Wiley . Visser , W . ( 1996 ) . Two functions of analogical reasoning in design : A cognitive - psychology approach . Design Studies , 17 , 417 - 434 . Visser , W . ( 2002 ) . Conception individuelle et collective . Approche de l ' ergonomie cognitive [ Individual and collective design . The cognitive - ergonomics approach ] . In M . Borillo & J . - P . Goulette ( Eds . ) , Cognition et cré - ation . Explorations cognitives des processus de conception ( ch . 14 ) [ Cognition and creation . Cognitive explora - tions of design processes ] ( pp . 311 - 327 ) . Bruxelles , Belgium : Mardaga . Visser , W . ( 2006 ) . The cognitive artifacts of designing . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Visser , W . ( 2009 ) . Co - élaboration de solutions en conception architecturale et rôle du graphico - gestuel : Point de vue de la psychologie ergonomique [ Co - elaborating architectural design solutions and the role of the graphico - gestural : The ergonomic - psychology viewpoint ] ( ch . 5 . 3 ) . In F . Détienne & V . Traverso ( Eds . ) , Méthodologies d ' analyse de situations coopératives de conception : Corpus MOSAIC [ Methodologies for analysing cooperative design situations : The MOSAIC corpus ] ( pp . 129 - 167 ) . Nancy , France : Presses Universitaires de Nancy . Visser , W . , & Morais , A . ( 1991 ) . Concurrent use of different expertise elicitation methods applied to the study of the programming activity . In M . J . Tauber & D . Ackermann ( Eds . ) , Mental models and human - computer inter - action ( Vol . 2 , pp . 59 - 79 ) . Amsterdam : Elsevier . 14 W . Visser : Design as Construction of Representations Pre - print of a paper published in issue 2 of Collection , on " Art + Design & Psychology , " pp . 29 - 43 . Whitefield , A . ( 1989 ) . Constructing appropriate models of computer users : The case of engineering designers . In J . Long & A . Whitefield ( Eds . ) , Cognitive ergonomics and human - computer interaction ( pp . 66 - 94 ) . Cambridge , England : Cambridge University Press .