Computer Supported Cooperative Work : The Journal of Collaborative Computing 5 : 155 - 200 , 1996 . 155 @ 1996 KluwerAcademic Publishers . Printed in the Netherlands . Coordination Mechanisms : Towards a Conceptual Foundation of CSCW Systems Design * KJELD SCHMIDT * and CARLA SIMONE * * * Systems Analysis Department , RisO National Laboratory , Roskilde , Denmark , EmaiI : kjeld . schmidt @ risoe . dk ; * * Department of Computer Sciences , University of Torino , Torino , Italy , Email : simone @ di . unito . it Abstract . The paper outlines an approach to CSCW systems design based on the concept of ' coordi - nation mechanisms . ' The concept of coordination mechanisms has been developed as a generalization of phenomena described in empirical investigations of the use of artifacts for the purpose of coordi - nating cooperative activities in different work domains . On the basis of the evidence of this corpus of empirical studies , the paper outlines a theory of the use of artifacts for coordination purposes in cooperative work settings , derives a set of general requirements for computational coordination mechanisms , and sketches the architecture of Ariadne , a CSCW infrastructure for constructing and running such malleable and linkable computational coordination mechanisms . Key words : Cooperative work , articulation work , coordination , artifact , coordination mechanisms , CSCW environments , Ariadne A major research issue in CSCW is to understand how computer systems can be instrumental in reducing the complexity of coordinating cooperative activities , individually conducted and yet interdependent . In fact , the issue was identified and defined with admirable precision quite early in the history of CSCW , by Anatol Holt : ' The new capabilities at which coordina - tion technology aims depend on finding and installing appropriate conceptual and structural units with which to express tasks , their diverse relations to each other and to the people who ultimately bear responsibility for them . ' ' To be useful , this must be done in a flexible yet well - integrated manner , with plenty of leeway for the unpredictability of real life . ' ( Holt , 1985 , p . 281 ) . Since then , this issue has been investigated by a range of eminent CSCW researchers . The initial results were not encouraging , however , in that coordination facilities were experienced as excessively rigid , either because the underlying protocol was not accessible and could not be modified ( e . g . , The Coordinator , cf . Winograd , 1986 ; Winograd and Flores , 1986 ; Flores et al . , 1988 ) , or because the facilities for changing the protocol did not support actors in modifying the protocol ( e . g . , DOMINO , cf . Kreifelts et al . , 1991a ; Kreifelts et al . , 1991b ) . * The first version of this paper was written while Carla Simone was with the University of Milano . 156 K . SCHMIDT AND C . SIMONE In response to these initial experiences , a number of research projects have attempted to make coordination facilities flexible to actors , e . g . , Egret ( Johnson , 1992 ) , ConversationBuilder ( Kaplan et al . , 1992 ; Bogia et al . , 1993 ; Bogia et al . , 1996 ) , and OVAL ( Malone et al . , 1992 ; Malone et al . , 1995 ) . While closely related to these and other CSCW research efforts , our research has taken a somewhat different approach in that we have aimed at developing a computational notation which , on one hand , is sufficiently general to facilitate the construction of computer - based coordination mechanisms for any cooperative work arrangement and which , on the other hand , supports the cooperating actors themselves in constructing mechanisms which are both malleable and linkable . This notation - named Ariadne ~ - exists in the form of an abstract formal specification which has been partially implemented as a ' concept demonstrator ' ( Simone and Schmidt , 1994 ; Simone et al . , 1995a ) . The development of the general notation for constructing coordination mecha - nisms involves a range of research activities . Firstly , we need to understand how cooperating actors devise and use coordinative constructs such as coordinative pro - tocols and workflows and how such constructs are supported by artifacts . A series of focused , in - depth field studies of coordinative practices in real - world cooperative settings have therefore been undertaken with the specific objective of investigating how the distributed activities of cooperative work arrangements are articulated and , in particular , how prescribed procedures and artifacts are devised , appropriated , and used for these purposes . On the basis of these and other investigations , we have developed a general conceptual framework which provides a set of categories and models which , in turn , form the basis of Ariadne . The whole process has been highly iterative , of course , in that the development of Ariadne has raised questions to the underlying conceptual framework which , again , has generated issues to be investigated further in the field studies . On the other hand , the findings from the field studies have be used to put the conceptual framework and the notation to test ; as a result the framework and the notation have been modified and refined repeatedly . While the research reported in this paper has been underway for several years and has been reflected in a number of papers and reports , the purpose of the present paper is to present a systematic exposition of the conceptual framework that has been developed in the course of this research and which serves as the foundation for the Ariadne notation . The argumentation underlying this exposition is , unfortunately , rather intricate . Thus , in order to help the reader to navigate the labyrinthine exposition , its flow is punctuated by a number of propositions which highlight and offer a condensed expression of the crucial points of the argumentation . ' ~ In Greek mythology , Ariadne was the daughter of Minos , the king of Crete . She fell in love with Theseus and helped him slay the Minotaur , the monster of the Labyrinth . She did that by giving Theseus a thread that would help him to find his way in and out of the Labyrinth .