a r X i v : c ond - m a t / 0703096v1 [ c ond - m a t . s o f t ] 3 M a r 2007 EPJ manuscript No . ( will be inserted by the editor ) Quantitative Tube Model for Semiﬂexible Polymer Solutions Hauke Hinsch 1 , Jan Wilhelm 1 , and Erwin Frey 1 Arnold Sommerfeld Center for Theoretical Physics and Center of NanoScience , Department of Physics , Ludwig - Maximilians - Universit¨at M¨unchen , Theresienstrasse 37 , D - 80333 M¨unchen , Germany Received : date / Revised version : date Abstract . We develop a analytical and quantitative theory of the tube model concept for entangled net - works of semiﬂexible polymers . The absolute value of the tube diameter L ⊥ is derived as a function of the polymers’ persistence length l p and mesh size ξ of the network . To leading order we ﬁnd L ⊥ = 0 . 32 ξ 6 / 5 l − 1 / 5 p , which is consistent with known asymptotic scaling laws . Additionally , our theory provides corrections to scaling that account for ﬁnite polymer length eﬀects and are dominated by the mesh size to polymer length ratio . We support our analytical studies by extensive computer simulations . These allow to verify assumptions essential to our theoretical description and provide an excellent agreement with the analyt - ically calculated tube diameter . Furthermore , we present simulation data for the distribution function of tube widths in the network . PACS . 83 . 10 . Kn Reptation and tube theories – 87 . 15 . Aa Theory and modeling ; computer simulation – 87 . 16 . Ka Filaments , microtubules , their networks , and supramolecular assemblies 1 Introduction Filamentous actin ( F - actin ) is a semiﬂexible biopolymer that has been the object of intensive research from sev - eral domains . As a major constituent of the cytoskeleton , F - actin networks play a key role in the ongoing puzzle of cell mechanics [ 1 , 2 ] and cell motility [ 3 ] . Depending on the presence of binding proteins , F - actin strands at medium concentration can form both chemical ( cross - linked ) and physical ( entangled ) networks with diﬀerent elastic prop - erties [ 4 , 5 , 6 ] . Besides rheological methods , single polymer visualizations also are feasible , as the strands exceed most synthetic polymers by length . This facilitated the observa - tion of tube - like regions along which DNA or F - actin ﬁla - ments reptate [ 7 , 8 ] . The conﬁnement of polymers to these cylindrical cages conﬁrmed the “tube model” postulated earlier by de Gennes [ 9 ] and Doi and Edwards [ 10 ] . This long standing paradigm had proven a successful concept to reduce the complex structure of entangled networks to a single polymer problem . In such entangled networks , polymers can eﬀortlessly slide past each other but are not allowed to cross . Their interaction is thus mainly of entropic nature as entangle - ments mutually restrict the accessible conﬁguration space . Grasping this feature in a single polymer model has lead to the famous tube model [ 9 , 10 ] . The suppression of trans - verse undulations of a test polymer by the surrounding polymers ( Fig . 1 ) is modelled by a tube . This tube follows Send oﬀprint requests to : frey @ lmu . de Fig . 1 . The eﬀect of all surrounding polymers that hinder the test polymer’s transverse displacement is described by a hypothetical tube . the average path of the test polymer and its proﬁle is fre - quently modelled by a harmonic potential . The average strength of this potential is determined by the local den - sity of the network . The tube concept has proven a suc - cessful tool to derive scaling laws for several network prop - erties [ 10 , 11 ] . For example , due to the conﬁnement energy of the ﬁlament inside , the tube diameter can be connected to mechanical properties of the network , e . g . the diﬀerent moduli [ 6 , 12 , 13 ] . However , due to the phenomenological nature of the tube model , most of its beneﬁts have been mainly qualitative . Recently , also quantitative predictions of the plateau modulus and the tube diameter of ﬂexible 2 Hauke Hinsch et al . : Quantitative Tube Model for Semiﬂexible Polymer Solutions polymers melts were achieved by a novel approach based on the microscopic foundations and the topological struc - ture of the network [ 14 , 15 ] . Even if most concepts developed for ﬂexible polymers can not be carried over to the semiﬂexible case with its large persistence length , the tube model is perfectly appli - cable as well . However , while in general scaling laws of the tube diameter [ 16 ] or the plateau modulus [ 13 ] are well es - tablished , quantitative theories are still under debate and lack from approval by measurements of suﬃcient accuracy . Again the challenge is to make the successful tube model quantitative by connecting the phenomenological tube and its microscopic origins . In the present work , we contribute to the discussion by supplying an absolute value for the tube diameter from a theory supported by extensive com - puter simulations . We will proceed as follows : in Section 2 the model un - der investigation is deﬁned and all relevant length scales are discussed . By the analysis of the free energy cost for conﬁning a polymer to a hypothetical tube , the tube diam - eter is derived as a function of Odijk’s deﬂection length for ﬁnite - length polymers . The appropriate deﬂection length for a given polymer concentration and persistence length is derived in the following sections . To this end , the polymer is modeled by a sequence of independent rods in Section 3 . Criteria for the correct choice of the independent rod length and a self - consistent determination of the tube di - ameter are developed , before a ﬁnal result for the tube diameter is obtained in Section 4 . Extensive numerical simulations supporting these result and providing addi - tional insight are presented in Section 5 followed by our conclusion in Section 6 . 2 Model Deﬁnition We consider a mono - disperse network of physically entan - gled polymers with a particular focus on pure solutions of the biopolymer F - actin . The polymer density is given by the number ν of polymers of length L per unit volume . The polymers are of bending stiﬀness κ corresponding to a persistence length l p = κ / k B T . A single polymer’s con - ﬁguration r ( s ) is parameterized by the arc length s and the average distance between the polymer chains can be characterized by a mesh size ξ : = p 3 / ( νL ) 1 . We will describe the constituent polymers by the worm - like chain model [ 17 , 18 ] and exploit the tube model concept [ 9 , 10 ] to reduce the description of the network to a single poly - mer and its neighbors . In the following we will begin our analysis with an investigation of the diﬀerent length scales involved in the system . 1 The mesh size has the unit length and can be interpreted as an average distance between network constituents . While the denominator p 1 / νL ensures the correct scaling the numerator is a mere deﬁnition . 2 . 1 Length Scales Typical F - action solutions are polydisperse with a mean ﬁlament length L ≈ 22 µ m [ 19 ] . With a persistence length l p ≈ 17 µ m [ 20 , 21 ] comparable to its length , it is the text - book example of a semiﬂexible polymer . At a concentra - tion of c = 0 . 5 mg / ml corresponding to ν ≈ 1 µm − 3 [ 22 ] the average mesh size equals ξ ≈ 0 . 4 µ m . We can thus state that the persistence length of a ﬁlament is much larger than the distance to its neighbors , l p ≫ ξ . Since the tube diameter L ⊥ is at most of the order of the mesh size , this additionally implies l p ≫ L ⊥ . The polymer will thus not deviate far from the tube center . Consequently , conﬁgurations where the polymer folds back onto itself are rendered unlikely . This is a minimal requirement to model the tube by a harmonic potential of strength γ . The po - tential has to be seen as a hypothetical tube representing the joint contribution of all surrounding polymers which constrain the transverse undulations of a given polymer ( see Fig . 1 ) . The energy of a certain polymer contour r ( s ) is the sum of the bending energy of the polymer and its con - ﬁnement into the harmonic potential and is given in the weakly - bending rod approximation by H ( γ , κ ) = Z L 0 ds h κ 2 ( r ′′⊥ ( s ) ) 2 + γ 2 r 2 ⊥ ( s ) i . ( 1 ) Here r ( s ) = ( s , r ⊥ ( s ) ) is a parameterization in arc - length s and transverse displacement r ⊥ ( s ) = ( y ( s ) , z ( s ) ) from the tube center . The prime denotes a derivative with respect to s . This harmonic approximation to the Hamiltonian of the worm - like chain model is valid as long as | r ′′⊥ | ≪ 1 , i . e . as long as the transverse coordinates of the tube coordinate can be considered to remain single valued . With the thermal average h·i the tube diameter can now be deﬁned as L ⊥ : = 1 L (cid:10) Z L 0 ds r 2 ⊥ ( s ) (cid:11) . ( 2 ) So far we have identiﬁed two length scales : the length scale of persistence length and the total polymer length describ - ing the properties of one speciﬁc polymer , and the length scale of mesh size and the tube diameter describing the properties of the network structure . Additionally we in - troduce the deﬂection length L d : = ( κ / γ ) 1 / 4 as a third useful length scale . It is interpreted below as that length on which interactions between single polymer and network occur . More precisely , it is a measure for the number of contacts of the polymer with the tube walls . For large conﬁnement strength γ the tube is small , making interac - tion with the encaged polymer more likely and therefore resulting in a small deﬂection length . On the other hand , for a large polymer rigidity κ transverse undulations allow - ing contacts with the tube walls are energetically unfavor - able and the distance between contact will decrease . For l p ≫ L ⊥ we expect the deﬂection length to be distinctively smaller than the polymer length , but also larger than the tube diameter . For quantiﬁcation we consider the free en - ergy cost ∆F ( γ ) of conﬁning the polymer to the tube . It Hauke Hinsch et al . : Quantitative Tube Model for Semiﬂexible Polymer Solutions 3 can be found from the partition sum that is obtained as a path integral over all polymer conﬁgurations : exp [ − β∆F ( γ ) ] = Z D [ r ⊥ ( s ) ] exp [ − βH ( κ , γ ) ] ( 3 ) with β = 1 / k B T . In the limit of inﬁnitely long polymers the free energy cost is [ 23 ] ∆F = √ 2 k B T L L d . ( 4 ) This result ﬁts into the picture of the deﬂection length as measure for the average distance between successive colli - sions of the polymer with its tube . If the typical distance between two collisions is given by L d , the free energy loss results as the sum over all L / L d points of contact where every collision costs one k B T . The free energy now allows one to derive the tube diameter as L 2 ⊥ = 2 L ∂∆F ∂γ = L 3d √ 2 l p . ( 5 ) In the limit of inﬁnite polymer length we have thus derived the tube diameter as a function of the deﬂection length by diﬀerentiation of the free energy cost . The above consideration also sets the road map for the remaining work . To calculate the tube diameter for the network , we need ﬁrst to connect free energy and tube diameter for polymers of ﬁnite length and then derive the deﬂection length for the model under investigation . 2 . 2 Finite length Polymers For ﬁnite size polymers the path integral in Eq . ( 3 ) can be evaluated exactly [ 23 , 24 ] and with the dimensionless deﬂection length l d : = L d / L results in ∆F = − 2 k B T g ( l d ) ( 6 ) with g ( l d ) = ln ( l 2d ) − 1 2 ln (cid:18) sinh 2 1 √ 2 l d − sin 2 1 √ 2 l d (cid:19) . ( 7 ) The limit of small l d that is guaranteed by L ≫ L d as stated above , allows an expansion g ( l d ) = − 1 √ 2 l d + ln ( l 2d ) + O ( e − 1 / l d ) for l d → 0 , ( 8 ) where the ﬁrst term is just the result for polymers with inﬁnite length ( 4 ) . Upon again using the relation L 2 ⊥ = ( 2 / L ) ( ∂∆F ( l d ) / ∂γ ) with the inner derivative ∂l d / ∂γ = − ( L 4 / 4 κ ) l 5d the tube diameter becomes L 2 ⊥ = L 3 2 l p l 5d g ′ ( l d ) . ( 9 ) For later convenience we simplify this to l 2 ⊥ = h ( l d ) by introducing a dimensionless tube width l ⊥ and function h ( x ) as l 2 ⊥ : = L 2 ⊥ l p L 3 and h ( x ) : = x 5 g ′ ( x ) 2 . ( 10 ) This relation connects the wanted tube diameter to the deﬂection length and hence to the hypothetical tube po - tential γ at a given bending rigidity . In the following we will further investigate the tube properties and set up a model that allows one to derive the deﬂection length and thereby the hypothetical harmonic tube potential strength from the polymer concentration and persistence length . 3 Independent Rod Model For simpliﬁcation and as an anticipation towards the com - puter simulations , consider for the time being a polymer in a two - dimensional ( 2D ) plane . In this case the transverse displacement vector r ⊥ reduces to a single component . The undulations of the test polymer in 2D are hindered by point - like obstacles as depicted in Fig . 2 ( top ) . These ob - stacles represent the cuts of the surrounding polymers in three dimensions with the chosen ﬂuctuation plane . Given an appropriate number of 2D obstacles equivalent to the density of surrounding polymers in 3D , the transverse dis - placement will correspond to one of the two components of the displacement vector r ⊥ , if we assume the ﬂuctua - tions of these components to be independent . Bearing in mind the large persistence length compared to the mesh size , the surrounding polymers in 3D are modelled as rigid rods and the area density ρ MC of obstacles in 2D corre - sponding to a polymer concentration ν in the 3D network is ρ MC = 2 νL / π . It is computed in Appendix A and will be explicitly needed for the comparison with simulation results . Recalling the Hamiltonian ( 1 ) , the polymer’s free en - ergy has a bending and an entropic contribution . To mini - mize the free energy it can be favorable to trade in bending energy for a wider tube . Thereby entropy is gained due to a larger available free volume , but the polymer is forced to sacriﬁce energy to obtain its curvature ( see Fig . 2 ( top ) ) . This competition deﬁnes a characteristic length ¯ L that has to be of the order of the deﬂection length L d , since this is the length scale characterizing interaction of the test polymer and its environment . In the following we will develop an analytical theory based on an independent rod model ( IRM ) that is in - spired by the competition we have just discussed . To this end , we use a simpliﬁed model of a semiﬂexible polymer , in which the ﬂexibility is localized to the joints of a se - quence of independent stiﬀ rods of length ¯ L . After deriv - ing the transverse ﬂuctuations of a single independent rod in an environment of ﬂuctuating neighbors , we apply a self - consistency argument to arrive at the corresponding tube width of the full length semiﬂexible polymer . Note that the analysis is carried out for three dimensions and the 2D simpliﬁcation only serves for illustration and for simulations later on . To begin with , consider the test polymer to be divided into independent segments of length ¯ L that are assumed to be completely rigid rods and are only allowed to undergo transverse ﬂuctuations . As the ﬂexibility in the IRM de - pends on the number of joints , it is obvious that the choice of ¯ L is crucial for the resulting tube diameter . Picturing 4 Hauke Hinsch et al . : Quantitative Tube Model for Semiﬂexible Polymer Solutions Fig . 2 . ( top ) The ﬂuctuation tube of a semiﬂexible polymer in a network of constraints is determined by a delicate balance of entropic and bending energy . ( middle ) Scheme of decomposi - tion of a semiﬂexible polymer into rigid rods of length ¯ L . The ﬂexibility is localized to the joints between independent rods . Given the proper choice of ¯ L both models produce the same transverse ﬂuctuation area . ( bottom ) Small rod length overes - timates and large rod length underestimates ﬂuctuations . the decomposition of the test polymer as in Fig . 2 ( mid - dle ) it can be seen that the transverse ﬂuctuations of the independent rods are hindered by the two closest obstacle polymers normal to either side of each segment of length ¯ L . If ¯ L is chosen too large ( e . g . ¯ L = L in the worst case ) the area of transverse ﬂuctuations will be much smaller than for a true semiﬂexible polymer because ﬂexibility is underestimated ( Fig . 2 ( bottom , right ) ) . On the contrary , if ¯ L is chosen too small , the normal distance to the near - est obstacle can be quite large ( Fig . 2 ( bottom , left ) ) . This overestimation of ﬂexibility results in a transverse ﬂuctu - ation area that is large compared to the polymer we try to model . Before we further discuss the proper choice of ¯ L , we will focus on the behavior of a single independent rod in more detail . The transverse ﬂuctuation of a single stiﬀ rod in the ( y , z ) - plane are constrained by the projections of the sur - rounding network constituents to this plane as depicted in Fig . 3 ( left ) . Since the mesh size is much smaller than the persistence length , the surrounding polymers can be assumed to be straight and “dangling ends” are neglected . The size of the shaded cross section will decrease with in - creasing density of polymers , i . e . with a decreased mesh size . Thus the tube diameter is of order of the mesh size and scales as L ⊥ ∝ ξ for a given 2D plane . Furthermore , an increase of the length ¯ L of the rigid rod signiﬁes an in - crease of obstacles that will be projected to the plane . As the average distance between surrounding polymers in di - rection of the test rod is also given by the mesh size ξ , the average number projected onto the plane increases as ¯ L / ξ . As this reduces the cross section area , we ﬁnally arrive at an overall scaling of the tube diameter as L ⊥ ∝ ξ 2 / ¯ L . Fig . 3 . ( left ) Projection of constraining polymers to the plane of transverse ﬂuctuations of a test polymer ( black dot ) . As the mesh size is much smaller than the persistence length , the con - straining ﬁlaments , can be assumed to be straight . The shaded area is the accessible tube area for a speciﬁc obstacle conﬁgu - ration . ( right ) Corresponding setup for a simpliﬁed geometry where obstacles can only be aligned with coordinate axes . Before we quantify this scaling result in the next sec - tion , let us ﬁrst have a closer look at the obstacles . In a self - consistent treatment these evidently have themselves to be regarded as semiﬂexible polymers of the network and therefore undergo ﬂuctuations around an average position as well . This causes the cross section area to smear out , as the test polymer has now a non - vanishing probability to take on values behind the average obstacle position . In terms of a conﬁnement potential the cross section is no more described by an inﬁnite well , but by some continuous potential which earlier has been assumed to be harmonic with strength γ per unit length of a polymer . The ob - stacle ﬂuctuations will also be modelled as Gaussian and to distinguish between the test polymer mean square dis - placement L 2 ⊥ and the obstacle’s , the latter is denoted as σ 2 . In a self - consistent treatment of the network the aver - age tube width L ⊥ of the test polymer is then determined as a function of the obstacle ﬂuctuations σ , where σ is cho - sen such that L ⊥ = σ . Of course , the value L ⊥ of a single obstacle conﬁguration will not only depend on σ but also on the obstacle positions in that speciﬁc conﬁguration . Consequently , averaging over all obstacle conﬁgurations will result in a distribution P ( L ⊥ ) and self - consistency would then also require a distribution P ( σ ) . However , if we assume these distributions to be reasonably peaked , we can use their averages as a good approximation . The Hauke Hinsch et al . : Quantitative Tube Model for Semiﬂexible Polymer Solutions 5 self - consistency of distributed tube widths is veriﬁed by simulations in Section 5 . 3 . 1 Single stiﬀ rod in simpliﬁed geometry According to the assumptions made above the obstacles ( in a top view ) are completely described by a normal dis - tance r k from the test polymer and an orientation α k ; compare Fig . 3 . We will neglect correlations and assume the obstacles to be uniformly distributed . The probability to ﬁnd an obstacle with a certain direction at a speci - ﬁed point is independent of the direction and that point . This corresponds to a complete factorization of the net - work distribution function into single polymer distribution functions . Consider ﬁrst a simpliﬁed geometry in which all obsta - cles are either parallel to the y or the z axis as depicted in Fig . 3 ( right ) . As ﬂuctuations in both coordinates are assumed to be independent and equivalent , the task of computing the tube width is reduced to a one dimen - sional problem with a single coordinate r . The network density or mesh size enters as the number ρ of obstacles per unit length . This density should be chosen such , that the average number of obstacles at a certain distance r from the test rod in the IRM is the same as the average number of obstacle polymers featuring a minimal distance r from the test polymer . This density is proportional to the length ¯ L of the stiﬀ segment and the number of sur - rounding polymers in a unit volume νL . The exact relation ρ = ( π / 2 ) ( νL ¯ L / 4 ) is calculated in Appendix B . As the obstacles are assumed to undergo Gaussian ﬂuc - tuations around their average position r k , the correspond - ing probability density is P 0 ( r − r k , σ ) : = (cid:0) 2 πσ 2 (cid:1) − 1 / 2 e − ( r − rk ) 2 2 σ 2 . ( 11 ) If the test rod interacts with only a single obstacle , we can state that the probability to ﬁnd the test rod at a certain position is given by the fraction of realizations still accessible to the obstacle . In this case P + ( r , r k , σ ) = Z ∞ r dr ′ P 0 ( r ′ − r k , σ ) ( 12 ) is the fraction of conﬁguration space still accessible to the obstacle if the test rod is placed at r ( for r k > 0 ) . Com - pleting the integral yields P + ( r , r k , σ ) = 1 2erfc (cid:18) r − r k √ 2 σ (cid:19) ( 13 ) and the corresponding probability for obstacles at negative positions P − ( r , r k , σ ) is simply obtained by a inverted sign of the argument . The probability to ﬁnd the test rod at a position r for a given conﬁguration of obstacles { r k } is then given by the product of all probabilities P ( r , { r k } , σ ) = 1 N Y k , r k > 0 P + ( r , r k , σ ) Y k , r k < 0 P − ( r , r k , σ ) . ( 14 ) The normalization N = N ( { r k } , σ ) is determined by the condition R drP ( r , { r k } , σ ) = 1 and depends on the obsta - cle conﬁguration . As the function P + ( r , r k , σ ) reduces to a Heaviside function in the case of σ → 0 , the product in Eq . ( 14 ) can be written as θ ( r − r − ) θ ( r − r + ) / ( r + − r − ) where r + and r − are the positions of the two closest obstacles . This reduction is justiﬁed because all further obstacles are completely shadowed by the two nearest neighbors . In the case of a non - vanishing σ the probability distribu - tion P ( r , { r k , α k } , σ ) will not be rectangular anymore but smear out . The test rod has a non - vanishing probability to be found behind the average position of the closest ob - stacle and thus a chance to feel the interaction of further network constituents . However , sketching the distribution in Fig . 4 , it becomes intuitively clear that this probability rapidly approaches zero for far obstacles or small ﬂuctua - tion amplitudes σ . We will exploit this fact in the numer - ical analysis below and in the simulations . 7 3 2 - 2 - 5 p r obab li t y transverse coordinate Fig . 4 . Probability density to ﬁnd the test rod at a spatial po - sition for mutual interaction with a single obstacle ( solid lines ) and resulting probability in an environment of all obstacles ( dashed line ) . The x - axis tics mark the center position of each obstacle . Distant obstacle only have a negligible inﬂuence on the overall probability function . The distribution function , Eq . ( 14 ) , for the test rod at hand , averages of any function f ( r ) can now be calculated for a single realization of obstacles as f ( r ) { r k } = Z drf ( r ) P ( r , { r k } , σ ) , ( 15 ) where the index { r k } denotes the speciﬁc obstacle conﬁg - uration . The tube center of the test rod is then r ( { r k } , σ ) : = r { r k } ( 16 ) and the width of the probability distribution is the wanted tube diameter L 2 ⊥ ( { r k } , σ ) : = r 2 { r k } − r 2 { r k } . ( 17 ) 6 Hauke Hinsch et al . : Quantitative Tube Model for Semiﬂexible Polymer Solutions The derived tube diameter of the test rod is not only a function of the ﬂuctuation width σ but also of the spe - ciﬁc obstacle conﬁguration . Consequently , sampling over diﬀerent obstacle sets will result in a distribution of values for L ⊥ . As mentioned earlier this distribution should be described by a single characteristic value - consistent with the obstacle ﬂuctuations that have also be assumed to be of equal size . Since the obstacles are uniformly distributed , they can be fully described by the density encoded in the average number of obstacles ρ per line . This is achieved by integrating out all obstacle positions and orientations in L 2 ⊥ ( { r k } , σ ) to arrive at the only density dependent L 2 ⊥ ( ρ , σ ) . We choose a simple average over a large number N of obstacle sets { r k } like h f ( { r k } ) i ρ = N Y k = 1 Z R / 2 − R / 2 dr k R ! f ( { r k } ) , ( 18 ) where R = N / ρ . In this nomenclature the average tube diameter 2 is obtained as L 2 ⊥ ( ρ , σ ) = h L 2 ⊥ ( { r k } , σ ) i ρ . Self - consistency is now expressed as L 2 ⊥ ( ρ , σ ) = σ 2 ( 19 ) at the point of self - consistency ( PSC ) σ = σ ∗ . By measur - ing length in 1 / ρ we can rewrite this to a dimensionless master curve l ( ρσ ) : L 2 ⊥ ( ρ , σ ) = 1 ρ 2 l ( ρσ ) , ( 20 ) since L ⊥ , 1 / ρ and σ are all lengths , The task of ﬁnding the self - consistent tube width L ⊥ ( ρ , σ ∗ ) = σ ∗ translates to ﬁnding l ( C ) = C 2 where the constant C = ρσ ∗ . As soon as this is achieved , the self - consistent tube diameter is available as a function of density ρ only and hence it depends like L ⊥ = C ρ = 2 C 3 π ξ 2 ¯ L ( 21 ) on the rod length ¯ L and mesh size ξ . The numerical determination of C is achieved by an in - tegration using a Monte - Carlo procedure . It includes the N - fold integrals over the obstacle positions r k from Eq . ( 14 ) as well as the integration over the test polymer posi - tion r from Eq . ( 15 ) . As mentioned above , the probability distribution rapidly decreases at distances far from the closest obstacle . Hence , we have restricted the integration range of the dr integration in the Monte - Carlo samples to values [ y min − 5 σ , y max + 5 σ ] where y min and y max are the closest obstacle at either side . Furthermore , the fast decrease of the probability distribution renders the contri - bution of distant obstacles quasi to zero . We can therefore drop all obstacles with y k 6∈ [ y min − 10 σ , y max + 10 σ ] . The 2 Of course , one could also image a diﬀerent characterization of the average tube diameter , e . g . the median or the maximal diameter . We choose the average as the most obvious quantity experimental groups might measure , e . g . in analyzing diﬀerent ﬂuorescent microscopy images . results are depicted in Fig . 5 and a graphical solution for the PSC constant results in C ≈ 3 . 64 . ( 22 ) Special attention should be paid to the behavior at ρσ = 0 . It provides a good test whether the used IRM is adequate and allows for a veriﬁcation of the numerics . At a ﬁnite density as required by the tube concept , l ( 0 ) reﬂects the situation of immobile obstacles with σ = 0 . At this point the tube diameter should remain ﬁnite and its value should be given by the density of obstacles . From the obstacle statistics and density per unit length ρ / 4 , the probability to ﬁnd the ﬁrst obstacle at position r ± is known to be P ( r ± ) = exp ( − r ± ρ / 4 ) . In the case of ﬁxed obstacles the available ﬂuctuation area is 2 L ⊥ = r + − r − and the expec - tation value 4 h L 2 ⊥ i = h ( r + − r − ) 2 i can be computed from the probability density above . Taking care of the normal - ization one arrives at L ⊥ = √ 8 / ρ . The master function yields l ( 0 ) = ρ 2 L 2 ⊥ = 8 , a value in good agreement with the data ( circles ) in Fig . 5 . 3 . 2 Generic 2d Geometry If the simpliﬁcation of axis - parallel obstacle polymers is dropped again , the obstacle conﬁguration needs to be spec - iﬁed by a set of radii { r k } and angles { α k } . The probability to ﬁnd the test rod at a position ( y , z ) for a given conﬁg - uration of obstacles { r k , α k } in the two - dimensional case as in Fig . 3 ( left ) is then again given by the product of all probabilities where diﬀerent angles have to be accounted for : P ( y , z , { r k , α k } , σ ) = 1 N Y k P ± ( y cos α k + z sin α k , r k , σ ) . ( 23 ) The normalization factor N = N ( { r k , α k } , σ ) is again de - termined by the condition R dydzP ( y , z , { r k , α k } , σ ) = 1 . In a single obstacle conﬁguration the tube diameters L ⊥ y , z in the y and z direction will in general be diﬀer - ent . However , in averaging over all conﬁgurations isotropy must be recovered to show L 2 ⊥ ( ρ , σ ) = h L 2 ⊥ y ( { r k , α k } , σ ) i ρ = h L 2 ⊥ z ( { r k , α k } , σ ) i ρ . ( 24 ) The average over obstacle conﬁgurations at ﬁxed density of uniformly distributed obstacles is performed as h f ( { r k , α k } ) i ρ = N Y k = 1 Z R 0 dr k R Z 2 π 0 dα k 2 π ! f ( { r k , α k } ) ( 25 ) with integration range being again R = N / ρ . Note that contrary to the simpliﬁed geometry the obstacle density per unit length ρ in this case is given by ρ = ( π / 2 ) ( νL ¯ L ) . Evaluating the integrals in Eq . ( 25 ) again by the Monte - Carlo method results in the data plotted in Fig . 5 ( tri - angles ) , where suppression of irrelevant obstacles was im - plied analog to the simpliﬁed geometry . The results do not deviate much from the data obtained earlier ( circles ) , i . e . Hauke Hinsch et al . : Quantitative Tube Model for Semiﬂexible Polymer Solutions 7 0 5 10 15 20 25 0 1 2 3 4 5 l ( ρ σ ) ρ σ isostropic geometry simplified geometry ( ρ σ ) 2 Fig . 5 . Master curve l ( ρσ ) of the tube diameter rescaled by obstacle density obtained by MC simulation for simpliﬁed ( circles ) and generic geometry ( triangles ) ; intersection with quadratic obstacle ﬂuctuation amplitude marks the point of self - consistence . The error of the simpliﬁed geometry is sur - prisingly small . the mistake in using a simpliﬁed geometry is surprisingly small . Again the value of the PSC is obtained graphically . It yields C ≈ 3 . 52 ( 26 ) and will be used in the remainder of this work . 3 . 3 Choice of Independent Rod Length As discussed before and illustrated in Fig . 2 ( bottom ) the choice of ¯ L is crucial for the success of the IRM . The number L / ¯ L of independent rods can be regarded as a measure for the ﬂexibility of the modeled polymer and has to be chosen such that the transverse excursions of the ensemble of stiﬀ rods equal the ﬂuctuations of the actual semiﬂexible polymer . To this end we consider both systems in a generic harmonic potential U [ y ( s ) ] = γ 2 (cid:2) y ( s ) − y 0 ( s ) (cid:3) 2 ( 27 ) with the potential minimum y 0 ( s ) as a Gaussian variable with h y 0 ( s ) y 0 ( s ′ ) i = αδ ( s − s ′ ) . This corresponds to the assumption of a “Gaussian random backbone” as a general property of the tube . We use this intuitive assumption as one possible prerequisite to determine the segment length ¯ L . Of course , other possibilities can be imagined . Note that the simulations in Sec . 5 will justify this assumptions a posteriori . The average position y ( s ) as a functional of a given potential y 0 ( s ) is obtained as an average over all poly - mer conﬁgurations in this potential . Averaging then over all potential conformations yields the the mean square of the polymer’s transverse ﬂuctuations h y ( s ) 2 i . The over - line thus denotes an average in a given potential and the brackets denote an average over all potentials . While the transverse ﬂuctuations of a rigid rod are a function of the potential parameters α , γ only , the response of a semiﬂex - ible polymer will additionally depend on its stiﬀness . This evidently provides a tool to connect the semiﬂexible poly - mer persistence length and the length ¯ L from the IRM by demanding that the ﬂuctuations h y ( s ) 2 i for given poten - tial parameters α , γ are the same for both cases . Starting with the IRM , it is suﬃcient to consider only one stiﬀ rod , as the individual rods are statistically inde - pendent . The average position is then y = 1¯ L Z ¯ L 0 ds y 0 ( s ) ( 28 ) and the transverse ﬂuctuations h y 2 i = 1 ¯ L 2 Z ¯ L 0 ds Z ¯ L 0 ds ′ h y 0 ( s ) y 0 ( s ′ ) i = α ¯ L . ( 29 ) For the semiﬂexible polymer the ﬂuctuations of polymer and tube potential are decomposed into modes ( Appendix C ) : h y 2 i = 1 L Z L 0 h y ( s ) 2 i = 1 L X k h y k 2 i , ( 30 ) where the mode analysis yields y k = y 0 k / ( 1 + q 4 k l 4d ) ( com - pare Eq . ( 51 ) ) with q k ≈ π ( k + 1 / 2 ) . Using now the corre - lations of the Gaussian random tube proﬁle and the iden - tity ( 53 ) the polymer ﬂuctuations can be related to the deﬂection length as : h y 2 i = 1 L X k h ( y 0 k ) 2 i ( 1 + q 4 k l 4d ) 2 = α L h ′ ( l d ) 4 l 3d . ( 31 ) Equating the ﬂuctuations for the IRM and the semiﬂexible polymer ﬁxes the segment length to ¯ L = L 4 l 3d h ′ ( l d ) . ( 32 ) Concluding the last section , we have obtained the tube diameter for a sequence of independent rods of length ¯ L and derived a condition how to ﬁx this length to correctly mimic the behavior of a semiﬂexible polymer in a network of same mesh size . It has turned out the the criteria for the correct rod size is a function of the deﬂection length . 4 Results If we recall that the tube diameter for a semiﬂexible poly - mer was derived in Sec . 2 from the Hamiltonian with a likewise dependence on deﬂection length , we are now equipped to set up an implicit equation to determine this deﬂection length . Afterwards the tube diameter can be derived from a simple calculation . Equating the expressions for the tube diameter of the polymer ( 10 ) and the IRM ( 21 ) respectively yields L 2 ⊥ = L 3 l p h ( l d ) = 4 C 2 9 π 2 ξ 4 ¯ L 2 . ( 33 ) 8 Hauke Hinsch et al . : Quantitative Tube Model for Semiﬂexible Polymer Solutions With the correct rod length ( 32 ) the implicit equation for the dimensionless deﬂection length is h ( l d ) = C 2 32 π 2 [ h ′ ( l d ) ] 2 l 6d l p ξ 4 L 5 . ( 34 ) Solving this equation , determines l d from the system’s pa - rameter l p , L and ξ . It is achieved by introducing a dimen - sionless function l p ξ 4 / L 5 = j ( l d ) : = l 6 d 32 π 2 h ( l d ) C 2 [ h ′ ( l d ) ] 2 . ( 35 ) Inversion then yields l d = j − 1 ( l p ξ 4 / L 5 ) . ( 36 ) With the abbreviation D = 3 C / π we ﬁnally obtain for the dimensional deﬂection length to ﬁrst order and second order in the argument of j − 1 : L d = D 2 / 5 2 13 / 10 ξ 4 / 5 l 1 / 5 p + D 4 / 5 2 11 / 10 3 ξ 8 / 5 l 2 / 5 p L . ( 37 ) By application of ( 10 ) , the tube diameter is easily obtained as L ⊥ = D 3 / 5 2 27 / 10 ξ 6 / 5 l 1 / 5 p + D 2 5 / 2 ξ 2 L . ( 38 ) Evaluation of the numerical factors holds the following results to ﬁrst order L d ≈ 0 . 66 ξ 4 / 5 l 1 / 5 p , L ⊥ ≈ 0 . 32 ξ 6 / 5 l 1 / 5 p . ( 39 ) Note that this also determines the conﬁnement free en - ergy of the polymer to ∆F ≈ 2 . 14 k B T L ξ 4 / 5 l 1 / 5 p . The lead - ing term of the tube diameter agrees with the established scaling [ 16 ] . The additional term’s dependence on the in - verse polymer length indicates a ﬁnite length eﬀect . It can be traced back to the partition sum of a ﬁnite poly - mer ( 8 ) and accounts for boundary eﬀects at the end of the tube . If the free energy of inﬁnite polymers ( 4 ) is used throughout the calculations , all higher order terms van - ish accordingly . In an earlier work [ 25 ] another prefactor of L ⊥ ≈ 0 . 53 ξ 6 / 5 l − 1 / 5 p for the scaling term has been pre - dicted by rather diﬀerent accounting of obstacles . It is important to be aware of the subtle diﬀerence between the explicit length dependence of the ﬁrst order term and the implicit dependence on L that enters via the mesh size ξ = p 3 / νL . In a polydisperse polymer so - lution the L in the mesh size has to be the average poly - mer length , while the L in the second order terms is the length of the actually observed ﬁlament in the tube . In a monodisperse solution as in our theory these quantities are identical . The importance of the second order term depends heav - ily on the nature of the polymers making up the network . In Fig . 6 the relative tube width correction obtained by 0 . 01 0 . 1 1 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 r e l a t i v e c o rr e c t i on ξ [ µ m ] L = 5 µ m L = 10 µ m L = 20 µ m MicrotubulesF - actin fd - virus Fig . 6 . Relative correction obtained by the second order term of the tube diameter ( 38 ) for diﬀerent biopolymers as a func - tion of mesh size ξ . fd - viruses ( L ≈ 0 . 9 µ m , l p ≈ 2 . 2 µ m [ 26 ] ) show a large correction due to their small length compared to the mesh size , while this eﬀect is rather small in microtubules ( L ≈ 50 µ m , l p ≈ 5000 µ m [ 27 , 20 ] ) . The correction for F - actin has been plotted for diﬀerent length from a typical length dis - tribution . the second order term is displayed for several semiﬂexi - ble biopolymers as a function of mesh size ξ . It is inter - esting to note that the intuitive dependence on the rel - ative persistence length l p / L present in the second order term of the deﬂection length is rather negligible . The most dominant eﬀect of the correction term is not obtained for the stiﬀest biopolymer , a microtubule , but for the small fd - virus . This is due to its small length to mesh size ra - tio . Finite length eﬀects will inﬂuence a large fraction of the polymer strand and not only the boundaries . Given a proper control of polymer length , this eﬀect should be experimentally observable in F - actin solutions . Focussing back on F - actin , Fig . 7 displays the result of our model in comparison to experimental data [ 28 , 29 ] . While theoretical and experimental results are certainly qualitatively comparable , a more detailed discussion is dif - ﬁcult due to the large ﬂuctuations of the measurements . However , it seems reasonable to interpret these measure - ments regardless of their ambiguity as an upper limit to the tube diameter . Two main reasons cause an experimen - tal observation of tube widths systematically higher than in the presented theory : from a technical point of view the microscope resolution broadens the observed tubes . Additionally , this eﬀect is further enhanced by collective ﬂuctuations of the complete elastic medium that remain unaccounted for in our approach . Contrary , the computer simulations presented below , can be tailored to avoid these eﬀects and study the exact model system used by the the - ory . 5 Simulations We have conducted intensive numerical simulations of the model system for several reasons : on the one hand they Hauke Hinsch et al . : Quantitative Tube Model for Semiﬂexible Polymer Solutions 9 0 . 01 0 . 1 0 . 1 1 σ [ µ m ] c [ mg / ml ] simulations theory first order theory second order experimental data [ Kaes ] experimental data [ Dichtl ] Fig . 7 . Comparison of tube diameter from theory , numerical simulations ( squares ) and reanalyzed experimental measure - ments ( triangles ) from [ 28 , 29 ] . While Dichtl has directly mea - sured potential strengths , K¨as has recorded the maximal tube width a . Therefrom we estimated a lower boundary of σ = a / 6 . serve as a tool to verify the validity of several approxima - tions used in the theoretical description developed above , being for example the harmonic description of the tube po - tential or the assumption of a single ﬂuctuation amplitude for the obstacles . Furthermore , the comparison between the simulated transverse ﬂuctuations and the ﬁnal result of our theory can prove if we have succeeded in correctly predicting the tube diameter in a network of semiﬂexible polymers . Finally , the simulations give us the chance to analyze observables that go beyond the analytical theory presented . These are in particular distribution functions and open up a further possibility to comparison with ex - periments . We use a Monte Carlo simulation of a single polymer in two dimensions that is surrounded by point - like obsta - cles . This reduction will result in an equal ﬂuctuation am - plitude as in the 3D model , because we have assumed the ﬂuctuations along the diﬀerent coordinates to be indepen - dent . Simulating a test polymer in 2D and measuring its transverse displacement , will thus on average correspond to either L ⊥ , y or L ⊥ , z given that the number of obstacle points has been chosen correctly . We calculate this num - ber as the number of stiﬀ rods that cut an arbitrary unit area plane if these rods are of length L , density per unit volume ν and equally distributed both in position and ori - entation . The approximation as rigid rods is justiﬁed by the large persistence length compared to the mesh size . The relation between polymer concentration ν and point - density in simulations ρ MC then yields ( 45 ) : ρ MC = 2 π νL . ( 40 ) Of course , the obstacles will cut the plane under diﬀerent angles . These can be incorporated via diﬀerent statistics of the obstacle ﬂuctuations . However , simulations show that no signiﬁcant diﬀerences compared with orthogonal cuts occur . This can be explained by an averaging out of anisotropies in performing ensemble averages . We there - fore choose to assume orthogonal intersections of the ob - stacle polymers with the plane of simulation . Having deﬁned a suitable conversion for the polymer density , we will proceed to implement the other contribu - tion to the test polymer’s Hamiltonian in our simulations , i . e . the persistence length . The test polymer is modelled as a chain of N rigid segments that approximate the continu - ous contour of a worm - like chain . The joint angle between two segments gives rise to a bending energy summed over all bonds : βH ( { t i } ) = k N − 1 X i = 1 t i t i + 1 , ( 41 ) where the t i are the tangents and k is chosen such to repro - duce the energy of a semiﬂexible polymer of persistence length l p . The relation in two dimensions is computed to L l p = − N ln (cid:20) I 1 ( k ) I 0 ( k ) (cid:21) ( 42 ) with I 0 as modiﬁed Bessel function of ﬁrst kind and its derivative I 1 . The simulations start from an equilibrium conforma - tion of the test polymer and with obstacle centers r 0 i that are uniformly distributed . At this point , obstacles are dis - criminated into those in the half - spaces left and right of the test polymer . During the following evolution of the system , every move of an obstacle and every conforma - tion change of the test polymer is rejected if it would result in a reclassiﬁcation of any obstacle into the other half - space . Besides this constraint the evolution is only governed by the bending energy of the test polymer and a harmonic potential U ( r i ) = σ / 2 ( r i − r 0 i ) 2 for every ob - stacle . During the evolution the transverse displacements L ⊥ of every bond from the average contour are recorded over the whole evolution . To avoid boundary phenomena , this is only done in the bulk . The whole procedure is then carried out repeatedly for diﬀerent initial sets of random obstacles and random test polymer conformations . If the computation is repeated for diﬀerent values of σ , a func - tion L ⊥ ( σ ) is obtained from which the point of self consis - tence L ⊥ ( σ ) = σ and its error can be deduced graphically . Repeating the procedure for diﬀerent parameters , holds results for the tube diameter in dependence of persistence length l p and concentration νL and can be compared to the theoretical prediction and the available scarce experi - mental data . As displayed in Fig . 7 the simulation results and the theoretical prediction to both ﬁrst and second or - der agree remarkably well . On the basis of the available data any discrimination between ﬁrst and second order would be bold . However , it has to be considered that any deviations due to lack of simulation time or shortcomings in the Monte Carlo moves will tend to reduce the observed tube width . The obtained simulation results are thus a lower boundary to the real tube diameter . Even if the good agreement between the theoretical predicted tube diameter and the values observed in nu - merical simulations suggests our theoretical description to 10 Hauke Hinsch et al . : Quantitative Tube Model for Semiﬂexible Polymer Solutions be valid , we employ the developed algorithms to explic - itly check on some of the assumption made in the course of deriving the tube diameter . One central assumption in the realm of the tube model is the substitution of an ensemble of neighboring poly - mers by an eﬀective tube potential . This tube potential is modelled by an harmonic function of strength γ as in the Hamiltonian ( 1 ) . This harmonic assumption seems sensi - ble and is also supported by preliminary experiments with colloidal probes [ 29 ] . Our numerical simulations can pro - vide further proof to the exact form of the potential . To this end , we have monitored the transverse displacement as a function of arc length . In the resulting histogram - see Fig . 8 ( top ) for some examples - we identify the dis - tributions maximum as the center position and analyze the form of the potential . Evidently , the resulting pro - ﬁles in the test polymer’s bulk are reasonably Gaussian shaped , while deviations at the boundaries ( compare data for s = 0 . 08 in Fig . 8 ( top ) ) occur but are negligible for a tube model where L > L ⊥ . For a quantiﬁcation the ratio of fourth moment to square of second moment of trans - verse ﬂuctuations Q = ( y − ¯ y ) 4 ( y − ¯ y ) 22 ( 43 ) was considered . For a perfect Gaussian distribution this quantity evolves to Q = 3 . As shown in Fig . 8 ( bottom ) this value is also asymptotically obtained in the simula - tions after suﬃcient simulation time . These results clearly support the validity of a harmonic tube potential . In contrast to the classical picture of an Edwards - tube with a rather homogeneous diameter the simulations re - veal a rather large variability in the local tube diameter as has also been observed experimentally [ 28 , 29 ] . Carry - ing out extensive simulations in a large number of diﬀer - ent obstacle environments allows one to record the distri - bution function of the tube diameters . This is of crucial importance , as our theoretical description has assumed that the tube diameter - and hence due to self - consistency also the obstacle ﬂuctuation width - can be described by a single characteristic value . This approach only seems feasible if the distribution described by the characteris - tic value is reasonably well peaked . The simulations prove that the resulting distribution is indeed equipped with a well - deﬁned peak ( Fig . 9 ) . However , the variability of the observed tube diameters is rather large with a half - width of the size of the average tube diameter itself . We observe a sharp cut - oﬀ for small tube widths while the distribu - tion’s tail to wide tubes is longer . The behavior at small tube width is dominated by the energy cost of conﬁning a polymer into an increasingly smaller tube and can thus be considered as a polymer property . On the contrary the distribution at tube widths larger than the average diame - ter is due to void spaces . These will follow an exponential decay and are therefore a characteristic of the network architecture . Finally , the numerical simulations provide a means to explicitly check if the self - consistence is guaranteed in spite of the simplifying assumption of a single ﬂuctuation - 1 - 0 . 5 0 0 . 5 1 p r obab ili t y den s i t y transversal coordinate [ µ m ] at s = 0 . 08 at s = 0 . 25 at s = 0 . 5 at s = 0 . 8 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 2 . 5 3 3 . 5 10000 100000 1e + 06 simulation steps tube diameter ( 10 - 8 m ) Q ( dimensionless ) Fig . 8 . ( top ) Distribution of transverse excursions at diﬀerent arc - lengths s shows a Gaussian potential proﬁle with rather large variability in the potential width . At the test polymer’s boundaries deviations occur . ( bottom ) After suﬃcient simula - tion time the ratio Q ( solid ) approaches the characteristic value Q = 3 of a Gaussian distribution . The transverse ﬂuctuation area ( dashed ) converges likewise . 0 0 . 02 0 . 04 0 . 06 0 . 08 0 . 1 0 . 12 0 . 14 0 . 16 0 . 18 0 0 . 05 0 . 1 0 . 15 0 . 2 p r obab ili t y den s i t y tube diameter [ µ m ] 0 . 5 mg / ml 0 . 4 mg / ml 0 . 1 mg / ml test polymerobstacles Fig . 9 . Distribution of L ⊥ sampled over polymer arc - length and diﬀerent obstacle environments . Distributions are well - peaked and exhibit longer tails at large tube widths . The noise at diameters far from the distributions maximum is an artefact from the numerical discretization . Hauke Hinsch et al . : Quantitative Tube Model for Semiﬂexible Polymer Solutions 11 width . To this end , we have used the resulting histogram of tube diameters from above to compute a normalized distribution function . The ﬂuctuation width of the obsta - cles are now initialized according to this very distribu - tion . The resulting histogram of tube diameters is then again fed back into the simulation as obstacle ﬂuctuation distribution . This procedure is carried out until both dis - tributions converge against each other in a self - consistent manner . Surprisingly , this is already the case after the ﬁrst iteration step of the process as displayed in Fig . 9 . This gives strong evidence that due to the self - averaging over obstacles the modelling of a network with Gaussian tube proﬁle and a single average tube diameter is suﬃcient to describe the physical reality . 6 Conclusion We have presented a new approach to determine the ab - solute value of the tube diameter in semiﬂexible poly - mer networks supported by computer simulations . To this end the deﬂection length of a polymer in a hypotheti - cal harmonic tube was connected to the tube’s diameter via the free energy cost for ﬁnite length polymers . The assumption of a harmonic tube was conﬁrmed by sim - ulation results . By decomposition into independent stiﬀ rods of appropriate length , we were able to establish an implicit equation for the deﬂection length . The resulting tube width L ⊥ is in agreement with the established scal - ing law L ⊥ = cξ 6 / 5 l − 1 / 5 p with mesh size ξ = p 3 / νL and persistence length l p . Our theory provides a prefactor of c ≈ 0 . 32 and a higher order term that accounts for ﬁnite length eﬀects and scales with ξ 2 / L . The available experimental data is consistent with our predictions . However , its quality does not allow for de - tailed comparison . To provide a precise validation , we have complemented our theoretical work by extensive Monte Carlo simulations of a test polymer in an environment of obstacles . The resulting self - consistent tube widths per - fectly match the theoretical value predicted . This strongly supports the validity of the absolute value for the concen - tration dependent tube diameter . Furthermore , we have employed simulations to observe properties beyond the analytical theory . We have recorded the distribution function of tube widths in a network for diﬀerent concentrations . Thereby we were able to explic - itly conﬁrm self - consistency of the simplifying model with a ﬁxed tube diameter . Both our theoretical predictions , e . g . the ﬁnite length contributions to the tube diameter , and our simulation data , e . g . the distribution functions , provide the oppor - tunity of feasible experimental comparison . On the theo - retical side , the signiﬁcance of correlations and collective ﬂuctuations of the complete medium , as well as an analyti - cal model of distribution functions may open up promising continuations of this work . We kindly acknowledge helpful discussions with M . Degawa , M . Giesen , R . Merkel and M . Romanoska . Financial support of the German Excellence Initiative via the program ”Nanosys - tems Initiative Munich ( NIM ) ” is gratefully acknowledged . HH acknowledges support by the international graduate program Nano - Bio - Technology funded by the Elite Network of Bavaria . A Rigid Rod Statistics I To relate the polymer concentration of a network to the obstacle density per unit area in the simulation , we cal - culate the number of randomly distributed and oriented stiﬀ rods per unit volume that intersect with a unit plane . Every intersecting rod will be described by its polar and azimuth angle relative to the unit plane , the point of inter - section and the distance between center of mass and inter - section point . Because of rotational symmetry the problem is independent of the azimuth angle and because of uni - form density it is independent of one of the coordinates of the intersection point . Hence , the problem is equivalent in two dimensions to the number of rods per unit area that intersect a unit line ( see Fig . 10 ( left ) ) . The plane contains ν rigid rods per unit area with random orientation α and center of mass position . The number of intersections ρ MC with the unit line ( bold dashed ) is computed by parame - terizing the center of mass ( C ) by the coordinate z of the intersection point ( P ) with the unit line , the distance s between C and P and the angle α . ρ MC is then obtained as the integral over all possibly intersecting rods : ρ MC = 2 ν 2 π Z dr 2 Z π 0 dα , ( 44 ) where the factor 2 accounts for the fact that any rod con - ﬁguration can be realized by two angles α since the rods have no direction . The integration area has to be cho - sen appropriately to only include intersecting rods . As r = ( sin ( α ) s , x − cos ( α ) s ) the Jacobian determinant of the coordinate transformation to integration variables is ∂r / ∂ ( x , s ) = sin ( α ) and the integral evolves to ρ MC = ν π Z 1 / 2 − 1 / 2 dx Z L / 2 − L / 2 ds Z π 0 sin ( α ) = 2 π νL . ( 45 ) B Rigid Rod Statistics II We derive the radial density of obstacles that eﬀectively hinder the test rods ﬂuctuations . To this end we consider the test rod to be aligned along the z - axis without loss of generality ( see Fig . 10 ( right ) ) . As criterion for eﬀec - tive obstruction of transverse ﬂuctuations between test rod and obstacle , we demand that the line connecting their points of closest approach ( PO ) is orthogonal to both polymers . As a projection of the obstacle to the plane spanned by the test rod and PO ⊥ ( dashed ) re - covers the setup discussed in Appendix A , the coordi - nates of the center of mass ( C ) can readily be extended to three dimensions by the radial distance R and the an - gle β to r = ( sin ( α ) s sin ( β ) − cos ( β ) R , sin ( α ) s cos ( β ) + 12 Hauke Hinsch et al . : Quantitative Tube Model for Semiﬂexible Polymer Solutions sin ( α ) R , x − cos ( α ) s ) and with the Jacobian determinant | ∂r / ∂ ( x , s , R ) | = sin ( α ) the integration gives ρ ( R ) = 2 ν 4 π Z L 2 − L 2 dx Z L / 2 − L / 2 ds Z π 0 dα Z 2 π 0 dβ sin 2 ( α ) = π 2 νL 2 . ( 46 ) Consequently , the density seen by an stiﬀ segment of length ¯ L in the IRM will be ρ = ¯ L L π 2 νL 2 = π 2 νL ¯ L . ( 47 ) Note that in the simpliﬁed geometry the obstacle density is not a complete radial density but a line density of ob - stacles on one of the four axes ( positive and negative y and z axis ) . To recover the complete radial density , one has to sum over all of these . Hence the obstacle density on either one of the four axes has to be : ρ = π 2 νL ¯ L 4 . ( 48 ) z x C α 1 / 2 −1 / 2 P O β O C P α β Fig . 10 . ( left ) Sketch of a rod with center of mass ( C ) and orientation α intersecting a arbitrary unit line ( dashed ) to il - lustrate the calculation of the number of intersecting rods ρ MC . ( right ) Two rods with minimal distance R are considered to be mutually interacting only if their line of closest approach ( OP ) is orthogonal to both . O ⊥ only serves to illustrate the analogy to the two - dimensional setup ( see text ) . C Mode analysis of polymer and tube Using the dimensionless arc - length ˜ s = s / L , polymer con - formation ˜ y ( ˜ s ) = y ( ˜ sL ) / L , tube center ˜ y 0 ( ˜ s ) = y 0 ( ˜ sL ) / L and persistence length η = l p / L the Hamiltonian ( 1 ) can be written for one transverse coordinate as βH = η 2 Z 1 0 d ˜ s (cid:2) ( ∂ 2˜ s ˜ y ) 2 + l − 4 d ( ˜ y − ˜ y 0 ) 2 (cid:3) . ( 49 ) For free boundary conditions the Hamiltonian is diago - nalized by an orthonormal set of eigenfunctions ψ k ≈ sin ( q k σ + φ k ) with q k ≈ π ( k + 1 / 2 ) [ 30 ] . Expanding both polymer and tube center in modes as ˜ y ( σ ) = P k y k ψ k and ˜ y 0 ( σ ) = P k y 0 k ψ k and using the orthogonality of the eigenfunctions allows one to write the Hamiltonian in the suggestive form βH = η 2 X k ( q 4 k + l − 4 d ) (cid:18) y k − y 0 k 1 + ( q k l d ) 4 (cid:19) 2 + q 4 k y 0 k 2 1 + ( q k l d ) 4 . ( 50 ) By comparison to ( 49 ) one can read of the minimum of the conﬁnement potential , i . e . the average tube center : y k = y 0 k / ( 1 + q 4 k l 4 d ) . ( 51 ) Additionally , this allows to write the complete trans - verse ﬂuctuations as a sum over the inverse conﬁnement strength of all modes : L 2 ⊥ : = 1 L Z L 0 ds ( x ( s ) − x ( s ) ) 2 = L 2 η X k 1 q 4 k + l − 4 d . ( 52 ) For the dimensionless function h ( l d ) relating the tube di - ameter to the deﬂection length follows : h ( ld ) = X k 1 q 4 k + l − 4 d . ( 53 ) References 1 . J . Howard . Mechanics of Motor Proteins and the Cy - toskeleton . Sinauer Associates , Sunderland , 2001 . 2 . A . R . Bausch and K . Kroy . Nature Phys . , 2 : 231 , 2006 . 3 . D . Pantaloni , C . L . Clainche , and M . F . Carlier . Science , 292 : 1502 , 2001 . 4 . M . L . Gardel , J . H . Shin , F . C . MacKintosh , L . Mahade - van , P . Matsudaira , and D . A . Weitz . Science , 304 : 1301 , 2004 . 5 . B . Wagner , R . Tharmann , I . Haase , M . Fischer , and A . R . Bausch . Proc . Nat . Acad . Sci . , 103 : 13974 , 2006 . 6 . B . Hinner , M . Tempel , E . Sackmann , K . Kroy , and E . Frey . Phys . Rev . Lett . , 81 : 2614 , 1998 . 7 . T . T . Perkins , D . E . Smith , and S . Chu . Science , 264 : 819 , 1994 . 8 . J . K¨as , H . Strey , and E . Sackmann . Nature , 368 : 226 , 94 . 9 . P . G . de Gennes . Scaling Concepts in Polymer Physics . Cornell University Press , Ithaca , NY , 1979 . 10 . M . Doi and S . F . Edwards . The Theory of Polymer Dy - namics . Clarendon Press , Oxford , 1986 . 11 . T . Odijk . Macromolecules , 16 : 1340 , 1983 . 12 . F . C . MacKintosh , J . K¨as , and P . A . Janmey . Phys . Rev . Lett . , 75 : 4425 , 1995 . 13 . H . Isambert and A . C . Maggs . Macromolecules , 29 : 1036 , 1996 . 14 . R . Everaers , S . K . Sukumaran , G . S . Grest , C . Svaneborg , A . Sivasubramanian , and K . Kremer . Science , 303 : 823 , 2004 . 15 . C . Tzoumanekas and D . N . Theodorou . Macromolecules , 39 : 4592 , 2006 . 16 . A . N . Semenov . J . Chem . Soc . Faraday . Trans . , 82 : 317 , 1986 . Hauke Hinsch et al . : Quantitative Tube Model for Semiﬂexible Polymer Solutions 13 17 . O . Kratky and G . Porod . Rec . Trav . Chim . , 68 : 1106 , 1949 . 18 . N . Saito , K . Takahashi , and Y . Yunoki . J . Phys . Soc . Jpn . , 22 : 219 , 1967 . 19 . S . Kaufmann , J . Ks , W . H . Goldmann , and G . Isenberg . FEBS Lett . , 314 : 203 , 1992 . 20 . F . Gittes , B . Mickey , J . Nettleton , and J . Howard . J . Cell Biol . , 120 : 923 , 1993 . 21 . L . Le Goﬀ , O . Hallatschek , E . Frey , and F . Amblard . Phys . Rev . Lett . , 89 : 258101 , 2002 . 22 . C . F . Schmidt , M . Baermann , Gerhard Isenberg , and Erich Sackmann . Macromolecules , 22 : 3638 , 1989 . 23 . T . Burkhardt . J . Phys . A . , 28 : 629 , 1995 . 24 . H . Kleinert . J . Math . Phys . , 27 : 3003 , 1986 . 25 . D . C . Morse . Phys . Rev . E , 63 : 031502 , 2001 . 26 . F . G . Schmidt , B . Hinner , E . Sackmann , and J . X . Tang . Phys . Rev . E , 62 : 5509 , 2000 . 27 . F . Pampaloni , G . Lattanzi , A . Jonas , T . Surrey , E . Frey , and E . - L . Florin . Proc . Nat . Acad . Sci . , 103 : 10248 , 2006 . 28 . J . K¨as , H . Strey , J . X . Tang , D . Finger , R . Ezzell , E . Sack - mannt , and P . A . Janmey . Biophys . J . , 70 : 609 , 1996 . 29 . M . A . Dichtl and E . Sackmann . New . J . Phys . , 1 : 18 . 1 , 1999 . 30 . S . Aragon and R . Pecora . Macromolecules , 18 : 1868 , 1985 .