Anurag Umbarkar Curriculum Vitae Address : 21 Lynx Lane East Setauket , NY , 11733 Phone : 703 - 659 - 5603 Email : anurag . umbarkar @ gmail . com Web : www . ece . sunysb . edu / ~ aumbarkar EDUCATION Ph . D . in Computer Engineering May 2014 ( Scheduled ) Stony Brook University , Stony Brook , New York  Dissertation Title : Performance - Optimized Detection , Tracking and Modeling of Physical Phenomena in Distributed Sensing Environments  Advisor : Prof . Alex Doboli M . S . in Computer Engineering August 2010 Stony Brook University , Stony Brook , New York  Thesis Title : Improved Sound - based Localization Through a Network of Reconfigurable Mixed - Signal Nodes  Advisor : Prof . Alex Doboli B . Tech . in Electronics and Telecommunication May 2008 Government College of Engineering ( COEP ) , Pune University , India RESEARCH INTERESTS  VLSI design  Electronic Design Automation ( EDA )  Hardware - software co - design of embedded systems  Performance - optimized data modeling in distributed sensing environments  Reliable detection and accurate tracking of physical phenomena in cyber - physical systems Anurag Umbarkar CV Page 2 of 6 RESEARCH EXPERIENCE Research Assistant , Stony Brook University September 2010 to present Mixed - Domain Embedded Systems Laboratory  Developed techniques using causal reasoning for identification and characterization of hidden sources of error in any system such as 3 - dimensional integrated circuits ( 3D - IC ) .  Proposed a linear - programming - based optimization scheme for robust modeling of thermal data in 3D - ICs that reduces error by up to 76 % and delay by up to 57 % .  Implemented a network simulator using SystemC to emulate the sensing , processing and communication between distributed embedded nodes connected in a grid topology .  Developed algorithms and optimization models for reliable data acquisition and efficient tracking of physical phenomena such as gas clouds and sound sources , using a resource - constrained network of reconfigurable embedded systems .  Developed performance metrics and used statistical analysis to study creativity in design of embedded systems . Graduate Research , Stony Brook University September 2008 to September 2010 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering  Awarded fellowship by Cypress semiconductors in Fall 2010 to develop a laboratory manual for their next - generation System - on - Chip ( SoC ) device ( PSoC3 ) .  Implemented low - cost sound - localization system on a wireless network of reconfigurable SoCs using PSoC1 and PSoC3 embedded nodes .  Published innovative sound - localization algorithm that exploited dynamic reconfigurability of PSoC to reduce memory requirements by up to 37 % and execution time by up to 92 % compared to existing technique . TEACHING and MENTORING EXPERIENCE Graduate Research Supervisor , Stony Brook University September 2010 to present  Coordinated and advised three graduate students working to develop algorithms for computational auditory scene analysis in vehicular - traffic scenarios  Devised techniques for feature extraction and fingerprinting of sound sources using support vector machines ( SVM )  Developed ontological models for classification and prediction of traffic scenarios Teaching Assistant , Stony Brook University Fall 2010 to present  Embedded Microprocessor Systems Design  Assignments included supervising laboratory work , grading and lecturing  Aided in development and verification of laboratory modules using AVR microcontrollers and a vast range of peripheral devices  Digital Design using VHDL and PLDs Anurag Umbarkar CV Page 3 of 6  Supervised students during laboratory activities which included simulation and prototyping of designs using SPLDs , CPLDs and FPGAs  Design using Programmable Mixed - Signal Systems - on - Chip  Developed and managed laboratory activities and project work  Prototyped , debugged and tested various designs using PSoC microcontrollers with M8C , 8051 and ARM cores GRADUATE COURSES COMPLETED  VLSI Physical and Logic Design Automation  Advanced VLSI Systems Design  HW - SW Co - design of Embedded Systems  Advanced VLSI Signal Processing  Pattern Recognition  Computer Architecture  System Spec and Modeling  Computer Communication networks  Local and Wide area networks  Computational Models  Multi - agent systems  Auto - ID Technologies  Solid - State Electronics  Computer - Aided Design MAJOR GRADUATE PROJECTS  System Modeling : Developed and implemented obstacle - avoidance algorithms for underwater navigation of swarms of robots using SystemC  VLSI Design Automation : Simulated floor - planning , placement and routing algorithms using data structures in C  Modeling of the SPU Architecture : Used Verilog to implement a model of the SPU Architecture powering the Cell Processor in Sony Playstation - 3  Data Mining Techniques : Studied pattern recognition and machine learning methods for embedded system applications  VLSI Design of RISC Processor : Designed and implemented the schematic and layout of RISC processor using Cadence tools and Verilog Anurag Umbarkar CV Page 4 of 6 LIST of PUBLICATIONS Journal Papers [ 1 ] A . Umbarkar , A . Doboli , “ Linear Programming based Optimization for Robust Data Modeling in a Distributed Sensing Platform ” , IEEE Transactions on Computer - Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems , ( under review ) , Jan 2014 . [ 2 ] A . Umbarkar , A . Doboli , S . Doboli , J . Betz , “ Modeling Semantic Knowledge Structures for Creative Problem Solving : Six Studies on Expressing Concepts , Categories , Associations , Goals and Context ” , Knowledge - Based Systems , ( under review ) , Dec 2013 . [ 3 ] A . Doboli , A . Umbarkar , “ The Role of Precedents in Increasing Creativity during Iterative Design of Electronic Embedded Systems ' ' , Design Studies , Elsevier , ( accepted for publication ) , Dec 2013 . [ 4 ] A . Umbarkar , V . Subramanian , A . Doboli , S . Doboli , “ Two Experimental Studies on Creative Concept Combinations in Modular Design of Electronic Embedded Systems ' ' , Design Studies , Elsevier , Jan 2014 . [ 5 ] A . Umbarkar , V . Subramanian , A . Doboli , “ Low - Cost Sound - based Localization using Programmable Mixed - Signal Systems - on - Chip ” , Microelectronics Journal , Elsevier , May 2010 . Technical Reports and Lab Manuals [ 6 ] A . Doboli , A . Umbarkar , “ Experiments , Analysis and Observations on Creativity in Iterative Design of Electronic Embedded Systems ” , Technical Report , College of Engineering and Applied Science , Stony Brook University , June 2011 . [ 7 ] A . Umbarkar , V . Subramanian , A . Doboli , “ Laboratory Manual for Mixed - Signal , Embedded Design using PSoC3 ” , Jan 2011 . Conference and Workshop Papers [ 8 ] A . Umbarkar , V . Subramanian , A . Doboli , “ A Multi - Level Variable Lumping Scheme for Robust Data Modeling in Distributed Sensing Environments ' ' , Design Automation Conference , Work - in - progress ( poster ) , 2013 . [ 9 ] A . Umbarkar , S . Kodasara , A . Doboli , " Online Construction of Analytical Prediction Models for Physical Environments : Application to Traffic Scene Modeling " , AVICPS Workshop , IEEE Real - Time Systems Symposium , 2012 . [ 10 ] V . Subramanian , A . Umbarkar , A . Doboli , " Decentralized detection and tracking of emergent kinetic data for wireless grids of embedded sensors " , NASA / ESA Conference on Adaptive Hardware and Systems , 2012 . [ 11 ] V . Subramanian , A . Umbarkar , A . Doboli , “ Maximizing the Accuracy of Sound Based Tracking via a Low - Cost Network of Reconfigurable Embedded Nodes ” , NASA / ESA Conference on Adaptive Hardware and Systems , 2011 . [ 12 ] A . Umbarkar , V . Subramanian , A . Doboli , “ Improved Sound - based Localization through a Network of Reconfigurable Mixed - Signal Nodes ” , IEEE International Workshop on Robotic and Sensor Environments ( ROSE ) , 2010 . Anurag Umbarkar CV Page 5 of 6 LIST of PRESENTATIONS Conference and Professional Presentations [ 1 ] Online Construction of Analytical Prediction Models for Physical Environments : Application to Traffic Scene Modeling  Paper presentation at the AVICPS Workshop as part of the IEEE Real - Time Systems Symposium ( RTSS ) , 2012 . [ 2 ] Decentralized Event Detection using Distributed Interrupts in Cyber Physical Systems  Paper presentation at the IEEE International Systems Conference ( SysCon ) , 2012 . [ 3 ] Sound Localization project for tracking applications using heterogeneous PSoC nodes to demonstrate hardware - software partitioning using reconfigurable architectures  Presentation at MIT - Lincoln Laboratories on November 30 , 2010 . [ 4 ] Improved Sound - based Localization using Reconfigurable Mixed - Signal Nodes  Paper presentation at the Graduate Council Lecture Series in Stony Brook University , 2010 . [ 5 ] Hands - on Introduction to configuring real - world applications using PSoC Technology  Presentation sponsored by Cypress University Alliance , in the American Society for Engineering Education ( ASEE ) workshop , 2010 . Teaching Presentations [ 6 ] Serial Peripheral Interface ( SPI ) in ATMega16  Lecture at Stony Brook University for the Embedded Microprocessor Systems Design undergraduate level course , Fall 2013 [ 7 ] Classification using Support Vector Machines ( SVM )  Lecture at Stony Brook University for the Pattern Recognition graduate level course , Fall 2011 [ 8 ] Sound Localization Theory and Implementation on PSoC  Lecture at Stony Brook University for the Hardware / Software Co - Design of Embedded Systems graduate level course , Fall 2012 and Fall 2010 [ 9 ] Implementation of Sound Localization on PSoC and logging data into Android application  Lecture at Stony Brook University for the Design Using Programmable Mixed - Signal Systems - on - Chip undergraduate level course , Spring 2012 , Spring 2011 and Spring 2010 Anurag Umbarkar CV Page 6 of 6 PROFESSIONAL SKILLS Technical Skills  Hands on experience with Atmel AVR microcontrollers , Cypress PSoC1 / PSoC3 / PSoC5 ( M8C , 8051 and ARM cores ) , Microchip PIC processors , SPLDs , CPLDs and FPGAs .  Design / Validation experience using tools such as AVR Studio , PSoC Creator , PSoC Designer , Aldec Active - HDL , ModelSim , Xilinx , Cadence , Eclipse ( with Android SDK ) and Microsoft Visual Studio .  Proficient in languages such as Assembly languages , Embedded C , C , C + + , SystemC , MATLAB , Verilog and VHDL .  Advanced knowledge of embedded communication interfaces , sensors , and peripheral devices .  Windows and UNIX systems experience .  Technical writing experience with LaTeX and Microsoft Word . Management Skills  Management and supervision of Master’s degree thesis projects for three graduate students  Teaching and tutoring of undergraduate and graduate students at a university level  Active collaboration with other members of the laboratory  Analysis and presentation of data at international conferences and workshops LANGUAGE SKILLS  English - full professional proficiency  Hindi - native language  Marathi - native language AFFILIATIONS IEEE – Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers  Graduate student member since 2011  Member of IEEE Computer Society