www . biotechnology - journal . com Page 1 Biotechnology Journal This article has been accepted for publication and undergone full peer review but has not been through the copyediting , typesetting , pagination and proofreading process , which may lead to differences between this version and the Version of Record . Please cite this article as doi : 10 . 1002 / biot . 201400404 . Submitted : 30 - Jun - 2014 Revised : 19 - Sep - 2014 Accepted : 31 - Oct - 2014 This article is protected by copyright . All rights reserved . Research Article Fluorescence techniques used to measure interactions between hydroxyapatite nanoparticles and epidermal growth factor receptors Mustafa Hussain Kathawala 1 * , Stella Pheng Kian Khoo 1 * , Thankiah Sudhaharan 2 , Xinxin Zhao 1 , Joachim Say Chye Loo 1 , Sohail Ahmed 2 and Kee Woei Ng 1 § 1 School of Materials Science and Engineering , Nanyang Technological University , 50 Nanyang Avenue , Singapore 2 Institute of Medical Biology Agency for Science , Technology and Research , 8A Biomedical Grove , Singapore * These authors contributed equally to the work § Corresponding author Assistant Professor Kee Woei Ng School of Materials Science and Engineering Nanyang Technological University N4 . 1 # 02 - 25 , 50 Nanyang Avenue , Singapore 639798 Email : kwng @ ntu . edu . sg A c ce p t e d A r ti c l e www . biotechnology - journal . com Page 2 Biotechnology Journal Keywords : hydroxyapatite , epidermal growth factor receptor , Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer , Fluorescence Lifetime Imaging Microscopy , cell - nanoparticle interaction Abbreviations : nHA hydroxyapatite nanoparticles nHA - ND needle - shaped nHA nHA - RD rod - shaped nHA EGFR epidermal growth factor receptors FITC fluorescein isothiocyanate GFP green fluorescent protein mRFP monomeric red fluorescent protein FRET Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer AP - FRET Acceptor Photobleaching – FRET FLIM - FRET Fluorescence Lifetime Imaging Microscopy – FRET CHO - K1 Chinese hamster ovary BEAS - 2B human bronchial epithelium cells RAW 264 . 7 Mouse leukemic monocyte macrophage cell line ROS reactive oxidative species CTAB cetyl trimethylammonium bromide APTES 3 - aminopropyltriethoxysilane DMEM Dulbecco’s modified eagle medium FBS fetal bovine serum HRP horseradish peroxidase TEM transmission electron microscope A c ce p t e d A r ti c l e www . biotechnology - journal . com Page 3 Biotechnology Journal Abstract The potential applications of nanomaterials in therapeutics are immense and to fully explore this potential , it is important to understand the interaction of nanoparticles with cellular components . To examine the interaction between nanoparticles and cell membrane receptors , this report describes the use of advanced fluorescence techniques to measure interactions between hydroxyapatite ( HA ) nanoparticles and epidermal growth factor receptors ( EGFRs ) , as a model system . Fluorescein isothiocyanate ( FITC ) - labelled HA nanoparticles and monomeric red fluorescent protein ( mRFP ) - conjugated EGFRs expressed in Chinese hamster ovary ( CHO ) cells were generated and their interaction measured using acceptor photobleaching - fluorescence resonance energy transfer ( AP - FRET ) and fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy - fluorescence resonance energy transfer ( FLIM - FRET ) . Results confirmed that hydroxyapatite nanoparticles not only interacted with EGFR but also attenuated downstream EGFR signalling , possibly by hindering normal dimerization of EGFR . Furthermore , the extent of signal attenuation suggested correlation with specific surface area of the nanoparticles , whereby greater specific surface area resulted in greater downstream signal attenuation . This novel demonstration establishes fluorescence techniques as a viable method to study nanoparticle interactions with proteins such as cell surface receptors . The approach described herein can be extended to study interactions between any fluorescently labelled nanoparticle - biomolecule pair . A c ce p t e d A r ti c l e www . biotechnology - journal . com Page 4 Biotechnology Journal Introduction The potential for applying nanomaterials in therapeutics ( Nanomedicine ) is immense [ 1 , 2 ] . At the same time , concerns over the safe use of nanomaterials are real ( Nanotoxicology ) [ 3 , 4 ] which makes toxicity screening of nanomaterials imperative [ 5 ] . From either perspective , it has become clear that the key to realizing the potential of nanomaterials in healthcare , while minimizing the associated health risks , lies in establishing fundamental understanding of cell - nanomaterial interactions . Cells communicate with their surrounding through chemical autocrine , paracrine and endocrine ligands . Most of these chemical signalling starts right where the ligands physically bind to membrane bound receptors which then initiate intracellular signalling circuits that lead to profound changes in cell behaviour . Consequently , interference of ligand - receptor interactions through the use of small molecules as receptor agonists or antagonists has therefore been a strategy in developing cancer therapeutics and chemoprevention [ 6 ] . With the nanotechnology revolution , the use of engineered nanoparticles to elicit specific biological response in cells has become an exciting proposition . For example , nanoparticles may act directly as drugs to activate classical tumour suppressor signalling pathways [ 7 , 8 ] . Nanoparticles may also be used as drug carriers , imaging agents or combinations of these in what is now known as nanotheranostics [ 9 - 11 ] . In particular , cellular uptake of nanocarriers through cell surface receptor endocytosis by ligand decoration on nanocarrier surfaces appears to be a viable strategy for cancer treatment [ 12 ] . However , there are limited studies evaluating the possibility of engineered nanoparticles interacting with cell membrane bound receptors and the resulting physiological influences . While it is exciting that engineered nanoparticles may be used as therapeutics , they may also elicit undesirable influences such as genotoxicity [ 13 ] . Our earlier A c ce p t e d A r ti c l e www . biotechnology - journal . com Page 5 Biotechnology Journal observation that cell defence mechanisms such as autophagy may be evoked by nanoparticles at low exposure levels suggests that physiological influences of nanoparticles need careful and thorough evaluation for specific applications [ 14 ] . Hydroxyapatite nanoparticles ( nHA ) have been extensively studied as drug delivery vehicles due to favourable biodegradability , relative ease of synthesis and tenability [ 15 , 16 ] . We had previously demonstrated that the shape of nHA directly correlates to their specific surface areas and their ability to exert cytotoxicity through reactive oxidative species ( ROS ) production [ 17 ] . It has been postulated that increased surface area may create discontinuous crystal planes that increase the number of structural defects and hence establish specific surface groups which function as reactive sites for ROS generation [ 18 ] . Alternatively protein absorption is encouraged due to increased surface area causing greater association with the cells and inducing greater ROS generation . Consequently , needle and plate shaped nHA exerted more toxic influence on BEAS - 2B and RAW 264 . 7 cells than spherical and rod shaped nHA [ 19 ] . One of the secondary observations made in these studies was the localization of nHA on the plasma membrane of the cells ; giving rise to the postulation that nHA may interact directly with membrane - bound proteins to influence cell physiology . Indeed , the small size of nanoparticles may allow them to reach confined spaces and physically interact with biomolecules to elicit a biological response . For example , titanium dioxide nanoparticles have been shown to find their way in between adherens junctions to disrupt the homophilic interaction of VE - cadherin , resulting in endothelial cell leakiness [ 20 ] . Nanoparticles may also strengthen intracellular tension and retard cellular migration [ 21 ] . A c ce p t e d A r ti c l e www . biotechnology - journal . com Page 6 Biotechnology Journal Epidermal growth factor receptors ( EGFRs ) are mitogenic receptors which play a key role in epithelial cancers [ 22 ] . Therefore interactions of EGFRs with external stimuli have received significant attention . In particular , nanoparticle interaction with EGFR is intriguing in the context of using nanoparticles as potential cancer therapeutics [ 12 ] . In this context , Comfort et al . [ 23 ] had investigated the influence of 10 nm gold , silver and iron oxide nanoparticles on EGF signalling by analysing signalling downstream of EGFR activation . It was found that all tested nanoparticles caused a disruption of EGF signalling response . Gold nanoparticles were found to decrease EGF - dependent Akt and Erk phosphorylation as well as inhibit Akt activity . Silver nanoparticles attenuated levels of Akt and Erk phosphorylation . Iron oxide nanoparticles produced a strong alteration in EGF activated gene transcription specifically targeting cell proliferation , migration and receptor expression . However it was not explored in this study if the nanoparticles used actually interacted with EGFR to interfere with downstream EGF signalling . In this report , we present novel evidence for the interaction between nHA of different shapes with EGFR through the use of fluorescence techniques including acceptor photobleaching – fluorescence resonance energy transfer ( AP - FRET ) and fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy – fluorescence resonance energy transfer ( FLIM - FRET ) . This is the first time that fluorescence techniques have been employed to elucidate nanoparticle - receptor interactions . We first carried out cytotoxicity analysis of the nHA using BEAS - 2B human bronchial epithelium cells , since inhalation is one of the most direct routes of entry by nanoparticles into the human body . Chinese hamster ovary ( CHO - K1 ) cells were subsequently used for the FRET experiments because they do not express endogenous EGFR , thus all EGFR activity measured A c ce p t e d A r ti c l e www . biotechnology - journal . com Page 7 Biotechnology Journal will come from those that are expressed through plasmid transfection . Western blot was performed to evaluate downstream EGFR signalling for correlation with FRET measurements . Materials and Methods Synthesis of Hydroxyapatite Nanoparticles Hydroxyapatite nanoparticles ( nHA ) of two different shapes were synthesized as described previously [ 19 ] . Needle - shaped nHA ( nHA - ND ) nanoparticles were synthesized through precipitation with cetyl trimethylammonium bromide ( CTAB ) as a surfactant by reacting aqueous sodium phosphate ( Na 3 PO 4 ) solution with calcium chloride ( CaCl 2 ) solution in the presence of polyethylene glycol 400 . Rod - shaped nHA ( nHA - RD ) nanoparticles were synthesized by wet chemical precipitation followed by hydrothermal treatment by the reaction of calcium nitrate [ Ca ( NO 3 ) 2 ] with ammonium dihydrogen phosphate solution ( NH 4 H 2 PO 4 ) . All reactions were performed under controlled conditions and subsequently , the hydroxyapatite suspensions were washed thoroughly and freeze - dried to obtain powder . Conjugation of Fluorescein Isothiocyanate ( FITC ) to nHA FITC - conjugated nHA ( FITC - nHA ) of various shapes were synthesized in a two - step reaction as recently reported [ 19 ] . Briefly , nHA were first functionalized with 3 - aminopropyltriethoxysilane ( APTES ) through a condensation reaction , by subsequently FITC was then bonded via a stable thiourea linkage . FITC - nHA was then collected by centrifugation , washed extensively with anhydrous ethanol and deionized water , followed by freeze - drying . A c ce p t e d A r ti c l e www . biotechnology - journal . com Page 8 Biotechnology Journal Cell Cultures BEAS - 2B ( ATCC , CRL - 9609 ) cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified eagle medium ( DMEM ) containing 10 % FBS ( Gemini , # 100 - 106 ) , and 100 IU / ml penicillin , 100 µg / ml streptomycin and 2 mM L - glutamine ( Invitrogen , # 10378 - 016 ) . Chinese hamster ovary - K1 ( CHO - K1 ; ATCC , CCL - 61 ) cells were cultured in F - 12K nutrient mixture with Kaighn’s modification ( Invitrogen , Singapore ) , supplemented with the same . All cultures were maintained in 75 cm 2 tissue culture flasks at 37 °C and 5 % CO 2 within a humidified incubator . Subculturing was carried out at 70 - 80 % confluency . mRFP - EGFR Plasmid Transfection and Endocytosis Inhibition The plasmid encoding mRFP - EGFR fusion protein was constructed by replacing the GFP gene of GFP - EGFR in Clontech N1 vector with mRFP [ 24 ] , which was amplified by PCR from pRSETB / mRFP ( kindly provided by Roger Tsien , University of California at San Diego ) , using the following primers with an AgeI or NotI site ( underlined ) , respectively : 5’ - GATCCACCGGTCGCCACCATGGCCTCCTCCGAGGACGTC , or 5’ - TTTTCCTTTTGCGGCCGCTTAGGCGCCGGTGGAGTG . We have previously established that the mRFP tags the EGFR at the N - terminus such that the fluorescence is observed on the cell surface and does not affect the biological activity of the EGFR [ 24 , 25 ] . The photo bleaching only affects the fluorescence of mRFP and not EGFR activity . The mRFP - EGFR plasmid DNA was transfected into CHO - K1 cells either via electroporation , as previously described [ 24 ] , or cationic polymers . For electroporation , ~ 90 % confluent cells in a A c ce p t e d A r ti c l e www . biotechnology - journal . com Page 9 Biotechnology Journal flask were washed once with 1x Phosphate Buffered Saline ( PBS ; PAA , USA ) , trypsinized with Trypsin / Versene 0 . 125 % ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid solution ( Biopolis Shared Facilities , Singapore ) for 5 min at 37 °C , and then resuspended in complete F - 12K medium . Cells were further centrifuged , mixed with 10 µg of mRFP - EGFR plasmid and resuspended in culture medium for electroporation using GenePulser Xcell ( Bio - Rad , CA ) . After electroporation , cells were left for 10 min at room temperature , and seeded at 8 , 000 cells per well in a 6 - well plate containing prewashed round cover glasses ( 30 mm diameter ; Paul Marienfeld , Germany ) and allowed to recover for 24 - 36 h . For transfection by cationic polymers , CHO - K1 cells were seeded at 10 5 cells per well in 6 - well plates containing 30 mm cover glasses , 24 h before transfection . Subsequent procedure was carried out according to the manufacturer’s protocol ( Turbofect™ , Fermentas , Canada ) . Subsequently , 24 h after the transfection , cells were washed thrice with 1x PBS and serum starved for 3 h . To avoid fast internalization of EGFR , cells were treated with a cocktail of endocytosis inhibitors consisting of 10 mM NaN 3 , 2 mM NaF and 5 mM 2 - deoxy - D - glucose ( Sigma , USA ) , for 1 . 5 h under standard cell culture conditions . Exposure of Cells to Nanoparticles All nHA suspensions were freshly prepared before exposure to cells . In the BEAS - 2B cell studies , nHA were suspended in sterile 0 . 1 % ( w / v ) sodium hexametaphosphate ( SHMP ) aqueous solution and bath sonicated in an ultrasonic cleaner ( MRC laboratory instruments Inc . , Holon , Israel ) for 10 min to obtain 10 mg / ml stock suspensions . These were diluted in complete DMEM media to obtain final concentrations of 10 , 30 , 100 and 300 μ g / ml , and vortexed A c ce p t e d A r ti c l e www . biotechnology - journal . com Page 10 Biotechnology Journal immediately prior to cell exposure . BEAS - 2B cells were subcultured in 24 - well plates at a density of 5×10 4 cells / well . After subculture , the cells were incubated overnight . Thereafter , media was replaced by fresh media containing the respectively nanoparticles and cultured for the appropriate times according to each assay described below . In the CHO - K1 cell studies , FITC - conjugated nHA were suspended using a probe sonicator ( Vibra Cell , Sonics & Materials , USA ) for 10 s to obtain 10x stock suspensions . These were diluted in complete F12 - K media and further sonicated for 10 s to obtain the final 1x working suspensions . Endocytosis inhibited ( via inhibitors ) CHO - K1 cells expressing mRFP - EGFR were treated with 10 μ g / ml nHA suspensions for 1 h under standard cell culture conditions . This concentration was chosen as it was a sub - lethal dose based on the cytotoxicity data presented . Cytotoxicity assays Non - tagged nHA were used for measuring cytotoxicity . Cytotoxicity was evaluated by measuring total double - stranded DNA content using the PicoGreen ® assay ( Molecular Probes ) . After 24 h exposure to the nanoparticles , cells were washed three times with 1x PBS and lysed in 0 . 1 % ( v / v ) triton X - 100 solution . Subsequently , 100 μ L aliquots of the cell lysate were transferred into a fresh 96 - well black plate , to which 100 μ L of PicoGreen ® working solution were added and incubated for 5 min . Fluorescence was measured using a microplate reader ( Infinite200 TM ) at excitation / emission wavelengths of 480 / 520 nm ( n = 3 ) . A c ce p t e d A r ti c l e www . biotechnology - journal . com Page 11 Biotechnology Journal Acceptor Photobleaching – Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer ( AP - FRET ) AP - FRET was carried out , as previously described [ 26 ] , on an Olympus FV - 1000 confocal imaging system with a C - Apochromat 60×1 . 2 W objective . FITC - nHA treated mRFP - EGFR positive CHO - K1were excited by 488 and 559 nm CW laser using a 405 / 488 / 561 dichroic mirror . The emission was monitored using the FITC ( BP 505 – 550 nm ) and Red ( LP 575 nm ) emission filters . A region of interest outlining a specific area with positive mRFP signal was selected on each cell and photobleached using 100 % of 559 nm laser line with 50 iterations . Thereafter , the increase in FITC fluorescence intensity owing to mRFP bleaching was measured as AP - FRET . The percentage FRET efficiency was calculated using the change in background subtracted fluorescence intensity as : 100 × [ ( post - bleach intensity ) - ( pre - bleach intensity ) / ( post - bleach intensity ) ] . Average AP - FRET values were obtained from 7 – 10 cells and all experiments were repeated twice . In order to verify that the increases in FITC intensities were not due to artifacts , the Pearson product moment correlation coefficient , r ( dimensionless index that ranges from − 1 . 0 to 1 . 0 inclusive ) , was obtained which reflected the extent of linearity between the FITC and mRFP fluorescence intensity changes upon acceptor photobleaching . Fluorescence Lifetime Imaging Microscopy - Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer ( FLIM - FRET ) The FLIM experiments were performed on a Time - Correlated Single Photon Counting ( TCSPC ) system ( Picoquant , Germany ) attached to an Olympus FV - 1000 confocal microscope ( Olympus , USA ) , using a 60×1 . 2 W objective . The excitation light source was 485 nm pulsed diode laser controlled by a Sepia II ( PioQuant ) driver having a dichroic mirror of 405 / 488 and 520 / 30 nm emission filter . Individual photon arrivals were detected using a SPAD detector and events were A c ce p t e d A r ti c l e www . biotechnology - journal . com Page 12 Biotechnology Journal recorded by a PicoHarp 300 TCSPC module . Lifetime analysis was carried out using Symphotime ( PicoQuant ) software . Mono and bi exponential fittings were obtained for FITC - nHA alone and in the presence of mRFP - EGFR , respectively . The samples of FITC - nHA alone were performed under identical conditions in the absence of mRFP - EGFR . The percentage FLIM - FRET efficiency was calculated as : 100 × [ 1 - ( lifetime of donor with FRET / lifetime of donor without FRET ) ] . All experiments were repeated twice . Western Blotting Whole cell lysates of nHA ( 10 µg / ml ) treated mRFP - EGFR positive CHO - K1 were obtained using an established protocol [ 7 ] . Proteins were separated by electrophoresis of 7 µg samples in 4 - 12 % gradient gels ( NuPAGE ® , Invitrogen ) . These were subsequently electrotransferred onto nitrocellulose membranes using the iBlot ® dry blotting system ( Invitrogen ) . After blocking for non - specific binding sites with 5 % ( w / v ) filtered non - fat dry milk in tris - buffered saline ( TBST ) for 30 min at room temperature , immunoblotting was then carried out with diluted primary antibodies overnight at 4 ºC , with gentle agitation . Samples were subsequently probed with horseradish peroxidase ( HRP ) - conjugated secondary antibodies for 30 min at room temperature . Protein bands were visualized with SuperSignal West Pico Chemiluminescent substrate ( Thermo Scientific ) using a gel documentation system ( LAS - 4000mini , GE Healthcare , UK ) . The primary antibodies used were rabbit anti - human phosphorylated EGFR ( Tyr1068 ; 1 : 1000 , # 2234 ; Cell Signaling Technology , USA ) , rabbit anti - human EGFR ( 1 : 1000 , # 4267 ; Cell Signaling Technology , USA ) , mouse anti - phosphorylated tyrosine kinase ( 1 : 1000 , 4G10 ; kindly provided by the Singapore OncoGenome Project , Institute of Medical Biology , A * STAR , Singapore [ 27 ] ) and mouse anti - β - actin ( 1 : 1000 , sc - 47778 ; Santa Cruz , USA ) . The secondary antibodies used A c ce p t e d A r ti c l e www . biotechnology - journal . com Page 13 Biotechnology Journal were HRP - conjugated goat anti - mouse IgG antibody ( P0447 , Dako , Denmark ) and HRP - conjugated goat anti - rabbit IgG antibody ( 1 : 4000 , P0448 , Dako , Denmark ) . Densitometry was done by reading pixel intensities of the bands of interest on the immunoblots , and quantifying the areas under the intensity maps using ImageJ ( NIH ) . Statistical analysis All quantitative experiments were conducted in triplicates and the data expressed as means ± standard deviation ( SD ) . Statistical analyses were carried out using SPSS version 11 . 5 . 1 - way ANOVA , followed by Tukey’s HSD ( honestly significant difference ) post hoc test , was used to compare across a group of more than 2 samples while Student’s t - test was used to compare between only 2 samples . In both tests , p values less than 0 . 05 were considered significant . Results Nanoparticle Characterization TEM revealed that the 2 groups of synthesized nHA , needle - shaped nHA ( nHA - ND ) and rod - shaped nHA ( nHA - RD ) , were homogeneous in shape and size distribution ( Figure 1 ) . The chemical compositions of these nanoparticles were proven previously to be hydroxyapatite using X - ray Diffraction ( XRD ) and Fourier Transformed Infrared Spectroscopy ( FTIR ) [ 15 ] . The major difference in shape can be attributed to the aspect ratio which was much higher for the nHA - ND . The mean hydrodynamic sizes in cell culture medium ( with serum ) , zeta potentials in DI water and the specific surface areas were also measured previously as follows : nHA - ND ( 74 . 9 nm , - 4 . 8 mV , 74 . 88 cm 2 g - 1 ) and nHA - RD ( 96 . 0 nm , - 5 . 7 mV , 23 . 33 cm 2 g - 1 ) , where a narrow distribution in hydrodynamic size was shown [ 19 ] . It was noted that the hydrodynamic A c ce p t e d A r ti c l e www . biotechnology - journal . com Page 14 Biotechnology Journal sizes of the nanoparticles remained stable at both the highest and lowest concentrations tested in the presence of serum , which is known to adsorb onto the nanoparticle surface and result in steric hinderance stabilization . Furthermore the hydrodynamic sizes measured were close to the lengths ( longest dimension ) of the nHA . We were therefore confident that agglomeration in the presence of serum was not a concern and that the nanoparticles were not excessively conglomerated in subsequent experiments . We had further verified the successful conjugation of FITC to the nHA , using FTIR , and demonstrated that FITC - conjugation does not alter the shapes of the particles [ 19 ] . The major physical difference between the two nanoparticles was aspect ratio , which is directly correlated to shape . Since the particles were void of surface pores , the surface area of each nanoparticle was therefore dependent on shape . The pristine lengths of the two nanoparticles were similar , as seen from the TEM micrographs ( Figure 1 ) . Other parameters such as hydrodynamic size and zeta potential were also not significantly different . Therefore , we concluded that any correlations found between the observed biological effects and the nanoparticle type can be attributed to varying surface area or , effectively , shape . Cytotoxicity Cytotoxicity was tested on BEAS - 2B cells due to the aforementioned relevance of potential risks associated with inhalation exposure of nHA . Both groups of nHA exhibited concentration dependent cytotoxicity on BEAS - 2B cells . nHA - ND was consistently and significantly more toxic than nHA - RD . However , cytotoxicity levels in both groups were only statistically higher than in controls at administered concentrations of 100 µg / ml and above ( Figure 2 ) . A c ce p t e d A r ti c l e www . biotechnology - journal . com Page 15 Biotechnology Journal Fluorescence Techniques Both nHA showed significant AP - FRET efficiencies which indicate positive FRET between the FITC ( donor ) conjugated on the nHA and the mRFP ( acceptor ) on the EGFR receptor ( Figure 3 and Table 1 ) . nHA - RD showed a relatively greater AP - FRET efficiency of 9 . 57 ± 2 . 42 % as compared to nHA - ND which showed an efficiency of 6 . 18 ± 2 . 42 % . In order to confirm the FRET phenomenon , the Pearson Correlation Coefficient was calculated and found to be between - 0 . 7 and - 1 . 0 , which is within the range corresponding to positive FRET [ 28 ] . In addition , significant reductions in lifetime of donor fluorophores was observed in both nHA , further indicating the occurrence of FRET . nHA - ND showed the greater FLIM - FRET efficiency compared to nHA - RD ( 10 . 48 ± 1 . 88 and 7 . 28 ± 1 . 91 respectively ) . Western Blotting Western blotting was performed to probe total EGFR , phosphorylated EGFR ( phospho - EGFR ) and phosphorylated Tyrosine kinase ( phospho - Tyr ) activities ( Figure 4 ) . Densitometry was carried out to normalize all blotting signals to β - actin in order to silence errors arising from unequal loading and possible differences in cytotoxicity . As expected , wild type CHO - K1 cells did not express any of the three target proteins since they do not express endogenous EGFR . Both nHA groups clearly attenuated the expression of EGFR , phospho - EGFR and phospho - Tyr compared to the control . Differences in total EGFR expression levels were not significant between the two nHA groups . However , nHA - ND appeared to attenuate phospho - EGFR and phospho - Tyr more significantly than nHA - RD . A c ce p t e d A r ti c l e www . biotechnology - journal . com Page 16 Biotechnology Journal Discussion It is now established that cytotoxicity of nanomaterials is dependent on composition , size and cell type [ 29 ] . Our current and previous results [ 19 , 30 ] show that nanoparticle shape affects their cytotoxic influence as well , likely due to variations in the effective surface area presented to cells . Indeed , others have also shown that nanoparticle shape will influence their path and destination in vivo [ 31 ] . Herein , we studied two different shapes of nHA and employed a system of fluorescent tags to study EGFR binding of nHA . Based on the theory of FRET , the FITC tagged nHA need to be within 10 nm of the mRFP - EGFR in order to build up the donor - acceptor relationship , which will indicate specific interaction between nHA and EGFR [ 28 ] . We proved this by first performing photobleaching of the mRFP ( acceptor ) on mRFP - EGFR expressing CHO - K1 cells . We consequently recorded marked differences between the emission intensities of FITC on nHA before and after photobleaching of mRFP ( AP - FRET , Figure 3 ) , and the corresponding Pearson Correlation Coefficient which confirmed the positive FRET . To complement this further , the fluorescent lifetime of the donor fluorophore was also measured ( FLIM - FRET , Figure 3 ) , which showed a significant reduction in nHA treated CHO - K1 cells . Collectively , AP - FRET and FLIM - FRET results proved specific interaction between nHA and EGFR . It was important to ensure that the signals were derived from nanoparticle - receptor interactions at the cell surface . Endocytosis inhibitors were therefore used prior to nHA exposure . All FRET measurements were performed in serum - free medium in order to minimise the influence of protein corona on the nanoparticles . Furthermore , mRFP - EGFR fusion protein was designed such that the fluorescent marker was placed at the N - terminus so that the fluorescence was A c ce p t e d A r ti c l e www . biotechnology - journal . com Page 17 Biotechnology Journal visible on the cell membrane without affecting EGFR activity [ 24 , 25 ] . Lastly , the concentration chosen was sub - lethal and also only a fraction of the amount needed for the nanoparticles to cover the cell layer completely due to sedimentation . This allowed nHA to freely interact with EGFR as opposed to the possibility of non - specific interactions which could be the case if very high concentrations were used . Together , these conditions allowed only specific nanoparticle - receptor interactions to contribute to the signals measured . The downstream effects of these interactions were captured by Western blotting . By probing EGFR , phosphorylated EGFR ( phospho - EGFR ) and phosphorylated Tyrosine kinase ( phospho - Tyr ) activities , we showed that nHA has the potential to attenuate downstream signalling of EGFRs . For this to happen , nHA nanoparticles could have acted as direct EGFR antagonists or interfered with EGFR dimerization . Under physiological circumstances in a dimerized complex consisting of two EGF ligands and two EGFRs , the two EGF ligands are located 79Å ( 7 . 9nm ) apart on the opposite sides of the EGFRs [ 32 ] . Based on the pristine sizes of the two nHA , as observed under TEM ( Figure 1 ) , it was unlikely that either of the two nHA forms would have found their way into the confined space between a dimerized pair of EGFRs . We therefore postulate that the nHA could have interfered with proper dimerization by binding EGFR monomers and preventing close proximity interaction of adjacent EGFRs , which in turn prevented autophosphorylation and therefore attenuated downstream signalling . This attenuation was nHA shape - dependent and agreed closely with the trend observed in cell proliferation ( Figure 2 ) whereby nHA - ND , the most toxic nHA also caused the greatest phospho - EGFR and phospho - Tyr attenuation . Even though the cytotoxicity of nHA is dependent on cell type , shape dependency is consistent across the different cell types [ 17 , 19 ] . Therefore even though we used A c ce p t e d A r ti c l e www . biotechnology - journal . com Page 18 Biotechnology Journal different cells for the cytotoxicity and protein expression analysis , the correlation of trends in both studies is affirmation of the shape dependent biological influence of nHA . Previous studies have also shown a similar trend in cytotoxicity [ 19 ] . Higher surface area has been attributed to greater oxidative stress and cellular association [ 17 ] . In our current study , we also observed more significant biological influences of nanoparticles with greater surface area ( surface area : nHA - ND > nHA - RD ; similar trends in cytotoxicity and attenuation of EGFR signalling ) . Furthermore , it is interesting to note that nHA interaction with EGFR and attenuation of its downstream signalling happened even though the nHA were significantly larger than EGFRs . The size discrepancy implies that the receptors do not interact with the entirety of the nanoparticles but rather with just a part . Therefore , greater availability of surface area would increase the chances for such interactions , thus possibly explaining the observed shape - dependence of nHA - EGFR interactions . Indeed , the trend of EGFR attenuation followed that of the nHA specific surface areas . nHA - ND exhibited the greatest specific surface area ( 74 . 88 cm 2 g - 1 ) , and consequently the greatest attenuation of EGFR signalling , followed by nHA - RD ( 23 . 33 cm 2 g - 1 ) [ 19 ] . Our data corroborates well with the recent study by Comfort et al . [ 23 ] in which silver , gold and iron oxide nanoparticles were found to impair A - 431 cells’ response to EGF . We postulate that this could be due to the specific interactions between the nanoparticles and EGFRs . Besides AP - FRET and FLIM - FRET , another fluorescence technique that could be employed for such A c ce p t e d A r ti c l e www . biotechnology - journal . com Page 19 Biotechnology Journal interaction studies would be fluorescence cross - correlation spectroscopy ( FCCS ) , in which co - diffusion of pairs of single fluorescent molecules are monitored in the femto - litre confocal volume to evaluate interaction [ 28 ] . For example , EGFR expressed in CHO cells can be separately labelled with 2 different fluorophores and tracked for dimerization in the presence and absence of nHA . Conclusions In summary , we have presented an effective method to probe nanoparticle - receptor interactions using modern fluorescence techniques . We probed CHO - K1 cells expressing mRFP - EGFR with FITC conjugated nHA and characterized their interaction using AP - FRET and FLIM - FRET . By quantifying the level of proximity between nHA and EGFR , we proved that nHA can interact specifically with EGFR . We further showed that this interaction resulted in significant attenuation of the downstream EGFR cascade by measuring protein expression levels of EGFR , phospho - EGFR and phospho - Tyr . The level of toxicity and attenuation of protein expression also suggested a dependency of these effects on the shapes of nHA possibly due to specific surface areas , with nHA - ND being the most potent followed by nHA - RD . Our demonstration presents a novel way of employing advanced fluorescence techniques for studying cell - nanoparticle interactions at a molecular level . We believe this is the first time that fluorescence techniques have been used to show nanoparticle - receptor interactions . A c ce p t e d A r ti c l e www . biotechnology - journal . com Page 20 Biotechnology Journal Acknowledgements We would like to acknowledge the funding support from Nanyang Technological University ( COE _ SUG / RSS _ 20AUG10 _ 10 / 14 ) and Ministry of Education , Singapore ( RG42 / 13 ) , to K . W . Ng , and from the Agency for Science , Technology and Research ( A * STAR ) , Singapore , to S . Ahmed . Conflicts of Interest The authors declare no commercial or financial conflict of interest . A c ce p t e d A r ti c l e www . biotechnology - journal . com Page 21 Biotechnology Journal References [ 1 ] Zhang , X . Q . , Xu , X . , Bertrand , N . , Pridgen , E . , et al . , Interactions of nanomaterials and biological systems : Implications to personalized nanomedicine . Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2012 , 64 , 1363 - 1384 . [ 2 ] Wagner , V . , Dullaart , A . , Bock , A . K . , Zweck , A . , The emerging nanomedicine landscape . Nature biotechnology 2006 , 24 , 1211 - 1217 . [ 3 ] Borm , P . J . , Robbins , D . , Haubold , S . , Kuhlbusch , T . , et al . , The potential risks of nanomaterials : a review carried out for ECETOC . Particle and fibre toxicology 2006 , 3 , 11 . [ 4 ] Fadeel , B . , Garcia - Bennett , A . E . , Better safe than sorry : Understanding the toxicological properties of inorganic nanoparticles manufactured for biomedical applications . Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2010 , 62 , 362 - 374 . [ 5 ] Kathawala , M . H . , Xiong , S . , Richards , M . , Ng , K . W . , et al . , Emerging in vitro models for safety screening of high - volume production nanomaterials under environmentally relevant exposure conditions . Small 2013 , 9 , 1504 - 1520 . [ 6 ] Johnson , K . A . , Brown , P . H . , Drug development for cancer chemoprevention : focus on molecular targets . Semin Oncol 2010 , 37 , 345 - 358 . [ 7 ] Ng , K . W . , Khoo , S . P . , Heng , B . C . , Setyawati , M . I . , et al . , The role of the tumor suppressor p53 pathway in the cellular DNA damage response to zinc oxide nanoparticles . Biomaterials 2011 , 32 , 8218 - 8225 . [ 8 ] Setyawati , M . I . , Tay , C . Y . , Leong , D . T . , Exploiting cancer ' s antioxidative weakness through p53 with nanotoxicology . Nanomedicine ( Lond ) 2014 , 9 , 369 - 371 . [ 9 ] Vinogradov , S . , Wei , X . , Cancer stem cells and drug resistance : the potential of nanomedicine . Nanomedicine ( Lond ) 2012 , 7 , 597 - 615 . A c ce p t e d A r ti c l e www . biotechnology - journal . com Page 22 Biotechnology Journal [ 10 ] Sumer , B . , Gao , J . , Theranostic nanomedicine for cancer . Nanomedicine ( Lond ) 2008 , 3 , 137 - 140 . [ 11 ] Zhang , G . , Zeng , X . , Li , P . , Nanomaterials in cancer - therapy drug delivery system . J Biomed Nanotechnol 2013 , 9 , 741 - 750 . [ 12 ] Master , A . M . , Sen Gupta , A . , EGF receptor - targeted nanocarriers for enhanced cancer treatment . Nanomedicine ( Lond ) 2012 , 7 , 1895 - 1906 . [ 13 ] Setyawati , M . I . , Khoo , P . K . S . , Eng , B . H . , Xiong , S . J . , et al . , Cytotoxic and genotoxic characterization of titanium dioxide , gadolinium oxide , and poly ( lactic - co - glycolic acid ) nanoparticles in human fibroblasts . Journal of Biomedical Materials Research Part A 2013 , 101A , 633 - 640 . [ 14 ] Zhao , Y . , Howe , J . L . C . , Yu , Z . , Leong , D . T . , et al . , Exposure to Titanium Dioxide Nanoparticles Induces Autophagy in Primary Human Keratinocytes . Small 2013 , 9 , 387 - 392 . [ 15 ] Loo , S . C . , Siew , Y . E . , Ho , S . , Boey , F . Y . , Ma , J . , Synthesis and hydrothermal treatment of nanostructured hydroxyapatite of controllable sizes . J Mater Sci Mater Med . 2008 , 19 , 1389 - 1397 . [ 16 ] Loo , S . C . J . , Moore , T . , Banik , B . , Alexis , F . , Biomedical Applications of Hydroxyapatite Nanoparticles . Current Pharmaceutical Biotechnology 2010 , 11 , 333 - 342 . [ 17 ] Zhao , X . X . , Heng , B . C . , Xiong , S . J . , Guo , J . , et al . , In vitro assessment of cellular responses to rod - shaped hydroxyapatite nanoparticles of varying lengths and surface areas . Nanotoxicology 2011 , 5 , 182 - 194 . [ 18 ] Xia , T . , Kovochich , M . , Brant , J . , Hotze , M . , et al . , Comparison of the abilities of ambient and manufactured nanoparticles to induce cellular toxicity according to an oxidative stress paradigm . Nano Letters 2006 , 6 , 1794 - 1807 . A c ce p t e d A r ti c l e www . biotechnology - journal . com Page 23 Biotechnology Journal [ 19 ] Zhao , X . , Ng , S . , Heng , B . , Guo , J . , et al . , Cytotoxicity of hydroxyapatite nanoparticles is shape and cell dependent . Archives of Toxicology 2012 , 1 - 16 . [ 20 ] Setyawati , M . I . , Tay , C . Y . , Chia , S . L . , Goh , S . L . , et al . , Titanium dioxide nanomaterials cause endothelial cell leakiness by disrupting the homophilic interaction of VE - cadherin . Nat Commun 2013 , 4 , 1673 . [ 21 ] Tay , C . Y . , Cai , P . , Setyawati , M . I . , Fang , W . , et al . , Nanoparticles Strengthen Intracellular Tension and Retard Cellular Migration . Nano letters 2013 , 14 , 83 - 88 . [ 22 ] Edwin , F . , Wiepz , G . J . , Singh , R . , Peet , C . R . , et al . , A historical perspective of the EGF receptor and related systems . Methods Mol Biol 2006 , 327 , 1 - 24 . [ 23 ] Comfort , K . K . , Maurer , E . I . , Braydich - Stolle , L . K . , Hussain , S . M . , Interference of Silver , Gold , and Iron Oxide Nanoparticles on Epidermal Growth Factor Signal Transduction in Epithelial Cells . ACS Nano 2011 , 5 , 10000 - 10008 . [ 24 ] Liu , P . , Sudhaharan , T . , Koh , R . M . L . , Hwang , L . C . , et al . , Investigation of the Dimerization of Proteins from the Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Family by Single Wavelength Fluorescence Cross - Correlation Spectroscopy . Biophysical Journal 2007 , 93 , 684 - 698 . [ 25 ] Liu , P . , Ahmed , S . , Wohland , T . , The F - techniques : advances in receptor protein studies . Trends in endocrinology and metabolism : TEM 2008 , 19 , 181 - 190 . [ 26 ] Hild , W . , Pollinger , K . , Caporale , A . , Cabrele , C . , et al . , G protein - coupled receptors function as logic gates for nanoparticle binding and cell uptake . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2010 , 107 , 10667 - 10672 . A c ce p t e d A r ti c l e www . biotechnology - journal . com Page 24 Biotechnology Journal [ 27 ] Chua , B . T . , Lim , S . J . , Tham , S . C . , Poh , W . J . , Ullrich , A . , Somatic mutation in the ACK1 ubiquitin association domain enhances oncogenic signaling through EGFR regulation in renal cancer derived cells . Molecular oncology 2010 , 4 , 323 - 334 . [ 28 ] Liu , P . , Ahmed , S . , Wohland , T . , The F - techniques : advances in receptor protein studies . Trends Endocrinol Metab 2008 , 19 , 181 - 190 . [ 29 ] Sohaebuddin , S . K . , Thevenot , P . T . , Baker , D . , Eaton , J . W . , Tang , L . , Nanomaterial cytotoxicity is composition , size , and cell type dependent . Part Fibre Toxicol 2010 , 7 , 22 . [ 30 ] Heng , B . C . , Zhao , X . X . , Tan , E . C . , Khamis , N . , et al . , Evaluation of the cytotoxic and inflammatory potential of differentially shaped zinc oxide nanoparticles . Archives of Toxicology 2011 , 85 , 1517 - 1528 . [ 31 ] Toy , R . , Peiris , P . M . , Ghaghada , K . B . , Karathanasis , E . , Shaping cancer nanomedicine : the effect of particle shape on the in vivo journey of nanoparticles . Nanomedicine ( Lond ) 2014 , 9 , 121 - 134 . [ 32 ] Ogiso , H . , Ishitani , R . , Nureki , O . , Fukai , S . , et al . , Crystal Structure of the Complex of Human Epidermal Growth Factor and Receptor Extracellular Domains . Cell 2002 , 110 , 775 - 787 . A c ce p t e d A r ti c l e www . biotechnology - journal . com Page 25 Biotechnology Journal Figure Captions Figure 1 . TEM micrographs of ( A ) needle - shaped ( nHA - ND ) and ( B ) rod - shaped ( nHA - RD ) hydroxyapatite nanoparticles show clear difference in the aspect ratios between the two nanoparticle groups . A c ce p t e d A r ti c l e www . biotechnology - journal . com Page 26 Biotechnology Journal Figure 2 . Cytotoxicity of nHA - NPs . Cell proliferation measured by DNA quantification was expressed as percentages of untreated controls after 24h exposure to nHA - ND and nHA - RD at varying concentrations . Data represent means ± SD ( n ≥ 3 ) . Statistical significance between samples at each concentration was analyzed by 1 - way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s HSD post hoc test [ * p < 0 . 05 w . r . t . negative control ( 100 % ) ; Ψ p < 0 . 05 ] . A c ce p t e d A r ti c l e www . biotechnology - journal . com Page 27 Biotechnology Journal Figure 3 . Measurement of interaction between hydroxyapatite nanoparticles and EGFR through FRET analysis . Representative single - plane confocal laser microscopy images show ( A ) FITC - conjugated needle - shaped hydroxyapatite ( nHA - ND ) , ( B ) mRFP - EGFR and ( C ) merged image of green and red channels , in CHO cells . Circled area represents a region of interest that was selected for the FRET and FLIM studies , where co - localization of red and green signal could be seen . A c ce p t e d A r ti c l e www . biotechnology - journal . com Page 28 Biotechnology Journal Figure 4 . Western blot analysis of downstream effects of interactions between hydroxyapatite nanoparticles and EGFR . ( A ) Immunoblotting of whole cell lysates from wild type CHO - K1 cells ( CHO WT ) and CHO - K1 cells expressing mRFP - EGFR ( CHO mRFP - EGFR ) . ( B ) Densitometry results for the Western blots . A c ce p t e d A r ti c l e www . biotechnology - journal . com Page 29 Biotechnology Journal Table 1 . FRET efficiencies obtained for the interaction of various hydroxyapatite nanoparticles with EGFR . Data are expressed as means ± SD ( n = 3 to 6 ) . Hydroxyapatite Nanoparticle AP - FRET Efficiency ( % ) Pearson Correlation Coefficient , r FLIM - FRET Efficiency ( % ) nHA - ND 6 . 18 ± 2 . 42 - 0 . 818 ± 0 . 034 10 . 48 ± 1 . 88 nHA - RD 9 . 57 ± 2 . 42 - 0 . 77 ± 0 . 060 7 . 28 ± 1 . 91 A c ce p t e d A r ti c l e