This thesis has been submitted in fulfilment of the requirements for a postgraduate degree ( e . g . PhD , MPhil , DClinPsychol ) at the University of Edinburgh . Please note the following terms and conditions of use : This work is protected by copyright and other intellectual property rights , which are retained by the thesis author , unless otherwise stated . A copy can be downloaded for personal non - commercial research or study , without prior permission or charge . This thesis cannot be reproduced or quoted extensively from without first obtaining permission in writing from the author . The content must not be changed in any way or sold commercially in any format or medium without the formal permission of the author . When referring to this work , full bibliographic details including the author , title , awarding institution and date of the thesis must be given . Novel roles of ADF / cofilins in maintenance of homeostasis in normal and malignant epithelial cells Georgios Kanellos Doctor of Philosophy The University of Edinburgh 2017 2 A dissertation submitted in partial satisfaction of the requirements for the award of Doctor of Philosophy Declaration I hereby certify that the present thesis has been composed by myself , and that I have personally carried out the entirety of the work contained herein , except where acknowledgment has been made . No part of this work has been submitted for any other degree or professional qualification except as specified . Part of the data and illustrations presented have been published in the following articles : Kanellos , G . , Zhou , J . , Patel , H . , Ridgway , R . A . , Huels , D . , Gurniak , C . B . , Sandilands , E . , Carragher , N . O . , Sansom , O . J . , Witke , W . , Brunton , V . G . , and Frame , M . C . ( 2015 ) . ADF and cofilin1 control actin stress fibers , nuclear integrity , and cell survival . Cell Reports 13 , 1949 - 1964 . Kanellos , G . , and Frame , M . C . ( 2016 ) . Cellular functions of the ADF / cofilin family at a glance . Journal of Cell Science 129 , 3211 - 3218 . Georgios Kanellos 15 February 2017 3 To my mum and dad . . 4 Acknowledgments I am extremely grateful to my supervisors ; Professor Margaret Frame for allowing me to undertake a project in her group , her belief in my abilities and her constant enthusiasm and guidance , and Professor Val Brunton for providing invaluable insight and support , as well as overseeing my first written reports of debatable quality . Furthermore , I would like to thank Cancer Research UK for providing the generous funding and making this PhD possible . I would also like to thank all the past and current members of the Frame and Brunton groups for their help , friendship and all the fun we had in the lab for the past four years . Special thanks to Dr Adam Byron for the many stimulating discussions about science and his help with the mass spectrometry and microarray experiments bioinformatics analysis , Dr Hitesh Patel for all the support , help with experiments and lengthy Friday strategy meetings that proved to be invaluable assets over the last four years , and Dr Martin Lee for introducing me to road cycling , which proved to be extremely beneficial for my sanity during my PhD . Thanks are also due to Dr John Dawson for his insightful comments and suggestions , and Dr Jun Li and Laura Gomez Quadrado for making our bench space fun . In addition , I would like to extend my gratitude to Morwenna Muir for all her help with the animal experiments . Finally , I am very grateful to Dr Ifigeneia Stavrou for tolerating me all these years , and , most importantly , I wish to thank my family ; my mum for her unconditional love , belief and sacrifice , and my dad , who passed away while I was studying for this qualification . This thesis is dedicated to both of them . 5 Table of Contents Abstract 10 Lay summary 12 List of abbreviations 13 Table of Figures and Tables 16 Chapter 1 Introduction to ADF / cofilins 20 1 . 1 Overview of the ADF / cofilin family 21 1 . 2 Biochemical properties , mechanism of actin severing , and how they affect the expression and localization of ADF / cofilins 25 1 . 2 . 1 Expression of ADF / cofilins 25 1 . 2 . 2 Cofilin - actin binding and mechanism of actin severing 26 1 . 2 . 3 Cofilin ancillary proteins 28 1 . 2 . 4 Cofilin mediated actin filament de - branching 28 1 . 2 . 5 Subcellular localization of ADF / cofilins 29 1 . 3 Regulation of cofilin activity 30 1 . 3 . 1 Phosphorylation and dephosphorylation 30 1 . 3 . 2 PIP 2 binding 31 1 . 3 . 3 Regulation through pH 33 1 . 3 . 4 Other regulatory mechanisms 33 1 . 4 New and emerging cellular roles of ADF / cofilins 35 1 . 4 . 1 Regulation of intracellular contractility 35 1 . 4 . 2 Involvement in apoptosis 36 1 . 4 . 3 Lipid metabolism 37 1 . 4 . 4 Mechanical checkpoint 37 1 . 4 . 5 Nuclear actin transport 38 1 . 4 . 6 Transcription 39 1 . 4 . 7 Stress response 40 6 1 . 5 Physiological importance of ADF / cofilins 40 1 . 5 . 1 Consequences of depletion or mutations of ADF / cofilin family members for organism and tissue homeostasis 41 1 . 5 . 2 Implications of the cofilin activities in other pathologies 42 1 . 6 Aims 43 1 . 6 . 1 The epidermis as a model for studying tissue homeostasis 44 Chapter 2 Materials and methods 47 2 . 1 Animal models and cell culture 48 2 . 1 . 1 Transgenic mice and 4 - OHT administration 48 2 . 1 . 2 Isolation of primary keratinocytes and cell culture conditions 48 2 . 1 . 3 Generation of SCC cell lines 49 2 . 2 RNA interference and inhibitor treatments 50 2 . 2 . 1 RNA interference and protein co - depletions 50 2 . 2 . 2 Inhibitor treatments 51 2 . 3 Cloning and cell infections 51 2 . 4 Immunohistochemistry , immunocytochemistry and immunofluorescence 53 2 . 4 . 1 Immunohistochemistry , BrdU labelling and quantification 53 2 . 4 . 2 Immunofluorescent immunohistochemistry and visualization of actin fibers in the skin 54 2 . 4 . 3 Immunofluorescent immunocytochemistry 54 2 . 4 . 4 Nuclear actin visualization 55 2 . 5 Fluorescence microscopy and image analysis 56 2 . 6 Gene expression assays 57 2 . 6 . 1 Gene expression profiling 57 2 . 6 . 2 Quantitative PCR 57 2 . 7 Cell membrane dynamics and kymograph analysis 61 2 . 8 Actin polymerization assays 61 2 . 8 . 1 Free barbed – ends assay 61 2 . 8 . 2 G - and F - actin assay 62 7 2 . 9 Cell lysis and other immunoassays 62 2 . 9 . 1 Western blotting 62 2 . 9 . 2 Immunoprecipitation 64 2 . 9 . 3 Cell fractionation 65 2 . 10 Cell cycle and cell viability analysis 65 2 . 11 Mass spectrometry 66 2 . 12 Hierarchical clustering , network and enrichment analyses 66 2 . 13 Data presentation and statistical analysis 67 Chapter 3 Consequences of ADF and CFL1 depletion in tissue and cell homeostasis 68 3 . 1 Introduction 69 3 . 2 Results 70 3 . 2 . 1 Double depletion of ADF and CFL1 triggers loss of skin tissue homeostasis 70 3 . 2 . 2 Depletion of ADF and CFL1 triggers actin fiber accumulation and cell morphological changes 74 3 . 2 . 3 ADF / CFL1 loss triggers actin polymerization 77 3 . 2 . 4 Depletion of both , ADF and CFL1 , affects membrane dynamics 80 3 . 2 . 5 Unrestrained actin filaments arising in the absence of ADF and CFL1 are associated with nuclear deformation 81 3 . 2 . 6 The loss of ADF and CFL1 compromises nuclear integrity 84 3 . 2 . 7 ADF and CFL1 depletion triggers damage - induced signalling and cell death 86 3 . 2 . 8 Accumulation of actin bundles leading to loss of nuclear integrity and cell death is dependent on the shared activities of ADF / cofilins 89 3 . 3 Discussion 95 Chapter 4 Mediators of the cell responses associated with the loss of ADF and CFL1 99 4 . 1 Introduction 100 4 . 2 Results 101 4 . 2 . 1 ADF and CFL1 depletion promotes enhanced SRF / MAL transcriptional activity 101 8 4 . 2 . 2 Disruption of nuclear shape and integrity in ADF / CFL1 depleted cells is promoted by Arp2 / 3 and SRF mediated actin filament accumulation 105 4 . 2 . 3 Actin over - polymerization upon ADF and CFL1 depletion affects cell viability 111 4 . 2 . 4 ADF and CFL1 depletion leads to enhanced actomyosin contractility that affects nuclear integrity 113 4 . 2 . 5 Myosin IIA is a critical mediator of nuclear deformation in ADF and CFL1 depleted cells 115 4 . 2 . 6 Nuclear deformation in ADF and CFL1 depleted cells is mediated by the LINC complex 117 4 . 3 Discussion 123 Chapter 5 Novel roles of ADF / cofilins in the cell nucleus 127 5 . 1 Introduction 128 5 . 2 Results 129 5 . 2 . 1 ADF and CFL1 depletion leads to accumulation of nuclear actin 129 5 . 2 . 2 ADF / CFL1 depletion affects nucleolar size 132 5 . 2 . 3 Loss of ADF and CFL1 might affect chromatin architecture 135 5 . 2 . 4 Novel CFL1 protein - protein interactions in SCC cells 136 5 . 2 . 5 Identifying novel protein - protein interactions of CFL1 in the nucleus 139 5 . 3 Discussion 144 Chapter 6 Discussion and future perspectives 148 6 . 1 ADF / cofilin activities are critical for cell and tissue homeostasis 149 6 . 1 . 1 Mechanisms contributing to actin overpolymerization 149 6 . 1 . 2 Cellular consequences of the loss of actin dynamics regulation 150 6 . 2 Actin dynamics : a critical factor of tissue maintenance 152 6 . 2 . 1 Involvement of the SRF signaling pathway 152 6 . 2 . 2 Mechanosensitive regulation through YAP / TAZ activity 153 6 . 3 Nuclear envelope : cell signalling mediator and implications in disease 154 6 . 3 . 1 Regulation of the nuclear envelope – actin connections 154 6 . 3 . 2 The nuclear envelope as a signalling node in cells 154 9 6 . 3 . 3 Nuclear envelope and disease 155 6 . 4 Nuclear roles of ADF / cofilins 156 6 . 5 Concluding remarks 158 Bibliography 160 Appendix I Related publications 185 10 Abstract Actin cytoskeletal regulation is of critical importance for a number of diverse cellular functions , including cell motility , endocytosis , cell division and transcription . Tight regulation of actin is critical for many aspects of cancer biology and in particular invasion and metastasis . ADF / cofilins are among the most important actin regulatory proteins . Mammals have three highly conserved members , ADF , CFL1 and CFL2 , which regulate actin dynamics by severing and depolymerizing actin filaments . Despite a huge literature on the roles of ADF / cofilins in actin treadmilling and cell migration in vitro and in cancer cell behavior during invasion , very little is known about their collective roles in tissue homeostasis . By employing genetic knock - outs of ADF , in conjunction with conditional depletion of CFL1 using a Cre - LoxP system under the control of the keratin 14 promoter , we were able to study the effects of ADF / CFL1 loss in vivo in the mouse epidermis . Furthermore , by generating ADF - null squamous cell carcinoma ( SCC ) cell lines and by transiently downregulating CFL1 with RNAi , we were able to investigate further the cellular responses after ADF / CFL1 depletion in vitro . Co - depletion of ADF and CFL1 from the mouse epidermis triggered loss of tissue homeostasis characterized by abnormal thickening of the tissue , actin filament accumulation and nuclear deformation . Loss of ADF / CFL1 in cultured malignant keratinocytes also led to aberrant cell morphology accompanied by unrestrained accumulation of actin stress fibers tethered to enlarged focal adhesions . Enhanced SRF / MAL - mediated transcription fuels this uncontrolled actin polymerization which is also mediated by Arp3 . Furthermore , these actin filaments are decorated with phospho - myosin light chain , which indicates their contractile nature . As a consequence , the increased intracellular acto - myosin tension results in nuclear deformation , which is promoted by the deregulated actin filaments tethered to the nuclear envelope via the linker of nucleoskeleton and cytoskeleton ( LINC ) complex . 11 Overall , we describe new conceptual insight into the cellular functions of ADF / cofilins . We show that their activities are essential for the dynamic regulation of contractile actin filaments that , if left unchecked , lead to loss of cellular homeostasis and cell death promoted by loss of nuclear integrity . Additionally , the critical roles of nuclear actin and actin - associated proteins have recently started being appreciated . Thus , for the first time we set out to investigate new functions of cofilins in the nucleus using proteomics , and identify new cofilin binding partners that implicate them in novel cellular pathways , expanding our knowledge on these small actin - binding proteins . 12 Lay summary Cells are not simple static entities , but they are able to demonstrate complex behaviour and have the ability to move on two - dimensional surfaces and within the 3 - dimensional space of tissues – an ability that is critical for the development and progression of diseases , such as cancer . Responsible for this movement are filaments inside the cells composed of a protein called actin . These actin filaments are controlled by other small proteins that mediate their assembly and disassembly . One group of such proteins are the so - called ADF / cofilins . In order to gain a deeper understanding of the cellular roles of these proteins , we employed a variety of techniques that allowed us to remove ADF / cofilins from cells and observe the consequences of this perturbation . We found that after losing ADF / cofilins the cells rapidly change appearance by adopting an irregular shape , they become less motile and start accumulating actin filaments in a way that is abnormal . This unrestricted accumulation of actin filaments affects cell control in multiple levels . We found that these filaments have the ability to generate too much force , which leads to an excessive amount of tension inside the cells . A subset of these filaments is also physically connected to the nuclear envelope , a structure consisting of a double membrane which encloses the genetic material of the cell and keeps the nucleus intact . As a consequence , the increased tension in this subset of actin filaments promotes deformations and ruptures in the nuclear envelope that lead to damages in the genetic material ( DNA ) of cells . In response to these insults , the cells initiate self - destruction mechanisms that lead to their death . Furthermore , we describe that when these events take place within a tissue – in mouse skin – the overall tissue control , appearance and ability to function is lost , as the cells cannot adjust to insults of such extent . Overall , we report a novel function of ADF / cofilins in keeping actin filaments under tight control , which has greater implications for cellular health than just cell motility . Namely , they are required for the maintenance of the nucleus that is critical for cells to survive and grow in tissues of the body . 13 List of abbreviations 4 - OHT 4 - hydroxytamoxifen Acta2 alpha actin 2 ADF actin depolymerizing factor ADP - P i adenosine diphosphate still bound to the terminal phosphate group ADP / ATP adenosine di - or tri - phosphate Aip1 actin - interacting protein 1 ANOVA one - way analysis of variance Arp2 / 3 actin - related protein 2 / 3 complex Arp3 actin - related protein 3 BrdU 5 - bromo - 2 ' - deoxyuridine BSA bovine serum albumin Cap1 adenylyl cyclase - associated protein 1 co - IP co - immunoprecipitation CSK cytoskeleton buffer DMBA 7 , 12 - dimethylbenz [ a ] anthracene DMEM Dulbecco ' s modified Eagle’s medium DMSO dimethyl sulfoxide EGF epidermal growth factor F - actin filamentous actin FBS fetal bovine serum Flna filamin - A G - actin monomeric / globular actin GMF glia maturation factor H & E hematoxylin and eosin HP1 α heterochromatin protein 1 homolog alpha 14 IP immunoprecipitation K14CreER T2 Cre recombinase - estrogen receptor ( ER ) fusion under control of the keratin 14 promoter KBM keratinocyte basal medium LINC linker of cytoskeleton to nucleoskeleton complex MAL MKL / myocardin - like protein 1 , also known as MRTF - A MAPKAPK - 2 mitogen - activated protein kinase - activated protein kinase 2 mDia1 diaphanous - related formin - 1 , also known as Diap1 mDia2 diaphanous - related formin - 3 , also known as Diap3 MRCK α myotonic dystrophy kinase - related Cdc42 - binding kinase alpha Myl9 myosin regulatory light chain 9 NES nuclear export sequence Nesprin - 2G nesprin - 2 giant , also known as Syne - 2 NF - κ B nuclear factor kappa B NLS nuclear localization sequence PAK p21 - activated kinase pfp proportion of false positives PIP 2 phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate PLD1 phospholipase D1 pMLC2 phosphorylated myosin light chain 2 ( Ser19 ) PtC phosphatidylcholine PtdOH phosphatidic acid qPCR quantitative PCR RNAi RNA - interference ROCK Rho - associated protein kinase RT room temperature SCC ( s ) Squamous Cell Carcinoma ( cells ) 15 Ser3 serine - 3 siCFL1 siRNAs targeting the CFL1 mRNA siCFL1 CR siRNAs targeting the coding region of CFL1 mRNA siCFL1 UTR siRNAs targeting the untranslated region of CFL1 mRNA siNT control non - targeting siRNAs siRNA small interfering RNA SIM structure illumination microscopy SMIFH2 small molecule inhibitor of formin homology 2 domain SRF serum response factor STS staurosporine Sun1 SUN domain - containing protein 1 Sun2 SUN domain - containing protein 2 TGF - β transforming growth factor beta TPA 2 - O - Tetradecanoylphorbol - 13 - acetate 16 Table of Figures and Tables Figure Title Page Figure 1 . 1 Multiple sequence alignment of mouse ADF / cofilins . Important residues that affect ADF / cofilin functions are highlighted . 23 Figure 1 . 2 Functions of the ADF / cofilin family members in mammalian non - muscle cells . 24 Figure 1 . 3 Concentration - dependent cofilin activity on actin assembly / disassembly . 27 Figure 1 . 4 Schematic representation of interfollicular epidermis architecture . 45 Figure 2 . 1 Graphical representation of mouse line - crossings held to achieve skin - specific deletion of both ADF and CFL1 . 49 Figure 2 . 2 Graphical representation of the strategy employed to generate stable Squamous Cell Carcinoma cell lines ( SCCs ) . 50 Figure 3 . 1 Loss of ADF and CFL1 promotes loss of epidermal tissue homeostasis . 72 Figure 3 . 2 Depletion of ADF and CFL1 triggers actin fiber accumulation and cell morphological changes . 75 Figure 3 . 3 Depletion of ADF and CFL1 triggers actin polymerization . 78 Figure 3 . 4 ADF / CFL1 loss promotes focal adhesion number and size increase . 79 Figure 3 . 5 Double depletion of ADF and CFL1 affects cell membrane dynamics . 81 Figure 3 . 6 ADF / CFL1 depletion promotes loss of nuclear integrity . 83 17 Figure 3 . 7 Nuclear membrane disruption upon ADF / CFL1 loss leads to leaking of nuclear transcription factors into the cytosol . 85 Figure 3 . 8 ADF / CFL1 depletion triggers damage - induced signalling and cell death . 87 Figure 3 . 9 Exogenous wild - type CFL1 expression prevents the cellular responses associated with ADF / CFL1 loss . 90 Figure 3 . 10 ADF re - introduction rescues the cellular responses that follow ADF / CFL1 depletion in ADF - null SCCs . 92 Figure 3 . 11 CFL2 over - expression rescues the cellular responses that follow ADF / CFL1 depletion . 93 Figure 4 . 1 Expression profiling of ADF / CFL1 depleted keratinocytes . 102 Figure 4 . 2 ADF / CFL1 depletion causes increased expression of SRF / MAL and YAP / TAZ target genes . 104 Figure 4 . 3 Co - depletion of Arp3 or SRF rescues cell morphology of ADF / CFL1 depleted cells . 106 Figure 4 . 4 Modulating actin filament accumulation following ADF / CFL1 loss rescues nuclear integrity of the depleted cells . 108 Figure 4 . 5 Inhibition of the Arp2 / 3 complex , but not formins , suppresses F - actin accumulation following ADF / CFL1 depletion . 110 Figure 4 . 6 Actin polymerization inhibition affects cell viability of ADF / CFL1 depleted cells . 112 Figure 4 . 7 Enhanced contractility ensues ADF / CFL1 depletion and promotes nuclear deformation . 114 Figure 4 . 8 Reduction of myosin IIA expression rescues the nuclear integrity of ADF / CFL1 depleted cells . 116 Figure 4 . 9 Uncoupling actin filaments from the LINC complex preserves the nuclear integrity of ADF / CFL1 depleted cells . 119 18 Figure 4 . 10 Disruption of the LINC complex rescues nuclear deformation of ADF / CFL1 depleted cells . 121 Figure 5 . 1 ADF / CFL1 depletion leads to enlarged nuclear actin structures . 130 Figure 5 . 2 Enlarged nuclear actin structures in ADF / CFL1 depleted cells are not the result of apoptosis . 132 Figure 5 . 3 ADF / CFL1 loss affects nucleolar size . 134 Figure 5 . 4 Depletion of ADF / CFL1 affects the status and organization of chromatin . 136 Figure 5 . 5 Total cell IPs and mass spectrometry for CFL1 binding partners . 138 Figure 5 . 6 Nuclear IPs and mass spectrometry for CFL1 binding partners . 140 Figure 5 . 7 Interaction network analysis of nuclear CFL1 binding partners . 142 Figure 5 . 8 Confirmation of interactions between CFL1 and lamin A / C and RelB . 143 Figure 6 . 1 Schematic summarizing the main pathways responsible for the aberrant actin filament accumulation that follows the depletion of ADF and CFL1 . 150 Figure 6 . 2 Schematic of main cellular mediators contributing to the loss of nuclear integrity and associated consequences that follows ADF and CFL1 depletion . 151 19 Table Title Page Table 1 Cloning primers for mouse wild - type ADF , CFL1 and CFL2 with EcoRI / SalI overhangs . 52 Table 2 List of primers used for quantitative PCR experiments ( mouse species ) . 58 Chapter 1 ½ Introduction 20 Chapter 1 Introduction to ADF / cofilins Chapter 1 ½ Introduction 21 1 . 1 Overview of the ADF / cofilin family Actin is one of the most abundant proteins in cells and it has been proposed that homologs or actin - like proteins can be traced all the way back to the origins of life and the common ancestor of all modern organisms ( Erickson , 2007 ) . The fundamental property of actin is its ability to polymerize and form filaments that comprise the cytoskeleton of cells . Aside from offering mechanical support , the state and properties of actin monomers and / or filaments influence numerous cell decisions and the outcome of cellular pathways . The regulation of the actin cytoskeleton is crucial for a number of diverse cellular functions , ranging from cell motility , endocytosis , cell division and transcription . Loss of tight regulation of actin is associated with various disorders that , among others , affect the normal function of neuronal or muscle tissues , as well as with cancer progression . Because of its central role in all these processes , the presence , abundance , polymerization and depolymerization of actin has to be tightly regulated in a spatiotemporal manner . Therefore , cells have developed an array of actin binding proteins that are entrusted with the job of regulating actin dynamics . Among them are the members of one of the most important families of actin regulators , the actin depolymerizing factor ( ADF ) / cofilin family . Isoforms of ADF / cofilins are found in all eukaryotes , and mammals express three highly conserved members ; in humans and mice these are the actin depolymerizing factor ( ADF , also known as destrin ) , cofilin - 1 ( CFL1 , also known as non - muscle , n - cofilin ) and cofilin - 2 ( CFL2 , also known as muscle , m - cofilin ) ( Maciver and Hussey , 2002 ) . The first ADF / cofilin to be identified was ADF , when lysates from chick embryo brains were passed through columns that had high affinity for actin , while searching for factors that affected actin polymerization ( Bamburg et al . , 1980 ) . Using similar approaches ADF was later isolated from porcine kidney and brain , where it was reported for the first time that it has the ability to sever ( destroy ) actin filaments , hence , it was termed ‘destrin’ ( Maekawa et al . , 1984 ; Nishida et al . , 1984a ; Nishida et al . , 1985 ) . Similarly , CFL1 was characterized from porcine brain extracts Chapter 1 ½ Introduction 22 because of its ability to bind monomeric ( G - ) , as well as filamentous ( F - ) actin , and it was named ‘cofilin’ because of this ability of being ‘co - filamentous protein’ ( Nishida et al . , 1984b ) . Lastly , CFL2 was identified in chicken skeletal muscle because of its similar properties to CFL1 ( Abe et al . , 1989 ) . Owing to these abilities ADF / cofilins are widely recognized mainly for their roles in regulating actin dynamics by severing and enhancing the depolymerization of actin filaments . ADF / cofilins are generally small proteins ( ~ 18 - 20kDa ) and all three mammalian isoforms are encoded from different genes . ADF shares 70 % identity with CFL1 and CFL2 at the amino acid level , whereas the latter share 80 % sequence identity ( Figure 1 . 1 ) . Because of this increased identity and the reasons outlined below , whether the individual members of ADF / cofilins are assigned with unique as well as redundant roles is not always clear from the existing literature , and in many cases this is a matter of confusion . To begin with , there is a general notion among many researchers that all ADF / cofilins perform similar activities . When yeast cofilin was identified a few years later then the mammalian homologues , it was shown that cofilin null yeast cells were not viable ; however , expression of the mammalian ADF or CFL1 had the ability to rescue the mutant cells ( Iida et al . , 1993 ; Moon et al . , 1993 ) . This certainly supported the above argument , but also led to a situation where many studies investigating the roles of ADF / cofilins do not specify which isoform is being studied . Furthermore , in tissues where more than one member is being expressed ( see below for ADF / cofilins expression patterns ) it is not always stated what is the level of expression of each isoform and what its contribution towards the total cellular ADF / cofilin content . Additionally , antibodies often do not discriminate between the different isoforms and in many cases rescue experiments in higher eukaryotic cells have been carried out with cofilin homologues from lower eukaryotes . For these reasons and for simplicity , for the rest of this chapter we will refer to all members of the ADF / cofilin family collectively as ‘cofilin’ , except in cases where information for specific isoforms exist . Chapter 1 ½ Introduction 23 The rest of this chapter will aim to introduce the main attributes of the ADF / cofilin family members . We will briefly outline their biochemical properties and how they might have an impact on their expression patterns . We will highlight their physiological importance and go through the main mechanisms of their regulation . In addition , we will briefly summarize their well - characterized roles in actin treadmilling and their involvement in membrane protrusion and cell motility . Finally , we will discuss some exciting new and emerging roles of ADF / cofilins in cell biology and define the specific aims of this study . • Ser3 phosphorylation site ( Moriyama et al . , 1996 ) • Bipartite NLS NES ( Munsie et al . , 2012 ) • Main phosphoinositide binding sites ( Zhao et al . , 2010 ) • v - Src phosphorylation site ( Yoo et al . , 2010 ) • F - actin binding site ( Pope et al . , 2000 ) • G - and F - actin binding sites ( Moriyama et al . , 1992 ; Paavilainen et al . , 2008 ) • pH sensitivity site ( Frantz et al . , 2008 ) • Cysteine oxidation on cofilin - 1 ( Cameron et al . , 2015 ; Klamt et al . , 2009 ) • For human cofilin - 1 structure see ( Klejnot et al . , 2013 ) Figure 1 . 1 . Multiple sequence alignment of mouse ADF / cofilins . Important residues that affect ADF / cofilin functions are highlighted . Cofilin - 1 MASGVAVSDGVIKVFNDMKVRKSSTPEEVKKRKKAVLFCLSEDKKNIILEEGKEILVGDV 60 Cofilin - 2 MASGVTVNDEVIKVFNDMKVRKSSTQEEIKKRKKAVLFCLSDDKRQIIVEEAKQILVGDI 60 ADF MASGVQVADEVCRIFYDMKVRKCSTPEEIKKRKKAVIFCLSADKKCIVVEEGKEILVGDV 60 * * * * * * * * : : * * * * * * * . * * * * : * * * * * * * : * * * * * * : * : : * * . * : * * * * * : Cofilin - 1 GQTVDDPYTTFVKMLPDKDCRYALYDATYETKESKKEDLVFIFWAPENAPLKSKMIYASS 120 Cofilin - 2 GDTVEDPYTSFVKLLPLNDCRYALYDATYETKESKKEDLVFIFWAPESAPLKSKMIYASS 120 ADF GATITDPFKHFVGMLPEKDCRYALYDASFETKESRKEELMFFLWAPEQAPLKSKMIYASS 120 * * : * * : . * * : * * : * * * * * * * * * : : * * * * * : * * : * : * : : * * * * . * * * * * * * * * * * * Cofilin - 1 KDAIKKKLTGIKHELQANCYEEVKDRCTLAEKLGGSAVISLEGKPL 166 Cofilin - 2 KDAIKKKFTGIKHEWQVNGLDDIKDRSTLGEKLGGSVVVSLEGKPL 166 ADF KDAIKKKFPGIKHEYQANGPEDLN - RTCIAEKLGGSLIVAFEGSPV 165 * * * * * * * : . * * * * * * . * : : : : * : . * * * * * * : : : : * * . * : Chapter 1 ½ Introduction 24 Figure 1 . 2 . Functions of the ADF / cofilin family members in mammalian non - muscle cells . cofilin - mediated actin treadmilling Rho GTPases LIMK / ( TESK ) P activation cofilin Serine 3 phosphorylation / inactivation Slingshot / Chronophin phosphatases P cofilin dephospho - rylation / activation cofilin regulation Ø myosin - cofilin competi - tion for filament binding Ø decreased / balanced contractility Ø cell homeostasis P P P P P P P P Ø inactive / depleted cofilin Ø excessive myosin binding Ø increased contractility Ø cell defects ( e . g . excessive cortical tension , mitosis defects , loss of nuclear integrity , apoptosis , etc . ) contractility cofilin regulates actin monomer nuclear import G - actin nuclear import nuclear architecture cofilin prevents actin stress fiber over - assembly and tightly regulates actin fibers associated with the nuclear envelope via the LINC complex . In turn , this may affect nuclear positioning , nuclear shape , chromatin architecture , transcription and mechanotransduction YAP / TAZ transcription / proliferation ? mechanical checkpoint cytochrome c release apoptosis cofilin translocation to mitochondria is an early step of apoptosis ? non - canonical actin filaments transcription cofilin was found to be associated with transcriptional elongation , however its exact role remains unclear RNA pol II transcription stress response cofilin - actin rod formation cofilin - actin nuclear rods following cellular stress , cofilin saturates cyto - plasmic / nuclear actin filaments forming cofilin - actin rods , and … … triggers nuclear accumulation of cofilin sub - cortical actin meshwork local cofilin activation in locomotory protrusions LIMK PLD1 P PLD1 P PtC PtdOH lipid metabolism p - cofilin regulates PLD1 activity affecting downstream signaling pathways including : vesicle trafficking , actin cytoskeleton dynamics , cell proliferation , differentiation , migration , mitogenesis , glucose transport etc . Ipo9 Cytoplasm Other apoptotic stimuli filament barbed - ends ATP - actin rich filament pointed - ends ADP - actin rich Arp2 / 3 cofilin myosin LINC complex nuclear lamina chromatin importin α / β complexes P phosphorylated cofilin Key adhesion complexes P I P 2 Na + H + ñ pH PIP 2 binding è cofilin inactivation PIP 2 hydrolysis P I P 2 PLC γ P E G F R NH E 1 Oxidant - induced apoptosis oxidised cofilin H 2 O 2 H 2 O 2 cofilin oxidation ( inactivation ) during cell migration Na + ñ pH H + pH - dependent cofilin release from cortactin during invasive cell protrusions NH E 1 cofilin mammalian isoforms : ADF , mainly expressed in epithelial , endothelial and neuronal cells Cofilin mammalian isoforms : cofilin - 1 , ubiquitously expressed , essential for life and development Cofilin mammalian isoforms : cofilin - 2 , mainly muscle specific isoform P P cortactin filament barbed - ends ATP - actin rich filament pointed - ends ADP - actin rich Arp2 / 3 cofilin myosin LINC complex chromatin importin α / β complexes P phosphorylated cofilin Key adhesion complexes oxidised cofilin cortactin nuclear lamina Chapter 1 ½ Introduction 25 1 . 2 Biochemical properties , mechanism of actin severing , and how they affect the expression and localization of ADF / cofilins 1 . 2 . 1 Expression of ADF / cofilins Despite their similarity at the amino acid level , each individual member of the cofilin family interacts with actin with different degrees of affinity . Initial biochemical characterisations revealed that although all mammalian isoforms have the ability to bind both , G - as well as F - actin , ADF and CFL1 were able to bind and promote steady - state F - actin disassembly to similar extents , whereas CFL2 was less efficient ( Vartiainen et al . , 2002 ; Yeoh et al . , 2002 ) . This biochemical difference was thought to be a reflection of the expression patterns of cofilins . Specifically , ADF and CFL1 are found in tissues that benefit from a higher degree of actin turnover ; ADF is mainly expressed in neuronal , epithelial and endothelial cells , whereas CFL1 appears to be ubiquitously expressed in most adult tissues , maybe with the exception of adult muscle tissue ( Gurniak et al . , 2014 ; Vartiainen et al . , 2002 ) . CFL2 , on the other hand , was considered to be a muscle - specific isoform , thus , restricted to muscle tissue , which is not associated with high actin turnover ( Gurniak et al . , 2005 ; Vartiainen et al . , 2002 ) . However , a more recent study , in which total internal reflection fluorescent microscopy was employed in order to assess the actin severing abilities of mammalian cofilins , suggests that ADF , CFL1 and CFL2 all bind to G - and F - actin with similar affinities , but , interestingly , ADF and CFL2 are more efficient in severing and enhancing the depolymerization of F - actin compared to CFL1 ( Chin et al . , 2016 ) . In addition , a CFL2 specific antibody was not readily available until recently , and this has delayed deeper understanding of the roles of this isoform . We now know that many tissues express all three isoforms , including oligodendrocytes , keratinocytes as well as cancerous tissue of non - muscle origin ( Kanellos et al . , 2015 ; Zuchero et al . , 2015 ) , and that CFL2 is a major constituent in human peritoneal mesothelial cells ( Herzog et al . , 2015 ) . It is possible that tissues , which express multiple Chapter 1 ½ Introduction 26 isoforms , may fine tune the expression levels of each individual isoform in order to tightly control the rates of actin turnover . Additionally , the types of accessory proteins that decorate actin filaments and the expression patterns of cofilin ancillary proteins ( see below ) might modify their efficiency in actin turnover . In turn , this could be linked to their tissue specific functions . 1 . 2 . 2 Cofilin - actin binding and mechanism of actin severing Actin monomers are bound with either an adenosine di - or tri - phosphate ( ADP or ATP ) , or the intermediate hydrolysis product of the latter , which is ADP still bound to the terminal phosphate prior to its dissociation ( ADP - P i ) . ADF and CFL1 bind ADP - associated actin subunits with higher affinity compared to ATP / ADP - P i subunits , and accelerate P i release ; however , CFL2 has the ability to bind the latter forms with higher affinity than ADF or CFL1 ( Kremneva et al . , 2014 ; Suarez et al . , 2011 ; Vartiainen et al . , 2002 ; Yeoh et al . , 2002 ) . The actin filaments are polar structures in that they grow faster from one end compared to the other . Initial experiments visualizing the elongation of actin filaments decorated with myosin heads revealed a pattern where the latter were seemingly pointing towards one end of the filament that was growing slowly , whereas the opposite end of the filament was growing rapidly , and the entire structure resembled a spear ( Hayashi and Ip , 1974 ; Pollard and Mooseker , 1981 ; Woodrum et al . , 1975 ) . For that reason , the fast - growing ends , which represent the ‘newer’ parts of the actin filaments , are termed as the ‘barbed - ends’ , whereas , the slow - growing ends , representing the ‘older’ parts of the filaments , are known as the ‘pointed - ends’ . The barbed - ends of the filaments are generally ATP - actin rich regions , whereas the pointed - ends are ADP - actin rich . Therefore , it is in the pointed - ends where severing preferentially occurs at the boundaries between bare and cofilin - decorated parts of the filaments ( Suarez et al . , 2011 ) ( Figure 1 . 2 ) . Mechanistically , actin severing is believed to occur because binding of cofilin to actin filaments results in changes in their properties and their structure . Cofilin binding results in the introduction of a tilt and a helical twist in the actin monomers that constitute filaments , which renders them Chapter 1 ½ Introduction 27 susceptible to fragmentation ( Galkin et al . , 2011 ; Galkin et al . , 2001 ; McGough et al . , 1997 ) . The binding of cofilin to actin filaments is cooperative , which means the conformational changes induced by cofilin binding invite the binding of more cofilin molecules in the same region of the filament ( Hayakawa et al . , 2014 ) . Recently , it was shown that binding of ~ 23 cofilins on an actin filament was sufficient to induce enough mechanical stress to trigger its fragmentation ( Gressin et al . , 2015 ) . Considering the above , it is easy to appreciate that the actin - severing function of cofilin is directly related to its concentration relative to actin ( the cofilin : actin ratio ) , and its binding density on the actin filaments at any given time and location ( Figure 1 . 3 ) . In fact , it has been shown that high concentrations of cofilin appear to be able to nucleate actin monomers , as well as saturate and stabilise actin filaments ; conversely , lower ratios between cofilin and actin promote filament disassembly , since cofilin will only be able to bind sporadically on filaments and create the appropriate mechanical stress to induce their fragmentation ( Andrianantoandro and Pollard , 2006 ) . Figure 1 . 3 . Concentration - dependent cofilin activity on actin assembly / disassembly . cofilin actin cofilin concentration actin filament stabilization actin filament fragmentation actin filament saturation and stabilization actin filament nucleation Chapter 1 ½ Introduction 28 1 . 2 . 3 Cofilin ancillary proteins As outlined above , when cofilin is mixed in solution with actin then the outcome of their interaction will depend on their relative concentrations . It is believed that inside cells the severing activities of cofilin are not sufficient for sustainable supply of monomeric actin . For this reason , there is an interplay between cofilin and other actin interacting proteins that modulates the severing efficiency of the former . One of the factors that cooperate with cofilin and enhance actin depolymerization is the actin - interacting protein 1 ( Aip1 ) ( Gressin et al . , 2015 ; Kueh et al . , 2008 ; Nadkarni and Brieher , 2014 ) , which is thought to achieve that by competing with cofilin for binding to filaments , thereby decreasing its concentration on filaments to amounts that favour disassembly ( Chen et al . , 2015 ) . Coronins also enhance actin depolymerisation by increasing the recruitment of cofilin to the filaments on one hand , and on the other by introducing more structural changes to them ( Jansen et al . , 2015 ; Kueh et al . , 2008 ; Mikati et al . , 2015 ) . Lastly , cofilin also synergizes with twinfilin and adenylyl cyclase - associated protein 1 ( Cap1 ) to promote rapid actin depolymerisation and fast filament turnover ( Bertling et al . , 2004 ; Johnston et al . , 2015 ; Normoyle and Brieher , 2012 ) . Cofilin remains bound to dissociated actin monomers and inhibits the nucleotide exchange on the monomer from ADP to the polymerization - competent ATP - bound state ( Hayden et al . , 1993 ) . Hence , aid from accessory proteins is needed in this regard as well , and Cap1 has been shown to promote dissociation of ADP - actin from cofilin and assist the nucleotide exchange ( Chaudhry et al . , 2010 ) . 1 . 2 . 4 Cofilin mediated actin filament de - branching Cofilin is able to sever not only straight actin filaments but also disassemble branched actin networks , in which , reportedly , it might be more efficient at ( Gressin et al . , 2015 ) . Cofilin , similarly to actin cable disassembly , de - branches mainly ‘older’ ADP - bound actin filaments by promoting the dissociation of the actin - related protein 2 / 3 ( Arp2 / 3 ) complex ( Chan et al . , 2009 ) . The Arp2 / 3 complex , which contributes to actin polymerization by nucleating new 70 o Chapter 1 ½ Introduction 29 angled branches at the sides of pre - existing filaments , has been shown to preferentially bind to newly polymerised ATP - actin segments , presumably because cofilin has lower affinity for ATP - actin and , therefore , there will be less competition for actin binding between them ( Chan et al . , 2009 ; Ichetovkin et al . , 2002 ) . Along with cofilin , another cofilin - like molecule termed glia maturation factor ( GMF ) has been recently identified to act in a similar manner to cofilin , albeit being more specific to Arp2 / 3 - induced branches , and contribute to efficient dismantling of actin filament branched networks ( Haynes et al . , 2015 ; Poukkula et al . , 2014 ; Ydenberg et al . , 2013 ) . 1 . 2 . 5 Subcellular localization of ADF / cofilins By severing , dismantling actin branched networks and enhancing the depolymerisation of the ‘older’ parts of filaments , ADF / cofilins increase the availability of filament - ends capable of polymerization and provides a sustainable pool of actin monomers that feeds this polymerization . In doing so , ADF / cofilins promote filament , as well as dendritic nucleation and / or elongation of actin networks , a process generally described as actin treadmilling ( see Figure 1 . 2 ) . This makes ADF / cofilins pivotal regulators of actin - based membrane protrusion and cell locomotion [ reviewed in ( Bravo - Cordero et al . , 2013 ) ] . However , despite the great similarity between the three mammalian ADF / cofilin family members , it is still under debate whether each isoform fulfils unique roles at the cell periphery . A recent study would suggest they do , as along with some redundant roles , depletion of ADF or CFL1 also promoted different cellular responses characteristic for each isoform , especially in cell migration , membrane dynamics , focal adhesion turnover and formation of aberrant actin structures ( Tahtamouni et al . , 2013 ) . In keeping with their roles in remodelling the actin cytoskeleton , ADF and CFL1 are enriched in sub - cellular locale associated with actin - based membrane protrusion and locomotion , such as ruffling membranes at the leading edges of motile cells , lamellipodia and invadopodia . Aside from the sub - cortical actin networks , ADF / cofilins are also found in other areas of the Chapter 1 ½ Introduction 30 cell where high actin turnover is required , like axons and dendritic spines of neuronal cells , as well as the contractile rings formed during the final stages of mitosis ( Bamburg , 1999 ; Gu et al . , 2010 ; Hotulainen et al . , 2009 ; Maciver and Hussey , 2002 ; Svitkina and Borisy , 1999 ; Vartiainen et al . , 2002 ) . CFL2 , on the other hand , as discussed above it has the ability to bind and disassemble ATP - and / or ADP - P i - bound actin subunits in filaments with greater efficiency , as opposed to ADF and CFL1 . Owing to this ability , it has been shown to predominantly localize between the Z - discs in muscle sarcomeres . In sarcomeres the barbed - ends of the actin filaments are capped and actin subunit exchange as well as filament length maintenance is primarily restricted to the pointed ends , which may contain a mixture of ADP - , as well as ATP / ADP - P i - bound actin subunits , and this renders CFL2 more efficient in regulating the length of actin filaments within these muscle building blocks ( Kremneva et al . , 2014 ) . ADF / cofilin family members also have a nuclear localization sequence ( NLS ) , as well as a nuclear export signal ( NES ) ( Munsie et al . , 2012 ) , which gives them the ability to translocate efficiently into and out of the nucleus ( Figure 1 . 1 ) , where there is increasing evidence of their involvement in nuclear function ( see below ) . 1 . 3 Regulation of cofilin activity 1 . 3 . 1 Phosphorylation and dephosphorylation The activity of cofilin is regulated by a plethora of mechanisms mediated by either post - translational modifications or its interaction with other proteins . Which regulatory pathways are employed is mainly defined by its subcellular localization ( see Figure 1 . 2 ) . The most well - known form of regulation of cofilin activity is its phosphorylation on serine - 3 ( Ser3 ) ( Moriyama et al . , 1996 ) , a residue conserved in all mammalian ADF / cofilin family members ( Figure 1 . 1 ) . Ser3 phosphorylation is mediated by LIM kinases ( LIMK1 and LIMK2 ) [ reviewed in ( Scott and Olson , 2007 ) ] and TES kinases ( TESK1 and TESK2 ) , and leads to inhibition of its interaction with actin ( Toshima et al . , Chapter 1 ½ Introduction 31 2001a ; Toshima et al . , 2001b ) . The predominant upstream regulators of LIM kinase activity are the Rho family of small GTPases and its effector kinases . Specifically , activation of LIMKs by phosphorylation can be downstream of either the Rho and Rho - associated protein kinase ( ROCK ) pathway ( Maekawa et al . , 1999 ; Ohashi et al . , 2000 ) , or Rac or Cdc42 signalling mediated by p21 - activated kinase ( PAK ) , or the activity of myotonic dystrophy kinase - related Cdc42 - binding kinase alpha ( MRCK α ) ( Dan et al . , 2001 ; Edwards et al . , 1999 ; Sumi et al . , 2001 ; Yang et al . , 1998 ) . LIMK1 is also downstream of mitogen - activated protein kinase - activated protein kinase 2 ( MAPKAPK - 2 ) activity in endothelial cells ( Kobayashi et al . , 2006 ) . To date , the regulation of TES kinases has not been studied to the same extent , and it is less well - understood . Dephosphorylation of Ser3 reactivates the ability of cofilin to interact with actin . The main protein phosphatases known to activate cofilin are members of the broad specificity family of slingshot phosphatases ( Mizuno , 2013 ; Niwa et al . , 2002 ) and the more cofilin - specific chronophin phosphatase ( Gohla et al . , 2005 ) . Cofilin spatiotemporal regulation by the latter was recently found to be important for cell protrusion and migration ( Delorme - Walker et al . , 2015 ) . Apart from these two classes of enzymes , the more generic serine / threonine phosphatases type 1 and type 2A have also been reported to dephosphorylate cofilin ( Ambach et al . , 2000 ) . In addition , besides activating cofilin , slingshot phosphatases can interact and dephosphorylate , therefore inactivate , LIMKs , thereby adding another level of regulation to cofilin activity ( Soosairajah et al . , 2005 ) . However , the phosphoregulation of cofilin is likely context - dependent and still not completely understood ( see also below in section 1 . 3 . 2 information about the proposed model of general inhibition – local activation of cofilin activity during directional sensing ) . 1 . 3 . 2 PIP 2 binding A second form of cofilin regulation , and one of the first to be identified , involves its interaction with phospholipids . Specifically , it has been shown that cofilin binds to phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PIP 2 ) , which inhibits its interaction with actin ( Yonezawa et al . , 1990 ) ( see Figure 1 . 2 ) . Cofilin - PIP 2 Chapter 1 ½ Introduction 32 binding is mediated by electrostatic interactions between the two molecules , and the residues required for this interaction on the surface of cofilin are located in the same regions that mediate its interaction with actin ( Zhao et al . , 2010 ) ( see Figure 1 . 1 for main residues in cofilin sequence that interact with PIP 2 ) . In addition , cofilin interacts with multiple PIP 2 - headgroups , which results in clustering of PIP 2 molecules upon cofilin binding . Therefore , changes in the density of PIP 2 can effectively regulate cofilin activity at the membrane ( Zhao et al . , 2010 ) . Chemoattractants , such as the epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) , stimulate hydrolysis of PIP 2 triggered by phospholipase C ( PLC ) activity , which results in local release from PIP 2 and , therefore , activation of cofilin in the sub - cortical region ( Figure 1 . 2 ) . In turn , this local cofilin activation induces the formation of membrane protrusions and mediates directional cell motility and chemotaxis ( Mouneimne et al . , 2006 ; Mouneimne et al . , 2004 ; Van Rheenen et al . , 2007 ) . The importance of this carefully orchestrated local activation of cofilin in directional cell migration is exemplified by experiments utilising a photo - sensitive , chemically - modified , inactive form of cofilin , which revealed that its spatial and temporal activation is sufficient for driving localised protrusions and determine cell directionality ( Ghosh et al . , 2004 ) . As mentioned above , cofilin binding to PIP 2 results in a spatial form of cofilin regulation confined to subcortical actin networks , and it appears to be independent from its phosphoregulation through LIMKs and TESKs ( Song et al . , 2006 ) . In fact , it has been proposed that general inhibition of cofilin by LIMK - mediated phosphorylation acts in concert with its local activation through release from phospholipids to permit cellular directional sensing . This is one possible explanation of why LIMK inhibition , which generally leads to higher levels of active ( not phosphorylated at Ser3 ) cofilin , results in loss of cell directionality and impaired invasion in 3D matrices ( Mouneimne et al . , 2006 ; Scott et al . , 2010 ) . However , it is worth noting that this proposed model of general inhibition of cofilin through phosphorylation at Ser3 arguably refers to the pool of free cofilin monomers found throughout the cell at any given time . A separate pool of active – not phosphorylated at Ser3 – cofilin will be Chapter 1 ½ Introduction 33 sequestered on actin filaments and monomers , will be associated with other cofilin - binding proteins , or will be fulfilling functions in the nucleus and other organelles , such as mitochondria , which are yet not fully understood . Hence , despite not being phosphorylated at Ser3 , this cofilin pool is not readily available with regards to actin treadmilling activity . 1 . 3 . 3 Regulation through pH Soon after its identification , cofilin activity , with respect to its effects on actin dynamics , was found to be affected by pH ( Yonezawa et al . , 1985 ) ( Figure 1 . 2 ) . Na + - H + - exchanger NHE1 is a major constituent of intracellular pH regulation and it plays an important role in this regulation ( Frantz et al . , 2008 ) . Firstly , clustering of PIP 2 at the membrane as a result of the interaction with cofilin is sensitive to pH , with higher pH leading to reduced clustering ( Zhao et al . , 2010 ) . In turn , this lowers the density of PIP 2 at the membrane , leading to increased local cofilin release and activation , and pH - dependent membrane protrusions and cell motility in response to growth factor stimulation ( Frantz et al . , 2008 ; Zhao et al . , 2010 ) . Secondly , cofilin actin severing and filament depolymerisation activities per se are sensitive to pH , with cofilin being more potent as pH increases from pH 6 . 5 towards pH 8 ( Yeoh et al . , 2002 ; Yonezawa et al . , 1985 ) . Thirdly , local variations in pH influence the binding of cofilin to cortactin , another cofilin - interacting protein , which has been found to be important in invasive protrusions of breast cancer cells ( Figure 1 . 2 ) . Phosphorylation of cortactin promotes the recruitment of NHE1 at the sites of membrane protrusions . This results in a local increase in pH that stimulates the release of cofilin from its inhibitory complex with cortactin , which activates cofilin and , in turn , promotes pH - dependent cell invasion ( Magalhaes et al . , 2011 ) . 1 . 3 . 4 Other regulatory mechanisms Other types of regulation of ADF / cofilins that have been reported include phosphorylation of CFL1 by v - Src at tyrosine - 68 , a residue which is not present in ADF . This ‘marks’ the protein for ubiquitination and subsequent Chapter 1 ½ Introduction 34 degradation by the ubiquitin / proteasome pathway ( Yoo et al . , 2010 ) . However , it is unclear if this represents a physiological mechanism that is normally carried out by c - Src . Furthermore , oxidation of cysteine residues 139 and 147 of cofilin has been shown to affect its binding to actin and regulate cell motility ( Cameron et al . , 2015 ; Rudzka et al . , 2015 ) ( see Figures 1 . 1 and 1 . 2 ) . The same modification has been reported to influence cofilin activities during apoptosis ( see apoptosis section below ) . In addition , binding of cofilin to actin filaments and their subsequent severing has been shown to be influenced by the tension of the filament , allowing for a mechanosensitive regulation of cofilin activity ( Galkin et al . , 2012 ; Hayakawa et al . , 2011 ; Tojkander et al . , 2015 ) . Cofilin appears to preferentially bind to less tensile actin filaments and mediate their degradation , whereas filaments under tension are protected from cofilin - mediated fragmentation . This mechanosensitive form of regulation has been found to be important for the maturation of contractile stress fibers in cells ( Tojkander et al . , 2015 ) . Coronins 1B and 2A have also been proposed to regulate cofilin activity and its recruitment to F - actin , in a process that involves their interaction with slingshot phosphatase ; in turn , this influences lamellipodial dynamics and focal adhesion turnover , respectively ( Cai et al . , 2007 ; Marshall et al . , 2009 ) . Lastly , a surprising form of regulation of cofilin has been reported in inflammatory lymphocytes . For their efficient migration during inflammation they were shown to rely on an interaction between the pro - inflamatory caspase 11 with Aip1 . This interaction promotes cofilin mediated actin turnover that facilitates appropriate lymphocyte cell migration ( Bailly , 2007 ; Li et al . , 2007 ) . Chapter 1 ½ Introduction 35 1 . 4 New and emerging cellular roles of ADF / cofilins 1 . 4 . 1 Regulation of intracellular contractility ADF / cofilin family members are mostly recognized for their roles in actin treadmilling . However , there is a growing list of other biological functions attributed to them that may be direct , indirect or unrelated to their functions as actin remodelling proteins . Many of these new interesting roles are discussed below . Since its first identification , cofilin was reported to compete with myosins and / or tropomyosins for binding to actin filaments ( Nishida et al . , 1984b ) . Later , it was suggested that the competition between them might be a decisive factor on which isoforms of myosins and / or tropomyosins will be able to bind to actin filaments . This , in turn , distinguishes these filaments according to their molecular composition that allows them to perform distinct roles based on their unique properties ( Bryce et al . , 2003 ) . Nevertheless , a true physiological relevance of the competition among cofilins and myosins / tropomyosins had not been reported until recently . Double depletion of ADF and CFL1 in HeLa cells triggers the accumulation of aberrant F - actin structures , and this has been shown to be mediated by excessive myosin II activity ( Wiggan et al . , 2012 ) ( Figure 1 . 2 ) . The consequences for the cells are critical and include unrestrained membrane blebbing , as well as impaired chromosome segregation and cell division ( Wiggan et al . , 2012 ) . These responses are less prominent when ADF is depleted alone and most severe after co - depletion of both ADF and CFL1 , implying functional redundancy in this cellular context ( Hotulainen et al . , 2005 ; Wiggan et al . , 2012 ) . This suggests that the shared activities of ADF and CFL1 regulate intracellular contractility , which if left unchecked in their absence , leads to excessive force generation and multiple cellular defects . Interestingly , another consequence of dysregulated actin cytoskeleton occurs during neuritogenesis . In differentiating neurons , remodelling of the cortical actin cytoskeleton , mediated by the activities of ADF and CFL1 , facilitates normal neurite differentiation . Depletion of both of these ADF / cofilin family members results in an aberrant actin cytoskeleton with a Chapter 1 ½ Introduction 36 denser , presumably more tensile , actin cortex , that obstructs appropriate microtubule positioning and protrusion , thereby interrupting neuritogenesis ( Flynn et al . , 2012 ) . 1 . 4 . 2 Involvement in apoptosis During chemical induction of apoptosis with staurosporine , active ( not phosphorylated at Ser3 ) cofilin translocates to mitochondria prior to cytochrome c release , and this has been shown to be a crucial step towards the initiation of cell death ( Chua et al . , 2003 ) . Transforming growth factor beta ( TGF - β ) - induced apoptosis in human prostate cancer cells , or apoptosis by ursolic acid treatment in gastric cancer cells , also require mitochondrial translocation of cofilin ( Tang et al . , 2014 ; Zhu et al . , 2006 ) . Cofilin functions during induction of apoptosis are not completely understood yet . Nevertheless , although cofilin targeting to the mitochondria might suffice for the initiation of the process , other actin - binding and cofilin ancillary proteins may be involved as well for enhanced regulation , as it was shown to be the case for Cap1 ( Wang et al . , 2008 ) . Furthermore , cysteine oxidation of active cofilin is essential for its translocation to mitochondria during oxidant - induced apoptosis . Following its translocation , cofilin has been shown to promote cytochrome c release by affecting the permeability of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore ( Klamt et al . , 2009 ) . Interestingly , mitochondrial translocation of oxidised cofilin was found to be necessary for initiation of a necrotic - like cell death in T - cells experiencing oxidative stress , but it did not involve caspase activation ( Wabnitz et al . , 2010 ) . However , cofilin oxidation appears to be dispensable when apoptosis is induced by stimuli other than reactive oxygen species ( Klamt et al . , 2009 ) ( Figure 1 . 2 ) . Mitochondrial translocation of cofilin is also reported to mediated amyloid - β - induced toxicity in neurons , in a process that involves Ran - binding protein 9 ( Woo et al . , 2015 ) . In addition to these roles at early stages of apoptosis , cofilin might also be involved in the regulation of apoptosis - associated cell morphologies during the later stages , such as in apoptosis - associated bleb formation ( Mannherz et al . , 2005 ) . Chapter 1 ½ Introduction 37 1 . 4 . 3 Lipid metabolism Cofilin that is phosphorylated on Ser3 was long considered to be inactive without any biological function . Contrary to this belief , it was later shown that this phosphorylated form of cofilin interacts directly with phospholipase D1 ( PLD1 ) and stimulates its activity ( Han et al . , 2007 ) . PLDs comprise a family of enzymes that catalyse the conversion of phosphatidylcholine ( PtC ) , a phospholipid found in biological membranes , to phosphatidic acid ( PtdOH ) . This triggers downstream signalling events that lead to a diverse array of cellular responses , which include vesicle trafficking , proliferation , mitogenesis , as well as actin cytoskeleton remodeling and migration [ reviewed in ( Exton , 2002 ; Wang et al . , 2006 ) ] . It was generally appreciated that PLD activity is regulated by signalling through Rho and modulated by actin dynamics ( Kusner et al . , 2002 ; Lee et al . , 2001 ; Schmidt et al . , 1999 ) , albeit , the exact molecular mechanism was not known . Rho signalling , however , also controls the activity of LIMKs , which subsequently phosphorylate cofilin , and it was this phosphorylated cofilin on Ser3 that was found to interact with PLD1 and mediate its translocation to the plasma membrane and stimulate its activity ( Han et al . , 2007 ) ( Figure 1 . 2 ) . PLD1 activity is inhibited by constitutively active cofilin ( Ser3 à Ala substitution ) , silencing of cofilin expression , or overexpression of slingshot phosphatase . By contrast , its activity is enhanced by overexpression of cofilin or phospho - Ser3 - mimetic cofilin ( Ser3 à Asp substitution ) . This demonstrates that even in its phosphorylated , presumed inactive form , cofilin is able to fulfil important biological roles ( Han et al . , 2007 ) . 1 . 4 . 4 Mechanical checkpoint Another emerging role for cofilins is the regulation of cell proliferation in response to mechanical cues . It was recently reported that mechanical cues trigger remodelling of the actin cytoskeleton mediated by cofilin . In turn , this modulates the activity of transcriptional co - activators YAP and TAZ ( Aragona et al . , 2013 ) ( Figure 1 . 2 ) . YAP / TAZ activities are crucial for processes like cell proliferation , pre - and post - natal development , and during the onset of various Chapter 1 ½ Introduction 38 diseases , such as cancer [ reviewed in ( Piccolo et al . , 2014 ) ] . Increased mechanical tension triggered by stabilised actin stress fibers that arise soon after cofilin has been depleted , promotes nuclear localization of YAP / TAZ and enhanced transcription and proliferation as a result ( Aragona et al . , 2013 ) . Conversely , remodelling of the cytoskeleton , or release of the built - up mechanical tension by chemical inhibition of contractility , prevents hyper - proliferation . These cytoskeleton - induced responses were found to be independent of the classical Hippo pathway that is mediated by the effector kinases MST1 / 2 and LATS1 / 2 ( Aragona et al . , 2013 ) . Similar crosstalk between the actin cytoskeleton and YAP has been shown to be the main inducer of a subset of uveal and skin melanomas . Uveal melanoma cells that possess mutations in the GNAC oncogene have reduced cofilin activity , which promotes the stabilisation of the actin cytoskeleton and activation of YAP . The resulting YAP activation can be modulated by chemical inhibition of contractility or actin polymerization , and is independent of the classical Hippo pathway in this context as well ( Feng et al . , 2014 ) , matching the observations of the previous study . Actin cytoskeleton remodelling involving the cofilin pathway and modulation of YAP activity has also been found to be a determinant of invasive and metastatic capacity of lung cancer cells ( Dubois et al . , 2016 ) . Taken together , these findings demonstrate that cells can sense the architecture of the microenvironment and respond to mechanical cues by cofilin - mediated remodelling of the actin cytoskeleton , eliciting responses that are vital for cell fate and tissue homeostasis . 1 . 4 . 5 Nuclear actin transport Actin has been found to be involved and regulate many fundamental nuclear processes , such as transcription , reprogramming and gene activation [ reviewed in ( Miyamoto and Gurdon , 2013 ) ] . For this reason , it is reasonable to assume that cells should have evolved very sophisticated mechanisms to tightly control the amount as well as the state ( G - or F - ) of actin in both , the cytoplasm and the nucleus . Actin does not possess a classical NLS signal , so it has to rely on either passive diffusion through the nuclear pore , albeit its size Chapter 1 ½ Introduction 39 of 42kDa puts it in the limit for passive diffusion , or its association with other proteins that have NLS and will mediate its efficient transfer in the nucleus . Cofilin does have a bipartite NLS that permits its efficient shuttling into the nucleus ( Munsie et al . , 2012 ) . It has been shown that one of the mechanisms that contribute to the maintenance of nuclear actin levels is by cofilin - mediated transport that involves the importin - β superfamily member importin - 9 ( Dopie et al . , 2012 ) ( Figure 1 . 2 ) . Importin - 9 interacts with actin in a cofilin - dependent manner , which is likely mediated by the cofilin NLS , and this interaction is critical for the nuclear transport of actin , which in turn regulates transcriptional levels ( Dopie et al . , 2012 ) . 1 . 4 . 6 Transcription As already mentioned , the levels of nuclear actin along with cofilin influence transcriptional activity in cells . However , instead of just regulating nuclear actin levels , CFL1 has been found to be an integral part of the RNA polymerase II transcriptional machinery ( Obrdlik and Percipalle , 2011 ) . In this regard , CFL1 was found to be primarily associated with the transcriptional machinery during transcriptional elongation of gene - coding sequences , whereas it was not enriched to the same extent in untranslated regions or gene promoters . In addition , CFL1 silencing leads to significantly reduced transcriptional activity . Two important observations that might contribute to this response is that CFL1 depletion was found to promote a decrease in association of RNA polymerase II as well as actin with gene - coding regions , which further highlights the important roles of CFL1 as part of the transcriptional apparatus ( Obrdlik and Percipalle , 2011 ) . Interestingly , restoring nuclear actin levels independently of cofilin by tagging it with a strong NLS signal is not able to restore normal levels of transcription ( Dopie et al . , 2012 ) . This provides further evidence that cofilin is not simply regulating transcription through regulation of monomeric actin availability , but it is directly associated with the process of transcription per se . Chapter 1 ½ Introduction 40 1 . 4 . 7 Stress response Since very early on in the cofilin history it was observed that under conditions promoting cellular stress , such as heat shock , osmotic stress or ATP depletion , cofilin accumulated in the nucleus and saturated actin filaments , resulting in the formation of cofilin - actin ‘rods’ ( Nishida et al . , 1987 ; Ohta et al . , 1989 ) . This response is not exclusive to the nucleus , and cytoplasmic cofilin - actin rod formation has also been observed ( Bamburg , 1999 ; Minamide et al . , 2010 ; Munsie et al . , 2012 ) ( Figure 1 . 2 ) . A physiological relevance of this rod formation has been primarily described in neurons , where it has been shown to be involved in the manifestation of neurodegenerative disorders such as Huntington’s and Alzheimer’s , as the cofilin - actin rods were found to be part of the protein inclusions that are associated with the disruption of neurite function ( Bamburg and Bernstein , 2016 ; Minamide et al . , 2010 ; Minamide et al . , 2000 ) . Rod formation is still incompletely understood , however , it has been suggested that formation of rods during cellular stress might limit excessive ATP expenditure associated with actin dynamics , thereby rendering it available to other immediate cellular stress responses ( Bernstein et al . , 2006 ) . 1 . 5 Physiological importance of ADF / cofilins Cofilin is included in the minimum set of proteins essential for actin - based motility in vitro ( Loisel et al . , 1999 ) . It is also required for endocytosis , at least in yeast ( Lappalainen and Drubin , 1997 ; Okreglak and Drubin , 2007 ) . Since a form of cofilin is present in every eukaryote , the important roles they fulfil are evident . In higher eukaryotes they are important for embryonic development , and contribute to maintenance of health and tissue homeostasis . Loss over their tight regulation , however , is linked with various disorders . Chapter 1 ½ Introduction 41 1 . 5 . 1 Consequences of depletion or mutations of ADF / cofilin family members for organism and tissue homeostasis CFL1 deficiency is embryonic lethal in mice due to defects in proliferation , polarization and migration of neural crest cells , which leads to subsequent failure of neural tube closure ( Bellenchi et al . , 2007 ; Grego - Bessa et al . , 2015 ; Gurniak et al . , 2005 ) . ADF is unable to compensate for CFL1 loss in vivo , implying they have non - redundant roles in brain development . Mutations or deletion of ADF does not cause lethality , however , mice develop cornea disease marked by aberrant actin cytoskeleton , epithelial hyperproliferation and eventual blindness ; of note , ADF is the predominant isoform expressed in cornea ( Bellenchi et al . , 2007 ; Ikeda et al . , 2003 ; Verdoni et al . , 2008 ) . Co - depletion of ADF and CFL1 leads to severely perturbed branching morphogenesis during ureteric bud development in mice , accompanied by disrupted cell motility , aberrant cell shape and accumulation of abnormal actin structures ( Kuure et al . , 2010 ) . Depletion of either ADF or CFL1 alone has no discernible effect , indicating that there is some functional redundancy between ADF / cofilin members in some tissue contexts . CFL2 is the only ADF / cofilin mutations of which have been reported in humans , and promote the development of severe myopathies ( Agrawal et al . , 2007 ; Ockeloen et al . , 2012 ; Ong et al . , 2014 ) . Genetic deletion of CFL2 in mice causes lethality eight days after birth , due to severe muscle deficiencies and aberrant actin accumulation within muscle myofibrils , indicating that CFL2 fulfils important roles in muscle development and maintenance ( Agrawal et al . , 2012 ) . A role of CFL2 in actin monomer exchange in sarcomeres has also been proposed ( Gurniak et al . , 2014 ) . Likewise , cofilin is equally important for the viability of lower eukaryotes . It is an essential gene for yeast ( Moon et al . , 1993 ) , as well as Dictyostelium ( Aizawa et al . , 1995 ) , and its depletion or mutations cause lethality in flies , worms and frogs ( Abe et al . , 1996 ; Gunsalus et al . , 1995 ; Mckim et al . , 1994 ) . Chapter 1 ½ Introduction 42 1 . 5 . 2 Implications of the cofilin activities in other pathologies Considering the roles of ADF / cofilins in actin dynamics and cell motility , it is unsurprising to associate their functions with the highly motile cancer cells that are able to invade healthy tissue , disseminate and colonize distant organs , a hallmark capability of tumour cells ( Hanahan and Weinberg , 2011 ) . Indeed , during the last decade the cofilin pathway has been associated with these hallmark capabilities mainly from studies in breast cancer , although it has also been found to be dysregulated in a variety of other tumours ( Wang et al . , 2007 ; Wang et al . , 2004 ; Wang et al . , 2011 ) . Protein expression profiling in metastatic tumour cells directly linked cofilin and the cofilin pathway to the invasive and metastasic potential of breast cancer cells ( Mouneimne et al . , 2006 ) . Moreover , human glioblastoma tumour cells become highly motile after cofilin overexpression in a concentration dependent manner ( Yap et al . , 2005 ) . Cofilin is necessary for invadopodia formation ( Yamaguchi et al . , 2005 ) , as well as for directional sensing and chemotaxis of cancer cells ( Mouneimne et al . , 2006 ; Mouneimne et al . , 2004 ; Sidani et al . , 2007 ) , an essential trait for tumour cell dissemination and metastasis ( Roussos et al . , 2011 ) . In fact , the expression patterns of cofilin regulatory proteins are used to predict the outcome of the pathway with regards to cell locomotion . This set of validated markers is now utilised in a clinically relevant way in order to assist with tumour prognosis , as well as help with patient stratification and treatment choices ( Karagiannis et al . , 2016 ) . Aside from its involvement in cancer progression , cofilin may also be involved in the progression of neurodegenerative disorders , owing to their role in formation of cofilin - actin rods in response to stimuli , which affect normal neuronal function ( Bamburg and Bernstein , 2016 ; Bamburg et al . , 2010 ) ( see also section 1 . 4 . 7 above for more details ) . Given that the cofilin - actin rod formation is a rapid response when cells are stressed in vitro , it has been suggested that rod formation could serve as a potential candidate for targeted treatment and prevention of neuronal degenerative disorders ( Bamburg et al . , 2010 ) . Chapter 1 ½ Introduction 43 1 . 6 Aims As outlined above , ADF / cofilins are required for normal embryonic and post - natal development and loss of their tight regulation has severe consequences on tissue homeostasis and organism health . Their activities are also crucial for the onset of various pathological conditions , particularly in aspects of cancer biology , such as invasion and metastasis , as well as in neurodegenerative disorders . Actin dynamics are arguably the most essential feature of cell locomotion , and ADF / cofilins are mostly recognised and essential for regulating this process . However , the list of cellular processes they are involved in is rapidly expanding , and there is increasing evidence suggesting that these small proteins are involved in the regulation of more than just actin treadmilling during cell motility . Despite a huge literature on the roles of ADF / cofilins in actin treadmilling at the leading edge during cell migration in vitro and in cancer cell behavior during invasion , very little is known about their collective roles in tissue and cellular homeostasis . The majority of the literature focuses on the study of CFL1 , since it is the most ubiquitously expressed isoform , and the only essential for embryonic development in mice ( Gurniak et al . , 2005 ) . Hence , in adult tissues where more than one isoform is expressed , whether ADF / cofilin family members have shared , owing to their great similarity , or unique roles remains elusive . In vitro studies so far suggest that double depletion of ADF and CFL1 have significantly greater impact on cellular function , indicating that their roles might be redundant in many aspects of cell biology ( Hotulainen et al . , 2005 ; Wiggan et al . , 2012 ) . However , two other studies reported some isoform - specific roles with regards to the migratory behaviour of metastatic rat mammary adenocarcinoma and human colon cancer cells , respectively ( Estornes et al . , 2007 ; Tahtamouni et al . , 2013 ) . Considering all the above , and the significance of this family in health and disease , it is paramount to investigate the extent of overlapping and / or unique functions of the family members in adult tissue homeostasis . In this study we address whether the maintenance of adult epithelial tissue Chapter 1 ½ Introduction 44 homeostasis is dependent on unique or shared activities of ADF and CFL1 , and if so , how suppressing their activity triggers biological consequences . Furthermore , by maintaining cultures of cells derived from this tissue in vitro , we seek to understand which proteins and pathways are affected following disruption of the normal expression of ADF and / or CFL1 , and how they contribute to the manifestation of these biological consequences . In addition , by generating cancer cell lines from the same tissue , we ask whether the same biological consequences observed in normal tissue are conserved in cancer . This sustainable system also lets us explore in greater detail the subcellular pathways regulated by ADF / cofilins , and allows us to perform rescue experiments with re - introduction of all mammalian members of the family individually , which directly addresses their abilities to compensate for each other’s functions when they are expressed in comparable levels . Finally , given the new and emerging roles assigned to ADF / cofilins , we set out to investigate for the first time for novel ADF / cofilin interacting proteins by utilising proteomic approaches . This will provide us with new insights into the molecular and cellular functions of this small , yet essential , family of actin interacting proteins . 1 . 6 . 1 The epidermis as a model for studying tissue homeostasis The skin epidermis is the tissue representing the outermost barrier of the body of every animal and protects against infections , environmental stresses , irradiation and water loss among its other functions . The interfollicular epidermis resides among the hair follicles and is composed by stratified epithelial cells organised in layers , which rest on the basement membrane that separates them from dermis , the region located underneath ( Figure 1 . 4 ) . The cells found in the different layers share distinct characteristics and expression patterns . In mice and humans these layers are the basal , spinous , granular and stratum corneum . The stem cells responsible for the self - renewal capacity of the epidermis are located in the basal layer . Upon stochastic symmetrical or asymmetrical cell divisions stem cells can give rise to two new stem cells , or two cells that will start differentiating and begin travelling Chapter 1 ½ Introduction 45 towards the outer layers of the epidermis before they shed off , or one stem cell and one differentiating cell ( Figure 1 . 4 ) , with predetermined probability of 10 : 10 : 80 ( Blanpain and Fuchs , 2009 ; Mascre et al . , 2012 ; Solanas and Benitah , 2013 ) . Because of this well - defined balance of epidermal cell regeneration and loss , this tissue represents an exemplary model for studying homeostasis . Even small imbalances in this fine - tuned process are easy to detect by examining the architecture of the tissue , as well as testing for an array of cell differentiation markers . Figure 1 . 4 . Schematic representation of interfollicular epidermis architecture . Another advantage of using the epidermis as a model for studying the biological function of a protein of interest is that tumours and malignant epidermal cells ( keratinocytes ) can be generated by following a well - defined chemical carcinogenesis protocol . This permits the study of the protein of interest in both settings , in normal cells and cancerous tissue , as well as circumvents the issues with the finite lifespan of normal cells when cultured in vitro and offers more flexibility in experimental design . The widely used protocol for transforming normal keratinocytes to malignant cells forming squamous cell carcinomas ( SCC ) involves treatment Chapter 1 ½ Introduction 46 of the animals with the carcinogen 7 , 12 - dimethylbenz [ a ] anthracene ( DMBA ) and the tumour promoter 2 - O - Tetradecanoylphorbol - 13 - acetate ( TPA ) ( McLean et al . , 2001 ; Quintanilla et al . , 1986 ) . In the majority of the cases , following this treatment the transformation driving mutations are located in the Ras oncogene with the most common one being a substitution of the glutamine in position 61 to a leucine ( Nassar et al . , 2015 ) . The initial phases of the treatment include the formation of benign papillomas , while some of them will progress and transform to aggressive SCC tumours in the later stages . The SCC tumours frequently harbour secondary mutations in separate loci , with the ones affecting the activity of the tumour suppressor p53 being highly favoured ( Nassar et al . , 2015 ) . The mutational landscape and behaviour of these chemically induced tumours in mice is very closely associated with human SCC tumours , making this model and the knowledge acquired from it relevant to human disease ( Nassar et al . , 2015 ) ( see also methods for more information on the cancer cell line generation ) . Chapter 2 ½ Materials and methods 47 Chapter 2 Materials and methods Chapter 2 ½ Materials and methods 48 2 . 1 Animal models and cell culture 2 . 1 . 1 Transgenic mice and 4 - OHT administration The collective roles of ADF and CFL1 in vivo were studied in the mouse epidermis . ADF was genetically deleted from the animals ( ADF - / - ) , whereas the second intron of CFL1 was flanked by lox - P sites ( CFL1 fl / fl ) in order to generate conditional knock - out mice as previously described ( Bellenchi et al . , 2007 ; Gurniak et al . , 2005 ) . In order to selectively excise the floxed - CFL1 alleles in the mouse epidermis Cre - recombinase fused with estrogen receptor ( ER ) was expressed in mice under the control of keratin 14 ( K14 ) promoter ( K14CreER T2 ) ( Li et al . , 2000 ) . To achieve a double knockout of ADF and CFL1 in the tissue , these mice were inbred with ADF - / - CFL1 fl / fl mice and resulted in offspring with ablated ADF , floxed CFL1 and carrying the recombinase - fusion ( K14CreER T2 / ADF - / - / CFL1 fl / fl ) . For the excision of floxed - CFL1 , 56 - day old mice were subjected to daily subcutaneous injections of 100µg 4 - hydroxytamoxifen ( 4 - OHT ) ( Sigma - Aldrich ) contained in 100µl sunflower oil for four days ( Indra et al . , 1999 ) ( Figure 2 . 1 ) . Mice were culled on the fifth day , unless otherwise indicated , and tissue or cells collected . All mice used were crossed onto and maintained on the FVB genetic background . All animal experiments were carried out in accordance with the UK Coordinating Committee on Cancer Research guidelines by approved protocol ( Home Office Project License no . 60 / 4248 ) . 2 . 1 . 2 Isolation of primary keratinocytes and cell culture conditions Primary keratinocytes were isolated from mouse tail skin . Tails were taken from mice , the skin was cut lengthwise and removed , and subsequently incubated for 2 - 3h in 4mg / ml dispase ( Gibco ) in PBS with rotation at 37°C . The epidermis was then separated from dermis and cut into small pieces . Following incubation for 10min at 37 o C in 0 . 025 % trypsin in PBS - EDTA ( Invitrogen ) , cells were dissociated by brief vortex pulses . Trypsin was neutralised with Dulbecco ' s modified Eagle’s medium ( DMEM ) ( Invitrogen ) supplemented with 20 % foetal bovine serum ( FBS ) ( Invitrogen ) and cells were Chapter 2 ½ Materials and methods 49 passed through a 70µm cell strainer ( Becton Dickinson ) . The cells were then pelleted by centrifugation at 1100rpm for 5min , washed with PBS and re - pelleted before either being plated on collagen I - coated plates in keratinocyte basal medium ( KBM ) supplemented with SingleQuotes kit ( Clonetics ) , or lysed as described . All cell cultures were maintained in 37 o C , 5 % CO 2 . Figure 2 . 1 . Graphical representation of mouse line - crossings held to achieve skin - specific deletion of both ADF and CFL1 . Control mice are also shown . 2 . 1 . 3 Generation of SCC cell lines Squamous Cell Carcinoma ( SCC ) cell lines were generated as summarized in Figure 2 . 2 , using a two - stage carcinogenesis protocol for H - Ras - driven chemically induced tumours with DMBA and TPA as previously described ( McLean et al . , 2001 ) . SCC tumours were introduced to mice nullizygous for ADF . Once developed , tumours were removed , cut into small pieces and incubated with 0 . 25 % trypsin in PBS - EDTA ( Invitrogen ) for 10min at room temperature ( RT ) . Trypsin was then neutralized with addition of DMEM + 10 % FBS ( Invitrogen ) and cells were let to grow in the presence of 100 Units penicillin and 100µg streptomycin per ml ( Sigma - Aldrich ) in 37 o C , 5 % CO 2 incubators with frequent changes of the cell culture media . Antibiotics were removed after five passages and the ADF - null SCC cells were considered a cell line once reached a stable growing capacity . Skin specific deletion of ADF and CFL1 : K14 - Cre - ER T2 ( 4 - OHT ) Adf - / - Cfl1 fl / fl x K14 - Cre - ER T2 Adf - / - Cfl1 fl / fl ( skin ) Adf - / - Cfl1 - / - ( 4 - OHT ) K14 - Cre - ER T2 Adf + / + Cfl1 + / + Adf + / + Cfl1 + / + Control Chapter 2 ½ Materials and methods 50 Figure 2 . 2 . Graphical representation of the strategy employed to generate stable Squamous Cell Carcinoma cell lines ( SCCs ) . 2 . 2 RNA interference and inhibitor treatments 2 . 2 . 1 RNA interference and protein co - depletions Transcript silencing performed by small interfering RNA ( siRNA ) reverse transfections using the lipofectamine RNAiMAX reagent ( Life Technologies ) according to the company’s standard protocol . Non - targeting control and siRNAs targeting the CFL1 transcript ( Dharmacon ) were used at a final concentration of 32nM . CFL1 knock down experiments were carried out for 48h unless otherwise indicated . siRNAs targeting actin - related protein 3 ( Arp3 ) , diaphanous - related formin - 1 ( Diap1 ; also known as mDia1 ) , diaphanous - related formin - 3 ( Diap3 ; also known as mDia2 ) , serum response factor ( SRF ) , nesprin - 2 giant ( nesprin - 2G ; also known as Syne - 2 ) , SUN domain - containing protein 1 ( Sun1 ) and SUN domain - containing protein 2 ( Sun2 ) ( all from Dharmacon ) were used at final concentration 64nM . For all protein co - depletion experiments cells were transfected by the same reverse transfection protocol used above with siRNAs targeting the proteins to be depleted alongside CFL1 at day 1 . 24h later the cell culture media was refreshed and cells were treated by forward transfections using RNAiMAX ( Life Technologies ) according to the company’s standard protocol , for further 48h with a mixture of siRNAs targeting CFL1 ( 32nM ) and the co - depleted DMBA / TPA injections Papilloma formation Squamous Cell Carcinoma transformation Dissection / trypsinization and release of cancer cells ADF - null Squamous Cell Carcinoma cell line ( Adf - / - Cfl1 + / + ) Generation of Ras - driven ADF - null Squamous Cell Carcinoma cell lines : Chapter 2 ½ Materials and methods 51 protein ( 64nM ) . Control cells were treated either with non - targeting siRNAs alone or alongside siRNAs for the co - depleted proteins . 2 . 2 . 2 Inhibitor treatments Prior to treatment with the actin / myosin modulating inhibitors cells were transfected with CFL1 or non - targeting control siRNAs . 30h post - transfection the cell culture media was changed with fresh media containing the inhibitors in their final concentrations . Cells were incubated with the inhibitor mixes overnight and then fixed . Cytochalasin D ( Sigma - Aldrich ) was used at a final concentration of 0 . 5µM , latrunculin A ( Tocris Bioscience ) at 0 . 4µM , blebbistatin ( Sigma - Aldrich ) at 25µM , Y27632 ( Sigma - Aldrich ) at 20µM , CK869 ( Tocris Bioscience ) at 5µM , 10µM and 50µM , and SMIFH2 ( Tocris Bioscience ) at 5µM , 15µM and 30µM , respectively . Treatments with staurosporine ( STS ) ( Sigma - Aldrich ) were carried out overnight with final concentration of STS at 1µM . Lastly , actinomycin D ( Sigma - Aldrich ) treatments were performed over 4h with 1µg / ml . All inhibitors were dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide ( DMSO ) ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , which was also used for the control treatments . 2 . 3 Cloning and cell infections RNA was extracted from wild - type SCC cells using the RNeasy kit ( Qiagen ) according to the manufacturer’s protocol . RNA was converted to cDNA using the SuperScript first - strand cDNA synthesis kit with random hexamer primers ( Invitrogen ) and the company’s protocol . The coding sequences for ADF , CFL1 and CFL2 were amplified with standard PCR using the PfuUltra Hotstart PCR master mix ( Agilent Technologies ) according to the manufacturer’s protocol , and with the primers were designed with EcoRI and SalI overhangs ( see Table 1 ) . Subsequently , the amplified products were run on a 1 % agarose gel , the corresponding gel bands were excised and the DNA isolated with the QIAquick gel extraction kit ( Qiagen ) , and cloned into a pre - digested with EcoRI / SalI ( New England Biolabs ) pWZL - Hygro retroviral vector with a standard DNA Chapter 2 ½ Materials and methods 52 ligation kit protocol ( Roche ) . The plasmids were then propagated following transformation with a standard heat - shock protocol of One Shot TOP10 chemically competent bacteria ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) and selection with appropriate antibiotic , and isolated with the plasmid Maxi kit ( Qiagen ) . In order to produce retroviruses carrying the desired expression sequences , pEco packaging cells contained in 60mm dishes were transfected with 5 - 6µgr pWZL plasmids using Lipofectamine 2000 ( Invitrogen ) and following the manufacturer’s protocol . Five days post - transfection the supernatant containing the produced retroviruses was collected , filtered through an 0 . 45µm filter ( Millipore ) and implemented with 10 % FBS . After addition of 1 : 1000 polybrene ( Millipore ) , SCC cells were infected with the retrovirus - containing supernatant . Successfully infected cells were selected using 1 : 100 Hygromycin ( Calbiochem ) 3 - 4 days post - infection and assessed for expression levels with western blot . Table 1 . Cloning primers for mouse wild - type ADF , CFL1 and CFL2 with EcoRI / SalI overhangs CFL1 forward 5’ - GAATTC - ATGGCCTCTGGTGTGGCTG - 3’ reverse 5’ - GTCGAC - TCACAAAGGCTTGCCCTCC - 3’ ADF forward 5’ - GAATTC - ATGGCCTCAGGAGTTCAGGTTGC - 3’ reverse 5’ - GTCGAC - CTACACAGGGGATCCTTCAAAGG - 3’ CFL2 forward 5’ - GAATTC - ATGGCATCTGGAGTTACAGTG - 3’ reverse 5’ - GTCGAC - TTATAGTGGCTTTCCTTCAAG - 3’ Chapter 2 ½ Materials and methods 53 2 . 4 Immunohistochemistry , immunocytochemistry and immunofluorescence 2 . 4 . 1 Immunohistochemistry , BrdU labelling and quantification Dorsal skin samples were harvested from mice and fixed overnight at RT in neutral - buffered formaldehyde 10 % vol / vol ( Surgipath Europe ) . Subsequently they were embedded in paraffin and cut into five micron sections for hematoxylin and eosin ( H & E ) staining or immunohistochemistry . For the latter , sections were deparaffinised with two 5min xylene ( Fisher ) washes , rehydrated with 5min incubations in decreasing ethanol concentrations ( 100 % , 100 % , 80 % and 50 % ) and rinsed with water before epitope unmasking performed with 10mM pre - heated sodium citrate ( pH 6 . 0 ) ( Fisher ) and 10min boiling in a pressure cooker in a microwave in full power . Sections were subsequently rinsed in water and washed 2 times for 5min in 0 . 0025 % Tween20 ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) in TBS . Following that , the sections were stained using the Dako Envision kit ( Dako , Agilent Technologies ) appropriate to the species of primary antibody . Briefly , sections were blocked for 15min at RT with peroxidase block buffer , rinsed with water , blocked with protein block buffer for 2h at RT , and incubated overnight at 4°C with primary antibody diluted in antibody dilutent buffer . The following day , the primary antibody was washed 5 times with 0 . 0025 % Tween20 in TBS , prior to 1h RT incubation with the Dako envision labelled polymer . Sections were then washed 5 times with TBS , treated with DAB / DAB chromogen for 10min at RT , rinsed with water , and counterstained for 2min in haematoxylin ( Pioneer Research Chemicals ) , before rinsed again with tap water and treated for 2min at RT with Scott’s tap water solution prepared with 0 . 35 % sodium bicarbonate ( Sigma - Aldrich ) and 2 % magnesium sulphate ( Sigma - Aldrich ) in distilled water . Finally , sections were rinsed with tap water , dehydrated with 5min incubations in increasing ethanol concentrations ( 50 % , 80 % 100 % and 100 % ) , cleaned with two 5min incubations in xylene and mounted with DPX mounting medium ( Fisher ) . For BrdU labelling mice were subjected to a single intraperitoneal Chapter 2 ½ Materials and methods 54 injection of 0 . 2ml / 20g of body weight 5 - bromo - 2 ' - deoxyuridine ( BrdU ) ( GE Healthcare ) 2h prior to harvesting . Skin sections from labelled mice were stained with anti - BrdU antibody ( 1 : 1500 , CST ) . Quantification of BrdU positive nuclei from the mouse epidermis was performed with ImmunoRatio , a web - based application for image analysis ( Tuominen et al . , 2010 ) . 2 . 4 . 2 Immunofluorescent immunohistochemistry and visualization of actin fibers in the skin In order to visualize actin fibers in the skin dorsal skin samples were harvested and fixed for 30min at 37 o C in 4 % paraformaldehyde solution ( Fisher ) . Subsequently , they were cooled down to RT and incubated overnight at 4 o C before being embedded in paraffin . The staining protocol was the same as in normal immunohistochemistry for the first day ( see above ) . Following overnight incubation with primary antibody , the sections were washed 5 times with 0 . 0025 % Tween20 in TBS , prior to 1h RT incubation with fluorescent secondary antibodies ( 488 Alexa Fluor , Invitrogen ) diluted in antibody dilutent ( Dako ) in the dark . The secondary antibody was washed 5 times with TBS and the sections were mounted on coverslips with Vectashield mounting medium containing DAPI ( Vector Laboratories ) . The antibodies used and their dilutions were the following : anti - β - actin ( 1 : 200 , CST ) , anti - lamin A / C ( 1 : 200 , CST ) , anti - β - catenin ( 1 : 200 , BD Biosciences ) , anti γ H2AX ( 1 : 400 , CST ) and anti - RelB ( 1 : 100 , CST ) . Visualization of the immunofluorescenlty labelled sections was performed with an Olympus FV1000 confocal microscope . 2 . 4 . 3 Immunofluorescent immunocytochemistry Primary tail keratinocytes or SCC cells were plated on 19mm glass coverslips ( VWR Collection ) and following any treatments they were fixed and permeabilized for 10min at RT in freshly made fixation solution prepared with 3 . 7 % formaldehyde ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) , 0 . 2 % Triton X - 100 ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , 1mM MgCl 2 ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , 100mM PIPES ( Sigma - Aldrich ) and 10mM EGTA ( Sigma - Aldrich ) . Cells were then washed twice for 5min at RT with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 in TBS ( wash buffer ) and blocked for 1h at RT with 2 % Chapter 2 ½ Materials and methods 55 bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) ( Calbiochem ) in wash buffer ( block buffer ) . Subsequently , they were incubated overnight at 4 o C with primary antibodies in block buffer and the following day rinsed with wash buffer and incubated with secondary fluorescent antibodies ( 488 Alexa Fluors , Invitrogen ) for 1h at RT in the dark . Lastly , the primary antibodies were washed twice for 5min with wash buffer at RT and the coverslips were mounted with Vectashield mounting medium containing DAPI ( Vector Laboratories ) . The only deviation from this protocol was for the visualization of α - actinin and β - actin , where instead of formaldehyde , cells were fixed for 5min with iced - cold methanol ( Fisher ) at - 20 o C . The rest of the protocol was the same as described . The following antibodies and dilutions were used in the immunofluorescence experiments : anti - lamin A / C ( 1 : 200 ) , anti - myosin - IIA ( 1 : 50 ) , anti - phosphorylated myosin light chain 2 ( Ser19 ) ( pMLC2 ) ( 1 : 200 ) , anti - phosphorylated paxillin ( 1 : 50 ) , anti - α - actinin ( 1 : 50 ) , anti - β - actin ( 1 : 200 ) , anti - γ H2AX ( 1 : 400 ) , anti - fibrillarin ( 1 : 400 ) ( all from CST ) , anti - vinculin ( 1 : 100 , Abcam ) , anti - HP1 α ( 1 : 100 , Novus Biologicals ) , anti - c - Myc ( N - 262 ) and anti - SRF ( G - 20 ) ( both 1 : 100 , Santa Cruz ) . F - actin was visualized using either TRITC - phalloidin ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , or rhodamine phalloidin ( Life Technologies ) along with the secondary antibody mix . 2 . 4 . 4 Nuclear actin visualization In order to visualize nuclear actin filaments with phalloidin a recently described protocol was used with minor modifications ( Baarlink et al . , 2013 ) . Briefly , cells were washed with TBS and subjected to an initial fixation for 1min at RT with 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 ( Sigma - Aldrich ) and 0 . 25 % glutaraldehyde ( Fisher ) added to cytoskeleton buffer containing 10mM MES pH 6 . 1 , 150mM NaCl , 5mM EGTA , 5mM glucose and 5mM MgCl 2 ( all from Sigma - Aldrich ) . Next , a second round of fixation followed for 15min at RT with cytoskeleton buffer implemented with 2 % glutaraldehyde . Prior to phalloidin labelling , autofluorescence was quenched by treatment with 1mg / ml freshly prepared sodium borohydride ( Sigma - Aldrich ) in TBS three times for 1min each at RT . Chapter 2 ½ Materials and methods 56 Lastly , cells were rinsed three times with TBS , blocked and labelled with phalloidin as previously described . 2 . 5 Fluorescence microscopy and image analysis All immunofluorescent experiments were visualized using an Olympus FV1000 confocal microscope equipped with an UPLANSAPO 60X / 1 . 35 oil immersion objective , and the Olympus FluoView FV1000 software . The super - resolution imaging with structure illumination microscopy was performed with a Nikon N - SIM super - resolution microscope equipped with 100x oil objective lens ( N . A . 1 . 49 ) . Image analysis was performed in ImageJ using the original microscope file containing all the metadata . In order to quantify fluorescence , the laser and acquisition settings were kept constant during imaging of each experiment , ensuring that no pixel saturation was reached . Quantification of total pixel intensity per cell was calculated after manual tracing of independent cells and measuring their integrated density followed by background subtraction . The levels of background fluorescence were obtained by calculating the average integrated density of three or more individual fields surrounding the regions of interest in every image . Quantification of the number of cellular structures , measuring their area or defining their shape was performed using the analyse particles plugin following image thresholding . For quantification of the nuclear versus cytoplasmic localization of transcription factors the total cell area was defined by thresholding the F - actin channel in ImageJ . The analyse particles plugin was utilised in order to create masks of the cells and save them in the ROI manager table , which were subsequently overlaid in the original file of the channel corresponding to transcription factor staining . This was then used to quantify the integrated density representing the total cellular staining with transcription factors . The same process was followed for nuclear transcription factor staining quantification . The value corresponding to the levels of cytoplasmic staining was obtained after subtraction of the nuclear staining from the total cell levels . Chapter 2 ½ Materials and methods 57 2 . 6 Gene expression assays 2 . 6 . 1 Gene expression profiling Gene expression profiling of wild - type and ADF and CFL1 null mouse tail keratinocytes was performed using DNA microarray technology . RNA was extracted from tail keratinocytes of three control and three experimental mice treated for four days with 4 - OHT using the RNeasy kit ( Qiagen ) and following the manufacturer’s protocol . The samples were hybridized to a Mouse MOE430 2 . 0 Affymetrix chip . The analysis was carried out at the microarray service facility at the Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute . Expression calls were generated as previously described ( Hubbell et al . , 2002 ; Liu et al . , 2002 ) . Subsequent bioinformatics analysis was performed with assistance from Dr Adam Byron ( Edinburgh Cancer Research UK Centre ) . Briefly , in order to detect the significantly differentially expressed transcripts , a rank products analysis with 100 permutations was performed using RankProdIt ( Laing and Smith , 2010 ) , with proportion of false positives ( pfp ) set to < 0 . 05 . Only transcripts detected in at least three samples were included for further analysis . 2 . 6 . 2 Quantitative PCR RNA was extracted from cells using the RNeasy kit ( Qiagen ) and converted to cDNA using the SuperScript first - strand cDNA synthesis kit with random hexamer primers ( Invitrogen ) according to the manufacturers’ standard protocols . Quantitative PCR reactions were prepared with the SensiFAST Hi - ROX kit ( Bioline ) according to the company’s protocol , using 400nM final primer concentration and 5 - 200ng cDNA per 20µl reaction . The reactions were run on a StepOnePlus Real Time PCR system ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) . Results were analyzed using the ΔΔ Ct method using GAPDH as endogenous control ( Livak and Schmittgen , 2001 ) , except in the cases where the relative expression levels of ADF , CFL1 and CFL2 , and that of myosins IIA , IIB and IIC were calculated . To achieve a meaningful relative comparison among these protein family members , the primer amplification efficiency of each set of Chapter 2 ½ Materials and methods 58 primers was corrected and a single threshold was calculated for all primer sets . In order to determine the amplification efficiency of each primer set , the linear regression slope of a dilution row was calculated based on the equation ( Pfaffl , 2001 ) : E ( efficiency ) = 10 ( - 1 / slope ) All primers were designed in the Universal ProbeLibrary Assay Design Center ( Roche ) and the sequences can be found in Table 2 . Table 2 . List of primers used for quantitative PCR experiments ( mouse species ) T arget Primer Sequence 5’ à 3’ Nesprin - 2G forward TAGACGCGGACATGCAAC reverse CTCAATCTCTGTCAGCATAGCC mDia1 forward GGTACCCGGGACAAGAAGA reverse CTCATGCTGGTAAATCTCTCCA mDia2 forward CCTAAAATTGCTCAGAACCTTTCA reverse AATATCATCGTCCTGATTTTCTCA Acta2 forward CTCTCTTCCAGCCATCTTTCAT reverse TATAGGTGGTTTCGTGGATGC β - actin forward GCCAACCGTGAAAAGATGAC reverse GAGGCATACAGGGACAGCAC Vinculin forward AGGAGACTTGCGAAGACAGG reverse GCCGTCGCCACTTGTTTA MYL9 forward GATAAGGAGGACCTGCACGA reverse GCCCTCCAGATACTCGTCTG Tpm1 forward GTCATCATCGAGAGCGACCT reverse TCTTCAAGCTCGGCACATTT Chapter 2 ½ Materials and methods 59 Flna forward GCAAGTGCACAGTCACAGGT reverse TTGCCTGCTGCTTTTGTGT Talin - 1 forward AAGGCTCTCTGTGGCTTCAC reverse TGGGGTCAGAGACACCAAC Tpm2 forward AAAACCATTGATGATCTGGAAGA reverse TGATGTCATTGAGTGCGTTG Zyxin forward AAGAGAAGCAGCACCCACA reverse CTCTACCTCCTTCAGGGTCAAG Gelsolin forward CCCCAAAGTCGGGTGTCT reverse AACTTCTCCACACGCCAGAT Cald1 forward CAGCTGCGGACATGCTTAG reverse CGTCATCATCATTTCTCTGATAGG ADF forward GCTTTGAGACCAAGGAGTCCA reverse TCAGAGGTGCTTGTTCTGGTG CFL1 forward TCTGTCTCCCTTTCGTTTCC reverse CATTGAACACCTTGATGACACC CFL2 forward ACGTACGAAACAAAAGAGTCTAAGAA reverse GCATAAATCATCTTGCTTTTTAACG GAPDH forward ATGGTGAAGGTCGGTGTGA reverse AATCTCCACTTTGCCACTGC Myosin IIA forward GTCCATGCCGGACAACAC reverse GGTGAAGTCGGTCACATTGAT Myosin IIB forward GGAGGACACCCTAGACACCA reverse CCACTTCCTGCTCACGTTTT Myosin IIC forward GCTGGGGAGCAGCTAAAAG reverse CAGGAAGCGATAATGGGAAC Sun2 forward AGATCGTCCAGGCCTCTCA reverse GTCCCAGCTCCTTCACAGAG Chapter 2 ½ Materials and methods 60 Involucrin forward AGCAGCTGCAGGTGAAAAAG reverse TCTCCAGATGCAGTTCCTGTT Dsc1 forward GGGAGCACCTTCTCTAAGCA reverse TTTTGACAGGCATCACAAAATAA Grhl3 forward AAGGAAGATGTCGAATGAACTTG reverse TCGTCCTCATTACTGTAGGGAAA S100a3 forward GGGACACCCAGTTGGTAGG reverse GCACACGATGGCAGCTACT Notch3 forward AGCTGGGTCCTGAGGTGAT reverse AGACAGAGCCGGTTGTCAAT CTGF forward CTGCAGACTGGAGAAGCAGA reverse GCTTGGCGATTTTAGGTGTC CYR61 forward TGACCTCCTCGGACTCGAT reverse GGTTCGGTGCCAAAGACA ANKRD1 forward CGGACCTCAAGGTCAAGAAC reverse TGAGGCTGTCGAATATTGCTT 47S _ ( 1 ) forward TACCCCTCGGTCCATCTGTT reverse ATTTCGGGTGTGAGCGAACT 47S _ ( 2 ) forward TTACTGGCTTGGGTCTGTCG reverse AGGTGTGACAACGACACCTC Chapter 2 ½ Materials and methods 61 2 . 7 Cell membrane dynamics and kymograph analysis Kymograph and membrane analysis were performed as previously described ( Benjamin et al . , 2010 ) . In brief , images of cells treated for 48h with siRNAs were taken every 30sec over 30min using a Scan ^ R high content screening station equipped with a 20X phase objective ( Olympus ) . Kymograph profile graphs were created using normalized pixel intensities from 1 - pixel wide kymographs generated in ImageJ . The length of membrane protrusions was calculated based on the distance difference in pixels between the peaks and their neighbouring valleys measured from the bottom of the kymograph . Protrusion persistence , which corresponds to the time required for a full membrane extension and retraction , was calculated using the kymographs and based on the width of each peak measured in its widest point between two neighbouring valleys . Only complete membrane protrusions were considered in the quantifications . All measurements were performed in ImageJ . 2 . 8 Actin polymerization assays 2 . 8 . 1 Free barbed – ends assay The active polymerization of free actin barbed - ends was assessed and quantified by an adaptation of the method previously described ( Worth et al . , 2010 ) . Following 48h of siRNA treatment of cells plated on coverslips , the culture media was changed and the cells were permeabilized using 0 . 125mg / ml saponin ( Sigma - Aldrich ) in the presence of 9µg biotin - conjugated G - actin ( Cytoskeleton ) prepared in the complete DMEM media . Subsequently , cells were incubated for 2min at 37 o C and fixed with the standard formaldehyde fixation protocol described above . Fluorescent detection of biotinylated actin monomers that were incorporated into filaments was achieved by incubating the cells for 10min at RT with FITC - streptavidin ( 20µg / ml , Vector ) . F - actin was labelled with TRITC - phalloidin ( Sigma - Aldich ) as previously described . Coverslips were imaged with the Olympus FV - 1000 Chapter 2 ½ Materials and methods 62 confocal microscope using the UPLANSAPO 60X / 1 . 35 oil immersion objective and the same acquisition parameters for all images . 2 . 8 . 2 G - and F - actin assay In order to isolate G - actin , 60mm dishes of cells treated with siRNAs were rinsed twice with cytoskeleton ( CSK ) buffer , which was prepared with 10mM PIPES pH 6 . 8 ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , 50mM NaCl ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , 3mM MgCl 2 ( Sigma - Aldrich ) and 300mM sucrose ( Sigma - Aldrich ) . Next , for the first lysis step 500µl of CSK buffer implemented with 1 % Triton X - 100 ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , 1µg / ml phalloidin ( Sigma - Aldrich ) and protein inhibitors in the form of cOmplete and phosSTOP tablets ( Roche ) ( lysis buffer 1 ) were added . Cells were incubated for 5min at RT with mild rotation on a shaker . The supernatants containing actin monomers were then collected and further denatured with addition of final concentration of 2 % SDS ( Sigma - Aldrich ) . The fraction containing F - actin was isolated in the second lysis step . Following three washes of the cells with CSK buffer , they were incubated for 5min at RT on shaker in 500µl of lysis buffer 1 implemented with final concentration of 2 % SDS . Subsequently , cells were scraped and the samples were homogenized using 25 - gauge needles and syringes . Protein concentration was determined in the G - actin fraction and equivalent amounts of lysates were analyzed by western blot ( see below for western blot protocol ) . 2 . 9 Cell lysis and other immunoassays 2 . 9 . 1 Western blotting Cells lysates were prepared using RIPA cell lysis buffer composed by 50mM Tris – HCl at pH 7 . 4 ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , 150mM NaCl ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , 0 . 1 % SDS ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , 1 % Triton X - 100 ( Sigma - Aldrich ) and 0 . 5 % sodium deoxycholate ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) , and proteinase and phosphatase inhibitors in the form of cOmplete ULTRA and phosSTOP tablets ( Roche ) . Cells were washed twice with ice - cold TBS and lysed for 10min on ice . Lysate clarification was by high - speed centrifugation at 13 , 000rpm at 4°C for 15min . Chapter 2 ½ Materials and methods 63 Protein concentration was determined by BCA assay ( Pierce ) following the company’s protocol . 20µg of lysates were prepared for gel electrophoresis by addition of 6x Laemmli sample loading buffer containing 292 . 5mM Tris – HCl pH 6 . 8 ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , 9 . 36 % SDS ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , 27 % glycerol ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) , 0 . 027 % bromophenol blue ( BioRad ) and 10 % β - mercaptoethanol ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , and incubation for 5min at 95 o C . Samples were separated by SDS - PAGE on 4 - 15 % Mini - PROTEAN TGX stain - free precast protein gels ( BioRad ) along with the precision plus protein dual color standards ( BioRad ) , transferred to 0 . 2 µm nitrocellulose trans - blot turbo nitrocellulose transfer packs ( BioRad ) using the Trans - Blot Turbo transfer system ( BioRad ) , and immunoblotted following 1h block at RT with 5 % BSA ( Calbiochem ) in TBS . Blots were incubated with primary antibodies overnight at 4 o C , washed three times with TBS containing 0 . 15 % Tween - 20 ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) and incubated for 1h at RT with appropriate secondary antibodies , before washed further three times and visualized . The majority of western blots were analyzed using the LI - COR Odyssey infrared imaging system and Image Studio software ( version 4 . 0 . 21 ) . Signal was detected using 680 and 800 IRDye fluorescent secondary antibodies ( LI - COR ) . The software settings were chosen to maximize signal - to - noise ratio without reaching saturation , and the colour images generated were converted to grayscale . Western blots for G - / F - actin assay and chromatin markers were analysed using traditional luminescence - based detection system ( ChemiDoc system , BioRad ) . Western blot quantifications were performed in ImageJ . The following antibodies and dilutions were used in the western blot experiments : anti - destrin ( 1 : 2000 , Pierce ) , anti - cofilin - 1 ( 1 : 2500 , CST ) , anti - cofilin - 2 ( 1 : 1000 , m - Cofilin KG - 60 gift from W . Witke or Abcam ) , anti - β - actin ( 1 : 2000 ) , anti - GAPDH ( 1 : 2500 ) , anti - PARP ( 1 : 1000 ) , anti - myosin - IIA ( 1 : 1000 ) , anti - pMLC2 ( Ser19 ) ( 1 : 1000 ) anti - lamin A / C ( 1 : 2000 ) , anti - cleaved - lamin A ( 1 : 1000 ) , anti - caspases 3 and 6 ( 1 : 1000 ) , anti - paxillin ( 1 : 1000 ) , anti - phospho - paxillin ( 1 : 1000 ) , anti - SRF ( 1 : 1000 ) , anti - α - tubulin ( 1 : 1000 ) , anti - RelB ( 1 : 1000 ) , anti - topoisomerase II α ( 1 : 1000 ) , anti - fibrillarin ( 1 : 1000 ) , anti - Chapter 2 ½ Materials and methods 64 Di / Tri - Methyl - H3 ( K9 ) ( 1 : 1000 ) , anti - Tri Methyl - H3 ( K4 ) ( 1 : 1000 ) , anti - Tri - Methyl - H3 ( K27 ) ( 1 : 1000 ) , anti - Acetyl - H3 ( K27 ) ( 1 : 1000 ) and anti - γ H2AX ( 1 : 1000 ) ( all from CST ) , anti - vinculin ( 1 : 1000 , Abcam ) , anti - Arp3 ( 1 : 1000 , BD Biosciences ) , anti - Hsp90 ( 1 : 1000 , BD Biosciences ) , anti - Plk - 1 ( 1 : 1000 , Millipore ) and anti - SUN1 ( 1 : 1000 , Santa Cruz ) . A notable exception to the cell lysis protocol described above was for the immunoblots for cell adhesion components and β - actin following ADF and CFL1 depletion . We found that in order to solubilise these proteins , the lysis buffer had to be implemented with 8M urea ( Sigma - Aldrich ) and the lysates homogenized using 25 - gauge needles and syringes . The rest of the procedure was as previously described . 2 . 9 . 2 Immunoprecipitation For immunoprecipitation ( IP ) experiments lysates were prepared in RIPA buffer as previously described ( see section 2 . 9 . 1 ) , with the exception that EDTA - free inhibitor tablets were used . 1 - 2mgr of protein were used per IP contained in ~ 400µl lysate and ~ 6µgr of antibody . CFL1 IPs were performed with a cofilin polyclonal antibody from Abcam ( ab11062 ) and control IPs were performed with an IgG control antibody ( Abcam , ab46540 ) . Samples were precleared by adding pre - washed protein G agarose beads ( Roche ) in the lysates and incubating the mix for 40min at 4 o C with rotation . 20µl of beads were washed four times in 200µl of lysis buffer and centrifugation for 1min at 4 o C at 5000rpm . Following preclearing , the lysates were centrifuged for 2min at 4 o C at 5000rpm , transferred in new tubes and incubated overnight with the antibodies at 4 o C with rotation . Next , the lysate - antibody mix was incubated for another 1h at 4 o C with rotation , following the addition of pre - washed protein G agarose beads as before . The beads were then collected by centrifugation of the mixes for 2min at 4 o C at 5000rpm , washed twice with 200µl of lysis buffer , and another two times with 1ml ice - cold TBS . If the IPs were used for western blotting , the antibody - antigen complex was isolated by addition of 15µl Laemmli buffer and subsequent incubation for 5min at 95 o C . Chapter 2 ½ Materials and methods 65 4µl of supernatant ( ~ 1 / 100 of the IP volume ) were collected from each step of the procedure in order to be used for further analysis . 2 . 9 . 3 Cell fractionation For nuclear and cytoplasmic subcellular fractionation , the cells were grown in 150mm plates until they reached ~ 85 - 90 % confluency , washed with ice - cold TBS and lysed for 5min on ice with cytosolic buffer . Cytosolic buffer was composed by 10mM Tris pH 7 . 5 ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , 0 . 05 % NP - 40 ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) , 3mM MgCl 2 ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , 100mM NaCl ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , 1mM EGTA ( Sigma - Aldrich ) and cOmplete ULTRA and phosSTOP tablets ( Roche ) . The nuclei were then pelleted by 5min centrifugation at 800g at 4 o C , washed twice with the cytosolic buffer and re - pelleted , before they were lysed for 10min on ice with RIPA lysis buffer prepared as previously described . Lastly , the nuclear lysate was collected with a 15min centrifugation at 16 , 000g at 4 o C and used in downstream assays . 2 . 10 Cell cycle and cell viability analysis Analysis of the cell cycle was based on image analysis . Cells were classified in G1 or S / G2 / M phases according to the intensity of nuclear fluorescent staining , which is a reflection of the amount of DNA content . Prior to imaging , the cells were incubated for 1h at 37 o C with 1 : 10 , 000 dilution of Hoechst 33342 ( Invitrogen ) . Fluorescently labelled nuclei were then imaged using the Scan ^ R high content screening station ( Olympus ) , with 12 fields imaged per well of 96 - well plates . Image analysis was performed with the ScanR Image Analysis software ( Olympus ) . Cell viability was assessed by alamar blue assays . Cell culture media was implemented with 10 % alamar blue ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) , and cells were incubated with the mix for 3h at 37 o C . Fluorescence was then measured as indicator of cellular activity at 590nm emission wavelength . The assays were performed in 96 - well plates , 48h post - siRNA treatments in triplicates . Chapter 2 ½ Materials and methods 66 2 . 11 Mass spectrometry Label - free mass spectrometry was performed in the Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine mass spectrometry facility using a Q Exactive Plus instrument ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) . Analysis of the quantified protein abundance values was performed with assistance from Dr Adam Byron . For total cell mass spectrometry analysis , the protein label - free quantification ( LFQ ) intensity values were used to quantify protein abundance . A fold change between the experimental and control samples was then calculated based on median LFQ intensity values from three biological replicate analyses , and their significance was assessed by two - tailed Student ' s t - test . Specifically enriched proteins in the CFL1 co - immunoprecipitation samples were considered if they were enriched by at least two - fold with a p value < 0 . 05 . For nuclear CFL1 interactome analysis , the protein LFQ intensity values were log2 transformed , the difference between the experimental and control samples was calculated , and their significance was assessed by Student’s t - test . Specific CFL1 - interacting proteins were then identified based on a difference of log2 - transformed LFQ intensities of two or greater , which is equivalent to a minimum of four - fold enrichment , and a corrected p value < 0 . 05 . 2 . 12 Hierarchical clustering , network and enrichment analyses Cluster and network analyses were performed with assistance from Dr Adam Byron . Briefly , unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis of normalized expression calls or protein enrichment was performed on the basis of Pearson correlation using Cluster 3 . 0 ( C Clustering Library , version 1 . 37 ) ( de Hoon et al . , 2004 ) . Clustering results were visualized using Java TreeView ( version 1 . 1 . 1 ) ( Saldanha , 2004 ) . Interaction network analysis was performed with Cytoscape ( version 3 . 0 . 2 ) ( Shannon et al . , 2003 ) . Enrichment analysis was carried out using the functional clustering and annotation algorithms provided in the DAVID bioinformatics database ( Huang et al . , 2009a , b ) . Chapter 2 ½ Materials and methods 67 2 . 13 Data presentation and statistical analysis Unless otherwise indicated , data were normalized and presented as a comparison to controls . Statistical significance assessment and generation of box - plots were performed in GraphPad Prism 7 . Bar charts and unpaired t - tests were generated in Microsoft Excel . Data distribution in all experiments was assessed by D ' Agostino & Pearson’s normality test . When data were normally distributed , statistical significance was assessed by unpaired Student’s t - test in case of comparison between two groups , or by One - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) and Tukey ' s multiple comparisons post - hoc test for comparisons among more than two groups of data . Statistical significance of data not passing the normality test was assessed by Mann - Whitney’s test in case of two data groups or Kruskal – Wallis one - way analysis of variance and Dunn ' s multiple comparisons post - hoc test when more than two groups of data were compared , respectively . Statistical significance was assumed for p values < 0 . 05 . Sample sizes , number of replicates and the specific statistical tests used in each occasion are indicated in the figure legends . Chapter 3 ½ Consequences of ADF and CFL1 depletion in tissue and cell homeostasis 68 Chapter 3 Consequences of ADF and CFL1 depletion in tissue and cell homeostasis Chapter 3 ½ Consequences of ADF and CFL1 depletion in tissue and cell homeostasis 69 3 . 1 Introduction As outlined above , ADF / cofilins have crucial roles in embryonic and organ development . However , whether homeostasis within adult tissues is also dependent on the activity of ADF / cofilins remains unclear . Some indirect studies suggest they do . Both , spontaneous mutations in the ADF locus in mice , or ADF genetic knockout with traditional gene targeting strategies , lead to development of corneal disease marked by aberrant actin cytoskeleton , epithelial hyperproliferation that leads to tissue thickening , and eventual blindness ( Bellenchi et al . , 2007 ; Ikeda et al . , 2003 ; Verdoni et al . , 2008 ) . Interestingly , ADF has been reported to be the main ADF / cofilin member expressed in this tissue ( Ikeda et al . , 2003 ) . Similarly , mutations or genetic knockout of the CFL2 gene – the predominant if not single ADF / cofilin isoform present in adult muscle tissue ( Gurniak et al . , 2014 ) – promotes development of myopathies in humans and mice , respectively ( Agrawal et al . , 2007 ; Agrawal et al . , 2012 ; Gurniak et al . , 2014 ; Ockeloen et al . , 2012 ) . Aberrant actin cytoskeleton with marked accumulation of actin filaments and loss of tissue maintenance was observed in all the cases reported . However , the consequences of the loss of one or multiple isoforms in adult tissues where more than one ADF / cofilin family member is expressed have not been examined to date . Furthermore , the two main isoforms expressed in non - muscle tissues , namely , ADF and CFL1 ( Vartiainen et al . , 2002 ) , have been attributed with unique as well as redundant cellular roles , owing to their significant similarity in amino acid sequence . Hence , the first aim of this project was to investigate the individual , as well as collective roles of these two members of the ADF / cofilin family in adult tissue , and assess what are their contributions regarding the function and maintenance of the tissue . To achieve that , we developed a research strategy consisting of three elements . Specifically , we utilised a mouse model system that allowed for specific double deletion of ADF and CFL1 in adult skin . This was implemented with in vitro cultures of primary cells derived from mice with the desired genotypes . Moreover , we developed cancer cell lines derived from these Chapter 3 ½ Consequences of ADF and CFL1 depletion in tissue and cell homeostasis 70 animals and employed RNA - interference ( RNAi ) to achieve transient gene silencing . This allowed us to explore in greater detail how suppressing the output of the ADF / cofilin pathway affects homeostasis in the cellular level , and unveil the molecular characteristics of these biological responses beyond their primary effects . Finally , by expressing independently each of the mammalian ADF / cofilins in cells depleted of the endogenous ADF and CFL1 proteins , we were able to investigate whether the roles of these three family members are shared or independent . Hence , in this chapter we explore the biological consequences arising from the depletion of ADF and CFL1 independently as well as concurrently in the mouse skin , we describe the effects of these perturbations in normal and malignant cells grown in culture , and , finally , we discuss whether these responses are attributed to shared or individual roles of the members of the ADF / cofilin family . 3 . 2 Results 3 . 2 . 1 Double depletion of ADF and CFL1 triggers loss of skin tissue homeostasis ADF and CFL1 are the two main ADF / cofilin isoforms expressed is epithelial cells ( Vartiainen et al . , 2002 ) . As discussed previously , parallel genetic depletion of ADF and CFL1 is not feasible since lack of the latter results in non - viable embryos ( Gurniak et al . , 2005 ) . Therefore , a genetic knockout mouse line of ADF ( ADF - / - CFL1 + / + ) ( Bellenchi et al . , 2007 ) was crossed with a conditional knockout mouse line caring floxed CFL1 alleles ( ADF + / + CFL1 fl / fl ) ( Gurniak et al . , 2005 ) , in order to generate mice lacking ADF ( ADF - null ) and having CFL1 floxed ( ADF - / - CFL1 fl / fl ) . To achieve double ADF / CFL1 depletion in epithelial cells of adult mice , we intercrossed the above lines with mice expressing the modified Cre recombinase - estrogen receptor ( ER ) fusion under control of the keratin 14 promoter ( K14CreER T2 ) , which is expressed in the majority of the cells in epidermal squamous cell epithelia ( Vasioukhin et al . , 1999 ; Vassar et al . , 1989 ) . Thus , subsequent treatment with 4 - OHT permitted Chapter 3 ½ Consequences of ADF and CFL1 depletion in tissue and cell homeostasis 71 specific loss of both isoforms in the tissue ( ADF - / - CFL1 - / - ) . K14CreER T2 mice with no other genetic alterations served as controls ( ADF + / + CFL1 + / + ) . Since the hair follicles along with the interfollicular epidermis accommodate a multitude of resident stem cells that undergo periods or regeneration and dormancy , we chose to carry all the 4 - OHT treatments eight weeks postnatal , when the majority of epidermal cells should be in their resting phase ( see Figure 3 . 1A for treatment timeline ) ( Hammond et al . , 2012 ; Muller - Rover et al . , 2001 ) . When skin sections of mice lacking either ADF or CFL1 alone were stained with hematoxylin and eosin ( H & E ) and compared to wild - type skin having both proteins , no significant phenotypic differences were noted ( Figure 3 . 1B ) . However , when both proteins were depleted there was an immediate and apparent loss of tissue homeostasis . This was characterized by a pronounced thickening of the epidermis , suggesting that it is the collective activities of ADF and CFL1 that are required for successful regulation of tissue maintenance ( Figure 3 . 1B ) . Western blot analysis of epidermis extracts confirmed that the ADF - null mice had no detectable levels of the protein , while the 4 - OHT treatment led to significant reduction of expression of the floxed CFL1 alleles ( Figure 3 . 1C ) . Surprisingly , despite being regarded as a muscle - specific isoform , CFL2 was readily detectable in the murine epidermis , albeit its expression levels remained unchanged following the loss of either or both other ADF / cofilin family members . The skin is an organ comprised of multiple layers of cells with distinct characteristics and expression patterns . In mice , these layers are the basal , which hosts the stem and progenitor cells capable of division , followed by the spinous , the granular and the cornified layers . Resident cells of the latter layers exist in different stages of differentiation before they shed off the epidermis ( Solanas and Benitah , 2013 ) . Since the ADF / CFL1 depleted epidermis exhibits this abnormal thickening as well as hyperkeratosis – an increase in the cells in the outermost layer of the epidermis ( see Figure 3 . 1B right panel ) – we set out to investigate the status of this stratification . In order to address this , we assessed the expression of several markers of epidermal differentiation by Chapter 3 ½ Consequences of ADF and CFL1 depletion in tissue and cell homeostasis 72 Figure 3 . 1 . Loss of ADF and CFL1 promotes loss of epidermal tissue homeostasis . ( A ) Relative timescale of murine hair follicle cycles during the first 12 weeks after birth . Black bars indicate the timeline of 4 - hydroxytamoxifen ( 4 - OHT ) treatments and sample collection . ( B ) Formalin - fixed , paraffin - embedded ( PE ) skin sections from K14CreERT 2 ( ADF + / + CFL1 + / + ) , K14CreERT 2 / ADF - / - / CFL1 wt / wt ( ADF - / - CFL1 + / + ) , K14CreERT 2 / ADF wt / wt / CFL1 fl / fl ( ADF + / + CFL1 - / - ) , and K14CreERT 2 / ADF - / - / CFL1 fl / fl ( ADF - / - CFL1 - / - ) mice treated with 4 - OHT were stained with H & E ( images courtesy of Dr Jing Zhou ) . ( C ) Immunoblot for proteins harvested from tail keratinocytes of 4 - OHT treated mice ( data courtesy of Dr Jing Zhou ) . ( D ) Relative expression of epidermal differentiation factors in mouse keratinocytes with the indicated genotypes tested with quantitative PCR ( qPCR ) . Data presented as mean ± SEM ( n = 3 mice per group ) . Statistical significance was assessed with unpaired Student’s t - test ; * p value < 0 . 05 ; * * p value ≤ 0 . 01 ; * * * p value < 0 . 001 . ( E ) Immunohistochemical ( IHC ) staining for BrdU of formalin - fixed PE skin sections derived B P16 P19 P22 P35 P45 P82 Morphogenesis C a t agen T e l ogen A nagen C a t agen T e l ogen Anagen sample collection P60 4 - OHT x4 P56 A E K 14 - C r e x 2 K 14 - A D F x 2 K 14 - C r e x 4 K 14 - A D F x 4 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 B r d U po s i t i ve ce ll s A . U . * * * * * * 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 a v e r age B r d U po s i t i v e nu c l e i pe r f i e l d ADF + / + CFL1 + / + ADF - / - CFL1 - / - 4 - O H T x 2 4 - O H T x 4 B r d U F D 0 0 . 4 0 . 8 1 . 2 1 . 6 Dsc1 Grhl3 S100a3 Notch3 Involucrin Epidermal differentiation r e l a t i v e e x p r e ss i on ADF + / + CFL1 + / + ADF - / - CFL1 - / - * * * * * * * * ADF CFL1 β - actin ADF wt / wt - / - wt / wt - / - CFL1 wt / wt wt / wt fl / fl fl / fl CFL2 4 - OHT + + + + C ADF + / + CFL1 + / + ADF - / - CFL1 + / + ADF + / + CFL1 - / - ADF - / - CFL1 - / - m u r i ne sk i n Chapter 3 ½ Consequences of ADF and CFL1 depletion in tissue and cell homeostasis 73 from BrdU - labelled mice with the indicated genotypes , treated for 2 or 4 days with 4 - OHT ( 4 - OHT x 2 or 4 - OHT x 4 ) . The red dashed lines denote the basement membrane . Quantification of BrdU - positive nuclei is shown in ( F ) with box plots displaying the full range of variation ( min to max ) ( n = 7 or more fields per mouse were quantified for two mice per treatment per genotype ) . * * * Mann - Whitney p value < 0 . 0001 . The scale bars correspond to 100µm in IHC images . qPCR ( Figure 3 . 1D ) ( Mascre et al . , 2012 ) . All the markers tested exhibited a significant downregulation in their expression in ADF / CFL1 depleted cells , indicative of aberrant cell differentiation in the skin . To further characterize this phenotype , we assessed cell proliferation in two different time points during its development . ADF + / + CFL1 + / + and ADF - / - CFL1 - / - mice were treated for two or four days with 4 - OHT and a single BrdU injection two hours prior to harvesting their skins . Immunohistochemichal analysis and quantification of BrdU - positive cells revealed a significant and almost maximum increase in cells undergoing genome replication in ADF / CFL1 depleted cells , irrespective of the time durations that followed the induction with 4 - OHT ( Figure 3 . 1E quantified in 3 . 1F ) . BrdU - positive cells can be seen throughout the epidermis , which is uncharacteristic for stratified epithelia , and highlights the immediate loss of homeostasis in the tissue that ensues ADF and CFL1 depletion . Overall , the ADF and CFL1 loss from adult epithelial cells had a moderate but significant impact on the general health of the animals , which was deteriorating fast and they had to be sacrificed four days post - 4 - OHT induction due to the Home Office regulations . After pathological examination , aside from the skin , major lesions were found in conjunctiva , cornea , and the oral cavity , where some expression of the keratin 14 gene has been reported ( Wang et al . , 1997 ) . Histological changes in the cornea included acute keratitis , stromal oedema , neutrophil infiltration , misshapen nuclei , apoptosis of epithelial cells , as well as ulceration . Similar were the histological changes evident in the epithelial linings of the oral cavity . This further highlights the significant roles of ADF and CFL1 in maintaining adult tissue homeostasis , and , taken together , our results indicate that these members of the ADF / cofilin family share redundant roles in that respect , since loss of either protein alone Chapter 3 ½ Consequences of ADF and CFL1 depletion in tissue and cell homeostasis 74 had no apparent effect in animal health . Therefore , for the rest of the study we focused on investigating their collective roles in tissue and cell maintenance . 3 . 2 . 2 Depletion of ADF and CFL1 triggers actin fiber accumulation and cell morphological changes Since ADF / cofilins are mainly recognised as regulators of actin dynamics , we next assessed the status of the actin cytoskeleton in vivo . Immunofluorescent labelling of the cytoskeletal component β - actin in skin sections of ADF + / + CFL1 + / + and ADF - / - CFL1 - / - mice ( Figure 3 . 2A ) revealed a clear and distinct accumulation of β - actin , throughout the epidermis in the ADF / CFL1 - null skin . Interestingly , a large amount of the accumulated actin was in the form of filaments , which are not typically present to such an extent in epithelial cells , as is also apparent from the staining of control ADF + / + CFL1 + / + sections . Next , in order to characterize the responses following ADF / CFL1 loss in individual cells , we isolated ADF + / + CFL1 + / + and ADF - / - CFL1 - / - primary tail keratinocytes and grew them in culture . The morphology of the ADF - / - CFL1 - / - cells was distinct from their wild - type counterparts . The former acquired an appearance akin to mesenchymal cells as opposed to the typical round and compact epithelial morphology of the latter ( Figure 3 . 2B , left panels ) . Fluorescent labelling of F - actin revealed a similar trans - cytoplasmic actin fiber accumulation in these cells to the one exhibited from cells within the tissue ( Figure 3 . 2B , right panels ) . Due to the finite lifespan and inability to propagate primary keratinocytes in culture , we generated malignant keratinocytes ( squamous cell carcinoma cells , SCCs ) following an H - Ras - dependent two - stage chemical carcinogenesis protocol using DMBA and TPA ( McLean et al . , 2001 ; Quintanilla et al . , 1986 ) . Using this protocol on mice with an ADF - null genetic background resulted in the generation of ADF - null SCCs . The identity of these cells was confirmed with positive staining for pan - cytokeratin ( data not shown ) . In order to achieve double depletion in this system , the remaining isoform ( CFL1 ) was knocked down by RNAi , using specific siRNAs targeting Chapter 3 ½ Consequences of ADF and CFL1 depletion in tissue and cell homeostasis 75 Figure 3 . 2 . Depletion of ADF and CFL1 triggers actin fiber accumulation and cell morphological changes . ( A ) Immunofluorescent ( IF ) staining for β - actin of PE skin sections of ADF + / + CFL1 + / + ( left panels ) and ADF - / - CFL1 - / - ( right panels ) mice . Zoomed images of boxed regions are provided in the corners and below the panels . Arrows indicate actin fibers spanning the cytoplasm . ( B ) Phase - contrast images of mouse tail keratinocytes ( left panels ) and fluorescent staining of filamentous actin ( F - actin ) . ( C ) A squamous cell carcinoma cell line was generated following the DMBA / TPA chemical carcinogenesis protocol from ADF - / - CFL1 + / + mice ( termed ADF - null SCCs ) . To achieve double depletion , the expression of the remaining isoform ( CFL1 ) was transiently downregulated using siRNAs ( siCFL1 ) . Phase - contrast and fluorescently labelled F - actin images of ADF - null SCCs treated B C s i N T s i C F L1 ADF - null SCCs F - actin DAPI A D F + / + C F L1 + / + keratinocytes A D F - / - C F L1 - / - F - actin DAPI ADF + / + CFL1 + / + ADF - / - CFL1 - / - β - actin DAPI A murine skin s i N T & s i N T s i C F L1 & s i N T 0 5 10 15 c e ll l eng t h / w i d t h r a t i o siNT c e ll l eng t h / w i d t h r a t i o 0 5 10 15 * * * siCFL1 D ADF + / + CFL1 + / + ADF - / - CFL1 - / - β - catenin DAPI murine skin H β - actin DAPI 0 % 20 % 40 % 60 % 80 % 100 % 120 % siNT siCFL1 c e ll s w i t h abe rr an t a c t i n a cc u m u l a t i on * * * E F CFL1 ADF GAPDH N o T r ea t m en t s i N T s i C F L1 poo l s i C F L1 CR s i C F L1 U T R 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 Cfl1 Cfl2 r e l a t i v e e x p r e ss i on siNT siCFL1 * * * ns G Chapter 3 ½ Consequences of ADF and CFL1 depletion in tissue and cell homeostasis 76 with non - targeting control siRNAs ( siNT ) or siCFL1 are shown ( left and right panels , respectively ) . ( D ) Quantification of the cell length to width ratio of siNT and siCFL1 treated ADF - null SCCs . Circles represent individual values and bars mean ±SD ( n = 33 cells per condition from three independent experiments ) . * * * Unpaired t - test p value < 0 . 0001 . ( E ) Percentage of ADF - null SCCs displaying aberrant actin fiber accumulation following siRNA treatments . Result presented as mean ±SEM ( n = 790 siNT and 615 siCFL1 treated cells were quantified in four independent experiments ) . * * * Unpaired t - test p value < 0 . 0001 . ( F ) siRNA knockdown efficiency for CFL1 was assessed by western blot 72h post - transfections . A pool of four , or individual siRNAs targeting either the coding region ( CR ) or the untranslated region ( UTR ) of the CFL1 mRNA were utilised . ( G ) Confirmation of knockdown efficiency of CFL1 was also assessed by qPCR 48h post - transfections . Data presented as mean ± SEM ( n = 3 individual experiments ) . * * * Unpaired t - test p value < 0 . 0001 . ( H ) IF labelling of PE skin sections for β - catenin . White dashed lines denote the basement membrane in skin sections . Nuclei were counterstained with DAPI in all IF experiments . The scale bars correspond to 125µm in phase - contrast and 20µm in IF images , respectively . the CFL1 transcript ( siCFL1 ) . When the ADF - null SCCs were treated with siRNAs for CFL1 acquired a significantly different morphology , characterized by a flattened profile and multiple membrane protrusions , compared to cells treated with non - targeting control siRNAs ( siNT ) ( Figure 3 . 2C , left panels , and Figure 3 . 2D ) . In addition , staining for F - actin revealed that the ADF / CFL1 depleted SCCs shared the same response with the respective normal keratinocytes , with regards to the massive increase in actin fibers extending throughout the cytoplasm ( Figure 3 . 2C , right panels ) . After 48h of siCFL1 treatment nearly the entirety of the cells was exhibiting this phenotype ( Figure 3 . 2E ) . These cellular responses were replicated in multiple additional and independently created ADF - null , CFL1 - null as well as wild - type SCC cell lines treated with siRNAs against the remaining or both isoforms ( data not shown ) . Furthermore , along with a pool of four siRNAs , two individual oligos targeting either the coding region ( siCFL1 CR ) or the untranslated region ( siCFL1 UTR ) of CFL1 mRNA were used in order to control for off - target effects . The efficiency of the knockdown was excellent at the protein and the mRNA level alike ( Figures 3 . 2F and 3 . 2G ) . CFL2 expression was also detected in the SCCs by qPCR , which revealed that its levels were not changed following ADF / CFL1 depletion , as it was the case in normal keratinocytes ( Figure 3 . 2G ) . Chapter 3 ½ Consequences of ADF and CFL1 depletion in tissue and cell homeostasis 77 Lastly , β - catenin immunofluorescent staining in mouse skin sections allowed the visualization of the cell periphery and the intercellular junctions of cells within the tissue , and revealed irregular cell shape and general aberrant cell morphology in the absence of ADF / CFL1 in this context as well ( Figure 3 . 2H ) . This indicates that the cellular responses that follow the loss of ADF and CFL1 are shared across different model systems , between normal and malignant cells , as well as among cells grown in culture or located within tissues in vivo . 3 . 2 . 3 ADF / CFL1 loss triggers actin polymerization So far we have shown that depletion of ADF and CFL1 in normal or malignant keratinocytes is accompanied by an increase in the cellular content of actin , mainly in the form of filaments , as judged by fluorescent staining of F - actin . To further assess the extent of actin polymerization in ADF / CFL1 depleted cells we performed a G - / F - actin assay , where we compared the levels of free ( G - ) actin monomers to polymerized ( F - ) actin filaments . The assay used ( see section 2 . 8 . 2 for details ) has , of course , its limitations in that the isolated F - actin fraction will consist predominantly of cytosolic actin fibers tethered in cell adhesions , whereas other cellular F - actin structures , for example nuclear actin networks , which are not anchored to the cell matrix might be collected in the G - actin fraction . Nevertheless , we found that the majority of cellular actin is incorporated in filaments in cells lacking ADF and CFL1 as opposed to control cells , which have comparable amounts of F - and G - actin according to this assay ( Figure 3 . 3A quantified in 3 . 3B ) . In addition , a barbed - ends assay , where only the ends of filaments that are actively elongating are stained , made apparent the significant upregulation by ~ 7 . 5 - fold in actin polymerization following ADF / CFL1 loss ( Figure 3 . 3C quantified in 3 . 3D ) . Furthermore , immunofluorescent staining for the actin microfilament binding and crosslinking protein α - actinin along with β - actin , revealed extensive co - localization between the two proteins , indicating that the actin filaments arising after ADF / CFL1 loss are most likely bundled ( Figure 3 . 3E ) . Chapter 3 ½ Consequences of ADF and CFL1 depletion in tissue and cell homeostasis 78 Figure 3 . 3 . Depletion of ADF and CFL1 triggers actin polymerization . ( A ) ADF - null SCCs were treated with siNT or siCFL1 and the levels of globular ( G ) and filamentous ( F ) actin were assessed by immunoblotting for β - actin . ( B ) Quantification of the ratio between the two forms of actin in each treatment in ( A ) . ( C ) Free actin barbed - ends and F - actin in ADF - null SCCs treated as in ( A ) were visualized using fluorescence . Quantification was performed in ImageJ and is provided in ( D ) . The result is presented as mean ±SEM ( n ≥ 40 cells were quantified from two individual experiments ) . * * * Unpaired t - test p value < 0 . 0001 . ( E ) IF staining of siRNA - treated ADF - null SCCs for α - actinin and β - actin . Two examples of siCFL1 - treated cells are shown , and zoomed images of boxed region are shown on lower right panels . Nuclei were counterstained with DAPI in all IF experiments . The scale bars correspond to 20µm . The accumulation of actin filaments in ADF / CFL1 depleted cells raised the question of whether they were anchored at the extracellular matrix via focal adhesions . Immunofluorescence with phosphorylated paxillin , which is a major component of adhesion complexes , showed that the siCFL1 - treated ADF - null SCCs had increased number of significantly larger and brightly stained cell - matrix adhesions , which accommodate the aberrant actin bundles formed upon ADF / CFL1 loss ( Figure 3 . 4A quantified in Figure 3 . 4C , 3 . 4E and 3 . 4F ) . Similar results were obtained when depleted cells were stained for G F G F β - actin siNT siCFL1 A C D 0 2 4 6 8 10 siNT siCFL1 ba r bed – end s ( a . u . ) * * * barbed - ends F - actin DAPI s i N T s i C F L1 E s i N T s i C F L 1 s i C F L1 s i C F L1 α - actinin β - actin DAPI 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 2 . 5 3 siNT siCFL1 F - / G - a c t i n r a t i o B Chapter 3 ½ Consequences of ADF and CFL1 depletion in tissue and cell homeostasis 79 Figure 3 . 4 . ADF / CFL1 loss promotes focal adhesion number and size increase . ( A - B ) IF labelling of the focal adhesion ( FA ) components p - paxillin ( Tyr118 ) and vinculin in ADF - null SCCs treated with siRNAs . Nuclei and F - actin were counterstained with DAPI and phalloidin , respectively . The scale bars correspond to 20µm . ( C ) Cell lysates from cells treated as in ( A ) analysed by western blot for FA components , β - actin , GAPDH and CFL1 . ( D - F ) Quantification of p - paxillin and vinculin staining , as well as FA number per cell based on p - paxillin staining , of cells treated as in ( A ) . The analysis was performed in ImageJ and the box - plots display the means and the full range of variation from min to max ( n = 40 cells for p - paxillin and 63 cells for vinculin staining in three or more fields from two individual experiments were quantified ) . * * * Mann - Whitney p value < 0 . 0001 . ( G ) FA size quantified in ImageJ based on p - paxillin staining . Circles represent individual values and bars mean ±SD ( n = 1 , 590 FA from siNT and > 5 , 000 FA from siCFL1 treated cells in two individual experiments were quantified ) . * * * Mann - Whitney p value < 0 . 0001 . A s i N T s i C F L1 s i N T s i C F L1 B Vinculin F - actin DAPI p - paxillin F - actin DAPI s i N T s i C FL 1 0 2 4 6 8 10 p - P ax il li n t o t a l i n t e n s i t y p e r ce ll a . u . * * * siNT siCFL1 0 2 4 6 8 10 p - pa x illi n t o t a l i n t e n s i t y pe r c e ll ( a . u . ) C s i N T s i C FL 1 0 10 20 30 40 50 V i n c u l i n t o t a l i n t e n s i t y p e r ce ll a . u . * * * siNT siCFL1 0 10 20 30 40 50 V i n c u li n t o t a l i n t en s i t y pe r c e ll ( a . u . ) D s i N T s i C F L1 0 20 40 60 80 F A s i z e ( u m ^ 2 ) ( p - P a x illi n ) * * * siNT 0 20 40 60 80 F . A . s i z e ( µ m 2 ) ( p - pa x illi n ) F siCFL1 s i N T s i C FL 1 0 200 400 600 800 F A no . p e r ce ll * * * siNT 0 200 400 600 800 F . A . no . pe r c e ll E siCFL1 Vinculin Paxillin p - paxillin β - actin GAPDH CFL1 s i N T s i C F L1 G Chapter 3 ½ Consequences of ADF and CFL1 depletion in tissue and cell homeostasis 80 vinculin , whose main roles include the tethering of actin filaments to integrin adhesion complexes ( Humphries et al . , 2007 ) ( Figure 3 . 4B quantified in Figure 3 . 4D ) . This correlation between the unrestrained accumulation of actin filaments and upregulation of cell - matrix adhesion components was also assessed biochemically , where the phosphorylated form of paxillin as well as the total amount of vinculin were both significantly upregulated in ADF / CFL1 depleted cells ( Figure 3 . 4G ) . 3 . 2 . 4 Depletion of both , ADF and CFL1 , affects membrane dynamics As discussed previously , in the literature ADF / cofilins are mainly associated with cell migration , membrane protrusions and lamellipodia dynamics . Furthermore , one would presume that cells having a lot of enlarged and seemingly stable focal adhesions spread throughout the cell periphery would not be very motile . Because of this , we next sought to investigate how the depletion of ADF and CFL1 affected the cells ability to generate dynamic peripheral membrane ruffles . Hence , we performed live cell imaging of control as well as ADF / CFL1 depleted SCCs , and followed their movements over the course of 30 minutes . We found that cells lacking ADF / CFL1 still maintained the ability to perform membrane protrusions and retractions , albeit many of them were heavily blebbing ( Figure 3 . 5 ) . However , when we assessed how dynamic these protrusions were , we found that compared to control cells they are less frequent , the range of membrane movement is smaller , and the cells spend more time to complete a full membrane extension and retraction ( see Figures 3 . 5B and 3 . 5C for representative kymographs and kymograph profiles and Figures 3 . 5D , 3 . 5E and 3 . 5F for quantifications ) . Taken together , our data support a role of ADF / cofilins in preventing excessive assembly and subsequent stabilization of actin filaments , which if left unchecked in the absence of ADF and CFL1 lead to loss of tissue and cell homeostasis . ADF / CFL1 cells are still capable of membrane ruffling , albeit far less dynamic . Chapter 3 ½ Consequences of ADF and CFL1 depletion in tissue and cell homeostasis 81 Figure 3 . 5 . Double depletion of ADF and CFL1 affects cell membrane dynamics . ( A ) ADF - null SCCs treated with siRNAs were imaged every 30 seconds over 30 minutes in order to monitor membrane ruffles and blebs and representative montages are provided . White bars with arrowheads drawn perpendicular to cell membrane and parallel to protrusion direction denote representative areas chosen for kymograph analysis . ( B ) Representative membrane protrusion kymograph profiles of cells treated as in ( A ) . Profiles were plotted using normalized intensity values from 1 - pixel - wide kymographs of membrane protrusions . ( C ) Representative kymographs generated from the cells in ( A ) . ( D - F ) The number of protrusions over 30 minutes , the protrusion length and persistence – time for a complete membrane protrusion / retraction – were calculated . Circles represent individual values and bars mean ±SD ( n = 20 cells with 83 and 20 cells with 34 protrusions following siNT or siCFL1 treatment in four individual experiments were quantified , respectively ) . * * * Mann - Whitney p value < 0 . 0002 . 3 . 2 . 5 Unrestrained actin filaments arising in the absence of ADF and CFL1 are associated with nuclear deformation Our data so far imply that the elongated flattened morphology displayed by the ADF / CFL1 depleted cells is promoted by the unregulated accumulation of aberrant actin filaments tethered into enlarged adhesions at the cell periphery . However , during our efforts to characterise the phenotypic alterations arising upon loss of ADF and CFL1 , and after closer examination of fluorescently labelled cells , we noticed that aside from cell morphology and impaired membrane dynamics there was also damage to cellular organelles . Specifically , s i N T 0 min 5 min 10 min 15 min 20 min 25 min s i C F L1 A B C s i N T s i C F L1 s i N T s i C FL 1 0 2 4 6 8 c o m p l e t e r u ff l e s / 30 m i n * * * p r o t r u s i on s / 30 m i n 2 4 6 8 0 siNT siCFL1 D s i N t s i C FL 1 0 20 40 60 80 p r o t r u s i on l eng t h ( u m ) * * * p r o t r u s i on l eng t h ( µ m ) 20 40 60 80 0 siCFL1 siNT E s i N T s i C FL 1 0 5 10 15 20 m i n pe r p r o t r u s i on * * * 0 5 x p r o t r u s i on pe r s i s t en c e ( m i n ) 15 20 10 siCFL1 siNT F 0’ 30’ 0’ 30’ 0 20 40 60 CFL1 - 1 CFL1 - 2 CFL1 - 3 CFL1 - 4 0 20 40 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 NT - 1 NT - 2 NT - 3 siNT siCFL1 time ( min ) no r m a li z ed i n t en s i t y v a l ue s kymograph profiles Chapter 3 ½ Consequences of ADF and CFL1 depletion in tissue and cell homeostasis 82 there was evidence of actin - mediated nuclear deformation in ADF - null SCCs treated with siCFL1 . Nuclei were evidently forced to either occupy the bulk space available between the aberrant actin filaments , or were compressed among the latter , which resulted in nuclear deformation ( see status of the nuclei in Figures 3 . 3E , 3 . 4A and 3 . 4B ) . These observations were confirmed in both , untransformed ADF - / - CFL1 - / - keratinocytes and ADF / CFL1 - depleted SCCs , by immunofluorescent staining for the nuclear envelope component lamin A / C ( Figure 3 . 6A ) . Construction of a 3D model consisting of the nucleus and actin filaments also made apparent that while in control cells the main F - actin fibers are located in the cell periphery , in the case of ADF / CFL1 depleted cells there is increased accumulation of actin filaments with a subset of them extending through the nuclear space ( Figure 3 . 6B ) . To implement these observations , cells treated as before were imaged with structure illumination microscopy ( SIM ) for enhanced resolution and visualization of the relationship between the nuclear envelope , labelled by lamin A / C staining , and F - actin ( Figure 3 . 6C ) . SIM further supported our finding that the unrestrained actin filaments extend into , and through , nuclear space in the absence of ADF / CFL1 , while there is no evidence of nuclear intrusion in control cells . Quantification of the extent of this occurrence confirmed that only ~ 17 % of cells depleted of ADF and CFL1 still contain non - deformed or fragmented nuclei after 48h of siRNA treatment ( Figure 3 . 6D – quantification on the right with more examples of deformed nuclei on the left ) . To test whether the similar actin accumulation discerned in vivo , in mice lacking ADF / CFL1 from their skin ( Figure 3 . 2A ) , affects the nuclear morphology of keratinocytes within the tissue , we stained ADF - / - CFL1 - / - and control ADF + / + CFL1 + / + skin sections with lamin A / C ( Figure 3 . 6E ) . We found that the nuclei of cells residing throughout the epidermis of ADF / CFL1 null skin have a jumbled arrangement , indicative of the loss of tissue architecture . Furthermore , there is significant difference in the nuclear shape of nuclei in the mutant tissue when compared to wild - type skin , some nuclei Chapter 3 ½ Consequences of ADF and CFL1 depletion in tissue and cell homeostasis 83 Figure 3 . 6 . ADF / CFL1 depletion promotes loss of nuclear integrity . ( A ) IF staining for the nuclear envelope component lamin A / C of control and ADF / CFL1 null mouse tail keratinocytes ( left panels ) and ADF - null SCCs treated with siRNAs ( right panels ) . The scale bars correspond to 20µm . ( B ) 3D model construction composed of nuclei ( blue ) and F - actin ( red ) of ADF - null SCCs treated with siRNAs . Model constructed using the IMARIS software ( Bitplane ) after 0 . 4µm optical slices were obtained with confocal microscopy . The keratinocytes ADF - null SCCs Lamin A / C F - actin DAPI s i N T s i C F L1 A D F + / + C F L1 + / + A D F - / - C F L1 - / - A B siNT siCFL1 F - actin DAPI A D F - nu ll S CC s La m i n A / C F - a c t i n D AP I s i N T s i C F L 1 C normal nuclei fragmented nuclei Lamin A / C 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 non - f r ag m en t ed nu c l e i siNT siCFL1 * * * D F E Lamin A / C DAPI m u r i ne sk i n * * * ADF - / - CFL1 - / - ADF + / + CFL1 + / + nu c l ea r s i z e ( µ m 2 ) 20 40 60 100 0 80 ADF - / - CFL1 - / - ADF + / + CFL1 + / + 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 1 0 0 . 8 c i r c u l a r i t y ( a . u . ) * * * G Lamin A / C F - actin DAPI Chapter 3 ½ Consequences of ADF and CFL1 depletion in tissue and cell homeostasis 84 siNT scale bar corresponds to 7µm and the siCFL1 scale bars correspond to 10µm , 20µm , and 10µm ( left to right images ) . ( C ) High resolution IF images for lamin A / C of siNT or siCFL1 treated ADF - null SCCs obtained with structured illumination microscopy ( SIM ) . The scale bar corresponds to 10µm . ( D ) ( Left ) IF staining for lamin A / C and representative images of nuclei classified as having normal ( top ) or fragmented / deformed morphology ( bottom ) . ( Right ) Quantification of nuclear morphology of siRNA - treated ADF - null SCCs . Data are presented as mean ±SEM ( n > 150 cells contained in three or more fields per experiment were quantified in three independent experiments . * * * Unpaired t - test p value ≤ 0 . 0001 . ( E ) IF labelling of PE skin sections for lamin A / C . The scale bar corresponds to 20µm . White dashed lines denote the basement membrane . ( F ) Quantification of nuclear size of skin keratinocytes based on lamin A / C staining performed in ImageJ . Circles represent all individual measurements and bars mean ±SD ( n = 88 control and 183 double knockout nuclei from PE sections from two mice per group were quantified ) . * * * Mann - Whitney p value < 0 . 0001 . ( G ) The circularity of IF stained nuclei for lamin A / C was calculated in ImageJ . Box plots display the means and full range of variation ( min to max ) ( n = 77 control and 118 double knockout nuclei from PE sections from two mice per group were quantified ) . * * * Mann - Whitney p value < 0 . 0001 . Nuclei and F - actin were counterstained in IF experiments with DAPI and phalloidin , respectively . appear indeed to be fragmented and a significant enlargement in their size is evident ( karyomegaly ) ( Figure 3 . 6E and quantifications in 3 . 6F and 3 . 6G ) , which further imply that ADF / CFL1 null keratinocytes are experiencing excessive cellular stress ( Chow et al . , 2012 ) . 3 . 2 . 6 The loss of ADF and CFL1 compromises nuclear integrity Although our data so far suggest that the unregulated actin filaments formed upon ADF / CFL1 depletion promote deformations on the cell nucleus , whether the integrity of the latter is still maintained is unclear . To assess whether the nuclear integrity is compromised , we tested the localization of the normally nuclear localized transcription factors c - Myc and SRF . Using immunofluorescence , we found that a significant amount of c - Myc and SRF was localized in the cytoplasm of ADF / CFL1 depleted keratinocytes that exhibited apparent nuclear disruption ( see arrows in Figures 3 . 7A and 3 . 7 . B ) . In a severe example shown , the nuclear envelope has been breached by the unrestrained assembly of F - actin , and nuclear content ( c - Myc in this case ) is diffused in the cytosol ( Figure 3 . 7A , right panels , see arrow ) . By contrast , wild - type keratinocytes exhibited predominant nuclear localization of the same transcription factors ( Figures 3 . 7A and 3 . 7 . B , left panels ) . Chapter 3 ½ Consequences of ADF and CFL1 depletion in tissue and cell homeostasis 85 Figure 3 . 7 . Nuclear membrane disruption upon ADF / CFL1 loss leads to leaking of nuclear transcription factors into the cytosol . ( A - B ) IF staining of keratinocytes isolated from mouse tails for the transcription factors c - myc ( A ) and SRF ( B ) . Zoomed images inset . Arrows indicate areas of apparent nuclear disruption . ( C ) ADF - null SCCs treated with siRNAs and stained for c - myc . ( D ) Quantification of nuclear and cytoplasmic staining for c - myc in ADF - null SCCs treated as in ( C ) . Data presented as mean ±SEM ( n > 230 cells contained in three or more fields were quantified from two individual experiments in ImageJ ) . * * Unpaired t - test p value = 0 . 002 . Nuclei and F - actin were counterstained with DAPI and phalloidin , respectively . The scale bars correspond to 20µm . Similar was the response when CFL1 was depleted in ADF - null SCCs , where almost half the amount of total cellular c - Myc was found to have cytoplasmic localization ( Figure 3 . 7C , quantified in 3 . 7D ) . These data suggest that the deformations observed in the nuclear envelope upon A 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 siNT siCFL1 c - M yc l e v e l s ( a . u . ) cytoplasmic nuclear * * SRF F - actin DAPI B C D c - Myc F - actin DAPI ADF + / + CFL1 + / + ADF - / - CFL1 - / - keratinocytes keratinocytes c - Myc F - actin DAPI s i N T s i C F L1 ADF - null SCCs ADF + / + CFL1 + / + ADF - / - CFL1 - / - Chapter 3 ½ Consequences of ADF and CFL1 depletion in tissue and cell homeostasis 86 ADF / CFL1 loss do not affect only the shape of the cell nucleus , but may indeed jeopardize the integrity of the organelle , leading to some of its content being leaked into the cytoplasm . 3 . 2 . 7 ADF and CFL1 depletion triggers damage - induced signalling and cell death Considering the severity of the consequences of ADF / CFL1 depletion in cells , we next set out to investigate their fate . To this end , firstly , we performed a cell cycle analysis on siRNA - treated ADF - null SCCs and found that almost the entire cell population had shifted into a sub - G1 phase within 72h following ADF / CFL1 depletion , whereas proliferation seemed to have by enlarge halted 24h past siCFL1 treatment ( Figure 3 . 8A ) . The small sub - G1 population of cells treated with control non - targeting siRNAs most likely represents a mixture of naturally occurring apoptosis in cultured cells and cytotoxicity of the transfection reagent . In addition , we followed and assessed biochemically the expression of some apoptotic markers in siRNA - treated ADF - null SCCs ( Figure 3 . 8B ) . As shown by the western blot performed with cell extracts from cells treated with siRNAs for 24h , 48h or 72h , many of these markers , such as active ( cleaved ) caspases and cleaved lamin A were elevated in the siCFL1 - treated cells , whereas total PARP levels were decreased . Furthermore , the halt in cell cycle progression of ADF / CFL1 depleted cells is supported from this experiment as well , as the total Plk1 levels , which is a kinase essential for maturation of the centrosomes and G2 / M transition , were decreased , especially at 72h post - transfection . Despite being present in the SCCs , CFL2 levels remain unchanged after the treatments , indicating that it does not try to compensate for the ADF / CFL1 loss . Notably , all these responses are triggered as soon as CFL1 levels are completely abolished 48h after the siRNA treatment , indicating how pivotal for cell survival and homeostasis are the shared activities of ADF and CFL1 . The same responses were verified in another independent ADF - null SCC cell line and in normal keratinocytes ( data not shown ) . Chapter 3 ½ Consequences of ADF and CFL1 depletion in tissue and cell homeostasis 87 Figure 3 . 8 . ADF / CFL1 depletion triggers damage - induced signalling and cell death . ( A ) Cell cycle profile over 72h of ADF - null SCCs treated with siNT or siCFL1 . Images of fluorescently stained nuclei were acquired and analyzed using the Olympus Scan ^ R acquisition software . Nuclei were gated according to their total intensity , which correlates with total DNA content and the stage of the cell cycle , to G1 phase ( green ) and S / G2 phase ( blue ) . Red corresponds to nuclei falling outside of these two gates . Black arrows indicate G1 phase and red arrows show a sub - G1 shift of siRNA treated cells . The experiment was repeated twice with two different cell lines . Pooled data of two cell lines from one representative experiment is shown . ( B ) Western blot analysis showing the expression of apoptotic markers over time in 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 siNT siCFL1 ( 2d ) siCFL1 ( 5d ) c e ll v i ab ili t y ( a . u . ) * * * B A siNT siCFL1 ADF Null SCCs 0 1 x 10 5 2 x 10 5 3 x 10 5 4 x 10 5 5 x 10 5 Total Intensity DAPI C e ll c oun t 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 C e ll c oun t 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 C e ll c oun t 5 15 25 35 45 55 65 75 85 95 C e ll c oun t 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 C e ll c oun t 5 15 25 35 45 55 65 75 85 95 C e ll c oun t 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 0 1 x 10 5 2 x 10 5 3 x 10 5 4 x 10 5 5 x 10 5 Total Intensity DAPI 0 1 x 10 5 2 x 10 5 3 x 10 5 4 x 10 5 5 x 10 5 Total Intensity DAPI 24h 48h 72h ADF - null SCCs 24h 48h 72h Total Intensity Hoechst 33342 Total Intensity Hoechst 33342 Total Intensity Hoechst 33342 s i N T s i C F L1 Lamin A / C cl - Lamin A PARP Plk1 GAPDH cl - Casp3 γ H2AX cl - Casp6 CFL1 CFL2 24h 48h 72h 24h 48h 72h siNT siCFL1 0 5 10 15 siNT siCFL1 γ H 2 AX l e v e l s / c e ll ( a . u . ) * * * F G γ H2AX DAPI A D F + / + C F L1 + / + A D F - / - C F L1 - / - γ H2AX F - actin DAPI keratinocytes A D F + / + C F L1 + / + A D F - / - C F L1 - / - C s i N T s i C F L1 ADF - null SCCs D γ H2AX F - actin DAPI E murine skin Chapter 3 ½ Consequences of ADF and CFL1 depletion in tissue and cell homeostasis 88 ADF - null SCCs treated with siRNAs . ( C - E ) Primary mouse tail keratinocytes ( C ) , siRNA - treated ADF - null SCCs ( D ) and PE mouse skin sections ( E ) IF stained for the DNA - damage factor γ H2AX . Zoomed images of boxed sections are shown below panels . White arrow indicates positively stained cell in mouse epidermis and white dashed lines the basement membrane . Nuclei and F - actin were counterstained with DAPI and phalloidin , respectively . The scale bars correspond to 20µm . ( F ) Quantification of γ H2AX levels in ADF - null SCCs treated as in ( D ) . Data presented as mean ±SEM ( n = 39 cells contained in three or more fields were quantified from two individual experiments in ImageJ ) . * * * Unpaired t - test p value < 0 . 0001 . ( G ) Cell viability of siRNA - treated ADF - null SCCs assessed by alamar blue assays over time . Data presented as mean ±SEM ( n = 3 independent experiments for the 2 day treatments but only one experiment was followed up to five days , hence , no statistical analysis is provided for this result ) . Interestingly , the loss of ADF and CFL1 also appears to elicit a DNA damage response , as indicated by upregulation of the expression levels of the phosphorylated histone variant H2AX ( γ H2AX ) ( Figure 3 . 8B ) . In light of our previous findings about the aberrant actin bundles challenging the nuclear integrity , it is interesting to speculate that the genome integrity would most likely also be affected and trigger , in turn , a DNA - damage response . To further test this hypothesis , we performed immunofluorescent staining in ADF - null SCCs treated with siRNAs , as well as ADF / CFL1 null keratinocytes and skin sections , for γ H2AX , as an indicator for DNA double strand breaks ( Figures 3 . 8C , 3 . 8D , 3 . 8E and quantification in 3 . 8F ) . We found that there is indeed a very significant increase in DNA damage foci in the ADF / CFL1 depleted cells in vivo as well as in vitro . However , we have not been able to unequivocally associate these DNA breaks with the nuclear membrane deformation / rupture occurring upon ADF / CFL1 depletion as it may also be a consequence of the induction of apoptosis , albeit it serves as an intriguing speculation . Lastly , as it was already alluded to , the viability of cells depleted of both , ADF and CFL1 , is severely diminished , with only about half the population being viable up to 48h post - depletion and less then 5 % still being metabolically active after five days ( Figure 3 . 8G ) . In conclusion , our data indicate that ADF and CFL1 , but not CFL2 , are required to prevent catastrophic accumulation of actin in cells that physically damages the nucleus and impairs cell and tissue homeostasis , which result in the induction of cell death pathways . Chapter 3 ½ Consequences of ADF and CFL1 depletion in tissue and cell homeostasis 89 3 . 2 . 8 Accumulation of actin bundles leading to loss of nuclear integrity and cell death is dependent on the shared activities of ADF / cofilins To assess whether the cellular responses described herein are a direct consequence of loss of the shared activities of ADF and CFL1 we performed rescue experiments with all three ADF / cofilin members individually , including CFL2 . To do so , expression of exogenous wild - type proteins was introduced to ADF - null SCCs via retroviral infections . Control cells were transduced with the empty vector ( pWZL ) alone . When the endogenous CFL1 transcript in the CFL1 - transduced cells was depleted using siRNAs targeting its untranslated region , the cell shape changes , as well as the accumulation of actin bundles associated with the loss of ADF / CFL1 were prevented ( Figures 3 . 9A and 3 . 9B ) . This was not the case when CFL1 was depleted using the same siRNAs in ADF - null SCCs expressing the empty vector . This rescue was achieved by a modest expression of the exogenous protein , since expression in greater amounts could not be attained ( Figure 3 . 9C and quantification in 3 . 9D ) . Regardless of the amount of CFL1 expression , the number of wild - type CFL1 transduced cells displaying aberrant actin cytoskeleton after the endogenous protein was depleted was not significantly different to that of control cells treated with control siRNAs ( Figure 3 . 9E ) . The result was similar regarding the morphology of their nuclei ; exogenous introduction of CFL1 prevented nuclear fragmentation or deformation following loss of the endogenous protein ( Figure 3 . 9F ) . Additionally , CFL1 - transduced cells do not exhibit the same extent of DNA damage 48h following endogenous CFL1 depletion and their viability is significantly enhanced ( Figure 3 . 9G quantified in 3 . 9H and Figure 3 . 9J ) . We next examined whether re - introduction of wild - type ADF in the ADF - null SCCs is able to prevent the development of the same cellular responses when they are depleted of CFL1 . We found that indeed ADF re - expression can supress the acquisition of aberrant cell shape , the accumulation of F - actin , as well as the subsequent deformation and fragmentation of the Chapter 3 ½ Consequences of ADF and CFL1 depletion in tissue and cell homeostasis 90 Figure 3 . 9 . Exogenous wild - type CFL1 expression prevents the cellular responses associated with ADF / CFL1 loss . ( A ) Phase - contrast images of ADF - null SCCs transduced either with an empty vector ( pWZL ) or a vector expressing wild - type CFL1 ( pWZL + CFL1 ) , and treated with siNT or siCFL1 UTR in order to deplete the endogenous protein . ( B ) ADF - null SCCs treated as in ( A ) and fluorescently labeled for F - actin . ( C ) Western blot 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 pWZL pWZL + CFL1 c e ll v i ab i l i t y ( s i C F L1 / s i N T ) 0 0 . 3 0 . 6 0 . 9 1 . 2 1 . 5 pWZL pWZL + CFL1 p r o t e i n l e v e l s a . u . siNT siNT siCFL1 UTR siCFL1 UTR pWZL pWZL + CFL1 F - actin DAPI ADF - null SCCs + siNT + siCFL1 UTR p W Z L p W Z L + C F L1 CFL1 GAPDH p W Z L + C F L1 p W Z L 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 siNT siCFL1 siNT siCFL1 pWZL pWZL + CFL1 c e ll s w i t h abe rr an t a c t i n cy t o sk e l e t on + siNT + siCFL1 UTR γ H 2 AX F - a c t i n D AP I 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 siNT siCFL1 siNT siCFL1 pWZL pWZL + CFL1 γ H 2 A X l e v e l s / c e ll ( a . u . ) 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 siNT siCFL1 siNT siCFL1 pWZL pWZL + CFL1 non - f r ag m en t ed nu c l e i * * A B C D E F G H J p W Z L p W Z L + C F L1 * * * ns * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * ns Chapter 3 ½ Consequences of ADF and CFL1 depletion in tissue and cell homeostasis 91 analysis comparing CFL1 levels in the transduced cell lines , and ( D ) quantification of two individual western blots performed in ImageJ . Data presented as mean ±SD . ( E - F ) Quantification of cells displaying aberrant actin cytoskeleton ( E ) , and harbouring non - fragmented – ‘normal’ – nuclei ( F ) after being treated as in ( A ) . Data presented as mean ±SEM ( n = 167 cells quantified in total contained in three or more fields per condition from two independent experiments ) . * * * One - way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test ; p value < 0 . 0001 . ( G ) IF images for γ H2AX of cells treated as in ( A ) . ( H ) Quantification of γ H2AX levels per cell based on total IF intensity performed in ImageJ . Data presented as mean ±SEM ( n = 114 cells quantified in total contained in three or more fields per condition from two independent experiments ) . * * * Kruskal - Wallis with Dunn’s multiple comparisons tests ; p value ≤ 0 . 0005 . ( J ) Cell viability 48h post - siRNA - treatment of the transduced cell lines assessed by alamar blue assays . Data presented as mean fold change of viability between the two treatments ±SEM ( n = 3 independent experiments ) . * * Unpaired t - test p value = 0 . 0007 . Nuclei were counterstained with DAPI and F - actin with phalloidin in all IF experiments . The scale bars correspond to 125µm in phase - contrast and 20µm in IF images , respectively . nuclei of cells devoid of CFL1 ( Figures 3 . 10A , 3 . 10B , 3 . 10C and 3 . 10D ) . However , albeit the ADF re - expression offers a significant advantage in viability of the CFL1 depleted cells , complete rescue could not be achieved in this regard ( Figure 3 . 10E ) . Over - expression of CFL2 , on the other hand , offered some , but not complete , rescue of the cell morphology of ADF / CFL1 depleted cells ( Figure 3 . 11A ) . The level of CFL2 over - expression achieved in the ADF - null SCCs was ~ 4 - 5 - fold above the endogenous levels of the isoform , as assessed in the protein and mRNA level , respectively ( Figure 3 . 11B quantified in 3 . 11C and Figure 3 . 11D ) . According to transcript quantitation by qPCR performed on extracts derived from three independent wild - type SCC cell lines , CFL1 was shown to be the main isoform of the ADF / cofilin family expressed in these cells ( Figure 3 . 11E ) . Relative expression of ADF was found to be ~ 5 - 6 - fold less than that of CFL1 , whereas CFL2 was expressed ~ 35 - fold less ( Figure 3 . 11E ) . This means that the total relative amount of available CFL2 in the CFL2 - over - expressing cells is comparable with the endogenous ADF expression levels expected to be found in wild - type SCC cells . This increase in CFL2 expression was adequate to significantly reduce the F - actin accumulation and nuclear fragmentation occurring after ADF / CFL1 double depletion when compared to control cells not over - expressing CFL2 ( Figures 3 . 11F and 3 . 11G ) . Furthermore , it offered a significant cell viability advantage to the ADF - null Chapter 3 ½ Consequences of ADF and CFL1 depletion in tissue and cell homeostasis 92 Figure 3 . 10 . ADF re - introduction rescues the cellular responses that follow ADF / CFL1 depletion in ADF - null SCCs . ( A ) Phase - contrast ( top panels ) and IF for lamin A / C ( bottom panels ) images of ADF - null SCCs transduced either with an empty vector ( pWZL ) or a vector expressing wild - type ADF ( pWZL + ADF ) , and treated with control or CFL1 - targeting siRNAs . Nuclei were counterstained with DAPI and F - actin with phalloidin . The scale bars correspond to 125µm in phase - contrast and 20µm in IF images , respectively . ( B ) Western blot analysis showing the successful re - introduction of ADF in the transduced ADF - null SCCs . ( C ) Quantification of total F - actin levels per cell based on total phalloidin intensity of cells treated as in ( A ) performed in ImageJ . Data presented as mean ±SEM ( n = 92 - 106 cells quantified per condition contained in three or more fields in three independent experiments ) . * * * Kruskal - Wallis with Dunn’s multiple comparisons tests ; p value ≤ 0 . 0005 . ( D ) Quantification of cells having non - fragmented – ‘normal’ – nuclei after being treated as in ( A ) . Data presented as mean ±SEM ( n = 100 or more cells quantified per condition per repeat in three or more fields in three independent experiments ) . * * * One - way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test ; p value < 0 . 0001 . ( E ) Cell viability 48h post - siRNA - treatment of the transduced cell lines assessed by alamar blue assays . Data presented as mean fold change of viability between the two treatments ±SEM ( n = 4 independent experiments ) . * * * Unpaired t - test p value < 0 . 0001 . SCCs that was equivalent to the one gained after ADF re - introduction in these cells ( Figure 3 . 11H ) . In conclusion , our results suggest that the accumulation of aberrant actin filaments that promote loss of nuclear integrity and eventually cell death when ADF and CFL1 are depleted , is a direct consequence of loss of the shared cellular activities of the ADF / cofilin family members . 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 pWZL pWZL + ADF c e ll v i ab ili t y ( s i C F L1 / s i N T ) + s i N T + s i C F L1 pWZL pWZL + ADF + s i N T + s i C F L1 Lamin A / C F - actin DAPI ADF - null SCCs β - actin ADF p W Z L p W Z L + A D F 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 siNT siCFL1 siNT siCFL1 pWZL pWZL + ADF F - a c t i n ( a . u . ) * * * * * * * * * 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 siNT siCFL1 siNT siCFL1 pWZL pWZL + ADF non - f r ag m en t ed nu c l e i * * * * * * * * * * * * A B C D E Chapter 3 ½ Consequences of ADF and CFL1 depletion in tissue and cell homeostasis 93 Figure 3 . 11 . CFL2 over - expression rescues the cellular responses that follow ADF / CFL1 depletion . ( A ) Phase - contrast ( left panels ) and IF for lamin A / C ( right panels ) images of ADF - null SCCs transduced either with an empty vector ( pWZL ) or a vector expressing wild - type CFL2 ( pWZL + CFL2 ) , and treated with siNT or siCFL1 . Nuclei were counterstained with DAPI and F - actin with phalloidin . The scale bars correspond to 125µm in phase - contrast and 20µm in IF images , respectively . ( B ) Western blot analysis showing the over - expression of CFL2 in the transduced ADF - null SCCs , and ( C ) quantification of the experiment performed in ImageJ . ( D ) Confirmation of CFL2 over - expression was also assessed by qPCR . Data presented as mean ± SD ( one representative experiment is shown ) . ( E ) Relative expression of ADF , CFL1 and CFL2 in wild - type SCCs . Results were generated from three individual cell lines and data is presented as mean ±SEM . The amplification efficiency of the primers was determined and a single threshold was calculated in order for the results to + siNT + siCFL1 p W Z L p W Z L + C F L2 + siNT + siCFL1 ADF - null SCCs CFL2 β - actin p W Z L + C F L2 p W Z L 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 siNT siCFL1 siNT siCFL1 pWZL pWZL + CFL2 F - a c t i n ( a . u . ) * * * * * * * A B 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 siNT siCFL1 siNT siCFL1 pWZL pWZL + CFL2 non - f r ag m en t ed nu c l e i * * * * * * 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 pWZL pWZL + CFL2 c e ll v i ab ili t y ( s i C F L1 / s i N T ) * * 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 pWZL pWZL + CFL2 p r o t e i n l e v e l s ( a . u . ) C D E 0 1 2 3 4 5 pWZL pWZL + CFL2 C f l 2 r e l a t i v e e x p r e ss i on F G H 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 CFL1 ADF CFL2 r e l a t i v e e x p r e ss i on wild type SCCs * * * * * * * * * Lamin A / C F - actin DAPI Cfl1 Adf Cfl2 Chapter 3 ½ Consequences of ADF and CFL1 depletion in tissue and cell homeostasis 94 be comparable . * * * One - way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test ; p value < 0 . 0001 . ( F ) Quantification of total F - actin levels per cell based on total phalloidin intensity of cells treated as in ( A ) performed in ImageJ . Data presented as mean ±SEM ( n = 69 - 114 cells quantified per condition contained in three or more fields in three independent experiments ) . Kruskal - Wallis with Dunn’s multiple comparisons tests ; * p value ≤ 0 . 02 ; * * * p value ≤ 0 . 0001 . ( G ) Quantification of cells having non - fragmented – ‘normal’ – nuclei after being treated as in ( A ) . Data presented as mean ±SEM ( n = 80 or more cells quantified per condition per repeat in three or more fields in four independent experiments ) . * * * One - way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test ; p value < 0 . 0001 . ( H ) Cell viability 48h post - siRNA - treatment of the transduced cell lines assessed by alamar blue assays . Data presented as mean fold change of viability between the two treatments ±SEM ( n = 4 independent experiments ) . * * Unpaired t - test p value = 0 . 002 . Chapter 3 ½ Consequences of ADF and CFL1 depletion in tissue and cell homeostasis 95 3 . 3 Discussion Taken together our results demonstrate an unequivocal role of the shared functions of ADF and CFL1 in maintaining tissue and cell homeostasis . Suppressing their activities in keratin 14 expressing cells in the epidermis leads to a pronounced thickening of the tissue , aberrant cell differentiation and increased mitotic entry . Intracellularly , these cells accumulate a striking amount of actin filaments , which are not typically found in such extents in this tissue . Cell - cell junctions are an integral part of epidermal homeostasis since they mediate the formation of epithelial sheets ( Fuchs and Raghavan , 2002 ; Vaezi et al . , 2002 ) . Interestingly , the actin cytoskeleton has also been shown to be an essential mediator of epithelial sheet formation by coordinating cell stratification in conjunction with the intercellular junctions ( Fuchs and Raghavan , 2002 ; Vaezi et al . , 2002 ) . Since the actin cytoskeleton is visibly perturbed once the activities of ADF and CFL1 are removed , it would be safe to conclude that a subsequent dysregulation in the epithelial cell - cell contacts could account to some extent for the total loss of homeostasis and disarrangement of cells within the tissue . Increased actin content , aberrant cell morphology , increased proliferation and DNA - damage response were also evident in adult hepatocytes depleted of ADF and CFL1 ( data not shown ) ( Kanellos et al . , 2015 ) . This suggests that the roles of ADF / cofilins in maintaining tissue homeostasis are not restricted to just the skin , but are more widespread and required for the proper function and maintenance of a variety of tissues . ADF / CFL1 depletion in cultured malignant keratinocytes , also led to increased actin polymerization and aberrant actin bundle formation . These unregulated actin fibers were tethered into enlarged focal adhesions . Interestingly , the recruitment of vinculin in focal adhesions is regulated in a force dependent manner ; enlargement of focal adhesions is promoted by increased contractile forces pulling onto the adhesions , whereas a decrease in these forces activates their disassembly ( Bershadsky et al . , 2003 ; Galbraith et al . , 2002 ; Grashoff et al . , 2010 ) . In this regard , vinculin levels reached a 20 - Chapter 3 ½ Consequences of ADF and CFL1 depletion in tissue and cell homeostasis 96 fold increase in the doubly depleted cells ( Figures 3 . 4B and 3 . 4D ) . Arguably , this serves as a reflection of an increase in contractile forces applied to these adhesions by the aberrant transcytoplasmic actin bundles , and suggests that these unregulated actin filaments arising after ADF / CFL1 depletion , create excessive transcytoplasmic tension that triggers the enlargement of the focal adhesions into which they are tethered . Consequently , the formation of these enlarged adhesions could account for the decreased motility observed in the depleted cells , since in their effort to move by extending their lamella and forming new adhesions in the area of extension , they experience difficulty to turn over the old strong adhesions . This increased tension may account for the characteristic flattened morphology that ADF / CFL1 depleted cells present . Of note , increased tension itself is thought to be able to promote actin fiber aggregation and bundle formation ( Walcott and Sun , 2010 ) . Aside from triggering focal adhesion enlargement , the tensile actin filaments arising upon ADF / CFL1 depletion are promoting nuclear deformation and loss of nuclear integrity . However , whether these bundles are actively puncturing the nucleus , or the nucleus is passively ‘squeezed’ onto them attempting to accommodate itself in the available space among them remains to be elucidated . Nevertheless , the consequences for the cells are severe , since some nuclear material was found to escape from the nucleus into the cytosol , and the genome integrity is also challenged with a significant rise of DNA breaks . Of interest is also that despite the current belief that CFL2 represents a muscle - specific isoform of the ADF / cofilin family , we were able to readily detect its presence in wild - type keratinocytes , as well as malignant SCC cells . In either case , the levels of its expression were not affected following the double depletion of the other two members of the family , ADF and CFL1 . This initially suggested that despite its presence , CFL2 is unable to compensate for the ADF and CFL1 loss . However , performing rescue experiments with all three mammalian ADF / cofilin members independently , allowed us to assess directly whether the cellular responses associated with the ADF / CFL1 loss are due to redundant roles between the isoforms , and whether some of these roles can be Chapter 3 ½ Consequences of ADF and CFL1 depletion in tissue and cell homeostasis 97 carried out by CFL2 as well . Surprisingly , we found that over - expressing CFL2 is able to significantly prevent actin filament formation and offer enhanced cell viability following depletion of ADF and CFL1 , a rescue of similar extent to that of ADF re - introduction to ADF - null SCCs , and in support of the recent findings that show that CFL2 is as potent actin filament severer as ADF and CFL1 ( Chin et al . , 2016 ) Of note , none of the individual re - expression experiments was sufficient to provide a total rescue of the depleted cells . The outcome of the interaction between ADF / cofilin members and actin filaments is now widely accepted to be dependent upon the relative concentration and abundance among the former and the latter ( the cofilin / actin ratio ) ( Andrianantoandro and Pollard , 2006 ) . This may offer some explanation for the differential rescue capabilities exhibited by the different isoforms . Cells may be in need of a very fine balance in the levels of these proteins at any given moment in order to successfully maintain homeostasis , suggesting that a simple re - expression of either member of the ADF / cofilin family is not sufficient in this regard . This may also offer an explanation regarding the difficulty to introduce exogenous wild - type CFL1 in ADF - null cells . Since CFL1 is the predominant isoform in the SCCs , its abrupt downregulation with siRNAs ( or any other modulation of its finely maintained level ) cannot be tolerated by the cells . Another study offered similar conclusions to ours , since it was reported that over - expression of CFL1 in human lung cancer epithelial cells results in cell cycle arrest ( Lee and Keng , 2005 ) . In our rescue experiments exogenous CFL1 rescued the formation of aberrant actin filaments , but cells were still facing other aberrations like poly - nucleation , suggesting cell cycle defects . In fact , cell cycle defects , multinucleated cells and unresolved contractile rings formed in the later stages of cell division were very frequent in the ADF / CFL1 depleted cells . However , this aspect of the phenotype was not studied further , since it has already been shown by others that contractile ring regulation during cytokinesis is included in the cellular roles of CFL1 ( Chen and Pollard , 2011 ; Hotulainen et al . , 2005 ; Nakano and Mabuchi , 2006 ) . ADF or CFL1 silencing in rat adenocarcinoma cells leads to decreased levels of Chapter 3 ½ Consequences of ADF and CFL1 depletion in tissue and cell homeostasis 98 mitosis and increased occurrence of multinucleated cells ( Tahtamouni et al . , 2013 ) , while overexpression of ADF1 in the fission yeast – the only member of ADF / cofilin in S . pombe ( Maciver and Hussey , 2002 ) – completely abolishes its ability to grow and divide because of defects in cytokinesis , with the vast majority of cells becoming multinucleated within 20h of overexpression ( Nakano and Mabuchi , 2006 ) . In conclusion , the interference in normal cytoskeleton dynamics , by depleting ADF and CFL1 , appears to trigger cellular catastrophe by multifaceted cellular responses . Firstly , cells cannot control the overassembly of aberrant actin filaments . Secondly , this filament accumulation leads to build of intracellular tension that , in turn , affects cell motility , adhesion and loss of nuclear integrity . Thirdly , their genomic integrity is affected and they also encounter increased incidence of impaired cell division . These responses were similar both , in vivo and in vitro , either in 4 - OHT - induced deletion for CFL1 in normal keratinocytes , or with siRNAs targeting ADF and CFL1 transcripts in cancer cells . Additionally , since the exogenous introduction of any ADF / cofilin member can prevent the manifestation of these phenotypes to a significant extent , we conclude that it is the shared activities of ADF / cofilins that are pivotal for the maintenance of cell and tissue homeostasis . Chapter 4 ½ Mediators of the cell responses associated with the loss of ADF and CFL1 99 Chapter 4 Mediators of the cell responses associated with the loss of ADF and CFL1 Chapter 4 ½ Mediators of the cell responses associated with the loss of ADF and CFL1 100 4 . 1 Introduction In Chapter 3 we delineate the consequences that double depletion of the ADF / cofilin members ADF and CFL1 has in the phenotype of cells in vivo within a tissue as well as in cells grown in culture . In summary , their co - depletion in mouse skin triggered loss of epidermal homeostasis characterized by increased keratinocyte proliferation and abnormal thickening of the epidermis . Loss of ADF / CFL1 in cultured normal or malignant keratinocytes ( SCCs ) also led to aberrant cell morphology with multiple membrane protrusions . Both , in vivo and in vitro , double depletion of ADF and CFL1 promoted the formation of aberrant transcytoplasmic actin bundles that appeared to be associated with nuclear deformation . In normal keratinocytes as well as SCCs , these aberrant actin filaments caused physical disruption of the nuclear membrane , leading to release of nuclear content into the cytosol , and were associated with DNA double strand breaks . Ultimately , these multifaceted cell responses promoted significant loss of cell viability as soon as the collective activities of ADF and CFL1 were removed . Once the main consequences for cell and tissue homeostasis upon ADF / CFL1 loss were defined , we set out to investigate what are the main signalling pathways that mediate these responses , and this comprises the main focus of the present chapter . Specifically , we sought to gain a greater understanding of the molecular events modulating the uncontrolled actin assembly following ADF / CFL1 depletion , and investigate which F - actin nucleation pathways are implicated in the aberrant actin fiber accumulation . Furthermore , we investigated what is the nature of the relationship between these fibers and the nuclear envelope , and what is the molecular mechanism associated with the nuclear deformation triggered upon ADF / CFL1 loss . Finally , we assessed whether there is a positive correlation between the aberrant actin assembly , the loss of nuclear integrity and the cell viability of the depleted cells . Chapter 4 ½ Mediators of the cell responses associated with the loss of ADF and CFL1 101 4 . 2 Results 4 . 2 . 1 ADF and CFL1 depletion promotes enhanced SRF / MAL transcriptional activity In pursuit of the molecular mechanism responsible for the cell responses that follow ADF / CFL1 deletion in epithelial cells , expression profiling of ADF + / + CFL1 + / + and ADF - / - CFL1 - / - keratinocytes was performed using a mouse genome expression array . This allowed us to identify differentially regulated sets of associated genes . The analysis was performed with mouse tail keratinocytes that were isolated from three control and three ADF / CFL1 null mice . The knockout efficiency for ADF / CFL1 depletion in the samples analysed was confirmed by qPCR ( Figure 4 . 1A ) ; ADF , since it is genetically deleted , was barely detectable and CFL1 was significantly downregulated by 3 - 4 - fold in the experimental samples . CFL2 levels were also assessed , but no significant changes were noted . CFL1 knockout levels were also assessed at the protein level by western blot analysis from cell extracts derived from another pair of mice treated in parallel with the ones used for the microarray analysis . ( Figure 4 . 1B , quantified in 4 . 1C ) . This further verified the successful downregulation of the protein after induction with 4 - OHT . Following data analysis , 42 genes were found to be significantly up - or down - regulated in our samples ( Figure 4 . 1D ) . Hierarchical cluster analysis performed with this set of most significant differentially expressed transcripts between wild - type and ADF / CFL1 null keratinocytes revealed successful clustering of the samples by their different genotypes . Furthermore , clustering according to the expression calls of these genes separated them in two main clusters depending whether they are significantly up - or down - regulated in the wild - type or null cells ( Figure 4 . 1D , left dendrogram ) . ADF ( annotated with its gene symbol Dstn ) was the most significantly downregulated transcript in the dataset , providing confidence with regards to the accuracy of expression calls derived from the microarray analysis . Gene ontology enrichment analysis on this set of 42 differentially expressed genes performed with the DAVID bioinformatics database confirmed that the most significantly enriched terms Chapter 4 ½ Mediators of the cell responses associated with the loss of ADF and CFL1 102 Figure 4 . 1 . Expression profiling of ADF / CFL1 depleted keratinocytes . Primary tail keratinocytes derived from three wild - type ( WT ) ADF + / + CFL1 + / + mice and three ADF / CFL1 - null ( Null ) ADF - / - CFL1 - / - mice were subjected to a microarray expression analysis . ( A ) Samples were assessed for ADF , CFL1 and CFL2 levels by qPCR . Data presented as mean ±SEM . * * Unpaired t - test p value < 0 . 005 . ( B ) The knockout efficiency was also assessed at the protein level by western blot of tail keratinocytes derived from another pair of mice treated in parallel with the ones used for microarray analysis . ( C ) Quantification of the western blot in ( B ) using ImageJ . ( D ) Hierarchical cluster analysis of the most significant differentially expressed transcripts between WT and nulls based on rank product analysis with 100 permutations and proportion of false positives ( pfp ) < 0 . 05 . Each column corresponds to single arrays and each row to independent probe sets . Blue colour indicates lower and red Chapter 4 ½ Mediators of the cell responses associated with the loss of ADF and CFL1 103 higher expression . Red and green arrows indicate SRF and YAP / TAZ transcription target genes , respectively . ( E ) Gene Ontology enrichment analysis for cellular components performed in DAVID database ; p < 0 . 05 with Benjamini – Hochberg post hoc correction , and ( F ) interaction network analysis of the most significant differentially expressed transcripts . The size of the nodes indicates the probability of a hit being false positive and blue and red colour the higher expression in the nulls or the wt , respectively . Yellow and purple boxes indicate SRF / MAL and YAP / TAZ target genes , respectively . Figures ( D ) and ( F ) courtesy of Dr Adam Byron . were falling in the categories of the cell ‘cytoskeleton’ and ‘keratin filaments’ , consistent with the roles of ADF / cofilins in regulating actin dynamics and with the perturbation of tissue homeostasis upon their loss described in chapter 3 ( Figure 4 . 1E ) . An interaction network analysis further confirmed that the differentially expressed genes are clustering in distinct groups ( Figure 4 . 1F ) . Interestingly , the centre of the cluster of the most upregulated genes in ADF / CFL1 depleted cells is occupied by three transcripts coding for alpha actin 2 ( Acta2 ) , myosin regulatory light chain 9 ( Myl9 ) and filamin - A ( Flna ) , which are not only associated with actin filaments in cells , but are also target genes of the same transcriptional pathway , the SRF / MAL pathway ( Figure 4 . 1F , yellow boxes and Figure 4 . 1D , red lines ) ( Olson and Nordheim , 2010 ) . Moreover , a YAP / TAZ regulated gene , which encodes the connective tissue growth factor ( Ctgf ) protein , that its expression was recently shown to be affected by the actin cytoskeleton ( Aragona et al . , 2013 ) , was identified in the same list of upregulated genes ( Figure 4 . 1F , purple box and Figure 4 . 1D , green line ) . This prompted us to examine the expression of several target genes that are downstream of the SRF / MAL , or the YAP / TAZ pathways ( Aragona et al . , 2013 ; Olson and Nordheim , 2010 ) , in order to verify whether indeed the activity of these pathways is enhanced in ADF / CFL1 depleted keratinocytes and SCCs ( Figure 4 . 2 ) . qPCR data confirmed that both transcription pathways are highly activated , since the expression of almost every target gene examined was upregulated upon ADF / CFL1 loss ( Figures 4 . 2A and 4 . 2B for SRF / MAL target genes ; Figures 4 . 2C and 4 . 2D for YAP / TAZ target genes ) . The differences in expression are more pronounced in SCC cells , presumably because they represent a less mixed population of cells as opposed to tail Chapter 4 ½ Mediators of the cell responses associated with the loss of ADF and CFL1 104 Figure 4 . 2 . ADF / CFL1 depletion causes increased expression of SRF / MAL and YAP / TAZ target genes . ( A - D ) Primary tail keratinocytes isolated from ADF + / + CFL1 + / + and ADF - / - CFL1 - / - mice , and ADF - null SCCs treated with siNT or siCFL1 were assessed for the expression levels of known SRF / MAL ( A - B ) and YAP / TAZ ( C - D ) target genes by qPCR . Data presented as mean ±SEM ( n = 3 mice per condition and three independent experiments for siRNA - mediated knockdown ) . Unpaired t - tests ; * p value ≤ 0 . 05 ; * * p value ≤ 0 . 003 ; * * * p value ≤ 0 . 0006 . extracted mouse keratinocytes , and the siRNA mediated depletion of CFL1 is more efficient than 4 - OHT treatment of CFL1 - floxed mice . It is worth noting that the majority of the SRF / MAL target genes represent important cytoskeletal and cell adhesion components , including actin itself , which previously were found to be perturbed after ADF / CFL1 depletion ( see chapter 3 ) . In addition , it is widely appreciated that the 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 ACTA2 r e l a t i v e e x p r e ss i on 0 5 10 15 20 25 MYL9 * * * * keratinocytes * * 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 ACTA2 r e l a t i v e e x p r e ss i on siNT siCFL1 * * * 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 MYL9 ADF - null SCCs A * * * * * 0 1 2 3 4 B 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 CTGF CYR61 ANKRD1 r e l a t i v e e x p r e ss i on siNT siCFL1 ADF - null SCCs * * * * * * * * C D keratinocytes * 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 Ctgf Cyr61 Ankrd1 r e l a t i v e e x p r e ss i on Ctgf Cyr61 Ankrd1 Chapter 4 ½ Mediators of the cell responses associated with the loss of ADF and CFL1 105 SRF / MAL transcriptional activity is directly influenced by actin dynamics . Specifically , it is regulated by the concentration and availability of free actin monomers in cells that have the ability to bind and , therefore , promote cytoplasmic retention of the SRF co - factor MAL ( Olson and Nordheim , 2010 ; Sotiropoulos et al . , 1999 ; Vartiainen et al . , 2007 ) . Since we found that upon ADF / CFL1 depletion the actin monomer pool is greatly reduced in favour of filamentous actin ( Figures 3 . 3A and 3 . 3B ) , we were intrigued to investigate the contribution of the SRF / MAL pathway in the described phenotypes . 4 . 2 . 2 Disruption of nuclear shape and integrity in ADF / CFL1 depleted cells is promoted by Arp2 / 3 and SRF mediated actin filament accumulation Since we found that the enhanced SRF / MAL activity is contributing to the accumulation of actin and actin associated proteins , and as it is well established in the literature that changes in the actin dynamics regulate SRF / MAL transcriptional activity ( Olson and Nordheim , 2010 ; Sotiropoulos et al . , 1999 ) , we sought to investigate how this pathway affects the uncontrolled actin accumulation , and whether this is associated with the loss of nuclear integrity and cell viability observed in the ADF / CFL1 depleted cells . In addition , we explored if any of the main F - actin nucleation pathways are implicated in the aberrant actin fiber accumulation that triggers these cellular responses . Actin filament generation in cells is generally mediated by three main pathways : ( a ) spontaneous actin nucleation and elongation depending on the concentration and availability of free actin monomers , ( b ) nucleation of branched filaments at the sides of pre - existing ones mediated by the Arp2 / 3 complex and ( c ) filament nucleation and polymerization mediated by formins ( Pollard and Cooper , 2009 ) . Therefore , we attempted to determine whether and , if so , which of these assembly pathways were required for the generation of the actin fibers arising upon ADF / CFL1 depletion . To do so , we successfully depleted Arp3 , a critical component of the Arp2 / 3 complex , the two major Chapter 4 ½ Mediators of the cell responses associated with the loss of ADF and CFL1 106 Figure 4 . 3 . Co - depletion of Arp3 or SRF rescues cell morphology of ADF / CFL1 depleted cells . ( A ) Phase - contrast images of ADF - null SCCs treated with siNT or siCFL1 alone or in parallel with siRNAs targeting Arp3 , mDia1 , mDia2 or SRF . Scale bar corresponds to 60µm . ( B ) Western blot confirming the knockdown efficiency of siRNAs against Arp3 , utilised in two different concentrations . ( C ) Knockdown efficiency of two concentrations of siRNAs against mDia1 and mDia2 assessed by qPCR . ( D ) Knockdown efficiency of siRNAs against SRF tested by western blot . ( E ) Quantification of the cell length to width ratio of ADF - null SCCs treated as in ( A ) . Circles represent individual values and bars mean ±SD ( n = 18 - 43 cells per condition from three independent experiments ) . One - way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test ; * p value < 0 . 03 ; * * * p value < 0 . 0001 . A Arp3 s i N T s i A r p3 64n M s i A r p3 32n M β - actin B 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 1 . 4 r e l a t i v e e x p r e ss i on siNT simDia1 32nM simDia1 64nM simDia2 32nM simDia2 64nM mDia1 mDia2 C SRF GAPDH N o t r ea t m en t s i N T 32n M s i N T 64n M s i S R F 32n M s i S R F 64n M D s i N T & s i N T s i C F L1 & s i N T s i A r p3 & s i N T s i A r p3 & s i C F L1 s i m D i a1 & s i N T s i m D i a1 & s i C F L1 s i m D i a2 & s i N T s i m D i a2 & s i C F L1 s i S R F & s i N T s i S R F & s i C F L1 0 5 10 15 c e ll l eng t h / w i d t h r a t i o siNT siCFL1 + - + - + - + - + - - + - + - + - + - + + siArp3 + siNT + simDia1 + simDia2 + siSRF c e ll l eng t h / w i d t h r a t i o 0 5 10 15 * * * * ns p = 0 . 06 ns * ns ns * E + siArp3 + simDia1 s i N T s i C F L1 + simDia2 + siSRF + siNT Chapter 4 ½ Mediators of the cell responses associated with the loss of ADF and CFL1 107 diaphanous - related formins - 1 ( mDia1 ) and - 3 ( mDia2 ) , as well as SRF as means to modulate actin abundance , alongside CFL1 in ADF - null SCCs using RNAi ( Figure 4 . 3 ) . Depletion of each of the two formins alone in ADF - null SCCs resulted in minor phenotypic alterations of the cells . mDia1 knockdown promoted a compact morphology , whereas mDia2 depleted cells exhibited a more elongated cell body compared to the former . Arp3 or SRF depleted cells did not display significant phenotypic differences compared to cells treated with control siRNAs ( Figure 4 . 3A , top panels and Figure 4 . 3E for quantifications of cell length versus width ratios ) . However , co - depletion of either formin alongside CFL1 had no effect on the characteristic flattened , elongated and wider cell morphology with multiple membrane protrusions displayed from ADF / CFL1 depleted cells . In contrast , co - depletion of either Arp3 or SRF with ADF / CFL1 appeared to significantly prevent this aberrant cell morphology ( Figure 4 . 3A , lower panels and Figure 4 . 3E for cell shape quantifications ) . The knockdown efficiency for all the co - depleted proteins was very good , while the higher concentrations of siRNAs were used for all experiments ( Figures 4 . 3B , 4 . 3C and 4 . 3D ) . Next , we determined the extent that the depletion of the above actin modulators affected actin fiber accumulation and nuclear deformation following ADF / CFL1 depletion . To do so , the F - actin content of ADF - null SCCs treated as above was quantified using fluorescence , while the cells were also classified as harbouring either phenotypically normal or fragmented / severely deformed nuclei as previously described ( see Figure 3 . 6D for examples of classification ) . This showed that Arp3 or SRF depletion alongside ADF / CFL1 had the ability to rescue in great extent the actin accumulation occurring when ADF and CFL1 are depleted alone ( Figures 4 . 4A , 4 . 4B and 4 . 4C ) . Interestingly , this was correlated with a significant rescue of the nuclear deformation in the Arp3 or SRF co - depleted cells ( Figure 4 . 4D ) . In contrast , more than 80 % of cells depleted only for ADF / CFL1 acquired fragmented and / or deformed nuclei within 48h of siRNA treatment . Co - depletion of either formin did not have any rescue capabilities regarding the F - actin accumulation Chapter 4 ½ Mediators of the cell responses associated with the loss of ADF and CFL1 108 Figure 4 . 4 . Modulating actin filament accumulation following ADF / CFL1 loss rescues nuclear integrity of the depleted cells . ( A ) IF images for lamin A / C of ADF - null SCCs treated with siNT or siCFL1 alone or in parallel with siRNAs targeting Arp3 , mDia1 , mDia2 or SRF . Nuclei and F - actin were counterstained with DAPI and phalloidin , respectively . Scale bar corresponds to 20µm . ( B - C ) Quantification of total F - actin levels per cell based on A s i N T s i C F L1 La m i n A / C F - a c t i n D AP I + siArp3 + simDia1 + simDia2 + siSRF + siNT * * * 0 4 8 12 16 20 siNT siCFL1 F - a c t i n pe r c e ll ( a . u . ) + siNT + siArp3 + simDia1 + simDia2 * * * * * * * * * * * B 0 4 8 12 16 20 siNT siCFL1 F - a c t i n pe r c e ll ( a . u . ) + siNT + siSRF * * * * * * C siNT siCFL1 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 non - f r ag m en t ed nu c l e i * * * * * * * * * 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 8 c e ll v i ab ili t y ( s i C F L1 / s i N T ) * * D E 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 NT + NT CFL1 + NT NT + Arp3 CFL1 + Arp3 c - M yc ( a . u . ) cytoplasmic nuclear * * ns * * ns 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 NT + NT CFL1 + NT NT + SRF CFL1 + SRF c - M yc ( a . u . ) cytoplasmic nuclear * * ns * ns F G Chapter 4 ½ Mediators of the cell responses associated with the loss of ADF and CFL1 109 total phalloidin intensity of cells treated as in ( A ) performed in ImageJ . Data presented as mean ±SEM ( n = 95 or more cells quantified per condition contained in three or more fields in three independent experiments in ( B ) , and between 30 and 81 cells were quantified per treatment in two independent experiments in ( C ) ) . Kruskal - Wallis with Dunn’s multiple comparisons tests ; * p value ≤ 0 . 05 ; * * p value ≤ 0 . 01 ; * * * p value ≤ 0 . 0001 . ( D ) Quantification of cells having non - fragmented – ‘normal’ – nuclei after being treated as in ( A ) . Data presented as mean ±SEM ( n = 150 or more cells quantified per condition per repeat in three or more fields in three independent experiments ) . * * * One - way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test ; p value ≤ 0 . 0005 . ( E ) Cell viability 48h post - siRNA - treatments as in ( A ) assessed by alamar blue assays . Data presented as mean fold change of viability between cells treated with siCFL1 and siNT ±SEM ( n = 3 independent experiments ) . The cell viability ratio of cells treated with siNT and siCFL1 with no other co - depletions serves as control . * * One - way ANOVA with Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test ; p value = 0 . 005 . ( F - G ) Quantification of nuclear and cytoplasmic IF staining for c - myc in siNT or siCFL1 - treated ADF - null SCCs co - depleted of Arp3 ( F ) or SRF ( G ) . Data presented as mean ±SEM ( n = 161 or more cells contained in three or more fields were quantified from two individual experiments in ImageJ ) . One - way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test ; * p value ≤ 0 . 01 ; * * p value ≤ 0 . 003 . or nuclear fragmentation observed in the ADF / CFL1 depleted cells . Knock down of either of these factors alone did not affect nuclear appearance significantly . Importantly , the rescue of nuclear deformation by Arp3 was also correlated with a significant rescue in cell viability of ADF - null SCCs that were depleted of CFL1 ( Figure 4 . 4E ) . SRF co - depletion also offered enhanced cell survival but failed to reach significance in this particular statistical test . However , the co - depletion of either Arp3 , or SRF , significantly restored the nuclear / cytoplasmic localization balance of the transcription factor c - Myc , indicative of preserved nuclear integrity in ADF / CFL1 depleted cells ( Figures 4 . 4F and 4 . 4G ) . To complement these findings and further verify the involvement of Arp2 / 3 , but not formins , in the actin accumulation of ADF / CFL1 depleted cells , we utilised an Arp2 / 3 inhibitor ( CK869 ) , as well as a general ‘small molecule inhibitor of formin homology 2 domain’ ( SMIFH2 ) that should target the majority of actin - associated formins ( Nolen et al . , 2009 ; Rizvi et al . , 2009 ) . We found that after Arp2 / 3 inhibition there is a dose dependent downregulation in F - actin accumulation following loss of ADF / CFL1 , which becomes significant in the higher inhibitor concentrations , while no suppression in actin accumulation was noted after treatment with the SMIFH2 inhibitor ( Figures 4 . 5A and 4 . 5B , quantified in 4 . 5C and 4 . 5D , Chapter 4 ½ Mediators of the cell responses associated with the loss of ADF and CFL1 110 Figure 4 . 5 . Inhibition of the Arp2 / 3 complex , but not formins , suppresses F - actin accumulation following ADF / CFL1 depletion . ( A - B ) Phase - contrast ( upper panels ) and fluorescently labelled for F - actin ( lower panels ) images of ADF - null SCCs treated with siRNAs and increasing concentrations of the Arp2 / 3 inhibitor CK869 ( A ) or the general formin inhibitor SMIFH2 ( B ) . Nuclei were counterstained with DAPI . Scale bars correspond to 60µm in phase - contrast and 25µm in images of fluorescence , respectively . ( C - D ) Quantification of total F - actin levels per cell based on total phalloidin intensity of cells treated as in ( A ) performed in ImageJ . Data presented as mean ±SEM ( n = 18 or more cells quantified per condition contained in four or more fields . One representative of two independent experiments is shown ) . One - way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test ; * p value ≤ 0 . 05 ; * * p value ≤ 0 . 002 . ( E ) Cell viability 48h post - siRNA and inhibitor treatments as in ( A ) assessed by alamar blue assays . Data presented as mean fold change of viability between cells 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 8 c e ll v i ab ili t y ( s i C F L1 / s i N T ) * * * E D 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 siNT siCFL1 F - a c t i n pe r c e ll ( a . u . ) DMSO 5uM SMIFH2 15uM SMIFH2 30uM SMIFH2 * * * * * C * * 0 5 10 15 20 siNT siCFL1 F - a c t i n pe r c e ll ( a . u . ) DMSO 5uM CK869 10uM CK869 50uM CK869 * * * A B DMSO 5µM 15µM 30µM SMIFH2 F - a c t i n D AP I s i C F L1 s i N T s i C F L1 s i N T DMSO 5µM 10µM 50µM CK869 s i C F L1 s i N T s i C F L1 s i N T F - a c t i n D AP I Chapter 4 ½ Mediators of the cell responses associated with the loss of ADF and CFL1 111 treated with siCFL1 and siNT ±SEM ( n = 2 independent experiments ) . The cell viability ratio of cells treated with siNT and siCFL1 and no inhibitor serves as control . * * * One - way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test ; p value < 0 . 0001 . respectively ) . Moreover , Arp2 / 3 inhibition was associated with significant improvement in cell viability of the depleted cells in all the concentrations used , whereas this was not the case after formin inhibition ( Figure 4 . 5E ) . This correlates with our previous observations when Arp3 and the two diaphanous - related formins were knocked down by RNAi ( Figure 4 . 4 ) . Our data , thus , support a direct role of the Arp2 / 3 complex in mediating actin filament assembly upon ADF / CFL1 loss , while the SRF - mediated transcription appears to fuel the uncontrolled actin accumulation , which if left unchecked in the absence of ADF / cofilins results in loss of nuclear integrity and , ultimately , cell death . 4 . 2 . 3 Actin over - polymerization upon ADF and CFL1 depletion affects cell viability We previously showed that the accumulation of actin filaments shortly after ADF / CFL1 depletion is accompanied by nuclear deformation , DNA damage , apoptosis and cell death . Furthermore , as already mentioned , one way actin polymerization can occur in cells is by spontaneous nucleation that depends on the actin monomer abundance . Hence , we set out to investigate whether the unrestrained actin polymerization per se is what is affecting cell survival . The indirect actin downregulation through SRF depletion and the consequent rescue in the phenotypes described above are in agreement with this argument . However , in order to strengthen this hypothesis , we utilised two very popular actin polymerisation inhibitors , cytochalasin D and latrunculin A , which both bind actin monomers , rendering them inaccessible to filament incorporation , and assessed the cell viability of ADF / CFL1 depleted cells . While ADF / CFL1 depleted cells display bigger , flattened cell bodies and multiple membrane protrusions , the addition of actin polymerization inhibitors promoted a cell morphology similar to that of control siRNA treated Chapter 4 ½ Mediators of the cell responses associated with the loss of ADF and CFL1 112 Figure 4 . 6 . Actin polymerization inhibition affects cell viability of ADF / CFL1 depleted cells . ( A ) Phase - contrast ( left panels ) and IF for lamin A / C ( right panels ) images of ADF - null SCCs treated with siRNAs and either DMSO , or the actin polymerization inhibitors Cytochalasin D ( 0 . 5µM ) or Latrunculin A ( 0 . 4µM ) . Nuclei and F - actin were counterstained with DAPI and phalloidin , respectively . The scale bars correspond to 125µm in phase - contrast and 20µm in IF images . ( B ) Cell viability 48h post - siRNA and inhibitor treatments as in ( A ) assessed by alamar blue assays . Data presented as mean fold change of viability between cells treated with siCFL1 and siNT ±SEM ( n = 3 independent experiments ) . The cell viability ratio of cells treated with siNT and siCFL1 and no inhibitor serves as control . One - way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test ; * p value ≤ 0 . 01 ; * * p value ≤ 0 . 002 . cells ( Figure 4 . 6A , left panels ) . The cells were no longer able to form extensive actin filaments after addition of any of the inhibitors , albeit some F - actin aggregates in the form of big puncta were visible after phalloidin staining , especially in the ADF / CFL1 depleted cells ( Figure 4 . 6A , right panels ) . Furthermore , the loss of ADF / CFL1 halved cell viability as soon as 48h post siRNA treatment compared to cells treated with control siRNAs , however , cells treated with latrunculin A benefited from a significant viability advantage compared to untreated , or cells treated with DMSO ( Figure 4 . 6B ) . Interestingly , although cytochalasin D acts in a similar manner to latrunculin A , it failed to offer a similar rescue in cell viability , and this might be explained by the way the two compounds bind actin monomers ( see Discussion at the end of this chapter for more details ) . Overall , these data + La t A siNT siCFL1 + C y t o D + D M S O F - actin Lamin A / C DAPI siNT siCFL1 A B * * * 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 8 c e ll v i ab ili t y ( s i C F L1 / s i N T ) Chapter 4 ½ Mediators of the cell responses associated with the loss of ADF and CFL1 113 strongly support a direct role of the unrestricted actin filament polymerization in the diminished cell viability that follows the depletion of ADF and CFL1 . 4 . 2 . 4 ADF and CFL1 depletion leads to enhanced actomyosin contractility that affects nuclear integrity As already discussed in chapter 3 , the focal adhesion enlargement observed in ADF / CFL1 depleted cells could be associated with increased mechanical tension mediated by the actin filaments tethered into them ( Grashoff et al . , 2010 ) . Another line of support for a tensile nature of these filaments was hinted by the transcriptomics data and the enhanced SRF - mediated transcription , where the expression of a myosin light chain gene as well as two tropomyosins , which along with actin are all components of the cellular contractile apparatus , were found significantly increased ( Figure 4 . 2A and 4 . 2B ) . Hence , having established which actin assembly pathways are required for the generation of the aberrant actin filaments formed upon ADF / CFL1 loss and the importance of the latter , we investigated whether these filaments were indeed contractile , and what is the significance of this property . To do so , we performed immunofluorescent staining for phosphorylated myosin light chain 2 ( Ser19 ) ( pMLC2 ) , which is an indicator of contractility as this phosphorylation site controls the assembly of stress fibers ( Totsukawa et al . , 2000 ) . We found that ADF - null SCCs treated with control siRNAs displayed a peripheral staining of pMLC that coincided with cortical actin filaments , whereas the vast majority of actin bundles crossing the intracellular space in doubly depleted ADF / CFL1 cells were decorated with pMLC ( Figure 4 . 7A ) . Increased pMLC2 levels following ADF / CFL1 depletion were also confirmed at the protein level ( Figure 4 . 7C ) . This implied that the actin filaments induced upon ADF / CFL1 loss are contractile , thus , leading to increased intracellular tension . Next , we assessed the significance of enhanced contractility in ADF / CFL1 depleted cells by inhibiting the activity of the Rho - associated protein kinase ( ROCK ) , an important contractile force regulator , using the specific Y27632 ROCK inhibitor , as well as the general myosin II activity with Chapter 4 ½ Mediators of the cell responses associated with the loss of ADF and CFL1 114 Figure 4 . 7 . Enhanced contractility ensues ADF / CFL1 depletion and promotes nuclear deformation . ( A ) IF for phospho - myosin light chain 2 ( pMLC2 ) ( Ser19 ) as an indicator of contractility in siRNA - treated ADF - null SCCs . Zoomed image of boxed region in shown below the panels . ( B ) Phase - contrast ( top panels ) and IF for lamin A / C ( bottom panels ) images of ADF - null SCCs treated with siRNAs and either DMSO , the contractility inhibitor blebbistatin ( 25µM ) or the ROCK inhibitor Y27632 ( 20µM ) . ( C ) Western blot confirming the increased levels of pMLC2 ( Ser19 ) following depletion of ADF / CFL1 . ( D ) Quantification of cells having non - fragmented – ‘normal’ – nuclei after being treated as in ( B ) . Data presented as mean ±SEM ( n = 150 or more cells quantified per condition per repeat in three or more fields in three independent experiments ) . * * * One - way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test ; p value ≤ 0 . 0001 . ( E ) Cell viability 48h post - siRNA - treatments as in ( B ) assessed by alamar blue assays . Data presented as mean fold change of viability between cells treated with siCFL1 and siNT ±SEM ( n = 3 independent experiments ) . The cell viability ratio of cells treated with siNT and siCFL1 and no inhibitor serves as control . * Kruskal - Wallis with Dunn’s multiple comparisons tests ; p value = 0 . 02 . In all IF experiments nuclei and F - actin were counterstained with DAPI and phalloidin , respectively . The scale bars correspond to 60µm in phase - contrast and 20µm in IF images . pMLC2 ( Ser19 ) CFL1 GAPDH s i N T s i C F L1 s i N T s i C F L1 pMLC2 ( Ser19 ) F - actin DAPI + DMSO + Bleb + Y27632 s i N T s i C F L1 A B Lamin A / C F - actin DAPI s i N T s i C F L1 C 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 + DMSO + Bleb + Y27632 non - f r ag m en t ed nu c l e i siNT siCFL1 * * * * * * D 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 c e ll v i ab ili t y ( s i C F L1 / s i N T ) * E Chapter 4 ½ Mediators of the cell responses associated with the loss of ADF and CFL1 115 blebbistatin ( Kovacs et al . , 2004 ; Straight et al . , 2003 ; Uehata et al . , 1997 ) . ADF - null SCCs treated with control siRNAs and these inhibitors displayed a general retraction of their cell bodies and characteristic thin membrane protrusions , particularly in the case of blebbistatin ( Figure 4 . 7B , upper panels ) . However , blebbistatin treatment of ADF / CFL1 depleted cells resulted in partial restoration of their cell morphology , whereas ROCK inhibition with Y27632 had a lesser effect ( Figure 4 . 7B , upper panels ) . Inhibitor treatment of control cells did not affect the general appearance of their nuclei , apart from many cells being binucleated , especially after blebbistatin treatment , due to perturbed cell division after myosin inhibition ( Straight et al . , 2003 ) ( Figure 4 . 7B , lower panels ) . On the other hand , myosin activity inhibition with blebbistatin significantly rescued nuclear deformation and / or fragmentation , and visibly suppressed stress fiber accumulation in ADF / CFL1 depleted cells , whereas ROCK inhibition did not have any discernible effect ( Figure 4 . 7B , lower panels and quantification in 4 . 7D ) . Additionally , contractility inhibition with blebbistatin offered a small but significant increase in cell viability of ADF / CFL1 depleted cells ( Figure 4 . 7E ) . 4 . 2 . 5 Myosin IIA is a critical mediator of nuclear deformation in ADF and CFL1 depleted cells In order to further confirm the hypothesis regarding the involvement of excess contractility in promoting nuclear deformation in ADF / CFL1 depleted cells , we set out to investigate which non - muscle myosin motors could be responsible for this perturbation . Non - muscle cells generally express differential amounts of three myosin II heavy chain isoforms , myosin IIA , myosin IIB , or myosin IIC ( Vicente - Manzanares et al . , 2009 ) . qPCR analysis of ADF - null SCCs revealed that myosin IIA was the predominant non - muscle myosin II heavy chain isoform expressed in these cells , while myosins IIB and IIC were barely or not detectable at all ( Figure 4 . 8A ) . Immunofluorescent staining for myosin IIA showed that there was extensive co - localization with the actin stress fibers in the ADF - null SCCs . Upon ADF / CFL1 depletion the Chapter 4 ½ Mediators of the cell responses associated with the loss of ADF and CFL1 116 Figure 4 . 8 . Reduction of myosin IIA expression rescues the nuclear integrity of ADF / CFL1 depleted cells . ( A ) Expression levels of non - muscle myosin heavy chains in ADF - null SCCs assessed by qPCR . The amplification efficiency of the primers was determined and a single threshold was calculated in order for the results to be comparable . Data presented as mean ±SEM ( n = 3 independent experiments ) . * * * Unpaired t - test p value = 0 . 0003 . ( B ) IF for myosin IIA in siRNA - treated ADF - null SCCs . Zoomed image of boxed region in shown next to the panels . ( C ) Western blot confirming the successful siRNA - mediated downregulation in myosin IIA expression ( siMyoIIA ) . ( D ) Phase - contrast ( left panels ) and IF for lamin A / C ( right panels ) images of ADF - null SCCs treated with siNT or siCFL1 alone or alongside siMyoIIA . ( E ) Quantification of the cell length to width ratio of ADF - null SCCs treated as in ( D ) . Circles represent individual values and bars mean ±SD ( n = 33 - 36 cells quantified from one representative experiment ) . Kruskal - Wallis with Dunn’s multiple comparisons tests ; * * p value < 0 . 01 ; * * * p value < 0 . 0001 . ( F ) Quantification of cells having non - fragmented – ‘normal’ – nuclei after being treated as in ( D ) . Data presented as mean ±SEM ( n = 150 or more cells quantified per condition per repeat in three or more fields in three independent experiments ) . * * * One - way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test ; p value ≤ 0 . 0001 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 r e l a t i v e e x p r e ss i on unde t e r m i ned * * * Myosin IIA β - actin s i N T s i M y o II A s i N T s i C F L1 Myosin IIA F - actin DAPI + s i N T + s i M y o II A siNT siCFL1 siNT siCFL1 Lamin A / C F - actin DAPI 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 + siNT + siMyoIIA non - f r ag m en t ed nu c l e i siNT siCFL1 * * * * * * F E 0 5 10 15 c e ll l eng t h / w i d t h r a t i o siNT siCFL1 + - - + + siNT + siMyoIIA + - - + * * * * * * * A B C D Chapter 4 ½ Mediators of the cell responses associated with the loss of ADF and CFL1 117 In all IF experiments nuclei and F - actin were counterstained with DAPI and phalloidin , respectively . The scale bars correspond to 60µm in phase - contrast and 20µm in IF images . staining for myosin IIA was significantly increased , and it was correlated with a corresponding increase in the F - actin bundles in the depleted cells ( Figure 4 . 8B ) . Next , we evaluated the contribution of myosin IIA in the cellular defects arising after depletion of ADF and CFL1 , by successfully silencing its expression using siRNAs ( Figure 4 . 8C ) . Myosin IIA co - silencing alongside CFL1 in ADF - null SCCs resulted in a significant rescue of their cell morphology , albeit cells still had slightly wider cell bodies compared to control cells silenced for myosin IIA alone ( Figure 4 . 8D , left panels , and quantifications of cell shape in 4 . 8E ) . However , co - silencing of myosin IIA resulted in a remarkable prevention of actin stress fiber accumulation and in a nearly perfect rescue of nuclear fragmentation in ADF / CFL1 depleted cells ( Figure 4 . 8D , right panels , and quantifications of nuclear fragmentation in 4 . 8F ) . In summary , blocking actomyosin contractility either via inhibitor treatment , or by downregulation of the main myosin II isoform expressed in SCC cells , prevented nuclear deformation triggered by the loss of ADF and CFL1 , and promoted integrity . We conclude that the contractile force generated by the unrestrained actin filaments , which accumulate in the absence of their dynamic regulation by ADF and CFL1 , is a critical property of these filaments and necessary for the physical disruption of the nuclear membrane integrity that ensues . 4 . 2 . 6 Nuclear deformation in ADF and CFL1 depleted cells is mediated by the LINC complex Our data so far suggest that the accumulation of contractile actin filaments affects the nuclear morphology of cells depleted of ADF and CFL1 . In order to achieve a greater insight into the molecular mechanism of this phenomenon , we examined the involvement of the linker of cytoskeleton to nucleoskeleton Chapter 4 ½ Mediators of the cell responses associated with the loss of ADF and CFL1 118 ( LINC ) complex , which has been shown to provide a physical link between the actin cytoskeleton and the nuclear lamina ( Crisp et al . , 2006 ; Starr and Fridolfsson , 2010 ; Zhen et al . , 2002 ) . To do so , we chose to disrupt the LINC complex by silencing the expression of one of its core components , nesprin - 2 giant ( nesprin - 2G ) , by RNAi ( see Figure 4 . 9B for knockdown efficiency ) . Visualization of the nuclear envelope by immunofluorescence for lamin A / C revealed that the depletion of nesprin - 2G in ADF - null SCCs gave rise to a number of nuclear morphologies ranging from normal ( white arrows ) , moderately misshaped ( blue arrows ) and enlarged ( yellow arrows ) nuclei ( Figure 4 . 9A , top right panels ) . This is consistent with what has previously been shown in the literature that disruption of the LINC complex affects nuclear shape in cells in the epidermis ( Luke et al . , 2008 ) . However , when nesprin - 2G was depleted alongside CFL1 in ADF - null cells , their nuclei appeared akin to those in cells that nesprin - 2G was silenced alone , and significantly different from the fragmented and severely deformed nuclei that arose after ADF / CFL1 loss ( Figure 4 . 9A , compare lower left and right panels with top right panels ) . Likewise , nesprin - 2G silencing with or without ADF / CFL1 co - depletion promoted a more ‘relaxed’ and rounded cell morphology with slightly enlarged nuclei visibly projecting from the cell surface , a morphology quite distinct from the flattened , elongated appearance of ADF / CFL1 depleted cells ( Figure 4 . 9C , and quantifications of cell morphology in 4 . 9D ) . Quantification of the amount of deformed and fragmented nuclei revealed that nesprin - 2G co - silencing led to significant rescue of the nuclear integrity of ADF / CFL1 depleted cells ( Figure 4 . 9E ) , suggesting that the mechanism by which the uncontrolled actin stress fibers damage the nuclear lamina involves their engagement with the LINC complex . It is worth noting that this rescue was not correlated with decreased F - actin levels in the nesprin - 2G depleted cells , as opposed to all other instances described previously after SRF , Arp2 / 3 or contractility inhibition , which implies a more direct role of the LINC complex in the manifestation of this perturbation ( Figure 4 . 9F ) . Chapter 4 ½ Mediators of the cell responses associated with the loss of ADF and CFL1 119 Figure 4 . 9 . Uncoupling actin filaments from the LINC complex preserves the nuclear integrity of ADF / CFL1 depleted cells . ( A ) IF images for lamin A / C of ADF - null SCCs treated with siNT or siCFL1 alone ( left panels ) or alongside siRNAs targeting the linker of nucleoskeleton and cytoskeleton ( LINC ) complex component nesprin - 2 giant ( siNesprin - 2G ) ( right panels ) . White arrows designate normal nuclear morphology , blue 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 r e l a t i v e e x p r e ss i on siNT siNesprin - 2G 32nM siNesprin - 2G 64nM Nesprin - 2G B + siNT + siNesprin - 2G s i N T s i C F L1 C E s i N T & s i N T s i C F L1 & s i N T s i N e s p r i n - 2 G & s i N T s i N e s p r i n - 2 G & s i C F L1 0 5 10 15 c e ll l eng t h / w i d t h r a t i o siNT siCFL1 + - - + + siNT + siNesprin - 2G + - - + c e ll l eng t h / w i d t h r a t i o 0 5 10 D * * * ns * * s i N T s i C F L1 + siNT + siNesprin - 2G La m i n A / C F - a c t i n D AP I A F 0 4 8 12 16 20 24 siNT siCFL1 F - a c t i n pe r c e ll ( a . u . ) + siNT + siNesprin - 2G * * * ns * * * 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 c - M yc ( a . u . ) cytoplasmic nuclear siNT siCFL1 + siNesprin - 2G + siNT + - - + + - - + * * * * * * ns G H 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 c e ll v i a l b ili t y ( s i C F L1 / s i N T ) * N E – a c t i n cy t o sk e l e t on d i s t an c e ( µ m ) 0 5 10 15 20 25 s i C FL 1 s i C FL 1 + s i S Y N E 2 0 5 10 15 20 25 * * * 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 non - f r ag m en t ed nu c l e i siNT siCFL1 * * * * * * I Chapter 4 ½ Mediators of the cell responses associated with the loss of ADF and CFL1 120 arrows moderately misshaped , and yellow arrows enlarged nuclei . Green dashed arrow indicates a gap ( white bar ) between the nuclear envelope ( NE ) and the closest actin fibers . Nuclei and F - actin were counterstained with DAPI and phalloidin , respectively . The scale bar corresponds to 20µm . ( B ) qPCR assessing the knockdown efficiency of two concentrations of siRNAs targeting nesprin - 2G . Data presented as mean ±SD . ( C ) Phase - contrast images of ADF - null SCCs treated as in ( A ) . The scale bar corresponds to 60µm . Please note that images of cells treated with siNT or siCFL1 ( left panels ) are the same as in Figure 4 . 3A , as they were part of the same experiment . ( D ) Quantification of the cell length to width ratio of ADF - null SCCs treated as in ( A ) . Circles represent individual values and bars mean ±SD ( n = 33 - 36 cells quantified from one representative experiment ) . One - way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test ; * * p value < 0 . 001 ; * * * p value < 0 . 0001 . ( E ) Quantification of cells having non - fragmented – ‘normal’ – nuclei after being treated as in ( A ) . Data presented as mean ±SEM ( n = 150 or more cells quantified per condition per repeat in three or more fields in three independent experiments ) . * * * One - way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test ; p value < 0 . 0001 . ( F ) Quantification of total F - actin levels per cell based on total phalloidin intensity of cells treated as in ( A ) performed in ImageJ . Data presented as mean ±SEM ( n = 60 or more cells quantified per condition contained in three or more fields in three independent experiments ) . * * * Kruskal - Wallis with Dunn’s multiple comparisons tests ; p value < 0 . 0001 . ( G ) Quantification of the distance between the NE and the closest visible actin filaments in cells treated with siCFL1 alone or alongside siNesprin - 2G ( see green dashed arrow in ( A ) ) . Evenly spaced measurements around the periphery of nuclei were performed in ImageJ . Circles represent individual values and bars mean ±SD ( n = 36 cells quantified per condition from nine or more fields in two independent experiments ) . * * * Mann - Whitney p value < 0 . 0001 . ( H ) Quantification of nuclear and cytoplasmic IF staining for c - myc of ADF - null SCCs treated as in ( A ) . Data presented as mean ±SEM ( n = 87 or more cells contained in three or more fields were quantified from two individual experiments in ImageJ ) . One - way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test ; * p value ≤ 0 . 02 ; * * p value ≤ 0 . 003 ; * * * p value ≤ 0 . 0002 . ( I ) Cell viability 48h post - siRNA - treatments as in ( A ) assessed by alamar blue assays . Data presented as mean fold change of viability between siCFL1 and siNT - treated cells ±SEM ( n = 3 independent experiments ) . The cell viability ratio of cells treated with siNT and siCFL1 alone serves as control . * Unpaired t - test p value = 0 . 01 . Remarkably , after co - staining of the nuclear envelope and F - actin , we observed an ‘actin - gap’ forming in the nuclear periphery of ADF / CFL1 depleted cells co - silenced for nesprin - 2G ( see Figure 4 . 9A , green arrow and white bar in lower right panels ) . Quantification of this space , which represents the distance between the nuclear envelope and the closest actin fibers , revealed a significant increase in this distance in the nesprin - 2G co - silenced cells ( Figure 4 . 9G ) . While ADF / CFL1 depleted cells had a minimal ‘gap’ between the nucleus and the actin cytoskeleton of ~ 0 . 35µm , concurrent depletion of nesprin - 2G resulted in a big variability of this distance that was collectively increased by ~ 8 . 5 - fold to ~ 3µm . This occurrence may signify the uncoupling of the accumulated actin fibers from the nuclear envelope promoted by the Chapter 4 ½ Mediators of the cell responses associated with the loss of ADF and CFL1 121 Figure 4 . 10 . Disruption of the LINC complex rescues nuclear deformation of ADF / CFL1 depleted cells . ( A ) Phase - contrast ( top panels ) and IF for lamin A / C ( bottom panels ) images of ADF - null SCCs treated with siNT or siCFL1 alone or alongside siRNAs targeting the LINC complex components Sun1 or Sun2 . Nuclei and F - actin were counterstained with DAPI and phalloidin in IF images . The scale bars correspond to 60µm in phase - contrast and 20µm in IF images , respectively . ( B ) Western blot confirming the knockdown efficiency of siRNAs targeting Sun1 . ( C ) qPCR assessing the knockdown efficiency of two concentrations of siRNAs targeting Sun2 . Data presented as mean ±SD . ( D ) Quantification of cells having non - fragmented – ‘normal’ – nuclei after being treated as in ( A ) . Data presented as mean ±SEM ( n = 130 or more cells quantified per condition per repeat in three or more fields in three independent experiments ) . * * * One - way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test ; p value < 0 . 0001 . disruption of the LINC complex . In addition , this was correlated with a significant rescue of the nuclear localization of the transcription factor c - Myc in the co - silenced cells , which indicates that they maintain their nuclear integrity , accompanied by a significant cell viability advantage ( Figures 4 . 9H and 4 . 9I ) . In order to further confirm the involvement of the LINC complex to the nuclear deformation phenotype associated with the accumulation of tensile actin filaments upon ADF / CFL1 depletion , we co - silenced independently the other two components of the complex that help tether nesprin - 2G in the outer Sun1 β - actin s i N T s i S UN 1 + siNT + siSun1 s i N T s i C F L1 s i N T s i C F L1 La m i n A / C F - a c t i n D AP I + siSun2 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 Sun2 r e l a t i v e e x p r e s i on siNT siSun2 32nM siSun2 64nM 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 + siNT + siSun1 + siSun2 non - f r ag m en t ed nu c l e i siNT siCFL1 * * * * * * * * * A B C D Chapter 4 ½ Mediators of the cell responses associated with the loss of ADF and CFL1 122 nuclear envelope , namely Sun1 and Sun2 ( Crisp et al . , 2006 ; Starr and Fridolfsson , 2010 ) . Silencing the expression of either protein individually using siRNAs did not lead to extensive variations in the cell or nuclear morphology compared to wild - type cells treated with control siRNAs ( Figure 4 . 10A , and Figures 4 . 10B and 4 . 10C for siRNA - mediated knockdown efficiencies ) . However , the independent silencing of both in ADF / CFL1 depleted cells significantly prevented the cell nuclei from being fragmented to similar extents with the rescue observed following nesprin - 2G co - silencing ( Figure 4 . 10D ) . Overall , these data indicate that disruption of the LINC complex results in the nucleus being freed from the increased tension and forces produced by the contractile stress fibers assembled upon ADF / CFL1 depletion , thus , escaping nuclear damage . Collectively , our results provide evidence that tight regulation of the actin filaments tethered to the nuclear envelope via the LINC complex by ADF / CFL1 is critical for cellular homeostasis . Chapter 4 ½ Mediators of the cell responses associated with the loss of ADF and CFL1 123 4 . 3 Discussion Previously we described the consequences of removing the activity of ADF and CFL1 from cells both in vivo , in murine skin , as well as in vitro , in normal and malignant mouse keratinocytes . In brief , the main effects of this depletion were massive actin accumulation that was correlated with aberrant cell and nuclear morphology , loss of tissue homeostasis , DNA damage response and cell death . These responses were triggered soon after ADF and CFL1 were depleted , highlighting their importance in cellular health and tissue homeostasis . Following this initial characterization , we set out to investigate the molecular mechanisms triggering these responses . In summary , we found that the key pathways that are going awry succeeding ADF / CFL1 depletion , and account for the main consequences this has for cells are the following : ( a ) enhanced SRF - mediated transcription fuels the cells with actin and actin - associated factors , ( b ) the Arp2 / 3 complex is involved in the rapid polymerization of the increasing amounts of available actin , ( c ) increased association of the risen actin filaments with myosin motors increases the intracellular tension , and ( d ) engagement of these tensile stress fibers with the LINC complex triggers nuclear deformation . In the previous chapter we described that loss of ADF / CFL1 in the skin led to divergent expression of cell differentiation markers , indicating a loss in tissue homeostasis . The transcriptional profiling data comparing ADF / CFL1 wild - type and null keratinocytes confirmed a perturbed expression of many keratin genes , consistent with abnormal keratinocyte cycles of differentiation , and the lost homeostasis in the skin ( Blanpain and Fuchs , 2009 ) . One of the keratins found to be significantly upregulated in the ADF / CFL1 null keratinocytes is keratin 6 . Keratin 6 is considered to be a marker of ‘active’ highly proliferative keratinocytes that respond to wound healing cues ( Freedberg et al . , 2001 ) . Immunofluorescence staining for this keratin confirmed that it is indeed extensively expressed in the ADF / CFL1 mutant epidermis as well as in isolated null keratinocytes , further indicating the extensive loss of homeostasis in this tissue ( not shown ) ( Kanellos et al . , 2015 ) . Chapter 4 ½ Mediators of the cell responses associated with the loss of ADF and CFL1 124 Aside from intermediate filaments , the transcriptome analysis of ADF / CFL1 null keratinocytes and their wild - type counterparts also revealed an upregulation of cytoskeletal components in the former . The expression of these factors is closely associated with SRF / MAL transcriptional activity ( Olson and Nordheim , 2010 ) . Similar upregulation of many SRF target genes , such as actins , myosins and focal adhesion proteins , was reported in another study comparing the transcriptional profiles of mouse cornea samples deficient for ADF , which is the predominant ADF / cofilin in this tissue ( Verdoni et al . , 2008 ) . This confirms that the cellular responses in transcriptional level following loss of ADF / cofilins are conserved in multiple tissues . Co - silencing of SRF in ADF / CFL1 depleted cells permitted for decreased actin accumulation , less nuclear deformation and increased cell viability , indicating that SRF - mediated transcription is fuelling the accumulation of actin , which is , in turn , associated with these phenotypes . Interestingly , the activity of the Arp2 / 3 complex is critical for the unrestrained accumulation of actin filaments in the absence of ADF / CFL1 . Inhibition of the Arp2 / 3 complex , either by depletion of its component Arp3 , or by inhibitor treatment , rescued the F - actin accumulation in ADF / CFL1 depleted cells , highlighting its importance for the accelerated formation of aberrant actin bundles in these cells . The majority of literature on Arp2 / 3 is , as in the case of ADF / cofilins , focused at the adjacent space to the plasma membrane , where it contributes to dendritic nucleation and branch formation at the sides of pre - existing actin filaments , thereby promoting membrane and cell motility ( Insall and Machesky , 2009 ; Ridley , 2011 ; Suraneni et al . , 2012 ; Wu et al . , 2012 ) . As discussed previously , there is a fine balance between the activities of ADF / cofilins and Arp2 / 3 for promotion of net actin polymerization ; ADF / cofilins de - branch and sever ‘older’ parts of actin filaments , whereas the newly created filament - ends are preferred for Arp2 / 3 branch nucleation ( Bravo - Cordero et al . , 2013 ; Chan et al . , 2009 ; Ichetovkin et al . , 2002 ; Svitkina and Borisy , 1999 ) . This implies that by removing ADF / CFL1’s severing and de - branching activities , the already existing branched actin networks are not being recycled . In addition , new branches are Chapter 4 ½ Mediators of the cell responses associated with the loss of ADF and CFL1 125 generated by unimpeded Arp2 / 3 activity on the unrestricted growing actin filaments . This immediately accelerates the aberrant bundle formation that is catastrophic for cellular and tissue homeostasis . In contrast , the requirement for diaphanous - related formins mDia1 and mDia2 or formins affected by the general formin inhibitor SMIFH2 was not perceivable . Restricting actin polymerization via SRF - mediated transcription silencing , Arp2 / 3 inhibition , or by rendering actin monomers inaccessible for actin polymerization with latrunculin A treatment , improved cell viability . However , cytochalasin D treatment did not have any effect on cell viability , despite inhibiting actin polymerization in a similar manner to latrunculin A . An explanation to this is offered by the fact that the two inhibitors bind in different areas on the actin monomer and this affects SRF signalling : cytochalasin promotes it , whereas , latrunculin blocks it ( Vartiainen et al . , 2007 ) . This likely enhances the expression of actin and other SRF / MAL target genes even more in ADF / CFL1 depleted cells , thereby further escalating transcriptional imbalance and accelerating the consequences this has to the cells . It also serves as a further confirmation of the importance of SRF - mediated transcription in the cellular responses observed in the ADF / CFL1 depleted cells . Interestingly , ADF / cofilins have been reported to sever actin filaments in a tension dependent manner , with contractile filaments being protected from severing – a process believed to promote stress fiber maturation ( Hayakawa et al . , 2011 ; Tojkander et al . , 2015 ) . Among the transcripts that change significantly upon loss of ADF / CFL1 are a lot of myosins , tropomyosins and cell adhesion components . This , along with the focal adhesion enlargement observed in the ADF / CFL1 depleted SCCs , hinted towards the tensile nature of the accumulated actin filaments , which was verified by their increased association with pMLC2 and myosin IIA , the main myosin motor expressed in these cells . Inhibiting contractile forces rescued the aberrant nuclear morphology and improved cell survival , thus , confirming that the enhanced contractile force generation that ensues ADF / CFL1 depletion is directly associated with the extensive nuclear deformation . This is in Chapter 4 ½ Mediators of the cell responses associated with the loss of ADF and CFL1 126 agreement with a role of ADF / cofilins in regulating myosin - mediated contractility , and suggests that in their absence , myosin motors are freely associated with actin filaments and promote excessive cellular tension . In fact , it has been previously proposed that ADF / cofilins compete with myosins and tropomyosins for binding on the actin filaments ( Nishida et al . , 1984b ; Wiggan et al . , 2012 ) , and this is supported by our data . Finally , it has been shown that cells can regulate their nuclear shape via an actin cap ; a subset of contractile actin filaments passing over the nucleus and terminating in distinct actin cap associated focal adhesions ( Khatau et al . , 2009 ; Kim et al . , 2012 ) . The phospho - myosin containing actin cap fibers are physically connected to the nuclear lamina by the LINC complex ( Khatau et al . , 2009 ; Starr and Fridolfsson , 2010 ) . By disrupting the LINC complex we were able to interrogate whether the aberrant nuclear shape found in ADF / CFL1 depleted cells was due to increased engagement of the nuclear membrane to the tensile stress fibers found in the depleted cells . Co - silencing of either of the components of the LINC complex , namely nesprin - 2G , which is the core component of the LINC complex that is responsible for tethering cytoplasmic actin filaments to the nuclear membrane ( Crisp et al . , 2006 ) , Sun1 or Sun2 , the two LINC components that interact with nesprin - 2G at the perinuclear space and tether it to the nuclear lamina ( Crisp et al . , 2006 ; Sosa et al . , 2012 ) , was sufficient to significantly rescue the nuclear deformation triggered by ADF / CFL1 depletion . This provides evidence that it is a group of overassembled , tensile actin stress fibers that upon engagement with the LINC complex promote the loss of nuclear integrity seen in ADF / CFL1 depleted cells . Taken together , our results demonstrate that the aberrant contractile actin filaments , formed when the activities of ADF and CFL1 are removed , are responsible for promoting nuclear deformation , since a subset of them is exerting increased forces to the nuclear envelope via its physical attachments to the LINC complex . This implies that actin stress fibers require the activities of ADF / cofilins to dynamically regulate their stability , and keep them in check so that they do not cause physical damage to the nucleus and cell death . Chapter 5 ½ Novel roles of ADF / cofilins in the cell nucleus 127 Chapter 5 Novel roles of ADF / cofilins in the cell nucleus Chapter 5 ½ Novel roles of ADF / cofilins in the cell nucleus 128 5 . 1 Introduction The last two chapters focused on the characterization of the previously unexplored phenotypes arising after double depletion of the actin depolymerizing proteins ADF and CFL1 in adult tissue . In addition , cultured normal and malignant keratinocytes permitted the investigation of the molecular pathways that are associated with these phenotypes . The experiments revealed interesting new roles for ADF and CFL1 in controlling cellular and tissue homeostasis . We have now defined that the shared and predominant roles of the ADF / cofilin family members include the control and dynamic turnover of actin stress fibers and the associated contractility . We have also shown that without these activities , over - polymerization of actin filaments causes physical harm and deformation to the cell nucleus . This response is mediated by the LINC complex , and the subsequent loss of nuclear integrity is associated with loss of cell and tissue homeostasis in vitro as well as in vivo . Recently the nuclear pool of actin has attracted a lot of interest . However , its nuclear functions are not clearly understood yet , albeit they have been shown to span from its association with all three RNA polymerases to moving entire chromosomes ( Chuang et al . , 2006 ; Miyamoto and Gurdon , 2013 ) . Recent data also suggest that nuclear F - actin signalling regulates SRF - mediated transcription ( Baarlink et al . , 2013 ) . Owing to its NLS , CFL1 ( and presumably the rest of the ADF / cofilin family members as well ) is known to be able to translocate into the nucleus too , where it has been shown to mediate actin transport and associate with the RNA polymerase II ( Dopie et al . , 2012 ; Munsie et al . , 2012 ; Obrdlik and Percipalle , 2011 ) . However , specific nuclear roles of ADF / cofilins are still not very well understood and generally unclear . The possibility that ADF / cofilin family members could regulate the nuclear actin pool and thereby affect nuclear function has not been explored . This would be particularly interesting and highly likely , given the extent of dysregulated actin dynamics observed in cells upon removal of the ADF and CFL1 activities . Hence , we set out to investigate whether , and if so , how double Chapter 5 ½ Novel roles of ADF / cofilins in the cell nucleus 129 depletion of ADF / CFL1 affects nuclear actin . In addition , by using proteomic approaches we sought for novel ADF / cofilin - interacting proteins and associated pathways that will help us gain a greater insight into the nuclear functions of the ADF / cofilin family . 5 . 2 Results 5 . 2 . 1 ADF and CFL1 depletion leads to accumulation of nuclear actin Actin severing is the main function attributed to the ADF / cofilin family in the majority of reports in the existing literature . Given the ever - increasing evidence regarding the involvement of actin in nuclear functions it would be safe to assume that ADF / cofilins , since they also exist in the nucleus , would continue carrying out their most well - characterised function in that compartment as well . In order to explore this hypothesis , we fluorescently labelled F - actin in ADF and CFL1 depleted ADF - null SCCs and obtained incremental optical slices using confocal microscopy . This allowed us to visualize the F - actin content throughout the cell body including the nucleus , where we found that the ADF and CFL1 depletion led to formation of multiple F - actin aggregates , which were not present in control cells to the same extent ( Figure 5 . 1A , compare lower with top panels ) . In order to confirm that these F - actin aggregates are undoubtedly within the nuclear space , we generated XZ and YZ projections from a 3 - dimensional reconstruction of optical slices obtained from a depleted cell ( Figure 5 . 1B ) . These projections unequivocally demonstrate that the nuclear F - actin aggregate that is primarily in focus , is a separate entity and clearly distinguished from what appears to be ventral stress fibers that extend throughout the lower part of the cell ( see red arrows in Figure 5 . 1B ) . Next , we performed biochemical fractionation experiments to enrich for nuclear actin , and compare its levels between control and ADF / CFL1 depleted cells . Since a recent report has also shown that transient polymerization of nuclear F - actin networks regulates SRF - mediated transcription ( Baarlink et al . , 2013 ) , we also co - silenced SRF using RNAi to Chapter 5 ½ Novel roles of ADF / cofilins in the cell nucleus 130 Figure 5 . 1 . ADF / CFL1 depletion leads to enlarged nuclear actin structures . ( A ) Representative montages of fluorescent staining for F - actin of ADF - null SCCs treated with siNT ( top panels ) or siCFL1 ( bottom panels ) . 0 . 8µm - spaced optical slices obtained with confocal microscopy are shown . ( B ) XZ and YZ projections from an siCFL1 treated cell and labelled as in ( A ) . Yellow lines indicate the positions of the projections , which were composed in ImageJ using a 0 . 4µm - spaced image stack obtained with confocal microscopy . Red arrows indicate the position of a nuclear actin structure . Nuclei were counterstained with DAPI and the scale bars correspond to 20µm in ( A ) and ( B ) . ( C ) Western blot of siRNA - treated ADF - null SCCs following detergent - based cell fractionation . The nuclear lysates were treated with 8M urea in order to solubilise actin aggregates . ( D ) Quantification of nuclear β - actin levels based on three western blots performed as in ( C ) . Loading was normalized to lamin A / C . Data presented as mean ±SD . ( E ) Lamin A / C expression assessed by qPCR . Data presented as mean ±SEM ( n = 3 independent experiments ) . siNT DAPI F - actin siCFL1 D AP I F - a c t i n X Z YZ 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 1 . 4 Lamin A / C r e l a t i v e e x p r e ss i on siNT siCFL1 β - actin CFL1 Lamin A / C GAPDH s i N T + s i N T s i N T + s i S R F s i C F L1 + s i N T s i C F L1 + s i S R F s i N T + s i N T s i N T + s i S R F s i C F L1 + s i N T s i C F L1 + s i S R F cytoplasmic nuclear A B C D E 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 siNT siCFL1 r e l a t i v e nu c l ea r β - a c t i n + siNT + siSRF 0 . 8µm 1 . 6µm 2 . 4µm 3 . 2µm 4 . 0µm 4 . 8µm 5 . 6µm 6 . 4µm 7 . 2µm 0 . 8µm 1 . 6µm 2 . 4µm 3 . 2µm 4 . 0µm 4 . 8µm 5 . 6µm 6 . 4µm 7 . 2µm siCFL1 Chapter 5 ½ Novel roles of ADF / cofilins in the cell nucleus 131 examine whether the nuclear actin levels are affected . Of note , we have found that in order to solubilise and visualize this enriched actin structures on gels we need to treat the lysates with urea , which results in immunoblots where proteins run less coherently . Nevertheless , the cell fractionation was successful as indicated by clear separation of GAPDH and lamin A / C in the cytoplasmic and the nuclear fractions , respectively ( Figure 5 . 1C ) . We found that nuclear actin levels are highly enriched following ADF / CFL1 depletion , and SRF co - silencing lessened the extent of this enrichment ( Figure 5 . 1C , and quantifications in 5 . 1D ) . Lamin A / C was used as a loading control , since we found that its expression remains unaffected following ADF / CFL1 loss ( Figure 5 . 1E ) . Previously , we reported that as soon as ADF and CFL1 were depleted , cells were initiating programmed cell death pathways marked by upregulation of cleaved caspases starting 48h post siRNA treatment ( Figure 3 . 8B ) . In order to exclude the possibility that the actin aggregate structures we observe in the ADF / CFL1 cells are a consequence of apoptotic cell death , we chemically induced apoptosis in ADF - null SCCs , which were not treated with siRNAs , using the kinase inhibitor staurosporine ( STS ) . Following F - actin labelling in the STS - treated cells , we quantified the size of the nuclear F - actin structures and found no significant difference in their size when compared to control cells treated with DMSO , whereas the size of the equivalent nuclear F - actin assemblies was significantly increased when the same cells were depleted of ADF and CFL1 ( Figures 5 . 2A and 5 . 2B , and quantifications in 5 . 2C and 5 . 2D ) . The successful induction of apoptosis by STS was verified by the PARP and caspase 3 cleavage following the treatment ( Figure 5 . 2E ) . Taken together , our results imply that double depletion of ADF and CFL1 triggers the formation of enlarged F - actin structures within the nuclear space , indicating for the first time that the shared roles of ADF / cofilin family members might include the regulation of actin dynamics within the nucleus . Chapter 5 ½ Novel roles of ADF / cofilins in the cell nucleus 132 Figure 5 . 2 . Enlarged nuclear actin structures in ADF / CFL1 depleted cells are not the result of apoptosis . ( A - B ) Fluorescent staining for F - actin of ADF - null SCCs treated with siRNAs ( A ) or 1µM staurosporine ( STS ) ( B ) . Nuclei were counterstained with DAPI and the scale bars correspond to 10µm . ( C - D ) Quantification of the size of nuclear actin structures of cells treated as in ( A ) and ( B ) , respectively . Circles represent individual measurements performed in ImageJ and bars mean ±SD ( n = 6 - 9 fields per treatment from two individual experiments were quantified ) . * * * Mann - Whitney p value < 0 . 0001 . ( E ) Western blot for apoptotic markers confirming the successful induction of apoptosis following the STS treatment in ADF - null SCCs . 5 . 2 . 2 ADF / CFL1 depletion affects nucleolar size A question arising following the observations above is whether there is a functional significance of this response . In many instances the morphology of the F - actin aggregate structures found in the nucleus post - ADF and CFL1 depletion was akin to that of nucleoli ( for example see siCFL1 - treated cells in Figure 5 . 2A ) . This prompted us to examine whether nucleolar structure and function was affected following ADF / CFL1 loss . Staining for fibrillarin , a siNT siCFL1 siCFL1 DAPI F - Actin DMSO STS STS DAPI F - Actin PARP β - actin cl . casp . 3 D M S O 1 µ M S T S s i N T s i C F L1 0 20 40 60 80 nu c l ea r a c t i n s t r u c t u r e s ( u m ^ 2 ) nu c l ea r a c t i n s t r u c t u r e s ( µ m 2 ) A B C D M S O S T S 0 10 20 30 nu c l ea r a c t i n s t r u c t u r e s ( u m ^ 2 ) D nu c l ea r a c t i n s t r u c t u r e s ( µ m 2 ) E * * * ns Chapter 5 ½ Novel roles of ADF / cofilins in the cell nucleus 133 methyltransferase that serves as a nucleolar marker , revealed that ADF - null SCCs depleted of ADF and CFL1 display a significant increase in the size , as well as the number of nucleoli present in their nucleus compared to control cells ( Figure 5 . 3A and quantifications in 5 . 3C and 5 . 3D ) . In order to test whether a similar response is evident in vivo we performed similar immunofluorescent labelling in mouse ADF + / + CFL1 + / + and ADF - / - CFL1 - / - skin sections ( Figure 5 . 3B ) . Quantification of the size of nucleoli in the skin epithelial cells revealed that the response was similar to the one observed in malignant keratinocytes , with ADF / CFL1 null cells exhibiting a significant increase in nucleolar size ( Figure 5 . 3E ) . However , no significant increase of their number per nucleus was noted in vivo ( Figure 5 . 3F ) . Nucleolar morphology is known to be prone to morphological changes upon cellular stress ( Boulon et al . , 2010 ) . As such , we next assessed whether this is the case in our system , since we know that ADF / CFL1 depleted cells are experiencing multifaceted stress inputs . In order to create stress conditions , we performed overnight treatment of ADF - null SCCs with STS . However , this chemical induction of apoptosis failed to trigger any significant changes in either the size or the number of nucleoli ( Figure 5 . 3G and quantifications in 5 . 3H and 5 . 3I ) , indicating that this response could be a direct consequence of the loss of ADF and CFL1 . Next , we examined whether this changes in nucleolar morphology upon ADF and CFL1 depletion have an effect on its function . In order to do so , we assessed the expression of the 47S ribosomal precursor RNA transcript by qPCR . We used two different oligomers to perform the reactions , after we successfully verified their specificity for 47S by inhibiting transcription using the transcription inhibitor actinomycin D ( Figure 5 . 3J ) . Surprisingly , despite the significant changes in nucleolar morphology , no significant changes in transcription of 47S were noted in either the siRNA - treated ADF - null SCCs , or the normal primary keratinocytes which are genetically depleted of ADF and CFL1 ( Figures 5 . 3K and 5 . 3L ) . Chapter 5 ½ Novel roles of ADF / cofilins in the cell nucleus 134 Figure 5 . 3 . ADF / CFL1 loss affects nucleolar size . ( A - B ) IF for the nucleolar component fibrillarin performed on siRNA - treated ADF - null SCCs ( A ) and PE murine skin sections ( B ) . White dashed lines denote the basement membrane in skin sections . ( C - F ) Quantification of nucleolar size and number in siRNA - treated SCCs ( C - D ) and murine skin sections ( E - F ) performed in ImageJ . Circles represent all individual measurements and bars mean ±SD ( n = 12 - 14 fields per mouse from three individual mice and 3 - 8 fields per treatment from two independent experiments were quantified ) . * * * Mann - Whitney p value < 0 . 0001 . ( G ) IF for fibrillarin of 1µM STS - treated ADF - null SCCs . ( H - I ) Quantification of nucleolar size and number in ADF - null SCCs treated as in ( G ) performed in ImageJ . Circles represent all individual measurements and bars mean ±SD ( n = 4 - 5 fields per treatment from two independent experiments were quantified ) . Mann - Whitney test not significant . ( J - L ) qPCR results for relative expression of 47S pre - ribosomal RNA in ADF - null SCCs treated with the transcription inhibitor actinomycin D ( J ) or siRNAs ( K ) , and in primary tail keratinocytes ( L ) . Two different sets of primers were utilised . Data presented as mean ±SEM ( n = 3 independent DAPI Fibrillarin siNT siCFL1 siCFL1 s i N T s i C F L1 0 50 100 150 200 nu c l eo l a r s i z e ( u m ^ 2 ) * * * siNT siCFL1 DAPI Fibrillarin ADF + / + CFL1 + / + ADF - / - CFL1 - / - murine skin ADF - null SCCs K 14 - C r e K 1 4 - A D F 0 1 2 3 4 5 no . o f nu c l eo li / nu c l eu s ADF + / + CFL1 + / + ADF - / - CFL1 - / - nu c l eo l a r s i z e ( µ m 2 ) 100 50 0 150 200 s i N T s i C F L1 0 5 10 15 no . o f nu c l eo li / nu c l eu s * * * siNT siCFL1 no . o f nu c l eo li / nu c l eu s 10 5 0 15 K 14 - C r e K 14 - A D F 0 2 4 6 8 10 a r ea o f nu c l eo l u s ( u m ^ 2 ) * * * ADF + / + CFL1 + / + ADF - / - CFL1 - / - nu c l eo l a r s i z e ( µ m 2 ) 6 4 2 8 10 0 3 2 1 4 5 0 no . o f nu c l eo li / nu c l eu s DMSO STS DAPI Fibrillarin ADF - null SCCs D M S O S T S 0 10 20 30 40 50 nu c l eo l a r s i z e ( u m ^ 2 ) nu c l eo l a r s i z e ( µ m 2 ) 30 20 10 40 50 0 DMSO STS D M S O S T S 0 2 4 6 8 10 no . o f nu c l eo l i / nu c l eu s 6 4 2 8 10 0 DMSO STS no . o f nu c l eo l i / nu c l eu s 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 47S _ ( 1 ) 47S _ ( 2 ) r e l a t i v e e x p r e ss i on DMSO actinomycin D A B C D E F G H I J 0 0 . 3 0 . 6 0 . 9 1 . 2 1 . 5 1 . 8 47S _ ( 1 ) 47S _ ( 2 ) ADF - null SCCs r e l a t i v e e x p r e ss i on siNT siCFL1 K L 0 0 . 3 0 . 6 0 . 9 1 . 2 1 . 5 47S _ ( 1 ) 47S _ ( 2 ) keratinocytes r e l a t i v e e x p r e ss i on Chapter 5 ½ Novel roles of ADF / cofilins in the cell nucleus 135 experiments and keratinocytes derived from three mice ) . In all IF images the nuclei were counterstained with DAPI and the scale bars correspond to 20µM in ( A ) and ( G ) and 10µM in ( B ) . 5 . 2 . 3 Loss of ADF and CFL1 might affect chromatin architecture The recent years there is an increasing amount of evidence that suggests that apart from being part of the transcriptional apparatus , nuclear actin is also a constituent of chromatin remodelling complexes ( Miyamoto and Gurdon , 2013 ; Viita and Vartiainen , 2016 ) . Hence , we explored the possibility that the loss of the actin regulators ADF and CFL1 might affect chromatin architecture . To do so , ADF - null SCCs depleted or not of CFL1 were initially immunofluorescently labelled for the heterochromatin marker heterochromatin protein 1 homolog alpha ( HP1 α ) ( Figure 5 . 4A ) . We found that , compared to control cells , HP1 α foci , designating heterochromatic regions , exhibited a sparser arrangement , or were barely visible in ADF / CFL1 depleted cells ( Figure 5 . 4A ) . However , similar was the result after treating the cells with STS , indicating that the differences in HP1 α staining could be a consequence of apoptotic cell death ( Figure 5 . 4B ) . In addition , differences in the expression of a range of other chromatin modifications in ADF - null SCCs treated either with siRNAs or STS were assessed by immunoblotting . Specifically , we examined the expression of di - or tri - methylated histone H3 on lysine 9 or lysine 27 , which mark repressed chromatin , tri - methylated histone H3 on lysine 4 , which is a modification found in actively transcribed promoters , and acetylated histone H3 on lysine 27 , which is a modification found in active enhancers ( Bannister and Kouzarides , 2011 ; Calo and Wysocka , 2013 ) ( Figure 5 . 4C ) . The result revealed that all the chromatin markers examined were upregulated in both , ADF / CFL1 depleted cells , or cells treated with STS , while a modest increase in the levels of fibrillarin was also observed in both instances as well . We conclude that although the differences in nucleolar morphology arising after depletion of ADF / CFL1 could be a consequence of the loss of their functions , chromatin remodelling per se might be an indirect effect of the induction of apoptosis . Chapter 5 ½ Novel roles of ADF / cofilins in the cell nucleus 136 Figure 5 . 4 . Depletion of ADF / CFL1 affects the status and organization of chromatin . ( A - B ) IF for the heterochromatin marker HP1 α of ADF - null SCCs treated with siRNAs ( A ) or 1µM STS ( B ) . Nuclei were counterstained with DAPI and the scale bar corresponds to 20µM . ( C ) Western blot for markers indicating different states of chromatin in ADF - null SCCs treated with siRNAs ( left panels ) or STS ( right panels ) . Generally , Di / Tri Methyl - H3 ( K9 ) and Tri Methyl - H3 ( K27 ) are markers of repressed chromatin , whereas Tri Methyl - H3 ( K4 ) marks actively transcribed promoters and Acetyl - H3 ( K27 ) active enhancers . 5 . 2 . 4 Novel CFL1 protein - protein interactions in SCC cells As it has already been mentioned previously , the vast majority of reports on ADF / cofilins are in the context of cell motility . Given the limited knowledge surrounding emerging roles of this protein family , other than the regulation of actin dynamics in the sub - cortical actin network , and in light of our new exciting findings about nuclear integrity loss , cell death , as well as dysregulated nuclear actin upon ADF and CFL1 depletion , we set out to investigate new roles of ADF / cofilins , which could advance our understanding about their under - s i N T s i C F L1 D M S O S T S D AP I H P 1 α Di / Tri Methyl - H3 ( K9 ) Fibrillarin Tri Methyl - H3 ( K4 ) Tri Methyl - H3 ( K27 ) Acetyl - H3 ( K27 ) GAPDH s i N T s i C F L1 D M S O 1 µ M S T S β - actin cl . Lamin A γ H2AX A B C D AP I H P 1 α Chapter 5 ½ Novel roles of ADF / cofilins in the cell nucleus 137 explored functions . To achieve this , we utilised a proteomic approach to identify novel CFL1 - interacting proteins , which would potentially hint towards their associated cellular pathways that CFL1 could also have a role in their regulation . We performed immunoprecipitation ( IP ) experiments in ADF - null SCCs , which express CFL1 as their main ADF / cofilin isoform . Using an antibody against CFL1 we verified the successful immunoprecipitation of the protein after careful optimization of the protocol using total cell lysates ( Figure 5 . 5A ) . No discernible CFL1 protein was detected in control IPs performed with a non - specific IgG antibody . In addition , there is confidence that the co - immunoprecipitated ( co - IP ) proteins in the CFL1 IPs are indeed CFL1 - specific interacting proteins , since probing for α - tubulin , Hsp90 and GAPDH , which are not known to interact with ADF / cofilins specifically , revealed that they are not detectable in the CFL1 IPs . However , CFL1 was able to successfully co - IP with β - actin , providing further evidence that we successfully co - IP CFL1 - specific binding partners using our protocol ( Figure 5 . 5A ) . However , this protocol does have its limitations , which are discussed in the Discussion section at the end of this chapter . Nevertheless , in order to identify new binding partners of CFL1 , three independent biological replicates of control IgG and CFL1 IPs were analyzed by mass spectrometry . Following data analysis , the significantly enriched peptides by two or more fold in the CFL1 IPs were identified . The relationship between the members of this group of proteins was visualized according to known physical interactions among them based on the existing literature ( Figure 5 . 5B ) . CFL1 , as expected , was the most abundant protein in the CFL1 IPs , and so was β - actin , a protein which is known to interact with ADF / cofilins . However , the network analysis reveals many new interesting and previously unknown protein interactions of CFL1 . Among the most highly abundant proteins that co - IP with CFL1 were members of the nuclear factor kappa B ( NF - κ B ) pathway , NFkB1 , NFkB2 and RelB , as well as lamin A , a component of the nuclear lamina ( Figure 5 . 5B , arrows ) . Chapter 5 ½ Novel roles of ADF / cofilins in the cell nucleus 138 Figure 5 . 5 . Total cell IPs and mass spectrometry for CFL1 binding partners . ( A ) Western blot of CFL1 and control IgG immunoprecipitations ( IPs ) in ADF - null SCCs confirming successful and specific immunoprecipitation of CFL1 . Arrows indicate the position of the proteins on the blot . ( B ) Three independent control IgG and three CFL1 IPs were subjected to mass spectrometry analysis . This interaction network analysis displays physical interactions among proteins that were statistically significant ( corrected p value < 0 . 05 ) enriched by two or more fold in CFL1 over IgG IPs . Colour intensity indicates the peptide abundance in the analysed samples . Arrows indicate interesting novel interactions of CFL1 with lamin A and the NFkB signalling components NFkB2 and RelB . Network courtesy of Dr Adam Byron . ( C - D ) Gene Ontology enrichment analysis for biological processes ( C ) , and cellular components ( D ) , performed in the DAVID database ; p < 0 . 05 with Benjamini – Hochberg post hoc correction . Mta1 Rbbp7 Relb Nfkb2 Ass1 Nfkb1 Hdac1 Smarca2 Smarce1 Tmpo Hdac3 Smarcc2 Arid1b Smarcb1 Dync1h1 Tubg1 Lgals3bp Pfkl Tubb2a Pfkm Idh3b Nsun2 Ran Mapk13 Cct8 Cct4 Hnrnpa1 Paics Ddx3x Fasn Cct6a Tufm Ywhaz Ide Prkar2a Arhgef7 Eef1a1 Nsf Eif4a1 Phgdh Arf4 Padi2 Cfl1 Camk2a Pfkp Iqgap1 Plec Cdk1 Atp5a1 Rpl5 Rps2 Slc25a5 Mrpl12 Rpl23 Nbr1 Rps9 Rps24 Nars Psmd4 Bclaf1 Lmna Smc3 Ruvbl1 Atrx Slc25a4 Ruvbl2 Smc1a Rab2a Hsd17b12Slc25a3 Hnrnpa0 Abcf2 Hnrnpm Rnh1 Tubb3 Tubb5 Thbs1 Rpl11 Cct3 Tcp1 Actb Wdr77 Cct5 Actr1a 10 7 10 11 10 9 log 10 ( intensity ) Cfl1 / IgG ≥ 2 , p < 0 . 05 Physical interactions only Mta1 Rbbp7 Relb Nfkb2 Ass1 Nfkb1 Hdac1 Smarca2 Smarce1 Tmpo Hdac3 Smarcc2 Arid1b Smarcb1 Dync1h1 Tubg1 Lgals3bp Pfkl Tubb2a Pfkm Idh3b Nsun2 Ran Mapk13 Cct8 Cct4 Hnrnpa1 Paics Ddx3x Fasn Cct6a Tufm Ywhaz Ide Prkar2a Arhgef7 Eef1a1 Nsf Eif4a1 Phgdh Arf4 Padi2 Cfl1 Camk2a Pfkp Iqgap1 Plec Cdk1 Atp5a1 Rpl5 Rps2 Slc25a5 Mrpl12 Rpl23 Nbr1 Rps9 Rps24 Nars Psmd4 Bclaf1 Lmna Smc3 Ruvbl1 Atrx Slc25a4 Ruvbl2 Smc1a Rab2a Hsd17b12Slc25a3 Hnrnpa0 Abcf2 Hnrnpm Rnh1 Tubb3 Tubb5 Thbs1 Rpl11 Cct3 Tcp1 Actb Wdr77 Cct5 Actr1a 10 7 10 11 10 9 log 10 ( intensity ) Cfl1 / IgG ≥ 2 , p < 0 . 05 Physical interactions only A i npu t f l o w - t h r ough e l ua t e f l o w - t h r ough – I g G β - actin CFL1 e l ua t e – I g G GAPDH Hsp90 α - Tubulin p r e c l ea r B C 0 2 4 6 amide biosynthetic process translation peptide metabolic process peptide biosynthetic process telomere maintenance telomere organization regulation of DNA replication telomere maintenance via telomere lengthening telomere maintenance via telomerase positive regulation of telomere maintenance regulation of telomere maintenance cellular protein metabolic process DNA replication - log 10 ( corrected p - value ) 0 10 20 30 extracellular exosome intracellular organelle part cytosolic part cytoplasm microtubule cytosol cytoplasmic part intracellular organelle lumen nuclear part SWI / SNF superfamily - type complex intracellular non - membrane - bounded organelle microtubule cytoskeleton nuclear lumen nucleoplasm chaperonin - containing T - complex SWI / SNF complex cytoskeletal part cytoskeleton - log 10 ( corrected p - value ) D Chapter 5 ½ Novel roles of ADF / cofilins in the cell nucleus 139 Interestingly , Gene Ontology enrichment analysis for biological processes revealed that many of the most enriched terms were involved in nuclear functions , such as in translation , telomere maintenance and DNA replication ( Figure 5 . 5C ) . Similarly , enrichment analysis for cellular components showed that a significant amount of the identified proteins was found to be nuclear ( Figure 5 . 5D ) , suggesting that indeed the ADF / cofilin family of actin modulators may have as yet unappreciated nuclear functions . 5 . 2 . 5 Identifying novel protein - protein interactions of CFL1 in the nucleus As outlined above , a significant proportion of the identified CFL1 interacting proteins were found to have nuclear roles and / or localization , despite the utilisation of total cell lysates to perform the experiments . This , along with our interest to uncover novel nuclear functions of ADF / cofilins , prompted us to enrich for nuclear CFL1 interactions by performing IPs and mass spectrometry analysis on nuclear lysates ( see Figure 5 . 6A for schematic of the methodology used to identify nuclear CFL1 interacting proteins ) . The nuclei of ADF - null SCCs were isolated using an optimized , detergent - based , cell fractionation protocol . The effectiveness of the protocol in nuclear - cytoplasmic separation was verified by immunoblotting , which confirmed distinct separation of the mainly nuclear proteins topoisomerase II - α and lamin A / C in the nuclear fraction , and for the predominantly cytoplasmic GAPDH and α - tubulin in their respective fraction ( Figure 5 . 6B ) . Following analysis of the mass spectrometry results , 783 proteins were identified in the samples and they were used for further analysis . Hierarchical cluster analysis of all individual CFL1 or IgG IP replicates performed with the set of most significantly ( corrected p value < o . 05 ) enriched peptides revealed successful clustering of the samples by the different antibodies used ( Figure 5 . 6C ) . In addition , clustering according to whether these peptides were enriched in the IgG or CFL1 IPs categorised them in two main clusters ( Figure 5 . 6C , left dendrogram ) . The data were also visualized in a volcano plot , Chapter 5 ½ Novel roles of ADF / cofilins in the cell nucleus 140 Figure 5 . 6 . Nuclear IPs and mass spectrometry for CFL1 binding partners . ( A ) Schematic representation of the workflow followed for the identification of nuclear binding partners of CFL1 in ADF - null SCCs . ( B ) Western blot for nuclear and cytoplasmic markers in order to confirm successful cell fractionation . ( C ) Hierarchical cluster analysis of the most statistically significant ( corrected p value < 0 . 05 ; FDR = 0 . 05 ) enriched proteins identified in the CFL1 and IgG IPs . Red colour indicates enriched peptides . ( D ) Volcano plot visualizing the distribution of the identified proteins . The difference between log2 - transformed mean protein label - free quantification values of the CFL1 versus the IgG IPs is shown in the x - axis , while the y - axis shows the log - transformed p values . Red circles indicate the proteins successfully meeting our cut - off criteria for significant enrichment in the CFL1 IPs ( log2 difference CFL1 - IgG ³ 2 , corrected p value < 0 . 05 ) . Plots in ( C ) and ( D ) courtesy of Dr Adam Byron . Topo - II - α Lamin A / C α - tubulin GAPDH C y t op l a s m N u c l eu s 5x CFL1 IPs 5x IgG IPs detergent - based cell fractionation nucleus cytoplasm mass spectrometry I g G _ r ep4 I g G _ r ep5 I g G _ r ep1 I g G _ r ep6 I g G _ r ep3 C f l 1 _ r ep5 C f l 1 _ r ep6 C f l 1 _ r ep4 C f l 1 _ r ep3 C f l 1 _ r ep1 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 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 - Log p Loading . . . Zscan20 Golgb1 Setd1a Arid1b Zbtb10 Bcl7c Psmd4 Dtnb Psmc3 Eno1 Cfl1 Eif3a Rab21 Cfl2 Nsf Lmna Pkm Psmc4 Psmc5 Rab1A Nbr1 Eml1 Lgals3bp Inf2 Yipf3 Mccc2 Tapt1 Phf12 Sntb2 Tfrc Akap9 Sgol2 Zbtb41 Tbl1xr1 Sun2 Srp68 Emsy Etf1 Nadk2 Prpf31 Zbtb9 Mib2 Wrnip1 Pycr2 Kif2c Cmas Trim33 Rab1b Timm50 Tmem126a Nfkb2 Ncor2 - 12 - 10 - 8 - 6 - 4 - 2 0 2 4 6 8 10 Difference A B C D Chapter 5 ½ Novel roles of ADF / cofilins in the cell nucleus 141 which also shows the CFL1 - specific interacting proteins meeting our cut - off criteria highlighted in red . These were chosen based on whether they were significantly enriched by four or more fold compared to the IgG IPs in our analysis ( Figure 5 . 6D , red circles , see material and methods for more information regarding the proteomics analysis ) . An interaction network constructed with the proteins identified as potential CFL1 interacting proteins in the nucleus , and visualizing the associations among them was generated as previously ( Figure 5 . 7A ) . CFL1 was again the most abundant protein in the CFL1 IPs . Interestingly , CFL2 , albeit its expression is multiple fold less compared to CFL1 in the SCC cells , was also identified in the nucleus , suggesting that there might be some antibody cross - reactivity between the two isoforms . Among the most highly enriched proteins were found to be again the member of the NF - κ B pathway , NFkB2 , as well as lamin A , providing more confidence that their interaction with CFL1 is actual . Remarkably , the member of the LINC complex Sun2 was also identified as CFL1 interacting protein in the nuclear fraction . This implies that there might be a more direct interaction and relationship between this complex and ADF / cofilin family members . Furthermore , members of the nuclear pore complex , namely , nucleoporines Nup160 and Nup93 , were also identified , along with some factors associated with the endoplasmic reticulum , presumably because the latter is an extension of the outer nuclear membrane . Gene Ontology enrichment analysis for biological processes showed that the most significantly enriched peptides were associated with the regulation of RNA polymerase II and transcription , consistent with what previously has been reported ( Obrdlik and Percipalle , 2011 ) ( Figure 5 . 7B ) . Next , we verified some interactions between CFL1 and potential novel binding partners . Specifically , we chose to perform IPs and look whether lamin A / C and / or RelB are co - immunoprecipitated with CFL1 , since the association of these factors has never been described before , and they were identified in both , the total cell as well as the nuclear CFL1 interactomes . We found that both , lamin A / C and RelB , were successfully co - immunoprecipitated in CFL1 but not in control IgG IPs , albeit the corresponding band for RelB runs Chapter 5 ½ Novel roles of ADF / cofilins in the cell nucleus 142 Figure 5 . 7 . Interaction network analysis of nuclear CFL1 binding partners . ( A ) Interaction network analysis among significantly enriched proteins in the CFL1 nuclear IPs . The size of the nodes ( circles ) indicates the degree of difference of the protein abundance between the CFL1 and IgG IPs , darker colours the higher statistical significance , and black node border that there is evidence of nuclear localization of the proteins in the literature . Network courtesy of Dr Adam Byron . ( B ) Gene Ontology enrichment analysis for biological processes performed in the DAVID database ; p < 0 . 05 with Benjamini – Hochberg post hoc correction . very close with the heavy chain of the antibodies ( Figure 5 . 8A ) . Nonetheless , in order to explore whether there is a functional consequence on the NF - κ B pathway when ADF and CFL1 are depleted , we labelled RelB using immunofluorescence in ADF / CFL1 wild - type as well as null mouse skin sections and assessed the changes in its localization ( Figure 5 . 8B ) . Quantification of the localization of RelB revealed that ADF / CFL1 null epidermal keratinocytes exhibit a significant decrease in the nuclear 0 2 4 positive regulation of RNA polymerase II transcriptional preinitiation complex assembly regulation of RNA polymerase II transcriptional preinitiation complex assembly ER - associated ubiquitin - dependent protein catabolic process positive regulation of transcription initiation from RNA polymerase II promoter RNA polymerase II transcriptional preinitiation complex assembly ERAD pathway DNA - templated transcriptional preinitiation complex assembly regulation of transcription initiation from RNA polymerase II promoter positive regulation of DNA - templated transcription , initiation macromolecular complex subunit organization - log 10 ( corrected p - value ) A B Chapter 5 ½ Novel roles of ADF / cofilins in the cell nucleus 143 Figure 5 . 8 . Confirmation of interactions between CFL1 and lamin A / C and RelB . ( A ) Western blot of CFL1 and control IgG IPs performed with total cell lysates from ADF - null SCCs confirming successful co - immunoprecipitation of CFL1 and lamin A / C and RelB . Arrows indicate the position of the proteins on the blot . ( B ) IF labelling of PE skin sections for RelB . The scale bar corresponds to 20µm . White dashed lines denote the basement membrane . Nuclei were counterstained with DAPI . ( C ) Quantification of nuclear levels of RelB in ADF / CFL1 wild - type and depleted mouse epidermis . Measurements were performed in ImageJ and the amount of staining was normalised to nuclear size to account for this variability . Data presented as mean ± SEM ( n = 155 and 345 nuclei quantified for ADF + / + CFL1 + / + and ADF - / - CFL1 - / - from 3 mice per group , respectively ) . * * * Mann - Whitney p value < 0 . 0001 . abundance of the protein ( Figure 5 . 8C ) . This implies that the ADF / cofilin pathway may have a role in cytosol - nuclear shuttling of members of the NF - κ B pathway , or may influence this process indirectly . Nevertheless , collectively , our results indicate that ADF / cofilin functions encompass important nuclear roles in regulating nuclear actin dynamics and beyond , which remain to be elucidated . Lamin A / C CFL1 i npu t RelB C F L1 I P I g G I P β - actin DAPI RelB A D F + / + C F L1 + / + A D F - / - C F L1 - / - m u r i ne sk i n 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 ADF - / - CFL1 - / - ADF + / + CFL1 + / + r e l a t i v e a m oun t o f nu c l ea r R e l B C B A * * * Chapter 5 ½ Novel roles of ADF / cofilins in the cell nucleus 144 5 . 3 Discussion The presence of ADF / cofilin family members in the nucleus has been observed since early on after their initial characterization , particularly in cases where cells experience some form of stress ( Nishida et al . , 1987 ) . However , their nuclear roles have not been extensively investigated , despite the fact that now their nuclear import and export signals have been characterized , and there is evidence that they are involved in nuclear actin transport and that they support transcription ( Dopie et al . , 2012 ; Munsie et al . , 2012 ; Obrdlik and Percipalle , 2011 ) . Furthermore , nuclear accumulation of cofilin was recently associated with advanced stages of high grade urothelial cancer and poor patient prognosis ; however , the mechanisms involved in these actions remain elusive ( Hensley et al . , 2016 ) . Here we expand this growing list of nuclear functions of ADF / cofilins . We show that ADF and CFL1 depletion promotes the formation of aberrant nuclear actin aggregate structures , and that this is fuelled by increased SRF - mediated transcription . This is in agreement with a recent report visualizing the formation of nuclear actin networks for the first time , and providing evidence that this serum - induced actin polymerization in the nucleus regulates SRF / MAL transcriptional activity ( Baarlink et al . , 2013 ) . We also verified that these nuclear actin structures are not a consequence of the initiation of cell death pathways , but they are specific to the removal of ADF and CFL1 shared activities . These actin structures do not appear to be exclusively associated with specific areas within the nucleus , such as chromatin dense regions , but seem to generally be scattered in the nucleoplasm . In a recent report where different forms of nuclear actin structures were visualized in somatic cell nuclei , it was shown that some similar nuclear F - actin structures ( albeit smaller in size ) were found in the interchromatin space ( Belin et al . , 2013 ) . Our data suggest that ADF / cofilins might be essential in the regulation of these nuclear actin pools . The depletion of ADF and CFL1 also appeared to affect the size of the nucleolus both , in vivo as well as in vitro . However , the increase in the number of nucleoli observed in the cultured malignant keratinocytes was not evident Chapter 5 ½ Novel roles of ADF / cofilins in the cell nucleus 145 in the skin . This difference could be due to the differences between the two model systems , i . e . cancer versus normal cells , or tissue versus in vitro cell culture , or it could be a reflection of the differences during imaging , since a smaller area of a cell is in focus when imaged within the three - dimensional space of tissues , compared to flat cells grown in two - dimensional culture plates . Nevertheless , despite the changes in nucleolar morphology , no functional difference between wild - type and ADF / CFL1 depleted nucleoli was noted when the transcription of the pre - ribosomal 47s RNA was assessed . It remains to be elucidated whether there are functional differences in other respects . In order to examine whether other aspects of the nuclear architecture were affected , we tested the status of various chromatin markers upon ADF / CFL1 loss . Our data revealed that the expression of all the chromatin modification markers assessed were affected after both , ADF / CFL1 depletion as well as induction of apoptosis with STS . This makes it hard to suggest a conclusive role of ADF / cofilins in regulating chromatin architecture . However , recent evidence shows that actin is associated with chromatin organisation and is part of chromatin remodelling complexes ( Cao et al . , 2016 ; Chuang et al . , 2006 ; Kapoor et al . , 2013 ; Spichal et al . , 2016 ) . Hence , the involvement of ADF / cofilins in regulating nuclear actin availability in order to be able to perform these functions seems highly likely , and more research is needed to establish the exact mechanisms of this regulation . Following the description of the above nuclear phenotypes associated with ADF / CFL1 loss , we set out to uncover novel protein - protein interactions that would point towards pathways that require ADF / cofilins as part of their regulation . To our knowledge our study is the first to search for novel ADF / cofilin interacting proteins using this proteomic approach . However , there are some limitations in the experimental design utilised . Namely , a more appropriate control for the co - IP experiments would involve IPs performed with the CFL1 antibody in cells depleted of CFL1 , in order to better control for unspecific binding of the CFL1 antibody . As described previously though , ADF - null SCCs are undergoing cell death soon after CFL1 has been depleted , hence , Chapter 5 ½ Novel roles of ADF / cofilins in the cell nucleus 146 we opted to use an IgG antibody of the same species as control for these experiments . Future studies exploring the CFL1 interactome might benefit from utilising additional approaches to ensure the specificity of candidate CFL1 - interacting proteins and minimize unspecific antibody binding . Such approaches might include protein crosslinking prior to cell lysis , as well as newer methods of protein - protein interaction detection , such as BioID , a method utilising a biotin ligase fused with the protein of interest and expressed in living cells in order to detect physiologically relevant protein interactions that occur only in very close proximity to the protein of interest ( Roux et al . , 2013 ) . During cell lysis the proteins become denatured , and disruption of their natural conformation might expose epitopes that are otherwise inaccessible in living cells . This might lead to unspecific protein interactions and the methods mentioned above should assist with their elimination . Nonetheless , the enrichment analysis performed in the nuclear CFL1 IPs showed that the most significantly enriched peptides were associated with the regulation of RNA polymerase II and transcription , processes in which CFL1 was recently found to be associated with ( Obrdlik and Percipalle , 2011 ) , thus , confirming the validity of these preliminary results . Remarkably , the LINC complex member Sun2 , which resides in the inner nuclear membrane , was found to co - immunoprecipitate with CFL1 . In light of our previous findings about ADF / cofilins controlling the nuclear shape and integrity via regulating actin filaments associated with this complex , this interaction is of particular interest , and more research is needed to show whether there is a more direct regulation of the LINC complex and the associated nuclear architecture by ADF / cofilins . Among the most enriched peptides in CFL1 IPs were also members of the NF - κ B pathway and lamin A / C . The reasons behind choosing for further validation these two proteins were manifold . Firstly , they were identified in both , the total cell as well as the nuclear proteomics experiments , providing a first line of evidence that the interaction does occur . Secondly , lamin A / C , aside from being involved in the nuclear shape regulation , as it was the case for Sun2 , and directly being associated with the LINC complex which ties with Chapter 5 ½ Novel roles of ADF / cofilins in the cell nucleus 147 our previous findings , it has also been found to modulate nuclear actin dynamics , and thereby regulating SRF / MAL signalling ( Ho et al . , 2013 ) . This already suggests an indirect association of lamin A / C with ADF / cofilins with regards to actin dynamics regulation . Thirdly , members of the NF - κ B pathway have been shown to localize at the nucleolus , and regulate aspects of its function during stress conditions ( Khandelwal et al . , 2011 ; Stark and Dunlop , 2005 ) . In light of our own data that associate ADF and CFL1 functions with the general morphology of the nucleolus , it makes for an interesting connection between the two pathways for future research . Overall , our data show that ADF / cofilin activities in the cell nucleus can be associated with modulation of the morphology of the nucleolus and potentially with chromatin architecture ; however , the exact functional consequences of these changes remain to be elucidated . Moreover , we provide for the first time a list with potential novel ADF / cofiln interacting proteins that will be a useful resource , and will serve as a guide for future research directions that will aim to uncover new interesting and important roles of ADF / cofilins in the cell and nuclear biology . Chapter 6 ½ Discussion and future perspectives 148 Chapter 6 Discussion and future perspectives Chapter 6 ½ Discussion and future perspectives 149 6 . 1 ADF / cofilin activities are critical for cell and tissue homeostasis The inducible genetic knockout of both ADF / cofilin family members , ADF and CFL1 , as well as the transient downregulation of CFL1 expression by RNAi in malignant keratinocytes , and the detailed analysis of the associated cellular and tissue phenotypes , allowed us to redefine the fundamental physiological roles of ADF / cofilins . To date , most of the literature concerning the cellular roles of ADF / cofilins is associated with actin treadmilling of dendritic cortical actin networks at the leading edge of motile cells . Here we show that this , in fact , is not their major role in tissue depleted of the shared functions of ADF and CFL1 . We demonstrate that their activities are actually required for the maintenance of the quiescent state in adult tissues , since their ablation promotes increased cell cycle entry , thereby permitting proliferation of differentiated cells , and leads to breakdown of tissue architecture , loss of tissue homeostasis and ultimately apoptosis . In cellular level , removal of ADF and CFL1 is associated with uncontrolled assembly of tensile actin filaments , aberrant cell shape , deformation of the nuclear membrane and nuclear shape , altered transcription , and increased genomic instability . Hence , we describe a novel link between dynamic regulation of filamentous actin , nuclear shape , transcription and nuclear and genomic integrity , and we add a novel role in the already extended and ever - increasing list of cellular functions of the ADF / cofilin family ( Figure 1 . 2 ) . 6 . 1 . 1 Mechanisms contributing to actin overpolymerization In wild - type cells the shared severing activities of ADF and CFL1 tightly regulate the length of actin filaments and maintain a balance between polymerized and free actin monomers . In turn , MAL , which is a cofactor of SRF that responds to actin monomer availability levels and drives SRF mediated transcription ( Miralles et al . , 2003 ; Vartiainen et al . , 2007 ) , is bound to actin monomers that regulate its cytoplasmic retention ( Figure 6 . 1 , left part of the schematic ) . Lack of actin severing in ADF / CFL1 depleted cells Chapter 6 ½ Discussion and future perspectives 150 promotes the exhaustion of the actin monomer pool and leads to very low G - / F - actin ratio , since increased polymerization promotes unrestrained incorporation of G - actin to filaments . As a result , MAL is now free to translocate into the nucleus where it binds to SRF and enhances SRF - mediated transcription . SRF target genes include primarily cytoskeletal , cell adhesion and actin regulatory molecules , including actin itself ( Olson and Nordheim , 2010 ) . The new actin monomers are incorporated to the existing or newly polymerized actin filaments , in a process that also requires the actin nucleation Arp2 / 3 complex . This compensation mechanism further fuels the depleted G - actin pool , which leads to greater impairment of the dynamic regulation of actin , uncontrolled over - polymerization , and actin filament assembly inside the cell , which has profound consequences to cellular and tissue homeostasis ( Figure 6 . 1 , right part of the schematic ) . Figure 6 . 1 . Schematic summarizing the main pathways responsible for the aberrant actin filament accumulation that follows the depletion of ADF and CFL1 . 6 . 1 . 2 Cellular consequences of the loss of actin dynamics regulation Mechanistically , enhanced polymerization and loss of control over the dynamic turnover of contractile actin stress fibers , which are the primary effects of ADF and CFL1 depletion , lead to physical damage of cell organelles orchestrated by increased tension . Absence of ADF and CFL1 permits Cytoplasm Nucleus CArG SRF SRF / MAL targets x CArG SRF / MAL targets e . g . actin SRF MAL MAL ADF / CFL1 F - actin G - actin MAL extended actin filaments aggregates of actin nuclear actin aggregates and / or filaments ? loss of tissue / cellular homeostasis , disruption of cellular components and cell death MAL ADF / CFL1 x ( + ) Chapter 6 ½ Discussion and future perspectives 151 increased association of polymerized actin filaments with myosin motors ( Wiggan et al . , 2012 ) . In turn , increased intracellular mechanical tension mediated by enhanced actomyosin contractility leads to stabilization and enlargement of focal adhesions into which the aberrant tensile actin filaments are tethered ( Carisey et al . , 2013 ; Ciobanasu et al . , 2014 ; Grashoff et al . , 2010 ; Pasapera et al . , 2010 ) . Figure 6 . 2 . Schematic of main cellular mediators contributing to the loss of nuclear integrity and associated consequences that follows ADF and CFL1 depletion ( Kanellos et al . , 2015 ) . A subset of these contractile actin filaments are part of the actin - cap , the specialized stress fibers that pass over the nucleus and regulate its shape ( Khatau et al . , 2009 ; Kim et al . , 2012 ) , and / or are physically connected with the LINC complex , which localizes to the nuclear envelope and physically connects a group of cytoplasmic actin filaments with the nuclear lamina [ reviewed in ( Starr and Fridolfsson , 2010 ) ] . The increased engagement of a group of the aberrant tensile filaments arising upon ADF / CFL1 depletion with the LINC complex results in physical intrusion of the nuclear membrane , ‘normal’ dynamic actin filaments LINC complex unrestrained accumulation of contractile actin filaments nuclear membrane region cell viability tissue homeostasis apoptosis tissue breakdown ADF / CFL1 loss F - actin Myosin SUN1 / 2 Lamins Nesprin - 1 / 2 Giant Focal Adhesion Complexes Chapter 6 ½ Discussion and future perspectives 152 deformed nuclei and loss of nuclear integrity . This actin and LINC complex mediated nuclear deformation trigger immediate chromatin re - arrangement , DNA breaks that trigger DNA - damage induced signalling , and , ultimately , apoptosis and loss of tissue homeostasis ( Figure 6 . 2 ) . This represents a previously unrecognized pathway by which ADF / cofilins control stress fiber dynamics and intracellular tension , and they regulate fundamental cellular functions including cell division , and focal adhesion turnover , nuclear architecture and cell survival . 6 . 2 Actin dynamics : a critical factor of tissue maintenance 6 . 2 . 1 Involvement of the SRF signaling pathway Our data revealed that upon ADF and CFL1 depletion epidermal cells enter abnormal cycles of differentiation , exit from their quiescent state , undergo apoptosis and the general skin homeostasis is lost ( Blanpain and Fuchs , 2009 ) . Since a wound healing pathway is also activated as noted by elevated keratin 6 expression , an inflammatory response may also be triggered that could account for the epidermal cell activation and proliferation observed in vivo . Keratinocyte activation and differentiation are also influenced by cell shape changes mediated by actin remodelling , and the status of actin networks has been found to regulate keratinocyte differentiation mediated by elevated SRF / MAL signalling ( Connelly et al . , 2010 ) , responses which are also evident in the ADF / CFL1 depleted cells . Thus , perturbed cellular shape and aberrant actin assemblies in ADF / CFL1 depleted epidermal keratinocytes transduce signals to SRF , and this likely contributes to keratinocyte activation . Interestingly , similar phenotypes and cellular responses have been described in three cases where the consequences of SRF deletion in the skin have been examined . In these studies researchers highlighted the importance of SRF in maintaining epidermal tissue homeostasis , which was lost upon SRF depletion , and it was characterised by loss of cell - cell contacts , perturbed actin cytoskeleton , increased keratinocyte proliferation and differentiation ( Koegel et al . , 2009 ; Luxenburg et al . , 2011 ; Verdoni et al . , 2010 ) . Perturbed cell - cell Chapter 6 ½ Discussion and future perspectives 153 contacts were also noted upon ADF and CFL1 depletion in the epidermis ( data not shown ) ( Kanellos et al . , 2015 ) , and loss of cell - cell contacts has previously been linked to release from a non - proliferative state ( Charest et al . , 2009 ; Owens et al . , 2000 ) . In this regard , loss of SRF phenocopies ADF / CFL1 deletion in mouse epidermis . Intercellular junctions are essential components of epidermal homeostasis by mediating the formation of epithelial sheets , and regulation of the actin cytoskeleton is crucial for their maintenance ( Fuchs and Raghavan , 2002 ; Vaezi et al . , 2002 ) . We believe that this is the functional link between all these studies ; impaired actin dynamics lead to catastrophic loss of tissue homeostasis . 6 . 2 . 2 Mechanosensitive regulation through YAP / TAZ activity As indicated above , ADF and CFL1 are required to prevent inappropriate spontaneous proliferation of keratinocytes that express differentiation markers , maintain cell - cell contacts and suppress keratinocyte activation . This implies that it is not necessarily a positive stimulus that induces cell cycle entry and proliferation in tissues , since , loss of dynamic regulation of actin networks appears to be sufficient to promote exit from a quiescent state , and mechanical force , which is generally derived from the external environment within tissues or internal strain , can also promote proliferation responses ( Benham - Pyle et al . , 2015 ) . The dramatic over - polymerization of actin and formation of uncontrolled contractile stress fibers inside cells upon ADF / CFL1 depletion also results in internally - induced severe mechanical stress , which signals to and activates the YAP / TAZ pathway ( Aragona et al . , 2013 ; Low et al . , 2014 ) . Indeed , we found that YAP / TAZ activity , as assessed by significantly upregulated expression of YAP / TAZ target genes , is significantly increased in ADF and CFL1 depleted cells , and this is another factor that could account for keratinocyte mechanically - induced hyperproliferation . We conclude that severely impaired dynamic actin regulation , whether by mechanical stress , indirectly through perturbed SRF signalling , or by upstream removal of the actin severing activities of ADF and CFL1 , have dramatic consequences for cellular and tissue homeostasis . Chapter 6 ½ Discussion and future perspectives 154 6 . 3 Nuclear envelope : cell signalling mediator and implications in disease 6 . 3 . 1 Regulation of the nuclear envelope – actin connections The connection between the nuclear envelope and the actin cytoskeleton is critical for a number of diverse cellular functions including , but not limited to , nuclear positioning within cells in tissues , nuclear movement , polarity , migration and even processes like mitosis and meiosis ( Luxton et al . , 2010 ; Starr and Fridolfsson , 2010 ; Stewart et al . , 2015 ) . Therefore , tight regulation of this relationship is crucial for all the cellular features and responses that are affected by it . However , to date , the specific mechanisms regarding this regulation between the actin cytoskeleton and the nuclear envelope have remained elusive . Here we have provided evidence that at least a subset of the aberrant contractile actin filaments arising upon removal of the activities of ADF and CFL1 are responsible for nuclear encroachment . This is associated with increased mechanical forces exerted onto the nuclear envelope mediated by its physical attachments to these tensile filaments via the LINC complex . This implies , and proposes for the first time , that the actin - cap and other LINC - associated actin stress fibers are regulated by ADF / cofilins , and this dynamic regulation is vital for the actin - LINC complex to control nuclear movement and integrity . 6 . 3 . 2 The nuclear envelope as a signalling node in cells It is now widely appreciated that the nuclear envelope is directly connected with the cell periphery and the extracellular matrix through the cytoskeleton , and this plays a major part in mediating signal transduction in response to extracellular cues ( Jaalouk and Lammerding , 2009 ; Wang et al . , 2009 ) . Furthermore , there is increasing evidence that the nuclear envelope connections with the cytoskeleton are important for genome organization , DNA repair and stability , as well as gene transcription ( Mekhail and Moazed , 2010 ) . Chromatin tethering to the nuclear envelope also regulates nuclear shape and deformability ( Schreiner et al . , 2015 ) , and deep nuclear envelope Chapter 6 ½ Discussion and future perspectives 155 invaginations from actin cables that are also mediating connections to neighbouring cells and the cell surroundings were recently reported ( Jorgens et al . , 2016 ) . Interestingly , tensile actin filaments linked to the nuclear lamina and leading to the formation of indentation sites on the nuclei were found to affect chromatin condensation and organisation ( Versaevel et al . , 2014 ) . Hence , the consequences of impaired regulation of the nuclear envelope’s integrity after ADF and CFL1 depletion are severe and manifold . The DNA damage response , chromatin modifications and apoptosis that ensue their depletion could , in part , be attributed to this dysregulation , and this further emphasizes the importance of tight regulation of contractile actin filaments mediated by ADF / cofilins for nuclear morphology and function . 6 . 3 . 3 Nuclear envelope and disease The first diseases associated with nuclear envelope deformations and inability for appropriate nuclear positioning were muscular dystrophies , but , ever since , an array of other maladies with similar characteristics has emerged ( e . g . progeria ) , which are collectively referred to as laminopathies ( Dauer and Worman , 2009 ; Davidson and Lammerding , 2014 ; Gundersen and Worman , 2013 ; Stewart et al . , 2007 ) . Aside from this mainly developmental disorders , there is increasing evidence that deformability of the nuclear envelope is an essential attribute of cancer cells , which facilitates their successful migration and invasion through complex and narrow environments ( Davidson et al . , 2014 ; Denais et al . , 2016 ) . Furthermore , it has been shown that this deformability is mediated by actin polymerization and involves the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Thiam et al . , 2016 ) . Our own data provide evidence that the activities of ADF / cofilins in normal as well as cancer cells are essential for nuclear shape regulation and nuclear integrity maintenance , whereas loss of ADF and CFL1 causes irreversible nuclear deformation and cell death . Given the synergistic roles between ADF / cofilins and the Arp2 / 3 complex it is safe to assume that apart from creating the driving forces required for cell motility , they also contribute to nuclear plasticity to facilitate invasion , intra - and extra - vasation and metastasis of cancer cells . Chapter 6 ½ Discussion and future perspectives 156 6 . 4 Nuclear roles of ADF / cofilins Despite a wealth of information on their cytoplasmic functions , not much is known about the nuclear roles of ADF / cofilins , and indeed of actin itself . Nuclear actin has been reported to be association with all three RNA polymerases , and its roles likely extend as far as controlling the movement and positioning of entire chromosomes ( Chuang et al . , 2006 ; Miyamoto and Gurdon , 2013 ) . However , the regulation of these actin activities and the consequences of their misregulation for health and disease have yet to be established . CFL1 has also been attributed with roles in transcription elongation as well as nuclear transfer of actin monomers , and they are both required for transcription maintenance ( Dopie et al . , 2012 ; Obrdlik and Percipalle , 2011 ) . Our results showed that removal of ADF and CFL1 promotes formation of enlarged aberrant actin aggregate structures within the nucleus , indicating that their severing activities might be required to regulate actin dynamics in this compartment as well . Interestingly , PIP 2 , which binds ADF / cofilins and regulates their activity in the sub - cortical space , has been found to regulate transcriptional activity too ( Toska et al . , 2012 ; Yildirim et al . , 2013 ) . Hence , all the evidence points towards nuclear ADF / cofilin functions that remain to be elucidated . Nuclear actin can control SRF / MAL mediated transcription ( Vartiainen et al . , 2007 ) , and nuclear actin polymerization induced by formins has been shown to regulate the activity of the pathway ( Baarlink et al . , 2013 ) . Arguably , nuclear actin severers such as the ADF / cofilin family members could also directly regulate SRF signalling by controlling nuclear actin levels , either by actively transporting actin or by severing the nuclear pool , and our data suggest that SRF signalling is heavily influenced by ADF / cofilins and indeed a major contributor to the phenotypes acquired following their depletion . Remarkably , nuclear actin polymerization was recently found to be associated with efficient DNA double strand break repair ( Belin et al . , 2015 ) . Researchers in this study suggested that induction of DNA breaks was followed by increased polymerization of nuclear actin in the form of filaments and / or Chapter 6 ½ Discussion and future perspectives 157 nuclear clusters , some of which were found in the nucleolus , with the size of the latter also being affected . Cofilin knockdown led to increased amount of persistent DNA breaks , suggesting that its actions are required for effective DNA damage repair . In addition , nuclear actin polymerization was shown to be induced during cell spreading in an integrin - dependent manner , and this was facilitated by the LINC complex ( Plessner et al . , 2015 ) . Interestingly , actin dynamics are affected by lamin A / C expression as well ; lamin A / C depletion , which is common in laminopathies , abrogates the formation of nuclear and cytoplasmic actin filaments , and fails to retain nuclear MAL in order to support SRF transcription ( Ho et al . , 2013 ) . This response is rescued by emerin overexpression , which is another inner nuclear membrane protein that is able to bind actin and facilitate its polymerization ( Holaska et al . , 2004 ) . Hence , it appears that the crosstalk between cytoplasmic and nuclear actin networks that involves nuclear membrane proteins is vital for many cellular responses . Therefore , it is critical to dynamically regulate the nuclear actin pool in order to prevent cellular damage , including damage of chromatin , as well as maintain its fine molecular connections with the cytoplasmic actin networks to facilitate efficient mechanotransduction . The visualization of aberrant nuclear actin structures upon ADF and CFL1 depletion makes us postulate that ADF / cofilins are likely contributors and regulators of the activities of nuclear actin . Furthermore , they serve as a paradigm of cell economy , since it is highly efficient for the cell to produce one type of protein that regulates actin dynamics in multiple scenarios , as well as different cell compartments , and affecting processes ranging from cell motility and protrusion to regulation of nuclear shape , nuclear actin availability , transcription and chromatin remodelling . Chapter 6 ½ Discussion and future perspectives 158 6 . 5 Concluding remarks Here we described novel functions of ADF / cofilins that extend beyond their regulation of membrane ruffles and protrusions . They dynamically regulate cytoplasmic as well as nuclear actin filaments and , in turn , affect actin polymerization , nuclear and cell shape , transcription , chromatin architecture , genomic integrity , and , ultimately , cell viability . Secondary roles may include focal adhesion turnover , which has previously been suggested ( Marshall et al . , 2009 ; Tahtamouni et al . , 2013 ) . Focal adhesion stability is a process with which SRF has also been associated with – primarily in the formation and stabilization of focal adhesions ( Schratt et al . , 2002 ) – and our data verify that there is a lot of interplay among ADF / cofilins and SRF , which might extend to the maintenance and stability of other intracellular organelles , apart from the nucleus , as well ( Beck et al . , 2012 ) . We further show that the accumulated actin filaments upon loss of ADF and CFL1 are under myosin - mediated tension . Actomyosin tension has been shown to induce hyperproliferation and skin tissue thickening , and has been further associated with enhanced tumorigenesis and tumour progression ( Samuel et al . , 2011 ) . As already discussed , the expression of many of the components of the cofilin pathway is perturbed in metastatic tumours , and actin cytoskeleton dynamics are a hallmark of cell motility , invasion and metastasis ( Wang et al . , 2007 ) . We also showed that ADF / cofilins modulate nuclear actin dynamics , which are essential for cancer progression as well . As mentioned above , nuclear actin is involved in chromatin maintenance and regulation , and , along with cofilin , they were found to be required for efficient DNA damage repair . In addition to these roles , their functions in mechanotransduction , transcription , cell division , as well as in nuclear deformability , processes that are all crucial for cancer progression , makes our results highly applicable to cancer research . Furthermore , we found that depletion of ADF and CFL1 was crucial for cell viability not only for SCC cells but also pancreatic cancer cells ( data not shown ) . Hence , it appears that ADF / cofilins can contribute to cancer progression via multiple inputs , and Chapter 6 ½ Discussion and future perspectives 159 further elucidation of the molecular mechanisms involved in these activities will be necessary if they are to be successful candidates for targeted cancer therapy , as previously suggested ( Wang et al . , 2007 ) . ADF / cofilins are implicated in a diverse and multifaceted array of cellular functions . However , it is not always clear whether these biological roles are a direct result of their actin - severing activities or whether these proteins may also have as yet unappreciated properties , such as scaffolding protein complexes and mediating protein interactions . One potential function includes the regulation of NF - κ B transcriptional activity by affecting the localization of RelA / p65 through modulating the actin cytoskeleton ( Fazal et al . , 2009 ; Wang et al . , 2015 ) . However , the exact molecular mechanism remains to be established , since either depletion or exogenous expression of wild - type , constitutively active or inactive cofilin , all inhibited NF - κ B mediated transcription ( Fazal et al . , 2009 ) . Our proteomics data revealed that CFL1 is associated with multiple members of the NF - κ B pathway , suggesting a more direct interplay between the two pathways that remains to be elucidated . On the same note , it is fascinating that nuclear envelope components , such as lamin A / C and Sun2 , were significantly enriched in our CFL1 co - immunoprecipitation experiments , given our observations on nuclear envelope shape regulation by ADF / cofilins . More research on the functional consequences of this association will expand our knowledge about these new and unexpected roles of ADF / cofilins that are beginning to emerge . Taken together , the current evidence points to a growing list of diverse biological roles for ADF / cofilins , and it is highly likely that many more will become apparent in the coming years . ADF / cofilins are indeed a functional node in cell biology , and it is worth investing in further understanding the crucial nature of their actions and their multi - layered regulation that are frequently perturbed in disease . Bibliography 160 Bibliography Bibliography 161 Abe , H . , Obinata , T . , Minamide , L . S . , and Bamburg , J . R . ( 1996 ) . Xenopus laevis actin - depolymerizing factor cofilin : A phosphorylation - regulated protein essential for development . Journal of Cell Biology 132 , 871 - 885 . Abe , H . , Ohshima , S . , and Obinata , T . ( 1989 ) . A cofilin - like protein is involved in the regulation of actin assembly in developing skeletal - muscle . Journal of Biochemistry 106 , 696 - 702 . Agrawal , P . B . , Greenleaf , R . S . , Tomczak , K . K . , Lehtokari , V . L . , Wallgren - Pettersson , C . , Wallefeld , W . , Laing , N . G . , Darras , B . T . , Maciver , S . K . , Dormitzer , P . R . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Nemaline myopathy with minicores caused by mutation of the CFL2 gene encoding the skeletal muscle actin - binding protein , cofilin - 2 . American Journal of Human Genetics 80 , 162 - 167 . Agrawal , P . B . , Joshi , M . , Savic , T . , Chen , Z . , and Beggs , A . H . ( 2012 ) . Normal myofibrillar development followed by progressive sarcomeric disruption with actin accumulations in a mouse Cfl2 knockout demonstrates requirement of cofilin - 2 for muscle maintenance . Human Molecular Genetics 21 , 2341 - 2356 . Aizawa , H . , Sutoh , K . , Tsubuki , S . , Kawashima , S . , Ishii , A . , and Yahara , I . ( 1995 ) . Identification , characterization , and intracellular distribution of cofilin in Dictyostelium discoideum . Journal of Biological Chemistry 270 , 10923 - 10932 . Ambach , A . , Saunus , J . , Konstandin , M . , Wesselborg , S . , Meuer , S . C . , and Samstag , Y . ( 2000 ) . The serine phosphatases PP1 and PP2A associate with and activate the actin - binding protein cofilin in human T lymphocytes . European Journal of Immunology 30 , 3422 - 3431 . Andrianantoandro , E . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2006 ) . Mechanism of actin filament turnover by severing and nucleation at different concentrations of ADF / cofilin . Molecular Cell 24 , 13 - 23 . Aragona , M . , Panciera , T . , Manfrin , A . , Giulitti , S . , Michielin , F . , Elvassore , N . , Dupont , S . , and Piccolo , S . ( 2013 ) . A mechanical checkpoint controls multicellular growth through YAP / TAZ regulation by actin - processing factors . Cell 154 , 1047 - 1059 . Baarlink , C . , Wang , H . , and Grosse , R . ( 2013 ) . Nuclear actin network assembly by formins regulates the SRF coactivator MAL . Science 340 , 864 - 867 . Bailly , M . ( 2007 ) . Moving away from death : When caspase - 11 meets cofilin . Nature Cell Biology 9 , 245 - 246 . Bamburg , J . R . ( 1999 ) . Proteins of the ADF / cofilin family : Essential regulators of actin dynamics . Annual Review of Cell and Developmental Biology 15 , 185 - 230 . Bamburg , J . R . , and Bernstein , B . W . ( 2016 ) . Actin dynamics and cofilin - actin rods in Alzheimer disease . Cytoskeleton ( Hoboken ) . Epub ahead of print . Bibliography 162 Bamburg , J . R . , Bernstein , B . W . , Davis , R . C . , Flynn , K . C . , Goldsbury , C . , Jensen , J . R . , Maloney , M . T . , Marsden , I . T . , Minamide , L . S . , Pak , C . W . , et al . ( 2010 ) . ADF / cofilin - actin rods in neurodegenerative diseases . Current Alzheimer Research 7 , 241 - 250 . Bamburg , J . R . , Harris , H . E . , and Weeds , A . G . ( 1980 ) . Partial - purification and characterization of an actin depolymerizing factor from brain . FEBS Letters 121 , 178 - 182 . Bannister , A . J . , and Kouzarides , T . ( 2011 ) . Regulation of chromatin by histone modifications . Cell Research 21 , 381 - 395 . Beck , H . , Flynn , K . , Lindenberg , K . S . , Schwarz , H . , Bradke , F . , Di Giovanni , S . , and Knoll , B . ( 2012 ) . Serum Response Factor ( SRF ) - cofilin - actin signaling axis modulates mitochondrial dynamics . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 109 , 2523 - 2532 . Belin , B . J . , Cimini , B . A . , Blackburn , E . H . , and Mullins , R . D . ( 2013 ) . Visualization of actin filaments and monomers in somatic cell nuclei . Molecular Biology of the Cell 24 , 982 - 994 . Belin , B . J . , Lee , T . , and Mullins , R . D . ( 2015 ) . DNA damage induces nuclear actin filament assembly by Formin - 2 and Spire - 1 / 2 that promotes efficient DNA repair . Elife 4 . Bellenchi , G . C . , Gurniak , C . B . , Perlas , E . , Middei , S . , Ammassari - Teule , M . , and Witke , W . ( 2007 ) . N - cofilin is associated with neuronal migration disorders and cell cycle control in the cerebral cortex . Genes & Development 21 , 2347 - 2357 . Benham - Pyle , B . W . , Pruitt , B . L . , and Nelson , W . J . ( 2015 ) . Mechanical strain induces E - cadherin - dependent Yap1 and beta - catenin activation to drive cell cycle entry . Science 348 , 1024 - 1027 . Benjamin , J . M . , Kwiatkowski , A . V . , Yang , C . , Korobova , F . , Pokutta , S . , Svitkina , T . , Weis , W . I . , and Nelson , W . J . ( 2010 ) . alpha E - catenin regulates actin dynamics independently of cadherin - mediated cell - cell adhesion . Journal of Cell Biology 189 , 339 - 352 . Bernstein , B . W . , Chen , H . , Boyle , J . A . , and Bamburg , J . R . ( 2006 ) . Formation of actin - ADF / cofilin rods transiently retards decline of mitochondrial potential and ATP in stressed neurons . American Journal of Physiology - Cell Physiology 291 , 828 - 839 . Bershadsky , A . D . , Balaban , N . Q . , and Geiger , B . ( 2003 ) . Adhesion - dependent cell mechanosensitivity . Annual Review of Cell and Developmental Biology 19 , 677 - 695 . Bibliography 163 Bertling , E . , Hotulainen , P . , Mattila , P . K . , Matilainen , T . , Salminen , M . , and Lappalainen , P . ( 2004 ) . Cyclase - associated protein 1 ( CAP1 ) promotes cofilin - induced actin dynamics in mammalian nonmuscle cells . Molecular Biology of the Cell 15 , 2324 - 2334 . Blanpain , C . , and Fuchs , E . ( 2009 ) . Epidermal homeostasis : A balancing act of stem cells in the skin . Nature Reviews : Molecular Cell Biology 10 , 207 - 217 . Boulon , S . , Westman , B . J . , Hutten , S . , Boisvert , F . M . , and Lamond , A . I . ( 2010 ) . The nucleolus under stress . Molecular Cell 40 , 216 - 227 . Bravo - Cordero , J . J . , Magalhaes , M . A . , Eddy , R . J . , Hodgson , L . , and Condeelis , J . ( 2013 ) . Functions of cofilin in cell locomotion and invasion . Nature Reviews : Molecular Cell Biology 14 , 405 - 415 . Bryce , N . S . , Schevzov , G . , Ferguson , V . , Percival , J . M . , Lin , J . J . C . , Matsumura , F . , Bamburg , J . R . , Jeffrey , P . L . , Hardeman , E . C . , Gunning , P . , et al . ( 2003 ) . Specification of actin filament function and molecular composition by tropomyosin isoforms . Molecular Biology of the Cell 14 , 1002 - 1016 . Cai , L . , Marshall , T . W . , Uetrecht , A . C . , Schafer , D . A . , and Bear , J . E . ( 2007 ) . Coronin 1B coordinates Arp2 / 3 complex and cofilin activities at the leading edge . Cell 128 , 915 - 929 . Calo , E . , and Wysocka , J . ( 2013 ) . Modification of enhancer chromatin : What , how , and why ? Molecular Cell 49 , 825 - 837 . Cameron , J . M . , Gabrielsen , M . , Chim , Y . H . , Munro , J . , McGhee , E . J . , Sumpton , D . , Eaton , P . , Anderson , K . I . , Yin , H . B . , and Olson , M . F . ( 2015 ) . Polarized cell motility induces hydrogen peroxide to inhibit cofilin via cysteine oxidation . Current Biology 25 , 1520 - 1525 . Cao , T . , Sun , L . , Jiang , Y . , Huang , S . , Wang , J . , and Chen , Z . ( 2016 ) . Crystal structure of a nuclear actin ternary complex . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 113 , 8985 – 8990 . Carisey , A . , Tsang , R . , Greiner , A . M . , Nijenhuis , N . , Heath , N . , Nazgiewicz , A . , Kemkemer , R . , Derby , B . , Spatz , J . , and Ballestrem , C . ( 2013 ) . Vinculin regulates the recruitment and release of core focal adhesion proteins in a force - dependent manner . Current Biology 23 , 271 - 281 . Chan , C . , Beltzner , C . C . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2009 ) . Cofilin dissociates Arp2 / 3 complex and branches from actin filaments . Current Biology 19 , 537 - 545 . Charest , J . L . , Jennings , J . M . , King , W . P . , Kowalczyk , A . P . , and Garcia , A . J . ( 2009 ) . Cadherin - mediated cell - cell contact regulates keratinocyte differentiation . The Journal of investigative dermatology 129 , 564 - 572 . Bibliography 164 Chaudhry , F . , Little , K . , Talarico , L . , Quintero - Monzon , O . , and Goode , B . L . ( 2010 ) . A central role for the WH2 domain of Srv2 / CAP in recharging actin monomers to drive actin turnover in vitro and in vivo . Cytoskeleton 67 , 120 - 133 . Chen , Q . , Courtennanche , N . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2015 ) . Aip1 promotes actin filament severing by cofilin and regulates constriction of the cytokinetic contractile ring . Journal of Biological Chemistry 290 , 2289 - 2300 . Chen , Q . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2011 ) . Actin filament severing by cofilin is more important for assembly than constriction of the cytokinetic contractile ring . Journal of Cell Biology 195 , 485 - 498 . Chin , S . M . , Jansen , S . , and Goode , B . L . ( 2016 ) . TIRF microscopy analysis of human Cof1 , Cof2 , and ADF effects on actin filament severing and turnover . Journal of Molecular Biology 428 , 1604 - 1616 . Chow , K . H . , Factor , R . E . , and Ullman , K . S . ( 2012 ) . The nuclear envelope environment and its cancer connections . Nature Reviews Cancer 12 , 196 - 209 . Chua , B . T . , Volbracht , C . , Tan , K . O . , Li , R . , Yu , V . C . , and Li , P . ( 2003 ) . Mitochondrial translocation of cofilin is an early step in apoptosis induction . Nature Cell Biology 5 , 1083 - 1089 . Chuang , C . H . , Carpenter , A . E . , Fuchsova , B . , Johnson , T . , de Lanerolle , P . , and Belmont , A . S . ( 2006 ) . Long - range directional movement of an interphase chromosome site . Current Biology 16 , 825 - 831 . Ciobanasu , C . , Faivre , B . , and Le Clainche , C . ( 2014 ) . Actomyosin - dependent formation of the mechanosensitive talin - vinculin complex reinforces actin anchoring . Nature Communications 5 . Connelly , J . T . , Gautrot , J . E . , Trappmann , B . , Tan , D . W . , Donati , G . , Huck , W . T . , and Watt , F . M . ( 2010 ) . Actin and serum response factor transduce physical cues from the microenvironment to regulate epidermal stem cell fate decisions . Nature Cell Biology 12 , 711 - 718 . Crisp , M . , Liu , Q . , Roux , K . , Rattner , J . B . , Shanahan , C . , Burke , B . , Stahl , P . D . , and Hodzic , D . ( 2006 ) . Coupling of the nucleus and cytoplasm : Role of the LINC complex . Journal of Cell Biology 172 , 41 - 53 . Dan , C . , Kelly , A . , Bernard , O . , and Minden , A . ( 2001 ) . Cytoskeletal changes regulated by the PAK4 serine / threonine kinase are mediated by LIM kinase 1 and cofilin . Journal of Biological Chemistry 276 , 32115 - 32121 . Dauer , W . T . , and Worman , H . J . ( 2009 ) . The nuclear envelope as a signaling node in development and disease . Developmental Cell 17 , 626 - 638 . Bibliography 165 Davidson , P . M . , Denais , C . , Bakshi , M . C . , and Lammerding , J . ( 2014 ) . Nuclear deformability constitutes a rate - limiting step during cell migration in 3 - D environments . Cellular and Molecular Bioengineering 7 , 293 - 306 . Davidson , P . M . , and Lammerding , J . ( 2014 ) . Broken nuclei - lamins , nuclear mechanics , and disease . Trends in Cell Biology 24 , 247 - 256 . de Hoon , M . J . L . , Imoto , S . , Nolan , J . , and Miyano , S . ( 2004 ) . Open source clustering software . Bioinformatics 20 , 1453 - 1454 . Delorme - Walker , V . , Seo , J . Y . , Gohla , A . , Fowler , B . , Bohl , B . , and DerMardirossian , C . ( 2015 ) . Chronophin coordinates cell leading edge dynamics by controlling active cofilin levels . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 112 , 5150 - 5159 . Denais , C . M . , Gilbert , R . M . , Isermann , P . , McGregor , A . L . , te Lindert , M . , Weigelin , B . , Davidson , P . M . , Friedl , P . , Wolf , K . , and Lammerding , J . ( 2016 ) . Nuclear envelope rupture and repair during cancer cell migration . Science 352 , 353 - 358 . Dopie , J . , Skarp , K . P . , Rajakyla , E . K . , Tanhuanpaa , K . , and Vartiainen , M . K . ( 2012 ) . Active maintenance of nuclear actin by importin 9 supports transcription . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 109 , 544 - 552 . Dubois , F . , Keller , M . , Calvayrac , O . , Soncin , F . , Hoa , L . , Hergovich , A . , Parrini , M . C . , Mazieres , J . , Vaisse - Lesteven , M . , Camonis , J . , et al . ( 2016 ) . RASSF1A suppresses the invasion and metastatic potential of human non - small cell lung cancer cells by inhibiting YAP activation through the GEF - H1 / RhoB pathway . Cancer Research 76 , 1627 - 1640 . Edwards , D . C . , Sanders , L . C . , Bokoch , G . M . , and Gill , G . N . ( 1999 ) . Activation of LIM - kinase by Pak1 couples Rac / Cdc42 GTPase signalling to actin cytoskeletal dynamics . Nature Cell Biology 1 , 253 - 259 . Erickson , H . P . ( 2007 ) . Evolution of the cytoskeleton . Bioessays 29 , 668 - 677 . Estornes , Y . , Gay , F . , Gevrey , J . C . , Navoizat , S . , Nejjari , M . , Scoazec , J . Y . , Chayvialle , J . A . , Saurin , J . C . , and Abello , J . ( 2007 ) . Differential involvement of destrin and cofilin - 1 in the control of invasive properties of Isreco1 human colon cancer cells . International Journal of Cancer 121 , 2162 - 2171 . Exton , J . H . ( 2002 ) . Phospholipase D - Structure , regulation and function . Reviews of Physiology Biochemistry and Pharmacology , Vol 144 144 , 1 - 94 . Fazal , F . , Bijli , K . M . , Minhajuddin , M . , Rein , T . , Finkelstein , J . N . , and Rahman , A . ( 2009 ) . Essential role of cofilin - 1 in regulating thrombin - induced RelA / p65 nuclear translocation and intercellular adhesion molecule 1 ( ICAM - 1 ) Expression in Endothelial Cells . Journal of Biological Chemistry 284 , 21047 - 21056 . Bibliography 166 Feng , X . D . , Degese , M . S . , Iglesias - Bartolome , R . , Vaque , J . P . , Molinolo , A . A . , Rodrigues , M . , Zaidi , M . R . , Ksander , B . R . , Merlino , G . , Sodhi , A . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Hippo - independent activation of YAP by the GNAQ uveal melanoma oncogene through a Trio - regulated Rho GTPase signaling circuitry . Cancer Cell 25 , 831 - 845 . Flynn , K . C . , Hellal , F . , Neukirchen , D . , Jacob , S . , Tahirovic , S . , Dupraz , S . , Stem , S . , Garvalov , B . K . , Gurniak , C . , Shaw , A . E . , et al . ( 2012 ) . ADF / cofilin - mediated actin retrograde flow directs neurite formation in the developing brain . Neuron 76 , 1091 - 1107 . Frantz , C . , Barreiro , G . , Dominguez , L . , Chen , X . M . , Eddy , R . , Condeelis , J . , Kelly , M . J . S . , Jacobson , M . P . , and Barber , D . L . ( 2008 ) . Cofilin is a pH sensor for actin free barbed end formation : Role of phosphoinositide binding . Journal of Cell Biology 183 , 865 - 879 . Freedberg , I . M . , Tomic - Canic , M . , Komine , M . , and Blumenberg , M . ( 2001 ) . Keratins and the keratinocyte activation cycle . Journal of Investigative Dermatology 116 , 633 - 640 . Fuchs , E . , and Raghavan , S . ( 2002 ) . Getting under the skin of epidermal morphogenesis . Nature Reviews : Genetics 3 , 199 - 209 . Galbraith , C . G . , Yamada , K . M . , and Sheetz , M . P . ( 2002 ) . The relationship between force and focal complex development . The Journal of Cell Biology 159 , 695 - 705 . Galkin , V . E . , Orlova , A . , and Egelman , E . H . ( 2012 ) . Actin filaments as tension sensors . Current Biology 22 , 96 - 101 . Galkin , V . E . , Orlova , A . , Kudryashov , D . S . , Solodukhin , A . , Reisler , E . , Schroder , G . F . , and Egelman , E . H . ( 2011 ) . Remodeling of actin filaments by ADF / cofilin proteins . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 108 , 20568 - 20572 . Galkin , V . E . , Orlova , A . , Lukoyanova , N . , Wriggers , W . , and Egelman , E . H . ( 2001 ) . Actin depolymerizing factor stabilizes an existing state of F - actin and can change the tilt of F - actin subunits . Journal of Cell Biology 153 , 75 - 86 . Ghosh , M . , Song , X . , Mouneimne , G . , Sidani , M . , Lawrence , D . S . , and Condeelis , J . S . ( 2004 ) . Cofilin promotes actin polymerization and defines the direction of cell motility . Science 304 , 743 - 746 . Gohla , A . , Birkenfeld , J . , and Bokoch , G . M . ( 2005 ) . Chronophin , a novel HAD - type serine protein phosphatase , regulates cofilin - dependent actin dynamics . Nature Cell Biology 7 , 21 - 29 . Bibliography 167 Grashoff , C . , Hoffman , B . D . , Brenner , M . D . , Zhou , R . B . , Parsons , M . , Yang , M . T . , McLean , M . A . , Sligar , S . G . , Chen , C . S . , Ha , T . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Measuring mechanical tension across vinculin reveals regulation of focal adhesion dynamics . Nature 466 , 263 - 266 . Grego - Bessa , J . , Hildebrand , J . , and Anderson , K . V . ( 2015 ) . Morphogenesis of the mouse neural plate depends on distinct roles of cofilin 1 in apical and basal epithelial domains . Development 142 , 1305 - 1314 . Gressin , L . , Guillotin , A . , Guerin , C . , Blanchoin , L . , and Michelot , A . ( 2015 ) . Architecture dependence of actin filament network disassembly . Current Biology 25 , 1437 - 1447 . Gu , J . P . , Lee , C . W . , Fan , Y . J . , Komlos , D . , Tang , X . , Sun , C . C . , Yu , K . A . , Hartzell , H . C . , Chen , G . , Bamburg , J . R . , et al . ( 2010 ) . ADF / cofilin - mediated actin dynamics regulate AMPA receptor trafficking during synaptic plasticity . Nature Neuroscience 13 , 1208 - 1215 . Gundersen , G . G . , and Worman , H . J . ( 2013 ) . Nuclear positioning . Cell 152 , 1376 - 1389 . Gunsalus , K . C . , Bonaccorsi , S . , Williams , E . , Verni , F . , Gatti , M . , and Goldberg , M . L . ( 1995 ) . Mutations in twinstar , a Drosophila gene encoding a cofilin Adf Homolog , result in defects in centrosome migration and cytokinesis . Journal of Cell Biology 131 , 1243 - 1259 . Gurniak , C . B . , Chevessier , F . , Jokwitz , M . , Jonsson , F . , Perlas , E . , Richter , H . , Matern , G . , Boyl , P . P . , Chaponnier , C . , Furst , D . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Severe protein aggregate myopathy in a knockout mouse model points to an essential role of cofilin2 in sarcomeric actin exchange and muscle maintenance . European Journal of Cell Biology 93 , 252 - 266 . Gurniak , C . B . , Perlas , E . , and Witke , W . ( 2005 ) . The actin depolymerizing factor n - cofilin is essential for neural tube morphogenesis and neural crest cell migration . Developmental Biology 278 , 231 - 241 . Hammond , N . L . , Headon , D . J . , and Dixon , M . J . ( 2012 ) . The cell cycle regulator protein 14 - 3 - 3 sigma is essential for hair follicle integrity and epidermal homeostasis . Journal of Investigative Dermatology 132 , 1543 - 1553 . Han , L . , Stope , M . B . , de Jesús , M . L . , Oude Weernink , P . A . , Urban , M . , Wieland , T . , Rosskopf , D . , Mizuno , K . , Jakobs , K . H . , and Schmidt , M . ( 2007 ) . Direct stimulation of receptor - controlled phospholipase D1 by phospho - cofilin . The EMBO Journal 26 , 4189 - 4202 . Hanahan , D . , and Weinberg , R . A . ( 2011 ) . Hallmarks of cancer : The next generation . Cell 144 , 646 - 674 . Bibliography 168 Hayakawa , K . , Sakakibara , S . , Sokabe , M . , and Tatsumi , H . ( 2014 ) . Single - molecule imaging and kinetic analysis of cooperative cofilin - actin filament interactions . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 111 , 9810 - 9815 . Hayakawa , K . , Tatsumi , H . , and Sokabe , M . ( 2011 ) . Actin filaments function as a tension sensor by tension - dependent binding of cofilin to the filament . Journal of Cell Biology 195 , 721 - 727 . Hayashi , T . , and Ip , W . ( 1974 ) . Polymerization polarity of rabbit actin . Journal of General Physiology 64 , A9 . Hayden , S . M . , Miller , P . S . , Brauweiler , A . , and Bamburg , J . R . ( 1993 ) . Analysis of the interactions of actin depolymerizing factor with G - and F - actin . Biochemistry 32 , 9994 - 10004 . Haynes , E . M . , Asokan , S . B . , King , S . J . , Johnson , H . E . , Haugh , J . M . , and Bear , J . E . ( 2015 ) . GMFbeta controls branched actin content and lamellipodial retraction in fibroblasts . Journal of Cell Biology 209 , 803 - 812 . Hensley , P . J . , Zetter , D . , Horbinski , C . M . , Strup , S . E . , and Kyprianou , N . ( 2016 ) . Association of epithelial - mesenchymal - transition and nuclear cofilin with advanced urothelial cancer . Human Pathology . Epub ahead of print . Herzog , R . , Tarantino , S . , Rudolf , A . , Aufricht , C . , Kratochwill , K . , and Witowski , J . ( 2015 ) . Senescence - associated changes in proteome and O - GlcNAcylation pattern in human peritoneal mesothelial cells . Biomed Research International 2015 . Ho , C . Y . , Jaalouk , D . E . , Vartiainen , M . K . , and Lammerding , J . ( 2013 ) . Lamin A / C and emerin regulate MKL1 - SRF activity by modulating actin dynamics . Nature 497 , 507 - 511 . Holaska , J . M . , Kowalski , A . K . , and Wilson , K . L . ( 2004 ) . Emerin caps the pointed end of actin filaments : Evidence for an actin cortical network at the nuclear inner membrane . PLoS Biology 2 , 1354 - 1362 . Hotulainen , P . , Llano , O . , Smirnov , S . , Tanhuanpaa , K . , Faix , J . , Rivera , C . , and Lappalainen , P . ( 2009 ) . Defining mechanisms of actin polymerization and depolymerization during dendritic spine morphogenesis . Journal of Cell Biology 185 , 323 - 339 . Hotulainen , P . , Paunola , E . , Vartiainen , M . K . , and Lappalainen , P . ( 2005 ) . Actin - depolymerizing factor and cofilin - 1 play overlapping roles in promoting rapid F - actin depolymerization in mammalian nonmuscle cells . Molecular Biology of the Cell 16 , 649 - 664 . Huang , D . W . , Sherman , B . T . , and Lempicki , R . A . ( 2009a ) . Bioinformatics enrichment tools : paths toward the comprehensive functional analysis of large gene lists . Nucleic Acids Research 37 , 1 - 13 . Bibliography 169 Huang , D . W . , Sherman , B . T . , and Lempicki , R . A . ( 2009b ) . Systematic and integrative analysis of large gene lists using DAVID bioinformatics resources . Nature Protocols 4 , 44 - 57 . Hubbell , E . , Liu , W . M . , and Mei , R . ( 2002 ) . Robust estimators for expression analysis . Bioinformatics 18 , 1585 - 1592 . Humphries , J . D . , Wang , P . , Streuli , C . , Geiger , B . , Humphries , M . J . , and Ballestrem , C . ( 2007 ) . Vinculin controls focal adhesion formation by direct interactions with talin and actin . Journal of Cell Biology 179 , 1043 - 1057 . Ichetovkin , I . , Grant , W . , and Condeelis , J . ( 2002 ) . Cofilin produces newly polymerized actin filaments that are preferred for dendritic nucleation by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Current Biology 12 , 79 - 84 . Iida , K . , Moriyama , K . , Matsumoto , S . , Kawasaki , H . , Nishida , E . , and Yahara , I . ( 1993 ) . Isolation of a yeast essential gene , Cof1 , that encodes a homolog of mammalian cofilin , a low - Mr actin - binding and depolymerizing protein . Gene 124 , 115 - 120 . Ikeda , S . , Cunningham , L . A . , Boggess , D . , Hawes , N . , Hobson , C . D . , Sundberg , J . P . , Naggert , J . K . , Smith , R . S . , and Nishina , P . M . ( 2003 ) . Aberrant actin cytoskeleton leads to accelerated proliferation of corneal epithelial cells in mice deficient for destrin ( actin depolymerizing factor ) . Human Molecular Genetics 12 , 1029 - 1037 . Indra , A . K . , Warot , X . , Brocard , J . , Bornert , J . M . , Xiao , J . H . , Chambon , P . , and Metzger , D . ( 1999 ) . Temporally - controlled site - specific mutagenesis in the basal layer of the epidermis : comparison of the recombinase activity of the tamoxifen - inducible Cre - ER ( T ) and Cre - ER ( T2 ) recombinases . Nucleic Acids Research 27 , 4324 - 4327 . Insall , R . H . , and Machesky , L . M . ( 2009 ) . Actin dynamics at the leading edge : From simple machinery to complex networks . Developmental Cell 17 , 310 - 322 . Jaalouk , D . E . , and Lammerding , J . ( 2009 ) . Mechanotransduction gone awry . Nature Reviews : Molecular Cell Biology 10 , 63 - 73 . Jansen , S . , Collins , A . , Chin , S . M . , Ydenberg , C . A . , Gelles , J . , and Goode , B . L . ( 2015 ) . Single - molecule imaging of a three - component ordered actin disassembly mechanism . Nature Communications 6 . Johnston , A . B . , Collins , A . , and Goode , B . L . ( 2015 ) . High - speed depolymerization at actin filament ends jointly catalysed by twinfilin and Srv2 / CAP . Nature Cell Biology 17 , 1504 - 1511 . Bibliography 170 Jorgens , D . M . , Inman , J . L . , Wojcik , M . , Robertson , C . , Palsdottir , H . , Tsai , W . T . , Huang , H . , Bruni - Cardoso , A . , Lopez , C . S . , Bissell , M . J . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Deep nuclear invaginations linked to cytoskeletal filaments : Integrated bioimaging of epithelial cells in 3D culture . Journal of Cell Science . Epub ahead of print . Kanellos , G . , Zhou , J . , Patel , H . , Ridgway , R . A . , Huels , D . , Gurniak , C . B . , Sandilands , E . , Carragher , N . O . , Sansom , O . J . , Witke , W . , et al . ( 2015 ) . ADF and cofilin1 control actin stress fibers , nuclear integrity , and cell survival . Cell Reports 13 , 1949 - 1964 . Kapoor , P . , Chen , M . M . , Winkler , D . D . , Luger , K . , and Shen , X . T . ( 2013 ) . Evidence for monomeric actin function in INO80 chromatin remodeling . Nature Structural & Molecular Biology 20 , 426 - 432 . Karagiannis , G . S . , Goswami , S . , Jones , J . G . , Oktay , M . H . , and Condeelis , J . S . ( 2016 ) . Signatures of breast cancer metastasis at a glance . Journal of Cell Science 129 , 1751 - 1758 . Khandelwal , N . , Simpson , J . , Taylor , G . , Rafique , S . , Whitehouse , A . , Hiscox , J . , and Stark , L . A . ( 2011 ) . Nucleolar NF - kappaB / RelA mediates apoptosis by causing cytoplasmic relocalization of nucleophosmin . Cell Death and Differentiation 18 , 1889 - 1903 . Khatau , S . B . , Hale , C . M . , Stewart - Hutchinson , P . J . , Patel , M . S . , Stewart , C . L . , Searson , P . C . , Hodzic , D . , and Wirtz , D . ( 2009 ) . A perinuclear actin cap regulates nuclear shape . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 106 , 19017 - 19022 . Kim , D . H . , Khatau , S . B . , Feng , Y . F . , Walcott , S . , Sun , S . X . , Longmore , G . D . , and Wirtz , D . ( 2012 ) . Actin cap associated focal adhesions and their distinct role in cellular mechanosensing . Scientific Reports 2 . Klamt , F . , Zdanov , S . , Levine , R . L . , Pariser , A . , Zhang , Y . Q . , Zhang , B . L . , Yu , L . R . , Veenstra , T . D . , and Shacter , E . ( 2009 ) . Oxidant - induced apoptosis is mediated by oxidation of the actin - regulatory protein cofilin . Nature Cell Biology 11 , 1241 - 1246 . Klejnot , M . , Gabrielsen , M . , Cameron , J . , Mleczak , A . , Talapatra , S . K . , Kozielski , F . , Pannifer , A . , and Olson , M . F . ( 2013 ) . Analysis of the human cofilin 1 structure reveals conformational changes required for actin binding . Acta Crystallographica Section D - Biological Crystallography 69 , 1780 - 1788 . Kobayashi , M . , Nishita , M . , Mishima , T . , Ohashi , K . , and Mizuno , K . ( 2006 ) . MAPKAPK - 2 - mediated LIM - kinase activation is critical for VEGF - induced actin remodeling and cell migration . EMBO Journal 25 , 713 - 726 . Bibliography 171 Koegel , H . , von Tobel , L . , Schafer , M . , Alberti , S . , Kremmer , E . , Mauch , C . , Hohl , D . , Wang , X . J . , Beer , H . D . , Bloch , W . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Loss of serum response factor in keratinocytes results in hyperproliferative skin disease in mice . The Journal of clinical investigation 119 , 899 - 910 . Kovacs , M . , Toth , J . , Hetenyi , C . , Malnasi - Csizmadia , A . , and Sellers , J . R . ( 2004 ) . Mechanism of blebbistatin inhibition of myosin II . Journal of Biological Chemistry 279 , 35557 - 35563 . Kremneva , E . , Makkonen , M . H . , Skwarek - Maruszewska , A . , Gateva , G . , Michelot , A . , Dominguez , R . , and Lappalainen , P . ( 2014 ) . Cofilin - 2 controls actin filament length in muscle sarcomeres . Developmental Cell 31 , 215 - 226 . Kueh , H . Y . , Charras , G . T . , Mitchison , T . J . , and Brieher , W . M . ( 2008 ) . Actin disassembly by cofilin , coronin , and Aip1 occurs in bursts and is inhibited by barbed - end cappers . Journal of Cell Biology 182 , 341 - 353 . Kusner , D . J . , Barton , J . A . , Wen , K . K . , Wang , X . M . , Rubenstein , P . A . , and Iyer , S . S . ( 2002 ) . Regulation of phospholipase D activity by actin - Actin exerts bidirectional modulation of mammalian phospolipase D activity in a polymerization - dependent , isoform - specific manner . Journal of Biological Chemistry 277 , 50683 - 50692 . Kuure , S . , Cebrian , C . , Machingo , Q . , Lu , B . C . , Chi , X . , Hyink , D . , D ' Agati , V . , Gurniak , C . , Witke , W . , and Costantini , F . ( 2010 ) . Actin depolymerizing factors cofilin1 and destrin are required for ureteric bud branching morphogenesis . PLoS Genetics 6 , e1001176 . Laing , E . , and Smith , C . P . ( 2010 ) . RankProdIt : A web - interactive Rank Products analysis tool . BMC Research Notes 3 , 221 . Lappalainen , P . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 1997 ) . Cofilin promotes rapid actin filament turnover in vivo . Nature 388 , 78 - 82 . Lee , S . , Park , J . B . , Kim , J . H . , Kim , Y . , Kim , J . H . , Shin , K . J . , Lee , J . S . , Ha , S . H . , Suh , P . G . , and Ryu , S . H . ( 2001 ) . Actin directly interacts with phospholipase D , inhibiting its activity . Journal of Biological Chemistry 276 , 28252 - 28260 . Lee , Y . J . , and Keng , P . C . ( 2005 ) . Studying the effects of actin cytoskeletal destabilization on cell cycle by cofilin overexpression . Molecular Biotechnology 31 , 1 - 10 . Li , J . Y . , Brieher , W . M . , Scimone , M . L . , Kang , S . J . , Zhu , H . , Yin , H . , von Andrian , U . H . , Mitchison , T . , and Yuan , J . Y . ( 2007 ) . Caspase - 11 regulates cell migration by promoting Aip1 - Cofilin - mediated actin depolymerization . Nature Cell Biology 9 , 276 - 286 . Li , M . , Indra , A . K . , Warot , X . , Brocard , J . , Messaddeq , N . , Kato , S . , Metzger , D . , and Chambon , P . ( 2000 ) . Skin abnormalities generated by temporally controlled RXRalpha mutations in mouse epidermis . Nature 407 , 633 - 636 . Bibliography 172 Liu , W . M . , Mei , R . , Di , X . , Ryder , T . B . , Hubbell , E . , Dee , S . , Webster , T . A . , Harrington , C . A . , Ho , M . H . , Baid , J . , et al . ( 2002 ) . Analysis of high density expression microarrays with signed - rank call algorithms . Bioinformatics 18 , 1593 - 1599 . Livak , K . J . , and Schmittgen , T . D . ( 2001 ) . Analysis of relative gene expression data using real - time quantitative PCR and the 2 ( T ) ( - Delta Delta C ) method . Methods 25 , 402 - 408 . Loisel , T . P . , Boujemaa , R . , Pantaloni , D . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 1999 ) . Reconstitution of actin - based motility of Listeria and Shigella using pure proteins . Nature 401 , 613 - 616 . Low , B . C . , Pan , C . Q . , Shivashankar , G . V . , Bershadsky , A . , Sudol , M . , and Sheetz , M . ( 2014 ) . YAP / TAZ as mechanosensors and mechanotransducers in regulating organ size and tumor growth . FEBS Letters 588 , 2663 - 2670 . Luke , Y . , Zaim , H . , Karakesisoglou , I . , Jaeger , V . M . , Sellin , L . , Lu , W . S . , Schneider , M . , Neumann , S . , Beijer , A . , Munck , M . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Nesprin - 2 Giant ( NUANCE ) maintains nuclear envelope architecture and composition in skin . Journal of Cell Science 121 , 1887 - 1898 . Luxenburg , C . , Pasolli , H . A . , Williams , S . E . , and Fuchs , E . ( 2011 ) . Developmental roles for Srf , cortical cytoskeleton and cell shape in epidermal spindle orientation . Nature Cell Biology 13 , 203 - 214 . Luxton , G . W . , Gomes , E . R . , Folker , E . S . , Vintinner , E . , and Gundersen , G . G . ( 2010 ) . Linear arrays of nuclear envelope proteins harness retrograde actin flow for nuclear movement . Science 329 , 956 - 959 . Maciver , S . K . , and Hussey , P . J . ( 2002 ) . The ADF / cofilin family : Actin - remodeling proteins . Genome Biology 3 , reviews3007 . Maekawa , M . , Ishizaki , T . , Boku , S . , Watanabe , N . , Fujita , A . , Iwamatsu , A . , Obinata , T . , Ohashi , K . , Mizuno , K . , and Narumiya , S . ( 1999 ) . Signaling from rho to the actin cytoskeleton through protein kinases ROCK and LIM - kinase . Science 285 , 895 - 898 . Maekawa , S . , Nishida , E . , Ohta , Y . , and Sakai , H . ( 1984 ) . Isolation of low - molecular weight actin - binding proteins from porcine brain . Journal of Biochemistry 95 , 377 - 385 . Magalhaes , M . A . O . , Larson , D . R . , Mader , C . C . , Bravo - Cordero , J . J . , Gil - Henn , H . , Oser , M . , Chen , X . M . , Koleske , A . J . , and Condeelis , J . ( 2011 ) . Cortactin phosphorylation regulates cell invasion through a pH - dependent pathway . Journal of Cell Biology 195 , 903 - 920 . Bibliography 173 Mannherz , H . G . , Gonsior , S . M . , Gremm , D . , Wu , X . Q . , Pope , B . J . , and Weeds , A . G . ( 2005 ) . Activated cofilin colocalises with Arp2 / 3 complex in apoptotic blebs during programmed cell death . European Journal of Cell Biology 84 , 503 - 515 . Marshall , T . W . , Aloor , H . L . , and Bear , J . E . ( 2009 ) . Coronin 2A regulates a subset of focal - adhesion - turnover events through the cofilin pathway . Journal of Cell Science 122 , 3061 - 3069 . Mascre , G . , Dekoninck , S . , Drogat , B . , Youssef , K . K . , Brohee , S . , Sotiropoulou , P . A . , Simons , B . D . , and Blanpain , C . ( 2012 ) . Distinct contribution of stem and progenitor cells to epidermal maintenance . Nature 489 , 257 - 262 . McGough , A . , Pope , B . , Chiu , W . , and Weeds , A . ( 1997 ) . Cofilin changes the twist of F - actin : Implications for actin filament dynamics and cellular function . Journal of Cell Biology 138 , 771 - 781 . Mckim , K . S . , Matheson , C . , Marra , M . A . , Wakarchuk , M . F . , and Baillie , D . L . ( 1994 ) . The Caenorhabditis elegans Unc - 60 gene encodes proteins homologous to a family of actin - binding proteins . Molecular and General Genetics 242 , 346 - 357 . McLean , G . W . , Brown , K . , Arbuckle , M . I . , Wyke , A . W . , Pikkarainen , T . , Ruoslahti , E . , and Frame , M . C . ( 2001 ) . Decreased focal adhesion kinase suppresses papilloma formation during experimental mouse skin carcinogenesis . Cancer Research 61 , 8385 - 8389 . Mekhail , K . , and Moazed , D . ( 2010 ) . The nuclear envelope in genome organization , expression and stability . Nature Reviews : Molecular Cell Biology 11 , 317 - 328 . Mikati , M . A . , Breitsprecher , D . , Jansen , S . , Reisler , E . , and Goode , B . L . ( 2015 ) . Coronin enhances actin filament severing by recruiting cofilin to filament sides and altering F - actin conformation . Journal of Molecular Biology 427 , 3137 - 3147 . Minamide , L . S . , Maiti , S . , Boyle , J . A . , Davis , R . C . , Coppinger , J . A . , Bao , Y . , Huang , T . Y . , Yates , J . , Bokoch , G . M . , and Bamburg , J . R . ( 2010 ) . Isolation and characterization of cytoplasmic cofilin - actin rods . Journal of Biological Chemistry 285 , 5450 - 5460 . Minamide , L . S . , Striegl , A . M . , Boyle , J . A . , Meberg , P . J . , and Bamburg , J . R . ( 2000 ) . Neurodegenerative stimuli induce persistent ADF / cofilin - actin rods that disrupt distal neurite function . Nature Cell Biology 2 , 628 - 636 . Miralles , F . , Posern , G . , Zaromytidou , A . I . , and Treisman , R . ( 2003 ) . Actin dynamics control SRF activity by regulation of its coactivator MAL . Cell 113 , 329 - 342 . Bibliography 174 Miyamoto , K . , and Gurdon , J . B . ( 2013 ) . Transcriptional regulation and nuclear reprogramming : roles of nuclear actin and actin - binding proteins . Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences 70 , 3289 - 3302 . Mizuno , K . ( 2013 ) . Signaling mechanisms and functional roles of cofilin phosphorylation and dephosphorylation . Cellular Signalling 25 , 457 - 469 . Moon , A . L . , Janmey , P . A . , Louie , K . A . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 1993 ) . Cofilin is an essential component of the yeast cortical cytoskeleton . Journal of Cell Biology 120 , 421 - 435 . Moriyama , K . , Iida , K . , and Yahara , I . ( 1996 ) . Phosphorylation of Ser - 3 of cofilin regulates its essential function on actin . Genes to Cells 1 , 73 - 86 . Moriyama , K . , Yonezawa , N . , Sakai , H . , Yahara , I . , and Nishida , E . ( 1992 ) . Mutational analysis of an actin - binding site of cofilin and characterization of chimeric proteins between cofilin and destrin . Journal of Biological Chemistry 267 , 7240 - 7244 . Mouneimne , G . , DesMarais , V . , Sidani , M . , Scemes , E . , Wang , W . G . , Song , X . Y . , Eddy , R . , and Condeelis , J . ( 2006 ) . Spatial and temporal control of cofilin activity is required for directional sensing during chemotaxis . Current Biology 16 , 2193 - 2205 . Mouneimne , G . , Soon , L . , DesMarais , V . , Sidani , M . , Song , X . Y . , Yip , S . C . , Ghosh , M . , Eddy , R . , Backer , J . M . , and Condeelis , J . ( 2004 ) . Phospholipase C and cofilin are required for carcinoma cell directionality in response to EGF stimulation . Journal of Cell Biology 166 , 697 - 708 . Muller - Rover , S . , Handjiski , B . , van der Veen , C . , Eichmuller , S . , Foitzik , K . , McKay , I . A . , Stenn , K . S . , and Paus , R . ( 2001 ) . A comprehensive guide for the accurate classification of murine hair follicles in distinct hair cycle stages . Journal of Investigative Dermatology 117 , 3 - 15 . Munsie , L . N . , Desmond , C . R . , and Truant , R . ( 2012 ) . Cofilin nuclear - cytoplasmic shuttling affects cofilin - actin rod formation during stress . Journal of Cell Science 125 , 3977 - 3988 . Nadkarni , A . V . , and Brieher , W . M . ( 2014 ) . Aip1 destabilizes cofilin - saturated actin filaments by severing and accelerating monomer dissociation from ends . Current Biology 24 , 2749 - 2757 . Nakano , K . , and Mabuchi , I . ( 2006 ) . Actin - depolymerizing protein Adf1 is required for formation and maintenance of the contractile ring during cytokinesis in fission yeast . Molecular Biology of the Cell 17 , 1933 - 1945 . Nassar , D . , Latil , M . , Boeckx , B . , Lambrechts , D . , and Blanpain , C . ( 2015 ) . Genomic landscape of carcinogen - induced and genetically induced mouse skin squamous cell carcinoma . Nature Medicine 21 , 946 - 954 . Bibliography 175 Nishida , E . , Iida , K . , Yonezawa , N . , Koyasu , S . , Yahara , I . , and Sakai , H . ( 1987 ) . Cofilin is a component of intranuclear and cytoplasmic actin rods induced in cultured - cells . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 84 , 5262 - 5266 . Nishida , E . , Maekawa , S . , Muneyuki , E . , and Sakai , H . ( 1984a ) . Action of a 19k - protein from porcine brain on actin polymerization - a new functional class of actin - binding proteins . Journal of Biochemistry 95 , 387 - 398 . Nishida , E . , Maekawa , S . , and Sakai , H . ( 1984b ) . Cofilin , a protein in porcine brain that binds to actin filaments and inhibits their interactions with myosin and tropomyosin . Biochemistry 23 , 5307 - 5313 . Nishida , E . , Muneyuki , E . , Maekawa , S . , Ohta , Y . , and Sakai , H . ( 1985 ) . An actin - depolymerizing protein ( destrin ) from porcine kidney - its action on F - actin containing or lacking tropomyosin . Biochemistry 24 , 6624 - 6630 . Niwa , R . , Nagata - Ohashi , K . , Takeichi , M . , Mizuno , K . , and Uemura , T . ( 2002 ) . Control of actin reorganization by Slingshot , a family of phosphatases that dephosphorylate ADF / cofilin . Cell 108 , 233 - 246 . Nolen , B . J . , Tomasevic , N . , Russell , A . , Pierce , D . W . , Jia , Z . , McCormick , C . D . , Hartman , J . , Sakowicz , R . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2009 ) . Characterization of two classes of small molecule inhibitors of Arp2 / 3 complex . Nature 460 , 1031 - 1034 . Normoyle , K . P . M . , and Brieher , W . M . ( 2012 ) . Cyclase - associated protein ( CAP ) acts directly on F - actin to accelerate cofilin - mediated actin severing across the range of physiological pH . Journal of Biological Chemistry 287 , 35722 - 35732 . Obrdlik , A . , and Percipalle , P . ( 2011 ) . The F - actin severing protein cofilin - 1 is required for RNA polymerase II transcription elongation . Nucleus 2 , 72 - 79 . Ockeloen , C . W . , Gilhuis , H . J . , Pfundt , R . , Kamsteeg , E . J . , Agrawal , P . B . , Beggs , A . H . , Dara Hama - Amin , A . , Diekstra , A . , Knoers , N . V . , Lammens , M . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Congenital myopathy caused by a novel missense mutation in the CFL2 gene . Neuromuscular Disorders 22 , 632 - 639 . Ohashi , K . , Nagata , K . , Maekawa , M . , Ishizaki , T . , Narumiya , S . , and Mizuno , K . ( 2000 ) . Rho - associated kinase ROCK activates LIM - kinase 1 by phosphorylation at threonine 508 within the activation loop . Journal of Biological Chemistry 275 , 3577 - 3582 . Ohta , Y . , Nishida , E . , Sakai , H . , and Miyamoto , E . ( 1989 ) . Dephosphorylation of cofilin accompanies heat shock - induced nuclear accumulation of cofilin . Journal of Biological Chemistry 264 , 16143 - 16148 . Bibliography 176 Okreglak , V . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 2007 ) . Cofilin recruitment and function during actin - mediated endocytosis dictated by actin nucleotide state . Journal of Cell Biology 178 , 1251 - 1264 . Olson , E . N . , and Nordheim , A . ( 2010 ) . Linking actin dynamics and gene transcription to drive cellular motile functions . Nature reviews : Molecular cell biology 11 , 353 - 365 . Ong , R . W . , Alsaman , A . , Selcen , D . , Arabshahi , A . , Yau , K . S . , Ravenscroft , G . , Duff , R . M . , Atkinson , V . , Allcock , R . J . , and Laing , N . G . ( 2014 ) . Novel cofilin - 2 ( CFL2 ) four base pair deletion causing nemaline myopathy . Journal of Neurology , Neurosurgery and Psychiatry 85 , 1058 - 1060 . Owens , D . W . , Brunton , V . G . , Parkinson , E . K . , and Frame , M . C . ( 2000 ) . E - cadherin at the cell periphery is a determinant of keratinocyte differentiation in vitro . Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 269 , 369 - 376 . Paavilainen , V . O . , Oksanen , E . , Goldman , A . , and Lappalainen , P . ( 2008 ) . Structure of the actin - depolymerizing factor homology domain in complex with actin . Journal of Cell Biology 182 , 51 - 59 . Pasapera , A . M . , Schneider , I . C . , Rericha , E . , Schlaepfer , D . D . , and Waterman , C . M . ( 2010 ) . Myosin II activity regulates vinculin recruitment to focal adhesions through FAK - mediated paxillin phosphorylation . Journal of Cell Biology 188 , 877 - 890 . Pfaffl , M . W . ( 2001 ) . A new mathematical model for relative quantification in real - time RT - PCR . Nucleic Acids Research 29 . Piccolo , S . , Dupont , S . , and Cordenonsi , M . ( 2014 ) . The biology of Yap / Taz : Hippo signaling and beyond . Physiological Reviews 94 , 1287 - 1312 . Plessner , M . , Melak , M . , Chinchilla , P . , Baarlink , C . , and Grosse , R . ( 2015 ) . Nuclear F - actin formation and reorganization upon cell spreading . Journal of Biological Chemistry 290 , 11209 - 11216 . Pollard , T . D . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2009 ) . Actin , a central player in cell shape and movement . Science 326 , 1208 - 1212 . Pollard , T . D . , and Mooseker , M . S . ( 1981 ) . Direct measurement of actin polymerization rate constants by electron - microscopy of actin - filaments nucleated by isolated microvillus cores . Journal of Cell Biology 88 , 654 - 659 . Pope , B . J . , Gonsior , S . M . , Yeoh , S . , McGough , A . , and Weeds , A . G . ( 2000 ) . Uncoupling actin filament fragmentation by cofilin from increased subunit turnover . Journal of Molecular Biology 298 , 649 - 661 . Bibliography 177 Poukkula , M . , Hakala , M . , Pentinmikko , N . , Sweeney , M . O . , Jansen , S . , Mattila , J . , Hietakangas , V . , Goode , B . L . , and Lappalainen , P . ( 2014 ) . GMF promotes leading - edge dynamics and collective cell migration in vivo . Current Biology 24 , 2533 - 2540 . Quintanilla , M . , Brown , K . , Ramsden , M . , and Balmain , A . ( 1986 ) . Carcinogen - specific mutation and amplification of Ha - ras during mouse skin carcinogenesis . Nature 322 , 78 - 80 . Ridley , A . J . ( 2011 ) . Life at the leading edge . Cell 145 , 1012 - 1022 . Rizvi , S . A . , Neidt , E . M . , Cui , J . Y . , Feiger , Z . , Skau , C . T . , Gardel , M . L . , Kozmin , S . A . , and Kovar , D . R . ( 2009 ) . Identification and characterization of a small molecule inhibitor of formin - mediated actin assembly . Chemistry & Biology 16 , 1158 - 1168 . Roussos , E . T . , Condeelis , J . S . , and Patsialou , A . ( 2011 ) . Chemotaxis in cancer . Nature Reviews : Cancer 11 , 573 - 587 . Roux , K . J . , Kim , D . I . , and Burke , B . ( 2013 ) . BioID : a screen for protein - protein interactions . Current Protocols in Protein Science 74 , Unit 19 . 23 . Rudzka , D . A . , Cameron , J . M . , and Olson , M . F . ( 2015 ) . Reactive oxygen species and hydrogen peroxide generation in cell migration . Communicative & Integrative Biology 8 , e1074360 . Saldanha , A . J . ( 2004 ) . Java Treeview - extensible visualization of microarray data . Bioinformatics 20 , 3246 - 3248 . Samuel , M . S . , Lopez , J . I . , McGhee , E . J . , Croft , D . R . , Strachan , D . , Timpson , P . , Munro , J . , Schroder , E . , Zhou , J . , Brunton , V . G . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Actomyosin - mediated cellular tension drives increased tissue stiffness and beta - catenin activation to induce epidermal hyperplasia and tumor growth . Cancer Cell 19 , 776 - 791 . Schmidt , M . , Voss , M . , Weernink , P . A . O . , Wetzel , J . , Amano , M . , Kaibuchi , K . , and Jakobs , K . H . ( 1999 ) . A role for rho - kinase in rho - controlled phospholipase D stimulation by the m3 muscarinic acetylcholine receptor . Journal of Biological Chemistry 274 , 14648 - 14654 . Schratt , G . , Philippar , U . , Berger , J . , Schwarz , H . , Heidenreich , O . , and Nordheim , A . ( 2002 ) . Serum response factor is crucial for actin cytoskeletal organization and focal adhesion assembly in embryonic stem cells . Journal of Cell Biology 156 , 737 - 750 . Schreiner , S . M . , Koo , P . K . , Zhao , Y . , Mochrie , S . G . J . , and King , M . C . ( 2015 ) . The tethering of chromatin to the nuclear envelope supports nuclear mechanics . Nature Communications 6 . Bibliography 178 Scott , R . W . , Hooper , S . , Crighton , D . , Li , A . , Konig , I . , Munro , J . , Trivier , E . , Wickman , G . , Morin , P . , Croft , D . R . , et al . ( 2010 ) . LIM kinases are required for invasive path generation by tumor and tumor - associated stromal cells . Journal of Cell Biology 191 , 169 - 185 . Scott , R . W . , and Olson , M . F . ( 2007 ) . LIM kinases : function , regulation and association with human disease . Journal of Molecular Medicine 85 , 555 - 568 . Shannon , P . , Markiel , A . , Ozier , O . , Baliga , N . S . , Wang , J . T . , Ramage , D . , Amin , N . , Schwikowski , B . , and Ideker , T . ( 2003 ) . Cytoscape : A software environment for integrated models of biomolecular interaction networks . Genome Research 13 , 2498 - 2504 . Sidani , M . , Wessels , D . , Mouneimne , G . , Ghosh , M . , Goswami , S . , Sarmiento , C . , Wang , W . , Kuhl , S . , El - Sibai , M . , Backer , J . M . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Cofilin determines the migration behavior and turning frequency of metastatic cancer cells . Journal of Cell Biology 179 , 777 - 791 . Solanas , G . , and Benitah , S . A . ( 2013 ) . Regenerating the skin : a task for the heterogeneous stem cell pool and surrounding niche . Nature Reviews : Molecular Cell Biology 14 , 737 - 748 . Song , X . Y . , Chen , X . M . , Yamaguchi , H . , Mouneimne , G . , Condeelis , J . S . , and Eddy , R . J . ( 2006 ) . Initiation of cofilin activity in response to EGF is uncoupled from cofilin phosphorylation and dephosphorylation in carcinoma cells . Journal of Cell Science 119 , 2871 - 2881 . Soosairajah , J . , Maiti , S . , Wiggan , O . , Sarmiere , P . , Moussi , N . , Sarcevic , B . , Sampath , R . , Bamburg , J . R . , and Bernard , O . ( 2005 ) . Interplay between components of a novel LIM kinase - slingshot phosphatase complex regulates cofilin . EMBO Journal 24 , 473 - 486 . Sosa , B . A . , Rothballer , A . , Kutay , U . , and Schwartz , T . U . ( 2012 ) . LINC complexes form by binding of three KASH peptides to domain interfaces of trimeric SUN proteins . Cell 149 , 1035 - 1047 . Sotiropoulos , A . , Gineitis , D . , Copeland , J . , and Treisman , R . ( 1999 ) . Signal - regulated activation of serum response factor is mediated by changes in actin dynamics . Cell 98 , 159 - 169 . Spichal , M . , Brion , A . , Herbert , S . , Cournac , A . , Marbouty , M . , Zimmer , C . , Koszul , R . , and Fabre , E . ( 2016 ) . Evidence for a dual role of actin in regulating chromosome organization and dynamics in yeast . Journal of Cell Science 129 , 681 - 692 . Stark , L . A . , and Dunlop , M . G . ( 2005 ) . Nucleolar sequestration of RelA ( p65 ) regulates NF - kappaB - driven transcription and apoptosis . Molecular and Cellular Biology 25 , 5985 - 6004 . Bibliography 179 Starr , D . A . , and Fridolfsson , H . N . ( 2010 ) . Interactions between nuclei and the cytoskeleton are mediated by SUN - KASH nuclear - envelope bridges . Annual Review of Cell and Developmental Biology 26 , 421 - 444 . Stewart , C . L . , Roux , K . J . , and Burke , B . ( 2007 ) . Blurring the boundary : The nuclear envelope extends its reach . Science 318 , 1408 - 1412 . Stewart , R . M . , Zubek , A . E . , Rosowski , K . A . , Schreiner , S . M . , Horsley , V . , and King , M . C . ( 2015 ) . Nuclear - cytoskeletal linkages facilitate cross talk between the nucleus and intercellular adhesions . Journal of Cell Biology 209 , 403 - 418 . Straight , A . F . , Cheung , A . , Limouze , J . , Chen , I . , Westwood , N . J . , Sellers , J . R . , and Mitchison , T . J . ( 2003 ) . Dissecting temporal and spatial control of cytokinesis with a myosin II Inhibitor . Science 299 , 1743 - 1747 . Suarez , C . , Roland , J . , Boujemaa - Paterski , R . , Kang , H . , McCullough , B . R . , Reymann , A . C . , Guerin , C . , Martiel , J . L . , De La Cruz , E . M . , and Blanchoin , L . ( 2011 ) . Cofilin tunes the nucleotide state of actin filaments and severs at bare and decorated segment boundaries . Current Biology 21 , 862 - 868 . Sumi , T . , Matsumoto , K . , Shibuya , A . , and Nakamura , T . ( 2001 ) . Activation of LIM kinases by myotonic dystrophy kinase - related Cdc42 - binding kinase alpha . Journal of Biological Chemistry 276 , 23092 - 23096 . Suraneni , P . , Rubinstein , B . , Unruh , J . R . , Durnin , M . , Hanein , D . , and Li , R . ( 2012 ) . The Arp2 / 3 complex is required for lamellipodia extension and directional fibroblast cell migration . Journal of Cell Biology 197 , 239 - 251 . Svitkina , T . M . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 1999 ) . Arp2 / 3 complex and actin depolymerizing factor cofilin in dendritic organization and treadmilling of actin filament array in lamellipodia . Journal of Cell Biology 145 , 1009 - 1026 . Tahtamouni , L . H . , Shaw , A . E . , Hasan , M . H . , Yasin , S . R . , and Bamburg , J . R . ( 2013 ) . Non - overlapping activities of ADF and cofilin - 1 during the migration of metastatic breast tumor cells . BMC Cell Biology 14 , 45 . Tang , Q . F . , Ji , Q . , Tang , Y . , Chen , T . , Pan , G . , Hu , S . J . , Bao , Y . J . , Peng , W . , and Yin , P . H . ( 2014 ) . Mitochondrial translocation of cofilin - 1 promotes apoptosis of gastric cancer BGC - 823 cells induced by ursolic acid . Tumor Biology 35 , 2451 - 2459 . Thiam , H . - R . , Vargas , P . , Carpi , N . , Crespo , C . L . , Raab , M . , Terriac , E . , King , M . C . , Jacobelli , J . , Alberts , A . S . , Stradal , T . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Perinuclear Arp2 / 3 - driven actin polymerization enables nuclear deformation to facilitate cell migration through complex environments . Natute Communications 7 . Tojkander , S . , Gateva , G . , Husain , A . , Krishnan , R . , and Lappalainen , P . ( 2015 ) . Generation of contractile actomyosin bundles depends on mechanosensitive actin filament assembly and disassembly . Elife 4 . Bibliography 180 Toshima , J . , Toshima , J . Y . , Amano , T . , Yang , N . , Narumiya , S . , and Mizuno , K . ( 2001a ) . Cofilin phosphorylation by protein kinase testicular protein kinase 1 and its role in integrin - mediated actin reorganization and focal adhesion formation . Molecular Biology of the Cell 12 , 1131 - 1145 . Toshima , J . , Toshima , J . Y . , Takeuchi , K . , Mori , R . , and Mizuno , K . ( 2001b ) . Cofilin phosphorylation and actin reorganization activities of testicular protein kinase 2 and its predominant expression in testicular Sertoli cells . Journal of Biological Chemistry 276 , 31449 - 31458 . Toska , E . , Campbell , H . A . , Shandilya , J . , Goodfellow , S . J . , Shore , P . , Medler , K . F . , and Roberts , S . G . E . ( 2012 ) . Repression of transcription by WT1 - BASP1 requires the myristoylation of BASP1 and the PIP2 - dependent recruitment of histone deacetylase . Cell Reports 2 , 462 - 469 . Totsukawa , G . , Yamakita , Y . , Yamashiro , S . , Hartshorne , D . J . , Sasaki , Y . , and Matsumura , F . ( 2000 ) . Distinct roles of ROCK ( Rho - kinase ) and MLCK in spatial regulation of MLC phosphorylation for assembly of stress fibers and focal adhesions in 3T3 fibroblasts . Journal of Cell Biology 150 , 797 - 806 . Tuominen , V . J . , Ruotoistenmaki , S . , Viitanen , A . , Jumppanen , M . , and Isola , J . ( 2010 ) . ImmunoRatio : A publicly available web application for quantitative image analysis of estrogen receptor ( ER ) , progesterone receptor ( PR ) , and Ki - 67 . Breast Cancer Research 12 . Uehata , M . , Ishizaki , T . , Satoh , H . , Ono , T . , Kawahara , T . , Morishita , T . , Tamakawa , H . , Yamagami , K . , Inui , J . , Maekawa , M . , et al . ( 1997 ) . Calcium sensitization of smooth muscle mediated by a Rho - associated protein kinase in hypertension . Nature 389 , 990 - 994 . Vaezi , A . , Bauer , C . , Vasioukhin , V . , and Fuchs , E . ( 2002 ) . Actin cable dynamics and Rho / Rock orchestrate a polarized cytoskeletal architecture in the early steps of assembling a stratified epithelium . Developmental Cell 3 , 367 - 381 . Van Rheenen , J . , Song , X . , Van Roosmalen , W . , Cammer , M . , Chen , X . , DesMarais , V . , Yip , S . C . , Backer , J . M . , Eddy , R . J . , and Condeelis , J . S . ( 2007 ) . EGF - induced PIP2 hydrolysis releases and activates cofilin locally in carcinoma cells . Journal of Cell Biology 179 , 1247 - 1259 . Vartiainen , M . K . , Guettler , S . , Larijani , B . , and Treisman , R . ( 2007 ) . Nuclear actin regulates dynamic subcellular localization and activity of the SRF cofactor MAL . Science 316 , 1749 - 1752 . Vartiainen , M . K . , Mustonen , T . , Mattila , P . K . , Ojala , P . J . , Thesleff , I . , Partanen , J . , and Lappalainen , P . ( 2002 ) . The three mouse actin - depolymerizing factor / cofilins evolved to fulfill cell - type - specific requirements for actin dynamics . Molecular Biology of the Cell 13 , 183 - 194 . Bibliography 181 Vasioukhin , V . , Degenstein , L . , Wise , B . , and Fuchs , E . ( 1999 ) . The magical touch : Genome targeting in epidermal stem cells induced by tamoxifen application to mouse skin . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 96 , 8551 - 8556 . Vassar , R . , Rosenberg , M . , Ross , S . , Tyner , A . , and Fuchs , E . ( 1989 ) . Tissue - specific and differentiation - specific expression of a human K14 keratin gene in transgenic mice . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 86 , 1563 - 1567 . Verdoni , A . M . , Aoyama , N . , Ikeda , A . , and Ikeda , S . ( 2008 ) . Effect of destrin mutations on the gene expression profile in vivo . Physiological Genomics 34 , 9 - 21 . Verdoni , A . M . , Ikeda , S . , and Ikeda , A . ( 2010 ) . Serum response factor is essential for the proper development of skin epithelium . Mammalian genome : official journal of the International Mammalian Genome Society 21 , 64 - 76 . Versaevel , M . , Braquenier , J . B . , Riaz , M . , Grevesse , T . , Lantoine , J . , and Gabriele , S . ( 2014 ) . Super - resolution microscopy reveals LINC complex recruitment at nuclear indentation sites . Scientific Reports 4 . Vicente - Manzanares , M . , Ma , X . , Adelstein , R . S . , and Horwitz , A . R . ( 2009 ) . Non - muscle myosin II takes centre stage in cell adhesion and migration . Nature Reviews : Molecular Cell Biology 10 , 778 - 790 . Viita , T . , and Vartiainen , M . K . ( 2016 ) . From cytoskeleton to gene expression : Actin in the nucleus . Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology . Epub ahead of print . Wabnitz , G . H . , Goursot , C . , Jahraus , B . , Kirchgessner , H . , Hellwig , A . , Klemke , M . , Konstandin , M . H . , and Samstag , Y . ( 2010 ) . Mitochondrial translocation of oxidized cofilin induces caspase - independent necrotic - like programmed cell death of T cells . Cell Death & Disease 1 . Walcott , S . , and Sun , S . X . ( 2010 ) . A mechanical model of actin stress fiber formation and substrate elasticity sensing in adherent cells . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 107 , 7757 - 7762 . Wang , C . H . , Zhou , G . L . , Vedantam , S . , Li , P . , and Field , J . ( 2008 ) . Mitochondrial shuttling of CAP1 promotes actin - and cofilin - dependent apoptosis . Journal of Cell Science 121 , 2913 - 2920 . Wang , N . , Tytell , J . D . , and Ingber , D . E . ( 2009 ) . Mechanotransduction at a distance : Mechanically coupling the extracellular matrix with the nucleus . Nature Reviews : Molecular Cell Biology 10 , 75 - 82 . Bibliography 182 Wang , Q . Z . , Gao , H . Q . , Liang , Y . , Zhang , J . , Wang , J . , and Qiu , J . ( 2015 ) . Cofilin1 is involved in hypertension - induced renal damage via the regulation of NF - kappa B in renal tubular epithelial cells . Journal of Translational Medicine 13 . Wang , W . , Eddy , R . , and Condeelis , J . ( 2007 ) . The cofilin pathway in breast cancer invasion and metastasis . Nature reviews : Cancer 7 , 429 - 440 . Wang , W . , Goswami , S . , Lapidus , K . , Wells , A . L . , Wyckoff , J . B . , Sahai , E . , Singer , R . H . , Segall , J . E . , and Condeelis , J . S . ( 2004 ) . Identification and testing of a gene expression signature of invasive carcinoma cells within primary mammary tumors . Cancer Research 64 , 8585 - 8594 . Wang , X . M . , Devalah , S . P . , Zhang , W . H . , and Welti , R . ( 2006 ) . Signaling functions of phosphatidic acid . Progress in Lipid Research 45 , 250 - 278 . Wang , X . M . , Zinkel , S . , Polonsky , K . , and Fuchs , E . ( 1997 ) . Transgenic studies with a keratin promoter - driven growth hormone transgene : Prospects for gene therapy . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 94 , 219 - 226 . Wang , Y . F . , Kuramitsu , Y . , Ueno , T . , Suzuki , N . , Yoshino , S . , Iizuka , N . , Zhang , X . L . , Oka , M . , and Nakamura , K . ( 2011 ) . Differential expression of up - regulated cofilin - 1 and down - regulated cofilin - 2 characteristic of pancreatic cancer tissues . Oncology Reports 26 , 1595 - 1599 . Wiggan , O . , Shaw , A . E . , DeLuca , J . G . , and Bamburg , J . R . ( 2012 ) . ADF / cofilin regulates actomyosin assembly through competitive inhibition of myosin II binding to F - actin . Developmental Cell 22 , 530 - 543 . Woo , J . A . , Boggess , T . , Uhlar , C . , Wang , X . , Khan , H . , Cappos , G . , Joly - Amado , A . , De Narvaez , E . , Majid , S . , Minamide , L . S . , et al . ( 2015 ) . RanBP9 at the intersection between cofilin and A beta pathologies : Rescue of neurodegenerative changes by RanBP9 reduction . Cell Death & Disease 6 . Woodrum , D . T . , Rich , S . A . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 1975 ) . Evidence for biased bidirectional polymerization of actin - filaments using heavy - meromyosin prepared by an improved method . Journal of Cell Biology 67 , 231 - 237 . Worth , D . C . , Hodivala - Dilke , K . , Robinson , S . D . , King , S . J . , Morton , P . E . , Gertler , F . B . , Humphries , M . J . , and Parsons , M . ( 2010 ) . alpha nu beta 3 integrin spatially regulates VASP and RIAM to control adhesion dynamics and migration . Journal of Cell Biology 189 , 369 - 383 . Wu , C . , Asokan , S . B . , Berginski , M . E . , Haynes , E . M . , Sharpless , N . E . , Griffith , J . D . , Gomez , S . M . , and Bear , J . E . ( 2012 ) . Arp2 / 3 is critical for lamellipodia and response to extracellular matrix cues but is dispensable for chemotaxis . Cell 148 , 973 - 987 . Bibliography 183 Yamaguchi , H . , Lorenz , M . , Kempiak , S . , Sarmiento , C . , Coniglio , S . , Symons , M . , Segall , J . , Eddy , R . , Miki , H . , Takenawa , T . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Molecular mechanisms of invadopodium formation : the role of the N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 complex pathway and cofilin . Journal of Cell Biology 168 , 441 - 452 . Yang , N . , Higuchi , O . , Ohashi , K . , Nagata , K . , Wada , A . , Kangawa , K . , Nishida , E . , and Mizuno , K . ( 1998 ) . Cofilin phosphorylation by LIM - kinase 1 and its role in Rac - mediated actin reorganization . Nature 393 , 809 - 812 . Yap , C . T . , Simpson , T . I . , Pratt , T . , Price , D . J . , and Maciver , S . K . ( 2005 ) . The motility of glioblastoma tumour cells is modulated by intracellular cofilin expression in a concentration - dependent manner . Cell Motility and the Cytoskeleton 60 , 153 - 165 . Ydenberg , C . A . , Padrick , S . B . , Sweeney , M . O . , Gandhi , M . , Sokolova , O . , and Goode , B . L . ( 2013 ) . GMF severs actin - Arp2 / 3 complex branch junctions by a cofilin - like mechanism . Current Biology 23 , 1037 - 1045 . Yeoh , S . , Pope , B . , Mannherz , H . G . , and Weeds , A . ( 2002 ) . Determining the differences in actin binding by human ADF and cofilin . Journal of Molecular Biology 315 , 911 - 925 . Yildirim , S . , Castano , E . , Sobol , M . , Philimonenko , V . V . , Dzijak , R . , Venit , T . , and Hozak , P . ( 2013 ) . Involvement of phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate in RNA polymerase I transcription . Journal of Cell Science 126 , 2730 - 2739 . Yonezawa , N . , Nishida , E . , Iida , K . , Yahara , I . , and Sakai , H . ( 1990 ) . Inhibition of the interactions of cofilin , destrin , and deoxyribonuclease - I with actin by phosphoinositides . Journal of Biological Chemistry 265 , 8382 - 8386 . Yonezawa , N . , Nishida , E . , and Sakai , H . ( 1985 ) . pH Control of actin polymerization by cofilin . Journal of Biological Chemistry 260 , 4410 - 4412 . Yoo , Y . , Ho , H . J . , Wang , C . , and Guan , J . L . ( 2010 ) . Tyrosine phosphorylation of cofilin at Y68 by v - Src leads to its degradation through ubiquitin - proteasome pathway . Oncogene 29 , 263 - 272 . Zhao , H . X . , Hakala , M . , and Lappalainen , P . ( 2010 ) . ADF / cofilin binds phosphoinositides in a multivalent manner to act as a PIP2 - density sensor . Biophysical Journal 98 , 2327 - 2336 . Zhen , Y . Y . , Libotte , T . , Munck , M . , Noegel , A . A . , and Korenbaum , E . ( 2002 ) . NUANCE , a giant protein connecting the nucleus and actin cytoskeleton . Journal of Cell Science 115 , 3207 - 3222 . Zhu , B . B . , Fukada , K . , Zhu , H . N . , and Kyprianou , N . ( 2006 ) . Prohibitin and cofilin are intracellular effectors of transforming growth factor beta signaling in human prostate cancer cells . Cancer Research 66 , 8640 - 8647 . Bibliography 184 Zuchero , J . B . , Fu , M . M . , Sloan , S . A . , Ibrahim , A . , Olson , A . , Zaremba , A . , Dugas , J . C . , Wienbar , S . , Caprariello , A . V . , Kantor , C . , et al . ( 2015 ) . CNS myelin wrapping is driven by actin disassembly . Developmental Cell 34 , 152 - 167 . Appendix I 185 Appendix I Related publications ( Relevant permissions for reproduction of the articles have been obtained under the authors’ rights )