© 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol nature protocols | VOL . 12 NO . 4 | 2017 | 783 IntroDuctIon Mechanical force is a fundamental regulator of cellular function . Living cells continuously sense mechanical forces and convert them into biological responses 1 – 3 . Similarly , external stimuli can influence cell homeostasis and cells’ ability to respond 4 , 5 . Gaining a quantitative understanding of how force is regulated in cells and how it persists and dissipates ultimately necessitates the system - atic determination of each molecular component participating in the force - generating processes . To add further complexity to this picture , force and mechanical stress act on biological sys - tems at very different length and time scales , from cells , down to single molecules and up to entire organisms , and lasting over a few seconds to hours and even over their whole lifetime . Cell mechanical properties such as cell stiffness and elasticity ( the ability to resist mechanical forces ) , in turn , are utterly different depending on the speed of the applied forces , including poroelas - tic and viscoelastic stress responses , as well as protein - turnover - dependent responses 6 – 9 . Current methods for examining force generation either necessitate highly specialized equipment or limit themselves to coarse - grained force measurements on the micron scale , which inevitably precludes identification and characterization of the underlying mechanisms . Consequently , new methods for characterizing molecular forces within living cells are necessary to help us understand macroscopic mechanics from the bottom up . Mechanical probing of living cells depends on the compliance and the length scale of the biological material , the frequency ( time scale ) at which mechanics is characterized , and the environmental and experimental conditions . Hence , a myriad of experimental tools and theoretical models adapted from soft matter physics and engineering are now available to quantify cell mechanics , includ - ing mechanical force generation and cell mechanical properties . Modern instruments are capable of probing and manipulating sin - gle cells and biomolecules at forces and displacements smaller than a piconewton ( 1 pN = 10 −12 N ) and a nanometer ( 1 nm = 10 −9 m ) , respectively 2 . TFM is perhaps the most commonly used technique for examining mechanical force generation in cells , owing to the simplicity of its implementation on most laser - scanning confocal microscopes . In TFM experiments , a thin ( 20 – 30 µ m ) elastic gel is formed on a glass coverslip to which proteins facili - tating cell adherence can be attached ( Fig . 1a ) 10 . Within the gel , which is typically made from polyacrylamide ( Materials and Procedure sections ) , fluorescent beads serve as fiducial markers , and imaging of the bead positions over time during the applica - tion of cellular tractions allows the displacement of the gel to be quantified . By combining the measured displacement field with knowledge of the mechanical properties of the gel , the tractions responsible for the displacements can be calculated . Notably , TFM is the ideal technique for investigating physiological interactions of cells within a 2D geometry and is extremely versatile because the polyacrylamide gel can be functionalized with any protein of interest . Fluorescently labeled proteins on the gel , or those integrated within intracellular structures of cells , can then be simultaneously monitored because of the multicolor ability of confocal microscopes 11 . Despite its widespread use , TFM is limited in sensitivity , owing to the finite density at which the displacement field can be sam - pled within the gel 10 . The density of fiducial markers must be high enough to reflect the complexity of the traction field that is applied by the cell . If the bead density is too low , areas of the gel will move without being reported by any bead movement , and the traction information will be lost . Conversely , if the bead density is too high , information will also be lost as a result of the point spread functions ( PSFs ) of each individual bead overlap - ping with those nearby , making their relative displacements hard to recover accurately . In general , this can be thought of as a sam - pling problem , in which to meet the Nyquist criteria the spatial sampling frequency of the displacement field must be twice that of any feature that may be resolved in the displacement field 12 . Consequently , the resolution limit of conventional fluorescent microscopes imposes a fundamental limit on the length scale Dissection of mechanical force in living cells by super - resolved traction force microscopy Huw Colin - York 1 , Christian Eggeling 1 & Marco Fritzsche 1 , 2 1 MRC Human Immunology Unit , Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine , University of Oxford , Oxford , UK . 2 Kennedy Institute for Rheumatology , University of Oxford , Oxford , UK . Correspondence should be addressed to M . F . ( marco . fritzsche @ rdm . ox . ac . uk ) . Published online 16 March 2017 ; doi : 10 . 1038 / nprot . 2017 . 009 cells continuously exert or respond to mechanical force . Measurement of these nanoscale forces is a major challenge in cell biology ; yet such measurement is essential to the understanding of cell regulation and function . current methods for examining mechanical force generation either necessitate dedicated equipment or limit themselves to coarse - grained force measurements on the micron scale . In this protocol , we describe stimulated emission depletion traction force microscopy—steD - tFM ( stFM ) , which allows higher sampling of the forces generated by the cell than conventional tFM , leading to a twofold increase in spatial resolution ( of up to 500 nm ) . the procedure involves the preparation of functionalized polyacrylamide gels loaded with fluorescent beads , as well as the acquisition of steD images and their analysis . We illustrate the approach using the example of Hela cells expressing paxillin - eGFp to visualize focal adhesions . our protocol uses widely available laser - scanning confocal microscopes equipped with a conventional steD laser , open - source software and common molecular biology techniques . the entire stFM experiment preparation , data acquisition and analysis require 2 – 3 d and could be completed by someone with minimal experience in molecular biology or biophysics . © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol 784 | VOL . 12 NO . 4 | 2017 | nature protocols © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . at which forces can be measured using TFM , which is typically greater than 1 µ m ( ref . 10 ) . Given the molecular origin of cellu - lar forces , the length scales at which they are active are probably submicrometer ; thus , there is a need to advance TFM to address questions on the nanoscale . A first attempt to overcome this limitation involved the use of two different colors of marker beads , which proved that the recovery of micron - sized tractions is feasible 10 . However , because of its reliance on the spectral separation of the beads , this technique is ultimately limited by the spectral range of the microscope . Development and overview of STFM To overcome these challenges , we recently improved the spatial resolution and accuracy of TFM using super - resolution optical STED microscopy ( Fig . 1b ) 11 . The increased spatial resolution of STFM allows a greater than twofold higher sampling of the forces generated by the cell than conventional TFM , leading to more accurate quantification of cellular tractions ( Fig . 1c ) . Experiments yield quantitative values of mechanical force , commonly presented in Pascals ( 1 Pa = 1 N / m 2 ) , computed from the displacements of the fluorescent marker beads within the polyacrylamide gel using a theoretical framework derived from linear elastic theory 13 , 14 . Optimal experimental conditions refer to the appropriate gel stiffness for optimal sensitivity , the imaging parameters for optimal signal - to - noise ratio and the appropriate implementation of STFM analysis . It should also be noted that the potential gain in resolution made possible using STED theoreti - cally offers up to fivefold higher sampling of the displacement field ; however , this improvement must be balanced against other imaging parameters such as acquisition rate and light dose 11 . In a typical STFM experiment , a polyacrylamide gel is first fabricated by a sandwich method and then validated to ensure that it has the correct mechanical ( elasticity , thickness and flatness ) and optical qualities ( homogeneity , refractive index ) . Fluorescent beads must be added to the gel at this stage , and here we describe a method of ensuring that the fluorescent beads are present only at the top surface of the gel , which leads to reduced background , as a result of out - of - focus light , and improved STED imaging ( Procedure ) . The gel can then be functionalized with proteins rel - evant to the biological system in question . Functionalization can be achieved by various methods , including biotin – streptavidin interactions , hydrazine hydrate and bifunctional cross - linkers 15 – 17 . Here we outline one of the most common methods , using the bifunctional cross - linked sulfo - SANPAH ( Procedure ) . Once the gel has been validated and functionalized , cells can be allowed to interact with the gel and force measurements can be recorded . Cells can be either plated on the gel before imaging , for example , in the case of adherent cells or pipetted down at the microscope , where forces involved in the spreading or early interactions of the cells and the substrate can thus be studied . In this protocol , we focus on the study of HeLa cell focal adhesions ; hence , the cells are allowed to adhere to the functionalized gel before imaging . To measure the forces generated by the adherent cells , we first record a STED image of the gel in a tensioned state , followed by treatment with trypsin – EDTA and allowing the cell to detach , and then we record a STED image of the relaxed state of the gel . Combining knowledge of the mechanical nature of the gel and displacement between the tensioned and relaxed state allows the computation of the forces to be recovered by applying a mathematical model 13 , 14 . This protocol will restrict itself to 2D force generation by STFM , and it is broadly applicable to any cell that undergoes physical inter - actions with any other large cellular organelle or the extracellular matrix . For reasons of simplicity and generality , we have used focal adhesions as an illustration of this protocol , but it is of course not limited to the study of adhesion - associating proteins . Applications of the protocol Applying STFM allows the investigation of mechanical force gen - eration within living cells . It is well suited to biological questions concerning 2D molecular force generation on the nanoscale—for example , cell adherence—but , as compared with conventional TFM , it does not provide further insights into forces acting on the micrometer scale . In a previous study 11 , we applied STFM in the single - cell environment to measure traction forces generated during immune cell activation 18 . Quantification of the STFM experiments yielded more detailed force maps with a substantially higher degree of information owing to a fivefold increased force sampling as compared with classic TFM . Hence , STFM allows an increase in accuracy of STFM , which is important when con - sidering cellular forces on small length scales , as is the case for receptor – antagonist interactions in immune cells . Using STFM , we are now better able to make links between the forces gener - ated by the cell and those molecules that are responsible for force Celledge Traction Functionalizedsurface Beads Cell a b c PAA gel Confocalmicroscopy STED STEDlaser Excitationlaser Detection Phaseplate Objective Sample STED Exc . Obs . Confocal microscopy STED Figure 1 | Outline of STFM . ( a ) Schematic representation of a typical STFM setup . An elastic polyacrylamide ( PAA ) gel filled with fluorescent marker beads is covalently attached to a glass coverslip and functionalized with proteins that facilitate cell adherence . Traction forces applied by the cell to the top surface of the gel result in lateral displacements of the gel , which can be quantified by imaging the displacement of the beads within the gel . ( b ) Schematic showing the beam path of a STED microscope . An excitation laser line ( green ) is combined with a STED depletion laser ( red ) that has passed through a phase plate , giving a characteristic doughnut shape in the focal plane . The combined STED doughnut ( red ) and excitation ( green ) result in a reduction in the size of the observed fluorescence spot ( orange ) . ( c ) Side - by - side comparison of the resolution enhancement offered by STED microscopy as compared with confocal microscopy using respective images of 40 - nm red fluorescent beads excited at 594 nm and a STED wavelength of 660 nm . Scale bar , 2 µ m . © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol nature protocols | VOL . 12 NO . 4 | 2017 | 785 generation . This is particularly valuable when force measurements are coupled to fluorescent data . Most biophysical interactions involve mechanical force genera - tion and depend on the mechanical properties of cells . Overall , mechanical force depends on the fraction of bound / unbound protein agonists , the total number of possible molecular inter - actions , the proportion of protein undergoing each interaction and the associated dissociation rate constant ( time of duration of the reaction ) of each interaction . Each of these variables can be modified by signaling , such as an increase in the proportion of phosphorylated protein in response to progression through the cell cycle . Post - translational modifications can result in changes in protein structure and consequently lead to changes in the binding affinity of some or all of a protein’s subdomains or the exposure of cryptic binding domains 19 . If a sufficient portion of the total protein is affected by these post - translational modifications , this will lead to changes in association / dissociation and thus in force generation . However , coarse - grained measurements of mechani - cal force at low spatio - temporal accuracy cannot report on the origin of changes in force . By allowing the determination of this information by STFM , we anticipate that our protocol will enable a more precise understanding of the molecular origins of changes in mechanical force generation . Computational models of cellular interactions with their mechanical environment have become an integral part of research into the organization and mechanics of the cytoskeleton during cellular processes such as adhesion , locomotion 12 , 20 , 21 , cytokine - sis 22 , 23 or cell – cell interactions 24 , 25 . These models attempt to test our understanding of cellular processes from the bottom up by incorporating quantitative force values known to participate in the process to predict macroscopic mechanical properties or mechani - cal force generation during these processes that can be measured experimentally . Thus , measurement of each component participat - ing in these force - dependent processes is necessary as an input for such simulations . We anticipate that our technique will comple - ment these computational approaches by experimentally character - izing the necessary mechanics and testing model predictions . Limitations of STFM By increasing the sampling density of the displacement field , STFM addresses a fundamental limitation of conventional TFM ; however , STFM naturally suffers from the restrictions inherent in all TFM experiments , and a discussion of this is given in the following . Interpreting mechanical force generation in terms of 2D dis - placements is naturally limited to the tangential components of forces , which only approximate the 3D force exerted by the cells on the substrate . TFM has been successfully extended to meas - ure 3D bead displacement generated by cells within a 3D elastic environment 26 . In the same way that 2D - STED can increase the accuracy of the tangential force reconstruction , using 3D - STED would allow for a greater sampling of the forces perpendicular to the gel surface , as has been demonstrated for TFM 27 – 29 . The location accuracy of STFM is theoretically not limited , as it scales with the applied STED power 30 . This must be balanced with other optical factors , such as maximal bead density within the gel , the ability to track the beads and the fluorescence light sensitivity of the biological specimen . Moreover , the nature of the ( S ) TFM setup requires all imaging to be done at the top surface of the gel , meaning that imaging is subject to aberrations induced by the mismatch between the refractive index of the gel and that of the immersion medium . Improvements in aberration correction—for example , using adaptive optics—would reduce the effect of these aberrations and would result in an improved STED resolution , possibly along all three spatial dimensions 31 , allowing even higher bead densities to be used and the accuracy of experiments to approach that of those shown possible by simulations 11 . Critical , case by case , investigation will decide whether such an extension provides in practice additional information and increased quality of the force data . Specifically , in scenarios for adhering HeLa cells , where focal adhesions predominantly generate force tangential to the substrate , 3D - STFM may not be required . Furthermore , TFM experiments cannot provide information about cooperative force generation dynamics between different domains of the molecules of interest but should be able to provide insights into avidity effects of the force - generating molecules . If such phenomena are at play , fluorescence resonance energy transfer ( FRET ) measure - ments will be necessary 32 . Another limitation of our super - resolved approach is that we can characterize only molecular processes that occur on suffi - ciently different time scales . If several molecular processes occur at similar frequencies , they cannot be separated , and the appar - ent force measured reflects a convolution over all the molecular processes acting at that frequency . In that case , the force results from multiple molecular processes and does not represent a real molecular force measurement . In these situations , interpretation of the results will necessitate in - depth consideration of all the force - producing reactions that can lead to observed displace - ments , which is something best achieved by using computational modeling approaches . Alternative methods to STFM In the following , we briefly introduce a number of alternative approaches to measuring cell - generated forces ( Table 1 ) and out - line their advantages and disadvantages as compared with STFM . Although TFM relies on a continuous elastic surface , micro - fabricated arrays of pillars made from an elastic material such as silicon or poly ( dimethylsiloxane ) can also be used to measure cell tractions 33 . The tops of the pillars serve as contact points for the cell and can be functionalized using methods similar to those used in conventional TFM . By measuring the displacement of the top of each pillar , the force acting on it can be calculated , with each pillar behaving independently . The technique can offer resolution comparable to that of TFM ; however , the complex topology of such an assay is not applicable to all cell types , and the influence of such a topology on cell behavior is unclear 34 . Quantification of intracellular force generation within cells can also be achieved using FRET - based force sensors . FRET is a single - molecule technique and relies on a donor fluorophore in an excited electronic state , which transfers its excitation energy to an acceptor chromophore in a nonradiative manner through long - range dipole – dipole interactions . FRET force sensors typically contain two fluorescent molecules coupled by a flexible linker that extends under mechanical load . The extension of the linker results in a measurable decrease in FRET signal between the two fluoro - phores 32 , 35 . These tools allow forces to be quantified at the single - molecule level within living cells and have been successfully used to measure forces in focal adhesions , as well as receptor – ligand © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol 786 | VOL . 12 NO . 4 | 2017 | nature protocols © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . interactions 36 – 38 . Recently , a FRET force sensor was combined with optical super - resolution techniques , yielding a spatial reso - lution of 50 nm 39 . Although this is an exciting development in the field , currently production of force - sensitive FRET probes is challenging and requires in - depth biochemical knowledge of the specific biological system . Molecular probes of this type are also limited to measuring only the magnitude of forces , whereas TFM can measure both the magnitude and the direction 27 . Other techniques focus on quantifying the mechanical proper - ties of cells . Atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) is a high - resolution surface characterization technique that is predominantly applied for imaging and measurements of mechanical properties but also allows the mechanical probing of biological samples 40 . AFM measurements use a microfabricated cantilever beam equipped with a micron - sized tip to deform and interact with the sample of interest . Specifically , force spectroscopy can be used as a single - molecule tool with subnanometer and piconewton resolution to characterize mechanical properties and active force generation by cells 1 . Cellular elasticity and rheology are measured by press - ing the cantilever tip against the cell surface while the imposed cellular deformation ( and thus force ) is monitored . Considering an appropriate contact model and the geometry of the cantilever tip , this yields information about measured force versus inden - tation , from which the elasticity of the cell is computed 41 . Force generation can be quantified by functionalizing the cantilever tip with integrins or protein - binding agonists expressed on the cell surface 42 , 43 . Moreover , AFM allows time - dependent mechanical characterization and oscillatory tests 44 in stress – relaxation and creep experiments 45 , 46 . Instrumentation of AFM cannot easily be custom - built , is less available than that for TFM and requires specialized microscopy equipment and training , but it is com - mercially affordable . Optical tweezers ( OTs ) use the concept of light trapping to mechanically manipulate , stretch and move cells 47 . Optical tweez - ers focus collimated light that enters a medium of different refrac - tive indices , resulting in a restoring force toward the center of the beam created by the light passing through the material that resists higher levels of refraction . Typically , the applied forces are in the piconewton range and allow spatio - temporal meas - urements at high accuracy of displacements in the nanometer range of objects ranging in size from 10 nm to over 100 mm 48 – 50 . Similarly to AFM , OTs have been used to quantify force - generating processes and mechanical properties of cells 51 . For instance , the adhesion energy was measured between the plasma membrane and the actin cortex by pulling particles attached to the cell mem - brane away from the cell surface with the optical laser beam 49 , 50 . Instrumentation of OTs with high spatio - temporal precision and accuracy can no longer be built by modifying a standard optical microscope but rather requires sophisticated devices under com - puter control . In addition , although OTs provide a valuable tool for high - precision measurements of small forces , they have an inherent limit on the amount of force that can be applied to cells without inducing local heating , affecting cell viability and the quality of force probing . Particle - tracking microrheology ( PTM ) relies on 3D tracking of fluorescent particles embedded in intracellular structures of cytoskeleton components in the cytoplasm of cells . The parti - cles can be cell - membrane - permeable or injected into the cells via micropipette aspiration 52 . Microrheological analysis of movement of the particles within cells reports on the existence of Brownian fluctuations of free - moving beads or directed motion of trapped beads . Indeed , the movement of particles within the cell is perturbed by both elastic and viscous mechanical resist - ances 53 . Other possible contributions could include the influ - ence of energy - consuming active processes and macromolecular crowding on tracer particles inside the cytoplasm . Generally , PTM experiments on cells reveal a dominant elastic response at high frequencies ( short time scales ) and a more viscous behavior on small frequencies ( over longer time periods ) 1 . Implementation of PTM can be achieved on a standard light - field microscope , but it is limited in its ability to transport the beads to the loca - tion of interest . One promising new method that overcomes such limita - tions is Brillouin optical cell microscopy ( BM ) . BM measures intracellular and extracellular hydromechanical properties of cells 54 . It is a label - free technique that does not require physical contact with cells and that quantifies changes in light scatter - ing due to cytoskeletal modulation and cell - volume regulation . Yet this method is sensitive to the biomechanical changes in a cell caused by factors such as polymerization , branching and liquid – solid volume fraction , and it measures only relative changes in the elastic behavior of cells . BM is a very promising new approach whose success still needs to be proven in the field of cell biology . Experimental design There are a number of key considerations when designing a TFM experiment , including the gel stiffness , the functionalization of the gel surface and the computational methods required to extract the gel displacements and to compute the traction forces . STFM is a straightforward extension of the TFM technique , but , as previ - ously mentioned , it requires extra consideration of a number of experimental parameters , primarily the bead density and distri - bution in the gel , the gel mesh size , and the imaging setup and equipment . In the following , we discuss the importance of each of these parameters . table 1 | Summary of force - probing techniques in living cells . technique resolution ( spatial / force ) Geometry Magnitude / direction of force reference FRET force sensors Single molecule / 10s pN 2D Magnitude only 32 , 35 – 37 Micropillar 1 – 2 µ m / 50 pN 2D Magnitude and direction 33 TFM 1 – 2 µ m / 1 nN 2D and 3D Magnitude and direction 10 STFM 0 . 4 – 1 µ m / < 1 nN 2D Magnitude and direction 11 © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol nature protocols | VOL . 12 NO . 4 | 2017 | 787 Gel stiffness . As with all TFM experiments , the gel stiffness is of critical importance and must be tuned to the biological system under investigation . Cells can exert forces over a wide range , and as a result the gel stiffness must be chosen such that any exerted forces result in appropriate displacements of the gel - embedded beads 10 . If the gel is too stiff , the cell will be unable to sufficiently displace the beads , preventing the accurate calculation of forces . Alternatively , if the gel is too soft , the displacements may be too large , contravening the assumption of linear elasticity , meaning that , in practice , the bead displacements should be 0 . 1 – 0 . 5 µ m ( ref . 10 ) . In some cases , the cells may have mechanosensitive properties and hence respond directly to the stiffness of the gel and only adhere to gels that are of the appropriate stiffness 55 . To this end , we fabricate gels using polyacrylamide , which can be produced over a wide range of stiffnesses by simply altering the ratio of acrylamide monomers to the cross - linker bis - acrylamide . Although the ratios of acrylamide and bis - acrylamide that yield a certain stiffness have been well characterized , if required , gel stiff - ness can be verified using AFM indentation 56 . It is important to note that the mesh size of the polyacrylamide gel is proportional to the stiffness , with stiffer gels having smaller mesh sizes . Care must be taken to ensure that the chosen stiffness has a mesh size sufficiently small to trap the chosen fluorescent beads within the gel structure . Mesh size may also determine the surface density of functionalized proteins 57 . Fluorescent bead distribution . Fluorescent beads required to track the displacement of the gel are usually added to the unpo - lymerized acrylamide / bis - acrylamide mixture at a given ratio . As the gel polymerizes , the beads are trapped within the gel matrix and remain in place . Although this is a very effective way of add - ing the beads to the gel , it results in beads being evenly distributed throughout the thickness of the gel . This is undesirable , as only beads at the top surface are useful for measuring forces . In addi - tion , out - of - focus light from beads that are not at the top surface contributes to a high level of signal background , making high - contrast imaging of the beads at the top surface challenging . This becomes especially problematic when high bead densities are used , as is required for STFM . To alleviate this , we modify this typical strategy to ensure that beads are present only at the top surface of the gel 58 . To achieve this , the coverslip used to form the top of the gel sandwich is first functionalized with poly - l - lysine , followed by a coating of fluorescent beads , creating a dense and uniform layer of beads on the coverslip ( Fig . 2 ) . When the sand - wich is formed , the beads are captured within the gel solution as it polymerizes , resulting in a dense layer of beads that is restricted to the top layer of the polyacrylamide gel . Optimal bead density . The density of beads on the top surface of the polyacrylamide gel directly determines the accuracy of force recovery . When deciding on the bead density to use , considera - tion must be given to the spatial scale and nature of the forces that are to be measured , as well as the image analysis method to be used to extract the bead displacements . Specifically , the accu - racy of the traction measurement depends on the sampling of the displacement field , which in turn is determined by the bead density . The relationship between bead density and the spatial size of traction that can be accurately recovered can be demonstrated by simulations . We computer - simulated a circular traction field at varying diameters and subsequently recovered the tractions by using displacements extracted from different bead densities ( Fig . 3 ) . The results illustrate how increasing spatial sampling allows smaller tractions to be effectively recovered . The qual - ity of traction recovery is measured by the deviation of traction magnitude ( DTM ) , which is the normalized difference in the norms of the simulated and recovered traction fields . A DTM Sulfo - SANPAH 365 nm Protein solution Steps 25 – 30 Gel validation at the microscope Fluorescent bead solution 0 . 5 % Glutaraldehyde 12 - mm coverslip 18 - mm coverslip 0 . 01 % poly - L - lysine 0 . 5 % APTMS 12 - mm coverslip – bead coated 18 - mm coverslip – APTMS + glutaraldehyde Acrylamide / bis - acrylamide solution Poly - L - lysine Polyacrylamidegel Steps 5 – 16 a b Steps 23 and 24 Fluorescent beads 12 - mm coverslip 18 - mm coverslip 0 . 4 µ l TEMED 1 . 0 µ l APS Acrylamide + bis - acrylamide + PBS Degas30 min Steps 17 – 22 100 µ l 580 / 605 - nm beads Coverslip x , y z Protein coating Figure 2 | Polyacrylamide gel fabrication and validation . ( a ) Overview of the polyacrylamide gel fabrication procedure ( Steps 1 – 30 ) . Polyacrylamide gels are formed by sandwiching a solution of acrylamide and the cross - linker bis - acrylamide between coverslips . The coverslips forming the sandwich are activated such that the bottom of the gel is covalently attached to the bottom coverslip , and the top surface of the gel is uniformly coated with fluorescent beads ( Steps 5 – 16 ) . After the gel solution has been prepared and polymerized ( Steps 17 – 22 ) , and a sandwich has been formed between the two coverslips ( Steps 23 and 24 ) , the top surface of the gel can then be functionalized with proteins that facilitate cell attachment via the bifunctional cross - linked sulfo - SANPAH ( Steps 25 – 30 ) . ( b ) Confocal images of the x / z cross - section demonstrating the distribution of beads and protein on the gel , both of which are localized to the top surface . Scale bar , 30 µ m . © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol 788 | VOL . 12 NO . 4 | 2017 | nature protocols © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . of 0 represents a perfect recovery , whereas −1 indicates that all information of the traction has been lost . This plot should serve as a guide to those wishing to resolve details on a certain spa - tial scale ; for example , submicron resolutions require a sampling density of 3 beads per µ m 2 or better . Critically , in order to gain accurate displacement measurements at these high bead densities , it is desirable to increase the optical resolution beyond that of a conventional confocal microscope by using STED . STED microscopy . STED microscopy is becoming increas - ingly available and has been implemented in a series of different commercial systems . This offers an opportunity to improve the accuracy of established methods such as TFM , which rely on con - focal microscopy . To maximize the resolution improvements of STED , while maintaining the biological integrity of the samples , a number of considerations must be taken into account , including the choice of laser wavelengths , the optical properties of the sub - strate , the fluorescent beads and the image acquisition settings . STED has been shown to work across the fluorescent spectrum , and indeed fluorescent dyes can provide resolution enhance - ment from the blue to the red range using , for example , STED wavelengths of 592 , 660 or 775 nm ( ref . 59 ) . As biological samples will absorb more strongly toward the blue end of the spectrum , it is desirable to use a STED wavelength that is red - shifted . In this study , we use a combination of 40 - nm red fluorescent beads excited at 594 nm and a STED wavelength of 660 nm . We dem - onstrated that this combination offers a resolution enhancement of > 5× when optical conditions are optimal 11 . Our protocol takes advantage of continuous - wave ( CW ) laser - based STED . This greatly reduces the cost and complexity of the optical system , removing the need for pulsed lasers . The disadvan - tage of CW - STED is the decrease in depletion efficiency , and hence resolution , because of the lack of temporal coherence between the excitation and depletion lasers . However , this can be overcome by gating the detection of the signal using gated - CW - STED 60 . This system has been routinely implemented and is , for instance , commercially available in the form of the Leica SP8 microscope , which was used in the protocol . However , there is no principle limitation on using pulsed STED laser systems instead . As STED microscopy is usually applied as a confocal - based tech - nique , it can be performed at any focal plane within the sample . This is a key requirement for TFM , in which imaging is performed at a focal plane at the top of the polyacrylamide gel and away from the coverslip . As the polyacrylamide gel has a refractive index that differs substantially from that of glass ( ~ n = 1 . 33 ) , using an oil objective optimized for glass will lead to optical aberrations and result in reduced signal and STED resolution when imaging at the top of the gel ( Fig . 4 ) . It is hence desirable to minimize these aberrations in the following two ways : ( i ) limit the thickness of the gel to ~ 30 µ m to reduce scattering losses while maintaining sufficient thickness to avoid problems with the assumption of gel linear elasticity and effects of the glass surface ; ( ii ) use an objec - tive immersion medium that is well matched in refractive index to that of the gel . We have found that using a water - immersion objective works well in this case , exhibiting minimal spherical aberrations and allowing a STED enhancement of 4× at a depth of 25 – 30 µ m ( Fig . 4 ) . When imaging biological samples using high - intensity laser light , it is important to conduct controls to ensure that laser light is not interfering with the biological function of the sample . This is particularly important in STFM , in which imaging should be conducted in both confocal and STED modalities to ensure that the higher laser intensities used in STED do not perturb the sam - ple . As with all scanning - based florescence techniques , to further minimize the phototoxicity effects on the sample , the scan speed should be maximized and line averaging should be applied ; that is , the pixel dwell time should be as low as possible to minimize the effects of local exposure . To increase photon count and enhance image contrast , multiple line averages should be taken rather than increasing the dwell time . STFM analysis . Image analysis forms a critical part of the STFM technique , and there are a number of methods by which bead displacement can be quantified . These methods can be broadly divided into those that depend on tracking each individual bead , single - particle tracking ( SPT ) techniques , and those that depend on correlating displacements within regions of an image , such as particle image velocimetry ( PIV ) . The choice of methods depends on the expected nature of the forces and on the density of beads within the image ; thus , it is important to consider at the outset which analysis is more suited to the particular experiment . In the case of focal adhesions , for which the forces are likely to result in the collective motion of a number of beads and hence smooth displacements , it is appropriate to use an image analysis method that depends on correlating regions of the image rather than individual bead movements . PIV has been widely imple - mented in this scenario and is a good choice for such measure - ments . As PIV does not depend on resolving each individual bead , higher bead densities , in the range of 3 – 15 beads per µ m 2 , can be used ( Fig . 3c ) . However , because PIV requires the image to be subdivided into regions of finite size , high - frequency spatial infor - mation within the subregions may be lost . To minimize this loss , Feature size 0 . 0 a c b 0 . 5 µ m – 2 0 . 5 µ m – 2 0 . 5 µ m – 2 15 µ m – 2 15 µ m – 2 3 . 0 µ m – 2 3 . 0 µ m – 2 3 . 0 µ m – 2 15 µ m – 2 – 0 . 2 – 0 . 4 – 0 . 6 – 0 . 8 – 1 . 00 . 00 . 5 STED STED STED 1 . 01 . 5 Traction diameter ( µ m ) D e v i a t i on o f t r a c t i on m agn i t ude N o r m a li z ed t r a c t i on m agn i t ude ( a . u . ) 2 . 02 . 53 . 0 1 0 T r a c t i on a cc u r a cy R e c o v e r y R e c o v e r y R e c o v e r y S i m u l a t i on Circular traction ( 1 µ m ) C on f o c a l C on f o c a l C on f o c a l Figure 3 | Relationship between bead density and traction resolution . ( a ) Quality of traction recovery for circular tractions of varying diameters , shown at three bead densities : 0 . 5 µ m −2 ( red ) , 3 . 0 µ m −2 ( blue ) and 15 µ m −2 ( green ) . ( b ) Recovery of a 1 - µ m circular traction probed at the corresponding three sampling densities . Recovery is seen to improve with increasing density . ( c ) Simulated fluorescent bead images at the highlighted densities in both confocal ( 300 nm PSF ) and STED ( 80 nm PSF ) microscopy . Scale bars , 2 µ m . © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol nature protocols | VOL . 12 NO . 4 | 2017 | 789 the selection of the PIV interrogation window is critical . If the window is too large , fine detail regarding the displacement of the beads will be lost , and the overall resolution of the traction will be reduced . Alternatively , if the window is too small , such that it con - tains no discernible feature , the correlation between frames will be unreliable and prone to error . As a guide , the PIV windows should be chosen such that they contain on average three beads , although optimization may be required for each particular experiment 61 . Therefore , if the bead density is 5 beads per µ m 2 , recorded at a 20 - nm pixel size , the interrogation window should be 30 pixels × 30 pixels . Alternatively , if the forces are more spatially complex or are likely to contain localized high - frequency displacements , it is desirable to use lower bead densities that allow each individual particle to be tracked using a SPT approach . In this case , a bead density of 0 . 5 – 3 beads per µ m 2 is appropriate ( Fig . 3c ) . In this protocol , the data acquired are more suited to a PIV approach for extracting the displacement ; however , it has been shown that , whether using PIV or SPT , the higher resolution offered by STED enhances the accuracy of force reconstruction 11 . To extract the displacement , we use in this protocol an open - source ImageJ implementation of a PIV routine ( PIV ( Particle Image Velocimetry ) - - - ImageJ plugin , available at https : / / www . sites . google . com / site / qingzongtseng / piv ) ( Procedure ) . Once displacements have been extracted from the bead images , this information can be combined with the mechanical properties of the gel to calculate the forces exerted on the gel . The traction field is a convolution of the displacement field and Green’s func - tion , which contains information about the mechanical properties of the gel , and therefore the traction solution requires solving a so - called ill - posed inverse problem . Inverse problems are subject to errors due to noise , in this case in the displacement field , and hence there are a number of methods proposed to optimize the solution to this inverse problem 13 , 14 , 62 – 64 . The most common and most general is use of Fourier transform traction cytometry ( FTTC ) in combination with regularization 10 , 14 . Regularization is a mathematical technique by which the solution of a linear prob - lem can be limited by some predefined constraint . The degree of regularization is chosen such that a balance is found between how well the solution fits the noise - corrupted experimental displace - ment data and the overall magnitude of the traction solution . If the solution is over - regularized , high - resolution information will be lost , as we are in effect oversmoothing the data . By contrast , under - regularization leads to a solution that overfits the noise in the data and will not be representative of the data . Once an ade - quate regularization parameter has been found , this value should be used for all subsequent traction measurements to make analysis across cells consistent . As with the PIV algorithm , the regularized FTTC has been implemented as an ImageJ plugin 61 ( the Traction Force Microscopy ImageJ plugin , available at https : / / www . sites . google . com / site / qingzongtseng / tfm ) , making processing of the STFM data straightforward ( Procedure ) . 50 Water Oil 100 150 R e s o l u t i on ( n m ) HC P L AP O 63 × / 1 . 20 w a t e r m o t C O RR C S 2 HC P L AP O 100 × / 1 . 40 o il S T E D w h i t e Confocal ( xz ) a c b d STED ( xy ) x , y z x , y y 0 20 40 60 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 Depth ( µ m ) N o r m a li z ed i n t en s i t y ( a . u . ) Water Oil Figure 4 | Microscope objective characterization . ( a , b ) Polyacrylamide gel cross - sections ( left ) showing the distribution of the fluorescent marker beads acquired using the ( a ) Leica HC PL APO 63× / 1 . 20 water motCORR CS2 and ( b ) the Leica HC PL APO 100× / 1 . 40 oil STED white objectives . The corresponding STED images ( right ) taken at a depth of 30 µ m within the gel . Scale bars , 10 µ m ( left ) and 2 µ m ( right ) . ( c ) Normalized intensity of the fluorescent signal as a function of depth within the gel . Signal decays linearly with depth using the oil objective , whereas the signal is maintained even to a depth of 30 µ m using the water objective . ( d ) Comparison of the obtained STED resolution at a depth of 30 µ m using both the oil and water objectives . STED resolution is improved by using the water objective , presumably because of the reduced spherical aberrations , which better maintain the intensity distribution of the STED depletion doughnut . Error bars are standard deviations from the mean . MaterIals REAGENTSGel fabrication ( 3 - Aminopropyl ) trimethoxysilane ( APTMS ; Sigma - Aldrich , cat . no . 281778 ) Ammonium persulfate ( APS ; Sigma - Aldrich , cat . no . 215589 - 100G - D ) Acrylamide solution ( 40 % ( wt / vol ) in ddH 2 O ; Sigma - Aldrich , cat . no . A4058 - 100ML ) N , N - Methylenebisacrylamide ( bis - acrylamide ) solution ( 2 % ( wt / vol ) in ddH 2 O ; Sigma - Aldrich , cat . no . M1533 - 25ML ) N , N , N , N - Tetramethylethylenediamine ( TEMED ; Sigma - Aldrich , cat . no . 411019 - 100ML ) FluoSpheres carboxylate - modified microspheres , 0 . 04 µ m , red fluorescent beads ( 580 / 605 ) , 5 % solids , azide free ( Thermo Fisher Scientific , cat . no . F - 8793 ) Poly - l - lysine solution ( mol . wt . 70 , 000 – 150 , 000 , 0 . 01 % ( wt / vol ) ; Sigma - Aldrich , cat . no . P4707 - 50ML ) Sulfo - SANPAH , 50 mg ( Thermo Fisher Scientific , cat . no . 22589 ) Fibronectin from bovine plasma ( Sigma - Aldrich , cat . no . F1141 - 1MG ) • •• • • • • •• Sulfuric acid , 99 . 99 % ( vol / vol ) ( Sigma - Aldrich , cat . no . 339741 - 500ML ) Hydrogen peroxide , 30 % ( wt / wt ) in H 2 O ( Sigma - Aldrich , cat . no . H1009 - 500ML ) Glutaraldehyde , 25 % in ddH 2 O ( Sigma - Aldrich , cat . no . G5882 - 50ML ) PBS tablets ( Sigma - Aldrich , cat . no . P4417 - 50TAB ) ddH 2 O Cell culture and transfection Cells of choice . Here , we use HeLa human cervical carcinoma cells ( e . g . , ATCC database , cat . no . PTA - 5659 ) ! cautIon The cell lines used should be regularly checked to ensure that they are authentic and that they are not infected with mycoplasma . Plasmid encoding the fluorescently tagged protein of interest . Here , we use paxillin - EGFP ( Addgene , cat . no . 15233 ) Cell culture medium ( DMEM ; Sigma - Aldrich , cat . no . D6046 - 500ML ) FBS ( Thermo Fisher Scientific , cat . no . 16140071 ) l - Glutamine , 200 mM ( Thermo Fisher Scientific , cat . no . 25030081 ) Penicillin – streptomycin , 10 , 000 U / ml ( Thermo Fisher Scientific , cat . no . 15140122 ) •• ••• • • •••• © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol 790 | VOL . 12 NO . 4 | 2017 | nature protocols © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Leibovitz L15 medium ( without phenol red ; Thermo Fisher Scientific , cat . no . 21083027 ) Lipofectamine 3000 transfection reagent ( Thermo Fisher Scientific , cat . no . L3000015 ) Opti - MEM I reduced serum medium ( Thermo Fisher Scientific , cat . no . 11058021 ) Trypsin – EDTA ( 0 . 05 % ( wt / vol ) ; Thermo Fisher Scientific , cat . no . 25300054 ) Software PIV ImageJ plugin ( available at : https : / / www . sites . google . com / site / qingzongtseng / piv ) TFM ( ImageJ plugin ( available at https : / / www . sites . google . com / site / qingzongtseng / tfm ) EQUIPMENT Coverslips ( no . 1 . 5 , 18 and 12 - mm ; SLS , cat . nos . MIC3342 and MIC3334 ) UV cross - linker with 365 - nm emission ( Stratagene Stratalinker 1800 / 2400 or equivalent ) Confocal microscope equipped with a conventional CW 660 - nm STED laser and an excitation white - light laser ( WLL ) , as well as an environmental control for live - cell imaging ( Leica Microsystems , model no . Leica SP8 , or equivalent ) 63× or 100× water - immersion objective ( Leica Microsystems , model no . Leica HC PL APO 63× / 1 . 20 W motCORR CS2 , or equivalent ) Sonication bath ( Grant Instruments , model no . XUB5UK ) Pipettes ( 1 , 000 , 200 , 10 and 2 µ l ; Rainin , cat . nos . 17014382 , 17014391 , 17014388 and 17014393 ) 18 - mm coverslip holder ( Bioscience Tools , cat . no . CSC - 18L ) Centrifuge tubes ( 15 and 50 ml ; Corning , cat . nos . 430053 and 430304 ) Microcentrifuge tubes ( 1 . 5 ml ; Corning , cat . no . 3621 ) Six - well tissue culture plates ( Corning , cat . no . 353846 ) T25 culture flasks ( Corning , cat . no . 430639 ) Petri dishes ( 100 × 15 mm ; Corning , cat . no . BP94A - 01 ) CO 2 incubator ( Panasonic , cat . no . MCO - 170AIC - PE ) Centrifuge ( Thermo Fisher Scientific , cat . no . 75004503 ) Biosafety cabinet ( CAS , model no . Biomat - 2 ) Parafilm ( Sigma - Aldrich , cat . no . P7793 - 1EA ) • • • • • • •• • • • • •••••••••• REAGENT SETUP APS solution Prepare a 10 % ( wt / vol ) APS solution by dissolving 1 g of APS in 10 ml of ddH 2 O . Freeze the solution in 50 - µ l single - use aliquots and store them at −20 °C for up to 1 month . Fluorescent bead solution Diluted bead solutions can be prepared by diluting the original manufacturer’s solution in ddH 2 O . For the case of the above - listed 40 - nm red fluorescent beads , a vol / vol dilution of 1 : 10 , 000 is adequate . To achieve this dilution , it is advisable to first make a 1 : 100 dilution by adding 10 µ l of the concentrated fluorescent bead solution to 990 ml of ddH 2 O . A further 1 : 100 dilution can be performed in the same way , adding 10 µ l of the 1 : 100 solution to a further 990 ml of ddH 2 O . When performing this serial dilution , it is critical that the solutions be well mixed at every stage and that the beads not be aggregated . To minimize aggregation , the solutions should be sonicated using an ultrasonic bath for 10 min before further dilution . Bead solutions can be stored at 4 °C for up to 1 month . Polyacrylamide solution The relative concentrations of acrylamide and bis - acryalmide determine the gel stiffness , and this must be optimized for each specific experimental condition . In the case of HeLa cells , a solution containing final concentrations of 8 % and 0 . 48 % acrylamide and bis - acrylamide , respectively , will produce a 40 - kPa polyacrylamide gel . To produce 500 µ l of this solution , add 100 µ l of 40 % acrylamide and 120 µ l of 2 % bis - acrylamide to 280 µ l of PBS . Formulations can be stored at 4 °C for up to 6 months . For a comprehensive list of formulations and their corresponding stiffnesses , see ref . 56 . ! cautIon Acrylamide is a potent neurotoxin , and care should be to taken to minimize contact . Sulfo - SANPAH cross - linker solution Dissolve the sulfo - SANPAH in 2 , 000 µ l of DMSO , creating a 25 mg / ml solution . Freeze 40 - µ l single - use aliquots and store them at −80 °C for up to 6 months . HeLa cell culture medium To a 500 - ml bottle of DMEM , add 50 ml of FBS , 5 ml of l - glutamine and 5 ml of penicillin – streptomycin . The cell culture medium can be stored at 4 °C for up to 1 month . proceDureacid cleaning of 12 - and 18 - mm glass coverslips ● tIMInG 1 . 5 h 1 | In a 500 - ml pyrex beaker , add 20 ml of 99 . 99 % sulfuric acid . To the same beaker , slowly add 10 ml of 30 % ( wt / wt ) hydrogen peroxide solution . ! cautIon The hydrogen peroxide must be added second to avoid causing dangerous local heating within the mixture . Acid cleaning must be done in a fume hood , and suitable protection must be worn . 2 | To this solution , add , one by one , 10 – 15 of both the 12 - and 18 - mm coverslips , ensuring that all are completely submerged . Gently agitate the mixture . Incubate the coverslips at room temperature ( 20 °C ) for 1 h , agitating periodically . Bubbles on the glass surface indicate the degradation of organic material on the glass . When the bubbles have significantly reduced , the glass has been cleaned . 3 | Prepare 2 liters of ddH 2 O in a suitable container . To the beaker containing the coverslips , add 500 ml of the ddH 2 O to dilute the acid solution as much as possible . Pour away the diluted acid solution , taking care that the solution being rinsed away is very dilute , in order to avoid any damage to the sink and surroundings . Repeat this process three times . On the final wash , do not discard the contents of the beaker , but keep the coverslips submerged in ddH 2 O . Cover the beaker with Parafilm . 4 | Repeat Step 3 for the 18 - mm coverslips .  pause poInt Coverslips can be stored at room temperature for up to 2 weeks . activation of 18 - mm coverslips ● tIMInG 1 . 5 h  crItIcal Steps 5 – 11 and 12 – 16 can be performed in parallel to save time . 5 | Place 10 – 15 acid - cleaned 18 - mm coverslips in a Petri dish , ensuring no coverslips are overlapping . 6 | To a 50 - ml centrifuge tube , add 40 ml of ddH 2 O , followed by 200 µ l of APTMS , forming a 0 . 5 % ( vol / vol ) solution .  crItIcal step APTMS can break down plastics , so pipetting should be done as quickly as possible . © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol nature protocols | VOL . 12 NO . 4 | 2017 | 791 7 | Submerge the coverslips in the 0 . 5 % APTMS solution ( vol / vol ) , ensuring that all coverslips are coated . Incubate the coverslips at room temperature for 30 min on an orbital shaker . 8 | Remove the coverslips from the shaker and aspirate the APTMS solution . Resubmerge the coverslips in ddH 2 O and then remove the washing solution . Repeat this step three times . 9 | In a 50 - ml centrifuge tube , mix together 40 ml of ddH 2 O and 800 µ l of glutaraldehyde , forming a 0 . 5 % ( vol / vol ) solution . ! cautIon Glutaraldehyde is toxic and should be handled in a fume hood and disposed of correctly . 10 | Submerge coverslips in the 0 . 5 % ( vol / vol ) glutaraldehyde solution , again ensuring that all coverslips are coated , and return them to the orbital shaker for a further 30 min at room temperature . 11 | Aspirate the glutaraldehyde solution and replace it with ddH 2 O . Repeat this step three times . After the final wash , leave the coverslips submerged in the ddH 2 O . Seal the Petri dish with Parafilm .  crItIcal step If the washing is not done correctly , or if incorrect concentrations have been used , a brown precipitate will form upon addition of glutaraldehyde ( Step 10 ) . If this occurs , the coverslips are unusable , and Steps 5 – 11 must be repeated with fresh 18 - mm coverslips .  pause poInt Coverslips can be stored at room temperature for up to 2 weeks . coating of 12 - mm coverslips with fluorescent beads ● tIMInG 1 . 5 h 12 | Dry six 12 - mm acid - cleaned coverslips using an air gun or an equivalent device . 13 | Place 25 µ l of 0 . 01 % ( wt / vol ) poly - l - lysine solution on each coverslip , and incubate at 4 °C for 30 min . 14 | Remove the poly - l - lysine by air gun . Alternatively , the poly - l - lysine solution can be removed using a pipette , and the coverslip submerged in ddH 2 O should then be allowed to air - dry . 15 | Place a 25 - µ l drop of 1 : 10 , 000 diluted fluorescent bead solution ( Reagent Setup ) on each coverslip , and incubate the coverslips at 4 °C for 30 min .  crItIcal step The precise dilution ratio may require optimization for a given bead size and gel stiffness . 16 | Remove the bead solution by air gun . Alternatively , the bead solution can be removed by pipette , and the coverslip submerged in ddH 2 O should then be allowed to air - dry .  crItIcal step Bead - coated coverslips should be freshly prepared before gel fabrication . Gel sandwich formation ● tIMInG 1 h 17 | In a 1 . 5 - ml microcentrifuge tube , place 50 µ l of the previously prepared acrylamide / bis - acrylamide solution ( Reagent Setup ) . The exact ratio of acrylamide and bis - acrylamide will determine the gel stiffness , and it must be tuned to the specific biological question . However , the polymerization procedure is independent of the gel formulation . Note that different acrylamide and bis - acrylamide concentrations yield the same elastic stiffnesses of gels at different gel mesh sizes , which can affect the mobility of the fluorescent marker beads within the gels . 18 | Degas the gel solution ( e . g . , using a sonication bath ) for 30 min to remove oxygen . 19 | For each gel to be fabricated , place one bead - coated 12 - mm coverslip ( from Step 16 ) and one air - dried 18 - mm APTMS / glutaraldehyde - treated coverslip on a convenient surface ( e . g . , tissue paper ) , ensuring that the bead - coated surface is facing upward . Typically , six gels can be made at any one time ; the procedure is limited by the speed at which the solution polymerizes . 20 | Thaw one aliquot of the 10 % ( wt / vol ) APS solution ready for gel polymerization . 21 | After degassing , first add TEMED at a 1 : 250 dilution ( 0 . 4 µ l in 100 µ l ) to the unpolymerized gel solution . Mix the solution gently by pipetting to avoid introducing any air bubbles . 22 | Working quickly , add APS to the solution at the volume ratio of 1 : 100 ( 1 µ l in 100 µ l ) , again mixing gently using a pipette . Pipette 3 µ l of the solution onto the 12 - mm coverslip , and quickly place an 18 - mm coverslip ( from Step 11 ) © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol 792 | VOL . 12 NO . 4 | 2017 | nature protocols © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . on top to form a sandwich . Allow the gel to polymerize fully for 30 min ; when the polyacrylamide gel solution in the microcentrifuge tube has polymerized , it can be assumed that the sandwich has also polymerized . Note that the volume of gel solution directly determines the thickness of the gel . Three microliters on a 12 - mm coverslip will form a gel 26 - µ m thick . ? troublesHootInG 23 | Using a scalpel , carefully remove and discard the 12 - mm coverslip from the top of the gel , and submerge the 18 - mm coverslip with a gel attached in a six - well plate in 2 ml of PBS . The beads have now been transferred to the gel attached to the 18 - mm coverslip . 24 | Wash each gel by replacing the 2 ml of PBS in each well with fresh PBS six times to remove all unpolymerized acrylamide . Under the microscope , assess a fabricated gel for its fluorescent bead coverage , STED resolution enhancement and thickness . This is a good opportunity to optimize the imaging conditions to maximize resolution and signal - to - noise ratio . For examples of recommended bead densities , see Figure 3c . ? troublesHootInG  pause poInt Gels can be stored in PBS at 4 °C for up to 2 weeks . Gel functionalization ● tIMInG 12 h or overnight 25 | Thaw one 40 - µ l aliquot of sulfo - SANPAH bifunctional cross - linker , and dilute the solution in 960 µ l of ddH 2 O ( Reagent Setup ) . Store the solution on ice for no longer than 30 min . 26 | On a Petri dish , stretch out Parafilm , so that it forms a suspended layer across the top of the Petri dish . 27 | Remove the gel ( from Step 24 ) from solution , and remove as much excess buffer as possible . Place the coverslip on the Parafilm - coated dish , making sure the gel is facing upward . Pipette 170 µ l of the sulfo - SANPAH solution onto the gel , and immediately place it under the UV lamp . Expose to 365 - nm UV radiation for 10 min . This process can be done in parallel for six gels at a time . 28 | Remove each gel from under the UV lamp and submerge it in 2 ml of PBS , exchanging the PBS three times to ensure that all the unbound sulfo - SANPAH has been removed . Note that after exposure to UV , the sulfo - SANPAH solution will darken in color from red to brown . 29 | On a second Petri dish , stretch out Parafilm so that it forms a suspended layer across the top of the Petri dish and place a 20 - µ l drop of 500 µ g / ml fibronectin for each gel . Place each coverslip , gel side down , on the drop of fibronectin , and incubate at 4 °C for 12 h or overnight . 30 | Remove each gel from the fibronectin solution and place it in a six - well dish containing 2 ml of PBS . Once again , wash by exchanging the PBS three times . Coverslips are now ready to use .  pause poInt Coverslips may be stored in PBS at 4 °C for up to 2 weeks . cell preparation ● tIMInG 12 – 24 h 31 | Remove the PBS from each well of the six - well plate containing the coverslips ( from Step 30 ) . Add 2 ml of cell growth medium to submerge the gels , and sterilize the coverslips by placing them under a UV lamp for 1 h . 32 | Detach HeLa cells , grown to 80 % confluency in a T25 flask , by first removing the growth medium and washing by adding 5 ml of PBS . Next , remove the PBS and add 2 ml of 0 . 05 % ( wt / vol ) trypsin – EDTA warmed to 37 °C . Return the cells to the incubator at 37 °C for 5 min . 33 | After validating the cell detachment using a benchtop light microscope , add a further 5 ml of medium to the cells and aspirate it from the flask . Transfer the solution to a 15 - ml centrifuge tube and centrifuge it at 200 g for 3 min at room temperature . Remove and discard the supernatant and resuspend the cells in 5 ml of fresh medium . 34 | Count the cells using a hemocytometer . Add 0 . 5 million cells to the center of each coverslip ( from Step 31 ) . Gently agitate the six - well plate to ensure that cells are well distributed over the gel surface . 35 | Return the six - well plate to the 37 °C incubator , and give the cells sufficient time to attach ( 6 – 12 h ) . The degree of cell attachment can be assessed using a benchtop light microscope . ? troublesHootInG © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol nature protocols | VOL . 12 NO . 4 | 2017 | 793 36 | Check whether the cells have attached .  crItIcal step Once the cells have attached , the plasmid of choice ( in this case paxillin - EGFP plasmid DNA ) can be transfected into the cell , as described in Steps 37 – 39 . 37 | For each coverslip , prepare two microcentrifuge tubes , each containing 125 µ l of Opti - MEM . To the first tube , add 1 µ g of plasmid DNA followed by 5 µ l of the P3000 transfection reagent . To the second tube , add 4 µ l of the L3000 reagent . Allow the contents to diffuse throughout the solution at room temperature for 5 min . Combine the two solutions and allow the mixture to stand for a further 20 min to allow the DNA and transfection reagent to form complexes . 38 | Add the combined mixture to each coverslip , pipetting slowly to distribute the solution evenly over the surface of the coverslip . Do not mix by pipetting . Return to the 37 °C incubator for 4 h . 39 | Remove the medium containing the DNA and transfection reagent , and replace it with fresh medium . Return the coverslips to the incubator for a further 12 h or overnight to allow the cells to express the fluorescent protein . 40 | Validate the expression by checking the signal from the fluorescent protein using a simple inverted microscope equipped with a fluorescent lamp . ? troublesHootInG Data acquisition ● tIMInG 1 h  crItIcal This procedure details how to set up and perform a STFM experiment on a Leica SP8 STED microscope . Similar functions should be available in most laser - scanning STED - based microscopes . For a practical guide to building a custom - built STED setup , see ref . 59 . We present optimal settings for acquiring STFM data on a microscope equipped with a 660 - nm STED line and a white - light laser for fluorescence excitation . 41 | Remove the gel - coated coverslips with cells attached from the 37 °C incubator ( from Step 39 ) , and load one of the coverslips into a suitable sample chamber . Add 500 µ l of L15 serum - free medium , and return the sample to the incubator while the microscope reaches 37 °C . 42 | Switch on all required laser lines , and allow the laser powers to stabilize ( ‘Configuration’ > ‘Laser Configuration’ > ‘WLL’ > ‘on’ ; set to 100 % power , 660 nm > on , set to 100 % power ) . Specific laser line powers are measured to be 488 nm : 36 µ W ; 594 nm : 55 µ W ; and 660 nm : 80 mW .  crItIcal step Before experimentation , ensure that the microscope is well aligned using the automatic alignment tool ( ‘Configuration’ > ‘STED’ > ‘Align Beams’ ) and that the environmental control is set to 37 °C . 43 | When the microscope has reached the correct temperature , load the sample and locate the cells using a water - immersion objective of suitable numerical aperture and magnification—for example , Leica HC PL APO 63× / 1 . 2 water motCORR CS2 objective . Locate a cell and select a region of interest . For dynamic measurements , choose a region that is not too large , so as to allow for a scan time that is sufficiently fast to capture the force dynamics in a representative region such as 20 × 20 µ m . 44 | For comparison , acquire a confocal image of both the cell and the beads beneath the cell . This image should be acquired using the same parameters as for the STED , only differing in laser powers ( as detailed below ) . confocal microscopy steD microscopy Pixel size 25 nm 25 nm Repetition rate 1 , 000 Hz 1 , 000 Hz 488 - nm excitation power 5 % 5 % 594 - nm excitation power 5 % 5 % 660 - nm STED power 0 % 80 % Gating time No gating 1 ns – 6 ns Gating time 48× 48× ROI size 20 × 20 µ m 20 × 20 µ m a ROI , region of interest . © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol 794 | VOL . 12 NO . 4 | 2017 | nature protocols © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . 45 | Acquire a STED image of the beads , as detailed above . Imaging parameters should be tuned to maximize the resolution .  crItIcal step Note that this is an important point at which to take note of any adverse effects of the laser light—for example , cell retraction . If these effects are observed , then lower laser intensities should be used in combination with faster scan speeds . 46 | Add 50 µ l of 0 . 05 % trypsin – EDTA ( wt / vol ) to the cells , and wait for 5 min or until the cell has fully detached . 47 | Acquire a further confocal and STED image of the relaxed gel . Save the data and associated metadata . Data analysis ● tIMInG 1 h 48 | Open ImageJ and load both the pre - and post - trypsin – EDTA treatment images . Using the stack tool ( ‘Image’ > ‘Stacks’ > ‘Images to Stack’ ) , combine both images . 49 | If required , correct for any drift between the two images using an appropriate tool such as StackReg ( ‘Plugins’ > ‘Registration’ > ‘StackReg’ > ‘Translation’ ) . This is critical , as any drift between the two frames will affect the measured displacements . 50 | To assess the displacement of the beads between the two frames , use the PIV ImageJ plugin ( ‘Plugins’ > ‘PIV’ > ‘Iterative PIV ( cross - correlation ) ’ ) . Save the result . Note that the minimum interrogation window of the iterative PIV routine must be sufficiently large to contain one bead . 51 | Use the FTTC TFM Plugin ( ‘Plugins’ > ‘FTTC’ > ‘FTTC’ ) to calculate the corresponding traction map . Insert the image pixel size , Poisson ratio ( assumed to be 0 . 5 ) , gel stiffness and regularization factor ( 1 × 10 – 10 is suitable value in most cases ) and load in the calculated displacements . Save the result . ? troublesHootInG Troubleshooting advice can be found in table 2 . ● tIMInG Steps 1 – 4 , acid cleaning of 12 - and 18 - mm glass coverslips : 1 . 5 h Steps 5 – 11 , activation of 18 - mm coverslips : 1 . 5 h Steps 12 – 16 , coating of 12 - mm coverslips with fluorescent beads : 1 . 5 h Steps 17 – 24 , gel sandwich formation : 1 h Steps 25 – 30 , gel functionalization : 12 h or overnight Steps 31 – 40 , cell preparation : 12 – 24 h Steps 41 – 47 , data acquisition : 1 h Steps 48 – 51 , data analysis : 1 h table 2 | Troubleshooting table . step problem possible reason solution 22 Gel does not polymerize Incorrect ratio of TEMED / APS Repeat , using the correct TEMED / APS ratio 24 No fluorescent beads visible at the top surface of the gel • Coating of poly - l - lysine was not correct • Fluorescent bead concentration was too low • Glass is not sufficiently clean • Repeat poly - l - lysine coating • Repeat with higher fluorescent bead concentration • Repeat glass cleaning ( Steps 1 – 5 ) 24 Fluorescent bead coating is not homogeneous Aggregation of fluorescent bead solution Increase sonication time or prepare a fresh solution 35 Cells do not attach to the gel Sulfo - SANPAH is not functional Protein concentration insufficient UV exposure insufficient or wrong wavelength used Repeat with a fresh aliquot of sulfo - SANPAH Increase the concentration of protein Increase the UV exposure , ensuring that it is at the correct wavelength 40 Paxillin - EGFP expression is low or not present Transfection is not working Optimize the ratio of DNA and transfection reagents © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol nature protocols | VOL . 12 NO . 4 | 2017 | 795 antIcIpateD results Figure 5 provides an overview of the anticipated results for the application of this protocol to focal adhesion in living HeLa cells . HeLa cells spread and form focal adhesions on a 40 - kPa polyacrylamide gel functionalized with fibronectin . The adhesion points can be visualized as bright regions of paxillin - EGFP signal ( Fig . 5a , b ) . Fully spread HeLa cells are in a contractile state , transmitting mechanical forces through the focal adhesions to the gel . To measure these forces , we must release the cell from the gel using the protease trypsin – EDTA , which severs the links between cell and gel , thus allowing the gel to relax to an equilibrium state . Imaging of the beads should be carried out before and after trypsin – EDTA treatment to ensure that the tensioned and relaxed states of the gel can be measured by the position of the fluorescent beads within the gel ( Fig . 5c , d ) . After extraction of the displacements via the PIV algorithm and calculation of the traction field via the FTTC algorithm , the force map shows a spatial agreement with the fluorescence intensity distribution of paxillin - EGFP . For comparative purposes , the images of the stressed and unstressed bead positions should be recorded in confocal and STED microscopy and the recon - structions should be compared as in Figure 5e , f . Using STED microscopy , more detail is apparent in the recovered traction field , and the distribution of the magnitude of force is in better agreement with the paxillin - EGFP distribution ( Fig . 5g ) . 0 3 . 3 T r a c t i on m agn i t ude ( k P a ) T r a c t i on m agn i t ude ( k P a ) 0 3 . 3 C on f o c a l S T E D C on f o c a l t r a c t i on s S T E D t r a c t i on s Traction magnitude a c e g f d b Bead displacement pre - / post - trypsin – EDTA 40 k P a PAA + 0 . 5 m g / m l f i b r one c t i n HeLa paxillin - EGFP 580 / 605 - nm beads 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 0 . 0 2 0 4 6 0 . 5 1 . 0 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 Distance ( µ m ) 2 0 4 6 Distance ( µ m ) N o r m a li z ed t r a c t i on m agn i t ude ( a . u . ) 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 N o r m a li z ed t r a c t i on m agn i t ude ( a . u . ) N o r m a li z ed i n t en s i t y ( a . u . ) N o r m a li z ed i n t en s i t y ( a . u . ) STED tractions Confocal tractions Paxillin intensity 1 . 2 . 2 . 2 . 1 . 2 . Figure 5 | STFM applied to HeLa cell focal adhesions . ( a ) Representative fluorescent image of HeLa cell expressing paxillin - EGFP ( green ) adhering to a 40 - kPa PAA gel coated with fibronectin and loaded with 40 - nm red fluorescent beads ( red ) . Scale bar , 10 µ m . ( b ) Close - up of inset marked in ( a ) . Scale bar , 2 µ m . ( c , d ) Confocal ( c ) and ( d ) STED fluorescent bead images of gel area under the cell . The bead positions before ( cyan ) and after ( magenta ) trypsin – EDTA treatment are superimposed to highlight the gel displacement . Scale bars , 2 µ m . Inset , close - up of dotted square region . Scale bars , 2 µ m . ( e , f ) Traction magnitude calculated from the measured confocal ( e ) and STED ( f ) recordings of the bead displacements . Scale bars , 2 µ m . Black dotted line represents cell boundary . ( g ) Line profiles showing the traction magnitude and the corresponding fluorescent intensities across the focal adhesions for STED ( blue ) and confocal ( red ) imaging . The dashed green line represents the fluorescence intensity distribution of paxillin . acknoWleDGMents We gratefully acknowledge support from the Wolfson Imaging Centre ( C . Lagerholm and E . Garcia ) and funding from the Medical Research Council ( MRC ; grant no . MC _ UU _ 12010 / unit programme G0902418 and grant no . MC _ UU _ 12025 ) , the MRC / Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council ( BBSRC ) / Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council ( EPSRC ; grant no . MR / K01577X / 1 ) , the Wellcome Trust ( grant ref . 104924 / 14 / Z / 14 ) and the Wolfson Foundation . We thank E . Sezgin for kindly reading the manuscript . autHor contrIbutIons H . C . - Y . conducted the experiments . H . C . - Y . , M . F . and C . E . wrote the manuscript . coMpetInG FInancIal Interests The authors declare no competing financial interests . Reprints and permissions information is available online at http : / / www . nature . com / reprints / index . html . 1 . Moeendarbary , E . & Harris , A . R . Cell mechanics : principles , practices , and prospects . Wiley Interdiscip . Rev . Syst . Biol . Med . 6 , 371 – 388 ( 2014 ) . 2 . Capitanio , M . & Pavone , F . S . Interrogating biology with force : single molecule high - resolution measurements with optical tweezers . Biophys . J . 105 , 1293 – 1303 ( 2013 ) . 3 . Bao , G . & Suresh , S . Cell and molecular mechanics of biological materials . Nat . Mater . 2 , 715 – 725 ( 2003 ) . 4 . Janmey , P . A . & Miller , R . T . Mechanisms of mechanical signaling in development and disease . J . Cell Sci . 124 , 9 – 18 ( 2011 ) . 5 . Valero , C . , Javierre , E . , García - Aznar , J . M . & Gómez - Benito , M . J . A cell - regulatory mechanism involving feedback between contraction and tissue formation guides wound healing progression . PLoS One 9 , e92774 ( 2014 ) . 6 . Sasaki , N . in Viscoelasticity - From Theory to Biological Applications 99 – 122 ( InTech , 2012 ) . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 5772 / 49979 . 7 . Moeendarbary , E . et al . The cytoplasm of living cells behaves as a poroelastic material . Nat . Mater . 12 , 253 – 261 ( 2013 ) . © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol 796 | VOL . 12 NO . 4 | 2017 | nature protocols 8 . Fritzsche , M . , Erlenkämper , C . , Moeendarbary , E . , Charras , G . & Kruse , K . Actin kinetics shapes cortical network structure and mechanics . Sci . Adv . 2 , 1 – 13 ( 2016 ) . 9 . Geiger , B . , Spatz , J . P . & Bershadsky , A . D . Environmental sensing through focal adhesions . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 , 21 – 33 ( 2009 ) . 10 . Sabass , B . , Gardel , M . L . , Waterman , C . M . & Schwarz , U . S . High resolution traction force microscopy based on experimental and computational advances . Biophys . J . 94 , 207 – 220 ( 2008 ) . 11 . Colin - York , H . et al . Super - resolved traction force microscopy ( STFM ) . Nano Lett . 16 , 2633 – 2638 ( 2016 ) . 12 . Wilson , K . et al . Mechanisms of leading edge protrusion in interstitial migration . Nat . Commun . 4 , 2896 ( 2013 ) . 13 . Dembo , M . & Wang , Y . - L . Stresses at the cell - to - substrate interface during locomotion of fibroblasts . Biophys . J . 76 , 2307 – 2316 ( 1999 ) . 14 . Butler , J . P . , Tolic´ - Nørrelykke , I . M . , Fabry , B . & Fredberg , J . J . Traction fields , moments , and strain energy that cells exert on their surroundings . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 282 , C595 – C605 ( 2002 ) . 15 . Judokusumo , E . , Tabdanov , E . , Kumari , S . , Dustin , M . L . & Kam , L . C . Mechanosensing in T lymphocyte activation . Biophys . J . 102 , L5 – L7 ( 2012 ) . 16 . Fischer , R . S . , Myers , K . A . , Gardel , M . L . & Waterman , C . M . Stiffness - controlled three - dimensional extracellular matrices for high - resolution imaging of cell behavior . Nat . Protoc . 7 , 2056 – 2066 ( 2012 ) . 17 . Damljanovic , V . , Lagerholm , B . C . & Jacobson , K . Bulk and micropatterned conjugation of extracellular matrix proteins to characterized polyacrylamide substrates for cell mechanotransduction assays . Biotechniques 39 , 847 – 851 ( 2005 ) . 18 . Gould , H . J . & Sutton , B . J . IgE in allergy and asthma today . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 8 , 205 – 217 ( 2008 ) . 19 . Fritzsche , M . & Charras , G . Dissecting protein reaction dynamics in living cells by fluorescence recovery after photobleaching . Nat . Protoc . 10 , 660 – 680 ( 2015 ) . 20 . Danuser , G . , Allard , J . & Mogilner , A . Mathematical modeling of eukaryotic cell migration : insights beyond experiments . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 29 , 501 – 528 ( 2013 ) . 21 . Lewalle , A . et al . A phenomenological density - scaling approach to lamellipodial actin dynamics . Interface Focus 4 , 20140006 ( 2014 ) . 22 . Stachowiak , M . R . et al . Mechanism of cytokinetic contractile ring constriction in fission yeast . Dev . Cell 29 , 547 – 561 ( 2014 ) . 23 . Pollard , T . D . Mechanics of cytokinesis in eukaryotes . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 22 , 50 – 56 ( 2010 ) . 24 . Coward , J . , Germain , R . N . & Altan - Bonnet , G . Perspectives for computer modeling in the study of T cell activation . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 2 , a005538 ( 2010 ) . 25 . Worth , A . J . J . et al . Disease - associated missense mutations in the EVH1 domain disrupt intrinsic WASp function causing dysregulated actin dynamics and impaired dendritic cell migration . Blood 121 , 72 – 84 ( 2013 ) . 26 . Stout , D . A . et al . Mean deformation metrics for quantifying 3D cell – matrix interactions without requiring information about matrix material properties . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 113 , 2898 – 2903 ( 2016 ) . 27 . Polacheck , W . J . & Chen , C . S . Measuring cell - generated forces : a guide to the available tools . Nat . Methods 13 , 415 – 423 ( 2016 ) . 28 . del Álamo , J . C . et al . Three - dimensional quantification of cellular traction forces and mechanosensing of thin substrata by Fourier traction force microscopy . PLoS One http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0069850 ( 2013 ) . 29 . Thomas , D . G . et al . Non - muscle myosin IIB is critical for nuclear translocation during 3D invasion . J . Cell Biol . 210 , 583 – 594 ( 2015 ) . 30 . Hell , S . W . & Wichmann , J . Breaking the diffraction resolution limit by stimulated emission : stimulated - emission - depletion fluorescence microscopy . Opt . Lett . 19 , 780 – 782 ( 1994 ) . 31 . Gould , T . J . , Kromann , E . B . , Burke , D . , Booth , M . J . & Bewersdorf , J . Auto - aligning stimulated emission depletion microscope using adaptive optics . Opt . Lett . 38 , 1860 – 1862 ( 2013 ) . 32 . Grashoff , C . et al . Measuring mechanical tension across vinculin reveals regulation of focal adhesion dynamics . Nature 466 , 263 – 266 ( 2010 ) . 33 . Ghassemi , S . et al . Cells test substrate rigidity by local contractions on submicrometer pillars . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 5328 – 5333 ( 2012 ) . 34 . Vogel , V . & Sheetz , M . Local force and geometry sensing regulate cell functions . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 , 265 – 275 ( 2006 ) . 35 . Blakely , B . L . et al . A DNA - based molecular probe for optically reporting cellular traction forces . Nat . Methods 11 , 1229 – 1232 ( 2014 ) . 36 . Stabley , D . R . , Jurchenko , C . , Marshall , S . S . & Salaita , K . S . Visualizing mechanical tension across membrane receptors with a fluorescent sensor . Nat . Methods 9 , 64 – 67 ( 2012 ) . 37 . Liu , Y . , Yehl , K . , Narui , Y . & Salaita , K . Tension sensing nanoparticles for mechano - imaging at the living / nonliving interface . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 135 , 5320 – 5323 ( 2013 ) . 38 . Wang , X . & Ha , T . Defining single molecular forces required to activate integrin and notch signaling . Science 340 , 991 – 994 ( 2013 ) . 39 . Morimatsu , M . , Mekhdjian , A . H . , Chang , A . C . , Tan , S . J . & Dunn , A . R . Visualizing the interior architecture of focal adhesions with high - resolution traction . Nano Lett . 15 , 2220 – 2228 ( 2015 ) . 40 . Müller , D . J . & Dufrêne , Y . F . Atomic force microscopy as a multifunctional molecular toolbox in nanobiotechnology . Nat . Nanotechnol . 3 , 261 – 269 ( 2008 ) . 41 . Harris , A . R . & Charras , G . T . Experimental validation of atomic force microscopy - based cell elasticity measurements . Nanotechnology 22 , 345102 ( 2011 ) . 42 . Hu , K . H . & Butte , M . J . T cell activation requires force generation . J . Cell Biol . 213 , 535 – 542 ( 2016 ) . 43 . Whited , A . M . & Park , P . S . - H . Atomic force microscopy : a multifaceted tool to study membrane proteins and their interactions with ligands . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 1838 , 56 – 68 ( 2014 ) . 44 . Alcaraz , J . et al . Microrheology of human lung epithelial cells measured by atomic force microscopy . Biophys . J . 84 , 2071 – 2079 ( 2003 ) . 45 . Darling , E . M . , Topel , M . , Zauscher , S . , Vail , T . P . & Guilak , F . Viscoelastic properties of human mesenchymally - derived stem cells and primary osteoblasts , chondrocytes , and adipocytes . J . Biomech . 41 , 454 – 464 ( 2008 ) . 46 . Moreno - Flores , S . , Benitez , R . , Vivanco , M . d . & Toca - Herrera , J . L . Stress relaxation and creep on living cells with the atomic force microscope : a means to calculate elastic moduli and viscosities of cell components . Nanotechnology 21 , 445101 ( 2010 ) . 47 . Guck , J . et al . Optical deformability as an inherent cell marker for testing malignant transformation and metastatic competence . Biophys . J . 88 , 3689 – 3698 ( 2005 ) . 48 . Guck , J . et al . The optical stretcher : a novel laser tool to micromanipulate cells . Biophys . J . 81 , 767 – 784 ( 2001 ) . 49 . Hochmuth , F . M . , Shao , J . Y . , Dai , J . & Sheetz , M . P . Deformation and flow of membrane into tethers extracted from neuronal growth cones . Biophys . J . 70 , 358 – 369 ( 1996 ) . 50 . Raucher , D . & Sheetz , M . P . Characteristics of a membrane reservoir buffering membrane tension . Biophys . J . 77 , 1992 – 2002 ( 1999 ) . 51 . Pontes , B . et al . Membrane elastic properties and cell function . PLoS One 8 , e67708 ( 2013 ) . 52 . Hochmuth , R . M . Micropipette aspiration of living cells . J . Biomech . 33 , 15 – 22 ( 2000 ) . 53 . Tseng , Y . , Kole , T . P . & Wirtz , D . Micromechanical mapping of live cells by multiple - particle - tracking microrheology . Biophys . J . 83 , 3162 – 3176 ( 2002 ) . 54 . Scarcelli , G . et al . Noncontact three - dimensional mapping of intracellular hydromechanical properties by Brillouin microscopy . Nat . Methods 12 , 1132 – 1134 ( 2015 ) . 55 . Discher , D . E . , Janmey , P . & Wang , Y . - L . Tissue cells feel and respond to the stiffness of their substrate . Science 310 , 1139 – 1143 ( 2005 ) . 56 . Tse , J . R . , Engler , A . J . , Tse , J . R . & Engler , A . J . Preparation of hydrogel substrates with tunable mechanical properties . Curr . Protoc . Cell Biol . chapter 10 , Unit 10 . 16 ( 2010 ) . 57 . Wen , J . H . et al . Interplay of matrix stiffness and protein tethering in stem cell differentiation . Nat . Mater . 13 , 979 – 987 ( 2014 ) . 58 . Knoll , S . G . , Ali , M . Y . & Saif , M . T . A novel method for localizing reporter fluorescent beads near the cell culture surface for traction force microscopy . J . Vis . Exp . ( 91 ) , 51873 ( 2014 ) . 59 . Clausen , M . P . et al . Pathways to optical STED microscopy . NanoBioImaging 1 , 1 – 12 ( 2013 ) . 60 . Vicidomini , G . et al . Sharper low - power STED nanoscopy by time gating . Nat . Methods 8 , 571 – 573 ( 2011 ) . 61 . Martiel , J . L . et al . Measurement of cell traction forces with ImageJ . Methods Cell Biol . 125 , 269 – 287 ( 2015 ) . 62 . Schwarz , U . S . & Soiné , J . R . D . Traction force microscopy on soft elastic substrates : a guide to recent computational advances . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 1853 , 3095 – 3104 ( 2015 ) . 63 . Han , S . J . , Oak , Y . , Groisman , A . & Danuser , G . Traction microscopy to identify force modulation in subresolution adhesions . Nat . Methods 12 , 653 – 656 ( 2015 ) . 64 . Schwarz , U . S . et al . Calculation of forces at focal adhesions from elastic substrate data : the effect of localized force and the need for regularization . Biophys . J . 83 , 1380 – 1394 ( 2002 ) .