Protecting the Home : Exploring the Roles of Technology and Citizen Activism from a Burglar’s Perspective Sheena Lewis Erete Technology and Social Behavior Northwestern University Evanston , IL 60208 USA sheena @ u . northwestern . edu ABSTRACT For decades , HCI scholars have designed technology for the domestic space . Many of these systems aim to protect the home and its residents by requesting help from local authori - ties during emergency situations . While the use of these sys - tems have been examined , few studies attempt to understand the behavior of potential offenders who can create such emer - gency situations ( e . g . , by attempting a burglary ) . This paper analyzes three panel sessions with 15 people who have been convicted of burglarizing homes , cars , and / or businesses . Par - ticipants describe in detail what they looked for when decid - ing to burglarize a home and what deterred them . Technolo - gies such as security systems , alarms , and cameras do not dissuade burglars . Instead , evidence of neighborhood cohe - sion was named the strongest deterrent . This paper presents implications for designing technologies that will effectively discourage burglary and support citizen activism . Author Keywords crime prevention technology ; burglary ; domestic space ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords H . 5 . m . Information Interfaces and Presentation ( e . g . HCI ) : Miscellaneous INTRODUCTION The home is not only a place of residence , but also a place of refuge . It is in the home , or the domestic environment , that people create memories with family and friends , store their most sentimental items , and spend a signiﬁcant amount of time . The domestic environment can be a place to escape the stresses of daily life [ 31 ] . Thus , when an unwanted ( and many times unknown ) intruder unlawfully enters the domes - tic space , it can have a traumatic effect on victims’ ﬁnancial and mental well - beings [ 16 , 26 ] . Burglary is a major concern since the majority of serious crimes ( i . e . , felonies that result in the longest minimum sen - tences ) reported are non - violent thefts of personal property . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior speciﬁc permission and / or a fee . CHI 2013 , April 27 – May 2 , 2013 , Paris , France . Copyright 2013 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 1899 - 0 / 13 / 04 . . . $ 15 . 00 . In 2010 , victims of burglaries in the US loss over $ 4 . 6 billion , with an average burglary resulting in a loss of over $ 2000 [ 16 ] . Despite a constant decline in crime over the years , bur - glary remains the second most reported serious crime ( behind larceny - theft ) [ 16 ] . Moreover , these are low estimates consid - ering that at least half of burglaries in the US are not ofﬁcially reported [ 42 ] . Not only does burglary cause a massive amount of ﬁnancial loss , there are also serious psychological consequences . Long after a burglary occurs , victims experience an increased fear of being burglarized again [ 34 ] and are afraid of being home alone [ 54 ] . Others have found that victims feel an increased amount of stress because of the fear and anxiety caused by burglary [ 27 ] . Researchers have found that long term effects of burglary are uneasiness and insecurity as a result of con - stantly thinking about the event [ 26 ] . Many times there are negative effects to personal relationships , because victims be - gin to suspect acquaintances of being involved [ 26 ] . Though much research in human computer interaction ( HCI ) focuses on designing technology for the domestic space [ 21 , 23 , 48 , 53 ] , few studies consider the domestic space a defen - sible area that should be protected from unwanted physical intrusion . The majority of research on the domestic space fo - cuses on understanding residents’ habits [ 2 , 11 , 33 ] and how the technology may affect their behavior or routines [ 1 , 9 , 18 ] . But little is known about how technology protects the domes - tic space and its impact on potential intruders . Furthermore , much of the technology that is built for the domestic space is meant to help catch culprits after they have committed an of - fense , not to prevent or discourage an offense from occurring . This study takes a nuanced approach at exploring this topic by asking the research questions : What dissuades potential of - fenders from breaking into a home ? How can we incorporate such features into technology ? The objective of this study is to identify what burglars look for prior to breaking into homes and to examine the role of technology in deterring burglars . This paper describes how intruders view technology and other deterrents that are designed to protect the domestic space . In three panel sessions , 15 participants , all convicted of burglary , were asked to describe 1 ) the factors that inﬂuenced their de - cisions to burglarize one home over another and 2 ) their per - ception of crime prevention technologies . The analysis indi - cates that perception of high community cohesion is the most effective deterrent for burglars and that technologies used to Session : Crime and Conflicts CHI 2013 , Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 2507 traditionally protect the home ( e . g . , security alarm systems , cameras ) are not major deterrents . Results suggest that when designing and building technology for crime prevention in the domestic space , there should be considerations for features that enhance perceptions of neighborhood cohesion and fa - cilitate in - person citizen activism and engagement . This work makes several contributions to the HCI commu - nity . First , this paper contributes to the growing interest in crime prevention technologies by providing a unique perspec - tive into how potential offenders view technology whereas previous crime prevention literature focused on potential vic - tims [ 3 , 25 ] or the police [ 52 ] as the users . Furthermore , this paper provides guidelines and principles to consider when de - signing technologies to protect the domestic space . Speciﬁ - cally , I extend previous HCI literature on understanding and designing technologies for the domestic space [ 23 ] . Lastly , I describe the role of citizen activism in crime prevention . This builds on prior citizen activism work , which has focused on the environment [ 14 ] , health [ 30 ] , and social movements [ 22 , 32 , 36 ] . BACKGROUND In this paper , I refer to burglary as deﬁned by the US Fed - eral Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) : “the unlawful entry into a structure to commit a felony or theft , including forcible entry , unlawful entry where no force is used , and attempted forcible entry” [ 16 ] . Though a structure could refer to a house , car , business , school , etc . , this study focuses particularly on the home . I speciﬁcally use the term burglary , not robbery , be - cause robbery refers to the “taking or attempting to take any - thing of value from the care , custody , or control of a person or persons by force or threat of force or violence and / or by putting the victim in fear” [ 16 ] . Thus , the major difference is that during a robbery , the victim is present and is in physical danger ; during a burglary , the victim is not present . Understanding Burglary Understanding burglary , speciﬁcally in the domestic setting , has been a topic of much interest in criminology , urban devel - opment , and economics . Much of the literature on burglary uses quantitative methods to understand the conditions under which burglary is most likely to occur . Chiu and Madden , for example , use statistical modeling to study the effects of in - come distribution on burglary and found that neighborhoods with higher income inequality reported a higher number of burglaries [ 10 ] . Results from Tilly et al . suggest that pro - viding the economically disadvantaged with more technology to secure their homes may decrease burglaries , especially in poorer neighborhoods [ 51 ] . Other statistical models suggest that the design of the urban environment ( e . g . , the homes , streets , alleys ) predicts burglary rates [ 7 ] . These studies at - tempt to predict factors surrounding burglary using quantita - tive data ; however , it is very difﬁcult to determine the exact cause of crime using statistics alone [ 44 ] . Diverging from the literature , this study uses a qualitative approach to examine the topic . I directly ask convicted burglars to describe their ra - tionale for breaking into one home as opposed to another and about their perceptions of various technological deterrents . Protecting the Domestic Space Technologies designed to protect the home can be roughly divided into two different types : reactive and preventive [ 28 , 35 ] . Reactive technologies help the police ﬁnd those respon - sible after a burglary has been committed ; preventive , on the other hand , deters burglars from attempting a break - in . The majority of crime prevention technologies are designed to be reactive ( i . e . , to catch perpetrators after they have en - gaged in criminal activity ) . One of the most common reactive technologies used in the home are security systems . In 2009 , US homeowners spent $ 28 . 2 billion on home security sys - tems [ 40 ] . Although home security systems have been found to be effective in increasing feelings of safety [ 41 ] , no evi - dence suggests that they actually deter or prevent burglaries . Furthermore , security systems are typically designed to alert the police after the home has been burglarized . Though an intruder may be caught because of the home security system , victims are still very much affected by attempted break - ins and may have increased feelings of anxiety , worry , and fear [ 26 ] . Another technology that is frequently used are cameras . Citizens sometimes mount cameras on the inside and outside of their homes . Sometimes the cameras can be remotely ac - cessed by the homeowner or the police using a static IP ad - dress . Like alarm systems , cameras typically assist the police apprehend perpetrators who have already engaged in a crimi - nal act . Even then , cameras can be ineffective if the offender cannot be identiﬁed because of quality , light , or disguises [ 5 ] . Technologies that are considered to be preventive ( i . e . , that effectively deter burglars ) are typically not intentionally de - signed for that purpose . Owners of home and car security systems , for example , will sometimes post signs and stick - ers as evidence that there is a security system present with the hope of deterring burglars . Similarly , cameras are some - times viewed as preventive . Based on crime statistics , Neito’s work suggests that police cameras that are mounted on high crime corners decrease crime , because potential offenders are afraid of being caught [ 29 ] . However , there are other studies that dispute such ﬁndings [ 6 , 15 ] . Though crime prevention technologies are of interest to scholars , no one has examined the degree to which technology affects burglars’ practices . This study addresses this gap by identifying what actually dissuades burglars from breaking into a home . Crime Prevention in HCI There has been increased interest in designing technology to address crime in HCI [ 3 , 12 , 25 , 39 ] . Most of this research focuses on preventing face - to - face crime and increasing feel - ings of safety . For example , Blom et al . created Comfort - Zone , a shared mapping system that allows individuals to tag different locations in a city to indicate areas where they do not feel safe [ 3 ] . Others have created handheld personal de - vices with the purpose of individual safety [ 4 , 39 ] . Wolfer et al . explored how mobile phones can improve safety amongst homeless youth [ 55 ] . This paper differs in that it focuses on non - confrontational crime , which occurs signiﬁcantly more often than confrontational ( i . e . , face - to - face ) crime [ 16 ] but can have similar detrimental effects [ 26 , 42 ] . Furthermore , prior work focuses on the individual as the user as opposed to this study , which focuses on the potential offender . Session : Crime and Conflicts CHI 2013 , Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 2508 Other HCI literature about crime prevention focuses on the police as the user . COPLINK manages crime statistics to im - prove the effectiveness of the police [ 8 ] . Tullio et al . [ 52 ] examined the beneﬁts and challenges of police departments using video surveillance in their policing efforts . Yet , this study differs in that it is the ﬁrst to ask past offenders about their view of crime prevention technology . The objective is to better inform technology design that will proactively pre - vent crime , not reactively assist the police in identifying cul - prits . Furthermore , this paper addresses a gap in the domestic environment literature by regarding physical intrusion of the domestic space as a major violation and by suggesting oppor - tunities to design effective technologies that protect the home . METHODS This work is a part of a three - year study exploring how var - ious communities in a large midwest city in the US use technology to address crime . During this study , I observed community - police meetings in ﬁve neighborhoods that vary in regard to race , socio - economic status , and crime rate . This paper focuses on three of those community - police meetings , where I not only observed but also asked questions during panel sessions with convicted offenders . The panel sessions were co - organized by local community groups and a non - proﬁt organization that aims to reduce recidivism . The panel sessions were open to anyone in the community to attend . Al - though I did not arrange the panel sessions , the organizers , panel participants , and community members who attended were familiar with the study and aware that I was a researcher taking notes . At the time of the ﬁrst panel session , I had been actively working in the communities for six months and was familiar with many of the residents who attended . The panel sessions provided a unique opportunity to engage with former burglars , as it is very difﬁcult for researchers to access those convicted of a crime due to special population restrictions set by Institutional Review Boards ( IRB ) in the US . There were three panel sessions with a total of 16 participants , i . e . , 6 , 6 , and 4 participants , respectively . The panel sessions were held roughly four months apart in different areas of the city . Each panelist participated in only one session . The fol - lowing sections describe the participants , the structure of the panel sessions , and the analysis . Participants Fifteen out of sixteen participants had been convicted of bur - glarizing homes , businesses , and / or automobiles . The re - maining participant was convicted of identity theft ; however , he stated that the personal information used to commit iden - tity theft was obtained from homes and cars that had been burglarized . In this paper , I refer mainly to the 15 partici - pants that had been convicted of burglary . Each participant stated that they had committed at least 30 burglaries prior to being caught . All participants were nearing the end of their sentences , and none had been convicted of a crime in two years . All participants were male , which may be expected since over 84 % of arrested burglary offenders are male [ 17 ] . Thirteen of the sixteen participants were convicted of residential bur - glary , which accurately reﬂects the fact that 74 % of reported burglaries in the US were residential [ 16 ] . Participants’ ages ranged from 20 to 50 . Sentences ranged from 4 up to 21 years . Table 1 provides a full list of the participants’ ages , convic - tions , length of sentences , and how they were caught . Participants had served time in a formal prison facility and were completing the remaining portion of their sentence in a rehabilitation center , which allowed them to work outside of the prison system . Despite their freedom to interact in society , participants remained wards of the state . There were restric - tions on where they were allowed to travel and when they had to return to the rehabilitation center . Since their convictions , the majority of the participants were either taking courses at a community college or in an apprenticeship program where they will receive a trade certiﬁcate upon completion . All had been through or were currently in counseling services for any addictions they may have had . Participants were subject to random drug tests while living at the rehabilitation center . Participants were invited by the non - proﬁt organization that runs the rehabilitation center to attend a meeting , where they would provide suggestions to community residents about how to better protect their homes . Participants were told that they would be asked a series of questions about methods they used to burglarize homes and / or vehicles . Participation was strictly voluntary . Participants were not monetarily compensated , nor did they receive community service hours for their partici - pation . Also , participants were not eligible for sentence re - ductions because of their participation in the panel , and none had cases pending against them . None of the participants were convicted of crimes that involved physical assault . Fur - thermore , most openly stated that they avoided face - to - face crimes ( i . e . , where the victim is present ) for multiple rea - sons including that it is not in their personality to physically hurt anyone , that they did not like confrontation , and that they just wanted to “make money” but face - to - face crime was not worth the risk of a lengthy sentence . Panel Sessions Acting as the panel moderator , an off - duty police sergeant asked participants a list of questions . The sergeant worked with the non - proﬁt that aimed to rehabilitate convicted of - fenders so participants had interacted with the sergeant for at least three months prior to the panel session . The sergeant’s presence was also necessary , because participants were re - quired to be escorted by an ofﬁcer when traveling to a loca - tion other than work or the rehabilitation center . The panel sessions began by participants giving their names , convicted crime , and number of years sentenced . Participants were then asked questions about the methods that they used to conduct burglary . They were asked about the type of neigh - borhood they preferred , whether or not they did surveillance or used disguises , whether they worked in a team , their pre - ferred point of entry , how they searched the home , and an - ticipated completion time . They were then asked if various technologies were deterrents . Participants were asked specif - ically about security systems , cameras , and social networking websites . They were also asked about non - technological pre - Session : Crime and Conflicts CHI 2013 , Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 2509 Participant ID Age Type of Burglary Jail Sentence ( in years ) How They Were Caught P1 30 Vehicular 4 Concerned citizens P2 43 Commercial 6 Selling the stolen items P3 27 Residential 4 Concerned citizens P4 25 Residential / Vehicular 5 From camera footage P5 46 Residential 8 . 5 Concerned citizens P6 41 Residential 6 Concerned citizens P7 26 Residential 4 Concerned citizens P8 35 Residential 6 Police tactical team operation on burglary P9 20 Residential / Commercial 3 Concerned citizens P10 50 Residential 7 . 5 Caught burglarizing a train P11 23 Residential 5 Concerned citizens P12 49 Residential 21 Accomplice gave his name to the police P13 40 Identity Theft 7 Caught driving under the inﬂuence of alcohol ( DUI ) P14 25 Residential 4 Police tactical team operation on burglary P15 28 Residential 8 Concerned citizens P16 40 Residential 6 Concerned citizens Table 1 . This table contains information about each participant including their age , the type of burglary conviction , total jail sentence , and the reason he was caught . ventive measures such as dogs , fences , and special locks on doors . Finally , they were asked to describe their number one deterrent and how they were caught . Participants were not asked to disclose speciﬁc information ( e . g . , names , locations ) about previous crimes they may have committed ; however , all seemed to refer to their previous criminal activity as opposed to what they heard or observed others doing . All participants were given the opportunity to answer each question but could choose to pass if they did not want to answer a question . I asked follow - up questions to clarify responses or to get more details . There were roughly 40 community members present at each panel session . Community residents were allowed to ask additional questions outside of those asked by the sergeant . Residents typically asked the participants more speciﬁc ques - tions about how to protect their homes and garages . Residents also thanked participants for coming and sharing their experi - ences . After each panel session , participants and community members had the opportunity to meet and talk face - to - face . On average , the sessions lasted 1 . 5 hours . Analysis For anonymity and protection of the participants , none of the panel sessions were audio or video recorded . However , I took detailed notes of the questions and responses . As a precau - tion , the notes were inspected once again for anonymity , re - moving all references to city , location of the crime , ( e . g . , spe - ciﬁc neighborhoods ) , and names of accomplices . There were only three instances that required removal of such references . Notes from the panel sessions were analyzed using an in - ductive thematic approach that uses aspects of grounded the - ory [ 49 ] . Each line of each observation was read to iden - tify emerging or repetitive phenomena . During this phase , the notes were iteratively analyzed , and codes were gener - ated and reﬁned . The codes were then grouped into similar concepts . There were 26 codes during the initial phase of analysis that were then grouped into 6 concepts . Examples of codes that emerged are successful deterrents , proﬁts , remorse , and neighborhood characteristics . Examples of concepts are deterrents , motivations , and advice . After no new codes or concepts were derived , the concepts were then grouped into higher - level categories . The overarching theme most prevalent was risk assessment . When asked about deterrents , participants perceived deter - rents as changing their risk of being caught and based on their assessment , they decided whether or not to burglarize a home or vehicle . This is consistent with victimization theory , which suggests that potential offenders assess the risk of be - ing caught , and this in turn , affects whether or not he or she commits a crime [ 24 ] . Therefore , the ﬁndings in this paper describe how deterrents relate to risk assessment . The next section presents stories and quotes that illustrate themes that repeatedly emerged during the panel sessions . The quotes are verbatim , with little alteration except to pro - tect the anonymity of the participants and victims . RESULTS Consistent with prior research [ 24 ] , participants described their views of deterrents relative to risk assessment . Specif - ically , participants described neighborhood cohesion as the most effective deterrent against burglary . They perceived cameras , alarms , and dogs to be low risk . Surprisingly , par - ticipants viewed privacy fences and cats as beneﬁcial ( i . e . , participants thought they decreased the risk of being caught ) . In the following sections , I describe the burglary process and how participants view deterrents as they relate to risk of being caught . The Process of Burglary During the panel sessions , participants were ﬁrst asked to ex - plain how they committed burglaries . They ﬁrst chose the Session : Crime and Conflicts CHI 2013 , Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 2510 ideal neighborhood . Fourteen of the ﬁfteen participants con - victed of burglary said that they preferred quiet neighbor - hoods . P11 said “I liked upscale , quiet suburban neigh - borhoods . ” P14 said that he targeted “suburbs because of the privacy” that he felt he had . Although not all partici - pants preferred the suburbs , there was a general preference for quiet streets and neighborhoods . For others , socio - economic status was most important . P15 , for example , said he pre - ferred , “middle and upper class neighborhoods , ” because he believed that there were at least some valuables at home and that most residents will be away from home ( i . e . , at work ) for a predictable period of time . The only participant who did not prefer quiet neighborhoods was P2 , because he burglar - ized businesses so he targeted industrial districts . Thirteen participants then said that they would observe the neighborhood to select the ideal home to target . Eleven used disguises to move about the neighborhood when doing their surveillance . For example , P5 , who targeted homes , said , “I would just want to go see what people were doing . I would dress up as a service provider for the [ local newspaper ] and would ask people if they would like a subscription for the [ newspaper ] . ” Similarly , P6 , who preferred to break into garages , stated , “I would get up early and shovel snow and rake leaves . I’d be the neighborhood handyman . I would tell people in the neighborhood that I’d like to help out . They would allow me to do it many times . Early in the morning , I’d look in people’s garages and see what they were driving and what was in there to see what I could get . ” Others said they would dress up as electricians , handymen , construction workers , and even a businessman . P15 was the only person to say that he used technology to help him survey the neigh - borhood , saying , “Google Earth was a tool I used because I could see your windows and your neighborhood . ” P15 fo - cused on the windows , because he wanted to ﬁnd a good entry point when breaking into a home . Those who did not use dis - guises said they either did not need to because they ﬁt into the neighborhood or because they would sit in a car to ob - serve the area . In one instance , P11 did not wear a disguise but said , “I’d walk around and pass out ﬂyers that I would pick up at restaurants . ” Only P15 said he used social networking websites to deter - mine if people were home or not . He stated that he would sometimes personally know the potential victims . He would look at their social networking status to determine if they were home , out of town , at work , etc . before proceeding with the burglary . He said , “People will post it publicly that they are leaving out of town . ” He also said he liked when people used applications on their phones that would automatically update their location ( e . g . , home , school , gym ) . Though I did not ask participants about their education level or experience with technology , it was apparent that P15 was very technol - ogy savvy , which was not as evident of other participants . After selecting a home , participants would normally decide if they were going to commit the burglary alone or not . Thir - teen preferred to burglarize alone . Most participants believed that acting alone diminished the risk of being caught . For ex - ample , P1 , who preferred to break into automobiles , said , “I worked alone because I didn’t want to be suspicious . ” This is an example of a participant being cautious of his behavior to avoid being noticed by community residents before or af - ter the burglary . He believed that working with someone else may draw attention to himself and increase his risk of being caught . Others wanted to maximize their proﬁts by working alone . P2 , who preferred to break into businesses , said , “I worked alone because I wanted the money and I didn’t want no one else to get me caught . ” P3 agreed saying , “I worked alone cause I was greedy and wanted the money . ” Those who worked with others said they usually only hired drivers be - cause they did not want to share the proﬁts . Next , they would select a point of entry , which was usu - ally a side door or window . However , P9 said , “I’d just kick in the front door” of a single family home , especially when he was not concerned about witnesses . Participants said they would typically search in the bedrooms ( closets , trunks , safes ) . Also , a few said they would look in the kitchen for checks and pre - approved credit cards . P15’s strategy was more targeted . His search for valuables would depend on the victims , because he would typically burglarize homes of those with whom he was very familiar . He said , “I would learn the family and ﬁgure out where they hide things . ” On average , participants said they would complete the entire bur - glary within 8 minutes . Those who preferred vehicles said they would complete a vehicle burglary in less than two min - utes . After the burglary , everyone said that they would either sell the items on the streets or use a “fenceman , ” a middleman who buys the stolen items “wholesale” from burglars and later sells the items for a higher price . High Risk Deterrents : Neighborhood Cohesion Though they were not speciﬁcally asked about it , participants identiﬁed neighborhood cohesion as the primary factor that deterred them from breaking into a home , business , or auto - mobile . All participants stated that the number one reason why they would not break into a home was “nosey neigh - bors . ” They deﬁned nosey neighbors as neighbors who talk to each other , ask how the participants are doing , or ask if the participants need help because they haven’t seen them be - fore . P14 said that areas with nosey neighbors are areas with “people looking out windows , people on the street talking to each other , people walking by and speaking to each other . ” While these may seem to be simple tasks , participants who did surveillance said that their risk of being caught increases if they can be identiﬁed by a neighbor , which is much more likely to happen if neighbors know each other and talk in - person . P8 , for example , said , “when someone from the com - munity stared at me , ” he left because he felt the neighborhood was not one where he went unnoticed . Similarly , P12 said he didn’t like “active neighborhoods because I wasn’t trying to work too hard . ” This demonstrates how simply looking at or speaking to burglars can dissuade them from proceeding with a burglary . Similarly , others contrasted cohesive neighborhoods with the types of neighborhoods that they preferred . P5 said , “I looked for areas where people didn’t speak or people that were walk - ing would just be on the phone and didn’t talk to each other . Session : Crime and Conflicts CHI 2013 , Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 2511 Everyone is minding their business . ” In this case , the partici - pant describes the type of behavior that he preferred amongst residents in a neighborhood as he was doing surveillance be - fore a burglary . He later said that if neighbors did talk to each other and seem cohesive , he would leave and go to an - other neighborhood . P1 agreed , saying that he preferred areas “where neighbors don’t communicate and don’t call the po - lice . ” These types of communities were targeted not based on what was actually happening but rather what was perceived during surveillance . Though neighbors may communicate online or talk on the phone to each other , that type of commu - nication may not be obvious to burglars who look for face - to - face interactions amongst neighbors . Low Risk Deterrents : Alarms , Cameras , and Dogs Participants overwhelmingly viewed security systems , cam - eras , and dogs as low risk deterrents , meaning that the vast majority of participants said that they would continue to at - tempt a burglary after seeing these types of deterrents . Twelve out of ﬁfteen participants stated that alarm systems would not deter them from breaking into a home , vehicle , or business . Participants cited slow police response times , lack of functionality , and an adrenaline rush as reasons why alarms are not a deterrent . P2 , who preferred to break into businesses , said that alarms were not a problem “in a place of business because the alarm company calls in three min - utes or so but by that time , I’d have many things and then I’m gone . ” P12 , a former residential burglar , said , “I have never intentionally gone into a place with an alarm but I know that they have a 4 to 10 minute response time so I wouldn’t run if it went off . I’d just be quicker . ” P14 agreed saying , “I know I have a couple minutes before the police arrive cause alarm companies have to make two calls . ” Home security systems typically respond to an alarm by ﬁrst calling the homeowner , an emergency contact ( if the homeowner does not answer ) , and then the police . P9 learned how alarms worked from a friend , saying “I had a buddy who worked for [ an alarm com - pany ] that told me how it worked . ” Burglars are aware of the slow response time and can use it to their advantage . Others said they knew that alarms may or may not be con - nected . For example , when asked if he would burglarize a home if he knew it had an alarm , P7 said , “Maybe . [ Alarm company ] signs are out front but that doesn’t mean [ the alarm ] is connected . ” He continues to say that if they are not connected , ‘Whose around [ to hear the alarm ] ? There is typ - ically no one around . I’ve done it many times . ” Similarly , P1 said , “I do cars so they never stop me . I just don’t open the door handles to the cars . ” Most car alarm systems will not sound unless a door is opened ; thus , P1 indicates his knowl - edge of how car alarms operate and how he worked around them . Though a burglar may be aware of a security system , that factor alone may not deter them but instead encourage them . In fact , at least three participants said they preferred homes with alarms , because they liked the “rush . ” P10 said , “I loved it . It was a challenge . ” He also said that at that time in his life he was engaged in substance abuse and that he viewed burglary as another type of “high . ” Only two participants said they were deterred by cameras . The other thirteen participants stated that cameras did not concern them because they believed that most cameras were not constantly monitored , especially police cameras . Al - though a camera played a role in one participant’s capture ( P4 ) , others believed that most cameras did not have a high enough resolution for them to be identiﬁed . P12 was the only one to describe how he disabled cameras , saying “I know how to disable [ cameras ] . I’d spray it and stand on the garbage and go through the window . ” Former burglars generally thought cameras did not increase their risk of being caught , which is consistent with prior work [ 15 ] . Ten of the ﬁfteen participants stated that dogs were not a de - terrent . Most stated that they had methods of “getting rid of” or quieting dogs . P6 , who has a fear of dogs , described the ﬁrst time he unlawfully entered a home with a large dog that seemed threatening saying , “Once I was with my man and he just fed the dog some meat and it was ﬁne . I went the other way while the dog was distracted . ” In this case , P6 was still able to enter the home despite his fear of dogs and after that , he said he used the same tactic in later offenses . Participants also stated that if they were concerned about a particular dog , they would just change their point of entry based on the dog’s position . P5 , who was convicted of res - idential burglary , said , “Dogs in the yard are ﬁne because I can get around them and just go through another way . ” Sim - ilarly P14 stated , “ [ Dogs ] are typically friendly and I know how to outsmart mean dogs . ” The most common reason that the 10 participants were not deterred by dogs was because they believed that most dogs are not trained to protect the home . P15 , for instance , de - clared , “Most dogs aren’t trained to protect the home so I can do what I want . ” P12 said , “I was raised with dogs so its not a problem unless the dog is trained . ” Participants referred to “trained dogs” as those that are professionally trained to pro - tect the domestic space by allowing strangers on the premises but not allowing them to leave until the owner gives the dog permission [ 50 ] . This type of training can be very expensive . The other ﬁve participants who viewed dogs as a deterrent ei - ther burglarized cars or cited that dogs made too much noise . P4 said , “Once I found a dog in the car and that caused all types of problems so yes , [ dogs ] are a problem . ” This par - ticipant reﬂects on a negative experience with a dog when burglarizing a car , which does not have many points of en - try . He later said that the dog’s barking drew attention to him . P16 , who burglarized garages at night , said , “ [ Dogs ] make too much noise . They draw too many nosey neighbors . ” Al - though the physical threat of dogs did not seem to be an issue , the attention drawn by barking dogs was a deterrent for a third of the participants . Again , participants were most concerned with neighbors who may notice something suspicious and call the police . “Beneﬁcial” Deterrents : Privacy Fences and Cats When asked about physical deterrents like fences that home - owners often use for privacy and protection from intrusion , participants identiﬁed fences as beneﬁcial ( i . e . , aiding them in not being caught ) . All participants said that they preferred Session : Crime and Conflicts CHI 2013 , Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 2512 homes with fences , because it provided them with the privacy that they needed to diminish the risk of being caught . P11 said , “I’d rather not do it without a fence because it provides more privacy . ” Participants mentioned that they would easily overcome a fence . “I know how to leap and jump so [ fences ] are not a problem for me” ( P6 ) . P4 mentioned that fences were not a problem “as long as there isn’t barbwire at the top . ” In addition to providing privacy , at least two of the par - ticipants said that fences helped them with dogs who may try to protect the home . P7 said , “I like them because they give me an area to lock the dogs in . ” Participants viewed fences as beneﬁcial , because it helped with privacy and dogs . When asked if there were other things that aided them , two participants mentioned ( while others agreed ) that cats were helpful in ﬁnding out if someone was home . P12 said he would check to see if there was a cat sitting in the window , and if so , he would assume that no one was home . Others agreed with him , stating cat and doggy doors were also help - ful when entering the home , especially those programmed to open when the pet’s collar is near . DISCUSSION Participants overwhelmingly stated that they targeted homes and neighborhoods where they perceived less cohesion amongst residents . Thus , neighborhood cohesion is an ex - tremely effective deterrent to burglary , even more so than crime prevention technologies . But what is the relationship between neighborhood cohesion and citizen activism ? In crime prevention literature , citizen activism is when residents actively seek to improve neighborhood conditions by engag - ing with others and participating in local initiatives [ 38 , 43 ] . Citizen activism can strengthen neighborhood cohesion , de - crease fear of crime amongst residents , and lessen neighbor - hood disorder [ 43 ] . Citizen activism takes various forms in - cluding building personal relationships with neighbors . I ar - gue that technology can help facilitate citizen activism , lead - ing to increased neighborhood cohesion . Traditional HCI research on citizen activism has focused on health [ 30 ] , sustainability [ 14 ] , and social change [ 22 , 32 , 47 ] . This study extends the literature by identifying the im - portance of citizen activism in crime prevention , speciﬁcally to protect the domestic space . The results suggest that bur - glary prevention technology should not only protect a physi - cal area ( e . g . , a house ) , but also facilitate in - person activism . Technology that aims to address local issues should support collective action as opposed to being individualistic in nature . The following sections describe the relationship between digitally - enabled activism and crime prevention and how re - sults from this study translate to designing effective technol - ogy to protect the home . Digitally - Enabled Activism and Crime Prevention There are many instances in which digitally - enabled activism has supported local change by informing , organizing , and mobilizing groups of people who may not otherwise have had an opportunity to participate in such movements [ 22 , 47 ] . In crime prevention , citizen activism typically operates at the lo - cal level , where residents engage in crime prevention strate - gies that will foster change on their block [ 45 , 46 ] . Thus , it is essential that we , as HCI researchers , not only consider tech - nology that supports activism at the higher - level ( e . g . , reduc - ing crime in the city ) , but also at the local level ( e . g . , stopping burglaries on my street ) . Prior work found that community residents appropriated on - line tools to discuss local crime [ 25 ] . Such tools facilitated cohesion and online communication , which may be viewed as digitally - enabled citizen activism about crime . This study suggests that non - users’ perceptions of citizen activism are important for deterring crime . Speciﬁcally , offenders stated that they look for signs of face - to - face communication as op - posed to searching websites to see if neighbors communicate . Thus , online communication , while important , may not pre - vent physical crimes like burglary . This implies that even if a neighborhood is very active online but is perceived to have little in - person interaction , burglars may still target homes in the area . How can we build crime prevention technologies that inﬂuence the perception of citizen activism ? Is the per - ception more important than the actuality of activism ? In the following section , I propose design implications that address these questions . Designing Crime Prevention Tools to Protect The Home Traditional efforts to stop burglary have focused on the phys - ical area of the domestic space . My ﬁndings suggest that technology intended to prevent burglary should enhance in - teraction amongst neighbors and encourage citizen activism . Furthermore , community residents may not realize that their actions ( or inactions ) on the street may inﬂuence whether their neighbor’s home is burglarized . Thus , designing tech - nology that rewards citizen engagement may be beneﬁcial to the neighborhood . Location - aware applications on mobile phones , for example , may encourage prosocial behavior by rewarding citizens with virtual points when they interact with neighbors . This begins to move us away from designing tech - nologies that are limited to the physical area of the home but instead that focus on what occurs outside of the home . Furthermore , designing preventive as opposed to reactive technology is essential . The former proactively deter crim - inal activities while the latter help law enforcement appre - hend offenders after a crime has been committed . It is im - portant to design technologies to prevent burglaries because once there has been a home intrusion , the victim is already emotionally scarred [ 27 , 34 ] . This paper reveals that the ef - fectiveness of deterrents are measured by the increased risk of being caught . Despite cameras , alarms , and other deterrents , burglars viewed face - to - face encounters as the highest risk to being caught . Thus , effective burglary prevention technology should heighten that risk . The following sections describe three implications for design - ing crime prevention technology that can be broadly applied to activist research . I propose designing technology that 1 ) promotes the perception of in - person neighborhood cohesion , 2 ) redeﬁnes neighborhood spaces as places where community collaboration occurs , and 3 ) facilitates collective efﬁcacy . Session : Crime and Conflicts CHI 2013 , Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 2513 Perceptions of Neighborhood Cohesion Findings from this study suggest that perceptions of neigh - borhood cohesion and citizen engagement are important to deterring burglary . Therefore , crime prevention technologies should exhibit cohesiveness in neighborhoods , whether it is actually present or not . More broadly , activist researchers must consider the importance of understanding non - users and any subsequent effects non - users may have on the issue being addressed . Health activist technology , for example , could in - form a city council of a community health initiative and inﬂu - ence their decision to establish a new farmers market that sells fresh fruits and vegetables in a community that does not have access to such foods . Though the members of city council may not be the intended users , the technology could impact their perception of health activism in a particular community and subsequently the community’s access to healthy food . Publics could be used to exhibit local activism and strong social ties amongst neighbors . One major limitation is that publics are typically in one location , making visibility lim - ited . However , publics can be used along with other tech - nologies ( e . g . , mobile phones ) to increase the visibility of local activism . Another caveat concerns the ethics around deception when designing technology that displays positive characteristics of a neighborhood ( that may or may not ex - ist ) . Is it appropriate for technology to be deceptive to beneﬁt the collective ? This leads to another area of future research - technology deception , speciﬁcally in communities . Nonethe - less , the use of outfacing technology that impacts non - users’ perceptions should be explored . Communal Space vs . Collaborative Place Researchers should consider ways that technology can help residents transform communal spaces ( e . g . , streets , parks , cul - de - sacs ) into places where co - production of neighbor - hood change occurs . Theories of space and place should be used to design technology that reconstructs space in neighbor - hoods [ 13 , 20 ] . Furthermore , urban planning can change the social atmosphere of a neighborhood [ 19 ] . Similarly , I rec - ommend designing crime prevention as well as other activist technology that ﬁts into the physical environment such that it supports and facilitates community action and in - person com - munication . For instance , I imagine smartphones that connect neighbors with the same interests ( e . g . , gardening ) and suggest times when they can interact face - to - face ( e . g . , working in the com - munity garden together ) . Technologies that transform space into places where residents gather may strengthen relation - ships amongst neighbors , encourage online and ofﬂine collec - tive action , and facilitate in - person communication in public places . Collective Efﬁcacy Neighborhood cohesion has been linked to trust and collective efﬁcacy as predictors of crime [ 38 ] . It is the linkage of mutual trust and the willingness to intervene for the common good that deﬁnes the neighborhood context of collective efﬁ - cacy . . . [ C ] ollective efﬁcacy of residents is a critical means by which ur - ban neighborhoods inhibit the occurrence of personal violence , without regard to the demographic composition of the population [ 38 ] . Prior literature in health and sustainability encourages scholars to build technologies that not only support collective action , but also encourage people to become advocates of social change [ 14 , 30 ] . Similarly , I argue that crime pre - vention technologies should increase feelings of agency and efﬁcacy , which can decrease crime [ 37 ] . Such technologies may highlight accomplishments by the neighborhood as a collective body and perhaps remind neighbors of others’ willingness to help , which may encourage reciprocity . LIMITATIONS Although this paper provides insight into how burglars view current deterrents , there are limitations . First , this study con - sists of a limited number of participants that was not a random sample of all burglars in the US . I attempt to address this is - sue by including burglars convicted of three different types of burglary ( i . e . , auto , commercial , and residential ) . In to - tal , participants had committed at least 450 burglaries before being caught ; some even stated that they committed two to three burglaries a week without being caught for up to 5 years . With only 12 . 4 % of burglaries solved in 2010 [ 16 ] , it is plau - sible that participants did commit unsolved burglaries without being caught . Another potential limitation is that the data is self - reported , which may or may not be completely accurate . There was no compensation or incentives , so there was little reason for panelists to be deceptive in their responses . Due to the sensitivity of the population , I did not record names or other identifying information ; therefore , it is not possible to corroborate the participants’ responses by examining police reports . Lastly , the fact that I did not recruit the participants may be viewed as a limitation . I did not provide any criteria to the non - proﬁt rehabilitation center , who recruited the partici - pants , and I was informed that anyone convicted of burglary from the rehabilitation center was invited to participate during an open call . FUTURE WORK The results of this study suggest a number of areas for future research . First , this paper introduces the concept of viewing the domestic space as a defensible area that can be protected . There are opportunities to design and build burglary preven - tion technology that seamlessly ﬁts into the domestic environ - ment and that will not interrupt the daily lives of families and residents . Moreover , we should further explore how technol - ogy can compliment or facilitate citizen activism , which my ﬁndings suggest can affect and even prevent crime against personal property . A second area for future work is understanding the extent to which non - users are affected by activist research . This pa - per , for example , focuses on stakeholders that extend beyond the intended users of crime prevention technology ( i . e . , local residents ) and found that non - users’ ( i . e . , offenders ) percep - tions of cohesion and collective action affect burglary . Thus , activist research on other societal issues beyond crime must consider the degree to which perception amongst stakehold - ers outside of the immediate users affects the targeted issue . A third area for future research is methodological . This paper provides an example of how we , as HCI researchers , can ex - Session : Crime and Conflicts CHI 2013 , Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 2514 pand our traditional view of stakeholders and how to pragmat - ically access a vulnerable population . The panel sessions with the community afforded a different type of dialogue to occur between previous offenders and potential victims . After the panel sessions , participants stated that they felt good that they were able to use their expertise to make a positive impact on the communities that they may have hurt . Thus , an impor - tant area for future research is to give voice to non - traditional stakeholders , whose opinions may be marginalized . Lastly , the ﬁndings suggest a broader area for future research . Though this paper adds to the growing HCI literature on crime and safety , there are additional opportunities to exam - ine the communities for which activist technologies are being built , speciﬁcally considering political , social , and economic contexts . As HCI researchers , we should examine why some neighborhoods have less citizen activism and how digitally - enabled activism can positively impact communities that are disproportionately affected by social problems ( e . g . , health , crime ) . CONCLUSION This paper provides insight into how burglars view technolo - gies intended to protect the domestic space . Findings suggest that before breaking into a home , burglars perceive neigh - bor interaction as the highest risk of being caught and avoid homes in such neighborhoods . Technologies designed to pro - tect the home ( e . g . , alarms , cameras ) are viewed as low risk deterrents and sometimes even as motivations to burglarize a home . Crime prevention technologies that enhance per - ceptions of in - person neighborhood cohesion and citizen ac - tivism are more likely to deter burglary . Broader implications for HCI suggest that when designing for citizen activism , it is important to understand the degree to which non - users’ per - ceptions of digitally - enabled activism affect the local issues being addressed . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Thanks to the panel participants and community organiza - tions in the study . I would also like to thank Jennifer Burrell , Ikpeme Erete , Dan A . Lewis , Molly Metzger , and the review - ers for their helpful comments on earlier versions of this pa - per . This work is supported by the NSF Graduate Research Fellowship . REFERENCES 1 . Baillie , L . , and Benyon , D . Place and technology in the home . Computer Supported Coop . Work 17 , 2 - 3 ( Apr . 2008 ) , 227 – 256 . 2 . Bell , G . , and Dourish , P . Back to the shed : Gendered visions of technology and domesticity . Personal Ubiquitous Computing 11 , 5 ( June 2007 ) , 373 – 381 . 3 . Blom , J . , Viswanathan , D . , Spasojevic , M . , Go , J . , Acharya , K . , and Ahonius , R . Fear and the city : role of mobile services in harnessing safety and security in urban use contexts . In Proc . of CHI ( 2010 ) , 1841 – 1850 . 4 . Blythe , M . A . , Wright , P . C . , and Monk , A . F . Little brother : could and should wearable computing technologies be applied to reducing older peoples fear of crime ? Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 8 ( 2004 ) , 402 – 415 . 5 . Bruce , V . Fleeting images of shade : Identifying people caught on video . The Psychologist 11 ( July 1998 ) , 331 – 338 . 6 . Cameron , H . Cctv and ( in ) dividuation . Surveillance & Society 2 , 3 ( 2004 ) , 136 – 144 . 7 . Chang , D . Social crime or spatial crime ? exploring the effects of social , economical , and spatial factors on burglary rates . Environment and Behavior 43 , 1 ( 2011 ) , 26 – 52 . 8 . Chen , H . , Zeng , D . , Atabakhsh , H . , Wyzga , W . , and Schroeder , J . Coplink : Managing law enforcement data and knowledge . Commun . ACM 46 ( 2003 ) , 28 – 34 . 9 . Chetty , M . , Sung , J . - Y . , and Grinter , R . E . How smart homes learn : the evolution of the networked home and household . In Proc . of UbiComp ( 2007 ) , 127 – 144 . 10 . Chiu , W . , and Madden , P . Burglary and income inequality . Journal of Public Economics 69 , 1 ( 1998 ) , 123 – 141 . 11 . Crabtree , A . , Rodden , T . , Hemmings , T . , and Benford , S . Finding a place for ubicomp in the home . In Proc . of Ubicomp ( 2003 ) , 208 – 226 . 12 . Czeskis , A . , Dermendjieva , I . , Yapit , H . , Borning , A . , Friedman , B . , Gill , B . , and Kohno , T . Parenting from the pocket : value tensions and technical directions for secure and private parent - teen mobile safety . In Proc . of SOUPS ( 2010 ) . 13 . Dourish , P . Re - space - ing place : ”place” and ”space” ten years on . In Proc . of CSCW ( 2006 ) , 299 – 308 . 14 . Dourish , P . Hci and environmental sustainability : the politics of design and the design of politics . In Proc . of DIS ( 2010 ) , 1 – 10 . 15 . Erickson , R . Armed robbers and their crimes . Tech . rep . , Athena Research Corp . , 1996 . 16 . Federal Bureau of Investigation . Uniform crime report : Crime in the United States , 2010 - burglary . Tech . rep . , US Dept of Justice , 2011 . 17 . Federal Bureau of Investigation . Uniform crime report : Table 33 . Tech . rep . , US Dept of Justice , 2011 . 18 . Forlizzi , J . , and DiSalvo , C . Service robots in the domestic environment : a study of the roomba vacuum in the home . In Proc . of HRI , ACM ( 2006 ) , 258 – 265 . 19 . Hall , K . , and Porterﬁeld , G . Community by Design : New Urbanism for Suburbs and Small Communities . McGraw - Hill New York , 2001 . 20 . Harrison , S . , and Dourish , P . Re - place - ing space : the roles of place and space in collaborative systems . In Proc . of CSCW ( 1996 ) , 67 – 76 . 21 . Hindus , D . The importance of homes in technology research . In Proc . of CoBuild ( 1999 ) , 199 – 207 . Session : Crime and Conflicts CHI 2013 , Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 2515 22 . Hirsch , T . Communities real and imagined : designing a communication system for zimbabwean activists . In Proc . of C & T ( 2009 ) , 71 – 76 . 23 . Howard , S . , Kjeldskov , J . , and Skov , M . B . Pervasive computing in the domestic space . Personal Ubiquitous Comput . 11 , 5 ( Jun 2007 ) , 329 – 333 . 24 . Lewis , D . A . , and Salem , G . Community crime prevention : An analysis of a developing strategy . Crime & Delinquency 27 , 3 ( 1981 ) , 405 – 421 . 25 . Lewis , S . L . , and Lewis , D . A . Examining technology that supports community policing . In Proc . of CHI , ACM ( 2012 ) , 1371 – 1380 . 26 . Maguire , M . The impact of burglary upon victims . Brit . J . Criminology 20 ( 1980 ) , 261 . 27 . Maguire , M . , and Bennett , T . Burglary in a dwelling : the Offence , the Offender and the Victim . Heinemann London , 1982 . 28 . Manning , P . K . Technology’s ways : Information technology , crime analysis and the rationalizing of policing . Criminology and Criminal Justice 1 , 1 ( 2001 ) , 83 – 103 . 29 . Nieto , M . Public video surveillance : is it an effective crime prevention tool ? Tech . rep . , California Research Bureau , California State Library , 1997 . 30 . Parker , A . , Kantroo , V . , Lee , H . R . , Osornio , M . , Sharma , M . , and Grinter , R . Health promotion as activism : building community capacity to effect social change . In Proc . of CHI ( 2012 ) , 99 – 108 . 31 . Pennartz , P . J . Atmosphere at home : A qualitative approach . Journal of Environmental Psychology 6 , 2 ( 1986 ) , 135 – 153 . 32 . Pirolli , P . , Preece , J . , and Shneiderman , B . Cyberinfrastructure for social action on national priorities . Computer 43 , 11 ( 2010 ) , 20 – 21 . 33 . Relieu , M . , Moustafa , Z . , and La Valle , N . At home with video cameras . Home Cultures 4 , 1 ( 2007 ) , 45 – 68 . 34 . Reppetto , T . Residential Crime . Cambridge Press , 1974 . 35 . Rosenbaum , D . P . Community crime prevention : A review and synthesis of the literature . Justice Quarterly 5 , 3 ( 1988 ) , 323 – 395 . 36 . Rotman , D . , Vieweg , S . , Yardi , S . , Chi , E . , Preece , J . , Shneiderman , B . , Pirolli , P . , and Glaisyer , T . From slacktivism to activism : participatory culture in the age of social media . In Proc . of CHI 2011 EA ( 2011 ) . 37 . Sampson , R . J . Trascending tradition : New directions in community research , chicago style . Criminology 40 , 2 ( 2002 ) , 213 – 230 . 38 . Sampson , R . J . , Raudenbush , S . W . , and Earls , F . Neighborhoods and violent crime : A multilevel study of collective efﬁcacy . Science 277 , 5328 ( 1997 ) , 918 – 924 . 39 . Satchell , C . , and Foth , M . Welcome to the jungle : HCI after dark . In Proc . of CHI EA ( 2011 ) , 753 – 762 . 40 . Scherzer , L . , and Herman , E . 10 things home - security ﬁrms won’t tell you , May 3 2010 . http : / / www . smartmoney . com / spend / real - estate / 10 - things - home - security - firms - wont - tell - you . 41 . Schneier , B . The psychology of security . AFRICACRYPT ( 2008 ) , 50 – 79 . 42 . Shover , N . Burglary . Crime and Justice 14 ( 1991 ) , pp . 73 – 113 . 43 . Skogan , W . Disorder and Decline : Crime and the Spiral of Decay in American Neighborhoods . University of California Press , Berkeley , 1990 . 44 . Skogan , W . Police and Community in Chicago : A Tale of Three Cities . Oxford University Press , 2006 . 45 . Skogan , W . , and Hartnett , S . Community Policing , Chicago style . Oxford University Press , 1997 . 46 . Skogan , W . , and Maxﬁeld , M . Coping with crime : Individual and neighborhood reactions . Sage Publications , 1981 . 47 . Smyth , T . N . , Etherton , J . , and Best , M . L . Moses : exploring new ground in media and post - conﬂict reconciliation . In Proc . of CHI ( 2010 ) , 1059 – 1068 . 48 . Solaimani , S . , Bouwman , H . , and Baken , N . The smart home landscape : A qualitative meta - analysis . In Proc . of the ICOST ( 2011 ) , 192 – 199 . 49 . Strauss , A . , and Corbin , J . Basics of qualitative research : Grounded theory procedures and techniques . Sage Publications , Inc , 1990 . 50 . Tierney , J . For the executive with everything , a $ 230 , 000 dog to protect it . New York Times ( June 11 2011 ) . 51 . Tilley , N . , Tseloni , A . , and Farrell , G . Income disparities of burglary risk . British Journal of Criminology 51 , 2 ( 2011 ) , 296 – 313 . 52 . Tullio , J . , Huang , E . , Wheatley , D . , Zhang , H . , Guerrero , C . , and Tamdoo , A . Experience , adjustment , and engagement : the role of video in law enforcement . In Proc . of the CHI ( 2010 ) , 1505 – 1514 . 53 . Vastenburg , M . H . , Keyson , D . V . , and Ridder , H . Considerate home notiﬁcation systems : a ﬁeld study of acceptability of notiﬁcations in the home . Personal Ubiquitous Comput . 12 , 8 ( Nov . 2008 ) , 555 – 566 . 54 . Waller , I . , and Okihiro , N . Burglary : The victim and the public . Toronto , University of Toronto ( 1978 ) , 82 . 55 . Woelfer , J . P . , Iverson , A . , Hendry , D . G . , Friedman , B . , and Gill , B . T . Improving the safety of homeless young people with mobile phones : values , form and function . In Proc . of the CHI , ACM ( 2011 ) , 1707 – 1716 . Session : Crime and Conflicts CHI 2013 , Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 2516