BudgetMap : Engaging Taxpayers in the Issue - Driven Classiﬁcation of a Government Budget Nam Wook Kim 1 Jonghyuk Jung 2 Eun - Young Ko 2 Songyi Han 2 Chang Won Lee 2 Juho Kim 2 3 Jihee Kim 2 1 Harvard SEAS Cambridge , MA USA 2 KAIST Daejeon , Republic of Korea 3 Stanford University Stanford , CA USA namwkim @ seas . harvard . edu { heretor92 , key44 , blairhan0126 , chiyah , juhokim , jiheekim } @ kaist . ac . kr ABSTRACT Despite recent efforts in opening up government data , de - veloping tools for taxpayers to make sense of extensive and multi - faceted budget data remains an open challenge . In this paper , we present BudgetMap , an issue - driven classiﬁ - cation and navigation interface for the budgets of govern - ment programs . Our novel issue - driven approach can com - plement the traditional budget classiﬁcation system used by government organizations by reﬂecting time - evolving pub - lic interests . BudgetMap elicits the public to tag govern - ment programs with social issues by providing two modes of tagging . User - initiated tagging allows people to volun - tarily search for programs of interest and classify each pro - gram with related social issues , while system - initiated tag - ging guides people through possible matches of issues and programs via microtasks . BudgetMap then facilitates visual exploration of the tagged budget data . Our evaluation shows that participants’ awareness and understanding of budgetary issues increased after using BudgetMap , while they collabo - ratively identiﬁed issue - budget links with quality comparable to expert - generated links . Author Keywords Budget classiﬁcation ; budget navigation ; civic engagement ; social issue ; tagging ; crowdsourcing ; visual interface . ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords H . 5 . m . Information Interfaces and Presentation ( e . g . HCI ) : Miscellaneous INTRODUCTION A government budget is taxpayers’ payment for services yet to be implemented . It is also considered as the single most important policy document of a government [ 19 ] . Accord - ingly , the ability for taxpayers to evaluate how a government spends their money is fundamental to a democracy [ 2 ] . To ensure budget transparency and public trust , many govern - ment administrations nowadays provide the public with data tables or interactive interfaces to understand how their ﬁscal Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita - tion on the ﬁrst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or re - publish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior speciﬁc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . CSCW ’16 , February 27 - March 02 , 2016 , San Francisco , CA , USA Copyright © 2016 ACM . ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 3592 - 8 / 16 / 02 $ 15 . 00 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2818048 . 2820004 resources are allocated . The impact of budget transparency is further ampliﬁed through public participation and collabo - ration [ 18 ] . Traditional participation channels include com - munity scorecards , public expenditure tracking , and partici - patory budgeting [ 13 ] . More recently , online channels such as crowdsourced budget prioritization and digital budgeting have gained popularity . The advantage of using Internet - based technologies is well recognized as they enhance the delivery of quality public services and achieve broad public participation [ 20 ] . Despite numerous efforts for opening up government data , engaging taxpayers to make sense of the extensive and multi - faceted budget data remains an open challenge . The complex - ity arises as the budget is allocated to an immense number of public services and programs , as a result of reﬂecting var - ious interests and tradeoffs in making budgetary decisions . Even though the budget proposals and plans are available on - line in many countries , these existing resources suffer from two main drawbacks : 1 ) they fail to reduce the complexity of the budget in their way of delivery to the general public , and 2 ) their static data format cannot accurately reﬂect public interests that constantly evolve over time . In addition , while taxpayers are capable of understanding complex issues and making informed decisions , government organizations lack suitable tools to leverage the wisdom of the crowd [ 26 , 22 ] . To address these challenges , we present BudgetMap , an issue - driven navigation interface for the budgets of govern - ment programs . It allows navigating a government budget through a lens of social issues , which dynamically reﬂect public interests . To collect the necessary link information be - tween social issues and budget programs , we explore human computation methods that elicit contributions from taxpayers . While domain experts might be able to ﬁnd the links , this ap - proach will not scale to constantly emerging social issues and millions of budget programs in a government . Automatic al - gorithms in a simple form would not work well as they may not be able to capture the nuances of complex social issues . Moreover , public participation can complement domain ex - perts by introducing taxpayers’ perspectives and local knowl - edge . It can also serve as an auditing channel to improve budget transparency . In this work , we turn to taxpayers for a scalable and participatory solution . BudgetMap embeds tagging activities for voluntary users to participate in . To accommodate users with differing levels of motivation for participation , BudgetMap provides two modes of tagging : user - initiated and system - initiated . User - initiated tagging ( UT ) allows people to voluntarily search programs of interest and classify each program according to the related social issues by tagging an issue , while system - initiated tag - ging ( ST ) guides people through possible matches of issues and programs via microtasks . They complement each other in that ST facilitates lightweight exploration of arbitrary ar - eas suggested by the system , while UT allows users to ac - tively explore areas of their interest . We explore these tagging methods in the iterative design and evaluation of BudgetMap . The ﬁrst version supported both UT and ST from a single interface [ 10 ] . We conducted a controlled lab study to see the feasibility of issue - driven classiﬁcation and navigation of a government budget . We found that participants formu - lated issues that span multiple budget categories , identiﬁed issue - program links with high accuracy , and reported im - proved awareness and interest on government budget poli - cies . We also had a live deployment of the ﬁrst version . While overall responses from the public were positive , we also observed that the level of participation was lower than expected , likely due to the complexity of the interface and usability issues . Based on these lessons , we redesigned Bud - getMap , where UT and ST modes are separated for improved discoverability . We particularly focused on simplifying ST to facilitate lightweight contributions . We then conducted an online study to evaluate the new ST interface , where partici - pants were asked to identify at least 150 issue - program links . We found that with ST , participants created issue - budget links with quality comparable to the links by budget experts . More - over , our results suggest that tagging activities inﬂuence their informedness and perspectives on budget operations . BudgetMap presents a crowdsourcing model in which users produce useful information for the system and future users , while the tasks help increase their awareness and interest on task - related issues . While some existing systems [ 29 , 8 ] have shown to provide intrinsic beneﬁts for participation while crowdsourcing information at scale , we contribute a novel application in the largely unexplored domain of government budget navigation . BudgetMap has implications for design - ing systems for civic engagement and other CSCW contexts that attempt to incentivize the crowd with beneﬁts beyond monetary rewards . The contributions of the paper are as follows : • An introduction of issue - driven classiﬁcation and naviga - tion of budget data , which reﬂects trending social issues . • BudgetMap , a system that solicits taxpayers to identify issue - budget links and facilitates visual exploration of the tagged budget data . • Results from evaluation studies showing the feasibility of the issue - driven approach , including high quality issue - budget tags as well as improved budget awareness . RELATED WORK We review previous work on improving government trans - parency , supporting public engagement , and enhancing infor - mation navigation , with a speciﬁc focus on the government budget domain . Improving Budget Transparency With the growing open government movement , it is now com - mon for government organizations to enable public access to internal data on the web . For example , the city of Seoul discloses detailed budgetary information including real - time budget spendings and allocated budgets to every program and service 1 . However , simply opening up more budget infor - mation to the public does not sufﬁce , especially when tax - payers face difﬁculty understanding and using it ( e . g . , legal language , administrative jargon , and hard - to - parse raw data ﬁles ) . For this reason , the public data is often processed and presented in the form of infographics or data visualiza - tions . Often , the efforts to make sense of government data for the public are made outside of public sectors to improve government transparency . For example , OpenSpending 2 is a community - driven project that tracks and visualizes pub - lic ﬁnancial information across the world . Many Bills [ 1 ] combines visualization and machine learning techniques to improve the readability and understandability of legislative documents . Our approach complements existing efforts by adding a familiar social issue dimension to budget data , thus lowering the barrier to understanding such data for taxpayers . Supporting Public Participation Better presentation and participation mechanisms for budget data can empower active input from the public . Recent ad - vances in civic engagement and crowdsourcing have lowered the cost of participation and enabled public collaboration at large scale [ 21 , 16 ] , thereby presenting a new channel through which taxpayers engage with government activities . For ex - ample , BudgetChallenge 3 is a collective prioritization tool that asks taxpayers to make budgetary decisions given a ﬁxed budget , while Buy a Feature 4 turns the budget prioritization into a serious game where people purchase features with lim - ited amounts of money . Factful [ 9 ] is a news reading appli - cation that supports the political discussion of a government budget through crowdsourced fact - checking and contextual budget information . Leveraging public participation at scale to address real - world problems can be found in other public domains as well . Peer - ToPatent attempts to improve the patent examination process by enabling the public to assess claims of pending patent applications 5 . ConsiderIt [ 12 ] supports public deliberation by allowing users to create , share , and adopt pro / con points of ballot measures , while integrating a fact - checking service through a public dialogue [ 11 ] . Similarly , OpinionSpace [ 5 ] provides a platform for collecting , visualizing , and analyzing public opinions on issues and policies . Moreover , many citi - zen science projects such as FoldIt and Test My Brain tackle scientiﬁc research questions in collaboration with the large number of citizen scientists on a web - platform . 6 BudgetMap contributes a novel effort to promote public participation in 1 data . seoul . go . kr 2 www . openspending . org 3 www . budgetchallenge . org 4 www . innovationgames . com 5 www . peertopatent . org 6 See Wiggins and Crowston [ 30 ] for a detailed overview and various types of citizen science projects . addressing real - world problems . In particular , BudgetMap engages taxpayers to classify budget programs by social is - sues of public interest , which makes the budget data more transparent and comprehensible for the public , while increas - ing public awareness and interests in budgetary issues . Enhancing Information Navigation through Metadata Organizing information with metadata is a popular method to help users browse and search information . Social tag - ging refers to collectively categorizing resources in a shared online environment [ 27 ] . Tags help the discovery of rele - vant resources , and the social relationships among taggers are a means of information discovery [ 17 ] . Since social tag - ging is a decentralized task , the vocabulary problem natu - rally arises [ 6 ] , which indicates the variability of word usage among individuals . However , researchers have shown that shared vocabularies emerge from large - scale distributed tag - ging systems [ 7 ] . There are numerous existing systems that use tagging to im - prove information navigation . CommentSpace adds tags and links to assist social data analysis by allowing users to or - ganize new evidence , identify others’ ﬁndings , and synthe - size both [ 31 ] . Crowdy collects summary labels from learn - ers who are watching existing educational videos to improve the learning experience both for themselves and future learn - ers [ 29 ] . Wordle is a text visualization technique often used to visualize tags to give an overview of information space [ 28 ] . Commercial examples include social bookmarking sites such as Delicious 7 and StumbleUpon 8 , or social network sites such as Instagram 9 and Pinterest 10 . While social tagging can al - leviate the problem of the overwhelming amount of govern - ment data , such advantage of tagging is less explored in the public domain [ 23 ] . A notable exception is the use of tags to improve the usability of library catalogues [ 25 ] . Bud - getMap takes a similar approach to traditional tagging sys - tems by supporting community - owned tags , but uniquely fo - cuses on the budget domain and supports user - and system - initiated tagging methods . This process generates domain - speciﬁc tags and social issues , which improve the naviga - tion of government budget information . Tagged and untagged budget areas are then visualized to facilitate further tagging and improve navigation . ISSUE - DRIVEN BUDGET NAVIGATION Our overarching goal in this research is to enhance public awareness of government activities . Speciﬁcally , we focus on helping taxpayers explore the budgets of government pro - grams by leveraging familiar social issues . We introduce the idea of issue - driven navigation , which uses social issues as ﬁlters to navigate complex and multidimensional budget data . In order to generate tags that link issues and budget programs , we engage taxpayers in UT and ST tasks . In these tasks , tax - payers generate useful navigation cues for future taxpayers , while engaging in a meaningful experience themselves . 7 www . delicious . com 8 www . stumbleupon . com 9 www . instagram . com 10 www . pinterest . com The motivation behind the issue - driven approach lies in prob - lems with the existing budget classiﬁcation system [ 4 ] . First , the current classiﬁcation system often fails to reﬂect the rapidly changing economic environment . For instance , in a crisis environment or transitional economic environment , it is important to stabilize the economy through timely and dynamic adjustment in expenditure plans . Second , the rigid - ity of the current classiﬁcation scheme forces budget items into a single category . Such inﬂexibility is a consequence of managerial convenience for the government to easily manage public expenditure . This often results in the difﬁculty of ac - curately evaluating the government’s service performance as mapping budgets to results becomes harder . Finally , the cur - rent classiﬁcation system is not designed with openness and accessibility in mind : it is currently difﬁcult for citizens to understand budget data due to its complex language and ob - scure jargon . To further illuminate the beneﬁts for using “social issues” to navigate government budget programs , we borrow a case of a recent tragic accident in Korea and its impact on the budget . On April 16th , 2014 , the Sewol ferry sank , and 295 people died and 9 people went missing . After the disaster , the public has raised concerns about the government’s safety manage - ment and the budgets allocated to it . Because government programs related to public safety were spread out across vari - ous budget categories , such as transportation , health , accessi - bility , and defense , taxpayers had trouble understanding how their money was spent on public safety . In response , the gov - ernment introduced a new budget accounting layer for public safety . However , it is unsustainable for a government to cre - ate a new accounting scheme whenever there is a new issue to be addressed . Thus , the need arises for a mechanism in which the public can actively participate in helping the budget clas - siﬁcation system to reﬂect time - sensitive social issues . We hypothesize that dynamic issue - driven classiﬁcation by the public will have the following advantages over the ex - isting classiﬁcation system . First , our classiﬁcation uses the language of the general public , therefore making the bud - get more accessible for navigation . Second , our classiﬁca - tion can meet the timely needs and interests of the public because social issues by nature reﬂect the current status of a society . Third , budget classiﬁcation using issues built by taxpayers can serve as constructive feedback for government ofﬁcials in their budget planning and system improvement efforts . Fourth , taxpayers can be better informed of bud - getary issues by engaging in activities related to government data [ 26 ] . However , we do not expect our issue - driven classi - ﬁcation to replace the existing system , but instead supplement it while improving public understanding and awareness . A set of design challenges exist in building issue - driven bud - get navigation . Since we turn to taxpayers for help in iden - tifying issue - program links , a crucial design consideration is motivating them to participate in the tagging tasks . That is , the beneﬁts conferred by engaging in the tagging tasks may not be seen higher than the advantages of the issue - driven navigation itself . In order to draw broad participation , sys - tem design should make the tasks manageable by lay users , ( a ) ( b ) Figure 1 : BudgetMap : ( a ) Overview of the BudgetMap interface . A : Budget category information of Seoul city . B : A list of programs sorted by budget size . C : A list of social issues . ( b ) Issue - driven navigation : When the user selects an issue , relevant budgets and programs are highlighted . On the middle panel , the matching programs are shown at the top . provide multiple ways of participation for users with differ - ent expertise , and , most importantly , incentivize participation through beneﬁts such as increased awareness and enjoyable experience . BUDGET DATA MODEL The budget data model used across this paper relies on two data sources ( budgets and programs ) managed by the City of Seoul 11 . A program is a unit of operating budget and refers to a set of activities or services that meet speciﬁc policy objec - tives of the government . We synthesize them into a single co - herent data model where each entity has a program name , its allocated budget , and hierarchical upper categories to which the program belongs . For example , a disability allowance program belongs to a budget category named ‘disability sup - port’ , and this category in turn belongs to an upper category named ‘social welfare’ . A social issue is a form of tag that may connect to multiple programs . It refers to a social problem or conﬂict raised by a society ranging from local to national issues . A budget pro - gram can be tagged by more than one issue and vice versa , resulting in a many - to - many relationship between issues and programs . We deﬁne three tag types , namely ‘related’ , ‘un - clear’ , and ‘unrelated’ , and keeps track of the number of tags for each type . When calculating the total budget of an issue , we aggregate the budgets of all related programs tagged by the issue . While the same data model is used in two iterations of a system design , they use data from different years—2014 and 2015 , respectively . BUDGETMAP : FIRST DESIGN ITERATION Design and Implementation BudgetMap is a web - based system designed to support issue - driven navigation of a government budget . BudgetMap solic - its issue - program tags from taxpayers via UT and ST methods 11 opengov . seoul . go . kr and cleanplus . seoul . go . kr and facilitates visual exploration of the tagged budget data us - ing social issues as navigation cues . We expect that the two tagging methods complement each other in serving the goal of helping taxpayers understand how budgets are allocated for speciﬁc social issues they care about . An earlier version of this iteration has been previously introduced [ 10 ] , and this section summarizes main system components and describes major design decisions , rationale , and lessons . The interface consists of three panels ( Figure 1 ) : a budget category visualization ( A : treemap ) , a list of programs ( B : bar chart ) , and a list of social issues ( C : list group ) . The left panel displays an overview of the entire budget space , and the selected budget category is used for ﬁltering programs in the bar chart . If no category is selected , all programs are dis - played . On the middle panel , programs are sorted according to their budget size and can be searched by keywords . On the right panel , a summary of the selected program and a list of related issues are shown . If no program is selected , all issues registered in the system are displayed . In UT , the user deliberately tags a budget with an issue . The system provides two ways to create a tag : the user selects a program of interest and then adds an issue to the program ( Figure 1 ( a ) : the light - blue ‘Add Issue’ button on the right panel ) , or the user selects an existing issue ﬁrst and adds a program to the issue by clicking on the program . In the for - mer , if the user adds an issue without selecting a program , then the issue is added to the global issue list without any program attached . To assist with browsing and tagging , pro - grams can be searched with keywords or ﬁltered by a budget category . ST solicits lightweight and structured contributions from users , especially those who may not deliberately search for programs and add tags ( Figure 2 ) . This task is activated when the user selects an issue and clicks the ‘Start a Budget Chal - lenge’ button . A random program is displayed and the user is asked to decide whether the program is related to the selected issue by choosing one of three options : ‘related , ’ ‘unrelated , ’ and ‘unclear . ’ Upon answering a question , a new question is displayed . All users’ collective contributions ( i . e . , the total budget of related programs identiﬁed by the crowd ) as well as individual contributions are displayed . With ST , the user can quickly add tags for the current issue without manually navigating the budget structure . Once budget programs are tagged with issues , the user can navigate the budget space using a speciﬁc issue . All the budget categories and programs related to the selected issue are highlighted , while other elements are grayed out ( Fig - ure 1 ( b ) ) . Evaluation For evaluation , we ran a lab study with UT and ST tasks in BudgetMap . Our goal was to see if our issue - driven and crowdsourced classiﬁcation has advantages over the exist - ing classiﬁcation system . Speciﬁcally , we examined whether participants create issues that span multiple categories , accu - rately identify issue - program links , and develop interest and awareness on government budget programs . Interfaces and Procedures Nineteen participants were recruited from a behavioral study participant pool at a university ( 5 female , 14 male , age mean = 21 . 79 , stdev = 2 . 74 ) . They were assigned to use one of three budget navigation interfaces ( a between - subject de - sign ) : a simple treemap visualization interface of the ex - isting budget classiﬁcation that the city government uses ( Treemap ) ; BudgetMap with only the UT enabled ( UT ) ; and BudgetMap with only the ST enabled ( ST ) . To give participants a concrete objective to explore the gov - ernment budget , we asked them to estimate the total budget related to an assigned issue , the calculation of which would be based on the information they would collect via the given interface 12 . Each interface was paired with one of the three social issues : public safety , childcare support , and welfare support for the disabled . Our research team selected these is - sues based on public interest in Korea as of September 2014 . While new issues can be submitted by users , we ﬁxed issues for the purpose of control experiments and focused on tag - ging budget programs with the given issues . For each issue - interface pair , participants were given seven minutes . In a pre - task survey , each participant was ﬁrst asked to come up with any social issues that they would like to know how much budget is allocated to . We intended to qualitatively un - derstand what type of social issues participants are interested to know in the budget context . In the main task , participants saw the three issues ( i . e . , public safety , childcare support , and welfare support for the disabled ) paired with the interface stimuli . The issue - interface pairs and their orders were coun - terbalanced across participants . A budget estimation task for each issue - interface pair was followed by a post - task survey . 12 Because Treemap did not include detailed budget information in program units , we provided web links to Seoul’s open data web por - tal ( opengov . seoul . go . kr ) so that participants could search through the open data without our interface support . Figure 2 : ST : the user is presented with a randomly chosen program and asked to determine the relationship with the se - lected issue . In a post - task survey , we asked the following self - reported questions in 7 - point Likert scale : Q1 ) whether a participant became more interested in the budget programs related to the given issue when using the given interface , and Q2 ) whether the given interface helped a participant better understand the budget programs related to the given issue . Results In the pre - task survey , 19 participants submitted 82 issues . A researcher in charge of Seoul’s budget data in our research team qualitatively analyzed these issues : 30 of those spanned multiple government - deﬁned categories and 10 of those were identiﬁed as trending social issues . For instance , the budgets related to ‘public safety , ’ ‘support for low - income families , ’ and ‘support for minorities’ spanned over multiple categories , and ‘Sewol ferry accident’ and ‘ ( recently reformed ) welfare support for the elderly’ are some of the examples of the highly debated current issues . This indicates that people think about issues in ways that the current budget classiﬁcation system does not support . To evaluate the quality of issue - program links that partici - pants had identiﬁed , we created an expert reference solution of issue - program links . A researcher in our team and an exter - nal expert who has a work experience in the budget account - ing team at a government organization rated every possible issue - program link for the three issues ( total 9426 links ) as ‘unrelated , ’ ‘weakly related ( a program is not originally in - tended for the issue , but it may have some indirect effect ) , ’ or ‘strongly related ( a program directly aims to solve the prob - lems related to the issue ) . ’ Note that ‘weakly related’ is a su - perset of ‘strongly related’ . Cohen’s κ values between the two raters for each issue were 0 . 63 , 0 . 54 , and 0 . 79 , respectively . Most differences between the raters were caused by how in - clusive the deﬁnition of each issue was . The two raters then constructed the ﬁnal reference solution by resolving their dif - ferences . Tags generated by study participants were evaluated against the reference solution by calculating the proportion of tags matched and the results are shown in 1 ; ‘unclear’ tags are not used in the evaluation . Accuracy Related Unrelated UT ST ST weak strong weak strong weak strong Public Safety 0 . 79 0 . 59 0 . 50 0 . 40 0 . 93 0 . 95 Childcare Support 0 . 73 0 . 61 0 . 77 0 . 68 0 . 99 0 . 996 Welfare Support for Disabled 0 . 91 0 . 89 0 . 77 0 . 77 1 . 00 1 . 00 Table 1 : Tag evaluation results for three issues ( ‘weak’ tags are a superset of ‘strong’ tags ) . Accuracy = ( # of tags that are consistent with the reference solution ) / ( # of total related and unrelated tags ) . As people’s perception of a social issue can vary widely , we expect the ‘related’ links identiﬁed in BudgetMap to reﬂect various interpretations of an issue . We ﬁrst observed that par - ticipants are more likely to ﬁnd a correct ‘unrelated’ issue - program link , as indicated by higher accuracy for ‘unrelated’ than ‘related’ links . Next , the accuracy for ‘weakly related’ links is over 80 % except for ‘public safety . ’ In case of the ‘public safety , ’ we posit that its deﬁnition signiﬁcantly varies across people compared to the other two issues . This high - lights one of the challenges in handling social issues that are perceived at a more abstract level . Finally , there was no sig - niﬁcant difference in accuracy between strongly related and weakly related links . This suggests that participants were able to identify non - obvious and indirect links with similar accuracy to what they did for more direct links . In the post - task survey , participants’ answers were higher in both Q1 ( Treemap : 3 . 16 , UT : 4 . 89 , ST : 4 . 42 ) and Q2 ( TreeMap : 2 . 84 , UT : 5 . 37 , ST : 4 . 32 ) when using UT and ST interfaces than when using Treemap ( p < 0 . 05 for Tukey HSD ) . UT scored higher than ST , although the result of Tukey HSD was not signiﬁcant . Preliminary Live Deployment : Although our lab study pro - vides some evidence for our hypotheses on the issue - driven classiﬁcation and navigation , the crowdsourcing nature of collecting issue - program tags calls for a large - scale deploy - ment . We publicly launched the BudgetMap website in September 2014 and broadly advertised using social media and mailing lists . In the ﬁrst ﬁve days of the deployment , 3 , 441 users visited the website . When we reviewed all the comments on Facebook that linked or shared our website , many appreciated the ability to view and navigate the city’s budget programs , which suggests that presenting budget data in a publicly accessible way can provide value to the public . However , we also discovered challenges in guiding the pub - lic to actively engage in tagging tasks . While 11 , 459 actions were logged ( clicks , search , tagging , and voting ) , only 697 issue - program tags ( identiﬁed as either related or unrelated ) were created using the two tagging methods . The number of tags was even less than that from the controlled experiment with only 19 participants . When we measured the accuracy of the collected tags compared to the reference solution used in the lab experiment , it ranged between 37 % and 65 % de - pending on the issue . Design Lessons L1 : Difﬁculty of motivating taxpayers’ participation A major challenge in our live deployment was to guide the public to participate actively in the tagging tasks . While taxpayers’ reactions to tagging were overall positive , casual users on the web have not participated in the tagging as ac - tively as we initially expected . While it may be a typical issue faced by online communities ( e . g . , tragedy of commons [ 14 ] ) , it may also be due to the inherent difﬁculty of budgetary in - formation or the complexity of the interface . We revisit this problem by redesigning the ST interface with a more simpli - ﬁed workﬂow in the next version . L2 : Need for quality control in the wild There were instances of taxpayers’ subjective and diverse in - terpretations of issues such as whether public safety includes public health issues or childcare support includes the con - struction of a children’s playground . Quality control in our context differs from conventional crowdsourcing tasks in that our tagging tasks are inherently subjective and affected by di - verse interpretations and sociopolitical views . At the same time , we also observed clearly incorrect tags as well . It is clear that there needs to be improved mechanisms to help users avoid unintentional mistakes and manage diverse re - sponses . Another lesson we learned was that there can be a trade - off between lowering the bar for participation and en - suring quality responses . L3 : Need to improve the usability of the interfaces We also observed usability issues based on feedback from live users . First of all , packing too many features in a single in - terface confused users . In particular , the ST interface was hard to discover . Also , a majority of users accessed the site through mobile devices , but the site was not mobile - friendly . These usability issues might have also contributed to the low level of participation . A live interface designed to encourage public participation should focus on providing a simple and usable user experience and making the tagging interface more prominent [ 3 ] . BUDGETMAP + : SECOND DESIGN ITERATION Design and Implementation We designed BudgetMap + ( Figure 3 ) , based on the lessons learned from the ﬁrst iteration . We focused on improving the ST interface as it is a key enabler for lowering the barrier to participation for lay users and for generating issue - program tags at large scale . We separated UT and ST into two individual interfaces for simplicity and better discoverability ( L1 and L3 from the de - sign lessons ) . To better control the quality of issue - program tags , we added a simple quality control mechanism similar to majority voting ( L2 ) . Instead of simply classifying each tag as true when the number of votes for ‘related’ is greater than that of ‘not related’ we maintain a differential thresh - old ( x ) between the former and the latter . For instance , in order for a tag to be considered as ‘related’ , the number of users identiﬁed an issue - program link as ‘related’ needs to be higher than the number of users identiﬁed the same link as ‘unrelated’ by x , and vice versa . We determine the optimal Figure 3 : BudgetMap + : ST and UT are separated into two individual interfaces . ( A ) : The new ST interface in which taxpayers can explore 10 randomly selected budget programs at a time along with their categories for a selected issue shown at the top . ( B ) : A list of social issues . ( C ) : budget category information of Seoul city . ( D ) : A list of programs sorted by budget size . threshold ( x ) value by considering the overall quality of the tags . While this mechanism might address spamming behav - iors and incorrect tags , we recognize that further exploration is needed to design a more advanced mechanism for incorpo - rating diverse perspectives and gaming behaviors to reﬂect a particular political view . We also addressed many usability issues to improve the over - all user experience ( L3 ) . First of all , BudgetMap + is mobile - friendly and uses a responsive layout . To emphasize social issues as navigation cues , they are relocated to the left panel ( Figure 3 - B ) , while a list or programs are relocated to the right panel ( Figure 3 - D ) . UT is further simpliﬁed to help users spot missing programs for a selected issue , when the visualizations highlight uncovered areas from ST . ST is signiﬁcantly redesigned as a separate interface to better serve the idea of minimizing participation efforts . For each is - sue selected , the user can explore 10 randomly selected bud - get programs at a time ( Figure 3 - A ) instead of one by one as in the previous version . The user can load the next 10 pro - grams to explore more . In addition to the amount of collective and individual contributions , we also show the user’s con - tribution ranking versus others and the number of programs tagged by the top user . In the tagging interface , the user can select an issue to redirect to the navigation interface to browse related tags . To explore the feasibility of automatically identifying issue - program links , we implemented an algorithmic solution based on simple keyword matching . We ﬁrst collected online news articles that are relevant to a social issue , by using the issue as a search term in Google News . We then extracted budget - related keywords from the articles by matching each word in an article with a list of keywords in the budget program names . Next , we ranked budget programs against the arti - cle text using tf - idf ( term frequency – inverse document fre - quency ) . We considered the top programs as valid issue - program links . Unfortunately , the quality of the automatic so - lution was very low ( less than 10 % overall ) . The surface - level keyword matching has many limitations . Most importantly , it misses many possible issue - program links that require a nuanced and contextual understanding of both the issue and the program . We do not suggest that automated solutions are not feasible ; that is , it could be improved if more structured features of the budget data were further utilized , such as re - lationships between programs indicated by categories , agen - cies , and departments . However , this simple test suggests that at least for some part of the link discovery process , human judgement would be more effective and appropriate than al - gorithmic discovery . For this reason , we chose to randomly select and present programs to the user in BudgetMap + . Evaluation To evaluate whether BudgetMap + can help taxpayers gener - ate issue - program tags , we conducted an online study . Since UT mostly remained the same , we only evaluated the ST in - terface in BudgetMap + . We publicly released BudgetMap + to allow any interested taxpayers to sign up to participate in the study . Participants Total 104 participants ( 72 female , 32 male , age mean = 25 . 32 , std = 7 . 36 , min = 19 , max = 63 ) who either currently live or have a primary address in the Seoul metropolitan area completed our study . We posted the link to the study website on our research team’s Facebook page , and also ran a Facebook ads campaign for recruitment . We later learned that our study link was shared on one university’s ( in Seoul ) community website and a major information sharing community with 1 . 5M regis - tered users . 36 out of 104 participants reported that they were currently paying taxes to the city , 17 participants have paid taxes to the city before , and the rest haven’t paid any taxes to the city . The low proportion of tax - paying participants is possibly due to the high proportion of college students in our participant pool . We acknowledge that our study participants may not be a representative sample of the city’s actual tax - payers , but everyone in the study was a registered voter who volunteered to participate in the study . ST Tasks and Procedures Each participant ﬁrst completed a pre - task survey to register on our study website . The pre - task survey was designed to measure a participant’s knowledge and opinions on the city’s budget . Participants were then asked to create at least 150 issue - program tags , with a minimum requirement of 50 tags for each of the three social issues that we pre - selected . Upon creating the minimum number of tags , the post - task survey link was activated . The post - task survey asked about partic - ipants’ experience on BudgetMap + and the issue - driven ap - proach . It also included the same set of questions as the pre - task survey and ended with general demographic questions . Participants could freely create more tags and navigate tags by issues using the visual interface after the study . The mean session length including the surveys and the tasks was 87m 8s ( median = 40m 7s ) . Participants could complete the study in multiple sittings by resuming their progress , as the system tracked activities for each user account . Each participant who completed the entire study received a 10 , 000 Korean won ( ∼ $ 9 ) gift card for their participation . We also rewarded the top 10 participants who tagged the most budget programs with additional 20 , 000 Korean wons ( ∼ $ 18 ) . We selected three social issues based on public interest in Ko - rea as of May 2015 : public safety , air pollution , and youth un - employment . Public safety has been one of the most debated social issues since the aforementioned Sewol ferry accident . Air pollution is a recurrent issue in the spring as the den - sity of micro air pollutants tends to increase during the sea - son . Youth unemployment in South Korea has just marked its record high since 1999 , hitting 11 % in February 2015 , which is more than double the general unemployment rate of the country 13 . Budget experts’ qualitative evaluation of BudgetMap + To gain insight into what crowdsourced issue - driven classiﬁ - cation would mean for the government and domain experts , we conducted semi - structured interviews with three budget experts after the experiment . The experts were a govern - ment ofﬁcer who works in the budget planning team at a local government ( with the same state level as Seoul metropolitan government ) ( E1 ) , a former national congressman ( E2 ) , and a government ofﬁcer who is in charge of open government data in the Seoul metropolitan government ( E3 ) . Each inter - view session took about 20 ∼ 30 minutes and the experts had a chance to interact with BudgetMap + , with the tags collected 13 The Korean national statistical ofﬁce : www . index . go . kr / potal / main / EachDtlPageDetail . do ? idx _ cd = 1063 during the experiment loaded . We report the experts’ feed - back on BudgetMap + in the discussion section . Evaluation of crowd - generated tags We compared the issue - program links identiﬁed by crowd - generated tags against a reference solution . First , we gener - ate a crowd solution from crowd - generated tags . An issue - program link is identiﬁed as ‘related’ if the number of ‘re - lated’ tags is more than that of ‘unrelated’ tags by x . To con - struct the reference expert solution , the two raters in the ﬁrst experiment and an additional researcher in our team rated all possible links between the three issues and budget programs in the city’s 2015 budget ( total 12 , 039 links = 4 , 013 programs × 3 issues ) as ‘unrelated’ , ‘weakly related’ , or ‘strongly re - lated’ . Fleiss’ κ values between the three raters for each issue were 0 . 64 , 0 . 74 , and 0 . 62 , respectively . The three raters then constructed the ﬁnal reference solution by resolving their dif - ferences . We acknowledge that our reference solution does not serve as ground truth , due to the subjective nature of issue - budget links . However , the reference solution can be a baseline to evaluate the crowd solution as it has the merit of raters’ manual issue - budget link identiﬁcation with concrete criteria , exhaustive coverage of the budget program space , and multi - step deliberation among the raters to reach consen - sus . For the public safety issue , we were able to consider a gov - ernment solution of issue - program links as the city govern - ment has recently started to provide a list of budget programs that are relevant to the issue to meet the high public interest . Cohen’s κ between the issue - program links provided by the government and the ‘strongly related’ programs in the refer - ence solution was 0 . 63 . Cohen’s κ increases to 0 . 69 when we include ‘weakly related’ links in the reference solution . While both solutions are fairly consistent with each other , they slightly differ in terms of the scope of the deﬁnition of public safety . For example , the government solution includes ‘aid for the Korean war commemoration ceremony’ and ‘civil engineer award’ , whereas they are ‘unrelated’ in the refer - ence solution . In contrast , the reference solution includes pro - grams related to drugs and infectious diseases , while the gov - ernment solution does not . Considering their fair similarity , however , we only use the reference solution in the evaluation . We observed a mean of 730 tags ( std = 1 , 941 , median = 173 , min = 160 , max : 12 , 522 ) per participant . Unlike the ﬁrst exper - iment , we combined both ‘weakly related’ and ‘strongly re - lated’ links in the reference solution when evaluating ‘related’ links in the crowd solution . We present precision , recall , and accuracy results as well as the coverage of the tags for differ - ent thresholds in Figure 4 . Precision indicates how accurate related or unrelated links in the crowd solution are compared to the reference solution , while recall shows how comprehen - sively participants identiﬁed related or unrelated links in the reference solution . Accuracy combines both related and unre - lated links and indicates how accurate total links in the crowd solution are compared to the reference solution . The results show that precision , recall , and accuracy initially increase but tend to drop after a certain threshold value . As shown in Figure 4 ( 4 ) , total links without a threshold cov - Figure 4 : Crowd solution quality for different thresholds : ( 1 ) Accuracy = ( # of programs links identiﬁed in the crowd solution that are consistent with the reference solution ) / ( # of programs links identiﬁed in the crowd solution ) , ( 2 ) Precision = ( # of ‘related ( unrelated ) ’ program links identiﬁed in the crowd solution that are consistent with the reference solution ) / ( # of ‘related ( unre - lated ) ’ program links identiﬁed in the crowd solution ) , ( 3 ) Recall = ( # of ‘related ( unrelated ) ’ program links identiﬁed in the crowd solution ) / ( # of ‘related ( unrelated ) ’ program links in the reference solution ) , and ( 4 ) Coverage = ( # of programs links identiﬁed in the crowd solution ) / ( # of programs ) . ers more than 90 % of entire programs , but are ﬁltered to less than 1 % with the threshold value of 5 . Overall , the quality of results was the best at the threshold value of 3 and is sum - marized in Table 2 . It should be noted that the optimal value may change particularly depending on total number of tags collected ; that is , one can expect that it will increase with a large number of tags . For the issue of public safety , 270 bud - get programs were linked with the threshold value of 3 , out of total 3 , 905 programs reviewed by study participants . The coverage of the tags is 7 % ( 270 out of total 4 , 013 programs ) . For the programs linked as ‘related’ , 72 % of them were matched with those of the reference solution ( precision ) . All the ‘related’ programs in the reference solution were covered by the crowd solution ( recall ) . 14 And 99 % of the ‘unrelated’ programs in the crowd solution were matching with the refer - ence solution ( precision ) . The recall was 74 % . Overall , 84 % of the budget programs in the crowd solution were correctly identiﬁed as either ‘related’ or ‘unrelated’ ( accuracy ) . Note that the accuracy rates were even higher for the other two is - sues . The overall precision of tags went up for all issues with the quality control . We used Cohen’s κ to measure agreement between the crowd solution ( with x = 3 ) and the reference so - lution . The values were 0 . 69 , 0 . 76 , and 0 . 81 for public safety , air pollution , and youth unemployment , respectively , which suggests a substantial level of agreement . Pre - task vs . Post - task Survey Results We analyzed self - reported measures of informedness and opinions in our pre - task and post - task surveys . Because par - ticipants answered the same set of questions in both sur - veys , we looked at changes in participants’ answers to see if their level of informedness and opinions on the city budget 14 Note that we limit our budget space only to the programs that pass the quality control test when we calculate accuracy , precision , and recall , which implies that our budget space changes when we change the threshold value x . This is because ‘true / false’ , ‘positive / negative’ classiﬁcation becomes ambiguous for the programs that cannot pass the quality control test due to the small number of tags obtained . Public Safety Air Pollution Youth Unempl . Total Reviewed 3905 4010 4013 Identiﬁed Links 270 574 1344 Coverage ( % ) 7 14 33 Accuracy ( % ) 84 97 99 R UR R UR R UR Precision ( % ) 72 99 71 99 75 98 Recall ( % ) 99 74 85 98 88 99 Table 2 : Crowd solution evaluation results when threshold x = 3 ( R : ‘related’ , UR : ‘unrelated’ ) . changed , using a two - sided Wilcoxon signed - rank test . We only present a subset of noteworthy questions here . To measure the change in participants’ informedness against Seoul city’s budget , we asked the following questions in 7 - point Likert - scale ( 1 : strongly disagree , 7 : strongly agree ) , and observed their level of informedness signiﬁcantly in - creased after tagging tasks . • “I know in which budget programs Seoul’s tax revenues are spent . ” 2 . 43 → 3 . 02 , ( p < 0 . 01 ) • “I know some budget programs related to public safety . ” 2 . 56 → 3 . 38 , ( p < 0 . 001 ) • “I know some budget programs related to air pollution . ” 2 . 24 → 3 . 29 , ( p < 0 . 001 ) • “I know some budget programs related to youth unemploy - ment . ” 2 . 89 → 3 . 40 , ( p < 0 . 01 ) Comments from participants in the post - task survey also sug - gest increased informedness . For instance , 16 participants mentioned that they had learned that program budget sizes were surprisingly large , 17 participants mentioned that they had learned that the unit of budget programs were very de - tailed , and 13 participants mentioned that they had learned that budget programs are quite diverse . We also examined if participants’ viewpoint on government spending changed after tagging tasks by asking the follow - ing questions in 7 - point Likert - scale ( 1 : strongly disagree , 7 : strongly agree ) . • “Considering overall operations of the city government , I’m willing to pay more tax” 2 . 85 → 3 . 05 , ( p = 0 . 06 ) . • “The city government is executing its budget in the right direction regarding public safety . ” 3 . 02 → 3 . 34 , ( p < 0 . 05 ) . • “The city government is executing its budget in the right direction regarding air pollution . ” 2 . 83 → 3 . 10 , ( p < 0 . 05 ) . • “The city government is executing its budget in the right direction regarding youth unemployment . ” 2 . 75 → 2 . 73 , ( p = 0 . 89 ) . While their perspective improved positively for public safety and air pollution and marginally for overall execution , it did not change for youth unemployment . All scores were on the negative side , however . In summary , participants generated expert - quality tags through ST , showing the capability of non - expert taxpayers in building the issue - driven classiﬁcation of budget programs . While the absolute scores were still low , their informedness of the government budget as well as their opinions on gov - ernment execution regarding public safety , air pollution were notably improved and changed . DISCUSSION We now discuss lessons from our design and study of Bud - getMap + , along with feedback from external experts includ - ing government ofﬁcials . These points might have practical implications for future researchers designing related systems . Beneﬁts of Issue - driven Approach In the post - task survey , 42 of 104 participants appreciated the ability to navigate budgets through the lens of social is - sues in their comments , describing BudgetMap + as more in - teresting and intuitive than the traditional budget classiﬁca - tion system . Participants commented that “Understanding government budget spending through issues would be more effective from a social problem resolution perspective . ”— p026 , and “We encounter social issues in our daily lives . They made it easier for me to evaluate the suitability of bud - get programs”—p045 . Similarly , experts acknowledged that the traditional budget classiﬁcation system can be mislead - ing ( E1 , E2 ) , because it is mainly designed for administra - tive efﬁciency . They also commented that the issue - driven approach would be more intuitive to the general public ( E1 , E3 ) . Twenty four participants said BudgetMap + was engag - ing and helped increase their interests on the government bud - get . A participant commented that “I used to be indifferent about government spending but became more interested after the study . I would like to further know how budgets are al - located in detail . ”—p085 , and an expert ( E2 ) emphasized the potential usefulness of BudgetMap as an educational resource for the public . Encouraging Participation & Collecting Opinions In the initial design phase , we envisioned that issue - driven budget classiﬁcation by taxpayers may serve as constructive feedback for government ofﬁcials , and expected that taxpay - ers become more interested in and better informed of bud - getary issues . In the post - task survey , 14 participants ex - pressed that they identiﬁed budget programs that they found to be useless or wasteful , and 15 said they felt more account - able for the government’s actions after using BudgetMap . One participant commented that “This kind of system can be useful for gathering public opinions and improving gov - ernment transparency and accountability . ”—p002 . An expert ( E1 ) also said that it would be useful to collect public opin - ions about individual programs . Another expert ( E3 ) noted that technological solutions like BudgetMap + may play an educational role for taxpayers who would want to engage in participatory budgeting . Incorporating Diverse Viewpoints of Taxpayers While we evaluated the quality of crowd - generated tags by comparing them against the expert - generated reference solu - tion , it is important to note that there is no ground truth an - swer for issue - program links . That is , low accuracy does not necessarily mean the lack of expertise of taxpayers , but may reﬂect different and yet legitimate viewpoints . A disagree - ment may come from the ambiguity in deﬁning the scope of a social issue , which eight participants mentioned in the post - task survey . Also , we observed that there are at least 10 programs that participants tagged as related to public safety , that are not in the reference solution ( e . g . , ‘remodeling of the Jang - chung sports stadium’ ) . This suggests that taxpayers may be able to contribute diverse , contextual , and localized viewpoints . An expert ( E1 ) noted that government ofﬁcials can have different rationale for developing programs , which may not be obvious or revealed to taxpayers . He also men - tioned that taxpayers are mostly concerned about their neigh - borhood . For future systems , it would be beneﬁcial to have a conﬂict resolution mechanism or additional communication channels . Crowdsourced moderation mechanisms might be another solution that can help reach consensus by encourag - ing citizen - to - citizen discourse . We also plan to incorporate design insights from Lampe et al . , who discuss the design and moderation results of political discussions on an online com - munity site [ 15 ] . Limitations Our study mainly evaluated the feasibility of issue - driven navigation by recruiting online participants to generate issue - program links . The experiment design had several limita - tions . First , participants were not allowed to create new is - sues . The issues we provided were rather broad , national is - sues . Future study is needed to see if narrow , localized is - sues produce different results . Also , while we attempted to simulate a live setting in the experiments , many study partic - ipants were students or non - taxpayers . This may have biased the tagging results . To more accurately reﬂect varying po - litical viewpoints and socio - economic status of taxpayers , an actual live deployment with active taxpayers will be neces - sary . Likewise , study participants were largely drawn from the young adult population who are likely to be more tech - nologically inclined than the general public . It is a funda - mental limitation many Internet - based civic systems face , as the elderly population is underrepresented in online spaces . Further design considerations are necessary to support tech - nologically challenged groups . The ﬁnancial incentives given to our study participants also create some concerns . First of all , the ﬁnancial incentives will become impractical when you want to encourage public par - ticipation at larger scale . In addition , more altruistic motiva - tion can be leveraged in the systems like BudgetMap that aim to create public value . Therefore , we plan to incorporate non - ﬁnancial motivations in the future versions of BudgetMap . First , personalized feedback with comparisons to others’ per - formance can be provided , which has been shown to be an effective motivator [ 24 ] . We also plan to consider combin - ing individual motivations and social motivations [ 14 ] , by ac - knowledging individual progress as well as the social contri - bution . Additionally , we will explore gamiﬁcation designs . In our study , we observed that two top tagging participants were having a close game , who each contributed more than 12 , 000 tags . While further investigation is necessary to more deeply understand taxpayers’ motivation in using our system , we suspect that even the simple leaderboard showing the top contributors’ performance was effective . CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK The open government movement introduces new challenges for the government to help the public make the best use of open data and to present open data in a readily accessible way . This paper explores the idea of classifying and navi - gating government budget programs using social issues , with the goal of leveraging taxpayers in generating issue - program links and increasing their awareness on budgetary issues . We implement this idea with BudgetMap , a web - based tagging and visual interface powered by the budgetary facts of the Seoul metropolitan government . For future work , we plan to explore ways to incorporate di - verse viewpoints of the public and to address the ambiguity in deﬁning the scope of an issue . We also plan to introduce non - ﬁnancial incentives to encourage public participation . In making use of the open data , we plan to expand current bud - get data to span multiple years . This will allow the navigation of budgets by issues over time , enabling analysis of temporal changes in budgets allocated to speciﬁc issues . For general - ization , we will explore other government organizations and other data domains to which the idea of issue - driven navi - gation is applicable . For example , legislative bills , or even the speciﬁc contents within , can be categorized using social issues to reduce the barriers to public understanding . Bud - getMap provides a simple yet powerful model for making open government data more accessible . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This research is supported by the Undergraduate Research Program and High - Risk High - Return Program at KAIST . Nam Wook Kim is partly supported by the Kwanjeong Ed - ucational Foundation . REFERENCES 1 . Yannick Assogba , Irene Ros , Joan DiMicco , and Matt McKeon . 2011 . Many Bills : Engaging Citizens Through Visualizations of Congressional Legislation . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’11 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 433 – 442 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979004 2 . Phineas Baxandall and Benet Magnuson . 2008 . Transparency . gov . 2 . 0 : Using the internet for budget transparency to increase accountability , efﬁciency and taxpayer conﬁdence . Boston : MASSPIRG Educational Fund ( 2008 ) . 3 . Susan L . Bryant , Andrea Forte , and Amy Bruckman . 2005 . Becoming Wikipedian : Transformation of Participation in a Collaborative Online Encyclopedia . In Proceedings of the 2005 International ACM SIGGROUP Conference on Supporting Group Work ( GROUP ’05 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 10 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1099203 . 1099205 4 . Jack Diamond . 2006 . Budget system reform in emerging economies : the challenges and the reform agenda . Technical Report . IMF . 5 . Siamak Faridani , Ephrat Bitton , Kimiko Ryokai , and Ken Goldberg . 2010 . Opinion Space : A Scalable Tool for Browsing Online Comments . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’10 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1175 – 1184 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1753326 . 1753502 6 . G . W . Furnas , T . K . Landauer , L . M . Gomez , and S . T . Dumais . 1987 . The Vocabulary Problem in Human - system Communication . Commun . ACM 30 , 11 ( Nov . 1987 ) , 964 – 971 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 32206 . 32212 7 . Harry Halpin , Valentin Robu , and Hana Shepherd . 2007 . The Complex Dynamics of Collaborative Tagging . In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on World Wide Web ( WWW ’07 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 211 – 220 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1242572 . 1242602 8 . Kurtis Heimerl , Brian Gawalt , Kuang Chen , Tapan Parikh , and Bj¨orn Hartmann . 2012 . CommunitySourcing : Engaging Local Crowds to Perform Expert Work via Physical Kiosks . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1539 – 1548 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2208619 9 . Juho Kim , Eun - Young Ko , Jonghyuk Jung , Chang Won Lee , Nam Wook Kim , and Jihee Kim . 2015a . Factful : Engaging Taxpayers in the Public Discussion of a Government Budget . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2843 – 2852 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702352 10 . Nam Wook Kim , Chang Won Lee , Jonghyuk Jung , Eun - Young Ko , Juho Kim , and Jihee Kim . 2015b . BudgetMap : Issue - Driven Navigation for a Government Budget . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1097 – 1102 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702613 . 2732932 11 . Travis Kriplean , Caitlin Bonnar , Alan Borning , Bo Kinney , and Brian Gill . 2014 . Integrating On - demand Fact - checking with Public Dialogue . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1188 – 1199 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2531602 . 2531677 12 . Travis Kriplean , Jonathan Morgan , Deen Freelon , Alan Borning , and Lance Bennett . 2012 . Supporting Reﬂective Public Thought with Considerit . In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ’12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 265 – 274 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2145204 . 2145249 13 . Renee Kuriyan , Savita Bailur , Bjorn - Soren Gigler , Kyung Ryul Park , and Ashnah Kalemera . 2011 . Technologies for Transparency and Accountability : Implications for ICT Policy and Recommendations . The World Bank . 14 . Cliff Lampe , Rick Wash , Alcides Velasquez , and Elif Ozkaya . 2010 . Motivations to Participate in Online Communities . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’10 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1927 – 1936 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1753326 . 1753616 15 . Cliff Lampe , Paul Zube , Jusil Lee , Chul Hyun Park , and Erik Johnston . 2014 . Crowdsourcing civility : A natural experiment examining the effects of distributed moderation in online forums . Government Information Quarterly 31 , 2 ( 2014 ) , 317 – 326 . 16 . Daniel Lathrop and Laurel Ruma . 2010 . Open government : Collaboration , transparency , and participation in practice . O’Reilly Media . 17 . Cameron Marlow , Mor Naaman , Danah Boyd , and Marc Davis . 2006 . Position paper , tagging , taxonomy , ﬂickr , article , toread . In Collaborative Web Tagging Workshop at WWW’06 . 18 . Rosemary McGee and John Gaventa . 2010 . Review of impact and effectiveness of transparency and accountability initiatives . Institute of Development Studies ( 2010 ) . 19 . OECD . 2002 . OECD Best Practices for Budget Transparency . OECD Journal on Budgeting ( 2002 ) . 20 . United Nations . Department of Economic . 2014 . United Nations e - Government Survey . ( 2014 ) . 21 . Tiago Peixoto . 2009 . Beyond Theory : e - Participatory Budgeting and its Promises for eParticipation . European Journal of ePractice 7 ( 2009 ) , 55 – 63 . 22 . Suzanne J Piotrowski and Gregg G Van Ryzin . 2007 . Citizen attitudes toward transparency in local government . The American Review of Public Administration 37 , 3 ( 2007 ) , 306 – 323 . 23 . Christopher G Reddick . 2010 . Citizens and E - Government : Evaluating Policy and Management . IGI Global . 24 . Katharina Reinecke and Krzysztof Z . Gajos . 2015 . LabintheWild : Conducting Large - Scale Online Experiments With Uncompensated Samples . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ’15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1364 – 1378 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2675133 . 2675246 25 . Louise F Spiteri . 2013 . The structure and form of folksonomy tags : The road to the public library catalog . Information technology and libraries 26 , 3 ( 2013 ) , 13 – 25 . 26 . Susan Tanaka . 2007 . Engaging the Public in National Budgeting : A Non - Governmental Perspective . OECD Journal on Budgeting 7 , 2 ( 2007 ) , 139 . 27 . Jennifer Trant . 2009 . Studying social tagging and folksonomy : A review and framework . Journal of Digital Information 10 , 1 ( 2009 ) . 28 . Fernanda B . Viegas , Martin Wattenberg , and Jonathan Feinberg . 2009 . Participatory Visualization with Wordle . IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 15 , 6 ( Nov . 2009 ) , 1137 – 1144 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2009 . 171 29 . Sarah Weir , Juho Kim , Krzysztof Z . Gajos , and Robert C . Miller . 2015 . Learnersourcing Subgoal Labels for How - to Videos . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ’15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 405 – 416 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2675133 . 2675219 30 . Andrea Wiggins and Kevin Crowston . 2011 . From Conservation to Crowdsourcing : A Typology of Citizen Science . In Proceedings of the 2011 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS ’11 ) . IEEE Computer Society , Washington , DC , USA , 1 – 10 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1109 / HICSS . 2011 . 207 31 . Wesley Willett , Jeffrey Heer , Joseph Hellerstein , and Maneesh Agrawala . 2011 . CommentSpace : Structured Support for Collaborative Visual Analysis . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’11 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 3131 – 3140 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979407