Leveraging Partner’s Insights for Distributed Collaborative Sensemaking Abstract SAVANT is a web - based tool that enables information and knowledge sharing between remote partners through explicit and implicit communication to help them collaboratively analyze and make sense of dis - tributed data . SAVANT’s implicit sharing provides an opportunity to leverage partners’ insights and reduce cognitive tunneling , and explicit sharing facilitates dis - cussion . Both techniques assist collaborative sensemak - ing processes . Author Keywords Sensemaking ; analytics ; collaborative analysis ; implicit sharing ACM Classification Keywords H5 . 2 . User interfaces , H . 5 . m . Miscellaneous General Terms Design , experimentation , human factors Introduction Successful distributed collaborative sensemaking re - quires partners to forage information [ 4 ] , share knowledge , consider multiple alternatives [ 1 ] , and reach common ground . However , collaborators often do not have access to the same datasets , hindering the process and outcomes of collaborative sensemaking . Copyright is held by the author / owner ( s ) . CSCW ’13 Companion , Feb . 23 – 27 , 2013 , San Antonio , Texas , USA . ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 1332 - 2 / 13 / 02 . Nitesh Goyal Cornell University Ithaca , NY 14850 ngoyal @ cs . cornell . edu Gilly Leshed Cornell University Ithaca , NY 14850 gl87 @ cornell . edu Susan R . Fussell Cornell University Ithaca , NY 14850 sfussell @ cornell . edu Figure 1 . SAVANT set up as a collaborative crime analytics tool spanning two screens : Document Space ( left ) that includes data about crime cases and Analysis Space ( right ) for organizing notes and communicating implicitly and explicitly for collaborative sensemaking . The Document Space and the Analysis Space are enlarged in Figure 2 and Figure 3 . SAVANT overcomes this difficulty by creating a space for collaborators to explicitly and implicitly share knowledge , information , and insights into data that would otherwise be hidden / inaccessible to their part - ners . System Design SAVANT has been designed based on existing research ( [ 1 ] , [ 2 ] , [ 3 ] , [ 4 ] ) and input from pilot - testing of the tool with university students . SAVANT consists of two spac - es ( spanning two screens , Figure 1 ) : Document Space and Analysis Space . While SAVANT’s modular imple - mentation makes its components easily replaceable with other modules , the current version of SAVANT has data and modules laid out for investigative and crime analysts . The current data used for testing SAVANT consists of crime - reports and cases . The Document Space ( Figure 2 ) is the space to access private data and view it . It provides a directory to lo - cate the data ; a multi - tabbed view of this data in the form of documents ; a visualization to observe and ana - lyze the entity - based connections between the docu - ments ; a map to give geo - spatial location of the data entities ; and a timeline to understand temporal pat - terns . The Document Space also allows in - situ annota - tions of the data . Our ongoing work shows the strengths and weaknesses of the different elements of the Document Space for the sensemaking process [ 2 ] . The Analysis Space ( Figure 3 ) is where the analyst may choose to externalize and reflect upon findings and in - formation extracted from the data . The Analysis Space is connected to the Document Space through annota - tions made in the latter – by selecting data ( e . g . , text or figures ) in documents , locations on the map , and events in the timeline . These annotations , made in the Document Space , appear automatically as digital post - it notes in the Analysis Space . As such , post - it notes pro - vide new ways to archive knowledge , construct hypoth - eses about the data , and preserve links to the docu - ments , map locations , and events in Document Space . The Analysis Space also supports creating new annota - tions in the form of digital notes without being connect - ed to the Document Space . To support knowledge sharing in a collaborative analy - sis task , SAVANT shares the digital post - it notes posted Figure 2 . Left screen of SAVANT includes the Document Space with a directory to locate the data ; a multi - tabbed view of this data in the form of documents ; a visualization to observe and analyze the entity - based connections between the documents ; a map to give geo - spatial location of the data entities ; and a timeline to understand temporal patterns . on the Analysis Space to create a virtually shared wall . That is , every post - it note created by one analyst can be seen by their partners on their Analysis Space . The - se notes are color - coded by creator , so that collabora - tors know who created each note . Because annotations are created and organized primarily for personal pur - poses of analysis or sensemaking and not for sharing purposes [ 3 ] , we call this form of sharing implicit . At the same time , we provide an explicit way to share in - formation among collaborators through direct commu - nication in a built - in chat that is part of the Analysis Space . The Analysis Space fosters collaborative analysis and sensemaking by supporting inferential hypothesis gen - eration in two ways : 1 ) users can draw connections between post - it notes via directed lines to create a sto - ry , and 2 ) they can visually organize notes in different ways in the Analysis Space ( similar to card sorting or affinity diagrams ) . Hence , in a collaborative situation , one user may choose to create connections between one’s notes and their partner’s notes ( shown in Figure 3 as lines between yellow and orange notes ) . The auto - matic sharing of post - it notes therefore serves to im - plicitly deliver peripheral artifacts between collabora - tors . SAVANT supports the iterative foraging loop [ 4 ] by making partners’ insights available for active gathering / filtering over passively shared post - it notes . SAVANT indirectly supports the sensemaking loop for alternative hypothesis generation [ 1 ] by facilitating user - generated connections or piles of post - it notes that explain and interpret the data . Additionally , while the original data may still follow privacy policies ( collaborators may not have access to shared databases due to organizational constraints and policies ) , SAVANT still enables implicit sharing and knowledge synthesis . SAVANT was tested with 34 pairs of university students acting as analysts to understand the effects of implicit sharing in a collaborative crime analysis scenario . Using a hidden - profile paradigm , each remotely connected collaborator received half of the documents required to solve a crime detection task and used SAVANT for one hour together to find a common pattern . Initial results show that implicit sharing benefitted collaborative sensemaking . SAVANT’s modules may also be general - ized beyond crime analysis into tools for collaborative Figure 3 . Right screen of SAVANT includes the Analysis Space , in which the analyst can create digital post - it notes , organize them in the space , and connect to other post - it notes through directed lines . Post - it notes are color coded by the collaborator who generated them – here orange and yellow . The bottom - left of the Analysis Space is a chat for direct communication among collaborators . learning by students in education or scholarly research . Further design directions are being considered . References [ 1 ] Convertino , G . , Billman , D . , & et al ( 2008 ) . The CACHE study : Group effects in computer - supported collaborative analysis . Proc . CSCW ‘08 , 353 - 393 . [ 2 ] Goyal , N . , Leshed , G . , & Fussell , S . F . ( Forthcom - ing ) . Effects of visualization and note - taking on sense - making and analysis . To appear in CHI ’13 . [ 3 ] Kang , R . , & Kiesler , S . ( 2012 ) . Do collaborators ' annotations help or hurt asynchronous analysis ? EA CSCW ‘12 . [ 4 ] Pirolli , P . , & Card , S . ( 1999 ) . Information foraging . Psychology Review , 106 , 643 – 675 . [ 5 ] Nobarany , S . , Haraty , M . , & et al ( 2012 ) . Facilitat - ing the reuse process in distributed collaboration : a distributed cognition approach . Proc . CSCW ' 12 , 1223 - 1232 . [ 6 ] Starr R . , Hiltz , P . , & et al ( 2011 ) . Introduction : So - cial media and collaborative systems for crisis man - agement . ACM ToCHI . 18 , 4 .