Mechanical feedback between membrane tension and dynamics Nils C . Gauthier 1 , Thomas A . Masters 1 and Michael P . Sheetz 1 , 2 1 Mechanobiology Institute , National University of Singapore , 5A Engineering Drive 1 , Singapore 117411 2 Department of Biological Sciences , Columbia University , New York , NY 10027 , USA The plasma membrane represents a physical inelastic barrier with a given area that adheres to the underlying cytoskeleton . The tension in the membrane physically affects cell functions and recent studies have highlighted that this physical signal orchestrates complex aspects of trafﬁcking and motility . Despite its undeniable impor - tance , little is known about the mechanisms by which membrane tension regulates cell functions or stimulates signals . The maintenance of membrane tension is also a matter of debate , particularly the nature of the mem - brane reservoir and trafﬁcking pathways that buffer tension . In this review we discuss the importance of membrane area and of tension as a master integrator of cell functions , particularly for membrane trafﬁc . Membrane tension and area In the past , we have discussed the role that tension in the plasma membrane of animal cells plays in the mechanical functions of cell motility , endocytosis , and membrane resealing [ 1 – 3 ] . It appears that tension acts as a break on the rate of those functions and coordinates them at the whole - cell level . Because of the large surface area to vol - ume ratio of most mammalian cells , the tension seems to be primarily set by the adhesion between the membrane and the cytoskeleton . A recent review [ 4 ] highlighted the inte - grating role of the plasma membrane in cell motility , particularly focusing on the dynamic interplay and the feedback between the biochemical and biophysical char - acteristics of the membrane . Recent studies have also highlighted the importance of tension in controlling com - plex transitions in cell motility [ 5 ] , polarization [ 6 ] , shape maintenance [ 7 ] , and overall membrane area [ 5 , 8 ] . Although the concept of membrane tension ( see Glossary ) has been extensively explained previously [ 1 – 3 ] , it is important to remember some basic principles ( Box 1 ) . Membrane tension is deﬁned by two main compo - nents . The ﬁrst is the in - plane tension in the lipid bilayer , mainly due to hydrostatic pressure . The second is mem - brane – cytoskeleton adhesion , mediated by phospholipid - binding proteins , which can be linked downstream to actin cytoskeleton remodeling through polymerization or con - traction . However , the relative magnitude of each contri - bution depends on cell state and remains unclear , because they are interdependent ; for example , actin polymerization pushing the membrane outward will clearly increase the in - plane term [ 5 , 6 ] . Experimentally , membrane tension is determined from the force required to maintain a small membrane tube , or tether , extracted from the cell plasma membrane . Usually , tethers are pulled with an optically trapped bead [ 9 ] . The force extracted from the bead displacement from equilibrium depends on both in - plane tension and cyto - skeleton adhesion components . As opposed to pure lipid vesicles devoid of cytoskeleton , in most mammalian cells the positive intracellular pressure is balanced by the strength of the adhesion between the membrane and the cytoskeleton . The typical tensions that have been mea - sured ( proportional to the square of the force required to pull the tether ) range from 0 . 01 to 0 . 04 mN / m . When membrane – cytoskeleton adhesion is reduced – for example , by the loss of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 , actin depolymerization , ERM protein depletion , or the loss of myosin 1B – the membrane balloons out in a bleb . In blebbing regions the tension that arises purely from hydrostatic pressure is typically fourfold lower [ 10 ] . Thus , the adhesion between the membrane and the cytoskeleton is a major determinant of membrane tension and is what causes the membrane to conform to the surface of the cytoskeleton . The range of membrane tensions observed for mamma - lian cells is much lower than the forces needed to open bacterial stretch channels ( 2 – 10 mN / m ) or lyse membrane ( 10 mN / m ) . This indicates that mammalian cells must employ sensitive membrane remodeling mechanisms to buffer tension changes that operate in this smaller range . For instance , mammal - speciﬁc stretch - activated channels have been described but still seem to operate at a higher tension threshold [ 11 ] . Review Glossary Caveolae : protein - driven plasma membrane invaginations ( of 60 – 80 nm diameter ) enriched in cholesterol , sphingolipids , and caveolin protein oligo - mers . Cortical tension : the tension borne by the actin cortex beneath the plasma membrane . In - plane tension : the component of membrane tension due to osmotic pressure differences across the plasma membrane . Membrane – cytoskeleton adhesion : the component of membrane tension due to the multitude of weak binding interactions between cytoskeletal compo - nents and membrane phospholipids . Keeps the membrane tightly adhered to the surface of the cytoskeleton . Membrane tension : the apparent tension in the membrane containing contributions from membrane – cytoskeleton adhesion and osmotic pressure . Corresponding author : Gauthier , N . C . ( mbinclg @ nus . edu . sg ) . Keywords : membrane dynamics ; CLIC ; GEEC ; cell migration ; endocytosis ; exocytosis . 0962 - 8924 / $ – see front matter (cid:2) 2012 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tcb . 2012 . 07 . 005 Trends in Cell Biology , October 2012 , Vol . 22 , No . 10 527 Membrane tension and membrane area are intimately related . The cell controls membrane tension by modulation of membrane area and cytoskeletal attachment . Mem - brane area is ﬁrst dependent on overall cell shape and particularly the presence of membrane superstructures , either supported ( e . g . , rufﬂes ) or unsupported ( e . g . , early forming blebs ) by the underlying cytoskeleton . Mem - brane area is also regulated by membrane trafﬁcking , with exocytosis and endocytosis expanding or reducing the surface , respectively . Thus membrane remodeling and trafﬁcking emerge as key players in controlling cell shape and migration . Although hundreds of proteins and lipids have been shown to move in and out of the plasma membrane during motility or shape changes , it is only recently that membrane area as a simple physical pa - rameter has re - emerged [ 12 ] as a critical factor in cell function . In this review , we focus on the regulation of membrane area and tension , particularly highlighting the nature of the membrane ‘buffer’ or ‘reservoirs’ and the membrane trafﬁcking pathways implicated . We also discuss how an endocytic recycling pathway , deﬁned as a non - clathrin , non - caveolar pathway , emerges as the ‘de - fault’ pathway for the cell to rapidly and efﬁciently retrieve and recycle membrane area directly under the control of membrane tension . Plasma membrane area and plasma membrane reservoir As cells change shape , the plasma membrane has to adapt to the new shape and the membrane area must be redis - tributed accordingly . This redistribution comes primarily from the readily available membrane reservoir , or buffer , present at the surface of the cell in the form of membrane superstructures [ 5 , 13 , 14 ] . Membrane folds During rapid shape changes , the total plasma membrane area of the cell may remain constant , but membrane will redistribute toward protruding regions . This phenomenon is very clear during cell spreading [ 5 ] ( Figures 1a and 2 ) or phagocytosis [ 15 ] . Membrane area requirements are pro - vided through the depletion of existing reservoirs at the surface in the form of large folds ( several micrometers and visualized by impermeable membrane dyes ) without addi - tion of membrane through exocytosis [ 5 ] . This type of reservoir , although still not well deﬁned , is morphological - ly similar to microvilli , ﬁlipodia , or membrane rufﬂes ( Figure 1a , b ) [ 5 ] , which are supported by the actin cyto - skeleton . Why the actin cytoskeleton under those reser - voirs will disassemble whereas the actin in the protruding parts of the cell pushes the membrane forward with almost Box 1 . Tension or tension Cortical tension , the tension state of the cell , membrane tension . . . Research articles often refer to tension , but it is not always clear which particular tension is really relevant , particularly with experi - mental approaches that record parameters in which several types of cell - mediated tension could be involved ( e . g . , atomic force micro - scopy , optical or magnetic tweezers , force sensing devices like arrays of micro - pillars ) . In addition to membrane tension ( black arrows , Figure I ) , in the scope of this review , some tension concepts need to be defined and interconnections outlined , particularly the notion of cortical tension and the tension that the cell is able to exert on the extracellular environment . Cortical tension ( Figure I , red arrows ) is mainly due to the actin cytoskeleton attached to the plasma membrane at the cell cortex . This actin cytoskeleton can either contract or relax . These fluctuations in contractility depend on the amount of crosslinking proteins in the meshwork ( filamin , a - actinin ) and rely on the balance between actin polymerization rates and the activities of motor proteins such as myosin . However , the cortical cytoskeleton is only ( directly or indirectly ) attached to cell elements ( mainly the plasma membrane ) and not to an external substrate . As such , cortical tension has a huge influence on membrane tension . If the cytoskeleton contracts inward ( i . e . , toward the cell center ) , cortical tension rises . Assuming cell shape and volume are maintained , membrane tension will spike and ultimately will be balanced by local membrane detachment from the cytoskeleton , inducing blebbing . By contrast , the cell is able to remodel its extracellular environment by attaching and exerting tension on it . The actin cytoskeleton machinery is also responsible for this type of tension ( Figure I , blue arrows ) . As opposed to cortical tension , the tension is here directed against the substrate and modulates only weakly membrane or cortical tension , particularly when attachments to the substrate are strong and very mature ( focal adhesion with large and strong stress fibers ) . The balance between these two types of cell - mediated tension is well illustrated during mitosis ( Figure I ) . When cells round up during mitosis , as tension onto the substrate weakens [ 57 ] , cells use cortical tension as a feedback loop to control shape and divide properly [ 56 ] . Accordingly , membrane tension is higher in mitosis than in interphase [ 13 ] . Mitosis Interphase Cell rounding Cor(cid:2)cal tension Tension on the substrate Membrane tension Key : Ac(cid:2)n cytoskeleton Adhesions TRENDS in Cell Biology Figure I . Cell - mediated tension during transition from interphase to mitosis . Review Trends in Cell Biology October 2012 , Vol . 22 , No . 10 528 Ruﬄe Microvillispikeﬁlopodia Wrinkles Bleb Caveolea Vacuole - like Dilata(cid:2)on ( VLDs ) P l a s m a m e m b r a n e Ongoing endocy(cid:2)c pathways ( CLIC - GEEC ) ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( d ) ( e ) ( f ) ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( e ) ( d ) ( f ) EXT INT 226 sec 267 sec 307 sec 410 sec Endogenous GRAF1 HeLa HeLa Endogenous GRAF1 5 min Dil Dextran5min 5 µ m A C G B 5 µ m TRENDS in Cell Biology Figure 1 . Plasma membrane area and plasma membrane reservoir . Schematic representation and experimental observations of plasma membrane superstructures regulating membrane area and tension . ( a ) Microvilli and spikes , as observed during rapid cell spreading [ 5 ] . ( b ) Membrane ruffles : flat sheets of membrane sustained by the cytoskeleton with high surface to volume ratio . Scanning electron micrographs of a fibroblast stimulated with growth factors . The cell harbores large ruffles . Reproduced , with permission , from [ 58 ] . ( c ) Membrane blebs , as observed in dying cells or amoeboid migration . This confocal image shows myosin ( green ) recruited to foci at membrane blebs ( red ) . Reproduced , with permission , from [ 59 ] . ( d ) Vacuole - like dilatations , as observed forming on the basal membrane of spreading cells after isotonic stimulation following hypotonic stretch [ 5 ] . ( e ) Caveolae , as observed on thin section and rapid - freeze , deep - etch views of a fibroblast . Reproduced , with permission , from [ 60 ] . ( f ) The clathrin - independent carrier ( CLIC ) and glycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchored protein enriched in early endosomal compartments ( GEEC ) pathways , which represent high membrane area capacities , as observed with Bin / amphiphysin / Rvs ( BAR ) and Rho GTPase - activating protein ( GAP ) domain - containing protein GTPase regulator associated with focal adhesion kinase - 1 ( GRAF1 ) . Reproduced , with permission , from [ 61 ] . Review Trends in Cell Biology October 2012 , Vol . 22 , No . 10 529 the same molecular components remains a mystery . One possible explanation may be linked to the membrane ten - sion continuum ( same membrane tension in the entire cell surface ) and to the adhesive nature of the protruding structure , whereas folds do not adhere to the substrate . Because the lamellipodium ( protruding region ) is attached to the substrate , actin polymerization will push the mem - brane forward but this actin , in turn , will have to sustain some resistance from the membrane ( membrane tension ) . This resistance may be transmitted through the actin network toward adhesions at the back of the lamellipodium that will in turn provide anchorage to the substrate to move forward [ 16 ] . By contrast , the cytoskeleton support - ing the membrane in the folds or rufﬂes is not attached directly to the substrate and will have an older , less dense actin network that can be absorbed inside the cell . As a consequence , folds will disappear rapidly , providing sub - stantial amounts of extra membrane area because those structures have a high surface to volume ratio . Membrane wrinkles or ‘micro - folds’ By pulling membrane tethers from already adherent ﬁbro - blasts at constant force , a rather small ( 0 . 3 – 1 % of the total membrane area ) membrane buffer was identiﬁed [ 17 ] . This buffer compensates for small changes in tension and its capacity is linked to actin cytoskeleton integrity [ 17 ] . However , the physical nature of the buffer was not identi - ﬁed . Given the very small size of this reservoir , it appears to be different than that used for spreading . Several possi - ble mechanisms can be imagined : some wrinkles or micro - folds ( Figure 1 ) could be present at the cell surface due to local proteolipidic heterogeneity or there may be small membrane invaginations such as caveolae or active endo - cytic – exocytic processes . Caveolae Recently , caveolae have been proposed as a major tension buffer [ 14 , 18 ] . Caveolae are small ( 60 – 80 nm in diameter ) plasma membrane invaginations [ 19 ] that depend on cho - lesterol and sphingolipids as well as caveolin proteins [ 19 ] ( Figure 1e ) . Knockout of caveolin 1 results in caveolar disassembly and has been used to address the function of these structures [ 20 , 21 ] . On osmotic swelling to increase membrane tension , disassembly of caveolae was observed [ 14 ] , as previously reported for mechanical stress [ 22 , 23 ] . Moreover , caveolin 1 - depleted cells ( devoid of caveolae ) were unable to buffer membrane tension [ 14 ] . In this case , the membrane tension increased by almost threefold for several minutes , whereas control caveolin 1 - positive cells restored a normal level of tension under the same experi - mental conditions [ 14 ] . This implied that caveolin 1 ( and so probably caveolae ) was required to absorb tension shocks . Surprisingly , osmotic swelling does not seem to affect cytoskeletal organization , although the cell volume increases by 35 % [ 14 ] . The estimated area in caveolae is only 0 . 3 % of the membrane area [ 14 ] , which resembles the buffer size in tether extensions from spread cells [ 17 ] . By contrast , a much larger membrane buffer ( > 10 % of mem - brane area in the form of folds ) was estimated to buffer the membrane area during spreading [ 5 ] . Caveolae are endo - cytosed on detachment of spread cells and return to the plasma membrane during spreading [ 24 , 25 ] . In the light of these results , it appears that cells can use different types of buffer . Chronologically , it seems that the primary buffer of Tension on the substrate Membrane tension Key : Ac(cid:2)n cytoskeleton Focal adhesions P1 ( non - contrac(cid:2)le spreading ) P2 ( contrac(cid:2)le spreading ) P3 ( polariza(cid:2)on ) Myosin II + exocytosis ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( d ) ( e ) ( f ) Membrane area TRENDS in Cell Biology Figure 2 . Model of cell spreading and polarization . ( a ) Rounded up cell with only weak cell – substrate attachment but higher membrane tension than interphase cel ( 2 – 3 - fold ) ( e ) . Membrane folds are clearly visible at this stage ( Figure 1a ) . ( b ) Rapid and non - contractile phase of spreading in which unfolding of the membrane reservoirs provides extra membrane area . In this phase , membrane tension is at a high but constant level compared with the interphase cell . ( c ) Spreading phase transition with entry into the contractile spreading phase or P2 . The membrane reservoirs are totally unfolded and give rise to an increase in membrane tension due to area limitation . This is followed almost immediately by activation of exocytosis and myosin II - mediated contraction . ( d ) As the cell progress into P2 , the leading edge becomes more heterogeneous with alternating protrusive and retractile regions along the boundary . Stable adhesions start to mature at this stage due to activation of contraction , and global remodeling of the cytoskeleton occurs with formation of actin bundles . The cell starts to exert strong forces onto the substrate at this point . As a consequence of exocytosis and further spreading , the membrane area progressively increases whereas membrane tension progressively decreases . ( e ) The cell is now fully spread and presents a drastic reduction in protrusive – retractive activities , while actin bundles have matured into strong and clearly identifiable stress fibers linking focal adhesions . The membrane tension is now at its low resting level with the endocytosis and exocytosis balance maintaining a constant membrane area . ( f ) P3 , or the polarized phase . As a consequence , lamellipodia protrude on one side of the cell , whereas the other side of the cell shrinks . Due to protrusion , membrane tension increases and the higher tension seems to help to maintain polarity [ 6 ] . Review Trends in Cell Biology October 2012 , Vol . 22 , No . 10 530 membrane area and tension for the cell is membrane folds . Once depleted or not available , and if the membrane tension increase still calls for extra membrane area , other mechanisms will be engaged such as caveolar disassembly and / or extra membrane area addition through exocytosis ( discussed below ) . Although caveolae in spread cells could serve as a physical buffer for area changes , they are also a major signaling platform that could respond to mechanical perturbations . Vacuole - like dilations and blebs Blebs ( Figure 1c ) and vacuole - like dilations ( VLDs ) ( Figure 1d ) are two other major membrane formations that participate in membrane tension maintenance and could be considered as mirror images of each other . Blebs are spherical membrane evaginations devoid of actin cyto - skeleton ( at least at early times [ 26 ] ) that form in response to outward pressure ; VLDs are spherical membrane inva - ginations that appear in the ventral surface of cells in response to inward pressure [ 12 ] . Blebs appear when the membrane – cytoskeleton attachment is too weak to sustain the ﬂuid pressure created by inward contraction of the actin cytoskeleton . This can be due to an increase in the overall contractile tension or to weakening of the mem - brane – cytoskeleton attachment . The spherical nature of the bleb gives it a minimal surface area to volume ratio and represents an excellent mechanism for the cell to efﬁciently relax membrane and cortical tension ( Box 1 ) [ 27 ] . Blebs rarely appear in resting cells subjected to osmotic swelling , indicating that the primary reason for their formation is weakening of membrane – cytoskeleton attachment . When cells are dying or ill , they often form huge blebs that do not heal , whereas active cells rapidly heal blebs by the assem - bly of an actin cytoskeleton . The low tether force of early blebs increases rapidly on the assembly of actin ﬁlaments on the bleb membrane [ 10 ] . By contrast , VLDs are structures well described in shrinking neurons , but are also clearly visible in ﬁbro - blasts during osmotic or mechanically induced shrinkage [ 12 ] . VLDs form in a matter of seconds from the ventral surface of the cell and penetrate into the cytoplasm . VLD formation is the direct consequence of the shrinkage of swollen cells that have an excess of membrane area that needs to be resorbed . Because the membrane tension drops only slightly below normal when VLDs form , the afﬁnity of the membrane for the cytoskeleton is maintained during shrinking [ 28 ] . VLDs shrink rapidly , presumably by the formation of endocytic vesicles or possibly endocytic tubules . The ventral location of VLDs can be explained by a weakened actin cytoskeleton between adhesion sites . Both outward and inward pockets of membrane can form in response to outward or inward pressures , but outward bleb formation in active cells involves the inward contraction of the cytoskeleton by myosin ; hence , the inhibitor of myosin is named blebbistatin because it blocks bleb formation [ 29 ] . Ongoing endocytic and exocytic processes In addition to the readily available plasma membrane buffer , the cell can also modulate membrane area in re - sponse to variations of membrane tension using endomem - branes by exo - and endocytosis ( discussed below ) . As the membrane invaginations formed by these processes are part of the plasma membrane continuum they are sensitive to membrane tension changes ( Figure 1f ) . For example , endocytosis has been described to be strongly hyperacti - vated after a rapid drop in tension [ 30 ] . Crosstalk between membrane trafﬁcking and membrane tension Increases in membrane tension have been described to activate exocytosis and inhibit endocytosis [ 31 ] . Converse - ly , a decrease in tension slows exocytosis and increases endocytosis [ 31 ] . These opposite effects will produce oppo - site changes in plasma membrane area and indicate that a major response to changes in membrane tension involves changes in membrane trafﬁcking . However , the control of endomembrane trafﬁcking by membrane tension is more difﬁcult to tackle experimentally and is poorly understood . Endocytosis In the case of endocytosis ( Figure 3 ) , it is easy to under - stand that vesicle formation will involve active inward bending of the membrane that is resisted by membrane tension resulting in an inverse relation between mem - brane tension and endocytosis rate [ 1 , 13 , 28 , 31 ] . Recently , an elegant study shed some light on this process [ 32 ] . It was previously assumed that the clathrin - mediated endo - cytic pathway was independent of the actin cytoskeleton . Progress in live cell microscopy and reﬁnement in observa - tions has shown that in fact an actin machinery , at least in some cell types ( particularly in yeast [ 33 ] ) , is involved in clathrin - mediated endocytosis [ 34 ] . The new study proves that variations in membrane tension were linked to the actin machinery [ 32 ] . When tension was high , the authors observed that the actin machinery was recruited and served as the main driving force needed to promote vesicle budding . However , when tension was low , the actin ma - chinery was disposable and vesicles could form easily . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis was not the only pathway sensitive to membrane tension ; clathrin - independent endocytic pathways also appeared to be linked to mem - brane area and tension regulation ( discussed below ) . Exocytosis During cell spreading , an increase in membrane tension activates net exocytosis equivalent to half of the sus - pended - cell membrane area [ 5 , 8 ] ( Figure 2c ) . The vesicles originate from a rapidly recycling membrane pool – con - taining Glycosylphosphatidylinositol ( GPI ) - anchored pro - teins – that is microtubule independent [ 8 ] . How can an increase in membrane tension activate exocytosis ? One simple hypothesis can be drawn from previous observa - tions in plants and membrane fusion models [ 12 , 35 – 37 ] . Vesicles could be pre - docked and the increase in membrane tension overcomes the fusion energy barrier . This could explain the tension - mediated but calcium - independent membrane fusion reported for plasma membrane area regulation in plants [ 12 ] . Modeling studies also indicate that an optimal membrane tension is required for proper vesicle fusion [ 35 ] . Using a cell mimicry assay , a similar situation was reported where vesicle fusion occurs as membrane tension increases [ 36 ] . However , in these two Review Trends in Cell Biology October 2012 , Vol . 22 , No . 10 531 situations , fusion occurs independent of protein . In the cell , proteins such as soluble NSF attachment protein receptors ( SNAREs ) and calcium signaling are required for efﬁcient fusion [ 38 , 39 ] . Is the tension - sensitive pathway calcium independent in mammalian cells ? Does the membrane tension only affect bilayer fusion ? Several models could be envisioned . Clathrin - mediated endocytic recycling pathways ( Figure 3 ) are unlikely to play a major role in plasma membrane area and tension regulation , mainly because of their small vesicle size ( 100 – 200 nm ) and extremely rich protein content . The endocytic recycling pathways that emerge as important regulators of membrane area turn - over come from the clathrin - independent pathways form - ing clathrin - independent carriers ( CLICs ) and GPI - anchored protein enriched in early endosomal compart - ments ( GEECs ) [ 8 , 40 – 43 ] , which recycle rapidly ( less than 2 min [ 41 , 42 ] ) to the cell surface ( Figure 3 ) . CLIC / GEEC pathways : fundamental regulators of membrane dynamics The clathrin - independent endocytic pathways are major contributors to membrane dynamics ( Figure 3 ) . Quantita - tive ultrastructural measurements indicate that the CLIC pathway could account for up to 90 % of the volume internal - ized by ﬁbroblasts over short ( 15 s ) timescales [ 41 , 42 ] . Un - like clathrin - mediated endocytic vesicles , which have a distinct spherical coated structure of about 100 nm in diam - eter , clathrin - independent endocytic pathways are diverse in shape . Caveolae , for instance , can combine together into rosette - like structures observable on electron microscopy as tree - like structures with several caveolae linked together by membrane tubules [ 19 , 25 ] . These structures can be deeply invaginated into the cell without breaking continuity with the plasma membrane . In general , the morphology of inter - nal clathrin - independent endosomes is poorly understood , rendering speciﬁc identiﬁcation difﬁcult . Phagocytosis Macropinocytosisﬂuids Dynamin independent Non - clathrin Clathrin Shiga toxin MHC1IL - 2R GPI - APs Fluid AerolysinVacACtxB GPI - APs CtxBGPI - APs Lipid clustering Arf6 Rho ? CDC42 Flo(cid:2)llin IgER Modiﬁed albumins GSL analogs SV40 , EV1 , CtxB Ab clustered GPI - APs EGFR , TfR , GPCR LDLR , LRP , Vamp7 Synaptotagmin Dynamin RhoA DynaminCaveolin DynaminClathrin Ac(cid:2)n Rac1 Ac(cid:2)n Rac1 Dynamin ? CDC42GRAF1 ( BAR domains ) CLICs GEECs Early endosome Dynamin dependant CLICs GEECs pathway Key : ( enclosed vesicle ) Macropinocitosis Focal adhesions Ac(cid:2)n cytoskeleton TRENDS in Cell Biology Figure 3 . Endocytosis : focus on the clathrin - independent carrier ( CLIC ) / glycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchored protein enriched in early endosomal compartments ( GEEC ) pathways . Schematic representation of the different endocytic pathways described in mammalian cells with their respective ligands and important molecular players . This representation is inspired by [ 62 ] . The CLIC / GEEC pathways are emphasized in the bottom part of the figure in a polarized migrating cell . Endocytosis recycling occurs mainly at the back of the cell leading edge [ 41 ] and probably also to some extent at the retracting trailing edge . Abbreviations : MHC1 , major histocompatibility complex 1 ; Arf6 , ADP ribosylation factor 6 ; CtxB , cholera toxin B ; IgER , immunoglobulin E receptor ; dynamin , GTPase at the neck of the burgeoning vesicle ( helps endocytosis but not always required ) ; GSL , glycosphingolipid ; SV40 , simian virus - 40 ; EV1 , echovirus ; Ab , antibody ; EGFR , epidermal growth factor receptor ; TfR , transferrin receptor ; GPCR , G protein - coupled receptor ; LDLR , low - density lipoprotein receptor ; LRP , low - density lipoprotein receptor - related protein ; Vamp7 , vesicle - associated membrane protein 7 . Review Trends in Cell Biology October 2012 , Vol . 22 , No . 10 532 The CLIC / GEEC pathways ( Figure 3 ) were identiﬁed when ligands such as bacterial toxins continued to enter mammalian cells after clathrin - mediated endocytosis was blocked . For example Aeromonas hydrophila Aerolysin toxin and the Helicobacter pylori VacA cytotoxin have been reported to hijack the GPI - anchored protein endocytic pathway . Some toxins , such as the Shiga toxin [ 44 ] , were also able to induce endocytosis through an endocytic path - way that shared several morphological characteristics with the CLIC / GEEC pathways [ 45 ] . Several studies have indi - cated that these endocytic recycling pathways were the main contributors to membrane area regulation , making them excellent candidates to respond to and regulate membrane tension [ 8 , 41 , 42 ] . They involved tubulovesicu - lar structures up to several micrometers in length , indi - cating that they harbored a large amount of membrane area sufﬁcient for tension adjustment [ 5 ] . Moreover , by measuring the surface area to volume ratio , the CLIC pathway was estimated to be able to turn over the entire plasma membrane of a ﬁbroblast in less than 12 min [ 41 , 42 ] – fast enough to account for the recycling capacity of the GPI - anchored protein pathway reported to increase membrane area during ﬁbroblast spreading [ 8 ] . Link to the actin cytoskeleton and Rho GTPases Most studies report that clathrin - independent endocytosis is highly dependent on the integrity of the actin cytoskele - ton . The actin cytoskeleton is also a major contributor to cell shape maintenance and cell migration . Surprisingly , the Rho GTPases – Rho , Rac , and Cdc42 – contribute both to cell migration and to endocytosis of CLICs / GEECs [ 46 – 48 ] ( Figure 3 ) . Rho promotes formation of stress ﬁbers and is linked to interleukin 2 receptor ( IL - 2R ) endocytosis [ 47 ] . Cdc42 promotes ﬁlopodium formation and VacA toxin and GPI - anchored protein endocytosis [ 46 , 48 ] . Finally , Rac promotes lamellipodium formation , macropinocytosis , and phagocytosis . These are endocytic pathways that share some similarities with the CLICs / GEECs [ 40 ] . Reevaluat - ing these studies in light of today’s knowledge , it appears clear that by modifying these GTPases , cell shape mainte - nance and cell migration functions will be perturbed . As a consequence , the endocytic machinery mainly implicated in this process is the CLIC / GEEC pathway , and it will be affected because membrane area and tension will require readjustment . Several recent studies have put membrane area and tension at the center stage of cell migration and shape maintenance [ 4 – 7 , 16 , 49 , 50 ] , and a more global pic - ture can now be drawn linking the CLIC / GEEC endocytic recycling pathways with cell migration because of mem - brane area and tension maintenance . Membrane tension orchestrates cell migration First experimental evidence More than a decade ago , lamellipodium protrusion was shown to be inversely related to membrane tension [ 51 ] . At about the same time , separate ﬁndings suggested that membrane trafﬁcking was directly linked to both mem - brane tension regulation and cell shape changes , particu - larly in mitosis [ 13 ] . However , with the exception of mitosis [ 17 ] , these effects were primarily linked to externally or internally induced mechanical or chemical modiﬁcations . Results from modeling Several modeling studies supported the idea that mem - brane tension controls the rate of motility , because the postulation of an inverse correlation between tension and motility rate best explains the observed motility [ 7 , 16 , 50 , 52 , 53 ] . Protrusive events were proposed to be limited by membrane tension [ 16 ] . Using keratocytes as a model system , migration was modeled by taking into account actin polymerization and treadmilling inside an inextensible bag of membrane , with membrane tension as a mechanical feedback to control shape changes [ 4 , 7 , 52 ] . However , unlike ﬁbroblasts , keratocytes do not form focal adhesions and remodel their membrane area with endo - membrane at a relatively lower rate . Moreover , in none of the studies above was the membrane tension measured experimentally , nor the membrane area regulation prop - erly addressed . New experimental ﬁndings Recent ﬁndings in the ﬁbroblast system provided the ﬁrst example that cells employ membrane tension as a global master regulator of overall shape by ‘sensing’ tension changes and adjusting the actomyosin cytoskeleton and membrane trafﬁcking accordingly [ 5 , 6 , 49 , 54 ] ( Figure 2 ) . These observations have been extended to neutrophils , in which a membrane tension increase is observed during lamellipodial protrusion [ 6 ] . Moreover , the increase in membrane tension after polarization was postulated to reinforce polarity by restricting lamellipodial protrusions to one side of the cell and retraction to the other side of the cell ( Figure 2f ) . Membrane tension appears to be a major contributor to cell polarity acquisition and maintenance . This point is further supported by observations in Caenor - habditis elegans sperm cells [ 55 ] . Nematodes lack actin , their cytoskeletons instead comprising major sperm pro - tein ( MSP ) . By lowering membrane tension during nema - tode sperm cell motion , the organization of the MSP cytoskeleton was perturbed , affecting the cell leading edge organization and slowing cell motion , whereas increasing membrane tension enhanced motility . An optimal level of tension is thus required to maintain MSP cytoskeletal organization and motility [ 55 ] , underlining a possible in - ﬂuence of membrane tension on the actin cytoskeletal organization in mammalian systems as suggested by modeling studies . This brings us to the ﬁnal part of this review and to the major questions that now emerge . Concluding remarks To play its role as a global regulator , the physical signal of tension needs to be transmitted to the well - established biochemical responses known to regulate functions such as trafﬁcking and migration . During these processes , the physical aspect of the signal could also induce more bio - mechanical consequences , such as protein stretching and extension that could lead to biochemical signaling . Recent reviews and commentaries have already proposed some interesting hypotheses and future areas of interest [ 4 , 49 , 54 ] and we have adapted these in light of recent ﬁndings . First , it is important to reconsider some of the previous work on speciﬁc membrane protein turnover in light of the general regulation of trafﬁcking by tension . For Review Trends in Cell Biology October 2012 , Vol . 22 , No . 10 533 example , factors that affect shape or motility can cause tension changes that can dramatically inﬂuence the rates of membrane exchange . A more integrated view of the relative contributions of all the pathways will be more complete once membrane area and tension maintenance are put back in the equation . However , in most cases experimental data are still lacking . More quantitative estimation of the relative contribution of each trafﬁcking pathway for membrane area turnover will be of great utility , as has been addressed [ 41 ] . Another important aspect is whether different cell systems rely on the feed - back mechanisms of tension and area to control shape and adjust downstream functions , particularly during mitosis [ 56 ] . A major limit on our understanding is imposed by technological boundaries . Pulling membrane tethers with optically trapped beads [ 9 ] is currently the only direct way to measure membrane tension , but this system has several limitations [ 1 – 3 ] . A probe that senses more directly changes in membrane tension would allow measurements in systems in which the cells are largely inaccessible , such as during development or collective cell migration . However , as previously mentioned , some of the best characterized tension - sensitive molecules , the bacterial mechanosensitive channels , generally operate at a much higher threshold than the tensions found in mammalian cells and so would not provide the necessary dynamic range ( although mutagenesis might lead to more suitable candi - date probes ) . Whatever the design , such a probe would be a quantum leap in allowing researchers to address the un - derlying inﬂuence of membrane tension across the biologi - cal spectrum . Although membrane tension provides a simple mechan - ical mechanism for linking diverse pathways of membrane trafﬁcking and motility , there are many aspects of mem - brane tension that are not understood . For instance , the tension - related processes discussed in this review are dynamic in nature , but how their relative rates inﬂuence their dependence on and contribution to membrane tension is unclear . Indeed , membrane fusion , membrane deforma - tion , and cytoskeletal remodeling can all occur in the sub - second to second range and understanding how they are interconnected remains a technical challenge . Future work can provide important insights into the mechanisms of signaling from tension to biochemical pathways linked to myosin contraction and exocytosis . Furthermore , the events in mitosis provide an extreme example of mem - brane tension effects on motility and membrane trafﬁck - ing . With the development of new probes for tension , a more complete picture of the sequence of events should emerge . Acknowledgments Funding was provided by a grant from the Singapore Government to the Mechanobiology Institute . The funders had no role in study design , data collection and analysis , decision to publish , or preparation of the manuscript . References 1 Sheetz , M . P . ( 2001 ) Cell control by membrane - cytoskeleton adhesion . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2 , 392 – 396 2 Sheetz , M . P . and Dai , J . ( 1996 ) Modulation of membrane dynamics and cell motility by membrane tension . Trends Cell Biol . 6 , 85 – 89 3 Sheetz , M . P . et al . ( 2006 ) Continuous membrane - cytoskeleton adhesion requires continuous accommodation to lipid and cytoskeleton dynamics . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 35 , 417 – 434 4 Keren , K . ( 2011 ) Cell motility : the integrating role of the plasma membrane . Eur . Biophys . J . 40 , 1013 – 1027 5 Gauthier , N . C . et al . ( 2011 ) Temporary increase in plasma membrane tension coordinates the activation of exocytosis and contraction during cell spreading . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 108 , 14467 – 14472 6 Houk , A . R . et al . ( 2012 ) Membrane tension maintains cell polarity by conﬁning signals to the leading edge during neutrophil migration . Cell 148 , 175 – 188 7 Keren , K . et al . ( 2008 ) Mechanism of shape determination in motile cells . Nature 453 , 475 – 480 8 Gauthier , N . C . et al . ( 2009 ) Plasma membrane area increases with spread area by exocytosis of a GPI anchored protein compartment . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 , 3261 – 3272 9 Fazal , F . M . and Block , S . M . ( 2011 ) Optical tweezers study life under tension . Nat . Photonics 5 , 318 – 321 10 Dai , J . and Sheetz , M . P . ( 1999 ) Membrane tether formation from blebbing cells . Biophys . J . 77 , 3363 – 3370 11 Lee , J . et al . ( 1999 ) Regulation of cell movement is mediated by stretch - activated calcium channels . Nature 400 , 382 – 386 12 Morris , C . E . and Homann , U . ( 2001 ) Cell surface area regulation and membrane tension . J . Membr . Biol . 179 , 79 – 102 13 Raucher , D . and Sheetz , M . P . ( 1999 ) Membrane expansion increases endocytosis rate during mitosis . J . Cell Biol . 144 , 497 – 506 14 Sinha , B . et al . ( 2011 ) Cells respond to mechanical stress by rapid disassembly of caveolae . Cell 144 , 402 – 413 15 Herant , M . et al . ( 2005 ) Mechanics of neutrophil phagocytosis : behavior of the cortical tension . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 1789 – 1797 16 Ji , L . et al . ( 2008 ) Fluctuations of intracellular forces during cell protrusion . Nat . Cell Biol . 10 , 1393 – 1400 17 Raucher , D . and Sheetz , M . P . ( 1999 ) Characteristics of a membrane reservoir buffering membrane tension . Biophys . J . 77 , 1992 – 2002 18 Mayor , S . ( 2011 ) Need tension relief fast ? Try caveolae . Cell 144 , 323 – 324 19 Parton , R . G . and Howes , M . T . ( 2010 ) Revisiting caveolin trafﬁcking : the end of the caveosome . J . Cell Biol . 191 , 439 – 441 20 Damm , E . M . et al . ( 2005 ) Clathrin - and caveolin - 1 - independent endocytosis : entry of simian virus 40 into cells devoid of caveolae . J . Cell Biol . 168 , 477 – 488 21 Kirkham , M . et al . ( 2005 ) Ultrastructural identiﬁcation of uncoated caveolin - independent early endocytic vehicles . J . Cell Biol . 168 , 465 – 476 22 Dulhunty , A . F . and Franzini - Armstrong , C . ( 1975 ) The relative contributions of the folds and caveolae to the surface membrane of frog skeletal muscle ﬁbres at different sarcomere lengths . J . Physiol . 250 , 513 – 539 23 Franzini - Armstrong , C . et al . ( 1975 ) Size and shape of transverse tubule openings in frog twitch muscle ﬁbers . J . Cell Biol . 64 , 493 – 497 24 del Pozo , M . A . et al . ( 2005 ) Phospho - caveolin - 1 mediates integrin - regulated membrane domain internalization . Nat . Cell Biol . 7 , 901 – 908 25 Echarri , A . and Del Pozo , M . A . ( 2012 ) Caveolae . Curr . Biol 22 , R114 – R116 26 Charras , G . T . ( 2008 ) A short history of blebbing . J . Microsc . 231 , 466 – 478 27 Norman , L . L . et al . ( 2010 ) Cell blebbing and membrane area homeostasis in spreading and retracting cells . Biophys . J . 99 , 1726 – 1733 28 Dai , J . et al . ( 1997 ) The secretion - coupled endocytosis correlates with membrane tension changes in RBL 2H3 cells . J . Gen . Physiol . 110 , 1 – 10 29 Straight , A . F . et al . ( 2003 ) Dissecting temporal and spatial control of cytokinesis with a myosin II inhibitor . Science 299 , 1743 – 1747 30 Dai , J . and Sheetz , M . P . ( 1995 ) Regulation of endocytosis , exocytosis , and shape by membrane tension . Cold Spring Harb . Symp . Quant . Biol . 60 , 567 – 571 31 Apodaca , G . ( 2002 ) Modulation of membrane trafﬁc by mechanical stimuli . Am . J . Physiol . Renal Physiol . 282 , F179 – F1190 32 Boulant , S . et al . ( 2011 ) Actin dynamics counteract membrane tension during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat . Cell Biol . 13 , 1124 – 1131 Review Trends in Cell Biology October 2012 , Vol . 22 , No . 10 534 33 Weinberg , J . and Drubin , D . G . ( 2012 ) Clathrin - mediated endocytosis in budding yeast . Trends Cell Biol . 22 , 1 – 13 34 Anitei , M . and Hoﬂack , B . ( 2012 ) Bridging membrane and cytoskeleton dynamics in the secretory and endocytic pathways . Nat . Cell Biol . 14 , 11 – 19 35 Shillcock , J . C . and Lipowsky , R . ( 2005 ) Tension - induced fusion of bilayer membranes and vesicles . Nat . Mater . 4 , 225 – 228 36 Staykova , M . et al . ( 2011 ) Mechanics of surface area regulation in cells examined with conﬁned lipid membranes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 108 , 9084 – 9088 37 Staykova , M . and Stone , H . A . ( 2011 ) The role of the membrane conﬁnement in the surface area regulation of cells . Commun . Integr . Biol . 4 , 616 – 618 38 Sudhof , T . C . ( 2012 ) Calcium control of neurotransmitter release . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 4 , a011353 39 Sudhof , T . C . and Rothman , J . E . ( 2009 ) Membrane fusion : grappling with SNARE and SM proteins . Science 323 , 474 – 477 40 Gauthier , N . C . et al . ( 2006 ) Helicobacter pylori VacA toxin : a tool to study novel early endosomes . Trends Microbiol . 14 , 292 – 294 41 Howes , M . T . et al . ( 2010 ) Clathrin - independent carriers form a high capacity endocytic sorting system at the leading edge of migrating cells . J . Cell Biol . 190 , 675 – 691 42 Howes , M . T . et al . ( 2010 ) Molecules , mechanisms , and cellular roles of clathrin - independent endocytosis . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 22 , 519 – 527 43 Lopez , L . A . and Sheetz , M . P . ( 1995 ) A microtubule - associated protein ( MAP2 ) kinase restores microtubule motility in embryonic brain . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 12511 – 12517 44 Johannes , L . and Mayor , S . ( 2010 ) Induced domain formation in endocytic invagination , lipid sorting , and scission . Cell 142 , 507 – 510 45 Romer , W . et al . ( 2010 ) Actin dynamics drive membrane reorganization and scission in clathrin - independent endocytosis . Cell 140 , 540 – 553 46 Sabharanjak , S . et al . ( 2002 ) GPI - anchored proteins are delivered to recycling endosomes via a distinct cdc42 - regulated , clathrin - independent pinocytic pathway . Dev . Cell 2 , 411 – 423 47 Lamaze , C . et al . ( 2001 ) Interleukin 2 receptors and detergent - resistant membrane domains deﬁne a clathrin - independent endocytic pathway . Mol . Cell 7 , 661 – 671 48 Gauthier , N . C . et al . ( 2005 ) Helicobacter pylori VacA cytotoxin : a probe for a clathrin - independent and Cdc42 - dependent pinocytic pathway routed to late endosomes . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 4852 – 4866 49 Keren , K . ( 2011 ) Membrane tension leads the way . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 108 , 14379 – 14380 50 Kozlov , M . M . and Mogilner , A . ( 2007 ) Model of polarization and bistability of cell fragments . Biophys . J . 93 , 3811 – 3819 51 Raucher , D . and Sheetz , M . P . ( 2000 ) Cell spreading and lamellipodial extension rate is regulated by membrane tension . J . Cell Biol . 148 , 127 – 136 52 Mogilner , A . and Rubinstein , B . ( 2010 ) Actin disassembly ‘clock’ and membrane tension determine cell shape and turning : a mathematical model . J . Phys . Condens . Matter 22 , 194118 53 Chamaraux , F . et al . ( 2008 ) Physical model for membrane protrusions during spreading . Phys . Biol . 5 , 036009 54 Mogilner , A . and Zhu , J . ( 2012 ) Cell polarity : tension quenches the rear . Curr . Biol . 22 , R48 – R51 55 Batchelder , E . L . et al . ( 2011 ) Membrane tension regulates motility by controlling lamellipodium organization . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 108 , 11429 – 11434 56 Sedzinski , J . et al . ( 2011 ) Polar actomyosin contractility destabilizes the position of the cytokinetic furrow . Nature 476 , 462 – 466 57 Minc , N . and Piel , M . ( 2012 ) Predicting division plane position and orientation . Trends Cell Biol . 22 , 193 – 200 58 Amyere , M . et al . ( 2000 ) Constitutive macropinocytosis in oncogene - transformed ﬁbroblasts depends on sequential permanent activation of phosphoinositide 3 - kinase and phospholipase C . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 3453 – 3467 59 Charras , G . T . et al . ( 2006 ) Reassembly of contractile actin cortex in cell blebs . J . Cell Biol . 175 , 477 – 490 60 Rothberg , K . G . et al . ( 1992 ) Caveolin , a protein component of caveolae membrane coats . Cell 68 , 673 – 682 61 Lundmark , R . et al . ( 2008 ) The GTPase - activating protein GRAF1 regulates the CLIC / GEEC endocytic pathway . Curr . Biol . 18 , 1802 – 1808 62 Wieffer , M . et al . ( 2009 ) SnapShot : endocytic trafﬁcking . Cell 137 , 382 . e1 – 382 . e3 Review Trends in Cell Biology October 2012 , Vol . 22 , No . 10 535