A NEAR - INFRARED FLUOROPHORE FOR LIVE - CELL SUPERRESOLUTION MICROSCOPY OF CELLULAR PROTEINS Gražvydas Lukinavičius 1 , , Keitaro Umezawa 1 , , Nicolas Olivier 2 , Alf Honigmann 3 , Guoying Yang 4 , Tilman Plass 5 , Veronika Mueller 3 , Luc Reymond 1 , Ivan R . Corrêa Jr . 6 , Zhen - Ge Luo 7 , Carsten Schultz 5 , Edward A . Lemke 5 , Paul Heppenstall 4 , Christian Eggeling 3 , 8 , Suliana Manley 2 and Kai Johnsson 1 1 Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne ( EPFL ) , Institute of Chemical Sciences and Engineering ( ISIC ) , Institute of Bioengineering , NCCR in Chemical Biology , 1015 Lausanne , Switzerland 2 Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne ( EPFL ) , Laboratory of Experimental Biophysics , NCCR in Chemical Biology , 1015 Lausanne , Switzerland 3 Max - Planck - Institute for Biophysical Chemistry , Department NanoBiophotonics , Am Fassberg 11 , 37077 Göttingen , Germany 4 European Molecular Biology Laboratory , Mouse Biology Unit , via Ramarini 32 , 00015 Monterotondo ( RM ) , Italy 5 European Molecular Biology Laboratory , Meyerhofstrasse 1 , 69117 Heidelberg , Germany 6 New England Biolabs , Inc . , 240 County Road , Ipswich , MA 01938 , USA 7 Institute of Neuroscience and State Key Laboratory of Neuroscience , Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences , Chinese Academy of Sciences , Shanghai 200031 , China 8 MRC Human Immunology Unit , Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine , University of Oxford , United Kingdom KEY WORDS : Living cells , silicon rhodamine , superresolution microscopy , self - labeling tags . The ideal fluorescent probe for bioimaging is bright , absorbs at long wavelengths and can be flexibly implemented in living cells and in vivo . However , the design of synthetic fluorophores that combine all of these properties has proven to be extremely difficult . Here , we introduce a biocompatible near - infrared silicon - rhodamine probe that can be specifically coupled to proteins using different labeling techniques . Importantly , its high permeability and fluorogenic character permit imaging of proteins in living cells and tissues , while its brightness and photostability make it ideally suited for live - cell superresolution microscopy . The excellent spectroscopic properties of the probe combined with its ease of use in live - cell applications make it a powerful new tool for bioimaging .