28 October 2018 AperTO - Archivio Istituzionale Open Access dell ' Università di Torino Nuclear translocation of integrin cytoplasmic domain - associated protein 1 stimulates cellular proliferation / FOURNIER H . N . ; DUP - MANET S . ; BOUVARD D . ; LUTON F . ; DEGANI S . ; BLOCK M . R . ; RETTA S . F . ; ALBIGES - RIZO C . . - In : MOLECULAR BIOLOGY OF THE CELL . - ISSN 1059 - 1524 . - 16 ( 4 ) ( 2005 ) , pp . 1859 - 1871 . Original Citation : Nuclear translocation of integrin cytoplasmic domain - associated protein 1 stimulates cellular proliferation Published version : DOI : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E04 - 08 - 0744 Terms of use : Open Access ( Article begins on next page ) Anyone can freely access the full text of works made available as " Open Access " . Works made available under a Creative Commons license can be used according to the terms and conditions of said license . Use of all other works requires consent of the right holder ( author or publisher ) if not exempted from copyright protection by the applicable law . Availability : This is the author ' s manuscript This version is available http : / / hdl . handle . net / 2318 / 38098 since Molecular Biology of the Cell Vol . 16 , 1859 – 1871 , April 2005 Nuclear Translocation of Integrin Cytoplasmic Domain - associated Protein 1 Stimulates Cellular Proliferation Henri - Noe¨l Fournier , * Sandra Dupe´ - Manet , * Daniel Bouvard , * Fre´de´ric Luton , † Simona Degani , ‡ Marc R . Block , * Saverio Francesco Retta , ‡ and Corinne Albiges - Rizo * * Laboratoire d’Etude de la Diffe´renciation et de l’Adhe´rence Cellulaires , Unite´ Mixte Recherche Universite´ Joseph Fourier / Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque 5538 Institut Albert Bonniot , Faculte´ de Me´decine de Grenoble , Domaine de la Merci , 38706 La Tronche Cedex , France ; † Dynamique Mole´culaire des Compartiments Cellulaires , Institut de Pharmacologie du Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque , 06560 Sophia Antipolis , France ; and ‡ Department of Genetics , Biology , and Biochemistry , University of Torino , 10149 Turin , Italy Submitted August 27 , 2004 ; Accepted January 26 , 2005 Monitoring Editor : Mark Ginsberg Integrin cytoplasmic domain - associated protein 1 ( ICAP - 1 ) has been shown to interact speciﬁcally with the (cid:1) 1 integrin cytoplasmic domain and to control cell spreading on ﬁbronectin . Interestingly , ICAP - 1 also is observed in the nucleus , by immunocytochemical staining , and after biochemical cell fractionation , suggesting that it has additional roles that have yet to be determined . We show that the nucleocytoplasmic shuttling capability of ICAP - 1 is dependent on a functional nuclear localization signal . In addition , overexpression of (cid:1) 1 integrin strongly reduced this nuclear localization , suggest - ing that integrin activity could modulate ICAP - 1 shuttling by sequestering it in the cytoplasm . Indeed , the nuclear localization of ICAP - 1 is dependent on the stage of cell spreading on ﬁbronectin , and we also show that ICAP - 1 expression stimulates cellular proliferation in a ﬁbronectin - dependent manner . This function is dependent on its nuclear localization . Moreover , ICAP - 1 is able to activate the c - myc promoter in vitro . Together , these results demonstrate that ICAP - 1 shuttles between the nucleus and cytoplasm in a (cid:1) 1 integrin - dependent manner . It could act as a messenger that relays information from sites of integrin - dependent cell adhesion to the nucleus for controlling gene expression and cell proliferation . INTRODUCTION Integrin adhesion receptors transduce signals that control complex cell functions such as proliferation , differentiation , and survival , which require the regulation of gene expres - sion . Integrins are major extracellular matrix receptors and connect to the actin cytoskeleton through the assembly of specialized sites known as focal complexes and focal adhe - sions ( Kaverina et al . , 2002 ) . Integrin - mediated cell adhesion initiates dramatic cytoskeletal rearrangements and signal transduction processes . The intracellular domain of inte - grins has no catalytic function , indicating that its interaction with other transducing molecules is crucial for signaling . Recent data have suggested that adhesion receptors and their cytosolic partners can regulate the trafﬁcking of signal - ing proteins between the cytoplasm and nucleus where they control transcription . One of the best described examples of such a phenomenon is the functional connection between lymphocyte function - associated antigen 1 ( LFA - 1 , a (cid:1) 2 inte - grin family member ) , and Jun activation domain binding protein 1 ( JAB - 1 ) . A two - hybrid screen identiﬁed JAB - 1 as a protein that binds to the (cid:1) 2 integrin cytoplasmic tail ( Bianchi et al . , 2000 ) . JAB - 1 is also a known coactivator of the c - Jun transcription factor and localizes both in the nucleus and at the plasma membrane . LFA - 1 engagement is accompanied by an increase in the nuclear pool of JAB - 1 and the subse - quent enhancement of activator protein - 1 – driven promoter activities . Another protein , Hic - 5 , a paxillin - related focal adhesion protein , can interact with the glucocorticoid recep - tor transactivation domain and acts as a coactivator of this transcription factor ( Thomas et al . , 1999 ; Yang et al . , 2000 ) . In a further example involving nonintegrin surface adhesion receptors , CASK / LIN - 2 , a member of the membrane - associ - ated guanylate kinase family , shuttles between synapses where it binds the transmembrane proteins neurexin and syndecan , and the nucleus interacting with the Tbr - 1 tran - scription factor . The localization of CASK is dependent on the relative levels of these cytoplasmic and nuclear anchors . High levels of Tbr - 1 recruit CASK to the nucleus and trigger gene transcription , including that of reelin required for ce - rebrocortical development ( Hsueh et al . , 2000 ) . In contrast , a high level of syndecan 3 , which acts as the transmembrane anchor , increases the CASK cytoplasmic pool . Similarly , other reports have established direct linkages between tran - scriptional regulators and cell adhesion molecules at cell - cell junctions . The most compelling evidence for adhesion - asso - ciated molecules involved in the regulation of transcription comes from studies on (cid:1) - catenin . This protein is able to interact with E - cadherin at cell - cell contacts , with the adeno - matous polyposis coli and axin complex in the cytoplasm , and with lymphocyte - enhancer binding factor 1 / T - cell fac - tor in nucleus ( Ben - Ze’ev et al . , 2000 ) . The membrane - asso - ciated guanylate kinase homologue zonula occludens - 1 also moves between cell - cell contacts where it binds (cid:2) - catenin This article was published online ahead of print in MBC in Press ( http : / / www . molbiolcell . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E04 – 08 – 0744 ) on February 9 , 2005 . Address correspondence to : Corinne Albiges - Rizo ( corinne . albiges - rizo @ ujf - grenoble . fr ) . © 2005 by The American Society for Cell Biology 1859 and the nucleus in a cell density - dependent manner ( Ben - Ze’ev et al . , 2000 ) . In this way , it might impact on epithelial differentiation and morphogenesis by interacting with Y - box transcription factor and by regulating the expression of erb - 2 ( Balda and Matter , 2000 ) . Further examples are zyxin , li - poma preferred partner , thyroid receptor interacting pro - tein - 6 , FHL - 2 , Ajuba , and p120 , all of which are predomi - nantly localized in focal adhesions or cell - cell contacts but additionally shuttle to the nucleus ( Wang et al . , 1999 ; Ka - nungo et al . , 2000 ; Muller et al . , 2000 ; Nix et al . , 2001 ; Morlon and Sassone - Corsi , 2003 ; Petit et al . , 2003 ; Roczniak - Fergu - son and Reynolds , 2003 ) . Among cytoplasmic proteins interacting with the intracel - lular tails of integrins , the integrin cytoplasmic domain - associated protein 1 ( ICAP - 1 ) has been shown to interact speciﬁcally with the (cid:1) 1 integrin chain ( Chang et al . , 1997 ) . ICAP - 1 is a 200 - amino acid protein containing a phospho - tyrosine binding ( PTB ) domain that interacts with the cyto - plasmic tail of the (cid:1) 1 integrin at a NPXY motif ( Chang et al . , 2002 ) . Similarly , ICAP - 1 recognizes an NPXY amino acid sequence within KRIT - 1 , a protein involved in the human disease , cerebral cavernous malformation 1 ( Zhang et al . , 2001 ; Gunel et al . , 2002 ; Zawistowski et al . , 2002 ) . Previous data have suggested that phosphorylation of ICAP - 1 on threonine 38 by CaMKII modulates (cid:2) 5 (cid:1) 1 integrin function ( Bouvard and Block , 1998 ) . A further involvement of ICAP - 1 in the regulation of (cid:1) 1 integrin function was suggested by experiments indicating that its overexpression increases (cid:1) 1 - dependent cell motility on adhesion substrates such as ﬁ - bronectin ( Zhang and Hemler , 1999 ) . Talin and ICAP - 1 com - pete for binding on the cytosolic domain of the (cid:1) 1 integrin chain and high concentrations of ICAP - 1 disrupt focal ad - hesions ( Bouvard et al . , 2003 ) . The identiﬁcation of the Rho family GTPases Cdc42 and Rac1 as binding partners for ICAP - 1 ( Degani et al . , 2002 ) suggests an implication of ICAP - 1 in integrin - dependent signaling pathways . Addi - tionally , we showed recently that ICAP - 1 interacts with Nm23 - H2 ( also called NDPK - B ) , a protein with nucleoside diphosphate kinase activity ( Fournier et al . , 2002 ) . Nm23 - H2 is linked to a variety of cellular activities , including the suppression of metastasis and activation of c - myc transcrip - tion ( Postel et al . , 1993 ; Berberich and Postel , 1995 ) . ICAP - 1 and Nm23 - H2 colocalize in rufﬂes upon integrin ligation ( Fournier et al . , 2002 ) . Very little is known , however , about the biological functions of ICAP - 1 . Interestingly , ICAP - 1 was often observed both in the nucleus and cytosol . Because the distribution pattern of a protein within the cell provides important clues to its function , we used a combination of immunoﬂuorescence microscopy and biochemical fraction - ation to determine the subcellular localization of ICAP - 1 in epithelial and ﬁbroblastic cells . Our results show that ICAP - 1 has a functional nuclear localization signal ( NLS ) sequence and belongs to the growing family of nucleocyto - plasmic shuttles . We also report a physiological relevance of this shuttling : ICAP - 1 nuclear localization is dependent on the stage of cell spreading on ﬁbronectin and is clearly related to an increase in cell proliferation , possibly through the activation of the c - myc promoter . MATERIALS AND METHODS Reagents Fibronectin was extracted from human plasma according to the method described previously ( Engvall and Ruoslahti , 1977 ) . Monoclonal antibodies against Nm23 - H1 were purchased from Seigakaku America ( Rockville , MD ) , anti - lamin B antibody was from Santa Cruz Biotechnology ( Santa Cruz , CA ) , and anti - actin polyclonal antibodies were from Sigma - Aldrich ( St . Louis , MO ) . Rhodamin - phalloidin was from Sigma - Aldrich . Rabbit anti - ICAP - 1 se - rum was raised in our laboratory by immunizing rabbits with puriﬁed re - combinant ICAP - 1 protein , and mouse monoclonal antibody ( mAb ) anti - ICAP - 1 4D1D6 was prepared using recombinant His - tagged ICAP - 1 as antigen , as described previously ( Bouvard et al . , 2003 ) . The mAb 4B7R , directed against human (cid:1) 1 integrin , was purchased from NeoMarkers ( Fre - mont , CA ) . Anti - bromodeoxyuridine ( BrdU ) mAb was from Sigma - Aldrich . Anti - cyclin D1 mAb was from Santa Cruz Biotechnology . Goat anti - mouse IgG and goat anti - rabbit IgG coupled to horseradish peroxidase were from Bio - Rad ( Hercules , CA ) and Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories ( West Grove , PA ) , respectively . Expression Plasmid Construction Full - length human ICAP - 1 was excised from the pBS - ICAP - 1 vector as an Eco RI / Xba I fragment and inserted into the pcDNA3 . 1 ( (cid:1) ) vector ( Invitrogen , Breda , The Netherlands ) . The 1 - to 99 - nt cDNA fragment corresponding to the N terminus of ICAP - 1 was cut from pet19b / 1 – 99 ICAP - 1 by digestion with Bgl II and Bam HI enzymes before cloning into pcDNA3 . 1 already cut with Bam HI . The 100 - to 200 - nt C - terminal fragment of ICAP - 1 was generated by polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) , allowing to generate a 5 (cid:2) Kpn end and a 3 (cid:2) Xho end to introduce the fragment into the Kpn I / Xho I sites of pcDNA3 . 1 . The site - directed mutagenesis for the NLS functional analysis was carried out on pcDNA3 . 1 / ICAP - 1 with the QuikChange site - directed mutagenesis kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions ( Stratagene , La Jolla , CA ) . The two lysines at position 6 – 7 were changed to alanines . This vector was called pcDNA3 . 1 / ICAP - 1 (cid:3) NLS . The human ICAP - 1 cDNA fragment was excised from the pcDNA3 . 1 / ICAP - 1 vector with Bam HI and Hinc II enzymes and inserted into the pTREhyg vector ( BD Biosciences Clontech , Palo Alto , CA ) digested with Bam HI and Eco RV . The pTREhyg / ICAP - 1 (cid:3) NLS was generated by mutagenesis by using the same strategy . All sequences were veriﬁed by DNA sequencing . The plasmid pcmyc - NHE was kindly provided by E . Postel ( Lewis Thomas Laboratory , Princeton , NJ ) and the pcDNA3 . 1 / (cid:2) - actinin vec - tor was a generous gift from A . Duperray ( Institut Albert Bonniot , Grenoble , France ) . The pcDNA3 / Nm23 - H2 was generously provided by M . L . Lacombe ( Faculte´ de Medecine Saint Antoine , Paris , France ) . The pECE human (cid:1) 1 integrin was kindly provided by E . Ruoslahti ( The Burnham Institute , La Jolla , CA ) . Cell Culture and Cell Transfection Chinese hamster ovary ( CHO ) , HeLa , and GD25 cell lines were cultured in (cid:2) - minimal essential medium ( MEM ) supplemented with 10 % calf serum and penicillin / streptomycin at 37°C in 5 % CO 2 - humidiﬁed chamber . The human lung cell line H358 was grown in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10 % calf serum and penicillin / streptomycin . Cells were transiently transfected with the cDNA constructs , by using Exgen 500 ( Euromedex , Mundolsheim , France ) and the expression of the transgene was assessed between 24 and 48 h after transfection . Transfection of H358 / tet - on or Madin - Darby canine kidney ( MDCK ) / tet - off epithelial cells was carried out with the use of FuGene ( Roche Diagnostics , Indianapolis , IN ) and Lipofectamine , respectively . To select sta - ble clones after transfection , H358 or MDCK cells were cultured in medium containing either Geneticin ( G418 ) and hygromycin , or puromycin and hy - gromycin . A targeted deletion of ICAP - 1 was generated by homologous recombina - tion in embryonic stem cells and introduced in mice . The generation and characterization of the ICAP - 1 knockout mice will be reported in a separate article . Primary osteoblasts were isolated from wild - type mice and mice that were homozygous null for ICAP - 1 by using standard procedure ( Globus et al . , 1998 ) . Osteoblasts were cultured in (cid:2) - MEM with 10 % calf serum and peni - cillin / streptomycin . Primary cells were then immortalized using the large T antigen by retroviral infection . Among several clones , SV2 . 1 and SV6 . 5 de - rived from ICAP - 1 null mouse and wild - type mouse , respectively , were used in this study . ICAP - 1 and EGFP cDNA were inserted as a bicistronic element into pCL - MFG retroviral vector ( Naviaux et al . , 1996 ) . Retroviral supernatant was produced by transient transfection of phoenix cells and used to infect SV2 . 1 and SV6 . 5 cells . Infection was conﬁrmed by ﬂuorescence - activated cell sorting ( FACS ) analysis for enhanced green ﬂuorescent protein ( EGFP ) ﬂuo - rescence , and cell sorting was performed to obtain a homogeneous popula - tion . Protein Immunoblot Analysis CHO cells were transiently transfected with Exgen 500 ( Euromedex ) . Twenty - four hours after the transfection , the cells were lysed in radioimmunoprecipi - tation assay ( RIPA ) buffer containing proteases and phosphatases inhibitors for 45 min , and proteins were subjected to electrophoresis and transferred to polyvinylidene diﬂouride ( PVDF ) membranes . The samples were analyzed by Western blot with either rabbit polyclonal or mouse monoclonal anti - ICAP - 1 antibodies , and with anti - actin , anti - Nm23 - H1 , and anti - lamin C antibodies . Immunological detection was achieved with horseradish peroxidase - conju - gated secondary antibody ( Bio - Rad or Jackson ImmunoResearch Laborato - ries ) , and the detection was carried out with enhanced chemiluminescence ( ECL ) according to the manufacturer’s instructions ( Amersham Biosciences , Piscataway , NJ ) . H . - N . Fournier et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 1860 Immunoﬂuorescence Staining of Cells CHO , GD25 , and MDCK cells were cultured as a monolayer in DMEM medium containing 10 % fetal calf serum ( FCS ) and harvested with trypsin / EDTA . The cells were plated on coverslips that were precoated with 10 (cid:3) g / ml human plasma ﬁbronectin in a 37°C incubator with 5 % CO 2 to reach 50 % conﬂuence the day of transfection . The cells were ﬁxed with 3 % paraformal - dehyde in phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) , permeabilized with 0 . 2 % Triton X - 100 in PBS . Nonspeciﬁc sites were blocked in 10 % goat serum for 1 h at room temperature . Cells were stained for 1 h with either monoclonal or polyclonal antibodies in a moist chamber . Anti ICAP - 1 4D1D6 monoclonal antibodies issued from hybridoma supernatant was used at 1 : 3 and anti - ICAP - 1 polyclonal antibodies were used at 1 : 1000 . The 4B7R mAb speciﬁc for human (cid:1) 1 integrin was used at 1 : 200 . After rinsing , coverslips were incubated with an appropriate Alexa - conjugated secondary antibody ( Molecular Probes , Eugene , OR ) for 30 min . The cells were mounted in Mowiol solution and viewed using an Provis AX 70 Olympus microscope . Fractionation of Cell Lysates HeLa cells or ICAP - 1 – expressing CHO cells were washed in PBS and then broken on ice in hypotonic buffer ( 20 mM Tris , 1 mM EDTA , 1 mM EGTA , and 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl ﬂuoride [ PMSF ] ) by using a Dounce homoge - nizer as described previously ( Sadoul et al . , 1995 ) . After low - speed centrifu - gation ( 2500 rpm , 10 min , 4°C , Hera¨us Biofuge ) to isolate nuclei , the post - nuclear supernatant was centrifuged at 30 , 000 (cid:4) g , 30 min , 4°C to obtain a crude membrane pellet and cytosol . The membrane pellet was washed once in high salt buffer ( 20 mM Tris , 1 mM EDTA , 1 mM EGTA , 1 mM PMSF , and 1 M NaCl , pH 7 . 4 ) before solubilization with a detergent - containing buffer ( 20 mM Tris , 1 mM EDTA , 1 mM EGTA , 1 mM PMSF , 150 mM NaCl , and 1 % Triton X - 100 , pH 7 . 4 ) . Solubilized membranes were centrifuged at 100 , 000 (cid:4) g , 1 h , 4°C to separate Triton - soluble membrane components from insoluble material . The remaining pellet was resuspended directly in SDS - sample buffer for gel electrophoresis . All volumes were kept constant starting with 10 6 cells / 100 (cid:3) l of hypotonic buffer . Fraction purity was tested by Western blot , by using as a cytoplasmic marker Nm23 - H1 and as nuclear marker lamin B . Cell Proliferation Assay For proliferation assay , MDCK cells were washed three times in DMEM before replating 2 (cid:4) 10 4 cells in 3 ml of DMEM supplemented with 4 % FCS . Triplicate wells for each time point were analyzed . The medium was changed every other day . The total number of viable cells per well was determined by counting at days 2 , 5 , 7 , and 9 after plating without reaching conﬂuence . BrdU Incorporation Assay Cells ( 1 . 6 (cid:4) 10 4 cells ) were plated on polylysine - , vitronectin - , or ﬁbronectin - coated coverslips , cultured for 24 h in 1 % FCS , and then incubated with 10 (cid:3) M BrdU ( Sigma - Aldrich ) for 1 h , washed twice with PBS , and ﬁxed in methanol . Cells were then treated with 2 N HCl at 37°C for 60 min , washed twice with 0 . 1 M NaB 4 O 7 , and rinsed with PBS . Cell population that entered the S phase was determined by quantifying the incorporated BrdU by using the mouse anti - BrdU mAb ( Sigma - Aldrich ) . In parallel , ICAP - 1 localization was visual - ized with the polyclonal antibody . After rinsing , cells were incubated with appropriate Alexa - conjugated secondary antibodies ( Molecular Probes ) for 30 min . The cells were mounted in Mowiol solution and viewed using an Provis AX 70 Olympus microscope for counting or a confocal laser scanning micro - scope ( Zeiss LSM 410 ) . Reporter Gene Assays CHO cells were transfected with a pcmyc - driven chloramphenicol acetyl - transferase ( CAT ) reporter gene and with the indicated cDNAs , by using the Exgen 500 reagent ( Euromedex ) . In all cases , the amount of DNA transfected was kept constant by the addition of the pcDNA3 plasmid ( the vector back - bone for ICAP - 1 ) . At the time of harvesting , the cells were placed on ice , washed twice with ice - cold PBS , and lysed directly on wells with lysis buffer provided by the manufacturer . CAT expression was measured in cell lysates 48 h after transfection at 405 nm according instructions from Roche Diagnos - tics . RESULTS Dual Localization of ICAP - 1 within Cells To visualize the subcellular localization of ICAP - 1 , we per - formed indirect immunostaining on ﬁbroblast NIH 3T3 or CHO cells overexpressing this protein constitutively ( Figure 1A ) . The use of either monoclonal or polyclonal antibodies revealed that ICAP - 1 was localized in both cytoplasmic and nuclear compartments . A similar staining was observed in the lung epithelial cell line H358 ( Tet - on ) in which ICAP - 1 expression was controlled by a tetracycline - dependent pro - moter . H358 clones with high expression of the rtTA trans - activator were transfected with pTREhyg plasmid encoding full - length ICAP - 1 . On induction with doxycycline , ICAP - 1 was observed in the nucleus and the cytoplasm ( Figure 1A ) . Biochemical fractionations were carried out to assay the dual cellular locations of the ICAP - 1 protein . In all of the men - tioned cells , endogenous ICAP - 1 was difﬁcult to detect ei - ther by immunoﬂuorescence or Western blot , probably due to low expression levels . Conversely , HeLa cells express detectable amounts of endogenous ICAP - 1 with a predom - inant localization in nucleus as visualized by immunostain - ing ( Figure 1B ) . Because HeLa cells express physiological levels of endogenous ICAP - 1 , they were used in a fraction - ation procedure , separating a cytoplasmic soluble fraction and a nuclear fraction . These fractions were characterized by stripping and reprobing the blot by using antibodies di - rected against marker proteins of different cellular compart - ments . As expected , Nm23 - H1 was found in the cytoplas - Figure 1 . Subcellular localization of ICAP - 1 . ( A ) Different types of cells were plated on coverslips coated with ﬁbronectin . NIH 3T3 or CHO cells were transiently transfected by pcDNA3 / ICAP - 1 . Twenty - four hours after transfection , the cells were ﬁxed , permeabil - ized , and stained with anti - ICAP - 1 polyclonal antibodies . The H358 cells stably transfected with pTREhyg / ICAP - 1 were induced with 1 (cid:3) g / ml doxycycline during 24 h before ﬁxa - tion , permeabilization , and immunostaining with anti - ICAP - 1 polyclonal antibodies . Two photos per cell type are shown to visualize nuclear and cytoplasmic localization of ICAP - 1 . Bar , 10 (cid:3) m . Endogenous ICAP - 1 was visualized in HeLa cells by immunostaining with anti - ICAP - 1 polyclonal antibodies ( B ) ( bar , 10 (cid:3) m . ) and by Western blot ( C ) by using the fractionation procedure described under Materials and Methods . Fractionation and Western immunoblot analyses of HeLa cells conﬁrmed the subcellular localization of ICAP - 1 protein in the cytosol and nucleus . Fractions are labeled as follows : C , cytosol ; N , nuclear . The various cell fractions were characterized by reprobing the blots for lamin as a nuclear marker , Nm23 - H1 as a cytoplasmic marker and actin as a general marker . Nuclear - Cytoplasmic Shuttling of ICAP - 1 Vol . 16 , April 2005 1861 mic , actin in nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions , and lamin B was restricted to the nucleus . As shown in Figure 1B , ICAP - 1 was detected in both cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions of HeLa cells consistent with the distribution observed in im - munoﬂuorescence microscopy experiments . ICAP - 1 Has a Functional Nuclear Localization Signal To identify a putative NLS in ICAP - 1 , the complete amino acid sequence of ICAP - 1 was examined using the PSORT program ( Expasy , Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics , Geneva , Switzerland ) . A “pat 4” residue pattern similar to the mono - partite NLS of the SV40 large T antigen was found at posi - tion 6 – 9 . This sequence usually encompasses three basic amino acids ( K or R ) and one histidine . On ICAP - 1 , this sequence was KKRH . To determine whether this motif was a functional NLS and targets ICAP - 1 to the nucleus , muta - tions were introduced , changing the two lysines at position 6 – 7 to alanines ( Figure 2A ) . After transfection in CHO cells and immunostaining with anti - ICAP - 1 antibodies , exoge - nous ICAP - 1 expression was veriﬁed by Western blot ( Fig - ure 2B ) , and a statistical analysis evaluating for the presence of ICAP - 1 in nucleus was carried out . Figure 2C shows that ICAP - 1 was localized in the nucleus for (cid:5) 60 % of transfected cells . As expected , the AARH mutant showed a diffuse staining in CHO - transfected cells for (cid:6) 95 % of the cells , demonstrating that the K / A substitution within the NLS impaired nuclear localization . This indicated that ICAP - 1 has a functional NLS in CHO cells . In addition , ICAP - 1 was fused to green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) to decrease passive diffusion due to the small molecular weight of ICAP - 1 . Figure 2 . Mutation in the NLS of full - length ICAP - 1 results in the accumulation of the protein in the cytoplasm . ( A ) Schematic representation of the different mutants of ICAP - 1 used for transfection . CHO cells were transfected with pcDNA3 . 1 plasmids that express different ICAP - 1 proteins fused or not with GFP , with or without mutations in NLS sequence ( (cid:3) NLS corresponds to the change of the two lysine ( KK 6 – 7 ) of the NLS to alanine and delta 12 corresponds to the deletion of the 12 ﬁrst amino acids of ICAP - 1 ) . ( B ) Proteins from cells 24 h after transfection were resolved by SDS - PAGE , and the wild - type and mutant ICAP - 1 was revealed by Western blot by using ECL substrate . The NT track corresponds to a lysate of CHO cells transfected with the empty pcDNA3 . 1 . ( C ) At 24 h posttransfection , the cells were prepared for immunoﬂuorescence microscopy by using the anti ICAP - 1 polyclonal antibodies , and ICAP - 1 distribution was examined . Two patterns were visualized : either nuclear or diffuse . Scoring 100 cells for ICAP - 1 protein distribution revealed that ICAP - 1 WT resides in nucleus in 60 % of cells , whereas mutation of NLS sequence results in the accumulation of ICAP - 1 in the cytoplasm for almost 100 % of the visualized cells . Experiments were independently reproduced at least three times . ( D ) Western blot analysis performed after cell fractionation of wild - type CHO and transfected CHO cells overexpressing either wild - type ICAP - 1 ( WT ) or ICAP - 1 (cid:3) NLS . Note the different distribution of ICAP - 1WT and ICAP - 1 (cid:3) NLS between the nuclear and the cytoplasmic fraction . Fractions are labeled as follows : C , cytoplasmic fraction ; L , total lysate ; M , membrane fraction ; N , nuclear fraction . H . - N . Fournier et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 1862 Within this construct , an N - terminal ICAP - 1 deletion en - compassing the KKRH sequence as well as AARH mutation was generated ( Figure 2A ) . The expression of the fusion proteins was veriﬁed by Western blot ( Figure 2B ) . Deletion of the NLS sequence resulted in a dramatic decrease in the number of cells displaying nuclear GFP - ICAP - 1 ( Figure 2C ) . To conﬁrm the shift of ICAP - 1 distribution induced by NLS mutation , CHO cells were transiently transfected with ICAP - 1 WT and ICAP - 1 (cid:3) NLS before performing subcellular fractionation as described under Materials and Methods . ICAP - 1 (cid:3) NLS was predominantly localized in the cytoplas - mic fraction , whereas wild - type ICAP - 1 was equally present in both cytoplasmic and nuclear fraction ( Figure 2D ) . (cid:1) 1 Integrin Overexpression Shifts ICAP - 1 Localization toward the Cytosol We then considered whether the nuclear localization of ICAP - 1 could be inﬂuenced by binding partners of ICAP - 1 such as the cytoplasmic domain of the (cid:1) 1 integrin chain . When the human (cid:1) 1 chain was coexpressed with ICAP - 1 in CHO cells , ICAP - 1 predominantly exhibited a diffuse pat - tern in 90 % of cells , whereas this pattern was only observed in 40 % of the control cells transfected with the ICAP - 1 – encoding plasmid alone ( Figure 3 ) . The point mutation Y to S in the NPXY membrane distal ( cyto3 ) domain of the hu - man (cid:1) 1 integrin abolishes the interaction between ICAP - 1 and the (cid:1) 1 cytoplasmic tail ( Chang et al . , 1997 , Bouvard et al . , 2003 ) . To test whether the modiﬁcation of ICAP - 1 localiza - tion by integrin expression was due to a direct interaction with the cytoplasmic tail , this mutant was coexpressed with ICAP - 1 . Indeed , coexpression of the mutant (cid:1) 1 chain with ICAP - 1 no longer shifted ICAP - 1 localization toward the cytosol . Approximately one - half of the transfected cells ex - hibited ICAP - 1 in nucleus , a distribution similar to that of the controls ( Figure 3 ) . These results suggest that cell adhe - sion molecules such as (cid:1) 1 integrins may regulate nucleocy - toplasmic trafﬁcking of ICAP - 1 , possibly by sequestering the protein in the cytosol . Even more clear - cut results were obtained with GD25 cells ( Figure 4 ) . These cells do not express the (cid:1) 1 integrin chain due to a null mutation in both alleles ( Fassler et al . , 1995 ) . Under our experimental conditions , immunoﬂuorescence microscopy or Western blot analysis did not reveal any detectable staining for endogenous ICAP - 1 in GD25 cells but ectopically expressed ICAP - 1 localized predominantly in the nucleus . On the other hand , GD25 cells were stably trans - fected with the human (cid:1) 1A full - length cDNA , called GD25 / (cid:1) 1A ( Fassler et al . , 1995 ; Retta et al . , 1998 ) . In such rescued cells , ICAP - 1 localization was mainly cytosolic ( Figure 4 , A and B ) . Thus , overexpression of (cid:1) 1 integrins in the cells almost fully abolished the nuclear localization of ICAP - 1 . Distinct Contributions of the C - and N - Terminal Halves of ICAP - 1 to Its Cellular Localization As mentioned above , the N - and C - terminal halves of ICAP - 1 exhibit unique features : The N - terminal moiety en - compasses the NLS sequence , whereas the C - terminal moi - ety encompasses the binding site of the (cid:1) 1 integrin tail . To address the role of each domain regarding to subcellular localization , we constructed two plasmids expressing either the N - terminal half or the C - terminal half of ICAP - 1 , respec - tively . After transfection of these plasmids into GD25 or GD25 / (cid:1) 1A cells , the expressed proteins were visualized by immunoﬂuorescence with anti - ICAP - 1 polyclonal antibod - ies . As expected , the N - terminal half ( 1 – 99 aa ) , carrying the NLS sequence , showed a nuclear ( (cid:5) 70 % of cells ) or diffuse ( (cid:5) 30 % of cells ) localization in GD25 and GD25 / (cid:1) 1A cells ( Figure 4 , A and C ) . Conversely , a predominantly cytoplas - mic distribution was observed in GD25 and GD25 / (cid:1) 1A cells tranfected with the C - terminal half ( 100 – 200 aa ) bearing the binding domain of integrin and devoid of the NLS sequence ( Figure 4 , A and C ) . ICAP - 1 Overexpression Increases Cell Proliferation In most cases , the end point of the integrin - induced signal - ing cascade is the regulation of gene expression programs that control cell differentiation or proliferation . To determine whether nuclear ICAP - 1 localization affects cell prolifera - tion , we generated stable MDCK clones overexpressing full - length ICAP - 1 in an inducible manner ( tet - off system ) and control cells transfected with the empty vector ( MOCK cells ) . Multiple independent clones of each cell line were isolated . Anti - ICAP - 1 immunoblot analysis of cell extracts demonstrated that ICAP - 1 protein with the expected size was expressed in all selected clones upon induction ( Figure 5 A ) . Immunoﬂuorescence studies also showed ICAP - 1 ac - cumulation in the nucleus ( Figure 5B ) . The proliferation curve of these cell lines , in the presence of 10 % serum , was followed for 5 d . The different clones overexpressing full - length ICAP - 1 consistently exhibited a proliferation increase of 15 % compared with that of control cells ( our unpublished data ) . This small but reproducible result encouraged us to measure cell proliferation in low - serum conditions ( 4 % ) . Under these conditions and after 7 d of culture , cells had a proliferation rate 2 – 3 times higher when ICAP - 1 was ex - pressed ( Figure 5C ) . The next question to be addressed was to determine whether ICAP - 1 – induced proliferation was correlated with its nuclear localization . We generated induc - ible stable MDCK clones expressing ICAP - 1 with the KKRH Figure 3 . (cid:1) 1 Integrin - dependent cytoplasmic translocation of ICAP - 1 . CHO cells were cotransfected with two different cDNAs , pcDNA3 . 1 / ICAP and pECE / human (cid:1) 1 or pcDNA3 . 1 / ICAP - 1 and pECE or pcDNA3 . 1 / ICAP - 1 and pECE / human NPXS (cid:1) 1 , as indi - cated in each histogram . The subcellular distribution of the ectopi - cally expressed proteins was visualized by double immunostaining by using the anti - human (cid:1) 1 mAb 4B7R and polyclonal anti - ICAP antibodies . Two distribution patterns were visualized : either nu - clear or diffuse . Scoring 100 cells for ICAP - 1 protein distribution revealed that human (cid:1) 1 integrin cotransfection resulted in the se - questration of ICAP - 1 in the cytoplasm for 90 % of the visualized cells , whereas the cotransfection with NPXS human (cid:1) 1 integrin restores the dual cytoplasmic and nuclear distribution . Experiments were independently reproduced at least three times . Nuclear - Cytoplasmic Shuttling of ICAP - 1 Vol . 16 , April 2005 1863 NLS sequence mutated into AARH ( Figure 6 ) . The levels of ICAP - 1 (cid:3) NLS expression were comparable with those achieved with wild - type ICAP - 1 , as estimated by immuno - blot ( Figure 6B ) . According to immunoﬂuorescence micros - copy study , it seemed that mutation in the NLS sequence redirected ICAP - 1 expression from the nucleus to the cyto - plasmic fraction , thereby preventing nuclear accumulation of the mutant protein and contrasting with the location of wild - type ICAP - 1 ( Figure 6A ) . Again , we conﬁrmed that the destruction of this NLS sequence abolishes nuclear import of ICAP - 1 stably expressed in MDCK cells . Proliferation curves were determined with untransfected MDCK and MOCK - transfected cells , two MDCK clones overexpressing ICAP - 1 ( clones 4 . 9 and 8 . 9 ) , and three MDCK clones overexpressing ICAP - 1 (cid:3) NLS ( clones 3 . 5 , 11 . 3 , and 16 . 2 ) . During the time course of the experiment , proliferation of MDCK / ICAP - 1 (cid:3) NLS cells was comparable with that of control MDCK cells ( Figure 6C ) , suggesting that the increase in cell prolif - eration observed upon ICAP - 1 overexpression is dependent on nuclear localization of the ICAP - 1 protein . Next , we address the point whether the loss of ICAP - 1 also inhibited cell proliferation . To test this , wild - type ( SV6 . 5 ) and ICAP - 1 – deﬁcient ( SV2 . 1 ) immortalized osteo - blasts were used in a BrdU incorporation assay . As expected , ICAP - 1 expression was abolished in null cells ( SV2 . 1 cells ) and restored in SV2 . 1 / ICAP - 1 cells upon retroviral infection ( Figure 7A ) . A homogenous population SV2 . 1 / ICAP - 1 cells was sorted by FACS by using the EGFP ﬂuorescence ( Figure 7B ) . Immunoﬂuorescence studies conﬁrmed a homogenous ICAP - 1 expression in (cid:6) 95 % of the SV2 . 1 / ICAP - 1 cell pop - ulation ( Figure 7C ) . In agreement with our previous obser - vations , we noted a dual localization of ICAP - 1 in both cytoplasm and nucleus . Consistent with the positive effect of ICAP - 1 on cell proliferation , ICAP - 1 – deﬁcient cells ( SV2 . 1 ) had a signiﬁcant lower proliferation rate assayed by BrdU incorporation compared either with wild - type osteoblasts ( SV6 . 5 ) or with ICAP - 1 – rescued SV2 . 1 cells ( SV2 . 1 / ICAP - 1 ) ( Figure 7D ) . We attempted to establish whether the type of matrix could regulate ICAP - 1 – dependent cell proliferation and the potential shuttling of ICAP - 1 . BrdU incorporation was carried out in ICAP - 1 – deﬁcient cells ( SV2 . 1 ) and ICAP - 1 – rescued SV2 . 1 cells ( SV2 . 1 / ICAP - 1 ) plated on different substrates . SV2 / ICAP - 1 cells had a higher proliferation rate when cells were spread on ﬁbronectin compared with polylysine and vitronectin ( Figure 7E ) . In good correlation with these results , a time course of spreading coupled with a confocal analysis showed that the nuclear localization of ICAP - 1 is linked to the type of matrix used and is dependent on the stage of spreading of cells : ICAP - 1 displayed a cytoplasmic distribution with a nuclear exclusion in case of round cells ( corresponding to the initial step of spreading ) , whereas the distribution of ICAP - 1 became nuclear in case of well spread cells ( Figure 7F ) . On the other hand , the distribution of ICAP - 1 remained cytoplasmic what - ever the stage of cell spreading onto polylysine . This result demonstrated that ICAP - 1 shuttling is regulated by cell adhe - sion on a (cid:1) 1 integrin - dependent substrate . Thus , ICAP - 1 – de - pendent signaling and subcellular localization of ICAP - 1 seem to be dynamic processes linked to adhesion onto speciﬁc ma - trix proteins . ICAP - 1 Increases Transcriptional Activity from the c - myc P1 and P2 Promoter c - myc is a proto - oncogene that has been primarily reported to stimulate cell proliferation and cell growth ( Grandori et Figure 4 . Subcellular localization of ICAP - 1 is modulated by (cid:1) 1 integrin expression GD25 or GD25 / (cid:1) 1 cells were transiently transfected with pcDNA3 . 1 / ICAP - 1 , pcDNA3 . 1 / ICAP - 1 ( 1 - 99 ) , or pcDNA3 . 1 / ICAP - 1 ( 100 - 200 ) . ( A ) Subcellular distribution of the ectopically expressed proteins was visualized by immunoﬂuorescence by using polyclonal anti - ICAP antibodies . Bar , 10 (cid:3) m . ( B and C ) Three distribution patterns were visualized 24 h later as either nuclear , cytoplasmic , or both cytoplasmic and nuclear . Scoring 100 cells for ICAP - 1 protein distribution revealed that cells devoid of (cid:1) 1 integrin sequestered ICAP - 1 within nucleus ( A and B ) . The 1 – 99 fragment bearing the NLS sequence was located in the nucleus ( A and C ) independently of the expression of (cid:1) 1 integrins , whereas the 100 – 200 fragment was sequestered in the cytoplasm ( A and C ) . H . - N . Fournier et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 1864 al . , 2000 ; Pelengaris et al . , 2000 ) . One of the ICAP - 1 partners , Nm23 - H2 ( Fournier et al . , 2002 ) , is a putative suppressor of tumor metastasis in humans . The protein self - assembles into a hexamer and has dual enzymatic functions , acting as an NDP kinase and as a transcriptional activation factor . It binds to a nuclease - hypersensitive element of the c - myc promoter through which it activates c - myc transcription ( Postel et al . , 1993 ; Berberich and Postel , 1995 ) . Because ICAP - 1 increases cell proliferation and interacts with the transcriptional activator of the c - myc proto - oncogene Nm23 - H2 , we hypothesized that ICAP - 1 may be involved in the regulation of speciﬁc genes and more particularly may acti - vate c - myc transcription . To address the potential relation - ship between c - myc transcription and ICAP - 1 – induced cell proliferation , we performed reporter gene assays by using a plasmid ( pcmycCAT ) containing the human c - myc P1 and P2 promoter driving the bacterial CAT expression . This plasmid was used in conjunction with either increased amounts of Nm23 - H2 expression vectors , increased amounts of ICAP - 1 expression vectors , or an irrelevant protein ex - pressing vector . These plasmids were cotransfected into CHO cells , and the expression of CAT was analyzed 48 h after transfection by using the CAT enzyme - linked immu - nosorbent assay kit ( Roche Diagnostics ) . Figure 8A shows that cotransfection of pcmycCAT with an empty vector or containing an irrelevant cDNA such as that of (cid:2) - actinin did not affect the activity of the c - myc promoter and was there - fore considered as the basal level of CAT expression . In contrast , a threefold increase in the relative CAT expression was observed from the wild - type myc promoter in the pres - ence of Nm23 - H2 . This activation level is comparable with the one reported by Postel’s laboratory ( 1993 ) . Similarly , cotransfection with the ICAP - 1 plasmid resulted in a con - centration - dependent increase in CAT expression , reaching Figure 5 . Nuclear localization of ICAP - 1 in - creases cell proliferation . ( A ) MDCK cells sta - bly transfected with pTREhyg / ICAP - 1 were induced for ICAP - 1 expression by removing doxycycline during 48 h before lysis of the cells . Total proteins were subjected to gel elec - trophoresis and then transferred to PVDF membrane before processing of Western blot with the anti - ICAP - 1 polyclonal antibodies . The same gel was blotted with anti - actin poly - clonal antibodies for normalization . ( B ) Im - munoﬂuorescence of cells after induction shows a nuclear localization of ICAP - 1 . Bar , 10 (cid:3) m . ( C ) After reducing the percentage of serum and maintaining cells in 4 % serum , proliferation curves of MDCK cells containing pTREhyg / ICAP - 1 ( clone 8 . 9 ) or pTRE / hyg ( ct ) alone were registered in the absence ( in - duction ) or presence of 2 (cid:3) g / ml doxycycline ( (cid:1) dox ) . The clone 8 . 9 expressing ICAP - 1 shows an increase in cell proliferation after 5 d of induction . Nuclear - Cytoplasmic Shuttling of ICAP - 1 Vol . 16 , April 2005 1865 a threefold induction over the basal level ( Figure 8A ) . The expression of cyclin D1 known as a c - myc target involved in cell proliferation also was measured at early and late stage of spreading on ﬁbronectin in ICAP - 1 – deﬁcient osteoblasts or rescued with ICAP - 1 . The experiments clearly showed a higher expression of cyclin D1 in the cells rescued with ICAP - 1 in the late stage of cell spreading on ﬁbronectin ( Figure 8B ) , which nicely correlated with a nuclear localiza - tion of ICAP - 1 ( Figure 7 ) . These data support a model in which ICAP - 1 could increase gene expression from c - myc promoter in a manner comparable with that of Nm23 - H2 . The following question was to determine whether ICAP - 1 could act synergistically with or independently of Nm23 - H2 to activate the c - myc promoter . After cotransfection with pcDNA3 / ICAP - 1 and pcDNA3 / Nm23 - H2 , we were able to detect the threefold induction of CAT expression with amounts of vectors that did not allow such induction when they were used separately ( see gray histograms in Figure 8C ) that favors the view of a synergistic action . ICAP - 1 Control of the c - myc Promoter Requires Translocation into the Nucleus and Is Independent of Its Interaction with (cid:1) 1 Integrin ICAP - 1 contains a canonical PTB , a protein module that is present in a variety of signaling and cytoskeletal proteins . All known PTB domain proteins contain additional protein – pro - tein interaction module ( s ) and are believed to function as adap - tor proteins in cell signaling ( Shc , IRS - 1 ) , lineage determination ( numb ) , and receptor internalization ( X11 , Fe65 , Disabled ) . Our previous results have shown that ICAP - 1 binds to (cid:1) 1 integrins and is recruited in lamellipodia ( Fournier et al . , 2002 ) . Via the integrin receptors , ICAP - 1 might transmit signals from the cell membrane to the nucleus . On the other hand , some ICAP - 1 mutants have been characterized to interact or not with (cid:1) 1 integrins and others to accumulate or not in the nucleus . There - fore , the question was whether the induction of the reporter gene controlled by the c - myc promoter is an indirect conse - quence of integrin activation or due to the nuclear localization of ICAP - 1 and possible association with a transcription com - plex . As judged by other groups’ reports and according to our pull - down assays between glutathione S - transferase - (cid:1) 1 and ICAP - 1 mutants ( our unpublished data ) , ICAP - 1 WT , the 100 – 200 fragment and the ICAP - 1 (cid:3) NLS mutant were all able to interact with the (cid:1) 1 integrin chain , whereas the 1 – 99 fragment and the ICAP - 1 I138A mutant showed a defect in the interac - tion with the (cid:1) 1 integrin cytoplasmic tail . Among the mutants tested , only the ICAP - 1 (cid:3) NLS mutant did not accumulate in the nucleus . As shown in Figure 9 , neither the 1 – 99 fragment , nor the 100 – 200 fragment of ICAP - 1 was able to operate as activa - tors of the c - myc promoter . Moreover , the inducibility of the reporter gene was dependent on the nuclear localization of ICAP - 1 because ICAP - 1 (cid:3) NLS , devoid of its NLS sequence , was not able to stimulate the transcriptional activity of the c - myc promoter . On the other hand , the ICAP - 1 I138A mutant that is compromised in its interaction with the (cid:1) 1 integrin chain could increase efﬁciently the transcriptional activity of the c - myc Figure 6 . Cellular distribution of ICAP - 1 depends on its NLS sequence and exhibits differential effects on cell proliferation . ( A ) Subcellular localization of ICAP - 1 was visualized by indirect immunoﬂuorescence analysis with anti - ICAP - 1 polyclonal antibodies in MDCK clones containing pTREhyg ( MOCK cells ) or pTREhyg / ICAP - 1 ( ICAP - 1 WT ) or pTREhyg / ICAP - 1 (cid:3) NLS ( ICAP - 1 (cid:3) NLS ) after induction ( (cid:7) dox ) or without induction ( (cid:1) dox ) with 2 (cid:3) g / ml doxycycline . Bar , 10 (cid:3) m . ( B ) After 7 d of induction ( (cid:7) dox ) , different clones expressing ICAP - 1 WT ( 8 . 9 and 4 . 9 ) or ICAP - 1 (cid:3) NLS ( 3 . 5 and 11 . 3 ) were lysed and expression of ICAP - 1 with expected size was detected by Western blot with anti - ICAP - 1 polyclonal antibodies . The same gel was blotted with anti - actin polyclonal antibodies for normalization . ( C ) The ratio of cell proliferation is shown for untransfected MDCK cells , MOCK cells , ICAP - 1 – overexpressing MDCK cells ( clones 4 . 9 and 8 . 9 ) , and ICAP - 1 (cid:3) NLS – overexpressing MDCK cells ( clones 3 . 5 , 11 . 3 , and 16 . 2 ) after 7 d of induction . H . - N . Fournier et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 1866 promoter . These observations strongly suggest that ICAP - 1 integrin binding and its function of transcriptional activation are two independent events . Together , these data are consistent with a scenario in which ICAP - 1 interacts directly or indirectly with the c - myc promoter and thereby increases c - myc pro - moter activity after its translocation into the nucleus . DISCUSSION ICAP - 1 Shuttles between Nucleus and Cytoplasm Compartmentalization of signaling molecules is an impor - tant regulatory mechanism that enables cells to build up an elaborate a network of signaling pathways . We have previ - Figure7 . LossofICAP - 1decreasescellproliferationinosteoblasts . ( A ) ICAP - 1 – deﬁcientosteoblasts ( SV2 . 1 ) rescuedornotwithICAP - 1werelysedwith Laemmli buffer , and total cell lysates were resolved in SDS gel , transferred to a PVDF membrane , and probed with the monoclonal anti - ICAP - 1 4D1D6 and anti - actin . ( B ) ICAP - 1 – deﬁcient osteoblasts rescued with ICAP - 1 ( SV2 . 1 / ICAP - 1 ) were sorted by FACS by using EGFP ﬂuorescence . ( C ) Immuno - stainingofICAP - 1withpolyclonalanti - ICAP - 1antibodieswasperformedinSV2 . 1 , SV2 . 1 / ICAP - 1 , SV6 . 5 , andSV6 . 5 / ICAP - 1cells . ( D ) BrdUincorporation wascarriedoutinICAP - 1nullosteoblasts ( SV2 . 1 ) , ICAP - 1 - rescuedSV2 . 1cells ( SV2 . 1 / ICAP - 1 ) , wild - typeosteoblasts ( SV6 . 5 ) , andSV6 . 5 / ICAP - 1 . Cellsthat have incorporated BrdU were counted under the microscope by using anti - BrdU staining , and the percentage of labeled cells was estimated by 4 , 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindolecounterstaining . TheresultsaretheaverageoffourexperimentsallowingustoestimatetheSD . ( D ) BrdUincorporationwas carried out in ICAP - 1 null osteoblasts ( SV2 . 1 ) or in ICAP - 1 - rescued SV2 . 1 cells ( SV2 . 1 / ICAP - 1 ) plated either on polylysine ( PL ) or ﬁbronectin ( FN ) or vitronectin ( VN ) . Cells that have incorporated BrdU were counted under the microscope by using anti - BrdU staining . The results are the average of three experiments allowing us to estimate the SD . ( E ) SV2 . 1 / ICAP - 1 cells were allowed to spread onto FN or PL during 15 min ( early stage of spreading ) or 5h ( latestageofspreading ) , andthentheywereﬁxed , permeabilized , andstainedwithanti - ICAP - 1polyclonalantibodies . Visualizationofasinglesection and image capture were done with a confocal microscope . Nuclear - Cytoplasmic Shuttling of ICAP - 1 Vol . 16 , April 2005 1867 ously shown a transitory localization of ICAP - 1 at the lead - ing edge of spreading cells ( Fournier et al . , 2002 ) . We now report that endogenous ICAP - 1 as well as exogenous ICAP - 1 protein can be found both in the nucleus and cytoplasm of a variety of cultured cells . Two monoclonal antibodies di - rected against the ICAP - 1 N terminus and one polyclonal antibody consistently showed such a staining pattern . Cell fractionation experiments provided further evidence for a nuclear , cytosolic , as well as membrane localization of ICAP - 1 protein . The relative cellular distribution of ICAP - 1 between nucleus and cytoplasmic fractions varied among cell types , but it seems to be regulated by (cid:1) 1 integrin ex - pression . Control of trafﬁcking between the nuclear and cytoplasmic compartments is critical for gene expression in response to a variety of stimuli and therefore provides an important mechanism whereby cell adhesion molecules may regulate biological events . In that sense , the observation that a signiﬁcant fraction of ICAP - 1 protein is localized to the Figure 8 . ICAP - 1 – mediated activation of the c - myc promoter . ( A and C ) CHO cells were transiently transfected with the c - myc - CAT P1 and P2 promoter construct ( 1 (cid:3) g ) along with increasing concentrations of Nm23 - H2 expression plasmid ( 0 , 0 . 5 , and 1 (cid:3) g ) or ICAP - 1 expression plasmid ( 0 , 0 . 5 , 0 . 7 , and 1 (cid:3) g ) . In all cases , the amount of DNA transfected was kept constant by the addition of the pcDNA3 plasmid ( the vector backbone for Nm23 - H2 or ICAP - 1 ) . Extracts were generated 48 h later and assayed for CAT expression . The results are the average of three experiments allowing us to estimate the SD . ( B ) SV2 . 1 and SV2 . 1 / ICAP - 1 cells were cultured for 24 h in 1 % FCS before replating them onto ﬁbronectin . After 15 min or 5 h of spreading , cells were washed with PBS and directly lysed onto petri dishes with RIPA buffer . An amount of 30 (cid:3) g of proteins per lane was subjected to gel electrophoresis and then transferred to PVDF membrane before processing of Western blot with the anti - cyclin D1 mAb . The same gel was blotted with anti - actin polyclonal antibodies for normalization . H . - N . Fournier et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 1868 nucleus of epithelial cells prompted us to search for a puta - tive nuclear localization signal within the ICAP - 1 amino acid sequence . ICAP - 1 protein has a stretch of basic amino acid residues , bordered by glycines , typical of a nuclear localiza - tion signal . This NLS sequence was found to be functional because mutation of KKRH motif into AARH or its deletion inhibits nuclear accumulation of the protein . According to our experiments , ICAP - 1 nuclear localization seems to be associated with an increase in cell proliferation , possibly through the activation of the c - myc promoter . The subcellu - lar localization of ICAP - 1 is probably determined by a bal - ance of nuclear import and export , and the dynamic equi - librium between these two processes may determine the different biological effects of ICAP - 1 . It is likely that a con - formational change in ICAP - 1 allows the exposure of either the NLS sequence or the integrin binding domain , although we cannot completely rule out that ICAP - 1 partners that localize within the nucleus may direct ICAP - 1 nuclear im - port . Many transcription factors associated proteins either bind directly to cell adhesion molecules or localize to specialized adhesion sites . The recruitment of ICAP - 1 into nucleus fol - lows this general scheme and can be inﬂuenced by anchor proteins , such as integrins that could mask the NLS or sequester the protein . Our data clearly indicate that overex - pression of (cid:1) 1 integrin strongly reduced nuclear localization of ICAP - 1 , suggesting that free and / or unpaired integrins could modulate ICAP - 1 localization by sequestering it out - side the nucleus . ICAP - 1 shuttling is regulated by cell adhe - sion on a (cid:1) 1 integrin - dependent substrate because nuclear localization of ICAP - 1 is linked to cell adhesion on ﬁbronec - tin and is dependent on the stage of spreading of the cells . All these results suggest that integrin - mediated cell adhe - sion is linked , in some manner , to ICAP - 1 nuclear signaling events and relevant to a given physiological activity of (cid:1) 1 integrins . How Could ICAP - 1 Increase Cell Proliferation ? According to our experiments , ICAP - 1 may increase cell proliferation by acting directly or indirectly on the c - myc promoter . These data also are supported by studies carried out with ICAP - 1 – deﬁcient mice that revealed a defect in cell proliferation in vivo ( Bouvard , Aszodi , Kostka , Block , Albiges - Rizo , and Fa¨ssler , unpublished data ) . The question remains whether this mechanism belongs to a new signaling pathway or whether is integrated into an already known pathway . Some results suggest that the integrin (cid:2) 5 (cid:1) 1 coop - erates with receptor tyrosine kinases to promote extracellu - lar signal - regulated kinase ( ERK ) activation necessary for cell proliferation through two major mechanisms : the Src family / focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) pathway , which is acti - vated by most of integrins through the cytoplasmic domain of (cid:1) subunit , and the Shc / FAK pathway , which is activated by a subset of integrins through the transmembrane segment of (cid:2) subunit ( Wary et al . , 1996 ; Pozzi et al . , 1998 ; Barberis et al . , 2000 ; Hirsch et al . , 2002 ) . It seems that the (cid:2) subunit - dependent pathway increases the level of ERK activation , whereas the (cid:1) subunit - dependent pathway prolongs this activation and provides crucial signals for ERK nuclear translocation . This latter event could be controlled by Rac because the introduction of a constitutively active Rac res - cues nuclear translocation of ERK , which is suppressed in cells carrying a mutation in the (cid:1) 1 cytoplasmic domain ( Hirsch et al . , 2002 ) . Alternatively , (cid:1) 1 integrins also can activate c - Jun NH 2 - terminal kinase signaling through the FAK / Cas / Rac pathway ( Dolﬁ et al . , 1998 ; Oktay et al . , 1999 ) . Our data indicate that translocation into the nucleus is re - quired for ICAP - 1 – dependent transactivation of the c - myc promoter and stimulation of cell proliferation , thereby strongly suggesting that the protein may act directly or synergistically with other nuclear factors such as Nm23 - H2 . ICAP - 1 – induced transcriptional activation of c - myc and its positive effect on cell proliferation are underlined by higher expression of the cyclin D1 , a classical c - myc tar - get , in the well spread cells rescued with ICAP - 1 . This transcriptional activity correlates with a nuclear localiza - tion of ICAP - 1 and can explain in part the cell prolifera - tion induced by ICAP - 1 . However , ICAP - 1 also has been shown to interact with Rac and Cdc42 ( Degani et al . , 2002 ) with a putative Rho GDP dissociation inhibitor activity , and its association with Nm23 - H2 could in turn recruit Nm23 - H1 linked to the Rac exchange factor Tiam1 . Thus , the interference of ICAP - 1 through Rac signaling with other known pathways linking integrins to cell prolifera - tion cannot be excluded . Regulation of c - myc Expression by (cid:1) 1 Integrins A recent report has demonstrated the presence of a (cid:1) 1 integrin - signaling pathway that promotes expression of the c - myc protein ( Benaud and Dickson , 2001 ) , independently of growth factors , but likely mediated by protein kinase C , Src kinase family , and ERK mitogen - activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) . Indeed , the known pathways leading to c - myc induction , namely , c - Src , ERK1 / 2 MAPK , and Ras / Akt ( Bar - one and Courtneidge , 1995 ; Sears et al . , 2000 ; Benaud and Dickson , 2001 ) are activated by integrin ligation ( Frame and Brunton , 2002 ; Howe et al . , 2002 ) . Additionally , the activa - tion of the c - myc promoter via ICAP - 1 may correspond to a new pathway linking directly (cid:1) 1 integrin - mediated cell ad - hesion to cell proliferation . ICAP - 1 is transiently colocalized with (cid:1) 1 integrins at the leading edge of spreading cells , and this step also corresponds to c - Src activation . It is tempting to hypothesize that once the interaction between integrin and ICAP - 1 is broken during the later stages of adhesion , the protein is sent to the nucleus as a messenger of cell prolif - eration . This working model could explain how (cid:1) 1 integrins are up - regulating c - myc gene expression . Figure 9 . Activation of the c - myc promoter requires a functional NLS of ICAP - 1 . CHO cells were transiently transfected with the reporter construct pcmycCAT and the different constructs of ICAP - 1 . After 48 h , after lysis , CAT expression was determined according to the protocol of Roche Diagnostics . Nuclear - Cytoplasmic Shuttling of ICAP - 1 Vol . 16 , April 2005 1869 The proﬁling of gene expression patterns ( (cid:6) 10 , 000 genes ) after c - myc activation in the basal layer of mouse epidermis has recently been carried out ( Frye et al . , 2003 ) . The major classes of up - regulated genes are involved in synthesis and processing of RNA and proteins that control cell prolifera - tion and differentiation . Conversely , (cid:6) 40 % of the down - regulated genes code for cell adhesion and cytoskeleton proteins , in correlation with the inhibition in cell adhesion , motility , and wound healing . Impaired cell spreading de - creases hemidesmosome formation and reduces the assem - bly of the actomyosin cytoskeleton in good correlation with the decreased expression of the (cid:2) 6 (cid:1) 4 integrin . The authors proposed that c - myc stimulates exit from the stem cell com - partment by reducing adhesive interactions with the local microenvironment or niche and that the failure of hair dif - ferentiation reﬂects an inability of keratinocytes to migrate along the outer root sheath to receive hair inductive stimuli ( Frye et al . , 2003 ) . This general reduction of cell adhesiveness that could result from c - myc activation is consistent with a general role currently attributed to ICAP - 1 , namely , the inhibition of cell adhesion . Additionally , activation of the c - myc promoter by ICAP - 1 may result in a delay or a change in cell differentiation or polarity due to a hyperproliferative effect ( Liu et al . , 2004 ) . It will be crucial to determine the exact role of ICAP - 1 in the nucleus and at the membrane level after integrin binding to extracellular matrix to under - stand their respective contributions to cell proliferation . In conclusion , our results provide novel insights into the cel - lular roles of ICAP - 1 and open a new avenue for a better understanding of how integrin - mediated cell adhesion is linked to the control of cell proliferation . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Jean - Luc Coll for the H358 cells transfected with pTet - on . We also thank Ve´ronique Collin for ﬂuorescence - activated cell sorting analysis . We thank Genevie ` ve Tavernier and Brigitte Peyrusse for technical assistance . We thank Karin Sadoul and Martin Pfa ff for critical reading of the manuscript . This work was supported by the Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque , a grant from the Fe´de´ration Nationale des Centres de Lutte Contre le Cancer ( FNCLCC ) , the Association de Recherche pour le Cancer , Alliance des Re - cherches sur le Cancer , and the Re´gion Rhoˆne - Alpes . H . - N . F . was supported by a fellowship from the Ministe ` re de l’Education Nationale , de la Recherche et de la Technologie . D . B . was supported by a fellowship from ARC . REFERENCES Balda , M . S . , and Matter , K . ( 2000 ) . The tight junction protein ZO - 1 and an interacting transcription factor regulate ErbB - 2 expression . EMBO J . 19 , 2024 – 2033 . Barberis , L . , Wary , K . K . , Fiucci , G . , Liu , F . , Hirsch , E . , Brancaccio , M . , Altruda , F . , Tarone , G . , and Giancotti , F . G . ( 2000 ) . Distinct roles of the adaptor protein Shc and focal adhesion kinase in integrin signaling to ERK . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 36532 – 36540 . Barone , M . V . , and Courtneidge , S . A . ( 1995 ) . Myc but not Fos rescue of platelet - derived growth factor signalling block caused by kinase - inactive Src . Nature 378 , 509 – 512 . Benaud , C . M . , and Dickson , R . B . ( 2001 ) . Regulation of the expression of c - Myc by (cid:1) 1 integrins in epithelial cells . Oncogene 20 , 759 – 768 . Ben - Ze’ev , A . , Shtutman , M . , and Zhurinsky , J . ( 2000 ) . The integration of cell adhesion with gene expression : the role of (cid:1) - catenin . Exp . Cell Res . 261 , 75 – 82 . Berberich , S . J . , and Postel , E . H . ( 1995 ) . PuF / NM23 – H2 / NDPK - B transacti - vates a human c - myc promoter - CAT gene via a functional nuclease hyper - sensitive element . Oncogene 10 , 2343 – 2347 . Bianchi , E . , Denti , S . , Granata , A . , Bossi , G . , Geginat , J . , Villa , A . , Rogge , L . , and Pardi , R . ( 2000 ) . Integrin LFA - 1 interacts with the transcriptional co - activator JAB1 to modulate AP - 1 activity . Nature 404 , 617 – 621 . Bouvard , D . , and Block , M . R . ( 1998 ) . Calcium / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase II controls integrin (cid:2) 5 (cid:1) 1 - mediated cell adhesion through the integrin cytoplasmic domain associated protein - 1 (cid:2) . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 252 , 46 – 50 . Bouvard , D . , Vignoud , L . , Dupe - Manet , S . , Abed , N . , Fournier , H . N . , Vincent - Monegat , C . , Retta , S . F . , Fassler , R . , and Block , M . R . ( 2003 ) . Disruption of focal adhesions by integrin cytoplasmic domain - associated protein - 1 (cid:2) . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 6567 – 6574 . Chang , D . D . , Hoang , B . Q . , Liu , J . , and Springer , T . A . ( 2002 ) . Molecular basis for interaction between ICAP1 (cid:2) PTB domain and (cid:1) 1 integrin . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 8140 – 8145 . Chang , D . D . , Wong , C . , Smith , H . , and Liu , J . ( 1997 ) . ICAP - 1 , a novel (cid:1) 1 integrin cytoplasmic domain - associated protein , binds to a conserved and functionally important NPXY sequence motif of (cid:1) 1 integrin . J . Cell Biol . 138 , 1149 – 1157 . Degani , S . , Balzac , F . , Brancaccio , M . , Guazzone , S . , Retta , S . F . , Silengo , L . , Eva , A . , and Tarone , G . ( 2002 ) . The integrin cytoplasmic domain - associated protein ICAP - 1 binds and regulates Rho family GTPases during cell spread - ing . J . Cell Biol . 156 , 377 – 387 . Dolﬁ , F . , Garcia - Guzman , M . , Ojaniemi , M . , Nakamura , H . , Matsuda , M . , and Vuori , K . ( 1998 ) . The adaptor protein Crk connects multiple cellular stimuli to the JNK signaling pathway . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 15394 – 15399 . Engvall , E . , and Ruoslahti , E . ( 1977 ) . Binding of soluble form of ﬁbroblast surface protein , ﬁbronectin , to collagen . Int . J . Cancer 20 , 1 – 5 . Fassler , R . , Pfaff , M . , Murphy , J . , Noegel , A . A . , Johansson , S . , Timpl , R . , and Albrecht , R . ( 1995 ) . Lack of (cid:1) 1 integrin gene in embryonic stem cells affects morphology , adhesion , and migration but not integration into the inner cell mass of blastocysts . J . Cell Biol . 128 , 979 – 988 . Fournier , H . N . , Dupe - Manet , S . , Bouvard , D . , Lacombe , M . L . , Marie , C . , Block , M . R . , and Albiges - Rizo , C . ( 2002 ) . Integrin cytoplasmic domain - asso - ciated protein 1 (cid:2) ( ICAP - 1 (cid:2) ) interacts directly with the metastasis suppressor Nm23 – H2 , and both proteins are targeted to newly formed cell adhesion sites upon integrin engagement . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 20895 – 20902 . Frame , M . C . , and Brunton , V . G . ( 2002 ) . Advances in Rho - dependent actin regulation and oncogenic transformation . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 12 , 36 – 43 . Frye , M . , Gardner , C . , Li , E . R . , Arnold , I . , and Watt , F . M . ( 2003 ) . Evidence that Myc activation depletes the epidermal stem cell compartment by mod - ulating adhesive interactions with the local microenvironment . Development 130 , 2793 – 2808 . Globus , R . K . , Doty , S . B . , Lull , J . C . , Holmuhamedov , E . , Humphries , M . J . , and Damsky , C . H . ( 1998 ) . Fibronectin is a survival factor for differentiated osteoblasts . J . Cell Sci . 111 , 1385 – 1393 . Grandori , C . , Cowley , S . M . , James , L . P . , and Eisenman , R . N . ( 2000 ) . The Myc / Max / Mad network and the transcriptional control of cell behavior . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 16 , 653 – 699 . Gunel , M . , Laurans , M . S . , Shin , D . , DiLuna , M . L . , Voorhees , J . , Choate , K . , Nelson - Williams , C . , and Lifton , R . P . ( 2002 ) . KRIT1 , a gene mutated in cerebral cavernous malformation , encodes a microtubule - associated protein . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 10677 – 10682 . Hirsch , E . , et al . ( 2002 ) . Defective Rac - mediated proliferation and survival after targeted mutation of the (cid:1) 1 integrin cytodomain . J . Cell Biol . 157 , 481 – 492 . Howe , A . K . , Aplin , A . E . , and Juliano , R . L . ( 2002 ) . Anchorage - dependent ERK signaling – mechanisms and consequences . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 12 , 30 – 35 . Hsueh , Y . P . , Wang , T . F . , Yang , F . C . , and Sheng , M . ( 2000 ) . Nuclear trans - location and transcription regulation by the membrane - associated guanylate kinase CASK / LIN - 2 . Nature 404 , 298 – 302 . Kanungo , J . , Pratt , S . J . , Marie , H . , and Longmore , G . D . ( 2000 ) . Ajuba , a cytosolic LIM protein , shuttles into the nucleus and affects embryonal cell proliferation and fate decisions . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 3299 – 3313 . Kaverina , I . , Krylyshkina , O . , and Small , J . V . ( 2002 ) . Regulation of substrate adhesion dynamics during cell motility . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 34 , 746 – 761 . Liu , H . , Radisky , D . C . , Wang , F . , and Bissell , M . J . ( 2004 ) . Polarity and proliferation are controlled by distinct signaling pathways downstream of PI3 - kinase in breast epithelial tumor cells . J . Cell Biol . 164 , 603 – 612 . Morlon , A . , and Sassone - Corsi , P . ( 2003 ) . The LIM - only protein FHL2 is a serum - inducible transcriptional coactivator of AP - 1 . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 3977 – 3982 . Muller , J . M . , Isele , U . , Metzger , E . , Rempel , A . , Moser , M . , Pscherer , A . , Breyer , T . , Holubarsch , C . , Buettner , R . , and Schule , R . ( 2000 ) . FHL2 , a novel tissue - speciﬁc coactivator of the androgen receptor . EMBO J . 19 , 359 – 369 . H . - N . Fournier et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 1870 Naviaux , R . K . , Costanzi , E . , Haas , M . , and Verma , I . M . ( 1996 ) . The pCL vector system : rapid production of helper - free , high - titer , recombinant retro - viruses . J . Virol . 70 , 5701 – 5705 . Nix , D . A . , Fradelizi , J . , Bockholt , S . , Menichi , B . , Louvard , D . , Friederich , E . , and Beckerle , M . C . ( 2001 ) . Targeting of zyxin to sites of actin membrane interaction and to the nucleus . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 34759 – 34767 . Oktay , M . , Wary , K . K . , Dans , M . , Birge , R . B . , and Giancotti , F . G . ( 1999 ) . Integrin - mediated activation of focal adhesion kinase is required for signaling to Jun NH 2 - terminal kinase and progression through the G1 phase of the cell cycle . J . Cell Biol . 145 , 1461 – 1469 . Pelengaris , S . , Rudolph , B . , and Littlewood , T . ( 2000 ) . Action of Myc in vivo - proliferation and apoptosis . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 10 , 100 – 105 . Petit , M . M . , Meulemans , S . M . , and Van de Ven , W . J . ( 2003 ) . The focal adhesion and nuclear targeting capacity of the LIM - containing lipoma - pre - ferred partner ( LPP ) protein . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 2157 – 2168 . Postel , E . H . , Berberich , S . J . , Flint , S . J . , and Ferrone , C . A . ( 1993 ) . Human c - myc transcription factor PuF identiﬁed as Nm23 – H2 nucleoside diphos - phate kinase , a candidate suppressor of tumor metastasis . Science 261 , 478 – 480 . Pozzi , A . , Wary , K . K . , Giancotti , F . G . , and Gardner , H . A . ( 1998 ) . Integrin (cid:2) 1 (cid:1) 1 mediates a unique collagen - dependent proliferation pathway in vivo . J . Cell Biol . 142 , 587 – 594 . Retta , S . F . , Balzac , F . , Ferraris , P . , Belkin , A . M . , Fassler , R . , Humphries , M . J . , De Leo , G . , Silengo , L . , and Tarone , G . ( 1998 ) . (cid:1) 1 - Integrin cytoplasmic sub - domains involved in dominant negative function . Mol . Biol . Cell 9 , 715 – 731 . Roczniak - Ferguson , A . , and Reynolds , A . B . ( 2003 ) . Regulation of p120 - cate - nin nucleocytoplasmic shuttling activity . J . Cell Sci . 116 , 4201 – 4212 . Sadoul , K . , Lang , J . , Montecucco , C . , Weller , U . , Regazzi , R . , Catsicas , S . , Wollheim , C . B . , and Halban , P . A . ( 1995 ) . SNAP - 25 is expressed in islets of Langerhans and is involved in insulin release . J . Cell Biol . 128 , 1019 – 1028 . Sears , R . , Nuckolls , F . , Haura , E . , Taya , Y . , Tamai , K . , and Nevins , J . R . ( 2000 ) . Multiple Ras - dependent phosphorylation pathways regulate Myc protein stability . Genes Dev . 14 , 2501 – 2514 . Thomas , S . M . , Hagel , M . , and Turner , C . E . ( 1999 ) . Characterization of a focal adhesion protein , Hic - 5 , that shares extensive homology with paxillin . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 181 – 190 . Wang , Y . , Dooher , J . E . , Koedood Zhao , M . , and Gilmore , T . D . ( 1999 ) . Characterization of mouse Trip 6 , a putative intracellular signaling protein . Gene 234 , 403 – 409 . Wary , K . K . , Mainiero , F . , Isakoff , S . J . , Marcantonio , E . E . , and Giancotti , F . G . ( 1996 ) . The adaptor protein Shc couples a class of integrins to the control of cell cycle progression . Cell 87 , 733 – 743 . Yang , L . , Guerrero , J . , Hong , H . , DeFranco , D . B . , and Stallcup , M . R . ( 2000 ) . Interaction of the tau2 transcriptional activation domain of glucocorticoid receptor with a novel steroid receptor coactivator , Hic - 5 , which localizes to both focal adhesions and the nuclear matrix . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 2007 – 2018 . Zawistowski , J . S . , Serebriiskii , I . G . , Lee , M . F . , Golemis , E . A . , and Marchuk , D . A . ( 2002 ) . KRIT1 association with the integrin - binding protein ICAP - 1 , a new direction in the elucidation of cerebral cavernous malformations ( CCM1 ) pathogenesis . Hum . Mol . Genet . 11 , 389 – 396 . Zhang , J . , Clatterbuck , R . E . , Rigamonti , D . , Chang , D . D . , and Dietz , H . C . ( 2001 ) . Interaction between KRIT1 and ICAP1 (cid:2) infers perturbation of integrin (cid:1) 1 - mediated angiogenesis in the pathogenesis of cerebral cavernous malfor - mation . Hum . Mol . Genet . 10 , 2953 – 2960 . Zhang , X . A . , and Hemler , M . E . ( 1999 ) . Interaction of the integrin (cid:1) 1 cyto - plasmic domain with ICAP - 1 protein . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 11 – 19 . Nuclear - Cytoplasmic Shuttling of ICAP - 1 Vol . 16 , April 2005 1871