Open Research Online The Open University’s repository of research publications and other research outputs Creativity in the design process : co - evolution of prob - lem – solution Journal Article How to cite : Dorst , Kees and Cross , Nigel ( 2001 ) . Creativity in the design process : co - evolution of problem – solution . Design Studies , 22 ( 5 ) , pp . 425 – 437 . For guidance on citations see FAQs . c (cid:13) [ not recorded ] Version : [ not recorded ] Link ( s ) to article on publisher’s website : http : / / dx . doi . org / doi : 10 . 1016 / S0142 - 694X ( 01 ) 00009 - 6 http : / / www . elsevier . com / wps / ﬁnd / journaldescription . cws home / 30409 / description # description Copyright and Moral Rights for the articles on this site are retained by the individual authors and / or other copy - right owners . For more information on Open Research Online’s data policy on reuse of materials please consult the policies page . oro . open . ac . uk Design Studies , Vol . 22 , No . 5 , pp . 425 - 437 , 2001 Creativity in the design process : co - evolution of problem - solution Kees Dorst Faculty of Industrial Design Engineering , Delft University of Technology , 2628 BX Delft , The Netherlands Nigel Cross Department of Design and Innovation , Faculty of Technology , The Open University , Milton Keynes MK7 6AA , UK Empirical data on design processes were obtained from a set of protocol studies of nine experienced industrial designers , whose designs were evaluated on overall quality and on a variety of aspects including creativity . From the protocol data we identify aspects of creativity in design related to the formulation of the design problem and to the concept of originality . We also apply our observations to a model of creative design as the co - evolution of problem / solution spaces , and confirm the general validity of the model . We propose refinements to the co - evolution model , and suggest relevant new concepts of ‘default’ and ‘surprise’ problem / solution spaces . Keywords : creative design , design process , product design , co - evolution 2 Creativity in the design process is often characterised by the occurrence of a significant event - the so - called ‘creative leap’ . Sometimes such an event occurs as a sudden insight which the designer immediately recognises as significant , but often it is only in retrospect that the designer ( or an observer of the design process ) is able to identify a point during the design process at which the key concept began to emerge . Retrospective accounts of creative events in design made by the designers themselves may not be wholly reliable . However , some recent descriptive , empirical studies of the creative event 1 , 2 have begun to shed more light on this mysterious ( and often mystified ) aspect of design . More of these independent studies of creativity in design are necessary in order to develop a better understanding of how creative design occurs . The growing number of protocol studies of design 3 , 4 , 5 tend to be constructed as studies of normal design activity , without any specific intention of looking for creativity . Studying creative design is seen as problematic because there can be no guarantee that a creative ‘event’ will occur during a design process , and because of the difficulty of identifying a solution idea as ‘creative’ . But in every design project creativity can be found - if not in the apparent form of a distinct creative event , then as the evolution of a unique solution possessing some degree of creativity . Christiaans 6 studied industrial design students with a particular intention of looking for creativity in design . Our research presented in this paper develops this work with students by extending a similar research methodology into studies of experienced designers . The empirical basis of this research consisted of protocol studies of nine experienced industrial designers working on a small design assignment in a laboratory setting 7 . The industrial design domain is particularly interesting for the study of creative design because it calls for new , integrated solutions to complex , multidisciplinary problems . 1 . The Protocol Study This empirical study developed from earlier work based on the study of student designers , which included procedures to measure the perceived creativity and the overall ‘quality’ of the resulting designs 6 , 8 . Christiaans found that when specialist assessors were asked to grade designs on ‘creativity’ , they were quite consistent . Apparently , they are much more in agreement ( in an admittedly intuitive way ) about recognising the creativity of a design than the inconclusive discussions about the definition of creativity would suggest . For our purposes , the results suggest that it is reasonable to claim that 3 creative design can be assessed dependably in this manner . The participants we recruited for this study were nine industrial designers with five or more years of professional experience ( the minimum was five years and the maximum was twenty ) . The particpants were all working in design consultancies , which is important because the assignment is modelled on design consultancy practice . 1 . 1 The design assignment The assignment ( problem or brief ) developed for these studies was designed to be challenging , realistic , appropriate for the subjects , not too large , feasible in the time available and within the sphere of knowledge of the researchers . The assignment was to create a concept for a ‘litter disposal system’ in a new Netherlands train . This problem is typical as far as industrial design practice is concerned , in that it calls for the integration of a variety of aspects , such as ergonomics , construction , engineering , aesthetics and business aspects . The written design brief ( Figure 1 ) outlined the problem , introduced the stakeholders and defined the designer’s position . 1 . 2 The experimental procedure A special condition in the experiment was the manner in which information was provided to the designers . All the necessary information was prepared in advance on information sheets , with one specific topic on each sheet . Topics included interviews with the client , technical information about materials and production techniques , or a survey of train passengers . If a designer wanted to know something , they asked the experimenter ( who was sitting nearby ) , who would then hand over the appropriate sheet . This was done to ensure a quick but natural flow of information . The information on the sheets was presented as if it had come from different natural sources : from textbooks or catalogues and from the different stakeholders who were presented in the design brief . As a result , the information sheets contained natural amounts of vagueness and inconsistency . If the information was not available on the sheets , or if the designer’s question related to a detail of a sheet , the experimenter answered the question . 4 Design Brief • The Company Lemmens Inc . is a producer of plastic bins and buckets . There are 40 employees in the factory , working with 10 injection - moulding machines , an assembly line and a small toolmaking facility . Most of the products made are injection - moulded : small special series are made by vacuum moulding or rotomoulding ( done by Ten Cate Rotomoulding ) . Lemmens has a small own assortment , aimed at professional users , and supply buckets to for instance Curver PC ( comparable to Tupperware ) in Oosterhout . The company wants increase its own assortment and reduce its supplying activities . • This assignment The NS ( Dutch Railways ) is working on a number of new trains for the nineties , including a new local , the SM90 . This will be a totally new design , with an increased passenger capacity attained by putting five ( 2 + 3 ) chairs in a row . Because of the growing number of travellers they are also thinking about a new litter - disposal system ( now : bin + emptying device ) for the passenger compartment . The producer of the current bins has made a new design , but the railway company is not very enthusiastic about it . As a result , they started a small inquiry into the functioning of the current litter disposal system : the kinds of litter were determined , and passengers and litter collectors were asked to comment on it . Then the railways decided to invite Lemmens Inc . , among others , to come up with a better concept . There has been a meeting between the manager of Lemmens Inc . , Mr . Kouwenhoven , and the leader of the project within the NS , Mr . Van Dalen . Lemmens Inc . sees this project as a chance to give it a higher profile within the market . That is why you , an external designer , are asked to make one or more proposals . Tomorrow you will have a meeting where your proposals will be discussed : - principal solution - general embodiment ( materials , construction ) - idea behind the form - 1 : 1 sketch views - cost estimation Figure 1 The design brief 5 The experiments were conducted as ‘think - aloud’ protocol studies 9 , 10 . The designers were requested to think aloud as they were solving the design problem , and the design session was preceded by a short training exercise , to help them become accustomed to thinking aloud . The design brief was then given to the designer . The time allotted to them was 2 . 5 hours . During this period designers were encouraged to think aloud only if intervals of silence lasted for more than 30 seconds . After the design session , there was a brief interview to determine the motivation and attitude of the designer towards the test situation and his / her own design . The sessions were recorded by two high - level video cameras in the corners of the room ; one pointing down at the designer to capture sketching and drawing behaviour , and one to take a general picture . 1 . 3 Design quality measurement In this study , we were interested in the overall ‘quality’ of the resulting design concepts produced by the designers . One aspect of that quality is the perceived creativity of the design concepts . Assessments of the design concepts were made by independent , skilled assessors . The design concepts developed by all of the designers were re - drawn and presented in a similar format ( see Figure 2 ) . Each of the concepts was then assessed independently by five design teachers from the TU Delft Faculty of Industrial Design Engineering , all of whom are also practising designers . The procedure was as follows : • First the assignment was read and some of the relevant information was shown to them in an abbreviated form . The judges could ask questions for further clarification . • Then slides of all the concepts were shown in random order for 15 seconds , accompanied by a one - sentence summary to explain the way each of them works . • The first scoring category was briefly introduced , and all the design concepts were again shown for 15 seconds in random order . Each judge graded the concepts individually in this category . The scoring categories were : creativity , aesthetics , technical aspects , ergonomics and business aspects ( in random order ) . • In the last run - through , the judges were asked to give a total judgement of the concepts . Thus the ‘total’ judgement is not a mean of the other scores , but a separate , ‘overall impression’ score . This rather laborious multi - step procedure enabled us to analyse the rationale behind the judging behaviour and to test the consistency between raters . The interrater reliability was determined by computing the alpha - coefficient for the agreement between the judges 6 , 11 . The alpha - coefficient for the end measure in this study , the total judgement , was a very reasonable 0 . 71 . 6 Figure 2 Sketches of all nine designs 1 . 4 Results An overview of the scores given for each design on the different aspects can be found in Table 1 . The concepts of designers 3 and 4 clearly stand out as the best on most aspects . Design concepts 7 and 1 are consistently bad on all aspects . Design concept 8 was 7 considered the worst on all criteria , except creativity ; it is decidedly new , and ‘different’ , but has many shortcomings . Concept ergonomics technicalaspects aesthetics businessaspects creativity totaljudgement D 1 4 . 2 6 . 4 6 . 4 6 . 6 3 . 8 3 . 8 D 2 6 . 2 6 . 2 6 . 2 6 . 4 4 . 8 4 . 6 D 3 8 . 6 6 . 6 5 . 2 5 . 4 7 . 6 6 . 6 D 4 7 . 2 7 . 0 8 . 4 7 . 8 6 . 4 7 . 0 D 5 6 . 6 6 . 4 5 . 0 6 . 4 5 . 2 4 . 8 D 6 4 . 6 6 . 4 6 . 6 5 . 6 5 . 0 5 . 6 D 7 6 . 0 7 . 2 2 . 6 4 . 8 3 . 2 3 . 8 D 8 3 . 8 5 . 0 4 . 8 5 . 0 6 . 8 3 . 4 D 9 4 . 8 6 . 6 6 . 0 6 . 8 3 . 4 5 . 4 TABLE 1 The mean scores of all judges ( on a 1 to 10 scale ) As it turned out , the ‘ergonomics’ judgement correlated most heavily with the ‘total judgement’ , and ‘creativity’ correlated least ( but see Figure 3 and discussion , below ) , but none of the aspects were of overriding importance ( Table 2 ) . This was confirmed by the factor analysis : the ‘ergonomics’ aspect correlated 0 . 95 with the main factor of the factor analysis , good for 43 . 4 % of the variance of the data . The relatively even distribution shown in Table 2 is precisely what was aimed at in the formulation of this design assignment : it was supposed to be a typical , all - round industrial design engineering assignment . The perceived need to balance aspects was built into the design assignment to invite integrative behaviour , rather than a bias towards any one aspect . Thus creativity ( or any other aspect ) was not emphasised to the designers as an all - important consideration . ergonomics technicalaspects aesthetics businessaspects creativity correlationwith total judgement 0 . 68 0 . 46 0 . 44 0 . 57 0 . 32 TABLE 2 Correlations between the ratings of the design concepts on different categories and the total judgement of the design judges Figure 3 shows a scattergram for the ‘creativity’ scores of the design concepts against the ‘total judgement’ scores . It shows that Design 8 is an exception to the general trend : on 8 the whole , the more creative designs were considered better in the total judgement . ( The low correlation of 0 . 32 in Table 2 rises considerably to 0 . 8 when Design 8 is omitted . ) So it may be that creativity is normally regarded as a significant aspect of an overall ‘good’ design . However , ‘creative’ design is not necessarily ‘good’ design . Design 8 scores high on creativity , but low on overall quality . It therefore provides an interesting observation on the role of creativity within the total set of design goals . A designer’s aim normally is to achieve a high - quality design , with newness , novelty or creativity being treated as only one aspect of an overall , integrated design concept . 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 total judgement c r e a t i v i t y D1 D2 D3 D4 D5 D6 D7 D8 D9 Figure 3 Scattergram for the means of ‘total judgement’ and ‘creativity’ 2 . Observations of Creativity in Design From the protocols , we are able to make several observations on the nature of creativity in design . 2 . 1 Creativity and definition of the design problem Christiaans 6 reported from his study that ‘the more time a subject spent in defining and understanding the problem , and consequently using their own frame of reference in forming conceptual structures , the better able he / she was to achieve a creative result . ’ Defining and framing the design problem is therefore a key aspect of creativity . When we inspect our protocols , we can see that the designers used different strategies to organise 9 their approach to the assignment . Some began by deciding whether the process should be one of design or redesign , others focused on which stakeholder should have priority in this project : the client manufacturing company , the Railways , the passengers or the cleaners . Some of the designers also explicitly arranged their design assignment to be new and challenging - i . e . to help provoke a creative response . They used a variety of techniques to ensure this newness , such as searching for technical , behavioural or cultural factors that were not addressed in the design of the current product , the standard litter bin in Netherlands trains . An example of such an episode can be found in the protocol record of Designer 3 ( whose design concept was rated very highly overall , including the highest ‘creativity’ rating ) : In the 26th minute , the designer has the idea of doing away with the litter bins all together , and just make a hole in the floor of the train . He then asks whether or not such an idea would be outside the scope of the assignment , saying he likes to manipulate assignments , because they are often too narrow . Then he realises that there is already a litter system in a train , namely the toilets . He asks for some information about that , and is genuinely shocked to hear that they are just a hole in the train floor , which opens onto the rails . He finds this an ugly , primitive , and very backward solution , and adopts a new goal , namely to change this also . He starts designing a special litter container , which sucks in all the litter and compresses it . After some sketching he asks to confer with the Dutch Railways about his interpretation of the design assignment . We observed that the designers did not treat the design assignment as an objective entity ( a given ‘Design Problem’ ) . All the designers interpreted the assignment quite differently , in awareness of their own design environment , resources and capabilities . This design assignment manipulation is an almost constant process , but there were episodes in which this modification of the design assignment ( especially tailoring it to the 2 . 5 hours available ) was particularly clear . An example can be found in the protocol record of Designer 4 : In the 20th minute , the designer checks whether he is dealing exclusively with the litter bin or with other factors as well . He notes that ‘ . . they talk about a litter system . . . which means we’ll also have to deal with the carrying of the litter out of the train . . . ’ So for him the assignment had grown , from ‘bin’ to ‘system’ , and this became a bit of a problem . The designer asked for more information and translated this ‘carrying out of the train’ into : ‘I’ll note down that this is about the litter bin and emptying method . . . ’ Later on , the design assignment was reduced again by 10 ignoring the design of a new emptying method , and adopting the current solution for this part of the system . Some time later the assignment was explicitly reduced again by letting go of a possibly complicated idea of combining the litter bin into the chair : ‘I’ll drop the chair idea because of time pressure . . . ’ The designer thus decides what to do ( and when ) on the basis of a personally perceived and constructed design task , which includes the design problem , the design situation and the resources ( time ) available , as well as the designer’s own design goals . The creativity of the design is thus influenced by all these factors . 2 . 2 Creativity and originality There is a particular example in this design exercise that makes one reflect upon the very nature of what is meant by ‘creative design’ and the notions of ‘originality’ and ‘ideas’ . In the information sheets that the designers could ask for , the problem of the newspapers that people leave in trains pops up , in several separate places , e . g . : - newspapers make up 40 % of the contents of the bins - the single largest ingredient of train litter - sometimes they are left behind on the luggage racks - the cleaners complain about having to collect the newspapers - the railway company wants to attain an environmentally - friendly image , and they are thinking about ways of recycling the waste collected in trains . All designers found most of these four issues in their exploration of the assignment , amongst many other issues to which they had to attend . These loose bits of information can be combined into the idea that newspapers should be collected separately . All nine designers got this idea , and all of them reported upon it as an original idea , a key concept in their solution . ( What is more , all 21 students in the previous studies by Christiaans , with the same design assignment , also had this same idea . ) The designers were very enthusiastic about this idea , and they were convinced that they were going to beat any competitors with this idea . It is a real ‘aha’ event 1 . It is interesting that they all seemed to think that this was an original concept . Indeed it was original in the sense that it is a different concept from the existing litter bin ; it was also original to each individual designer . ( This is an instance of Boden’s 12 distinction between ‘personal’ creativity and ‘historical’ creativity ; where the latter type represents genuinely unique insights that occur to the first - ever individual in history known to have 11 the insight . ) But the re - occurence of the idea independently in the minds of different designers suggests that somehow it may be an ‘easy’ step in originality ; that certain kinds of information in the problem data may spur similar ‘creative’ concepts . All the designers took this idea as one of the key features in their subsequent design process , even though it led to a number of different designs . For instance , the system level on which they incorporate this idea in the end differs widely among designers : one can take the level of the whole train , a railway carriage or just a compartment as the scope of the design , or simply add a newspaper rack to a litter bin . In Figure 2 , in concepts III , IV , VI and VII we see a product solution at a very local level ( adding a newspaper bin to the litter bin ) , while concept VIIII includes a newspaper rack that is to be placed at the end wall of each passenger compartment ( not drawn ) . 3 . Modelling Creative Design as Co - evolution It seems that creative design is not a matter of first fixing the problem and then searching for a satisfactory solution concept . Creative design seems more to be a matter of developing and refining together both the formulation of a problem and ideas for a solution , with constant iteration of analysis , synthesis and evaluation processes between the two notional design ‘spaces’ - problem space and solution space . The model of creative design proposed by Maher et al . 13 is based on such a ‘co - evolution’ of the problem space and the solution space in the design process : the problem space and the solution space co - evolve together , with interchange of information between the two spaces ( Figure 4 ) . P ( t ) P ( t + 1 ) S ( t ) S ( t + 1 ) Evolution Evolution Focus , Fitness Focus , Fitness Focus , Fitness TIME Problem - Space Dimension Solution - Space Dimension Figure 4 The co - evolution model of Maher et al . 12 We can express the case of the ‘creative event’ of the ‘keep newspapers separate’ idea , as we found it in our protocol studies , in the terms of this model of the co - evolution of problem space ( PS ) and solution space ( SS ) . A rough description of what happened in this case is that a chunk , a seed , of coherent information was formed in the assignment information , and helped to crystallise a core solution idea . This core solution idea changed the designer’s view of the problem . We then observed designers redefining the problem , and checking whether this fits in with earlier solution - ideas . Then they modified the fledgling - solution they had . This pattern of development can be modelled quite clearly along the lines of the Maher model . Figure 5 represents what we observed in our experiments . The designers start by exploring the PS , and find , discover , or recognise a partial structure ( P ( t + 1 ) ) . That partial structure is then used to provide them with a partial structuring of the SS ( S ( t + 1 ) ) . They consider the implications of the partial structure within the SS , use it to generate some initial ideas for the form of a design concept , and so extend and develop the partial structuring ( S ( t + 2 ) ) . Some of this development of the partial structuring may be derived from references to earlier design projects . They transfer the developed partial solution structure back into the PS ( P ( t + 2 ) ) , and again consider implications and extend the structuring of the PS . Their goal is to create a matching problem - solution pair . Problem - Space Dimension Solution - Space Dimension P ( t ) P ( t + 1 ) S ( t ) S ( t + 1 ) S ( t + 2 ) P ( t + 2 ) P ( t ) initial problem space P ( t + 1 ) partial structuring of problem space S ( t ) initial solution space S ( t + 1 ) partial structuring of solution space S ( t + 2 ) developed structuring of solution space P ( t + 2 ) developed structuring of problem space Figure 5 Co - evolution of problem - solution as observed in this study 13 4 . Bridges , Frames , Defaults and Surprises Cross 2 suggested that the creative event in design is not so much a ‘creative leap’ from problem to solution as the building of a ‘bridge’ between the problem space and the solution space by the identification of a key concept . Our observations confirm that creative design involves a period of exploration in which problem and solution spaces are evolving and are unstable until ( temporarily ) fixed by an emergent bridge which identifies a problem - solution pairing . A creative event occurs as the moment of insight at which a problem - solution pair is framed : what Schön 14 called ‘problem framing’ . Studies of expert and outstanding designers 15 suggest that this framing ability is crucial to high - level performance in creative design . How do designers frame the partial problem space ? In the protocols we observed , with respect to the ‘keep newspapers separate’ idea , there is the recognition of a cluster of related information in the PS . This recognition enables the designers to make a partial structuring of the PS . The designers appear to have a strategy for this . They search through the information by asking a quasi - standard set of questions , such as : ‘capability of the company’ , ‘available investment’ , etc . Apparently , they have a set of expectations about the answers to these questions . These expectations more or less constitute a default project with which they compare the current challenge . ( This is in marked contrast to the students that were studied earlier , who did not display this checking behaviour , but clearly had to try to absorb all the information , and then structure it . ) In doing this , they check the information related to the assignment to build up a general image , and to look for surprises . This process of checking then leads to ( 1 ) an overview of the project ( and of the priorities of the stakeholders ) and ( 2 ) a collection of ‘interesting points’ - for instance , designers can be seen to make a small stack of information sheets that interest them , or make a list of these items . In the case of the ‘keep newspapers separate’ idea , the creative event can be observed to happen as follows : 1 - Loose , surprising information is linked into a coherent chunk , which offers a simplification of the design problem 2 - The recognition of the simplification happens suddenly , and is experienced as an idea ( a creative insight ) . This finding of a coherence between the interesting information items apparently gives the designers the feeling of having grasped the core of 14 the problem ( ‘the problem behind the assignment’ ) . This is a highly emotional step , and none of the designers could ignore the impact . 3 - This ‘keep the newspapers separate’ idea is then ( mistakenly but understandably ) seen as being original . Thus the simple ( obvious ) selection and combination of information leads to the same core idea for all the designed products . 4 - Then ( and just by accident in this case ) the transformation of this problem - chunk into a solution turns out to be very simple , too . The designer only has to turn the problem around to arrive at a solution : ‘If it is too much trouble putting the newspapers into the bin , keeping them there and getting them out again - then why put them in ? ’ And as it happens , a product to hold some newspapers is easily imagined . None of our designers could resist this reasoning path . 5 . Conclusion We hope to have shown that the ‘problem - solving’ aspect of design can be described usefully in terms of Maher’s model of the co - evolution of problem and solution spaces , and that the ‘creative’ aspect of design can be described by introducing the notions of ‘default’ and ‘surprise’ problem / solution spaces . Schön 14 used the notion of ‘surpise’ in his theory of creative design , where it has the pivotal role of being the impetus that leads to framing and reframing . Surprise is what keeps a designer from routine behaviour . The ‘surprising’ parts of a problem or solution drive the originality streak in a design project . The process of evolution in the natural world is nowadays seen as driven by a reaction to a surprise ( change in environment ) , rather than a gradual changing of a phenotype and genotype in an ever closer approximation to an optimum in the fitness function . We suggest that creativity in the design process can validly be compared to such ‘bursts of development’ . Acknowledgments This research was conducted at the Faculty of Industrial Design Engineering , Delft University of Technology . We are grateful to the designers who acted as participants , and to colleagues who assessed the qualities of the designs produced . The concepts in the paper were first presented at the Fourth International Conference on Computational Models of Creative Design . 15 References 1 Akin , Ö and Akin , C Frames of reference in architectural design : analysing the hyper - acclamation ( A - h - a ! ) Design Studies , vol . 17 , no . 4 ( 1996 ) pp . 341 - 361 2 Cross , N Descriptive models of creative design : application to an example , Design Studies , vol . 18 , no . 4 ( 1997 ) pp . 427 - 455 3 Cross , N , Christiaans , H and Dorst , K ( eds . ) Analysing Design Activity , Wiley , Chichester , UK ( 1996 ) 4 Suwa , M and Tversky , B What do architects and students perceive in their design sketches ? a protocol analysis , Design Studies , vol . 18 , no . 4 ( 1997 ) pp . 385 - 403 5 Gero , J S and McNeill , T An approach to the analysis of design protocols , Design Studies , vol . 19 , no . 1 ( 1998 ) pp . 21 - 61 6 Christiaans , H Creativity in Design ( PhD Thesis ) , Delft University of Technology , Delft , The Netherlands ( 1992 ) 7 Dorst , K Describing Design : A Comparison of Paradigms ( PhD Thesis ) , Delft University of Technology , Delft , The Netherlands ( 1997 ) 8 Christiaans , H and Dorst , K An empirical study into design thinking , in Cross , N , Roozenburg , N and Dorst , K ( eds . ) Research in Design Thinking , Delft University Press , Delft , The Netherlands ( 1992 ) 9 Ericsson , K A and Simon , H A Protocol Analysis : Verbal Reports as Data , MIT Press , Cambridge , Ma . , USA ( 1993 ) 10 van Someren , M W , Barnard , Y , and Sandberg , J The Think Aloud Method : A Practical Guide To Modelling Cognitive Processes , Academic Press , London , UK ( 1994 ) 11 Nunnally , J C Psychometric Theory , McGraw - Hill , New York , NY , USA ( 1967 ) 12 Boden , M The Creative Mind , Weidenfeld and Nicolson , London , UK ( 1990 ) 13 Maher , M L , Poon , J and Boulanger , S Formalising design exploration as co - evolution : a combined gene approach , in Gero , J S and Sudweeks , F ( eds . ) Advances in Formal Design Methods for CAD , Chapman and Hall , London , UK ( 1996 ) 14 Schön , D A The Reflective Practitioner : How Professionals Think In Action , Basic Books , New York , NY , USA ( 1983 ) 15 Cross , N and Clayburn Cross , A Expert Designers , in Frankenburger , E . , P . Badke - Schaub and H . Birkhofer ( eds . ) Designers - the Key to Successful Product Development , Springer Verlag , London , UK ( 1998 )