Methodology Speech , Publisher’s Version 07 / 08 / 01 1 SUCCESSES AND FAILURES IN THE TRANSFORMATION OF ECONOMICS By Richard G . Lipsey Emeritus Professor of Economics , Simon Fraser University and Fellow Canadian Institute for Advanced Research Simon Fraser University at Harbour Centre 515 West Hastings Street , Vancouver , BC V6B 5K3 Canada Voice : ( 604 ) 291 5036 , Fax : ( 604 ) 291 5034 email : rlipsey @ sfu . ca , home page : http : / / www . sfu . ca / ~ rlipsey A revised version of the Keynote Address for The International Network of Economic Method at The University of British Columbia June 30 2000 Forthcoming in The Journal of Economic Methodology , 2001 DISTRIBUTION VERSION ( The distribution version differs from the publisher’s version only in that the notes are in footnotes in the former and endnotes in the latter . ) Methodology Speech , Publisher’s Version 07 / 08 / 01 2 TABLE OF CONTENTS I . Economics Then And Now . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 II . Qualitative Insights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 III . Theory and Observation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 IV . Theory Today . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 V . Theory and Policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 VI . Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29 BIBLIOGRAPHY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30 Methodology Speech , Publisher’s Version 07 / 08 / 01 3 SUCCESSES AND FAILURES IN THE TRANSFORMATION OF ECONOMICS 1 I thought I should take a hint from the letter inviting me to give this talk 2 and speak about how I saw economics when I was a neophyte and how I see it now . I must point out at the outset that I am only an amateur methodologist . I have , however , had a strong interest in methodology ever since introductory economics (cid:190) a social science purporting to have laws about human behaviour (cid:190) seduced me away from becoming an astronomer . I . ECONOMICS THEN AND NOW As a final year undergraduate in honours economics at the University of British Columbia in 1949 - 50 , I encountered Lionel Robbins’ An Essay on the Nature and Significance of Economic Science . What I read there was that economic theory is erected on assumptions that appeal to one’s intuition and that these are used to make deductions , not all of which are obvious . Since the deductions follow from intuitively obvious assumptions , they must be true ( provided only that we do not violate any rules of logic in arriving at them ) . If the facts disagree with the conclusions , so much the worse for the facts . In short : empirical observations are used to illustrate theories not to test them . As I read Robbins , I said to myself : “There must be something wrong with this view ; facts must play a more important part in the evolution of any science than just as illustrations of generalisations reached by a priori reasoning” . This observation led me to form a research program to discover what was wrong with Robbins’ Euclidean methodology (cid:190) a methodology that Mark Blaug subsequently taught me was also employed by the Austrians and many of the classical economists . The Robbinsian methodology was influential at the time . Indeed , as a graduate student at the University of Toronto ( 1951 - 53 ) and at the London School of Economics ( 1953 - 55 ) , my contemporaries and I spent much time arguing about the plausibility of assumptions as the way to criticise a theory . When I was appointed to the staff of the LSE in 1955 , I was instrumental in forming a staff seminar to study methodology . We soon discovered Karl Popper . Whatever the current evaluation of him , Popper provided us with a way to escape from the methodology that we had been taught . When we thought we had the answer to what was wrong with Robbins’ methodology , we renamed our seminar the “LSE Staff Seminar on Methodology , Measurement , and Testing in Economics” (cid:190) the M 2 T seminar . In 1960 , I set out to write a textbook that would expound what we saw as the new methodology . ( We were unaware of Terrance Hutchison’s earlier exposition of a similar 1 This paper is a revised version of my Keynote Address to the meeting of The International Network of Economic Method at The University of British Columbia , June 30 , 2000 . I am grateful to Roger Backhouse , Clifford Bekar , Mark Blaug , Ken Carlaw , Joanna Lipsey - Ouimet , and Alvero Pereira for their many comments and suggestions 2 Where it was stated : “We think of you as an important economist who long before there was any organization such as INEM , tried to introduce serious methodological thinking into economic practice . ” Methodology Speech , Publisher’s Version 07 / 08 / 01 4 position ( Hutchison 1938 ) . ) 3 In 1963 , I completed the first edition of An Introduction to Positive Economics , which became an instant best seller in the UK and for years was known as IPE . Because only a small proportion of British students who graduated from secondary education went on to university at that time , and because those who studied introductory economics at the LSE were already committed to a serious study of some social science , it was possible to influence the subject through the medium of a first year text book in ways that would be impossible today . The book played a significant part , at least in the UK , in eliminating the Robbinsian methodology so completely that most economists today do not realise that it was one of the most prevalent methodologies within living memory . 4 Two of the book’s main themes were as follows . First , although theoretical structures are needed , models are only models . The proof of their value is in how well they explain or predict what we see . Without a model , we have only shapeless accumulations of observations ; without observations to act as controls , we have only potentially irrelevant accumulations of theories . Second , students need to learn mathematics to express many economic theories and econometrics to test them . In the first edition , I was a naive falsificationist , but in later editions I developed a less rigid view of the place of empirical observation . The UK book is now in its 9 th edition and has been translated into over 15 foreign languages ( although its US offshoot is no longer widely used ) . 5 I also made a small contribution to the mathematisation of our subject with a campaign to introduce mathematical analysis into the economic theory undergraduate specialisation taught at the LSE in the 1950s and early 1690s . 6 This gave rise to a textbook called An Introduction to a Mathematical Treatment of Economics ( Archibald and Lipsey , 1967 ) , which was designed to teach mathematics to those who knew some economics but no mathematics . The book was quite successful . It went through three editions and several foreign language translations and was widely used in the UK for over 20 years . 3 See also his excellent critique of some modern trends in economics in Hutchinson ( 1992 ) . 4 I have told the story of my methodological interests and the origins of the M 2 T seminar and IPE in more detail in my “Intellectual Autobiography” which is the introductory chapter in Lipsey 1997b . 5 The American adaptation of IPE was called Economics by Lipsey and Steiner . The first edition ( 1966 ) preserved IPE’s methodological approach . But under relentless market pressure , the methodological parts were slowly stripped away . First the introductory methodological chapter was greatly watered down . Then the chapters at the end of each part that suggested that the theories just learned might not be true in all respects and that outlined some competing theories , disappeared one by one . US instructors seemed keen to teach their students economic “truths” and not to expose their subject as an evolving one with many ongoing controversies . This was not totally surprising since the audience in the UK , where less than 10 percent of all secondary school graduates went on the university in the 1960s , was quite different from the audience in the US , where the figure was closer to 40 percent . This is also an example of the conflict discussed in Observation 10 between expounding science and advocating “good” policies . 6 When one specialized in economics at the LSE in the 1950s and early 1960s , one chose from a number of special fields of which “Economics Analytical and Descriptive” was the theory option . Surprisingly , neither mathematics nor mathematical economics was taught in that option ( nor in any other of the economics options for that matter ) until some time in the 1970s . In an effort to subvert the LSE economists’ anti - mathematical bias , I surreptitiously inserted an option that used the economics the students had already learned as a vehicle for teaching them some elementary mathematical analysis . This was possible because any staff member was allowed to invent and teach his own optional course . Methodology Speech , Publisher’s Version 07 / 08 / 01 5 Since I first published IPE , there has been an exponential growth in our subject (cid:190) probably over 90 % of all the words written on economics have been written over the life times of some living economists . There has also been a transformation in the amount of mathematical and econometric technique taught to economics students . Today , it is inconceivable that anyone could do as I did , discovering that after one of the best educations available in Canada and the UK , I needed to learn calculus in order to work on my thesis topic . ( I literally did not know how to differentiate x 2 when I began working on the theory of customs unions . ) After my generation , came the first wave of economists who were routinely given a solid technical training in mathematics and econometrics . Many displayed , not surprisingly , a growing mesmerisation with technique for its own sake (cid:190) both mathematical and econometric . I had foreseen this but hoped that it would be a transitional problem . My expectation was that because the second generation of well trained economists would grow up knowing that all their compatriots had the same techniques , no one would see any advantage in showing off his or her mastery of them . After that , I hoped , the advanced techniques would take their place as just another set of tools to be used or left aside as the specific occasion required . It took a little longer than I expected , but I think this is happening to some extent with today’s younger generation (cid:190) although there are still , as I shall point out later , other unfortunate consequences of the formalism that now characterises much of economics . The outpouring of economic writing that has occurred since the 1960s covers the whole range from very good to very bad . Today , however , I am more optimistic than I was 5 - 10 years ago that the balance between good and bad is changing for the better . Almost everywhere one looks there is an increasing supply of “goods . ” Problems that formerly seemed intractable are currently yielding to a mixture of good economic theory and solid empirical analysis . In today’s talk , I take the existence of the “goods” as given and mention them only where they are needed to highlight some of the “bads . ” ( To avoid misunderstanding , let me re - emphasise at the outset that there are many , many “goods” in our subject . 7 ) My task to day , however , is to study some of the remaining “bads” . Their existence is interesting and it can be illuminating to ask why they occur . My suggested answers are only illustrative ( and I hope provocative ) , as a full examination would require a survey of all sub - disciplines , attempting to answer my question in each case . I will arrange my comments around 11 observations grouped into 5 main classes . 7 Here are just a few examples of what I see as “goods” in addition to those mentioned later in the text : principle agent and moral hazard theories ; transaction cost theory , except where it becomes an untested alibi for whatever observations that other theories cannot explain ; environmental economics , with such important policies as transferable rights to pollute ; transport economics , with many important tools such as congestion taxes , user fees for roads , and peak load pricing ; the understanding that monetary policy is the major determinant of inflation . Notice that all of these require relatively simple theory much of which can be expounded in an introductory text . The last insight came after a textbook case of debate in the 1960s and 1970s between two conflicting theories , Keynesian and monetary , in which empirical testing was critical . ( I have reviewed this debate in Lipsey 2001b . ) Methodology Speech , Publisher’s Version 07 / 08 / 01 6 II . QUALITATIVE INSIGHTS I believe that many of the general problems faced by today’s economists , and many of the specific “bads” that they produce , can be traced to a single cause that I state as my first observation . Observation 1 : The great insights of economics are all qualitative . Early economists asked a qualitative question : “Why do independent agents acting in their own self interest produce a more or less co - ordinated outcome ? ” They developed a shatteringly insightful qualitative answer , which was ( couched in modern terminology ) : “The price system leads large numbers of independent private agents to co - ordinate their myriad actions because they all respond to the same public signals of market prices that reflect relative national scarcities of inputs and outputs . ” 8 This is one of the greatest social insights of all time . The world would be a much more productive and happier place if those making , carrying out and criticising public policy understood the coordinating role of the price system and many of its subtle applications . Ever since the earliest economists , the important insights about how the market mechanism works (cid:190) such as the price system as a social control mechanism , the role of prices in leading to a relatively efficient allocation of resources ( about which more later ) , diminishing marginal utility and the “law” of demand , diminishing marginal product , the gains from trade requiring comparative not absolute advantage , technological change is more important than capital accumulation as an engine for very long term growth (cid:190) have all been qualitative . 9 Indeed , economics contains no quantitative constants similar to Plank’s constant , or the inverse square rule of universal attraction , or the Hubble constant (cid:190) the value of which determines the size , age and ultimate fate of the universe . 10 Furthermore , the formal theories of our textbooks are all qualitative and , until specific and ephemeral values are given to their parameters , the theories make only qualitative predictions . As a result , economics has nothing like the theories of physics that predict specific quantitative outcomes such as the precise way in which light will bend under gravitational attraction , the deceleration of time and the increase in mass as the speed of matter approaches that of light , or one of the specific solutions to Einstein’s field equations in which there is an 8 It is not clear when this co - ordination question , and its remarkable answer , entered economics . Although Adam Smith did propound some of the functions of price system , he was interested in growth not static resource allocation , as were the other Classical economists . I shall not delve further into this fascinating question in the history of economic thought . 9 Of all these , probably only the last is subject to any serious debate . Right or wrong , however , the statement is clearly qualitative . Its quantitative importance varies among times and places and measurements of it are in any case dependant on a breakdown , which is dubious at best . ( We have argued for this generalisation and also made the point about the dubious nature of measurements that split the causes of growth into capital accumulation and technical change in Lipsey and Carlaw 2000a and 2000b . ) 10 The estimated value of this last mentioned constant has been falling steadily over the last 75 years , and is currently around 50 . Along with all other admirers of Douglas Adams’ great trilogy in five parts , The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy , my heart jumped when , a few years ago , a measure of the Hubble constant came out at , “ 42 ” . Unfortunately , this number is now thought to be too low . Methodology Speech , Publisher’s Version 07 / 08 / 01 7 unstable void that explodes in a “Big Bang” when even the smallest particle of matter is introduced . In natural sciences , where stable quantitative relations allow such tight theories to be developed , conflicts between theory and new evidence (cid:190) an example of what I call anomalies (cid:190) are immediately obvious . They typically encourage research until either the new evidence is proven to be erroneous or the theory is amended to accommodate it . Of course , I realise that an evolving theory must tolerate many anomalies . But in natural sciences anomalies remain causes for concern . Physicists are no better methodologists than economists ; they are also prone to many of the same attitudes , such as valuing pure theory over “mere” observation . They do , however , have something that economists do not have : theories that are tightly enough related to stable observations as to force knowledge - advancing behaviour on them . In contrast , economic theory and empirical observations are nothing like as tightly bound together . There are no universal constants . There are few if any stable quantitative relations among variables . There are no general theories that cut across the whole of economic behaviour , that have a strong evidential base , and that make precise quantitative predictions that form research agendas to direct subsequent work . Economics has many levels of theory , from the most abstract found in highly mathematical journals , through more accessible theories found in the main line journals , to the less formal and more intuitive theories found in many books and in more applied journals . Similarly , there are many levels of empirical analysis running , from the those that use the most complex techniques , through more standard techniques , to more purely empirical work , to the cases studies and the broader observations found in the writings of many business school economists . Consider , for example , all the types of theory and observation that exist concerning the behaviour of firms . Those who operate at any one level of theoretical abstraction and empirical sophistication seldom communicate with those who operate at other levels . Indeed , they are often unaware of results produced at other levels . For just one example , many game theorists who theorise about firm behaviour are unaware of the wealth of detail on firm behaviour in books such as Chandler’s The Visible Hand or Scale and Scope . Indeed many who theorise on firm behaviour see no need to be informed on what is contained in such “descriptive” books . 11 As a result , anomalies , particularly those that cut across the sub - disciplines and that can be studied with various levels of technical sophistication , are tolerated on a scale that would be impossible in most natural sciences (cid:190) and would be regarded as a scandal if they were . The lack of communication among economists operating at the various levels of theoretical abstractions and empirical sophistication causes them to be unaware of many of these anomalies , so their existence often does not induce research to resolve them . ( In my terminology an anomaly arises when conflicts exist within the subject . 11 It has been suggested to me that the same points about various levels of theoretical and empirical sophistication can be made about such sciences as physics and biology . Without being certain , I doubt that those wishing to make contributions to the understanding of some physical particle or some biological behaviour operate at such widely different levels of theoretical sophistication ( and with such poor channels of communication ) as do economists intending to make contributions to the understanding of the behaviour of firms . Methodology Speech , Publisher’s Version 07 / 08 / 01 8 Important conflicts commonly exist in economics between the predictions of some theory and established evidence , between conflicting predictions made by different theories about the same phenomenon , between conflicting results of different tests conducted on the same theory , and between conflicting conclusions drawn informally by different economists about the same issue . ) There may be yet another reason for the high degree of anomaly toleration among economists . Freedman’s essay on “The Methodology of Positive Economics” argued that economists should not be concerned to test the empirical validity of a theory’s assumptions in addition to testing the empirical validity of its predictions . For more than a generation , this was the only methodological writing that many American economists read . In so far as it was an attack on the Robbinsian methodology , it may have had a salutary effect . What was wrong with Robbins , however , was not his stressing the issue of the validity of assumptions , but his view that the test to be applied was their reasonableness as judged by introspection . But Friedman’s position suggested that empirically relevant theories could be built on empirically false assumptions and this was wholly counterproductive . 12 If a theory’s predictions pass test in spite of being derived from assumptions that are empirically false , we learn by asking why ? Perhaps the incorrect assumption is not necessary for the correct prediction being tested , in which case we learn by stripping it away . Perhaps there is a second incorrect assumption that is counter balancing the first in deriving the predictions so far tested . But surely we learn by seeing how this is happening . Also , sooner or later the incorrect assumptions must yield some incorrect predictions . If we wish to have empirically relevant theories , the only useful dictum is to expose to empirical test any empirical statement in the theory (cid:190) whether assumption , or prediction , or anything else . Otherwise , no problem is seen with the many anomalies between assumptions and empirical observations that currently exist in economic theories and with the many current cases in which theories with more such anomalies are preferred over theories which contain fewer (cid:190) on such grounds as superior mathematical tractability or superior elegance . These cases are tolerated with complacency and often with approval , when they should be a cause for concern and an invitation for anomaly removing action . I will return to this theme of anomaly toleration several times in what follows . 12 I do not have time for an extended evaluation of Friedman’s essay and my only concern here is the effect it had on his contemporaries . Friedman clearly said many wise things in that essay . For example , his attack on those who criticised maximisation theory because businessmen had not heard of marginal concepts was wholly justified . But the examples of assumptions that he chose did not include factual assumption that can be directly tested such as “all demand curves have positive slopes” or “costs vary inversely with output” . At various times in his essay , he criticises the testing of assumption by their “reasonableness” or “realism , ” which suggests a critique of the Robbinsian position . At other times , however , he makes such statements as “Such a theory cannot be tested by comparing its ‘assumptions’ with ‘reality’ , ” ( 41 ) which to many of his readers suggested a much wider critique of assumption testing . Given his treatment , there is some debate as to what his position actually was on testing assumptions . Certainly , however , many of his readers understood him the way I have interpreted him and , for a contemporary critique by sophisticated methodologists who take my interpretation , see Klappholz and Agassi ( 1959 ) . Methodology Speech , Publisher’s Version 07 / 08 / 01 9 III . THEORY AND OBSERVATION In spite of the fact that the qualitative nature of most of our theories does not force economists into a tight relation between theory and fact , many economists try and often succeed in relating theories to factual observations . This leads me to my second observation . Observation 2 : Good work in economics tends to be where theory and observations do easily go hand in hand . Two of the fields in which this tight relation between theory and fact are observed today are economic history and labour economics . The explanation for economic history is that most of the questions are related to factual observations . There are myriad examples and I will choose for idiosyncratic reasons two in which I have been at least tangentially involved . Why did Medieval European peasants stick to open farming with widely separated strips rather than consolidated fields when most scholars agree that the latter were more productive than the former ? One explanation that has been offered is that the purpose of scattered holdings was to reduce the variance of each peasant’s harvests . On that matter , three explanations have been offered as to how peasants survived high variations in their crop yields : peasants scattered their holdings to reduce the harvest’s variance ; peasants stored grain ; informal networks were developed to facilitate income sharing . Deirdre McClosky has advocated the first explanation . Clifford Bekar ( Bekar 2000 and 2001 ) 13 obtained a larger data set than was available to McClosky and developed a simulation model to test the three explanations . His ranking showed pooling of crops to be the most effective shield ; that pooling and storage always dominate scattering ; and that even small amounts of saving were more effective than scattering . So the reason for scattering remains a mystery because existing explanations do not seem to fit the evidence . Another puzzle concerns the varying strength with which the Christian church applied its prohibitions against usury over the centuries . Reed and Bekar ( forthcoming ) show that the church was concerned through its charity and support of informal pooling of crops to smooth consumption in the face of varying agricultural outputs . However , the capital market posed a moral hazard threat to these activities . It could cream off those whose wealth was sufficient to allow them access to consumption loans . This threat varied over the centuries and the vigour with which the usual prohibitions were pressed varied in the same way . The details of these , and the dozens of other illustrations that I could have chosen , do not matter . What does matter is that these historical issues are yielding to a determined attack by economists approaching them with theory and evidence . In summary , economic history is a field in which fairly precise questions are being asked , questions to which evidence can be brought to bear . Furthermore , these questions are being studied by a group of scholars who share common knowledge and technical tools , and who are more 13 The 2000 dissertation won the CAGS / UMI Distinguished Dissertation Award for the best 1999 Canadian dissertation in the Humanities , Social Sciences and Fine Arts . Methodology Speech , Publisher’s Version 07 / 08 / 01 10 or less aware of what everyone else in the group is doing on any subject under debate . All of these conditions contribute to success . Another example of a field that produces a fairly tight relation between theory and observation is labour economics . Of the many advances in the study of labour market issues , I mention just two for purposes of illustration . Once again these are drawn from personal experience , this time from my own research group on “Economic Growth and Policy” which operates under the support of the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research . First , new light is being shed on the nature of unemployment by a study of the contrasting behaviour of the unemployed in the US and Canada ( Riddell 1999 ) and by new evidence on a four fold division of the population into employed , unemployed , loosely attached , and fully out of the labour force ( Jones and Riddell 1999 ) . Second , a much fuller understanding is being developed of why labour markets are not auction markets in which prices fluctuate to equate demands and supplies . These “new Keynesian” studies provide a deeper understanding of the kind of stickiness in labour market behaviour that has been hypothesised ever since Keynes’ General Theory . 14 This latter set of insights is still largely ignored in the many macro economic models that assume competitive market clearing behaviour in labour markets because it is tractable , not because it is right (cid:190) an example of the sort of ignored anomaly that I discussed earlier . Two major reasons for the successes of labour economics are worth mentioning . First , large and relatively reliable data sets are available . Second , when most of the other sub - disciplines in economics went almost exclusively into mathematical model building in the 1970s and 80s , labour economics stayed heavily empirical . Labour economics has largely been a user of theory rather than a developer . One advantage of this is that the best brains in the field are not tempted into theoretical exercises for their own sake . 15 For example , although human capital was a theoretical construct invented from within the field , it was useful in understanding empirical observations without inviting a great deal of theoretical manipulation for its own sake . In summary , the major factors contributing to success in labour economics are the existence of large data sets and the non - existence of radically new , complex , and attractive theories , which could deflect activity into purely theoretical manipulations . Contrast this with Industrial Organisation . In the 1960s and 70s I . O . students got a fair bit of institutional knowledge about such “practical” matters as competition policy . They were also exposed to considerable empirical information about scale effects and entry barriers , following the work of Jo Bain . Today , many I . O . students know little more than game theory (cid:190) a useful tool , but no t all there is to know . It is not uncommon to find graduate students with I . O . as a field who have no idea of such things as : how industrial concentration has varied over time and place ; how many industries fit the models of perfect competition , monopolistic competition ( very few ) , oligopoly , and monopoly ; the 14 I have review these studies in the context of judging their importance for macro economics in Chrystal and Lipsey ( 1997 : 322 - 342 . ) 15 Making this point fully , and in a balanced way , would require an article devoted solely to it . Of course , purely theoretical manipulations are needed to see what is implied by some new theory , but these often give rise to a purely theoretical research program , what I call an “internally generated research program” later in this essay . Methodology Speech , Publisher’s Version 07 / 08 / 01 11 extent and source of scale economies ; how the location of economic activity has shifted over time ; the dramatic changes in the proportions of total costs made up of such things as direct labour and machine costs , design costs , and marketing costs ; current competition and industrial policies . Of course , this is not the case in all universities , but my own questioning of I . O . students educated at many universities supports these generalisations . The cont rast between economic history and labour economics on the one hand and I . O . on the other leads me to conjecture that there may be an optimum number of investigators in one field , an optimum number of levels of sophistication of analysis ( few ) , and an optimum number of relevant journals . Where this number is not exceeded , everyone can be aware of what everyone else is doing and alleging so that anomalies come quickly to attention (cid:190) calling for some response other than a yawn . Considering the fields where theory and fact are not closely related , leads me to my next observation . Observation 3 : Without a close relation between evolving theory and empirical observation , new theory tends to be developed in unconstrained ways that are empirically relevant only by accident . This leads to theoretical fads that eventually peter out with one or two conferences asking why we have not learned more , after which investigators move on to another issue . Let me give an illustration from the burst of theorising concerning economic growth that started in the 1940s and occupied many of the best brains in the subject for nearly thirty years . Early in that period Roy Harrod ( 1939 ) and Evsey Domar ( 1946 ) manipulated a very simple Keynesian model to produce the then - famous knife edge result : the economy had a steady state growth path , which was unstable in that the slightest deviation from the path caused national income to rise or to fall at an ever accelerating rate . Harrod motivated his study by stating both that it was an attempt to develop a dynamic theory parallel to the well - established static ‘laws of supply and demand’ and that it would be an addition to attempts to explain macro oscillations on the basis of lags alone ( presumably a reference to Hicks’ Theory of the Trade Cycle ) . Domar motivated his study by the desire to further elucidate the relation between employment and the growth of income . The basis of the both these similar models was the new , trendy , Keynesian theory . The models were highly abstracted , omitting many of the mechanisms known to operate in the real world ; the “naive” ( i . e . fixed capital / output ratio ) instantaneous accelerator was the only explanation of investment . There was no technological change and there was no price mechanism . Although all that had happened was that a very restricted type of model had been shown to exhibit one type of instability , great concern was expressed over whether or not the real economy was poised on a knife edge . It is hard to understand the source of the concern over possible real - world instability unless one understands economists’ overwhelming preoccupation with models and the all - too - often absence of any strong link that starts from a precise set of facts and then calls for theorising to explain them . This concern created a research program of finding out what models would generate the Harrod - Domar results and what models would not . The resulting burst of theorising had Methodology Speech , Publisher’s Version 07 / 08 / 01 12 all the characteristics of what I call an “internally driven research program” ( IDRP ) . By this I mean a research program that is driven by its own internal logic . Investigators seek to understand problems created by the models that they are using , rather than deriving their problems from observations . An IDRP is not always conducted without any appeal to facts . It often begins with some factual question and later , if any tests are used at all , they typically take the form of trying to make the model track the data ? Since investigators are usually free to alter the detailed specifications of variables , lags etc . , tracking the facts is a very weak test . With a bit of ingenuity almost any model can be made to track a set of " relevant " facts . 16 Many of the fads and fashions that sweep economics are aspects of one internally driven research program or another . 17 Early growth theory was typical of an IDRP in that at least one the originators , Domar , had empirical concerns (cid:190) concerns about the possibility of maintaining full employment in a capitalist economy that were raised by the experiences of the Great Depression and the Second World War . But the question was soon forgotten as each new investigator dealt with purely formal problems that were raised by the contribution of the previous contributor . An IDRP is to be contrasted with an “externally driven research program” ( EDRP ) , which is one that is driven by , and constrained by , observed facts . A classic example from astronomy is the search over two millennia for an explanation of the observed behaviour of the planets in which “awkward facts , ” such as small perturbations in the orbit of Mercury , defeated many beautiful theories until the truth was finally brought to light . First , Copernicus freed the earth from its assumed place in the centre of the universe . Then Brahe , the great measurer , provided enough hard data to severely constrain the theories . Then Kepler showed that planets moved in ellipses rather than circles . Finally , Newton generalised Kepler’s three laws of planetary motion into his great laws of universal motion . Of the many attempts to build models that did not display the Harrod - Domar knife - edge , by far the most influential was Solow ' s neoclassical growth model . Solow ' s concern was to show that when labour and capital were substitutes for each other ( no fixed capital / output ratio ) , there would be stability rather than Harrod - Domar instability . According to his model , when capital and labour both grow at the same rate , a balanced growth path occurs in which per capita real income remains constant . The path is stable in the sense that negative feedback will push the economy towards the path whenever it deviates from it . Amartya Sen ( 1970 : 21 ) observed that : " Not a little of the attraction of this model lies in its beautiful simplicity . . . . " 16 A particularly worrying habit of economists , when they are making models track the data , is to try many alternative specifications and then publish only the one that has the highest t statistic ( or the best value of whatever test of goodness of fit is relevant to the techniques being used ) . Then , with a straight face , report these statistics as if they were genuine tests of the adequacy of the model . 17 This is not to say that internally driven programs never produce interesting results ; they sometimes do . The probability of their producing empirically relevant results (cid:190) even when there is a demand that their models be made to track the data (cid:190) is , however , quite low . Methodology Speech , Publisher’s Version 07 / 08 / 01 13 Solow’s work led in two directions . One was the empirically based growth accounting exercise that looked for the sources of the residual that Solow had attributed to technical change (cid:190) and that turned out to be due to a much more complex set of influences than just technical change . The other was the theoretical investigation of growth models . I concentrate here on the second direction . To the extent that the purpose of Solow’s model was to show that a two - sector world , with substitution between capital and labour , did not produce a Harrod - Domar knife - edge , the object was a valuable one . However , the impact of his theorizing went much further . The profession went off on a 15 - year bout of balanced growth research . ( Another approach , pioneered by Nicholas Kaldor ( Kaldor and Mirrlees , ( 1961 - 62 ) , sought to endogenise technological change . However , this approach was largely ignored in the theoretical literature (cid:190) although it had a major influence on many European scholars . ) Swan ( 1963 ) and Uzawa ( 1961 ) considered a type of technological change that enhanced the productivity of labour in such a way that labour grew at a constant rate measured in efficiency units . They showed that a balanced growth path was only possible in a neoclassical model when all technological change was of this sort and the efficiency of labour grew at the same rate as capital was accumulated . This Harrod - neutral technical change produced a balanced growth path while avoiding the constancy of per capita real income associated with Solow’s original balanced growth path . It quickly became the centrepiece of growth models . No new empirical evidence about technological change caused the profession to concentrate on this particular type of “labour augmenting” technical change . What mattered was that by merely re - labelling Solow’s physical labour inputs as labour inputs measured in efficiency units , a balanced growth path could be produced in which real income rose at a constant rate . Trevor Swan ( who was surely concerned with real - world growth ) considered the conditions in which a balanced growth path would occur in a Solow - type neoclassical growth model . At the outset of one of his best known papers ( Swan 1963 ) he urges " . . . economists to consider very closely what it is that theories of economic growth are about , what questions they are trying to answer , if economic theory is not merely jejune mathematics . ” ( 203 ) Having expressed these thoughts , he goes on to ask : " Is the Golden Age [ of capital accumulation ] indeed the ' device for sorting out our ideas ' which we have been looking for ? Or is it , as Hicks said of the stationary state , ' in the end nothing but an evasion ' , exercising a ' baneful influence on the minds of economists ? ' ” ( 204 ) In his paper , he establishes a series of formal propositions about the mathematics of Golden Age , balanced growth and , significantly , offers no concluding remarks . Reflect on how typical this is of the first bout of neoclassical growth theorising . Highly intelligent economists express altogether reasonable doubts about the value of abstract theorising related to growth . Then , having unburdened their consciences , as it were , they go on to do more of the same and do not in their conclusions offer any explanation of how their new theorising is exempt from the doubts they expressed at the outset . Another step in the IDRP was to remove the " unrealistic " assumption of one output and replace it with the two sectors , one producing a composite capital good and the other a composite consumers ' good . Many famous names are associated with these models , including Meade , Uzawa , Solow , Drandakis , Hahn , Inada , and Kurz . Sen ( 1970 : 28 - 9 ) Methodology Speech , Publisher’s Version 07 / 08 / 01 14 lists four questions that were asked by all of these scholars : “First , given a stock of capital inherited from the past and given a labour force that happens to exist today , does there exist a momentary equilibrium for this point of time ? Second , is the momentary equilibrium unique ? Third , is there a unique balanced growth path ? Fourth , is the system stable ? " Much intellectual effort went into producing answers to these questions . Within the confines of a neoclassical two - sector growth model , the answers were that the behaviour of the model depends on the assumptions about saving and the capital intensities of the two production sectors . For example , a sufficient but not a necessary condition for the existence of a momentary equilibrium is that the consumer goods sector be more capital intensive than the capital - goods sector . Another result is that , if all wages are consumed and all profits are saved , the balanced growth path is unique . These were intellectually fascinating , and technically very difficult issues , but surely we are looking at an IDRP not an EDRP . There is no evidence that any empirical observations were driving these questions or that it would have been possible to make any empirical observations that might have tested the answers that were provided . Turnpike theorems grew out of the analysis of maximal growth paths where the sole object is to maximise consumption at some terminal date . Proving the existence of a maximal growth path was a major project of the IDRP on growth . The next question in the IDRP program was to ask how best to get onto such a path from some arbitrarily chosen point away from it . The answer was that the optimal thing to do is to approach the path quickly ( almost orthogonally ) and then follow it . This is an interesting result intellectually but it surely has little to say about real world growth where the problem is not how get as quickly as possible to a non - existent balanced growth path but to understand , produce , and manage unbalanced , jerky , capitalist growth . 18 The burst of activity around neoclassical growth theory had just about reached its end by 1970 . Writing in that year Amartya Sen had this to say at the conclusion of his survey of the theory : " The policy issues related to economic growth are numerous and intricate . . . . While the logical aspects involved in these exercises are much better understood now than they used to be , perhaps the weakest link in the chain is the set of empirical theories of growth that underlie the logical exercises . Possible improvement of policies towards growth that could be achieved through a better understanding of the actual process of growth remains substantially unexplored . [ ! ] It is partly a measure of the complexity of economic growth that the phenomenon of growth should remain , after three decades of intensive intellectual study , such an enigma . It is , however , also a reflection of our sense of values , particularly of the preoccupation with brain - twisters . Part of the difficulty arises undoubtedly from the fact that the selection of topics 18 Turnpikes illustrate my earlier observation that IDRPs can sometimes produce practical results by accident . Although no real - world policy maker was ever trying to guide her economy optimally onto a maximal growth path , the theorem turns out to have many other applications to approach problems , some of which have practical applications . Methodology Speech , Publisher’s Version 07 / 08 / 01 15 for work in growth economics is guided much more by logical curiosity than by a taste for relevance . The character of the subject owes much to that . " ( Sen , 1970 : 33 ) Sen has said it much better than I could . The first round of neoclassical growth theorising produced little of relevance because it started without a set of facts to be explained and to constrain theorizing . Internally generated questions produce internally directed answers (cid:190) precisely what the growth theorizing of the ‘60s and 70’s produced . After nearly twenty years of intense activity by some of the worlds’ finest economists , not one word of advice could be given to policy makers that was not available 20 years earlier (cid:190) except the potentially misleading advice that a society’s long term growth rate was unrelated to its willingness to save . The more recent burst of endogenous growth theorising has been more fact based than the earlier burst and some more interesting work has resulted . It arose from a concern about an anomaly between the predictions of the Solow model and actual observed convergence of per capital real incomes across countries . It was able to use large quantities of new data made available by the publication of the Heston - Summers historical data on growth . Some of its assumptions and predictions were tested and found not to have strong support in the data . One example was Romer’s assumption that there were increasing returns to new investment at the macro level . I have no time here to go into an assessment of the vast literature that has resulted , except to make a couple of observations . First , all of the models that are being used predict constantly converging , or diverging , or unchanging international differences in growth rates . When they are extrapolated backwards , the divergent models predict universal equality at some time in the not - too - far - distant past , while the convergent ones predict growing divergences beginning with large unexplained initial divergences at some unspecified past date . To explain real growth over the centuries , to say nothing of over the millennia , models must be able to accommodate both divergence and convergence (cid:190) which none of those now available can do . Second , all the models explain the growth of real national income by the growth of physical capital , human capital , labour and technological change . All but the last are measured variables while the error term in the regressions is assumed to measure the effect of technical change . It is clear that any theory that explains the error term as being the effect of an unmeasured variable is shielded from any possible refutation . 19 IV . THEORY TODAY So much for theory and observation in general . What do I make of the problems of current economic theory ? 19 Ken Carlaw and I have argued that widely differing views are held within the profession as to what the error term , which is called total factor productivity , TFP , actually measures (cid:190) another tolerated anomaly . We have also argued that the commonly held view that TFP measures technical change is quite mistaken . ( See Lipsey and Carlaw 2000a and 2000b . ) Methodology Speech , Publisher’s Version 07 / 08 / 01 16 Observation 4 : Major shortcomings of basic micro theory in many ( possibly most ) contexts are that it is timeless , institutionless and based on comparative static equilibrium analysis . The basic value theory model of micro text books is timeless in the sense that everything is reversible , institutionless in the sense that its equations are all related to the actions of agents who are either buyers or sellers , and almost exclusively static . Time : The absence of an “arrow of time” in conventional value theory is less important for some issues , such as how public and non - rivalrous goods complicate the co - ordinating function of the price system , and more important for other issues , such as economic growth . Growth is a largely path dependent , co - evolution of technology and institutions in a time - irreversible process . The absence of a time dimension is being addressed in some of today’s non - main - stream , evolutionary theorising . The study of path dependency and , more generally , the whole evolutionary branch of economics , seeks to put time into theories in meaningful ways . Institutions : The best economists always knew that market systems require an underpinning of good institutions , some of them quite complex . But the importance of institutions is not routinely taught in theory courses and it is debatable how many economists understood the importance of institutions at any one time . An important test seemed to come with the marketisation of the former USSR . Many US economic advisors said in effect : “Just free up the markets and privatise all industries and all will be well . ” This advice was profoundly a - temporal and non - institutional . Russian privatisation was a fiasco and well - functioning capitalism has proved to be unachievable without institutions to secure such important things as effective intellectual property protection , security of private property , orderly bankruptcy , the rule of law , and reliable banks . It also remains to be seen if the necessary institutions can grow spontaneously in ground uncultivated by effective government policy . Possibly as a result of these unhappy experiences , an increasing number of economists are today turning their attention to formal analyses of institutions (cid:190) better late than never . Those who advocated that Russia follow a cold turkey transition are now explaining how they gave the best possible advice under the circumstances . It is now debated whether the advisors were mistaken or just made the misjudgement that they could not give complex qualified advice in a situation in which simple slogans were needed to carry the day . This latter contention raises the issues considered under observation 10 below . Static equilibrium : Standard neoclassical theory sees competition as the end state of perfectly competitive equilibrium . The Austrian tradition sees competition as a process that takes place in real time . ( Blaug 1997 ) In many contexts , neoclassical comparative statics works well . For example , when relatively stable markets not dominated by technological change are subject to isolated shocks , such as when rent control is introduced into a housing market , or OPEC changes its output policy . In other cases , comparative statics is not only irrelevant but also downright misleading . This is particularly so when technology is changing sufficiently to affect outcomes . Whereas neoclassical GE theory assumes that technology and tastes are constant ( or subject to random exogenously determined shocks ) , evidence shows that technology is continuously changing in response to economic signals (cid:190) a point made by such students of Methodology Speech , Publisher’s Version 07 / 08 / 01 17 technological change as Nathan Rosenberg long before it was popular to include endogenous technological change in macro growth models . ( See e . g . , Rosenberg , 1982 . ) For this reason , long run comparative static analysis of how the economy responds to some shock is likely to be misleading whenever it covers a period long enough for endogenous technological change to matter . Michael Porter ( 1990 ) gives many examples of cases in which the induced technological responses of firms to specific shocks differed across countries and the final outcome was the opposite of what it would have been if technology had remained constant . 20 Instead of creating activity to remove the anomaly created by the discrepancy between the predictions of comparative static equilibrium theory and observations such as those made by Porter , this type of work is often dismissed by mainline economists as business school trivia and the observations as “mere anecdotes” . Indeed economists commonly use the word " anecdote " pejoratively when seeking to dismiss what would otherwise be worrying anomalies . ( Had Kepler done the same to the deviations in the orbit of the planet Mercury from his predictions , he might never have discovered his laws of motion . ) Observation 5 : High - powered theories are needed at times to analyse complex problems but , like all - powerful tools , their use is associated with risks as well as benefits . Mainstream economics has been mathematised in my lifetime and I want to point to some problems associated with this mathemetisation of our subject ( always with the qualification that mathematics are necessary for much good theorising ) . First , Popper taught me always to use the simplest model that will prove the point in question . For example , a single contrary numerical example is sufficient to disprove a generalisation . Today , however , economists typically call for the most general treatment possible under all circumstances . Generality is desired for its own sake , even when it obscures the simplicity of solutions to some problems . Second , to get an article published in most of today’s top rank economic journals , you must provide a mathematical model , even if it adds nothing to your verbal analysis . 21 I have been at seminars where the presenter was asked after a few minutes , “Where is your model ? ” When he answered “I have not got one as I do not need one , or cannot yet develop one , to consider my problem” the response was to turn off and figuratively , if not literally , to walk out . This reminds me of reports from seminars in Cambridge in the early 1940s . The presenter was asked if he was assuming that savings always equalled investment and further attention to his presentation depended on whether he answered “yes” or “no” . What defines the “in group” of economists changes in each generation , but the requirement that to be listened to one must do what that group requires does not change . 20 For example , in the late 1980s , US consumer electronics firms decided to move their operations aboard to avoid high and rigid labour costs . They went where labour costs were low enough to make their existing technologies pay . Their Japanese competitors met the same challenge by staying at home and innovating away most of their labour costs (cid:190) and then b uilt factories in the US to replace the factories of US firms that had gone aboard . ( Porter : 507 ) 21 When I have made this point in private conversations , several economists have given me examples in which they were asked to provide unnecessary formal models as a condition for having an article accepted for publication . Methodology Speech , Publisher’s Version 07 / 08 / 01 18 Third , the high cost of learning advanced mathematics has tended to push more descriptive and factual material out of the curriculum . One result is a declining level of empirical knowledge from generation to generation . Another is that students cannot even consider that the tools they have laboured so hard to master might not be the best tools for approaching all economic problems . This attitude encourages the views covered in my next two points . Fourth , a more serious view is that if you cannot model some problem it is not economics . This is particularly unfortunate since really novel problems are typically unstructured ones that cannot be modelled until much work has gone into refining the questions and developing tentative answers . This requires what Richard Nelson calls “appreciative theory . ” Fifth , and equally serious , is the implicit assumption that if some result is derived from a complex model containing all the OK assumptions ( e . g . , maximising over long time horizons ) it must be true (cid:190) or as Mark Blaug likes to put it “economists tend to believe their own models . ” By way of a dramatic illustration , not long ago I read in a US bank review that Grossman and Helpman ( 1991 ) had proven that if manufacturing output increases , R & D activity must decrease . The writer failed to point out that Grossman and Helpman were assuming full employment in a world of two sectors , manufacturing and research & development ! We must wonder what economists think they learn from the analysis of such abstract models that are empirically untested . I agree with what Mark Blaug has to say on this issue ( 1992 : xxi - xxii ) : “Many economists cannot abandon the notion that mere theoret ical progress , a deeper understanding of some economic problems , is of value in itself even if it does not produce any substantive findings . . . [ or ] enhance our ability to predict the consequences of economic policies . In so doing , they reflect the increasing tendency in modern economics to pursue theorizing like an intellectual game . . . The fact that graduate education in economics emphasises technical puzzle - solving abilities at the expense of imparting substantial knowledge of the economic system is simply a reflection of the empty formalism that has come increasingly to characterize the whole of modern economics . And . . . [ what ] is wrong with elegant economics practised as an intellectual pastime ? . . . One [ answer ] is that some of us . . . cannot help wondering just how the economy actually works . . . The second answer is that . . . [ economics ] has been intimately connected with economic policy . . . but if economists are going to take a stand on questions of economic policy . . . they must have knowledge of how the economic system functions . . . . All this is to say that economics must be first and foremost an empirical science or else it must abandon its age - old concern with ' piecemeal social engineering’ . ” There can be no doubt that economists often do infer behaviour in the real world from abstract , untested models , many of them patently wide of the mark . Think again about the Methodology Speech , Publisher’s Version 07 / 08 / 01 19 burst of growth theorising in the 1950s and 1960s . When I was a student , Harrod - Domar was the latest thing in growth theory and my teachers mused about the real world being unstable and poised on a knife - edge . No one gave us systematic or anecdotal evidence ; the pure model was the source of these musings . Then , when the original Solow model was in vogue , my colleagues mused to their students that growth seemed to be independent of the savings rate . This was a potentially disastrous belief for students to take away from their academic studies . Once again , its source was a property of a pure model that was manifestly located in another world ( steady state , balanced growth with Harrod - neutral technical progress ) from the growth issues students would encounter when they returned to their own countries , many of which were striving to create the conditions for “catch - up” growth . Observation 6 : In the current state of economics , elegant and general theories are likely to be empirically empty . Economists aspire to create really general theories and this is nowhere better illustrated than in the theories that explain why we believe that the price system is superior to any of the alternatives . Over the years , two types of reasoning have been used to argue the virtues of a market economy that is operating with the required institutional underpinning . The first is informal in the sense that it is not laid out in equations leading to a formal , mathematical result . But it does follow from hard reasoning , and it has been subjected to searching scrutiny . This informal defence of the market economy is an example of Richard Nelson’s appreciative theorising . It is as old as Adam Smith , and it is based on a view of competition as a process , as it is found in many I . O . texts , and not as an end state , as it is found in price theory texts . In this kind of competition : “ . . . firms jostle for advantage by price and non - price competition , undercutting and outbidding rivals in the market - place by advertising outlays and promotional expenses , launching new differentiated products , new technical processes , new methods of marketing and new organizational forms , and even new reward structures for their employees , all for the sake of head - start profits that they know will soon be eroded . . . . [ in short ] competition is an active process . ” ( Blaug , 1977 : 255 - 6 ) This informal defence has four well - known points . First and foremost , the market system co - ordinates economic decisions better than any known alternative . Second , markets tend to do this relatively efficiently by , e . g . , inducing decision makers to economise on the use of resources that are scarce while making lavish use of resources that are plentiful . Third , a well - functioning market economy with the necessary institutional underpinnings tends to decentralise power and to involve less coercion , and opportunities for corruption , than does any centrally administered type of organising mechanism . Fourth , the market system is conducive to growth by encouraging the exploration of opportunities for innovation by decentralised , profit seeking , decision - takers competing against each other and employing privately owned capital . ( This last point is probably the one that is most sensitive to being wrong in certain social , and religious environments . ) Methodology Speech , Publisher’s Version 07 / 08 / 01 20 The second type of defence is the formal defence . It is based on a type of reasoning that dates back at least as far as Walras and is currently embodied in the two fundamental theorems of welfare economics . It arose because professional economists were not satisfied to rest their case for the price system solely on informal reasoning . They wanted to be more precise about just what the market economy did so well . 22 To do so , they developed the proof that an idealisation of the market economy called perfect competition would lead , in equilibrium , to an optimum allocation of resources . In this idealisation , not only is the market economy a better way of organising economic decisions than any known alternative ; it is the best way ; it achieves optimality ; there can be nothing better . Although the proof of the optimality of perfect competition was an intellectual triumph , basing the practical case for the market system on this proof had some unfortunate consequences . While professional economists went on studying and refining the model and their academically bound graduate students went on learning it , the great bulk of their students were sent out into the world with an intellectual defence of the market economy that would not stand up to five minutes of rough handling by anyone who knew anything about the actual behaviour of real markets . It was obvious to most non - economists , who were exposed to the economists ' model , that the assumptions of perfect competition are not even remotely related to much of the world in which we live . Nor is static perfect competition an achievable state in our dynamic changing world . As Mark Blaug ( 1997 : 255 ) puts it “ . . . everyone admits that these beautiful theorems are mental exercises without the slightest possibility of ever being practically relevant . . . . ” Possibly an even more important limitation is that the formal argument concentrates on static resource allocation and says nothing about economic growth . The static model deals with inter - temporal issues by having dated inputs and outputs as well as futures markets . It does not , however , contain endogenous , path dependant , technological change , which , as Schumpeter long ago observed , is by far the most important force influencing our living standards over any long period of time . Many people who would have accepted the proposition that market economies tended to be superior to other possible forms of economic organisation , were unwilling to accept the Panglossian view that , whatever misery and injustice it produced , the real - world market economy was the best of all possible economic worlds ( i . e . the optimal economy ) . 23 Even more unfortunate , many of those who found the formal proof unconvincing came to believe that there was no strong case for the price system . When I contemplate the formal defence , I wonder how different we economists are from the pre - Kepellerian astronomers who were dominated by the Greek belief that a model of perfection could be used to deduce behaviour in the imperfect world in which we live . Plato had announced that the circle was the perfect form of closed motion and that , since 22 It is possible that they saw themselves as developing something akin to a law of physics . But the Arrow Debreu model of perfect competition was not tightly based on a body of quantitative evidence , nor did it make any new testable predictions . 23 The possibility of an infinite number of Paretian optima is usually ignored and students are left to believe that perfect competition produces the optimum economy ( often loosely thought of as one that would maximise consumers surplus ) . Methodology Speech , Publisher’s Version 07 / 08 / 01 21 the heavens were within the spheres of perfection , heavenly bodies must move in circles . Kepler banned from astronomy forever the view that we could deduce something about real - world behaviour by studying these Platonic ideas of perfection . Yet today economists seek to deduce propositions about the real world from models of perfection , such as the Arrow Debreu model of the efficiency of perfect competition . No one ever thought that the real world was diffused with perfect competition or competitive end - state equilibrium . Yet somehow we must think we learn something about the world from such models , for otherwise the bulk of economists would not insist that the formal proof of optimality is about the most important thing that can be taught to students . Once again , I refer to Mark Blaug’s treatment of this issue : “So long as we continue to demand the standards of rigour that we have come to accept from the highly stylised logically tight , choice - theoretic models of mainstream microeconomics , we will never explore an alternative to end - state competitive theory . Empirical science frequently proceeds on the untidy basis of what is plausible rather than what can be formally demonstrated beyond any shadow of doubt . As Tom Mayer ( 1993 ) has argued , empirical science is precisely what characterizes much of modern physics and biology , not to mention medicine , chemistry and geology , and not the sort of mathematical formalism that is so highly prised by modern economists . . . ” ( Blaug 1997 : 257 ) Observation 7 : Elegant error is often preferred to messy truth . 24 The concentration on theory only loosely related to facts often leads economists to prefer tightly specified models that are wide of the empirical mark to more messy , less elegant , treatments that come closer to agreeing with the facts . One debate where this propensity was clearly demonstrated was that between Keynesians and New Classical Economists in the late 1970s and early 1980s . One charge that was pressed with vigour , and is still accepted by many as a telling one , was that Keynesian macro theory had inadequate micro underpinnings . This charge raises two questions . First , what were the Keynesian underpinnings ? Second , how do they compare with the new classical underpinnings that replaced them ? Since I have dealt with this at length elsewhere ( Lipsey 2000b ) , I will summarise very briefly here . The consumption function , both time series and cross section , had been studied from the late 1930s in great detail . Then Modigliani , in a series of papers starting in 1954 ( Modigliani and Brumberg 1954 ) , and Friedman in an influential book ( 1957 ) , gave life cycle - permanent income underpinnings to this important function . Investment demand had a micro underpinning stretching back to Irving Fisher , and earlier . In Keynesian times , it was also researched in great detail by many scholars , as were both the “naive” and the flexible accelerators . The Keynesian money demand functions were developed by Baumol ( 1952 ) , with respect to the dependence of money demand on income , and by Tobin ( 1956 and 1958 ) , with respect to its dependence on interest rates . 24 This section is based on Lipsey 2001b . Methodology Speech , Publisher’s Version 07 / 08 / 01 22 The goods market underpinnings were also intensively researched by Keynesian economists . 25 Countless studies confirmed two main facts . First , short run cost curves are flat up to capacity output . Second , oligopolistic firms are price setters responding to short - term fluctuations in demand by varying output , holding their prices constant . These two propositions were initially put forward on the basis of strong empirical evidence ( see e . g . , Neild ( 1963 ) ) . Subsequently , Okun ( 1981 ) and others provided theoretical underpinnings in which menu costs of price changes played an important part . Labour market underpinnings were also part of an evolving Keynesian research program . Beginning in the 1970s with implicit contract theory , Keynesian economists , and others , went much deeper into labour market behaviour than had earlier Keynesians . In a research program that has carried on through the modern new Keynesians , many reasons why wages do not fluctuate to clear markets have been studied , both theoretically and empirically . 26 The charge that Keynesian economics had no strong microeconomic underpinnings is clearly wide of the mark , although my casual survey of newly trained graduate students suggests that this is the prevailing belief . How then do these underpinnings compare with the new classical ones that succeeded them ? On expenditure , the consumption function has been extended from the horizon of one lifetime , as in Modigliani and Friedman’s versions , to infinite time horizons in some versions and overlapping generations of households , each with finite time horizons , in other versions . The basics of the investment function have not been significantly altered . There is no rational reason for demanding money in a continuous time , new classical , GE model and a positive demand for money is usually created by inserting money into the utility function ( which provides no explanation of why it is valued ) . In the goods market , the new classical economists replaced the Keynesian oligopolistic underpinnings with perfectly competitive ones . New classical firms get signals about market conditions only through prices . But this clearly is not what we see in real markets for manufactured goods and most services . In these markets , producers of differentiated products must set prices and let sales provide them with signals about the state of the market . Thus , Keynesian underpinnings were clearly closer to the reality of the goods market than are new classical ones . Similar remarks apply to the labour market . New Keynesians argue that the available evidence overwhelmingly conflicts with the belief that labour markets are perfectly competitive . As Hall said in his 1980 review “There is no point any longer in pretending that the labour market is an auction market cleared by the observed average hourly wage . In an extreme case , wages are just instalment payments on a long - term debt and reveal essentially nothing about the current state of the market . ” Since that time , a mass of additional evidence has been collected about the non - market clearing behaviour of labour markets . In conclusion ( Lipsey 2001b ) : 25 I have reviewed this literature in the context of the debate between Keynesians and new classicists in Lipsey ( 1981 ) . 26 A survey of this work contemporary with the height of the battle between the Keynesians and the new classicists can be found in Hall ( 1980 ) . I have reviewed the modern evidence more recently in Chrystal and Lipsey , Chapter 10 : 324 - 344 . Methodology Speech , Publisher’s Version 07 / 08 / 01 23 “…it seems clear , in retrospect , that the charge of inadequate micro underpinnings did not refer to the extent to which Keynesian underpinnings were absent or unrealistic , but to the fact that the Keynesian underpinnings were developed piecemeal and could not be formally aggregated to yield precise macro economic behaviour . The new classical model accomplishes this aggregation by employing a series of strong and clearly factually incorrect assumptions , some of the most important of which are market clearing under perfect competition and representative agents which can be blown up to become the aggregate of all producers and consumers . 27 Keynesians argue that the world is irretrievably one of price setting not price taking in virtually all manufacturing and service industries , and often one of small group oligopoly rather than of large group monopolistic competition . They agree that no one knows how to aggregate from such micro economic behaviour to macro relations . But , they say , if that is the way the world , is there is no point in pretending that it fulfils the competitive conditions needed for aggregation . Thus it seems to me that with respect to virtually all micro economic underpinnings , the new classical programme replaced messy Keynesian truth with precise neo - classical error (cid:190) recalling Tom Mayer’s point that empirically based natural sciences often proceed on the untidy basis of what is plausible rather than on what can be formally demonstrated . Observation 8 : Theoretical tractability is often preferred to empirical relevance . An interesting illustration of this observation is the rise and fall and rise again of Chamberlin’s monopolistic competition . By 1965 , a consensus had been reached among I . O . economists that Chamberlin’s model of large group monopolistic competition was theoretically flawed and empirically empty . It was theoretically flawed because it was based on Chamberlin’s famous symmetry assumption that all versions of some differentiated product were equally good substitutes for each other so that a new product variant would take demand away from all existing variants in equal proportion . It was empirically empty because most actual differentiated manufactured products are produced by oligopolistic industries where a few firms produce a large array of differentiated products . This consensus was discussed in detail in Blaug ( 1978 ) and reflected in an appendix entitled “The Rise and Fall of Monopolistic Competition” which appeared in the 6 th and 7 th editions of IPE . Then , as economists became dissatisfied with perfect competition , they felt a need for a theoretically tractable model that would go beyond it . When Curtis Eaton and I started from known facts , as laid out in Eaton and Lipsey ( 1989 : 725 - 6 ) , we were forced to develop models in characteristic space ( which we called the “address approach” ) because these facts could be incorporated in this formulation but not in traditional ones ( which we 27 As Lancaster ( 1979 ) and Eaton and Lipsey ( 1997 : Introduction ) have argued , the behaviour of agents who operate in a characteristic space that captures what we know about differentiated goods cannot be aggregated into a single macro - function that describes their collective behaviour as if there were a representative consumer . Methodology Speech , Publisher’s Version 07 / 08 / 01 24 called “goods are goods” approach ) . 28 Formulations in characteristic space do not , however , lend themselves to aggregation to the behaviour of a representative consumer ( as Lancaster ( 1979 ) had earlier shown ) . Most other model builders started from Chamberlin’s earlier assumptions and used only the one fact of the existence of differentiated products . Many of the models developed from this approach could be aggregated to operate at the GE level . Of these models , the Dixit Stiglitz version won the day . It is now the accepted model of non - perfect competition . Because it uses a single representative consumer ( who consumers some of all variants of each differentiated product ) , it was able to fulfil the IDRP requirement to develop a GE model of monopolistic competition that was formally aggregated from models of micro behaviour . This it did trivially (cid:190) just multiply the representative consumer by n . But this representative consumer cannot be real “representative person” since no one person consumes all variants of all differentiated products . Instead “he” must himself be an aggregation from individual consumers , each one of whom consumes only a small fraction of all the available variants . However , no one knows how to do such aggregation . Certainly it cannot be done when individual consumer’s tastes are specified in characteristic space , which is the natural way to model the empirically established consumer behaviour with respect to any differentiated commodity whose variants individual consumers perceive as closer and more distant substitutes for each other . The Dixit - Stiglitz model also has all the features that had come to discredit Chamberlin’s model in the eyes of I . O . economists , especially the symmetry assumption that all versions of a single differentiated product are equal substitutes for each other . 29 Yet the Dixit - Stiglitz theory has become the tool for modelling imperfect competition . It is used in many models from which untested welfare judgements are made and untested policy advice is drawn without qualification . I find that many , perhaps most , economists who use it are not even aware of how much it is in conflict with known facts of individual behaviour with respect to differentiated products . 30 Here is yet another tolerated anomaly between theory and observation , this time on a major scale . 31 28 While others were trying to develop formulations that could be inserted into GE models , Eaton and I were pursuing our own research agenda to investigate the robustness of various generalisations that were suggested by Hotelling‘s famous model of duopolists competing on a line ( which can equally well be interpreted as physical or characteristic space ) . We developed the concepts of “goods are goods” and “address” formulations in Archibald , Eaton and Lipsey ( 1986 ) and I outline my origins of our research program in Chapter 10 , “Space Capital and Value” in Lipsey 1997b , vol . 1 . 29 We have discussed these issues in detail in the Introduction to Lipsey & Eaton ( 1997 ) . 30 In Eaton and Lipsey ( 1989 ) we list the known facts with respect to differentiated products , many of which are inconsistent with the Dixit Stiglitz theory . 31 A well - known economist recently told me not to be impatient . “After all” , he said , “replacing the [ unreal ] model of perfect competition with the [ unreal ] model of Dixit - Stiglitz monopolistic competition is a step forward . Later perhaps , this model will be replaced by one with the oligopolistic behaviour that address models use to explain the known facts of consumer behaviour with respect to differentiated products . ” What he did not go on to observe , however , was that in the meantime , the Dixit - Stiglitz model is confidently used to draw all sorts of untested conclusions with no acknowledgement of its major inconstancies with observed facts . Methodology Speech , Publisher’s Version 07 / 08 / 01 25 V . THEORY AND POLICY Economists have traditionally been concerned with economic policy and many have shown a great sense of social responsibility in fighting for what they believe to be good policies and resisting misguided ones . However , this policy commitment is not without its dangers . I wish to focus on these dangers without meaning to denigrate the unselfish efforts of many policy - oriented economists . Observation 9 : Economists often prefer theories that produce unambiguous policy results to theories that do not , irrespective of their relative evidential bases . Those who support markets often fear that any result that finds markets not working well will have unfortunate results on opinion . Many economists , who know in their guts that the price system is better than any alternative , worry about findings that seem to lend support to opponents of market solutions . Reactions to the theory of second provide an illustration . According to second best theory : “ . . . in a situation in which there exist many constraints which prevent the fulfilment of the Paretian optimum conditions , the removal of any one constraint may affect welfare or efficiency either by raising it , by lowering it , or by leaving it unchanged” ( Lipsey and Lancaster 1956 : 154 ) . Thus in the absence of massive amounts of knowledge about the general equilibrium of the economy , there is no presumption that removing any one market imperfection will raise welfare . In the 15 years after the publication of our article , literally hundreds of articles were written on second best theory . Many of these sought to upset the theory or to limit severely its range of applicability . When this effort failed , the theory was simply ignored in mainstream teaching and relegated to the position of a minor curiosity . At about the same time , the “new welfare economics” of the 1940s and 1950s was largely forgotten . This branch of the subject had analysed the limited applicability of welfare propositions , paying particular attention to the social conflicts revealed by intersecting community indifference curves . The sometimes - ambiguous compensation tests of “new welfare economics” were then largely replaced by an uncritical teaching of consumers surplus analysis . The latter’s implicit assumption of additive utility avoids any need to study those social conflicts that make an unambiguous ranking of many alternative situations impossible when only ordinal utility is assumed . The victory of consumers surplus has been so complete that many modern economists are unaware of the second best critique that turns most of what they confidently recommend into articles of faith , rather than scientifically derived results . Similarly , many economists are unaware of the social conflicts that were studied by the new welfare economics of the 1940s and 1950s and that manifested themselves in crossing community indifference curves . 32 32 Consider comparing two community consumption b undles A and B . Community indifference curves intersect one way if those who would gain by a move from A to B can compensate those who would lose if the move were made , while those who would lose are able to pay a large enough bribe to induce those who would gain not to make the move . They cross the other way if those who would gain cannot compensate those who would lose if the move were made , while those who would lose are unable to pay a large enough bribe to persuade those who would gain not to make the move . Methodology Speech , Publisher’s Version 07 / 08 / 01 26 Observation 10 : Because economists have the dual role of studying how well the system works and defending it against unreasonable criticisms , they often must strike an uneasy balance between calling things as they are and calling things so as to influence public opinion . After Kelvin Lancaster and I published our general theory of second best , many of my senior LSE colleagues responded : “But my dear Dick it is so nihilistic . ” Few seemed to be persuaded by my reply that I wanted to understand the world as it is rather than as we would like it to be . I realised eventually that my colleagues’ were worried that second best theory would be used to justify all kinds of misguided government interventions . A more modern example is found in industrial policy . Governments , particularly in North America and Europe , have no doubt squandered vast amounts of funds on interventions in the names of both Science & Technology and Industrial Policies . Many economists , myself included , agree that if the choice were between no government policies in these areas and a heavy handed picking of technology winners by bureaucrats and a backing of national champions , the preferred choice would be no policy . But holding that position does not require one to believe that governments have had no successes in these areas . Many economists have tried to point out both successes and failures in order to make the debate “more nuanced and less polarised . ” ( Mowery and Nelson : 15 ) . Examples of both successful and unsuccessful policies can be found in many writings such as Lipsey and Carlaw ( 1996 and 1998 ) , Mowery and Nelson ( 2000 ) , and Lipsey ( 2001 ) . Here are just a very few illustrations . More than half of my examples come from the US because American economists are often the most vociferous advocates of the view that the governments can do nothing constructive to assist industry . First , virtually no currently industrialized country went through its early stages of development without substantial protection of its home market . The list includes the United States , Germany , France , Canada , and Japan . Second , the Japanese automobile industry developed the lean production methods that revolutionized manufacturing production worldwide behind post Second World War projectionist walls ( Womack , Jones and Roos ) . Without these protections , it probably would have become a branch plant extension of the US automobile industry , as did the Canadian industry . Third , the government of Singapore spent several million dollars in successfully picking an electronics winner and then went on to become , among other things , the world’s largest producer of hard discs . ( Lipsey and Wills 1996 ) . Fourth , the US aircraft industry received substantial government assistance at several crucial stages in its development . In its early stages , the National Advisory Committee on Aeronautics ( NACA ) supported invention and innovation through its government - operated experimental facilities . Among other things , NACA pioneered the development of large wind tunnels ; it provided essential test data that led to the development of such innovations as the " NACA cowl " ; it demonstrated the superiority of airframes designed with a retractable landing gear . Later , the airframe of the Boeing 707 , the first successful long range commercial jet , and the engines of the 747 , the first wide bodied commercial Methodology Speech , Publisher’s Version 07 / 08 / 01 27 jet , were developed under military procurement contracts that greatly reduced Boeing’s R & D costs and risks . Fifth , the first electronic computers were developed during the Second World War with US government funding . Sixth , the US software industry was virtually created by US government procurement that , among other things , imposed the uniform standards that were vital for the industry’s subsequent commercial success . Seventh , in its early stages , the US biotech industry received substantial assistance from public funds . In view of these , and myriad other , examples I concluded elsewhere ( Lipsey 1997 : 106 ) : “A host of science & technology and innovation policies have been used in various countries . The great success of some and the massive failure of others suggest several lessons . First , there is scope for major government activity in the area of encouraging technological change . Second , there is also enormous scope for wasteful failure . Third , the expectations are poor for big technology pushes that require massive changes in the existing facilitating structure or even the development of wholly new structures ; the successes have tended to be those that accept the path dependency of technological change , going for significant advances that build on existing strengths and not trying for the great leaps in the technological dark that unfortunately seem to attract politicians . Fourth , although no assistance is clearly better than bad assistance , good assistance is often better than none - - at least in some circumstances in some countries . ” This leads me to make three points . First , there are major tolerated anomalies in the literature between those who argue that there is no place for industrial policy and those who point to both successes and failures . The slogan for the extremists is “governments cannot pick winners . ” This slogan avoids the real issue : Because governments can and have picked winners and have supported winning activities , the operative issue is to discover the circumstances that are conducive to policy success rather than policy failure . One may make the judgement that on balance there are so many government failures that it would be better if governments never tried . But to say , as so many economists do , that because governments cannot pick winners , there is no place for industrial policy is to fly in the face of the evidence . Second , when anyone tries to introduce what Mowery and Nelson call “nuanced and less polarised” considerations into the public debate , they are often vilified by fellow economists as giving fodder to the enemy . This happened to me recently when industrial policy became an issue in the Canadian election of November 2000 . I commented in several places that the evidence was mixed on such assistance . I was then attacked by those who , correctly in my view , judged that the present government misused such assistance in many counter - productive ways and it would be better if they had done nothing . My critics wanted me to say that it is always better for governments to do Methodology Speech , Publisher’s Version 07 / 08 / 01 28 nothing (cid:190) some were quoted as saying that “governments just cannot pick winners” . They argued that by putting forward a more nuanced view , I was giving support to what we all agreed were the thoroughly bad polices of the incumbent Canadian government . There could , be no better example of the mixing of the assessment of scientific evidence with the making of effective arguments in support of good polices . Third , the attempts of various writers to get the argument among main - line economists off the advocacy of factually refuted polarised positions and onto a discussion of the conditions that encourage success have mainly failed . My own view is that many case studies show that neither of the extreme views that government policies designed to encourage innovation succeed easily or always fail are tenable . Instead , the real issue is to identify the types of policies that are likely to succeed and the political conditions that encourage success rather than failure . Carlaw and I tried to do this in several publications ( especially Lipsey and Carlaw 1996 and 1998 ) , as did all the writers in Mowrey and Nelson ( 2000 ) . But this does not seem to reduce the frequency with which both refuted extremes are advocated in another set of tolerated anomalies . Observation 11 : Big issues are harder to settle than small ones ; yet it is the big issues that dominate much debate over economic problems . How much do “market failures” matter ? Those who support unhindered markets tend to answer “not much” and those who support some intervention tend to answer “quite a bit . ” I suspect which of the above answers is given is determined more by one’s political position than by an unbiased scrutiny of the available evidence . Do the results of the actual economy come close enough to those of perfect competition to allow the theoretical model to be safely used to promote and to assess actual policies ? Some say definitely “yes” and others reply “ridiculous” (cid:190) surely an important tolerated anomaly How do you transit from a corrupt command economy to a market system so as to keep transitional pain as low as possible and the end result as good as possible ? Russia and China present two very different routes . Russia made political reforms first and then tried to free up the economy rapidly and without the required institutional underpinnings , with disastrous results . China has made gradualist economic reforms first and many observers hope that , as the middle class grows , political freedoms will follow . People who believe in the power of the unaided market tend to favour the Russian cold turkey approach , arguing that Russian troubles arose because they did not go far enough . People who stress the importance of institutions , behavioural attitudes , and path dependencies , tend to prefer the route of slower evolution such as the Chinese seem to be following . This is another example of the sort of polarised views that characterise the debate over industrial policy . How do poor economies get on a strong growth path ? Is freeing up markets sufficient or just necessary ? This is a debate that pits those who believe in the power of the unaided market against those who believe in the need for a “guided hand . ” I have discussed this in detail elsewhere and so only mention it as one of those great issues that seem as far from being settled as when it first arose . ( See Lipsey 1997a and 2001a . ) Methodology Speech , Publisher’s Version 07 / 08 / 01 29 What do we conclude from the fact that virtually no advanced industrial nation or NIC began its period of sustained growth without strong tariff barriers and other substantial government interventions ? Is this relevant , or just accident ? This is one of those great issues in industrial policy on which all shades of opinion seem possible when unconstrained by evidence . But it takes quite a leap of faith to argue , as many economists do , that a major policy set adopted by virtually every country that successfully industrialized was either unnecessary or even counterproductive . VI . CONCLUSION One does not have to spend much time with non - economists in policy - making situations to realize the enormous value of economics . But most of that value depends upon a qualitative understanding of how the price system works . Economics is advancing rapidly in many directions , some of which unite theory and quantitative evidence . Nonetheless , it is salutary to understand that the many good practices of modern economists continue to be interlaced with all too many bad ones , of which a lack of detailed factual control over theories and excessive formalism are two of the worst . END OF TEXT Methodology Speech , Publisher’s Version 07 / 08 / 01 30 BIBLIOGRAPHY Archibald , G . C . , B . C . Eaton and Richard G . Lipsey ( 1986 ) , “Address Models of Value Theory” in New developments in the Analysis of Market Structure , ( J . E . Stiglitz and G . F . Mathewson ( eds . ) , ( London : Macmillan ) G . C . Archibald and Richard G . Lipsey ( 1967 ) An Introduction to a Mathematical Treatment of Economics , 1 st edition , ( London : Weidenfeld & Nicolson ) ( 3 rd edn . 1977 ) . Baumol , W . J . ( 1952 ) , “The Transactions Demand for Cash : An Inventory Theoretic Approach” , The Quarterly Journal of Economics , 66 , 545 - 56 . Bekar , Clifford , ( 2000 ) “Two Productivity Puzzles in British Economics History” Phd . Dissertation , Simon Fraser University . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ( 2001 , forthcoming ) , Scattering as insurance : A robust explanation of Open Fields ? ” Research in Economic History . Blaug , Mark ( 1978 ) , Economic Theory in Retrospect , ( Cambridge : Cambridge University Press ) . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ( 1992 ) , The Methodology of Economics : Or How Economists Explain , ( Cambridge : Cambridge University Press ) . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ( 1997 ) , “Competition as an end - state and competition as a process , ” in Trade , Technology and Economics : essays in honour of Richard G . Lipsey , B . C . Eaton and R . Harris ( eds . ) ( Cheltenham : Edward Elgar ) , Chandler , Alfred , D . , Jr . ( 1977 ) The Visible Hand ( Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press ) . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ( 1990 ) Scale and Scope ( Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press ) . Chrystal , K . Alec and Richard G . Lipsey ( 1997 ) Economics for Business and Management , ( Oxford , UK : Oxford University Press ) . Domar , Evsey ( 1946 ) “Capital Expansion and Growth” Econometrica , 14 , 137 - 47 reprinted in Sen ( 1970 ) . Eaton B . C . , and R . G . Lipsey ( 1989 ) , “Product Differentiation” , in Handbook of Industrial Organisation Volume One , ( R . Schmalensee and R . D . Willig eds . ) ( Amsterdam : North Holland ) _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ( 1997 ) , On the Foundations of Monopolistic Competition and Economic Geography , ( Cheltenham : Edward Elgar ) Friedman , Milton ( 1957 ) , A Theory of the Consumption Function , ( Princeton : Princeton University Press ) . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ( 1953 ) , “The Methodology of Positive Economics” in Essays in Positive Economics , ( Chicago : University of Chicago Press ) Methodology Speech , Publisher’s Version 07 / 08 / 01 31 Grossman , Gene M . and Elhanan Helpman ( 1991 ) Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy , ( Cambridge : MIT Press ) Hall , Robert E . ( 1980 ) , “Employment Fluctuations and Wage Rigidity , ” Brookings Economic Papers , 10 th Anniversary Issue , 91 - 123 . Harrod , Roy F . ( 1939 ) , “An essay in Dynamic theory , ” Economic Journal , 49 , 14 - 33 . Reprinted in Sen ( 1970 ) . Hutchison , T . W . ( 1938 ) , The Significance and Basic Postulates of Economic Theory , ( London : Macmillan ) . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ( 1992 ) , Changing Aims in Economics , ( Oxford : Blackwell ) Jones , Stephen R . G . , and W . Craig Riddell ( 1999 ) “The Measurement of Unemployment : An Empirical Approach , ” 67 , 147 - 161 Johnston , J . ( 1960 ) , Statistical Cost Curves , ( New York : McGraw Hill ) . Kaldor , N . and J . A . Mirrlees ( 1961 - 2 ) , “A New Model of Economic Growth , ” Review of Economic Studies , 29 , 174 - 90 . Reprinted in Sen ( 1970 ) . Klappholz K . and J . Agassi ( 1959 ) , “Methodological prescriptions in economics” , Economica 26 , 60 - 74 Lancaster , K . ( 1979 ) , Variety , Equality and Efficiency , ( New York : Columbia University Press ) . Lipsey , Richard , G . ( 1963 ) An Introduction to Positive Economics , 1st edition ( London : Weidenfeld & Nicolson ) . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ( 1981 ) , “The Understanding and Control of Inflation and Unemployment : Is There a Crisis in Macro Economics ? " Canadian Journal of Economics , 14 , 545 - 576 . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ( 1997a ) “Globalization and National Government Policies : An Economists View , " in Governments , Globalization , and International Business , John Dunning ( ed . ) , ( Oxford : Oxford University Press ) . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ( 1997b ) The Selected Essays of Richard G . Lipsey , Volume One : Microeconomics Growth and Political Economy , and Volume Two : Macroeconomic Theory and Policy , ( Cheltenham , UK : Edward Elgar ) . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ( 2001a ) “Some Implications of Endogenous Technological Change for Technology Policies in Developing Countries , ” Economics of Innovation and New Technology , special edition , forthcoming . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ( 2001b ) “IS - LM , Keynesianism and the New Classicism , ” Macroeconomics and the Real World , Roger E . Blackhouse and Andrea Salanti ( eds . ) , ( Oxford : Oxford University Press ) , forthcoming . Lipsey , Richard , G . and Kenneth Carlaw ( 1996 ) “A Structuralist View of Innovation Policy” in The Implications of Knowledge Based Growth , Peter Howitt ( ed . ) , ( Calgary : University of Calgary Press ) . Methodology Speech , Publisher’s Version 07 / 08 / 01 32 _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ( 1998 ) A Structuralist Assessment of Technology Policies : Taking Schumpeter Seriously on Policy , ( Ottawa : Industry Canada ) . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ( 2000a ) , “What Does Total Factor Productivity Measure ? ” manuscript available at http : / / www . sfu . ca / ~ rlipsey . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ( 2000b ) Introduction and Conclusions to “What Does Total Factor Productivity Measure ? ” International Productivity Monitor , Inaugural Issue . Lipsey , Richard G . and Alec Chrystal ( 1999 ) , Economics , ( Oxford : Oxford University Press ) ( This is the successor to An Introduction to Positive Economics , which on the 8 th edition , changed publishers and title and added a co - author . ) Lipsey , Richard , G . and Kelvin Lancaster ( 1956 ) “The General Theory of Second Best , " in The Review of Economic Studies , 24 , 11 - 32 . Lipsey , Richard , G . and P . O . Steiner ( 1966 ) Economics : An Introductory Analysis , 1 st edition . ( New York : Harper & Row ) ( 12 th edn . , 1999 ) . Lipsey , Richard , G . and Russel M . Wills ( 1996 ) " Science and Techno logy Policies in Asia Pacific Countries : Challenges and Opportunities for Canada , " in The Asia - Pacific Region in the Global Economy : A Canadian Perspective , Richard Harris ( ed . ) , ( Calgary : University of Calgary Press ) . Mayer , T . , ( 1993 ) Truth Versus Precision in Economics , ( Aldershot : Edward Elgar ) . Modigliani , F . and R . E . Brumberg ( 1954 ) , “Utility Analysis and the Consumption Function , ” in Post - Keynesian Economics , K . Kurihara ( ed . ) , ( New Brunswick , N . J . : Rutgers University Press ) . Mowery David C . and Richard R . Nelson ( eds . ) , ( 2000 ) Sources of Industrial Leadership : Studies of Seven Industries , ( Cambridge : Cambridge University Press ) . Neild , Robert ( 1963 ) , Pricing and Employment in the Trade Cycle , ( Cambridge : Cambridge University Press ) . Okun , A . M . ( 1981 ) , Prices and Quantities , ( Washington : Brookings Institute ) . Porter , Michael , ( 1990 ) The Competitive Advantage of Nations , ( New York : Free Press ) Reed , Clyde and Clifford Bekar ( forthcoming ) “Religious Prohibitions Against Usury , ” Journal of Law and Economics . Robbins , Lionel , ( 1932 ) An Essay on the Nature and Significance of Economic Science , ( London : Macmillan ) . Riddell , W . , Craig ( 1999 ) “Canadian Labour Market Performance in International Perspective , ” The Canadian Journal of Economics , 32 , 1097 - 1134 Rosenberg , Nathan ( 1982 ) , Inside the Black Box : technology and economics , ( Cambridge : Cambridge University Press ) Sen , Amartya ( ed . ) ( 1970 ) Growth Economics , ( Harmondsworth : Penguin ) . Methodology Speech , Publisher’s Version 07 / 08 / 01 33 Swan , T . W . ( 1963 ) , “Golden Ages and Production Functions , ” in Economic Development with Special Reference to East Asia , K . E . Berrill ( ed . ) , ( London : Macmillan ) . Reprinted in Sen ( 1970 ) . Tobin , James ( 1956 ) , “The Interest - Elasticity of the Transactions Demand for Cash , ” Review of Economic Statistics , 38 : 241 - 47 . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ( 1958 ) , “Liquidity Preference as Behaviour Towards Risk , ” Review of Economic Studies , 25 : 65 - 86 . Uzawa , H . , ( 1963 ) “Neutral Inventions and the Stability of Growth Equilibrium , ” Review of Economic Studies , 28 : 117 - 24 . Womack , James P . , Daniel T . Jones and Daniel Roos ( 1990 ) The Machine that Changed the World , ( New York : Maxwell Macmillan ) . Methodology Speech , Publisher’s Version 07 / 08 / 01 34 END NOTES