A New Method for Identifying Recombinations of Existing Knowledge Associated with High - Impact Innovation * Satyam Mukherjee , Brian Uzzi , Ben Jones , and Michael Stringer How existing technologies and ideas are recombined into new innovations remains an important question , particularly as the store of prior technology , art , and work expands at an increasing rate . Yet , methodologies for identifying effective recombinations remain a nascent area of research . This paper extends our previous work , which developed a network methodology for assessing a scientiﬁc article’s recombinations of prior work . The methodology uses information from the entire co - citation network of all papers recorded in the Web of Science to identify combinations of prior work that are conventional or atypical and then identiﬁes the virtuous mix of conventional and atypical pairings associated with high impact work . Here , we summarize our prior method and ﬁndings , present new ﬁndings , and perform a case study application to the ﬁeld of management science . First , the results show that despite an ever - increasing frontier of possible new combinations of prior work , atypical combinations of prior work are becoming increasingly rare with time , while the distribution of conventional pairings is increasing with time . Second , our analyses show that with time the atypical pairings found in hit papers have a relatively stable mean rate at which they become conventional pairing . Nevertheless , the variance around the mean is growing signiﬁcantly , which indicates that there is a greater tendency over time for novel pairings either to be virtually never used again or to become conventional pairings . Practitioner Points (cid:129) High - impact work is sharply elevated when combina - tions of prior work are anchored in substantial conven - tionality while mixing in a left tail of combinations that are rarely seen together . (cid:129) In business , companies and analysts could better predict the value of a future patent or product based on its combination of high conventionality and infusions of novelty . (cid:129) Consumer products like computer games that are able to incorporate conventional pairings with a small compo - nent of novelty may be more likely to be popular . Introduction I nvention is spurred on when existing innovations or their components are assembled into original new designs ( Becker , 1982 ; Guimera , Uzzi , Spiro , and Amaral , 2005 ; Jones , 2009 ; Jones , Wuchty , and Uzzi , 2008 ; Schilling , 2005 ; Schumpeter , 1939 ; Usher , 1954 ; Uzzi and Spiro , 2005 ; Weitzman , 1998 ) . Nevertheless , it remains a mystery as to what recombined elements of existing innovations or components are likely to be prom - ising and attractive to their intended audiences . In some creative ﬁelds , it is often lamented that it is impossible to know which recombinations will be fruitful ( Committee on Facilitating Interdisciplinary Research , 2004 ) . In ﬁlm - making , it is accepted wisdom that “all hits are ﬂukes , ” an idiom echoing Samuel Goldwin’s quip that “nobody knows nothing” about what combination of previously used , or altogether new plot details , actors , settings , or direct references to past movies makes for a hit ( Spitz and Horvát , 2014a , 2014b ) . As a consequence , many expen - sive failures must be suffered in the hope that one hit can recover the costs of experimentation . To some degree , similar uncertainty lies behind innovation in general ( Börner et al . , 2011 ; Evans and Foster , 2011 ; Fiore , 2008 ; Stokols , Hall , Taylor , and Moser , 2008 ; Wuchty , Jones , and Uzzi , 2007 ) . Nevertheless , innovative ideas can be difﬁcult to absorb ( Henderson and Clark , 1990 ) and communicate as well , leading creatives to intentionally display conven - tionality ( familiar combinations used many times in pre - vious work ) side - by - side with atypical combinations . In his Principia , Newton presented his laws of gravitation using accepted geometry rather than his newly developed calculus despite the latter’s importance in developing his Address correspondence to : Satyam Mukherjee , Kellogg School of Management and Northwestern Institute on Complex Systems ( NICO ) , 600 Foster Street , Evanston , IL 60208 . E - mail : satyam . mukherjee @ gmail . com . Tel : 847 - 491 - 2527 . * Sponsored by the Northwestern University Institute on Complex Systems ( NICO ) , by the Army Research Laboratory under Cooperative Agreement Number W911NF - 09 - 2 - 0053 , and DARPA BAA - 11 - 64 , Social Media in Strategic Communication . The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the ofﬁcial policies , either expressed or implied , of the Army Research Laboratory or the U . S . Government . J PROD INNOV MANAG 2015 ; •• ( •• ) : •• – •• © 2015 Product Development & Management Association DOI : 10 . 1111 / jpim . 12294 insights ( Whiteside , 1970 ) . Similarly , Darwin devoted the ﬁrst part of On the Origin of Species to conventional , well - accepted knowledge of the selective breeding of dogs , cattle , and birds . In commercial product design , similar dynamics between conventionality and novelty may occur . For example , e - books retain page - ﬂipping graphics to remind the reader of physical books , and blue jeans were designed with a familiar watch pocket to look like conventional trousers . High gross movies like Avatar mix conventional storylines with a novel setup of com - puter graphics . These patterns suggest that novelty and conventional - ity are not necessarily factors in opposition where one hand takes from the other ; rather , innovations that mix novelty with conventionality may produce enough added value over the current state of the art while providing enough accepted knowledge to allow easy adoption . In our prior work , a network - based methodology was developed for understanding innovation in science . Our focus in this paper is to examine the diversity of the conventional and atypical pairings of the content of the innovation . In scientiﬁc work , conventional and atypical pairing of the content of the innovation includes the knowledge put forth in prior published work and repre - sented by the papers referenced in a publications bibliog - raphy . In our study of science , the focus is on “hit” innovations—those papers in the top 5 % of the citation distribution for their ﬁeld . To identify each article’s pattern of conventional and atypical combinations of prior work , we developed a network analysis method that exploited the full co - citation network of the entire Web of Science ( WoS ) , which includes 17 . 9 million papers that cite nearly three quarters of a billion papers over the period 1950 – 2000 . The level of conventional and novel combinations of prior work is measured by coding all 17 . 9 million plus papers in the Web of Science across all subﬁelds of science . 1 The relative conventionality and novelty of the prior work that an article combines is measured by examining the papers referenced in an arti - cle’s bibliography ( Small , 1973 ; Stringer , Sales - Pardo , and Amaral , 2010 ) . The pairwise combinations of prior work in each article’s bibliography allows us to assess how common or novel any pairwise combination of prior work was . To determine this , a full co - citation network is created and journal pairings are counted , using different journals as a proxy for different areas of knowledge ( Itzkovitz , Milo , Kashtan , Ziv , and Alon , 2003 ; Small , 1973 ; Stringer et al . , 2010 ) . Having determined the observed frequency of each journal pairing , we consid - ered the frequency distribution for each journal pairing that would have occurred by chance across the entire Web of Science by permuting the co - citation network using a variation of the Markov chain Monte Carlo ( MCMC ) algorithm . The more often a journal pairing occurred compared to chance , the more conventional the pairings of prior work , and the less frequently a journal pairing occurred compared to chance , the more novel the pairing . Further , because the null model algorithm randomizes the detailed article - level citation network structure of the 1 The Web of Science is the largest known repository on the planet for recorded scientiﬁc papers worldwide , circa 1950 – 2000 . We examined approximately 17 . 9 million scientiﬁc publications across 12 , 000 journals as indexed in the Thomson Reuters Web of Science ( WoS ) database , 1950 – 2005 period . According to each journal’s subject area , the Institute for Scientiﬁc Information further deﬁnes three ﬁelds and constituent subﬁelds : science and engineering ( 171 subﬁelds ) , social sciences ( 54 subﬁelds ) , and arts and humanities ( 27 subﬁelds ) with coverage for research publications in science and engineering since 1945 , social sciences since 1956 , and arts and humanities since 1975 . The WoS records papers’ citations , number of authors , and citation links to other papers in the database . BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES Dr . Satyam Mukherjee is a postdoctoral fellow at the Kellogg School of Management and Northwestern Institute on Complex Systems ( NICO ) . He obtained his doctorate in physics from the Indian Institute of Tech - nology Madras , and his research interests include physics of complex systems , social network analysis , and sports analytics . Dr . Mukherjee’s works have appeared in Science , Scientiﬁc Reports , Interface , and Physical Review E and have been featured in The Economist , Times of India , and Wall Street Journal . Dr . Brian Uzzi is a globally recognized scientist , teacher , consultant , and speaker on leadership , social networks , and new media . He is the Richard L . Thomas Professor of Leadership and Organizational Change at the Kellogg School of Management , codirector of Northwestern Insti - tute on Complex Systems ( NICO ) , and faculty director of the Kellogg Architectures of Collaboration Initiative ( KACI ) . He also holds profes - sorships in Sociology at theWeinberg College ofArts of Sciences and in Industrial Engineering and Management Sciences at the McCormick School of Engineering . Dr . Uzzi has a Ph . D . in Sociology and M . S . from the State University of New York , Stony Brook . He also holds an M . S . in Organizational Psychology from Carnegie Mellon University and a B . A . in Business Economics from Hofstra University . Dr . Ben Jones is the Gordon and Llura Gund Family Professor of Entrepreneurship , the professor of strategy , and the faculty director of the Kellogg Innovation and Entrepreneurship Initiative . He holds a Ph . D . from Massachusetts Institute of Technology . His research focuses largely on innovation and creativity , with recent work investigating the role of teamwork in innovation and the relationship between age and invention . His research has appeared in journals such as Science , Quar - terly Journal of Economics , and American Economic Review , and has been proﬁled in media outlets such as the Wall Street Journal , the Economist , and The New Yorker . Dr . Michael Stringer is co - founder and partner of Datascope Analytics , a Chicago data - driven consulting and design ﬁrm . Dr . Stringer received his B . S . in engineering physics from the University of Colorado and a Ph . D . in physics from Northwestern University . At DatascopeAnalytics , he has led and contributed to projects across a variety of industries for clients such as Procter & Gamble , Thomson Reuters , and other well - known companies . 2 J PROD INNOV MANAG S . MUKHERJEE ET AL . 2015 ; •• ( •• ) : •• – •• global citation network of the Web of Science , it pre - serves each article’s in - degree and out - degree ( i . e . , back - ward and forward ) citation counts on a constantly updated year - to - year basis , allowing each year of the Web of Science to be compared to every other year on a rela - tive basis ( i . e . , all comparisons are made to the same third quantity—the null model ) , despite the growth in the size of prior art and the rate of new publications ( Uzzi , Mukherjee , Stringer , and Jones , 2013 ) . Because many innovations are based on elements of prior published work—patents , law , video games , or literature—the method is general . Figure 1 presents a stylized example of how article pairs and journal pairs are drawn from the network struc - ture of citations . In panel A , the circular nodes represent papers and the directed links exist when the top article cites the bottom four papers . In panel B , the circular nodes represent papers and the undirected co - citation links between papers are shown in black . A co - citation exists between each pair of papers that occurs in the reference list of the focal article . Here , there are four references and therefore six ( i . e . , four choose two ) co - citation links . In panel C , article nodes are grouped by journal ; the shaded ovals represent the three journals in which each of the cited papers is published . Finally , in panel D , the co - citation links between papers are mapped to the journal level , and the black links represent journal co - citations . Note that the total number of article - to - article co - citation links ( six ) is preserved at the journal co - citation level . Figure 2 shows how citation links between papers are switched randomly but constrained to have the same origin year and target year . Thus in the left panel , switch - ing links A and B is allowed , while switching links A and C is not allowed . The switching algorithm thus preserves for each article its ( 1 ) number of references , ( 2 ) citation count , ( 3 ) citation accumulation dynamics , and 4 ) the age distribution of referenced work . Performing QE switches ( where Q = 10 and E is the number of edges in the graph ) converges to a random graph from the conﬁguration Figure 1 . How the Null Model Relates Paper Pairs and Journal Pairs with a Monte Carlo Simulation Figure 2 . The Model Preserves the Co - Citation Network Backwards and Forwards in Time INNOVATION COMBINED WITH EXISTING TECHNOLOGY J PROD INNOV MANAG 3 2015 ; •• ( •• ) : •• – •• model ( 26 ) where the number and dynamics of citations are preserved but the origin of the citations is random - ized . Since each node is equally likely to be the originat - ing node of any citation , given the constraints , it is known a priori that no disciplines exist in this randomized cita - tion network . The middle panel above demonstrates the citation history of an article—the citation history of every article is exactly preserved under our null model , control - ling for both the variation in magnitude and dynamics of citation accumulation to papers . Comparing the observed frequency with the frequency distribution created with the randomized citation net - works , a z - score for each journal pair is generated . This normalized measure describes whether any given pair appeared novel or conventional . Z - scores above zero indicate pairs that appear more often in the observed data than expected by chance , indicating relatively common or “conventional” pairings . Z - scores below zero indicate pairs that appear less often in the observed WoS than expected by chance , indicating relatively atypical or “novel” pairings . The z - score measure has been used previously in network analysis to determine the degree to which observed linkages among nodes ( in our case papers are nodes and links are citations among nodes ) are due to chance ( Saavedraa , Kathleen , and Uzzi , 2011 ; Wasserman and Faust , 1994 ; Watts and Strogatz , 1998 ) . Viewed conceptually , our methodology uses the construct of cut ups—random pairings—to deﬁne novel combina - tions . The technique of “cut ups” was pioneered by poets to drive the process of innovation . In cut ups , a poem or text is written and then randomly cut into strips . The strips are randomly reassembled and new poem or text is written around random connections among the elements of the original text with the intention of creating an inno - vative , previously unimagined recombination of existing elements . Our method assigns each article a distribution of journal pair z - scores based on the article’s reference list . To characterize an article’s tendency to draw together conventional and novel combinations of prior work , two summary statistics were taken . First , the central tendency of an article’s combinations is characterized by the article’s median z - score . The median allows us to char - acterize conventionality in the article’s main mass of combinations . Second , the article’s 10th percentile z - score is considered . The left tail allows us to character - ize the article’s more unusual journal combinations where novelty may reside . Figure 3 uses a non - parametric categorization to sum - marize how papers are classiﬁed by their conventionality and novelty . An article is categorized as high or low Low Conventionality On average few citations have appeared together High Conventionality On average most citations have appeared together High Novelty Outliers of atypical pairings Low Novelty No outliers of atypical pairings Darwin Hypothesis AcceptedWisdom Avant - garde Platypus Conven(cid:2)onal N ov el Figure 3 . Categorization of Types of Scientiﬁc Papers Based on their Combinations of Conventional and Novel Pairings of Prior Published Work 4 J PROD INNOV MANAG S . MUKHERJEE ET AL . 2015 ; •• ( •• ) : •• – •• “median conventionality” if its median z score is in the upper or lower half of all median z - scores , respectively , and having high or low “tail novelty” if the article’s 10th percentile z - score is above or below zero , respectively . As shorthand , we term papers belonging to high - median conventionality and high tail novelty as Darwin’s Tower , consistent with his approach to presenting his ideas in the Origin of Species . Papers with high median convention - ality and low novelty are referred to as Accepted Wisdom ; papers with high tail novelty and low conventionality are referred to as Avant - garde ; and papers residing in the low conventionality and low novelty category are termed Platypuses because of their neither - nor - like quality . Case Example for Management Figure 4 illustrates the method for a single article in man - agement , “A Dynamic Theory of Organizational Knowl - edge Creation , ” which proposes a theoretical framework for managing the dynamical aspects of innovation cre - ation process ( Nonaka , 1994 ) . For example , our demon - stration article ( Nonaka , 1994 ) belongs to the category of high median conventionality and high tail novelty and also accrued 311 citations through the ﬁrst eight years of publication ( Uzzi et al . , 2013 ) . This paper cites 88 refer - ences and a subset of all possible observed journal fre - quency pairings of the article in Figure 4 is shown , including , for example , ( i ) Brown and Duigud Organiza - tion Science ( 1991 ) with Cohen , March and Olsen Administrative Science Quarterly ( 1972 ) , ( ii ) Brown and Duigud Organization Science ( 1991 ) with Takeuchi and Nonaka Harvard Business Review ( 1986 ) , and ( iii ) Takeuchi and Nonaka Harvard Business Review ( 1986 ) and Prahlad and Hamel Harvard Business Review ( 1990 ) . Our basic measurement question is to assess how much an article draws on conventional and atypical ideas by examining to what extent each pairwise combination of prior work listed in the reference section of the article is a common or atypical combination . To do this , we computed ( 1 ) the observed frequency of any given pairing of references in the WoS and ( 2 ) the frequency of a given pairing that would have occurred by chance . Combining ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) creates a normalized measure to describe whether any given pairing appears novel or conventional . To measure the observed frequency of any given pairing in the WoS , the following ﬁve steps are taken : ( 1 ) Take the references listed in a given article’s bibliography . ( 2 ) Consider all pairwise combinations of the papers refer - enced in the bibliography of the article . ( 3 ) For each pairwise combination , record the two journals that were combined . ( 4 ) Repeat steps 1 to 3 for every article in the WoS . ( 5 ) Count the aggregate frequency of each journal pairing for all referenced pairs for a given publication period ( e . g . , by year or decade ) . Having determined the observed frequency of each journal pairing , a null model is built to consider the Figure 4 . A Sample of the Journal Pair Frequencies , Expected Frequencies , and Z - score for an Illustrative Paper , “A Dynamic Theory of Organizational Knowledge Creation” INNOVATION COMBINED WITH EXISTING TECHNOLOGY J PROD INNOV MANAG 5 2015 ; •• ( •• ) : •• – •• underlying frequency distribution for each journal pairing that would have occurred by chance . The null model randomly reassigns the citation links between papers while preserving ( 1 ) the number of citations to and from each article and ( 2 ) the citing and cited year for each link using a variation of MCMC algorithm to randomly switch co - citations between papers while preserving the detailed article - level structure of the global citation network with its 17 . 9 million papers ( nodes ) and 600 million citations ( edges ) . Using this algorithm , 10 synthetic instances of the entire WoS are created , each with a different set of ran - domized citation links . For each instance of the WoS , steps 1 to 5 above are repeated , calculating the frequency of each co - referenced journal pair . Looking across all 10 randomized cases of the WoS , we generate a distribution of frequencies for each journal pair . Next , the z - score for each observed pair relative to what was expected by chance is evaluated as : z obs = − ( ) exp σ where obs is the observed frequency of the journal pair in the actual WoS , while exp is the mean and σ is the standard deviation of the number of journal pairs obtained from the 10 randomized simulations of the article - to - article citation network . Returning to each indi - vidual article , a z - score is assigned to each of the journal pairs in that article’s reference list . Note that our method examines journal pairings , using journals to proxy for different areas of knowledge . The relative beneﬁts of using journals and randomizations at the article level for deﬁning areas of knowledge relative to other approaches has been demonstrated elsewhere ( Uzzi et al . , 2013 ) . Figure 4 displays the observed frequency , expected frequency , and z - score for several journal pairings in the article . Further , the observed frequency of pairings permits a distribution of journal pairings to be created for each article , which represents the collective prior knowl - edge of the papers in terms of conventionality and atypicality . Figure 5 summarizes the information of the distribution of the z - score for our example article from management . Two primary summary statistics : the median z - score for that article and the 10th percentile z - score are taken for that article . The ﬁrst measure is a summary statistic that tells us about the central tendency of the combinations of journals that an article cites . The larger the median z - score for an article , the more the journals referenced in the article are combined compared to chance . The second measure is a summary statistic that tells us about the left tail for that article , that is , journal pairings that are relatively unusual among the set of journal pairings an article’s reference list makes . Key Results of the Method for Science in General The overriding result of our analysis is that there are universal patterns of innovation in science expressed in the relationship between an article’s impact and the Figure 5 . Distribution of Z - Scores of All Journal Pairs for the Paper , “A Dynamic Theory of Organizational Knowledge Creation” 6 J PROD INNOV MANAG S . MUKHERJEE ET AL . 2015 ; •• ( •• ) : •• – •• degree to which it draws on a virtuous mix of conven - tional and atypical combinations of knowledge . Further , our analysis shows that the virtuous mix appears not to be a problem that is solved by individuals . Relatively speak - ing , teams show a much higher probability of hitting on the virtuous than do individuals . Moreover , at any mix of conventionality and atypicality , teams do more to assimi - late combinations of conventional and atypical ideas in a single article . First , hit papers are quantiﬁed as those papers in the top 5 % of the citation distribution . Our ﬁndings indicate that papers that display a high level of median conven - tionality with a mix of high tail novelty ( Darwin’s Tower ) have a likelihood of becoming a hit that is nearly twice that of the expected background rate of 5 % . All other combinations have no higher expectations of becoming hits than that of the 5 % background rate or have a rate lower than the background rate with the Platypus class of papers displaying a hit rate of just 2 % ( Uzzi et al . , 2013 ) . Second , regression analysis with controls for other variables known to affect citation counts and ﬁxed effects for year and each distinct ﬁeld in the WoS shows that the above patterns hold for deﬁnitions of hit papers in the top 10 % , 5 % , and 1 % levels of the distribution of citations and across time . Speciﬁcally , Figure 6 indicates that high tail novelty mixed with high median conventionality ( Darwin’s Tower ) outperforms other categories in all decades from 1950 to 2000 , regardless of whether a “hit” article is deﬁned as the top 1 % , 5 % , or 10 % by citations received . In all cases , Darwin’s Tower sees hit rates approximately twice the background rate . Third , Table 1 shows that the pattern of innovation found for high median conventionality and high tail novelty holds when regressions are run on a ﬁeld - by - ﬁeld basis . For each of the 252 ﬁelds in the WoS , the papers are categorized by ranking them according to their probabil - ity of producing hit papers . This analysis revealed that high tail novelty and high median conventionality ( Dar - win’s Tower ) are the highest impact papers in 64 . 38 % of ﬁelds and either ﬁrst or second in 85 % of ﬁelds . And while the effect holds for 64 . 38 % of the ﬁelds , it holds for the vast majority of all papers because it holds for the ﬁelds with the largest number of scientists in them . By contrast , low tail novelty and low median conventionality are the lowest or second lowest in about 87 of ﬁelds ( Platypus ) ( see Uzzi et al . , 2013 , for additional details ) . Fourth , our work shows that the process of ﬁnding the right balance between conventional and novel pairings favors teamwork over solo work . Solo authors and teams commonly write papers with the same level of median conventionality but teams are more likely to have left tail novelty than solo authors . Further , it is observed that at any combination of levels of conventionality and novelty , team papers are more likely to be hits than are solo papers . For example , taking a team and a solo article whose median levels of conventionality are at the 90 percentile of the median conventionality distribution and have high left tail novelty , the team article , on average , has nearly twice the probability of a hit . This indicates that teams not only reach for novelty more but appear to assimilate it better with conventional knowledge . Here , as a further extension of the ﬁndings of Uzzi et al . ( 2013 ) , we examined two dynamic processes related to innovation : ( 1 ) how the level of conventionality and the level of novelty in science are changing over time and ( 2 ) whether novel pairings are the seeds of future conven - tional pairings . As mentioned above , scientiﬁc innovations draw heavily on conventional combinations of the past . Our analysis of the change in conventionality over time shows that science is becoming signiﬁcantly more conventional . Figure 7A displays the cumulative distribution of median z - scores across all papers in the WoS published in the 1950s through 1990s by decade . This plot shows that there is a high propensity for conventionality in all years . Further , with respect to time , conventionality is system - atically and increasingly dominant in scientiﬁc papers . In all decades , the cumulative distributions are moving sig - niﬁcantly to the right . By the 1980s and 1990s , fewer than 4 % of papers have median z - scores below 0 and more than 50 % of papers have median z - scores above 64 . Figure 7B considers the 10th percentile z - scores , which further suggest a propensity for conventionality . In all decades , the curves are systematically falling . With each decade that goes by , the level of novelty in scientiﬁc papers drops systematically . Only 41 % of papers in the 1980s and 1990s have a 10th percentile z - score below 0 . Overall , by these measures , science is increasingly becoming conventional and more rarely drawing on atypical pairings of prior work even as novel combina - tions remain critical to hits and the percentage of science done in teams has increased . In regard to the changing distributions of convention - ality and novelty for the ﬁeld of management as deﬁned in the WOS , our ﬁndings indicate that management reﬂects the pattern of most sciences . Figure 8A displays the cumulative distribution of median z - scores across all papers in the WoS published in the 1970s through 1990s by decade . Considering that a z - score below zero repre - sents a journal pair that occurs less often than expected by chance , the analysis of median z - scores suggests very high propensity of conventionality in all decades . Further , INNOVATION COMBINED WITH EXISTING TECHNOLOGY J PROD INNOV MANAG 7 2015 ; •• ( •• ) : •• – •• with respect to time , conventionality is systematically and increasingly dominant . In all decades , the cumulative distributions are moving signiﬁcantly to the right . By the 1980s and 1990s , fewer than 5 % of papers have median z - scores below 0 and more than 50 % of papers have median z - scores above 32 . In the 1990s , only 4 . 9 % of papers had median z - scores below 0 , while in the 1990s the percentage fell to 1 . 7 % , indicating a persistent and prominent tendency for high conventionality . Figure 8B considers the 10th percentile z - scores , which further Figure 6 . Fixed Effects Regressions for Probability of Impact Deﬁned Multiple Ways and Controlling for Time and Field Fixed Effects Indicate a Robust Relationship between High Median Conventionality and High Tail Novelty in Scientiﬁc Papers 8 J PROD INNOV MANAG S . MUKHERJEE ET AL . 2015 ; •• ( •• ) : •• – •• suggest a propensity for conventionality . In all decades , the curves are systematically falling . With each decade that goes by , the level of novelty in management papers drops . Only 19 . 6 % of the papers in the 1970s , 17 . 9 % of the papers in the 1980s , and 16 . 8 % in the 1990s have a 10th percentile z - score below zero . Finally , the sources of conventionality are investigated by examining whether the roots of conventional pairings originated in the novel pairings of high impact papers . Statistical power is gained by looking at all the ﬁelds of science simultaneously . First , the top 5 % of highly cited papers published in 1980 is considered . We then examine whether the 10th percentile journal pairs in these papers , a combination known to be novel at the time , become increasingly conventional with time . Figure 9 quantiﬁes the mean of the z - scores with time . The mean z - score of novel pairings found in hit papers in 1980 and followed through to 2000 show that novel pairings on average remain novel up to 20 years later . This suggests that novel pairings are not the seeds of conventional pairings but remain conventional . Nevertheless , it is observed that there is a signiﬁcant increase in the variance around which novel pairings become conventional pairings in future . This suggests that over time , novel pairings are more likely to become conventional pairings . For example , in 1980 , all the variance around the mean is negative ( which is expected , as this is the ﬁrst year the novel pairings appear ) . As time moves forward , novel pairings have an increased chance of becoming conven - tional pairings ( i . e . , there are now increased numbers of pairings over the mean and into the positive range of the z - score ) . While this evidence does not conclusively support or disprove this exploratory analysis , the prima facie evidence suggests that the mean is fairly stable but that some novel pairings become conventional , suggest - ing that these novel pairings hit on particularly virtuous combinations . Knowing , at the time , which combinations were virtuous was likely impossible given the broad vari - ance in future outcomes among all novel pairings . Discussion Our analysis of 17 . 9 million papers across all scientiﬁc ﬁelds has implications for theories of innovation . Com - binations of existing material are centerpieces in theories of creativity , whether in the arts , the sciences , or commercial innovation ( Becker , 1982 ; Collins , 1998 ; Guimera et al . , 2005 ; Jones et al . , 2008 ; Schilling , 2005 ; Schumpeter , 1939 ; Usher , 1954 ; Uzzi and Spiro , 2005 ; Weitzman , 1998 ) . Within the tradition of examining how recombinations of work may impact innovation , two lines of research have arisen . One line focuses on the ability of teams of diverse individuals to bring together novel com - binations of preexisting innovations or their elements . In this view , each team member overcomes their tendency to narrowly view the range of possible recombinations that have been deﬁned in their area of expertise or experience . If the members of the team have uncorrelated expertise or experience , chances are that unusual and new product designs could emerge ( Page , 2007 ) . Building on this approach is the idea that new ideas need to be embedded in a framework of accepted conventions , which increase the audience’s ability to ﬂuently evaluate innovativeness in an ever - expanding sea of knowledge ( Einstein , 1949 ; Fleming , 2001 ; Jones , 2009 ) . Yet , it remains unknown as to what mix of conventional and atypical ideas results in a virtuous balance of convention and invention , as well as how to measure convention and invention through time . Our method provides a means for measuring the degree to which a pairing of elements in an innovation are conven - tional or innovative and what mix of convention and atypical knowledge within an innovation is associated with high impact . Table 1 . Darwin’s Tower Dominates Innovation in Science as Measured on a Strict Field - by - Field Basis Rank 1st 2nd 3rd 4th Avant - garde 20 . 25 % 44 . 53 % 28 . 74 % 6 . 48 % High tail novelty and low median conventionality Accepted knowledge 9 . 71 % 26 . 72 % 50 . 61 % 12 . 96 % Low tail novelty and high median conventionality Darwin’s Tower 64 . 38 % 21 . 86 % 3 . 64 % 10 . 12 % High tail novelty and high median conventionality Platypus 5 . 66 % 6 . 89 % 17 . 01 % 70 . 44 % Low tail novelty and low median conventionality INNOVATION COMBINED WITH EXISTING TECHNOLOGY J PROD INNOV MANAG 9 2015 ; •• ( •• ) : •• – •• Our results show that the propensity for high impact work is sharply elevated when combinations of prior work are anchored in substantial conventionality , while mixing in a left tail of combinations that are rarely seen together . Further , a link between the mix of conventional and atypical knowledge and teams is established . We ﬁnd that teams are more likely to reach for novel combina - tions than are individuals , a fact that reinforces prior case study and lab research . Moreover , it is observed that at any mix of conventionality and novelty , teams do more with the mixture , i . e . , they produce higher impact science at any mix of conventional and atypical knowledge . This suggests that teams are better at reaching for novel com - binations and better at assimilating conventional ideas and novel ideas into new innovations . We believe that our methods and conceptual approach can be applied to other domains . In business , links between novelty and conventionality in successful patents is a natural extension . Patents also draw on prior work and represent that prior work through citation pat - terns to prior art . If this is the case , then companies and analysts may be able to better predict the value of a future Figure 7 . Temporal Evolution of Conventionality and Novelty for All Disciplines in Web of Science 10 J PROD INNOV MANAG S . MUKHERJEE ET AL . 2015 ; •• ( •• ) : •• – •• patent based on its combination of high conventionality and infusions of novelty . Similarly , consumer product design might also beneﬁt . Consider the development of new games or apps . In each case , there are established categories of story lines , settings , technical capabilities , and so on . For example , a computer game could be ﬁrst - person or second - person shooter ; online , computer spe - ciﬁc , or both ; any sports , racing , or ﬁghting game ; and within each of these categories there may be ﬁner distinc - tions . In each case , these ﬁner distinctions may provide a basis for quantifying what are conventional pairings of categories and novel pairings of categories in consumers’ minds based on the frequency of pairings in prior games compared to chance . For example , those games that are able to incorporate conventional pairings with a small component of novelty may be more likely to be hits . In this way , the methodology and approach could be con - ceivably extended to diverse domains in technology , medicine , or consumer products . At root , our work sug - gests that creativity appears to be a nearly universal phe - nomenon of two extremes . At one extreme is conventionality and at the other is novelty . Curiously , Figure 8 . Temporal Evolution of Conventionality and Novelty in Management INNOVATION COMBINED WITH EXISTING TECHNOLOGY J PROD INNOV MANAG 11 2015 ; •• ( •• ) : •• – •• notable advances appear most closely linked not with efforts along one boundary or the other but with efforts that reach toward both frontiers . References Becker , H . S . 1982 . Art worlds . Oakland , CA : University of California Press . Börner , K . , N . Contractor , H . Falk - Krzesinski , S . Fiore , K . Hall , J . Keyton , T . Klein , B . Spring , D . Stokols , and W . Trochim . 2011 . Mapping a research agenda for the science of team science . Research Evaluation . 20 ( 2 ) : 145 – 58 . Brown , J . S . , and P . Duigud . 1991 . Organizational learning and communities - of - practice : Toward a uniﬁed view of working , learning , and innovation . Organization Science 2 ( 1 ) : 40 – 57 . Cohen , M . D . , J . G . March , and J . P . Olsen . 1972 . Garbage can model of organization choice . Administrative Science Quarterly 17 ( 1 ) : 1 – 25 . Collins , R . 1998 . The sociology of philosophies : A global theory of intel - lectual change . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Committee on Facilitating Interdisciplinary Research . 2004 . Facilitating interdisciplinary research . Washington , DC : NationalAcademy of Sci - ences , National Academy of Engineering , Institute of Medicine . Einstein , A . 1949 . The world as I see it . Secaucus , NJ : Citadel Press . Evans , J . , and J . Foster . 2011 . Metaknowledge . Science 331 ( 6018 ) : 721 – 25 . Fiore , S . M . 2008 . Interdisciplinarity as teamwork : How the science of teams can inform team science . Small Group Research 39 ( 3 ) : 251 – 77 . Fleming , L . 2001 . Recombinant uncertainty in technological search man - agement . Science 47 ( 1 ) : 117 – 32 . Guimera , R . , B . Uzzi , J . Spiro , and L . A . N . Amaral . 2005 . Team assembly mechanisms determine collaboration network structure and team per - formance . Science 308 ( 5722 ) : 697 – 702 . Henderson , R . M . , and K . B . Clark . 1990 . Architectural innovation : The reconﬁguration of existing . Administrative Science Quarterly 35 ( 1 ) : 9 – 30 . Itzkovitz , S . , R . Milo , N . Kashtan , G . Ziv , and G . Alon . 2003 . Subgraphs in random networks . Physical Review E 68 : 026127 ( 1 - 8 ) . Jones , B . 2009 . The burden of knowledge and the death of the Renaissance Man : Is innovation getting harder ? The Review of Economic Studies 76 ( 1 ) : 283 – 317 . Jones , B . , S . Wuchty , and B . Uzzi . 2008 . Multi - university research teams : Shifting impact , geography , and stratiﬁcation in science . Science 322 ( 5905 ) : 1259 – 62 . Nonaka , I . 1994 . A dynamic theory of organizational knowledge creation . Organization Science 5 ( 1 ) : 14 – 37 . Page , S . E . 2007 . The difference : How the power of diversity creates better groups , ﬁrms , schools , and societies . Princeton , NJ : Princeton Univer - sity Press . Prahlad , C . , and G . Hamel . 1990 . The core competence of the corporation . Harvard Business Review 68 ( 3 ) : 79 – 91 . Saavedraa , S . , H . Kathleen , and B . Uzzi . 2011 . Synchronicity , instant mes - saging , and performance among ﬁnancial traders . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108 ( 3 ) : 5296 – 301 . Schilling , M . 2005 . A “small world” network model of creative insight . Creativity Research Journal 17 ( 2 – 3 ) : 131 – 54 . Schumpeter , J . 1939 . Business cycles . New York : McGraw - Hill Book Company , Inc . Small , H . 1973 . Co - citation in scientiﬁc literature : A new measure of the relationship between two documents . Journal of American Society for Information Science 24 ( 4 ) : 265 – 69 . Spitz , A . , and E . - Á . Horvát . 2014a . Measuring long - term impact based on network centrality : Unraveling cinematic citations . PLoS ONE 9 ( 10 ) : e108857 . Spitz , A . , and E . - Á . Horvát . 2014b . Acookbook of cinematic delicacies that do not expire . Leonardo 47 ( 3 ) : 271 . Stokols , D . , K . L . Hall , B . K . Taylor , and R . P . Moser . 2008 . The science of team science : Overview of the ﬁeld and introduction to the supplement . American Journal of Preventive Medicine 35 ( 2 ) : S77 – 89 . Stringer , M . , M . Sales - Pardo , and L . A . N . Amaral . 2010 . Statistical vali - dation of a global model for the distribution of the ultimate number of citations accrued by papers published in a scientiﬁc journal . Journal of American Society for Information Science 61 ( 7 ) : 1377 – 85 . Takeuchi , H . I . , and I . Nonaka . 1986 . The new product development game . Harvard Business Review 64 ( 1 ) : 137 – 46 . Usher , A . P . 1954 . A history of mechanical invention . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Figure 9 . Z - Score of Novel Journal Pairs Found in High - Impact Papers Published in 1980 and Followed through the Year 2000 Show the Increasing Tendency to Become Conventional Pairings 12 J PROD INNOV MANAG S . MUKHERJEE ET AL . 2015 ; •• ( •• ) : •• – •• Uzzi , B . , and J . Spiro . 2005 . Collaboration and creativity : The small world problem . American Journal of Sociology 111 ( 2 ) : 447 – 504 . Uzzi , B . , S . Mukherjee , M . Stringer , and B . Jones . 2013 . Atypical combi - nations and scientiﬁc impact . Science 342 ( 6157 ) : 468 – 72 . Wasserman , S . , and K . Faust . 1994 . Social network analysis : Methods and applications ( structural analysis in the social sciences ) . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Watts , D . J . , and S . H . Strogatz . 1998 . Collective dynamics of “small - world” networks . Nature 393 ( 6684 ) : 440 – 42 . Weitzman , M . L . 1998 . Recombinant growth . Quarterly Journal of Eco - nomics 113 ( 2 ) : 331 – 60 . Whiteside , D . T . 1970 . The mathematical principles underlying Newton’s principia mathematica . Journal for the History of Astronomy 1 ( 2 ) : 116 – 38 . Wuchty , S . , B . Jones , and B . Uzzi . 2007 . The increasing dominance of teams in the production of knowledge . Science 316 ( 5827 ) : 1036 – 39 . INNOVATION COMBINED WITH EXISTING TECHNOLOGY J PROD INNOV MANAG 13 2015 ; •• ( •• ) : •• – ••