Because I Seek an Image , Not a Book Moritz Neum¨uller Wirtschaftsuniversit¨at Wien 1090 Wien , Austria mneumueller @ ekno . com Abstract . Drawing on a semiotic approach to hypermedia introduced at last year’s OHS workshop , this paper presents a fresh look and new questions on the retrieval of – and navigation in – visual hypermedia . 1 Introduction Searching and navigating visual hypermedia is a special case of the “exploratory , discovery - based , serendipitous form of search , typiﬁed by poorly deﬁned goals – I’ll know it when I see it – [ which ] has typically been contrasted with traditional goal oriented search as addressed by Information Retrieval” [ 11 , p . 26 ] . In today’s WWW , many eﬀorts have been made to raise the capabilities and usability of search engines . This is a revolutionary increase of functionality especially at the beginning of a hypertext session . Yet , the results are often frustrating or just too numerous to be feasible for review . In this paper , I propose semiotic methodology for those theoretical issues that have to be taken into account – besides technological considerations – in a Web augmentation that is based on encouraging linkage [ 16 ] . 2 Semiotic Basics Many people will not even be aware of the fact that there is diﬀerence between the signiﬁer / dog / and its signiﬁed , our concept of the dog . Saussure takes this as reason enough to speak of the sign as their sum . From the experience that a child will automatically say “dog” whenever it sees a drawing of one , we can see that the process works in both directions , as depicted in Fig . 1 . In the semiotic terminology , a sign is to be distinguished from what we often call a “sign” in colloquial language . 1 Saussure had stressed that the signiﬁer and the signiﬁed were as inseparable as the two sides of a piece of paper , they were intimately linked in the mind by an associative link , and wholly interdependent , neither pre - existing the other , cf . [ 41 , p . 77 ] . Lacan was one of the main engineers in the conversion of the 1 Hypertext theorists who ignore the key results of decades of semiotic investigations ( whilst using the terms sign , text , communication , code , metaphors , etc . ) risk failing to produce state of the art user - centered research . S . Reich , M . M . Tzagarakis , P . M . E . De Bra ( Eds . ) : OHS / SC / AH 2001 , LNCS 2266 , pp . 104 – 113 , 2002 . c (cid:1) Springer - Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2002 Because I Seek an Image , Not a Book 105 signifier signified Fig . 1 . The Saussurean sign model . Source : [ 41 , p . 78 ] Saussurean sign model , appropriating Saussure through Jakobson to Freud : He related metaphor to Verdichtung ( condensation ) and metonymy to Verschiebung ( displacement ) , cf . [ 20 ] . Peirce oﬀered a triadic relation between the representa - men ( R ) , the interpretant ( I ) and the object ( O ) , see ﬁg . 2 . N¨oth [ 35 ] has sub - stituted these terms for more intuitive terminology : the sign vehicle , the sense and the reference object . Accordingly , signs might be considered in themselves , or in relationship to their object , or ﬁnally in relationship to their interpretants . These three considerations yield three trichotomies : a sign considered in itself might be a quality and thus a qualisign , an individual thing or event , thus a sinsign , or a law , hence a legisign ; the relation of a sign to its object can be an iconic or indexical or symbolical ; the relation of the sign to its interpretant is a rheme or dicent or argument , cf . [ 10 , p . 132 ] . R I I O quali - sin - legisign rhemadicentargument icon index symbol r e p r ese n t a t i on c o m m u n i c a t i o n signification R I I O R I I O R I I O 1 1 1 2 2 2 3 3 3 Fig . 2 . Peircean sign classes and unlimited semiosis . Sources : Source : [ 31 ] ; [ 28 , p . 137 ] This concept , of course , can be seen as going beyond Saussure’s emphasis on the paradigmatic and syntagmatic value of a sign in its relation to other signs . To demonstrate the logics of the Peircean classiﬁcation , Colapietro takes the example of a knock on the door . 2 The second trichotomy has been cited more than once in isolation from the two other trichotomies . An iconic relation 2 “If there is a knock on the door announcing the arrival of guests , this rap is a sinsign . More accurately , it is a dicent , indexical sinsign . It is a dicent ( or dicisign ) since it in eﬀect performs the function of an asserted proposition ( ‘The guests have arrived’ ) . It is indexical since there is an actual , physical connection between the sign vehicle and its object ( the knocking sound and the guests announcing their arrival by means of knocking ) . Finally , it is a sinsign because the knocks as they are occurring here and now – the sounds in their individuality – serve as the sign vehicle” [ 10 , p . 132 ] .