Determination of the Failure Stresses for Fluid - filled Microcapsules that Rupture Near the Elastic Regime R . Mercadé - Prieto & R . Allen & D . York & J . A . Preece & T . E . Goodwin & Z . Zhang Received : 28 August 2011 / Accepted : 21 February 2012 / Published online : 8 March 2012 # Society for Experimental Mechanics 2012 Abstract The encapsulation of liquids within an external wall or shell is an important technology often utilized in the production of many commercial products . The mechanical characterization of such microcapsules is paramount in or - der to fully understand their performance in their target environment . Some microcapsules , with wall materials such as inorganic based compounds , rupture at small deforma - tions , commonly near the elastic regime . The study herein presents a general methodology that enables calculation of the failure stresses leading to the elastic - like rupture of microcapsules under parallel compression testing . Two sce - narios of failure , brittle and ductile , were considered . Anal - yses of the critical stresses present within the microcapsule wall during different degrees of fractional deformation were obtained using finite element modelling , resulting in similar values for both the brittle and ductile scenarios . The correlations presented were used to determine the failure stresses of tetraethoxyorthosilane - methyltrimethoxysilane ( TEOS - MTMS ) microcapsules with a model core oil , which are 11 – 14±10 MPa . The data were further analyzed using Weibull distributions . Keywords Elastic behaviour . Finite element modelling ( FEM ) . Fracture stress . Micromanipulation . Microcapsule Introduction The microencapsulation of liquids is both a common and useful technology which may be utilized in order to enhance the stability of the encapsulated material , whilst also con - trolling its release . The mechanical testing of such micro - capsules to the point of rupture is often performed in order to characterize the final product , and investigate its suitabil - ity for applications whereby triggered release of the liquid core material by mechanical forces is desired [ 1 ] . Develop - ing an understanding of the mechanical properties of micro - capsules is therefore critical in this endeavour . The mechanical testing of microcapsules is commonly per - formed between two parallel plates using a unique apparatus which has been designed specifically for the compression and analysis of microcapsules of 1 – 1000 μ m , the use of which is referred to as a micromanipulation technique [ 2 ] . One of the most studied microcapsule shell materials for the encapsulation of liquids is melamine - formaldehyde ( MF ) , particularly in the encapsulation of perfume oils . MF micro - capsules containing liquid oils commonly break ( rupture , burst , fail or fracture ) at large fractional deformations ( ~ 0 . 4 – 0 . 7 ) ε , defined as the displacement of the microcap - sule divided by its diameter , and it has recently been shown that this occurs after extensive plastic deformation [ 3 – 5 ] . Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article ( doi : 10 . 1007 / s11340 - 012 - 9605 - 5 ) contains supplementary material , which is available to authorized users . R . Mercadé - Prieto : R . Allen : Z . Zhang ( * ) School of Chemical Engineering , University of Birmingham , Edgbaston , Birmingham B15 2TT , UK e - mail : Z . Zhang @ bham . ac . uk D . York Procter and Gamble Technical Centre , Newcastle upon Tyne NE27 0QW , UK J . A . Preece School of Chemistry , University of Birmingham , Edgbaston , Birmingham B15 2TT , UK T . E . Goodwin ENCAPSYS® , Appleton , P . O . Box 359 , Appleton , WI 54912 - 0359 , USA Experimental Mechanics ( 2012 ) 52 : 1435 – 1445 DOI 10 . 1007 / s11340 - 012 - 9605 - 5 On the other hand , when inorganic materials are used for the encapsulation of liquids , the fractional deformations where breaking is observed ( ε B ) are smaller , i . e . < 0 . 3 . For example , fluid - filled CaCO 3 microcapsules break at ε B ~ 0 . 08 [ 6 ] . Micromanipulation compression experiments read - ily provide two parameters : the previously mentioned ε B , and the breaking force F B . These parameters , however , are specific to the testing method , and so intrinsic mechanical property parameters ( such as the elastic modulus , yield stress , and failure stress ) are also required in order that results can be applied to end - use applications , and compar - isons may be made of microcapsules prepared using differ - ent formulations and various processing conditions . Two examples are available in the literature where failure stresses in the wall of a core - shell structure are estimated using finite element modelling ( FEM ) , one for single yeast cells with a core - shell structure similar to that of micro - capsules [ 7 , 8 ] and one for single carbon microballoons [ 9 ] . Failure was considered to occur within the elastic re - gime , and therefore the failure stresses were determined from the FEM results at ε B and the population average elastic modulus E . The analysis from previous studies how - ever , can not be applied to liquid - filled microcapsules that rupture at small deformations ( ε B < 0 . 35 ) . The elastic regime — wherein the deformation of micro - capsules is considered to be fully elastic — has been deter - mined in two different ways . Experimentally , compression and holding , loading - unloading , and repeated compression experiments have been performed to establish whether the elastic behaviour occurs until the point of fractional defor - mation tested [ 4 , 10 , 11 ] . These methodologies are not well suited to accurately determine the fractional deformation above which non - elastic behaviour is observed ( termed ε LE ) for a large number of microcapsules ( for statistical significance ) , and particularly for microcapsules with small ε B , as ε LE ~ < ε B . A different approach has been used to determine ε LE , via the comparison of experimental compres - sion force versus displacement data with predictions from theoretical elastic models [ 12 ] or FEM [ 3 ] . In the present study , the elastic regime and ε LE of micro - capsules that break at small deformations will be determined by the comparison of experimental force - displacement data with FEM simulations . Due to the reverse engineering meth - odology to determine the elastic modulus E of the micro - capsule wall [ 13 ] , and the experimental accuracy of the data , the predicted elastic regime primarily represents the linear - like profile of the stress – strain curve of the wall material , see Fig 1 . In some instances therefore , depending upon the stress – strain curve , the predicted elastic regime may be overestimated . The ultimate aim of this study is to estimate the failure stress of the microcapsule wall , σ B for the hypothetical material shown in Fig . 1 , occurring at a strain H B . σ B can only be found for such a material if the complete stress – strain profile is known before failure , but such a complex reverse engineering problem has not yet been solved for microcapsules with any kind of stress – strain curve . The only two material models that have been studied in detail are that of purely elastic and elastic - perfectly plastic [ 3 , 13 ] , which will be also applied in this study . If the material is com - pletely elastic until failure , then σ B ¼ σ B ; elastic ¼ σ LE . If the material is elastic – plastic before failure , the elastic - perfectly plastic results will be used to determine σ LE , thus allowing estimation of the breaking stress within the interval σ LE < σ B < σ B , elastic , as shown in Fig . 1 . Materials and Methods FEM Simulations of Elastic Microcapsules Spherical capsules compressed between two parallel plates ( a top probe and a bottom substrate ) were simulated using Abaqus® 6 . 5 as described in detail elsewhere [ 3 , 13 ] , a schematic diagram is shown in Fig . 2 . In summary , the capsule wall is simulated as an axisymmetric object in the y plane , with 1440 CAX4RH elements ( 4 - node bilinear , reduced integration with hourglass control , hybrid with con - stant pressure ) , with 4 element layers to model the shell for all thicknesses tested . The mesh chosen was validated using a denser mesh , with 20 element layers to model the shell thickness . In agreement with previous studies [ 9 , 14 ] , a mesh of 4 - element layers provides both accurate and rapid Fig . 1 Schematic representation of a hypothetical true stress — true strain curve of a microcapsule wall material until rupture ( shown as B ) . Straight line shows the likely estimated elastic modulus using a reverse engineering method [ 13 ] . The possible overestimation of the elastic regime from the real yield point ( σ Y and H Y ) to the estimated elastic limit ( σ LE and H LE ) is shown . For a rupture strain H B , the corresponding rupture stress assuming a fully linear elastic behavior , σ B , elastic , is larger than the real rupture stress σ B 1436 Exp Mech ( 2012 ) 52 : 1435 – 1445 results . Different shell thickness h to radius r ratios were simulated , between 0 . 6 – 9 . 1 % . The liquid core of the micro - capsules was designed using incompressible FAX2 elements ( 2 - node linear axisymmetric hydrostatic fluid ) with a densi - ty of 1000 kg m − 3 , and the cavity volume was kept constant . The capsule shell was assumed to be incompressible ( Pois - son ratio 0 . 5 ) , and the contact interaction between the plates and the wall was considered to be frictionless . For more information and validation of the simulations , refer to Mer - cadé - Prieto et al . [ 5 ] . Formation of TEOS - MTMS Microcapsules Microcapsules with an inorganic wall material were made in order to obtain microcapsules that failed near the elastic regime at small fractional deformations . The wall material was based on tetraethoxyorthosilane ( TEOS , > 98 % , Fisher , UK ) and methyltrimethoxysilane ( MTMS , > 98 % , Fisher , UK ) , while for the liquid core a model oil , hexyl salicylate ( HS , > 98 % , SAFC , USA ) , was used . Microcapsules were made as follows : equimolar weights of MTMS , TEOS and water were placed in a round bottomed flask equipped with a condenser and thermal control . The mixture was stirred at 500 rpm and heated for 4 . 5 h at 100°C with alcohol being simultaneously distilled . The resulting mixture ( silica pre - condensate ) was cooled to ambient temperature whilst stir - ring was maintained at 500 rpm , before being transferred to an airtight container . This silica precondensate was dispersed in 9 g HS prior to the addition of 70 mL 0 . 1 M HCl ( aq ) . The solution was immediately homogenised ( Model L4RT , Silverson Machines Ltd . , UK ) at 1500 rpm for 30 min to produce an oil - in - water emulsion . The resulting emulsion was stirred with a magnetic stirrer at 400 rpm for 1 h prior to the addition of 3 g of MTMS , followed by further stirring for 1 h . The average diameter of the microcapsules D [ 3 , 4 ] was 17 . 6 μ m , measured using a Mastersizer 2000 ( Malvern ) based on a refractive index of 1 . 43 [ 15 ] . The wall thickness of the microcapsules was measured using transmission elec - tron microscopy ( TEM ) , JEOL 1200EX , operating at 80 eV , as described previously [ 16 ] . Microcapsules were compressed between two flat surfa - ces using a micromanipulation rig , described in detail else - where [ 2 , 17 ] . The microcapsules were added to a Perspex chamber containing deionized water . A ϕ 69 μ m glass probe was mounted on a force transducer with a maximum load of 5 mN ( Model 403A , Aurora Scientific Inc . , Canada ) , and used to compress single microcapsules at a speed of 2 . 2 μ m / s . Compression experiments were carried out at room tem - perature ( 22±1°C ) . Failure Criteria It is of interest to discuss the possible mechanism of failure of microcapsules that burst within or near the elastic regime . Such an elastic - like fracture usually occurs in organic or inorganic materials after small deformation strains , which would result in small fractional deformations at rupture ε B . In biological systems such as yeast cells , an elastic failure is observed at ε B ~ 0 . 6 – 0 . 7 [ 11 ] . The scope of the present study , however , is limited to ε B < 0 . 35 , the range a priori most relevant for polymeric and inorganic microcapsules . Micro - capsules break because a failure criterion has been fulfilled ; we discuss subsequently two classic criteria that are appli - cable here . ( a ) Maximum principal stress ( Rankine ) theory . For brittle materials that fail by brittle fracture , failure is common - ly observed when the largest maximum principal stress ( σ Max , P ) in the system equals the elastic limit stress in simple tension [ 16 ] . ( b ) Distortion energy ( von Mises ) theory . This is usually applicable to ductile failure , when failure is due to the maximum shear strain energy component in the system being equal to that at the yield point in tensile con - ditions [ 16 ] . Both failure criteria can occur during the compression of a microcapsule . Further information would therefore be required in order to determine if the failure is brittle or ductile . However , evidence has not yet been obtained for individually compressed microcapsules due to their small sizes ( with capsule wall thickness in the order of hundreds of nanometers ) . In the present study the general scenario is Fig . 2 Schematic diagram showing the parallel plate compression of a microcapsule with a liquid core , before and after a displacement d of the top plate Exp Mech ( 2012 ) 52 : 1435 – 1445 1437 considered , and therefore both failure criteria will be devel - oped . The aim is to obtain critical stresses that define either the point at which rupture actually occurs ( if the process is instantaneous ) , or the point at which rupture is initiated with breakage occurring soon after , the most likely scenario . Brittle Failure Failure of brittle materials is commonly initiated by the presence of microcracks , flaws or discontinuities that act as local stress raisers [ 16 ] . The effect of the material imper - fections on the strength of the microcapsule wall will be considered using linear elastic fracture mechanics ( LEFM ) [ 18 ] . Figure 3 inset shows a typical σ Max , P distribution for a compressed microcapsule . Usually the area of maximum stress is at the point of maximum internal curvature of the wall , i . e . where it is bent , and this is where failure is most likely to occur ( a close up is shown in Fig . S1 in the Supplementary Information ) . The largest stresses are ob - served in the circumferential direction ( Out - of - Plane stress or S33 in Fig . S2 ( c ) ) , which would result in meridional fissures . In the case of thick - walled capsules at small ε , however , the stresses are concentrated in the area of the wall which is in contact with the flat plates , see Fig . 4 for h / r 0 4 . 8 and ε 0 0 . 06 , as discussed previously by Carlisle et al . [ 9 ] . Externally , wrinkling appears in the part of the wall directly in contact with the plates causing compressive stresses [ 13 , 19 ] , whilst the interior surface is stretched . The largest σ Max , P under these conditions are found within these stretched regions of the wall . From the FEM results , the σ Max , P at each ε was deter - mined , as well as its position within the microcapsule wall , shown in Fig . 5 . Figures 3 and S1 ( a ) show the plane in which the σ Max , P is located when the bent region is that of maximum stress . Under these conditions , it is observed that the normalized σ Max , P / E with ε is fairly independent of the wall thickness to radius ratio h / r ( Fig . 5 ( a ) ) . All of the Fig . 3 von Mises stress and maximum principal stress ( shown in the inset ) distributions for the compression of a microcapsule with h / r 0 4 . 8 % , E 0 100 MPa and ε 0 0 . 18 . The thickness planes of the four failure stresses discussed in the text are also shown Fig . 4 Diagram of the stresses in the horizontal direction ( direction 1 in the axis shown ) for a microcapsule ( h / r 0 4 . 8 % , E 0 100 MPa ) with a small deformation of ε 0 0 . 06 . Note that the area of large von Mises stress which is in contact with the probe is generated by compressive horizontal stresses that arise due to wrinkling Fig . 5 Values of the normalized largest maximum principal stress found in microcapsules of different shell thickness to radius ratios h / r ( shown in symbols ) subjected to different compressive deformations . The location of the largest stress is shown in ( b ) , where the position of σ Max , P in degrees relates to the non - deformed shape of the microcap - sule as shown in the inset . The best fits using equations ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) that describe the stresses in the bent region ( Fig . 3 ) are also shown , and the dashed lines are the 95 % CI 1438 Exp Mech ( 2012 ) 52 : 1435 – 1445 conditions tested are well represented with the following equation ( ε < 0 . 35 , 95 % Confidence Interval ( CI ) ±0 . 0034 ) σ Max ; P E ¼ 0 : 146 " 2 þ 0 : 293 " ð 1 Þ However , for thick - walled capsules at small ε values , σ Max , P / E increases linearly with the fractional deformation for displacements < h . Thereafter it remains fairly constant with ε until the largest σ Max , P in the bent area surpasses that in the contact area ( Fig . 4 ) , and the resulting sudden change in position of σ Max , P is shown in Fig . 5 ( b ) . In a similar manner , the position of the largest σ Max , P at each ε does not differ significantly if only the bent area is considered . The data for all h / r values tested are well represented using the following polynomial , whereby the position of σ Max , P in degrees ( ° ) is for the initial non - deformed microcapsule , shown in Fig . 5 ( b ) inset ( 95 % CI ±4º ) . Position of σ Max ; P (cid:2) ð Þ ¼ (cid:3) 2185 : 7 " 3 þ 1471 : 3 " 2 (cid:3) 408 : 4 " þ 90 ð 2 Þ In summary , for not too thick - walled microcapsules ( e . g . h / r < 9 % ) with not too small ε B ( e . g . > 0 . 05 ) , the Rankine failure criterion of a microcapsule can be estimated with equation ( 1 ) . Ductile Failure Under Perfect Plasticity If the microcapsule wall material deforms plastically prior to rupture , a ductile failure will eventually occur . There are many plastic models but only the simplest one will be considered here as discussed in “ Introduction ” , i . e . that of perfect plasticity . The complexity that arises with more elaborate plastic models is left for future studies . In perfect plasticity the stress is constant above the yield stress , and unlike in Fig . 1 here σ Y ≈ σ LE , hence the stress at rupture of an elastic — perfectly plastic capsule is equal to the yield stress , although the yield strain ( H Y ≈ H LE ) will be different from the rupture strain ( H B ) [ 5 ] . The critical stress obtained from a perfectly plastic scenario ( σ Y ≈ σ LE in Fig . 1 ) will be equivalent to the lower threshold for other plastic materials ; the upper threshold could be found using the elastic scenario at the rupture deformation discussed in the previous section ( ie . σ B , elastic in Fig . 1 ) . In the case of plastic deformation , the stress to use is the von Mises stress ( σ MIS ) . Figure 3 shows the σ MIS distribu - tion of a compressed microcapsule , whereby two regions of high stress are observed , i . e . under the compression plate and within the bent region . The former is a valid failure region for a brittle failure case , but it is not for a ductile failure . Figure 4 , as well as Fig . S2 , show that the largest σ MIS in the wall under the compression plate are caused by compression stresses . Compressive stresses are an unlikely cause of failure of microcapsules due to the typically higher compressive strength of materials when compared to tensile strengths , and are therefore unlikely to result in ductile fail - ures , even for plastics [ 16 , 19 ] . It is for this reason that the values of σ MIS located under the parallel plates , which are of a compressive nature , will be shown but will not be consid - ered in subsequent analysis . As in the previous section , the key area is the bent region , and an enlarged image of it is shown in Fig . S1 ( b ) . Firstly the position of largest σ MIS obtained from the FEM results is considered , termed σ Max , MIS . This point is found in the inner side of the wall , in a plane that is closer to the compressing plates than that found for σ Max , P . Analysis of σ Max , MIS , see diagrams in Fig . S2 , shows that there is a large compressive component , which again is judged unlikely to be a good predictive parameter for ductile failure . For this reason , two other stress parameters are proposed . The first parameter is the largest average σ MIS found within the thickness of the wall , termed σ Av , MIS . Hence , this param - eter does not reflect localized stress conditions , but the aver - age stress to which the whole wall thickness is exposed . The location of σ Av , MIS , shown in Fig . 3 and S1 , is similar to that where shear stresses are the largest ( Fig . S2 ( d ) ) . The second parameter is the largest minimum σ MIS found within the thickness of the wall , termed σ Min , MIS . It is determined from FEM results as follows : the minimum value of σ MIS is deter - mined for the cross section at each angle , and then the cross section at which the minimum σ MIS is greatest is selected . All the values of σ MIS at that plane are therefore greater than , or equal to , σ Min , MIS . The thickness plane of σ Min , MIS is fairly close to where the shear stress is maximum , and is also in the region where the largest out - of - plane stress is found ( e . g . S33 in Fig . S2 ( c ) ) . The position of σ Min , MIS is slightly closer to the equator than that of σ Av , MIS . Both positions are only slightly dependent on h / r ( in the bent region ) , and in general they are very similar to that of σ Max , P . The same equation ( equation ( 2 ) ) for σ Max , P , also represents the positions of σ Min , MIS and σ Av , MIS well , shown in Fig . S3 , which from an experimental point of view would be indistinguishable . The normalized values of σ Min , MIS and σ Av , MIS at differ - ent ε are shown in Fig . 6 ( in the linear elastic regime , the normalized values are constant ) . As previously , there is little effect of h / r on the stress values when only the bent region is considered . The best fitted polynomials are σ Av ; MIS E ¼ 0 : 294 " ð 3 Þ σ Min ; MIS E ¼ 0 : 215 " 2 þ 0 : 225 " ð 4 Þ with a 95 % CI of ±0 . 0027 and ±0 . 0019 for σ Av , MIS / E and σ Min , MIS / E , respectively . Whereas σ Av , MIS is intuitively a Exp Mech ( 2012 ) 52 : 1435 – 1445 1439 better failure parameter as σ Av , MIS > σ Min , MIS , σ Min , MIS has several interesting advantages due to the way in which it is calculated . For instance , σ Min , MIS easily provides values of the bent region , but not of the region in contact with the compressing plates ( see the positions of thick - walled capsu - les in Fig . S2 ) . σ Min , MIS is therefore less sensitive to h / r than σ Av , MIS under wider conditions of h / r and ε , which in turn increases the robustness and accuracy of the parameter . Finally , this failure criterion agrees with the implication of the fractional deformation at the elastic limit ( ε LE ) proposed by Mercadé - Prieto et al . [ 3 ] , whereby the yield stress σ Y was determined using the fractional deformation beyond which the compression force of an elastic – plastic capsule diverges continuously from the elastic scenario . Equation ( 5 ) is pre - sented to fit all h / r data reasonably well [ 3 ] . σ Y E ¼ " LE (cid:3) 0 : 0354 3 : 13 0 : 01 < σ Y E < 0 : 07 ð 5 Þ The good agreement of equation ( 5 ) with the results of σ Min , MIS ( Fig . 6 ( b ) ) strengthens σ Min , MIS as a failure param - eter because ε LE represents the fractional deformation above which the whole thickness of the most bent area has yielded [ 3 ] , which would lead at higher deformations to a plastic collapse [ 20 ] , when the material easily deforms until the rupture strain is achieved . In summary , three stress parameters have been presented in order to determine the failure stresses of microcapsules based on brittle or ductile failures . The locations of these stresses usually occur in almost exactly the same part of the bent region . In addition , despite σ Max , P ≥ σ Av , MIS ≥ σ Min , MIS , the differences of all three stress parameters , whilst they are statistically significant at some ε , are not major ( see Fig . S4 for a comparison of equations ( 1 , 3 and 4 ) ) . Determination of Failure Stresses from Experimental Data of Compression Previous work on the determination of rupture stresses , showed that the key parameter is the fractional deformation at rupture ε B , from which either the rupture stress is calcu - lated ( in the case of rupture within the elastic regime [ 8 , 9 ] ) , or the rupture strain ( in the case of elastic - perfectly plastic microcapsules that rupture at high ε B [ 3 , 5 ] ) . The former case is of relevance here , however , in microcapsules it is common to observe that ε B does not exactly fall within the elastic regime . Figure 7 shows five examples of compression curves of TEOS - MTMS microcapsules that will be analyzed in detail later on ; here it is intended to present a general methodolo - gy . The compression force ( F ) has been normalized by the elastic modulus of the wall ( E , which for present purposes has already been estimated , as explained subsequently ) , the microcapsule radius ( r ) and the wall thickness ( h ) . The continuous line represents the scenario of a fully elastic capsule as obtained by FEM [ 13 ] , which represents the elastic regime mentioned in “ Introduction ” . The microcap - sules break with ε B between 0 . 1 – 0 . 25 , but there is a large disparity of behaviours : some microcapsules break near the elastic regime , following the small deviation from the elastic master curve , such as capsules D and E in Fig . 7 , while others ( capsules B and C ) break far from this regime . In order to quantify the degree of closeness to the elastic regime , the fractional deformation at which the force con - tinuously deviates from the ideal elastic scenario is first determined . This , as mentioned earlier , corresponds to the determination of the elastic limit ( ε LE ) as explained else - where [ 3 ] . F LE is the compression force at ε LE . The ratios " B (cid:3) " LE ð Þ = " LE and F B (cid:3) F LE ð Þ = F LE for the 5 example capsules are shown in the inset table in Fig . 7 . Values of < 10 % would indicate that rupture occurs very near the elastic regime , and thus the theoretical models developed above would be directly applicable . In some cases , for example capsules B and C , the values of these ratios are greater than 50 % , and thus raise the question if an elastic - Fig . 6 Normalized values of the largest average and minimum von Mises stresses , as described in the text . The best fits using equations ( 3 – 5 ) that describe the stresses in the bent region ( Fig . 3 ) are also shown , and the dashed lines are the 95 % CI . The legends represent the h / r of the microcapsules 1440 Exp Mech ( 2012 ) 52 : 1435 – 1445 like failure is applicable . Capsule A , with values of 10 – 20 % , would correspond to an intermediate case . Explanations for the deviation of the force from the elastic scenario before rupture are investigated subsequently . There are two main explanations for the two failure scenar - ios considered previously [ 21 ] . At this point , it should be emphasized that the failure mechanism of the capsule , brittle or ductile , is completely unknown . If a brittle failure is considered , the force would deviate from the elastic regime due to the propagation of microcracks or imperfections within the wall . At some point , the extensive microcracks cause rupture of the wall . Following linear elastic fracture mechanics [ 18 , 22 ] , there is a critical stress ( σ cr ) above which a given microcrack of length h crack will propagate σ cr ¼ 2 Γ E p h crack (cid:1) (cid:3) 0 : 5 ð 6 Þ where Γ is the surface energy of the microcrack per area . Hence , from a brittle failure point of view , the key stress is σ cr , as at higher values of stress the microcrack will quickly grow until such propagation results in instability in the wall material . In the present case , σ cr corresponds to the largest principal stress at ε LE , σ Max , P . The second approach utilized in the analysis of the devi - ation of the force from the elastic regime , is to consider that the material has yielded prior to rupture . The compression data of capsules B and C in Fig . 7 were compared assuming an elastic - perfectly plastic behaviour [ 3 ] as considered in “ Ductile Failure Under Perfect Plasticity ” . A good agree - ment was found between the capsules until failure , consid - ering a yield stress to elastic modulus ratio σ Y / E 0 0 . 02 ( this value was not optimized , but was fitted qualitatively ) , shown in Fig . 7 . Under a perfectly plastic scenario , the stress values in the most stressed areas remain fixed at the yield stress . Despite the fact that a fraction of the wall has yielded , the compressive force increases with ε because the contact area between the microcapsule and the compressing plates increases . Under perfect plasticity , the yielded section easily distorts at higher fractional deformations until eventually the rupture strain of the shell material is reached , causing the rupture of the whole microcapsule [ 3 , 5 ] . The key stress is the yield stress , which facilitates deformation of the wall , and occurs for the first time throughout the whole thickness of the wall at ε LE . The difference between ε LE and ε B , as in H LE ( ≈ H Y ) vs H B in Fig . 1 , will be related to the plastic properties of the wall material . In summary , it has been shown that following two differ - ent failure mechanisms , the critical stresses of a brittle failure and that found in an elastic - perfectly plastic wall before failure are the same , and are found at the elastic limit . Example of Determining the Failure Stresses of TEOS - MTMS Microcapsules In this section , the attainment of failure stress data from compression experiments of individual microcapsules using parallel plates will be demonstrated . In the present study , compression experiments were performed using a microma - nipulation rig [ 2 , 4 ] , whereby single microcapsules were compressed while immersed in water within a perspex chamber . Figure 8 ( a ) shows three experimental results in which the compression force is normalized by the capsule size ( i . e . diameter ) . Capsule G is another example of failure near the elastic regime , whilst capsule H is an example of failure far from the elastic regime . From such data , the product Eh is calculated as explained elsewhere [ 13 ] , con - sidering a wall thickness of ~ 0 . 4 μ m . With Eh , the elastic limit ε LE was determined as shown in Fig . 8 ( b ) [ 3 ] , while ε B is easily determined from the compression profile . The rupture force of 86 capsules analysed is shown in Fig . 9 ( a ) . Contrary to previous published data , such as melamine - formaldehyde microcapsules [ 4 , 13 ] , a linear re - lationship between F B and the capsule diameter is not ob - served . Scattered , but less than F B , ε B has a mean value of 15 . 9±6 % ( SD ) ( Fig . 9 ( b ) ) , whereas ε LE is even less scat - tered with a mean value of 9 . 7±2 % . Note that neither ε B nor ε LE shows any significant dependence on the capsule size , in agreement with many previous compression results [ 13 ] . Following the above , it is no surprise that the individual Eh values are also scattered ( Fig . 9 ( c ) ) , with a mean value of 180±110 Nm − 1 . Assuming h ~ 0 . 4 μ m ( see “ Wall Thickness ” for justification ) , the mean population E is 450±275 MPa . Finally , Fig . 9 ( d ) shows the ratio " B (cid:3) " LE ð Þ = " LE , where values close to zero imply a rupture Fig . 7 Different examples of compression experiments : some micro - capsules burst near the elastic regime ( shown as the continuous curve ) while others burst farther away . The different rupture and elastic limit parameters are shown for microcapsule A . The two ratio values are calculated to indicate how close the bursting of the microcapsule is to the elastic regime , shown in the inset table . Note that microcapsules B and C are well represented considering an elastic - perfectly plastic shell material with a yield stress to elastic modulus ratio σ Y / E 0 0 . 02 ( shown as the dashed curve ) , from Mercadé - Prieto et al . [ 3 ] Exp Mech ( 2012 ) 52 : 1435 – 1445 1441 near the elastic regime . Considering a cut off value of ~ 20 % , such as capsule A in Fig . 7 , approximately ~ 35 % of the capsules broke near the linear regime . Again , no trend with the capsule size was observed . The normalized failure stresses are calculated with ε LE and the equations presented in “ Failure Criteria ” , obtaining : σ Max ; P = E ¼ 0 : 031 (cid:4) 0 : 008 SD ð Þ , σ Av ; MIS = E ¼ 0 : 029 (cid:4) 0 : 007 , and σ Min ; MIS = E ¼ 0 : 025 (cid:4) 0 : 007 . In the present case , only the value of σ Min , MIS / E is statistically different from those of σ Max , P / E and σ Av , MIS / E . The final step is to obtain the individual failure stresses using the individual E calculated for each microcapsule . The individual results are shown for the case of σ Av , MIS in Fig . 10 . Note that , due to the scatter of Eh shown in Fig . 9 ( c ) the failure stresses are also highly scattered , with the following average values : σ Max ; P ¼ 13 : 8 (cid:4) 9 SD ð Þ MPa , σ Av ; MIS ¼ 13 : 2 (cid:4) 9 MPa , and σ Min ; MIS ¼ 11 : 1 (cid:4) 7 MPa . In comparison , if the rupture deformation ε B was used instead of ε LE , it would result in a value of σ Max , P at rupture of 18±10 MPa . This stress can be used as an upper threshold value , for example , in capsules known to fail in a ductile manner after a plastic hardening regime ; the lower threshold stress would be σ Min , MIS . The mechanical properties found here for TEOS - MTMS microcapsules are difficult to compare with those in the literature , which were obtained using typical tensile tests , due to different formulations and testing condi - tions , but they are in the same order of magnitude , see Table S1 . Fig . 8 ( a ) Three examples of compressions of TEOS - MTMS micro - capsules and the best fit of the elastic regime based on FEM [ 8 ] ; the capsule sizes and the calculated Eh are shown in the inset table . ( b ) Difference between the experimental normalized compression force and that predicted for a fully elastic microcapsule , which was used to deter - mine the elastic limit ε LE . Solid arrows show ε B ; dotted arrows show ε LE Fig . 9 Experimental compres - sion results for TEOS - MTMS microcapsules , showing ( a ) the rupture force , ( b ) the fractional deformation at rupture and the elastic limit , ( c ) the calculated Eh ( error bars show the SD ) , and ( d ) the deviation of the rupture point from the elastic regime ( low values imply ruptures near the elastic regime ) 1442 Exp Mech ( 2012 ) 52 : 1435 – 1445 Weibull Distribution Analysis of Failure Stresses The large dispersion of the failure stresses shown in Fig . 10 highlights that a simple mean value of the microcapsules tested is an insufficient parameter to characterize the whole population . In such instances , Weibull distributions are commonly used to describe the mechanical properties of brittle materials [ 18 , 23 , 24 ] . Its applicability can be limited to instances when flaws are few and do not interact with one another ; failure occurs once any flaw initiates fracture ( the weakest link assumption ) ; and when the flaw distribution is unimodal [ 25 ] . Such information , however , is at present not available for microcapsules . Here it is assumed that it is sufficient to use at this early stage of studying microcapsule failures , if a Weibull distribution can represent the failure data well . A three parameter Weibull distribution is consid - ered here [ 26 ] CDF ð x Þ ¼ 1 (cid:3) exp (cid:3) x (cid:3) x 0 x c (cid:1) (cid:3) b " # ð 7 Þ where CDF ( x ) is the cumulative distribution function and x is the failure stress , x 0 is the location parameter ( i . e . the lower bound of the distribution ) , x c is the scale parameter ( x 0 + x c is about the median value ) , and β is the shape parameter , which is related to the properties of the material . These parameters were determined by fitting the failure stress data using the median ranks method explained else - where [ 27 ] . Figure 11 ( a ) shows the typical fit of equation ( 7 ) to the normalized σ Av , MIS / E failure data shown in Fig . 10 , and Fig . 10 Normalized and absolute values of the average von Mises failure stress . The E value used is found using the individual Eh shown in Fig . 9 ( c ) and a wall thickness value of 0 . 4 μ m Fig . 11 ( a ) Example of the fitting of a three parameter Weibull distribution using the median ranks method . ( b ) Cumulative failure probability ( i . e . the CDF ) using the σ Av , MIS failure criterion , consider - ing the population average E or that determined from each individual compression Fig . 12 ( a ) Example of TEM image of TEOS - MTMS microcapsules used to determine the wall thickness . ( b ) Average wall thickness of several microcapsules . Error bars show the minimum and maximum thickness measured for each capsule Exp Mech ( 2012 ) 52 : 1435 – 1445 1443 the good agreement between them justifies here the use of Weibull distributions to microcapsules . However , it is σ Av , MIS and not the normalized value that is of primary interest . If σ Av , MIS is calculated using the population average E given previously , of ~ 450 MPa , the shape of the CDF is the same as that shown in Fig . 11 ( a ) ( i . e . β remains unchanged at ~ 2 . 2 ) , and only the parameters x 0 and x c vary . If the individual E calculated for each capsule , however , is used ( from Fig . 9 ( c ) ) , then the CDF of the σ Av , MIS calculated is quite different from that obtained from using the population average E , with β ~ 1 . 3 ( Fig . 11 ( b ) and Table 1 ) . The small value of β quantifies the large scatter observed for the breaking force shown in Fig . 9 ( a ) . Wall Thickness In the previous section , a uniform wall thickness value of ~ 0 . 4 μ m has been considered without evidence . TEM images of the cross section of microcapsules show that the wall thickness was not uniform , and an example is shown in Fig . 12 ( a ) . The minimum wall thickness of the two capsules shown is ~ 0 . 4 μ m , while the maximum thickness is 0 . 95 – 1 . 25 μ m . Variations are not only observed within a capsule but also as expected between different capsules . The aver - age wall thickness of TEOS - MTMS microcapsules was not observed to change with the capsule size , as shown in Fig . 12 ( b ) , with a mean value of 0 . 47±0 . 16 μ m ( SD , n 0 175 , using a correction factor of 0 . 86 in order to consider random slicing effects [ 13 ] ) , whereas the population mean of the minimum thickness for each capsule was 0 . 33± 0 . 13 μ m . It is expected that a share of the large scatter observed for Eh ( Fig . 9 ( c ) ) comes from the observed intra - and inter - capsule variability in the wall thickness , as h / r is required to accurately estimate Eh . It is not known , however , whether the h variability will cause more or less scattered E values . It is not currently possible to obtain accurate wall thicknesses of microcapsules after being compressed ; hence population mean values have to be considered . The average thickness would be the most appropriate to determine E values , yet the minimum wall thickness can control fracture [ 9 ] . For this reason , we have considered a compromised thickness value of 0 . 4 μ m for simplicity . The mean average thickness to radius ratio for microcapsules of 10 – 20 μ m in diameter , the size range considered in compression experiments ( Fig . 9 ) , was 5 . 5±2 % ( SD , n 0 106 ) from TEM images , while the mean minimum thickness to radius ratio was 3 . 7±1 . 4 % . These relatively low h / r values and ε LE ~ 0 . 1 justify using the bent region in Fig . 3 and S1 as the most likely failure region , and not that in contact with the parallel plates . The uncertainty of the wall thickness affects the determination of failure stresses primarily from the determination of E , as the failure stress to E ratios are fairly independent of h / r for the failure conditions of TEOS - MTMS microcapsules , see Figs . 5 and 6 . Conclusions The first general analysis to estimate the failure stresses of microcapsules that burst near the elastic regime has been performed in the present study . Three simple equations have been developed using FEM in order to estimate the failure stresses of single microcapsules under parallel compression . Two different failure mechanisms have been considered , brittle or ductile failure . Importantly , due to the difficulty in experimentally determining the mechanism of failure of microcapsules , all three critical stress scenarios presented have similar values , and occur at a similar location within the microcapsule wall . It has been argued that critical stresses occur when the compressive force begins to deviate from the elastic scenario . Under the brittle failure scenario it would be due to the propagation of flaws that weaken the structure of the microcapsule wall , while in the ductile failure it would be caused by the yielding of the wall material . The model presented has been used to characterize the failure stresses of TEOS - MTMS microcapsules , obtain - ing similar values to that expected from the literature . A Weibull analysis has been demonstrated to be useful in analyzing failure data , particularly if brittle failure is a reasonable scenario . Acknowledgements The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council ( EPRSC ) , UK , through grant number EP / F068395 / 1 . References 1 . Yow HN , Routh AF ( 2006 ) Formation of liquid core - polymer shell microcapsules . Soft Matt 2 : 940 – 949 2 . Zhang Z , Stenson JD , Thomas CR ( 2009 ) Chapter 2 micromanip - ulation in mechanical characterisation of single particles . In : L Jinghai ( ed ) Advances in chemical engineering , characterization of flow , particles and interfaces . Academic Press 3 . Mercadé - Prieto R , Allen R , York D , Preece JA , Goodwin TE , Zhang Z ( 2011 ) Compression of elastic - perfectly plastic Table 1 Weibull parameters ( equation ( 7 ) ) calculated for the failure stresses of TEOS - MTMS microcapsules E used β x 0 ( MPa ) x c ( MPa ) σ Av , MIS Individual 1 . 34 1 . 2 13 . 3 σ Max , P Individual 1 . 35 1 . 2 13 . 9 σ Min , MIS Individual 1 . 35 0 . 94 11 . 2 σ Av , MIS Population 2 . 22 6 . 2 7 . 9 1444 Exp Mech ( 2012 ) 52 : 1435 – 1445 microcapsules using micromanipulation and finite element model - ling : determination of the yield stress . Chem Eng Sci 66 : 1835 – 1843 4 . Sun G , Zhang Z ( 2001 ) Mechanical properties of melamine - formaldehyde microcapsules . J Microencapsul 18 : 593 – 602 5 . Mercadé - Prieto R , Allen R , York D , Preece JA , Goodwin TE , Zhang Z ( 2011 ) Failure of elastic – plastic core - shell microcapsules under compression . AIChE J . doi : 10 . 1002 / aic . 12804 6 . Long Y , Vincent B , York D , Zhang ZB , Preece JA ( 2010 ) Organic – inorganic double shell composite microcapsules . Chem Commun 46 : 1718 – 1720 7 . Smith AE , Zhang Z , Thomas CR ( 2000 ) Wall material properties of yeast cells : Part 1 . Cell measurements and compression experi - ments . Chem Eng Sci 55 : 2031 – 2041 8 . Smith AE , Moxham KE , Middelberg APJ ( 2000 ) Wall material prop - erties of yeast cells . Part II . Analysis . Chem Eng Sci 55 : 2043 – 2053 9 . Carlisle KB , Lewis M , Chawla KK , Koopman M , Gladysz GM ( 2007 ) Finite element modeling of the uniaxial compression be - havior of carbon microballoons . Acta Mater 55 : 2301 – 2318 10 . Hu JF , Chen HQ , Zhang ZB ( 2009 ) Mechanical properties of melamine formaldehyde microcapsules for self - healing materials . Mater Chem Phys 118 : 63 – 70 11 . Stenson JD , Hartley P , Wang C , Thomas CR ( 2011 ) Determining the mechanical properties of yeast cell walls . Biotechnol Progress 27 : 505 – 512 12 . Wang CX , Wang L , Thomas CR ( 2004 ) Modelling the mechanical properties of single suspension - cultured tomato cells . Ann Bot 93 : 443 – 453 13 . Mercadé - Prieto R , Nguyen B , Allen R , York D , Preece JA , Goodwin TE , Zhang Z ( 2011 ) Determination of the elastic properties of com - pressed microcapsules using finite element modelling . Chem Eng Sci 66 : 2042 – 2049 14 . Lim TJ , Smith B , McDowell DL ( 2002 ) Behavior of a random hollow sphere metal foam . Acta Mater 50 : 2867 – 2879 15 . Malitson IH ( 1965 ) Interspecimen comparison of the refractive index of fused silica . J Opt Soc Am 55 : 1205 – 1208 16 . Long Y , York D , Zhang ZB , Preece JA ( 2009 ) Microcapsules with low content of formaldehyde : preparation and characterization . J Mater Chem 19 : 6882 – 6887 17 . Zhang Z , Ferenczi MA , Lush AC , Thomas CR ( 1991 ) A novel micromanipulation technique for measuring the bursting strength of single mammalian - cells . Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 36 : 208 – 210 18 . Gross D , Seeling T ( 2006 ) Fracture mechanics with an introduc - tion to micromecanics . Springer , Berlin 19 . Nadler B ( 2010 ) On the contact of a spherical membrane enclosing a fluid with rigid parallel planes . Int J Non Lin Mech 45 : 294 – 300 20 . Payten W , Law M ( 1998 ) Estimating the plastic collapse of pres - sure vessels using plasticity contours . Int J Pres Ves Pip 75 : 529 – 536 21 . Keller MW , Sottos NR ( 2006 ) Mechanical properties of micro - capsules used in a self - healing polymer . Exp Mech 46 : 725 – 733 22 . Alava MJ , Nukala PKVV , Zapperi S ( 2009 ) Size effects in statis - tical fracture . J Phys D : Appl Phys 42 : 214012 23 . Lechner MD ( 2005 ) Chapter 3 . 4 . Glasses . In : Martienssen W , Warlimont H ( eds ) Springer Handbook of Condensed Matter and Materials Data , Berlin 24 . Gao X , Dodds RH , Tregoning RL , Joyce JA , Link RE ( 1999 ) A Weibull stress model to predict cleavage fracture in plates contain - ing surface cracks . Fatig Fract Eng Mater Struct 22 : 481 – 493 25 . Danzer R , Supancic P , Pascual J , Lube T ( 2007 ) Fracture statistics of ceramics — Weibull statistics and deviations from Weibull sta - tistics . Eng Fract Mech 74 : 2919 – 2932 26 . Weibull W ( 1951 ) A statistical distribution function of wide appli - cability . J Appl Mech - Trans ASME 18 : 293 – 297 27 . Curtis RV , Juszczyk AS ( 1998 ) Analysis of strength data using two - and three - parameter Weibull models . J Mater Sci 33 : 1151 – 1157 Exp Mech ( 2012 ) 52 : 1435 – 1445 1445