Actin and Actin - Binding Proteins Thomas D . Pollard Departments of Molecular , Cellular , and Developmental Biology , of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry , and of Cell Biology , Yale University , New Haven , Connecticut 06520 - 8103 Correspondence : thomas . pollard @ yale . edu SUMMARY Organisms from all domains of life depend on ﬁlaments ofthe protein actin to provide structure and to support internal movements . Many eukaryotic cells use forces produced by actin polymerization for their motility , and myosin motor proteins use ATP hydrolysis to produce force on actin ﬁlaments . Actin polymerizes spontaneously , followed by hydrolysis of a bound adenosine triphosphate ( ATP ) . Dissociation of the g - phosphate prepares the polymer for dis - assembly . This review provides an overview of the properties of actin and shows how dozens of proteins control both the assembly and disassembly of actin ﬁlaments . These players catalyze nucleotide exchange on actin monomers , initiate polymerization , promote phosphate disso - ciation , cap the ends of polymers , cross - link ﬁlaments to each other and other cellular com - ponents , and sever ﬁlaments . Outline 1 Introduction 2 Genes , sequence conservation , distribution , and abundance 3 Structures of actin and actin ﬁlaments 4 Nucleotide binding and polymerization 5 Overview of actin - binding proteins 6 Actin - monomer - binding proteins 7 Severing proteins 8 Nucleation proteins 9 Actin ﬁlament polymerases 10 Capping proteins 11 Cross - linking proteins 12 Filament - binding proteins 13 Concluding remarks References Editors : Thomas D . Pollard and Robert D . Goldman Additional Perspectives on The Cytoskeleton available at www . cshperspectives . org Copyright # 2016 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press ; all rights reserved Advanced Online Article . Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a018226 1 Harbor Laboratory Press at SERIALS / BIOMED LIB0175B on March 19 , 2016 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from 1 INTRODUCTION The evolutionarily ancient , highly conserved actin mole - cule assembles reversibly into ﬁlaments that constitute one of the three major cytoskeletal polymers . This review ex - plains how the structure of the actin molecule accounts for its functional properties , including polymerization dy - namics and regulation by a suite of actin - binding proteins . Other contributions to this collection explain how actin participates in many cellular functions , including inter - actions with myosin motor proteins ( Sweeney and Holz - baur 2016 ) , intracellular transport ( Titus 2016 ) , cellular structure and motility ( Svitkina 2016 ) , muscle contraction ( Sweeney 2016 ) , and cytokinesis ( Glotzer 2016 ) . 2 GENES , SEQUENCE CONSERVATION , DISTRIBUTION , AND ABUNDANCE The actin gene originated in the common ancestor of all life on Earth , as evidenced by the fact that bacteria , archaea , and eukaryotes all have actin molecules related structurally and functionally to each other ( Gunning et al . 2015 ) . Even earlier , the genes for actin and the glycolytic enzyme hexo - kinase might have had a common ancestor as their folds are similar and both bind ATP in a central cleft . Bacteria have genes for three types of actins called MreB , FtsA , and ParM . Polymers of each protein have different functions : MreB inﬂuences cell wall synthesis and shape , FtsA participates in cell division , and ParM separates large plasmids . In ad - dition , bacterial plasmids and bacteriophages contain genes for more than 30 additional actin homologs ( Der - man et al . 2009 ) . A subset of archaea has a gene for MreB , and organisms in the so - called TACK ( Thaumarchaeota , Aigarchaeota , Crenarchaeota , and Korarchaeota ) branch have another actin gene more closely related to eukaryotic actin in sequence and structure . A nearly complete genome sequence from a deep - sea environmental sample came from the prokaryote most closely related to eukaryotes . This “unseen” ( not cultured ) archaeal cell called Lokiarch - aeota has a genuine actin gene and other eukaryotic genes such as Ras - family GTPases ( Spang et al . 2015 ) . An ancient relative of Lokiarchaeota is presumed to have founded the eukaryotes when it took on a bacterial symbiont that evolved into the mitochondria . Thus , the eukaryotic actin gene was present in the founding organism . All eukaryotes have one or more genes for actin , and sequence comparisons have established that they are one of the most conserved gene families , varying by only a few amino acids between algae , amoeba , fungi , and animals . This conservation is attributed to constraints imposed by the interactions of actin with itself to polymerize , with motors and with a large number of regulatory proteins ( Gunning et al . 2015 ) . The early branching ﬂagellate Giar - dia has the most divergent actin eukaryotic gene ( Paredez et al . 2011 ) . Many eukaryotes , including budding yeast , ﬁssion yeast , and the green alga Chlamydomonas , get by with a single actin gene and protein to make all of the cytoskeletal structures required for life , but many species , including humans , have multiple actin genes expressed in different tissues ( Herman 1993 ) . Humans have three genes for a - actin ( muscles ) , one gene for b - actin ( nonmuscle cells ) , and two genes for g - actin ( one in some smooth muscles and one in nonmuscle cells ) . Plants have 10 or more actin genes ; some are specialized for reproductive tissues and others for vegetative tissues . Early during the evolution of eukaryotes , the primor - dial actin gene was duplicated multiple times and , through divergent evolution , gave rise to genes for actin - related proteins—so - called “Arps” ( Muller et al . 2005 ) . The Arp genes diversiﬁed into multiple families with distinct func - tions more than 1 billion years ago when the common ancestor of animals , fungi , and amoebas diverged from the large clade of organisms , including algae , plants , cili - ates , and a diversity of other single - cell organisms . Arps share between 17 % and 52 % sequence identity with actin and are numbered Arp1 – Arp11 according to their diver - gence from actin . Arp1 and Arp11 are part of the dynactin complex ( Barlan and Gelfand 2016 ; Goodson and Jonasson 2016 ) , Arp2 and Arp3 are part of the Arp2 / 3 complex ( see below ) , and several Arps ( Arp4 – Arp9 ) participate in chro - matin - remodeling complexes and other nuclear functions ( Oma and Harata 2011 ) . Actin is one of the most abundant proteins on Earth and the most abundant protein in many cells , from amoe - bas to human , often accounting for 10 % or more of total protein . Its abundance is topped only by tubulin in brain and keratins in skin . Actin molecules in cells turn over very slowly , on the order of weeks in muscle cells . 3 STRUCTURES OF ACTIN AND ACTIN FILAMENTS The strong tendency of actin to polymerize into ﬁlaments thwarted efforts for decades to grow crystals , but eventually , in the early 1990s , cocrystallization with DNase I ( Kabsch et al . 1990 ) or proﬁlin ( Schutt et al . 1993 ) allowed for high - resolution structures . Now dozens of crystal structures are available for eukaryotic and prokaryotic actins ( Domin - guez and Holmes 2011 ) . The eukaryotic actin polypeptide of 375 residues folds into a ﬂat protein with a deep medial cleft that binds ATP ( Fig . 1A , B ) . Actin is described as having four subdomains . The polypeptide winds from the amino terminus in sub - domain 1 to subdomains 2 , 3 , and 4 and back to subdo - T . D . Pollard 2 Advanced Online Article . Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a018226 Harbor Laboratory Press at SERIALS / BIOMED LIB0175B on March 19 , 2016 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from main 1 at the carboxyl terminus . ATP binds in a deep cleft , interacting more strongly with subdomains 3 and 4 , but also with residues in subdomains 1 and 2 . Several proteins bind in a prominent groove between subdomains 1 and 3— and , hence , some call it the “target - binding groove” ( Dom - inguez 2004 ) . The two halves of the protein ﬂanking the nucleotide - binding cleft have similar folds but no sequence similarity , suggesting that a very ancient duplication formed the orig - inal actin gene , followed by divergence of the two halves of the gene . Arps have the same fold as actin , including all of the atoms required to bind to ATP ( Robinson et al . 2001 ) , but their surfaces differ extensively from those of actin , with insertion of one or more surface loops and many amino acid substitutions that participate in forming unique macromolecular assemblies . Early X - ray diffraction studies of live muscle and elec - tron microscopy of isolated ﬁlaments ( Huxley 1963 ) re - vealed that actin ﬁlaments consist of two strands of subunits in right - handed helices staggered by half the length of an actin monomer ( 2 . 7 nm ) ( Fig . 1C , D ) . This structure can also be described as a single - stranded left - hand helix that encompasses all of the subunits of the ﬁlament . The polarity of the ﬁlament was revealed by elec - tron micrographs of negatively stained preparations of ﬁlaments saturated with myosin heads , which form an arrowhead - shaped complex with each turn of the helix ( Fig . 2A ) . These myosin arrowheads deﬁne the “barbed” and “pointed” ends of a ﬁlament . The target - binding groove is at the barbed end , and the nucleotide - binding cleft is at the pointed end of the actin subunit . The best available actin ﬁlament structures are recon - structions of electron micrographs of frozen - hydrated ﬁlaments ( Fig . 1C ) ( Fujii et al . 2010 ; von der Ecken et al . 2014 ) and models from X - ray ﬁber diffraction of aligned ﬁlaments ( Oda et al . 2009 ) . These models revealed ex - ATP DNase loop Pointed end 4 2 C A B D 3 C N Nucleotide - binding cleft Barbed - end groove Barbed - end 1 S232L221 E334S348A7 D1 I34K68K50G46 V247E241V247E241 A321K326A321K326 Figure 1 . Structures of the actin molecule and actin ﬁlament . ( A ) Ribbon diagram of the actin molecule with space - ﬁlling ATP ( protein data bank [ PDB ] : 1ATN ) . N , amino terminus ; C , carboxyl terminus . Numbers 1 , 2 , 3 , and 4 label the four subdomains . ( B ) Space - ﬁlling model of actin showing the nucleotide - binding cleft with ATP in situ and barbed - end groove . ( C ) Reconstruction of the actin ﬁlament from cryo - electron micrographs . The labels are single - letter abbreviations for selected amino acids . ( D ) Cartoon of the actin ﬁlament showing the position of the pointed and barbed ends . ( A , B , Reprinted , with permission , from Pollard and Earnshaw 2007 ; C , reprinted , with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd . , from Fujii et al . 2010 ; D , adapted , with permission , from Pollard and Earnshaw 2007 . ) Actin and Actin - Binding Proteins Advanced Online Article . Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a018226 3 Harbor Laboratory Press at SERIALS / BIOMED LIB0175B on March 19 , 2016 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from tensive contacts along the short - pitch helix and between subdomain 2 of each subunit and the barbed - end groove of the next subunit along the long - pitch helix . Compared with crystal structures , the subunits in ﬁlaments are “flat - ter” because of a scissors - like rotation between subdomains 1 and 3 . 4 NUCLEOTIDE BINDING AND POLYMERIZATION The availability of large quantities ( hundreds of milli - grams ) of puriﬁed actin from muscle and other sources ( see Box 1 ) has enabled a half - century of quantitative mechanistic experiments on nucleotide binding and hy - drolysis and their roles in polymerization . Actin monomers bind ATP or adenosine diphosphate ( ADP ) tightly , provided that either Ca 2 + or Mg 2 + is present in the buffer . One of these divalent cations associates with the b - and g - phosphates of ATP , stabilizing its interaction with the protein ( Kabsch et al . 1990 ) . Ca 2 + is used during the puriﬁcation of actin , but Mg 2 + is bound under physi - ological conditions and is assumed to be present in the following discussion of polymerization . ATP binds nucle - otide - free actin monomers rapidly , with a rate constant of 6 m M 2 1 sec 2 1 and dissociates at (cid:2) 10 2 2 sec 2 1 , and so the K d is in the nanomolar range ( De La Cruz and Pollard 1995 ) . Chelation of free divalent cations increases the dis - sociation rate of ATP 20 - fold . Monomers without a bound nucleotide denature in seconds unless stabilized by high sucrose concentrations . Actin monomers polymerize spontaneously under physiological salt conditions with either or both monova - lent and divalent cations in the buffer . Cations bind speciﬁc sites that promote interactions between subunits in the ﬁl - ament ( Kang et al . 2013 ) . Spontaneous polymerization be - 10 D T ATP 0 . 8 0 . 3 0 . 16 1 . 3 K = 0 . 6 μ M K = 0 . 12 μ M K = 2 . 0 μ M K = 2 . 0 μ M ATP 100 nm Barbed - end growth Decoratedseed Pointed - end growth A B C D 4 8 10 10 1 1 10 100 10 6 D T 12 1 . 4 Polymer 08 06 P i E x t en t o f r ea c t i on 04 02 00 2 4 6 8 Minutes 10 12 14 Figure 2 . Actin polymerization . ( A ) Electron micrograph of a negatively stained actin ﬁlament . A seed was ﬁrst decorated with myosin heads and then allowed to grow bare extensions . Elongationwas fasterat the barbed end than at the pointed end . ( B ) Diagram showing the rate constants for actin association and dissociation at the two ends of an actin ﬁlament . The pointed end is at the top and the barbed end is at the bottom . Unit of association rate constants , m M 2 1 sec 2 1 ; unit of dissociation rate constants , sec 2 1 . The K values are the ratios of dissociation rate constants to association rate constants , the critical concentrations for each of the four reactions . The horizontal arrows indicate the exchange of adenosine diphosphate ( ADP ) for ATP . ( C ) Time course of spontaneous polymer - ization of Mg - ATP – actin monomers . The solid line is the polymer concentration measured by the ﬂuorescence of pyrene - labeled actin . The initial lag comes from slow spontaneous nucleation . The reaction reaches a steady state when the free actin monomer concentration reaches the overall critical concentration . Filled circles are the extent of hydrolysis of the bound ATP , which lags behind polymerization by a few seconds . ( D ) Mechanism of nucleation , showing monomers , a dimer , a trimer , and a ﬁlament , with estimates of the rate constants for each step . Unit of association rate constants , m M 2 1 sec 2 1 ; unit of dissociation rate constants , sec 2 1 . ( A , B , D , Adapted , with permission , from Pollard and Earnshaw 2007 ; C , reprinted from Pollard and Weeds 1984 . ) T . D . Pollard 4 Advanced Online Article . Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a018226 Harbor Laboratory Press at SERIALS / BIOMED LIB0175B on March 19 , 2016 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from gins with a lag period that depends very strongly on the concentration of the actin monomers . Already , in the 1960s , the lag was correctly interpreted as a slow nucleation stepthatformssmalloligomerssuitableforelongation ( Oo - sawa and Asakura 1975 ) . Computer modeling of the com - plete time course of polymerization of awide range of actin monomer concentrations established that nucleation con - sists of two unfavorable steps : formation of a dimer and addition of a third subunit to form a trimer ( Sept and McCammon 2001 ) . The association reactions are fast , but dimers and trimers are very unstable—dimers dissociate at (cid:2) 10 6 sec 2 1 , and trimers dissociate a subunit at 100 sec 2 1 ( Cooperetal . 1983 ; Frieden1983 ) . Thus , dimersandtrimers are present at exceedingly low concentrations in a polymer - ization reaction . The oligomer is more stable after adding a fourth subunit , presumably because the subunits have a full complement of intermolecular contacts . Larger oligomers elongate at the same rate as long ﬁlaments , with the rate of elongation depending on the monomer concentration . Actin ﬁlament elongation is understood much better than nucleation because one can measure the elongation rates in bulk solution or by observing single ﬁlaments by electron ( Pollard 1986 ) or light microscopy ( Kuhn and Pollard 2005 ) . Barbed ends grow much faster than pointed ends , with a diffusion - limited association rate constant of (cid:2) 10 m M 2 1 sec 2 1 for ATP – actin and slow dissociation at (cid:2) 1 sec 2 1 ( Fig . 2D ) . The ratio of the dissociation and asso - ciation rate constants gives the “critical concentration” for polymerization at the barbed end of (cid:2) 0 . 1 m M . Association and dissociation of ATP – actin is much slower at pointed ends . A bound nucleotide stabilizes monomers but is not required for polymerization . Free energy from association of actin subunits with the barbed end can be used to pro - duce piconewton forces ( Kovar and Pollard 2004 ) . The conformational changes associated with actin polymerization increase the rate of hydrolysis of bound Mg - ATP from 7 × 10 2 6 sec 2 1 by actin monomers to 0 . 3 sec 2 1 in ﬁlaments ( Fig . 3 ) ( Blanchoin and Pollard 2002 ) by repositioning the protein and water molecules around the g - phosphate ( McCullagh et al . 2014 ) . Hydro - lysis is irreversible ( Carlier and Pantaloni 1986 ) . The hy - drolysis reaction is “concerted” in the sense that association of the attacking water with the g - phosphate is coupled with dissociation of the bond between the b - and g - phosphates ( McCullagh et al . 2014 ) . Most evidence favors the hypoth - esis that hydrolysis occurs randomly on polymerized Mg - ATP – actin subunits ( Je´gou et al . 2011 ) , although the nu - cleotide state of neighboring subunits might inﬂuence the rate . One version of such inﬂuence was a proposal that Seed ATP hydrolysis P i dissociation ADP – actin ADP - P i – actin ATP – actin ATP Half - time ~ 60 sec ; 14 times faster with profilin Barbed end Half - time 350 sec Half - time 2 sec Figure 3 . Nucleotide reactions of actin . The cartoon shows an actin ﬁlament that has grown from both ends of an ADP – actin seed . Over time , ATP bound to the polymerized subunits is hydrolyzed random - ly to ADP and phosphate ( P i ) , followed by slow dissociation of the phosphate , leaving ADP – actin . ADP dissociates from ADP – actin monomers and is rapidly replaced by ATP . Proﬁlin speeds ADP dis - sociation . ( Adapted , with permission , from Pollard and Earnshaw 2007 . ) BOX 1 . PURIFICATION AND HANDLING OF ACTIN The classic preparation of actin from skeletal muscle starts by extracting myosin from homogenized tissue with a high con - centration of salt , precipitating the residual proteins with ace - tone , and drying to make an acetone powder . Actin monomers are extracted from this dry powder with a dilute buffercontain - ing ATP and polymerized by adding salt . The ﬁlaments are pelleted by ultracentrifugation and depolymerized by dialysis against low - salt buffer . Gel ﬁltration removes actin oligomers , capping protein and other minor contaminants , yielding monomers suitable for quantitative assembly experiments ( McLean - Fletcher and Pollard 1980 ) . Puriﬁcation from other cells usually requires a preliminary step to concentrate the actin by ion - exchange chromatography ( Gordon et al . 1976 ) or afﬁnity chromatography with an actin - binding protein such as DNase I ( Schafer et al . 1998 ) or gelsolin ( Ohki et al . 2009 ) . One or more cycles of polymerization and depolymerization , followed by gel ﬁltration , complete the puriﬁcation . Actin can be stored for days at 4 ˚ C in low - salt buffer with ATP , a sulfhy - dryl reducing agent , 0 . 1 m M CaCl 2 , and sodium azide to pre - vent bacterial growth . Freezing is not recommended . Actin and Actin - Binding Proteins Advanced Online Article . Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a018226 5 Harbor Laboratory Press at SERIALS / BIOMED LIB0175B on March 19 , 2016 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from hydrolysis occurs in a zipper - like fashion along the polymer ( Korn et al . 1987 ) . After ATP hydrolysis , the g - phosphate dissociates very slowly from polymerized actin , with a half - time of (cid:2) 6 min ( dissociation rate constant (cid:2) 0 . 003 sec 2 1 ) ( Carlier and Pantaloni 1986 ) , and so ADP - P i – actin is a long - lived in - termediate in the polymerization process ( Fig . 3 ) . The po - lymerization properties of ADP - P i – actin are close to those of ATP – actin ( Fujiwara et al . 2007 ) , but once the g - phos - phate dissociates , the ADP – actin subunit behaves quite differently . Most notably , ADP – actin subunits dissociate faster from both ends than ATP – actin subunits ( Fig . 2 ) . The critical concentration for polymerization of Mg - ADP – actin is the same at both ends , 1 . 8 m M ( Pollard 1986 ) . With ATP in the buffer and bound to actin monomers , the critical concentrations for polymerization differ at the two ends of ﬁlaments ( Fig . 2B ) . Consequently , at steady state , net addition occurs at the barbed end balanced by net loss of subunits at the pointed end—so - called treadmil - ling . The treadmilling rate of , 1 subunit / sec is so slow that it contributes little to actin ﬁlament turnover in cells , but it has fascinated the ﬁeld since its discovery in the 1970s ( Wegner 1976 ) . Filaments trap ADP irreversibly , but they exchange phosphate with the medium . The afﬁnity of polymerized ADP – actin for phosphate is very low because phosphate binding is very slow , with an association rate constant of only (cid:2) 2 M 2 1 sec 2 1 ( Carlier and Pantaloni 1986 ) . Thus , the K d for phosphate - binding ADP – actin ﬁlaments is on the order of 1 m M , depending on the pH . Differences in phosphate binding explain the polymer - ization asymmetry between the ends ( Fujiwara et al . 2007 ) . Subunits at the ends of ﬁlaments bind and dissociate phos - phate faster than interior subunits , and the afﬁnityof point - edendsforphosphateis10timesweaker thanthatof barbed ends . Given this difference and given that subunits associ - ate and dissociate slower at pointed ends , pointed ends are much more likely than barbed ends to hydrolyze bound ATP and dissociate g - phosphate before being buried in the ﬁlament . This exposes ADP – actin with its higher crit - ical concentration for dissociation from the pointed end . Cycles of actin assembly in cells occur in an environ - ment with millimolarconcentrations of Mg - ATPand phos - phate . Most of the cytoplasmic actin monomers have bound Mg - ATP ( Rosenblatt et al . 1995 ) , which is hydro - lyzed on polymerized subunits , followed by phosphate dissociation . Depolymerization releases Mg - ADP – actin monomers into the cytoplasm , where ADP exchanges for ATP , restarting the cycle ( Fig . 3 ) . Regulatory proteins , dis - cussed below , promote phosphate dissociation from ﬁla - ments , disassembly , and nucleotide exchange , but none has been shown to inﬂuence ATP hydrolysis . Actins from species as divergent as mammals and amoeba polymerize ( they even copolymerize ) and handle the bound ATP similarly , but one must be alert for excep - tions . For example , polymerized yeast actins hydrolyze bound ATP and dissociate the g - phosphate much faster than other actins ( Harris et al . 2004 ; Ti and Pollard 2011 ) . 5 OVERVIEW OF ACTIN - BINDING PROTEINS The behavior of actin in cells differs dramatically from that of the puriﬁed protein in a test tube . At the total concen - trations found in cells ( 50 – 200 m M ) , . 99 % of puriﬁed actin would polymerize in seconds , and subunits would exchange on and off the barbed ends roughly once per second and at the pointed end would exchange more slowly . In contrast to this largely static situation , approx - imately half of total actin in cells is unpolymerized at concentrations in the range (cid:2) 25 – 100 m M , orders of mag - nitude higher than the critical concentration . Furthermore , ﬁlaments assemble and turn over on timescales of tens of seconds—far faster than relatively inert actin ﬁlaments in a test tube . Actin - binding proteins account for these differences by regulating virtually every aspect of actin assembly ( Fig . 4 ) . Collectively , these proteins maintain a large pool of actin monomers available for polymerization , nucleate assembly of new ﬁlaments , promote elongation , cap barbed or point - ed ends to terminate elongation , sever ﬁlaments , and cross - link ﬁlaments . Most actin - binding proteins are widely distributed in eukaryotes , and so they arose in an ancient common an - cestor . Giardia is an exception as it lacks genes encoding many actin - binding proteins , including myosin , coﬁlin , formins , and the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Paredez et al . 2011 ) . It might have branched before the actin system was fully de - veloped or lost these genes . The following sections explain the properties of proteins in each of these families , most of which have subtle mechanisms of action that contribute to the dynamics of the actin system in cells . 6 ACTIN - MONOMER - BINDING PROTEINS The small ( (cid:2) 13 – 14 - kDa ) , actin - monomer - binding pro - tein proﬁlin is essential for the viability of most eukaryotes . Given its afﬁnity ( K d ¼ 0 . 1 m M ) for ATP – actin monomers and a cellular concentration in the range 50 – 100 m M , most of the unpolymerized actin in the cytoplasm is bound to proﬁlin , except for mammalian cells that express thymosin - b 4 ( see below ) . Proﬁlin bound to the barbed end of an actin monomer ( Fig . 5C ) sterically inhibits nucleation and elon - gation at pointed ends , but not elongation at barbed ends . Proﬁlin binds weakly to ATP – actin on the barbed end of T . D . Pollard 6 Advanced Online Article . Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a018226 Harbor Laboratory Press at SERIALS / BIOMED LIB0175B on March 19 , 2016 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from ﬁlaments ( K d . 20 m M ) , so proﬁlin dissociates rapidly af - ter a proﬁlin – actin complex binds , freeing the end for further elongation . ( Proﬁlin has much higher afﬁnity for the barbed ends of ADP – actin ﬁlaments [ Courtemanche and Pollard 2013 ] . ) However , high concentrations of free proﬁlin can slow elongation and even promote dissociation of the terminal subunit ( Je´gou et al . 2011 ; Courtemanche and Pollard 2013 ) . Two other activities of proﬁlin are essential for viability ( Lu and Pollard 2001 ) . Bound proﬁlin reduces the afﬁnity of actin monomers for ATP or ADP , so proﬁlin catalyzes nucleotide exchange ( Mockrin and Korn 1980 ) by rapidly dissociating ADP from newly depolymerized actin mono - mers and allowing ATP to bind ( Fig . 3 ) ( Vinson et al . 1998 ) . Proﬁlin also binds polyproline sequences at a site physically separated from the actin - binding site ( Archer et al . 1994 ; Ferron et al . 2007 ) . As explained below , this interaction allows proﬁlin to deliver actin to polyproline sequences in elongation factors , such as formins and Ena / VASP , and to promote elongation of actin ﬁlament barbed ends . Phos - phatidylinositol ( 4 , 5 ) - bisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , com - monly known as PIP 2 ) binds proﬁlin and competes for binding actin . Thymosin - b 4 is a peptide of 43 residues originally de - scribed as a thymic hormone , but it is also the most abun - dant actin - monomer - binding protein in some cells , including leukocytes and platelets ( Safer et al . 1991 ) . The amino terminus of thymosin - b 4 forms a short helix that Monomerbinding Elongation Elongationby formin Monomers Capping Cappedfilaments Profilin – actin on FH1 domain Filament Branching Network Bundle Arp2 / 3 complex P B B Severing Annealing Cross - linking Figure4 . Overviewof families of actin - binding proteins , including monomer binding , polymerases such as formins , capping proteins , severing proteins , cross - linking proteins , and branching protein Arp2 / 3 complex . Filaments can anneal end to end , but no proteins are known to facilitate this reaction . The drawing does not include tropomyosin and myosin motors , which bind to the sides of ﬁlaments . ( Adapted , with permission , from Pollard and Earnshaw 2007 . ) A B C D Figure 5 . Proteins that bind actin monomers . Space - ﬁlling models of the actin monomer with ribbon diagrams of bound proteins . This is the standard view of actin ( see Fig . 1 ) , with the ATP - binding cleft at the top and the barbed - end groove at the bottom . ( A ) The WH2 helix binds in the barbed - end groove ( PDB : 3M1F , from Vibrio para - haemolyticus Vopl ) . ( B ) Thymosin - b 4 helices bind in both the barbed - end groove and across the pointed - end cleft ( PDB : 4PL7 ) . ( C ) Proﬁlin can bind simultaneously to the barbed end of actin and to polyproline helices such asthat from vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein ( VASP ) , shown here as a red stick ﬁgure ( PDB : 2PBD ) . ( D ) The carboxy - terminal coﬁlin domain from twinﬁlin binds on the barbed end of the actin molecule ( PDB : 3DAW ) . Actin and Actin - Binding Proteins Advanced Online Article . Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a018226 7 Harbor Laboratory Press at SERIALS / BIOMED LIB0175B on March 19 , 2016 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from binds in the barbed - end groove , and the rest of the peptide consists of an extended region that binds the front surface of actin and a second helix that caps the pointed end at the top of the nucleotide - binding cleft ( Fig . 5B ) ( Xue et al . 2014 ) . Given concentrations of . 100 m M in the cytoplasm and a micromolarafﬁnity for Mg - ATP – actin , thymosin - b 4 can sequester a large pool of actin monomers , preventing them from engaging in any of the polymerization reactions because of steric interference with all of the interactions required for polymerization ( Fig . 2D ) . Proﬁlin competes with thymosin - b 4 for binding actin monomers , offering a pathway for actin monomers seques - tered by thymosin - b 4 to participate in elongation ( Panta - loni and Carlier 1993 ) . This shuttling process is possible because both proteins exchange rapidly on and off actin monomers . Given the physiological concentrations of all three proteins , most of the actin monomers are bound to either proﬁlin or thymosin - b 4 , leaving a low ( submicro - molar ) concentration of free actin monomers . Other proteins have one or more sequences homolo - gous to the amino - terminal half of thymosin - b 4 , including the helix that binds in the barbed - end groove of actin ( Fig . 5A ) ( Chereau et al . 2005 ; Rebowski et al . 2010 ) . These sequences are called WH2 ( WASp - homology 2 ) motifs af - ter their discovery in Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASp ; see Sec . 8 ) . WH2 motifs can deliver an actin sub - unit to the barbed end of a ﬁlament such as those nucleated by the Arp2 / 3 complex ( see Sec . 8 ) . Tandem WH2 motifs allow proteins in the Ena / VASP family to promote actin ﬁlament elongation ( see Sec . 8 ) and the proteins Lmod ( Chereau et al . 2008 ) and Spire ( Quinlan et al . 2005 ) to promote nucleation by bringing together multiple actin monomers . 7 SEVERING PROTEINS The two main families of actin ﬁlament – severing proteins differ greatly in size—tiny 15 - kDa coﬁlin and large multi - domain proteins of the gelsolin family . In addition , at least two formins , FRL - a ( Harris et al . 2004 ) and INF - 2 ( Gurel et al . 2014 ) , can sever actin ﬁlaments . Most eukaryotes express high concentrations of coﬁlin , a small protein that binds in the barbed - end groove of actin monomers and to actin ﬁlaments ( Fig . 5D ) . Coﬁlin bound to actin monomers inhibits nucleotide exchange ( Nishida 1985 ) , but proﬁlin overcomes this effect ( Blanchoin and Pollard 1998 ) . The main function of coﬁlin is to sever actin ﬁlaments . Coﬁlin binds cooperatively to the sides of actin ﬁlaments , with a higher afﬁnity for ADP – actin subunits than ATP - or ADP - P i subunits ( Cao et al . 2006 ) . Thus , ATP hydrolysis and phosphate dissociation act as a timer for coﬁlin binding . Nevertheless , weak binding of coﬁlin to ADP - P i subunits in ﬁlaments promotes dissociation of the g - phosphate , producing ADP – actin polymers in seconds rather than in minutes ( Blanchoin and Pollard 1999 ) , a timescale reasonable for the rapid turnover of ﬁlaments in cells . A crystal structure showed that a coﬁlin domain from the actin - monomer - binding protein twinﬁlin binds in the barbed - end groove of monomeric actin ( Fig . 5D ) ( Paavi - lainen et al . 2008 ) . This interaction is maintained when coﬁlin binds an actin ﬁlament , whereas other parts of co - ﬁlin contact subdomain 2 at the pointed end of the adjacent actin subunit along the long - pitch helix ( Galkin et al . 2011 ) . These interactions force actin subdomains 1 and 2 ( the outer domain ) to rotate (cid:2) 30 ˚ from the ﬂattened con - formation in the ﬁlament to become even more skewed than monomers . To avoid steric clashes , the twist between successive subunits along the short - pitch helix is reduced from 167 ˚ to 162 ˚ , enough to reduce the repeat of the long - pitch helices from 36 nm to 27 nm and make the ﬁlaments more ﬂexible ( McCullough et al . 2011 ) . Cellular processes dependent on actin ﬁlament severing by coﬁlin include motility and cytokinesis . The mechanism of severing is remarkable . Filaments saturated with coﬁlin are very stable , but binding of small numbers of coﬁlins promotes severing , most likely at interfaces between ﬂexible decorated sites and stiffer bare segments ( Elam et al . 2013 ; Ngo et al . 2015 ) . Therefore , steady state severing is optimal at concentrations of coﬁlin far below the K d ( Andrianan - toandro and Pollard 2006 ) . However , high concentrations of coﬁlin sever transiently as the ﬁrst few coﬁlins bind to a bare ﬁlament or if other proteins compete with coﬁlin for binding . Coﬁlin was originally called actin - depolymerizing fac - tor ( ADF ) ( Bamburg et al . 1980 ) , because it reduced pel - leting of actin ﬁlaments in the ultracentrifuge . Severing explains this behavior . Severing also creates free ends for depolymerization , but coﬁlin does not promote dissocia - tion of subunits from either end of ﬁlaments ( Andrianan - toandro and Pollard 2006 ) , contrary to a widely cited theory ( Carlier et al . 1997 ) . Cells use multiple strategies to regulate coﬁlin ( Mizuno 2013 ) . Binding of coﬁlin to PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 or phosphoryla - tion of Ser3 of coﬁlin interferes with coﬁlin binding to actin , so either inactivates all functions . LIM kinases phos - phorylate Ser3 , and phosphatases , including Slingshot and chronophin , remove the phosphate . The extent of coﬁlin phosphorylation changes during many cellular activities , developmental processes , and diseases because many sig - naling pathways impinge on LIM kinase . These include bone morphogenetic protein signaling through receptor serine kinases , inﬂammatory mediators operating through T . D . Pollard 8 Advanced Online Article . Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a018226 Harbor Laboratory Press at SERIALS / BIOMED LIB0175B on March 19 , 2016 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from Rho and ROCK , guidance molecules through Rac , Cdc42 , and PAK , and vascular endothelial growth factor through the mitogen - activated protein kinase pathway . Chemotac - tic signals also inﬂuence the activity of Slingshot . In addi - tion to disassembling actin ﬁlaments , severing produces a free barbed end that can stimulate actin ﬁlament assem - bly ( Bravo - Cordero et al . 2013 ) . Actin - interacting protein Aip1 cooperates with coﬁlin to promote actin ﬁlament turnover in cells and actin ﬁlament severing in vitro ( Chen et al . 2015 ) . Many organisms , from yeasts to ﬂies , have a single co - ﬁlin gene that is essential for their viability , but mammals have three isoforms ( coﬁlin - 1 , muscle - speciﬁc coﬁlin - 2 , and ADF ) ( Poukkula et al . 2011 ) . Coﬁlin - 1 is required for viability of mice , whereas ADF - null mutant mice are viable but have ocular defects . Other members of the coﬁlin family are widespread from fungi to humans , but none of them is as essential to viability as coﬁlin itself ( Poukkula et al . 2011 ) . Glia matu - ration factor ( GMF ) shares the coﬁlin fold , but , rather than interacting with actin , it binds Arp2 / 3 complex and disso - ciates actin ﬁlament branches ( Ydenberg et al . 2013 ) . Twin - ﬁlin consists of tandem coﬁlin domains that bind actin monomers and ﬁlaments , suppress polymerization ( Paavi - lainen et al . 2008 ) , and promote subunit dissociation from both ﬁlament ends in cooperation with cyclase associate protein ( Johnston et al . 2015 ) . Members of the gelsolin family comprise two to six homologous gelsolin domains . The fold of the gelsolin domain resembles that of coﬁlin ( Nag et al . 2013 ) , although no strong evidence exists that gelsolin and coﬁlin have a common ancestor . Mammalian family members consist of three or six gelsolin domains plus other domains , whereas homologous proteins in other species have two , four , or ﬁve gelsolin domains . Gelsolin and related proteins sever actin ﬁlaments and cap their barbed ends . Calcium binding regulates most family members by releasing gelsolin from an autoinhib - ited inactive state and stabilizing the gelsolin domains into a conformation that permits binding to the actin ﬁlament . The afﬁnities of the calcium - binding sites range from K d ¼ 0 . 2 m M , which is physiologically relevant , to K d . 100 m M . The long a - helices of gelsolin domains 1 , 2 , and 4 bind in the barbed - end groove of actin , similar to the binding of coﬁlin . This interaction with a ﬁlament results in severing , leaving gelsolin associated with the barbed end of the sev - ered ﬁlament . Polyphosphoinositides ( e . g . , PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ) can compete the gelsolin cap from the end of the ﬁlament ( Janmey and Stossel 1987 ) . Mice with a deletion muta - tion of the gelsolin gene are viable , but they have defects in cellular motility and platelet function during blood clotting . One splicing isoform of gelsolin has an amino - terminal signal sequence that directs the protein into the secretory pathway and eventually into the blood . The high calcium concentration in the blood keeps gelsolin active so that , together with vitamin D – binding protein , it forms a “scav - enger” system to depolymerize actin ﬁlaments released into the bloodstream from damaged cells ( Nag et al . 2013 ) . A mutation in patients with one form of familial amyloidosis makes gelsolin susceptible to proteolysis in the Golgi ap - paratus , and the resulting peptides form amyloid deposits that damage multiple organs ( Solomon et al . 2012 ) . The eight members of the gelsolin gene family in mam - mals have speciﬁc expression patterns ( Nag et al . 2013 ) . For example , adseverin helps secretory granules reach the plas - ma membrane in endocrine organs , and villin has an extra domainthatallowsitto bundleactinﬁlamentsin microvilli . Macrophages express CapG , a family member with three gelsolin domains that cap , but do not sever , actin ﬁlaments . 8 NUCLEATION PROTEINS Given that actin ﬁlament nucleation is intrinsically unfa - vorable and suppressed by proﬁlin and thymosin - b 4 , cells rely on regulatory proteins to initiate actin ﬁlament poly - merization in a controlled manner . They use Arp2 / 3 com - plex to produce actin ﬁlament branches , formins to initiate unbranched ﬁlaments , and proteins with tandem WH - 2 domains to form other ﬁlaments . Arp2 / 3 complex is an ancient ( basal eukaryote ) assem - bly of seven subunits , including Arp2 and Arp3 ( Fig . 6 ) . The complex is intrinsically inactive because the other sub - units hold the two Arp moieties apart ( Robinson et al . 2001 ) . When Arp2 / 3 complex binds the side of an actin ﬁlament , Arp2 and Arp3 move closer together and form the base for growth of a branch ( Rouiller et al . 2008 ) . The free barbed end of the daughter ﬁlament elongates , whereas the Arp2 / 3 complex anchors the pointed end of the ﬁlament rigidly to the side of the mother ﬁlament . A variety of nucleation - promoting factors activate Arp2 / 3 complex ( Rottner et al . 2010 ) , each in a particular cellularcontext , including at the leading edge of motile cells ( WASp , N - WASP [ neural - WASp ] , Scar [ suppressor of cAMP activator ] / WAVE [ WASP family verprolin homolo - gous protein ] ) , at sites of endocytosis ( WASp ) , and for internal membrane trafﬁc ( Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein and Scar homolog [ WASH ] ) ( Rotty et al . 2013 ) . All of these nucleation - promoting factors are intrinsically inactive because of sequestration of their binding sites for actin monomers and Arp2 / 3 complex . Intramolecular interactions inhibit WASp and N - WASP . Rho - family GTPases , polyphosphoinositides , and proteins with Src - homology 3 domains overcome these autoinhibitory inter - Actin and Actin - Binding Proteins Advanced Online Article . Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a018226 9 Harbor Laboratory Press at SERIALS / BIOMED LIB0175B on March 19 , 2016 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from actions , allowing WASp and N - WASP to interact with actin monomers and Arp2 / 3 complex . The WAVE regulatory complex , consisting of ﬁve subunits , inhibits the Scar / WAVE family ( Chen et al . 2010 ) . The Rac GTPase binds the WAVE regulatory complex and frees Scar / WAVE to in - teract with Arp2 / 3 complex . A similar protein complex regulates WASH ( Campellone and Welch 2010 ) . Binding of Arp2 / 3 complex to the side of an actin ﬁlament is unfavorable because it requires conformational changes in both partners ( Rouiller et al . 2008 ) . These high - energy states are poorly populated , so stable binding is slow ( Beltzner and Pollard 2008 ) because most interactions re - sult in dissociation ( Smith et al . 2013 ) . Association of two molecules of nucleation - promoting factor prepares Arp2 / 3 complex for binding actin ﬁlaments ( Padrick et al . 2011 ; Ti et al . 2011 ) , which completes the activation process . Each nucleation - promoting factor also brings along an actin monomer ; together , they become the ﬁrst two subunits in the daughter ﬁlament . Binding to the mother ﬁlament is thought to drive the conformational changes that posi - tion the Arps to initiate the branch ( Ti et al . 2011 ) , but one nucleation - promoting factor ( Dip1 ) can activate Arp2 / 3 complex to nucleate a ﬁlament independent of a preexist - ing ﬁlament ( Wagner et al . 2013 ) . In contrast , a protein named arpin inhibits nucleation of actin ﬁlament branches by Arp2 / 3 complex ( Dang et al . 2013 ) . Actin ﬁlament branches are quite rigid and stable for tens of seconds . The protein cortactin stabilizes branches ( Weaver et al . 2001 ) , but both coﬁlin ( Chan et al . 2009 ) and the related protein GMF ( Ydenberg et al . 2013 ) promote dissociation of branches . A drug - like molecule called CK - 666 is available to inhibit branch formation ( Nolen et al . 2009 ) . Formins are multidomain , homodimeric proteins char - acterized by a formin homology 2 ( FH2 ) domain that in - teracts with the barbed end of an actin ﬁlament ( Fig . 7A ) ( Goode and Eck 2007 ; Paul and Pollard 2009 ) . FH2 do - mains form head - to - tail dimers ( Xu et al . 2004 ) . When free of actin , an a - helical link holds the two halves of the dimer close together , but the linker can stretch into an extended chain to allow the FH2 dimer to wrap around an actin ﬁlament ( Fig . 7B ) ( Otomo et al . 2005 ) . The actin in cocrystals with FH2 forms a polymer with twofold sym - metry rather than the 167 ˚ helical twist of actin ﬁlaments ( Otomo et al . 2005 ) . A reﬁned model of an FH2 dimer on the end of an actin ﬁlament ( Fig . 7B ) has extensive contacts between the FH2 and actin ( Baker et al . 2015 ) . Next to the FH2 domain , most formins have an FH1 domain with multiple proline - rich sequences that bind proﬁlin . Many formins are autoinhibited by interactions between a diaph - anous autoinhibitory domain ( DAD ) near the amino ter - minus and a DAD - interacting domain ( DID ) near the carboxyl terminus ( Alberts 2001 ) . Binding of Rho - family GTPases near the DAD overcomes this autoinhibition . Most formins nucleate actin ﬁlaments , presumably by stabilizing actin dimers ( Pring et al . 2003 ) . Only free actin monomers appear to participate in this nucleation process ( Paul and Pollard 2009 ) . In ﬁssion yeast , each of the three formins nucleates unbranched ﬁlaments for speciﬁc struc - tures , such as the cytokinetic contractile ring or interphase ARPC1 ARPC5 ARPC4 ARPC2 A B C ARPC3 D1 D2 ARPC3 ARPC2 ARPC1 Arp2 Arp3c v v Actin Actin ARPC2 ARPC4 ARPC5 ARPC1 ARPC3 90° 2 4 3 3 3 1 1 1 Arp2 Arp3 Arp2 Arp3 ccc AA AA Figure6 . The Arp2 / 3 complex . ( A ) Ribbon diagram showing the two actin - related proteins ( Arps ) and the ﬁve novel subunits . Subdomains 1 and 2 of Arp2 were disordered in this structure ( PDB : 1K8K ) . ( B ) Model of the branch junction from reconstructions of electron micrographs ( Rouilleret al . 2008 ) . The Arp2 / 3 complex anchors a branch represented by daughter subunits D1 and D2 on the side of the mother ﬁlament . The numbers indicate the subdomains of Arp2 ( red ) and Arp3 ( orange ) . ( C ) Model ( Padrick et al . 2011 ) for the interaction of Arp2 / 3 complex with two verprolin - coﬁlin - acidic ( VCA ) motifs ( black ) , each with an actin subunit bound to the V ( WH2 ) motif ( Chereau et al . 2005 ) . The location of the A motif on Arp3 was determined by X - ray crystallography ( Ti et al . 2011 ) . Other aspects of the model were inferred from binding and cross - linking experiments ( Padricket al . 2011 ) . ( A , Reprinted , with permission , from Pollard and Earnshaw 2007 ; B , reprinted from Rouiller et al . 2008 ; C , adapted , with permission , from Padrick et al . 2011 . ) T . D . Pollard 10 Advanced Online Article . Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a018226 Harbor Laboratory Press at SERIALS / BIOMED LIB0175B on March 19 , 2016 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from actin ﬁlament cables , but with some overlap . The situation is much more complicated in mammals , which have 15 isoforms with partially overlapping functions ( Higgs and Peterson 2005 ; Campellone and Welch 2010 ) , and so as - signment of biological functions is still in progress . These formins also nucleate unbranched ﬁlaments for the con - tractile ring , stress ﬁbers , and ﬁlopodia . Some formins are associated with the plasma membrane or intracellular membranes , such as the endoplasmic reticulum , and others interact with microtubules . Transmembrane helices anchor some plant formins to membranes . Most formins can ei - ther inhibit or promote actin ﬁlament elongation , as ex - plained in Section 9 . Proteins with tandem WH2 domains promote nucle - ation , presumably by favoring the association of dimers or trimers ( Dominguez and Holmes 2011 ) . This family in - Actinsubunitaddition DID A B FH1 GBD DAD FH2 TrailingFH2 TrailingFH2 Incomingactin FH2step FH2 linker LeadingFH2 LeadingFH2 Figure 7 . Structure and role of formins . ( A ) Domain organization of a diaphanous ( Dia ) - type formin . DAD , diaphanous autoinhibitory domain ; DID , DAD - interacting domain ; GBD , GTPase - binding domain ; FH1 , pro - line - rich formin homology 1 domain ; FH2 , formin homology 2 domain . ( B ) Model of the actin ﬁlament elongation mechanism , with actin subunits shown by a space - ﬁlling model and the formin Bni1 FH2 dimer shown as red and blue ribbon diagrams . The model is based on the crystal structure ( Otomo et al . 2005 ) docked on the barbed end of the actin ﬁlament model from ﬁber diffraction ( Oda et al . 2009 ) and reﬁned by molecular - dynamics simulation ( Baker et al . 2015 ) . An actin subunit binds from solution , creating a binding site for the trailing FH2 domain ( blue ) to “step” toward the barbed end . The lower diagrams show end - on views , including ( left ) the actin ﬁlament and ( right ) the FH2 dimer alone . Actin and Actin - Binding Proteins Advanced Online Article . Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a018226 11 Harbor Laboratory Press at SERIALS / BIOMED LIB0175B on March 19 , 2016 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from cludes proteins called spire , cordon bleu , and JMYthat have been implicated in the development of the nervous system and other tissues ( Campellone and Welch 2010 ) . A protein with one WH2 domain , called leiomodin , participates in actin polymerization in muscle ( Chereau et al . 2008 ) . Some bacteria express proteins with WH2 domains that subvert cellular actin assembly . Two other mechanisms can create barbed ends . As not - ed above , severing by coﬁlin produces a free barbed end and a free pointed end , a reaction shown to stimulate polymer - ization in live cells ( Bravo - Cordero et al . 2013 ) . Removing a cap from the end of a ﬁlament has the theoretical capacity to open a site for elongation ( see Sec . 10 ) . 9 ACTIN FILAMENT POLYMERASES In addition to nucleating actin ﬁlaments , formins both inhibit and promote the elongation of actin ﬁlament barbed ends by interacting processively with the growing end ( Paul and Pollard 2009 ) . On their own , FH2 domains from all formins tested slow barbed - end elongation . A sim - ple explanation is that the complex of the FH2 domain and the end of the ﬁlament has two conformations : Actin monomers can bind to the open state but not the closed state ( Vavylonis et al . 2006 ) . Depending on the formin , barbed ends are open between 5 % and 90 % of the time . Proﬁlin overcomes this inhibition and can bias polymeri - zation toward ﬁlaments with formins , providing that the formin construct has an FH1 domain in addition to the dimer of FH2 domains . FH1 domains are ﬂexible “tenta - cles , ” located amino - terminal to the FH2 domain , with one to 14 polyproline tracks that bind proﬁlin – actin complex - es . After rate - limiting binding of proﬁlin – actin to multiple sites in the FH1 domain , diffusion of the FH1 domains delivers proﬁlin very rapidly to the end of the ﬁlament , allowing rapid elongation in spite of the fact that the end is in the closed state part of the time . In favorable cases , such as formin mDia1 , which is open 90 % of the time and has an FH1 domain with 14 potential proﬁlin – actin - bind - ing sites , elongation can be ﬁve times faster than for a free barbed end ( Kovar et al . 2006 ) . In spite of the rapid elon - gation , all formins tested are remarkably processive , “step - ping” onto the newly added subunit for thousands of cycles without failure . This polymerase activity inhibits capping by capping protein and allows actin ﬁlaments associated with a formin to grow very quickly and persistently in the cell . For example , formin mDia1 grows ﬁlaments at 700 subunits / sec in ﬁbroblasts ( Higashida et al . 2004 ) . Similar to formins , tetramers of Ena / VASP associate with growing actin ﬁlament barbed ends , promote elonga - tion , and inhibit capping ( Edwards et al . 2014 ) . In contrast to formins , Ena / VASP proteins do not seem to nucleate polymerization . VASP can deliver either free actin mono - mers or proﬁlin – actin to the barbed end of the ﬁlament , using either an actin - monomer - binding site related to a WH2 domain ( Ferron et al . 2007 ) or polyproline tracks that bind proﬁlin ( Hansen and Mullins 2010 ) . VASP is much less processive than formins , with a dwell time on barbed ends of only 1 . 5 sec . Mice need at least one of their three Ena / VASP genes for viability . These proteins concen - trate at the leading edge of motile cells and the tips of ﬁlo - podia , where they contribute to the growth of the ﬁlaments . 10 CAPPING PROTEINS Capping protein ( Edwards et al . 2014 ) is a heterodimer of structurally similar a - and b - subunits that binds tightly to actin ﬁlament barbed ends ( Fig . 8 ) . Virtually all eukaryotic cells express capping protein . Given micromolar con - centrations of capping protein in cells , barbed ends are capped in seconds—and remain capped as the half - time for dissociation is 30 min . Capping protein cooperates with proﬁlin to maintain the actin monomer pool , limit the number of barbed ends available for growth during actin - based protrusion of the leading edge , and stabilize the barbed ends of ﬁlaments in the Z - disk of striated muscles . Capping protein is constitutively active , but is regulated allosterically by proteins that are generally unrelated but contain a capping protein interaction motif , including “capping protein Arp2 / 3 myosin I linker” ( CARMIL ) . Other molecules that regulate capping protein do so by sterically inhibiting its binding to the barbed end ( Edwards et al . 2014 ) . Polyphosphoinositides bind capping protein and block its interaction with barbed ends but do not dis - sociate capping protein from the end of a ﬁlament . V - 1 / myotrophin sequesters capping protein in the cytoplasm of animal cells , whereas CARMIL allows capping protein to associate weakly with barbed ends and slow elongation . As discussed above , members of the gelsolin family are calcium - regulated proteins that not only sever ﬁlaments but also bind to barbed ends ( Nag et al . 2013 ) . This capping activity allows gelsolin and capping protein to nucleate ﬁlaments that grow from their pointed ends , as observed in skeletal muscles ( Littleﬁeld et al . 2001 ) . Tropomodulin is exclusively a pointed - end capping protein ( Rao et al . 2014 ) . The protein wraps around the three terminal subunits at the pointed end and blocks subunit addition and loss ( Fig . 8 ) . Interactions with the amino - terminal ends of two tropomyosin molecules strengthen the capping activity . These interactions stabilize the pointed end of the thin ﬁlaments in muscle but still allow slow exchange of actin subunits . A shorter isoform of tropomodulin caps the pointed ends of the tiny actin ﬁla - ments in the spectrin – actin network of red blood cells . T . D . Pollard 12 Advanced Online Article . Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a018226 Harbor Laboratory Press at SERIALS / BIOMED LIB0175B on March 19 , 2016 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from Arp2 / 3 complex also caps pointed ends in the act of nucleating actin ﬁlament branches that grow at their free barbed ends . When a branch dissociates from the side of a mother ﬁlament ( spontaneously or promoted by coﬁlin ) , Arp2 / 3 complexcaps the pointed end of the former daugh - ter ﬁlament . 11 CROSS - LINKING PROTEINS Physical connections between actin ﬁlaments made by a large family of cross - linking proteins ( Matsudaira 1994 ) stabilize higher - order structures , such as bundles of ﬁla - ments in microvilli , ﬁlopodia , and cytoplasmic cables , as well as networks of actin ﬁlaments ( see Svitkina 2016 ) . Two actin - binding sites in the same polypeptide or in two sub - units of oligomeric proteins are required to connect two ﬁlaments ( Fig . 9 ) . The actin - binding domains ( ABDs ) of many of these proteins consist of two calponin - homology domains ( Borrego - Diaz et al . 2006 ) , but the distance be - tween the pairs of ABDs varies considerably . The tandem ABDs of ﬁmbrin and the twofold symmetry of fascin pro - mote the formation of actin ﬁlament bundles , whereas the ABS2 Tropomodulin ( Tmod ) ABS1 TMBS1 TMBS2 Tropomysin ( TM ) 180° CP β CP α β - tentacle Capping protein ( CP ) Figure8 . Capping of the twoends of the actin ﬁlament . Depicted is a space - ﬁlling model of a short ﬁlament with two laterally aligned tropomyosin molecules ( orange ) , terminating with tropomodulin at the ﬁlament pointed end ( magenta ) ( Rao et al . 2014 ) and heterodimeric capping protein ( CP ; cyan and blue ) at the ﬁlament barbed end ( Urnavicius et al . 2015 ) . ( Figure prepared by Roberto Dominguez of the University of Pennsylvania . ) Actin and Actin - Binding Proteins Advanced Online Article . Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a018226 13 Harbor Laboratory Press at SERIALS / BIOMED LIB0175B on March 19 , 2016 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from widely separated ABDs of ﬁlamin ( ABP ) cross - link less - organized networks of ﬁlaments , such as those at the lead - ing edge of motile cells ( Matsudaira 1994 ; see Svitkina 2016 ) . ABDs typically have relatively low afﬁnity for actin ﬁl - aments ( K d (cid:2) 10 m M ) , so they exchange on and off ﬁla - ments on a subsecond timescale . Rapid exchange of these linking proteins makes the mechanical properties of actin ﬁlament networks much different from those of covalently cross - linked synthetic polymers ( Yao et al . 2011 ) . When deformed rapidly , cross - linked actin networks are stiff , but the rapidly rearranging cross - links do not resist slow deformation ( Xu et al . 1998 ) . This explains why cells are stiff and elastic on fast timescales but deformable on time - scales of tens of seconds . 12 FILAMENT - BINDING PROTEINS The coiled - coil protein tropomyosin binds along each of the two long - pitch helices of the actin ﬁlament ( Fig . 8 ) ( von der Ecken et al . 2014 ) . Genes for one or more tropo - myosins are present in fungi and animals but not amoebas , plants , or other types of eukaryotes . Tropomyosin protects ﬁlaments from severing by coﬁlin ( Maciver et al . 1991 ) and inﬂuences which myosins interact with a ﬁlament ( Pollard and Lord 2014 ) . In yeast , particular tropomyosin isoforms associate with ﬁlaments produced by different formins . In striated muscles , tropomyosin and troponin comprise the calcium - sensitive switch that regulates contraction ( see Sweeney 2016 ) . 13 CONCLUDING REMARKS Evolution has produced a system of proteins that use actin subunits to build a rich array of different structures in prokaryotes and eukaryotes . These range from the stable sarcomeres of striated muscles ( Sweeney 2016 ) to force - producing branched networks at the leading edges of mo - tile cells that turn over in seconds ( Svitkina 2016 ) . Appre - ciating the mechanisms of the modest number of regulatory proteins covered in this review will allow the reader to understand actin ﬁlament dynamics in all of the systems described in this collection . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The author’s research reported in this publication was sup - ported by National Institute of General Medical Sciences of the National Institutes of Health under awards number R01GM026132 , R01GM026338 , and PO1GM066311 . The content is solely the responsibility of the author and does not necessarily represent the ofﬁcial views of the National Institutes of Health . The author thanks Roberto Domin - guez for many valuable suggestions and Figure 8 , and Qian Chen , Naomi Courtemanche , and Shalini Nag for com - ments on a draft of this review . REFERENCES ∗ Reference is in this collection . Alberts AS . 2001 . Identiﬁcation of a carboxyl - terminal diaphanous - re - lated formin homology protein autoregulatory domain . J Biol Chem 276 : 2824 – 2830 . Andrianantoandro E , Pollard TD . 2006 . Mechanism of actin ﬁlament turnover by severing and nucleation at different concentrations of ADF / coﬁlin . Mol Cell 24 : 13 – 23 . Archer SJ , Vinson VK , Pollard TD , Torchia DA . 1994 . Elucidation of the poly - L - proline binding site in Acanthamoeba proﬁlin - I by NMR spec - troscopy . FEBS Lett 337 : 145 – 151 . Baker JL , Courtemanche N , Parton DL , McCullagh M , Pollard TD , Voth GA . 2015 . Electrostatic interactions between the Bni1p formin FH2 domain and actin inﬂuence actin ﬁlament nucleation . Structure 23 : 68 – 79 . Bamburg JR , Harris HE , Weeds AG . 1980 . Partial puriﬁcation and char - acterization of an actin depolymerizing factor from brain . FEBS Lett 121 : 178 – 182 . ∗ Barlan K , Gelfand VI . 2016 . Microtubule - based transport and the dis - tribution , tethering , and organization of organelles . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 101101 / cshperspect . a025817 . Beltzner CC , Pollard TD . 2008 . Pathway of actin ﬁlament branch forma - tion by Arp2 / 3 complex . J Biol Chem 283 : 7135 – 7144 . ABD Fimbrin / plastin 40 nm 80 n m P P P GPIB / IX - binding domain Actin - binding domain β - sheet domains EF hands Filamin / ABP Triple - stranded α - helical domains α - actinin ABD ABD ABD ABD ABD ABD Figure 9 . Cross - linking proteins . Illustrations depicting the size , domains , and organization of the actin ﬁlament cross - linking proteins ﬁmbrin , a - actinin , and ﬁlamin ( ABP ) . The different patterns of distribution of the actin - binding domains lend the proteins distinct cross - linking capabilities . ABD , actin - binding domain ; EF hand , calci - um - binding motif . ( Adapted from Pollard and Earnshaw 2007 , with permission from Elsevier . ) T . D . Pollard 14 Advanced Online Article . Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a018226 Harbor Laboratory Press at SERIALS / BIOMED LIB0175B on March 19 , 2016 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from Blanchoin L , Pollard TD . 1998 . Interaction of actin monomers with Acanthamoeba actophorin ( ADF / coﬁlin ) and proﬁlin . J Biol Chem 273 : 25106 – 25111 . Blanchoin L , Pollard TD . 1999 . Mechanism of interaction of Acantha - moeba actophorin ( ADF / Coﬁlin ) with actin ﬁlaments . J Biol Chem 274 : 15538 – 15546 . Blanchoin L , Pollard TD . 2002 . Hydrolysis of ATP by polymerized actin depends on the bound divalent cation but not proﬁlin . Biochemistry 41 : 597 – 602 . Borrego - Diaz E , Kerff F , Lee SH , Ferron F , Li Y , Dominguez R . 2006 . Crystal structure of the actin - binding domain of a - actinin 1 : Eval - uating two competing actin - binding models . J Struct Biol 155 : 230 – 238 . Bravo - Cordero JJ , Magalhaes MA , Eddy RJ , Hodgson L , Condeelis J . 2013 . Functions of coﬁlin in cell locomotion and invasion . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 14 : 405 – 415 . CampelloneKG , WelchMD . 2010 . Anucleatorarmsrace : Cellularcontrol of actin assembly . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 11 : 237 – 251 . Cao W , Goodarzi JP , De La Cruz EM . 2006 . Energetics and kinetics of cooperative coﬁlin – actin ﬁlament interactions . J Mol Biol 361 : 257 – 267 . Carlier MF , Pantaloni D . 1986 . Direct evidence for ADP - Pi - F - actin as the major intermediate in ATP - actin polymerization . Rate of dissociation of Pi from actin ﬁlaments . Biochemistry 25 : 7789 – 7792 . Carlier MF , Laurent V , Santolini J , Melki R , Didry D , Xia GX , Hong Y , Chua NH , Pantaloni D . 1997 . Actin depolymerizing factor ( ADF / coﬁlin ) enhances the rate of ﬁlament turnover : Implication in actin - based motility . J Cell Biol 136 : 1307 – 1322 . Chan C , Beltzner CC , Pollard TD . 2009 . Coﬁlin dissociates Arp2 / 3 com - plex and branches from actin ﬁlaments . Curr Biol 19 : 537 – 545 . Chen Z , Borek D , Padrick SB , Gomez TS , Metlagel Z , Ismail AM , Ume - tani J , Billadeau DD , Otwinowski Z , Rosen MK . 2010 . Structure and control of the actin regulatory WAVE complex . Nature 468 : 533 – 538 . Chen Q , Courtemanche N , Pollard TD . 2015 . Aip1 promotes actin ﬁla - ment severing by coﬁlin and regulates the constriction of the cytoki - netic contractile ring . J Biol Chem 290 : 2289 – 2300 . Chereau D , Kerff F , Graceffa P , Grabarek Z , Langsetmo K , Dominguez R . 2005 . Actin - bound structures of Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) - homology domain 2 and the implications for ﬁlament as - sembly . Proc Natl Acad Sci 102 : 16644 – 16649 . Chereau D , Boczkowska M , Skwarek - Maruszewska A , Fujiwara I , Hayes DB , Rebowski G , Lappalainen P , Pollard TD , Dominguez R . 2008 . Leiomodin is an actin ﬁlament nucleator in muscle cells . Science 320 : 239 – 243 . Cooper JA , Buhle EL Jr , Walker SB , Tsong TY , Pollard TD . 1983 . Kinetic evidence for a monomer activation step in actin polymerization . Bio - chemistry 22 : 2193 – 2202 . Courtemanche N , Pollard TD . 2013 . Interaction of proﬁlin with the barbed end of actin ﬁlaments . Biochemistry 52 : 6456 – 6466 . Dang I , Gorelik R , Sousa - Blin C , Derivery E , Gue´rin C , Linkner J , Nem - ethova M , Dumortier JG , Giger FA , Chipysheva TA , et al . 2013 . Inhib - itory signalling to the Arp2 / 3 complex steers cell migration . Nature 503 : 281 – 284 . De La Cruz EM , Pollard TD . 1995 . Nucleotide - free actin : Stabilization by sucrose and nucleotide binding kinetics . Biochemistry 34 : 5452 – 5461 . Derman AI , Becker EC , Truong BD , Fujioka A , Tucey TM , Erb ML , Patterson PC , Pogliano J . 2009 . Phylogenetic analysis identiﬁes many uncharacterized actin - like proteins ( Alps ) in bacteria : Regulated polymerization , dynamic instability and treadmilling in Alp7A . Mol Microbiol 73 : 534 – 552 . Dominguez R . 2004 . Actin - binding proteins—A unifying hypothesis . Trends Biochem Sci 29 : 572 – 578 . Dominguez R , HolmesKC . 2011 . Actinstructure andfunction . AnnuRev Biophys 40 : 169 – 186 . Edwards M , Zwolak A , Schafer DA , Sept D , Dominguez R , Cooper JA . 2014 . Capping protein regulators ﬁne - tune actin assembly dynamics . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 15 : 677 – 689 . Elam WA , Kang H , De La Cruz EM . 2013 . Biophysics of actin ﬁlament severing by coﬁlin . FEBS Lett 587 : 1215 – 1219 . Ferron F , Rebowski G , Lee SH , Dominguez R . 2007 . Structural basis for the recruitment of proﬁlin - actin complexes during ﬁlament elonga - tion by Ena / VASP . EMBO J 26 : 4597 – 4606 . Frieden C . 1983 . Polymerization of actin : Mechanism of the Mg 2 + - in - duced process at pH 8 and 20 ˚ C . Proc Natl Acad Sci 80 : 6513 – 6517 . Fujii T , Iwane AH , Yanagida T , Namba K . 2010 . Direct visualization of secondary structures of F - actin by electron cryomicroscopy . Nature 467 : 724 – 728 . Fujiwara I , Vavylonis D , Pollard TD . 2007 . Polymerization kinetics of ADP - and ADP - Pi - actin determined by ﬂuorescence microscopy . Proc Natl Acad Sci 104 : 8827 – 8832 . Galkin VE , Orlova A , Kudryashov DS , Solodukhin A , Reisler E , Schro¨der GF , Egelman EH . 2011 . Remodeling of actin ﬁlaments by ADF / coﬁlin proteins . Proc Natl Acad Sci 108 : 20568 – 20572 . ∗ Glotzer M . 2016 . Cytokinesis in metazoa and fungi . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 101101 / cshperspect . a022343 . Goode BL , Eck MJ . 2007 . Mechanism and function of formins in the control of actin assembly . Annu Rev Biochem 76 : 593 – 627 . ∗ Goodson HV , Jonasson EM . 2016 . Microtubules and MAPs . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 101101 / cshperspect . a022608 . Gordon DJ , Eisenberg E , KornED . 1976 . Characterizationofcytoplasmic actin isolated from Acanthamoeba castellanii by a new method . J Biol Chem 251 : 4778 – 4786 . GunningPW , GhoshdastiderU , WhitakerS , PoppD , RobinsonRC . 2015 . The evolution of compositionally and functionally distinct actin ﬁla - ments . J Cell Sci 128 : 2009 – 2019 . Gurel PS , Ge P , Grintsevich EE , Shu R , Blanchoin L , Zhou ZH , Reisler E , Higgs HN . 2014 . INF2 - mediated severing through actin ﬁlament en - circlement and disruption . Curr Biol 24 : 156 – 164 . Hansen SD , Mullins RD . 2010 . VASP is a processive actin polymerase that requires monomeric actin for barbed end association . J Cell Biol 191 : 571 – 584 . Harris ES , Li F , Higgs HN . 2004 . The mouse formin , FRL a , slows actin ﬁlament barbed end elongation , competes with capping protein , ac - celerates polymerization from monomers , and severs ﬁlaments . J Biol Chem 279 : 20076 – 20087 . Herman IM . 1993 . Actin isoforms . Curr Opin Cell Biol 5 : 48 – 55 . Higashida C , Miyoshi T , Fujita A , Oceguera - Yanez F , Monypenny J , An - dou Y , Narumiya S , Watanabe N . 2004 . Actin polymerization - driven molecularmovementofmDia1inlivingcells . Science 303 : 2007 – 2010 . Higgs HN , Peterson KJ . 2005 . Phylogenetic analysis of the formin ho - mology 2 domain . Mol Biol Cell 16 : 1 – 13 . Huxley HE . 1963 . Electron microscopestudies on thestructure ofnatural and synthetic protein ﬁlaments from striated muscle . J Mol Biol 7 : 281 – 308 . Janmey PA , Stossel TP . 1987 . Modulation of gelsolin function by phos - phatidylinositol 4 , 5 - biphosphate . Nature 325 : 362 – 364 . Je´gou A , Niedermayer T , Orba´n J , Didry D , Lipowsky R , Carlier MF , Romet - Lemonne G . 2011 . Individual actin ﬁlaments in a microﬂuidic ﬂow reveal the mechanism of ATP hydrolysis and give insight into the properties of proﬁlin . PLoS Biol 9 : e1001161 . Johnston AB , Collins A , Goode BL . 2015 . High - speed depolymerization at actin ﬁlament ends jointly catalysed by Twinﬁlin and Srv2 / CAP . Nat Cell Biol 17 : 1504 – 1511 . Kabsch W , Mannherz HG , Suck D , Pai EF , Holmes KC . 1990 . Atomic structure of the actin : DNase I complex . Nature 347 : 37 – 44 . Kang H , Bradley MJ , Elam WA , De La Cruz EM . 2013 . Regulation of actin by ion - linked equilibria . Biophys J 105 : 2621 – 2628 . Korn ED , Carlier MF , Pantaloni D . 1987 . Actin polymerization and ATP hydrolysis . Science 238 : 638 – 644 . Kovar DR , Pollard TD . 2004 . Insertional assembly of actin ﬁlament barbed ends in association with formins produces piconewton forces . Proc Natl Acad Sci 101 : 14725 – 14730 . Actin and Actin - Binding Proteins Advanced Online Article . Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a018226 15 Harbor Laboratory Press at SERIALS / BIOMED LIB0175B on March 19 , 2016 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from Kovar DR , HarrisES , Mahaffy R , Higgs HN , PollardTD . 2006 . Control of the assemblyof ATP - and ADP - actin by formins and proﬁlin . Cell 124 : 423 – 435 . Kuhn JR , Pollard TD . 2005 . Real - time measurements of actin ﬁlament polymerization by total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence microscopy . Biophys J 88 : 1387 – 1402 . Littleﬁeld R , Almenar - Queralt A , Fowler VM . 2001 . Actin dynamics at pointed ends regulatesthin ﬁlament length in striated muscle . Nat Cell Biol 3 : 544 – 551 . Lu J , Pollard TD . 2001 . Proﬁlin binding to poly - L - proline and actin monomers along with ability to catalyze actin nucleotide exchange is required for viability of ﬁssion yeast . Mol Biol Cell 12 : 1161 – 1175 . MaciverSK , ZotHG , PollardTD . 1991 . Characterizationofactinﬁlament severing by actophorin from Acanthamoeba castellanii . J Cell Biol 115 : 1611 – 1620 . MatsudairaP . 1994 . Actincrosslinking proteinsattheleadingedge . Semin Cell Biol 5 : 165 – 174 . McCullagh M , Saunders MG , Voth GA . 2014 . Unraveling the mystery of ATP hydrolysis in actin ﬁlaments . J Am Chem Soc 136 : 13053 – 13058 . McCullough BR , Grintsevich EE , Chen CK , Kang H , Hutchison AL , Henn A , Cao W , Suarez C , Martiel JL , Blanchoin L , et al . 2011 . Coﬁ - lin - linked changes in actin ﬁlament ﬂexibility promote severing . Bio - phys J 101 : 151 – 159 . McLean - Fletcher S , Pollard TD . 1980 . Identiﬁcation of a factor in con - ventional muscle actin preparations which inhibits actin ﬁlament self association . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 96 : 18 – 27 . Mizuno K . 2013 . Signaling mechanisms and functional roles of coﬁlin phosphorylation and dephosphorylation . Cell Signal 25 : 457 – 469 . Mockrin SC , Korn RD . 1980 . Acanthamoeba proﬁlin interacts with G - actin to increase the rate of exchange of actin - bound adenosine 5 ′ - triphosphate . Biochemistry 19 : 5359 – 5362 . MullerJ , OmaY , VallarL , FriederichE , PochO , WinsorB . 2005 . Sequence and comparative genomic analysis of actin - related proteins . Mol Biol Cell 16 : 5736 – 5748 . Nag S , Larsson M , Robinson RC , Burtnick LD . 2013 . Gelsolin : The tail of a molecular gymnast . Cytoskeleton 70 : 360 – 384 . Ngo KX , Kodera N , Katayama E , Ando T , Uyeda TQ . 2015 . Coﬁlin - induced unidirectional cooperative conformational changes in actin ﬁlaments revealed by high - speed atomic force microscopy . Elife 4 : e04806 . Nishida E . 1985 . Opposite effects of coﬁlin and proﬁlin from porcine brain on rate of exchange of actin - bound adenosine 5 ′ - triphosphate . Biochemistry 24 : 1160 – 1164 . Nolen BJ , Tomasevic N , Russell A , Pierce DW , Jia Z , McCormick CD , Hartman J , Sakowicz R , Pollard TD . 2009 . Characterization of two classes of small molecule inhibitors of Arp2 / 3 complex . Nature 460 : 1031 – 1034 . OdaT , IwasaM , AiharaT , MaedaY , NaritaA . 2009 . Natureoftheglobular to ﬁbrous actin transition . Nature 457 : 441 – 445 . Ohki T , Ohno C , Oyama K , Mikhailenko SV , Ishiwata S . 2009 . Puriﬁca - tion of cytoplasmic actin by afﬁnity chromatography using the C - terminal half of gelsolin . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 383 : 146 – 150 . Oma Y , Harata M . 2011 . Actin - related proteins localized in the nucleus : From discovery to novel roles in nuclear organization . Nucleus 2 : 38 – 46 . Oosawa F , Asakura S . 1975 . Thermodynamics of the polymerization of protein . Academic , New York . Otomo T , Tomchick DR , Otomo C , Panchal SC , Machius M , Rosen MK . 2005 . Structural basis of actin ﬁlament nucleation and processive cap - ping by a formin homology 2 domain . Nature 433 : 488 – 494 . Paavilainen VO , Oksanen E , Goldman A , Lappalainen P . 2008 . Structure oftheactin - depolymerizingfactorhomologydomainincomplexwith actin . J Cell Biol 182 : 51 – 59 . Padrick SB , Doolittle LK , Brautigam CA , King DS , Rosen MK . 2011 . Arp2 / 3 complex is bound and activated by two WASP proteins . Proc Natl Acad Sci 108 : E472 – E479 . Pantaloni D , Carlier MF . 1993 . How proﬁlin promotes actin ﬁlament assembly in the presence of thymosin b 4 . Cell 75 : 1007 – 1014 . Paredez AR , Assaf ZJ , Sept D , Timofejeva L , Dawson SC , Wang CJ , Cande WZ . 2011 . An actin cytoskeleton with evolutionarily conserved func - tions in the absence of canonical actin - binding proteins . Proc Natl Acad Sci 108 : 6151 – 6156 . Paul A , Pollard TD . 2009 . Review of the mechanism of processive actin ﬁlament elongation by formins . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 66 : 606 – 617 . PollardTD . 1986 . Rate constants for the reactions of ATP - and ADP - actin with the ends of actin ﬁlaments . J Cell Biol 103 : 2747 – 2754 . Pollard TD , Earnshaw WC . 2007 . Cell biology , 2nd ed . Saunders , New York . Pollard LW , Lord M . 2014 . Getting myosin - Von the right track : Tropo - myosin sorts transport in yeast . Bioarchitecture 4 : 35 – 38 . Pollard TD , Weeds AG . 1984 . The rate constant for ATP hydrolysis by polymerized actin . FEBS Lett 170 : 94 – 98 . Poukkula M , Kremneva E , Serlachius M , Lappalainen P . 2011 . Actin - depolymerizing factor homology domain : A conserved fold performing diverse roles in cytoskeletal dynamics . Cytoskeleton 68 : 471 – 490 . Pring M , Evangelista M , Boone C , Yang C , Zigmond SH . 2003 . Mecha - nism of formin - induced nucleation of actin ﬁlaments . Biochemistry 42 : 486 – 496 . Quinlan ME , Heuser JE , Kerkhoff E , Mullins RD . 2005 . Drosophila Spire is an actin nucleation factor . Nature 433 : 382 – 388 . Rao JN , Madasu Y , Dominguez R . 2014 . Mechanism of actin ﬁlament pointed - end capping by tropomodulin . Science 345 : 463 – 467 . Rebowski G , Namgoong S , Boczkowska M , Leavis PC , Navaza J , Dom - inguez R . 2010 . Structure of a longitudinal actin dimer assembled by tandem Wdomains : Implications for actin ﬁlament nucleation . J Mol Biol 403 : 11 – 23 . Robinson RC , Turbedsky K , Kaiser DA , Marchand JB , HiggsHN , Choe S , Pollard TD . 2001 . Crystal structure of Arp2 / 3 complex . Science 294 : 1679 – 1684 . Rosenblatt J , Peluso P , Mitchison TJ . 1995 . The bulk of unpolymerized actin in Xenopus egg extracts is ATP - bound . Mol Biol Cell 6 : 227 – 236 . Rottner K , Hanisch J , Campellone KG . 2010 . WASH , WHAMM , and JMY : Regulation of Arp2 / 3 complex and beyond . Trends Cell Biol 20 : 650 – 661 . Rotty JD , Wu C , Bear JE . 2013 . New insights into the regulation and cellular functions of the ARP2 / 3 complex . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 14 : 7 – 12 . Rouiller I , Xu XP , Amann KJ , Egile C , Nickell S , Nicastro D , Li R , Pollard TD , Volkmann N , Hanein D . 2008 . The structural basis of actin ﬁlament branching by the Arp2 / 3 complex . J Cell Biol 180 : 887 – 895 . Safer D , Elzinga M , Nachmias VT . 1991 . Thymosin b 4 and Fx , an actin - sequestering peptide , are indistinguishable . J Biol Chem 266 : 4029 – 4032 . Schafer DA , Jennings PB , Cooper JA . 1998 . Rapid and efﬁcient puriﬁca - tion ofactin from nonmusclesources . CellMotilCytoskeleton 39 : 166 – 171 . Schutt CE , Myslik JC , Rozycki MD , Goonesekere NC , Lindberg U . 1993 . The structure of crystalline proﬁlin – b - actin . Nature 365 : 810 – 816 . Sept D , McCammon JA . 2001 . Thermodynamics and kinetics of actin ﬁlament nucleation . Biophys J 81 : 667 – 674 . Smith BA , Padrick SB , Doolittle LK , Daugherty - Clarke K , Correˆa IR Jr , Xu MQ , Goode BL , Rosen MK , Gelles J . 2013 . Three - color single molecule imaging shows WASP detachment from Arp2 / 3 complex triggers actin ﬁlament branch formation . Elife 2 : e01008 . Solomon JP , Page LJ , Balch WE , Kelly JW . 2012 . Gelsolin amyloidosis : Genetics , biochemistry , pathology and possible strategies for thera - peutic intervention . Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol 47 : 282 – 296 . Spang A , Saw JH , Jørgensen SL , Zaremba - Niedzwiedzka K , Martijn J , Lind AE , van Eijk R , Schleper C , Guy L , Ettema TJ . 2015 . Complex T . D . Pollard 16 Advanced Online Article . Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a018226 Harbor Laboratory Press at SERIALS / BIOMED LIB0175B on March 19 , 2016 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from archaea that bridge the gap between prokaryotes and eukaryotes . Na - ture 521 : 173 – 179 . ∗ Svitkina TM . 2016 . Actin cytoskeleton and actin - based motility . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 101101 / cshperspect . a018267 . ∗ Sweeney L . 2016 . Muscle contraction . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 101101 / cshperspect . a023200 . ∗ Sweeney L , Holzbaur E . 2016 . Motor proteins . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 01101 / cshperspect . a021931 . TiS - C , PollardTD . 2011 . Puriﬁcation of actin from ﬁssionyeast S . pombe and characterization offunctional differencesfrom muscle actin . J Biol Chem 286 : 5784 – 5792 . Ti S - C , Jurgenson C , Nolen BJ , Pollard TD . 2011 . Structural and bio - chemical characterization of two binding sites for nucleation promot - ing factor WASp - VCA on Arp2 / 3 complex . Proc Natl Acad Sci 108 : E463 – E471 . ∗ Titus MA . 2016 . Myosin - driven intracellular transport . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 101101 / cshperspect . a021972 . Urnavicius L , Zhang , Diamant AG , Schlager MA , Yu M , Patel NA , Rob - inson CV , Carter AP . 2015 . The K structure of the dynactin complex and its interaction with dynein . Science 347 : 1441 – 1446 . Vavylonis D , Kovar DR , O’Shaughnessy B , Pollard TD . 2006 . Model of formin - associated actin ﬁlament elongation . Mol Cell 21 : 455 – 466 . Vinson VK , De La Cruz EM , Higgs HN , Pollard TD . 1998 . Interactions of Acanthamoeba proﬁlin with actin and nucleotides bound to actin . Biochemistry 37 : 10871 – 10880 . von der Ecken J , Mu¨ller M , Lehman W , Manstein DJ , Penczek PA , Rauns - er S . 2014 . Structure of the F - actin - tropomyosin complex . Nature 519 : 114 – 117 . WagnerAR , LuanQ , LiuSL , NolenBJ . 2013 . Dip1deﬁnesaclassofArp2 / 3 complex activatorsthat function without preformed actin ﬁlaments . Curr Biol 23 : 1990 – 1998 . Weaver AM , Karginov AV , Kinley AW , Weed SA , Li Y , Parsons JT , Cooper JA . 2001 . Cortactin promotes and stabilizes Arp2 / 3 - induced actin ﬁlament network formation . Curr Biol 11 : 370 – 374 . Wegner A . 1976 . Head to tail polymerization of actin . J Mol Biol 108 : 139 – 150 . Xu J , Wirtz D , Pollard TD . 1998 . Dynamic cross - linking by a - actinin determines the mechanical properties of actin ﬁlament networks . J Biol Chem 273 : 9570 – 9576 . Xu Y , Moseley JB , Sagot I , Poy F , Pellman D , Goode BL , Eck MJ . 2004 . Crystal structures of a formin homology - 2 domain reveal a tethered dimer architecture . Cell 116 : 711 – 723 . Xue B , Leyrat C , Grimes JM , Robinson RC . 2014 . Structural basis of thymosin - b 4 / proﬁlin exchange leading to actin ﬁlament polymeriza - tion . Proc Natl Acad Sci 111 : E4596 – E4605 . Yao NY , Becker DJ , Broedersz CP , Depken M , Mackintosh FC , Pollak MR , Weitz DA . 2011 . Nonlinear viscoelasticity of actin transiently cross - linked with mutant a - actinin - 4 . J Mol Biol 411 : 1062 – 1071 . Ydenberg CA , Padrick SB , Sweeney MO , Gandhi M , Sokolova O , Goode BL . 2013 . GMF severs actin - Arp2 / 3 complex branch junctions by a coﬁlin - like mechanism . Curr Biol 23 : 1037 – 1045 . Actin and Actin - Binding Proteins Advanced Online Article . Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a018226 17 Harbor Laboratory Press at SERIALS / BIOMED LIB0175B on March 19 , 2016 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from published online March 17 , 2016 Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol Thomas D . Pollard Actin and Actin - Binding Proteins Subject Collection The Cytoskeleton Actin and Actin - Binding Proteins Thomas D . Pollard http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / cgi / collection / For additional articles in this collection , see Copyright © 2016 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press ; all rights reserved Harbor Laboratory Press at SERIALS / BIOMED LIB0175B on March 19 , 2016 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from