373 Review www . expert - reviews . com ISSN 1747 - 6348 © 2010 Expert Reviews Ltd 10 . 1586 / ERS . 10 . 28 Acute respiratory distress syndrome ( ARDS ) , as defined by the American – European Consensus Conference Committee , is a syndrome of inflammation and increased permeability asso - ciated with acute onset of hypoxemia ( partial arterial oxygen pressure / fractional inspired oxygen [ PaO 2 / FiO 2 ] ≤ 200 mmHg ) accom - panied by bilateral infiltrates on chest radio - graph that cannot be explained by , but may coexist with , left atrial or pulmonary capil - lary hypertension ( pulmonary artery occlu - sion pressure ≤ 18 mmHg ) [ 1 ] . The term acute lung injury ( ALI ) implies a milder degree of hypoxemia ( PaO 2 / FiO 2 ≤ 300 mmHg ) [ 1 ] . It was first described by Ashbaugh et al . in 1967 in 12 patients , seven ( 58 % ) of whom died [ 2 ] . Mechanical ventilation ( MV ) is an integral part of ARDS therapy , but like all treatments , inap - propriate application can lead to side effects , namely ventilator - induced lung injury ( VILI ) . To date , limiting VILI through lower tidal volumes is the only intervention proven to reduce mortal - ity in ARDS [ 3 ] . Patients randomized to a lower tidal volume ( 6 ml / kg ) ventilation strategy had a 22 % relative reduction in mortality compared with patients receiving 12 ml / kg [ 3 ] . Although mortality in patients with ALI / ARDS in large randomized controlled trials in the last decade is reported to have fallen by almost half [ 3 – 5 ] , a recent meta - analysis questions whether this is representative of real - world practice [ 6 , 7 ] . In this meta - analysis by Phua et al . , mortality did not decrease between 1994 and 2006 [ 6 ] . Moreover , mortality was lower in the controlled environ - ment of randomized trials than observational studies [ 6 ] , implying a contribution of potentially modifiable iatrogenic factors . Since the first report by Greenfield et al . dem - onstrated that MV with large tidal volumes and pressures alters the surface properties of canine lung extracts [ 8 ] , it became obvious in both in vitro and in vivo studies that although MV is a lifesaving tool in patients with ARDS , it can aggravate pre - existing or even cause de novo lung injury [ 9 ] . The central role of mechanotrans duction ( i . e . , the conversion of a mechanical stimulus into chemical activity ) in the pathogenesis of VILI is now well recog - nized . However , despite the progress made in the understanding of the mechanisms through which cells decorating the blood – gas barrier and lining the airways respond to mechanical stress and produce a local and systemic response [ 10 , 11 ] , the factors that define the stress and the actual stress to which cells are exposed is still unclear . The major reason for this uncertainty stems from the inherent limitations of cur - rently available imaging techniques to provide real - time information on the mechanics of indi - vidual alveoli . This article will focus on current Maria Plataki 1 and Rolf D Hubmayr †1 1 Thoracic Disease Research Unit , Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine , Mayo Clinic , 200 First Street SW , Rochester , MN 55905 , USA † Author for correspondence : Tel . : + 1 507 284 2301 Fax : + 1 507 284 4521 rhubmayr @ mayo . edu Although mechanical ventilation ( MV ) is a life - saving intervention for patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome ( ARDS ) , it can aggravate or cause lung injury , known as ventilator - induced lung injury ( VILI ) . The biophysical characteristics of heterogeneously injured ARDS lungs increase the parenchymal stress associated with breathing , which is further aggravated by MV . Cells , in particular those lining the capillaries , airways and alveoli , transform this strain into chemical signals ( mechanotransduction ) . The interaction of reparative and injurious mechanotransductive pathways leads to VILI . Several attempts have been made to identify clinical surrogate measures of lung stress / strain ( e . g . , density changes in chest computed tomography , lower and upper inflection points of the pressure – volume curve , plateau pressure and inflammatory cytokine levels ) that could be used to titrate MV . However , uncertainty about the topographical distribution of stress relative to that of the susceptibility of the cells and tissues to injury makes the existence of a single ‘global’ stress / strain injury threshold doubtful . K eywords : acute lung injury • acute respiratory distress syndrome • esophageal pressure • lung strain • lung stress • mechanical ventilation • mechanotransduction • plateau pressure • ventilator - induced lung injury The physical basis of ventilator‑induced lung injury Expert Rev . Resp . Med . 4 ( 3 ) , 373 – 385 ( 2010 ) For reprint orders , please contact reprints @ expert - reviews . com Expert Rev . Resp . Med . 4 ( 3 ) , ( 2010 ) 374 Review knowledge and controversies regarding the properties of injured lungs that contribute to the generation of stress from MV and render them sensitive to VILI ; efforts undertaken to define and measure lung stress and the effects of ventilatory management on its distribution ; the interconnectedness of different mechano - transductive responses and their potential role ( protective / repara - tive vs injurious ) and , finally , will cover evidence in support of injury mechanisms from large clinical trials . Biophysical properties of injured lungs Baby lung For almost two decades , ARDS was considered a homo ge - neous process associated with relatively uniform lung injury . Quantitative assessment of chest computed tomography ( CT ) images , however , revealed that the ARDS lung consists of nor - mally aerated , poorly aerated and nonaerated tissue , and the amount of normally aerated tissue is roughly equivalent to that of a healthy male child of 5 / 6 years [ 12 – 14 ] . This finding gave birth to the concept of ‘baby lung’ by Gattinoni [ 14 , 15 ] . The same group of authors also found that respiratory compliance is any well correlated only with the amount of normally aerated tissue and not with the amount of nonaerated tissue , and specific tissue compliance ( compliance / normally aerated tissue ) of the residual inflated lung is nearly normal [ 16 ] . These findings reinforced the idea that the ARDS lung is not stiff but small [ 15 ] . Thus , a large proportion of the delivered tidal volume gets distributed to the baby lung , placing it at risk of injury from overdistension [ 17 ] . The redistribution of the densities to the dependent portion of the lung after prone positioning indicated that baby lung is not a distinct anatomical structure [ 18 ] . It was hypothesized that increased lung weight due to accumulated edema raises super imposed pressure , and gas in the dependent lung regions is squeezed out by the heavy lung parenchyma above [ 15 , 16 , 19 ] . Dependent regions collapse at lower transpulmonary pressures ( P tp ) and reopen abruptly at an elevated opening pressure cor - responding to the lower inflection point ( LIP ) of the pressure – volume ( P – V ) curve , after which respiratory system compliance increases . The above interpretation of CT and P – V curve findings has since been challenged [ 20 ] . Gravitational CT grayscale gradi - ents correspond to gradients in regional air , and can be due to either gradients in alveolar size or gradients in water per alveolus . CT cannot distinguish between collapsed and fluid - filled alveoli and hence provide information on regional volume and stress [ 20 ] . In direct measurements of regional volume in edematous lungs , regional volumes in the dependent part of the lung were some - what larger than the corresponding volumes at the same airway pressure in the control state , even though regional ventilation was much smaller than that in the control state [ 21 ] . Moreover , when examining regional ventilation as a function of time , no evidence of abrupt opening , which could correspond to the LIP , was found [ 21 ] . The changes in the P – V curve described in ARDS patients are similar to those noted during the inflation of lungs rinsed with fluids of fixed surface tension [ 22 – 24 ] . The knee of the P – V curve corresponds to the pressure where the air – fluid interface enters the alveolus and describes the transition from the fluid - filled to the air - filled high - surface - tension state [ 25 ] . The alveolar tissue remains open during this transition . In agreement , a recent study of sub pleural alveoli in normal and hydrochloric acid - injured murine lungs using optical coherence tomography by Mertens et al . found that volume increases by alveolar expansion rather than recruitment in both normal and injured lungs [ 26 , 27 ] . Although there is agreement on the existence of airless depend - ent regions that contribute to the gas exchange abnormalities , atelectasis ( derived from the greek ‘ateles ektasis’ , which literally means incomplete expansion ) of these regions has completely dif - ferent implications for stress generation than if they are viewed as fluid - filled and expanded [ 11 ] . Altered vascular barrier function & surface tension Altered vascular barrier function is considered the main mecha - nism of both ARDS and VILI pathophysiology [ 9 , 28 ] . Increased elastance and resistance of edematous lungs is attributed to increased minimal surface tension caused by surfactant decrease and dysfunction [ 29 ] , airway block caused by air – liquid interfaces and bubble formation in small airways [ 30 – 32 ] , bronchoconstric - tion [ 33 , 34 ] , pneumoconstriction [ 35 ] and peribronchial edema [ 31 ] . Surfactant dysfunction is attributed to alveolar flooding and plasma protein - induced changes in surfactant properties [ 29 ] . MV may also specifically affect the endogenous surfactant system by influencing aggregate conversion through changes in alveolar surface area [ 29 ] . The increased surface tension promotes alveolar collapse , which is counterbalanced by interdependence mecha - nisms [ 36 ] . The resultant fall in interstitial pressure promotes fur - ther alveolar leaking from the malfunctioning vascular barrier , which increases as the mean radius of curvature of the air – liquid interface , and thus the alveolar liquid pressure falls [ 20 , 21 ] . Laser confocal [ 20 ] and electron microscopy [ 37 ] of edematous animal lungs shows that the alveoli are not collapsed , but rather com - pletely or partially flooded and that they contain air pockets of different sizes . Obstruction of conducting airways by liquid and foam could cause and preserve a nonuniform alveolar gas pressure in trapped air pockets that would explain the lack of increase in the vertical gradient of regional lung volume [ 21 ] . Liquid bridges and moving of air – liquid interfaces through conducting air - ways would increase impedance to regional ventilation , causing a reduction in tidal expansion of dependent regions that is restored after positive end - expiratory pressure ( PEEP ) application [ 21 ] . Moreover , the tension of an advancing air – liquid interface in a channel the size of a small airway and the pressure generated at the air – liquid interface when a collapsed wet tube is opened are capable of deforming and wounding lining cells [ 38 , 39 ] . The energy released during fracture of liquid bridges is also sufficient to injure neighboring cells [ 40 ] . Lung heterogeneity & interdependence Heterogeneity in local impedance to lung expansion has important implications for shear stress generation owing to inter dependence . Alveoli on the outside of the lung are exposed to P tp ( alveolar pres - sure minus pleural pressure ) , but within the lung the outside wall of one airspace is at the same time the inside wall of its neighboring Plataki & Hubmayr www . expert - reviews . com 375 Review unit [ 36 ] . In a homogeneously expanded lung , gas pressure in all interconnected airspaces is the same and approximates P tp . In non - uniformly expanded lungs , local distending pressures differ from P tp in such a manner as to reduce the nonuniformity of expan - sion [ 36 ] . When gas or liquid pressure differences exist between adjacent alveoli , such as in the ARDS lung , air space septa are deformed . Variations in shape or volume change the projected area over which distending forces of tissue attachments are distributed , thus changing local stress ( force per unit area ) . Tissue attachments between neighboring units with different pressure carry a shear stress that is substantially greater than average P tp [ 36 ] . Unravelling the interplay between the topographical distribu - tions of deforming stress and the attributes that render different structures susceptible to deforming stress is paramount for the understanding of VILI and its prevention . Effects of mechanical ventilation on the topographical distributions of parenchymal stress & strain Basic definitions & concepts Engineering terms have traditionally been used to describe the mechanical properties of tissues . More specifically , ‘stress’ is defined as the counterforce per unit of cross - sectional area of a structure that balances and reacts to an external load [ 41 ] . It has the same units as pressure , and in fact pressure is one special variety of stress . The associated deformation of the structure relative to its resting state is called ‘strain’ [ 41 ] . Although ideally the reference state is the unstressed state , the lung is always pre - stressed ( i . e . , P tp is not zero ) . Therefore , the choice of reference state ( volume ) is arbitrary and different authors have computed lung strain relative to total lung capacity [ 42 ] or , alternatively , relative to relaxation volume [ 43 ] . Needless to say , the choice of reference volume is critical if one wishes to interpret strain as a determinant of mechano transduction . Stress and strain are vectors , which can be expressed as directed orthogonally ( normal ) or tangentially ( shear ) to a plane of interest . The observation that the response of cells and tissues to normal stress often differs from that to shear stress is simply a reflection of the complex nonuniform geometrical arrangement of the molecu - lar stress / strain sensors in cells and tissues . Although continuum mechanics and linear elasticity theory provide a useful framework for thinking about lung deformation on a macroscopic scale , they are not suitable theories for modeling mechanotransduction on a cellular and molecular level [ 44 ] . The topographical distribution of parenchymal stress and strain of the normal lung is not uniform [ 45 – 48 ] because it is gov - erned by shape - matching constraints between two gravitationally deformed elastic solids : the lungs and the chest wall . The weight of the heart [ 49 , 50 ] and the effect of the abdomen on the diaphragm and thoracic cage [ 51 ] also affect lung shape and regional volume distribution , along with small - scale hetero geneity that still has not been explained by any gravitational mechanism [ 52 , 53 ] . The weight of the healthy lung itself is only a minor determinant of the nonuniform P tp [ 46 ] . In the case of the injured ‘heavy’ lung , although the pleural pressure gradient would be expected to increase , how this increase would reflect on regional volume is not straightforward [ 20 ] . The major force - bearing element in the lung is the connective tissue , which consists of three different systems interconnected with each other : an axial fiber network extending from the central airways to the alveolar ducts , a peripheral network extending centrally from the visceral pleura , and a parenchymal intersti - tium that is anchored at the elements of both [ 54 ] . The peripheral network is extended by changes in lung volume , whereas the line elements of the central network that form alveolar entrance rings are extended by surface tension on the alveolar walls [ 55 ] . The anatomical constituents of the connective tissue of the lung are the collagen and the elastic fibers , and the matrix in which they are embedded [ 56 ] . Their complex structural organization and interconnectedness along with surface tension at the air – liquid surface contribute to pulmonary elasticity [ 55 , 56 ] . Distortion of the connective tissue by mechanical forces is transferred through the extracellular matrix to the adhering cells [ 57 ] . Measurements of the macromechanical properties of the lung do not offer direct information regarding the micromechanics of the parenchyma . Interalveolar septa have pleats at the sites of septal junctions that unfold as lung volume increases and alveo - lar walls only get stretched at higher lung volumes [ 55 , 56 , 58 , 59 ] . Tschumperlin and Margulies found that , during an inspira - tory capacity maneuver , the alveolar basement membrane area increased by 35 % , which corresponded to a cell stretch of only approximately 15 % [ 60 ] . Therefore , strains computed from lung regions greater than 1 cm 3 greatly overestimate cell stretch [ 20 ] . Strengths & limitations of clinically derived stress / strain surrogates Imaging techniques Better insights into ARDS and VILI pathophysiology changed the goals of MV from obtaining normal blood gases to accom - plishing the minimum necessary gas exchange while protecting the lung . Clinically derived stress and strain surrogates ( B ox 1 ) have to be employed in order to evaluate different ventilation strate - gies . CT has led the way in enhancing the understanding of the heterogeneity of lung injury in ARDS and has since been used to test the effect of different ventilator settings . The CT density of the lung is defined by the amount of alveolar gas , tissue , blood and water [ 18 ] . Density is a ratio of gas / tissue or water and thus , in cases of increased density , CT cannot differentiate between tissue and water . More specifically , CT cannot differentiate between atelectatic ( collapsed ) and edematous tissue . Moreover , the anatomical structures included in one voxel , the ‘CT pulmo - nary unit’ , may range from one to several acini depending on the resolution of the CT and the status of the lung [ 18 ] . CT scans can detect recruitment , defined as the difference in nonaerated tissue under different ventilatory conditions [ 16 ] , and hyperinflation , defined as an increased gas / tissue ratio [ 18 ] . CT has highlighted the importance of the individuality of lung injury distribution in patients with ARDS to potential responses to MV and VILI [ 61 , 62 ] . It has been used extensively to study the effects of different levels of PEEP in an effort to find a ventilatory strategy that confers the most recruitment with the least hyperinflation [ 62 – 65 ] . It is important to stress , however , that it cannot give any information The physical basis of ventilator - induced lung injury Expert Rev . Resp . Med . 4 ( 3 ) , ( 2010 ) 376 Review on overdistension , stress or strain . A lung may be overdistended and not hyperinflated and vice versa [ 18 ] . Finally , its usefulness in setting the parameters of MV in everyday clinical practice given the levity of ARDS patients and the amount of radiation exposure is limited . Lung ultrasound can also demonstrate loss of aeration and increased amount of lung tissue / water in the form of ‘comet tails’ in critically ill patients with ALI / ARDS [ 66 ] and provide information on reaeration in patients with ventilator - associated pneumonia [ 67 ] . Given its ease of application , it could perhaps be used to provide information on recruitment after PEEP changes , but it would not reveal any specific information on lung stress / strain . Macromechanical measurements In ARDS , ‘one size does not fit all’ [ 68 ] , and measurements of the macromechanical properties of the respiratory system have been used to estimate global lung stress / strain and adapt ventilator settings to individual characteristics of lung injury . Initially the LIP and upper inflection point ( UIP ) of the characteristic static P – V curve were considered to represent pressures below which alveolar derecruitment took place and above which overdistension occured , respectively [ 69 ] . It was soon demonstrated , however , that alveolar recruitment occurs throughout the P – V curve up to the highest pressure studied [ 70 , 71 ] . Assuming normal chest wall mechanics , the plateau pressure ( P plat ; i . e . , the airway pres - sure during an end - inspiratory occlusion maneuver ) is a surrogate measure of peak P tp ( i . e . , peak lung stress ) . Based on this reason - ing , many experts recommend limiting P plat to < 30 cmH 2 0 [ 72 ] . However , there is now ample evidence that chest wall mechanics in patients with ARDS are abnormal [ 73 – 75 ] and that peak lung stress may not be the only or even the most important determi - nant of VILI [ 76 , 77 ] . For example , a post hoc ana lysis of the ARDS network’s low tidal volume trial suggested that reducing tidal volume from 12 to 6 ml / kg was beneficial even in patients with P plat values significantly below 30 cmH 2 O [ 78 ] . Chiumello et al . measured esophageal pressure ( P es ) as a sur - rogate of pleural pressure in order to calculate lung stress ; they defined lung strain as the fractional volume change between func - tional residual capacity ( FRC ) , the volume at zero end - expiratory pressure and end - inspiration [ 43 ] . They observed considerable vari - ability between subjects in apparent maximal lung stress and strain because chest - wall mechanics and the volume of non recruitable lung varied considerably between patients [ 43 ] . On this basis , they suggested that P plat and tidal volume are inadequate surrogates of lung mechanics on which to base ventilator manage ment deci - sions [ 43 ] . However , the implication that threshold values of peak stress and strain as defined by Chiumello et al . are useful guides of VILI risk have been challenged [ 79 ] . In material science , the change in stress is determined by the product of the material’s elastic modulus , which is a measure of its stiffness , and strain ( i . e . , its corresponding deformation ) . Accordingly , Chiumello et al . substituted D P tp for D stress and the fractional change in lung volume between end - inflation and relaxed end - expiration for strain . The relationship between stress and strain was fairly linear and , surprisingly , its slope ( the elastic / bulk modulus of the lung ) was fairly normal . Notwithstanding the uncertain confounding by lung recruitment during inflation , this suggested that the mechanical properties of the ‘open lung’ ( the bulk modulus of Gattinoni’s baby lung ) were near normal . While it is fair to assume that esophageal manometry yielded a reasonable estimate of the change on P tp , there is considerable con - cern about systematic bias ( the ‘so - called’ mediastinal artifact ) in specific P tp values , including those at end - inspiration . Therefore , the poor correlation between P plat and the lung stress estimate at end - inflation could reflect some combination of between - subject variability in chest wall recoil pressure , in measurement bias and in the amounts of recruitable lung . A gas dilution technique for measuring thoracic gas volume in intubated patients has recently been made available for clini - cal use . Chiumello et al . used a nitrogen washout technique to measure the lung volume of patients with ARDS at zero end - expiratory pressure ( FRC ) and found that volumes varied a great deal between individuals . This is of interest insofar as current tidal volume setting guidelines are based on predicted body weight ( PBW ) and as such are relatively insensitive to the severity of lung injury . PBW scales with the size of the normal lung , but not with that of the injured lung [ 80 , 81 ] . Consequently , Chiumello et al . were able to show that using current guidelines the lungs of patients with a small FRC are exposed to much larger deforma - tions than those of patients with a relatively normal FRC . To emphasize this point , Chiumello et al . computed strain as the volume change between FRC and end - inspiration , normalized by FRC ( strain = D V / FRC ) , and implied that strains greater than 2 Box 1 . Clinical surrogates used for the estimation of lung stress / strain and experimental tools in the investigation of macro - and micro - mechanics . Clinically derived stress / strain surrogates Imaging techniques • Chest computed tomography • Lung ultrasound Macromechanical measures • LIP and UIP of static P – V curve • P plat • P es – Change in P tp during inspiration – Absolute values of P tp at end - expiration and end - inspiration Experimental tools Lung elastography ( macromechanics ) • Magnetic resonance elastography • Ultrasound elastography Intravital microscopy ( micromechanics ) • Real - time confocal microscopy • Optical coherence tomography • Atomic force microscopy LIP : Lower inflection point ; P es : Esophageal pressure ; P plat : Plateau pressure ; P tp : Transpulmonary pressure ; P – V : Pressure – volume ; UIP : Upper inflection point . Plataki & Hubmayr www . expert - reviews . com 377 Review might be injurious . However , this is unfortunate because strain , as defined by Chiumello et al . , ignores the independent effects of tidal volume and PEEP on lung injury ( F igure 1 ) . As early as 1974 , Web and Tierney showed that lung injury in rats ventilated with a peak inspiratory pressure of 45 cmH 2 O and no PEEP was much greater than when they were ventilated to the same peak pressure but with 10 cmH 2 O PEEP [ 82 ] . In contrast to Chiumello et al . , Talmor and Loring have used the absolute values of airway occlusion pressure and P es to calcu - late lung stress ( P tp ) at end - inspiration and relaxed end - expira - tion [ 75 – 77 ] . In 70 patients with acute respiratory failure , only 24 % of the variance in apparent P tp was explained by airway pressure , and 52 % was due to variation in P es [ 75 ] . Interestingly , the appar - ent end - expiratory P tp was often negative [ 75 – 77 ] . This suggested that the injured lung is compressed by pleural effusions and the weight of the abdominal contents and that much higher values of PEEP are required to counterbalance this compressive force than are used in conventional clinical practice . The dilemma arising from this conclusion is the concern for stress injury in those parts of the lung that are not exposed to compressive stress , namely , the already ‘open’ largely nondependent baby lung . For P es to accurately reflect pleural pressure , the pressure meas - ured in the esophageal balloon has to accurately represent the pressure in the esophagus ; the transmural pressure of the esopha - gus should be zero ; the esophagus should not be compressed by the heart or other mediastinal structures ; and the pressure in the mediastinum surrounding the esophagus should be equal to pleural pressure [ 83 , 84 ] . P es can exhibit variations unrelated to pleural pressure depending on the position of the balloon in the esophagus [ 85 ] , on the volume of air inside the balloon [ 86 ] or on postural artifacts [ 87 ] . There is general agreement among experts that , if calibrated and positioned appropriately , P es may be used to estimate pleural pressure change during breathing in normal man . This is because when near resting volume the nor - mal lung is fluid - like and hence regional variability in changes in pleural pressure is relatively small . But at high volumes and high prestress the lung becomes stiff and even small deviations from the shape that would have been observed in a uniformly inflated state produce large local stress gradients [ 88 ] . The stress distribution in the injured lung of the ARDS patient is even more heterogeneous , because altered barrier properties promote alveolar flooding , occlusion of small airways by liquid plugs , small - scale variability in surface tension and varying degrees of gas absorption atelectasis [ 20 ] . Pelosi et al . compared P es and pleural pressure recorded by pressure transducers placed directly in the pleural space in oleic - acid - injured dogs and found that the variations of pleural pressure and P es were correlated [ 71 ] . The absolute values of P es , however , did not always correlate with pleural pressure for all regions of the lung [ 71 ] . Given the greatly increased topographical variability in sur - face pressure of injured lungs , the chance that the pressure any - where along the lumen of the esophagus , especially in depend - ent areas surrounded by pleural effusion , informs about the average lung stress is slim [ 88 ] . Negative P tp may be attributed to airway closure during exhalation that causes alveolar gas trapping and under estimation of alveolar pressure by airway pressure [ 76 , 77 ] . Alternatively , P tp is biased by units that are closed and extrinsically compressed by pleural fluid and / or the weight of abdominal contents [ 88 ] . Pleural pressure is probably lower and P tp higher in the non dependent lung . The authors consider P es as an estimate of global pleural pressures [ 89 ] and “an indica - tor , albeit imperfect , of an effective pleural pressure in critically ill patients” [ 76 ] . However , those concerned with lung injury attributable to hyperinflation might argue that knowing average pleural pressure and consequently average lung stress misses the point . PEEP should be titrated so that maximal stress , namely that acting on nondependent , already recruited units , can be maintained below some yet to be defined injury threshold . Until we learn how to measure that stress , it is unlikely that the debate about ‘best PEEP’ will arrive at an informed conclusion . Strain TLC VEI VEE FRC Figure 1 . Chiumello et al . computed strain as the volume change between functional residual capacity and end - inspiration , normalized by functional residual capacity ( strain = D V / FRC ) . They were able to show that by titrating tidal volume ( VT ) to predicted body weight , the lungs of patients with a small FRC are exposed to much larger deformations than those of patients with relatively normal FRC . The above definition of strain ignores the independent effects of VT and positive end - expiratory pressure on lung injury . FRC : Functional residual capacity ; TLC : Total lung capacity ; VEE : Volume at end - expiration with positive end - expiratory pressure ; VEI : Volume at end - inspiration . Data from [ 43 ] . The physical basis of ventilator - induced lung injury Expert Rev . Resp . Med . 4 ( 3 ) , ( 2010 ) 378 Review Experimental tools in the investigation of macro - & micro - mechanics Lung elastography Efforts have been made to apply imaging techniques for the mapping of the elastic properties of lung tissue ( B ox 1 ) . Magnetic resonance elastography ( MRE ) is a phase - contrast technique that encodes synchronized cyclic shear wave displacements into the phase of the MR signal followed by estimation of the spatial fre - quency of the shear wave [ 90 – 92 ] . The shear modulus is calculated by determining the local shear wavelength from the shear wave displacement maps . It can spatially map shear stiffness ( shear stress / shear strain ) of tissue - like materials . The intrinsically low signal - to - noise ratio of lung parenchyma makes lung MRE chal - lenging . Moreover , the application of shear waves to the lung is not practical owing to the presence of the chest wall and the pleural space . Recently , the feasibility of using conventional 1 H MRE in a small animal model was demonstrated [ 90 ] . Although the magni - tude of the signal within the lung was low , there remained enough phase coherence to encode phase displacements from the shear wave . This technique was capable of spatially resolving differences in shear modulus associated with changes in inflation pressure and the introduction of fluid into the lung . Both the use of 1 H and 3 H MRE in animal models have shown that shear stiffness of the lung parenchyma increases with inflation pressure [ 90 – 92 ] . Similar ‘proof of concept’ observations were recently made using an ultrasound - based surface wave method for noninvasively meas - uring the viscoelasticity of lungs [ 93 ] . Lessons from intravital microscopy Conventional histological techniques may not reflect in vivo architecture . Most fixatives alter tissue architecture [ 94 ] and the lung volume history prior to fixation affects the degree of unfold - ing or stretching of the alveolar epithelium [ 95 ] . The extent to which cells undergo mechanical deformation with changes in lung inflation remains elusive , even in the normal lung during tidal breathing [ 96 ] . Morphometric studies on perfusion - fixed lung tissue suggest that alveolar walls unfold and stretch only at high tidal volumes [ 59 , 60 ] . Perlman and Bhattacharya applied real - time confocal microsopy in an isolated perfused rat lung to image the alveolar perimeter distention of single alveoli , divided the perimeter into five – eight segments and determined their lengths [ 97 ] . Hyperinflation to 20 cmH 2 O from 5 cmH 2 O increased mean segment length by only 14 % . Segment distention was heterogeneous , even within the same alveolus . On the contrary , a series of intravital microscopy studies in animals with both normal and injured lungs suggest that the main mechanism of alveolar volume change is recruit - ment / de recruitment [ 98 – 103 ] . Interpretation of the results of those studies is confounded by methodological issues . Lung injury was inflicted by surfactant deactivation , images of subpleural alveoli in the apical nondependent part of the lung were examined , mechan - ics of subpleural alveoli may have been influenced by their cou - pling to the visceral pleura , and the pleural surface pressure was altered by thoracotomy and gentle suction applied to hold the lung under the coverslip . Recently , Mertens et al . examined P – V changes of subpleu - ral alveoli in normal and hydrochloric acid - injured mouse lungs using optical coherence tomography . They concluded that volume increases by alveolar expansion and not recruitment in both mod - els [ 27 ] . Preferential loss of compliance in small alveolar clusters redistributed tidal volume to larger alveoli , which increased spatial heterogeneity in alveolar inflation in the injury model . It is worth noting that the optical coherence tomography probe does not need to be in contact with the tissue . Thus , instead of applying suction , a ribcage window was covered by a transparent polyvinylidine membrane and gas was removed from the pleural space with a transdiaphragmatic catheter . This study was also confounded by the examination of subpleural alveoli in the nondependent part of the lung [ 26 ] . Apart from the contribution of the heterogeneity of stress dis - tribution in the whole lung and at the individual alveolar level to lung injury , responses to deformation on a cellular or even subcel - lular level have been investigated . Even though the extracellular matrix is considered to be the main load - bearing element in the lung , mechanical properties of alveolar cells or cellular compart - ments can influence mechanotransduction . Azeloglu et al . used atomic force microscopy indentation in combination with fluores - cence imaging to map the elastic modulus distribution in alveolar epithelial type I and II cells and fibroblasts [ 104 ] . They reported phenotypic differences in biomechanical properties of the cells , but also of different cellular compartments . Berrios et al . have pre - viously shown using magnetic twisting cytometry that the state of differentiation and the application of deforming stresses can influence the mechanical properties of type II cells in culture [ 105 ] . Therefore , mechanical properties and responses to uniform defor - mations may be different and modifiable in diff erent cell types or even within different compartments of the same cell type in the alveolus . Despite the existing limitations , intravital imaging techniques ( B ox 1 ) may shed some light on stress - related pathology at the alveoli level in the experimental setting . Mechanotransduction From macromechanics to mechanotransduction Mechanotransduction refers to the conversion of mechani - cal stimuli into chemical signals and is ultimately executed by the cell [ 106 ] . The lung is a dynamic organ subjected to vary - ing mechanical forces during normal breathing , and through mechano transduction those forces influence lung development and metabolism [ 96 ] . MV applies a force to the lung and can pro - duce injury both by direct mechanical distortion and by influenc - ing mechano transduction . The extent of the injury depends on the magnitude and rate of application of the force . In other words , lung stress and strain depend on maximum pressure and volume , but also on the amount and rate of P – V change [ 17 , 82 , 107 , 108 ] . For reasons outlined previously , stress distribution is not uniform and therefore individual alveoli , depending on their location and their state of recruitment , are exposed to different levels of stress [ 36 ] . Even within the same alveolus , strain may not be uniform [ 97 ] . The major load - bearing structures of the alveolus are the extracellular matrix that is composed of collagen , elastic Plataki & Hubmayr www . expert - reviews . com 379 Review fibers and proteoglycans , each of which is characterized by dif - ferent mechanical behavior and surface tension [ 56 ] . Cells then sense mechanical forces via receptors and adhesion complexes that connect the cytoskeleton to the extracellular matrix [ 57 ] . Different cell types and even different compartments of the same cell type not only have different mechanical properties [ 104 ] , but also the ability to modify these properties in response to various stimuli [ 11 , 105 ] and are therefore subjected to different strains . VILI is then mediated through uncompensated cell deforma - tion [ 11 ] and surfactant inactivation [ 29 ] , which in turn increase alveolar instability [ 20 ] and heterogeneity in regional mechan - ics [ 36 ] further raising cell and tissue stress [ 36 ] . Even if the stress applied to the lungs of two different patients is the same , the force actually reaching individual cell elements and the corresponding response ( mechanotransduction ) can be quite heterogeneous and variable . Given the regional variability of stress as well as the vari - ability in the susceptibility of different lung structures to stress , the existence of a single ‘global’ stress / strain injury threshold is questionable [ 43 , 76 , 79 ] . Mechanotransductive pathways & their significance as surrogate markers of lung injury The microscopic alterations described in experimental VILI include interstitial and intra - alveolar edema , endothelial lesions , inter - and intracellular gap formations , denuded basement mem - brane and epithelial cell membrane disruption [ 11 ] . Some of these findings could represent an active remodeling response in an effort to adapt to strain and are not necessarily the result of stress fail - ure [ 11 ] . Gajic et al . observed that after removal of the injurious stress , 60 % of injured cells repair plasma membrane defects [ 109 ] . In vitro experiments have shown that living cells attempt to adapt to deformation through matrix and cyto - skeletal remodeling [ 110 – 112 ] and regulation of cell surface area and plasma membrane tension [ 113 – 116 ] . The susceptibility to stress failure varies not only with strain ampli - tude but also with strain rate [ 114 ] . Failure to activate protective mechanisms or failure of those mechanisms to repair injured cells could lead to the release of the intra cellular contents , which would in turn initiate an immune and inflammatory response ( i . e . , biotrauma ) [ 117 – 120 ] . It is noteworthy that not all of these changes are necessarily observed simulta - neously . For example , epithelial gaps and endothelial lesions have been described in the absence of cell necrosis [ 121 , 122 ] and increases in the mRNA expression of extracellular matrix proteins have been measured in the absence of alveolar cell breaks [ 123 ] . Although plasma membrane wounding causes activation of stress response genes followed by the induction of proinflammatory signaling , stress can also trigger the release of proinflammatory cytokines in the absence of gross cell injury [ 124 – 126 ] . In a model of low - volume injury , D’Angelo et al . found alterations in lung mechanics and an increase in lung water that were not associated with an increase in pro inflammatory cytokine TNF - a [ 127 ] . Therefore , in differ - ent models of stress injury , edema can develop in the absence of cell membrane wounding or inflammation , and inflammation can be upregulated in the absence of gross cell injury . Animal models of experimental lung injury , which are confounded by the differences in immune and inflammatory responses com - pared with humans , do not fully reproduce the features of human lung injury , exhibiting either impaired vascular permeability and impaired surface tension or inflammatory changes , but seldom all three [ 128 ] . Edema , altered tissue mechanics , cellular stress fail - ure and the innate immune response may all act synergistically , but could also be manifestations of different injury pathways ( F igure 2 ) . Whether they represent different stages of the same response or whether different amounts of stress initiate different mechanisms and which of those are really important for the final clinical picture are questions to be answered [ 129 ] . Evidence on VILI from clinical trials The extensive research that has provided insights on defor - mation - induced lung injury has mainly involved in vitro and animal experiments . Several studies have tried to translate these findings in clinical practice in order to design ‘protec - tive’ mechanical ventilation strategies . Protective mechanical ventilation has focused on two variables , the choice of tidal volume and ‘best PEEP’ . After three negative or inconclusive trials [ 69 , 130 , 131 ] and a small single - center study that suggested benefit of an open lung strategy [ 132 ] , the ARDS Network trial Stress Strain Mechanotransduction Biotrauma Injury Repair Edema Cellular stress Failure Airway pressure Tidal volume Esophageal pressure Lung elastography Figure 2 . Mechanical ventilation applies an additional stress to the prestressed lung and the resulting strain is transformed by cells into chemical signals . Edema , cellular stress failure and the innate immune response may act synergistically , but may also be manifestations of different injury pathways . The interaction of injurious and protective / reparative mechanotransductive pathways leads to ventilator - induced lung injury . Airway pressure and tidal volume are widely used in clinical practice as surrogate markers of lung stress / strain . Given their limitations , however , other measures , such as esophageal manometry and lung elastography , are under investigation . The physical basis of ventilator - induced lung injury Expert Rev . Resp . Med . 4 ( 3 ) , ( 2010 ) 380 Review unequivocally settled the tidal volume question . Patients ven - tilated with 6 ml / kg PBW and a P plat of 30 cmH 2 O or less compared with 12 ml / kg PBW had a 22 % relative mortality reduction [ 3 ] . The lack of significant outcome difference in the negative trials was attributed to the smaller difference in tidal volume settings between treatment arms [ 20 ] . In a retrospective study of patients who developed ALI after the onset of mechan - ical ventilation , the use of large tidal volume was an independent risk factor for ALI ( odds ratio 1 . 3 for every ml above 6 ml / kg PBW ) [ 133 ] . This and a series of subsequent reports focusing on the ventilatory management of patients with normal lungs in the operating room [ 134 – 136 ] strongly suggest that MV with tidal volumes above 10 ml / kg PBW initiates a proinflammatory immune response and is probably harmful in some cases . The extent to which tidal volume and P plat should be reduced in patients with ALI remains controversial . Those who consider peak lung stress and overinflation as primary injury mechanisms had argued that tidal volume reductions were less important in patients with low P plat . However , in a post hoc analysis of the ARDS Network low tidal volume trial , a safe P plat , below which there would be no beneficial effect of further tidal volume reduction , could not be identified [ 78 ] . Until there is greater clarity on the relative risks of overinflation versus under - recruitment , not to mention the confounding influences of alveolar ventilation and local CO 2 tension on surfactant function , vascular barrier proper - ties and innate immune responses , this issue will not be settled in the foreseeable future [ 137 – 140 ] . The open lung strategy entails opening the lung with a recruitment maneuver and then keeping it open by the appli - cation of PEEP or gradually opening the lung with stepwise increases in PEEP , thus preventing tidal recruitment / derecruit - ment . The value of PEEP in the treatment of ARDS is even mentioned by Ashbaugh in the original description of ARDS [ 2 ] . Nevertheless , higher PEEP levels repeatedly failed to be asso - ciated with improved mortality . The lack of beneficial effects has been attributed to suboptimal PEEP titration . Two studies set PEEP according to predetermined tables of PEEP – FiO 2 combinations [ 4 , 141 ] . Gas exchange , however , is not the most informative surrogate marker of micromechanical alterations . Limiting tidal volume and P plat may not be sufficient to avoid hyperinflation [ 142 ] and PEEP is likely to increase hyperinflation in some patients [ 143 ] . Thus , the need to customize lung - pro - tective ventilation according to individual patient mechanics became obvious . Mercat et al . titrated PEEP to reach a P plat of 28 – 30 cm H 2 O and failed to show benefit [ 144 ] . By study design , patients with more severe lung injury and lower respiratory system compliance received lower levels of PEEP . Grasso et al . used the stress index , which is a monitoring tool that calculates hyper inflation over recruitment / derecruitment based on the curvature of the pressure – time tracing during constant flow ventilation on a breath - by - breath basis [ 145 ] . The stress index revealed hyper inflation in all patients during the ARDS net - work strategy and PEEP was decreased . Plasma concentrations of inflammatory markers were significantly lower during the ‘stress index’ ventilation . Talmor et al . used P es measurements to calculate P tp and found a great percentage of patients with estimated negative P tp at end - expiration [ 75 ] . They considered those patients to be at risk for tidal derecruitment [ 75 , 89 ] . In a subsequent study , they used P es to increase PEEP to a level that corresponded to positive end - expiratory P tp , sometimes at the cost of high P plat [ 77 ] . This strategy was associated with significant improvements in oxygenation and respiratory sys - tem compliance , paralleled by a strong trend towards increased survival and shorter durations of MV . In aggregate , to date , all trials aimed at defining ‘best PEEP’ in patients with ALI are limited by uncertainty about the topo - graphical distribution of stress and the corresponding suscep - tibility of different lung structures to stress . Those who believe in ‘opening the lung’ have pursued this quest with relative disregard for high inflation pressures , while those concerned with hyperinflation keep pushing for lower P plat targets , thereby accepting lower PEEP , tidal volume , oxygenation and alveolar ventilation targets . Expert commentary Ventilator - induced lung injury is an insidious process , the clini - cal expressions of which may lag causal management choices by hours or even days . Clinicians , who must choose a ventilator setting , are understandably influenced by physiologic response variables , which can be easily measured and which provide immediate feedback to a change in therapy , namely , airway pres - sure and arterial oxygen tension . However , it is not always clear whether these are appropriate surrogates of efficacy . Therefore , advances in lung protective mechanical ventilation await a refined means of being able to measure the topographical dis - tribution of parenchymal stress and strain and the consequences of management decisions on them . In their absence , the debate , regarding whether it is more important to recruit as opposed to worry about injury from hyperinflation , will probably continue . Five - year view In the coming 5 years we will hopefully learn if lung stress - guided ventilator management is superior to airway pres - sure - guided management . Esophageal manometry and the less - established elastography techniques should make this pos - sible . The lessons would undoubtedly inform the debate about specific biophysical determinants of injury and their relative impact on patient outcomes . They will have to be integrated with experimental and clinical research on topics such as per - missive hypoxemia , therapeutic hypercapnia and on molecular mechanotransduction mechanisms . Financial & competing interests disclosure This study was supported by NIH grant HL63178 . The authors have no other relevant affiliations or financial involvement with any organization or entity with a financial interest in or financial conflict with the subject matter or materials discussed in the manuscript apart from those disclosed . No writing assistance was utilized in the production of this manuscript . Plataki & Hubmayr www . expert - reviews . com 381 Review References Papers of special note have been highlighted as : • of interest •• of considerable interest 1 Bernard GR , Artigas A , Brigham KL et al . The American – European Consensus Conference on ARDS . Definitions , mechanisms , relevant outcomes , and clinical trial coordination . Am . J . Respir . Crit . Care Med . 149 ( 3 Pt 1 ) , 818 – 824 ( 1994 ) . 2 Ashbaugh DG , Bigelow DB , Petty TL , Levine BE . Acute respiratory distress in adults . Lancet 2 ( 7511 ) , 319 – 323 ( 1967 ) . • The first description of 12 adult patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome ( ARDS ) . 3 Ventilation with lower tidal volumes as compared with traditional tidal volumes for acute lung injury and the acute respiratory distress syndrome . The Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome Network . N . Engl . J . Med . 342 ( 18 ) , 1301 – 1308 ( 2000 ) . •• ARDS Network study demonstrating benefit by comparing mortality with a tidal volume of 6 versus 12 ml / kg predicted bodyweight in patients with ARDS . 4 Brower RG , Lanken PN , MacIntyre N et al . Higher versus lower positive end - expiratory pressures in patients with the acute respiratory distress syndrome . N . Engl . J . Med . 351 ( 4 ) , 327 – 336 ( 2004 ) . 5 Steinberg KP , Hudson LD , Goodman RB et al . Efficacy and safety of corticosteroids for persistent acute respiratory distress syndrome . N . Engl . J . Med . 354 ( 16 ) , 1671 – 1684 ( 2006 ) . 6 Phua J , Badia JR , Adhikari NK et al . Has mortality from acute respiratory distress syndrome decreased over time ? A systematic review . Am . J . Respir . Crit . Care Med . 179 ( 3 ) , 220 – 227 ( 2009 ) . 7 Zambon M , Vincent JL . Mortality rates for patients with acute lung injury / ARDS have decreased over time . Chest 133 ( 5 ) , 1120 – 1127 ( 2008 ) . 8 Greenfield LJ , Ebert PA , Benson DW . Effect of positive pressure ventilation on surface tension properties of lung extracts . Anesthesiology 25 , 312 – 316 ( 1964 ) . 9 Dreyfuss D , Saumon G . Ventilator - induced lung injury : lessons from experimental studies . Am . J . Respir . Crit . Care Med . 157 ( 1 ) , 294 – 323 ( 1998 ) . •• Comprehensive review of findings from experimental studies on the mechanisms of ventilator - induced lung injury ( VILI ) . 10 Vlahakis NE , Hubmayr RD . Response of alveolar cells to mechanical stress . Curr . Opin . Crit . Care 9 ( 1 ) , 2 – 8 ( 2003 ) . 11 Vlahakis NE , Hubmayr RD . Cellular stress failure in ventilator - injured lungs . Am . J . Respir . Crit . Care Med . 171 ( 12 ) , 1328 – 1342 ( 2005 ) . •• Excellent review of the mechanisms through which lung cells respond to deformation and discussion of their relevance in the context of VILI . 12 Gattinoni L , Pesenti A , Torresin A et al . Adult respiratory distress syndrome profiles by computed tomography . J . Thorac . Imag . 3 , 25 – 30 ( 1986 ) . 13 Maunder RJ , Shuman WP , McHugh JW , Marglin SI , Butler J . Preservation of normal lung regions in the adult respiratory distress syndrome . Analysis by computed tomography . JAMA 255 ( 18 ) , 2463 – 2465 ( 1986 ) . 14 Gattinoni L , Pesenti A . ARDS : the non - homogeneous lung ; facts and hypothesis . Intensive Crit . Care Dig . 6 , 1 – 4 ( 1987 ) . 15 Gattinoni L , Pesenti A . The concept of ‘baby lung’ . Intensive Care Med . 31 ( 6 ) , 776 – 784 ( 2005 ) . • Review of the findings that led the author to formulate the idea of the ‘baby lung’ and its subsequent implications . 16 Gattinoni L , Pesenti A , Avalli L , Rossi F , Bombino M . Pressure – volume curve of total respiratory system in acute respiratory failure . Computed tomographic scan study . Am . Rev . Resp . Dis . 136 ( 3 ) , 730 – 736 ( 1987 ) . 17 Dreyfuss D , Soler P , Basset G , Saumon G . High inflation pressure pulmonary edema . Respective effects of high airway pressure , high tidal volume , and positive end - expiratory pressure . Am . Rev . Resp . Dis . 137 ( 5 ) , 1159 – 1164 ( 1988 ) . 18 Gattinoni L , Caironi P , Pelosi P , Goodman LR . What has computed tomography taught us about the acute respiratory distress syndrome ? Am . J . Respir . Crit . Care Med . 164 ( 9 ) , 1701 – 1711 ( 2001 ) . 19 Bone RC . The ARDS lung . New insights from computed tomography . JAMA 269 ( 16 ) , 2134 – 2135 ( 1993 ) . 20 Hubmayr RD . Perspective on lung injury and recruitment : a skeptical look at the opening and collapse story . Am . J . Respir . Crit . Care Med . 165 ( 12 ) , 1647 – 1653 ( 2002 ) . •• Insightful review that challenges the traditional concept of the injured dependent ARDS lung as atelectatic versus flooded . 21 Martynowicz MA , Minor TA , Walters BJ , Hubmayr RD . Regional expansion of oleic acid - injured lungs . Am . J . Respir . Crit . Care Med . 160 ( 1 ) , 250 – 258 ( 1999 ) . 22 Smith JC , Stamenovic D . Surface forces in lungs . I . Alveolar surface tension - lung volume relationships . J . Appl . Physiol . 60 ( 4 ) , 1341 – 1350 ( 1986 ) . 23 Stamenovic D , Smith JC . Surface forces in lungs . III . Alveolar surface tension and elastic properties of lung parenchyma . J . Appl . Physiol . 60 ( 4 ) , 1358 – 1362 ( 1986 ) . 24 Stamenovic D , Smith JC . Surface forces in lungs . II . Microstructural mechanics and lung stability . J . Appl . Physiol . 60 ( 4 ) , 1351 – 1357 ( 1986 ) . 25 Wilson TA , Anafi RC , Hubmayr RD . Mechanics of edematous lungs . J . Appl . Physiol . 90 ( 6 ) , 2088 – 2093 ( 2001 ) . Key issues • Ventilator - induced lung injury can result from overdistension of nondependent and already open lung units or from under - recruitment of dependent nonaerated units . Both regions coexist in the heterogeneously injured acute respiratory distress syndrome - lung to varying degrees . • Ventilatory strategies that aim to maximize recruitment of dependent regions through the application of high positive end - expiratory pressure put nondependent regions at risk of injury from overdistension . • Ventilatory strategies that aim to minimize the risk of injuring nondependent regions by overdistension implicitly accept the risk of low - volume trauma from under - recruitment . • Thoracic imaging approaches and measurements of respiratory system mechanics have been used to balance these risks , but have yet to establish clinical efficacy . The physical basis of ventilator - induced lung injury Expert Rev . Resp . Med . 4 ( 3 ) , ( 2010 ) 382 Review 26 Hubmayr RD . Another look at the opening and collapse story . Crit . Care Med . 37 ( 9 ) , 2667 – 2668 ( 2009 ) . 27 Mertens M , Tabuchi A , Meissner S et al . Alveolar dynamics in acute lung injury : heterogeneous distension rather than cyclic opening and collapse . Crit . Care Med . 37 ( 9 ) , 2604 – 2611 ( 2009 ) . 28 Artigas A , Bernard GR , Carlet J et al . The American – European Consensus Conference on ARDS , part 2 : Ventilatory , pharmacologic , supportive therapy , study design strategies , and issues related to recovery and remodeling . Acute respiratory distress syndrome . Am . J . Respir . Crit . Care Med . 157 ( 4 Pt 1 ) , 1332 – 1347 ( 1998 ) . 29 Spragg RG , Lewis JF . Pathology of the surfactant system of the mature lung : second San Diego conference . Am . J . Respir . Crit . Care Med . 163 ( 1 ) , 280 – 282 ( 2001 ) . 30 Cook CD , Mead J , Schreiner GL , Frank NR , Craig JM . Pulmonary mechanics during induced pulmonary edema in anesthetized dogs . J . Appl . Physiol . 14 ( 2 ) , 177 – 186 ( 1959 ) . 31 Delaunois L , Sergysels R , Martin RR . Acute effects on airways mechanics of pulmonary edema induced by intravenous oleic acid in dogs . Bull . Eur . Physiopathol . Respir . 16 ( 1 ) , 47 – 55 ( 1980 ) . 32 Frazer DG , Stengel PW , Weber KC . The effect of pulmonary edema on gas trapping in excised rat lungs . Resp . Physiol . 38 ( 3 ) , 325 – 333 ( 1979 ) . 33 Chung KF , Keyes SJ , Morgan BM , Jones PW , Snashall PD . Mechanisms of airway narrowing in acute pulmonary oedema in dogs : influence of the vagus and lung volume . Clin . Sci . ( Lond . ) 65 ( 3 ) , 289 – 296 ( 1983 ) . 34 Derks CM , D’Hollander AA , Jacobovitz - Derks D . Gas exchange and respiratory mechanics in moderate and severe pulmonary oedema in dogs . Bull . Eur . Physiopathol . Respir . 17 ( 2 ) , 163 – 177 ( 1981 ) . 35 Esbenshade AM , Newman JH , Lams PM , Jolles H , Brigham KL . Respiratory failure after endotoxin infusion in sheep : lung mechanics and lung fluid balance . J . Appl . Physiol . 53 ( 4 ) , 967 – 976 ( 1982 ) . 36 Mead J , Takishima T , Leith D . Stress distribution in lungs : a model of pulmonary elasticity . J . Appl . Physiol . 28 ( 5 ) , 596 – 608 ( 1970 ) . •• Milestone study on lung architectural interdependence . 37 Bachofen H , Schurch S , Michel RP , Weibel ER . Experimental hydrostatic pulmonary edema in rabbit lungs . Morphology . Am . Rev . Resp . Dis . 147 ( 4 ) , 989 – 996 ( 1993 ) . 38 Bilek AM , Dee KC , Gaver DP 3rd . Mechanisms of surface - tension - induced epithelial cell damage in a model of pulmonary airway reopening . J . Appl . Physiol . 94 ( 2 ) , 770 – 783 ( 2003 ) . 39 Gaver DP 3rd , Kute SM . A theoretical model study of the influence of fluid stresses on a cell adhering to a microchannel wall . Biophys . J . 75 ( 2 ) , 721 – 733 ( 1998 ) . 40 Huh D , Fujioka H , Tung YC et al . Acoustically detectable cellular - level lung injury induced by fluid mechanical stresses in microfluidic airway systems . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 104 ( 48 ) , 18886 – 18891 ( 2007 ) . 41 Fung Y . Biomechanics : Mechanical Properties of Living Tissues . Springer - Verlag , New York , USA ( 1981 ) . 42 Rodarte JR , Hubmayr RD , Stamenovic D , Walters BJ . Regional lung strain in dogs during deflation from total lung capacity . J . Appl . Physiol . 58 ( 1 ) , 164 – 172 ( 1985 ) . 43 Chiumello D , Carlesso E , Cadringher P et al . Lung stress and strain during mechanical ventilation for acute respiratory distress syndrome . Am . J . Respir . Crit . Care Med . 178 ( 4 ) , 346 – 355 ( 2008 ) . 44 Waters CM , Sporn PH , Liu M , Fredberg JJ . Cellular biomechanics in the lung . Am . J . Physiol . 283 ( 3 ) , L503 – L509 ( 2002 ) . 45 Agostoni E . Mechanics of the pleural space . In : Handbook of Physiology . Geiger S ( Ed . ) . American Physiological Society , MD , USA , 531 – 559 ( 1986 ) . 46 D’Angelo E , Michelini S , Agostoni E . Partition of factors contributing to the vertical gradient of transpulmonary pressure . Respir . Physiol . 12 ( 1 ) , 90 – 101 ( 1971 ) . 47 Rodarte J , Fung Y . Distribution of stresses within the lung . In : Handbook of Physiology . Section 3 : Respiratory System . Fishman A ( Ed . ) . Williams and Wilkins Co . , MD , USA , 233 – 246 ( 1986 ) . 48 Wilson TA . Solid mechanics . In : Handbook of Physiology . Section 3 : Respiratory System . Fishman A ( Ed . ) . Williams and Wilkins Co . , MD , USA , 35 – 40 ( 1986 ) . 49 Albert RK , Hubmayr RD . The prone position eliminates compression of the lungs by the heart . Am . J . Respir . Crit . Care Med . 161 ( 5 ) , 1660 – 1665 ( 2000 ) . 50 Bar - Yishay E , Hyatt RE , Rodarte JR . Effect of heart weight on distribution of lung surface pressures in vertical dogs . J . Appl . Physiol . 61 ( 2 ) , 712 – 718 ( 1986 ) . 51 Agostoni E , D’Angelo E , Bonanni MV . The effect of the abdomen on the vertical gradient of pleural surface pressure . Respir . Physiol . 8 ( 3 ) , 332 – 346 ( 1970 ) . 52 Chang H , Lai - Fook SJ , Domino KB et al . Spatial distribution of ventilation and perfusion in anesthetized dogs in lateral postures . J . Appl . Physiol . 92 ( 2 ) , 745 – 762 ( 2002 ) . 53 Hubmayr RD , Rodarte JR , Walters BJ , Tonelli FM . Regional ventilation during spontaneous breathing and mechanical ventilation in dogs . J . Appl . Physiol . 63 ( 6 ) , 2467 – 2475 ( 1987 ) . 54 Weibel ER , Gil J . Structure – function relationships at the alveolar level . In : Bioengineering Aspects of the Lung . West JB ( Ed . ) . Dekker , NY , USA , 1 – 81 ( 1977 ) . 55 Wilson TA , Bachofen H . A model for mechanical structure of the alveolar duct . J . Appl . Physiol . 52 ( 4 ) , 1064 – 1070 ( 1982 ) . 56 Suki B , Ito S , Stamenovic D , Lutchen KR , Ingenito EP . Biomechanics of the lung parenchyma : critical roles of collagen and mechanical forces . J . Appl . Physiol . 98 ( 5 ) , 1892 – 1899 ( 2005 ) . • An excellent review on the structure and micromechanics of the lung parenchyma . 57 Ingber D . Integrins as mechanochemical transducers . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 3 ( 5 ) , 841 – 848 ( 1991 ) . 58 Misof K , Rapp G , Fratzl P . A new molecular model for collagen elasticity based on synchrotron X - ray scattering evidence . Biophys . J . 72 ( 3 ) , 1376 – 1381 ( 1997 ) . 59 Bachofen H , Schurch S . Alveolar surface forces and lung architecture . Comp . Biochem . Physiol . 129 ( 1 ) , 183 – 193 ( 2001 ) . 60 Tschumperlin DJ , Margulies SS . Alveolar epithelial surface area – volume relationship in isolated rat lungs . J . Appl . Physiol . 86 ( 6 ) , 2026 – 2033 ( 1999 ) . 61 Puybasset L , Cluzel P , Gusman P et al . Regional distribution of gas and tissue in acute respiratory distress syndrome . I . Consequences for lung morphology . CT Scan ARDS Study Group . Intensive Care Med . 26 ( 7 ) , 857 – 869 ( 2000 ) . 62 Puybasset L , Gusman P , Muller JC et al . Regional distribution of gas and tissue in acute respiratory distress syndrome . III . Consequences for the effects of positive end - expiratory pressure . CT Scan ARDS Plataki & Hubmayr www . expert - reviews . com 383 Review Study Group . Adult Respiratory Distress Syndrome . Intensive Care Med . 26 ( 9 ) , 1215 – 1227 ( 2000 ) . 63 Caironi P , Cressoni M , Chiumello D et al . Lung opening and closing during ventilation of acute respiratory distress syndrome . Am . J . Respir . Crit . Care Med . 181 , 578 – 586 , ( 2010 ) . 64 Gattinoni L , Caironi P , Cressoni M et al . Lung recruitment in patients with the acute respiratory distress syndrome . N . Engl . J . Med . 354 ( 17 ) , 1775 – 1786 ( 2006 ) . 65 Nieszkowska A , Lu Q , Vieira S et al . Incidence and regional distribution of lung overinflation during mechanical ventilation with positive end - expiratory pressure . Crit . Care Med . 32 ( 7 ) , 1496 – 1503 ( 2004 ) . 66 Lichtenstein D , Meziere G , Biderman P , Gepner A , Barre O . The comet - tail artifact . An ultrasound sign of alveolar - interstitial syndrome . Am . J . Respir . Crit . Care Med . 156 ( 5 ) , 1640 – 1646 ( 1997 ) . 67 Bouhemad B , Liu ZH , Arbelot C et al . Ultrasound assessment of antibiotic - induced pulmonary reaeration in ventilator - associated pneumonia . Crit . Care Med . 38 ( 1 ) , 84 – 92 ( 2010 ) . 68 Deans KJ , Minneci PC , Cui X et al . Mechanical ventilation in ARDS : one size does not fit all . Crit . Care Med . 33 ( 5 ) , 1141 – 1143 ( 2005 ) . 69 Brochard L . Respiratory pressure – volume curves . In : Principles and Practice of Intensive Care Monitoring . Tobin M ( Ed . ) . McGraw - Hill , NY , USA , 597 – 616 ( 1997 ) . 70 Crotti S , Mascheroni D , Caironi P et al . Recruitment and derecruitment during acute respiratory failure : a clinical study . Am . J . Respir . Crit . Care Med . 164 ( 1 ) , 131 – 140 ( 2001 ) . 71 Pelosi P , Goldner M , McKibben A et al . Recruitment and derecruitment during acute respiratory failure : an experimental study . Am . J . Respir . Crit . Care Med . 164 ( 1 ) , 122 – 130 ( 2001 ) . 72 Slutsky AS . Mechanical ventilation . American College of Chest Physicians’ Consensus Conference . Chest 104 ( 6 ) , 1833 – 1859 ( 1993 ) . 73 Gattinoni L , Chiumello D , Carlesso E , Valenza F . Bench - to - bedside review : chest wall elastance in acute lung injury / acute respiratory distress syndrome patients . Crit . Care 8 ( 5 ) , 350 – 355 ( 2004 ) . 74 Hess DR , Bigatello LM . The chest wall in acute lung injury / acute respiratory distress syndrome . Curr . Opin . Crit . Care 14 ( 1 ) , 94 – 102 ( 2008 ) . 75 Talmor D , Sarge T , O’Donnell CR et al . Esophageal and transpulmonary pressures in acute respiratory failure . Crit . Care Med . 34 ( 5 ) , 1389 – 1394 ( 2006 ) . 76 Loring SH , O’Donnell CR , Behazin N et al . Esophageal pressures in acute lung injury - do they represent artifact or useful information about transpulmonary pressure , chest wall mechanics , and lung stress ? J . Appl . Physiol . 108 ( 3 ) , 515 – 522 ( 2010 ) . 77 Talmor D , Sarge T , Malhotra A et al . Mechanical ventilation guided by esophageal pressure in acute lung injury . N . Engl . J . Med . 359 ( 20 ) , 2095 – 2104 ( 2008 ) . 78 Hager DN , Krishnan JA , Hayden DL , Brower RG . Tidal volume reduction in patients with acute lung injury when plateau pressures are not high . Am . J . Respir . Crit . Care Med . 172 ( 10 ) , 1241 – 1245 ( 2005 ) . 79 Brower RG , Hubmayr RD , Slutsky AS . Lung stress and strain in acute respiratory distress syndrome : good ideas for clinical management ? Am . J . Respir . Crit . Care Med . 178 ( 4 ) , 323 – 324 ( 2008 ) . 80 Maisch S , Boehm SH , Weismann D et al . Determination of functional residual capacity by oxygen washin - washout : a validation study . Intensive Care Med . 33 ( 5 ) , 912 – 916 ( 2007 ) . 81 Olegard C , Sondergaard S , Palsson J , Lundin S , Stenqvist O . Validation and clinical feasibility of nitrogen washin / washout functional residual capacity measurements in children . Acta Anaesthesiol . Scand . 54 ( 3 ) , 370 – 376 ( 2010 ) . 82 Webb HH , Tierney DF . Experimental pulmonary edema due to intermittent positive pressure ventilation with high inflation pressures . Protection by positive end - expiratory pressure . Am . Rev . Resp . Dis . 110 ( 5 ) , 556 – 565 ( 1974 ) . 83 Gibson GJ , Pride NB . Lung distensibility . The static pressure – volume curve of the lungs and its use in clinical assessment . Br . J . Dis . Chest 70 ( 3 ) , 143 – 184 ( 1976 ) . 84 Hager DN , Brower RG . Customizing lung - protective mechanical ventilation strategies . Crit . Care Med . 34 ( 5 ) , 1554 – 1555 ( 2006 ) . 85 Milic - Emili J , Mead J , Turner JM . Topography of esophageal pressure as a function of posture in man . J . Appl . Physiol . 19 , 212 – 216 ( 1964 ) . 86 Milic - Emili J , Mead J , Turner JM , Glauser EM . Improved technique for estimating pleural pressure from esophageal balloons . J . Appl . Physiol . 19 , 207 – 211 ( 1964 ) . 87 Washko GR , O’Donnell CR , Loring SH . Volume - related and volume - independent effects of posture on esophageal and transpulmonary pressures in healthy subjects . J . Appl . Physiol . 100 ( 3 ) , 753 – 758 ( 2006 ) . 88 Hubmayr RD . Is there a place for esophageal manometry in the care of patients with injured lungs ? J . Appl . Physiol . 108 , 481 – 482 ( 2010 ) . 89 Sarge T , Talmor D . Targeting transpulmonary pressure to prevent ventilator induced lung injury . Minerva Anestesiol . 75 ( 5 ) , 293 – 299 ( 2009 ) . 90 McGee KP , Hubmayr RD , Levin D , Ehman RL . Feasibility of quantifying the mechanical properties of lung parenchyma in a small - animal model using 1 H magnetic resonance elastography ( MRE ) . J . Magn . Reson . Imaging 29 ( 4 ) , 838 – 845 ( 2009 ) . 91 McGee KP , Hubmayr RD , Ehman RL . MR elastography of the lung with hyperpolarized 3 He . Magn . Reson . Med . 59 ( 1 ) , 14 – 18 ( 2008 ) . 92 Goss BC , McGee KP , Ehman EC , Manduca A , Ehman RL . Magnetic resonance elastography of the lung : technical feasibility . Magn . Reson . Med . 56 ( 5 ) , 1060 – 1066 ( 2006 ) . 93 Zhang X , Qiang B , Hubmayr R et al . Preliminary study of human lung elasticity with the noninvasive surface wave technique . Presented at : UFFC Meeting 2010 . CA , USA , 2 – 4 June 2010 . 94 Bachofen H , Gerber U , Schurch S . Effects of fixatives on function of pulmonary surfactant . J . Appl . Physiol . 93 ( 3 ) , 911 – 916 ( 2002 ) . 95 Oldmixon EH , Hoppin FG Jr . Alveolar septal folding and lung inflation history . J . Appl . Physiol . 71 ( 6 ) , 2369 – 2379 ( 1991 ) . 96 Wirtz HR , Dobbs LG . The effects of mechanical forces on lung functions . Respir . Physiol . 119 ( 1 ) , 1 – 17 ( 2000 ) . 97 Perlman CE , Bhattacharya J . Alveolar expansion imaged by optical sectioning microscopy . J . Appl . Physiol . 103 ( 3 ) , 1037 – 1044 ( 2007 ) . 98 Carney DE , Bredenberg CE , Schiller HJ et al . The mechanism of lung volume change during mechanical ventilation . Am . J . Respir . Crit . Care Med . 160 ( 5 Pt 1 ) , 1697 – 1702 ( 1999 ) . 99 Schiller HJ , Steinberg J , Halter J et al . Alveolar inflation during generation of a quasi - static pressure / volume curve in the acutely injured lung . Crit . Care Med . 31 ( 4 ) , 1126 – 1133 ( 2003 ) . The physical basis of ventilator - induced lung injury Expert Rev . Resp . Med . 4 ( 3 ) , ( 2010 ) 384 Review 100 Halter JM , Steinberg JM , Schiller HJ et al . Positive end - expiratory pressure after a recruitment maneuver prevents both alveolar collapse and recruitment / derecruitment . Am . J . Respir . Crit . Care Med . 167 ( 12 ) , 1620 – 1626 ( 2003 ) . 101 Steinberg J , Schiller HJ , Halter JM et al . Tidal volume increases do not affect alveolar mechanics in normal lung but cause alveolar overdistension and exacerbate alveolar instability after surfactant deactivation . Crit . Care Med . 30 ( 12 ) , 2675 – 2683 ( 2002 ) . 102 Schiller HJ , McCann UG 2nd , Carney DE et al . Altered alveolar mechanics in the acutely injured lung . Crit . Care Med . 29 ( 5 ) , 1049 – 1055 ( 2001 ) . 103 Pavone LA , Albert S , Carney D et al . Injurious mechanical ventilation in the normal lung causes a progressive pathologic change in dynamic alveolar mechanics . Crit . Care 11 ( 3 ) , R64 ( 2007 ) . 104 Azeloglu EU , Bhattacharya J , Costa KD . Atomic force microscope elastography reveals phenotypic differences in alveolar cell stiffness . J . Appl . Physiol . 105 ( 2 ) , 652 – 661 ( 2008 ) . 105 Berrios JC , Schroeder MA , Hubmayr RD . Mechanical properties of alveolar epithelial cells in culture . J . Appl . Physiol . 91 ( 1 ) , 65 – 73 ( 2001 ) . 106 Banes AJ , Tsuzaki M , Yamamoto J et al . Mechanoreception at the cellular level : the detection , interpretation , and diversity of responses to mechanical signals . Biochem . Cell . Biol . 73 ( 7 – 8 ) , 349 – 365 ( 1995 ) . 107 Dreyfuss D , Saumon G . Role of tidal volume , FRC , and end - inspiratory volume in the development of pulmonary edema following mechanical ventilation . Am . Rev . Resp . Dis . 148 ( 5 ) , 1194 – 1203 ( 1993 ) . 108 Egan EA . Lung inflation , lung solute permeability , and alveolar edema . J . Appl . Physiol . 53 ( 1 ) , 121 – 125 ( 1982 ) . 109 Gajic O , Lee J , Doerr CH et al . Ventilator - induced cell wounding and repair in the intact lung . Am . J . Respir . Crit . Care Med . 167 ( 8 ) , 1057 – 1063 ( 2003 ) . 110 Yoshigi M , Clark EB , Yost HJ . Quantification of stretch - induced cytoskeletal remodeling in vascular endothelial cells by image processing . Cytometry A 55 ( 2 ) , 109 – 118 ( 2003 ) . 111 Wang N , Ingber DE . Control of cytoskeletal mechanics by extracellular matrix , cell shape , and mechanical tension . Biophys . J . 66 ( 6 ) , 2181 – 2189 ( 1994 ) . 112 Heidemann SR , Wirtz D . Towards a regional approach to cell mechanics . Trends Cell Biol . 14 ( 4 ) , 160 – 166 ( 2004 ) . 113 Ko KS , McCulloch CA . Partners in protection : interdependence of cytoskeleton and plasma membrane in adaptations to applied forces . J . Membr . Biol . 174 ( 2 ) , 85 – 95 ( 2000 ) . 114 Vlahakis NE , Schroeder MA , Pagano RE , Hubmayr RD . Role of deformation - induced lipid trafficking in the prevention of plasma membrane stress failure . Am . J . Respir . Crit . Care Med . 166 ( 9 ) , 1282 – 1289 ( 2002 ) . 115 Vlahakis NE , Schroeder MA , Pagano RE , Hubmayr RD . Deformation - induced lipid trafficking in alveolar epithelial cells . Am . J . Physiol . 280 ( 5 ) , L938 – L946 ( 2001 ) . 116 Oeckler RA , Hubmayr RD . Cell wounding and repair in ventilator injured lungs . Respir . Physiol . Neurobiol . 163 ( 1 – 3 ) , 44 – 53 ( 2008 ) . 117 Chakrabarti S , Kobayashi KS , Flavell RA et al . Impaired membrane resealing and autoimmune myositis in synaptotagmin VII - deficient mice . J . Cell Biol . 162 ( 4 ) , 543 – 549 ( 2003 ) . 118 Tremblay L , Valenza F , Ribeiro SP , Li J , Slutsky AS . Injurious ventilatory strategies increase cytokines and c - fos m - RNA expression in an isolated rat lung model . J . Clin . Invest . 99 ( 5 ) , 944 – 952 ( 1997 ) . 119 Pugin J . Molecular mechanisms of lung cell activation induced by cyclic stretch . Crit . Care Med . 31 ( 4 Suppl . ) , S200 – S206 ( 2003 ) . 120 Dos Santos CC , Slutsky AS . Invited review : mechanisms of ventilator - induced lung injury : a perspective . J . Appl . Physiol . 89 ( 4 ) , 1645 – 1655 ( 2000 ) . 121 West JB , Tsukimoto K , Mathieu - Costello O , Prediletto R . Stress failure in pulmonary capillaries . J . Appl . Physiol . 70 ( 4 ) , 1731 – 1742 ( 1991 ) . 122 Tsukimoto K , Mathieu - Costello O , Prediletto R , Elliott AR , West JB . Ultrastructural appearances of pulmonary capillaries at high transmural pressures . J . Appl . Physiol . 71 ( 2 ) , 573 – 582 ( 1991 ) . 123 Berg JT , Fu Z , Breen EC et al . High lung inflation increases mRNA levels of ECM components and growth factors in lung parenchyma . J . Appl . Physiol . 83 ( 1 ) , 120 – 128 ( 1997 ) . 124 Pugin J , Dunn I , Jolliet P et al . Activation of human macrophages by mechanical ventilation in vitro . Am . J . Physiol . 275 ( 6 Pt 1 ) , L1040 – L1050 ( 1998 ) . 125 Vlahakis NE , Schroeder MA , Limper AH , Hubmayr RD . Stretch induces cytokine release by alveolar epithelial cells in vitro . Am . J . Physiol . 277 ( 1 Pt 1 ) , L167 – L173 ( 1999 ) . 126 Li LF , Ouyang B , Choukroun G et al . Stretch - induced IL - 8 depends on c - Jun NH2 - terminal and nuclear factor - k B - inducing kinases . Am . J . Physiol . 285 ( 2 ) , L464 – L475 ( 2003 ) . 127 D’Angelo E , Pecchiari M , Della Valle P , Koutsoukou A , Milic - Emili J . Effects of mechanical ventilation at low lung volume on respiratory mechanics and nitric oxide exhalation in normal rabbits . J . Appl . Physiol . 99 ( 2 ) , 433 – 444 ( 2005 ) . 128 Matute - Bello G , Frevert CW , Martin TR . Animal models of acute lung injury . Am . J . Physiol . 295 ( 3 ) , L379 – L399 ( 2008 ) . 129 Hubmayr RD . Ventilator - induced lung injury without biotrauma ? J . Appl . Physiol . 99 ( 2 ) , 384 – 385 ( 2005 ) . 130 Brower RG , Shanholtz CB , Fessler HE et al . Prospective , randomized , controlled clinical trial comparing traditional versus reduced tidal volume ventilation in acute respiratory distress syndrome patients . Crit . Care Med . 27 ( 8 ) , 1492 – 1498 ( 1999 ) . 131 Stewart TE , Meade MO , Cook DJ et al . Evaluation of a ventilation strategy to prevent barotrauma in patients at high risk for acute respiratory distress syndrome . Pressure - and Volume - Limited Ventilation Strategy Group . N . Engl . J . Med . 338 ( 6 ) , 355 – 361 ( 1998 ) . 132 Amato MB , Barbas CS , Medeiros DM et al . Effect of a protective - ventilation strategy on mortality in the acute respiratory distress syndrome . N . Engl . J . Med . 338 ( 6 ) , 347 – 354 ( 1998 ) . 133 Gajic O , Dara SI , Mendez JL et al . Ventilator - associated lung injury in patients without acute lung injury at the onset of mechanical ventilation . Crit . Care Med . 32 ( 9 ) , 1817 – 1824 ( 2004 ) . 134 Wolthuis EK , Choi G , Dessing MC et al . Mechanical ventilation with lower tidal volumes and positive end - expiratory pressure prevents pulmonary inflammation in patients without preexisting lung injury . Anesthesiology 108 ( 1 ) , 46 – 54 ( 2008 ) . 135 Determann RM , Wolthuis EK , Choi G et al . Lung epithelial injury markers are not influenced by use of lower tidal volumes during elective surgery in patients without preexisting lung injury . Am . J . Physiol . 294 ( 2 ) , L344 – L350 ( 2008 ) . 136 Schultz MJ , Haitsma JJ , Slutsky AS , Gajic O . What tidal volumes should be used in patients without acute lung injury ? Anesthesiology 106 ( 6 ) , 1226 – 1231 ( 2007 ) . Plataki & Hubmayr www . expert - reviews . com 385 Review 137 Kavanagh BP , Laffey JG . Hypercapnia : permissive and therapeutic . Minerva Anestesiol . 72 ( 6 ) , 567 – 576 ( 2006 ) . 138 Laffey JG , Engelberts D , Kavanagh BP . Buffering hypercapnic acidosis worsens acute lung injury . Am . J . Respir . Crit . Care Med . 161 ( 1 ) , 141 – 146 ( 2000 ) . 139 Laffey JG , Kavanagh BP . Carbon dioxide and the critically ill – too little of a good thing ? Lancet 354 ( 9186 ) , 1283 – 1286 ( 1999 ) . 140 Mascheroni D , Kolobow T , Fumagalli R et al . Acute respiratory failure following pharmacologically induced hyperventilation : an experimental animal study . Intensive Care Med . 15 ( 1 ) , 8 – 14 ( 1988 ) . 141 Meade MO , Cook DJ , Guyatt GH et al . Ventilation strategy using low tidal volumes , recruitment maneuvers , and high positive end - expiratory pressure for acute lung injury and acute respiratory distress syndrome : a randomized controlled trial . JAMA 299 ( 6 ) , 637 – 645 ( 2008 ) . 142 Terragni PP , Rosboch G , Tealdi A et al . Tidal hyperinflation during low tidal volume ventilation in acute respiratory distress syndrome . Am . J . Respir . Crit . Care Med . 175 ( 2 ) , 160 – 166 ( 2007 ) . 143 Grasso S , Fanelli V , Cafarelli A et al . Effects of high versus low positive end - expiratory pressures in acute respiratory distress syndrome . Am . J . Respir . Crit . Care Med . 171 ( 9 ) , 1002 – 1008 ( 2005 ) . 144 Mercat A , Richard JC , Vielle B et al . Positive end - expiratory pressure setting in adults with acute lung injury and acute respiratory distress syndrome : a randomized controlled trial . JAMA 299 ( 6 ) , 646 – 655 ( 2008 ) . 145 Grasso S , Stripoli T , De Michele M et al . ARDSnet ventilatory protocol and alveolar hyperinflation : role of positive end - expiratory pressure . Am . J . Respir . Crit . Care Med . 176 ( 8 ) , 761 – 767 ( 2007 ) . The physical basis of ventilator - induced lung injury