Skip to Content Skip to Content Gale Academic OneFile Qualitative Data Analysis : An Expanded Sourcebook , 2d ed Citation metadata Author : Janet Orosz Date : November - December 1997 From : Public Administration Review ( Vol . 57 , Issue 6 ) Publisher : Wiley Subscription Services , Inc . Document Type : Book review Length : 6 , 692 words Main content Article Preview : Miles , Matthew B . and Michael Huberman , 2d ed . ( Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage , 1995 ) , 338 pp . ; $ 65 - 00 cloth , $ 32 . 00 paper . The quest for research that builds theory and helps practice in public administration reached a way station with a collection of essays covering 15 years of debate ( White and Adams , 1994 ) . Its editors urged greater acceptance within public administration for alternative research approaches , both interpretive and critical , as a way to further knowledge development in public administration . At the same time , they and others acknowledge weaknesses in the current practice of alternative approaches ( meaning to some any method that is nonquantitative in form ) , using public administration doctoral dissertations as an indication of the state of knowledge development in public administration ( White , Adams , and Forrester [ 1996 ] , Adams and White [ 1994 , 1995 ] , Cleary [ 1992 ] , White [ 1986a ] , McCurdy and Cleary [ 1984 ] ) . How can the development of interpretive and critical forms of knowledge acquisition in public administration be advanced ? Where can interested researchers , students , teachers , and practitioners turn for help in using these forms ? My objective in writing this review is to direct attention to resources available to those who are interested in research from interpretive and critical approaches . The essay is , of course , influenced by my own experiences with alternative methodologies . ( 1 ) I hope it will prove useful to faculty members supervising - - and students undertaking - - dissertations described as " qualitative " or " case study " research . Practitioners may find the review worthwhile if they are interested in expanding public program evaluation beyond administratively defined outcome measures and into the " lived experience " of program participants ( Denzin [ 1989 ] ) . Finally , as more manuscripts employing interpretive and critical modes of inquiry are submitted to journals of public administration and other human sciences , it becomes increasingly important for reviewers to understand that there are different and appropriate processes used in works of qualitative research . As Weitzman and Miles ( 1995 , 5 ) express it , qualitative research is " a big tent , " covering works labeled as explanatory or positivistic , interpretivist , and critical theorist in their approaches to understanding the social world ( White and Adams [ 1994 ] , Fay [ 1976 ] , Habermas [ 1971 ] , White [ 1986b ] ) . To those using positivistic approaches , qualitative research includes case studies with structured interview questions , open - ended survey questions , and focus groups with pre - structured questions , resulting in reports and texts that often include a smattering of semiexact quotations intended to give findings " real person flavor . " Generalizable knowledge and explanation remain the goal of this type of qualitative research . The researcher working from an interpretivist perspective is interested in understanding participants ' own experiences , and for him or her the above forms of qualitative research have far too much researcher construction . Interpretive and constructivist approaches can be further broken down into miniparadigms such as ethnography , ethnomethodology , grounded theory , phenomenology , and hermeneutics . ( 2 ) Critical theorists and postmodernists expect the stance and role of the writer / researcher and the potential for research co - inquirers to evolve during the research process ( Richardson [ 1995 ] ) . Marshall and Rossman ( 1995 , 2 ) explain that they utilize the term " qualitative research " as a broad umbrella : " Throughout the text we refer to qualitative research . . . Access from your library This is a preview . Get the full text through your school or public library . Source Citation Source Citation Orosz , Janet . " Qualitative Data Analysis : An Expanded Sourcebook , 2d ed . " Public Administration Review , vol . 57 , no . 6 , 1997 , p . 543 + . Accessed 3 Nov . 2020 . Gale Document Number : GALE | A20210688 Qualitative data analysis : An expanded sourcebook Explore This is a preview . Get the full text through your school or public library . Access from your library Footer About Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Policy Accessibility Qualitative Data : An Introduction to Coding and Analysis . QUALITATIVE DATA QUALITATIVE STUDIES IN PSYCHOLOGY This series showcases the power and possibility of qualitative wo Qualitative Data : An Introduction to Coding and Analysis . QUALITATIVE DATA QUALITATIVE STUDIES IN PSYCHOLOGY This series showcases the power and possibility of qualitative wo An Introduction to Numerical Analysis ( 2nd Edition ) . AN INTRODUCTION TO NUMERICAL ANALYSIS Second Edition Kendall E . Atkinson University of Iowa • WILEY John Wiley & Son Matrix Analysis 2nd edition . Matrix Analysis Second Edition Linear Request PDF | On Jan 1 , 2013 , Matthew B Miles and others published Qualitative Data Analysis : A Methods Sourcebook | Find , read and cite all the research you need on ResearchGate . Method . Employee learning is examined using a qualitative , inductive approach to data analysis . Ten participants were invited , five from each alliance partner organisation with the aim to increase validity of findings as a cross - case analysis was also performed , and current data were triangulated with archival data . Emerging themes were then compared to extant literature – mainly from the cognitive constructivist psychology literature , but also organisational learning research , as well as alliance and merger acquisition literature .