Cell Stem Cell Forum In Search of Naivety Martin F . Pera 1 , * 1 University of Melbourne , Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health , Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research , Melbourne , VIC 3010 , Australia * Correspondence : mpera @ unimelb . edu . au http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . stem . 2014 . 10 . 013 Devising a cell culture method that maintains human pluripotent stem cells ( PSCs ) in a state similar to naive mouse embryonic stem cells ( ESCs ) has been a much sought after goal in recent years . Here I consider the historical background to this quest and ask why it is considered consequential . Introduction A recent ﬂurry of reports has described a strangely diverse set of endpoints in a search for what has become something of a Holy Grail in contemporary stem cell biology : a cell culture method that maintains human pluripotent stem cells ( PSCs ) in a state similar to that of naive mouse embryonic stem cells ( ESCs ) . Here I consider the historical background to this quest and ask why it is considered consequential . I assess the methodolo - gies used to derive and maintain the cells and the benchmarks used by various in - vestigators to gauge the success of their efforts , and I ﬁnally place the ﬁndings in the context of recent analyses of pluripo - tent stem cell populations at the single - cell level . The Historical Background Following a trajectory analogous to that of research in the mouse , the ﬁrst human PSC lines were derived from teratocarci - nomas . It was apparent from this early work that human teratocarcinoma - derived cell lines were different from their mouse counterparts and from mouse ESCs . The human cells displayed a different morphology and an epithelial phenotype , they expressed a different set of cell surface markers , they grew poorly if at all at clonal density , and they did not respond to Leukemia Inhibitory Factor ( LIF ) . There were several conceiv - able explanations for these discrep - ancies . The human cancer - derived lines were grossly aneuploid , malignant cells , and it was possible that they looked and behaved differently from the mouse cells due to changes introduced during trans - formation . Alternatively , it was possible that the human cells might represent a different developmental stage to the mouse ESC lines . Finally , it was possible that there were genuine differences in early embryonic development between the mouse and human , and the cell lines would therefore reﬂect these differences . The derivation of diploid ESC lines from the rhesus monkey and human embryo , which were essentially similar in pheno - type to human teratocarcinoma , showed that the differences between primate and mouse PSCs were unlikely to be a consequence of the process of malignant transformation . The discovery of mouse epiblast stem cells put a whole new perspective on this question . Epiblast stem cells , which are derived from postimplantation mouse or rat embryos and are similar to the post - implantation epiblast , in many respects closely resembled human ESCs . This ﬁnding lent credence to the notion that perhaps the human cells were not ESCs at all but really epiblast stem cells that somehow emerged from the process of their derivation from the inner cell mass . The obvious corollary to this interpretation was that a human equivalent of a bona ﬁde naive mouse ESC must exist . The search for this entity soon began , though it is important to remember that the exis - tence of a natural naive state of human pluripotency similar to that in the mouse remains a theory , not a proven fact . It is also important to remember that human PSCs , whether they originate from the process of carcinogenesis in vivo ( terato - carcinomas ) , from embryos , or from induction of pluripotency by deﬁned fac - tors , all settle into a similar phenotype or attractor state , distinct from that of naive mouse ESCs , even in those instances where they were established under condi - tions ( e . g . those that involve feeder cells , serum , and LIF supplementation ) that support ( albeit suboptimally ) long - term maintenance of mouse naive ESCs . Why Naive Human PSCs ? It is obviously of fundamental interest to those studying the biology of pluripo - tency and comparative development to know whether there is some universal naive ground state that exists across spe - cies . However compelling and important this concept may be , it is also fair to question whether there would be any real practical advantages to having hu - man naive PSCs . It has long been noted that the low clon - ing efﬁciency of the human PSCs relative to that of mouse naive cells represents a barrier to some research protocols , in particular gene targeting , though new technologies for genetic manipulation ( TALEN and CRISPR ) seem likely to obviate this difﬁculty . It is less clear that growth at clonal density is an essential attribute for scale - up platforms , a number of which successfully expand undifferen - tiated cells in aggregate suspension cultures . Maintenance of two active X chromosomes , and X inactivation upon differentiation , is characteristic of naive mouse ESCs , and indeed for certain pur - poses , maintaining this state in the human cultures would certainly be advanta - geous . Although there may be species dif - ferences in X inactivation , inconsistencies in human cell lines derived under conven - tional conditions are certainly problem - atic . Finally it is generally held that at the level of the transcriptome and epige - nome , epiblast stem cells and conven - tional PSCs display more evidence of lineage priming ( i . e . , coexpression of plu - ripotency and lineage - speciﬁc markers ) than naive cells do . This characteristic has led to the reasonable suggestion that naive cells , in a more pristine epige - netic state , might be more amenable to differentiation into multiple tissue lineages than primed cultures of human PSCs or Cell Stem Cell 15 , November 6 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 543 mouse epiblast stem cells would be . However , there is not much evidence ( apart from in vivo chimera formation ) to show that mouse naive cells are better at giving rise to differentiated cells than epiblast stem cells are . By now a vast va - riety of differentiated tissue cells have been generated from conventional human PSCs , and in many cases they have been shown to be capable of signiﬁcant functional maturation . Indeed , products derived from conventional human ESCs ( and recently iPSCs ) are in clinical trials now for several indications and more are likely to follow soon . In summary , while it is of undoubted fundamental interest to capture human naive PSCs , many bar - riers to the use of conventional PSCs in research and therapy have already been surmounted ( Tabar and Studer , 2014 ) , and the practical advantages that naive cells might offer are mostly speculative at present . Many Roadmaps , Many Destinations ? Recently published studies describe multiple pathways ( some more convo - luted than others ) to the establishment of the human naive state ( Chan et al . , 2013 ; Gafni et al . , 2013 ; Takashima et al . , 2014 ; Theunissen et al . , 2014 ; Ware et al . , 2014 ) . Several of the protocols begin with an epigenetic rebooting , deliv - ered through either treatment with histone deacetylase inhibition or transient expres - sion of pluripotency factors . Given that most any differentiated cell in the body can be reprogrammed to pluripotency through such manipulation in vitro , it is not surprising that these tactics should succeed in nudging PSCs around the epigenetic landscape . For purposes of maintenance , most protocols incorporate the paradigm from Ying and Smith’s land - mark studies using small - molecule inhibi - tors of differentiation pathways to provide strict maintenance of the naive state in mouse cells . All protocols incorporate GSK and ERK inhibition with LIF supple - mentation , though universally this com - bination alone fails to establish and maintain human PSCs . Some of the methods still retain factors that activate FGF and or Activin / nodal signaling , though several dispense with these path - ways altogether . ( Few studies take into account the possibility of autocrine or paracrine signaling between cells , which could confound the interpretation of the data ) . Several studies , but not all , prove dependence of the cells on LIF signaling for maintenance . The data on ERK inhibi - tion are not inconsistent with a require - ment for FGF , since the positive effects of FGF or other tyrosine kinase receptor signals on human PSC maintenance are mediated via activation of PI3K / AKT rather than the MEK / ERK pathway ( Singh et al . , 2012 ) . Apart from these commonal - ities , the various methods employ a somewhat eclectic set of combinations of inhibitors of signal transduction ki - nases , with at least one report ( Theunis - sen et al . , 2014 ) stating that three other published systems failed to maintain cells altogether in the authors’ hands . The key criteria used to assess arrival at the naive state include morphology , gene expression , metabolic activity , epigenetic status ( particularly X inactivation in female lines ) , and differentiation capacity . Most studies claim that the human cells in naive conditions form dome - like mouse ESC colonies . With respect to gene expres - sion , Huang et al . ( 2014 ) have undertaken a systems biology survey of these studies . Some very interesting points emerge from this work . Active gene networks in human naive cells resemble those in the human ( but not mouse ) blastocyst , while conven - tional human PSC cultures display a pro - ﬁle that resembles blastocyst outgrowths , suggestive of adaptation to culture . It is interesting that the gene networks that most strongly link naive cells with the blastocyst are those regulating metabolic activity . The authors note that the various culture systems used to maintain naive and conventional human PSCs in these studies vary considerably ( many of the studies compare conventional PSC cul - tures grown in serum or serum replace - ment to naive cells grown under more deﬁned conditions ) . Because basal cul - ture media components can profoundly affect both the cell’s metabolism and epigenetic status , it is important to consider the role these factors might play in determining the differences be - tween naive and conventional states . The overview of the data indicates clearly that each human naive state has a distinct transcriptional proﬁle . Given this , and the report from Theunissen et al . ( 2014 ) indi - cating that several of the culture systems for naive state propagation do not even maintain stem cells in their hands , it seems fairly clear that independent conﬁr - mation on a broad panel of cell lines by multiple laboratories will be required to validate whether indeed any of these sys - tems merits adoption as a common plat - form for naive human PSC derivation and propagation . Several reports show that the naive conditions shift cells to oxidative meta - bolism in a manner more similar to that of mouse ESCs rather than the anerobic glycolysis seen in conventional human PSCs . Most reports claim widespread resetting of the epigenome after transfer to naive conditions , including a decline in bivalent histone marks and decreases in DNA methylation , and there is evi - dence in some studies for the presence of two active X chromosomes in female lines . However , surveys of DNA methyl - ation across a broad panel of human PSCs have revealed considerable varia - tion among cell lines , as have studies of X inactivation , and both of these epige - netic features are reported to be subject to modulation by culture conditions in conventional human PSC lines . All studies report considerable improvement in clon - ing efﬁciency under naive conditions , but again , it has been known for some time that human PSCs grown under conven - tional conditions can also readily undergo adaptation to dissociation and survival as single cells . Finally , none of these studies really demonstrates that any naive human PSC has a superior differentiation capac - ity compared to conventional ESCs , with the exception of one study showing some enhancement in PSC ability to incorporate into the mouse blastocyst relative to naive cells ( Gafni et al . , 2013 ) , and another using naive rhesus monkey iPSCs that showed substantial engraft - ment into host mouse embryos ( Fang et al . , 2014 ) . This is an assay that mea - sures not only developmental capacity , but also the ability to integrate into host embryonic structures and to respond to host developmental clues on the mouse developmental timetable . It will be of in - terest to see if new cell lines derived from nonhuman primates are able to inte - grate into conspeciﬁc host embryos to form chimeras . The Current State of Naivety While it is unlikely that we have heard the last of this matter , it appears that a wide range of experimental protocols enable Cell Stem Cell Forum 544 Cell Stem Cell 15 , November 6 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . the maintenance of cultured human PSCs with features similar , but not identical , to those of naive mouse ESCs . The resolu - tion of the fundamental questions of whether a natural state of naive pluripo - tency similar to that in the mouse exists in the primate and whether conventional human PSCs in fact equate to epiblast stem cells will need to await further careful comparative studies of primate preim - plantation and postimplantation develop - ment and more extensive data on de novo derivation of naive human PSCs . In fact the few comparative studies that have addressed signaling pathways controlling growth and differentiation in the preim - plantation embryo show fairly clear differ - ences between human and mouse . One of the most signiﬁcant developmental dif - ferences , pertinent to the generation of naive epiblast cells , is the ability of mouse , but not human , embryos to enter diapause , in which the epiblast exists in a state of suspended animation . Notably the only known physiological role of LIF in preimplantation development is the maintenance of the epiblast in diapause ( Nichols et al . , 2001 ) . All of these studies of naive human PSCs have been carried out at a popula - tion level . Recent single - cell studies of mouse and human pluripotent cells main - tained under conditions that support naive pluripotency ( mouse ; Morgani et al . , 2013 ) or strongly suppress sponta - neous differentiation ( human ; Hough et al . , 2014 ) indicate that substantial het - erogeneity still persists in these popula - tions . In both cases there is evidence for oscillation of cells between a state in which pluripotency genes are consistently expressed at a high level and a state that is primed for differentiation into the extraembryonic endoderm lineage ( a fate expected of early epiblast cells ) . The sin - gle - cell work argues , perhaps unsurpris - ingly , that PSCs in culture are inherently metastable , even when maintained under conditions that strongly suppress somatic differentiation . Indeed , one of the more exciting con - cepts to emerge from the work on human naive stem cells is that , given a bit of an epigenetic shock and some judicious short - circuiting of signaling pathways , it is possible to maintain and propagate entirely new cell states in culture—cell states that may represent evanescent in - termediates in embryonic or fetal devel - opment or somatic tissue lineages , or even completely synthetic cell states that do not exist in nature . These new cellular states may provide facile routes to the production of specialized tissues with important therapeutic properties . This concept is similar to some views of the process of cellular reprogramming to pluripotency : clones that are discarded or ignored as incompletely reprog - rammed cells may in fact be very inter - esting intermediates on pathways to new and different destinations . These altered cellular states may exist and propagate in deﬁance of epigenetic gravity , but there is nothing really new here . Thirty years of incredibly productive research using mouse ESCs has relied on their ability to do just that . REFERENCES Chan , Y . S . , Go¨ke , J . , Ng , J . H . , Lu , X . , Gonzales , K . A . , Tan , C . P . , Tng , W . Q . , Hong , Z . Z . , Lim , Y . S . , and Ng , H . H . ( 2013 ) . Cell Stem Cell 13 , 663 – 675 . Fang , R . , Liu , K . , Zhao , Y . , Li , H . , Zhu , D . , Du , Y . , Xiang , C . , Li , X . , Liu , H . , Miao , Z . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Cell Stem Cell 15 , 488 – 496 . Gafni , O . , Weinberger , L . , Mansour , A . A . , Manor , Y . S . , Chomsky , E . , Ben - Yosef , D . , Kalma , Y . , Viu - kov , S . , Maza , I . , Zviran , A . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Nature 504 , 282 – 286 . Hough , S . R . , Thornton , M . , Mason , E . , Mar , J . C . , Wells , C . A . , and Pera , M . F . ( 2014 ) . Stem Cell Reports 2 , 881 – 895 . Huang , K . , Maruyama , T . , and Fan , G . ( 2014 ) . Cell Stem Cell 15 , 410 – 415 . Morgani , S . M . , Canham , M . A . , Nichols , J . , Sharov , A . A . , Migueles , R . P . , Ko , M . S . , and Brickman , J . M . ( 2013 ) . Cell Rep . 3 , 1945 – 1957 . Nichols , J . , Chambers , I . , Taga , T . , and Smith , A . ( 2001 ) . Development 128 , 2333 – 2339 . Singh , A . M . , Reynolds , D . , Cliff , T . , Ohtsuka , S . , Mattheyses , A . L . , Sun , Y . , Menendez , L . , Kulik , M . , and Dalton , S . ( 2012 ) . Cell Stem Cell 10 , 312 – 326 . Tabar , V . , and Studer , L . ( 2014 ) . Nat . Rev . Genet . 15 , 82 – 92 . Takashima , Y . , Guo , G . , Loos , R . , Nichols , J . , Ficz , G . , Krueger , F . , Oxley , D . , Santos , F . , Clarke , J . , Mansﬁeld , W . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Cell 158 , 1254 – 1269 . Theunissen , T . W . , Powell , B . E . , Wang , H . , Mitali - pova , M . , Faddah , D . A . , Reddy , J . , Fan , Z . P . , Maet - zel , D . , Ganz , K . , Shi , L . , etal . ( 2014 ) . CellStemCell 15 , 471 – 487 . Ware , C . B . , Nelson , A . M . , Mecham , B . , Hesson , J . , Zhou , W . , Jonlin , E . C . , Jimenez - Caliani , A . J . , Deng , X . , Cavanaugh , C . , Cook , S . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 111 , 4484 – 4489 . Cell Stem Cell 15 , November 6 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 545 Cell Stem Cell Forum