Research Policy 39 ( 2010 ) 290 – 300 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Research Policy journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / respol Open innovation in SMEs—An intermediated network model Sungjoo Lee a , Gwangman Park b , Byungun Yoon c , ∗ , Jinwoo Park d a Industrial & Information Systems Engineering , Ajou University , San 5 , Woncheon - Dong , Youngtong - Gu , Suwon , 443 - 749 , Republic of Korea b Techno - Economics Research Department , Technology Strategy Research Division , Electronics and Telecommunication Research Institute , 138 Gajeongon , Yuseong - gu , Daejeon , 305 - 700 , Republic of Korea c Department of Industrial and System Engineering , Dongguk University , 3 - 26 , Pil - dong 3ga , Chung - gu , Seoul , 100 - 715 , Republic of Korea d Department of Industrial Engineering , Seoul National University , San 56 - 1 , Shillim - Dong , Kwanak - Gu , Seoul , 151 - 742 , Republic of Korea a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 7 August 2008 Received in revised form 29 November 2009 Accepted 14 December 2009 Available online 12 January 2010 Keywords : Open innovation SME Network Intermediary Case study a b s t r a c t In spite of increasing interest in open innovation , discussion about the concept and its potential applica - tion to the SME sector has been excluded from mainstream literature . However , given that the argument about the effect of ﬁrm size on the effectiveness of innovation is still ongoing , it is worth addressing the issue from an SME perspective . That is the focus of this article , which seeks , ﬁrstly , to place the concept of open innovation in the context of SMEs ; secondly to suggest the input of an intermediary in facilitating innovation ; and ﬁnally to report accounts of Korean SMEs’ success in working with an intermediary . The research results support the potential of open innovation for SMEs , and indicate networking as one effective way to facilitate open innovation among SMEs . © 2009 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . 1 . Introduction Innovation is traditionally viewed as taking place mostly within a single ﬁrm . But the increasing availability and mobility of knowl - edge workers , the ﬂourishing of the internet and venture capital markets , and the broadening scope of possible external suppli - ers in the present age have undermined the effectiveness of the traditional innovation system ( Chesbrough , 2003 ) . In the wake of these changes , the concept of open innovation has emerged , with processesthatarecharacterisedasspanningﬁrmboundaries . Com - panies now want to include in their business model not only the commercialisationoftheirownideas , butalsoofexternalideas . The analysisofopeninnovationhassubsequentlybeenextendedtovar - ious perspectives , e . g . studies on the industrial dynamics of open innovation ( Christensen et al . , 2005 ) , on the open innovation pro - cesses in a particular industry sector ( Cooke , 2005 ; Henkel , 2006 ) , oronwaysinwhichtoboostopeninnovation ( Lichtenthaler , 2008 ) . In spite of the increasing interest in open innovation research , most previous studies have been intended for managers in large technology - based companies , where the notion of open innova - tion ﬁrst started . Discussions about the concept of open innovation in small and medium - sized enterprises ( SMEs ) have been excluded ∗ Corresponding author . Tel . : + 82 0 2 2260 8659 ; fax : + 82 0 2 878 3511 . E - mail addresses : sungjoo @ ajou . ac . kr ( S . Lee ) , gwangman @ etri . re . kr ( G . Park ) , postman3 @ dongguk . edu ( B . Yoon ) , autofact @ snu . ac . kr ( J . Park ) . from the mainstream ( West et al . , 2006 ) for the following reasons . Firstly , open innovation is more easily studied in larger ﬁrms , as SMEs have less ability to access external resources and fewer tech - nological assets that they can exchange than larger ﬁrms ( Narula , 2004 ) . However , considerations about open innovation also need differentiating between SMEs and large ﬁrms , since it is gener - ally recognised that they are good at different types of innovation ( Vossen , 1998 ) . Secondly , SMEs use non - internal means of innova - tion more than large ﬁrms , as they consider alliances or network as ways to extend their technological competences ( Edwards et al . , 2005 ; Rothwell , 1991 ) , which means that innovation in SMEs is already has an external focus , and the concept is not new to them . However , their collaborations tend to be limited to strate - gic alliances with larger ﬁrms ( Rothwell and Dodgson , 1994 ) and outsourcing , mainly via other SMEs ( Rothwell , 1991 ) . Considering the fact that ﬁrms involved in multiple types of ties are more inno - vative than those which only utilise one type of tie ( Baum et al . , 2000 ; Powell and Owen - Smith , 1999 ) , it is important to investi - gate the potential of different types of SME ties in the context of open innovation . Finally , SMEs consider external sources as a means of getting access to marketing and sales channels at the later stages of innovation ( especially the commercialisation stage ) , whileopeninnovationnormallyfocusesmoreontheearlystagesof innovation , addressing external technology sourcing and network - ingwithtechnologyprovidersandinnovative , upstreamcompanies ( Vanhaverbeke and Cloodt , 2006 ) . Though open innovation at the commercialisation stage has not been considered seriously in the 0048 - 7333 / $ – see front matter © 2009 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . respol . 2009 . 12 . 009 S . Lee et al . / Research Policy 39 ( 2010 ) 290 – 300 291 existing literature , it can be an important topic , since economic values of innovation at the commercialisation stage are to a large extent towards other downstream players . While the argument on the effect of ﬁrm size on the effec - tiveness of innovation is still ongoing , it is worth addressing the particularities of open innovation from the perspective of SMEs which are nevertheless major actors in innovation ( Maula et al . , 2006 ) . This article therefore focuses on open innovation strategies in SMEs , ﬁrstly seeking to place the concept of open innovation in the context of SME , and secondly to encourage innovation by suggesting a network model that emphasises the role of inter - mediaries in linking SMEs . Finally , it introduces some stories of open innovation success in Korean SMEs that have ﬂowed from the intermediary activities of the Korean Integrated Contract Man - ufacturing Service ( KICMS ) , which was established to facilitate innovation in Korean SMEs . The research results support the notion of open innovation in SMEs , by proposing intermediation as one way of facilitating this strategy , and by suggesting an intermedi - ated network as an effective model to enable their collaboration and specialisation . The rest of this paper consists of four parts . The following sec - tion brieﬂy reviews the characteristics of innovation in SMEs , while Section 3 discusses how those characteristics can be reﬂected and facilitatedbyproposinganopeninnovationmodelforSMEs . Tover - ify this discussion , open innovation efforts among Korean SMEs are introduced in Section 4 . For this purpose , we analysed the report , Korea’s Technology Innovation completed in 2005 and published by the Survey Science and Technology Policy Institute ( STEPI ) to understand the nature of innovation activities in Korean SMEs , and conducted a case study of KICMS activities . The ﬁnal section presents some conclusions and notes on limitations . 2 . Open innovation in SMEs 2 . 1 . Nature of innovation in SMEs There is considerable literature about innovation , and vari - ous models have been suggested to describe its nature , such as product innovation and process innovation ; radical innovation and incremental innovation ; systemic innovation and component innovation ; technology - push and market - pull ; and more recently closed innovation and open innovation . Models can also be divided according to their innovation processes ( linear models , chain - linked models , etc . ) , or according to the ﬁtness for developed or developing countries , etc . However , strangely , there have been very few studies regarding aninnovationmodelspecialisedforSMEs . Themajorityofliterature limits its focus to the study of entrepreneurial traits or structural characteristics ( Hoffmanetal . , 1998 ) , butthereislittleexamination of the embeddedness of innovation in SMEs ( Shaw , 1998 ; Paniccia , 1998 ) . According to Laursen and Salter ( 2004 ) , it is not statistically evidentthatlargerﬁrmsarebetterthanSMEsinnew - to - the - world - type innovation , meaning that SMEs may well have capacity for innovation , especially radical innovation . It is agreed that , while SMEs’ ﬂexibility and speciﬁcity can be advantages in accelerating innovation , few of them have sufﬁcient capacity to manage the wholeinnovationprocessbythemselves , andthisencouragesthem to collaborate with other ﬁrms ( Edwards et al . , 2005 ) . They can lack the resources and capabilities in manufacturing , distribution , marketingandextendedR & Dfunding , whichareessentialfortrans - forming inventions into products or processes . As a result , while many studies have shown that SMEs tend to have a higher R & D productivity than larger ﬁrms ( although there is considerable vari - ation by industry , see Audretsch and Vivarelli , 1996 ) , there is still much debate on assessing the innovativeness of SMEs because of their material or resource factor disadvantages . Apart from this argument , SMEs have an obvious role in innova - tion : UK ﬁgures , for instance , show that ( including sole traders ) SMEs account for 99 % of business , 55 % of non - governmental employment and 51 % of turnover ( SBS , 2001 ) . Naturally , encourag - inginnovationinSMEsiscentraltopolicyinitiativesforstimulating economic development at the local , regional , and even national levels ( Jones and Tilley , 2003 ) . The question then becomes how to facilitate innovation in SMEs , trying to discover which factors contributed to the success ( or failure ) of their innovation efforts . Speciﬁcally , as technology becomes so complex that it cannot be handled by one ﬁrm alone , and relevant knowledge is ever - more scattered across various ﬁrms , collaboration between ﬁrms is increasingly regarded as an important factor for success . SMEs also have engaged in various modes of collaboration ( Kleinknecht and Reijnen , 1992 ) , and SME networking and alliances have attracted considerable research attention . Here , common collab - oration modes are based on bi - ﬁrm networks and include alliances with and outsourcing to other ﬁrms . For example , Mangematin et al . ( 2003 ) show that biotechnology SMEs typically enter into contracts with big industrial groups or run small projects , man - ufacturing their own products and marketing them . Networking represents another possible form of collaboration , and its grow - ing use by SMEs reﬂects a possible catch - up of large ﬁrms ( Narula , 2004 ) , with many researchers claiming that the success of SMEs in comparison to their larger competitors is based on their ability to utilise external networks more efﬁciently ( Rothwell and Dodgson , 1994 ) . Mytelka ( 1991 ) even suggests that a ﬁrm’s competitiveness is determined more by its external networks than its size . SMEs have been noted to use external resources to ( among other things ) shorten innovation time , reduce risk and cost and increase the ﬂex - ibility of their operation ( Hagedoorn , 1993 ) , but their use must be carefully considered in strategic terms , as inter - ﬁrm collaboration can also lead to new risks and threats as well as transaction cost . Nevertheless , inter - ﬁrm collaboration is particularly important for SMEs with limited complementary assets who need to leverage their technology externally ( Lichtenthaler , 2005 ) . We argue that a necessary focus for future research is the nature of innovation in SMEs , and the extent to which open innovation is embedded in such ﬁrms . Open innovation in SMEs will be different from that in larger ﬁrms , since innovation processes differ between the two ( Vossen , 1998 ) . But innovation processes have not been explicitly analysed within the context of open innovation ( West et al . , 2006 ) , despite the fact that moving from a relatively closed world to a very open one has posed important challenges for SME ( Maranto - Vargas and Gómez - Tagle Rangel , 2007 ) . 2 . 2 . Concept of open innovation in SMEs Open innovation is an emerging paradigm based on the follow - ing assumption : Valuable ideas can come from inside or out of the company and can go to market from inside or outside the company as well . This approach places external ideas and external paths to market on the same level of importance as that reserved for internal ideas and paths to market during the Closed Innovation era ( Chesbrough , 2003 ) . As the prevailing literature indicates , the possibilities for open innovation in SMEs also lie with external sources , which are often criticaltotheinnovationprocessinanytypeoforganisation ( Cohen and Levinthal , 1990 ) . Where large ﬁrms focus mainly on R & D in open innovation efforts , SMEs focus more on commercialisation because , while many of them have superiorities in technology for invention , they often lack the capacity in terms of manufactur - ing facilities , marketing channels and global contacts to introduce them effectively to the innovation market ( Narula , 2004 ) . Consid -