Neuron , Vol . 34 , 999 – 1010 , June 13 , 2002 , Copyright  2002 by Cell Press Calcium Regulation of Dendritic Growth via CaM Kinase IV and CREB - Mediated Transcription et al . , 1997 ; Benes et al . , 1977 ; Deitch and Rubel , 1984 ; Purves and Hume , 1981 ; Kalb , 1994 ) . Much of our understanding of the relationship be - Lori Redmond , 2 Amir H . Kashani , and Anirvan Ghosh 1 Department of Neuroscience tween neuronal activity and dendritic development has Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine come from studies in the Xenopus retinotectal system 725 North Wolfe Street wheretimelapseimaginghasalloweddetailedinvestiga - Baltimore , Maryland 21205 tions of dendritic development in vivo . In Xenopus , the onset of dendritic development closely parallels the for - mation of the first synaptic inputs ( Wu et al . , 1996 ) . The Summary dendritic arbor rapidly expands over the subsequent few days ( Wu et al . , 1999 ) . During this period of rapid We report that CaM kinase IV and CREB play a critical dendritic growth , synaptic currents are principally medi - role in mediating calcium - induced dendritic growth in ated by NMDA receptors , and pharmacological blockade corticalneurons . Calcium - dependentdendriticgrowth of NMDA receptors markedly reduces dendritic growth is suppressed by CaM kinase inhibitors , a constitu - rates ( Rajan and Cline , 1998 ) . tively active form of CaM kinase IV induces dendritic Whiletheseobservationsindicatethatafferentactivity growth in the absence of extracellular stimulation , and plays a critical role in regulating dendritic growth during a kinase - dead form of CaM kinase IV suppresses den - development , the underlying molecular mechanisms dritic growth induced by calcium influx . CaM kinase havenot yetbeen identified . Forexample , itis notknown IVactivatesthetranscriptionfactorCREB , andexpres - if neuronal activity influences dendritic growth by induc - sion of a dominant negative form of CREB blocks cal - ing local cytoskeletal changes at sites of synaptic con - cium - and CaM kinase IV - induced dendritic growth . tact , or if activity - dependent dendritic growth requires In cortical slice cultures , dendritic growth is attenu - signaling to the nucleus . Since the long - term biochemi - ated by inhibitors of voltage - sensitive calcium chan - cal and cellular effects of neuronal activity are mediated nels and by dominant negative CREB . These experi - by calcium influx ( Ghosh and Greenberg , 1995 ) , it is ments indicate that calcium - induced dendritic growth likely that the effects of activity on dendritic growth are is regulated by activation of a transcriptional program mediated by calcium signaling . Here we report on our that involves CaM kinase IV and CREB - mediated sig - investigations of the signaling mechanisms by which naling to the nucleus . calcium influx regulates dendritic growth in cortical neu - rons . Introduction Results Neuronal activity exerts a profound influence on the patterning of dendrites during development ( reviewed The effects of neuronal activity on dendritic growth were in Cline , 2001 ) . This view is based on an extensive litera - examined in cortical cultures prepared from embryonic ture of activity deprivation experiments , which suggest day 18 rats . The dendritic morphology of individual neu - that loss of normal activity during development leads to rons was visualized by transfection of (cid:1) - galactosidase lasting deficits in dendritic development . For example , atE18 (cid:2) 2daysinvitro ( DIV ) followedby (cid:1) - galactosidase activity blockade by various pharmacological interven - immunocytochemistry 2 days post - transfection . This tions leads to deficits in dendritic growth in Xenopus method reveals the detailed dendritic morphology of tectal neurons ( Rajan and Cline , 1998 ) , and in the mam - transfectedneuronsandcanbeusedtoevaluatetherole malian visual system , monocular deprivation alters den - of different signaling pathways in regulating dendritic dritic development in the lateral geniculate nucleus and growth ( Threadgill et al . , 1997 ) . As shown in Figures the visual cortex ( Coleman and Riesen , 1968 ; Wiesel 1E and 1G , cortical neurons in culture elaborate well - andHubel , 1963 ) . Aroleforneuronalactivity inthedevel - differentiated dendritic trees by 4 days in culture , which opment of visual cortical neurons is also supported by allows for quantitative analysis of dendritic parameters . the observation that exposure to enriched environments Extracellular calcium enters neurons primarily via increases dendritic branching in cortical pyramidal neu - NMDA receptors and voltage - sensitive calcium chan - rons and that elaboration of dendrites in cortical slices nels ( VSCCs ) ( Ghosh and Greenberg , 1995 ) . To deter - can be attenuated by activity blockers ( Holloway , 1966 ; mine if calcium influx via these channels contributed to Greenough andVolkmar , 1973 ; Volkmar andGreenough , dendritic growth under basal conditions , we examined 1972 ; Juraska , 1982 ; McAllister et al . , 1996 ) . Neuronal the consequences of treating the cultures with antago - activity has also been implicated in the control of den - nists of the NMDA receptor or VSCCs . While treatment dritic development of auditory brainstem neurons , cere - of the cultures with the NMDA receptor antagonist APV bellar Purkinje cells , spinal motor neurons , and cilliary had no detectable effect on dendritic growth , inhibition ganglia ( Rakic and Sidman , 1973 ; Sotelo , 1975 ; Mason of L - type VSCCs ( L - VSCCs ) with Nifedipine resulted in a significant reduction in dendritic growth ( Figures 1A and 1B ) . Thus calcium influx via VSCCs , but not NMDA 1 Correspondence : aghosh @ jhmi . edu receptors , influences dendritic growth under basal ac - 2 Present address : Department of Pharmacology , Medical College of Georgia , 1120 15th Street , Augusta , Georgia 30912 . tivity conditions . Neuron1000 Figure 1 . Activation of Voltage - Sensitive Calcium Channels and Calcium Influx In - duces Dendritic Growth ( A and B ) Effects of blocking VSCCs ( with Nifedipine ) or NMDA receptors ( with APV ) on total dendritic length in cortical cultures un - der basal conditions . ( C and D ) Effects of stimulating cortical cul - tures as indicated on total dendritic length . ( E – G ) Examples of E18 cortical neurons in culture at 4 DIV , either unstimulated ( E ) , or stimulated with 50 mM KCl ( F ) or 100 (cid:3) M Glutamate ( G ) asin ( C ) and ( D ) . Notethatneu - rons depolarized with KCl show markedly in - creased dendritic growth and branching . Scale bar is 20 (cid:3) m . ( H – K ) Cortical neurons , when depolarized with50mMKCl , show anincreaseinintracel - lular calcium . Raw fluorescence images of Fura fluorescence in normal saline solution ( NSS ) at 380 nm before ( H ) and after stimula - tionwith50mMKCl ( J ) . ( I ) and ( K ) showcolori - metric representations of the data in ( H ) and ( J ) , respectively , as percentage change . ( Blue (cid:4) 0 % change , green (cid:4) 75 % change , yellow (cid:4) 150 % change , red (cid:4) 250 % change . ) Notethatallfourpanelsshowthesamegroupofcells . ( L – O ) Nifedipine reduces the intracellular Ca 2 (cid:2) increase induced by KCl . Raw fluores - cence images of Fura fluorescence in NSS (cid:2) 20 (cid:3) M Nifedipine before stimulation ( L ) and after stimulation with 50 mM KCl ( N ) . ( M ) and ( O ) show colorimetric representations of the data in ( L ) and ( N ) , respectively , as percent - age changes . Note that all four panels show the same group of cells . ( P ) The percent change in Fura - 2 fluores - cence ( (cid:5) F380 / F380 initial ) isshownasafunction of time for cells ( n (cid:4) 14 ) depolarized with KCl ( H – K , dark blue trace ) or cells ( n (cid:4) 19 ) depolarizedwithKClinthepresenceofNifed - ipine ( L – O ) . ( Q ) Quantification of the effects of chelating extracellularcalciumwith2mMEGTAonKCl - stimulated dendritic growth . ( R ) Effect of blocking NMDA receptor ( with APV ) or voltage - sensitive calcium channels ( with Nifedipine ) on total dendritic length in unstimulated or KCl - stimulated cortical cul - tures . Note that KCl - induced dendritic growth , as is intracellular calcium increase , is blocked by Nifedipine , indicating that both are mediated by VSCC activation . Cortical cultures were transfected at E18 (cid:2) 2 DIV with either RSV - (cid:1) - galactosidase or eGFP expression vector and either treated with 20 (cid:3) M Nifedipine , 200 (cid:3) M APV , or 100 (cid:3) M glutamate at 2 DIV for 48 hr or with 50 mM KCl at 3 DIV for 18 – 24 hr . In experiments combining KCl stimulation and EGTA , APV , or Nifedipine treatment , all agents were added at 3 DIV for 16 – 24 hr . For calcium imaging experiments , cortical neurons were loaded with Fura - 2AM , imaged at E18 (cid:2) 2 DIV in NSS ( see Experimental Procedures ) containing 50 mM KCl with or without 20 (cid:3) M Nifedipine . To determine if calcium influx was sufficient to drive increased and then decayed to approximately 50 % of the maximal response ( Figure 1P ) . Chelation of extracel - dendritic growth , we stimulated cortical cultures with 50 mM KCl or 100 (cid:3) M glutamate , which we have pre - lular calcium with EGTA blocked the increase in intracel - lular calcium ( data not shown ) , indicating that the re - viously shown is effective in activating VSCCs and NMDA receptors , respectively ( Hu et al . , 1999 ) . Stimula - sponse to KCl stimulation was dependent on calcium influx . KCl - induced calcium influx was attenuated by tion with KCl , but not with glutamate , led to a dramatic increase in dendritic growth and branching ( Figures 1C – Nifedipine , indicating that between 30 % and 50 % of the depolarization - induced calcium influx is mediated by 1G ) . To demonstrate that cortical cultures respond to KCl stimulation by increasing intracellular calcium con - L - VSCCs ( Figures 1L – 1P ) . To determine if the effects of KCl on dendritic growth were mediated by calcium centration , cultures were depolarized with KCl and cal - cium dynamics imaged with Fura2 ( Figures 1H – 1P ) . In signaling , we examined the consequence of various pharmacological perturbations on KCl - induced den - response toKCl stimulation , intracellularcalcium rapidly Calcium Regulation of Dendrite Development 1001 Figure 2 . Calcium - Induced Dendritic Growth Is Suppressed by Inhibition of CaM Kinases and MAP Kinases ( A – F ) Photomicrographs ( A – C ) and video - camera lucida drawings ( D – F ) of E18 cortical neurons left unstimulated , or stimulated with KCl at 3 DIV in the absence or presence of the CaM kinase inhibitor , KN62 ( 10 (cid:3) M ) . Scale bar is 20 (cid:3) m . ( G and H ) Quantification of the effects of inhibiting CaM kinases with KN62 ( G ) or MAP kinases with U0126 ( H ) on KCl - induced dendritic growth . Note that inhibiting either pathway attenuates the KCl - induced dendritic growth . Cortical cultures were transfected at E18 (cid:2) 2 DIV with RSV - (cid:1) - galactosidase expression vector , treated as indicated at 3 DIV , and fixed and processed for immunocytochemistry at 4 DIV . dritic growth . As shown in Figure 1Q , KCl - induced den - dendritic growth , constitutively active mutants that lack the autoregulatory domain had striking but opposite ef - dritic growth was blocked by EGTA , indicating that the dendritic growth effect is calcium mediated . In addition , fects on dendritic growth . Expression of a constitutively active form of CaM kinase IV ( CaMKIV ca ) induced a KCl - induced dendritic growthwas suppressed by Nifed - ipine , but not APV ( Figure 1R ) . Thus calcium influx via dramatic increase in dendritic growth , indicating that activation of CaM kinase IV signaling is sufficient to L - VSCCs can activate a signaling pathway that induces dendritic growth . induce dendritic growth ( Figures 3A , 3B , and 3D ) . This increase in dendritic growth occurred in the absence of The principal signaling molecules activated by cal - cium influx in neurons are the calcium / calmodulin - extracellular stimuli and was similar in magnitude to that seen with KCl stimulation . In contrast , expression of a dependent protein kinases ( CaM kinase II and CaM ki - nase IV ) , mitogen - activated protein kinases ( MAPK ) , and truncated constitutively active form of CaM kinase II ( CaMK IIca ) led to a marked reduction in dendritic protein kinase A ( PKA ) ( Ghosh and Greenberg , 1995 ) . Under basal activity conditions , inhibiting either CaM growth ( Figures 3A , 3C , and 3D ) . We also examined the effectsofexpressinganotherconstitutivelyactiveCaMK kinases or MAPK , but not PKA , led to an attenuation of dendritic growth , comparable to that seen with VSCC II mutant ( CaMK II T286D ) on dendritic growth . As shown in Figure 3E , expression of this construct also led to a inhibition ( see Supplemental Data at http : / / www . neuron . org / cgi / content / full / 34 / 6 / 999 / DC1 ) . To deter - decrease in dendritic growth , but the effects were not as pronounced as those of the truncated CaM kinase II mine if these signaling molecules were involved in med - ating calcium - induced dendritic growth , cortical cul - mutant . The difference in the magnitude of the effects of the two CaM kinase II mutants may be due to the tures were stimulated with KCl in the absence or presence of inhibitors of CaM kinases ( KN62 ) or MAPK fact that the truncated form is targeted to the nucleus , while the point mutant remains in the cytoplasm ( Sun ( U0126 ) . The KCl - induced increase in dendritic growth was suppressed by both KN62 and U0126 , indicating et al . , 1994 ) . Therefore , although CaM kinase II and CaM kinase IV are both activated by calcium influx , they have that CaM kinase and MAPK contribute to calcium - dependent dendritic growth ( Figure 2 and data not distinct effects on dendritic growth . Whereas activation of CaM kinase II restricts or inhibits dendritic growth , shown ) . To directly explore the role of CaM kinase II and CaM CaM kinase IV activation markedly stimulates dendritic growth ( Wu and Cline , 1998 ) . kinase IV in activity - dependent dendritic development , we expressed wild - type and constitutively active forms We also examined the effects of transfecting wild - type and constitutively active forms of MEK ( a MAP of these molecules in cortical neurons . Whereas wild - type forms of CaM kinase II and IV had little effect on kinase activator ) on dendritic development in cortical Neuron1002 Figure 3 . CaM Kinase II and IV Have Distinct Effects on Dendritic Growth ( A – C ) Camera lucida drawings of cortical neurons transfected with the parent vector or with constitutively active forms of CaM kinase IV ( CaM KIV ca ) or CaM kinase II ( CaM KII ca ) . Scale bar is 20 (cid:3) m . ( D and E ) Quantification of the effects of expressing wild - type ( wt ) or constitutively active ( ca ) mutants of CaM kinase II and CaM kinase IV on total dendritic length in E18 cortical cultures . ( F ) Quantification of total dendritic length in cortical neurons transfected with control vector or wild - type CaM kinase IV in the absence or presence of KCl stimulation . Note that overexpression of CaM kinase IV dramatically potentiates the effect of KCl depolarization on dendritic growth , indicating that intracellular CaM kinase IV levels are limiting for calcium - activated dendritic growth . ( G ) Quantification of the effects of expressing a kinase inactive ( dominant negative ) mutant of CaM kinase IV on KCl - induced dendritic growth . ( H ) Expression of CaM kinase IV in the developing rat cerebral cortex as determined by Western blot analysis . Samples in lanes 2 – 8 are cerebral cortex homogenates from the indicated ages . Lane 1 contains lysates from cortical cultures at E18 (cid:2) 4 DIV . Lane 9 was loaded with P8 cerebellar homogenate . Note that there is marked increase in CaM kinase IV expression between E18 and P15 , which coincides with the period of maximal dendritic growth . Cortical cultures were transfected at E18 (cid:2) 2 DIV with RSV - (cid:1) - galactosidase together with the empty parent vector ( control ) or the CaM kinase expression plasmids in a molar ratio of 1 : 2 ( (cid:1) gal : construct ) , and fixed and processed for immunocytochemistry at E18 (cid:2) 4 DIV . neurons . Although pharmacological inhibition of MAPK extracts prepared from different developmental ages . As shown in Figure 3H , there was a dramatic increase indicated a role for MAPK in regulating dendritic growth ( Figure 2H ) , expression of constitutively active MEK was in CaM kinase IV expression in the cortex between E18 and P15 . Remarkably , this almost precisely matches the not sufficient to induce dendritic growth ( data not shown ) . Since CaM kinase IV was the only kinase suffi - period of maximum dendritic growth in the cortex ( Miller and Peters , 1981 ) , suggesting that CaM kinase IV levels cient to induce dendritic growth , in the remainder of the study , we focused on the mechanisms that mediate the may be causally linked to developmentally regulated dendritic growth . To directly test if intracellular CaM growth - promoting effects of CaM kinase IV . To determine if CaM kinase IV expression in the brain kinase IV levels are limiting for activity - dependent den - dritic growth , we examined the consequences of over - isregulatedduringdevelopment , wecarriedoutWestern blot analysis of CaM kinase IV expression in cortical expressing wild - type CaM kinase IV on KCl - induced Calcium Regulation of Dendrite Development 1003 Figure 4 . Calcium - Induced Dendritic Growth Requires New Protein Synthesis during a Brief Period Immediately Following Stimulation ( A – D ) Camera lucida drawings of cortical neurons transfected with (cid:1) - galactosidase at E18 (cid:2) 2 DIV and either left unstimulated ( A ) , stimulated with 50 mM KCl ( B ) , treated with cycloheximide ( CHX ) 1 hr prior to 50 mM KCl stimulation ( C , CHX - 1 hr pre - KCl stimulation ) , or treated with CHX 6 hr after 50 mM KCl stimulation ( D , CHX - 6 hr post - KCl stimulation ) . Cultures were fixed and processed for (cid:1) - galactosidase immunocytochemistry at E18 (cid:2) 4 DIV . Scale bar is 20 (cid:3) m . ( E ) Quantification of the effects of CHX treatment on KCl - stimulated dendritic growth . Note that CHX blocks KCl - induced dendritic growth when added up to 1 hr after stimulation , but does not inhibit KCl - stimulated dendritic growth when applied 6 hr after stimulation . dendritic growth . While overexpression of wild - type KCl stimulation . As shown in Figures 4A – 4C and 4E , KCl - induced dendritic growth was completely prevented by CaM kinase IV did not significantly affect dendritic growth in unstimulated neurons , it greatly potentiated pretreatment with cycloheximide , indicating that cal - cium - dependent dendritic growth requires new protein the calcium - dependent increase in dendritic growth in KCl - stimulated neurons ( Figure 3F ) . This result indicates synthesis . When cycloheximide was added 1 hr after stimulation , dendritic growth was also inhibited , but ad - that the level of expression of CaM kinase IV is a key determinant of calcium - dependent dendritic growth . dition of cycloheximide 6 hr after stimulation had no inhibitory effect on dendritic growth ( Figures 4D and As a final test of the role of CaM kinase IV in dendritic development , we examined the effects of a kinase - dead 4E ) . Thus , activity - dependent dendritic growth requires new protein synthesis between 1 and 6 hr following ( putative dominant negative ) form of CaM kinase IV ( Ho et al . , 1996 ) on calcium - dependent dendritic growth . As stimulation , suggesting that calcium - induced dendritic growth may have a transcriptional component . shown in Figure 3G , the effect of KCl stimulation on dendritic growth was attenuated by expression of this The best - characterized transcription factor target of CaM kinase IV is cAMP response element binding pro - construct , supportinga rolefor CaMkinase IVin activity - dependent dendritic growth . The attenuation of activity - tein ( CREB ) ( Sun et al . , 1994 ; Matthews , 1994 ; Sun et al . , 1996 ) . CaM kinase IV induces CREB - mediated tran - dependent dendritic growth by KN62 , together with the effects of altering CaM kinase IV levels and activity on scription by phosphorylation of CREB at Ser133 , which is required for CREB to associate with its coactivator , dendritic growth , strongly suggests that CaM kinase IV is a major effector of calcium - dependent dendritic CBP ( Hu et al . , 1999 ; Chawla et al . , 1998 ) . We therefore carried out a series of experiments to examine the role growth in cortical neurons . Calcium signals could influence dendritic morphology ofCREBand CBPincalciumand CaMkinaseIV - induced dendritic growth . To determine if CREB function was either by inducing local cytoskeletal changes or by regu - lating the synthesis of proteins that control dendritic required for activity - dependent dendritic growth , we ex - amined the consequences of expressing a dominant growth . Since CaM kinase IV is best characterized for its role in transcriptional regulation , the involvement of negative mutant of CREB in cortical neurons ( Walton et al . , 1992 ) . As shown in Figure 5A , KCl - induced dendritic CaM kinase IV suggests that calcium - dependent den - dritic growth may require new protein synthesis . To test growth was completely blocked by dominant negative CREB , indicating that calcium - dependent dendritic this possibility directly , we treated cortical cultures with the protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide , either im - growth requires CREB function . Since we propose that CaM kinase IV is a key mediator of activity - dependent mediately prior to stimulation or at various times after Neuron1004 Figure 5 . Calcium Influx and CaM Kinase IV Activation Induce Dendritic Growth via CREB - and CBP - Mediated Transcription ( A ) Quantification of the effects of expressing a dominant negative mutant of CREB ( KCREB ) on KCl - induced dendritic growth . ( B ) Quantification of the effects of expressing a KCREB on dendritic growth induced by constitutively active CaM kinase IV . ( C ) Quantification of the effects of expressing a dominant inhibitor of CBP ( E1A CXdl ) or a mutant of the inhibitor that does not bind CBP ( E1A CXdl , del 2 - 37 ) on KCl - induced dendritic growth . ( D ) Quantification of the effects of expressing E1A ( CXdl ) and E1A ( CXdl , del 2 - 37 ) on dendritic growth induced by constitutively active CaM kinase IV . Cortical cultures were transfected at E18 (cid:2) 2 DIV with RSV - (cid:1) - galactosidase , CaM kinase IV ca , and either empty parent vector , KCREB , E1A ( CXdl ) , or E1A ( CXdl , del 2 - 37 ) at molar ratios of 1 : 2 : 8 ( (cid:1) - gal : CaM kinase IV ca : construct ) and at E18 (cid:2) 4 DIV were fixed and processed for immunocytochemistry . dendritic growth , we also examined the effect of domi - ( E1A ( CXdl ) ) that inhibits CBP function in cortical neu - rons ( Hu et al . , 1999 ) . As shown in Figures 5C and 5D , nant negativeCREB on CaM kinaseIV - induced dendritic growth . This too was completely blocked by dominant the ability of KCl and CaM kinase IV to induce dendritic growth was completely blocked by E1A ( CXdl ) . The fact negative CREB ( Figure 5B ) . These experiments show that calcium and CaM kinase IV induce dendritic growth that the effects of inhibiting CBP were more pronounced than the effects of inhibiting CREB may be due to the via CREB - mediated transcription . We and others have previously shown that calcium fact that CBP is known to interact with many different transcription factors , and therefore inhibiting CBP might activation of CREB - dependent transcription requires CBP function , and that CaM kinase IV phosphorylates inhibit transactivation via transcription factors in addi - tion to CREB . To determine if the E1A effect was indeed CBP and induces CBP - mediated transcription ( Chawla et al . , 1998 ; Hu et al . , 1999 ) . We therefore tested the role due to its ability to bind CBP , we tested the effect of a slightly variant mutant ( E1A ( CXdl del 2 - 37 ) ) that can no of CBP in calcium and CaM kinase IV - induced dendritic growth by expressing a mutant form of the E1A gene longer bind to CBP ( Sun et al . , 1994 ) . This E1A construct Calcium Regulation of Dendrite Development 1005 Figure 6 . Neurons in Cortical Slice Cultures Show Spontaneous Calcium Transients ( A ) Example of cortical neurons in slice culture loaded with Fura2 - AM . Note that the cell bodies of individual Fura - loaded neurons can be clearly distinguished . ( B ) Examples of spontaneous somatic calcium transients in cortical neurons in slice culture . The change in Fura - 2 fluorescence ( (cid:5) F380 / F380 initial ) is shown as a function of time . Note that calcium transients in groups of neurons are synchronized , as reported by Mao et al . ( 2001 ) . These recordings are in ACSF with 3 mM Ca / 0 mM Mg . ( C ) Spontaneous transients are eliminated in ACSF containing 1 mMCa / 3mM Mg , as well as by the calcium chelator EGTA ( data not shown ) . was no longer effective in blocking KCl - and CaM kinase cortical slices ( Figure 7C ) . Treatment of the cultures with the L - VSCC blocker Nifedipine significantly reduced IV - induced dendritic growth . Therefore , as would be ex - CREB phosphorylation ( Figure 7C ) , indicating that en - pected for a CREB - dependent mechanism , activity - dogenous activation of L - VSCCs regulates phosphory - dependent dendritic growth requires CBP function . lation of CREB in cortical slice cultures . In a final series of experiments , we investigated To determine if signaling via L - VSCCs regulates den - whether the signaling pathway we had identified based dritic growth in cortical slice cultures , we transfected on KCl - induced dendritic growth in cortical cultures was P7 cortical slice cultures with a GFP expression vector . likely to be involved in dendritic growth control in a The slices were then placed in control media , or in media physiological context . For these experiments we turned containing the L - VSCC inhibitor Nifedipine for 2 days . to postnatal cortical slice cultures , which we and others At the end of the experiment , slices were fixed and have shown preserve cortical cytoarchitecture ( Whitford processed for GFP immunofluorescence , which reveals et al . , 2002 ) . To determine if neurons in such slice cul - the morphologies of individual transfected neurons tures were spontaneously active , we imaged calcium ( Whitford et al . , 2002 ) . For this set of experiments , we transients in postnatal cortical slices using Fura - 2 im - restricted our analysis to layer 5 cells , which are a popu - aging . As shown in Figure 6 , individual neurons can lation of cells that have well - developed dendrites at this clearly be visualized based on Fura - 2 loading , and many age . As shown in Figure 7 , cortical neurons in slice of them show calcium transients . As reported by Yuste cultures have well - developed basal dendritic trees that and colleagues , groups of cortical neurons are phase - resemble their morphology in vivo . Treatment with locked in their calcium responses ( Figure 6B ) . These Nifedipine led to a significant reduction in total dendritic transients are eliminated in a high Mg 2 (cid:2) / low Ca 2 (cid:2) bath length , indicating that calcium signaling via spontane - ( Figure 6C ) , or by treatment with EGTA ( data not shown ) , ous L - VSCC activation in cortical slice contributes to consistent with the interpretation that the transients in - dendritic growth . Sholl analysis of the dendritic trees in deed reflect calcium signals . It has previously been this experiment also revealed a significant reduction in shown that these transients correspond to action poten - the number of crossings in the presence of Nifedipine tials - induced calcium influx ( Mao et al . , 2001 ) . Thus , ( Figure 7E ) , indicating that calcium signaling increases cortical neurons in slice cultures have a fairly high de - the overall complexity of the dendritic tree rather than greeofspontaneousactivity , whichmakesthemsuitable simply extending the length of existing dendrites . for studies of activity - dependent dendritic growth . Finally , we examined the consequence of inhibiting The two principal conclusions of our cell culture ex - CREBfunction ondendritic developmentin corticalslice periments were that calcium influx via L - VSCCs induces cultures . For these experiments , P7 cortical slices were dendritic growth , and that this requires CREB - mediated transfected with GFP together with a control vector or transcription . To determine if these key features were a dominant negative CREB construct ( KCREB ) . As also true for dendritic growth in cortical slices , we first shown in Figures 7F – 7I , total dendritic length and den - examined whether L - VSCC activation regulated CREB dritic complexity were sharply reduced in cells express - phosphorylation in cortical slices under spontaneous ing dominant negative CREB . Thus , as surmised from activity conditions . Western blots indicated that phos - the cell culture experiments , CREB - mediated transcrip - tion plays an important role in regulating cortical den - phorylated CREB could be readily detected in untreated Neuron1006 Figure 7 . Inhibition of VSCCs and CREB Activity Attenuates the Growth and Complexity of Layer 5 Pyramidal Neuron Basal Dendrites in Cortical Slice Cultures ( A and B ) Camera lucida drawings of basal dendrites of GFP - transfected layer 5 pyramidal neurons in P7 cortical slices at 2 DIV that were either unstimulated ( A ) or treated with 20 (cid:3) M Nifedipine ( B ) for 36 hr . Scale bar is 50 (cid:3) m . ( C ) Level of CREB phosphorylation as detected by phospho - CREB Western blot in P7 cortical slice cultures under basal conditions ( Control ) or after treating with 20 (cid:3) M Nifedipine ( Nifedipine ) for 36 hr . Note that inhibiting L - VSCCs reduces phospho - CREB levels in cortical slice cultures . ( D and E ) Effect of Nifedipine treatment on the complexity of layer 5 basal dendrites as measured by total dendrite length ( D ) and Sholl analysis ( E ) . Asterisks indicate p (cid:6) 0 . 05 . ( F and G ) Camera lucida drawings of basal dendrites of GFP - transfected layer 5 pyramidal neurons in P7 cortical slices at 3 DIV that were transfected with GFP together with either empty parent vector ( F ) or a dominant negative mutant of CREB ( KCREB ) ( G ) for 48 hr . Scale bar is 50 (cid:3) m . ( H and I ) Effects of expressing parent vector or KCREB on the complexity of layer 5 basal dendrites as measured by total dendrite length ( H ) and Sholl analysis ( I ) . Note that expression of KCREB decreased both the length and complexity of basal dendrites . drite development . Together with the Nifedipine experi - such as filopodia formation , as well as longer term ef - fects such as regulation of dendritic growth . ments , these observations support a model in which While both CaM kinase IV and MAP kinase appear to calcium influx through L - VSCCs regulates dendrite de - be required for calcium - induced dendritic growth , it is velopment via CREB - mediated transcription . intriguing that a constitutively active form of CaM kinase IV , but not of MEK , can induce dendritic growth . Al - Discussion though the basis of the difference in the effects of CaM kinase IV and MAP kinase is not yet known , one possibil - Our observations suggest that calcium influx induces ity is that it may be related to their ability to induce dendritic growth via activation of a transcriptional pro - CREB / CBP - mediated transcription . Both CaM kinase gram that involves activation of CaM kinase IV , and IV and MAP kinase have been implicated in mediating CREB - and CBP - mediated gene expression . MAP ki - calcium activation of CREB - dependent transcription , nase is also likely to participate in this process since but they are thought to differ in their mechanism of inhibitors of MAP kinase block calcium - induced in - action . While CaM kinase IV appears to be involved in creases in dendritic growth . MAP kinase has previously the rapid phosphorylation of CREB , the MAP kinase been implicated in activity - dependent filopodia forma - pathway is activated with slower kinetics and appears tion in hippocampal neurons ( Wu et al . , 2001 ) . Thus , to be important for the sustained phosphorylation of MAP kinase signaling appears to be involved both in CREB ( Shaywitz and Greenberg , 1999 ; Dolmetsch et al . , 2001 ; Hardingham et al . , 2001 ; Chawla and Bading , mediating the short - term effects of calcium signaling , Calcium Regulation of Dendrite Development 1007 2001 ) . Both the rapid and sustained components of that dendritic growth is regulated by a combination of influencesthat includeintrinsicgenetic programs , extra - CREB phosphorylation are required for transcription ( Dolmetsch et al . , 2001 ) . In addition , calcium signaling cellular growth factors , and neural activity , their relative contributions in regulating specific aspects of dendritic directly activates CBP , which is another important com - ponent of the CREB transcription complex ( Chawla et patterning are not well understood . Based on the ex - pression patterns of various extracellular factors and al . , 1998 ; Hu et al . , 1999 ; Impey et al . , 2002 ; but see Kornhauser et al . , 2002 ) . In our experiments , the fact the timing of innervation , it seems likely that intrinsic genetic programs and extracellular factors are most im - that inhibitors of either CaM kinases or MAP kinase block calcium - dependent dendritic growth is consistent portant during embryonicdevelopment , and that activity becomesprogressivelymoreimportantduringpostnatal with the dual requirement of these kinases in activation of CREB . Constitutively active CaM kinase IV is probably development . While this is a reasonable speculation , it has not been rigorously tested . Selective inactivation of effective in inducing dendritic growth because it can sustain CREB phosphorylation due to its continued L - VSCC , CaMkinaseIV , or CREBduringspecificperiods of development should help address these issues . presence in transfected neurons , and it is effective in activating CBP ( Hu et al . , 1999 ; L . R . and A . G . , unpub - While we have focused on the role of transcription - dependent mechanisms in this study , it is likely that lished observations ) . Activation of MEK alone , in con - trast , may not be effective in inducing dendritic growth local calcium signaling events also play an important role in dendritic patterning . In addition to previous stud - because of its inability to activate CBP ( Hu et al . , 1999 ) . Thus , the differential ability of CaM kinase IV and MEK ies that support a role of NMDA receptor signaling in regulation of spine morphology ( Maletic - Savatic et al . , to activate CBP may be the molecular distinction that underlies the distinct biological effects of these kinases . 1999 ; Engert and Bonhoeffer , 1999 ) , a recent study sug - gests that local calcium signaling can play an important The target genes of CaM kinase IV and CREB that mediate dendritic growth are not known , but an impor - role in regulating the stability of terminal dendritic seg - ments . Lohmann et al . ( 2002 ) report that in retinal gan - tant potential target is brain - derived neurotrophic factor ( BDNF ) . We have previously shown that CaM kinase IV glion cells , distal dendritic segments display localized calcium transients due to calcium release from intracel - can induce BDNF expression by a CREB - dependent mechanism ( Shieh et al . , 1998 ) , and it has been reported lular stores . Suppression of these calcium signals leads to the rapid withdrawal of distal dendritic segments . that BDNF expression in cortical neurons can lead to increased dendritic growth ( McAllister et al . , 1995 , 1997 ; Therefore , the effects of activity on dendritic morphol - ogy are likely to involve both local and transcriptional Horsch et al . , 1999 ) . Thus calcium - and CaM kinase IV - induced dendritic growth may be mediated by BDNF . consequences of calcium signaling . The fact that cyclo - heximide suppresses calcium - dependent dendritic growth To test this possibility , it will be important to determine if calcium - induced dendritic growth is compromised in in our experiments is consistent not only with a role for calcium - induced gene expression , but also with a micelackingBDNFortheBDNFreceptor , Trk - B . Regula - tion of dendritic growth via CaM kinase IV , CREB , and potential role for local protein synthesis in this process . It will be interesting to determine whether local protein BDNF may be relevant to mechanisms of learning and memory since all of these proteins have been previously synthesis contributes to the cellular effects of local den - dritic calcium transients . implicated in mediating different aspects of long - term plasticity ( Dash et al . , 1990 ; Bito et al . , 1996 ; Shaywitz The observation that calcium influx may influence dendritic development by both transcription - dependent and Greenberg , 1999 ) . Since dendritic architecture is likely to influence patterns of synaptic connectivity , and transcription - independent processes raises the possibility that calcium influx via NMDA receptors and some of the effects of calcium signaling on long - term plasticity may be mediated by the CaM kinase IV - and VSCCs may regulate separate aspects of activity - dependent dendritic growth and patterning . While the CREB - dependent regulation of dendritic growth . While CREB is the best - characterized target of CaM overallgrowthof thedendriticarbormay beregulatedby L - VSCC activation and CREB - dependent transcription , kinase IV , it is likely that activation of CREB alone is not sufficient to induce dendritic growth . In preliminary thestabilityofparticular dendriticbranchesmaydepend upon NMDA receptor - dependent activation of intracel - studies , we have found that , in contrast to the effects of constitutively active CaM kinase IV , expression of a lular stores . A related possibility is that NMDA receptor activation may lead to local biochemical changes that constitutively active form of CREB is not sufficient to induce dendritic growth by itself ( L . R . and A . G . , unpub - in effect tag regions of the dendrite for subsequent growth . L - VSCC - dependent events may then specifi - lished observation ) . Thus the effects of CaM kinase IV on dendritic morphology are likely to involve activation cally drive dendritic growth at these tagged sites . Such a mechanism would allow for targeted dendritic growth of additional transcription factors . The identification of these putative CaM kinase IV targets should provide in a transcription - dependent manner . This possibility is conceptually similar to the synaptic tag hypothesis that important insight into the mechanisms that underlie the cellular effects of CaM kinase IV . has been proposed for long - term changes in synaptic strength ( Frey and Morris , 1997 ) . A major goal of future experiments will be to assess the role of L - VSCCs , CaM kinase IV , and CREB in regula - The recent identification of a number of signals that influence dendritic development suggest a model in tion of dendritic growth in vivo . Along with developing appropriate pharmacologicalor genetic methodsto per - which different signals regulate particular aspects of dendriticgrowthandpatterning . Studiesonthedevelop - turb these molecules , this will require a better under - standing of how and when calcium signals influence ment of cortical neurons serve as a useful illustration of this point . Soon after arriving in the cortical plate , neu - dendritic growth during development . While it is clear Neuron1008 used contained 20 (cid:3) M Nifedipine . In all experiments , the cells were ronsareexposedtoagradientofSema3A ( Polleuxetal . , imaged in Normal saline solution ( NSS : 137 mM NaCl , 25 mM Glu - 2000 ) . This signal acts as a chemorepellant for efferent cose , 10 mM HEPES , 5 mM KCl , 1 mM MgCl 2 , and 2 mM CaCl 2 ) . axons and as a chemoattractant for apical dendrites , In experiments where cells were depolarized , osmotic stress was thus establishing the core morphology of cortical pyra - prevented by isosmotically substituting 50 mM KCl for 50 mM NaCl . midal neurons . The subsequent growth of cortical den - Solutions were changed using a gravity - based perfusion system withflowratesapproximately2 – 3 ml / min . Imagingwasalwayscom - drites is regulated by a number of extracellular signals . pleted within 1 hr of loading . Images of Fura - loaded cells were Important among these are BDNF and Slit - 1 , which act captured at 0 . 2 – 0 . 5 Hz with an Orca II digital camera ( Hamamatsu as growth and branching factors , and Notch , which ap - Photonics ) attachedtothesideportofaNikonEclipseTE300micro - pears to restrict growth ( McAllister et al . , 1995 , 1997 ; scope driven by OpenLab 3 Imaging software ( Improvision , Inc ) . Sestan et al . , 1999 ; Redmond et al . , 2000 ; Whitford et al . , Eachexperimentwasrepeatedaminimumofthreetimesandyielded 2002 ) . In addition to these extracellular factors , activity - comparable results . dependent calcium influxis likely to exerta considerable influence on dendritic morphology . We propose that Slice Cultures and Transfections activation of L - VSCCs regulates overall dendritic growth Cortices from postnatal day 7 rats were coronally sectioned in ice - via a CaM kinase IV and CREB - dependent mechanism , coldHBSSonavibratome ( TedPella ) at350 (cid:3) mandtransferredonto a porous membrane ( Becton - Dickinson ) . Slices were maintained at and , by analogy with retinal ganglion cells , the stability an air - media interface in 50 % glutamine - free Basal Media Eagle , of individual dendritic branches may be regulated by 25 % horse serum , 20 mM glucose , 1 mM glutamine 1 mM Hepes , local elevations in intracellular calcium . Thus the coordi - and HBSS as previously described ( Whitford et al . , 2002 ) . Individual nated action of both activity - independent and activity - neurons were transfected with green fluorescent protein ( GFP , dependent mechanisms may specify the mature mor - Clonetech ) plasmid - coated 1 . 6 (cid:3) m gold particles using biolistics phology of cortical neurons . ( Helios gene gun , Bio - Rad ) on the day of plating and at 1 DIV , were treatedfor36hrwitheither20 (cid:3) MNifedipine ( Calbiochem ) orvehicle then fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde . Cotransfections were similarly Experimental Procedures performed with 1 . 6 (cid:3) m gold particles coated with GFP and either KCREB or empty vector at molar ratios of 1 : 4 ( GFP : construct ) and Dissociated Cell Cultures and Transfections Cortical neurons from Long Evans rats were cultured as described fixedafter48 hr . SliceswereprocessedforGFP andMAP2immuno - fluorescence with rabbit anti - GFP ( Molecular Probes ) and mouse previously ( Threadgill etal . , 1997 ) . Briefly , embryonicday 18cortical cells were digested in 10 U / ml papain ( Worthington ) , dissociated , anti - MAP2 ( Sigma ) primaryantibodies , visualizedwithAlexa488and Alexa568 conjugated secondary antibodies ( Molecular Probes ) , and plated onto poly - D - lysine and laminin - coated 12 well dishes at 1 (cid:7) 10 6 cells per well in glutamine - free Basal Media Eagle , 1 mM gluta - counterstained with Hoechst . Hoechst and MAP2 immunostaining wereusedtoidentifylayer5 , fromwhichGFP - transfectedpyramidal mine , 1 % N2 , and fetal bovine serum ( all from Life Technologies ) , and maintained at 37 (cid:8) C in 95 % / 5 % O 2 / CO 2 . Cells were transfected neurons were chosen for morphological analysis . by a modified calcium phosphate procedure as described ( Thread - gill et al . , 1997 ) at 2 days in vitro ( DIV ) and processed for Analysis of Slice Cultures (cid:1) - galactosidase immunocytochemistry at 4 DIV with either mouse To analyze the morphology of transfected neurons in cortical slice anti - (cid:1) - galactosidase ( Promega ) or rabbit anti - (cid:1) - galactosidase ( 5 (cid:9) – cultures , the entire basal dendritic tree of layer 5 pyramidal neurons 3 (cid:9) ) primary antibodies and visualized with peroxidase conjugated was captured by z sectioning on a Zeiss LSM510 confocal micro - secondary antibodies ( ABC Elite , Vector Labs ) ( Threadgill et al . , scope . Z stacks were imported into OpenLab 3 Imaging software 1997 ) . The wild - type and truncated CaM kinase II and IV constructs ( Improvision , Inc . ) and the dendrite length in the x and y planes and the CaM kinase IV inactive expression construct used in this measured . Themeasurementsdonotincludecorrectionsforinclina - experiment have been previously described ( Sun et al . , 1994 ) . In tions of dendritic processes and therefore represent projected all cases , transfection with the empty parent vector was used as lengths . Sholl analysis was carried out by counting the number of control . basal dendrites that cross a series of concentric circles at 25 (cid:3) m interval distances from the cell soma . The representative basal den - Analysis of Dissociated Cell Cultures dritic trees shown in Figure 7 were traced in OpenLab . Data are Transfection experiments were carried out in duplicate wells , and shown as mean (cid:10) standard error . Asterisks indicate statistically all of the experiments described were repeated multiple times with significant differences ( Student’s t test , p (cid:6) 0 . 05 ) . comparable results . Images of RSV - (cid:1) - galactosidase - transfected neurons were captured using a digital CCD camera ( Dage , MTI ) attached tothe side portof an invertedmicroscope driven byIP Lab Calcium Imaging in Cortical Slices Spectrum 3 . 1 . 1 image - acquisition software ( Scanalytics ) . Captured Calcium imaging of spontaneous calcium transients was performed cells were then traced using ClarisDraw software . To assess the on rat cortical slices ( Mao et al . , 2001 ) . Briefly , rat pups ranging in effects of pharmacological treatments and expression constructs age from P7 – P14 were quickly decapitated . The whole brain was on dendritic growth , the dendritic trees of at least 25 neurons were removed and mounted on a vibratome cutting block in an ice cold reconstructed and the total dendritic length was determined using bathofACSFbubbledwith95 % O 2 and5 % CO 2 . ( ACSFcomposition IP Lab Spectrum software . Data are shown as mean (cid:10) standard follows in mM : 123 NaCl , 26 NaHCO 3 , 1 . 25 NaH 2 PO 4 , 10 glucose , 6 error . Asterisks indicate statistically significant differences ( p (cid:6) KCl , 1 CaCl 2 , 2 MgCl 2 . ) Brain sections were cut approximately 300 – 0 . 05 ) . 350 (cid:3) m in thickness and cultured for 1 day in serum containing media at 37 (cid:8) C in an incubator . Immediately before imaging , slices were loaded with 10 – 15 (cid:3) M Fura - 2AM ( Molecular Probes ) for 1 Calcium Imaging in Dissociated Cell Cultures Dissociated cortical neurons were cultured on poly - lysine / laminin hr at 37 (cid:8) C and then washed with ACSF for 10 – 15 min to reduce background fluorescence . The slice was then loaded onto the stage coated 35 mm glass bottom tissue culture dishes ( MatTek ) at 1 . 5 (cid:7) 10 6 cells per dish and imaged after 2 DIV . On the day of imaging , of a Nikon Eclipse TE300 inverted scope and visualized using a 40 (cid:7) oil immersion objective ( Nikon ) . Solutions were changed using a cells were washed twice with DMEM and incubated with 2 . 5 (cid:3) M Fura - 2AM ( Molecular Probes ) in DMEM for 15 min at 37 (cid:8) C . The cells gravity - based perfusion system with flow rates around 3 – 5 ml / min . ImageswereacquiredusingaHammatsuOrcadigitalcameradriven were washed twice with DMEM and left at 37 (cid:8) C for another 15 min to allow for complete hydrolysis of the acetoxymethyl ( AM ) ester by Openlab Software ( Improvision ) . Frames were acquired at 1 Hz for 300 – 500 s . After a solution change , the slices were allowed to moiety . In experiments where Nifedipine was added , cells were incubated with 20 (cid:3) M Nifedipine ( Calbiochem ) during this second equilibriate in new solutions for several minutes before recording began . DMEM incubation . In these experiments , all subsequent solutions Calcium Regulation of Dendrite Development 1009 Western Blot Analysis ciated with hippocampal long - term synaptic plasticity . Nature 399 , 66 – 70 . Cortices were dissected from embryonic ( E18 and E21 ) and postna - tal rats ( P1 , P8 , P15 , P22 , and adult ) or samples collected from E18 Frey , U . , and Morris , R . G . ( 1997 ) . Synaptic tagging and long - term cultured cells . Tissues and cells were homogenized with a dounce potentiation . Nature 385 , 533 – 536 . homogenizer in lysis buffer as previously described ( Redmond et Ghosh , A . , and Greenberg , M . E . ( 1995 ) . Distinct roles for bFGF and al . , 2000 ) . Protein concentration was determined using BCA protein NT - 3 in the regulation of cortical neurogenesis . Science 268 , assay ( Pierce ) and 10 (cid:3) g of each homogenate was separated by 239 – 247 . PAGE and transferred to nitrocellulose . Blots were blocked in 5 % Greenough , W . T . , and Volkmar , F . R . ( 1973 ) . Pattern of dendritic milk in TBST and incubated with anti - CaMK IV antibody ( Transduc - branchinginoccipitalcortexofratsrearedincomplexenvironments . tion Labs ) diluted in blocking solution for 16 hr at 4 (cid:8) C . Blots were Exp . Neurol . 40 , 491 – 504 . incubatedinperoxidaseconjugatedanti - mousesecondaryantibody ( Amersham ) diluted in blocking solution and visualized using a che - Hardingham , G . E . , Arnold , F . J . , and Bading , H . ( 2001 ) . A calcium miluminescent detection system ( Pierce ) . Cortical slice cultures microdomain near NMDA receptors : on switch for ERK - dependent were harvested by boiling SDS lysis , proteins separated on SDS - synapse to nucleus communication . Nat . Neurosci . 4 , 565 – 566 . PAGE , and transferred to nitrocellulose using standard protocols . Ho , N . , Gullberg , M . , and Chatila , T . ( 1996 ) . Activation protein Blots were blocked in 5 % milk in TBST and incubated with anti - 1 - dependent transcriptional activation of interleukin 2 gene by phospo - CREBantibodies ( CellSignaling ) dilutedinblockingsolution Ca2 (cid:2) / calmodulin kinase type IV / Gr . J . Exp . Med . 184 , 101 – 112 . for 16 hr at 4 (cid:8) C . Secondary antibody incubation and visualization Holloway , R . L . ( 1966 ) . Dendritic branching : some preliminary results were performed as above . After visualization of phospho - CREB lev - oftrainingandcomplexityinratvisualcortex . BrainRes . 2 , 393 – 396 . els , blotswerestrippedandreprobedwithanti - CREB ( phosphoryla - tion - state independent , Cell Signaling ) antibodies diluted in 4 % Horsch , H . W . , Kru¨ttgen , A . , Portbury , S . D . , and Katz , L . C . ( 1999 ) . horse serum in TBST and visualized as above . Destabilization of cortical dendrites and spines by BDNF . Neuron 23 , 353 – 364 . Hu , S . - C . , Chirivia , J . , and Ghosh , A . ( 1999 ) . Regulation of CBP - Acknowledgments mediated transcription by neuronal calcium signaling . Neuron 22 , 799 – 808 . We would like to thank the following individuals for plasmids : Drs . Richard Goodman ( KCREB ) , Richard Maurer ( CaM kinase II and IV Impey , S . , Fong , A . L . , Wang , Y . , Cardineaux , J . - R . , Fass , D . M . , Obrie - ( wt / ca ) ) , Talal Chatila ( kinase - dead CaM kinase IV ) , Tom Soderling tan , K . , Wayman , G . A . , Storm , D . A . , Soderling , T . R . , and Goodman , ( CaM kinase II T286D ) , Ed Crebs ( MEK ) , James DeCaprio R . H . ( 2002 ) . PhosphorylationofCBPmediatestranscriptionalactiva - ( E1A ( CXdl ) ) , Kate Bobb ( E1A ( CXdl , del 2 - 37 ) ) . Also , thanks to Shu - tion by neural activity and CaM kinase IV . Neuron 34 , 235 – 244 . Ching Hu , Kristin Whitford , LeeAnna Ghosh , and members of the Juraska , J . M . ( 1982 ) . The development of pyramidal neurons after Ghosh labfor comments anddiscussions . This workwas supported eyeopeninginthevisualcortexofhoodedrats : aquantitativestudy . by an NIH NRSA award ( L . R . ) , a Merck Scholar Award ( A . G . ) , and J . Comp . Neurol . 212 , 208 – 213 . grants from the NINDS ( NS39993 ) and NIMH ( MH60598 ) ( A . G . ) . Kalb , R . G . ( 1994 ) . Regulation of motor neuron dendrite growth by NMDA receptor activation . Development 120 , 3063 – 3071 . Received : September 28 , 2001 Kornhauser , J . M . , Cowan , C . W . , Shaywitz , A . J . , Dolmetsch , R . E . , Revised : May 9 , 2002 Griffith , E . C . , Hu , L . S . , Haddad , C . , Xia , Z . , and Greenberg , M . E . ( 2002 ) . CREBtranscriptionalactivityinneuronsisregulatedbymulti - References ple calcium - specific phosphorylation events . Neuron 34 , 221 – 233 . Lohmann , C . , Myhr , K . L . , and Wong , R . O . L . ( 2002 ) . Selective stabili - Benes , F . M . , Parks , T . N . , and Rubel , E . W . ( 1977 ) . Rapid dendritic zation of developing dendrites by transmitter - evoked local calcium atrophy following deafferentation : an EM morphometric analysis . release . Nature , in press . Brain Res . 122 , 1 – 13 . Maletic - Savatic , M . , Malinow , R . , and Svoboda , K . ( 1999 ) . Rapid Bito , K . , Deisseroth , K . , and Tsien , R . W . ( 1996 ) . CREB phosphoryla - dendritic morphogenesis in CA1 hippocampal dendrites induced by tion and dephosphorylation : a Ca ( 2 (cid:2) ) - and stimulus duration - synaptic activity . Science 283 , 1923 – 1927 . dependent switch for hippocampal gene expression . Cell 87 , 1203 – 1214 . Mao , B . Q . , Hamzei - Sichani , F . , Aronov , D . , Froemke , R . C . , and Yuste , R . ( 2001 ) . Dynamics of spontaneous activity in neocortical Chawla , S . , and Bading , H . ( 2001 ) . CREB / CBP and SRE - interacting slices . Neuron 32 , 883 – 898 . transcriptional regulators are fast on - off switches : duration of cal - cium transients specifies the magnitude of transcriptional re - Mason , C . A . , Morrison , M . E . , Ward , M . S . , Zhang , Q . , and Baird , sponses . J . Neurochem . 79 , 849 – 858 . D . H . ( 1997 ) . Axon - target interactions in the developing cerebellum . Perspect . Dev . Neurobiol . 5 , 69 – 82 . Chawla , S . , Hardingham , G . E . , Quinn , D . R . , and Bading , H . ( 1998 ) . CBP : a signal - regulated transcriptional coactivator controlled by Matthews , R . P . ( 1994 ) . Calcium / calmodulin - dependent protein ki - nuclear calcium and CaM kinase IV . Science 281 , 1505 – 1509 . nase types II and IV differentially regulate CREB - dependent gene expression . Mol . Cell . Biol . 14 , 6107 – 6116 . Cline , H . T . ( 2001 ) . Dendriticarbordevelopmentandsynaptogenesis . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 11 , 118 – 126 . McAllister , A . K . , Lo , D . C . , andKatz , L . C . ( 1995 ) . Neurotrophins regu - late dendritic growth in developing visual cortex . Neuron 15 , Coleman , P . D . , and Riesen , A . H . ( 1968 ) . Evironmental effects on 791 – 803 . cortical dendritic fields . I . Rearing in the dark . J . Anat . 102 , 363 – 374 . McAllister , A . K . , Katz , L . C . , andLo , D . C . ( 1996 ) . Neurotrophinregula - Dash , P . K . , Hochner , B . , and Kandel , E . R . ( 1990 ) . Injection of the tion of cortical dendritic growth requires activity . Neuron 17 , 1057 – cAMP - responsive element into the nucleus of Aplysia sensory neu - 1064 . rons blocks long - term facilitation . Nature 345 , 718 – 721 . McAllister , A . K . , Katz , L . C . , and Lo , D . C . ( 1997 ) . Opposing roles for Deitch , J . S . , and Rubel , E . W . ( 1984 ) . Afferent influences on brain endogenous BDNF and NT - 3 in regulating cortical dendritic growth . stem auditory nuclei of the chicken : time course and specificity of Neuron 18 , 767 – 778 . dendritic atrophy following deafferentation . J . Comp . Neurol . 229 , 66 – 79 . Miller , M . , and Peters , A . ( 1981 ) . Maturation of rat visual cortex . II . AcombinedGolgi - electronmicroscope studyofpyramidalneurons . Dolmetsch , R . E . , Pajvani , U . , Fife , K . , Spotts , J . M . , and Greenberg , J . Comp . Neurol . 203 , 555 – 573 . M . E . ( 2001 ) . Signaling to the nucleus by an L - type calcium channel - calmodulincomplex throughtheMAPkinase pathway . Science 294 , Polleux , F . , Morrow , T . , and Ghosh , A . ( 2000 ) . Semaphorin 3A is a chemoattractant for cortical apical dendrites . Nature 404 , 567 – 573 . 333 – 339 . Engert , F . , and Bonhoeffer , T . ( 1999 ) . Dendritic spine changes asso - Purves , D . , andHume , R . I . ( 1981 ) . Therelationofpostsynapticgeom - Neuron1010 etry to the number of presynaptic axons that innervate autonomic ganglion cells . J . Neurosci . 1 , 441 – 452 . Rajan , I . , and Cline , H . T . ( 1998 ) . Glutamate receptor activity is re - quired for normal development of tectal cell dendrites in vivo . J . Neurosci . 18 , 7836 – 7846 . Rakic , P . , and Sidman , R . L . ( 1973 ) . Organization of cerebellar cortex secondarytodeficitofgranulecellsinweavermutantmice . J . Comp . Neurol . 152 , 133 – 161 . Redmond , L . , Oh , S . - R . , Hicks , C . , Weinmaster , G . , and Ghosh , A . ( 2000 ) . Nuclear Notch1 signaling and the regulation of dendritic development . Nat . Neurosci . 3 , 30 – 40 . Sestan , N . , Artavanis - Tsakonas , S . , and Rakic , P . ( 1999 ) . Contact - dependent inhibition of cortical neurite growth mediated by notch signaling . Science 286 , 741 – 746 . Shaywitz , A . J . , and Greenberg , M . E . ( 1999 ) . CREB : a stimulus - inducedtranscription factoractivatedby adiversearray ofextracel - lular signals . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 68 , 821 – 861 . Shieh , P . B . , Hu , S . - C . , Bobb , K . , Timmusk , T . , and Ghosh , A . ( 1998 ) . Identification of a signaling pathway involved in calcium regulation of BDNF expression . Neuron 20 , 727 – 740 . Sotelo , C . ( 1975 ) . Anatomical , physiologicalandbiochemicalstudies ofthecerebellumfrommutantmice . II . Morphologicalstudyofcere - bellar cortical neurons and circuits in the weaver mouse . Brain Res . 94 , 19 – 44 . Sun , P . , Enslen , H . , Myung , P . S . , andMaurer , R . A . ( 1994 ) . Differential activation of CREB byCa2 (cid:2) / calmodulin - dependent protein kinases type II and type IV involves phosphorylation of a site that negatively regulates activity . Genes Dev . 8 , 2527 – 2539 . Sun , P . , Lou , L . , and Maurer , R . A . ( 1996 ) . Regulation of activating transcription factor - 1 and the cAMP response element - binding pro - tein by Ca2 (cid:2) / calmodulin - dependent protein kinases type I , II , and IV . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 3066 – 3073 . Threadgill , R . , Bobb , K . , andGhosh , A . ( 1997 ) . Regulationofdendritic growth and remodeling by Rho , Rac , and Cdc42 . Neuron 19 , 625 – 634 . Volkmar , F . R . , and Greenough , W . T . ( 1972 ) . Rearing complexity af - fects branching of dendrites in the visual cortex of the rat . Science 176 , 1145 – 1147 . Walton , K . M . , Rehfuss , R . P . , Chrivia , J . C . , Lochner , J . E . , and Good - man , R . H . ( 1992 ) . A dominant repressor of cyclic adenosine 3 (cid:9) , 5 (cid:9) - monophosphate ( cAMP ) - regulated enhancer - binding protein activ - ity inhibits the cAMP - mediated induction of the somatostatin pro - moter in vivo . Mol . Endocrinol . 6 , 647 – 655 . Whitford , K . L . , Marillat , V . , Stein , E . , Goodman , C . S . , Tessier - Lavigne , M . , Chedotal , A . , and Ghosh , A . ( 2002 ) . Regulation of corti - cal dendrite development by Slit - Robo interactions . Neuron 33 , 47 – 61 . Wiesel , T . N . , and Hubel , D . H . ( 1963 ) . Effects of visual deprivation on morphology andphysiology of cells in thecat’s lateral geniculate body . J . Neurophysiol . 26 , 978 – 993 . Wu , G . - Y . , and Cline , H . T . ( 1998 ) . Stabilization of dendritic arbor structure in vivo by CaMKII . Science 279 , 222 – 226 . Wu , G . - Y . , Malinow , R . , andCline , H . T . ( 1996 ) . Maturationofacentral glutamergic synapse . Science 274 , 972 – 976 . Wu , G . - Y . , Zou , D . J . , Rajan , I . , and Cline , H . T . ( 1999 ) . Dendritic dy - namics in vivo change during neurnal maturation . J . Neurosci . 19 , 4427 – 4483 . Wu , G . - Y . , Diesseroth , K . , and Tsien , R . W . ( 2001 ) . Spaced stimuli stabilize MAPK pathway activation and its effect on dendritic mor - phology . Nat . Neurosci . 4 , 151 – 158 .