Drug Discovery for Neglected Diseases : Molecular Target - Based and Phenotypic Approaches Miniperspectives Series on Phenotypic Screening for Antiinfective Targets Ian H . Gilbert * Drug Discovery Unit , Division of Biological Chemistry and Drug Discovery , College of Life Sciences , University of Dundee , Dundee DD1 5EH , U . K . ABSTRACT : Drug discovery for neglected tropical diseases is carried out using both target - based and phenotypic approaches . In this paper , target - based approaches are discussed , with a particular focus on human African trypanosomiasis . Target - based drug discovery can be successful , but careful selection of targets is required . There are still very few fully validated drug targets in neglected diseases , and there is a high attrition rate in target - based drug discovery for these diseases . Phenotypic screening is a powerful method in both neglected and non - neglected diseases and has been very successfully used . Identi ﬁ cation of molecular targets from phenotypic approaches can be a way to identify potential new drug targets . ■ INTRODUCTION Neglected tropical diseases represent a signi ﬁ cant health burden in large parts of the world . The available medicines to treat these diseases by no means re ﬂ ect the clinical need . However , there has been a signi ﬁ cant e ﬀ ort to develop new drugs to treat these diseases over the past 10 years . This has been driven by funding from charities such as the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and the Wellcome Trust and through various governmental agencies . Public private partnerships such as the Drugs for Neglected Diseases Initiative ( DNDi ) and the Medicines for Malaria Venture ( MMV ) have been key for co - ordinating this work and establishing pathways for drug discovery . Also key to this progress has been the engagement of a number of pharmaceutical companies who have initiated work in this not - for - pro ﬁ t area . A signi ﬁ cant number of academic groups have engaged in the basic biology , and a few groups have engaged in coordinated drug discovery , such as our own unit , the Drug Discovery Unit ( DDU ) at the University of Dundee . The purpose of this perspective is to comment on strategies for drug discovery for neglected tropical diseases , considering both target - based ( protein screening ) and phenotypic ( whole cell screening ) approaches . The focus will be on human African trypanosomiasis ( HAT ) but will be of relevance for other neglected tropical diseases . ■ TARGET - BASED APPROACHES Target - based approaches to drug discovery are extensively used in the pharmaceutical industry . This involves screening a library of compounds against a protein and then optimizing the compounds for potency against the enzyme , selectivity , cellular activity , and pharmacokinetic properties . However , there are relatively few validated drug targets across the disease spectrum , and this is particularly the case in infectious diseases . Arguably , a target is only fully validated when there is a registered drug for which it can be shown the principle mode of action is by inhibition of the target . Overington and colleagues carried out an extensive analysis ( published in 2006 1 ) to assess how many di ﬀ erent molecular targets are modulated by registered drugs . This was carried out by a literature review , where they sought to link evidence of modulation of a molecular target to cell or in vivo e ﬃ cacy . They were able to do this for 1065 unique drugs . From this they estimated there were about 324 molecular targets for human diseases , of which 266 are targets in the human genome and the remainder ( a minority ) for pathogen targets . In the case of parasitic diseases , there are very few validated molecular targets . By way of example , it is interesting to look at the mode ( s ) of action of currently registered drugs used for the treatment of kinetoplastid infections ( Table 1 ) . For most of them , the mode of action is poorly understood , and for many , it is likely to involve interaction with a number of di ﬀ erent targets . The only drug for which there is a well - de ﬁ ned molecular target is e ﬂ ornithine , which inhibits the enzyme ornithine decarboxylase . With the notable exception of Trypanosoma brucei ( the etiological agent of human African trypanosomiasis ) , there is a lack of genetic tools to validate drug targets in these parasites . Furthermore , there is often a disconnect between genetic validation ( through methodologies such as RNAi and knock - out ) and chemical modulation of targets in these organisms . Selection of molecular targets is key to success in target - based drug discovery . In Dundee , we triage drug targets by assessing Special Issue : Miniperspectives Series on Phenotypic Screening for Antiinfective Targets Received : March 11 , 2013 Published : September 9 , 2013 Perspective pubs . acs . org / jmc © 2013 American Chemical Society 7719 dx . doi . org / 10 . 1021 / jm400362b | J . Med . Chem . 2013 , 56 , 7719 − 7726 them against a number of criteria : druggability , essentiality , assayability , toxicity , resistance potential , and structural information . 12 , 13 Each criterion is scored using a tra ﬃ c - light system . This helps to assess the level of validation of a target and also can highlight key experiments that need to be carried out to increase the level of validation . For example , it can highlight if more experiments need to be carried out to determine the essentiality of the target through chemical validation or whether a robust assay is required . In other cases , it can indicate that the target is not a valid drug target . At the DDU in Dundee , we have carried out a number of target - based and phenotypic drug discovery programmes against HAT . By way of illustration , a few examples of target - based discovery will be discussed . N - Myristoyltransferase as a Drug Target for HAT . N - Myristoyltransferase ( NMT ) is an enzyme responsible for the cotranslational myristoylation of the N - terminal glycine of a number of di ﬀ erent peptides . This enzyme is essential in eukaryotic organisms , and it has been extensively investigated as a drug target in fungal diseases . 14 − 26 We were interested in NMT as a potential drug target for HAT . Smith ’ s group in York had carried out RNAi studies that indicated that the enzyme was essential in T . brucei . 27 , 28 To further establish the essentiality of the target , an in vivo RNAi experiment was carried out . Mice were infected with T . brucei ; when the RNAi was induced , these parasites were not viable , adding more genetic evidence . 29 It was possible to produce the enzyme in signi ﬁ cant quantities and assays amenable to scaling to 384 - well format that were known , thus permitting a target - based approach . Orthologues of the protein in other species ( fungi ) were known to be druggable , as shown by extensive literature in this ﬁ eld , suggesting the target is druggable . However , we tested a range of known antifungal inhibitors ; none of the ones that we tested showed activity against the T . brucei NMT . 30 This led to the assessment of the target Table 2 . To chemically validate Tb NMT as a target and to provide a starting point for a drug discovery program , we conducted a high throughput screen against the enzyme , using a diversity screening set of 62 , 000 compounds that we have put together in the DDU . 31 From this we identi ﬁ ed several series , one of which was a series of pyrazole sulphonamides ( Figure 1 ) . The discovery of this start point and subsequent elaboration of the hit have been reported in detail , 30 , 32 but the key points are summarized here . Although we could develop a homology model of Tb NMT , we were unable to deduce how the hit bound in the active site . Therefore we set about a chemistry program systematically varying the structure of the hit . 30 We looked at : replacing the pyrazole ring with a number of potential aromatic replace - ments , substituents on the pyrazole ring ; replacement of the sulphonamide , and variations around the phenyl ring . The outcome of these studies ( Figure 2 ) were that the aromatic replacements to the pyrazole were less active , the N - methyl group on the pyrazole was essential for activity , and the sulphonamide could not be replaced ( data not shown ) . We prepared a number of di ﬀ erent phenyl derivatives to probe this position . We found relatively ﬂ at SAR with simple phenyl modi ﬁ cation , except that having a 2 , 6 - dichloro substituent appeared to increase activity by about 10 - fold . Substitution was tolerated in the para - position of the phenyl group , which led us Table 1 . Mode of Action of Currently Used Drugs for Kinetoplastids drug disease mode of action suramin HAT Not fully known . 2 Probably polypharmacology . There is some linkage to the endocytic pathway , lysosomal function , spermidine , and N - acetylglucosamine biosynthesis . 3 pentamidine HAT The drug is selectively accumulated in the parasite by the action of various transporters . 4 The precise molecular target ( s ) are unknown . Pentamidine is known to interact with DNA and to a ﬀ ect mitochondrial function . 2 melarsoprol HAT Selectively concentrated by the parasite . 5 The target ( s ) are not known - possibly multiple targets . 2 e ﬂ ornithine HAT Inhibits ornithine decarboxylase ( suicide inhibition ) . nifurtimox HAT / Chagas This is activated by a type I nitro - reductase . 6 , 7 The product of this reaction was thought to generate radicals which generate oxidative stress on the parasites . Recent evidence indicates that upon reduction , nifurtimox produces an unsaturated nitrile compound which is active against the parasite , presumably acting as a Michael acceptor . This probably accounts for some or all of the activity of nifurtimox . 8 benznidazole Chagas Free radical generation after being activated through a type I nitroreductase . 6 , 9 amphotericin B leishmaniasis The drug targets the cell membrane , disrupting the ion gradients across the membrane . miltefosine leishmaniasis Multiple modes of action , including e ﬀ ects on lipid metabolism , induction of apoptosis , and mitochondrial function . 10 There also is some suggestion of immunomodulatory e ﬀ ects . paromomycin leishmaniasis In bacteria this inhibits protein biosynthesis by binding to the 30S subunit of the ribosome . The precise mode of action in leishmania is not known . 11 stibogluconate leishmaniasis Activated to a trivalent form within the macrophage . Molecular targets unknown . 11 Table 2 . Target Assessment of T . brucei at the Outset of Our Project criterion score comment essentiality amber Genetic validation ( RNAi studies in T . brucei ) . druggability green Drug - like inhibitors known for the fungal enzymes . assayability green High throughput assay reported . Protein available . resistancepotential green No known isoforms within T . brucei and no known escape mechanisms . toxicity amber / red Human homologue present . No information as to whether it is possible to obtain selectivity for T . brucei . However information that it is possible to prepare compounds selective for the fungal enzyme over the human enzyme . 22 structuralinformation amber Opportunity to build a homology model . Figure 1 . Screening hit for T . brucei NMT . Journal of Medicinal Chemistry Perspective dx . doi . org / 10 . 1021 / jm400362b | J . Med . Chem . 2013 , 56 , 7719 − 7726 7720 to investigate derivatives in this position in more detail ( Figure 3 ) . From our studies in substitution at the para - position of the phenyl ring , there were two compounds which particularly stood out : an N - methyl piperazine derivative 12 ( IC 50 = 0 . 14 μ M ) and the corresponding morpholine analogue 11 ( IC 50 = 38 μ M ) ( Figure 3 ) . These had over a 100 - fold di ﬀ erence in potency ; the key di ﬀ erence in the structure was the presence of a basic nitrogen in the more active substituent . Reported inhibitors of fungal NMT have a basic group which forms an electrostatic interaction with the C - terminal carboxylic acid residue of NMT . This is where the N - terminal glycine of peptides to be myristoylated binds . We hypothesized that the basic nitrogen on our compound in Figure 3 was binding in this pocket , explaining the increase in binding potency . Further work focused on constraining the amine , giving the lead molecule DDD85646 ( 13 ) . 30 , 32 This compound had very high levels of potency against both the T . brucei NMT ( IC 50 = 0 . 002 μ M ) and bloodstream form T . brucei parasites ( EC 50 = 0 . 002 μ M ) . The lead compound 13 showed good oral pharmacokinetics in mice , commensurate with obtaining su ﬃ cient oral levels for treatment of HAT . E ﬃ cacy studies with mouse models of stage 1 infection with T . brucei brucei and T . brucei rhodesiense showed cure when treated orally with 12 . 5 and 50 mg / kg bid for four days , respectively . 30 , 32 Figure 2 . SAR studies with T . brucei NMT . Figure 3 . Discovery of the NMT lead , compound 13 . Journal of Medicinal Chemistry Perspective dx . doi . org / 10 . 1021 / jm400362b | J . Med . Chem . 2013 , 56 , 7719 − 7726 7721 To give further evidence that NMT is a good drug target in T . brucei , we carried out experiments to con ﬁ rm that these compounds were inhibiting NMT in the cell , and it was through inhibition of NMT that the parasites were dying . These experiments have been reported in detail , 32 but the key points are summarized herein : ( 1 ) There was an excellent correlation between inhibition of T . brucei NMT and growth inhibition of T . brucei across a range of analogues of the hit with a range of potencies . ( 2 ) We were able to obtain a cocrystal structure of 13 with the homologous Leishmania major NMT , showing the compound binding in the peptide binding site of enzyme , with the basic nitrogen of the piperazine binding interacting with the C - terminal carboxylic acid of NMT . ( 3 ) Compound 13 caused rapid cell death in the parasite . ( 4 ) When NMT was overexpressed in the parasite , this gave an increase in the EC 50 value for inhibition by NMT . ( 5 ) Compound 13 prevented incorporation of radiolabeled myristic acid into proteins of T . brucei So why is NMT a good drug target in T . brucei ? In terms of biology , inhibition of the enzyme causes rapid death of the parasite . The reasons for this are not fully understood , but it must block some vital pathway ( s ) for the parasite . Bio - informatic analysis predicts there to be at least 60 peptides / proteins which are myristoylated by NMT in T . brucei . Therefore inhibition of the enzyme is likely to have pleiotropic e ﬀ ects , inhibiting multiple pathways . In terms of chemistry , the enzyme active site is about the correct size and balance of hydrophilicity / hydrophobicity to obtain potent small molecule drug - like inhibitors . Other Successful Target - Based Approaches . Successful target - based approaches have been reported for neglected diseases by a number of other groups , where targets have been validated and progressed through into clinical trials . For example , inhibitors of sterol 14 - α - demethylase have been shown to be active against Chagas disease ; posaconazole and E1224 ( a prodrug of ravuconazole ) have been advanced into clinical trials . 33 Dihydrofolate reductase and dihydropteroate synthase are validated drug targets in malaria , with clinically used drugs acting against these targets ( e . g . , pyrimethamine , a dihydrofo - late reductase inhibitor ) . 34 Other target - based approaches are also being investigated against malaria . 34 In some cases , potential targets are highlighted through the identi ﬁ cation of the molecular targets of phenotypic hits ; so for example , the mitochondrial bc1 complex has been highlighted as the target of atovaquone . One antimalarial target currently being pursued is dihydro - orotate dehydrogenase , an enzyme involved in pyrimidine biosynthesis . Elegant work by Phillips and co - workers has shown the power of structure - based design approaches , using X - ray crystallographic information to increase the potency of hits to give very potent compounds . 35 , 36 Care in Selection of Target - Based Discoveries . However , care has to be taken with target - based drug discovery , particularly in the selection of molecular targets . There is likely to be a high attrition rate in drug discovery programmes . Target selection is very di ﬃ cult , given our incomplete understanding of the complex biology underlying these pathogens and the lack of both genetic and chemical validation . This will be illustrated with some examples . In many cases , given our lack of knowledge , the large e ﬀ ort to develop chemical tools is required to validate or otherwise potential molecular targets . Pteridine Reductase 1 ( PTR1 ) . Pteridine reductase ( PTR1 ) has been highlighted as a potential drug target in T . brucei . Recently , Fairlamb ’ s group has genetically validated this as a drug target in T . brucei by RNAi knockdown . 37 It proved impossible to carry out gene knockout studies ; whenever this was attempted , the gene for PTR1 was either retained at the same site in the genome or found elsewhere . However , RNAi studies led to complete knockdown of protein and cell death within four days . The RNAi cell lines had greatly reduced virulence . Most known inhibitors of PTR1 are also inhibitors of dihydrofolate reductase ( DHFR ) . However , we managed to develop some inhibitors which showed no inhibition of T . brucei dihydrofolate reductase ( Tb DHFR ) but were potent inhibitors of Tb PTR1 ( IC 50 for Tb PTR1 = 7 nM ; IC 50 for Tb DHFR = > 30 μ M ) . These were developed by initially carrying out an in silico fragment screen . 38 One hit based on a benzimidazole sca ﬀ old was identi ﬁ ed . We were able to obtain cocrystal structures of three examples of this sca ﬀ old ( compounds 14 − 16 , Figure 4 ) , which all bound in slightly di ﬀ erent locations within the active site . We then optimized one of these benzimidazole sca ﬀ olds , using a structure - guided approach , to give the potent inhibitor 17 ( Figure 4 ) . 39 These compounds occupy a subpocket of the substrate ( biopterin ) binding pocket . However , although we had some very potent inhibitors of the enzyme , there was no correlation between inhibition of Tb PTR1 and growth inhibition of the parasite T . brucei . There could be a number of reasons why there is a lack of correlation between inhibition of the enzyme and inhibition of parasite growth . This includes lack of cellular penetration , e ﬄ ux of compound , sequestration of the compound into lipid compartments ( it is quite lipophilic ) , high nonspeci ﬁ c protein binding , alterations in protonation state of the molecule in the enzyme active site , or bypass through pterins / nutrients in the media . 40 However , we have made an additional hypothesis based on kinetic properties of the enzyme . The T . brucei enzyme has a very low K m for the substrate ( 25 nM ) . Given the physiological levels of the substrate for Tb PTR1 ( around 480 nM ) and the Figure 4 . PTR1 Inhibitors discovered at Dundee . Journal of Medicinal Chemistry Perspective dx . doi . org / 10 . 1021 / jm400362b | J . Med . Chem . 2013 , 56 , 7719 − 7726 7722 need to have substantial inhibition of the enzyme ( estimated to be > 90 % inhibition ) , this indicates PTR1 inhibitors will require very high levels of inhibition ( K i less than 1 nM ) in order to see an appreciable e ﬀ ect against the intact parasite . 38 , 39 To achieve this level of enzyme potency , will probably require a signi ﬁ cantly larger molecule than the current lead in order to develop more interactions with the enzyme . This increase in size of compound may well be incompatible with the required blood − brain barrier penetration . Further work is required to understand the lack of cell activity of the above aminobenzimidazoles , although interest - ingly the author has been unable to ﬁ nd a report in the literature of good correlation between inhibition of T . brucei PTR1 and growth of parasites . More potent PTR1 inhibitors may well have an e ﬀ ect on the intact parasites . Additionally , some classes of compounds are known to be accumulated in T . brucei ( for example using the P2 transporter 4 ) , and if this occurred with PTR1 inhibitors , it would facilitate cell e ﬃ cacy . Nonetheless , enzyme kinetics are an important characteristic that needs to be taken into account when selecting molecular targets . Trypanothione Synthase ( TryS ) . In the kinetoplastids , the thiol trypanothione is required for prevention of oxidative stress . The enzyme trypanothione synthase is required for biosynthesis of this unique thiol . Work by the Fairlamb group has shown that knockout of TryS in T . brucei using a tetracycline conditional double knockout of the enzyme gives parasite death after about eight days . Mice treated with these parasites and fed with tetracycline did not develop disease . 41 This is very strong genetic evidence for the validation of TryS as a drug target . We developed potent inhibitors of this enzyme at the DDU ( eg Figure 5 , 18 , IC50 = 0 . 045 μ M ) . 42 Mode of action studies indicate that using these compounds led to a loss of thiols ( trypanothione and glutathionylspermidine ) within T . brucei , as would be expected from the role of the TryS in biosynthesis of trypanothione . 41 Furthermore , it was possible to show that chemical inhibition of TryS gave a reduction in the intracellular levels of the reaction product trypanothione and an increase in the levels of the enzyme substrate , glutathione . 43 The TryS single knockout T . brucei was more sensitive to inhibition with compound 18 than wild - type ( SKO EC 50 = 1 . 2 μ M ; WT EC 50 = 7 . 0 μ M ) . Similarly , T . brucei lines which overexpressed TryS were less sensitive to inhibition by compound 18 ( EC 50 = 23 μ M ) . 41 All this is very strong evidence that our TryS inhibitors are acting on target and that chemical inhibition of TryS gives growth inhibition of T . brucei . However , despite the strong genetic and chemical validation of TryS , there was a very large drop in potency on going from enzyme to cell . What is the explanation for this ? Interestingly , when the conditional double knockout parasites were treated with tetracycline , the knockout of the enzyme has no e ﬀ ect on growth rate of the parasite for the ﬁ rst three days and the growth rate only decreased after that . Analysis of the levels of TryS indicated that levels of enzyme were still detectable up to six days after removal of the tetracycline in the conditional double knockouts . 41 Therefore , T . brucei can survive with very low levels of TryS ( or trypanothione ) . This is probably the explanation for the relatively poor cellular e ﬀ ect of the TryS inhibitors ; compound pressure would have to be applied for considerably longer in our standard cellular assay to cause su ﬃ cient depletion of TryS and trypanothione levels to have a very signi ﬁ cant trypanocidal e ﬀ ect . The longer time course would probably mean that compounds targeted against TryS would require a longer time to show a therapeutic bene ﬁ t to the patients and require longer dosing . Hence , although TryS is a genetically and chemically validated target within T . brucei , compounds targeted against it may not ful ﬁ ll the target product pro ﬁ le on their own . There is a possibility that TryS inhibitors could be used in combination with other compounds as therapeutic agents . 41 CRK3 ( Cdc2 - Related Kinase 3 ) . Protein kinases represent potential drug targets in kinetoplastid diseases . 44 The cyclin - dependent cdc2 - related kinase , CRK3 , has been proposed as a potential drug target in kinetoplastids . CRK3 forms a complex with cyclin 6 ( CYC6 ) , which is thought to have a similar role to the human cyclin dependent 1 − cyclin B complex which is involved in the control of the cell cycle . There is genetic evidence reported with Leishmania mexicana which suggested that CRK3 is essential for cell cycle progression and involved in the G2 / M transition . 45 , 46 To further validate the target , we carried out a screen against the Leishmania CRK3 − CYC6 complex using our focused kinase set . 31 This led to identi ﬁ cation of eight chemical series . Three of these series were optimized to give high potency and high selectivity compared to mammalian cyclin dependent kinase 2 − cyclin A Figure 5 . Inhibitor of Tb TryS Developed in the DDU . Figure 6 . Examples of compound series active against CRK3 . Journal of Medicinal Chemistry Perspective dx . doi . org / 10 . 1021 / jm400362b | J . Med . Chem . 2013 , 56 , 7719 − 7726 7723 interaction ( CDK2 − CYCA ) ( Figure 6 ) . Examples of com - pounds from these series however were not active against Leishmania major promastigotes . Given the high degree of similarity in the sequences of CRK3 between the Leishmania and Trypanosoma enzymes , selected compounds were also evaluated against T . brucei brucei but likewise were not active . There could be a number of reasons for the lack of cellular activity . First , the enzyme may not be essential for the parasite ; there may be bypass mechanisms . Second , by analogy to our experience with PTR1 , we may not have a su ﬃ cient level of inhibition ; this is a potential problem with protein kinases where millimolar levels of ATP are present in the cell which can out - compete ATP - competitive inhibitors . Third , the physio - logical cyclin partner for CRK3 may be di ﬀ erent from CYC6 , which may not be inhibited by our compounds . Other possibilities might be lack of cell penetration or e ﬄ ux mechanisms for compounds . However , this lack of correlation between inhibition of enzyme and parasite extended over a number of di ﬀ erent chemotypes , all with reasonable phys - icochemical properties , suggesting these latter causes are not likely to be the reason . ■ PHENOTYPIC SCREENING Whole cell parasite screening has become feasible in high - throughput screening mode , allowing screens of large libraries . Phenotypic screening has the advantage of identifying compounds which are active against the whole cell , meaning issues such as cell uptake and cell e ﬄ ux have already been addressed . It is also straightforward to carry out counter - screens against mammalian cells to obtain an idea of selectivity , allowing rapid ﬁ ltering of compounds showing general cytotoxicity . There has been a major emphasis on phenotypic approaches to drug discovery for neglected diseases and a number of notable successes reported in the literature , particularly in the areas of malaria and HAT . In the area of HAT , two compounds have recently been progressed into clinical trials by DNDi ( www . dndi . org ) : the nitroimidazole , fexinidazole , and the oxaborole , SCYX - 7158 . Both of these were discovered through phenotypic screening . In the case of malaria , MMV ( Medicines for Malaria Venture , www . mmv . org ) have a number of novel compounds in preclinical and clinical development , most of which were discovered through phenotypic screening . E ﬀ orts are being made to understand the mode of action of these compounds and to identify their molecular targets . However , this is a retrospective study . ■ EXPERIENCE IN THE PHARMACEUTICAL SECTOR Recently , a very interesting review of the experience in the pharmaceutical sector has been published by Swinney and Anthony . 47 Essentially , in this review , they summarized all the new molecular entities ( NMEs ) that were registered between 1999 and 2008 ; there were 176 small molecule NMEs registered during this period . The majority of these NMEs were discovered through target - based approaches , where the isolated protein was screened . However , a signi ﬁ cant proportion were also discovered through phenotypic ap - proaches ( Figure 7 ) . What is particularly interesting is to look at this information for First in Class molecules . For these molecules , a bigger proportion were discovered through cellular ( phenotypic screening ) compared to screening of isolated proteins . Identi ﬁ cation and validation of the target through phenotypic approaches may then lead to subsequent target - based ( protein ) approaches against these targets . Thus in the pharmaceutical industry , drug discovery is conducted using both target - based ( protein ) screens and phenotypic ( cellular ) screens . ■ CONCLUSION At this time , a balanced portfolio of carefully selected target - based approaches together with phenotypic approaches is probably the best strategy for drug discovery for the neglected tropical diseases . However , care has to be taken in selection of molecular targets for target - based drug discovery approaches . This can be problematic in the case of neglected tropical diseases , where there are very few fully validated molecular targets . One approach being taken to select molecular targets is to identify the molecular targets of phenotypic hits . This can be a very e ﬀ ective approach ; however , it is not without its di ﬃ culties and pitfalls . Despite recent advances such as next generation sequencing and chemical proteomics , discovering the molecular targets of phenotypic hits can still be very challenging and in some cases these molecular targets may not be proteins . Furthermore , many phenotypically active compounds may well work by inhibition of several di ﬀ erent proteins / enzymes within a cell . 48 ■ AUTHOR INFORMATION Corresponding Author * Phone : + 44 1382 386 240 . E - mail : i . h . gilbert @ dundee . ac . uk . Notes The authors declare no competing ﬁ nancial interest . Biography Ian H . Gilbert did his Ph . D . in synthetic organic chemistry at the University of Cambridge . After lecturing chemistry at the University of Zambia and postdoctoral research , he set up a medicinal chemistry research group at the Welsh School of Pharmacy , Cardi ﬀ University , with extensive interests in neglected tropical diseases . In 2005 , he moved to a chair in medicinal chemistry at the College of Life Sciences in the University of Dundee . He is head of chemistry in the Drug Discovery Unit . ■ ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The HAT project in the Drug Discovery Unit was funded by the Wellcome Trust ( WT077705 and WT083481 ) . I would Figure 7 . Origins of NMEs in the period of 1999 − 2008 . Journal of Medicinal Chemistry Perspective dx . doi . org / 10 . 1021 / jm400362b | J . Med . Chem . 2013 , 56 , 7719 − 7726 7724 also like to acknowledge members of the Drug Discovery Unit at the University of Dundee for contributions to this HAT project and discussions around target validation and compound selection . ■ ABBREVIATIONS USED CRK3 , Cdc2 - related kinase 3 ; DHFR , dihydrofolate reductase ; CYC6 , cyclin 6 ; CDK2 − CYCA , cyclin dependent kinase 2 − cyclin A interaction ; DDU , Drug Discovery Unit at the University of Dundee ; DNDi , Drugs for Neglected Diseases Initiative ; HAT , human African trypanosomiasis ; MMV , Medicines for Malaria Venture ; NME , new molecular entities ; NMT , N - myristoyltransferase ; PTR1 , pteridine reductase 1 ; Tb NMT , Trypanosoma brucei dihydrofolate reductase ; Tb NMT , Trypanosoma brucei N - myristoyltransferase ; Tb PTR1 , Trypanosoma brucei pteridine reductase 1 ; TryS , trypanothione synthetase ■ REFERENCES ( 1 ) Overington , J . P . ; Al - Lazikani , B . ; Hopkins , A . L . How many drug targets are there ? Nature Rev . Drug Discovery 2006 , 5 , 993 − 996 . ( 2 ) Brun , R . ; Don , R . ; Jacobs , R . T . ; Wang , M . Z . ; Barrett , M . P . Development of novel drugs for human African trypanosomiasis . Future Microbiol . 2011 , 6 , 677 − 691 . ( 3 ) Alsford , S . ; Eckert , S . ; Baker , N . ; Glover , L . ; Sanchez - Flores , A . ; Leung , K . F . ; Turner , D . J . ; Field , M . C . ; Berriman , M . ; Horn , D . High - throughput decoding of antitrypanosomal drug efficacy and resistance . Nature 2012 , 482 , 232 − 236 . ( 4 ) Barrett , M . P . ; Gilbert , I . H . Targeting of toxic compounds to the trypanosome ’ s interior . Adv . Parasitol . 2006 , 63 , 125 − 183 . ( 5 ) Barrett , M . P . ; Gilbert , I . H . Targeting of Toxic Compounds to the Trypanosomes . Adv . Parasitol . 2006 , 63 , 126 − 183 . ( 6 ) Wilkinson , S . R . ; Taylor , M . C . ; Horn , D . ; Kelly , J . M . ; Cheeseman , I . A mechanism for cross - resistance to nifurtimox and benznidazole in trypanosomes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 2008 , 105 , 5022 − 5027 . ( 7 ) Sokolova , A . Y . ; Wyllie , S . ; Patterson , S . ; Oza , S . L . ; Read , K . D . ; Fairlamb , A . H . Cross - resistance to nitro drugs and implications for treatment of human African trypanosomiasis . Antimicrob . Agents Chemother . 2010 , 54 , 2893 − 2900 . ( 8 ) Hall , B . S . ; Bot , C . ; Wilkinson , S . R . Nifurtimox activation by trypanosomal type I nitroreductases generates cytotoxic nitrile metabolites . J . Biol . Chem . 2011 , 286 , 13088 − 13095 . ( 9 ) Maya , J . ; Cassels , B . ; Iturriaga Vasquez , P . ; Ferreira , J . ; Faundez , M . ; Iturriaga Va ́ squez , P . ; Fau ́ ndez , M . ; Galanti , N . ; Ferreira , A . ; Morello , A . Mode of action of natural and synthetic drugs against Trypanosoma cruzi and their interaction with the mammalian host . Comp . Biochem . Physiol . , Part A : Mol . Integr . Physiol . 2007 , 146 , 601 − 620 . ( 10 ) Dorlo , T . P . C . ; Balasegaram , M . ; Beijnen , J . H . ; de Vries , P . J . Miltefosine : a review of its pharmacology and therapeutic efficacy in the treatment of leishmaniasis . J . Antimicrob . Chemother . 2012 , 67 , 2576 − 2597 . ( 11 ) Croft , S . L . ; Coombs , G . H . Leishmaniasis  current chemo - therapy and recent advances in the search for novel drugs . Trends Parasitol . 2003 , 19 , 502 − 508 . ( 12 ) Frearson , J . A . ; Wyatt , P . G . ; Gilbert , I . H . ; Fairlamb , A . H . Target assessment for antiparasitic drug discovery . Trends Parasitol . 2007 , 23 , 589 − 595 . ( 13 ) Wyatt , P . G . ; Gilbert , I . H . ; Read , K . D . ; Fairlamb , A . H . Target Validation : Linking Target and Chemical Properties to Desired Product Profile . Curr . Top . Med . Chem . 2011 , 11 , 1275 − 1283 . ( 14 ) Brown , D . L . ; Devadas , B . ; Lu , H . F . ; Nagarajan , S . ; Zupec , M . E . ; Freeman , S . K . ; McWherter , C . A . ; Getman , D . P . ; Sikorski , J . A . Replacements for lysine in L - seryl - L - lysyl dipeptide amide inhibitors of Candida albicans myristoyl - CoA : protein N - myristoyltransferase . Bio - org . Med . Chem . Lett . 1997 , 7 , 379 − 382 . ( 15 ) Nagarajan , S . R . ; Devadas , B . ; Zupec , M . E . ; Freeman , S . K . ; Brown , D . L . ; Lu , H . F . ; Mehta , P . P . ; Kishore , N . S . ; McWherter , C . A . ; Getman , D . P . ; Gordon , J . I . ; Sikorski , J . A . Conformationally constrained [ p - ( omega - aminoalkyl ) phenacetyl ] - L - seryl - L - lysyl dipep - tide amides as potent peptidomimetic inhibitors of Candida albicans and human myristoyl - CoA : protein N - myristoyltransferase . J . Med . Chem . 1997 , 40 , 1422 − 1438 . ( 16 ) Sikorski , J . A . ; Devadas , B . ; Zupec , M . E . ; Freeman , S . K . ; Brown , D . L . ; Lu , H . F . ; Nagarajan , S . ; Mehta , P . P . ; Wade , A . C . ; Kishore , N . S . ; Bryant , M . L . ; Getman , D . P . ; McWherter , C . A . ; Gordon , J . I . Selective peptidic and peptidomimetic inhibitors of Candida albicans myristoylCoA : protein N - myristoyltransferase : a new approach to antifungal therapy . Biopolymers 1997 , 43 , 43 − 71 . ( 17 ) Devadas , B . ; Freeman , S . K . ; McWherter , C . A . ; Kishore , N . S . ; Lodge , J . K . ; Jackson - Machelski , E . ; Gordon , J . I . ; Sikorski , J . A . Novel biologically active nonpeptidic inhibitors of myristoylCoA : protein N - myristoyltransferase . J . Med . Chem . 1998 , 41 , 996 − 1000 . ( 18 ) Devadas , B . ; Freeman , S . K . ; McWherter , C . A . ; Kuneman , D . W . ; Vinjamoori , D . V . ; Sikorski , J . A . A chiral recognition element with an unusual size constraint affects the potency and selectivity for peptidomimetic inhibitors of Candida albicans myristoyl - CoA : protein N - myristoyltransferase . Bioorg . Med . Chem . Lett . 1996 , 6 , 1977 − 1982 . ( 19 ) Devadas , B . ; Freeman , S . K . ; Zupec , M . E . ; Lu , H . F . ; Nagarajan , S . R . ; Kishore , N . S . ; Lodge , J . K . ; Kuneman , D . W . ; McWherter , C . A . ; Vinjamoori , D . V . ; Getman , D . P . ; Gordon , J . I . ; Sikorski , J . A . Design and synthesis of novel imidazole - substituted dipeptide amides as potent and selective inhibitors of Candida albicans myristoylCoA : p - rotein N - myristoyltransferase and identification of related tripeptide inhibitors with mechanism - based antifungal activity . J . Med . Chem . 1997 , 40 , 2609 − 2625 . ( 20 ) Devadas , B . ; Zupec , M . E . ; Freeman , S . K . ; Brown , D . L . ; Nagarajan , S . ; Sikorski , J . A . ; McWherter , C . A . ; Getman , D . P . ; Gordon , J . I . Design and Syntheses of Potent and Selective Dipeptide Inhibitors of Candida Albicans Myristoyl - CoA - Protein N - Myristoyl - transferase . J . Med . Chem . 1995 , 38 , 1837 − 1840 . ( 21 ) Ebiike , H . ; Masubuchi , M . ; Liu , P . L . ; Kawasaki , K . ; Morikami , K . ; Sogabe , S . ; Hayase , M . ; Fujii , T . ; Sakata , K . ; Shindoh , H . ; Shiratori , Y . ; Aoki , Y . ; Ohtsuka , T . ; Shimma , N . Design and synthesis of novel benzofurans as a new class of antifungal agents targeting fungal N - myristoyltransferase . Part 2 . Bioorg . Med . Chem . Lett . 2002 , 12 , 607 − 610 . ( 22 ) Kawasaki , K . ; Masubuchi , M . ; Morikami , K . ; Sogabe , S . ; Aoyama , T . ; Ebiike , H . ; Niizuma , S . ; Hayase , M . ; Fujii , T . ; Sakata , K . ; Shindoh , H . ; Shiratori , Y . ; Aoki , Y . ; Ohtsuka , T . ; Shimma , N . Design and synthesis of novel benzofurans as a new class of antifungal agents targeting fungal N - myristoyltransferase . Part 3 . Bioorg . Med . Chem . Lett . 2003 , 13 , 87 − 91 . ( 23 ) Masubuchi , M . ; Ebiike , H . ; Kawasaki , E . ; Sogabe , S . ; Morikami , K . ; Shiratori , Y . ; Tsujii , S . ; Fujii , T . ; Sakata , K . ; Hayase , M . ; Shindoh , H . ; Aoki , Y . ; Ohtsuka , T . ; Shimma , N . Synthesis and biological activities of benzofuran antifungal agents targeting fungal N - myristoyltransferase . Bioorg . Med . Chem . 2003 , 11 , 4463 − 4478 . ( 24 ) Masubuchi , M . ; Kawasaki , K . ; Ebiike , H . ; Ikeda , Y . ; Tsujii , S . ; Sogabe , S . ; Fujii , T . ; Sakata , K . ; Shiratori , Y . ; Aoki , Y . ; Ohtsuka , T . ; Shimma , N . Design and synthesis of novel benzofurans as a new class of antifungal agents targeting fungal N - myristoyltransferase . Part 1 . Bioorg . Med . Chem . Lett . 2001 , 11 , 1833 − 1837 . ( 25 ) Ebara , S . ; Naito , H . ; Nakazawa , K . ; Ishii , F . ; Nakamura , M . FTR1335 is a novel synthetic inhibitor of Candida albicans N - myristoyltransferase with fungicidal activity . Biol . Pharm . Bull . 2005 , 28 , 591 − 595 . ( 26 ) Yamazaki , K . ; Kaneko , Y . ; Suwa , K . ; Ebara , S . ; Nakazawa , K . ; Yasuno , K . Synthesis of potent and selective inhibitors of Candida albicans N - myristoyltransferase based on the benzothiazole structure . Bioorg . Med . Chem . 2005 , 13 , 2509 − 2522 . ( 27 ) Price , H . P . ; Menon , M . R . ; Panethymitaki , C . ; Goulding , D . ; McKean , P . G . ; Smith , D . F . Myristoyl - CoA : protein N - myristoyl - transferase , an essential enzyme and potential drug target in kinetoplastid parasites . J . Biol . Chem . 2003 , 278 , 7206 − 7214 . Journal of Medicinal Chemistry Perspective dx . doi . org / 10 . 1021 / jm400362b | J . Med . Chem . 2013 , 56 , 7719 − 7726 7725 ( 28 ) Panethymitaki , C . ; Bowyer , P . W . ; Price , H . P . ; Leatherbarrow , R . J . ; Brown , K . A . ; Smith , D . F . Characterization and selective inhibition of myristoyl - CoA : protein N - myristoyltransferase from Trypanosoma brucei and Leishmania major . Biochem . J . 2006 , 396 , 277 − 85 . ( 29 ) Price , H . P . ; Guther , M . L . S . ; Ferguson , M . A . J . ; Smith , D . F . Myristoyl - CoA : protein N - myristoyltransferase depletion in trypano - somes causes avirulence and endocytic defects . Mol . Biochem . Parasitol . 2010 , 169 , 55 − 58 . ( 30 ) Brand , S . ; Cleghorn , L . A . ; McElroy , S . P . ; Robinson , D . A . ; Smith , V . C . ; Hallyburton , I . ; Harrison , J . R . ; Norcross , N . R . ; Spinks , D . ; Bayliss , T . ; Norval , S . ; Stojanovski , L . ; Torrie , L . S . ; Frearson , J . A . ; Brenk , R . ; Fairlamb , A . H . ; Ferguson , M . A . ; Read , K . D . ; Wyatt , P . G . ; Gilbert , I . H . Discovery of a novel class of orally active trypanocidal N - myristoyltransferase inhibitors . J . Med . Chem . 2012 , 55 , 140 − 152 . ( 31 ) Brenk , R . ; Schipani , A . ; James , D . ; Krasowski , A . ; Gilbert , I . H . ; Frearson , J . A . ; Wyatt , P . G . Lessons learnt from assembling screening libraries for drug discovery for neglected diseases . ChemMedChem 2008 , 3 , 435 − 444 . ( 32 ) Frearson , J . A . ; Brand , S . ; McElroy , S . P . ; Cleghorn , L . A . T . ; Smid , O . ; Stojanovski , L . ; Price , H . P . ; Guther , M . L . S . ; Torrie , L . S . ; Robinson , D . A . ; Hallyburton , I . ; Mpamhanga , C . P . ; Brannigan , J . A . ; Wilkinson , A . J . ; Hodgkinson , M . ; Hui , R . ; Qiu , W . ; Raimi , O . G . ; Van Aalten , D . M . F . ; Brenk , R . ; Gilbert , I . H . ; Read , K . D . ; Fairlamb , A . H . ; Ferguson , M . A . J . ; Smith , D . F . ; Wyatt , P . G . N - Myristoyltransferase inhibitors as new leads to treat sleeping sickness . Nature 2010 , 464 , 728 − 732 . ( 33 ) Chagas Disease ; BIO Ventures for Global Health : Washington , DC , 2011 ; http : / / www . bvgh . org / Biopharmaceutical - Solutions / Global - Health - Primer / Diseases / cid / ViewDetails / ItemID / 1 . aspx . ( 34 ) Wells , T . N . ; Alonso , P . L . ; Gutteridge , W . E . New medicines to improve control and contribute to the eradication of malaria . Nature Rev . Drug Discovery 2009 , 8 , 879 − 891 . ( 35 ) Coteron , J . M . ; Marco , M . ; Esquivias , J . ; Deng , X . ; White , K . L . ; White , J . ; Koltun , M . ; El Mazouni , F . ; Kokkonda , S . ; Katneni , K . ; Bhamidipati , R . ; Shackleford , D . M . ; Angulo - Barturen , I . ; Ferrer , S . B . ; Jimenez - Diaz , M . B . ; Gamo , F . J . ; Goldsmith , E . J . ; Charman , W . N . ; Bathurst , I . ; Floyd , D . ; Matthews , D . ; Burrows , J . N . ; Rathod , P . K . ; Charman , S . A . ; Phillips , M . A . Structure - guided lead optimization of triazolopyrimidine - ring substituents identifies potent Plasmodium falciparum dihydroorotate dehydrogenase inhibitors with clinical candidate potential . J . Med . Chem . 2011 , 54 , 5540 − 5561 . ( 36 ) Phillips , M . A . ; Rathod , P . K . Plasmodium dihydroorotate dehydrogenase : a promising target for novel anti - malarial chemo - therapy . Infect . Disord . Drug Targets 2010 , 10 , 226 − 239 . ( 37 ) Sienkiewicz , N . ; Ong , H . B . ; Fairlamb , A . H . Trypanosoma brucei pteridine reductase 1 is essential for survival in vitro and for virulence in mice . Mol . Microbiol . 2010 , 77 , 658 − 671 . ( 38 ) Mpamhanga , C . P . ; Spinks , D . ; Tulloch , L . B . ; Shanks , E . J . ; Robinson , D . A . ; Collie , I . T . ; Fairlamb , A . H . ; Wyatt , P . G . ; Frearson , J . A . ; Hunter , W . N . ; Gilbert , I . H . ; Brenk , R . One Scaffold , Three Binding Modes : Novel and Selective Pteridine Reductase 1 Inhibitors Derived from Fragment Hits Discovered by Virtual Screening . J . Med . Chem . 2009 , 52 , 4454 − 4465 . ( 39 ) Spinks , D . ; Ong , H . B . ; Mpamhanga , C . P . ; Shanks , E . J . ; Robinson , D . A . ; Collie , I . T . ; Read , K . D . ; Frearson , J . A . ; Wyatt , P . G . ; Brenk , R . ; Fairlamb , A . H . ; Gilbert , I . H . Design , Synthesis and Biological Evaluation of Novel Inhibitors of Trypanosoma brucei Pteridine Reductase 1 . ChemMedChem 2011 , 6 , 302 − 308 . ( 40 ) Sienkiewicz , N . ; Jaros ł awski , S . ; Wyllie , S . ; Fairlamb , A . H . Chemical and genetic validation of dihydrofolate reductase − thymidylate synthase as a drug target in African trypanosomes . Mol . Microbiol . 2008 , 69 , 520 − 533 . ( 41 ) Wyllie , S . ; Oza , S . L . ; Patterson , S . ; Spinks , D . ; Thompson , S . ; Fairlamb , A . H . Dissecting the essentiality of the bifunctional trypanothione synthetase - amidase in Trypanosoma brucei using chemical and genetic methods . Mol . Microbiol . 2009 , 74 , 529 − 540 . ( 42 ) Spinks , D . ; Torrie , L . S . ; Thompson , S . ; Harrison , J . R . ; Frearson , J . A . ; Read , K . D . ; Fairlamb , A . H . ; Wyatt , P . G . ; Gilbert , I . H . Design , synthesis and biological evaluation of Trypanosoma brucei trypanothione synthetase inhibitors . ChemMedChem 2012 , 7 , 95 − 106 . ( 43 ) Torrie , L . S . ; Wyllie , S . ; Spinks , D . ; Oza , S . L . ; Thompson , S . ; Harrison , J . R . ; Gilbert , I . H . ; Wyatt , P . G . ; Fairlamb , A . H . ; Frearson , J . A . Chemical Validation of Trypanothione Synthetase . J . Biol . Chem . 2009 , 284 , 36137 − 36145 . ( 44 ) Doerig , C . Protein kinases as targets for anti - parasitic chemotherapy . Biochim . Biophys . Acta : Proteins Proteomics 2004 , 1697 , 155 − 168 . ( 45 ) Hassan , P . ; Fergusson , D . ; Grant , K . M . ; Mottram , J . C . The CRK3 protein kinase is essential for cell cycle progression of Leishmania mexicana . Mol . Biochem . Parasitol . 2001 , 113 , 189 − 198 . ( 46 ) Grant , K . M . ; Dunion , M . H . ; Yardley , V . ; Skaltsounis , A . L . ; Marko , D . ; Eisenbrand , G . ; Croft , S . L . ; Meijer , L . ; Mottram , J . C . Inhibitors of Leishmania mexicana CRK3 cyclin - dependent kinase : chemical library screen and antileishmanial activity . Antimicrob . Agents Chemother . 2004 , 48 , 3033 − 3042 . ( 47 ) Swinney , D . C . ; Anthony , J . How were new medicines discovered ? Nature Rev . Drug Discovery 2011 , 10 , 507 − 519 . ( 48 ) Hopkins , A . L . Network Pharmacology : the next paradigm in drug discovery . Nature Chem . Biol . 2008 , 4 , 682 − 690 . Journal of Medicinal Chemistry Perspective dx . doi . org / 10 . 1021 / jm400362b | J . Med . Chem . 2013 , 56 , 7719 − 7726 7726