INFORMATION PROCESSING IN THE CONTEXT OF MEDICAL CARE Valerie Florance , Ph . D . Gary Marchionini , Ph . D . Assistant Professor , Associate Professor , Dlwslon of Medical Informatics College of Library and Information Services University of Rochester Medical Center , University of Maryland , Rochester , NY College Park , MD Abstract We report findings from an exploratory study whose overall goal was to design an online document surrogate for journal articles , customized for use in climcal problem solving . We describe two aspects of literature - based medical decision making . First , there are interaction effects among citations in a search output ( or among articles in a stack of articles ) that affect the physician’s judgment of clinical applicability . Second , physicians select among different information processing strategies when attempting to use literature for tinding an answer a clinical question . 1 . INTRODUCTION Skill at clinical problem solving is fundamental to high - quality patient care . Problem solving in a medical setting requires that reformation from diverse sources - - personal observations ; oral testimony from patients ; laboratory results ; published and unpublished data on the manifestations , causes , prognoses , treatments , and prevention of disease - - be selected and integrated into a cohesive whole . The research reported here derives from an exploration of how published knowledge is incorporated mto clinical decision making . Solving the problem requires strategies both for finding and for processing information ( Simon 1982 ) . We describe two aspects of literature - based medical decision makmg that address Simon’s elements of problem solving . First , there are interaction effects among citations in a search output ( or among articles in a stack ofarticles ) that affect the physician’s selection judgments during the search for relevant information . Second , physicians select among different information processing strategies for extracting information from a set of references to answer a question . Our data derive from an exploratory study whose goal was the design of an alternative online document surrogate for use in medical problem solving ( Fforance , 1994 ) . In the study , physicians chose articles relevant to specific patient care problems and explained how they would use information from those articles as a basis of action . For purposes of our research , the physician is not simply attempting to stay current in her discipline , or to explore an hypothesis that has emerged from Permission to make digital / hard copies of all or port of this material widlout fee is granled provided thot the copies are nol made or distributed for profit or commerci : d Idvant : ige , the ACM copyright / server notice , the title of the } ~ ublication LUILi its date : Ippear , anti notice is given that copyright is by permission of’ the Ass { ~ cia [ iun for Computing M ~ cbinery , Inc . ( ACM ) . To cnpy nthcrwise , tu republish , to post on servers or to nxiistribute to lists , rcquirw specific permission sud / or fee . SIGIR’95 Seattle WA USA [ { ’ 1995 ACM 0 - 89791 - 714 - 6 / 95 / 07 , S3 . 50 recurrent practice situations ( Florance , 1992 ) . Rather , her problem solving is bounded by real - time needs and information gaps that have arisen in the context of a specific case . 2 . METHODS Three physicians participated , each of whom was regularly involved in direct patient care in a primary care setting . The physicians were given six clinical questions and asked to consider the questions as their own ( i . e . , as if they had arisen with their own patients . ) Two semi - structured interviews were held with each physician for each question . In the first interview session for each question , the physician discussed the parameters of the question and then reviewed a MEDLINE search , judging the clinical applicability of each citation to the problem at hand , and defending his reasoning . In the second session , the physician reviewed a selection of articles from the search output for each question , working through the text of the articles to identify and extract information that helped to answer the question . Interview sessions were tape - recorded , and the physicians marked up search outputs and articles to identify important pieces of text . The transcripts and marked - up documents are the basis of the findings reported here . 3 . INFORMATION PROCESSING DURING SELECTION DECISIONS In each interview session , participants were asked to work systematically through a list of citations or a set of articles . In both kinds of exercises , the relevance scores assigned to an item were often affected by other items in the set . The participating physicians remarked upon this several times , and sometimes reassigned higher or lower scores to items after seeing others in the set . Once a potentially relevant article was found in a search output , the participants’ interest in reviewing additional citations waned . Once they had read an article whose data they accepted , the participants had no desire to search through additional articles for additional data . Responding to the researcher’s observation that the judgment of any single citation seemed always to be relative to others in the output , one physician said : When I was going through that [ article ] , [ was saying “ [ f I had no other information , this would implicitly give me information . ” [ t’s a function of the condition of independence . Here’s my question . 1 have two sources of information . If I know about article 1 ( and article 1 is relevant ) , then article 2 no 158 longer matters , ~ [ don ‘t know about article 1k relevance , then [ care about bolh articles . Regard ] ng [ he statement above , atmcle 2 may actually contain useful information comparable to that in article 1 , but it WIII not be valued as highly as the first because the information has already been located . Thus , article 2 appears to bring no additional benefit and receives a lower score , In another session , this physician expanded on these ideas : 1 have some uncertainty about the question , and some idea about the answer . There are a bunch of articles available to me . The question is , “Do I want to retrieve the next article ? ” What’s really going on is that when I look at the abstracts , [ ’m beginning to narrow my uncertain ~ . At a certain point , I can recognize that the next article is not going to change tny uncertainty . You want to eliminate . You want to make a conclusion on the next piece of da ( a on the basis of everything you ‘ve seen beforehand . Thus , the physician looks at articles and continues to reduce uncertainty until some acceptable threshold is reached . This decision model - - moving to the next piece of ewdence , making a decision , and stopping or going forward - - is a reflection of diagnostic technique . The same physician descrtbed the diagnostic process this way : Suppose that [ a ] person has IgA allergy . You want to know whether your patient is going to have it . They give you another piece of evidence . Rather than saying “this is right’8 or “this is wrong , ” you say “this has bearing on the be [ ie ~ ” Then , the question is “where is your threshold for action ? ‘o and does the piece of evidence cause you to cross that threshold ? Evidence should give you evidence about what you want , but it adds new uncertain ~ . This physician described the way information from an article affects treatment decisions by diagraming the process and explaining lt tn terms of relationships among different elements in the diagram ( Figure 1 ) . Figure 1 . Effect of articles on beliefs about probability prior posterior His explanation of the diagram accentuates the way information in articles can provide data to support quantitative decision making : There is the probability of disease itself ( the prior ) and there is my beltef about the probability of disease ( posterior ) . In the left side of tb is dtagram , P ( D ) is the prior pro babiluy of duease . [ ) n concerned about the probability of disease ; these ( article 1 , article 2 ) give me evidence . [ ’d start out With lhis , the pr ; or probability of disease , given data in article 1 and data in article 2 . I observe data in the articles . Now I want to reverse the arrows : what’s my belief about the probability of disease given what I learned from articles I and 2 ? These articles are affecting that notion of probability . Start off with prior , [ get the data , I reverse the relationship between the articles and the P ( D ) shown in the right side of the diagram . Now , what’s powerful is that I can use this [ the prior and posterior probabilities ] now in some decision problem , to treat or not to treat . Relevance judgments are also affected when two or more retrieved articles provide conflicting evidence . In revlewln articles for a question on antivenin treatment for ~ snakebite , one physlclan noted : The problem is that this article ( 62 - 2 ) and these two ( 62 - 7 and 62 - 14 ) are very contradictory . Articles 62 - 7 and 62 - 14 are the closext . These are hospitalized and these are emergency room patients , so the site becomes itnportant . I still have to get a better sense Are they really measuring the same thing ? It’s easy to say “ [ ’m going to do what the authorities tell me to do . “ These two support each other , so I can go ahead . There are holes . When you need to make a decision , you realize that there are holes . In the situation in which two articles present conflicting evidence , a high relevance score assigned to the initial article may be adjusted downward once the physician locates the conflicting evidence . On the other hand , if a second article provides information that corroborates information presented in a favored source located earlier , the second might receive a higher score due to a kind of “halo” effect . These subtle relationships among topically related materials are further complicated by situational factors such as the information seeker’s previous knowledge , sense of urgency and so on . 4 . INFORMATION PROCESSING IN KNOWLEDGE EXTRACTION Many researchers have characterized problem solving as a process of completion : something is missing ( information ) and someone ( problem solver ) wants to find It , or something N wrong in a person’s state of knowledge and she wants information to resolve the problem . Belkin’s ( 1980 ) model of the “anomalous state of knowledge” is a widely - discussed example of this approach in the information sciences ; Brenda Dervm’s notion of the information gap is another ( Dervin , 1986 ) . The action takes place in a problem ] . The snakebite question was referenced in the interwews as ‘question 62’ , hence the numbers in the quotation that follows , 159 space , a place the problem solver “has created within which to search for the solution “ ( Newell 1990 : 98 ) . When facing a patient - care problem , the physician particularizes a problem space by defining what is known and not known , and by deciding which knowledge gaps need to be filled . As she locates relevant reformation , the physician integrates it into a cognitive framework established during her work - up of the case ( Patel , 1989 ) . The process of answering the question is not necessarily linear , nor is it always conclusive . As gaps are filled , new questions may arise , requiring the physician to reconsider Information she has already seen , or to seek information not specified in the original problem statement . Once articles are located that are clinically applicable to a given case , the physician must extract information from them that can be used to solve the problem . Data from our study , though insufficient for supporting strong assertions , offer intriguing glimpses of two information processing patterns used by physicians when they employ literature in clinical problem solving . The way information was extracted from articles to answer a question was not identical among the physicians for each question , nor did any physician use a single strategy for the six questions . Two basic gap - filling strategies , additive and recursive , were employed by the participants . Using the additive strategy , the physician builds an answer sequentially , moving through the stack article by article , uncovering individual data elements and their associations . The additive strategy is an efficient way to move quickly through a set of articles , capturing only those pieces of information that fit the identified knowledge gaps . By contrast , the recursive strategy is non - sequential . Using it , the physician moves back and forth among articles , answering questions raised in one by referring to sections of another . In some instances , he may pass up information as irrelevant and then returned to it later because new information makes it seem more valuable . Table 1 shows the distribution of additive and recursive strategies across participants and questions in the study . Additive and recursive strategies can be viewed as two methods for filling knowledge gaps in a problem space . Table 1 . Information processing strategies , by question type I Ouestion MD MD MD type # 1 # 2 # 3 Q . 11 diagnosis A R R Q . 23 diagnosis A A A Q . 39 treatment A A A Q . 51 prognosis R A A Q . 62 treatment R R A Q . 73 prognosis R R R A = Additive R = Recursive The selection of an information processing strategy , like the selection of any tool , allows the information seeker to apply her abilities within constraints unique to the problem . Two detailed examples are given below to illustrate differences between these approaches . 5 . THE ADDITIVE STRATEGY : AN EXAMPLE Each physician was asked to consider the following question as if it had arisen in his own practice : Had patient with a chordoma in sacral area who had been treated surgically , but tumor had not been totally excised . Need information on whether radialion therapy would be usefid in this situation . This question deals with treatment for a known condition ; the physic } an is trying to decide on a course of post - surgical therapy for a tumor . Physician 3 said his strategy was to seek information on whether radiation therapy would be useful . He was inclined to proceed with radiation therapy , but wanted to confirm or refute hls decision . He reviewed seven articles , having first judged them all as potentially relevant on the basis of their MEDLINE records . AS he reviewed the seven articles , Physician 3 gathered pieces of information from each article , enlarging and reinforcing his mental image of the context in which radiation therapy could or should be used . Some articles reinforced information in previous articles ; others filled knowledge gaps . Even irrelevant articles had an effect by helping him decide to dncount certain pieces of information . The information processing strategy Physician 3 used for this question was additive . Table 2 records comments and pieces of information he used to arrive at an answer . The articles are listed in the order in which they were reviewed . At Table 2 . A Article # 39 - 18 39 - 16 39 - 15 39 - 14 39 - 1 Iitive strategy , question 39 Information Gained chordomas are radioresistant ; sacral chordoma M rare ; survival time is highly variable ; no natural history information available for comparmg outcome % incidence of metastasis : survival rates difficult to interpret significant Palliation : radioresistant : large doses of radiation used ; possible course of treatment ; treatment of recurrences radiation rarelv cures : 50 % survival at 5 , years or longer ; alternative surgical techniques ; radioresistance ; palliative effect of radiation ; dosage levels ; symptom reliefi difficult to judge success of treatment case of tumor appearance on site of a radiated chordoma , but not recurrence data on relapse and cures for 33 cases ; effect of radiation ; survival rate for 50 % ; standard treatment of surgery plus radiation length of remission ; dosage level ; 5070 survival rate ; effect of dosage rate on time to recurrence ; freedom from local progression the end of the article review , Physician 3 described the result in terms of his intended action : [ would irradiare this patien ~ . I’m satisj7ed it would guarantee to give palliation at a high dose , and it would improve survival . Because it constantly incorporates new data into an established cognitive framework , the additive strategy places low demands on the reader’s memory , This strategy takes advantage of attributes of human memory that reduce cognitive overhead ( Miller 1956 ) . The additive strategy would be useful when declarative ( i . e . , factual ) knowledge IS sought to 160 complete a picture , when practice parameters are well - established , when the physician has considerable expertise in the problem area , or when the physician is seeking confirmation of a decision . 6 . THE RECURSIVE STRATEGY : AN EXAMPLE Question 73 was posed as follows : Had a six - month old patient with complete neuroblastoma lesion [ stage 1 ] of the upper thoracic spine and needed the most recent prognostic information for children on the relationship between the length of the interval between symptoms , surgery , and the recovery offurrction . For question 73 , Physician 1 reviewed seven articles looking for information on the prognosis for pediatric neuroblastoma patients . He was particularly interested in the survival rate , and in the range of possible outcomes for a patient with this diagnosis , given various treatment options . Physician 1 used the recursive strategy to answer this question . Table 3 shows Physician 1‘s strategy for working through the articles to fill his knowledge gaps for this problem . Table 3 . Ret w 73 - 18 73 - 14 73 - 18 ~ 73 - 5 73 - 3 73 - 18 73 - 7 73 - 13 73 - 21 ursive strateg y , question 73 Information Gained survival rate ; Shimada histologic classification ; survival curve by age group ; problem is rare general importance of biology in this case two references on age and prognosis prognosis by tumor stage review Shimada classification same study population as 73 - 14 ; ha - RAS gene as a markefi nothing on prognosis only 8 extrarenal cases ; S - 100 marker occurrence rate of extrarenal ; survival of stage 2 & 2 children doesn’t change with age ; only stage 4 children under 1 have better prognosis recurrence is likely ; relapse can be late ; prognosis good for late recurrences ; refs on influence of age at diagnosis , factors affecting survival S - 100 as a marke ~ cases matched to patient and judged irrelevant In answering question 73 , Physician 1 used a con - sequential , or recursive strategy . The recursive strategy pieces together an answer by repeated reinterpretation and reconsideration of data in light of each new fact . The relationships among data change as new facts are discovered , as do their relative value . For example , Shimada’s histologic classification was not judged relevant until it became clear that tumor staging had an effect on survival rates for neuroblastoma patients . After reviewing the seven articles , Physician 1 described the stateof his knowledge this way : I would still like to see an aggregate survival curve that gives me 10 patients like mine . If I were to do the search again , I would focus on stage 1 neuroblastoma , That’s what I really care about , prognosis m stage I kids under I year . [ also need to corre [ a ~ e prognosis with site of stage I . If I get a survival curve of kids with extra adrenal stage 1 , [ ’d be happy . Depending on where [ ’m practicing , and whether I have access to any of these other histologic markers , I might use them . [ ’d read the biology article ( article 73 - 18 ) more carefully because N - myc , that N - myc gene , comes up over and over again . The recursive strategy places more demands on the physician’s memory than the additive strategy does , because the physician is constantly reassessing and reformulating the variables . The recursive strategy is a response to complex problem solving situations , such as treatment decisions , in which multiple variables must be weighed and compared at the same time . It is also a response to a situation in which the literature provides only pieces of data that must be associated or computed in some way before an answer can be obtained . The recursive strategy would be useful when the physician’s experience with a problem area is limited , when the problem is ill - defined , when the physician is seeking procedural information , or when the physician is attempting to choose among alternatives . 7 . DISCUSSION When selecting relevant articles for patient cases , physicians make a quick judgment about the value of each individual item . Unlike parameters for certain kinds of information searches , the selection criteria in a care - related information search often focus on uncertainty reductton rather than the comprehensive retrieval of all known items . The individual judgments made early in the search process affect later ones in two ways : by recalibrating the physician’s judgment scale ( e . g . , I’ve already seen a good one ) or by reformulating his cognitive map ( e . g . , I’ve seen this term twice , it must be important ) . Our findings support the work of other researchers who reported order effects ( e . g . Eisenberg , 1988 ) in relevance judgments . The interaction effects we observed in our study suggest that the likelihood that a physician will notice and evaluate any individual item is very much affected by ( 1 ) its place in line , ( 2 ) the number of other items on the list , and ( 3 ) the degree to which information in the citation changes the physician’s notion of the problem . Search systems like MEDLINE , that allow physicians to retrieve large lists of potentially relevant items , could improve the context for selection decisions by offering filtering mechanisms to reduce or re - order retrieval results . A preliminary review of the gap - filling strategies used by the three physicians as they worked through the six questions in this study provides no conclusive answers about the determinants of strategy selection ( Table 1 ) . The clearest correlation between strategy and question type appears for prognosis questions . [ n those situations , the searches turned up no articles that gave good prognostic summaries , requiring the participants to compute an estimate from a number of data sources and integrate them recursively . The conditions that lead to the selection of one strategy or the other remain to be explored . For example , if strategy selection reflects individual style differences , then a physician will favor one strategy over another and use it repeatedly to solve a variety of different problems . As Table I indicates , this was not the case with participants in our study . [ f strategy selection reflects the task 161 at hand , the physician will select the strategy that best suits his mental image of the problem . Our data offer no clear answer to this : on three questions , one of each type , all participants employed the same strategy . Nor did the participants consistently use the same strategy for the same type of question : Physician 1 employed an additive strategy for both diagnosis questions , but Physician 2 and 3 used a recursive strategy for one diagnosis question and an additive strategy for the other . Personal experience is another possible factor In strategy selection . Physician 3 was the only one of the participants experienced in the topic of question 62 ( consensus guidelines universal treatment with antivenin for snakeblte ) ; his strategy choice might reflect his prior knowledge . Physician 1 , a pediatrician , might have adopted the recursive strategy for question 51 ( a search for general information on IgA deficiency ) because it is outside the usual scope of his practice . Another way to think about the additive and recursive construction strategies is to look at them as behavioral adaptations , as ways to address uneven findings in the literature . The articles for the two problems summarized in Tables 2 and 3 provided very different resources for problem solving . In question 39 , the physicians examined three review articles , two time series reports and a combined case study and review . The article set for this question contained four Items that the three physicians scored as “high relevance” , a score they assigned to the “best” articles . The text of the articles provided several overviews of chordoma , plus detailed reports of experience for two large groups of patients . The review articles contained similar information , reinforcing one another’s assertions . Additional supporting ewdence from the two time series articles confirmed general knowledge provided by the review articles . It is possible that this mix of articles supports additive construction . That is , the fact that all three participants employed the same strategy for question 39 may simply reflect the high relevance of the articles they used to find the answer . For question 73 , four research studies , two sets of cases and a single review article were examined by the participants . The review article dealt with the biology of neuroblastoma . The research studies detailed one aspect or another of neuroblastoma , requiring the physicians to piece together a general clinical - level view of neuroblastoma from research results and basic science knowledge . The physicians disagreed on their initial relevance scores for most of the articles ; only one received high ratings from all three . The article set provided individual reports that , of themselves , were not clinically pertinent . Taken as a group , they suggested a course of action . The contents of the articles , molecular - level biology and study results , required cognitive processing on the part of the participants to make them applicable in a clinical setting . A literature retrieval of this type , most of whose individual citations are judged to be of only medium relevance , may require a recursive strategy to arrive at a useful answer . The notion of strategy selection is not new in studies of medical decision making . For example , Rennels ( 1987 : 82 - 91 ) defined four strategies that characterize multi attribute decision making : lexicographical ordering , satisficing , dominance and trade off . All involve rank ordering of the attributes of an item being considered , but each takes a different approach to assigning value to those attributes . [ n lexicographical ordering , for example , the physictan selects items that are the best for a given attribute and eliminates all others . If there is a tie among the best , decisions are based on other attributes , using one of the other strategies . In satisficmg decisions , on the other hand , the physician assigns an acceptability threshold to each attribute and computes an overall utility score for each item . Thus , no single attribute defines the decision . Like the strategies described by Rennels , the additive and recursive strategies described here are tools for decision makmg . 8 . CONCLUSION Increasingly , physicians are called upon to employ literature in patient - related problem solving situations ( Evidence - based Medicine Working Group , 1992 ) . The effective retrieval and use of the published knowledge base is bounded both by the specific problem and by the cognitive framework a physician builds while framing that problem . Our findings provide some specific examples of the way physicians choose and use published information for patient care , Problem - centered information seeking , particularly in the medical setting , has context variables that require specialized responses to help the physician make good selection decisions . Further work is required to determine the robustness and validity of the notion of additive and recursive information processing strategies . The way participants judged the relationships between citations and articles , and the way they worked with the content of articles to construct answers to their questions , illustrate very clearly how problem solvers focus on the information problem rather than on the search or on documents . Systems designed for end users must provide more integrated search and display mechanisms to allow users to concentrate on finding evidence for decision making . One approach would be to provide distinct interfaces for each of the two strategies discussed here . For example , finely - tuned relevance feedback seems like an obvious technique around which to build support for the additive strategy in which similar results are sought to fill hypothesized gaps . On the other hand , new techniques that allow multiple pieces of ewdence to be juxtapositioned and viewed simultaneously might be more appropriate to support recursive strategies . Finally , it is clear that direct access to text elements within the article or to a customized document surrogate , rather than to a generalized document surrogate such as the standard MEDLINE record , will be required for effective literature - based clinical problem solving . Our study results suggest that a multi - layered hypertext biomedical article , whose surrogate provides links to defined areas within the document , could serve this purpose . REFERENCES Belkin , NJ . 1980 . Anomalous states of knowledge as a basis for information retrieval . Can J lnjii Sci 5 : 133 - 43 . Dervin , B . and Nilan , M . “Information needs and uses . ” In M . Williams ( Ed . ) Annual Review of Information Science & Technology . Volume 21 . Medford , NJ : Knowledge Industries , 1986 . Eisenberg , M . and Barry , C . 1988 . Order effects : a study of the possible influence of presentation order on user judgments of document relevance . JASIS 39 ( 5 ) : 293 - 300 . Evidence - Based Medicine Working Group . 1992 . Evidence - based medicine . A new approach to teaching the practice of medicine . JAMA 268 : 2420 - 2425 . Florance , V . 1994 . Climcal Extracts of Biomedical Literature for Patient - Centered Problem Solving . College of Library & 162 Information Serwces , Umversity of Maryland , College Park . Doctoral Dissertation . Florance , V . 1992 . Medical knowledge for clinical problem solving : a structural analysis of climcal questions . BMLA 80 : 140 - 149 . Miller , GA . 1956 . The magical number seven , plus or minus two : some Iimlts on our capacity for processing information . Psych Rev 81 - 97 . Newell , A . Unijied Theories of Cognition . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press , 1990 . Patel , VL , DA Evans , and GJ Green . “Biomedical knowledge and clinical reasoning . ” In Cognitive Science in Medicine , eds . DA Evans and VL Pate ] . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press , 1989 . Rennels , GD . A Computational Model of Reasoning from the Clinical Literature . Vol . 32 . Lecture Notes in Medical tnformatlcs , ed . PL Reighertz and DAB Lindberg . Berlin : Springer - Verlag , 1987 . Simon , HA . The Sciences of the A + icial . 2nd Ed . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press , 1982 . 163