Augmenting Creative Design Thinking using Networks of Concepts Georgi V . Georgiev 1 Center for Ubiquitous Computing , University of Oulu , Finland Kaori Yamada 2 Organization of Advanced Science and Technology , Kobe University , Japan Toshiharu Taura 3 Integrated Research Center , Kobe University , Japan Vassilis Kostakos 4 Center for Ubiquitous Computing , University of Oulu , Finland Matti Pouke 5 Center for Ubiquitous Computing , University of Oulu , Finland Sylvia Tzvetanova Yung 6 School of Art and Design , University of Bedfordshire , UK Timo Ojala 7 Center for Ubiquitous Computing , University of Oulu , Finland A BSTRACT Here we propose an interactive system to augment creative design thinking using networks of concepts in a virtual reality environment . We discuss how to augment the human capacity to be creative through dynamic suggestions providing new and original ideas , based on specific semantic network characteristics . We outline directions to explore the structures of the concept network and their connection to creative concept generation . It is expected that augmented creative thinking will allow the user to have more original ideas and thus be more innovative . Keywords : Creativity , concept generation , creative thinking , augmented thinking , design thinking , concept network . Index Terms : H . 5 . 1 [ Information Interfaces and Presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) ] : Multimedia Information Systems—Artificial , augmented , and virtual realities 1 R EPRESENTATION OF C REATIVE D ESIGN T HINKING P ROCESS Creative design thinking remains a vague notion . It is still not clear how it can be systematically enhanced and augmented . Previous research investigated creative concept generation at an early stage of design [ 5 , 7 ] , thereby suggesting that it can be facilitated by using “semantic network” aids with certain structures . Semantic networks comprise words and semantic relationships between them ; these networks are generated using a concept dictionary ( e . g . , WordNet , [ 2 ] ) , based on the user’s verbalizations . Previous research described the network structure of the concept generation process [ 7 ] , identifying certain structural characteristics in this thinking process that can lead to a highly creative design idea . To augment and enhance creative design thinking , the idea proposed in this research agenda is to visualize and investigate the intricate structure of a semantic network of concepts in virtual reality . In our planned prototype , we have the option to utilize two types of virtual reality systems , i . e . HMDs such as the Oculus Rift or HTC Vive , as well as a CAVE system , with a panoramic stereoscopic rendering as virtual reality environment ( Figure 1 ) . Figure 1 : The proposed system concept ( utilizing HMDs or CAVE ) . We are interested in the structure of knowledge itself during concept generation or design thinking which results in an idea ( whether it is an industrial , product , software , or any other kind of design ) of high originality . To represent this structure , we propose a method in which a semantic network is a framework of the concept space ( space of concepts in which the design thinking is performed ) . In particular , we are interested in the possibility of walking through a semantic network by using an immersive virtual reality system . The motivation to use virtual reality is based on : ( 1 ) Immersive characteristics of virtual reality can support inherent characteristics of creative thinking ; ( 2 ) interaction characteristics of the virtual reality representation can contribute to the persuasiveness of concept generation as an activity , such as the concept of presence [ 6 ] ; ( 3 ) high levels of presence in virtual reality have a positive impact on performance [ 1 ] ; ( 4 ) exploration of the structural characteristics of the concept network can contribute to ‘a - ha’ or insight moments ; and ( 5 ) dynamic interaction with network is expected to contribute to real - time feel in conjunction with the actual thinking process . Experimentation and supporting playfulness in tools have value that support creative thinking [ 4 ] . When people concentrate too much effort on how to use the tools themselves , they will have less cognitive resources left for use in finding creative solutions to their tasks [ 4 ] . Early virtual reality studies had concluded that immersive virtual reality systems increased user performance in tasks demanding spatial perception [ 6 ] . In addition , task performance will also increase due to increased attentional resources users allocated , if they experience high levels of presence [ 1 ] . 2 M ETHOD AND E XPLORATIVE C ASE The method relies on the principle of a semantic network comprising the semantic relationship between words , such as hypernym – hyponym ( hierarchical superordinate – subordinate ) and other relationships . We use WordNet [ 2 ] as a tool to create a semantic network . WordNet is a large - scale database containing 1 georgi . georgiev @ oulu . fi 2 kyamada @ mech . kobe - u . ac . jp 3 taura @ kobe - u . ac . jp 4 vassilis @ ee . oulu . fi 5 matti . pouke @ oulu . fi 6 sylvia . tzvetanovayung @ beds . ac . uk 7 timo . ojala @ oulu . fi information about the manner in which humans process language and concepts . We propose a 3D visualization for the network , where the nodes ( words ) and connections ( relationships between words ) would be visualized in a virtual reality . Such visualization would allow interactive examination of the network by walking through different network paths and examining the details , words , and their connections . The possible directions to explore and augment are outlined in Table 1 . The particular plan for future experimentation with this visualization will request the participants to walkthrough the network ( e . g . , in a case with reference to a particular idea or product ) . Semantic networks have measurable network parameters , such as path and density [ 7 ] . By using such parameters , the semantic network structures for idea generation process perceived as one with higher creativity can be replicated in new idea generation processes . Table 1 : The directions to explore in creative concept generation . Structures to explore in semantic networks Connection to creative concept generation Exploration of related but divergent concepts Divergence of concepts Exploration of network of higher hierarchy concepts Abstraction of concepts [ 8 ] Exploration of distant concepts Longer paths relate to originality [ 7 ] Connection between two concepts through a part of the network with lower density Lower density relates to originality [ 7 ] Exploration of neighborhood of a concept with high number of links High number of links to concepts relates to originality [ 7 ] Figure 2 : Examples of base network and low density network . Here , we discuss an explorative case of visualization of semantic networks as a preliminary investigation . In the proposed system , the 3D representation will aid the systematic walkthrough representations in accordance with the directions identified in Table 1 . The benefits of 3D visualization over 2D will be a better understanding the networks , inter - connections , and structures , offering an additional degree of freedom . Furthermore , stereoscopic viewing could make graphs more readable , as overlapping and non - orthogonal nodes easily make graphs unreadable . The benefits over non - virtual and less immersive visualization will be in terms of immersiveness , interaction , exploration , and dynamics . In an example of implementation , we take the network between the concepts ‘bird’ and ‘glass’ as a base network ( Figure 2 ) , visualized in a CAVE environment . Example of low density network from the base network can be seen in Figures 2 ( see Table 1 ) [ 3 ] , visualized with Fruchterman Reingold 3D layout . The following outcomes can be expected from interactions with such visualization : ( 1 ) Exploration of the relations and paths of design thinking , providing structure , and also associative clues ; ( 2 ) realization or surprise regarding the characteristics of the design thinking process , externalizing inexplicit concepts that can lead to unexpectedness ; and ( 3 ) reflections on design thinking and knowledge creation concerning the design thinking process . 3 C HALLENGES TO A DDRESS AND F URTHER S TEPS Specific challenges and design issues to address in future implementation of working prototype are : ( A ) Dynamic construction of networks and visualization on the basis of searches in WordNet [ 2 ] , ( B ) mode of user input and user’s way to interact with the data , and ( C ) implementation of divergence and convergence activities in concept generation ( the way the semantic networks change ) . Challenge ( A ) requires the implementation of searches in WordNet , construction of multiple networks and visualization of one network at a time ( corresponding to a direction in Table 1 ) . For challenge ( B ) , we plan to use verbal user input ( new words ) and gesture - based interactivity / operation with the graph ( selection of connections / views ) . Verbal input and gesture - based operation will allow natural interaction , blending virtual environment with the non - augmented thinking mode . Interactivity is a very important element in almost any information visualization system [ 9 ] . Challenge ( C ) will require limiting the number of network nodes visualized based on the time of visualization and user operation . Further research will include the use of such network visualizations in an experiment , comparing unaided and aided idea generation on exposure to stimuli ( in accordance with Table 1 ) . We expect CAVE to be a better environment for augmenting design thinking , being closer to existing modes of design thinking . We expect that augmented design thinking will result in ideas that exhibit greater originality and overall creativity . A CKNOWLEDGEMENTS This work has been partially supported by the COMBAT project ( 293389 ) , funded by the Strategic Research Council at the Academy of Finland . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] Karl - Erik Bystrom , Woodrow Barfield , and Claudia Hendrix , " A Conceptual Model of the Sense of Presence in Virtual Environments " , Presence : Teleoperators and Virtual Environments , 8 ( 2 ) , pages 241 – 244 , 1999 . [ 2 ] Christiane Fellbaum , WordNet : An Electronic Lexical Database . Cambridge , MA , MIT Press , 1998 . [ 3 ] Ivan Herman , Guy Melançon , and M . Scott Marshall , " Graph visualization and navigation in information visualization : A survey " , IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , 6 ( 1 ) , pages 24 – 43 , 2000 . [ 4 ] Mitchel Resnick , Brad Myers , Kumiyo Nakakoji , Ben Shneiderman , Randy Pausch , Ted Selker , and Mike Eisenberg . Design principles for tools to support creative thinking , working paper , 2005 . [ 5 ] Nicole M . Segers , " Computational representations of words and associations in architectural design " , Doctoral dissertation , Technische Universiteit Eindhoven , 2004 . [ 6 ] Mel Slater , and Sylvia Wilbur , " A framework for immersive virtual environments ( FIVE ) : Speculations on the role of presence in virtual environments " , Presence : Teleoperators and Virtual Environments 6 ( 6 ) , pages 603 – 616 , 1997 . [ 7 ] Toshiharu Taura , Eiko Yamamoto , Mohd Y . N . Fasiha , Masanori Goka , Futoshi Mukai , Yukari Nagai , and Hideyuki Nakashima , " Constructive simulation of creative concept generation process in design : a research method for difficult - to - observe design - thinking processes " , Journal of Engineering Design , 23 ( 4 ) , 297 – 321 , 2012 . [ 8 ] Thomas B . Ward , Merryl J . Patterson , and Cynthia M . Sifonis , " The role of specificity and abstraction in creative idea generation " , Creativity Research Journal , 16 ( 1 ) , pages 1 – 9 , 2004 . [ 9 ] Ji Soo Yi , Youn ah Kang , John T . Stasko , and Julie A . Jacko , " Toward a Deeper Understanding of the Role of Interaction in Information Visualization " , IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , 13 ( 6 ) , pages 1224 – 1231 , 2007 .