http : / / bst . sagepub . com / Bulletin of Science , Technology & Society http : / / bst . sagepub . com / content / 30 / 6 / 377 The online version of this article can be found at : DOI : 10 . 1177 / 0270467610385893 2010 30 : 377 originally published online 1 November 2010 Bulletin of Science Technology & Society Bernie Hogan The Presentation of Self in the Age of Social Media : Distinguishing Performances and Exhibitions Online Published by : http : / / www . sagepublications . com On behalf of : National Association for Science , Technology & Society can be found at : Bulletin of Science , Technology & Society Additional services and information for http : / / bst . sagepub . com / cgi / alerts Email Alerts : http : / / bst . sagepub . com / subscriptions Subscriptions : http : / / www . sagepub . com / journalsReprints . nav Reprints : http : / / www . sagepub . com / journalsPermissions . nav Permissions : http : / / bst . sagepub . com / content / 30 / 6 / 377 . refs . html Citations : What is This ? - Nov 1 , 2010 OnlineFirst Version of Record - Dec 4 , 2010 Version of Record > > at Statsbiblioteket on February 6 , 2012 bst . sagepub . com Downloaded from Special Issue Articles Bulletin of Science , Technology & Society 30 ( 6 ) 377 – 386 © 2010 SAGE Publications Reprints and permission : http : / / www . sagepub . com / journalsPermissions . nav DOI : 10 . 1177 / 0270467610385893 http : / / bsts . sagepub . com The Presentation of Self in the Age of Social Media : Distinguishing Performances and Exhibitions Online Bernie Hogan 1 Abstract Presentation of self ( via Goffman ) is becoming increasingly popular as a means for explaining differences in meaning and activity of online participation . This article argues that self - presentation can be split into performances , which take place in synchronous “situations , ” and artifacts , which take place in asynchronous “exhibitions . ” Goffman’s dramaturgical approach ( including the notions of front and back stage ) focuses on situations . Social media , on the other hand , frequently employs exhibitions , such as lists of status updates and sets of photos , alongside situational activities , such as chatting . A key difference in exhibitions is the virtual “curator” that manages and redistributes this digital content . This article introduces the exhibitional approach and the curator and suggests ways in which this approach can extend present work concerning online presentation of self . It introduces a theory of “lowest common denominator” culture employing the exhibitional approach . Keywords Goffman , online identity , performance , exhibition , privacy , symbolic interactionism All the world’s a stage , And all the men and women merely players : They have their exits and their entrances ; And one man in his time plays many parts . —Shakespeare , As You Like It , 2 / 7 There is a distinct irony in Shakespeare’s claim , as spoken by Jacques in As You Like It . Shakespeare is not remembered for his charisma , his looks , or his wit at parties but for his voluminous plays and sonnets . The world is not only a stage but also a library and a gallery . We do not merely move through life’s stages , as Jacques’s monologue suggests , but leave a multitude of data traces as we go . In an era of social media , these data traces do not merely document our passage in life’s play but mediate our parts . We can interact with the data left by others alongside direct interactions with people them - selves . The world , then , is not merely a stage but also a par - ticipatory exhibit . The goal of this article is to clarify the ontological ( rather than emic or phenomenological ) distinction between actor and artifact . The actor performs in real time for an audience that monitors the actor . The artifact is the result of a past performance and lives on for others to view on their time . In making this distinction , I contend it is possible to extend current theories of online interaction and answer existing research questions such as : Why is it that contexts have “col - lapsed” online , as boyd suggests ? Why is it so hard to nail down the notion of a friend online ? How tightly can we couple the identity of an individual online and the activities of that individual ? Addressing these questions entails a distinction between the sorts of online spaces where actors behave with each other ( “performance” spaces , or behavior regions ; Goffman , 1959 ) and “exhibition” spaces where indi - viduals submit artifacts to show to each other . Clarifying this distinction creates an expanded theoretical repertoire for scholars , thereby enabling them to disentangle processes occurring when actors are copresent ( in time , if not in the same geographic place ) and processes that occur when actors are not necessarily present at the same time but still react to each other’s data . An exhibition is still a form of presentation of self . One can find off - line personal exhibitions in the presentation of photos in someone’s house . Indeed , Halle ( 1996 ) indicates how class clearly differentiates the choice of artwork ( or lack thereof ) on display in living rooms . This is to say that people take their choice of what to display personally and consider it a form of impression management . This distinction between performance and exhibition should be useful to scholars who are interested in the presen - tation of self online , and those who , like this author , consider notions of impression management a useful theoretical foil 1 Oxford University , Oxford , UK Corresponding Author : Bernie Hogan , Oxford University , 1 St Giles , Oxford , OX1 3JS , UK Email : bernie . hogan @ oii . ox . ac . uk at Statsbiblioteket on February 6 , 2012 bst . sagepub . com Downloaded from 378 Bulletin of Science , Technology & Society 30 ( 6 ) for understanding online behavior ( boyd , 2007 ; Marwick & boyd , in press ; Mendelson & Papacharissi , 2010 ; Lewis , Kaufman , & Christakis , 2008 ; Quan - Haase & Collins , 2008 ; Schroeder , 2002 ; Tufekci , 2008 ) . I begin this article with a review of Goffman’s dramatur - gical approach and its extensive use within social media studies . I then introduce the exhibitional approach , paying particular attention to the “curator , ” a key role generally absent from everyday life situations . In the penultimate section , I cover two areas of concern on social network sites ( friend lists and collapsed contexts ) , where shifting the focus toward exhibi - tions may reveal new insights and facilitate future research agendas . Goffman’s Dramaturgy Goffman’s dramaturgical approach is a metaphorical tech - nique used to explain how an individual presents an “ideal - ized” rather than authentic version of herself . The metaphor considers life as a stage for activity . Individuals thus engage in performances , which Goffman ( 1959 ) defines as “activity of an individual which occurs during a period marked by his continuous presence before a particular set of observers and which has some influence on the observers” ( p . 22 ) . This continued presence allows individuals to tweak their behav - ior and selectively give and give off details , a process he termed “impression management . ” One core assumption of the dramaturgical approach is that activity takes place in specific bounded settings . To explain this Goffman draws on Roger Barker’s ( 1968 ) notion of the “behavior setting” . In reacting to the behaviorism the early 20th century ( Skinner , 1939 ; Watson , 1913 ) , Barker ( 1968 ) suggested most behavior was not determined by individual - specific stimulus - response patterns but was instead guided by the norms and goals of specific settings . Goffman ( 1959 ) distilled these specific settings into the well - worn dichotomy of the “front region” and the “back region , ” or more colloquially , the “front stage” and the “back stage . ” In the front stage , we are trying to present an idealized version of the self according to a specific role : to be an appropriate server , lecturer , audience member , and so forth . The back - stage , as Goffman says , is “a place , relative to a given perfor - mance , where the impression fostered by the performance is knowingly contradicted as a matter of course” ( p . 112 ) . In the backstage , we do much of the real work necessary to keep up appearances . What is key for this article is to highlight how situa - tions are bounded in space and time . According to Goffman ( 1959 ) , [ W ] hen a performance is given it is usually given in a highly bounded region , to which boundaries with respect to time are often added . The impression and understanding fostered by the performance will tend to saturate the region and the time span , so that any indi - vidual located in this space - time manifold will be in a position to observe the performance and be guided by the definition of this situation which the performance fosters . ( p . 106 ) This quote parallels Barker key qualities of a behavior setting ( adapted from Heft , 2001 , pp . 253 - 254 ) : • Specifiable geographical location • Temporal boundaries • Boundaries are perceptible • Behavior settings exist independently of any single person’s experience of them Considering these qualities of the situation , Goffman’s ( 1959 ) dramaturgical approach is quite apt . Much like a stage play ( rather than the script ) , it is bounded in space and time , and represents the instantiation of specific roles . Players seek to perform their role as convincingly as possible , and for the show to succeed there is much work that must take place behind the scenes . That these regions are bounded in time is implicit in how Goffman discusses shifts in performances : By proper scheduling of one’s performances , it is pos - sible not only to keep one’s audiences separated from each other ( by appearing before them in different front regions or sequentially in the same region ) but also to allow a few moments in between performances so as to extricate oneself psychologically and physically from one personal front , while taking on another . ( p . 138 ) The Audience Within the dramaturgical approach , the audience refers those who observe a specific actor and monitor her performance . More succinctly , these are those for whom one “puts on a front . ” This front consists of the selective details that one presents in order to foster the desired impression alongside the unintentional details that are given off as part of the per - formance . Underlying this notion is the idea that the audi - ence makes a single coherent demand on the individual . The above quote ( “By proper scheduling . . . ” ) reminds us that Goffman not only considers different regions as bounded in space - time , but that the audiences are bounded as well . That is to say , there is usually one specific front that needs to be presented in any given situation , because each region is not just a space - time locus , but a time - space - identity locus inhab - ited by a specific audience . Thus , it does not matter if the waiter knows his customers personally , so much that the waiter puts on that specific front to the customers . Moreover , a front involves the continual adjustment of self - presentation based on the presence of others . Goffman ( 1961 ) reinforces at Statsbiblioteket on February 6 , 2012 bst . sagepub . com Downloaded from Hogan 379 this idea in Encounters , by discussing unfocused and focused interactions . Focused interaction “occurs when people effec - tively agree to sustain for a time a single focus of cognitive and visual attention” ( p . 7 ) . But even in unfocused interac - tion such as “when two strangers across the room from each other . . . [ each ] modifies his own demeanor because he him - self is under observation” ( p . 7 ) . The key point here is that individuals put on specific fronts and modify said fronts because of the sustained observation of an audience . Goffman also notes that conflict can arise when fronts col - lide . In The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life , Goffman ( 1959 ) discusses the civil inattention that takes place when someone answers a telephone in front of others , or when con - versations in public are loud enough to be heard by a third party . Similarly , Ling ( 2008 ) discusses the problem associ - ated with the “dual - front” that emerges from the cell phone . He notes how an office phone that is tethered to the place of work represents the individual in that place , and is part of the rituals that constitute the office . In contrast , the cell phone connects people in many situations including ones where there is substantial mismatch between the two fronts ( such as the high - powered business deal that gets done at the other - wise languid airport terminal ) . Goffman as Applied to Online Media Goffman might not consider himself a media scholar , although Lemert ( 1997 ) makes the case that Goffman is a product of the televisual age . And to the extent that he does , it might be more for Frame Analysis ( Goffman , 1974 ) than for The Pre - sentation of Self in Everyday Life ( Goffman , 1959 ) . Never - theless , Goffman’s dramaturgical approach is frequently considered a useful foil for understanding online presenta - tion of self . The following list contains some of the many articles that use Goffman to this end : • Donath ( 1998 ) employed Goffman as a starting point for signaling theory . • Schroeder ( 2002 ) uses Goffman’s dramaturgy quite literally in his analysis of virtual worlds . • boyd ( 2004 , 2006 , 2007 ) used Goffman to ground SNS activity as networked identity performance . • Hewitt and Forte ( 2006 ) use Goffman to explain identity production on Facebook and conflict because of the use of multiple fronts . • Robinson ( 2007 ) argues for the effectiveness of Goffman’s approach over postmodern perspectives found in Turkle ( 1997 ) . • Lewis , Kaufman , and Christakis ( 2008 ) draw on Goffman’s front stage / back stage distinction for deriving research questions about privacy . • Tufekci ( 2008 ) builds her research on Facebook presentation around Goffman alongside Dunbar’s social brain hypothesis . • Quan - Haase and Collins ( 2008 ) use impression management to discuss the art of creating status messages that signal availability . • Menchik and Tian ( 2008 ) use Goffman and symbolic interactionism more broadly to interpret “face - saving” on e - mail mailing lists . • Mendelson and Papacharissi ( 2010 ) demonstrate that pictures on social network sites conform to tra - ditional notions of impression management . A common thread running through these articles is that individuals would employ impression management ( or the selective disclosure of personal details designed to present an idealized self ) . However , several articles draw more explicitly on the dramaturgical approach to suggest that sites based on access control are inherently private , and therefore , a “back stage” ( boyd , 2006 ; Lewis et al . , 2008 ; Robinson , 2007 ) . The notion that media provide a window into the private lives of others ( or into things they would not normally show in public ) is not specific to social media . This idea was used by Meyrowitz ( 1986 ) to explain some of the cultural impacts of television . He asserts that television exists in a private space and shows private lives : “through electronic media , groups lose exclusive access to aspects of their own back region , and they gain views of the back regions of other groups” ( Meyrowitz , 1986 , p . 135 ) . Children get to view the typical adult world of their parents , men and women are now privy to conversations that would normally be segregated , and idols are brought down to earth through tabloid journal - ism . It is from here we can see the genesis of boyd’s “col - lapsed contexts” ( 2007 ) , as well as concerns about impression management vis - à - vis tabloid journalism and television’s focus on scandal . Backstage Is Not Private Space I consider two issues emerging from this model : the confla - tion of the backstage with private spaces and the conflation of presentation of self with performance . Several researchers have used the idea that Facebook is a backstage ( Lewis et al . , 2008 ; Tufekci , 2008 ) in order to motivate questions about privacy . However , the idea that some information is to be withheld from people is not the same thing as saying this information was part of what went into the creation of a front or that it contradicts a front as matter of course . From Goffman’s definition , anywhere can be a back stage to another front stage . Academics working in their office present a front to the colleagues at their depart - ment by showing studiousness and perhaps not surfing the net . However , this front may also involve long periods of deliberation on a piece of work that is hidden from another front : the audience at a conference . Online , the notion of a backstage fails to capture the role of a third party in regulating who has access to information at Statsbiblioteket on February 6 , 2012 bst . sagepub . com Downloaded from 380 Bulletin of Science , Technology & Society 30 ( 6 ) about an individual . That Facebook allows only friends or “friends of friends” to see specific content does not suggest that this content signifies a backstage to other possible con - tent that is available for anyone to see . To expect privacy online is not to imply that one has something worth hiding or a presentation that may contradict one’s role in other spheres of life . Rather , it signifies that some individuals are classi - fied as being considered contextually appropriate for this spe - cific information ( Nissenbaum , 2004 ) . It further suggests that there is a third party ( Facebook’s servers ) that knows who is considered an appropriate audience member for this con - tent and who is not . Lewis et al . ( 2008 ) used the notion of the backstage when comparing cultural information displayed by individuals with private and public accounts . They discovered that those with public accounts actually display more obscure music tastes . They loosely connected this to the notion of the back - stage and suggest that some individuals draw open the stage’s curtain to let the world see their tastes . To make their meta - phor successful , they imply that music tastes are something inherently private and something that go into the creation of a front stage . However , it is more likely that showing music tastes is appropriate to the context of Facebook . Musical tastes are not a backstage but rather are a front . Some people carefully select which tastes to show , and thus , give a clear reason to make their profile less private . It is not that others with a narrower range of music want to hide their musical tastes but that they are indifferent to the association of taste and identity . Artifacts Are Representations Not Performances Beyond the issue of the back stage and privacy is a deeper issue about whether online content can be considered a per - formance in the first place . The conflation of performance and online profile is likely because of the notion that because a blog or profile signifies a single individual it does not merely stand in for that individual but is that individual ( Reed , 2005 ) . Similarly , Robinson ( 2007 ) coins the term cyberperformers to denote individuals who perform in cyberspace . In doing so , she equates the behavior of individuals in chat rooms and instant messengers ( who either interact in real time or with specific known recipients ) with the behavior of Flickr . com photo submitters and bloggers . Can all content be considered a performance ? To address this issue , it is useful to distinguish between performance as ephemeral act and performance as recorded act . Once a per - formance has been recorded , the nature of the performance has altered . It may still be a presentation of self , and undoubt - edly it continues to signify an individual . However , it no longer necessarily bounds the specific audience who were present when the performance took place . Instead , it can be taken out of a situation and replayed in a completely differ - ent context . For example , a concert video may bring back great memories of a summertime show , but it does not trans - port the band to the viewer’s living room . The distinction between ephemeral act and recorded has an instructive parallel in the domain of art . In The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction , Benjamin ( 1967 ) considers the functions of art in a time when process and reproduction make most artwork easily accessible to the masses . He asserts that these reproductions lack the unique “aura” of the original object . This aura is not a transcenden - tal force but simply the unique historical trajectory of a sin - gular object . This distinction between unique artwork with its aura and mechanical reproductions designed to signify the original parallels the distinction between singular individual , with one’s own mind and presence , and digital traces designed to signify the individual . Benjamin ( 1967 ) notes several consequences of this shift away from an emphasis on the aura of objects that also have a relevant parallel . First , in being reproduced , the reception of art becomes less something to be revered in a unique situa - tion and more something to be consumed alongside other work : In the same way today , by the absolute emphasis on its exhibition value the work of art becomes a creation with entirely new functions , among which the one we are conscious of , the artistic function , later may be rec - ognized as incidental . ( p . 225 ) Benjamin also suggests that individuals should be dissociated from their reproductions . All historically unique objects ( including people ) have an aura . He suggests that film is what separates the person from their aura : [ F ] or the first time - and this is the effect of film—man has to operate with his whole living person , yet forgo - ing its aura . For aura is tied to his presence ; there can be no replica of it . ( p . 229 ) Third , he presages the difference between immediate impression management and the context - collapsing artifacts online . He does this by considering the fixed gaze of the camera : The film actor lacks the opportunity of the stage actor to adjust to the audience during his performance , since he does not present his performance to the audience in person . . . The audience’s identification with the actor is really an identification with the camera . ( p . 228 ) Thus , embedded in Benjamin’s ( 1967 ) thesis about artwork is a relevant distinction between the individual and the representation of the individual . Benjamin , as well as those writing in his wake tended to focus on the consequences of art and film ( cf . Hansen , 1987 ) . However , there is nothing in his thesis that prevents us from importing these ideas into everyday at Statsbiblioteket on February 6 , 2012 bst . sagepub . com Downloaded from Hogan 381 life—now that everyday life is replete with reproductions of the self . To link this notion more explicitly to Goffmanian impression management , I offer below an explication of exhibition sites . Exhibitional Approach Introduced An exhibition site can now be defined as a site ( typically online ) where people submit reproducible artifacts ( read : data ) . These artifacts are held in storehouses ( databases ) . Curators ( algorithms designed by site maintainers ) selec - tively bring artifacts out of storage for particular audiences . The audience in these spaces consists of those who have and those who make use of access to the artifacts . This includes those who respond , those who lurk , and those who acknowledge or are likely to acknowledge . Scope In contrast to situations , many social media sites do not depend on being bounded in space and time with continued observation occurring between individuals . Instead they have the following features , which I consider sufficient compo - nents of an exhibition space : 1 . Information signifying an individual is delivered to the audience , on demand by a third party . 2 . Because of the reproducibility of content and the fact that it is sent to a third party for distribution , the submitter does not continually monitor these data as an audience is receiving it , and may possibly never fully know the audience . Sites such as Facebook . com , Flickr . com , and YouTube . com have these qualities , as do the talk pages on Wikipedia . org ( where content is associated with contributors ) . Wikipedia article pages would not be considered exhibition sites since the article is not designed to signify the specific individuals who wrote the article . Blogs generally fulfill these criteria but online gaming sites would not . That is to say , these criteria are most closely associated with what we presently consider social media or social network sites ( boyd & Ellison , 2007 ) . The first and fundamental criterion draws a line between that which requires the present in order to be understood and that which makes no such demand . Virtual worlds and most online gaming ( particular first - person shooters and MMOR - PGs ) take place in the present . A user’s actions are not sim - ply placed in a sequence ( such as reply - to ) , but are understood through mutual reactions where the timing of each action is relevant . Although individuals are not copresent in space , they are still monitoring and reacting to each other . The con - text of the game or the social world stands in for the context of a specific setting ( Schroeder , 2002 ) . In contrast , exhibition spaces require a third party to store data for later interaction ; real - time interaction can take place , but it is not necessary . This is clearly unlike a “situation” as is noted by the afore - mentioned quotes from Goffman . The second criterion draws a line between that which is addressed and that which is submitted . Some content is addressed to a particular person or some particular people . E - mail and instant messaging are examples of addressed media . Each message denotes a specific sender and a specific set of recipients . This is much like a situation where people are addressing specific alters or a specific audience . It is not necessarily in real time , but one can still put up a front intended for a specific set of recipients , and monitor activity in a direct reply . In exhibition spaces content is submitted to a data repository ; people post status updates to Facebook , upload pictures to Picasa . com or Flickr . com and post articles to a blog . This latter content may be produced and submitted with a specific audience in mind , but those who view and react to this content may be different from those for whom it was intended ( if it was intended for anyone in particular to begin with ) . These criteria do not preclude the use of an exhibitional approach in other domains but to suggest spaces where it is most appropriate : blog posts , photo galleries , and status updates . These are places where content is submitted to a third party , available to a large and potentially unknowable audience and tethered to a specific submitter . The extension of the exhibi - tional approach to other spaces ( and to hybrid spaces such as Google Wave ) is beyond the scope of this article . The Curator Unique historical artifacts have typically been curated by experts . These people select which artworks to display , where to place them , and what narrative to tell about this selection . With a shift from presence ( and aura ) to data and reproduc - tion , it is now possible for information signifying someone to be endlessly copied and reconfigured . Everyone can have his or her own exhibit , as long as the relevant information can be displayed with some coherence . Yet it is simply impracti - cal to have a human curator pore over one’s social informa - tion and devise a unique and relevant exhibit for each person , on demand . Consequently , computers have taken on this role , devising continually more sophisticated ways to curate artifacts . 1 Curators mediate our experience of social information . Good curation presents things to the user that the user finds relevant or interesting . Bad curation is either overwhelming or unexpectedly irrelevant . Curators facilitate the following functions , which are available online and generally not a part of performances and situations : filtering , ordering , and search - ing . These functions are based on the fact that storehouses keep more artifacts than are generally on display . As such , it is necessary to limit the artifacts in some meaningful way . at Statsbiblioteket on February 6 , 2012 bst . sagepub . com Downloaded from 382 Bulletin of Science , Technology & Society 30 ( 6 ) Filtering artifacts simply limits which artifacts are on dis - play . This can be done based on qualities of the artifacts or qualities of the relationship between an individual and the artifacts . For example , one might want to view only tweets that mention a specific topic . If the tweet is public and men - tions the topic , it is included in the set of things to be dis - played . If it is private , then the curator determines access to this tweet . If I am following someone’s private account , then I can view these tweets . Filtering performances is not something that can be done in a situation . Granted , one can choose to ignore a perfor - mance or specific aspects of it . People may choose to censor a humorous story for a specific group . But selectivity in a situation is not the same as filtering . Performers censor , curators filter on behalf of the audience . We can “tune in” or “tune out” performances , but filtering implies that one can evaluate a set of things before they are presented for con - sumption . Curators can do this because they retrieve things from a storehouse and put them on display . Artifacts are also ordered in some way . Depending on the task , there is often a meaningful ordering . Communication is usually presented in reverse chronological order . Items for sale are frequently ordered according to price . More sophis - ticated algorithms can order items by relevance . For exam - ple , Facebook will select potential friends for the user from the larger set of friends . These potential friends will be ordered using a black box statistical metric seemingly related to the individuals one is likely to know . Amazon orders potential products based on their perceived relevance , which is a rank order based on a statistical measure of similarity . Lists of names are often sorted alphabetically . Again , ordering is not something that can be done in a performance . That is not to say things in situations do not have a sequence . It is to say that performances in situations cannot be “reordered” as convenient . The order of online artifacts is based on the fact that each artifact is part of a set of similar artifacts that are known ahead of time . Perfor - mances have sequence but because they take place in “real time” or have a specific space - time locus they cannot be resorted at will . Finally , artifacts online can be searched . Searching is simply filtering ( and ordering ) based on user input . Curators often work passively , as when people view their RSS read - ers , their Twitter queues or their Facebook news feeds . How - ever , sometimes filtering and ordering is done on content that includes specific requests from a user . Simply by view - ing online content one is subject to filtering and ordering . Searching requires the user to submit additional information to fine - tune the display of content . The role of the curator is to manage the preexisting con - tent on behalf of the submitters . Within this space , it is more relevant to ask about the access controls that the curator put in place than whether or not this space is private . We may ask about the consequence of a specific ordering of data and whether this ordering is effective . We may also ask what is hidden from the users as a result of filtering , or what data are available for users to reorder . For example , can one reorder friends based on the number of mutual ties ? Can one restrict access to content to a specific group of friends ( i . e . , impose a filter based on specific audience members ) ? How clearly do individuals understand different groups of friends on a given site ? How easy is it to move content from one site to another ? Limits of the Exhibitional Approach The exhibitional approach does not cover all online interac - tion , much like the dramaturgical approach does not cover all off - line interaction . For example , virtual worlds are hybrid spaces that share aspects of both off - line situations and online exhibitions . Insofar as there are servers that mediate informa - tion between individuals who are not immediately copresent , there is some recording involved . But play in social worlds generally takes place in specific bounded locations at specific bounded times in the same way that off - line interaction takes place in situations . One’s avatar is meant to signify her mind as acting in a virtual context . The avatar interacts directly with other avatars that appear on the screen within one’s field of view . It simulates off - line interaction , and consequently simulates the situation . Thus , it is unsurprising that Goffman has already been applied to these spaces ( Schroeder , 2002 ) . Examples That Apply an Exhibitional Approach In the penultimate section , I illustrate some examples where an exhibitional approach may illuminate or at least reorient our interpretations of online spaces . What Is a Friend Online ? Sharing artifacts online is often done through “friends . ” As such , people add many friends to their online profile in order to participate in these sites fully . Curators use this list of friends in order to determine how to properly redistribute content . This list , however , is not tethered to a situation , but to an individual , beyond any specific situation . Consequently , people can add many more friends than would normally be included in a specific situation . It is not uncommon for stu - dents to have more than 200 friends on a social networking site ( boyd , 2007 ; Lewis et al . , 2008 ) . This is larger than the number of people one is likely to know personally and feel close to . Depending on the question asked and method used , the number of people in the personal network varies from the low 30s ( Hogan , Carrasco , and Wellman , 2007 ) through the upper 60s ( Boase , Horrigan , Wellman , & Rainie , 2006 ; McCarty , Bernard , Killworth , Shelley , & Johnsen , 1997 ) to upwards of 150 ( Roberts , Dunbar , Pollet , & Kuppens , 2008 ) , but rarely if ever above that . at Statsbiblioteket on February 6 , 2012 bst . sagepub . com Downloaded from Hogan 383 The irony of this situation is that only 10 years ago , soci - ologists and those in related fields were actively assess - ing whether online interaction was isolating people ( Kraut , Lundmark , Kiesler , Mukopadhyay , & Scherlis , 1998 ; Nie , Hillygus , & Erbring , 2002 ) . Yet in 2009 , the most recent OxIS report in Britain notes ex - users and nonusers of the Internet report twice as much of a sense of loneliness as Internet users ( Dutton , Helsper , and Gerber , 2009 ) . At the same time , people online are complaining the need to man - age overwhelming lists of friends ( Acquisti & Gross , 2006 ; Hewitt & Forte , 2006 ) . This is unsurprising as there cogni - tive limits to the number of people one can actively maintain in a personal network ( Dunbar , 1998 ) . If we consider online friends not as a means for signifying those with whom we have close relations but those with whom we want to manage access to content , we can refocus both what a friend means online and how to manage the surging lists of friends on many social network sites . How can systems be designed in order to curate more effectively ? How do users classify their friends relative to a classification that emerges from the traces of interaction on a website ? Gilbert and Karahalios ( 2009 ) approach this latter question by focusing on the ways in which strong ties can be modeled through passive data , such as time to last message or mutual friends . This work is oriented toward the ordering of content that has already been submitted . It is therefore possible to consider it as a means for fine - tuning the curatorial process . However , there is still little work on the means for fine - tuning the submission process . Do strong ties represent a single group to which one submits content ? Or are there different strong ties within different groups whereby it is more useful to submit to the group and have group members filter accord - ingly ? Here I do not provide an answer but reframe the ques - tion so that an answer can more effectively conform to the reality of what a “friend” is in an exhibition space . Collapsed Contexts and the Lowest Common Denominator ? Friends are a form of access control online , and followers are a form of information management . These metaphors ( friend and follower ) do not perfectly correspond to their original meanings . Nevertheless , they are evidently a useful way to simplify the process of granting access controls online . If anything , these metaphors may be too simple . boyd ( 2006 ) lists 13 plausible reasons for befriending someone she encountered in ethnographic studies with teens . Only one was being a friend . The remainder focused on popularity , con - cerns for access control , and difficulty in saying no . What has emerged from this underdetermined friend tag is the accumulation of many social circles of friends under a single rubric ( Hewitt & Forte , 2006 ) . As sites expand to encompass more individuals from one’s off - line life , with no clear dis - tinction between them it also collapses all of the partially overlapping social circles of modern life ( Simmel , 1922 ) into a single list . Friends may now refer to family members , coworkers , actual friends , neighbors , acquaintances , high school friends , people from online hobby groups or gaming sites , one - night stands , distant friends of friends , students past or present , and generally any other potentially personal relationship . boyd ( 2007 ) has referred to the existence of all of these groups in one space as the “collapsed contexts” quality of social network sites . For each of these contexts , one might have a slightly different presentation of self . Yet since they all have on - demand access to one’s online artifacts , this results in a decontextualization of any of these artifacts . Artifacts are not tied to situations but to individual profiles . The indi - vidual therefore comes to represent these same artifacts to all “friends . ” If social network sites house more friends than are cognitively manageable , all of whom have access to one’s content , and many of whom represent different social group - ings and different potential fronts , then how do individuals manage to submit any content at all ? Why is there not a sense of self - presentation paralysis ? The answer is that one need not consider everyone when submitting content but only two groups : those for whom we seek to present an idealized front and those who may find this front problematic . That is , in addition to the traditional audience of situations , one must add a hidden audience who are not the intended recipient of content but will have access to it as well . One might not post for one’s boss on Twitter , but if one’s boss is following ( or is likely to follow ) , then one will certainly post in light of the fact that the boss may read it . One might not be posting for one’s parents ( or children or students ) on Facebook , but again , one is posting in light of the fact that these individuals may have access ; these indi - viduals define the lowest common denominator of what is normatively acceptable . 2 A theory of lowest common denominator culture is more appropriate to exhibition spaces replete with persistent con - tent than single context performances . It offers a potential an explanation for three aspects of social network sites . The first is why individuals effectively participate in these sites , halfheartedly join , or even refuse : An individual assesses whether his identity can be effectively represented by the lowest common denominator of the people who view his content in his absence . The second is to explain how in an age of profound surveillance ( both from authorities and peers ) , individuals still submit content that is unambiguously questionable ( nudity , violence , political extremism , racial epithets ) : The lowest common denominator of niche sites may be different than that of general sites . As such , one may have a clean profile on Facebook but a series of lewd pic - tures on Xtube . com , Suicidegirls . com , Pornotube . com , and so forth . Similarly , one may be sexually ambiguous or even deceptive on Facebook or one’s twitter account , but still have a openly gay profile on Gaydar . co . uk , Gay . com , Manhunt . com , at Statsbiblioteket on February 6 , 2012 bst . sagepub . com Downloaded from 384 Bulletin of Science , Technology & Society 30 ( 6 ) and so on . A businessperson may seek to be clean cut and professional on one site but espouse politically extreme views on Stormfront . org or Newsaxon . org . In more positive terms , a teacher may complain about troubling students on TheApple . Monster . com but make no such claims on Face - book , where the teacher might be friends with students’ par - ents or the students themselves . The third aspect of these sites that a theory of lowest common denominator addresses is how exactly individuals interpret this particular context : it is likely that people do not create sophisticated projections of their social network , nor need they . Instead , their behavior is in reference to specific salient individuals , who are small enough in number to be coherent . The persistence of this content beyond these salient individuals is rarely accounted for . This theory is also in keeping with research by Acquisti and Gross ( 2006 ) about why individuals will reveal a great deal of information on Facebook : they trust the site to curate it for them appropriately ( even though they are often misin - formed about the who can access what ) , and that they submit information they feel is inoffensive to some perceived salient individuals . Conclusions Many online sites set up a situation where individuals can con - tinually submit data to be associated with their profile . This sort of “interaction” where people view and react to the sub - mitted content of others is dissimilar from the traditional situ - ations that gave rise to Goffman’s germane dramaturgical approach . The impetus for this article was to suggest that many aspects of Goffman’s approach ( e . g . , impression manage - ment ) can work in a framework that is more aligned to these spaces , namely through the metaphor of an exhibition rather than one of a stage play . One of the key distinctions between exhibitions and performances is that performances are subject to continual observation and self - monitoring as the means for impression management , whereas exhibitions are subject to selective contributions and the role of a third party . I refer to this third party as a curator that has the capacity to filter , order , and search content . The exhibition has its own logic , such as lowest common denominator culture and easy persistent friends that do not have direct analogs in offline life . Pri - vacy becomes a matter of how content is aggregated ( e . g . , Is it tied to a real name ? Is it tied to a geographical location ? How findable is the user and the user’s data ? ) and how access control is managed a priori , rather than in situ . I draw on Benjamin’s classic essay to indicate that the notion of distin - guishing individuals from their reproductions is not a novel idea . What is novel , however , are its application to everyday life , and its aggregation through digital means . Acknowledging the difference between performances and exhibitions is an ontological matter , not an empirical or phenomenological one . People need not acknowledge this mediated relationship in order to participate in it . In fact , it is likely that ignorance blissfully facilitates the willing capture , storage , and use of private data . Moreover , it is a difference that allows individuals to consume and view each other’s past artifacts without directly engaging the individual , or in many instances , even letting the profile owner know that their information is being viewed . What is empirical in this domain is the extent to which misunderstandings about the basic ontological structure of data , its curation , and exhibition give rise to new unintended problems : social information overload , collapsed contexts , accidental disclosures , and “identity” theft . What people do is based on their mental models of these sites , and as past work has demonstrated , there is often a great mismatch between the mental models and the actual behaviors ( Acquisti & Gross , 2006 ) . These sites also give rise to new potentials : heightened social capital from newly accessible weak ties ( Ellison , Steinfeld , & Lampe , 2007 ) ; asynchronous and coordinated grassroots organizing ( Earl , 2010 ) ; strengthen - ing of long distance ties through photo sharing and rapid exchanges ( Cook , Teasley , & Ackerman , 2009 ) ; otherwise hidden communities such as gays and lesbians suddenly being able to find each other rapidly and privately ( Gray , 2009 ) . These new phenomena are not necessarily about the perfor - mance but the new mediated architecture that encapsulates and redistributes past performances for mutual and often asynchronous benefits . The capabilities of exhibition sites allow a person to be found when others want to look rather than when the person is able to be present and perform . Thus , extending presentation of self by considering an exhi - bitional approach alongside a dramaturgical one is meant to be a step toward a clearer articulation of both the poten - tials and the perils of self - presentation in an age of digital reproduction . Acknowledgments The author would like to thank the anonymous reviewers along with danah boyd , Scott Golder , Allison Powell , Ralph Schroeder , Amaru Villanueva Rance , and the participants of the Oxford Inter - net Institute’s 2009 summer doctoral program for their input and constructive criticism . Declaration of Conflicting Interests The author ( s ) declared no conflicts of interest with respect to the authorship and / or publication of this article . Funding The author ( s ) received no financial support for the research and / or authorship of this article . Notes 1 . Interestingly , “digital curation” is now used in the United Kingdom to refer to the practice of maintaining storehouses at Statsbiblioteket on February 6 , 2012 bst . sagepub . com Downloaded from Hogan 385 of digital research content ( see http : / / www . dcc . ac . uk / ) . But in this case , it is still implied that there is an expert individual who is maintaining the data . This is a different matter , and one that parallels offline archival . This sort of curation also tends to work at the level of the data set , much like off - line curation works with a specific artwork , rather than the level of raw data . 2 . I would like to thank an anonymous reviewer for noting that lowest common denominator culture is not specific to exhibi - tion spaces but to collapsed contexts . For example , a wedding speech might not cater to every single audience member but simply be inoffensive to salient individuals ( e . g . , a priest and one’s mother - in - law ) while appealing to friends and certain relatives . That said , even in the case of a wedding speech , cer - tain poor jokes can immediately be “recovered” in ways that artifacts may not . References Acquisti , A . , & Gross , R . ( 2006 ) . Imagined communities : Aware - ness , information sharing , and privacy on the Facebook . In D . Danezis & P . Golle ( Eds . ) , Lecture Notes in Computer Sci - ence : Vol . 4258 . Privacy Enhancing Technologies ( pp . 36 - 58 ) . Berlin , Germany : Springer . Barker , R . G . ( 1968 ) . Ecological psychology : Concepts and meth - ods for studying the environment of human behavior . Stanford , CA : Stanford University Press . Benjamin , W . ( 1967 ) . The work of art in the age of mechanical reproduction . In W . Benjamin ( Ed . ) , Illuminations ( pp . 217 - 251 ) . New York , NY : Schocken Books . Boase , J . , Horrigan , J . , Wellman , B . , & Rainie , L . ( 2006 ) . Pew report : The strength of Internet ties . Washington , DC : Pew Internet and American Life Project . Retrieved from http : / / www . pewinternet . org / Reports / 2006 / The - Strength - of - Internet - Ties . aspx boyd , d . ( 2004 ) . Friendster and publicly articulated social network - ing . In CHI ’04 : Proceedings of the twenty - second annual SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems ( pp . 1279 - 1282 ) . New York , NY : ACM Press . boyd , d . ( 2006 , December ) . Friends , friendster and MySpace top 8 : Writing community into being on social network sites . First Monday , 11 . Retrieved from http : / / firstmonday . org / issues / issue11 _ 12 / boyd / index . html boyd , d . ( 2007 ) . Why youth ( heart ) social network sites : The role of networked publics in teenage social life . In D . Buckingham ( Ed . ) , Youth , identity , and digital media ( pp . 119 - 142 ) . Cambridge : MIT Press . boyd . d . , & N . Ellison . ( 2007 ) Social Network Sites : Definition , History , and Scholarship . Journal of Computer - Mediated Com - munication . 13 ( 1 ) Retrieved from : http : / / jcmc . indiana . edu / vol13 / issue1 / boyd . ellison . html Cook , E . , Teasley , S . D . , & Ackerman , M . S . ( 2009 , May 10 - 13 ) . Contribution , commercialization & audience : Understanding participation in an online creative community . Proceedings of ACM Group 2009 , 41 - 50 . Donath , J . ( 1998 ) . Identity and deception in the virtual community . In M . Smith & P . Kollack ( Eds . ) , Communities in cyberspace ( pp . 29 - 59 ) . London , England : Routledge . Dunbar , R . I . M . ( 1998 ) . The social brain hypothesis . Evolutionary Anthropology , 6 , 178 - 190 . Dutton , W . , Helsper , E . J . , & Gerber , M . M . ( 2009 ) . The Internet in Britain : 2009 . Oxford , England : Oxford Internet Institute . Earl , J . ( 2010 ) . The dynamics of protest - related diffusion on the web . Information , Communication & Society , 13 , 209 - 225 . Ellison , N . , Steinfeld , C . , & Lampe , C . ( 2007 ) . The benefits of Facebook “friends” : Social capital and college students’ use of online social network sites . Journal of Computer Mediated Communication , 12 . Retrieved from http : / / jcmc . indiana . edu / vol12 / issue4 / ellison . html Gilbert , E . , & Karahalios , K . ( 2009 ) . Predicting tie strength with social media . In CHI ’09 : Proceedings of the 27th annual SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( pp . 211 - 220 ) . New York , NY : ACM Press . Goffman , E . ( 1959 ) . The presentation of self in everyday life . New York , NY : Anchor Books . Goffman , E . ( 1961 ) . Encounters : Two studies in the sociology of interaction . New York , NY : Macmillan . Goffman , E . ( 1974 ) . Frame analysis : An essay on the organization of experience . London , England : Harper & Row . Gray , M . ( 2009 ) . Out in the country : Youth , media and queer visibility in rural America . New York : New York University Press . Halle , D . ( 1996 ) . Inside Culture : Art and Class in the American Home . Chicago , IL : University of Chicago Press . Hansen , M . ( 1987 ) . Benjamin , cinema and experience : “The blue flower in the land of technology . ” New German Critique , 40 , 179 - 224 . Heft , H . ( 2001 ) . Ecological psychology in context . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . Hewitt , A . , & Forte , A . ( 2006 ) . Crossing boundaries : Identity man - agement and student / faculty relationships on the Facebook . Poster session presented at CSCW , Banff , Alberta , Canada . Hogan , B . , Carrasco , J . , & Wellman , B . ( 2007 ) . Visualizing per - sonal networks : Working with participant aided sociograms . Field Methods , 19 , 116 - 144 . Kraut , R . M . , Lundmark , P . V . , Kiesler , S . , Mukopadhyay , T . , & Scherlis , W . ( 1998 ) . Internet paradox : A social technology that reduces social involvement and psychological well - being ? American Psychologist , 53 , 1017 - 1031 . Lemert , C . ( 1997 ) . Goffman . In C . Lemert & A . Branaman ( Eds . ) , The Goffman reader ( pp . ix - xliii ) . Oxford , England : Blackwell . Lewis , K . , Kaufman , J . , & Christakis , N . ( 2008 ) . The taste for privacy : An analysis of college student privacy settings in an online social network . Journal of Computer - Mediated Commu - nication , 14 , 79 - 100 . Ling , R . ( 2008 ) . New tech , new ties : How mobile communication is reshaping social cohesion . Cambridge : MIT Press . at Statsbiblioteket on February 6 , 2012 bst . sagepub . com Downloaded from 386 Bulletin of Science , Technology & Society 30 ( 6 ) Marwick , A . , & boyd , d . ( in press ) . I tweet honestly , I tweet pas - sionately : Twitter users , context collapse , and the imagined audience . New Media & Society . McCarty , C . H . , Bernard , R . , Killworth , P . D . , Shelley , G . A . , & Johnsen , E . C . ( 1997 ) . Eliciting representative samples of per - sonal networks . Social Networks , 19 , 303 - 323 . Menchik , D . A . , & Tian , X . ( 2008 ) . Putting social context into text : The semiotics of email interaction . American Journal of Sociol - ogy , 114 , 332 - 370 . Mendelson , A . , & Papacharissi , Z . ( 2010 ) . Look at us : Collective narcis - sism in college student Facebook photo galleries . In Z . Papacharissi ( Ed . ) , The networked self : Identity , community and culture on social network sites ( pp . 251 - 273 ) . London , England : Routledge . Meyrowitz , J . ( 1986 ) . No sense of place : The impact of electronic media on social behavior . New York , NY : Oxford University Press . Nie , N . H . , Hillygus , S . , & Erbring , L . ( 2002 ) . Internet use , interper - sonal relations , and sociability : A time diary study . In B . Wellman & C . Haythornthwaite ( Eds . ) , The Internet in everyday life ( pp . 215 - 243 ) . Oxford , England : Blackwell . Nissenbaum , H . ( 2004 ) . Privacy as contextual integrity . Washing - ton Law Review , 79 , 119 - 157 . Quan - Haase , A . , & Collins , J . L . ( 2008 ) . I’m there , but I might not want to talk to you . Information , Communication & Society , 11 , 526 - 543 . Reed , A . ( 2005 ) . My blog is me : Texts and persons in UK online journal culture ( and anthropology ) . Ethnos , 70 , 220 - 242 . Roberts , S . G . B . , Dunbar , R . I . M . , Pollet , T . V . , & Kuppens , T . ( 2008 ) . Exploring variation in active network size : Constraints and ego characteristics . Social Networks , 31 , 138 - 146 . Robinson , L . ( 2007 ) . The cyberself : The self - ing project goes online , symbolic interaction in the digital age . New Media & Society , 9 , 93 - 110 . Schroeder , R . ( 2002 ) . The social life of avatars : Presence and inter - action in shared virtual environments . In R . Schroeder ( Ed . ) , Social interaction in virtual environments : Key issues , common themes , and a framework for research ( pp . 1 - 18 ) . Berlin , Germany : Springer - Verlag . Simmel , G . ( 1922 ) . Conflict and the web of group affiliations . New York , NY : Free Press . Skinner , B . F . ( 1938 ) . The behavior of organisms : An experimental analysis . New York , NY : Appleton - Century - Crofts . Tufekci , Z . ( 2008 ) . Grooming , gossip , Facebook and MySpace . Information , Communication and Society , 11 , 544 - 564 . Turkle , S . ( 1997 ) . Life on the screen : Identity in the age of the Inter - net . New York , NY : Simon & Schuster . Watson , J . ( 1913 ) . Psychology as the behaviorist views it . Psycho - logical review , 20 , 158 - 177 . Bio Bernie Hogan is a Research Fellow at the Oxford Internet Institute at the University of Oxford . His work focuses on relationships , social media and social networks . He received his dissertation from the University of Toronto in 2009 . at Statsbiblioteket on February 6 , 2012 bst . sagepub . com Downloaded from