Participatory Research as a Path to Community - Informed , Gender - Fair Machine Translation Dagmar Gromann 1 , Manuel Lardelli 2 , Katta Spiel 3 , Sabrina Burtscher 3 , Lukas Daniel Klausner 4 , Arthur Mettinger 5 , Igor Miladinovic 5 , Sigrid Schefer - Wenzl 5 , Daniela Duh 5 , and Katharina B¨uhn 5 1 University of Vienna , Austria , { name . surname } @ univie . ac . at 2 University of Graz , Austria , { name . surname } @ uni - graz . at 3 TU Wien , Austria , { name . surname } @ tuwien . ac . at 4 St . P¨olten University of Applied Sciences , Austria , mail @ l17r . eu 5 FH Campus Wien University of Applied Sciences { name . surname } @ fh - campuswien . ac . at Abstract Recent years have seen a strongly in - creased visibility of non - binary people in public discourse . Accordingly , considera - tions of gender - fair language go beyond a binary conception of male / female . How - ever , language technology , especially ma - chine translation ( MT ) , still suffers from binary gender bias . Proposing a solution for gender - fair MT beyond the binary from a purely technological perspective might fall short to accommodate different target user groups and in the worst case might lead to misgendering . To address this chal - lenge , we propose a method and case study building on participatory action research to include experiential experts , i . e . , queer and non - binary people , translators , and MT ex - perts , in the MT design process . The case study focuses on German , where central findings are the importance of context de - pendency to avoid identity invalidation and a desire for customizable MT solutions . 1 Introduction With an increased visibility of non - binary people in public discourse , gender - fair language strategies to go beyond a binary conception of male / female have been proposed . Gender - fair language sub - sumes gender - inclusive , i . e . , linguistically includ - ing all gender identities , and gender - neutral , i . e . , removing all gender references , strategies . Prac - tically applying gender - fair language across gram - © 2023 The authors . This article is licensed under a Creative Commons 4 . 0 licence , no derivative works , attribution , CC - BY - ND . matically different languages is challenging for hu - man and machine translation . In human gender - fair translation , substantial errors can be ob - served ( Lardelli and Gromann , Forthcoming ; At - tig , 2022 ) . In MT , the “masculine default” might have been mitigated with strategies to debias MT , however , generally with a binary focus ( Savoldi et al . , 2021 ) and not linguistically acknowledging ex - isting gender identities with few exceptions ( Saun - ders and Byrne , 2020 ; Piergentili et al . , 2023 ) . Savoldi et al . ( 2021 ) call for research beyond NLP and its “narrow , problem - solving oriented ap - proach” to advance the field and Attig ( 2022 ) pro - poses to include queer and non - binary people in a community - informed translation process . The proposed case study builds on the no - tion that gender - fair ( machine ) translation requires an early community involvement . The word “machine” is at times placed in brackets since there was a common consensus that first gender - fair translation strategies are required to facilitate gender - fair MT . To this end , ten researchers in Austria organized a three - day workshop with in total 21 participants from three groups of stake - holders , i . e . , queer and non - binary people , profes - sional translators , and MT experts , to reflect on their experiences , desires , and concerns regarding MT . Furthermore , we seek to provide a method that emphasizes the importance of human value , similar to the Diverse Voices method ( Young et al . , 2019 ) , and includes marginalized groups in technology design , i . e . , with participatory design ( Spiel et al . , 2020 ) . In the proposed method , Par - ticipatory Action Research ( PAR ) is utilized to de - sign a set of activities to identify problems , desires , strategies , and proposed adaptations to the MT de - sign process , as depicted in Fig . 1 . In MT , it has been proposed to solve the issue by focusing on gender - neutral strategies ( Piergen - tili et al . , 2023 ) , which , however , cannot be applied to all contexts , especially not without information loss , and might not be the strategy preferred by all MT users . In fact , findings from this work - shop challenge the current MT paradigm of one input equals one output and reveal strong prefer - ences for a customizable solutions that allow users to select their preferred strategy and make context - informed suggestions . To the best of our knowl - edge , this is the first community - informed work - shop on gender - fair ( machine ) translation with the explicit purpose to include human value and marginalized groups in the technology design pro - cess . In this paper , we describe the activities them - selves , their practical implementation as a work - shop with three groups of stakeholders , and a po - tential blueprint of the activities to develop similar workshops for other languages and communities . 2 Preliminaries To provide a theoretical basis for the following dis - cussion , we first briefly explain the discourse on gender and language , and PAR as well as stake - holder selection taken from value - sensitive design . 2 . 1 Gender and Language The term gender involves biological aspects , i . e . , functionality of brains , production of hormones , as well as psychological , i . e . , the way people identify , experience , think about gender , and social aspects , i . e . , how gender is enacted in a particular context ( Barker and Iantaffi , 2019 ) . Gender identities are self - determined and not assigned ( Zimman , 2019 ) and beyond the male / female dichotomy range from agender , genderfluid to non - binary or pangender among many others ( Richards et al . , 2016 ) . Gen - der identities are crucial in daily lives since they are used as a criterion to regulate access to services and goods ( Fae , 2016 ) as well as public spaces , such as restrooms ( van Anders et al . , 2017 ) . Structurally , natural languages have been cate - gorized into grammatical gender , notional gender , and genderless languages ( Stahlberg et al . , 2007 ; Savoldi et al . , 2021 ) . In grammatical gender lan - guages , nouns , adjectives , pronouns , and deter - miners are gender - inflected . In notional gender languages , such as English , lexical gender , such as boy and girl , derivational nouns , such as waiter and waitress , and pronouns are gender - specific . In genderless languages , such as Finnish , mostly ref - erences to kinship are gendered , e . g . sister and brother . Gender is not only a matter of gram - matical gender , but also a social construct and can emerge in the way language is used , which reflects assumptions and norms on gender identity . Gender - Fair German Inspired by Sczesny et al . ( 2016 ) , we subsume gender - inclusive and gender - neutral strategies as gender - fair language . Gender - inclusive strategies , which seek to make all gen - ders visible , can be of two different types : ( 1 ) ty - pographical characters ( * , : , ) to separate male from female forms and include all genders , e . g . Leser * innen ( reader ) and sie * er ( she * he ) ( Horn - scheidt and Sammla , 2021 ) ; ( 2 ) new gender sys - tems , such as the SYLVAIN system ( de Sylvain and Balzer , 2008 ) , that introduce a fourth gram - matical gender in addition to masculine , feminine and neuter , e . g . Lesernin ( reader ) . Gender - neutral strategies can vary , ranging from the use of ty - pographical characters to remove any gender end - ings , such as Les * , and rewording to the introduc - tion of neutral endings and pronouns , e . g . Lesens and ens ( Hornscheidt and Sammla , 2021 ) . Impact of Gender Bias Bias in language tech - nology can be defined as systems that “ systemati - cally and unfairly discriminate against certain in - dividuals or groups of individuals in favour of oth - ers” ( Friedman and Nissenbaum , 1996 ) . Bias in the training data leads to MT systems with biased predictions , e . g . sampling non - random subsets of data . The main impact of gender bias is the harm that can be produced by a biased system . Crawford ( 2017 ) differentiates between allocational and rep - resentational harms . The former refer to the allo - cation or withholding of opportunities or resources to certain groups . The latter refer to lessening or omitting the representation of specific groups and their identity . Not recognizing the existence of gender beyond the binary can imply the harm of disregarding the language used by these communi - ties ( Savoldi et al . , 2021 ) . Misgendering , the as - signment of a wrong gender to a person , should be added to the list , which can lead to emotional pain and a feeling of identity invalidation ( Zim - man , 2019 ) . Finally , stereotyping refers to prop - agating negative generalizations of a social group ( Savoldi et al . , 2021 ) . 2 . 2 Participatory Action Research Participatory Action Research ( PAR ) is a highly community - led approach that allows for different stances that , when combined , deliver a more vi - brant description of agendas and contexts of use than researchers’ perspectives could provide on their own ( Hayes , 2011 ) . With action research as a methodological base , this method is committed to have a positive transformative impact on the in - dividuals’ lives as well as further representatives of the associated communities . Concretely , this means also to actively facilitate negotiation be - tween different stakeholder groups and their poten - tially contradicting needs and desires . A typical PAR process consists of alternating ac - tion and reflection phases ( Kindon et al . , 2007 ) , where action focuses on building relationships and performing collaborative activities and reflections focus on research design / process , ethics , knowl - edge and accountability as well as towards the end on how well the collaboration has worked and further steps that are required . Typical activities include dialog , storytelling , and collective action that with their hands - on nature are particularly ad - equate for work with marginalized or vulnerable people since they allow participants to generate in - formation and share knowledge on their own terms using their own language ( Kindon et al . , 2007 ) . 2 . 3 Value Sensitive Design Value Sensitive Design ( VSD ) seeks to account for human values in technology design , where values substantially depend on the interests and desires of human beings within a specific context ( Fried - man et al . , 2013 ) . VSD considers direct and indi - rect stakeholders , where the former are those that directly interact with the technology and the lat - ter are those impacted by the technology , even if potentially never touching the technology itself . Stakeholders may span more than one role in a de - sign process , e . g . translator and non - binary in our case study . VSD can further help in deciding on which stakeholder groups to prioritize , where we follow Young et al . ( 2019 ) in prioritizing trans - parency over specific ethical or other concerns . We seek to include these groups that impact and are most likely impacted by the technology , but who have yet been underrepresented in previous research , i . e . , queer and non - binary people . 3 Objective In our initial endeavors to develop a gender - fair MT model , we quickly realized that we not only lack training datasets but sufficient knowledge to decide on a gender - fair strategy for German . Thus , our objective in organizing a workshop was to bring together three communities to jointly dis - cuss considerations and implications that should be taken into account in designing gender - fair MT solutions . Queer and non - binary people represent indirect stakeholders in the sense that their interaction with MT in the past or future is neither a given nor a requirement . Nevertheless , this group is substan - tially impacted by gender - fair language use or the lack thereof . The active use of gender - inclusive or gender - neutral strategies in MT could positively affect the visibility of gender diversity , since its use is widespread and users are frequently not even aware of consuming MT outputs ( Martindale and Carpuat , 2018 ) . Professional translators are both direct and in - direct stakeholders . In spite of some resistance ( Cadwell et al . , 2018 ) , MT is increasingly in - tegrated into translation pipelines ( Way , 2020 ) , which makes translators direct stakeholders . On the other hand , as providers of translations for training MT models , they are indirect stakeholders who impact the technology . While translators at times might have been included in post - editing or MT evaluation studies , the two groups above have to the best of our knowledge not been included in the MT design and development process . Finally , we decided to select MT develop - ers / researchers as a stakeholder group to gather in - sights into the feasibility of ideas devised in group discussions and include their perspective on this topic in the cross - community exchange . To reach stakeholders , it is vital to include facilitators who are trustworthy to the respective communities , in particular in case of sensitive topics , and who can rely on personal networks and contacts for invita - tions of stakeholders . Furthermore , such facilita - tors , in our case as part of the research team , need to actively help shape the plan in an appropriate and acceptable manner for participants , moderate the workshop , and intervene in group discussions if stagnation or conflicts arise . In terms of method , our objective was to encour - age participants to share their experiences , desires , and concerns as well as informed critique on ex - isting gender - fair ( machine ) translation strategies and requirements . Participatory Action Research ( PAR ) is designed to elicit and generate situated knowledge that provides insights beyond a unique case study and ensures an interactive , motivating design . Thus , the design of our activities follows the PAR principles and cycles . 4 Participatory Workshop Activities The workshop plan was designed to alternate inter - active sessions in small groups and plenary discus - sions on each of the five main topics and stages depicted in Fig . 1 . Activities in small groups deliberately alternated between groups consti - tuted by members of the same stakeholder group ( community - internal ) and groups with members of each stakeholder group ( cross - community ) . Each interactive group activity was planned for approx . one hour and accompanied by written instructions , followed by approx . 30 minutes of presentation of results and plenary discussion . At the end of each day , a joint summary of major topics and findings was to be prepared in plenary session , including interactive quizzes and word clouds on Mentime - ter . 4 . 1 Warm - Up Phase For the registration , voluntary colored stickers to indicate a ) the stakeholder group and b ) the pro - nouns of participants were foreseen . As an ice - breaker , a first sociometric introduction asked par - ticipants to position themselves along different axes of the room for a number of off - topic , e . g . means of transportation to arrive at the work - shop , and on - topic questions , e . g . familiarity with gender - fair language and MT , to establish relations among participants . 4 . 2 Stage 1 : Problem Storming A first problem storming session in a cross - community setting of three to four participants per group , where each community was represented , targeted an exchange of experiences , interests , and needs as well as potential challenges in reference to gender - fair ( machine ) translation . To initiate the discussion , different text samples were pro - vided : descriptions of non - binary people ( Exam - ple ( 1 ) ) , mixed - gender groups ( Example ( 2 ) ) , and without gender indication ( Example ( 3 ) ) . For the last two , we provided the English source text with “they” for mixed - gender groups and two MT out - puts in German produced with Google Translate and DeepL . The use of colored cards on a pin board was suggested to analyze issues in the ( ma - chine ) translation of such texts . ( 1 ) Eliot Sumner ist Musiker * in , Schaus - pieler * in und als Kind von Sting und Trudie Styler quasi im Entertainment - Biz aufgewachsen . Außerdem ist Eliot nicht - bin¨ar , identifiziert sich also weder als Mann noch als Frau , weshalb wir hier das nicht - bin¨are Pronomen “xier” benutzen . ( 2 ) Did someone leave their books here ? a . Hat jemand seine B¨ucher hier liegen lassen ? ( Google Translate & DeepL ) ( 3 ) An employee will not do a good job if they don’t have the right training . a . Ein Mitarbeiter wird keinen guten Job machen , wenn er nicht die richtige Ausbildung hat . ( Google Translate ) b . Ein Mitarbeiter wird keine gute Ar - beit leisten , wenn er nicht die richtige Ausbildung hat . ( DeepL ) 4 . 3 Stage 2 : Utopia Storming The second stage represented a community - internal group activity and instructs each stake - holder group to jointly dream up a social and tech - nological utopia , where the focus was explicitly not on feasibility but on dreams , hopes , and de - sires . Here all materials available in the room could be used , including wool , pipe cleaners , etc . At the end of Stage 2 , the day concluded with a summary sessions and two Mentimeter word clouds , one on the greatest insights and a second one on the greatest barriers for gender - fair ( ma - chine ) translation . 4 . 4 Stage 3 : Hands - On To not go directly from utopias to strategic con - siderations on the second day , we intercepted the process with a hands - on stage where specific ex - amples of use can be analyzed and the preparatory handout can be put to practice . Cross - community groups of three to four participants obtained pro - files of fictional characters , such as Ariel , The Lit - tle Mermaid , Peter Pan , Pippi Longstocking ( see Fig . 2 ) , with the task to prepare their introduc - tion in gender - fair language . The objective of the activity was to raise awareness on the degree of gender specificity in German , one’s own language ProblemStorming UtopiaStorming Hands - On StrategyStorming Strate - gizing Figure 1 : Stages for Participatory Workshop on Technology Design use , and the multiciplity of gender - fair strategies , of which each group was instructed to select one . Figure 2 : Presenting fictional characters as non - binary 4 . 5 Stage 4 : Strategy Storming Having identified problems and a desired utopia , the strategy storming stage seeks to gradually turn towards the concrete and potential approaches in an open process endorsing creativity rather than feasibility , which was explicitly described as the focus of the next stage . For this stage , partici - pants were asked to visualize their results , e . g . on flipcharts or with colorful sticky notes . 4 . 6 Stage 5 : Strategizing Finally , strategizing focuses on the social as well as technical feasibility of discussed strategies . The initial session was a cross - community task within the same grouping as in the strategy storm - ing session . The last day was dedicated to first community - internal sessions on potential cross - fertilization initiatives across communities , fol - lowed by a cross - community session on who needs what from whom . At the end of the second day , we asked participants for their preferred gender - fair strategy by means of Mentimeter quizzes . 4 . 7 Synthesizing At the end of the third day , a summary of the most central insights and implications was jointly pre - pared in a plenary session . For a summary at the end of each day as well as for this final summary , we recommend taking notes online live and pro - jecting these notes so that participants can correct potential mistakes directly . Furthermore , the final summary is circulated to participants for inspec - tion , expansion , and correction . To avoid losing the momentum of a successful community build - ing effort and event , concrete steps to interact be - yond a sharing of workshop outcomes and fur - ther research endeavors should be taken . Follow - ing the principles of PAR , a democratic and self - determined method should be foreseen , such as a mailing list , a Wiki , or any other means of inter - change of ideas , which at best should be decided together with the participants . 5 Participatory Workshop in Action A team of ten researchers from Austria conducted a three - day participatory workshop on the topic of gender - fair MT with an initial focus of translating from and to German . Our research team consisted of members of and people closely connected to the queer and non - binary community , professional translators with good contacts in this community , active MT and human - computer interaction re - searchers with a corresponding network . Thus , we could strongly rely on our personal networks to in - vite participants and instill the necessary trust for participants to accept the invitation . Participants were additionally recruited through activist groups and open calls , following a sampling strategy that allows for a spread of different marginalized expe - riences including intersecting aspects of marginal - ization . The workshop initially targeted ten participants for each community and stakeholder group . Fi - nally , in total 21 people participated , ten trans - lators , six MT experts , and five queer and non - binary people . Several of these 21 participants had intersectional roles , e . g . translator and MT ex - pert or non - binary and translator . Given that the workshop was organized amidst the pandemic , we were grateful for this turnout and the substantial commitment of participants to take three days off their working week , one MT expert even traveled from Switzerland . To establish a common basis of knowledge , we distributed a preparatory handout summarizing several gender - fair language strate - gies for German 1 . Additionally , the handout pro - vided pointers for further reading . In the following we present the results from the workshop activities ( see Section 4 ) by identified problems , proposed utopias , and strategic consid - erations for realizing gender - fair ( machine ) trans - lation . 5 . 1 Problems In terms of barriers to gender - fair ( machine ) trans - lation , most participants indicated acceptance , ig - norance , lack of resources , and a lack of under - standing . One central issue that was identified across stakeholder groups is the linguistic creativ - ity of the German language and the respective higher effort to effect change to achieve gender - fair language use . Ideally , people should be di - rectly asked for their identified pronouns and lan - guage strategy , which , however , is practically not feasible for written texts in MT or mixed groups . Participants agreed that numerous linguistic as - pects are strongly context - dependent and one gen - eral gender - fair language strategy will hardly ac - commodate all possible contexts . In reference to MT specifically , a lack of gender - fair text samples and training corpora was addressed . Already at this stage first ideas towards solutions were pro - posed , e . g . to enable users to select the desired gender - fair strategy in the target text and to po - tentially implement translations from German to gender - fair German as a first step . One central issue unanimously agreed upon is that language alone will not suffice to achieve inclusivity if only linguistic surface forms are changed , but stereo - typical gender ideas and reactionary thinking re - main unaltered . 5 . 2 Utopias Utopia storming in a community - internal setting targeted hopes and dreams of a better , gender - fair world supported by technology , where all available materials could be used . Fig . 3 exemplifies the cre - ativity of the groups , i . e . , the MT lego unicorn ( a ) and the translators’ “Eierlegendes Wollmilch Ich - bin - Ich” ( egg - laying wool - milk I - Am - Me ) 2 ( b ) . 1 https : / / genderfairmt . univie . ac . at / files / Handout _ Genderfaires _ Deutsch . pdf 2 It reflects on the “eierlegende Wollmilchsau” , a colloquial - ism to indicate something that can cater to all needs exempli - ( a ) “Leonda , the Gender Avenger” ( b ) “Eierlegendes Wollmilch Ich - bin - Ich” Figure 3 : Shared visualized utopias The utopia of translators and MT experts advo - cated guidelines and standards to allow for an eas - ier practical and technical implementation . Stan - dardization could foster acceptance of gender - fair language and simplify language patterns , which could be beneficial to MT . Nevertheless , any stan - dard should be flexible enough to allow for visibil - ity of people disregarded by its necessary reduc - tion . Another interesting idea was a point of con - tact for gender - fair language , such as a helpline . The utopia of the queer and non - binary group in - dicated rather a harsh reality , since they desired respect , sensitivity and “just to be able to exist” . In the following joint plenary session the necessity of political , legal and social frameworks were dis - cussed as a means to foster the demand for gender - fair language , e . g . to provide incentives for en - terprises to achieve specific gender - fair language goals , such as a gender - fair certification mark . 5 . 3 Strategies When directly asked about the preferred gender - fair language strategy on the second day , ex - actly half of voting participants ( n = 20 ) preferred gender - inclusive and the other half gender - neutral language . In the hands - on Stage 3 , a predomi - nant strategy consisted in omitting pronouns , uti - lizing names and passive constructions , and sub - stituting nouns with plural or neutral variations , e . g . Meerjungfrau ( mermaid ) became Meerwesen ( merbeing ) . Even though for several participants omitting pronouns seemed easier than using neo - pronouns , e . g . nin , this inevitably led to a more frequent repetition of names and subjectively less frequent sentence structures . Two groups utilized the gender - inclusive Dey - E - System 3 . Participants familiar with gender - fair language use found writ - fied in the unreal animal providing eggs , wool , and milk , and “Das kleine Ich bin ich” ( Little I - A - Me ) is a reference to a children’s book . 3 As in einey gute Arzte ( a good doctor ) ; see https : / / geschlechtsneutral . net / dey - e - system / ing texts from scratch easier than ‘translating’ an existing profile to gender - fair language , with the argument that gender - specific elements can easily be overlooked . Such involuntary omission is not only a challenge for human beings , but equally for MT , since designing a system that detects in - frequent or less obvious mentions , such as mer - maid , as gender - specific and is capable to provide a gender - fair alternative is definitely an open re - search issue . When asked to consciously select a strategy , each group preferred a different solution : ( i ) a multi - stage model , ( ii ) the gender - neutral ens strategy , and ( iii ) the gender - inclusive SYLVAIN system . The idea of a multi - stage model was to clearly assess one’s own language use and gradually progress towards gender - fair language . The bottom stage linguistically includes women , e . g . utilizing male and female forms , the Ger - man Binnen - I ( LeserInnen ) , and only using female forms ( Leserinnen ) . The second stage includes non - binary people by utilizing gender - inclusive characters ( * , : , ) , where MT experts remarked on the issue of * being a syntactic element of technical languages , e . g . to represent text in italics . The final stage aims to avoid outing individuals by linguistic means , which can be achieved with gender - neutral strategies . This idea of a multi - stage model to - wards gender - fair language could be implemented as a multi - stage MT adaptation process . The second group preferred the - ens strategy as in M ens ch ( human being ) , e . g . Lesens ( reader ) . Utilizing this strategy would resolve the issue of special characters , character and text length , and pronunciation and readability . Arguments against this strategy were that this form is too similar to the genitive case in German , which might lead to confusions , and that no distinction between sin - gular and plural is foreseen , which leads to fur - ther omission of information apart from gender - specific omissions . The third group preferred the SYLVAIN system that introduces a new gender , the liminal gender , due to a preference of inclusion over omission of gender and with the arguments that contexts can be preserved , direct translation equivalents are fa - cilitated , and a consistent use of language is eased without omissions of information . Nevertheless , translating gender - neutral elements with the SYL - VAIN system , e . g . English singular they to nin , would change the context of the source text and might erroneously assign a liminal gender . 5 . 4 Strategizing One suggested solution to overcome the dispar - ity between gender - inclusive and gender - neutral forms was to develop a hybrid form that uses gender - neutral forms and simultaneously permits gender - specific references . However , the crite - rion of not involuntarily outing individuals might still be an issue in such a hybrid model . In addi - tion to this criterion , practicability , ease of access and pronunciation , universality and acceptability were proposed . To ensure inclusion of diverse groups , including language learners and people with disability , comprehensibility and readability should be taken into consideration . For instance , Lesx or Les * represent gender - neutral language but are neither straightforward to pronounce , compre - hend , or apply for first language speakers of Ger - man . From a business perspective , it was deemed essential to achieve and ensure a consistent use of language , e . g . for search engine optimization , whether when writing new contents or translating existing ones . This brought up the idea of stan - dards or guidelines again , which could increase the confidence in grammatical correctness and unify pronunciation . Furthermore , a guideline would ease adoption and support from a social and so - cietal standpoint and equally from an institutional perspective , e . g . major dictionaries of the German language as the Duden , media , or public authori - ties . Referencing and addressing unknown people would considerably be eased by such standardiza - tion , however , such an endeavor is in opposition to the dynamically evolving language and gender - fair language , where strategies are still developing within the queer and non - binary community . As an alternative , flexible guidelines potentially combine a degree of standardization with open possibilities to personalize language . A reduction of the multiplicity of gender - fair language strategies could ease the generation and availability of gender - fair texts and training data to facilitate MT . In this context , the idea of rule - based generation of text samples and a novel professional profile of a community - based gender - fair pre - and post - editor were discussed . Whether rule - based or implemented differently , MT systems were seen as central tools to explore different approaches to gender - fair language systems . 5 . 5 Cross - Community Support In the discussion of mutual support across commu - nities , the translation community suggested jointly creating a cheat sheet for gender - fair language that can be consulted during the translation pro - cess , official guidelines to justify translation de - cisions for clients , training workshops from the queer and non - binary community , and tools to facilitate gender - fair translation . The queer and non - binary community mainly desired gender - fair translations , whether automatically or manually created , to increase gender - fair language use and active and continuous exchange with the other communities , as initiated by this workshop . This community emphasized the role of translators to potentially bridge a gap and facilitate exchange between the majority society and the queer and non - binary community . Furthermore , the com - munity often feels like applicants or solicitors to be included and thus , would desire to be better included and considered by the other communi - ties . The MT community desired mainly gender - fair text samples and corpora and equally a con - tinuous exchange with the other two communities . A continuous involvement of the other communi - ties in the further progress of a gender - fair MT de - velopment process was envisioned . In short , com - munities were united by the desire for interdisci - plinary , “multiprofessional” teamwork to jointly work towards the defined objectives . A very nice visual summary that resulted from a final cross - community group session is depicted in Fig . 4 . 6 Reusability of the Participatory Workshop One option to address a more diversified pool of participants and reach a wider as well as slightly bigger audience could be to move a considerably shortened version of these activities online , as e . g . done by Pannitto et al . ( 2021 ) with more tool support for interactive sessions , e . g . Miro to re - place flipcharts , breakout groups in video confer - ence tools , etc . Since the nature of PAR projects is to be situated in a particular context and re - lationships in order to generate situated knowl - edge , targeting large audiences might benefit from a different methodological choice . Nevertheless , a PAR project provides insights with wider im - plications from unique use cases , called “commu - nicative generalization” ( Cornish , 2020 ) . It ad - dresses the “the significance of knowledge to epis - Figure 4 : Multi - professional teamwork temic communities rather than abstract universal truth” ( Cornish , 2020 ) , facilitating the expression and perception of multiple perspectives , enriching the reader’s generalized other , and problematizing situations that are taken for granted . Our case study focused on the issue of gender - fair ( machine ) translation from English to German as a starting point . While the proposed English materials might be reusable for workshops focused on other languages , adapting the activities to other languages should take culture - and community - specific considerations into account . Nevertheless , we believe that the general method and structure of the workshop can be utilized as a blueprint for fur - ther such workshops . On a general note , we rec - ommend alternating group activities , within and across groups of stakeholders , with plenary ses - sions for joint reflections . Each group should be observed by one team member in a non - participant manner to ensure to take notes on discussions and to intervene should any conflicts or situations of stagnation arise . For plenary sessions , we recom - mend live summaries that are projected so that par - ticipants can directly add / change notes . We pro - vide the core ideas and principles of each activity to facilitate reproducing the workshop in different languages and contexts . Pre - Workshop Preparation For any given re - search topic that seeks to involve various , fre - quently distinct groups of stakeholders , it is vi - tal to ensure that all participants share a common body of knowledge . To this end , a preparatory handout explaining the most essential facts can be distributed to all participants prior to the event . This requires preparing ahead to permit sufficient time for each participant to familiarize themselves with the provided contents . The advantage of this preparatory step is that the workshop can com - mence with interactive sessions instead of present - ing content to participants and participants have the chance to familiarize themselves with the topic at their own pace . Furthermore , it permits time for additional reading in case a single stakeholder feels they would like to know more about a topic – corresponding pointers should be included in the handout . Warm - Up With sensitive topics , such as gen - der identity in language , we recommend warm - up activities , such as a sociometric introduction ( see Section 4 . 1 ) , and subtle as well as optional means to identify with a specific group of stakeholders or community . Stage 1 & 2 At the beginning of the workshop activities , we utilize gender - fair texts and their ma - chine translations to initiate the discussion on po - tential problems of the topic . These can easily be reproduced for other languages and with any available MT system , since the focus is not on translation adequacy but on triggering a discus - sion on gender - fair language . Also utopia storm - ing is an easily transferable activity that is best or - ganized offline with a large pool of very different ( handicraft ) materials , e . g . colorful papers , scis - sors , building blocks , etc . For this stage , it is im - portant to emphasize that proposed utopias neither need to be possible nor feasible , but could repre - sent any dream vision . Stage 3 For the hands - on activity , materials need to be adapted to the respective target culture and community . The chosen fictional characters and corresponding profiles should be well known by the participants to be able to present them in gender - fair language , e . g . there might be a bet - ter choice than Pippi Longstocking for other set - tings . For this activity , enough time should be pro - vided for cross - community groups to consider dif - ferent potential solutions before presenting the one of their choice for the specific fictional character . Stage 4 After the practical application of strate - gies , the goal of strategy storming is to con - sciously think about preferred strategies for ( ma - chine ) translation and in general . This stage can directly be transferred by adapting the instructions to the specific language . Stage 5 The final stage seeks to discuss feasi - ble solutions and their socio - technical implications as well as mutually beneficial aspects of commu - nity exchange . For this stage , we strongly recom - mend going from a community - internal to a cross - community group session in order to first discuss ideas within groups of stakeholders and then ex - change these among groups . For this stage , mate - rials to visualize thoughts and results are also very important to allow for groups to summarize their main points and sort their ideas . 7 Key MT Implications As an overview , we summarize the key implica - tions for gender - fair ( machine ) translation in the following list : • need for user - centric , customizable selection of gender - fair language strategy in the target language • gender - fair MT output ( s ) depend not only on the input but on the context , people ad - dressed , purpose , and user preferences • potential need to perform intralingual rewrit - ing , e . g . from German to different gender - fair versions of German • preference to combine gender - neutral with gender - inclusive language to minimize infor - mation loss • awareness that gender - fair language is language - specific and a quickly evolving field , requiring flexible , adaptable solutions • general criteria to select a gender - fair lan - guage strategy , which entail future ( psy - cholinguistic ) research : – readability and comprehensibility – ensuring not to involuntarily out some - one – practicability and universality – ease of access and pronunciation 8 Discussion and Conclusion As becomes evident from these results , a straight - forward decision on a single strategy to ensure lin - guistic inclusivity is not feasible and this decision should depend on the context – to quote one partic - ipant of the workshop “one size fails all” . A dispar - ity between a desire to standardize and to personal - ize gender - fair language brought the discussion to the conclusion that a customizable MT implemen - tation would be most beneficial . It should allow users to flexibly select which strategy to use for a text and , where possible , make informed sugges - tions for a context - specific strategy . PAR - based activities gradually brought new ar - guments from different communities to light and resulted in a catalog of criteria to guide the selec - tion process of gender - fair language strategies for ( machine ) translation from the multiplicity of dy - namically growing proposals , including practica - bility , ease of access , and universality . Addition - ally , a central criterion was to provide means of ad - dressing individuals without involuntarily outing their gender identity . Furthermore , any gender - fair language use should be readable , comprehensible , and easy to learn and pronounce . In many cases , gender - neutral strategies , such as - ens , comply with these criteria , however , in a translation set - ting the inherent loss of context - specific informa - tion by omitting gender - specific information and plural forms might not be feasible . In a translation setting , a context - preserving target text irrespec - tive of the specific strategy selected was deemed essential as well as further experiments on their translatability . One central issue with any gender - fair language strategy was a current lack of text samples for training MT systems but also for teaching and ex - emplifying each strategy , which mostly rely on conjugation and declination tables for their intro - duction . Hands - on examples clearly showed that any automated method to detect and potentially alter gender - specific mentions in a text needs to go beyond grammatical gender or linguistic sur - face forms to also detect less obvious examples , such as mermaid . To overcome the issue of data for MT , hybrid methods with rule - based elements to synthetically generate text samples were pro - posed as well as to initiate MT adaptations with a community - informed intralingual system to trans - late from German to gender - fair German . In short , this idea of accommodating sev - eral gender - fair target texts depending on con - text and / or user preferences would fundamentally change the current MT paradigm , which relies on the correspondence of one source text with one target text . While the idea of providing differ - ent target texts to choose from has entered the world of commercial MT systems , e . g . allowing users to choose between male and female target sentences for a given input , this customization of MT to personalized gender - fair MT target texts would require further substantial adaptations and a community - informed , context - dependent decision on which gender - fair strategies to display if none are indicated by the user . To initiate this develop - ment , further research on the selection of gender - fair language strategies that comply with the iden - tified criteria is planned as future work , especially readability and comprehensibility . As an overall feedback on the workshop , partic - ipants were satisfied with the respectful , produc - tive , and constructive atmosphere and there was a general consensus to have gathered new knowl - edge from the cross - community and community - internal exchanges . Concrete steps for continuing this inter - and transdisciplinary multi - professional teamwork in terms of readability studies and procuring gender - fair text samples have already been initiated . We as organizers were very grateful for the wealth of socio - technical ideas and argu - ments contributed by participants . We hope that their input will be used to guide future research on gender - fair MT . References Attig , Remy . 2022 . A call for community - informed translation : Respecting queer self - determination across linguistic lines . Translation and Interpreting Studies . Barker , Meg John and Alex Iantaffi . 2019 . Life isn’t Binary . Jessica Kingsley Publishers , London , UK . Cadwell , Patrick , Sharon O’Brien , and Carlos S . C . Teixeira . 2018 . Resistance and accommodation : factors for the ( non - ) adoption of machine transla - tion among professional translators . Perspectives , 26 ( 3 ) : 301 – 321 . Cornish , Flora . 2020 . Communicative generalisation : Dialogical means of advancing knowledge through a case study of an ‘unprecedented’ disaster . Culture & Psychology , 26 ( 1 ) : 78 – 95 . Crawford , Kate . 2017 . The trouble with bias . In Conference on Neural Information ProcessingSys - tems ( NIPS ) – Keynote , Long Beach , USA . de Sylvain , Cabala and Carsten Balzer . 2008 . Die SYLVAIN - Konventionen – Versuch einer “geschlechtergerechten” Grammatik - Transformation der deutschen Sprache . Liminalis , 2008 ( 2 ) : 40 – 53 . Fae , Jane . 2016 . Non - gendered pronouns are progress for trans and non - trans people alike . The Guardian , 14 Dec . Friedman , Batya and Helen Nissenbaum . 1996 . Bias in computer systems . ACM Trans . Inf . Syst . , 14 ( 3 ) : 330 – 347 , jul . Friedman , Batya , Peter H . Kahn , Alan Borning , and Alina Huldtgren . 2013 . Value sensitive design and information systems . In Doorn , Neelke , Daan Schu - urbiers , Ibo van de Poel , and Michael E . Gorman , editors , Early engagement and new technologies : Opening up the laboratory , pages 55 – 95 . Springer Netherlands , Dordrecht . Hayes , Gillian R . 2011 . The relationship of action re - search to human - computer interaction . ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . , 18 ( 3 ) , August . Hornscheidt , Lann and Ja’n Sammla . 2021 . Wie schreibe ich divers ? Wie spreche ich genderg - erecht ? : Ein Praxis - Handbuch zu Gender und Sprache . w orten & meer , Insel Hiddensee . Kindon , Sara , Rachel Pain , and Mike Kesby . 2007 . Participatory action research approaches and meth - ods : Connecting people , participation and place , volume 22 . Routledge , New York , NY . Lardelli , Manuel and Dagmar Gromann . Forthcom - ing . Translating Non - Binary Coming - Out Reports : Gender - Fair Language Strategies and Use in News Articles . The Journal of Specialised Translation . Martindale , Marianna J . and Marine Carpuat . 2018 . Fluency over adequacy : A pilot study in measuring user trust in imperfect MT . CoRR , abs / 1802 . 06041 . Pannitto , Ludovica , Lucia Busso , Claudia Roberta Combei , Lucio Messina , Alessio Miaschi , Gabriele Sarti , and Malvina Nissim . 2021 . Teaching nlp with bracelets and restaurant menus : An interac - tive workshop for italian students . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2104 . 12422 . Piergentili , Andrea , Dennis Fucci , Beatrice Savoldi , Luisa Bentivogli , and Matteo Negri . 2023 . From inclusive language to gender - neutral machine trans - lation . CoRR , abs / 2301 . 10075 . Richards , Christina , Walter Pierre Bouman , Leighton Seal , Meg John Barker , Timo O . Nieder , and Guy T’Sjoen . 2016 . Non - binary or genderqueer genders . International Review of Psychiatry , 28 ( 1 ) : 95 – 102 . Saunders , Danielle and Bill Byrne . 2020 . Reducing Gender Bias in Neural Machine Translation as a Do - main Adaptation Problem . In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu - tational Linguistics , ACL 2020 , pages 7724 – 7736 , Stroudsburg , PA . ACL . Savoldi , Beatrice , Marco Gaido , Luisa Bentivogli , Mat - teo Negri , and Marco Turchi . 2021 . Gender bias in machine translation . Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 9 : 845 – 874 , 08 . Sczesny , Sabine , Magda Formanowicz , and Franziska Moser . 2016 . Can gender - fair language reduce gen - der stereotyping and discrimination ? Frontiers in Psychology , 7 . Spiel , Katta , Emeline Brul´e , Christopher Frauenberger , Gilles Bailley , and Geraldine Fitzpatrick . 2020 . In the details : the micro - ethics of negotiations and in - situ judgements in participatory design with marginalised children . CoDesign , 16 ( 1 ) : 45 – 65 . PMID : 32406393 . Stahlberg , Dagmar , Friederike Braun , Lisa Irmen , and Sabine Sczesny . 2007 . Representation of the Sexes in Language . In Fiedler , Klaus , editor , Social Com - munication , Frontiers of Social Psychology , pages 163 – 187 . Psychology Press , New York , NY . van Anders , Sari M , Zach C Schudson , Emma C Abed , William J Beischel , Emily R Dibble , Olivia D Gun - ther , Val J Kutchko , and Elisabeth R Silver . 2017 . Biological sex , gender , and public policy . Policy Insights from the Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 4 ( 2 ) : 194 – 201 . Way , Andy . 2020 . Machine translation : where are we at today ? In Angelone , Erik , Maureen Ehrensberger - Dow , and Gary Massey , editors , The Bloomsbury companion to language industry studies , pages 311 – 332 . Bloomsbury Publishing Plc , London , UK . Young , Meg , Lassana Magassa , and Batya Friedman . 2019 . Toward inclusive tech policy design : a method for underrepresented voices to strengthen tech pol - icy documents . Ethics and Information Technology , 21 ( 2 ) : 89 – 103 . Zimman , Lal . 2019 . Trans self - identification and the language of neoliberal selfhood : Agency , power , and the limits of monologic discourse . Inter - national Journal of the Sociology of Language , 2019 ( 256 ) : 147 – 175 .