Collaborative Creative Coding Through Drawing Robots Shiqing He liciahe @ tamu . edu Texas A & M University College Station , Texas , USA Jasmine Jones jonesj2 @ berea . edu Berea College Berea , Kentucky , USA Figure 1 : In this studio , we investigate plotters’ potential in introducing collaborative creative programming in informal learn - ing environments . Left : plotters are accessible CNC machines that guide various tools ( e . g . , pen , pencil , and brush ) along vector paths . Right : examples of plotter - made paintings that are created from one algorithm . Original artwork by Shiqing He . ABSTRACT With the development of end - user fabrication technology , plotters have become increasingly accessible and attractive to a broader community . Since their invention , these 3 - axis CNC machines have been connecting digital and analog creation . Plotters have great potential as a tool to bridge the digital - physical divide , allowing learners from a variety of backgrounds to gain immediate satis - faction from their programming by translating digital output into physical artifacts . In addition , due to their roots in art , plotters may be more inviting to students from artistic backgrounds new to programming . In this studio , we investigate plotters’ potential in introducing creative programming in collaborative learning en - vironments . By introducing collaborative creative programming through the lens of plotters , we explore solutions to challenges in programming education , collaborative programming , and personal fabrication . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → Collaborative interaction . Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the owner / author ( s ) . TEI ’22 , February 13 – 16 , 2022 , Daejeon , Republic of Korea © 2022 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 9147 - 4 / 22 / 02 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3490149 . 3503667 KEYWORDS creative coding , generative art , plotter , collaborative coding ACM Reference Format : Shiqing He and Jasmine Jones . 2022 . Collaborative Creative Coding Through Drawing Robots . In Sixteenth International Conference on Tangible , Embed - ded , and Embodied Interaction ( TEI ’22 ) , February 13 – 16 , 2022 , Daejeon , Re - public of Korea . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 4 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3490149 . 3503667 1 INTRODUCTION " What makes it so rewarding is my continuing fascination with the slow , mesmerizing apparition of each drawing on the paper and the anticipation of witnessing the correct unfolding of the proof . " - Jean - Pierre Hérbert [ 7 ] Plotters are 3 - axis computer numerical control ( CNC ) machines that have a rich connection to art and image - making . Since their invention in the 1960s [ 3 ] , plotters have been building bridges between digital and analog creation . Computer art pioneers such as Vera Molnar , Frieder Nake , Jean - Pierre Hébert , and Manfred Mohr have adopted plotters to realize their generative ideas . With the development of end - user fabrication technology , plot - ters have become increasingly accessible and attractive to a broader community . While rooted in computer generated art , they have been used for multidisciplinary engagement . The creative process , material , goal , and results of plotters has also diversified . Artists and online communities such as # PlotterTwitter foster discussion of plotter - based creative explorations [ 11 ] that reach beyond creating TEI ’22 , February 13 – 16 , 2022 , Daejeon , Republic of Korea Shiqing He and Jasmine Jones images with pen and paper to other physical materials such as paint [ 10 ] and thread [ 6 ] . In addition to their use as creativity tools , the studio organizers are investigating the use of plotters as engaging tools to teach in - troductory programming . Methods for introducing programming to visual thinkers have been sought after by work such as [ 8 ] . Also , creative coding has been popularized by open - source tools and libraries such as Processing 1 and OpenFrameworks 2 . Yet , the beginner - friendly use of these tools is often limited to screen - based imagery . We believe plotters have great potential as a tool to bridge the digital - physical divide , allowing learners from a variety of back - grounds to gain immediate satisfaction from their programming by translating digital output into physical artifacts . In addition , due to their roots in art , plotters may be more inviting to beginner learner with artistic background . In this studio , we investigate plotters’ potential in introducing creative programming in collaborative learning environments . Our activities introduce creative programming through the lens of plot - ters , and aim to address several challenges : • We need inclusive pedagogical practices for introducing cod - ing to beginning programmers , especially those who do not identify as engineering or computer science students , or even as trendy term " makers . " • Specialized tools like plotters remain out - of - reach for the average learner due to their cost and space requirements . Community makerspaces might provide affordable access to such tools , but access to the makerspace itself might also be a barrier . A distributed , hybrid virtual approach to gen - erative art creation might help to bring plotter - operating experiences to a broader audience . • Best practices for learning programming emphasize peer learning based approaches , yet collaborating over a distance is hard . We explore using a physical plotter as an anchor for collective creation of generative art . This way we can create a truly collaborative learning environment for learners who might not be together in - person . Through this studio , we propose to investigate plotters’ potential in introducing creative programming in a collaborative , distributed learning environment . Leveraging existing knowledge from cre - ative programming education ( e . g . , [ 8 ] ) , generative art ( e . g . , [ 2 ] ) and drawing robots ( e . g . , [ 11 ] ) , we will facilitate collaborative pro - gramming sessions where participants work together to create generative visual art pieces in both the digital and physical world . 2 COLLABORATIVE CREATIVE CODING 2 . 1 Creative Coding Creative coding can be defined as a “discovery - based process con - sisting of exploration , iteration , and reflection , using code as a primary medium , towards a media artefact designed for an artistic context [ 9 ] . ” Introducing programming in an artistic context , such as generative art , has been shown to increase student motivation and engagement with the material when compared to traditional CS1 courses [ 5 ] . Yet , simply providing a programming tool may 1 www . processing . org 2 https : / / openframeworks . cc Figure 2 : Overview of the studio plan . not be enough to enable beginners to learn to program and engage in the creative process . Learners need scaffolding to get over the initial barriers to start ( often sample code ) ; they need to minimize the gap between their creative idea and the result of their program , and they need assistance visualizing the program state and main - taining a mental model of the software [ 9 ] . We explore how the tightly coupled code input and physical output of CNC plotters could enhance the creative coding process for beginners . 2 . 2 Collaborative Development Peer learning strategies , such as pair programming , are a well - established means of learning programming [ 12 ] . Pair programming and its variants ( i . e . , buddy programming , hybrid pair ) also align well with demonstration - based teaching and peer critique familiar in the arts , providing both a social and content - oriented learning experience . The collaborative format of this workshop explores a hybrid approach to collaborative programming with participants , including individual , paired , and collective group coding exercises . Plotters and other desktop fabrication machines have not quite realized the one - in - every - household vision . However , these tools’ increasing affordability and ease of use have made it more feasible for community makerspaces in schools and libraries to acquire and Collaborative Creative Coding Through Drawing Robots TEI ’22 , February 13 – 16 , 2022 , Daejeon , Republic of Korea make available new craft and fabrication tools . Makerspace - based educational approaches often rely on collaborative , problem - based learning , which is a crucial aspect of inclusive pedagogies focused on increasing the participation of women and minorities [ 1 ] . Re - cent conversations about the future of work , accelerated by the COVID - 19 pandemic , have highlighted the dearth of tools to enable collaborative , hands - on activities at a distance , such as those pur - sued in makerspaces . Many makerspace communities have been disrupted and unable to continue their operations , with physical ac - cess to tools and equipment made impossible . However , this hybrid studio embraces the role of makers as experimental innovators by exploring ways to engage all participants in meaningful interaction - at - a - distance with each other as well as the physical plotters . 3 STUDIO PROPOSAL We plan to host this studio for participants to experience collabora - tive creative programming through the lens of plotters . Through the workshop , participants will experience creative coding in digital and physical settings . With the goal of creating a series of three images collaboratively , we will introduce participants to founda - tional programming concepts using the Processing language . We will plot these digital creations during the studio to introduce the benefits and limitations of plotters . We provide hybrid access to three pen - plotters and plan to recruit 10 participants ( see section 6 for more detail about the hybrid access plan ) . During this four - hour studio , participants will go through four phases of activities shown in figure 2 . We plan to start the studio by introducing participants to foundational concepts , theory , and history in creative programming and drawing robots . Participants will also become familiar with the physical setup ( e . g . , plotter oper - ating basics ) and the digital environment during the first hour . We plan to use p5Live 3 , an online collaborative live - coding site where multiple participants can program at the same time . Participants will also obtain an overview of the studio , including objectives , ap - proaches , and the schedule . Because we include many collaborative modules in this studio , we also plan to introduce each participant and conduct team - building exercises . In the next three hours , we structure the hands - on studio ses - sions to contain four major components , including 1 ) demonstra - tion , 2 ) rapid prototyping time , 3 ) critique , and 4 ) plotting time . In the Experiment phase , participants will join a short demonstration that introduces essential graphical elements . With the ability to construct and modify simple geometries , participants will start pro - totyping one piece of plotter - compatible generative art . We will give participants a specific prompt that defines the scope of the creation . For instance , all participants will create images of the same size , using similar elements . Participants will create their first images independently because parallel prototyping leads to better and more diverse design results [ 4 ] . After the creation of these digital images , participants will present their work and offer critiques . Participants will then interact with the plotter as we plot selected images together . The Refine phase shares a similar schedule as the Experiment phase , except participants will pair up to create the work instead of working remotely . By pairing up and sharing the same plotting 3 https : / / teddavis . org / p5live area , participants will integrate ideas and code into coherent images . After these two rounds of creative coding , all participants will col - laborate on a final piece in the Collaborate phase . Each participant is assigned a specific mark - making tool ( e . g . , calligraphy pen of a particular color , HB pencil , or chisel marker ) but will create artwork in the same area . Through live coding , all participants will create the digital and physical versions of the generative art together . To wrap up , we will host a discussion session where we reflect on the process and results of the studio . Mainly , we will focus on examining lessons and challenges learned through the collaborative art - making experience . We will also discuss how the digital - physical hybrid setting impacts participants’ experiences . In addition , we will investigate the potential of adopting modules developed in this studio in other informal learning settings . 4 STUDIO GOALS AND LEARNING OBJECTIVES During this studio , we will • experiment with teaching creative programming through the lens of drawing robots . • facilitate informal learning through co - creating . • examine independent , pair , and group collaborative program - ming in a distributed setting . • reflect on opportunities and challenges for plotter - supported learning . Through the studio , participants will • experience creative coding in the digital and physical set - tings . • understand basic concepts in generative art . • understand benefits and limits of plotters . • reflect on collaborative creating experiences . • produce physical and digital generative art pieces . • potentially take exercises from workshop to adapt to their own learning settings 5 DETAILED SCHEDULE The studio is a four - hour hybrid event that take place in the TEI venue and online . To accommodate multiple time - zone , we plan to adjust detailed schedule based on the final recruitment . Figure 3 provides a detailed plan of the studio . 6 HYBRID STUDIO PLAN We plan to host the studio both in - person and online . One of the hosts plan to travel ( if travel condition permits ) and set up a physical studio environment for participants who attend TEI in - person . The other host will arrange a remote session for participants who wish to attend online . Two sessions will happen synchronously . To pro - vide plotter - interacting experience , we will transport a plotter to the venue . We will also set up cameras to stream the plotter - operating footage . We plan to utilize at two to three plotters simultaneously to ensure that both the physical venue and the remote session would each have a dedicated plotter . Participants will be able to see the plotted result in real - time . After the event , we plan to finish plotting all pieces and mail to participants who wish to receive them . TEI ’22 , February 13 – 16 , 2022 , Daejeon , Republic of Korea Shiqing He and Jasmine Jones Figure 3 : Detailed studio schedule We plan to be flexible with the timing of the studio to accommo - date our participants’ schedule . We also recognizes that continuous online events could be tiring , therefore scheduled several breaks during the studio . 7 STUDIO SUPPORTING RESOURCES To ensure that participants can spend valuable studio time creating generative art rather than building elemental infrastructure , the authors will create a participant - accessible code repository that contains code snippets . Participants can choose to upload and share their creations to the repository . The repository will also serve as an archiving site that hosts the schedule , reference , and addi - tional reading materials . In addition to digital setup , the authors will prepare physical supplies needed for the plotting , including var - ious mark - making tools , drawing canvases , and backup electronic components . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Lecia Barker and J McGrath Cohoon . 2015 . How do you retain women through inclusive pedagogy ? Computer Science Education 12 ( 2015 ) , 16 . [ 2 ] Hartmut Bohnacker , Benedikt Gross , Julia Laub , and Claudius Lazzeroni . 2012 . Generative design : visualize , program , and create with processing . Princeton Ar - chitectural Press . [ 3 ] Jack E Bresenham . 1965 . Algorithm for computer control of a digital plotter . IBM Systems journal 4 , 1 ( 1965 ) , 25 – 30 . [ 4 ] StevenPDow , AlanaGlassco , JonathanKass , MelissaSchwarz , DanielLSchwartz , and Scott R Klemmer . 2010 . Parallel prototyping leads to better design results , more divergence , and increased self - efficacy . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) 17 , 4 ( 2010 ) , 1 – 24 . [ 5 ] Ira Greenberg , Deepak Kumar , and Dianna Xu . 2012 . Creative Coding and Visual Portfolios for CS1 . In Proceedings of the 43rd ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education ( Raleigh , North Carolina , USA ) ( SIGCSE ’12 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 247 – 252 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2157136 . 2157214 [ 6 ] Shiqing He and Eytan Adar . 2020 . Plotting with Thread : Fabricating Delicate Punch Needle Embroidery with X - Y Plotters . In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( Eindhoven , Netherlands ) ( DIS ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1047 – 1057 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3357236 . 3395540 [ 7 ] Jean - Pierre Hébert . 2004 . Still Plotting after All Those Years . . . . In ACM SIG - GRAPH 2004 Art Gallery ( Los Angeles , California ) ( SIGGRAPH ’04 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 51 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1185884 . 1185929 [ 8 ] Golan Levin and Tega Brain . 2021 . Code as Creative Medium : A Handbook for Computational Art and Design . MIT Press . [ 9 ] Mark C . Mitchell and Oliver Bown . 2013 . Towards a Creativity Support Tool in Processing : Understanding the Needs of Creative Coders . In Proceedings of the 25th Australian Computer - Human Interaction Conference : Augmentation , Application , Innovation , Collaboration ( Adelaide , Australia ) ( OzCHI ’13 ) . As - sociation for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 143 – 146 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2541016 . 2541096 [ 10 ] Lorenzo Scalera , Stefano Seriani , Alessandro Gasparetto , and Paolo Gallina . 2019 . Watercolour robotic painting : a novel automatic system for artistic rendering . Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems 95 , 3 ( 2019 ) , 871 – 886 . [ 11 ] Hannah Twigg - Smith , Jasper Tran O’Leary , and Nadya Peek . 2021 . Tools , Tricks , and Hacks : Exploring Novel Digital Fabrication Workflows on # PlotterTwitter . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 15 . [ 12 ] Hans Yuan and Yingjun Cao . 2019 . Hybrid Pair Programming - A Promising AlternativetoStandardPairProgramming . In Proceedingsofthe50thACMTechni - cal Symposium on Computer Science Education ( Minneapolis , MN , USA ) ( SIGCSE ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1046 – 1052 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3287324 . 3287352