JCB : Article The Rockefeller University Press $ 30 . 00 J . Cell Biol . Vol . 187 No . 7 1055 – 1069 www . jcb . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200908040 1055 Correspondence to Vivek Malhotra : vivek . malhotra @ crg . es Abbreviations used in this paper : ADF , actin - depolymerizing factor ; BFA , brefeldin A ; CHX , cycloheximide ; dLIMK , Drosophila LIMK ; dsRNA , double - stranded RNA ; dSSH , Drosophila SSH ; GPI , glycosylphosphatidylinositol ; iFRAP , inverse FRAP ; Jasp , Jasplakinolide ; LatA , latrunculin A ; LIMK , LIM kinase ; LIMK - kd , LIMK – kinase dead ; LIMK - wt , LIMK – wild type ; MS , mass spectrometry ; SILAC , stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture ; ss - HRP , signal sequence HRP ; ss - RFP , signal sequence RFP ; SSH , slingshot ; VSV - G , vesicular stomatitis virus G . Introduction Newly synthesized signal sequence – containing proteins that enter the ER have basically two fates : ( 1 ) to stay in the ER or ( 2 ) to be exported by COPII - coated transport carriers . Cargo sort - ing , packing , and export from the ER require a large number of specific receptors , guides , and chaperones ( Lee et al . , 2004 ; Saito et al . , 2009 ) . The secretory proteins travel via the ER – Golgi inter - mediate compartment to the Golgi . The mechanism of cargo transport across the Golgi stack remains a controversial issue ( Glick and Malhotra , 1998 ; Matsuura - Tokita et al . , 2006 ; Patterson et al . , 2008 ; Glick and Nakano , 2009 ) . At the TGN , the secretory cargoes are sorted for distribution to their respec - tive destinations ( Mellman and Warren , 2000 ) . Compared with export from the ER , sorting of proteins at the TGN is more com - plicated and less well understood . For a start , there are several exit routes from the TGN but none comparable with the stable exit sites of the ER . The sorting of lysosomal hydrolases is well understood , which is mediated binding to the mannose 6 - phosphate receptor and subsequent export by clathrin - coated vesicles ( Kornfeld and Mellman , 1989 ; Ghosh et al . , 2003 ) . Integral membrane proteins destined to the cell surface are known to contain export signals in their cytoplasmic tail , but no general rule has emerged thus far for their export from the TGN ( Fölsch et al . , 1999 , 2009 ; Ang et al . , 2003 , 2004 ; Salvarezza et al . , 2009 ) . The mechanism by which soluble secretory cargo is sorted and packed for export at the TGN remains largely obscure . The yeast exomer is required for the export of a population of secre - tory cargo at the TGN ( Wang et al . , 2006 ) . This complex of pro - teins does not have a homologue in other eukaryotes . By and large , coats , cargo receptors , and guides for the sorting and ex - port of secretory cargo ( other than those used for clathrin - mediated transport to the endosomes ) at the TGN in the mammalian cells remain elusive . We performed a genome - wide screen to identify new com - ponents of the secretory pathway in Drosophila melanogaster K nockdown of the actin - severing protein actin - depolymerizing factor ( ADF ) / cofilin inhibited export of an exogenously expressed soluble secretory protein from Golgi membranes in Drosophila melanogas - ter and mammalian tissue culture cells . A stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture mass spectrometry – based protein profiling revealed that a large number of endogenous secretory proteins in mammalian cells were not secreted upon ADF / cofilin knockdown . Although many secretory proteins were retained , a Golgi - resident protein and a lysosomal hydrolase were aberrantly secreted upon ADF / cofilin knockdown . Overall , our findings indicate that inactivation of ADF / cofilin perturbed the sorting of a subset of both soluble and integral membrane proteins at the trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) . We suggest that ADF / cofilin - dependent actin trimming generates a sorting domain at the TGN , which filters secretory cargo for export , and that uncontrolled growth of this domain causes missorting of proteins . This type of actin - dependent com - partmentalization and filtering of secretory cargo at the TGN by ADF / cofilin could explain sorting of proteins that are destined to the cell surface . Actin remodeling by ADF / cofilin is required for cargo sorting at the trans - Golgi network Julia von Blume , 1 Juan M . Duran , 1 Elena Forlanelli , 1 Anne - Marie Alleaume , 1 Mikhail Egorov , 3 Roman Polishchuk , 3 Henrik Molina , 1 and Vivek Malhotra 1 , 2 1 Department of Cell and Developmental Biology and 2 Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats , Centre de Regulació Genòmica , 08003 Barcelona , Spain 3 Department of Cell Biology and Oncology , Consorzio Mario Negri Sud , 66030 Santa Maria Imbaro ( Chieti ) , Italy © 2009 von Blume et al . This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike – No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the publica - tion date ( see http : / / www . jcb . org / misc / terms . shtml ) . After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License ( Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Unported license , as described at http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 / ) . T H E J O U R N A L O F C E L L B I O L O G Y JCB • VOLUME 187 • NUMBER 7 • 2009 1056 cells express three different isoforms of twinstar called cofilin1 , cofilin2 , and actin - depolymerizing factor ( ADF ; Bamburg , 1999 ) . Phosphorylation of cofilin at serine3 ( Ser3 ) by LIM kinase ( LIMK ) inactivates cofilin , whereas dephosphorylation reacti - vates it ( Arber et al . , 1998 ) . Exogenously expressed LIMK1 in neurons localizes to the Golgi membranes , and cofilin is reported to play a role in the export of p75 - GFP to the apical surface of tissue culture ( S2 ) cells ( Bard et al . , 2006 ) . This procedure revealed several new components , including twinstar ( the Drosophila homologue of cofilin ) , which regulates actin polymerization ( Kueh et al . , 2008 ; Chan et al . , 2009 ; Kardos et al . , 2009 ) . Apart from the finding that twinstar knockdown inhibited secretion of the soluble secretory protein HRP , we could not deduce anything else about its role in protein secretion ( Bard et al . , 2006 ) . Mammalian Figure 1 . Twinstar is required for secretion of HRP in Drosophila S2 cells . ( A ) Drosophila S2 cells stably transfected with a plasmid containing ss - HRP were incubated with two different dsRNAs ( ds - R1 and ds - R2 ) specific for twinstar ( tsr ) . The knockdown efficiency was monitored by RT - PCR . ( B ) S2 cells stably expressing ss - HRP were incu - bated with dsRNA specific for twinstar and syn - taxin 5 ( Syx5 ; the Golgi - specific t - SNARE ) and tested for secretion of HRP . ( C ) S2 cells , control , and twinstar knockdown were treated with DMSO or LatA stained with phalloidin to monitor actin organization . Bar , 5 µm . ( D ) S2 cells stably ex - pressing ss - HRP , control , and twinstar knockdown were treated with DMSO or LatA , and HRP secre - tion was measured . ( E ) S2 cells stably expressing ss - HRP were incubated with two different dsRNAs specific for dLIMK ( dsLIM - R1 and dsLIM - R2 ) and dsSSH ( dsSSH - R1 and dsSSH - R2 ) . The effects of dLIMK and dSSH knockdown on HRP secretion were monitored . Error bars indicate mean ± SD of HRP activity in the medium normalized by HRP activity in cell lysates of triplicate measurements from representative experiments . Compared data - sets were termed as statistically significant when P < 0 . 01 ( * * ) . 1057 ADF / cofilin is required for cargo sorting at the TGN • von Blume et al . knockdown efficacy ( Fig . 2 B ) . Compared with control siRNA , the level of ADF and cofilin1 was reduced by 75 % with our procedure ( Fig . 2 C ) . To test the role of ADF and cofilin1 in protein secretion , HeLa cells were transfected with control , ADF , cofilin1 , or ADF and cofilin1 - specific siRNA . After 24 h , cells were transfected the polarized MDCK cells ( Rosso et al . , 2004 ; Salvarezza et al . , 2009 ) . These findings prompted us to readdress the role of co - filin in the secretory pathway . Our results reveal a surprising function of cofilin in sorting of proteins at the TGN . The discus - sion of our findings follows . Results HRP secretion requires twinstar in Drosophila S2 cells A genome - wide screen revealed that twinstar was required for the secretion of signal sequence HRP ( ss - HRP ) in Drosophila S2 cells ( Bard et al . , 2006 ) . However , the specificity of twinstar in this process and the site of its action along the secretory path - way were not reported . We first reconfirmed the requirement of twinstar in protein secretion from S2 cells with a double - stranded RNA ( dsRNA ) different ( dstsr - 2 ) from that reported previously ( dstsr - 1 ) . The efficient knockdown of twinstar by dstsr - 1 and dstsr - 2 in S2 cells was confirmed by RT - PCR ( Fig . 1 A ) . Secretion of HRP from S2 cells was monitored as described previously ( Bard et al . , 2006 ) . In the presence of dstsr - 2 , HRP secretion was inhibited by 75 % , which is similar to that observed previously ( Fig . 1 B ) . To examine the effect of twinstar knock - down on the organization of the actin cytoskeleton , Drosophila S2 cells treated with control dsRNA or dstsr - 2 were stained with fluorescently labeled phalloidin and visualized by fluores - cence microscopy . Inhibition of twinstar by dstsr - 2 revealed ac - cumulation of actin filaments , which were removed by treatment of the cells with the actin - depolymerizing agent latrunculin A ( LatA ; Fig . 1 C ) . Importantly , LatA treatment of twinstar knock - down cells restored secretion of HRP ( Fig . 1 D ) . Twinstar is phosphorylated by LIMK ( Ohashi et al . , 2000 ) and dephosphorylated by the protein phosphatase slingshot ( SSH ) . The phosphorylated form of twinstar is inactive in actin severing ( Niwa et al . , 2002 ) . To further ascertain the role of twinstar in ss - HRP secretion , S2 cells were incubated with specific dsRNAs to knockdown Drosophila LIMK ( dLIMK ) and Drosophila SSH ( dSSH ) . We verified the efficacy of dLIMK and dSSH knockdown by RT - PCR ( unpublished data ) . Although knockdown of dLIMK had no effect on HRP secretion , dSSH knockdown was very effective ( Fig . 1 E ) . This fits well with the known inhibitory effect of LIMK - mediated phosphorylation and inactivation of cofilin’s actin - severing activity . Collectively , these results confirm the scope of our genome - wide screen and strengthen our proposal that twinstar was required for secretion of HRP . HRP export from the Golgi requires ADF and cofilin1 in mammalian cells The mammalian homologue of twinstar called cofilin has three isoforms : cofilin1 , cofilin2 , and ADF ( Bamburg , 1999 ) . To deter - mine which of the three actin - severing proteins are present in HeLa cells , equal amounts of lysates were analyzed by Western blotting with specific antibodies to cofilin1 , cofilin2 , and ADF . Both cofilin1 and ADF were detected in HeLa cells ( Fig . 2 A ) . To knockdown ADF and cofilin1 , HeLa cells were trans - fected with ADF - and cofilin1 - specific siRNAs . After 48 h , cells lysates were probed with specific antibodies to quantify Figure 2 . Expression of cofilin isoforms in HeLa cells and their knockdown by siRNA . ( A ) Equal amount of HeLa cell lysates were analyzed by Western blotting using antibodies recognizing cofilin1 ( CFL - 1 ) , cofilin2 ( CFL - 2 ) , and ADF . Positions of cofilin1 , cofilin2 , and ADF are indicated by arrowheads . ( B ) Lysates of HeLa cells transfected with control or ADF + cofilin1 siRNA were analyzed by Western blotting using anti - cofilin1 and anti - ADF anti - bodies , respectively . The lysates were also blotted with anti –  - actin anti - body to monitor and normalize protein concentration of samples analyzed by Western blotting . ( C ) The effect of ADF + cofilin1 siRNA was quantified by densitometry using the ImageJ software and normalized to the expres - sion of ADF and cofilin1 , respectively , compared with cells transfected with control siRNA . Error bars represent the SD of triplicate experiments . JCB • VOLUME 187 • NUMBER 7 • 2009 1058 ADF and cofilin1 knockdown cells were also treated with the actin - depolymerizing agent LatA or actin - stabilizing reagent Jas - plakinolide ( Jasp ) . The medium from these cells was analyzed for HRP secretion . Control or ADF and cofilin1 knockdown cells expressing a control or HA rat cofilin1 plasmid as described for the HRP secretion assay were lysed and analyzed by Western blotting with an anti - cofilin1 antibody . The antibody recognized endogenous cofilin1 ( Fig . 3 C , lanes 1 and 3 ) and HA - tagged rat cofilin1 ( Fig . 3 C , lanes 3 and 4 ) . Importantly , HA - tagged rat cofilin1 was not silenced by ADF and cofilin1 siRNA , and it res - cued inhibition of HRP secretion ( Fig . 3 , B and C [ lane 4 ] ) . HRP secretion was also rescued by treatment of ADF and cofilin1 knockdown cells with LatA but not with Jasp ( Fig . 3 B ) . Collec - tively , these findings demonstrate that knockdown of ADF and cofilin1 inhibits secretion of HRP in HeLa cells . The fact that treatment of ADF and cofilin1 knockdown cells with LatA res - cued HRP secretion demonstrates that the defect was caused by hyperpolymerization of actin . Knockdown of ADF and cofilin1 with ss - HRP plasmid for an additional 20 h . The culture medium from these cells was analyzed for HRP secretion as described previously ( Bossard et al . , 2007 ) . Although knockdown of either ADF or cofilin1 had no significant effect on HRP secre - tion , simultaneous knockdown of both inhibited HRP secretion by 75 % compared with control cells ( Fig . 3 A ) . This is not sur - prising because ADF and cofilin1 have overlapping functions in actin severing in mammalian cells ( Hotulainen et al . , 2005 ) . Therefore , all of the following experiments described were per - formed with HeLa cells in which both ADF and cofilin1 were knocked using this protocol . To test whether the defect in HRP secretion was ADF and cofilin1 specific and whether it was a result of the reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton caused by ADF and cofilin1 depletion , various control experiments were performed . HeLa cells were transfected with control or ADF - and cofilin1 - specific siRNA . After 24 h , cells were transfected with a rat HA - tagged cofilin1 or a control plasmid and an ss - HRP plasmid for an additional 20 h . Figure 3 . Depletion or inactivation of ADF and cofilin1 inhibits secretion of HRP in HeLa cells . ( A ) HeLa cells were transfected with con - trol or ADF , cofilin1 ( CFL - 1 ) , or ADF + cofilin1 siRNA . After 24 h , cells were transfected with ss - HRP – Flag . The medium from these cells was analyzed for HRP secretion . ( B ) HeLa cells were transfected with control or ADF and cofilin1 siRNA . In parallel , ADF and cofilin1 knockdown HeLa cells were transfected with a rat HA - tagged cofilin1 plasmid . The cells were transfected with ss - HRP – Flag . The medium from these cells was analyzed for HRP secre - tion . LatA and Jasp were added 4 h before collection of the medium . ( A and B ) Error bars indicate the mean SD of HRP activity in the me - dium normalized by HRP activity in cell lysates . ( C ) Control and ADF + cofilin1 knockdown cells were transfected with a control or HA rat cofilin1 plasmid , lysed , and subsequently ana - lyzed by Western blotting using an anti - cofilin1 antibody . ( D ) HeLa cells were transfected with control ( left ) or ADF + cofilin1 siRNA ( right ) followed by transfection with ss - HRP – Flag . HRP was accumulated in the TGN at 20°C for 2 h in the presence of 100 µM CHX . The cells were shifted to 32°C for the indicated time , and the location of HRP was detected with an anti - HRP antibody ( red ) . Cells were also stained with an anti - TGN46 ( green ) antibody to visualize the TGN . ( E ) 100 cells from each sample ( con - trol and ADF + cofilin1 siRNA – treated cells ) in three different experiments were randomly counted to visualize intracellular HRP location compared with TGN46 after a 0 - and 60 - min shift to 32°C . Error bars represent the mean ± SD of 100 counted cells from three indepen - dent experiments . Compared datasets were termed as statistically significant when P < 0 . 01 ( * * ) . Bars , 5 µm . 1059 ADF / cofilin is required for cargo sorting at the TGN • von Blume et al . Golgi apparatus in > 90 % of cells ( Fig . 3 , D and E ) . However , HRP was arrested in the TGN in ADF and cofilin1 knockdown cells at this time point ( Fig . 3 , D [ right ] and E ) , indicating their requirement in the TGN to cell surface transport . The same procedure was repeated to monitor trafficking of signal sequence RFP ( ss - RFP ) in ADF and cofilin1 knock - down cells . In ADF and cofilin1 knockdown HeLa cells , RFP accumulated in the TGN ( Fig . S2 ) . Transport of vesicular stomatitis virus G ( VSV - G ) protein , GP75 , and GPI - GFP is unaffected in ADF and cofilin1 knockdown cells To assess the role of ADF and cofilin1 in transport of membrane - associated cargoes , HeLa cells stably expressing a temperature - sensitive mutant of the VSV - G protein ( GFP - ts045 – VSV - G ) were either transfected with ADF and cofilin1 or control siRNAs as described in Fig . 3 . This mutant VSV - G protein harbors a thermosensitive - folding defect and accumulates in the ER at the was also found to inhibit secretion of the endogenous interleukin - 8 from MDA - MB cells ( unpublished data ) . Overexpression of LIMK – wild type ( LIMK - wt ; to inacti - vate ADF and cofilin1 ) and cofilin S3E ( phosphomimetic and therefore inactive ) but not of LIMK – kinase dead ( LIMK - kd ) or cofilin S3A ( not phosphorylatable and therefore active ) inhib - ited export of HRP from the Golgi ( Fig . S1 ) . To determine the site of HRP accumulation in the secre - tory pathway as a result ADF and cofilin1 knockdown , HeLa cells ( control or ADF and cofilin1 siRNA treated ) were trans - fected with ss - HRP and incubated at 20°C in the presence of cycloheximide ( CHX ) to arrest newly synthesized secretory proteins in the TGN ( Fig . 3 D ) followed by their shift to the per - missive temperature of 32°C to release the cargo for 60 min . The cells were stained with anti - HRP and anti - TGN46 antibodies . HRP was found to colocalize with TGN46 - containing Golgi membranes in both control ( Fig . 3 D , left ) and ADF / cofilin1 knockdown cells ( Fig . 3 D , right ) at 20°C . Within the subsequent 60 min at 32°C , HRP in control cells was depleted from the Figure 4 . Knockdown of ADF and cofilin1 does not affect transport of VSV - G and p75 . ( A ) HeLa cells stably expressing ts045 – VSV - G – GFP proteins were transfected with control or ADF + cofilin1 ( CFL - 1 ) siRNA . After 24 h incubation at 37°C , cells were shifted to 40°C for 30 h ( to promote clearance of the cell surface VSV - G by endocytosis and degrada - tion in the lysosomes ) . To accumulate VSV - G in the TGN , cells were incubated for 2 h at 20°C in the presence of 100 µM CHX . Finally , cells were shifted 32°C to allow progression of newly synthesized VSV - G – GFP from the TGN to the cell surface . Samples were taken at the indicated time points , and VSV - G – GFP was localized using an antibody against the extracellular domain of VSV - G . ( B ) HeLa cells were transfected with control or ADF + cofilin1 siRNA . VSV - G – GFP was transfected , and VSV - G transport assay was performed as described in A for 90 min . The levels of VSV - G at the cell surface and inside the cells were de - termined by FACS analysis . Error bar indicates the relative ratio of VSV - G – GFP at the surface to the total in cells . ( C , top ) Schematic outline of the experimental setup for iFRAP - based analysis of GFP - p75 transport as described previously by Lázaro - Diéguez et al . ( 2007 ) . ( bottom left ) The GFP - p75 intensity was plotted over time by fitting the data points ( dotted lines ) to a one - phase exponential decay equa - tion ( solid lines ) . The graph represents iFRAP decay curves of GFP - p75 intensities in control or ADF / cofilin1 siRNA – treated cells . ( bottom right ) Quantification of data shown in C ( right ) . MF , mobile fraction of GFp - p75 ; t 1 / 2 , loss of 50 % mobile GFP - p75 pool . Error bars repre - sent the mean ± SD of the relative ratio of VSV - G – GFP at the surface to the total in cells of three independent experiments . Bars , 5 µm . JCB • VOLUME 187 • NUMBER 7 • 2009 1060 nonpermissive temperature of 40°C . Upon shifting cells to 20°C , the ts045 – VSV - G protein folds , exits the ER , and is accumulated at the TGN . Shifting cells to 32°C allows the export of VSV - G from the TGN to the cell surface . The cells in this ex - periment were fixed without permeabilization and incubated with an antibody that recognizes the exoplasmic domain of VSV - G at indicated time points after the shift to 32°C . Confocal microscopy revealed that ADF and cofilin1 knockdown did not affect transport of VSV - G from the TGN to the cell surface ( Fig . 4 A ) . To quantify this result , cells from this experiment were analyzed by FACS , which confirmed that ADF and cofilin1 knockdown did not affect traffic of VSV - G to the cell surface ( Fig . 4 B ) . Overexpression of LIMK - wt , LIMK - kd , cofilin S3E , and cofilin S3A did not affect transport of VSV - G protein to the cell surface in HeLa cells ( Fig . S3 ) . HeLa cells contain the machinery necessary for sorting apical and basolateral proteins in the TGN ( Yeaman et al . , 2004 ) . Therefore , we tested whether ADF and cofilin1 were required for trafficking of the apically targeted protein p75 in HeLa cells . To visualize GFP - p75 trafficking along the secretory pathway , HeLa cells treated with ADF and cofilin1 or control siRNA were transfected with the apically targeted GFP - p75 . Subsequently , the cells were incubated at 20°C to arrest proteins in the TGN followed by a release to 32°C for synchronous export to the cell surface . GFP - p75 was detected at the cell surface 30 min after transfer to 32°C in both control and ADF / cofilin1 knockdown cells ( unpublished data ) . To obtain more quantitative data on the effect of ADF and cofilin1 knockdown on p75 export from the TGN , we used inverse FRAP ( iFRAP ) as described previously ( Lázaro - Diéguez et al . , 2007 ) . The experimental procedure is shown schematically in Fig . 4 C ( top ) . In brief , control and ADF and cofilin1 knockdown HeLa cells were transfected with a plas - mid encoding GFP - p75 for 12 h . The cells were shifted to 20°C in the presence of CHX for 2 h to arrest GFP - p75 in the TGN and to prevent new protein synthesis . All GFP - p75 except the Golgi pool was photobleached , and the decrease in fluorescence at the TGN was monitored by live cell imaging ( Fig . 4 C , top right ) . The GFP - p75 intensity was plotted over time ( Fig . 4 C , bottom left ) , and the mobile fraction , i . e . , the amount of cargo exported from the Golgi after 15 min at 32°C , was calculated by fitting the data points to a one - phase exponential decay equation using Prism software as described previously by Lázaro - Diéguez et al . ( 2007 ; Fig . 4 C , bottom right ) . The quantitation of t 1 / 2 ( loss of 50 % mobile GFP - p75 pool ) revealed no obvious delay in the export of p75 from TGN in ADF and cofilin1 knockdown HeLa cells compared with control cells ( Fig . 4 C , bottom right ) . Simi - lar fluorescence microscopy – based analysis revealed that knock - down of ADF and cofilin1 in HeLa cells had no effect on the trafficking of glycosylphosphatidylinositol ( GPI ) - GFP to the cell surface ( unpublished data ) . ADF and cofilin1 knockdown causes missorting of a subset of soluble proteins in the TGN Our results present a striking situation : ADF and cofilin1 are required for the secretion of HRP , RFP , and interleukin - 8 but not the transport of integral membrane proteins such as the VSV - G , Figure 5 . ADF and cofilin1 knockdown changes the composition of pro - teins secreted by HeLa cells . ( A ) HeLa cells were transfected with control or ADF + cofilin1 ( CFL - 1 ) siRNA . After 48 h , the cells were pulsed with [ 35 S ] methionine for 15 min and chased with standard medium containing unlabeled L - methionine . 2 h after the chase , newly synthesized proteins secreted in the medium were precipitated using TCA and analyzed by SDS - PAGE / autoradiography . BFA was added to one half of control or siRNA - treated cells 60 min before the pulse and kept throughout the chase . Secretion inhibited ( asterisks ) and increased secretion ( arrowheads ) in ADF + cofilin1 knockdown cells are shown compared with control cells . ( B ) Cells described in A were lysed , and aliquots of the lysates and me - dium of control and ADF + cofilin1 knockdown cells were analyzed by Western blotting with a  - actin antibody . The position of actin is indicated by an arrowhead . 1061 ADF / cofilin is required for cargo sorting at the TGN • von Blume et al . Interestingly , a large number of new proteins or proteins secreted in higher amounts ( Fig . 5 A , arrowheads ) were evident in the medium from ADF and cofilin1 knockdown cells . As ex - pected , brefeldin A ( BFA ; blocks conventional protein secre - tion ) treatment of control and ADF and cofilin1 knockdown cells efficiently inhibited the amount of total protein secretion from HeLa cells ( Fig . 5 A , right ) . There was no difference in the levels of  - actin in the medium , which rules out the possibility that new proteins released into the medium were a result of cell death and lysis ( Fig . 5 B ) . To identify proteins secreted upon ADF and cofilin1 knockdown , we used quantitative stable isotope labeling by p75 , or GPI - anchored GFP from TGN to the cell surface . To gain further insight into the involvement of ADF and cofilin1 in TGN to cell surface transport , we monitored secretion of endog - enous soluble secretory proteins . HeLa cells were transfected with ADF - and cofilin1 - specific or control siRNAs . Subsequently , cells were pulsed with medium containing 35 S - labeled methionine for 15 min and chased for 2 h in the complete medium . Total medium from the cells was collected to precipitate secreted proteins and analyzed by SDS - PAGE and autoradiography ( Fig . 5 A , left ) . Our find - ings revealed that secretion of several proteins was inhibited or reduced ( Fig . 5 A , asterisks ) upon knockdown of ADF and cofilin1 . Figure 6 . ADF and cofilin1 knockdown causes missorting of soluble proteins . A schematic presentation of the SILAC experi - ment . HeLa cells were incubated in medium containing normal arginine and lysine or with the stable isotope arginine ( 13C6 ) and lysine ( 13C6 / 15N2 ) . After five passages , heavy - labeled cells were transfected with con - trol siRNA and unlabeled cells with ADF + cofilin1 siRNA . 48 h after transfection , cells were washed and incubated in medium with - out FCS and cultured for 2 h . Media were collected and mixed in 1 : 1 ratio according to cell number and SILAC - based analysis of the cell pellet . The mixed proteins were hereafter separated by 1D gel electrophoresis , and ex - cised bands were trypsinized . Extracted pep - tides were analyzed by reverse - phase HPLC coupled to a mass spectrometer . Dotted lines together with arrow lines are used to indicate mass differences between SILAC peptide pairs . Based on the relative abundance ratio of specific peptides ( Ong and Mann , 2006 ; Harsha et al . , 2008 ) , the proteins were clas - sified as class A ( ratio between heavy [ H ] and light [ L ] peptides = 1 ; secretion unchanged ) , class B ( ratio between H / L > 1 ; secretion inhibited in ADF / cofilin - depleted cells ) , and class C ( ratio between H / L < 1 ; secretion ac - celerated in ADF / cofilin - depleted cells ) . JCB • VOLUME 187 • NUMBER 7 • 2009 1062 cells were analyzed by Western blotting with an anti - TIMP1 antibody . There was a marked increase of TIMP1 in the medium of ADF and cofilin1 knockdown HeLa cells compared with con - trol siRNA – transfected cells ( Fig . 7 B ) . To further examine the site of TIMP1 transport acceleration in ADF and cofilin1 knock - down cells , we monitored its export from the TGN by fluores - cence microscopy . To visualize TIMP1 export from the TGN under both conditions , control siRNA or ADF - and cofilin1 - treated HeLa cells were incubated at 20°C in the presence of CHX to arrest TIMP1 in the TGN . The cells were shifted to 32°C to revive protein export from the TGN . The cells were fixed and stained at the onset and 15 min after the shift to 32°C . At 20°C , TIMP1 was arrested in the TGN in both conditions ( Fig . 7 C ) . In control cells , after 15 min at 32°C , TIMP1 was still present in the TGN ( Fig . 7 C , left ) . Interestingly , in ADF and cofilin1 knock - down cells , TIMP1 was not detectable in the TGN at this time point ( Fig . 7 C , right ) . 100 cells from this experiment were counted for the presence of TIMP1 in the TGN , and the data support our findings that ADF and cofilin1 knockdown accelerated the export of TIMP1 from the TGN ( Fig . 7 D ) . The localization of Golgi - resident enzymes GFP - conjugated sialyltransferase ( TGN ) , galactosyltransferases ( medial / trans - Golgi ) , and M2 ( mannosi - dase II ; cis - / medial Golgi ) was not affected upon knockdown of ADF and cofilin1 in HeLa cells ( unpublished data ) . The lysosomal hydrolase cathepsin D is synthesized in the ER as a precursor polypeptide of 53 kD , which is transported to the Golgi . The precursor is subsequently sorted to lysosomes and further converted to a 47 - kD intermediate and a 31 - kD mature form ( Gieselmann et al . , 1985 ; Zaidi et al . , 2008 ) . Com - pared with control siRNA – treated cells , cells depleted of ADF and cofilin1 secreted large amounts of cathepsin D precursor ( 53 kD ; Fig . 7 E ) .  - Actin was not detected in the medium upon ADF and cofilin1 knockdown , confirming that the release of Cab45 and cathepsin D was not a result of cell lysis ( Fig . 7 E ) . There was no difference in the localization of the lysosomal integral membrane protein LAMP1 ( unpublished data ) . Early endosomal protein , EEA , transferrin , and mannose 6 - phosphate receptor were also unaffected upon ADF / cofilin1 knockdown amino acids in cell culture ( SILAC ) mass spectrometry ( MS ) . The procedure for this experiment is shown schematically in Fig . 6 . In brief , one pool of HeLa cells was cultured in me - dium containing normal arginine and lysine , and another was grown in heavy arginine - and lysine - containing medium ( Fig . 6 ) . After normalization of growth conditions , cells were transfected with control or ADF - and cofilin1 - specific siRNA . 48 h after transfection , the secreted proteins were collected and processed as described in experimental proce - dures . Based on the ratio between heavy and light peptides secreted into the medium , the proteins were classified as class A ( ratio of 1 and no defect in secretion ) , class B ( ratio > 1 and inhibition in secretion ) , and class C ( ratio < 1 and secretion accelerated ) . Although several proteins were secreted at normal levels from ADF and cofilin1 knockdown cells ( class A ; Table I ) , se - cretion of secretogranin - 2 ( 90 % inhibition ) and several colla - gens ( 40 – 80 % inhibition , depending on the type of collagen ) was inhibited under such conditions ( class B ; Table II ) . A large number of secretory proteins was secreted in higher amounts ( class C ; Table III ) , which included galactosidase A ( lysosomal hydrolase ) and Cab45 ( a soluble resident protein of the Golgi apparatus ; Fig . S4 ) . To further investigate the effect of ADF and cofilin1 knockdown on secretion of Cab45 , we analyzed the medium and HeLa cell lysates ( transfected with control and ADF and cofilin1 siRNA ) by Western blotting with specific antibodies . The medium was also analyzed with an anti –  - actin antibody to test for cell lysis . Cab45 was detected in the lysates of control and ADF and cofilin1 knockdown cells ( Fig . 7 A ) , and it was secreted upon ADF and cofilin1 knockdown but not by transfec - tion of HeLa cells with control siRNA . There was no release of  - actin from cells under our experimental conditions ( unpub - lished data ) . We also tested the effect of ADF and cofilin1 knockdown on the secretion of TIMP1 ( tissue inhibitor of metalloprotein - ases - 1 ) from HeLa cells . The medium and the cell lysates from control siRNA – treated and ADF and cofilin1 knockdown HeLa Table I . Secretion of cargoes unchanged upon ADF and cofilin1 knockdown ( class A ) Protein name Unique peptides Ratio ( H / L ) control / RNAi Matrix - remodeling – associated protein 5 14 1 Fibulin 1 1 1 Procollagen C - endopeptidase enhancer 1 5 1 Carboxypeptidase A4 47 1 Follistatin - related protein 1 35 1 Laminin subunit  5 30 0 . 9 Fibrillin - 1 4 0 . 9 Fibronectin 12 0 . 8 Secretion of proteins into cell culture media from control and ADF and cofilin1 siRNA – treated HeLa cells was analyzed by SILAC - based MS . There was no change in secretion of cargoes classified as class A upon ADF and cofilin1 knockdown ( ratio between heavy and light peptides [ H / L ] = 1 ) . Table II . Cargoes inhibited in secretion upon ADF and cofilin1 knockdown ( class B ) Protein name Unique peptides Ratio ( H / L ) control / RNAi Secretogranin - 2 2 11 Collagen  1 ( III ) chain 3 4 . 6 Lumican 3 3 Collagen  1 ( I ) chain 4 2 . 8 Collagen  1 ( XVIII ) chain 4 2 Agrin ( secreted form ) 16 1 . 9 Collagen  1 ( VII ) chain 42 1 . 9 Collagen  1 ( XV ) chain 6 1 . 9 Immunoglobulin superfamily member 10 7 1 . 8 Perlecan 51 1 . 6 Secretion of proteins into cell culture media from control and ADF and cofilin1 siRNA – treated HeLa cells was analyzed by SILAC - based MS . There was an inhibition of secretion of cargoes classified as class B upon ADF and cofilin1 knockdown ( ratio between heavy and light peptides [ H / L ] > 1 ) . 1063 ADF / cofilin is required for cargo sorting at the TGN • von Blume et al . unlabeled methionine for 2 h with or without BFA . Intact cells were surface biotinylated with NHS - biotin by the established pro - cedures ( Nishimura et al . , 2002 ) . The cells were subsequently lysed , and the same amount of lysate from control or ADF and cofilin1 siRNA – transfected cells ( based on [ 35 S ] methionine content ) was incubated with avidin - conjugated beads . The proteins bound to the beads were analyzed by SDS - PAGE / autoradiography . Our results revealed that ADF and cofilin1 knock - down cells contained several new cell surface proteins ( Fig . 8 , new surface proteins [ N ] ) . There were also several proteins missing from the cell surface or present in lower quantity under such conditions ( Fig . 8 , less or missing [ L ] ) . A large number of proteins showed no difference in their levels at the cell surface ( Fig . 8 , asterisks ) . In cells treated with BFA to block protein secretion , the appearance of methionine - labeled proteins at the cell surface was highly diminished , confirming that polypep - tides identified by this procedure were newly synthesized proteins . Although the identity of these proteins is not known ( it is technically difficult to obtain their sequence at present even by MS ) , these results suggest that knockdown of ADF and cofilin1 affects sorting of a subset of integral membrane pro - teins as well . TGN is swollen upon ADF and cofilin1 knockdown To gain further insight into the effect of ADF and cofilin1 knock - down on the ultrastructure of the Golgi membranes , HeLa cells ( control and ADF and cofilin1 knockdown ) were visualized by electron microscopy ( Fig . 9 A ) . The Golgi membranes retain their morphology of stacks of cisternae upon knockdown of ADF and cofilin1 . Interestingly , there was an accumulation of large , swollen membranes juxtaposed to the Golgi stacks ( Fig . 9 A ) . A section of the Golgi membrane in ADF and cofilin1 knockdown cells is enlarged to reveal the features of swollen Golgi cisternae ( Fig . 9 A ) . To identify these swollen membranes , HeLa cells treated with control or ADF and cofilin1 siRNA were cotransfected with a TGN - specific marker , TGN38 tagged with HRP ( TGN38 - HRP ) . The localization of TGN38 - HRP for immunoelectron microscopy was determined as described previously ( Polishchuk et al . , 2000 ) . 30 cells were processed for this experiment , and a typical section is shown ( Fig . 9 B ) . HRP - conjugated TGN38 was localized in swollen cisternae , which provides strong evidence that the swollen membranes in cells depleted of ADF and cofilin1 are the TGN . Discussion Actin is required for a large number of cellular processes such as cytokinesis , cell shape , and migration . Actin has also been reported in the events leading to membrane fission in endo - cytosis and exocytosis ( Egea et al . , 2006 ; Sun et al . , 2006 ; Massarwa et al . , 2009 ) . Our findings reveal a surprising role of actin in cargo sorting at the TGN . Knockdown of the actin - severing proteins ADF and cofilin1 arrested HRP in Golgi membranes of HeLa cells . A SILAC - based analysis of the secreted proteins re - vealed a more precise role of ADF and cofilin1 at the Golgi . Knockdown or inactivation of cofilin had the following effects ( unpublished data ) . Therefore , the secretion of lysosomal en - zymes is not the result of global disruption of the endosomal – lysosomal compartments . To discard the possibility that the ADF / cofilin1 knock - down – dependent sorting defect was a result of effects on pro - tein synthesis , we performed the following experiment . Control and ADF / cofilin1 knockdown HeLa cells were pulsed with me - dium containing 35 S - labeled methionine for 15 min and chased with unlabeled methionine on 20°C for 4 h to prevent export of cargo from the TGN . Subsequently , the cells were lysed , and equal amounts of cell lysates were used to immunoprecipitate Cab45 with anti - Cab45 antibody . The immunoprecipitates were analyzed by SDS - PAGE / autoradiography , and the data revealed no difference in the intracellular levels of Cab45 between con - trol and ADF / cofilin knockdown HeLa cells ( Fig . S5 ) . The effects on protein secretion are not the result of effects on protein synthesis upon ADF / cofilin1 knockdown ( Fig . S5 ) . ADF and cofilin1 are required for sorting of a subset of integral membrane proteins To understand the generality of ADF and cofilin1 in transport of membrane - associated proteins , we monitored the transport of all newly synthesized endogenous membrane proteins to the cell surface . HeLa cells were transfected with control or ADF - and cofilin1 - specific siRNA . The cells were pulsed with 35 S - labeled methionine for 15 min followed by incubation with Table III . Cargo secretion accelerated upon ADF and cofilin1 knock - down ( class C ) Protein name Unique peptides Ratio ( H / L ) control / RNAi Thrombospondin 3 3 0 . 3 Follistatin - related protein 4 10 0 . 3 Thrombospondin 1 12 0 . 4 Pappalysin - 1 4 0 . 4 Serine protease HTRA1 6 0 . 4 Laminin subunit  1 20 0 . 5 Laminin subunit  4 16 0 . 5 Proprotein convertase subtilisin / kexin type 9 8 0 . 5 Metalloproteinase inhibitor 1 ( TIMP1 ) 2 0 . 5 Nidogen - 1 6 0 . 5 SPARC - related modular calcium - binding protein 1 3 0 . 4 Laminin subunit  1 18 0 . 6 Laminin subunit  1 20 0 . 5 Galectin - 3 – binding protein 3 0 . 6 72 kD type IV collagenase 2 0 . 6 Stanniocalcin - 2 1 0 . 6 Cystatin - C 1 0 . 6 Cab45 ( Golgi ) 2 0 . 6  - Galactosidase A ( lysosome ) 2 0 . 6 Secretion of proteins into cell culture media from control and ADF and cofilin1 siRNA – treated HeLa cells was analyzed by SILAC - based MS . There was an accelerated secretion of cargoes classified as class C upon ADF and cofilin1 knockdown ( ratio between heavy and light peptides [ H / L ] < 1 ) . Cab45 , a lumi - nal Golgi - resident protein , and  - galactosidase A ( lysosomal hydrolase ) were secreted upon ADF and cofilin1 knockdown . JCB • VOLUME 187 • NUMBER 7 • 2009 1064 TGN . ( e ) The composition of integral membrane proteins at the cell surface was perturbed upon ADF and cofilin1 knockdown . The identity of these proteins is not known , and the changes observed could be the result of a combination of defects in exo - cytosis and perhaps endocytosis . However , trafficking of Shiga toxin B from the cell surface to the endosomes , Golgi , and the ER was not affected by ADF and cofilin1 knockdown , and the organization of endosomal and lysosomal membranes was normal in these cells ( unpublished data ) . Collectively , these findings strongly indicate that ADF and cofilin1 are required for sorting of cargo in the TGN . In this regard , it is noteworthy that carboxy - peptidase Y , a vacuolar protein , is secreted in yeast harboring a temperature - sensitive mutant of cofilin ( Okreglak and Drubin , 2007 ) . We suggest that this could be the result of missorting at the Golgi , as we have found to be the case in mammalian cells . HA - tagged LIMK1 has been localized to the Golgi and was reported to play a role in Golgi organization and transport to the cell surface in neurons ( Rosso et al . , 2004 ) . More recently , it was reported that overexpression of activated cofilin , LIMK1 - kd but not LIMK2 - kd , or knockdown of LIMK1 delayed the trans - port of p75 from Golgi to the apical surface in polarized MDCK cells ( Salvarezza et al . , 2009 ) . Transport of a basolateral plasma membrane protein and GPI - YFP was unaffected under these conditions . Under their experimental conditions , Salvarezza et al . ( 2009 ) suggest a defect in cutting of apically targeted transport carriers at the TGN . We did not observe any obvious defect in the transport of p75 to the cell surface in HeLa cells upon ADF and cofilin knockdown . Therefore , the delay in p75 on the secretory cargo and Golgi membranes . ( a ) Cab45 and the lysosomal hydrolase cathepsin D were secreted . Cab45 is a sol - uble lumenal Ca 2 + - binding protein in the Golgi ( Scherer et al . , 1996 ) . Cab45 is normally not secreted , implying that in the knockdown cells , it must be exported from the TGN because of a defect in sorting . ADF and cofilin1 knockdown did not affect the steady - state distribution of mannose 6 - phosphate receptor ( unpublished data ) but caused export of cathepsin D in an im - mature form . These data suggest a defect in sorting that resulted in secretion of cathepsin D instead of its transport to the lysosomes . ( b ) Export of secretory proteins such as TIMP1 from the TGN was accelerated upon ADF and cofilin1 knock - down . ( c ) Secretogranin - 2 and collagens were not secreted . Secretogranin - 2 is somehow sorted into secretory storage granules at the TGN and exported from cells . However , collagens do not enter the secretory storage granule for secretion . In other words , proteins normally destined for secretion by different routes were retained in the TGN upon ADF and cofilin1 knockdown . ( d ) The TGN was swollen . The TGN is a highly fenestrated compart - ment , but the significance of this feature in sorting and cargo export is not known . Treatment with carboxylic ionophore monensin causes efflux of protons in exchange for sodium ions , and this leads to the osmotic swelling of acidic compartments such as the TGN ( Dinter and Berger , 1998 ) . Unlike monensin treat - ment , which neutralizes the acidity of TGN , ADF and cofilin1 knockdown did not affect the intraluminal pH of TGN ( unpub - lished data ) . Therefore , the defective export of proteins docu - mented in this study was unlikely caused by pH changes in the Figure 7 . ADF and cofilin1 knockdown af - fects secretion of secretory cargo . ( A ) HeLa cells were transfected with control and ADF + cofilin1 ( CFL - 1 ) siRNA . 48 h after transfec - tion , cells were washed in medium without FCS and cultured for 2 h . Equal amounts of cell lysates and media were analyzed by Western blotting using an anti - Cab45 anti - body . ( B ) Equal amounts of the cell lysates and medium , as described in A , were ana - lyzed by Western blotting with an anti - TIMP1 antibody . Arrowheads in A and B indicate the position of Cab45 and  - TIMP1 , respectively . ( C ) HeLa cells were transfected with control ( left ) or ADF + cofilin1 siRNA ( right ) for 40 h . Endogenous TIMP1 was accumulated in the TGN at 20°C for 2 h in the presence of 100 µM CHX . The cells were shifted to 32°C , fixed , and stained with an anti - TIMP1 antibody ( green ) at the indicated times . Cells were also stained with an anti - TGN46 ( red ) antibody to visualize the TGN . ( D ) 100 cells from each sample ( control and ADF + cofilin1 siRNA – treated cells ) in three different experi - ments were randomly counted to visualize intracellular TIMP1 location compared with TGN46 after a 0 - and 60 - min shift to 32°C . Compared datasets were termed as statisti - cally significant when P < 0 . 01 ( * * ) . ( E ) Equal amounts of the medium and the cell lysates as described in A were Western blotted with anti – cathepsin D ( left ) and anti –  - actin anti - body ( right ) . Error bars represent the mean ± SD of 100 counted cells from three indepen - dent experiments . Bars , 5 µm . 1065 ADF / cofilin is required for cargo sorting at the TGN • von Blume et al . latter that binds directly to cargo . The sorters could be channels or pumps that regulate Ca 2 + concentration or the lipid composi - tion within the actin - based sorting domain . We suggest that these hyper - actin patches generated as a result of ADF / cofilin1 knockdown are pulled by myosin in all directions . This pulling causes membrane swelling , and the membrane tension created modifies the physicochemical properties of the sorters , thus changing their sorting properties . Although we await the identification of the molecular sorters , there is some evidence already in support of this model . Treatment of post - ADF and cofilin1 knockdown cells with LatA restored HRP secretion from cells . Although LatA rescued defects in HRP secretion , it is important to note that treatment of control cells with this reagent caused missorting of soluble secretory cargo ( unpublished data ) . This means that an actin patch has to be assembled and disassembled in a regulated manner to organize molecular sorters . Because actin is a key in this scheme of protein sorting , regulators of actin would influence this reaction . This might explain the requirement of a large number of actin - binding proteins for protein export from the Golgi ( Kroschewski et al . , 1999 ; Stamnes , 2002 ; Egea et al . , 2006 ; Hayes and Pfeffer , 2008 ) . A dynamic , actin - based process is reported to segregate GPI - anchored proteins at the plasma membrane ( Goswami et al . , 2008 ) , and this kind of mechanism for protein concentration and sorting might be more widely applicable than presently appreciated . Materials and methods Antibodies , plasmids , and cell culture Monoclonal antibodies against cofilin1 , HA clone ( 15CA5 ) , HRP , and TIMP1 were obtained from Abcam , polyclonal antibodies against cofilin2 and cofilin phospho - Ser3 were provided by S . Aznar ( Center for Genomic Regulation , Barcelona , Spain ) , polyclonal anti - ADF and monoclonal anti –  - actin were obtained from Sigma - Aldrich , sheep anti – human TGN46 were obtained from AbD Serotec , monoclonal anti – cathepsin D antibody was obtained from Cell Signaling Technology , and anti - Cab45 monoclonal antibody was obtained from Transduction Laboratories . The monoclonal antibody 8G5F11 against the extracellular domain of VSV - G protein was provided by D . Lyles ( Wake Forest University School of Medicine , Winston - Salem , NC ) . Secondary antibodies for immunofluorescence microscopy , Western blotting , and allophycocyanin - labeled secondary mouse antibody were obtained from Invitrogen . ss - HRP – Flag and GFP – VSV - G plasmids were described previously ( Bossard et al . , 2007 ) , Discosoma sp . Red – ss - RFP was provided by H . - P . Hauri ( Biozentrum University of Basel , Basel , Switzerland ) and described previously ( Ben - Tekaya et al . , 2005 ) , and HA – LIMK1 - wt or HA – LIMK - kd were described previously ( Sumi et al . , 1999 ) . GFP - p75 neurotrophin receptor was provided by G . Egea ( University of Barcelona , Barcelona , Spain ; Lázaro - Diéguez et al . , 2007 ) . Cell culture and transfection Drosophila S2 cells stably expressing ss - HRP ( Bard et al . , 2006 ) were grown in Schneider’s medium ( Invitrogen ) supplemented with 10 % FCS at 20°C without CO 2 . HeLa cells stably expressing GFP - tagged M2 ( HeLa - GFP - M2 ) and GFP - ts045 – VSV - G were grown in DME ( Invitrogen ) containing 10 % FCS at 37°C at 7 % CO 2 incubator . The cells were transfected with Lipofectamine 2000 ( Invitrogen ) , FuGENE 6 ( Roche ) , or the Nucleofector solution ( Cell Line kit V ; Lonza ) following the manu - facturers’ recommendation . Generation of dsRNAs To generate twinstar - specific dsRNAs , the cDNA fragments corresponding to the positions 176 – 344 ( dstsr - 1 ) and 31 – 523 ( dstsr - 2 ) were amplified by PCR with sequence - specific primers containing T7 promoter at both ends using the pMT - DEST48 - twinstar as a template . To generate the dsRNA against syntaxin 5 , the cDNA fragment corresponding to the position export from the TGN reported by Salvarezza et al . ( 2009 ) could also be the result of defective sorting of the overexpressed p75 ( by nuclear injection of a plasmid ) in MDCK cells under condi - tions that promoted actin depolymerization . An unexpected role for actin at the TGN COPII vesicles to the ER – Golgi intermediate compartment / Golgi transport almost all secretory cargo that exits the ER . The ER has only one kind of export site of which numerous copies are spread throughout the ER . However , the TGN has numerous ex - port routes . We hypothesize that the TGN is compartmentalized into different domains for cargo export and that those involved in export to the cell surface are organized by dynamic actin . We suggest that actin is bound to the molecular machinery sorters , which influences the capture of secretory cargo for export . Two layers of components are therefore required for cargo sorting at the TGN : the actin domain , which organizes the sorters , and the Figure 8 . A subset of plasma membrane proteins are missorted upon ADF and cofilin1 knockdown . ADF and cofilin1 ( CFL - 1 ) knockdown affects the polypeptide composition of plasma membrane . HeLa cells were trans - fected with control or ADF + cofilin1 siRNA . The cells were pulsed with 35 S - labeled methionine for 15 min and chased with unlabeled L - methionine for 2 h with or without BFA . Subsequently , intact cells were surface bio - tinylated with NHS - biotin and lysed . Equal amounts of lysates ( based on [ 35 S ] methionine content ) from control and ADF / cofilin1 knockdown cells were incubated with avidin - conjugated beads . The plasma membrane population of polypeptides in ADF + cofilin1 knockdown cells was differ - ent compared with control cells . N , new proteins ; L , less or missing ; * , no obvious change . JCB • VOLUME 187 • NUMBER 7 • 2009 1066 against ADF ( oligo1 , 5  - GCTTTGTATGATGCAAGCTTTGAAA - 3  ; oligo2 , 5  - AGAAGATCTCAATCGGGCTTGTATT - 3  ) and cofilin1 ( oligo1 , 5  - GGAT - CAAGCATGAATTGCAAGCAAA - 3  ; oligo2 , 5  - CCTACGCCACCTTTGT - CAAGATGCT - 3  ) and Stealth RNA negative control were obtained from Invitrogen . ADF and cofilin1 siRNAs ( 150 nM each ) or control siRNA were transfected using HiPerfect ( QIAGEN ) . HRP transport assay 30 h after transfection with siRNA , HeLa cells were transfected with ss - HRP – Flag using Lipofectamine 2000 . 50 µl of the medium was harvested 48 h after the initial siRNA transfection . HRP activity was measured by the chemiluminescence assay as described for S2 cells . For normalization , cells were lysed with RIPA buffer , and internal HRP activity was measured . Lat A or Jasp was added to a final concentration of 500 nM for 4 h at 37°C , and HRP secretion was monitored . Immunofluorescence microscopy of fixed samples All fixed samples were analyzed with a confocal microscope ( SPE ; Leica ) using the 63× Plan Apo NA 1 . 3 objective . For detection , the following laser lines were applied : DAPI , 405 nm ; Discosoma sp . Red and Alexa Fluor 594 , 532 nm ; and Alexa Fluor 488 and GFP , 488 nm . Pictures were aquired using the Leica software and converted to TIFF files in ImageJ ( version 1 . 37 ; National Institutes of Health ) . VSV - G transport assay Cells stably expressing GFP - ts045 – VSV - G were transfected with siRNA . After 12 h , the cells were shifted to 40°C for an additional 34 h . To accumu - late VSV - G in the Golgi , the cells were incubated for 2 h in the presence of 676 – 1 , 182 was obtained by PCR using the pMT - DEST48 – syntaxin 5 as a template . Full - length dLIMK and dSSH were PCR amplified from a Drosoph - ila cDNA library . Different cDNA fragments with T7 promoter were gener - ated as described for the dstsr : dLIMK - R1 , position 2 , 757 – 3 , 097 ; dLIMK - R2 , position 4 , 725 – 4 , 957 ; dSSH - R1 , position 2 , 305 – 2 , 564 ; and dsSSH - R2 , position 2 , 275 – 2 , 592 . dsRNAs were generated by in vitro transcription of the T7 containing cDNA fragments using the MEGAscriptT7 kit ( Applied Biosystems ) following the manufacturer’s instructions . dsRNA transfection and HRP secretion assay in S2 cells To knockdown twinstar , syntaxin 5 , dLIMK , and dSSH , S2 cells stably ex - pressing ss - HRP on a copper - inducible promoter were seeded with 3 µg dsRNA in triplicates in medium without serum . Serum was added after 4 h incubation . After 5 d , HRP secretion was induced by replacing culture me - dium with medium containing 0 . 5 mM CuSO 4 . 4 h later , 50 µl of medium was mixed with ECL reagent ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) , and luminescence was measured with a multi - label counter ( WALLAC1420 ; PerkinElmer ) . RT - PCR RNAs from control and dsRNA - treated S2 cells were prepared using the RNAeasy Mini kit ( QIAGEN ) following the manufacturer’s instructions . cDNAs were synthesized with the Cloned AMV First - Strand cDNA Synthesis kit ( Invitrogen ) . Finally , twinstar was amplified with specific primers recog - nizing a 226 - bp fragment of twinstar . siRNA transfection in HeLa cells The day before transfection , HeLa cells were plated to ensure 50 % conflu - ence on the day of transfection . Functionally validated Stealth RNA directed Figure 9 . ADF and cofilin1 knockdown causes swelling of the TGN . ( A ) HeLa cells were trans - fected with control or ADF + cofilin1 ( CFL - 1 ) siRNA . The cells were fixed and processed for electron microscopy . ( B ) HeLa treated with control or ADF + cofilin1 siRNA were trans - fected with HRP - TGN38 , and the organization of Golgi membranes and the localization of TGN38 were monitored by electron micros - copy as described previously ( Bossard et al . , 2007 ) . Bars , 180 nm . 1067 ADF / cofilin is required for cargo sorting at the TGN • von Blume et al . according to previously described protocols ( Ong and Mann , 2006 ; Harsha et al . , 2008 ) . The incorporation of heavy amino acids was ana - lyzed by liquid chromatography / MS / MS . Control ( heavy - labeled cells ) or siRNA ( unlabeled cells ) - transfected cells (  5 × 10 7 cells / condition ) were washed five times with serum - free medium . The cells were grown in serum - free medium , and after 2 h , the medium was collected . Cells were counted and lysed in RIPA buffer . Media from control and siRNA - treated cells were filtered using a 0 . 45 - µm filter ( Millipore ) centrifuged at 5 , 000 g for 15 min , and the resulting supernatant was spun at 100 , 000 g for 2 h . Samples were concentrated using a 3 , 000 - D molecular mass cutoff spin column . The concentrated medium from control ( heavy ) and ADF and cofilin1 ( light ) siRNA – treated cells was mixed accord - ing to cell counts and SILAC - based analysis of the cells after collection . The mixed proteins were hereafter separated by 1D gel electrophoresis , and the bands were excised and trypsinized ( Promega ) according to established protocols ( Shevchenko et al . , 2006 ) . Extracted peptides were analyzed by reverse - phase HPLC ( 1200 nanoflow pump ; Agilent Technologies ) coupled to a mass spectrometer ( Orbitrap XL ; Thermo Fisher Scientific ) . MS / MS data were extracted using MaxQuant ( version 1 . 0 . 12 . 31 ; Cox and Mann , 2008 ) . MS / MS data were searched against forward and reversed Interna - tional Protein Index Human database using Mascot ( version 2 . 2 ; Matrix Science Inc . ) . 10 ppm and 0 . 5 D were used as MS and MS / MS mass accuracies , respectively . N - terminal acetylation and oxidation of methio - nine residues were allowed as variable modifications . A false discovery rate of 0 . 01 was used as the identification threshold . Matched peptides were assigned to MS spectra using MaxQuant , and fold differences between heavy and light peptides were calculated without normalization . Transmission electron microscopy For transmission electron microscopy , HeLa cells were transfected with con - trol or ADF and cofilin1 siRNA . 48 h after the transfection , cells were fixed with 1 % glutaraldehyde in Hepes buffer embedded in epon 812 and pro - cessed for electron microscopy . Thin sections were analyzed by an electron microscope ( Philips Tecnai - 12 ; FEI ) . Images were obtained with a charge - coupled device digital camera ( UltraView ; Olympus ) . Morphometric analysis of Golgi stacks was performed in 30 cells for each experimental condition using image analysis software ( Olympus ) . Immunoelectron microscopy HeLa cells were transfected with control or ADF and cofilin1 siRNA . After 36 h , cells were transfected with TGN38 - HRP . 12 h later , cells were fixed with 1 % glutaraldehyde in 0 . 2 M Hepes for 20 min . After washing with PBS and 0 . 1 M Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 4 , buffers , cells were incubated in 0 . 5 mg / ml DAB / H 2 O 2 solution for 15 min . After washing with 0 . 1 M Tris and PBS , cells were incubated with 1 % glutaraldehyde in 0 . 2 M Hepes for 5 min . Finally , cells were placed in 1 % BSA solution , scraped , and pelleted . Finally , cells were processed and imaged by electron microscopy . Statistical analysis Statistical significance was tested in an unpaired Student’s t test using Prism software ( GraphPad Software , Inc . ) . Compared datasets were termed as statistically significant when P < 0 . 01 . Online supplemental material Fig . S1 shows that expression of LIMK - wt or phosphorylated cofilin1 inhibited HRP secretion . Fig . S2 shows that RFP is arrested in the TGN upon ADF / cofilin1 knockdown . Fig . S3 reveals that overexpression of LIMK - wt or cofilin S3E did not affect transport of VSV - G protein to the cell surface . Fig . S4 shows that Cab45 is a luminal Golgi protein . Fig . S5 shows that ADF / cofilin1 knockdown did not affect protein synthesis of Cab45 . Online supplemental material is available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200908040 / DC1 . We thank members of the Malhotra laboratory , Scott Emr , Misha Kozlov , and Gustavo Egea for insightful discussions . We thank Carolina de la Torre for help with proteomics and Tobias Maier for suggesting the use of SILAC technology to analyze the secreted proteins , Timo Zimmermann and Raquel García for help with laser - scanning microscopy , Josse van Galen for providing normal rat kidney Golgi membranes , and Felix Campelo for support with the preparation of the manuscript . We also thank Dr . Marina Bacac ( University of Lausanne , Lausanne , Switzerland ) for the generation of the stable VSV - G HeLa cell line . The work is supported by a consolider grant from Plan de Nacional of Spanish ministry to V . Malhotra . J . von Blume is supported by a European Molecular Biology Organization fellowship , J . M . Duran is supported by a Juan De la Cierva fellowship , and V . Malhotra is an Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats professor at the Center for Genomic Regulation . 100 µm CHX at 20°C . Cells were shifted to 32°C , and at various time points , as indicated in Fig . 4 , were fixed and incubated with the antibody 8G5F11 that recognizes the extracellular domain of VSV - G for 1 h and fur - ther processed for immunofluorescence microscopy . FACS analysis of VSV - G surface exposure To monitor the arrival of VSV - G at the cell surface quantitatively , the cells were processed as described for the VSV - G transport assay and subse - quently harvested after 90 min at 32°C with a cell dissociation buffer ( Invitrogen ) . After blocking with PBS containing 1 . 5 % serum and 0 . 1 % sodium azide , the labeling of surface VSV - G – GFP was performed for a 30 - min incubation at 4°C with the anti – VSV - G 8G5F11 antibody . After washing with the blocking buffer , the cells were incubated with the allophycocyanin - labeled anti – mouse IgG antibody ( Invitrogen ) for 30 min at 4°C . After washing , the cells were analyzed with a flow cytometer ( FACSCalibur ; BD ) . Imaging of HRP , RFP , p75 , and TIMP1 30 h after transfection of HeLa ( for HRP and p75 ) or HeLa GFP - M2 ( for RFP ) cells with siRNA , cells were transfected with a GFP - p75 , ss - RFP , or ss - HRP – Flag . To yield a high transfection efficacy , ss - HRP and ss - RFP were trans - fected using Nucleofector solution ( Lonza ) . 100 µg / ml CHX was added before a 2 - h incubation at 20°C . Cells were fixed after different time points , as indicated in Figs . 3 , 4 , and S2 , after the shift to 32°C , incubated with primary antibodies ( anti - HRP and - TGN46 ) , and further processed for immunofluorescence microscopy . Live cell imaging and iFRAP analysis iFRAP experiments were performed with a confocal laser - scanning micro - scope ( SP5 ; Leica ) using a 63× Plan Apo NA 1 . 4 objective equipped with an environmental control system set to 37°C and 5 % CO 2 atmosphere . All experiments were performed at 32°C and 5 % CO 2 . For visualization of GFP , a 488 - nm laser line ( emission range detection of 500 – 600 nm ) was used with the confocal pinhole set at 4 . 94 Airy units to minimize changes in fluorescence caused by protein GFP displacement from the plane of focus . The whole cytoplasm , except the Golgi of GFP fusion protein – transfected cells , was photobleached using 50 – 80 scans with the 488 - nm laser line at full power . After bleaching , images were monitored at 5 - s intervals for 15 min . The excitation intensity was attenuated to  5 % of the half - laser power to avoid significant photobleaching . Longer recording times were also performed to monitor the arrival of cargo at the plasma membrane and the subsequent absence of fluorescence in the Golgi . Decay curves were background subtracted , fitted , and calculated as described previously ( Lázaro - Diéguez et al . , 2007 ) . Metabolic labeling Control and siRNA - treated cells were cultured in DME without L - methionine and L - cysteine for 60 min and pulsed with 100 µCi [ 35 S ] methionine ( Perkin - Elmer ) for 15 min . The cells were washed five times with PBS and chased with DME containing 10 mM unlabeled methionine for 2 h . For BFA treatment , 10 µg / ml BFA was added to the medium for the last 30 min of incubation and kept for the whole experiment . Cells were lysed with RIPA buffer ( 100 mM Tris - HCl , 150 mM NaCl , 0 . 1 % SDS , 1 % Triton X - 100 , and 1 % deoxycholic acid , pH 7 . 4 ) , 20 µl of cell extracts was mixed with scintillation cocktail , and the radioactivity was determined for normalization . The collected medium was precipitated with TCA and analyzed by SDS - PAGE / autoradiography . Surface biotinylation of membrane - associated proteins To analyze cell surface proteins , cells were pulse chased as described for metabolic labeling . After 2 h chase , cells were washed twice with ice - cold PBS and subsequently labeled with 250 µg / ml sulfo - NHS - SS - biotin ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) for 30 min on ice . The biotin - labeled cells were incubated with 150 mM glycine solution for 20 min to quench unlabeled free biotin followed by an ice - cold PBS wash . Cells were lysed in RIPA buffer including complete protease inhibitor mixture ( Roche ) , and the lysates were affinity purified using immobilized NeutrAvidin beads ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) overnight at 4°C . Finally , the beads were washed with RIPA buffer followed by the addition of SDS - PAGE sample loading buffer and analyzed by SDS - PAGE / autoradiography . SILAC cell culture and sample preparation Ready to use SILAC DME containing unlabeled arginine and lysine ( R0K0 ; light ) and media containing heavy ( 13C6 ) arginine and ( 13C14N ) lysine ( R6K8 ; heavy ) were purchased from Dundee Cell Products . Dialyzed FBS was obtained from Invitrogen . HeLa cells were grown in light and heavy medium for five passages until full incorporation of heavy amino acids JCB • VOLUME 187 • NUMBER 7 • 2009 1068 Kroschewski , R . , A . Hall , and I . Mellman . 1999 . Cdc42 controls secretory and endocytic transport to the basolateral plasma membrane of MDCK cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 : 8 – 13 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 8977 Kueh , H . Y . , G . T . Charras , T . J . Mitchison , and W . M . Brieher . 2008 . Actin disassem - bly by cofilin , coronin , and Aip1 occurs in bursts and is inhibited by barbed - end cappers . J . Cell Biol . 182 : 341 – 353 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200801027 Lázaro - Diéguez , F . , C . Colonna , M . Cortegano , M . Calvo , S . E . Martínez , and G . Egea . 2007 . Variable actin dynamics requirement for the exit of dif - ferent cargo from the trans - Golgi network . FEBS Lett . 581 : 3875 – 3881 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . febslet . 2007 . 07 . 015 Lee , M . C . , E . A . Miller , J . Goldberg , L . Orci , and R . Schekman . 2004 . Bi - directional protein transport between the ER and Golgi . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 20 : 87 – 123 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . cellbio . 20 . 010403 . 105307 Massarwa , R . , E . D . Schejter , and B . Z . Shilo . 2009 . Apical secretion in epithelial tubes of the Drosophila embryo is directed by the Formin - family protein Diaphanous . Dev . Cell . 16 : 877 – 888 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2009 . 04 . 010 Matsuura - Tokita , K . , M . Takeuchi , A . Ichihara , K . Mikuriya , and A . Nakano . 2006 . Live imaging of yeast Golgi cisternal maturation . Nature . 441 : 1007 – 1010 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature04737 Mellman , I . , and G . Warren . 2000 . The road taken : past and future foundations of membrane traffic . Cell . 100 : 99 – 112 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674 ( 00 ) 81687 - 6 Nishimura , N . , H . Plutner , K . Hahn , and W . E . Balch . 2002 . The delta subunit of AP - 3 is required for efficient transport of VSV - G from the trans - Golgi network to the cell surface . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 99 : 6755 – 6760 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 092150699 Niwa , R . , K . Nagata - Ohashi , M . Takeichi , K . Mizuno , and T . Uemura . 2002 . Control of actin reorganization by Slingshot , a family of phosphatases that dephosphorylate ADF / cofilin . Cell . 108 : 233 – 246 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674 ( 01 ) 00638 - 9 Ohashi , K . , T . Hosoya , K . Takahashi , H . Hing , and K . Mizuno . 2000 . A Drosophila homolog of LIM - kinase phosphorylates cofilin and induces actin cytoskeletal reorganization . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 276 : 1178 – 1185 . doi : 10 . 1006 / bbrc . 2000 . 3599 Okreglak , V . , and D . G . Drubin . 2007 . Cofilin recruitment and function during actin - mediated endocytosis dictated by actin nucleotide state . J . Cell Biol . 178 : 1251 – 1264 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200703092 Ong , S . E . , and M . Mann . 2006 . A practical recipe for stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture ( SILAC ) . Nat . Protoc . 1 : 2650 – 2660 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nprot . 2006 . 427 Patterson , G . H . , K . Hirschberg , R . S . Polishchuk , D . Gerlich , R . D . Phair , and J . Lippincott - Schwartz . 2008 . Transport through the Golgi apparatus by rapid partitioning within a two - phase membrane system . Cell . 133 : 1055 – 1067 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2008 . 04 . 044 Polishchuk , R . S . , E . V . Polishchuk , P . Marra , S . Alberti , R . Buccione , A . Luini , and A . A . Mironov . 2000 . Correlative light - electron microscopy reveals the tubular - saccular ultrastructure of carriers operating be - tween Golgi apparatus and plasma membrane . J . Cell Biol . 148 : 45 – 58 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 148 . 1 . 45 Rosso , S . , F . Bollati , M . Bisbal , D . Peretti , T . Sumi , T . Nakamura , S . Quiroga , A . Ferreira , and A . Cáceres . 2004 . LIMK1 regulates Golgi dynamics , traffic of Golgi - derived vesicles , and process extension in primary cultured neu - rons . Mol . Biol . Cell . 15 : 3433 – 3449 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E03 - 05 - 0328 Saito , K . , M . Chen , F . Bard , S . Chen , H . Zhou , D . Woodley , R . Polischuk , R . Schekman , and V . Malhotra . 2009 . TANGO1 facilitates cargo loading at endoplasmic reticulum exit sites . Cell . 136 : 891 – 902 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2008 . 12 . 025 Salvarezza , S . B . , S . Deborde , R . Schreiner , F . Campagne , M . M . Kessels , B . Qualmann , A . Caceres , G . Kreitzer , and E . Rodriguez - Boulan . 2009 . LIM kinase 1 and cofilin regulate actin filament population required for dynamin - dependent apical carrier fission from the trans - Golgi network . Mol . Biol . Cell . 20 : 438 – 451 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E08 - 08 - 0891 Scherer , P . E . , G . Z . Lederkremer , S . Williams , M . Fogliano , G . Baldini , and H . F . Lodish . 1996 . Cab45 , a novel ( Ca2 + ) - binding protein localized to the Golgi lumen . J . Cell Biol . 133 : 257 – 268 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 133 . 2 . 257 Shevchenko , A . , H . Tomas , J . Havlis , J . V . Olsen , and M . Mann . 2006 . In - gel digestion for mass spectrometric characterization of proteins and pro - teomes . Nat . Protoc . 1 : 2856 – 2860 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nprot . 2006 . 468 Stamnes , M . 2002 . Regulating the actin cytoskeleton during vesicular transport . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 14 : 428 – 433 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0955 - 0674 ( 02 ) 00349 - 6 Sumi , T . , K . Matsumoto , Y . Takai , and T . Nakamura . 1999 . Cofilin phosphoryla - tion and actin cytoskeletal dynamics regulated by rho - and Cdc42 - activated LIM - kinase 2 . J . Cell Biol . 147 : 1519 – 1532 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 147 . 7 . 1519 Sun , Y . , A . C . Martin , and D . G . Drubin . 2006 . Endocytic internalization in bud - ding yeast requires coordinated actin nucleation and myosin motor activ - ity . Dev . Cell . 11 : 33 – 46 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2006 . 05 . 008 Wang , C . W . , S . Hamamoto , L . Orci , and R . Schekman . 2006 . Exomer : a coat complex for transport of select membrane proteins from the trans - Golgi Submitted : 7 August 2009 Accepted : 25 November 2009 References Ang , A . L . , H . Fölsch , U . M . Koivisto , M . Pypaert , and I . Mellman . 2003 . The Rab8 GTPase selectively regulates AP - 1B – dependent basolateral trans - port in polarized Madin - Darby canine kidney cells . J . Cell Biol . 163 : 339 – 350 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200307046 Ang , A . L . , T . Taguchi , S . Francis , H . Fölsch , L . J . Murrells , M . Pypaert , G . Warren , and I . Mellman . 2004 . Recycling endosomes can serve as inter - mediates during transport from the Golgi to the plasma membrane of MDCK cells . J . Cell Biol . 167 : 531 – 543 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200408165 Arber , S . , F . A . Barbayannis , H . Hanser , C . Schneider , C . A . Stanyon , O . Bernard , and P . Caroni . 1998 . Regulation of actin dynamics through phosphory - lation of cofilin by LIM - kinase . Nature . 393 : 805 – 809 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 31729 Bamburg , J . R . 1999 . Proteins of the ADF / cofilin family : essential regulators of actin dynamics . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 15 : 185 – 230 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . cellbio . 15 . 1 . 185 Bard , F . , L . Casano , A . Mallabiabarrena , E . Wallace , K . Saito , H . Kitayama , G . Guizzunti , Y . Hu , F . Wendler , R . Dasgupta , et al . 2006 . Functional genomics reveals genes involved in protein secretion and Golgi organiza - tion . Nature . 439 : 604 – 607 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature04377 Ben - Tekaya , H . , K . Miura , R . Pepperkok , and H . P . Hauri . 2005 . Live imag - ing of bidirectional traffic from the ERGIC . J . Cell Sci . 118 : 357 – 367 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 01615 Bossard , C . , D . Bresson , R . S . Polishchuk , and V . Malhotra . 2007 . Dimeric PKD regulates membrane fission to form transport carriers at the TGN . J . Cell Biol . 179 : 1123 – 1131 . Chan , C . , C . C . Beltzner , and T . D . Pollard . 2009 . Cofilin dissociates Arp2 / 3 complex and branches from actin filaments . Curr . Biol . 19 : 537 – 545 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2009 . 02 . 060 Cox , J . , and M . Mann . 2008 . MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates , individualized p . p . b . - range mass accuracies and proteome - wide protein quantification . Nat . Biotechnol . 26 : 1367 – 1372 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nbt . 1511 Dinter , A . , and E . G . Berger . 1998 . Golgi - disturbing agents . Histochem . Cell Biol . 109 : 571 – 590 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s004180050256 Egea , G . , F . Lázaro - Diéguez , and M . Vilella . 2006 . Actin dynamics at the Golgi complex in mammalian cells . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 18 : 168 – 178 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2006 . 02 . 007 Fölsch , H . , H . Ohno , J . S . Bonifacino , and I . Mellman . 1999 . A novel clathrin adaptor complex mediates basolateral targeting in polarized epithelial cells . Cell . 99 : 189 – 198 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674 ( 00 ) 81650 - 5 Fölsch , H . , P . E . Mattila , and O . A . Weisz . 2009 . Taking the scenic route : biosyn - thetic traffic to the plasma membrane in polarized epithelial cells . Traffic . 10 : 972 – 981 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1600 - 0854 . 2009 . 00927 . x Ghosh , P . , J . Griffith , H . J . Geuze , and S . Kornfeld . 2003 . Mammalian GGAs act together to sort mannose 6 - phosphate receptors . J . Cell Biol . 163 : 755 – 766 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200308038 Gieselmann , V . , A . Hasilik , and K . von Figura . 1985 . Processing of human ca - thepsin D in lysosomes in vitro . J . Biol . Chem . 260 : 3215 – 3220 . Glick , B . S . , and V . Malhotra . 1998 . The curious status of the Golgi apparatus . Cell . 95 : 883 – 889 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674 ( 00 ) 81713 - 4 Glick , B . S . , and A . Nakano . 2009 . Membrane traffic within the Golgi apparatus . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 25 : 113 – 132 . Goswami , D . , K . Gowrishankar , S . Bilgrami , S . Ghosh , R . Raghupathy , R . Chadda , R . Vishwakarma , M . Rao , and S . Mayor . 2008 . Nanoclusters of GPI - anchored proteins are formed by cortical actin - driven activity . Cell . 135 : 1085 – 1097 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2008 . 11 . 032 Harsha , H . C . , H . Molina , and A . Pandey . 2008 . Quantitative proteomics using stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture . Nat . Protoc . 3 : 505 – 516 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nprot . 2008 . 2 Hayes , G . L . , and S . R . Pfeffer . 2008 . WHAMMing into the Golgi . Dev . Cell . 15 : 171 – 172 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2008 . 07 . 011 Hotulainen , P . , E . Paunola , M . K . Vartiainen , and P . Lappalainen . 2005 . Actin - depolymerizing factor and cofilin - 1 play overlapping roles in promoting rapid F - actin depolymerization in mammalian nonmuscle cells . Mol . Biol . Cell . 16 : 649 – 664 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E04 - 07 - 0555 Kardos , R . , K . Pozsonyi , E . Nevalainen , P . Lappalainen , M . Nyitrai , and G . Hild . 2009 . The effects of ADF / cofilin and profilin on the conformation of the ATP - binding cleft of monomeric actin . Biophys . J . 96 : 2335 – 2343 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2008 . 12 . 3906 Kornfeld , S . , and I . Mellman . 1989 . The biogenesis of lysosomes . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 5 : 483 – 525 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . cb . 05 . 110189 . 002411 1069 ADF / cofilin is required for cargo sorting at the TGN • von Blume et al . network to the plasma membrane in yeast . J . Cell Biol . 174 : 973 – 983 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200605106 Yeaman , C . , M . I . Ayala , J . R . Wright , F . Bard , C . Bossard , A . Ang , Y . Maeda , T . Seufferlein , I . Mellman , W . J . Nelson , and V . Malhotra . 2004 . Protein kinase D regulates basolateral membrane protein exit from trans - Golgi network . Nat . Cell Biol . 6 : 106 – 112 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb1090 Zaidi , N . , A . Maurer , S . Nieke , and H . Kalbacher . 2008 . Cathepsin D : a cel - lular roadmap . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 376 : 5 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bbrc . 2008 . 08 . 099